Vera Effigies DIONYSII PETAVII


THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD: OR, AN Account of Time.

Compiled by the Learned Dionisius Petavius. And Continued by Others, To the
Year of Our Lord, 1659. Together with A Geographicall Description OF Europe,
Asia, Africa, and America.

LONDON, Printed by J. Streater, and are to be sold by Francis Tyton at the
Three Daggers in Fleet Street, MDCLIX.

To the Reader.
Ingenious Reader,
WE present thee One of the most Eminent pieces of History in the whole World.
The acuteness of the Author in his manifold polite Writings is fully
demonstrated to all persons in Christendom. Insomuch, that who has not heard
of his Fame, may be justly reputed to have spent his days in some Anchorite's
Cell in the Terra incognita. Great and Exquisite is the Learning, which he has
manifested in his Books of the Doctrine of the Times: though it must be
confessed, he is somewhat too liberal in his lashing of Scaliger, a man of great
Knowledge, yet too much doting upon his own parts. In this Discourse he shows
the concisenesse of his pen without obscurity. Sir Walter Rawleigh and others
that have highly deserved by their Achievements in the Theater of History,
have so voluminously enlarged themselves, that the Reader's patience is too
discourteously oppressed. We must acknowledge much to the view of the four
Monarchies exhibited by Sleidan; yet the curtnesse of that Piece is such, that
many stately and heroic Actions of Noble Princes are either not touched at all,
or slightly past over, without satisfaction given to the diligent Inquirer.
Cluverius has written well, but not comparably to this Learned Man: having not
so well stated the Chronological part of his History. Whereas Here, besides the
innumerable testimonies of all the Ancient and Modern Authors, whose Writings
are of any use and subsidiary help to so general and brave a Work; ye have
likewise many of the most famous Eclipses and Celestial Characters set down in
their distinct places out of Herodotus, Thucydides, Aristotle, Plutarch, and
hundreds of others in the Monkish Age, which are most infallible demonstrations
of the truth of those passages and relations herein delivered. So that we may
safely say, without the Censure of arrogance, That in respect of those heavenly
Phenomenon, whereby History is made to ride in its most triumphant Chariot,
there was never yet an Historical Book so Complete as this, Extant in any Age.
He is not so short, as to draw the vail of brevity over any Noble Actions: He
is not so long and profuse, as to Nauseate the Reader with prolixe and tedious
circumstances: wherein others take too much liberty to insert their own private
Judgments and descants upon the Warlike Actions and deliberated Counsels of
great Kings and Generals, sometimes impertinently, sometimes absurdly and
childishly; whereas the matter of fact, a thing principally to be attended by
sober Historians, might be comprehended in a small view. Insomuch, that we may
truly term this, The Index of Times; so that any person that is inquisitive
into more ample Narrations, may by his choice Citations furnish himself with a
whole Library of History. In a word, he deserves the Laurel from them all, a
Temple of praise to be erected to his honor, and all other Historians to be
offered up as Victims to his renown.

Furthermore, We must acquaint thee (most Candid Reader) that where Our Noble
Author does terminate his Account of the History of former times; that the Work
might be produced Complete in all its parts, we have made use of various helps
and observations of those who have lived beyond the Seas, as well as at home,
to draw the Discourse down to this very day. We have indeed in the latter years
more copiously enlarged, because the great and general Wars of Christendom,
since the blazing of the great Comet in 1618, have administered more plentiful
matter both at home and abroad, then several Ages that have preceded.

In the last place, We have annexed a Compendious Geographical Discourse of the
whole Earrh, and its most memorable places, that so the beautiful Statue of
History might have both her eyes ( Chronology and Geography) in a most lively
manner inserted for the grand ornament of her personage. From whence the
Historical passages in the foregoing Treatises may be fixed to the very places
wherein they were acted by the Noble Chieftains of Armies, in their several
Warlike Expeditions against their Enemies.

Accept therefore this Tract as a most choice Treasure: whereby thou may be
enriched with the knowledge of the rarest and most material Transactions that
have happened under the Conduct of Divine Providence ever since the World began.

Thine to serve thee, R. P.

TO The most Illustrious PRINCE, D. Ludovick Borbon, Duke of Enguienna.
IF Arts and Disciplines (Most Famous Prince) could of themselves speak, truly
they would give great thanks unto thee and thy Father, a most excellent man;
neither would they less gratify themselves with this honor, the which, at
this day, by your judgment concerning them, they have attained, very ^reat.

For this is a clear witness, how much ye have made of them; because both
being of so great a Nobleness, he would have thee be brought up in the Besome,
and Lap of them; Thou have held the delights and pleasures of the Court,
inferior to the company and familiarity of the same. This is, I say, a thing
altogether Noble, and Honorable unto our Learning, that thou, a child of a
Kingly stock, and towardness, do accustom thy self in handling those; not
that thou call forth the Masters of them home unto thee, or receivest them
in the room of a delight, and pleasant Narration, but that thou thy self of
thine own accord come daily to their houses; neither in performing the
Duties of Scholars, do take any thing proper to thy self above others.
Wherefore either of you both get unto your selves an everlasting name, and
fame; and also do give an example to this and the following Age, in what great
esteem henceforward they ought to be accounted; That that may be plucked out of
the opinion of men, which seems to have made many of that rank, either
openly, or by a silent custom and judgment, to ^elieve: that as every one is
born in the highest place so he is to have the least commerce with those idle
and sloathfull studies. But if anyone shall dare to boast for the future; not
of Alexander the Great, not of Charles ou^ Countryman, not of the rest (whom
from the remembrance of Antiquity we are wont to produce) but, by that thy more
modern, and the practice of thy most famous Parent, he shall be refuted. By
this honor therefore, as I have said, how very great thanks should Sciences,
if they could use speech, profess themselves to owe unto you both, and also
they who can do this, their Favorites, and Lovers, shall plentifully, and
abundantly do it; and they shall join the commendation of this praise to
others, the standing Corn, and matter of which, they have finished in thy most
famous Father; but in thee nothing less, and they trust will be agreeable to
these good things of Birth and Nature, which thou bear before thee. The
which hope, conceived of thee by the opinion of all, those so many tokens of
excelling Virtues, which thou have even at that Age, do render confirmed, and
sure. I know not what altogether Divine thing there is in you Princes, and a
higher towardness then the common capacity, which separateth you from the
common sort, and plainly shows that ye were born unto the Rule of Men, and to
take in hand great and difficult matters. And as in the Bee's kind, some signs
are put on their Kings, whereby they are easily known from the rest. Or as the
successors of the Spartans were made remarkable by a Lance; The Polopidans by
an Ivory shoulder; The Seleucidans by an Anchor, others by other natural
marks: So there is wont to be in Great men some excellent thing; whom the will
of God, who governs not so much the condition of a stock, as all things, and
setting down to every one his own rank, lifts up above the Lot of other men.

Those same things we have learned to be in Thee; first of all a sharp, and
excelling wit, of which there is such a speediness to comprehend all Arts,
that now it being the Eleventh year of thy Age, thou hold the chiefest seats
of Learning and industry in the School of Eloquence, a Mind also stirred up
with the pricks of praise and glory; often Combats with the Adversary
concerning all kind of Learnings; neither are the Conquests and Victories more
seldom then the contentions. Whiles thou indeed obtainest the chiefdome among
thy Equals, of all things, wherewith that Age is wont to be adorned; and,
whether by the persuasion of thy father, or of thy own accord, thou attainest
that, which unto a certain Prince (with Homer) going to Warfare, his father is
read to have commanded him -- (...)
Always to be the best in the Train;
Other's exceller, and remain.


That, being a Child, in this shadowy, and sporting encounter, thou make a
flourish with those Triumphs, which afterward in a ripe Age thou shall carry
back from lawful enemies, and battles. Unto these, which commonly seem more
gorgeous, those many better things happen; A certain flower of integrity, and
comeliness, besmeared with the spots of no Vices, a teachable nature, and
pliant and bending to the will of the fashioner, as also pure Manners, and
lovely, and, toward all, even the lowest, the greatest gentleness, and
courtesy of talk. Lastly, a diligent lover of Christian Piety, and Worship,
without guile. These, and others of like sort, great of themselves, yet in thee
they are but the seeds and beginnings, with which thy mind waxes by degrees
ripe, and is perfected unto the grace beseeming a Prince.

But I have not determined here to make a solemn cry of thy praises. That, when
there shall be need, the which I had begun to speak of, it shall behoove all
chiefly, who follow after Learning's Studies, to agree, and endeavor together
for that end: and also above all, our Society shall need to do it: unto whose
education, thy Father (never without praise to be named) has passed thee over.
The which when he did, he gave together therewith, a pledge and token of his
singular esteem and affection of it; and likewise he obliged Its faithfulness
toward thee, that by what means it could, it should employ it self both for
the enlarging thy renown, and also for helping, and stirring up thy studies. I
therefore, who, because I am of that Fellowship, and a lover of liberal Arts,
do think my self held by the law of both duties, I judged that I must perform
my duty in that very thing, by fathering this Work on thee: within which all
History from the beginning of the World unto the times of our Age, with as much
briefnesse, and diligence as I could, I have contained. For so I thought I
might chiefly profit thy studies; whose chief part is placed in the knowledge
of History, and Antiquity. But Wise men rightly deliver, this to be not only
comely for Princes, but very profitable. Whether because the civil learning of
Prudence is taken out of that, while men learn from others examples and
chances, with no pains of theirs, and danger, what in managing their own, or
common affairs, is to be held, and avoided; or from so daily a changeableness
of humane affairs, and fortune, which they gather from thence, and the downfall
of Empires, and Cities, they are wont to make little regard of those, and, both
in defending them, or requiring them, to give a mean to their desires; and
pass over their purposes unto the fruit of sound and constant glory, which by
virtue and godliness alone is received. That this is even the most excellent
use of reading History, especially that grave Author Otho of Frisingia, does
(not once) admonish, chiefly in these words, which he has placed in the end of
his second Book. All these evils of things, nodding, or shaking (as I may so
speak), the daily deaths of mortal men, ought to send us unto the true, and
remaining life of eternity. Thou shall gather out of this our book the same
kind of fruit, of manners, and life, not only more profitably, but also, which
is the goodness of thy Wit, more pleasantly, than that of science, and
knowledge, of which there is especially a forcible love in Children. And hence,
last of all, from those two duties toward thee, which I have said to be owing
from me with the whole society, there will be made another consequent, that
although there being as yet no private Deserts of thine; of thy most
illustrious Father, surely there is toward me, as also toward our Society,
common to both, I will in like manner pay the Honor, and Observance due from
me by this (what sort soever) commendation of thy name.

ILL. C. T. Thy Most Obliged, Dionys. Petave.

A Collection or Sum of the most Christian King's Prerogative-Royall.
IT is provided by the Authority of the King, That none in his Kingdom, or
other places subject to his power, may in any character or form, print, or
otherwise sell being printed, or in any other manner sell or spread abroad, the
Book which is thus inscribed, An Account of Times, of Dionysius Petavius,
Jesuit, within ten years, to be reckoned from the day of the first Edition
finished, besides Sebastian Cramoisy, chief Printer of the King and Queen,
Governor of the King's Printing, and who also has been Consul of the City. He
that shall do otherwise, a Fine is proclaimed, as in the King's Letters Patents
is more largely contained.

Given at Paris the 19th day of September, 1647.
This first Edition was perfected the 25th day of May, 1651.
The Sufferance of R. P. V. Provincial.
I Charles of Allemant V. Provincial of the Jesuits Society in the Province of
France, do grant, that the Book inscribed, The Account of Times, of Dionysius
Petavius, and approved by three Learned Men of this Province of the same
Society, be committed to the Press; For the confirmation of which thing, we
have given these Letters subscribed with our hand, and fortified with our seal,
at Lutetia of Paris, the 29th day of April, 1651.

Charles of Alleinant.

Reader, by reason of some extraordinary difficulties in the Copy, several
Errors have escapt the Press, which are carefully corrected as follows,

Errata.

Page 5. line 1. for Seth's read Sem's, and l. 17. r. we think these things
were not done, p. 11. l. 30. for Siwan r. Sivan, p. 29. l. 14. for repudiated
r. divorced, line 15. and 16. for his cruel formal Wife r. the cruel Woman,
p. 30. l. 44. del. and, before having, and l. 45. r. and, before according, p.
33. l. 7. for (...) r. generations. p. 31. l. 2. a Colon after were, p. 35. l.
17. for agonals r. Games, p. 37. l. 12. for and r. they and l. 27. r. leading
before the Chalcedonian, p. 38. l. 34. for (...) r. a Governor, p. 44. l. 8.
read Kingdoms, p. 57. l. 25. for 750. r. 770. p, 59. l. 28. for commune r.
common, p. 75. l. 3. after it r. is, p. 80. l. 32. for Origin r. beginning, p.
82. l. 11. for an r. and, p. 86. l. 1. for (...) r. the Long-handed, p. 88. l.
38. after put r. out, p. 94. l. 40. for tetracterick r. foure-yearly, p. 102.
l. 26. after Philotas r. into suspicion, p. 113. l. 14. and 18. for Paeni r.
Carthiginians, add l. 31. for maritimi r. Mamertimi, p. 127. l. 45. for wane r.
Eclipse, p. 134. l. 30. for decrease r. Eclipse, p. 136. l. 15. for King r.
Kingdom, p. 137. l. 39. r. Eclipse, p. 146. l. 1. for Insuber Gallus r. a
French Insubrian, p. 173. l. 7. after in r the, p. 186. l. 13. for Prusaena r.
Prusaenian or Prusian, p. 191. l. 12. for in Philosopher r. of Philosophy and
l. 19. for 135. r. 235. p. 203. l. 47. for Ravens r. Ravenna, p. 207. l. 48.
for Constantius r. Constantine, p. 227. l. 3. for him r. up, p. 234. l. 28. for
August r. Augustus, and l. 43. r. Augustus, p. 235. l. 39. for Procuror r.
Solicitor, p. 250. l. 29. after the r Empire, after Placentine, del. comma, p.
258. l. 9. after or r. the, p. 262. l. 18. for Renu r. Rhemes, p. 269. l. 21.
after Uncle r. Justine, l. 25. after Empire put a Colon, for (...) r. very
young, l. 46. for Justinian's r. Justin's, p. 278. l. 18. after death r. of, p.
290. l. 30. for his r. her, p. 293. l. 33. after exceeded r. but, p. 294. l.
15. for with r. of, p. 306. l. 5. for put down r. slaughter, l. 35. after the
r. year, p. 311. l. 12. for persuade r. persuaded, l. 16. for but r. and, l.
18. after called r. him, l. 42. after brought r. him, p. 312. l. 35. before
seventh r. the, p. 313. l. 13. for on r. in, p. 318. l. 43. for August r.
Augustus, p. 119. l. 6. after Lewis dele Calvus, l. 11. for Baria r. Barbaria,
p. 325. l. 43. for 712. r. 912. p. 327. l. 19. for again r. against, p. 333.
l. 19. del for the manage l. 29 d. to p. 336. l. 26. for other r. next, p.
339. l. 35. put a Comma after man, and l. 34. for Odo r Odulo, p. 340. l. 10.
for declared r. declaring, and del. and p. 341. l. 40. after same r. time, p.
348. l. 40. r. A, before wicked, p. 354. l. 10. for and r. unto, p. 364. l. 21.
for Latreat r. Lateran, p. 365. l. 6. for which r. where, p. 367. l. 2. for
1234. r. 1254. p. 354. l. 23. for Hospitals r. Hospitallers, p. 383. l. 8. for
Contemptor r. Contemner, l. 16. for bring r. bringing, l. 25, and 26. r. He
took Capha and Theodosia, but lost his labor about Rhodes, p. 391. l. 4. del.
and lost the battle, p. 397. l. 15. for he r. she, l. 36. after he lost r. the
Kingdom, p 401. l. 22. for Wascoines r. Vascoines, l. 46. for her. Francis and
l. ult. for Concordatum r. an Agreement, p. 410. l. 14. for again r. against,
p. 416. l. 46. for Mount ferra r. Mount ferrat, p. 417. l. 15, and 16. r.
received the Kingdom of Hungary, p. 418. l. 8. after warred r. with l. 9.
after which r. is, p. 466. l. 9. after enfolding r. in, p. 467. l. 22. before
promised r. the Scots, p. 475. l. 9. for yea r. year, p. 478. l. 1. del. who,
p. 485. l. 7. put a Colon at Scots, p. 494. l. 45. before requiring r. they, p.
504. l. 13. for labor r. labored, p. 509. l. 44. to them add selves, p. 527.
l. 10. after England r. was a companion, p. 534. l. 29. for is r. was, p. 549.
l. 44. for their r. there, p. 596. l. 7. and 8. for Bremerwerden r. Bremen, p.
602. l. 1. for it r. in.

Courteous Reader, where thou meetest unusual names of places Correct them
thus; for Suevi r. Swedes, for Mediolanum r. Millain, for Tarraton r. Arragon,
for Neopolis r. Naples, for Andegavia r. Anjou, for Northmanuia r. Normandy,
for Lotharingia r. Lorrain, for Lusitania r. Portugal, and such like.

Books worth buying, newly printed, and to be sold by the Booksellers of
London.
THe History of the Wonders of Nature, treating Philosophically and Physically
of the Heavens, Elements, Meteors, Minerals, Beasts, Fish, Fowl, Plants, and of
Man. Folio, The History of Magic, written in French, by G. Naudeus, now
Englished. A most excellent Piece in, defense of all the wise men mentioned in
the Holy Scripture, and other Authors. Octavo. The Life of Piereskius, written
by P. Gassendus, being the sum of his great Seize in Learning,
Philosophy, Chemistry, Policy, and Antiquity; the like not to be read in any
Author. Octavo. The History of the Constancy of Nature, proving, That the
World, nor any thing therein, does not decline or grow worse. Octavo. The
Potestants Evidence, a most Learned Work, proving, That in the 16. several
Centuries since Christ, there has been Eminent and Learned Men that have
professed the Faith of the Church of England. Folio. Also, A Theological
Concordance of the Holy Scriptures, of small price, and performing as much as
many large Volumes, very useful for all that desire to attain to knowledge.
Octavo. Renodeus his Dispensatory, being the sum of all Physical and
Chirurgical operations. Folio. The Vale-Royal of England, being an Historical
and Geographical Description of the County of Chester. Folio. The Refinement of
Zion, Or, The old Orthodox Religion justified and defended. Quarto. Lemnius, Of
the secrets of Nature in general, but more especially upon Generation, and the
parts thereof; very necessary for all that study Physic, and search into the
hidden things of Nature. Folio. Olaus Magnus, Bishop of Upsal. his History of
the Northern Nations. Fol. A new Treatise, proving a Multiplicity of Worlds,
That the Planets are Regions inhabited, and the Earth a Star. 120. An History
of Appirations, Oracles, Prophesies, Dreams Visions and Revelations, etc.
Folio. There is now published An Excellent TREATISE of PHYSIC by Mr. John
Tanner. Octavo.
THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. Anno 730. J. P. unto 2386.
OR, AN Account of Time.
The First Book.
COntaining the years from the beginning of the World, or from the year of the
Julian Period 730, unto the third of Solomon, which is the 3702 year of the
same Period.

CHAP. I. What things have first come to pass worthy of remembrance from the
Creation of the World, unto the Deluge; wherein first is treated of the six
days Works, and of the year of Noah's Flood.
IF Divine Authority could not persuade us, that God did create the World, yet
its contemplation would sufficiently teach us the same: Although that great
Artificer could in a moment of time create it whole and complete in all its
parts, yet was he rather willing to perfect it by little and little, in the
space of six days.

Wherefore in the beginning of all things nothing did appear and exist besides
the earth, Genesis 1.
and that huge immensity of waters that overspreaded the Earth: Then the waters
were not so thick joined together, as we see them now, but thin, and like unto
a vapor, and the mist had filled up this whole vacuum or hollow place, which
the vastness of the celestial bodies, and of the other Elements did possess
upon the Earth. Moses declares them partly by the denomination of waters, and
partly of the deep; which he says to have been encompassed by darkness, when
he light was not yet brought forth, and that the Spirit of God moved upon the
face of the waters. Out of the Water and Earth, as out of their matter, were
afterward all the other bodies formed, that are reckoned in the six days work.
Now when Moses says, That, In the beginning God created the Heavens and the
Earth; it is a general sentence that comprehends all that which was done in
those six days, which, afterward is expounded throughout all its parts.

On the first day God created the Light, which the Water or that thin and
immense Region of vapors did receive, the Sun not being yet produced; and that
he might define and distinguish the spaces of the day and of the night, he
encompassed this same Light with the motion and agitation of that misty body.

On the second day was the Firmament formed of God; by which appellation we
believe are signified as well the celestial bodies, as the Air and Sky: that
is, all that which appears from the Earth unto the extremities and farthermost
parts of the World, which is vulgarly believed to be hollow and empty: for the
forming of all which, the deep, that is, that huge and infinite lump of waters
subtilified and attenuated into a vapor, did afford the matter: Again, the
Firmament has that power given unto it to divide the waters above, from the
waters below: not that it self whole should in its middle come betwixt them
both, but only in one of its parts, which being the nearest to the Earth, is
called the lower Region of the Air; for as it is part of the Firmament that is
of that outstretched voidnesse, so likewise it may be called Firmament or
spreading: the higher-most waters are clouds, hanging in the midst of the air,
out of which rain is engendered, the lowermost are the Seas and the Rivers,
which had their beginning the day following.

On the third day he first gathered the waters into one place, yea even into so
many places as there are Seas and Rivers, for having heaped the Mountains to an
immensity, and made hollow channels, he made them receptacles and passages of
waters: thence he commanded the earth to be clothed with the greenness and
verdure of the herbs and plants, and to bring forth Trees.

And God set the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars in the Firmament of the Heaven on
the fourth day.

And on the fifth day God created the fishes and the fowls out of the water.

On the sixth day he at last formed Man out of the earth, and breathed into his
nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul, to whom he gave the
name of Adam, from the Earth: The Earthly Paradise.
Then did God transport this new man into those most pleasant and delightful
Gardens which he had planted, which by a right apprehenfion were in the Land of
Babylon, or in the Confines of Babylon and Mesopotamia: for Tygris and
Euphrates, which Moses mentions by name, have not their channels running in
any other place. Now in this garden, amongst all other Trees, for the use and
delight of Man, God did plant two remarkable Trees, the one of life, and the
other of Knowledge of Good and Evil; the former has gotten its name from the
effect, August. 3. civ. c. 20. Prosper. 2. de vita cont. c. 18. August. 14.
civ. c. 17. par. 1. c. 19.
because it had the virtue to lengthen health, and foment life, as Augustine,
Prosper, and others do judge: the latter is so called from the event, because
that as soon as they had tasted of its fruit, they understood into what a great
evil they had fallen, having lost so great a good, as it seems to the same
Augustine, and also to Bar Cephe in his Commentary of Paradise; Rup. 2. de
Trin. c. 27. Genesis 4. Genesis 4.14. Genesis 4.26. Genesis 5.22.
or because the Serpent did promise from that Tree, the knowledge of good and
evil, as Rupertus observes it, very discreetly: There the Lord formed that
ribb which he had taken out of the side of Adam when he was asleep, into a
woman, which he gave to him for his companion and help-meet: but she brought
upon her self and him a more grievous ruin, then any cruel enemy; who, being
enticed by her flatteries, did cat that fruit presented by her to him of the
forbidden Tree; the guilt of which wickedness procured upon him a sudden and
present punishment, and a future upon his posterity: Therefore being cast out
of that blessed Mansion, he with the companion of his fault is cast out into
the miseries of this life. Then the first of men that were born of them, were
Cain and Abel, of whom the first excrcised his life in the tilling of the
ground, Genesis 6.
and the other in the feeding of Cattle, who for his integrity and uprightness
was best accepted of God; And for this cause Cain burning with wrath and envy,
murdered his innocent brother; and in revenge of this his murder, being a
fugitive and vagabond on the Earth, he begat children like to himself, namely
rebels and enemies of God; and he built a City, and called it by the name of
his son Enoch: But Seth, a while after Abel's death, being born to Adam, begat
a posterity contrary to that, namely godly and religious; whose son Enos is
said to have began to call upon the Name of the Lord; because, as the opinion
is, he did publicly re-establish that Worship of God, which had been blotted
out by Cain's children; and amongst the rest came that excellent and renowned
Enoch, Jared's son: Whom God having loved for his innocence, he took up to
himself alive from the eyes of men, having not yet fully ended his days; whose
posterity, whom the Scripture calls, The sons of God, being grown worse, and
degenerated from their good manners, joined themselves in marriage with Cain's
posterity, out of which mixture and commerce were Giants brought forth. Then
mortal men addicting themselves to all sorts of wickedness, did turn and draw
Gods wrath upon themselves. When no cause of delay could be objected to him,
all Virtue being extinguished and blotted out from amongst men: Then therefore
God, angry and offended by Adam's posterity, decreed to destroy them all by an
inundation of waters. There remained one only of Seth's blood, who did persist
in the faith and obedience of God: to him does God reveal the certainty of his
counsel a hundred and twenty years beforehand; Noah's Ark.
and commands him to build an Ark for himself, in it to save few men and
beasts. This Patriarch employed a whole hundred years in the building of it,
Genesis 7.2.
which was three hundred cubits in length, in breadth fifty, and in height
thirty, having the first, second, and third stories, in which he gave to every
kind of living creatures their mansion; eight heads of men in all, of every
clean beasts and fowls by seven, and of unclean by two, were shut up in this
Ship, and so raised up and taken away by the waters of the deluge, all other
things were destroyed by the overflowing and inundation of the waters over all
the earth, which the continual rain of forty days, and the fountains of the
great deep, being broken, had caused; so that the high Hills that were under
the whole Heaven were covered by it, and the water prevailed fifteen cubits
over them. And that was the year from the Creation of the World, 1656, and
before Christ's birth, 2329.

CHAP. II. What things are remembered both out of Sacred and profane Histories,
that were done in that interval of time, which begun from the year of the
Julian period 2387, unto 2752. Wherein is spoken of the building of Babel, of
Abraham's original, and of his pilgrimage. Of the Kingdoms of the Assyrians,
Egyptians, and Sicyonians.
THe Deluge being past, Josephus 1. auct. c. 4.
Noah being come forth out of the Ark, offered burnt-offerings unto the Lord in
the Mountains of Armenia; where some ancient Authors have recorded, That the
remnants and pieces of this Ark were reserved a very long time.

After this, Noah having applied his mind to husbandry, planted a Vineyard, and
having drunk somewhat largely of the Wine, whose virtue and strength he did not
yet know, became drunk, and then fell into a sleep, whom undecently lying in
his Tent, with his shame uncovered, Ham mocked, and showed to his brethren; but
they turning their backs and going backward, did cast a cloak upon it: But
their father afterward knowing the thing, having cursed Ham's posterity, did
bless Seth's and Japhet's children. Then Mankind being propagated by these
three, did soon increase so much, that one Country could not alone contain
them any longer, and even the other parts of the World also were to be
inhabited. Into which before they went to sojourn, and before they were
separated asunder, they went about to build a high Tower in the Land of Shinar,
whose top might reach unto Heaven, that might be to them a name, and a general
Monument to all their posterity; for then the whole Earth was of one language,
and of one speech, and God did confound it, for to frustrate their endeavors
and Imaginations, distracting it into several other tongues; so the commerce
and understanding of the voice being taken away from them, they then left and
cast away their counsel and design of building; And what remained of this
matter, is thought to have been for the beginning of Babylon; for that Tower
began to be named Babel, from the mixture and confusion of tongues. And as
these things are less judged to have been done at the beginning of this great
Tower, which was a full Century of years after the Flood; so it is not
convenient for us to enlarge our selves farther upon them. Now the first part
of the next Century being past, then happened the diversity of Languages, and
the propagation of People and Kingdoms.

From Heber's posterity, with whom the use of the first tongue, Abraham's
pedigree.
and the true Religion remained, had Abraham his pedigree, who was to be an
excellent and great proof and example of godliness and obedience. His father
was Terah of Caldea, out of which Country by Gods command, he being aged
seventy years, went together with his father into Mesopotamia, and he dwelt in
Haran about five years. There having left his Father, as he was commanded, he
soon traveled into the Land of Canaan, with his Wife Sarah, and Lot his
Nephew, it being then the 145 year of Terah his father, and his 75th year: Then
in the days of his father he lived near sixty years in the Land of Canaan,
which being expired, he in the 135th year of his age returned into Mesopotamia,
and into his fathers house, whence, by the command of God, he returned again
into Canaan: And thus are reconciled those things which are usually objected
out of the History of Moses, and of the Acts.

After that Noah's posterity was dispersed throughout the whole face of the
Earth, The Assyrians Kingdom.
then began the diversity of Nations and Kingdoms, of whom the first beginnings
are recorded in the Scriptures; the ancientest of which, was that of the
Assyrians or Chaldeans: That began first in Babylon, thence in Nineveh, and
thence was transported into Assyria, and there remained, near a thousand and
three hundred years. For those things which Eusebius relates out of Africanus,
concerning ancienter Kingdoms of the Arabians and Chaldeans, are more like unto
a fable, then to a real truth.

Belus is put the first in the list of the Kings of the Kingdom of Assyria,
who reigned in Babylon; Belus, or rather Nimrod.
and by profane Authors is thought to be the builder of it, whence he seems
to be he, who in the Divine Records is called Nimrod; to him, having reigned 65
years, succeeded Ninus, of whom was built Nineveh, and thither was the Throne
of the Kingdom transported, which afterward received its name from the
Assyrians. Beyond him the profane Histories do not mention any one; And he is
said the first to have waged Wars against other Nations, out of the lust and
desire he had to enlarge and extend his Empire, having brought Asia into his
own subjection, he at length overcame the Bactrians, and their King Zoroastres:
Diod. 2. Just. 2.
Thence having taken Semiramis for his Wife, and by her having begotten his son
Ninia, he dies fifty two years after he had began his reign.

Semiramis having put out of the Kingdom this young son, she takes by art and
cunning the Kingdom to her self, Diod. 2. Just. 1. Eusebius. Chro.
the which she obtained forty two years. The Greek Chronicles do assert, That
Babylon was built by her, but it may rather be said, that Babylon was amplified
and enlarged by her, Herodor. 2.
and environed by a most admirable wall, whose circuit was of four hundred and
eighty furlongs; and the said Annals record farther, That she entered into Asia,
Media, Persia, Egypt, Libya, and Ethiopia, and subdued them, and that she
after that entered with her Army into India, and spoiled and ruinated it. At
length this lascivious woman provoking her son to incest, is by him killed in
the 42. year of her reign; and in the 24th year of Semiramis reign was Abraham
born, and not as Eusebius falsely has persuaded himself.

Ninias having killed his Mother, with much sloth and idleness held that
Kingdom, which had been exceedingly amplified and enlarged by his Ancestors,
and governing all things by Governors and Deputies, and seldom appearing; he
passed the rest of his life in the company of Harlots, and was set in the list
of the effoeminates; which life the Kings that followed him embracing, were
scarely known to posterity by their name, or remarkable in any thing, being
reckoned in Eusebius's Chronicles three hundred and three; Asricanus numbreth
four more in their rank, and lengtheneth that intervall of the whole Empire
more then reasonably he should; which (as I have already demonstrated) is
limited in 1300 years.

In the same time that the Kingdom of the Assyrians had its beginning, B. 9. de
doct. temp. 25.
there were also other Kingdoms established in other places; especially the
Kingdoms of the Egyptians, and Sicyonians, but the license of fables has
corrupted and perverted their beginning and original: The Egyptians fable.
The Sicyonians Kingdom was erected in Sicyo almost twelve years after that of
the Assyrians, and 2164 years before Christ's Nativity, and continued near upon
a thousand years.

CHAP. III. The sum of the Sacred History comprehended in that space of time
which was from the year of the Julian Period 2753. unto the 3183. of the same.
Wherein is treated of the deeds of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of his
Children; And also of Job at last.
THe various Pilgrimages and things acted, both by Abraham, Abraham's deeds.
Genesis 12.10.
and his Posterity; are contained in the space of these years. Abraham, the
Famine being great almost in that very first year that he transported himself
into Canaan, went into Egypt: Genesis 13.
Where God preserved his Wife Sarah from the lust of the King: Thence being
returned again into Canaan, he is put away and separated from Lot his brothers
Son, who had traveled with him out of Mesopotamia, and had long been his
domestical companion. Genesis 14.
He desired and chose to dwell in the Country of Sodom, but Abraham dwelt in
Hebron in the plain of Mamre.

Thence followed that War in which those five Kings, Genesis 16.3.
of the number of whom the Kings of Sodom and Gomorrah were; being overcome,
and their Cities destroyed by Chedorlaomer and the three other Kings. His
Confederates Lot with his family and all his goods, was part of the prey; Genesis
16.16.
but Abraham having heard of it surprised on a sudden the Conquerours, Genesis
17.1.
and they smitten and put to flight, in an unexpected and quiet night, he
recovered all things safe, together with Lot his Kinsman. Genesis 18. and 19.
And Melchisedeck King of Salem, as he was returning from the defeat of the
Kings; brought him gifts, and an oblation of Mystical Bread and Wine, and this
Salem is Jerusalem, and to him Abraham reciprocally gave the tenth part of all
the spoil.

Ten years after that, Abraham had began to dwell in Canaan. Sarah seeing her
self barren, suffered, and gave her handmaid Agar to her Husband; She being
with child, and despising her Mistress, being hard dealt by with her, flies
into the Wilderness, but being returned home by the Angels command, brought
forth Ismael to Abraham then aged 86. years.

This Patriarch in the 99th year of his age, by that Covenant that he had made
with God, was Circumcised with all his family, and Ismael his Son, then aged
between thirteen and fourteen years.

This same year was fatal to Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim; which Cities
for their abominable wickedness, The burning of Sodom.
and by reason of their unreasonable lust, the fire from Heaven being kindled
and fomented with Pitch and Brimstone consumed them. Out of which burning Lot
being delivered and snatched by the Angels, having lost his wife, which
contrary to the forbidding command looking back, Genesis 17.17.
was Metamorphosed into an Image of Salt, he first escaped into the City Zegor
or Zoar, which by his prayers he delivered from that imminent danger and
destruction, thence he retired himself into the next mountain; where, in the
night, and through drunkenness he defiled his daughters with incest: thence
were begotten Moab and Ammon, from whom did also two people descend and
propagate.

Abraham in the hundredth year of his age begat Isaac of Sarah his Wife, then
ninety years old, it being 1936. years before Christ's birth: and some few
years after, he by her warning, as well as by Gods command; Genesis 23.1. Joseph.
1. Orig. c. 14.
turned Agar out of doors, together with Ishmael her Son. Isaac having now
attained unto man's estate, that is (as Josephus thinks) the 25th year of his
age, stands ready to be offered up for a sacrifice by his father, in the
Mountain of Moriah, being soon delivered again by the command of God that had
commanded him to be offered up. After his mothers death, which died the 127th
year of her age: Genesis 24. Genesis 25.20.
he married to wife Rebeccah, the daughter of Bethuel, Son of Nahor, Abraham's
brother. And then was Isaac in the fourtieth year of his age. Abraham having
taken Kethura for his second Wife, got six sons by her. Isaac aged sixty years,
Genesis 25.26.
having by his prayers turned away his Wives barrenness, he begat of her twins,
Esau and Jacob in the year before Christ 1876. Then dies Abguham, in the 175.
year of his age, and before Christ's birth 1862.

Then Isaac being exercised by diverse travels and troubles, Genesis 25.7. Genesis 26.
etc.
his Son being grown to the age of 77. years, he himself being 137. years old
(as it is deducted from Joseph's age when he went into Egypt, and from Jacobs
abode with Laban) desirous to bless his Son Esau, he first commands him to get
him some Venison; but Jacob by his Mothers advice surreptitiously beguils him.
After which, fearful of his brothers revenge, he flies into Mesopotamia, to
his Uncle Labans. Genesis 29.
In which Journey he is encouraged by diverse promises from God, appearing to
him in a Vision, as he slept on the top of a ladder. But when he had served
Laban seven years in the nature of a Shepherd; he was not permitted to have
Rachell, for whom he had bargained, before he married her elder sister Leah,
which was effected by guile, in the 84. year of his age, in the 2921. year of
the first Period. From these and their two handmaids, Genesis 30.
Bala and Zelpha, and Jacob twelve Sons; of Lea seven; Reuben, Simeon, Levi,
Judah, Issachar, Zabulon, and one daughter called Dina. Of Rachel, two; Joseph,
and Benjamin. Of Bala, two; Dan, and Nepthali. Of Zelpha, two; Gad, Aser.
Twelve Sons and one daughter; After twenty years spent with Laban, Jacob
returns to Canaan, A.C. 1780.
about the 97. year of his age. Where he pitched his Tent in diverse places, but
especially at Succoth, Alexand. Poly. apud. Eusebius. 9. prae. page 227.
and at Salem, a Town of the Sichemites. Where after ten years that he came
from Mesopotamia, his Daughter Dina is ravished by Sichem, the Son of Hemor the
King. Which two of her Brothers, Simeon and Levi revenged, by the death of the
Sichemites, and spoiling of their City; From thence Jacob departs for Bethlem,
having received the name of Israel. Which the Angel with whom he wrastled at
his return from Mesopotamia to his fathers; gave him as Genesis 23.28.
a token of his strength. Genesis 35.19.
Rachel dies in childbirth of Benjamin, when Joseph was between Genesis 37.2. etc.
sixteen and seventeen years old. Who a while after through the envy of his
brothers being drawn away and carried into Egypt, was bought by Potapher one
of Pharaoh's chief officers. With whom after he had been a while, being by his
wife often, in vain, allured to commit fornication, by means of her false
accusation suffered a three years imprisonment, as the reward of his innocence;
from whence being fetched to interpret the Kings dream, when as he had presaged
the ensuing plenty of seven years, as also the imminent scarcity of seven
other, he was placed as governor over all Egypt. Thither went Jacob by the
importunity of his Son Genesis 47.
with all his Family and goods, being in the third year of the Famine, before
the coming of Christ 1747 years, himself being Genesis 47.9.
130. years old, and in the fourtieth year of his Son Joseph's age. Jacob lived
in Egypt 17. years complete. Where dying, his body by his own direction, was
carried into Palestine, where he was buried in the Sepulcher of his Parents.

Genesis 50.25
Joseph having completed 110 years, dies in the year of the World 2308. being
about 71. years after Jacobs Journey into Egypt. The Generation of Israel now
every day increasing, Exodus 1.
the King of Egypt, whether of envy or fear, to obstruct their growth,
Commands all their Males to be killed and thrown into the River as they were
born; Exodus 2.
so that Moses exposed to drowning, was by the Kings daughter taken up, and
fostered in the Court as her own. He was Amrams Son, Caathus Grandson, Levi
being his great Grandfather, Maria was his sister, and Aaron his younger
brother. Being of the age of Acts 7.30.
forty years, going to see his Countrymen, he slew an Egyptian whom he found
smiting an Hebrew, which coming to the Kings ear, he for fear flew into
Midian, where he married Sephora Jethro's daughter, the Priest. Exodus 3.4.
In the 80. year of his age, feeding his sheep in Oreb, which is also called
Sinai, being encouraged by a divine voice from out a burning bush, he returns
into Egypt.

At that time it is very probable that Job that admirable pattern of patience
and fortitude was in being, Eusebius. 1. de Them. c. 4. Epiph. Chry. sost. Hom. 2.
de Job.
whom, as most of the Ancient writers suppose, was descended from Esau. Him
from probable grounds we conjecture to be much about this time. He was born of
Zara, being Grandchild to Esau, the 232. year before the chidren of Isreal's
Journying out of Egypt; Before Christ 1763. He in the 50. Ang. 18. ci^. c. 47.
year of his age was permitted to suffer various afflictions from the Devil in
one year: After which having escaped, he lived 139 years, and died in the 189th
year of his age, A.C. 1575.
45. years before the Children of Israel went out of Egypt.

CHAP. IV. Of the Kingdom of the Grecians, Inachus his Posterity, and Ogyges
his deluge; of Prometheus, and the Kingdom of the Athenians.
IN the sixth year after Abraham's death; Argivorum regnum init.
1857. years before Christ, the new Empire of Greece was established in
Peloponnesus; Inachus being the Author of it. Whom most of the Ancients make
equal to Moses. But Eusebius affirms that he was long before his time. We
limit the beginning of his Kingdom from 327. years before the Children of
Israel went out of Egypt. After Inachus, Greece continued its Empire 546.
years under 13. Kings. Of whom the nine first, even to Gelanore, were called
Inachads, as descending in a direct line from Inachus. Castor apud Eusebius.
Gelanore being expelled of the Grecians, by their general consent, Danaus is
invested with the Empire, having been a Sojourner in Egypt. He derived his
Original from Inachus. For Epaphus, Belus his son, whom Io the daughter of
Inachus bore to Jupiter, was reported to be his great Grandfather. Between
Danaus and Acrisius were four others possessed of the Empire, who after that by
his imprudence, he was slain of Perseus his Grandchild, Micenus interposeth in
the Kingdom. The last of whose blood, was Erystheus. He being slain by the
Heraclides, the Pelopides, in number six, enjoyed his estate, the last Kings of
whom, were Tisamenus, and Penthilus, Orestes Son. The Mycaeni reigned 210.
years. In the whole from Inachus, 756. years, to the 80. year after the
destruction of Troy. All which, though here glanced at, will afterward be set
down in their direct intervals. These happened for the most part, in that
intervall which terminates the Children of Isreal's progress out of Egypt.

Phoroneus, Son of Apol. 2. Eusebius.
Inachus and Melissa Oceanina, Instituted laws to govern them, who hitherto
were Paus. cor. p. 52.
rude, and lived dispersed, and, if we may credit Init. l.2.
Apollodorus, had Peloponnesus under his Government.

Apol. 2.
His Son was Apis, from whom Apia derives its name, which afterward was called
Peloponnesus, who being hated for his tyranny, was treacherously slain of
Thelxion and Thelchines, leaving no Issue behind him. After his death he was
consecrated with divine Eusebius. and Aug. 18. civ. c. 6.
honors in Egypt, and also Io Herod. 1.
Inachus his daughter, they report, was there canonized, Eusebius.
and named Isis. But Pausanias attributes it to Jasus Son to Triopas, which
seems more probable.

Under the same Phoroneus reigned Ogyges in Attica, in whose time happened that
great inundation which was called by his name. Excerpta Scal. Graeca p. 363.
This is reported by Acusilaus to precede the first Olympiade 1020. years. By
which computation it was before Christ 1796. being in the fifth year after the
death of Isaac, Anno 3184. Jul. Period, unto. 3701.
Vide 5. l. 2. par. 2.
Although some would have it to be about twenty two years before.

In the reign of Apis was built Sparta, says Eusebius.

Tatianus.
In the time of Triopas the seventh King of Greece, Cecrops also governing in
Allica, were Prometheus the Son of Iapetus, and Atlas his brother, two famous
Astrologers, made much more famous by the fictions of the Poets. This was about
the time of the Hebrews departure out of Egypt. Triopas truly began his Vid.
loc. cit. par. 2.
reign in the 1557. year before Christ, and the 23. before the progress of the
people of God. In a short time after, Cecrops began to reign over Athens,
which, says Eusebius, was 1558. years before Christ.

CHAP. V. Of those remarkable passages which happened to the people of Israel
the first Forty six years after their departure out of Egypt.
MOses in the 80, year of his age, Ant. Chri. 1531.
went according to command, to deliver the children of Israel from the Egyptian
bondage. Ex. 5.6. etc.
And having in vain sued to Pharaoh for their dismission, He by many prodigious
calamities so terrified the Egyptians, that when Exodus 12.
last of all, the first born of all Egypt were by an Angel slain in the night,
they thereupon suffered them to depart. Which before they did, they solemnly
dedicated the Feast of the Passover, which day was from thence forth for ever
Instituted to be observed in memorial of their deliverance. Lib. 9. de doct.
temp. c. 24.
That appears to be the second night in April. Ex. 12.52.
There were numbered of the children of Israel, of able Swordmen only, six
hundred thousand. Exodus 14.
Immediately after, Pharaoh pursues them in their departure. But Moses broke a
way through the red Sea for them to pass; whom when by the same the Egyptians
pursued, Moses smiting with his rod, even as it parted, so it closed again, and
overwhelmed their trembling enemies. So the Israelites passing over to the
Arabian shore, in the third Month, which is Ex. 19.1.
Siwan, received the Law made by God, by which both sacred and profane Laws
were instituted.

After many journeyes ended, in the beginning of the next Ex. ult. 15.
year after their coming out of Egypt, about the eighth day of April, Moses
erected a Tabernacle; and made Aaron a High Priest, his Sons being Priests
under him. But the ungrateful people notwithstanding so many benefits
received, as continually Manna rained down from Heaven to feed them, Numb. 12.
with Quails also sent down amongst them, disrellishing these dainties,
desisted not yet to murmr against God, and at Moses. Numb. 13.
Afterward Moses sent ten men to search the Land of Canaan. Who returning
after forty days, did so possess the minds of the people with terror;
notwithstanding Joshua and Calebs endeavors to the Contrary, who themselves
also went to view the Land, that they were ready to rebel, ( a) for this they
were denied an admittance into the land of Canaan, and led back again by the
deserts of Arabiae, till after all the Rebels being consumed, and dead, two
only remaining of the whole maki^ude, Joshua and Caleb, who had persevered in
Faith. Wherefore about thirty nine year they wandered up and down in that Defart
like Pilgrims; in which they suffered the severe punishment of their obstinate
rebellion against God and Moses. Numb. 16.
First of all Core, Dathan, and Abiram, the Authors of a wicked revolt, were
with their families swallowed up by the earth, and 250. of their faction
burning Incense, were by fire from Heaven devoured. 14700. more being
immediately devoured by the same fire, were made exemplary to the rest. Many
more also, for their daily provoking of Moses, were slain with the biting of
fiery Serpents. Which evil to prevent from spreading too far; Moses Numb. 22.
erected a Brazen Serpent. These things happened in the fortieth year of their
coming out of Egypt. In which Aaron the Numb. 20.
High Priest dying, his Son Eleazer supplied his room. After this Sion King of
the Ammorites, and Og the King of Bashan being overcome, Bala^k King of the
Moabites, joining with him the Midianites, opposed the Hebrews, not so much by
open war, as by subtle craft, bringing along with him Balaam the Soothsayer to
curse them. But his curses being by divine providence turned into a blessing.
The King of Israel by Balaam's advice, thought to have ensnared them by the
beauty of their Women whom they proffered to them, Numb. 25.
at which time Phineas the Son of Eleazer, out of his great zeal of, piety to
God, finding one of the chief of the people in company with a Harlot, ran them
both through in the sight of all the Congregation, by which means he not only
gained to himself the perpetual honor of his Priesthood, but pardon to the
people for that great sin.

Deuteronomy. 34.
In the fourtieth year of their departure out of Egypt at the latter end of the
eleventh Month, Moses dies in Mount Neb^, which rises from the plains of
Moab, in Ant. Chr. 1491.
the 120. year of his age. He was succeeded by Joshua the Son of Nun, of the
Tribe of Ephraim, who led the people into Canaan over Jordan, the River being
dried up; the Josh. 4.
tenth day of the first Month, which is Nisan, which is about the sixth day of
April. After which besieging diverse Cities, he destroyed them and their
Inhabitants by fire and Sword, Josh. 6.
beginning with Jericho, the walls of which City after seven days surrounding
with the Ark, by blowing of horns, and the shout of the Soldiers, he levelled
with the ground. He put to flight Josh. 10.
five Kings of Gibeon, which was surrendered up to the Hebrews, in pursuit of
whom, and to their utter ruin, that he might have the more space, he commanded
the Sun and Moon to stand still a whole day. After all this, in the last place
having overcome Josh. 12.
thirty one Kings, and in six years space overcome the greatest part of
Palestine; He divided it amongst the Hebrews by their Tribes about the year
before Christ, 1486.

CHAP. VI. The remainder of the sacred History to the building of the Temple,
wherein both what was done by the Judges, as by Saul, David, and Solomon are
contained.
JOshuah Josh. ult.
departing out of his life the 14th year after Moses his decease in the 110th
year of his age; The Elders then governed the Commonwealth about 10 years;
after which others succeeded them both in order and time. To speak more fully
of each particular action of them, and their deputies, brevity does here
forbid. Wherefore some few of them shall here suffice. Judge. 1.
After the death of Joshua, the Tribe of Judah overcame Adonibezec King of the
Canaanites in battle, whom apprehending in his flight, they cut off his thumbs
and his toes, the same punishment being reserved for him, which he before had
inflicted upon seventy other Kings. Other Cities this Tribe overcame, taking
some, and making the others their Tributaries; not without offending God, by
whom all conditions with that Nation were forbidden to them.

The History of Micha and the Tribe of Dan, which is comprehended in the 18
Chapter of Judges, appears to have come to pass under those Elders which
succeeded Joshua, as also Jonathan, grandchild of Moses, and his sons that were
chosen for Priests to the Tribe of Dan, are in the same place spoken of.

At that same time arose that Civil War occasioned by a rape committed by the
Gibeonites of the Tribe of Benjamin, upon the Wife of a Levite; which offense
the other Tribes most sharply revenged. The Benjamites which stood up for the
defense of their fellows, being in the third Battle almost all slain, who had
been conquerors in the two former. This happened about the same time which I
spoke of, Josh. 10.21.
that Phineas Eliazer's son, Aarons grandson, officiated in the Priesthood.

Those Elders being now extinct, who although by their Authority they had kept
the people in Order, they forsaking now their own Religion, Judge. 3.
and being forsaken of God, were by Chus, the King of the Moabites, oppressed
with 8. years bondage. That by their adversity they might be brought to
remember God, whom in their prosperity they had forgotten. But upon their
repentance God raised up Othoniel to revenge their quarrel, and for their
deliverance, being in the year before Christ, 1459, who vanquishing Chus, for
forty years procured them their liberty. But after his death revolting to the
same wickedness, they were also punished with the like servitude, which they
suffered 18 years under Eglon King of the Moabites, till the 3313 year of the
Julian Period. Eglon being slain, Ehud for his virtue was preferred to be
Judge, who governed for a long time, (to wit) 80 years.

In the year before Christ, 1301, Judge. 4.5.
Israel subdued by Jabin King of Canan, were for 20 years by him oppressed;
after which being again reconciled to God, they shake off their yoke. The
Instruments of their victory and delivery were two Women; Deborah the
Prophetess, who encouraged and stirred up Barack of Nephthali to undertake the
War. And Jael, who receiving Sisera flying from his Army into her tent, slew
him, by driving a nail through his temples as he slept.

Judge. 6.7.
Deborah being dead, the Hebrews relapse into their pristine wickedness and
Idolatry, for which they are delivered into the hands of the Midianites in
bondage, which when they had undergone 7 years in the year of the World, 2730.
they are restored to their liberty by Gideon, Ant. Chr. 1254.
who by Gods appointment chose out 300 men, whom he furnished with trumpets and
earthen pitchers, which when he brought forth to the battle, breaking their
pitchers, wherein their lamps were included, and at the same time sounding
their trumpets, their Enemies were so terrified, that they ran one upon another
to their mutual destruction.

Gideon after 40 years Judge. 9.
dying, Abimelech his son tyrannously usurps his succession, assisted by the
means of the Sichemites, who confirming the Kingdom by murder, which he had
gained by guile, most barbarously slew his 70 brothers; having finished his
third year by great impotence and cruelty. After he took the City of Thebes,
and besieged the Tower, unadvisedly going under the wall, smitten in the head
with a stone thrown down by a woman, offered himself to be slain of his
Armor-bearer.

Judge. 11.
Some Judges escaping us who did nothing worthy of memory. Jephtha of great
esteem, though of obscure birth, (being the son of a Harlot) was a valiant and
active man: Whom the Israelites that inhabited at Gilead, being oppressed by the
Ammonites, chose to be their Captain, wandering up and down with a company of
Robbers. He being about to encounter his enemies, made a Vow to offer in
sacrifice to God, whatsoever first met him at his return home. In pursuance of
which vow, he sacrifices his daughter, who was the first that came to meet
him. This happened in the year before Christ, 1166, about 18 years after the
destruction of Troy, being ten years more after. Agamemnon likewise slew his
daughter: unless this Fable be feigned in allusion to that true history.

Judge. 14. etc.
In the year before Crist, 1135, began Sampson to officiate as Judge, a man of
most heroic valor, appointed by God to suppress the Tyranny of the
Philistines; Judge. 14.
He was born of a woman that was barren, being consecrated by God from his
mothers womb to be unshorn, after the manner of the Ibidem.
Nazarites, by which means he was endued with such strength, That meeting with
a Lion, he tore him even as a kid. He married his Wife from amongst the
Philistines, which in his absence, joined her self to another: being highly
incensed with the Injury, he determined in a hostile manner to oppose himself
against them. Judge. 15.
And first of all, taking 300 Foxes, to whose tails he fastened firebrarnds,
which letting go amongst their standing corn, immediately consumed it. After
this being by the Philistines demanded, to inflict punishment upon him, and
delivered up to them by the Hebrews, whom they had then under their subjection,
He immediately breaking his bands, and snatching up what was next him, which
was the Jaw Bone of an Ass, he therewith slew 1000 of his enemies. But Judge.
16.
all Gaza's City gates being shut upon him, and he there intercepted, pulled up
the gates with the posts thereof, which together he carried away upon his
shoulders to the top of the next hill. After this and the like examples of his
unparalleled strength, being deceived by the allurements of a woman, and by
her betrayed to the Philistines, by whom he was blinded, and exposed to be the
subject of their sport; He taking the pillars in both his arms, which were the
supporters of that house wherein the Nobles being assembled together to feast
themselves, and to behold him, were buried together with him in the Ruins of
the same, in the 20th year after he began to be Judge.

Sampson being dead, in the year before Christ, 1115, 1 Reg. c. 1. etc.
Eli the high Priest under the title of Judge, governed the people 20 years;
for the former 20 he assisted Sampson. Both of them governing the
Commonwealth. In the second year of Sampson before Christ, 1134, Samuel (it
appears) was born. His father was Elcana, of the posterity of Caath, of the
tribe of Levi, as the 1 Paral. c. 6.
Scripture demonstrates: Whom having by prayer obtained from God, his Mother
Anna, a pious woman, devoted him to the Ministry of the Temple. By him Eli in
vain admonisht to restrain the lust of his sons, injurious to their holy
office, was of God severely revenged. 1 Reg. 4.
The Hebrews being overcome by the mighty Army of the Philistines, the Ark also
by them taken, which they had placed in their Camp as their chief safeguard;
both the sons of the high Priest slain, Their father at the news falling
backward from his Seat, broke his neck.

Ant. Chr. 1095.
Afterward Samuel about the 40 year of his age, takes upon him the charge of
the people. To whom with Saul the book of the Act. 13.20.
Acts ascribes 40 years; twelve of which to Saul, the rest we attribute to the
Prophet only, as we conjecture. No sooner Samuel came to the Government, but
things soon changed for the better. 1 Reg. 6.
The Ark which for 7 months had been detained by the Philistines, which
whithersoever they carried it, brought a pestilential ruin with it, being sent
back again to the Israelites, continued 20 years at Cariathjearim. 1 Samuel 7.
After that time in the year of the World, 2909, the people solemnly convening
it to Mizpeh, Samuel made a Covenant with the Lord. The token of Gods
reconcilement to them, was a remarkable Victory obtained against the
Philistines, whom the Prophet compelled to contain themselves within the limits
of their own Country, dispoyling them of the booty they had gained in their
former battles.

Ant. Chr. 1067.
After this, the people tired out with too much liberty, 1 Samuel 8.
petitioning for a King, Saul 1 Samuel 9.
the son of Kis, of the Tribe of Benjamin, first by the appointment of God, and
afterward by the general suffrage of the people, was advanced to that dignity;
1 Samuel 11.
from him the Inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead dissenting, he overcame Naash the
King of the Ammonites, who had caused them to make a covenant with him, with
conditions to thrust out their right eyes. From the Ammonites he converted his
force against the Philistines, which then 1 Samuel 14.
kept the Hebrews under their subjection, whom by the bold attempt of his son
Jonathan, being discomfited, he slew throughout their whole Camp, and that with
so much eagerness, that he permitted not any upon pain of death to taste one
bit of food; of which restraint Jonathan being ignorant, he with the end of his
rod tasted a little honey, being innocently condemned of his Enraged father, he
hardly escaped, notwithstanding the importunity of the people. But he by
degrees varying his manners, was discovered by God; and 1 Samuel, 16.13.
David the son of Jesse, of the Tribe of Judah, was appointed to succeed him.
Whom about the 22 year of his age, Samuel privately anointed, in the year
before Christ, 1063.

Six years after, Samuel the Prophet dies, Ant. Chr. 1057.
two years before Saul, as Clemens Alexandrinus relates in Strom. 1.

1 Samuel 31.
Saul after 12 years fighting with the Philistines, Ant. Chr. 1055.
was, together with his son Jonathan flain, whose head being placed in the
Temple of Dagon, his body they hung upon the Walls.

2 Samuel 1.
David bewailing the death of them both, takes the Kingdom, ruling first over
his own Tribe 7 years 2 Samuel 5. 4, 5.
and 6 months, when as he was anointed with great solemnity in the open
Assembly at Hebron, in the 30th year of his age.

2 Samuel 2.8.
In the mean time Ishbosheth son of Saul, ruled over the other Tribes; nor was
the end of this, less then Civil Wars between both Competitors; the one
claiming the Kingdom by right of Succession; the other vindicating his divine
establishment, and both by arms: but humane at length gave place to divine
might; in the 8th year 2 Reg. 4. and 5.
that he had succeeded his father, he was in his own house by a desperate
attempt privately murdered, leaving the sole possession of the Kingdom to
David.

2 Reg. 5.
In the year before Christ, 1047, all the Tribes of Israel convening together,
he was at last made King at Hebron, being a man of undaunted courage, and
famous for his achievements; yet far more renowned for his piety. His first
rudiments he had under King Saul, with whom much ingratiated for his behavior,
as also that memorable achievement in killing Goliath, and subduing the
Philistines, he was admitted into affinity with the King, and 1 Samuel 19.
David's calamities.
married his daughter Michol. But the ardent affection in a moment turned into
the greatest envy and hatred; for being often sought after to have been slain,
through deserts, rocks and caves obscuring himself, he disappointed the
sedulity and earnest endeavors of his father-in-laws strict and diligent
search of him. Nor would he once lay hands on him when he had him at his mercy.
By such like examples of his patience and meekness, being seven years
exercised; Saul (as before spoken) being dead, Rex fit Judeae.
first of all over his own Tribe, and afterward over the rest of the people, (
Ishbosheth being dead) he without any Competitor obtained the Government.

Which no sooner gotten, but he took the Tower of Sion, and having 2 Samuel 5.7.
thence expelled the Jebusites, he there constituted his Court.

But 2 Samuel 6.
in the year before Christ, 1045, he removed the Ark from the house of
Aminadab, in the Town of Gibeah, which as it was a carrying to Sion, Uzziah
unadvisedly touching, was struck dead. At which David affrighted, turns aside
with it into the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite, and from thence after 3
months brings it to Sion in great pomp.

2 Samuel 11.
About the year before Christ, 1039, which is computed to be the 17. from the
death of Saul, happened the Adultery of David, and the murder of the Innocent
Uriah in the Ammonitish War. In the following year, was 2 Samuel 12.
Solomon born of Bathsheba, which was now become his Wife. About the same time
it was, that Amnon committed incest upon his sister 2 Samuel 13.
Thamar.

2 Samuel 13.23.
Two years after Amnon was slain by Absolon, Thamar's own brother trecherously
at a feast.

2 Samuel 15.7.
Forty years after Saul was made King, being the 27. from his death, was David
expelled from Jerusalem, and banished from his kingdom by his Absolons, who
entering his Court, did most reproachfully defile his fathers Concubines. But a
while after, being overcome and exposed to flight, carried by his Mule under
the thick boughs of a spreading Oak, he was there hanged by the hair of his
head; And that which he gloried in as his greatest Ornament, became the
Instrument to hang him, as says Lib. 7. cap. 9.
Josephus in his Commentary, which is scarce credible; but more prebable it is,
that he hung by the Neck, when Joab one of the Captains of David's Army ran him
through with three darts.

Lib. 5.1 Reg. 2.
David spending the rest of his life, and reign in peac^ and prosperity, and
now become an old man, worn as it were out with his former labors. When he had
established his son Solomon in his Throne, in the 40th year of reign, being 70
years old, dyed. Solomon was then about 23 years old, the beginning of whose
reign was before Christ, 1015 years. 1 Reg. 2.25.
He suspecting his brother Adoniah, slew him. 1 Reg. 3.1.
He took to Wife Pharaoh's daughter king of Egypt. God appearing to him in a
vision, and tendering him his choice of whatsoever he should desire, when as he
preferred wisdom before riches and what ever else, he not only obtained what
he desired, wisdom; but, in addition to his wishes, those other things which
he neglected.

CHAP. VII. Of the Original of the Ancient Greeks which was comprised in that
space of time, from the Israelites departure out of Egypt, to the fourth year
of Solomon. Of the threefold kind of the Graecians, Aeolicks, Doricks, and
Ionicks; which sprang from Hellen, Son to Deucalio^.
THis Intervall comprehends the Original of the Ancientest Greeks: of which,
however the truth be; it is so confounded with those many fictions of the
Poets, that it is something dubious to judge of. Notwithstanding which, we
shall endeavor from the probablest of ancient writers to digest it in some
order of time. And seeing the Grecian affairs and those renowned people, are
the subject and scope of the work, it will be here pertinent to speak of the
Grecians themselves, and of the first derination of that name and stock.

Their name and stock derived from Hellen the Son of Deucalion, Ex. Apollod.
lib. 1. Diod. 4. Strab. 8. Pansan. Conon apud Phot. Cod. 186.
is distinguished and divided into three kinds; Aeolick, Dorick, and Ionick;
the Author of this progeny, as I said, was Deucalion, who is reported to have
had his Kingdom and seat in Thessaly. In his age was the inundation of Greece,
whose time from the probable opinions of diverse, we conceive to be in the year
before Christ, 1529. the third year after the Israelites progress out of
Egypt, as we shall demonstrate in its convenient place.

The Sons of Deucalion and Pyrrha were two, Hellen, and Amphictyon. Amphictyon,
expelling Cranaus, reigned in Athens. From Hellen the Greeks are called (...).
He begot three Sons of Orseis, Aeolus, Dorus, and Xuthus. Conon. apud. Phor.
lib. 27.
Aeolus being the eldest, succeeded his Father, and obtained whatsoever lay
between the Rivers Enipeus, and Asopus. So that besides Thessaly, he became
master of Locris, and Beotia. To Dorus's lot, fell that Country which is under
Parnassus. He built Boeus, Cytinius, Pindus, and Erineus, From him the Kingdom
of Doris took its name. Xuthus the youngest Son, expelled by his brothers for
robbing his Father of his treasure, took his flight into Attica, where he built
Tetrapolis, and married Creusa, the daughter of Erechtheus.

Aeolus begat seven Sons; Aeolidarum soboles.
and five daughters of Enares the daughter of Deimachus. His Sons were,
Critheus, Sisyphus, Athamas, Salmoneus, Deion, Magnes, and Perieres; and his
daughters, Canoche, Alcyone, Pisidice, Calyce, and Perimide. Crithius of Tyro,
his Brother Salmoneus's daughter, begat Aeson, Amythaon, and Pheres. The Son of
Aeson was Jason, Amythaon, inhabited Pilos, in Peloponnesus, and begot Melampos
and Biantes. Melampos for curing the daughters of Praetus of a Frenzy, had the
Kingdom of Greece; together with his Brother Byantes delivered to him from
Anaxagoras, the Son of Megapenthes; and of Iphianira, Proetus his daughter, he
had Antiphas, Mantus, Bias, and Pronoes: the Sons of Antiphas were Oicles, or
as Pausanias calls him, Iocles, and Amphalx: but Oicles begat Amphiaraus,
father of Amphilachus, and Al^meon.

Bias begat Talaus, father of Adrastus, and Parthenopaeus, of Perona, and
Eriphyle of Amphi^ra, his Wife.

Pheres, begat Admetus, and Lycurgus, from him sprang Opheltes, who was also
called Archemorus. These were Critheus his Sons.

Sisyphus founded Corinth, and of Merops the daughter of Atlas he had Glaucus
the father of Bellerophon.

Athamas being King of Beotia, by Nephele, had Phryxus and Hellen: Afterward
of Ino daughter of Cadmus, he had Sons Learchus and Melicertes.

Salmoneus first inhabited Thessaly, and after that, Elis; whose daughter Tyro,
before she was married to her Uncle Critheus, brought forth to Neptune, Pelias,
and Neleus. Who when they came to age, falling to variance amongst themselves,
Neleus flies to Messana; and of Chloris, Amphion's daughter, had eleven Sons,
who were all (except Nestor) slain by Hercules. And but one daughter named Pero.

Pelias governed in Thessaly, having two Children, Acastus, and his sister
Alcestis; Deion possessed Phocis, and besides other Sons, had Cephalus, whose
Wife was Procris. Magnes, his Sons were Polydectes, and Dictys, Inhabitants of
Seriphus. Perieris of Gorgophone daughter to Perseus, begat Aphareus,
Leucippus, Tyndareus, and Icarus.

Hitherto Apollodorus brings the progeny of the Aeolids. But Lib. 4. p. 187.
Graec. edit.
Diodorus Siculus, besides these, mentions another Son of Aeolus, called
Mimas, who wandering remote from his brothers, reigned in Aeolis. his Son was
Hippotes, who of Melanippe begat Aeolus, whose daughter was Arne, who being got
with child of Neptune, and for that reason delivered in custody to a
Metapontinean, by her Father, she at his house was brought to bed of Twins,
Aeolus named after his Grandfather, and Beotus, of whom Aeolus inhabited those
Islands, from him called Aeoles: and Beotus, returns to his Grandfather, and
ruled in Aeolis, who built Arnes, naming the Inhabitants Beotians after his own
name.

But Xuthus (for of Dorus progeny there is nothing memorable) Hellens youngest
Son, expelled by his brothers, Ionum stirpe.
made his abode in A^tica, where marrying the daughter of Erechtheus, King of
Athens, he had Sons, Achaeus, and Ion. Achaeus against his will becoming
guilty of murder, (as Conon upon Photius has it) escapes to Peloponnesus, and
in that Kingdom which he named Achaia, (but, before, Aegialea) he built
Tetrapolis; After which, by the assistance and aid of the Athenians, and
Aegialenses, going into Thessaly, he received his fathers possession.

Ion remained at Athens, and if we may credit Conon, Jones called Atticks.
Erechtheus being dead, obtained the same Kingdom; From him also were the
Atticks called Jones. But this only that Author asserts. Neither is Ion
in-registred amongst the Kings of the Atticks. But Pausanias says, that after
the death of Erectheus, there arising a contention amongst his Sons about their
succession, that Xuthus of Achaia, the father of Ion, was by them chosen as
Umpire, who adjudging the Kingdom to Cecrops, as being the eldest, being
constrained to obscure himself from the other brothers, he betook himself to
Aegialus, which was then in Achaia, where he died. Of Ion the same Pausanias
relates, that in Achaia, when he made his escape out of Attica to make war
against Selinunt, was to him reconciled, by an agreement of marriage with
Helice. Selinunt's only daughter, and afterward succeeding his Father in Law,
he named them Jones, which before were called Aegialenses, Afterward there
arising a war between the Athenians and the Eleusinians, by whom Ion being
chosen Captain, coming out of Achaia, he finished his life in Attica. This
Pausanias relates concerning the Achaians and the Atticks.

It is now worth our labor to consider what distinction of Languages were used
amonst the first Graecians, De Graecorum variis linguis.
for the people were principally derived into three kinds, Aeolicks, Doricks,
and Ionicks, to which may be added Atticks; who could not consist without being
joined to the Ionians. Strabo says of these four languages, or dialects of the
Greeks, there were but two Originally. The other being corruptly formed from
the commixture of the others. The two former are the Doricks, and the Atticks,
whereof the former is the Ancient Aeolick, and the other the Ionick. But that
which was afterward termed to be the Aeolick and Ionick, through their
commerce with diverse Nations, varied its property according to their several
conditions; for the former remained incorrupted, because that they possessed
quietly the Country of the Doricks, and Atticks, by reason of their roughness
and barrenness, being little invaded by strangers and Foreigners.

The same Author adds, That all the People beyond Isthmus were in Greece,
excepting the Athenians, Megarenses, and Doricks, the Inhabitants of Parnassus,
and were called Aeolians even to this time. But of ancient time the Aeolenses
inhabited between Isthmus, with whom the Jones coming out of Attica, and the
Doricks from Doris were mingled. These also the Heraclides brought back into
Peloponnesus: but why the Doricks are reported by Strabo to be brought back
into Peloponnesus, I do not very well see; nor that afterward the Ionians and
Aeolians had first their seat there, as we read. But the same Author in his 9th
book writes, That Aepalius King of the Doricks being by Hercules restored to
his Kingdom, for requital of that favor, adopted Hyllus, Hercules's son, whom
also he left his successor: from whence sprang the Heraclides, the inhabiters
of Peloponnesus. Moreover, Strabo lib. 8.
the Ionians (as * Strabo writes) were by the Achaians, of the Aeolian's stock,
driven out of Agialus, or Achaia; from whence there remained but two sorts in
Peloponnesus, the Doricks, and Aeolicks.

Moreover, the Arcadians and Eleans, who inhabited those ancient Seats, who by
reason of the Mountains in that Kingdom, and craggy rocks, could hardly be
approacht unto, sacrificing to Jupiter Olympius, used the Dorick tongue; but
the others, a language made up of the Attick and Dorick dialect, says Strabo,
in the beginning of his 8th book; which quotation of the Author is something
corrupted.

It is not in the power of humane Art exactly to compute the times wherein
these things happened, yet I shall endeavor it in a homely style. Xuthus
banished out of Thessaly into Attica, repairs to King Erectheus; Erectheus began
to reign in the year before Christ 1400, Deucalion's flood is reported to be
much about the year before Christ, 1529. So that the stock of Hellen being
named Grecians, and distinguished into several kinds of people, were about 14.
or 15. ages before Christ. Much about the time that the Israelites possessed of
Palestine, began to be under Judges. This order observed, partly out of other
probable Histories, and partly by conjecture, we shall prudently compute the
time of the several posterities of Hellen, which in this place will be
needless to do.

CHAP. VIII. Of the time of the Maecenian Kings, which succeeded the Grecians,
and of the Inachids, and some remarkable passages of Perseus his progeny,
conducing to better knowledge of Antiquity.
THe ancientest family of the Grecian Kings (says Eusebius) took its rise from
Acrisius, and from thence he faith was the Kingdom of Mycaene tranflated by
Perseus, the City whereof he built, still governing Greece; for after the death
of Acrisius, Megapenthe Proetus his son, Talaus and Adrastus made this City the
head of the Kingdom, Talaus succeeding Megapenthe; Vide 9. de doct. temp. c.
16. and 18.
after whose death Adrastus his son leaving Greece, traveled into Sycione,
where after he had governed certain years, he returned to Greece again, where
he received Tydius and Polynices, two fugitives. But truly at that time when
Agamemnon governed Mycene, did Diomedes the son of Tydius rule over Greece, as
Eustathius observes about the 9th Iliad in this verse; (...). That we may come
to the Mycenians, we must explain the stock of Perseus, with which are
contained the chiefest Acts of the Grecians in that Age. But deriving their
original yet higher, we shall speak of the progeny of the Agenorians or
Cadmeians, in which we shall follow Apollodorus. Inachus had a daughter named
Io. she going into Egypt, had by Jupiter, Epaphus the King of Egypt, of whose
daughter Lybia and Neptune got Belus and Agenor, being twins; Bilidarum stirps.
so faith Apollidorus: But we assent rather to Paus. Corin. p. 58.
Pausanias, who makes this Io, not the daughter of Inachus, but of Jasus many
years since, which also appears by the time of Danaus. Besides these two,
Neptune is said to have begotten of Lybia, Busiris Eusebius. Apol. 4.
also, who leading his life not far remote from Nilus, was very noted for theft
and murder, much about the Jews departure out of Egypt. I shall return to the
sons of Epaphus, of whom Agenor went into Phoenicia; Belus governed in Egypt,
and had two sons, Aegyptus, and Danaus; the former he sent to Arabia to obtain
it; the other into Lybia. After which, when Aegyptus had 50 sons, Danus as many
daughters, who being by the Oracle advised, that he should be slain by one of
his brother's sons, Danaus of whom the Grecians.
he escapes into Greece in a Ship rowed with 50 Oars, where Sthenelus being
dead, and Gelanor his Successor banished by the consent of the people, he was
made King the year before Christ, 1475, the third after the death of Joseph: by
his name were the Grecians called Danai. After this, the sons of Aegyptus going
into Greece, were there murdered by their Wives, the Daughters of Danaus;
Only Lynceus excepted, who succeeded his father-in-Law. Lynceus took his
beginning from the year before Christ 1425, wherefore a little before this, by
consequence, happened this massacre. Lynceus had a son named Abas; he also had
two sons, Proetus, and Acrisius; the former of whom, Eusebius says, governed
in Greece; but Corin. p. 58. and vid. 9. de doct. Temp. cap. 18.
Pausanias says, That they so divided their fathers kingdom, that Acrisius
obtained Argos; Proetus, Tyrinthe, Midea, and Haereon. Apollod. 2.
Apollodorus mentions, that after the death of their father Abas, they
contended for the Kingdom, and that Acrisius being conqueror, continued at
Argos: Proetus making his escape to Iobates in Lycia, whose daughter Sthenobea,
or, as Homer would have it, Antia, he married; after which, relying upon his
father-in laws assistance, he returned to Peloponnesus, and possessed himself of
Tyrinth; but Eusebius opposes this, who ranketh Proetus amongst the Kings of
Greece in order before Acrisius, wherefore his 17 past years must be restored
to Abas or Acrisius. This is that Proetus, to whom Bellerophon the sixth son of
Glaucus fled from Deucalion, when he had committed murder; and being allured
by Stenobea to commit fornication with her, upon his denial, being subtly by
her accused, he was sent to Apollod. 2.
Iobates in Cilicia, where he is said to have encountered with the Chimaera,
which falls out to be in the year before Christ 1360, Ehud exercising the
office of Judge to the Hebrews.

In the reign of Acrisius, as I suppose, was Perseus born of his daughter
Dan^e, which in his second year was computed before Christ, 1343, He having
overcome those dangers which are noted by those fables of him, about the 25
year of his age going with an Army into the East, he achieved those things at
Cepheum, which are celebrated by the verses of the Poets, and had to Wife
Andromeda. Clement's error, Strom. 1.
Which from ancient Chronologies, Clemens Alexandrinus notes to be 34 years
before the destruction of Troy, it being a manifest error, which in some
foregoing pages he contradicts by another computation of time. Eusebius. Chron.
Acrisius was unawares slain by Perseus his grandchild about the 31 year of his
reign, being in the year before Christ 1312, or 1311; at that time was Perseus
in Greece with his Wife Andromeda, being about some five or six years before he
delivered it; for it is more probable, that Acrisius then reigning, and not
dead, Perseus was born, who was not above 30 years old when he slew Acrisius,
Paus. Corinth. p. 58.
who being dead, not any longer abiding to live at Argos, he changed his Empire
with Megapenthe his Uncle, son to Proetus, and at Tyrynth, which fell to
Proetus his share, as is before spoken, he constituted his Kingdom, which
afterward he translated to Mycenas, a City by himself built. But Megapenthe,
when he had reigned certain years at Argos, resigns his kingdom to Talaus, as
is before said.

Perseus therefore about 1312 years before Christ, Perseus his sons.
began to reign first at Tyrinth, and afterward at Mycaenas, who besides
Perses, whom he left with his father-in law Cepheus, from whom the Persians are
named; He begot of his Wife Andromeda at Mycenas, six sons, Alcheus, Sthenelus,
Hela, Mestor, Electryon, and a daughter called Gorgophone, whom Perierus Aeolus
his son, and Hellen's grandson married, as a little before I showed you.

To Alcaeus of Hypominome, Menoecius his daughter, was born Amphitruo, and a
daughter called Anaxo; of Mestor and Lysidice, daughter of Pelops, was born
Hyppothoe, of whom by Neptune was brought forth Taphius, who built the City
Taphon in Cephallenia, naming the people Teleboans; Taphaus his son was
Pterelas, whom Neptune made immortal.

Electrio by Anaxo daughter of Alceus, had Alomena, besides nine sons, and
Licymnius of Midea's bastard. Sthenelus by Nicippe the daughter to Pelops,
begat Euristheus, to whose service Hercules devoted himself.

Between the beginning of Perseus his reign, and Sthenelus's, were 58 years;
for Sthenelus began about the year of the World 2730, which interval Perseus
does not seem to exceed, if we may credit ^^^^dorus, who says, That Electrion
governed Micenas with Taphius. But Pausanias in his Corinth says, at Midea.
And that may be, that he might both reign at Micaenas, and at Midea too; for
Midea and Tyrens are tributaries to Micaenas. Moreover, in the Catalogue of
Micaena's Kings, are reckoned Electrio and Taphius, Perseus his sons, who are
set before Sthenelus, unless that at the same time we will have more Kings to
govern all together, which in those days was used, when the Governors but of
Cities went under the term of Kings. Taphius truly, and Electrion swayed the
Scepter both together, whose sons demanding their part of their father's
Kingdom from Electryon, there arising a great contest, slew his sons; which to
revenge, Electrio gave his daughter Alomena to Amphitruon, upon that condition,
that he should not have her, till his return from his Expedition against the
Teleboans; but when Amphitruon had imprudently slain Electrio, expelled by
Sthenelus, with his Wife Alomena, he escapes to Creon at Thebes, by whom being
acquitted according to his former Covenant, he prosecuted his design against
the Teleboans. About that time the report goes of Hercules his birth, that it
was 1289 before Christ; Hercules born. Eusebius notatur.
which being thus, it does extenuate the credit of Eusebius his catalogue of
the Mycenian Kings; for Perseus being dead, Electrio governed before Sthenelus;
nor was Perseus over the Mycenians above 58 years, as from his and Pausanias's
computation we have already showed.

The Posterity of Perseus ending with Euristheus, The Pelopides sprung from
Pelops, that was son to Tantalus King of Phrygia; from these had Peloponnesus
its name, and, as some conjectured, they held their dominion over all
Peloponnesus: but it is not so, for he first reigned in Pisia, and by his great
Valor and Industry, he reduced most of the Inhabitants of that Island, as
Diod. lib. 4. p. 192.
Diodorus affirms. He removed out of Phrygia into Greece, and obtained
Hippodamia Oenemaus his daughter more by craft, then as the true reward of his
swiftness in the race wherein they contended, which happened in the year
before Christ 1324, at the expiring of Ehud's Government over Israel. Hyg. f.
81. etc.
His sons were Atreus and Thyestes, who became very noted to Posterity, from
their hateful parricides and Incestuous rapes: Thyestes defiled Aerope his
brothers Wife. Atreus on the other side made him a feast of his sons being
murdered. After this, Thyestes in whoredom with Pelop's daughter, begat
Aegystus, which slew Agamemnon, Atreus his son, whom Apollodorus would have to
be descended of Plisthene, Atreus his son, as also Menelaus asserts; and this
Eustathius, from Hesiod his Author, confirms, at the beginning of his Iliads,
in these words; (...). Where it is evident, that the Kingdom of the Mycenians
was translated to the Pelopides, about the time that the Heraclides enjoyed
Peloponnesus; of which hereafter: for the Pelopides (...) came into Affinity
with the stock of Perseus; so that, of Nicippe, Pelop's daughter, Sthenelus
begat Euristheus, as aforesaid.

CHAP. IX. Of another double Progeny of the Inachids, Agenorians, and
Pelasgians, and of Cadmus his stock.
HItherto we insisted upon the race of Belus, or Danaus, from whom the Persians
sprang: now we shall speak a little to the other stock of the Inachids, which
took its rise from Agenor; this is not impertinent, for to give us a light into
the more ancient Achievements of Greece.

Agenor of Telephassa begat Europa his daughter, besides three Sons Phoenices,
Cadmus, and Cilices; as Apollodorus in his third Book, who in his second Book
asserts that Agenor had these Sons when he was in Phoenicia, which is a
Kingdom in Asia, and in the third, after his coming into Europe, to which
agrees that Phoenices being sent with his brother Cadmus to seek his sister,
whom not finding, he went into Phoenicia, that from thence his father might not
send him away. Wherefore when Jupiter had ravished Europa, Agenor appoints his
three Sons to go to seek her, with whom went their Mother Telephassa. Cadmus.
Whereupon Phoenix inhabites Phoenicia; Cilix, Cilicia. Cadmus after his Mother
Telephassas death, comes into Greece and builds Thebes after the names, as it
appears, of the Country. For Agenor seems to take his rise from the Egyptian
Thebes. Conon. lib. 32.37.
Conon upon Photius writes that Europa was the daughter of Phoenix (which also
Apollodorus affirms). But Cadmus who had great Authority among the Phoenicians,
was by their King sent into Europe to erect a new Government, there dissembling
his intent to be the seeking of his sister. And last of all he is thought to
have built Thebes in Beotia borrowing its name from the Egyptian word, because
the Phoenicians having got a great part of Asia, placed the seat of the Thebane
Kingdom in Egypt: from this is that fable that Cadmus sailing into Europe to
seek his sister who came to inhabit Europe; thus says Conon. Nemeac. 10.
Pindarus Scholiastes asserts that Agenor reigned in Phoenicia. But however
things were, it must needs be that Cadmus his coming into Greece, and building
of Thebes, was in the time of the first constitution of Judges, and the Hebrews.

Cadmus by Harmonia, had these daughters Autonoe, Ino, Semele, Cadmus his
posterity.
and Agave, his Sons name being Polydorus. Autonoe he married to Aristaeus, Ino
to Athamas, and Agave to Echionus. Bacchus his age.
Semele brought forth Bacchus about 1354. years before Christ. Ehud being then
Judge over the Hebrews. Eusebius would have it to be 628. years from Abraham,
which was before Christ 1389. But Semele was not then born, Phryxus his flight
with his sister Hellen, was about this time; Apol. 1. Hyg. fab. 4.
both which Nephete bore to Athamus. He afterward married to Ino, by whose
craft Phryxus and Hellen, being by their Father destinated to dye, she compelled
them to convey themselves to Cholchos. In which journey Hellen falling into the
Sea, It was afterward called by her name. Phryxus arriving whither he steered
his course, committed the Treasure which he brought along with him, to the
custody of the King of Colchos. The License of Poetic Verses, relates this to
be the Golden-Fleece, which rich booty Phryxus bringing along with him, left
there to be kept. Polydorus ruled at Thebes, and of Nicteis, daughter of
Nicteus, he begat Labdacus, who dying after Pentheus, he left behind him his
Son Laius, being but a year old, wherefore Lycus, Nicteus his brother (they
both came of Eubea) takes possession of the Kingdom. Nicteus his daughter was
Antiopa, who being great with child by Jupiter, fearing her fathers anger,
flies into Sycione, to Epopeus whom she married. Nicteus dying desires his
brother Lycus to take revenge upon Epopeus, whom having taken at Sycione and
slain, he brought back Antiopa, who in her journey was delivered, at Eulethera
in Beotia, of Zethus and Amphion being twins; where they were taken by a
Cow-heard, and by him brought up. In the interim, Antiopa being but ill treated
of Lycus, and his Wife Dirce, is owned by her Sons, being now grown to age, who
having slain Lycus, and fastened Dirces to the tail of a wild Bull, to be torn
in pieces, they enjoyed the kingdom of Thebes. Laius being by them expelled,
betakes himself to Peloponnesus, and Zethus to Thebes; Amphion marries Niobe
daughter of Tantalus; who being all defunct, Laius is restored to the Kingdom,
and takes Jocasta to wife, the daughter of Menoecius, by whom he had Oedipus,
whose incest in marrying his Mother, and slaughter of his Sons, is the general
subject of Poets, being personated upon every Theater. A little after he was
expelled Thebes; The time wherein happened the rest, may be computed from the
first year of his coming into Greece. Thus Apollodorus, lib. 3.

Last of all from Europa and Asterius King of Crete, as Eusebius. chron.
Eusebius says, but Apollodorus asserts from Jupiter, Minos Radamanthus, and
Sarpedon were born. Diod. 4. p. 183.
Diodorus is the Author of two Minoes, one being the Son, the other the
Grandson of Europa.

The Poets and Historiographers mention a third race, The third race of the
Inachids.
of the Pelasgians to proceed from Inachus: for Pelasgus being descended from
Jupiter by Niobe the daughter of Phoraneus, who was Inachus his Niece; Lycaon
Son of Dion. Hal. lib. 1. Apol. 2. and 3.
Pelasgus, had fifty children, who were all except Nyctimus slain: he had also
a daughter named Apollod. l. 3.
Calistone, of whom was born Arcas: His Sons were Elatus and Aphidas, who begat
Aleus and Stenobea, Wife to Pretus. To Aleus were born Cepheus, Lycurgus, and
Auge sister to them both, who bore to Theuthrantis, Telephus King of Mysia.
Lycurgus his Sons are reported to be Anceus, Epochus, Amphidamas, and Ideus; of
Amphidamus, Melanion, who married Atlanta, the daughter of Jasus or Schoeneus,
and Mother to Parthenopaeus, one of the seven Captains that attempted the
taking of Thebes.

Therefore the Pelasgians seem to be the same with the Arcadians, Strab. l. 5.
p. 153. Dion. Halic. l. 4. p. 14.
which, expelled out of Peloponnesus, went into Hemonia, which is also
Thessaly, under the conduct of Acheus, Pythius, and Pelasgus, from whence after
six years being driven by the Curetians and Letegians which afterward were
called Aetolians and Locrians, some to Crete, some to the Cyclades, others to
Hestiotis, which lies at the foot of Olympis, and Ossa. Others to Beotia,
Phocis, and Euboea, others betaking themselves to Asia, Hellespont, and Lesbos,
many of them escaping into Saturnia, which is Italy, there made their Original
abode, as says Dyonisius, to which Strabo assents.

CHAP. X. Of Hercules, Jason, The Expedition of the Argonautes, Minos, Theseus,
Oedipus, and his sons, and of the Thebane War.
AT that time which immediately followed the departure of the Hebrews out of
Egypt, were extant those names famous amongst the Poets in their verses, and
also those fabulous Grecian Heroes; some whereof are ranked amongst the
greater, other esteemed to be of the demie and lesser gods. Most of these here
and there, as occasion has offered, we have already treated of; and now we
shall come to speak of some of the most noted amongst them; and first of all of
Hercules, which name appears not to be attributed to one alone. Diodor. fine.
I. 3. Hercules plures.
There were three mentioned by Diodorus, one of the ancientest of which was
Aegyptius, who traveled over all the World in the exercise of arms. The
second, Cretensis, who came of the Cybells Priests, and instituted the Olympic
games. The last of all was born of Alomena, a little before the Trojan Wars,
who was subject to the commands of Euristheus: These, Diodorus asserts, are by
the Vulgar reduced to One. Cic. 3. de Not. deorum. Herculis Postremi gesta.
Cicero reckons six, the last of which is this same son of Alomena, of whom we
shall here speak. The father of Alomena, was Electrio, the son of Perseus and
Andromedes; his Mother, as Apollodorus thinks, was Anaxo the daughter of
Alceus; but as Lib. 4. p. 151.
Diodorus says, Eurymeda or Eurydice of Pelops; She when she had married
Amphitruon her Cozen-german, (for he was the son of Alceus, the brother of
Electrio, Perseus his son,) was delivered of Hercules by Jupiter, whose age
appears to be much about the time of Gideon's command, for Eurystheus began to
reign in the year of the Julian Period 3468, the ninth year of Gideon, and
before Christ 1246. Hercules gesta.
Hercules being born at Tyrene, was carried with Amphitruon to Thebes, Diodor.
4. p. 152.
which City as it began to increase by his means, shook off their subjection to
the command of Erginus King of the Minians, and overthrew Orchomen, a City in
Boeotia, which was the Metropolitan of that Kingdom. For which, Creon King of
Thebes gave him Megera his daughter to his Wife. After which, obliged to the
service of Eurystheus, he achieved various attempts. Diod. 4. p. 18. Hyg. fab.
14. and 89. Apoll. 1.
He went also with Jason amongst the Argonautes to Colchos, and encountering the
Diod. 4. p. 156. Apol. 2.
Amazones, together with their Queen Hyppolita, overcame them at the City of
Themissa, from thence returning to Diod. 4. p. 165. Hyg. 89.
Troy, he is reported, having overcome it, and slain Laomedon, to have
conferred the kingdom upon Priamus. He also made incursion upon Spain and Italy
some 55 years before the last subversion of Troy, as by and by shall be spoken
of: but at the celebration of the Diod. 4. p. 170. Eusebius. Chro.
Olympic games in Greece, falling into a desoerate sickness, he cast himself
living into a burning fire: of all which, the certain time may be conjectured,
from the Expedition of the Argonautes; of which therefore it will be here
convenient to speak a little.

Apoll. 1. Argonautarum Expeditio.
Critheus the son of Aeolus, grandchild to Hellen, whose great grandfather was
Deucalion, begat Aeson the father of Jason, upon Salmon the daughter of Tyron,
and of her, being ravished by Neptune, Pelias was begotten. He, Critheus being
dead, invades the kingdom of Thessalie, having expelled his brother Aeson,
whose son increasing now in vigorous years and strength, whom fearing, he
commands him to fail for Colchos, to fetch thence the Golden Fleece, which was
to regain that Treasure which Phryxus in his flight had there laid up. The fame
of this Expedition being spread through Greece, which then abounded with most
valiant men, many of which he makes his associates and partners of this so
glorious an enterprise, whose names are various. The Vid. Hyg. fab. 14. Apoll.
1. Apollon. Rhod. Val. Orph. etc.
chiefest are famed to be Hercules the son of Alcmena, Orpheus born of Oeagrus
and Calliopa, eminent in Music and Poetry; Castor and Pollux, Peleus the
father of Achilles, Telamon, Thesus, Peritheus, and others. Who having
constituted Jason their Captain, and provided a Ship larger then hitherto had
been seen any, to whom for her swiftness they gave the name Argo, hoist sail
for Troas. Where Hercules delivered Hesion the daughter of Laomedon, Dion. 4.
Hyg. etc.
having slain the Whale to which she was exposed to be devoured; and having a
grant of her for his labor, he left her behind with her father, together with
his swift horses, till at his return from his Expedition, he might receive them
altogether. Jason no sooner arrives at Colchos, but falling in league with
Medea, the daughter of King Aeeta, is made master of his desires, whom having
wedded, he conveys her, together with the Golden Fleece for Thessaly. Hercules
demanding his contracted-for reward from Laomedon, and seeing himself deluded
by his perjury, vanquisheth Troy, slayes Laomedon, and delivers the Kingdom to
his son Priamus. The writer of the lesser Iliads reports, this to be done about
forty years before the Grecians utterly demolished Troy. Wherefore the Voyage
of the Argonautes appears (if it be so) to have been in the year that is
numbered before our Christian Epock 1226; Dares the Phrygian relates these
things somewhat variously, saying, That these Argonautes being denied the
Harbor of Troy by Laomedon, that soon after they were returned into Greece,
having furnished themselves with a Fleet of Men of War, having sailed to Troas,
took the City of Ilium, and slew Laomedon with all his sons, one only
excepted, who was then happily absent, Priamus by name; and that Hesto fell to
Telamon's lot in reward of his virtue: whom Priamus by his Ambassadors in vain
redemanding, he sent his son Alexander into Greece with an Army, by whom
Menelaus's Wife, Helen by name, being carried away, hereby was caused that huge
and so memorable War; Thus says Dares, the Phrygian.

Diod. 4. p. 176.
These Argonautes being returned home into their Country, they appointed to
make, in Jupiter's honor, a solemn Play, with great preparation and show, and
they committed the care of it to Hercules; who erected the Olympic games in
Elis, a Province of Peloponnesus, near the River Alpheus, although that Vell. 1.
Velleius makes Atreus the Author of them, and that he says, That through them
Hercules was the Conqueror of all sorts of games; but it may be that these
games were not only once, and by both in a short space of time played and
celebrated, Hercules death was not long before the attempt of his posterity
upon Peloponnesus, and before Eristheus's death, which falls upon the twentieth
year before Troy's utter destruction, as hereafter shall be evidenced.

In the mean time Jason living at Corinth with Creon the King, Diod. p. 179.
Apoll. 1. Diod. Ibidem.
he married Glaucis his daughter, having repudiated Medea, having now lived ten
years with her; which injury his cruel formal Wife, revenging upon Creon's
family, and upon her own children which she had by Jason, she flies for
security to Hercules then in Thebes; and after tedious and long wanderings, she
at last after a long space of time returns into her own Country; Jason by
reason of his treachery being much envied, Diod. p. 180.
being destitute of all things, he bereft himself of his life. There escaped
Thessalus, the only one of Jason's and Medea's children, who afterward
setting upon Iolcus his fathers Country, Vell. 1. Diod. 4. p. 183. plu. These.
Apol. 3. Hyg.
took the Kingdom due to him by his father's right, which from him was called
Thessalia; though the same Velleius attributes this to another of the same
name.

At the same time did Mines reign in Crete, the Nephew of that other Minos who
is said to be Jupiter's son by Europa; Aegeus, Theseus's father, caused this
man's son named Androgeus, to be murdered in Attica: And for this cause did
Minos wage War with the Athenians, then at the same time a great famine and
drought being sent of God into Attica, and throughout all Greece, the Princes
of the Cities sent to Delphos to consult the Oracle, What remedy they might
take for this evil? And as they were asking, Diod.
the Oracle answered, That they should make Aeacus the son of Jupiter and
Aegena, the Patron and Mediator of all Greece. Aeacus having taken well and in
good part their vows, restored fertility and plentifulnesse to the fields of
them all, except of the Athenians: But they going again to the Oracle, Apollos
answered, That they should not have an end put to this evil, until they
satisfied Minos's desire concerning Androgeus's death; therefore by his decree,
every seventh year they are commanded to send seven Males, and so many females
into Crete. Hyg. fab. 41.42.
Whither Theseus Aegeus's son, being come, either by his own free will, or by
chance having overcome the Minotanrus (which is said to have been Minos's
General under the name of a Bull) by the help and danger of Ariadna, which was
in love of him, he freed for ever the Athenians from this bondage: This
happened a little before the death of Aegeus, and the beginning of Theseus's
reign; for when Aegeus saw a ship of Theseus sailing from Crete with sails, and
not white, as amongst them was agreed, into the harbor of Athens, he is said
to have cast himself head long into the Sea. Again, Theseus began to reign some
forty seven years or thereabouts before the ruin of Troy. Then Minos fetching
back by force of arms, Clem. Alex. 1. Strom. Diod. 4. p. 194. Hig. 43. These.
vide. par. 29. l. 2. c. 9.
Dedalus his ingeneer, who had fled from Crete to Cocalus, King of Sicily, was
smothered in a Bath by the said Cocalus. Theseus at the emulation of Hercules
having achieved great things, got a famous name throughout all Greece.

Amongst his chief exploits he cut to pieces the Amazonian Armies, Plu. These.
Diod. 4. p. 163. Diod. 4. p. 185. Vetus Chronol. apud. Clem. Alex. l. 1.
Plutarch. Arund marm. Plut.
which from Pontus had bordered upon the coasts of Athens, in the Month
Boedromio, having spoiled them of their Colors; who for the memorial of this
signal Victory, had afterward this name. Afterward, he preserved in the
safeguard of the Athenians, with an excellent commendation of fidelity,
Hercules his posterity from Euristheus, who pursued them with arms. At length
having ravished Helen, a Virgin of ten years of age, some five and twenty years
before the destruction of Troy, and having provoked the Tyndars to war against
himself, being expelled out of Athens by Menescaeus's faction, he retired
himself into the Island Syrus, and there he dyed for grief, not without the
detestation of his ungrateful Country, which divided into Borroughs and
Villages at the beginning of his reign, he had brought into a body of a whole
City. Diod. 4. p. 185. Hig. 67. etc. Apoll. 3.
Before this time, there was a sad spectacle done at Thebes. Oedipus having
slain his father Laius unadvisedly, in recompense of his slaying Sphinx, he
married Jocasta his Mother, from which wedlock were born Etheocles and
Polynices. The thing being found out, Oedipus his eyes being plucked out,
freely and willingly suffered punishment; his Sons did so agree together, that
they should reign every year at their turns, but Eteocles having reigned his
year, would not afterward yield the dominion to his brother Polynices, who
retiring to Adrastus into Argos became his Son in Law. Apoll. 3. Diod. 4. p.
185. Hyg. 68. and seq. The names of the seven Princes that went against Thebes.
Hence, Theseus being yet living, there arose a vehement war against the
Thebans, Polynices stirring up Adrastes and other Princes, who are said to be
seven in number, to war against his brother Etheocles. Adrastus who ruled at
Argos. Tydeus the son of Oeneus, the Calydonian, Capaneus, Hippomedon,
Parthenopeus, born of Atalantha, Schenoeus's daughter, Amphiaraus who had
married Eriphilis, Adrastes sister, and Polynices: all which perished with an
exceeding great slaughter of their Army, the Carcasses of all whom Creon, the
brother of this same man's Mother, and brother in law to Oedipus, Apol. 3.
forbad to be buried; Adrastus only escaping alive. But the Athenians, Theseus
being their Captain General, denounced wars to the Thebans, according to common
civility; and having taken their City, they gave them liberty to celebrate the
Funerals of their Friends.

This Thebane war was, Clem. Alex. 1. Strom. Diod. 4. p. 187. Hyg.
if we may give faith to the old Chronicles of Clemens, thirty seven years
before the overthrow of Troy, and ten years after that, those Princes were
destroyed before Thebes: their Sons who were called Epigonians, having chosen
Alcmeon, Amphiaraus's Son for their General, they undertook a War against the
Thebans, and these Thebans being overcome in fight, they demolish the City;
they lead away prisoner Tiresia, who died by the way, and send away his
daughter from Manto to Delphos, which thence went into Asia. Diodorus calls her
Daphne, Paus. Acha. p. 208. Diod. 4. 187.
and says that she remained at Delphos, and relates that the Oracles have
elegantly set forth her beauty, and rare qualities, Diod. 4. 187.
out of which Oracles he says that Homer took not a little: The Thebans being
expelled out of their City, they likewise turn the Dorians out of their Towns
and City, and many of them afterward returned to Thebes.

CHAP. XI. Of the Trojans Kingdom, and of the ruin of Troy, of Aeneas 's
travel into Italy, of the age of Jupiter and Saturn.
ALmost fifty years after the Children of Israel went forth out of Egypt, a
little before Joshua's death, Apollod. 3. Diod. 42. p. 191.
was erected the Kingdom of Troy in Asia, by Dardanus, although Teucer is said
to have reigned the first in Troy, who was the Son of Scamander and of Idea the
Nymph, from whom the people were called Teucri. Moreover Jupiter and Electra,
had yet two Sons more, Dardanus and Jasion or Jasius, who both reigned first in
Italy, Virg. 3. Aen. and Ser. Varro. and Greeks. apud. Serve. ibid.
and that in the City Coritus in Tufcia, though some do not consent that they
draw their Original out of Italy, but out of Arcadia; therefore having both
left their fathers Court, they came into Samothracia.

Whence afterward; Dardanus traveling to Troy, was courteously received of
Teucer the King, and married his daughter Batiea. Serve. ad. 3. Aen. aut Troy.
Apoll. 3.
Some say that Dardanus slew his brother Jasius. Apollodorus says that for his
attempting to violate Ceres, he was killed by a Thunderbolt: Serve. ad. 3: Aen.
auct. l. de prog. aug. Apol. Diod.
There are yet some who think that Dardanus reigned in Troy before Teucer, and
that this man came from Crete. Teucer being dead, Dardanus built a City of his
name in Mount Ida, near the Sea, and called the people Dardanians, after his
name: his Son Erichthonius begat Troe of Astyoche, Simoes daughter; Apoll. Ibid.
by whom the Country was called Troia. This Troe begat of Callirrhoe,
Scamandrus's daughter, Ilus, Assaracus, Ganimedes, and Cleopatra a daughter.
Tantalus King of Paphlagonia, stole Ganimed away about 192. years before the
destruction of Troy, Diod. 4. p. 191. Clem. Alex. 1. Stro.
as Clemens Alexandrine asserteth out of the old Chronicles. Eusebius's
Chronicles mention this History a little after this time, and calls the King of
Phrygia, which then was called Meonia, Tantalus. Ilus avenging this injury by
arms, expells Tantalus out of his kingdom. Diod.
To Assaracus was born Capys, who begat Anchises, father to Aeneas. Ilus built
up Ilium in the Champion Country of Troas, and begat Laomedon, who had two
Sons Tithonus and Podarces, and a daughter called Hesion. Tythonus being gone
into the East, and Aethiopia; there he begat Memnon his Son. Podarces, Laomedon
being slain, as we have said above, received the kingdom of Hercules, Auct.
Troic.
which he is said to have held forty years, he had many children. Amongst whom
was Alexander who is called Paris, who being carried by shipping into
Peloponnesus and Sparta, he ravished and stole away his Host Menelaus's Wife:
For whose sake the Greeks waged a cruel and bloody war of ten years time
against the Trojans, The Trojan War. Dyctis Cret. Dares Phryg. Hyg.
to the great detriment of both Nations, and to loss of both their valiant
Generals. But the Greeks at last whose cause was more Just, obtained the
Victory, having taken and demolished the City by Anthenors's and Aeneas's
treason. This overthrow certainly was in that very year 3530. of the Julian
Period, before Christ, 1184. in the time of Jair Judge over the Hebrews:
fortune was not much more favorable, to the Conquerours, as they returned
home, than she had been to them that were conquered; for most part were cast
away or oppressed by the Tempest. Velle l. 1. Hyg. fab. 119.
Agamemnon in the embraces of his household Gods, and of his wife, was thrust
through, and so murdered by the adulterer Aegisthus, Thyesta's Son, but his
Son Orestes did afterward avenge his death, who with Electra his sister,
familiar to all his counsels, did slay Aegisthus and Clytemnestra his own
Mother, the Gods (as it is reported) approving this his parricide, blessed him
with a long and happy reign, for he reigned seventy years and lived ninety, and
he married Hermio, Menelaus's and Helena's daughter, Pyrrhus Achilles Son,
being slain at Delphos, who had taken to himself his contracted spouse twenty
years after Ilium's destruction.

With better success did those two Trojans, Eusebius. Aeneas goes into Italy.
Dictys l. 5. Virg. 1. Aen. Dares Halic. 1. Live. 1. Eusebius. Chron. l. de orig.
Romans Halic. vide par. 2. l. 2. c. 10.
Antenor and Aeneas, from the burning of Troy, go into far Countries; of whom,
the first landing in the Venetian shore, built there Patavia, the other with a
fleet of two and twenty ships arrived into Latium which was then ruled by
Latius, Faunius's son, or as some would have it Hercules's Son: Before whom we
find there was but four Kings, Janus, Saturnus, Picus, and Faunus: whilst
Janus reigned Saturn being expelled by his Son Jupiter, he came to the Italian
shore, and there being courteously entertained, he built a Tower not far from
Janiculum, which from his name he called Saturnia. Vide Lact. fine l. 1.
Eusebius's Chronicles allot 130. years to these four Kings: whence it appears
that the beginning of Janus's reign was about 1330. The age of Jupiter and
Saturn. Aen. c. 7. 14. Met. Dion. Halic. 1. Victor de. Orig.
years before Christ, and by this we may gather what is the ancienty of the
heathenish Gods: for being Saturn as I have said, was alive when Janus ruled in
the year 1330. before Christ, his son Jupiter could not be born much before
that, and that was in the time of Ehud, judge over the Hebrews, about three
thousand years before this our age, about which time was the Golden age so much
commended by the Poets Fables. Vrgil and Ovid assert that Picus was Saturns
son: But when Faunus reigned, then did Evander sail from Arcadia into Italy, it
being some threescore years before Troy's destruction, and built there
Palantium, where room was built after: Before his time, the Pelasgians went
first out of Thessaly into Epiros and Dodona; then, being gone thence into
Italy, they joined themselves with the Aboriginians, who long time before had
gone into Italy from Arcadia, by whom the Sicilians being expelled in the space
of sixty years, as Philistus says, or ninety, that is three (...), as
Hellanicus has written; they went into Trinacria or Sicania, which from them
was called Sicily: five years after, Evander arived in Italy; Hercules's
arrival into Italy.
and five and fifty before Troy's destruction, Hercules with a fleet of
Graecians abbording the shores of Italy, was courteously received and
entertained by Evander.

Then Latinus reigning, in the 35th year of his reign, Dion. Halic. 1. Live. 1.
Aliter Conon apud Phot. cod. 186. l. 46.
Aeneas three years after the Trojans calamity was brought to Laurentum's
Country: he made peace and alliance with Latinus, marrying his daughter
Lavinia, after whose name he called that City he built, Lavinium. Then Turnus
the Rutulians's King waged War with Latinus and Aeneas together, being
displeased with both, because he had given his daughter Lavinia rather to a
stranger, then to him an inborn Prince, to whom she had already been promised.
The Rutulians being overcome in fight, there were both Turnus and Latinus slain
the fourth year after Troy's destruction: And so Aeneas alone enjoyed all for
the space of three years, whom being slain in the next Wars he had with the
Rutulians and Mezentius, Aeneas his death.
Kings of the Tyrrhenians, his son Ascanius succeeded, he having dispersed his
enemies, and made peace with Mezentius, 30 years after the building of
Lavinium, he built Alba: In which City 14 Kings after Ascanius, had their seat,
ruling unto Romulus's time, and to the first foundation of Rome.

CHAP. XII. Of the Expeditions of Hercules's Posterity into Peloponnesus; of
Melanthus and Codrus, Kings of Athens; then of the Archontians, of the Aeolick
and Ionick transplantations; and of some other particulars.
HErcules the son of Alcmene and Amphitryo, Ex Apoll. 2. Diod. l. 4. p. 181.
and seq. Paus. Corin. p. 60. et alibi passim. Eusebius. 5. de praep. p. 124.
had his original both from Peloponnesus, and from the Mycenian Kings: for both
his Father and Mother were Perseus's grandchildren, and were brothers children;
for Alcaeus, Amphitryo's father, was Perseus his son; and Alcmena was daughter
to Electrio, Perseus's son: Amphitryo having slain his brother and step-father
inconsiderately, being banished out of Mycenas by his Uncle, went to Thebes;
Hercules being dead, Euristheus the King of Mycenas, Sthenelus's son, did
endeavor utterly to extinguish his posterity, fearing, that if they should
come to age, they would sway the Scepter of the Mycenians Kingdom. Therefore he
denounces to Ceycus King of Trachone, with whom they were to banish out of his
Country those Children whom he suspected, if he had not rather to deliver them
up to him; the which if he does not, he must expect nothing but War. The
Heraclides being affrighted by this command, no body daring to receive and
entertain them for fear of Euristheus, they retire themselves to Theseus, then
King of the Athenians, and not to Demophoon, In Heraclid.
as Euripides says: Euristheus raises a great Army against them, thereupon
was the battle given; In which were chief Commanders Iolaus the son of
Hercules's brother, and Hillus, whom Hercules had begotten by Deianira, and
Theseus; Eristheus being overcome, is killed by Hillus, and all his posterity,
being a son, Apol. 2.
dyed with him. The Heraclides being conquerours, possess themselves of
Peloponnesus, and in a short time recover all that they had lost. But the
Plague being imminent, having hastened their return before the time appointed,
being warned by the Oracle, they freely departed. After this, Hillus having
again consulted the Oracle, he was answered, to stay until the third gathering
of the fruits; Eusebius. 5. de praep.
that was as much as, unto the third age of man: But he understanding it to be
the third year, after this time he prepares a new Expedition, Thucyd. 1.
and sends his Forces through Isthmus, being again deceived by that ambiguous
Oracle, that promised the victory to the Leaders through wet straights: Thucyd.
Scholl. l. 1.
by which deceitful speech, Apollos understood the Sea, through which one
sayls to the mouth of Peloponnesus. As the Heraclides approached near Atreus,
Eristheus's Uncle and his opposed himself with forces to them: The fight being
begun, Aristomachus, one of the Heraclides, is killed, and then Hillus
challenges any one of the enemies to fight with him in a single duel, upon the
condition, That whosoever of either party should overcome, the same party
should possess Peloponnesus, and that the Heraclides if their enemy should
overcome them, should not come again against Peloponnesus such a certain time;
(which Diodorus says, was the space of fifty years, and others say an hundred.
The condition being excepted, Echemus King of the Tegeatars, Schol. Thucyd. ad
l. 1.
fights with Hillus, and at length kills him; The Heraclides return back again
to Actica. This first irruption was twenty years before Troy's ruin.

Then an hundred years after this, Thucyd. 1. Vell. 1. Tatian. Eratost. apud
Clem. Alex. 1. Strom. Apoll. 2. Paus. init. Lacon. Apollod. 2. Pausan. Eliac. 1.
and fourscore years after the overthrow of Troy, the Heraclides assault
Peloponnesus again. The Chiefs of this Expedition were Aristomachus his three
sons, Temenus or Temenes; Cresphontes; and Aristodemus; while they sailed to
Lepantum, Aristodemus dyed either by a Thunderbolt, or by the plot of Pylades
and Electra, children, Tisamenus Kinsmen, whose place his two sons Procles and
Euristhenus supplied, who by the Oracle's command made Trioculus, or a man with
3 eyes, General of the Expedition, they lighted upon a purblind man, riding
upon a Mule, Oxylus by name of Aetolia, having agreed with him to give him
Elis. By his conduct and encouragement, they prepared a Navy, and invade
Peloponnesus. About this time the Country was inhabited almost by two people,
the Achaians and the Jones, so called from Xuthus his two sons; the Achaians
dwelt at Argos and Lacedemon, under the dominion of the Pelopides, which were
Agamemnon's posterity, Tisamenus and Pentilus by name, whose father was
Orestes. The Jones possessed Achaia: The Heraclides having expelled the
Achaians, they distribute their lot into three parts, of which Argos befell to
Temenes, Pausan. Messen. 113. Apoll.
and Messenia to Cresphontes, and Laconia to Aristomedes's sons; and they said,
that these Countries did belong to them by right of inheritance, as well as of
conquest, Paus. Cor. p. 60.
because that the posterity of Perseus possessed Argos before Pelop's children,
and that Hercules had committed Laconia to Tindareus, having slain Hippocoontes
who held it first, and Messenia to Nestor which he had conquered, Paus. Eliac.
1. p. 150. Strabo. l. 8.
having slain Neleus his father, and all his brothers.

Oxylus took possession of Elis as they had covenanted, of whose offspring was
Iphitus, who renewed the Olympic agonals. The Arcadians alone remained in
their former fituation, because they lived in unaccessible and rocky places.
Paus. Cor. p. 56.
The Elidians received in one part of their Country the Aeolians that were
strangers. Renindas Falcus's son did invade the Phltasians, having expelled
Hippasus, who thence went to Samos, and had a son called Euphrones, who was
father to Mnesarchus, of whom descended Pythagoras.

This incursion of the Heraclides afforded great motions and transmigrations
throughout all Greece: for whenever any one Nation was ejected out of her own
Country by a stronger, Paus. in Eliac. 1. and in Acha. p. 206.
she fell upon the next weaker then her self; even as it is done in the Sea,
tormented and tossed by the winds, where the waves arising from far off, drive
away the next in their way. The Achaians being forced to yield their Country to
them, as I have said, they fall upon the Ionians in Achaia, and these being
overcome and put to flight, they went into their Country, Paus. in Acha.
having killed Tissamenus the King in the battle. The Ionians fled into Attica,
where Melanthus received them, who himself had come thither with the children
of Neleides and Nestor, together with others not long before.

Pausanias says, That this man was Andropompus's son, Corint. p. 60.
the grandchild of Borus, whose father was Penthilus, Conon. l. 39. apud Phot.
cod. 186. Suid. in voce (...).
who was the grandchild of Periclymenus, Nestor's son, and that since the
Heraclidian expulsion he went to sojourn in Athens, with whom Conon agrees.
Pernaps then the Athenians with the Boeotians waged War at Oenon, and so for
the singularity of these Kings battle it was demolished. Thymetes King of
Atheas fearing him, Melanthus being in hope of the Kingdom, underwent the
danger. And having slain Xanthus the King of the Boetians, he changed his
banishment to the Athenian Empire, soon after he a stranger received the
Ionians that the Achaians had driven away. Hence it appears, that Melanthus
began his reign in Attica, after the Heraclides return into Peloponnesus;
though Eusebius in his Chronicles seems to think otherwise. Codrus aemulating
his father Melanthus's glory, Velle. 1. Just. 2. Paus. Acha. p. 232. Codrus.
he also deferved greater praises; for in the War that was between the
Dorrenses, the new Inhabitants of Peloponnesus, and the Athenians, Apollos
having answered, That those should be the Conquerors whose General should die
in the battle, having put on a Shepherds habit, he enters the enemies Army,
there rashly stirring up a quarrel, he is slain by a common Soldier whom he
had wounded: The Dorienses finding it to be the corpse of the King, they then
retired without fighting: In which deed of his, whether his contempt of his
life, or of his Kingdom, is most to be admired, it is hard to resolve, because
mortal men usually prefer these two things before any other thing, though never
so dear and precious. This fight was in the year before our Christian account
1071, which is according to the Julian period 3643.

By Codrus's death the Kings of Athens succession being extinguished, and the
Government of the Republic being permitted to the Magistrates, whom they
called (...), they at the beginning were in office for life, and the first of
them was Medon, Codrus's son, Paus. Acha. p. 206.
lame of one foot, whom his brother Neleus not willing that he should be a
Prince, the thing being referred to Apollo's answer, he commanded Medon to have
the office.

That I may make an end to what I had resolved touching the transplantations
and Colonies of the Grecians, The Aeolians transplantation.
After the return of the Heraclides there was two remarkable ones. The first
Aeolick, whereof was Commander in chief Penthilus Orestes's son, Strabo. l. 13.
who as soon as he left Laconia, entered first with his men into Thracia; then
he being dead, there they transported themselves into Asia, and possessed that
part which afterward was called Aeolis; for the Athaians who inhabited
Laconia, Paus. Acha. p. 206. Aelian. l. 8. Varr. c. 5. Herod. in vita Hom.
Velleius.
were the Aeolians. The other transplantation was much more renowned, which is
called Ionick, an hundred and thirty years after the ruin of Troy, or, as some
other do think, 140 years. The Ionians being gone to Athens, as we have already
declared, after Codrus's death, his sons Neleus and Androchus being their
Leaders, they transported themselves into Asia, and into that confine of it
which by them was called Ionia, the Towns whereof they inhabited.

In the space between these two transplantations, Theras, Autesion's son, the
great grandchild of Polynices Oedipus's son, whose sister Argia being married
to Aristodemus, brought forth to him Procles and Euristenes, led a Colony of
Minyans out of Laconia; Now these Minians were the posterity of the Argonautes
of Lemnos, who being driven out of Lemnos by the Pelasgians, they with
entreaties obtained entertainment in Lacedemon, where being courteously
received, and suffered to dwell in the City, as they began to grow insolent,
and to vindicate to themselves the right of the Kingdom, they are cast into
prisons; thence having changed their habits with their Wives, they escape into
Taygetum. But as the Lacedaemonians were leading them to the punishment, Teras
required, that they might be forgiven and granted to him, for to lead them to a
new Plantation. Having obtained them for the companions of his Voyage, he led
them into the Island Calistis, Paus. Acha. p. 206. Strabo 13.
which is between Crete and Lybia, and commanded it to be called Thera after
his name; Pausanias says, That this was done an Age before the Ionick
transplantation, which is esteemed to be thirty years.

After the Jones transplantation out of Attica, Herod in vita Hom. Aelian. l.
8. Varr. c. 5.
the Aeolians began to inhabit the City Cuma Phricotis, or Phriconis, or
Aeolick, who about the same time being departed out of Laconia toward Locris,
and possessed that Mountain Phrisium, whence being transported into Asia, they
called that City Cuma, from that Mountain which they have possessed twenty
years after Lesbon, was frequented by her Citirens; but it is manifest,
Velleius. Cyril. 7. Con. Jul. Vide Eus. 10. de praep.
that this Plantation was increased at the Ionians arrival into Asia with new
Colonies.

The Aelians in the eighteenth year after they had arrived to Cuma, built
Smyrna, that is 168 after the destruction of Troy; At which time was born that
admirable and clear light of understanding, Homer, about a thousand years
before Christ, Solomon then ruling over the Jews; although Authors do not
punctually agree about his age: Longom. 2 Sphaer. p. 83.
Near equal to him was Hesiodus, at the same time both in genius and fame, then
living, who some say was a fore him, and others say, after him; but the learned
in the Poetic Art do gather from Arcturus rising, that he was equal to him.

Cuma was one of the Towns of the Island Eubaea, Steph. Strabo 5. Vell. 1.
Eusebius. Chron.
out of which Calcides, Hippocles, Cumeus, and Megasthenes, the Chalcidonian
leading Colonies into Italy, there they built Cuma, whose travel and steering
(as it is said) a Pidgeon directed flying about before them, or the noise of
brass, such as was wont to be done at the Vigils of Ceres festivals. It Is said,
that they agreed so amongst themselves, that of the two people, the one should
be the Colony, and the other should give him his name; and so having the
Cumeans name, she was properly of the Chalcidonians, which Virgil therefore
does call Eubaeick. Strabo says, That of all the transplantations which went
into Italy or Sicily, this was the ancientest, and therefore ancienter then the
Trojan affairs; but Velleius and Eusebius judge it far otherwise.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Kingdoms of the Lacedaemonians and Corinthians, and of
Cypselus and Periander.
THe Dorians with the Heraclides, having possessed Peloponnesus, established
there two chief Kingdoms the Lacedemonian, and the Corinthian, the sons of
Aristodemus, having expelled the Achaians, and Orestidians, invested themselves
of Lacedemon. Procles and Euristides by name, whom Cicero has declared to have
been both a live, only that Procles dyed a year before his brother and did
greater archievements, of whom the two families of Kings were propagated in
that City, of the Euresthidians which was esteemed the chiefest, L. 2. de div.
and of the Procledians, which was the second in Principality; this same was
also called the house of the Euredipondites, from Euripontes, Procles his
Grandchild: the list of the Kings, out of the first stock was more diligently
observed, the other remained more obscure, without the number of the years that
every one of them reigned. The beginning of that first Kingdom was soon after
the return of the Heraclides into Peloponnesus, Polyb. 4. p. 271. and 304.
in the 1102. year before Christ, it ended in Egesipolis and Lycurgus, who both
after Cliomenes death, did reign about the first Olymp. year, 140.

About the same time that the Heraclides began to rule in Lacedemon, Vide l. 9.
de doct. temp. c. 31. Corint. p. 47.
then also did the Corinthians erect a Kingdom, the which the Aeolians or
Sisiphians held before, as Pausanias says, out of which progeny the last
Doridas, and Hyantydas being disinvested of the kingdom by Atletes, Hippotes's
Son, grandchild of Philantes, and kinsman to Antiochus in the third degree,
and to Hercules in the fourth, remained as private men in the same City, and
after that Atletes's children did enjoy the kingdom, of whom Telestes is
numbered the last by Pausanias, after whom were chosen the annual Consulls;
Automenes being the first; whom Eusebius makes a king, yet the new family of
the Corinthian kings is wont to be esteemed, as extracted first of Bacchides,
and is called the house of the Bacchides. The last king of the Heraclides,
Telestes by name, according to Eusebius ceased to reign three years before the
first Olympiad, unto which are reckned 324. years from the beginning of Atletes
reign, which is the next year after the Heraclides return to Peloponnesus.

After Automenes, the chiefest of the same house of the Barchidians did govern
the City, one of the family being every year created chief Magistrate, whom
they called (...), unto Cypselus, who had his original of Melas, Antasus's
son. This Melus was born in the Town Goneusa, near to Sycio, who with Atletes
and the Heraclides, overcame Corinth: he was by them afterward made a Citizen.
Herod. l. 5. c. 92. Aristor. 5. Poll. c. 12.
Cypselus reigned thirty years in Tyranny, and his Son Periander, forty four.
And therefore from the beginning of the Heraclides reign, unto Periander's
death were 518. years.

The END of the FIRST BOOK.
THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. OR, AN Account of Time.
The Second Book.
COntaining 484 Years, from the fourth year of Solomon, which is 3702 year of
the Julian Period, to the death of Cyrus, 4185 years of the same Period.

CHAP. I. Of the Kings of Judah, from Solomon to Jehosaphar; and of the Kings
of the Israelites, from Jeroboam to Baasha, things done, and the times.
IN the 2972 year from the framing of things before Christ 1012 years. Solomon,
Wisdom being gotten from God, 3 Kings 6. Solomon.
and being furnished with incredible provision of plenty, which his father in
times past unto this time had gathered together, he goes about the Temple in
Jerusalem; which hereafter should be the holy place of the Jewish Religion.
That was finished in the eighth year.

3 Kings 7.1.
After the Temple Solomon builded princely Palaces for himself, and his Wife
the daughter of Pharaoh, and also other houses, thirteen years. Although it may
be, that he built the Temple of the Lord, and those Palaces at the same time,
and so, that not in the 24th year of his Kingdom, but in the sixteenth all the
building was brought to an end.

3 King. 11.
In the mean while he far excelling all mortal men in riches and wisdom, when
as he was rewarded with honor by the gifts and services both of Kings and
people, and the bounds of his kingdom being farther enlarged, he enjoyed peace
and rest; at last he bare not the greatness of prosperous affairs. For age now
declining, he being taken by the enticements of Wives and Concubines, (both of
which he had gathered to the number of a thousand) he is drawn away unto
forbidden and wicked superstitions. Neither is it hitherto certain, whether he
repented before his death, whereby a doubtful conjecture is left to posterity
of his salvation.

Rehoboam overthrows the Kingdom, trodden under foot by his fathers vice. 3
Kings 12.
For this King being entreated by the people, that it might be done a little
milder toward them, then had been done by his father, exercises dominion, the
counsel of the old men being rejected, who thought something must be granted to
their just complaints, he answers them proudly and roughly after the opinion
of his equals. Which thing so heightened their minds, that ten Tribes being
wholly rent from David's family, they appointed themselves a new King, Jeroboam
the son of Nebat, an Ephramite, only the two Tribes of Judab and Benjamin,
being the numbers left for Rehoboam. By that, was the Jewish name cleft into
two kingdoms; whereof one was called the kingdom of Judah, the other of Israel;
but this latter also was wont to be called the kingdom of Ephraim, from its
builder Jeroboam, and of Samaria; afterward the seat of the kingdom was
transported into that Town, which hitherto had been placed in the City of
Sichem, 3 Kings 12.25.
which Jeroboam built in Mount Ephraim; for the strength of either kingdom was
in Jerusalem. One and twenty Successors of David held the kingdom in the Tribe
of Judah; of Israel, eighteen. The former ruled after the death of Solomon
about 387 years, the latter almost 254.

That I may return to both those Kings, True piety toward God remained with
neither. Yet the Israelite sooner failed, 3 Kings 22. etc.
who as soon as he was made King, fearing lest if his Subjects should go
together to Jerusalem unto the solemn Feasts appointed, by little and little a
weariness of their divorce should take them, he forbade them to go any more
thither for the sake of holy things: and, that they might have that with them
which they might worship, he raised up the golden likenesses of Calves,
especially in Bethel, and Dan: to the which he also appointed sacrificing
Priests, and profane worshippings of god like the true. Whom, burning
Frankincense to the golden Image of the Calf, the Prophet did exceedingly
chide. But the King bearing that unworthily straightway commanded him to be
laid hold of; but when his hand, wherewith he beckened that he should be taken,
had dried up, he being affrighted with this wonder, and being turned to
entreaties, obtained favor of his punishment. The Prophet returning thither
from whence he came, he is invited by another Prophet to his house, and there
taking care of his body, contrary than was commanded him of God; straightway as
soon as he departed, he is slain by a Lion, the Ass: whereby he was carried,
being left safe.

3 Kings chapter 14. and 2 Chr. 12.
Rehoboam being touched with the same superstition of gods, he also drew his
Subjects into destruction. Therefore he placed Altars and Temples here and
there, and dedicated groves in profane places to gods. Hence God being angry,
sent Sesacus King of Egypt against them, whom Josephus thinks to be Lib. 8.
chapter 4.
Sesostris, who coming to Jerusalem in the 3 Kings 14.25.
fifth year of Rehoboam, the treasures, and all the presents being taken away,
he departed.

2 Chr. 13.
Under Abiam the king, the son of Rehoboam; Jeroboam received a great
slaughter. This king drew out eight hundred thousand into an Army. Against whom
Abiam going with four hundred thousand, and being nigh besieged, he begging the
help of his father's God, obtained a famous victory, five hundred thousand of
his enemies being slain: The which by reason of the straits of both kingdoms,
may scarce have credit, if it were related by any other witness then God.
Neither yet could he by so great a blessing, be affrighted from imitating his
fathers impiety.

3 Kings 15. and 2 Chr. 14.
The beginnnings of Asa were most laudable. For he took away the Altars and
Idols, and the steps of his fathers superstition, only the high places being
left. These Altars were indeed for the worship of the true God, but here and
there erected, and elsewhere, than in the chief City, against the injunction of
Moses. 2 Chr. 16.
He reigning, Zerah king of the Aethiopians breaking in with ten hundred
thousand soldiers, and three hundred Chariots; God serving the turn at the
godly prayers of the king, he was vanquished with an universal slaughter. 3
Kings 15. and 2.
Afterward Baashah fencing Ramah against Asa. Benhadad king of Syria being
called out by great gifts, compelled him to leave off his enterprise. Which the
Scripture makes mention to be done in the 2 Chr. 16.1.
year 36. to wit, from that time wherein both kingdoms were rent asunder. But
when he was reproved by Hanan the Prophet, for that he had passed over his hope
from God unto humane defenses, he taking that grievously, commanded the
admonisher to be led away into custody: Neither afterward stood he in his
duty. Therefore being afflicted for three years space with pains of his feet,
the help of God being despised, he being diligently bent on the art only of
Physicians, he perished in the 41. year of his kingdom. 2 Chr. 16.14.
His burial was celebrated with ambitious pomp, and precious superfluity of
sweet smells and Ointments.

The sixth from David was Jehosaphat, alike famous, both in godliness and
riches. He had the chiefest care in the beginning of his kingdom, of
appointing religion. 2 Chr. 17.
For the Monuments of wicked superstition being taken away, in the third year
of his kingdom, he sent forth his Princes with Levites, about the walled towns
to instruct the people, in the year of the Julian Circuit 3802. which was the
year of Sabbath's or rest, and therefore the more fit for that purpose. By that
thing so great a terror of his name cast it self on the neighboring nations,
that striving who should exceed, they paid him tributes. 2 Chr. 17.
But he had for the Garrison of his kingdom, that which may be incredible,
seventeen hundred thousand of valiant men.

CHAP. II. Of the other Kings of Judah and Israel, even to Hezekiah.
BUt in the Israelitish Kingdom, 3 Kings 16 15.
Baashah being dead, and his Son Elam, who both reigned twenty and four years,
nor those entire; Zimri, by whom Elam was slain, enjoyed his affairs only seven
days. 3 Kings 16.21.
From that time the people of Israel went into two factions. For the one part
obeyed Thebni the Son of Gineth; the other part followed Amri; In the same
place, v. 18.
by whom when Zimri was besieged at Tirza, despairing of safety, he burned
himself with his Palace. And that Civil dissension seems to be continued
for four years; that is, to the 31 year of Asa, wherein Amri In the same place,
v. 23.
sought for the kingdom; the which we so interpret, that from that time he
reigned alone, his competitor or fellow-suiter being taken away. 3 Kings 16.24.
Samaria built.
This is that Amri, who when he had the seat of his kingdom fix years at Tirza,
he bought the Mountain Semoron, of Semer, and there built Samaria, whither also
he passed over the mansion place of the kingdom, about the year of Christ, 923.

This man, being dead, in the twelfth year of his reign 3 Kings 16.19.
Ahab his son succeeded, worse than his father, 3 Kings 16.31.
who took to Wife Jezabel the daughter of the King of Tire by unhappy
enterprises, a destroying and troublesome Woman. With affinity of this King
Jehosaphat was infolded. 2 Chr. 21.6.
For he gave his daughter to Joram the son of Ahab and Jezabel. About that
time, and about the 13 year of Ahab, as the Jews affirm in Sederholam, Eliah
the Tishbite began to go forth; that is, about the year of the Julian Circuit
3809, before Christ 905, whose parents, and beginning of age. the Scripture is
silent of. 3 Kings 17. and 18.
This man foretold a drought of three years and six months. Then staying
sometime at the Brook Cerith, a Raven supplying him with victuals, he came
forward to the Widow of Sarepta, whose dead son afterward he restored to life.
The same man, as it were an Umpire of the World, at the promised day restored
rain and fruitfulnesle to the Earth: When the Priests of Baal being called
forth to confirm the faith of the true God by a miracle, and they bestirring
themselves in vain, he had obtained or pleased God, by sacrifice-fire being
called forth out of Heaven, and had slain 850 of those Priests in number. For
that thing he being sought for to the death, and flying from the threatenings
of wicked Jezabel, he enjoys talk with God, and by his 3 Kings 19.19.
warning, chooses Elisha the Prophet his Successor.

3 Kings 20.
Benhadad King of Syria moving Waragain and again against Ahab with a strong
Army, Eliah frustrating all his endeavors, after a most foul slaughter, in
which a hundred and twenty seven thousand In the same chap. v. 29.
Syrians were slain, he being humble desired peace.

3 Kings 22. and 2 Chr. 18.
But the King of the Israelites being fully bent to falsehood against so many
benefits of God, gave punishments to the utmost, both by other wickednesses,
and also by the reproach of Naboth who was slain, and in the battle which he
had begun against the Syrians, in the third year when he had made peace with
them, being smitten through with an Arrow, he dyed the death. But Jehosaphat,
who by joining Armies together came into the fellowship of his danger, by the
help of God is wonderfully snatched out. 2 Chr. 20.
After these things innumerable multitudes of Moabites and Ammonites pitching
their Camps against Jehosaphat; by his prayers they were destroyed by a
slaughter: Whereby the prey was so great, that they could not carry it away in
three days.

Ahab being dead, Ahaziah his son held the kingdom of the Israelites in the
year before Christ 897. Moreover, in which year Elijah being caught up into
Heaven in a fiery Chariot, cast his cloak on the top of Elisha, and appointed
him the heir of his Prophetical gift. The Chronicle of the Hebrews which they
name Seder-holam does confirm that to have happened in the 17th year of
Jehosaphat. But also the 4 Kings 1. and 2.
fourth book of the Kings shows, that not long after the death of Ahaziah
King of Israel, Elijah was a liver on the earth. For in the same year Ahaziah
dies, who being sick, had sent certain men on a Message, to ask counsel of
Baalzebub concerning his recovery; whom Elias meeting, bade them to tell the
blamed Prince, that he should dye of that disease. 4 Kings 1.
By and by, fire being called down from Heaven, he consumed the men of the
guard that were sent to take him.

After Ahaziah his brother Joram was chief over Israel in the 4 Kings 3.1.
eighteenth year of Jehosaphat, an heir of his fathers wickedness, although he
was sometimes more gentle. To this King leading an Army with Jehosaphat and the
King of the Edomites, against the Moabites; and being in danger in a thirsty
Country for want of drink, Elisha came for relief for Jehosaphats sake: and
besides water, gave victory also over the enemy: in which War the King of the
Moabites came unto that despair, that he being enclosed by a siege laid, and in
vain endeavoring to break forth, Ibid. ver. 27.
he sacrificed his own son the heir of his kingdom, through a cruel murdering
Religion. After these things Elisha waxed famous in a greater manner by
miracles, and foretellings of things to come; the which are declared in some
Chapters of the 4 Kings 4. and following.
fourth book of the Kings.

About the same time two Jorams both ruled in the kingdom, the one the son of
Jehosaphat, the other of Ahab. For Jehosaphat in twenty and five years finished
his reign; after whose death Joram slew his brethren, and by the like
unhappiness and treachery the other four years being finished, he 4 Kings 10.
and 2 Chr. 2.
gave place to Ahaziah the son of Athaliah, the daughter of Ahab, the Niece of
Amri, who scarce performing his office a whole year, was slain by Jehu with
Joram the King of Israel. For the Lord carried up this man to the kingdom of
Israel, to blot out utterly the stock of Ahab. The which as soon as he had
gotten, he stoutly indeed endeavored that work for God: for he commanded
Jezabel to be cast headlong out of a window: whose dead carcass when it was
sought for burial, nothing of her was found besides the skull and feet, and
upper parts of her hands; the rest, the dogs devoured: but he took care also at
the same moment to have the seventy sons of Ahab slain. Also all the
sacrificing Priests of Baal gathered together into one place through the show
of a holy solemnity, he commanded to be killed, he butned the Image with fire,
demolished its house: but that which remained, he restored not the worship of
his fathers god: and he abode in the worshipping of the Calves which Jeroboam
had placed.

But 4 Kings 11.
Athaliah the Wife of Joram King of Judah, Ahaziah being dead, whatsoever
remained of the kingly stock, she took away, and proceeded with tyranny. One
son of Ahaziah, Joash by name, was delivered from death by his Aunt Josaba, the
Wife of Jeboiadah the high Priest. Whom, after six years, Athaliah being
killed, Jehoiadah restored into his fathers Throne.

4 Kings 12. and 2 Chr.
Joash King of Judah, as long as Jehoiadah lived, might be reckoned among the
best kings. He being dead 2 Chr. 24.15.
in the 130th year of his age, being corrupted by the flatteries of Courtiers,
his fathers Religion being despised, he had regard to groves and Idols. And he
added to his wicked superstition the In the same place, v. 20.
most unworthy death of Zachary the Prophet, the son of that Jehoiadah, to whom
he owed his life and kingdom: because he, the Spirit of God constraining him,
reproved their wickedness. Neither did God long defer the revenging of so great
wickedness. The year following, Hazael King of Syria with small Armies, having
wasted the kingdom of Judah, slew all the Princes, and could scarce be turned
away from Jerusalem, the which he now sought occasion against, by great gifts,
into which all the treasures were poured out. Joash himself a little after
being taken with a most grievous sickness, being thrust through by his servants
in his bed, dyed in the fourtieth year of his reign, neither was he laid among
the Sepulchers of the Kings.

Among the Israelites Jehu being dead, his son Jehoahaz, as also Joash the son
of Jehoahaz do both reign sixteen years. Then Jeroboam, the son of Ioas forty
one years, all not worthy to be named, and given to Idols. Moreover, 4 Kings
13. and following. Joh^a^az king of Israel.
Joash king of Judah had Amaziah his son his Successor thirty one years.
Amaziah, Azariah took by craft, who is also Oziah, and was chief 52 years.

The eleventh from David reigned Amaziah the son of Joash, 4 Kings 14. and 2
Chr. 25.
whose beginnings, even as of his father, were worthy of praise, their ends
were unlike. He raising war against the Edomites with the whole strength of the
kingdom, armed three hundred thousand of his Soldiers: beside whom, he hired
out of the Israelitish kingdom an hundred thousand; the which the charges
which he had bestowed on them being slighted, he straightway sent home at the
word of one Propher, forbidding him to make use of the help of such. God being
delighted with the king's obedience, gave him to overcome his enemy. But that
victory, as prosperous affairs are oftentimes wont, turned into the destruction
of the Conqueror. For very many Images of gods being gotten among the spoils,
he pursued with worship and holy rites: Neither would he hearken to the Prophet
affrighting him from that wickedness. Therefore he being forsaken of God, first
of all he is overcome and taken by Joash king of Israel, whom he had foolishly
provoked; the Walls of Jerusalem being broken down; all his riches as well
sacred as kingly being taken away. At length, Amaziah after fifteen years from
the death of Joash, was slain by the conspiracy of his servants.

4 Kings 13.
Joash reigning, and in his tenth year, if any credit may be given to the
Hebrew Chronicles, Elisha dies, which is the 3884 year of the Julian Circuit;
the which by this account, must needs perform that Prophetical gift very long,
under six kings of Israel; he dying, promised a threefold victory to King Joash
over the Syrian; which also a little after he obtained. But into his Sepulcher
the dead carcass of a man being cast, straightway as soon as it touched the
bones of the good man, it is raised to life.

Azariah reigned the twelfth from David, or Oziah, a Prince good enough, and
therefore he being covered with God's defense, happily governed the kingdom.
But at last forgetting himself whiles he usurpeth through pride the offices
belonging to the Priests, being made leprous on a sudden, he is driven out from
all, even civil office, the ordering of the kingdom being passed over unto his
son Jotham.

Among the Israelites Jeroboam at that time swayed the Scepter, in which time
Azariah began; for this man is said to have begun in the 4 Kings 15.1.
27. year of him.

Under this and Oziah kings, many Prophets flourished, especially in the
kingdom of Israel, the which as it was more corrupt, so it had need of more
often remedies. 4 Rog. 14.25.
Therefore while Jeroboam reigned, Jonah stood forth or up, who foretold to him
a victory over the Syrians. Moreover under Oziah were famous, Hosea, Jo^l,
Amos, Abdiah. Isaiah also prophesied under the same king. (b) (...) Kings 15.4.
The thirteenth from David in the kingdom of Judah was Jotham, not unlike to
his Father Oziah in godliness. 4 Kings 16. and 2 Chr. 28.2.
But his son Ahaz was the worst of Kings, and so despised his fathers Religion,
that he worshipped Baal, and set Images and Altars by him, he sacrificed his
sons by a wicked custom in the fire. For that thing the neighboring kings
vexed him with very great slaughters; the king of Israel, Syria, and the
Assyrian, whom he had stirred up against this king with great rewards: also the
Edomites, and Philistines. That he might appease those calamities by foolish
counsel, he appointed cursed rites, to pacify the gods of Damascus toward
him, and the Temple being shut up, he raised up Altars here and there to
Heathenish gods.

Ahaz governing the Tribe of Judah, Hosea was chief over the Israelites, a
little more tolerable than former Kings of Israel; neither yet cast he away the
worship of vain gods, or brought over his mind to the worshipping of the true.

But 4 Kings 18. and 2 Chr. 29.
Hezekiah king of Judah, who succeeded his father Ahaz next to David, far
excelled all Princes. For this king cast down all Images and Temples, cut down
the groves, took away the high places: And lastly, wholly obeyed the Law of
Moses. In the sixth year of this king, the ninth of Hosea, the 3993 year of the
Julian Period, Salmanassar the king of the Assyrians, Samaria being taken, he
carried away all the Israelites into Assyria, and so the kingdom of Israel
ceased, which remained almost 254 years.

4 Kings 18.13. and chapter 19.
In the fourteenth year of Hezekiah, the 4000th year of the Julian Circuit
Sennacherib the son of Salmanassar, king of the Assyrians, breaking into Judea,
took many Towns, or overthrew them. And then he sends Rabshakeh with Armies to
besiege Jerusalem, who returning, while he is making ready to invade Jerusalem,
in one night an hundred eighty and five thousand are slain by the Angel.

In the same year, after the slaughter of the Assyrians, Hezekiah falls into a
deadly disease; of the which he was healed from God by Isaiah the Prophet, and
his life prolonged for fifteen years. See the 9. of the doctr. of times, chapter 56.
They do disorderly, who place the disease of Hezekiah before the flaughter of
the Assyrians.

Among the Israelites, who were carried away by Salmanassar, See 10. of doctr.
of times, chapter 4.
was Tobiah, a most holy man, whose History is delivered in a particular book
of writing.

The sixteenth from David reigns Manasseh, in the twelfth year of his age, 4
Kings 31. and 2 Chr. 33.
who so degenerated from his fathers manners, that thou can not know,
whether, on either part, was more famous: the one in piety toward God, and
performances of other virtues; the other in the (...) contempt of his fathers
worship, in cruelty, lust, whereby he made forcible assaults on sacred, and
likewise on humane things. Therefore in the eighth year, as we guess, of his
reign, he being taken by the Princes of the king of Assyria's Army, and bound
in fetters, he is brought into Babylon; where he being showed his evils, and
turned with his whole heart unto the Lord, he is wholly restored by him, and
straightway the Idols and all the Monuments of wicked superstition being taken
away, he endeavored to show forth the worship of his father's God. See the 12
of Doctr. of times, chapter 26.
To us, as also to many others, it seems to be probable, that Manasseh was
taken by Merodach, both ruler of Babylon, and subject to the King of Assyria;
For both their times do agree, as we shall see afterward. And about that time,
Judith.
the History of Judith and Holophernes to have happened. For Nebuchadnezzar one
of the successors of Assarhaddon, had the Medes and Babylonians, and other
people, and Lords of great power subject unto him: yet so, that they in the
mean while managed their own affairs by themselves, and severally also they
themselves exercised Government. See the 12, of Doctr. of times, chapter 26.
Wherefore about the year before Christ, 688. we believe the famous act of
Judith to have happened.

4 Kin. 21. and 2 Chr. 33.
After Ammon the Son of Manasseh, who imitating the former life of his father,
he most wickedly reigned, even to two years space. 4 King. 22. and following,
and 2 Chr. 34. and following.
Josiah a child of eight years old, was exalted to the Government, who excelled
in holiness and religion, even from his tender years, and all the remembrance
of Images and heathenish devotions being wholly abolished, he worshipped God
sincerely and from his heart. In the eighteenth year of his reign be repaired
the Temple by contribution Money. There the book of the Law being found, and
read before the King, for the terror of punishment denounced against the
back-sliders, he rent his Garments. In the same year he proclaimed a Passover
with a most famous provision at Jerusalem. But at length, while he set himself
with an Army unadvisedly against Necho, or Nechao King of Egypt, bending
himself against the Assyrians, he was slain in battle the 31th year of his
reign.

CHAP. III. Of the succeeders of Josiah, especially Zedekiah, and the
destruction of Jerusalem, and their seventy years bondage.
THe 2 Chr. 3.15.
sons of Josiah are reckoned four; Johanan, Joakim, See animad. Epiph. page 18
and 19. of Doctr of times, chapter 61
Zedekiah, and Shallum. Of the which Chap. 22.11. 4 Kings 23.30.
Jeremiah writes, Shallum to have reigned after his father. Therefore he is
the same with Jehoahaz, who succeeded Josiah, and reigned six Months. He was
both cast down from his royal seat by Necho King of Egypt, and carried away
into Egypt: who appointed Eliakim or Joakim his brother King in his place.
Moreover it seems Iohanaan deceased, Josiah as yet living. Therefore
Iehohahaz being taken away who, as is suspected, was by a faction of the people
put before his elder brethren. Ioakim reigned in the year of the Jul. Cir.
4104. Joakim.
in whose Dan. 1.
third year entering, Nebuchadnezzar being sent by his Father Nabopollazar into
Syria, and 4 Kings 24.7.
Necho King of Egypt being overcome, he subdued Ioakim to himself in Jer. 15.1.
the entrance of his fourth year. 4 Kings 24.1.
Who, when after three years he had rebelled, he was taken by the Army of
Nebuchadnezzar; and Ioakim his Son, who also was called Iechoniah, commanded to
reign in his room. But after three Months, Nebuchadnezzar coming again to
besiege Jerusalem, 4 Kings 24.36. and 2 Chronicles. 6. Jechoniah.
Iechoniah yielded to him of his own accord, and he was led away with his
mother, and nobles, and many others, into Babylon. This man in the fourth book
of Kings is said to be made king, being eighteen years of age, but in the
second of Chronicles, at eight years of age; the which may be so interpreted;
that he was taken by his father into the fellowship of the kingdom, about the
second year of his reign, and reigned with him ten years.

4 Kings 25. Jer. 52. Zedechiah.
The last King of Judah made by Nebuchadnezzar in the place of Iechoniah, is
Mathaniah, who is also called Zedechiah, the son of Josiah, he also being a
forsaker of divine worship and faith, as well paid to God, as performed to him
of Babylon, by whom he was made King. For from the ninth year of his reign he
revolted, and provoked the same against him. Therefore he began to besiege
Jerusalem at the Of Jul. Cir. 4123. before Christ, 591.
beginning of the year of rest, or Sabbaths. Moreover the 3393. year of the
World, as is gathered Chap. 34.
out of Jeremy, and in the third year it being taken, and the Temple burnt with
fire, Zedechiah being brought back from flight, and being deprived of his eyes,
with the which he had first seen his children slain before him, he is led away
in chains unto Babylon.

The City was won by assault in the year before Christ 589. Jerusalem taken.
in the fourth month and fifth day, Chapter 39.2.
as Jeremy writes, but the same man in another place determined it the Chapter
52.6.
ninth day. Indeed on the fifth day some part of the City was seized on, but on
the ninth wholly broken up. Which day agrees with June 16. Jer. 52.6.
in the following Month, which was Ab, on the 10. day, which runs into the
20. of July, the City with the Temple is set on fire.

With Zedekiah the King, were famous Prophets, Jeremiah and Ezekiel. But Daniel
lived then a young man in Babylon, whither he was carried with the rest, in the
fourth year of Ioakim. But Ezekiel, with Iechoniah, after eight years 4 Kings
25. Jer. 42.
Jeremiah, who for many years, and especially in the time of the siege, was
cruelly vexed by his own countrymen; the City being taken at the command of
Nebuchadnezzar, he was honorably esteemed by Nebuzardan, Leave being granted
him of dwelling where he would. When he would not depart from the ruins of his
country, being recommended to Gedaliah, whom the Chaldean made chief over the
remainder of the people, he a little while after being slain by Ishmael, is
snatched away against his will with Baruch, by his own people. There while he
withstood the wickednesses of the Jews, having suffered very many things,
Epiph. of Prophetic. men.
at length by them is slain.

CHAP. IV. Of the Tyrian Kings, the building of Carthage, of Lycurgus the
Lawgiver, and the beginnings of the Medes and Macedonians.
ABout the same time, wherein to both kingdoms of the Hebrews, Princes of their
own Nation were as chief, and for a long space after both kingdoms were
extinct, there was a kingly government at Tire, a place inhabited of the
Sydonians: the which was built two hundred and forty years before the Temple
was founded by Solomon: Joseph. 8. Antiq. chapter 8. The year of the Jul. Cir.
3467. before Christ, 1247.
Josephus affirms this out of the Annals or yearly Chronicles of the Tyrians.
That time happens on Gideon's Lievtenantship, and the year before Christ, 1247,
before the destruction of Troy almost the seventieth year. But Antiquity has
blotted out the remembrance of the former Kings of Tire; neither of any of them
is there an ancienter than Abibal, and his son Hiram; who lived in David's, and
Solomon's time: and being joined in league and friendship with them both, Hiram
king of Tire.
he also plentifully supplied this latter with matter and cunning Workmen to
build the Temple.

Ithobaal the high Priest of King Astartus, is named to have reigned the eighth
from Hiram, whose daughter Jezabel, Ithobaal. 3 King. 16.31.
Ahab the wicked king of the Israelites took in marriage. Moreover, Pygmalion
is reckoned the eleventh from the same Hiram; who deprived Sichaeus ( Hercules
Priest, the husband of his sister Elisa or Dido, gaping after his riches) of
his life. But Dido, all her riches being secretly put into Ships, Dido and the
building of Carthage.
not a few companions of the flight being gotten, sailed into Africa, where
buying a field of Solinus, chap. 30.
Hyarba the Governor of the Tauny-Moors, she built a Town, which they called
Byrsa at the first, (that was the name of a Tower) after that, Carthage. That
departure is delivered by Joseph. against Appio page 1043.
Josephus out of the Records of Phoenicians, to be in the seventh year of
Pygmalion. But Carthage is said to be founded in the 144 year after the Temple
was begun, which is the 316. year after the misery of Troy, before Christ 868
years. Virgill is taken notice of.
Therefore the account of Virgil is least agreeable, who determined Dido to be
equal in time to Aeneas, whom it is certain, among the Annals, to have lived
almost three hundred years after. For although some of the Ancients have
written the building of Carthage to be before the taking of Troy by siege: yet
those have not judged Dido the sister of Pygmalion to have been the author of
it.

At the same season, wherein a new Town is placed in Africa by the Tyrians,
Lycurgus the son of Eunomus, of the stock of Proculus or the Europontides,
founded the Commonwealth of the Plutarch. of Lycurg. Justine, Book
Lacedaemonians in Greece with most wholesome Laws, whose brother Polydectus the
King being dead, when his Wife would agree with him in marriage, through the
death of a son which she carried in her womb, the lust of the woman being
wisely shifted off, or mocked, he ordained the young Prince as yet an Infant,
to be placed from his birth in the Kingly Throne: and resigning to him the
kingdom, he afterward purely administered the Commonwealth in the place of a
Guardian. Charilaus (that was the name of the Child) being ripe of age, that he
might purge away the envy of an affected dominion, going afar off, he brought
back a frame of Laws and civil discipline, composed from the custom of diverse
sorts of people, into his Country. First of all, he divided equally the ground
of Sparta amongst them all: he utterly took a way the use of gold and silver,
as the cause of strifes and all wickednesses, weighty pieces of Iron-money
being brought in. And lest riot should give an occasion of getting wealth, he
both forbad all to feast publicly, and also to accustom themselves with
thrifty and hard fare. A great sedition arising, brought almost death on him,
giving in charge these and other statures to his Citizens, the which while he
endeavors to avoid by flight, Alcander, his head being turned about, put out
his eye, looking back by chance. By this spectacle their minds being bent to
pity, the author of that wicked act is committed to punishment, whom he
receiving into his house, so bound to himself by gentleness and entreaty, that
none from thenceforth was more friendly. In that manner his Laws being openly
received, that he might give an everlasting continuance to them, he told them
that he would go to the Oracle at Delphos, and bound all his Citizens with an
Oath, that they should change nothing of his Laws before he returned. So he
going into Creet, remained there even until his death. Apolog.
Tertullian relates, he taking it grievously that the Lacedaemonians had
changed the Laws given them by him, ended his life by voluntary hunger.
Moreover also, he dying, commanded his bones to be cast into the Sea, lest
they, being brought back to Sparta, the Lacedaemonians should believe that they
were loosed from the bond of their oath. The time of these things, by reason of
the disagreement of writers cannot be certainly concluded. Pausan. El. 1. p.
150.
Some will have him to have flourished under the first Olympiad, others that he
was before them an hundred years, and more than that.

A whole age before the first Olympiad, the old Kingdom of the Assyrians
failed; Sardanapalus the last King being despised by Arbaces, the chief ruler
of the Medes for his riot and sloth, and after his army dispersed, forced to
dye. It was a custom of the Assyrian Princes delivered of old, that they
should offer themselves to be seen of none, because they did lead a life
shameful and not beseeming men, among flocks of Harlots. Contrary to this
custom Arbaces being admitted, when he had beheld Sardanapalus drawing or
carding wool among Harlots in women's apparel, being much moved with the
unworthiness of the thing, revolted from him. And after some battles managed
with a changeable event, last of all he forced him, being overcome, to a
despairing of his Kingdom and life. Therefore betaking himself into an inner
room of his Palace, all his treasures being heaped on a pile of wood, he cast
himself on it, and burnt himself alive, that by this Cret. with Died. 1. p. 83.
and Athen. book 12. Just. 1, of same Chr. The begin. of the Medes.
bold enterprise, however he might show himself a man. So the royal power of
the Medes was founded in Asia, about the eighth year of Iehu King of Israel,
but the third year of Ioash the son of Ahaziah, King of Judah, before Christ
876. The first in the Medes order reigned Arbaces, the last Astyages the
Grandfather of Cyrus. There were nine Kings in all, who enjoyed their affairs
317 years.

But Herodotus has delivered things a little otherwise concerning the Medes.
For he tells that the A^ssyrians held Asia 520 years. Afterward the Medes
fell off from them, who when they had lived very long without laws and
Government, at last King Deioces was chief over them; in whose prudence of
declaring right, or civil Law, they were made skilful. By this king, was the
Town of Ecbactana built.

Sixty and two years after the beginning of the Medes, Amaziah reigning in the
Tribe of Judah, but Jeroboam of Israel; The Kingd. of Macedon.
the kingdom of the Dexippus in Exerc. Eusebius. Gr. p. 49.
Macedonians was founded by Caranus a Grecian the brother of Phidon, Eusebius.
Chron.
him who first is said to have found out measures and weights. The lineage of
these men is drawn from Hercules, from whom Caranus is reckoned by Dexippus,
the eleventh; by Velleius, the sixteenth; who, a great company of men being
drawn together out of all Peloponnesus, came into Macedonia, and there began to
consult of a Kingdom. Hence the Kings of Macedonia, and also the Alexandrians,
arising from Lagis Ptolomey, a Macedonian, called themselves the sons of
Hercules. The beginning of Caranus out of the Chronicle of Eusebius, agrees
with the year of Abraham 1204, of the Jul. Cir. 3901. which is the 38th year
before the first Olympiad. The last king of the Macedonians, Perseus the son of
Phillip was taken by the Romans, in the year of the City built, 586, when as
Kings had now reigned in number 40, 647, years. And in the beginning they being
shut up in narrow bounds, they waged daily but mean wars with the Romans and
Thracians. Justin. 7.
By the which, Europus or Aeropa being king, a thing truly worthy remembrance
happened. Philip the son of Argaeus the sixth king in order, about the year of
the J. C. 4116. the third of the 45. Osymp. dying, left Europus almost as yet
an Infant, his heir. Whose age being despised, the Romans wage war with the
Macedonians. They being overcome in the first battle, by and by the strife
being renewed, they place their King laid in a cradle before the Army; and from
the beholding of him they took such heat of courage in their mind, that their
enemies being scattered with a great slaughter, they bring back a noble victory
gotten over them. The rest even to Philip, and Alexander the Great, were almost
in nothing famous.

CHAP. V. Of the Olympic Conflicts or Games.
THe most famous Olympic conflict or Game, was set up in the 408. year after
Troy was overthrown, before Rome was built the twenty and third, when Uzziah
had now reigned over the Jews the thirty and fourth year. The chief repairer of
this, was Iphitus, the Son of Praxonida, Eleus, who brought back his lineage to
Hercules. Moreover there were many Herculesses. Of these, he which is reckoned
among Ida's Cybeles Priests, first set forth those plays, the which after that
were renewed by others, Pelops the son of Tantalus, and Atreus; and afterward
Hercules, the son of Alcmena celebrated them. At length by Iphitus, and him
which I have spoken of, they began to be never-failing in their time, that they
might return in the beginning of every fifth year; from whence they were called
[(...)] that is, five years Games or Conflicts. For four years being perfected,
they ran back into a Circle. But this four years space consisted in that kind
of year, which Greece of old used, which was made by the Moon, but less exact,
as we have shown in Book 1. of the Doctr. of times, and 4. Var. disc. to Ura.
another place. Africanus in George Monk showed, that the Moon is called by the
Egyptians, Olympias, because she wanders through the twelve parts or signs of
the Zodiac every Month; which Circle is by the Ancients named ((...)) whence
he thought them to be called Olympiads. But that is least true; For the name of
Olympiads seems among the Greeks to have been more ancient, than the dividing
of the compass or Zodiac into twelve pieces, as we shall discourse Book 2. of
Var. discour. to Uran. chapter 2.
elsewhere. Therefore their name is put upon them from the place. It found the
name of Pisates from the chief City Pisa, in Princely Peloponnesus; the which,
Stephanus being Author, is also called Olympia. Pausan. Eliac. 1. p. 200.
Strabo. 8.
This City, their neighbors the people of Elis overthrew, when the Pisates had
endeavored to snatch themselves out of their power, to which they had been
subdued. At or near to the same City was the most ancient Temple of Jupiter,
distant from Elis three hundred Furlongs, nigh the River Alpheus. Neither far
from thence is there a Wood set with wild Olives, of which the Crowns of the
Conquerours were weaved, as also a race or Furlong, wherein the pastime plays
or spectacles were shown.

Pausanias writes, the Temple being made of Dorick-work, had from the lowest
floor unto the highest top, sixty and eight foot, broad ninety five, but long
330. foot, whose Master builder was Libo; Paved with Pentelick-Marble, that is,
such as Mercuries Images were of: for Tyles, the covering was of this; in it
was Pausan.
the Altar of Jupiter Olympus, whose border was 125 foot in compass, the
height 22. They called the border ((...)) in which the sacrifices were slain,
but their limbs were burnt on the top of the Altar. Therefore Pausanias tells
that this Altar was made out of ashes. But both the steps, and that even to the
((...)) or border were of stone, from thence to the Altar they were of ashes
Strabo.
In the same place was the memorable Image of Jupiter Olympus; the which being
wrought by Phidias, Panaenus the Painter painted with colors.

Pausan. Eliac. An. page 200.
Now the Eleans were the chief of those sports, and they utterly overthrew the
Pisates, who endeavored to usurp that right. Polyb. b. 4. page 337.
The same being safe by the worship of Jupiter and the games, had a ceasing
from weapons, and lived almost in the Country. But, that rest being despised,
when afterward they had taken part in wars, they fell into great calamities.
Paus. Eliac. An. page 156.
Therefore of that Nation the Judges of the conflicts, which they called
(agonothetas), or (Hellanodicas), were at the first two, then nine, afterward
ten, and twelve; from thence they are made eight, and at last, ten.

Paus. Eliac. An. p. 173.
Before these the Champions being brought to the Image of Jupiter Fidius, they
were bound with an oath which they named ((...)), that they should fulfill all
kind of disciplines, or artificial exercises, ten months before the day of
the conflict. The Paus. Eliac. An. p. 200.
chief and most ancient kind of contending was running, which they called a
race, afterward they added others. Pindar. and his Schol. to the Olymp. 5.
Tzet. to Lycoph.
Five days were wholly given for the renewing the Plays, from the eleventh
day of the Month, to the fifteenth. For at the full of the Moon, they went to
the conflict, as says Pindarus. Thuc. book 5. p. 380. the vech. edit.
And a little before the pastime, a league being proclaimed throughout the
Cities, if any waged war one with another, they were commanded to abstain from
arms.

Dion. Halic. b. 7. about the end.
Now when the Champions did strive altogether naked, a law and bashfulnesse
drove away the female sex from those beholdings: in the which time, b. 5. of
the live. Creat. chapter 17.
Aelianus set Flies before them, which flying away of their own accord,
appeared no where for that time. The reward of the Conquerours was a crown of
the Wild Olive tree. Then they performed rites at six Altars, all which a pair
of gods obtained. The first Olympiad or four hours exercise employed Coraebus a
Citizen of Elis for his course, whom Athaeneus declares to have been a Cook by
Trade. Moreover the Olympiade began in the 3938. year of Jul. Cir. Of the World
3208. which is before the birthday of Christ, 776. And the games were acted
from the 19. day of July to the 23. for the just time of them was in Summer,
under the very Solstice, or Sun-stead.

CHAP. VI. Of the latter and revived Kingdom of the Assyrians, and of its
Princes; and of Judith, and Olofernes; and of Sargon and Thartan: as also the
beginning of the Babylonish Kingdom.
THere is made frequent mention in sacred books, of the Assyrian Kings; even
after that time, wherein Sardanapalus being dead, it is manifest that Empire,
first begun by Belus or Ninus, had an end. For it is agreed amongst all, that
that happened in that year, wherein the foundations of the royal government of
the Medes were laid, the which indeed we have shown above in the 4th chapter,
to have happened an hundred years before the first Olympiade, that is, three
hundred and seventeen years before the beginning of Cyrus. But long after that
time, other Princes of the Assyrians are reckoned up. So Azariah reigning after
his nine and thirtieth year; Phul King of the Assyrians is said to have 4 Kings
chapter 15.19.
vexed the Israelites. Which year is numbered seven hundred seventy one years
before Christ, and is the hundredth and sixth year from the death of
Sardanapalus, and the destruction of Nineveh.

That I may not stay thee longer; I think that after that old Empire of the
Assyrians put out, Jul. Cir. 3493.
or passed over to the Medes, the Medes waxing old by little and little, and
their strength being weakened through sloth and calmnesse, some fell off from
them: first the Assyrians, and then the Babylonians. For because the Medes kept
not the same course of fortune from Arbaces to Deioces, from that, it is very
likely, that Herodotus says, the Medes in that mean space were free, and to
have lived without a King. Wherefore Nineveh being overthrown, and the former
Assyrian Kings being taken away, there were afterward new Kings, who restored
that City, and bare a large rule, until they were overcome in war by the
Babylonian Kings. The names of these, and what Kings were reigning in Judea,
which indeed are mentioned in Scripture, I will write down.

A Register of the Assyrian Kings.
The Kings of Assyria. Kings reigning in Judea. The years of the Jul. Circ.
into which their mention falls. 1 Phul. Osea. 4 Kin. 15. 3943. 2
Teglathpelazar. Joatham and Phacee. 19, ib. v. 29. 3955. 3 4 Salmanassar.
Hezekiah. 4 Kin. 17. v. 3993. Sennacherib, his son. Hezekiah. 3, ib. 18, 13.
and 1 Tob. 1.18. 4000. 5 Assarhaddon, Sennacherib's son. Hezekiah. 4 Kin. 19.37
4001. 6 Nebuchadnezzar differing from a Babylonian. Manasseh. Judith 1.5. 4025.

These are the Kings of the Assyrians, of which the Scripture has made
mention: the which at the beginning it appears to have conquered Babylon, out
of the 4 Kings 17. v. 24.
sacred History of the Kings. Where Salmanassar is said to have sent
inhabitants out of Babylon and other countries into Samaria. But it is gathered
out of the Chapter 18.2. See Isaiah, 23.13. out of the Hebr. interpr.
same book that they reigned over the Medes.

4 King. 17. and following.
Salmanassar invaded the Kingdom of Israel, and sent away the Israelites, in
which name all, or almost the ten Tribes were contained, into Media and
Babylon, and other Eastern Provinces for them; he spread Inhabitants out of
diverse nations into their empty seats; to whom when Lions were troublesome, the
King of Assyrians sends unto them one of the Captive Priests of the Jews, by
whom they being perfectly taught the worship of the Hebrews God, they embraced
every one these same together with the profane superstitions of their own
country. The Samaritans gathered together of diverse Nations.
Hence the filthy dirt of the Samaritanes took beginning, and was increased for
a long time.

4 King. 18. and following.
After the wasting of Israel, which fell out under the sixth year of Hezekiah;
Salmanassar could not reign beyond the 14. year of Hezekiah. For Sennacherib
succeeded him about that year, in which year he led an Army into Judea; and
many walled Towns being won by assault, while he attempteth Jerusalem, and by
Ambassadors triumphs with reproachful words over King Hezekiah and the
Israelite's God, in one night, 185000. being destroyed by the Angel, he
trembling, returned home. Where, through the parricide or father-killing
murder, of his sons, amongst his holy things, and in the very sight of his God,
he most wretchedly perished; when Tob. 1. See the 12. Book of Doct. of Times.
first by the death of the banished Jews, which he had carried away into his
Kingdom, he had revenged the slaughter received in their Country.

But Nebuchadnezzar whom we have numbered the last in order that is, he, who in
the History of Judith 1.
Judith, is said, a battle being entered against Arphaxad King of the Medes, by
whom Ecbathana was built, to have overcome in the twelfth year of his reign.
Arphaxad is no other then the Deioces of Herodotus, and Ctesias, who is placed
the first king of the Medes by Herodotus. For the times do wonderfully agree.
The time of Judith.
Hence we believe with the most, Judith to belong to the times of Manasseh.
Moreover Manasseh began to reign in the 4016. year of the Jul. Cir. But Deioces
the 4018. in Babylon, notwithstanding some Princes from Nebonassar afterward
ordered the Kingdom. Which little thing or kingdom in the beginning, was also
subjected to the Government of the Assyrians. Whence 2 Chr. 33.11.
Merodach, who about that time held Babylon, is called one of the Princes of
Nebuchadnezzar, by whom Manasseh was taken and led away into Babylon. Who being
absent, Nebuchadnezzar sent Olofernes into Judea, who by Judith a most laudable
woman, was wisely mocked and slain.

Besides these Assyrian kings, Chapter 20.1.
Isaiah mentions Sargon king of the Assyrians, who sent Tartan, whom most
confound with Sennacherib, 4 K. 18.17.
because this King is said to have sent Tartan. Yet they are not wanting, who
make both to be different; to whom if we hearken, he shall be thrust in between
Salmanassar and Sennacherib, and is to have been thought either the Father, or
surely the brother of this. Because Tob. 1.18.
Salmanassar being dead, Sennacherib his son is said to have reigned in his
stead. Therefore none seems to be placed between them both. But those things
which we have a little before cast in by the way, concerning the beginning of
the Kingdom of Babylon; they are supported by the witness of Ptolomey, and
old Astronomers, who do reckon their times from the beginning of Nabonassar
king of Babylon, which beginning goes before the reckoning of Christ, Jul.
Cir. 1967.
747. years. From hence the old kingdom of the Chaldeans seems to have
begun. In holy Books, the first mention of the Babylonian kings is under the
reign of Hezekiah, about his fourteenth year, in which Merodach the son of
Baladan king of the Babylonians; is said to have sent Ambassadors to Hezekiah,
that he might ask him concerning the wonder, which had happened in the land; as
also because he had learned that he was sick. The fourteenth year of Hezekiah,
from these things which have been above explained, runs into the year before
Christ, 714. which is the thirty fourth from the beginning of Nabonassar. There
is an old rule or Canon of the Babylonian kings, which Ptolemy and other
Mathematicians have used, which is lengthened from Nabonassar unto the death of
Alexander the Great. Moreover in that Canon, Mardoxempadus, who is named
Meradach in sacred books, began to reign twenty seven years from Nabonassar,
and peradventure that Baladan is his father, whom Conon calls Iluleus.

Wherefore there is a probable guess, that some space of time after the
Assyrians, the Babylonians fell off from the Medes, and appointed themselves a
private kingdom, Nabonassar being their Captain. Which kingdom small in the
beginning, and subject to the Assyrians, was enlarged by Nabopolassar, and his
son Nebuchadnezzar, as also the Medes themselves, and the Assyrians it
subjected to it self. Of which thing afterward. But the beginnings of that
Empire are very dark; Of which, History has almost left nothing but conjecture.

CHAP. VII. Of Romulus and the building of Rome, and of the deeds of him, and
of the six following Kings.
A Mulius reigned the twelfth from Aeneus over the Latins, Dionys. Hal. b. 1.
etc. 2. b. 1. Plut. life of Romul. Victor. of the beg. of Rome.
his brother Numitor being oppressed, to whom for his age the right of the
kingdom did belong. There was one only daughter of Numitor, Sylvia, the which
Amulius, lest there should be any hope of posterity, made a Vestall Nun. But
she, it being uncertain by whom she was defloured, brought forth twins, Romulus
and Remus: who being put abroad by the command of the king, and being privily
brought up by Faustulus a shepherd, after they were of ripe age, Amulius being
slain, they restored their Grandfather into the Kingdom, and in his second
year built Rome. Which by the Plutarch.
account of Varro happened on the third year of the sixth Olympiad.

b. 2. p. 119. the Vech. edit.
Dionysius is the Author, that Romulus was born the second year of the second
Olympiad going out, which is before Jul. Cir. 3944.
Christ 750. and the eighteenth year after, that is Jul. Cir. 3961. Romulus.
before Christ 753. to have prosperously built the City. This man therefore in
the eighteenth year of his age, by the power of many sorts of people meeting
together, is first saluted king, when as already his brother striving for a new
kingdom, he had taken out of the way. Straight way the state of things, being
set in order, and the people being divided into charges of office, he took the
maids of the Halic. 2. p. 100. Live. Florus Piut.
Sabines by force, through occasion of sports, in the fourth year of his
kingdom, whereby they waged a fierce and long war with the Sabines. The
Caeninenses, Antomnates, Crustumini being overcome: and at length the Sabines
with their Captain Tatius overcharging them, through the mediation of the taken
maids, it is agreed between them both, that they should dwell commonly at Rome,
and that two should rule together; Romulus and Tatius. But this man after six
years, being slain; Romulus alone reigned over them both, and filled up 38,
years, the neighboring Cities in the mean time being overcome by war. First of
all the Fidenates and Veienses. Dionys. Livy, Plut. Flor. See the 10. of the
Doctr. of times, chapter 21.
At length while he had an assembly at the Marsh Caprea, a dark tempest
suddenly arising, he no where appeared, being torn in pieces, as many are of
opinion, by the Counselors of State, of whom he had began to be hated for his
wilfulness. His death happened the first year of the 16 Olympiad going out,
Jul. Cir. 399^.
before Christ 715, about the 13th year of Hezekiah, in which year on the 26
day of May a little before Sunfetting he deceased.

He first distributed the City into thirty Wards; the people into three Tribes,
he set forth or allowed small safeguards of the mightier men, whom also he
named Senators. He carried three Triumphs over a conquered Enemy into the City;
1. Of the Coeninenses, and Antemnates; when also Acron their King being slain
with his own hand, he carried back the chiefest of the spoils to Jupiter
Feretrius. 2. Of the Camerines. 3. Over the Fidenates and Veienses.

After one years interval of the kingdom, Numa.
Numa Pompilius was desired King by the Romans, by birth a Sabine, and
springing from the family of the Curii, Dionys. l. 2. p. 120. Livy, 1. Plutarch
in the Life of Niona.
in the third year of the sixteenth Olympiad, before the account of Christ 714,
who being turned to the study of peace, appointed the Roman religious rites; he
increased their year two months, hitherto consisting of ten. Moreover, the
Temple being shut up, he gave a continual rest unto his Subjects. He reigned 38
years.

The third King of Rome reigned Tullius Hostilius, Dionys. 3.
who began the second year of the 27 Olympiad, before Christ 671, a man
unaccustomed to peace, and given to Wars. This King, the Albanes being
overcome, rooted out their City, when he had brought over all their wealth and
the people it self to Rome; and had drawn in diverse pieces Metius Fuffetius the
Dictator or chief Officer of the Albanes, he being manifestly reproved of
treachery, bound between two Chariots, the Horses being driven. He triumphed
thrice over the Albanes, Fidenates, and Sabines. He Reigned 32 years, and being
stricken from Heaven, he perished with his Wife and Family.

The fourth reigned Ancus Martius, the Nephew of Numa Pompilius, the year
before Christ 639, the second year of the 35 Olympiad, of whom the Latins were
overcome, and many received into the City, who were placed in Aventinum. The
Town Janiculum was fenced by the same king, and entries being framed, Tyber is
joined by a bridge made of posts. He reigned twenty four years.

The fifth King of Rome, Tarquinius Priscus, began the second year of the 41
Olympiad, before Christ 615. This Man was the son of Demeratus Corinthus, of
the stock of the Bacchiadae or people of Corinth, a fugitive, and, at first
called Lucumo, wandered to Rome, and from the Tarquines, a Town of the
Etruscians, where he had hitherto dwelt with his Father, was called Lucius
Tarquinius. He having gotten the Empire, enlarged the Senate; subdued 12 people
of Tuscia, and took from them honorable tokens of the highest authority,
bundles of rods carried before the Magistrate, the King's robe or kirtle,
Chariots and Ivory Chairs, the Senators long silken robe, and other things of
that sort. Moreover, he built stately Works in the City; as Channels, whereby
the water was derived into Tyber. He began the Temple of Dionys. 4 etc.
Jupiter Capitolinus: He was slain by the sons of Ancus, when he had reigned 38
years.

Servius Tullius, the son in law of this King, reigned the sixth in order, in
the fourth year of the 50 Olympiad, before Christ 577. This Man was born of
Ocrisia Corniculana, a captive Mother; and being commended by Tarquinius the
King for his virtue, he is put before the heads of the kingly race. Many things
were famously ordained by him in the Commonwealth. He first appointed a See
the first book of Doctr. of times, chapter 76.
reckoning or numbering of the people, and decreed it every fifth year turning
about to be made. By the accounting he distributed the People into Companies
and Bands of an hundred footmen. He enlarged the City it self. At length, the
kingdom being governed for 44 years with the greatest praise, by the accursed
parricide of his son in law Tarquinius and his daughter, his life was taken
from him.

In the fourth year of the 61 Olympiad, as Dionysius shows, before Christ
533, the seventh and last reigned Tarquinius, by surname, the Proud, whom most
of the old Romans, and those Livie has followed, have affirmed to be the son
of Priscus. Dionys. 4. p. 212. Live. 1. etc.
Dionysius makes us believe he was his Nephew. This man governed the kingdom
gotten by wickedness, no better than he had sought it. He assaulted the
Senators and Nobles with slaughters and robberies. He made the Temple in
Albanum commune to his Companions the Latins, and framed the Latin
holy days. He built the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, begun by his
Grandfather, from spoils taken in War. At length, for a ravishment brought on a
most Noble woman Lucretia, by Aruntes his son, he being absent, while he
besieged Ardea, by the agreement of the People his highest dignity was taken
away, and with him the name of King was taken away out of the City, the year of
the City's building going out, 244.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Messenian War, and their King Aristomenes; and of Tyrtaeus
the Poet.
MEssenia is the next Country to Pausan. Messen. Just. 3. Things gathered out
of Diodor. set forth by Vales. p. 226.
Laconia, the which, the Successors of Hercules possessed. The Inhabitants of
this Country, a great and daily War being valiantly waged with the
Lacedaemonians, at length are overcome, and compelled to change their soil. The
cause of the War seems to have been the covetousness and ambition of the
Lacedaemonians, from the which, envy and grudging arises against Neighbors.
Either a ravishment offered to the Laconian women by the Messenians through a
show of holy things, and death brought on Teleclus King of the Lacedaemonians by
the same; or mutual injuries of private persons, gave the occasion: the which
while the Cities prosecuted courageously, a fierce War waxed hot on both sides.
The Lacedaemonians made the first assault, The Messenian War.
who, the Messenians provoking them in vain to equal conditions, binding
themselves first with a most grievous oath, That they would not cease from
Arms, before they should obtain Messenia; they possessed their Town Amphia,
placed on the side of an hill. Pausan. Messen. p. 116.
That happened in the second year of the ninth Olympiad; this is of Jul. Cir.
3971, Euphaes reigning over the Messenians. On the fourth year after, which was
of Jul. Cir. 3975, a cruel battle was fought, as also a new breaking in of the
Lacedaemonians; and lastly, the Messenians, other Towns being left, do fence
Ithome. Euphaes being dead, Aristodemus is chosen King by the Messenians, he
who killed his daughter before the Oracle. That fell out about the 3984 year of
Jul. Cir. the third year of the 12 Olympiad. The Lacedaemonians received a great
slaughter from this king: Justin. 3.
whom it so pleased, as to prostitute their Wives to supply offspring. Whence
were born those whom they called Parthenians, The Parthenians.
of which afterward. That thing happened about the third year of the 13
Olympiad, the fifth year of Aristodemus. At length Aristodemus, the safety of
his Country being despaired of, because the Spartans did oppress Ithome with
a most straight siege, he stabbed himself at his daughters grave, after he had
reigned six years, and a greater part of the seventh. But in the first year of
the 14 Olympiad going out, of the Jul. Circ. 3991, the twentieth after the
Messenian War was begun, Ithome was forsaken by the Messenians, and overthrown
by the Lacedaemonians. Thus an end is put to the former War. After this some of
the Messenians, Alcimadas being their Captain, through Shipwreck, travel to
Rhegium, which is a Town of Italy.

After 38 years from thence, this is the 4th year of the twenty third Olympiad,
of Jul. Cir. 4029. Tlesias being chief Governor of Athens, as Pausanias says,
through the encouragement of Aristomenes, a man endued with Heroic valor, the
Messenians renew the War against the Lacedaemonians; in which War the
Lacedaemonians desire a Captain from the Athenians, by the Oracle. These ordain
for them Tyrtaeus the Poet, a Schoolmaster, who being Commander, at the first
they are overcome; afterward they are made the superiors rather by deceit,
than virtue. The Messenians betake themselves into the Mountain Ira in the
third year of the War: where they resisted their enemies eleven years.
Aristomenes about that time did Pausan. of the Messen. 128. etc.
many incredible and astonishing things. At length in the first year of the 27
Olympiad, Ira was vanquished, before Christ 671, and the War ceased, which by
the report of Pausanias is gathered, to have held 14 years. See Vales. ad Exo.
Diod. p. 38.
Yet Justine shows, that the second War was renewed by the Messenians after
eighty years from the former; when all this space of time, they had been kept
in a slavish manner by the Lacedaemonians. The Messenians, their Country being
overthrown, the Spring coming on, do fail into Sicilia, and there possess
Zancles, which they name Messena.

CHAP. IX. Of Cyaxar King of the Medes, and the breaking in of the Scythians;
and of the Kings of the Babylonians, especially of Nebuchadnezzar, and his
Successors.
HErodotus Herod. b. 1. chapter 102.
in the first book of the Medes, writes, That Phaortes the Father of Cyaxar,
reigning, the Empire was increased and enlarged; and that by him the Persians
and people of Asia were by War tamed and subdued. Who when he assaulted the
Assyrians, and besieged Ninus, he there perished with the greatest part of his
Army. Cyaxar the son of Phaortes, that he might revenge his Father, he also
undertook a War against the Assyrians: The which being overcome, in the very
besieging of Ninus, by a sudden breaking in of the Scythians, he is repressed:
Who, The breaking in of the Scythians.
the Cymmerians a people of Italy, following after them, Madys being their
Captain, had flowed into Asia and Media. The same ruled over Asia twenty and
eight years, taking continual preys out of it, and robbing by the highways,
unpunished, none forbidding them; until after 28 years Cyaxar received them
with a banquet, and they being allured with large cups, and made drunken, he
slew them every one, and recovered his ancient kingdom.

Afterward when some of the Scythian Nation came to the same Cyaxar, he
received them favorably: unto whom also the Children of the Medes he delivered
to be instructed in the Scythian language, and skilfulnesse of Archery, in
which they excelled others.

In the mean while the Scythians going daily to hunting, they always brought
some Venison to the King; the which when sometimes through want of prey they
had failed to do, they were unkindly received by him. Which injury they
revenged with a barbarous cruelty. For they bring to the King one of their
Scholars being killed, and dressed after the manner of Venison; and
straightway b^take themselves as suppliants unto Alyater the King of Lydia.
Cyaxar, the wicked act being found out, requires the run-awayes to be yielded
to him for punishment; and, unless he should obtain his request, threatens War
with the Lydians. Therefore a five years War being waged through diverse and
doubtful chances, at length in the sixth year there is a battle betwixt them:
from the which through the sudden darkning of the Sun, they being affrighted,
gave off. At length, by the endeavor of Cilix a Syennian, and Labynitus a
Babylonian, they were made friends one with another, and a peace is established
by a nuptial Covenant. For Arienne the daughter of Alyattes, married Astyages
the son of Cyaxar. That Labynitus seems to be the same, who in holy books is
called Nebuchadnezzar, the son of Nabopolassar, who both reigned in Babylon,
and the rule of the Medes being now shook off, enlarged the Babylonian affairs;
of the which mention is to be made hereafter.

After Nabonassar, whom we rightly think the Founder of the Babylonian Empire,
many, but obscure ones, are numbered even to Nabopolassar in the Mathematicians
Canon, of the which we have made mention above. Nabopolossar increased by
weapons the Babylonian kingdom, the which he had received little. For According
to Joseph.b. 9. of Antiq. chapter 11. and 1. against App. p. 925. the Edition of
Frob. Eus. 9. of Praep. p. 267.
Berosus, an equal Writer of the Chaldaick Annals, and of the times of
Alexander the Great, has delivered, That Nabopolassar, the Father of
Nebuchadnezzar, bearing rule over Egypt, Coelesyria, and Phoenicia, a
Lieutenant, was chief over them: who when he fell off, Nabopolassar being now
of great age, sent his son Nebuchadnezzar against him with an Army; who, his
stubborn enemies being overcome, and his command recovered, when as between
these things Nabopolassar was by Natures destiny dead, he speedily fled to
Babylon, all his Armies together with the prey being left with a certain one of
his friends, that he might carry those things into Babylon. Nabopolassar
reigned twenty and one years, and began in the year of the Jul. Cir. 4089 of
Josiah the King the 17. Moreover, that former Expedition of Nebuchadnezzar
happened in the third year of Joachim the son of King Josiah, or the fourth
entering of the Jul. Cir. 4107, from which the Jews have counted the beginning
of King Nebuchadnezzar; although Nabopolassar was alive two years space after
this year. Moreover, Nebuchadnezzar being much more famous than his Father,
waged very exceeding great Wars, and passed through very many Nations, by
overcoming them; the which not only the holy Writings do witness; but also
Megasthenes in his fourth book of the Indian affairs, according to Joseph.
Antiq. chapter 31.
Josephus, has wrote concerning this King, That Hercules was much exceeded by
him in valor, and greatness of things done. For both that chief City of
Africa, and the greater part of Spain, he brought by weapons under the yoke.
Philostratus adds in the Histories of the Phoenicians and Indians, That Tire
was besieged by the same king thirteen years; the which he seems to have
attempted about the sixteenth year of his reign, of the Jul. Cir. 4122, an year
before he besieged Jerusalem, Zedekiah reigning. Nebuchadnezzar being lifted up
with such successes, would first have himself to be worshipped as a god; Dan. 3.
and an Image of gold being raised up, to his great self, as it Hierome.
pleases some, he commanded it to be worshipped after the fashion of a god.
The three Children cast into a fiery Furnace.
The which impiety the three Hebrews, Ananias, Azarias, and Mizael, freely
refusing to do, he commanded them to be cast alive into a burning furnace. But,
when the men of the guard which were about it being slain, the flame had spared
those three, and amongst them a certain fourth of an unknown shape, but more
majestical, than is belonging to a man, was seen: His anger being turned into
amazement and Religion, the King gave afterward all honor unto those young
men and Daniel their companion; and also passed over the worship and reverence
unto the Hebrews god by agodly Edict, the which he had usurped wickedly to
himself. But his Dan. 4.
manners sliding back into pride, after that he neither suffered himself by the
divine wonders, nor by Daniel's exhorting, to be called back unto his duty, he
ran into madness; whereby he living after the manner of Cattle, and by fodder,
he passed a way seven whole years under the open Firmament abroad; until, his
understanding being received, and pardon of his wickedness entreated, he was
restored unto his ancient condition. And then he dies after the death of his
father, the forty third year of his reign, Jul. Cir. 4151.
before Christ 563, in which the second year of the 54 Olympiad enters.

Beros. with Joseph. 1. against App. p. 226. Edit. Frob. and Eusebius. 10. of
Praep. p. 267.
Evilmerodach the son succeeded this King; who presently as soon as he came to
the kingdom, he had in esteem Joachin or Jeconiah, the son of Joachim, who had
yielded himself to Nebuchadnezzar, being freed out of prison, and received him
into familiarity. The sister of this King, Neriglossoor had in marriage, and of
her he begat Laborossarchod. Therefore Evilmerodach being slain, after two
years reign being fulfilled, as it were in the name of a guardian, for his son
Laborossarchod, whom we believe to be Belshazzar, he governed the kingdom four
years; the which indeed are wont sometimes to be imputed to Laborossarchod. But
this King, his father being dead, when he Dan. 5.
added unto riot, and continual drinking, sacrilege, and had commanded the
holy vessels, which his grandfather had carried out of the Temple of Jerusalem,
to be committed to the profane uses of Feasts, he saw the fingers of a man's
hand moving themselves on the wall, and painting three words; the which when
none could interpret, besides Daniel, he got the highest honor thereby. But
the King was slain the same night by the conspiracy of his servants, whom he
for his evil disposition had estranged from him, nine complete months after
the death of his Father.

Then by the agreement of the Nobles the Government is bestowed on Nabonidus, a
certain Mede by birth, and a companion of the conspiracy. The which when he had
administered seventeen years, he being invaded by War by Cyrus King of Persia,
and being shut up within the Tower Borsippa, a yielding being made, he was
removed into Carmania.

CHAP. X. Of the last Kings of Egypt out of Herodotus, Sethon, the twelve
Princes, Psammetichus, Nechaus, Amasides, and others.
THe beginnings and lordly powers of the Egyptians, which George Monk has
gathered out of Africanus and Eusebius, are mixed with many fables. Wherefore
those being let pass, we will bring into public view a few Kings out of
Herodotus, which do seem needful to illustrate this our, and the sacred
History. Herodot. 2. chapter 141. etc. Sethon.
He therefore, some kings being rehearsed, writes, Sethon the Priest of Vulcan
to have reigned; who when he behaved himself scornfully in a warlike kind, fell
into his discontent. Therefore when Sennacherib king of the Arabians and
Assyrians had with great Forces assaulted Egypt, Sethon being forsaken by his
Army, implored the aid of his god; from whom a multitude of field Mice being
sent by night, gnawed asunder their quivers of Arrows, and strings of their
bows, and rains of their bucklers. So the day after the enemies being naked of
weapons fled. There is no doubt, but that Sennacherib was the same King of
Assyrians, who, Hezekiah reigning, sacked Judea. For times on both sides do
agree.

After Sethon, Twelve Princes.
twelve Egyptian kings were chief over them, the Country being divided into
so many parts. One of these was Psammeticus; who being driven out by his
fellows, and removed into marshy places, by the help of the Ionians and
Carians; the other eleven being overcome, he possessed all Egypt; and made
friendship with the Greeks, and he first gave them a field or Land in Egypt to
inhabit in. His beginning happens into the year before Christ 670, the third
of the 26 Olympiad; and from that, he reigned fifty four years, of the which he
spent thirty one years in besieging Azotus, a Town of Palestina.

After this King Necho his son was chief, Necho.
whom, Herodotus is Author, the Syrians overcame with an Army at Magdolum. 4
Kings 23. 29. and 2 Chr. 35. 20.
This is Necho the king of Egypt, by whom Josiah was slain in Megiddo, about
the year before Christ 611. in which, Necho now reigned the sixth year. Who,
sixteen years being finished in his kingdom, he had Psammis his Successor:
This man had Apries, who, according to Jer. 44. 30.
Jeremy, is Ephree.

The Egyptians fell off from him, Apries.
by reason of the Cyrenian Expedition, in no case managed from judgment; to the
appeasing of whom, says Herodotus, Amasis, a Lieutenant was sent, who making
the Rebels friends to himself, he invaded the kingdom, and yielded up Apries to
those that required him to be kept in custody, and then to the Egyptians for
death. Apries began, by the accounts of Herodotus, in the year of the Julian
Cir. 4120, and he reigned twenty five years. Thus Amasis began in the year of
the Julian Circuit 4145. Whom at the first I have believed to have been set
over Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar, Necho as yet living: and after Apries being
slain, the rule of the Babylonians being shook off, to have begun to reign by
their own authorities. For Nabopolassar, as I have shown above, had long ago
subdued Egypt; which, as it appears, being suffered with their own Kings,
and those made tributary, he added an Overseer, who should keep it in its
homage: the which also his son Nebuchadnezzar afterward appointed.

Herod. b. 2. chapter 172.
Herodotus reports, That Amasis, because he was of a common stock, was in the
beginning despised of his Subjects: but he brought these by counsel and
diligence, rather than by force unto the reverencing of him after this manner.
He brake a golden basin, in which he had wont to wash his feet with his guests,
and made out of it the Image of a God, and dedicated it openly. The which when
he had learned to be had in great honor by the Egyptians, an assembly being
called, he said, That Image which they so worshipped, was made of that basin,
which had accustomed to serve unto base uses. But it had happened to him as
unto that; who when as before he had been of the common people; now he is their
Prince. Therefore it seems meet, that from henceforth honor should be had by
him from all: by which speech he by and by effected what he would have.

Herod. b, 2. chapter 177.
Also it is reported, that by the same King this Law was given, That every year
all should confess openly before the Presidents of the Provinces, from whence
they got their living; he that either should not do this, or not prove an
account of his manner of life, should be punished with death: The which law,
Solon afterward having imitated, is said to have brought on the Athenians.
Amasis deceased about six months before that Cambyses rushed into Egypt; of
whom it shall be spoken a little after.

CHAP. XI. Of Astyages the last King of the Medes, and of the fall of the
Medean Kingdom, and of the beginning of the Persian: Of Croesus and Cyrus, and
things done by this King, his Monarchy, and death; and of the return of the
Jews from Babylonian bondage.
THe last over the Medes reigned Astyages, as Herod. 1. Ctes. Just. 1.
Herodotus, and Ctesias, and other Historians out of them have since delivered.
This man joined only one daughter which he had, (seeing he wanted manly
offspring), Mandanes, with a certain Persian, Cambyses, a quiet man, nor
desirous of new affairs, because he had learned by a dream, that he should be
deprived of his Kingdom by a Nephew. For the same cause he calls his daughter
unto him being great with child, and delivers the infant that was born of
her, to Harpagus to be slain; which one man he had most familiar, The infancy
of Cyrus.
and the partaker of all his secrets. But he gave him to be put out privily
unto the kings shepherd, of whom being brought up, when as he came to age, he
fullfilled the truth of the dreams. For when as he was acknowledged of
Astyages, and received into favor, at length Harpagus counselling him, (whose
son Astyages, for keeping his Nephew alive, had slain, and offered to his
father to be eaten,) he fell off from his Grandfather. Astyages having
forgotten what he had committed against Harpagus, delivered unto him the chief
accomplishment of the war. Who straightway betrayed all the army to Cyrus.
After these things Astyages new armies being drawn together on every side,
encounters with Cyrus; who being overcome in battle, lost his liberty,
together with his kingdom, in the which he had Her. 1. chapter 130.
fulfilled thirty and five years. So the Rule passed from the Medes to the
Persians after three hundred and seventeen years, the 55. Olympiad entering, as
the agreement of all the ancient Historians has it, Jul. Cir. 4155.
which is the year before Christ, 559.

Astyages being overcome, there was a contention with Croesus and the Lydians.
For Croesus being joined in affinity with Astyages, as I have above rehearsed,
he not bearing both the increasings of Cyrus and the Persians with a moderate
mind, waged war on them. In the which he being overcome, came with all his
Kingdom, and the Sea-inhabited places of Greece into the power of Cyrus. In
things gath out of Vales. set forth p. 241.
Diodorus writes, that Eurybatus an Ephesian, being sent with a great sum of
money from Croesus, that he might muster Soldiers in Peloponnesus, and the
other part of Greece, he ran away to Cyrus. Thence the name of Eurobatus is
accounted for a reproach, that whose notable treachery and dishonesty they
would signify, him they would call Eurybatus. That slaughter of the Lydians
seems to have happened about the 59. Olympiad beginning The year of Jul. Cir.
4170.
before Christ 544.

Croesus being condemned by the Conqueror Cyrus to the burning flame, when as
he often times one after another named the name of Solon to Cyrus; demanding at
length what that man should be, he answered, he was a wise Athenian, who in
times past had admonished him, That no mortal man ought to be called blessed
before death; which word how true it was, now at length he did understand. This
being heard, Cyrus not only spared the man, but also afterward had him in
esteem. And then Lydia being subdued, he vanquished Asia, over which he made
Mazares chief; from whom when the Lydians had again rebelled by the Counsel of
Croesus, weapons and Horses being taken away, they were commanded to exercise
Taverns, and playing pastime arts, and bawderies, from the which the very words
ludorum and ludiorum, that is, of plays and pastimes, are believed to have
flown. After this man, Harpagus took care of the same Province, and made Herod.
1.
Ionia, and other nigh Provinces, of the Persian Empire, beginning from the
City of Phocas; whose rude inhabitants for fear of slavery, all their goods
being put into Ships, and cursing themselves with a curse, if ever they
returned, they sailed to Corsica, and Italy, and the Coast of France, and in
Isocrat. in Archid. Justin. 48.
this built a noble Town which they called Massilia, which happened about the
60 Olympiad. Although others say, Massilia was built by the same Phoceans not a
little before that time; and Harp. on (...). See Scal. to Eusebius. 1417.
Harpocratio is witness, that the most excellent man Aristotle was in that
opinion, and Eusebius records the building of it to be at the 45. Olympiad. In
the mean time Cyrus, an army being transported into Babylon; in the which then
reigned Nabonidas, whom we have showed above to have been called Darius the
Mede, begotten of a Mede, his father an inhabitant of Babylon, after a long
siege he took Babylon the head of the Nation, about the 22. year after they had
overthrown the riches of the Medes, Jul. Cir. 4176.
before Christ, 538. in which the third year of the 60. Olympiad entered. But he
carried away Darius the Mede into Carmania. From this year of Babylon being
taken, Cyrus received a new beginning of rule, and from thence his years are
wont to be reckoned in Holy Writings.

Cyrus being lifted up with so many Victories, waged War with the Massageti,
the which was in the beginning prosperous, in the end it proved miserable unto
Cyrus himself, and his Persians. For Tomyris the Queen, whose son, Cyrus, when
he had feigned a flight, being enticed by Wine, and Banquets, had slain, with a
great slaughter of the Scythians, overthrew the same Cyrus, with his whole
army, being taken by the same wile. Whose head being cut off, Tomyris is said
to have cast into a Vessel of man's blood and to have cried out; Satisfy thy
self with blood, of the which thou have always been unsatiable. These things
almost Herodotus and Justine. Ctesias a little otherwise, who first of all
denies Astyages to have been joined with Cyrus in any right of nearness, but
afterward to be made his son in Law, when Cyrus took his daughter Amyntas to
wife. After that he shows that the Bactrians submitted themselves of their
own accord to Cyrus. Then the Sachaeans being overcome by him, and their King
Amorges taken. Afterward the Lydians and Craesus at last fighting in battle
against the Derbians, a wound being received, to have the third day after
deceased, his Empire being divided between his two Sons. Whereof the elder
Cambyses succeeded his Father, but the younger Tanaxarces obtained the
principality over the Bactrians, Choramnians, Parthians, and Carmanians. Cyrus
died the thirtieth year of his reign, the fourth of the 62. Olympiad, Jul. Cir.
4185.
before Christ, 529.

2 Chr. chapter last. and 1 Esdr. 1
In the first year of the Babylonian rule, which was the twenty and second from
the beginning of the Persian reign, this King gave power by an edict to the
Jews, of returning into their Country, and of repairing the City, and likewise
the Temple. For of the City Joseph. b. 11. Ant. chapter 1. See 1 Esd. chapter 4.11. and
12. Of the Doctr. of times, chapter 31
Josephus speaks by name. Therefore Zerubbabel the son of Salathiel being
their Captain, and also Joshuah the Son of Jozedeck High Priest, the Jews went
away 1 Esd. 2.64 1 Esd. 4.
42360. in number, who first of all, the Altar being built, the seventh month
beginning, they offer a daily sacrifice. 1 Esd. 3.
But in the second year after they came thither, in the second Month, which
happened into April, the foundations of the Temple were laid. But the work was
disturbed by the reproaches of their adversaries, and hindered Cyrus being
alive, until it was renewed in the second year of Darius the son of Hystaspis.

CHAP. XII. Of those things, which in this whole intervall of time, are
gathered, delivered, spread here and there in Histories, which is, from the
building of the Temple, unto the death of Cyrus; and of men of that Age
excelling in learning.
A Little before the first Messenian War, a beginning was given to many famous
Cities. First of all to Syracusa, whereof the builder was Archias a Corinthian,
of the stock of the Bacchiades, who, Diodor. in things gath. out of Vales. p.
119. Schol. Pind. on the 2. Pyth.
four Towns being overthrown, Achradines, Neapolis, Epipolis, Tyches, he made
out of them all, one City, unto which also Ortygia happened, which hitherto had
been an Island. Both names, both of Ortygia, and Syracusa, either gave it to
those places; or so many daughters of Archias, which, being born there, he
called Ortygia and Syracusa, took their name from those Cities. Afterward he
being slain by Telephus a certain man, through deceit, who was beloved of him,
he gave him punishment for the old wickedness committed in his country, for
that he was compelled to depart out of Greece. But that was after this manner.

Plut on 4. Amat. Nar. Diodor. in Excerpt. Vales. p. 229. Maxim. diss. of the
Tyr. Apollon. Schol. to b. 4.
Melissus was of Corinth, born of that Abron, who had privily opened to them
the counsels of Phido a King of the Grecians, seeking an occasion against the
liberty of the Corinthians, and for that thing he being endowed with a City
from them, he traveled thither with his whole house. This man's Son Actaeon, of
a fine beauty of body, but endued with a greater chastity, when Archias had in
vain solicited with gifts, and diverse allurements, he tried to take him away by
force. For a great company of servants and friends being raised, he brake into
the house of Melissus, and Actaeon being laid hold of, he began to lead him
away from thence. But his father and household servants resisting them, the Lad
being drawn away on both sides, was destroyed between their hands, and
represented the death, both of him Diod. and Schol. Apol.
of the Surname, and of that fabulous thing, not with an unlike manner of
dying, he being torn assunder by his own dogs, even as he was. Melissus, the
aid of Laws and Magistrates being besought in vain, when he would express
more indignation and grief of all things, than what was meet, he goes up
through the Isthmian interlude, and a frequent Market of Greece there, into the
Temple of Neptune, which was placed in a steep place. There, after that he had
thoroughly pleaded many things against the Bacchiades, and concerning the deserts
of his father Abron toward the Corinthians, at last praying the Gods to be his
revengers, he cast himself headlong from the top. A little after, a drought and
Plague arising, the Corinthians sent Archias to Delphos to ask the cause of
Apollo. To this man, asking counsel, the Oracle answered, this evil should
thus cease, If the Corinthians had taken punishment for the death of Actaeon.
which thing being heard, Archias not daring to go back to Corinth, sailed into
Sicily. All the Bacchides being cast out of Corinth, changed their soil:
Eusebius set forth by Pontacus, shows the building of Syracusa to be in the
fourth year of the ninth Olympiad, which is before Christ 741. The edition of
Scaliger, brings it into the fourth year of the eleventh.

Also Thucidides writes that Thucid. b. 6.
Naxus was built a year before Syracusa, Thucid. b. 5. Steph.
Thucles a Chalcidian of the Island Euboea, being the author, who also in
Thucid. 5.
the fifth year after Syracusa, replenished Catana with people, the Sicilians
being driven thence.

Out of the same offspring of the Bacchiades, Chersicrates and he himself a
runaway from Corinth, led inhabitants into the Island Corcyra; as Among Schol.
Apol. b. 4.
Timaeus has delivered. But he has added that that was done six hundred years
after the destruction of Troy, the which does least of all agree, for it was
the first year of the forty and ninth Olympiad, which is far absent from the
building of Syracusa, and the Bacchiades driven from Corinth. Eusebius writes
down the building of Corcyra to be at the eighteenth Olympiad.

The Paus. Phoc. p. 326. Just. 3. Lact. b. 1. chapter 20.
Lacedaemonians being overcome by Aristodemus in the Messenian war in a great
battle for the supplying of offspring, they send soldiers of a flourishing
age home, and they make to them an Army of men of the women left there. The
Parthenians.
Whence sprang those whom they named Parthenians, who in the thirtieth year
after, as Justine says, being sent away to seek new seats, sailing into Italy
with their Captain Phalantus, they built Tarentum. The slaughter of the
Lacedaemonians seems to have happened in the 726 year before Christ, in the
third year of the 13 Olympiad. Therefore the wandering of the Parthenians is
brought by Justine, into the year before Christ 696 which is the first year of
the twenty first Olympiad. Wherefore a little after this time, Tarentum was
built by the Lacedaemonians. Eusebius. Pont.
Not much after Chalcedon was built by the Megarenses, to wit in the fourth
year of the 22. Olympiad; in the third year after, Cyzicus in Asia, and Locris
in Italy are founded.

In the 39. Olympiad, the year before Christ, 624, Thuc. 1. Strab. 7. Eus.
Pont. Cyrene built.
Epidamnus was built by the Corcyraeans. Neither much after, Battus erected
Cyrene in Lybia, the which Solinus affirms to have happened in the 45
Olympiad, the 568 year after Troy was taken. This shall be about the second
year of that Olympiad. But b. 19. chapter 3.
Pliny assigns the 143 year of the City, which is the second year of the 43
Olympiad, before Christ 611. the which is also agreeable to Theop. b. 6. Of
Causes, chapter 3.
Theophrastus, who affirmed Cyrene to be built about three hundred years before
Simonides Archontes, which is the second year of the 117 Olympiad, before
Christ 311. Moreover the same Theophrastus writes Silphius to have risen up
seven years before Cyrene was built, a shower of Pitch suddenly moistening the
earth, about the Gardens of the Hesperides, and the greater Syrtis or Gulf.

Draco set forth Laws to the Athenians Clem. Alex. 1. Stro. Eusebius.
under the 29 Olympiad, (which they called Aelian. 8. Varro.
(...), or Laws established and written in Tables, written, as said Damades,
rather Plut. Sol.
with blood than ink. For their roughness was such, that a capital punishment
was equally inflicted on small and great offenses; and he which was condemned
of idleness, was punished no less with death, than he that had committed
parricide. Those Laws, except those that were concerning privy murderers,
Solon afterward abolished.

Thue. 1. Plut. Solon. The enterprise of Cylo.
In the same City about the 45 Olympiad, there was a memorable enterprise of
Cylo, one of the Princes. Who being admonished by the Oracle to possess the
Tower or Castle, and lordship; On a most famous feast day of Jupiter, he goes
about that thing, between the time of the Olympic game, he being ignorant that
there was another feast of Jupiter, which they called Diasia. Therefore the end
answered not his endeavor. He being encompassed by a siege of his own people,
he escaped with his brother, the rest being forced by hunger and thirst, sat
down suppliants at the Altar which was in the Castle, when promise being given,
nevertheless being brought forth hence, they were slain; the authors of this
murder, and their posterity, were accounted for sacrilegious persons, and
heinous offenders, and were afterward banished out of the City.

As Fortune made void the counsels of them, of exercising Lordlinesse over
their Country; so many in that very age going about the same thing as it were
by agreement, obtained what they would. Memorable of that number of Tyrants
were, Pertander.
Periander a Corinthian, the son of Cypselus, Herod. b. 1. and 3. b. Aristot.
5. Pol. chapter 12.
who four and forty years exercised maistership, and began in the thirty and
eighth Olympiad, before Christ 628, and deceased in the fourth year of the 48.
Olympiad, that is, one year before the 49. Olympiad, as Sosicrates according to
Diogenes shows, before Christ 585. Herod. 3. Diodor.
This man slew his wife Lysides, whom he named Melissa, the daughter of Procles
a Tyrant of the Epidaurians, the which his son Lycophron taking grievously,
first of all he being rejected by him, and then banished into Corcyra, when
afterward he was called back by his father to take the tyranny on him, he was
slain by the men of Corcyra. For that thing Periander sent three hundred
children of the chief men of that Island unto Alyattes King of Lydia to be
gelded; the which being brought into Samos, the Samians took away, and sent
back into their Country. Herod. b. 1.
Arion a Musician of Methymna worshipped this man, whom also returning out of
Italy, both being compelled by the Mariners to cast himself into the Sea, and
carried back by a Dolphin, he received. (a) Also Thrasybulus a Tyrant of
Miletum was joined in friendship to Periander.

Not much after the death of Periander, Eusebius.
that is, about the fifty and third Olympiad, Phalaris snatched up the Tyranny
of Agrigentum in Sicily. For when he was of the receipt of custom, Polyaenus
l. 5. c. 1.
or a publicane, and was chief in building the top of Apolloes Tower public
moneys being received, he hired Mercenary fellows in great number, and bought
many slaves. Then having gotten by stealth matter to be brought privily to him
out of the Tower, he received power of fencing the Tower; Eusebius.
therefore he took the Tyranny at unawares, the which afterward by the highest
cruelty he exercised sixteen years.

Equal to this was Pisistratus, who Aristot. 5. Pol. chapter 12.
possessed Athens twice; Pisistratus.
first about the 55. Olympiad, and beginning of Cyrus. But in Herod. 1 chapter 59.
etc.
a short time after, he being driven out by the faction of a very mighty
Citizen Megacles, when he had reconciled him to himself by an agreement of a
Marriage, he was brought into the Tower by the same, through a woman set forth
in the show of Minerva. Whence he being cast out by the conspiracy of Megacles,
he was at length again restored in the eleventh year, about that time, wherein
Croesus waging war against Cyrus, looked out for the aid of the Greeks. He died
about the first year of the 62. Olympiad, his son Hippias being left his
successor, when he had enjoyed the tyranny no more then seventeen years.

Moreover this Megacles had a son, Alemaeones, who was enriched by Croesus, and
he begat a son, Megacles, of the same name with his father, the son in law of
Clisthenes, Prince of the Sicyonians. Clisthenes.
Herod. in the same place
For this man being willing to give his daughter Agarista in marriage to the
most excellent man of all Greece, appointed a certain day, at which all her
suitors should come to Sicyo, out of whose number he chose Megacles the son of
Alemaeon. Also among others, Herod. Diod. in excerpt. Vales. p. 230.
Smyndirides a Sabarite is said to have been present, famous about that time
for wealth and riot. And Herodotus is witness, that this happened the second
Age after Solon and Croesus.

There were at that season men famous for Wit, and in the praise of wisdom; of
Poets indeed, Archilochus in the Tatia. Cyr. 1. ag. Jul.
23 Olympiad; Stenichorus, who is born, says Suidas, the 37 Olympiad, and
dies in the 57.

Alcman, a Lyrick Poet, flourished Eusebius.
about the 42 Olympiad.

At the same time also Alcaeus lived, who exercised enmity with Pittacus, and
other mighty ones. Eusebius in his Chronicle, sets down Alcaeus; and Sappho in
the 44, or 45 Olympiad.

Theognis flourished in the 58 Olympiad, Eusebius being witness, whom Plat. 1.
of Laws. Theod. 5. ag. Genesis
some report to have been a Megarenian of Sicily. Others affirm him to have
sprung from Megara, a neighboring City to the Corinthian Isthmus.

Hipponax, a writer of biting Jambick verses, was in the 60 Olympiad, as b. 36.
chapter 5. The sevon Wise men.
Pliny says.

Moreover, in Philosophy, or the love of Wisdom, those seven were chiefly
famous, who made that word proper to themselves. These Plato in Protagoras, and
out of him Pausan. Phoc. p. 340.
Pausanias thus repeateth in the History of the Phocians.

The first was Thales Milesius born in the first year of the 35 Olympiad,
Damasias being chief Governor: he dyed in the 58 Olympiad, after he was
present with Croesus, in the Expedition against Cyrus. Wherefore he lived not,
as Diogenes says, 70, or 90, but 96 years, he finished 24 whole Olympiads.

The second, Pittacus, of Mitylene, who flourished in the 42 Diog. Laert.
Olympiad, and dyed in the third year of the 52 Olympiad, Aristomenes being
chief Governor.

The third, Bias of Prienna, Diog.
who lived in the same time, under Alyattes, and Croesus, kings of Lydia.

Whose notable act to be celebrated with everlasting praise, is delivered by
Diodorus in his Collection lately set forth. For when Noble Virgins of Messenia
were taken by Robbers, he nourished them, being redeemed with his own money,
and had them in the place of daughters. The which when their kindred a little
while after required, no price being taken of their redeeming, nor nourishment,
he restored unto them. The Maids being mindful of this singular good turn,
when they returned home, when as a little after that time the Fishermen of
Messenia had drawn out a brazen trivett, on which was written, [To the most
wise;] they concluded by argument among their kindred, That he should be sent
to Bias, as the most worthy of all men.

The fourth, Solon, who was Praetor at Athens in the Diog. Plut.
third year of the 45 Olympiad, Tarquinius Priscus reigning at Rome; in which
time also he gave Laws to the Athenians, and set in order their Commonwealth.
He dyed being Diog.
80 years old, in the same year, as it appears, wherein Cyrus began to reign
in Persia, Aelian. 8. Var. chapter 16.
a little after the mastership exercised by Pisistratus over the Athenians.

The fifth, Cleobulus Lyndius equal in time with Solon.

The sixth, Myson of Chenas, of a Town in Laconia, or rather of O^teus, which
he calls Chenas.

The seventh, Chilo, a Lacedemonian, whom Diogenes says, was an old man in the
45 Olympiad.

For Myso, says Pausanias, many reckon Periander of the Corinthians: others,
Anacharsis the Scythian, who lived at that season.

Also Aesop, the writer of fables, flourished in that Age; whom Eusebius
reports to be killed by the people of Delphos, in the 54 Olympiad.

Epimenides a Cretian, is written down among the wise men of those times; who
in the Diog.
46 Olympiad coming to Athens, purged the City from the defilement of the
heinous offense of Cylo. In the same place.
He is reported to have slept 57 years in a cave, to have lived 154, or 157, or
298 years. Moreover, Diogenes writes, That he raised up many Altars for the
purging of the Athenians, dedicated to no certain god. Unto which, Paul in the
13th of Acts, seems to have had respect.

Diog.
Anaximander the Milesian, in the second year of the 58 Olympia^ was 64 years
of age, and a little after dyed. Anaximenes, and he also a Milesian, was born
in the 63 Olympiad, and dyed about the taking of Sardis, as says Diogenes; but
falsely. For See the 13 book of the Doctr. of times.
Sardis was taken by Cyrus in the first year of the 59 Olympiad.

Diog.
Xenophanes was famous in the 60 Olympiad; in which same time Pherecides a
Syrian Philosopher lived.

There are some who reckon Periander, as I have said, of Corinth, and
Pisistratus, Tyrants of Athens, among the Wise men of that Age.

The End of the Second Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. OR, AN Account of Time
The Third Book.
Containing the Times from the Year of the Julian Period 4186 to 4430: or from
the beginning of Cambyses, unto the beginings of Ptolomey Philadelphus.

CHAP. I. Of those things which happened under Cambyses and Darius, worthy of
memory; especially of the Marathonian Conflict.
CAmbyses in the fourth year of the 62 Olympiad, before Christ 529, as has
been shown, began to reign in Persia; in the fifth year, as Eusebius writes,
he invadeth Egypt. Lib. 3. Init.
Herodotus shows a ridiculous cause of this War: Cambyses desired the
daughter of Amasis to Wife: but for her, Nitetis the daughter of Apries being
sent by Amasis, because he knew she was not to be accounted in the place of a
lawful Wife, but of an whore or leman; Things done by Cambyses.
when Cambyses understood that matter, he turned his weapons against Egypt. But
seeing that Apries dyed 44 years before that Cambyses desired Egypt, it is not
likely to be true, that the daughter of Apries could be chosen for a Maid in
the marriage of Cambyses. Wherefore it more probable, the which also Herodotus
writes some to affirm, that affinity to have been sought after, not by
Cambyses, but by Cyrus.

Which thing also Polyaenus believed. For he writes unto Cyrus, requiring the
daughter of Amasis to wedlock; Nitetis the daughter of Apries being sent by
Amasis, in her room; which Nitetis, the matter being dissembled, when as she
had born many children by Cyrus, and among these Cambyses, the deceit being
confessed to Cyrus, he forced him, That because Amasis was dead, he should
revenge himself on his son Psammeticus. But in the providing, Cyrus being dead,
Cambyses by the encouragement of his Mother, passed over the kingdom of Egypt
unto the Successors of Apries.

Herod. in the same place.
Before that Cambyses went into Egypt, Amasis dyed, and his son Psammeticus
succeeded him. Who being taken by Cambyses, he lived sometime in Persia.
Cambyses was helped in that Expedition by a Navy of Polycrates, a Tyrant of the
Samians. Egypt being subdued, he acted many things in a cruel and wicked
manner. He leading an Army against the Aethiopians, for want of provision, left
off his enterprise. But when he had sent about 50 thousand to burn the Temple
of Jupiter Hammon, by that tempest, and great heaps of sand, they were
overwhelmed.

Moreover, he commanded Croesus, Croesus freed from death.
friendly admonishing him of what was his duty, to be led to death. But the
Persians withdrew him privily. Which thing being known, being glad of his
safety, he punished his preservers with a mortal punishment.

At length, in the beginning of the eighth year of his reign, before Christ
522, Cambyses fell into madness, and commanded his own brother Smerdis to be
slain; because he had seen in a dream him sitting in his Chair of State.
Prexaspes executed that command. So indeed Herodotus. But Ctesias writes his
name to have been Tanyoxar: and he explaineth the matter a little otherwise.
Not much after, Cambyses falling suddenly upon timber, he hurt the muscle of
his thigh, and the eleventh day after he dyed.

Herod. in the same place.
Cambyses being sick, Polycrates in Samos, in the 11th year of his tyranny,
being called forth through deceit by Oroetes the Lieutenant of Sardis is slain,
and his dead carcass is hung upon a gibber.

About the same time, before the death of Cambyses, Magus, Magus enters on the
Kingdom.
a certain man most like to Smerdis, put his person on himself, and Cambyses
being dead, held the kingdom seven months.

Herod. 3. Valor. Max. 7. chapter 6. Just. 1.
Who being slain by seven of the chief men, Darius, one of this number, by the
endeavor of Oebares his Groom, and by the neighing of his horse, obtained the
kingdom, being 28 years of age. For Herodotus in the end of his first book,
says, in the last year of Cyrus, Darius was about 20 years old. He a little
after killed Oeretes. He punished Intaphernes, one of his six assistants, with
death, because he being forbidden by the usher of his Chamber, and Porter, to
come unto the King, he had cut off both their noses and ears. He reduced the
Tributes to a certain mean. The sum of these out of Asia and Egypt was 14560
of Euboean talents; the which being reduced to our brass money, do make
10374000 of our Targets.

He gave to Sylosontes the brother of Polycrates, of whom being deprived, he
was as yet endowed with a robe or a chief Counselor in Egypt, the chief rule
of his Country, the Isle of Samos. At which time almost, Babylon fell off; the
which being besieged 20 months, he obtained through Zopyrus a Prince of great
trust: which fell out next after the third year of the 67 Olympiad.

There was a twofold famous Expedition made by him. Herod. 4. Just. 1. Corn.
Nep. in Milt.
The former against the Scythians; the other against the Greeks. In the former
he commanded Bosphorus, a narrow Sea with a bridge; then the other he made in
the River Danubius: for the keeping of which, he placed Princes of the Ionian
Cities, by whom it was deliberated, whether or no, the bridge being broken
down, to which thing the Scythians persuaded them, they should deliver Darius,
and the strength of the Persians to be overthrown, by an universal slaughter on
the same. The Expedition of Darius against the Scythians.
But the opinion of Histiaeus Milesius prevailed, who persuaded, that that
should not be done for this reason, because by the kingdom of Darius, their own
safety and rule was supported. Therefore Darius, a great part of his Army being
lost, returned with grief into Asia; Megabazus being left with 70 thousand in
Europe, that he might subdue it by weapons. This dispatch against the Scythians
happened, the 68 Olympiad beginning, before the account of Christ 508.

Herod. 5.
Megabazus subdued Thracia and Macedonia unto the Government of Darius. At
which time Alexander the son of Amyntas King of the Macedonians, slew certain
chief of the Persians, wantonly sporting themselves in a banquet at his own
house. Darius returning into Persia, Histiaeus. Milesius.
drew Histiaeus, a Tyrant of Miletus along with him against his will, through a
show of honor, and set his Couzen-german over the City in his place: Whom
afterward, was privily encouraged, that he would fall off from the King, and
should draw the Ionians with him into the fellowship of the War. For through a
desire of his Country, and a weariness of the Persian Court, he took that
counsel, that under pretense of quenching that domestic flame, he might obtain
leave to travel from Darius. In the mean time, Aristagoras, freedom being
restored to the Milesians, and Tyrants, as far as he could, being every where
taken away, he looked at the aid of the Grecians. Therefore the Lacedaemonians
being tried in vain, he comes to Athens; of whom he being helped with a Navy
of twenty Ships, he openly fell off from the Persians: Straightway by their
help Sardis was taken and set on fire. That happened in the 69 Olympiad. The
Persians following hard after the Ionians, do scatter and put them to flight.
Who being forsaken by the Athenians, they however maintained no lesser war
against the Persians. They take Byzantium and other Cities. Darius, it being
heard that Sardis was burned by the Athenians, being covetous of revenging,
commanded, that he should be daily put in mind of bringing war on the Athenians.

Herod. 6.
Aristagoras being afterward slain in the Army, Histiaeus, who was sent by
Darius, does vainly strive against the King with the Ionians: who being
overcome in a Sea Fight, Miletus in the sixth year from the falling away of
Aristagoras, was vanquished and consumed with fire; Histiaeus being taken in
fight by Harpagus Captain of the Persians, and being brought unto Artaphernes
the brother of Darius, they hang him on a gibber.

Darius sends Mardenius his son in law against the Grecians with an Army; who,
Tyrants being taken away out of the Cities of Ionia, in their stead he
appointed Governments popular, or of the people. Thereby he subjected Thracia,
Macedonia, and the Neighboring Countries unto himself. He being tossed at the
Mountain Atho with a grievous calamity, lost twenty thousand men. After these
things Darius sent Ambassadors into Greece, who should take away by force, or
demand, the water and fire, unto which the people of Aegina did homage.

At length, in the third year of the 72 Olympiad, 4224 of the Jul. Cir. they
fought at Maratho.

Herod. 6. Cor. Nepos. Milt. Paus. Art. p. 31. Just. chapter
A desire partly of spreading his command into Europe and Greece, partly of
revenging on the Athenians, afforded to Darius the cause of this War, who had
helped the Ionians against themselves, and had burnt Sardis. He not only
pretended this latter for his Expedition; but this moreover, that he might
restore Hippias the son of Pisistratus, who was cast out of Athens, and become
an humble suitor to him, into his tyranny.

Darius being moved with these things, sends a Navy into Greece of six hundred
Galleys with Oars, as says Herodotus: but as Cornelius Nepos relates in
Miltiades, of five hundred; wherein he put two hundred thousand footmen, ten
thousand horsemen, if we believe the same man. But Lysias in his Epitaph
numbreth five hundred thousand. That Navy ( Datis, and Artaphernes the son of
Artaphernes, the brother of Darius, being Captains) first being brought to
Euboea, took Eretria. From thence it comes into Attica, and set forth its
Armies on the plain field Maratho. The Athenians create ten Praetors or Majors
against them, who were chief over the Army; amongst whom was Militiades, by
whose Successes with a very small company (for he had not more than ten
thousand, whereof nine thousand of Athenians, of the Plataeans there were a
thousand) the Barbarians were scattered. Cornelius Nepos affirms Datis to
have brought an hundred thousand of footmen, and ten thousand horsemen into
battle array; 6400 being slain of the Persians. The Athenians make famous 192
on the 16 day of [Boedromion], as says Plut. in Came.
Platarch, this is the 29 of September: Among others, Callimachus a chief
Warrior of the Athenians, and Cynaegirus, who laying hold o^ the flags of an
enemies ship with his hand, it being cut off, he dyed.

After this slaughter, Darius made a greater provision against the Greeks of
Herod. 7. in the begin.
three whole years space. But in the fourth year Egypt forsook him. While
therefore he fitteth himself to be revenged of both, a dissension arising
between his sons, who required to be by their father chosen King, contrary to
the custom; at length Xerxes was by him ordained and put before Artabazanes
the elder, because he was also born of Arossa the daughter of Cyrus; and was
received into the chief power. At length in the year following, from the
falling off of Egypt, Darius dies. These things Herodotus. From the which,
this is concluded, the Marathonian fight to have happened in the thirty and
second year of Darius; That is, in the fifth year before his death.

CHAP. II. Of the History of those of the Family of Pisistratus, and the death
of Hipparchus; as also of the Lordship of Miltiades; and the most grievous
Error of Cornelius Nepos.
IN the twentieth year before the Marathonian battle, as b. 6. Herod. 5. and 6.
Thucydides is Author, the rule of those of Pisistratus was quenched in
Athens, by the endeavor of the Alcmaeonides, and the help of the
Lacedaemonians. For Hippias the son of Pisistratus, was driven out, when he had
been chief 18 years after the death of his Father; whose brother was
Hipparchus, as A discourse of desire of gain. In Collec. of Vales. p. 250.
Plato is witness, a moderate and learned man. Yet Diodorus says, That
Hipparchus and Hippias were violent and wilful men; but the third son of
Pisistratus, Thessalus, to have been civil and well manner'd, who, Tyranny
being renounced, was much beloved of his Citizens: whom again b. of Polic.
Heraclides contradicts, who says, Thessalus to have been the younger, and
fiercely rash in boldness: Whom the Conspirators being willing to kill, they
slew Hipparchus, far more gentle than his two brethren, in his stead. This man
was slain by the conspiracy of Harmodius and Aristogiton, in the time of the
Athenians exercising their active games. Who both being killed by them of the
guard, many others were tortured, and punished. Pausan. At.
After that, Hippias lorded it three years over the Athenians; and in the
fourth being driven out, he fled to Darius, in the twentieth year before the
fight at Maratho, as says Thucydides. Wherefore the death of Hipparchus
happened in the fourth year of the 66 Olympiad; in which year, it is gathered
from thence, the five yearly active games, sacred to the Athenians, were wont
to be proclaimed. But this year was before Christ 513. But Hippias was cast out
in the third year of the 67 Olympiad, of the Jul. Circuit 4204; afterward
Images were publicly placed for Harmodius and Aristogiton, as b. 34. chapter 4.
Pliny writes; who says, that was done in the same year, wherein the Rulers
were driven away. But they were thrust out in the third year of the same
Olympiad going out; that is, of the Jul. Cir. 4205.

Herod. b. 6.
About the same time, wherein Darius by Ambassadors required the water and
fire from the Grecian Cities, when the people of Aegina had obeyed his
commands, and Cleomenes Ruler in Lacedemon had come thither to enquire into, or
hear their cause debated, he being by his companion in Office Demaratus led
into a fault, he caused the Government to be taken away from this very man;
Pythias being brought in as a false witness, which denied Demaratus to be the
lawful son of Arista, Leotychides was ordained in the rooom of this man; of
whom he being sharply touched with a mock, he ran away to the Persians.

At that season Miltiades the son of Cimon was renowned at Athens, who obtained
dominion in Cherronesus, a City of Thracia. For Miltiades the Uncle of this
man, the son of Cypselus born of the same Mother as Cimon, by the Dolonean or
swift-footed Thracians, who inhabited Cherronesus, he being called to the chief
rule, by the Oracle, at Athens, Croesus reigning, with whom when he exercised
friendship, he held that Country. He dying, left Stesagoras the son of his
brother Cimon his successor. Who being killed by a privy murderer, the sons of
Pisistratus, says Herodotus, send Miltiades the son of Cimon, whem they
themselves had taken away from amongst them, thither; who there enjoyed the
affairs. But in the third year after it came to pass, the Scytbians break into
Thracia, whom Darius had provoked by his Expedition made against them. Whom
Miltiades shunning, left Cherronesus, and was restored afterward to the same by
the Thracians. These things Herodotus. Which that they may be true, it must
needs be, that Miltiades was sent by Hippias only after the death of
Hipparchus, for in the third year after, the Scythians made their violent
assault or inroad.

Wherein the Error of Cornelius Nepos is worthy the taking notice of, The
great error of Corn. Nep. concerning Miltiad.
who has confounded the former Miltiades with the latter, and has ascribed
the deeds of both unto one. But Aelianus (in his diverse things) rightly
distinguishes of three Miltiades, in like manner, as we have done.

Miltiades the son of of Cimon, when the Persian Navy got over that whole Sea,
he slipped to Athens, and afterward being General against the Army of Darius, he
contended in the field of Marathon with a most prosperous and glorious success.
Which victory being gotten, he is sent to pursue its remainder with a Navy; and
while he compasses by the Islands of Bella, a Town in Campania, he goes to
Paros; and what with a false fright of an Army of Persians invading, what
through the sickness of an hurt body, being beaten off from thence, he was
fined by the unjust sentences of his Citizens, with a great sum of money; and
because he had not paid it, he was cast into prison, till he dyed. These things
happened the next year after the Marathonian victory.

CHAP. III. Of certain Learned men who lived about that time.
IN the interim, from the third year of the 60 Olympiad, and the rise of Cyrus
in Babylonia, to the death of Darius, and the beginning of the reign of Xerxes,
the memories of the most famous in all literature and several Arts are
delivered to posterity. Some exquisite in Poetry, Simonides. Phocylides.
Simonides Ceus, a famous Lyrick, to whom Eusebius ascribes the Bays in the 61
Olympiad, together with Phocylis.

After him Anacreon, Anacreon.
a great Favorite of Polycrates the Samian Tyrant, as Lib. 3. c. 3.
Herodotus tells us: which Polycrates dyed by the hands of Oroetes in the 64
Olympiad.

Scol. Aesch.
Aeschylus also, the brother of Cynegirus, who behaved himself so valiantly in
the Battle at Marathonia, was very famous at Athens about this time: which
Aeschylus likewise was in the same fight, as the Writer of his life tells us:
But in the life of Sophocles we are informed Cynegirus was son to one Archontes
Philippus, and born in the second year of the 71 Olympiad, and younger than
Aeschylus by 17 years; by which account, Aeschylus was born in the first year
of the 67 Olympiad, and of the Julian Period the 4202, and fought this Battle
of Marathonia in the 22, or 23 year of his age; so that his death will fall in
the 4267 year of the Julian Period. For he lived 65 years. But since it is
apparent he lived and dyed in the time of Hiero King of Sicilie, and that Hiero
himself dyed in the 4247 year of the Julian Period; the story hangs not well
together, but in all likelihood he was born long before the 67 Olympiad.

Amongst the Philosophers, Xenophanes, an excellent Naturalist, stands upon
record, who was also very famous for Poetry, whom Diogenes and Eusebius place
about the 60 Olympian.

But this Age was more honorable in nothing than Pythagoras himself,
Pythagoras Jambl. in vita Pyth. Diog. Diod. in Excerpt. Vales. p. 241.
who took his origin from Samos, and after a long travel returning to his
native Country, Polycrates still reigning there, went to Crotona in Italy,
where he had the discipline of very many who came to be tutored by him, as
Diogenes reports. Some say he very much disaffected Sylosontes, brother and
successor to Polycrates. He was renowned in the 60 Olympiad, if we may believe
Diogenes. About the 62 Olympiad he writes, That Jamblicus went into Italy,
where Polycrates had begun his reign. He dyed in the fourth year of the 70
Olympiad, when he had lived either eighty or ninety years, as Diogenes
delivers. Jamblicus reports he was very intimate with Phalaris the Tyrant,
Abaris.
and Abaris; the same Jamblicus who writes of his life and Doctrines. This
Abaris was a Priest of Apollo, who adored Pythagoras instead of Apollo, and
brought him a wonderful strange and curious Arrow, with which crossing the
River, he freed the cities that were infected, from the pestilence; and other
things most miraculous, he acted by virtue thereof; as we have it from
Jamblicus. But In Apol. c. 46.
Tertullian writes, that this Pythagoras aimed at the sovereignty of the
Thurians.

By the sage precepts of Pythagoras, the Crotoniats instituted their
Commonwealth, and thereby improved, not only in civility, Diod. 12.
and good government, but in Martial Discipline, so much that 100 thousand of
them encountered with 300 thousand of the Sybaritans at the River Sagra (under
the conduct of Milo) and having put the enemy to the Sword, utterly demolished
the very city.

Heraclitus the Ephesian was in great esteem about the 69 Olymp. as Diogenes
testifies: nor will we forget how famous Tert. ad. Mort. c. 4.
Zeno Eleates was at this time,

CHAP. IV. Of the Kings dethroned at Rome, and the Wars thence kindled amongst
the Romans.
LIviu^ says, Rome was a Monarchy for 244. Lib. 1. in fine. Dion. lib. 4.
Plut. in Popl. Jul. Per. 396^.
years from the foundation of it before it became a free State. Therefore in
the 245 year they deposed their King, disannulled that government, and then
were Consulls first elected and created. Wherefore fince (by the testimony of
Varro) the City was erected in the third year of the 6 Olymp. or in the year
before Christ, 753. the decease of Kingship, and the rising of Confulship,
there fall upon the fourth year of the 67 Olymp. the year before Christ, 509 if
we follow the same site of Months, as in the old Roman year, and is now
observed in the Julian Account. The Palilia, or feast of Pales, were celebrated
on the 6th of the Calends of May, whence the time from the building of the City
was compured. And the Olympian years from the solstice. So that the beginning
of the City-account of their years, and the end of the Olympian, agreed
exactly. But the Roman Months this while kept not the same order with the
Olympian; and what rule they then observed, we can by no means find out,
therefore we commonly use the site of Months now known and settled amongst us
at this day.

The Monarchy of Rome was dissolved, Vid. 10. de doct. Temp. c. 21.
and Lucretius (then Monarch) expelled, because his son offered to have
ravished Lucretia. This was transacted upon the 6th of the Calends of March, on
which day the Regifugium, or expulsion and departure of Kings is noted to have
been in the Roman Calender.

Instead of their Kings, when the Prefect of the City had summoned together
the noble men, (as we have it in the Commentaries of Servius Tullius) two of
them, to wit, L. Junius Brutus, and L. Tarquinius Collatinus were created
Consulls. One of them (i.e.) Tarquinius being a neighbor of the Tarquinii, and
one of the Family of Damaratus, and his Grandfather; who after the detection of
that conspiracy, in which the sons of Brutus, and a sisters son of the said
Tarquinius were taken, because he behaved himself too favorably toward the
conspirators; by Brutus his own means, was banished amongst the rest; and one
P. Valerius Poplicola supplied his place. After this, the King Tarquinius waged
a war against the Romans, wherein Brutus fell, and in his place, first
Lucretius, and afterward M. Horatius were made Consul. And at last they made
a decree, that every year two new Consulls should be chosen, and so the state
of Rome was governed by an anniversary pair of Confulls.

Live. 2. Dion. 5. Plut. in Popl.
In the third year from the Roman liberty, Porsenna a petty King of the Clusini
(to restore the Tarquinii) waged a war against the Romans, in which war the
singular prowess of M. Hortensius Cocles was most illustrious and notable. He
himself alone kept a bridge against the enemy, do they the utmost they could,
an the bridge being cut down, swam safe to land. Mutius Scaevola having aspired
to the crown, and being baffled in his design. This Horatius took him, and held
his hand in the fire till he was so terrified, that he sued for peace with the
Romans. The fortitude of the Female Sex at this time was no less conspicuous,
but of Clelia especially amongst them all, who being delivered as a Hostage to
the King, having deceived her keeper, escaped over a great River to her own
party.

Live. 2. Dion. 6.
After the repulse of the Etruscians succeeded an insurrection of Romans,
stirred up by the incitations of Oct. Mamilius, a Son in Law of Tarquinias, and
a Roman himself. The war raging violently, The first Dictatour.
Posthumous, made Dictator in the year of the City 258. was sent out against
these incendiaries, who having overthrown them in a pitched field, at a place
called Regulus Lacus, (i. e.) Kings-Mear, restored the Conquered to the
friendship of the Romans. Nor was this the first Dictator; for before him, in
the year of the City 250. T. Lartius, having borrowed money, and therewith
bribed the people to give their voices, by that means was created Dictatour.

Live. 2. Plut. Cor. The Voscian wa^.
After they began to make war upon the Volsci, which by reason of
intermissions, was protracted for many years. Therefore take notice that it
began in the year of the City 259. Dion. l. 8. Live. Plut.
In this war the stupendous success of C. Marcius Coriolanus is most worthy
of memory, who in the year of the City 263. playing least in sight, for that he
was under contempt at home, went to the Volsci, and stirred them up to a war,
for the managing whereof, they elected him and one Tullius Accius, who were so
befriended by fortune in that war, that after many victories had against the
Romans, at last they followed them to the very City-walls; when, by the
entreaty of his Mother, he was taken off the enterprise of the City, which fell
out in the year, according to the City-account, 266. Notwithstanding the loss
of Coriolanus, the Volsci profecuted the War, but were conquered most
tryumphantly by Spurius Cassius who had been thrice Confull.

But this good fortune was the ruin of the man. For he was the first after the
depulsion of the Tarquinii, that was so hardy as to attempt the Sovereignty of
Rome, but was suppressed in the attempt Dion. 8. Live. 2. The first Agrarian Law.
and for his pains precipitated from the Rock Tarpeia. Anno, U.C. 269. He was
the chief man in bringing in the Agrarian Law, but the very year before his
death.

But in the 261 year of Rome, the common people being so exhausted by usury and
oppression, that they were not able to pay their debts betook themselves to the
Mount called Sacrum, or holy, and by the Counsel and Oration of Menius
Agrippa, The Creation of Tribunes.
found the means to recover themselves, he having first ordered a Magistracy,
which he made use of for his own safety against the violence of the Fathers of
Rome, and these they called Tribunes.

CHAP. V. Of Xerxes his expedition into Greece, The Graecians victory at Sea (
near Salamis) and the destruction of the Persians.
THe tenth year after the Marathonian fight, the battle of Salamis was
disputed, as Thucidides reports. Herod. 7. and 8. Plutarch in Them. and Arist.
Just. 2. Cor. Nep. in Them. Diod. 11.
For Xerxes who in the fourth year of the 73 Olymp. and the year before Christ
485 (his father being dead) began his reign, as well by the advice and
instigation of the Pisistratans and Alvadarians, as also being incited thereto
by many and fearful Vifions in the 5th year of his reign) of the Jul. Per. the
4233. or the 4th year of the 74 Olymp. took his voyage into Asia, and having
passed over the Winter at Sardis, the Spring following, he passed into Greece.
Herodotus, tells us there were five Millions two hundred eighty three thoufand
heads in his Army, In Paral.
Plutarch five Millions. Orat. 10. con. Graec.
Theodoretus, thirty hundred thousand. Cornelius Nepos 700 thousand foot, and
400 thousand Horse. The same Author reckons his Navy to 12 hundred
Lacedaemonians, under the command of Leonidas, with 300 Spartans, and 4000 of
other Greeks from the borders of Thessaly, called by the name Thermopylae, who
had formerly repelled his Army from their coasts, but the other Graecians being
all departed, the Lacedaemonians being encompassed by the Persians, were
overcome. The Athenians being warned by an Oracle that they should make
themselves wooden Bulwarks, (as we find by Themistocles) they left their
country, and, with their Families, and all they had, betook themselves to the
Sea; and to that end provided and got together, (as Cornelius Nepos stories i^)
200. Sail, to which 100 more Greek Ships being added, they made up a fleet of
three hundred sail. Herodotus mentions but a hundred twenty seven Attick Ships;
but in all they amounted to 271. Xerxes entering Attica set A^hens on fire.
Herod. 8. init.
Then began the conflict at Salamina, in which the Persians were routed, on the
20, day of the Month Boedromion, which falls upon the 23th of our September.
Xerxes betook himself to flight, and the 45 day after the fight arrived at
Hellespont, having left Mardonius with 300000. foot Soldiers in Graecia. This
Sea Fight happened in the beginning of the first year of the 75 Olymp. the 480
of the account before Christ, being the next ensuing. Mardonius being fought by
Pausanias the Lacedemonian, and Aristides, the Grecian Generals, was
vanquished at Platea, the third of Boedromion, or 25th of September Herod. l.
9. Diod. 11. Plut. Arist.
upon which very day, the Graecians overthrew the Persians in another Sea fight
at Mycale.

At the same time that the Graecians and Persians were Grapling by Sea. The
Carthaginians whom Xerxes had incited to invade Sicily were routed in a
Land-fight at Himera by Gelo, as Lib. 11.
Diodorus observes.

CHAP. VI. Of the most memorable occurrences transacted in Graecia, after the
Persian War ended, and other, and the civil broils in Greece.
WHen the storm of the Persian war was allayed, the Graecians had their hands
full at home. For their two chief Cities Athens and Lacedemonia were at
contention which of them should have the pre-eminence, and with these (some
with one, some with the other) all the other Cities sided.

Diod. 11. Cor. Nep. Them. Plut. Them.
The Athenians chief care was when they had ordered their affairs, to re-edify
their walls which had been ruined by the Persians, which by the industry of
Themistocles they accomplished, (do the Lacedaemonians what they could to hinder
it) who opposed it lest it might become a better fortyfied City then
Peloponnesus, (which the Barbarians made their safeguard and refuge, whilst
they forraged and plundered Graecia). But it was plain, they opposed it not so
much for any affection to the public good, as out of fear and envy, lest
their rival City should out-top them, but by the advice of the same Thucid. l.
1. page 62. Corn. Nep.
Themistocles, the Athenians made them a Haven in the Piraeeum, whereas
hitherto they had made use of Phalericum.

Diod. 11. Corn. Nep. in Pausan.
Afterward the Grecians sent Pausanias with a fleet into Cyprus and
Hellespont, to clear those parts from the Barbarians Thucid. 1. Diod. 11. Cor.
Nep. Plut. Parall.
Who having taken Byzantium whilst he stayed there, dealt privately with the
Persians, about the betraying of Greece, which being made known to the
Grecians, he was sent for, condemned, and died for it. In the mean time out of
distaste, at the haughtiness of Pausanias. The Grecian people were much
alienated in their affections to the Lacedaemonians, which opportunity the
Athenians laid hold on, and by the means of Aristides consederated them to
themselves, who thought conventient to make a certain Treasure in the Island
Belos, into which every year they cast in every man somewhat, which custom the
Athenians held afterward.

After the death of Pausanias, The flight of Themistocles.
Themistocles being accused of Treachery by the Lacedaemonians, he betook him to
his heels, and fled to the Persians, which Diodorus reckons to be in the second
year of the 77 Olymp the year before Christ, 471. being the ninth year after
the great slaughter at Salamis, so that Xerxes being then living, to him it was
that Themistocles went as elsewhere we have declared.

Diod. 11. Plut. in Cim. Corn. Nep.
The year after, Cimon the son of Miltiades with a fleet of 250. Vessels,
worsted, and utterly routed, and dispersed in downright fighting 340. Sail of
the Barbarians, and the same day having clothed his Soldiers in Persian habit,
and put them into the ships he had taken in the battle with the Barbarians,
came upon the Persian Army at unawares on land, and utterly cut them off at the
River Eurimedon.

Lacedemon terrified with a great Earthquake which was in Peloponnesus, when
the Helots and Messenii were swallowed up, first craved aid of the Athenians;
but whilst the Auxiliaries were marching toward their relief, (the enemy being
restrained by Archidamus) the Lacedaemonians suspected the Auxiliary forces of
Athens, and durst not trust them, but sent them back the same way they came;
which was so resented, that it was the cause of much Heart-burning betwixt
them. This Diodorus writes to be in the fourth year of the 77 Olympiad.

The following year being the 78 Olympiad, Mycaenae, because they would not
submit to the Graecians, Diodorus tells us, they and their City were utterly
destroyed by them, and then Paus. Cor. 59.
Pausanias (as the same Author intimates) out of emulation of their springing
glory began to hate the Grecians perfectly, because in the Persian War the
Argivi sat quiet at home, whilst the Mycaenians sent 80 Soldiers to
Thermopylae against the Persians. In the year following he says Hiero King of
Syracuse dyed, Hiero.
when he had reigned eleven years, and his brother Thrasibulus succeeded him,
who being dethroned by the unanimous vote and consent of the Syracusans, went
to the Locri. Diod. 11.
From this time to the reign of Dionysius, the Syracusans lived in a continued
peace and tranquillity, which was for the space of 60 years; which Diodorus
reckons to the third year of the 78 Olympiad.

Diod. 11. Just. 5.
In the fourth year of the same Olympiad, Xerxes was slain by Artabanus; and in
the very year before that, Darius his son was murdered by Artaxerxes his
brother, whom Artabanus accused before him of the fact, and he judged
Artaxerxes, and condemned him according to his demerit. So Artaxerxes (...),
the same year began his reign. This man in the third year of his reign, and the
second of the 79 Olympiad, warred upon Egypt, which fell off from him,
together with Inarus King of Lybia. But Inarus being backed with the Athenians
ayds, stood it out with the Persians, who were, but the third year of the same
Olympiad, routed by the Athenians in a conflict at Sea, and the next year after
were pursued by them to Memphis, and besieged there. At last, in the 81
Olympiad, Thucyd. 1.
the Egyptians deserting the Athenians, they were glad to come off upon equal
terms: Inarus was executed for his revolt, and Egypt recovered.

In the interim, the seeds of discord grew up so by degrees betwixt the two
Cities, that at last they fell from words to blows, by the continual
provocation one of another. For the Athenians were so taken with their own
breeding and generosity, that being puffed with pride, the great ones of them
behaved themselves not only arrogantly, but injuriously iusulted over their
fellows; so that many of them fled over to the Lacedaemonians, as says Diod. 11.
Thasius, in the 79 Olympiad of his Aegineta. Whereupon they made several
incursions upon one another Territories. The Athenians, when under their
Captain Leocrites they had routed the Corinthians and Epidaurians, marched for
Peloponnese in the second year of the 80 Olympiad. And the 81 Olympiad, under
their General Tolmides, harassed Laconia, and subjected aegina to their
Dominion. Thucyd. 1. p. 72.
After that, by the means of Cymon, the quinquennial or fifth year Truce was
compounded, they turned the dint of the War against their old enemies the
Persians. Cymon with a Navy under his Command marched for Cyprus, and defeated
the Barbarians both by Land and Sea, and brought Artaxerxes to compound for
peace, than which nothing to this day redounded more to the honor of Greece,
or to the disparagement of the Persians. For they were glad to accept peace
upon these conditions, That they should not come within a days journey for a
well-mounted horseman, of the Seaside; and that they should not pass betwixt
the Cyaneans and Chelidonians in any long or beaked Ships, and that they should
set free all the Cities of Asia which they held. Diod. 11. Thucyd. 3. Plur. and
Corn. Nep. in Cimone.
This peace was concluded in the fourth year of the 82 Olympiad, as Diodorus
reports. The very same year Cymon, as he lay at the Leaguer of Citium, fell
sick and dyed.

Thucyd. Diod. 12.
After this, the old grudge amongst the Grecians began to fester, and the War
broke out anew, notwithstanding that it was reconciled by that triennial League
in the third year of the 83 Olympiad. In this interim the Samians revolted from
the Athenians, and were light upon by Pericles, and foiled and reduced in the
4th year of the 84 Olympiad. Also the Corinthians warring upon the Corcyraeans
and the Athenians, two Allies and Confederates, about the second year of the 86
Olympiad, were clearly baffled in a Conflict at Sea. Therefore the
Lacedaemonians and their sides-men allege, That the Athenians violated the
Articles the 4th year after they were concluded. And so the Peloponnesian War,
as they call it, broke forth in plain terms.

CHAP. VII. Of the Roman Affairs, from the 271 year, from the building of the
City, to the 323; and the beginning of the Peloponnesian War.
THe Live. 2. Dion. 9. Gellius 17. cap. 20.
Veian War began at Rome, according to the City account, the 271 year; which
when the Fabii alone undertook to manage the War themselves upon their own
charge, and had pitched their Tents at the River Cremera, their quarters were
beaten up the very first day, and six hundred of them put to the sword; which
Gellius says was in the 277 year of the City account; and the 4th after the
Battle was at Salamis. But the year following, the Veians had to do with
Servilius Consul.

Live. l. 3. Dion. 10.
The War went on with the Volsci, who were often overcome, especially by T.
Quinctius Capitolinus. He, the 286 year of the City, destroyed Antium the head
of that Nation; and the 296, was sent Dictator against the Aequi, and being but
a man that came from the plough-tayl, delivered Minutius Consul, who was hemmed
in by them, and subjugated his enemies, and made them Tributary.

Dion. 10. and 11. Live. 3.
In the 303 year of the City-account, and the 451 before Christ, the
Constitution of the Roman State was altered, according to Dionysius. For then
the Decemviri (or the Government by Ten) were established in the Supreme
Authority, who appointed several Laws for the Romans, which they gathered out
of certain Constitutions brought thither the year before, by certain Legates
out of Greece, which I say they new-modelled and fitted to the Conisitution of
the Roman Commonwealth. But these men presently made use of the power put into
their hands, to Tyranny and Oppression; insomuch, that one of them (by name
Appius Claudius) seeking by force to compel Virginia to be his Concubine, her
father, to prevent him, slew her with his own hands. Whereupon grew another
Insurrection amongst the common people; to appease which mutiny, they were fain
to suppress the Decemviri, and restore the Tribunes of the People and Consuls,
to Office again: which fell out upon the 305 year of the City, and the Cicer.
2. de fine.
60 after the liberty thereof, the year before Christ 449; so that the
Decemviri had ruled but three years at most.

Live. 4. Val. l. 5. c. 3.
In the 315 year of the City, Sp. Melius took the opportunity of engaging the
affections of the people to him, as a probable way to attain the Sovereignty,
by distributing corn amongst them very liberally in a most raging famine. But
was cut off by the command of Quinctius the Dictator, and by the hand of C.
Servilius. The year following, the Fidenates fell off to Lartes Tolumnius, King
of the Viens, and put to death the Roman Legates, whose Statues or Monument
were erected in the Forum; and the year following, being the 317 of the City,
they were vanquished by Mamercus Aemilius the Dictator. Tolumnius was slain by
Cornelius Cossus, who was the first but Romulus that devoted a rich booty to
Jupiter Feretrius; although Sigonius thinks he dedicated them in his
Consul-ship the 326 year of the City.

Live. 4.
The first Censors at Rome were created the 311th year, who were constituted
Quinquennial or for five years; but in the 320 they were reduced tobe
half-yearly, by Mamercus Aemilius the Dictator.

In the 323 year, A. Posthumous the Dictator was very fortunate in his War
against the Aequi and Volsci, but the honor of his victory was very much
defiled by the blood of his son, whom he punished no less severe, for but
fighting without Orders, than with the Dint of his Ax.

CHAP. VIII. Of the most Learned men, famed in the World during the interval
betwi^ct the Persian Expedition into Greece, and the Peloponnesian War.
THe most ingenious Philosophers in these times were Anaxagoras, who the very
year that Xerxes sailed into Greece, arrived the age of 20 years; in which year
also he began to read Philosophy, as Diogenes reports; by which account he was
born the 70 Olympiad, (which Apollodorus confirms) and dyed the 88: where
Diogenes mistakes himself, and writes (...), (i. e.) 70, for (...), (i. e.) 80.
Pericles was Scholar to this Anaxagoras.

Diog. Laert.
Socrates also, that father of Philosophers, was born the 4th year of the 77
Olympiad, on the sixth day of the month Thargelion which falls upon the 4246
year of the Julian Period, and the 468 year before Christ. He lived 70 years,
and dyed in the first of the 95 Olympiad.

Democritus was born the third year of the 77 Olympiad, being a year before
Socrates, (as Thrasillus reports out of Diogenes) and lived 109 years, so that
his death fell upon the 4th year of the 105 Olympiad. But in regard he
testifies he wrote a book, entitled, (...), in the 730 year after the
destruction of Troy; which year, according to our reckoning agrees with the
4260 of the Jul. Period, it is evident by this account, he was but then 15 years
old. But it may be Troy was destroyed some years before this; as we have noted
elsewhere.

Apol. 46.
Tertullianus avers, That this Democritus put his own eyes, because he could
not behold a woman without lustful imaginations.

Diog. Laerr. Eusebius.
Empedocles and Protagoras were illustrious in the world about the 84 Olympiad;
at which time also Melissus, and not long after Parmenides, who was so famed in
the 90 Olympiad, contracted great admiration. Nor must we forget the honor
those times received by Gorgias, Hippias, Prodicus, and Hippocrates the
Physician, whom Eusebius places in the 86 Olympiad. Meto the Astronomer, who
observed the Solstice before the Peloponnesian War, has deserved no less
observation.

Of Poets famous in these times were Pindarus, Pind. vita.
who had attained 40 years of age a year before Xerxes passed into Greece, and
appeared upon the stage of this World in the 65 Olympiad; and Bacchylides, whom
Eusebius places in the 82 Olympiad. The famous Tragedians of this Age were
Eschylus, of whom we have spoken formerly; Sophocles, Sophocles. Eschylus.
who was 17 years younger than Eschylus, was born the second year of the 71
Olympiad, the 495 year before Christ, and dyed in the 90 year of his age, being
the third of the 93 Olympiad, the 4308 year of the Julian Period, as Diod. 13.
Diodorus reports; who likewise tells us, that Apollodorus makes mention in his
Chronicle, That Euripides dyed the very same year; who was born (as Thomas
Magister in his Life sets down) in that very first year of the 75 Olympiad, in
which Xerxes invaded Greece, and lived to the age of 75 years.

Of Comicks also, Cratinus and Aristarchus stand upon record, in the 81 Olymp.
in Eusebius.

CHAP. IX. Of the Peloponnesian War; and other Transactions contemporary, in
Greece.
THat bloody and so long continued War in Greece, Thucyd. 2. Diod. 12. Plut.
Peric.
between the Alhenians and Peloponnesians, took date from the latter end of the
first year of the 85 Olymp, in the Spring season, ( Pythodorus being Governor)
the 431 year before Christ. Pericles was the chief Incendiary of this
combustion, who having too lavishly expended 7000 talents, rather than he would
be called to account, he would confuse the affairs of Greece.

In this War, The death of Pericles.
Madam Fortuna played fast and loose to the production of many contrary events,
and great variety of Transactions. Pericles at the end of two years and six
months from the beginning of this War, dyed of a Plague, which began to rage
and spread it self, the second year of this War. The Thucyd. 3. Diod. 12.
Lesbians, and especially the Mitylenians revolted from the Athenians, the
fourth year of the War; but the next year after, were received again by
Pachetes the Captain, who had very much ado to save their lives; and the 10th
year Cleo, General of the Athenians, and Barsidas of the Lacedaemonians, both
perishing in the War, they had truce on both sides for 15 years, but it was
broken at eight years end.

Thucyd. 3. Diod. 12.
In the 16th year of this War, being the 91 Olympiad, and the time of the
Truce, the Athenians invaded Sicilie, to the relief of the Aegestans and
Leontins, against the Syracusans; over which Expedition, Alcibiades, Nicias,
and Lamachus were made Generals; but Alcibiades being accuses of sacrilege in
his absence, was commanded home about it; whereupon he fled to the
Lacedaemonians, and persuaded them to send aid to the Syracusans: In which
Voyage Gylippus was sent General; The Sicilians Conquest at Athens.
by whom the Athenians, who hitherto had proceeded to their hearts desire in
every thing, were vanquished both by Sea and Land, and fell wholly into his
hands. In this conflist the most valiant Commanders, Demesthenes and Nycias,
fell under the swords dint. This fell out the 19th year of the War, and the 413
before Christ.

From this time the Declension of the Athenians fortune was observed; which
nevertheless Thucyd. l. 8. Diod. 13.
Alcibiades recovered in all he might, when he was restored to his Country,
having abolisht the then Government or rule over the people, and constituted
the Commonwealth among four hundred persons, which afterward were five
thousand.

Corn. Nep. and Plu. in Lysan. Diod. 13.
At last the Athenians were totally routed at the bridge of Aegos, by the two
Generals, Aracus and Lysandrus, and the very City came into their hands, and so
the War ended in the beginning of the 28 year, the 16 day of the month
Munychion, which falls about the 18th of April. The war therefore continued 27
whole years, The Athenian bondage.
even until the Athenian subjection. Xeno. 2. Hellen. p. 270. Graec.
But Xenophon will have it to last till the Autumn following, in which the Sun
declined its wonted course, which fell upon the 404 year before Christ, being
the first of the 94 Olympiad, the third day of September. But if he reckons it
to have come to pass the ninth Olymp. following; so it falls to be the next
after that, which he reckons most appositely to be the 93, in the beginning of
his first book.

The War began the 34 year of Artaxerxes Longimanus his reign, (for he dyed the
seventh year of the War, as we find by Thucyd. l. 3. p. 285.
Thucydides, when he had reigned 40 year,) and ended in the latter end of the
first, or beginning of the second of Artaxerxes Memoriosus, as appears by Diod.
13.
Diodorus.

During this same War, as Diodorus testifies in the 22 year thereof, the
Aegestans, who came to the aid of the Athenians, robbed them of all they could,
and so fled to the Carthaginians, who sent out Hannibal the son of Amilcar with
a strong party. He spoiled Selinunte, and destroyed Himera. Against him
Hermocrates the Syracusan in his banishment made strong opposition; but he
having secretly got into Syracusa the first year of the 93 Olympiad, together
with his accomplices, was put to the sword, amongst whom Dionysius (that
afterward in the last year of the Peloponnesian War was possessed of the
Sovereignty) was, but escaped. Lib. 7. lnit.
But Dionysius Halicarnassus writes, That Callia being President in the third
year of the 93 Olympiad; (who began his rule the 4309 year of the Julian
Period,) Diod. 13. Zeno. 2. (...).
Dionysius compassed the Sovereignty a among the Syracusans, by the same wile
that Pisistratus had before used amongst the Athenians.

CHAP. X. Of all the Memorable Occurrences transacted from the end of the
Peloponnesian War, to the reign of Philip King of Macedon.
AFter the Xenoph. l. 2. (...). Diod. 13.14.
Athenians were subjugated by Lysander, the management of Athens was committed
to 30 Governors, who, insulting too imperiously upon the people, were deposed
by Thrasibulus, and the Athenians restored to liberty the fourth year of the 94
Olympiad, and the fourth year after the City was taken. In which very year,
Cyrus the younger son of Darius the brother of Artaxerxes Mnemon, being made
President of Asia by his father, he, encouraged by the assistance of Greece,
and especially Lacedemon, warred upon his brother, and was slain in a battle.
The Grecian Auxiliaries being brought from ten, to five thousand, Xenoph. in
libris (...) Chion. ad Matridem.
Xenophon amongst others being a Commander amongst them, most strangely escaped
through Armenia and Paphlagonia, and the very Army of the King, in the first
year of the 95 Olympiad.

In the mean time, Pharnabazus and Tissaphernes being made Governors of Asia
by Artaxerxes, the Lacedaemonians joined with Pharnabazus against Tissaphernes,
by whom, Conon the Athenian was made Admiral.

Agesilaus likewise, when he was made President of Asia, behaved himself very
valiantly; Diod. 14. X^noph. 4. (...). Plut. in Ages. Cor. in Ages.
but when Tissaphernes the King was slain, a peace being concluded with the
Persians, the Boeotians, Aphenians, Corinthians, and Graecians conspiring
against the Lacedaemonians, he was called home, and fought the Boeotians, and
came off with equal success. This, Diodorus says, happened the second year of
the 96 Olympiad.

After this, the Lacedaemonians grew weaker and weaker. They were utterly routed
also by the Persians at Gnidus, under their General Conon, at what time the Sun
declined its wonted course, as Zenophon and Plut. in Ages. tell us. This fell
out the 4320 year of the Jul. Per. the 14 day of August.

The most famous Generals of this time, were, at Athens, The famous Comman ers
of the Athenians.
Iphicrates, Chabrias, Thrasybulus, Timotheus; amongst the Thebanes, Pelopidas,
and Epaminondas, a man not only honorable for his learning, but also most
illustrious for his valor, and Justice, who stirred up his Thebans to take in
hand the sovereignty of Greece. For he quelled the Lacedaemonians whilst they
sought to recover their decayed luster, more by treachery then valor.
Phoebidas being sent General against the Corinthians, Xenoph. Hell. 5. Diod.
15. Plut. Pelop. Just. 6. Cor. Nep. in Pelop.
by a wile possessed himself of Cadmea, a Fort of the Thebans, and constituted
Tyrants there, the third year of the 99. Olymp. as Diodorus takes it. But at
the end of the 4th year, by the advice and contrivement of Pelopidas, they
recovered not only their liberty, but their Fort. After, the Cities of Greece,
all joining their forces, were wholly bent against the Lacedaemonians, the
Athenians being the Ringleaders, but Artaxerxes made war upon the Egyptians
who had revolted. And, lest his Armies should any longer be detained in Greece,
commanded that they should all lay down their arms, and return to their wonted
liberty, and that all the Forts should be disgarisonned; which whosoever should
dissent from, he would account as foes. To this proposal of peace, all Greece
gladly adhered, except the Thebans, whom Epimanondas had preoccupated with a
fear of danger in joining therein. But this concord amongst the Grecians lasted
not long. For soon after the war broke out again, and grew more violent then
ever. The Thebans took up arms against the Athenians, and to satisfy an old
grudge, destroyed Platea. Then went they against the Athenians, and overcame
them at Leuctra, The battle at Leuctra.
in Boeotia. (although they were the far greater in number) under the conduct
of Epimanondas their General, in which conflict, Cleombrotus perished. Xen.
Hell. 6. Cor. Nep. in Epam. vide l. 10. de Doctr. Temp. c. 32.
This (as Diodor. tells us) happened upon the second year of the 102. Olymp.

After this, the Lacedaemonians began to grow contemptible, and were again sadly
foiled by the Arcadians. Furthermore, the Thebans under their General
Epaminondas, invaded Laconica, and laid siege to Sparta. The Lacedaemonians send
for aid to Athens, but Epimanondas (do they both what they could to hinder him)
pillaged the field of the Lacedaemonians again. At length in the third year of
the 103 Olymp. the Lacedaemonians were reconciled to the Thebans, by the means
of the Persian King. Then they converted the dint of their weapons against
Alexander Pheraeus the Tyrant, against whom Pelopidas fighting, was slain
whilst the Victory was on his part. Again, the Thebans being requested to the
aid of the Mantinians (who stood off from the rest of the Arcadians) took up
arms under the command of Epimanondas. Diod. 15. Xen. 7. Cor. Nep. in Epam. The
death of Epimanondas.
He engaged in the last conflict at Mantinea with the Lacedaemonians and
Arcadians, where he came off Conqueror, but so wounded, that soon after he
died, the second year of the 105 Olymp.

The year following Diod. 15. Plut. Ages. Cor. Nep. in Ages. Xenop. in Encom.
Ages.
Agesilaus died in the 84 year of his age and the 41. of his reign in
Cyrenaica, as he returned out of Egypt from the aid of Tachon their King, who
had revolted from the Persians.

Dyonisius (the father) the Tyrant. Diod. 15.
But in this mean while Dionysius was busy in the war in Sicilia. Nor had he
more to do to defend himself against foreigners, than his own countrymen the
Carthaginians. He often quelled the insurrections of the Syracusans, advantaged
by the assistance of the Lacedemonian power, and had many a sore dispute with
the Carthaginians constantly; who (under the command of Imilcon their General)
whilst they besieged Syracusa (making havoc of all that came in their way, not
sparing the most holy things) were struck with a very sore plague, so that what
by this Pestilence, what by the Syracusan Navy, and the Army of Dionysius, they
were utterly vanquished both by Land and Sea, in the first year of the 96.
Olymp. (as Diodorus testifies). But they for all this, again invaded Sicily,
and at last made a peace with Dionysius, who afterward when he would have
renewed the war, Diod. 15.
dyed of a surfeit whilst he was preparing his Artillery, and after he had heard
himself proclaimed twice Victor in the Lenaean games at Athens. Cic. Tusc. 5.
He reigned 38. years, began his sovereignty the 25. of his age, and died in
the beginning of the 103 Olym. the year before Christ, 368, and his son who
bore the same name succeeded him in the Throne, Diod. ib. Corn. Nop. and Plut
in Dione. Dionysius the younger. Dio.
against whom, Dio the son of Hipparinus (whose sister Aristomache was wife to
the former Dionysius) by the guidance of two pack-Pedlers, went out of Greece,
and (taking the opportunity of the Governors absence) possessed himself of
Syracusa. Who having Garrisonned the Castle, when he saw he could bring the
Syracusans to no conditions, sailed into Italy. In the interim, Dio was
butchered by the Zacynthian Mercenaries, Diod. 16. Plut. Corn. Nep. in Dion.
in the third year of the 106 Olymp. Dionysius, the tenth year after his
ejection, recovered Syracusa, being the second of the 108. Olymp. Timoleon.
At last Timoleon the Corinthian petitioned thereunto by the Syracusans,
deposed Dionysius, and sent him to Corinth, where he kept a private School of
boys till he was very old. This came to pass the second year of the 109
Olymp. the year before Christ 343.

About the time these things were agitated, Plut. and Corn. Nep. in Timol.
Diod. 16.
Timoleon having abolisht all the relics of Monarchy, gave the Carthaginians
a signal overthrow, the seventh day of the Month Thargelion, which falls upon
the 26 of May, the latter end of the 4th year of the 110 Olymp. and so having
appeased Sicily, spent the residue of his days there in peace, and quiet.

CHAP. XI. Of the Sociall and Sacred war in Greece, and of the exploits of
Philip of Macedon.
THe Sociall war in Greece, broke out in the third year of the 105 Olymp. Diod.
16.
in which the Byzantians, Rhodians, Coans, and Chians, together with Mausolus
Prince of Caria: conspited together against the Athenians. Chabrias, the
General of the Athenians perished in the war, the very same year, and in the
4th year that war was terminated.

Diod. 16. Pausan. Phoc. P. 318. Just. 3. Oros. 3. c. 12.
About this time, another war (which they called Sacrum, or the Holy, arose.
The Amphictyones (which were certain Judges or Counselors, elected out of all
parts of Greece) imposed a mulct upon the Lacedaemonians and Phocenses; on the
one, because they held Cadmea, one of the Cadmeans Fortresses; on the other,
for that they had incroached upon some holy or dedicated land. Philomelus
stirred his Phocenses to the spoiling of the Temple at Delphos. When the City
was thus tainted with sacrilege, they were presently engaged in another Broyl
with the Locrians, Phocenfian War.
with the the Thebans, wherein they expiated that heinous fact, with the utter
ruin and slaughter of their whole Nation. In which it is most remarkable what
Philo de Provid. apud. Eusebius. 8. de Praep. Evang. p. 231.
Philo in Eusebius writes, That whereas there was a Law, that whosoever should
rob the Temple, of her money or Ornaments, should either be precipitated, or
drowned, or burnt, three chief Captains of the Phocenses, who were partakers in
this sacrilege, perished by these three several deaths: for first Philomelus
being conquered by the Thebans, cast himself from a Precipice, and so died, as
Diod. tells us, in the third year of the 106 Olymp. After him, Onomarchus was
thrown into the waters by his own soldiers, and so drowned, the fourth year of
the same Olymp. The third was Phyallus, who, the year following, was burnt
alive in the Temple at Abas, although Diodorus and others say, he died of a
Consumption. This was accomplished by Philip King of Macedon, to whose aid the
Thebans flocked, and the Phocenses had supplies from both Lacedemon, and
Athens. Yet all the Cities of the Phocenses except Abas which was clear of the
sacrilege, were levelled with the Ground. This war began, as Diodorus reckons,
in the second year of the hundred and sixth Olympiad, the three hundred ninety
and ninth year from, or after, the foundation of Rome, and ended the very
beginning of the tenth year of it in the latter end of the second of the
hundred and eighth Olympiad; of the Julian Period, the four thousand three
hundred sixty eighth, although Paus. Phoc. p. 318.
Pausauias will have it to begin whilst Aga^hocles was Praetor at Athens, and
in the fourth year of the hundred and fifth Olympiad, and to expire in the
beginning of the hundred and eighth Olympiad, Theophilus being President, being
two years before Diodorus his account, but I think it safer to consent to the
opinion of Diod. For Demosthen. (...).
Demosthenes in his Orat. de Ementit. Legate. testifies, that in the very same
year the Cities of the Phocenses were demolished by Philip; the Pythian Games
were celebrated, to which (by reason of their great mourning) the Athenians
omitted the sending of their (...) and (...). ( i. e.) their sacred Legates, and
that the Vide l. 1. Doct. Temp. c. 83.
Pythian Games ended in the latter end of the second year of the tetraeterick
Olympian sports.

This Victory established Philip in the favor and great opinion of the
Graecians in general, and at last in the sovereignty it self. He was the son of
Amyntas, and being a Pledge at Athens, lived some time with Epaminondas, under
whose discipline only, his Acts afterward sufficiently express how much he
improved. Diod. 16. Just. 8. Philip of Macedon.
His three Brothers (of which Perdiccas was the last) being dead, he ascended
the Throne the second year of the hundred and fifth Olympiad. The same year
having vanquished the Athenians at Methon, he made peace with Amphipolis, that
so he might with the more facility, subjugate his next neighbors. Then he
Conquered the Paeons, and Illyrians; which done, he took Amphipolis, and having
Conquered three Kings of the Thracians, Paeons, and Illyrians, he brought the
Olynthii into his subjection by Policy; that is to say, bribes and deceits in
plain English, in the beginning of the hundred and eighth Olympiad, in which
very year the Phocenses being utterly expunged, he put an end to the War
called Sacrum, or the Holy War, to which he came as an assistant, and
General, at the entreaty of the Thebans.

Plut. Pyt.
In the third year of the hundred and ninth Olympiad, after the death of
Arymbas, King of the Molossi, he dethroned Aeacid, the son of Arymbas, and the
Father of Pyrrhus, and set Alexander, the Brother of his Wife Olympias, in his
place.

When he had opposed Byzantium, he was deterred from that enterprise, when he
saw the Athenians, and other Grecians agree together against him, and therefore
he concluded a peace with the Athenians, the hundred and tenth Olympiad; Which
being broken, the third year after, he had a conflict with the same Athenians,
and the Boeotians at Chaeronea, and having the Victory, prosecuted it very
moderately, and by the advice of Demades, renewed the peace and friendship with
the Athenians. Aelia. l. 8. Var. c. 15.
After the Victory at Chaeronea, he gave this testimony of a very moderate and
sober mind, that he commended that every day he should be put in mind of his
frail condition, and to that very end he appointed a Boy, who should daily,
before he left his Chamber, proclaim these words to him; Philip thou art but a
man. At last being made General for the Graecians against the Persians,
whilst he was preparing himself for the War, in the very height of the
sport, in the Games which Aegis set up in Macedonia, he was Diod. 16. Just. 8.
and 9.
stabbed by Pausanias, a Yeoman of the body to him; it is uncertain whether set
on by his Wife Olympias, or his Son Alexander, which fell out in the beginning
of the ninety first Olympiad, the year before Christ, three hundred thirty six.
He reigned twenty four years.

CHAP. XII. The most memorable Transactions in the Roman Affairs, from the
beginning of the Peloponnesian War, to the death of Philip, that is, from the
373, to the 418 year of the City-Account.
SEveral Wars were waged at Rome, from the beginning of the Peloponnesian War,
to the death of Philip. Live. 4. and 5. Flor. l. 1. c. 12. Eutro. 1.
For they had to do not only with the Aequi and Volsci, but also with the
Veians, whose City they besieged and kept at the Leaguer ten years together.
When it was, that it came first into use to make Tents of Skins to defend
themselves from the sharpness of the Winterstorms. They began the siege the
349, and the City was taken by Camillus the Dictator, the 358th year of the
City Account. The same Camillus reduced the Falisci to the Roman Empire, (not
so much by force, as by the opinion he gained amongst them by his singular
Justice) the 360 year from the foundation of Rome.

Live. 5. Flor. l. 1. c. 13. Plut. Came. Eutr. 1.
But Rome her self, that famous Conqueress, had almost been brought to nothing
by the Galls. Who, when in the 363 year they had besieged Clusium, and the
Romans had sent the three Fabii Legates thither, The City is taken by the Galls.
they, (contrary to the Laws of Nations) when they had once appeared in the
front of the Army, forsook Clusium, and fled to the City.

At the first onset those Romans that stood to it were routed, and fled to
Alia: and at last the City was taken, set on fire, and the Capitol (into which
the flower of the City had betaken themselves) beset, and Manlius being absent,
had been taken by the enemy, but for the gagling of certain Geese at their
approach; which awaked Manlius and the rest, who came together thither, and
forced the Galls down a precipice from the Capitol. In this mean time,
Camillus, who was banished, and at Ardea, was restored home, and while he was
absent, elected Dictator. He, when he came, rallied the Roman forces, and
repelled the Galls, and cleared the Coasts of them within eight miles of the
City.

After this, the Dictator, Camillus, persuaded the Romans from a fancy they
were very earnest in, of leaving the ruins of Rome, and invading the Veians,
M. Manlius.
(but with very much a^o) and brought them to repair the ruins of their own
Country. But M. Manlius, taken with the splendor of the Capitol, from which he
had the surname, Capitolinus, being puss'd up with arrogance, he was induced,
through his own ambition, and the favor he had with the people, to propose to
himself, and go about the means of compassing the Sovereignty to himself; but
being taken in this project, was precipitated from the Live. 16. Plut. Came.
Tarpeian rock, (the very place he had had in charge to defend) the 370 year
after the City was built.

Live. 6. Flor. 1. c. 26.
At length a great difference grew between the Patricii and the common people.
For C. Licinius, and L. Sextius, Tribunes, made a law the 377 year of the City,
That the Commons should have the election of another Consul; which when the
Senate opposed most violently, the Tribunes would suffer no Officers of State
to be created: Live. 7. The first Consul of the People.
By which means Rome became an Anarchy for the space of five years, and at last
the Plebeians prevailed in the 387 year of the City; and the year following,
the common people made their first Consul, L. Sextius.

Live. 7. Oros. 3. c. 5.
In the 392 year of the City, there happening a great opening or gaping of the
Earth in the midst of the Eorum, and the Oracle commanded, that the best thing
the Romans had, should be dedicated to it. Whilst all men wondered what this
should mean, M. Curtius.
M. Curtius, an excellent young Soldier, and notably valorous, all armed and
mounted on horseback, cast himself into the jaws of the gaping earth,
accounting, That no virtue more became a Roman, than valor and courage, nor
was a greater good.

After this, they went to War with the Tiburtians, the Tarquinii and Falisci,
but most hotly the 398 year of the City, when the Falisci and Tarquinians
fighting with firebrarnds, and casting Serpents in the front, to the great
terror of the Priests, were conquered by Fabius Consul, and had conditions of
peace granted to them both for 40 years, in the 403 year of Rome.

With the Galls also they had to do more than once. Whilst they stood in
battalia, M. Valerius, Tribune of the host, at the age of 23 years, Pichier'd a
certain bravado of the enemy, who stood challenging and enticing the Romans to
battle, and slew him by the help of Corvus, in the 405 year of the City; whence
he took the surname Corvinus; and the year following, for his singular deserts,
was made Consul.

But none of these Wars proved more tedious and virulent, The Samnian War. Live.
l. 7. Flor. l. 1. c. 16. Eutr. 2.
than the Samnian, which the Romans took upon them at the request of the
Campani, the 411 year of the City. For they being vanquished by the Samnians,
put themselves under the protection of the Romans, by a League of fealty, and
so engaged the Romans in that War, Live. 31.
which lasted 70, or 71 full years, although the Samnians were often that while
conquered, and often entered into League with the Romans; as in the 413th year
they Live. 8. Flor. l. 1. c. 14 Oros. 3. c. 9.
renewed their hostility against the Romans; but the year following were
conquered again by Coss. Torquatus and Decius, one of whom struck his son with
an Ax, for that he had engaged in fight without commission; the other engaged
himself for the Army, and they committed themselves to his fealty and
protection; but soon after, viz. the 460 year, they rebelled, and were then
clearly eradicated.

CHAP. XIII. The famous Wits of those Times.
THe Diog. in Plat. ex Apol. Plato.
most famed for ingenuity and wisdom, in Greece, amongst the Philosophers,
were Plato, who was born the first year of the 88 Olympiad, the 7th day of the
month Thargelion, Aminias being President, who was also called Epaminon, which
was in the 3556 year of the World, (for this year the Magistrateship of Aminias
expired a little before the beginning of the Olympiad) and dyed the first year
of the 108 Olympiad, under the rule of Theophilus, the 406 year of the
City-account, the 348 year before Christ, it being then the 81 year of his age.
He began to hear Socrates his Lectures when he was twenty years of age; upon
which account he could be his hearer not above eight years; for Socrates dyed
the first year of the 95 Olympiad, when Plato was but 28 years of age.

Diog.
Speusippus his sister's son succeeded Plato in his School, who dyed the second
year of the 110 Olympiad; Lysimachus then presiding, so that he kept that
School about eight years. In Apol. c. 46.
Tertullianus says, this Speusippus being taken in adultery, dyed for it. Him
Zenocrates succeeded for the space of 25 years.

Diog. Laert.
Aristotle, that founder of the Sect of the Peripateticks, (as Apollodorus in
Diogenes conceives) was born the first year of the 99 Olympiad, the 384th year
before Christ, being younger than Plato, about 43 years, whom he began to learn
of, in the 17th year of his age, was an auditor 20 years, and dyed when he had
arrived to 63, being the third year of the 114 Olympiad; in which year also
Demosthenes descended the stage of this World.

Vide l. 2. de doct. Temp. c. 6.
Eudoxus Cnidius was famous the 103 Olympiad, as Diogenes tells us, who by the
general account of that Age merited the crown amongst Astronomers.

Diog.
Xenophon, that support of Platonists, was illustrious at this time, not only
for his skill in Philosophy, but for his exquisite Souldier-ship. He, together
with his brother Cyrus, the 4th year of the 94 Olympiad, whilst Zenaenetus
presided, being the year preceding the death of Socrates, undertook an
Expedition against Artaxerxes; and having put a period to the War, brought back
the Greek Auxiliaries into Greece in safety. He departed the Scene of this
world at Corinth, the first year of the 105 Olympiad, in the time of
Callidemides his Magistrateship, in which very year Philip began his reign over
the Macedons, which falls in with the 3625 year of the World.

Gellius, l. 15. c. 23.
This Age also was not a little famous for illustrious and most exquisite
Historians, amongst whom Thucydides was the chief, concerning whom, that place
of Gellius, in the eleventh book of Pamphylas, is most worthy taking notice of.
Hellanicus in initio belli Peloponnesiaci, etc. (i.e) Hellanicus in the
beginning of the Peloponnesian War had lived 60 years. Herodotus, 53. and
Thucydides, 40.

Philistus the Syracusan, a familiar acquaintance of both the Dionysius's, left
this life the 106 Olympiad, in a conflict at Sea which he had with the
Syracusans, in behalf of Dionysius minor, or the less, as we have formerly
related out of Diodorus.

Theopompus the Scholar of Isocrates, and Ephorus the Cumaean, who was
descended from Ulysses; Ctesias also the Cnidian Physician, who flourished in
the time of the younger Cyrus: But Isocrates, that Master of Eloquence, was
born the 86 Olympiad. Lysimachus praesiding four years before the Peloponnesian
war, and the 3548 year of the World, as Dionysius and Plutarch relate it, in
his Life. He left this life the same year that the Athenians received that
signal overthrow at Chaeronea, in the time of Cheronidas or Charondas his
President-ship, the 3646 year of the World.

Amongst the Poets of this Age, the most famous were Aristopanes the Comic
about the Peloponnesian war, Eupolis and Cratinus also, two other Comicks, were
not obscure then; neither Philoxenus Cythereius, Timotheus, Telestes,
Dithyrambicks or Poets of Bacchus, flourished then also; as Diodorus records it
in his 14th book. And Dionysius the major Tyrant, writ his Tragedies about this
time.

CHAP. XIV. Of Alexander the Great, and his time, with many Acts by him
performed; of the death of Darius; the fall of the Persian Empire; and the
death of Alexander.
Diod. Plut. in Alexand. Arria. Curt. Vide l. 10. de Doct. Temp. c. 32. and
Paral. page 856.
ALexander the son of Philip, for his high achievements, was surnamed Great.
He was born the 106 Olympiad, the 328 year of the City, the 3628 of the World,
and 356 before Christ, according to Diodor. Plutarch also adds, it was upon the
6th day of the month Hecatombeon; on which very day, he tells us, Philip
received three most welcome messages when he had taken Potidaea; the first was,
the victory Parmenion had over the Illyrians. The second, that he had the prize
in the Olympic games, by the swiftness of his horse: and the last, the news
of his son's birth; all which it is possible might fall out the same month Lous
or Hecatombeon; but they were never brought to his year the very same day.
Likewise the Olympic Agones were celebrated in the Plenilunium or full of the
Moon of that month which answers to Hecatombaeon, unless perchance the first
month of the Elidenses happened that year to precede the Attick Hecatombeon or
Lous. Rupertus in his 9th book, de victoria verbi Dei, in the 11th Chapter of
it, (out of what Author I know not) delivers, That Nectanebus, a certain
Inchanter, whilst the Olympic games were at the height of agitation, turned
himself into the shape of Ammon or Cornuted Jove, and by that means begat
Alexander.

It Is past controversy, that the same night Alexander entered the stage of this
life, the Temple of Diana at Ephesus was on fire, from which proceeded that
saying of Timaeus, That it was no wonder that Diana whilst she was present at
some part of the Olympic Sports, should be absent from her Temple. Which 2. de
Not. Deor.
Cicero commends as an accute fancy; but Plutarch justly despises it, as
silly and dis-ingenious.

Diog. Laert. in Arist.
Alexander was committed to the Tutorship of Aristotle at the age of 15, and in
the 20th of his age, and the 418th of the City; his father Philip being slain,
he began his reign; Arianus init. l. 1.
Pythodorus being then President at Athens, who was also called Pythodemus.

In the very same year Darius Codomanus, the last of the Persian Kings, was
crowned. Against whom, Alexander, by the general vote of Greece, besides the
Lacedaemonians, was elected General. But the Greeks, like fickle-headed people
as they were, whilst Diod. 17. Aria. 1. Plut. Just. 11.
Alexander was at war in Thracia, revolted from him. When he heard this, he
made all speed with his Army toward them; and having reconciled himself to the
Athenians, and some others, upon their fair deport, bent his Forces against the
Thebans, who stood most stiffly against him, and having taken their City by
force, utterly destroyed it the 15 day of the month Boedromion, which fell
upon the fourth day of October, in the second year of the 111 Olympiad, as I
conceive, Aelia. 13. Var. c. 7.
90000 of the Thebans being put to the sword, and 30000 captivated; the
children were all led captive, except the Hosts of Philip, who when he was a
boy, was pledge in that City, and the offspring of the old Poet Pindar, whose
house only Alexander left standing in the whole City.

From thence passing the Hellespont, he arrived in Asia the 3650 year of the
World, the third year of his reign, as Zoz. 1.
Zozamus tells us. He had then in his Army 30000 foot, and 4500 horse; with
which so small number, but old experienced and hardy Soldiers, he destroyed
and abolisht the Persian Empire. The first Combat happened to be at the River
Granicus in Phrygia, where the Persians were vanquished, and almost all Asia
became the Triumph of that victory, being pestered every where with the Greek
Colonies, whilst Memnon, in the mean time, the best Commander Darius had,
harrassed the Islands.

Curtius, l. 3.
The second conflict was at Issum, a little before which fight, Alexander fell
dangerously sick, but by the skill of a Physician of his father Philips, he
soon recovered: at long running the Persians were worsted, although their Army
consisted of no less than 400000 foot, and 100000 horse. The Tents of Darius,
with his Mother, Wife, and Children, fell into the hands of Alexander, who
treated them most courteously and virtuously. This happened the 333 year before
Christ, the 3651 year of the World; and the year following, being the first of
the 112 Olympiad, Alexander arrived in Phoenicia, Diod. Curt. 4. Arianus Plut.
Just. Tire taken.
which when he was wholly possessed of, saving Tire, he sent thither Heralds to
persuade them to peace; but the Tyrians, contrary to the Law of Nations, put
them to death, and cast them into the Sea. He was sorely provoked by this
affront, and presently laid strict siege to the City, raised great bull-works
against it, and used all military engines and force to the storming of the City:
When they within, what through despair of pardon, what by being out of all
hopes of, and from the Carthaginians, whose Ambassadors by chance were then
there, and resolved them of that matter, stood it out the more resolutely, but
at last were vanquished by plain force the seventh month after the siege was
laid, when he commanded that they should all, except those that took sanctuary
at the Temple, be put to the sword, and their houses set on fire, but 15000 of
them were saved by the Sidonians of Alexander's Army, and carried to Sidon.
There were six thousand men of war slain in the City; 2000 that escaped the
sword, were crucified along the Seashore. The City was taken (as Lib. 2.
Arianus tells us, Anicerus being chief Magistrate, (who is named Niceratus by
Diodor.) the 332 year before Christ, in the month Hecatombeon, which falls
much about the Solstice. Diod. writes, That Hephaestion gave Balonymum for a
King to this City, descended indeed of a royal stock, but by poverty become a
gardner in the Suburbs of it. Curt. l. 4.
But Curtius tells us, That before the captivity of Tire, Abdolominus was not
only made King of this City, but of Sidon also. After this, Alexander subdued
Gaza by force of Arms.

About this time, Joseph. l. 11. cap. 8.
coming to Jerusalem he was entertained by Jadduas the Priest there. He
sacrificed in the Temple, and bestowed many gifts upon the Jews; professing
that he had an Apparition in Macedonia, in the very same garb that the high
Priest came to meet him in, who advised him to go on with the Persian
expedition, and promised him the Victory.

Afterward he went to Egypt, Diod. l. 5. Curt. 4. Plutarch. Alex. Just. 11.
and visited the Oracle of Jupiter Ammon, and in his return thence, built
Alexandria. At length he became Victor in the last battle, at Arbella, with
Darius, in the second year of the 112 Olymp. the 331 year before Christ, and
the 423 of the City, in which battle, Plutarch further recounts, Plin. l. 2. c.
90.
Darius had ten hundred thousand soldiers in his Army, which Author (as also
Arrianus) places the building of Alexandria before the sacrifice he made at the
Temple of Ammon; But Curtius, Diodor, and Justin, conceive it to be after.

Upon this account the year of the World, 3653, The last and utter breakneck of
the Persian Empire and Darius.
and the 331 year before Christ, was the very year wherein Alexandria was
founded. In which very year also the utter rout of the Persians at Arbella, or
Gaugamela, put a period to the Persian, and gave beginning to the Macedonian or
Grecian Empire. Which year is thought to be the sixth year of the reign of
Alexander, and so much after the death of his father Phillip.

Darius with much ado escaped out of the fight, and by the swiftness of his
horses heels, frustrated the pursuit of Alexander after him, and having rallyed
his forces, and joined in battle again, was by Bessus the commander of the
Bactrians basely butchered, the next year after the overthrow at Arbella. In
the mean while, Alexander being possessed of Susiana, he spoiled Persepolis the
head of the Nation, and burned the Kings Palace therein to the ground.

Nor was Antipater, Alexanders General, less fortunate in his contest with
the Lacedaemonians, wherein Agis the King lost his life.

In the East, Alexander got more victories then he marched paces, every where as
he went. He brought under his subjection all Hyrcania, the Paropomisades, the
Inhabitants of Caucasus, the Indians when he had first conquered their King,
and taken him prisoner, and after them diverse Nations and Provinces far and
wide. The first year of the 113 Olymp. Bessus was delivered up to him and he
gave him condign punishment for his treachery to his Lord and Master Darius.
By this he was so puffed with his high success, that not able to bear sogreat
fortune, he began to forget his humane state, and would be accounted the son of
Jupiter.

Then by flattery, luxury, and excess, his disposition was quite altered into
immane cruelty, insomuch that he put many friends to death, who had deserved
very well both of him and his father Philip. Amongst these, he too rashly
brought Parmenion, a most valiant Captain, and his son Philotas? and slew
Clitus with his own hands at a Banquet. About two years before his death, he
lost Hephaestion his chief friend, whose death he took to heart out of measure,
and most womanly; whose body he commanded to be carried to Babylon, and there
to be interred with great solemnity. And would needs have him accounted a god,
as Lucian tells us in his book, De Calumnia.

At last in the thirteenth year of his reign, Diod. l. 18. Arrian. 7. Pltit.
Alex. Just. 12. Curt. 10.
that is, when he had reigned twelve complete years and seven Months, he died
at Babylon of a disease he had contracted by his intemperance in drinking, or
(as some think) by poison, in the beginning of the thirty third year of his age.

CHAP. XV. The most remarkable occurrences transacted in the East and in Greece
from the death of Alexander unto Pyrrhus his time.
AFter Alexander's death, in regard he would nominate no successor, there grew
up almost as many kings as there were Governors and Captains belonging to him:
but Perdiccas at first had the command of almost all, for that Alexander upon
his deathbed, gave him his ring: and afterward their minds changing, Diod. l.
18. De ip. apud Phot. cad. 82. Cu^r. l. 10. Arrian. de rebus post, Alex. obitum
gestis apud. Phot. Cod. 82.
Aridaeus, son of Philip by Philinna a Thessalian, and a Concubine of his was
made titular (and had very near been indeed) King, and took to himself, and had
given him the name of Philip; and Perdiccas was appointed his vice gerent: then
were the Satrapae's and Praefectures all distributed into Principalities, and
assigned; The Successors of Alexander.
to Ptolomey the Son of Lagus, Egypt; to Laodemon the Mitylenean, Syria; to
Philotas, Sicilia; to Python, Media; Paphlagonia to Eumenes, with Cappadocia,
and the outer Provinces; Pamphilia to Antigonus with Ly^^a and Phrygia the
Greater; Caria to Cassander, Lydia to Meleager, Phrygia the less to Leonnatus,
Thracia to Lysimachus; Macedonia to Antipater; the upper Provinces of Asia to
those who were then Governors of them. Seleucus was made commander of the
Horse of his companions. Craterus at this time had been sent by Alexander with
10000 choice and tried Soldiers in Cilicia, to whom, together with Antipater,
was Graecia appointed.

This while, the Grecians hearing of the death of Alexander were every where in
a tumult. In the first place the Athenians, who under their Captain Leosthenes,
called the Greeks to liberty; overthrew Antipater, and besieged him at Lamia, a
Town of Thessaly, whence it was called the Lamian war, The Lamian War.
which began the first year after the death of Alexander Auct. Cir. and Plut.
in Demost.
but the year following, when Craterus joined his forces with Antipater, the
Athenians were foiled at Cranon in the Month Metagitnion, which falls even
with our August, and in Boedormion, that is September, they received the Guard
of Macedonians against Munychias.

Diod. Dex. Cor. Nep. ac Plut. in Eum.
But Perdiccas, desiring to bring all things in the East to himself and his
command, in order to his suppressing the Governors and commanders, he resolved
to begin with Ptolemy. Against whom he led a most strong Army, but by his pride
having alienated the affections of his Soldiers, in the passing of Nilus they
conspired against him and slew him the 322 year before Christ. But Eumenes a
friend to Perdiccas, a little before had a conflict with Craterus and
Neoptolemus, and came off Victor, which two being both conquered and slain, the
one with his own hands, for this cause both Eumenes; and Alcetas, Perdiccas his
brother; were voted enemies, and all things else were disposed and ordered by
Ptolomey and Antipater, under whose jurisdiction the Principality of Antigonus
then was, Antigonus by that means being sent against Eumenes and Alcetas,
overthrew them both in Pisidia. Antipater died whilst Polyspercon was tutor of
King Aridaeus, and his wife Euridice, and his son Cassander Chiliarch; with
which fortune being not content, he fell over to Ptolemey Polyspercon, recalled
Olympias the Mother of Alexander to Macedonia, from Epirus; whither she had
fled for fear of Antipater. She, when she was restored, put to death Philippus
Aridaeus, and his wife Euridice, and many other Princes that were friends to
Cassander. Diod. 19.
Diodor. says this fell out about the three hundred and eighteenth year before
Christ, who assigns six years and four Months to the reign of Aridaeus.

At the same time Cassander had to do with Polyspercon in Graecia. and Eumenes
(one that held with Polyspercon and Olympias) with Antigonus in Asia. The
Athenians came into the hands of Cassander: who took away their popular
Government, and constituted Demetrius Phalerius over them. This Demetrius was
the Scholar of Theophrastus, whose parallel for Eloquence and Philosophy that
age could not produce. This mutation of State Affairs happened in the
Praetorship of Diod. 19.
Archippus, in the third year of the 115. Olympiad, a little before which
Phocion being a condemned person, was lit on by Polyspercon, and sent to
Athens, Plut. Phoc. Cor. Nep.
where he was executed by the Athenians (as the manner was) with a potion of
wild Hemlock. Cassander, the first year of the 116. Olympiad, having got
possession of Macedonia, sent Olympias out of the World, and took Thessalonice
the sister of Alexander the Great, to his conjugall bed.

Cor. Nep. and Plut. in Eum. Diod. 19.
Eumenes having a long while tired out Antigonus in Asia, was at last betrayed
into his hands by his old fouldiers called Argyraspidi or silver-shielded, and
put away by him the tenth year after the death of Alexander the Great. From
this time Antigonus growing very much in power and wealth, together with his
son Demetrius, who was surnamed Polyorcetes, waged war against Cassander and
Ptolomey; both of them pretending to restore the liberty of the Grecian
Cities, which Cassander had infringed. The greatest part of them, by the help
of his son Demetrius, Antigonus restored to their own Laws and privileges. In
the first place, the 15th year after they had been brought under by the Lamian
war, he removed the Garrison from Athens, and restored the City to its former
immunities the 307. year before Christ. In which year not only they two, but
all the rest of Alexanders successors took to themselves both the name and
port of Kings, Immediately upon this, in the 24th year after the death of
Alexander, the 301. year before Christ, and the last of the 119 Olymp. when the
extraordinary power of Antigonus and Demetrius was become formidable to all the
rest, Lysimachus, Cassander, and Seleucus joined their forces, (to the number
of 74000 foot; of horse, 10500; and 120. Chariots) against them two, whose
armies consisted of 70000 foot, and 10000 horse, and 75 Elephants: which all
met, and fought at the very Town of Phrygia. Antigonus was conquered, and died
in the battle, and Demetrius fleeing into Graecia, was kept out by the
Athenians. Plut. in Demet.
But a little after having recruited his forces, he made against Athens, and
took the City after a years siege, and deposed Lachares (who ruled as King
there) in the first year of the 121 Olymp. Then appeared the Kings great
clemency, who behaved himself so courteously toward them (who, being
conquered, could expect nothing but the utmost) that after some verbal
reprehensions, he restored unto them, not only their liberty, but all things
else that were theirs, and having placed a Garrison there, bent his forces
against the Lacedaemonians, whom with their king Achidanus, when he had
conquered, and was preparing to besiege Sparta, he was encouraged to make for
Macedon, Just. 16. The death of Cassander.
for that lately Cassander had died (to wit, the third year of the 120 Olymp.)
and left three sons which he had by Thessalonica, the eldest of which named
Phillip, having reigned but one year now the other two, Antipater and Alexander
were at ods about the Kingdom, which was the ground of fresh hopes to
Demetrius. Antipater the son in Law to Lysimachus King of Thrace (for that he
saw her something more inclined to his brother Alexander then to him) slew his
mother, she begging her life of him by those her breasts he had been nourisht
by. Alexander therefore desired aid of Pyrrhus, who, upon that condition,
received part of Macedonia into his power. At this time also came Demetrius,
whom also Alexander had sent for, who, having expelled Pyrrhus and Antipater,
and slain Alexander, got the whole possession of Macedonia, the third year of
the 121 Olymp.

Plut. in Pyrrho. and Demetrio.
But when he levied a great army consisting of two hundred thousand foot, and
twelve thousand horse, with a Navy of five hundred ships, for the regaining of
Asia; Seleucus, Lysimachus, Ptolomeus, and Pyrrhus, with one consent prepared
for to oppose him. Being expelled Macedonia, and terrified with the defection of
other of his Cities, he is forced to yield himself into the hands of Seleucus:
who voluntarily gave his daughter Stratonice to Wife to his Son Antiochus,
because he was so desperately in love with her, that thereby he was in danger
of his life, and with him the third year after, Demetrius his death.
he most ingloriously died by his intemperance and Luxury, being the third year
of the hundred twenty third Olympiad.

Just. 17. Paus. Phoc. 335. Dexip. apud. Eusebius. in Collec. Gr. p. 49.
Not long after, these three Conquerours died. Ptolomeus the son of Lagus
having transferred the Kingdom to Philadelphus, his son, left this life the
first year of the hundred twenty and fourth Olympiad. Lysimachus the third year
of the same Olympiad, the two hundred eighty second year before Christ, past
into Asia against Seleucus, and there in a fight died the seventy fourth of his
Age. And Seleucus in his seventy seventh year (the last of Alexanders
associates in war) about seven Months after, distressed by the cunning and
treachery of Ptolomeus Ceraunus, the brother of Philadelphus, lost the Kingdom
of Macedonia (which he had taken from Lysimachus) and with it his life.
Demetrius being dead, his posterity reigned in Macedonia, until the time of
Perseus the son of Philip, of whom we shall speak more hereafter.

And these are the chief Kingdoms that after Alexander's death rose out of his
ashes, The four Dominions of the Greeks.
and which are numbered four by Daniel the Prophet, shadowed under obscure
figures, Dan. 7.6.
The Chief of them were Ptolomeus the son of Lagus, in Egypt; Seleucus in
Babyloaia, and Syria; Cassander in Macedonia and Graecia, and Antigonus in
Asia: all which (as also did Lysimachus in Thracia) assumed the Title, Badges,
and Port of Kings, in the second year of the 118 Olympiad, Diod. 20.
as we find by Diodorus, the year before Christ 307. In emulation of whom, the
Tyrant Agathocles (who then chanced to be in Africa at war with the
Carthaginians) took upon him also the honor and title of King. At last,
Antigonus being subdued, the whole fell into the power of the three Dominions,
to wit, that of Egypt, Syria, and Macedonia: to which that of Pergamus was
added, which took its rise, and was founded in the reign of Lysimachus.

The Dominion or Kingship of the Ptolemeys in Egypt continued along in the
direct line of Posterity, The Ptolemeys Kings of Egypt.
from Ptolemaeus the son of Lagus the very founder of it, (or, as Pausanias in
his Atticks tells us, of Philip the father of Alexander the Great, who although
he had the title of King but the eighteenth year after the death of Alexander,
yet his Kingdom or reign is reckoned from the very year wherein Alexander dyed.
From this time therefore began the Ptolemeys to reign in Egypt. For they have
forty years attributed to them by Eusebius, and all the rest,) and reached
from the 3660 year of the World, to the 3699. For in this very year he
substituted his son Ptolemey, surnamed Philadelphus, King in his lifetime;
which son was born unto him by Berenice his Wife.

CHAP. XVI. Of Agathocles, Pyrrhus, and diverse Expeditions of the Gauls into
Graecia.
ABout the same time Diod. l. 19.
Agathocles reigned in Syria, very meanly born, the son of Carcinus a private
Citizen of Rheginum, of whom he learnt the trade of a Potter. He got to be
Tyrant in Syracusa the fourth year of the 115th Olympiad, the 3667th year of
the World; which place he continued in for about twenty eight years, through
most strange variety of fortune. Diod. l. 20. Just. 20. etc.
Having often conquered the Sicilians, he had to do also with the
Carthaginians, by whom at the River Himera, being worsted in the third year of
the 117 Olympiad, unadvisedly conveying his Forces into Africa, he there
requited the destruction of his Forces to the Victors. Curtius makes this
Expedition of the Syracusans into Africa, and the siege of Carthage
contemporary; in which account he is out no less than two and twenty years. The
year wherein Agathocles passed into Africa, is noted for a most remarkable
Eclipse of the Sun, by Diodorus and Justin, which happened at Syracusa about
eight of the clock in the morning, of the 15th day of August, the 4404th year
of the Julian Period, the 310 year before Christ. The Carthaginians being
reduced to very great extremity, sacrifice their children to Saturn, and recall
their General Amilcar from Sicilia. But he having besieged the Syracusans, is
taken by the very besieged, and put to death. Diod. 20. and in Ecl. l. 21.
Just. 23.
At last, Agathocles taking Sea against the Bruttians in the 4th year of the
122 Olympiad, the 289 before Christ, is poisoned by his Nephew Agathocles.
Excerp. Vales. p. 25.
Diodorus in his excerptions of the last Edition calls him Agatharchus.

Plut. in Pyrrho. Dio. dori Eclogae Justinus, l. 16 and seq.
The various fortune of Pyrrhus was no less stupendous, but his virtue as a
lawful Prince much more illustrious, who being the son of Aeacidas, the son of
Arybas, who was born Prince of the Molossi; and being depell'd from his Country
under Demetrius Peliovcetes, who had married his sister Deidamia, had the very
elements of his martial discipline. For in that famous conflict, wherein
Demetrius with his father Antigonus was overcome; he was one being yet a very
youth. Afterward by the affinity and furtherance of Ptolemy Lagidas, and his
wife Berenice, he regained his Kingdom, whose beginning Velleius, lib. 1.
Velleius attributes to that year, wherein Q. Fabius, and P. Decius Mus. were
Consuls, which is the 459 year of the City-account, and the 3689 year of the
World. In which very year being entreated in aid into Macedonia, to Alexander
the son of Cassander, he requires his part of it. Whence being depuls'd by
Demetrius Poliorcetes for some years, partly by himself, partly joining his
Forces with Lysimachus, Ptolemey, and Seleucus, he made war upon him, and for
his reward enjoyed Macedonia, indeed, but not above seven months. Immediately
after being called to the aid of the Tarentines into Italy, he wars in vain
upon the Romans. And likewise attempting Sicilia, he was beaten as well thence,
as out of Italy, and so returned home. Then again he gets possession of
Macedonia, having ejected Antigonus the son of Demetrius. Lastly, being called
to the aid of Cleonymus of Sparta, the son of Areus into Peloponnesus against
Antigonus, he dyed at Argos the first year of the 127 Olympiad, and the 272
year before Christ, in the 23 year of his reign, as it appears, in that he
began to reign the 459th of the City, and the 295 before Christ. He had a very
sad Auspicium that very night that he entered Argos, A Bird sitting upon the
point of his Spear; as Aelianus writes.

Book 10. of Hist. of years, chapter 36. The breaking in of the Gauls into Thrace
and Greece. Pausan. Phoc. p. 325. Just. b. 34. Dexip. in Coll. of Scal.
A dispatch also of the Gauls into Thrace and Greece happened into the same
space of time. It is described by Pausanias to be threefold. First of all,
Cambaules being Captain, they pierced even into Thrace; with whose wasting
being contented, they returned home. Secondly, their Army being divided in
three parts, some came to Thrace, Cerethrius being Leader, others to Pannonia,
Brennus, and Achichore Leaders; the rest Bolgius carried into Macedonia and
Illyricum. The Macedonians daring to resist this man, do receive a great
slaughter. The valor of one chief one, Sosthenes, raised up the affairs of
Macedonia, being past hope; who beat back the Barbarians, triumphingly
rejoicing in victory, and drove them out of the borders of Macedonia; and by
that desert obtained the Kingdom. Polyb. 2. p. 128. and 155.
Polybius writes, That four Kings, Ptolomey Lagidas, Lysimachus, Seleucus, and
Ptolomy Ceraune, dyed within the 124 Olympiad. Wherefore the murder of Ceraune
shall be truly reckoned to the fourth year of that Olympiad going out, of the
World 3704.

The year following brought a third breaking in of the Gauls into Greece,
Brennus and Achichore being Generals, whose Army consisted of 152 thousand
footmen, twenty thousand and four hundred horsemen; unto every of which
horsemen, were adjoined two servants, who should succeed their dead masters:
which (...), or certain number of Soldiers, they called (...), or a
thrice-horsing. For the French or Gauls did name a horse, (...), says
Pausanias. Pausan. Phoc. fol. 335.
So there were sixty and one thousand horsemen, and two hundred more. They are
first overcome at Thermopylae, then at Parnassus, whither they had broken
through, for obtaining and spoiling the Temple of Delphos sake. Brennus himself,
many wounds being received, drinking down new wine more largely, voluntarily
ended his life. That calamity of the Gauls is noted by Pausanias, Anaxicrates
being chief Ruler, in wintertime; this was in the second year of the 125
Olympiad before Christ 279.

Again, the following year, Democles being Praetor of Athens, the Gauls poured
forth themselves into Asia, as the same Pausanias shows: Polyb. 4. p. 313.
But Polybius writes, That in the same year the remainders of the Gauls
invaded Thrace, Comontorius being their Captain, and required tribute from the
Byzantines.

CHAP. XVII. Things done by the Romans, from the year of the City Built, 419,
unto 472.
WHile in the East, and Greece, all things were, by Alexander the Great, and
his succeeders, through Wars and Tumults, in a hurly-burly, Italy suffered no
less storms of weapons; in which the Roman valor exercised it self unto the
dominion of the world.

Live. 9. Eutrop. The War with the Samnites. b. chapter 12.
The War with the Samnites was beyond the rest, of a long continuance, and very
dreadful, (b) of which I have made mention above; the which in this space of
time was most sharply carried on with some slaughter, in the mean time, and
disgrace of the Romans; but with a great, and, which is the top of all, the
last of the Samnites, who being at last subdued, in the year of the C.B. 482,
made an end of War, in the 71 year, as we have already said; to wit, from the
year of the City 411, unto 481. Live. 9.
In which space, the Caudinae furcae, or gallows made of the trunks of Trees,
were made noble by the disgrace of the Romans, in the year of the City 433, the
4th after the death of Alexander the Great, when the Roman Army yielded to
their enemies, and, with both Consuls, was cast under the yoke. But that
disgrace, the year following, Papyrius repayed with a greater overthrow of the
Samnites, and like disgrace, a most valiant Commander in that Age: besides
whom, many others also are reckoned up by Livy, Live. 9.
who might be equal to Alexander, if (as the report was) he had come into
Italy. Live. 9. Just. 12. Oros. 3. chapter 11.
Another Alexander King of Eripus, Uncle of of the Great, being sent for into
Italy, by the Tarentines, when as he had oftentimes fought valiantly against
the Samnites, Bruttians, and Lucanes, a peace being made with the Romans in the
year of the C. B. 422, was at length slain by the Lucanes at the River
Acherunt, in the year of C. B. 428, the third of the 113 Olympiad, Alexander
the Great surviving.

Polyb. 2. p. 106. Live. 7. Wars begun with the Gauls.
With the Gauls also a fight is renewed one time after another; whose diverse
in-breakings, I will briefly touch at, out (...) of Polybius, and the Roman
Annals. The thirtieth year after that they conquered Rome, not far from the
Colline, or little hill-gate, a great slaughter being made on both sides, they
were scarce turned away. Servilius Anhala being chosen Dictator, was the cause
of that Tumult, in the year of C. B. 394. In the 12th year after, which was of
the City 405, they were again slain by Camillus; at which time Valerius Corvine
overcame the provoking Gaul by the help of a Raven or Crow. After thirteen
years, they make a Peace and League with the Romans, in which they remained 30
years. Therefore a little before the 45th year of C. B. the Gauls on this side
the Alps, with those beyond the Alps, and Etruscians, destroyed the fields of
the Romans. Thence those of this side the Alps being returned with a great
prey, about this very prey do fight with swords among themselves. The 4th year
after, they being joined together with the Samnites and Etruscians, a battle
being joined, they flew the Roman Legion, of which L. Scipio-Propretor was
chief. At which time another fight flaming, and the left-wing of the Army now
giving back, P. Decius, Consul, avowed his head, and brought forth a victory by
his own death, in the year of C. B. 459.

Polyb. p. 107. and 108. Eutr. Epit. Live. 13.
Ten years after these things being slidden away, the Senonian Gauls being
again called forth by the Lucanes, Bruttians, Samnites, and Etruscians,
besieged Aretius; and L. Caecilius the Praetor being overcome, they slew
thirteen thousand of the Romans. Which overthrow, the Consul Dolabella
straightway revenged, and the Gauls being put to flight, their City Sena being
taken, he brought thither a plantation. The Boians being much troubled at the
misery of the Senones, and conspiring with the Etruscians, make fight at the
Lake of Vadimo; in which all the Etruscians for the most part were slain, very
few of the Boians escaped. That happened in the 471 year of the City. But the
following year, the Boians being again by the Romans utterly overthrown,
entreated peace, and a league, the third year before Pyrrhus came into Italy.

Live. 8.
Moreover, the Palaepolitans, where now is Neapolis, daring to bring War on the
Romans, in the third year, which was of C.B. 428. were by Publilius the
Proconsul subdued.

So, 12 people of the Etruscians being stirred up for the destruction of the
Roman name, in the year of C. B. 442, Live. 9. Flor. 1. c. 17. Oros. 3. chapter 21.
were overcome in the year 444 by Fabius the Consul, in a great battle, in the
which were slain, or taken, to the number of 60 thousand of the enemies.

CHAP. XVIII Of Men excelling in Learning.
AT Athens, after the Diog. in Aristot.
death of Aristotle, who dyed in the third year of the 114 Olympiad,
Theophrastus Eresius governed the School of the Peripateticks; when as two
years before, Diogenes the Cynick departed out of life, The same Author in
Diog. the Cyn.
to wit, in the same year, (wherein also Alexander the Great dyed) almost
ninety years of age.

Diog. in Xenocracr.
Xenocrates, Master of Plato's sect, when he had been chief over it five and
twenty years, to wit, from the second of the 110 Olympiad, and Lysimachus chief
Ruler, dies in the third year of the 116 Olympiad. Idem.
Also Polemo the hearer of Xenocrates; Crates of Polemo; and Crantor of Sola,
of him; likewise Arcesilaus the hearer of Crantor, was the author of a middle
University, of Pitana, a Town of Aeolis, who was accounted famous in the 120
Olympiad.

In the third year of the 109 Olympiad, Diog. in Epicurus. Zeno the Stoic.
Epicurus was brought forth to light; he dyed in the second year of the 127
Olympiad, being 92 years old. Zeno the founder of the sect of the Stoics,
before the Scholar of Crates, beautified that same Age; whom Eusebius shows
to have dyed in the 129 Olympiad. Likewise Demetrius Phalereus the Scholar of
Theophrastus, no less noble in the ability of governing the Commonwealth,
than of Philosophy and Eloquence. He was chief Governor of Athens 10 years, as
says Diogenes Laertius. Diog. 18. Plut. in Phoc.
But he began in the third year of the 115 Olympiad; in which year, Cassander
conquered Athens. But in the second year of the 118 Olympiad, Demetrius
Poliorcetes obtaining, he fled into Egypt unto Ptolomy the son of Lagus, Diog.
in Demetr.
who dying, and being by Ptolomey Philadelphus, banished, and pining with
grief, he perished with the biting of an Aspe about the first year of the 124
Olympiad. Ptolem. 7. chapter 3.
Timocharis was famous in the knowledge of Astronomy about the 121 Olympiad.

But Demosthenes overcame the rest in the famousnesse of a name, Plut. in
Demost.
who in the third year from the death of Alexander, the same in which Aristotle
yielded to Natures destiny in the Island Galauria, whither he had betaken
himself for fear of the Macedonians.

Menander the Comical Poet is declared to have dyed, Philip being chief
Governor; as it is in an old note or writing, seeing he was born in the third
year of the 109 Olympiad, Sosigenes being chief Ruler: So he dyed, being fifty
years of age.

Diod. in collect. of Vales. p. 258.
Timaeus a Sicilian Tauromenite in the time of Agathocles, wrote a History, by
whom being driven out of Sicily, he vindicated himself in a phrase of writing,
the which he is said to have used the more intemperate against him. The same.
But on the contrary, Callias of Syracusa, because he had been moved by the
same Tyrant, with great benefits in his History, shamefully flattered him.

But Alexander the Great reigning, Tatian. with Eus. of Praep. in 289.
Berosus the Egyptian; and under his Successors, Ptolem^is Lagidae, and
Philadelpho Joseph. Antiq. chapter 3. Theoph. to Autol. 3.
Manethon of the City of Diospolis, Historians, are remembered.

The End of the Third Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. OR, AN Account of Time.
The Fourth Book.
COntaining an History of memorable affairs from the Year of the Julian Period
4431. to 4713.

CHAP. I. Occurrences in the Roman state, from the Account of the City, 472. to
536. and chiefly concerning the Epirotick, first Punick, and Gallick Wars.
THe Romans now began to redeem their liberty from the Greeks, obtained by
their courages and powers, which began to be debilitated, and therefore Italy
and Africa will yield greater subjects for History then the Orient which is the
cause of our first beginning with the Roman History.

Epit. Live. 13. Plut. in Pyr. Eutrop. 2. Flor. l. 1. c. 18. Oros. l. 4. c. 4.
Just. 24. Diod. in Eclo.
The people called Tarentini as soon as the Roman Army removed thence, in the
year from the foundation of the City 472. fell injuriously upon the Roman
Legates, for lucres sake, and thereby provoked the Romans, not because they had
any such strength, whereby they might possibly make good their affront, but
passionnately by Grecian levity incited thereunto, for which L. Aimilius
Barbula overcame in battle the Tarentines, Samnites, and Salentinians, which
so enraged them, that they procured Pyrrhus to their aid who in the year of the
account of the City 474. drew his Army into Italy, and waged a war with the
Romans, which continued six years, when the Romans first met with them they
retreated, Levinus being their leader, surprised not so much with the Army as
the unwonted sight of their Elephants. Pyrrhus at the request of C. Fabricius,
released the prisoners without any ransom at all. Presently peace was
endeavored by the Embassy of Cinea, which took no effect, blind Appius working
against it, twice they joined in battle with the Romans, it being uncertain
whether side had the greatest loss, then called by the Syracusians against the
Paeni, where things succeeded not according to his desire, he returned into
Italy. In the year of the City 479. he was overcome, spoiled of his Castles,
and being driven out of Tarentum, returned into Epirus, after he had warred fix
in Italy, and the Poeni.

Epit. Live. 14. Oros. 4. c. 3.
Pyrrhus being quite chased away, the Tarentines, Brutians, and Carthaginians,
who contrary to their league assisted in this War, overcome in fight, submitted
to the Roman authority and power, and obtained quiet and liberty in the year
from the foundation of the City 482, in that which went before Eutr. 2.
Ptolemy Philadelphus, was united, or associated himself to the Romans.

Flor. r. c. 19
The Pirenian, Selentinian, and lastly of all the most grievous war the Polyb.
1. Epit. Live.
Punick followed, which was first begun in the year of the City account 490.
the eleventh year after Pyrrhus returned into Epirus.

Polyb. r. p. 12. and seq. Epit. Live. Flor. 2. c. 2. Eutrp. 2. Appian. Oros. l.
4. c. 7.
The cause of the first Punick war, was the ambition of both Cities, and their
mutual suspected and formidable power. The Maritimi offered affronts to Hiero
King of the Syracusians and ally of the Carthaginians, who Polyb. 1. p. 8.
Pausan. Eliac. 2. p. 189.
in the year of the Olympiad, 126. the second was first made Governor by the
Syracusians, and after saluted King the fourth Olympiad, 127, he made war
against the Mamertini, who dwell in Messana: These implore the Roman aid,
having begun to fight against the forces brought into the Island by Hiero, and
the Carthaginians; the fortune of that war was long doubtful, the
Carthaginians prevailing at Sea, and the Romans upon the land, who at last in
the fourth year of the war, in the year of the City, 493, obtained the art of
Sailing and fighting at Sea, better then formerly. But that being again and
again laid aside, and taken up, they at last had the upper hand. In that war,
Attilius a Prince or Duke, comes to be remembered with the first or chief;
who, the forces of the Carthaginians being broken in a Sea and land battle,
when as he would not grant peace to them desiring it, but on unequal terms,
was overcome by Xanthippus, a Captain of the Lacedaemonians, and taken in the
battle with 15. thousand soldiers, 30 thousand being slain, in the year of
the City 500. lacking two. He afterward being sent to Rome by the
Carthaginians, that he might treat with the Senate about the exchanging of
Captives, he interceded that that might not be done; and of his own accord
returned to Carthage unto a most certain execution. C. Duilius first got a
Sea-victory of the Romans, in the fifth year of the war. C. Lutatius the
latter, in the 23. and last year, in which Victory he warred with the
Carthaginians at the Island Aegas; with whom peace was granted on these
conditions, That they should yield up all the Islands that lay between Italy,
and Africa, and should pay for 20 years, two thousand and two hundred Talents.
That was done in the year of the City built, 513, before Christ, 241. A greater
danger at home took hold on the Carthaginians, having finished a foreign war.
For the hired soldiers, of which sort, the Carthagenians made very much use,
required their pays, and the rewards of warfare, which thing, the treasury
being exhausted, could not be performed. Therefore robbing and killing
throughout Africa, and largely wasting all things, it could hardly be stopped.
Polyb. b. 1. p. 65. App. in Pun. Diod. in Collect. p. 275
Polyb. 1. p. 88.
At length, after three years and four Months, they put an end to that war.
Eutr. 3. Plut. in Numa Oros. 4. chapter 11.
In the year of the City 519. which very seldom happens at Rome, the Temple
of Janus was shut, wars being every where appeased. But a little after, new
stirs arising, it was opened. The Ligurians, Sardians, Corsians, being subdued.
And then a war being begun with the Illyrians, and Queen Teuta, in the year of
the City 524. the third year after, was finished, and then, Ambassadors,
Messengers of Conquest being sent through Greece. Polyb. 2. p. 101.
The Corinthians received the Romans into the fellowship of the Isthmians.

Polyb. 2. p. 109. Flor. 2. chapter 4. O. os. 4. chapter 13.
Moreover, there was a fearful in-breach of the French or Gauls. The
Insubrians and Boyans by reason of the Picene-field or land taken away from the
French Senones, and divided by the field law Cic. 2. University questions.
by Flaminius, Tribune of the Communalty (which law was given forth in the 522
year of the City, the French beyond the Alps, Gaesates, (so they called
Mercenary soldiers) being called to them, fought against the Romans. Against
whom the Romans mustered, which is scarce to be believed, Polyb. 2. p. 113.
Eutr. 2.
700000 footmen, 70000. horsemen. The French were often overcome, and their
Army led over Padus, especially in the 530 year of the City built; and the
Insubrians were tamed, Eutr. 2.
and Virdumur King of the Gaesates being by C. Marcellus the Consul slain,
gave from himself rich spoils, Diodor. Eccl. 25.
Unto this war Hiero King of Sicily, who a little before the beginning of the
Punick or Carthaginian war being overcome by the Romans, had passed over into
the parties and friendship of the conquerours, sent a very great store of
bread-corn, the price whereof, when the war was ended, he received.

CHAP. II. The second Carthaginian War.
THen another war with Carthage followed, Polyb. 2. Live. 1. Dec. 5. Flor. 2.
chapter 6. Plut. Fab. and Marc. Appia Oros. chapter 14.
in the four and twentieth year from the end of the former, the which indeed
was less in space of time, but so more dreadful in the cruelty of slaughters,
says Florus, that if any one compares the losses of both people, the people
that conquereth, is more like to the conquered. There was the same cause of the
war, as of the former, desire of Masterdome: and in the Carthaginians an
impatience of bondage, because they being overcome, had (as I have said)
already the four and twentyeth year yielded to the weapons of the Romans.
Hannibal the son of Amilcar, put under the chief torch unto this flame, of that
Amilcar who being General of the Carthaginians in the former war, had received
with grief the conditions of peace; and who, things being composed in Africa,
in the year of the City (as is gathered out of Polyb. in the beginning of b. 1.
Corn. Nep. in Hannibal. Pliny of famous men.
Polybius) 517. being sent into Spain, had taken Hanniball, being nine years of
age, along with him; when as he had first commanded him to swear at the Altar,
that he would never be in friendship with the Romans. Amilcar being about nine
years after slain; Hasdrubal his son in Law was put in his room, who sent for
Hanniball, and after eight years, being slain, had him for his successor, of
the City 534. when he had began about the seven and twentieth year of his age
by which account, he seems to be born in the year of the City built, 507;
before Christ 247. Therefore presently, as soon as he is made chief Commander,
he subjected to himself all Spain within the River Iber. Live. 21. Polyb. 3.
Hence after seven months, great forces being raised up, he took Saguntum an
associate City of the Romans. All the Saguntines, help being in vain looked for
of the Romans, partly by the sword of the Enemy, partly by their own hand, were
slain. Thus the second Carthaginian war was moved, the which beginning in the
year of C. B. 536. Live. 30.
P. Cornelius Scipio, and T. Sempronius Longus, being Consulls, had an end in
the seventeenth year, M. Servilius Geminus, and T. Claudius Nero, Polyb. 3. p.
189. Live. 21.
being Consulls of the City built, the year 552. Hannibal had in his army, as
Polybius writes, of footmen, 90 thousand, of horsemen twelve thousand. Livy
declares diversely concerning the number. At the first onset, both Consulls are
overcome, P. Cornelius at Ticinum, Sempronius at Trebeia. The following year of
the City built, 537. a greater slaughter is received at the Lake Thrasumene;
when in the mean time, Ae. Fabius Maximus, being made Pro-dictator by the
people, however by delaying, upheld the business. Polyb. 3. p. 264. Live. 2.
Appian. Flor. and others quoted.
But the most cruel destruction of all happened in the year of the C. B. 538.
at Canna, through the rashness of Terence Varro, another Confull. In that
fight were slain of the Romans 40000. Neither yet, their courage being unbroken
for that calamity, they would not redeem those that were taken in the Cannian
battle. Polyb. 8. p. 515. and fol. Live. 3. Dec. 4. Plut. Mart. Archimedes.
Then Marcellus the Consul besieged Syracusa, which City, after the death of
Hiero, which fell out in the 539 year of the C. B. had fell away from the
fellowship of the Romans, in the year of the City 540. which the industry of
one man defended from his fierce assault. That man was Archimedes, who being an
excellent mufer of the Heaven and Stars in that age; but in the inventings of
Engines and warlike works, much more famous, mocked all the preparations of the
Romans, with a very light matter. Therefore at length, scarce in the third
year, of the City 542, could Syracusa be taken. At which time it is delivered,
Archimedes, his mind being earnestly bent on those studies unto which he had
been given, and thinking nothing of those things which were carried on by this
tumult, being by an unknown Soldier, and in vain, enquiring who he was, slain;
Marcellus to have taken great grief from his death, who had commanded the
Soldiers breaking into the City, that they should preserve his life; and to
have taken care for his burial.

This misery of the Syracusans put an end to Kingly rule in Sicily, Polyb. in
Collect. of Va. les. p. 10. and b. 1. Hist. p. 16.
the which, that Hiero of whom we have made mention a little before, had
restored; and had by courtesy and clemency made of a Tyrannical a just one,
and acceptable to the common people; when as he took nothing as chief to
himself, from so great dignity, besides care, and liberality. But he reigned 54
years, beginning from the 485 year of the C. B. the sixty before the first
Carthagenian war, who entering, being overcome by Appius the Consul, he fell
off from the fellowship of the Carthaginians unto the Romans, and continued in
their friendship Live. b. 4. Dec.
nigh fifty years. Polib. in Collect. of Vales. p. 13. Live. b. 4. Dec. 3. Paus.
El. 2. Justin. 28.
He had a son, Gelo, of the same manners, who died before his father in the
fiftieth year of his age, and he left Jerome, begotten from Nereis the daughter
of Pyrrhus, King of the Epirotes, heir of his Grandfathers Kingdom, the which
he came to in the 539 year of the City, Hiero being dead, being in the 15th
year of his age. But as he was of a very bad disposition, running out into all
kind of wickedness and cruelty, by the conspiracy of his own subjects, he is
the same year killed.

In the mean time Laevine the Pretour crushed Philip king of Macedonia, having
made a fellowship with Hannibal, waiting for an advantage against Italy, and
constrained him, his Navy being of his own accord burnt, to betake himself into
his own Macedonia, in the year of C. B. 542. But in Spain, P. and Cn. Scipioes,
brethren, who had hitherto stopped up the passage of Hadruball unto his brother
Hanniball into Italy, and had performed many things valiantly there, the Army
being overthrown, they both fell, Live. 3. Dec. 5
L. Marcius a Roman Knight, being chosen, (in fear, a Captain by the voice of
the Soldiery, supported a decaying state. Under whose conduct, in one night
and day, two camps of the enemies were vanquished, and slain of the enemies 37
thousand, the which happened in that year of the City 542. Live. 3. Dec. 6
And at the same time Tarentum, besides a Castle, being taken by Hannibal, and
Capua besieged by the Romans; Live. 3. Dec. 9.
from the which, that Hannibal might turn them away, he bends to Rome. But a
sudden tempest arising suddenly, drove back this man from its walls and sight.
And then Capua being delivered to the Romans, whose Princes took away their own
life by poison; the Senators being beheaded, the City was reduced unto a
Lievtenantship.

Livy in the same placer Val. 3. chapter 7. Plin. of famous men.
P. Scipio was the son of that P. Scipio, whom we have mentioned to have been
slain in Spain; who after that Spanish overthrow, all being affrighted, being
four and twenty years old, be professed himself to carry his commanding power
into Spain, and thither he was sent for a Consul, in the year of the City 543.
Live. 3. Dec. b. 6. Polyb. 11. p. 638.
There very great things being done, and Hasdrubal the son of Gisco, and Mago
being overcome, in the 5th year after he had come, cast out the Carthaginians
from all Spain. Thence going forward into Africa, he joined friendship with
Syphax of the Masilians, and then with Masanissa of the Masulians, Kings. These
things were done in the year of the City 548, the third year from the overthrow
of Marcellus the Consul; Live. 3. Dec. 7. Plut. Mart.
who in the year 546 some prosperous battles being made with Hannibal, he being
compassed about by the layings in wait of the same, is slain. Live. in the same
place. Polyb. in the beginning of b. 11.
But the following year Hasdrusbal the brother of Hannibal, who had come with a
new Army into Italy, before he could join himself together with his brother,
was by two Consuls, Claudius Nero, and Livy Salinator, with his Army
overthrown. Hannibal was then in Apulia; against whom Nero the Consul had
opposed himself. Livy had Camps in France on this side the Alps, against
Hasdrubal. The letters of Hasdrubal being intercepted, Nero came privily,
Hannibal not knowing it, having measured over all Italy in six days space,
unto the Camps of his co-partner, with part of his Army; and his enemies, as
has been mentioned, being overcome, returned unto his standing Camps, before
that Hannibal thought him to have departed; 56 thousand are reported to be
slain of the enemies in that battle; taken, 5000, and 400. The head of
Hasdrubal being cast by Nero before the standing places of the Carthaginians,
was a sorrowful token unto Hannibal of the received slaughter.

Live. 28. Appia.
But P. Scipio, that he might call back Hannibal from Italy, determined to
transport the War into Africa; the which at length in the year of the City 549,
in which he bare the Consulship, he attempted. But in the beginning, seeing
that thing was accounted rash counsel, there was nothing neither of money nor
Soldiers publicly supplied; So none but a voluntary Soldiery being
mustered, and money received upon borrowing, and gathered by entreaty, first
being Consul, unto Sicily; thence, being Pro-consul in the year of the City
550, the fifteenth of the War, he came with a Navy into Africa. Live. Plin. of
famous men. Herodian. b. 1.
In which year, the image of the Mother Idea being brought from Pessinunt in
Phrygia, from the Oracle, unto Rome, by P. Scipio Nasica the son of Cn. which
young man the Senate had dedicated as a most excellent or very good man, it was
received.

Hasdrubal the son of Gisco is set by the Carthaginians, a Captain, against
Scipio; who had espoused Sophonisba the daughter of Masanissa. Live.
Appian-Flor. etc.
But the people of the Carthaginians, her father, and the betroathed man being
absent, joined her openly unto Syphax, who being taken in love of the Maid,
wasted their fields, that they might bring him over from the friendship of the
Romans unto their own. With which wrong Masanissa being much moved, gave
himself wholly to the Romans; and afterward brought great help to beat down
the Carthaginians.

Syphax and Hasdrubal came suddenly upon Scipio, besieging Ulica with 100000
armed men, whose Camps the same day were destroyed, 40000 being slain, six
thousand taken; and both again, their Armies being renewed, were overcome in
another battle. Syphax was by Laelius, and King Masanissa taken alive.

When as Masanissa had carried away Sophonisba his Wife, being blamed by
Scipio, he sent poison unto her, wherewith she brought death on her self. Live.
3. Dec. 10. App. etc. Polyb. 15.
Hannibal being called by the Carthaginians, leaving Italy, in the 16th year of
the War, of the City 551, he returned into Africa; Diod. in Coll. of Vales. p.
290.
his companions that would not follow, what being slain, what being brought
into bondage, and a peace being in vain attempted by discourse together, he
having joined in battle, is by Scipio overcome: after him Vermina the son of
Syphax, who had come for aid to the Carthaginians. Scipio made conditions of
peace with the Carthaginians, the Senate and people of Rome being the author;
Hannibal fled away to Antiochus.

Live. 3. Polyb. 15.
The War was ended in the 17th year, of the City 552, M. Servilius Geminus, and
T. Claudius Nero being Consuls, and the following year peace being granted to
the Carthaginians by the Senate; and Scipio was carried triumphing into the
City, Polyb. 16. p. 733.
and in that triumphing Syphax was led, a little after dying at Tybur in
prison. But In the end of book 10. Dec 3.
Livy tells, that he dyed before the triumph, Valor. Max. b. 5. chapter 1.
and was advanced with an open Funeral. Where also he affirms Polybius to
think that which I have said. This King, he says, to have been led in the
triumph, Polybius an author, in no case to be despised, delivers: which
rehearsing of the most excellent historian, seems unto me to be too straight,
and nothing copious.

CHAP. III. Of the first beginning of the Achaeans, the enterprises of Pyrthus,
and his death, and the original of the Kings of Troy, and the Parthians.
FUrthermore, in Greece and the Eastern parts, these things chiefly appertain
to history. The Commonwealth of Troas and Peloponnesus did by degrees close
into one, Polyb. 22. page 129.
whose foundations were laid in the 124 Osympiad, about the time Pyrrhus went
over into Italy; when the Dymaeans, Patrensians, Tritaeans, and the Pharaeans,
were agreed, to whom all the rest for the future betook themselves. These at
the first appointed one Scribe and two Praetors for the public. When 25 years
were expired, they were content to make choice of one only Praetor. He was
wont to be made so about the appearance of the seven Stars, Polyb. init. 5. p.
350.
as Polybius our Author reports, and Marcus Carynensis the chief of all the
Pretors, is by him betrayed. In whose fourth year Aratus Sycionius being 20
years of age, began to be famous for what he had done. Wherefore in the last
year of that Olympiad, arose this Commonwealth in the year before Christ 281,
in the year of the City 471. In the following year Pyrrhus went over Sea into
Italy. The Lacedaemonians being perplexed with sedition at home, came to be
governed by Pyrrhus. Cleomenes after 60 years and ten months dyed in his
Kingdom, as Diodorus witnesses, when Demetrius Phalereus was Praetor at
Athens. He is the fourth of the 117 Olympiad. Diod. 20. Pausan. in Lacon. p.
87. Plut. in Ag. and Cleo. See b. 10. of doctr. of times, chapter 5.
This man begat two sons, Acrotatus, who dying before his father, left a son
called Areus; and a younger son, whose name was Cleonymus. When they were at
variance about his succession, the Senate preferred Areus before Cleonymus: him
they studied to entice by fair speeches, honors, and preferments, not to be
advised against the Commonwealth. For amongst other things, he being sent unto
Tarentum against the Lucanes and Romans with aid, overcame the Lucanes. He
vanquished Tarentum, which had fallen off, in the year of the City built 451,
in the second year of the 119 Olympiad, as Diod. 26.
Diodore is author. After the City of the Salentines being taken by the Romans,
Aimilius Consul being Captain, in the year 452, being put to flight with his
Navy, he comes to the Patavine shoares ravening the prey; where his Navy being
very badly entertained, the fifth part of it scarcely returned home, as Livy
Live. 10.
writes, who names not this King of the Lacedaemonians aright. But he, after
many years, being both mindful of the repulse, and also provoked by a new
injury, because Acrotatus the son of Areus, had suddenly snatched away
Chelidonis his Wife, called forth Pyrrhus into Laconica, Plut. in Pyrrhus,
Justin. 25.
in the same year, wherein he having returned out of Italy, had taken
possession of Macedonia, Antigonus being driven out; which is the 481 of the
City built. The death of Pyrrbus.
Therefore the following year, an inroad being made into Laconicae, he took the
City almost void of defenders. But being driven out through the valor of the
Townsmen, he contendeth at Argos: which City having entered into, and fighting
against Antigonus, a tyle being by a woman dashed on his head, he was slain, in
the entrance of the 127 Olympiad; That is the 272 year before Christ, unto
which, from that year wherein Cleonymus was cast off from the Kingdom, which
was before Christ 309, about seven and thirty years come between.

Strabo. b. 13. Paus. Attic. p. 7. The Kingdom of Pergamus.
At the same time, in which the Cities of the Achaians began to be reduced into
one body, at Caycus, a River of Pergamus, a Town of the greater Phrygia, the
foundations of a new kingdom were laid. About the 124 Olympiad, in the last
year of Ptolemy Lagides, Philetaere, an Eunuch, high Treasurer, taking
grievously from Lysimachus the death of his son Agathocles, whom, his father of
false crimes, by his Wife Arsinoe, being accused, had taken away by poison,
fell off from him, and was chief of a new royal authority at Pergamus. This man
had two brethren, Eumenes and Attalus, who also succeeded in the Kingdom: but
Attalus first took on him the Kingly Title, as says Strabo. The last was
Attalus, nephew of the former Attalus, who dying, appointed the people of Rome
his heir, in the year of the City built, 621. So the Kings of Pergamus reigned
about 152 years.

The Kingdom of the Parthians, The beginning of the Parthians.
that was afterward strivingly ambitious with the Roman, whose founder was
Arsaces, began at the same time, in which the first Carthaginian War flamed in
the West. But by reason of the disagreement of the Ancients concerning its
beginning, it is uncertain.

Just. 41.
Justine indeed makes mention, that the first falling away of the Parthians
happened in the first Carthaginian War, L. Manlius Vulso, and Attilius Regulus
being Consuls, Seleucus reigning, whose discord with his brother Antiochus gave
a lack of punishment to that falling away. Those Consuls possess the 504th
year of the City built, before Christ 250, in which year Antiochus, [(...),]
that is, the God, the third of the Seleucidain race, the father of Seleucus
Callinicus. Unto Seleucus were born, Seleucus Ceraunus, who after his father
Callinicus dying in the twentieth year of his reign, reigned three years: and
Antiochus the Great, who succeeded his brother Callinicus. Justine, who says,
the Parthians fell off from Seleucus the great grandchild of Antiochus Soter,
understood not Callinicus, but his son Ceraunus, whose brother Antiochus was.
In which, Justine's Error.
he is wonderfully deceived. Seleucus Ceraunus began his reign in the second
year of the 138 Olymp. In the first year of the Olymp. following, he dyed; for
he reigned three years. Therefore the beginning of him agrees with the year of
the City 527, which is the 15th from the peace made with the Carthaginians; and
from the Consulship of Vulso and Attilius, the four and twentieth. Moreover,
Eusebius ascribes it under Antiochus the god, to the 133 Olympiad, two years
after the Consuls mentioned by Justine.

Strabo the 13. Appian. in the end of Sir.
But Strabo writes, Arsaces to have fled, Callinicus reigning, which agrees
well enough with Eusebius. Appian says, the Persians to have fallen off at
that time, wherein Antiochus the god (that would be so called) being dead,
Laodice kills Bernice another of his Wives; whose death her brother Ptolemy
Euergetes desiring to revenge, went into Syria, and even unto Babylon. These
things were done in the very first year of Seleucus Callinicus, a little after
the death of Antiochus the god. Wherefore we do believe, that the beginnings of
the Parthians were laid under Callinicus, and in the first of his reign, about
the 246th year before Christ. For Arria. in Parthic. Phot. in book 58.
Arrian with Photius, is author, that Arsaces, with his brother Teridates, slew
Pherecles, Lieutenant (from Antiochus the god) of his Country, for the chastity
of either of them tempted or tried by him. Whence, even Antiochus the god, as
yet living, or a little after his death, that thing is very likely to have
happened.

Hence forward, the Princes of the Parthians took their name from Arsaces, even
as from Caesar and Augustus, the Roman Emperors, were called Augustuses and
Caesar's. The royal command of these, remained unto about 472 years; from the
year before Christ 246, unto 220 years after Christ, and even to the fifth of
the son of Alexander Mammeas; Hercdian. 6.
In which year, Artaxerxes by birth a Persian, Artabanus King of the Parthians
being slain, passed over the top of their affairs unto the Persians.

Theodotus also, Governor of the Bactrians, is (at the same time wherein
Arsaces) made the founder of a new Kingdom. Which very thing was of very small
continuance, and yielded it self into the title of the Parthians.

CHAP. IV. What things were carried on in Greece, and through the East, from
the year before Christ 252, unto 219, and the beginning of the second Punick
War.
THe Commonwealth of the Achaians Polyb. 2. p. 130. Plutar. in Aratus. Pausan.
Cot. 51.
in Peloponnesus, through the valor of Aratus Sicyo, grew up with great
increases. This man in the twentieth year of his age (which is reckoned both
the eleventh year of the former Carthaginian War, and, from the Commonwealth
of the Achaians founded, the one and thirtieth, Polyb. 2. p. 130.
that is, the 4th year of the Lievtenantship of Marc of Caryna) attempted to
wrest the Greek Cities, which for the most part were at that time held by
Tyrants, from theirs, and also from the Macedonian yoke. Of which thing, he
made a beginning from his Country, the which being endowed with liberty, (
Nicocles the Tyrant being driven out) he joined to the Council of the Achaians,
in the 253 year before Christ, of the City built 501. But when more than 500
banished persons retu^ning unto Sicyo, required their goods, Aratus going into
Egypt, wrung out 150 talents from Ptolomey Philadelphus, wherewith he might
satisfy them. The eighth year after, he was first made Praetor; and Plut. in
Aratus.
a year coming between, he again took the same Office: by which, Polyb. Plut.
Pausan.
a garrison being thrown out of a Castle of the Macedonians, over which Perseus
the Stoic was chief, he freed Corinth; which example prevailed in many or most
Towns, who followed the same fellowship. But that thing happened before the
last victory of the Romans over the Carthagintans, as Polybius shows, in the
twenty second year of the former Carthaginian War; of the City, 511.

Plut. Ag. and Cleomen.
A little before, or about the same time, a tumult arose at Lacedemon, Agis,
and Leonidas reigning, the one whereof was of the family of the Euritionides,
or Euripontides, the sixth from that Agesilaus the Great, who had in times past
done famous things against the Barbarians. Leonidas was sprung from the stock
of the Agides, or Euristhenides, which excelled the other in worthiness, born
of his father Cleonymus, which son of the abovesaid Cleomenes, being put after
Areus, the son of Acrotatus his brother, I have Chapter 4.
shown above, The History of Agis.
Pyrrhus to have brought into Laconia. Agis not as yet in the twentieth year of
his age, defiring to restore the fallen discipline of Lycurgus, he attempted to
do it by new obligatory writings, and dividing of their fields; whom when the
chief men of the City, and amongst them the other King or Ruler, Leonidas
withstood; nevertheless he persisted in his enterprise, having gotten Lysander
a Lacedemonian Magistrate, an assister of his counsels, by whom Leonidas being
required for judgment, the Kingdom being repealed, and conferred on
Cleombrotus his son in law, he settled himself a suppliant in the Temple of
Minerva. Afterward, new Ephori or Lacedemonian Magistrates succeeding, and
citing Lysander, and other favorers of Agis to declare the cause: both the
Kings come into the assembly with a guard of friends, they reduce the Ephori
into order: for these, when they do ordain others of their own parties, and
also Agesilaus a most large husbandman, but wrapped or covered in debt; who
therefore was a worker on Agis, that before the law for the ground, he should
set forth new obligations to mitigate the common people. When Agis had yielded
to his counsel, when it came unto the dividing of the fields, Agesilaus was
diligent to mock or deceive, and wrangle by wonderful crafts. which thing
estranged the minds of the Citizens from Agis. Therefore by the conspiracy of
his enemies, Leonidus is called back from banishment, and is restored to the
Kingdom. Agis and Cleombrotus being suppliants, fly together unto the Temple of
Minerva Chalciaeca. Cleombrotus, through Chelonis his Wife, the daughter of
Leonidas, his life being by request obtained, changes his soil; and thither
Chelonis followed her husband, her father in vain restraining her. Agis being
laid hold on by the Ephori, and condemned for his life, ended his life with an
halter: and with the same punishment Agistrata his Mother, and Archidamia his
grandmother were dissolved; his brother Plut.
Archidamus escaped death by flight, who a little after being called back again
by Leonidas, and taken into the fellowship of the Kingdom, he being dead, book
5. p. 385.
Polybius shows, to have fled again for fear of Cleomenes, and by him at
length to be slain. Agiatis the wife of Leonidas, was constrained to marry her
son Cleomenes, being as yet a child: whom, after the example of her former
husband, she more vehemently inflameth to follow after the same enterprises,
being stirred thereunto of his own accord. That calamity of Agis happened about
the finishing of the first Punick War, and the Castle of Corinth possessed by
Aratus.

Leonidas a little after having finished his life, The deeds of Cleomenes.
Cleomenes reigned about the year, as we think, before Christ 235; of the City
built, 519, a young man of a great courage, but hot, and cruel, and especially
stout in War. Who, the A^haians flourishing in strength and rule, and all
Peloponnesus, with their Captain Aratus, flying, he often overthrew in battle;
when as the Lacedaemonians had passed away from their league, the which they had
hitherto openly maintained, unto the fellowship of the Aetolians, with whom
they had war. For the Achaians, that which they had always desired, that they
much more about this time did prosecute by the Author Aratus, that of all the
Cities of Peloponnesus, Things done by Aratus.
they might make one Commonwealth. Which thing the Kings of Macedon fearing,
they either had placed in most of them cruel Lords; or did confirm those that
were already appointed by themselves with their safeguard. In the beating down
these by any force, in bringing those by any free will into a common covenant,
Aratus performed a diligent endeavor; and to perfect that thing, he much
prevailed by industry and counsel. Therefore Antigonus Gonatas as yet living,
the son of Demetrius Poliorcetes, besides other Towns, he joined Sycio and
Corinth (the Tyrant being cast out from thence; from hence, the garrison of the
Macedonians) unto the covenant of his own Countrymen. But then Gonatas being
dead in the third year of the 134 Olympiad, of the City built 512, and
Demetrius his son, who dyed (ten years being finished) in the year of the City
522, before Christ 232; he betook all his endeavor for the freeing of Greece.
At what time, he first of all loosed Attica from the yoke of the Macedonians;
Diogenes, who was chief over it, being allured to betray it, with great
rewards. And then the Argivi, Hermionenses, Philiasii, and others, the cruel
Lords yielding themselves of their own accord, for fear of Treason, and
applying themselves to the common league of the Graecians. Against whose so
prosperous affairs, the Aetolians, and Cleomenes King of the Lacedaemonians,
objected delays: they, through envy and craftiness; he, through open force
and weapons: whereby he often, as we have already said, overcame and put to
flight Aratus and other Commanders of the Achaians. Which war, as he ordered it
by his own advice, not at the direction of others, made him, which thing he
long since thought, that the Ephori being taken away, he might challenge all
the authority and command unto himself; and he declared the old discipline of
his house, in the tenth year of his reign, of the City of Rome 528, or next
following. After that, being loosed and free from homebred fear, he wholly
bent himself on the Achaick War. When the Achaians saw themselves unfit for the
undergoing this war, Aratus being already weary and languishing, and great
slaughters being received from Cleomenes, that same man, or Aratus, being the
author, they had regard unto the help of the Macedonians. Antigonus, by
surname, (...), that is, one about to give or profit, reigned over Macedonia.
Which name he obtained from this, because he said he would give sundry times
one after another what was asked of him. This man governed the kingdom for
Philip the son of Demetrius, from the year before Christ, 232; of the City 522,
the 137 Olympiad entering, to wit, a little before the passing over Rome into
Illyricum, as book 2. p. 131.
Polybius says. Therefore Aratus requires the fellowship of Antigonus, with
his Citizens, when as hitherto they had made use of the friendship of Ptolomey;
which new Covenant they joined in, by a great hire of the Town or Castle of
Corinth, from which they parted to the Macedonian, and straightway renounced
both by Sea and Land the same Captain of the Greek name. There came into the
Polyb. p. 279.
communion of that league, the Macedonians, Achaians, those of Epirus, the
Phocians, Boetians, Arcadians, Thessalians. Cleomenes, Antigonus breaking in
with great Armies, when he met him at the Isthmus or narrow creek of land,
being affrighted at the revolting of the Grecians, went back to defend his
Country. So the Macedonians, no man forbidding them, came to Peloponnesus in
the year of the World, 3761, of the City, 531, in which the second year of the
149 Olympiad began; and in the year following they conquered many Towns.
Cleomenes in the mean time not loytering, who took Megalopolis at unawares, and
utterly overthrew it, because the Citizens had refused to enter into fellowship
with him, although they should be vagabonds in their Country, Philopoemenes
thus persuading, Plut. in Philop.
who was then thirty years of age. Last of all, in the year of the City 533.
before Christ 221, in which the 4th year of the same Olympiad began, a Polyb.
5. Plut in Ag. and Cleom.
battle being pitched or joined, at Selasia, a Town of Laconia, Cleomenes was
overcome by Antigonus: when as this brought out twenty thousand, the other
thirty thousand into the battle, Cleomenes having slipped out of the battle,
saileth over Sea to Ptolomey Euergetes into Egypt, leaving Lacedemon empty for
defenders against Antigonus: To the which he coming, restored to it its
liberty, and all its ancient rights. The next day he being certified, that the
borders of Macedonia were invaded by the neighboring Barbarians, he hasts
thither as speedily as he could. In his passage he was present at the Nemean
sports; by whom he was received with great acclamations, and all kind of honor
by the Greeks. But as soon as he came to Macedonia, the Illyrians, and other
Barbarians being put to flight, his body long ago being taken with a
consumption, he deceased, and left the Government to Philip, who afterward
warred against the Romans. That happened in the 533 year of the City, of the
World 3763, in which the 4th year of the 139 Olympiad is numbered; the
mentioning of the Nemean pastime persuades it, which about the end of the
third Olympic year, and near the Sunstead, was wont to be begun, Notes to Jul.
p. 323. etc. Polyb. 2. p. 155.
as we have shown elsewhere.

Cleomenes being very honorably, and lovingly received by Ptolemey Euergetes,
he a little after dying, he came into suspicion with Philopator, the succeeder
of Euergetes; who from the counsel of Sosibius, by whose authority the Kingdom
was ordered, kept him in custody, making haste into Greece; out of which he at
length breaking with a few, and their swords being drawn, he running through the
whole City, and in vain calling to the Alexandrians for liberty, laid hands on
himself; Polyb. 4. p. 304.
in the third year after he came to Egypt, the Plut. Ag. and Cleom.
sixteenth of his reign being finished. For presently after the death of
Cleomenes, Polybius book 9. p. 385.
witnesses, Coelosyria was betrayed by Theodotus to Antiochus; which happened
in the 535 year of the City built, the second of the 140 Olympiad. After this
manner the beginning of Cleomenes is affirmed, the which we have ascribed to
the second year of the 136 Olympiad, of the City 519. For from that time, to
the year of the City 535, full sixteen years do run between.

CHAP. V. Of the Wars of Antiochus the Great, and the fight of Ptolemy
Philopator at Raphia; the famous deeds of Achaeus.
IN Syria the riot and cruelty of the Princes had miserable issue; Antiochus
the Nephew of Seleucus Nicanor, had Laodices the daughter of Ptolemy
Philadelphus to wife, as Appian. in the end of Sir. Jerome at the end of 11.
chapter Dan.
Appian tells; and by her he had two sons, Seleucus Callinicus, and Antiochus
Jeraces; and when both Kings waged very great Wars between themselves, at
length they came unto these conditions of peace, That Bernice the other
daughter of Philadelphus should marry Antiochus, Laodices being either refused,
or accounted in the place of a Concubine. And then Philadelphus being dead, in
the year of the City, 507; before Christ, 247, Antiochus overcome with love,
call^ Laodices back again, who fearing the unconstancy of her husband, took
away his life by poison. Then Bernice, and her son, as yet an Infant, being
slain, she carried up her son Seleucus to the Kingdom. This Bernice was Aunt to
him whom book. 5. p. 382.
Polybius shows was slain by Ptolemy Philopator.

Jerome. Polyb. 5. p. 403.
Ptolemy Euergetes, who succeeded Philadelphus, being brought into Syria,
revenged the death of his sister, with the slaughter of another: Neither being
content with that fruit of his victory, he overran a great part of Asia; and
being called back by an homebred tumult, he obtained Syria, which I think was
Coeles, by his Soldiers; Jerome.
but he left Cilicia to Antiochus Jeraces: He dies in the 26th year of his
reign, of the World 3763, wherein the third year of the 39 Olympiad ended. But
b. 2. p. 5.
Polybius is author, that he deceased in that Olympiad, who also, he says, was
dissolved by a disease. But Just. b. 30.
Justine affirms him to be taken away by the parricide of his son; on whom,
he writes, the surname of [Philopa^or] or lover of his father, was imposed by
a mock.

Therefore in that year, which I have set, Ptolemy Philopator began to sway the
Scepter in Egypt, Polyb. 5. p. 380. Just. 30
who presently slew his brother Magas, and Berenice, as Polybius shows,
Polyb. 5. p. 380. Plut. Ag. and Cleom. Just. 30.
and gave himself wholly over unto gluttonies and luxury. The which he did so
much the more freely, because he thought security to be gotten for him both at
home and abroad for a long time. For both his brother, and others that were
near to him being killed, he brought terror to his own kindred; and Antigonus
of Macedonia, and Seleucus of Syria, Kings, being dead, in their places came
Antiochus and Philip, almost as yet children, from whom he then feared nothing
on himself.

App. Sir. The beginning of Antiochus the Great.
For there being a fit opportunity, Seleucus Callinicus being dead, who reigned
twenty years; and his son Seleucus his succeeder, after an unhappy fight with
Ptolemy Euergetes, being killed by the lying in wait of his friends, Antiochus,
the brother of Seleucus the son of Callinicus, was called from Babylon to take
the Kingdom, almost a child, the 139 Olympiad entering, of the City built, 530;
who for valiant deeds done, and not a little part of the Empire being
recovered, he obtained the name of Great. For this man's beginning was
tumultuous, and exercised or full of action; his Lievtenants of Provinces
falling off from him through contempt of his age. Polyb. 5. p. 86.
First Molo Governor of Media, and Alexander of Persia, his brother, shake off
the yoke; unto which counsel the fear of Hermias Caris, a most wicked man, who
could do all things with the King, chiefly enforced them. These, Antiochus
being vexed a few years, that is, not full three, according as we have gathered
out of Polybius, and his Captain Xenoetas being overcome and slain, many Cities
being vanquished, at length being overcome by the King himself, they prevented
deserved punishment by a voluntary death. And in the same year Hermias
endeavoring wicked attempts against the life of the King, he commanding, he is
by lying in wait slain, which was the year of the City built, 533, the very
same year, wherein we have related in the former Chapter, also Cleomenes King
of Sparta, to have been overcome by Antigonus.

Polyb. b. 4. p. 271. and 314.
When Seleucus Ceraunus (as has been spoken) was slain, Achaeus usurps the
Kingdom.
Achaeus his near kinsman having revenged his death, recovered by War
whatsoever was on this side the Mountain Taurus, and despising Antiochus, took
the kingdom to himself: Polyb. 4. p. 99.
At which time Molo being subdued by war, Antiochus beat Artabazanes, a noble
Lord, in the very year of the City which we have mentioned, 533, in the 4th
year of the 139 Olympiad; Polyb. 4. p. 315.
and after two years from the death of Seleucus, the younger brother of
Antiochus. But before that Antiochus moved against Achaeus, he first agreed to
attempt Coelosyria; Polyb. 5. p. 380. and 428. Just. 30.
which Province the Egyptians held of old, and had wont to make more of the
possession of that, than even of Egypt it self, because the situation of that
is very fit against the Kingdom of Syria. Therefore in the year of the World
3765, of the City 535, the third year before the Raphian fight, book 5. p. 409.
which Polybius shows, he led an Army into Polyb. 5. p. 402. and 405.
Coelosyria, and first vanquished Seleucia. After which things, Theodotus, an
Aetolian by birth, the Lieutenant of Coelosyria under Ptolemey, partly through
despising of this man, partly because he had the good will of his Governors,
suspected toward him, fell off to Antiochus, and delivered that Province unto
him. Polyb. 3. p. 407. and 7. etc.
Ptolomey being privily furnished with a great provision of war, proceeds
against Antiochus; whom Polyb. 5. p. 422.
their ensigns being pitched over against each other at Raphia, a Town of
Phoenicia, he overcame. Seventy thousand footmen, five thousand horsemen, with
seventy and three Elephants, are Polyb. 4. p. 421.
written to have been in the Army of Ptolomey. Antiochus numbered sixty two
thousand footmen, six thousand horsemen, an hundred and two Elephants. Polyb.
5. p. 420, etc.
The left wing of Ptolomey was scattered by the right of Antiochus; the left
wing of this, by the others right: the apiece Army or wings restored the
fight on both sides: in which the Soldiers of Antiochus in the last field gave
place. Of these, almost to the number of ten thousand are lost, with three
hundred horsemen. Of Ptolemey's Soldiers, a thousand five hundred footmen,
seventy horsemen. This is that combat, of which the third book Apocryphal of
the Macchabees in the beginning mentions; which moreover relates a bold deed
of Theodotus of Syria, a Traitor, when breaking into Ptolomey's Tent before the
fight, with two men, he by chance not being found, he killed another for him:
the which also book 5. p. 425.
Polybius has committed to memory. The third of the Macchabees adds, That
Arsinoes, the sister of Philopator, was present at that battle, and the
Soldiers of Antiochus making strong resistance against them, she quickened her
Soldiers to battle, when her hair being spread abroad in rows or order, the
tears ran down, and promised to every Soldier two pounds of gold, thereby it
came to pass, that the Egyptians were uppermost in the battle, in the same
year they fought at Raphia; book 5. p. 412.
Polybius is author: in which year the Romans were overcome by Hannibal at
Thrasumenum in Etruria, the third year of the 140 Olympiad, and he shows that
p. 421. and 431.
same thing to have happened in the Springtime; at which time also the Romans
contended at Thrasumenum. Moreover, the wane of the Moon went before the same
fight, as book 5. p. 420.
Polybius writes; which by the reckoning above, happened on the 536 of the
year of the City, before Christ 218, in the Calends of September.

Polyb. p. 428. Just. 30.
Philopator knew not how to make use of such a victory gotten beyond hope and
desert, who if he had joined unto fortune, courage, and industry, he might have
spoiled Antiochus of his kingdom. Now he being contented to recover what he had
lost, granted a peace unto Antiochus asking it; as also he stayed three months
in Syria and Phoenicia; 3 Mac. 1. Ptolemy is forbidden to enter into the secret
place.
in which time while the Jews had sent to give him thanks, he came to
Jerusalem, and there sacrifices, of right, being celebrated, he tried to enter
into the very innermost holier place, or holy of holies of the Temple; The
which while he desires to attempt, they in vain resisting him; he being by an
hidden power cast on the earth, his body being dissolved or weakened, and his
voice hindered, he is carried away by his guardians, being filled with fear and
amazement; and from that moment he departed thence, raging and threatening. He
being returned unto Alexandria, whatsoever there was of the Jewish Nation
throughout Egypt, he commands to be divided into Companies, and to be
brought away bound in fetters to Alexandria, and to be enclosed in a circle;
then Elephants to be brought into the place, that he might expose them to be
bruised by their feet, in the sight of all the people. Unto this spectacle,
when he had oftentimes appointed a certain day, as often as it came, his
remembrance was taken away by God; in all of that which he had decreed, neither
could he at any time execute the things determined. Therefore his hatred being
suddenly changed into pity, and afterward into love of the Nation, he let them
all go; and after that behaved himself more fairly and liberally toward them,
than any of the Kings hitherto. Moreover, he suffered them, that they might
inflict punishment on the forsakers of the Country Religion of their kindred.
Just. 30. Jerome.
Philopator having dispatched these cares, by and by returned unto his ancient
manners, and having forgotten kingly Majesty, and all shame, he spent days and
nights in whoredoms and mischievous deeds. For Eurydices his sister being
slain, and the same a wife, he is ensnared by the flatteries of Agathoclea an
harlot, and he yielded himself wholly to her, his brother Agathocles being
joined, and his Mother Oenanthes unto them, by whose will all things, the
greatest and least were handled or ordered.

Polyb. 5., page 415, etc.
But in Asia, which is on this side Taurus, Achaeus in the mean time, while
Antiochus contends with Ptolomey about Coelosyria, endeavored to confirm and
spread his kingdom as largely as he could, bringing daily wars on the
neighboring Kings, and Cities. Polyb. p. 420.
Whom Attalus Kihg of Pergamus not sluggishly resisted, even the Gauls of
Tectosagia being hired out of Thracia for Auxiliaries; to whom afterward
drawing back from the warfare, and that because the Moon, their Camps being
pitched, had left shining upon Megistus, a River of Mysia, they holding it for
a religious observation, he gave leave to depart, in the third year of the 140
Olympiad, of the City 536. For in that year the Moon was darkened in the Calends
of September. The same Gauls afterward abundantly wasting all things, Polyb.
in the end of b. 5. p. 447.
Prusias King of Bythinia, not far from Hellespont or the Grecian Sea, killed
every one, in the year of the City, 538.

Polyb. 5. p. 444. and b. 6. p. 5, 6. and book 8. p. 522.
Antiochus (things with Ptolomey being composed, and Coelosyria being lost)
turned the weight of his War on Achaeus; whom also being besieged at Sardis,
through the treachery of two Cretians, he reduced into his power, and ended his
life by extremest torments, in the year of the City 539.

Polyb. 9. p. 428.
About the same time, wherein Antiochus being overcome at Raphia, did prepare
War against Achaeus, the City of the Rhodians was shaken with a great
Earthquake, whereby a great part of the Walls and Ship-docks being cast down,
the great Colossus or Image of Rhodes decayed or fell. Which loss, the large
liberality of Kings and Cities toward them a little after repaired. Colossus
lay many years on the ground, The Colossus of Rhodes.
until Mauvia King of the Saracens, Rhodes being taken, sold it to a certain
Merchant, about the year of Christ 653. This Statue was 70 cubits in height;
and book 34. chapter 6.
Pliny writes, that it was prostrated by the Earthquake the 56th year after
that it was made by Charetes the scholar of Lysippus: few could grasp his
thumb; his fingers were bigger than many images; made in twelve years of 300
talents of brass. This ruin Eusebius brings into the second year of the 139
Olympiad: Polybius (as I have said) into the seventh from it.

CHAP. VI. Of the Social war against the Aetolians, Philip King of Macedonia
being made Captain; and of the famous Deeds of the same Philip.
ANtigonus, who from his liberal promises was surnamed [(...),] being called by
the Achaians for aid against Cleomenes, he being overcome, he Polyb. 4. p. 272.
and 276.
made peace with all Greece; amongst other of whose conditions that was one,
That the Aetolians should not enter into Achaia with an Army. Philip, a little
while after, almost a child, succeeded this man, having finished his life;
Polyb. in the same. p. 274. and 294.
for he had not yet exceeded the seventeenth year; Polyb. 4. p. 339.
of a great towardness, and an excelling example of the number in that Age, to
accomplish manly works and great things: which also both the comeliness of his
speech, and a certain kingly beauty of his whole body did commend. But a little
after, by the acquaintance of wicked persons, Diod. in the Collect. of Vales.
p. 191.
especially of Tarentinus Heraclidas, and licentiousness of detestable acts, he
overthrew those so many good things of Nature, and the hopes of men concerning
him. The Polyb. 4. p. 271. and 185.
Aetolians, the age of this King being despised, when it long since grieved
them for their public peace, because they were accustomed, otherwise, to live
by robbery, and to take preys on every side, made a beginning of troubling the
peace, from the sacking of Messenia, which was now in their fellowship. Of
this, see Diod. Collect. Vales. p. 278.
Dorimachus and Scopas were chief; to whom when Aratus and the Achaians had
declared in vain, that they should forbear their weapons and wrongs from the
borders of the Peloponnesians, the matter is brought unto a War, the 139
Olympiad going out, which was the year before Christ 220, of the City built,
534. Polyb. 4. p. 281.
The first battle between them was fought at Caphyas, a Town of Arcadia,
wherein the Achaians were overcome. The Aetolians (a greater boldness being
taken thereby) robbed all Peloponnesus. Against whom Philip is called forth by
the common consent of the Companions, into whose number the Messenians are
received, The sociable War.
he proclaims a War against them, which was called, A Social, or fellowly
War, begun Polyb. 4. p. 295. and 298.
from the first year of the 140 Olympiad, before Christ 220, of the City built
534, when Aratus was Praetor of the Achaians. In the same first year Polyb. 4.
p. 305.
of the Olympiad, but before Christ 219, the Spring now in the prime, that is,
about, or a little before the rising of the seven Stars; Great stirs every,
where the 140 Olymp. entering.
at which time the Praetors of the Achaians entered into their Office; Aratus
the younger, the son of Aratus, being put into his father's place, Philip
attempted to fight against the Aetolians: while at the same time Hannibal fits
himself for the siege of the Saguntines; the Romans move war against Demetrius
Pharius Prince of the Illyrians, Aemilius the Consul being chief Commander; who
a little after being overcome, betaketh himself unto Philip. Then, Lycurgus
being made King presently after the death of Cleomenes, a League being made
with the Aetolians, vexed the Achaians. The Rhodians, Prusia King of the
Bythinia being joined to them, contend against the Byzantines; because they
being compelled to pay tribute to the Gauls, they imposed certain customs on
Merchants. The Synopians defend themselves with a garrison of Rhodians against
Mithridates King of Pontus, watching an advantage against their City. Those so
many beginnings of Wars, In the end of the second book, etc. p. 271.
Polybius observes to have happened in the same first year of the 140
Olympiad; and he shows the cause of them to be, for that then new Princes
almost of the whole known world, came to their Kingdoms and Empires.

The Social-War Philip ordered unto the third year, having Polyb. b. 4. p. 338.
etc. Plut. Arat.
made much use of Aratus, whom, when being moved at the reproaches of his
Governors, he had somewhat estranged from him; by and by, as soon as indeed he
knew what a man he was, he had him in the greater esteem. Polyb. 8. p. 519.
Plut.
But the same man again being brought to envy, he took care to kill him by
poison, about the year of the City built, 541; the 4th of the 141 Olympiad;
Plut. in Arat.
a little after the Ships of Philip being burnt by the Romans, and Polyb. 8. p.
519.
about the besieging of the Syracusans, begun by Marcellus in the year of the
City 542: wherefore, in the 62 year of his age beginning, The death of Aratus.
Aratus dyed, which was the fifth from the end of the Social-War. Polyb. b. 4.
p. 297. and 442.
For in this year of the City 537, the third year of the 140 Olympiad ending,
it was finished, peace being made with the Aetolians: when as a slaughter of
the Romans being heard of, Philip desired to sail into Italy to the Lake of
Thrasumenum, and to take part with the Carthaginians of victory. Polyb. in the
same, p. 446.
Therefore being carried into Illyricum with a Navy, he being suddenly beat
back through fear of the Romans, he left off from his enterprise. Afterward in
the year of the City 559, he The same, b. 7. Livy, b. 24.
entered into a League with Hannibal; whereby he brake forth into open War with
the Romans, in the year of the City built 540, in which the Coasts of Illyricum
being tried, Live. b. 21.
by Marcus Valerius Laevinus, he being much afftighted, his Ships being drawn
away or burnt, he came to Macedonia by Land. Laevinus makes an agreement with
the Aetolians against Philip, in the Live. 26.
year of the City 542. With these and King Attalus, the Romans fight against
the Macedonians and their Companions; whereof the chief were the Ashaians.
Polyb. b. 11. p. 629. Live. Decad. 4. b. 4. and 5.
Philopomenen the Prince of these was famous in that Age; by whom Machanidas, a
Tyrant of the Lacedaemonians, was driven to Mantinaea, about the year of the
City 548; Polyb. b. 13. p. 674. and Diod. in Coll. Vales. p. 285.
whom Nabis, a far more cruel one than him, received. But when things were
neglected by the Romans in Greece, because they were busied in a domestique war
with the Carthaginians, at length the Epirotes coming between, a peace was made
between them and Philip, and the companions of them both; in the year of the
City, 549.

Polyb. b. 15. Jerome on 11 chapter Dan. Just. b. 30.
Things in Europe being appeased, Philip bends his mind to possess Egypt. A
fit opportunity, Ptolemy departed this life in the year before Christ 204, of
the City 550. Ptolemy Epiphanes his son of four years of age being left.
Therefore Philip entered into counsel with Antiochus, of invading his kingdom.
But the Alexandrians, Agathocles, the Protector or guardian, and his sister
Agathoclea being taken away, sent Ambassadors to Rome, who granted them
safeguard. Antiochus in the mean time recovereth Coelosyria and Phoenicia. And
then Onias the High Priest, with very many Jews, flies into Egypt, where,
under Philometor, he afterward at Heliopolis built a City.

CHAP. VII. Of Men excelling in wit, who lived from the 125 Olympiad, to the
145; or from the year of the City built 474, unto 554.
CHrysippus the Stoic, the Scholar of Cleantes, was in this time famous.
Diogenes writes him to have dyed the 143 Olympiad, 73 years of age. So about
the beginning of the 124 Olympiad, he came forth into light. Strato Lampsacenus
of the School of the Peripateticks, was chief after Theophrastus 18 years,
Diogenes being witness. Wherefore when he began to teach in the 123 Olympiad,
as Laert. in Lyco.
the same Diogenes shows, about the end of the 127 Olympiad he dyed, Lyco
succeeded Strato, Diog. Laert.
and held the School 40 years, but he lived 74 years. Lacydes, a Cyrenian, an
author of a new University, began to teach Diog.
in the 4th year of the 134 Olymp. and held the School 26 years.

Eratosthenes, a man endued with diverse kind of learning, and surnamed [ Beta,]
because he kept the seconds in every kind of Science or knowledge; he was born
in the 126 Olymp. and being 80 years old, he ended his life with want; says
Suidas.

Suidas.
Amongst Poets, Callimachus, a Cyrenian, was made famous in Greece, Ptolemy
Philadelphus reigning.

And also Aratus, The Life of Aratus. Livy the Poet.
who flourished under Antigonus Gonatas.

But at Rome, Livius a Poet, in the year of the City built 514, first taught a
Comedy. Naevius deceased in the 144 Olymp. as Jerome places him in the
Chronicle of Eusebius.

But the following Olympiad Plautus dyed, the same being author, in the 554
year of the City.

Quintus Eunius was born in the year of the City built 515, he innobled the
same Age.

CHAP. VIII. The famous Deeds of the Romans against Philip King of the
Macedonians, Antiochus of Syria, and Perseus of the Macedonians, in like manner
Kings.
THe Live. b. 31. Flor. 2. chapter 7. Plut. in Flam. Justin. 30. Eut. 4.
second Punick-War being finished, the Macedonian war succeeded with King
Philip; which being begun almost ten years before, says Livy, was laid down in
the third year. Indeed almost thirteen years before, the 540 of the City,
Philip began to be vexed by Laevinus the Praetor; but in the year of the City
built 549, they returned into agreement. Peace being granted to the
Carthaginians, the War with Macedon was taken up afresh; which was proclaimed
in the 554 year of the City. Both the old injuries of Philip drove the Romans
to that thing, The Maccdonian War.
and also a new annoyance of their Associates, especially of the Athenians, who
being much wasted by the King, had fled together to the Romans.

Polyb. book. 16. p 735. Plut. in Flaminius.
Philip made a beginning of waging War from the siege of the Abydeni; whom he
cast into that despair, that after the manner of the Saguntines they rushed on
death. At length, in the fourth year after it was restored, of the City 557, it
was ended by Titus Quinctius Flaminius, Philip being overcome at Cynoscephala
in Thessaly. Polyb. book 7. p. 702.
Polybius relates, and out of him Plutarch, That eight thousand of the
Macedonians were slain, five thousand taken. The price of the victory, was the
liberty of Greece; the which being declared by the voice of the publisher at a
solemn pastime of the Polyb. Eccl. 9. Plut. in Flam.
Isthmians; so great an outcry delivered it self with applause, that Crows
fell down on the earth, flying over the race: Florus, The error of Florus.
not through a light error, affirms that to be done at the Nemean or Achaian
games, being five years sports. For neither was the game of the Nemeans, five
yearly; and Polybius and Plutarch do affirm this to have happened in the
Isthmians. Livie, b. 34.
Moreover, in the Nemeans, freedom was pronounced to the Greeks called Argivi,
alone.

Live. 33.
Lucius the brother of Titus at the same time received the Acarnans, being
discouraged or overcome unto an yielding or surrender.

Live. 35. Polyb. Eccl. 22. Plut. in Philop.
After that, Titus Quinctius moved War against Nabis, a Tyrant of the
Lacedaemonians: but Argos being freed, he granted him peace. So of the Grecian
Cities, Sparta alone is left in bondage; the which in the 562 year of the City
built, Philopomenen, Nabis being killed by him, joined unto the fellowship of
the Achaians.

A few years after the Macedonian War, The War with Antiochus.
war was waged with King Antiochus; who, ^olyb. book 16.
Syria being recovered, and Scopas the Captain of Ptolemaeus Epiphanes being
overthrown, he had now began to be fearful unto the Romans. Against whom
Hannibal chiefly stirred him up, Live. b. 33. at the end. Corn. Nep. in Hann.
who fearing the same enemies, had fled to him in the year of the City built
559. The Ambassadors also of the Aetolians, who were now estranged from the
fellowship of the Romans, brought no small moment thereto. Live. 34. etc. Flor.
2. chapter 8. Appian. Sir. Just. 31. Eutr. 4. Oros. 4. chapter 10.
Antiochus being by these things enforced, a peace being composed with Ptolemy,
unto whom he gave Cleopatra his daughter in marriage, and in the name of a
dowry he granted him Coelosyria and Judea. He brought war on the Romans; the
which being undertaken in the 562 year of the City built, held full three
years. For in the year of the City 564, Lucius Cornelius Scipio being Consul,
coming into Asia with Publius Cornelius Africanus his brother, an Ambassador,
by this man's counsel chiefly, he overcame Antiochus. Livy, book 37.
Livy relates, That fifty thousand footmen, four thousand horsemen were slain
in one battle. Peace being granted to Antiochus, with other conditions, as also
that, that he should yield up all Countries which were on this side the
Mountain Taurus.

Livy, b. 38. Flor. 2. chapter 9.
Antiochus being overcome, straightway the Aetolians are tamed by Fuloius the
Consul, in the year of the City built, 565; and in the same year the
Gallo-Greeks were subdued by Cneius Manlius, another Consul.

In the 149 Olympiad, three notable Commanders dyed, The death of P. Scipio,
Hannibal, and Philopoemen.
Publius Scipio, Hannibal, and Philopoemenes. Publius, a day being set by the
Livy in the same place.
Petillian Tribunes, of taking the money from Antiochus for peace granted, he
sent back Liternus into Campania. His brother Lucius was condemned of robbing
the common Treasury. But Livy about the end of b. 39.
Publius in that Julian year dyed, which began the 570 of the City; in which
year, Publius Claudius, Lucius Porcius, were Consuls before the Consureship of
Marcus Cato, which, the same being Consuls, he performed. Hannibal a year or
two after, Livy in the same Corn. Nep. in Hannib.
for Writers do differ, being demanded of Prusias King of Bythinia for death,
ended his life with poison. Livy in the same P^ut.
In the year of the City 571, Philopoemen, Captain of the Achaians, being taken
by the Messenians, was slain; when indeed he had compelled the Lacedaemonians,
falling off from the fellowship of the Achaians, being naked of Walls and Laws,
to endure the yoke.

Polyb. Coll. Legate. 52. and 53.
The death of this man, Lycortas the Praetor of the Achaians revenged; and
restored the Messenians and Lacedaemonians into the council or agreement of the
Achaians. For both, but these especially, very hardly obeyed, trusting in the
power of the Romans, who suffered the fellowship of the Achaians to grow
together against their will.

In the mean while, Philip, being rather beaten back by the Romans in the
former fight, than overcome, wholly employed himself about the provision of a
new War; who Livy b. 40. Polyb. Eccl. 50.
seeing he had two sons, Perseus the elder, and Demetrius, and this man very
acceptable to the Romans, with whom he had lived some years, as a pledge in
War, a grudg arising between them both, he put to death Demetrius, being
suspected through the friendship of the Romans, and his brother's reproaches,
the 150 Olympiad entering, in the year of the City built 574.

Live. b. 45.
Therefore in the year following, which is reckoned the second of the 150
Olympiad, of the World 3802, of the City built 575, Perseus the last King of
the Macedonians.
Perseus the last King of the Macedonians began, the forty first from Caranus,
who first reigned there. This King being heir of his father's hatred against
the Romans, and counsel, waged war against them; which in the 4th years ended
as well in the slaughter and slavery of him, as of the whole Macedonian Empire,
in the first year of the 153 Olympiad, of the City built 586. The Livy b. 44.
Velleius, 1. Plut. in Aemil. Just. b. 33. Flor. 2. c. 12. Evar. b. 4.
General of the Romans in that battle, was the Consul Aemilius Paulus, wherein
were slain in battle of the Macedonians to the number of twenty thousand, taken
eleven thousand. No more than an hundred of the Romans fell. That famous
victory and fall of the Macedonian Kingdom, was in the decrease of the Moon;
the which the day before that day, wherein they contended, happened on that
night, which came between the 4 and 5. of the Roman September, which in the
Julian Calender was the middle between the 21 and 22 of June. That cannot agree
on another year, than what was 168 Jul. Cir. 4646.
before the Christian account of the World 3816. Therefore in this very year
the Macedonian Empire was put out by the Romans, in the 11th year of King
Perseus; For so many Livie assigns; Eusebius one less, whom also before, we
have followed; now, we prefer Livie before him.

An addition to the Romans of the Macedonian War and victory, was Gentius King
of the Ilyrians; who being led into the fellowship of danger by Perseus through
deceit, yielded matter unto Lucius Anicius the Praetor, of the Illyrican
triumph, whom in the same year he carried away: concerning which Perseus of the
Macedonians, Aemilius writes. Each King going before the Chariot of his
conqueror, in the year of the City 587; Macedonia and Illyricum departed into
the form of a Province.

CHAP. IX. Of the Jewish Affairs, and miseries, which they suffered under
Antiochus Epiphanes, and of the dispatches of Epiphanes into Egypt, and of the
Temple of Jerusalem defiled by that King.
WHiles Europe and Asia is shaken through Roman weapons, also foreign and
likewise domestique storms were hurtful to Judaea. Strabo, book 16. Just. b.
32. See 10. b. of doctr. of times, chapter 45.
Antiochus the Great, when he would rob or spoil the Temple of Jupiter Belus
among the Elymaeans in Susiana, he was by the Barbarians slain, as Strabo
tells, in the second of the 148 Olympiad, of the Greeks 126. Seleucus
Philopator his son succeeded him. Who reigning, Onias the third of that name
held the High Priesthood, a holy man, who Heliodorus scourged.
freed Heliodorus one of the Senators of Seleucus, being sent to rob the
Treasury of the Temple, and scourged by Angels, and half dead, by his prayers.

App. in Sir.
Seleucus having finished twelve years of his reign, and being slain by the
lying in wait of Heliodorus, as Appian writes, Antiochus Epiphanes was put in
his place, in the 1 Match. 1.11.
year of the Greeks 137, which is the first of the 151 Olympiad, of the City of
Rome 578, before Christ 176, as is gathered by a sure account of the Grecian
years.

By that King, all holy and profane things at Jerusalem, and throughout all
Judaea were trodden and trampled under foot. His first fury set upon the
Priesthood of the Nation; Onias, a man most worthy to be praised, (as I have
said already) was High Priest. 1 b. Mac. chapter 4.
Jason his brother, a destructive and wicked man, bought the high priesthood of
Antiochus with a great sum of money, as appears, about the very beginning
of his reign, who brought in Heathenish customs to Jerusalem. Onias departed
to Antiochia.

About the same time Ptolemy Philometor, the son of Ptolemy Philopator, and
Cleopatra the sister of Antiochus reigned at Alexandria; whose beginning fell
into the year before Christ 181, of the City built 573, the 4th year of the 150
Olympiad.

Jerome on Dan. 11. Luc. 42.
Ptolemy Euergetes was brother to this man, Cleopatra sister, all of a weak
age. For that cause, things were ordered by Tutors, Eulaius their nourisher, an
Eunuch, and Lenaeus; who daring to require Coelosyria, which Antiochus held,
being recovered by his father, they stirred him up against them, otherwise
watching an advantage against Egypt; the governing of which Kingdom, The War
of Antiochus with Philometor.
by a defenders right, he challenged to himself, under the name of neernesse of
kin. For he both sent Apollonius his Captain, for that thing's sake into
Egypt, and by the chief men of the Kingdom, as 2 Mac. 4.21.
the writing says, was frustrated of his desire. But then going unto
Jerusalem, he is with the greatest honor received of Jason; and thence went
away into Phoenicia to build a Navy, which seems to have fallen out in the
139 year of the Greeks, of the City 580. While therefore both Kings with great
provision on both sides prepare War, they Polyb. in Embas. 71, and 72.
sent Ambassadors to Rome, by the which they accused one another: Neither in
the mean time, the Egyptians delaying, bended Jerome on Daniel.
Antiochus sloathfully toward Egypt. There, between Pelusium, and the Mountain
Casius, a fight is begun, Diod. in Collect. Vales. p. 330.
wherein the Egyptians being overcome, might have been blotted out by killing,
unless Antiochus himself riding between the ranks of his Soldiers, had
commanded them to spare the slaughter, and to take them alive: by which
humanity he profited more than by arms. For presently he obtained Pelusium, and
afterward all Egypt.

Live. 44.
Philometor, this slaughter being received, being despised of his Subjects, and
being driven out of Alexandria by his younger brother Euergetes, was received
by Antiochus, who through an honest show of reducing him unto the King, brought
war on the Alexandrians; by whom Euergetes, who also was called Physcon, was
declared King. The Eusebius. Chr. in the former part, p. 54.
Greek Collections of George Monk, which Scaliger fathers upon Eusebius, say,
Ptolemy Philometor to have reigned only eleven years, and then to be overcome
by Antiochus, and to be driven from his Kingdom. But Live. 44.
Livy, to whom we rather give credit, shows Philometor not to be cast out by
Antiochus, but by his younger brother: but Antiochus, which I said but now, to
have made war with the younger brother, through pretense of bringing back the
elder; and being conqueror at Pelusium in a Sea Fight, to have besieged
Alexandria. Therefore Ptolemy and Cleopatra sent Ambassadors to the Senate:
Wherewith the Patriots being moved, they commanded out of hand Caius Popilius,
with two others, to go to Alexandria, to make the Kings, friends between
themselves. Live. 45.
Antiochus, the walls of Alexandria being in vain attempted, Philometor being
left at Memphis, and other places in Egypt delivered unto him, left the strong
garrison of Pelusium, and from thence went away into Syria, and came to
Jerusalem. There he robbed the Temple, made a slaughter, and brought great
mourning on the Jews. The 1 Match. 12.
Scripture witnesses this to have fell out, in the 143 year of the Greeks, in
these words; And Antiochus turned, after he smote Egypt, in the hundredth and
forty third year, and came up to Israel. Which year of the Greeks runs into
the five hundredth eighty fourth year of the City built, of the hundred and
fifty second Olympiad, the third, and it had Regist. Capit.
Aulus Mancinus, and Aulus Attilius Serranus, Consuls. But the year following,
of the City 585, is noted to be when Quintus Marcus Philippus II. and Cneius
Servius Caepio were Consuls, which was the 144 year of the Greeks; that their
error may be manifest, who ascribe that battle of Antiochus with the
Egyptians, between Casium and Pelusium, to Philip II. and Caepio Consuls,
against the credit of the writing. Moreover, the beginning of this War, which
was moved by the Egyptians for Coelosyria, was in the year of the City 582,
Popilius Consul. and Publius Aelius being Consuls, b. 42.
as Livy shows, who shows plainly in the year following, Publius Licinius
Crassus and Caius Cassius Consuls, this war to have been already enforced.

Match. 4. 23. Wicked High Priests of the Jews.
A little before that, Antiochus desired Egypt, that is, after three years
space from the High Priesthood being gotten, and so in the year of the Greeks
142, Jason the High Priest sent Menelaus unto Antiochus with moneys. But he
bought the High Priesthood of the King, by an agreement of three hundred
talents more than Jason paid. But when he performed not his promise, he was
removed from the Priesthood, his brother Lysimachus being his successor, or
rather given for a Vicar to him. For the Greek writings say, Menelaus to have
left his brother Lysimachus successor of the Priesthood. In the same place v.
9.
But the Latin say, Menelaus to be removed from the Priesthood. Neither that
to be done against his will, the following History does demonstrate. For a
little after he killed Onias a most holy man, and the lawful High Priest, Holy
Onias is killed.
who had shut himself up in the Sanctuary of Apollo, being drawn out by deceit
through the endeavor of Andronicus; whose death Antiochus bewailing, condemned
Andronicus to lose his head. And then Menelaus returning to Jerusalem, moved
Lysimachus to rob the holy treasury. But in the very wicked act, Lysimachus was
oppressed or grieved. Menelaus being complained of to the King, through favor
and corruption got the better, his accusers being slain. Concerning these two
brethren, it is not a vain question, whether or no they were of the stock of
Aaron, in which power alone, the right of the Priesthood was, or of another
Tribe, especially of Benjamin: because the 2 Match. 4. 25.
writing names Menelaus to be the Brother of Simon; Moreover the same is 2
Match. 3.4. Joseph. b. 11. chapter 8. See 10 of Doct. of time. chapter 50.
witness, Simon to have been of the Tribe of Benjamin. Josephus makes them
both the brothers of Onias and Jason, the which also we embrace, but the word
of [brother] may be referred to some affinity.

In the mean time, Philometor fearing the lying in wait or treachery of
Antiochus, confirms a peace with his brother and sister, at which their
agreement, Antiochus being offended, prepares war against them both in the 144
year of the Greeks. The Ptolomies send three Ambassadors to Rome, for the
obtaining of help. These setting forward from Rome, came to Alexandria in the
Month of March, as thou may gather Book 45.
out of Livy (which then happened about our December; the which that decrease
of the Moon does show, which before the Macedonian battle happened in the
Month September, which then possessed June, as we have minded in the 8th
Chapter) but a little or just after the victory of the Romans over King
Perseus, that is, after the Summer of the year before Christ, 168. of the City
586, of the Greeks 145. But there they beat back Antiochus, busily employing
himself in the siege of the City, and swelling with a Sea victory gotten at
Cyprus, with their authority alone. For Polib. Ecl. 92. Live. 45. Valor. Max. b.
6. chapter 4. Just. b. 35. Vell. 1. Ponilius Amb^ssadour affrights Antiochus.
Pompilius, one of the Ambassadors, delivered a Table to him, stretching forth
his right hand, containing the decree of the Senate: which being read through,
when Antiochus had said, he would consider, his friends being brought together,
what should be done by them; the Ambassador drew a line about with a rod which
he held, and commanded him, before that he went off that Circle to give an
answer, which he might carry back to the Senate. With which boldness of speech
the King being affrighted, answered that he would be in the power of the
Senate. Thus by the word and power, or Authority of one Ambassador, the land
and Sea-armies of Antiochus, were driven away from Egypt.

Antiochus being deceived of this hope of possessing another right or title,
and being mad with fury came unto Jerusalem, especially 2 Match. 5.
having heard, that Jason (a false report being spread abroad of his death) had
moved arms against Menelaus, and had taken the City. For that thing he being
angry with the Jews, by a promiscuous flaughter, and burning flame, Jerusalem
being wasted, The profaning of the Temple.
he defiled the Temple; and filled all places with Idols, and abominable
devotions, after two years from the former coming, on the fifteenth day of
Chisleu, which fell into November. Match. 1.30. and 57. Joseph. b. 12. chapter 1.
Moreover he forced diverse Citizens with cursed punishments, to renounce with
an oath their Countrey-Religion. He being returned to Antiochia, delivered
Eleazer, 2 Match. chapter 6. and 7.
and seven brethren, with their mother, because they refused to eat of
Swinesflesh, against the command of God; to be sundry ways tormented to death.

CHAP. X. Of the affairs of the Jews, from the profaning of the Temple, unto
the death of Simon; Where, of Judas Macchabeus, and the Kings of Syria.
ANtiochus wickedly going on to the destruction of the Jewish Nation, and holy
things, 1 Match. 2. see b. 10. of the Doct. of times, 50.
Mattathias of the stock of Joarib High Priest, one of the Kings guard being
killed, who forced the people to profane customs, runs away out of the Town
Modin, and a company of Jews being gathered together, he despised the kings
threatenings. He dying in the year of the Greeks 146, of the City built 587. He
encouraged five sons which he had, most valiant men, to defend their liberty.
The chief of these were, Judas syrnamed Machabaeus, Judas Machabaeus.
Jonathas and Simon, who one by one were chief among the people.

1 Match. 3. and 4.
The first Judas Machabaeus, some prosperous battles being made with the
Captains of Antiochus, he going into Persia, purged again the Temple, and
restored divine worship, which had been hindered for three years: that happened
in the hundred forty eighth year of the Greeks, the 25th of Chisleu, which
runs into November.

1 Match. 6. and b. 3. chapter 9. The death of Antiochus.
In the mean time, Antiochus, while he imitateth the example of his father's
sacrilege, in robbing the Temple of Diana, which was in Elymais, by the
concourse of the Townsmen he being cast out, went away into Babylon. But in
the journey, a falling off of the Jews being heard of; being mad with grief and
anger, he fell into a grievous disease, and horrible pains of his bowels, and
his body being consumed with worms, requiring pardon of his wickedness from
God in vain, he died a wretched death In the same place, v. 6. Antiochus
Enpator.
in the year of the Greeks 149, of the City built 590. when he had reigned
eleven whole years.

Lysias the Orator being diligent about it, his son Antiochus Eupator
succeeded him. Who to bring help to his friends, who were besieged in a Tower
by Judas, he led an Army to Jerusalem, and besieged it, the year of Sabbaths or
Rest running on; of the 1 Match. 6. v. 20. and 53.
Greek, 150; before Christ, 163. Lastly, peace being made with the Jews, he
being taken within the City, contrary to promise, their walls being overturned,
goes to Antiochia; when as now Judas was carried up by the consent of the
people unto the High Priests Office.

Joseph: b. 12. chapter 17.
For Josephus and Eusebius relate, that he was in that office three years
space. By this account, about the 149 year of the Greeks, in which Antiochus
dyed, from the Captain of the people he was made High Priest.

1 Match. chapter 7. Polyb. Ecl. b. 1.4.
Two years after, of the Greeks 151, Demetrius Soter.
Demetrius Soter the son of Seleuthus, who was the brother of Epiphanes
Antiochus, in times past given by his father a pledge to the Romans for
Antiochus, when as Epiphanes being dead, he required himself to be let go in
vain, he ran away privily out of the City into Syria, and Antiochus Eupator,
and Lysias, by his command being killed, he began to reign being twenty and
three years old, as Polyb. Ecl. 107. App. Sir.
Polybius writes, and Appian. To this man 1 b. Match. 7. v. 49. and 2 Mac. 14.
Alcimus, coming of a Priestly stock, a destructive man, obtained the High
Priesthood. But Judas most sharply resisted him, who also, the Kings Army
being scattered, he slew his Captain Nicanor, the 151 of the Greeks going out,
on the thirteenth day of the Month Adar, which falls into the year before
Christ 161. 1 Mac. 8.
About these times, Ambassadors being sent to Rome, he entered a league, and
into fellowship with the Romans: At length in the year of the Greeks 152, when
Demetrius had sent Bacchides and Alcinius, with 20000 footmen, and 2000.
Horsemen against the Jews, 1 Mac. 9. The death of Judas.
Judas being forsaken by his Soldiers, guarded no more then with eight
hundred, he was bold to begin, or commit himself to battle; The which when he
had undergone a whole day, he died a glorious death. A man second to none in
Godliness and warlike valor: Jonathas his brother succeeded him, who was
chief about eighteen years. But Alcimus while he demolisheth the work of the
Temple, a disease being inflicted on him from God, he perished in the hundred
fifty third year of the Greeks.

Moreover Demetrius, that he might make the Romans his friends, B. 10. Doct.
times, chapter 50.
he sent Leptines and Isocrates a Grammarian bound, of whom, the one had killed
Cneius Octavius, an Ambassador come from Rome, unto Antiochus Eupator, in the
150 year of the Greeks, he had proved the fact, in the 152 year of the Greeks,
as is gathered out of Appian and Polyb. Ecl. 125. and foll.
Polybius. He expelled Ariathes King of Cappadocia his Kingdom, being hired by
an agreement of a thousand Talents from his brother Olophernes, who going to
Rome the Polyb. Ecl. 125. App. Sir.
Senate decreed that both brethren should reign together. Moreover three Kings
being stirred up against him, Ptolomy of Egypt, Attalus of Asia, and, whom I
have named, Ariathes of Cappadocia; Prompalus, a certain young man of a
desperate fortune, being by the same, suborned or set forth in honor, who
should report himself to be begotten by Antiochus, he is thrust down from the
Kingdom. 1 Mac. 10. Just. 35. Joseph. Jonathas the High Priest.
For he naming himself Alexander, by surname Balam, in the 160 year of the
Greeks, raised arms against Demetrius, and after two years space took away from
him his Kingdom and life, Jonathas the High Priest of the Jews, being
reconciled unto him, straightway he married Cleopatra the daughter of Ptolomey
Philometor, a woman born for the destruction of Syria, and the family of
Seleucus. So he being carried up to the highest power beyond hope and desert,
while he lived a destructive life in his Palace in riot, and sloth; 1 Mac.
10.67. and chapter 11. Demetrius Nicanor. The P^olomies Kings.
Demetrius Nicanor, the son of Demetrius Soter, coming out of Crete in the 165
year of the Greeks, sets upon him. Also Ptolomey Philometor sailing into Syria,
and being received with great solemnity by his son in law, by a notable
treachery he took from him the Kingdom, with his daughter Cleopatra, whom he
appointed to Demetrius. From thence joining in battle with Alexander, he forced
him to fly into Arabia: where In the same v. 19. Epit. Live. 52.
being beheaded, he also received punishment for the old injury against
Demetrius Soter, in the 167 year of the Greeks, of the City of Rome 608. Three
days after, Philometor died of a wound, his brother Euergetes being left his
succeeder: with whom there had been a grudge. For The Collect. Eusebius. 62. p.
54. Posib. Ecclo. 113.117.
when both had lived at Alexandria six years, from the 12 of Philometor to the
17th, the kingdom being afterward divided, in the 18th year of Philometor, 150
of the Greeks, Lybia and Cyrenia fell by lot to Euergetes, with which he being
least of all contented, made his complaints to the Senate of Rome; who decreed
Cyprus to be given unto him, as Polybius is Author, and Eusebius in his
Chronicle. Philometor being dead Just, 38.
Euergetes being sent for from Cyrene, reigned at Alexandria, deformed in his
countenance, and the stuffing of his belly more like a beast than a man, who in
the very day of Marriage, which he had joined with Cleopatra his sister, and
sometime the wife of his Brother, he killed a little one the son of them both,
in the very mothers arms or embracing. Neither afterward held he the Kingdom
with less cruelty. So that his Citizens being embittered, he was compelled to
fly into Cyprus, with the daughter of his, and the same sister of Philometor,
the which, her mother being divorced, he had joined to himself, being first
ravished in wedlock. There he having heard, that his images were cast down by
the Alexandrians, he sent a son which he had begotten of Cleopatra, to her,
divided in pieces.

1 Mac. 1. Joseph. b. 13. chapter 9.
Demetrius being in the mean while vexed with sedition by the Antiochians, he
restrained them by a Garrison of Jewish Soul diers. But when he was hated of
all, Diodotus sitnamed Tryphon, who had bin a guard-man of Alexander Balam,
appointed Antiochus his son, who was brought up with Emalthuel, or Malchus King
of Arabians, King; and endeavored to get Jonathas on his side, in the year of
the Greeks 168; at which time also Jonathas renewed fellowship with the Romans
and Spartans. In the following year 2 Mac. 12. Simon High Priest.
Tryphon, loving tyranny, that there might not be any delay, through Jonathas,
unto his counsels, him being taken by lying in wait, he slew, in whose place
Simon his brother, was made Captain of the people and chief Priest. Who entering
into a League with Demetrius, he got liberty from him, 1 Mac. 13.41. See 10 b.
doctr. times, chapter 52.
in the 170 year of the Greeks, of the City 611, from which time the years of
Simon's chief Priesthood, began to be reckoned. The same man also vanquished
Gaza, and the Tower of Jerusalem, the which also he fortified, and afterward
dwelt there.

Demetrius, that he might get help against Tryphon; went into Media, as says
the writing; but Just. b. 36. and 38. App. Sir.
Justine witnesses him to have gone thither to besiege the Parthians; by whom
he was taken and used kindly: so that Phraates the King gave him his daughter
Rhodogunes in marriage.

Demetrius being taken, Tryphon slew Antiochus a pupil, Demetrius taken by the
Parthians.
or not under his father's power, and took the Crown, which he held until
about the third year, Joseph. b. 12. chapter 13.
Josephus being author; although Appian says, he reigned one. Whence there is
a conjecture, that, in the 1 Mac. chapter 14. the Expedition of Demetrius after the
death of Antiochus the brother of Alexander, in that, the Writer not to have
observed the order of time, but of declaring.

While these things are done, Just. 56. Joseph. in the same place.
Antiochus Sidetes the son of Demetrius Soter, the brother of Nicator, came
into Syria, and being sent for by Cleopatra, the Wife of his brother married
her, and killed Tryphon in the 174 year of the Greeks. He afterward 1 Mac. 16.
waged War with Simon by Cendebaeus his Captain, who was overcome by Joannes
the son of Simon.

The treachery of Ptolemy (he was the son in law of Simon) confounded the
prosperous affairs of the Jews, Simon high Priest slain.
who slew his father-in-law with two sons, being received to a Feast. But
Joannes, surnamed Hircanus, the son of the same Simon, escaped; who after that
was chief among the Jews 31 years. 1 Mac. 16.14. Joseph. b. 1. chapter 15. Eusebius.
8. of Praep.
That slaughter happened on 177 year of the Greeks, in the eleventh month
Schebat; which was the year of rest, begun in the year of the World 3848, from
the account of the City 618, as the Seleucides had wont to reckon. But the
Jews, from the month Nisan, from the which Schebat is numbered, the eleventh.
And hitherto the holy History proceeds.

Antiochus Sidetes, in the fourth year of his reign, (says Joseph. b. 13. chapter
16.
Josephus, in the fourth of Hircanus, encompassed Jerusalem with a most
straight siege, to wit, in the year of the Greeks 178, before Christ 135, and
at the Feast of Tabernacles, seven days truce being granted; he so angered
Hircanus, that he requested peace of him on equal terms.

CHAP. XI. The famous Deeds or Affairs of the Romans, and diverse Wars, the
Achaick, Punick, 3 Macedonick, 3 Numantine, the slavish War.
THe Macedonians, after Antiochus the Great, being by the other War tamed, and
their Kingdom reduced into the form of a Province, none afterward was ashamed
to serve the Romans. Therefore people and kings, emulating one another, gave
themselves over unto the obedience of those, and from those they took the
Umpires or judgments of peace and war between themselves. Polyb. Ecl. 93. Live.
b. 45. Epit.
Of Kings, two, before others, endeavored to allure their favor, Eumenes of
Asia, and Prusias of Bythinia, who was App. Mith.
surnamed [venator] or hunter, one whereof being suspected of hidden favor
toward Perseus, that he might purge himself, he sent his brother Attalus to
Rome; the which his brother showing that he had remained faithful, was most
acceptable unto the Senate; who lest he should ask the kingdom privately for
himself, he was affrighted from it by Stratius a Physician, whom Eumenes had
given to him a companion in that counsel. That, Livy shows, was done in the
587 year of the City.

Polyb. Ecl. 97. Livy 45. App. on Mith.
Prusias, who being joined in affinity with Perseus, had nourished or taken
neither part, he coming to Rome with his son Nicomedes, after a servile manner
he flattered the Senators, so that he called them, in saluting them, gods, that
were preservers from danger, and named himself their bondsman made free. The
same King departing from Rome, he left his son to be brought up, in the same
year of the City.

But Eumenes King of Pergamus being dead, about the year of the City 596. For
he reigned full forty years, seeing he had left a son, Eumenes as yet of a
weak age; the Kingdom procured Attalus his brother a guardian for him 21
years. Polyb. 5. Ecl. 128, 135.136. App. Mith. Epit. Live. 50.
With whom the year following, when Prusias waged war; which was in the year of
the City built 601, by the command of the Romans it was appeased.

The Rhodians very greatly feared the anger of the free people of Rome, and
truly they had deserved it. Live. 44. Polyb. Ecl. 80. and 99.
For they had been diligent for Perseus, and dared proudly, not so much to
persuade them to peace, as to command; also they had added threatenings, that
they would account them for enemies, by the which it had continued, that there
could not be a peace made. Therefore Perseus being overcome, it wanted but
little, but a War should have been decreed against them. The which by the most
humble entreaties they had turned away, Lycias and Carias being taken away from
amongst them.

But two people, not with a single damage of their affairs, but with the
destruction of their Cities, purged away the hatreds of the Romans, the
Achaians and Carthaginians. The former, many being partly allured into one body
of a Commonwealth, partly Cities, being constrained by force, were the most
mighty of all Greece. The same compelled the Lacedaemonians against their wills
(their Walls and Laws being taken away) into the same society, as we have
already above mentioned. The Achaick War.
With whose complaint the Senate being very much moved. When it had not once
interposed between the endeavors of the Achaians, and lest their wealth should
be too much, endeavored to draw them asunder, Polyb. Ecl. 142. Paus. Ach.
Just. 14. Oros. b. 5. c. 3. Flor. b. 2. c. 16. Velleius, 1. Epit. Live. 52.
at length in the year of the City built 606, of the world 3836, it sent
Ambassadors into Greece; who commanded them to rent asunder not only the
Lacedaemonians, but also Corinth, Argos, Heraclea, and the Orchomenian
Archadians, from their body. They uttering these things, Critolaus chiefly
stirring them up, so great a sedition arose on a sudden, that they killed all
strangers, especially the Lacedaemonians; and they had not spared even the
Ambassadors themselves, but that their flight had prevented their force. For
which causes, a War is proclaimed against them, in the 607 year of the City;
and first of all, they are overcome by Metellus the Praetor in two battles at
Thermopylas, and in Phocia; in one whereof Critolaus was Captain; in the other
Diaeus: at length in the same year, which was of the City 608, Corinth over,
thrown.
by Lucius Mummius Consul, all Achaia being brought unto a surrender, Corinth
it self the head of the Nation, was burnt with fire. Then by the sentence of
ten Ambassadors, the Council of Greece being taken away, and the form of a
tribute written down, it was appointed, that a Praetor should be sent every
year to declare the law. See Plin. b. 8. Ep. the last, and our notes to the 35
Ep. Jul.
From which time all Greece took the name of Achaia, as Pausanias is witness.

Corinth being on a flame of fire, from the gold, silver and brass being
melted, and mingled one among another, the chance found out that kind of most
precious brass, which they called Corinthian, wonderfully praised by the
Ancients. Plin. b. 33. chapter 2.
The destruction of that most noble City, Pliny that thing elegantly
witnessing, happened in the third year of the 158 Olympiad, of the City 608,
before Christ 146.

Flor. b. 2 chapter 45. Epit. Live. 52. App. Lybian Eutr. 4. Osor. 4. chapter 23. The
third Punick-War, and Carthage overthrown.
The same year also gave an end to the third Punick War in Africa, with the
fall of Carthage. The color for this War was gotten from King Masanissa, whom
the Carthaginians had beaten back by arms, invading their borders; and the
cause being brought to the Romans, by their judgment they had been fined in
Land, moreover and in money. But the Romans under any pretense had decreed
utterly to blot out Carthage, especially Marcus Cato the Censor urging it, who
was wont to add this, in the Senate, unto all his speeches. Therefore in the
year of the City 605, the Carthaginians begun to be besieged by two Consuls,
Manilius, and Censorinus, when they had yielded themselves to the Romans; which
same thing, the Uticenses had done, in vain. They being commanded out of hand,
their City being beaten down, to seat themselves ten miles from the Sea, being
turned into madness and despair, they resisted beyond their strength; until
in the 4th year in the same, as I have said, in which Corinth was destroyed, by
Publius Cornelius Scipio Proconsul, who being begotten by Paulus Aemilius, was
adopted for the son of Scipio Africanus, Carthage was taken, set on fire, and
utterly overthrown. About, or a little before the beginning of the War,
Masanissa King of Numidians, almost for sixty years (they are the Eutrop. 4.
words of Eutropius) being a friend of the people of Rome, in the year of his
life 97 dyed, leaving 44 sons. By whose desire Scipio being sent by Manilius
the Consul, received the last breath of him dying, and divided his kingdom
amongst his sons.

Vell. init. b. 2. Flor. l. 2. chapter 17. Orol. l. 5. c. 4. Epit. Livy 52.
About the same time the Lusitanians in Spain grieve the Romans with a foul
slaughter, Viriathus being Captain; who being suddenly made from a hunter, a
robber; from a robber, a Captain and chief Commander, often overcame the Army
of the Romans. That was memorable among other slaughters, wherein, in the year
of the City built 608, The Viriathick War.
as Appian writes, he slew Vetilius, the Praetor being taken, his Armies being
scattered. Orosius witnesses of the year; but he reports Vetilius to have
escaped by flight. Neither was he alone overcome by Viriathus: but others
besides, of which the Sea Sigon. Fast.
Annals have made mention. Against whom first of all Caius Laelius the Cic. in
Laelius.
Praetor, in the year 609, excellently fought. Afterward Quintus Fabius
Maximus Aemilianus, Proconsul, the warlike discipline being renewed, overcame
the same man. Then Quintus Fabius Maximus Servilianus Consul, the brother of
the other, forced, scattered and put him to flight, into Lusitania, in the
612th year. But when he being compassed about by Viriathus, might have been
suddenly taken, to him, The Numantine War.
much desiring peace, he yielded on equal conditions. But that being lightly
regarded, Quintus Servilius Caepio in the year 614, suddenly setting upon
Viriathus, his Ambassadors being corrupted, slew him by deceit, it being a
greater disgrace of the people of Rome, than worth their labor.

For a much more cruel War rose up in Spain. App. Epit. 55. of Spain, etc.
Flor. 2. chapter 18.
For the Numantines when they had received the Segidenses, their Companions,
having escaped out of the hands of the Romans, being commanded by Metellus the
Pro-consul, to yield them up in an humble manner, to lay down their arms to
him, they refused to do either. Thereupon, although unequal in number and
riches, they valiantly resisted the Romans some years; Epit. 55. Front. b. 3.
App. Eutr. 4. Plin. of Illust. men.
The Army of Marcus Popilius, Proconsul, being beaten by them in the year of
the City 616, and also in the following year thirty thousand of the Romans,
their Captain Mancinus being Consul, were scattered by four thousand
Numantines; the which disgrace, a more shameful peace followed. But the Senate
would not have it confirmed. Therefore in the 618 year of the City built,
Mancinus was given to the Numantines by that law, which he himself moved. But
the Numantines received him not. Epit. 59. App. etc. Numantia overthrown.
At length, Scipio being Captain, who had rooted out Carthage, the Numantines
were overcome and put to flight; and being besieged within their own City with
the utmost despair, they were constrained to dye. So none being left alive,
(for all of them killed themselves together) Numantia is made equal to the
ground in the ninth year after they had fallen off from the Romans; which same
year is numbered by Eutrop. 4.
Eutropius the fourteenth from Carthage being overthrown; but of the City built
621. So Flor. b. 2. chapter 10.
Florus is to be interpreted, who says, Numantia without a Wall, without
Towers, situated by the River Durius on a little hill, meanly high, with four
thousand Spaniards, to have a lone withstood an Army of 40000 for 14 years:
which cannot be understood of Numantia alone; but so, as that the War of
Viriathus with the Romans must be comprehended together with it.

The Achaians and Carthaginians had not yielded unto the Roman Generals, when
Flor. b. 2. chapter 14. Eur. 4. Epit. 49.
Macedonia was the third time by them tamed: the which Andriscus a certain man
of the lowest condition representing himself for Philip the son of Perseus, had
possessed, in the year of the City 605. Who in the year 606 was overcome by
Quintus Caecilius Metellus the Praetor, The Macedonian War.
25 thousand of his Army being slain. From thence the surname of Macedonicus
was put upon Metellus.

While the Romans are busied in Spain, The Servile War.
with the Spanish and Numantine War, a Servile or slavish Tumult arose in
Sicily, in the year, Oros. b. 6. chapter 6.
as Orosius thinks, of the City 619. Fulvius Flaccus, and Calpurnius Piso
being Consuls, a certain Flor. b. 3. chapter 10. Epit. 59. Valor. Max. b. 2.
Syrian, Eunus by name, a frantique rage being feigned, while he boasts of the
Ceremonies of the Syrian goddess, he stirred up servants unto liberty and arms,
as it were, by the command of the gods, as says Florus. Hence great Armies
being gathered, even to seventy thousand, and four Roman Praetors being
overcome; at last in the fourth year, of the City 622, by Publius Rupilius
Consul, he was put to flight.

CHAP. XII. What Men were accounted famous in the praise of Wit, from the 145
Olympiad, to the 162; or from the year of the City 564, to 622.
Caecilius a Comical Poet, Insuber Gallus, and the chamberfellow of Ennius, was
accounted famous in the 150 Olympiad, of the City 574, as Jerome writes in his
Chronicle.

Ennius dyed, being seventy years old, Caepio being Consul, and Philip the
second time, of the City 585, Cicero being author, in his book of old age.

Ten years after, that is, of the City 595, Terence the Comical Poet, did his
duty to Nature; it is witnessed in his life.

Also Pacuvius, and Accius were made famous: of whom the one is said by Jerome
to have flourished about the year of the City 600; the other, 601.

Of Philosophers, three especially adorned that Age, Diogenes the Stoic,
Carneades the Academick, and Critolaus the Peripatetick, who were sent
Ambassadors from Athens to Rome, that they might require the fine of five
hundred talents to be forgiven to the City, for the wasting of Paus. Ach. p.
216. Cic. 2. Acad: Gell. b. 7. chapter 14. and b. 17. chapter last.
Oropus which it had made, the Sicyonians condemning them; to whom the judgment
of that cause had been granted by the Senate: The time of that embassage is
delivered with wonderful disagreement of Authors. Gellius, book 17, relates
those to have come to Rome under the second Punick-war; and makes Ennius later
than their coming. Which I think to be false. For Ennius dyed, as has been
said, in the year of the City of Rome 585. But Cicero (2. of Academicks)
assigns that embassage to Publius Scipio, and Marcus Marcellus, being
Consuls, which is the year 585. But Pausanias in his Achaicks, under the In the
same year Causabon thinks that to have happened, in his Synopsis to Polyb.
603 year of the City, shows them to have come. For he writes, Menalcidas
bearing the Lievtenantship of the Achaians, a little after that embassage,
Oropus to have been spoiled by the Athenians; and not long after, Metellus to
have led an Army against Andriscus.

In the same space of time, Hipparchus the Prince of Astronomy lived, whose
first observation of the Aequinoctial of Autumn, agrees with the year of the
World 3822, of the City 592, as Ptol. 2. See b. 4. of Doct. Times, en. 26.
Ptolemy is Author. But the last of the Spring Aequinoctial falls into the year
of the World 3856, of the City 626. Wherefore the Lunar or Moon Eclipses, which
Ptolemy shows out of Hipparchus in the end of the fourth book, whereof the
first runs into the year of the World 3783, of the City 553, do not seem to
be marked with the eyes of Hipparchus himself; but to be taken by others. For
the space between from this eclipse, unto the last Aequinoctial found out by
Hipparchus, is of years, 74.

Attalus also lived in that Age, not an ignoble Grammarian, nor ignorant of
Astronomy, Hippar, b. 1. to Phaeon, of Arat.
who has illustrated or made plain Aratus with Commentaries.

CHAP. XIII. The Wars of the Seleucian and Egyptian Kings, and of the Jews,
from the year of the World 3854, which was of the City 624, unto the year of
the World 3865, of the City 665.
ANtiochus Sidetes in the ninth and last year of his reign, (for so many he
reigned, as Eusebius is witness in his Chronicle) led an Army against the
Parthians, under a pretense of recovering his brother Demetrius, as App. Sir.
Just.
Appian shows; but Justine shows a far differing cause. Joannes Hircanus
went together with him with ayds of Jews. Phaortes King of the Parthians sends
Demetrius into Syria, to possess the kingdom with a Parthian defense; and in
the mean time sets upon Antiochus at unawares, who being forsaken of his
soldiers, was slain, says Justine. Appian affirms him to be killed with his
own hand. But many think him to be that Antiochus, of whom mention is made in
the 2 Match. chapter 1.
Epistle of the Jews at Jerusalem unto the Egyptians. Where Antiochus is said
to be slain in the Temple of Nanea, when he would have robbed its moneys. It
may be, that the Victory being lost, he desiring with the remainder of his army
to fly upon that prey, and being shut in, brought death on himself. This thing
happened, as is gathered from his beginning, and the space of his reign, in the
year of the Greeks 183. of the world 3854. about winter, as Justine shows.

Joseph. b. 23. chapter 17.
Hircanus being a little before dismissed as appears, Hircanus High Priest.
from Antiochus, his death being heard of, he vanquisheth some Towns, and among
these Garizim of the Samaritanes, where he overthrew their Temple, built two
hundred years before, in the time of Alexander.

Demetrius the second time enjoying the kingdom of Syria, held that four
years, until being hated of all, and overcome by Alexander Zebinas, whom
Ptolomy had sent to the Syrians desiring a king, was by his Wife Cleopatra
slain, bearing it unworthily that he had married Rhodogunes, as App. Sir. Just.
39. See b. 10. of Doctr. of times chapter 45.
Appian is Author. Justine affirms, when he went to Tire by the command of
the Governor, he was slain going out of the Ship, which happened in the year
of the World 3859.

Unto Demetrius were born of Cleopatra two sons, Seleucus, and Antiochus
Grypus. Unto Antiochus Sidetes, by the same, Antiochus Cyzicenus. Seleucus,
because he had taken the Crown without his Mothers bidding, was by her struck
through with a Dart or Arrow, says App. Sir. Just. 39.
Appian. Grypus married Gryphina, others call her Tryphaena, the daughter of
Ptolomy, he slew Alexander; his mother drinking poison to him, he compelled her
self to drink it, in the fourth year of his reign. For he reigned twelve years,
as Eusebius writes in his Chronicle. But Justine tells, that he reigned eight
years peaceably after the death of his mother, and indeed he added seventeen
other years, in which he contended with continual hatreds with his brother, as
Joseph. b. 13. chapter 21.
Josephus shows, who writes that he reigned 29. years.

Moreover Ptolomey Euergetes was the father in law of Grypus, whose
wickednesses, and loose life, we have before sharply touched; and he, Just. 37.
his sister Cleopatra being reconciled to him, which was a great wonder, at
what time he did favor Antiochus Grypus against Alexander Zebina; dying about
the year of the World 3867, of the City built 637, as the Sea 10. b. of Doct.
times, chapter 46.
race of the Kings of the Egyptians shows; he left the kingdom to his wife
Cleopatra, the daughter of Cleopatra, his sister, and sometimes wife; and to
that child of his, which she should choose. His children were 2, Ptolomy
Lathurus, and Ptolomey Alexander; and besides these, a third born of an Harlot,
Ptolomy King of Cyrenians.
Ptolomey Appio, to whom his father granted by will the Kingdom of the
Cyrenians, Just. 39. Epit. 70. Jul. obs.
Justine being Author, who departing this life, about the year of the City
built, 657. made the people of Rome his heir.

Cleopatra was more inclined toward her son Alexander: but being compelled by
the people to choose the elder; before she gave him the kingdom, she took away
Cleopatra a most dear wife and sister to him, and for her she commanded him to
marry the younger Seleuces. Cleopatra married Antiochus Cyzicenus, which,
Antiochia being by Grypus taken, by the command of her sister Gryphina, the
wife of Grypus, she is slain in the Temple. Neither much after, Cyzicenus,
Gryphina being likewise slain, celebrated his wives funeral. The death of
Cleopatra seems to have happened in the thirteenth year of Grypus, of the
City 642, to wit, after those eight peaceable ones, which I have above
mentioned out of Justine. But of Gryphina, the year following.

Just. 39. Eusebius. Chr. Paus. Attick. p. 7.
In Egypt, Cleopatra the mother, expelled Ptolomey Lathurus, and for him
appointed Alexander king, in the 654 year of the City, the 170 Olymp. entering,
as is gathered out of the Chronicle of Eusebius, and the race of the Egyptian
Kings. He being driven out, held Cyprus, and warred with Alexander king of the
Jews. But Cleopatra persecuting him with an implacable hatred, fled from
Judaea, and at length was killed by her son Alexander, in the year of the City
664. Therefore this man being cast out by the Alexandrians, after he had
reigned ten years, he also in the year of the City, 665. by Chaereas a
Ship-master, or Pilot, is slain. But then Lathurus being called back again, he
afterward finished eight years. This is that Ptolomy, the eighth from the son
of Lagus, whom Pausanias calls Philometor, or lover, or beloved of his Mother,
affirming that he was so called by a mock, because his Mother troubled him with
more than step-mothers hatred. Which thing he has put upon some of the writers
of the Annalls, who have passed over that declaration of Pausanias, unto the
sixth Ptolomey Philometor.

Joseph. b. 13. chapter 7. Hyrcanus.
In the mean time things chiefly flourished under Hircanus the High Priest;
when as the power of the Seleucians being consumed with father-killing hatreds,
and mutual slaughters, by little and little was waxen old or forgotten.
Therefore Hircanus stretched forth the borders of his power or title, longly
and largely. He compelled the Idumaeans, being by war subdued, to receive
Jewish customs, with Circumcision, Joseph. 13. chapter 19.
Josephus being witness. Neither yet used he a Crown, or a kingly name,
Joseph. in the same place. The first King of the Jews, after times of the
Macchabees.
the which his son Aristobulus first appointed; who, the High Priesthood being
performed thirty and one years, succeeded his Father, a cursed and wicked man.
For he killed both his Mother, and youngest brother, the other three he kept in
bonds, in the year of the City 651. his Wife Salome, or Saalina, made Alexander
one of the brethren of her Husband, an obtainer of his desire, or partaker of
the kingdom, and of his wedlock. Who killed one of his brethren employing
himself about new matters; the other being contented with a private life and
rest, he retained. The same man was hated of the Jews, and tossed to and fro by
their hatreds and factions; whom likewise he cruelly was revenged of. For he
slew no less than fifty thousand of them in six years. Joseph. b. 3. of Exc.
chapter 3. and 4.
He waged often wars, for these things, with Ptolomey Lathurus, and Demetrius
Eucaerus and others, and through the interchangeable course of fortune, his
rule being nevertheless enlarged, he drew it out unto twenty and seven years,
as Josephus Writes.

CHAP. XIV. The Roman affairs from the year of the City built, 621. to 662.
Especially the seditions of the Gracchians, the Wars of Marius with the
Cymbrians, and Teutons: And also the Jugurthine war.
THat I may touch at the Roman affairs, which fell into that time; Attalus the
son of Eumenes (his Uncle Attalus, who after the death of Eumenes, took care of
the Kingdom as a Guardian, ending his life) having reigned five years, and
dying about the year of the City built 622. as is Strabo b. 13. Vell. b. 2.
Flor. b. 2, chapter 20. Eutr. 4. Oros. 5. chapter 10.
gathered out of Strabo, he appointed the people of Rome his heir: the which
Aristonichus, the son of Eumenes by an Harlot, taking grievously, he invadeth
Asia, and overthrows the Army. Afterward by the Consul Perperna he was put
to flight in the year 624, the remainder of which war, Marcus Aquilius Consul,
in the year following finished. Which year was lamentable through the death of
Scipio Africanus, and Numantinus, who not without suspicion of a lustful
disease given him by his wife, was found dead in the bed, as Velleius writes.
Asia being made the Romans, says Justine, with its riches, it passed over its
vices also to Rome. In which year, Attalus made the people of Rome his heir, a
cruel sedition arose at Rome. Live. Ep. 58. Vel. 2. Flor. 3. chapter 13. App. 1.
Civil. Plut. in Grac.
For Tiberius Gracchus the Tribune of the people (a Law for land being made,
that none should possess more than fifty Acres of Ground) when he had taken
away the office from Octavius his companion withstanding him, The sedition of
those of Gracchus.
and moreover would have the money of King Attalus among the people, and also
ambitiously sought for the Tribuneship on the year following, the Senators
being by that thing moved, Publius Cornelius Nassica being the Author, in the
Capitol, in which he had betaken himself, was slain.

After the death of Tiberius, The same Flor. b. 3. chapter 15.
Caius his brother following the same sect, by Opimius the Consul, in the year
of the City built, 633, he was overcharged, and with him, Fulvius Flaccus one
of the Council, straitway Opimius exercised a most cruel examination, in the
which three thousand men were slain, as August. b. 3. of the City, chapter 24.
Augustine shows.

The Romans fought first in France, with the people beyond the Alps, in the
year of the City built 629. The Allobrog.
The beginning was caused by the Salvians and Allobrogians, whom Fulvius
Flaccus, the same who after four years, as I have said, was slain with Caius
Gracchus, tamed in war. But in the year 633. Fabius Consul finished the
Allobrogian War. who overcame Bituitus King of the Averni in battle, 120000 of
his army being slain at Isara, the King himself coming to Rome to satisfy the
Senate, he was committed into custody at Alba. Then also Narbony in France, was
made a Province, and a Colony, The Colony of Narbo.
or Plantation, was brought unto Narbo, as Vel. chapter 1.
Velleius teaches in the 636 year of the City.

Afterward the Romans had almost a continual strife with the French, by whom
they received many and great slaughters. The Cimbrians and Teutonians, were a
terror above others; who, France and Spain being compassed, when as they
desired Italy, and had not by request obtained ground from the Senate, they
scattered Marcus Silanus the Consul, in the year of the City 645, as appears
out of Ascon. in Corn. Tac. of Ger. manners.
Asconius. In like manner in the year following Scaurus another Consul is
overcome by the Cimbrians. (h) Tacitus being Author, by the Tigurine Helvetians
Caesar 1. Comment. Epit. Live. 75. Flor. l. 3. chapter 3. Just. 32.
Lucius Cassius, Conful in the year of the City 647, in the borders of the
Allobrogians; which thing is manifest out of Caesar. But more memorable than
the rest was the calamity of Quinctius Caepio, of him who being Consul, Tolosa
being robbed among the Tectosagi, took away 110000 pound weight of Gold, five
Millions in pound-weight of silver, as Justine writes, which was done in the
year of the City built, 648. Epit. 63. Oros. b. 3. chapter 19.
But in the following year, the Proconsul, with Caius Manilius Consul, purged
away the theft by the slaughter of the Roman Army. It is manifest that there
was slain of the Romans in that battle, and of their companions, 80 thousand,
of slaves and drudges 60000. The command of Rome was repealed from Caepio.

Plut. Mar. Epit. 68. Oros. 5. chapter 16. Flor. in the place cited Eutr. 5.
At length by Marius the fourth time Consul, the Teutons and Ambrones being
almost all killed, 200 thousand being slain, seventy thousand taken, in the
year of the City 652. The same Consul in the year 653, with Catulus the
Proconsull, he cut down the Cymbrians breaking in through Noricum, a hundred
and twenty thousand being slain, sixty thousand taken.

Unto so many Victories Marius heaped up the victory gotten in the war with
Plut. Mar.
Jugurtha. For in the 643 year of the City, The victory of Morius over the
Cymbrians.
as is gathered out of Salust, a war was taken up with Jugurtha King of
Numidia, Salust of the Jugurthan War. Plut. Mar. and Sylla. Epit. 62. Eutr. 4.
Oros. 5. chapter 15.
because he had spoiled Hiempsal, and Adherbal the sons of Micipsa, the Nephews
of Masanissa, and his fathers brothers sons, of their Kingdom and life. But
when he had vanquished the Romans for some years, rather by Gold than by
weapons, first of all being broken by Metellus Consul, a commander of the
ancient rigor: last of all by Marius the Consul, in the year of the City
built 647. and in the year following he being Proconsull, beaten down, through
the Treason of Bocchus King of Mauritania, unto whom he had fled, he came into
the power of the conqueror, whose triumph being honored, he was killed in
prison. Afterward the frequent and most foul tempests at home interrupted the
prosperous course of the Roman rule abroad, the beginnings of which sprung
from the Tribunes, Epit. 69. App. 1. of the City. Plut. in Mar. Oros. 5. chapter 17.
Saturninus, a field law being made, that what land Caius Marius, the Cymbrians
being driven out of France, had gotten, should be divided among the people,
Metellus Numidicus resisting him, he punished with banishment, and at length by
Caius Marius the sixth time Consul, in the year from the building of Rome 654,
he was slain. Metellus the year following being called back from banishment.

Epit. Live. 71. Flor. 3. chapter 27. App. 3. City. Oros. b. 5. chapter 28.
After this man Livius Drusius, a Tribune of the common people, when to recover
the ancient honor with the Senate, he would pass over judgments unto them,
the which Caius Gracchus had communicated with horsemen, he took away the same
field-Lawes, and gave hope to his fellows of obtaining the City, the which,
when he could not perform, he runs into the hatred of all, and was privily
thrust through with a Sword, in the year of the City six hundred sixty three.

CHAP. XV. The last Affairs of the Seleucians in Syria, and their downfall; and
also of the Ptolemies in Egypt.
THe Kingdom of the Seleucian Kings in the East through riot and discord, by
little and little came to ruin, Antiochus Grypus is killed by the lying in
wait of Heracleon, in the 45 year of his age, of his reign 29, says Joseph.
15. chapter 21.
Josephus, who imputes all that time to his reign, wherein others reigning, he
was surviving; because in the mean time, he ruled in some part of Syria. For
the Chronicle of Eusebius assigns twelve years alone for his reign. He
therefore, about the 658 year of the City dies, b. 10. of Doctr. of Times, chapter
45.
four sons being left, Seleucus, Antiochus, Philip, Demetrius Eucaerus, as
Josephus is Author: Seleucus succeeded his father, who killed his Uncle
Antiochus Cyzicenus, in the year 659; he Joseph. and App. Sir.
in the year following being by Antiochus Pius the son of Cycizenus, driven
away at Mopsuestia, by a civil sedition was burnt a live.

Antiochus Pius took to Wife Selene, which had first married his father
Cyzicenus, and his uncle Grypus, and of her he begat Antiochus, surnamed
Asiaticus. The same man deprived the son of Grypus, Antiochus, of his Army and
life. But Ptolemy Lathurus carried on Demetrius Eucaerus to the Kingdom. Thus
at the same time there were many Kings in Syria; until the Syrians through the
weariness of so many civil Wars, and Parricides, called Tigranes King of
Armenia, at that season very mighty, thereunto: who, as Just. 40.
Justine writes, held Syria quietly 18, but as Appian, 14 years. Appian.
He being overcome, Lucullus in the 686 year of the City built, saluted
Antiochus Asiaticus King of Syria. Wherefore 18 years being withdrawn from 686,
the 669 of the City is gathered, wherein Tigrdnes began to reign in Syria; and
so Antiochus Eusebes reigned about nine years.

Pompey in the year of the City 688, Tigranes being received upon surrender, or
made to yield, took away Syria from Antiochus Asiaticus. Therefore they reigned
in Syria from the beginning of Seleucus the first, unto the beginning of
Tigranes 228 years, to the last year of Asiaticus 247 years.

In Egypt, Ptolemy Lathurus dyed, in the year of the City built 623, in which
Lucius Sulla made Cic. of the field-law, 1. and 2. Trog. Pomp. 39. App. b. 1.
Civil.
Alexander the son of the brother of Alexander Lathurus King of Egypt. But he
after 19 days being killed by the Alexandrians, another of the same name, and
his Cousen-german obtained the Kingdom; the which we book 10. of Doctr. Times,
chapter 46.
show in another work. And this man about the year 689 being driven away by his
Subjects, departed unto Tire, where he also dying, appointed the people of Rome
to be his heir.

After this King, Strabo 17. Clem. Alex. Strom. Eus. Chr. Epiph. of months.
Chr. Alex.
Ptolemy [Auletes] so called, from the study of Pipes, followed; a stranger
from the stock of the Ptolemies; who being guilty to himself, both of his own
birth, and of the will of Alexander, bought the fellowship and friendship of
the people of Rome with an infinite sum of money; by reason of which, he
burthening the Egyptians with cruel Taxes, by their agreement he is driven
away in the eighth year of his reign; of the City 697. Therefore he began in
the year about 690. He being absent, the Alexandrians carry away the Scepter
unto his eldest daughter, and compel her to marry Cybio-sactas, a filthy and
obscure man of Syria, whom the Queen, a few days after slew. And then she
married Archelaus, a Priest of the Comani in Pontus. Auletes two year after, of
the City built 699, is, at the command of Pompey, restored by Gabinius. He took
away his daughter with her husband; all which things b. 17. Strabo has
delivered to memory.
This King seems to have done his duty to nature in the 703 year of the City;
the which b. 8 Epist. Fa. op. 5.
Coelius writing unto Cicero shows. Therefore he reigned 13 years.

Vide 10. de Doct. Temp. c. 45.
Ptolemy surnamed [(...),] that is, Bacchus, the son of this King, first with
his sister Cleopatra; by and by, she, as it seems, in the year of the City
706, being driven away, held the Kingdom alone; App. 2. Civ. Dion. 42.
in which time Caesar came into Egypt; Ptolemy his sister being cast out, that
he might drive her from the entrance of the kingdom, was ready with an Army;
the which is manifest out of Dion, to have been the 706 year. Hircan. of the
Alex. War.
Moreover, in the year following, he fighting against Caesar, fell, and left
the kingdom to his sister Cleopatra.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Social War, the War with Mithridates, of Sylla and Marius;
the Sertorian war; the Servile War; the Conspiracy of Catiline.
THe Romans App. Civ. Epit. 71. Flor. 3. chapter 18. Plut. Syll. Eutr. 5. Oros. 5.
chapter 18.
almost at that time, waged two most hard and fearful Wars; whereof the one
happened in Italy, the other without Italy. That was called the Social or
Marsian, because it was first stirred up by the Marsians. For all the Latins,
and most people of Italy, taking it unworthily, that they, who were partakers
of all labors and dangers, should be shut out from the fellowship of
Government and Honor, they endeavored, the City through Drusus being vainly
hoped for, to get that by weapons, which they could not by right. And first of
all, at the time of the Latin holy days or Solemnities, they endeavored, in
the year of the City 663, to kill both the Consuls, Philip and Caesar: the
thing being discovered, they fell off openly. They killed Quintus Servilius
Proconsul, Fonteius the Ambassador, and all the Romans of Asculum. After these
things they fought with a diverse event. The chief honor of victory Cneius
Pompeius strabo, the father of the Great Pompey, first of all the Ambassador
of Publius Rutilius Consul, obtained against them, in the year of the City 664,
in which, a breaking out being made out of the Town Firmum, he drove back the
Latins besieging it, and chased them to Asculum, and then the Consul, in the
year 665, wherein he took Asculum, reduced the Vestini and Peligni unto a
surrender, and triumphed over them. Also Lucius Sylla, the Ambassador of
Lucius Caesar, Consul, in the year 664, many and the greatest battles being
dispatched with the greatest praise, obtained the Consulship in the year 666;
and in that, pursued the remainders of the war. App. Civ. 1. Macrob. 1. Sat.
chapter 11.
Appian writes, in that War the freemen were first called to an oath.

Vell. 2. App. Mithr. Ep. 76, etc. Flor. 3. chapter 5. Eutr. 5. Oros. 5. chapter 19.
The War with Mithridates.
The other War was undertaken against Mithridates in Asia, who drew his
beginning from the Kings of the Persians, and is numbered the sixteenth from
Darius the son of Hystaspis, (for so it must needs be read App. in Mithr. chapter
149. Graecol.
with Appian) (...), not as is commonly read [(...),] the eighth from that
Mithridates, who a little after the death of Alexander, fell away from the
Macedonians; although Appian had thought him the sixth before him. The War
arose from thence, because Mithridates, Ariathes King of Cappadocia, the
husband of his sister being killed by lying in wait, then his son of the same
name, possessed the Kingdom; and afterward he being driven away by an unjust
possession, he had expelled Epit. 74. see Sigon.
Ariobarzanes given unto the Cappadocians by the Senate; whom indeed Lucius
Sylla Propraetor restored in the year of the City built, 660.

Epit. 74. Appr. Mithr. Plut. Syll. and Pomp. Flor. 3. chapter 5. Eutr. 5. Oros. 6.
chapter 2.
After these things, Ariobarzanes from Cappadocia, Nicomedes from Bythinia,
being through the endeavor of Mithridates, expelled, by the decree of the
Senate, they recovered their kingdoms; the which Mithridates taking grievously:
and moreover, being provoked by Roman weapons, invadeth Cappadocia and
Bithynia, puts to flight the Roman Armies, kills all the Italians at an
appointed day, reduces Macedonia, Thracia, Greece, and Athens into his power
or title. Against this King Sylla, the Consul going, in the year of the City
built 668, takes Athens. The Captains of Mithridates being overcome, brings
him to conditions of peace, That he should yield up, or depart from Asia,
Bithynia, and Cappadocia.

Vell. 1. App. 1. Civ. Plut. Syl. and Mar. Flor. 3. chapter 21. Eutr. 5.
For a Civil War came on, the which also brought delays on Sylla, the Consul
setting forward. For before this time, in the year of the City 666, Marius,
although stricken with old age, burning with a desire of waging the
Mithridatick War, through Caius Sulpitius the Tribune of the common people, he
had taken away that Province of Sylla, The factions of Sulp. Trib. of the
common people.
and had passed it over unto himself or them. For which thing Sylla being much
moved, possesses the City, and Sulpitius being slain, he puts Marius to
flight. But he being absent, Cinna the Consul in the year 667, much troubling
the Commonwealth, by Octavius, his Companion in office, being driven out of
the City, Marius, Carbo, and Sertorius being joined unto him; the Armies being
divided into four parts, he assaults his Country. That being taken, many
Citizens are slain; Marius the year following was quenched by a disease.

A peace being made with Mithridates, Sylla being returned into Italy, in the
year 671 he finished a Civil War, Carbo, Norbane, Marius the younger, The
Marian banishment.
and others being vanquished; and a Dictator in the year 672 was proclaimed,
and he likewise took away very many of the Marian parties by banishment.

Vell. 2. Plut. in Sert. Ep. 96. Oros. 5. chapter 23.
Quintus Sertorius in the year 671, his parties despairing, goes into the
farther Spain; where he underwent War for some years, with the like valor and
industry.

Plut. Syll. App. 1. Civ. Vell. Flor. 3. chapter 22. Oros. 5. The Civil War of
Lepidus.
Sylla, when he had resigned himself of the Dictatorship in the year 675, he
dyed in the year following of a lowzie disease, being 60 years old. After whose
death Lepidus the Consul attempting destructive counsels of revoking his Acts,
he is put to flight by Catulus his fellow-Consul, in the year of the City built
676. But in that year that followed, he coming unto the City with an Army, he
being overcome by the same Catulus and Cneius Pompeius, flees into Sardinia,
where he dyed of a disease. The same Pompey being sent into Spain against
Sertorius, that he might succor Metellus, he advanced not very much. But he
being overcharged by the treachery of his own Soldiers, the other easily
received the Province, in the year of the City built 682.

In the mean time, The Mithridatick War. put to an end.
the War with Mithridates ( Sylla as yet living) waxes new again; the which
was waged by Lucius Muraenas, in the year of the City built 672, as the Vell.
2. Epit. 72. Plut. Luc. App. 1. Civ. Dio. 33. Eutr. 6.
Epitomy of Livy teaches. After the death of Sylla, when as the King had made
a league with Sertorius, and had possessed himself of Bythinia by Arms; the
which Nicomedes dying in the year 679, had left unto the people of Rome. Lucius
Lucullas Consul, in the year 680, going thither, by most prosperous battles
made at Land and Sea, he constrained Mithridates first to fly into Pontus, and
thence by and by into Armenia to Tigranes, in the year of the City built 683.
So Pontus being subdued, he overcame in battle both Kings, going together with
two hundred thousand footmen, sixty thousand horsemen, in the year 685; the
which With Phor. Cod: 97.
Phlegon witnesses, assigning that to the fourth year of the 177 Olympiad.
About these times, Tigranocerta the head of Armenia, and also Nisibis, very
great Cities, were taken. But at last, Lucullus being forsaken by his
Soldiers, he was forced to yield up the fruit of so many labors and victories
unto Cneius Pompeius, in the year 688. The Law of Manilius.
Pompey, a Law being made, in the year which I have said, by Cneius Manilius
Tribune of the common people, he undertook a War with both Kings, he commanded
Tigranes, being brought to a surrender, to be contented with Armenia alone.
While he followed after Mithridates, he added the Iber; and Albanes to the
Roman Empire, in the year of the City 689. Lastly, Mithridates being beaten on
every side, in the year 691, things being desperate at home, thinking of a
flight into France, being very much affrighted through the failing or falling
away of his son Pharnaces, and his Army, he took away his own life. Which
account of Times, is manifest out of Dio. 36. Plut. Pomp. App. Mithr.
old Historians, and yearly Registers.

Thus the Mithridatick War was ended in that year wherein Cicero was Consul, of
the City 691, the which Flor. 3. chapter 5. App. begin. of Mithr. Futr. 6. Oros.
chapter 6.
Florus affirms to have remained 40 years. More, Appian in his beginning of
Mithridates; but in the end 40: so many Eutropius. But Orosius, but 30 has
given, from the year 662, unto 691, wherein Cicero was Consul: But in the year,
as I have above mentioned, 660, Sylla Propraetor restores Ariobarzanes,
against Mithridates. Thence to the Consulship of Cicero are full 32 years.
Appian reckons the moving of Mithridates from the 173 Olympiad, which began in
the year of the City built 666; in which year, the matter was brought into an
open War, and Sylla sailed into Greece. By this account, six and twenty, not
forty, shall the years be thought or reckoned. He lived, as the same Appian
writes, 68 years, or 69; he reigned 57. Eutropius thinks he reigned 40.

Vell. 1. Epit. 96. Plut. Crass. Flor. 3. chapter 10. Eutr. 6. Oros. 9. chapter 24. The
Spartan War. The Pirate War.
The War with Mithridates being in a flame, a Servile war was blown together,
in the year of the City 681, Spartacus Oenomaus, and Crixus, cutthroats, the
School of Lentulus being broken up at Capua, and not a little company of loose
fellows being gathered together, they more then once scattered the Roman
Armies; and at length by Crassus the Praetor, and Pompey, they were put to
flight, in the year 683.

Also Plut. Pomp. Epit. 99.
Pirates, who being stirred up or procured by Mithridates, troubled all Seas,
and Coasts. Pompey in the year 687, in a short time brought under, having
gotten an extraordinary power from the Gabinian Law.

Sull. in Cataline War. Cic. in speech of Catil. Dio. 36. Jos. 14. chapter 8. Plut.
Cic. Ep. 102. Flor. 4. chapter 1.
While the Roman Empire is enlarged abroad by Pompey, almost the head of the
Empire was overthrown by the conspiracy of wicked Citizens; who, Catiline being
Captain, Lentulus Praetor, Cethegus and other Senators joined to them, had
conspired of the death of Cicero the Consul, and of setting on fire, and
robbing the City. But the watchfulness of the Consul disappointed the
endeavors of these men. Catiline being cast without the walls, runs away to
provide an Army; punishment being taken on Lentulus and the chief of the
Conspirators, the very Consulship of Cicero going out in the year 691. The year
following Catiline being overcome by Petreius the Ambassador of Antonius
Proconsul, he fell in fight.

CHAP. XVII. What things happened under Hircanus and Aristobulus; and how their
liberty being lost, they were brought back into the power of the Romans.
THe Commonwealth of the Jews, See b. 10. of Doct. Times, chapter 54.
through the ambition of the Princes and Civil discords, was brought into the
utmost destruction. The first, as has been said, in that Nation, A istobulus
of the Hasamonaeans, usurpeth a Kingdom, the son of Joannes Hircanus high
Priest, the Nephew of Simon Machabaeus, who when he had reigned one year, had
Joseph. Ant. b. 13. chapter 24. Hegef. 2.
Alexander Jannaeus his brother, heir of the Kingdom and Priesthood, in the
year of the City built 650, the first of the 169 Olympiad, who of Salomes, or
Alexandra, or Saalina, before the wife of Aristobulus, begat two sons;
Hircanus, more desirous of peace and rest, than of war; and Aristobulus, a man
of a cruel disposition, and greedy of rule: and in the year of the City built
766, dying, he touched at the 27th year of his reign, as, Josephus being
Author, is manifest. Joseph. in the same b. 13. chapter 23.
Salome after the death of her husband, ordered the Kingdom nine years, and
left the chief Priesthood to Hircanus, and lived 73 years. Aristobulus in the
9th year entering from the death of Alexander, falling off from his Mother,
attempts to possess Cities by force. She being dead, in the third year Joseph.
b. 14. chapter 1.
says Josephus) of the 177 Olympiad, Hortensius and Metellas Creticus being
Consuls, (this is the year Varronian, of the City 685, wherein the third year
of the Olympiad ended, and the 4th began,) Aristobulus moves war against
Hircanus high Priest. But straightway a peace being composed, the Priesthood
fell out to Hircanus, the Kingdom unto Aristobulus. A little after, Joseph. 1.
chapter 2. Heges. 1. chapter 14.
Antipater, an Idumaean, a moneyed-man, rents Hircanus from that agreement, and
desirous of new things, by whose persuasion Hircanus flees privily unto Aretas
King of the Arabians, until Jerusalem being taken by Pompey in the 179
Olympiad, Cicero and Antonius being Consulls, which is the year of the city
691. Hircanus received the chief Priesthood: But from that time, Jerusalem
began to pay tribute to the Romans, and many Cities, which hitherto had been
tributaries to the Jews, a chief ruler of their own being allowed them, the
nation it self was reduced within its old bounds. Joseph. b. 14. chapter 8.
These things Josephus.

Which change of things is, to be accounted as it were a certain hinge before
the eyes of the Jewish History, which arises afterward. Therefore Hircanus
bare the chief Priesthood twelve years, from the year of the city built six
hundred seventy six, in which his Father Alexander died, even until the year
six hundred eighty eight. For in this year he seems to have fled to the King
of Arabians, although b. 20. chapter 6.
Josephus says, Aristobulus bare the High Priests office three years, and as
many months after Hircanus, until Jerusalem was taken by Pompey, which by b.
14. chapter 8.
the same Author is delivered, to be taken in the 691 year of the city built,
on the third Month.

Pompey led away Aristobulus, with his son Alexander and Antigonus, and as many
daughters to Rome. Alexander slipping away privily, ceased not to raise a
tumult against Hircanus in Judea, until he had expelled him, Joseph. b. 14.
chapter 10.
whom Gabinius restored, in the year of the city built six hundred ninety
eight, who also appointed five Law-Sessions in Judaea. Gabinius Aristobulus
escaping out of bonds, and making a disturbance in Judaea, he sent back to
Rome. Who being loosed out of prison by Jul. Caesar in the year of the city
built, seven hundred and five, was taken away by poison. But Alexander, by the
command of Pompey, was smitten by Scipio with an hatcher. At length Joseph. in
the same b. chapter 19.
Antigonus, Asinius and Domitius being consulls, which is the year of the city
built seven hundred and fourteen, by the help of the Parthians, gave his Uncle
Hircanus, having cut off his ears, to be led away by the same Barbarians. This
breaking in of the Parthians, Dio brings into the year, which I have said, that
therefore Josephus after Jerusalem being taken by Pompey, rightly reckons
twenty four years to Hircanus the High Priest. But in the year seven hundred
and seventeen, Herod by the endeavor of Sosius, the city being vanquished,
quenched Antigonus, of which thing a little after. From those things it is
manifest, that the Roman Empire was incredibly enlarged by Pompey, a^ infinite
of people being added to it. The praise of Pompey.
So that in a Plin. 7. chapter 26.
speech or Oration, he gloried, He had taken in Asia (understand the Less) the
farther most of Provinces, and had restored half of the same unto his country.

CHAP. XVIII Of the Civil War of Pompey and Caesar.
THe whole World being now almost tamed; the fortune of the Roman Empire had
come unto that state, that it could neither enlarge it self any farther, nor
consist in that degree which it held. Therefore when there could be no force
through the utmost attempts, for the overthrowing of this, at length it
consumed it self by its own wealth. The which misery the ambition of Princes,
and civil discord procured thereby, brought upon it.

Plut. Caes. Dio. 37. App. 2. Civ. Vel. 2. Suet. Caes. Flor. 4. chapter 1. Epit.
109. Eutr. 6. Oros. chapter 15. and foll. The ^leeds of Coesar.
Caius Caesar by the City Praetorship, having gotten the Province of Lisitania,
in the year of the City 693, and things in the same place being famously
managed, obtained a triumph. But he put the sure hope of this, after the honor
of the Consull-ship, the which while he earnestly sought in the year of the
city 694, at the same time Pompey, Lucullus interrupting his acts, which he
would have had made established decrees by the Senate, joined himself with
Caesar and Crassus, and other chief ones. So Caesar obtained the Consullship in
the year 695. wherein he also approved or confirmed Pompeys acts through the
Senate, and divided the Campanian land, among very many citizens, and eased the
common Farmers of the Knight order, desiring an abatement of a third part of
their rents. A daughter of Julia being appointed for Pompey, he married
Calpurnia of Pison. When as by these Arts and infinite bounty, he had gotten
the favor of all ranks of men unto himself, he got the French Province, the
which from the year of the city 696, he began to Govern, and ruled nine years,
as Suet. in Jul. chapter 25. See Casar.
Suetonius is Author: In which space of time he reduced all France, which is
contained by the Pyrenean Alps, the Rivers of Rhene and Rhodane or Roan, and
imposed on it every year the debtor title of a Stipend or Subsidy: he also,
first of the Romans, provoked the Germans beyond Rhene, a bridge being laid
over Rhene. He also was present with the Britains, whither none before had
pierced. Among these things, in the year of the city built 698. he made such an
agreement with Pompey and Crassus, that the Province of France was continued
unto him, Pompey enjoyed Spain, Crassus, Syria, by lot, and the Parthian war,
to which Plut. Cras. Dio. App. Parth.
he going in the year 699, in the third year from thence, he most miserably
perished with the greater part of his Army. After that slaughter, the Parthians
rushing into Syria, Cassius honorably beat back.

Suet. in Jul. Plut. in Pomp. and Casar Flor. 4. chapter 2. Dio. 46. and foll. App.
2. Civil. Eutr. b. 6. Oros. 6.
Crassus being dead, when neither Pomp^y could bear his equal, nor Caesar any
more a Superior, a civil war arose. Those of Pompeys party working that that
Caesar (the time being fulfilled) should part with the Province and army.
Moreover, those of Caesar's, endeavoring the same thing as Pompey did, at last
in the year 705. Caius Claudius Marcellus, and Lucius Cornelius Lentulus,
Consulls, Caes 1. Civ. The Civil war of Pompey and Caesar.
the Senate decreed, that before a certain day Caesar should dismiss his army:
Antonius and Cassius interceding in vain, are constrained to flee unto Caesar;
who hastening with his Army to the city, so affrighted Pompey and others, that
without delay, the city, and after that, all Italy being left, they sailed into
Greece. Caesar going into Spain, overcame Afranius and Petreius, and brought
their Army unto a surrender. In his return he vanquished Massilia, and entered
into the first Dictatourship, the b. 10. of Doctr. times* ch, 97.
which indeed he held four times, and last of all, always.

In the year 706. Pompey being overcome by Caesar in the Pharsalian fields,
went away into Egypt, and there by the command of Ptolomy is slain, in the
59th year of his age. The same most dangerous battle being finished, when
Caesar the year following had come to Alexandria, he granted the Kingdom of
Egypt unto Cleopatra and her brother. The year following he overcame Scipio
and Cato in Africa, with King Juba. Cato at Utica brought a voluntary death on
himself. The year that followed this, of the City built 708. gave a beginning
to a most excellent thing, the correcting of Calendars, and the year: the which
Caesar in this year gathered; from whence the Julian years went forward. The
beginning of which has wont to be drawn from the Calends of January, of the
year of the City 709. When by a most great and hard war, he had overcome the
sons of Pompey the following year, which is of the City built 710, is numbered
the second of the Julian setting forth, by the conspiracy of Brutus and
Cassius, and other he was thrust through in the very Senate, in the fifty sixth
year of his age, as says Plutarch. Wherefore he was born in the year of the
city built, 654. Caius Marius the sixth, and Flaccus being Consulls.

The civil war of Caesar and Pompey, both other wonders or signs foreshewed,
and also a b. 10. Doctr. times, chapter 18. An Eclipse of the Sun.
fearful Eclipse or failing of the Sun, which happened in the year of the
World 3933, which went next before the Julian year, in which the civil war was
begun. But it happened on the seventh day of our March, nine digits or inches
after noon, of which sign Dio Lucan, and Petronicus are to be understood.
Beside these shakings of weapons; with which the whole World was shaken, others
less, rose up at Rome in the mean while. Dio 39. App. 2. Civ. Plut. in Cic.
Clodius cas^s out Cicero.
Clodius Pulcher, or the fair, being passed over from the Senators, unto those
of the common people, and made a Tribune of the common people, punished Cicero
with banishment, in the year of the city 696. because he had condemned with
death noble citizens, the companions of Catiline, the cause not being shown,
the which misery he bare more gently, than for the other worthiness of his
life. But in the year following, he is by the endeavor of Pompey, and Lentulus
Consul, called back, and received with the greatest honor. The same Clodius
the people of Rome adjudged to Cyprus, to possess which, Cato being sent,
Ptolomy, King of that Island, his moneys being cast into the Sea, prevented the
reproach by a voluntary death, in the year of the city built 698. Plut. in Cat.
and Cras. Dio. 39.
The Senate decreed the Praecorship unto Cato, being returned to Rome without
assemblies of election; Which honor he would not make use of, desiring rather
to obtain that by the lawful voices of the people, but his hope deceived him.
For by the faction of Pompey and Crassus, he went without that office which he
desired, and Vatinius was preferred before him. After that, Trebonius the
Tribune of the common people working, they obtain, Crassus, Syria, Pompey,
Spain, for five years. France being prolonged to Caesar for three years space.
Crassus went in his Consullship into the East, in the year of the City six
hundred ninety and nine.

Plut. Pomp. Dio 40. Vell. b. 2.
Affectation of honor, moreover, waxing hot in the assemblies of Elections,
and the suitors in white garments filthily confounding all things, when as
there had been an intervall of Government a long time, at Rome; ^neius Pompey,
after a new manner, neither hitherto heard of was created Consul without a
partner in the same office: in which Magistracy, he both most severely pursued
an examinationof other faults, and also of the death of Clodius, whom Milo in
the same year killed, and therefore he went away into banishment.

CHAP. XIX. Of Men Excelling in Learning which that Age brought forth, from the
Year of the City, about 622, unto 710.
CArneades See Miscel. our Exer. to Julianus. chapter 8.
with great commendation of Wisdom flourished in Greece before others, by
country a Cyrenian, a standardbearer of University men. Of whose death it is a
wonder that old Chronologers have delivered so uncertain, yea false, things.
For Apollodorus with Diogenes in his chronicles, assirmed him to have died in
the fourth year of the 162 Olymp. into which the 626 year of the City falls,
Diog. Carn Hesych.
in which time it is delivered to memory, the Moon to have failed of light. But
it may be gathered out of Cicero that he deceased long after that time; with
whom (in his first of an Oratou^) Antonius says, when he went into Asia,
Proconsull, he met with Carneades the Academick at Athens, who after his
country manner, The death of Carneades.
was contrary to all of the sect in disputing. That year of the Proconsulship
of Antonius was from the building of the city 652. Marius 4. and Catulus being
Consulls. Therefore Carneades was yet a liver in that time. Cic. 4. Acad. Val.
Max. 8. chapter 7.
Whom we read to have increased his age unto ninety years.

Strab. 13. Cic. 2. of an Orat.
Metrodorus also, a Sceptick Philosopher, and famous Orator; and endued, as
also Carneades, with an excelling memory, lived in the time of Mithridates, and
Tigranes: with whom he was in friendship.

Also b. 2. Doct. times, chapter 6. and in notes on Geminus. p. 411.
Geminus a Mathematician lived about the six hundred seventy seventh year of
the City, as we have shown out of Geminus himself.

But at Rome, and in Italy, as it were the glory of Learning being passed over
with the Empire, many more in that age excelled in learning. Orators indeed
also many, nothing inferior to the old Greek, as Marcus Antonius, as Lucius
Crassus, and many others, whom b. of famous Orat.
Cicero reckons up, and among the rest Hortensius. But one darkened the
brightness of all Latins, and Greeks in the same of Eloquence, Cicero, unto
which also he joined the Grace of Philosophy. This man was born in the 600
forty eighth year of the City, the third of the Nones of January, as Gell. b.
15. chapter 28.
Gellius says, in which year, nine Months after, Pompey was born, who, Plin.
b. 37. chapter 2. Vell. b. 2. Plut. Cic.
Pliny is witness, was born the day before the Kalends of October, most large
honors being born in the Commonwealth, whose parent and builder, Cataline
being quenched, he deserved to be called; he died in the sixty fourth of his
age, in the Triumviral or three men's, banishment, of the City built 711.

That I may be silent of Caesar, Caesar.
who may be numbered up among the most learned and Eloquent, but that he had
rather spread the bays of his rule and triumph than wit. Two Varro^^.
Marcus Terentius Varro obtained the chief in that age, of learning. There was
also another of the same name, a Poet, Publius Terentius Varro, born in the
Village Attaces in Narbony, Jerome. Chron.
in the year of the City 672.

Also Lucius Caelius Antipater, a writer of History, about the year of the City
built 630. to wit in the time of the Gracchi. Likewise Valor. Max. 1. chapter 7.
Caius Crispus Salust. Of the Greeks, Diodorus Siculus, as by his book
appears. Also Didymus the Grammarian of Alexandria Suidas.
syrnamed Chalcenterus. But Poets in repute, were, Turpilius a Comicall, and
Lucilius a Satyricall Poet; who, Jerome says, died about the year of the City
built 651. And also Tullius Quintius Atta, a writer of Gown-matters, died in
the year of the City built 676. as the same shows. Moreover, Lucretius,
Jerome Chron.
who about the year of the city built 700. brought death on himself, 44 years
of age. Jerome affirms Catullus to have been born in the 668 year of the
City. In the Phleg. with Phoc. Cod. 9. Don. in the life of Virgill.
seventeenth year after, the year of the City 684. Virgil the Prince of Poets
was born, in the Ides of October, Vitruvius also was famous under Jul. Caesar,
in the knowledge of building, or Architecture: the which appears by his
writings.

CHAP. XX. What things happened unto the Roman Affairs, from Caesar's death,
unto the Actian Victory.
CAesar dyed, as I have made mention above, in the year of the City built 710,
the second Julian year, the Ides of March; which year indeed, the Sun was of an
unusual paleness, foul, and wan, Plin. b. 2. chapter 30. Virg. b. 1. Georg.
as Pliny writes, and Virgil; yet no other eclipse or failing of the Sun was
in that year, as we have b. 10. Doctr. of Times, chapter 63.
taught in its place. Plut. Anton. Dio. 24. etc. App. 2. etc. Epit. 1.7. etc.
Vell. 2. Cic. Phil. 1.
Caesar being slain, Antonius Consul, so moved the people by a seditious
speech, that they burnt his body openly, and threatened sword and faggot to the
houses of the Citizens. After, the tumults being appeased, he repeals the
Dictatorship; Caesar's will being made void, he attempts many things through
force and Tyranny. Octavius Caesar, born of Accia the daughter of his sister
Julius, and adopted by the will of Julius Caesar, when he was despised by
Antonius, he gathers an Army of old Soldiers, and opposes himself to his
Tyranny. Antonius obtains the Province of France from the people by force,
whose passage to it, Mutina being possessed, Decimus Brutus shuts up; therefore
in the same place by Antonius he is besieged.

Plut. in Ant. and Brut. and Cic. Dio. 45. etc. App. 3. Civ. Epit. 117. Flor.
4. chapter 5.
Hirtius and Pansas being Consuls, in the year of the City 711, Cicero sounding
the Trumpet, a War is undertaken against Antonius, being judged an enemy, and
Octavius is joined unto both Consuls, with a Proconsular power, being about the
Vell. 2.
twentieth year of his age. There is made a fierce and cruel battle at Mutina,
App. 3. Civ.
wherein the Praetorian Soldiers dyed every one. But Antonius is overcome, and
Brutus freed of the siege; nevertheless both Consuls were slain.

Dio. 47. App. 3. Civ. Cic. Phil. 11.
Which things, while they are carried on in Italy, in the very year of Rome
built 711, Dolabella, when he came into Asia, Trebonius being laid hold of at
Smyrna, an examination being first had for two days with stripes and torments,
punished him of his head. App. 4. Civ.
Cassius (a great Army being got together, or made up, unto twelve Legions, one
legion 6200 foot, and 730 horsemen,) forced likewise Dolabella, being besieged
at Laodicea, to death.

App. etc.
In Macedonia, Brutus lying in wait for him, killed Caius Antonius the brother
of Marcus; and he got him a strong or stout Army. Plut. Cic. App. Dio. Vell.
etc.
After that, lest it should climb higher, the Senate appointed by little and
little, to gather Octavius into an order or degree of dignity; the which he
obtaining, agrees with Antonius and Lepidus. The Triumviri.
So [Triumviri,] or the three men, are made for the setting in order the
Commonwealth the 27 of November: who, the Roman Empire being three manner of
ways divided, they banished very many Citizens. The death of Cicer^.
Among these, Mar. Tull. Cicero, who going about to take his flight into
Greece, while he stood still a little while, his head being cut off by Popilius
a Centurion, whom he had defended in the cause of his head, he dies the 7th of
December. the 64 year of his age. See App. 4. Civ.
In that banishment, many, and on both parts memorable examples, are set forth;
and book 2.
Vel leius writes, There was toward the banished men the greatest faithful
dealing or aid of their Wives; indifferent, of the freemen, some, of the
servants; of their sons, none. The Epitome of Livy relates, That there was 130
names of Senators. Dio. Strabo. Jerome. Chron.
The same year of the City built 711, gave a beginning to the most noble Town
of Lugdunum or Lions in France, the Author Munatius Plancus Proconsul, at the
meeting together of the Rivers Arar and Rhodane.

But the year following, The War of Brutus and Cassius.
Octavius and Antonius contended in battle with Marcus Brutus, and the chief of
the Conspirators, in Thessaly, at the City of Philippi, with an uncertain
event. Epit. 123. Dio. 47. Plut. Brut. App. 4. Civ. Flor. 4. chapter 6.
For both the right wings of the Armies overcame, and the Camps were robbed on
both sides. But Cassius, who was in that wing which was beaten, supposing the
whole Army to be seattered, felt death to himself of his own accord. Brutus
being overcome in another battle, he also ended his life with his own hand,
living the seven and thirtieth year, says Valleius. Moreover, none of the
stabbers of Caesar was living more than three years space; and all were taken
away by a violent death, as says Suetonius; some killed themselves with the
same dagger, with which they had stabbed Caesar.

Dio 48. Epit. 127. etc. Plut. 4.
After the victory Antonius went into Asia, Octavius Caesar into Italy. This
Caesar had war against Lucius Antonius the brother of the Triumviri, and his
Wife Fulvia, a woman of a manly courage; and Lucius being driven out of the
City, and judged an enemy, and shut up in Perusia, he forced to a surrender.
App. Parth. Flor. b. 4. chapter 9.
In the mean time, the Parthians being stirred up by Labienus of Pompey's
parties, break into Syria, in the year of the City built 714, whom, in the
following year, Ventidius (they being afflicted with a most great slaughter,
their King being slain,) expelled, and recovered Syria.

App. 5. Civ. Dio. 49. Epit. 18. etc. Flor. 4. chapter 8.
The brother of Cneius Pompey, commanding the Sea with a Navy, troubled it with
robberies. Caesar going against him, in a Sea Fight being overcome, put him to
flight, in the year of the City built 718. In the same year Lepidus, who had
passed over from Africa into Sicily, having put off the Government, he granted
to live a private life. But App. in the end Civ. Flor. 4. chapter 10.
Sextus Pompey betaking himself unto Antonius, was by his command killed, being
40 years old. When as the same Antonius a little before, a dispatch being
undertaken against the Parthians, had received a great slaughter.

Epit. 132. and 133. Dio. 50. Plut. Ant. Flor. 4. chapter 11.
At last, Antonius, when he had given himself wholly unto Cleopatra, Octavia
the sister of Caesar being forsaken, he proclaimed war against him, and at
length he was overcome by a Navy at Actium, a Promontory of Epirus. Caesar had
more than 400 ships, Antonius about 200, but of a huge bulk, that they yielded
the show of Castles and Cities walking through the Sea. The astonished tumult of
Cleopatra, otherwise a doubtful fight turned unto the destruction of Antonius.
Who fleeing, being followed by Octavius into Egypt, The Actian Fight.
and besieged at Alexandria, slew himself; whom straightway Cleopatra
following, that she might not live at the will of the Conqueror, an Asp being
put to her, perished.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Roman Affairs, from the Actian Victory, unto the birth of
Christ; and also of Learned Men, who lived, Augustus Caesar enjoying the
affairs.
ANtonius and Cleopatra being dead, Egypt was reduced into the form of a
Province, in the 294th year after the posterity of Lagus ruled in it. Dio. 51.
Caesar in the 725 year of the City built, made three Triumphs, the Dalmatian,
Actian and Egyptian, in the same month Macrob. Satur. 1. chapter 12.
of August. After which, whether in earnest or feignedly, he deliberated with
Agrippa and Maecenas, of laying down the Empire. The first persuading it, the
latter affrighting from it; when he had determined to follow the counsel of
this, nevertheless he declared to the Senate of resigning the Empire; and by
this Dio. 51. and 53. Sueton.
cunning he brought it to pass, that it was confirmed unto him by the Senate
and people, in the year of the City built 726.

Dio: ibid.
Cornelius Gallus a Knight of Rome, Lieutenant in Egypt, for his proud boldness
being condemned to banishment, killed himself in the year 728, when Augustus
waged war some years by his Captains, with the Cantabrians and Asturians, from
the year 729, to 735, in which they were tamed by Agrippa; Dio. 54.
who indeed being returned, refused to make a triumph offered to him. Phraates,
King of the Parthians, in the year 734, restored the Roman Ensigns taken away
from Crassus.

Dio. 55.
But he had two friends in estimation above others, Maecenas and Marcus
Vispanius Agrippa. The one being contented with the degree of a Knight, dyed in
the 38 Julian year, a singular refuge of learning and all learned men. Augustus
made Agrippa his son in law, his daughter Julia being given him in marriage,
which he begat of Scribonia, of whom were born Caius and Lucius Caesar's,
Agrippa a posthume, or born after his father's death, Agrippina married to
Germanicus the son of Drusus the son of Livia; and Julia, whom Aemilius
married. Moreover, Augustus took away Dio. Sueton.
Livia, being great with child, by her former husband Tiberius Nero, by whom he
had no offspring, when as she had brought forth by Nero, Tiberius, who
afterward reigned, and Drusus, who perished in Germany, in the Dio. 55.
Julian year 37, Agrippa Dio. 54.
being now dead in the Julian year 34. Moreover, Caius Caesar Agrippa, and
Julia, was born in the Julian year 26; but Lucius in the year 29.

Sucton. Vell. 2. Dio. 55. Men excelling in Learning.
Tiberius in the 40th Julian year, obtained the power of a Tribune for five
years space, Armenia being committed unto him, in the following year he
departed into the Isle of Rhodes; where fearing the ill will of his sons in
law, he sat down seven years. The chief cause of his separating, Tybcrius
endued with the Tribune power.
was the hatred of his Wife Julia, who spent her life in all kinds of
detestable wickednesses. Whom being found out, Augustus in the 44 Julian year,
banished for the infamy of this thing.

The Age of this Emperor, was fruitful of great Wits. Among the Greeks
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, who delivers that he lived, Augustus being
Emperor, who famously, in brief, handled History: and Nicolaus Damascenus, who
likewise was dear to Augustus, and Herod in a few things. Of the Latins,
Cornelius Nepos, the sonin law of Atticus. Jerome Chron.
Salust, who dyed four years before the Actian battle. Marcus Portius Latro,
famous in the faculty of speaking, through the wearisomnesse of a double
quartane Ague, he brought violence on himself in 40 Jerome Chron.
year of Augustus. In Asia In the same place.
Hybreas, an Orator, flourished under Antonius and Cleopatra. In the same place.
At Rome, Hyginus, a Grammarian, by surname Polyhistor. Also the most famous
Poets of the whole Age lived in great number. Jerome Chron.
Virgil (Sentius Saturnicus, and Lucretius Cinna, Consuls) in the year of the
World 3965, before Christ 19 years, dies at Brundusium, being fifty years old.
Dona in the Life of Virg.
For he was born in the year of the City built 684. Pompey and Crassus,
Consuls, before Christ, the seventieth, of the World 3914. The Life of Horace.
Horace, Censorinus, and Gallus Consuls, dyed the 57th year of his age turning.
For he was born, Cotta and Torquatus Consuls, in the year of the City built
689, the sixth of the Ides of December. he dyed, Censorinus and Gallus Consuls,
of the City 746, 5 Calends December. in which same year also Mecaenas, but he
departed in the twelfth after Virgil. Also Tibullus and Propertius, writers of
Elegies or mournful Verses, and the equal of them, Ovid, who was born, Hirtus
and Pansa being Consuls, to wit, in the year as he has sung, -- Wherein, by
equal destiny,
Both Consuls fell, by Anthony.
He In the same.
ended his life in banishment at Tomos, a City in Pontus, in the year of Christ
17, of the City 770, of his age, 60.

CHAP. XXII. The History of Herod.
FOr the searching out the Birth of CHRIST the Savior, See b. 10. of Doct.
Times, chapter 65. and b. 11. chapter 1. etc.
the History of Herod is altogether needful; whose beginning, and the years in
which he reigned, we will set down in this Chapter.

This man was the son of Antipater an Idumaean, therefore he also an Idumaean
by birth, not an Ascalonite; which thing Eusebius. 1. hist. chapter 7.
Africanus with Eusebius, from the report of some, has delivered. We rather
believe Joseph. b. 14. chapter 2. See Lit. of Doct. Times, chapter 5.
Josephus, who makes this man an Idumaean; the which as it is more likely to be
true, so that is least to be reproved, because all the ancient Fathers almost,
do say Herod to have been a stranger. For the Idumaeans are reckoned strangers,
that is, born of another stock, not as from Jacob, although following the same
Religion with the Jacobites, they were by profession Jews, not by stock. But of
begetting and Nature we treat, not of Faith and Religion, when we seek
concerning a Native and a stranger, as in that controversy of Herod. Antipater
in that disagreement of brethren, of which we Chap. 17.
have spoken before, adhered to Hircanus, and was appointed by Julius Caesar
Solicitor of Joseph. 14. chapter 5.
Judaea, who presently made his son Herod Lieutenant of Galilee, about twenty
five years old, not fifteen, as book 14. chapter 17.
Josephus is deceived. From the sixth year after, Herod was set over Coelosyria
by Caesar, in the year of the City built seven hundred and seven. For in this
sixth year Caesar appointed Legions of Soldiers over Syria, Hirt. of Alex. War.
Hirtius being Author; after the fight at Philippi, he Joseph. b. 14. chapter 23.
obtained a Tetrarchy with his brother Phasaelus, from Antonius, in the fifth
Julian year. After that, the Parthians being stirred up in Judaea by Antigonus
the brother of Aristobulus, for the bargain of a thousand talents, Herod flees
unto Antonius; through whom, he was beyond hope, made King of Judaea by the
Senate. Joseph. b. 14. chapter 26.
Calvinus and Pollio being Consuls, in the sixth Julian year, the 185 Olympiad
entering. For with that purpose he had come to Rome, that he might ask the
Kingdom for Alexander the Nephew of Aristobulus his Wives brother. He being
returned into Judea, with Antigonus the brother of Aristobulus, he strove more
than two years. At length, Sosius the Captain of Antonius bringing help, he
besieged and took Jerusalem, wherein Antigonus had shut himself, in the third
month in a day of fasting. Dio. 49. Joseph. 14. chapter last.
Dio writes, it was the Sabbath day; Josephus, the year of Sabbaths; Agrippa
and Gallus being Consuls. This year of the World is necessarily numbered by us,
3947. Julian, the 9th. Of the City, seven hundred and seventeen. Therefore Dio
is to be corrected, who assigns him to Claudius and Norbanus Consuls, that
is, in the 8th Julian year. But the Character of the year of Sabbath reproves
him of falsehood. Antigonus being bound to a stake, and beaten with rods, a
little after was smitten with a hatcher, as Dio and Josephus report.

Thus the chief rule of the Hasamonaeans ceased, after the year, says
J^sephus, 126; the which is most true. For Judas first was made chief Priest of
that stock, in the year of the World 3820, of the City 90; from which, the
hundred twenty sixth is the 717 year of the City.

Hence it appears, A double beginning of Herod.
there was a twofold beginning of the reign of Herod; one from the sixth
Julian year; the other from the 9th: in the former, he was declared King by the
Senate; in the latter, he reigned alone, his fellow-suiter being taken away.
Moreover, Joseph. 17. chapter 10.
Josephus writes, That from the former beginning, Herod enjoyed the Kingdom
for thirty seven years; from the latter, thirty four: and the same man bringing
some of his years to remembrance, in about book 15. chapter 7. 12. 13. 14. b. 16.
chapter 9. b. 17. chapter 10. See b. 11. of Doctr. of Times, chapter 1.
six places, he draws them from the latter.

Herod married Mariamnes in the third year after he had been declared King by
the Romans; that is, in that very year, wherein Jerusalem was taken, b. 14. chapter
27.
Josephus being witness; whose Joseph. 15. chapter 3.
brother Aristobulus he made high Priest in the eighteenth year of his age: And
the same man he straightway stined in a fishpond, because he seemed to be most
acceptable to the people. The same in the War against Caesar, followed Antonius
his parties, he being overcome, first Hircanus the grandfather of Mariamnes
being killed, he goes to Rhodes In the same b. chapter 10.
unto Caesar, by whom he was courteously used: and by his authority, and a new
decree of the Senate, the Kingdom was confirmed unto him. When as he returned
to In the same b. chapter 11.
Jerusalem, he slays Mariamnes his wife, and also her mother Alexandra.

In the same b. chapter 14.
In the eighteenth year of his reign, which is the twenty eighth Julian, he
began to repair the Temple at Jerusalem, even from the foundations, as Josephus
writes, or appointed to mend it.

In the same b. 16. chapter last.
Last of all, being carried forth with a greater madness every day, the sons
which he had begotten of Mariamnes, young men of a famous towardness,
Alexander and Aristobulus being accused of false crimes by their brother
Antipater, he killed, a few years before his death, which falls into the forty
two Julian year, if we believe Dio and Josephus; whereof the one writes, Herod
to have reigned thirty four years from the 9th Julian year, wherein Antigonus
was slain. Dio. 43.
But Dio from the Julian year fifty one, Lepidus and Aruntius being Consuls,
says, Herod the Palestine being accused by his brethren, beyond the Alps, was
lifted up again by Augustus, and the Tetrarchy given to a Province. This can be
no other than Archilaus, who, Herod being dead, obtained the Tetrarchy of of
Judaea by request from Augustus, and was cast out from the same in the tenth
year. Nine whole years being deducted from 51, the 42 Julian year is left,
wherein Herod dyed; Joseph. b. 18. chapter 15. b. 17. chapter 8. and 15.
whose death, an eclipse of the Moon went before, Josephus being witness;
which in the same year is beheld March 13. almost the third hour from Midnight.

The End of the Fourth Book.
THE Latter Section or Division OF Dionysius Petavius, Jesuit, OF THE Account
of Time.
The Fifth Book.
Comaining Years from the first of CHRIST, to the Thirty fourth.

CHAP. I. Of the death of Augustus Caesar, and the Government and death of
Tiberius Nero. And also of the Birth and Death of CHRIST, and the things which
happened in those first Christian times.
IN the year of Christ 14. at Nola in Campania, Augustus dyed, on the
fourteenth of the Calends of September, Sueton. August 100. Dio 56. Augustus.
in the year of his age 76. when he had lived 56. years from the first entrance
into office: from the death of Antonius, forty and three, full: A Prince most
excellent, and needful for the Roman Commonwealth. Which, laboring with too
much happiness, nor capable of its own fortune, but running headlong into
ruin, he supported; and both with the best Laws, and also riches, and all
plenty of things, he so furnished it, the City it self also being adorned with
stately works, that he might rightly be called, the second builder of it, and
father of his country, and [ Augustus] that is, Magnificent, royal, or
renowned.

Of which, cruelty and filthiness increased a defire of Tiberius that was
great of it self, Tiberius.
whom he had his succeeder. This man, his father Nero, Livia his Mother, was
born the 16th Kalends of December, in the year of the City built 714. the 4th
Julian year, Sueton. Tiber. 5.
after the Philippian War. Being in the 55th year of his age, in that very year
in which Augustus dyed, he reigned, the most sorrowful of mortal men, and
through cruelty, robbery, lust, and arrogance, was hated of all: which vices
notwithstanding, about the beginning of his chief rule, he dissembled with
wonderful cunning, through fear of Germanicus; whom he by the charge of his
brother, had adopted the son of a Father in law, flourishing both in all the
praise of virtues and famous warlike deeds, and because he was fitter for
Government, very greatly mistrusted. This man when he had dispatched
successefully the greatest wars, he passed over out of Germany into the East,
and he Tacitus. 2.
opposed the Parthians, in the year of the City built 769. Cneius Piso, at the
same time an ordinary Lieutenant, being sent into Syria: with whom, and
Germanicus there were great enmities. Therefore Germanicus was put out, not
without suspicion of poison given him by him, Tacit. 16. Dio 17. Suet. in Caio.
1. and 2.
in theyear of the City built 772 in the sixth of Tiberius. For that thing, he
being required to Rome for judgment, Tacit. 5. Seianus.
Piso, prevented the sentence by a voluntary death.

And then Tacit. 4. Dio 58.
Aelius Seianus, carried up by Tiberius in the Knightorder, after many
wickednesses, now determining all the highest things in his mind, one letter of
Tiberius being delivered to the Senate against him, he is cast down from that
top or pitch, and by the hand of the Executioner, was killed with all his stock.

Two years before this time, that is, the 16. of Tiberius, the 29 of Christ,
Livia the mother of Tiberius deceased, in Taeit. 5. Dio 58.
the year of her age 86. Tac. 4. Dio. 58.
Tiberius was then in the Island Caprea, whither about the thirteenth year of
his reign, of Christ 26. he had departed, never to return afterward to the
City. Where the Judges being removed, he wallowed himself in all kinds of
detestable acts. Among these disgraces, not more to all others, than cursed to
himself, The death of Tyberius.
he died the seventeenth Kalends of April, of his reign the 23d year, of Christ
37. being in the 78 year of his life.

Augustus enjoying the affairs, Jesus Christ, the Son of God is born of the
Virgin Mary, under the 194 Olymp. Tiberius reigning, when he had fullfilled the
thirty fourth year, for the recovering the salvation of mankind, he suffered
voluntary pains, with the punishment of the Cross. Tiberius Varro, and Seianus
Consulls on the 23 of March. After that, on the third day, rising from the
dead, on the fourtieth after he had revived, he was carried back into Heaven,
before the eyes of his Disciples.

After the death of Christ, and the Holy Spirit having fallen on the Disciples
boldly, they professing what they had seen, and openly; the Jews waxed bitterly
cruel against them. Act. 6. and 7.
Stephen one of the seven, who were chosen to perform profane and holy services
in the company of the Christians, What things happened a little after the year
of suffering.
because he more fervently employed himself, in publishing the glory of Christ,
being laid hold of by contentious, envious persons, was overwhelmed with stones.

From that time the chief of the Jews endeavored to blot out the name of the
Christians, by what means they could: but especially, Act. 6. The conversion of
Paul.
Saul burned against them, who, the largest power being made over to him from
the High Priest, when as he bended to Damascus, that he might oppress them, he
is affrighted, and being struck down, he suddenly applied himself wholly unto
his worship, That happened on the third year from the death of Christ. For
those thirty five years, wherein the Ancients affirm Paul to have served
Christ, as we have before taught, from the 13 of Nero; of Christ 67, numbered
backward; end into that which is the third from the year of Christ's suffering.

CHAP. II. Of Caius Caligula, Claudius, and Nero: Whose deeds are sharply
touched.
From the 37. of Christ, to the 68.
Caius Caesar Caligula, so called from a warlike shoe or sock, which being a
boy he was wont to use in the Camps ( Germanicus his father, his Mother
Agrippina, the daughter of Marcus Agrippa, and Julia) succeeded Tiberius, in
the same year in which he died, in the year of Christ 37. Suet. Caius 12. Caius
Caligula.
Who now ending his life is said to have hit or struck against his Jaws with
his own hand. He was then entering the twenty fifth year of his age, for he was
born says Suetonius, at Antium the day before the Kalends of September, says
Suet. chapter 8.
Suetonius, his father and Capito being Consuls, which is of the Christian
account, the twelfth year. As Soon as he attained the Empire, there was great
gladness of the people, nor less hope of the Diviners, that he would be like
to his father Germanicus, Suet. in the same 3.
to whom it is delivered to memory, all virtues of the mind and body came. And
indeed, as there are wont to be for the most part, the best beginnings of the
worst Princes, he brought forth not a few signs of a moderate and civil mind;
but a little after, as if he had put off Man, he overcame the very wild beasts
in cruelty, striving for the slaughters of all ranks of men: he killed Dio 59.
Suet. 26.
Macro Lieutenant of the Praetorians, by whose endeavor he had been made
Emperor. Also he accustomed to commit whoredom with his sisters. Infinite
riches being exhausted, and scarce a year turning about, that whole twenty and
seven thousand H. S. the which Tiberius had gathered together, being consumed,
the which amount almost to 72561500 Crowns of Gold, he turned his mind unto
banishments, and robberies. Amongst other tokens of cruelty, this word was
taken: Would the people of Rome had one neck! In his buildings, he coveted to
effect no works so much, as what was denied could be effected. Suet. 19. Dio. 9.
He joined together the middle space of the City, Baia in Campania, and the
heaps or water-dams of Puteoli, three miles, and six hundred paces, with a
bridge, in the year of Christ 39. Suet. Philo of Legate. Joseph. 19. Ant. chapter 2.
Suet. 58.
The same commanded, if he could, to be worshipped for a God throughout the
whole world, and Temples to be built for him. At last the 9th Kalends Febr. he
was killed by Chaereas Cassius a Tribune of the Praetorian band, and other
conspirators, in the year of Christ 41. when he had reigned three years, and
ten Months, and eight days as Chap. 59. Dio 59.
Suet. Claud. Dio 59.
Suetonius Writes, but he lived twenty and nine years.

Suet. Claud. Dio 59.
Claudius Nero the Uncle of Caius Caligula, the son of Drusus was chief after
Caius, a man very little evil by nature, but foolish and blockish: Therefore
he was not so much cruel of his own nature, as through others leading, and
will, especially of freemen and wives, to whose power he committed himself, and
all things. Tacit. b. 11. Suet. Dio 60.
He had first of all Messalina to wife, whose whoredoms and unheard of
wickednesses unknown to none, he alone knew not, until she daring openly to
marry Silius a Knight, by his command she is killed with the adulterer,
Narcissus constraining him, who, with Pallantes another freeman, could do all
things with him. That happened in the eighth year of his reign, of Christ 48.
Dio and Tacitus being witnesses. Another token of foolishness was, that
Messalina being slain, of whom he had begotten Brittannicus, a son, and
Octavia; he married Agrippina the daughter of his brother Germanicus, the
Mother of Nero by Domitian, in the ninth year of his reign, of Christ 49. And
that at the persuasion of Pallantes: whose son ( Nero) also by the entreaties
of Agrippina, he adopted in the tenth year of his reign, and Brittanicus being
passed by he ordained him his successor. The same drove away the Jews from
Rome, in the year of Christ forty and nine, the Tacit. 12. Suet.
Mathematicians from Italy, in the year fifty and two. An expedition being made
into the Island Britain, within sixteen days he subdued the whole, as says
Dio 60.
Dio, in the third year of his Empire. He dies, Marcellus and Aviolas, being
Consulls, 3. Ides October, in the year of Christ fifty four, when as poison was
given him in a Mushrome by Agrippina. He Suet. Dio.
reigned thirteen years, eight Months, and twenty days; he lived sixty four
years.

God being angry with the Romans, Suet. Dio. 62.
after the death of his father, in law, Domitius Nero took the Empire, being
Suet. Ner. 8.
seventeen years old, the which in the beginning he so carried on, that he
might have been accounted the best of Princes: to wit, as long as he obeyed the
precepts of his Master Seneca. Afterward, being corrupted through the liberty
of age, and flattery, he was more like a Monster then a Man. He ^ac. 15. Dio
62. Corbulo an excellent Captain.
beat back the Parthians, tobbing or spoiling, Armenia being taken by Corbulo,
a stout Captain, both of ancient virtue and severenesse. Who also recieved
Armenia in Tac. 14.
seventh year of Nero, of Christ sixty, and compelled Tirtdates the brother of
Vologesis, King of the Parthians, to come to Rome, and to ask the Crown of
Nero. Which was done, in the Tac. 16. Dio 63.
year of Christ, sixty six, of Nero, thirteen, in which year also he compelled
Corbulo honorably called back to dye. Presently as he began to reign, he took
away Britannicus by poison. His mother Suet. 34. Tat. 14. Dio 61.
Agrippina being first spoiled of all honor, and driven out of her Palace, at
last he commanded to be killed. Which Parricide least any thing should be
wanting to the unhappiness of those times, the Senate approved of. That fell
out in the year of Christ fifty and nine, of Nero six. Suet. Dio. 62. Tac. 14.
After these things Poppaea being brought in, which he had taken away from
Otho, Octavia sent a far off, he slays. The Tac. 15. Dio 62. Suet.
conspiracy of Piso and others against him, being disclosed he punished with
death Lucan, the Poet, Seneca the Philosopher, with very many others in the
year of Christ sixty and five, and in the same year he killed Poppaea being
great with child, with a stroke of his heel. He added to this cruelty, the
reproach of a most shameful disgrace, because he feared not to come forth on
the Stage among Stageplayers, or to play and sing among Harpers, and to ride
about Horses, in the Circian or Circle-sports. Moreover that he might set forth
the likeness of burning Troy, as it were by pastime, he set the City on fire,
in the Tac. 15. Suet. Dio. 63.
year of Christ sixty four, by which detestable acts, when he had come into the
hatred and contempt of his subjects, being forsaken of all, and sought out for
punishment, he played the part of an Executioner on himself in the 14. year of
his Empire, of the account of Christ, 68. Suet.
on that day wherein he killed Octavia.

CHAP. III. Jewish and Christian affairs under Caius Claudius and Nero.
From Christ 37. unto 68.
AGrippa the son of Aristobulus, the Nephew of Herod, See b. 11. of doct.
times, chapter 10. and foll. King Agrippa.
the elder, being bound by Tiberius, because endeavoring for Caius Caligula,
he had entreated for him the Empire; straightway as soon as Tiberius died, he
was loosed by Caius from bonds, and and was endowed with the Tetrarchies of
Philippi, and Lysania, with the title of King, Joseph. 18. Ant. 8.
Josephus being author; and the year following, the second year of Caius, as
the same man shows, he sailed unto his Kingdom, after whose imitation, his
sister Herodias, who, her husband Philip being left, had joined an incestuous
marriage with his brother Herod Antipater, Tetrarch of Galilee, she constrained
this very man to go unto Rome, to obtain the Kingly grace. But there, by the
letters of Agrippa, he finds Caius to be offended with him, Joseph. in the same
chapter 19.
and he changed his hoped for honor of King, for banishment, and was sent away
to Lugdunum, and Agrippa increased his Tetrarchy, the which to have happened in
the third year of Caius, or the fourth entering, will be a little after
manifested. At which time Petronius was granted successor to Vitellius
Lieutenant of Syria, to whom it was commanded by Caius, that he should place
his Image, in the Temple of Jerusalem, but Petronius prolonging it, in the
Joseph. chapter 11.
mean time Caius dyed. The Jews also of Alexandria being unworthily used by
Flaccus Avilius the Governor, they sent Phil. b. of Embassad. Joseph. in the
same, chapter 10.
Philo, a noble and discreet man of their own nation, in embassage unto Caius,
by whom he was shifted off and cast out. Moreover in the same year, Pilate
weary of his life, as we have learned In his Chr. and 2. Hist. 7.
out of Eusebius, brought death on himself.

Caius taken from the living, Claudius who succeeded him in the year of Christ
41. Joseph. b. 19. chapter 4.
in that very year he enlarged the Kingdom of Agrippa; Judaea, and Samaria
being added. So the Kingdom of Herod, after his death being divided into
pieces, Agrippa first possessed the whole of it. Who presently going unto
Jerusalem, he began to persecute the Christians, whereby he might make the Jews
friends unto him, and first of all he Act. 9.
killed James: and then cast Peter into Prison: from whence he was snatched
forth by the Angel. Neither forbear heavenly anger long, the cruel and
ambitious Prince. After three years that he was made King of all Palestina,
when he was at Caesarea, which is called Strato's Tower, Act. 12. Joseph. 19.
chapter 7.
and made a speech at the Tribunal seat, suffering them to cry him up as it
were a god, by the sudden wrath of God he was dispatched by a consumption of
worms, issuing out of his body. You shall find the relation of his death in
Josephus, a little differing from Luke. But of the time, that we have spoken he
affirms; He affirms, that he reigned four years, Caius being Emperor,
three under Claudius, in the whole seven years, afterward Judea was given to
Syria, and ceased to have Kings of their own.

In the mean while Christian Godliness began to be increased through Judaea
and Syria, The increase of Christian affairs.
and farther also, the Disciples diligently employing themselves in that
matter, and especially Peter and Paul, of whom, the first traveling over
Syria, is believed to have fastened the Bishop seat of Antiochia, the seventh
year after the suffering of Christ, the 37. of the common account, over which
he was chief six whole years; from thence Eusebius. 2. Hist. chapter 14.
about the second year of Claudius, he traveled to Rome, as Eusebius writes
in his Chronicle, who also shows, that Peter was Bishop of the City 25 years.
Dionysius Alexandrinus, with Eusebius, is Author, that Peter preached first of
all the Faith at Rome, or there founded a Church. The beginning of this seat
falls into the third year of Claudius, of Christ 43, which is the next year
from his going thither, when as Paul had not as yet come thither,; Peter's seat
at Rome.
who in the mean time purely administered the Gospel in Asia and Greece, and
Macedonia: and in the 25. year after the suffering of Christ, of Nero the
second, he was brought bound to Rome, Jerome Writ of the Church.
as Jerome witnesses, which is the year of Christ 56. Therefore Peter came to
Rome long before Paul.

Paul was heard before Nero, and was freed. But when through the endeavor of
both Apostles, as appears, the Christian faith increased, Nero first
persecuted it: The first persecution under Nero.
who when he had set fire on the City, as was abovesaid, in the 11 year of his
reign, of the Christian account, 64. he falsely turned away the envy of his
wickedness on the Christians. Therefore many were laid hold of, and afflicted
with fearful punishments, so that Tacit. Ann. 13. Suet. 16.
some being smeared over with Tallow, fatt and Pitch, burned like Torches for
the use of night-light. Almost at the same time, Simon Magus, Act. 8.
who, Philip carrying the Christian Religion to Samaria, had given him that
name, and had afterward returned to mischievous arts, came to Rome, and
deluded the Romans by his impostures. Arnob. 2. Cyrill. Cat. Chrysol. Ser.
47.6. Sulp: b. 2. Chrysostom. Hom. 18. on acts Ephr. Ser. of haeret, 803. and
others. The death of Peter and Paul.
Whom Peter, he being carried up into the Air, and flying, cast down by his
praying. For that thing, by the command of Nero. as well he as Paul, were
condemned of their life. the 3 Kalends of July, in the year of Christ, 67. the
thirteenth of Nero going out. Ambr. on 118. Ps. Oct. 21. Eusebius. 3. of Them. p.
75. Aug. Ser. 28. of Sanct.
Peter, the soals of his feet being turned inward, was fastened to a Cross.
Jerome of Scrip. Chrysostom. hom. 2. on Ep. Ro^
Paul the same day was beheaded with a sword.

No acts almost of the other Apostles are certain, and worthy credit, they lie
hid comprehended in History in the dark. Of Matthew, Iren. b. 2. chapter 1. James
the younger.
Ireneus writes the Gospel to be written by him, when Peter appointed the
Roman Church. Also James the Lords younger brother, who was ordained the first
chief ruler at Jerusalem by the Apostles, Jerome of Writ. of the Church. Eusebius.
Chron. The Roman seat is demonstrated. See the 11. of Doctr. of times, chap. 13.
in the thirtieth year of his seat, the seventh of Nero, the Jews slew, which
begins on the 61 year of Christ. Simon succeeded James, Linus, Peter, who
hitherto is thought to have been Bishop of some Region.

The time of either chair is supported with Authority. But the Roman intervall
has more witnesses than the Antiochian. For Eusebius alone is the assertor of
this, in his Chronicle, who sets down its beginning at the last year of
Tiberius, from the which in the seventh year after, he marks Peter to have gone
to Rome. But that first rent from the Antiochian Seat, is not proper, seeing it
neither appears in old books; and he teaches absurdly, Peter to have
remained 25. years at Antioch. Of the Roman seat the ancients speak more
certainly, whose end was made in Peter's death, in the year of Christ 67. the 13
of Nero, as yet sliding, and the fourteenth at hand, but that fourteenth year
is reckoned by Jerome, who writes both the Apostles to have dyed in that very
year, and numbreth 37 after the suffering of Christ. Jerome of famous men.
Moreover he says, Peter obtained the Roman seat 25 years. Whence it may seem
that he made his beginning the 43 year of Christ, but of the seat of Antioch
six years before, of Christ 37. Neither truly do the Ancients deliver the Roman
Church only to be found ed by Peter. But also Innocent the first, in his first
Epistle, it is manifest, says he, into all Italy, France, Spain, Africa, and
Sicily, and the Islands lying between them, none to have ordained Churches, but
those Priests whom the reverend Apostle Peter, or his successors have
appointed: If there be another Apostle, says he, in these Provinces, they
either send him as a Deputy, or he is chosen to have taught.

CHAP. IV. Of Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus, Domitian; and of the
destruction of Jerusalem.
From the 68 of Christ, to 96.
ALittle before the death of Nero, Suet. Ner. chapter 40. and 41. Xiph.
Caius Julius, a redresser of things, who governed France as a Praetor, openly
falling off, instantly persuaded Sergius Galba, governing Spain, to take the
Empire; the which, he, the redresser being a little while after killed with his
own hand, continued steadfastly to do. Suet. Galba. Xiphil.
Thus, Nero being taken away, he reigned about seven months, already of a
great age: and the year following, the 69 of Christ beginning, he perished with
Piso, him whom he had adopted: when as now Marcus Sylvius Otho was proclaimed
Emperor. But to this man, there was a very short space of reigning, as of
three months.

In the mean time, Tac. 1. hist. and 2. Suet. in Otho and Vitel. Plut. in Otho.
Xiphil.
Vitellius, through the boldness of the Germane Legions, over whom, as the
Consuls Ambassador, he was chief, usurps the name of Emperor; and at
Bebriacum by an easy battle he overcomes the Army of Otho, who being weary of
Civil arms, killed himself about the month of April, in the 37th year of his
age.

Suet. Tao Xiphil.
Vitellius after Otho bare the Empire almost eight months in the same year of
Christ 69; which space of time he fulfilled not alone. For Flavius Vespasian,
who was sent by Nero to suppress the Jews, Alexander Lieutenant of Egypt, and
Mucianus President of Syria, helping him, as it were, floting in the slaughter
of three Princes, and he undertook an uncertain Empire. Tac. hist. 2.
First Tiberius in the Kalends of July, of the year of Christ 69, forced the
Legions to an oath in his words: and he, the first day of his principality
being celebrated the next day after, says Tacitus, Suet. Xi. phil.
governed the Empire ten years with the greatest equity and clemency. He
suffered the freedom of slanderers, and especially of Philosophers, most
patiently. Yet he banished Helvidius Priscus the son in law of Thraseas, by
sect a Stoic, and Praetor, being constained by his too much insolency, and
commanded him to be killed, and also he removed the Philosophers, one Musonius
excepted, from the City, in the year of Christ 73. He embraced Wits and
Learning with great liberality. He appointed an hundred pounds yearly to Latin
and Greek Rhetoricians, out of his Exchequer. Only covetousness of money was
blamed in him; the which notwithstanding he was wont to excuse with the
scarcity of the money-treasury, affirming, That there was four hundred thousand
needful, that the Commonwealth might stand. That sum being reduced to our
money, will make about 107500000 Crowns of gold.

The Jewish War was finished by that Emperor; unto which being as yet a
private man, he was sent by Nero, The destruction of Jerusalem.
as I have taught above. That had its beginning from some seditious persons; of
whom Joseph. b. 2. of destruct. chapter 17. etc.
the Captain was Eleazar the son of Ananias the High Priest; who through show
of Religion raised arms against the Romans. Afterward through the slaughter of
their own Countrymen, that were slain by the Caesarians, and them of
Scythopolis, and others here and there, the mad Nation contended the more
stiffly against the Romans. Cestius Gallus the Ambassador of Syria, besieging
Jerusalem, with a great slaughter of his Army is put to flight, in the Joseph.
b. 2. chapter 24. Josephus the Historian.
12th year of Nero, in the month of November. of Christ 65. The Conquerours
returning to Jerusalem, as they choose both other Captains of the War, and also
Josephus the son of Matthias, in the Joseph. b. 2. of destruct. chapter 14. Suet.
Xiph.
year of Christ 67. Vespasian coasting about through Galilee and Judea with
weapons, he reduced Josephus himself, a Captain of the War, into his power: by
whom also the Empire was foretold unto him. Last of all setting upon Jerusalem,
the head of the Nation; straightway being now Emperor, he renews the siege
by his son Titus, that was interrupted by the slaughter of Nero and others, in
the second year of his reign, of Christ the 70, at the days of unleavened
bread. And at length, on the Joseph. b. 10. of destruc. chapter 26.
10th of Lois, or the 5th day of August, the Temple being set on fire, the City
was wholly taken, the The same, book. 6, 47.
8th of Gorpiaeus, which answers to September. 1. the 7th resting day, as
Xiphilinus, has declared out of Dio.

That slaughter brought destruction on the Jewish Nation and name, and so great
a force of calamity, and such a manifold kind of evils was there, that it did
appear for the most unworthy death of that Son of God, those punishments were
thoroughly paid them. Joseph. b. 7. of destr. Dio 68.
For both horrible hunger enforced those that were shut up within the walls
into that madness, that they did eat man's flesh, and also monthers consumed
the bodies of their children; and eleven hundred thousand, which was scarce
given credit to being spoken, perished in that one siege. Last of all, the City
it self being made equal to the ground, Jerome on 8. of Zach.
over which also the Conqueror thrust in the plow, in the third year of his
reign, of Christ 71. Joseph. 7. chapter 24. or 10.
Vespasian with his son Titus triumphed over the Jews; and then he shut up the
Temple of Janus, and began to build a Temple of Peace. In the same year, the
Jews making tumults at Alexandria, The same book, chapter 30. or (...).
Lupus the Governor stopped up their Temple Onion, so called from Onias the
high Priest, who had founded it. Moreover, in his ninth Consulship, which he
bare with Titus his son, Suet. Vesp. chapter 14. Dio. 66.
he deceased, of a disease, while he answered or heard Embassages, affirming;
It behooves an Emperor to dye standing. This was the 79th year of Christ, the
eighth day of the Calends of July, when he had lived 69 years, one month,
seven days; he reigned ten years.

Suet. Xiphil.
Among the best Emperors, Titus, who was put in the place of his father
Vespasian, is by right numbered; although before he reigned, he was mistrusted
of cruelty, covetousness, and lust. But whatsoever were his manners, in his
chief rule he so turned for the better, that he deserved to be called, The Love
and delight of Mankind. There was an especial fame of meekness and readiness
in him. Being wont to deny any thing to none, he said, None ought to depart
sorrowful from his Prince. When after Supper, he had remembered, that he had
performed nothing for any one that day; On friends, said he, I have lost a day.
He being Emperor, in the year of Christ 80, a great force of flames of fire,
and straightway ashes, brake out of the Mountain Vesuvius. Xiphil. Plin. Jun.
b. 6. Ep. 16.
But it passed through into Africa, Syria, and even to Egypt. Two Towns
perished, of Pompey and Hercules. He dedicated the Amphitheatre or Playhouse,
and hot Baths, with his own name.

He dies in the year of Christ 81, in the Ides of September after two years,
and as many months, and 20 days after he had succeeded his father, Sueton.
in the forty and first year of his age, not without suspicion of poison given
him by Domitian his brother.

Titus dying, had left a great lack of him to the Senate and people. Suet.
Xiphil.
Domitian increased that desire, his brother and succeeder, the most naught of
almost all Princes, who hitherto had, and afterward lived. But among the
beginnings of his principality, some show of clemency and justice uttered it
self. But straightway he betrayed his disposition, and shows himself an
imitator of Nero, in cruelty, robbery, and riot. Being lavish in gifts and
spectacles, he, among other things, appointed a five years game, a threefold,
on the Capitol of Jupiter, a musical riding, and exercising game, in the year
of Christ 86. He first would be called Lord, and God. When he had made a
beginning of reigning in the year of Christ 81, he was quenched by the
conspiracy of his Subjects, in the year 96, the fourteenth of the Kalends of
October. the 45 year of his age, when he had commanded 15 years, six days.

CHAP. V. Of Christian Affairs, from the death of Nero, unto the last year of
Domitian; or from the year of Christ 68, unto 96.
CHristian Affairs of that time, are conversant in no great light: it was
rather through the scarceness of Writers, than because there was nothing which
might have been committed to letters. For it is to be believed, the Apostles
and Disciples of Christ to have carried on neither small matters, nor things
unworthy to be known: but many things are sprinkled with fables and uncertain
tales. And also we have decreed to commit to this book, not an exact history of
all things, but only some chief heads of things.

Peter being slain by Nero, The Roman Bishops.
Linus undertook to govern the Roman Church, as Iren. b. 5. chapter 3. Tert. Carm.
against Mar. b. 3. Eusebius. Chron. Epiph. haer. 28.
ancient Writers affirm, by whom is given by voice an old table of the Roman
Bishops, framed together in the time of Liberius, the which we have in our
possession. They assign to this man 11 years, two months, and some days; that
he deceased in the year of Christ 78, whom Cletus afterward succeeded, whom
Irenaeus calls Anacletus, as also many of the Greeks; and he sat twelve years,
and seven months; and suffered Martyrdom in the year of Christ 91, and had
Clement his successor. Furthermore, in the Eusebius. Chron.
13th of Domitian, or 14th, a persecution began to wax hot against the
Christian name; in which, Saint John the Apostle being banished into the Isle
Patmos, Jerome of Writ. of the Church.
wrote the Revelation, Iren. b. 5. chapter 30.
about the death of Domitian; when as before at Rome, being overwhelmed in
burning oil, he had come forth unhurt; the which Jerome. l. 1. in Jovin.
Jerome approves of, out of Tertullian. Also Flavius Clemens, Consul, cousen
of Domitian, and his Wife Flavia Domitilla, kinswoman of the same Emperor,
suffered; on whom the crime of ungodliness and Judaism was cast, as Dio b. 67.
Dio writes; Eusebius says, or Jerome in his Chronicle, Domitilla was the
Nephewess of Clement the Consul by his sister; and he names the same Virgin, a
famous Roman Martyr.

Moreover, there were many Heretics in the same space of time; but the chief,
Simon Magus, cast down from on high by the Apostle Peter: Nicolaus, from whom
the Sect of the Nicolaitans flowed forth. 2 Timothy 1. and 2. and 4.
Hymenaeus, Philetus, Phygellus, Alexander, of whom the Apostle makes mention.
Epiph. haer. 30.
Ebion, after the destruction of Jerusalem, spread the poisons of his heresy,
as Epiphanius writes. Menander also, and Cerinthus lived in those days.

CHAP. VI. Of Men excelling in the praise of Learning, who flourished from the
birth of Christ, to the death of Domitian, almost a whole Age.
THe Eloquence, and likewise the wisdom of Philo the Jew, made famous this
Age; Phil. of Embas.
who performed an Embassage for the Jews of Alexandria, with Caius the
Emperor. As also M^sonius Tyrrhenus sprung from the Vulsinians, by Sect a
Stoic, who lived in Nero's time, as says Suidas. Apollonius Tyaneus, a
familiar friend of Musonius. Demetrius the Cynick much Sen. Ep. 63.
praised by Seneca. But Seneca himself, the Stoic, was accounted far more
famous, and the Master of Nero, and compelled by the same to dye. Under
Tiberius flourished Strabo. 13. Famous Poets.
Strabo a Philosopher, and likewise a Geographer. Under Nero famous Poets, were
Lucan Silius an Italian, who being Consul, Nero dyed. Persius a writer of
Satyrs. A little after, under Domitian, Martial, Valerius Flaccus, Statius
Juvenal. Historians, Suetonius, Tacitus; Among the Jews Joseph. in End of 10.
book.
Josephus, who in the 13th year of Domitian, about the 93 of Christ finished
the Jewish Antiquities, in the 56 year of his age, as he professes. So he
should be born in the 37th year of Christ, the first of Caius Caligula, the
which he himself witnesses in his life. His equal and imitator was Justus
Tiberiadensis, of whom Phot. b. 35.
Photius. Also, Vespasian being Emperor, Quintus Curtius, a most polished or
fine Historian is reported to have lived. Under Tiberius, Appio a Grammarian,
born at Alexandria, bare the conquest of diverse kinds of Learning; Plinius the
elder, who, in the second year of Titus, while he beholds the flame of the
Mountain Vesuvius nearer than was safe, he was Plin. Jun. b. 6. Ep. 6.
quenched in the 80 year of Christ. Likewise Pliny the younger born of his
sister, was famous under Domitian and Trajane, and Quintilian at the same time.
Asconius Pedianus, a most noble Interpreter of Cicero, in the 7th year of
Vespasian, as Jerome writes in his Chronicle, being 73 years old, he was taken
blind, he lived afterward twelve years.

CHAP. VII. Of Nerva, Trajanus, and Hadrianus, and what things most remarkable
have been done by them, and in their times.
From the 96 year of Christ, unto the 138.
Dio. 68. Aur. victor. Eutr. 5.
COcceius Nerva, born in the Town of Narney, being already full of years, took
the Empire after Domitian, in the 96 year of Christ's Nativity, and reigned one
year, four months, and eleven days, a very good Prince, but despised by
reason of his age; he revoked Domitian's Acts, and restored those that by
violence and injustice had been nullified. He said, That he had so lived in the
Throne, that he nothing feared to live securely, if he should be a private man
again. But he wanted authority for to keep the Soldiery under: Therefore they
that had slain Domitian, of whom he had received the Empire, he himself
opposing to it, were killed by the Pretorian bands; wherefore he adopted for
his son, Trajanus, then governing Germany, Victor.
with whom he lived three months; he dyed the 6th of February-Kalends, Dio.
having lived 65 years, 10 months, and 10 days: Eutropius says, he lived 72
years.

Then Ulpius Trajanus took the Empire upon him in Collen-Agrippina, the 98 year
of Christ, being then 42 years old, born in the City Tudertina, as Victor Dio.
l. 68. Victor. Eutrop. 8.
writes. Eutropius says, that he was born in Spain near Italy; he was strong
and expert in military affairs, wise, moderate, and courteous; so that by the
general consent of all, he deserved the name of Very good. Eutropius says,
That his friends blaming him, because he was too familiar and courteous to all
sorts of persons; he answered them, Trajan's golden Proverb.
That He was such an Emperors to private persons, as when he was a private
person he did desire Emperors to be toward him. He added to the Roman
Provinces Dacia of Schythia, having conquered Decebalus the King, who dyed by
his own proper hands the 102 year of Christ. Dio. siuseb. Chro.
Being gone into the East, he subdued the Armenians, Iberians, the Colchians,
the Sarmates, the Osrhoenes, the Arabians, and the Bosphorians. Falling upon
the Parthians, he brought under his power Seleucia, Ctesiphon, and Babylon, and
several other Cities. But whiles he sails into the Red Sea, most of these
people revolted from him, whom soon both in his own person, and by his
Commanders he subdued again. Dio.
A huge Earthquake, whilst that he swayed the Scepter, overthrew Antioch, in
the year of Christ 115; by which were stricken Messala and Pedo, of whom Pedo
was on a sudden smothered in the ruin, Trajanus being drawn out through a
window, escaped hardly. The Cyrenian Jews also with much cruelty against the
Romans and Grecians did overrun Egypt and Cyprus, whom Trojanus defeated with
a great slaughter, by Martius Turbo. At length the Parthians rebelling, who had
chased away the King given to them by the Roman Emperor, disposing himself to
war against them, he fell sick, and of that disease, being carried into the
City Selinuntes of Cilicia, there he dyed the 4th of August, the 117 year after
Christ's birth, and from him was the City called Trajanopolis, he lived, as
Victor Records, 64 years; and Eutropius says 63; he ruled the Empire 19 years,
6 months, and 15 days, as Dio. 68.
Diod. says.

Spartia. Dio. 66. Victor. Eutrop. 8.
Aelius Hadrianus, Trajan's Couzen-german and his Countryman, (for he was an
Italian) by Plotina's favor, which was Trajan's Wife, began to reign in the
117 year of Christ; A man of much Wit and great sagacity, and fit for virtue,
as well as for vice: he applied his mind almost to all sorts of Arts, both of
the exquisitest and smallest, the masters whereof, as emulators with him, he
was wont to put down; he had an excellent memory, and he was careful and
diligent in his Government of the Provinces, and therefore did no man travel so
many Countries as he did. After Trajan's death, he left Parthia, Armenia,
Assyria, and Mesopotamia, he had also forsaken Dacia, had he not feared the
loss of many thousand Roman Citizens that were in it.

Spart. Dio. 69. Xiphil. Eusebius. Chron. Oros. 7. c. 13.
The Jews rising up in arms, were first suppressed under him by Martius Turbo
in the second year of his Empire. After this, he repaired Jerusalem, which he
called Aelia Capitolina, and brought a Colony to it; and in the very same place
where the Temple had been, there he built another to Jupiter. The which deed so
moved the spirits of the Jews, that having taken up arms more fiercely than
ever before under their General Barcocheba, against whom Hadrian sent Severus,
whom he had sent for from the Britains, with other chief Officers, by whom the
Jews being by little and little suppressed, were at last utterly defeared, and
in that battle were killed of the Jews fourscore thousand men, as Diod. says,
beside an infinite number that were devoured by famine, by sickness, and fire,
so that all Palestine was almost reduced to a desert. From that time the Jews
were forbidden to return to Jerusalem under pain of death, Greg. Naz. Orat. 12.
except for one day in the year to lament their great loss. This War was put to
a period in the 135 year of Christ, at which time Hadrian was going into the
twentieth year of his Empire.

Spart. Dio. 69. Eutrop. Vict.
At last, growing ancient, and sickly, having no children, he adopted Ceionius
Commodus Verus for his son, whom he named Aelius Verus, and created him Caesar,
in the 137 year of Christ; But he dyed in January-Kalends on the very next
year, as Spartianus writes. Thereupon Hadrian being sick, he adopted Arrius
Antoninus, who afterward was called Pius, upon those terms, that he should
adopt two others to himself, viz. Annius Verus, Aelius Verus his son; and
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. At length, having killed Servianus, his sisters
husband, a man of 90 years of age, having with vexation and weariness of his
life several ways attempted to dispatch his life, Dio. 69. Xiphil. Spart. vide
11. de Doct. Temp. c. 21.
he at last dyed at Baia the 6th of July, in the year of Christ 138, in the
presence of Antoninus Pius, having lived 62 years, five months, and 17 days;
and having reigned 22 years, and 11 months.

CHAP. VIII. Of Antoninus Pius, M. Aurelius, Verus, Commodus. Anno 138 of
Christ, unto 192.
ANtoninus Pius, adopted by Hadrian, governed the Roman Empire in the year of
Christ 138, Capitolinus Victor. Eutrop. 8.
with so much virtue and goodness, that he excelled all other examples. For he
governed the Commonwealth rather by a fatherly, then Princely affection; and
he governed the whole World by his sole authority, without any war, all the
time of his Empire: therefore was he compared with Numa. The Foreign and far
distant Princes and people did so dread him, that they would make him the
Arbitrator of their differences, he forbid enquiry to be made after them that
had conspired against him. He dies in the year of his age 70, and of his
Empire twenty four, Victor gives him up seventy two years, he died in the
hundred sixty one year after Christ's Nativity, in the Month of March having
taken the Scepter, the fifth of July, in the one hundred thirty eighth year of
Christ; so that he Governed the Empire two and twenty years, and almost eight
Months.

After him, ruled the Empire M. Antoninus Verus, Pius's son in law; For he had
in marriage his daughter Valeria Faustina. He from his very youth being brought
up and instructed in the studies of virtue, as well as of all other Arts, he
had virtue no less in his life and manners, then in his speeches and
profession. At first he made L. Aelius Verus, to whom he had married his
daughter Lucilla, his companion in the Government of the Empire; and then did
first two Emperors by name of Caesar's rule at once. And this thing was so full
of dignity and novelty, that some of the chief Consulls, took hence their order
of Consulls, says Spartianus. Spart. in Veto Eutrop. 8. Capitol.
They then reigned eleven years together, as the same with Eutropius Records,
being of a contrary manner of his life: for Verus was sloathfull, drowned in
riot and pleasure, and of an uncivil and unmannerly disposition, which was
moderated and mitigated by his brother's reverence and respect: By whom being
sent against the Parthians, he for the space of four years, had by his chief
officers prosperous success. Therefore they both triumphed over the Parthians:
Then, after it, they undertook the Marcoman-Wars. But Verus died in that
exploit of the Apoplexy, between Concordia and Altinum, in the 171 year of
Christ's birth, if he attained the eleventh year of his Empire; or in the 169,
if he did not exceed the ninth, for Eusebius's Chronicles mention both:
Therefore did M. Aurelius alone, fight for the space of three years with the
Marcomans, to whom the Quades, the Vandalls, the Sarmates, the Swedes, and all
the other barbarous nations there-about those parts, had joined themselves to;
and at last overcame them in a most dangerous fight: whereing his Army
languishing and perishing for want of water, the Christian Legion refreshed
them with that rain that by their prayers they had obtained from Heaven, the
which (as Eusebius shows) was the 174 year after. The public treasure being
spent, and exhausted, lest he should burden any one by taxes, he sold and
pawned all the plates, ornaments and Jewels that belonged to his imperial
Majesty, and after his victory he repayed the price back again to them that had
bought them, and were willing to render them back: Avidius Cassius upon a false
report of his death took the Government upon himself, Volcat. Gallus
and, after it, was killed within three Months. M. Aurelius having Governed
the Empire 19 years, and 11 Months, he died in Vienna, of sickness, in the
180 year of Christ, being aged 59. years as Victor says: for he was born,
Verus his Grandfather being Consul, the Author of the Capitol being Augur,
which agrees with the 121 year of Christ's birth.

To this very good father succeeded a very bad son Aurelius Commodus Antoninus,
Xiphil. Capitol. Herodia 1. Victor. Eutrop.
full of cruelty, lust, covetousness, and of sordid and villainous and
mechanical arts, unfit and unworthy an Emperor; very like to Nero for filthy
life and conversation: Having quelled all in Germany, he triumphed in Rome: He
killed Lucilla his sister, which with several others had conspired against
him. The Annual Prefect Praetor, being the Judge of the fact, who himself
being soon after deprehended in the same fault, had his head cut off: from that
time were two invested with the Pretors office. To the perennall office
succeeded Cleander, who for his cruelty and covetousness was hated of the
people, who by the command of Commodus, was killed for having raised a
sedition. He is ensnared by the conspiracy of them of his own, whom he had
appointed to death, and so he dies, having swayed the Scepter twelve years,
Lampr.
nine Months, and 14. days, as says Xiphilinus, after he had lived one and
thirty years and four Months: he died the first day of January-Calends, in the
year 192 after Christ's birth.

CHAP. IX. By whom the Christian Interest, either by their blood, or by their
right, has been defended, and under what Princes, and what were the worthy and
renowned persons of that time, both of Gentiles and Heretics for their
Doctrine.
Whilst that Trajan ruled the Roman Empire, Hier. de script ec. Plin. l. 10.
Ep. 98. Eus. 3. His. c. 33. et in Chr. ex. Tert. Apol.
no new persecution suddenly arose; but Domitian's edict once published, caused
some Martyrs. Amongst whom, was that renouned Bishop of Rome, St. Clement, who
died in the third year of Trajans Empire, having been nine years and six
Months Bishop of the Diocese; whom Anacletus succeeded.

But in Bythinia, C. Plinius, Proconfull questioning the Christians, and
finding them ordinarily accused of false crimes, having received an answer from
Trajan, he desisted from farther enquiry; so that he punished only those that
were obstinate and refractory, Trajans Persecution. Eusebius. Chron. and 3. Hist.
c. 32. and following.
being brought before him.

Again, about the tenth year of Trajans Empire, was the third persecution
stirred up; wherein Simeon, Cleophas's son, being 120. years old, was
crucified: And also Ignatius brought out of Asia to Rome, is exposed to Lions
in the Amphitheater, in the 108 year of Christ's birth: and Maximus Martyr is
mistaken, to place Ignatius's death before that of Domitian, because that
Dionysius in his 5. chapter mentions Ignatius amongst the divine names. Onesimus,
also St. Paul's Disciple, Bishop of Ephesus suffers for Christ's name, and Pope
Anacletus having had the Sea of Rome, 9. years and 3. Months, yet Euaristus
excepts him.

Trajans successor, viz. Hadrian, increased the persecution, Acta. S. S^ Faust.
et Jov.
and showed himself very cruel toward many Martyrs. Pope Euaristus being by
him put to death, left the seat to Alexander, which he by his Martyrdom in the
15. year of Hadrians Empire left to Sixtus, Faustinus, and Jovita, both of
Brixia in Italy, by his command having been put to death, about the fourth year
of his Empire.

Under Antonius Pius's Empire, Justin. Martyr. Eusebius. b. 4. Hist. c. 16. Hie.
1. de script.
Justine Martyr made his first Apology and defense; and the other he made under
M. Aurelius, and L. Verus; at the beginning of whose Empire, he underwent a
most famous Martyrdom.

And these Roman Bishops suffered Martyrdom for Christ's cause, Sixtus in the
second year of Antoninus Empire, Polycarpus. Iren. b. 3. c. 3. Eus. b. 4. Hist.
c. 14. and following and Chron.
having officiated in the place near upon ten years. Telesphorus in the 14 year
of his Empire. Haginius in the 18. And Pius in the 5. year of Aurelian: To Pius
succeeded Anicetus, who also suffered Martyrdom, in the 13 year of his Empire.
Then to Rome went Polycarpus, the Bishop of the Church in Asia, and soon after
about the seventh year of Marcus Aurelius's Empire, he underwent a most
excellent combat for Christ in Asia. Pionus suffered also the same Martyrdom
in the same Province. Soter having possessed the Sea of Rome four years after
Anicetus, filled the place of the Emperors sacrifice, and to him was
subrogated Eleutherius, Eusebius. l. 5. Hist. c. 1. and following.
about the 17 year of M. Aurelius's Empire, when in the Gauls and France many
Christians suffered Martyrdom by the Emperors cruel edicts, amongst whom the
Martyrs at Lions were the eminentest, Lib. 2.
chiefly, the Bishop Photinus; Attalus, Alexander Medicus, Blandina: "And then
were these the first Martyrdoms that were seen in France (says Severus) Gods
Religion being seriously received, and sincerely entertained beyond the Alps.

This came to pass in the 177 year after Christ, St. Martyrolog. Romans Eusebius.
4. Hist. Hier. de script.
Beatrix also with her seven sons, suffered under Aurelius: Many excellent
persons in that age, did defend the Christian faith against the Gentiles and
Heretics, as Agrippa Castor, who in Hadrians time writ against Basilides the
Heretic, Quadratus and Aristides the Athenian, who made the Christian
Religion's Apology and defense, the same being Emperor.

Also like to them was Papias, Scriptores Ecclesiastici, Papias.
John's Disciple, and Hegesippus who is recorded by Hieronymus, to have lived
at Rome under Anicetus, and Eleutherus; that is, Marcus Aurelius and Commodus
being Emperors, when Melito of Sardis, and Apollinaris the Hierapolitan, and
Dionysius the Corinthian being Bishops, and Athenagoras the Athenian
Philosopher, did spread abroad the fame of Godliness and Orthodox doctrine.

Amongst the Gentiles under Trajan, Xiphil. et Eusebius. Chron.
Plutarchus the Cheronaean was esteemed a notable and renowned Philosopher: so
was also Dio, the Prusaena: under Hadrian, Favorinus, Euphrates the Stoic, who
charged with age and sickness ended his days, with a draught of poison,
Capitol. Eus. Chron.
by Hadrian's leave. Also Sextus, Agathobulus, Oenomaus, under Antoninus Pius,
did Taurus Beritius the Platonic live. Likewise Arrianus the Nicomedian
Philosopher and Historian. Maximus Tyrius, Apollonius Chalcidicus the Stoic,
and Basilides the Scythopolitan; who were all M. Aurelius's tutors, in whose
time Peregrinus the Philosopher, syrnamed Proteus, burnt himself in the fire
that was made at the Olympick-play in Pisas, in the 236 Olympiad, as Eusebius
writes in his Chron. Lucius mentions him in a particular book that he made of
his death. Menelaus the Mathematician first observed in the first year of
Trajan, the Moon in the sign of Virgo, in the 98 year after Christ, and a
little after Ptolomeus the Prince of Astronomers appeared under Hadrian and
Antoninus. Ptole. b. 7. 270. Grae.


For witty learning, Philostr. Eus. Chron: Suid.
and excellent speech, under Trajan the Emperor were esteemed C. Plinius the
younger: Dio Prusaeus whom Trajan did wonderfully honor Polemo, of Laodicea,
near Lycus the Rhetorician, and Sophista Aristides's Master who flourished
under Hadrianus, Fronto that famous Orator, Philostratus of Lemnius; Herodes,
the Athenian, who was renouned in the time of these Emperors, Trajan, Hadrian,
and Antoninus; Hermogenes the Tarsian, whom Suidas mentions to have been
professor in Rhetoric with great admiration, when he was but 18. years old,
and at the 24. year of his age, to have utterly forgotten all; no
coffeehouse nor sickness appearing, to have waxed old in an extreme folly
and ignorance. Suid.
Phlegon, Hadrian's servant, who produced his work unto the two hundred twenty
ninth Olympiad, that is, unto Hadrians death, and unto the hundred thirty
seventh year after Christ. Suid.
In the same age flourished Galenus, who was esteemed the Prince of Physicians.

These set forth Histories; Pausanias, Herodes's equal, Appianus, Justinus,
Aelianus Praenestinus, who for his own eloquence was preferred to the Grecians:
Capitol.
Also Lucianus, and Apuleius who followed him, all gallant Historiographers,
are esteemed to have lived about this time. And of great Doctors at Law, these,
in Trajan's and Antoninus's time, are esteemed most remarkable, Neratius
Priscus, Domitius Labeo, Salvius Julianus, Volusius Maetianus. Grammarians,
Aper, Pollio, Eutychius, Proculus Siccensis, Aulus Gellius.

Eusebius. 4. hist. Epiph. Haer. 19. and 27. etc.
The Heretics under Trajan and Hadrian, most memorable, were these; Elxais,
who, as Epiphanius says, joined himself to the Ossenes, Saturninus
Antiochenus, Basilides Alexandrinus, Carpocrates, of whom issued that unlucky
sect of the Gnostics. Prodicus and Marcio Ponticus, whom we find to have
spread his poisonous doctrine about the 134th year of Christ, which was in the
latter end of Vide animad. ad Epiph. p. 83. Iren. l. 3. c. 4. Eus. 4. hist. c.
10.
Hadrian's life, came to Rome: Cerdo, Tatianus, Justin Martyr's disciple, the
heresy of the Eus. Chr. Epiph. haer. 48. The Greck Interpreters of the
Scripture.
Cataphrygians, whereof Montanus was Author, and Priscilla and Maximilla, two
mad and silly women, sprung up under Aurelian's Empire, as the Annals do
testify.

Amongst the Heretics must these two Interpreters of the Bible be reckoned who
lived in that Age, Aquila, a man half a Jew, and half a Christian, who, as
Epiph. de Men's. et pond. In animad. ad Epiph. p. 399.
Epiphanius relates, lived unto Hadrian's time; and Symmachus, who writ under
M. Aurelius. Theodosius was not far from these, as we have already observed.

CHAP. X. Of Commodus, Pertinax, Julian, Severus Caracalla, Geta, Macrinus,
Alagabalus, Alexander.
Anno 193. of Christ, unto 235.
COmmodus being slain in the beginning of the 193 year after Christ, Herod. 2.
Xiphil. Capitol. Eutr. Victor.
Helvius Pertinax was made Emperor by them who had destroyed Commodus: who
when he intended to govern the Commonwealth with good Laws, and to crush the
military ambition and rudeness, was cut off the 88th day of his Empire, at
whose death Didius Julianus did presume to aspire to the government of the
Empire, then floating and tottering. But two months and five days after, he
is forsaken by the same persons; because he could not give them the whole
gratuity and recompense that they expected, he is slain by Septimius Severus's
command.

For this man being born in Africa, and Governor of Pannonia, Spart. and alii
superiores.
through a show of avenging Pertinax, he violently took the Empire upon
himself. And first he discharged the Pretorian bauds circumvented by his own
servants for murdering Pertinax unworthily; then he went against Pescennius
Niger Governor of Syria; and Clodius Albinus Governor of Britain, and both
competitors of the Empire. Niger being the first overcome, ( Antioch, where he
had fled, being taken) flying to Euphrates, was killed, as says Herodianus.
Spartianus says, That he was killed near Cyzicum: Niger being suppressed,
Severus took Byzantium, Byzantium taken.
which persisted still in his obedience, after three years siege: and having
divested it both of walls and of freedom, made it tributary to the Perinthians,
near upon the fifth year of his Empire.

Having quieted all things in the East, he turned his arms against Clodius
Albinus, whose friendship hitherto he had procured to himself, by offering him
the dignity of Caesar: encountering him with his Army near Lions in France,
Lions destroyed.
many being slain on both sides, and amongst the rest, Albinus himself, he
alone enjoyed the Government. The City was burnt and demolished, and Albinus's
head sent to Rome, and much cruelty was used toward those of his party and his
friends.

Thence again being gone into the East, he subdued the Parthians, the
Adiabenians and the Arabians, he granted a Charter of Corporation to the
Alexandrians. Plautianus in the mean while governing all things at Rome, whose
daughter Plautilla he had betrothed to his son Antoninus, Spart.
and their wedding was solemnized about the tenth year of Severus's Empire, and
she had as much for her portion, as would have been a sufficient dowry for
fifty Queens. But not long after, near upon the 204th year of Christ,
Plautianus himself conspiring against the General, is slain by Antoninus his
son in law, and many more were put to death after him, who were his
Confederates in the Conspiracy.

Severus went to Britain in the 15th year of his Empire, with his two sons;
Basianus, whom he surnamed Antoninus, and had made Augustus in the seventh year
of his Empire; and with Geta: There, having had a prosperous success of his
affairs for four years space, he retired himself, and fortified it with a wall
all round about the Island, and there at length he dies at York the ninth of
February, in the year of Christ 211, his eldest son having often plotted
against him; after he had governed the Empire 17 years, eight months, Xiph.
and three days. At his death he left in store seven years revenues and
provisions; so that every day might be spent seventy five thousand bushels of
corn, and of oil as much as might suffice all Italy in five years.

Antoninus Caracalla, Spart. Herod. 4. Xiphil. Eutr. Vict.
and Geta, Severus's two sons, by equal right obtained the Government of the
Empire, after their father's death, in the year as I have said, 211 of Christ,
who by reason of their contrary nature, had daily and continual dissension and
difference together: Geta was of a meek and civil nature; the other was a
turbulent and fiery man: by whom in the second year of his Empire was his
brother, aged 23 years, slain, in the very bosom of their Mother, under a show
of a particular discourse, in the 212th year after Christ, as Xiphilinus does
record, and soon upon it was an infinite number of his favorites and friends
put to death, amongst whom was that great Doctor in the Law Papinianus, because
he would not by Law excuse his murder. After this Antoninus went into the
East, and there he made a great slaughter of the Alexandrian Citizens, because
they had once spoken some words against him, he deceitfully invaded Artabanus
King of the Parthians, and spoiled his Kingdom, at length, six years and two
months after his father's death, he is slain by a Marshal Centurion, or
Captain, by the order of Opilius Macrinus the Praetor, between Edessa and Carras
the sixth of April, as Xiphilinus says in the year of Christ 217, and in the
29 of his age; but Spartianus gives him 43.

Macrinus, Capitol. Lamprid. Herodianus Xiph. Vict. Eutrop.
a year and two months after he had usurped the Empire, being slain by his
Soldiers, Aurelius Antoninus Alagabalus Varius, together with Diadumenus,
descended of Jupiter's, or Sol's Priest, commonly thought, though falsely,
Caracalla's son, took the Empire. He was the vilest of all men, insomuch, that
having cast off all manhood, he difformed himself into a woman, and did suffer
any thing in his body. Therefore having ruled three years and nine months, by
the consent of the Soldiers, he was slain with his Mother Semiamira or Julia,
in the 222 year of Christ, his corpse being dragged in the channel, and thence
drawn into the River Tiber, in the 18th year of his age. Most Authors attribute
to his Empire, two years and some months; and to his age 16 years: but we
rather adhere to Xiphilinus, whose account is given in another place, where
mention is made of Alexander.

In the year of Christ 222, Aurelius Severus Alexander obtained the Empire,
having been made Caesar the year before. A Prince far surpassing all in
goodness; and most excellent and valiant, both in peace and war. He was
wonderfully diligent either in giving judgment, or in requiring justice of the
Judges, he reprehended and corrected those who by favor or bribes did exceed
the bonds of Justice and right; he banished out of his Court all flatterers,
scoffers, and shames of the Court. He forbad the Magistrates Offices to be
bought, asserting, That it could not be, but what one had bought, he would sell
it again for hire-sake: Therefore he did give a Salary out of the Treasury to
the Governors of the Provinces, lest they should be burdensome to the people.

He was not an enemy to Christ; for he worshipped him in his Chapel, not being
suffered by the Senate to give him any public divine honor, and to build him
a Temple: In ministering Justice, he made use of the industry of the chiefest
and ablest Lawyers, as Lamptid. Zosimus 1.
Ulpianus, Pomponius, Celsus, Modestinus, Paulus, Proculus, Venuleius. Of
these, Ulpianus being advanced to the Pretorian dignity, he was killed in a
mutiny of Soldiers, as Zosimus affirms. But he was a gallant Warrier, as well
as an industrious Lawyer. In the fifth year of his Empire, Artaxerxes the
Persian, Herodia. 6. Agath. 1. p. 61. Persians recover their Empire.
having overcome the Parthians in three field-battels, and slain their King
Artabanus; he re-established the Persian Empire in the East, by whom the Magi
began to be esteemed, as Agathias writes. Against whom, making incursion upon
the Roman Territories, when Alexander could not affright him away by his
Letters, he went out with an Army, and overcame him; as Lampridius records out
of the Acts of the Senate; and triumphed the 7th of October. Although this
Author relates, That Herodianus has written concerning this, far otherwise.
Having performed this Expedition, he undertook another against the Germans,
wherein by the conspiracy of a few Soldiers, he is killed with his Mother at
Moguntiacum, Hier. in Chron. and Eus. Oros. 7. c. 58.
who as long as he lived, showed himself obedient, even unto envy itself; so
say Lampridius, Herodianus, and Zosimus, by Maximinus, who had usurped the
Empire, having betrayed him with his Mother. Lamprid. in Alexander. Herod. 6.
Zosim. 1.
These things were done in the 235th year of Christ. He governed the Empire a
little more then 13 years, and lived 29, and 3 months.

CHAP. XI. Of the Christian Affairs in the time of those Emperors; and of the
most famous Persons for Piety and Doctrine.
IN the same year that Commodus was slain, Eus. 5. hist. c. 27.
Pope Eleutherus dying, had Victor of Africa for his Successor; who,
excommunicated from the Church, Theodotus, a Tanner of Byzantium, having an
erroneous opinion of Christ: then he pacified and composed the Controversy
touching Easter, both in Rome and in other places by assembly of Synods: And he
also intended to separate from the communion the Asians, who continued to
celebrate it after the Jewish custom; but Eusebius. 6. hist.
Irenaeus dissuaded him from this resolution: In the time of his Papacy, was
the tempest of persecution very grievous upon the Christians, which Eusebius's
Chronicles record to have been in the tenth year of Severus, and in the 202 of
Christ. In this persecution, Leonides, Origen's Father, of Alexandria; Martyr.
Romans Jun. 28.
and Ireneus of Lions, with almost all his people, did suffer Martyrdom. This
persecution extended so far as to Africa, first under the government of
Saturninus, Tertul. in Scap.
then of Scapula, in that Province.

Under Alexander the Emperor the Church did enjoy peace; for he is said to
have been friendly to the Christians; yet taking into his counsel those, who,
as they were best learned in the Law, so likewise were the bitterest and
cruellest against Christians, then also were some few Martyrs put to death;
Martyr. S. Caecilia.
amongst whom Caecilia was eminent; with Tuburtius and Valerianus: the sword
did also at that time cut off Urbanus, who had been Pope seven years, being
succeeded by Zephyrinus.

These times were made more illustrious and memorable both by the excellent
holiness, Hier. de Script.
and also admirable learning of Pantaenus, who of a Stoic became a Christian,
who having been Rector of the School in Alexandria, went to the Indies, there
to preach the Gospel, and flourished under Severus and Caracalla: Asianus,
Tatianus's disciple, flourished at Rhodes, under Commodus and Severus, Clemens
of Alexandria, Pantenus's Auditor, and Origen's Master: Miltiades and
Apollonius, who writ against Montanus Priscilla and Maximilla, Apollonius the
Senator, who made an Apology in the Senate, in the defense of the Christian
faith, and by the Senates decree had his head cut off, Commodus then being
Emperor. Polycrates, the Bishop of Ephesus, who resisted with much vehemence
Victor the Pope of Rome, for the Lent. Tertullian in Africa, and Minutius
Foelix at Rome, flourished under Severus and Caracalla. Origin in Alexandria,
who was born in the sixth year of Commodus's Empire, and about the 185th year
of Christ; he was 17 years old when his Father Leonides suffered Martyrdom, as
Eusebius relates. Eus. 6. hist. c. 3. and in Chron. Hier. de Script. Eccl.
In that time was Julius Africacanus eminent, to whom Origenes writ under
Alexander. Gregorius Thaumaturgus, Heracles Bishop of Alexandria, Ammonius the
Christian Professor in Philosopher in the same City, of whom Plotinus
Lycopolitanus was a hearer, as Porphyrius records in his life. Concerning these
and others, whom for brevities sake we omit, you may further consult Hieronymus.

CHAP. XII. Of Maximinus, the Gordians, Philip, Decius, Gallus and Volusianus,
Valerianus, Gallienus, Claudius, Aurelianus, Tacitus; of the 30 Tyrants, and
also of Odenetus and Zenobia.
From the 235 of Christ, to 276.
MAximinus, Gothus's and Alanas's son, Lampt. Herodia. 7. Eutr. Victor.
either having slain Alexander, as Herodianus will have it, or after his death,
by no plot of his own contrived and attempted, was made Emperor 135 years
after Christ's birth, who having prosperously put an end to the Wars of Germany,
he wintered at Sirmium, and in the mean while by his Governors and Deputies,
used much cruelty in Rome, and put many of the Nobles to death. In the midst of
these things, the Gordians, both father and son, usurp the Empire in Carthage.
The Romans by the order of the Senate forsake Maximinus, and Ambassadors are
sent every where to keep the Provinces under the power and command of the
Senate, and 20 men are chosen for to keep and defend Rome. The Gordiani within
a year and few days being slain in Africa by Capelianus, Maximinus's General.
Balbinus and Maximinus Pupienus, out of the 20 Governors of Rome, were by the
Senate advanced to the Imperial dignity, in the year of Christ 237; wherein
Maximinus, whilst he besieges Aquileia, is slain, with his son yet a boy, by
his Soldiers; having lived two years and some months in great power and
authority.

Capitol, Herod. 8. Eut. 9.
Balbinus and Pupienus, with Gordianus a youth, Nephew to that Gordianus, who
with his son was slain in Africa, as says Capitolinus; but Eutropius says his
son; governed a full year the Commonwealth. Then they, desiring to put down
Gordianus, because he obtained the favor more then they, were slain by the
Soldiers, 238 years after Christ; since which time, Zos. 1.
Gordianus alone enjoyed the Empire with the favor of all, being either 11, or
13, or 16 years old, (for it is ambiguously recorded) a child of a very good
nature, made and fitted for all sorts of virtues which the discretion of
Misitheus, a most discreet and learned person, whose daughter he had married,
did moderate and direct; with whom both Janus's gates being opened, he went
with a puissant Army in the fifth year of his Empire against the Persians, and
regained from them Carras, Nisibis, and other Towns, and compelled them into
their own Country. The next year following Misitheus being murdered by the
snares and plot of Philippus the Arabian, soon after Gordianus is also
murdered by those mutinous Soldiers, Vict. Eus. Zosim. 1.
whom Philippus had stirred up to such a villainy by bribes and gifts, in the
244th year of Christ, having ruled five years, whose dignity this very
murderer did succeed; who having concluded a peace with Sapor, returned to
Rome, in the 4th year of his Empire. At what time he had been Consul the third
time, and his son Philip, Caesar the second time, were celebrated in Rome the
secular Plays, being a thousand years after the building of the City, Vide l.
1. de Doct. Temp. c. 25.
and 248 after Christ, about harvest-time, as we may gather out of Zos. 2.
Zosimus. At length, having ruled 5 years the Empire; at the beginning of the
sixth, the elder Philip has his throat cut at Verona; the younger at Rome, by
the Soldiers, in the year of Christ 249; having before taken to himself the
purple Robe.

Vict. Zosim. Eutr.
Decius born in the lower Pannonia, a man of excellent virtue, and well
exercised in War, as Victor sets him, forth; he ruled, as the same Author
faith, two years and a half, and fighting against the Barbarians, he dyed in
the promiscuous crowd of the Soldiers, by the flood of a sluice of a pond,
opened upon them by the Barbarians; insomuch, that his corpse could not
afterward be found. By Gallus's treachery, as Zosimus writes, secretly
conspiring with the Barbarians. This slaughter wherein Decius's son dyed, was
in the 251 year of Christ.

Vict. Eutrop. Zos. l. 1. Oros. 7. c. 21.
Hence Gallus Hostilius the chief Commander of the Army that defended the
frontiers in Maesia, being by the suffrage and general voice of the Soldiers
created Emperor; and having associated to himself Volusianus his son, two
years and 4 months after he is slain, together with him, by the Soldiers,
near Interamna, as he pursued Aemilianus then raising new broyls in Maesia.
This came to pass in the 254 year of Christ. Eus. 7. hist. c. 17. Cyp. de
Morr^l.
In the time of his Government such a pestilential sickness did rage almost
all over the World, as before that never was seen the like, in the year 252
after Christ, wherein the charity of Christians did marvellously shine even
toward their persecutors.

But the Persians invading the borders of the East with an Army destroyed
Antioch: The Scythians being passed over into Asia, spoiled and destroyed the
Country far and near, whom Aemilianus valiantly resisted; and having
suppressed them, he by the general voice of the Soldiers obtained the Imperial
dignity, Gallus, as we have said, being slain: Trebell. Eutrop. Victor. Zos. 1.
Oros. 7. c. 22.
Then, Aemilianus being cut, off three months after, Valerian with Galienus
his son enjoyed the Empire, with whom he governed seven years the Empire; and
in this space of time the Roman power and dominion was much diminished and torn
to pieces by the Barbarians. St. Augustine in his 80 Epistle says, That in the
time of Galienus's reign, the impressions, incursions, and cruelties were such,
that they could have wished for the end of the World. In this time also did
many Tyrants rise up, in several parts of the world; who are reckoned 30 in
number by Trebellius Pollio: Valerian then being gone against the Scythians who
had taken Chalcedon, burnt Nicea, and the Temple of Diana at Ephesus. Thence
being gone against Sapor, then spoiling the East borders; and taken by him, and
used in manner of a base slave, that as often as he got up his horse's back, he
laid his foot upon his head, making him to bow down to the ground; Eusebius.
Orat. Constan. ad San. 2. c. 24. Agath. l. 4. p. 129.
At length he commanded him to be flead alive and salted, as Eusebius records.
This overthrow was in the 260th year of Christ. About what time Odenatus the
Governor of the Palmyrenians, who had married Zenobia, did valiantly repulse
and drive back the Trebell.
Persians, who had far entered the Roman Empire, and defended the Roman power,
having taken the title of King upon himself.

Trebell. Vict. Eutrop. Oro. 7. c. 22.
In the mean while, Galienus, a man altogether given to lust and wickedness
suffered the Empire to be torn to pieces every where, both by the Barbarians,
and also Tyrants. To whom when Odenatus having taken Nisibis and Carras,
conquered Mesopotamia, put to flight the King of the Persians, slain many
thousands, sent the Princes and chiefest of them bound; he, without any shame,
as though he had conquered them himself, triumphed in Rome: This victory of
Odenatus is ascribed by Trebellius, to be in the 262 year of Christ, when
Galienus and Saturninus were Consuls. A few years after, Odenatus being
declared Emperor by Galienus, he is murdered by conspiracy of his
Couzen-german, together with Herod's son, whose wife Zenobia, a woman of a
manly spirit, took the Empire upon her self. Galienus is slain near Millain by
Martianus and Cecropius, both Generals of the Army that went against Aureolus
the Tyrant, together with his brother Valerian; he governed almost seven years
with his father, and eight alone.

Therefore in the 268. year after Christ, Claudius, Trebell. Vict. Eutrop. Zos.
l. 1. Oros. 7. c. 20.
about the 9th of April, as by Trebellius appears, began to rule, a
providentiall and moderate man, and a Prince of great advantage to the
Commonwealth, who having destroyed Aureolus the Tyrant, he fought gallantly
against the Goths; it appears that he with his Army destroyed and killed
300020. of them, and defeated and destroyed two thousand ships of theirs; and
them that remained of these Barbarians, the Famine and the Plague destroyed
them, near about Haemimontum; Atticianus, or Antiochianus, and Orphitus being
Consuls, which does agree with the year of our Lord, 270. Claudius soon after,
being infected of the plague, dies; having ruled a year, and a little more
then nine Months, as Eusebius and Cassiodorus do record, but being that
Trebellius asserts that he dyed in the two hundred seventieth year of Christ,
it seems that he did near upon fill the two years; otherwise he died in the
latter end of the 269 year.

His brother Quintillus having usurped the Empire, within sixteen days after,
he was beheaded by the Soldiers: by whom was chosen Aurelianus, Vopiscus.
Victor. Eutrop. Zos. Oros. 7. c. 13.
born of inferior Parents, but reckoned by the Heathens amongst the most
worthy and laudable Princes, unless that he inclined too much to cruelty. By
him were subdued the Alemans, and the Marcomans, who had given a great defeat
to the Romans, for which Aurelian thought that it was expedient to go to the
books of the Sybills, which happened the 3. day of January, in the year of
Christ 271, as Vopiscus says. Coming to Rome after this his Victory, he put to
death many of the Senators, he amplified the walls of the City, being gone
into the East he overcame Zenobia, Zenobia taken with Tetricus.
and led her in his triumph with Tetricus the Tyrant, who having received of
the Catalonians at their yielding, he recovered France. Then suffering both to
live afterward, he made him the Correctour of Lucania, and kept her in the
City. Hieronymus writes that from her did the Zenonian Family propagate. Hier.
Chron.
Aurelius Victor says, that he was the first amongst the Roman Emperors that
wore a Diadem upon his head, and that was seen clothed with a garment of
embroidery and jewels. He gave order that Swines flesh might freely be
distributed amongst the people; he died in the beginning of the fifth year of
his Empire, in the beginning of the 275th year of Christ, by the conspiracy of
Mnestheus, Secretary General, near Caenophrurium, betwixt Bizantium and
Heraclea: Victor.
After his death, there was an interregnum some seven Months, because that in
the Election of an Emperor there was risen a great contest and contention
between the Senate and the Soldiers, both attributing to themselves the right
of Election: Vopisc. Eutrop. Zos. Victor.
At length the 7. of October, he was created Emperor by the Senate.

Tacitus, a person of excellent breeding, and gifted for the Government of the
Commonwealth, who had his pedigree of Tacitus the Historian. Victor.
But he died on the two hundredth day after, at Tarsus of a Fever, to whom
Florianus his brother succeeding, Probus was made Emperor by the greatest part
of the Soldiers, Florianus cutting his own veins died within 60. days of his
own accord, in the 276 year of Christ.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Christian affairs and persecutions: and of the Heretics:
as also of those Men who were Illustrious and renowned for their Piety,
Holiness, and Learning, who lived from Maximinus 's time, unto Aurelianus.
MAximinus, as soon as he enjoyed the Empire, Maximinus's Persecution. Eus. l.
6. Hist. c. 28. et in Chron. Oros. 7. c. 19.
exercised great cruelty against the Christians, and, as its thought, he begun
the sixth Persecution, wherein died of Martyrdom Pontianus, a Pope of Rome, to
whom succeeding Anterus, after the enjoyment of it for a Month, he obtained
also the Title of Martyr.

But Decius, in the beginning of his Empire, in the year of Christ 258. stirred
up the seventh Persecution, Decius's Persecution. Eus. 6. Hist. c. 32. Oros. 6.
c.
in which was slain Fabianus, the Bishop of Rome, the 20 of January, having
held the seat 15 years. Origines Origines sacrifices to Idols. Epiph. haer.
64. See our observations. Eus. Hist. 7. c. 1. Epist. 55. ad Pammach. Cypr. Ep.
55. Epiph. Haer. 59.
being comprehended in this persecution, rather then to suffer abominable
things, he would offer incense to the Idols, and thence retiring himself to
Tyrus, five years after he died under Valerian and Galienus the sixty ninth
year of his age, as it may be gathered out of Eusebius; and Hieronymus records
that he suffered death in Tyrus: In the last year of Decius, being the 251 of
Christ, the Roman Sea having been vacant above one year, Cornelius succeeded to
Fabianus, against whom Novatianus blowed up a schism, and division, being
chosen by some few of his own party. To whom Novatus the Bishop coming out of
Africa, joined himself, who by many is indifferently taken for Novatianus.
Novatianus's Schism.
Under Decius among many others, suffered Agatha, in Sicilia, and Apollonia of
Alexandria, which cheerfully cast her self into the burning Scaffold, as
Eusebius writes. Vide Eus. 26. hist. c. 41.


In the first or second year of Decius's reign being the 250 of Christ, when
Decius and Gratus were Consulls, Greg. Tur. l. 1. hist. c. 30. S. Dionysius
parisiensis Episcopus.
as Gregorius Turonensis says, Saturninus Bishop of Tolose went to Rome; with
whom were sent Gratianus Bishop of Turine, and Dionysius Bishop of Paris, and
that they together with Rusticus and Eleutherius suffered their Martyrdom.

To whom agrees the author of St. Omers life, who relates that Fuscianus and
Victorinus, St. Denis companions, preached at the same time the faith of
Christ. That St. Quintins did the same amongst the Ambianians, but they
suffered the 11th of November under the Emperor, Maximinian: then Denis dyed
not long before Maximians time; that is, about 50. years.

Decius's followers, viz. Gallus and Volusianus prosecuted this same slaughter
of the Christians: therefore Cornelius Pope of Rome within two years and two
Months, suffered at Rome. And Lucius supplied his place, who being put to
Martyrdom under Valerian and Galienus left the Sea to Steven.

About the same time flourished that light of the Church of Africa St. Cyprian,
Bishop of Carthage; Who when Philip was made Augustus the third time, and his
son Caesar Consul the second time, that is, St. Cyprian. Cypr. Epist. 55.
in the year of Christ 248. was advanced to the office of Bishop. For he
writes, that four years after he was invested with the office, there arose a
Schism of one Felicissimus, when Cornelius was first made Pope of Rome, which
was upon the 251. year of Christ.

When Steven possessed the Roman. Cypr. Epist. 70. and following. Aug. de bapt.
Cont. Don. Vinc. Lirin. The Carthaginian Synod for the rebaptising of
Heretics. Cyprian's Martyrdom.
See in the 256th year of Christ, Cyprian held a council of Bishops at
Carthage, wherein the Heretics Baptism was adjudged false, and to be done
again anew: this very same thing did Firmilianus in Cappadocia, and Dionysius
of Alexandria decree. But Steven by his Apostolic Authority resisted them all:
But Cyprian not long after washed away this spot with his own blood under the
Emperors Valerian, and Galien: By whom was revived the persecution about the
4th year of their Empire, which was the 257 year of Christ, that is, when
Valerian was Consul the 4th time, and Galien the third, as The Acts of Saint
Cyprians sufferings do witness; Act. passio. S. Cyp. Hieron. de Script.
For being banished that very year, he for Christ's sake ended his life the next
year after, being the 258th year of Christ, the 18th of October, so he
performed the office of a Bishop ten full years, and some Months.

In this same persecution of Valerian, Steven having officiated in the Roman
See two years and three Months, suffered Martyrdom: And so likewise Sixtus
his successor, having enjoyed the Papal office one year, and almost two
Months, was put to death for the name of Christ the 8th of August of the 258
year of Christ, and four days after, St. Laurence and Hippolitus, with diverse
others.

But Valerian paid at last very dear for this his cruelty, for being taken by
the Persians and constrained to do the sordid and base services of a slave, he
was at length flayed alive, and salted, as we have above observed: Eus. 7 hist.
1. c. 13. Oros. 7. c. 22. Eus. 7. hist. c. 8 Epiph. her. 65. Paul. Samosatene.
Eus. 7. hist. c. 22. 23. and 24.
Galienus being taught by his fathers example, forbad that Christians should be
further persecuted.

The Churches outward storm ceasing, then began the inward: Paul Samosatene,
Bishop of Antioch, aemulating Sabellius, who had divulged a little before, a
most pernicious doctrine against the holy Trinity at Ptolemais, begins to
oppose and deny the divine nature of the Son, against whom was the first Synod
held at Antioch, in the year of Christ 260. wherein were Firmilianus of
Caesaria, Gregorius of Neocaesarea, and his brother Athenodorus. But when Paul
by his deceitful tergiversation mocked and shifted away the writings of the
Fathers; yet in the next Council held at Antioch, he was condemned and turned
out of his office; which he not willing to deliver up, Aurelian the Emperor
being petitioned, Aurelianus his Persecution.
turned him out per-force, in the two hundred seventieth year of Christ: for
then Aurelianus was somewhat well affected toward the Christians. But two
years after, being the two hundred seventieth year of Christ, he stirred up the
ninth persecution, as many do reckon, wherein an infinite number of Martyrs did
suffer, to which Tacitus did put an end, as the Acts of Chariton the Martyr do
testify.

Paul the Hermit was a great splendor to that age: who, Surius 28. Sept. St.
Paul the hermit. Hier. in Paulo. Idem in Chro. Eus. 7. hist. c. 28.
when Decius afflicted the Christians, by reason of escaping death retired
himself into a cave, wherein he embraced a solitary life, the 23 year of his
age, and of Christ 250. which year brought also forth Antonius the Great, as we
may gather out of Hieronymus, also Dionysius of Alexandria died in the
thirteenth year of Galien's reign, as Eusebius says, and so likewise Gregorius
Thaumaturgus: of the Gentiles, Plotinus the Philosopher, died in the beginning
of Aurelianus's reign, being the 270 year of Christ, as may be gathered out of
Porphyrius, upon his life.

Suidas says, that he was very old under Galien, and that Amelius was his
hearer, and that Porphyrius was Amelius's hearer, and Jamblicus the hearer of
Porphyrius; and that Porphyrius flourished under Aurelian, and that he attained
the days of Dioclesian's Empire But Eunapius makes Amelius to be Porphyrius's
School-fellow, and not his Master. He together with Origenes Aquilinus, and
Porphyrius lengthened his days unto the time of Aurelianus's, and Probus's
Empire: at which time also lived Dexippus the Historian, Longinus is also
reckoned amongst the learned ones of that age, by whom Porphyrius was taught
and surnamed, being before that called Malchus: but Zenobia making use of
Longinus for to teach her Greek, Aurelianus therefore caused him to be put to
death, as writes Vopiscus.

CHAP. XIV. Of Probus, Carus, Numerianus, Carinus, Diocletian, Maximian,
Constantius, Chlorus, and Armentarius.
Anno 276 of Christ, unto 304.
TAcitus and Florianus his brother, being dead, Vopiscus. Victor. Eutrop.
Idatius in fastis Zosi. 2.
M. Aurelius Probus by the General consent of the Soldiery, is invested with
the Empire, the 276 year of Christ, born in Pannonia Sirmiensis, a person
endued with all virtue, for he was admirables in feats of arms, and excellent
in good manners, who as soon as he was created Augustus, he inquired after those
Soldiers that had slain Aurelianus: Thence going into France, he regained
sixty Towns out of the Barbarians hands, and killed of them near upon seventy
thousand. Having quieted all things in France, he went into Slavonia, and
overcame the Nations in Scythia. And being gone thence into the East, he gave
battle to the Persians, and having overcome them, and taken some of their
Cities, as he was returning to Italy, passing through Slavonia, he was killed
at Sirmium by the Soldiers, who hated him for his too great severity, in the
282 year of Christ, and the 7th of his Empire, whereof he lived some four
Months.

M. Aurelius Carus born in Narbon in France, Vopiscus. Victor. Eutrop. 9. Zosim
2. Oros. 7. c. 14. Carus Carinus and Numerianus.
succeeded Probus, who soon after created his sons Carinus and Numerianus,
Caesar's; and having sent Carinus into France to keep it in peace, and Govern
it, he, with Numerianus his son, went into the East, against the Persians:
There having overcome Mesopotamia, being gone as far as Ctesiphon, he was
stricken dead by a Thunderbolt, having governed the Empire about a whole year,
it being the 283. year of Christ. Numerianns, being exceedingly afflicted for
his fathers death, by reason of too much weeping fell into an ocular disease;
and as he was carried in a Litter, he was murdered by the conspiracy of Aprus
his father in law, in the two hundred eighty fourth year of Christ.

Carinus, Ibid.
of a far other temper than his father and brother, lived full of vices, and
all defiled with wickedness: For its said that he wanted no manner of mischief
and baseness, and that he had no token or spark of virtue and goodness:
wherefore being hated both by great and small, a while after his fathers death,
he contended against the people as well as against Dioclesian, by both whom he
was hated; and he attained to the year of Christ 285. that is, one year after
that Dioclesian was advanced to the Imperial dignity. For then, being betrayed
by his own party near Margus a town of Moesia, he was killed by Dioclesians
army, which overcame him.

Then about the Month of September, Victor. Eutrop. 10. Eus. Chron. Fasti
Siculi Oros. 7. c. 25.
in the year of Christ 284. Dioclesian who before was called Diocles, after
Numerianus's death, received the Purple Robe presented to him by the Soldiers;
born in Dalmatia of low Parentage, (for he is said to have been a bondservant
to Anulinus the Senator) but a gallant warrior: He in the first Assembly,
swore that Numerianus had been murdered without his consent, or knowledge, and
thereupon killed the Murderer Aprus with his own hands, and by it fullfilled
that Prophesy, that he had once received, That he should be Emperor, when he
had killed Aper (which signifies a Bore) with his own proper hands. Whence in
his hunting as often as he lighted upon a Boor, he was wont to kill him with
his own hands with a hunting staff, but after he had slain Aper, then he
boasted that at length he had found out the fatal Bore: Then the Peasants of
France rising up in an uproar that were called Bacaudes, having sent Maximian
Herculian to them, he quieted them in the 285 year, whereupon Maximian was made
Caesar the first time: For the next year following being the 286 year.
Dioclesian created him Augustus; because, says Idatius, he might prop up and
uphold the republic that was tottering and falling, what by the Barbarians
incursions, what by the Tyrants oppressions. For at the same time Carausius
being busied among the Britains, and Achilleus in Egypt, had both taken the
purple Robe. And from the East Narses, the King of Persia threatened hard with
a puissant Army; and Africa was spoiled, and destroyed by the Quinquagentians.
By which troubles and tempests was the Roman Empire tossed and agitated some
years together. Idat.
Therefore in the 7th year of his Empire, and the 291 year of Christ, that he
might prevent and resist all these dangers, he created two Caesar's, Constantius
and Galerius created Caesar's by Dioclesian.
Constantius Chlorus, who is said to be the Nephew of Claudius the second by
his daughter, as Eutropius records; and Galerius Maximian, born in Dacia, not
far from Sardica, who was surnamed Armentarius, because he had been a herdsman.
Dioclesian, that he might join these to himself by affinity, gave to
Armentarius his daughter Valeria; and to Constantius, Maximinianus Herculius
gave Theodora his daughter in Law: So having divided their Forces into four
Armies, Dioclesian went into Egypt, Herculius into Africa, Armentarius into the
East, and Constantius into Britain. By the long, tedious, and laborious
Expeditions of them all, was the Roman world again settled in peace. About the
end of the 12th year of Dioclesian's Empire, it being the 296 of Christ, as
Eusebius records in his Chronicle, Alexandria after eight months siege being
taken, together with Egypt, was brought back again unto the obedience of the
Romans.

Carausius seven years after his revolt, was killed by Alectus his Associat in
the 293 year of Christ; and so the Eutrop.
Britains were again recovered, in the tenth year after their revolt, says
Sutropius. At the same time were the Quinquegentians subdued by Maximianus
Herculius, and Galerius Armentarius, being beaten by Narseus, and proudly
entertained by Dioclesian. Idat.
The year following being the 297, he revenged himself for the ignominy and
reproach he had received, defeating the Persian Army, and taking prisoners
Narseus's Wife, his sisters, and his Children. Eut. 9. Victor.
Therefore did Dioclesian receive him again with respect and honor in
Mesopotamia.

Idem e. Zosim. Eusch. 8. hist. c. 13. and in Chron. Oros. 7. c. 25. Dioclesian
and Maximian lay down their purple Robes
At length, after these two Augustus's had both magnificently triumphed at Rome
for their many and great exploits of Wars, they were both made private persons
again, having laid down their purple-Robes. Dioclesian lived at Nicomedia, and
Maximianus at Millan: But Dioclesian did it of his own accord, or by reason of
his old age, and tired by his great labors, or being wearied and importuned
about the Christian Concernments, whom he had no mind to persecute, he retired
himself into a Garden in Salone. But Maximian was forced to it more by the
authority of his Associate, then by his own will. This was done in the 20th
year of Dioclesian's Empire, and of Christ 304; at what time Dioclesian had
been 9 times Consul, and Maximianus 8, as Idatius writes; who relates, That at
that same time Constantius Chlorus, and Galerius Maximianus Armentarius were
declared Augustus's; and that Severus, and Galerius Maximianus Armentarius
sister's son, were created Caesar's, as Victor says also.

And so Constantius with Galerius Maximianus did enjoy the whole Roman Empire,
parting the same between themselves: and to Galerius Maximinus's lot, fell
Scythia, Asia, and the East; to Constantius's, France, Italy, and Africa, who
afterward gave Italy and Africa over to his Companion. And so Maximian
established Severus over Italy, and Maximinus over the East. In the mean while,
Constantinus, Constantius Chlorus's son, having been delivered by his father to
Dioclesian and Galerius Maximianus for his hostage and pledge; and being
re-demanded by his father, having been cast upon several dangers, and having
escaped privately, he flies to his father at Gessoriacum. So a certain Author
of a Manuscript, without name, does declare.

CHAP. XV. Of the state of the Christian Religion, from the year of Christ 276,
wherein Probus first entered into the Empire, unto the death of Constantius
Chlorus, and the beginning of Constantinus; that is, unto the 305, or 306th
year, wherein is spoken of Dioclesian's Persecution: Of the Original of the
Donatists, and of several Pious and Learned Persons.
IN these few years, that we comprehend in this Chapter, there were very great
Troubles and Persecutions against the Church. In the beginning of Probus's
Empire, that is, in his second year, and of Christ's 277, broke forth the
heresy of the Manichees, as we read it in Eusebius's Chronicles: In which time
also, notice is taken of the Account of the years of the Antiochenians, and
Laodicenians, etc. (Heretics, so called). Leo. Hom. 2. de Pent. Vide Epiph.
haer. 66. and animad. nostra. Cyr. Cat. 6.
Pope Leo ends this year, when Probus and Paulinus were Consuls: At which
time Archelaus Bishop of Caschara in Mesopotamia, renowned for his holiness
and learning, resisted strongly and constantly the rage and madness of the
Manichees.

But under Dioclesian, the persecution of the Christians was so grievous and so
great, as before this time there was never the like, at the latter end of his
Empire. Although Baronius Apud. Sur. J^n. 20.
gathers out of St. Sebastian's Acts, that before this time he had already
begun to exercise his cruelty; and says, That he began in the second year of
his Empire with Tiburtius Chromatius, and others.

But this fire of persecution did flame more vehemently in the latter end of
Dioclesian's 18th year; or, as Eus. in Chron. and hist. 8. Oros. 7. c. 25.
Eusebius thinks, in the 19th of his Empire; which he begins to reckon from the
month of Easter. Then it was (in those days of Christ's passion) that the
Emperors commanded, by their Edicts, that all the Christian Churches should be
demolished; and all the sacred books should be burnt; and that all those
Christians that had any public office, should be degraded and turned out, and
all the others should be put to death. Div^rs Martyrs.
Thereupon an infinite number of Christians suffered Martyrdom by diverse sorts
of torments for Christ's sake; of whom Eusebius names some, as Procopius in
Caesaria of Palestine, Alpheus, Zaccheus, etc. But the Martyrdoms that are read
in the Ecclesiastical Histories are innumerable; of whom were Marcus, and
Marcellian; Cosma, and Damianus, two brothers; Vincentius, Agnes, Lucia,
Maurice, D^vers Martyrs.
and an infinite number of the Thebeans. Also Pope Marcellinus, in the year of
Christ 304, (the Emperors being then reduced to order) suffered Martyrdom for
Christ's sake, the 8th of May; and the next year after this great Persecution,
both the Emperors laid down their dignity, as Eusebius says.

And they who for fear and punishment did deliver their Bibles; were called in
Africa Traditores or Traitors, which afterward was the seed of the Donatists
Schism: And first there was held a Council of Bishops, most of them infected
with this crime in Optatu^ l. 1. Aug. 3. Con. Cresc. c. 26.
Cyrtha of Numidia, wherein Secundus Tigisitanus the Primate of Numidia was
President. In which for avoiding of Schism, the Donatists were taken in, in the
year of Christ 303.

And the Church was not only celebrate and renowned by her Persecutions, but
also by the Learning of rare Persons: For Eusebius. Chron. Hieron. de Script. The
Learned and godly persons.
Anatolius of Laodicea, a man of great learning, lived in Probus's time; and
under Carus and Dioclesian, lived Pierius the elder, of Alexandria, and
Pamphilus, who afterward suffered under Maximinus: Lucian put to death in the
same persecution. Methodius of Olympus-Licia, and then Bishop of Tyrus,
suffered under Dioclesian. Some think that he suffered under Decius and
Valerianus, as Hieronymus says; but the first is more likely, being he writ
against Porphyrius and Origin, of whom the first attained to the days of
Dioclesian's Empire; and the last lived after Decius. Arnobius, who under
Dioclesian taught Rhetoric at Sicca, and afterward became a Christian; and
his disciple Lactantius. The chief Poets amongst the Gentiles under Carus and
Dioclesian, were Calphurnius, Siculus, and Nemesianus; and the Historians were
Lampridius, Capitolinus.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. OR, AN Account of Time.
The Sixth Book. WHerein are contained the Years from the 304 of CHRIST, unto
491.
CHAP. I. Of Constantine Chlorus, and of his son Constantine; of Licinius, and
of the Wars that were between them; and of the original of the Accounts of
Times.
Anno 304 of Christ, unto 337.
DIoclesian and Maximian laying down their dignity, and ^mbracing a private
life; that same year and day, were Julius Constantius Chlorus, and Galerianus
Maximinus Armentarius, from Caesar's, honored with the title of Augustus's, and
Emperors, as Idatius in fast.
Idatius says. Of whom the first contented himself with France and Britain,
and the Eutrop. l. 10. Victor. Scho. and in Caes. Oros. 7. c. 25. Zon.
last possessed all the other Dominions of the Empire: which when he could not
rule and govern well alone, he divided the care of it with two more, viz.
Severus and Galerius Maximinus both Scythians: the last being his own sisters
son, whom he had also created Caesar's. Victor. Schot.
In the same time when Constantinus was called Caesar, that was in the 305, or
306. year of Christ, Italy is committed to Severus, and the East to Maximinus,
and Maximianus went into Scythia.

Eutrop. 10. Victor. Schot. Eus. 1. devita Constable. et in Chron. Oros. 7. c. 25.
Zonar.
Constantius Chlorus enjoyed the dignity of Augustus a year or two only, as
most do say, and he died in York of England, he was of a meek and civil
nature, and liberal, he did not suffer any persecution to be inflicted upon
the Christians; yea rather of all those of his company, the Christians were
preferred before the others.

Eus. 1. de. vita Cons. Sozo 1. c. 7. Victor. Zona.
To him fled Constantinus his son, who as a pledge lived in Bononia or
Gassaricum, fearing Maximian's treachery; and his father embracing him, died in
his arms at York, in the year 306, when Chlorus and Armentarius were Consulls
the sixth time, as Socr. 1. c. 1.
Socrates says.

Paneg. Constable et Max. dictus.
In this year did Constantinus begin to rule, although he was then contented
with the title of Caesar, yet the year following he received the title of
Augustus of Maximian, whose daughter he had married, he was then 32 or 33 years
old, the which we shall better understand from his death hereafter, he was then
born about the 273 year of Christ, of Helena Bithyna, whom Hier. Chro. Zosim.
l. 2. Oros. 7. c. 25. Chr. Alex.
many say to have been a Concubine, and Ambr. de fund. Theod.
Ambrosius says that she was a victualling housekeeper; others say that she
was his legitimate wife, but born of low degree, Zona. To. 3.
Zonaras leaves it in doubt what she was.

Eutrop. 10. Victor. Eus. 8. hist. 14. et de vita Constable.
But Maxentius, Herculius's son, as soon as Constantinus's Images were brought
to Rome, was immediately created Emperor by the Praetorian bands, who at the
first for to obtain the favor of the people, seemed to favor the Eus. 8.
hist. c. 14. Optat. l. 2.
Christians, and moderated the persecution, but soon after he weltered himself
in all sort of cruelty, and wickedness: Vict. Scb. Eutrop. 10. Zosim. 2.
Against him Maximian sent Severus Caesar; who being forsaken of his own
Soldiers, fled to Ravenna, Galerius going to Rome with his Army, and in vain
having exhorted Maxentius his son in law by Ambassadors, to deserve the Empire
rather by prayers and love, then by Arms, he being cowardly and unworthily
forsaken of his Army, fled into Scythia, where he created Eutrop. 10. Vicr. Sch.
Licinius Caesar in the 307 year of Christ: Eur. 10. Vict. Epist. Oros. 7.
whereby Herculius having raised his hope of recovering, what he had forsaken
against his will, he returns to Rome from Lucania: He desires Dioclesian then
living at Cornuntum in Pannonia (and not Cornutum in Celtica, as Anon. Zos. 2.
Vict. Sch. Oros. ibid.
Zosimus wrongfully says) or as Victor Salon, by letters to help him, but he
refused. Then having deprehended Severus in a perjury, and bringing him back
from Ravens, he brought him in the habit and condition of a prisoner, and in
the way going to Appium a mile from the City, he caused him to be strangled, as
Idatius asserts: Herculius plotting some treachery against Maxentius his son,
he is driven out of Rome, and flies into France to Constantine, to whom he had
given his daughter Paneg. Constable. et Max. Eutrop. 2. Zosim. 2.
Fausta in Marriage when he created him Augustus.

Then in the 308. wherein Herculius had been Consul ten times, and Armentarius
seven, Hier. Chr. Ida. Fast. Vict. Sch.
Licinius being created Emperor at Carnutum in November, as Idatius writes,
The Commonwealth began to be governed Eutrop. 10.
by four Augustus's, by Constantine and Maxentius, sons of two Augustus's, by
Galerianus Maximianus, and Lucinius both persons of themselves raised up to
dignity: Eutr. and others.
Herculius in the three hundred and tenth year of Christ, as he plots some
wicked design against his son in Law Constantine, he is discovered by Fausta
his daughter, and flying to Marseilles, there he suffers for his treason,
Idatius tells when: Eus. 8. Hist. c. 17.
Galerius Maximianus the year following, died of a foul disease the Eus. and
Idat. fall.
eighth time he was Consul: whom Maxentius Ve^us inscr. nummi apud Baro.
his son in law did reckon and number amongst the gods.

Eus. 1. de vita. Constable. c. 22. and 9. Hist. c. 9. Zosim. 2. Vict. sch. Eutr.
10.
In the year three hundred and twelve, Constantine having seen the Apparition
of the Cross in Heaven, and being animated against Maxentius, and being gone
over the Alps, having beaten his commanders, and their Armies unto Verone, he
overcame him not far from the City: who hastily stealing away through the
Bridge that he caused to be laid over the River Zosim. 2. Eutrop. 10.
Tiber, being smothered in the fall of the Bridge, and so drowned, he died: his
head was carried up and down in Rome, and in Africa, as Naxarius has said in
his Panegyricks.

Things being ordered and well settled in the City, going into Germany, he
marries his sister, Eus. 8. hist. c. 9. and 10. Zosim. l. 2. Eutrop. 10. Vict.
Sch. Oros. 7. c. 28.
Constantia to Lucinius in Millain, in the three hundred and thirteenth year of
Christ, and in that same year Galerius Maximinus, that great murderer of
Christians, having foolishly and indiscreetly taken up arms against these two
Emperors, being beaten and routed in Schythia, by Licenius, he flies into
Asia, and there in Tarsus of Cilicia, he was consumed by an horrid disease:
Neither did these two Princes continue long in amity and friend-ship: The same
Authors.
for they, as they were the fourth time Consulls, as Idatius relates, in the
year of Christ three hundred and fifteen, having broken their league and
friendship, they fought first near Cibalis a Town in Pannonia, upon the eighth
of October; then again in the Mardians fields, where the Lycinians were
defeated, routed and put to flight. At length being reconciled, and having
concluded a peace, they of new divided the Empire between themselves, in the
mean time Dioclesian died at Salona the third of December, as Idatius says.

Anonym. Zosim. 2. Eus. 1. de vita. Constable. etc.
In the three hundred twenty fourth year, Licinius having again taken up arms
against Constantinus, accusing him to have broken into another man's dominion
(although necessity had forced him to beat back and destroy those who spoiled
and invaded the Goths, Thracia, and Moesia) he received a very great overthrow
near Hadrianopolis, the ninth of July, as Idatius observes; having 35 thousand
slain of his Army, which consisted of 150 thousand foot Soldiers, and 15
thousand horsemen; then flying to Byzantium, he is also beaten by Sea; and
lastly, being overcome in a fieldbattle near Chalcedon, he came into his
Conquerour's hand; of whom having obtained his life by the interposition of his
Wife, Constantine's sister; and being sent away to Thessalonica, in the Idat.
Licinius's death.
year following being 325, he was put to death in the City, for plotting a new
design. And thus ended these Intestines and Civil Wars.

Domestical troubles attended and received Constantine, Crispus is put to death.
having achieved his Martial Exploits to the terror of his enemies, Oros. 7.
c. 28.
Crispus Caesar his son by his first Wife Minervina, a youth of an excellent
beauty and rare nature, being brought into suspicion of having attempted incest
with his Mother-in-law, he is put to death at Pola in Istria, as Amm. 14.
Ammianus writes; but Zos. 2.
Zosimus says, that it was at Rome; and Idat. Fast. Hieron. Chron.
Idatius says, That it was in the year of Christ 326. But God did not delay it
long, before he avenged the innocent; because the next year was Fausta (which
had accused wrongfully her son in law) put to death; which being deprehended
and convinced of falsehood, by Constantine's command was smothered in a hot bath.

Hieron. Chron. Zos. 2. Socr. 1. c. 15. vide 11. de Doct. Temp. c. 42.
Byzantium was built up again by Constantine the Emperor, and was enriched by
the spoils of almost all the world; insomuch, that it became equal to Rome,
and received the name of its builder, as well as his Imperial Throne and Court.
Idatius records, that it was dedicated the 5th of May, in the year 330. Now the
Law being there brought and established, and insculpt in a pillar of stone;
Socrates says, that he commanded it to be called New Rome.

Hieron. Chron. Anonym. Idat.
The Sarmatians after this being subdued, and distributed into several places
of the Roman Empire, the 4th year after, which was the 337th of Christ, on a
Whitsunday, Constantinus dies in the Suburbs of Nicomedia, where most of the
Ancients affirm, that he was baptized a little before his death. Petron. in
Resp. p. 239.
With whom Cardinal Perron of late did agree. But Eusebius. 4. de vita Constable.
Hier. Chron. Ambr. Ora. in sun. Theod. Socr. Theod. Soz.
Eusebius of Nicomedia asserts, That Constantine was baptized soon after the
Convocation of the Nicaean Synod.

It Is ordinarily thought, That the Sea b. 11. of Doct. Times, chapter 39. etc.
Indictions had first their original in Constantine's time, and that in the 6th
year of his Empire, being the 312 of Christ: but I think, that those who are of
that opinion, are in a dream, and speak not truly; for they allege not one fit
witness: In Epist. ad Episc. Aemiliae.
Ambrose makes mention of it in these words; Now the Indiction begins in the
month of September. Leg. 9. Cod. de Indul.
And it is called in Theod. book, The Valennian Indiction; Ancienter Authors
than these, worthy of faith, cannot easily be found: And whence this word
Indiction came first, and what is its own proper notion, it is not clearer then
before. Learned men agree amongst themselves in this, That Indictions are
nothing else but Customs and Tributes, whose Canon or Model was declared every
year: but why he was pleased, that they should end 15 years after, and why
first at what time they were begun, there being many conjectures of diverse
persons, none sufficiently probable is alleged. Now the use of these
Indictions is threefold, for one is in September, and is called
Constantinopolitane; another is in the 8th of September, and is called
Caesarian: which of them two is the ancientest, I am not yet well resolved. The
third is called Pontifick or Roman, and is affixed to the Pope's bulls, and
takes its beginning in January, following the two former Epoches.

CHAP. II. Of the Affairs of the Church which came to pass in the time of
Constantine the Emperor; of Maximian's Persecution; of the Schism of the
Donatists; of the heresy of the Artians; and of the Nicean Synod; and also of
those Persons eminent in Piety and Learning.
THe Persecution commenced by Dioclesian, and continued after him and Herculius
against the Christians, was propagated and increased by Galerius Maximianus,
and by Galerius Maximinus: but Constantine who ruled France, did not only
abstain from shedding Christian blood, but also had the Christians in great
esteem. Above the others, did Eus. hist. Martyrs under Maximinus.
Maximinus rage in the East, putting an infinite number of Christians to
Martyrdom; Excellent and renowned persons, were Pamphilus, a learned Elder of
Caesaria; and Procopius, who suffered in the same City. Peter Bishop of
Alexandria, who excluded Arrius from the Communion by reason of his Schisms.
Pallad. Laus. c. 1.
St. Potamiena of Alexandria; Lucian of Nicomedia, etc. Eusebius. 9. hist. c. 4.
Also was spread abroad a most pernicious and detestable book under Pilat's
acts by maximinus's command, wherein many wicked and horrid things were
contained of Christ; And Maxentius raged as much at Rome. But Constantine the
Victorious, did put a stop and period to the Persecution; under whose
protection and favor the Christian Religion was propagated and enlarged, even
farther then the Roman Territories.

After this Licinius Eus. in vita. Constable. Chro. Socr. 1. c. 8. Oros. 7. c. 22.
being become an enemy, from a friend and Protector: he made not a few Martyrs
also, amongst whom 40 Soldiers of an excellent and commendable valor are
reckoned, who were starved of cold in Cappadocia; Basil Bishop of Amasea, and
others: when Licinius was slain by Constantine, then did the Christians enjoy
peace.

Whilst this Tyrant rages with fire and sword against the Christians, the
inward and domestic troubles did also afflict the Church; for its said, That
two schisms and heresies had their rise under the beginning of Constantine's
and Maxentius's Empire; The schism of the Donatists in Africa, and the schism
of Meletian in Egypt. The first arose upon these causes.

Opt. 1. Aug. 1. Con. Parm. et in brevi and alibi tom. 7. part. 1.
Lucilla was a woman of Chartages in Spain, mighty and factious, who being
reprehended by Caecilian the Archdeacon, sought the occasion of revenging her
self: It happened, that Mensurius the Bishop of Chartage, being called to Rome
by Maximian, he commended the Vessels to the care of the Elders: Who being
dead, Caecilian was ordained in his place by Felix Aprungitanus, who asking of
these Elders that that was left in their hands, they refused and opposed his
communion, and to them joined her self Lucilla. And this was the first original
of the Donatists, The history of the Donatists.
who had their name from Donatus, of the black houses, the chief Author of this
schism, by whom was Majorinus ordained, although that they had rather to have
their denomination from the other Donatus, who succeeded Majorinus: Opt. 1.
Aug. Ep. 8. 1^2. 165. and in several other places. vide tom. 1. Conc. Gall.
and Eus. 10. hist. c. 5.
Maxentius being taken away, when the Donatists did petition Constantine
against Caecilian, whom they affirmed to have been ordained by Felix the
Deliverer. The Emperor committed the cause to Melchiades the Pontiff of Rome,
and to some other Bishops, of whom three were French, by whom in the year 313,
the Donatists were condemned, with their grand-Leader Donatus, as Heretics and
Schismatics. But they again troubling Africa, and condemned again by Aelian
Proconful, they appeal to the Emperor, by whose command their cause was again
examined by a Synod at Arelatis, and the sentence was given in Caecilian's
behalf, in the year 314, Volusianus and Amanus being Consuls; but
notwithstanding this, having again appealed to Constantine, being commanded
first to come to Rome, then to Millan, there they were at last condemned, and
punished by banishment, but Constantine afterward recalled and pardoned their
banishment.

The other was the Schism of Meletians. Athan. Apol. l. 2. Soer. 1. Soz. 1.
Theod. c. 9.
The Author of it was Meletius Bishop of Lycopolis, who being degraded by Peter
Bishop of Alexandria, for diverse crimes, and for having offered sacrifice to
Idols, fell of from him; this business was broached at the same time wherein
that of the Donatists was.

Out of this faction came Athan. passim. Socr. 1. 28. Soz. 1. 25. Theod. 1. c.
30. Epiph. haer. 69.
Arius, an Elder of the Alexandrian Church, who spread abroad an ungodly and
blasphemous heresy against the Son of God, for which being cast out of the
Church, he sought for his advocates and defenders, Eusebius Bishop of
Nicomedia, and another Bishop of Caesaria, with diverse others, the which
burning, when Constantius could not restrain and quench it by letters, nor by
his Ambassador Hosius, at length he ordained a Synod to be convoked at Nicea,
in the year 325, wherein were present 318 Bishops.

By this Synod is condemned Arius's heresy, and the Controversy about the
Passover is determined. Athan. Apol. 2.
Arius and eight other that were of his party, by the consent of the Bishop of
Nicea were again admitted to the faith, as Hieron. Con. Lucif.
Hieronymus writes; Arius upon the condition not to return into Alexandria,
Gelas. l. z. c. 36.
whose books indeed Constantius gave out an Edict, that they should be burnt,
Socr. Trip. 2. c. 15.
and that they who maintained his opinion, should be called Porphyrians. Now
Athanasius Deacon to Alexander Bishop of Alexandria turned upon himself the
hatred of all the Arrians, because he had prosecuted the action more vehemently
then any other. Theod. l. 15. c. 20.
And five months after this Synod, Alexander dying, he was ordained in his
place; Neither could it ever be obtained by prayers nor threats from him, that
Arianus might have the liberty to return into Alexandria. By reason of this
being vexed by the Calumnies of the Melitians and Arians; Athan. Apol. 2. Socr.
2. Theod. Soz. 1. 25. Ruff. 1. Athanasius's Troubles.
at length, he was condemned in the year 335, of false crimes, and being come
to the Emperor into Constantinople, being suspected by him, by reason of his
enemies new machinations and false accusations, he is sent prisoner to
Treveris, in the 336 year of Christ. Arius having by all means possible
endeavored to obtain the favor and communion of Alexander Bishop of
Constantinople, as he hastened to the Church, he ended his life with an
infamous death.

Ruff. 1. c. 8 Socr. 1.17. Soz. 2.24. Ambr. de fund. Theod. Paul. epist. 2.
Sever. Sulp. l. 2.
Helena, Constantine the Emperor's Mother, found the crofs of Christ in
Jerusalem, Eus. 3. de vita Constable.
and erected two Cathedral Churches, and Constantine built a most magnificent
one, with the very City.

Sapores persecutes the Christians in Persia, and puts to Martyrdom Acepsima,
Ibid. and Theophia. Cedrenus.
Aithales, and many more, whom the Emperoun endea voured to moderate and
mitigate by letters. Ruff. l. 1. c. 9. Socr. 1. c. 25. Theo. 1. c. 23. Soz. 1.
c. 23.
Again, Frumentius Tyrius, a Philosopher, propagated and divulged the Christian
faith in the Indies, and being ordained Bishop by Athanasius, he returned
thither the 327th year of Christ, at what time the light of the Gospel, by the
means and labor of a certain bondwoman, began to shine amongst the Scythians.
Now that the Christian concernments might goon prosperously, this godly
Emperor provided the Christians with many good laws, L. 1. Cod. Th. de Episc.
whereof this was very remarkable, viz. That Bishops should give their
sentences in causes and Judgment, it was enacted the 314th year of Christ; he
also by another Law granted immunity to the Clergy, Eus. 3. de vita, c. 61.
Soz. 2. c. 32.
then he did forbid the Heretick's Conventicles, and commanded their Churches
to be pulled down, and to be confiscated to the Catholics.

To. 1. Conc.
Then Synods, kept in several places, did establish the Christian discipline,
especially that at Ancyrane, wherein Basilius Bishop of Amasia, who suffered
Martyrdom by Licinius's command, was present; and that held at Gangria, not
certainly known what year.

And that Age was not less abounding with persons of holiness, and deep
Learning, besides those whom here and there we have mentioned, most of them who
were in the Nicean Synod are commended for men of excellent and admirable
piety, as Nicholaus the Bishop of Mira, Socr. 1. c. 10, 11.
Spyridio of Trimitum in Cyprus, Eustathius of Antioch, Paphnutius of Thebes,
and infinite number of others; also Rhaeticus the Augustodinian, was also
esteemed amongst the Learned, who together with Melchiades was granted to the
Donatists by Constantine, to be their Judge: Hieronymus reckons amongst
Arnobius, who of a Rhetorician and Gentile, became a became a Christian in the
20th year of Constantine; but I think that he was long before this time: for he
is said to have set out books against the Gentiles; for a certain token that he
had embraced the Christian faith, and it appears by his books, that he writ
them to the persecutors of the Christians; Then in his second book he
testifies, that it was 1050 years after the first building of the City, which
by Varo's account falls upon the 297th year of Christ, a little before
Dioclesian's persecution. Arnobius questionless writ under Dioclesian. But
Lactantius, the most learned man of his time, Crispus Caesar's Master, lived
after him; Hier. Chron.
but so poor, that oftentimes he wanted things needful, as Hieronymus says.
Amongst the Poets, Juvencus a Spanish Elder was most excellent; and Publius
Optatianus Porphyrius, who dedicated to Constantine his panegyric, of a
pensive Artificer's letters. Nazarius and Patera were esteemed rare Orators in
France, living at that time.

CHAP. III. Touching the sons of Constantine the Great, and their Saccessours,
and chiefly of Constantine and Gallus Caesar, Vetranius and Magnentius the
Tyrants, and of the Persian wars.
From the 337 year of Christ, to 361.
COnstantine left three sons, whom he had by Fausta Maximian's daughter, heirs
of the Empire, who also divided the Empire amongst themselves, France and all
what was on this side the Alps, fell to the lot of his eldest son Victor,
Zosimus 2. Ruf. 1. c. 15.
Constantine; and Rome, Italy, Africa, Sicilia, and all the other Islands,
Scythia, Thracia, Macedonia, and Greece, to Constans; and the second brother
Constantius had for his lot all Asia, from the Sea Propontides, and all the
East, with Egypt.

Socr. l. 2. c. 1. Zos. 2. Victor. Eutr.
Constantinus their father had two brothers, Constantius, Julian's Father, and
Dalmatius, some call him Anabalianus, he had two sons, Dalmatius, who was
created Caesar in the year 335, as Idatius says, and also called Censor, as
Lib. 1. c. 27.
Socrates relates, and Annabalianus or Annibalianus, whom Constantine had
established King of the Kings, and people of Pontus, therefore does Amm. l. 14.
Ammianus call him King.

A sudden sedition after Constantines death, The bloody beginnings of
Constantine's sons.
embroyled them all in blood, and wars, by the commotion or diffimulation of
the Emperor Constantius. With them Optatus, invested with the title of
Patricius, newly and first invented by Constantine, and Ablanius the Governor,
were slain in the Judgment-Hall. Then the son of Constantius Constantinus's
brother, the brother of Gallus and Julian, writing to the S. P. Q. Ath. hardly
escaped. Gallus who was sick, and Julian by reason of his tender age (for he
was then but five years old) during the fates and destinies of these horrid
murders, these three brothers obtained the Empire, who were not in unity and
peace long together: Eut. 10. Sacr. 2. c. 5. Zofim. Victor. Idat. Constantine
the younger is slain. Then Constans.
For four years after their fathers death in the year of Christ 340.
Constantinus raising wars against his brother Constans, and breaking into his
territories, he was slain near Aquileia. Constans himself, ten years after,
being the beginning of the 350th year, as we may gather from Socr. 2. c. 6.
Sozo. 4.1.
Idatius, is slain by Gaison, Magnentius's General, near to the Pyreneyes in
Helens castle being then 30 years old, as Hieronymus writes in his Chronicles,
although Aurelius Victor gives him but 27 Idem.
whose death being known Vetranius Commander in chief of the forces in
Pannonia, near Mursa, and Nepotianus son of Constantius's sister possess
themselves of the Roman Empire, he in May, and this in June, and Idat. Julian.
Orat. 1. and 2.
Vetranius eight Months after, upon the eighth of January, being reduced to
order, lives privately again: Nepotianus eight and twenty days after was
suppressed by Magnentius's Army: but after that upon the fourth of October
Victor. Socr. 2. c. 31. Soz. 4. c. 7. Oros. 7. c. 29.
next, there was a very hot and bloody fight between them in Pannonia near
Morsa, where Constantius's Army being beaten at the first encounter, became at
last victorious, and in this fight was the Roman power much weakened by the
loss of an infinite number of people: this was done in the 351 year of our
Lord, Idat. Socr. l. 2. c. 31. Zos. Vict. Eut. etc.
two years after being the 353, Magnentius despairing of all, killed himself
near Lions in France, the third of August: Decentius his brother died the 15 of
September amongst the Senones.

Amm. 14. Idat. Socr. 2. c. 34. Vict. Eutrop. 10. Zos. 2.
Gallus being created Caesar in the year 351, Gallus Caesar.
and established over the East Countries by Constantius, and abusing that great
power committed into his hands by his cruelty and lust, being called back by
Constantius, he was put to death in Scythia by his order. Julia. Orat. 3. etc.
Amm. 15. Zos. 3. vide Ep. Jul. ad S. P. Q. A.
Julian his brother having been preserved by the sudden arriving of Eusebia,
Constantius's sister, and sent to Athens to study, afterward in the year 355
he was invested with the dignity of Caesar, and married to Helena the Emperors
sister, and made Deputy of France, whereto being come he performed many gallant
exploits against the Germans, the French and Alemans: he sent Connodorus King
of the Alemans bound to Rome: Whose prosperous success Constantius envying,
Julian is created Emperor.
he endeavored to draw away the soldiers from him, and to transport them into
the East against the Persians: Amm. Hier. Chr. Idat. Zos. Socr. l. 3. c. 1.
etc. sup. cit. Constantius's death.
but the soldiers saluted Julian in Paris by the name of Emperor, as
Constantius was a preparing war against the Persians, which being somewhat
ended or rather delayed, as he was hastening against Julian, intending to be
revenged of him, he died the third of November at Mopsucrenes near Tarsus.
Vict. Epi. de Constable.
Victor says that Constantius died in the 44 year of his age, and of his
Empire 39, and that he was Augustus 24. times. Eutropius writes that he died in
the 45 year of his age, and 35 of his Empire. But Ammian gives him but few
days besides the forty years of his life and Empire. He was Baptized a little
before his death by Eusoius an Arrian Bishop, as Socr. l. 2. c. 46.
Socrates says. Indeed its true that Lucif. l. 1. Pro. S. Ath.
Lucifer Bishop of Calaris did warn him by Athanasius and other his
companion-Bishops, to seek after the wholesome Baptism, and receive it.

In the time of his Empire Nisibis was thrice besieged by Sapor, as Ruffus
writes. Hieron. Chron.
First soon after Constantines death, in the year 338. it was beleaguered
almost two Months, when Constantius was at Antioch, where he was healed of his
disease by Metaph. 12. Sept.
St. Spirido the Bishop of Trimitunth. Secondly in the year three hundred and
fifty, when Constantius left the East, to follow Magnentius; for he being
departed, Julia Orat. 1. Theod. 2. Hist. c. 30. and in Philotheus.
Julian asserts that Sapor did again assault it, and this siege lasted four
Months, and was raised by the prayers of Saint James the Bishop, there being
sent a great Army of Gnats amongst the Barbarians, which drove them away, and
put them to flight. Thirdly, when Julian was Caesar, and had subdued the
French, the Salians and the Quades; and when Constantius required of him two
legions of Soldiers to send thither: and so Nisibis (as it appears) was
besieged in the year three hundred and sixty, when Lucillianus defended it most
valiantly, as Zos. 3.
Zosimus says.

CHAP. IV. Of the Ecclesiastical affairs, during the time of Constantius, and
of the several Councils; of Athanasius's Persecutions, and of the most eminent
persons for Holiness and Excellent Genius.
GRievous and lasting troubles did attend the Church infected with heresies
during Constantius's Empire: for the Arrian perfidious Heresy, which for the
fear of Constantinus had been suppressed, now began again to lift up its head.
One of the causes of so great an evil was a woman, Constantia by name, which
had married Ruff. l. 1. c. 11. Socr. l. 1. c. 26. Soz. l. 1. c. 38. and c. 34.
and l. 2. c. 1. Theod. 2. c. 3. Constantius propagates Arianus's Heresy.
Licinius. Dying, she recommended to her brother Constantine the Emperor, a
certain Elder infected with the opinion of Arius, whom he had in great esteem
afterward; and as he died, he committed him his Will, and having delivered it
into Constantius's hands, he was no less esteemed by him then by his father:
wherefore as he had persuaded Constantinus to recall Arianus, so at last he
prevailed so with Constantius that he professed himself a strong upholder and
preserver of that heresy, and on purpose to spread it abroad he mixed many other
things with it.

Then the care and thoughts of all the Artians were bent to the destroying of
Athanasius: on whom at that time the Catholic Concerns did rely: Athan. Apol.
2. Theod. l. 2. c. 1. Socr. l. 2.
But Constantine the younger sends him from France, Theod. l. 2. c. 1.
Athanasius brought to question.
where he had remained two years and four Months, back into Alexandria with
very honorable and commendable Letters in the year of our Lord 338. But
Eusebius of Nicomedia and others troubling him; Pope Julius warned them both to
come before him to decide the controversy, but the Eusebians shifting, and
putting off their appearing, and Athanasius having appeared, and stayed in Rome
a year and a quarter, in the year 341. he returned into Alexandria: Athan.
Apol. and Ep. ad Orth. Socr. l. 2. c. 10. Zos. l. 3. c. 10. Theod. 2. c. 4. The
Council of Sardis.
But the same year was held a Council at Antioch, for to dedicate Constantines
Cathedral Church, wherein Athanasius being ejected, in his place was ordained.
Gregorius Cappadox, who possessed that place, having committed a great murder,
Athanasius being secretly escaped, and gone to Rome, whether Paul, Bishop of
Constantinople, and other Catholic Bishops, being expelled by the Arians, had
retired themselves as to a sure place of refuge: Idem. and Sulp. 2.
And for their cause, by the command of Constans and Constantius, was a
general Synod assembled at Sardis, in the year 347. By which the Arians
retiring and hiding themselves, Athanasius was restored to his office, and all
the other Bishops also, and the Heretics being condemned, the Articles of
Faith concluded at Nicene, were here ratified. Socr. 2. c. 20. Sez. 3. c. 10
At the same time the Arians convoke a Conventicle at Philippis in Thracia,
which they also called by the name of Sardis, where they forbad the Word of
Consubstantiall evermore to be heard, Extat. apud. Hilar. in frag.
and sent their decree to them in Africa. But then Constantius being forced by
Constans's threatening letters, commanded Athanasius to return into Alexandria:
Sulp. 2. Socr. 2. c. 21. Theod. 2. c. 5. Soz. 4. c. 2.
But Paul being re-entered into Constantinople, and soon after cast out again,
and brought to Cucusum, he was put to death by the Arians, and soon after this
is also Athanasius turned out; And Constantius by all means possible seeking
and endeavoring Athanasius's destruction, partly by force partly by
threatenings he compells them to condemn him, and he punished partly by prison,
A grievous Persecution for the cause of Athanasius.
partly by banishment, those who disowned and spoke ill of this wickedness.
Eusebius of Verselles, Dionyse of Millan and Liberius the Pope are banished,
who two years after, for desire of recovering the Sea of Rome, subscribes
Athanasius's condemnation: but Osius of Cordubia, having constantly resisted
and opposed it, at last, wearied out by sufferings and terrors, he assented
also to it.

In the midst of all this, Athanasius being narrowly prosecuted to death, by
the divine providence and protection, at last escaped.

Athan. etc. citati. vide Anim. nostras ad Epiph. Haer. 73.
Now the Arians were making again new Articles of Faith, such as they had done
within Eleven or Twelve years.

Never at any other time were Synods of Bishops more frequent then under this
Emperor, the which Amm. in fine l. 21.
Ammianus an Heathen writer has not ably observed as by his own words we may
here see. Confounding (says he) the absolute and simple Christian Religion
with superstition, in the searching of which, with more perplexity then gravity
in the composing of the same, he stirred up many dissentions, which being
dispersed abroad, he maintained and fomented by contention of words, so that he
cut off the sinews of the thing carried about, whilst he endeavors to draw
to his will the whole Ceremony of it, by multitudes of Bishops riding far and
near as public laboring beasts to the Synods, ass they call them: Hilar. de
Syn. Socr. l. 2. c. 29. Soz. l. 4. c. 6. Animadv. ad Epiph. Haer. 73.
Now the chiefest that were held by the Heretics, are reckoned to be these,
viz. That of Syrmia in the year 351. Wherein Photiaus Marcellus, Anciranus's
Disciple, Vide append. hujus operis.
often brought into Judgment before and condemned, at length he was reduced into
order, Basilius chiefly prosecuting him, Athan. de Syn. Sever. 2. Socr. 2, c.
29. Soz. 4. c. 16. Ruff. l. 1. c. 21. Theod. 2. c. 18.
And that of Arimina, and also that of Seleuca, both held at the same time in
the three hundred fifty ninth year of Christ; wherein perfidiousnesse was
strengthened by the fraud and impiety of the Arians.

Other Heresies besides that of Arius broke forth, as that of the Semirianians,
who professed the Son of God, to be not of the same substance of the Father,
but of a substance like to it, of the Marcellians, who revived Epiph. Theod. de
haer. Aug. de haer. Sever. 2.
Sabellius's opinion: of the Photinians, who presumed to say that Christ was
only a mere man: of the Macedonians, or Pneumatomachians, who put the Holy
Ghost in number of things created. Epiph. haer. 76. Soz. l. 2. c. 35.
Also the Heresy of the Anomoeans, or Eunomians, from Aetius Syrus, and his
Disciple Eunomeus: who asserted the Son to be different from the Father, Epiph.
haer. 70. and 75. Paul the first Hermire, and Antonius.
then of the Audianians and Aerians; of whom Epiphanius, Theodoretus, and
others do speak.

The persons illustrious for their holiness that dyed in this Age were chiefly
these, Paul the first Hermit, and Antonius the Monk: Hieronymus in his
Chronicles writes, That in the 19 year of Constantius, dyed Antonius the Great;
the which Lib. 1. Hist. Franc. c. 38.
Gregory of Turin has followed; the which year in Scaliger's Edition is
ascribed to the fourth year of the 283 Olympiad in Pontacena, to the first year
of the 284 Olympiad, and to the 359th year of Christ; but the 19th year of
Constantius began in the 355 of Christ, Arbitianus and Lollius being Consuls;
whence it may be, that Antonius dyed the year following 356 in January. Athan.
in vita ejus. Hier: Chron.
He was 105 years old, therefore his birth falls upon the 250 year of Christ,
Decius then possessing the Empire, and persecuting the Christians, as
Hieronymus's Chronicles do relate.

Paul was older then Antonius by 23 years; yea Hieronymus in Paul's life
relates, that Antonius was 90 years old when Paul dyed, in the 113 year of his
life; by this account, this Paul was born about the 227th, or 228th year of
Christ, and dyed the 340, or 341, and lived in the hermitage 90 years.

Nevertheless, Hieronymus speaks somewhat confusedly about Paul; for he says,
That Paul, at that time when Antonius came to him, that he had already led an
heavenly life for the space of 115 years, and that in the 15th year of his
life, for to escape the Persecution, he hid himself in a cave, which does not
well agree together. If he had lived 113 years in the desert after Decius's
persecution, he would be said to have dyed the 363d year of our Lord; after the
death of Constantius and Antonius, and had lived 128 years, or Antonius, who
lived after him 15 years, dyed in the year 378; which is altogether absurd.

At that time did flourish St. James Bishop of Nisibis; Eustathius of Antioch
ejected out of his Office by the Arrians for his faith, in the year 340.
Hilarious of Pictavene 355, banished by Constantius. Epiph. heir. 30.
Josephus Comes, of a Jew became Christian; Eusebius of Vercelles, Paulinus of
Trevirenes; And for deep Learning are praised Eusebius of Caesarea, who dyed in
the 340th year of Christ, Victorinus the Rhetorician, and Donatus the
Grammarian, Hieronymus's Schoolmaster.

CHAP. V. Of Julian, and of his Deeds.
Anno 361 of Christ, unto 363.
Julian ad S.P.Q. Ath. Amm. 15. Zos. 3. Socr. 3. Theod. 3. Soz. 4. Sulp. 2.
Oros. 7. c. 10.
JUlianus, his Couzen-german Constantius being dead, alone governed the Empire
in the year of our Lord 361, having already obtained of Constantius the title
of Idar. Fast. Socr. 2. c. 34.
Caesar, ever since the 8th of November 355; and having been entitled Augustus
by the Soldiers, in the 36th year in the City of Paris; as soon as he alone
enjoyed the whole Empire, he either put to death or banished all Constantius's
friends: Amm. 21. and 22. Socr. 3. c. 4.
he opened again the Temples of the Idols, and having renounced all the
Sacraments of the Christian Faith, he was consecrated High Priest by profane
ceremonies; then being gone against the Persians, in the year 362. being in
Antioch, and mocked there by the people, he made a Satyrick book in his own
vindication, that he entitled, Misopogon.

Amm. 24. and 25. Zosim. l. 3.
After this in the 363 year, the third of March, having led his Army against
the Persians, having somewhat prosperously pursued the War, he foolishly
rejected the honorable and reasonable conditions of peace offered to him by
the King of the Persians. At length, by his own indiscretion, his Navies being
burnt up that went along with the Army to supply them with victuals, and all
the provision that was in them being stopped upon the River, and he himself
intercepted by the Persians, and being in want of all things, he dyed in the
midst of the fight; but it is uncertain who shot his Arrow at him, in the Socr.
5. c. 21. Theod. 3. c. 25.
26 of June, of the 363 year of Christ, of his own age 31, having governed the
Empire after Constantius's death one year and seven months. Theod. 3. c. 25.
It is said, That as he dyed, he took some blood out of his wound into his
hand, and cast it up toward Heaven, with these words, Now have thou overcome,
O Galilean.

Hieron. Chron. Ruff. 1. c. 32. etc. supr. cit.
Under this Emperor the Christian's Persecution was rather a flattering and
enticing, then a forcing and constraining persecution, to make them to worship
Idols, and sacrifice to them; for he fought against the Christian Faith by
hidden and sly arts and practices: he advanced none but Heathens to places of
public employment; he forbad all Authors but Heathens, to be taught in the
Schools: He suffered Prelates and Bishops of diverse heresies to live at their
own will and fancy, intending by it, that they should not live peaceably and
quietly amongst themselves: yet he put some to death, as amongst others,
Artemius the Governor of Egypt Augustal, who, under pretext of other crimes,
being brought to Antioch, and accused with the constancy of his faith, to have
presumed to blame and speak ill of the Emperor, was slain Martyr. Romans
the 20th of September.

Socr. 3. c. 7, 8, 9. Theod. l. 3. c. 4. and 5.
Now Julian having by his Edict recalled all them that had been banished;
Athanasius being returned into Alexandria, he convoked a Synod in the year of
our Lord, 362, wherein it was decreed, That all the Bishops that had been
turned out of their Offices, should again enjoy their places. The Luciferanian
Schism.
Lucifer Calaritanus soon after came into Antioch, divided them into three
factions; for some were called Eustathians; so called from that great
Eustathius, who was ejected out of Antioch by the Arrians; some, Meletians,
from Meletius, infected by the Arrians company, who hated the Catholics; and
thirdly, some, Arrians, over whom was Euzoius. Therefore Lucifer being come
thither, he ordained Paulinus, Eustathius's Presbyter, Bishop for the
Catholics; so that there were three Bishops in that City. After this Eusebius
of Verselles being come thither, disapproved what Lucifer had done; whereupon
he being offended, and having taken it ill, that all those who had been
dispossessed of their Offices, should repossesse and re-enjoy them again, he
broke off from the communion of the Catholics; and this was the first schism
that was amongst the Luciferanians.

Ruff. l. 2. c. 34. Soer. l. 3. c. 9. Theod. 3. Soz. 3.
Now at the instant request of the Arrians, Julian commanded Athanasius to be
turned out of Alexandria, who being by the subtle counsel of his persecutor,
persecuted to death, at last escaped their hands. Opta. 2.
This same Emperor being petitioned by the Donatists, restored them to their
former estate. Socr. l. 3. etc.
Again, he either commanded or suffered the Gentiles to exercise all sorts of
villainies and cruelties against the Christians, without punishing them for it.
Amongst other things, when those of Alexandria butchered Amm. 22. Julia. Ep. 10.
Georgius, who had been put in Athanasius's place, he contented himself to
reprehend them mildly. Upon whose death Athanasius seeing the place void,
returned to it; whom Julian commanded again to be turned out.

In this Emperor's time were these persons of great fame for their Learning,
Persons of fame.
Hier. Chron. Eunap.
Prohaeresius the Sophist, a Christian, who by reason of Julian's Edict, That
no Christian Doctors should teach Schools, gave off keeping of School of his
own free will; although Julian had excepted him by his own name, being then 85
years old, as it may be gathered out of Eupanius; and Aimerius also, a Sophist,
Prohaeresius's emulator, as Suidas writes; also Aut. cit. and Suidas.
Themistius the Philosopher, Libanius the Sophist, Oribasius the Physician,
Maximus the Philosopher, and Ecebolius.

CHAP. VI. Of Jovian, Valentinian, and Valens.
Anno 363 of Christ, unto 378.
JOvian, born at Amm. 25. Ruff. 2. c. 1. Socr. 3. c. 24. etc. Soz. 6. Theod. 4.
Vict. Eur. 10. Zosim. l. 3.
Sigidon in Pannonia, was saluted Emperor by the suffrage and common consent
of the Soldiers, the 5th of July, the 363 year of our Lord, as Idalius writes.
A man of an admirable proportion of body, yet of a more excellent mind for
piety and goodness, who suddenly brought the Soldiers from the superstitious
worship of the Heathens, to the true Christian Religion; And set out an Edict,
That all the Idols Temples should be shut up, and the sacrifices utterly
abolisht, having concluded a peace more for necessity then for honor, with
Sapor King of Persia for 30 years, by which he yielded Nisibis, and the most
part of Mesopotamia, he established the Roman estate. But as he was returning
to Constantinople, he dyed at Dadastane, in the Territories of Galatia, of a
surfeit, or of the smell of Prunes, or by the fall of a new roof, the 11th of
March, the 33 year of his age, and the eight month of his Reign.

Athan. ad Jovia.
He being an embracer and professor of the Christian faith, he required
Athanasius to give him a rule and Canon of the same; and he rejected the
Arrians, cunningly coming and creeping to him: who being met together in the
Nicean Council, are said by Socr. 2. c. 25. Soz. 6. c. 4.
Socrates and Sozomenus to have made a form of it, Meletius being their chief
Leader, and the Acacians giving their voices to it: But Hieronymus relates in
his Chron. that they by a common decree established homousium, that is, the
word Consubstantial, to be nullified; and the word anomoeum, that is, Unlike,
to be allowed and approved: That is to say, they approved and confirmed the
opinions of the Macedonians and Semiarians.

Amm. 26. Zosim. fine. 3. and in 4. Victor. Socr. 4. Theod. 4. c. 6. Ruff. l.
2. c. 2.
Jovianus being dead in the very same year of Christ 364, Valentinian the next
day after Bissextile was elected Emperor at Nicea, having shunned the
bissextile, as Ominous, as Ammianus writes, he under his Father Gratian
governed the second Fencing-School of Cybalis, a City in Pannonia; but Julian
removed him out of that dignity, because of his constant mind in the Christian
Religion, who the same year entitled his own brother Augustus. In
Constantinople, the 4th of April, (as Idatius says,) Amm. 30. Vict.
having committed the East to his charge, he goes himself into the West, he
was endued with many ornaments of virtue; Valentinian's noble qualities.
but he exceeded most in the love of Justice, insomuch, that sometimes he
exceeded in punishing of vices, he had an admirable face, and an excellent
genius, he was learned and experienced in diverse Arts, he was wonderfully
temperate, and yet more worthy of praises for his constancy and integrity in
the Christian faith, and that much the more, because his brother did renounce
it to his great defame. He waged wars against the Alemans, the Quades, and the
Saxons, besides other Nations: The Quades or Sarmats at length wasting the
borders, when as he was a preparing an Army against them, and that they had
sent their Ambassadors to him in way of submission; being somewhat
extraordinarily passionate against them; being suddenly taken with an Apoplexy,
he dyed the 15 of December in Pannonia, in Brigition's Castle, as Idatius
says, Amm. 30.
in the 55 year of his age, and the 12th of his Empire. He left his son
Gratian, already made Augustus before, to succeed him in the Empire. And Idat.
Valentinian his other son by Justina, six days after was invested with the
same honor at Acincum in Pannonia by the Soldiers.

Amm. 26. etc. Zosim. 4. Socr. 4. c. 3. and 5. Soz. 6. c. 8. Theo. 4. c. 12.
Them. Orat. 9. Oros. 7.
Valens at the very beginning of his Empire, envying and hating Procopius
Silex, Julian's kinsman, because he had possessed himself of the Government of
Constantinople, he subdued him in Phrygia, in the year 366, and put him to a
cruel death the 6th of June; Amm. 27. vide Jornam.
Then he had continual Wars with the Goths; whose King asking peace of him,
obtained it in the year 369. But in the year 379, he courteously and civilly
entertained him and Fritigernes, when they were expelled out by the Hunns, Amm.
31.
and settled them in Thracia, with the Goths there. They afterward being
stirred up by Lupicinus's covetousness, rose up against the Romans. Hieron.
Chron. Amm. 31. Zos. 4. Socr. 4. c. 38. Soz. 7. c. 40. Ruff. l. 2. c. 1^. Oros.
7. c. 3. Theod. 4. c. 36.
And Valens himself at length fighting against them near Hadrianopolis, and
being wounded with a dart, was burnt with Tugurium, the Town whither he had
retired himself the 5th of August 378, by the Barbarians, as Idatius
witnesses: he dyed, being almost 50 years old, and having governed the Empire
14 years, and some four months. Ammian records, That his manners and
disposition were indeed tempered with some virtues, but with many more vices,
especially of wrath, cruelty, and envy; which were the more violent, by reason
of his impiety toward God, and the poison of that contagious heresy of the
Arrians.

Amm. 16. Zosim. 4. Socr. 4. c. 19. Soz. 6. c. 33.
He showed a notable testimony of his cruelty in the year 370, in which many
were put to death by his command, because it was said, That he enquiring by
curious arts, Who should be his successor? and that the first part of his name
was thus showed to him, THEOD: Hier. Chr. Oros. 7. c. 33.
Whereupon Theodosius the elder, the Father of Theodosius, afterward Emperor,
is thought to have been put to death in Asia, having been baptized. A very
unworthy reward for all his good services and deserts from the Commonwealth;
for amongst others, he had subdued Firmus the Tyrant, who spoiled and destroyed
Africa, with a great Army of Moors, and had followed and pursued him so close,
that at length he killed both him and his brothers.

CHAP. VII. The affairs of the Church worthy of memory under those Emperors,
and the persons of fame for their Piety or for their Learning.
AT this time the Catholic interest was in the East in great troubles under an
Arian Prince. Theod. 4. c. 12. Hier. Chron. etc. Valens Persecutes the Church.
For Valens was infected with the Heresy of the Arians by reason of his
familiarity and acquaintance with them: he vexed continually them that adhered
to the Nicean opinion and doctrine, chiefly after he was baptized by Eudoxius
the usurper of the Bishopric of Constantinople, in the very design of his
Gothic expedition; and he going before he swore both that he never would
forsake that impious opinion, and that he would oppose and pull down with all
his power all the professors of the contrary opinion: and he performed both
according to his promise; for he stirred up a cruel and bloody Persecution,
wherein were many Bishops banished, and Catholics of other ranks; the rest
were afflicted diverse ways, not a few suffered very deep. Socr. 4. c. 4. and
11. Basil. Ep. 54.
The Macedonians and Semiarians having made a confederacy together, sent
Ambassadors to the Pontiff of Rome, and many of them having approved the
Articles of Faith, concluded in the Nicean Synod, were re-established, and
particularly Sebastenus Eustathius a subtle and crafty Arian.

Bas. Ep. 195. Socr. 4. c. 7.
The Emperor disliking this their condescension, he would have an assembly of
his own to be held at Nicea, by whom Eunomoeus the Prince of the Anomoeans was
created Bishop of Cizicum, Eleusius being ejected, but afterward he was turned
out by the Cyzinians.

Socr. 4. c. 13. etc. Soz. b. c. 14. etc
After Eudoxius's death in the year 370. the Catholics having substituted
Evagrius, and the Arians Demophylus, Valens removed them both: the Catholics
afterward being vexed and oppressed by the Arians, they sent eighty
Ecclesiastical persons to complain to the Emperor, whom Modestus the
Governor by Valens's command, being embarked, and in the middle of the Sea,
consumed both by fire and water. Idem. et Naz. in Euc. Basil. and Ep. 20.
Above all others, he hated the Monks, and by an edict forced to be listed for
Soldiers; yet, notwithstanding all this, God was not wanting to his Church in
this turbulent and distressed estate of hers: for he opposed to the Heretics
many rare and excellent persons, both for their godliness, Basilius and
Gregorius.
and for their learning: Amongst them were these two, Basilius, and Gregorius,
most eminent, who came as it were out of the Wilderness to succor the
Catholic party. Valens does in vain oppose Basilius created Bishop of Caesarea
in Cappadocia, in the year three hundred and seventy, whose son Galates for his
fathers fault, is punished with death, and Gregorius ordained Bishop of the
Sasimans dyed. After Nazantius at this time did also flourish that other
Gregorius Bishop of Nissene, and brother to Basilius, whom Valens deposed out
of his office, as also Meletius of Antioch; Eusebius of Samos. Socr. 4. Theod.
4. Soz. 6.
But intending also to dispossess Athanasius, fearing that the Alexandrians
would rise in an uproar, he desisted from his enterprise, but he being dead,
and Peter being by the Catholics ordained in his place, Valens commanded
Lucius an Arrian to be preferred to it, and Peter to be shut up in Prison.
Hereupon the estate of the Church was very sad, which by the slaughter of the
Catholics, the ravishment of Virgins, and also by the turning away of the
Monks; the banishment of some, and the tearing of others into factions, Lucius
found. Athanasius died, as Socr. 4. c. ^9. Theod. 4. c. 2.
Socrates says, under the consulate of Gracian II. and Probus which was the
year of our Lord three hundred seventy one, having been an officer of the
Church forty six years in the time of her great changes and alteration; At
that time Socr. 4. c. 36. Soz. 6. c. 38. Ruff. 2. c. 6.
when Mauvia Queen of the Saracens, offered peace to the Romans upon that
condition, that Moses that holy Hermit might be given for a Bishop to her
Nation, who being brought into Alexandria, would never suffer Lucius to give
him the imposition of hands, and at last obtained to be consecrated by a
Catholic Prelate: S. Epiphanes was also a great splendor to the Churches of
the East, who began to enter into the Ecclesiastical office in the year three
hundred seventy five, as also Hier. Chr. Socr. 4. c. 25. Ruff. 2. c. 7.
Didimus of Alexandria, who being blind ever since he was five years old, yet
flourished in all sorts of learning.

This great Basilius died in the beginning of the 379th year of our Lord in
January; after whose death, in the ninth Month after, was convoked an assembly
of Catholic Bishops at Antioch, wherein for to compose and quiet the
dissentions of that Church, it was decreed by general consent, that concerning
Paulus and Meletius, that one of them being dead, the other should remain
Bishop alone without any other: Socr. l. 5. c. 5 Soz. l. 7. c. 3.
And Gregorius Nazianzenus, is by the same Council sent to Constantinople,
there to order the Ecclesiastical estate.

In the West which Valentinian a Catholic Prince did govern, there was scarce
any trouble occasioned by the Heretics, only that Soc. Greg. ipse de vita sua
Auxentias Bishop of Millain of the Arrian faction, under a pretense of Piety
deceived the Emperor, Hilar. con. Auxen. Sulp. 2.
who seeing St. Hillary a Pillar of the French Churches to be ready to dispute
with Auxentius, commanded him to depart out of the City.

But there broke out a great schism at Rome, in the 367th year of Christ after
the death of Liberius the High Priest. Urcisinus being by a lawful consent and
suffrage against Damascus, ordained Bishop, thence arose such a bitter
sedition, that there were sound in one day 137 dead corpse in Sicininus's
Cathedral Church, as Ammianus witnesses.

Amm. 27. Socr. 4. c. 29. Ruff. 2. c. 10.
Then Auxentius Bishop of Millan being dead, Ambrosius is created in his place,
a person of Counsel, in the year 375. eight days after he was Baptized. And
in the same year is Paul. in vita Ambr. Hier. Chr. Ruff. 2. c. 11. Socr. 4. c.
30.
St. Martin made Bishop of Turin in France. Greg. Tur. 1. c. 47.
Five years before this time, being the 370th year, died St. Eusebius
Verselliensis, and Lucifer Calaritanus, who stirred up a Schism of his own
name; Hier. Chr.
neither long after did also die Hilarious the Bishop of the Pictes, but Hier.
Chr.
Optatus Bishop of Milevium in Africa, was then eminent, and confuted
Parmenianus Donatus's successor in a great and laborious volume of his own.

Palestine also in these times was adorned by St. Hilarie's piety who dyed
about the 372 year of Christ, aged about eighty years, as Hieronymus writes
upon his life, who then dwelt in Syria; and Ephrem that holy man and ornament
of the Edessean Church was also living about these times.

Hier. Chr. Ruff. 25. c. 7. Paul. Laus.
In the same Country of Palestine Melania Marcellus the Consulls eldest
daughter, was in these days highly recommended for her piety and holiness,
although Ruffius's acquaintance imbrued her a little with Origen's opinions.

Amongst the Gentiles was Vita. Them ex ejus scriptis collecta 4. c. 32.
Themistius, surnamed Euphrades, in great esteem and repute for his learning,
who from Constantines Empire unto Theodosius, and unto Arcadius, beginning, was
accounted the Prince of Philosophy and Eloquence: and Amianus who warred under
Valens, and Aurelius Victor do obtain the praise of great Historians.

In this intervall of time broke forth the Apollinarians Heresy, whose Author
was Sozo. 6. c. 25. Naz. Ep. ad Chelon.
Apollinaris of Laodicea, whom Damasus the Pope condemned together with his
Disciple Vitalis, in a Synod of Rome, in the three hundred seventy and third
year of Christ.

Valentinian's Epock is remarked by that illustrious character of the year
Bissextil, Valentinians Epock is approved.
which is the three hundred sixty fourth year of our Lord as it appears out of
Amm. 23.
Amianus, and here ought to be a period of those times Chronology, which being
compared with the books of the Consulls and Emperors of that age asserts the
beginnings and endings of every one, as we have here set down.

CHAP. VIII. What things came to pass during Gratian's, Valentinian's, the
younger, and Theodosius 's times; and of Maximus and Eugenius the Tyrants.
Anno 378. of Christ, unto 395.
VAlentinian being Augustus, had two sons, Gratian who was born the fourteenth
of May, in the year of Christ three hundred fifty and nine, as Idatius says in
his records; and Valentinian, Junior, whom he begat of his Wife Justina (which
had first married Magnesius the Tyrant as Zosim. 4.
Zosimus writes) the eighteenth of January, in the year three hundred sixty and
six, by Idatius's accounts. Valentinian created his son Idat.
Gratian, Augustus, at Amiens in France the ninth of Septemper, Anno three
hundred sixty seven. And Valentinian the younger, in the three hundred seventy
fifth year, soon after his Fathers death by the general voice of the
Soldiers, was extolled to the same honor being but ten years old. Amm. 30.
Socr. 4. c. 31. Idat.


Amm. 27. Victor.
Gratian was of an admirable Genius and propensity to all virtue and honesty,
which was farther adorned by the excellent comeliness of his body: he was a
reasonable good Scholar, but he had no great skill to govern the public,
being wont to prefer Barbarian and raw Soldiers before the Romans and
old-ones: Zosim. 4. Socr. 5. c. 2. Soz 7. c. 12. Theod. 5. c. 9. Vict. Oros. 7.
c. 24.
He, Valens-being dead, when the Goths did overrun and spoil Thrace, and other
territories of the Roman Empire, not being able to bear the whole burden
alone, after he had called Theodosius the son of that Theodosius which had
innocently been put to death in Africa Cap. 6.
as we here above have observed, out of Spain he made him his companion in the
Empire when he was thirty three years old, as Victor writes, Prosper. Chron.
Idat. Marcell. Chr. Alex.
which was the three hundred seventy ninth year of our Lord, the fourteenth of
February at Sirmium.

Theodose overcoming and defeating the Barbarians restored peace and quietness
to those territories, and a while after received honorably Athanaricus their
King, expelled by his subjects, flying to him in Constantinople, in the year
three hundred eighty and one, and the same Month of January that he had come
to him, being dead, his Funerals were celebrated as becomes the estate of a
King: but Idatius records that the whole Nation of the Goths, together with
their King submitted themselves the next year to the Roman Empire, to whom the
Emperor assigned a country to inhabit; the which Synesius shows in Orat. de
regno.

Sever. 2. Victor. Zosim. 4. Marcel. Socr. 5 c. 1. Soz. 7. c. 13
After this, Maximus took upon himself the Government of Britain in the three
hundred eighty and second year, and having established his Court at Trivirum;
he by Andragatius his General, killed by treachery and fraud Gratian, as he
was forsaken of his Soldiers near Lions the eighth of September, Anno 383.
therefore Gratian died in the 25 year of his age, whose death Lat. Pac. Paneg.
Ida. Marcell. Ruff. 2. c. 32. Socr. etc.
Theodosius well revenged, and also restored Valentinian the younger into the
Empire, who had been expelled out of Italy, Ambr. Ep. 57.
and reconciled him with Ambrosius, and the Catholic Church, to whom both,
having rejected his Mother, and the Arian faction, he wholly and constantly
adhered: which was done in the 388, year of Christ, when by the special
protection and providence of God the Idat.
5th of August, he overcame and killed Maximus near Aquileia: his son Victor
few days after was put to death by the Earl Argobastes, but Andragatius did
precipitate himself into the Sea.

Victor. Ambr. in fun. Theod.
Theodosius was adorned and enriched with all the virtues becoming a Christian
Emperor,, and he was in no ways inferior to the Princes that went before,
nor to them that came after him: Admirably valiant in wars, and yet engaged in
none but such as were needful, endued with singular clemency and humanity, he
was officious and courteous to all, yet he was somewhat too soon moved to anger
though it was for some unworthy things but he was soon appeased again. This,
Ambrose did witness in his Sermon at his Funeral.

Paul in vit Ambros. Ruff. 1. c. 8. Theod. 5. c. 18. Soz. 7. c. 14.
He showed a great testimony of this his disposition when he avenged himself of
the Thessalonians sedition: for when that people had killed Bothericus their
Governor, the General of the Scythians Army: Theodosius revenged this fact by
the death of many of their Citizens, even of those that were innocent: For this
cause, coming to Millan, he was by Anbrose forbidden admittance into the
Church, the which he did not only bear patiently, but satisfying to the
Pontific's injunction, he ordained a law, that all sentences given against
Malefactors, should in their execution be delayed forty days after; This
seems to have been done Anno three hundred and ninety. Chrysostom. Orat. 10. ad Pop.
But he had pardoned the Antiochians, (who in a certain sedition of his wife
Flacilla, had cast down the Images) in the year three hundred eighty eight by
Flavianus's intercession in his preparation for wars against Maximus, as
Zosimus relates.

Not long after Zosim. 4. Marcell. Socr. 4. c. 72. Soz. 7. c. 25. Oros. 7. c. 5.
Eugenius by the power of the Earl Arbogastes, usurped the Government in the
year 391; and the year following, the said Arbogastes did kill Valentinian at
Vienna in France: Epiph. de Meoi. and Pond. Idat. Fast.
Epiphanius says, That he was strangled in his Palace on the first Sabbath day
of May before Whitsunday, when Arcadius and Ruffinus were Consuls, which of
necessity was the 392 year of Christ, if he was 26 years and four months old:
he was then catechized for his faith, and had required Ambrosius to baptize
him, as he himself mentions in his speech at his funeral; for he had him in
great reverence; and he elegantly set forth and left to posterity the excellent
piety and rare virtues of this Prince.

Ruff. 2. c. 35. Theod. 4. c. 24. Prosp. Marcell. Aug. 5. de Civit. c. 26. Oros.
Theodosius put to death Eugenius, whom in the same year 394, he had conquered
and taken prisoner, not so much by any humane power, as by the help of God who
fought for him. Argobastes killed himself. This was Theodosius's last victory;
for he dyed Victor. Socr. 5. c. 26. Idat. Chr. Alex. Theo. 4. c. 25. Soz. 7. c.
28.
the 395 year of our Lord, the 17th of January at Millan, having been Emperor
16 years, and having lived 50, as Victor says; Socrates gives him 60; and the
Alexandrian's Chronicles do attribute him 5. years more.

CHAP. IX. The History of the Ecclesiastical Affairs, which came to pass
during the time of these Emperors; an account of the Constantinopolitan Synod;
the heresy of the Priscillianites; Ambrose 's Conflict; Then the renowned
Persons for Piety and Learning.
Anno 378 of Christ, unto 395.
THeodosius embracing with much love the Catholic Religion, he employed all
his power and industry in the preserving and adorning of it: And the baptism
which of his own free motion and desire he received, did yet more kindle his
zeal; being fallen sick, he was baptized Socr. 5. c. 6. Sozo. 7. c. 4.
by Ascholius Bishop of Thessalonica: L. 5. cod. de haer. and l. 2. cod. de
fide Ath.
Therefore he made a Law against all heretics, and commanded all to embrace
that only Catholic faith that Damasus the Pontiff of Rome did then profess.
Socr. 5. c. 7. Idat. Soz. 7. c. 12. Marcell.
Then being gone into Constantinople the 18th of December, in the year of
Christ 380, he confiscated to the Catholics, the Churches that the Arrians had
possessed for the space of 40 years. Soz. l. 7. c. 6.
At what time when the Arrians, who were many in Constantinople, did labor and
endeavor to draw and win Theodosius to themselves, and chiefly Eunomius, that
notable and witty disputant, as he had a desire to hear him, his Thod. l. 5 c.
19.
godly and religious Wife Flaccilla dissuaded him from it, together with the
deed of a certain Bishop's discretion and homeliness, who having saluted
Theodosius very honorably, called his son Arcadius, who sat by him, as if he
had been an ordinary boy; at which the Emperor being much displeased,
commanded him to be turned out of his presence? Then the Bishop said to him,
What do thou think, O Emperor, who art angry at me for having denied thy
son the honor due to him? Of what mind think thou is God, when he sees his
Son despised by the Heretics, and not honored as himself. The Emperor well
rellishing this seasonable attempt of the Bishop, called him back, and had him
in great estimation; and acknowledging his fault, he refused farther to hear
the heretics.

Greg. Naz. Carm. de vita sua. Ruff. l. 2. c. 9. Socr. l. 5. c. 6. and 7.
Theod. 5. c. 8. Soz. 7. c. 7. Tripar. 9.
being gone thither for to foment and uphold the Catholic faith, was at first
contemned and despised, but afterward he came to great esteem; so that by the
general suffrage of the people he was made Bishop, Peter Alexandrine giving his
consent to it; but soon after having changed his mind, he advanced to the
place, Maximus a Cynick Philosopher. Theodosius both for to maintain the
profession of the Nicean Synod, and to confirm Gregory in his new dignity, he
assembled at Constantinople a general de qua tom. 1. Conc.
Synod of 150 Bishops, which condemned Maximus, and all his ordinations rashly
done, and having approved the Articles of faith concluded in the Nicene
Council, and made a decree and assertion of the Holy Ghost's divinity against
Macedonius; and according to this, Meletius being dead, Gregory apprehending
that Flavinius would succeed him, resisted it manfully; whereupon that whole
Diocese would have fallen to Paulinus; but that it was so agreed, That whereas
there were two Bishops of the Catholics, to wit, Paulinus, and Meletius, that
whoever of the two should first dye, the other should have the whole Diocese
alone.

Hence a great contest arising, and Timothy, Peter's successor and Prelate of
Alexandria, by his command denying a Bishop to Constantinople, Gregory for
peace and quietness laid down his dignity of his own consent. And Nectarius
supplied his place, after this, every ones Diocese was limited, and the same
rites and privileges were granted to the Bishop of Constantinople, as the
Bishop of Rome enjoyed only, being after him in dignity: but the Authority of
the Roman Pontiffe forbid the ratification of this decree: And this was the
second general Synod held at Constantinople in the year 391. Tom. 1. Council.
in which year was held another Synod at Aquileia in Italy, where Ambrose was
the President; but the Palladian, and the Secundian Council condemned the
Arrian Bishops. The Sect of the Priscillanians.


Sever. Sulp. l. 1. hist. Prosp. Chron. Aug. de haer.
But in Spain, the new Heresy of the Priscillians breaking forth, which had
adjoined it self to that of the Manicheans and others, almost about the same
time was held a Council at Caesarea Augusta, in which Priscilian the Father of
that Sect with some other Bishops, is put out, being himself a layman; those
Bishops that by this Synod were condemned, made him Bishop of Abulens. but
Idatius and Ithacius both Bishops procured their banishment by Gratians edict:
although soon after through their cunning and subtility, they were again
restored to their former dignities: After this, there was another Synod held at
Burdingall, where Priscillianus was condemned, who appelling to Maximus the
Governor, by his command having heard him at Trevirum, he was put to death
with many others. Ithacius the Bishop and his adherents because they had
intermedled themselves unlawfully in this bloody matter, were judged not fit
nor capable to enter into the Communion of the Church, which came to pass the
three hundred eighty fifth year of Christ; Sever. in the life of Martin.
but in the next year, Itharius is absolved at Trevirum by a Synod of those of
his well-wishers: with whom St. Martin who was come thither for to Petition
Maximus for something, having at first refused to communicate with him, soon
after, that he might obtain what he came about, he yielded to the Emperors
entreaties, by whom being invited to a feast both he and his Wife entertained
him very honorably.

Paul. in the life of Ambr. he in Auxent. and Ep. 13, 14. and 36.
In the mean time Ambrosius suffering many unworthy things by Justina,
Valentinian the younger's mother, a woman of the Arrian opinion, he by
sacerdotall constancy resisted her weak practice. And at that time she brought
the Relics of the Saints, Gervasius and Protasius, which were showed with
great reverence, into the Temple of Ambrosius, whose worship he established
with great prodigies: as Ep. 53. and 54.
Ambrosius himself does witness, as well as L 9. Conf. c. 7.
Augustinus who was present with him; by which things the ignorance L 7. Con.
Perron. cap. 11
of Molinaeus, a Calvinian Minister, is convinced, who was consenting to this
rashness; who not only believed that the whole report, of the bodies that
were found, was false; but also that that Epistle of Ambrosius did not belong
to him, wherein he writes this very thing; than which nothing can be spoken of,
more absurd. Ambrosius at length being sent Ambassador by Justina to Maximus,
he reprehended an eminent Tyrant of Italy with like magnanimity, and opposed
and rejected both his and the Ithacians company.

Aug. 5. civ. c. 26. Prosper de prom. l. 3. c. 38.
Theodesius after Maximus death, commanded the Temples of Idol-gods to be
pulled down, their Images to be broken to pieces, and their ceremonies to be
abolished: Ruff. 2. c. 29. Socr. 5. c. 16. Soz. 7. c. 15
Amongst other was the famous Temple of Serapis demolished by Theophilus Bishop
of Alexandria, who about the same time was very helpful to the Church of
Antioch: Ambr. Ep. 9. Socr. 5. c. 15. Theod. 5. c. 23.
for he restored Flavian their Bishop into favor with Siricius the Pontiffe of
Rome, and brought him again into the Church Communion, of which he had been
deprived for countenancing and maintaining a Schism after Meletus his death.

These times were adorned and enriched with some persons of great learning and
piety, Men of note, Basilius.
amongst whom was Basilius who died in January Anno 379. having exercised the
office of a Bishop nine years, who in the year of our Lord 370. supplied
Eusebius after his death, wherefore he was Bishop of Caesaria eight years, and
some Months, Nyss. de S. Macrina. Naz. de S. Basil. quae est 20. Gregorii
Nazianz. et Nyssen.
as both the Gregory's, Nyssenus, and Nazianzenus do assert, both a great
Ornament of this same age: of whom, the first being Basilius's cousen German,
suffered much for the Catholic faith under Valens, and by him was Nyss. de S.
Macr.
banished some 8. years: And the other, one of Basilius's intimate friends,
dyed in the year 389, as we may gather out of Hier. de Script.
Hieronymus: L. 5. c. 5.
Socrates seems to declare the time of Basilius's birth and death, who says
that a Synod was convoked at Antioch, for to settle the state of the Church
after Theodosius's renunciation, the which Nyssenus in his speech concerning
Macrinas death, writes to have been the ninth Month after Basilius's death,
and Theodosius was created Augustus the sixteenth of January, Anno 379, as the
same Socrates asserts.

Hier. de script. and histor. cit.
Amphilochius Bishop of Iconium; Gelasius of Caesarea in Palestine, Ambrosius
of Millan, Theodore of Mopsuestes, Greg. Turon. 2. hiff. Fran. c. 13.
Exuperius of Tolouse, Simplicius of Vienna, Amandus of Bourdeaux, Mauris of
Anjou, were all accounted Bishops of great same. Also Aug. de haer.
Philastrius of Breux. But likewise Aug. 5. civit. c. 26. Ruff. 2. c. 32.
John an Anchoret in Egypt, were men of great piety, and Theodose the Emperor
often took the Counsel and advice of this man; So likewise was Vit^ P. P.
Arsenius, who was sent by Damascus the Pontiffe to instruct the Emperors son,
and having secretly retired himself from the Court, went to dwell in a
Wilderness.

Also these Widows were of a holy life and conversation, Monica, Augustines
Mother, Aug. 9. Conf. c. 11.
which died at the Gates of Tyber' Anno Domini 389, and of her age 56. And
Paula the noblest of all the Women of Rome, Hier. Ep. Paul.
which having despised all her greatness and Riches, that she might wholly
give her self up to Christ, traveled to Bethlehem about the year 384. as
Hieronymus writes in her Epitaphy, who himself living in the same place filled
the whole World with the fame of his great Learning and Piety.

In the same age was that Learned and Eloquent Symmachus, who being Governor
of the City, petitioned Valentinian to restore and re-establish the Altar of
Victory, whom Ambrosius opposed. Macrobius also lived under the Emperor
Theodosius.

In the same age broke forth also some certain Heresies, as that of Jovinian,
whom Syricius the Pope condemned in the year of our Lord three hundred and
ninety, and that of Vigilantius, which both were learnedly confuted by Hierome.
The madness of Origen's his followers, were great in those times, of which
number were John Bishop of Jerusalem, Ruffin Priest of Aquileia. Palladius the
Galatian, whom St. Epiphanius, and Hierome confuted.

CHAP. X. Touching Arcadius, and Honorius, and the chief things of their Times,
and of Stilichon, Eutrop, Ruffin, Radagaisius, Alaricus: and of the taking of
Rome, and of the irruptions of the Barbarians, both into France, and Spain.
Anno 395 of Christ, unto 408.
THeodosius dying in the year of our Lord 393, as I have abovesaid, he left two
sons heirs of the Empire, Arcadius to whom he gave the East, and Honorius to
whom he allotted the West, Arcadius was eighteen years old, Idat. Marcel.
Chron. Alex.
and Honorius eleven, if he was born at Ricimeris the fifth of September in the
year 384. when Clearchus was Consul, his brother Arcadius having been created
Augustus by his father the year before the seventeenth of February: Chr. Alex.
And Honorius in the year three hundred eighty and nine, Timasius and Promotus
being Consulls, attained to the same honor: Prosp. Mar. cel.
some say that it was when Theodosius the third, and Abundantius were Consulls.

Arcadius soon after his fathers death, married Eudoxia, Eutrop making the
match lest he should marry Ruffin's daughter: for then the power and dignity of
these two Princes was great amongst the Romans, viz. of Ruffin who then lived
in Constantinople, and of Stilichon who lived in the West: Stilichon was a
Vandal born, as Oros. 7. c. 38.
Orosius writes, who after Zos. 4. Marcel. Jornan. de reg. succ. c. 94. Socr.
6. c. 1. Ruffinus c. 1. con. Ruff. Eutrop.
Theodosius's death, arrogating to himself the Guardian-ship and Government of
both the Empires, intended to go into the East; whom to hinder Ruffinus with
his Armies, stopped him the passages of Greece: then he stirred King Alaricus
up to arms, whom Stilico put to flight, as he was a wasting and pillaging
Greece, and sent his General Gainas of the Goths Nation with his bands to
Arcadius. By whose means Ruffinus had his head cut off by the Soldiers in the
same year that Theodosius died, whom Claudius says to have been born in Elusa
a Town of Aquitania. Eutropius Spado with Stilichon were his Counselors, but
Eutrop fearing Stilichon, he caused him to be banished as an Enemy both to the
Emperor and Senate, and procured to himself the friendship of Zos. 5. Jornand.
Marcel. Oros. 7. c. 36.
Gildo an Heathenish Earl whom Theodosius had established Governor of Africa,
who having taken upon him the Title of a Tyrant King, and forbidden corn to be
brought into the City, being routed and defeated by his brother Mascezeles,
whom Sticho had sent with an army against him, he slayed himself; And not long
after was Mascezeles, being returned into Italy, by Stilichon's command, cast
headlong into the River by his soldiers from the bridge. Idat. Marcel.
That Victory was obtained in Africa in the three hundred ninety and eighth
year of Christ.

Zosi. 5. Socr. l. 6. Oros. 7. ^rosp. Marcellinus. Gamas Eutro. pii Mors.
In the year three hundred ninety and nine, when Manlius Theodorus and Eutrop
Eunuchus were Consulls, Gainas the General of the Army of the Goths, having
been taken and sent by Stilicho to Constantinople, he conspires against
Arcadius with his Kinsman Trigibildus, having so agreed together that
Trigibildus should publicly revolt, and that Gainas should be the General of
his Army, and guide the whole design to the best advantage of both and so by
Gainas practice was Eutrop slain, having been plundered of all the very year
that he was Consul, and his memory was put out of the Roman Chronicles, he
being taken out of the way, Gaynas resolves easily to stir up a tumult, and
sedition, and openly to war against the Commonwealth. Whose Treason being
found out, and his private design of seizing upon Constantinople discovered, he
is judged an enemy by Arcadius, and is beaten chiefly by the help of Fravitta
the Goth a Gentile, and his army; and dies in Thracia upon the latter end of
the year 400, or at the beginning of the following, as the Alexandrine
Chronicles do show: Arcadius after this dies, Socr. 6. c. 23.
having done nothing of remark and memory in the year 408. He was of a
peaceable or rather sloathfull disposition, and too much addicted to his wife,
which pleasuring and contenting with too great expenses, he undid no less the
Commonwealth then the Church. Procop. 1. Persic. init. Agath. l. 4. p. 132.
Dying, he left the Protection of his son Theodosius to Jezdegirdus King of the
Persians by his Testament, who taking the charge laid upon him, charged
Antiochus, a man of deep learning with the ruition of the Pupil, and he
declared that he would act as a public enemy against those who should dare to
plot and conspire against the child. Arcadius dyed in May, in the 31. year of
his age.

In the West, the many invasions and incursions of the Barbarians were almost
the utter undoing of Rome and of the Roman Empire. Zos. 5. Prosper. Marcell. in
Chron. Oros. 7. c. 37. Aug. 5. de Civ. c. 23. Jornandes.
Radagaisus Prince of the Goths, with four hundred thousand of Soldiers, as
Zos. records, or two hundred thousand, as Orosius and Marcellus do say,
overran all Italy; he was the potentest of all the enemies the Romans had, and
a most bitter enemy to the Christians. Which whole multitude, Stilicho by a
wonderful success, having shut them up in the mountains, defeated and killed,
having taken and killed the General himself. Prosper says, that this wonderful
victory was obtained in the year of Christ 405; but Marcellus assigns it to
the year following.

Zos. 5. Oros. 7. c. 39. Jornand. de reg. suo c. 96. and de rebus Get. c. 10.
Miscel. l. 13.
After him, Alaricus King of the Goths, of the Balthick Family, having wasted
and spoiled Greece, and a long time remained at Epirus by Stilichon's command,
who intended to draw and transport Thracia from Arcadius's dominion and rule,
to Honorius, broke afterward into Italy; whom to divert and hinder, Honorius
granted him and his people to possess and inhabit France and Spain, because he
could no longer retain and keep those Provinces himself; whereunto Alaricus
going with his men, Saul a Captain of the Gentiles, to whom Stilicho had
committed an Army, unadvisedly assaulting the Barbarians upon an Easter day, is
by them overcome. By which success Alaricus being elevated in his mind, having
drawn his forces nearer, and ransacked all Italy, he took Rome. Zosim. 6.
Jornand. Marcell. Stilichon's death.
But Stilicho before this was already put to death by Honorius's command; but
intending after Theodosius's death to take the whole Empire upon himself, and
to create his son Eucherius (a Gentile, and cruel enemy to the Christians)
Emperor; the sooner and better to bring his design to pass, he resolved to
imbroyl all the Commonwealth; And therefore be underhand stirred up the
Barbarians to invade and tear the Empire to pieces; for he brought the Vandals,
the Alans, the Swedes, and the Burgundians into France and Spain, whither,
Prosper in his Chronicles writes, that they advanced in the year 406; his
affinity with the Emperor strengthened his courage, because he had married
Serena, Theodosius's sister, and had by her two daughters, Mary, which soon
after dyed, and Theumantia which he had married; but his secret practices and
designs being discovered by Olympius, he is killed by Heraclinian, in the year
of Christ 408, in Ravenna's Church being fled thither, who by that deed
deserved, as it was bestowed upon him, the Government of Africa, as Zosimus
says; Zos. 5.
then the year following, Eucherus is slain with Senera his Mother. Stilichon
being dead, Alaricus intending to enter into a league with Honorius, he was
rejected by an indiscreet counsel. Prosp. Chron. Socr. 7. c. 10. Soz. 9. c. 6.
Olymp. apud Phot. number. 80. Oros. 7. c. 39. Jornand. Marcell.
Therefore at the example of the Goths and Hunns, with great forces, together
with Athaulphus his wifes brother, he besieges Rome, and took it in the year
of Christ 410; which having given to his Soldiers to plunder, he commanded
them not to hurt or wrong any of them that fled into the Churches, and chiefly
into the Cathedrals of St. Peter, and St. Paul. Six days after departing from
the City, and leaving to his brother A haulph Placidia the Emperor's sister,
he went to Rhegium, intending to go to Scythia and Africa; but there he dyed of
a sickness, whose place his brother Athaulph supplying, having again plundered
Rome, he carried away along with him Placidia, and joined her to himself at the
Borough of Cornelium.

Idat. Oros. 7. c. 40.
Whilst this tempest rages in Italy, the like calamity oppressed France and
Spain; the Alans, the Vandals, and the Swedes having wasted and plundered
France, and being past over the Pyreneys, possessed Spain, Idat.
in the year of our Lord 409, the Vandals and Swedes obtained for themselves
Gallecia; the Alans, Lusitania and the Carthagenian Province; and the
Sillinges, who were another Nation of the Vandals, made an Invasion into
Boeotia.

CHAP. XI. The Ecclesiastical Affairs; and some of the most renowned Persons of
that time; and of St. Martin's death; and something of Chrysostom's banishment.
AMbrosius lived near three years after the most Christian Emperor Theodosius,
as Paulinus says, Paul. in vita S. Ambros.
who ended his life on a Sabbath day, being the 4th of April in the year of
Christ 397, Caesarius and Atticus being Consuls; by which account he had
officiated the Bishops Office two and twenty years, and near a quarter; for in
the year 374, that is, the year before Valentinian dyed, Auxentius being dead,
he is recorded by Hierome to have succeeded him in his Bishopric; yet
Marcellus says, that Ambrose dyed in the year 398, The death of St. Ambrose.
when Honnorius and Eutychianus were Consuls; but his opinion is refuted by the
Annals of the Church.

Severus in dial. Greg. Turon. l. 1. hist. Franc. c. 16. and l. 10. c. ult.
The other great Light of the West Countrey-Churches, dyed in the year 401,
that great Prelate of Turin, St. Martin, born in Sabaria of Pannonia, who
following Hilarious into France from his banishment, having there lived an
austere and retired life, was created Bishop of Turin almost at that time that
Ambrosius was established Bishop of Millan, namely, in the year of our Lord
375, A man to be admired far above all his Predecessors for piety, whom the
Emperors themselves have had in great esteem, as amongst the rest Maximus, who
feasted him, Anno 386, as he was come to him, in a feast that his wife the
Emperesse had prepared, Who supplied the place of a waiter, and attendant at
the table her self.

But St. John from a Priest at Antioch, being made Bishop of Constantinople
after Nectarius's death which was in the year 397. the 27. of September as
Pallad. in vita Chrysostom. Socr. 6. c. 2. Theod. 5. c. 14. Soz. 8. c. 17. etc.
Socrates says, who relates, that John the 26 of February, in the year
following, did sit in his Throne. Being advanced to that dignity, as he
bitterly rebuked the corrupt life and conversation of men, and especially of
the Clergy, and of the Princes, he drew the hatred and ill will of many upon
himself, and chiefly the hatred of Eudoxia the Empress; which being
reprehended by him, constrained and induced Theophilus of Alexandria to plead
and dispute against him in Constantinople, and for to condemn by a Photius Cod.
59. Socr. 6. c. 15. Soz. 7. c. 17.
tumultuous and abrupted Synod, that was held in the year of Christ 403, in the
Suburbs of Calchedon, in a place called, At the Oaks. But there arising a great
sedition of people, and a sudden Earthquake, the Emperor being affrighted by
it, caused him to be recalled; but the year following, because he rebuked still
with the same boldness both Eudoxia, and others, Socr. l. 6. c. 18. Soz. 8. c.
22.
being again condemned by her doings, he is banished away the 20th of June,
having refrained himself from the administration of his Office two months
before, being about Easter. The Greek Histories relate, That Eudoxia dyed three
months after that Chrysostom had been ejected, being the 4th of October, Anno
404, there having fallen, four days before, hail of huge bigness.

Socr. l. 6. c. 19. and 20. Soz. 8. c. 23.
Arsacius succeeded Chrysostom in the place, a man of no speech nor learning;
then he being dead 14 months after, Atticus a Monk of Arminia succeeded. In
the mean while, Chrysostom being afflicted with many miseries and griefs both
in Armenia and Isauria, the Catholic Bishops laboring hard for him, and
especially Innocentius the Roman Pontiff, Chrysostom's death.
to whom he had appealed, and whose faith he had implored; he dyed at Comanum
near Euxines bridge the 18th of December, in the year 407; he lived 52 years,
and 8 months, and he sat in the Bishops seat 9 years, 6 months, and 20
days; so that he was born in the year 355, about March. Soz. 8. c. 26.
Thereupon Innocent, and with him all the Churches of the West would have no
communion with Atticus, and all the Churches of the East; until that
Arsacius's name being blotted out of the Diptycks, which are the Ecclesiastical
Records, and John's name set down in his place.

Socr. 6. c. 12. Soz. 8. c. 14.
At the same time lived Epiphanius, a man highly recommended for his piety, he
was Bishop of Salamina in Cyprus, who together with John Chrysostom vehemently
contended against Origen's opinions: The Origenists vexed.
for then began his errors to be questioned, which were spread, without any
punishment, through the Monasteries of Egypt; but they had for their defender,
Epiph. Epist. ad Joh. Hier. Con. Ruff. and Con. Joan. Hier.
John Bishop of Jerusalem, and Russinus Priest of Aquileia, and Palladius a
Galatian, from whom differed especially Theophilus and Hierom. But Theophilus
at a Synod that was convoked in the year 399, was the first that condemned the
Origenists, and sent the decrees of that Synod to Anastasius the Roman Pontiff,
who in the year 398 had succeeded Siricius in the Roman See; then Hier. ep. ad
Demetr. and Apol. con. Ruff. and Ep. 78. ad Pamp. and ad Marcel.
Anastasius sends circular letters both to Epiphanius and John Chrysostom,
having condemned Origenes. Socr. and Soz. cit.
Chrysostom resolving to consider the matter more punctually, would by no
means condemn Origen's books, notwithstanding Epiphanius's and Theophilus's
persuasions and instances; and for this cause Epiphanius being displeased,
departed from him; and both, as its reported, prophesied by the spirit of God,
what should befall one to the other.

At that same time flourished also Saint Asterius the Prior of Amasea, whose
Learned Homilies, composed in the year of Christ four hundred, we have unto
this day: And also Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, Chrysostom his enemy; a
man indeed worthy of blame, for his great and immoderate covetousness, but of
great learning, and Hierome's companion, who made Sinesius, who from a Gentile
Philosopher, became a Christian, Bishop of Ptolomais, about the four hundred
and tenth year of Christ, to wit, three years after Chrysostom his death, and
Theophilus his reconciliation of his party, which was soon after his death.

Martyr. Romans 26. Jun. and Usu
S. Vigill Bishop of Trent when Stilicho was Consul, suffered Martyrdom, as
Usuardus Writes, and as it appears, Vita S. Porphyr. apud. Sur. 26. Febr.
St. Porphyrius Bishop of Gaza, in the year four hundred, under Arcadius the
Emperor, did abundantly show his piety, miracles and labors that he suffered
for the Faith of Christ. And Severianus Gabalitanus, as he was a learned man,
so likewise by reason of his emulation with Chrysostom, deserved less esteem
in the memory of posterity; but Sta. Paula has deserved an exceeding
remarkable and excellent name, who dyed at Bethlehem the 404th year of our
Lord, January the twenty sixth, being fifty six years six Months and eleven
days old, whereof she lived five years in Rome in her Religious design, and
twenty at Bethlehem, as Hier. Ep. Paula.
Hierome testifies.

Prudentius a Spanish Poet, did write about the same time, being born when
Philippus and Salia were Consulls, in the year 348; as he himself Prud. in
Cathem.
declares; and he composed some Verses when he was 57. years old, and so he
made (...), in the year 404.

Ruffinus Priest of Aquileia, and a Monk, was of great renown for his Learning,
first by his friendship with Saint Hierome; then more renowned for his offense,
dyed, soon after that Rome was taken by Alaricus, as Baronius conjectures, at
which time also St. Marcella the Widow dyed, Hier. Ep. 16.
as Hierome asserts.

Amongst the Gentiles Claudianus was the Prince of Poets, a great stickler for
Stilichon: but the chief Historians were Zosimus, and Eupanius.

CHAP. XII. What things worth memory came to pass under Theodose the younger,
Honorius, and Valentinian the third, in both the Empires; and the violent
assault of the Vandals in Africa.
Anno 408. of Christ, unto 450.
AFfter Arcadius's death, the Roman Empire remained under two Princes, Honorius
had the West, and Theodosius possessed the East. Soer. 4. c. 6. Marcel. Chr.
Alex. Theopha.
He was born the 10th of April, in the year 401. and the year following
declared Augustus, under the tuition of the King of Persia. Antiochus being his
tutor, began to reign alone in the East; he had four sisters, Flacilla,
Pulcheria, Arcadia, and Mary, of whom Theodosius called Pulcheria, Augusta, in
the year, as Marcellinus agrees with the Alexandrian Chronicles, 414. And not,
as Theophanes says, 411. And she is recorded to have been born in the year of
Christ 399. Socr. 7. c. 22. Soz. 9. c. 1.
By her, Theodosius and his other sisters being instructed, they altogether,
and only advanced in piety and virtue, so that they differed in nothing from
the Monks, and their Court was in a manner turned into a Religious house.

Theodosius, by the counsel of his sister Pulcheria, aged twenty years,
married Athenaides the daughter of Leontius the Philosopher, a woman of rare
qualities and of exquisite beauty and comeliness of body, which he named
Eudoxia, he had by her a daughter, which having also called Eudoxia, he married
to Valentinian the third. Marcel. Chron. Alex. Zonar. Cedre. Theoph. hist.
Misc. 24.
Theodosius governed the Empire unto the 450th year of Christ, in which year he
dyed in the Month of August: having first recalled and restored his sister
Pulcheria, which through the calumnies of his Wife Eudoxia, and of Chrysaphius
the Eunuch he had degraded and rejected: During the time of this Emperor, the
peace and tranquillity of the East, was scarce at all disquieted by wars,
except by some few broils of no long continuance, Theoph. Socr. 7. c. 18.
amongst which was the Persian war moved by Vararan Isdegerdes's successor in
the year four hundred twenty two, by Ardaburius his General, and ended by a
wonderful miracle, the Barbarians being all affrighted and routed.

But in the West, The misery and loss of the Empire of the West under Honorius.
both under Honorius and Valentinian, there was continual civil and foreign
wars, and the face of the Roman Empire was all disfigured, and defeated: for
Honorius was of his nature, meek and jocond, and given to sloathfullnesse, and
negligent of the Government of the Commonwealth, and of the affairs that
concerned it: but he was inclined to piety and Religion, which he maintained
with diverse edicts. Diverse Tyrants.
After the Gothic invasion, which like a Whirlwind in the four hundred and
tenth year, rushed upon the City of Rome, and oppressed it, there arose diverse
usurpers in many places of the Empire. First Zos. 5. and 6. Olymp. apud Phor 80.
Attalus by Alaricus command made Emperor by the Senate, having proudly
refused Honorius's association which he offered him by Ambassadors, being
again brought back to a private life by Alaricus himself, and often after that
restored and strengthened, and forsaken. At last having reassumed the
usurpation and Government in France, being forsaken of the Goths, and taken by
the Earl Constantius in the year four hundred and fifteen Prosp. Chr. Marcell.
Oros. 7. c. 42. Pa^lus Diac. 14.
he came under Honorius's power, and having his hands cut off, was so left
alive, the which Marcellinus says, was in the four hundred and twelfth year,
but Prosper says the contrary.

At that time Constantine the Tyrant possessed France, who from a private
Soldier, only by reason of the name, was proclaimed Emperor in the year four
hundred and seven, as Olymp. apud Phot. 80. Prosp. Chron. Zos. 6. Idat. Chr.
Marcel.
Olympiodorus, Prosper, and Zosimus do declare, Marcus and Gratianus having
both taken the Government before him. Intending to secure and defend themselves
with the Britain Armies against the Vandalls and Alans, whom the same Author
say to have broke in upon France, and invaded it: Thence being departed into
France with his two sons, Constant. and Julian, being vanquished by the Earl
Constantius, he was strangled at Vienna by Honorius's command, the 411th year,
having fled as to his Sanctuary, to the Priests Oratory of Olymp.
Arelates.

After him, Idem. Olymp. Idat. Marcel. Prosp. Oros. 7. c. 42.
Jovinus, and Sebastianus his brothers took the dominion upon themselves, were
taken and slain near Narbon by Athaulp, Prince of the Goths, in the year 414.
as Idatius and Marcellinus do testify.

Heraclianus also, Earl in Africa, usurping also the power there, daring to
sail into Italy against Honorius, with a Fleet of seven hundred ships, and
three thousand soldiers, he was beaten by the Earl Marinus at Sea near
Utriculum, and being returned into Africa, he is murdered at Carthage in the
Temple of Memory Prosp. Idar. Marcell. Oros. 7. c. 42.
in the year four hundred and thirteen. Marinus being sent into Africa to
settle it, whether by malice or corrupted with Gold, its uncertain, put to
death Marcellinus the Tribune, who had magnanimously and valiantly carried
himself for the Catholic faith against the Donatists, and soon after he was
called back out of Africa, as Orosius writes.

Besides this multitude of Usurpers, The invasion of the Barbarians.
the Barbarians did also invade, plunder, spoil, and destroy the West; the
Goths with Athaulph their King entered into France, Prosp.
in the year 412; and the year following, the Burgundians, a people of Germany,
possessed that Country of France near adjacent to the R^ine.

Athaulphus having married Placidia in January, Anno 414, as Olympiodorus
writes, had by her Theodosius, who not long after dyed at Barcelonia. Olymp.
apud Phot. 80. Jornand.
Athaulph by Placidia's means being induced to peace and quietness, having in
vain endeavored to transport both the Empire and the name unto the Goths,
resolved at length to restore them the Empire, and to be expelled together with
his Goths, out of Narbonne, and to be sent away into Spain; whilst he had
these thoughts, he is killed Prosp. Marcell. Idat. Oros.
by one of his own Nation, in the year 415; and Sigericus, Sarus's brother,
possessed the Kingdom, who unworthily entreated Placidia, and within seven
days after was slain, and Wallia succeeded him, who having made a peace with
the Romans, restored Placidia to Honorius, having received (as Olympiodorus
relates) 600000 bushels of corn, he went against the Vandals, Alans, Swedes,
and other Nations which had seized themselves of Spain; and Honorius gave
Olymp. Prosp. Jornand. Prosp.
Placidia against her own will to the Earl Constantius, in the 417th year of
our Lord; and the same year he begat of her his daughter Honoria. But
Valentinian the younger was born at Ravenna the 6th of July, in the year 418.
Constantius ratified a sure peace with Wallia, and called him back into France,
and granted him the Country of Aquitania, from Toulouse unto the Ocean, as
Idatius writes; Then was Tolouse the head City of the Kingdom of the Goths,
Constantius is made Emperor.
or Wise-goths, in the year 419. And the year following 420, Constantius was
created Emperor by Honorius, (though against his will) and he was by him
admitted to rule the Empire with him, as Olympiodorus says, but seven months
after he dyed, being the year of our Lord 420, if we may credit Marcellinus;
but Prosper says, that it was the year following, he was born at Panesum, a
Town in Scythia; he had many honorable places and commands under Theodosius,
but at last having attained to the highest places of dignities, being weary of
them, he often complained, because he could not recreate himself in sports and
games, as before he was wont to do, as Olympiodorus writes; who farther relates
thus much, That Theodosius would not ratify to him the dignity of August, and
that therefore he had resolved to take up arms against him.

Olymp.
Constantius being dead, there was at first a great familiarity betwixt
Honorius and Placidia his sister, and their fame less renowned; at last, soon
after by the practice of Placidia's Nurse, and of Leontius her Curator, there
arose such an hatred betwixt them, that after several quarrels at Ravenna,
Honorius at length in the 413th year of Christ, banishes her with her children
into the East.

A while after this, Honorius's death.
dies Honorius, in the 423 year of Christ, either the 15th of August, as
Theophanes says, or the 25 of the same, as Olympiodorus asserts in the 35 year
of his age. Theodosius having honored his sister Prosp. Marcell. Olymp.
Placidia with the title of Augusta, and having first created Valentinian then
about 5 years of age, Caesar; he sent him to Italy in the 424 year, who was
very soon after created August at Rome. Scor. 7. c. 23. etc.
In the mean time John, the Atturney-General, takes the possession of Ravenna,
usurping the Government thereof, against whom Theodosius sent Ardaburius, who
being tossed and agitated with a tempest, fell into the Tyrants hands, but an
Angel in the habit of a Shepherd having opened a way through the boggs that
were in the way, brought Aspares, Ardaburius's son, safe into Ravenna.

So John being dead, Idem. and Chron. Alex.
Valentinian was created Emperor at Ravenna, in the year of Christ 425, the 23
of October, as is recorded in Alexander's Chronicles.

After this, the Vandals, whom the Earl Boniface had before driven back from
Africa, broke into it again from Spain, Geisericus being their General; The
Vandals take possession of Africa.
for as Boniface was accused of Treason by Aetius, and that Sigisuultus was
sent against him, finding, that he was not able to encounter the Roman Army
with his forces, he implored help of the Vandals, with whom he before had made a
league. Prosp. Miscel. l. 14. Victor.
Therefore in the year 427, as we may gather out of Prosper's Chronicles,
Geizericus with an Army of 80000 of Vandals and Alans sailed over into Africa,
and by little and little brought it under subjection. Procop. 1.
In the mean time, Placidia being reconciled, Boniface not being able to
persuade the Barbarians to return back, striving to drive them out by force of
arms, he is by them overcome; and in the year 432, coming to Rome, deposed of
his command. He dyed not long after, either of a sickness, as Prosper writes,
or, as Marcellius says, of a wound that he had received of Aetius; and dying,
charged his Wife Marcell.
Pelagia not to marry any one else but Aetius.

Prosp. Idat.
Aetius sustained, refreshed, and in some sort defended the Roman interest in
France against the Francks, the Goths, the Burgundians, the Hunns, and other
barbarous Nations. The Francks were defeated and subdued near the River of
Rhine, when Prosp.
Felix and Taurus were Consuls, being the year of Christ 428, And the
Burgundians, with their King Guadicarius, in the year 435, to whom also Aetius
granted peace, as Prosper writes. Idat. Prosp.
He also by his General Litorius, in the year 439, drove back the Goths from
Narbonne, forcing them to raise the siege.

Aetius had chased the Hunns out of Pannonia, in the year 432, and made use of
their help against the Goths; so has Prosp. Salvian. 7. Idat. Chron. Isid.
Chron. Miscella. 24.
Prosper set it down in his Chronicles: But Pithoeanus says, That it was that
Aetius who was Gaudentius's son, which was killed by the Soldiers; he says,
that he brought in the Hunns to help John the Tyrant in the same year that he
was killed, being the 425 year. Then it is like that he twice solicited the
Hunns; but in the 434 year Honoria, Valentinian's sister, being driven out of
the Court, The Invasion of the Hunns.
and sent to Theodosius, because of the adultery she had committed with her
procuror, she induced Attila to arms against the Commonwealth in the West, as
Marcellinus writes: Litorius a Roman Commander being made Governor of the
West, as he labored to attain to greater glory then Aetius, adding faith to
what the Southsayers and Witches said, he unadvisedly gave battle to
Theodoricus King of the Goths, who in a most humble submission had entreated
peace; and having received a great defeat, he was taken and put to death when
Theodosius and Festus were Consuls, in the year 439. Prosp. Jorn. de reb. Get.
At what time also Carthage under pretense of peace, was on a sudden assaulted
and taken by the Vandals upon Prosp. (...) Idat.
the 4th of November, and dismantled by the Barbarians, as all the ordinary
Citizens were exposed by them to several torments, so likewise were they most
violent and cruel against the Nobility and the Clergy. Prosp.
At length, Valentinian concluded a peace with Geisericus, in the year of
Christ 442, and then was Africa divided between them by certain limits.

At which time Theodosius obtained peace, by paying a sum of money, of
Marcell. Alex. Chr. Jornandes.
Bleda and Attilla, the Hunns two chief Commanders, who wasted and destroyed
Scythia and Thracia. Prosper.
Two years after, Attilla ruled alone the Hunns after his brother was slain.

Again, the Picts and the Scots made diverse incursions into Britain, and
chiefly in the 446 year of Christ, when Aetius was Consul the third time, who
being deeply engaged in other affairs, and especially in strengthening and
fortifying France against the Hunns, was in vain petitioned by the Britains to
aid them, and to revenge their quarrel; the which are described by Gilda. Beda.
1. hist. c. 13.
Gildas, and by Beda after him.

CHAP. XIII. Of the first rise of the Francks, and of the Kingdom by them
established in Gallia.
IN this Interval of time were laid down the beginnings and first foundations
of the Francks Kingdom, the most noble Kingdom of all the World. Of what
Country they first were, it is uncertain; neither is it sufficiently expressed
by the ancientest Writers: Vide l. 11. de Doct. Temp. c. 48.
They are deceived, who esteem them to be of the Trojan stock, as Gaguinus and
Aemilius would have it. But the Gesta Franc. ex Greg. c. 1.
opinion of them who think, that this name at first was not of one Nation
only, but of more, seems to me to be most likely, who combining together, did
cast off the yoke of the Romans, and so were called Francks by reason of their
liberty. Phil. Cluver. l. 3. Germ. ant. c. 20.
They are thought to be the Bructerians, the Chamavians, the Ansivarians, the
Chartes, the Usipians, and Tencteres, who are contained under the name of
Gelderland-people; the Frisians, the Delgibians, the Chassivarians and
Angrivarians, who possessed all those Countries of Germany that are between the
Rivers Albis and Rhine, unto the Ocean, which now are called by the names of
Westfalia, Frisia, Saxony, Turingia, Hessia, Misnia, and Franconia, which yet
seems to retain the very name.

Greg. Tur. l. 2. c. 9.
Gregorius says, That it is uncertain whether they ever had a King before this,
for their chief Officers were only called Leaders, Captains or Governors.
When Maximus the Tyrant ruled in France, Alexander records, that then the
Francks called Marcomer and Suno, but petty Kings; but this same Alexander
calls them promiscuously Governors or Kings.

The first that is set down in the list of Kings in the Annals, and first
called King, was Pharamund, Aimo. 1. c. 4. Ivon. Chr. Gesta Fr. Epit. c. 4.
Marcomer's son, of whom Gregory mentions nothing. Prosp. a Pith. editus.
Prosper's Chronicle ascribes him the beginning of his reign in the 420th year
of Christ, when Honorius was 26 years old; but after him reigned his son Ita
Greg. 2. c. 9.
Chlogius, or Ita Sidon. car. V. ver. 212.
Cloius, or rather Prosp. P^th. Aimo. 2. c. 4.
Clodius, the son of Aimo. 1. c. 4. Ivon. Chr. Gesta. Franc. epit. c. 5.
Pharamund, who retired himself to Dispargum, which Gregory says is in the
borders of Thoringia: but if it be so, it was very far distant in name to what
it is now called; for that Town Dispargum was in Sicambria, or in the Confines
thereof, Cloio began to reign in the 428, or 429 year of Christ, Prosp. Pith.
five years after Honorius's death, and he was the first that broke into
Gallia: Prosper vulgatus.
But being driven back by General Aetius, he lost that part of Gallia that is
near adjacent to the Rhine, which he with his people had inhabited; then about
some 18 years after, leading his Army of Francks into the Territories of the
Atrebans and Camerian, he beat the Romans, and routed them, and spread his
borders unto the River Sumina, bringing all those people under his own
subjection, Sigeb. Greg. 2. c. 9. Aimo. 1. c. 5.
in the 445 year of Christ: Sidon. Car. V. ver. 212.
yet it seems, that he got some loss by Aetius and Majorianus, as Sidonius
declares: He reigned Aimo. 1. c. 6.
almost 20 years; but Prosp. Pith.
Prosper says, That he reigned in France 25 years, being the 448, or 449 year
of Christ; and so by this account Pharamund reigned 8 years.

Greg. 2. c. 9. Aimo. c. 6. gest. Fr. c. 5.
Meroveus Cloio's kinsman enlarged the power and dominion of the Francks in
Gallia, whom the Gag. Aem.
Francks Annals do record to have helped Aetius against Attila, and that he
obtained the best part of the victory; his son and heir Greg. Tur. l. 2. c. 12.
Aimo. 1. c. 7. Ivon. Gesta. Fr. c. 6. and 7.
Childerick was so wicked and lascivious, that he spared not the bodies of the
noblest of the people, therefore was he mortally hated of them, and all the
orders conspiring against him, he fled to Thoringes, having left at home one
Uvinomadus, in whose friendship and fidelity he much confided, who in his
absence might reconcile him to the Francks; the which he most cunningly
performed, for he exhorted the Francks to take for their King Aegidius a Roman
Senator; and by this means he easily brought it about, that the chiefest of
the Nation, whom he chiefly knew were Childerick's foes, were put to death
under suspicion of Treason; so at last he persuaded the Francks, whose mind and
inclination to be far from a new King, to recall Childerick from his
banishment, who Greg. Turon. cir.
eight years after he had been rejected, was again by them received and
restored to his former dignity; he shut up in the City of Soissons, Aegidius,
whose Army he had defeated, he overcame Greg. 2. c. 18. Aimo. 1. c. 7. Gesta.
Fr. c. 12.
Odovacrius the Saxon; he subdued those of Orleans and Anjou; Aimo. 1. c. 12.
Ivo.
having reigned 24 years, dying, he left the Kingdom to Clodovius his son, whom
he had of Basina the wife of his host King of the Thoringians, who being born
in the 482 year of Christ, L. 7. c. 2.
as hereafter shall be declared: It appears, that Childericus began his reign
either the 457, or 458 that he may have reigned 24; but Meroveus lived about
some ten years.

CHAP. XIV. Of the first Originals of the Goths, and of their diversity; and of
the Kingdoms that they established in Gallia, Spain, and Italy.
IT is very useful for to understand the history of that Age, to know the
first rise and increase of the Goths, who being dispersed far and near in
Europe, brought forth a very flourishing Kingdom. We judge it very convenient
to repeat what Jordan, or rather Jornand the Goth, and Paul Diacon, have
recorded of it.

The name of Goths is come from Scanvia, or Scandinavia, which Jorn de reb.
Get. c. 3. 4. etc.
Jornandes says to be almost an Island, containing the Kingdoms of Norway and
Swedland. They having for sometimes held and possessed the Country adjacent to
the Baltic Seas, thence being past over into Scythia, they settled themselves
in the borders of the Euxine Sea: Paul. Diac. in mise. l. 12. c. 21. Jorn. c. 4.
of whom those who went farther toward the East, were called Ostrogoths, that
is, Goths of the East; and those who dwelt in the West part, were called
Visegoths, that is, Goths of the West. Although some would have them to be
called from Ostrogotha, a certain King of theirs, of Amalus's stock: Jorn. c. 5.
Therefore two Kingly families of the Goths, of the Amalians under whom were
the Ostrogoths, and of the Balthians that ruled over the Visegoths, the first
were so called from Jorn. c. 14.
Amala, a most ancient King of that Nation, Jorn. c. 29.
and the others so called from boldness, because Balth signifies bold: Soc.
l. 4. c. 33. et sequen. Paul. in Misc. 12. c. 12.
These two people having lived in a long peace and friendship together; In the
time that Valens was Emperor, there arose a cruel and bloody civil war
amongst them: Fridigernus, or rather Fritigernes, was the General of the Goths
of the West, and Athanaricus commanded the Goths of the East. Fridigernus not
being equal in forces to the others, he requires Valens to help him by Ulphila
an Arian Bishop of his own Nation, Paul. 12. Misc. c. 12.
and to gratify him, he embraced the Christian Faith under the Arian
profession, the which Ulphilas propagated far and near after the two Nations
were reconciled together again; The Goths become Arians.
So were the Goths confirmed, and hardened in the profession of the Arian
Heresy: But Athanaricus put many of the people to death for professing the
Christian Faith, who are reckoned in the Church for Martyrs: Vide Praeter. cit.
authors Procop. l. 4. Goth. p. 323. Sozo. l. 6. c. 37. Jornan. de. rebus. Get.
c. 14.
After these things, the Huns with their King Balmir having sailed over the
Italian Seas, made a sudden invasion upon the Ostrogoths, to bring them under
their subjection: At whose loss and overthrow the Visegoths being affrighted,
implore again Valens, who allots them the Country of Moesia for their
habitation: But being contumeliously and unworthily entertained by Lupicinus,
and other Governors of the adjacent Countries, they give battle to the
Romans. And Valens the Emperor, Supr. c. 6.
as we have already said, being overcome in the fight was burnt by them,
suffering punishment for the violating of his religion, or Christian promise.
But afterward having composed all differences with Theodosius who received
them in friendship and alliance, they were properly called Allies, and Jornan.
c. 18.
Confoederates: After Theodosius death, Alaricus of the Balthick Family, with
his Wisegoths broke into Italy, and his Army had such event as here above Cap.
10.
I have declared in his Wars; Vide sup. c. 12.
whose successors having subdued France and Spain, established there a
Kingdom of the Visegoths, whereof we have already made mention.

Jornan. c. 48.
In the mean time the Ostrogoths under the Dominion of the Hunns, possessed
still the same Countries with their private Kings. Hermanaricus, in whose reign
that invasion of the Hunns happened, as Jorn. chapter 25.
Jornandes tells; although others, which I have touched at above, do mention
that to be done, Athanaricus being King: He had a son Jorn. chapter 14.
Hunnimund, of whom was begotten Thorismund. Whose son Berimud being weary of
the Hunnian slavery, fled over into France to the Visigoths: when as Theodorick
the first of that name, Vallias being now slain, reigned. The Nephew of Berimud
was Eutharick, to whom Theodorick King of the Ostrogoths, gave Amulasuntha his
daughter, in marriage. Unto this Family, as that which descended from the race
of Hermanicus, the Right of the Kingdom of the Ostrogoths did properly belong;
Jorn. chapter 48.
but Berimud going aside, Vuandular, begotten by the brother of Hermanicus,
held as it were a frail dominion. Three noble sons of this King lived in arms,
and mutall agreement, Vualamir, and Theodomir, and Videmir; who strove with
Attila against Aetius, and their neighbors the Visigoths in France. At length
Attila being put out, the other people, and also the Ostrogoths, shook off the
yoke of the Hunns. Jorn. chapter 52.
Theodorick was the son of Theodomir by a Concubine: who being given for a
Pledge unto Leo the Emperor to establish a peace, grew to ripe years among the
Romans. Then Zeno being Emperor, when he had received the Kingdom of the
Goths, delivered him by his Father Theodomir, by the persuasion of the
Emperor, he proceeded to recover Italy, which Odovacrius had invaded: and in
the same place, which shall be spoken of afterward, he built the Kingdom of
the Ostrogoths; the which Justinian afterward overthrew.

CHAP. XV. Ecclesiastical affairs under those Princes, and chiefly of the
Pelagian Heresy, and Nestorian, and also an exact description of the Synod of
Ephesus.
HOnorius and Theodosius reigning, The History of the Pelagian Heresy.
diverse shakings were in the Church, and most famous strivings of the Catholic
parties, with Heretics; and against two Heresies especially, of Pelagius, and
Nestorius, the combat was.

Pelagius, by Jerome Praef. to b. 1. and 3. on Jerome.
Nation a Scot, of the Isle of Britain: whence he is also Aug. Ep. 108.
named Brito; he lived first a Monk in Palestine, where he conceived in his
mind a most Pestilent opinion against the Grace of Christ; Jer. in the same,
Aug. 2. of Orig. Sin. chapter 3.
of which, to him Ruffine is delivered to have been the beginner. This man had
Caelestius his Scholar, who first in Africa openly preaching Heresy, Ep. of
Coun. Carth. to Pope Innocent. Aug. of Orig. sin.
in the year 412. was condemned at Carthage, Paulinus a Deacon of Carthage
accusing him.

Afterward Eros, and Lazarus, two Bishops of France, carried the name of
Pelagius to the Palestine Bishops. Aug. 2. Retr. chapter 47. and of deeds of Pel.
35. Phot. in the same 34.
But when as a disease fell on one of them, they were hindered from being
present at the time. Wherefore they sent heads gathered out of the books of
Pelagius, and Caelestius. So a Synod being had at Diospolis in Palestine, in
the year 415. in Aug. against Jul. chapter 3. and of deeds of Pel.
which fourteen Bishops were present. P^lagius being examined by them, easily
shifted off by catching answers, the Greeks, men ignorant of his tongue, and
deceit. Therefore being freed through the endeavor chiefly of John Ruffinus of
Jerusalem, and Origin his favourer; the which Oros. Apol.
Orosius shows, he took the greater courage. But first of all by the sharp
manner of writing of Jerome, and also by the sentences of the African fathers,
he began to be troubled. For in the year 416. Tom. 1. Counc.
two Provincial Synods were solemnized; one at Carthage, wherein Aurelius was
chief: the other at Milevum in Numidia, Silvanus being President, at which
Augustine was present, and from thence the Synods opinions were sent to Pope
Innocent, wherein they declare the errors of Pelagius and Caelestius to be so
condemned by them, that they spared the authors themselves. Tom. 1. Coun. and
Ep. Aug. 91. 93.
Innocent the year following, wherein Honorius and Constantius are marked to be
Consulls, (that is, the 417th of Christ) in the Month of Jannary, answers to
both, and judged Pelagius and Caelestius, to be deprived of Church Fellowship.
Which thing being found, Pelagius wrote to Innocent. But he Aug. 2. of Orig.
sin. chapter 5. and 17.
dying that very year of Christ 417, 5. Call. August, letters came to Zosimus.
Zos. Ep. Tom. 1. Coun. Where is also the confession of Pelagius.
Who first through the feigned profession of Caelestius (for this man had come
to purge himself) as also being decieved by a subtle Epistle of Pelagius; with
which he had sent a commendatory letter of Praylius, who had in the year 416,
succeeded in the seat of Jerusalem, he was a little the more moved against the
Fathers of Africa, and also against Eros and Lazarus. Neither yet restored he
Pelagius and Caelestius to Communion, but set two Months day for this, at
which their accusers should be present. In the mean time, the African Bishops
bestirring themselves, the craftiness of the Heretics being discovered at
Rome by Zosimus, when Caelestius had privily withdrawn himself out of the City,
he was Aug. 2. ag. two Epist. of Pel. chapter 3. and 4.
likewise condemned with Pelagius in the year four hundred and eighteen. There
followed the same year, the day before the Calends of May, an See Bar. in the
year 418. Pos. in the life of Aug.
edict of Honorius, whereby they were both astonished or overcome. But the
African Bishops, the decree of Zosimus being received, the very Calends of May
of the same year four hundred and eighteen, in a full assembly, as Prosper
says, of two hundred and thirteen Bishops, they framed eight Canons against
the Pelagian Heresy; which are amiss, commonly attributed unto the Synod of
Milevum. A common error of the Milevitan Synod.
But that Milevitane Synod determined nothing against Pelagius. And of those
very eight Canons, the third, fourth, and fifth are cited by Pope Caelest^^en
p. to the Bishops of France.
Caelestine under the name of the Council of Carthage. Lastly, in a general
assembly of all Africa, not in a Provincial, it ought to be pronounced
concerning so great a matter. By this means the assembly decrees being brought
to Zosimus, says Prosper, even through the whole World the Pelagian Heresy was
condemned. Julian the Pelagian.
Of which being almost put to flight, Julian the son of Memorius, Bishop of
Capua, and his successor, undertook the Patronage. Who for the same heresy
being driven from his seat, entered a great combat with Augustine, a man of a
ready tongue, and eloquent, but malepert and rash.

A certain appendice of the opinion of Pelagius, Semi-Pelagians.
was the faction of the Semi or half-Pelagians; who affirmed the beginning of
salvation to be from our selves, and thought otherwise of predestination than
Augustine did: Aug. book of Pred. of Saints.
The which hiddenly going on, Augustine a few years before his death began to
assault; and after him Prosper of Aquitane.

Zosimus being dead, Pope 7, the Kalends of January, of the year 418, Boniface
was created, and about the same time Eulalius by schismatics; The book of Vat.
with Bar. to the year 419.
whom Symmachus the Governor of the City favored. But he a little after fell
from his cause, in the year of Christ 419. After Boniface, in the year 423
Caelestine was chief over the Roman Church; whose 6th year sliding, of Christ
419, Marcell. Chron.
Nestorius of Antioch is ordained Bishop of Constantinople, in the place of
Sisinnius; who a little after published a new heresy, affirming Christ to
consist of a double person; and adding Blessed Mary, not to be the Mother of
God, but only of Christ a man. For the quenching this flame, Cyril before
others (the chief Ruler of the Church of Alexandria) runs; who from the year
Socr. 7. c. 7.
412, had been put in the place of his Uncle Theophilus: he being very much
stirred up by the letters of Caelestine, in which he commanded him to search
into Nestorius his cause, and to appoint him ten days to repent; the which in
the year 430, was by Cyril in vain tried.

The acts of th. Synod. of Ephesians. and ep. of Caelestine. Prosp. Socr. b. 7. chapter
34. Evag. b. 1. Marcell. Theoph. Zona. Cedren. The Synod of Ephesus.
Wherefore in the year of Christ 431, an assembly was gathered together at
Ephesus; unto which Arcadius and Projectus Bishops, and Philip an elder, the
Ambassadors of Pope Caelestine went. Moreover, there were above two hundred
Bishops present: and for the hindering of tumults, Candidian, and Irenaeus,
Earls, touched with the Nestorian spot, were appointed by Theodosius the
Emperor. But the Eastern Bishops, who were called with John of Antioch, were
more flowly present; because they were brought by constraint to condemn their
Countryman or Companion. Therefore when in the year spoken of, on 10 Kal.
Jul. the Synod was begun, and being thrice summoned to appear, Nestorius was
deposed from his seat; the fifth day after, John came with his Bishops; among
whom Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus, who presently appeared before them, a
tumultuous small Council being gathered together, they repealed the acts of a
lawful Assembly, and condemned Cyril and Memnon Bishop of Ephesus. The Earls,
all the letters of the Catholics being intercepted, they incensed the
Emperor against them with letters full of reproaches; so that Cyril himself
was cast into prison. At length, through a faithful man, who, going to
Constantinople in a beggars habit, brought away the letters of the Catholics
enclosed in a reed, the Emperor was more certified of all things: and the
Monks endeavoring it, and Pulcheria taking pains, the Acts of the Synod were
confirmed by the Emperors authority, and Nestorius being cast out, Maximian
was appointed in his room. Moreover, the Niceph. 5. chapter 2.
same Pulcheria built a Cathedral in Blachernum, in honor of the most holy
Mother, by the Sea, which afterward was famous for the Religion of the Greeks.

The assembly being ended, in Prosp. against Collat.
which also, Prosper is author, the Pelagian heresy was condemned; there
remained between John and Cyril, and the Bishops divided on both sides, grudges
for some time. Which by the endeavor of Theodosius, and coming between of that
great The Life of Sym. with Sur. 5. Jan.
Simeon Stylites, were composed. Acts Epit. and Evag. 1. chapter 2.
Nestorius being first of all sent back into his ancient Monastery of
Euprepius, which was at Antioch: thence, because he should not blow on many
with the infection of his error, he was commanded away into Oasis in the year
436, where a while after, his tongue breeding worms, The wretched end of
Nestorius.
he received a wretched departure of his life. His books by the appointment of
Theodosius, were given to the flames.

Facund. b. ^. and a little book is extant of Lep. Cons.
Furthermore, Leporius a French Monk made a flourish of the Nestorian heresy;
who being untaught by Augustine, he asked pardon of his error for the war
which he had offered; the which came to pass about the 420 year. In Socr. 7.
chapter 18. Theod. 5. chapter 39. Marcell.
which year also the whirlwind of a new persecution had troubled Persia,
Isdegerd, or his son Vatanes reigning; for that is delivered doubtfully.
Prosper. Victor. Utic. 1.
But also the Africane Church suffered grievous things under the tyranny of the
Vandals, Gesserick being King, who, amongst others, killed Sebastian an Earl,
son in law of Boniface, who had fled to him for refuge, with the greatest
treachery.

CHAP. XVI. Famous Men and Women in this Age.
TWo Stars of the Church brought much brightness unto those times, not only
by their life, but also by their death, Jerome, and Augustine. The former of
these departed in the year 420, the day before the Call. October. 91 years of age,
as Prosper. Chron.
says Prosper; but the Baron. to the year 372.
yearly registers of Baronius set down but 78 or 79.

Prosper.
Augustine dyed in the year 430, 5 Call. Sept. of his age 76, of his Bishopric
36; in which year the Vandals now besieged Hippo the third month, as Poss. in
the Life of Aug.
says Possidius; he was born in the year 354, on the Ides of November, as he
himself witnesses in his book of a blessed life, and in his first of order, he
was converted to Christ in the year 387, Aug. 9. Con. chapter 2. etc.
about the vintage holy days: and in the year following, about Easter, he was
baptized; neither was he catechized or instructed for two years space, as some
have thought. So in the 34 year of his age beginning, he received baptism. This
man had a most sharp and continual war against heresies, and all sects, which
then were rife in Africa; especially of the Manichees, Pelagians, and
Donatists. Collat. Carth.
But against these, there was a memorable coming together or conference in the
year 411, before Marcellinus the Tribune, a most religious man, whom Honorius
had sent into Africa to pacify the Church: of which Augustine was a great
party. After this, the stubbornness of the Donatists was by L. 51, 54, 55.
book. Theod of Heret.
diverse Edicts broken by the Emperor. In the same b. 53. of heref.
Moreover, the same Honorius in the year 412, banished Jovinian the heretic
into the Island Boas.

Amongst the famous chief ones in holiness and learning, Greg. Pope 3. Dial.
chapter 1. Sur. 22. Jun.
Paulinus appeared, by Country an Aquitane, who Christian poverty being put
after wealth and nobleness of Birth, was afterward made Bishop of Nola: in
which dignity he set forth a memorable example to all Ages of Charity, and
despising of himself, while, that he might redeem the captive son of a certain
widow, he yielded himself into slavery to the Vandals. This man being made
famous by the praises and friendship of Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, Martin, and
others, dyed 10 of Call. Jul. in the year 431.

Marcel. Chron.
Pope Leo wonderfully graced the Bishopric of Rome, which he obtained in the
year 440, with learning, piety, and famous deeds. The Life of Hill. with Sur.
May 5. Hilary of Arelat.
Also Hilary the Bishop of Arelata was famous, whom Leo, because he seemed to
encroach on another's Diocese, strictly corrected. Novell. Valent. b. 7. Tit.
24. of ordain. Bish.
And this man does not seem to have exceeded the year 449. Thom. 1. against
Gall.
For in that very year Leo, 7 Call. September. letters being granted to the
Bishops of the Province, he confirmed Ravennius the successor of Hilary by his
opinion. Which Hilary, he names also of holy memory. But that Hilary was
diverse from this, who, with Prosper, wrote to Augustine about the remainder of
the Pelagians. From whence the word of Arelata seems to have crept into those
Epistles.

At Ravenna also flourished Peter, named from his eloquence [Chrysologus] that
is, a golden Speaker; Rubeus in his histor. of Raven.
who, by Pope Sixtus, through the advice of Apollinar, was granted Bishop to
that City, about the year 433.

Marcell.
Orosius an Elder of the Spanish kind was famous in writing history; the which
he undertook by the persuasion of Augustine: and being sent by the same into
the East, he from thence brought the remainders of St. Stephen into Africa,
about the year 416; Ep. Lucian. with Sur. 3. of Aug.
which relics indeed Lucian an Elder, being shown to him from God, had
brought to light.

Vm. Lir. Common.
Vincentius Lirinensis in the year 434, set forth a golden book against
heresies, to wit, in the third year after the Synod of Ephesus, as he himself
witnesses. Likewise Cassian, by stock a Scythian, the Scholar of John
Chrysostom, built afterward a Monastery at Massilia; who busying himself
about the heresy of the Semi-pelagians, (the which had then possessed the
minds of many in France) Prosper of Aquitane, a learned man in that Age, and
eloquent, confuted; a book being set forth against the parttaker.

Besides, these chiefly got praise in the West. Prosper. Chron. and ag. Coll.
Beda 5. hist. Aug. chapter 13.
Palladius who about the year 429, is sent by Bishop Caelestine, the first
Bishop unto the Scots.

Constable. in his life, Pros. Scal. Edit.
And also Germanus Bishop of Antissiodor, a most holy man, whom Prosper in his
Chronicle makes mention of Palladius, a Scottish Bishop, working to be sent by
Caelestine into Britain, that he might quench the Pelagian heresy, Florentius
and Dionysius being Consuls, that is, in the year 429. Bid, l. 1. chapter 17.
But Bid, Sigebert, and others reckon that going of Germanus with Lupus
Trecensis in the year 446; and the same Bid witnesses, that he was sent by a
certain French assembly. But the second, which he undertook with Severus Bishop
of Trevira the Scholar of Lupus, Bid tells, happened a little after, that
is, as Sigebert says, in the year 449.

The life of Genov. 1. Jan. with Sur.
At the same time at Lutetia of Paris, Genovesa shone with the wonderful light
of all virtues, born in Nemetodor, a certain Village of the same City; the
which Germanus in his former travel passing thither by chance acknowledged to
be of God, and after that worshipped with the greatest reverence.

Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, enlightened the Eastern Church, who succeeded his
Uncle Theophilus, in the year 412, as we have said already; and having
performed many labors for the Catholic faith, and the worthiness of the
most holy Virgin, he departed in the year 444, the 9th of June, the which is
gathered out of his Paschals.

Synes. ep. 66, and notes to the same.
Synesius a Cyrenian, from a Heathen Philosopher, became a Christian, and was
made Bishop of the same City by Theophilus, about the year 410; how long he
sat there, is not certainly found.

See Bar. to the year 423.
Theodoret Bishop of Cyrus in Syria, began to be chief over that Church about
the year 423, and he excelled in Learning and Eloquence.

His Life with Sur. 5. Jan.
Then lived that Simeon Stylites, so called from a pillar; in the which he
standing days and nights, he began or led a life nearer to Angels than men in
a mortal body.

Jerome ep. 79.
Also Eustochium the daughter of Paula, was famous with titles of Virginity and
holy life, who out-living her mother 15 years, dyed in the year 419.

But two women were famous in Learning, Niceph. l. 14. chapter 13.
Eudocia the wife of Theodosius the younger: and Hypatia the daughter of Theo a
Philosopher, and Mathematician, whom Synesius had in great esteem, and
oftentimes names her his Mistress. Socr. b. 17. chapter 13. 20.
But she in a sedition of the people in the year 415, was butchered by the
Alexandrians, because she was thought to draw away Orestes the Governor from
the friendship of Cyril.

CHAP. XVII. Of Marcion, Leo, Zeno, Anastasius, and those things that happened
under them in the Eastern Empire; where, of Aspar, and Ardaburius, Basiliscus,
Tyrants.
Anno 450. of Christ, unto 491.
MArcian born in a mean place in Illyricum, but famous for warfare, Theod. Lect.
from a Tribune was made Emperor by Pulcheria, with whom also she agreed hand
in hand, yet with that engagement, that she might be a Virgin. Marcell. Chron.
Alex. Theoph. Miscel. Evag. 2. chapter 1. Zon. Ced.
The which happened in the year of Christ 450. The Commonwealth was managed by
them both with the greatest agreement: and there was a like endeavor in them
both, of defending both justice and Catholic piety. But Marcian, although now
stricken in age, Pulcheria first dyed, after her great endeavor done for the
Church, in the Marcell. Chr. Alex. Theoph. of Roman Martyrs.
year 453, 10th of September. which day being consecrated, is gathered in
Church-Tables. Marcian the fifth year after dies, to wit, of Christ the 457,
Theod. Lect. 2. Collect.
January going out, when he had commanded 6 years, and so many months.

Leo by birth a Thracian, Candid. with Phot. 79.
follows Marcian, promoted by the endeavor of Aspar, of whom were three
sons, Ardaburius, Patricius, and Hermenaricus, of whom, Leo had promised to
make Patricius Emperor; the which when he had long deferred, Cedrenus. Niceph.
15. c. 27.
at length in the 12th year of his reign, of Christ 468, he perfected, his
daughter Ariadna being espoused unto the same; but he made Ardaburius
Patricius. Marcell. Evag. 2. c. 15. Theopha. Jornand.
He beheadeth Aspar, being deceived by this deceit, with Ardaburius, by the
sword of his Eunuchs. Patricius, beyond expectation, wounds being received,
escaped safe. Hermenaricus, who was then absent, flees into Isauria; and Zeno
being Emperor, returning to Constantinople, married his bastard daughter,
says Theophanes. Can^id. with Phot.
Leo passed over the affinity on Tarasicodisas Isaurus, named Zeno, whom first
he had made his friend, and delivered unto him his daughter Ariadna, and the
Lievtenantship of the East.

Basiliscus was the brother of renowned Verina, the wife of Leo, a treacherous
and heretical man, who being made chief Commander by Leo, over a great Navy
which he had provided against the Vandals, betrayed his master, whether
corrupted with a sum of money by Gensiricus, Theod. Lect. Procop. of the
Vandal War. Niceph. 15. chapter 17.
or having covenanted for the Roman Empire from Aspar and Ardaburius, as a
reward of this unfaithfulness. Who returning to Constantinople, flees to the
Church, and being pardoned by the Emperor through the entreaties of his sister
Verina, he was banished unto Perinthum; not long after being wholly restored,
he drove away Ostrys the Protector of Aspar, and Theodorick the son of
Triarius, whose sister Aspar had married. together with Zeno, from the siege of
Constantinople, Theoph.
in the year 472.

Leo dies, 17 years, 6 months of his rule being finished, Theoph. Theodor.
Lect. Evag. 2. c. 17. Chron. Alex. Zon. Ced.
in the month of January, when as he had declared Leo the younger son of Zeno
and Ariadna, Emperor; who the month of Febr. after crowned his father Zeno
with his own hand, and appointed him Augustus; and 10 months being passed
over, dyed with him in that very year, wherein his grandfather Leo had deceased
474. Victor Tununensis says, Zeno would have killed his son Leo, and another
to be appointed by Ariadna, for him: but Leo lay hid under a Clerks shaving,
and to have lived even until the time of Justinian; the which is more like a
fable then an history.

Evag. 3.
Zeno therefore afterward reigned alone, born in Isauria, no less foul in
body than mind, says Zonarras; and a stranger from the Catholic opinion;
Marcell. Evag. Theod. Lect.
who about the beginning of his reign, the Mother in law of Verina, and of
Basiliscus the brother of this Verina, being assaulted by laying in wait, he
ran away with Ariadna into Isauria, Chron. Alex.
who preferred conjugal troth before the flatteries of her Mother, and the
Court. Basiliscus with his wife Zenodia, was proclaimed Emperor, a Prince in
nothing more profitable than Zeno, and led by his Wife into the Eutychian
heresy.

With Phot. 79.
Candidius writes, That Verina was ensnared with the loves of her Master
Patricius, that he might marry her for the dowry of the Empire, to have
excluded her son in law: but against her hope, the top of things was brought on
Basiliscus. Zeno was driven out in the year 476, Basiliscus and Armatus being
Consuls; Simp.
which thing is gathered out of an Epistle of Pope Simplicius, these being
Consuls, dated the 4th of the Ides of January, wherein he encourages Zeno,
That he would attempt some thing for his being Emperor. But Marcellinus and
Victor Tununensis mention Zeno to be driven away, himself alone being Consul,
in the year 475, and to have been restored in the following year, Basiliscus
and Armatus being Consuls, whom the letters of Simplicius do overthrow; not the
fourth only, but also the seventh being dated after the Consulship of
Basiliscus and Armatus, on the 8th of Ides of October, which is the year 477,
in which he gives thanks with Zeno for the Empire being recovered. Evag. 1. c.
8. Theoph. Lect. Marcell. Theoph. Zonar. Cedr.
But whilst Basiliscus abuses through tyranny, the Empire ill-gotten, and his
Wife stirring him up, he restored Timothy Aelurus, and Peter Fullo, the worst
of Heretics, into their seats, from whence they were cast forth: Acacius the
Bishop of Constantinople, a subtle heretic; and Daniel Stylites, stoutly
withstanding: and Candidus.
Verina, her mind being changed into the favoring of her son in law, acting it
privily; Zeno in the 477 year recovered the Empire, after 20 months that he
was cast out, as Victor Tununensis is author, and Armatus the Cousen of
Basiliscus, the master of the Soldiery being corrupted, who being in
friendship with Zenonis the wife of this Zeno, through a custom of whoredom,
he could do all things, he Procop. 1. Vand.
shut up Basiliscus, being separated from the Church, in a a Castle of
Cappadocia at Lemnos, and there compelled him with his wife Zenonis to dye with
hunger, apud Phot. Cod. 78.
Malchus is author, that Basiliscus with his Wife and Children, was put to the
sword. Armatus a little after, for the Military Lievtenantship which Zeno had
promised him, by the command of the same Zeno was slain. His son by an
agreement was called Caesar by Zeno, he was reckoned for a Theoph.
Clergyman; and Cyzicenus being afterward made Bishop, was chief over that
Church with praise.

After these things, new shakings rose up against Zeno, Evag. 3. c. 26.
First Marcian the son of Anthemius, him who had been Emperor of the West,
having Leontia the daughter of Verina, and the sister of Ariadna in marriage,
challenged the Empire to himself by the right of his wife, because she was the
daughter of Leo now holding the Empire, not as Ariadna, he being a private man.
The matter therefore he valiantly attempting, Zeno being driven out, at last he
corrupted a gotten victory with riot and sloth. Therefore straightway being
overcome by the deceit of Isaurus, of the stock of Illus Patricius, he is
consecrated an Elder by Acacius the Patriarch, Theoph.
in the year 479.

The year following from hence, another storm fell on Zeno. This man banished
Verina his Mother in law, by the counsel of Illus, with Marcian and her
daughter Leontia, into a certain Castle; and by and by he tried to kill Illus
himself, Ariadna stirring him up, Candid.
by a certain fellow Alanus. But his ear being only cut off, Illus escaped.
Whom that Zeno might appease, he made him Captain of the East, with the
greatest power. Evag. and Theoph.
But he being mindful of the wrong, in the year 482, he brought by force Verina
the Empress out of the Papyrian Castle of Isauria, that at Tarsus a Town of
Cilicia, he might make Leontius Patricius Emperor.

After two years Verina dying, to wit, in the year 484, Leontius and Illus were
overcome by John a Captain of Zeno, and shut themselves up in the Castle of
Papyrium: the which after four years being vanquished, both their heads were
cut off, being brought to Constantinople in the year 488.

The Emperor being unthankful against so many benefits of God, unto heretical
ungodliness he added cruelty: and when he had learned from Marian a Knight,
foretelling, That one of the School of the Silentiaries should be the succeeder
to him, of Empire and wedlock; he punished some innocent persons with death:
but especially Pelagius, a man most highly endued with good arts and virtues;
who had come up from the Silentiary School, unto a Senators dignity. That
happened in the year 499. The next year from that, Zeno being taken with the
falling evil, the which he had drawn by gluttony, calling on the name of
Pelagius many times together, he departed out of this life, as Evagrius
writes. Others tell, that he was buried, as yet living; and when the voice of
the awakened was heard by Ariadna, he being forbidden to be drawn out, there
miserably dyed: God thus establishing the prayers of Pelagius, whom, he being
about to dye, had called as a witness and revenger of his innocence.

CHAP. XVIII Of Valentinian 3d. Maximus the Tyrant, Avitus, Majorianus,
Anthemius, Olybrius, Glycerius, Nepos, Augustulus, Western Emperors; Likewise
of those things which happened in the Western Empire, from the year 450, to
491. Of Attila, Odovacres, Theoderick.
VAlentinian the third as yet surviving, Attila, who in the Prosper.
year 444, his brother Bledas being slain, began to reign over the Hunns. In
the sixth year after, he bended himself for France, which was of Christ 450.
the which at that time the Goths held, whom the Franks, Brugundians, Alanians,
and other Barbarians name Wisigoths, the Romans hardly defended a part of it,
Aetius being Captain, who only at that season, lest it should utterly perish,
supported the Empire of the West. Theodorick reigned over the Goths; Jorn de
rebus Get. c. 56.
whose daughter, Geiserick, she having married his son Hunnericus, for a
suspicion of Poison, her nose being cut short, and her Ears, he had sent back
disgraced to her father. For this the Vandal fearing him, he provoked Attila
against him with great gifts.

Jorn. of Ger. affairs, chapter 36.
Who led an Army unto Aurelia; For Sangiban King of the Alanians, had promised
that he would deliver up this City unto him. Which thing being known, the
Citizens defended themselves from his treachery. There was then in that City
Gregor. Turon. 2. c. 7. Sidon. l. 8. epist. 15.
Anian a Bishop, famous in the appearance of Holiness and learning; who at the
report of Attila approaching, had gone to Arelate unto Aetius, for to crave
aid; and both by the confidence of this man, and also much more of divine help,
he confirmed their trembling minds. Therefore Aetius comes on Attila,
besieging the Aurelians at unawares, with the covenanted Kings: whom he flying,
departed into Belgia. Mare. Idat. chr. Alex. Theop. Paulus Diac. b. 15.
There in the year 451, a great battle being joined, he was scattered in the
Catalonian fields, which are also named Mauriacan, says Jornandes, the which
lie open a hundred leagues, as the French call them, in length; they are broad
seventy; the same Author affirms. Moreover a league has a thousand and five
hundred paces. Jom.
In that battle, says Jornandes, were present with the Romans, the Wisegoths,
Franks, Sarmatans, Burgundians, Saxons, and other Nations, with the Hunns, the
Gepidans, and Ostrogoths, Valamir being Captain. Yet Carm. 7.320.
Sidonius affirms, the Franks, and Burgundians to have been in Attila's
Camps, the which may be understood of some part of both. Theoderick King of the
Wisegoths was slain, and were killed on both sides, 170000. as says Jornandes.
Idatius 300000. It is manifest enough, that they might have been subdued with
the Hunns, but that it was feared by Aetius, lest these being utterly put out,
the Goths could not be upheld in France. Greg. Tur. b. 2. chapter 7.
Therefore he persuaded Thorismund the son of Theodorick, through a show of
coming to his fathers Kingdom, to return into Narbony: Idta. Chr.
who, the year turning, was stabbed by his brothers, Theodorick, and Frederick.

Jorn. Cassiod. Chr. Paul. Diac. 15.
Attila being beyond hope delivered, sends an Army into Italy: where Aquileia
being taken by siege, he made it equal with the ground, from thence
Mediolanum, Ticinum, and other Towns being wasted, he desiring Rome, being
moved by an Embassage of Leo, who met him at the River Mincius, he went back
into his Country, in the year 452. from whence going against the Alanians into
France, who had set down beyond Irigeris, he was, as Jornandes says, put to
flight by Thorismund, in like manner as in the Catalonian fields. Priscus with
Jorn. Marc. Theoph.
But in the year four hundred fifty and four, when as he had married a Maid,
new Wine being largely drawn in, he came to his end by a sudden vomiting of
blood.

Blond. Dec. 3. b. 1. Sabell. Enead. 8. b. 1. Sig. of Emp. Ital. b. 13 The
begin. of Venice. Valentinian slain.
They say the City of the Venetians took its beginning from that inroad of the
Barbarians, many people of Italy, and especially of the Patavians, from the
burnings of their Cities, and ruins, betaking themselves for refuge, unto
overflowed places.

Marc. Idat. Paul. Diac. 15. Jorn. of succes. of Kings. Cassiod.
But Valentinian through the death of his Mother Placidia, which deceased in
the year four hundred fifty one, the Reins of liberty being let loose, he
abuses his Government by lust and cruelty, and when he had committed adultery
on the wife of Maximus, a Senator, he beheadeth Aetius being returned to him,
suspected for his crafty counsel in the Palace, the year four hundred fifty
four, and in the following year, by the deceit of the same Maximus, he is
thrust through by the men of Aetius Guard, Anonym. Cussp.
the sixteenth Call. April. thirty six years old, of the Empire the third.
Maximus Procop. Vand.
Maximus having enjoyed a Marriage with Eudoxia, the wife of Valentinian, when
he had confessed that he for the love of her, had conspired against the death
of Valentinian, she bearing unworthily that thing, called Genserick into Italy,
out of Africa, at whose coming Maximus being affrighted, in the flight, Annon.
Cusp. of Max. see Sidon. b. 2. Ep. 3.
the day before the Ides of June, was torn in pieces, or cruelly killed by his
own companions, and cast into Tyber, scarce the other Month of the Empire
being finished. Paul. Diac. b. 15. chapter 5.
Genserick, the City being taken, being made mild by the speech of Pope Leo, he
abstained from firing and slaughter. Yet for Anon. Cusp.
fourteen days, robbing all holy and profane Riches, he led away Theoph.
Eudoxia the Emperesse, and her two daughters, Eudocia and Placidia into
Africa, and coupled her to his son Hunerick, this because she was already
married to Olybrius, he kept. Eudoxia in the year four hundred sixty two, was
sent back to Constantinople. Idatius is Author. Her daughter, when she had
lived sixteen years with Hunnericus, and had brought forth Ildericus, privily
sliding into holy places, she fled in the year four hundred seventy two, as
Theophanes writes.

Cassiod. Mare. Idat. Paul. Diac.
In the mean time Avitus Gallus, in the same year four hundred fifty five, the
sixth ofth Ides July, as says Anonymus Cusp. being proclaimed Emperor by the
French Army at Tolousa, he confirmed peace with the Goths. By whose persuasion
Theodorick entering into Spain, he conquered the Suevi, their King Rechiarius
being slain, in the year four hundred fifty six. Avitus in the third year after
he had been chosen, being forsaken by the Goths, failed of his Empire and life,
as Idatius writes. Paul. 15. chapter 5.
Paulus Diaconus reports, that he having laid down the Placentine, was made
Bishop. that happened in the year four hundred fifty seven, wherein also
Marcian did his duty to nature in the East. Anonymus Cusp. says, that Avitus
was taken in the year of Placentius, 13. of Call. October. in which John and
Varran were Consulls. Truly Evagrius a certain Historian, gives b. 2. chapter 7.
no more, than ten Months and eight days unto Avitus. But out of that
Anonymus, more than 14. Months will agree; and the space of ceslation of an
Emperor, shall be six Months ten days. For he says Majorian was lifted up
in the year four hundred fifty seven, the Call. of April, when as the day
before the Call. of March, he was made master of the soldiery, in which day
also Ricimer from the Master of the Soldiers, was made Senator: After this
manner it may be true, which Idatius says, in the third year, after he began
to reign, Avitus was taken away, to wit, the space of cessation of rule being
reckoned. Therefore in the year four hundred fifty seven by the will of Leo the
Emperor, who succeeded Marcian. Mare. Idat. Paul. Diac.
Majorian undertook the Empire of Ravenna, a Prince of a great courage. Non.
Major. Tit. 3. to the Sen. Procop. 1. Vand. Jorn. Cassiod. Anon. Cuspin.
Who being covetous of recovering Africa, attempting a war against the
Vandalls, went to Genserick in the show of an Ambassador. But being laid hold
of by Ricimer a Senator, and master of both kinds of warfare at Dertona, and
compelled to give off, is slain in the year four hundred sixty one, when he had
commanded four years and four Months. For he was stripped of his Empire by
Ricimer, Dagailaphus and Severinus being Confulls, that is in the year four
hundred sixty one, the fourth of the Nones of Aug. and was slain the seventh
Ides of Aug. at the River Hira. And then Ricimer made Severus Emperor by an
agreement in the same year four hundred sixty one, in the Month November. the
Anon. Cosp. Cassiod. Idat. Marc. etc.
thirteenth of Call. December. whom also in the fourth year of his Tyranny, he
took away by poison, Anon. Cusp.
the eighteenth of Call. September, of Christ four hundred sixty and five.
Afterward there was a cessation of the Empire, the space of one year and some
Months. Then in the year four hundred sixty seven, by the Authority of Leo the
Emperor, there was sent an Emperor into the West.

Cassiod. Marc. Sidon. Paneg. Evag. 2. chapter 18.
Anthemius a Senator, the Nephew of Anthemius, who under Theodosius the
younger, had held a chief place in the Commonwealth, his father being
Procopius. Anon. Cusp.
He was called Emperor of Rome the day before the Ides of April. Moreover it
had been thus agreed between Leo and Ricimer, that a Greek Emperor should be
sent to Rome, whose daughter should marry Ricimer. So, that Barbarian being
made the son in law of Anthemius, by a wonted treachery, he kills his father in
law at Rome, first set upon by a The same.
civil war, the Marc. Cassiod.
fifth Ides of Jul. in the year four hundred seventy two, when he had commanded
five years, and some Months besides.

Cassiod. Marc. Paul. Diac. 15. Jorn. of succ. of Kings.
Olybrius was placed in the room of Anthemius by Ricimer Anon. Cusp.
who died forty days after the death of Anthemius, thirteenth Call. of
September, neither bad he Olybrius living long after. For he in the same year,
The same.
the tenth Call. November, finishing his life, the seventh Month after he was
created, Gundiabalus persuading it, whom Olybrius had made a Senator, as
Cassiodor writes, Glycerius took the Empire at Ravenna, in the year four
hundred seventy three, Anon. Cusp.
on 3. Non. March, which governed almost four Months above a year.

Marc. Cassiod.
Julius his Nephew in the year four hundred seventy four, succeeded in his
place, Anon. Cusp.
eighth Call. Jul. who suffered Glycerius to be made Bishop in the Roman
Ship-harbour by the Emperor, but Of Ger. affairs.
Jornandes says, he was made Bishop of Salo. But Marcellinus Glycerius to have
taken it in the year four hundred seventy five. Therefore he was chased to Salo
by Orestes, Anon. Cusp.
fifth Call. Septem. and after five years Marc. Jorn.
not far from thence, was slain in his own Village in the year 480. the seventh
Ides May, as Anonymus with Cuspinian is witness.

Cassiod.
Monyllus, who is also Augustulus, was put in place by his father Orestes,
Anon. Cusp.
the day before the Call. November, the last of the Roman Emperors in the
West. Jornan. de rebus Ger. c. 46. Marcel.
For Odovacre King of the Turcilingians possessed Italy with the Scyrans, and
Herulians, assistants, Anon. Cusp.
the 10. Call. Septem. And the fifth of the same Call. Orestes being slain, and
his brother Paul the day before the Nones September, he banished Augustulus
into Campania, so the Marcel. Cassiod. Anon. Cusp.
Empire of the West was ended, Basiliscus and Armatus being Consuls, the
fourteenth of Constantines annual account, in the year of Christ 476.

Odovacre held Italy by a Kingly name, Cassiod.
without his tokens of honor, about seventeen years before the Ostrogoths,
Theodorick being King, came into it. Cassiod. Chron.
By him Pheletheus, or Phaeba King of the Rugans, was overthrown, and was taken
with his most bad wife Gisa, in the year forty eight, Anon. Cusp.
November. 18 which slaughter Severinus a Eugip. in the life of Sever.
Messenger of the Noricans, had foretold unto him. Frederick the son of
Pheletheus, his Kingdom being recovered by the endeavor of Theoderick, was
driven out by Odovacre, the whole Nation being brought over into Italy.

But in the year four hundred eighty nine, Marc. Jorn. P^^. 1. Goth. Cassiod.
Chron.
Theodorick King of the Goths, by the encouragement of Zeno going to Italy,
Odovacre being overcome in a double battle at the River Isontius, and at
Verona; but the year following being thirdly overcome at the River Ducas, he
constrained him to fly to Ravenna the Ides of Jul. as says Anonymus of Cusp.
where he besieged him three years, and at last, a deceitful covenant being
made with him, Anon. Cusp.
the third Nones of March, that they should hold Italy, in common, a feast
being made, slew him in the year four hundred ninety three in which year the
Kingdom of the Goths had its beginning in Italy.

CHAP. XIX. Of Church Affairs, from the year of Christ 450, to 491, where of
the Synod of Chalcedon, and of the Heretics Peter Fullo, Cnaphaeus, Moggus,
Acacius, and of Henoticus of Zeno; And of holy and Learned Men.
THe fourth Oeconomical, or general Assembly, Marcian reigning as Emperor, and
Leo chief Bishop, was solemnized in the year of Christ 451, in which Eutyches
was condemned: the order or manner of whose proceeding I will conclude in a
short abridgment.

Eutyches, The Eutychian Heresy and the Order of the Chal. Synod.
an Abbot of Constantinople, was the author of a new heresy, which took away
all difference of natures in Christ. He being Counc. Chal. Act. 1. Liber. in
Breviar. Vict. Tunun. Marcel.
required for judgment by Eusebius Bishop of Dorylaeum, was condemned in an
Assembly at Constantinople, by Flavian the Bishop of that City, in the year
448. The year following, through the endeavor of Chrysaphius an Eunuch, who
was offended with Flavian, another Synod was had at Ephesus, which they name
(...), that is, robbing; over which Dioscorus of Alexandria was chief, he who
in the year 444, succeeded Cyril. In that Assembly Eutyches was restored to
communion, Flavian being displaced; Niceph. Chron. The robbery of the Synod of
Ephesus.
and Anatolius an Elder, and Chancellor of Dioscorus, being ordained in his
room. But both Theodoret and Domnus of Antioch, were reduced into order;
although this last is gathered to have subscribed unto that small Council,
together with Juvenal of Jerusalem. Flavian while he calls on the Roman Bishop,
being driven into banishment, and evilly entreated with fists and heels, he
dyed. The Ambassadors of Rome being vexed, Pope Leo condemned this Synod, with
whom, likewise Dioscorus, through a wicked boldness, renounced communion at
Alexandria. All these things, Theodosius, otherwise a most religious Prince
winking at, but deceived by Chrysaphius, were finished: when as Pulcheria was
absent; who had given place in the year 447, to the reproaches of that gelded
one, and Eudocia the Empress, in the administering the Government. At length
the error being acknowledged, Theodosius sends Eudocia, sharply chidden, unto
Jerusalem, and called home Pulcheria in the year 430, in which same year he
dying, Marcian with Pulcheria his wife received the Empire; she Marcell. Chr.
Alex. Couns. Chal. Liberar. Evag. b. 1. ch 4.
commanding, Chrysaphius was slain.

Vict. Tun. The Council of Chalcedon.
Furthermore, in the year 451, there was a general Assembly solemnized at
Chalcedo, of 630 Fathers; at which, Roman Ambassadors were present,
Paschasinus Lilybaetanus, and three others; and also Dioscorus himself.
Moreover Marcian the Emperor with Pulcheria, and Officers and Senators, were
present. It was begun the 8th of the Ides of October. and after 13 sittings in
Kal. November. being finished, in which the Synod of robbers being repealed, Leo
ep. 6. etc. Gelas. little work of Excom. Anast. to John Diac. in Col. Pet. Sirm.
Dioscorus was condemned, and Eutyches; and the remembrance of Flavian,
restored with honor. Dioscorus being sent away to Gangra of Paphlagonia, there
ended his life. Liberat.
The 29 Canons of that Council were least of all recieved by Leo. Dioscorus
being driven out, and Proterius ordained in his place, the Alexandrians through
the love of their new Prelate, were turned to sedition. But Marcian easily
restrained them. After his death in the year 457. they began to tumult again,
all the Heretical Monks disturbing, whom Timothy Aelurus, from a Monk, an
Alexandrian Elder, Theod. Lect. 2. Collect.
being, together with Peter Moggus a Deacon condemned by Proterius, a wicked
and impure man, had moved against Proterius; Evag. 2. chapter 8. Vict. Tun. Chron.
Liber. Theoph.
when as he running about through their Cells, feigned that an Angel, was sent
to him, and commanded to make Timothy Bishop in his place. Neither was there a
vain hope of so blockish an invention. Proterius on the very day of the
preparation fleeing into the washing font or vessel, by the mad people, Evag.
or by the Soldiers, whom Timothy, the seat being now possessed, had privily
sent, he was beheaded. Victor Tununensis is witness in his Chronicle,
Constantine and Rufus being Consuls, which is the 457 year, Proterius was slain
on the sixth holy day of the last week of fasting. That year, Easter fell out
on the first day before the Kalends of April, so the preparation happened the
4th. Kalends, by which the place of Victor is to be corrected, which is
commonly faulty. The letters of the Bishops of Egypt unto Leo the Emperor,
say, Proterius to be slain on the very day of Easter. Perhaps they so named the
preparation, as in time past many had wont. Ep. 15.
Liberatus affirms that was done on the day of the Lords Supper. Of the year,
Pope Leo makes us certain in his Epistle 73, etc. which being dated in the year
457, do bewail that Tragedy of Alexandria.

Leo punished the authors of so great wickedness, with the Theoph. Liberat.
cutting out of their tongues: he reserved Timothy for the judgment of the
Bishops: and lastly, Pope Leo Pope, ep. 99. and 100. Evag. 2. chapter 11. Vict.
Tunun.
Leo being urgent, he commanded him to be carried farther off, first to Gangra,
and then to Chersona.

About that time another Plague infected the Church of Antioch, Peter Fullo an
Elder at Chalcedo, of the Church of Bassa, following Zeno the Captain of the
East, who afterward was Emperor, in the year 463, Theoph.
a multitude being provoked against Martyrius Bishop of that City, invaded his
seat, and renewed the heresy of the Theopasacites, Foelix P. ep. 3.4. Trisag.
corrupted.
those words being added to Trisagius, [ Who have suffered for us.] But
straightway being by the Emperor condemned to banishment, he lay hid in the
Monastery of the Acaemetes at Constantinople. Until Leo being dead, Liberat.
chapter 16. Theoph.
Basiliscus the Tyrant taking the Empire, in the year 476, he restored as well
this man as Timothy. Whom again Zeno, the dominion being recovered, in the year
477, expelled. Vict. Tun.
And in the same year Aelurus dyed; whom Liberat. c. 16.
Liberatus affirms, to have taken away his life by poison. Into whose place,
the heretics chose Peter Moggus Bishop; but Timothy Solophaciolus the
succeeder of Proterius, was restored to the seat by the Catholics; Moggus not
being killed by Zeno, as Evag. 3. c. 11.
Evagrius has written, but was compelled to live in exile.

Simp. P. ep. 14. and 16. Evag. 3. chapter 10. Theoph.
Cnapheus being cast out, Stephen a Catholic was ordained at Antioch; who in
the year 479, was thrust through by the pages of Fullo, in the place of washing;
after whom another Stephen was appointed for this man at Calenum, both
Catholics.

Niceph. Chron.
Then Acacius governed the seat of Constantinople, who was put in place of
Gennadius in the year 471; a crafty or turn-coat man, and privily favoring the
Eutychian heresy; but a wonderful crafts-master of dissembling. Simp. ep. 17.
and 18. Liber. chapter 17. and 18. Evag. 3. chapter 14. Vict. Tun.
By the persuasion of this man, Zeno cast out John Talaidas, who had been made
Bishop of Alexandria after the death of Timothy Solophaciolus, and suffered
Peter Moggus to return unto that seat in the year 482. Then he set forth a new
form of faith so craftily composed, that the heretics, even as the
Catholics, might agree upon it; because he called it, (...), that is, a
Reconciler: but in that there was a disannulling of the Council of Chalcedo.
Victor says, That was published Trocundus being Consul, which is the year 482.
By the Emperor's Edict the Catholic Bishops resisted this wicked fellow: and
amongst others, the head of all, Foelix Bishop of Rome, who was chosen after
Simplicius in the year 483. Liberat. 18. Evag. 3. chapter 20. and 21.
He from the Roman Council sent three Ambassadors unto Constantinople. Vitalis
Troentinus, Misenus Bishops of Cuma, and Felix, a defender of the Roman Church:
who also summoned Acacius unto the Judgment Seat of the Bishop of Rome; and
took care, Moggus to be driven from Alexandria. Misenus and Vitalis being
troubled by Acacius, they communed together with him and Peter Moggus: Felix,
when as he stayed by reason of a disease, afterward coming to Constantinople,
was cast into prison. Ep. Syn. Romans Con. 2. under Felix.
For these things Pope Felix authorized two Ambassadors, and declared a
sentence of excommunication against Acacius: who repaying like for like,
blotted out the name of Felix, out of the [ Diptychs,] which are Church-Tables.
That happened in the year 484.

Leont. of Sects. Act. 5.
Moreover, Peter Moggus at Alexandria, Henoticus being received, while he
studieth to deserve well of the Catholics, even as of Heretics; and swimming
on both sides, sometimes casts off the Chalcedonian Assembly, sometimes
acknowledges it, runs into the hatred of them both. For many Eutychians fell
off from him: who because they were neither of the Catholic party, nor could
agree with their Bishop, were called [ Acephali,] as if they should say,
Without an head. The same went into diverse divisions of Sects; of which it
shall be treated a little after.

Anast. Diac. in Nic. Syn. 2. out of Theod. Lect. Theoph. The first opposer of
holy Images.
At the same time, that is, about the year 485, Xenais, The beginning of the
Acephalians.
who is also Philoxenus, by birth a Persian, of a slavish condition, was made
Bishop of Jerapolis by Peter Cnapheus; he first lifted up a standard of impiety
against holy Images.

Theoph.
And then Cnapheus dies in the year 486; Peter Moggus in the year 498. But
Acacius in the year 488, about the keeping of whose remembrance in
Church-Tables, the Bishops of Constantinople strove very long with the Bishops
of Rome, as for they which were Catholics; Niceph. 16. chapter 9.
as Euphemius, who after Flavitas the heretic was carried up unto that seat
in the year 489, for that cause he feared not the fellowship of the Apostolic
seat.

Faustus ep. to Leon. tom. 3. Conc. France.
In France, the heresy of the Predestinatians stood up, which had its
beginning out of the books of Augustine, being ill under stood. Of that sect,
Lucidus, a certain one being chastised by Faustus Regiensis, returned into the
way. Eleven Bishops subscribed to the Epistle of Faustus in the Arelatian
Council, in the year 475; by which Faustus himself affirms, a hard piece of
work was put upon him, of disputing concerning grace and free will. he (a dart
being let fly beyond his bounds) aspersed a little some Catholic things in
his books. At the same time also was solemnized at Lugdunum an Assembly of 27
Bishops.

In Africa under the Arrians and Barbarian Princes, The Vandals trouble the
Church in Africa.
the Church was grievously oppressed: First of all Geiserick being King, who 37
years after Carthage was taken, in the 476, dyed, Vict. Ucic. book 1. in the
end, and b. 2. and 3.
as is gathered out of Victor. After this King Hunericus his son, when he had
showed himself moderate enough in the beginning, and less estranged from the
Catholics, at length in the eighth and last year of his reign, of Christ 484,
Marcell.
in the month of Febr. he exercised an unheard of cruelty against them, he
thrust out more than 334 Bishops into banishment; he cut short many of their
tongues and hands; Aeneas Gaz. Marcell. Vict. b. 3. Vict. Tunun.
who being brought unto Constantinople, and into other places, were for a
miracle, when as they spoke nevertheless, with a perfect voice. Which torment
of the godly, a fearful death of the Tyrant in a short time followed; who in
the going out of the 484 year, being consumed by worms, he perished.

For the greatest ornament to the Church in those times, Holy Men and Learned.
in holiness joined together with Learning, were first of all Leo the Great,
the Bishop of Rome, Marcel.
who from the year 440, to 461, almost 21 years, held the Roman Chair: and he
dying, Martyrolog.
April 11. had Hilary his succeeder; a man excelling in godliness and
knowledge, and ability of speaking: by which garrisons he both defended the
whole Church from the spot of Heretics; and Italy from the cruelty of invading
Barbarians; that the surname of Great, has deservedly cleaved unto him.

In Italy also Ennod. in his Life.
holy Epiphanius Prelate of Ticinum, in the year 466, entered into the
Bishopric; whom Theoderick King of the Goths worshipped with singular
observance; Ennodius Ticinensis wrote his Life.

In France, Anian Bishop of Aurelia, of whom I have made mention above. But
ancient Histories witness, That this man two years after Attila was overcome
by Aetius, passed into Heaven, November 17. in the year of Christ 453. But
because they tell, the same man to have succeeded Eortius; if that be so, one
of the two must needs have sat very long: for Euortius is he, who subscribed
to the Valentine Council in the year of Christ 374, Prosper excepteth Anian, as
Sidonius shows. In the same France, Sid. b. 5. Ep. 16. Greg. Tur. 1. Hist.
Franc. chapter 21.
Sidonius Apollinaris was famous, born of a famous stock; who had married
Papianilla the daughter of Avitus the Emperor; and afterward by the Governor
was ordained Bishop of Avernum about the year 472; in which year also, or the
foregoing, Rhemigius was taken to the Bishopric of Rhemes very young. For Tom.
1. Counc. Gal. p. 203.
in an Epistle which he wrote in the year 523, he says, he holds that dignity
now 53 years.

Also Mars. Romans 29. July.
Lupus Bishop of Trecena, about the year 478, when he had been chief in that
seat 52 years.

Sigeber. and Martyr.
There flourished at the same time Principius the brother of Remigius, Bishop
of Suessiona. Vedastus of Atrebatum, afterward made Bishop; Solemnis
Carnotensis.

Gennad. See book 2. Doct. Times, c. 62. and Appen.
Victorinus of Aquitane, by the desire of Pope Hilary, set forth an Easter
Circle of 532 years, in the year 463.

In the East, Gennadius Bishop of Constantinople, who Marcell.
succeeded Anatolius in the year 458, excelled in learning and holiness.

Sur. 8. Jan.
Severinus Bishop of Noricum, dyed in the year 482. Jan. 8.

Theoph.
That admirable man, Simeon of Stylites, dies about the year 461, when he had
attained to the 109th year; and he was Raderus 1. Virid. Par. 3.
born in the year 351, whose death being certainly known from God, His life
with Sur. Dec. 11.
Daniel took to himself the same good manner of life.

Theoph. to 491.
Studius a certain man, built a famous Monastery at Constantinople, into which
be brought over some out of the house of the Acaemetes, in the year 462.

The End of the Sixth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. OR, AN Account of Time.
The Seventh Book. WHerein are contained the Years from the 491 of CHRIST, unto
641.
CHAP. I. Of Anastasius, and Justinus; and what things (they reigning) were
carried on in the Eastern Empire; from the year 491, to 527.
ZEno Theod. Lect. Evag. 3. chapter 29.
being dead with his wife Ariadna, Anastasius undertook the Empire of the East
in the year 491, Vict. Tun. Marcell. Theoph.
Olybrius being alone Consul, of the order of the Gentlemen-Ushers, not as yet
recorded among the Senate. His Country was Dyrrachium: and before that he took
the Command, he gave unto Euphemius the Patriarch of Chalcedon a profession of
his faith, witnessed with his own handwriting. Leont. of Sect. The virtues of
Anastasius mixed with vices.
For he was a favourer of the Eutychian Opinion, and of the flock of the
Doubters, whereby he pleased Henoticon, or reconciler of Zeno. Therefore
Euphemius believed that he was tied fast by that Caution, the which he laid up
in the yearly Registers of the Church. But when he was made partaker of his
desire, he openly returned to falsehood, and ceased not to fight against the
Catholics; otherwise a profitable Prince to the Commonwealth: the which
being overcharged by too much taxes, he eased, with the highest approbation of
all.

Evag. 3. c. 39. Theoph. Cedren.
He is praised especially in that kind, because he took away Chrysargyrum, or
the gold and silver poll-money. That was a tribute, which had been laid upon
all heads as well as on great beasts and lesser cattle; even on dogs: ye^, he
forbad it to be required in the ninth year of his Empire. As soon as he
obtained the Empire, he had something to do with the Isaurians, who under
Zenon, their friend and Countreyman, could do much in the Commonwealth.
Longinus, Zenons brother being frustrated of his hope, to enjoy the Empire, was
turned out into Isaura, and with him were all the people of Isaura to depart
out of their City.

Marcel. Theoph, Evag. 3. c. 35.
Hence arose that Isaurick war, The Isaurick war.
wherein Longinus was their General which began in the year of our Lord four
hundred ninety two, and ended Anno 497. which was the sixth year of the Wars.

Marcell. The Persian War.
Two years after, that is, in the 499th year, the Bulgarians first daring to
make incursions into the Roman Territories, wasted Thracia, and afterward
began to be formidable: Marcel. Theoph.
And the Persians in the mean time, that they might want nothing to keep a
wicked Prince under, they overran the East, and took Amida by the treachery of
the Monks of that place, whom Victor Cabades commanded to be put to death for
an example, Anno 502. Anastasius sent three Generals with three Armies against
him, such great Armies as never before the like were seen, as Procop. apud
Phot. N. 63.
Procopius, but Marcellinus says that they were not above 15000, but their
discord amongst themselves, made this great preparation of no effect: yet soon
after this, Cabades being defeated, by the virtue and magnanimity of Celer,
Master of the offices, a very valiant man, he concluded a peace with the
Romans, and having received a vast sum of money, he delivered up Amida, and
some other Towns, Anno 505. as Theophanes and Marcellinus do declare. Marcel.
In this same year, the temerity and indiscretion of the Roman Captains,
brought not a small loss and detriment to the Romans, for Sabinian had a very
bad success in fighting against Mundo Geta. Anastasius having hardened his
heart against so many Arguments of an angry God, he ceased not to tread
underfoot the Catholic interest, by divulging his own heresy.

Theoph.
For he forbad by a wicked Appendix, The Trisagium corrupted by Anastasius.
the Trisagium hymn once to be sung, Qui Crucifixus es pro nobis, publicly in
the Church, to his great danger: for hence arose a grievous sedition of the
people, in the year 514. which drove Anastasius to hide his head, his Wife
Ariadna censuring him for his impiety. In the same year also Marcel. Vict. Tun.
Evag. 3. c. 24. Z^n. Theoph.
Vitulianus, a Scythian General of the confederates; for so were the Goths
called, as Jornandes records, under pretense of defending the Catholic
interest, he rebelled against Anastasius, and having made a great slaughter,
and drawn his Army near to the City, he granted them peace upon that condition,
that Pope Hormisda should assemble a Synod, which might take a care of the
state of the Church, which was in the 515 year of Christ, but Anastasius by his
wonted practices, deluded and made void the desires and intentions of the
Catholics, making no Conscience to lie and forswear himself after the manner
of the Manichees, whose erroneous opinions he had embraced: Evagrius writes
that there was also a Sea Fight, and that Vitalian was beaten by Marinus Syrus.
But Zonaras says, that by the industry of Proclus the Mathematician, were made
Brass Prospectives, which burnt Vitulians Navies, by which means Maximus
obtained a most remarkable Victory, which soon after was followed with an
agreement of peace.

Marcel. Vict. Tun.
In that age, as Marcellinus says, in the year five hundred and fifteen, the
Hunns having passed through Armenia, wasted and destroyed all Cappadocia, and
came unto Lycaonia. And Ariadna Augusta, having lived sixty years, dyed in her
Palace.

Evag. 3. in fine Marcel.
At last in the five hundred and eighteenth year of our Lord there having been
such tumult as the like never was, because Anastasius had defiled and corrupted
the Trisagiums hymn, Anastasius laying down his imperial dignity, induced the
people to compassion and tenderness toward him, who entreated him to reassume
it again. Theoph. Anastatius's deplorable death.
But the eleventh of April was stricken dead by a Thunderbolt Vict. Tun.
in the eighty eighth year of his age, having governed the Empire Marcel. Zon.
Ged. Theoph. Paul. Diac. l. 15.
twenty seven years, and three Months. The rumor is, that a little before his
death there appeared to him, a man of a dreadful shape, who holding a book in
his hand showed him that fourteen years should be cut off out of his life,
because of his impiety. Its a thing admirable that he had such a long time
appointed him to live, which if he had completed, he would have lived 102
years.

Justine being already aged, succeeded after Anastasius was dead, the 9th of
July, in the same year, Evag. 4. Marcel. Vict. T^n. Theoph. Z^^. Ced. Niceph.
17. c. 1. Chr. Alex. Vitalian's death.
518. He was a Thracian by Nation, descended of Parents of low degree, but an
eminent person in Religion and godliness: whose wife Lupicina, having changed
her name, was called Euphemia. As soon as he had assumed the Purple Gown, he
put to death Amantius the Steward, and Andreas the Chamberlain, and also
Theocritus whom Amantius the Eunuch would have made Emperor: he made Vitalian
in whom he much confided, General of the Militia, who in the seventh Month of
his Consulship, in the five hundred and twentieth year of Christ, was stabbed
in the Palace, as Marcellus says; or by a sudden uproar of the people, as
Theophanes asserts; or, as Evag. ^. c. 3.
Evagrius says, by Justins treachery, or by Justinian Patricius's faction, as
Victor Tununensis affirms.

Chron. Alex. Theoph. Zon. Ced. etc.
^zathius the King of the Lazores, rebelling against the Persians, comes to
Justinus to Constantinople in the year 522, and after he had embraced the
Christian Faith, the Emperor bestowed upon him royal garments. Which deed
Cabades King of the Persians taking ill, he resolved to declare wars to the
Romans, but suddenly after he concluded a peace and alliance with them. Procop.
1. Pers. Theoph. Zon.
Then as he intended, that Justine should adopt Chosroes his youngest son, whom
he had designed to succeed him, he was rejected by Proclus the Treasurer.

Evag. 4. c. 5. Theoph. Nice. 1. c. 4.
In the days of this Emperor, Antioch was afflicted by a great loss, for it
was almost all overthrown by a strong Earthquake upon the twenty ninth of May,
in the year 526. being the 8th year of Justins Empire, and not the 7th; a great
burning immediately followed the Earthquake.

At last Justine, in the 527th year, when Marcel. Vict. Tun. Chr. Alex. Theoph.
Mavortius was Consul, created Emperor Justinian, his sisters son, whom
having made most noble, he had created Caesar in the year five hundred twenty
four, as Victor Tunun. records, and then died of a wound four Months after, in
August, being the Chapter Alex. Theoph. Paul. Diac. in fine chapter 15. Justine was no
part of a Scholar.
seventy seventh year of his age, having ruled the Empire nine years and a
Month.

Procopius in his Suppressed History, says that he was wonderfully ignorant of
Learning, in so much that he could not write his own name, wherefore what is
read of Justinian in Suidas, that he was (...) and (...), ignorant of all
learning, and not knowing the Letters, is to be understood of Justinus, and not
of Justinian, says In Not. ad Procop.
Alemannius, for he proves that Justinian was a very learned man. For which
cause also Suidas supposes that (...) was taken for (...), concerning which we
must consider farther.

CHAP. II. Of the affairs of the West under King Theodoricus, and of the
Franks, and their Prince Chlodoveus, of the Burgundians, Wisigoths, and
Alaricus.
Anno 491. of Christ, unto 527.
THeodoricus King of the Ostrogoths, Theodoricus King of the Ostrogoths.
having subdued Odovacre in the West, obtained Italy, Anno 493. Cassio^.
Albinus then being Consul, who endeavored to establish and settle his
Kingdom, by the affinity of the neighbor Princes: for he married Audeflenda
Aimo 2. c. 1.
sister to Chlodoveus King of the Franks, as Aimonius says, and not his
daughter: which Jornandes and To. 2. l. 5. c. 18.
Freculsus do reckon amongst his daughters, which he had by his Concubine, one
of whom was married to Alaricus King of the Wisigoths, and the other to
Sigismund King of the Burgundians: And he so governed the Republic at first,
that he might worthily have been compared with any one of the best Caesar's: and
although by the peoples Law, he maintained the Arian opinion, he with much
faithfulness preserved the rights of the Romans, and the liberty of the
Church, but waxing old, he became cruel and barbarous.

Greg. 2. c. 27. Aimoinus 1. c. 12.
At this time the Kingdom of the Franks in Gallia, The exploits of the Franks
under Chiodoveus.
under doveus. under their King Chlodoveus, began to extend far and near.
Having overcome and killed Syagrius, the Earl Aegidius's son, who governed the
Soissons in the fifth year of his reign, and of Christ four hundred eighty six,
and in the tenth of his reign, and of Christ four hundred ninety one. Having
subdued the Greg. 3. c. 2. Aimo. 1. c. 12.
Turingians, he married Chlotildes, daughter to Chilpericus of Burgundy, the
brother of Gundobald, by which being often exhorted to embrace the Christian
Religion, Greg. 2. c. 31. Aim. c. 19.
at length he obeyed her advice, in the year six hundred ninety six, after
that, in the fight that he fought with the Alemans, near Tolbiacum in the Ubes,
he had experienced the present assistance of Chlotides's God, whom he invoked.
Having subdued his enemies near Greg. Turon. l. 2. c. 31.
Remi, he was received into the Communion of the Church by St Remigius Bishop
of that City, Tom. 1. Conc. Gall.
and with him his sister Albofledis, which died not long after, and also his
other sister, Lanthildis, from her Arian opinion became a good Catholic. He
was baptized on the day of Christ's Nativity, as it appears by Tom. 1. Con.
Gall. Hinem. in cap. Cat. call. 35.
Avitus Epistle, by which he congratulates him his assumption of the Christian
Faith: In vita S. Rem. apud. Sur. 13. Jan. and in capit. Car. Call. 35.
Flodoardus and Aimoinus add farther, that when Lib. 1. c. 13.
Hincmarus a boy, carried a Vial wherein was the sacred unction, and was shut
in by the flocking of the multitude, that then at the prayers and request of
this Holy Prelate, there fled to him a Dove from Heaven, which brought another
Vial in her beak, wherewith was Chlodoveus anointed: and since that time are
all the kings of France consecrated and anointed at Rheyms, but Gregory makes
no mention of this.

Greg. Aim. Chlodoveus's war with the Burgundians.
Not long after this did Chlodoveus make war against Gundebaldus, the king of
the Burgundians, to revenge the death of Chilpericus his father in law: for
Gunderick king of that Nation, taking his Original of Athanaricus Prince of
the Goths, had left four sons, Gundebaldus, Godegisilus, Chilpericus, and
Godomarus. Gundebaldus, having killed Childeric and his wife, as also Godomar,
he reigned with Godegisilus; therefore at the instant request of Chlotides, and
Godegisilus, he gave battle to Greg. Turon. 1. c. 32. Aimo. p. 2. c. 19
Gundebaldus. And having overcome him near Dijons Castle, commanded him to
satisfy himself with the half of the kingdom, and the other half he gave to
Godegisilus, and laid an impost upon both: Chlodoveus being departed,
Gundobaldus kills his brother Godegisilus, having on a sudden besieged Vienna
wherein he was, and taken it. Then having shaken off the French yoke,
^undebaldus's Laws.
he recovered all that territory that now is known by the name of Burgundy, and
ordained Laws to his people, which very likely were signed in the year five
hundred and one, when Arienus was Consul, or enacted in the year following.

Greg. 2. c. 35.
Alaricus king of the Wisigoths fearing, not without good reason, the
increasing power of the French he desires to enter into friendship with
Chlodoveus: but as they were of different religion, (for the Goths were
Arrians) their friendship lasted not long, for a while after, from secret
grudges, there broke forth an open hatred, and hence a war. Chlodoveus fought
five year before his death, the five hundred and seventh year of Christ, as
Greg. 2. c. 43.
Gregorius says with Alaricus in the Vocladians fields, ten miles from the
City of Poitou. And having defeated his Army, Chlodoveus overcomes Alaricus
and the Goths in France.
he killed him with his own hands, who had already ruled Isid. Chr.
twenty three years in Gallia and Spain, hence pursuing his victory, he added
to his kingdom all that which was from the River Ligeris to the Rhosne
together with Tolouse. But the Province of Narbonne, which was called the first
Province of France, remained in the Goths subjection, and thence it began to be
called Gothia: For Amalaricus, his father Alaricus being dead, hastily flying
into Spain, he retained under his power Spain, with that part of France which
we have already named: Theodoricus king of Italy possessed all what was beyond
the Rhosne, that is the other Country of the Narbonnes, and the Alps by the
Sea side. Isidorus says, that Alaricus death was in the year 507. it being the
same year that Giselicus whom he had by his Concubine, striving to possess the
Kingdom, was expelled out of it by Theodoricus, who having taken upon him the
tuition and Guardian-ship of Amalaricus, his Nephew, he ruled Spain, and all
the other Dominions of the Wisigoths 15 years, by Governors and Deputies, as
Isidorus relates.

The divine providence gave to Chlodoveus, above all other Princes of the
World, in those days such happy and joyful success, as oftentimes by
miracles, his wars were confirmed to be guided of God, such as are recorded by
Greg. 2. c. 37. Aim. 1. c. 21.
Gregory of Turine, amongst which is that remarkable thing: That hastening
against Alaricus, having encamped near the River Vigenna, he found a shallow
place by the direction of a Hind that passed over the River before him, through
which he transported his Army to the other side, and after this Victory
preparing to besiege Engoulesme, the walls of the City falling down of their
own accord, gave him an easy entrance into the City: Greg. 2. c. 38. Aimo.
Which things being known. The Emperor Anastasius the year following, the
victory of Vocles, in the year of his Consulat, sent a standard to Chlodoveus.
And he went in procession in St. Martins Church at Turine, under whose
protection and help he thought he was come to so great an honor, with his
belt, his Purple Gown, and his Diadem. Then coming to Paris, Paris is made the
head City of the Kingdom.
there he established his Throne in the year of our Lord 507, with so happy
successes.

Cassiodorus says, that in the year of Christ 508. the next year after the
Vocladian fight, when Celer and Venantius were Consulls, the Franks were
overcome by Theodoricus King of the Ostrogoths, and that Gallia was taken out
of their hands: there being slain above 30000 of them, as says Jornandes; but
of this I have found nothing amongst our own Historiographers. Procopius
Procop. 1. Goth.
relates, That the Franks being driven away from the siege of Carcasone, and
having forsaken the Country of Narbonnes, obtained Aquitania, and that
Theodorick let them have that part of the Country, because he could not easily
drive them out. Cassiod. 8. ep. 10.
But that they defended and kept Arelatis from being surrendered to the Goths,
Cyprian in Caesar's life witnesses it.

Procop. 1. Got.
Neither may I omit what our Historiographers themselves have not mentioned,
whereof Procopius has spoken; That the Francks made a League offensive with
King Theodorick against the Burgundians, and that the Goths delaying the time
purposely, at length arrived when the fight was ended, and so without receiving
any loss or detriment, they divided the spoil with the Franks, equally sharing
the Kingdom, which it is like came to pass about the 508 year of Christ, it
being after the Wisigoth's great defeat; although at that time the Burgundian
Kingdom was not utterly extinct out of France, Greg. 3. c. 5.
for Gundebald being defeated and dead, Sigismund his son kept still what
remained, who hearkening to St. Ado. Chron. Anno 492.
Avit, the Bishop of Vienna, he changed his Arrian heresy into the Catholic
faith.

Greg. 2. c. 42. and 43. Aimo. 1. c. 23. Chlodoveus's death.
At this time Clodoveus raging against his nearest friends, put them almost all
to death; and at last in the 45th year of his age, and the 30th of his reign,
112 years after St. Martin's death, as Gregorius says, he dyed in Paris, which
seems to be the 511 of Christ, when Secundinus and Felix were Consuls; for
when Felix was Consul, upon the 6th of July, it is remarked, That Clodoveus
convoked the Tom. 1. Con. Gall.
first Synod at Orleans.

Greg. Tur. l. 3. c. 1.
His four sons divided equally his Kingdom amongst themselves, as then was the
custom. Theodoricus whom he had of a Concubine, kept the seat of his Kingdom
at Mets, Clodomirus at Orleans, Clotharius at Soissons, and Childebert at Paris.

Procop. 1. Goth.
Theodorick the King of the Ostrogoths, degenerating in his latter days from
his first laudable and good qualities wherewith he was endowed, as we have
said, into cruelty; he put to death Symmachus, and his son in law, who were
both accused of a false crime; Theodorick's depravation and death.
which deed having perpetrated, as he had the head of a huge fish set before
him at Supper, he imagined that he saw Symmachus's head; and being affrighted
by this dreadful fight, he soon after dyed, 35 years after the death of
Odovacer, in the year of Christ 528, being the 564th year of Spain, as Isid.
Chron.
Isidorus supposes.

CHAP. III. The Ecclesiastical Affairs under Anastasius, and the other Princes,
from the Year of Christ 491, unto 527.
THe Churches estate could not but be very full of trouble under an Emperor,
who was such an opposite enemy to the Catholic parties.

Anastasius, of the number of the Evag. 3. c. 30. and 31.
Acephalians and Hesitants, and also adhering to the Manichaeans, gave liberty
to every one to profess what opinion he would: The Emperor Anastasius an
Heretic.
And he mortally hated the Catholic Bishops, expelling Euphemius Bishop of
Constantinople out of his seat, having oftentimes laid snares for him; in whose
place was ordained Macedonius, Marcell. Theoph. Theod. Lect.
Anno 495, in the 5th year of Anastasius's Empire, who sub scribed to Zenon's
Henoticum; and for this cause the Catholics refusing his company, suffered
much.

At that time was the Church of Constantinople separated and divided from the
society of the Roman-See, The Schism of the Church or Constantinople because of
Acacius.
because the Bishops would not blot out of the sacred Tables of Constantinople,
Acacius's name, who did dye in a Schism and heresy, or durst not: whom to
recall to their duty and concord, the Pontiffs of Rome omitted nothing. First
Anast.
Gelasius, who in the 492 year of Christ succeeded Pope Felix: Gelas. ep. Tom.
2. Conc.
He the year following did in vain persuade Euphemius and Anastasius by the
means of Faustus Master of the Offices, sent to Constantinople by Theodorick:
Then Anastasius, who succeeded to Gelasius in the Papal office, The Schism of
Rome under Pope Symmachus.
in the 496 year of our Lord, and also Symmachus, who succeeded Anastasius in
the 498 year, did all endeavor to obtain it: but it was so impossible to
persuade the Emperor Anastasius to peace and unity, that on the contrary, he
poured forth the pestilence of his breach and dissension upon the Catholic
Church, which exhorted him to love and reconciliation: Festus, a certain Roman
Senator, being sent by Theodoricus to Constantinople, having secretly promised
to Anastasius the Emperor, that Anastasius the Pontiff of Rome should
subscribe to Zenon's Henoticum; as he returned to Rome, and found Pope
Anastasius dead, Symmachus being already by a legal election ordained, some
certain factious persons being corrupted with money, opposed to him another
Pope called Laurence, in the year of Christ 498; whence arose murders and
disboistnesses: which to prevent and remedy, the decision of the whole
controversy, (according to Odoacres's law) was referred to the King, (who was
Theoricus); he gave sentence in the behalf of Symmachus: So this burning, a
little quenched, flamed out the more soon after: Tom. 2. Conc. in Synodis
tempore Symmachi.
Therefore in the year 501, and some following, were held several Synods at
Rome about it, by King Theodorick's command; and Laurence in the same year 501
was condemned. But the year following, Odocres's Law was abrogated, by which he
had forbidden the election of the Roman Pontiff without the King's command;
herein, above all others, was to praised the endeavor of Ennodius of Tichick,
who gallantly pleaded Symmachus's cause against the Schismatics: Anastasius in
the mean time endeavoring to amplify and spread his heresy, brought in every
one: therefore did he admit into Constantinople, Xenaya, Prince of the
Manichees in the Theoph.
506th year of Christ, and in the 509th year he received Severus of the
Acephalians sect, Severus the Heretick's beginning.
a notorious person, with some 200 Monks coming along with him, and entertained
them all very honorably: And this was the beginning of that filthy Severus,
who in the year Marcell. Evag. 3. chapter 32.
513, possessed by violence the Antiochian Bishopric, out of which Flavinius
because of his constant zeal for the Catholic profession had bin turned out,
and he attempted to bring all them of the East to the condemnation of the
Chalcedonian Synod: but he turned out of their places those Catholic Bishops,
who opposed to him first Elias Bishop of Jerusalem, then Marcell.
Macedonius in the 511th year of Christ.

Anast. Biblioth.
Pope Symmachus being taken out of this world, Hormisda who was elected in his
place, endeavored as much as he could, to reunite into one communion both the
Churches, by the means of General Vitelian, who for that cause had taken up
arms against Anastasius; but he deceived them both by his old craftiness.
Hormisda epist. tom. 2. Council. The Peace of the Church mediated by Justinus.
He being dead, and Justinian a most Religious Prince governing the Empire,
Hormisda obtained what he had so earnestly endeavored in the year of our Lord
519, having sent Ambassadors to Constantinople, amongst whom Germanus of Capua
was a very godly man, and therefore by their means and labor was condemned the
memory of Acacius, Euphemius, and Macedonius, with all other heretics; and
also of Zenon and Anastasius both Emperors, and there was a full peace
concluded, and renewed unity by the East Country Churches with the Sea of
Rome, Suggestio ^egatorum ad Hormisd. Tom. 2. Conc.
which as Hormisda's Ambassadors went to declare and proclaim along the
Country: amongst them was one John a Bishop of Thessalonica, who was cruelly
and ignominiously entreated by the people of Thessalonica, who were of the
faction of Dorotheus Bishop; for which cause Dorotheus being warned to appear
before Justinus, the Judges being bribed, he escaped with a small punishment.
This discord of the East and West Churches lasted almost 40 years, as Lib.
cont. Mocia. p. 565.
Facundus writes, that is, reckoning exactly 36 years, which being numbered from
the 484th year of Christ, at which time Pope Felix anathematised Acacius, unto
the 519th of Christ, do belong unto the 6th of Hormisda.

Evag.
Then Justine by Edicts and punishments restrained the Heretics, and restored
the Catholic Bishops, he commanded Severus's tongue to be pulled out of his
mouth, because he had usurped by robbery the Bishopric of Antioch; but he fled
with Julian Bishop of Halicarnassus into Egypt, Evag. 4. chapter 4. Severus
infected Egypt.
the first year of Justine's Empire, in the month of September, and there
spread the contagion of his error, Liberat. c. 19. Leont. de sectis. Act. 5.
and 10. Vict. Tunun.
insomuch, that at that time there was diverse divorcements and separations of
that sect in Alexandria, some of them affirming the body of Christ to be
corruptible, as Severus; and others incorruptible, as Julian of Halicarnassus.
Timothy of Alexandria followed Severus; and Julianus was followed by
Themistaeus his Deacon, who separating himself from Timothy, broached forth the
new heresy of the Agn^etans; hence arose the division of the Corrupticolites,
that is, that held Christ's body corruptible; and of the Incorrupticolites,
which held Christ's body to be incorruptible, or of the phantasticks.

Epist. Hormis. Tom. 2. Conc.
There also arose in Constantinople an idle question by the Monks of Scythia,
Whether any mention might be made of the Trinity; concerning which thing the
Catholics fell not a little at variance amongst themselves. Tom. 4. Bibl. P. P.
Maxentius was one of those Monks, who made his apology against the Pontiff
Hormisda's Epistle, wherein he with his Companions was remarked.

Marcell. Theoph. Diac. 15. Greg. Pop. 3. Dial. Niceph. 17. c. 9.
Now as Justine was afflicting and tormenting the Heretics, and especially the
Arrians, whose Churches he joined to the Catholics: Theodoricus an Arrian
Prince taking it ill, he sent Pope John who had succeeded Hormisda, in the year
513, to Justinus, that he would abstain from farther wronging and injuring the
Arrians, threatening, That if he did not do it, that he would reciprocally rage
with cruelty all Italy over. The Emperor received most honorably the Pontiff,
Anast. Bibl.
and he the first of all the Emperors received of him the honor of Imperial
Majesty. Justinus being overcome by his prayers, he desisted from farther
persecuting the Arrians, if we may believe Miscella the Deacon: but this John
himself says quite otherwise, in his second Epistle, because that being then
returned to Rome, he was cast into prison, where worn out with grief, he dyed
at Ravennes the 12th of June, as Anastasius says, Anno 526; Theodorick's
cruelty.
at which time also Theodoricus put to death by the sword Boethius and
Symmachus, who dying 90 days after John, he seemed to a certain Friar cast
down into Hell headlong, Greg. 4. Dial.
as St. Gregory relates in his Dialogues.

CHAP. IV. Of Excellent Persons, who by their Piety and Learning adorned and
enriched that Age.
IN that Age Fulgentius for Piety and Learned Divinity carried it above all
others, Vita Fulg. apud Sur. Jan. 1.
who went to Rome the same year that Theodorick entered into it, by
Cassiodorus's account, being the year of our Lord 500; but being made Bishop of
Rupes, he was banished with others by King Thrasamund into Sardinia, and then
after Thrasamunds death in the Isid. Chron.
512th year of Christ, he returned; after that Hilderic, Hunricks son, had
restored peace to the Churches of Africa. Ferrand Dioconus, a most notable
writer in those days was his disciple.

In France shined S. Caesarius Bishop of Arles, Tom. 1. Conc. Gall.
whom we read to have been one of the Council of Agathus, held in the 506th
year of Christ, and lived unto Vigilius's time, of whom he received a letter in
the year 538.

Also Avitus Bishop of Vienna, of whom, and by whom the Burgundians received
the Catholic faith.

Flodoard. l. 2. c. 21. and 18.
Item, St. Rhemigius Bishop of Rhemes, and deservedly called, The Apostle of
the Franks; he was invested of that Bishopric in the 571 year of Christ, being
then 22 years old, as Hincmarus and Flodoardus do assert; for in his Tom. 1.
Conc. Gall. p. 204.
Epistle that he writ in the year of Christ 523, unto the three Bishops, he
testifies, That he had executed the Bishop's office 53 years already; he dyed
before the 535th year, being that in this same year was held a Council at
Auvergnes, wherein was Flavius Bishop of Rhemes: Then are Hincmarus and
Flodoardus mistaken, in saying, that he officiated in the Bishopric 74 years,
and lived 96.

In Italy Ennodus Bishop of Ticena, whose labor and work we have above
declared to have been very great against the Schismatics under Pope Symmachus;
also then lived Claudius Bishop of Vesontium, who was in the Tom. 1. Conc. Gall.
Epaonian Synod, held in the year 517.

Marianus Scotus Messingh. in SS. Hiber.
In Ireland, St. Patrick first Bishop amongst them, dyed in the year 491, being
then 82 years old, as it may be gathered out of Marianus's account; though he
himself attributes him 92 years; and others 123, or 122, as Sigebertus; some
say that he lived 134 years, whereof he lived 60 in that Island preaching
Christ.

In the East lived Cyril in vita S. Sabbas.
St. Sabbas the Friar, who by his Piety and holiness adorned Palestina, and at
that time maintained the Catholic Faith against the infectious impiety of
Anastasius the Emperor. St. John Silentiarius, who from Bishop of Collen in
Armenia, turned a Monk, was his disciple.

Niceph. 17. c. 4. and 5. Evag. 4. c. 6.
Two Zosimus's are reckoned amongst the Worthies of that Age, one living
solitary in Phoenicia, and the other in a certain Monastery in Palestina, who
both foresaw from God that calamity that befell Antioch in Justinus's time.

In Gallia, Aimo. 1. c. 17.
Launomarus of Carneton, and Id. and Sigeb. Anno 495.
Maximinus of Orleans, were a great honor to the Fryeries; Maximus built the
Mician's Monastery near to the City, he was St. Euspicius's Nephew. Clodoveus
as he went first to Orleans, brought them both thither along with him, as
writes Aimoinus; Sigebert calls that Monastery of the Mirians, Maximus's
Monastery; and Aimoinus calls it, the Monastery of the Initians, that is, the
Micians, and retains still the name; also Avitus and Carilesus, Maximus's
disciples. Sur. 11. Febr. Aimo. 1. ^. 24.
Then Severinus the Abbot, who healed King Chlodoveus of a grievous sickness
at Paris, in the year 508; Aimoinus calls him the Abbot of the Agaunian
Monastery; but it is not like, that it was already built then, because that
afterward it was built by Sigismund King of the Burgundians, St. Avitus being
the Author of it, as Ado of Vienna writes; Greg. p. 1. dialog. l. 1.
St. Equitius flourished in Italy about the same time.

Cassiodorus and Boethius have obtained great honor of sincerity, virtue and
excellent doctrine under Theodorick King of Italy: Epist. Horm.
Possessor Bishop in Africa did write to Pope Hormisda concerning the
Chronicles of the Kings; also John Maxentius, one of those Monks of Scythia, of
whom is here above made mention, has presumed to write Extat in Bibl. pat.
against Pope Hormisda, who seems somewhat aspersed with the Eutychian mist.

The Life of S. Geno. apud Sur. Jan. 3.
Virgin St. Genovesa, the Patroness of the Parisians, yea of all the Franks, is
said by Sigebertus to have dyed in the year that the first Synod was kept at
Orleans, being the last year of Chlodoveus's reign, and of our Lord 511, she
being fourscore years old; and by this, her birth will appear to be about the
year 431, and that will be more probable that Beda says of St. German and
Lupus's pilgrimage, and also Sigebert, that it was in the year 446, and not as
Prosper says 429, but L. 1. c. 4.
Aimoinus says, That she attained to Clotharius, and Childebertus's days.

CHAP. V. Of Justinian the Emperor, and of those things that came to pass
during his Empire in the East, where it is spoken of the utter destruction of
the Vandals power in Africa; and of the Gothic War.
Anno 527 of Christ, unto 565.
WHen Mavortius was Consul, Marcel. Vict. Tun. Chr. Alex.
as it is taken from the Records of all Annals, that is, in the 527 year of
Christ, Justinian, in the month of April, his Uncle being alive; in the month
of August, after his death, being already of age; for he was Zona.
either 45, Onufrius.
or 44 years old, governed the Empire. Procop. (...). p. 29.
Although Procopius thinks, that he was much younger, when he says, That as
Justine ruled the Empire (...), he attained to the Government of the
Commonwealth; he was a Prince of diverse qualities, and endued with virtues, as
well as bespotted with vices; for he was vehemently zealous for Piety and
Religion; the which he has testified by several Edicts of his own, for the
preservation and propagation of the Catholic Faith, and Ecclesiastical
Government; but he at last fell into Eutychius's error, then all his lifetime
he was defiled with the spots of extortion, covetousness, and unfaithfulness;
Procop. in (...). p. 57.
Procopius in his work called (...), that is to say, Suppressed, declares that
he was unjust in many and horrid things; the which he durst not have done in
Justinian's days against the people, wherein he declares something of
Justinian, Theodora, and Belisarius, to be wondered at, not so much as known or
believed by the vulgar. None can dissent from him touching Theodora,
Justinian's Wife, (for Theophanes is mistaken to say that she did marry
Justinus, when he says that she was an impotent, covetous, lascivious, and
Heretic woman: for from vile and scenick Arts, and by her whorish lucre she
became the Emperors legitimate wife by reason of her great beauty, whom
Justinian esteeming and loving above reason, committed many things as well to
the detriment of the Church, as Republic, but its not convenient in this place
to touch farther his private qualities and inclinations.

Many and great were the wars in this Emperors days. Procop. 1. Pers.
First the Persian war which was undertaken by Justinian in the beginning of
his Empire, in the behalf of the Laziceans, (which are the people of Cholchos)
their king having embraced the Religion of the Romans with their alliance.

Theoph.
To this War was Belisarius sent General Anno five hundred twenty nine, who
having but doubtfully acted the matter, he was called back the five hundred
thirty one year of our Lord by Justinian to the war against the Vandalls, and
the year, following at the Marc.
11th Indiction, he concluded a peace with the Persians Procop. 1. P^rs.
in the sixth year of his Empire, and yet upon the condition that both should
war against Lazica. In that same year arose up in Constantinople, a most
dangerous sedition against the Emperor, whom the vulgar and commons called
(...), from a Dice. Marcell. Theoph. Chr. Alex. Procop. 1. Pers. A violent
sedition against Justin.
By this seditious people, was Hypatius the Senator created Emperor with
Pompey and Probus his kinsmen, who were all three the Emperor Anastasius's
Nephews. Justinian doubting of his safe escape, by Theodora's advice he
fortified the Palace, and in a short time by Belisarius and Narsetes he
suppressed the mutiny, having killed in Theoph.
one day, being the 19th of January, 35000, or, as Procopius says, 30000 of
them. Procop. 1. de aed. Just.
Then were many Churches overthrown, which Justinian mended afterward, and
chiefly St. Sophyes Temple which he, in the 10th year of his Empire, began with
exceeding great cost, to re-edifie.

Procop. l. 1. Pers. p. 39. and seq.
In this sedition the rage of the people was most violent against two of
Justinians favorites, Johannes Capapdox the Lord chief Justice, and
Tribonianus the Treasurer: the last of whom though not very learned, yet he was
a notable headpiece, and unreasonably greedy of money, and defiled with vices
and great wickedness: and the first was born at Pamphilia, the most learned
man of his age, and exceedingly well verst in the Law, but as avaricious and
defiled with vices as the other. Wherefore he was daily wont either to make new
laws, or to abrogate those that were already. Justinianus being affrighted,
for to condescend to the people, degraded them both of their dignities: but a
while after he restored them to their former honors, Procop. ibid. p. 42.
and Tribonianus having lived many years after, died invested with the same
office. But John being turned out of all his estate, 10 years after, being the
542 year of Christ, he turned a Priest, and then he resided a time in the
suburbs Church: thence being forced into Egypt, there he led a miserable life
until Theodora's death, that is, unto the five hundred forty eighth year of
Christ, Procop. in fine l. 2. Persic.
at which time Justinian recalled him, where he also retained a Priestly
office, having a foolish hope of enjoying the dignity of Augustus, because of
some false divinations, he at last found them to be but Chimeraes, and false
imaginations, when he was shorn for a Priest, and constrained to take that
Order's garments, because he had none of his own, a certain Priest named
Augustus clothed him with his Gown and Coat.

Procop. in Vand. The Vandalian War.
Then the Vandalian War began in Africa in the year 533. Belisarius being also
General of the same, was ended the year following. Geliber ruled the Vandalls,
having slain Hilderick the son of Hunerick and Eudoxia the daughter of
Valentinian the third, Belisarius took Carthage at the end of that year; and
the year following Gitimer having been besieged all that winter, came under his
power, and was brought to Justinian to Constantinople, Marcell. Belisarius's
triumph.
when he was Consul the fourth time, by which deed Belisarius cleared himself
of that calumny wherewith he was aspersed of usurping the Dominion of Africa,
and got much honor by a kind of Triumph of a long continuance in great
apparel and ceremony he walking along on foot, the captives being led before
him, The Vandals Kingdom in Africa extinct.
amongst whom was Gilimer, he went to Justinian who expected them in the
Stiltyard, whom Gilimer was forced to worship, crying aloud, Vanity of vanity,
etc. Belisarius was honored with a second triumph in the field of Cappadocia,
but because he would not forsake the Arians Heresy, he was not suffered to be a
Consul. The Kingdom of the Vandalls was utterly extinguished ninety six years
after their possession of Carthage, 108. years after their entry into Africa:
Wherefore Victor Tununensis is mistaken in saying that Gilimer was taken, and
Africa freed from the Vandals ninety seven years after their invasion and
ingresse into it.

Procop. Vand. 2. Theoph.
The Vandals after this, having retaken and recovered Africa; had continual
Wars with their neighbor Nations, and chiefly with the Moors, until that
Solomon, Spad, a valiant man in feats of arms, who was sent thither, having
suppressed the enemies, restored peace to that Province Procop. l. 2. p. 151.
v. 7.
the thirteenth of Justinian's Empire, in the year of Christ 539. Procop. ibid.
p. 154.
but two years after being forsaken by his soldiers, he was slain in the
battle: and the Barbarians having retaken courage, being moved and irritated
by the cruelty and unfaithfullnesse of the Romans, did much harm and hurt to
them, giving them many routs, losses and defeats at several times. Also at
this time rose up many Tyrants and Usurpers Id. Marc.
amongst whom was Guntharus, who had been Captain of Salomons's Lifeguard. He
put to death Areobinda the Emperors kinsman, who was sent to Africa to govern
it: he himself in the 36 day of his usurpation was slain by Artabanes the
Persian, Id. p. 163. Ver. 28.
in the 19 year of Justinians Empire.

The Gothic war began the Procop. 1. Goth. p. 76. Marcel. Theoph* Misc. Zon.
Cedre.
9th year of Justinians Empire in the spring, as it may be collected out of
Procopius, whereof this is the account.

Theodorick the King being dead, as we have said, in the 526 year of Christ:
A^halaricus son of Amalasuntha, Theodorick's daughter, and of Eutharicus of the
house of the Amaleans, reigned over the Goths, under his mothers regency, being
then Procop. Ibid. p. 167.
eight years old, and Id. p. 19. Jornand. de rebus Get. c. 59
died the eighth year of his reign, being the 534 year of Christ: Amalasuntha
fearing the Goths did transfer the Scepter upon Theodatus son of Amalafrida,
Theodorick's sister, whereunto he being elevated above and beyond hope, and
being very sloathfull and covetous of money, he put to death a most virtuous
and rare woman, which had well deserved at his hands. This deed (as In (...).
Procopius says) was done by the agitation and practice of Theodora,
Justinian's wife, fearing that Justinian would esteem her above her self.

The Emperor being grievously moved and offended at her death, and also
intending to recover Italy, being animated to it by his happy success he had
in Africa, he sends his conquering Army, (still under the command of Procop.
Goth.
Belisarius) against the Goths in the year 535, at the Marcel. l.
15th indiction: beginning the war in Sicilia which he possessed all in the
same year. And entered Procop. p. 272. Goth.
Syracusa the last day of his Consulate. The year following did the Goths choose
Vitigis to be their King, having put to death Theodatus who valiantly resisted
the Romans: Belisarius takes Rome in the 536 year of Christ, and delivers the
City afterward, when it had been besieged by Vitigis Procop. Goth. p. 126.
Graec.
a year and nine days, near upon the Equinox of Winter, in the 538 year of our
Lord: Thence Ravenna with Vitigis himself, and his Wife, being reduced under
Belisarius's power, who having denied to take upon him the Kingdom of the
Goths as it was offered to him in the 540 year of Christ, and the Proc. l. 3.
Vitiges taken prisoner.
fifth of this Gothic war, he is called back again for to go against the
Persians, and brings Vitigis to Justinian. Ildibaldus was created King by the
Goths, and after him Eraricus, then Proc. 3. p. 260. 261. graec. comparatis
cum. p. 205. v. 23.
in the year of our Lord 541. Totilas, Ildibaldus's kinsman, a severe and
discreet person who was endued with many excellent virtues befitting a Gallant
Prince, he restored the decaying estate of the Goths in Italy, no less by
justice and moderation, then by warlike generosity: having several times
routed and defeated the Romans, he re-took Rome, the five hundred forty sixth
year of Christ; which, Belisarius being again sent into Italy out of the East,
took into his possession: but Totilas recovered it two years after.

Again in the Proc. 4. p. 363. and seq.
eighteenth year of this war being the 552d of Christ: Narses Spado a Persian
by Nation, overcame Totilas in battle, who flying from the fight, had his head
cut off, Proc. p. 270. v. 41.
having reigned eleven years: after him Theias governed the Goths, who being
soon after slain in battle, Procop. in fine l. 4. Goth.
upon the latter end of the 18th year of the wars, being the 553 of Christ, the
battle was fought with the Goths. As the Gothic war was thus flaming, the
Persian begun again of new in the East, Procop. Pers. p. 52. v. 10.
upon the latter end of the thirteenth of Justinians Empire, being the 540th
year of Christ: Procop. Init. l. 2. Pers. and Goth. 2.
Vitiges King of the Goths having induced Cosroes (who of himself was ready
enough, because he envied Justinian's prosperous successes in Africa and Italy)
to break and violate his peace with the Romans, having sent to him two Priests
of Liguria Procop. 2. Goth. p. 244. ver. 5.
upon the latter end of the 4th year of the Gothick-war, which was the 539 year
of Christ. Therefore the year following Cosroes having overrun Syria,, he took
Antioch and burnt it, and wasted, destroyed and burnt the Country, all about
the Roman borders, as if it had been in time of peace, not being fortified with
any garrisons: At length cessation of arms was agreed upon for five years
Colligitur ex Procop. in fine 2. Persic. p. 90. v. 30.
about the 545 year of Christ, and the 19 of Justinian; so that the War in
Cholcos was very slowly carried on: Procop. 4. Goth. p. 343.
Then the five years of cessation being ended, five other more were added to
them in the 551 year of Christ, to the greater ignominy and shame of the
Romans, who were constrained to pay tribute to the Persians.

Agath. l. 3. p. 60. Gr.
Then reigned in Lazica, (which is Cholcos) Gubazes, an intimate friend to the
Roman, who being envied by Martinus and Rusticus, both Justinian's Captains,
because he had accused them to the Emperor of sloathfulnesse, being himself
falsely accused, was killed by treachery at Bessa; which fact alienated the
minds of the Colchians, and made them to join themselves to the Persians, in
the year of Christ 455, as Lib. 2. p. 62.
Agathias says; Agath. l. 3. p. 85. Ib. p. 100.
Then Tzathes being given by Justinian to the Lazians for their ninth King; the
Persians were overcome in a great battle, wherein were killed ten thousand of
them. Nachoragan the General of the Persian Army being called back by Chosroes,
had his skin pulled off for his ill success and bad government of that Military
Expedition.

Agath. l. 4. p. 128.
About the time of this victory was brought into question by the Romans,
Gubazes's murder, and the authors of it were punished. Agath. ib. p. 137.
Chosroes afterward agreed with the Romans touching Cholcos, that whatever any
of the two had of it, he should in the mean time possess it, until a more
full and certain peace were agreed upon, Theoph.
which was at last concluded 17 years after in the year of Christ 562.

Agath. l. 5. p. 150. etc.
In the mean time, the Hunns made several excursions into Thracia, and having
laid a strong garrison near to the City, they plundered and pillaged far and
near, Theoph.
especially in the 558th year of Christ: when the Emperor being then wearied
out with age and lingering in his life, he wholly applied himself to rare
buildings, and used all means to have and settle peace, casting off and
neglecting all military care. Agath. ib. p. 139.
At last, by Belisarius's counsel (who also was grown ancient) and valor, the
Barbarians being suppressed by a great defeat, came to nothing, entering amongst
themselves into a Civil War, they by it did utterly undo themselves.

Procop. 2. p. 299.
Theodora the Empress dyed the 14th year of the Gothic Wars, in the year of
Christ 548, and of Justinian's Empire the 22, in the month of June, as
Theophanes says; but Justinian being full of age, dies in the 565 year of
Christ, being then infected with that heresy Evag. 4. chapter 39.
which denied, that Christ's flesh could suffer any thing, or be corrupted no
more then after his resurrection; and having dejected Vita S. Eutych. Apr. 6.
Eutychius a most godly and holy man out of his Bishopric, because he would
not consent with him in his opinion: He ruled the Empire 38 years and 8
months, as Evagrius says, Chron. Alexand. Theoph.
for he dyed the 14th of November.

Pope Agatho extolls much the faith and piety of this Emperor, now dead, in
his Epistle, Act. 4. p. 45. The way how to make Silk.
mentioned by the sixth Synod that was assembled during his Papacy.

In the time of his Empire some Monks who came to Constantinople from the
Indies, taught the way of making silk, having brought from thence some
silkworms eggs; whereas before the Roman Merchants brought nothing but silk
ready made from Persia, Procop. Goth. p. 345. Zonar.
which was, as Procopius says, in the 25 year of Justinian's Empire.

Belisarius dyed Theoph.
the same year that Justinian dyed, the 13th of March, being the 565 year of
Christ, who two years before being suspected of conspiracy against the
Emperor, and forbidden to go out of his house, being confined in it, was not
long after reconciled, having all his estate restored to him with much honor.

CHAP. VI. What things worthy came to pass in the time of the Emperor
Justinian in other parts of the World, besides the Romans dominion, and of the
Kings of the Franks, and of their Exploits.
THe Gothic Affairs decaying in Italy, and at last being overthrown by the
power of the Grecians, The Kingdom of the Franks increased daily more and more,
and by them was first the Burgundians Kingdom extinguished. Greg. l. 3. c. 6.
Procop. 1. Goth. p. 186. Aim. l. 2. c. 3. etc. Gesta Franc. c. 34. etc. Sige.
Sigismund, Gundebala's son, he valiantly kept and defended from the Franks
what was left to him of the Kingdom; who as he was to be esteemed and praised
for changing his Arrianism, into the Catholic faith, by St. Avitus's
exhortation; so likewise was he highly to be blamed for the murder of his
innocent son, whom he had by Theodorick's daughter, and by his last Wife's
instigation did put to death; nevertheless he blotted out this horrid crime in
the Agaunensian Monastery that he had built, by many days fasts and tears.

Chlodomirus who ruled over Orleans by his Mother Chlotildes's persuasion, The
history of Sigismund of Burgundy.
declared war against him, and having overcome him in battle, he brought both
him, his wife and children away in the year 527. In the mean while, Gundomarus,
Sigismund's brother, recovered the Kingdom that the Franks had taken into their
possession; The which Chlodomirus bearing impatiently, Sigismund and all his,
being cast into a Well, Anno 528, he undertakes a new Expedition against the
Burgundians, having defeated his enemies, as he advanced and ventured too much,
into the thick crowd, being run through with a Spear, he dyed. The Franks, if
we may believe Agath. 1.
Agathia, being affrighted at their King's death, gave equal Laws and
conditions of peace to their enemies, whom they had vanquished. But our
Historians relate, that they desirous to revenge their King's death, fell into
such a rage, that they routed and utterly defeated them. Greg. 3. c. 11. Aim.
2. c. 7. Gesta Franc. 37. Burgundy won by the Franks.
But four years after, Childebertus and Clotharius revenged their brothers
death, who having expelled Godomar, brought the Kingdom of Burgundy to be part
of the Kingdom of France.

In Spain, after the Isidor. Chr. Greg. 3. c. 10.
death of Theodorick the King of the Astrogoths, his Tutor and Governor, which
was in the year 526, as we have said above, Amalaricus King of the Wisegoths
held the Scepter five years, being allied to the Kings of France, whose sister
Chlotidis he had married: As he, who was a Prince of the Arrian heresy, vexed
her for her constancy in the Catholic faith, by several means and ways;
Childebert resolves to revenge that injury: Isid. Chr. Greg. 2. c. 10. Aimo. 2.
c. 8.
Amalaricus being vanquished in battle, and preparing himself to fly, is
strangled by some of his own party at Narbonnes in the Marketplace, in the
year of our Lord 531. Childebertus returns home, bringing a great booty and
much spoil along with his sister; which dying by the way, was buried in Paris.

About three years before this, Greg. 3. c. 4. and 7. Aimo. 2. c. 9. Sigeb.
Jorn. de rebus Get.
Theodoricus who reigned in the Territories of Mets, having called to his help
his brother Clothar, undertook a War against the Thoringians, and having
overcome Hermenefridus the King, Greg. 1. c. 18. Sig.
who had married Amalaberga, sister to Theodorick King of the Ostrogoths, he
added Thoringia to his Principality. Clotharius took in part of the spoil
amongst the Captives, Radegundes the daughter of Bertarius Hermenefridus's
brother, whom he had himself slain, which he took for his wife, and having
married her, he gave her leave to become a Nun, that she might the better
enjoy God.

As these Wars against their enemies were a great honor to the undertakers, so
also their Civil Wars amongst themselves bred great envy amongst their
Children. Aimo. 2. c. 12. Gesta Franc. 38.
But chiefly Clotharius's murder, which he perpetrated with his own hands,
with his brother Childebertus, for he stobb'd with a knife Theodovaldus and
Guntharius, the sons of Clodomeris their couzen-german, who was killed in the
Burgundian Wars, the third son, Clodovaldus being escaped by flight, he was
first admitted into the number of the Clergy; then because of his rare and
excellent piety and holiness, he soon after was taken up into the heavenly
Mansion, and is reckoned at Neyen for a Saint; which Town was upon that called
by his name. Sigebertus has observed this, unto the 531 year of Christ.

Greg. 3. c. 18. Aimo. 2. c. 18.
Then the friendship of these two Kings being turned into a mortal hatred,
Childebertus with Theodebertus son of Theodorick's brother, conspired
Clotharius's ruin; and as both Armies were setting themselves in battel-array,
there arose a sudden tempest with great showers, hail, thunder and lightning,
which defeated both Armies; and so God hearkening to their Mother Clotildis's
prayers stopped the stream of blood in Civil Wars. I think that Agath. l. 2.
Agathias the Historian had respect to this, when he praises the Franks, that
when they were divided into more Kingdoms then one, if there was any dissension
between them, and had taken up arms, they were wont to end the quarrel in that
very Precinct by a mutual discourse, rather than by a battle. Greg. Tur. 3. c.
29. Aimo. 2. c. 19. The Franks Expedition in Spain.
Then soon after Clotarius and Childebertus having renewed their league and
friendship, fall both upon Spain; the greatest part of which, as Gregorius
says, they conquered. Aimo. 2. c. 19.
They also attempted to besiege Saragossa; of which siege the Inhabitants freed
themselves, giving to Childebert St. Vincent's garment, in whose honor the
King built a Cathedral in the Suburbs, which is now called St. Germans;
concerning which Aimo. 2. c. 20.
we read, that the Charter was given in the 48 year of his reign, being the 559
of Christ: now this Spanish Expedition was in the year 542, Aimo 2. c. 21.
according to Sigebert.

Procop. l. 4. p. 358. vid^ l. 3. p. 304. Gre. 3. c. 32. Aimo 2. c. 21.
At the same time that the Franks glittered their arms over Spain, they
extended their rage beyond the Alps. Lib. 2.
Theodebertus, Theodorick's son, Totilas reigning over the Goths, and being
engaged in the Roman Wars, he brought under his subjection Liguria, the Alps
Cottiae, and part of the Venetians Territories; and departing thence, he left
Bucellinus, who as our Chronicles record, did overrun all Italy and Sicily:
But Procopius says, That Theodebertus in the last year of Vitigis's reign,
being accounted the 539 year of Christ, as Bucellinus was besieged in Ravenna
by Belisarius, broke into Italy with an Army of an hundred thousand men, and
that being beaten by the Romans, and the plague being very hot and violent
there, he was forced to retire himself.

Agath. l. 1.
After his death Theobaldus his son in the end of the Gothic War, being the
554 year of Christ; he commanded his Soldiers under the conduct of Leutharis
and Bucellinus, to the Italian Expedition, Agath. l. 2. p. 31.
who, Narsetes no ways resisting them, being gone as far as Samnium, in the
year 555, divided their Army: Butilinus (so he is called by Agathias) being
advanced into the Tyrrhenian borders, he went as far as to the Sicilian Sea;
there were in their Armies both Franks and Alemans; but the Franks who were of
the same Religion with the Romans in plundering, abstained from sacrilege; but
the Alemans being Gentiles, plundered all, not making any difference betwixt
things common, and things holy, Agath. p. 34, etc.
having gotten a great booty. Leutharis, Summer drawing on, retired himself
into the River Poe: Bucellinus, having engaged his faith to the Goths, and
hoping to be admitted their King, remained with thirty thousand men, and was
defeated by eighteen thousand Romans, commanded by Narsetes near the River
Casilinum, not far from Capua, all the whole Army, together with Bucellinus,
being slain, but five only. When Leutharis having lost the greatest part of
his Army and booty, fell into a frenzy, and dyed of it. This overthrow was in
the 555 year of Christ, the next year after Theobaldus's death, who, as we have
declared, dyed the 554, and Lib. 2. c. 47.
Agathias records it thus.

Now Thoodatus King of the Goths, The Franks obtain all what the Goths had in
France.
at the beginning of the Gothic war, as Procop. 1. Got. Sig. A. 530.
Procopius says, granted to the Franks that part of Gallia, which the Goths
held, for to get them of his side; And Vitiges the year following ratified it,
having drawn from thence the Gothick-forces; Procop. l. 3. Goth. p. 104.
Clotharius reigns alone.
And Justinian in the year 548, desiring also the friendship of the Franks,
confirmed them by his decree the possession of that Province, and from that
time forth they celebrated at Arles the Knights Combat, and did beat pieces of
gold, out of French metals, not as other Nations, even as the Persians with the
stamp and effigies of the Emperor, but coined it with their own proper stamp.

Now that I may return to our discourse of Clodoveus's Children, the three
brothers and their children being all dead, there remained Clotharius alive,
who governed the Principality of the Franks somewhat above two years, and the
last year of his reign he burnt Greg. l. 4. c. 13, 16, 17, 20. Aimo 2. c. 30.
Appen. Marcell.
Chramnus, whom he had begotten of his Concubine, with his wife and children,
being cast into a shed, in which they were all shut up, because of his constant
rebellion and contumacy; then he dyed in the 51 year of his reign, and upon his
deathbed, he uttered these words worthy of memory; Oh! What King think thou
the King of Heaven is, who thus destroys great Kings? Greg. l. 4. c. 21. Aimo
l. 2. c. 37. Greg. ibid. c. 22.
His four sons did again divide the Kingdom of the Franks between themselves,
The Kingdom of Childebertus and his Throne of Paris fell to Charibertus, and to
Guntramnus Clodomer's Kingdom, who had his Throne at Orleans; and to Clipericus
his father Clotharius's Kingdom, who had his Throne at Soissons; and to
Sigebert, Theodorick's kingdom, whereof Rhemes was the head City.

Procopius mentions Theodebert in the fourth of his Gothicks; and he writes,
that his sister was married to Hermenisclus Prince of the Varnes, whom he
asserts to be divided from the French by the River Rhine: And that after his
death his son in law Rhadasis married her by her Father's Will, who before was
betrothed to the King of England his sister, which with an Army from her
brother fell upon the Varnes; and having defeated their Army, and taken
Rhadasis prisoner, she constrained him to marry her, and to reject his Mother
in law.

CHAP. VII. The Ecclesiastical affairs, of both the Empires, during Justinian;
and of the three Chapters.
THere was held a Tom. Conc. Gall.
Synod at Orange, in the year five hundred twenty nine, Debius the younger then
being Consul, where Caesarius of Arles was President: in this Synod was
maintained and defended Christ's free Grace, against Pelagius and his opinions.

But at Constantinople, Epiphanius the Bishop being dead, Liberatus c. 20.
Anthimus Bishop of Trapenzonda, was advanced to the place, by the practice of
the Emperesse Theodora, addicted to the Eutichian party, whereof Anthimus was
then the head: whom Pope Agapetus sent by Theodatus King of the Goths, Marcel.
Append.
to Justinian, Liberatus c. 21.
having turned out of that Throne he deprived him of the Priesthood, and
excommunicated him from the Christian Communion, and established Menna in his
place in the year 536. who convoked Conc. sub. Mena. Tom. 2. Conc. A Synod at
Constantinople under Menna.
a Synod in the same year after Agapetus's death, on the sixth of May, wherein
Anthimus, Severus and other Heretics were condemned, who were all banished by
Justinians edict, their books being all burnt.

Liberat. 22 Anasta.
The death Agapetus being heard of, Silverius the son of Pope Hormisda was
chosen at Rome. But Theodora having privily made a bargain with Vigil a Deacon
of Rome, of restoring Anthime and of nourishing other Heretics, she took care
that Sylverius be sent by Belisarius, into banishment, and Vigil to be made
Bishop of Rome in his stead, Marcell.
in the year 538. Two years after Silverius being killed in the Island
Palmaria, through miseries Liberat.
and need, Vigil received the chief Bishopric by lawful assemblies for
Election.

This man being chief Bishop, that famous controversy concerning the three
heads arose, for the which the fifth General assembly was accomplished at
Constantinople: the order of which thing, I will briefly explain.

Liberat. chapter 10. See Facun. Her. The History of three certain heads, from the
writing of Theodore of Mopsuestia.
Nestorius being condemned, his favorers spread abroad books among the common
people of Theodore, once Bishop of Mopsuestia, in which he so affirmed the two
natures in Christ, that he might seem to give his voice for the Nestorian
error. Of these books the Catholics discoursed among themselves a little
after the Synod of Ephesus. The Armenian Monks withstanding Theodore, with many
others, and among these Rabulas Bishop of Edessenum, and then John of Antioch,
and others standing for him; and also Theodosius the Emperor himself.

The Council of Chalced. 2. of the Epist. of Ibas.
Moreover Ibas Bishop of Edessenum, the successor of Rabulas writ an Epistle
unto Maris the Persian, wherein he reproves Cyrill as well as Nestorius, as
also Rabulas. But he greatly commends Theodore. The Council of Chalcedon
followed, in which Counc. of Chalced. act. 10. Synod. 5. Collat. 5. Facun. 6.
chapter 3.
Ibas being by some required for judgment, and having been freed in the
Berytenian assembly in the year 448, he is again received, after he pronounced
a curse on Nestorius and Eutyches, and then his Epistle was read, and so far
tolerated, that there was no heretical opinion in it. For although he sharply
touched Cyrill; Of the writings of Theodoret against Nestorius.
yet the discord being as yet new between the Eastern and Egyptian Bishops,
there seemed a necessity of pardoning that very thing. In the same Council
Theodoret, who had been deposed by Diascorus in the Ephesine robbery, was
admitted into his seat, who indeed, that grudge which I have spoken of, flaming
between John of Antioch, and Cyrill, had set forth a stinging Commentary
against the twelve curses of this man.

Liberatus chapter 23.
After these things, some Palestine Monks being urgent, and together with these
Pelagius the Deacon of the Roman seat and Chancellor, Origin was by the
decree of Justinian condemned, to which Mennas of Constantinople, and Pelagius
subscribed; as also Vigill himself the Roman Bishop, and other Patriarchs.
Which thing sorely offended Theodore Bishop of Caesarea, the defender of
Origin, and the Acephalians, with whom Pelagius had a grudge, This man by
reason of that favor with which he prevailed with the Emperors, was the
Author, that for the reconciling the Acephalians with the Catholics, Theodore
of Mopsuestia, who was praised in the letter of Ibas, should be condemned,
together with the letter itself, and the books of Theodoret against Cyrill.
which thing when it had greatly pleased Justinian through an hope of renewing
concord, many Catholics came between, supposing, those three being condemned,
the authority of the Chalcedonian Synod would be weakened, wherein both Ibas
with his Epistle had been approved, and Theodoret restored unto his seat. Yet
the Emperor prevailed, and in the year 546, he set forth a book in which those
three brief heads he condemned, and constrained Mennas and the rest of the
Patriarchs to subscribe thereto. But he Proclus m^ntioneth it b. 3. p. 279.
Vigill hardly condemns the three heads.
provoked Vigil the Bishop of Rome to Constantinople: and a long time turning,
drew him by force into his opinion. For the year following, he set forth a
decree, which is called a [judgment] wherein, the reverence of the assembly of
Chalcedon being preserved, he condemned those three heads. Furthermore,
Justinian pursuing, that he might utter a condemnation without any mention of
the assembly, Vigil refused, and abode with an unconquered courage, against all
threatenings and reproaches.

The fifth Syn. Tom. 3. Counc. The fifth assembly.
Justinian that he might put an end to that controversy, proclaimed a general
Council, which was solemnized, the fifth in order, at Constantinople, in the
year 553. Vigil crying out against it, who took to him a patronage of the three
brief heads against the Emperor. Nevertheless those same were condemned by
the fifth Synod, and Cyr. in Sabba with Sur. 8. December.
Origin moreover, together with Dydimus and Evagrius, were laid under
excommunication. Vigil because he would not subscribe to his decree, was cast
forth into banishment, and many others were vexed for the same cause, Vict.
Tun. Facund. Her.
especially the Africans, and Illiricans, who stuck stiffly in the profession of
the three heads. Greg. Pope 1. Ep. 24. and in other places here and there. The
death of Vigill.
But the Synod being confirmed at length by the agreement of the Roman seat,
held its place amongst Oecumenicall, or universal assemblies. Vigil being by
the endeavor of Narses called back from banishment, while he is returning to
Rome, he died with a disease of the stone after the 13. of C. of Basil, says
the Appendice of Marcellinus, or the 17th, as Victor has it. Whereof the first
is, of Christ 554. the last 558.

Anast. Sigeb.
Pelagius received this man, who shook off the suspicion of death brought on
Vigill, by a public oath upon the Gospels and the Cross.

CHAP. VIII. Learned and holy Men, whom the time of Justinian brought forth; as
also Heathens who were famous in Learning.
JUstinian enjoying the Empire, there were famous in Learning and holiness of
manners, Sigeb. in the year 528.
Cassiodore a Senator, who, King Theodorick being dead, was made a Monk of the
Classenian Monastery.

See 12. of Doctr. times chapter 3. and Append.
Dionysius a small Abbot, who framed his Circle in the year 526.

Facun. in his books.
Facundus Bishop of Hermania, a defender of the three heads.

Liber in his Breviar. Tom. 8. Coun.
Liberatus Archdeacon of the Church of Carthage, of the same sect.

Sigeb. Bed.
Victor Bishop of Capua, who refuted Victorius the framer of the Circle of 532.
years.

Victor Bishop of Tunneis in Africa, a Chronicle-writer.

Anator a Poet, who dedicated his book to Pope Vigill.

Sigeb. in the year 535.
There were Bishops in France, famous in holiness, Gildard. his brother
Medard, Bishops of Rothomagia and Suesonia: Agerick of Virdunia. In the East
Sabbas, in the West, Benedict, Abbots. Greg. 2. Dial.
It is sure, that this man lived under Justine and Justinian; the year of his
death is uncertain. Greg. Tur. 3. Hist. chapter 7.
Also Radegundis illustrated France with wondrous holiness, who preferred the
poverty of Christ before the marriage of King Chlotharius, and devoted her self
unto him in the Covent of Pictavia.

The same Justinian reigning, Procopius and Agathias, and also Marcellinus an
Earl, Historians, flourished Agath. 2. p. 65.
Philosophers, Damascius a Syrian, Simplicius a Cilician, Eulamius, a Phrygian,
Priscian a Lydian, Hermias and Diogenes a Phaenician; Isidore of Gaza, all
Heathens. Who being stirred up with a report of the Persians and Cosroes, went
into the East to see them, and being decieved of their hope, when as they had
there seen their manners and Laws publicly and in private, more corrupt then
among their own Countrymen, returned home, as Agathias writes, Ag. p. 62.
who also delivers, Cosroes to have then been famous, with a false
commendation of learning.

CHAP. IX. Of Justine the younger, Tiberius, and Maurice; and a worthy History:
What things happened in the Eastern Empire, under them.
Anno 565 of Christ, unto 600.
JUstinus was born of Evag. 5. Theoph. Zon. Ced. Paul. Diac. b. 16. Justine the
younger.
Vigilantia the sister of Justinian, and Dulcissimus his father, he was crowned
by Curopalatas in that year wherein Justinian departed, in the year 565.
together with Sophia his wife, the Vict. Tun.
Nephew of Theodora, the Wife of Justinian, He was of an apt and ready mind
toward the duties of piety; but a stranger from warlike affairs: a lover of
Laws and Justice: the which being decayed through the weakness or
wilfulness of Princes, through a famous example of strictness he restored;
of whom: Cedrenus makes mention, Cedr. p. 3319.
and it is altogether a worthy deed the which here also may be read.

When as the Citizens ran on every side to Justine, A famous deed of Justine.
as often as he went forth openly out of his Palace, to complain of the wrongs
of the mightier sort, and he had oftentimes in vain reported of that thing to
the Senate, A certain one of that order rising up, received him; If he should
be made Governor of the City, and a leave of the Emperor might be granted him
of coming to him, as often as he would, and through the same it should be
lawful to use his power, he would bring it to pass within a Months time,
that there should be no injuries and complaints left in the City, but if there
should be any of any one, the which being brought to him he should not revenge,
he would perform it with the punishment of his head. The condition being
received, a little after, a woman of the common people, brought the name of a
certain chief man, who had spoiled her of all her goods by deceit, and
reproach. He, by the command of the Governor or Lieutenant, was summoned to
appear the second time, when as he neither had stood before him, and the same
day he had gone to a Banquet being invited by the Emperor, the Lieutenant
breaking in a moment into the Palace, warns the Emperor sitting at the Table
of the agreement, who when he had said he forbade nothing, whereby he might the
less do by the Law whatsoever he would; he forthwith commands the man to be
led away, and being brought before the seat of judgment, and convicted to be
punished with stripes: then his head being shaven, carried upon an Ass, to be
brought through the City, and all his fortunes or estate, to be adjudged to the
woman. When he had begun in this, and likewise in other things, he struck so
great a terror on all, that afterward they abstained from wrongs. Then he
going to the Emperor, said, I have done what I had promised: do thou, if it
lists thee, make trial. Justine straightway proceeding, when all things were
largely quiet, neither did any one any more exclaim, he conferred a Senators
dignity on the commended man, and Lievtenantship of the City, for his whole
life.

The same Emperor brake a peace agreed on with the Avarians, their yearly
tribute being denied, not seasonably enough, in the year 566. Likewise a
Persian peace, with a far greater damage to the Commonwealth. Evag. 5. c. 7.
Theoph. Paul. Dia. 16.
For a war being undertaken for an honest cause, in the year 572. he unwisely
and sloathfully managed.

Chron. Alex. Theoph. Simoc. 3. c. 11.
In the year 574. the 8th of Constantines account, now begun from September. and
on its seventh day, he declared Tiberias Lieutenant of the Watchers and
Warders, to be Caesar, by whom afterward the Commonwealth was governed. For
Justine having recieved a slaughter in the East, being horribly affrighted,
fell into a phrensy: Evag. c. 12.
wherewith Cosroes being moved, granted a three years truce unto Sophias
desiring it; So that in the mean time they strove only in Armenia. There
therefore, the war being renewed about the year 576, Cosroes was overcome
Simoc. 3. c. 13. and. 14. Evag. 5. c. 14. Theoph. Paul. Dia. 17.
by Justinus his Captain, and was deprived of the Camp, and so great a fear
took hold of him by that slaughter, that he established it by a continued law,
that the King himself should not henceforward lead an Army against the Romans.
Theoph. Paul. Dia.
Some will have that victory to have happened, Justinus being dead; but
Simocrata, Evagrius, and John Biclariensis, write, it was gotten, he being
alive, yet Tiberius, who then governed all things, being the Author.

Justine, the disease growing heavy on him Chron. Alex. Theoph. Paul. Dia.
on the 12th of Constantine's account, the 26 day of September, that is, the
year 578, made Tiberius, of Caesar, Augustus or Emperor; and the October
following, the 4th day, he departed from the living, when he had reigned 13
years, and less than one month.

Evag. 5. Theoph. Paul. Dia. Zon. Ced.
Tiberius therefore, by birth a Thracian, began to reign in the year 578; whom
all Historians do diligently set out for his gentleness, justice, bounty,
piety, and other virtues becoming an Emperor. In the beginning of his rule he
reduced Sophias, hiddenly preparing ambushes for him, unto a private condition,
Theoph. Joan. Biclar.
he slew the Persians, Mauricius being Captain, proudly refusing a Roman peace;
and those things, which, Justinian being Emperor, were possessed by them, he
in the fourth year of his Empire received. Diaconus writes, the treasures of
Narsetes were found by him. He reigned after the death of Justine 3 years, and
about 10 months. For in the year 582, Chron. Alex. vita. S. Eutychi.
the 15th of Constantine's account, the 14 day of August, he dyed of a disease:
when as the day before, he had given his daughter Constantine unto Mauricius,
and had ordained him his succeeder, both of them being crowned.

Mauricius, Evag. 5. chapter 13. Simocrata.
born at Cappadocia in the Town of Arabissum, is made Emperor of the Romans in
the year of Christ 582, praised for his virtue and knowledge of warlike
affairs. But the foul spot of covetousness deformed either comeliness; the
which also at last turned unto his destruction. He successfully ordered a war
undertaken with the Persians, Justine being Emperor, by his Captain Philip and
others.

Simoc. 3. chapter 6. Theoph. Paul. Diac. book 17.
The chief Victory was gotten by a Roman Captain, in the eighth year of
Mauricius, the 7th Constant. account, and so in the year of Christ 589. For the
which, Hormisdas being angry, he sent to Baramus their Captain a woman's gown
for a mock, who had fell off from that Army. In the mean time, Hormisdas being
taken by Vindoes, and a little after was made blind by his son Cosroes; and at
length, because he made no end of cursing, Cosroes kills his father.
he was killed with the beating of a club or cudgel. Cosroes for the parricide
being hated of his subjects, and Baramus rising up against him, flees unto
Mauricius; by whom he was adopted for his son; and Baramus, by the endeavor of
Narses, being overcome, he was restored into the Kingdom. Thus in the same year
589, an end was made to the Persian War: the which Simoc. 3. chapter 9.
Simocrata writes not exactly enough, to have continued 20 years. For it was
begun in the year 572, and held on 22 years.

The Avarican war succeeded the Persian war, The Avarican War.
Chagan King of the Avarians, watching an advantage; when as also the
Sclavonians and Bulgarians provoked the Romans.

Comentiolus who was Captain in the Avarican War, by the command of Maurice,
set Theoph. Paul. Diac. 17. chapter 19. Chr. Alex. Zon.
some thousands of seditious Soldiers lightly armed, against the Barbarians:
the which being partly slain, partly taken, Chagan, a very little money being
demanded for the redemption of the Captives, because the Emperor would not
redeem them, he killed them all in the year 600, the Theoph. Simoc. 8. chapter 11.
third Constable. Account. Mauricius felt God to be angry with him for so great
cruelty. Therefore, as he was religious and godly, letters being sent,
throughout Monasteries, and all holy places, he commanded that God should be
entreated, that he might pay the punishments of his committed offense, rather
living than dead; the which, upon his desire, God granted to him.

For in the year 602, Chron. Alex.
6 Constable. Acc. in the month of November, Phocas a certain Centurion, of a
ready tongue, and for that, acceptable to the common Soldiers, The miserable
death of Maurice.
the Army being stirred up against Mauricius, he was saluted Emperor; and the
27 day of the same month, the third holiday, Mauricius, his sons being killed
in his sight, he is beheaded at Chalcedon. But Constantine his wife three years
after, Chron. Alex.
the 8. of Constable. Acc. is slain, and together her three daughters with her.

Simoe. l. 8. c. 11. Theoph. Paul. Diac. 17. chapter 52. Zon. Ced.
Not any other Emperor had trial of a more sharp fortune, or bare it more
steadfastly. One speech of his in so great a torment of his sons, is taken;
Thou art righteous, O Lord, and thy judgment right. Moreover, the Nurse hiding
one of his sons as yet an Infant, and offering her own to death for him,
Maurice of his own accord discovered the deceit; neither suffered he the
strange child to be killed. He Reigned 20 years, three months, and some days.

CHAP. X. What things were carried on in the West, Justin 2d, Tiberius, and
Maurice being Emperors. And the first Kingdom of the Longobards in Italy; and
of the three Narsetes; as also of the Exarchi or chief Governors, or
Lievtenants of Ravenna.
THe Longobards, Paul. Vuarnef. b. 2. chapter 9.
so named from their long beards, when as they were before called Vuinilians,
from thence they came The same, chapter 1.
out of Scandinavia, from whence also the Goths, Vandals, Rugans, Herulians,
Turcilingians came. They, Prosper.
Iboreas and Aion being Captains, Ausanius, and Olybrius, Consuls, that is, in
the year of Christ 379, the Vandals being overcome, possessed many seats; and
at length, Audoinus being King, which is reckoned the Paul. Vuarnef. b. 1. chapter
12.
ninth by Paul, invaded Pannonia, The same, b. 2. chapter 7.
in the year of Christ 526. A league being entered with the Romans, being helped
by their riches, they made prosperous battles against the Gepides, in the 14
and 17th year of the Gothic War, as Procop. p. 307. and 360.
Procopius writes, of Christ 548, and 551; and likewise they also came for aid
to the Romans in the same Gothic war: Procop. p. 301. Vuarnef. 2. chapter
At which time Narses being sent into Italy, warred with the Goths, their King
Totila being slain, in the year 552, as I have minded above. But when they
assaulted all Italy after the manner of beasts; The coming of the Longobards
into Italy.
and wasting all things with sword and fire, they defiled the very holy houses
with whoredoms: Narses sent him away from him as soon as might be, into
Pannonia. Audoinus then reigned over the Longobards, whose son Alboinus first
came into Italy, Justine the second being Emperor, in the year of Christ 568,
1 Constable. Account; in which year, Easter was celebrated on the Calends of April.
So Vuarnef. 2. chapter 7. and 15. and Paul. Diac. in Misc. 16. chapter 35.
Paul Vuarnefride. The year following, the 3d Constable. Account entering, he
vanquished almost all Liguria, except the Sea-Cities; entering into Mediolam, he
besieged Ticinum full three years; which Town at length he enjoyed in the year
572, and afterward roving throughout the rest of Italy, he possessed almost
all places Vuarnef. chapter 26.
besides Rome and Ravenna. This man was joined in affinity with Clotharius the
son of Clodoveus, whose daughter Clothosinda he had in marriage. She being
dead, he married Rosamund the daughter of Cuniemund King of the Gepides, whom
he had killed with his own hand; by which daughters lying in wait, he was
killed, when he had reigned three years and six months in Italy; or from his
entrance he touched the seventh year, as our Greg. Tur. 4. chapter 35.
Gregory has delivered. Therefore he perished in the year 572. Vuarnef.
Rosamund flying with the treasures of Alboinus, and her adulterer Hermiges,
unto Longinus the Exarch or chief Lieutenant to Ravenna, by his persuasion he
drank poison to her, part whereof being drank, he compelled her to drink the
rest, with the drawn sword of Hermiges. So hoth the adulterers paid the
punishments of their wicked parricide.

Anastas. in Joan. 3. Vuarnef. chapter 25. The History of Narses.
Anastasius and Vuarnefride affirms, That the author of this breaking in of
the Longobards, was Narses a Senator, a gelded man, by whom the kingdom of the
Goths was blotted out. For when he was by the Romans brought in for an
accusation before Justine; he was commanded by reproachful letters of Sophia
the Empress to return to the spinning of wool, as became an Eunuch; he
answered, he would weave such a web for her, the which neither she, nor her
husband, should ever unweave: and so called forth the Longobards to invade
Italy. These things Vuarnefride. Which things are therefore thought to be
refuted by some, because Narses then lived at Constantinople, as Corippus
affirms, and because the same man afterward resided in that City, far most
dear unto the Emperors: until by Phocas in the year 605, he was burnt alive,
as Theophanes writes. But the history of those times shows many of that
name. For Justinian being Emperor, Procop. 1. Pers. p. 25. Got. p. 280.
Procopius mentions there were two Narsetes; whereof the one was a gelded
man, and was now Treasurer of the common treasury the 4th year of Justinian, of
Christ 530, by whom the affairs of the Goths were overthrown in Italy, Totilas
being slain in the year 553, as I have shown above. Procop. 1. Pers. p. 25.
And this man was a Pers. Armenian by birth. The other arising from thence,
with his brother Aratius and his Mother, fell away to the Romans in the same
4th year of Justinian, and was received by the former Narses. Of these,
Anastasius tells, that the former dyed in the year of Christ 572, after he
called out the Longobards. I have not remembered I have read of the death of the
latter. Corippus treating of the Consulship of Justine the second, names
Narses his Armor-bearer, who as he there sings, was Of goodly shape, and
hair combed out so fine,
And comelyspeech, was all of golden mine.


This cannot be that gelded one, which was then somewhat old and misshapen. But
neither was the latter of the stock of Aratius, unless we would think him to
have been almost a child when he went over unto the Romans. Therefore it is not
an absurd suspicion, that he was the son of this man, to whom Greg. l. 1. cp. 6.
Gregory gave an Epistle, unless thou had rather he should belong unto the
very father of this. Moreover, I judge the same Narses, the son of the latter,
to have been burned alive by Phocas; whom they who think him to have been that
famous Eunuch, do greatly err; as amongst others, Constance Manasses.

That I may return to the Longobards, these by little and little got Italy;
Rome, as has been said, and Ravenna excepted; and from them the name of
Longobardy being drawn almost through the large Province of Italy, and to this
day keeps it. They reigned 206 years. For Paulus Vuarnef. b. 6. chapter last.
the last King Desiderius being overcome by Charles the Great, king of the
Franks, in the year 773, and shut up in Ticinum, the following year, the City
being taken, he was brought into France. His son Adelgisus fled to
Constantinople. Where by Constantine, Copronymus, he got the honor of a
Senatourship; the which our Annals witness; and also Paul Vuarnefride.

Furthermore, at the same time, wherein the Longobards bare rule in Italy,
[Exarchi] or dispatching-Princes held Ravenna. They were Greek Governors, who
had wont to be sent by the Emperor from Constantinople: and in some sort
resisting the Longobards, they defended there the remainder of the Empire; but
through wilfulness and covetousness, they brought more hurt unto their own
Citizens, than the enemies themselves.

Therefore about the year 568, Rubeus b. 3. and 4. Vuarnefr. b. 1. chapter 29.
Longinus a Senator is sent the first Exarch to Ravenna, Narses being removed,
Justine the younger commanding. The last was Eutychius, under whom Aistulphus
King of the Longobards possessed Ravenna by arms, Rubeus b. 4. p. 211.
about the year 752. After this account, the Greek Exarchs, or dispatching
Princes, were chief over Ravenna, about 185 years.

CHAP. XI. What things were done in France and Spain, in the mean while, from
about the year 565. to 600. whereof the four sons of Clotharius, Charibert,
Chilperick, Sigebert, Gunthchramnus, and the Posterity of Sigebert, as also of
Levigild King of Spain, Hermenigild, and Ricared.
FRance being divided into so many parts, obeyed the four sons of Clotharius:
as Chapter 6.
we have above mentioned. The worst were Charibert and Chilperick, in whom,
besides the not punishing of Lusts, and liberty of them, thou might
acknowledge nothing of a King. Greg. 4. c. 15. Aim. ^. c. 4.
Sigibert, that he might reprove the disgraceful wedlocks of these, he desired
the affinity of Athanagild King of the Wisigoths in Spain, his daughter
Brunechild being married. Greg. 4. c. 18. Aimo. 3. c. 5.
Whom Chilperick imitating, a little after took unto him his sister Gasuntha
Fredegund a Harlot, being cast off, by whose flatteries he being afterward
ensnared, deprived the harmless woman of her life, and took the Harlot in her
room. For that thing Gregory tells he was driven by his brothers from his
Kingdom, the which nevertheless he a little after received.

The Chronicle of Sigebert seems to bring back the marriages of both
brethren, into the year 569. But Athanagild, who being author, those two
married, as says Gregory, died before that year, Joan. Biclar. Isidor. in
Chron.
to wit, of Justine 2d. and so in the year of Christ 567, in which year Liuba
succeeded.

Chartbert, for his lawful wife Ingoberta being cast off, and the wedlocks of
Merofledes, and afterward of her sister, being again renewed, he being by
Germane Bishop of Paris, forbidden of holy things, died at Blavia in Sancton,
Charibert excommunicated.
Sigeb. in Chron.
in the 9th year of his Kingdom, therefore of Christ about 570. Greg. 4. chapter
26. Aimo 3. chapter 2.
whose Kingdom, his brothers divided among themselves.

Chilperick and Sigebert being continual enemies against each other, waged
more often wars with themselves, than with strangers. While this follows after
the Huns with weapons, Greg. 4. chapter 23.
Chilperick invaded some Cities of him being absent. Neither yet rejoiced he
long in this victory. For Sigebert having returned, takes the Town Suessonium,
and in it, Theodebert the son of Chilperick by Audovera: whom, an Oath being
first required, that he should not take up arms against him henceforward, the
year turning, he sent away. Greg. Sigeb. and Aimo.
That fell out a little after the Marriage of Brunechild.

Another Civil war after the death of Charibert was raised by Chilperick.
Greg. 4. chapter 40.
Who in a hostile manner invaded the Turonians, and Pictavians, whom Sigebert
has taken by lot from the dividing of his brothers Kingdom. But Sigebert, his
forces being joined with Guntramnus, through Eunius surnamed Mummolus, a most
valiant Captain at that time, recovered all, a little after the year in which
Charibert dyed, of Christ 574. The fifth year after, after the slaughter of
Alboinus, as Book 2. chapter 32. and b. 35. c. 1.
Warnefride shows, of Christ 574. or the year following, some Princes of the
Greg. 4. chapter 36. and foll. Vuarnef. b. 3. chapter 16. and foll.
Longobards of those ten which succeeded Alboinus, brake out into France, and
troubled the Burgundians with slaughters and sackings. But Mummolus slew them
at Ebredunum. Neither long after, he Aimo 5. chapter 7. Vuarnef. b. 3. chapter 5.
crushed the Saxons, who had joined themselves unto the Longobards, with no
less slaughter.

Greg. 4. chapter 42. and foli. Amo 3. chapter 14.
The third civil war, the same Chilperick moved, the Turonians, Pictavians,
Lemovicinians, Cadurcinians, and other Provinces, of Sigebert being possessed,
and like an enemy wasted. With which things he being much moved, the people
beyond Rhene being called out to his help, he so affrighted Chilperick,
although trusting to the aid of Guntramnus, that of his own accord, all being
restored, he desired peace. But that was broken after one year by the same
Chilperick, who again drew to him Guntramnus into a fellowship of the war, but
he being easily reconciled, Sigebert put Chilperick to flight, and all places
even unto Paris and Rothomagum being largely reduced into his power, he being
fenced with a buckler by the French, according to a solemn custom, was
proclaimed King in the place of Chilperick. From hence Armies being sent before
to besiege Tornacum in Nervia, in which City Chilperick, with his wife and
children had hedged himself, The death of Sigebert.
by two privy murderers, whom Fredegund had privately sent, their knives being
dipped in poison, he was thrust through, in the Greg. in end of b. 4.
14th year of his reign, of his age 40, of Christ 575. Brunechild was then at
Lutetia, whose son Childebert a Greg. 5. chapter 1.
child of five years old, is by Gundobald his fathers Captain, led away by
stealth, to the Kingdom of Austrasia. Brunechild being spoiled of all by
Chilperick, is sent a way to Rothomagum. Greg. 19. chapter 2.14.19. Aimo 3. chapter 14.
and 15.
With whose love Meroveus the son of Chilperick being taken, he took her as his
Wife without his fathers knowledge, and at last, soldiers being sent to lay
hold of him, that he might not come under his fathers power he yielded himself
to a certain familiar friend of his to be slain, in the year of Christ 577. as
is manifest from the Greg. 5. chapter 6. and 26.
years of Childebert, numbered by Gregory: and also from Chapter 17.
Easter, the which that year was solemnized, he says, in France, 14th Call.
May. In Spain, 12. Call. April.

Childebert in the mean time under the Protection of his Mother Brunechild,
reigned in Austrasia, who in like manner waged wars with his Unkles. Greg. 6.
chapter 40.
Chilperick when he had seen Clotharius born to him of Fredegund, the 4th
Month after, a little before night, returning from hunting, is by privy
murderers killed, in the year of Christ 584. to wit, in the 9th year of
Childebert, as Greg. 6. chapter 33.
Gregory tells. Whose Sepulcher is also at this day seen in Basilica at the
City of Vincent. Aimo. 3. chapter 56.
That murder is said to have been done by the Counsel of Fredegund, by
Landerick an adulterer of hers, which thing Gregory has been silent in. Who
Greg. 7. chapter 6.
writes this one thing, she was required by Childebert to declare the cause,
and, whereby she might the less do it, Guntramnus interceded. Greg. 7. chapter 6.
But this man being called by Fredegund to Lutetia, took the Kingdom of
Charebert and Chilperick. For he undertook the tuition of Clotharius the 2d;
son of Chilperick, who in the same year in which his father was killed, Greg.
b. 7. chapter 7.
in the fourth Month of his age, was declared King.

After these things Greg. 6. chapter 41. Vuarn. 3. chapter 16.
Childebert being hired by Maurice against the Longobards, he through fear
forced them to an yielding. But when in the 13. Greg. 9. chapter 5. and 26. Vuarn.
b. 3. chapter 28.
year of his reign, he had again sent an Army against them, it was almost
wholly overthrown, Greg. 8. chapter 30.
Guntramnus used nothing a more prosperous fortune against the Goths, who sent
an army into Septimania, which then belonged to the Gothic title or
jurisdiction. Those wheresoever they took their journey, having spoiled all
things, holy and profane, in a hostile manner, blotted out this wickedness,
with their great slaughters It appears out of b. 7. of Greg. chapter 24. and 8. chapter
38.
in the year of Childebert 10. of Christ, 586.

Greg. 9. chapter 31. John Bichar. Isid. Chr.
Then in the fourth year after, of Christ 589. Septimania being again
attempted, the Army of Guntramnus was cut off by a greater destruction. The
Captain of the Goths was Claudius: who, John Biclariensis is Author, with no
more then three hundred men, scattered sixty thousand of the French or Franks,
which thing is not likely to be true.

Freged. in Chron. chapter 14. Aimo 3. chapter 81.
Guntramnus dies in the year of Christ 593. or 594. 5 Call. of April, having
left a famous remembrance of godliness and other virtues, the which being
Martyr. Romans
committed to Church-Tables, is repeated every year on the 28. of March. His
Kingdom came to Childebert. This King having followed after old enmities,
framed a strong Army against Clotharius and his mother Fredegund. Aimo 8. chapter
82.
Fredegund, a woman bold beyond a woman's capacity, showing Clotharius whom she
carried in her arms, caused so great a courage in those Soldiers, that a great
force being made on the enemies at unawares, they brought forth a Victory
through their great slaughter. Clotharius was then at least nine years old, who
was born in the year of Christ five hundred eighty four, as we have above
taught.

Aimo 3. chapter 84. Fred. chapter 17.
Childebert in the fourth year from the death of Guntramnus, of Christ 596, is
with his wife, taken away by poison, whom Theodebert and Theodorick his sons
succeeded, under the tuition of their Grandmother Brunechild. Aimo 3. chapter 86.
Fred. chapter 17.
But Fredegund, Lutetia being taken, with other neighboring towns, scattered
the conjoined Armies of both the brethren unto the destruction of Chlotharius
her son, and in the year following, she having finished her life, is burried at
the City Lutetia, in the Chapel Cup of Vincent.

Fred. chapter 20. Aimo. 3. chapter 87.
The sons of Childebert, their Grandmother stirring them up, fight against
Chlotharius, and compel him to part with the greatest part of his Kingdom,
being overcome in battle.

But in Spain Leovigild being received into the fellowship of the Kingdom by
his father Liubas, in the John Biclar. Isid. Roder. Tolet. 3. chapter 14.
third year of Justine, married Gosuintha the wife of Athanagild, in the year
of Christ 568, when as now he had two sons, Hermenigild and Ricared, by
Theodosia the daughter of Severian Duke of Carthage, John Vaseus in his Chron.
the sister of Leander, and Isidore, and he very much enlarged the affairs of
the Goths by warlike virtue and victories, in Spain. But being besmeared with
the Arrian poison, he cruelly persecuted the Catholics: so that for that
cause, Greg. of Turon. 5. chapter 39. and b. 8. chapter 28. Hermenigild killed by his
father.
he condemned Hermenigild, with death. Ingund the daughter of Sigebert King of
the Metenians had married this man, by whose persuasion he changed the Arian
Heresy for Catholic Godliness: and fearing the offense of his father, and
lyings in wait, he fell off from him, and desired aid from the Romans, and sent
Leander an Ambassador unto Tiberius the Emperor. But they delaying, Leovigild
in the mean time following Hermenigild close with war, reduced him under his
power, and banished him to Valentia, John By. clar. Greg. Tur. 8. chapter 28.
Vuarn. 3. of things done Long. chapter 21.
in the second year of Maurice the Emperor, of Christ 584, and the year
following, on the very night of Easter, which happened the 15th of April, in
the year 585. deprived him, denying to communicate with the Arians, of his
life. Whose death, Greg. P. 3. Dial. chapter 31.
Pope Gregory, witnesses to have been made famous by very many miracles.
Moreover neither Biclariensis nor Gregory Turonensis have made mention of his
Martyrdom.

Leovigild Biclar. Isid. in Chron.
in the fourth year of Maurice, of Christ 585, dies at Toletum, and Ricared
reigned in his stead, Turon. 8. chapter 46. The piety of Ricared.
unto whom, his father dying, is said to have given a command, that he should
embrace the Catholic faith, the which, Leander being Author, he performed
with so great zeal, that he joined the whole Kingdom by little and little to
the fellowship of the Catholic Church. The same man being famous for war,
established and increased the Rule of the Goths. A peace being from King
Gunthramnus desired in vain, the war brought on him by the other, as we have
plainly shown above, he valiantly repulsed.

CHAP. XII. Some chief heads of Church Affairs, as also some men famous in
holiness and Learning, from the year 565, unto the year 600.
IN the last year of Justinian, of Christ, 565, Eust. in his life with Sur.
Apr. 6.
Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople, a holy man; because he condemned the
Emperors heresy, was cast out of his seat the 22 Jan. and carried away to
Amasea, and after 13 years being restored by Justine the third of October,
Theoph. Cedr.
11 of Constant. Account, of Christ 577, dies in the last year of Tiberius, of
Christ 582. This is that Eutychius, whom not thinking rightly of the
resurrection, Joan. Diac. in the life of Greg.
Gregory both Chancellor of P^lagius, chief Bishop, Greg. Turon. b. 10. chapter 1.
and himself afterward made chief Bishop in the year 590, untaught. Who when as
he had in vain avoided that dignity with what reasons he could, carried on so
great matters in it, that the surname of Great was deservedly given unto him.

Greg. Tur. 5. chapter 21.
In France, Sagittarius, and Salonius; the first of Ebreduna, the other of
Vapinga, Bishops; for their wickednesses, and also because being armed, they
fought in manner of Soldiers, in the assembly of Lugdunum, were deprived of
the honor of Bishopric in the Counc. Lugd. 2. Tom. 1. Counc. France. p. 325.
6th year of Guntramnus, which is of Christ, 567; but they appealing to John,
by his command they were restored; at last, because they continued in heinous
offenses, they were again by the Cabillonian Council spoiled of all dignity, as
Greg. Tur. 5. chapter 28.
says Gregory, in the 4th year of Childebert, of Guntramnus and Chilperick the
18, which was of Christ 579.

Greg. Tur. 9. chapter 2.
Radegund dyed at Augustoritum, of the Picts, the 14 August, 4th. holiday as
her acts teach us, in the year of Christ 587, Greg. 8. chapter 43.
to wit, the 12th of Childebert, in whose Monastery were some Virgins sprung
from a royal stock: The disturbance in the Monastery of Radegund.
who after his death being listed up in pride against Leubovera the governesse
of the Nunnery, first of all departed from her: the men of the guard being sent
into the Monastery, and all things taken away, they drew out Leubovera by force
from thence. At length, by the command of Childebert, a Council of Bishops
being gathered together in Pictavia, they were cast off from communion, and
Leubovera restored into her former place. Pater ex Greg. 9. c. 26, 39, etc. and
l. 10. c. 15. and 16.
That seems to have been begun the 14th year of Childebert, of Christ 589, to
be ended the following year.

In the Island of Britain, Christian Religion was much propagated, through the
labor and endeavor of Columban, a most holy man; who coming out of Ireland,
brought over the Northern Picts unto it, Beda l. 7. Hist. of England, chapter 4.
in the year 585. But the English Saxons, who possessed in times past the
Southern part of the Island, Gregory Bishop of Rome Beda l. 1. chapter 23. etc.
John Diac. in the life of Greg. b. 2. chapter 34. Greg. P. of Bish. b. 5. cp. 52.
etc.
converted to the same faith, Augustine, and other Monks being sent thither, in
the 14th year of Mauricius, of Christ 596.

Besides these, highly holy in that Age, flourished another Gregory Bishop of
Turo in France, Germane of Paris, Greg. Tur. b. 5. chapter 6. and 8.
who dyed in the first year of Childebert, of Christ 576. Greg. b. 7. chapter 1.
Salvius of Albigenum, he dyed in the same year wherein Chilperick, of Christ
584. Greg. chapter 9.
Dumnol of Cenomania. The same, b. 6. chapter 39.
Sulpitius of Bituricenum. These were all Bishops. Besides these, The same, chapter
8.
Hospitius of Nicaea, leading a retired life, Eparchius of Ingolisma, wonderful
in the like purpose of life, and many others.

In the East, Evag. 9. chapter 5.
Anastasius Sinaita, Bishop of Antioch; Niceph. Chron.
Eulogius of Alexandria, both familiar friends to Gregory the Great. In Spain,
Leander Bishop of Hispalia. Greg. 5. chapter 38.
Martin of Gallecia, who dyed in the year 580, when he had held that seat 30
years; whence from the same place also that great Prelate of Turo, to wit, out
of Pannonia arising, was excelling in Learning.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Affairs of the Eastern Empire, from the year 600, unto 641,
under the Emperors Phocas and Heraclius; and of Mahumet builder of the Arabian
sect; and the beginning of the Monothelites, or one-onely-Willers.
PHocas, Mauricius being slain, governed the Empire almost eight years, with
the same cruelty whereby he had got it to himself. For he began the 602 of
Christ, the Chr. Alex. Theoph. Paul. Diac. b. 17. Zon. Cedr.
6 Constable. Account, the 23 day of November. 6 holiday, in which Cyriach the
Patriarch crowned him; and being taken by Heraclius, he was slain in the year
610, the 14 of Constable. Account.

The same Authors.
He reigning, Cosroes King of the Persians, as it were revenged the death of
Maurice, with whom he had made peace with great deserts of his toward him, on
the authors; he sacked the Roman borders; and snatching away all things like a
current of waters, came through Chalcedon even unto Bithynia. When Phocas in
the mean while, being in all things secure, and settling himself at home in
filthy lusts, satisfied himself with the blood of the Princes. When as this
thing could not longer be born, See the same Authors, and b. 4. Part. 2. chapter
24. Niceph. Breviar. and Notes on the same.
Heraclius the son of Heraclius Lieutenant of Africa, in the year, as we have
said, 610, in the month October; loosing from thence, obtained Constantinople,
and Phocas being laid hold of, takes punishment of him. Among these things,
that Persian flame came forcibly on, which snatched away the East, and Asia in
a moment. Chr. Alex. Theoph.
Furthermore, in the year 614, in the month of June, 2 Constable. Account,
Jerusalem was taken by the Persians, and many Clerks and Monks of both sexes
being killed, the reverend Cross was carried away into Persia; the year
following 615, Saes the Captain of Cosroes besieged Chalcedon: this is (...),
not (...), as Cedrenus amiss has it; and Paul. Diac. b. 18. chapter 6.
Paul Diaconus, who turns it [Carthage.] Thence the error was set into the
Annals, that Cosroes pierced even to Carthage: the which is otherwise: For the
Persians never held Africa. The same year the Persians enjoyed Egypt,
Alexandria, and Lybia. Theoph. Paul. Diac. b. 18.
With which calamities Heraclius being sore abashed, desired peace in an humble
manner from Cosroes: but he proudly answered, He would have no condition of
Peace, unless they would renounce their crucified God, and worship the Sun.

Moreover, that no kind of evil might be absent, at the same time the Avarians
made an inroad into Thracia; who being hardly appeased, he wholly applied
himself unto the Persian War, whose success, God favoring, was better than
all their desire. An Army being Niceph. Breviar. Theoph. Paul. Diac. Zon. Cedr.
transported into Asia in the year of Christ 621, he often fought in battle
with the Captains of Cosroes: and their great Armies being overthrown, he brake
into Persia in the year 627. Cosroes, all things being without hope, ordained
Merdases, The slaughter and death of Cosroes.
in the flight, his youngest son, his successor. The which Siroes the elder
taking grievously, conspiring with the chief of Persia against his father,
first making him a laughing stock, and compelled to see all his sons slain
before his face, commanded him to be exposed to darts or arrows. He agreed a
peace out of hand with Heraclius, the Captives being set at liberty and
restored, which had been taken away out of all Roman Provinces; as also the
holy cross being restored, in the year of Christ 628; the which in the Spring
following, Heraclius brought over to Jerusalem with the greatest reverence.

Theoph. Paul. Diac. Zon. Ced. etc. The time of Mahumes.
This man commanding, Mahumet a Prince of the Arabians raised up a destructive
sect; the which also he by force of arms farther extended. This fellow, from a
shepherd of Camels, being made a husband of a wealthy mistress, went into
Palestina, where talking with Christians and Jews, Sergius a Monk being his
assistant, who had been cast out of the Church for heresy, out of the filthy
heap of all sects, framed that new Monster: unto which blockish lie he added
authority. For when ever and anon he was tossed by the devil and
falling sickness, or grew weak, he persuaded his wife grieving for that thing,
that he being astonished at the sight and talk of the Angel Gabriel, was so
moved: That, Sergius confirming, was largely dispersed by the endeavor of the
poor woman, and was commonly believed. Theophanes writes, that heresy to have
lien hid ten years; and nineteen years after to have avouched it, being spread
abroad by power and sword. That is manifest, in the year of Christ 622, the 16
day of July, the 6th holy or resting day, he took his flight, when as for the
newness of the error he was in danger of his life. From this flight, which
the Arabians call Hegyra, that is, (...), or persecution, their new Epoch, or
stop, or measure of time, goes forward.

This man in the year of Christ 628 coming unto Heraclius out of Aethribum, a
Country of Arabia Foelix, with his Saracens, begged a piece of Land to inhabit
in; and afterward in Theoph. Miscel. 18. chapter 38.
the 631 year dyed. From which time the Saracens his successors, subjected by
degrees, Syria, Egypt, Palestina, Heraclius reigning, unto themselves.
Moreover also in the year 640, King Hormisda being put to flight, they took
Persia.

Heraclius gave a beginning to so many miseries of his Empire, the wrath of God
being provoked against him, whilst he obstinately defends the heresy of the
Monothelites or maintainers of one will, being rashly received. Theoph. Diac.
The beginning of the Monothelites.
That took its beginning in the year of Christ 630; in which, when Heraclius
was at Jerapolis, being asked by Athanasius the Patriarch of the Jacobites,
whether there were two wills and actions in Christ, or only one; from this
same man, and from Sergius of Constantinople, and Cyrus of Alexandria, Bishops,
he learned to profess one only will* Syn. Later. under Mart. Sectet. 1. and 3.
the which also by an Edict, or as they call it, an [Ecthesis,] he openly set
forth in the year 639. Niceph. Breviar. p. 83. Theoph. Diac. Zon. Cedr.
Heraclius dies at length on the 11th day of March, in the year of his age 66,
when he had reigned 20 years, 4 months, and 6 days, of Christ 641, of water
between the skin gathered, and other diseases, with which, he is believed to
have paid the punishment of the incestuous marriage with Martina his brothers
daughter.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Affairs of the Western Empire at the same time, and
especially the French, and also of famous Men.
IN France, the two sons of Childebert, Theodebert and Theodorick, (their
Grandmother Brunechild working that thing) reigned with perpetual disagreement
together among themselves, and with Clotharius. Clotharius was first of all
overcome by them, Fredeg. in App. chapter 20. Aimo. 3. chapter 87.
in the year from the death of Childebert their father, five, which is of
Christ 600. Then again Fred. chapter 26. The error of Fredegarius.
after four years, he is overcome by Theodorick, when as against this King,
Meroveus the son of Clotharius was chief Commander of his Army; as Fredegarius
says: the which seems absurd. For Clotharius was born in the year of Christ
584. Therefore in the year 604, he had exceeded the twentieth year of his age
at the highest.

After that, those same brethren burned with mutual hatreds amongst themselves.
Theodebert being overcome by his brother in battle, in Fred. chapter 38.
the 17th year of their reign, of Christ, 612, is Aimo. 3. c. 98.
slain by his own Soldiers at Colonia. Theodorick dies the year following, 5
bastard sons being left, because he wanted a lawful wife, his grandmother
endeavoring that, whereby she might have her Nephew the more subject to her,
Fred. 40. and 41.
who a little after paid the punishment of her wicked acts unto Clotharius; for
the which, she was hated of the French; Sigebert. Clotharius kills Brunechild.
who in the same year of Christ 613, having obtained the whole Kingdom of the
French, he bound Brunechild in a Cable-rope, led about with wild horses, and
tare her to pieces. After these things, the affairs of the Franks were at rest,
and flourishing, this and his son Dagobert being King. Frede.
Whom in the year 622, being called into the fellowship of the kingdom, he made
Lieutenant of Austrasia. Aimo. 4. chapter 8.
He revenged the same man, in a war against the Saxons, being evilly entreated
by them, and wounded in the head, with a great slaughter of his enemies; when
as indeed, none of them who was greater than his sword, he left alive.

Fred. chapter 56. etc.
Clotharius dies in the year 628, of his dominion 45, whose kingdom Dagobert
wholly received, his brother Charibert endeavoring in vain, he being begotten
of Sichild, the latter wife; Dagobert was born with Berthrude. Who at length
taking pity on his brother, granted him the greatest part of Aquitania. And
this man, the seat of the Kingdom being appointed at Tolousa, he subdued all
Vascony unto himself. Dagobert, having made use of the counsels of Arnulph,
Bishop of Metenum; and also of Pipin of Austrasium governed the Kingdom with
the greatest equity and prudence. Fred. 6.
Afterward being let loose into riot, he is said to have had three wives,
beside many Concubines at the same time. Yet being liberal toward those in
want, and given to piety, He reverenced especially Dionysius Bishop of Paris:
to whom he built a Temple not far from the City; the which he enriched with the
spoils of others. Fred. 6.
He also compelled the Jews, through the persuasion of Heraclius the Emperor
to undergo Christian rites; which very thing Heraclius himself in the East had
done.

Phocas reigning, John Diac. in the life of Greg.
Pope Gregory dyed in the year of Christ 604, 7 Constable. Account. But Heraclius
being Emperor, John Bishop of Alexandria surnamed [Eleemon] or mercifully
flourished; in the framing of whose years, there is a great blemish of the
Annals, In the Notes to Niceph. Brev. and 11. of the Doct. Times, chapter 49.
which we have elsewhere corrected. That is certain, the Persians in the 6th
year of Heraclius, of Christ 616, took Alexandria; whence, if he were made
Bishop by Heraclius, it must be, that he dyed short of the sixth year of his
dignity. See the same places.
Aaastasius a Persian, a Monk, and Martyr, suffered for Christ about the 622
year, of Heraclius the 12th.

Equal to these, was Tom. 1. of the Greek Bibl. PP.
Antiochus, a Monk, and Abbot of Sabbasat Laura, who prosecuteth the slaughter
at Jerusalem, and that Persian whirlwind, in his 107 Homily, and in his
confession, in a sorrowful style: And the same man writes down a doleful end
of a certain Monk. Who after many years passed over in a private life by all
the ornaments of virtues, the devil set before his sight on this side, the
Apostles, Martyrs, and all Christians wan or black and blew, and in a filthy
and unhandsome habit: on that side Moses with the Prophets, and multitude of
the Jews, neat and shining; and drove him so far, that Christian Religion being
condemned, he made himself a Jew, and being circumcised, married a wife. In
which wickedness, ere the third year that he wrought those things, his body
breeding worms, the Homily shows he was, by his worst destiny, consumed.

In France, a very famous name of holiness, got Sigeb.
Amandus Bishop of Trajectum under King Dagobert. Sigeb. in the year 625.
Arnulph of Metenum, the son of Arnold, the Nephew of Ansbert, whom Blithild
the daughter of Clotharius the first had married. Austregifil of Bituricenum;
Lupus Bishop of Senonenum; Sig. stylo.
besides Bavo converted from a robber, by Amandus. Columhane likewise being
very much vexed by Brunechild, lived under Clotharius, and his Scholar Gallus.
In Spain, Isidor Bishop of Hispalenum.

The End of the Seventh Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. OR, AN Account of Time.
The Eighth Book. WHerein are contained the Years from the 641 of CHRIST, unto
1100.
CHAP. I. Affairs of the Eastern Empire under the succe ssours of Heraclius,
from the year 641. to 685. Of the sixth Synod against the Monothelites.
COnstantine the son of Heraclius, by his former Wife Niceph. Brev. Theoph.
Miscel. in fine l. 1.
reigned after this in the year of Christ, 641. and in the fourth Month is
taken away by poison, by his stepmother Martina.

Theoph. Zon. Cedr. Diac. in Miscel. 18.
Heracleonas, with Martina his Mother, reigns no more than six Moncths. Which
being finished, his Nose, and his Mothers tongue, is cut off by the decree of
the Senate: and Constance the son of Constantine is made Emperor, the Nephew
of Heraclius: who had rather in the worship of Religion, be like his Grand
father than his father, for he was a Monothelite, when as his father had been a
Catholic.

He being stained with this Heresy, snatched away Pope Martin a most holy man,
(because being commanded to subscribe to the form of Heraclius, he had
condemned him in an assembly, Anast. Col. lect. and in Martino Theoph. Miscel.
16.
with the error of the Monothelites, in the year 649.) by Theodore Calliopas
his Exarch unto Constantinople, in Exilii S. Mart. historia in Colle. p. 79.
the year 653. to wit, in which he was 13th Call. July, 4. Holiday: and thence
banished him unto Chersona. Where he in the year 655, dies, 14. Constable. Acc.
16. Septem. as it is in the Anast Colle. p. 104.
collections of Anastasius. ^ad. p. 196. and 264. Theoph. etc.
Also Maximus a Monk, a great contender for the Catholic Faith, being cut
short in tongue and hand, he carried away into exile.

With which wicked acts, God being offended, he suffered the Roman Empire to
be torn by the weapons of the Saracens. Theoph. Misc.
Against whom in the year 654, in a Sea-battell, he most unhappily fought.
Paul. Vuar. 5. de gest. Lang. c. 10.
Being weary of Constantinople, he passed over thence into Italy, where with no
more prosperous warlike success he fought against the Longobards. He being
incensed by that slaughter, sacked Rome with a barbarous fury: and passed over
into Sicily, where when he had remained six years, he was killed in a Bath by
his own Syracusans, in the year 668. Theoph. Zona. etc.
after he had reigned 27. years.

Theoph. Misc. etc.
Constantine the son of this, beginning to reign in the same year, restored
Catholic worship. Theophanes writes, and out of him Paul Deacon, that both
his brothers Noses, Tiberius, and Heraclius, were cut off by his command, in
the beginning of his reign. But the same men relate, those same, in the 14th
year of his Empire, of Christ 681. to have been cast out from rule, and
Constantine alone with his son Justinian, to have managed the Commonwealth
which are least agreeable.

Niceph. Brev. p. 99. and seq. Theoph. Paul. Diac. 19. Cedr.
The Saracens having proceeded further by conquering, besieged Constantinople
seven years. But when as both the Mardaits, inhabitants of Libanus, had stopped
them by a homebred war, and the Romans valiantly resisted; at last they made
peace for thirty years on these conditions, that they should weigh to the
Romans every year 365 thousand Crowns of Gold, and the heads of fifty men,
noble Horses 50. The Navy of the Saracens being cast away with a tempest, in
the return all perished by shipwreck, the which Theophanes, and others write to
have happened after the peace granted. Nicephorus affirms, the peace to have
been the latter, and to be desired through occasion of this destruction by the
Barbarians. Theophanes delivers, the Saracens began to assault Constantinople
in the fifth year of Constantine, and out of him Cedrenus, and Paul Deacon: but
in the ninth year, the peace to have been begun. By this means it shall be
false, that it was besieged seven years: which they do number up, as well as
Nicephorus, in his Breviary. At or about the same time, that fire that is
called commonly [Greek] was invented by ascertain man Callinicus, whose force
is such, that it burns in the very waters. The Niceph. Brev.
Avarians following the example of the Saracens, and other Barbarians entreated
peace of the Romans. Theoph. Diac.
The which two years after, from the Bulgarians, who at first, that is, in the
year of Christ, six hundred seventy seven, had forced on the Roman borders,
he, was constrained to redeem, with the agreement of an yearly Tribute.

The quiet of the Commonwealth being established, the Emperor passed over his
Counsels to pacify the Church. Niceph. Brev. p. 109.
For which thing, he called the sixth general Council, Agatho being Roman
Bishop, the which being begun in Anast. in Agath. Theoph. Diac. 19. Zon. Cedr.
the year 680. the 9th of Constable. Acc. in the Month November. was ended the year
following. In that Council, five universal Synods being approved of, it was
decreed, there was two Wills, and as many actions in Christ, as there were
natures in him: and those who had taught otherwise, were condemned for
Heretics, Sergius, Pyrrhus, Cyrus, Paulus, and others, to whom also, Honorius
in the Acts, is joined, who had sat Roman Bishop, Heraclius being Emperor.
But John in Ep. to Constant. in the Collect. of Anaff.
John the 4th, drives away this reproach from him, who held the chief
Bishopric the third from him. Where he teaches to Sergius, subtly asking
concerning one will in Christ, Honorius answered, there were not two resisting
wills, and contrary, as we experience in our selves; but two natures in him,
and as many wills were acknowledged by him. Niceph. p. 109. Theoph. Diac. Zon.
Cedr.
Constance died in the year six hundred eighty five, when he had commanded 17
years.

CHAP. II. The History of the Western World belonging to the above space of
time, as also what Men were accounted Famous for Godliness and Learning.
DAgobert died in France Fred. 79.
in the 16. year of his Kingdom, of Christ 644, the 19. of Jan, to whom
Chlodoveus was born of Fredeg chapter 56. Aimo 4. chapter 59.
Nanchild a Nun, Fred. 59. Aim. 4. chapter 20.
when before he had, in the 629 year, begotten Sigebert of Ragintruda a Harlot,
that is, in the seventh year after the beginning of his reign. Sigebert being a
child, was made King of Austrasia by his father, in the year 632. other
Kingdoms being left unto Chlodoveus, Frede. 76. Aimo. 4. c. 27.
that is, of Neustria and Burgundy, under the tuition of his Mother Nanthild.
Fred. 80.
Aegas also Master of the Palace, a most laudable man, being added. Chlodoveus
was 12 years of age, for he was born Fred. 76.
in the twelfth year of Dagobert, from the former beginning as appears, of
Christ 633.

Fred. 83. and foll. Aimo. 4. chapter 57. and foll.
Aegas being dead, in the year 646. Erchenwald Mayor of the Palace, or house
in the Kingdom of Neustria, and Flaochate, in Burgundia, are chosen. But Pipin
dying in the same year, Grimoald his son performed the same worthiness of
office in Austrasia the Kingdom of Sigebert.

Append. Aimo. Sig.
Sigebert without hope of offspring, adopteth Hildebert the son of Grimoaldus,
and ordained him his successor in the Trithem:
seventh year of his reign, of Christ 651. But when as beyond hope he had
begotten Dagobert, he being committed unto the trust of Grimoald, dies in the
eleventh year of King Chlodoveus, of Christ 554. Grimoald sent Dagobert being
shaven, into Scotland, and brought up his son Hildebert unto the Kingdom. With
which unfaithfullnesse, the French being offended, make Grimoald being, laid
hold of, to stand to the judgment of Chlodoveus: who, he being condemned with
imprisonment, and Hildebert removed, himself gave his own son Hilderick a King
to the Austrasians, whom Fred. 91. Aimo 4. chapter 41.
he had begotten of Bathild a Saxon woman, with two others, Chlotharius, and
Theodorick.

Moreover, the singular bounty of Chlodoveus toward the poor, is praised in
the Annalls: Aimo. 4. chapter 41.
Whom that he might succor in a very great scarcity of Victuals, he commanded
the Gold and silver wherewith his father had adorned the Graves of Dionysius
and his fellow Martyrs, Saints, and to be divided amongst them. Aimon reckons
that to the 14th year of his reign, which falls into the 657 of Christ.

Aimo in the same Monast. Dionys. b. 3. chapter 4.
And that he might recompense this, whatsoever injury of the holy place, two
years after, a most famous assembly of Bishops being had, he appointed the
Monastery of Dionysius, which his father had built nigh to the City, to be free
from the jurisdiction of all Bishops; Landerick the chief ruler of Paris
agreeing to it. Concerning which thing, an ordinance of Chlodoveus being set
forth is read the 10. Call. July, in the 16 year.

Chlodoveus died in the year 660. of the Kingdom the 17. and at the same time,
Erchenwald Lieutenant of the Palace dying, the French ordain Ebruine a man
famous for cruelty and treachery. Sig. in the year 662.
From which time, the French Kings being let loose into riot and sloth by
little and little, the top of affairs came to the Governors of the Palace:
when by them all things were ordered, but the kings contented only with a name
or title, contained themselves in their Palace; neither came they but once
every year, on the Call. of May, into open view of the people. Which thing also
is read in the yearly Register of the Greeks, with this most foolish fable; the
kings of France being like Hogs, have a Wheyey back, and therefore were called
[Trichorachatos.]

Fred. 93.94. Aimo 4. chapter 44. Sigeb.
Chlotarius, who had succeeded his father Chlodoveus, after four years of his
reign, dying, about the year of Christ 664. Theodorick his brother, for a short
space was chief. For the French being quickly weary of this man, chose
Childerick, who reigned at Austrasia king; they shut up Theodorick with Ebroin,
shaven, in a Monastery; the one, in that of Dionysius at Lutetia: this, in that
at Luxovicum. Childerick having run out three years in the kingdom: of Christ
667. by Bodilo a noble Frank, whom he had manded, being bound to the stump of a
Tree, to be punished with rods, he was after Easter, with his Wife great with
child, slain, whose son Chilperick, P. Sirmon mentions him in Notes to To. 1.
Counc. p. 620.
is read in the first year of his reign, registered in a certain Bull or Writ
of Corbeia: of whom there is no mention any where made, The life of Leodeg.
and presently Theodorick is called unto the Kingdom, to whom, Leudesius the
son of Erchenwald is given as master of the Palace.

But Fred. 96. Sig. Aim. 4. chapter 44. The cruelty of Ebroin on Leedeg. and others
Ebroin breaking out of secret places of the Monastery, again invaded the
Lievtenantship of the Palace, Leudesius being killed as also Ursine in the
life of Leodeg. 2. Oct. with Sur. Sig. Fred. Aimo.
Leodegar, chief Ruler of Augustodunum, whom being many ways tortured with
diverse torments, and in a Council of Bishops spoiled of his dignity, he
commanded to be smitten with a sword. Sigebert has brought that to the year
685. To. 1. Counc. Franc. p. 510.
in which year indeed that Council is said to have been solemnized in the
Kings Country House. That it must needs be, those to err, who bring the death
of holy Leodegar into the year 672. Balderick. b. 1. Chron. Camerac. chapter 25.
See Sir. Not. to 1. To. of Counc. Franc. p. 610. Holy men in France.
seeing in the seventh year of Theodorick, 2. Constable. Acc. that is, in the year
six hundred seventy four, he is read underwritten in the Letters of Vindician.

There were many men at those times flourishing in holiness especially in
France. Amongst whom Eligius and Audoenus, famous Bishops are mentioned, the
one of Noviomam, this of Rothomagum, made in the same day, Audo. in life of
Elig. b. 2. chapter 2.
in the third year of Chlodoveus; of Christ 646. to wit, the 14th day of the
third Month, which is May; Which was the Lords day before the greater
Lettanies, or Supplications. And in the same chapter 32.
Eligius died in the 70 year of his age, about the beginning of Clotharius. The
life of Audo. Aug. 24.
Moreover Audoenus dies being ninety years old, when he was working out the 44
year of his Bishopric. Besides these, Chlodoveus being King, were most holy
Bishops, Sigeb.
Remaclus of Trajectum. Autbert of Cameraca. Theodard a Martyr, of Trajectum:
whom Lambert succeeded; who also himself afterward died a Martyrs death, in
the second year of Childebert, that is, of Christ 696. Sigeb. in the year 658.
Audomar of Tarvenum, who while the relics of Vedastus were brought over, his
sight, which through old age he had lost, being restored unto him, as soon again
as he wanted the same, he obtained, supposing a sharpness of mind or
understanding, to be better then the foundnesse of his eyes. Private persons
also graced France with an exact holiness of life: Furseus, Foillanus, Ultan;
who having come out of Ireland, built Monasteries. Jodocus son of the King of
Britons, who, riches being despised, gave himself to a solitary life. Also
Sigeb. in the year 661.
Bathild the wife of Chlodoveus, which built the Corbeian and Calenian
Monasteries, and also Itta the Widow of Pipin, who with her daughter Gertrude,
consecrated her self to God.

In Britain, not a few were famous for the same ornament of holiness. Beda.
b. 3. chapter 6. and 9. Hist. Eng.
But before others, holy Oswald, who fighting against the Heathens for his
Country, fell in battle.

In Spain, the piety of King Bambas is praised, who in the 714th year of their
money or tributes-reckoning, as says Ruder. Tolet. b. 3. chapter 1.
Ruderick, that is, in the year of Christ 676. (but as Vosaeus writes) in his
Chronicle, in the year 672, he was compelled by force to take the Kingdom; the
which had been conferred upon him by the consent of all. Which afterward even
unto the tenth year he managed; that being resigned, he made himself a Monk,
that he might be the readier to take a heavenly life on earth. Ruder. 2. chapter 12.
Likewise holy Ildephonsus Bishop of Toleto, who for a patronage of the Blessed
Virgin undertaken against heretics, was endowed by her, with a garment
brought from Heaven.

CHAP. III. What things happened under Justinian the second, Leontius,
Artemius, and Theodosius in the East, from the year 685, to the year 717; and
of the appendice or addition of the sixth Assembly in Trullum or the Palace.
Theoph. Paul. Dia. b. 9. Zon. Cedr.
JUstinian the second, surnamed Rhinotmetus, from his nose being cut off, as
shall be said afterward, succeeded his father Constantine in the year of
Christ 685, Niceph. brev.
sixteen years old, who through a childish lightness and weakness undid the
Commonwealth. He drew down the Mardaites, the Inhabitants of Libanus, the
only terror of the Saracen Nation, and strength of their Empire, out of
Libanus. After that, Theoph. Misc. 19.
in the year of his Command, the 7th, he dissolved the peace entered into with
the same Saracens, with the like blockishnesse, trusting to the ayds of the
Sclavonians, by whom being forsaken, a victory now gotten, he corrupted by a
shameful flight. From which time Mahumet Prince of the Arabians, wasted the
Roman borders without control. Unto that rashness in warlike affairs and
counsels, when he added also cruelty and robbery at home, he runs into the
hatred of the people; therefore by the encouragement of two Monks, Paul and
Gregory, Niceph.
Leontius a Senator being sent by Justinian out of prison to govern Greece, he
lays hold on this very man, and sent him far away, being mangled in the nose,
into Chersona, in the year 695; and so he got the dominion promised him long
ago by the same Monks through their skill in the Stars: the which he bare three
years space.

Niceph. Brev. Theoph. Diac. Zon. Cedre.
Leontius being Emperor, Carthage was vanquished by the Saracens, in the year
698. To recover this, an Army being sent by Sea by Leontius, the matter being
ill carried on, he being afraid at the loss of it, he carried forth Apsimarus,
a certain one, to the Government, and called him Tiberius.

Niceph. Theoph. Miscel. the same.
Tiberius Apsimarus in the same year 698, hedged Leontius in a Monastery, being
rendered deformed through the like spoil of his nose, as this had made
Justinian. A little after this, two hundred thousand Saracens, it is delivered
by Miscel. book 20.
Theophanes, were slain in Syria by the Romans, in the third year of Tiberius;
he reigned 7 years.

Theoph. Miscel. Niceph. Brev. Anast. in Joan. 7.
For Justinian fleeing from Chersona unto Chagan King of the Abarians, he led
his sister or daughter in marriage; by whose showing, lyings in wait being
found, provided by his father-in law, he passed over to the Bulgarians; by
whose help after ten years banishment, being restored, he in the year 705 had a
new beginning of commanding. First of all, Apsimarus and Leontius being a long
time led through the horse-race, and mocked, he cut off their necks. And then,
the peace which he had agreed with the Bulgarians, being rashly violated, he
paid the punishment of an unthankful mind toward them by whom he was helped,
with disgrace, and the slaughter of his subjects, in the 4th year of his
Empire. At last, being offended with the Chersonites, because he had remembered,
layings in wait were made for him by them, a strong Navy being sent against
them, he caused them almost all to be killed. The which Navy, in the month of
October returning, a cruel tempest drowned by shipwreck, wherein seventy and
three thousand men perished. Justinian being secure for so great a slaughter,
when as he had taken that one thing grievously, that the Soldier in that
destruction of the Chersonites had abstained from the slaughter of the little
ones, The cruelty of Justinian.
he led a new Navy thither to kill them. But the Princes being moved with
hatred of so mad cruelty, proclaim Bardan Philippick Emperor, in the year 711,
when Justinian lived the sixth year from the Empire recovered; who by the
command of Philippick, he with his son Tiberius was slain. Anastasius shows
in the life of Pope Constantine, this very man being called forth to
Constantinople by Justinian, set forward from Rome the 5th of October. 9th Constable.
Account, that is, the year 710, and there being received with the greatest
honor, to have returned the 24 of October. 10 Constable. Account, which is the 711th
year; and after three months, a Messenger to have brought word to Rome of the
death of Justinian. Wherefore about the end of the 711th year, or the 712th,
Justinian was slain. Theoph. Miscel. 20. Zona.
A wicked word gathered from his mouth, witnesses the fierce and unmild spirit
of this Prince. When as a dangerous tempest arising, to one admonishing him,
that he would make a vow unto God, If he would go forth safe out of it, to
spare all his enemies: He answered, Yea, let me here miserably perish, if I
shall even spare one.

Niceph. Breviar. Theoph. Paul. Diac. Zon. Ced.
Philippick foolishly and neglectfully governed the Empire through wickedness
gotten, and lavished out the riches gotten by Justinian, through too many, and
unprofitable charges. Cyrus being driven away, he brought up John to the
Constantinopolitan seat, an impure and heretical man, who being his assistant,
by Bishops of the same faction, made void the sixth Synod in the year 712, and
renewed the heresy of the Monothelites. Of which impiety a little after he
experienced God to be a revenger. Theoph. Niceph. Misc. etc.
For after he had reigned two years, and some months, when as a horse-exercise
being had, he slept after dinner, in a place apart, he was taken by force by
conspirators, and deprived of his eyes the day before Pentecost; which fell out
in that year the 713, on the 4th of June. See Notes to the Brev. of Niceph. p.
198.
On which Eve of Whitsontide, Nicephorus and Theophanes do falsely affirm the
birthday to have agreed or met at Constantinople.

Niceph. Theoph. Diac. Zon. Cedr.
Artemius, who was Secretary to Philippick, his name being changed, was called
Anastasius, he reigned the same year of Christ 712; which thing the Baron. to
the year 713.
public acts of the Virg in that was freed from the devil, the 12th Constable.
Account, in the month October, Anastasius being Emperor, do witness.

He made ready a great Navy against the Saracens, who had brought ships to the
Isle of Rhodes to cut timber. But a division arising in the Army, and the
Captain being killed, the Soldiers bring Theodosius of Adramyttium, a certain
gatherer of Customs, a quiet man, and lying hid, to take the Empire.
Anastasius mistrusting his affairs, his promise or faith being received, and
the famous things of rule being laid aside, made himself a Monk, and was passed
over to Thessalonica, in the year of Christ 715, when he had reigned two years.
This man was excellently garnished with Learning, and a favourer of the
Catholic party. Therefore John the heretic being cast off, he brought over
Germane, Bishop at Cyzicum to Constantinople, the 15th of Constable. Account, as
Theophanes writes, that is, in the year 715.

Niceph. Breviar. Theoph. Diac. Zon. Cedr.
Theodosius of Adramyttium, being made Emperor, as it were, by sport, reigned
about two years, even till the year 717, in which he gave place in the Empire
of his own accord, unto Leo of Isaurus, who was carried up thereto by the
voices of the Soldiers, and, with his son, being shaven into a Clergyman, he
passed away the remainder of his age in rest. He dyed at Ephesus, says
Cedrenus; and commanded this word to be written on his tomb, (...), that is,
Health. Moreover, there is a report, that he was famous for miracles after
death.

Niceph. Breviar. Theoph.
He reigning, Musalmas Prince of the Saracens, setting upon Constantinople, run
out into Asia, and possessed Cappadocia.

Theoph. to the old year of Pogonatus, Syn. is extant, with a Commentary. Zona.
and Balsam.
Justinian enjoying the affairs, and in the year of Christ 707, there was an
assembly had of Greek Prelates at Constantinople in the Trullum, so they named
the Palace, by which were made 105 Canons; which Synod they called (...), that
is, a five-sixth, as it were, to supply the 5 and 6 Universal assemblies, in
which there were no Canons or rules set forth. Anast. in Serg. Bid of the
sixth Age.
But those Canons being foolishly, and beyond all right registered, they wanted
authority by a decree of the Roman Bishops.

CHAP. IV. Of the Affairs of the Western World, especially in France and Spain,
in that same space of time. Of the last Kings of the Franks, from the stock of
Meroveus; and of the Saracens invading Spain; likewise of Men eminent in
holiness of life.
IN France, Ebroine Governor of the Palace, ( Theodorick obtaining even but in
name, the Kingdom of France, which they called the Kingdom of Neustria,) raged
with cruel tyranny. In like manner the Kingdom of Austrasia obeyed the
Governors of the Palace. Vulsoaldus being dead, Pipin the son of Ansegisus
took that dignity, Fred. Chron. Sigeb. Pipin Mayor of the house. The death of
Ebroine.
in the year of Christ 687, who in the beginning joining in battle with
Theodorick and Ebroine, is overcome: and his Companion in office, Martin,
against promise made, is killed by Ebroine. Ebroine himself in the year, as
appears, 688, Ursin. in Leodeg. 2 October. 29 Sur.
that is, in the third after the death of Leodegar, was thrust through by
Hermenfride. But then Pipin, Theodorick being overcome, held the mastership of
both kingdoms Breviar. of the French Kings. Fred.
in the year 691, an excellent man, and most worthy of the command of the
French: but that one stain of lust darkeneth this man's memory. For besides
Plectrude a noble Wife, he had Elpais a Harlot, of whom was begotten Charles
Martell: in which one man afterward, the worthiness of the French Nation
stood. Sigeb.
This his intemperance Lambert Bishop of Leodium daring to correct, he was
beheaded by Dodo the brother of Elpais; in whose place holy Hubert was
ordained; which Sigebert has shown to be in the year 698.

Fred. 102.
Pipin, the Frisons being subdued, and their Captain Rathobod, and the Kingdom
of France managed 27 years with the greatest equity, dies Annal. Pith. Sig.
in the year 714, whom Charles succeeded, begotten of Elpais, of whom,
afterward. Now I will express the other Kings of France even unto Pipin the
son of Charles; who are reckoned with a title only, when as all the power was
after that, in the power of the Lievtenants of the Palace, whom they name
Mayors.

Theodorick the son of Clodoveus the second, dying about the year of Christ
690, left an empty possession of a kingly title unto Clodoveus his son, the
third of that name; the which he held 4 years, and dying in the year 694,
delivered it to his brother Childebert; Childebert numbered the Things done, in
French Epit. c. 15.
17th year of the Kingdom, and dyed Frag. book Nazar.
in the year 711.

Affairs of French, chapter 51. Aimo. 4. c. 51. Ivo.
Dagobert his son reigned five years, whom the Pithaean Annals show to have
dyed in the 715th year.

In the same place.
The French appoint for this, Daniel, a certain Clerk, of a Kingly spirit, but
not enough assuredly known; whom his name being changed, they call Chilperick:

Ann. Pith. Sigeb.
Raginfred is joined to this King as Lieutenant of the Palace. Both being
overcome by Charles Martell, he runs away to Eudo Prince of the Vascoines; but
he also being broken, and put to flight, Chilperick who had yielded to Charles,
dies in the 5th year of his reign, Ann. Pith.
of Christ 720; in the same year Charles makes Theodorick King, who Sigeg.
reigned 15 years. Therefore he deceased about the year 735.

After this man, there was a Probat. Sirm. in notes to Tom. 2. of Counc. Franc.
p. 621.
cessation of a King about 7 years, which turning over, the last of the
posterity of Meroveus, Childerick the third, began in the year 742, who had the
likeness of a kingdom until the year 752. For in this very year, Pipin,
Childerick being shut into a Monastery and shaven, began to be called King of
the French; which year, from the beginning of the kingdom of the Franks, that
is, from the year of Christ 420, is numbered 333.

But in Spain, the Saracens pouring out of Africa, Ruderick reigning, Saracens
invade Spain.
oppressed the Goths, being called thither by Julian an Earl; whose daughter,
or wife, Ruderick had forced with whoredom. The beginning of that slaughter
Ruderick notes to be Ruder. Tol. 3. chapter 18.
in the 91 year of Mahumet's flight, of the Spanish account 712. In the same
place, chapter 19.
Two years after, Ruderick the King, in a great battle joined, being betrayed
and forsaken by his own, was slain. Ruder. Tol. 4. chapter 1.
So Spain came into the power of the Saracens. The remainders of the Goths had
their retiring place in Asturia and Cantabria; and there the Barbarians being
valiantly beat off, they, they held however the possession of the ancient
Kingdom, Pelagius being their Captain; who first reigned over the Asturians.

Not a few in that space of time made proof of their holiness; in England
Cuthbert, whom 4 Hist. chapter 6. etc.
Bid witnesses to have been made Bishop about the year 685. Sigeb. anno 692.
and 697.
From thence also Vuillebrod coming with his 12 companions, and being sent by
Pipin into Frisia, brought the light of the Gospel unto the batbarous people,
and appointed the seat at Trajectum, as Sigebert has it, in the year 697; in
which year he declares holy Killian to have dyed a Martyr's death. Also Bid
made his Britain famous with no less godliness and learning, than history,
who even unto the year 735 has concluded the Christian beginnings of that
Nation. Most holy Monks at the same time beautified France, Vandregisil a
Fiscanian, and of Fontinel, a builder of Monasteries, of whom in the year 692,
Sigebert makes mention. Sigeb. 698.
Ursmar of Lobia, a founder of a Monastery. Bertine Abbot of Sithiena. The
same, 715.
Aegidius who coming out of Greece, made the Province famous. Childebert
reigning, in the year 709, the same Sigebert writes, that rock by the
appointment of Michael Archangel, The Temple of Michael in France.
which is worshipped in the Abrincatean Diocese by his name and religion, was
consecrated by Authbert the Bishop.

CHAP. V. Of Leo of Isauria; the heresy of the Iconoclastarians; and other
things of the East, from the year 717, to 741. And also of Western Affairs; and
of Charles Martell, and the Saracens overthrown by him.
LEO, born of an obscure stock in Isauria, who first was called Conon, came to
the Empire in the year 717, 15 of Constable. Acc. 25 day of March, as Theoph. at
the last year of Leo, Paul. Diac. 21. chapter 32. Niceph. Brev.
Theophanes writes, repulsed the Theoph. Paul. Diac. 21. Cedr.
Saracens, Asia being wasted, and Pergamus vanquished, besieging Byzantium,
with a great put down of them, about the very beginning of his reign. He
quenched Tiberius a Tyrant in Sicily by his Captains, and made the West quiet
in the year 719. At length he brought forth an impiety, in times past conceived
in his mind against holy Images, using a Jew his author, in the year 726;
Theoph. Paul. Diac. 21. Cedr. Zonar.
in which by his guard-men he threw down the Image of our Savior: Who being
slain by the people, the Prince burning with wrath, most cruelly prosecuted
their slaughter; and waxed cruel, especially on a College of Learned men,
gathered together out of the professors of all arts, when he had stirred them
up in vain unto the fellowship of unfaithfulness. Theoph. Niceph. Brev. Diac.
Cedr.
Which wickedness of his, the falling away of Greece, and the Cycladians, and
a prosperous success in suppressing it, made the sharper, in the year 727.
Therefore three years after, he set out a cruel Edict against worshipful
images, Theoph. Diac. Niceph.
13 Constable. Acc. 7th Jan. 7th holiday. That is, in the year of Christ 730.
Germane the Bishop, in vain interposing his fury, resigned himself of his own
accord; and on the 22 Jan. Anastasius was appointed in his room, a partaker of
the impiety, when as Germane almost lived the hundredth year of his age; for he
is he whom in the year 726, Gregory the second in an epistle affirms to have
lived ninety and five years, which is in the 7th Synod. Many keepers of the
ancient faith, being afflicted with diverse torments and punishments by the
Tyrant, had glorious ends. Theoph. Dia. Anast.
This madness of Leo, Gregory the second, Bishop of Rome, when he could not
restrain by letters, he Zonar. Rome and Italy withdrawn from the command of the
Greeks.
cast the Emperor, and those touched with his heresy, under excommunication;
and whatsoever was left of Italy, he drew away from the command of the Greeks;
and further, he forbade them to pay tribute unto them.

For these things, Leo burning in anger prepared a Navy against the Rebels the
Italians. Theoph. Breviar.
which perished with a Tempest in the Adriatic Sea in the 732. A little before
he endeavored to oppress Anast. in Greg.
Rome with the chief Bishop himself, by the dispatching Princes of Ravenna and
Luitprand King of the Longobards. But the Bishop came of his own accord to the
Longobard hanging over the City, and so bended him by his steadfastnesse and
speech, that he coming unto his feet, whatsoever he had asked, he readily did.

Niceph. Brev. Theoph. Diac. Zon. Cedre.
There was in the last year of Leo a fierce Earthquake, the 9th, says
Theophanes, of Constable. Acc. the 26 October. 4th holiday, the 8th hour, (so that
this was the year of Christ 740) whereby Thracia and Bythinia being shaken, and
especially Constantinople, Nicomedia and Nicaea, a great destruction happened.
All the Temples of Nicaea besides one, went to decay. That misery yielded to
the Emperor an occasion of a new tax. For to repair the walls, he increased
the measure of the tributes; the which after that he continued. The same.
He dies of a pain between the skin, or grief of the bowels, the 24 year of
Rule being finished, and three months above; the 18th of June, the 9th of
Constable. Account, of Christ 741.

Which same year, 11th Call. November. was the last to Charles surnamed Martell or
Tudites, when he had now governed France she eight and twentieth year, a Prince
famous for warlike valor and deeds done. Annals of Pith. Fred. 104. etc.
Pipin his father being dead in the year 714, being cast into prison by his
stepmother Plectrude, and slipping out from thence, the following year, he was
bold to provoke Raginfride chosen Mayor of the house, as was then the manner of
speaking; and he being first by him overcome, he was afterward the chief Fred.
106.
in the year 717, the 12th Call. Apr. Affairs of the French Epit. b. 1. chapter 53.
on the Lord's day. He scattered in a renewed battle in the year 718, the same
man trusting to the aid of Eudo Duke of Aquitane, and then he subdued the
Saxons, Almains, Bajoarians, Noricans; and, Eudo being put to flight, the
Aquitanes. Eudo distrusting his affairs, called out the Saracens, with their
King Abdiramas from Spain, in the year 725, whom largely sacking holy and
profane places, A wonderful slaughter of the Saracens.
Charles met, and killed them with a universal slaughter. There were slain in
one day three hundred seventy and five thousand; when as of the Franks there
were no more than 1500 slain, as Anast. in Greg. 2. p. 97.
Anastasius writes. Straightway having obtained Burgundy and Lugdunum in the
year 727; the year following, Eudo finishing his life, he invaded Aquitane; he
again threw to ground the Saracens in great number running into France to
revenge their slaughter, in the year 731, and received Avenian taken by them.
Then going to Narbonne which those held possessed with Spain, to whom it was
made tributary, he vanquished its head Narbona, and afterward other Towns, the
Saracens being slain, who often came to bring help. Tom. 1. Counc. of France
Ep. Greg. 3.
Last of all, he frighted away Luitprand, being humbly besought by Gregory the
third, King of the Longobards, hurtful to the Roman Church. These things, the
old Annals of the Franks set forth by Pithaeus, Fredeger, Sigebert, Aimoinus.

Leo being Emperor, John Damascene was famous in Syria, who contended, for the
worshipping of holy Images, with a sharp pen. In Germany, Boniface a Messenger
of this Province was consecrated Bishop of Rome Tom. 1. Counc. of France. page
512.
in the month of December, 6th Constable. Acc. in the year 722, he there promoted
Christian Religion for a long time. But the year following, Eucherius of
Aurelian departed into banishment, into which he was driven by Charles, as
Sigebert is Author.

CHAP. VI. Of Affairs of the Western Empire under Copronymus, Leo, Constantine,
and Irene. From the year 741. to 800.
AFar more foul Offspring succeeded an Heretical and wicked father: who, from
the dung which the Infant being moved into the water in Baptism, had dashed
forth, deserved the name of Copronymus, Theoph. Diac. Cedr. Zon.
from the which, German the Patriarch who baptized him, took no vain guess of
his ungodliness. That happened in the third Theoph. Diac. 21. chapter 14
year of Leo, of Christ 719. October. 25. Therefore, he began to reign in the 22.
year of his age sli^ing, to wit, of Christ 741. To this man, Irene the daughter
of Chagan King of the Avarians had married, in the year seven hundred thirty
two, who, being a young beginner in Christian Ceremonies, constantly held
sincere piety.

Constantine in the beginning had Artabasdus, the husband of his sister Anne,
corrival of the Empire, himself being hated by the common people for Heresy,
and a very bad disposition, found out by no obscure tokens. Therefore being
expelled; and fled from Constantinople, Artabasdus is saluted Emperor; who
straightway restored Catholic worship. But in the year 743. Theoph. Misc. 22.
12 Constable. Acc. in the Month Septem. he was taken with his son, by
Constantine, and made blind.

Niceph. brev. Theoph. Diac. Zon. Cedr.
This man being Emperor, a cruel Plague from An. 747. continued for three
years space, and wandering through Sicily, Calabria, and the East, so raged,
especially in Constantinople, that there well high wanted a place for burying
the dead carcases, and those who should bury them. Besides this, being vexed
with the wars of the Saracens, Sclavonians, and Bulgarians; by these also being
overcome in some battles; when he led an Army against the same, being taken by
a deadly sickness, and unknown to the Physicians, and put into a Ship, he
breathed out his wretched Soul, Theoph. Paul. Diac.
the 14 day of September. 14. Constable. Acc. of Christ 775, when he had commanded
34. years and almost. 3. Months. Cedren. Theoph. Zon. The despairing death of
Copronymus.
He dying, witnessed that he, for disgracing the blessed Virgin, the Mother of
God, was damned in the eternal flame, and commanded worship to be given to her
hence-forward. This was the departure of the unfaithful and most cruel
Prince: (f) Who denied the holy Virgin to be the Mother of God, Christ himself
to be God, forbade honor to be done to Saints, had overthrown holy images.
Theoph. Mise 12. chapter 24.
The which also, a Council being gathered together, at Constantinople of 338
Bishops, he endeavored to have condemned, 7. Constable. Acc. in the year 754.
being angry chiefly against the Monks, of whom he, a great number, as also of
other orders, whom he had known to disagree from his wickedness, afflicted
with diverse kinds of punishments.

In his 20th year, an Eclipse of the Sun happened, Aug. 15th. (as faith
Theophanes) 6th holiday, 10th hour. Which is the year of Christ 760. Whence the
beginning of Constantine is affirmed.

Leo his son succeeded this, an heir of his fathers ungodliness, living the
twenty sixth year. Theoph. Diac. 22. chapter 22.
For he was born in the year 750. Jan 25. Constable. Acc. 5. who at the beginning
feigning himself a Catholic, after that, through bounty, he had gotten to
himself the people's favor, he broke out into the open profession of Heresy,
the which also he increased with Sacrilege. The same.
For being covetous of precious stones, a Crown glittering with little stones,
the which Maurice had in time past dedicated in the greater Church, being taken
away from thence, he placed on his own head. For which wickedness, punishment
presently followed from God: Carbuncles breaking out from the same head,
whereby a burning Fever arising, in a short time killed the man, Sept. 8.
Theoph. Paul. Diac. Cedr.
in the year of Christ 780. when he had commanded almost five years. For he
began in the year 775. Sept. 14. He left an Heir, Constantine, under the
tuition of his Mother Irene, whom being born at Athens, he had married, Theoph.
in the year 771. Jan. fourteen. Therefore he began his reign in the eighteenth
year of his age.

Constantine therefore with his Mother Irene, commanded about ten years, in
which time, all things were managed by the Counsel of Stauracius a Senator.
By these, the ancient piety with worshipping of Images was called back. Theoph.
Paul. Diac. 13. chapter 14. and foll. Zon. Ced.
Tarasius a most holy man being made Patriarch on the very Birthday of Christ,
of the year 784, when as first he had made a sure promise of gathering together
a universal Assembly. Of which, the Emperors It is in an Ep. in 7. Synod.
had already written to Pope Adrian in the same year; 7. Constable. Acc. Therefore
the matter was deferred until the 787 of Christ, and 21. Constable. Acc. in which
they consulted, having transported the Synod to Nicaea on the eighth Call.
October, which ended in the Month October. the third of its Ides, 250. Fathers
came together, two Peter's, Ambassadors of the Bishop of Rome being present,
one a chief Elder, the other an Elder and Governor of Sabbas, with Tarasius,
and other Vicars of the other Patriarchs. See Theoph. Diac. 23. chapter 21.
In that Council, which is called the seventh Oecumenicall, the Heresy of
[Iconoclastarians] or cryers out against Images, being banished, the worship of
holy Images was restored. Which year an Eclipse of the Sun made famous: which
happened in the eighth year of Constantine and Irene, as Theophanes writes, on
the Lords day, Sept. 16.

After these things, Irene constrained her son Constantine, Theoph. Diac. 21.
chapter 22. the life of Charles the Great.
to whom she had espoused Rotrude the daughter of Charles King of the French, in
the year 782) to marry Mary, a woman born in Armenia, in the Month November,
of the year 788. From Synod. 7. Act. 1. p. 377. Act. 7. p. 654.
which marriage, he disagreeing, and also being weary of the unlimited power of
Stauracius, he at last, in the year 790. reduced his Mother into Order, and
reigned alone eight years. Which power he greenly and immoderately using,
Theoph. Paul. Diac. 31. c. 32. Ced.
deprived Nicephorus his Uncle, and Alexius his Captain, of their eyes; he cut
out the Tongues of others in the Month of August, 15. Constable. Acc. of Christ
792. Three years after, Mary his Wife being cast off, and thrust down into a
Monastery, he married Theodota his Chambermaid. Joseph a certain Abbot joining
that marriage; but Tarasius winking at it, for fear least (which he thteatned)
the young man burning with lust, should set open Idoll-Temples. Which thing
filled the Eastern Church with tumults, and disagreements. Theoph. Misc. 23.
chapter 36.
For two most holy men of this age, Plato, and Theodore Studita, departed from
the fellowship of Tarasius. The same Zon. Cedr.
At length, in the 18. year of his Empire, of Christ 797. he was taken by the
deceit of his Mother Irene, and Stauracius, and cruelly made blind in the
Month August, on the Sabbath, on which day five year he had deprived his Uncle
before of his sight. Constantine, his eyes being dug out, is said to have
given up the Ghost a little after; Theoph. Diac. Cedr.
which parricide, or child-murder, some of the Greeks brought unto Irene's
praise, but how hateful it was to God, a fearful darkness of seventeen days
witnessed, which followed his death. Irene also, the sixth year after, of
Christ, 802.11. Constable. Acc. Oct. 13. Holiday 2, being stripped by Nicephorus of
Government, and all her fortunes, and carried away into Lesbos, a year not yet
turning about, dyed.

CHAP. VII. Of the affairs of the West, and of Pipin, and Charles the Great,
From the year 741. to 800.
TWo sons succeed Charles Martel Prince of the French, Fred. 210.
Carloman and Pipin: to the one he granted the West part of France, with the
Sveves or Almain, and Thuringia; to Pipin, Burgundy, Provance, and Neustria.
Adelm.
Gripho the brother of them both, for he was the eldest, begotten on the
daughter of Odilo Duke of the Bajoarians, seeing himself excluded, possesses
Laudunum; where being besieged by his brethren, surrender being made, he is by
Carloman cast into prison. Ann. Pyth.
And then Hunald Duke of Aquitane, and also Odilo the Bajoarian, and the
Almains being by them both tamed, Carloman in the year 747, through the love of
an heavenly life, first of all embraces a monastic manner of living in
Soractes, afterward, being unknown at Cassinum. Gripho, loosed out of Prison,
rebelleth against Pipin, and being taken by him, at length slipping into Italy
by flight, is beheaded in the Alps, in the year 751. Pipin is made King of
France.
When as now Pipin by the former authority of Zachary chief Bishop, and the
consent of the heads of France, had added unto the Kingly power, which he long
since held, a new title of French King. Ann. Pith.
For in this year of Christ, which is numbered 752. Hildrick the last King of
the Merovingians, for his sloth being put out of office, and thrust away into
a Monastery, the Kingdom of the Franks passed over into a new Family. Pipin
his first care was to ease the Roman Bishop oppressed by the Longobards. Anast.
in Zacchar. Paul. Vuarnef. 6. c. 9.
He had brought back Rachisius king of that Nation, who being moved from the
siege of Perusia, by a speech of Pope Zachary, resigning his Kingdom, unto a
Monkish kind of life, in the year 750, Aistulph his brother had succeeded.
Auast. in Steph. 10.2. Coun. Frane.
Whom hurting the Romans, Pope Steven the third, flying from, came to Pipine
into France; by whom being received with incredible honor, he persuade him,
that he would bring war on the Longobards. Therefore in the year 754. passing
over the Alps, Pipin constrained Aistulph shut up in Papia, to swear that he
would restore all places that belonged to the Roman title, and again, delaying
to perform his promises, but also watching over the walls of the City for
evil, he passing over into Italy, called back unto the faithful performance
of his Covenants Ann. Pith.
in the year 756. And then Anast. in Steph. 3.
by Fulrade an Abbot, he delivered the Exarch-ship of Ravenna; which they call
Romania, and Pentapolis, that is, Ancona, with four Towns of Picenum, and other
places, unto the Bishop of Rome. Anast.
Which places being taken out of the hands of the Greek Emperors by Aistulph,
Copronymus in vain by Ambassadors required of Pipin. With the same endeavor
of defending the Church, Pipin overthrew Annal. Pith. Adel. Ado. in the life of
Charles the Great. Sigeb.
Vaipharius, Duke of Aquitane, making a prey on holy things, and rebelling^ in
his seventh dispatch into Aquitane, the which in the year 768, ended with the
death of Vaiphar. Who being slain, and all Aquitane subdued, Pipin dyed at
Paris 8. day Call. October. the seventeenth year of his reign.

Egin in the life of Charles the Great. Ann. Pith. Aimo. etc. The beginning of
Charles the Great.
Therefore in the year of Christ 768. Charles with his brother Carloman divided
their fathers Kingdom. But he in this year 771. dying, Charles reigned alone,
without controversy the greatest Prince. For he being both unconquered by
weapons, and Garnished with the studies of Learning, was a most diligent
favourer of them, and he reverenced only the Catholic Religion, and its
head, the Roman Bishop. Ann. Pith. Anast. in Adrian. Charles overthrows the
Kingdom of the Longobards.
He being moved by the entreaties of this man, (it was that Adrian who was
ordained in Stephen his place, in the year 772) he undertook a war against
Desiderius King of the Longobards, an enemy of the seat of Rome, in the year
773, and being besieged at Ticinum, and brought under his power, he brought
into France in the year 774. But when he would have all things which had been
given him by Pipin his father, to be confirmed to the Roman Bishop, then also
he added very many others; the Territory of Sabinum, the Duchy of Spoletto,
and Beneventa, which are repeated by Anast. in Adrian.
Anastasius, and to those, the Provinces of Venetia, and Histria, are joined.
After these things with a most long war, and continuing nigh Egin. Aim. Pith.
the life of Charles the Great, an uncertain author.
thirty and three years, he very much tamed the Saxons. That began in the year
772, and was ended in 804; when he transported all those beyond Albania, with
their households into France. Likewise he brought over the Sclavonians, and also
the Bajoarians, with their Duke Tassilo rebelling, unto his obedience. Ann.
Charles the Great. Egin. Sigeb. etc.
Also a war undertaken with the Avarians, or Hunns, in the year 791, he
finished with their great slaughter; and so much prey gotten, Eginhart writes,
as in no other War.

Eginh.
Moreover, the Saracens being beaten down in Spain, he subdued no small part
thereof unto French weapons. Ann. of Charles the Great, and Pith.
But especially in the year 778, an Expedition being made into Spain,
attempting Caesaraugusta, pledges being received, he departed thence unto
Pampilona; A slaughter of the French in the Pyrenaean Mountains.
whose walls being thrown down, whiles he goes forth through the Pyrenaean
Mountains into France, the Vascoins rising up in a very great company by the
Straights, some slaughter of the chief being made, and hindrances removed,
they saved themselves in unpassable woods and hiding places from the weapons of
the French. Eginh.
There was slain amongst others, Rutland, a Governor of the Britain Coast:
The yearly Registers of that Nation affirm, that slaughter to have been brought
on them by Alphonsus Castus King of Spain, who had provoked Charles into Spain:
which thing Baron. in the year 778.
Baronius out of the just writers of those times Eginh. and Ann. of Charles the
Great.
refuteth. Who mention, that there was between both those Kings a most firm
league of friendship; and also they do show those things were long before the
beginning of Alphonsus; who indeed Roder. Tolet. b. 4. chapter 11.
began to reign in their account 825, of Christ 787, also a valiant and
religious Prince, and from his continual chastity obtained the surname of
Chaste.

Nor Charles less burning with an endeavor of promoting the Catholic
Religion, than his Kingdom, he for that purpose solemnized often Councels of
Bishops. Ann. of Charles the Great, and Pith. Alcuin. 1. Counc. Elipan.
Amongst which, that was famous in the year 792, because the heresy of
Orgelitanus and Elipandrus Bishops of Toleto, was in the Assembly of Ratisbone
condemned, who affirmed Christ to be the adopted Son of God. In the same place,
See Tom. 2. Coun. France. p. 193.
And the same heresy was again considered in the Assembly of Frankford, at the
River Moenus; in which Synod seventh Universal Assembly was rejected by the
Bishops that were ignorant of its decrees, in the year 794. When as about the
same question of images, Pipin being King, another was celebrated at
Gentiliacum, in the To. 2. Conc. Gal.
year 767.

The life of Alcuine.
Under this King, Alcuine coming out of England into France, flourished with
the greatest opinion of Learning, whom Charles made very much use of as a
Master, he also himself being in a few things instructed in divine and humane
learning, whom he made Governor of the Monastery of Martin amongst the
Turonians, and some others; neither yet was he a Monk, nor a Priest, but being
contented with the order of a Deacon, he ceased to live, in the year of Christ
804, on the very day of Whitsontide, which happened on May the nineteenth.

CHAP. VIII. Of Charles the Great, the first or chief Emperor of the West; and
Ludovicus Pius; and the Deeds of both, from the year 800, to 840.
THe eight hundredth year of Christ brought a new Augustus unto the West, he
least of all indulging or giving respect to the piety of the French, got that
dignity, which the Greeks in the East, by reason of haughtiness and impiety, by
degrees lost.

Anast. in Leont. 3.
Leo the third, who was chosen in the room of Adrian, in the year 795, was by a
faction of some persons, maimed in his eyes and tongue, and vexed after an
unworthy manner in the year 799. And although God by an unusual wonder, had
restored unto him his eyes Anast. in the same. Charles is made Emperor.
and tongue, yet Charles being very much moved with the cruelty of the wicked
act, came to Rome. Where when the most harmless Bishop had washed away the
faults laid against him by an oath, Eginh. Ann. Charles and Pith. Theoph.
on the very day of the Lord's birth, in the year 800, he coming on, Charles not
thinking of it, put the Crown on his head, and saluteth him Emperor of the
Romans. Unto whom Charles from that time requited the good turn by obedience and
bounty. Anast. The Deeds of Charles.
The year straightway following on, there is an examination had concerning the
parricides; and being condemned of their life, the Bishop entreating, they
changed their soil. A little after these things, the Danes Ann. Charles and Pith.
with their King Godefride were crushed: and also the Venetians, who also were
received upon yielding by Pipin the son of Charles in the year 810, which was
the last year to Pipin himself. For he dyed the 8 Ides July. Also he drove back
the Moors, sacking Italy and the Islands, by his Captains. Eginh. The death of
Charles.
About the end of his life, being wholly bent on the duties of Religion and
godliness, he closed his day 5 Call. Feb. at Aquisgrane, in the year of Christ
814, of his age 71, of his kingdom 47, and of Empire the 14.

Ann. Ludov. and Chr. Pith. Theogan. in the life of Lud.
Ludovick, having gotten the surname either from his remarkable love and
affection toward divine matters, or toward his Subjects, being already the
former year taken from the King of Aquitane, into the fellowship of the Empire;
he succeeded the same, on a holiday, in the year, as has been spoken, 814, the
other sons of Charles being dead, he as yet surviving; Pipin in the year 811,
Charles the year following. Annal. Adel. Anast.
He received Stephen the 5th, being in the room of Leo the third, at Rhemes in
the year 816, and by him the imperial Crown was beautified.

The year following, Bernard the son of his brother Pipin Theogan. etc.
by a Concubine, King of Italy, rebelling against Ludovick, and then for fear
of him, a surrender being made, is deprived of his eyes: many chief ones being
condemned for offense of Treason, and punished with banishment; amongst whom
were Anselm of Mediolan, and Theodulf of Aurelia, Bishops: on the son of whose
brother he inflicted voluntary punishments of strictness from the will of the
Bishops, in the year 822. The same Authors.
Irmingard the 9th of October. of the year 818, dying, (in which year the Sun, 8
Ides of July, is said to have been eclipsed, of Ludovick year 5,) he married
Judith the daughter of Vuelpus an Earl; of whom was begotten Charles, by firname
Calvus, or the Bald: when as he had already three sons, The Sons of Ludovick
rebel against their Father.
Lotharius, Ludovick, and Pipin, who when they could not suffer with a quiet
minds Charles to be preferred before them, at once rose up against their father.
Ann. Pith.
First of all in the year 830, Pipin King of Aquitane, conspiring with the
chief Governors, lays hold of the Emperor, and shuts up Judith into a
Monastery, Lotharius straightway coming upon it and approving it. But in the
following year, through the endeavor of the Germans, Ludovick received the
Empire. Ann. Pith. The Life of Ludovick. Nichardus. To: 2. Counc. Franc. and
To. 3.
From the which again, in the year 833, he being by the conspiracy of the three
sons, and advice of the Bishops, withdrawn and compelled to resign; not long
after he is wholly restored, in the year 834. wherein Lotharius, who had dealt
more disgracefully with his father than the rest, favor being more slowly
reconciled with him, confounded France with Civil War; until through the
Emperor's clemency all things being pardoned, a peace however grew between
them. After these things an Assembly of Prelates being solemnized at the
Village of Theodones, Conc. Franc. To. 2.
Ebbo Bishop of Rhemes, partaker of that wicked conspiracy against Ludovick,
with Agobard of Lugdunum, was deposed, in the year 835. To. 3. of Council of
France in a Synodian Council of Tricassia.
And after the death of Ludovick, in the very year 840, was by Lotharius
restored; a little after, for fear of Charles, he fled to the same Emperor.
Last of all, the office of preaching the Gospel to the Northmannes, being
committed to him by Paschall chief Bishop, he obtained the seat of Hildenesheim
in Saxony, not far from their borders, by the bounty of Ludovick King of
Germany, and there deceased.

Ann. in the life of Ludov.
At length Pipin being dead in the year 837, Ludovick, the kingdom being
divided among the other three, while he hasteneth to prevent Ludovick his son
preparing war for the unjust dividing of the kingdom, The death of Lewis.
dyed 12 Call. Jul. of the year 840, in the year of his life 64, of rule 27; and
was buried among the Mediomatricans in the Cathedral of Arnulph by his brother
Drogon Bishop of that City. Whose departure, a dire eclipse of the Sun
foreshewed In the life of Lewis. Ann.
the day before Lord's Day of the Ascension; which was the day before the Nones
of May, the 9th hour of the day.

CHAP. IX. What things were carried on under Nicephorus, Michael Curopalatas,
Leo the Armenian, Michael Balbus, Theophilus, in the East, from the year 800,
to 841.
IN the East, Irenes, as we have said, being cast forth in the year 802,
Nicephorus took to him the Empire and Bardan, who was brought up by the
Soldiers against his will to the same height: being removed, he took to him
Stauracius his son, a partaker of imperial Majesty, Theoph. Paul. Diac. b. 24.
12 Constable. Account, in the month December. of the year 803, a covetous man, and
treacherous, through the learning of the Manichees, unto whose magical arts he
was given. Therefore disagreeing from the holy things of Christians, he dealt
very badly with Bishops, Clerks and Monks, and commanded them to be oppressed
and trodden under foot by the Magistrates. He had a War with the Saracens, from
whom Peace being purchased on most shameful conditions, he never faithfully
performed it. He going about to lead an Army against the Bulgarians, made the
Churches tributaries. Concerning which thing to a certain familiar friend
complaining, his heart was hardened, as once Pharaoh's, he confessed, God so
willing it. Neither was the punishment of his wicked head, long deferred. He
being compassed about by the Bulgarians, fell with the flour of his whole
Empire, Theoph. Miscel. 24. chapter 25.
in the year 811, July 26. when he had commanded (...) years. The same.
Stauracius being wounded in fight, reigned a few months.

For in the same year Theoph. Misc. chapter 24. Zon. Ced.
Michael Curopalates, by firname Rengabe 5. October. weekday 5, is proclaimed
Emperor, a man famous for godliness and peaceable arts: but therefore not fit
for warlike affairs. Wherefore he being overcome by the Bulgarians in the year
813, he gave place in Dominion unto Leo of Armenia not against his will, who
was crowned by Nicephorus the Patriarch, 6 Constable. Acc. 11 day of July, 2d.
weekday: when in the same year (which must needs be of Christ the 813, the Sun
had the 4th day of May suffered an Eclipse, as Theoph. Misc. chapter 24. and 42.
Theophanes writes, whose history ends this year.

Furthermore, the same Theoph. Misc. 24. chapter 31.
Theophanes being witness, Michael bent all his endeavor to establish the
agreement of the Eastern Church. For it was rent into parties, when as Plato
and Theodore Governors of the Studites, loaded with all praise, did therefore
disagree from Nicephorus, otherwise a most holy man; because he, of a layman,
had been made a Bishop; both because he had received to communion Joseph the
steward of the house, who had joined the marriage of Constantine the son of
Irenes, and Theodota. For which cause Theodore with his brother Joseph Bishop
of Thessalonica, and Plato, was banished, in the year 809, in the month of
January, from which banishment, Michael a little after called him back again.

Curopal. Zon. Cedr.
Leo of Armenia, in the year 813, in the month of July took the Empire, much
unlike to Michael. For he raged on holy images, and Catholics, specially
Monks, with all cruelty, using Theodorus his encourager unto that thing: whom
indeed, Nicephorus the Patriarch being driven away, he made Prelate of
Constantinople, Ced. Zon.
a Prince otherwise not unprofitable to the Commonwealth. He commanded 7 years,
5 months; and on the very day of the Lords birth, by Michael Balbus, whom as
guilty against Prerogative-royal, he held in prison, he was amongst his very
holy duties slain in the year of Christ 820, in which presently reigned Curop.
Zon. Cedr.
Michael from a default of his tongue called [Balbus] or Stuttering, born at
Amdrium, which is a Town of Phrygia, Zon. Cedr.
where had lived a certain sect, out of the filth of Jews, Manichees, and other
pests; the which Michael having followed, he banished holy images, and all
Catholic name or authority: Cedr.
he thrust out Euthymius and Methodius most holy men, into banishment; also by
his son Theophilus he receives the one with lethern whips even to death.
Methodius afterward held the Patriarchship of Constantinople. Curopal. Zon.
Cedr.
He overcame Thomas a certain Tyrant, providing against him with the help of
the Bulgarians, and butchered him with all kind of cruelty.

Cedre. Zon.
Crete about this time being possessed by the Saracens of Spain, about the year
823. But Sicily by the Africans in the year 828, through the treason of
Euphemius, who being thrust through in the siege of Syracusa, paid the
punishment of his tre^^hery. After that, Calabria, and Apulia, and many places
of Italy obeyed the Saracens. The same authors.
He dyed in the year 829, after 8 years, and nine months rule.

The same Authors.
Theophilus his son followed this in the month of Oct: 8 Constable. Acc. as
Cedrenus writes: without doubt in the year which I have said, 829, an imitator
of his Father's ungodliness. For he both persecuted the worshippers of Images,
and chiefly dealt disgracefully with Theophanes and Theodore, brethren far
excelling in piety. Yet the same man is reported to have been a most strict
Requirer of Justice. And enjoying the Empire 12 years and three months, he
departed out of this life in the year of Christ 841, being the next after the
death of Lodovick Pius.

CHAP. X. Of affairs of the Western Empire under the successor of CHARLES the
GREAT; And of others, from the year 841. to about 900. And especially of the
Kings of France; and of Famous Men.
AFter the departure of Ludovick Pius the Emperor, The Civil wa^ of the sons
of Ludovick.
there arose a disagreement amongst his sons concerning the right of the
Kingdom, or reign, and board. Lotharius the Emperor who was eldest, desired
to draw all unto himself. This man, Ludovick and Charles, their forces being
joined together, resisted; and he being overcome 7. Call. July, they chased him
in a great battle unto Fontinata a Village, Chron. Pith. Regin. Herman. O tho.
First. 5. chapter 15. Mary of Scotland.
in the year of Christ 841. In which fight, so great a slaughter of the French
was made, as they had not remembered hitherto to have been.

The year following, Lotharius being again put to flight, at length they agree
among themselves, and thus they divided their fathers kingdom: Unto Lotharius,
besides the Roman Empire, that is, Regin.
Rome, and Italy, Otho. Fris. l. 5. c. 35. sig.
the seat of Belgica: which is said to have got the name of Loraine from him,
and is environed by these two Rivers Scald and Rhyne, as Sigebert says in the
year 844, and also the Province of Burgundy. And to Ludovick all Germany unto
the River Rhine, Anno 5. c. 19. Sigeb. A. 844.
and beyond it for convenience of Wine, three Cities more, viz. Mentz, Spires,
and Worms. And Charles had to his lot the West Countries of France, Otho. Regin.
sig. vide c. car. call 37. and firm. ibid.
from the River Maze unto the English Seas. Therefore he constrained Pipin and
Charles, sons of his Brother Pipin, because they claimed the right of Aquitane
to become Monks, and Sigebert refers this to the year eight hundred fifty two.

Council. Gall. To. 3. p. 194. and seq. Flodoa. l. 3. c. 12. Meyerus.
His daughter Judith, which he had begotten of Hermetrude being married to
Ethelred Flodoar.
King of England, after his death returned into France, and was ravished not
unwillingly by the Earl Baldwin Conc. Gall. Tom. 3. Judith Ealvus daughter
ravished by Baldwin.
in the year 862. Wherefore Baldwin being Conc. Gal. p. 213. To. 3.
anathematized by the Bishops sentence, he went to Pope Nicholas to Rome, who
with earnest prayers, at last obtained his pardon from the King, Baldwin being
then reconciled, and the marriage celebrated, he received Flanders from the
King for her Dowry, in the year of our Lord 866.

Ann. Pith. segeb. Her. Moria. Regin. Otho. Fris. 9.
Then was Lotharius the third, Emperor of the West after Charles the Great, and
governed the Empire about some fifteen years, but in the year of Christ 855
being wearied with the management of humane affairs, he gave over to his three
sons the government of the Kingdom, and became a Monk in the Prunian
Monastery, where he died the third of October, his sons were Lewis to whom he
left Italy with the Empire, Lotharius to whom he gave Lorain, and Charles who
had Burgundy, Cap. Cart. Call. Loc. Cit.
after whose death the two other brothers divided his estate; and of it Lions,
Belanson and Vienna fell to Lotharius's Lot.

Lewis the II. was the fourth Emperor, and began to rule in the year 855.
Otho. Fris. 5. c. 6.
and Governed the Empire 19. years, unto the year 875. he warred against the
African Saracens who spoiled and destroyed Italy, and he brought under
subjection Otho. Fris. 5. c. 4. Sigeb.
Adelgisus the Captain of the Herpines, and although that being by him
circumvented he made an ignominious agreement, having driven him out of Italy,
he forced him to fly into the Isle of Corsis: Tom. 3. Con. Gall. p. 189. Otho.
Fris. l. 5. c. 3. and 4. Herm. Aimo. 5. c. 29. Sigeb. Anno. 863. Anast. in
Nicol. prim. Ann. Pith. 863.
His brother Lotharius being ensnared by the love of Waldrada the Harlot, he
resolved to reject and repudiat his wife, Theurberga, Bosones's daughter,
charging her with fals^^rimes, about which thing having first written to
Nicholaus the Popish Bishop, delaying too long, he assembled a Synod at
Aquisgrane, the third of May, in the year 862. of eight Bishops, the chiefest
of whom were Guntharius of Agrippina, and Thurgandus of Treveris, who permitted
him to Marry waldrada: Con. Gal. To. 3. p. 217. An. Pith.
The which Nicolaus disapproving, and having convoked another Synod at
Divodurum in Brabant, it was held the year following being the 865th year, with
an event as the first, and from this Council were sent Ambassadors to Rome,
Guntharius and Thurgandus, whom Nicholas the Pontiff degraded, and
anathematised the Metensian Synod, in the Council of Lateran, yet they
despising the Pope's authority, still behaved themselves as Bishops, but
Nicholaus ordained others to be created in their places. Regino. and Caet.
citati. Lotharius's dreadful death.
Lotharius after frequent overthwarting, at length being called by the Emperor
Lewis, to help him against the Saracens, he went to Rome in the year 869. two
years after Nicholaus's death, and having by deceit and lying, obtained his
pardon of Hadrian, Nicholas his successor, having sworn by the Communion of
our Lords body, that he would refrain himself from the company of Waldrada the
Harlot, and that he would be under the Pope, his power and Law, he was
deservedly punished for this his perjury, and horrid offense, being eaten up
with a grievous sickness, he died at Placentia, Regino.
the sixth of August in the same year. Ann. Pith.
Some say that he dyed July, and that he did not obtain of Hadrian what he was
come forth to do. Charles Calvus, and Lewis King of Germany, Cap. Car. Call. Tit.
357. Herm. Reg.
did divide his Kingdom amongst themselves. It seems that rather by him, then
by his father, his Kingdom was called Lorain.

In the time of those Emperors Charles surnamed Calvus, was King of the West
Countries of France: Charles Calvus King of France
he was a cunning and fraudulent Prince, thirsting after the right of others,
Cap. Car. Call. p. 407. Aimo 5. c. 32. Regin. Herman. Marian.
who in the thirty sixth year of Francis, and of our Lord 875, having heard of
Lewis the Emperors death, flying to Rome, he was crowned August by John the
eighth, on Christmas day. Sig. 876.
Whereupon he raised his spirit very high, and after the Grecians custom,
walked with a Surplice. After this he dies in the Month of October, in the
year of our Lord eight hundred seventy seven, as the third of his Empire, says
Floardus; after the death of his father Pius, thirty seven years; being
poisoned by Sedecias the Jew, whom he employed for one of his chief Physicians.
His brother Lewis King of Germany dyed in the year of our Lord eight hundred
seventy and six, leaving three sons behind, Otho. 6. c. 6.
Carlomannus, who had for his lot Bavaria, Pannonia, Bohemia, and Moravia;
Lewis, who had the East Countries of France, Thuringia, Saxony, Friesland, and
Lorain; and Charles Crassus, who obtained Almain. Of whom, Ann. Pith. Aimo. 5.
c. 33. and 34.
Lewis Calvus repulsed back Calvus from the borders of Lorain, with a great
slaughter, as he was invading the Country in the eight hundred seventy sixth
year, in the Month of October and it is recorded that he died the thirteenth
of December Pith. An. Herman. Aimo. 5. c. 40.
Anno 882,

Carlomannus King of Baria, dyed in the 880th year of Christ, as Pithoeus's
Chronicles do record, having a son called Arnolphus, of whom we shall speak
hereafter.

Charles Calvus the fifth Emperor being dead, then was the sixth Elected.

Who was Charles Crassus the son of Lewis King of Germany Aimo. 5. c. 40. Otho.
Pris. 6. c. 8.
in the year 888, for they are mistaken that reckon Lewis Balbus, Calvus's son
amongst the Emperors: the mistake does arise hence, Aimo. 5. c. 37.
that he is said to have been crowned by Pope John, the seventh of September,
in the year 878. but that was his kingly Coronation, and not his Imperial,
although John favoring Balbus, and for this cause being vexed by the Romans,
he was constrained to depart the Town, as Sigebert relates unto the year of
Christ 878. Thence being gone to Balbus, he was a whole year with him: Ann.
Pith.
then dyed Balbus three years after his father, the fourth of April, Aimo c.
39.
Parasceue: Which character happened in the year 879. which is the Sign
punctually remarked by the Annalls, Ann. Pith. and Regino. Sigeb.
by reason of the two Eclipses that were the year before, one of the Moon the
fourteenth of October, and the other of the Sun upon the 29th of the same
Month, which were in the year 878. being the year immediately foregoing, that
wherein Lewis dyed. He had by Arnsgardis his first wife (which afterward, by
his fathers command, he rejected) two sons, Lewis and Charlemain; and by
Adelaidis, Charles the Simple whom, Aimo 5. c. 42. and Floriac. Chr. Fragm.
dying, he then left in the Cradle. After a long contest then were the kings of
France created.

Cap. Call. Aimo. 5. c. 40. Sigeb. 878.
Lewis to whom by lot fell France, and Normandy, and Charlemain, who had
Burgundy, and Aquitane, Boson being rejected, who was brother to Richildis,
Calvus's wife, the son in Law of Lewis the Emperor, son of the Emperor
Lotharius, whom the same Charles Calvus had made king of Provence, in the year
878, as Sigebert says, as he then possessed Loraine: Hugo, Lotharius's son by
Waldrada, dyed, Aimo c. 5. 39. and 40.
and Lewis in the year eight hundred eighty two in August; and Charlemain, also
died in the eight hundred eighty fourth year of Christ.

Otho. Fris. l. 6. c. 8. and 9. Sigeb. Herm.
They being dead, then is Charles le Gross created Emperor in the year 885.
who possessed not this new kingdom of France longer then unto the year 889,
which he was forced to forsake by reason of his distemper, both in mind and
body. Having had ill success against the Normans, he fell into that calamity,
that he did beg his sustenance of Arnulphus, son to Charlemain king of Bavaria.
He died in the year 888. Otto Frisigensis, Hermannus, and Regino do commend him
for his piety: but yet he is not praised in that he was jealous without cause
of his Wife, which was a most chaste woman, and that he divorced her from
himself.

Charles being taken out of the way, both the Roman Empire and the Kingdom of
France, were for a time in a floting condition. And so is Berengarius, son to
Ebergardus, Duke of Forojulium, made King. Luith. Prand. l. x. c. 6.
Wido, being cast out of hope of enjoying the Kingdom of France, after Calvus,
who was son to Lambertus, Duke of Spoletum, he takes up Arms against
Berengarius, and having overcome him, forces him to fly to Arnulphus, whom the
hope of enjoying Italy soon led thither. Maria.
Now wido enjoying the name of Emperor, died in Italy, in the year 894. Luith.
1. c. 20. Otto. Pris. 6. c. 13. Sigon. 6. de Reg. Ital. Onurf. 3. de Romans Princ.
whose son Lambertus who in the eight hundred ninety and second year of Christ,
had received the title of Emperor, was killed Anno 899, as he was a hunting.

Then Arnulphus, Charlemaine's son, as Lambert was yet alive, was created
Emperor of the West, by Pope Formosus, in the year of Christ eight hundred
ninety six: Luith. 1. 3. Herma. Otto. Fris.
who from Bishop of Torquemada was made Pope of Rome, in the year eight hundred
ninety one, Sergius being ejected out of the place, who by violence had
invested himself of the Priests dignity. But Arnulphus was Emperor but three
years; for he died eaten up by Vermin Regino Luith. Maria. Lamp. Shaph. Herm.
Sig. 902. Ursp.
in the year 899, the fifth of December, as Luithprandus records.

Now Formosus being dead in the year eight hundred ninety six, he was dug
out of his Grave the year following by Stephen his successor, and being
uncloathed of his holy Garments, and three of his fingers being cut off, he was
cast into the Tyber, because he had left his first seat and usurped the Roman
See. But this his act was recalled and nullified by the Council assembled at
Ravenna by John the ninth, in the year 898, as Sigonius says, who records the
decrees of that Council, Lib. 5.
of which also treats Rubeus. Others, as Baronius, say that it was in the
year 904. and Sigebert would have it the year before.

In the mean while, the French by Arnolphus's consent, elect Regino Frag. Pith.
Otto or rather Odo the Earl of Paris for their King, in the year 889. until
that Charles son to Balbus Lewis came to age: he was son to Robert Duke of
France, Regino.
who was slain by the Normans, in the year 878. And he governed the French nine
years, unto the year Reg. Sige. Odotannus.
898, when dying the third of January, he charged and besought all the other
Princes of France, to confer and yield the Kingdom, to Charles, Lewis Balbus's
son, with whom he had already waged war for some years: But Sigebert says that
the Franks, Odo tarrying too long in Aquitaine, recalled CHARLES to the Crown,
being then about twelve years old (as Sigebert says); but we shall show
afterward that he was older, since which time there is a Civil War between
CHARLES and Sige. abho. de obs. Par. l. 2.
Odo. The History of Popesse Joanna, was about this time, for she is recorded
to have been in the year eight hundred fifty and fourth year of Christ, in both
the Chronicles of Marianus Scotus, and Sigebertus, and she is reckoned between
Leo the 4th, and Benedict the 3d. But there is no mention made of this Joane in
any of the emended exemplaries: and also Leo Allatius Com. de Joanna Pap.
Photius, who lived in that same Age, names Benedictus, Nicolaus, and then
John, without interlining any other between them; that it might appear that
this sporting fable was feigned by some idle Jesters.

This is that Leo the 4th, Anast. in Leone.
who added to old Rome, new Rome, which he called Leonina, when the Saracens
overran Italy, defeated the Venetians Fleet, and affrighted the Romans far
and near.

In the time of Lotharius the Emperor, flourished Sigeb.
Rhabanus Maurus, who from a Monk was made Bishop of Mentz in Germany: and
Hincmarus Bishop of Rhemes in France, under King Charles Calvus. Conc. Gal.
Tom. 3. p. 64. etc.
By these two was refuted and condemned Godescalus Monk of Orbs, who is
thought to have renewed the Doctrine of the predestinarians. And he being
convicted in the Synod at Mentz, wherein Rabanus was President, and by it
condemned in the year 848, and in the same year having received the same
sentence at Rhemes of Hincmarus; after he was whipped, he was forced to cast
himself his own books into the fire, and then was cast into a prison: But
Florus, Master-Deacon of Lions, in the name of the Church of Lions refuted
Hincmarus, and reprehended and disappointed the whole transaction against
Godescalus, by publishing a learned and exquisite Treatise. Tom. 3. Conc. Gal.
p. 352.
In the time of Nicolas the first, Johannes Scotus a very learned man lived
then in France, he turned Dionysius's books into Latin, concerning which
interpretation Pope Nicolas writ to Charles Calvus.

CHAP. XI. Of the Normans Incursions, and of the diverse overthrowes they gave
at several times to the French, and of Normandy (then called Neustria) granted
to them to inhabit.
IN this time the Norman's Incursions and Robberies were frequent all over
France, and very hurtful to all the Provinces thereof: They are reported to be
Danes by Nation, and that they came out of Scanzia which now is called Nortway,
Annal. Pith. an. Bio. etc.
who, when Charles the Great swayed the Scepter, had resolved to sail along the
North Seas of France, to pillage and plunder the Sea Coast; and to indammage
and overrun the borders of Frisland and Scotland; but because that there the
limits and Confines of the Empire were strongly fortified, their assaults were
soon refelled, and those their assaults they endeavored to continue during
Lewis Pius; but after his death, Chron. Besuense in Script. Nort. p. 22.
when as the whole Empire was tossed by civil commotions the Soldiers being
drawn away from the Sea-garrisons, that so the maritime Country might be
destitute of forces, then began they more boldly to run abroad and make
excursions without any danger, and then they no more fell upon pyraticall
excursions, but made lawful and gallant Expeditions into the heart of the
Kingdom. Gesta. North.
In the year immediately following, Lewis death, being the 841 year of Christ,
having on a sudden seized upon Roan, they spoiled and destroyed all with fire
and sword, and having run and destroyed all along the Seine, they got infinite
store of plunder and booty. Chron. Turon. in hist. North. p. 25. and Odo. clun.
Tract. de revers St. Mart. in Bibl. clun. p. 117.
In the same year being gone out under their General Hasting, against those of
Tours, as they had environed the City round about, they were repulsed from the
walls of the City by St. Martin's help, upon the 4th of May. Gesta North. and
Chron. vetus Scriptum.
Two years after, they were conveyed and advanced into the passages of the
River Liger, by the treason of Count Lambert, who had revolted from the French
to Nomenoius of Britain; they take the Town of Nentz, where they put to death
the Bishop as he was employed in the holy Ceremony on the Lords day, with many
Clergy men, and a great multitude of men and women: Some Annals do record that
this was done in the year 843, but Regino referrs it to the issue of 853, at
which time he writes that the Normans fleet aboarded the banks of Liger, to
which the Fuldensian Chronicle and Sigebert do consent: but it is very like
that in each year they invaded Gesta North. theg. Odo. Clun. and Chron. Turon.
Sig.
Nentz by their entry at the River Liger, also in the latter year after they
had plundered and sacked the Town being advanced against those of Tours, and so
being shut up by the Channels of the two Rivers Care and Liger that were
exceedingly increased, and so being hindered from approaching to the City, they
burnt all the suburbs and parts adjacent to the City together with the
Monastery that was called the great, so renowned by reason of St. Martin's
habitation in it, having sacrificed an hundred and twenty Friars in it, and
exposed Abbot Heberne to cruel Torments, and thence having plundered the
Country of Le Main, as the report was, that they were returning against Tours,
Transportation of St. Martin.
the Clergy carried St. Martin's body first all about Orleans, and thence a
among the Antissidorians, where having been kept for some years, it became
famous by several and strange miracles; which when those of Tours, all things
being pacified, went to fetch back and redemand, and that the Antissiodorians
refused to deliver again, Ingelgerius Earl of Angers, having recovered it by
force of arms, carried it back into its former seat in the year of Christ 885.
Gesta North.
But the Normans upon the 6th of November, in that year 853, destroyed the City
of Tours, with St. Martin the Cathedral, and other Churches that were all
burnt, and also Juliomagus of Angier. Chron. Fuld. in Hist. North. p. 15.
By which sacriledges and wicked deeds, the Deity being moved to anger, there
arose civil divisions and wars amongst them; wherein besides an infinite
number of Commons, the Nobility was almost all destroyed, so that the royal
line was all destroyed by it, but one only child; The Fuldensian Annals say,
that this happened in the year of Christ 854. Gesta North.
And in the year following, as they went against the City of Poictiers, they
were routed with a great slaughter by the Guyannians, insomuch, that not many
above 300 escaped: But two years after, being the 857th of Christ, having
assaulted Paris, they burnt down the Suburbs, and diverse Churches in them,
amongst whom was the Church of St. Genovesa: the Citizens obtained of them with
a vaste sum of money, that they burnt no more.

Gesta North.
Then being carried, after a long and vaste circuit between Spain and Africa,
by the passage out of the Mediterranean Sea into the Ocean, and going upon the
Rhosne, they spoiled all the Countries along unto Valentia, and making an
excursion into Italy, they on a sudden plundered Pisa in Thuscia. Being
returned to Paris Ead. Gesta. St. Croix the
in the year 861, they burnt the Cathedral of St. Vincent, or rather St.
German, which had four years before been redeemed with a vast sum of money,
as we have already showed. They made also an excursion in Orleans, and the
Country all about, in the year 865, and having burnt the Monastery of St.
Floris, they destroyed the City at the same time. Cathedral of Orleans
miraculously preser ved.
In which Town all the other Churches being consumed, the only Cathedral
called St. Croix, could not be destroyed by fire, although the Barbarians cast
upon it an infinite number of faggots and billets.

At that time did Charles Calvus reign in France, Gesta North.
who being more unable by his mind then by his power, to withstand and repel
such calamity, he unworthily made a League with them, with a great sum of
money in the year 867; Ead. Gesta. and Rhegn.
nevertheless, their rage could not be so restrained, but that in the same
year under Hasting their General, being carried along the River Liger, being
joined with the Britains, they destroyed as they were wont to do the Country
of Nentz, Angers, Lemain and Tours: but thence returning loaded with great
booty and plunder, and being set upon by Rupert the Governor, and Ragnold Duke
of Aquitane, and having slain them both, and routed the French, they safely
retired themselves with their booty into their Navies, Gesta North.
the Annals record, that the Barbarians at that time were not above four
hundred, and that by so small a party their Generals were slain, and their
great Armies defeated, one of whom wrongfully detained the Monastery of St.
Hilary, and the other that of St. Martin. Hugo surnamed Abbas supplied Rupert's
office, and, as well as they, was Superintendent over some certain Monasteries
in the office of an Abbot; for his two sons Eudo, or rather Odo and Rutbert
could not yet by reason of their young age assume the dignity upon them.

Rheg. Sigeb. A. 875.
The Barbarians being puffed up by this success, that they might leave off
pyracy, and settle themselves in some certain place in France, they took
possession of Angiers then destitute of her Citizens who were all fled away,
and resolve to fortify it, and bring their Wives and children with all their
goods into it: At which Charles being displeased, he calls to his help Solomon,
petty King of Guien, and having gathered a strong Army, he besieges the Town:
but Charles being tired, and his Army wearied and decayed, what with famine,
what with pestilence, and by the tediousness of the siege, suffered them to
depart the Town upon Articles in the year of Christ 873, having received a
sum of money.

Rheg.
King Calvus and his son Lewis being dead, Lewis Karlomannus's brother
restrained with some good success these Normans from farther pillaging Belgia
and Somona, in the year 881. Gest. Nort. Fuld. Chr. Rheg. Aim. 5. c. 61.
But they having turned their courses and excursions into that part of Germany,
which is on this side the Rhine, they left every where Monuments of their rage,
they then burnt the Palace of Aquisgrane, and the City Trevers and Cullen in
the 882 year of our Lord. Ibid.
Charles Crassus who was then Emperor, mistrusting his strength, he concluded
peace with their Kings Godefridus and Sigefridus, having yielded to them
Friesland, and given them many great gifts. Gesta North. Rheg. Sig. A. 880.
Some Annals add, that Godefridus having been baptized, and admitted into the
Church, and having the Emperor for his Godfather, married Gisla or rather
Gilla, King Lotharius's daughter.

Gesta North. Rheg. Sig. A. 885,
The Normans being departed thence, advance their Forces against Carlomannus,
who, his brother Lewis being dead, reigned alone in France, and screws from him
a good sum of money, and charge him with a tribute for the future, Anno 883,
but he dying the year following, they returned again into his Kingdom to
plunder and sack it with a puissant Army, and they said, That they might
lawfully thus do, because that they had made no peace with any but with the
King. Whereby the Princes being affrighted, they desire Charles Crassus the
Emperor to take the kingdom of France upon himself, hoping and assuring
themselves to be well gerded and secured by his Armies and power, who was ruler
of so many Nations against the attempts and invasions of the Normans; but they
were much deceived in their hope.

Abbo. Flori ac Gesta North. Rheg. sig.
For the Barbarians having a stronger Army then this King, did hazard to
besiege Paris, Joan. Asser. Pith. editus ante Abbonem F^ld. Chr. The siege of
Paris.
in the year 886, but the City was relieved, and the siege raised by Odo a
valiant Commander son to Rutbert, and Gosline the Bishop, who defended it, and
they returned against it in the year 887: until that Charles in vain assaulting
them, Rheg.
at length made composition with them, granting them to go into Neustria which
had rebelled against him, and to sack it and pillage it: A. 888.
Sigebert declares, that all that part of France was granted to the Normans,
not to spoil it, but to possess it by a perpetual right and privilege.

Abbo. l. 2. de obsid. Lat. p. 476. Edit. Pith.
That peace was concluded, as it appears in the month of March, in the year
887, and Charles retired thence in November following, neither did he long after
this enjoy his Kingdom, nor his life, for the Kingdom was taken away from him;
And Arnulfus was made Emperor in his place, and Odo Roberts son was made King
of France, who both did not a little endamage the Normans. Otho Fris. l. 6. c.
11. Sl^^^ A. 895.
Arnulphus as they were making incursion into Lorain, cut them almost all off
in the year 893. Abbo of Florence, a man of great piety, and renowned for the
glory of his Martyrdom, writes thus much touching Odo's wars against the
Normans. The Normans, Charles Crassus being yet alive, contrary to their
agreement of peace with him, being again returned against Paris, were at length
hemmed in by the Parisians, and so being constrained to entreat pardon, they
engaged their faith never again to return to it, being dismissed upon these
terms; yet soon after according to their custom, they returned and made great
slaughter and robberies, at which the Parisians being exceedingly moved, they
put to death as many of the Normans as they found (now there were about some
five hundred). After this, when Charles Crassus was dispossessed, Odo having
accepted the title of King, fought valiantly against the Normans, and routed 18
thousand of them upon Mount Faulcon, (which is a hill near the Suburbs of the
City) and this was done in the year 898.

Rheg.
The Normans last attempt against Paris in the year 890, had no better success
then the former; so that despairing the taking of it, at last they went away.
Besuenses in hist. North. Dudo. l. 2.
Some Annals assert, that this last siege lasted seven years; but I think that
by intervals of time, they at diverse times renewed the siege; for Sigebert
says, that they did so for some years, and that whilst Charles the Simple
reigned after Odo's death, the Normans under the command of Rollo, made
excursions into Paris, overrunning all the Country about; and this is also
recorded as worth memory by ancient Historians, that as Chartres was by them
besieged the Virgin Mary's smock being carried, which Charles Calvus had brought
from Besanson into that place, cast in them such a terror and fear, that they
fled away headlong, and in a confusion. This is mentioned in one Turon. p. 26.
hist. North.
Chronicle to have been in the 6th year of Arnulphus, Ambaziensi. p. 25. ibid.
and in another to have been seven years after Odo's death, which is thought to
be the 905th year of Christ; In vetere membrana.
some say, that it was in the 911th year of our Lord, when the battle was
fought by Richard and Robert, the two Generals, near Chartres, with the
Normans, who by them were defeated, of which expedition Lib. 2.
Dudo makes mention.

Dudo. l. 2. gesta North. Floriac. Chr. p. 34. Hist. North.
At length, Rollo General of the Normans by the means of Franco Bishop of
Rouen, made peace and alliance with Charles the simple, and Charles gave him his
daughter Gisla after he was Baptized and admitted into the Church, with all the
Maritine country of France, which extends from the River Epta unto the Sea,
and is from them called Normandy, Robert Duke of the French, was his Godfather,
and was by him called Robert, Ordericus. l. 3.
this was done in the year 712, as Dudo says, who farther adds this; That
Neustria by reason of their frequent excursions and devastations, being
unhabited and ruinated, and not being sufficient to yield them plenty enough,
then King Charles granted them the lesser Britain, whereupon they might live.

And thus did the Normans, after they had overrun, almost by the space of a
hundred years, a great part of Europe, and chiefly France, which they had
exceedingly molested by their saccaging and pillaging of it, at last they
obtained in it a certain habitation, and thence going against other Nations,
they got a great renown in War, and the power and dominion of some of those
Nations.

CHAP. XII. Of the Empire of the East under Michael, and his Mother Theodora,
Barda, Basilius, Macedo, Leo the Philosopher, and of St. Ignatius, Pnocius, and
of the eighth Synod.
1. Curopal. Zon. Ced. Glycas. Constable. Manass. Michael and Theodora. The
Bulgarians converted to Christ.
THeophilus dying, left his son Michael to be Emperor of the East, under the
regency of his Mother Theodora, a religious and Heroic woman, which, restoring
the holy images, created Methodius a very godly man Patriarch, she turned away
Bogoris king of Bulgaria, and drove him back as he was going to war against the
Romans: and he by his sisters exhortation, which being taken Prisoner in war,
had embraced the Christian faith at Rome, gave up his name with all his people
to Christ, which deed the Pithian Annals relate to have been in the year of
Christ eight hundred sixty five.

Sigeb. 855.
It is recorded that for quietness and privacy sake he became a Monk, but
understanding that his son, who was his successor, did ill govern the
Commonwealth, and intended to return to his former superstition, he took again
the Kingdom upon himself, and having put out the eyes of this his son, and
conferred the authority and dominion upon his younger son, he returned into a
Monastery.

Michael's sloathfullnesse, and his Uncle Barda's ambition, troubled and
molested this so happy and flourishing Empire: for by this man's counsel
Michaell drove his Mother Theodora to a private life in the year 855. Curop.
Bardas.
after she had ruled the Commonwealth, 14. years. Then all things being
carried on according to Barda's will, who was made Curopalates, then Caesar,
Michaell gave himself over to all sorts of games, sports, and drinking. Idem.
et Nicetas in S. Igna.
At last Bardas Caesar by Michaels consent, together with that of Basilius
Macedo the Protestatour, is slain the 5th of April in the year 866. Indict.
14. as Curopalates says: Eutrop. Ced.
After this, Basilius is made Emperor by Michael, the twenty sixth of May on a
Whitsunday, who as he desired to recall him from his wickedness, and loose
conversation to an amendment of life, he provoked his hatred against himself
and by it moved him to treachery. Now to avoid these snares Basilius slew
Michael as he was drunken with Wine, because he had offered the Government to a
Water-man, after he had ruled the Empire 25. years, that is 11. alone, and 14.
with his Mother.

During Michaels Empire, St. Ignatius, son to the Emperor Curopalates, made
Eunuch by Leo the Armenian, and shut up into a Monastery, was created Nicetas
in Ignat. Curo. p. Zon. Ced. Anast. praet. in 8. Synod. Photius condemns
Ignatius.
Constantinopolitan Patriark, after Methodius in the year 847, and thence being
expelled by Barda's means 11. years after, because he would not excommunicate
Theodora after she was degraded, and yet had driven Bardas out of the
Communion, because of his customary incest with his sons wife, in whose place,
Photius a laick man was ordained by Bardas, and so Ignatius was condemned by
him in a Council, who likewise made no scruple to pass sentence upon Nicholas.

Curop. Zon. Ced. Glyc.
Basilius Macedo, Michael being taken away, ruled alone the Empire in the year
876. he was of low extraction born in Macedonia, as Zonaras writes, detracting
from Curapalates, and secretly speaking ill of him because he did fetch
Basilius's pedigree from the Arsacides: for Basilius's Predecessors had their
Original from Armenia. He refreshed and restored the Commonwealth which was
undone by Michaels sloathfullnesse; for he committed the Magistracy to very
honest persons, and willed them to execute Justice and equity, and he himself
sometimes appeared in the Judgment Seat. Also he had a prosperous success in
his war again the Saracens, and the Manichees by Chrysocoris his General as
they molested and troubled the Romans, and he in the first place was a true
lover of the Catholic faith, and took great care to preserve it. St. Ignatius
was recalled from banishment by him, She 8th Synod
and Photius rejected, against whom, in the 869th year was the 8th Provincial
Synod convoked at Constantinople, by which Photius was banished. But in the
year 878, at which time Ignatius died, he recovered the seat, being recalled by
Basilius, who was cheated by the delusions of one Santabarenus, and of Photius
himself. He governed the Empire with Curopal. Cedr.
Michael one year, and alone 19. and he died in the year 889. of Christ. At
which time Leo, Basilius's son, or, as other do say, of Michael Zona. Glyc.
who gave Eudoxia his concubine whom he had begotten with child, to Basilius
for his Wife, attained the Empire of the East: he was much addicted to the
Study of Philosophy, whence he was called by the name of Philosopher, Curop.
Zon. Ced. Glyc. Man.
Basilius had put him up in prison for suspicion by reason of the calumnies of
Theodorus Santabarenus the Monk, and at the Senate's request had released him:
But as soon as he took the Empire upon him, he revenged the injury upon
Santabarenus, and his friend and upholder Phocius the Patriarch, whom he turned
out of his seat. He fought with a bad success against the Bulgarians, their
King Simeon disturbing the peace, but then he overcame them by the help of the
Turks. He governed the Empire Zonar. Curop. 2.
25. years, and three Months; he died in the year 911, the 11th of June.

CHAP. XIII. The Kings of Italy, and the tumult under Vido, Lambert,
Berengarius, Radulphus, Hugo, and of the Germans first entrance into the
Kingdom of Italy.
From the year 900, or thereabouts, unto the 966.
Afterward there was a continual commotion of civil wars, especially in Italy
and France, the Kingdom sometimes being for these, and sometimes for those: of
which vicissitudes and alterations, I shall observe the sum.

Vido and his son Lambert being dead, the principality of Italy fell upon
Berengarius: Luith. 2. c. 10. Regino. Marian. Gotfr. Viterb. Joan. Villan. l.
3. chapter 4.
but Lewis being stirred up to be his competitor in the Province on this side
the Alps by Adelbert Marquess of Tuscia, Boson's son, by Hermingarde, daughter
to Lewis Junior, the Emperor, whom we have mentioned to be born when Lotharius
was Emperor, he having put Berengarius to flight, he was created Emperor at
Rome by the Pope in the year Diplo. ejuapud Sigon. 6. de reg. Ital. Onuf. 3. de
Romans Prin.
901, who three years after, by the Treachery of the said Adalbert, by whom he
was called, being taken at Verona by Berengarius, was deprived of his Eyes and
the Empire, in Regino Gotf. Otto. 6. chapter 15.
August in the year 904, as Regin. says; but Godfridus Viterb. asserts, that
it was in the year following; so also Otto Frisingensis.

Luith. l. 2.
Then Berengarius his competitor being cut off, he again obtained the Kingdom
of Italy, and was anointed by John the 10th in September, Anno 915, as Sigo. 6.
de reg. Ital.
Sigonius shows by his Bulls; but Alderbert Marquis of Eporedia, and some
other Nobles of Italy called Luith. 2. c. 26.
Rodulphus King of Burgundy at Berengarius's long delay, to take the Kingdom of
Italy. And he not long delaying, he went thither Sigon. 6. de reg. Ital.
Flodoard. Onuf. 3. Romans Prin.
in the year 922, as Flodoard says, and having routed Berengarius's Army, he
was called King of Italy. Berengarius is killed by the treachery of one
Flambert Flod. in Chron. Luith. c. 20. Sigo.
in the year 924, at Verona, whither he had fled from the snares that were laid
for him, he had a daughter called Chisela, by whom Adelbert Marquess of
Eporedia begat Berengarius, who was afterward King of Italy.

Rodulphus kept not long the Kingdom of Italy after Berengarius's death,
because it was conferred by the Italian's conspiration upon Hugo Earl of
Provence Flod.
in the year 926. Luith. 3. c. 3. and 5.
Luitprandus says, That he was a valiant man, lover of piety as well as of
learning; but that waxing somewhat lascivious, he had many Concubines, but that
he begat of his lawful wife Alda, Lotharius, who afterward reigned with him;
Rodulphus went into Burgundy, Flod. Chr. Suppl. Regino.
where he dyed in the year 937, having reigned 48 years, beginning at the 898
year of our Lord, at which time he put the crown upon his head, and was the
first King of Burgundy, (as Sigebert says) or rather of Gallia on this side
the Alps, as Flodoard in his Chronicles calls him in the year 937, who writes,
that his son Conradus succeeded him.

Then in the year of Christ 926, Hugo began to reign in Italy, who was Earl of
Arles, Sig. and Onuf. Luith. 2. c. 13.
and remained in that dignity about some 20 years: At that time Marosia, Pope
Sergius the third's Strumpet, oppressed Rome by her usurpation and tyranny; and
of her he begat John, who also afterward was Pope; And Adelbertus Marquis of
Tuscia, begat also Albericus by her: which after she had married Vuido,
Adalbertus's son by Bertha, he being dead, married with Hugo, bringing him for
her dowry the Principality of Rome, in the year of Christ 928; but he was soon
after ejected thence by Albericus, Marosia's son: Then he took for his
co-partner in the Kingdom his son Lotharius, in the year of our Lord 932,
having given him to his wife Adeleidis, Rodulphus's daughter.

At length, Berengarius, the second Berengarius's Nephew, having plotted new
practices against Hugo, he fled to Otho King of Germany in the year 939, thence
being returned into Italy six years after, viz. Flodoard.
in the year 945, he thus covenanted with Hugo, who then was forsaken of all,
that he with his son Lotharius should content themselves with the title of
King, Berengarius King of Italy.
and that the management of the Kingdom and of all things should be left to
Berengarius; so Hugo having left his son Lotharius in Italy, he returned into
Provence in the year 947, two years after Lotharius's being dead.

Berengarius took upon him the title of King Flod.
in the year 950, together with his son Adalbertus, to whom intending to give
for wife Adaleidis, Lotharius's widow, she invited Otho King of Germany into
Italy, Regin. Suppl. Flod.
and married him in the year 951. Berengarius, after petitions and requests
made to Otho, obtained afterward the kingdom of Italy for some 12 years,
until that all the Italians being offended at the Government of this Tyrant,
fled again to Otho for aid, who being gone into Italy, Flod. reg. Lamb. Schaph.
Joan. Villa 3. c. 3.
in the year 962, received the Crown of the Empire of Pope John, Albericus's
son, and was saluted the first Emperor of Germany; he two years after led away
Lamb.
Berengarius into Bavaria, who at last dyed Reg. Suppl.
in the year 966 at Bamberg.

The most remarkable achievement that Hugo did above others, is his disturbing
and dispossessing the Saracens of Fraxine's Castle, Luith.
which they had possessed for some years, situated in Cottia, and strengthened
by the natural situation of the Alps, and therefore inaccessible and
impregnable, and thence sallying and making excursions into the
Neighbor-provinces, had been a terror to the Christians, endamaging them not
a little; Hugo put them to flight, by casting artificial fire into it in the
year 841, as Sigebert writes.

CHAP. XIV. The Kings of Germany, and then the Emperors of it, since the year
900, unto 985, Conrad. Henrick Auceps, Otto I. Otto II. And those things worthy
of memory that came to pass in the West under them.
DUring this time, Lewis, son to Arnulphus the Emperor, is elected in Germany
by the Princes, Marian. Regino. Otro Pris. 6. c. 15. Gotfr. Viterb. Ursper.
in the year 900: he reigned two years, but he neither had the Crown, nor the
Title of Emperor; Regino app. Lam.
For the Hungarians as he reigned, over-runing Germany, and having overcome
him, carried away much plunder and booty; Regino Herm.
he dyed in the year 911, and with him ended the posterity of the Carolians, as
Marian.
Otto Frisingensis says.

And in his place did succeed Otto 6. c. 15.
Conrad, the son of Conrad, who was slain by Adalbert or rather Albert, Earl of
the Franks, in the year 905, and obtained the kingdom of Germany Anno 912;
Luith. 2. c. 7. Reg. Gotfr. Otto 6. c. 6. Lamb. Marian.
yet some of the chiefest denied his command, but he adjoined them to himself
with a great deal of discretion; seven years are attributed to his reign, which
seem to end in the year 918; at which time Marianus and Trit. in Hirsan. Chr.
Trithemius say, that he dyed the 10th of June. Luith. 2. c. 7. Regino.
It is said, that dying, he enjoined his Princes not to choose any other
Successor then Henrick son of Otho Duke of Saxony, of Vitikindus's stock, who
was brought by Charles the Great to embrace the Christian faith.

Then was Conrad succeeded by Henrick, surnamed the Fowler, because he was much
given to fowling, Lamb. Marian. Vuitich. 2. Ditm. 2.
in the year 919, who obtained a memorable victory over the Hungarians, as they
spoiled and wasted Germany. Sigebert records two victories of great note, the
first in the 15th, the other in the 33 of his reign. Luith. 2. c. 8. and 9.
Luitprandus records the first, and asserts, that he obtained it from and by
the special providence of God, because of the vow he had made to destroy
utterly the Simoniack heresy; the which Sigebert says, was in the 922 year of
Christ; and Flodoard in his Chronicles says, That the last was in the year
933; after which the Germans ceased to pay tribute to the Saracens, says
Sigebert: He governed the Empire 17 years, and dyed the Reg. Maria. Gotfr:
Vuitich.
6th of July, in the 60th year of his age, Vuitich. 1. Ursperg. Gotfr. Viterb.
in the year of Christ 936, as he was preparing his journey to Rome. Thence he
took away from Rodulph King of the Burgundians by force of Arms Constantinus's
Spear that was adorned with Christ's nails; which afterward was wont to be
carried before the Emperors; Sigebert says, that he got it in the year of our
Lord 929.

Otho son to Henrick the Fowler by Malthides, daughter to Theodorick Prince of
the Saxons, was inaugurated king of Germany, Marian. Lamb Schaf. Gotfrr. Reg.
in the year 936, and obtained the kingdom some Gorfr. Viter. Vuitich. l. 6.
c. 2. Di^m. 2.
37 years, and was surnamed Great, not more by name then by desert. The
Sclavonians, or rather Bohemians were subdued by him after fourteen years War
that he had with their King, who had slain St. Vincent. Sigebert observes that
this was in the year 968. And then also the Belgae, or rather the Lorains,
under their General Gisibert, husband to Gerberga, Otho's sister, with whom
Henrick, Otho's Brother, and other of the chiefest men had conspired: Flod.
Regin.
who were all conquered by Otho, in the year nine hundred thirty nine, at which
time Lewis King of the Franks of the West, the son of Charles the Simple, having
made an invasion into Alsatia, was routed by Otho, and the Kingdom of Lorain
came under the Conquerours power, Otho. Fris. 6. c. 19. Got. Viter.
and afterward remained under the Dominion of the Almains, and thence being
invited into Italy by Adeleis, Widow of Lotharius, Hugo's son, he married her,
after he had betrothed the daughter of Edmond King of England. Sigebert
remarks, that it was in the year 934. At what time he brought Berengarius the
second under his subjection, and defeated the Hungarians, Reg. Herm. Flodoard.
in the year nine hundred fifty and five, insomuch that it is reported that not
above seven of them of their whole Army remained alive.

Oath. Frising. 6. c. 20.
Which Victory Otho himself ascribed to the Merits of St. Udalricus the Priest
of the Augustines, who being illustrious for his holiness, was created Bishop,
Herman. Otho the Emperor. Charles posterity failing.
in the year 924. and having officiated 50. years, he died in the 973. by
Herman's testimony. At length Otho being gone to Rome, he was saluted Emperor
in the year 962.

So the Roman Empire of the West descended from the posterity of Charles the
Great unto the Lombards, and from them to the Saxons, Vid. Otton. Fris. 6. c.
1. and 22. Got. Viter. Ursperg.
of whom Otho was the first Emperor. Although some Germans do reckon Conrade
and Henrick Auceps, amongst the Emperors: who nevertheless are omitted by
others, because they were neither anointed, nor crowned by the Roman Pontiff;
wherefore he is esteemed the first of the Almains.

Luith. 8. c. 6. and seq. Otto. Fris. 6. c. 21. and seq. Regin. sig. Marian.
Gotfr. Viter. Jean. Vill. l. 4. c. 1.
Otho the Great was created Emperor of the West, and Crowned by Pope John the
twelfth, in the year 962. But after he was departed out of Rome, John, who was
Albericus's son, being called before that Octavianus, revolting from Otho,
called to Rome Adalbert, Beringarius's son. Against whom being returned with an
Army, and having put them both to flight, he convoked a Synod of Bishops at
Rome, wherein John was abrogated from his Pontificat, and Leo was ordained in
his place Regin. Lambert.
in the year of Christ 963. Again the Romans indiscreetly rising up in Arms,
the year following were by him defeated with a great slaughter. Otto. Fris.
Sig. reg.
Pope John in the midst of this being dead, the second of May in the year 964.
was succeeded by Benedictus, whom the Romans had created Pope; but Otho having
degraded him, led him away prisoner into Germany: Witik. 3.
After these things having avenged himself of the treachery of the Greeks, who
then were governed by Nicephorus Phocas, he drove them out of Calabria, and
Apulia, as some Authors do write, or made them pay tribute, as Ditmarus has
observed in his second book, he died the fourth day before Whitsunday, Herm.
Marian. Lamb. Ditm. 2. Ursper. Witi. 3.
in the year 973, being the Month of May, as Uspergensis says, with
Witichindus, and was buried at Madeburg. Herman says that St. Udalricus died
the same year, the fourth of July on a Friday: by which token of times, is
declared the year of Christ, which had Whitsunday upon the eleventh of May,
with the letter E. And so Otho reigned about some 37. years, of which he was
Emperor eleven years, and some Months.

Otho the second being made companion in the Government of the Empire by his
father, and crowned by John the XIII. Lamb.
in the year 967, Witich. 3.
on Christmas Day, he alone Governed the Empire after his death, 19. years and
7 Months.

Lam. A. 97^ Witich. 3. Sigeb. Herm. Lamb. Goth. Diam. 2.
He married Theophania daughter to Constantine the Emperor: Sigeb.
but in the year 982, he had very bad success, fighting against the Greeks,
who by the help of the Saracens, recovered Calabria and Apulia, for they wholly
defeated his Army, and he by swimming escaping in secret, fled away: Dirm. 3.
Theophania insulting over the Latins, because her Countrey-people had overcome
them, by which thing she procured against her self the hatred of the Germans:
Marian. Herm.
Otho for grief of mind, falling into a distemper, dyed at Rome the eighth of
December, Lamb. sig. Ursperg.
in the year nine hundred eighty three.

CHAP. XV. The Emperors of the EAST, Constantine, Son of Porphyrus by Zoe,
Romanus, Nicephorus Phocas, John Tzimisces.
LEO the Philosopher being dead, his Brother Alexander under the name of Tutour
began to govern Curop. Cedr. Zon. Glycas. Constable. Man.
the Eastern Empire in the year of Christ 911, Constantine Porphyr. Leo's son
by Zoe his fourth Wife being yet a very young child: for which cause Nicholas
the Patriark, having prohibited Leo entrance into the Church, was deposed of
his office, and Euthymius ordained in his place.

Alexander, Alexander Emperor.
as soon as he began to govern, he abrogated the dignity from Euthymius, and
re-established Nicholas. And having spent thirteen months in the Empire without
any action worthy of a man, much less of a Prince, drowning himself in lust,
and drunkenness, he died on the seventh of June, in the year 912, having lost
much blood by his Nose and secret parts, surfeiting himself with drink, with
play at Tennis-ball, and often riding with violence without moderation.

Ibid.
Constantine Porphyr. being deprived of such a Guardian, and that indeed not
much to his damage, he governed the Empire at seven years of age, by the care
of Nicholas the Patriarch, and of other persons, to whom, Alexander dying, had
recommended him; as also of Zoe his Mother, which having been ejected by
Alexander was by the consent and desire of the Tutours recalled: Constantine
Ducas the Tyrant is subdued. The Bulgarians, making irruption under their King
Simeon, and being puffed up by the Victory that they had obtained, were at last
overcome by Leo Phocas, who by this his success aspiring to the Empire, in his
attempt to obtain it was slain.

Eight years after, Zoe, the Emperors Mother being removed from the Palace,
Romanus Lecapenus, Glyeas Manasses.
Constantine's son in law is made the guardian and father of the Emperor, by a
new title of honor not known before that time, nor used now adays; and soon
after upon the Curop. Cedr.
24 of September, in the year 919, he is created Caesar, and in December
following saluted Augustus; and he in the year following advanced his son
Christopher to the same honors, and his two other sons, Steven and
Constantine, in the year 928, Curop. Cedr.
upon a Christmas day; he made also Theophylactus his son, Patriarch in the
place of Steven, when he was 16 years old, in which dignity he lived twenty
three years in all manner of looseness and debauchednesse, delighting much to
breed good horses for the manage. Curolepates says, That he dyed the 27 of
February, in the year 956, at which time also was the Roman See defiled with
such lewdness and impiety by Octavianus, Albericus's son, who was called John
the XII, as Curopal. and Cedrinus have remarked.

The Empire being established and strengthened with so many and so great
defenses, Romanus began to despise Constantinus, and to offer him place after
himself, chiefly after he had concluded a league and friendship with Peter King
of the Bulgarians, to whom he gave to wife his Niece Christopher's daughter;
which impiety and unfaithfulness toward to his Prince, God punished also by
his own son's wickedness toward him; for in the twenty sixth year of his
association into the Empire, Curop. Cedr.
the 16 of December, in the year 944. Steven his son having deprived his father
of the Augustian dignity, banisheth him into an Island. At whose example
Constantinus, Leo's son, being stirred up, having thrown out Romanus's
Children, he began alone to rule the Empire; and he governed it in drunkenness
and debauchednesse some fifteen years, then he dyed Curop. Cedr.
the 9th of November, in the year 959; it is reported, that Romanus his sons
did murder him in the 54th year of his age, after he had ruled with his
father, with his Uncle Alexander, and his Mother, 13 years, and with Romanus
26, and alone 15.

Curop. Cedr. Zun. Glyc. Constable.
He was of the same nature and disposition as his father, viz. of an effeminate
and dissolute life; he admitted Romanus to the Empire the 959 year of Christ,
who ruled with him three years and 4 months, and dyed the 24 year of his age,
in the year 963. During his reign, Nicephorus Phocas recovered Crete by force
of arms, from the Saracens, Anno 961.

After him, this Nicephorus Phocas ruled the Empire in the year 963, whose
filthy and covetous mind is remarked by the Annals; for having burdened and
oppressed the Churches with many great taxes, yet he was a gallant Warrior,
and had prosperous successes in his wars against the Saracens both in Cilicia
and Syria, and recovered out of their hands diverse Towns, whereof Antioch was
one. This is that Nicephorus to whom Luitprandus was sent Ambassador with
great magnificence by Otho; which Embassage of his, he has described in a
particular book; he was killed by the treachery of his wife Theophanon, and
John Tzimisces the 11th of December, in the year of our Lord 969, whose death
is the more remarked by reason of a great Sun's eclipse, which is observed to
have been the Curop. Ced. Luith.
22 of December, at 3. of the clock, in the year of our Lord 968.

Curop. Cedr. Glycman.
Therefore was John Tzimisces saluted Emperor in the year 969, who soon after
associated to himself in the Government of the Empire, Basilius and
Constantine, Romanus's sons. He by the command of Polyeuctus the Patriarch
banished Theophanon, Nicephorus's wife and others, by whose help Nicephorus had
been slain: he drove the Saracens back from Antioch, he overcame the Bulgarians
and the Rossians, and forced them to a composition of peace; which war having
ended, entering into Constantinople after the manner of a triumphant Conqueror,
John Tzimisces's Piety toward the Virgin Mary.
he caused the Virgin Mary's Image, to be carried before him by a Chariot that
was adorned and enriched with other spoils, which together with the Image he
had got from the Bulgarians in solemn pomp and magnificence, as yielding the
honor and power of his victory to her presence and protection.

Another argument of his piety was, That he first coined pieces of gold with
our Savior's picture, with this Inscription, Jesus Christ King of Kings.
Having ruled six years and six months, being poisoned by Basilius his
Chamberlain, whose great covetousness he had checked and suppressed; he dyed in
his Syrian Expedition the 4th of December, in the year of our Lord 975.

CHAP. XVI. The Affairs of the Franks under their Kings, Charles the Simple,
Rodulph, Lewis Transmarinus, Lotharius, and Lewis in whom Charls's issue ended.
IN this time Charles the Great his posterity did valiantly defend and keep the
kingdom of the Franks in Gallia from the oppression of those Princes who
possessed the Provinces; not by the will of the king, and for a time, but as
their own proper right for ever. Amongst whom was most eminent Rutbert the son
of that Rutbert who was killed in battle by the Normans in the year 867, who
was brother to that Odo, or rather Eudo, who succeeded Charles le Gross, and
Heribert Earl of Verone, Aimo. 5. chapter 43.
who had given his sister to wife to Rotbert, and had brought him forth Hugo.
At this time Charles the Simple reigned in France, who after Eudo's death alone
obtained the name of King from the year 898, he added to his Dominions
Lotharius's kingdom, as appears by his Edicts: Dudo. l. 2. de mor. and Act.
North.
he concluded peace the same year with the Danes or rather Normans, who then
wasted and spoiled France, and made a league of friendship with them, having
given his daughter Gysla in Matrimony to Rollo their General, Chap. 11.
as we have above mentioned.

Then the regal authority growing out of date, the Princes by a consent at
Soissons revolted from Charles in the Flod. Chr.
920th year of Christ, because he took into his private Council Haganon, Charles
is forsaken.
a man of mean sort, and raised him up to high dignities, Heriveus Bishop of
Rhemes relieved and helped the King with his means after he was forsaken of all
his Nobles, and reduced them all into the Kings favor; but this breach being
but slightly made up, broke out again into a greater mischief two years after:
Flod. Robert usurps the Kingdom.
for in the year 922 Robert is chosen King by the Princes faction, and is
consecrated by Heriveus Bishop of Rhemes at the latter end of June; but this
rebellion did cost them their fatal undoing. Three years after this dies
Heriveus, Flod. Chr. Odoran. Pith. editus 297. Aimo 5. c. 43.
and the year following Robert with Heribert, whose sister he had married, and
by whom he had his son Hugo, fighting against Charles, was slain at Soissons,
Regino.
having his mouth pierced with a lance, that it might appear that member which
had deceived his Prince, suffered condign punishment to his offense; yet as he
dyed, he left his Army victorious. This battle was fought Odora. Robert
suffers for his treachery.
the 15 of June on a Sunday, as the old Chronicles do record, whence it is
gathered, that it was in the year of Christ 923. Not long after, Rodulph Duke
of Burgundy was called to the possession of the kingdom as though it had been
vacant, and was saluted king with all solemn ceremonies at Soissons, Flo. Aim.
reg. Odoran.
Charles under pretext of a treaty of peace is led by Heribert into Theodorick's
Castle near the River Marne, whence afterward he is carried to Perone, where
he dyed the Flod.
929 year of Christ, leaving his son Lewis whom he had by Eadgina daughter to
Alstanus king of the English Saxons, who when his father was taken prisoner
fled into Britain to his Grandfather, and thence afterward being returned, he
reigned. So then Charles reigned after Odo's death 25 years, viz. from the 898
year, unto the 923; yet in his patents which are read in the first foundation
of St. Denys's Monastery near the City, the beginning of his reign is taken
from the year of Christ 893; at what time we have mentioned that he was created
king by the Franks for to oppose Eudo. And in one of them is read this
Subscription, The IV of Febr. Indict. I. of the V. year of the most gracious
King Charles the first restored. This is that year 898, wherein Eudo dying the
3d of January, he began his new kingdom, having first began in the year 893.
Again, Sigebert's Error.
in another Patent, Given the V. of June, Indict. V. the 25 year of our most
glorious King Charles, the 20th year of his renovation, and the 6th after his
having obtained a larger and greater inheritance. This year is demonstrated to
be the 917th of Christ, which is six years after his possession of the kingdom
of Lorain, and the 20th from the year 898, and the 25th from the year of our
Lord 893. Whence it appears, that he was 12 years older then Sigebert has
declared; we have before showed, that he first began to reign when he was yet in
the cradle, in the year of our Lord 879.

Charles being thus dethroned and degraded, Rudulph began to rule the kingdom of
the Franks in the year 923, whom Odoran. Aimo. 5. c. 43. Flod. A. 923. Glaber.
1. c. 2.
Odoranus and Aimoinus do report to have been rejected by the sentence of Hugo
and the rest of the Princes when Charles was shut up in prison; he was son to
Richard Robert's son in law, whose daughter Emma had married the sister of Hugo
the great. Frag. Chr. Flor. by Pith.
He slew the Danes robbing and killing in Aquitane, almost to one. But he
prolonged the Kingdom troubled by the disturbing parties of Heribert and Hugo,
unto the year 936, Flod. Aim. 5. chapter 43.
in which year dying, he is buried in the Monastery of Columba at Seno, in the
thirteenth year of his reign, and in the same year 936; I have taught above,
Henry Auceps King of Germany to have departed: and Flodoard writes that the
Moon was Eclipsed, in that very year, the day before the Nones of Septem. This
man the Abbot of Ursperg has rashly confounded with the other Rodulph whom we
have shown before, being called unto the Kingdom by the Italians, and to have
been driven away by Hugo. But there is no doubt that they were diverse, and
that Flodoard shows in the year 923, 935, and 937. Where he calls him the
Italian and Jurensian King of France on this side the Alps, and in the year
937, the other after the King of France he tells that he died.

Flod.
Ludovick the son of Simplex, being called back by Hugo out of England, took
the Kingdom in the year 936: whom, from that travel beyond the Sea, they
commonly name Transmarine. The climbing pride of Heribert, and Hugo, made the
kingdom in nothing more quiet to this man than to his father Charles. Yet
requiring by arms Lotharingia, in which, Charles, his affairs being without
hope, had yielded unto Henry King of Germany, he is driven away by Otho, the
son of Henry, in the Flod. Reg. Herm. Maria. Ursperg.
year 939. in which, Gislebert the son in law of Henry, Lieutenant of
Lotharingia, with other Rebels, being overcome by Otho, was flain. Whose wife
Gerberga the sister of Otho, Ludovick took in marriage. Glaber. 1. chapter 15. The
wretched death of Heribert.
Heribert Earl of the Viromanduans, a seditious and treacherous man, dyed a
wretched death, in like manner detesting the wickedness taken up against
Charles, in the Flod.
year 943. Uvill. Gem. b. 3. chapter 12. Norm. Hist
to wit, in the same year wherein Wilielm his son in Law, the son of Rollo,
Duke of Northmannia. Which Province Ludovick invading, under the name of a
Defender, brought away Richard the son of Wilielm. But he being received by his
friends, he himself being after that taken, is let go by the coming between of
Hugo; Whose power a little while after he not bearing, he humbly craveth the
aid of Otho his Wives Cousin-Germane. Who Flod. Otho the Emperor breaks unto
France.
in the year 948, a great Army being led into France, and some Towns being
vanquished, and Rothomagum besieged in vain, he made no great price of his
labor. Although the Ursperg. Witich. 2. Albert. Krant. 3. chapter 23.
Germane Writers do more greatly extol that expedition.

Last of all Ludovick dyed Flod. Aimo. 5. chapter 43.
in the year 954, in the Month September. when as with full speed, he pursuing a
Wolf, and falling on the ground, his body being bruised, fell into a Leprosy.
He was buried at Durocottorum of Rhemes in the Cathedral of Remigius. Aimo. in
the same.
He begat two sons of Gerberga, Lotharius and Charles. Aimon appoints to him 16.
years, but there is reckoned two years more.

Lotharius the heir, both of his fathers Kingdom and misery, began Aimo 5. chapter
44.
in the year 954, the day before the Ides Nov. anointed at Rhemes: he bare the
likeness of Kingly Majesty about two and thirty years. Flod. Odo. ran.
In the third year of this King, Hugo of Oderic. Uric. b. 1. Aim. 5. chapter 44.
Orleans, the great French Duke died the 15 Call. July, and was buried in the
Cathedral of Dyonysius near the City. He left three sons of Sig. in the year.
965. Glabia. chapter 4.
Hathwide the sister of Otho the Emperor, Hugo Capetus, Otho, and Henry; Emma
a daughter, Flod. in the year 960.
who married Richard Duke of the Normans. Hugo enjoyed the Dukedom of the
French after his father: Otho, of Burgundy, after Gislebert: Henry succeeded
Otho, dying a little after.

Flod. The War of Lotharius with Otho.
Lotharius in the year 955. waged War with Hugo the great, in Pictonia, against
Duke Willelm. Then Lotharius fought against Otho, that he might recover
Lotharingia, or Interamnensis of Belgium, the which Otho the second had granted
to his father Charles, Sigeb.
in the year 977. Whom staying by chance at Aquisgrane, he pressing hard upon
at unawares, and unprovided, he put to flight in Sigeb. Herm. Lamb. Aimo 5. chapter
45. Vuil. Nang. Chron.
the year 978. That Otho might blot out this disgrace, he wandering through the
fields of Rhemes, and the neighboring Cities, and Paris, Sig. Aim. Orderick.
Utic. b. 1. Glab. 1. chap. 3.
while he passed over, in his return, the River Axona, Lotharius following
after, together with hindrances, he lost no few soldiers.

Sig. Aim.
A little after, Lotharius having talk with Otho upon the River Charus, he let
go Lotharingia to him. Which being done, he rendered the wills of his Princes
more strange from him. Sigeb. in the year 984.
Therefore after some years, the same things being again attempted, and
Virdunum taken; but presently restored, Sigch.
he deceased in the year 986. and was buried at Rhemes, in the Cathedral of
Remigius.

Ludovick the son of Lotharius the last of the stock of Charles, began his reign
Sig. Vuil. Nang. Chron.
in the year 986. committed to Hugo by his dying Father, and being famous in no
warlike act, dying at Compendium without offspring, is buried in the Church of
Cornelius and Cyprian, in the year 987. In him the offspring of Charles, and
the second family of the Kings ceased, after the consecrating of Pipin 235.

Neither shall I let that pass, that there are two opinions meet in the Annals
about the Kingdom of Lotharius, and Ludovick. Ut Aim. 5. chapter 45. Odoran.
Odric. Utic. (...)
Some add to Lotharius about twenty two years, and make him to dye in the year
of Christ 976. Moreover they appoint to his son Ludovick 9 years. Sig. Ivo.
Carn. in Chr. Aquit. with Pith. Frag. flower of Chron. with the same.
Others far more able both in number and authority, make with us.

Aim. Sup. b. 5. chapter 44. Sig. Nang.
Ludovick dying without offspring, the Kingdom did of right belong unto
Charles, his Uncle, the son of Ludovick Transmarine; who was then Duke of
Lotharingia, or Lorrain, from the year nine hundred seventy seven: therefore
made, as Sigebert shows, that he might withstand the endeavors of his
brother Lotharius, and toward him the desires of the French did bend. But
whiles he by delaying, brought the matter unto Counsel or debate, as In the
year 987. and Mang.
Sigebert says, the top of the affairs is passed over on Hugo Capet, who was
the son of Hugo the great Duke, by syrname Abbot, of Hathuide the sister of
Otho the first Emperor of that name. Unto which Authority of the Princes, the
will of Ludovick the last of the stock of Charles King of the French had come;
who as Odor. set forth by Pith.
Odoran writes, dying, had given the Kingdom unto Hugo. Frag. of flowers set
forth by Pith.
Therefore in the year nine hundred eighty seven. Hugo took the Kingly token of
honor at Noviodunum in Belgia. The same.
And 5. Nones July, was anointed at Rhemes. The which thing Charles grievously
bearing, moves war on him without delay: and first of all takes Laudunum into
possession Sig. Nang.
in the year 988. But being in a short time after besieged by Hugo, The same
Authors.
in the second Month of the siege, a sudden breaking out of the gates being
made, he kills not a few; he put the rest being much affrighted, with Hugo, to
flight; he freeth the City from besieging. Nang.
He takes Durocottorus of Rhemes, through the treachery of Adelgarius an
Elder, in the year either 989, Sigeb.
or the year following; The same Author.
and he made Arnulph Bishop in that City, the son of his brother by a
Concubine; Adalbero, who then was Chief over that Church, being taken away:
where a little after, he departed out of life. Nang.
But Hugo, a very great Army being drawn together, besieges Charles being shut
up in Laudunum with his Wife Herbertes the daughter of the Duke of Trecaria.
Frag. Hist. aqu. and Aim.
Asceline, or Nang.
Anselm Bishop of Laudunum, of the nearest friendship to Charles, Frag. Hist.
Aqui. set forth by Pich. of Asceline Bishop of Laudunum.
and being partaker of his Counsels, is said to have made a foul business:
for he led, as they report, Hugo by night into the City, and betrayed Charles
unto him, at or about the days of the Holyer week. There is among the Epistles
of Gerbert, who being advanced to the Roman Bishopric, was called Sylvester
the second of that name, a certain letter unto Apollinus or Ascelinus Bishop of
Laudunum, full of sharpness and stomach, in which he upbraids his
unfaithfullnesse toward his king, not as against Charles, whom he had as a
Capital enemy; but against Hugo, for the instruction or bringing up of whose
son Robert, he had been chief. Also he calls forth Asceline to Rome, to declare
the cause, that thereby there may be a conjecture; the same man who had once
broken his trust with Charles, to have performed no greater afterward to Hugo.
Gerbert. with Masson. in Hist. of the kings of France and Robert. in French
Christi.
Although I find Adalbero at that time, wherein Charles was taken to have been
Bishop of Laudunum.

Aimo. Suppl. 5. chapter 44. Nang.
Hugo brought Charles, being reduced into his power, unto Orleans; where he
being shut up in the Tower, ended his days. He left a son Sig. 991.
Ottones by his former wife, who also had the Dukedom of Lorain after his
father: but by another wife, Lewis and Charles. Of whom the first is declared,
by Vuillelm Nangius, Chron. Dionys. Nicoll. Gill. See Haillan.
and other writers, to have been Duke of Lorain after his father. But I see
more to agree with Sigebert. Aimo. 5. c. 44. and Frag. Aqui.
Some yearly Registers deliver, that both these were born in prison; Frag.
Aquit.
and being driven out by the French, to have betaken themselves to the Emperor.

Vill. Nang. Till. in Comm.
Besides, Charles is said to have begotten two daughters, Harida and Emengard.
This married the Earl of Namursia; and of her Baldwin drew his beginning, Earl
of Hannonia, whose daughter Usabell, Philip the Emperor took for a wife; which
brought forth Lewis the eighth, father of a Saint: that by that reason the
successors of Saint Lewis drew their mothers stock, at leastwise from Charles
the Great. So Vaillelm Nangius.

Aimo. 5. chapter 45. Sig. in the year 992.
But Hugo drawing out his conceived hatred against Arnulph Bishop of Rhemes,
did his endeavor, that he, a Council of Bishops being gathered together at
Rhemes, should be displaced: and when he had kept him three years in prison at
Orleance, and gave Gerbert, who, as I have said, Robert his son had used for
his Master, a successor for him in the year 992. At which thing John the 15th,
the Bishop of Rome being moved, forbade all the Bishops who had done that, holy
things; and caused, that Gerbert being removed, Arnulph should be wholly
restored; the which In the life Abbon. Flor. chapter 11.
Aimoine shows, was perfected under Pope Gregory, and King Robert.

The Cluniacian Order took beginning in that age from Bernon Abbot of
Gigniacia; whom dying in the year 912, says Sigebert, he had made Odo
sometimes a Musician, Abbot of the Cluniacian Monastery. Moreover, Odo to have
departed in 937, and Ademare to have succeeded him: This man Maiolus, in the
year 943, then Odo in the year 992, the same Sigebert affirms.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Affairs of the Western Empire under Otho the third, Henry
the second, Conrade, Henry the third, and the rent or schism of this Emperor;
From the year of Christ 984, to 1106.
Otho Frifing. 6. chapter 25. Lamb. Herm.
OTho the third, a very boy, reigned in Germany in the year Lamb.
984, being endowed with the title and crown of Emperor, at Rome, by Gregory
the 5th, chief Bishop in the year 990; two years after, Lamb. Glab. b. 1. chapter 4.
Crescentius through the honor of the Consulship, tyrannically assaulting
people in the same City, he condemned of his head: whose Wife being taken in
marriage, he afterward let go. For his former wife Mary the Empress, the
daughter of the King of Arragon, he is reported by a wonderful example of
Justice, to have condemned to the flames at Mutina, the which they tell to have
fell out thus.

Gotfr. Viterb. Crantz.
By chance the Empress being taken with the love of an Earl no less chaste
than beautiful, when she was by him beat off; accused this very man of that
attempted wickedness that she had designed to her husband; who out of hand
passed a sentence of his head on the young Earl. A memorable Example of Justice
in Otho.
The Earl's wife, whom the man that was to dye, had made knowing of this thing,
coming to the Emperor, declared right on the seat of Judgment, and opened
before him both the innocence of her husband, and the wicked act of the
Empress: and to confirm the truth of both, she handled a bright burning plate
of metal with an unhurt hand. By which token, the Emperor's wife being
reproved both of unchastity, and reproach or false accusation, suffered
punishment by the burning flame.

See Bellarm. b. 3. of passing over the Empire, chapter 1. Baron. in the year 996.
There is a report, the same man being Emperor, that Gregory the 5th tied up
the right of choosing the Emperor unto the voices of certain Princes; whom
either he himself, or some succeeder of him is believed to have appointed seven
in number. See Stephen with Sur. 15. Aug. Bonsin. De^. 2. b. 1.
The Hungarians and Transylvanians under him embraced the Christian faith.

Most holy men lived at that time, Romuald: Adalbert in Prussia having suffered
Martyrdom: His life. 20. Aug.
Stephen King of Hungary; Sigeb.
Maiol Abbot of Cluniaca, from the year 943. Gerbert excelled in learning,
being from the seat of Rhemes, and Ravenna, carried up unto the Roman seat by
Otho in the year 999, a little after Silvester the second by name. Lamb. Herm.
Otho dyed in the year 1002, January 23.

Dithm. 7. John Villa.
Otho being dead without children, Henry the Bavarian, the second of that name
from Auceps, the first of the Imperial title, reigned about 23 years; he took
the honorable tokens of Rule, Herm. Lamb. Sig. Ursperg.
in the year 1014, from Benedict the eight; Pand. Collen. b. 3. p. 96.
at which time the Greeks with the Normans, and, with them both, the Saracens
strove about the possession of Apulia. The Normans almost at the beginning of
Henry the Emperor had begun to come into the coast of Italy. Which thing how
it was carried on, shall not be from the matter to unfold.

Book 2. Chr. Casin. chapter 38.
Leo Ostiensis writes, in the 7th year of Arnulph Abbot of Casinum; whose
third year he says does agree with the year of Christ 1014, that his first may
be of Christ 1012, the Normans began to invade Apulia; (this shall be the 1018
year) when as almost sixteen years before they had first come thither. For
about the year of Christ 1002, forty Normans returning from a travel to
Jerusalem, came to Salernum, of a great stature of body, and stout in war. That
Town was then besieged by the Saracens, and Gaimar a Prince was in it, who, as
Pandulph Collenutius is Author in his third book, was of the Norman stock; who
then already from the year of Christ 900, tells, the Wars of the Normans
began to be brought on through Aemilia, Flaminia, Tuscia, and Campania.
Therefore those forty, when they had obtained weapons and horses by request
from the Prince, brake out upon the enemies; and very many being killed, the
rest put to flight, they got a wonderful victory.

Gaimar being bound by so great a benefit, great gifts being offered, and
greater shown, endeavored to keep them with him. But when as he had obtained
neither, (because they said also this acceptable work by them ordered was from
the love of God alone) neither could they be absent any longer from their
Country: he commands Ambassadors to go along with them, who showing in a
bravery Citron-Apples, and other fruits of that sort of that Country, with
precious garments, and horse-trappings, they stirred up the Normans to come to
a Province fruitful of such good things. By chance it fell out about that
time, that Gislebert and Vuillelme Repostellus, born of the highest rank among
the Normans, disagreed from each other: and Gislebert before Robert himself
Duke of Normandy in hunting killed Repostell. Who fearing the anger of Robert,
and the near friends of Repostell, with his four brethren Rainulph, Ascittine,
Osmund, and Rodulph, and other Nobles, followed the Ambassadors of Salerne
into Apulia. book 7. chapter 3.
But Vuillelme a Monk of Gemmeticum, named him who did the murder, Osmund
Drengore. When they came into Italy, they joined themselves to Pandulf a Lord
of great power at Capua, and under him and other Princes, receiving Soldiers
pays, they undertook a profitable and glorious work against the Greeks and
Saracens. Neither neglected they their own affairs in the mean time. For they
having obtained some Towns, they made Dukes of their own Nation chief over
them. Whereof the first is delivered by Vuillelme, to be Turstine, by surname
Scitell. Book 3. p. 94.
Pandulph calls him Tristane, who mentions his successors even to Robert
Viscard; a little otherwise than Vuillelme. Pandul.
There was Tancrede a certain Duke in Normandy, who took his surname from
Alta-Villa, that is, a high Village. This man begat twelve sons of two wives,
Sarnus, Godfride, Drogon, Tancrede, William Ferrebrachius, Humphrey, Robert
Vuiscard, Roger, Richard, another Godfride, Frumentine, Molugell. Of these
William Ferrebrachius is chosen Duke by those which inhabited Apulia; who beat
down the Saracens, and also the Greeks. Pand. 3. p. 96.
The Saracens coming again unto Apulia, their Army being divided into two
parts, at the same besiege Capua and Barium. But Gregory Captain of the
Grecians, helped by the forces of the Venetians, freed Barium from besieging.
Henry the Emperor brought help unto Capua, who was then at Rome, and had
received the Crown, as I have showed a little before, from Benedict chief
Bishop in the year 1014. He, the Saracens being overthrown, crushed the
Grecians with the same force, and took away Troy from them; which Town had been
of late built by them in Apulia; and so restored peace to Italy. So Pandulph.
Book 1. chapter 40. etc. The same thing have Herman. V^sperg.
But Leo Ostiensis writes this dispatch of the Emperor, wherein he took Troy
in that same year in which it was built by the Greeks, by surrrender, to have
happened in the year 1022. The same. 44.
At which time when he had come into the Monastery of Casinum, and there
grievously labored with the stone, in the night Benedict appeared unto him,
and made a promise, that his body should lie in that place, of which he
hitherto doubted, and in the same moment restored health unto him.

Leo Ost. b. 2. chapter 47. etc.
In a short time after, he, shining in holiness went out of the body into
Heaven, having kept a continued flour of Virginity in marriage with Kunegund,
Herm. Sig. Lamb. Otho Fris. b. 6. chapter 27. Ursperg.
in the year 1024, the third Ides of July, and was buried in the Church of
Bamberg, the which he had built there, with the Bishop's house. Sig. 1010.
This Emperor was joined in affinity with Stephen King of Hungary, very
equally holy; his sister Gisla being given him in marriage. By whose endeavor
the Hungarians were converted to the Christian faith. This man being Emperor,
Abbo Abbot of Floriacum in Vascony, while he went in the middle between them
brawling, being thrust through, has deserved to be registered among the Martyrs,
Aimo. in his life, chapter last. Glaber. 3. chapter 3. Sigeb.
in the year 1004, 2d. Constable. Account, November. 13, being made famous by many
wonders. Herm. Sigeb.
Heribert Bishop of Colonia dies, the same man being Emperor, in the year
1021. Baron. Sigeb. in the year 1028.
The following year gave a beginning to a new and more brief kind of music,
Areton a Monk of Guido being the inventer; by whom those six notes, which we
use at this day, were appointed.

Herm. Maria. Ursp. Sig.
Conrade who was King of Germany in the year 1024, is saluted Emperor in the
year 1026. Unto this man Rodulph King of Burgundy dying, appointed his Crown
with his Kingdom, The same.
in the year 1032; the which he came to, in the year following, Glaber. Herman.
wherein the Sun is delivered to have suffered an eclipse the 29 of June, the
6th hour. Sigebert who gives that to the year 1034, says Rodulph, being
offended with the Burgundians, because they proceeded to be proudly bold
against their King, to have passed over his kingdom unto Conrade, which from
the time of Arnulph the Emperor had obtained Kings of their own Nation, The
Kingdom of Burgundy cease to be.
more than an hundred and thirty years, and so at last Burgundy to have been
reduced into a Province. This is that kingdom of Burgundy, which Rodulph in the
year 890, began to consult of, as we have mentioned above in the 13th Chapter
out of Sigebert. The same Sigebert tells, that Ode of Campania, Rodulph's
sisters son, bearing that grievously, when he could not obtain that Province by
request from Conrade, warred against him, and to have besieged Lorain. But
being overcome at Barum by Gothelo the Captain, in battle, with a great
slaughter of the French, to have been slain. Herm. Lamb. Ursper. Sigeb.
Which falls into the year 1037. Two years after Conrade dyed, the day before
the Nones of June, and was buried at Spira; Glaber. 4. chapter 9. Herm. Ursper. Sig.
which year an eclipse of the Sun makes famous, on the eleventh Call. Sept. the
sixth hour, 4th weekday, noted in the Annals, in the year of Christ 1039. He
commanded 15 years, Herman. Maria.
Conrade reigning, holy Kunegund dyed the year 1038; and in the same year
Stephen King of Hungary, whom Peter succeeded.

Marian. Herm. Lamb Ursper. Glab. 3. chapter 2. and 4. Sigeb.
Henry of the Emperors called the second of that name, of the Kings the third,
was ordained in the room of his father Conrade, in the year 1039. by whom the
Bohemians were subdued in war, and also the Hungarians, whom, their King Peter
being cast out, had made Ovo chief over them. But this man being driven out by
the Forces of Henry, Peter was wholly restored. Leo Oct. 2. chapter 200.
From this Emperor Leo the ninth chief Bishop, received Beneventum, on this
Law or condition, that he should forgive the Tribute of the Church of Bamberg.
Marian a Scot, a noble Chronologer flourished in this age, who in the year
1056, witnesses that he was made a Fuldenian Monk. Maria. Lamb.
Henry dies in the year 1056, the the third of the Nones of October: when he
had reigned seventeen years. Glab. 5. chapter 1.
He left, of Agnes the daughter of Willelm Earl of Pictavians, Henry his heir.
This man Reigning, Peter Damian was accounted a most learned and most holy man,
Leo Ost. 2. chapter 102.
who, in the year after, 1057. was by Stephen the tenth made a Cardinal, and
Bishop of Ostia.

In the year of Christ 1056. Henry, of Emperors the third of that name, of the
Kings of Germany the fourth, Lamb.
a child of five years old, began his reign, the which he drew out unto two and
fifty years, to the great loss of Christian affairs. For he was rent from the
Bishop of Rome, with a foul and almost continual discord, Vuill. Tyrus b. 1.
chapter 13.
because he ordained Bishops and Abbots partly for reward, partly by a private
Authority which they commonly call an investing. He had a chief combat with
Gregory the seventh, a Bishop of great courage, who Lamb. Bertol.
in the year 1073. succeeded Alexander the second, before called Hildebrand.
The beginning of the rent was made Sigeb. Bertoll. The schism of Henry.
in the year 1076. in which Gregory forbade Henry the fellowship of holy
things. Bertol. John Vill. 4. chapter 21.
The same man the year following being reconciled; but a little after being
returned to his former manners, at length he astonished or overthrew him by his
sentence. Otho Fris. 5. chapter 15.
In the mean time, the Saxons fall off from Henry, and choose Rodulph Duke of
Suevia King, who at first Bertol. Leo Ost. 3. chapter 8.
put Henry to flight in the year 1080, the sixth of the Calends of February,
and in the second joining, he in the like manner being put to flight, when as
he fought valiantly amongst the chief men, he dyed in the Ides of October, the
Victory being left in the power of his Soldiers, Maria. Guibert. Anti. Pope.
in the same year 1080, in which year Henry made Guibert Bishop of Ravenna,
being condemned three years before by Gregory with excommunication, chose Pope
in a small Council of his own. From whom also at Rome, Gregory being shut up
in the Tower of Angelus, he took the honorable tokens of the Empire Berroli.
in the year 1084, on the very day of Easter.

Again the covenanted Princes of the Catholic parties, carry the Kingdom to
Hermane of Lorain, Maria. Bertol. Sig.
in the year 1082, who in the 7th Bertol.
year, of Christ 1088, 12. Constable. Acc. died in Lorain, and was buried at Meta.
Bertol. Leo Ost. 3. chapter 64.
Three years before, that is, in the year 1085. the eighth of Constable. Acc. the
eighth of the Call. Jun. Gregory dyed, but Guibert Sigeb.
in the year 1100. Neither yet by the death of this man, were the studies of
disturbing parties quenched Henry as yet surviving. Otho Fris. 7. chapter 11. and
12. Ursperg.
Who at length being spoiled of his Empire, by Henry his son, the year 1105.
going out, on the very birthday of Christ, and running away, he deceased at
Leodium in the year 1106. the seventh of the Ides of Aug. the third day of the
Week, of his age 55.

The Normans at the time of these tumults, The warlike deeds of Robert Vuiscard.
Robert Wiscard being their Duke, performed very famous and faithful obedience
unto the Roman Bishop, when as now they had joined Apulia, being taken from
the Greeks, unto their power, Leo Ost. 2. chapter 68. Vuill. Gemmet. b. 7. chapter 30.
from the year 1041. in which Arduine a certain Longobard overcame Duclian
Captain of the Grecians, and others by the help of the Normans, whence it came
to pass that they enjoyed Apulia. And first of all William, of whom I have
made a little mention above, the son of Tancrede; and also Drogo, were Princes
of the Nation. Hunfride succeeded Drogo: this man, Robert Wiscard; who were all
brethren. Leo Ost. Otho Fris. 1. of affairs Frid. chapter 3.
Robert being least of all contented with Apulia, subdued Calabria and Sicily
by weapons. For that thing he being forbidden the use of holy things Greg. Ep.
with Baro.
in the year 1074, and being the seventh year after reconciled, which was the
1080, he held all those Provinces by a bountiful right from him, and paid
Tributes. A most prosperous course of things followed this peace. Leo Ost. 3.
chapter 48. Zon. in Alexio.
In the year following with fifteen thousand armed Soldiers, the Sea being
crossed, he contended against Alexius the Greek Emperor in Thracia: and he
overcame in battle, he meeting him with a hundred and seventy thousand. Bertol.
Alexius covenanted with Henry the Emperor for a great sum of Money, that he
would withold Robert, hanging over the Empire of the East, by war, in the
year 1084. Which money, he contrary to the tie of an oath, spent in bountiful
gifts, to bring over the minds of the Romans unto him, when indeed he had taken
the Lateran Palace, with Guibert the Antipope, on the fifth day of the Week,
before the Palm-Lords day, into possession, but Gregory had betaken himself
into the Tower of Angelus. Bertol. Leo Ost. 3. chapter 52. Pand. 3. John. Villa. 4.
chapter 17.
Which things being heard of, Robert after the Kal. of May, flying unto the
City with an Army, so frighted Henry, that he speedily fleeing out of the City,
hastened with a continued course into Germany. Robert, the rebellious City being
plundered, and in great part consumed with fire, drew Gregory safe out of the
Tower, and brought him away to Salernum; where also he dyed. Robert also, about
the same time in the Month of July departed. But the year, by the disagreement
of Writers, is most uncertain. For Pandul. 3. p. 108.
some will have him dye in 1082. Fazel.
others in the following year. B. 3. chapter 56. compared with 64.
Leo of Ostia seems to appoint 1084. Bertold 1086. Baron. out of Romualdus
Some 1085. He was of a great and lofty mind, and excelling in warlike praise,
in a very short space he enlarged his affairs in a wonderful manner. Leo. Ost.
3. chapter 57.
Also his piety toward God and the Saints is commended, the which he left
witnessed by many and great gifts.

CHAP. XVIII Of affairs of the Eastern Empire, From the year 976. to 1118.
Curop. Cedr. Zon. Glyc.
ZImisces being dead in the year 975. the Empire returieth unto Basil and
Constantine, the sons of Romanus the younger, the which Basil held fifty years;
Constantine three years more. Not a few usurped Tyranny against them. First of
all Bardas by surname (...), that is, Hard. Who established a league with the
the Saracens by affinity. Then Bardas Phocas, by whom Hard was taken up by
deceit. The same Phocas, 2. Constable. Acc. in the year 989, being slain in fight,
was reconciled to the Emperor. Basil, these affairs being dispatched, Syria
being appeased, subjected Bulgaria by a daily War, to himself, Samuel the King
being overcome, 15 thousand of whose Soldiers being made blind, he sent back
to him, all the Captains of hundreds with one only eye going before them, at
whose sight the Bulgarian being very much affrighted, a little after he dyed.
Frag. Ann. Aquit.
It is delivered in the Aquitane Annalls, Basil to have vowed he would be a
Monk, if he should overcome; being condemned of his vow, that which was left of
his life, he wearing a Monks habit hiddenly under honorable tokens of the
Empire, abstained from copulation and flesh. He died being 70. years old, 9.
Constable. Acc. in the Month December. in the year of Christ 1025, a Prince stout in
war; but endued with covetousness, and ravenousnesse, and Greek craftiness.
Yet Constantine his brother, a worse then he, overlived him three years, a man
of no thrift, and given to sports and jests or scoffs, he departed in the year
1028, in the Month November. the 12. Constable. Acc.

Curop. Cedr. Zon. etc.
Argyrus the Roman, being constrained to leave his former Wife, took the Empire
with Zoe the daughter of Constantine. In the beginning he showed himself a
moderate and just man, but his manners being changed for the worse, he drew out
the wealth of private men with unlimitted taxes or exactions: he lost Syria
through his own default, taken back again by former Emperors; the which George
Maniac a most valiant Captain however held again. He perished by the lying in
wait of Zoe his Wife, in the year 1034. April the 11th, the fifth weekday, of
the greater Week; as it is with Curopalatas the Grecian. For Cedrenus who
Copied out this man, was corrupted in this place. He reigned five years six
Months.

The same Michael Paphlago.
Michael, the adulterer of Zoe, who stirring him up, he had killed Romanus,
passed over almost the whole time of his rule evilly vexed with a Devil, which
was seven years, eight Months. The health of his body being despaired of, he
determined to take care of his mind, and being shaven into a Monk, he died in
the year 1041, December. 10. Constable. Acc. 101. having abhorred his parricide with
great grief. This man reduced Zoe into an order. George Maniac, he commanding
as Emperor, recovered Sicily from the Saracens. But when by false reproaches
he was cast into bonds, he being absent, Sicily was lost. Unto which misery the
falling away of the Bulgarians happened.

The same.
Paphlago being dead, the height of affairs returned upon Zoe; who, knowing a
woman to be unfit for so great a weight, adopted Michael Calephate, the son of
Stephen, (who had lost the business of Sicily) Caesar, and made him Emperor,
an oath being first taken by him, that he should always have her in the place
of a Mother, and Mistress. He having forgotten this covenant, desiring to
remove Z^e: while he begins to move the minds of the common people, he
inflameth his endeavors against Zoe and her sister Theodora. On whom the
Empire was suddenly brought over, whose hope was for ever taken away from
Calephate, with his eyes:

The same.
Constantine Monomach, being taken by Zoe a companion of her bed, and also of
command, is crowned in the same year 1042, 12th of June. This man being
Emperor, great slaughters were received by the Greeks. First by the Sueves
they were very evilly entreated, forty thousand being slain. Then by the
Normans in Apulia, The Normans obtain Apulia.
by whose aid George Maniac rebelled. Who afterward being taken away, the same
Normans remained in the possession of Apulia.

At the same time, the Turks receiving Soldiers pay, under Mahumed the
Saracen, Prince of the Persians, fall off from him; and he being often
overcome, and at length dying, they invade Persia, whose first Sultan or
Emperor is by Curopalates guessed to be Tragolipace Mucalett. The Temple at
Jerusalem of the Lord's resurrection, was renewed from the foundations in the
year 1048, before 57 years overthrown by the Saracens; as Book 1. chapter 7.
Vuillelme Tyrius writes; he dies of a disease when he had reigned 12 years,
8. Constable. Acc. in the year 1054. Theodora, after this, reigned one year, when
Zoe had now dyed: and she dyed in the year 1055, 9th Constable. Account, in the
month of August.

Ep. 1. Leon. Sig.
Constantine being Emperor, Michael Cerular, Patriarch of Constantinople
fought against the Roman Church by writings, in the year 1053. whom Leo chief
Bishop learnedly confuted. Leo P. ep. 7. and 8. Leo Ost. 2.89. Sig.
But the year following he sent Ambassadors to Constantinople, Humbert Bishop
of Sylvia the White, a man very learned in that Age, and Frederick, both
Cardinals, with Peter Bishop of Amalphitania; See Baron.
who being courteously heard by the Emperor, Nicetas Studiensis a Monk, what
things he had rashly written against the Latins, they compelled to revoke. But
Michael the Patriarch, stubborn in his error, they openly condemned.

The same.
No more than one years rule happened unto Michael Stratiocus after Theodora; a
man for his age, and unskillfulnesse of things least of all fit. But such a one
the gelded ones of Palatina had chose in that Council, as he was, who being
contented with a show of honor, left the business and profit of the Empire
unto them. While therefore he had the chief men in contempt, and in a proud
manner, he kindled their hatreds. Therefore Ced. Zon.
Isaac Comnenus was made Emperor against this man, the 8th of June, 10 Constable.
Account, in the year 1057. Stratioticus somewhat delaying, he at length asked
the Bishops, whom the Patriarch had sent unto him, that they might persuade him
to a private life, What reward there should be of laying down the Empire? They
answering, A heavenly Kingdom. He straightway put off his purple, on the last
day of August, of the year 1057, 10 Constable. Acc. Thus Cedrenus, whose history
here ends.

Zonar. Glyc. Manass.
Isaac Comnenus is saluted Emperor in the same year 1057, the Call. September.
the 11th Constable. Acc. entering, he is said to have been of a sharp wit, and
famous, but of a proud disposition; and the same most skillful in war. Two
years and three months being finished, health being despaired of, he ordained
Ducas Emperor: and betook him into the Monastery of Studia, where he being
eased of his grief, he nevertheless persisted in what he had begun.

The same.
Constantine Ducas entered in the year 1059, of profitable behavior, and a mind
readily inclined toward Justice, but dull and slow. Therefore under this
Emperor the Barbarians robbing and killing without control, the Empire was
mangled: He reigned seven years and six months, three sons being left with his
wife Eudocia, Michael, and Andronicus, whom he had begotten, being a private
man: and Constantine who was born while he was Emperor, who therefore was
called Porphyrogenitus, that is, begotten in purple: he dyed therefore in the
year 1067. Zonar.
John Xiphiline of Trapezunt, being of a Monk a Patriarch, flourished,
Constantine being Emperor.

The same.
Eudocia, against the oath which she had promised to her dying husband, That
she would yield none to be a father in law to her children in common, after the
seventh month, married Romanus Diogenes; of whom she had determined there was
need, the affairs of the East then decaying. Moreover, she craftily by the
Patriarch expressed the bond of the oath; when she had seigned, she had a great
desire to the next wedlock of him. This man, some prosperous dispatches being
made against the Turks; at last his Ensigns being placed, being overcome by the
treason of Andronicus, he came under the power of the Sultan. Of whom being
kindly received, the Zonar. Glyc. Manass.
Greek Annals do mention, he was also honorably let go. But Vuill. Tyr. 1. chapter
9.
Vuillelm Tyrius writes, Diogenes to have been to the Barbarian, going up into
his Throne, or coming down, for a footstool.

Zonar. Glyc. Manass. Vuill. Tyr.
In the mean time Eudocia being banished into a Monastery at Constantinople, a
new Emperor is chosen. Diogenes being let go by the Sultan, found less
humanity among his own, than among the Barbarians. For contrary to promise his
eyes being cruelly dug out, nor his wounds taken care of, his head swelling
and abounding with worms, he was in a short time consumed in the third year of
his command, and above the eighth month, which seems to have happened in the
year 1071.

Zonar. Glyc. Manass.
Michael Parapinace the son of Constantine Ducas, was chosen for his father in
law in the year 1071, whose sloth was the Turks increase, who subdued the
Coast of Pontus by arms; the which he calls the Kingdom of Turcomannia; and
at the same time, two Nicephori, Botoniates and Bryennius, the one in the East,
the other in the West, where he was chief over Dyrrachium, usurp the Empire.
Botoniates trusting to the aid of the Turks, first possesses the Palace, and
on the 25 of March was after the solemn custom proclaimed Emperor. Michael
being passed over into the Studien Monastery, changes his purple for a
mourning cloak, the day before Easter, that is, the 7th of April, in the year
1078, when he had been chief Ruler 6 years, and as many months. About this time
John Xiphiline dyed, having performed the Patriarchship eleven years and seven
months.

Zonar. Glyc. Manass.
Nicephorus Botoniates in the beginning of his Dominion, brake Bryennius,
proudly refusing all conditions of peace by Alexius Comnenus, and deprived him
of his eyes, a little after an eclipse of the Moon, whereof Glycas makes
mention. Which indeed happened at Constantinople in the same year of Christ
1078, January 31, the first hour after midnight. But while age now growing
great, and by reason of inbred softness, he neither rightly managed the
Commonwealth, nor made he fit Magistrates over it; he came into contempt of
his subjects: and being by the Cemnens, spolyed of his dignity, he is registered
among the Monks, when he had commanded three years, in the year of Christ 1081.
In this Emperor, Constantine Manasses ends his History.

Zonar.
Of the two Comnens, Isaac and Alexius, this, although the younger came to the
Empire, because he excelled both in favor, and skilfulnesse of warlike affairs;
he began in the year 1081, 4th Constable. Acc. April 1. the 5th weekday of the
greater week; as it is in the Chronicle by us set forth, together with the
breviary of Nic^phorus. wicked man, and unfaithful, and to fill up the common
treasury, which he had drawn dry by infinite bountiful expenses, sparing the
wealth of none. This man was evilly entreated by the French: Leo Ost. 3. chapter
48. Zon.
chiefly by Robert Guiscard Duke of Apulia; as we have minded in the former
Chapter; the which, Zonaras is witness, happened in the year 1081, the reign
of Alexius beginning. Vuill. Tyr. 1. chapter 8. Otho. Fris. b. 1. chapter 2.
After that, when he withstood the French hastening into Palestina, Godfride
being their Captain, he was driven back with a great slaughter of the Grecians
in the year 1096. But truly nothing in that Emperor was more deceitufl and
unjust than this whole dispatch of our Countrymen, nothing in his successors,
as long as Christian affairs there stood, he was more cruel and perfidious
against them. He lived about 70 years, and commanded 37 years, and about 4
months, and some days; and he dyed in the year 1118, a little before his
death forsaken of all, not indeed lifted up with an Emperor's funeral: his
son, whom he being alive had called Augustus, being left his succeeder. In this
man Zonaras bounded his history, and almost Curopalates; which Greek Author we
have had in our keeping.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Affairs of France, from the year 987, and the beginning of
Hugo Capet, unto the year 1108, under the Kings Hugo, Robert, Henry the first,
Philip the first; and also of the shakings of Italy, and Apulia possessed by
the Normans; as also the dispatch of Godfry Duke of Bulloign, into Palestina.
THe Kingdom of France passed over from the posterity of Charles the Great,
unto a Family of the Saxon-birth; Hugo Capet the son of Great Hugo, being
carried up by the agreement of the chief men unto that dignity, whom Ann. Pith.
set forth in French Ann.
Vuillelm Nangius thinks to have belonged unto the stock of Charles by the
Mothers kind. Because Mathild the Wife of Henry Auceps, the mother of Otho, was
begotten by Ludovick the son of Arnulph, the Nephew of Carloman. Of which
Mathild was born to Henry, Avoida, the mother of Hugo Capet. But the authority
of the Ancients persuades that to be false. Vuitich. b. 1. Luitpr. 4. chapter 7.
Sig. in the year 937. Ursperg. See John Villa, b. 4. chapter 3.
Who show Mathild to have been the daughter of Theodorick the Saxon, and to
have sprung from that Vuitikind, who had war with Charles the Great. Therefore
Capet had nothing common with Charles his race. Who held Charles the son of
Lotharius, the brother of Ludovick, as has been said, in Prison. Glaber. 2.
chapter 1.
This King in the beginning of his new dominion, by Counsel and industry
overcame not a few of the chief ones, having gotten them against him. Frag.
Floriac.
He dyed in the year 997, whom Robert his son followed from the Glaber. Rod.
year of Christ 998, being now made partaker of the Crown and kingdom; he was
endued with the greatest piety and prudence. Moreover, with no common knowledge
of learning; Frag. Floriac. Helgal in the life of Robert. Frag. Aquit. Pith.
who, an incestuous marriage being taken away by the injunction of Gregory the
5th Roman Bishop, he married Frag. Floriac.
Constantia the daughter of Vuillelm Earl of Tolouse. He added Burgundy, being
by weapons tamed, unto the kingdom of the French. He built very many holy
houses and Monasteries, among which, he took care, that that which was
dedicated unto Helgal. in the life of Robert. p. 73. and 77.
Anian at Orleans, should be consecrated with solemn ceremony in the year 1029,
Constable. Acc. 12. Glaber. 2. chapter 5.
which City, the same being King, being consumed by fire in the 999, Arnulph
chief Bishop, at first, repaired the Cathedral of the Cross at his own
charges, being then helped with a very great sum of gold; which he found
while they dug. The most holy King departed, Helgal. p. 77.
and is made samous by many miracles from God in the year of Christ 1033,
Helgal. in the same place. Glab. 4. chapter 9.
the thirteenth Call. August, 21 days after that the Sun had been eclipsed;
which eclipse fell out on 5 Call. July, of the year 1033. But Helgal says, the
King dyed the 5th weekday, when as the 13 of Call. of August was the sixth
weekday. He reigned after his father's death 36 years. In which thing the
Annals are to be corrected, who number 33 or 34. Helgal. Glab. 3. chapter 7.
His body was brought into the Cathedral of Dionysius at Milodunum, where he
had dyed. Frag. Aquit. Hist. Trithe.
This man reigning, through the persuasion of the Jews that were at Orleance,
the Prince of Babylon overthrew the Temple which was at Jerusalem over the
Sepulcher of Christ. Frag. Floriac.
Which deceit of the Jews being known, very many being killed, the rest were
made to flee out of the Roman World. Frag. Floriac.
At that season Fulbert Bishop of Carnota, with rare holiness, and the like
learning, adorned France.

In the year of Christ 1033, Henry the first reigned over the French, his
Mother Constantia being unwilling, who did prefer Robert the younger, appointed
by his Father. Frag. Floriac.
He overcame Tetbald and Stephen the rebellious sons of Odo Earl of Carnota, by
Godfride Earl of the Andegavians; unto whom he gave the City of Turo. He
restored Vuillelm the bastard-son of Richard Duke of the Normans, being
commended for his faith, into his fathers title, Herm.
in the year 1047, thirty thousand Normans being scattered, when as he had no
more than three thousand. Lamber. Herman. Leo Ost. 2. chapter 88. Otho Fris. 6. chapter
53. Sig. 8. of the Kings of Italy. Pandul. b. 3.
Pope Leo the 9th, he reigning, by the entreaty of Hermer Abbot of Remigium,
came into Rhemes; where he consecrated a Monastery built by that Abbot, with
solemn pomp, in the year 1049, wherein it was accomplished on the 6th of
December. on the Lords day. He in the year 1053; sets upon the Duke of the
Normans in Apulia, requiring peace with the most humble entreaties, being
helped by the ayds of the Germans; by whom 14th Call. July, he was overcome in
battle, almost every one of the Germans being slain; when as the Longobards
being at the first onset affrighted, had turned their backs. The same, and Leo
Off. 2. chapter 88.
Leo being by the same besieged in a certain Castle, he was brought forth to
Beneventum honorably from thence; and at length let go. Henry finished his
life in the Frag. Floriac.
eight and twentieth year of his Vitriacan kingdom, of Christ Aimo. 5. chapter 47.
1060, as appears out of the writs or bulls; Book 3. the beginning of Monast.
of Dionysius, chapter 12. etc.
in one whereof, the first year of Philip is compared with the year of Christ
1060, in the other the 8th year of the same Philip with 1068, Constable. Acc. 6. on
Call. August. In the third, the 14th year of Philip, with the 1073 of Christ.
This King reigning, Casimir from a Monk of Cluniaca, being made King of
Polonia, lived most holily.

Frag. Flor. Aimo. 5.
Of Henry the first, Philip, being begotten from Anne the daughter of the King
of the Russians, began to reign being a child, Baldwine Earl of Flanders being
given for a guardian; whose Nephew Arnulph, being cast out of his Dominion by
Robert his Uncle, Philip endeavored to restore by arms, was overcome by
Robert, in which combat Arnulph dyed in the year (as Sigebert thinks) 1072.
He had Berta the daughter of Frisias Frag. hist. of France, from Robert to Phil.
Duke of Florence, his wife, the sister of Robert of Flanders. Of whom he begat
Ludovick. Sig. Aim. b. 5. chapter 49.
Who after being cast off, he took Bertrarda the wife of Fulco Earl of
Andegavia. For that thing he was by Urban chief Bishop forbidden the use of
holy things Berthold.
in the year 1094. Two years after, when he had abundantly satisfied him, he
was reconciled with the Church. By the same Urbane at Clarus the Mountain, the
Town of Avernia, a Synod was solemnized Berthold. Vuill. Tyr. 1. chapter 14. Aim.
5. chapter 48.
in the year 1095, in the month November, Constable. Acc. as says Tyrius; in
which the Bishop of Rome persuaded the Christians unto a holy dispatch into
Palestina; Vuill. Tyr. 1. chapter 11. and 13.
he being moved by a speech of Peter a French Hermit, who had come from
Jerusalem for to urge the thing. They being as it were by that Trumpet called
up, poured forth Armies gathered together at diverse places and times, unto that
warfare.

Vuill. Tyr. 1. chapter 2. Matthew. Paris.
Godfry of Bulloign in the year 1096, the fifth day of August, setting forward
with his Soldiers, after infinite pains, Tyr. 8. chapter 24.
at length in the year 1099, the 15 day of July, 6th weekday, about the 9th
hour of the day, vanquished Jerusalem, and by the voices of all Tyr. 9. chapter 1.
was first chosen King. Id. chapter 5. Sig. 1089.
This man was the son of Eustachius Earl of Bononia, Ida his mother, the sister
of Godfry the Crook-back, Duke of Lorain; who dying without children, appointed
a Kinsman the son of his sister, his heir and successor.

Frag. Floriac. Aimo. 5. chapter 49.
The death of Philip happened on the year 1108, the third Call. Aug. and he
reigned 49 years, two months, seven days, and was buried in the Floriacian
Monastery.

He reigning the seventh year, Vuill. Malmes. Roger. Vuill. Gemmet. Neubr.
Matthew. Paris Polyd. 7.
a great turn of things was made in England; the Government being conferred on
a Prince of a strange birth; the which happened almost in this manner; Ethelred
King of England, of the old stock of the Angle Saxons, had Emma the sister of
Richard of Normans, the second of this name, in marriage, and of her he begat
Alfred and Edward. This King being overcome by Sueno King of Denmark, and
forced to depart the Island about the year 1013, flees unto Richard the
brother of his wife; by whose help, after the death of Sueno, his son Canutus
reigning, he recovereth the kingdom. But afterward being overcome by Canutus,
dies in the Polyd.
year of his kingdom 38, of Christ 1016. The son of this King, Edmund (whom he
had begotten of Ethelgine a former wife) made peace with Canutus on that
condition, that they should divide the kingdom equally betwixt them; the which
a year sliding out, the Dane received whole: For Edmund reigned no more than
one year, Canutus had two sons by a Concubine, Harald and Sueno. Therefore,
that he might sometime supply himself with lawful offspring he coupled Emma
once, the wife of Ethelred; being called back out of Normandy, and Canutus
being begotten of her, he dyed in the year 1036. This Harald followed; then
Canutus. Who having finished his life, the kingdom is brought on Alfred the son
of Ethelred, all the Danes being killed, the eight and twentieth year after
they had come with Sueno into England.

Alfred when he had passed over into England to take the kingdom, is privily
slain by Godwine, a very mighty man, who had Thira the sister of Canutus the
second, his wife, and of her had begotten Harald. He, that he might turn away
from himself the suspicion of the parricide, or father-murder, was an author to
the English, Holy Edward King of England.
that they should make Edward the brother of Alfred, (being called out of
Normandy) King. So Edward received his father's kingdom about the year of
Christ 1043, and took to him Edith the daughter of Godwine in wedlock; with
whom he kept the continual flowr of integrity, with many and the highest
virtues, and miracles, the witnesses of virtues, being made famous from God.
Roger Par. 1.
For which things (three and twenty years in the kingdom being finished, and
six months) he was received into heaven, in the year 1066, and afterward
written down among the number of the heavenly ones. After this man, Harald the
brother of Edith possesses the kingdom; the which when, Edward living, had
promised to Willelm the bastard, Duke of Normandy, his near kinsman: This man,
a most strong Army being brought over out of Normandy, overthrew Harald in
battle, in which Harald himself valiantly fighting, dyed Roger Malmes. Neubrig.
Matthew. Paris. Matthew. Paris. Vuill. Gem. b. 7. chapter 37.
in the year 1066, the day before the Ides of October, on the Sabbath day. From
which time the Normans hence forward, ruled in Britain, in the 618 year after
the Angles and Saxons came into that Island, which happened in the year four
hundred forty and nine.

In this Age learned and holy men not a few came forth. Sig.
Hilperick set forth a learned account in the year 1005; The same.
also Franco a Schoolman of Leodium wrote of the squaring of the Circle, in the
year 1047.

Sigeb. Leo Ost. 2. chapter 82.
Leo himself the 9th, lived with the greatest learning, and alike soundness of
manners; from Bishop of Tullia in France, made chief Bishop, in the year 1049.
Likewise Cardinal Humbert; who confuted the Greeks themselves, both by
disputing before them at Constantinople, and by writing afterward. Lanfrank
from an Abbot made Bishop of Canterbury, Vuill. Malmes. 1. Matthew. Paris.
in the year 1070; and he that succeeded him in the year 1090, his scholar
Anselm, both, but this especially, brought (in holiness and learning) light
unto that Age. And this indeed having finished many labors, and banishments
for the liberty of the Church, deceased in the Edinerus in his life. Malmes.
Matthew. Paris. etc.
year 1071, the 8th Kal. May, on the very day of Mark, of his age 76, of his
chief Bishopric 16.

Ivo ep. 1. Sigeb.
Moreover, Ivo made Bishop of Carnota by the preferment of Quintine of
Belvacum, was famous with both ornaments, by Urban the second, in the year
1092. Sigeb. his life with Sur.
Odilo Arvernus being brought over from the Brivatian Monastery unto the
Cluniacian after Maiolus, in the year nine hundred ninety three, when he had
been chief over this, six and fifty years, he passed into Heaven in the year
1048, the very Kalends of January. Sig. 1080.
Moreover, Arnulph a Monk of the Monastery of Medard in Suessiona was famous in
the praise of holiness, and afterward Bishop of the same City. And also
Theobald a noble Frank, who being shut up in the Cell of Vincentia in Venetia,
the twelfth year after dies, and is beautified from God with many miracles
after death; whose bones were carried into France. Sigebert has mentioned in
the year 1050.

Sigeb. 1084. the life of Hugo with Sur. Apr. 1.
Also Bruno, Canon of the Church of Colonia and Rhemes, bare the praise of
Learning and holiness, and Master of the Schools; by whom the Order of the
Carthusians was begun in the year 1086 Hugo a most holy Prelate of
Gratianopolis, whose beginnings Peter Clun. b. 2. of miracles, chapter 28.
Peter Cluniacensis describes: and also Guibert Abbot of Nongentum, who was
the equal of Bruno, in the Whose fragments Cl. Homeraeus sets forth in
Carthusian.
Treatise concerning his life. Neither have both the Canons mentioned that
Parisian, who after his death reviving, is reported to have put the standers
about in fear with a denouncing of a cruel Judgment concerning them: as neither
Sigebert, who lived in the same age. Which History notwithstanding many learned
and weighty men have delivered to letters.

The Cistercian Order two years after, to wit, in the year 1098, had its
beginning, as Sigebert is author; begun by Robert Abbot of Molisma.

Malmes. b. 3. Sigeb. 1051.
On the contrary, Berengarius Archdeacon of Andegavia, is the author of a
shameful heresy; which denies the body of Christ to be in very deed
contained in the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist; he sprinkled a disgrace
on the French Nation. But this man when he had found his error often condemned
by them, it is said, he dying in the year 1088, at the last revoked it.

CHAP. XX. Of Italian and Germane affairs from the year 1109, and about 1200.
Henry the V. Lotharius, Conrade the III. Frederick Aenobarb, Henry the VI.
Emperors; and also of a double Rent or Schism; and of Bernard, and other
famous Men.
Otho Fris. 7. chapter 14. and b. 1. of deeds of Gotfr. Viterb. Sig. Ursper.
HENRY the fifth, the son of the fourth, not only imitated the violent mind of
his father, against the seat of Rome, whose Avenger he had professed himself,
but also, he being dead, exceeded. For as soon as he came to Rome, he laid hands
on Paschal, 12. and from him he by force wrung out all rights, concerning which
there had so great a strife arisen. Thus the Emperor was consecrated, in the
Sig. Gotfr. Dodechimus Ursp.
year 1111. 4. Constable. Acc. But as soon as he departed from Italy, Ursper.
the Roman Fathers decreed those things to be void, Paschal surviving, and he
having finished his life, his successors being Gelasius the second, and
Calixtus the second. Ansel. in App. to Sig. Rob. of Mountain Gotfr. Ursperg.
Henry, Gelasius being duly chosen in the year 1118. opposed Burdine as a Pope
against him, a runagate man out of Spain, chosen by the voices of his own
Bishops, whom they named Gregory. Otho 7. chapter 16.
For these things he being renounced by the curses of Pope Calixtus, when as he
saw himself by little and little to be forsaken by his own, being affrighted
with the example of his fathers misery, returned unto his duty, all things
being repealed which through Tyranny, he had pronounced. Anselm. in Append.
By this means peace was restored to the Church in the year 1122. Ursperg.
Two years after, an Army being provided against Ludovick King of France; that
he might bring help to Henry King of England, whose daughter Mathild he had
married, being affrighted at the meeting of the French, he went back again, and
Anselm. Ursperg.
in the year 1125. deceased of a disease at Trajectum, Anselm.
the fifth day of the Week of Pentecost: or, as it pleases others, Ursperg.
Otho Fris. 7. chapter 16.
the tenth Calends of June, which was the Sabbath after Pentecost, of his
Kingdom 19, of the Empire 14. year. This man being Emperor, Otho Bishop of
Bamberg, instructed the Pomeranians in Christian Principles, Vrsperg.
in the year 1124. Constable. Acc. 2.

The vacant Empire of the Germans being by the death of Henry, on Lotharius the
Saxon, Otho Fris. 7. chapter 17.
although resisting, yet unwillingly is transported Otho Fris. addit. ad Lamb
Ansel. Vrsper. Goth. Joan. Villa. 4. c. 33.
in the year 1123. Otho Fris. Chr. 7. c. 17. and 1. de Gest. Frid. c. 16. Vrsp
Ansel. Goth.
The Annals do record that he was a Prince very temperate, and a great lover of
Justice, he had for corrivalls, his kinsmen; Frederick and Conrade, his sisters
sons, at the beginning of his reign, Otho 7. Chron. c 17. Ansel. Goth.
whom Honorius the Pope excommunicated, because of their stubbornness and
contumacy, but St. Bernard reconciled them afterward to the Emperor. At that
time was a sad Division in the Church of Rome, in the year of our Lord 1130,
after Honorius's death. After whom Gregorius being lawfully created, who was
called Innocent the second, Peter of Lions was chose by his adverse party under
the name of Anacletus the second: S. Bernardi vita plat.
The greatest part of the World did obey Innocent, especially by the means and
endeavors of Bernard, Bishop of Carevalla, a man of great fame and note, who
made use both of Authority, and miracles for to reconcile the Church. Roger son
of Roger, which was son to Robert Giscard's son, favored Anacletus: now this
Roger was Earl of Sicilia, and Duke of Apulia and Calabria after the death of
Vuillelmus his uncle, which was in the year 1127. Anacletus for to obtain his
favor, and to have him on his side, Anacleti diploma apud. Baron. 1130.
gave him the name and title of King in the year 1130. Lotharius going to Rome
with Innocent, and Bernard of Carevalla was honored with the title of
Emperor, in which year, the Annalls Ansel. Rob. de Mon. Ursp.
do record, that the fourth of August the sun was Eclipsed, being the year
1133. at which time the same Annals observe that Lotharius was Crowned. Then
the Emperor had War with Roger, whom having beaten out of Apulia and Calabria,
he established Rainald Governor thereof, and soon after being called back into
Germany, Auct. Gemel. Rob. de Monte. Gotfr.
he died by the way, in August, in the year of his reign thirteen, and of his
Empire six, and of Christ, 1137. Ursper. Onufr.
Some say that he died not till the year following.

Sigon. vide Ursperg.
It is said that he ordained the Roman civil Law to be executed in all places
of Judicature: thereupon begun the Civil Law to be taught and professed at
Bononia, and other Cities of Italy.

Conrade the third, son to Frederick, Duke of Swedes, by the sister of Henry
the younger, began to reign Otho. Fris. 7. c. 22.
in the year 1139. He was not crowned by the Pope, because I think that Italy
was then in a combustion of Civil wars, for Roger after Rainolds death, boldly
and without resistance, wasted and destroyed the Country about, Otho Fris. 7.
c. 24.
whom Innocent pursuing with an Army, he was taken by him, and being honorably
entertained by him, he granted him the Principality of Apuleia, Calabria, and
Capua, with the title of King the twenty fourth of July, Ursper.
in the year 1139.

Otho Fris. 1. de Gest. Frid. c. 27. etc.
At the same time Arnoldus Brixianus, Abelardus's Disciple under the habit of a
Friar, imbroyled the Roman-See with tumults and seditions: for he enticed the
people to create Jordanus Senator, under whose command and conduct they cast
off the Pontiffs yoke, feeding themselves with the hope and Image of old
liberty. Otho. Fris. Chr. 7. c. 29.
When the Cities of Italy could not agree amongst themselves, and all Italy was
in commotion and in confusion of Wars. Otho Fris. Chr. 7. c. 31. et seq.
These Roman troubles being somewhat appeased and calmed by Eugenius the third,
who being first Abbot, and St. Bernards Disciple, was created Pope, in the year
1145. who as soon as he understood that the Saracens had taken Edessa, the East
City of Syria beyond Euphrates, brought the Christian Princes into an unanimous
consent, to undertake the expedition of the holy Wars, Uvill. Tyr. 1.16.
and Conrade King of Germany, and Lewis King of France, were the chief leaders,
who had the Cross in their Colors, by St. Bernards exhortations, and with
their Armies advanced to Jerusalem. Conrade with an Army of 50000. men, and
Lewis with 30000 Horses, besides an huge body of Foot Soldiers, as the
Gemblaeian Annalls do record. Otho a S. Blasio^m App. Frising. and Otho Fris.
in 1. de Gest. Frid. c. 58. Append. Lamb. Rob. de Monte.
This Expedition was in the year 1147; but being betrayed by the Greeks, they
returned without any memorable advantage. Conrade died in the year Otho 1. de
gest. Frid. c. 63.
1152. the 15th of March. Baron.
Gratianus, Friar at Bononia, under this King, made the book of Canons in the
year 1151. And St. Bernard died in the year 1152. being 63. years old, having
retired himself into the Cistercian Mo^astery, with diverse others, as we read
it in his life, and in Robert Montanus's works: for Sigebert ended his
Chronicles in the year 1112; and Eugenius, Bernard's Disciple, died the eighth
of July, in the year 1153. Otho Fris. in rebus gest. Frid. and Radevic. Fris.
de iisdem. Otho a St. Blasie Joan Villa 5. c. 1.
Frederick Aenobarbus, who succeeded his Uncle Conrade, was of an excellent
nature, and disposition to all virtues: but his hatred against the Pope of Rome
by breaking the peace of the Church, did much obscure it, Otho a S. Blas. App.
Lamb. Dodech Auctar. Sig. Ursp.
having been created King of Germany in the year 1152, he obtained the title of
Empeperour, of Adrian the 4th at Rome, in the year 1155, but soon after, the
Pope having been his opposite enemy, dyed in the year Otho a S. Blas.
1160, and he preferred Victor to Alexander, (who had succeeded him) in the
Council held at Pavia. Then having taken war against the Ligurians, and
Lombards, who fought for the Pope against him, he often defeated their Armies,
and so defeated the Milanois, that he utterly destroyed and demolished their
City Otho a S. Blas. Auct. Aquicinct.
in the year 1162. But the Ligurians rebelling again, and suddenly falling on
him unawares, defeated his Army, and brought him under the Popes subjection,
and hereby did the Church recover her former peace, in the year 1177.

Frederick, for to blot out this his offense, hearing that Saladine had taken
Jerusalem, in the year 1187. he went thither with an Army of Germans, bearing
the Cross in his Standard; and having performed diverse gallant achievements,
both in Thracia and Asia against the Emperor of Constantinople, and the
Saracenian Princes, refreshing his hot body on a Summers day in the cold River
of Cydnum, in Tarsis, he died Vrsper. Auct. Aquicinct. Otho a S. Blas.
in the year 1190, having been King thirty eight years, and Emperor 35.

Henrick, the fourth, son to Aenobarbus, is related to have been of a cruel
and rash humor: being made co-partner of the Kingdom by his father, he
married Gotfrid. Viterb. Auct. Aquicinct. Joan. Villa 5. c. 15. etc.
Constantia, daughter to Roger, first King of Sicilia, being one and twenty
years old, in the year 1168, upon the sixth of February, though some Anton. and
Pand. l. 4. Aliique Vide Baron. A. 1197
erroniously say that she was a Nun, and that she was 50 years old when she
married him.

Frederick, his father being dead, he with his Wife received the Empires Crown
of Celestinus the third, Auct. Aquicinct.
in the year 1191. having first been forced to deliver up to the Romans Vrsp.
Tusculum, who being inveterate enemies to the Inhabitants of the Town, by whom
they oftentimes had been beaten, put part of them to death and part of them
they sent into banishment, and demolished their Town. Henrick ( William,
Roger's son, being dead) received into his Dominion Apuleia, Calabria, and
Sicilia; and afterward he exercised all manner of cruelty against them, but
especially against the Sicilians, in the year 1193, and following.

Nicetas Chr.
Alexius Angelus Emperor of the East, threatening him out of his Kinddome, did
cast him into such a fear, that he drove him to pay him tribute, which as he
was gathering of his subjects in the eighth year of his reign, and Auct. Aquic.
of Christ, 1199. he died at Messana, Vrsp.
being poisoned by his Wife, as some Authors do think, leaving a young child
called Frederick: he was excommunicated by the Pope; because he had cast in
Prison Roger. in Annal.
Richard King of England, as he returned from the Holy Land, Otho a S. Blas.
in the year one thousand one hundred and ninety, and had constrained him to
pay his ransom.

CHAP. XXI. The affairs of the EASTERN Empire, from the year 1118, unto 1204.
At what time the LATINS possessed Constantinople.
JOhn Comnenus, who was also called Calo Joannes, Alexius's son began Nicetas
Choniates. Vuil. Tyr. l. 11. c 31. and l. 12. c. 5.
in the year 1118 to govern the Grecian Empire, he was somewhat more renowned
and expert then his father in Martial achievements: for in Thrace, he put to
flight the Scythians and Hungarians, who had got over the Isther, Nicetas.
in the fifth year of his Empire; and then the Persarmenians in Asia.

Nicetas. The piety of John Comnenus toward the Virgin Mary.
After which Victory, having commanded a triumph, he brought back into the City
the Virgin Mary's Image, laid in a Chariot, drawn with four Milkwhite horses
in great pomp. Then being honored and crowned with the glory of diverse gallant
achievements in Asia, he advanced as far as Antioch, hoping to win it by
composition from Nicetas Tyr. l. 15. c. 22.
Prince Raimund: but being frustrated and deceived of his hope, having spoiled
and overrun his Country, he returned through Cilicia, where, as he was a
hunting, shooting an arrow, the head whereof was rubbed over with poison, which
touched his hand, and so poysonned it, which poison spreading it self
throughout all his body by little and little, he died in April, having
governed the Empire Vuil. Tyr. 15. c. 23.
twenty four years, and eight Months, Otho Fris. 7. Chr. c. 28.
in the year of our Lord 1143, the year after the taking of Edessa by the
Saracens, as Tyrius l. 16. c. 3. and 4.
William Tyrius declares. Therefore was Edessa taken in the year 1142, but Otho
Fris. 7. c. 30.
some say in the year 1155: and Vuil. Tyr. 13. c. 14. Ansel. Gembl.
Tyrus, in the year 1124, came under the power of the Christians.

Nicetas.
Manuel Comnenus his younger son, was by him preferred before Isaac his elder
brother, and by him made Emperor, he was a crafty man, and a great enemy to
the Christian affairs, which did concern the Latins, yea, he was so wicked,
that he conspired their ruin with the Saracens.

Vuil. Tyr. 16.18. Nicetas.
It sufficiently appears that the Armies of Conrade King of Germany, and of
Lewis King of France were overthrown and defeated, in the year 1147, by his
treachery and perfidiousnesse. Nicetas.
Which injury and wrong, Roger King of Sicilia avenged, who sailing along the
coast of Greece, spoiled and destroyed the Country far and near. Nicetas.
Manuel, upon the latter end of his life, grew so mad and out of his wit, that
he could almost have joined to the Saracens decrees. At length promising
himself a longer life, he dyed the thirty eighth year of his age, Nicetas.
in the Month of September, in the year 1180. Vuill. Tyr. l. 22. c. 5.
William Tyrius exalts him highly for his freeness, and liberality, and says,
that he died the third of October, in the fourtieth year of his Empire, and one
and fourtieth of his life, wherein he is much out of the way. Nicetas.
Eustathius Homer's Interpreter.
Eustathius that learned man, Homers interpretour, lived in his days, he was
Bishop of Thessalonica, who constantly resisted him who asserted the Heresy of
Muhammedes, as Nicetas records.

Nicetas.
Alexius, Manuel's son, being about twelve years of age succeeded his father,
he married Agnetes daughter to Lewis King of France, being but eight years old,
as Guil. Tyr. 22. c. 4.
William Tyrius says, but Nicetas calls her Anne. Nicetas.
He had the name of Emperor almost for three years space, and then was slain
by Andronicus his fathers Uncle, whom he unwillingly had admitted to be his
partner in the Government of the Empire, not having yet fully completed the
fifteenth year of his age; But before this, Andronicus had put all the Guil.
Tyr. 22. c. 10. and seq. The Latins slain in Constantinople.
French and Latins to death that were in Constantinople, who had been Manuel's
best friends in Counsel and security, and whom he knew would oppose his
Tyranny, and Usurpation.

Which great slaughter the Latins, who by flight could escape, did revenge
with no less hurt and destruction of the Greeks. For Sailing along the
Maritime Coasts of Thrace, and Greece, with a gallant Fleet, they put all to
fire and Sword whatsoever was in their way.

Nicetas.
Andronicus having murdered Alexius, began to rule alone in the year 1183: he
married Agnetes which was betrothed to Alexius at eleven years of age, now
grown in years: but he enjoyed not long the Empire, which he had obtained by so
vile and wicked deed. For two year after, as he plotted the death of Isaac
Angelus, he was set upon by the people who rose in an uproar, Andronicus's
Iamentable death.
and being carried through the Town upon a Camel, having one hand cut off and
one eye put out, he was torn to pieces by the rage of the multitude, saying in
the midst of all the reproaches and ignominies that were cast upon him, these
words, Lord have Mercy, and, Why do you bruise a broken Reed. He died in the
year of our Lord 1185. And thus ended the Family of the Comnenius's.

Nicetas.
Isaac Angelus was made by the same faction Augustus, and enjoyed the title 9
years, and eight Months. He overcame the Sicilians Fleet near Strymon, and
took their two Admiralls, Richard and Baldwin: he in vain attempted with his
Fleet to recover Cyprus out of the hands of Isaac Comnenus the Tyrant: he had
but bad success in his wars against the Mysians or Valachians. He moved, to
his own great disadvantage, Frederick Aenobarbus to fight against him, because
he would stop his passage into Palestine through Thrace and Asia, he was at
last deprived both of the Empire, and of his eyes, in the year of Christ 1195.
by his brother Alexius Angelus.

Nicetas.
Alexius Angelus surnaming himself Comnenus, governed the Empire eight years
three Months and three days. Philip, Emperor of Germany, had married Irene,
Isaac Angelus's daughter, to whom the said Isaac fled, by whose entreaties and
persuasions, Dandulus Duke of Venice, Baldwin Earl of Flanders, and diverse
other Princes, having all engaged and undertook an expedition into the holy
land, against Alexius Comnenus: who despising his enemies, and not being in
capacity to defend himself, nor having prepared any strong Army, was forced to
fly into Debeltum; the City being taken and burnt in the year 1203. He being
gone,

Isaac Angelus the blind, entered into his former dignity with his son Alexius
Nicetas vide. et Joan. villa. Constanstinople taken by the Latins.
in the year following, being the year of our Lord 1204, but they neither
agreeing between themselves, and a certain Alexius Mursiphilus usurping the
Government; the Army of the confederates took Constantinople, the 12. of
April, the last Week in Lent, as Nicetas says, which Character shows it to
have been the year of Christ 1204.

Then was Baldwin Earl of Flanders 32 years old, by the common voice of all,
created at Constantinople the first Emperor amongst the Latins. Nicetas vide
Rigor, in Philippo.
He was highly praised and esteemed by the Greeks for his great virtue.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Kings of France, Lewis the sixth, Lewis the seventh, and
Philip Augustus.
From 1108 of Christ, unto 1223.
IN the year 1108, began Lewis the sixth, surnamed Le Gross to reign in
France, as L 3. Orig. S. Dio c. 13.
by his Pattents it appears, being but 12. or 13 years of age, as Sugar. in
vita Ludo. Grossi.
Sugerius records, but rather 30 years, because he died the 60th year of his
age, and of his reign the 30th. He was anointed at Orleans, and crowned by
Dambertus of Soissons, moved unto it Vide Ivon. Ep. 50. Aimo. 5. c. 49.
by Ivon of Chartres, because that the Bishop of Rheyms was then at variance:
neither is it so needful that the Kings of France be all consecrated at
Rheyms, says the said Ivo Bishop of Chartres. Sugerius, Abbot of St. Denis,
has written the life of this Lewis. He died of a sickness Auctar. Gemb.
Vestmenast.
in the year of Christ 1137. Sigeb.
in August, having ruled 30. years.

During his reign, was held a Synod at Carevalentia, wherein St Bernard the
Abbot was President, Ansel. Gembl. Rob. de Monte.
in the year 1115. The Premonstratensian order began to be established in the
year 1120, as St. Norbert says. Trith.
At this time was in great fame, Hugo St. Victor, and Hugo the Grationopolitan
Bishop, who died in Ansel. Gemb. and Rober.
the year 1132. He was a very devout and pious man.

Sugar.
Lewis the seventh, surnamed the younger, swayed the Scepter over the French,
in the year 1137. who of his own Supreme power, married Alienora the daughter
of William Duke of Aquitane, and had with her the whole Lordship and dominion
of the said William for her Dowry. vita S. Bernard. l. 2. c. 6. and Theobal. in
vita S. Guillielmi. apud. Sur. Feb. 10.
This is that William Earl of Poicters, and Duke of Aquitane, who adhering to
Anacletus against Innocentius, was brought to a better mind by St. Bernard:
Whom Sugar. in Ludov. Juniore. Robert. Auctar. Gemb. Sugar. Vuill. Tyr. l. 16.
c. 18. Joan. Vill. 4.34.
Sugerius, who then was living, records to have died in Spain soon after, that
is, at the end of Crassus his reign, and beginning of Lewis the younger, being
gone thither to procession to St. James's. Robert Montanus asserts that he died
in the year 1137. in St. James's Church, in the last Week of Lent, and that he
was buried before the Altar. Hereby it appears that Theobaldus the Recorder of
his life is mistaken, in saying that he died in the year 1156.

Lewis in the year 1147. after Whit-Sunday, engaging himself for the Holy Wars,
dispatches his expedition into Palestina with Auct. Gembl.
30000 Horsemen, and a great Army of Foot. But such a mighty Army perished
there, more by the treachery of the Greeks then by the valor and power of the
Saracens. Then Vuil. Tyr. l. 17. c. 8.
having stayed there a year, and being returned into France, in the year 1150
he divorced his Wife Alienora, and married the daughter of Alphonsus the 7th,
who called himself Emperor of Spain, which is called by Tyrius, and Sugerius
Mary, but the West. Monas. Math. Paris.
Annalls of Spain call her Beatrix. Ruderic. Par. 3. c. 31. Alph. a Cath. c.
77. Sugar. Westminster. Math. Paris. A^m. 5. c. 32.
Alienora the year following married Henry Duke of Normandy and Earl of Aniou,
who reigned in England after Steven the second of that name, in the year 1154.
wherein Steven is Rogerius de Hoveden. West. Monast. Matthew. Paris.
reported by the English Annalls to have died the 8th of November, and Henry to
have been consecrated the 14th of January, following upon a Lords day.
A^^^^gen. ad Sigeb.
Which proved the seed of a most bloody war, which a rose between the French
and the English about the right and possession of the Dukedom of Aquitaine,
Auct. ad.
which was somewhat pacified after six years by the marriage of Margaret,
Lewis's daughter, to Henry's son: Quadrip. Hist. Roger. West. Matthew. Paris.
Otho a S. Bafilio. Auct. Aquicinct.
In the time of this Henry, St. Thomas Bishop of Canterbury was first banished
for his defending and preserving the rights and privileges of the Church, then
suffered a glorious death in the year 1171 being murdered in the Church. lidem
Ann. Angl.
King Henry sorrowed publicly for the suspicion of this Murder, and in
recompense of it, he received many great benefits for his penitence sake,

Lewis dyed in Paris in the year 1180, Rigord. in vita Philip.
the 28 of September, the 44 year of his reign; during his reign was eminent,
Peter Lombard Bishop of Paris, entitled Master of the Sentences; and also
Peter Comestor.

Philip, Lewis's son entitled Augustus, and commonly called Adeodatus, his
father being yet living, was saluted King Rigord.
in the year 1179, in the month of November; and the year following being 16
years old, he reigned alone; Rigord. Aimo 5. c. 56.
for he was born 8 weeks after the assumption day, which was in the year 1164,
and not 1165, as Rigord says, and Aimoinus's Annals do record. Who at the very
beginning of his reign, after his father's death caused the Jews throughout all
France to be apprehended Rigord. The Jews banished out of France.
the 16th of March, on a Sabbath Day, in the year 1181, because that in
derision of the Christian rights and Religion, they put children to death,
committing also some other grievous offenses; then in July next after, he
banished them all for ever. Then having heard that Jerusalem was taken by the
Saracens, having engaged himself for the Expedition into the Holy Land, he with
Richard King of England went into the East, Rogerius.
in the year 1190; Rigord. Auct. Aquicinct.
and the year following he arrived into Palestina, and came to Aceona with the
other confederate Princes the 4th of Westminster.
June, in the year 1191; in which year was a memorable eclipse of the Sun,
which is observed by Rigordus, Rogerius, and Westmonasteriensis, to have bin
upon a Sunday the 23 of June. But these confederate Princes falling out amongst
themselves, Philip returned that same year into his kingdom, and Rigord. Ursper.
Richard of England having sold Cyprus, which he had taken, to the Templers,
and to Guido, sometimes King of Jerusalem, and having put to death 5000
Saracens, being in his return intercepted and seized upon by Leopold Duke of
Austria, he returned at last into England Riger. Westminster.
in the year 1194, and waged War for the space of five years with Philip of
France, Rigor. Roger. Westminster. Math. Paris. Auct. Aquic. England subjected to the Sea of Rome.
until that at the siege of a Castle he dyed, in the year 1199, of an Arrow
shot by a cross-bow the 8th of April, as Roger says, and was buried in the
Monastery of Fountain-Ebrald, where did also lie his father's body. And to
Richard succeeded John his brother, commonly called, Without Land, who renewed
the Wars with Philip, and subjected to the Roger. Westmon. Math. Par.
See of Rome the kingdoms of England and Ireland, in the year 1213, which were
to yield and pay him an annual tribute instead of a benefice. Rigor.
But Philip having obtained two victories in a year, and his son Lewis having
overcome the English in Poictou, and himself having vanquished Otho the
Emperor in Flanders, a Synod held at Sylvanectum established and decreed
Monuments of Trophies and victory to the honor of them both; Westminster. Matthew.
Par. Rigo.
After this Lewis sailing into England, and having driven out John, he received
it under his power and subjection; but as soon as he was departed thence, the
whole Land revolted from him to Henry the third, John's son; this was done in
the year of our Lord 1214. Rigor.
Philip departed this life in the year 1223, in July having reigned after his
father's death 43 years, wanting some three months.

The End of the Eighth Book.
THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD. OR, AN Account of Time.
The Ninth Book. WHerein are contained the Years from the 1200 of CHRIST, unto
1632.
CHAP. I. What things came to pass both in Germany and Italy, from the Year
1200, unto 1250, under Philip, Otho, and Frederick the second, and of the sad
division of the Church under him; and of persons of renown for Piety and
Learning.
HEnrick the 6th, Frederick's son, Ursperg. Vincent. Bellou. l. 26. c. 59. Si
frid. Frag. Incer. Auct. Alberto praefixum. Blond. l. 6. dec. 1.
as here above we have mentioned, being dead, the Princes fell out amongst
themselves in the election of a Successor in the Empire; for some attributed
the honor of the Empire to Philip, Henrick's brother; and others giving it to
Otho Duke of Saxony. The King of France held for Philip; and Innocent the third
for Otho, who hated the posterity of Frederick, because he had once been
anathematised: Philip obtained first the Empire at Aquisgranum Siffrid. Frag.
Incer.
in the year 1198. Whereunto Otho soon after attained; and having gotten the
kingdom into his hands, he warred against Philip for some time, Ursper.
until that they agreed; so that, during Philip's life, Otho should abstain
himself from the title of King; and after his death should lawfully enjoy it.
Ursperg. Vincent. tom. 4. l. 29. c. 10. Frag. Incer. Auct. Suffrid. Antoninus
Trithem.
Philip reigned 10 years, and was slain the 23 of June in the year 1208, by one
Otho a Palatine, whose wife the daughter of Isaac Emperor of Constantinople,
having heard of her husband's death, ended also her life.

Otho entered into the possession of the Roman Empire, which then was void by
the death of his competitor, and upon these conditions married Philip's
daughter, Vincent. l. 29. c. 106. U^sper. Rob. de Monte. Siffr. Chr. Citic.
Anton. Joan. Villa. 5. c. 35.
whom Innocent created Emperor with due rites and ceremonies, performed at
Rome in the year 1209; but he rejected him afterward from the communion of the
Church, because that against his engagement he did violate and break the Romans
rights and privileges, in the year 1^10. This is that Otho, who together with
his Uncle Richard King of England, fighting against Philip of France, Ursper.
Vinc. tom. 4. l. 30. c. 53. Rigor. Anton. Part. 2. Tit. 9. c. 3.
near Bovina, was by him overcome and put to flight in the year 1214. Hence,
the year following, was celebrated at Rome the Council of Latrent, by Innocent
the third; to which out of all the parts of Christendom resorted Ursperg. vide
tom. 4. l. 10. c. 64. Anton. Tit. 19. tom. 3. c. 1. Paragraph. 6. Chr. Incert.
412 Bishops; in it was confirmed the Transubstantiation both in name and deed;
and by it was condemned the book of Abbot Joachim, which he had composed
against Peter Lombard.

Otho thus forsaken of all, and worn out with grief, dyed Chr. Colmar. Frag.
Incert. Trithem. in Hirsing. Chr.
in the year 1216; but some say the year following; and some others, in the
year 1218. Ursperg. Monach. Pad. Chr. Colmar. Frag. Incert. Auct.
Innocent dyed in the same year the 16th of July, in whose seat was elected
Honorius.

Frederick the second, the son of Henrick the 6th, Nephew to Frederickno
Aebarbus, Otho having been degraded in the year 1211, as says Vincent. tom. 4.
l. 31. c. 1.
Vincent, is elected Emperor by the Germans suffrage three years after his
Uncle Philip's death, having before that contented himself with his Mothers
kingdom of Apulia and Sicilia; Ursperg. Chr. Incert. Colm. Citiz. Trithe. vide
Joan. Vill. l. 6. c. 1.
but in the year 1219, upon St. Cecill's day he was created Emperor at Rome by
Honorius. But being persuaded by his son in law's fatal hatred against the
Romans, he falsified his faith: for which cause being first excommunicated by
Honorius, John Brennus King of Jerusalem interceding for him, reconciled them
Vinc. to. 4. l. 50. c. 125.
in the year 1222; at what time Frederick married Jolanta, Brennus's daughter,
after the death of his wife Trith. in Hirsau. Chr.
Mary, the daughter of the King of Arragon, by whom he had gotten Henrick and
Conrad, Mon. Pad. 1224.
from him succeeded the title of Kings of Jerusalem, to the Kings of Sicily;
Monach. Pad. 1220. Vrsperg.
he transplanted the Saracens out of the Mountains of Sicily into Apulia, and
placed them in Niceria.

Honorius being dead in the year 1227, was succeeded by Gregorius the 9th,
Trithe.
who anathematized Frederick, because contrary to his engagement and vow he
delayed his Expedition into Palestina. Id. and Villa. 6. c. 27.
And the Emperor the year following sailing into Syria, he betrayed the
Christian interest by a disadvantageous and unworthy peace with the Sultan, of
whom he obtained by prayers, and under specious pretense, Jerusalem: Being
returned from the East, he filled all Italy with inward hatred and factions,
which upon it was divided into two parts, whereof the party adhering to the
Pope, was called the Guelfians; and the other which followed the Emperor, had
the name of Gibellines. These denominations were first given them near
Pistorium, in the year 1240, as Blond. Dec. 2. l. 7.
Blondus relates; but Trithem. Nauc. Genesis 42. p. 953. Vide J^an. Villa. 5. c.
37.
Nauclerus says, that it was long before that, when Conrad the third reigned,
then did this hatred break into a certain demonstration of war, but was at
length propagated by the studies and endeavors of Frederick, and dispersed it
self through all Italy into a civil and pernicious war. Vide Monach. Pad. l. 2.
The chief Pillar and General of the Gibellines on this side side Padua, was
Ecelinus the tyrant of the Teutonick family, who for 30 years together held
under his power, Trent, Tarvisium, Padua, Verona, Brescia and other Towns and
Cities; he was in favor with Frederick, and lived 10 years after him; but
being wounded in fight with a dart in the year 1260, and taken by his enemies;
he dyed in the 80 year of his age. Blond.
Frederick did suppress Henry his son, who had risen in rebellion against him,
and banished him into Apulia, in the year 1235. Where the year following he
dyed, but not at all relenting his pertinacy and hatred against the Roman See,
he was excommunicated in a Council held at Lions by Innocent the 4th, Gregory's
Successor, after Caelestinus Fragm. Incert. Blond. and A^neas Sil. l. 7. Dec.
2.
in the year 1241, after two years inter-reign; which Council was celebrated in
the year 1245, and then he deposed him of the Imperial dignity. In this Council
was the honor of the scarlet-Cap given to the Cardinals. Upon this, in
opposition to Frederick, was Henrick Landgrave of Hassia elected Emperor, and
enjoyed the same Imperial dignity two years, and dyed in the 1247, to whom
Vincent. l. 31. c. 1. Anton. Tit. 19. c. 45. Mon. Pad. Blond. l. 7. Dec. 2.
Joan. Villa. 6. c. 25.
William Earl of Holland, in the year following succeeded by the suffrage of
the Princes Electors. Siffrid. Mon. Pad.
Frederick being then deeply engaged against the tumults that were in Gallia
Cisalpina, for the whole people of Lombardy had revolted from him; against whom
engaging, he besieged Parma in the year 1247; but being repelled by a sudden
salley of the Townsmen, with much ado he escaped by flight into the
Territories of Cremona in 1248; and Mon. Pad. Villa. 6. c. 42.
two years after Trith.
upon the 18th of October, he dyed in Apulia, in the 32 year of his Empire, and
of his age 57. Blond. Dec. 2. l. 7. Anton. Tit. 19. c. 6. Paragraph. 4.
The report is, that he was stifled by Manfredus (whom he had gotten by a
Concubine) in a featherbed.

Joan. Villa. 5. c. 23, 24.
During Frederick's Empire, were two Orders of Friars erected, whereof were
Authors St. Dominick and St. Francis, who are said to have set up their Orders
at two diverse times; the first dyed Vincent. l. 30. c. 124. Siff^id. Colm.
in the year 1221. And Francis Tritho.
1226. Besides them were these following persons renowned and eminent,
Anthonius of Padua, of the society of the Minors; Alexander of Alenson of the
Dominicans order, Albert the Great, Vincent of Belvasia, and William of Paris,
with others mentioned by Vincentius, and Antoninus. In this Age lived also
those Women, highly commended for their Piety, Elizabeth the Wife of the
Landgrave of Thuringem, and Vincent. l. 30. and Anton.
Mary Oegniacensis, whose life Jacob of Vitrey has well described.

CHAP. II. Of the Affairs of Germany and Italy, from the year 1251, unto 1300
or thereabout; then of Conrad, Manfred us and Conradine; and touching the
entrance of the French into Sicily, and of their overthrow there; and of the
Spaniards possessing Sicily.
AFter Frederick's degradation, was William of Holland created by the Germans
King of the Empire; but six years after being surprised by the Ambushes of the
Frisians, he dyed Colm. Chron. Siffrid.
in the year 1256.

After his death, the designs and intentions of the German Princes being
divided and distracted Trith. in Her. Chr. Vide Joan. Villa. 6. c. ^5.
in the year 1257. Some of them declared Richard Prince of Cornwall, the King of
England's brother, King of the Romans; and others Alphonsus King of Castile, a
renowned Astronomer; Trith.
He contenting himself with the only title of the Empire, did not move his
foot out of Spain; Richard hastening to Franckford, and there having been
admitted into the Government of the kingdom with all ceremonies therein
required, having wasted all his estate in sumptuous and superfluous expenses,
he was despised of them that had called him to that dignity; wherefore on a
sudden returning into England, he left the Empire void; and this Inter-regnum
of the Empire lasted Trith.
until that by Pope Gregory the 10th's Patents, the Princes Electors chose
Siffrid. Coimar. Chron.
Rodulph Earl of Alsatia, in the year 1273, whom Siffrid. Trithem.
Histories do highly commend for his Piety, Justice and magnanimity in wars:
he suppressed and put to death Ottocar King of Bohemia, who had revolted from
him in the year 1278; Siffrid. Colm.
he dyed in the 19th year of his reign, and Villa. 7. c. 145. Siffr. Trithem.
in the year of Christ 1291.

Anton. Naucl. Villa. 7. c. 152.
The year next immediately following, Adolphus Earl of Nassau was saluted King
of the Romans; Siffrid.
but by reason of his cruelty and great covetousness was soon degraded, and in
his place was elected Albert Duke of Austria, against whom Adolph fighting a
field-battle near Worms, was killed Siffrid. Albertus Argentin.
in the year of Christ 1298.

At this time all things were infected with Civil Wars throughout all Italy,
for Conrad son to Frederick the second, came out of Germany Blond. dec. 2. l.
8. Anton. Tit. 20. c. 1.
in the year 1251, to possess the kingdom of Apulia and Sicilia, and having
subdued the Neapolitans, and dismantled their City, enjoying both the
Sicilians, he was poisoned by Manfredus his brother Frederick's natural son,
Colmar. Chron.
in the year 1234, leaving behind him his son Trithe.
Conrad, whom the Italians called Conradine.

Blond. Anton. Naucl. Nangis in vita S. Lud. Joan. Villa. 6. c. 47. and 90. and
l. 7.
In the interim Manfredus governing the kingdom as if it were for the pupil,
he waged war against the Pope of Rome, by the help of the Saracens, who had
Lucerca under their dominion.

Urban the 4th, who was born at Troys in Champagne, succeeded Alexander the
4th, in the year 1261; to whom by his command there was a day every Siffrid.
Blondus Dec. 2. l. 8. Anton. Trithe. Naucl. Nangis.
year instituted for receiving of the Sacrament. Charles declared the Earl of
Anjou, St. Lewis's Couzen-German, King of Sicily.

But whilst he prepares himself for this Expedition, Urban dyed, whom Clement
the 4th succeeded, by whose will Charles being made Senator of the City of
Rome, and King of both the Sicilies, having an annual pension of 48000 Ducats,
he subdued Manfredus, putting him to death Pand. Villa. 7. c. 9. etc.
in the year 1266. And two years after, he overcame Conrad, who with an Army of
the Gibellines was gone against Italy; and having taken him prisoner, he cut
off his head, in the year 1268, by whose death the family of Frederick, and
house of Sweden, was utterly extinguished.

In the year 1274, Gregory the 10th who succeeded Clement that dyed in the year
1270, Trith. Blond. Dec. 2. l. 8. Nang. Philippo Joan Villa. 7. c. 4
celebrated a Synod at Lions, wherein he ordained some things concerning the
creation of Popes, and received the Greeks to the unity of the Roman Church.
Nangis 4 in vita Philippi.
In this Council were assembled 500 Bishops. Blond. Fazel. l. 8. Par. 2. Anton.
Tit. 20. c. 4. Nang. in vita Philippi. Pand. Collen. Joan. Villa. 7. c. 57. etc.
Peter King of Arragon, Manfredus's son in law, whose daughter Constantia he
had married, by the persuasion of John sometimes Lord of the Island Prochyta,
and of Michael Palaeologian to the Emperor of the Greeks, who feared Charles,
applied his mind and study to invade Sicily, as his wifes Dowry; therefore by
the instigation of them both, a hidden Plot and Conspiracy being attempted
throughout all Sicily, and executed upon Easter. Sunday by the Sicilians, all
the French without difference or respect of either sex or age, were killed and
murdered by them, who suddenly on an evening all armed did fall upon them; and
their cruelty was such against them, that they ripp'd open the womb of women
with child, searching their children with their swords; And this was called
always afterward, The Sicilians Evening. This Massacre was done the 30 of
March, Blond. Dec. 2. l. 8.
in the year 1282; and so by this means Peter entered into the possession of the
kingdom of Sicily, and so held it, though cursed and anathematized by the
Pope; The which Charles in vain attempting by arms to regain, received also a
great overthrow; for his son Charles the lame was overcome in a Sea Fight, and
taken prisoner Colm. Villa. 7. c. 92. etc.
in the year 1284. Peter pardoned him beyond all hope, because it was thought
that he would avenge upon him the death of Coaradine his kinsman, who ended his
life in Biond. l. 8. Dec. 2.
the year 1285; wherein also Charles King of Sicily dyed the 7th of January, as
Nangisius writes in Philip's life. As he defended his father's kingdom, that by
a cruel sentence was given over to spoil, fighting against Philip King of
France, he was slain, having by his will made his sons heirs, viz. Frederick
heir of Arragon; James heir of Sicily: and, at the entreaties of his Mother
Constanita, he dismissed his son Charles upon some certain terms and conditions
in Naucl.
the year 1288; amongst which, this was one, That he might obtain both the
right of the kingdom of Arragon, and also that of Sicilia, with the favor of
the Pontiff of Rome, which Nicolas the fourth absolutely denied him; whence
broke forth between them a bloody War, Fazel. Dec. l. 9.
which by the reconciliation of Bonifacius the VIII, who did succeed St.
Celestine the third, which of his free will had laid down his office, was
pacified in the year 1299, Jacob yielding Sicilia. But the Sicilians having
advanced Naucl.
Frederick, Jacob's brother, to the Royal dignity, resisted and opposed Charles
and the Roman Pontiff.

At the same time all the rest of Italy was in an inward uproar and commotion,
especially the chiefest of the Venetians and Genoans, who with all sort of
cruelty sought the ruin and destruction one of another; whose first dissension
arose from small beginnings at Ptolemays a Town in Syria, in the Blond. Dec. 2.
l. 8.
year 1260, and brought to both of them mutual calamities.

In this Age the Church was honored and enriched in Piety and Learning by
Bonaventura and Thomas Aquinas, Nauc.
who both were taken up into Heaven in the year of our Lord 1274. And also by
Albertus Magnus, Thomas's Master, Trithe. in Chr. Her. saug.
who dyed in the year 1280, in the 87 year of his age: Also by Anton. ^. Colm.
Peter Martyr, who was beheaded by the Heretics in the year 1252, At this time
also dyed St. Claire, St. Francis's Countreywoman, Anton.
in the year 1252: and St. Lewis Bishop of Tolouse, son to Charles the second
King of Sicilia and Apulia. Naucl.
At this time also lived Nicolas Liranus, Doctor in Paris, of the Order of the
Minimes.

Lutzemberg.
Bernard
Raymond Lullus of Majorca, flourished in very great fame in that Island about
the year 1290. St. Ivo in Gaien, and St. Roche in the Province of Narbonne,
were highly renowned for their piety.

CHAP. III. Of the Latin Emperors of Constantinople, and of the affairs
transacted in the EAST, from the year 1205. unto 1300. Wherein it is discoursed,
of the recovery of Constantinople by the GREEKS; of the Tartars excursions; and
of the Holy Land wholly taken away from the CHRISTIANS.
THe Latins held Constantinople in their hands fifty and eight years. The
first of them that reigned in it was Baldwin, Baldwin Emperor of
Constantinople.
as we have already observed, who with his other companions in the expedition,
divided the Empire, chiefly with the Venetians and Genoans, the first of whom
took the Isles of the Aegean Sea; Creet, Euboea, and others, says Blond. Dec.
2. l. 6.
Blondus; but Nicetas has recorded that the Genoans possessed Creet:
Bonifacius, Marquis of Montferrat establishes the new Kingdom of Thessalonica
at this time. Niceph. Greg. l. 1.


Nicetas.
Baldwin at the revolution of the year being overcome by the Bulgarians, and
taken prisoner in the year 1205. the 15th of April, and having been kept close
prisoner sixteen Months, he is at last put to death by the cruelty of John
King of the Bulgarians. Nicetas.
And then Henrick, Baldwins brother is advanced to the Government of the Empire
in the year 1206. Nicetas extolls this moderation of the Latins, who would not
usurp too hastily and rashly, the Kingdom before the death of the true and
legitimate Prince and successor: but he abhors the pride and cruelty of his
own Contrymen, who were wont to attain to the Imperial Majesty by the death
of the other Emperors: Henrick ruled the Empire near upon ten years, and died
the Anton. Tit. 19. c. 3.
first years of Honorius the third, and of Christ 1216. whom Peter
Antissiodorensis, who had married Jolanta, Henricks sister, as Niceph. Greg. p.
11. and 40.
Nicephorus says, or as others would have it, his daughter, Anton. Tit. 19. c.
3.
he being crowned by Honorius the third at Rome, as he advanced his journey
into Thracia, he is treacherously taken by Theodorus, Prince of Dyrrachium, and
is slain by Theodorus Lascaris.

Robert, Peter's son, governed the Empire after his father. Then Baldwin,
Robert's brother, who Nangis in vita S. Ludov. p. 448. Nic. p. 58. Nauc.
in the year 1261. having recovered Constantinople from the Greeks, and being
returned into the West, went to Charles King of Sicily, and betrothed his son to
his daughter, having promised him Constantinople if by his help and aid he
could recover it. And thus did the Latins possess Constantinople, the space
of 58 years.

As the Latins thus held Constantinople, Nicetas Niceph. Greg. p. 7.
Theodore Lascaris was created Emperor by the Greeks, and kept his Throne at
Nicea in Bythinia; he was a valiant man in feats of Arms, wholly applying
himself to it, he defeated the Turks with a great slaughter, whom his father in
law had stirred up to arms against him, and slew with his own hands their great
Sultan: dying Niceph. p. 11.
in the 18th year of his Empire, and of Christ 1222. He appointed John Ducas
his son in law to be his successor, who recovered many places from the
Latins, Niceph. in fine l. 2.
and having been Emperor thirty three years, he died in the year 1255.

Theodore Lascaris, John's son, succeeded his father, when he was Niceph.
initio. l. 3.
thirty three years old, and ruled the Empire four years, dying in the year
1259. and so he was Niceph. l. 3. p. 29.
thirty six years old at his death, leaving behind him his son John, of six
years of age.

Niceph. l. 4. Joan. Vuill. l. 6. c. 72.
But Michael Palaeologus Comnenus, deriving his Pedigree by his Mothers side of
Alexius, who was the son of Andronicus Palaeologus, four years after, having
put out the Pupills eyes, who was then Niceph. p. 43.
ten years old, he usurped the Empire; By whose stratagems, Constantinople was
treacherously taken by Alexius Caesar with no greater Army then 800 Soldiers:
yet hence fearing Charles King of Sicilia, who daily threatened Constantinople,
he sought his reconciliation and Concord with the Roman Church. And sent
Ambassadors as far as Africa, to Saint Lewis in the year wherein he died,
which was, as Pachim. in Fragm. Anth. p. 300.
Pachymeres says, in the year one thousand two hundred and seventy, and in the
year one thousand two hundred seventy four, Vide Niceph. Greg. l. 5
he sent his Ambassadors to the Council then celebrated at Lions, and
confirmed and ratified the Articles of Faith that they had made and ordained.
Anton. Ti. 20. c. 4. Paragr. 1.
It was he that promoted, advanced, and caused both by his Authority and
supplies of all things, that cruel and Barbarous conspiracy of the Sicilians
against the French to be executed in the year one thousand two hundred eighty
two. He died in the year of the Niceph. p. 72.
Greeks account, 6791. which was the year of our Lord one thousand two hundred
eighty three. And because he inclined to the Latins, and had made a strict
league with the Pope, Niceph. 6.
his son Andronicus did not so much as honor him with ordinary Funerals, for
not far from the Camp Castle, wherein he then was, he caused him to be covered
with Earth after he had reigned since John the Pupill's abdication, near upon
some twenty three years.

Niceph. Greg.
Andronicus, Michael's son, after the death of his son Michael designed his son
Andronicus to be heir of the Empire, who oftentimes rebelling against his
Grandfather, at length forced him to retire himself into banishment upon his
old age, having taken Constantinople, and being thus deprived of his Imperial
dignity, and remaining a private man, he died Niceph. il. 10. p. 125.
in the year according to the GREEKS, six thousand eight hundred and forty
which was the year of Christ one thousand three hundred thirty two.

In this age the Tartars having shaken off the yoke of the Indian-Kings, and
having erected a new Monarchy amongst themselves Vincent. l. 29. c. 69. Naucl.
Genesis 41. Vol. 2. Vide Join. in Hist. St. Ludovici p. 192. Joan. Vill. 6. c. 28
in the year one thousand two hundred and two, extended far and near: part of
whom having destroyed Georgiana Armenia, and other Provinces, did overrun,
sack, spoil, and plunder Transylvania and Polonia, near about the Monach. Pad.
year of our Lord, one thousand two hundred forty one, Naucl. Vol. 2. Genesis 42.
under their General Batho. But he being dead, by reason of their wants and
Famine, after three years space, they were forced to retire back. Vincen. l.
29. c. 88.
The other Colony of them drove the Chorasmians, who were descended of the
Parthians, out of their seats and habitations, who being hired and taken into
pay by the Sultan of Egypt, dispersed and routed the French out of Palestina,
and overthrew and demolished the Tomb of our Lord, Vincen. ib. etc. 89. and l.
31. c. 1.
in the year one thousand two hundred forty four. The Tartars following them,
invade Persia, out of which they expel Vinc. 30. c. 50.
the Turks, and put to flight their Sultan, who reigned at Iconium. Vinc. c.
31. c. 28. Nang. in vita. S. Ludov.
But the Turks the year following engaging to pay them a tribute, redeem
themselves, and obtain peace: for this cause Innocent the fourth, sent some
Friars of St. Dominicks Order to the Tartars; whose progress is mentioned by
Vinc. l. 31. Joan. Vill. 6. c. 61.
Vincentius.

The Christians also achieved some exploits in Palestina, Mon. Pad. Vinc. l.
30. c. 84. and seq. Blond. Dec. 2. l. 7. Trith. in Chr. Hist. Cliv. Sho. Joan.
Till. 5. c. 39.
whereof that in the year 1218, was of great fame. When Leopold Duke of
Austria, and Andreas King of Hungary, with John Brennus of Jerusalem, took
Damiata, having besieged it 18. Months. But having their spirits heightened by
this success, and by it being much encouraged, as they pursued the Barbarians,
Nilus's Channel being broken into their Camp, they were constrained to accept
conditions of peace, restoring to them all what they had gotten, this was done
in the year 1221. Vinc. 30. c. 86.
But two years before, Conrade Saphadin's son, did utterly demolish Jerusalem,
except the Temple, and the Tower of David. Afterward Innocent the fourth in
the Lateran Council in the year 1245, engaged the Princes of Christendom to
the holy Wars, whither St. Lewis being the General, Sailed with a great Army,
Nang. Vinc. l. 31. c. 89. Joan. Siffr. Non. Pad. Sanut. l. 3. p. 12. Nauc.
Joan. Vill. 6. c. 37.
in the year 1248. The whole burden and engagement of this War was against
Damiata a City in Egypt, which was subdued under the power of the French, in
the year 1249: but the Plague raging throughout their Camp and Army, they were
forced to surrender it, and to accept of peace upon condition that they might
safely depart, Damiata being yielded up: Sanat. l. 3. p. 12. c. 21. and 22.
Blond. Dec. 2. l. 8. 9. Nace.
Then in the year of our Lord 1291, did Ptolomais Tyrus, and whatsoever yet
remained in Syria in the Christians hands, come all under the power and
jurisdiction of the Turks: and since that time did the Christians desist from
attempting any other expedition into the East.

CHAP. IV. Of those things that were transacted from about the year of our Lord
1200, unto 1300, by the French, under Philip, Lewis the 8th, Lewis the 9th,
Philip the Hardy, and Philip the Fair.
Hist. Al. big. Vincent. l. 29. and 30. Anton. Tit. 19. c. 3. The Albigian War.
DUring Philip's reign in France, there arose a holy war in Tolouse, and in
Occitania a Country of Narbon, against the Albigian Heretics, and villainous
company of Manichims, whose part was taken by Raymond Earl of Tolouse, and King
of Arragon, and by him strongly defended; Against whom by the persuasion of
Innocent the third, the Catholic Princes engaged, who made Simon Montford the
General of their Army, a Religious valiant man, who having oftentimes defeated
their forces, dyed triumphantly in the siege of Tolose, Vinc. 30. c. 35. Ant.
in the year 1218; This War that was begun in the year 1226 by Lewis the 8th,
St. Lewis's father, was ended by his son in the year 1229. At what time Raymond
the Earl of Tolose, having renounced his heresy in Paris, he gave his daughter
in marriage to Alphonsus, St. Lewis's brother, with the Earldom of Tolose for
her Patrimony.

Rodor. Sant. p. 3. c. 35. Franc. Taraph. Muria. l. 11. c. 23. etc. Blond. Dec.
2. l. 6.
At the same time was Alphonsus King of Castile successfully and prosperously
engaged in war against the Saracens, Miramolinus King of Tunis having
victoriously ever-run all Spain, he broke into the Country as far as Arles and
Avignon; but in the year 1212, the four Kings of Castile, Arragon, Lusitania,
and Navarr, advancing their Armies to Tolose a Town in Spain, routed so the
Arabians, that (as it is reported) no less of them were slain than two hundred
thousand; and of the Christians not above 25: This battle was fought the 16th
of July, as Mariana writes; since which the Saracens affairs and interests fell
to decay; so that having lost by little and little the other Provinces, they
had nothing left them but the kingdom of Granada.

Gesta Lud^v. 8. Vinc. l. 30.
Lewis the 8th, after his father Philip's death, reigned in France in the year
1223; he having demolished Rochel and other Towns in Garona, he chased away
from all the parts of the farther Aquitania the English, Gesta Ludov. 8.
in the year 1224, and two years after returning from the Albigian Expedition,
he dyed in Auvergnes, at Montpentsier, the 4th year of his reign, the 8th of
November, upon a Sunday.

Nangis. Vinc. 30. c. ^29.
In the same year was Lewis the 9th, son to Lewis the 8th, consecrated at
Rhemes, (the honor and glory of the French) in the 12th year of his age; but
Vincent attributes to him 14 years, who was put in the number of the Saints for
his pious and innocent life, by Boniface the 8th. He at the beginning of his
reign forced Theobald Earl of Champagne, Hugo of Marches, with some other
Princes, who having entered into a conspiracy against their new King, had taken
up arms to submit to his favor: hence having quieted all, and recovered peace
every where, and being recovered out of a dangerous sickness, Nangis, Vincent.
Join.
in the year 1244, he took the sign of the Cross, and advanced into Egypt with
that Army, as I have already mentioned, wherein he spent five years in all
duties and practices of Christian Religion; whilst that Blanch his Mother,
daughter to Alphonsus King of Castile, and of Eleanor the daughter of Henry the
second, King of England, governed the kingdom.

After whose death being returned home, he was enriched with all the Christian
virtues that can make a perfect and complete Prince; Iidem and Joan. Villa. l.
7. c. 36.
but being daily more and more zealous to propagate the Christian Religion, as
if the first had been according to his desire, he undertook a new Expedition
into Africa against the Saracens, in the year 1269; and the year following
having encamped against Tunis, being infected with that disease that then was
amongst his Soldiers, he yielded up to God his pious Soul the 8th of
September, in the 56th year of his life, and of his reign 44, and of Christ
1270.

Nangis, Villa. c. 39.
The same day that this Lewis dyed his brother Charles King of Sicilia arrived
into the Coasts of Africa with a strong Army, by whose help the French were so
encouraged, that they overcame and beat the Barbarians, and forced them to seek
and entreat peace, to their great disadvantage.

Nangis, in vita Philippi.
Philip, Lewis's son, called the Hardy, being proclaimed in Africa, King of
France, in the year 1270, was the year following consecrated on the
Assumption-day at Rhemes: his Uncle Alphonsus Earl of Poitou, and Tolose,
returning from Africa, dyed in Tuscia, whose inheritance then void of any other
Successor, fell to Philip: He reduced under his dominion the Vascones, who are
called Navarreans, having taken Pompeiopolis, Nangis.
in the year 1276. Iid. and Joan. Villa. l. 7. c. 10. etc.
But Peter king of Tarracon, whom we have above said to possess Sicilia, being
excommunicated by the Pope, and his kingdom being given to Charles of Valois,
Philip's son; Philip that he might send him to possess it, fought with all his
force and power against him, and took Gerona in the year 1284, In which siege
Peter dyed of a mortal wound, Vill. 7. c. 104. Gaguin. Aemil.
but the Pestilence raging much, the French retired thence. Roger the Admiral
of the Tarraconian Navy fell upon them at unawares, and on a sudden, who
having cast wildfire from the ships into the Town, made themselves passage
with their swords through the straights of Mount Pireneus. Philip his sickness
increasing, dyed in Perpignan in October, 1285, Paul. Aemil. Philip.
who was at the funerals of three kings, viz. Charles of Sicilia, Peter of
Tarracon, and Philip of France did reign above 15 years, Gaguin. Aemil. Til.
he left behind him Philip the Fair, whom he had by Isabella of Arragon, and
Charles of Valois; and by Mary of Brabant, he had Lewis of Brabant.

Annal. Franc. Gaguin. Aemil.
Philip the Fair entered into the Government of the kingdom in the year 1285,
but was consecrated the 8th of January, in the year 1286, and reigned 29 years;
during which time he had almost continual wars with the English, and the
Flemings their confederates. Edward the second King of England invading
Normandy and Aquitane, was repulsed with a great loss, by the Army commanded
by Charles de Valois, in the year 1293, who recovered again all Aquitane.

Guido Earl of Flanders, embracing Edward's part, was overcome with him at
Furnes, in the year 1295; then having been subdued by Valesius, rebelled again
from him in the year 1299, Joan. Villa. 8. c. 55.
whose Army had a bad success against the rebels in the year 1302 at Curtrack;
but two years after they came to a composition, their Army being defeated at
St. Omer.

Joan. Villa. 8. c. 62. Blond. Dec. 2. l. 9.
Philip the 8th had also something to do with Pope Boniface the 8th, who
delaying and putting off the holy wars, was by him excommunicated in the year
Chron. Colmar. Conrad. Vecer. in Hen. 7. Plat. Vill.
1302: Sarra Columnensis being gone into Italy with the Knight Nogoretus,
seizing upon him at unawares at Anagnia, brought him to Rome, where for grief
of mind he dyed the 11th of October, in the year 1303. Benedictus succeeding
Boniface, restored Philip into the Churches communion. And Clemens the 5th
succeeded Benedict, being first Archbishop of Bourdeaux in the year Joan.
Villa. 8. c. 80. Ber. Guidonis Plat.
1305, who transported the Pontifical seat to Avignon, where it remained full
seventy years. Albert. Argent. Plat. Villa. 8. c. 92.
He condemned by a Decree the Templars, and having caused King Philip to punish
them in the year 1307, and their goods, adjudged their goods to the Hospitals,
and the other part confiscated. Philip dyed, as Gaguin. Aemil.
some say, in the year 1313; Joan. Villa. 9. c. 65. Til.
others say, in the year following, the 29 of November; which is the most
approved: whence it appears, that he dyed at the beginning of the 30th year of
his reign.

Whilst St. Lewis reigned, Joinuil.
Robert Sorbona established a College of Theologians, which unto this hour
retains his name, Geneb.
about the year 1343.

CHAP. V. Of the Affairs of the Western Empire, both in Germany and Italy.
From the year 1300 of Christ, unto 1400.
Conrad. Veccar. in vita Henrici 7. Albertus Argentin. Blond. dec. 2. l. 9.
Naucl.
ALbert of Austria King of the Romans, son to the Emperor Rodolph, was cruelly
murdered by John his brother, in May, Anno 1308, in the 10th of his reign: and
in his place is elected Henrick of Luxemburg Albert.
in November following, who being advanced into Italy, fought valiantly against
the Gibellinian faction; and having taken diverse places, what by composition,
what by force, he was crowned in Rome, Albert. Naucl. Villa. 9. c. 42.
in the year 1312. Robert at this time held in his possession the kingdom of
Naples, from the year 1309, wherein his father Charles the second, surnamed the
Lame, dyed. Henrick pursuing him with his Army, having banished him by his
Imperial Majesty, resolved to drive him out of Italy; Conrad. Vecc. Alb.
Argent. Naucl. Blond. dec. 2. l. 9. Villa. 9. c. 51.
but he dyed in this his enterprise in the Territories of Genoa, not without
suspicion of being poisoned by a Friar of St. Dominick's Order.

After the inter-reign of 14 months, the Princes being divided into two
parties, many of them ordained Lewis of Bavaria to be Emperor; and others
chose Frederick of Austria: Lewis comporting himself as Emperor against the
will of the Pontiff of Rome, who then had his seat at Avignon, it was John the
22, Bernard. Guidonis, Naucl. Plat-Joan. Vill. 9.
who after the death of Clemens the 5th, after two years interval entered into
the Pontifical dignity the 7th of August, on a Saturday, in the year 1216,)
exasperated his spirit against him. Wherefore Frederick being overcome and
taken prisoner by Lewis, who exulted exceedingly at his victory, Lewis was
anathematized the year following by Pope John; Blond. Albertus, Plat. Villa. l.
10.
which Curse Lewis scorning and despising, he advanced into Italy, and having
assumed the Title of Emperor, he advanced to the Pontificate, Peter of Corbey,
a Franciscan, who was called Nicholas the Fifth.

Villa. 9. and 10. Blond. Dec. 2. l. 10.
In the midst of all this was Italy enflamed all over with Civil broils, and
in several places did many Princes and great men take to themselves the Rule
and Government of Cities, whom Pope Benedict the XII, legitimated Princes of
the same, that they might be ready and willing to help and defend him against
Lewis of Bavaria; so that Verona belonged to the Scaligers, with the neighbor
Towns; and Ferraria to the Estenses; and Mantua to the Gonzages.

Robert King of Naples espoused his son at seven years of age to Joanna Niece
of Andrew Charles King of Hungaria, Joan. Vil l. 10. c. 225.
in the year 1333: Id. lib. 12 c. 9.
then he celebrated their wedding a little before his death, which fell upon
the 19th of July, Anno 1343. Joanna two years after, Joan. Villa. c. 50. etc.
Alb. Naucl. Pand. 5. Matthew. Vill. 1. c. 8.
viz. in the year 1345, strangled Andrew with an halter, and then married Lewis
of Tarentum; then fearing Lewis King of Hungaria, who had taken up Arms to
avenge the death of his brother, Fazel. poster. Dec. l. 9.
she concluded peace and confederacy with the King of Sicily in the year 1347;
thence she retired her self into a Province of her own Jurisdiction the year
following, Joan. 5. Joan. Vill. 12. c. 106. etc.
wherein the invasion of the kingdom of Naples by Lewis of Hungaria, Plat.
Paul. Aem.
Clemens the 6th bought Avignon of her, Gesta Pont. Aquic. Pandul.
and restored Joanna into the Neapolitan kingdom, having concluded some certain
agreements of peace with Lewis of Hungaria.

Lewis of Bavaria dyed Albert. Nau. Vide Joan. Villa. l. 12. c. 59. and 105.
in the year 1347, the 11th of October, there being appointed another Emperor
in the year before to oppose him.

Naucl. Trithe. Albert.
Charles the 4th of Luxemburg, son to John King of Bohemia, was crowned in Rome
the 5th of April Matt^. Vill. 5. c. 1.
on an Easter Day, in the year 1355, and soon after by the order of the Pontiff
of Rome, he departed both out of Rome and Italy; he ruled the Empire after
Lewis's death 31 years, and almost two months; Albert.
for he dyed in the year 1378, the 29 of November, having created two years
before Wenceslaus his son King of the Romans, buying the suffrages of the
Electors with a great sum of money.

Hist. Romans Pont. Bosq. edita Naucl. Plat.
In the same year 1376, Gregory the XI, by the exhortation of St. Katherine,
which then was eminent in piety, being departed from Avignon in the month of
September, returned to Rome seventy one years after the transportation of the
Roman See into France; but Naucl. Plat. Onu. Frossar. l. 2. c. 12.
after Gregorius's death, which fell upon the year of our Lord 1378, there was
a sad and tedious Schism for almost 40 years, some of the Popes erecting their
seats at Rome, and some at Avignon: This began first by the means of Joanna of
Naples, which fearing Urban the 6th, Gregory's Successor, so raised up the
spirits of the French Cardinals, that causing the Chamber of Election to be on
their side, they created Clement the 7th Pope, who established his seat at
Avignon, Naucl. Aemil. Pand. Collen. 5.
whom Joanna following, she adopted Lewis of Anjou, brother to Charles King of
France: she at last was put to death in the same manner that she had slain her
first husband, by Charles Dirrachinus, son to Charles Dirrachinus, upon whom
Urban did transfer the kingdom of Naples. Lewis Naucl.
two years after he entered into Italy, dyed, with most of his Nobility, as it is
reported, by waters whereof the Fountains were poisoned, Joan. Tilius.
1383.

Naucl. Vol. 2. Genesis 46.
St. Bridget arrived at Rome when Urban the 5th was Pope, and dwelt in the
City, and had made an Order, which was confirmed in the year 1366; and not long
after John Columbinus began the Order of the Jesuits. At this time Francis
Petrarcha, and John Boscasius, both of Etruria, were very famous for their
learning, and also Paul of Burges the Theologian; also Bartolus and Balclus,
learned Doctors in the Law, and whilst Lewis of Bavaria was Emperor, lived
John Okam, a man of great acuity of spirit.

Naucl. Egnat. Aemil. in Caro. 6.
Wenceslaus after his father Charls's death, governed so the Empire some 22
years, that by the general vote and consent of the Princes, he was dispossessed
of his Imperial dignity To. un. Germ. Script. in fine. Trit.
in the year 1400. Polyd. l. 2. de Inu. c. 10.
Under this Emperor was invented by a German an engine of war called
Bombarda, from the noise and terror it gives; and the Venetians are reported
to be the first that made use of it in the Rampire Clodia, Anton. Matthew. Palmer.
when they were at wars with the Genoans in the year 1380; the said Emperor
created John Galeatus Duke of Millan for a great sum of money, who having slain
his Uncle Bernabon who likewise was his son in law, had invaded Millain; and
having reduced it under his power, confirmed and secured it by his affinity and
league with other great Princes. Lewis of Orleans, Couzen-german to Charles the
sixth, King of France, married his daughter Valentina: Anton.
He raising up his spirits daily, and waxing high in mind, aimed in his heart
at the whole Principality of Italy, possessing already besides Insubria,
Bononia, Sena, Perousa, part of the Duchy of Spoletum and Pisa, Verona and
Vicentia, with several other Cities, and yet aspired at the state of Florence,
with whom he had continual war.

The French, whilst Venceslaus was Emperor, Mer. l. 14. Fross. l. 4.
in the year 1396, achieved a great expedition, whereof Philip Duke of
Burgundy made his son John General, when Sigismond King of Hungary implored
help of the Christians against Bazajeth, Emperor of the Turks, overrunning
Pannonia, and making sad havoc, cruel slaughter in the Country: but the
battle beginning very fiercely and cruelly near Nicopolis, the Turk got the
victory by reason of the Christians rashness and temerity: many of ours in
this battle were killed, and many taken Prisoners, John himself the General
with other Princes, obtained his life with great difficulty, and paid a vast
sum of money for his ransom.

CHAP. VI. The affairs of FRANCE from the year 1300, unto 1400. or there
abouts, under Lewis Hutin, Philip the Long, Charles the Fair, Philip of Valois,
Charles the V. and VI.
Gaguen. Aemil.
IN France, Lewis Hutin, which word signifies contentious and obstinate,
reigned after Philip the fair, in the year 1315. having already been created
King of Navarre, dyed sixteen Months after, Annal. Franc.
he ordained an ordinary Parliament to be assembled in the Palace-Royall at
Paris, he died in the year 1316. the fifth of June, leaving Clementia his Wife
big with child, which brought forth John after his fathers death, but he dying
before he was eight days old,

Idem.
Philip the Long, Hutins brother, was created King of France by the Salick Law,
Joanna, Hutin's daughter being rejected, who reigned five years, and died in
the year 1322. the sixth of January.

Idem.
Charles his Couzen-German succeeded him, he was surnamed the Fair, he died in
the year 1328. having reigned six years; there remaining none of Philip the
Fair's stock alive.

Idem. et Villa. 10. c. 88.
Philip of Valois, son to Charles of Valois, who was Philip the Fair's brother,
succeeded him by the Salick Law, the English not at all opposing it; Fros. l.
1. c. 4.
Notwithstanding that their King Edward the third, whose Mother Isabella was
daughter to Philip the Fair, claimed an Inheritance to the Crown of France:
this contest did almost at last consume both Nations, with cruel Wars and
great calamities.

Fros. l. 1. Gag. Aem.
This war begun in the year 1336, Robert Earl of Artois revolting from the
French to the English, because that having a quarrel and suit at law with
Mathildes wife to the Duke of Burgundy, he said he had been wronged in it by
Philip.

And then were the French first defeared at Cluses in Flanders, in a Sea Fight,
Fres. 1. c. 51. Pont. Romans H^st. Bosq. in Clem. 6. Gag. Aem. Vill. 11. c. 109,
and l. 12.
in the year 1340. the three and twentieth of June; then again at Cressy, were
the French beaten, in which battle were killed twelve Princes, twelve hundred
horsemen, and 30000. footmen, this battle was fought in the year 1346. on a
Saturdy, Fross. 1. c. 132.
the 26th of August, and thenceforth did Fross. 1.c. 129. Alb. Argent.
Calice come under the power of the ENGLISH.

Fros. 1. c. 145. Matthew. Vill. 1. c. 25.
Humbert Prince of Vienna, mitigated a little these great losses of the French
by selling Albert. Gag. Aem. Math. Villa.
in the year 1349, the Daulphiney to King Philip, and retired himself amongst
the Dominicans. Idem.
Philip died in the year 1350, the Fross. 1. c. 113. Matthew. Vill. 1. c. 74.
two and twentieth of August, having reigned twenty three years: its uncertain
what day it was properly.

Aem. Till.
During his reign, there were great disputes about the Churches Jurisdiction,
hence it came to pass that Peter Cunerius who was the Kings Advocate in the
Parliament of Paris, stood it out against the Clergy, for to maintain the Kings
Rites and Privileges, and on the other side Peter Bertrand Bishop of
Augustodunum, afterward made Cardinal defended their part, in favor of whom
King Philip himself gave sentence, after a long contest and dispute in the year
1329. the very same day that Thomas of Canterbury suffered death for
maintaining the privileges of the Church, hence did Philip obtain the name of
Catholic.

John succeeded his father Philip, whom he had by Joanna daughter to Robert
Duke of Burgundy, who had worse success in wars with the English then his
father had; Friss. 1. c. 132. and seq. Math. Villa. 7. c. 15.
for fighting a field battle in Poictou the Math. Villa. Ibid. Gag. Aem.
18th of September, 1356. against Edward Prince of Wales, son to King Edward,
his Army being beaten and defeated he was taken prisoner, with his son Philip,
and carried away into ENGLAND, where he remained Prisoner four years, after
which, having concluded a peace, he was freed. After so many and so great
calamities, as he prepared himself for the Holy Wars, appointing his son Philip
Duke of Burgundy to go in his room, he sailed over into ENGLAND, for to
conclude a firm peace with EDWARD their King. Then he died in the year of our
Lord 1368. the eighth of April, having been king fourteen years.

CHARLES the V. his son, Surnamed the WISE, succeeded him, but died when he was
seventeen years of age, in the year of Christ one thousand three hundred and
eighty; During his time, there arose a cruel war betwixt Charles of Bloyes, and
John Montfort, about their rights of Britain in France which was ended by
Charles of Bloyes death, Gag. and Aem.
who in it was slain in the year one thousand three hundred sixty nine. In
which year Philip the Bold, Duke of Burgundy, king Charles his brother, married
Margaret daughter to Lewis, Earl of Flanders. Hence afterward, after his
Father in Law's death, he had in the year one thousand three hundred eighty
four, Flanders for his Wife's Portion, which he revived and comforted by his
meekness and discretion when it was almost overflown with miseries, and
destructions; At the same time was the War with the ENGLISH renewed, Fross. 1.
c. 246. Gag. Aem.
for the Earl of Armignack, and the Gascoin, having complained to the king of
France how many great wrongs they suffered by Edward Prince of Wales's unjust
oppressions, prevailed with Charles to send him a writ of appearance: but he
refusing, the War was again set on foot, wherein John Montfort Lord of little
Britain, revolting from the French, adhered to the ENGLISH; this War as well as
the former, proved the more violent and cruel by reason of the fame, and
valor of Bertrand Gueshin of Guienne, Histor. Guestl. Fross. l. 1. c. 245.
Gag. Mariana.
who a little before had got a renown in feats of Arms, and an immortal name
by his magnanimity in Spain, when he fought against Peter of Castille, for
Henry his illegitimate brother. For by his means, chiefly after diverse turns of
fortune; Henrick overcame Peter, and put him to death Tarapha.
in the year 1369.

Fross. l. 2. Gag. Aem.
Charles the VI. reigned longer then any one of the others since Saint Lewis
unto this age, but to the Frenches greater hurt and detriment. Charles the VI.
son to Charles the V. began to reign in the year of Christ 1380. being so young
that his age was not fit to rule the Commonwealth, to whom his father by his
will appointed for Guardians and Tutours his Uncles, John Duke of Aquitain, and
Philip Duke of Burgundy; making Lewis Duke of Aniou the eldest of all his
Uncles, chief Governor of all things during his minority. After this arose
great troubles both at home and abroad, and the commons broke out into a
tumult, and sedition, because of the too many and grievous taxes that were
laid upon them: for truly Lewis of Aniou, whom we have said above Joanna of
Naples adopted, soon exhausted the treasures by his expedition into Italy, and
other great expenses and charges; but not long after he was killed in Italy.
Joan. Til. Meyer. Gag. Aem.
Upon this began the Flemish War, this war was caused by the rebellion of the
Flemings, and especially of those of Gaunt, who under the command of Philip
Artevellius assaulting Lewis their Earl, forced him to implore the aid of the
French.

King Charles learned his first rudiments of Military Discipline in this war
against the Flemings, wherein its said that there were killed of the Rebels
40000. amongst whom dyed also their General Artevellius: This battle was fought
the 27th of November, being the fifth day of the Week, Fross. l. 2. c. 126.
in the year 1382. Fross. 2. c. 48. Gag. Aemil. Meyer.
Two years after this, Lewis of Flanders died the 30th of January, Anno 1384.
Fross. 2. c. 178. Meyer.
whose Heir, Philip the Hardy Duke of Burgundy having suppressed this sedition,
at length restored peace to the country in the year 1385. Fross. 4. c. 43.
Aemil. Gag. Meyer.
But King Charles being offended at John, petty-King of the lesser Britain, as
he advanced an Army against him, being in the Country of Lemain, his head
being hurt by the great heat of the sun, he fell into a madness and Frenzy,
which now and then seized upon him, the power and administration of all things
returned into the hands of his Uncles, viz. of John Duke of Aquitain, and
Philip Duke of Burgundy, Lewis the kings brother Duke of Orleans, being
rejected. This was the seed of an implacable and irreconcilable natred between
the Duke of Burgundy and the Duke of Orleans, and their posterity also. Philip
the Bold Meyer.
dyed in the year 1404. His son John Duke of Nevers, more active and violent
then his father, having an old grudg against Lewis of Orleans, did not question
to execute it by his death, hiring a private murderer, who unawares did set
upon him at Paris, the Alanns Carter. Monstrell. l. 1. c. 36. Gaguin. Aenil.
Meyer.
10th of December 1407: Hence broke forth a bloody Civil War; And at this same
time was also the old war renewed with the English, who had given aid to the
Duke of Orleans, and destroyed the Country far and near. Henry of Lancaster
reigned then in England, on whom was the kingdom of England transferred; King
Richard being condemned to perpetual prison, Fross. 4. c. 107. etc. Gaguin.
Aemil.
in the year 1399.

Philip of Burgundy Prince of Flanders joined himself to him, as he arrived
into France, with a numerous and combersome Army, intending to revenge the
death of John his father, Alan. Monstrel. 1. c. 11. Olivar. 1. c. 2.
who was slain at Mountreull, whither he was gone to parley with Charles, son of
Charles the sixth, even in the sight and presence of him, Meyer. Gaguin. Aemil.
in the year 1419. Therefore the King of England accrewing and increasing in
power and strength without any resistance or opposition, as a destroying fire,
devoured all before him, and left all wasted after him. In the midst of these
things, Charles, through public and private griefs, having lived in his best
strength 42 years, dyed the 22 of October, Monstrel. l. 2. c. 297. Gaguin.
Aemil.
in the year 1422.

CHAP. VII. Of the rest of the Emperors of Constantinople, until the time
that the Turks took the possession of it; wherein also is made mention of the
Turks Original, and of their increase; Also of Usumcassanes, Ismael Sophus; and
likewise of the beginning of the Persians Dominions at this day.
THe Affairs of the East were in no better and quieter estate than those of the
West, which as we have declared, were all brought to a confusion and ruin by
wars and tumults amongst themselves; for the Empire of Constantinople was in a
languishing and tottering condition. And as a Whale cast upon the Seashore, and
grievously wounded, decays and dies by little and little, striving against
death for life; Or as a body poisoned decays by little and little, and then
dies when once the poison artains to the heart; So likewise the Greeks Empire,
the Barbarians roving and ranging in the bowels of it, adding to their power
Provinces after Provinces, the Imperial City and Fortress being by them taken,
was at last utterly demolished and overthrown.

After the death of Andronicus, son to Michael the elder, which was in the year
1332, the Palaeologus's posterity reigned in Cona^sntinople 121 years.

Egnac. Curopin. Onuf.
Andronicus the younger, as we have above observed, having ejected his
Grandfather, reigned about some eight years, unto the year of Christ 1341; in
which dying, he committed the care and tuition of his two sons, John
Palaeologus, and Manuel, to John Cantacuzenus. Sixteen years after this, being
the year of our Lord 1357, was Cantacuzenus dispossessed of his Office: then
John Palaeologus reigned 27 years, and Manuel his brother did succeed him in
the Government of the Empire in the year 1384, who having completed 37 years,
left the Empire to his son John, Vide Vigner. Tom. 3. Bibl.
in the year 1419, which he possessed 27 years: At last, Constantine the 8th,
and last, began to govern the Empire in the year 1445. In the 8th year of his
Empire, being the year of Christ 1453, Constantinople came under the power and
dominion of the Turks.

Chalc.
The Original of the Turkish Nation, which in this Age, and that following,
increased mightily, did quite extinguish the Greeks name. It is diversely
reported by Authors, most part do think, that they had their beginning from
Sarmatia or Scythia, who sallying out of the Caspian Ports, when Heraclitus was
Emperor, Theoph. Cedre. Niceph. Brev.
being the 625th year of Christ, wasted and depopulated Persia, and came to aid
the Romans against Cofroes; then when Constantine Monomachus ruled in Persia,
Curop.
being the year 1042. The Persians being subdued by them who had been their
Tributaries, they extracted from them their Mahometick superstition; then they
dispersed themselves, and extended their arms into Syria, Cappadocia, and other
Provinces of Asia minor, dividing themselves into several Principalities, but
they were all extinguished and suppressed, but only the family of Othoman,
which enjoyed all. From him, were afterward the Princes of the Turks alone so
called.

Their first settlement is ordinarily accounted to have been in the year of our
Lord, Annal. Turc. 1. Egnat.
1300; but if Othoman ruled the Empire 29 years, as the Turks Annals record;
and if he dyed in the year of Christ, 1326, upon the latter end of November,
Othoman must needs have begun his Empire before the year 1300, or else he ruled
but 27 years.

Othoman's within less then Annal. Turc. Chal.
29 years increased wonderfully his Empire and the Turkish Dominion, and
subdued a great part of Bithynia, and established the Throne of his kingdom at
Prusa.

Dying, Urchanus in the year of Christ 1326, who brought under his power and
dominion Mysia, Lycaonia, Phrygia, Caria, and all the rest unto Hellespont and
Euxinum, whilst that Cantacuzenus and the Palaeologi fight both with hatred
and arms one against the other. He reigned 32 years.

Annal. Turc.
Amurath succeeded his father Urchanus in the beginning of the year 1357, his
elder brother Soliman being then dead, who is recorded in the Turks Annals to
be the first that entered into Europe with an Army; Amurath took into his
possession Annal. Tur. Chale.
Callipolis, Annal.
Hadrianopolis, and the adjacent Provinces. Cuspin.
Some say, that he lived but 23 years; The Annals of the Turks record, that he
lived 32 years, and record, that he dyed in the year of our Lord 1388.

Bajazeth, Amurath's son, Gilderim, by the Turks Annals, succeeded his father;
he exceeded all his predecessors in cruelty and valor; he subjected to his
Turkish Dominions, Thessalia, Macedonia, Phocis, Attica, Mysia and Bulgaria;
and besieged Constantinople many years.

Fross. 4. c. 67. Gag. Aemil. Chalc. 2.
Against whom the Emperor Immanuel imploring the aid of Charles the 6th King of
France, coming into France for that purpose; but Sigismund King of Hungaria
imploring it also, some of the Christian Princes engaged for an Expedition into
the Holy Land; amongst whom was John of Nevers, son to Philip of Burgundy, but
as they rashly and unadvisedly engaged in the battle, part of them, were
killed, and part taken by the Barbarians, together with John their General.

Annal. Tur. Chal. l. 3. Nau. Genesis 47. Bisartus 9. Hist. Pers.
But God not long after avenged himself of Bajazeth's pride, who by this his
great success was puffed up in his heart: For Great Tamberlain, whom the Turks
Annals call Temiris, broke into Asia with an innumerable Army of Tartars, whom
Bajazeth meeting with a huge Army, and both Armies engaging, Bajazeth had the
worse; for there being killed in the battle 200000 Turks, Bajazeth himself was
taken prisoner, and put in an Iron-Cage, as a wild beast, he carried him so
away along with him for to make sport and derision of him; so that he was glad
to seek a way how to end his life, for to be freed of this calamity: The Turks
Annals record, that this Tartarian Expedition was in the year of our Lord 1401,
and relate, that Bajazeth before this his overthrow ruled the Empire 14 years;
and that great Tamberlain ruled 40 years: Frossard and others do call this
Bajazeth Lamorabaquinus; I think, that they deducted this name from Amarath, as
if it were Amurathberg. Bajazeth left behind Annal. Turc.
him 5 sons, of whom one and that the 5th.

Who was named Isazebell, Solomon his brother, who usurped the kingdom in the
year of Christ 1402, or 1403, and held it 7 years, and then dyed.

Whom his brother Musa succeeded,

Muhammedes in the year of Christ 1413,

Amurath his son, Uladislaus their King, whom they had chosen after Albert
Caesar, and John Huniades their General, Cuspin.
wherein being often worsted at last in the year 1444, he gave a great
overthrow to the Christians, in the battle at Warnes, wherein King Uladislaus
himself was slain the 10th of November; he had also a very bloody war with
Scanderbeg King of Epirus, a gallant Warrior; but as the chief City of his
kingdom Croia was besieged, he dyed of grief the Annal. Turc. Leuncl. Barl. in
Scander.
31 year of his reign, the 75 of his age, in the year 1451.

Muhammedes succeeded Amurath, he was his second son, and the year following he
besieged Constantinople, and took it in the year 1453, the 29 of May, Lib. 1.
de Doct. Temp. c. 53.
as above we have showed.

Though his Mother was a Christian, he was a mere contemptor of all Religion,
Chalcond. l. 8.
and yet was educated in several disciplines, especially in Astronomy, and in
the acuity of the Greek, Latin, Arabic, and Persick tongues; but he is
recorded to have been unreasonably cruel, and treacherous: but being a gallant
Warrior, and rare Commander, he enlarged mightily his Turkish power and
dominion, for he overthrew two Christian Monarchies: Also he subdued under his
power the kingdom and City of Chalcond. l. 9. Paul Mahom. Leuncla.
Trapezonda, besides that of Constantinople with Colchis, bring thence David
Comnenus Usumcassanus's father in law, who ruled and governed it, with his
whole family into Constantinople, and soon after put him to death; which Empire
Comnenus had about some 250 years before erected, after the taking of
Constantinople by the Latins. He is recorded to have brought under his
subjection twelve Kingdoms, and above 200 Cities, being driven back from before
Belgradum, by the valor and magnanimity of John Huniades. He took from the
Venetians, Corinth, Lemnos, Mitylena and Euboea: from the Genoans he strived to
get Capha, Theodosia, and Rhodes: but his labor was lost. Yet he took Otronta
in Italy. Then he dyed in the year 1481, the third of May, being Paul. Joy, in
lib. de reb. Tur. Supp. Chal. and Hist. Turc.
53 years old, as some assert; Naucl.
but some say 58; and others 76, or 74: it is certain he exceeded the 53 year of
his age, if his son lived 74 years, and reigned 31; for 53 and 31 make up 84;
whereof taking 74, there remains ten; at what time Muhammedes had begotten
Bajazeth the second; but this is incredible: Wherefore Nauclerus may perhaps
have spoken truth, when he says, that he lived 58 years.

Paul. Jov. hist.
His son Bajazeth, the second of the name, Zisimus, who flying to the
Christians, dyed in Italy, at what time Charles the 8th King of France, invaded
the kingdom of Naples.

This Bajazeth took from the Venetians, Naupactum, Metona and Dyrrachium; but
being forced by the conspiracy of his Princes to abdicate himself from the
Empire, he yielded it to his son in the 74 year of his age, and of his reign
31, and of Christ 1512.

Selimus his son defeated the Mammalucks or Circasses in Egypt, Tommambaisus at
Cairus, in the 923 year of Annal. Turc. Leuncl. Jov. Supp. Chal.
Hegira, being the 1517 of Christ, the 9th of April. Since this, Egypt has
been constrained to pay tribute to the Turks. Three years after, Iid. Annal.
etc.
Selimus dyed the 9th year of his Empire, the 22 of September, in the year of
Christ 1520.

lid.
Solomon, Selimus's son, a discreet man, and being a Barbarian, was reasonably
meek, yet was stout and magnanimous, he took Belgradum in the year 1521; and
the year following he took Rhodes, which he had besieged six years, the 22 of
December, having routed the Hungarian Forces, Lewis, he took Buda in the year
1526, being repulsed from before Vienna, where he received a great overthrow in
the year 1529. He brought under his jurisdiction Alba-regia, Strigonium, and
other Cities in Pannonia; by his assistance Barbarossa, that notable Pyrate,
took Tunetum in Africa: He had as prosperous success against the Persians by
those two Generals he sent thither: Mist. obsid. Melit. Supp. Chal.
he besieged Mileta in the year 1565; but the year following he dyed at Sigetum
a Castle in Hungaria: He was near 80 years old, having ruled the Empire 47
years, he dyed in the year of our Lord 1566.

After him ruled Selimus the second;

Him succeeded Amurath the third,

Machomet the third was a sloathfull and lascivious Prince,

Achmet ruled 14 years, Osman was not above twelve years old, and therefore was
saluted Emperor by the Pretorians.

Mustapha, 's brother, a sloathfull and foolish man lived a solitary and
retired life in a cave; but two months after was put up in custody and
security.

Suppl. Chalcon. l. 10.
Osman, Achmet's son, Mustapha his Uncle out of prison, they declared him
Emperor: then having disrobed Osman of all Imperial dignities, and leading him
with a horse in a most sad and deplorable spectacle, they strangled him with a
bowstring the Suppl. Chalcon. l. 10. p. 981.
20th of May, in year 1622.

And so by this means did Mustapha again obtain the Empire; but the year
following returning unto his former condition, he was again shut up in prison.

And Amurath was chosen in his place, being Osman's brother,

And thus much concerning the Othoman's Family; Volaterr. l. 7. Bisarius l. 9.
Hist. Pers. p. 294. etc.
Besides which, there were three other Princely families, viz. the family of
the Assimbeiores, of the Candelores, and of the Caramannores; the two last were
suppressed by the arms of the Othomans, and so were expelled out of their
kingdoms, and fled to the Assimbeiores, who had possessed Cappadocia, and
Armenia the less, after that the Candelores had for a long time inhabited part
of Pontus, and the Caramannores Cilicia.

Usumcassanes had his original from the Assimbeiores, who being expelled out of
Armenia by Bajazeth the first, Emperor of the Turks, fled with his father
Casanes to Tamberlain King of the Tartars, by whom both he and his children
were re-established into their kingdom; but the Tartars being afterward
overcome, he enjoyed the Persian Empire Bisar. l. 9. p. 317. and l. 10.
in the year 1470. Then he fought against the Turks and Mahomet the second,
with no good success, Annal. Turc.
in the year 1474, Bisar.
at what time Mahomet subdued Paphlagonia and Trapezon, and brought to
Constantinople David, Usumcassanes's father-in-law, with all the family and
posterity of the Comneni; Bisar. ib.
yet Usumcassanes desisted not to have war with the Turks, but also engaged
against diverse other Eastern Nations, and so has extended his Dominions far
and near in the East; whence he has obtained so great fame and renown
throughout the whole world; so that Calixtus Pope of Rome sent him letters,
whereby he entreated and exhorted him eagerly to continue his war with the
Othoman's, and that the Venetians would do the like, and make a strict covenant
and friendship with him; Bisar. ib. p. 329.
he lived 78 years, and dyed in the year of Christ 1478 in January; his son
Jacupp succeeded him, and seven years after being poisoned, together with his
son, by his adulterous wife, he dyed of it; and she her self being constrained
to drink of the same potion, dyed the same day also: other Kings did succeed
unto the time of Immanuel Sophus, whose rise we must fetch a little higher.

Bizar. l 6. p. 295. and l. 10. p. 323. Suppl. Chalc. l. 2.
Hales was Couzen-german and son in law to Mahomet the Legislator of the
Saracens and Turks, who changing his laws partly adding to them, and partly
taking from them, and by expounding what was received into practice, he set up
a new sect, but it by little and little being neglected, became obscure; the
discipline of Homarus Mahomet entering into greater force and acceptance amongst
the people: Bizar. l. 10. p. 383.
Until the year 1350, that a certain petty King called Sophus, drawing his
pedigree from Hales, restored that discipline which for a long space of time
had layn dead and buried, when the Turks were yet oppressed by the Empire of
the Tartars. Iid.
His son Guines increased much this sect, by the conceit they had of his piety
and learning, whom Tamberlain the Scythian is recorded to have much honored:
then Sicaidares, Guines's son, called by his Country Harduell, by the same art
and cunning increased both this sect, and his authority and power: Him did
Assimbeius Usumcassanes adopt for his son in law, giving him Martha his
daughter to wife, which he had of the daughter of Trapezont-Emperour. Now as
all the Country about both out of Armenia and Persia resorted to him, as he
preached and declared Hales's Laws and Institutions, Rustanus King of Persia
hindered their concourse; he suppressed Sicaidares with a great many of the
faction: but Ismael Sophus, Sicaidares's son, escaped away, being yet but a
boy: And also Techelles Sicaidares's disciple, who was esteemed no ways
inferior to his Master, nor in virtue, nor in knowledge; Ismael growing into
age, followed his father's steps, and renewed the sect again: and being
excellent in speech, eloquence, magnanimity of spirit, and acuity of wit, he
soon attained to great power and credit.

Bizar. Jovius Suppl. Chalcon.
Then the King of Persia being conquered and slain by the Turks, the Persian
Empire was transported after a long space of time from the Turks to the natural
people of the Country, in the year 1499, and unto this day is possessed by
some of the same family, which have almost always continual wars with the
Othomans. So was God pleased to provide for the security of Christendom, that
such a powerful enemy as the Turk is, having his forces divided, might the
more easily be resisted.

CHAP. VIII. Of Robert, and Sigismond, Emperors; and of those things that
under them were acted both in Germany and Italy.
From the year 1400 of Christ, unto 1437.
VEnceslaus the Emperor of the Romans being degraded of his Imperial dignity
by reason of his sloathfulnesse, Robert Duke of Bavaria was elected in the
place, Anton. 3. Par. Tit. 22. c. 3. Nauol. Langius. Chr. Germ. l. 26. Cusp.
in the year 1400, who being entreated by the Florentines to help them against
Viscount Galeacius Duke of Millan, advanced into Italy; but having achieved
nothing of great consideration, he returned into Germany, leaving a cruel war:
from whence he retired. Galeacius dying a little while after, Anton. Palmer.
Naucl.
being the year 1402, most part of those Cities stood up for their liberty, and
freed themselves; and some of them were added to other Princes's Dominions. The
Venetians took under their protection Verona and Padua, Naucl. Sansovinus.
Anton.
in the year 1405, at what time the Dominions and Principalities of the
Scaligerians and Carrarisians was wholly extinguished, and the Inhabitants of
Pisa submitted themselves to the Florentines. This change of things brought
great and almost fatal troubles to Italy. Pand. l. 5. Palm. Naucl. Barlet. 10.
Scanderb.
At this time did Ladislaus reign in Apulia: he was son to Charles Dirrachinus
King of Apulia and Pannonia, who taking occasion by the divisions and
distractions that were in Rome, attempted twice the taking of it; he was
overcome and suppressed Pand. 5. Palmer.
by Lewis, son to Lewis Duke of Andes, who dyed in the wars he had in Apulia
against Charles Dirrachinus, Pand. 5.
in the year 1410; but Lewis not knowing how to make use of his victory and
advantage, returned into France.

In the midst of these times, an old and bitter division did tear the bowels of
the Church, two Popes at the same time attributing each to themselves the
Pontifical office; but as the cause of Peter Lunensis, who had changed his name
into Benedict, and lived in France, was worse; so also did his authority daily
decrease and lessen amongst those of his party, so that being forsaken by the
French, he fled into Spain, where he was born, where for a long time he was
maintained by the Arragonians. But Gregory the 12th remained in Italy. Anton.
Palmer. Naucl.
Princes of both sides met together at Pisa, for to bring them to order and
reconciliation; and having deprived them both of the Pontificat, they elected
Alexander the 5th, of the Order of the Minimes, in the year 1409; by this
action they made one Pope more. Naucl. Chr. Germ. Onuf.
Robert dyed in the year 1410, having ruled the Empire 10 years.

Anton. 3. Par. Tit. 22. c. 6. Naucl. Palmer. Chr. Germ. Cuspin.
Sigismond was after him elected Emperor by the suffrage of the Electors; he
was King of Hungaria, and son to Charles the 4th Emperor, and brother to the
Emperor Venceslaus, who is recorded to have been much adorned with discretion,
magnanimity, liberality, and with all other virtues proper for a Prince; but he
had no good success in military affairs; but was excellent in piety, and in
the zeal of Religion; for he sent Ambassadors all over Christendom for to
order and reconcile the peace of the Church, and hazarded to go into France,
England, Spain, in his own person, and in Italy also; and at last by his
assidual care and diligence, prevailed with Pope John the 23d, who in the year
1410 had succeeded Alexander, to assemble a Synod.

Therefore by Sigismond's labor, was kept a general Council at Constance in
the year Council. Constant. Anton. Aeneas Silv. Hist. Boem. c. 38. Naucl. Langus
Chron. Citiz. Chr. Germ. Plat.
1414, Council. Constable. Sess. 1.
on the 5th of November, being the second day of the week, Ib. Sess. 45.
which lasted four years, ending the Aen. Syl. c. 36.
22 of April, Anno 1418. Chron. Citiz. Hist. Boem.
In this Synod was condemned the opinion of Wickliff and John Huss, he himself
being then present, and not yielding to the Churches authority, was burnt the
6th of July, Conc. Constable. Sess. 42.
in the year 1415; and the year following Hierome of Prague was also burnt for
the same cause, being both glorious Martyrs for the truth of the Gospel. Now
after John the XXIII, and Benedict the XIII, were both deposed of the Papacy.
Odo of Collen is chosen in their room, in the year 1417. Naucl. etc.
the eleventh of November, and was called Martin the fifth.

So was ended the Schism that had lasted forty years, Lang. in Citiz. Chr.
though Benedictus strived still to oppose, but he died in Spain, in the year
1424. But the two Cardinals of his faction chose Clemens the VIII. in his
place, who four years after was fully suppressed; therefore some do record that
this Schism lasted 50. years. During this Council, the Prince of Savoy, from an
Earl, was created Duke by the Emperor Sigismond, in the year of our Lord 1415.

Aen. Sylv. c. 37. and seq. Naucl. langus.
But John Husse's Disciples and followers who already had taken up Arms in
Bohemia for to avenge his death, did overrun all this Country: they were
encouraged to it by Venceslaus's sloathfulnesse, who being dead in the year
1419. they elected for their General against the Emperor Sigismond, Ziska, a
Aen. Sylv. c. 38.
valiant acute and notable warrior. He in a short time having raised up a
great Army, took by force of Arms most part of the Towns and Cities of Bohemia,
and often routed Sigismonds Army. He built a Town fortified by nature upon an
exceeding high Rock Aen. Sylv. c. 40.46.
which he called Thaboris, hence were the inhabitants called Thaborites. It is
said that as he died, he gave order, that of his skin should be made the bottom
of a Drum, which being beaten, might cheer up their Soldiers, and give terror
to their enemies. Naucl.
This was in the year 1424.

In Italy, king Ladislaus dying in the year 1414 as Pand. l. 5. Anton. Par. 3.
Tit. 12. c. 7. Plat. in Mat. 5.
Pandulphus relates, his sister Johanna swayed the Neapolitan Scepter: she was
light of carriage and lewd, Olivar. Mar. c. 1. Pand. Col. Lenar.
she having married James of Bourbon, Earl of March: she afterward forced him
to fly back again into France, because he assumed the greatest power and
authority of the kingdom upon himself, where despising all worldly things, he
took the habit and Order of Saint Francis at Bezanson.

Bertho Facius l. 1. and seq. Alphonsus king of Aragon goes to possess the
Kingdom of Naples.
Joanna having alienated from her self the Heart of Pope Martin the V. and
fearing the Arms of the great Duke Sfortia, she implored to her aid Alphonsus
king of Aragon and Sicilia, whom upon conditions, she adopted Pand.
seven years after the death of Ladislaus.

Berth. Facius 1. and seq. Pand.
Now Martin the Pope had already entitled Lewis of Anjou, the third of that
name, son to Lewis the second, king of Naples, and given to him all the Rites
thereunto belonging, having degraded Joanna, allowing him Duke Sfortia, for
help in the carrying on of the expedition. Hence arose a most cruel and bloody
War between Alphoxsus and Lewis: not long after this broke forth a dissension
and division between Queen Joanna and Alphonsus, whereby Lewis by the means and
endeavors of the Duke Sfortia, being ingratiated and adopted, obtained the
kingdom in the year 1431. Fatius l. 4. Pand.
Three years after this, Lewis died of a sickness in the year 1434, Then was
Rainer, who also is called Reinat, Lewis's brother, named heir of the Crown, by
Joanna her self, whilst he yet was retained prisoner by the Duke of Burgundy,
Paxd. l. 6. and Fac.
In the interim, Alphonsus relying upon the former dedition of the Kingdom,
done to him by the Queen, he attempted the possession of the same: but being
overcome in a Sea Fight by the Genoans, and by them taken Prisoner, he is
carried to Pand. ibid. Palm. Fac. l. 4.
Philip Duke of Millan, under whose dominion then Genoa was, of whom he was
received exceeding courteously: and a little after by him released, he again
attempts to recover the Kingdom, which had already been possessed by Isabella,
Reiners Wife, who then was come to Naples to her, being released from his
imprisonment of Burgundy. Fac. l. 7. Pand. 6.
Alphonsus took Naples, sending his soldiers into it by that Channel, through
which Belisarius's Army had broken into Naples, Pand. Palm.
this was in the year one thousand four hundred forty two. At which time
Reiner being received into France, Alphonsus reigned without any competitour,
and having agreed with Eugenius, he confirmed his right to the Crown, both upon
himself, and his illegitimate son Ferdinando.

At this time Philip Maria the Vicount son to John Galeaceus, after the death
of John Maria his brother, holding Millan in his power, Naucl. de eo Facius. l.
4. sub. sin.
in the year 1415. which was the cause of all the troubles of Italy, having
concluded a peace with the Florentines, he brought under his subjection Genoa,
having chased out of it Thomas Fregosius, Duke thereof, Anton. Par 3. Tit. 22.
c. 8.
then by Pope Martins agitation, he put an end to the Wars, which he had again
begun with the Florentines, and Venetians, in the year 1427. But not long after
they Anron. ibid. c. 9. and seq.
fell to it again.

In the interim, Pope Martin having convoked a Council in Basil, died in the
year 1431, after whom Eugenius the IV. was chosen: he forbad the fathers
convoked at Basil to proceed farther: but nevertheless they continued their
assembly, and condemned Eugenius himself; therefore lasted this Council Conc.
Basil. Sess. 1.
from the seventh of December, 1431, unto the seventeenth of June Sess. 4.
Lang. in Chr. Citiz.
in the year 1448. being seventeen years. But Eugenius at last prevailed
against them, so then was their authority nullified. And Conc. Bas. Sess. 39.
Amedeus called by the Duke of Savoy, Foelix the V. who by this Synod had been
made Pope, abdicated himself the seventeenth of November, in the year 1439.
after Eugenius's death; and was dignified by Nicholas the fifth, Eugenius's
sucessour, in the year 1449, with the order of the Purple-Gown Prelates. Tilius.
Yet the Articles of Faith established by that Synod, were admitted and
received in France, both by Charles the VII. King of France, and by the
Parliament of Paris, but was abrogated by King Francis many years after.

Before this the Emperor Sigismond dyed the ninth of December. Plat. Cusp. Onurf.
in the year 1437, and of his age the 70th 26. years after his Election, and
six years after his coronation at Rome by Pope Eugenius Naucl. Citiz. Chron.
which was done in the year 1432, (d) when he also created Francis Gonzaga
Marquis of Mantua.

Chron. Citiz. An. 1417.
During this Emperors days, these persons ^ourished in Learning and Piety,
Peter of Alenson Bishop of Cameracum, John Gerson Chancellor of the University
of Paris: he was sent Ambassador by the king of France, Chr. Citiz. Trith.
to the Synod of Constance, Emmanuel Chrisoloras a Grecian, who first
acquainted Italy with his Country studies, and Paul. Jov. in Flog.
dyed during the sitting of the Synod at Constance, Trith.
Leonard Aretinus, Poghius, who both were Italians, Trith.
John of Turrecremata Cardinal, Alphousus Tostatus Bishop of Alba in Spain;
Trith.
Thomas Valdensis, Dionysius Ri^ell Carthurisian, a man of as great Learning as
piety, he died in the year 1471. Paul who from a Jew became Christian, and
Bishop of Burges; Flavius Blondus Forojuliensis the Historian, Nicholas de
Tudescis Cardinal, and Panormitanus Archbishop, Prince of the Canonick Laws of
that age. But these following surpassed all others in holiness, Anton. 5. Par.
Tit. 22. c. 5.
Bernard Senacensis a Minime, Laurentius Justinian Patriark of Venice, Vincent
of Ferrara a Trith.
Spaniard, who died in the year 1418. Catherine Senensis, and others, whose age
is recorded, partly in their lives, partly in the Histories, and Chronicles of
the times.

CHAP. IX. What things have been acted in Germany, Pannonia, Italy, Cyprus; and
all the parts of the East, under the Emperors Albert, Frederick, and
Maximilian, and the renowned persons of their time.
From the year 1438. unto 1500. or thereabouts.
ALBERT Duke of Austria Naucl. Cuspio. Onurf. vide Ae^. Sylv. de Hist. B^em. c.
96. and in Europa. Bonf. Dec. 3. l. 4.
in the year 1438. received the Title of the Empire, then vacant by the death
of Sigismond his father in law, who in a short time having achieved many
gallant enterprises, against the Mores, the Bohemians, and the Turks, died at
last in an expedition against the Turks in November the second year of his
Empire, in the year 1439. Flor. Con. Plat. in Eng. Pal. in. Citiz. Chr. Naucl.
In this year Eugenius having interdicted the Synod of ^asill to assemble any
longer, he convoked another to Florence where John Paleologus Emperor of
Constantinople was present with Joseph the Patriarch, who died there the same
year, the Greeks were then reconciled with the Latins, and also the Armenians,
who had a form of the Catholic Faith given to them by Eugenius, but the
Grecians being returned into the East, they broke off from the Roman society by
the remonstrance and persuasion of Mark of Ephesius, and Scholarius both deeply
Learned and Wise.

Cuspin. Onurf. Palm. Naucl. Citiz. Chr.
Frederick Duke of Austria, Ernestus's son, obtained the Kingdom of the Romans
in the year 1440. Under his Empire Egnat.
Germany was more at peace and quiet then it was wont, whilst that the other
parts of Chistendome, were all in an uproar and distraction by fire and sword.

Francis Sfortia his son, who following Lewis of Anjou had fought valiantly in
Apulia against Alphonsus, advancing against the Venetians for to help Naucl.
Philip Prince of Millan, whose illegitimate daughter Palm.
Blanch he had married, overthrew him, and lost the battle, whereupon Anton.
3. Part. Tit. 21. c. 12. Paragh. 1. and 2. Plat. in Nichol. 5.3.
Philip died without any heir the sixth of August, in the year 1448. At what
time there was an Eclipse of the Sun at seven of the Clock in the morning, as
Antonius says: by this may Bandulphus and Platina be convinced, who say that
this Philip dyed the year before. But Francis subdued under his power the
Milanois, who earnestly, though in vain, endeavored to get their liberty.
Alphonsus King of Aragon and Apulia, dissembled with them, because Philip had
made him his heir, as Colenutius asserts. Charles, Duke of Orleans, Lewis's son,
claimed no less of right and title to this Province, as being son to
Valentina, Galeaceus's daughter, and sister to Philip: Anton. 2. Tit. 22. c. 12.
but upon this, the Venetians fearing such a potent neighbor, they conclude
peace and league with Alphonsus: then the Florentines entreated the alliance
and society of the French, and by this means was a cruel war renewed in Italy,
but afterward Francis Sfortia did conclude a peace and friendship with
Alphonsus, Pand. l. 6.
in the year 1454. and gave his daughter Hippolyta to Wife to Alphonso his
Nephew, Ferdinand's illegitimate son. Pand. 6. Monstr 1. Jov. l. 1. Hist.
And four years after this died Alphonso the elder in July, 1458, being 66.
years old, leaving the kingdoms of Aragon and Sicilia to his brother John, and
to Ferdinando's son, the kingdom of Naples: Pius 2. in Eur. c. 65. Pand. 6.
Facius.
Alphonsus's generous and magnanimous spirit is highly commended by the
Historians, and also for his love and respect he bore to learning and learned
men, and in remembrance thereof, they have extolled his name to Posterity.

In Pannonia and Albania, the undoubted virtue of these two Princes, John
Corvinus Hunides, and Alexander king of Epirus, who ordinarily is called
Scanderbeg, upheld the Christian interest in this age. Bonfin. Dec. 3. l. 3.
Chalc. l. 8.
The first, whose Father was Walachus, born of a Greek woman, not of ignoble
stock, in the Town of Corvinum, thence had the surname of Corvinus: and he was
called Huniades from a Lordship that Sigismond had given him.

Sconderbegs valor stopped that rod of the Christians, Amurath, who with his
mighty power threatened and affrighted all Europe, and forced him upon very
reasonable terms to conclude peace with Uladislaus, king of Hungaria, but the
Hungarians themselves broke it: when the Turks were engaged in Asia, but it was
to the great detriment of the Christians, Plus Pont. Europ. c. 5. Bonfin. Dec.
2. l. 6. Naucl.
for their Army was routed and defeated by the Turks at Warna, in which battle
both Uladislaus the king, and Julianus the Cardinal, who was the Author of the
breach of the Peace, died the tenth of November, in the year 1444. Aen. Sylvin
Europa. Bensin. etc.
After this overthrow, Ladislaus son to Albert Caesar by Elizabeth, Sigismonds
daughter, being but five years old, is elected king by the States of Hungary.
John Huniades in the time of his minority, was made Protector of the kingdom,
because Frederick the Emperor, Pius 2d. in Europ.
to whose trust his Mother had recommended the Crown of the kingdom, would not
deliver him up to them: Bonfin. dec. 3. l. 7.
At which Huniades being displeased, he overrun and wasted Austria and other
Provinces belonging to Frederick, in the year 1445; he also fought often with
great success against Amurath; and, Amurath dying at Croia in Epirus, fought
against his son Mahomet, who took Constantinople Anton. Par 3 Tit. 22. c. 13.
Bonfin. dec. 3. l. 8. Naucl. Palmer. Chr. Citiz.
in the year of Christ, 1453, the 29 of May; Iidem. and Vill. Aen. Boem. Hist.
c. 65. Chal^. l. 8.
but three years after as he besieged Taurinum, which is called Alba, he drove
him back with much disgrace, and great loss of his Army, in the year 1456, on
Magdelene's day. Pope Calistus decreed a holy day to be celebrated in
remembrance of this great victory. In the obtaining of this and other
remarkable victories, appeared the piety and devotion of John Capistranus of
the order of the Minimes; and as he thus behaved himself, many embraced the
Cross, and engaged for the Holy Wars.

Bonfin. Anton. etc.
In the same year John Huniades Prince of Transylvania, as they are wont to
say, with happy and prosperous issue, ended his life the 4th of September; and
Capistranus himself dyed not long after, Naucl.
whose sanctity was made illustrious by prodigious miracles.

Ladislaus being dead, the Aen. Syl. c. 70. Boem. Bonfin. dec. 3. l. 8.
10th of December, in the year 1458, Matthias Corvinus, John's son, is elected
King by the Hungarians: he was in nothing unlike his father, and by him were
the Turks often beaten.

Barlet. Ain. Sylv. in Europa, c. 15.
Scanderbeg being escaped from the hands of the Turks, and having recovered his
fathers right of Epirus, often vanquished several petty Kings and Bashaws of
the Turks, who assaulted him with huge and innumerous Armies, with a handful
of valiant Soldiers; and as long as he lived, he was a great terror to them.
Libr. 13. hist. Scand. in fine.
Marin Barlet records, that he began to reign the 4th of December, in the year
1443; and having reigned 23 years, he dyed in the year 1466, in the 63 year of
his life.

In Italy Plat. Anton. Par. 3. Tit. 12. c. 12. Chr. Citiz.
Eugenius the Pope being dead the 23 of February, in the year 1447; after him
was elected Plat. Anton.
Nicolas the 5th, a great lover of Sciences, and of learned men; he erected the
Vatican Library, having sought Volumes and Writings from all the parts of the
World, even from the East also: Plat. Anton. c. 14.
he dyed the 8th year of his Pontificat the 25 of March, in the year 1455, whom
Calistus the third succeeded; and after him was elected Pius the second, a man
of deep learning, who before was called Aeneas Sylvius, in the year 1458, he
wholly and unanimously aimed at the carrying on of the War against the Turks;
Pand. l. 6. Naucl. Plat.
therefore did he conclude peace with Ferdinand King of Naples, Alphonsus's
son, Palmer. Plat. Naucl.
and ordered the Christian Princes to resort to Mantua to consult upon it; but
nothing could be done, because all the Princes applied their mind to domestical
affairs, and were unwilling to engage in foreign wars; Palmer.
therefore did this Princely assembly at Mantua break up in the eighth month
of their sitting.

Naucl. Pand 6. Barler.
Alphonsus's death being known, John son to Renate of Anjou, whom we have
already showed to have been driven back into his own Country, having levied a
strong Army, advanced into Apulia, and having set up his Standard, he put
Ferdinand to flight, and took possession of his Fortress, defeating all his
Army, and he had been-quite undone, had not Scanderbeg by the entreaties of
Alphonsus and Pope Pius assisted him, and came to help him with an Army. Lib.
10. de gest. Scand.
Maurin Barlet complains, that the Historians and Chronologians did not fully
record this Expedition of Scanderbeg into Italy.

At the same time the Genoans being vexed and infested by King Alphonsus, they
yielded themselves to the protection of Charles the 7th King of France, Palm.
Til. in Chr.
in the year 1458; whither John, Renate's son being sent, he fortified the
City; Palm.
but it revolted again three years after from the French, under command of
Prosper Adurnus; which Lewis the 11th granted to Francis Sfortia Duke of
Millain Palm.
in the year 1464. Id. Palm. Plat. Naucl.
In which year Pope Pius dyed at Ancone, having got much glory in a short time;
for he lived in the Office but six years: him followed Paul the second of that
name.

Whilst Europe is troubled all over with intestine dissension and tempest, the
like calamity and distraction afflicted also Asia. Pius Pont. in Asia, c. 97.
Naucl. Hist. Cyprus.
Richard King of England had granted the Island Cyprus, being taken away from
the Greeks, unto Guido Lusianus of the French stock, who did take to himself
the right or title of the kingdom of Jerusalem.

His successors reigning in it, the Genoans, How the Ringdome of Cyprus came
to the Venetians.
a slaughter of their Countrymen being there made, provide a strong Navy,
Trugosius being chief Commander, to revenge them: in a short space, the whole
Island, with the King and Queen, came under their power. To those, when they
had been sometime held in prison, at length pardon is granted. But a tribute
laid on the kingdom, and Salamis, which is Famagusta, a common Mart-Town for
Traffiques, yielded to the Conqueror for a prey. The King would have his son
that was born in prison, to be called Janus, because it is the custom to call
Genua, commonly Janua. This King, the Sultan of Egypt, Cyprus being taken and
plundered, and many mortals killed, made tributary. John his son succeeded his
dead father; for riot and delights, more like a woman, than a man; who took
Helena of the blood of the Palaeologians in wedlock, of whom he begat Carlotta;
but of a Concubine, James. Carlotta married Lewis the son of the Duke of the
Allobrogians. James, whom that his father might shut out from hope of the
kingdom, by the persuasion of Helena, he had made chief Ruler of Nicosia; both
being dead, being more desirous of obtaining Cyprus, than became a Christian,
came to the Sultan of Egypt; in whose words a wicked oath being taken, he is
brought by the same into the kingdom: Lewis the husband of Carlotta being
driven away, Naucl.
about the year 1459. Afterward, the Genoans being cast out, and Salamis being
taken back again, James drove away Aecaterina his Wife, the daughter of Marcus
Cornelius of the Venetians; whom the Senate of Venice adopted for a daughter.
The same, and Palm.
The King being dead, and his Posthume James, that kingdom came into the power
of the Venetians by a right of inheritance, in the year 1476.

Frederick the Emperor made an end of living Cuspin. Naucl. Chr. Spenheim.
Trith. Suppl. Palmer.
in the year 1493, August the 19, of his Command the 53 year, whom his son
Maximilian succeeded, chosen King of the Romans 7 years before.

Onost. Cuspin.
This man came even unto the year of Christ 1519, of his Empire 26, and the day
before the Ides of January, in the 63 year of his age, he deceased. Many
shakings there were, and great, this man being Emperor, especially in Italy,
about his beginning: which shall be explained in the French affairs.

As those things sorrowful to be remembered, so these things joyful, then
happened. Tarafa. Maria.
Ferdinand King of Spain vanquisheth Granata, which remnant had sat down in a
City of the Moors, in the year 1492; in which year the Rule of the Saracens
ceased in Spain after 780 years that they had come thither. Naucl. Maria.
And the same year, 171 thousand families of the Jewish stock went away into
banishment, which are said to have been to the number of 800000 heads.

Many unknown Countries in the outmost borders of the East and West began to be
entered; the passage unto them being made plain by the Spanish and Lusitanian
ships. Histor. of India, Append. Palm.
Christopher Columbus, by Country a Genoan, most knowing in Sea-Affairs,
loosing from Spain under the authority of Ferdinand and Isabell, Kings, in the
year 1499, found new Islands. Whose example others following, by little and
little opened that wide Continent, which makes the fourth part of the World.
Osor. h. 1. of the Deeds of Emm.
Vascus Gama, a Lusitanian enflamed with the same study, having gone by the
command of Emmanuel from Ulyssipon, into the East, in the year 1497, on the
seventh of the Ides of July; the year following 13 Kalends of June came to
Calecute; and he shows by the saylings of the Lusitanians unto these places,
the way to Indian Commerces or Traffiques.

Learning, Famous Men.
Frederick reigning, was in great brightness throughout Italy, the most
learned of the Grecks, who, Greece being taken, ran unto it, sharpening the
studies of the Latins through a striving to imitate them. Cardinal Bessario
was accounted chief, as in worthiness of Office, so in the learning of the
Greeks. Palm. Paul. Jov.
whom, in the year 1472, France saw as an Ambassador. Whence returning to
Rome, he dyed at Ravenna, in the 77 year of his age. Likewise Theodore-Gaza of
Thessalonica; who Book of the month, chapter 16.
in the year 1470, wrote a book concerning the months, Palm. Trith.
and dyed in the year 1478. Palm. Jov.
George Trapezunte, a Cretian, dyed 1485, Argyropylus of Byzantium, and
Demetrius Chalcondylas, lived at the same time. Trith.
Among the Latins, Pius the second chief Bishop, highly flourished, who was
called before Aeneas Sylvius. Likewise Laurentius Valla, of a sharp and biting
wit, Jov.
dyed in the year of Christ, 1457. Francis Philelphus, Trith.
who dyed, being 90 years old, in the year 1481. Palmer.
But Flavius Blond an Historian, in the year 1473, of his age 57. Jov. Trith.
Nicolas Perotus, Platina, who wrote thoroughly the lives of the Roman Bishops,
even until Paul the second. Matthew Palmerius a Florentine writer of a
Chronicle, Trith.
who for a heresy delivered in a writing concerning Angels, is punished with
the burning flame, as says Trithemius. Others affirm, not himself, but his
book to have been burnt; the which also is more like to truth. Domitius
Calderinus, who Trith.
perished in the year 1477. The same.
Rodulph Agricola. Palm. Trith.
John de Monte-Regio, that is, of the King's Mountain, a Mathematician, he dyed
at Rome in the year 1476. John Picus of Mirandula, Hermolaus Barbarus followed;
whom Trithemius writes to have dyed in the 39th year of his age, and of Christ
1493. Angelus Politianus Trith.
in the year 1494, Palm.
of his age 40. Marsilius Ficinus, Sabellicus an Historian, Antonine a
Florentine Bishop. Neither indeed does it concern us to make mention of all; of
whom Trithemius a writer of that same Age, and Paul Jovius in his Elogies or
commendatory Writings, and many others, have written.

But it fitly happens, that (when Barbarism being wiped away, Printing
Invented.
Learning should lift up its head) for the committing so many births of great
Wits unto eternity, the Art of Printing should show it self forth Palm. in the
year 1457.
in the year 1440, John Guttemberg a Knight of Moguntia being the finder of it
out.

CHAP. X. Of the French Affairs, and other things done on this side the Alps,
by Charles the seventh, Lewis the eleventh, and Charles the eighth, Kings of
France; and of the shakings of Italy, which were infolded, this last reigning,
with the affairs of France.
Charles the seventh, in the year 1422, The English War.
entered a wretched and troubled Kingdom, the English holding many places of
France, with whom, Philip Duke of Burgundy for revenging of his father's death,
had joined his Forces. The first breaking out of the English into France,
happened Alan. Monstr. b. 1. chapter 139. Naucl. Mey. Aem. Gagu.
in the year 1415, Henry the fifth being King. In which a battle was joined at
Azincurt, not far from the Town of Calice: and in that fight the flowr of the
French Nobility was partly slain, partly came into the hands of their Enemies.
Charles Duke of Orleance was taken, who was in custody Monstr. b. 3. fol. 106.
25 years, and other Princes. After that, the fellowship of the Burgundian made
all things readily inclinable to the English, who had in his power the King of
France, partaker neither of his understanding, nor his right, with the Queen
and her daughter Katherine. Henry (Paris, the Castle of the kingdom, being
possessed in the Monstr. b. 1. chapter 143. and b. 1. chapter 214.
year 1418,) Monstr. 1. chapter 265.
two years after in Tricassia, took Katherine in wedlock, with the kingdoms
Dowry; Charles the Dolphin being shut out. But Henry had a very short fruit of
so great success, dying in the very same year, in which we have taught Charles
the 6th to have perished, Olivar. 1. chapter 3, etc.
in the year 1422, August 29. Henry the 6th, is put in the room of this: Charles
the seventh in the room of Charles, two months after having finished his life.
There was thereby, or from that time, a continual course of the English
victory; Towns daily falling off from Charles. Moreover, the chief bending of
affairs is made against the people of Orleans, the most noble City of Celtica.
Alan. Monstr. 2. Meyer. Aemil. etc. Micquellus.
The English King had besieged it in the year 1428, the 4th Ides of October.
The Duke of Salisbury who was slain in that siege; but John a bastard, the
natural son of Lewis Duke of Orleans, who was slain by John of Burgundy,
defending. God by a wonder rare to this day, brought help to the Townsmen now
fearing the extremest things. Joan the Maid of Aurelia.
Joan Durcia was a Maid, her father being a husbandman, in the Tullian field, a
keeper of sheep: she being inwardly stirred by words from God, to loose the
siege of Orleans, and deliver Charles out of so many straights, came of her own
accord unto this King: And a promise being made, she being sent to Orleance
with ayds, beat back the English broken in some battles from the City, in Alan.
etc.
the year 1429, May 12. She brought the King to Durocottum of Rhemes, to take
of right, the holy things or ceremonies of the kingdom. The enemy being often
scattered, she was at length taken at Compendium in the year 1430; Monstr. b.
2. fol. 59. Aemil. Gag. Mey.
whom after a long debate had concerning her, Peter Cauchonius, Bishop of
Bellovacia, condemned. The English burnt her alive in the year 1431; at which
time, book 2. fol. 76.
says Monstrelett, an Assembly began to be had at Basil. Concerning this
Virgin, who is commonly called, The Maid of Orleance, some reproachful things
are falsely vaunted of by some. But that she was innocent and dear to God, both
many things do persuade, See the hist. of Joan set fort^ by many. Bellefor. in
Chron. in Charles 7. and to Ni^^l. Gil.
which are read, delivered in full Volumes; and also a most prosperous issue of
the thing having followed; as it may be right to ascribe it to none but God as
the Author. For afterward all things waxed worse with the English. Charles (the
Burgundian being reconciled unto him Alan. Monstr. 2. fol. 113. Oliv. 1. chapter 3.
in the year 1435) by degrees received his kingdom out of the hand of the
enemies; Monstr. b. 3. Polyd. 23. Alan. Homebred Troubles of England.
so that in the year 1453, Talbot, a man of great valor being slain, and
Aquitane again taken away, he caused nothing to be left unto the English in
France, beside Callice. After this manner the English tumult, after two and
forty years, took an end.

A civil disagreement at home followed the English, being beaten out of other
men's borders. There were two Kingly Families amongst them; the one of York, the
other of those of Lancaster. Henry of Lancaster, Richard the second being
compelled to resign, and being slain, had usurped the Kingdom Polyd. Virg. b.
20.
in the year 1399; and being called the 4th of that name, departed in the The
same, in the end of 22. book.
year 1413. This man Henry the 5th his son succeeded; who, a fellowship being
made with Philip the Burgundian, weakened the riches of the French; and Henry
the 6th being begotten from Katherine the daughter of Charles the 6th, he dyed
in the year 1422, as I have above related.

After the English cast out of France, Polyb. b. 23.
in the year 1453, a faction of the chief ones arising, whose author was
Richard of York, King Henry, their Ensigns being joined, is overcome by him in
the year 1460, and by the sentence of the Council, the succession of the
kingdom is ordained to Richard. In the mean time, Margaret, daughter of Renatus
Duke of the Andegavians, a woman endued with a manly courage, the wife of
Henry, no small company being gathered together, overcomes Richard in battle,
and slew him; then another Richard, Earl of Warwick, being shifted out of the
Camps, he put to flight, and restored her husband into his kingdom. Afterward
Edward the son of Richard Earl of March, by the help of him of Warwick, drives
Henry and Margaret out of England, and is declared King himself in the Polyb.
b. 24 See Comm. on chapter 50. and foll.
year 1461. the fourth Call. July. And then the Earl of Warwick, a grudge
arising between them both, by the help of Ludovick the XI. King of France, put
this man to flight: and brought back Henry unto his ancient dignity, in the
year 1471. But Edward by the assistance of Charles Duke of Burgundy, received
the Kingdom that he had lost, the sixth Month after: and Richard of Warwick,
being killed in fight, he took away the life from Henry, and also Edward his
only son. This Henry was a very holy man: so that he was famous for miracles
alive and dead. Book 24.
Polydore is witness. He had the name of King 38 years six Months. Margaret
his Wife being spoiled of her son and the Kingdom, returned to her father into
France.

Edward reigned twenty and three years, and then died in the year 1483. whose
brother Richard Duke of Gloucester a wicked man, his sons being slain, usurpt
the Tyranny; for the which, he being at length besieged in the third year, by
Henry of Richmond, the son of John, who was the brother of Henry the sixth, he
lost, with his life. Moreover, this Henry began to govern the kingdom in the
year 1486, the seventh of that name, the father of that Henry, who departed
from the Communion of Catholics. And he married Elizabeth the daughter of
king Edward the fourth, of the Family of York. Polyb. b. 26.
Which being done, those famous and destructive hatreds to the English, of the
houses Lancaster and York, he quenched.

In France, the Lordly rule of the English being shaken off, Charles took breath
again; but that, rest being gotten from war, he fell into homebred tumults.
Monstr. b. 3. fol. 68. Oliv. b. 1. chapter 36.
For Ludovick his son being offended with his father, betook himself to Philip
the Burgundian, in the year 1456. neither returned he thence into France before
his death which fell out in the year 1461. July 22.

Therefore Ludovick the XI. of that name, came in the same year, into his
fathers place, a crafty and subtle man; Who about the beginning of his reign,
being troubled with the factions of the chief ones, conspiring among
themselves, he shook off their endeavors by Council and prudence. For, by
giving liberally to all what they should ask, he afterward set upon every one,
divided from each other. Monstr. b. 3. Chr. Lud. 10. Commin. chapter 8. Monstr. b.
3. p. 13. Oliv. b. 1. chapter 37.
This agreement, that fight went before, which was made at Mount Leherick,
about eight miles from the City, in the year 1465. in which, a Victory
sufficiently prosperous, was manifest to neither. Charles Earl of Carolesia was
chief of the contrary party, the son of Philip Duke of Burgundy. He, when
through the death of his father, which happened in the year 1467, June the
15th, the second day of the week, was in most large wealth and power; as he was
by nature cruel, and desirous of new things, ceased not to provoke his
borderers: Comm. Til. Armil. Gaguin.
but especially Renatus Duke of Lorain, and the Helvetians; with whom Ludovick
had made a fellowship against the common enemy. As Charles easily overcame
Renatus, and being almost stripped of his dominion, he constrained him to fly
into France: So a slaughter being twice received by the Helvetians, when
Renatus had recovered his Province, he contended against him in Lorain. There
while he besieges Nantz, being overcome by Renatus, furnished with Germane and
Helvetian aids, he fell in battle in Comm. chapter 95. Aemil. Gag. Til. Append.
Monstr. Fol. 190.
the year 1477. January the fifth, only one daughter Mary being left, which
married Maximilian the son of Frederick the Emperor. The death of Charles being
heard of, Ludovick out of hand subjected Burgundy, and his old Title in
Belgica, unto his power.

Comm. chapter 136.
He died in Turo in the year of Christ 1483, the third Calends September, the
Seventh day of the week; Comm. chapter 130.
when as he had first called unto him Francis Paulanus out of Italy, a most
holy man, and famous for miracles: by whom, the Order of the Minims or least
sort of Friars was appointed.

Charles the 8th, the son of Ludovick, living the thirteenth year, Chr. Lud.
21. Til.
for he was born in the year 1470, the day before the Ides of July, undertook
the Kingdom under the tuition of his sister Anne; whom Peter Borbon a
Frenchman had married. Gaguin. Aemil.
Ludovick the brother of Charles, the Nephew of that Ludovick, whom we have
shown to have been thrust through at Paris by the command of John of Burgundy,
Duke of Orleans, took it grievously that she should be chief over them.
Therefore flying unto Francis Duke of Britain, when as many had come into the
fellowship of the Governors; a battle being joined with the Kings Captains, at
the Temple of Albine, in Aremoricum, fell in Victory, and likewise in liberty
Chron. of Charles the 8. out of Jalignius, etc. gathered out of Godfr.
in the year 1488. Idip. 166.
and was held in a three years custody. Peace was granted to the Duke being
humble, with that condition, that what had been gotten by the Kings weapons,
that should remain in his power. Giguin. Collections of Jalig. etc. Ti^.
Between these things the Duke dying, Charles took Anne his daughter, betroathed
unto Maximilian king of the Romans to Wife, Margaret being divorced, the
daughter of Maximilian, whom he had espoused to himself, his father Ludovick
being Author. The same.
Maximilian for that thing waging war; at last a peace followed: when as the
fellowship or County of the Acrebatians had yielded to him from the will of the
king.

Commin. in Charles 8. Guic. Append. Monstr. Gag. Jalig. Coll. etc. Ferron.
Peace being made in the kingdom, Charles much desired Wars afar off, An
Expedition being undertaken into Italy, to recover the Neopolitane Kingdom;
Which being passed over by Renatus Duke of Andegavians, on Ludovick the
eleventh, Ferdinand the sou of Alphonsus the Great, possessed; the Father of
another Alphonsus, whose son in Law was John Galeacius, obtaining nothing of
the Mediolan dominion besides a title, when as all the rule was in the power of
Ludovick Sfortias his Uncle, the which he had drawn to himself under the
pretense of Guardian-ship. Indeed Alphonsus bare that thing grievously, and for
his son in Law prepared War. This War, that Ludovick might turn away, he called
forth Charles, in hope of obtaining Apulia in Italy. Therefore that he might
leave nothing of an enemy behind him, Gag. Gillius Ferro.
he granted of his own accord, Ruscio, and Perpinian, unto Ferdinand King of
Spain, concerning which there was a strife between them; then in the Comm.
Guis. etc.
year of Christ 1494, the Alps being overcome, he descended into Italy. The
which when he had accomplished by a sudden affrightment, he took a quick
journey through Tuscia even to Rome, and afterward to Neapolis. Till.
At Rome he took the title (from Alexander the sixth) of the Constantinopolitan
Empire, in the year 1495 when as Guic.
in the former year Ferdinand had departed this life, January the 25th, Comm.
Guic.
Whose son Alphonsus being very much affrighted at the coming of Charles,
passed over into Sicily, and resigning himself of the Kingdom, left it unto
his son Ferdinand. Guic.
Ferdinand for fear of the French, betook himself into the Island Ischia.
Charles entering Neapolis Append. Monst. Gill.
on the 12th day of Febr. in a short time obtained the whole kingdom.

These sudden successes of the French, caused envy with the Princes and Cities
of Italy. Guic. 2. Comm.
Therefore Maximilian the Emperor being joined unto them, and Ferdinand king
of Spain, also Alexander chief Bishop privily favoring it; the Venetians, and
Ludovick Sfortia, to whom, Guic.
Galeacius being dead, Maximilian the Emperor had granted the right and Title
of Duke of Mediolanum, make a conspiracy; and endeavor, things being ordered
in Apulia, to shut in the king of France returning into France. Guic. 2. Comm.
chapter 3. and foll. Gag. Append. Monstr. Collect. Jalig. etc.
They fought the day before the Nones of July at the Marketplace, or
Wine Press of the Novanians, not far from Parma, and by a small company of the
French, Gaguin.
(they are delivered to have been no more then seven thousand) forty thousand
of the enemies, especially of the Venetians were broken through. Charles,
Collect. Jalig. etc.
Ludovick Duke of Orleans being received, who being besieged by Ludovick
Sfortia at Novaria, had come into the greatest straights, returned full of
Grace and glory into France, in the same year in which he had come to Rome and
Neapolis. Comm. chapter 38. Guice. 2.
He scarce going aside, the Neapolitans and all the rest fell away to
Ferdinand, the French, Gilbert Monpenser the Lieutenant being dead, a little
after they all departed. Comm. 38. Guic. etc.
This slaughter of Italy, and the coming of Charles, Jerome Savanarola a
Dominican Friar, a famous and wonderfully acceptable Orator unto the
Florentines, is said often to have foretold, Comm. in Charles chapter 25. Append.
Palm. Naucl.
who for his stubbornness, and seditious Sermons, paid the last punishment,
the day after that day, wherein Charles departed out of life. Guice. in the end
of b. 3. Nauc.
Who at Ambasia in Turo, died suddenly of an Apoplexy, the 7th Ides April, in
the year 1498, the 15th year of his reign.

Comm. chapter 53. Guice. b. 3. Till. Gag. etc.
Ludovick the 12th of that name, Charles dying without an heir, succeeded by
Law, the son of Charles, Duke of Orleans: Guic. 4. Comm. Till. Ferron. etc.
who by and by would be called King of either Sicily, and Jerusalem, and Duke
of Mediolanum; and forth with, wholly employed himself toward an Italian
expedition: Guice.
Anne the Widow being first married, a Princess of the Aremoricans, sometime
the Wife of Charles the eighth, and a divorce being made with Joanna, the
daughter of Ludovick the 11th, whom his father had brought on him against his
will, who indeed going to Biturgia, was afterward in great fame for holiness.
Guic. 4. Til. Ferron. Naucl.
Mediolanum through the flight of Ludovick Sfortias, came into the power of the
French, with the other Insubrians in the year 1499.

CHAP. XI. What things were carried on through the whole World, from the year
1500 to 1547. Maximilian and Charles being Emperors, and Ludevick the 12th, and
Francis, Kings of France.
MAximilian being Emperor, Guic. 4. and foll. Till. Addition to Monst. Ferron.
the Append of Velleius to Gaguin. The History of Bayard.
and Ludovick the 12th King of France, a cruel war was renewed in Italy.

The Mediolans had hated Trivulcius, who did govern the Insubrians in the name
of Ludovick the 12th Guic. 4.
because he was of the Guelfick Faction, for this City did anciently favor the
Gibellines party. Therefore they privily call back Ludovick Sfortias living
with Maximilian, and deliver themselves unto him in the year 1500. But a little
after Ludovick being taken by the French, with his brother Ascanius the
Cardinal, he is sent into prison to the Castle of Lochia, in which he lived ten
years.

The same book of Forson.
After these things, a league being made with Ferdinand King of Spain, Ludovick
possesses the kingdom of Neapolis, which legacy Frederick then held for
himself from Ferdinand the son of his brother Alphonsus. And this man resigning
himself on condition, that the Province should be given him from the king with
yearly stipends, he departed to the Andegavians, in the year 1501. The
Neapolitan Kingdom being divided among the French and Spaniards, there could
be no long peace.

Gonsalve the Captain of Ferdinand, within two years time, drove the French
quite out from thence: and for that thing obtained the name of Great Captain.
Guice. 6.
The French departed from all the Towns in the year 1504.

After that, Ludovick conspireth with Maximilian, and Julius the 2d, Bishop of
Rome, against the Venetians, Guic. 8. and foll. Ferron. Till. Chron. History of
Bayard, etc.
a very mighty City in Italy, and fearful to its neighbors; in the year 1508.
Moreover in the year following, the Venetians being overcome by Ludovick in
battle, whatsoever was in the adjoining Country, they did almost lose. But
Julius, the Venetians being reconciled unto him, turns his weapons against
Ludovick. Vasto Flustas Duke of Nemora, was chief over the French affairs in
Italy, who, all places being largely wasted, when as he encountered with the
Armies of the Venetians, and Spaniards, and Julius at Ravenna: and a memorable
Victory being gotten, he being rashly brought among his enemies, was slain,
Ravenna was spoiled by the Conquerours. At this battle, which happened in
Guice. 10. History o^ Bayard.
the year one thousand five hundred and twelve, on the very day of Easter,
Bayard an Allobrogian knight, a most valiant and famous man, at that time was
present. Ludovick being earnestly bent on the Italian affairs, the neighboring
Princes brought war on France. Ferdinand the Spanish king stripped John Albert
of the kingdom of the Woscoins, which they call Navarre. Henry the 8th, King
of England, who succeeded his Father, being of his sit name, in the year 1509,
setting upon Picardy, possesses the Morinians, and Wervians. Thus the French
being besieged by so many enemies, let go Italy in the year 1513, in which year
Pope Julius dies, Bellacus 1. Commin.
But Ludovick king of France, things with the English king being composed, and
Mary the sister of Henry being taken in Marriage; for Aane had now died;
Claudia and Renata, his children being alive, while he provideth a new war
against the Insubrians, he finisheth his life on the Bellaius Til. Parad. etc.
very Call. of Jan. of the 1515th year-entring.

Leo the 10th, of the stock of the Medices, is chosen in the room of Pope
Julius; Francis Duke of the Valesians for Lewis the King, and Earl of Ingolesm,
his son in law: for he had married Claudia the daughter of him and Anne, after
the death of her mother. Charles was father to this man, the son of John of
Ingolesm, a man famous in holiness, and for miracles, after death; whose
father was Lewis Duke of Orleance, slain at Paris by a privy murderer.

Francis, as soon as he was made King, his Forces being turned toward a
Mediolan Expedition; he slew the Helvetians, who had opposed themselves against
him, in two days fight at Marinian, Til. Bellaius. Guic. b. 12. Parad. b. 1.
in the year 1515, Sept. 13 and 14. By which victory, a surrender of the
dominion of Mediolum followed. Pope Leo was then chief over the Roman Church,
who had succeeded Julius the second, from the year 1513. A discourse being had
with this man at Bononia, he made an effectual promise of making void the
King's answer by letter, and of receiving Concordatum, The same Authors.
in the year 1516. And then an end was put to the Council of Lateran, the which
had been begun from the year 1512, in the year 1517, and a dispatch into Turkey
was decreed.

The same year fell out lamentable unto Germany and the whole Church, through
the rising up of a pestilent heresy; whose framer was Luther, Cochl. Til.
Guic. etc.
born at Isleby in Saxony in the year 1483, November. 10th: In that year 1517, he
began to cry out against Pardons. From which spark, by little and little the
flame waxed hot; wherewith all Europe burned.

In the mean time, Charles the 5th Emperor.
through the death of Maximilian, Charles his Nephew, the son of Philip of
Austria, and Joane the daughter to Ferdinand and Isabel, in Guic. 13. Til.
Bellai. Parad. 1.
the year of Christ 1519, took the Empire the 20th year of his age; for in the
year 1500, Febr. 24, he was brought forth to light. With this Emperor, Francis
had almost continual war, the which was proclaimed The same.
in the year 1521. Therefore at the same time, two most mighty Kings, Charles,
The Wars of (...) and Cha^^s, Emperor.
and Henry of England fighting against Francis, he underwent wars in three
places. In Vascony the matter went on prosperously at the beginning,
Pompeiopolis, the Castle of the kingdom being taken: In which siege, Ignatius
Loiola, a Cantabrian or Spaniard, desending the Town against the French, his
leg being broken with the stroke of a stone, came into the utmost danger of
life, which wound brought forth unto Ignatius the health of his soul, and a new
order to the Church, of the Jesuits or society of Jesus. The Spaniards a
little after, the French being cast out, recovered all that they had lost.
There was the like unsuccessefulnesse of King Francis in Italy. For the
Insubrians rebelling against Odetas Flustas Lau^recius, they drove away the
French from thence, in the very year 1521.

In which year Emmanuel King of Lusitania, a very great Prince, dyed the 13th
of December, and his son John succeeded him, the third of that name.

But indeed Leo the tenth having dyed a sudden death on the Kal. of December. of
the same year, Adrian the 6th, who did then govern Spain, undertook his place
Jan. 9th of the year following. Which year, Rhodes taken.
the slaughter at Rhodes made mournful to the Christians. Parad. 1. chapter 7.
Guic. b. 15. Turkish Aunals.
For Solomon the Turk, after six months siege, the City being taken, reduced
this Island into bondage, in the year 1522, December. 22. through the treachery
of Andrew Meralius, a Lusitanian Knight. Parad. b. 3.
The seventh year after the Knights being transported into the Island Melita or
Malta, they there hitherto proceed to be a safeguard to the Christian affairs,
against the Barbarians.

In France, Charles Borbon Master of both Soldiery, whom they call Earl of the
Stable, being offended with the King, fell away to the Spaniard in the year
1523. Til. Bellaius, b. 2. Parad. b. 1. chapter 6. Guic. b. 15.
Forthwith, the 1525th year entering, Francis ( Mediclan, and other Towns of the
Infubrians being received) being taken in the siege of Ticinum, Febr. 24. is
sent unto Charles into Spain; by whom the Guic. b. 16. Bella. Til. Parad.
following year, with little honest conditions he is let go, the King's
children being given for pledges. Who The same. Rome is taken.
in the year 1529, peace being established on more equal terms, they were
redeemed with twenty hundred thousand crowns of gold.

But Charles Borbon moving war against Clement the 7th, estranged from Charles
the 5th, his Armies being moved to the City, whiles he scaled the wall among
the first, being stricken through with an iron bullet, he was slain Til. Bellai.
Guic. b. 28. Parad.
in the year 1527, whose Soldiers, Rome being taken, with the Bishop, they
foully plundered it. Francis sent Lautrecius with an armed company into Italy to
free the chief Bishop. He besieging Neapolis, a plague being made common
throughout the Army, he dyed, in the year 1528.

Til. Parad. b. 2. chapter 7.
Amongst these noyses of weapons, Solomon entering Pannonia, vanquished Buda,
and overthrew king Ludovick. He after that, his horse running away, fleeing
through the Marshes, being infolded within a muddy gulf, dyed Aug. 29. in the
year 1526. Ferdinand the Emperour'd brother is chosen in his place.

In Germany the Lutheran Opinion creeping on, Christian profession was rent
into diverse heresies, while that every one was ready with tongue and boldness,
rather to be the author of his own sect, than to rest upon another. Whose
infection of poison at last passed through into the Island of Britain. History
of English Schism. Guic. 28. Til.
Henry the 8th, who, a large work being of late set forth against Luther, had
deserved the title of Defender of the Faith, in the year 1521, being taken by
the allurements of Anne an Harlot, when as he made divorce with Katherine his
wife, the Aunt of Charles the Emperor, in the year 1532. For that thing, he
being made notorious by the sentence of the Roman Bishop, he rent himself with
all his kingdom from his communion: and took unto himself the chiefdome of that
Church. Then he also punished the highest, and famous men, disagreeing from
those wicked Councels. Amongst these, Thomas Moor, Chancellor of the kingdom,
an honest and learned man; and John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, adorned with a
Purple garment by the chief Bishop, in the year 1535, he subjected to the
sword. Parad. b. 3. chapter 8. Til.
Whilst Charles the Emperor, a Navy being passed over into Africa, Barbarossa,
the famous SeaRobber being driven out, who had larely possessed Algier, and
Coletum, a most strong Castle, not far from that place, where Carthage was
situated, being subdued, he restored Muleassus into his kingdom.

Parad. b. 4. chapter 8. Til.
The same man, the Princes rebelling in Germany, whom the poison of Luther had
blown upon; and being oftentimes by repeated discourses in vain invited unto
agreement, he forced them, being overcome in a great fight, unto their duty, in
the year 1546: Bella. Com. 10. Til. The besieging of the City Sandesideria.
when as two years before he had made peace with king Francis, being thereby
brought to it, because he had not undertaken the last dispatch into France,
with any like issue as he hoped for. For while he delayed in vanquishing some
small Towns, he lessened his Army, and lost the occasion of greater matters.
His chief loss was at Sandesideria; which very small place in the passage of
French Campania, and ill fenced, he rising up against, with all his forces,
could not overcome by six months siege, nor reduced he it into his power, but
on most equal conditions, in the year 1544. In the mean time, the King of
England on the other side setting upon the French, waged war not sloathfully
on the Morinians; who the same time took Bononia, with the Ancients called
Gessoriacum, by surrender. But in the year following, which was of Christ 1545,
he likewise made peace which Francis. Moreover, in the year 1547, both those
Kings, Henry of England, and Francis of France, chanced to receive an unlike
departure of life: He being confirmed in his schism; This, all the Sacraments
being rightly received, closed his last day in the confession of the Catholic
faith, the day before the Kalends of April, the 33 year of his reign; when as
Henry had dyed the January going before.

The Learning of France owes much to this Prince. Learned and godly Men.
For by his liberal bounty, men furnished with all kind of Arts being on every
side called unto him; public Schools, with suitable allowances were appointed
at Paris in the year 1530. Til.
Unto which thing he made use of John Bellaius, who was afterward a Cardinal;
and William Budaeus, a man every way most learned, as encouragers: When as
Desiderius Erasmus of Batavia flourished at the same time; who in the year
1536, being seventy years old, is reported to have dyed; Learned men.
Budaeus in the year, 1540. And many others also left a famous name unto
posterity: as in Germany, John Eckius, and John Cochlaeus, Albert Pighius, who
contended most sharply against Luther for the Cat^olique party. In Italy,
Thomas of Vio, Cardinal Cajetan, Ambrose Catharinus of the Family of Dominick,
Divines. But in a more polished Learning were accounted excelling, Paul Jovius
Bishop of Coma, James Sadolett Bishop of Carpentoracta; Peter Bembus, Andrew
Alciate, who in the year 1548 dyed: when as in the year before, Francis
Vatablus Professor of the Hebrew Tongue, had deceased Til.
the same year wherein James Tusan, on the 13th day of March: Paul Aemilius,
Guicciard, Historians. In holiness, Hist. of Society of Jesus. Ribad.
Ignatius builder of the Society of Jesus, beautified this Age; the which in
the year 1540, Paul the third, chief Bishop, on the 27th day of Sept. commanded
to be confirmed: and The same, and of Tursellus.
Francis Xaverius a Cantabrian; who in the year 1541, the first of the
Scholars of Ignatius, going into the outmost part of the East, great things
and miracles being there done, he deserved to be called the Apostle of the
Indians.

CHAP. XII. Of those things which happened throughout the World worthy to be
remembered, from the year 1547, to 1589, under Charles the Fifth, Ferdinand,
Maximilian, Rodulph, Emperors; and Henry the second, Francis the second,
Charles the ninth, Henry Valesius, Kings of France.
Charles the 5th, Emperor, outlived Francis king of France almost 12 years: in
which, Henry the son of Francis reigned in France. In Germany, Luther, the
author of all troubles being taken away, who Cochl.
in the year 1546, had dyed a sudden death, yet civil disturbances were not
at rest. Guice. Comm. b. 2.
For they which through occasion of maintaining the German liberty, and
defending a new opinion, had brought a War on Charles, are scattered by him at
the River Albis, in the year 1547. The chief of these was Frederick Duke of
Saxony, who came under the power of the Conqueror; and being by him condemned
of his head, a little after by the entreaty of the chief Governors, he
suffered a milder punishment: And with him was taken also Philip the Landgrave.
By the punishment of these men, the tumults of Germany were a little allayed.

Annals of France of Bellefor. Matthew. Pleix. The Reign of Henry the second.
Henry, in the mean time, king of France, that he might establish the
Commonwealth, having begun with Religion, restrained the Lutherans, secretly
ranging abroad in the Countries, with most strict Edicts; neither punished he
a few of that sect, being laid hold on with the burning flame. It was the
custom then, to call men of any sort of heresy, Lutherans. And then a new
error of Calvin grew more and more through France; and they who did spread it,
had allured not a few under the color and show of a feigned integrity. The
Assembly of Trent.
Against all these at that time a Synod was had at Trent, begun from the year
1545, Paul the third being chief Bishop. But by reason of the Civil
disagreements of Christians, drawn out for a long time, at last under Pius the
4th, took its end in the year 1563.

Between these things, Henry renewed war with Charles the Emperor, in the year
1551, and Towns being taken on both sides, the French made the Mediomatricans,
and other Towns lying about them, subject to their power, in the year 1552.
Charles besieged Diviodutum the head Town of the Mediomatricans, whom they call
the Metians, with an hundred thousand armed men. But Francis of Guise defending
it, he departed thence through a despair of conquering it.

Then, being separated from the weariness and love of humane Affairs, Guicc.
Comm. b. 2.
in the year 1555, casting off from him his Kingdom and Empire at Bruxels, he
passed over that unto Philip his son; the governing of this, unto Ferdinand his
brother. Being as it were eased of this burden, he sailed into Spain, and
there enclosed himself within the Monastery of Justus: whence Guic. c. 2.
in the year 1558, Ferdinand being by the seven Men or Princes pronounced
Emperor, he ceased to live.

Hist. of Schism.
In England the Catholic faith took a little breath in the year 1553, when as
after the death of Edward, Mary the daughter of Henry the 8th, and Katherine,
began to reign. But she being married to Philip Prince of Spain in the year
1554, Reginald Pool Cardinal, her kinsman, being called unto her, he restored
the whole Island to Roman faith and fellowship. But the sixth year after, which
was of Christ 1558, Mary being dead, Elizabeth the daughter of Henry and Anne
of Bulloign, called back the former unfaithfulness.

Annals of France. The dispatch of Guise into Italy.
In the mean time, the French not sloathfully enforced the war with Philip his
son, which they had waged with Charles. Francis of Guise led an Army into
Campania and the Neapolitan kingdom in the year 1557; in which year indeed the
French were by Philip slain at the Town of Quintine in Veromandua, the 10th day
of August, when they had run together to loose the siege. In that battle many
Nobles being taken, the Townsmen yielded. But the Spaniards knew not how to
make use of a Victory. At last peace by both Kings was received with alike
desire of them both, and was tied together by a nuptial League, Elizabeth the
daughter of Henry being given to Philip in wedlock, Belles. etc.
in the year 1559, of June 29.

But, as humane affairs are, so great mirth is in a short time recompensed with
great grief, The death of Henry the second.
through the death of Henry; who at a pastime horse-exercise, received a deadly
wound in the head, and dyed July the 10th, of his age 43, of his reign 13.

Ann. of France. Francis the second.
Francis the son of Henry the second, who in the 17th year of his age was put
in his father's place, had almost an year and halfs dominion. And that space
was unquiet through the seditions of the Calvinists, whom they call Hugonots:
although there was a strict examination had concerning them; and Annas Burgius
of the order of Senators, who by the command of Henry had been cast into
bonds, was openly hanged on a gibbet, and his dead carcass burnt, December. 23,
of the 1559 year. The Hugonots being stirred by these punishments, conspire
against the King, and endeavor to draw him privily out of Ambasia, where he
then was. But the thing, by certain that gave notice, being known; Ludovick
Borbon Prince of Conde being brought under suspicion, is delivered to custody:
and while it is inquired against him concerning his life, at Orleans, wherein
men, chosen of the ranks of the whole kingdom, had come together, Francis the
King dyed of a disease in the year 1560, December. 5.

Charles the next elder brother followed him. Charles the 9th.
Under whom the fury of the Hugonotts, a greater boldness being taken, brake
forth into open rebellion. To bring these into agreement, if upon any account
it might be done, an Assembly is held at Pissiack, in the year 1561; in which,
the Protestants came into contention concerning Controversies of Faith, with
the Catholic Divines. When as nothing could go forward, the matter is brought
to arms. The Protestants were rather overcome in many battles, than tamed; of
which there were chiefly three. First, at the Town Drocas, wherein the Prince
of Conde was taken by Francis of Guise, Captain of the Catholic parties in
the year 1561. The second at Jarnacum, among the Santonians: in which, Henry
the brother of Charles leading the Catholics, the same Prince of Conde was
slain, in the year 1569. The third battle was made among the Pictonians at
Moncontorium, both the same year, and General. The stubborn enemies were slain
in great number.

Two years after they were slain in greater number at Paris, when as they were
come thither to solemnize the marriage of Henry Borbon King of Navarr, who was
then of those parties, with Margaret the sister of Charles. With the like
slaughter they were killed in many Cities of France. That was begun on the 9th
Kalends of September, of the year 1572, at Paris, on a day, holy to St.
Bartholomew; from whom afterward it found a name.

Before these things, Maximilian the second, The beginning of the year ceased to
be taken from Easter in France.
(by the death of Ferdinand the Emperor) his son took the title of the Roman
Empire in the 1564; which year brought that remarkable thing to the account of
reckoning times, because it was provided by the Edict of Charles in France, that
the beginning of years, should be reckoned in private and public Tables, from
the Kalends of January; which hitherto have been accustomed to be taken from
Easter, or the birth of Christ. Also the same year dyed John Calvin, the 27 of
May.

In Belgium (the which Margaret governed in the name of her brother Philip)
like as in the rest of France, Belgic Troubles.
all places were troubled with the weapons of Protestants; Ferdinand Duke of
Albania being sent to pacify this Province, in the year 1567, through the
rougnesse of judgment; and especially, through the punishment of two Earls of
chief nobleness, of Egmunda and Horna, provoked them of Flanders in the year
1568; In which year Charles the son of Philip King of Spain by Mary, a
Lusitanian, being committed to custody by his father, by his command is
delivered to death. The Batavians, whom they call the Hollanders, The falling
off, of the Batavians from Spain.
and the Inhabitants of the Mattiacarian Islands, they commonly call them Isles
of Zeland, first lifted up the Ensign of freedom in the year 1572, the rule of
the Spaniard being shaken off; which the Albane Duke had rendered hateful by
immoderate exactions. A little after, other Cities came unto their League, and
grew together into that Commonwealth, which also at this day is called The
W^al-publique of the Conenanted Orders, or United Provinces.

Scotland drew a pestilent heresy through the infection of her Neighbor
England. Into which, Mary Stuart the Queen, when, after the death of Francis
the second her husband, King of France, had betaken her self, and had desired
Henry Stuart Duke of Lenox for her husband in the year 1564, he being slain by
the Protestants she having slipped to Elizabeth Queen of England, out of prison,
in which James a bastard had enclosed her, by her most unjust sentence, after
20 years imprisonment, was punished with the loss of her head, in the year
1587.

Bisarre in Hist. of Cyprus
Between these tumults of Christians in Europe, the Turkish affairs grew up
with great increases. Pialis the Bashaw returning from the besseging of Malta,
which happened in the year 1565, the matter not ended, took away Chios the
Island, the year following from the Genoans. After that, Mustapha took away
Cyprus from the Venetians, in the year 1571, when as he had compassed Salamina
with a siege of eleven Months. Which City having conquered, against a
covenanted promise, he killed all the Christians; But Bragandine the Govervour
having his Nose and Ears cut short, was flayed alive. Pius the fifth, a most
holy chief Bishop, being very much moved with that unworthiness, (this man,
the fourth of his surname having finished his life in the year 1565; was the
year following chosen in his room) raised a holy war against them. Therefore
the chief bishops, the Spaniards and Venetians ships being drawn together into
one Navy, a fight is made at Naupactum in the Sea-bosome of Corinth, The fight
at Naupactum.
in which the Barbarians being overcome, two hundred Galleys with Oars, partly
taken, partly sunk, there were slain or taken Captive, to the number of 25
thousand Turks: twenty thousand Christians being restored to liberty.

The Covenanted Navy, a strife arising among the chief ones, wasted, without
any price of their labor, which might have been very great. The day of the
Victory was the seventh of October in the year 1571. Neither long, after this
and other things well carried on in his Prelateship, survived Pope Pius. For in
that year which followed, 1572. on the Calends of May he departed this life;
The seventh Month before that, a new Star was seen in Heaven, which indeed
having begun to be seen in Cassiopeia, and by degrees lessened, the 1574th year
of Christ entering, ceased to appear. That year 1573 which was between, Henry
the brother of Charles, besieged Rochell a very strong Castle among the
Santonians, possessed by the Hugonots. But when at the same time, by the voices
of the Polonian Princes, he was required to the Kingdom of that Nation, he
departed from that City. Ludovick the 13th, laying up the honor of this City,
being conquered; by whom the six and fiftieth year after, being taken, it
ceased to be a refuge of Rebellious Heretics. Henry went into Polonia in
January of the following year, 1574. and returning from thence the sixth Month
after, he hastened into France to take the Kingdom; which the death of Charles
had made void of a ruler, May the 30th, of his reign 14.

Henry 3. Ann. Franc.
Henry the Valesian the third of that name, having consulted of, or begun his
reign in the year of this Age 1574, drew it out unto fifteen years and above
two Months, all which time he spent in vexations, and dangers, being tossed
with homebred, and likewise with foreign tumults. Francis Alenconius, his
brother, a Prince, fell off from him in the year one thousand five hundred
seventy five, the Prison-keepers being cunningly deceived by the industry of
his sister Margaret, by whom he had been commanded to be kept by reason of
suspicions. With this man, Henry Borbon King of the Vascoins, and Henry of
Condy another of his fathers brothers sons, is joined with no small company of
Hugonots, the Germans being hired for aid. But by the interposing of Katherine
their mother, the brethren being reconciled among themselves, An assembly of
the Kingdom of all ranks is gathered together at Blesa, in the year one
thousand five hundred seventy and six, in which the large edicts in favor of
the Protestants, are revoked, which thing a little after stirred up greater
troubles.

The same Ann. and Hist. of Flanders.
Through Belgium in the mean time, the force of the covenanted Provinces
against the Spaniards being crushed by John of Austria; who in the year one
thousand five hundred seventy eight, had departed from the living, the height
of rule is brought on Francis Alenconius by the conspired Orders. He being
brought out of ENGLAND, unto Belgium, (whither he had sailed in hope of
finishing a marriage with Queen ELIZABETH) in the year one thousand five
hundred eighty two, and earnestly received by all; the year following he
returned into France, when as he had found their desires by whom he was called,
to be changed toward him. Alexander Farnesius Duke of Parma was present for
the Spaniards; who, the rebels being scattered and cast out by little and
little, brought back the Cities unto obedience, especially in one thousand five
hundred eighty three, and one thousand five hundred eighty four. In this latter
year, William of Aurania being slain, Maurice his son is chosen Captain by the
Covenanters, being but eighteen years of age.

Hist. of the African expedition.
In the mean time the Lusitanians received a great slaughter in Africa by the
Saracens, King Sebastian with the flower of the Nobility of Lusitania being
there slain: who in the four and twentieth year of his age, to bring back
Muleius by Arms, who was cast forth of his Kingdom, had undertaken rather a
glorious or boasting, than profitable expedition, in the year one thousand five
hundred seventy eight. Henry the Cardinal, brother of his Grandfather, now of a
great age, and crazy health, succeeded this: and he being dead, Philip King of
Spain, came to a feeble possession of the Kingdom, many things drawing toward
him, in the year 1580.

History of Schism of England,
But in ENGLAND, ELIZABETH vexed the Catholics with all kind of torments.
Among whom Edmund Campian of the society of Jesus, in the year one thousand
five hundred eighty three, was famous in an honorable confession of the Faith,
that I may let pass the rest, both for number, and constancy to be remembered.
The year that went before this, one thousand five hundred eighty two, was
famous in amending of the Church Calender, the which Gregory the thirteenth,
chief Bishop, appointed with the greatest praise and profit. Three years after,
the same man, obedience being received of three Princes of Japonia, by
Ambassadors of that Nation, he died the tenth of April, for whom Sixtus the
fifth was chosen. And in the same year, Civil storms being renewed in France,
the Catholic Princes entered into a secret league among themselves, of putting
the Protestants to flight, especially Henry of Guise, and Charles Borbon
Cardinal, the Uncle of Henry of Navarre; which conspiracy we have wont to call
[ Liga] a bond, tie or League. Sixtus, chief Bishop, a curse being pronounced
again the Henry's, the Vasconian and the Condoean, he prononnced either of them
unworthy the succession of the Kingdom, which next belonged unto them from the
year one thousand five hundred eighty four, in which Francis Alenconius had
yielded to nature's destiny, the tenth of June, at the Camp of Theodoricum.
Hence a most cruel war was largely spread over all France. Henry King of the
Navarrians had mustred the Germane soldiers. Robert of Bullein being Captain,
while he goes to meet this man, resisting him, he overthrew Annas Joieusius
meeting him with his Army at Curtasium in Aquitane, The fight at Curtrasium.
in which fight the Duke himself was slain, in the year one thousand five
hundred eighty seven. Moreover the Germans being stirred up in many battles by
Henry of Guise, at last they are put to flight at Alnetum in Belsia. The year
after, which was eighty eight, Henry of Condy dyed the fifth of March, having
left behind him an heir of the same name, who was born in the Month of
September, who afterward followed the communion of Rome, and obtains unto
this day his father's and Grandfather's Nobility, increased with the praise of
sincere piety.

That same year was lamentable through the death of Henry of Guise, and
Cardinal Ludovick his brother: who by the Blesensian assemblies of the whole
Kingdom, were, by the command of King Henry slain; chiefly for that thing
incensed, because when he had been at Paris a little before, in the Month of
May, He being suddenly moved at the coming of the Guisian Duke, had made a
sedition, and had forced the astonished King to slight for fear. Henry of Guise
on December. 23 (the day after) his brother was thrust through by the Kings Guard.

Amongst these Tempests of France, Charles Emmanuel Duke of Savoy, possesses
the dominion of Saleucia of the French Title, in a Country under the Alps. The
Spanish Navy with never so much preparation carried into England, partly by
shipwreck, partly by the Counsel and valor of Drake an English Captain, most
knowing in Sea-affairs, perished.

Lastly, the death of Katherine, Mother of Kings, made the eighty ninth year of
that age mournful, on January the fifth. But it happened much more forrowfull
by the most unworthy murder of the King himself. Who, great envy being
(through the death of the Guisians) contracted, when as the Cities here and
there fell off from him, and Paris it self the head of the kingdom rebelled
before the rest, this, Henry of Navarre being called to him for aid, he began
to besiege, and his Camps being pitched against it, he is slain with a cruel
parricide, a poisoned knife being thrust through his belly on the Calends of
August. By whose death the stock of the Valesians, fit for a kingdom, ceased.
Therefore the top of affairs turned aside unto the Family of the Borbones, as
the next in kindred. Whose beginning is derived from Robert Earl of Claromonta,
the second son of Ludovick.

The plenty of famous wits through France, and other Countries, was never
greater at any other time than these men reigning, whom I have reckoned up in
that Chapter. All which if I would number up, it will be the matter of a full
Volume. I will therefore touch at a few for the undertaken brevitie's sake.

In France, Henry the second being King, Learned Men.
John Fernelius an excellent Physician of Ambia was eminent. Andrew Tiraquell a
Lawyer, Julius Caesar Scaliger. Under CHARLES, Adrian Turneb, Rondelett, a
Physician, John Aurate, Peter Ronsard, at that time accounted the Prince of
French Poetry. James Cuiack, a Lawyer of Tolouse, Mark Anthony Muretus Lemovix,
Francis Baldwine a Lawyer, Dionysius Lambine, John Passeratius; Of whom, many
came unto the time of Henry the third. In other Provinces under Henry, about
the second, and Charles: Stanislaus Hosius, Ruard Tapper, William Lindane,
Cornelius Jansen, Andrew Vega, Lawrence Surius, a Carthusian Friar, James
Pamell, James Lainez, General overseer of the Jesuits society. Arias
Montanus, Martine Azpicuelt, of Navarre, Anthony Augustine, Bishop of Tarracon,
Peter Victor, which three last indeed departed out of life, in the year 1586.
Paul Manute, Onufrius Panuine, Charles Sigon, Jerome Cardane, and many others.
Ignatius who in the year 1556. the day before the Calends of August, died after
Francis Xavery, to whom death happened in the year 1552. December the second.
Teresia, in the year 1582. Charles Borromaeus, famous for holiness, two years
after, they increased the heavenly number.

CHAP. XIII. What things were done throughout the World, Rodulph being
Emperor, and Henry Borbon King of France.
From the year 1589 of Christ, unto 1610.
A New Family of Kings after the death of Henry the third, Annals of France.
fortunately began in the year 1589, Henry the 4th King of Navarr being taken
to the Rule of the French; against whom the covenanted-Princes, because he was
not as yet a Catholic, renewed war. The Captain of these was Charles of Medua,
the brother of Henry of Guise, slain by Henry the 3d. A little after, a
disturbance of things followed through all France. When as parties striving
with a killing hatred, and the agreement of Cities being rent asunder; as well
the neighboring Cities among themselves, as all people of the same Cities
among each other, burned with inward discords. Charles Borbon, the Kings Uncle,
who was as yet kept in custody, is saluted by a mock, the tenth King of that
name, in the year 1590. The Juriacan Fight.
Between these things, a noble victory being gotten at the Temple of Andrew,
through which the Earl of Egmonda, a Leader of the Spanishayds, dyed; and which
is wont to be called the Juriacan-battel. Henry compasses Paris with a most
straight siege, when in the mean time, Charles Borbon paid his debt to Nature at
Fontenaium: and the Duke of Parma coming out of Belgium to bring help to the
Parisians, the King, the City being left, leads an Army against him, and
makes provision to fight. But at Paris, after the loosing of the siege,
assemblies are solemnized by the covenanted-Princes in the year 1593, for the
choosing a new King. But those were made void by the ambition and disagreement
of the Princes. Henry the 4th embraced the Catholic Faith.
Henry having professed the Catholic faith, July 25, sent the Duke of Niverna
Ambassador to Rome, unto Clement chief Bishop, (who the former year had entered
the Prelateship, Jan. 30,) to request pardon. The which when the Bishop
deferred, Henry in the mean time is anointed at Autricum of the Carnutians,
with holy oil, Febr. 27, in the year 1594; because Durocottorum of Rhemes,
where that thing according to the custom was wont to be performed, was in the
power of the enemies. And then he is privily let into Paris, March 22, with
armed Soldiers. At length, in the year 1595, the Bishop being entreated by
James Perron the King's Ambassador, the sentence of condemnation being
abolished, he wholly restored the king. In which thing, Francis Tolett Cardinal
of the Jesuits Society, performed a famous work for him, although by birth a
Spaniard; and the king held himself to owe much unto him before those of that
Nation. But then, the Governor and Cities returned, strivingly, unto the
defense of Henry.

At length, in the year 1598, at Vervin, May the 2d, a peace was established
between the French and Spaniards, the chief Bishop being the author: and Philip
of Spain the fifth month from thence, dyed the 13th of September.

Hist. of Flanders.
Whilst things are so carried on in France; in Belgium against the Spaniards,
Maurice, Captain of the Covenanted Ranks, or United Provinces, without delay
moved War. Therefore through the absence of the Duke of Parma, who ever and
anon ran out against Henry into France; he took some Cities by force and
surrender. The Parmian Duke dyed at Atrebates, in the year 1592, in whose place
first of all Ernest of Austria, the brother of Rodulph the Emperor, was: Then
he being dead, Albert a Cardinal, the brother of them both was sent; unto whom
Isabel, the daughter of Philip the elder, being given in wedlock, the dominion
of those Provinces chanced by lot in the year 1598. This man setting upon
Ostend a Sea-City of Flanders, in the year 1601, The siege of Ostend.
the third year after by Ambrose Spinola of Genoa he received it on surrender;
truly not worthy the price of so many charges, and lives, which he is said to
have spent on that siege. Annals of France.
In the mean time, Elizabeth Queen of England in the year of her age 70, the 45
of her reign yielded to Nature's destiny, of Christ 1602, and had James king of
Scotland her Successor, (the which thing she had commanded by Will) born of
Mary Stuart; whom I have mentioned above to have been slain by Elizabeth,
against right. Spond. Chron. The Kingdom of Swethland usurped by Charles.
Also in Swethland there was trouble: When as Charles the Uncle of Sigismund
king of Poland had craftily taken away the kingdom committed to his trust,
Sigismund being excluded; who therefore had contended out of Poland, that he
might recover it, in the year 1599. That being taken away from the Catholic
Prince, afterward the Protestant Governors passed it over by a public
decree, on Charles partaker of the same sect, in the year 1604. Furthermore,
that Sigismund the only son of John the third, king of Swethland, who dyed in
the year 1592, in the same year was called King of the Swedes, the affairs of
Swethland being brought into good order, two years after he had returned into
Poland. In Hungary and Transylvania there were the like shakings for Religion's
sake.

Sigismund Bathor Prince of Transylvania, using rash Counsel, in the year 1598
had departed from his dominion for the sake of Maximilian of Austria; Andrew
Bathor the Cardinal, his father's brother's son bare that thing grievously; and
a little after Sigismund himself changing his mind, brake his covenants.
Thereby a War began to be waged between the Bathorians and Austrians;
Transylvania remained in the power of these: Sigismund by the interposing of
Clement chief Bishop, returned into favor with the Emperor; and at length
dyed at Prague in the year 1613. But the Protestants again, the Emperor being
despised, choose Botsicaius a Hungarian, besmeared with the errors of
Zuinglius, their Captain or Duke; who by the help of the Turks joined unto him
a great part of Dacia, and miserably vexed the Catholics; in the year 1605.
The same man the following year makes peace with the Emperor on these
conditions, That for himself, and children, if he should leave any males, he
should have Transylvania: At which time Rodulph the Emperor entered into a
twenty years truce with the Turks. But in Moscovy the same year 1606, Demetrius
the Prince, because he was of a more inclinable mind toward the Germans and
Polonians, neither disagreed from the Bishop of Rome, by his own Subjects is
most cruelly slain.

That I may bring back my Pen unto the Affairs on this side Rhene, Henry King
of France proclaimed war against Charles Duke of the Allobrogians, in the year
1600, that he might retake the dominion of Salussia, possessed by him through
the Civil Troubles of France. At last they agree between themselves; and the
Country of Salussia was repayed with the Province of the Sebusians on this
side the Alps. Two years after Charles Gontald Duke of Bironia, being hitherto,
for his warlike boldness, and undaunted courage in dangers, very acceptable
unto Henry, when as he desired greater matters, and privily conspired against
the King's life, was beheaded the day before the Kalends of August, in the year
1602.

The Jesuit-Society being nine years before by the decree of the Senate, The
Jesuite-Society restored.
commanded to depart from Paris, and other Cities, is called back again by the
kings Proclamation, the year 1603 going out. Which Proclamation, the Senate of
Paris, the 4th Nones of January, of the year following had confirmed. The same
fellowship being much desired by many Cities of the kingdom, through the most
greatest will of the most courteous King, began to open or prepare Schools in
many places.

Of desiring which, the King himself gave an example unto the people: Who
likewise at his own charge appointed Schools for that fellowship at Flexia of
the Andegavians; the Palace of the Vindocinian Dukes being ordained for them:
in which first the Seminary was brought; and with a decree, that after death
his heart should be safely laid up there. Which thing indeed being sooner done,
than was profitable for the kingdom and society, both grieved. My mind is aghast
to relate the most bitter death of the most valiant, and most courteous king
after this enclosed dominion. Whom when all desired to be immortal, the
parricide of one detestable privy murderer took away, May the 14th, of the
year 1610, the day after that he had taken care for Mary his wife to be
anointed and crowned (as the manner of Queens is) at the Town of Dionysius. She
was the daughter of Francis Medices the great Duke of Etruria; who in the year
1600, a marriage being entered into with Henry, brought forth the year following
1601, Ludovick, a Prince profitable unto France, Sept. 27.

While Henry reigned over France; what with holiness, what with learning
adorned, famously dyed, Philip Nerius a teacher of Latin Oratory, in the year
1595, March 26, who by Gregory the 14th, with four others, Isidore a Spaniard;
Ignatius, builder of the Jesuits Society; Francis Xavery, the Apostle of the
Indians, and Terefia, was registered among the number of Saints, March the 12th,
of the year 1622. Francis Tolet of the fellowpship of Jesus, Cardinal, in the
year 1596. Caesar Baronius, Cardinal, a noble writer of Church-Annals, or
Yearly Accounts, in the year 1607, the day before the Kal. July. Justus Lipsius
in the year 1606, dies at Lovane, March 23. Benedict Arias Montanus a
Spaniard. Abraham Ortelius, Thomas Stapleton, three in the same year 1598. Of
the Protestants, Theodore Beza, 1605, October the 25th, of his age 87. Joseph
Scaliger dyed in the year 1590, January the 20th, of his age 69.

CHAP. XIV. Of those things which happened worthy to be known, Rodulph,
Matthias, and Ferdinand, being Emperors: and Lewis, King of France.
From the year of Christ 1610, to 1632.
Ex hist. Ludovici XIII and annuis Comm^nt.
After the death of Henry the Great, to be by all kinds of people bewailed,
things were more quiet in France under Lewis a child, than the hope of all men
supposed: whose guardianship, with the ordering of the kingdom is straightway
granted to his Mother. Some of the chief ones made a beginning of tumulting in
the year 1614; who hated the too much power of the Florentine Concinus.

Between these stirs, Lewis went into Aquitane in the year 1616, that he might
take Anne, the daughter of the Catholic King, Philip the second, (whom he
before, by an Ambassador, had espoused to himself,) unto a lawful wedlock: and
at the same time with the like good success, he took his sister Elizabeth to
be joined with Philip the son of Philip the third. So two most mighty Princes,
with the greatest profit unto Christian affairs, more strictly bound the
promise of peace between themselves by this nuptial exchange. Homebred
agreement the year following, doubled the public merriment; Henry Prince of
Conde, and the other Covenanters being reconciled with Lewis. But suddenly, new
suspicions arising, on the very Kal. September. of the year 1616, the Condian is
sent to prison.

The Princes, Now strius.
who the former year had made a fellowship with him, depart from the Court.
Against these, a war by the King's authority is proclaimed; which in the
following year 1617 was ended. Concinus being in the very entrance of the
King's Palace thrust through by the King's guard, on the 14th day of April,
because being commanded by the King for certain cases to be laid hold of, he
had tried to defend himself by weapons. His death, a peace of the
covenanted-Governours, and a public quietness, followed.

The Queen Mother, until these Troubles were appeased, being in the mean time
entreated to go apart, betook her self to Blesa. From which time King Lewis
began to carry on the Commonwealth by his own authority. The beginning of
which to be managed, that he might take from Religion, in the month September,
he by a public Law decreed, That in the Province of Benearn, which is situate
at the Pyrenaean bottoms, the Catholic worship should be every where
restored; and also that the Protestants should restore the goods taken away
about 50 years before, unto the Churches.

Without France, The siege of the Juliacans.
these things happened worthy of memory almost at these same years. Juliack a
Town of Lower-Germany was received upon surrender by Maurice of Nassaw, being
helped by the French ayds, September entering of the year 1610; concerning whose
possession, some Princes strove amongst themselves; after that John William the
Duke dyed without offspring.

Philip King of Spain having gotten the most strong Tower of Alarach, The Moors
driven out of Spain.
built by the Moors at the Gaditane Sea, the keepers of it being corrupted by
reward, commanded all the Moors to depart out of Spain. They are said to have
gone out to the number of ninety thousand heads, in the year 1610, and some
years following after that.

Sigismund King of Poland, takes Smolenskum, a most fortified Town of
Roxolania or Muscovy, after two years besieging, in the year 1611. in the
Month of July. Whose son Uladislaus they choose Duke of Mosch, although
afterward their Counsel or purpose being changed, they desire another: whereby
a cruel war, after that, arose.

CHARLES, Charles, King of Suevia, being dead, Gustave succeeds.
King of Swethland, dying through grief of an overthrow, brought on him by the
Danish King, in the Month November, in the year 1611. Obtained his son
Gustavus successor of the Kingdom; others in vain desiring to bring it over
unto Sigismond King of Poland.

But the 1612th year entering, the twentieth of January, Rodulph the Emperor,
died, the thirty sixth year from the departure of Maximilian his father. Whom
his brother Matthias succeeded the same year.

The Venetians, after these things, being troubled by the inroads of the
Croatians, encounter with arms, Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, the son of
Charles Archduke, who was the brother of Maximilian the second, Emperor, in
the year one thousand six hundred and fifteen. Which War being waged on both
sides, through mutual losses for three years space, the 1618 year entering, was
laid down.

A greater war arose in Italy between the Mantuan and Subaudian Dukes, in the
year 1613, over the Principality of Montferra, when as Francis of Mantua dying
without issue Male, Ferdinand his brother, of a Cardinal was chosen in his
room. Who being defended by the Spaniards helps against Charles Philibert Duke
of Subaudia, he strove some years, and Arms being laid down, and ever and anon
taken up again. For the third year after, that is, of Christ 1615. peace being
composed, in the year following the war was restored. Moreover Vercella was
taken in the year 1617, the 25th of July, by the Vice-king of Mediolum; and a
year almost turning about, by the endeavor of the most Christian King, was
restored in the year 1618, in the Month of June, and so there was made an end
of warring.

In Dacia, Gabriell Bathor, being put to flight by Bethleem Gabor, furnished
with the aids of the Turks, most wretchedly perished. Gabor defended the
Province possessed, against the Emperor, after that, by weapons and treachery.

A far most cruel War of all, was stirred up in Germany, The German War in
Bohemia.
in the year 1618; in which, Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, and King of
Bohemia, also the kingdom of Hungary he received on certain conditions from
Matthias the Emperor. But then at Prague, the Protestants revolted from him,
the Earl of Turra stirring them up: who, the Magistrates being killed, and the
Citizens compelled to swear in their words, he provoked all Bohemia, and the
neighboring Provinces unto arms. Unto this man, Ernest Mansfield a bastard,
joined himself. Between these things, Matthias dies in the year 1619, of March
the 20th, the 62 year of his age turning, of his Empire 6 years, and nine
months; in whose place Ferdinand king of Bohemia and Hungary, being chosen,
not slowly prosecuteth the war against the seditious, Bucquoius and Dampeter
most valiant Captains, being opposed against them. But the Protestants make
Frederick Elector Palatine, The Palatinate is made King of Bohemia.
the son in law of the King of England, king of Bohemia: and he in the same
year 1619, on the month November, with his wife, a woman covetous of a
kingdom, received the Crown after the solemn custom at Prague. But truly so
great successes had not a lasting gladness. For in that year which followed,
1620, the 8th day of November, under the very walls of Prague, a memorable
battle being made, by Bucquoius Captain of the Emperor's Army, and the
Bavarian, the Palatine is scattered; and being put to flight, He is overcome
and put to flight.
and banished, the year following, he flees over unto the Batavians or Dutch:
where being private from that time with his wife and children, he led his life.
Bohemia by and by with the other Provinces returned unto the obedience of the
Emperor; who restored every where the Catholic profession; and the fathers of
the Jesuit-Society, by name, driven away from Prague, at the beginning of the
troubles; the same year he most honorably brought back. And unto this very
fellowship, to the immortal praise of King Lewis toward it, it was granted to
open Schools at Paris, in the same year wherein Prague banished it, 1618.

Which was the sixth from a new company of Clerks framed at the same Lutetia or
Paris, under the name of the Oratory. which being gathered together by Peter
Berull a Parisian Elder, in the year 1612. Paul the fifth, the year following,
by an Episcopal Proclamation, decreed to be confirmed. Moreover Urbane the
eighth registered the author of this famous instruction, eminent in the like
praise of learning and Godliness, into the order of the most eminent
Cardinals in the year 1627. Who, two years after being increased with great
deserts, and famous in a great off spring, died the sixth Nones of October in
the year 1629. of his age the 55th.

At the same time, The War in the Tellinian Valley.
in which it was warred the Palatinate, (that was the year 1620) in the Valley
of Telline: which at the command of the Rhetians or Canes, whom they call the
Grisons; Civil troubles flamed. The Catholics being provoked with the
injuries of the Protestants, hidden Counsels being entered into among
themselves, oppress or come upon all the Calvinists: and the aid of Duke
Ferias Governor of Mediolum being entreated, they get leave of him of enjoying
Castles in some fit places. Moreover the Rhetian Nation being all troubled, and
with them the Venetians: who believed these enclosures of Italy to be held by a
continual possession by the Spaniards, was in no case making for their
affairs, both defiring aid from him. Ludovick King of France was not wanting,
and first of all, in the year 1620, he obtained by Ambassadors from the King
of Spain, that he should promise to restore all things wholly, while they
consulted of the Catholic affairs. Which caution being approved by the most
Christian King, when as nevertheless the matter wanted an issue, it is brought
to weapons. Furthormore those exercisd the French and Spaniards, and the
confederates of both, with a diverse success, for some years.

In the mean time a Civil war was renewed throughout France, A Civil War in
France.
some Governors conspiring against Lewine, whose power had increased even unto
envy; whom the secret flight of the Queen Mother, and her passage into the
Castle of Andegavia, had enforced to attempt new matters.

In which war, Ludovick making use of the Faithful endeavor and counsel of
Henry Prince of Condy, who in the year one thousand six hundred and nineteen,
in the Month of October, had been freed from Prison, in a short time he
restored rest and quietness to the French, in one fight at Caesar's bridge, the
Armies of the adversaries being slain. Which conquest made the Queen Mother,
and others of those parties, friends with the King in the year 1620.

The same year, The Expedition of Benearn.
an expedition for Benearn followed: which being finished with incredible
speediness, brought a fruit more welcome then could be expected. For the
stubborn enemies being affrighted at the sudden coming, the King found there
all things inclinable to obedience.

Therefore, holy houses, and the goods of the Catholics were delivered into
his power, that whole country lying under the Pyrenaean Hills, whose right it
was to be separated from the rest of the Kingdom, from that time foreward he
determined by his decree that it should be made tributary to the same, the
which at last in the year 1624, was established. But three years before, of
Christ 1621, very many Towns of the Santons, and Novempopulonia, and the
neighbor Provinces, which are to the number of sixty; were by force or fear,
with a very great slaughter of the stubborn enemies, subdued. The siege of
Mount Albane
By little and little the course of Victories came on, to Mount Albane. Which
City the King setting upon at an unseasonable time of the year, he left off to
besiege: many, moreover, of the chief Nobility being lost, and, which happened
most to be lamented, Henry Duke of Medua, himself, Lieutenant of Aquitane.
Neither long time after, Lewine Master of both Soldiery deceased of a disease,
the fifteenth of December, in the year 1621. Which same year was the last to
Paul the fifth, chief Bishop. For he departed the eight and twentieth day of
January, of his age the sixty ninth; of his Prelate-ship the sixteenth. The
Month following, and the ninth day thereof, Alexander Ludovisius of Bononia,
is chosen, who would be called Gregory the fifteenth. And this man, about two
years and five Months being finished, in the year 1623, the eighth of July,
gave place to Maphaeus Barberine, who under the name of Urbane the eighth from
a. d. 7. Ides of Aug. of the same year 1623, unto this time is chief over the
Church, and as yet makes it more famous by virtues, worthy of so great
chief-dome, joined with excellent Learning.

The death of Philip the third, king of Spain followed the death of Paul the
fifth, the third Month after, which fell out the day before the Calends of
April, in the year 1621, of his age forty three, of his reign twenty three.
But in the Month of September, the fifteenth Calends of October, Robert
Bellarmine of the Jesuits society, S. R. E. Cardinal, flew up into Heaven,
whither (the same which had brought him unto the Purple garment) integrity of
life the companion of singular Learning, carried him.

About the same time also Breda a Town of Brabant, The fiege of Breda.
Spinola Captain of the Spanish Army, besieged; and in Aquitane, and the
Province of Narbony, Rohanne, and Subizius, Protestant brethren, renewed a war
against king Ludovick. Breda in the year 1624. in the Month of August, is
begun to be Besieged: on June the thirteenth, of the following year, for want
of Provision, made a surrender. With the Rebellious French it was fought by
land, and Sea, and the same being every where overcome: but in this latter, in
which Gauisius was Captain, the Navy of the Rochellanian Robbers being tamed,
the Island Rhee was reduced into the power of Ludovick the King.

Which things while they are carried on in France, in Italy, The Genoan War.
Lediguer master of the Horse being Captain of the French Army for the Prince
of Subaudia, fought against the Genoans and Spaniards, in whose Protection
those are. But Mansfield had troubled Germany with often inroads and robberies,
a tumultuous company of robbers being gathered together. Who being put to
flight by Tilly a most valiant commander, he flees unto Gabor the
Transilvanian; and from thence striving to go to the Venetians, with an
incredible profit and joy of the Catholic parties, he perished, in the year
1626. The Rochellers unmindfull of their sworn faith a little before, and of
peace the same year received, call forth privily the English against the King.
Who in the year 1627. being brought unto the Isle Rhea, or of Rhee, with a Navy
of an hundred and twenty Ships, Buckingham being Captain, they possess the
whole, except the Castle; over which Toirase was governor, a stout man, and
greatly skillful in warlike affairs. This man, although the works were new, nor
as yet finished, shifted off the sharp and continual forces of the enemies,
until now laboring with the want of all things, and being wearied, the
industry of Ludovick the King came to help them. For this King using Ricelieu
the Cardinal, The Isle of Ree taken away from the English.
a man flourishing in all praise, his helper and Minister; he sent over quickly
Schonberg a famous Captain, indeed with no great number of soldiers unto the
succor of the besieged; who, Toirase being joined to him, drove out the
English, being slain and chased out of all the Island.

Nothing seemed to be done by so many wars and Victories, as long as that
despiser Rochell, The siege of Rochell.
impatient of Kings, and all Rule, lifted up another Kingdom as it were in the
middle of a Kingdom. Which City being situate at the chinks, or overflowed
places of the Ocean, it was fenced both with the nature of the place, and also
with the hand, and Art, that it was commonly accounted invincible. This most
sure City, Ludovick attempteth with a great courage and hope, which he had
taken from the help of God, being made trial of in so many affairs, in the
year 1627. And the same Ricelieu the Cardinal, being partaker of the
Counsels, by works and Fortifications, and, among other things, huge Bulwarks
unmovable, being finished by the Ocean side, he so held it shut up a whole
year, that the Citizens being killed up with hunger, and having suffered all
extremity, yielded themselves unto the King. Therefore it, the walls being cast
to the ground, was reduced almost into the form of a Village for a terror and
example to others, that the invincible might rather desire the defense and
clemency of their Prince, then to attempt weapons. Rochell was taken in the
eight and twentieth year of that age, October the 30th. After that, the Rebels
returned wholly unto their duty, neither saw the year following, any thing of
an enemy left in France.

Ludovick being busied about Rochell, and the English: the Duke of Subaudia had
stirred up the weapons of the Spaniards against Mantuan: with whom he had an
old strife about the possession of Mountferrat. And also some Cities being
already taken: The besieging of Casall.
and Casal (that is, a Town, as least ancient, so of that Province, as the
report is, the most fortified of all Italy) Collaltus had besieged. Ludovick,
things being appeased in Italy, led his Army, being Conqueror, thither through
the Alps, and the close places of the Mountains, being broken through, which
also nature through the roughness of places, and most strong Garrisons of the
enemy had made unpassible, he overcame Segusio, a City under the Alps, at the
first onset, the three and twentieth of March, in the year 1629. The Spaniards
having departed from Cassal, left it free for a military supply, and
Provisions, our soldiers carrying on their Journey within the Town. After the
departure of the French, they by and by returned unto the siege that was broken
off for a time, with a greater provision then before.

About the same time, Collaltus Captain of the Emperors Army, very much wasted
the land of Mantua: and Spinola chief Governor for the Spaniards from the
Catholic king, a man of great fame for warfare, besieged Casall with all his
Forces. But the unconquered virtue of Toirase, who held that Town in Garrison,
made all their endeavors void. At last, the French flee to Ricelieu the
Cardinal, ordering the War with the greatest power, the second time beyond
the Alps to bring help.

There, many Towns being conquered, while they extend their journey, stopped
with many difficulties; Mantua, through the Plague received within the walls by
the Townsmen, and defendants, being wasted, is suddenly invaded by the
Germans, on the Month of July, in the year one thousand six hundred and thirty.

The French being nothing affrighted with the misery of Parties, three Armies
being in vain opposed, the victories repeated over the enemies, they through
valor brought forth thither a passage for themselves whither they had
intended. Then under the very sight of Casal, and the Spaniard pitching his
Tents, when they were in readiness to join battle, Mazarine running between,
the matter is brought unto conditions of peace without arms, and blood; by the
highest providence toward both, yea toward all Christians: lest either through
a great slaughter, victory should be manifest to either; or might yield to
neither, a mutual slaughter being made. This was the end of the Italian
Expedition, November going out, of the year 1630. When as now the labor of the
siege bringing a continued disease, a disease brought a departure of life to
Spinola.

After these things the name of Lewis was famous throughout all people; not
more by the report of weapons, than equity, and faithfulness toward his
fellows, whose safety he held more beloved, than his own private profits and
wealth. Also the excelling force and virtue of mind of the most eminent
Cardinal Riceliou was for admiration; and in managing great affairs, a like
industry of a diligent Wit.

In the year 1631, in the month of April, both Ambassadors agreeing, a peace
was established between the Emperor and Duke of Mantua, on equal terms; and
also the possession of Mantua was confirmed to this man by the Emperor's
decree, and of Montferrat, the second day of July. Thus all things being
appeased, the ancient rest and quietness returned unto Italy.

French and German stirrs followed Italian peace. The Offense of the
Queen Mother and King's Brother.
In France, the Queen Mother, a grudge being taken up against Cardinal
Ricelieu, she openly renounced her friendship from him; neither that she might
receive him into favor, could she be entreated by any of his, or even by the
entreaties of King Lewis her son himself. Gasto the King's brother in a short
time after followed his Mother's example, and his mind being estranged from the
same Cardinal, he departed unto Orleance, which City belonged to his Title.
Straightway the King, with all the Court, and likewise the Queen Mother, go to
Compendium: Who being there left, when as the king a little after had gone
away, she privily escaped out of that Town into Flanders, July the 19th day;
The Duke of Orleance now going aside from Orleance, from the month of March,
into Burgundy, thence fleeing from the King, following after him, he also
departed into Lorrain, and lastly into Flanders.

Then a tumultuous company being gathered together, A Civil War, wherein the
Kings Brother is overcome.
he breaking out into France; the following year he set upon Narbone in France,
which they name Occitania. The Duke Montemorence was chief over this Province;
who falling away unto him in the month of July, brought with him a great
increase of Forces, and courage; That now the Army of the king, with Schonberg
the Captain, assailing on him, he durst to resist, and encounter with it.
Therefore on the very Kalends of September, of the year 1632, they met in a
very short, but bloody battle at Castlenaudar; in which, the Rebels were
overcome, and not a few chief men were slain. Montemorence, some wounds being
received, came under the power of his enemies; and being brought to Tolouse, a
Sentence of his head being passed on him by the Senate, he submitted his neck
to the sword or hatchet the third Kal. Of November. Which highest chance not
only with a steadfast, but also godlily and religiously, as became a
Christian, with a ready mind he underwent.

In Germany, Troubles of Germany, and the King of Sweden's Expedition.
Gustave king of Swethland, who from the year 1630, going out of his own
borders, had cast forth the Emperor's Armies out of Pomerania, and other
neighboring Provinces; in the following year 1631, he moved forward into more
inward places, and, Towns without number being vanquished, he largely spread
about his terror. Tillie, the Captain of the Catholic party being in vain
opposed against him: who also himself, from the year 1630, having in the mean
time set upon Magdeburg, brake it through with the greatest force, and burned it
the ninth of May, of the following year 1631. But the Lutheran Princes, an
Assembly being had at Lipsia, they conspire against the Emperor; and their
forces being joined with Gustave, they take up war. Against these Tillie is
opposed; who in the month of September, another Captain, Papenheim, being
joined with him, besieges Lipsia, and compels it to yield. A little after,
the Covenanted-Princes, are present, and especially the king of Swethland, with
the Duke of Saxony.

There is made at Lipsia, between these and the Tillians, The Fight at Eipsia.
a most sharp battle; whose issue fell out lamentably unlucky to the Catholic
party. Tillie being overcome, withdrew himself by flight, and for the most part
ten thousand being lost. Lipsia was retaken by the Saxons into possession. This
Victory laid open to the king of Swethland that which was left of Germany, none
hindering him. Herbipolis being taken, he subdued all Francony, and also
Moguntia, and others: From that time forward, he passed through other Provinces
in manner of an out-breaking flame, or steep-running River: The Saxon in the
mean time invading Bohemia, afterward took Prague, the head City of that
kingdom, by surrender. Some of the Princes of Germany, that they might turn
away the storm invading them, implored the help of Lewis King of France, whom
he by his weapons and authority defended safe from wrong; especially the
Archbishop of Trevirs: the which in the year following 1632, was perfected.

This very year the Swedish King kept the same course of victories without
offense or hindrance: and wandering through Suevia, Alsatia, and Bavaria, he made
many Towns to come under his power. The River Danubius being passed over, he
scattered the Bavarians with their Captain Tillie, who a little after deceased
of a wound, at Ingolstade, now of a great age, and excelling in warlike glory;
but more famous in Religion, and the worship of Catholic Piety. Vualstine
Lieutenant of the highest Catholic affairs, recovereth Prague against the
Saxon and Swede. And then after many tossings, at length at Lutzen, which Town
is not far distant from Lipsia, The last Fight and death of the King of Sweden.
Valstein and Papenheim fight for two days space against the King of
Swethland: In which battle Gustave the king of Sweden dyed. Nor long after,
Papenbeim. That was done in the month November. The Swedes, their king being
slain, renewed the War nothing more slowly; the which they prosecute unto this
day.

The same year 1632, made Uladislaus king of Poland; who into the place of his
father, by solemn Assemblies of the kingdom was chosen, according to the
custom, in the month October; when as the nine and twentieth day before of
April, Sigismund had dyed, of his reign the 45.

Moreover, this year was memorable for the burning flame of the Mountain
Vesuvium; the which being renewed on the month of February, brought a very
large wasting, but a great affrightment unto the Neapolitans: who, a solemn
supplication being for that thing proclaimed, by the which, the head of
Januarius the Patron or Defender of the City was carried about, they turned
away the destruction hanging over their heads.

The End of the Ninth Book.
AN APPENDIX TO The foregoing Account. OR, A Summary RELATION of what Memorable
things happened from the year 1632, unto 1656.
The Tenth Book.
CHAP. I. Of what things fell out in Germany, England, and other places worthy
to be known.
From the year 1632, unto 1638.
AFter the death of Gustave King of Swethland, who (by the chance of War) was
on the 6th of September 1632, slain in a set-battle, the Bavarian Duke being
Commander in chief of the Emperor's Party: although he was constrained to quit
the field in the same fight; Oxenstern Chancellor of Sweden undertook the
government of the War; and in the year 1633, committed sixteen thousand
Soldiers into the hands of Lanaeburgick and Kniphuse, to go into Westphalia;
sends away Vinarien into Francony, and he himself goes unto the Duke of Saxony
to consult together with him. And, in the mean time, Altringe subdueth some
Cities of Swethland: and Horn goes thither, where 1600 Contrymen were
killed at Sundgove, and 130 at Brisgove hanged upon a gibbet. In the mean time,
as a slender reward of the cruelty, Hagene is destroyed, by laying in wait; and
the Count of Rhene strives against the Lorrain Duke possessing the Cottages of
Alsatia and Dachsteyn; and being increased in his Forces by Vinarien, he drives
away the Bavarian, by punishing them of the Emperor's party, into Bavaria,
when he had returned from Rain unto his Lord the Emperor. But the City of
Augusta is by a changeable condition, kent sometimes by the Swedes, sometimes
by the Conquerours. And Craze being more than ordinarily displeased with
Fridland, unto whom, the Emperor in the year before, 1632, had committed the
chief command of warfare, one Farenstsbek assisting him, was to deliver up
Ingolstade on the 4th of May.

And indeed the good success of War was at this time almost every where
contrary unto the Emperor's forces. So that Vinarien, having vanquished
Ratisbone, turns away the warlike weapons from Pomerania, and takes Chame and
Straubinge into his possession. So, by Enhuse, in a hasty and disorderly
Combat, in Alsatia, there are 400 of the Emperor's slain, and as many taken:
And Fridland himself fights with the like loss at Olave in Silesia; but at
Oppele he lost no more than three hundred: And which is more than ordinary
remarkable, Dellone in Swethland brings forth but an hundred and fifty, which
was on the 4th of June 1633, and puts 600 of the Emperor's Soldiers to flight.

In the same year the Protestants of Germany hold an Assembly at Hailbrunne,
where they renew their League and Covenant with the Swedes, and they appoint a
giver of instructions, and frame a Council. All religious persons so called,
that refused to take an oath from the Swedes, were commanded to depart. And
afterward they meet together at Frankford; where the sailing into both the
Indies that had been begun six years before, was enlarged with the privileges
of Gustaveburg. Yet the Emperians take this year Frankford into possession; And
the Duke of Saxony endeavored to recover it, but all in vain.

But in the year 1634, both parties seem to bestirr themselves, although not
with a like success; for the Swedes overcome Alsatia, and likewise the
Bavarians that were about to help Wiltzburg. Also the conspiracy of Selestade
was discovered to the Swedes. And besieging Rheinsfield, they take it, putting
the Emperians to the sword. Philippiburg is yielded to Smidberger on Janu. the
10th; which place, the French did much desire for himself. In the mean time,
Horn is busied in Silesia, where the Emperor's forces take Wartenberg by
surrender, but Namslave by force. But Dranderf is beaten. Altenburgick moves
into Alsatia, and vanquisheth Budissine, Gorlete, and having the upper hand of
Arnheim, he slew 4000, and took 1400; also Clogove, and other places, whose
religious rites the Emperians do change. Frankford at Viader comes into the
power of the Swedes. Crossa, to Bannier being furnished with twenty thousand
Soldiers. Thereupon there is peace insisted upon at Licomerice, but in vain.
Hirsberg is forsaken and burned by the Emperians in the month of July of this
year. But the Swedes having the upper hand throughout Swethland and the upper
Palatinate, Dubabell makes the Bavarians flee out of Chame. In the same year
also, Vinarien besieges Forcheym; and the Duke of Saxony, Sittave. Horn also
takes Aicha; also Bannier breaks into Bohemia, though to no purpose, while
both Vinarien and Horn hasten to secure Ratisbone. And about this time, the
highest power of managing the War, was committed unto the Elector of Saxony
throughout both his Circles. Steinford being subdued, Boninghause is put to
flight, while as in the mean time, Gustave, kinsman of King Gustavus is made a
powerful Lord of Osnabrugense, and there brings in the religious rites of the
Protestants. Then also the lower Saxony held an Assembly at Halberstade, and
decrees to take up arms in their own defense. Then the Swedes crave aid of the
Hollander, and so get the Masterdome. And among other tossings, Luna, (a Town
in Hetruria, so called from its marble Mines, shining like the Moon) was four
times taken.

Moreover, the 14th of February, this year proved fatal unto Fridland the
Emperor's Ambassador, and Captain of all his Soldiery, who (either
undergoing envy, or through the malignity of a tongue at will, or too bitter
and sharp a command, or through ambition of others, or through suspicion of the
Protestant Religion, not sincerely renounced) is, as it were, smelled out, and
Galasse put into his place, being about to pass over to the Protestant
parties, is thrust through at Eger; in which day also Schafgotsch is laid hold
of in Silesia, and in the year following beheaded, and Lawenburgick on the 16
day, who was ignorant of matters. But hereupon it came to pass, that the
Emperor's warfare, until that his son the King of Hungary, the Captains
requiring it, together with pay for the Soldiers, was put upon the Army, was
but in an unsettled and floating condition.

So that the Count of Rhene in the beginning of March following kills 1500 of
the Emperor's Soldiers in Alsatia: takes Tanna Bellaford, and other places;
and some surrender of their own accord: In the same Alsatia, the Argentines
discovered Treason. And they burn the poysonsome person (if he were so) who did
accuse the Jesuits as the beginners of it in the year 1633. While the Swedes
vanquish the Fort of Hunning, Horn as a Conqueror, subdueth Bibrack,
Campodune, and other places.

The King of Hungary, General of the Emperians, not idle, besieges Ratisbone,
having stopped up the passages, whom Vinarien that was no body being turned
from his Arms, vainly endeayoureth to break through: So that the City was
yielded on the 16th of July following, unto him, and Kaufber a little after,
whereby the Saxon is inclined unto a peacemaking.

Vinarien was the author, that Philippiburg, which but lately was stoutly
denied, is delivered up to the French, whither he himself (having gathered
together a scattered Soldiery at the lower Maenus, his other affairs being
lost) came for help. The Spanish Orator complaining to the Bishop of Rome
concerning that surrender, having, it seems, an evil eye, as thinking it too
good for him; received this answer, We must not envy a Brother, because a
Stranger held it. Which words employed a toleration of envy, even to a brother,
in some cases. How far then was he from loving his enemies? Heidelberg is now
yielded to the Emperor.

The Infanta of Spain at that time brought 6500 foot, and 1500 horse, at the
entreaty of the King of Hungary; and, besides many Towns taken through the
Lower-Francony, got a victory at Nordlingon the 26 and 27 of August.

Oxienstern now seeing the fortunous hazard of the Swedes to be too largely
spread, has a meeting of the Protestants at Frankford in the month of March,
and another at Worms, about the middle of November, where the Duke of Neoburg
desires to be excused as not to meddle with either party; and it is decreed
amongst them, that Furstenberger and Geleene go unto Philip, (who in the
Juliacan Mountain, and Berganian Field, mustred an Army) to desire ayds from
the Hollanders: The while Herbipolis is made subject unto the Emperians, the
City of Argentine refuses the protection of the French, whether it were
through fear of the one, or mistrust of the other's fidelity; The Landgrave of
Hassia is put to flight at Hirsfield; The Ligistians go into Wetterave, where
they obtain Braunefelse, who yielded themselves willingly; but two Towns,
Fridberg and Buding, they take by force.

But in Belgium also, or the Low Countries, there were no small preparations of
War made, in the year 1632. For the Hollanders on the 21 of May take Venloe,
and afterward nearer places into their possession. They also confirm the
continuance of the siege of Trajectum, at Mose, and stop 140 Wagons of
provision of victual of the enemies. They give Papenheim the Emperian
Commander, (who was slain, not long after Gustave) a valiant repulse, and after
the surrender of the said Trajectum, they subdue also Limburg and other places.
Also the 15th of October following, Orfoy; when as in order to the work,
William of Nassaw had from the beginning seized upon some Munitions between
Antwerp and Bergubzome.

Moreover, the year after, which is 1633, while they contend with the Spaniard,
Auriack or Orange besieges Rheinberck, and takes it, the Spaniards fortifying
the Island of St. Stephen so called; but in the mean time, William of Nassaw in
lieu of it snatcheth away quickly Stellate and Philippine.

This year also the Hollanders make large progresses into the West Indies, and
suffer a most grievous overflowing of waters; but then again to make up their
losses, they snatch two ships out of the East, (were they not our Merchantmen
coming home? who, it is more than probable, were thrown overboard by them for
the pelss sake) with sixty Tuns of gold.

Also in the year 1644, these Hollanders they vanquished the Fortress of great
Rivum in the other Western World: They receive three ships from Guiny, bringing
1044 pound weight of gold, they possess the head of Augustine; they chastize
the Pirates of Memphis: They bring the Island called Paccuvia, Volbecce being
their Leader, under the yoke. Then they receive seven ships out of the
East Indies, they possess the Island where there is the best Indian salt, they
quickly take Paraibas, a most famous place. And all this, to add to a worldly
treasure.

In Turkey, the Sultan ( Amurath, or Emperor of the Turks), Uzref the Bashaw
being removed from his voyage, joins in a Truce with the Persian, although
young, he coming to reign after his Grandfather, and then brings back his torn
Armies, in the year 1632, in which year also his American Navy is cast away, to
the number of ten ships, with the High Admiral and Ammirall besides, he lost
1500 Seamen of War. Also the unlimited power of this Tyrannical Monarch,
hanged with a Halter a Merchant of the Venetians, in the year 1634. who had (as
it were) defiled his Concubines Palace with a Prospective-Glasse; as also the
Muphti, that is, the High Priest, which was a very rare thing, he being
accounted even his corrivall, giving no more honor to him then he to him: but
his greatest brother slipped into Italy, and is made a young beginner in the
Bishop of Romes devotions, although perhaps little the better for it, and
scarle worth the pains of his travel; for what difference is there (as to
commend to God) between a Titular Christian, and a professed Mohammedan?

In Poland at assemblies held for diverse matters in 1632, as beating back the
Muscovite, restraining the Tartars, making a lasting peace with the Swede, for
choosing a new king in the room of Sigismun^ (who dying April the 9th, 1632, was
buried the 14th of Jan. 1643. Uladislaus who was chosen the year before, being
crowned the 27 day of the same January 1643) the Emperor, desiring aid from
them, was denied it, the States not consenting thereto. So good is a curb to
unlimited power, that by the will and pleasure of one, a multitude may not
suffer. And the Emperor the year following (being it seems put to his
shifts) beheadeth eleven Captains, and hangs as many, because of a battle that
they had lately deserted.

While these ruins were working abroad, some Great ones in England, who were
then in peace, not foreseeing trouble, attempted (...) matters as emblems of
prosperity, amongst which, was the repair of Paul's Cathedral in London, which
began in 1632, the chief author being William Laud then Bishop of London:
wherein not only vaste sums of money were exhausted; but also, through the
toylsomnesse of the work, many poor men exhausted their strength in drawing up
huge stones from the water side like horses: But before this magnificent Temple
could be finished, the saying of Ecclesiastes overtook it, There is a time to
build, and a time to pluck down.

In this year also on the eleventh of February, happened that lamentable and
grievous fire on London Bridge, which (by the judgment of many) had not the
hand of God been seen in the sudden turning of the wind, (which before drove it
toward the City) when it came to the bottom of Fish-Street-hill, would have
proved the desolation of London, there being so much fit fuel in the adjacent
street for the fire to feed upon. As London then escaped agreat, and since,
nosmall dangers; so let her take heed of abusing too too much her breathing
time, and day of Visitation: For though either Places, Person, or Persons, have
been once and again delivered, yet they cannot sing a perpetual safety unto
themselves. For we see that Charles the late King, (who when he went, in his
Princedome, with Buckingham in to Spain, being in no small danger, is said to
have kissed English ground as a token of his safe arrival); and afterward in
the ninth year of his reign 1633. (in which year he went into Scotland and was
Crowned) hardly escaped the hands of one Arthur a Dominican Friar of Spain,
from being murdered by him) after many tossings and tumblings, hopes, and
fears) went headless to his Grave, not dying a natural death.

Also in the year 1632, Lord Wentworth, afterward Earl of Strafford, was made
Deputy of Ireland, and the year following, 1633, September the nineteenth,
William Laud carried up from the London-See, to the Archbishopric of
Canterbury. But if the one had been then made but Justice of the Peace, (as he
afterward said, when too late, he should desire to be no higher) and the other
but Parson of some private Parish; whatever weight the less might have layen
on their Souls, yet in regard of their bodies, an untimely death might have
been prevented; for that of the Historian is many times verified. Ubi maxima
fortuna, ibi minima licencia; That is, Where there is the greatest Worldly
fortune, there is the least liberty.

The year following 1634. (besides diverse Pattents and Monopolies of
Commodities in the Land, that had been granted to diverse particular men under
the Kings broad Seal) Noy Attorney General to the said King of England, set on
foot the Tax of Shipmoney, thinking thereby to do his master good service; but
the event proved quite contrary, for it being an unpresidented thing; Esquire
Hambden, esteemed by many a good Common-Wealthsman, refused to pay, and
maintained a suit against the King, bringing the Case to Trial in Westminster
Hall, whereby the people of the Nation were the more incited, as opportunity
served, to vindicate what they believed to be their liberties. This Atturny Noy
died the very same year, the ninth day of August, after.

The King of France, in the year 1632, in his progress from the Mountain
Pessula, was afflicted with a stormy Tempest of three days, and on the fourth
of October, being almost under the open Air without covert, the waters of two
Rivers meeting together, he was hardly plucked out of them, but 116 persons of
his company were lost, with the Kings household stuff: God is (we see) no
respecter of persons.

Also the Duke of Lorrain this year, who was always of the Austrian party, is
beaten by the Argentines; he also (on sundry occasions) falls into the
displeasure of the French King, and is oftentimes reconciled again. Things of
light substance are soon hot, soon cold.

This year also in Gothe, 600 houses, with the Temple of the Lady Margaret, are
destroyed by fire; And the Isle of Malta in 1634. is defaced by the flame: and
the houses of the Venetians, with some Warehouses, or Cottages do burn.

But on the Tower of Stockholm, in Swethland, at the very same space of time
that they fought the pitched battle at Lutsa, and night now coming on, was
seen two maids, the one bearing a burning Torch, the other a handkerchief, or
neckerchief cast abroad. Likewise every one of the doors of the Tower, opened
thrice of their own accord. A River of an indifferent eminency, for the space
of a whole day was dry, that men might pass over dry-shod. And lastly, in
Smaland, the bells of their own accord sounded. All which things, the issue
proved to be fore-tokens of their Kings death.

That we may look a little back on the affairs of Germany, Vinarien in the year
1635. on the very beginning of January, passes over the River Menus with
12000. Soldiers into Wetterave; then the Lieutenant of the Tower being
besieged, delivers up Herbipolis unto Gotze. But not long after, Bamberger of
the Emperian party recovereth it again, and Philippiburg (which the French had
but the year before taken by a stratagem). Whereupon Oxenstern, and Vinarien,
with Granse the French Ambassador, do enter into new consultations about
matters, at Winsheyme; and in the mean time, by the law of requital, they had
news brought them, that Braunfelse was come likewise under their power by a
stratagem. The King of Hungary having gathered rogether no less then 23000,
indeed suffered some loss at Altorp: but yet Spira being surrendered, he makes
a bridge over Rhene, and troubles Heydelburg. Where the Swedes did recover (
Oh the uncertainty of humane affairs!) Spira for the French; then the Emperians
come in a hostile manner out of Wetterave, and Hasse, into Rhingave. And in the
mean time the Count of Embden, by the help of Metternich, takes Trevire into
possession. And Galasse subdueth Augusta of the Vinbdolians by starving it, but
Lamboy, Coburge by force, and the French take for his part, the Telline Valley,
(the place, whence Joane called the maid of Orleance, came to the relief of
Orleance, when besieged by Henry of England, as was specified above in the
Account) at unawares.

The Duke of Neoburg, whether through fear, or love of peace, earnestly
desires, in the midst of these shakings, to stand as a Neuter, but it seems
that would not be suffered; for Lunaeburgick the Swedish Commander, at the
Mountain of the Rape-roots, sets down with his besiegers on July the twentieth,
before Neoburg; and on the 30th day of the same Month, it made surrender unto
him.

But (nevertheless) the affairs of the Swedes were to be bewailed, and sad; So
that Oxenstern goes away unto the French, and the Swedes had almost solemuized
the Sicilian Vespers of Mentz, unto the French King. Banner (at this time) had
perished or suffered loss by the laying in wait of Stalman: notwithstanding
the Legion of Deckenfield (which is a number of Soldiers consisting of 6200
foot, and 730. horse, is overthrown. Weide is taken, and Mansfield passes out
of the Colonian field into Wetterave, yet not without Diminishment. So that by
this means the Duke of Neoburg, as well by forces and strength, as words,
recovereth his own again.

The Emperor also at or about the same time, in the year 1635: calls an
assembly at Semprone. Where he requires a great sum of Money, under more then
one pretense, for the carrying on his designs and achievements, and (either
out of simple zeal and love to them, or mixed with Policy, the more easily to
accomplish his desire) decrees the Temples to be restored unto the Catholics
(so called) that were built by their Ancestors; and there receives Elsy,
Fridlands Chancellor, (who it appears had been estranged before upon his
masters account) into favor. He also strikes a peace (being first well
weighed) of the Empire with the Duke of Saxony at Pirnedresde, he garnisheth
and strengthens the same peace, the seditious rude ones of Styre being first
appeased, and tamed by his Commander Swartzburg, on the twenty ninth and
thirtieth of May, at Prague, (for all this fair weather of Imperial
correspondency in the forementioned particulars) he being interceded with by
the Saxon in the behalf of the Silesians, as touching a favorable toleration
in their Religious Rites, (such is the obstinacy of blind devotion) remains
unmovable. Of which also the Pope was joyful, and had a desire to pacify the
French.

This peace made, and confirmed at Prague, many or most of the States of Prague
like of, and accept; Notwithstanding (old friends being loath to part) the
Swedes cannot be sent away from the Saxon, even after a long disputation, and
the endeavor of the Megapolitane, yea, although the Emperor had written an
Order for the withdrawing of the Warfare. But as the Saxons were upon going, so
other supplies came in the room: for Vinarien goes against Galasse, beyond
Sare, and being increased in number through fresh supplies of the French, had
beat back Galasse, but that Landstall had afforded succor to this, and terror
to the other. However he freeth Mentz from besieging, and frames a bridge,
attempting some other matter. But in his return through VVester unto Metis,
Galasse following after him, although below him in forces, he gives him an
overthrow, yet at Sare he passes not over without slaughter, and in a French
field, refreshes his tattered Army. To speak of all particular passages, would
be too tedious, and not agreeable to the former Account. But then, above eighty
thousand of the Emperians, under the command of three Captains, Galasse and
Grane, with the Duke of Lorrain, were seen ready to invade France, and
encamping at Maser and Rambervill of Lorrain, they, with the French, and also
Vinarien, are tormented with hunger. And at that time the Lorrainer destroys
no less than 400 Villages on the borders of France, with Fire.

Craze also (who in the year 1633. was offended and offensive to Fridland) in
this year 1635. in the Month of May follows him even in the same kind of
death, with the Sword, (Thus death ends these Earthly Controversies). And one
Scaffgith eight days after, followed him, both at Vienne: where also in the
same Month, a horrible Tempest with Lightning burnt the Scotch Tower unto the
Stones, and with the fervency of the flame, melted the Bells. The Saxon (being
of a friend become an enemy) about the same time, joyneth together with the
Emperors forces at Sandave in Silesia.

So that in the year following 1636. in diverse places there was cruel and
raging war on both sides. For Kniphuse his weapons, the Swede, and the weapons
of Ludersheyme the Emperian, glittered, and made Westphalia to shine; and on
the very first day of January, do afflict one another with mutual slaughter
and destruction. Then Cratesteyn of Kniphuse, and Geleen of Ludersheyme,
undergo the same changes, and take their warlike turn. Also one Klitsing was
not wanting in his endeavors for the Emperors party, who notwithstanding
being unprosperous in battle, leads away into Silesia, and was forced to
deliver up the Province unto Gaece.

Bannier, aloft, carries about the chief of the Swedish Arms, and suddenly
passes over the River Albis, and making four assaults on Barbye, at the fifth
onset takes it; He subdueth Misne. Yet (that he might not boast too much) he
yields two Legions (no less) unto Baudissine the Saxon (with whom Hatsfield,
together with Ulefield, had joined the Emperian Auxiliaries) to be beaten. So
also Magdeburg is lost to him, with Bernburg, whilst that he overthrows
Isawlisk at Sandersleve, and takes the Fort of Winsenne; But departing in a
more calm manner through Marchia, at Wittistock, he obtains a plentiful
Victory of the Saxons and Emperians, or Saxons turned Emperians, where about
the middle of September, he scattered them, took away all their Guns,
Carriages, Bag, and Baggage, and quitted them of the field. From hence he goes
away to scourge Thuringe, and at the length, in the height of December
threatening Erford with fire and Sword, he obtains it. When as he besieges
Mansfield, the which made not surrender until the year 1639. in the Month of
April, he chased the Saxons running thither to help it; and moreover he added
Naumberg, and Torgave, with other places unto a heap of Victories.

The Duke of Saxony (to make yet hotter work) calls forth his Countrymen that
stayed behind (by a public Letter) out of the Swedish Camps, and together
with the Emperians, he recovereth Havelberge, and Ratherave, and after the
strengthening of the Garrisons of Pomerania, he calls away Marazine, and so
grants his Army and their enterprises unto the Emperor, to be passed over
into the hand of Hatsfield. And then the Emperor thought a little after, in
requital of the French) as we may suppose) to invade France, and to extend the
seat of war beyond the bounds of Germany, to which end he had proclaimed
assemblies for Election of Officers. Wherefore the Lorrainer makes assault on
Burgundy, where the Prince of Condy being at the siege of Dole (at his
approach) betakes himself unto a voluntary flight: and also four of the
Emperors Commanders, Galasse, Lamboy, Merce, and Isolane, trouble
French-Burgundy, until Vinarien, being joined with Valettane, the French
Commander, taking Rambervill, and some other places first, scattered the
Emperians, whereby they were called back again, without doing any thing that
might be said worth their labor, and so sit down at Drusenheyme, at the lower
Alsatia, which is on the left bank of Rhene, only besieging Hagenoe by the way.

This year also the Emperor gave a Tartarian Ambassador a hearing, who
promises him aids, though undetermined what; but he kept him from his
Country, either as a saucy Guest, or an enemy.

He allows also the Garrison of Uratslave for defense unto our Earl of
Arundell, going over this year, in the name of the Britain King, to require a
restoring of the Palsgrave: he had a courteous hearing at Lince, but more
courteously sent away; words and complements are but Wind. Was he ere the
sooner restored?

Geleen runs in the year 1637, with evil success upon Wrangle, and Funce bends
into Silesia, that he might oppose Wrangle, who endeavored to compass
Custrine; and in the mean while Bannier was necessitated to forsake Lipsia,
that was ready to yield, because Hatsfield, Galasse, and Gaece being sent for,
ran thither, out of the Jenian ground that had been laid waste. He takes a Fort
that lay against Wittemberg-bridge, (although (the ball being so tossed on both
sides) he held it scarce two months space) that he might draw back the
Emperians from Erford; the which the Saxon supposed was wholly besieged. But at
Torgave he is encompassed with no less than ninety five thousand Warriors;
And yet, (see how discord weakeneth!) through the contention of the besiegers,
he slips forth, even to Landsberg and Custrine. The Saxon bestirring himself,
makes (what by force and policy) a Fort and two other places his own, while the
Emperians vanquish three more, Wolgast, Damnine Town, and Luneburg, a
Field-Commander; but Bannier stronger than he, retakes Werbene Fort from the
Saxons, afterward being partaker of a supply from Wolline, he had escaped,
drawing after him 30000, and at last goes in an afflicted condition into
Silesia. Thus the Proverb is fulfilled, Yours to day, and Ours to morrow.

Before I go any farther, let me take notice of a Comet that in 1633 hung over
Barcelona's head, in shape like a Lance. If any thing of that kind signify,
surely a sad token; especially being of such an unusual and warlike form: So
that we may add to that Philosophical Observation, (which is (...).
There Is Comet none, which brings not evils dread)
this, How much more, like a Lance when he does spread?

Also of three Marriages solemnized, the one in 1634, by Christian the 5th of
Denmark, King, with Magdalene Sybill daughter to the Duke Electour of Saxony,
at Coppenhague, on the 5th of October; the other the year following 1635, at
Vienna, where Maximilian Duke, Elector of Bavaria took to wife, Marian of
Austria, the Emperor's sister. Also Uladislaus King of Poland in 1637, couples
to himself Cicill Renate the Arch-Dutchess, at Vienna, his brother representing
him. In which year also a Plague passed through all Germany, with the United
Provinces of the Low Countries. Hot Anger.

Which Polander had, on the third of January this year 1635, entered into
Thuronia, and Guard the Swede has under his banners sixty thousand footmen,
and four thousand horsemen, in Borussia, and was attentively heedful on his
opportunity; but a peace comes in between them, in the height of July, for a
league of twenty four years. But how I pray was this league kept? have they not
fought since? What then was this great show for? Nay, is not the Swede at this
day preparing for fear of him, and the 24 years are not yet up? All this then
was little better than The King of France with forty thousand men
Went up a hill, and so came down again.
Yet this it appears, Polands peace, afforded a very ravenous mercenary
homebred Soldier both to the Swede and Emperor, some taking one side, some
another, according to their loose affections, or where was best pay; and
hereupon the King of Hungary besieges, Heidelberg, Hannove, and other places,
his father the Emperor takes Lutrea by force and slaughter, Landstull by craft.

But the French King (great danger accompanying great worldly honor) was laid
in wait for, in 1635, at three several places, Paris, Nance, and Abbevil, but
the adversaries attempts were frustrated; whereupon three were committed to a
slavish imprisonment Pylaurence, Fargyse, and Monpenser: Having proclaimed war
against the Spaniard, amongst other achievements, he overcomes him at Hoy (
Castilion being General there) with an extraordinary advantage, there being
3000 of the Spaniards, and but 100 of the French slain: there were also taken
then by the French, three of great note, Ferian, Charles of Austria, and Ladro,
besides twelve Captains, who afterward, two of their keepers being by reward
corrupted, made an escape. And in the year 1637, they make great preparations
against the triumphing scorn of their enemies; and the French King maintains
the two Islands of Margaret and Honoratus (being it seems of great concernment
to his affairs) with great might and main. The Emperor's forces also invading
Burgundy, he drives them out of that Province, where he vanquisheth the Temple
of [Love] so called. Love indeed is always conquered, but does not conquer,
where the sword bears sway. But from the Rhetians he heard no good news, for
two reasons, because the Soldiery was not paid off; and (no wonder) because
the Roman devotions were brought back again, with a suppression of those of a
contrary opinion, the Duke of Rhoan much laboring therein.

The English King frames a huge Fleet in 1637, as it was then said, for
restraining, or subduing the Sea. But whether there might not be some other end
in it; for he intercedes that year with the Emperor, in the behalf of the
Palatinate; And (it seems the Spaniards were then in the English books) makes a
stop of the Hollanders at Plymouth, for spoiling the Spaniards. Again he trimms
and prepares a Navy in 1637, and 'twas questioned by some, whether to restore
the Palsgrave by foul means, seeing fair would not do? or to subdue his own
subjects upon occasion at hand? We may think the latter; for after that Burton,
Pryn, and Bastwick had received their last Censure from Archbishop Laud in the
Star Chamber, (for the two last of these had been censured before in 1634,
Febr. 12th.) on Jan. the 14th of this year 1637; (for writing against the pride
and corruption of Prelates; scourging with a sharp Pen Stage Players and their
abettors; speaking against men given to change from better to worse, according
to that expression in the Proverbs, by turning inward sincerity into outward
Ceremonies: which word Ceremony, takes its derivation either from the Latin
word Carendo, because they are least wanted; or from the Greek, (...), that is,
to endure but for a time, and so was to give place unto, and not be brought in
place of the true worship;) and on the 30th day of the same January had stood
in the Pillory and lost their cars, and afterward were sent away remote from
London, and from each other, as was thought, unto perpetual imprisonment. And
not only in England, but about six months after sending a book of Liturgy, so
called, into Scotland, to be imposed on them, that were generally less able to
bear it: and thereupon the Scots first Petitioning the King against it in the
October following, and the same month entering into a Covenant against that and
such other things; the King (in whose name and authority all things were
carried on) might well see a storm arising, and so make preparation; which,
although, at first, it was but as Eliah's cloud, like a man's hand, yet it grew
to such an overflowing scourge, as both Nations have since most sadly
experienced.

The Spaniard, amongst the rest, keeps doing; he besieges Philippine (that he
had lost in 1633) in 1635, yet to no purpose; yet as he gets not that: So he
renders the siege of Leody by Orange and Castilion, void. He loses of his
Neapolitan Navy, by a tempest, nine Oar Galleys, fifteen bigger ships, with six
thousand men of war, this year: and at Lisbone ten Galleys with Oars, and 30
sailing Vessels, with 6000 men of war.

The Dutch war but slowly this year 1636; but in 1637, although they lost
Greffling Fort by subtilty, it being, as it were, wrung out of their hands, yet
they, after they had attempted Hulst, besiege Bredah with labor and
difficulty, and constrain the Spaniards to yield, being nothing discouraged at
the loss of Venlo. To cheer their hearts, they hear about this time good news
from Nassave, that they had sent before into America, and receive great ships
laden with Gold, Ivory, Copper, Pepper, Sugar, and Scarlet wood.

But the Turks and Persians also contend (in 1635) in battle; the Turks took
the Town called Rava, from the Persians, not by storm, but surrender; and in
the battle were slain 90000 Turks, 20000 Persians; and yet the Turk was the
Conqueror, because the more numerous. Then he burns four Villages belonging to
Buda, and kills fifty poor mortals, and carries away seventy into slavery;
when as the month of August before he had almost burned down Buda it self with
fire. Behold the desolations of the Earth, for want of the King of Peace to
rule!

Before I conclude this Chapter, I cannot but take notice of some remarkable
Prodigies and Accidents that fell out in diverse places in 1634, and 1635: An
Eagle at Frankford of Menus, cast down in a leaden bowl. England shook and
trembled, about London, a Marsh there boiling with black waters, etc. At
Torrune, water turned into blood. At Witteberg it rained brimstone; with diverse
other like. There fell Hail of three pound weight in a field of Darmstade, in
1636. At Paris in their religious Pilgrimages, a bridge brake as they passed
over, thirty were choked, eighty hurt. At Dusseldorp three hundred barrels of
Gunpowder took fire in a house, and laid fifty adjacent houses level; all the
people thereof had almost some hurt: and a brass Gun is cast abroad, off from
a bull wark that was on the other side the River Rhene; in 1635, an Earthquake
in Messina, the Vesuvian Mountain is again in a flame; and at the latter end of
this year the Swedes lost 30 ships by a storm. There was also great companies
of foreign birds, and madness of dogs at Straubinge. And lastly, (which is
almost incredible, yet all things are possible unto God) one Daniel Becker
tells of a man whose name was Andrew Grunheyd, living in a place called
Grunevald, seven miles from the City Regimont, who on the 29th day of May,
1635, going about to cast out his nauseousnesse, or that which he had a desire
to vomit up, before noon, lets a knife into his throat, to that end, above the
breadth of ten fingers in length, and suffering it to slip out of the tops of
his fingers, it sticking there fast, nor sliding back again, although he were
lifted upright on his head; moved it forward by drinking Beer or Ale. The
Physicians of Regimont come to this man on the 9th of July following, which was
above five weeks after, and they open his skin, flesh, and stomach it self,
they draw out the knife, and restore the mangled, wounded man to health, who
also afterward married, and begat Children.

There is a time to live, and a time to dye; Death [ aequo pede pulsat pauperum
tabernas, Regumque turres,] knocks alike at Princes Palaces, as Poor men's
Cottages. There dyed in the year 1632, Maurice Lantgrave of Hesse, Sigismund
the third, King of Poland, as abovesaid. Leopold Archduke of Austria. Tilly,
the Emperor's General at Ingolstade of a wound; also Papenheim, another of his
Captains, in the battle at Lutzen, where the King of Sweden, Gustavus, was
slain: As also Nicolas Horn one of his Captains dyed; the Duchess of Lorrain,
Couzen-german to the Empress; Charles Prince of Spain. Also Frederick Electour
Palatine on the 19th of November, with others. John Casimir, Duke of Saxony,
the 16th of July, 1633, departed from the living, whose brother John Ernest
succeeded him. Famous Isabel, called Governesse of Belgium, November. 21. Ulrick
son of the Danish King, by lyings in wait in Silesia. Lunaeburgick, at Cella,
etc. James Dubald, who was a faithful General of the Swedes, at Silesia. The
Archbishop of Bremes. Otto Ludowick Count of Rhene, who fell sick through
crossing a River, and fear of an approaching enemy; these three in 1634, with
others. Moreover, two brothers of the King of Poland fulfilled their days in
1635. Casimir of Padua; and Alexander of Miss; Frederick Nisse Counselor to
the Emperor's Court, in 1636. But in the year 1637, on the Nones of Febr.
Ferdinand the second, Emperor of Germany, being in the 59th year of his age,
after all firings, dyed of a Dropsy, that is, a waterish disease, in the the
19th year of the Empire; in which year also danger of death, as he was going to
Prague, is threatened to him by an Italian privy murderer. Also Boleslaw Duke
of Pomerania, the 14th of that name. Cardinal Basmanne. Alcalan, Lieutenant of
Mediolum in a journey. In England, Attorney General Noy, Aug. the 9th. 1634, as
abovesaid.

These came to untimely deaths by punishments. Duke Montmorence Lieutenant of
French Narbony, who for falling off to the Kings brother, was beheaded at
Tolouse, either on the third Kal. November, as above in the Account; or on the
17th of October, as others, in 1632. Five Tribunes or Majors, with other
Governors, and eight Senators were beheaded at Pilsene by the Emperor, in
1634, about the business of Fridland; but four Majors separated or pardoned by
favor. Likewise this year the Governor of Fridberg was beheaded, for yielding
up a Castle. Also Schaffgo^sch (as abovesaid) and Schaffenberg were beheaded by
the Emperor in 1635. Finally, at Rome, the Marquess of Bolognien was beheaded
for Libels or little books spread abroad, and his houshold-servants hanged, in
1636.

CHAP. II. Of Warlique Passages and other memorable things that fell out in
Germany, Britain, and other parts; Ferdinand the third being Emperor, and
Charles the first, King of England.
From the year of Christ 1638, to 1642.
FErdinand the second being deceased; the year following, 1638, The Swedish
party (whether through the force of warlique valor, or partly occasioned by
the Emperor's death) proceeded against their Adversaries with great success.
For both the Duke of Vinarien returning suddenly and unthought of, out of
Burgundy, unto Rhene; and also a little after, the Swedish forces being brought
back unto the Baltic Sea, performed diverse noble Exploits.

The occasion of his sudden return thither, was the news that he heard, of
about 14 Brigandines, or Coats of crust of clay made to cast off the water,
that were placed in Rhenes banks, to have yielded through the power of Werth.
After his coming, he besieged Rheinfield, and fighting his enemies in two
battles, being overcome, at length he overcomes, and took prisoners of war,
Werth, Enkford, Spereutea, Frustenberger, with other Captains, and Savell, who
deceived his keepers, by slipping away in an old woman's habit: unto this place,
by incredible enforcement of endeavor, and conquest, he subdueth Fridburg, a
Town or City of Brisgove, and he laid traps for Brisack Lord of the Rhene, to
hinder it from provision, in as much as he knew the old store of victual was
bestowed on the Army, and that himself might be able to stop the new. Whereupon
two great Emperian Commanders, Gaece, and the Duke of Lorrain run to help; but
both with ill luck and slaughter: of which also Lamboy putting in for an
opposer, made himself a partaker. And both parties (what about bringing in
victual, destroying a bridge, and spoiling and overthrowing each others Camps)
fought most sharply, for the space of 4 months, with a doubtful event of War
and loss; but the Vinurne Duke kept them so long in play, until that most
fortified place, through most cruel famine, of which one thing alone, (and that
enough) it knew the force, came to yield. But this place cost hot water,
consuming on both sides, above 80000 men: and spent the Conqueror of the
Imperialists 1100000 pounds; which charge or principal sum, nevertheless,
being taken, my author tells me, it restored with a most large usury. Then at
the aforesaid Baltic Sea; these Swedes were altogether dreadful to their
enemies, both defensively and offensively: For they courageously defend Rugye
against the Emperor's forces: and having increased their own forces, wring (as
it were) Gartise out of the hand of the Duke of Brandenburg; and from the Saxon
Warbnian, Wolgast, besides a Castle: and being suddenly overcharged in their
most wary legions, they, in a military fury, rifle or cast to the ground, or
both, Malchine and Bernave.

While, or a little after, that the Emperor courted the King of Poland with
sumptuous entertainment at Vienna, and most courteously receives the Duke of
Saxony, with his sons at Leutmerice, sends an Embassage by Eggenberg unto the
Bishop of Rome; and on the day before the Ides of December, undergoeth peril
in hunting, the vehement force of a wind throwing down Trees; the Duke of
Lorrain fights stoutly, throughout Burgundy, Alsatia, and Lorrain; but partly
(as may be well supposed) through his bearing ill will to Gaece, by reason of
emulous strife, the mother of confusion, he is often beaten; whereby also the
said Gaece being disarmed, was by Mansfield brought before the Duke of Bavaria
to render an account of his ordering the warfare; and in which he gave him
satisfaction. But the said Duke of Lorrain, (who although he held Espinal and
other places, that were judged to be of great concernment, either to withdraw
from or overcome Vinurn at Brisack, yet he prevailed nothing, as above
mentioned; Being himself dispersed at Thanne, was constrained to betake himself
into a Wood, out of which (by a witty device, to wit, small ropes being made of
shrubs, and hung upon every side, by the light of fireballs when they are
cast) he by night brought forth all, one by one. There being also some
Ecclesiastical tumult (as I may so speak) about this time at Bremes, about a
Cathedral, which their new Archbishop had given unto the lovers of his sect.

But the Swedish forces, the year following also 1639, lustily act Mars his
part, when as the Emperor's forces did but little execution; for after the
Duke of Viburn had Brisack surtendred unto him, he takes Landiscrone, and
mustering 11000, goes away into Burgundy to winter: neither was he there idle,
but by great endeavor subdueth Pontarly, and almost all Burgundy, he takes
into possession the narrow passages, even unto Mortave, and obtains the
Castle of Jaux, the loss of which the Lieutenant or Governor purged away with
the loss of his head; the Spaniard also a long time after besieging it, but in
vain. And at length Thane, (with two Temples of Hippolytus and Claudius) where
the Lorrainer had been scattered, being subdued, recruiting his Army, he sets
foreward for upper Germany, but soon breathed his last, as is thought, by
poison. Whereupon the top of affairs was committed to the guidance of four
persons, Erlach, Otto Earl of Nassaw, Rose, and Oeheme; whom, that the French
King (who it seems stood in as much, or more need of the Swedes friendship
and assistance, than the other did of his) might make his own, (whether they
loved him not, or suspected him) he encounters them with a great sum of
Money, and renews his League with the States of High- Germany, also a
General of the Army being added in Vinurne's room. But in the mean time these
four Directours draw down unto the lower parts, where they possess Bungye,
Oppenheyme, with other places, and passing over the River Rhene, meeting with
Geleen the Emperian, are beaten by him in Rhingave: from whence going unto the
land of the Archbishop of Triers, or Trevira, by reason of the enmities of
Capitulum, which being a City in Italy, I cannot learn what the ground of that
enmity should be, they use it in a hostile manner.

That I may not exceed the nature of this Account, let me include Bannier's,
with other Swedish exploits of this year 1639, in few words. The one, not
preferring Lipsia, takes Zwiccave Chemnice, and Altenburg into his possession,
also attempting Freyburg again and again, to no purpose; but he subdueth
Pirnave, Ausige, and Leutimerice, with Tettschine Castle. Then being increased
by Tortenson, gets a victory at Chemnice, where he takes thirty foot, and
twenty Horse Ensigns, besides Prisoners of War, and (pursuing his Victory)
follows Frustenberger into Bohemia, he quickly snatcheth Melnice, and
Brandise, he fights again, and takes two great Emperians, Hoffkirch, and
Montcucule. But withal he receives no small check, in seeing four legions (in
snatching after all warlike necessaries) to be dispersed by the Hungarians;
notwithstanding he conquers again at Johnsbrode; where, through lust or
inordinate defire, his men had almost tumulted. While the other Swedish parties
are bringing under Wolflag, and Halle, Wrangell a Major, comes to them with 300
men, having before fallen off unto the Duke of Brandenburg. Also Axel Lilly,
subdueth Damnum, Hornburg, and Maurice his Castle. Likewise other Captains take
Burgsdorffe, the Duke of Brandenburg his chief Captain, and Bernave a Town, the
second time. Then Koningsmart, conquering at Duderstade, makes that Town,
together with Gleychensteyne, and Glettenburg, his own, yet being busied
elsewhere, was thrown out of Bilefield. Lily Holk, and Lily Spart, coworking,
make five Towns acknowledge Swethland, whereof Frankford was one; two Towns,
Dreisia, and Beuzen, are taken with the slaughter of the Saxons, with some
other things, quae nunc perscribere longum est.

The Emperor performed little, therefore I will briefly recite his deeds. He
calls Hatsfield into Bobemia, and conferreth the highest command on the
Archduke, he also encourages the Saxon to subdue Pirnave, that Bannier had
taken a little before, and he attempteth it often, but in vain, as also
Al^ville, yet, not unstoutly bestirring himself at Marburg, he brings his
Grisons unto certain laws or conditions. The Emperor also sends away the Duke
of Brandenburg into Livonia, where his Men under the command of his Captain
Hermanne Bottye are scattered, and Bottye himself taken. He commands George
Duke of Lunaeburg, to restore him Hildesse; that Koningsmart had taken from him
a little before. Being willing to be rid of Banniers company in Bohemia, he
bids Ohre a Major to set upon Oldendorp, that so the other might be
necessi^ated to depart thence, for its relief. And lastly makes Leopold
Willelme the Archduke, chief Commander of his Horse.

It Is high time to cast an eye upon the affairs of other Nations, and
especially on Britain, Britain I say, which (being environed with the Sea, of
so considerable a bigness, it being reputed, if not the greatest of all, yet
save one, the greatest of Islands in the whole World, so fertile for all kind
of necessary sustenance, (with contentment) especially England, that its
inhabitants may live of themselves, without the help of other Countries) is of
a temperate climate, and to be accounted amongst the happiest of Regions; and
which for a considerable number of years, I do not find had been, so much as in
any eminent peril of sorreign enemies, unlesse't were in 1588. by the Spanish
Armado, nor but once in the jaws of death, by an undermining conspiracy of a
Powder Plot, in its own bowels, from both which it received a deliverance by a
high hand of providence; Now about the year 1638, begins as was said of Rome [
suis viribus ruere] to fall and undo it self by its own strength: for (after
the imposing of many Ceremonies by the English Bishops, the Book for sports,
and the Pilloring and banishment of those three men, mentioned in the former
Chapter, the Liturgy enjoined to the Scottish Nation, and afterward, on April
the eighth, 1638. John Lilburn a young man sadly whipped at a Carts tail in
London, and then pillored, chiefly for spreading books in Holland, or elsewhere
in behalf of William Prin, and Doctor Bastwick, the Scots having first engaged
themselves by a Covenant, first are disturbed among themselves, (though with
relation to what came from England) insomuch that the Marquess Hamilton their
own countreyman and very eminent amongst them, went into Scotland, on May the
sixth, that by his personal presence, behavior, threatening, or persuasion, he
might appease tumults that were there raised, and so prevent a War, but however
that hindered not their proceedings and some say he raised more dissentions, as
having an aim at the Scottish Crown, but about seven-Moneths after, the Earl of
A^gile a Highlander, declared for those that were called Covenanters, and then
they took up Arms, and that they might not be first invaded, and prevented of
what they had engaged for in their Covenant, do March into England with a
considerable Army of twenty or thirty thousand, David Lesley being General,
holding up, as is reported, the Bible, as a token of what they endeavored to
maintain: and coming some miles into the North of England, took New Castle, (a
noted Town for Sea-Coal) and fortified it as a principle Garrison, and place of
retiring. Hereupon without delay, the English King, who was King of all Britain
and Ireland, resolving (with his nearest Counselors, to assert and vindicate,
what his Authority had before enjoined) raises an Army nearly proportionable
unto the other, fortifying as well by Sea as land, and on the 27th of March, he
Marched into the North against them. The Scots went forward to meet the King,
though not with displayed banners, and coming in sight, as an humble token,
that stubborn rebellion was not the cause of Arming, but rather a constrained
necessity for defense and Vindication of their freedom, laid down their Arms
on the ground before him. And when both sides were ready to join bartell
(Whether as not willing to strive with their fellow subjects, or through a
fear, at that time, possessing them) the English denied to fight; so that there
was a necessity of a treaty with them, which began on the tenth of July
following, and in eight days time was concluded, and the next day after, which
was the 18th of July, the Armies began to be disbanded, the Scots had good
conditions from the King, as with relation to their Covenant and charges, for
such was the bent of their spirits in that business, that without those, they
were resolved not to retreat. When the cloud was over the King, soon returned
to his house at Theobalds, for on the first of August following he came
thither, and was at his Court at White Hall, on the third day of the same
Month. This year there were two Parliaments in Scotland, the one began on May
the fifteenth, and dissolved by the King within a Months time: the other on
August the one and thirtieth, which sat till December. the 18th, and then was
adjourned until June the second following: I hear not of any great matter done
by the first, the time was short; Nor by the second, unless it were to invade
England the second time. There was also a Parliament summoned in Ireland this
year, in the latter part of the year by the Earl of Strafford, upon his return
into Ireland, who some few Months before, in August, had come into England,
where he received that Title from the King. This Irish Parliament, granted
Strafford four subsidies indeed, but could do little good to that
Common-W^alth, not being so happy, (through the cunning close concealment of
the bloudily intended Irish) as to foresee and prevent that cruel and bloody
Tragedy, which in a Rebellion with in two years after broke forth. The said
Earl of Strafford returned into England near the beginning of the next year.

The French ( Janus-like) in the year 1638, turn their faces with their
weapons, two ways; against the Spaniard, and also against the Lorrainer with
the Emperor's forces. For the king of France sends the Prince of Conde with a
great Army into Spain, who setting upon a place called Fontarabe, is by the
Spaniard beaten off from the siege; yet fighting a hurtful Sea-battel to both
sides, he gets the victory, at Genua in Italy; and then vanquisheth a small
Castle of Piccardy. And in 1639, warring by land against the Spaniard, forces
Hesdin, a Town of theirs, to yield: but then Feckier besieging Theonsville, he
is repaid with advantage, being overthrown and taken by Piccolomine and Beckye.
When he had besieged a fortified Temple of Audomare to no purpose 1638, he
notwithstanding beat the Duke of Lorrain in Burgundy, the Duke of Longueville
being chief Commander: Whereupon he vanquisheth two places, Polignye, and
Arboese; And afterward Danviller in the Tertitories of Lucemburg. Then there
being a Conspiracy for the betraying, or at unawares taking the City of Metis
or Metz in Gallo-Belgia, or French Germany (so called, from Metius a Roman, who
(this City being vanquished by Julius Caesar) enlarged and encompassed it with
Walls; as the City Augusta, was named from Augustus that built it;) This French
King sent Ayds so sufficiently seasonable (which is the chiefest of prudential
time) unto the Duke of Vinurn, that (before 'twas too late) he hindered that
from taking effect. And this year also France began to be too hot to hold the
King's or Queen Mother; King Lewis her son not being pleased with her, the
enmity against Ricelieu the Cardinal, it seems remaining; and the stir of her
younger son the Duke of Orleance, she not disaffecting: So that she must return
through Flanders, to the Hollanders, with much French suspicion, and there not
making much stay, came in the same year at the very latter end of October into
England; which coming being even at the very time that the Scots began to arm,
was judged by very many of the English, not a little to heighten, if not
harden, Kingly opposition; which as it was increased, so the animosity of many
subjects there, having an antipathy against many things, was raised also:
Contraries neven yielding willingly to contraries; but rather (as fire in the
coldest weather which scorcheth most) take strength against each other. She
staying about 9 or 10 months time here, returned (not into France) out of
England, rather unto most more welcome, than when she came in; and not very
long after departed life.

The young Palatinate this year 1638, obtaining some help from the English King
his Uncle, musters a Soldiery, and gets to himself Meppene, a Town in
Westphalia; but Hatsfield the great Imperial Commander, scatters and put him to
flight; and withal, takes his brother Robert, who was in the engagement: but
he obtaining his liberty from the Emperor in the year 1641, the King of
England himself had employment for him and his younger brother Maurice, in
carrying on his War (as chief Commanders) against the Parliament. And then (as
an addition to the Actions of the Emperor's Forces this year) the said
Hatsfield subdueth Vecta, a strong place, with labor and toil.

But the Spanish King also amongst the rest, strikes, this year, on both sides
of him: for he on the one hand contends in Italy, and overcomes three places,
Breme, Vercella, and Pomara; and in the Juliacan field, Kerper. On the other
hand, he fights with the Dutch, with the like overthrow; for he punishes them
most grievously at Antwerp, whither he defends the Calloane Fort, and Geldre
most valiantly to their loss. And being somebody at Sea, as well as at Land,
calls his Duke of Modena High-Admiral of three Seas. But (as a curb to a high
spirit) the same year, in the very Haven of Texel, forty of his ships perished
by a tempest. But in the year following, 1639, Bellona or warlique affairs
smiled upon him throughout Piedmont, a Province of the French: for the
Spaniards make first of all the Camp of Gregui and Crescence their own; then
after that, the French, to withstand them, joining themselves together in the
Suburbs of Taurine, fought the Spaniard; but although the battle was doubtful
enough, yet the Spaniard added to the other two, the place called Villa Nova,
or New Village, with three other Towns. And made Trine, a Town rich both in
provision and plunder, yea and Taurine it self, with its Castle, besides two
other places, to obey him as a Conqueror. The French King on the contrary,
lest he should seem to do nothing against his enemy, by two Leaders possesses
four places, Chivase, and Salsa in the County of Rossilion, by the Prince of
Conde; Lared and Anthonie's Temple, at the Cantabrian Ocean in Biscay, by the
Bishop of Burdegale, (whether through valor or policy) he overcomes; and also
quickly snatcheth away two ships of Spain laden with great spoils. At length
both of them tasted the seat or state of warlique weapons in Italy, the which
was so wearyed with tossings and tumblings to and fro, that at the latter end
of the year Salsa was again yielded to the Spaniard. Who doing displeasure to
the Trajectines of the River Mose by Sea, felt the force of the Dutch Fleet in
a Sea Fight at Dunkirk to his damage, Martin Trump being Conqueror; and
toward the end of this year 1639, in a far more fierce one, a far greater
loss; the Spaniard of 50 ships saving but 15: The two Navies pitching on the
English Coast, the English interrupted them.

While these things were acting in Europe, the Turks in Asia vanquished Babylon
in 1639, which was defended by the Persians until the Besieger slew 40000 of
the besieged, but who certainly knows what he himself lost? This grand Sultan
Amurath appoints a Navy to go, as far as the red Sea, against the Cossacks, and
runs toward Breger in Hungary, devouring the prey; notwithstanding the Plague
being in the City Aleppo, makes his Imperial Majesty to depart the place for
fear; all this in 1639.

That I may insert a grain of Honey amongst so much Gall, we may take notice,
that in the year 1638, in a piece of ground belonging to Hungary, at the
greater Waradine, amongst the rubbish of a burying Chapel destroyed by
Bethlem Prince of Transylvania, there was a treasure found, with a port-mantle
or some such thing, with a diamond in bigness of a hens egg. I find also three
eminent marriages solemnized in these two years: one whereof was between
Francis Charles Duke of Lawenburg, and the widow of Bethlem Gabor the foresaid
Transylvanian Prince, who dying in the year 1636, (I must recede a little) new
troubles arose in Transylvania; after that, one Ragotzy enjoyed the affairs.
Salymye of Bethlem's family gathering 2000 Soldiers and more, in opposition of
him, etc. Thus much in the general. And it is credibly reported, that in the
same Transylvania, there is a visible Church, who maintain their orderly
succession of Ordinances from the Apostles times, by an administrator of
baptism, without intermission. Be it so: yet what is a succession of the form,
without the life and power they lived in?

Also of two male children born into the world; for which there is joy to the
travailing mothers; the one to the Duke of Bavaria, Jerome by name, on the day
before the Kal. of October. 1638; the other to the Duke of Lorrain's brother,
named Ferdinand born at Vienne in 1639. But then again, the Duke of Brandenburg
p^ssing by, if I mistake not, in Pareuthe, is smitten with a leaden bullet out
of a window, in 1638; the committer of which treacherons fact being thither to
unknown.

By that time I have mentioned two or three things of note, it will be time to
proceed unto the actions of the two other years, to be contained in this
Chapter. At Vienna, the biggest Bell in the City sounded of his own accord,
none enforcing it, which to me seems not the least of wonders. In the
Prince's Court also of the same place, an Eagle of fifteen years old fell down
dead: which seems not the least of tokens. And (which is among the greatest of
wonderful things) a Chariot with 6 horses, and five that were carried therein,
was by the force of the wind cast off from a long bridge into the River
Danubius of the same Vienna. These three in one year, to wit, in 1639.

Money (which is accounted the sinews of War) being wanting to the Emperor;
himself, with the Electors, Ambassadors, and the Deputies of other States came
together at Norimberg, in 1640; but there being nothing done at that meeting,
there were the same year Assemblies of all ranks summoned at Ratisbone, where
they treated both concerning raising money for carrying on the War, and also,
of restoring the administration of Civil Justice in places where they could;
which by reason of the wars, must needs have been either abolished, or
neglected. For,

Inter arma silent leges.
Where warlique weapons bear command,
Laws do hold their tongue in hand.
This Emperor, in a special manner, endeavors a peace with the Danish King
this year; but lustily encounters the Swedish Forces: for ( George Duke of
Luneburg recovering Steynbruck, a Town before lost) the Imperialists having
Spork for their Leader, perform two considerable Services, by beating Ekard and
Rose, two Swedish Commanders; and which is more, by driving Bannier out of
Bohemia: but being somewhat dispersed hereby, they gather their Army together,
and sit down at Salfield, and with this second Army they recover Telchine
Castle: Moreover, forcing Bannier to retire himself in the Lower-Hassia; but,
following him thither, as it seems, too hotly, although they were joined with
Geleen, Haese, Gonzage, and Hatsfield, they are there scattered. These also
vanquish three Towns more, and under the command of Golze, force Hirschberg in
Silesia unto a demolishment; the Saxon Duke, the Duke of Brandenburg, and
Truckmuller, at three several places with like Martial force, in the mean time
earnestly laboring, although in vain, and with slaughter of their men. The
Pope amongst all this, being urgently busied to make peace between the Kings.

Those that had been under the command of the Duke of Vinurn, on the contrary,
are not idle, but do divide their company into three parts, possessing
Wetterave, and spreading themselves in three chief places thereof. The
Emperians assault Bingium, the which being a place fit for passage or
conveyance; the other sharply defend against them; yet at last they lose it:
and setting their warfare in order, a heap of battles employing them, they join
with Bannier; and at the latter end of the year, do scatter and beat the Baron
of Bredah at Zigenhayne: where also Rose, a Major, takes a French Earl (full of
gold and Brigandines) unthought of.

But Bannier himself this year 1640, plays Rex; he robbed and killed in
Bohemia in the ways as he went, and beheadeth the Confuls or chief Magistrates
of two Towns, Satze and Cade, together with a Judge: after that, when the
Emperor's forces had recovered two garrisons, he sleighting another place,
takes speedily, although with some loss, Plane-Castle, very full of all sort
of victual: thence, while the Emperians overcome Chemnice, he departed to
Erford, and being increased by other Armies, he opposed himself against them,
who going forward to Salfield, had there rested with 70 thousand men. His wife
now dying, being grieved (when he had first taken Fulda, and had heard a voice
in the air, Be gone, Bannier, be gone, for now the time is,) he went away to
Eschwege, and then joins the forces of Durlace to himself, whereby he wrested
that honorable Victory at Homburg in Hassia aforementioned, from the
Imperialists; which Conquest, the surrender of Amaenoburg followed; then
returning back to Erford, be besieged one place, and took another, now ready to
strive, if he could, to break into Bavaria: Into which to come, he bends
himself in the beginning of 1641, and therefore calling to him Guebrian, who
was the French General of Vinurn's Army, breaks through by fighting, and takes
Chamice, as also clothes appointed for the Emperor's Soldiers. But then
letting go Guebrian to another place, while he was more secure than ordinary at
a place ordained for hunting, that he had taken away from the Duke of
Brandenburg, he is invaded by the Emperians; and unless Schlange of Neoburg had
before a Wood, valiantly resisted them, he had been quite overthrown. However,
he was forced to redeem his escape into Bohemia with the loss of 26 Ensigns,
and 1800 horsemen; yet perceiving the Conqueror to follow after him, he calls
back Guebrian, and, at Zwiccave, is joined with him.

Then again, at the River Sale, the chief of warlike matters (and the
conclusion to Bannier) is joined, where each party maintain a Bank; Bannier
toughly, and (as I may say) with his teeth defending his; yet at length being
forced to yield, he goes to Halberstade, where voyding much blood and matter,
through an Imposthume, or breaking of a vein, he put an end to his life, and so
to all his toil and labors; the Voice, as may be well supposed, that he heard
in the Air the year before, having reference rather unto this time of his
death, than unto the Victory that he got a little after, at Homburg. But the
Swedish forces (what through this Arch-warriour's death, what through this last
repulse at Sale) were broken both in strength, and courage: yet not being
wholly dismayed, they stand waiting upon the Senate of Stockholm for new
orders, who commanded Torstensohn to undergo, as General, Bannier's charge and
burden, who having received his Commission, passes over the River Albis with a
supply of his own, and joins with the Bannerians; whereby they allayed the
spirits of the Emperians that then were hot against them. Notwithstanding they
having renewed their League with the Lantgrave of Hesse, and the Duke of
Luneburg, break through Wolsebyte, and (being resolvedly bent) they beat and are
beaten, until the Duke of Luneburg could pass over unto the Emperor's party;
which gave an occasion to the Bannerians of moving elsewhere.

Many places were yielded to the Emperor's Soldiers this year; first the Town
Crucinack with its Castle; then seven other considerable Cities and Town, with
other places of less note. Dorstene (somewhat remote) was after two months
siege taken. Einbeck and also Clive were forced to yield, and that with a
slaughter of the Hassians who had come for relief; and in the mean time the
Duke of Saxony, through very much labor and industry brings Gorlice under his
power. In which year also (being 1641) by the Emperor (at Assemblies held at
Ratisbone concerning a right managing the War, and supplying the said War with
ayds) Edward Duke of Bregance, the natural brother of the valiant and diligent
King in Portugal, is committed to custody.

But in England, after Charles King of Britain was again estranged from the
Scots a little after the pacification between them, and had disavowed that
Paper which the Scots, avouched to contein the true conditions of the same, and
in testimony of his indignation against it, had commanded it to be burnt by the
common Executioner, in the year 1639. he told his Privy-Councell about the
beginning of December, the same year, that he intended to summon a Parliament,
or Kingdom's Representative in England, (which began on April the thirteenth,
in the year 1640) with which the subjects were even filled with hopes of
redresses of many things amiss, and almost with wonder, at the having of that,
the name of which seemed to be strange amongst them; But their hopes were not
answered herein; for the King being very urgent at the said Parliament for
money to War a second time with the Scots, and to pay the Army that he had
already raised in order thereto, which was to be done by that which they call
[Subsidy], some Members preferring a redress of grievances before the other,
made speeches to the same purpose: but yet they taking the said Subsidies into
consideration, while they were debating the business, the King thinking (it
seems) they were not Cordial therein, and did it with delay, brake them up, on
the fifth of May following, which was in the space of three weeks. But after
that, he continved the sitting of the Convocation of their Clergy until May
the twenty ninth, (a thing never known so before) who, by his Authority, made
Canons, and put Oaths upon some. And on the eighth of July following, the said
King had a third son born unto him, named Henry, and entitled Duke of
Gloucester. But the Scots upon new discontents enter England the second time,
on August the seventeenth, (their second Parliament now sitting again, June the
second, that had been adjourned from December the eighteenth, 1639.) against
whom the King (having had contributions from the Clergy and others) and issuing
out Writs for Ship Money, and other ways undertaken for defraying the charges
of the war) set forward toward the North of England with an Army, on the
twentieth day of the same August, under the command of the Deputy, Earl of
Strafford (the Earl of Northumberland, who was appointed as General, not being
in health) where having a fight, or rather a skirmish, at Newburn, on the
twenty eighth day, and at another place far North, the English soldiers, not
willing to engage in that cause, and many mutinying against their Officers; the
King (who had on September the twentieth, set up his Standard of War at the
City of York, and his Council meeting there on the twenty fourth day) by a
choice of some Lords of both Kingdoms, to compose the matter, at length came
to a cessation of Arms with the Scots upon seven Articles on Oct. the twenty
sixth of the same year, until December. the sixteenth following, which Armies
were not disbanded until the beginning of August following, in the year 1641.
In the mean time some English Peers and Barons, being somewhat sensible of the
condition of their Nation, and what the consequence of this war with their
fellow subjects, might be; do Petition their King to call another Parliament
with speed; who seeing a necessity thereof, as well as the Petitioners,
acquainted his Council at York of his intentions for a Parliament, which
should begin on November. the third following, which Parliament (having the same
year, Jan. the Eleventh, exhibited a Bill for one to be had every three years,
and also May the tenth, in 1641, another bill for their own continuance, until
they were willing to dissolve, unto both which the King signed) sat from
November the third, 1640. unto April the 20th, 1653. almost thirteen years,
and therefore was by the English called the [Long-winded] Parliament. One of
the first things this great Council set upon, was to impeach those whom they
judged offenders against the Commonwealth: the first of whom was the
aforesaid Deputy of Ireland, the Earl of Strafford, a deep Politician, who
being committed to custody, on the Eleventh day of November 1640. and to the
Tower of London, the two and twentieth of the same, and began to be tried in a
Pompous and remarkable manner on March the two and twentieth following, upon
nine Grand Articles, in the Hall of Westminster, whose trial ending April the
fifteenth, 1641. was (being by his Judges, adjudged Guilty of High Treason)
beheaded (the King having first signed to his Execution) on the 12th of May of
the same year.

Another was, to censure and remove diverse Ministers of the Church that were
scandalous, or superstitious, and to relieve and recompense those who had been
diligent, and Conscientious sufferers.

The Parliament and people of England (at this time) loving the Scots, because
they looked on them as instruments, (by opposing the King) of procuring this
means of their redress, Commissioners from Scotland, had acceptable residence
in London on the 19th of November 1640. the Parliament on the twelfth day of
the same Month, before their coming thither, having by Vote ordered the
Scots, in part of 300000 lb. no less then 10000 lb. to be paid them, for
supplying their losses and necessities. At the latter end of which Month,
Pryn, and Burton, and within a Fortnights time, Bastwick, who had three years
before, suffered as abovesaid, were brought with triumph into the City from
exile, about which time also there was Petitioning by the Londoners, against,
not only the misdemeanors, but the very standing of the Bishops of their
Church; and william Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, was on the eighteenth day
of December 1640. by the Great Council of the Kingdom, sequestered from all
his dignities, and (to the Kings grief) committed, first into the hands of the
Usher of the upperhouse, which they call the black Rod, and on the eight and
twentieth day of January following, unto a closer confinement in the Tower of
London: and afterward in the Month of November, 1641. there being tumults of
the Citizens of London, in the midst of which, they declared against, and
threatened the Bishops; twelve of whom (having protested against the validity of
the Parliaments votes in their absence, the which, they said, the danger of the
tumultuous occasioned) were accused thereupon of High Treason; ten whereof were
sent Prisoners to the Tower, the other two to the black Rod. Amongst these
things the British King espoused his eldest daughter Mary, unto William of
Nassaw, son of Henry Prince of Orange in the year 1640 and the said young
Prince coming to London on April the twentieth 1641. (the Parliament being
pleased with the marriage, the States of Holland's Ambassadors, make fair
proposals to the King) was with great solemnity married unto her on the second
of May, the same year, she being then not above ten years of age, and the
Prince about sixteen.

The king also took a journey this year, on August the tenth, into Scotland
(the Parliament entreating his longer stay, by reason of the kingdoms
occasions). Which proved a hinderance unto Englands affairs. And although the
kings end of going at that time, was not by the English understood, yet a
Scottish Writer says, (for it was about the time of the two Armies disbanding)
It was secretly to engage them against the English Parliament by large and fair
promises, and also to take some Noble men of Scotland out of the way, whose
willingness therein he suspected. But in the mean time, on October the three
and twentieth, 1641. the conspiracy of the Irish in Ireland (so long kept
close) broke forth in a most bloody manner against the English, and Protestants
there, so that in two Months space, (besides many great and grievous torments,
and spoylings of worldly goods and estates) were murdered no less, (as is
credibly reported) then 200000 Souls. Amongst other places of strength, the
Castle of Dublin, Irelands Mother-City, and that kingdoms chief Magazine, was
to be seized on this very day; but by a Countreyman of their own, servant to an
English knight, through a providential relation overnight, by MacMohone, of
some passages unto him, it was discovered; whereby this Macmohone, and Maguire
an Irish Lord, were suddenly apprehended, who afterward suffered death in
England for the same, the Irish being on the first of January following, openly
proclaimed Rebels; and the English Parliament, taking what care they could (in
so sudden a case) for supplies against them.

But on January the third (next after the said king returns from Scotland,
which was on November the twenty fifth, on which day he was with pompous
solemnity, and costly equipage received into London by the Citizens) he
exhibited seven Articles of High Treason against six Members of that
representative, (chiefly moved hereto as some say, by his Queens being begun to
be accused about the troubles of Ireland) and the day following came personally
into the Lower House, (two or three hundred armed men attending him) and
sitting down in their Speaker's Chair, demanded five of their Members; but they
having absented themselves upon information, and that house judging the King to
have broken their privilege thereby, he being urged as for other things, so
for that he could not have his will on those men; the people also flocking to
Westminster in great throngs, from discontent, took (as he thought) a just
occasion to depart from the City unto an house of his about 12 miles from
London, called Hampton Court, on the very 10th day of the same Jan. 1641; Who
(being petitioned for the Militia on the 27 day, to be put into the Parliaments
hands, which he refused,) after diverse movings from place to place, came, at
length, on March 19th, unto York, where we found him, when he first divulged
his intent of summoning this Parliament, with whom now he was discontented. Who
also had this year published a Law for the restoring the Palatinate his Cousen,
(in whose place, his father being dead, the Danish King is set) but to little
or no purpose, beginning to have enough to do at home. ^n Wales also, a
dominion belonging unto England, being in the year 1640, what with Sea and rain
waters, almost drowned, which may be accounted a presage of the misery, that
for some few years overspread, and almost overwhelmed that Nation.

The French King, in the mean time, minds his own affairs, taking care to have
two places (concerning Germany) fortified, Brisack and Rheinfield; and gives
increases unto Vinurn's Army under the command of Guebrian; yet loses Salse;
these in 1641. But against the Spaniard the same year he prevails not a little;
for they besieging Casale, he beats them off, and stripping them of their
Camps, obtains a prey to the value of 60 thousand Ducats, which was for the
Soldiers pay; the other almost inestimable, for there was a lofty Chariot that
cost (it self) 8000 Ducats. They fight again at Pade, where the French had the
masterdome, and gets Taurine by surrender. Moreover, he performed a notable
piece of service in the Netherlands against him; for coming upon Atrebate
unthought of, he surrounds it, and within three months time subdueth it; which
Town, had for the space of 148 years renounced the Rule of France, and
therefore by the French King's Ancestors had been seven times besieged; yet all
in vain. And whereas the Catalonians (who by reason of nearness of situation,
are subject to Spanish Incursions) were dealt unworthily withal by them, they
humbly craving aid, the French begins this year by great Armies to set them at
liberty; and in the year 1641, goes about the business with the Spaniard, and
gives him often overthrowes at Barcellona; and then besieges Tarragon of
Catalonia; which the Spaniard (loath to lose) often attempts to beat them off,
and as often frustrated by the French, until at length being overpowred in
number, he is forced to leave it. The Prince of Conde likewise robbing and
killing in the Spaniard's County of Russilio. The King of Spain also having
somewhat to say unto John the 4th, King of Lusitania or Portugal this year, by
disswasory letters, he is not at all moved thereat, but sends his Ambassadors
every way even to the Dutch and Swedes, endeavoring to get their favor.
Discovering also, and quenching a most destructive Conspiracy against him at
Lisbone.

Moreover, the Pope being a partaker against the French, occasions him to fight
at Bulloign, and he sees all the Dukes of Italy to take in hand that which
they had made a common cause against him. But when as the Governor of Suesso,
being supported by other helps, had made an inroad into France nigh the Wood or
Forest of Arduen, he turned thither all his power, overthrew the other, the
Suessonian himself falling in battle, and who was the last of that stock and
ambition. The French after this, subdued three Towns of their enemies, but were
forced to restore Arre after four months, by reason of other distractions.

The Dutch seems to be more enriched with Tunns of gold out of both the Indies
this year 1640, than impoverished by battles; for they receive from thence 150
of them: yet they feel the force and damage of some great storms in their
havens: and fight bloodily against the Spaniard at Hulst, attempting two
places, Sluse, and Bruge in vain. But stoutly besieging the small Fortress of
Gennepe in 1641, they constrain it to yield. Arming the year before by reason
of the dashings begun in England; and being then also forbidden to ride on the
Danish Sea.

Amurath, Emperor of the Turks (who had the report of a good Soldier, but a
great Tyrant) dying in the year 1640, the 33d year, the flowr of his age, his
brother Ibraim, in the 27th year of his age, succeeded him; who continued his
busy endeavor of peace with the Persian: but calling the Tartarians into his
fellowship, threatens a most cruel War on Poland; whose Pirates also of Argier
take a Spanish ship, valued to be worth 300000 Florens.

Three or four strange and unusual things happened in diverse places within two
years space: The one was a Whale, which being (in a Province of France) left
without water, on a place where the Tide ebbeth and flows, was found to be
320 foot long, and 162 foot broad: This monstrous King of Fishes, was nine
days in destroying with Guns, as if 'twere shooting against a Castle;
afterward being drawn to shore by 500 strong armed men, opening his chaps,
they saw them easily to receive a horse with his rider. Another was, a
sevenfold offspring brought forth at one birth in the Swedish Camps, in the
year 1640, four whereof were male-children, three female; the last of which
received a baptism, and then gave up the ghost. Also at Stockholm in Sweden, on
the 4th of the Ides of January, 1641, the whole Princes Court seemed to be very
bright and shining with lights; and, which is the greatest thing, three great
Guns were heard to be discharged, without the moving of any man's hand, or fire
unto them. But throughout Bavaria, in 1640, was there a spacious hunting made,
as they say, by the Prince of darkness, with howling cries, dogs, flesh, and a
company of servants, and diverse wild beasts; now ready after a while to go (as
he said) a fishing. This being true, as it is related, surely a lively sign
both of violence, by the hunting; and of deceit, by the fishing, in the earth,

Besides those mentioned in our discourse by the way, these may be taken notice
of in their deaths both natural and violent. Christian, Prince of Portugal;
and Marodas Duke of Prague; Francis Jacinth, Prince of Subaudia, a child; which
three departed life in the year 1638. And the same year, one Cyril a Patriarch,
that is, a chief father of the Greek Church, through the instigations or
movings of his adversaries at Constantinople, was strangled with a rope.
Columna, Master of the Stable, dyed at Rome in the year 1639; in which year the
Emperor of Germany lost Philip and Augustine, his second and third sons, by
death. And Lewis, son to the Prince of Orange, was almost born, and dead in a
moment. Kirchbaw an Emperian Major, being taken among the Swedes, was beheaded
at Vienna in this year 1639; and within the compass of the same year the Earl
of Buchaim being mortally wounded in a sporting-exercise, in a short time after
exchanged life for death. In 1640, besides Amurath the Turk, dyed George Con,
(one of the Pope's three Ambassadors, that (by the Queens prevalency with the
English king her husband) had been lately sent unto him, and with great honor
received by him, in his return out of England to Rome. Also George Wilhelm,
Duke Elector of Brandenburg; whom Frederick Wilhelm succeeded. Which Frederick
the year following began to diminish the Emperor, by little and little, making
his Garrisons his own, and therefore is honorably and bountifully received in
the Assemblies at Warsove. But Christian Ulrick, a Prince of Denmark, departing
from Colone, a City on this side the River Rhene, by the hands of the provoked
Hollanders (for this very year 1640, they were fordidden the Danish Sea)
perished. Besides John Bannier the Swedish Champion, this year 1641, dyed
Arnheym, Chief Commander of the Duke of Saxony's Soldiery. John George, Duke
of Brunswick, and Luneburg this year departed at Hildese, who would have
obtained his Wolsebyte; but died without what he sought after. Likewise Otto, a
single man, Earl of Schaumburg, and the last of that Earldome. Amongst the rest
Anthony Caraffa in the Province of Barryen, in the kingdom of Neapolis, is to
be minded, who in 1641, for new burdens (a fair warning) imposed on the
people, was by the common people slain. And to conclude this Chapter with a
most sad accident that happened in the year 1640. At Forcheym of Francony, a
Countreyman killing a Hog, went away about other occasions; in whose absence
two little Boys, one of six, another of three years old, in imitation of their
father, kill a little brother of theirs under three Months old; and as though
they had well done, tell the horrid act to their father, being in the Garden.
He beholding the business, chides them with harsh words. Whereupon the
children for fear of rods, hide the child in the oven. Their Mother, being
about her work and knowing nothing, running from the cattle, sets fire on dry
wood to bake, and departs: when she came to draw out the coals, she sees (as I
may say) her own bowels in her child's, burned: which caused her to rush
headlong into a Well and drown her self; and her Husband (through this double
grief) to hang himself.

CHAP. III. An account of what noted Passages happened in Germany, England, and
other places.
From the year of Christ 1642, to 1646.
ALthough England might now begin to be the chief Subject of our surveying
Account, her billows of trouble and civil dissentions rising high; yet since
Germanie's calamity was before her in order and continuance of time; it shall
be also in order of declaring.

Torsthenson therefore having taken on him Bannier's trust in behalf of the
Swedes, plays Bannier's part; for, having condemned one Seckendorf (a
Commander) to be beheaded, for treachery to the Army at the siege of Wolfebyte;
and by Koningsmark raised the siege of Mansfield; hearing that Stalhanse was
overcharged by the Duke of Lawenburg throughout Silesia, he runs to him, and
having reduced four places of strength; in the month of June 1642, scatters
the said Lawenburg his forces, and at Swenice, takes him, with 38 Wagons.
Thence (having fortified another place as a refuge in doubtful cases) he goes
to Sittave, and undertaking to besiege Lipsie, the Emperians coming to oppose
him, he goes to meet them, and gave them a great overthrow; there were slain to
the number of 5000, he took 83 great and choice Officers prisoners, and above
4000 and 400 common Soldiers, 122 Ensigns, 46 great guns, together with 69
Wagons: and when this was done, returns to Lipsie, and on the 24 of October
the same year, receives it by surrender. And (that he might the better deal
with the Emperor) persuades the Duke of Brandenburg to stand as a neuter; but
the Duke of Saxony not so.

Guebrian, likewise the French General, and Eberstein the Commander of the
Hassians, by the sufferance of the Dutch, pass over the River Rhene unto
Vesalia, where they fall upon and beat Lamboy, (who had assisted the Duke of
Suesso the year before in his in-breach into France) about to depart into his
Winter Quarters; there are 3000 slain, and 4000 taken; amongst whom their chief
Captain himself, with two others, 14 Colonels, nine Ambassadors, eight chief
men of the guard, 28 Masters of horse, 38 Centurions or Captains of foot; Rose
also the Tribune, scattering the residue that gathered themselves together;
four strong holds being afterward vanquished and possessed, and 500 wagons
taken, that were carrying things of great value unto more secure places.

But the Emperor (about to set his Soldiery in order) exchanges Horn for
werth, two grand Commanders that had been mutually taken: yet he is rather
affected this year 1642, with grief and anger for the two overthrowes received
(as abovesaid) at Silesia, (whereby Moravia, the very Center of the Land is
possessed by the Conqueror) and at Lipsia, which by reason of nearness made
Prague to tremble; (This overthrow was by flight, whereupon he branded that
Legion that chiefly fled, with disgrace, and cut off the head of Mandesloh the
Major) than with any great joy for warlique success; yet this supplied the
place of all comfort, that he recovereth Oelsa of Silesia, as also Marcodure in
the Juliacan field, affording succor (by joining with the Duke of Bavaria)
unto the Province of Colone. About the beginning of this year, he confirms a
peace with the Turk at Buda the chief City in Hungary, for 20 years. And, being
now worsted, (through the labor and endeavor of the King of Denmark) toward
the end of the year, he admits of a Treaty of peace with the Swedes; and to
this end, are Assemblies gathered together at Frankford upon the River Mentz.
Nevertheless, the war going on, and being every where strove against; not
forgetting the slaughter and overthrow at Lipsia, he beheadeth in 1643 more of
the chief, and authors of that flight, publishing his Brigades to be infamous.
And for his assistance, would have drawn forth the Hungarians without their
Kingdom's bounds, but could not obtain them. This year also he grants
Piccolominie to the King of Spain for a General: yet the said Piccolominie in
1643, before that concession, hastening against Torsthenson, makes him to quit
Freyberg of Misnia; but he scatters Bruoy, and setting Olmuce at liberty,
finding there a considerable treasure, he sends it away into Swethland. Now
also he receives bands of Soldiers from the Dacians, having taken Neostade and
other places into possession. And having first redeemed some Captains of three
Legions (that were through sloth surprised by the enemy) with money, he
afterward hangs some, and cashiereth others. But besieging Brunne, a strong
place, to his great damage, he over-recruited the said loss, by dispersing
Bucheym an Emperian Commander, and vanquishing Eulenburg, a Town (in the
borders of Moravia and Silesia) containing in it a million of gold. Yet while
he most hastily leads away into Holsatia, and disperseth some Troops of
horsemen that first came against him, he loses Sittavia of Silesia, Lemberg,
and other places.

Horn leads an Army out of Swethland through the main Land, consisting of 20000
men, and a double Navy was trimmed up at Stockholm; for they fell out with the
Dane this year, for three causes; for hindering their passage by Sea, cleaving
to the Muscovite and Polander, and for supplying Cracove in Pomerania (their
enemies garrison) with money and Soldiers, against which Koningsmark the same
year 1643, opposed himself, who departing out of Hassia, imposes tribute on
the people, as he wandered up and down, intercepting two Towns, Halberstade, and
Osterwick. But the French under the command of Guebrian, who in 1642 after the
victory against Lamboy, had returned on this side Rhene again, and in 1643 had
taken up their Winter Quarters in Francony, do send the Forces of Werth to crop
them, and at Milteburg to beat them. Whereupon they flee to Brisack; but making
no stay there, straightway return into the Badian field: And joining battle at
Ravensburg, they are Conquerours, two chief Commanders, Merce and Witgenstein,
falling by their hands. They also receive supplies from France, under the
conduct of the Duke of Enguienne. Then they take the Town of Rothweile, but it
cost them the loss of four Legions, and at Durling they are quite overwhelmed,
three thousand being slain, and above four thousand common Soldiers (besides
chief Captains) taken. Eberstein the head of the Hassian Soldiery, having
before left them, returning out of the Badian field unto Heydelberg, where he
took the Duke of Lorrain's housholdstuff at unawares, and had almost taken the
Duke himself. Who also robbed and killed in the Colonian Land; and whereas
there had been cruelty exercised in Gronsfeld, a place under the power of the
Emperor, he from Novese, that was a Town yielded to him the year before,
renders them like for like. Thus the Proverb is verified, Homo homini Lupus.
Man that should be a fellow brother,
Prey's like the Wolf upon each other.


The King of England, being at the City of York, whither he came toward the
latter end of the year 1641, sent to the Parliament, Apr. 8. 1642, to acquaint
them, that he would personally go over into Ireland to engage (as he said)
against those bloody Rebels there; and therefore would arm a Lifeguard (which
he intended to raise about Westchester, a near and convenient place of passage
into that Kingdom) for himself, of about 2000 and 200 horse and foot, out of
the Magazine of Hull, a very strong Seaport Town in the North. But, there
having been a letter not long before, of George Digbie's, a Lord, unto the
Queen, out of Zealand intercepted, in which he spoke of the King's declaring
himself, and retiring to some safe place, etc. besides other grounds, this
Court suspected his intentions, and appointed John Hotham, a Knight of that
Country to prevent the King of taking that strong hold with its ammunition,
into his possession. At which the King being greatly moved, and coming in
person with some Soldiers in arms, besides some of the Nobility and Gentry, on
the 23 day of the same month, to demand entrance into that Town; the said
Hotham denying him on his knees, upon the Town-wall, was proclaimed Traitor by
the King: whose act nevertheless the Parliament justified on the 25 day, and
endeavored to appease the King, but in vain. For the King daily summoning by
Proclamations both the chief and common sort of those parts, to attend him as a
Guard for his Person, who (said he) was in danger of the Parliament; (about
which time also Thomas Roe Knight, was by him sent over as an Ambassador to
Vienna in Germany, to press on the cause of the Palatinate,) the Parliament
likewise declared, that such arming of men in an extraordinary way, was against
the Laws and Kingdom's Liberties. And when about the latter end of this month
of April, 1642, 36 Lords, as also many of the Commons house, within a months
time, went from the Parliament unto the King at York; then the Kingdom in
general feared a Civil War, which before was by many suspected; so that on
the second of July following, propositions being by that high Court, sent unto
the King for his consent, and no conclusion made concerning them; It was
ordered on June the 10th, by Parliament, That Money and Plate should be brought
in, either by gift or loan, which they professed was to levy Forces for the
maintaining the Protestant Religion, the King's Person, authority and dignity,
the peace of the Kingdom, together with the Laws of the Land, and privileges
of the People's Representative, the Parliament. The King also did the like,
inviting people to the same thing in the same words. And (toward the latter end
of June) his Great Seal being conveyed unto him from the Lord Keeper of it,
Littleton, he issued forth Proclamations, one whereof was, That the Parliaments
Warrants about settling the Militia in their hands should not be obeyed. And
they (on the contrary) forbade raising arms by the King's Warrant, without
their authority. The King also having pawned the Jewels of his Crown for 200000
l. sterling, (which his Queen had carried over into Holland, in the month of
Febr. 1641, to that purpose, when she went over with her daughter the Princess
of Orange) at this time, received money, with Arms and Ammunition, so that now
he sent out Commissions of Array, for the arming men in all Counties; which
Commission was proclaimed in London, for which the Lord Mayor of that City was
turned out, and disabled of any Office, and committed prisoner to the Tower,
July the 11th; and on the next day, the Earl of Essex was by the Parliament
voted General of their Army. The Earl of Warwick also, skillfull in
Sea-Affairs, was by their Ordinance chosen Admiral of the Navy, who a little
after took a considerable ship coming out of the Netherlands, laden with
Gunpowder for the King's service; which was not a small addition to his
Sea-strength. The said Earl of Essex raising an Army upon the Parliaments Vote,
on the first of August following, began to divide his men into Regiments, which
in a short time amounted to nigh 14000 horse and foot; when in the mean time,
the King with 3000 foot, and 1000 horsemen on the 15th of July began to besiege
Hull; which siege (what by opening a sluice, and drowning the Country
thereabout, what by two sallies made out of the Town, by one John Meldrum
Knight; in the first of which, the besiegers were made to retreat with some
small loss; and in the second, after the strengthening of the Town with more
men, making them disorderly to retire, with the slaughter of 21 persons, and
some taken prisoners, taking also the King's Ammunition, and firing the barn in
which it was kept) was broken up. And now [furor arma ministrat] both sides
beginning to assault one another with fury, diverse places began to be taken and
retaken. Amongst which, the strong Sea-garrison of Portsmouth was on September.
7. 1642, surrendered to the Parliaments forces under the command of Sir William
Waller Knight.

The King on the 22 of August the same year sets up his Standard (which I may
call an actual Marriage of that War, which was but before espoused) and the
third day after sent to the Parliament to compose the difference between him
and them by a Treaty. Of which that Court said they were not in a condition to
do, unless the Standard were taken down and Proclamations (wherein they were
called Rebels and Traitors) were revoked. So that on the 9th of September.
General Essex departed from London toward his Army, who expected his coming
unto them to their Rendezvous at North-hampton; Unto whom also the Parliament
sent a Petition, which he should present unto the King, to withdraw himself
from those persons about him, etc. But he was too far prejudiced to grant the
same; the Bishops, (to make the sore the wider, whom he loved, and without
whom, he thought he could be no King,) being on September. 1. 1642, voted
powerless in Church Government, who not long before had power both in Church
and State. So, Essex attending the King's motion (after some skirmishes of
parties) October. 23, on a Plain called, The Vale of Red-Horse, situate at the
foot of a steep Hill, called Edgehill, near to a Village called Keynton, in
the County of Warwick, joined the first pitched battle with the King's Army,
(the Earl of Lindsey being the king's General) his Army consisting of about
11000 horse and foot. Essex (having, for haste of following them, left no small
part of his forces and Artillery behind him) had scarce so many. This fight was
bloody and dubious; Robert the king's Cousen charging furiously on the
Parliaments left wing, put both horse and foot to flight, seizing on his
enemies Carriages and baggage. A valiant Knight on the other side, brake the
foot of the King's left wing, and seized on his Artillery; the King's Standard
was taken, but soon retaken: both sides had Trophies of victory, Ensigns,
prisoners, and great guns; so that neither party could much upbraid each other.
Notwithstanding, of the 5000 and upwards that were slain in all, more of the
King's side were slain; and besides, Lindsey his General was taken prifoner,
and soon after dyed of wounds received.

The King, after the fight, marched to the City and University of Oxford; which
place he took up, as it were, the Metropolis of his residence in the time of
the War; and Essex unto Coventry for refreshment, who came November. 7. to
Westminster, his Army quartering in Villages adjacent, by reason of the King's
wide excursions out of Oxford, which put London in fear. At which time, (while
the Parliament was petitioning him for an accommodation of peace, being but 15
miles from the City, and he had manifested a grief for the peoples sufferings,
with a desire to treat with them near London upon Propositions) his forces fell
unexpectedly upon a Parliament broken Regiment at Brainford, seven miles
distance, killing many, on the 12th day of November; and the next day there was
a bloody fight maintained by two other Regiments coming for assistance. Esex,
soon hearing of it at London, came speedily with strength for relief, with a
great number of armed men out of London; So that, had there not been an
oversight committed, in withdrawing 3000 men from Kingstone upon Thames, a Town
10 miles off, the King (being by a far greater number enclosed) would scarce
have escaped; the which now he did, safely returning to Oxford: But this action
did not a little engage London against him.

Amongst diverse besiegings, stormings, taking of places this year, that of
Cyrencester, a Town of Gloucestershire, is remarkable, which being entered by
the King's Forces, the resisters were very rigidly and too too cruelly dealt
withal, many of them being brought (in the winter season) from that place to
Oxford through mire and dirt barefoot; this was in the beginning of February; On
the 22d day of which month, the Queen of England landed at Burlington, a
Sea-Town in Yorkshire, with arms against the Parliament, whence she went to
York on March the 7th; and was by the Parliament voted a Traitor to the
Commonwealth, May the 23d, 1643. A little after whose landing, March the
second, 1642, the Lord Brook, a Parliament Commander, who was accounted both
valorous, learned, and virtuous, is by a Musket shot from the Minster of
Lichfield in Leicestershire, stricken dead, as he looked out of a window toward
the enclosed enemy, to the sorrow and enragement of his Soldiery. About the
middle of which month also, diverse Capuchin-Fryers, that had before belonged
unto the Queen, were by order of the said Parliament sent away into France,
from whence they came. And whereas now the Prince of Orange had begun to help
the King, he is by the States of the United Provinces, either through good
will, or Policy restrained.

But the year following 1643, (raging hatred and resolution now striving, as it
were, to exceed) the kindled fire was broken forth into devouring flames in
many or most Counties of the Land; so that I shall not undertake here
particularly to view the variety and multiplicity of actions, some following
years in Britain, especially in England; but shall confine my self unto some
few most remarkable things. Yet this I say, There were very few Wars in the
World ever carried on with more vigor, enmity, and desire of conquest, than
this, for the time: but, the greatest storms being usually soonest over, makes
that natural Axiom true in a moral sense, Nullum violentum est perpetuum,
No violent thing (but comes with blasting)
Yet it is not always lasting.


This Summer, the chief time for action, the Parliament went down the wind; for
Ferdinand Lord Fairfax, with his son, was routed by the Earl of New Castle on
Barmtham Moor, March 29, 1643, and then by him besieged in Hull. The Earl of
Essex indeed besieging Reading, April 16, had it surrendered unto him within 12
days after. But his Army, after that, what by reason of sickness, what
through want of necessaries, for which many forsook their Colors, himself was
forced to retreat to London, waiting for a recruit. About which time also, Sir
William Waller Knight (besieging the Town of Devizes Westward, where the
besieged were put to hard shifts) was by a party of the King's from Oxford,
through vicissitude of fortune in July, totally defeated; and losing his Army,
came to London also; whereupon the City of Bristol was on the 24th day of the
same month besieged by the King, and within four days time yielded up unto
him, (which sudden surrender, many imputed unto the softness of the
Governor's spirit) strong holds now falling into the hands of his forces, as
it were untimely fruit, or leafs shaken with the wind. Exeter, a strong City in
the West, was begirt by Prince Maurice, which was taken Sept. 3. following:
Only Gloucester (in which the Governor Massey's courage and resolution was
famous) stood out nigh a months space, straightly besieged, and furiously
assaulted, yet unconquered: the successful King, through his over much
emulousnesse of subduing that place, neglected (like Hannibal of old) to
improve his victories to the best advantage, who (in all likelihood) if he had
then come for London, might have been master of it; until, Essex being well
recruited, came, at the last pinch, for that Citie's relief, which was on
September the 8th, fighting the King's Army on the 20th day in a set-battel at
Newberry in Barkshire, where they were vanquished; and so the Parliaments
strength revived, and came even to an equal weight, who before were very much
over-ballanced.

The Parliament wanting money to maintain their Armies, an Excise on Victual,
and diverse Commodities, was thought of, at the very beginning of the year,
March 28, the first mover being Mr. William Pryn, one of the three Sufferers;
which Excise, some in detestation, called the Dutch-Devil, because it was an
imitation of that people, and lay heavy upon the poorer sort. It was settled by
Ordinance, July 18 following.

This was the time also wherein a joint Covenant was entered into by the English
with the Scots, called a solemn vow and Covenant, one main head (as to maintain
the King's Person and just dignity, whereof was, to endeavor the bringing of
the three Nations into one-nesse of conformity in Religion and worship
according to the Word of God: which clause, Word of God, being afterward
thought of by many, gave them (in their apprehensions) a liberty of dissenting
from any conformity, that they judged not agreeable thereto. Which Covenant,
the Parliament (as an example to the rest) took, June 6. 1643.

About the same time there was a sad design against the Parliament and City of
London discovered, which was for armed men to arise, killing and slaying, while
the City was in diverse places burning; for the which, two chiefly suffered
death before their own doors, Thompkins, who had some relation to the Queen;
and Challenour, a Citizen, on July the 5th. The books of the Archbishop of
Canterbury being given unto another Doctor who was their friend, by the
Parliament, October. 3. who also in the month November, had a new Great Seal
made; against which, the King (the same November 21,) openly declared.

The Bishop of Rome (who had excommunicated the Duke of Parma, whereupon he
renounced the Protection of France in 1641) having fallen out with him, treats
of a peace with the said Duke in 1642; in which year also Rome is fortified,
because they there feared the weapons of their Spanish Catholic King, who was
offended with the Pope, for entertaining a Portugal Ambassador. But the year
following, the Bishop and the Duke (not agreeing) wage a hot war; he demanding
ayds (as his due) from the Viceroy of Naples, arming also the Princes of Italy
against the Duke. And would have had Piccolominie for his General, but could
not obtain him. But the Florentines this year, give him an overthrow, killing
one thousand of his Soldiers, and taking another, with all his warlike
provision: notwithstanding, within a little time, he revengeth himself upon
him. So he that kills with the sword, shall be killed with the sword; Yet this
did not Peter.

The French and Spaniard in 1642, affect one onother with mutual overthrows,
although the French exceed. The one in Catalonia, overcommeth the son of the
Duke of Lordon a Spanish Commander, slaying 3000, taking many, and but few
escaping; finding also among some of the prey, 60000 double Crowns. The
Spaniard also conquers the French at Castellatum, killing 3000 and six hundred,
3000 and 400 being taken. He recovered the Town Bassaea. But the French take
from him Colibria and Argiller in Catalonia, besieging Perpinian, and by the
extremest hunger tames it, avoiding the treachery, and layings in wait of
their enemies, in which siege, 300 persons yielded to the hungry for the
support of life; dispersing also the Spaniards, who by night set upon
Exclusana. He obtains likewise this year, some Victory both by Sea and land at
Barcellona; by land, snatching withal the enemies victual; by Sea, in a
Sea Fight, though not without loss to himself, subduing two strong holds in
Italy this year, and in 1643, as many; lengthening his league with the Swede
for three years longer. The Spaniard indeed makes Tortone yield to him this
year 1643. As also vanquisheth Monsone in Catalonia, receiving most rich ships
out of the Indies. But the Frenchman vanquisheth the Spaniards at Rocroy,
where there was much blood spilt, 12000 being slain on both sides; so that,
although the French had the day, taking many of the Conquered (which Captives
they redeemed with 22000, 288 Florenes, as before 800 prisoners of war at
Antwerp for 50000 Florenes) and 180 Ensigns, all their Guns, bag and baggage;
yet they might say with Livy the Historian concerning a Roman Victory.

Multo sanguine ac vulneribus ea victoria stetit.
That Victory (although the enemy lost)
To get, yet us, much blood and wound it cost.
He also besieges the Spanish in Theonsvile, and vanquisheth it, and joining
with the Portugal King, is prosperous at Sea. But the Dutch and he, do not
many great matters; the Spaniard vanquishing them at the River Mose in 1642.
The Dutch the next year attempting the Garrison of Hulst in vain; but obtaining
out of the Indies a Mass of Treasure, to wit, 200 Tuns of Gold. The King of
Spain amidst all, affording help to his bloody fellow-Catholiques, the Irish in
1642.

Now also the Queen of France being conscious of her vow made to the Lady of
Lauretta for health restored to the Dolphine, sent a Messenger thither with
1200 l. of Silver, and in his arm the Image of the child Jesus, of 250 pounds
of Gold. This would stop a hole in the Pope's Coffers.

The Danish King, being at ods with the Swede, is the same year 1643,
reconciled with them of Hamburg; whose natural son Voldamar yet illegitimate,
goes now into Moscovia, to take in marriage their Great Duke's Daughter. In
which year, the Governor of Sueinice, a Garrison of the Swedes, escapes the
subtle Devices of the Deputy, Senators, and Jesuits against him. And
Cardinal Mazerine in France, whose power is so large, as to be the orderer of
the French affairs, is conspired against, and the conspiratours frustrated. And
in the Month of Febr, a Council (which the Germans call a Diet) is begun at
Frankford at the River Maenus.

The Emperor in 1644, (by reason of Torstensons absence, who was gone to fight
with the Dane) recovereth (at length) the strong Garrison of Wohlave;
vanquishing also Sueinice, (where the year before, were designs against the
Governor, as was but now said) And who not long before, bruised (though but
lightly) his shoulder and leg, being shaken off his Horse, by a wild Boar
overturning him. He likewise commands Galasse, a chieftain of his, to bring aid
to the King of Denmark; the same Galasse takes quickly the Castle of Zeize,
sending away the Soldiery by virtue of the Emperors Oath or promise made unto
them; and fighting with the Swedes at Odesloe, there was little noise of that
conflict. But laying siege unto Pinneburg, he is by them beaten off thence,
whom Torstenson suffers to return to Bernburg, and follows him thither, where
he beats 3000 Purveyors. And coming for relief to Eislebe that was besieged,
Galasse slips away, but other 2000 of his purveyors are beaten by him, with the
Garrison Soldiers, he pursues the Victory, following after Galasse's last
troop, the which he chaseth with Enkefort that was their leader, and takes the
said Enkefort in the narrow passages lying between Magdeburg and Witteberg.
Then by a fearful assault, he wins Pegave; and prevailing over the Castle
of Zeize, that Galasse had but even now taken, he demolisheth it, and then like
a careful Commander, refreshes his soldiers, who were almost tired with
these toils. Koningsmart (in the mean time) is busied in gathering
contributions on every side; who possesses and destroys the Town of
Langwele, that was subdued by the Archbishops Army. But he is beaten by the
Emperians at Akerslebe, even as the Swedes that were too secure, were at
another place but a little before. But Wrangel takes three strong holds, under
whose conduct, also the siege of Pinneburg (abovementioned) was quit.

Moreover, although Torstenson fought this year against the Dane, with equal
success of Victory, yet Horn, with the Army that the year before he led out of
Swethland, invading Scandia, and the Fleming (who was also engaged against him)
entering Norway; could not but much molest him. Whose King (although the Swedes
were somewhat overcome at Colding, where, of four Legions, 34. men were slain,
137 taken, and 15 wounded) every where complains of breaking into his
Dominions, as well as they of him, for stopping up the passage of his Sea from
them, whereby they were hindered of their Northern Trassique. And although the
Fleming gave place unto a greater number of the Danish troops this year then he
had, yet it was celebrated by him with much blood. The Swedes and he have a
treble Sea Fight also; the first was doubtful to either, the second was more
acceptable to the Swedes: and the third most acceptable unto them, dispersing
therein the Danish Fleet, whose King committing himself in person to his Sea,
is this year wounded. Who likewise recovered Breydenburg from the Swedes by
land; and turns them out of the Castles of Ripe and Haderslebe, places within
his command that they Garrisonned. And further, being offended with one Peter a
Frenchman, his Vice Admiral, for suffering the enemy to slip out of the
Chelonian Haven, where he had him at an advantage, he cuts off his head. He
dismisseth the Emperors Captain (willingly enough) his aids afforded, being
too chargeable and slow in coming; which being gone, he finds it enough to do,
to extirpate the Swedish Remainders that had taken root in his Country.

Lastly, his son Voldamar, who is received by the white Russians or Muscovites
(this year 1644) in a stately manner, as him that was to be the son in Law, and
heir of their Prince; When he refused to take on him their Mungrell-Religion,
(there being not envy wanting to spur it on) he is less trimly observed, and
being confined from his liberty in Muscovy (whether that were the sole cause of
it, I know not) until the Great Duke closed his last day, he neither by the
craft or force of the Polanders, nor by the earnest entreaty of the King of
Denmark his father, in 1644. could obtain the same.

Much was the action both in Germany and Britain, and not a little in some
other places, in the year 1645. For the Emperor who had to deal with, as also
fearing, an unwearied enemy, the Swede; having received unto him his Army (out
of Holsatia) that was shattered, and greatly lessened, musters a new Army; and
that he might have prosperous success, appoints public prayers to be made in
his behalf, and withal, goes to Brandise unto the Image of the Virgin Mary,
which was there set in its first state, for he had redeemed it out of the hands
of the Swedes for 10000 Florenes. Nevertheless Torstenson (who thought to be
at hand with the Emperor before he should renew his Army) when he had in his
march wasted Bruxy with fire, passing through Ottove, and Moldavia, stops at
Jancoa, which place was between him and the Emperians, and for want of room,
possessing a hill, he fights most stiffly with Goce (who was chief Commander for
the Emperor) for eight hours space (this battle was on the twenty fourth of
February, 1645) and he vanquisheth the said Goce his Army, taking from the
Emperor 289 Officers of note, even to the Trumpeters, 4000 common soldiers
were taken, besides 45 Wagons, 32 Ensigns, 26 Engines; with the loss of five
Captains. These leaders of his thus taken, he redeems out of Torstensons hands
with 80000 Royals, and so by force requires tribute from the people for this
purpose. The Conqueror after this is not idle, he dispersed 2000 of many sorts
or companies, that had gatherred themselves together after this rout, and
besides, freeing Olmuce a Garrison that the enemy had possessed, he forced in
eight or nine considerable places, even to Vienna the Emperor's place of
residence, so that that City it self was mistrusted: but that he might not too
much triumph in success, he besieges Brunne in vain, with the great damage
of his foot soldiery; yet the occasion of deserting that siege, was from one
Gersdorf, being intercepted with Letters of great moment in Silesia; so that
having fortified the Town of Cornuburg, he visits Moravia, and straight way
after Bohemia, where he wipes their nose both of Gold and Bread-Corn, which
being sent before into Silesia, he follows; then vanquisheth other places, he
puts the City Prague into a fright; and passing over the River Albis that was
frozen up with cold, he hastneth to win Tetchine Castle by assault; but being
sick of the Gout, he is brought to Lypsye; committing unto Wrangle the whole
charge of his office: who had Bruxia now yielded up unto him, which Torstenson,
had hurt by fire before, as abovesaid.

The Emperor also this year, being an enemy unto Ragotzy Prince of
Transylvania, sends Bucheym a chieftain to oppose him, which Transilvanian,
Torstenson was busied in, enfolding a continual War, as we may judge, to keep
(such is the Policy of Warlike enemies) the Emperor the more in action; yet he
comes to an agreement this year with the said Ragotzy, sending Bucheyme with
six thousand men, and furniture to aid the Duke of Bavaria who was in danger,
striving also what he could to drive the Swedes out of Bohemia, whose Camps,
(through the exceeding fierceness of the cold) were (at Glactove) in the
latter end of the year, pitched one against the other for lodgeing.

The King of Denmark is this year beaten by Wrangle before he undertook
Torstensons trust; expecting nothing but war with the Dutch: He lost also a
great Ship called the Sophia by Shipwreck, that his mother had beautified with
the Charge of 120000 Royals, carrying sixty four pieces of Ordinance; and
although he recovered Bremeroverd by craft, and took prisoner the Governor of
Wartisberg, with a company of 800 Collectours of money. Yet at length (fortune
having forsaken him) and being bent thereto through the entreaties of his
States, after a Negotiation sufficiently long, he enters a peace both with the
Swedes and Dutch, through the vehement labor of the French King therein.

Whiles Wrangle was afflicting the Dane throughout Holsatia, Koningsmark
subdueth the Archbishopric of Bremes, vanquishing five strong holds there:
then joining their Forces together, they destroy Buchwald the Emperian, with a
great slaughter. And about the middle of this Summer, Wrangle himself overcomes
an Island, called the Isle of Bornholm, Koningsmark departing from him into
Hassia, that he might repair the French, that had been under Vinurn, who were
beaten by Werth, the General of the Bavarians, at Mergentheym; Where, the
Vinurn-French, Koningsmark, Geece, and the General of the Hassians, joining in
one, they drive the Bavarians from Kirchain, and crossing the River Rhene, they
win three places by assault, overflowing the Valley Tauber: and then
Koningsmark being called back into Saxony, the Duke of Enguien adding by a
supply of strength, courage unto them, they fight most sharply July 24, at
Albersheyme; in which conflict, the right Wing, in which the French were
placed, is dispersed; bet the left Wing, in which the valor of the Hassians
chiefly appeared, overcame; Geleene was here taken, and Merce slain, to the
grief of the conquered. And then gathering themselves together from the chase,
they drive the Bavarians over the River Danubius. Hereupon two Garrisons,
Nordlinge and Dunkelspule, are made the Conquerour's, Hailbrunne being
besieged, but left, when as the Emperor had sent the Bavarian large assistance
by Bucheyme aforesaid, that they might make them rush, as it were, headlong,
leaving their greater guns behind them, toward Philippiburg. Then the Bavarian
recovered three places, whereof Dunkelspule is one. Koningsmark having (before
this battle) taken three strong holds in Saxony, and brought the Electour
thereof unto a truce for six months. By all which may be gathered, what ground
the Emperor lost this year.

Some other things were done, as Bugsdorff, possessing himself of Hornburg, and
another place, etc. But I shall stop here with Germany for this year, when I
have added these two things, That William of Bade undergoeth the protection of
France, Halle admiting a garrison of Swedes into it for defense. And Maurice of
Nassaw is returned from exile out of Sigeum, a Town and Promontory near Troy,
unto his own Country.

In Britain, the English Parliament seeing a need of assistance from their
Neighbour-Nation the Scots, in 1643, and sending Commissioners to Edinburg for
the drawing of them into England; upon condition of a joynt-taking the Covenant
aforesaid, and paying them 100000 l. toward raising the Army, promised them
21000 horse and foot. Which accordingly, either about the middle of January, or
the beginning of March the same year, passed over the River Tyne, and came in;
when as now, as I have said, the Parliament were in an indifferent equality of
strength by their own Armies.

The King also, not to be wanting in the like kind of endeavor, grants a
Cessation of arms unto the Rebellious in Ireland, (the which was made September.
15. 1643.) whereby he might have Forces out of Ireland for his help: and it
being at that time not a discommodity, but a benefit unto them, the King
received a pretty sum of money from them for it, to wit, 30000 l. (which
Cessation being against the Parliaments Act formerly signed unto by him, was
much spoken against by many). The landing of which Irish forces in behalf of
the King, being November. 19 following at Moston, was two or three months before
the Scots coming in behalf of the Parliament, in execution; although the other
might be first in resolution.

Neither were these mutual aids alike prosperous; for they that had
victoriously fought against those that Rebelled in Ireland, now fighting
against the Parliament, being but a little while atrived, were quite broken by
forces under the command of Sir Thomas Fairfax, most or all their principal
commanders, together with 1700 Common soldiers being taken; when as it was not
so with the Scottish Army. Who under the Earl of Leven their General, marching
against the Earl of Newcastle, who had a great Army for the King in the North,
took some strong holds, and (though there was some heat of fighting) by
enduring the great cold and hardness of weather at that season, weakened and
lessened the said Newcastles Army. And in the year 1644. two other Generals,
Earl of Manchester (where that stout, and I may say, Iron soldier Oliver
Cromwell commanded) and Lord Fairfax after their several services, joining with
the Scottish General, they went all together with concord (by the which, as
Masinissa King of Numidia said to his sons, dying; Resparvae crescunt, Small
matters gather strength, and increase) and then besieged York, the second chief
City in England, in which the Earl of Newcastle himself was enclosed; which
place being of great moment, Prince Rupert the Kings Cousin came with great
forces to relieve; whereby the three Generals being engaged to draw off, the
Earl of Newcastle, having freedom to bring his forces out of York, joined with
Rupert, and so on a place called Marston Moor adjoining, July the second 1644.
was fought the greatest battle of that Civil war. In which battle, although
(through some disadvantage of ground) the Parliaments right wing was put to
flight; yet Cromwell brake by a furious force the right wing of the King's, and
put them to flight, and with Lesley the Scottish Lievtenant-General, pursued in
chase. Cromwell also coming about again with his horsemen, and relieving the
other wing, whereby at length a full Victory was gotten, and all Ruperts great
Guns, Carriages, Bag and Baggage, with above a hundred Ensigns, were in the
Conquerours possession. Who returned unto the siege of York, and soon had it
surrendered unto them upon conditions, Rupert being before gone or rather fled
into the South, and the Earl of Newcastle passing into Germany. Leven, (the
forces being parted assunder) a while after, taking (by his Scots) the Town of
Newcastle, farther North, which by reason of the trade of Sea-col chiefly, is
esteemed rich.

But although (by reason of diverse, and not small Armies that were raised on
both sides at the Spring of this year 1644, under several valiant Commanders,
and their almost equal success,) England seemed to be unhappy, yet about the
latter end of the Summer, there was (as it were) a retaliation of this Northern
Conquest, by the defeating the Parliaments General, Essex, in the West of the
Land, (besides the prevailing of the King's Forces over the Parliaments, in the
Southern and Midland parts,) who with Sir William Waller, having begun to
besiege or block up Oxford on both sides, the King escaping with a few horse
out of the City, that design was left off; and ( Waller not being with him, but
dividing their forces on May the 29th) the said General Essex marched into the
West, even as far as Cornwall, (when at Burford, he had appointed Waller to
pursue the King on June the 6th, who had marched with his Army toward
Worcester from Oxford, June the third, who could not hinder the King of his
design, and returned to encounter other forces;) where being environed, by the
King's Army that came upon them (in Cornwall, the latter end of August, the
farthest County Westward) he was dispersed, his whole Infantry or foot
submitting to the King, the horse escaping as well as they could, the Earl
himself fleeing to Plymouth, September. 1. whose Soldiers also through the
enmity of the Inhabitants unto the Parliaments cause, suffered injuries. After
this, he being again recruited, on October. 27. following, there was a second
battle fought near Newberry in Berkshire, where although there were losses on
both sides, yet no great cause of triumph there was to either.

The Queen in the month of April 1644, journeying Westward, came to Exeter,
where June the 16th, she was delivered of a daughter Princess Henrietta, and
the 15th of the next month July, she arrived at the Seaport Town of Breast in
Britany, a Dukedom of France. Who went over, to use (though fruitless)
endeavors for aid from the French King and the Catholics; and some say, that
Cardinal Mazarine was a great hinderer of French ayds against the Parliament.
Likewise after much earnestness, the Duke of Lorrain gave King Charles hope of
10000 men, of those that he for some years had taken the Emperor's part with,
against the Swede and the French. But although there were a Negotiatour sent
into Holland about the business, and their conveyance; yet they never set
footing in England.

At the same time also the King sought assistance from the Rebels of Ireland,
giving the Earl of Ormond the Lieutenant, power to make peace with them, as
well as a Cessation before made; (assuring them both of the free exercise of
their Religion, and, when his War was ended, of an abrogation of all Laws made
against Papists there,) which he wished them to hasten, for reasons in a Letter
to Ormond. But when their demands were so high, that in many Treaties with them
Ormond could effect nothing, He fully impowreth the Lord Herbert, whom he had
made Earl of Glamorgan, being a strict Papist, to make peace with them, and
indulge them, with as much secrecy as might be: which was concealed for a time
both from Ormond, and Lord Digby the Secretary: which politic and cunning
working afterward between Digby and Glamorgan, for fear of reflecting upon the
King, who would not be seen to treat and make peace with them by a Papist; and
also of displeasing the Protestants of Ireland: having a doubt, in the mean
time, lest they should offend the Irish Rebels, especially seeing all those
devices for bringing an Army of those Irish into England, were frustrated, I
shall forbear any further to mention.

Amongst all which miseries and doubtful events of War this year 1644,
Propositions being sent to Oxford in the month of November, the King and the
Parliament came to a Treaty concerning three particulars; Of their
Church Government and Religion; of the Militia or standing Holds and Magazine
of England; and about prosecuting the war of Ireland, where there had been nigh
a year and half Cessation of arms. It began on Januar. 30 this year, by
Commissioners from both, besides Commissioners from Scotland, and continued a
little above three weeks, until February 22. None of the three being consented
unto by the King, but the issue of war was left to decide all.

The Parliament therefore, who, after debate between the Lords and Commons,
wherein the Lords at first dissented, on December. 31 foregoing, had voted Sir
Thomas Fairfax, son of the Lord Fairfax, sole General of their Armies, who was
highly esteemed both for Valor and Modesty. Which change, the emulation of
great Commanders partly occasioned, whereby some good designs had not
prospered; and the Earl of Essex, with two other Earls by Land, and the Earl of
Warwick by Sea, giving up their Commissions; modelled a new Army, consisting of
21000 horse and foot. In which were many Colonels and Officers of full bent and
active resolution to go through the business of War, that they had undertaken.
The King also not wanting diverse Commanders, and great forces under them which
possessed their several Coasts, with many strong Garrisons that were in his
hands. But before I speak of the achievements of that Fairfaxian Army, which
were great and manifold in the year 1645, I shall take notice of some
observable things in 1644. Which were, (besides diverse Ambassadors that came
from France, from the Dutch, from Spain, to London, and so to Oxford, in 1643,
and 1644, to mediate between the King and Parliament; which all took no effect;
and Commissioners from the Irish Protestants to Oxford, Novem. 23. 1644; as
also Commissioners from the Romanists in Ireland, December. 3. following,) of a
great fire that happened in the month October this year in Oxford, burning
down a great deal of building from Carphux toward the Castle Yard. Of three
Suns or Par-helii that were seen in London, November. 19. two being made by the
image or likeness of the One Sun, in a thick and even, quiet and watery cloud,
lively set forth through the breaking in of the Sun beams. In which year also
the two Hothams, father and son, who had July the 15th, 1643, been brought
prisoners out of the North to London, for conspiracy to betray Hull to the
King, breaking their trust, etc. were on the very Kalends of January, 1644,
beheaded. (A sad disaster, showing, it is better never to engage in any thing,
than not to be constant to what is undertaken.) On the third day of which
January, the Common Prayer Book (which before (together with Crosses and
Images, in which number Cheap Side Cross was demolished) Cathedral Service and
Organs, etc. had been in most places taken away by Army-force, and
Parliamentary-permission) yields unto a Directory, made by an Assembly or
Synod at Westminster, which was established in its room, by
Parliament-ordination. Within eight days after which, as though it had been on
purpose, The Archbishop, William Laud, after almost four years imprisonment in
the Tower of London, was smitten with the Ax for Crimes of a various kind; who
seemed to behave himself with confidence at the place of his execution, taking
that place of Scripture, as a subject to speak on to the people, Let us run
with patience the race that is set before us. The which matter he did read unto
them; the which was printed. Mr. Burton also the suffering-Minister under him,
soon after, setting forth something as to show the false application of the
same Scripture unto himself. Likewise the Anti-Parliament, which were the
Members that went from Westminster, who had assembled as a Parliament at
Oxford, Jan. 22. 1643, were adjourned for seven months, from March the 10th
1644, till October. 10th, 1645; whom also the King himself in a Letter to his
Queen in France, called a Mungrel Parliament.

Charles also, Prince of Wales, in the same month of March, departing into
France. And (as though they would now make their King a Delinquent, the Commons
house, on the 24th day of this month, as a conclusion of the year, voted, That
that clause [For preservation of his Majesty's Person] which was before in
Essex's, should be left out in their new General's Commission.

Who now being in a fit and strong posture, (although not seeming so, either in
the honorable worthiness of Commanders, or in the experienced antiquity of
the Soldiers,) one of the first enterprises that was undertaken by this
new-modelled Army, was to besiege Oxford, which began on May 22, 1645; (the
King about 15 days before marching out of the same, who being joined with his
two Cousins, Rupert and Maurice, amongst other intended designs, in the mean
time besieged Leicester, May 30, and the day following took it by storming;
which place was considerable in regard of strength and situation,) Cromwell,
Fairfax his Lieutenant General, above a month before doing some execution on a
party of the Kings, at a place called Islip-bridge, besieging also Blechington
house, a Garrison, whither some of them had fled, and had it surrendered unto
him April 24; for which the Governor Colonel Windebank was the next day shot to
death. While Oxford was besieged, there was an eminent salley made by the
enclosed, which gave some affront to the besiegers, June the 2d; and within a
few days after, General Fairfax raised his siege, time having been lost by
that unseasonable undertaking.

Time now drew nigh for a pitched battle, the which in Northhamptonshire, in
the fields of Naseby, was on the 14th day of the same June, joined; many (as
well they might) calling it, The Fatal battle of Naseby; because (like the
Vertical point in the Zodiac) it made the King's successes, which were now
raised high, to go, from that day, retrograde, and decay. In this fight,
although at the first, through the routing of the left Wing of the Fairfaxians,
and Prince Rupert's pursuit thereof, the day of victory seemed to shine upon
the King's Army; (For they were somewhat stronger in horse) yet Cromwell's
force doing the like to the Royalists, together with Major General Skippon's
magnanimousnesse amongst his foot, though much wounded, brought a night upon
the former likelihoods; and gave both an absolute and happy victory to the
Parliament: The horse fleeing to the late taken Garrison of Leicester, by
Cromwell's pursuit, no small number were taken prisoners; the Footmen (in
general) desiring quarter for their lives, having first thrown down their Arms,
were to the number of four or five thousand brought prisoners to London.
Trophies also of this Conquest were the King's Standard of War, with 100
Colors, besides the King's Coach, with his Letters of Secrecy; all their
great Guns, bag and baggage, rich pillage, with much gold and silver; and
(which made it more acceptable) it was, though not [sine sudore] without pains;
yet [sine multo sanguine] it cost not much blood, hardly 500 being slain in
all; whereof almost 400 were of the conquered. Leicester hereupon (as York
before, upon the like dysaster) quickly yielding to this conquering Army. The
which by diligence and courage, without delay defeated remaining Forces,
relieved Taunton, took strong holds and Garrisons, faster than ever the other
party had taken them before; amongst which, that tough and strong garrison of
Basing-house, belonging to the Marquess of Winchester, and by him defended,
(that had been more than once attempted, but in vain, and with the loss of
many lives, was on September. 14 this year 1645, taken (under the Command of
Lieutenant General Cromwell) by storm, in which the Marquess himself was a
Prisoner, and one Benjamin Johnson, a notable Stage Player formerly at London,
amongst the after-heat of the stormers, was by some Soldier slain.

The surprizal also of Hereford by Colonel Birch his stratagem, is remarkable,
who under show of bringing in Pioneers out of the Country in the night; the
which the defendants for the King, had sent for, to strengthen their works, had
the Drawbridge pulled up unto a bold Soldier (with his company) that
pretended the Constables Office, who stoutly kept up the bridge from being put
down, until the watchful approaching Soldiers came in, and with no small
hurly-burly possessed that strong City. It happened on December. 17th following,
and amongst diverse Sea transactions, five ships this year were taken by the
Parliament at Sea, one whereof carried an Apostolic Messenger, so called,
with 180000 Pistolets.

The King now seeing unto what pass things were brought, and bringing against
him, desired to treat in person with the Parliament, Jan. 13, which was denied
by them, chiefly (I understand) for fear lest his Personal presence in London,
(where were a multitude affecting both his Cause and Person) should either
cause disturbance, or incurr danger. They having also perceived from his
letters that were taken in the aforesaid fight at Naseby, which had been
publicly read in London, as diverse things, so, that he treated not with them
at Uxbridge out of a candid mind, neither would he willingly have given the
name of a Parliament unto them; saying, It was one thing to call them so, and
another thing so to acknowledge them. After which refusal of the Parliament to
treat, amongst the rest, West-Chester (which the King was very loath to part
with, it being so convenient a landing place from Ireland, and would fain have
had Irish to relieve it,) was in February surrendered. And at the closure of
this year 1645, the Lord Hopton, on conditions granted him by General Fairfax,
who had marched into the West parts, (which Hopton, had about the beginning of
the War diverse encounters with Sir William Waller, and was worsted by him, who
was still on his legs, and did great and long service for the King) suffered
all his forces to be disbanded, March the 14th.

Scotland also (who were helping their fellow-covenanters in England, and after
a long siege of 42 weeks, had the City and strong Garrison of Carlisle delivered
unto them June 28, 1645. who garrisonning the same with their own men, caused
the Parliament to write unto the Scottish General, to give it into English
hands; Ordaining also thence-forward English Commissioners to reside in
Scotland, as Scotch Commissioners did in England at this time felt the plaguing
force of the Earl of Montrosse, who, from the time that his Contrymen came
into England in 1643, attempted to molest Scotland in the Kings behalf. Who
receiving about 1200 of the Rebellious in Ireland, with others added to them in
Scotland, for almost a year and an halfs space, until the battle of Kilsieth,
by excursions, and retreats into craggy and difficult places, getting one
Victory, and losing two, lay like a gawling sore, or pestilentious disease in
his Country. On whose success the King having no small reliance, earnestly
attempted to join, but could by no means accomplish it, being hindered by
Parliament Commanders. (The Kirk of Scotland, in the mean time, having given a
serious admonition unto the King, showing the danger of those courses; which he
little or nothing regarded;) Nevertheless, Montrosse, suddenly appearing, with
scarce 4000, out of his rediring places, Aug. 17. 1645, in Kilsieth field, near
the Town of Glascow, gave a great defeat and slaughter unto the Army of that
State, by reason of ambushes laid in places that were there fit for them,
killing above 5000 men; most of the Towns suddenly yielding unto him, and many
persons, showing their concealed good wills, now joining with him; for which
calamity of that Nation, the English sympathizing, kept a public Fast. The
English chief Army Officers showing also a freeness to adventure their lives
for them, if domestique affairs would suffer. But David Lesley marching into
Scotland out of England, to relieve his distressed Country, with his horsemen,
within a months time, September. 13. at Selkirk or Philip-haugh, wholly ruined
the same Montrosse; and the changeable condition of this kingdom, was restored,
as it were, into its former state: the King being at Rouston-Heath (by Major
General Pointz) overcome with the loss of 800 men, Sept. 24, designing either
to join with Montrosse, or to relieve besieged West-Chester. The Lord Digby
being as unfortunate, who October. 15. following, was defeated at Sherburn in
Yorkshire, and put to flight.

The Frenchman assailing Graveling, a strong Town that was Garrisonned by the
Spaniard 1644, reduces it under his power, by a short, yet laboursome, siege;
but in Catalonia he was less prosperous, whereupon (as is usual in bad
successes of war) one Hodencurt a French-Commander there, returning home, is
encompassed in with a Prison. He possessed also two places in Italy, being
angry with Cardinal Barbarine, (Cardinals being his choosers) about the
Election of the new Pope. The Spaniard, who (in his Idolatry) committed both
his soldiers, and all his affairs unto the Patronage of the Virgin Mary, had
(however) better success then the Emperor of Germany, in the same way, the
year after; for he beat at Lerida 6000 French, and 2000 Portugals, forcing
Lerida it self unto a surrender: (as also the same year, the Castle of Astia in
Italy, that the French had before possessed). But that he might have no cause
to dote upon that imaginary protection; they repayed him again the same with
usury, the next year 1645. Who (besides taking the Town of Rosate, which it
seems was so battered, that there were scarce ten whole houses remaining in it
at the yielding; as also a strong hold called Trinity-Fort) beat the Spaniards
at Balaquere, chasing them unto a place, called Cantelme. And by intercepting
the provision that was for its relief, forces the Town to yield to him. And
hangs some Catalonians, that were convicted of treachery against him. In Italy,
he snatcheth also (as it were) this year, the Town Vigenane, in which there was
a Million of prey, yet lost it again. But in Flanders he overcame Mardike, two
holds more, with a great Bulwark adjoining to Dunkirk of the Spaniards, and
also that notable Garrison of Motte of Lorrain, unto which no less then 1800
Country-Towns, and Villages belonging to the French-Title, were constrained to
pay Tribute; carrying away unto Atrebate a Town and Garrison of his, a prey
with two hundred Wagons, 1200 head of Cattle, laying 200 Country Towns
desolate. Yet losing Mardike again in Flanders, as he did Vigenane in Italy.
And whereas Anthony Barbarine (whether through fear, jealousy, or discontent)
had departed out of Rome by night, he undertakes (this year) the cause of him
and his, with the Bishop of Rome.

Which Bishop in 1644 had made peace with the Duke of Parma, and the
Florentines, which was received with the great joy of all Italy.

The Emperor and his successor setting the Archbishop of Triers at liberty
the year following 1645, who being pompously received by Torstenson, enters
into his Diocese.

This year also the Maiden-Queen of Swethland, lays hold of the stern of
Government in that Kingdom.

The Portugal also acting prosperously enough through the Ocean, the Spaniard
being this year 1644. inferior to him in Shipping.

The Tartars also making an inroad into Poland, are now beaten.

But in Turkey, the Great Vizier presents himself armed before the Sultan, and
reproves evil affected persons. Who being received by the Emperor or
Sultan's mother, an invective Woman, he notwithstanding represseth by laying to
her charge, the unruly desire of Women to bear command, of which (it appears)
she was guilty; for the which he is assaulted with a dagger, and striving to
slip away is slain; this was in 1644. Now also the Offices or charges of the
Turkish Court are changed. And Usur Piall the High Admiral at Sea, who was
this yea, scattered by the Ships and people of Malta, where was a Ship taken by
them, having in it many Concubines, descended of a Noble Pedigree, and likewise
of a great value, esteemed at four Millions, which is 4000000 lb. is (after
some endeavor to escape) choked by the command of the Great Turk; who in
1645, gave peace unto Ragotzy of Transylvania, through the earnestness of
Tscherine his Ambassador pressing the same. Which Turk also, now arms himself
by Sea and Land, as threatening the European world that own not his Mahomet:
but, according to the Proverb, Threatened folks live long. However, he besieges
and overcomes Canea. And deals injuriously with the French and Venetian
Ambassadors at Constantinople.

But the Dutch before peace made with the Danish King, pass through his Sea in
1645, whether he would or no; receiving also seven Ships of great value out of
the Indies. They take counsel likewise with the French, of setting upon
Flanders on both sides of it. And themselves, who the year before attempted (as
was said) Hulst in vain, do now make it yield by breaking through the same,
vanquishing also two other fortresses. But then, that they might not be too
proud of their wealth; fourteen of their Ships, accounted to be worth four
Millions of money, by reason of a Sea-Tower in the Danish-Sea, which (giving
light unto Mariners to see their safe way into the Haven) was removed to
another place, being dashed against the Rocks, were drowned.

Memorable accidents in four years space, are these; A mischance happened at
Vesalia, where hundreds of pounds of Gunpowder, being in the open Marketplace
laid into a Wagon by reason of the gaping chaps of the barrells, through the
striking of a horses foot with his iron shoe against a flint stone, took fire;
whereby, the adjoining houses were cast down, and 30 people killed. Likewise at
Vienna, out of a boat or Barque that was overwhelmed in the great River
Danubius, one servant was saved from drowning, by virtue of two hunting dogs,
that were tied together, by the which he held. At the City of Buda in Hungary,
it rained lead and Tin. And at Strigone a Town sciruate on Danubius, the fishes
flocking together, covered the River, showing their heads above water, which
thing the aged inhabitants, (it seems) from former observation, foretold to be
a token of the change of their Lord and Master: these in 1642. But in the year
1644, in the Month of May, a great Wood (belonging to the Dukedom of
Norimberg) of 8000 Acres of Land, burned in a flame, which is extraordinarily
notable, if not ominous. The same year also Koningsmark the Swedish Commander,
had a strange and sad accident befell his children and houshold-servants by
lightning, at the solemnities of the Funeral of a Major, at Minda; flashing
upon his sons: It defaced the first born's face, it smote the right side and
arm of the second, and the right arm of his third born; yet the eldest and
youngest of his daughters had no hurt, but the servants, one and the other were
destroyed.

Chances by fire in 1645, amongst which these two were the saddest. At Vilna,
3000 houses burned: But at Constantinople, one thousand dwelling houses, and
fifteen thousand Merchants Warehouses, two hundred Temples, four consecrated
places, and thirty stately dwellings or Palaces, were spoiled by the flame. The
great winds at Basil in Germany, doing above 200000 Florenes damage; the
Seacoasts also of the Low Countries and France feeling the same thing.

These closed their last day. The Queen Mother of France, dyed at the City
Agrippina in Germany 1642, having departed out of England the year before. Also
Cardinal Cajetan, this year. Francis Albert Duke of Lawenburg, of a wound
received, fighting against the Swedes; with others. In England, the Lord Brook,
slain, as aforesaid.

The year following 1643, in France, dyed Lewis the 13th, King of France, son
to the deceased Mother the year before; as also Philip Landgrave of Hesse the
Upper, in Germany, who deceased at Butsback. In England, Hambden a Colonel, one
of the five accused Members by the English King, who was in June, 1643, at a
place called Chalgrove field in a fight, mortally wounded, of which he dyed
within six days after; and on December the 8th, the same year, John Pym,
another of those five Members; who was esteemed a great Statesman, gave up the
ghost.

The Queen of Poland the following year, 1644, when she had brought forth a
daughter named Claudia, breathed out her life in childbed. Pope Urban the 8th,
being above seventy years of age, and having been chief Bishop 21 years, now
also deceased. Whence arose four Factions of Cardinals about the choice of a
new Pope, the Spanish, French, Roman, and Barbarine: but the Roman party
prevailed, and chose John Baptista Pamphilius, named Innocent the 10th.

Two this year dyed of an Apoplexy, the Duke of Bavaria his Ambassador, at the
Council of Frankford; and Albert Duke of Saxony. One, with suspicion of
drinking poison, to wit, the Queen of Spain. But the Archbishop of Burgedale
departing the World, left a yearly mustering of 4000 Target-men (as a Legacy to
Cardinal Mazarine) in France, that King so commanding it. And in England,
besides the Hothams, and their Archibishop already mentioned by us, John
Steward, Lord, of the King's party, and, I suppose, (by his name) his Kinsman,
dyed naturally at Abbington five miles from Oxford at the beginning of April,
and was interred at Oxford on the 5th day.

And Alexander Carew Knight, was beheaded five days before the Hothams, for
crimes of the like nature objected against him, by the Parliament. Macquire
also the Irish Baron, (who by pleading Peerage, protracted his life a little
longer than Mahone, who dyed the same death a while before him) was on February
the 20th, 1644, hanged and quartered at London's Tyburn.

Amongst others, dyed Goce, a General of the Emperor's; in Bohemia Wolmar Rose
a German, through a box of the ear given him by one Widmare. The great Duke of
Muscovy. These three in 1645.

Of the English; Lord Littleton, Keeper of the Broad Seal at Oxford, August the
27th. And to conclude, one Dr. Featley, a man of much reading, and of a sharp
Wit, who was chosen a Member of the Parliamentary Synod at WEST MINSTER, upon
some secret compliance, or intelligence given to the King's party at Oxford,
was committed a prisoner unto Peter-house in London, in 1643, or 1644; and at
length writing a book in a tart manner against those called Baptists, or
Anabaptists, had shortly after, a liberty granted of going abroad, yet still a
prisoner at large, who a very little time enjoyed that freedom, dying on April
17, 1645.

CHAP. IV. Of things which were done in diverse parts of the World, Ferdinand
the third being Emperor of Germany, and Charles the first, for a while, King of
Britain.
From the year 1646, unto 1650, inclusively taken.
THe Emperor in 1646, who by the assent of the Duke of Saxony, that had
prolonged his Cessation of arms with the Swedes, quitting the garrison of
Magdeburg, (Wrangle having departed unto Cremsie, a place out of the way)
recovereth three Towns from the Swedes, and afterward Cornuburg, a Garrison of
great concernment. And then being increased in strength of Forces by the
Bavarians, goes down through Francony into Wetterave and Hassia, where he
labors (though all in vain) to intercept or forestall both the Swedish Camps
and provision of victual. For, he triumphing in his Camps for the joy of his
son Ferdinand the 4th, so called, who was chosen King of Bohemia, (whom toward
the end of this year he so crowned) and also for the late return of Cornuburg
into his hands. Wrangle slipping away, environeth the Emperor's Soldiers, and
passing over the River Moenus, he bends his march unto Danubius. But
Koningsmark the Swedish Commander after one or two services, and estsoon
subduing the Town of Breververd this year, does join himself with Wrangle, when
he had descended from Ilmene through Erford and Eichfield unto Visurg. For he
passed over the Mindean Foords, and had taken eight Towns, of which Paderborn
was one. He fortifying his Camps at Amoenoburg, withstood the Bavarians coming
on with great force, and being by French Ayds made stronger, he preffeth upon,
and encompaffeth them, that so they being kept apart from the River Moenus, he
making haste, might come before them unto Danubius to hinder their passage over
that River, and leaving Schorndorf to win Turain by assault, he himself takes
Nordling and two other considerable holds: which being done, he calls him unto
him again, and fights against the City Augusta of the Vindelicians, but
overcame it not. He also had almost made Lyce or Lycum his own, notwithstanding
he intercepted warlique furniture, and large store of victual of the enemies
more than once. But more than this, returning unto Memminge, he with the
greatest boldness violently takes both the narrow passages that were between
the Hills, and the Town of Brigant it self, which is, as it were, the Key,
opening unto, or shutting out of many Countries, wherein was great spoil and
prey: as also Langenarch at the end of this year 1646, by surrender. In the
mean time, the Castle of Marpurg being besieged, is yielded to the besiegers.
But it cost one Willick the Defender thereof, his head, at Giesse. Two places
soon after following that Castle's example. Butsback (notwithstanding) being
taken by Eberstein the Emperian. In the upper parts of the Country this year
are subdued Smalcald, with sour other places by the Emperor's Soldiers, of
which two, Kirichain, and Rauschenburg, are lost, with no prosperous conflict.
Geise recovering Kirichain, demolisheth the same, and vanquisheth Alsfeld;
getting also a victory over Eberstein, who was increased in number by Melander,
carrying back eight Wagons, with 500 prisoners of War, and 700 horses; but
this was after that Rabenhaupt had returned from the siege of Zonse, and
Melander had taken Euskirk and Flemburg; the waich example paderborn followed
at the end of the year, taken before by Koningsmark. But the Duke of
Wittemburg, bringing a supply unto the Swedish forces in Silesia, much
troubles or tyreth Montecucule the Emperian, who at the first of the year had
the upper-hand, and follows him, going back into Bohemia; he takes also
Haselcher, and two Towns more from the Emperians in the said Silesia; but
besieging Troppave a strong Garrison in Moravia, he lost his labor.

The year following 1647, when as Wrangle had fortified the Island of Menave,
together with the Castle of Lagenarch, and receiving Messengers from Helvetia,
had dismissed them with a friendly answer, he departs there-hence for lack of
grass or fodder; confirming also a cessation of arms at Monastere, and
afterward at Ulme, between the Swedish, French, the Hassians, and the Bavarian
and Colonian. Then after some other passages of War, Koningsmark having
besieged Warendorf, there was a stout fight at Sea, when their Ships were
brought unto the Podanian Lake, at four places. The Novesians taking Nidek in
the Juliacan field, and Wrangle, receiving supply, by his Captain Lowenhaupt,
Nordling, and Sweinfurt. The Duke of Wittenberg also returns stoutly into
Silesia, and Dewage being cast out of two places betook himself to Breslave.
Whose forces also taking the Town of Trautenave, take also the Glogavians
therein, with 146 Horsemen, 40 Footmen, 270 Horses with bag and baggage.
Bucheim and Spork Emperians make have, who besieging Olave lose their labor.
But Mortane is sent away unto Hesse of Cassella, who subdued unto his power 9
Garrisons, whereof Fridberg, and a place called the Palatinate Fort, were two;
but then besieging Rheinfelse, he dyed with a mortal wound; whereupon there
was a Truce made between the Hassians and Emperians. But the Emperor not only
disliking, but disdaining the conditions of the former Cessation of Arms, most
violently assaults the Town and Garrison of Weissenburg, and wins it from his
enemies the defenders. Appointing also the Earl of Holtsapfell, (who was of
late known throughout Hassia, where he warred, by the name of Melander,
General, in the room of Gallasse, who was by little and little in a decaying
state of body, and thereupon repairing his Army, he fortifieth also three very
considerable places, to wit, Prague in Bohemia, Pilsene, and Vienna, the City
of his Palace in Germany on Danubius; and having done this, (as thinking he had
done some great matter toward his protection and success) he bequeaths a
Feast Day or holiday to be kept in remembrance of the Virgin Mary's Conception,
and so commits himself, his affairs, and Soldiers unto her Guardianship. Being
impatient of a cessation, he withdrawes Werth and Spork, two chief Commanders
of the Bavarian Army, from the said Duke of Bavaria, (although they were
condemned by him of treachery) and joins them unto his new General Holtsapfel;
but he excused that deed unto the Swedes and French, it having been
perfidiousnesse in him, to have voluntarily sent any of his, unto his
assistance, against those with whom he had a cessation from arms, within the
limited time: He subdueth Falkenave, but going to hinder Egere from besieging,
he slackened his pace, being often stopped by over or foolhardy Wrangle, (for
that was his Epethite) in his very Camps, while he would break violently through
unto a little bridge belonging unto a house of the Emperor's, for the
entertainment of friends. He fights at Plane, and two other places, with a
diverse issue, until the Bavarian, the cessation of arms being ended, joined
himself unto him again; as also until that Wrangle (calling Koningsmark unto
him) should snatch away, as it were, his Army through Bohemia toward Anneberg,
and should pass over unto Misnia, Erford, and Visurge of Hoxtere, that he
might refresh Soldiers at diverse places, and then show himself in Hassia:
whither the Emperor's and Bavarian forces following him; (for a cause moving
them thereunto) they were pleased to besiege the City Marpurg, where
Holtsapfel, formerly Melander, the Emperor's General, through a Splinter of a
beam (which was occasioned by the Castle's or Tower's Guns thundering into the
place of his abode) breaking a vein of his neck, had almost breathed out his
life, together with his blood, by that open passage. But (after one or two
places vanquished by the Emperor, one whereof, to wit, Iglave, very hardly;
and Nordling (that was taken this year, before, by Lawenhaupt the Swedish
Captain; as says Mercurius Gallobelgicus) wickedly or unhappily retaken by the
Bavarian) the Swedish Novesians performed notable exploits, killing Gosse or
Goce with 100 common Soldiers, and taking the said Earl of Holtsapfell, some
Majors, with 200 common Soldiers prisoners. Nevertheless Lamboy (on the other
side) watching his opportunity, vanquisheth Windeke with three other strong
holds in Colonia, and from thence goes into Westphalia, although he was
commanded by the Emperor to come with his Brigade unto the chief of his
warlique affairs.

Moreover, the same year, being 1647, the Soldiers of Turain are overcharged
by Neighboring garrisons of the Emperors, at Zwingenberg: and do assure the
City Mentz, and Worms, against the subtle devices of both Garner and
Boninghause. But there was like to be a falling out with their own
Fellow Soldiers, about Rose the Tribune, whom some Regiments required from the
Army, to be restored their Captain; neither could they be brought to return to
their duty by any means; but yet on some certain conditions they do join to
Koningsmark. Rose himself being brought to Paris, to declare the cause hereof.
And when as the Colonian, now renounceth his cessation of arms made a while
before, with the Swede, French, and Hassians, by reason of a Town that was
taken of theirs, in the mean time, and some other unworthinesses received from
the enemy; then Koningsmark, increasing his number with Rabenhaupt's Soldiers,
(that prospered in some achievements the year before) begirts Paderborn that
had been taken and retaken in 1646, and stoutly opposes himself against Lamboy
at Steynford, as he pierced into Ostro-Frisia, or East-Friesland, and that,
until both Armies were summoned away unto the highest matters.

And truly, (as though things were now coming to the highest pitch) the Swedish
Commanders and Armies do hotly encounter the Imperial Forces (in the year 1648)
to their disadvantage. For Wrangle in the first place takes from the Duke of
Luneburg 1400 horses, and the clothing for his Army; and calling a Council of
War at Stade, he moves toward Paderborn, where he drives away the Emperians
and Bavarians out of Hassia, where they wanted Victual, into Francony, having
been sufficiently worn out at the siege of Marpurg. Then increasing his Army,
he passes over the River Moenus at Asciburg, being 23000 strong, 15000
footmen, 8000 horsemen, 160 great Guns, and 200 wagons, and by force wrested 9
piece of Ordinance that were left by the Emperor's Army at Forcheym. And
coming unto Eeuchwange, he sets his Army in array; but the Emperor's forces do
part asunder, the Emperians departing unto Ratisbone, and the Bavarians unto
Eichstade; but Wrangle himself sits down at Guntsburg; Koningsmark in the mean
while wandering up and down, unto whom the abovesaid discontented Turanian
Soldier then came. Then after three places yielded, possessed, and laid waste,
and three others fortified: And the upper Palatinate put to extreme villainy by
the rude and cruel Soldiers, at length there was a conflict about crossing the
River Lyce, (the French before that, coming to the Swedes, and covering
Bavaria, upon which Bucheym and Spork are called out of Silesia) toward the
City Augusta, and that, an unhappy one to the Emperians, Holtsapsell their
General being in the very reat slain, also Konigsmark brings away their
Secretary, with 200 and 70 Common men, and so opened their passage in Bavaria,
whither it appears they were rending. (Two reasons were given of this
misfortune; either because Gronsfeld, Leader of the Bavarian Soldiery, had
been Commanded (in imitation of the Hassians) to decline the Front of the
Battle, and bring his Soldiers to defend rather the more sound or strong parts
thereof: or because he envyed Holtsapsell, the said Holtsapsell having his
Chief Officers the less obedient unto him, both in regard of the Rigor of his
Army discipline, and likewise, for that his Religious Rites were very much
estranged from theirs. But Koningsmark breaking into Bohemia, and on July 16,
making a free Egresse and Regresse unto the Town and Garrison of Eger, that was
shut up by the Enemy; on the 26 of the same month, he encompassing and taking
300 Scouts, or a party sent forth, by a cunning Stratagem, brought a greater
mishap unto the Emperor, than the other: who sending forth by night as many of
his own Soldiers unto Colored the Vice-King of Bohemia, under a color of
being his party that was sent out, now returning, their Watchword being first
stolen; took by this disguise before day, that which is called Little Prague,
with the Castle of Rets or Retise thereto belonging, with more than 200 men of
a great fame, whom he made them to ransom. A prey also of above seven millions
value, fell hereby into his hands, the richer part of which he sends away in 60
Wagons unto Lipsia, Colored also the Viceroy, hardly escaping from being
seized on in his bed. Wrangle also crossing Lyce, confirms one garrison, and
takes two into his possession; the Emperor's sliding away unto Viltshove, the
Bavarians spreading themselves into Garrisons to defend those more strong
places, who, upon the losing of Lyce, quitted or departed from Isare, the which
Wrangle possesses wholly: who besieging Wasserburg, was frustrated of his
attempt, and seeking a passage over the River Oene, could not obtain it, the
Bavarian stoutly defending the right bank against him. Then he has a conflict
with the Emperians and Bavarians who revived again, at Dinckelsinge, and sits
down at Landshute, being repulsed by Werth, who with great violence assailed
them; the said Werth, having been newly received into favor by the Duke of
Bavaria, who before had a prejudice against him.

Lest I should be too tedious, let me briefly run over some actions of two or
three more chief Swedish Warriors this year. The Duke of Wittenberg (who was
of that party, and was Lieutenant of the Ordnance,) that he might make amends
for some loss that Dewage had suffered through a mistake, which was 136
horsemen, and 336 horses, runs to him; demolishing Oelsa, and preying upon
Silesia, and being increased with a supply of 6000 men from Pomerania and
Moravia, breaks through into Bohemia, where, at Brandise, (the place where the
image of the Virgin Mary trimly stood) he takes 600 of the enemies, and being
put into the room of Koningsmark, who was absent, he shows himself before old
Prague: and then possesses a Town, and a Castle in that Kingdom; after that,
passing through to Moldavia, about to come suddenly upon Misling of Crumavia,
he, at Budovice, lights upon Bucheym, with three other of eminency, that were
bring 120 Wagons unto places of more safety; he takes them with their wagons,
only one Garner escaping, and so goes to meet their new General; who came out
of Swethland amongst these clashings this year, with 8000 most choice
Soldiers: (This was Charles Gustave, who being begotten of his father John
Casimir, who was of the family of the Palatinates of Bipont, and his mother
being the sister of Gustave Adolphus King of Sweden) was Couzen-german unto the
Queen thereof; and unto whom she afterward resigned that Kingdom;) leading
them from several places, until he brought them into Bohemia, where he is
received by Koningsmark, and the Duke of Wittenberg aforesaid. His design was
for the siege of Prague, unto which he breaks through: But of this by and by,
when I have spoken a few things concerning some others.

Therefore Rabenhaupt the Hassian, together with Duglas the Swede, (while that
those chiefest matters by the main Armies were tumbled out of Hassia through
Francony, unto Lyce, and into Bohemia) recovereth some places that the enemy
had possessed, taking Homburg by force, where were 20 Ordnance very well
fitted, another place by a slight, but raced or spoiled Gleichenstein, and at
length Geise is put in his place, with whom this year 1648, Lamboy contended:
who closely besieging Geise at Giseck; through the valor of Ernest the
Lantgrave, who with 300 common Soldiers brake in upon the besiegers, sets the
besieged at liberty, Lamboy losing some hundreds of his men, (yet Ernest
himself was taken in the enterprise) who returning unto Bonne, and demolishing
another place, he presents himself at Grevenbruge before the Camps of Geise,
and joining battle, he routs the left wing of Geise his Army, taking prisoners
the Earl of Weide, with 200 common men, and seven wagons. But while (as
oft-times comes to pass) he the more sharply pursues the dispersed left wing,
all his great guns were taken from his own right wing, and turned against him,
so that he lost what he had gotten, Geise recovering the Captives of the left
wing, and besides slew above a thousand of Lamboy's Army, took 500, above 13
Wagons, and 15 Ensigns, with the loss of but 160 men. Lamboy being thus
worsted, (whom the Emperor indeed had commanded (as in the year before, 1647,)
to come to his main Army; but the Colonian prevented it by showing him, how
much it concerned, not to leave Westphalia destitute of strength) the Archduke
of Austria affords him money, and the garrisons of Westphalia supply of men,
making prayers to make God their friend. The first achievement after this
recruit and supplication was the surrender of Castorium unto him: after which,
he opposes his Camps to the Hassian Army almost within sight of Agrippine a
City of Colonia. Geise notwithstanding (especially when Frederick the Lantgrave
had brought him 1500 horse) valiantly conquered the Town of Marcodure, Lamboy
employing his Auxiliaries in vain to hinder it: notwithstanding he stoutly
loses Paderborn from besieging: and then both parties sitting down
over against each other at Brakell in the said Colonia; news is brought them of
a concluded peace between them.

Which peace (without doubt) between such accustomed and stomachful enemies,
the prevalency of the Swedish Forces this year, together with this new
General's coming into Germany with such fresh supplies, caused; who sets upon
the City of Great Prague in good earnest, making Mines under the ground,
whither Bucheym, lest it should be subdued, swiftly came, that he might
manfully withstand the Forces of Charles, the said new Swedish Commander. Yet
surely it was sorely endangered; for into both Pragues, are carried no less
than 3286 strokes of discharged Ordnance; the besieger likewise possessing two
places of residence within the Territories of new Prague, whither also the
concluded peace is (not sorrowfully) brought tidings of. It was first concluded
of by most noble Ambassadors on all sides, in Westphalia, on the 14th and 24th
day of October, 1648, whose Masters established it by their assent the two next
months; the Emperor on the 13, and 23 of November, the French King on the 14,
and 24 of the same; by the Swedes on the 12 and 24 of December; in which peace,
the Duke of Lorrain (whether through prejudice conceived against him for the
notoriousnesse of his Armies villainy in Germany and Flanders, besides spoils
done to the French) could not be included therein: and the King of Spain would
not, whether out of enmity to the French, or hatred to the Protestants with
whom it was concluded; for the Bishop of Rome his most Great father, pursued
with a Protestation against it, because hereby his Church should lose both rich
Territories and dignities. Yet the Spaniard the same year enters a peace with
the United Provinces of the Low Countries at Munster, laying aside all a
uthority and privilegious right over those Provinces, as also the lower
Hassians with the Upper, on some hard conditions made betwixt them.

Thus (Reader) I have brought thee to the Walls of Prague, within, which the
cause and foundation of nigh twenty eight years, cruel tedious and
depopulating war, (to wit) by the choice and Crowning of Frederick the Electour
Palatine there, unto which he was pushed forward by some Germane Princes, was
laid and given; and here now ends; expecting for the future that brief saying
to be fulfilled, Pax invidiam prosternit, Peace prostrates or burieth envy; the
which (questionless) was by long broils, slaughters, and cruelties much
contracted,

In the mean time in England (after the defeating of Lord Ashly, a Roya list in
a field battle, by Morgan a Parliament Colonel, himself with 1600 being taken
Prisoners, which was on the very brim of the year 1646, March 21. of 1645, and
some other strong holds, delivered into their hands, amongst which was Corf
Castle in Dorset-shire, by storm, and a stratagem (not much unlike to that of
Hereford) April the eighth, 1646, Prince Ruperts Troops being also disbanded
on the twenty fifth day: and Oxford it self (wherein the King was) after a
blocking up, was ready to be closely besieged by General Fairfax, the said
King escaped out of the City (under color of one of his favorites man, with
whom he rode) unto the Scottish Army, who were encamped at Southwel stra^g^^ly
besieging (with some Parliament English forces) that most strong and infesting
Garrison of Newark, who having had a sore plague, together with hunger and
straits, upon their Kings coming unto the besiegers, the Scots yielded the
Town on conditions. He came thither May the fifth following; which coming,
caused (there having newly been some jarring between the English and Scots
about want of their pay, and neglect of Church discipline according to the
Covenant) no small dissentions and diverse harsh writings between the Scots and
the English Parliament, about the disposal of his person (which the English,
for diverse the more just reasons, demanded out of their hands, whom they
carried farther North) for some Months. Notwithstanding, in the very interim
there was such a prudentiall management of things; that both the Nations
friendlily conj^yned (amongst other transactions) in sending nineteen
propositions, as was said, for a safe and well-grounded peace, strained not
very much higher than those of Uxbridge, unto the King by English
Commissioners, at Newcastle, Scotlands Parliament Commissioners being also
there, and assenting; this was Jul. the 15th of this year, Unto which (after
persuasions, and pressings, amongst which Lord Lowdens Oration the Scot was
eminent) he would not agree. So that the English Parliament voting the Scots
400000 lb for their assistance; of which, 200000 l. they were presently to
receive, and accordingly, about the latter end of January they did. Upon which
receipt (as they were to do) they delivered up three strong Garrisons that were
in the North of England; Newcastle, Barwick, and Carlisle, into the Parliaments
hand, and withal the King, (whom many say they sold) for they would not carry
him to Edinburgh, though they had free leave of the English so to do, for fear
of new disturbances) whom the English Commissioners brought into one of his
Southern Palaces, ( Holmby, the 17th of February) according to his desire,
with great honor and respect, in all this he not being used as a conquered
Captive, but a King. The Scottish Army, on February the Eleventh following,
marched over the River Tweed into their own Country, three Commissioners also
(at the same time) being sent thither to the Scotch Parliament concerning
public matters. For they had begun to consult how to settle the affairs of
both Nations without the King.

Oxford the mean while, which on May the second, 1646. was by General Fairfax
besieged, and summoned, was in about six weeks time surrendered, (for it was on
June the twenty fourth after) the besieged having very fair and large
conditions allowed them. (They treated above a Months space of the time, and
the Parliament debated the business.) For they had five thousand choice
soldiers in that strongly fortified City, good store of provisions: the first
day of opening, which was May the sixth, between four and five thousand are
reported to have been fed thereby, besides no want of Arms or Ammunition. None
except Rupert and Maurice, who were to depart the land, were forbidden to come
to London, and the Kings son, the Duke of York, was with honor thither
conducted. But the old Broad Seal which they left behind them, was August the
eighteenth, (the Parliament having made a new one) broken and defaced ar London.

Five or six other most strong places, soon yielding themselves after Oxford
(of which the Island and Castle of Scilly, at the West end of the Land, was one
Sept. 16. Which was a great harbourer of Men of War for the King by Sea, that
took great spoil of Merchants Ships, and from whence Prince Charles had not long
before fled into Jersey) and Colonel Masseys brigade being by Fairfax quietly
disbanded in the West, among whom (about the difference of Presbytery and
Independency in Church Government, of which there were great factions then in
England) a mutiny was feared, the war was even finished, and General Fairfax
came November. the 12th with triumph into London, where by both houses of
Parliament, he was (in order) most amply and heartily congratulated, unto which
he replied with a short modest answer. The Earl of Essex their first General,
that brake the Ice, dying (as is said) of an Apoplexy, the 13th of Sept.
aforegoing, who on the 22th of October. following, was most pompously (by the
Parliament) interred.

But the next year 1647, was partly spent in the divisions of fellow
Conquerours, and many others, divided under the name of Presbyterians and
Independants; the former complaining that the solemn Covenant was not kept, the
latter, that it was misinterpreted: the Royalists in the mean time ready to
join with either for their own advantage, very many having out of
taken-Garrisons resorted to London. These dissentions increasing, Petitions
were both presented to the Parliament against the Army as Independants, and the
Parliament themselves debated of disbanding them, against which (as wronged)
they Petitioned the General, because they neither had their Arrears, nor the
Laws and Liberties they had fought for, were obtained. And although the other
party much stomached and complained of the said Petition. yet on June the
fourth, 1647, the King was by a party (under the command of one Cornet Joyce)
taken from Holmby, and carried unto several places, according to the removing
of the Armies quarters. Whereupon, the Parliament ordered where he should
reside, which was at Richmond, but eight miles from London, and also who should
attend and Guard him. But in stead of fullfilling the same order, there was
sent from the Army an impeachment against eleven members of the Commons, as
hinderers of right, doing something against the Army it self, and hindering
Irelands relief, the which, had been, as was thought, too long obstructed
already by reason of the Kings going to the Scots. This caused half a years
separation of these members from the house, although voluntary. Notwithstanding
through the associating of many Citizens and Apprentices of London (that were
for the restoring of the King and the Covenant) with some that had been chief
Officers of the Army, (as Sir William Waller, Colonel Massey, Major General
Pointz, after that the houses, through the violation of their sitting, and free
voting, by some of the aforesaid Citizens and Apprentices, had adjourned for
four days, and in the mean while many went from London to the Army) the
matters swelled up to that height, that on July the thirtieth, the City of
London openly declared against the Army, (being strengthened on the very same
day by three votes of the Members that remained at London, (two new speakers
being chosen) choosing Massey General of their forces and Militia, that they
then raised to oppose the Army: Which Army hereupon drawing nigh to London, did
something allay the Citizens courage; so that they both deserted the Parliament
of July the 30th, with the eleven Members, disbanded and delivered up all
Forces, Forts, and Militia into Fairfax his hand, recalling also their late
Declaration. And on Aug. the sixth, the departed Members, were (by the Army)
restored to their sitting. Who with a full body, the next day, Aug. 7. Marching
through the City, slighting its Works and Forts, taking possession of the Tower,
and confining its Militia to its own only bounds, receiving also a Months pay
from the Parliament in gratification; all this being to the gladding of some,
and the grief and vexation of others.

This being done, the Army Aug. the 18th, 1647. remonstrated their desires for
the Parliaments closing with the King, and that he might come to London upon
that closure; Yet the Scotch Commissioners (who, before satisfaction given unto
his people, had denied the justness of his accession thither) would have had
him now out of the Armies hands, personally to treat at London; however to stay
at Hampton Court, whither he came, Aug. 24. Propositions were sent him thither,
unto which to consent he denied; More were again framed, and in the mean time,
Nov. 11. he privily fled into the Isle of Wight, leaving a Letter behind him,
showing, the end of it was, to preserve his own safety, against whose life some
laid wait. About seven days after his coming thither from Carisbrook Castle,
he sent to the Parliament a Letter, in which he was earnest for a personal
treaty at London, that might be accompanied with three appendices, honor,
freedom, and safety; they voted, November. 26. that upon signing four
propositions, in order to security, which seemed not unreasonable, that should
be admitted: who nevertheless, the Scots being averse unto the said bills
presenting, and people divided into parties in London, flatly refused to
confirm the same, for which cause, they voted Jan. the third, that no further
addresses should be made unto him, or message received from him by themselves,
or any other without their leave. Which Votes, the General, and Army-Councell
on the eleventh day seconded with a Declaration, resolving to cleave to the
Parliament in settling the Kingdoms affairs, both without, and against the
King, or any of his partakers.

These Votes, and Army-Declaration, inflamed rather than appeased the anger and
fury of many people, who not only longed for, but expected the King to be
restored unto his former dignity, although the Parliament sought by another
Declaration, (showing how often they had applied themselves unto the King, yet
all in vain) to assuage their disturbed minds: so that tumnlts and
insurrections (the beginnings of a second war) were not only feared, but
raised; the first of which was that in the Isle of Wight it self, near the very
Castle in which the King was; for which, the principal Leader, Captain
Burleigh, was at an Assizes, called at Winchester on purpose, condemned for
Treason, and executed Febr. 10. 1647. Notwithstanding in the month of April
1648, London's Apprentices, and other young people, gave a notable example of
war and sedition unto adjacent places, who saying they were for Charles their
King, put the whole City in great fear, the Lord Mayor being constrained to
betake himself unto the Tower, who the next day by a party sent by General
Fairfax, were vanquished and quieted, and a thousand pound given to the
Soldiers for the service. The Duke of York escaping (in the same April) from
James his house near Westminster, out of the Parliaments hands. And the Prince
being as a banished man in the peoples eye, by private Commissions from his
Father the King, raised war; which war seemed more formidable and dangerous
unto the Parliament and Army than the former, both in regard of the Scots, who
from assisting friends, were turned threatening enemies, and chiefly those that
were called Presbyterians, siding both in London and the Country with the
Royalists upon the Covenant-account.

Now diverse strong holds were seized on for the King, as Barwick, April the
30th, by Sir Marmaduke Langdale; and Carlisle about the beginning of May
following; Pontfract Castle, (where also Colonel Rainsborough was treacherously
by the enemy afterward, October. 29, taken in his bed and slain, as he lay at
the siege thereof,) was June the third surprised by a Major and Captain of the
King's, having first killed the Governor. Before which, on May the 12th, there
was an Insurrection at St. Edmondsbury not far from London, and a seditious
Petition by the Surrey-men on the 16th day, the Petitioners besides hurting,
killing one of the Parliament's guard; for which, themselves were by some horse
scattered, and some killed. A far greater on the 24th day was by the Men of
Kent, with whom diverse great ones of that Country joined; Great toil it cost
Fairfax (who was with seven Regiments engaged against these risers) to subdue
them: the greatest conflict was at the Town of Maidstone, where with very much
difficulty, and no small danger with the loss of 40 men, the place was
obtained, against about 2000 defendants, 200 being slain, most of them taken
prisoners, besides horses and arms. Thousands of their Contrymen of the same
party, looking on, in the mean time, and not daring to oppose the General. A
remnant of this Kentish-Army under the Lord Goring's conduct, approached high
London, to see the affections of the Citizens, who being pursued by some
Horsemen of the Army, Goring with four or five hundred of them crossed the
River into Essex, where the Lord Capell, and Sir Charles Lucas with forces
joined with them, who notwithstanding were soon afterward driven into the City
of Colchester (unto whom many from London resorted) by Fairfax, and after a
pretty long siege, the besieged having no hopes of relief, and being brought to
great straights, horseflesh being accounted good meat, Aug. 28. yielded
themselves into the Conquerour's hands, two of whom were shot to death, to wit,
Sir Charles Lucas, and Sir George Lisle.

But (to leave other risings in the West and other places, because they were
soon quelled) much danger threatened the Parliaments Cause in Wales, by
Laughorn, Poyer, and Powell's conjoyning, who before had done the Parliament
(especially Laughorn) good service. The said Laughorn with Powell having an
Army of 8000 men in the field; unto the which one Colonel Horton with but 3000
gave a complete overthrow, killing many, and taking about 3000 prisoners; this
was in May. Those two flying unto Poyer in Pembrook-Castle, a most strong
place, (after that Chepstow-Castle was surrendered unto another Parliament
Commander, whose chief Defendant Sir Nicholas Kemish, was after the yielding,
May 25, slain,) Cromwell after a while about July had it yielded unto him, with
the opposers all prisoners; extremities within constraining them thereunto.

The Earl of Holland also (who before had played fast and loose) now taking his
opportunity, with the Duke of Buckingham, was in arms at Kingston upon Thames
with 500 horsemen, who was put to flight by Sir Michael Levesey, and afterward
taken and sent to Warwick Castle; the Lord Francis, the Duke's brother, being
in the Combat slain.

The plundring forces also belonging unto Pomfret Castle were quite vanquished
by Colonel Rossiter, who, in that action, was sorely, though not mortally
wounded.

But the greatest block to leap over, was a Scottish Army under Duke Hamilton's
Command, who (though they were judged to be both that Kirks and Kingdoms
enemies, and so had not their good wishes for their success) invaded England
about or in the month of June, and a little after being added unto by
Langdale's forces, were strong in number, having no less than 25000, and cruel
and terrible unto the Inhabitants where they came. This Army Major General
Lambert kept in play, until Lieutenant General Cromwell ( Pembroke-Castle
being seasonably delivered unto him) could come to join with him, who being in
all not full ten thousand strong, Aug. 17. 1648, wholly vanquished and defeated
that Army, took the Lieutenant General, and soon after the Duke himself in
flight with 3000 horse, 3000 having been before slain, and 9000 taken
prisoners. The Conqueror, Cromwell, after this, entering Scotland with a happy
success, aided that Nation against some enemies, that there stood up,
(reducing also Baruick and Carlisle) and was by them both magnificently
entertained, and ingenuously acknowledged (under God) Scotland's Preserver,
whose Army was before called by many of them, A company of Sectaries.

Diverse ships likewise revolted from the Parliament unto the Prince by Sea, at
the beginning of June, not suffering Rainsborough the Vice Admiral to come
aboard: so that the Prince within two months after, was with near 20 sail upon
Thames, out-daring the Earl of Warwick, who was too weak for him: But through
the prudence of Sir George Ayscough, the Portsmouth Fleet was brought by the
Princes ships safe unto the Earl, and then they followed the Prince upon the
coast of Holland, whither he was gone to victual.

In the midst of these stirs, (whether in love or fear of the King and his
Cause, the Parliament themselves altered their former Votes, nulling on June
30, 1648, those for no further Addresses to the King, Jan. 30. before, (having
admitted the 11 impeached Members) And voted, (though not a Personal Treaty at
London, yet an honorable one to be had with him, he first accepting thereof,
upon Propositions, in the Isle of Wight, which began September. 18 this year, 5
Lords, and 10 Commons being chosen as Commissioners to treat, and 10000 l. to
defray the charges of the same. It lasted about 9 weeks, until November. 27.

But in the mean time, this new war being now over, and the Army at some
leisure, its Council of Officers altogether disliking that Treaty, gave a
prevalency (by a Remonstrance of theirs unto the Parliament, November. 20) unto
diverse County Petitions delivered in the months September and October, for the
execution of impartial Justice upon some aforementioned, as Hamilton, etc.
authors of much blood and calamity, and especially on King Charles himself, as
the raiser of the whole War, and that God's wrath might be feared to attend
them, if he were unpunished. Whereupon, when as the King's Concessions in the
Isle of Wight, were December. 5. following, voted satisfactory by the Parliament;
the next day, diverse Members that had so voted, were both secluded from
sitting, and confined, by the Army; and a little after, the King was brought
out of the Island unto Hurst Castle, by a party of Horse, and so to Windsor,
December. 23. And after the Supreme authority voted to be in the House of
Commons, Jan. 4. there was an Ordnance made for the King's Trial on the 6th
day; in order to which, an unusual Court, called, an High Court of Justice, was
erected, on the 9th day, before whom the King appeared Jan. 20, and when as he
would not plead to his Accusation, as being unsatisfied in that Courts power to
judge him, (but rather forbad the Clerk to stop, and hold his peace, after his
earnest desire to speak-with the Houses in the Painted Chamber, which would not
by the President Bradshaw and the Court be suffered) he was sentenced to be
beheaded by the said President, the which was accordingly executed on Jan. 30,
on a Scaffold erected before White Hall, who there testified unto the people,
That he dyed a Protestant according to the Church of England's Doctrine,
(delivering his George unto Dr. Juxon, who was his bosome-attendant, that, as
was supposed, he might send it unto the Prince) and speaking not much in the
vindication of his innocence. He was afterward Febr. 9th, by 4 Lords, and Dr.
Juxon weeping, inhumed at Windsor in Georges Chapel, where Henry the eighth
was formerly buried: after this, Proclamation was made, in Towns, That none
should dare to proclaim Charles Stuart his son, or any of that race or other,
King of England, upon pain of death for Treason; for the which, one Beaumont a
Minister, was on the 16th of February executed at Pontfract; the Scotch
Commissioners having before, Jan. 10. disavowed those proceedings of the
English, and therefore, young Charles was on Febr. 5th proclaimed King in
Scotland, and on the 16 day likewise proclaimed in Ireland. The house of Lords
being on the 6 day of the same Feb. voted by the Commons, useless and
dangerous, (a necessary consequence of the fall of Monarchy) and on the 17 day
a Democratical Government of 40 chief ones, called a Committee or Council of
State, was by and under the Parliament Senate appointed. Amongst which actions,
Duke Hamilton, Earl of Norwich, who had likewise raised Forces for the King in
this last War, Earl of Holland, Lord Capell, and Sir John Owen, were all
brought to a Trial before a second High Court of Justice, which began Febr.
10, and after sentence of death passed on all five, March the 6th, two, to wit,
Earl of Norwich, and Sir John Owen, were on March the 8th reprieved, and the
next day the other three beheaded in the Palace-Yard of Westminster, Lord
Capell behaving himself the most confidently, and undauntedly at the time of
execution. And to close up this year in England, after the voting down of the
Lords in Parliament, the Earl of Warwick, a Peer, was removed from his
Admiralship at Sea, Febr. 21; and the next day, a considerable ship called the
Hart-Frigot revolted from this new State. But Pontfract Castle, that tough
relic of Carrisons, which all this time held out, was on March the 22, 1648,
constrained to surrender.

In the mean time, the Frenchman by the Duke of Turain well handles the League
with the Swedes in 1646, and receives Anthony Barberine the Cardinal at Paris,
endowing him with some yearly profits belonging to Spain: and among other
actions of this year, he sets his Army in Array at Genoa in Italy, against whom
the Pope opposes the Duke of Savile. He also fits a Navy, and takes possession
of the Haven of Stephen and Telamon, besieging the Sea-Town of Orbitell, and
fighting prosperously enough in a Seabattel, though he lost Brese his
Sea-Commander, he gains the place: he was indeed by the Pope's forces cast out
of Tuscia, yet he subdued Portologona, together with Plumbine, and so makes the
agreement of the Barbarines to be easy, with the Pope. But there was a
Conspiracy by the Spaniard against his Viceroy or King at Barcellona, the
Spaniard proclaiming the Duke of Arcose Vice-King of Naples: yet he vanquisheth
the Fort of Arragon, and besieges Lerida; but he received after eight months
siege, a most valiant repulse by two Spanish Commanders, 70 of his Ordnance
being taken, the Spanish Soldiers being spread abroad for the prey. But it was
otherwise in Flanders this year: for by his Captains, the Duke of Orleance and
Enguienne, he first obtains the Town and garrison of Cortrack from the
Spaniards, although they had a sharp conflict with him at Cuerne about it; and
then wins Vinociberg and Mardike by assault, and at length that notable place
for Pirates, Dunkirk, a very great help and safety to his affairs, if he could
have kept it.

But the Dutch, who (as was said) had consulted with the French. of assailing
the Spaniard on both sides of Flanders, do intercept Tiene by the crossing
passage of the River Mose, taking therewith many Captives of no small name and
fame; yet they vainly endeavor this year, 1646, to take Venloe by siege.
Neither indeed is any thing performed by them besides, worth the price of their
warfare, unless it were, that by busying the Spaniard, they helped the French
Expedition. They agree also to restore places that were possessed by them in
the Juliacan field, unto the Electour of Brandenburg, who married Ludovica,
daughter to the Prince of Orange.

The same year the King of Poland having joined himself in marriage to Nivernia
at Warsove, he gives a hearing unto an Ambassador of the great Duke of
Moscovy, concerning a League to be mutually made against the Tartars. And
fearing war from both Turks and Tartars, he studies warfare; against which, the
States (fearing an oppression of their Country thereby) do strongly endeavor.
Whose brother Casimir is now counted or enrolled amongst the number of
Cardinals: but being disappointed of the title of a Kingly brightness
conferred on him, (such was his zeal) he quite left that pretended holy order.

Now also the Turk and Venetian do struggle, John Capello being declared
General for these, in the room of Francis Erizzo, who dyed this year 1646, and
Francis Molino chief Captain of the Dukes Navy, both aged men, the first above
seventy years of age, the second one under. Degenfield commanding his forces
throughout Dalmatia, the which, Turkish weapons made to tremble, for Noviograde
is yielded unto him, and Zare is overcome; yet the Venetian recovered them both
again, freeing another place from siege, and slaying the Bashaw of Bosnia, the
Turk vanquisheth Schissanion Castle, but he is overcome at Dardanelly, and
again by Sea, losing three Oar-Galleys; yet had the upper hand at Canea through
the error or obstinacy of the Commander Valettane. Capello also, craving
excuse for his age, had John Baptista of Grimane for successor in his
General-ship, after which, they joining a doubtful battle with the Turks at
Retime, a Town that yielded it self unto their violence, the Venetians (who
think their contention against the Turk a kind of holy War) run to three
remedies; Prayers, Alms-Deeds, and Embassages to other Princes to entreat their
aid and assistance. The Jews also being taken in the very act in passing over
or conveighing Weapons to the Turks.

Moreover the Moscovite the same year, sends an Ambassador into Swethland,
being by all neighbourlinesse studious of peace. A Swedish Ambassador de la
Guard going likewise to Paris, and another from the Transilvanian, coming unto
Lypsia, the Hungarians at the same time, treating in their public Assemblies
about confirming peace with the said Transilvanian Prince, and likewise with
their Emperor (who before had Crowned his son their King) concerning rooting
out the Jesuits from amongst them. This honor also (at Stockholm) the Swedes
afford unto Gustave Gustavison the illegitimate son of their late King, to be
reckoned among their Earls, although not capable of a Kingdom.

But the Bishop of Rome (who it seems is full of money) bestows 18000 Crowns
on a Chain to shut up the Haven of Civita Vecchia in 1647. Yet (as not having
enough) in 1649, he is at variance with the Duke of Parma about the Duchy of
Castro, whether it be the Fee-farm of the Church, They join battle about it,
but the Duke has the upper hand, and then the Bishop lays the blame of moving
that war, on Godfride a Marquess; but comes to an agreement with the Duke for
a round sum, paying him 300000 Crowns presently down, and 600000 Crowns to
be told out to him a while after. Notwithstanding the Castro (which I
understand to be the house or Palace belonging to the land) is laid equal
with the ground. And before the year was ended, a Jubilee or Feast of joy and
rejoicing is in a solemn (though Jewish) manner opened or prepared at Rome.

The same year there is a new Governor for the Spaniard in the Netherlands, to
wit, Leopold, Archduke of Austria; he subdueth three Towns, Armentere that was
laden with all kind of Victual, also Comene and Lense; and afterward Landrese,
the French (at the same time) quickly taking Bassea and Dixmude, attempting
also Newport, and at Wawer at Bruxells, carrying all the spoil out of the
place, turned 80 houses into ashes. Yet now as a forerunner of a league, there
is a cessation of arms beween the Spaniards and Dutch, but Chemleve returns
with disgrace unto Dixmude, while Ranzove another French man retakes (with
great pains) Lense from the Spaniard, losing six eminent persons in the
achievement. unto this Country also are brought out of the Indies ten
Millions and a half of Gold.

Somewhat there was to do likewise between the French and Spanish on the other
side of France, this taking one place from the French, etc. But this was
remarkable, that Lerida was now strongly defended against the Prince of Condee,
who was General there in the room of Harcourt.

But the next year, 1648, the King of Spain (setting forth his Soldiers, and
laying out his money at Ostend, brings an Army into the field of 27000,
subduing Cortrack, and yielding Ypre to the Prince of Condy, and afflicts
Ranzove the French Commander, who was now gaping for Ostend it self. Yet he
suffers a notable slaughter and overthrow at Lense, for the French being
increased by the Army of Erlack, beats the Spaniard grievously; Beck and his
son being both slain, and taking the Prince of Ligne, and the Marquess of
Grana, with twenty Captains, 6000 and 200 Commonsouldiers, forty Great Gnns,
90 Ensigns. Through Italy the Spaniard takes Furn, but loses it again, and
receives loss by the Duke of Modena at Pade, who scattered 700 Spaniards, and
again, kills 300 of them, taking 1000 and 300. The French King also sending the
Duke of Guise privily amongst the seditious Neopolitans, was disappointed of
betraying the Tower or Castle of Carmine; the Duke was taken, and was not let
go but with a ransom. Moreover homebred troubles arise now in France, (a chief
cause being the oppression of the people, which is not small in that Kingdom)
the Duke of Orleans, together with the Senate striking at the Court, yet there
was a present quietness, when as the King had changed the Judges of criminal
causes, and somewhat eased the people by Parliament. But (as a sore not healed
to the bottom) the distemper grew fresh again, when as the Duke of Brussells,
more freely pleading the peoples cause, was cast into bonds, the King going
aside unto the Temple of Saint Germans. But at length, before this year's
expiration, which is 1648, when the Captive Duke was restored, there is a
second rest, the King returning unto Paris, though with very much entreaty. A
homebred conspiracy (likewise) there was made at Madrid the chief City in
Spain, for the which, two chief actours, Charles of Padigle, and Peter of
Sylvapegme, Princes, lost their lives.

While these things were in action, the Tartars, and Cossacks offend Poland:
the one wasting the Country, being instant for their tribute: and the other,
for the restraining their ancient Religious rites, and the robberies of the
Lievtenants of their Countries. They take two confiderable places of Poland
this year 1648 into possession. And Dominick the Polanders General, despising
the counsel of Wiesnewick, a chief Officer of that Army, is by these Cossacks
put to flight, losing 72 piece of Ordnance, and 20000 Soldiers, requiring for
the rensome of the Captive General, a great sum: this great loss caused great
strife in their public assemblies, so that they fought there about it. But
Chmielinsky the leader of the Cossacks, will have it decreed amongst them
concerning the Religious matters of his Country, and Family, and the next year
the new King of Poland, John Cassimir who was chosen the year before 1648, and
now in 1649 Crowned, (who also married his brothers Widow bound in her bed)
moving against both the Cosacks and Tartars, the Cosacks by force obtain both
their ancient ceremonies of Religion, and an amendment of the Government of
their Commonwealth. But the Cosacks slew in Poland in the year 1648 (So cruel
were they) 8000 Jews, and above 200000 Natives.

Toward the latter end of this year, Frederick, who was of late Archbishop of
Bremes, is Crowned King of Denmark, this Churchman could not say, My Kingdom
is not of this World. And Mary Ellenor the Queen Widow of Gustave Adolphus, is
brought, (Peace being now concluded in Germany) from Wolgast with honor and
solemnity unto Stockholm.

But the Venetians afflict the Turks both by Sea and land, in 1647 and 1648.
for the Christian Navy under the Knights of Malta possess some places in their
enemies Land, taking many Oar-galleys, their land Army doing the like
throughout Dalmatia, which losses made the Turkish Emperor gnash his teeth for
anger, at his Captains. Preys also being taken from him in Hungary, where he
keeps a Bashaw. And in 1648, Foscol the Land-Generall scourges them in
Dalmatia, vanquishing three Towns, and then dispersing 4000 of these Infidels,
two places more yielded themselves unto Foscol, yet he lost Licca, and elsewhere
the Turk had some Masterdome. But the Venetians get Mirabell in Creet or Candy,
with the Victualling ships: and his loss by shipwreck was great; Grimmane the
High-Admirall with 1000 and 600 Soldiers, with the value of 14 Millions: the
Venetian fights prosperously against him also at the Forts of Dardanell; for
which business, the Governor and three Bashaws were flain at Constantinople,
thirty Galleys come laden to Cannea with Soldiers and Victuals from the Turk
this year, where two Forts are lost and recovered by the Venetians, and that
with much blood, the Earl of Solm falls in battle, with seventeen Captains of a
hundred men. The Venetians maintaining also the Haven of the pleasant Vale of
Suda in that fruitful Island, against the opposing Turks, whose Emperor or
Sultan Ibraim, is reported about the same time, by reason of his Tyranny, to
have given place unto his son, which if so, must be, by the Timariots, and
however the Janissaries willing it so to be.

The year following, 1649, (which according to the Germane account, takes its
beginning at January, but according to the English, not until March 25.) the
Swedish and Emperian-weapons are changed into consultations for establishing
and confirming that peace, which was the year before agreed on. For the which,
three Dukes come together at Norimberg, the Duke of Amalse from the Emperor,
of Ersken for Sweden, and of Vandort in the name of France; where they treat of
four things, restitution of what was possessed, satisfaction for injuries,
emptying or quitting of Garrisons, and paying of the Soldiers. Amongst other
things, this was done. The Swedish Soldier was spread through seven Circles
allotted them by the Emperor, until the final confirmation of the peace. And
five Millions are wrung out for discharging the said Swedish Soldiers. The
emptying was begun at three several distances of time, by equal estimations;
so now, when at length he had the Articles of highest concernment confirmed,
then Ludovick the Palatinate is suffered to return unto Heidleberg, the cause
of whose Countries restoring we see, was not upon submission unto the Emperor,
so much as upon conditions of Peace. This being done, the Emperor was present
this year at Posone, among the public Assemblies of the land, where he would
not admit of the burdens of his Clergy, that had been tossed to and again in
debate since the year 1603. against the Protestants, whatever opposition the
Archbishop made against the Palatinate.

Yet the Conditions of peace were not fully agreed on until the next year,
1650; for they now also stoutly labor thereabout at Norimberg; but when as
Hailbrunne, with 3000 Royals a month, out of the public Treasury, were
allowed for three months time unto the Palatinate, until the matter could be
otherwise composed, and four times five unto the Garrison of Francodale; there
were three terms of time appointed, in which places that were kept of the
Emperor's by others, (of whom, the Duke of Lorrain held three, Hammersteyn,
Landstule, and Homburg) should be voyded: The French King lets go all Towns in
the Coast of Rhene, besides the Cities of the Wood. The Emperor strengthens
Prague and Eger, with the same frontier that lay against the Turks; he
receives Olmuce, and other places, as the Duke of Luneburg did Nieburg at
Visurge: and then the Soldier was paid off and discharged, who goes down by
Companies unto the pay of the Spaniard: from whence some fearful minds in
Germany (the Spaniard being hereby strengthened, and the hired being Soldiers
of fortune) foretold some hurtful and unhappy thing to ensue.

But to leave German-events, and return unto Britains transactions; after that
Charles the late King was taken out of the way, and other Capital enemies,
amongst whom, Colonel Poyer was shot to death, April 25. 1649, this second
(though but short) War being over in England, that Commonwealth speedily set
about the transporting a considerable part of their victorious Army into
Ireland, that had been too long hindered of relief by domestique interruptions,
whereby the united parties there (having proclaimed young Charles their King)
had very much prevailed, as by and by we shall speak: But there was a present
stop made hereto by parties in the Army it self, surnamed, if not nicknamed,
Levellers, as that they should profess to lay every man's estate equal by
force: Yet this I only find, that those so called, refused to pass over into
Ireland, until they should see (the King being now gone, who was by them and
his Judges accounted a Tyrant) some footsteps of reformation in the
Commonwealth touching the Law, Tithes, etc. according to some former vows made
both by Officers and Army; and chiefly according unto something not long before
drawn up, which was called, An Agreement of the People, presented to the
Parliament, Jan. 19. 1648. This refusal, or rather resistance of theirs, was at
this time esteemed both unseasonable, and giving an ill example unto others; so
that April 27, 1649, one Lockier was shot to death in London (after some
resistance made against his apprehenders) as an arch-stickler in this design:
whom that party openly carried to his grave, in a kind of stately affront (as
was judged) with Seagreen colors, at that time, the badge of such. Then they
gathered themselves together in arms at Burford in Oxfordshire, whither not a
few of the Army were coming to join with them. But General Fairfax, and the
Lieutenant General Cromwell in heat and speed marched May the 9th against them,
and an Officer being the day before sent unto them in way of treaty and
affability; instead of what they expected, they were surprised on the 15th day
by the General's parties, three of the chief actors being shot to death, and
another (a preaching Cornet) upon recantation pardoned. But one Thompson, a
stout-fellow, escaping, stood in his own defense, who being pursued, was at
length slain in a place called Wellingborough-Wood; their former
Fellow Soldiers, now being enemies, behaving themselves fiercely and roughly
toward the surprised. And at the same time that this was doing, (which was on
the 16th of May) England was voted a Free State. (General Fairfax returning
from this reducement three days after, May 29, 1649) Whereupon an Act for
abolishing Kingly Government was May the 30th, proclaimed in London by the Lord
Mayor of that City.

The Impediments of Ireland being now removed, Cromwell, now made Lord Deputy
of that Kingdom, thought upon his march thitherward, the which he began July
the 30th following: But the City of Dublin being hardly besieged by the Irish
Marquess, Ormond, with an Army of 22000 men, which began June the 21, (and
Londonderry by some of the rebellious there, for these two strong holds were
only left unto the Parliament) about 3000 horse and foot were posted away
beforehand to Dublin, who joining themselves with 6000 more at the most, under
the Command of Colonel Jones, sallied out, and totally routed and defeated
Ormona's besieging Army, killing nigh 2000, taking many, with all their great
Guns, Ammunition, etc. as also a wealthy spoil; This was on August 2. 1649,
about 14 days before L. G. Cromwell's arriving there with his considerable
Army; who being come, lost no time, but soon after besieged Drogheda, a
stubborn place, and, by storming, made it yield indeed, in a short time, but
not without sweat and blood unto the Conqueror, who (for terrour's sake to
others) killed with the sword nigh 3000 armed men after entrance therein: and
then the confederates mouldred down apace, garrisons being taken and yielded,
and field-parties routed, in great number. Nevertheless, the Natives being
expert in the Bogs and Woods of that Country, whither they retired and sheltred
themselves, made a perfect reducement thereof, much longer than otherwise it
would have been.

In the mean time, the Covenant in England, was turned into an Engagement, for
the which there was an Act made Jan. 2. 1649, by the Parliament for its
subscription; it ran thus, I do hereby, promise and engage to be true and
faithful unto this Commonwealth, as it is now established without King or
house of Lords. Upon this, many were tried and outed of their places and
Offices, as in the Universities and elsewhere; neither could any one have any
public employment either in that National Church or State, that refused to
subscribe; nor indeed could he challenge any protection from the said
Commonwealth.

A little before this, news was brought to England of some of their Plantations
that fell off from obedience to this State, and either thinking or saying to
themselves according to the Roman Proverb, [Antiquum volo,] I will have the old
Law still, I will have no Innovations; punished diverse with branding, fines,
and banishment, for not conforming unto Monarchy, and the old Church-Liturgy:
these were Virginia, and those called Carybe-Islands: who were notwithstanding
(by a prohibition of all Traffic with them, and the industry of Sir George
Ayscue's Fleet,) within not many months, themselves Nolens, volens, reduced to
Conformity.

This year also 1649, toward the latter end of October, was John Lilburn (who
had been an opposer of one and the other, most part of the Wars, and was
committed to the Tower of London in July, 1646) brought to trial for his life,
(by a Sessions called on purpose) for invective books (that were generally
believed to be of his penning) against both the Governors, and Government of
England, who notwithstanding was, beyond expectation by a Jury of 12 men,
acquitted, and thereupon released.

We find the Scotch King about the end of 1649, March 16, at Bredagh in the
Netherlands, with whom the Scots there treated, and concluded, an utmost
endeavor to re-instate him in his Father's Throne over the three Nations; in
order to which, June 6, 1650, he set forth from Holland, and landed in the
North of Scotland, English ships lying in vain to intercept him. He was not
crowned King of that Nation, until Jan. 1. following. For he did not ascend
that Throne with ease; (For first he took their Solemn League and Covenant, and
then (which went against the hair) signed a Declaration framed by the Kirk, for
abandoning his Fathers sins, and his Mothers Idolatry, etc.) And scarce at all
might be said to enjoy it. For England's Parliament (upon this agreement
between the Scots and their King, resolved to prevent a War in their own
bowels, by invading Scotland. To which end, Cromwell was sent for out of
Ireland, (things being now in a victorious condition there) who leaving Ireton
his son in law Deputy in his room, returned into England about the beginning of
June, 1650. Montrosse (the old Thorn in Scotland's sides) not long before,
attempting to infest his Country with fresh supplies, was on March 29,
defeated by a party of that Kirk's, and being disgracefully brought prisoner
unto Edinburgh-Castle, May 18, was on May 21, barbarously hanged and quartered
by his incensed Countrymen. After whom, some others were there executed, as
Urrey, and Spotswood, etc. the said Spotswood confessing he had a hand in the
murder of one Dr. Dorislaus an English Agent, at the Hague in Holland, May 3,
1649, who was about the middle of June interred at Westminster.

And the year following, (such was the malice of some in other Nations against
England) Mr. Anthony Ascham, (a man of accomplished abilities for such an
undertaking) who was sent from the Parliament a public Minister into Spain,
was June 6, 1650, cruelly stabbed in the head at Madrid, by one of the six that
had easy admittance into the room, his interpreter Riba a Spaniard, being also
killed in the place. Which persons all (save one) being carried to prison from the
Sanctuary, by the King of Spain's Command, occasioned a difference between the
said King and that Church, its privileges being, as the Churchmen pleaded,
hereby infringed.

But General Fairfax being now voted by the Parliament to march with an Army
against the Scots, (for Reasons best known to himself) laid down his
Commission, whereupon it was immediately conferred on Oliver Cromwell, June 26,
1650, who two days after advancing Northwards, (The Parliament also publishing
a Declaration of the grounds and reasons of that advance, which was afterward
sent unto Edinburgh from the new General, by a blinded Trumpeter) the Scots
expostulated the business in Papers sent to the Governor of New Castle,
putting the English in mind both of the Covenant, (which the Engagement had now
buried) and also of a large Treaty and Union between England and Scotland; The
which their Overtures with young Charles had dissolved: So that the English Army
entered Scotland July 22, and on the 26th day came to Dunbar, where they were
refreshed with provisions by their ships: but afterward, for five or six weeks
space, endured no small discouraging hardships by sickness of Soldiers
watchings, wetnesse, and coldness enough of the weather, together with want of
drink, (having in the mean time had some particular skirmishes with the enemy;
until at last, near the same Dunbar, (whither they were marching from
Haddington, the Scots Army following them apace, and hindering them at a Pass)
they being environed, and, as it were, in a pound, were constrained to break
through without delay, who after a vigorous and unanimous pressing forward, and
but an hours sharp conflict, routed and put to flight the Scottish Army
consisting of 20000 horse and foot; the English being scarcely 12000 in number.
The foot were generally slain and taken, many Colors, all their Ordnance, with
15000 Arms, as also many Colonels, and other inferior Officers. This was on
September. 3. 1650. For which victory, a day of Thanksgiving being solemnized
throughout England, as before a Fast, many Ministers (upon the former
Covenant-account) were averse and backward in the observation thereof; at which
time also there were days of Humiliation kept both by the English and Scots
(of the Kirk-party) in Scotland: amongst whom there were no less than three
divisions of parties.

A fair entrance being now made into Scotland's bowels, by this overthrow in
the fields of Dunbar, diverse strong holds were successively delivered into the
Conquerour's hands, (as also Colonel Kerr with his party were defeated by Major
General Lambert, taking Kerr himself, and some other chief Officers; Colonel
Straughan himself, with others hereupon, (who before were stiff and zealous for
the Kirk) voluntarily came in to Lambert;) who lying at Edinburgh before that
Castle, both published and put in execution a strict Proclamation, for
prevention of surprizals and murders daily committed on the English Soldiers
by straggling Scots: and on December. 24. 1650, Edenburgh-Castle it self, an
impregnable place, and of very great importance unto the English affairs, was
surrendered unto General Cromwell, with all the Magazine and furniture thereunto
belonging, the Soldiers of the Castle being to march away with their Arms, in
a flourishing manner. The foregoer of this surrender, was a Battery raised, on
which a great Canon and Morter-piece was planted, and began to play: yet many
were of opinion, that Money carried it, according to that old Verse, (...).
With silver weapons do encounter,
All things and places thou shall conquer.


Little was done for a while after, by reason of the Winters sharp coldness.

But in the interval of these actions in Scotland, these things were done at
home by Parliamentary authority in England; After the coining of new moneys,
(in which the King's Arms and Picture was left out, and the Commonwealth's
stamp in the room thereof, with this circumscription, God with us, on the one
side; and, The Commonwealth of England, on the other; for which there was an
Act made July 17, 1649) the King's Statue, that amongst other Kings and Queens
since the Conquest, was erected in the circumference of the Royal Exchange in
London, was on Aug. 10. 1650, broken and defaced, with these words written over
the head, Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, Anno libertatis Angliae restitutae
primo, Anno 1648, Jan. 30. That is, The last Tyrant King (or Ruler) goes out,
on the 30th day of January, 1648, in the first year of Liberty restored to
England. Which if so, is a happy year for that Nation indeed; His Statue was
also overthrown at the end of Paul's the Cathedral, on the same day, and within
few days after, quite removed from the Exchange, and broken to pieces.

Also one Colonel Andrews a Royalist, was underfelt and detected by one
Bernard, (who for his pains was rewarded with a Troop of horse) in conspiring
by Charles Stuart's Commission, King of Scots, against England's Government,
which being accounted (at this time) of dangerous consequence, he was by the
High Court of Justice tried, and beheaded, Aug. 22. 1650. One Benson being for
the same Conspiracy hanged, October. 7. following. A rising in the County of
Norfolk began likewise in the same month October, to the same purpose; which
being soon allayed, diverse to about the number of 20, suffered death.

This year also were the King's and Bishops Lands, together with the Estates of
banished offenders, set to sale.

Now also the Seas were every where troublesome unto Merchants, by reason of
the English and French ships (besides Pirates) that were at the utmost variance;
and especially Robert the Palatinate, who of a Land-General, was now become a
Sea-Admiral, by diverse preys greatly endammaging the English Merchants, (who
was abetted by the King of Portugal therein, for the which he lost no small
prizes by the hand of General Blake's Fleet. But at length Robert spoiling and
burning diverse of the said Merchants ships at Malaga in Spain, in the
necessitated absence of the said Blake, he was pursued by this valiant Admiral,
who took and destroyed seven of his ships, two being only left, that fled to
corners; one of which a while after suffered a sad dysaster in the Straights,
Robert himself being in great danger.

And that it might be known abroad, that by their Ambassadors, Englands
Commonwealth, like the Tribe of Judah over the Israelites, were fiercer and
more prevalent than Charles Stuart, who claims that Crown, and had sent diverse
unto several Princes for supply in recovering the same, a notable example in
Turkey at Constantinople, about this time made manifest; where two meeting
together in Embassage, (to wit, Sir Henry Hide from the King of Scots, and Sir
Thomas Bendish for the English Parliament) unto the Sultan; Hyde, as thinking
his Commission the strongest, stood up against Bendish for Preheminency of
place, (coming thither with intent to destroy the Turkish companies Trade, and
to seize on the Merchants goods, and null the Parliaments interest in those
parts) Bendish hereupon obtained a hearing of the state of matters before a
Vizier Bashaw there, who (like a crafty Politician, as the Turks are, siding
(although for most absolute Monarchy in their own practice) with the strongest
side in possession) delivered up Hide unto Bendish his disposure; who sent him
into England, where he (his act being judged not only an affront, but a
denial of the Government in the eyes of other Nations) was, March the fourth
1650. beheaded before the Exchange for Treason, the place of Merchants meeting
for foreign News.

But there was a more remarkable deliverance from death of one whose name was
Anne Green, innocently condemned to dye, as for murder of an abortive Infant,
at Oxford Assizes in 1650, through a too harsh prosecution of her potent Master
Sir Tho. Reed, by one of whose men or friends in that house she affirmed to be
with child: the overstraining of whose body by working, caused this abortion to
be made in a house of easement: who hanging by the neck about half an hours
space, together with strokes and tuggings by her feet of soldiers, and other
standers by, must needs in the judgment of all, be fully dead: Yet being
brought into a house for anatomizing sake, (as in the University is wont to be
done) her throat seemed to rattle; whereupon one Doctor Petty and Bastock;
Physicians, with some others, used speedy ways to recover her life, both by
breathing a vein to give a vent to suppressed nature; and also other good means
to comfort natural heat, so that she soon spoke, and was restored, and still
maintaining her integrity, (as well she might) had her pardon. This I insert
here amongst the number of memorable accidents, because it was Gods special
finger in discovering man's rigor, and a poor creatures innocence. The said Sir
Thomas Reed, within a short time after, being choked outright at his own
Table, confirming that moral and true saying of Cato the wise.

Esto animo forti, cum sis damnatus Inique,
Nemo diu gaudet qui judice vincit iniquo.
See that thy heart nor cour age fails,
When thou unjustly art condemned;
For who by wrongful Judge prevails,
His joy shall quickly have an end.
The King of Portugal, having many places and Parishes within his dominions
void of Priests, treats with the Bishop of Rome in 1649, concerning receiving
an Ambassador, and the supplying those empty charges with Churchmen:
publishing withal, a book, that unless the Bishop did cure that neglect, he
would take that right to himself. The defect was not supplied by the Bishop,
and yet notwithstanding, he does not allow or indulge the said King, in taking
to himself the privilege of appointing Bishops etc. in the year 1650.

But the United Provinces of the Netherlands have no great joy for the peace
made in 1648 with the King of Spain, because they found it more profitable for
the people, when the war was vigorous amongst them, which must needs be by the
Soldiers spending their pay there, and taking of spoil, which (its like) they
sold to the inhabitants at a mean rate. But as he that lives by Physic, may
truly be said to live miserably; so that is but a wretched pelf, that is gotten
by blood, ruins, and desolations. Yet the Prince of Orange had almost the same
year 1650, found them some work among themselves who finding not such
entertainment (as his now aspiring sovereignty, beyond his Predecessors
expected, at Amsterdam in the Province of Holland; Bicard, or Bicher, a Consul
or Lord of that City, having without the advice of the other Provinces,
commanded, for keeping the peace-sake, the soldiers that were spread through
the Garrisons to be discharged) he attempted secretly and politickly to seize
upon the City of Amsterdam at unawares, by Horse and Foot under the command of
Count William, who were coming in the night, and were to be at the Town-Ports,
at an appointed time, the Foot that went before being to make entrance for the
Horse. If this had taken effect, that huge mass of treasure, that was banked
up there, had fallen into his hands, with which he might have helped the Scotch
King, his brother in Law; in whose fathers Throne, the said Prince had a
vehement desire to see him established. But the design was frustrate, by
intelligence given beforehand, by the Post coming from Hamborough, whereat
all warlike preparations were made to defend the City against the assaylant,
and the sluices opened. The Prince hereupon made conditions of peace with the
Lords of the City, on no low terms, and had two of the Bicards removed from
Government, the chief of whom being Andrew, was distasted by the Commonalty, as
for other reasons, so for damage received by drowning of their fields. This
was in Summer, and in October. following (Man being but as the flower of the
field) he died, whose Princess was about ten days after delivered of a
Posthume son. He was buried in Pomp and State, before this years expiration,
(according to the English account) March 15. 1650. whose young son, did allay
the States grief for their (although before not loved, yet now lamented)
General.

The French King had but bad success in Italy, in the year 1649. for Ceva,
Biella, and the Temple of Damian, fell from him into the Spaniards hands; as
also in Catalonia, where he lost Sapirce: so that the Duke of Modena being
afflicted, was constrained to a reconciliation with the Spaniard, whose
Archduke that is now the Governor of Belgium, takes also Ipra from them
there, besides two other places, and sends 4000 robbers of the prey into
Campania. Yet the next year, 1650. the Spaniard had greater advantages on the
French, by reason of that Nation's Civil discords and troubles, which in a
greater measure again brake out; for three of the chief subjects of that King
being imprisoned by an arrest from the Queen Mother and Cardinal Mazarine, that
great Church-States-man, and the Queens huge favorite (in whose hands the
management of State Affairs were in the Nonage of the young King Lewis, whose
Father died as was said in 1643,) to wit the Prince of Condy, of Conti,
brethren of the Royal blood, and the duke of Longville their sisters son, for
that upon this discontent, they took some strong holds of the Kingdom into
possession, the which were (after their imprisonment, reduced by force,
threatenings, and favor) yet now the people (wanting not leaders) and being
enraged at the Duke of Espernon, but in general against Mazarine) a civil war
universally overspread the whole Land; the Duke of Bullein stirring up the
people of Aquitane, who as well as the Princess of Condy, and the Duchess of
Longville, desired aid, both by money and Soldiers from the Spaniard, who
supplied them therewith. After much blood spilt, the liberty of those Princes
was procured, Espernon was withdrawn from Bordeaux, and from Government in the
Commonwealth, but the Cardinal with all his kindred were banished, yet he soon
returned when the storm was a little over, with a kind of triumph, both to the
grief of the emulating Princes, and to the grievance of a servile Commonalty,
who labor with continued troubles. The Spaniard laughing as it were, at these
things; possesses Garrisons, and spoils some French Provinces with much more
ease. The French loses in Italy the Haven of Plombine, and Portologone; and is
beaten off from the siege of Lions in Catalonia. In Picardy, he beholds
Castelletum, and Capella to be wrung out of his hands, notwithstanding he
valiantly defended Guise. Yet in Flanders, he opposes three Armies against
three Spanish, under the command of three Dukes, of Villequier, Hockincurt, and
Villareg; The Spanish King sending the Archduke and two others in the mean
while, into the borders of France, who, in 1650, lord it over Picardy. Yet
himself was not without some trouble, for the sedition of Naples, that began
again to bud forth in 1649, upon which, the heads of diverse were cut off, and
was not quenched the year following, although he had filled Prisons with the
peoples Governors. He also wanting money, requires silver from the Clergy of
Naples, (for the which his Grandfather the Pope was angry) and sold the Duchy
of Pontremole for five hundred thousand Crowns, in the year 1650.

But the Bishop of Rome now grants eight years time to the Duke of Parma to
restore the Castrum, that the year before 1649, was equalled with the ground,
and that he might seem to be Servus Servorum, a servant of servants, washes
the feet of some Religious Pilgrims, at Rome; whose Cardinal, Ludovise, feasts
9000 of them at one time.

Swethland having now little to do, arms again in 1650. the design was
uncertain, whether for England, or against the Muscovite, or to settle Germany,
which before they had unsettled. Two Ambassadors likewise come unto Stockholm
at the same time, one from Portugal, another from the Netherlands; and by the
mediation of Contarine the Venetian, are the former conditions confirmed with
the King of Poland. With which Polonian, Chmielinsky Captain of the Cossacks,
is the same year reconciled, having received the liberty of their Churches: yet
the tumults of the Provinces do not altogether cease, the Ambassadors of the
Muscovite bring themselves with Pride and disdain, into three Provinces, of
which Smolensko is Prince, and return with a title; and then the great Duke of
Muscovy was not called in letters as their friend, but as their Lord and
Master, for which so unworthy actions, the Ambassadors were imprisoned;
nevertheless an everlasting peace is established between them, although
against the will of the Tartars.

Whose Cham or Emperor takes off the accustomed Tribute from the Polanders,
that they used to pay him, on this condition, that there should be a murual aid
afforded when desired, if the Turk should invade either; by which Turk, a
Tartar that was allied unto the house of Ottaman, suffers a repulse at
Constantinople.

The said Cham also tames and brings under the Cercassians, a people within his
dominions that rebelled against him. But breaking into the Kingdom of China,
because a Tyrant had now taken possession of that industrious Kingdom, as
going beyond his bounds, he is sent forth (as we say) with a Flea in his Ear,
being wholly expelled thence.

But the War between the Venetians and the Turks waxes hot in the year 1649.
Two overthrows the Venetian gave him; one in the Haven of Foggio, where 72
Oar-Galleys perished, 18 bigger ships, 60 ships laden, 6000 Turks were slain
together with the Bashaw, taking as many more Prisoners. And this with the
loss of but 90 Venetians, and 40 wounded.

This made the Sultan mad with rage, and he changes the Purple Garments of
Saranzone, his Ambassador with others, into a mourning weed; he casts the
Christians into chains, and falls upon them with whips, but by the persuasion
of the French Orator, he is appeased. He also makes stop of the English Ships,
and so returns unto his force against the Venetians: Who slew 1500 Turks at the
Haven of Suda, drowning six Galleys, with the Bashaw that was their chief
Captain. They contend vehemently for Mocenige, 4000 Sacks stuffed with Wool,
and 33000 Scaling Ladders being brought thither for storming, it is twice lost,
and as often recovered again, but at the third attempt, a Mine is made
underground that consumed 3000 Turks, and 200 Christians. Twice were the Alps
of Italy crossed, into the lower Hungary, for prey.

And when Haase had given place unto Colorede, and had gone into Dalmatia,
20000 Turks were there consumed with the Plague. The Sultan could willingly
have laid aside Creet this year, but, yet he could not do it, because of a
Moschee or Temple of Mahomet, that he undertook there to consecrate. However,
more than fifty thousand Christians (so called) were Captivated by him.

The next year 1650, he is watchful over the Persians, who showed their arms
in a bravery against Babylon; and renews peace with the Hungarians, who the
year before, because the Emperor of Germany would not grant them a war against
him, upon the forgiving them a tribute of six hundred thousand Royals, were
willing to make a peace, and (as a token of their neighbourlinesse) the number
of some thousands of Royals were to be reciprocally exchanged between them. He
likewise reduces the irregular Cyprians, and the Bashaw of Cagre into order
and obedience.

But in Candy, the Venetian affects him diverse times with less in the Gulf
Del Vole: four times he was preyed upon, and the Haven of Maluase was stopped,
together with victual. Whereupon he moves in war by Ufais his Bashaw, and that
chiefly, because his Navy at Dardanelle was penned up. Other Havens were also
possessed by the Venetians, that provision could not be brought into the Island
for relief of his garrisons; so that we will now leave the Venetians in their
hopes, of having a most large surrender of that whole Island unto them.

In the year 1646, it was disputed at Paris by Sarbona, Whether there ought to
be one head of the Church, or whether indeed there may be more; (this being a
rare Controversy among Catholics, I here insert it) which little book that
reasoned of the Point, the Pope whom it nearly touched, gives to be examined by
his Cardinals. The same year is also a book of one Ostermanne concerning
Government, publicly burnt at Agrippina of Colone; but in Wallersdorf at
Glace, 109 persons, with a noble woman with child, are strangled by fire. In
1647, there was a kind of miraculous thing befell one James (a child of 7 years
old) that was born at Modena, by reason of the tender greenness of his years,
who at that age disputed, and that learnedly, of all faculties. This youngling
was more than Ingenui vultus, puer ingenuique pudoris.
A Child of comely bashfulnesse, and of ingenious look,
Who more performed by Wisdom's gift, than Students long by book.
Also the Sultan, had 7 sons born to him in one month this year. But the Swedes
had the treasure, digging, at Meynave, out of the earth, the value of five
millions. Outlandish birds were seen at the meetings of the Rivers Mosella and
Rhene, returning about the evening beyond the bank of France in 1648. In which
year the Gate of Lubeck opened of its own accord. And many ships were swallowed
up throughout the whole Ocean and Mediterranean Sea.

These amongst other great ones conjoined in marriage, the Infant of Spain, and
the firstborn daughter of the Emperor in the month of June, 1646; Philip the
4th, King of Spain, with Marian the Emperor's daughter, in 1647. Ferdinand the
Emperor himself, with Mary the daughter of Leopold of Tyrole, in 1648, whose
Empress Mary dyed in 1646. The Duke of Mantua with famous Isabell of Tyrole,
in 1649. Ludovick Count Palatine Electour, with Charlotta Casselan the Hassian.
The firstborn son of the Duke of Bavaria, married Adelheid, daughter to the
Duke of Savoy. These two, in the year 1650.

There yielded in Italy unto Nature's destiny in the year 1646, the Duke of
Parma, Honofrius, the Cardinal brother of Pope Urbane the 8th; the Heir and
Infant of Spain at Saguntum, of the small Pox. The Prince of Condy at Paris;
Oxienstern the Swedish Chancellor at Stockholm; Christian the 5th, Prince of
Denmark; Charles Prince of Poland; the Archbishop of Mentz, at Franckford on
Moenus; these 5 in 1647.

The year following, the death of Charles the first, of Great Britain, King,
made famous, with diverse others in England the same year already mentioned in
the History. Also the Duke of S. Donatus in Aprutium for tyranny this year.
Philip Earl of Pembroke in England. Christiern the 4th of Denmark; and
Uladislaus the 4th of Poland. Seven Governors in Moscovia put to death by that
Great Duke for disallowing or reproving a Marriage he made the same year 1648,
with the daughter of a vassal Earl or Prince. Gustaf Oxienstern the Swede.
Mazarine the Archbishop, at the Sestian waters, the brother of the Cardinal;
Ragotzy the elder, the Transylvanian Prince; and also the Duke of Brunswick.

In 1649, Mary the Empress, having brought forth a son, as also the Duchess
of Modena after the childbirth. Frederick Savell the Emperor's Ambassador, at
Rome; Martinice Jaroslaus, Vice-King of Bohemia, of late cast out of a window.
Lastly, Ferdinand Archbishop of Colone, and one of the seven Electours in 1650.
Wrangle, the Arch-Warriour of the Swedes; and Ossalmsky Chancellor of Poland,
who was about to go to Rome for Religions sake.

CHAP. V. An Account of what happened in diverse places worth remembrance: from
the 1650, to 1653 inclusive, the year wherein General Cromwell was sworn Lord
Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
AFter that (through Ferdinand's, the German Emperor, at the beginning of
1651, marrying Elenor Duchess of Mantua at Neostade, and Wolfgang Palatine of
Neoburg, taking his third Wife Francisca, daughter of Ego Earl of Furstenburg)
(all Germany being now pacified) the Courts and minds of the Princes were
poured forth into Nuptial merriments, and by the late pacification, it was
thought to be provided for the rest and quiet of Germany; the beginning of a
new War (by the Electour of Brandenburg entering into the Montian Dominion in
hostile manner) suddenly arose: of which, though it were sudden and straightway
composed, yet this was the occasion. William Duke of Julia, Clivia, and Montia,
etc. marrying, in 1546, Mary the daughter of Ferdinand the first, Emperor,
obtained two privileges of Charles the fifth, Emperor; which were afterward
also confirmed by his successors: First, That if Duke William should beget no
heirs male of Mary, or being begotten, they should depart life; all the right
of the Dominions and Provinces, should be devolved on the daughters begotten of
them; or if none of them should survive, to the lawful heirs male of the same.
And then, that all those said Dominions should remain undivided, with one only
universal Lord and Successor: a custom hitherto observed by the Princes of
Germany, and many of other Countries, to confirm the strength of power.

William therefore, begetting two sons, and four daughters; Charles Frederick,
the elder, a Prince of great hope, dyed in 1577, in the flower of his age, at
Rome. John the other son, (his father dying 1592) succeeded in his dominions.
But being sickly, and begetting no children of two wives, in 1599 left them
(being dead) to be of diverse Princes desired. But by the Emperor's authority,
the inheritance had regard to his sisters: the eldest of whom (married to the
Duke of Borussia) dyed in 1608, before John, leaving one only daughter, Anne,
who afterward married Sigismund Electour of Brandenburg, which is the
Grandfather of the late Electour Frederick: whence the Brandenburgians derive
their right to those Provinces. The second sister marrying Philip Count
Palatine, she out-living her brother, and beautified with Wolfgang an heir
male, seemed to be nearest of all unto these dominions. The third was given in
marriage to John of Bipont, having also sons. The fourth marrying Charles
Marquess of Burgovia, the Palatine of Neoburg, passed over her right to
himself by certain agreements. Therefore John dying, and others asserting their
right by writing: Wolfgang the Neoburgian Palatinate, in his Mothers name;
Ernest Marquess of Brandenburg in the name of his brother the Electour
Sigismund and his Wife, possessed those empty Provinces: making an agreement at
Tremonia the last of May, equally to govern the said Province, till it should
be friendly by judgment decided of every one's right.

Then was it provided by the States of the Country, concerning Religion, and
the exercise thereof, That the Roman Catholic, and other Christian Religions,
as spread abroad through the Roman Empire; so also in these Provinces, as to
their public exercise, they be continued, and defended, nor that any one be
troubled therefore. But when as at that time, there was almost only the
exercise of the Catholic Religion, in all places of the Dominions, except a
few, into which, about the last time of Duke William, and his son, against the
Commands of the Princes, Masters of new Religions had creeped: it came to
pass, that by the winking and emulation of the new Princes of different
Religion, new masters were strivingly brought in against the former Covenants
and promises. But, the Neoburgian Palatine, leaving the Augustane, acknowledged
the Roman Church openly in 1614. He professed it at Dusseldorp, marrying
Magdalene the Duke of Bavaria's daughter; beginning also to be much more
diligently intent than before; that, what was agreed on in the beginning, the
exercise of the Catholic Religion should be observed in those places, where
it had been before; those being sent away and cast out, who had been hitherto
brought in against the Covenant, or hence following endeavored to creep in.
And that the rather, because it was expressly agreed in the Borussian and
Neoburgian marriages; that if the inheritance of these dominions should chance
to come to the above mentioned daughters: there should be no innovation: but
the Catholic Religion retained without any obstacle. But the Brandenburgians
thought it neither hindered the nuptial Covenants, nor the State's promise, if
the followers of other Religions, than what was usual, was brought in; so it
might be done without wronging the Catholics, and they among these do live
quietly and peaceably: moreover, it made for the no less quiet of the
conscience, than of the Commonwealth, seeing it is a thing uncomely, and
diverse from the worthiness of a Prince, That no exercise of his own Religion,
should be lawful in his own Provinces, (which Religion is only one) whose
likeness and agreement may breed love to them, and the reverence of their
Subjects. This diversenesse of opinions increased, after they divided the
Provinces betwixt them, and the contention came even so far, that the States of
Holland intermingled them; and to affright the Neoburgian from his purpose,
what they could, (by their Garrisons of the neighboring Cities of Rheinberck
and Orsoy, led captives the parish Priests, and religious persons out of the
Dukedomes of Montia and Julia; and held them some years in hard custody; in
which also, some were consumed with grief and misery, plainly harmless, and
without the like game, danger, and controversy: whence it came to pass, that
many Catholic parish priests fleeing for fear, their subjects long wanted the
exercise of divine worship: and many Infants departed this life without
baptism; persons of riper age without Confession and the Eucharist. Therefore,
the Neoburgian, that he might deliver himself and subjects from these
difficuities: after letters sent, and Embassages to and from Camerarius
Burgstorff, chief man with the Elector of Brandenburg, in the year 1647, he
thus concluded Apr. 8. about Religion, and its exercise, at Dusseldorp: That
the Churches, and their goods and revenues should be restored to those that
possessed them in the year 1609; but both the public and private exercise of
Religion without the Churches, should be in that manner as it had been in any
part of the year 1612. Moreover, it was confirmed by the Electour: and Deputies
sent from either Prince, who begin the execution of the said transaction. But
here again the action stuck. The Brandenburgians would not go back from a
promiscuous use of Religion, and that in the strength of the first Reversals.
The Neoburgians contended (on the contrary) that they must of necessity insist
on this transaction, which had been taken up as a moderating of the said
Reversals, of whose meaning hitherto the Princes could not agree. So they
departed, the matter un-ended. But the Neoburgian, when as not long after, a
whole pacification was ended in Germany, because the particular transactions
did not proceed, he flees to the observance of that; and for restoring
Religion and its exercise, he took the year 1624 generally prescribed in that
pacification, in example of the other Princes, who now began to consult of that
in many places throughout the Empire. Amongst these things, the Electour of
Brandenburg in this year 1651, talking with the Electour of Saxony a few days
in Liechtenburgh Castle, went to Clive, sending some Armies before, which he
had drawn out of his garrisons, and others to follow after; over all which he
had placed Otto Sparrius, they being in all, almost 4000. A Command was
published at Clive, June the 15th, in the Electour's name, and straightway
fastened on some places, in the Dukedoms of Montia and Julia, to their States
and Inhabitants; The Electour first signifying, he came into those Provinces,
that he might restore their liberty and privileges, into the ancient place and
vigor, according to the Covenants and promises entered into by their Ancestors,
against the diverse injuries of the Palatine of Neoburg; and in order hereto it
was needful, that one place or other be possessed where he might fasten his
foot. Where none ought to interpret that thing otherwise than he thinks,
since it is not his purpose, to seek any other than the glory of God, the
safety of his Country, and Justice, which he would have imparted to all and
every one, without respect of their Religion, according to the Covenants and
transactions of former years. And then, he commanded all Governors and
Inhabitants of these Dukedomes, that hence-forward they decree or pay not any
contributions to the Palatine of Neoburg, afford him no aid, by counsel or
deed, but that they respect and observe him and his heirs only. At last he
threateneth, if any one shall go on to resist this Edict, or shall help the
Neoburgian by any means, he (taking away all his privileges) shall hold him
for an enemy and Rebel. The same day of his Edicts divulging, the Electour's
Soldiers attempted Angermond Castle, by storming, and casting in many
grenades, some Citizens and others being slain at the first onset, and then,
when the Castle made stronger resistance than they had hoped, the street being
plundered, and the adjacent Temple, the spoylers go through the neighboring
places with the same force. And in the Temple of the Village Mulchem, not being
content to have robbed that, they slay an Infant in its Mother's arms, by
cleaving its head. Thence to the Village Pempelfurt, in the sight of
Dusseldorp, and the very Forts, coming to the Village, driving away all the
Princes herds, and lesser cattle, they spoil as much as they might for the
time, adding threatenings of speedy coming with a greater Army and forces. In
the mean time, the Electour had sent to the Emperor to purge or acquit
himself, explaining the causes of this his action against the Palatine, which
for brevity sake I forbear here particularly to set down. But the Palatine
openly protesting by a writing of the force and wrong brought on him: refuted
also what things were published against him in the Electour's name, by a
contrary writing: and then sent to solicit Leopold the Archduke, and Charles
Duke of Lorrain for aid, to repel the unthought of war: sending also to
Vienna, perfectly to inform the Emperor of all things, and require help
against unjust force. And having first purged himself to Caesar of Brandenburg
his accusation, he confuted it by a divulged writing. And (the while) musters
Soldiers throughout all his Dominions, over whom he placed John Baro of
Reuschenberg, and Philip returning out of Brabant, brought a part of the
Lorrain Army.

They pitching their Tents, sat down between Ratinge and Dusseldorp against
the Brandenburgians, who had taken up their place not far from thence, at the
mouth of Anger flowing into Rhene. There, among often skirmishes made; at
length by the Princes talking together, a pacification began, and then by the
Emperors Ambassadors, it was brought to an issue at Clive, October the
eleventh, that the controversy of Religion and its exercise, be examined and
decided by the Emperors Commissioners long since named; to wit, the Bishop of
Munster, and the Duke of Brunswick, and that to those two may be joined, to
wit, Augustus Duke of Anhault, and Ludowick Earl of Nassaw, for the Electour,
and the Bishops of Paderborn, and Osnabruge for the Neoburgian; who consulting
among themselves, and both parties reasons being heard, shall enquire whether
the state of Religion in these dominions, be to be reduced to the observance of
1624, according to the peace at Munster; or to 1609, according to the Covenants
and agreements (Provincial) of the Princes, and if indeed, it shall seem to be
this last; how those Covenants are to be understood and explained. But if (for
the equalness of voices) the Commissioners can determine nothing; The
Emperor, some head men of the Empire being taken into counsel, alike in
number, of either Religion, or in the next assembly for Election, shall decide
and determine the whole controversy by the same; and they shall stand to that
judgment without further contradiction, by force of the late public
pacification; but (the mean time) all things shall be restored into that state
in which they were before these shakings, nor shall any one be troubled for
Religion. And then, shall neither, for the future, wage war on other, even
under any pretense, and that under penalty, of violating the peace, and the
loss of all rights, which any one pretends to these dominions; but shall let
go controversies hence-forward to arise, to a friendly composure, and judicial
sentence.

Lastly, Prisoners on both sides shall be let go, and Armies, except those
which are needful to the guarding of the body, or Garrisons of places, neither
shall it be for any one by deceit of either party, to be present by counsel or
help at these shakings. But other things which concern the state-Politick,
shall so remain, as it has been agreed in diverse transactions between the
Princes, yet without prejudice and deceit of all, who pretend to the Juliacan
succession. These things being thus finished, and sealed to, they straightway
depart from Arms.

But after that Charles Stuart was at or about the beginning of Jan. 1650
Crowned King of Scotland, at Shoone, the usual place of former Coronations,
(which Month, as I have said, begins the 1651 year of the Germane Account)
in a solemn assembly of the heads of that Kingdom, among which ceremonies;
Robert Duglasse gratifying him with a prepared Oration or speech; exhorted him
(from the opinion of them all, to revenge his fathers death) he spent all his
time in warlike preparations; and, as soon as the season of the year permitted,
came into the field against General Cromwell. The Scots began to be both
powerful and numerous by reason of an agreement now pieced up of many parties
and factions there, and having completed their levies to 15000 foot, and 6000
Horse, they faced the English at Torwood, but would not engage them, encamping
behind inaccessible places to delay the same. Wherefore the English landing
1600 Foot, and four Troops of Horse, at Queens Ferry, into Fife (losing but
about six men) July the 17th 1651; the Scots sent four thousand to drive them
out of Fife. Whereupon the General, sending four Regiments of Horse and Foot
to join with the other, the English attempted the enemy by ascending the Hill,
routed the Scots, slaying about 2000, and taking 1400, Brown the chief
Commander being one; few of the English were slain, though many wounded. Then
was there an additional strength sent into Fife, and strong Inchigarney Castle
there, surrendered, July the 25th after, and soon after that, Brunt-Island (with
all its Provisions etc. only the soldiers to march away with Colors flying,
etc.) was delivered to the English Army; of much concernment, as storing them
with all necessaries. Thence Marching to St. John's Town of great strength, it
was also soon yielded unto them. But the Scotch King (fearing least his Army
should moulder away with daily detriments, and rather willing to transfer the
War into England, slipped in thither by the way of Carlisle, coming to
Worcester, Aug. the 22th with about 16000 Horse and Foot; (an undertaking
rather from necessity and despair, then mature deliberation, as appeared by a
brief letter of Duke Hamiltons, taken amongst other Papers) yet animated
thereto by a notable design of English Covenanters with the Scots; who being
offended with the new Commonwealth, now favored the Kings cause.

This design was for a general rising in Lancashire, and adjacent parts, the
Earl of Darby to come out of the Isle of Man, and raise the Country, who
joining with the Scotch forces, should confront the Parliaments greatest power.
The chief promoters hereof in England, were several persons (now too tedious
to relate particularly) meeting at Christopher Love's house, a Presbyterian
Minister, who (by his own Narrative) was privy thereto after the breaking off
of the Treaty between the King and the Scots at Jersey, which being seasonably
discovered, and the grand Agent Thomas Cook, apprehended, and after escape,
retaken, March 30. 1651. Major General Harrison (after the seizing of one
Birkenhead another Agent) was by the Parliament ordered to March Northward with
Horse and Foot, to prevent risings, and oppose the Scotch Army if they should
enter England: Love himself with others being apprehended; he was arraigned
before Englands High-Court of Justice, June 21. 1651, sentenced July the fifth,
and on the 15th day being reprieved for 28 days, was with one Gibbons) another
actour therein) beheaded on Tower Hill, August the 22th following.

The King coming to Worcester was proclaimed King of Great Britain and
Ireland, thought to take his journey straight to London; which made the City
tremble. But while he stays there to refresh his soldiers (a few days)
wearied with their journeys toil, Cromwells speedy expedition, prevented his
counsel; who leaving Monk with 7000 in Scotland (who took in six strong holds
there, with several others) came to Worcester before he was expected of his
adversaries, and after about an hours sharp dispute of the Kings party, in
opposing the English passage over Severn, they giving ground, maintained with
about three Regiments, another hot dispute at Powick bridge: but at length ran
into Worcester: whom the English, as Conquerours, following, they drew out what
they could, making a resolute sally: where after a little retiring of the
Generals men, the enemy was totally routed, their works taken, the Town entered
and sacked, about 10000 were taken in all, and about 3000 were slain.

Amongst the many of quality, Duke Hamilton (being wounded) fell into his
enemies hands, dying next day of his wounds: happy (as one says) in this, that
by a timely death, he escaped the English Axe. The King fleeing, and leaving
his fellows, whose faith he suspected in such straits, gets with one Lord
Wilmot into a hollow Tree next day till night: and so in disguised habit and
hair cut, by the assistance of a Lady, (whether coming to London first or not)
got over into France, 500 l. being offered to any one that should detect him.

This defeat was on Sept. the third, 1651. when as a little before, Aug. 23.
the said Earl of Derby landing with about 300 in Lancashire, had soon increased
them to 1500, he was by Colonel Lilburn, with his only Regiment in an hours
time routed; many of note taken and slain, with all their baggage, etc. the
Earl himself recovering Worcester, but was afterward taken by the said
Lilburn, and October. 15. following, beheaded at Bolton, as was also Sir Tho.
Fethersonhaugh at Chester, on the 22th day, with others executed at Chester,
Shrewsbury, etc, Genesis Cromwell returning to London in triumph, Sept. 12, was
loaded with famous gifts from the new Commonwealths Governors.

The Captives, whom for number the Prisons would not contain, being diversely
disposed of, a great part were sent away into America.

In Scotland also were apprehended most of the Nobility and Gentry of that
Nation, as they were assembled to propagate their King's interest. So that
Scotland being after the English Armies passage into Fife, with little
difficulty subdued: Commissioners were sent from the Parliament at London into
Scotland, to receive those that had yielded themselves into their defense and
protection.

Four very considerable places fell this year 1651. into the Parliament of
Englands power, as additionalls to their success. The one was Scilly Islands,
a great annoyance to Merchantmen of the Commonwealth, for reducing whereof,
Genesis Blake set sail, Apr. 18. which were surrendered Jun. 2. following. Another
was the Isle of Man, for which end, three Foot Regiments were shipped at
Chester and Lever-pool, October. 16. who although they were on the eighteenth day
driven into Beumorris by contrary winds: Yet, sailing thence the 28th day, they
had assurance by an Islander, of landing without any opposition, (which
facility recompensed their former difficulty) all being secured for them but
two Castles, Rushen, and Peel, which (they besieging) were delivered on low
terms without any bloodshed Oct. 26. Colonel Hain also, setting sail for
Jersey, October. 19. and after some difficulty, and opposition received in
landing, all was soon reduced but Elizabeth Castle, which held out till the
middle of December, whose Governor, Sir George Carteret, had large conditions,
for the wonderful strength and situation thereof.

The last was Cornet-Castle in the Isle of Guernsey, even an impregnable place;
which although being before attempted by storm, diverse were slain, and some
drowned in getting off, yet in the Month of November, was surrendered on
composition.

The Parliament about this time, setting forth an Act for increase of Shipping,
and encouragement of Navigation; to the perplexing of the Hollanders, which was
contained in four particulars, they sent their Ambassadors to London, who came
thither December. the 17th and had audience the nineteenth. But because they
could not procure the repealing of that Act especially; they assayed to do it
by force. Two Ambassadors were likewise sent into Holland out of England March
11. who though they were received at Roterdam, yet were several times
affronted.

On Jan. 11. this year, was the Barbado's surrendered to Sir George Ayscough, in
the Parliaments behalf. And John Lilburn Jan 15. was sentenced to banishment
about the business of Sir Arthur Haslerig, which was executed on him by an act
made to that purpose on the thirtieth day of the same Month. 1651.

And to conclude this year in England, an Act of general Pardon and Oblivion
came forth from the Parliament, Febr. 24. 1651, that ill will and rancour might
be buried as to former differences and offenses before Sept. 3. of the same
year; and although many were thereby (at the present) cleared at Assizes, etc.
for diverse offenses; yet many things besides murder were left unpardoned:
neither was the stomach of many in that Commonwealth thereby allayed, as
afterward appeared.

But in France, after that the Princes were set at liberty, (and the banished
Cardinal, after some movings, came into the Archbishopric of Colonia, seating
his dwelling at Brule in the Archbishop's Castle) they coming to the King and
Queen; that there might be a greater confidence of a reconciliation, the
Lievtenantship of Aquitane is offered to the Prince of Condy, (this in 1651,)
the Duke of Espernon renouncing it of his own accord: whose Government the
Burgedalians, obstinately enough, spoke ill of; and unless he laid down his
Lievtenantship, they threatened new stirs.

The King, in the mean time, entering into the 14th year of his age, came forth
from under the tuition of the Queen his Mother, in the month September. of the
same year: where (in the highest Court of the chief ones of all ranks or states
assembled, with all the King's Senate; likewise the Duke of Orleance, Andegave,
York, and the Queen of England, the King's Aunt) the King having given brief
thanks to the Queen his Mother, in that for so many years she had governed the
Kingdom with great care and pains, is placed in a Chair of Estate, and begins
his Kingly functions. First of all the Prince of Conde was quitted, (being
absent); for, that he might not be present at this action, he had few days
before departed from Paris. Then was confirmed the Senate's decree for the
Cardinal's departure. Some favors (also) being conferred among the Peers:
amongst other things, the care of the King's Seal was committed to the chief
Man of the Senate, the Archbishop of Toulouse. Moreover, the Prince of Conde
going into his own Province of Aquitane, the minds of the Burdegalians being in
friendship with him, musters new Armies; many of the Court and Nobility
following him; by whose favor and wealth, when he had drawn both all Aquitane,
and Santonie, with the neighboring Cities, it appeared, that he undoubtedly
attempted a new War. The King endeavors, with the Duke of Orleance and the
Senate of Paris, to appease Conde, that laying down his arms, he might sit down
quiet in his own Province. When that could not be obtained, he also preparing
arms, condemns Conde of Treason; and leaving Paris, speedily goes to Pictave,
speedily calling back the Cardinal, who, the while, had enrolled some forces
for this event. Therefore about the end of the year, the Cardinal returns into
France with an Army; the Senate of Paris much beseeching, That the decree
against the Cardinal might be continued.

Thus that most flourishing Kingdom being divided into factions, destroys its
self with its own forces; and the next year 1652, Civil discords more cruelly
burned out, Condy and Orleance, with the Parliament of Paris, urging by force
of arms the Cardinal's passe-port, and the Decree's execution against him. He
being supported (on the contrary) by the King and Queens defense stiffly
defends by arms, the dignity of the King's authority against the force and
power of the alike contenders. But, what will at length be the issue hereof,
following years will make manifest.

This year also 1651, brought forth a notable Victory to the Polanders against
the Cossacks and Tartars. For the Cossacks not being contented with the peace
made a year or two before, kept an Army in the field; and not containing
themselves within their appointed bounds, they hindered not the Taurican
Tartars going into Walachia; but defended them with all their aid, against
which, the agreement was. But when the Polonians in so doubtful affairs, sat
down with part of their Army, beneath Camenece in Podolia, to defend their own
borders: nor could bring help to the Duke of Walachia their confederate, for
fear of the Cossacks: yet they blamed the Polonians, as if they provided arms
against them, and mustered the whole Soldiery of their Kingdom, only utterly
to destroy and blot out them. Therefore Chimelinsky sending Ambassadors, first
to Potoccie the Lieutenant General, who was at Camenece, and afterward to the
King: They required, that the Army might be led out of Podolia and their
borders: who answered them, They should return to their own, and leave the
Tartars and Walachia; that there was no evil to be feared from them, while
they stood to their Covenants, and maintained the peace. But they continued
holding up arms, and to help Polana's enemies: the cause was, That being
careful of their own defense, they might look to their own affairs, and see
that the Commonwealth took no damage. Then at Assemblies which the King had
sumoned about the end of the former year, an Embassage was decreed to the
Cossacks, to denounce peace, if they obeyed; but contrarily, war: and also for
that war, if there were need, to advance the Charges and common Customs, and
that 36000 foreign Soldiers should be entertained, besides those Armies that
were in the Kingdom, and that it should be in the King's power, when there was
need, to call all the Nobility to arms, and so to meet the enemy with all the
forces of the Kingdom. The Assemblies ended, the King designed six Poland Peers
to go to Kiove in Embassage to the Cossacks; and that being in vain, he bent
his mind to provide for Arms; sending away those through Poland and Prussia, who
should muster what Army they could, and at first of the Spring, should bring
them to him beneath Lubline, with his whole Nobility which he was speedily to
call forth, ready furnished and provided. Chimelensky hearing of the issue of
the Assemblies, prepared himself no less slowly for an imminent war. Neither
only entering into fellowship with the Tartars; but also he had sent dispatched
Messengers to Constantinople, and to the neighboring Turkish Governors, and
into Transylvania for aid. Some of whom being intercepted, discovered his
wonderful counsels and cruel attempts against Poland. Therefore in the
beginning of the Spring, Chimilensky, passing over Borysthenes, led 140000
(among whom were 12000 Taurican Tartars, whom as yet 40000 others were to
follow) into Volynia, and there, possessing some places, pitched his Camps. The
Polanders in the mean time, Calinovius being their Leader, take Vinnicia, a
famous City of Podolia, and kill all the Cossacks therein. Which slaughter
hastened Chimelinskies coming out of Volynia, where he had also forcibly taken
by the way Bialakaercave, so that he moved with his whole Army against
Calinovius: who being unequal to so great forces, recovered Camenece; and
leaving a sufficient Garrison there, betook himself to the King, who having
passed over the River Bugus at Socale, expected the Polonian Nobility, and the
Lithuanian Army. Chmielensky having endeavored in vain to stay Calinovius
going back, with small fights, attempted Camenece with some onsets; but being
always repulsed with the great slaughter of his Soldiers, he at length sat
down pitching his tents at Constantinovia: which place is distant almost 15
miles from Camenece, between the borders of Volynia and Podolia. Moreover, the
King, after that his Nobility and the other Armies came together, his Army
being increased to almost 100000; moving from Socale, he led it against the
enemy. Neither did Chmielensky shift off the fight, now more fierce, because
the Emperor of Tartars himself had a little before, entered in his Camp with
the most choice of his Soldiers. And then he far exceeded the Polonians in
number: for if credit be to be given to those who have written of his Camp, it
was to the number of 300000. Therefore both Armies moving forward, they came
together at the Town Beresteck. The first onset on the Polander's Camp was made
by 10000 Tartars, June 28, who being repulsed with slaughter, the Emperor
himself next day, with all his Tartars, and part of the Cossacks, assaulted the
Polander's Army with great force: and that battle endured, until night
withdrew the fighters. This two days battle was a flourishing skirmish before
the general fight; and as yet, their forces were in danger of departing from
each other with a mutual fear. On the third day therefore, which was the last
of June, the whole Army met, and that with such force and stiffnesse on both
sides, that it long remained doubtful which side should have the victory. At
last, the Polanders strength overcame, who, when they had made their first
assault on the Tartars, and had driven them from their standing, their flight
very much troubled the Cossacks Army. So the most numerous Army being scattered
and put to flight, left a most ample victory to the Polonians. The King a
little before evening, in the very place where the battle was fought, gave
thanks to God, the Conqueror of enemies, singing a solemn hymn of thanks:
which, a mixed sound (with terrout) of great Guns and Trumpets, did distinguish
with an acceptable mean or temper.

The day after, it is told the King, a very great multitude of enemies, which
escaped in flight, as yet stood, and fenced themselves in a fit and fenny
place, setting their Carts and baggage on the sides of them, of which they had
a great number. Chmielensky was in that place, waiting for an occasion to be
given him, of revenging himself. The King, seeing he could not (by reason of
the place) drive them out thence by force; he appointed, that (all ways being
stopped up) no provision might be brought unto them: which thing, drove the
besieged almost to desperation, but that they had as yet one passage: through
which, when (all their victuals being spent) on the 10th day after, they had
disorderly poured forth themselves, many of them were slain by the Polanders
following on them: Some also were supt up in the Fens and Pools, the bridges
breaking which they (in this necessity, and want of matter) had sewed together
of skins. In this flight, there perished to the number of 20000: and amongst
them, the Greek Patriarch, sent from Constantinople to encourage the Cossacks
to this war. This victory being gotten, the Poland Nobility, although the King
very much exhorred them to prosecute the victory, taking (at length) their
leave, departed home. The other Soldiers that were hired for reward, were sent
to follow after them that fled. Janus Ratzvil, Captain of the Lithuanian
Soldiery, following with his men to Borysthenes, took in Kiove, once the
Mother-City of all Russia, and Monilove, with other Cities situated on this
side and beyond Borysthenes, by force or surrender. Chmielensky therefore being
afflicted with so many discommodities, and fearing greater, is again compelled
to desire peace. Which was granted him by the chief Governors of the Polonian
warfare, (their Armies daily diminishing with infection) on these conditions:
First of all, a common to leration of Religion is granted, a return of them
that were expelled, into their country, and a granting them their goods;
pardon was granted to all that followed this war, and to Chmielensky himself;
yet so, that coming to the next public assemblies, he should in humble
manner beseech the King: neither henceforward should have more then 20000
Cossacks under his banners, with whom he being tied by oath to the King of
Poland, he should defend the borders of his Kingdom against the inroads of the
Tartars, Turks, and Muscovites, and to dissolve what leagues he had with the
Polanders enemies; and hereafter perform faith and obedience to the King and
Kingdom.

In the beginning of the year 1652, (which with the Germans, is in January)
Maximilian Henry, Archbishop and Electour of Colonia, having a little before
entered into the Priesthood, and receiving it at the hands of George Paul
Stravius, Bishop of Joppa, and the Bishops Vicegerent of Colonia, entered into
Colonia with the Archbishops Pall, on the fourth day of the said January, and
the day following, (the Clergy and Magistracy of the City being called together
to the Metropolitans house; the Princes, Philip Palatine of Neoburg, and Ernest
Lantgrave of Hesse being present, the Canons according to the custom, standing
by and waiting, with the Bishop of Joppa, and six mitted Abbots) he began the
solemn evening duty of the Lords Epiphany, which being finished in a
Pontifical manner, the next day, the day of Epiphany it self, in the same
assembly having performed rites at an Altar built in the same place, he
bestowed his Archiepiscopal blessing, with a most full pardon of sins, on a
multitude of people gathered about him. To the making famous this act, which
Colonia had not seen a hundred years before, and the more fitly to behold the
Majesty of the Rites of the Roman Church, there was prepared in the middle of
the Cathedral, a place made of boards between the chief Pillars, and fenced
with wooden railes, and on every side adorned with most precious
Arras-hangings, which the Guard men with Lances encompassed to restrain the
multitude; in the former part of that place was built a Theater on high with
three steps, embracing almost the space of two Pillars, and spread with red
cloth, for the chief Altar which was seen in its front toward the East: the
Altar also being higher then the Theater by three steps, Silver Images of the
twelve Apostles, and in the midst of the same, a very great Silver Cross (once
the gift of Pilgrim Archbishop) beautified it. At the right part of the Altar
toward the North, was raised up the Archbishops chair, and a little beneath
it, four seats for the Princes, the Neoburgian, Lantgrave and his Wife, and the
Earl of Furstemburg his Widow, etc. But the public confession of Ernest the
Lantgrave, and Eleanor his Wife, of the Roman Catholic Faith, much increased
the solemnity and joy of this first Liturgy. Who, before it began, when at the
Archbishops feet, before the Altar, their face turned toward the people, on
bended knees, they had desired to be received into the lap of their mother the
Church, he consenting, they approved of the form of faith before read, and
touching the book of the Gospells, they confirmed it by a solemn oath. Many
hardly withheld from tears, when they saw, these Princes to be returned to that
Church, as it were after banishment, over which, a 150 years before,
Archbishop Hermanne Lant-grave of Hesse, (of the same house) was chief, most
famous for his many and great deserts toward the Church of Colonia. And then
(after a little time) the Electour went to Hildese, and coming to the
possession of that Bishopric, he there finished what belonged to a Bishop,
with the accustomed Ceremonies, even as he had also done before at Leodium.

The same year 1652, produced a bloody Sea-war between Englands Republic, and
the states of the United Provinces; for these (through diverse years prosperity
and industry in Maritime affairs, although it was truly observed by Keckerman
in his time: Hoc certum est omnibus hodie gentibus navigandi industria et
peritia, Superiores esse Anglos, post Anglos Belgas, et inter hos, Flandros,
Hollandos, Zelandos. This is sure (says he) that of all Nations at this day,
the English are chief in the diligence and skillfulnesse of Navigation; after
them, the Belgians; and amongst these, the Flandrians, Hollanders, and
Zelanders) so increased in strength at Sea, that they durst dispute their
quarrel in diverse bloody encounters with the English, refusing to strike their
top-sail in the narrow-Seas, Englands right of Sovereignty there; as also
denying to pay the tenth Herring (caught by them in the English Seas) to the
new Commonwealth, refusing also not to afford refuge or help to the house of
the Stewards in their Provinces as was demanded; and to give satisfaction for
damage brought by them on the English in the Indies, which amounted to above
1000000 lb sterling, and for hereafter to be cautious of not offending, and
also to suffer the English to sail freely and safely on the Danish Sea, with
some other such like. An Ambassador indeed from Holland had audience, but
departed out of England without any composure of differences June 30. For while
they were upon a Treaty, Vantrump the Dutch Admiral coming with 42 Sail of
Ships (nigh the Britain shore, toward Dover road) to view, refused to strike
his Sail, and hung out a Red flag, the signal of his Fleet, giving the English
General Blake a broad side; Whose Navies encountering each other about four
hours space; one Dutch Ship was sunk, and another taken, with their Captains,
and about 150 Prisoners. The English Fleet having about ten slain, and forty
wounded, and receiving little hurt, but in the Admirals Masts, Sails, and
rigging, with many shot in her Hull. This was May 19. 1652, and was the
beginning of almost two years War, in which, the first fight after was made by
Sir George Ayscough (returning some Weeks before from reducing the English
Plantations) in July, who with his Squadron of Ships, took, burnt and dispersed
30 or 36 Dutch ships, and August 16 following, fought them near Plymouth. But
three terrible Sea Fights were betwixt the two Nations (besides others) in that
space of time. The one, Febr. 18, 1652, near the Isle of Wight and Portland,
wherein the Dutch were worsted. Another was June 2, and 3, 1653, where they
were also worsted; but with the loss of the English General, Dean: who was
afterward pompously buried at Westminster. The third and last, and saddest
conflict, but most seasonable victory to the English, was July 29, and 30,
1653, wherein their Admiral Vantrump was slain, and their Fleet also worsted,
about 30 Men of War being sunk and fired, and about 1000 prisoners, with 6
Captains taken out of their sinking ships. Yet Genesis Blake himself was somewhat
put to the worst in December. 1652, which made the Dutch rejoice and insult; and
in the Levant Seas, toward the latter end of the same year, five considerable
English ships were taken and blown up by the Dutch also.

There was also several Transactions between the English and the Danish King;
who refused to deliver some Merchants ships, that (to avoid the danger of the
Dutch then in the Sound) had put themselves under his protection; 18 sail set
forth from North-Yarmouth Sept. 19. 1652, to convoy them home; and on the 26
day received a Letter from the King, That he would secure them for the
Merchants as he had done; but would not deliver them unto them: whereupon they
(as destitute of hope) left their Ships and came home with this Fleet. And
although in October. following, one Bra^shaw was sent as an Agent to the King of
Denmark, on the Merchants behalf; yet he both detained the ships, and (at
length) sold the goods.

The French Fleet also this year, consisting of seven considerable Ships, one
small Frigot, and six fireships, and going Septem. 5. from Calice-Road for the
relief of Dunkirk (then hardly besieged by the Spaniard), were chased by Genesis
Blake, and most of them taken: whereby the besieged in Dunkirk despairing of
relief, yielded it to the Spaniards, Sept. 6. Graveling also did the like.

About the same time, an Ambassador from the King of Portugal (having to
grapple with the Spaniard) arrived in England, with a sumptuous Train; and
having audience October. 2. 1652, after many Conferences, Addresses, and Offers,
obtained a Peace.

Agents likewise (now about) came to the English out of France; the one from
the King, desiring a release of his aforesaid ships going to relieve Dunkirk,
and for a right understanding between them. Others from the Prince of Condy,
craving aid against the Cardinal; who had straightly besieged Bordeaux. All
which Negotiations were of none effect. Other Nations also interposed for
composing those mortal differences between the English and Dutch; as Sweden,
the Switzers, the Citics Lubeck, Hamburgh, etc. but with as little effect (at
that time) as the other.

But General Cromwell perceiving the corruptions and dilatory proceedings of
England's long-sitting Parliament, to perpetuate their Session; entered the
House April 20, 1653, with some of his principal Officers, and (some reasons
thereof being given) dissolved that Parliament: the Members departing, some by
force, some for fear, others with murmuring. Then he with his Council of
Officers set forth a Declaration for satisfaction of the Nation, declaring the
grounds of its Dissolution. Which had the consent both of the Officers of the
Landforces in Scotland and Ireland, and also of the Generals and Captains of
the Fleet. And lest public Officers of the Nation should de^line from their
duties; or others make disturbances hereupon; he published another brief
Declaration April 30, That all persons should demean themselves peaceably, and
obey the former Laws, under a Council of State then declared, till approved
persons should be called from several parts of the Commonwealth, to the
Supreme Authority: Which new Parliament being summoned (by Warrants from the
General and his Officers, to each Member pitched upon throughout the three
Nations) to appear July 4. 1653; they accordingly met in the Council Chamger;
where the General (after a seasonable speech unto them) devolved on them, or
any 40 of them, the Supreme Authority and Government, by an Instrument under
his own hand and Seal; not to sit longer than November. 3. 1654: who, though they
made some laudable Acts, whereof one was, for relief of Creditors and poor
prisoners; yet in other things, there being no small confusion and disagreement
amongst them; as about Ministers and Tithes; For continuance of which,
Londoners had petitioned Sept. 2. One among them moved, That their siting as
then constituted, was not for the peace of the Commonwealth, and therefore it
was requisite to deliver up the powers they received from the General, unto
him: which motion being seconded by several Members, the Speaker with the
greater number going to White Hall, by a writing under their hands, resigned up
the same unto the General accordingly. This was on December the 12th, 1653. On
which day, the General and his Council of Officers meeting, and a wise speech
made to them by him, some things were transacted in order to a settlement and
composure: advising also with other persons of interest, how the burden of
governing England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the Armies and Navies, should be
born, and by whom; who at length resolved, That a discreet Council consisting
of 21 persons should be nominated. And that the General himself should be
chosen Protector of the three Nations; which was done accordingly in
Westminster Hall, December. 16. 1653, the Commissioners of the great Seal,
Judges, Council of State, called the Keepers of England's Liberties, Mayor and
Alderm^n of London, and most of the Armie's chief Officers being present; where
Rules and Articles (called an Instrument of Government) being first read; he
solemnly took Oath to perform the same: and returning to White Hall in state as
he came, he met with his Council: by whom a Proclamation was ordered to be
published, strictly to charge and command all persons whatsoever in the three
Nations, to take notice of Oliver Cromwell's being declared Protector of the
said Nations, and to conform and submit to the Government so established.

Two Ordinances in the month of January following were made by the Protector
and Council; the one, declaring what offenses should be adjudged Treason, that
persons might know the nature and danger of their offense: The other, for
repealing the Acts and Resolves of Parliament, touching subscription to the
Engagement: which (indeed) must necessarily follow upon the change of the
Government, now become even Monarchical again. The said Protector was Febr. 8.
following (riding triumphantly into the City of London) magnificently feasted
by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and several Companies thereof.

But some months before, June 10, 1653, John Lilburn, before banished by the
Parliament, hearing of its dissolution, and so a change in Government, returned
into England without license, craving General Cromwell's Protection: who
notwithstanding, being left to the Law, was sent prisoner to Newgate, June 16;
and being brought to the City-Sessions July 13 after; and again on the 16 day,
his Trial was deferred till the next Sessions: at which he appearing August 16,
was (on the 20th day of the same month, after several hours spent in
examination of Witnesses for and against him the prisoner, and in making his
defense) acquitted by the Verdict of his Jury about 12 at night. Yet on the 27
day after, was sent from Newgate to the Tower of London. Also on the same 20th
day, a General Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland (not judged, it appears,
tending to peace) was dispersed by the English Forces kept in that Nation for
quietness sake.

Two things were this year observable; the one in England, which was warm
blood, Jan. 20, rained at the Country Town of Pool in Dorsetshire: so that some
there thought (at first) it was blood ran from their noses. The other in
Ireland, March 15, on which day three Suns were seen at Dublin, the Mother-City
of that Nation.

The King of Poland returning to Warsove (from his famous victory) in triumph;
A domestique mourning took hold of him, hearing of the death of his sister Anne
Katherine Constance. For this Princess going (in the beginning of the
Brandenburgian stirs) from Dusseldorp to Colonia, for quietness sake; those
troubles being composed; while she joyfully meets the Prince her husband coming
to her, and taking him by the hand, leads him to the Court, being taken with a
sudden failing of her spirits, she falls down between his hands astonished, on
the ground; and the day after (with the great sorrow of the Prince and all his
Courtiers, unto whom for her meekness and clemency she was exceeding dear) she
departed this life, October. 9. A Princess laden with all Regal virtues.

The same month that the Archbishop of Colonia was (as abovesaid) invested
into his Bishopric, Philip Elector of Trevira, and Bishop of Spire dying after
long languishings of old age, Charles Caspar, who had been long before appointed
his fellow-helper, straightway succeeded him; and was inaugurated few days
after, according to the wonted custom, by the Metropolitan College. The mean
while, the business of quitting Franckendale, (which was as yet held by a
Spanish garrison) after many debates, was brought so far, that the King of
Spain having his money paid him, the garrison should depart in the month of
April, 1652, and the place should be restored to the Elector of Heidelburg, by
virtue of the German Pacification. And after these things, the Emperor about
the end of this year summoned public Assemblies of the Empire, at Ratisbone;
inviting in the mean time, the Electours to him, to Prague, unto a very
friendly Discourse, whit^^^ he first went in July, with his son the King of
Hungary, and all the Court.

But in Poland things were now no l^ss quiet than in France. For there,
public Assemblies being summoned at the beginning of this year 1652, and
almost brought to an end, the interceding of one Provincial Messenger dispersed
them; the Under Chancellor of the Kingdom, having lost the King's friendship,
the Nobility disdaining him, and being condemned by the King and Senate of
Treason, he fled first to Petricove, and thence into Swethland. The Cossacks
the while, and the Tartars, being stirred up by these troubles, making
slaughter of the Polonian Army (that defended the frontiers) at Borysthenes,
break again out of their dens into Val^chia^ and fining that Prince a great
sum of money, are now said to assault Camenece in Podolia, the strongest
Castle of that Province, with the greatest force. Which things so pierced the
Polanders, that the King calling his Nobility again to arms, summoned new
general Assemblies of the Kingdom.

There dyed in Germany in 1651, about the end of September, Maximilian Electour
of Bavaria, in the 78 year of his age: who (says one) was not to be put behind
(in the glory of warlique deeds, especially in his Religion, prudence and
felicity) any Prince of his Time: who of his latter Wife Mary-Anne daughter of
Ferdinand the second, Emperor, left two sons, Ferdinand Maria, and Francis
Ignatius, heir not only of their father's Dominions; but also of his virtue
and glory. Unto Ferdinand, a few months before his father's death, Adelheids
sister of the Duke of Savoy was espoused: who being received at Waserburg (in
June 1652, by the Bridegroom the Prince Electour, his Mother, also Duke Albert,
and his son Sigismund Bishop of Frisinge) she was brought to Monachium. The
same year also two English Worthies departed from the living, Pophan, a General
at Sea, in the month November; and on the 26 day of the same month, Henry
Ireton, Deputy of Ireland under his father in law, General Cromwell: Both whom,
especially the latter, were interred with great solemnities at Westminster.
There dyed also the following year, 1652, Aloysius Contaren, Ambassador and
Mediator of the Venetian Commonwealth, to the Othoman Court, and diverse
Princes of Europe; and lately also into Germany, to the universal pacification
there: Also Leonard Torsthenson, General of the Swedes, through Germany; Amelia
Elizabeth Lantgravesse Casselane of Hesse. Francis Piccolominie,
Overseer-General of the Jesuits Society: in whose place Alexander Gottefride,
by a general meeting of those Fathers, was chosen in the beginning of the year
1652. Both which, Goswine Nickell succeeded by the same voices, who was a long
time Rector of the College of Colonia, and Provincial Overseer throughout the
lower Province of the Rhene.

CHAP. VI. An Account of what memorable things happened both in England and
other Parts, from about the latter end of the Year, 1653, unto this present
Year 1658.
IN England, (after that (the form of Government being now changed) Oliver
Cromwell took upon him the Supreme Magistracy as Protector of the three
Nations, and he sitting with his council at White Hall, (being 13 in number)
December. 21, 1653, and a Declaration from them came forth, That instead of the
Name, Style, Title and Test of the Keepers of the Liberties of England by
Authority of Parliament, used in all Courts, Writs, etc. from December. 26. 1653,
the Name, Style, Title and Test of the Lord Protector for the time being, of
the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions
thereunto belonging, should be used, and no other: also the Government of the
said Commonwealth under the said Protectorship, containing 42 particular
heads, was published,) there was discovered a secret Conspiracy on the behalf
of Charles Stuart, Feb. 18 following; whereupon eleven of the Conspirators being
committed to the Tower of London, were after a short time set at liberty: About
which time, (on the contrary) as a testimony of affection to the Protector's
Government, there appeared Addresses and Congratulations, from many parts of
the three Nations. Then was there a main business in agitation, to wit, peace
with the Dutch, and about this time well nigh finished: and after that, two of
the Dutch Embassdours, Newport and Youngstall, had gone over for full power
from their superiors, and returned into England, March the 3d. 1653. desiring
a speedy Cessation of Arms on both sides, as being fully empowered to ratify
the late concluded peace. On April 5. following, 1654, the Articles of Peace
betwixt both States were signed and sealed by both parties: and on the 26 day
of the same month in England proclaimed; (the day after which, the Protector
feasted the said Ambassadors at White Hall, himself first lodging there on the
15th of the same April, 1654.) also in the Netherlands about the same time. And
on May 30. following, the Lord Ambassador Whitlock arrived from Swethland,
having finished his Embassage, which was to make an intimate peace and alliance
between Sweden and England: For when the said Ambassador had understood, that
the Treaty with the Dutch could have no reflection upon the Swedish affairs,
(for before, that Queen would give him no dispatch) he putting on the business
more than formerly; in 14 days after they came to a full agreement: and April
28, 1654, the Articles of Alliance with the Swedish Nation were interchangeably
signed and sealed also. Then on May 12 following, he having his last audience
in the same order and state as at his first receiving: after a brief speech
made unto the Queen, and she likewise signifying ^her high contentment taken,
that the Lord Protector should at such a season send so honorable an Embassy
entrusted to the management of so worthy a person: and that she accounted it a
very great addition of happiness to her Reign, that she had made so intimate
an Alliance, etc. And that although she was about to quit her Government, yet
she should remain a perfect friend to the Protector: not doubting, but that the
Prince her Cousin, and all others who should succeed, would be careful
inviolably to maintain the friendship of that Commonwealth. This transaction
being performed at Upsall, a Town and University there.

A little before which time, were the spirits and expectations of some Scots
heightened, partly through promises which their King made them by his Agents;
and partly through the discontent of diverse persons in England; so that under
the command of the Earls of Glencarn and Kenmore, was an Army raised in
Scotland of 4000 horse and foot; who Rendezvouzing at the Lough, Colonel Morgan
with about 1500 horse and foot there wholly routed them, Febr. 17. 1653, and
slew about 150 of them. But then did the affairs of Ireland tend more and more
toward perfect settlement, by reason of the vigilant care which the Lord
Deputy Fleetwood and the Council had in transplanting the Irish Natives into
the Province of Connaught, whereby the English there were in all likelihood
secured both in life and estate, from Insurrections.

In the month of May following, 1654, a discovery being made of a second
Conspiracy against the Lord Protector's life; and to be put in execution on a
prefixed day, as he should go betwixt London and Hampton Court: also to seize
on all guards about the City of London, the City it self, and also the Tower
thereof; to proclaim Charles Stuart King of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
a High-Court of Justice (so called) was erected in Westminster Hall, Jul. 1.
before whom, three of the apprehended Conspirators being brought, to wit, John
Gerard, Peter Vowell, and Somerset Fox: they were charged of High Treason; and
upon proof thereof, were condemned to dye: one whereof, to wit, Fox, being
reprieved for his free and ingenuous confession: the other two (who denied the
knowledge of any such design) suffering according to the Sentence, Jul. 10.
Vowell being hanged; but Gerard, upon petition, beheaded on Tower Hill: on
which sad Theater, one Don Pantalion Sa, brother to the Portugal Ambassador
then in England, for a murder by him (with his companions) a good while before
committed on a man at the New-Exchange. And on the very morning of this
execution-day, were the Articles of Peace (now fully concluded betwixt England
and the Kingdom of Portugal) signed by the same Ambassador; who immediately
withdrew out of the City.

But those in the Highlands of Scotland (being not as yet discouraged, and
receiving some additionall strength from Middleton who had landed there out of
Holland, as chief General for the young King) were quickly again reputed an
Army, against whom General Monk being sent, and in those High-lands attending
their motions in several Marches from June the ninth, 1654, unto July 29
following, he by degrees totally defeated them: Middleton himself being
necessitated to flee and take shipping out of Scotland; and his scattered
forces daily repairing unto the Garrisons of Englands Commonwealth for mercy.

On Sept. the third following 1654, (the Protector thinking it meet to summon
a Parliament, two Indentures being first made, one between the Sheriffs of
particular Counties, and the choosers of Members, and another between the
Sheriffs and the Burgesses (with the Inhabitans of Buroughs, so chosen) that
they for themselves, and people of the said Butroughs, have full power to act
and consent to those things which in Parliament shall happen, so they alter not
the Government from one single person and a Parliament, as then settled. They
met at Westminster Abbey, then repairing to the house, and beginning to
question the lawfullnesse of that power which called them together; a
recognition of the Government was to be signed by them before their entrance
into the House again; which most of them signing, they sat five Months,
according to the time allotted by the instrument of Government; and January the
two and twentieth following, were dissolved by the Protector.

But (whether for glory sake, or revenge of an injury) an Army under the
command of General Venables, was conveyed by a Fleet of Ships, set forth out
of England under the conduct of General Pen, toward the Island of Hispaniola,
(the first place in America, that Columbus discovered for the King of Spain,
and by the Spaniards not a little set by) who setting sail from Portsmouth,
December. 27. were at Barbados January the twenty eight after, where the whole
Fleet being certified to be in a good condition, March 19. 1654, and having
seized on eighteen Dutch Merchants Ships, for trading there contrary to an Act
of the long sitting Parliament, they thence sailed for Hispaniola, on the
thirtieth day of the same Month; where landing (though not all at once) in
April following; they (through the climates unkindnesse, want of water, and
other necessaries, and their enemies expertnesse of the Country) received no
very small repulse, not a few perishing in that action; Wherefore (that the
honor of that design might not wholly be lost) they about the third of May
re-embarqued themselves for Jamaica Island, in whose Harbor they Anchoring
some days after, with small resistance were Masters of the same.

In the mean time, the Protector, his Council, and Army Officers, were
employed at home, in suppressing a discovered Plot, and insurrections in diverse
places; for it was certified from York unto London, March 26, 1655, that one
Sir Richard Maliverer, inviting his Tenants a few nights before, unto a Supper,
incited them to join in Arms with him; who (with others) intended to seize on
the City of York the same night for King Charles, appointing them a Gate where
he would meet them: and going with four of them unto Hessay Moor, diverse chief
of the Country met them, with Carts laden with Arms; yet the appearance being
too small, they dispersed again. Wherefore, the said Maliverer was necessitated
to flee beyond the Seas. There were some said to be risen about Merioneth
shire, and other parts of Wales: against whom, some other Inhabitants rose to
join in opposing them. Another party reported 500, (though not so many) rose in
Nottinghamshire; whom from Colonel Hacker, a party marched out of
Leicestershire, to suppress. Shrewsbury Castle was to be possessed by a
stratagem of two men going into the Castle in women's apparel, and two other
as their men to wait on them, etc. of which the Governor having notice,
prevented the design. The City of Chester being likewise intended to be seized
on. But that of most dangerous consequence to the peace of the Commonwealth
was, the insurrection at and about Salisbury in wiltshire, beginning March 12.
for the Judges coming into Salisbury on Saturday night from Winchester Assizes;
some (for King Charles) came into the Town also, as being a time of least
suspicion: and rendezvouzing the next day, in the night were above an hundred;
the chief Commander being one Sir Joseph wagstaffe: who on Monday morning
early, seizing all horses, seized also on the Sheriff the same morning,
endeavoring to force him to proclaim Charles Stuart King: and wounding and
knocking him over the head with a pistol for refusal of the same; and carrying
him away. They plundered also both the Judges, Sheriff, Justices, and others, of
all that was fit to carry away: yet did the Judges no harm in their persons;
but, taking away their Paroll, they let out both prisoners for debt, and also
malefactors with their irons on them, mounting those who would join with them;
and after they had proclaimed Charles Stuart King) departed (in number about
200) out of the City toward Blanford in Dorsetshire, encouraging their
followers, That their chief Leader was coming from France to head them with
10000 men, (for the Country joined not with them, as was expected).

But soon after, came news, signifying the total defeat of those under
Wagstaffe, Jones, Penruddock, and Groves; for Unton Crook, a Captain, pursuing
them out of Wiltshire into Devonshire, with his own only Troop, fell in
amongst them at South-Molton: where after a few hours dispute, he took Jones,
Penruddock, and Groves, (with about 60 other prisoners, and nigh 140 horse and
arms, Wagstaffe himself escaping) who being committed to Exeter Goal, a
Commission soon came forth for the trial of the risers, at Salisbury, Exeter,
and Chard in Somersetshire, and 14 of 30 being condemned at Salisbury, three of
them, to wit, Lutas, Thorp, and Kensey, were on May 3. 1655, executed, with
seven others on the 7th day; and on May the 9th, 14 of the condemned persons at
Exeter, were there also executed, (most being reprieved) amongst whom,
Penruddock and Groves were beheaded: but Jones (by order) likewise reprieved.
Likewise at Chard were diverse persons executed, May 17, one Major Hunt escaping
in his sisters habit. After which, diverse prisoners in the Tower of London, who
had a former hand in conspiring against the Protector's Person, as also most of
them, who for this insurrection were imprisoned in the West of England, there
ordered to be sent away into foreign Plantations.

But one effect which these Insurrections produced, was instructions given to
the Major Generals of Counties, to endeavor the suppression of all Tumults,
etc. as also all foreign Invasions, by drawing Forces and Troops into all
convenient places upon occasion: and also by disarming Papists and others, who
had been in arms against the Parliament, and all others dangerously suspected.
Other orders were likewise given them, both to have a strict eye upon the
carriage of all disaffected persons within their Counties; and likewise to
endeavor the apprehending of Thieves, Robbers, High-way-men, etc. with some
other particulars. And all those hereupon, who had any way assisted the King,
were also to pay the 10th part of their estates, to the bearing of the charges
of the Army.

The English Fleet having landed their Countrymen at Jamaica, and left a
Squadron of Ships there, were now bound homeward for England; wherefore setting
sail from thence, June 25, 1655, they anchored at the Spit-head near
Portsmouth, Aug. 13 following. General Venables also arriving in another ship,
Sept. 9. weak of body, and having been near death: who together with General
Pen, either upon suspicion of his fidelity, were committed to the Tower of
London, Sept. 20th after; but soon after set at liberty again.

But General Blake, while these things were doing in Europe and America,
behaved himself valiantly in Africa against the Turkish Pirates of Tunis;
(toward which parts he set sail from Plymouth, Oct. 6. 1654,) for having
demanded satisfaction of the Dye or Governor of Tunis, for certain ships they
had taken: and also the Captives of the English Nation, April 18. 1655; and
being not only denied either, but had also some kind of provoking or daring
terms given him; he calling a Council of War, resolved (if possible) to burn
their ships which lay in Porto Ferino: within musket shot of which Castle, the
English Admiral, Vic.-Admiral, and Rear-Admiral lying, played on it and their
Forts with 20 great guns; the wind also favoring them; so that although there
were 120 guns planted on the shore and Castle against them; they courageously
in their long boats, burnt 9 ships down to the water in the space of 4 hours;
with the loss of only 25 men, and 48 wounded. Moreover, a breach of mu^ual
amity between England and Spain being now begun, an Ambassador extraordinary
was sent from the King of Spain into England; where he arriving May 2. 1655,
came in a stately manner through London to Westminster; and having public
audience given him by the Lord Protector on the 8th day of the same month,
with other audiences, nothing as to an agreement between the two Nations, was
concluded; so that June 12 following, he parted from the Protector only with
mutual complements, and so returned into Spain. For a league between the
English and French Nation, began now to be thought of; and an Ambassador from
France, residing a while in London to that end: at length, Peace between
England and France was ratified November. 19. 1655; and on the 28th day
proclaimed (one effect of which league, was the exiling of the house of the
Stuarts out of the French Dominions). Before which, there was certain
intelligence from Bayonne and S. Sebastian, Sept. 5th, that the King of Spain
had made a seizure of the persons and goods of the English within his power;
and on Febr. 16th following, War with England was openly proclaimed by the
Spaniards at Dunkirk.

But as to France it self, the Prince of Conde, with the other discontented
ones against Cardinal Mazarine and his party, being allayed there, as having no
considerable party within the bowels of that Nation: the said Prince sent one
General Marsin into Spain, to negotiate in his behalf; (for upon the Spaniard
was all his dependence) and going with his Troops in the Country and Bishopric
of Liege or Luyck in Flanders, he there waged (about the months of December
and January,) 1653 a little new War, to get Winter Quarters: the Inhabitants
every where standing to defend and maintain their privileges and freedom; but
the Prince's forces took from them by force, the little Town of Fosses, (which
is situated between the rivers of Sambre and Mense) marching also against the
Town Chastelet, seated on the river Sambre, of which (at that time) there was
no doubt but they would be soon masters of. Their design likewise being to take
Dinant and Chivai; which were to be for a Principality to the said Prince;
intending Rocroy (of which, his son the Duke of Anguien was Governor, and who
having there a very strong garrison, forced the Country round about to pay him
Contribution) for his Head-City: so that the Court-party of France quite gave
him over, supposing him not to be brought back by any tolerable means of
accommodation: wherefore they at Paris about the same time raised a suspicion
(out of policy) among the Spaniards, as if he had intended to make his peace
with the King and Court of France, giving it out, That a Treaty to that end was
actually set on foot: which doing him some present wrong among the Spanish
party, he went to Brussels to Leopold the Archduke, principally to give
assurances of his resolution against the Court of France, and all Mazarine's
party; and to procure moneys and recruits, that at Spring (for it was now
Winter) he might be in some indifferent capacity to infest that Kingdom. It was
also then presaged in France, (by many) that some strange turn of affairs was
yet to be expected there, from the Duke of Orleance, the King's Uncle, being
more than usually hardy, in refusing to come to that Court; although-strongly
solicited thereunto. The people also of that Nation being deceived in their
expectations of golden days, which they thought to have seen upon the Court's
return to Paris, and the composure of their last tumults; instead whereof they
were both impolitickly and tyrannically dealt withal, that it was certainly
believed, That if ever the Princes make up a confiderable party again in
France, the people would turn to them: most of the good Towns stood for them;
and the Parisians themselves were as high for them as ever. Then were the Court
of France drawing up a Declaration against the Prince of Conde; having also had
lately good success against the Spaniards in Catalonia. And about the same
time arrived an extraordinary Courtier from Rome unto the French Court, with
letters, pressing the King to hearken unto a Pacification with Spain, and give
way to a general Peace: wherein also the Pope promised to contribute his best
assistance. The Messenger departing likewise in haste for Spain, Jan. 21. 1653,
with Letters of the same nature, to that King; which intervening, produced no
effect: however, it has been observed, these two Monarchies have been like the
Sea, losing at one place and time, what they gain in another; so vexing
themselves and Europe also to no purpose. The Pope also sent order to his
Nuntio refiding at Paris, to make enquiry what Irish Bishops and Priests were
in that City, with their names and sirnames, and how they then lived.

The Portugal Ambassador at Paris also about the same time, making several
instances to advance the alliance of a League offensive and defensive, between
his Master the King of Portugal, and the French King, offered withal a
marriage between the said young King, and the King of Portugal's daughter, with
a Dowry of four millions of gold.

But on June 7th 1654, the young King of France was crowned at Rheimes with a
great acclamation of the Inhabitants and Soldiers of that City, who met him
half a mile out of the Town, crying, Vive le Roy, or, Let the King live. The
Ministers of Rheims also highly applauding the Cardinal in their Orations upon
the anointing of the King, looking on him as the only means that has kept up
the Scepter from falling into the hands of an ambitious Prince, that is, Conde,
who seeks more his own greatness, than the welfare of the Nation. The Cardinal
of Retz, being kept confined by Mazarine, one pretense whereof was, the nor
surrendering up of the Archbishopric of Paris; he sent about this time, the
Master of his horse to Rome, to pray the Pope to give his consent unto the same
surrender, that Mazarine might have no farther pretense for keeping him so
confined.

Now also was there preparation made in France for the siege of Stenay, by the
King and Cardinal, the only place that the Prince of Conde had at his Command;
and at which siege, the King intended to assist in Person: and the Cardinal
resolved to take that strong place, though with length of time, and vast
expenses: wherefore setting about it, and the young King courageously and
industriously visiting that Leaguer, and animating the Souldiety, after a great
Bartery raised, he summoned the place: which the Governor refusing to
surrender, without Condee's consent, they applied themselves to carry the
Citadel first: whereupon the besieged made a resolute salsey of above 200 men;
but they sallying upon the Switzers quarter, were by them valiantly repulsed:
the Governor after a second summons, sending answer back, he was resolved to
live and die in the place; they drew together more Forces to reinforce the
King's Camp: the besieged having by a sally killed between 3 and 400 of the
besiegers; yet shortly after (for that was in July 1654) in August, they having
made a very great breach with their Mine, they came to a Capitulation for
surrender, which was made with a Spanish Commander, the Earl of Chamilly
accepting of the King's pardon in surrendering it, and the garrison retreating
to Montmedy.

In the mean time, the Spaniard, to divert the French Forces that had besieged
Stenay, closely besieged Arras, a considerable Frontier Town belonging to the
French King: whose Governor was no less courageous than that of Stenay; and
the management of the siege being (by the Spaniard) said to be solely committed
unto the Prince of Condee; who had full power to fight as he should see
occasion. The Spaniards were in great want of provision; the French having so
secured the passages, that none could be brought unto them: yet a Convoy of
1000 Wagons being sent from Doway to victual the Camp, and through some
opposition, retreating to Air, from thence got safe within the lines of the
Spanish Camp; whereby they were supplied for 3 weeks: which was longer than (at
that time) the Town was (in the eyes of many) likely to hold out: The
Spaniards, Aug. 14, assaulting a half Moon of Arras, were beaten off with the
loss of 400 men. But Marshal Turein, with diverse other forces from all parts,
hastening to the relief of the besieged, (so that they had no less than 40000
in all) the Spaniard also lurking too long in his Trenches, and not engaging
the French Army at the first, (as the Prince of Condee is reported to have
advised them) they having hereby the more opportunity to circumvent them in all
passages, and hinder the access of provisions, they surrounded the Spanish
Army, and actually hindered all provisions for their relief: wherefore the
Spaniards being reduced to this strait, were necessitated to withdraw from
before the Town, on the first hopeful opportunity, and that in the night,
leaving their Ordnance and baggage behind them; yet the French having notice by
their Scouts, of their first motion, the grand Army under Marshal D.
Hoquincourt (notwithstanding all the Prince of Conde could do by persuasion or
example) coming on amain upon them, routed the Arch-Duke's horse, leaving most
of their foot to their enemie's mercy; with their Commanders, bag and baggage.
But the Governor of Arras himself (knowing the time of the Spaniards intended
retreat) sallying out with about 1500 or 2000 men at the instant of their
moving, did much facilitate the business; most of the Spanish foot being slain
or taken, to the number of 6000 prisoners; and the first Onsett being made upon
the Lorrainer's trenches, the worst storm fell on them; and many almost starved
for lack of food: This happened in August, 1654. Which success rendered
Cardinal Mazarine impregnable; whereas, if he had been put to the like retreat,
it was supposed he must have shortly retired out of France again: for those of
Bordeaux were then discontented by reason of some new imposts lately imposed on
some Commodities there, by means of Trompette Castle serving to keep that Town
in awe: the discontented also scattering several papers up and down, against
tyranny, and the oppression which they lay under; and it was then verily
believed, if Arras had been taken by the Spaniard, more places would have shown
their discontent by reason of the heavy imposts laid on them.

But the Country of Liege was about the months of January and Febr. 1653, in a
sad condition; both by the Duke of Lorrain, who quartered his Troops there,
partly by consent, and partly by force, pretending, the States of the Country
did invite him thither, because their Prince and Bishop governed altogether
absolutely, and against their Laws and privileges; so that he was come to
redress their grievances, and beget a good understanding between the Bishop
and his people. The Prince of Condee's Troops (on the other hand) pretending,
that those of Liege were affected to, and held correspondence with, the French:
also that it was the Lorrainers which betrayed them, doing them all possible
mischief they can contrive where ever they come: wherefore they were come to
secure them and their Country, from being preyed on by the Lorrainers. The
Troops likewise of the King of France and the Empire were then marching toward
Liege, pretending also, they came to relieve the afflicted, and to assist a
Prince of the Empire, who was quarreled with, and abused in his rights and
prerogatives. Wherefore, all these caused the Spanish Troops, and those of the
United Provinces to march also toward the same Country; both to hinder the
French Troops from entering into Liege, and to secure their Frontiers. Thus
although neither of these ought to have come there, the Country being Neutral;
yet, through these quarrels and debates, the Inhabitants were miserably used
like enemies on all sides.

But these thus forcibly quartering in the Country, occasioned the Prince or
Bishop of Liege, and the Archbishop of Collen, to make a league offensive and
defensive with the two Electours of Triers and Mentz, mutually to assist each
other against all manner of foreign forces under what pretense soever: and in
March following, the Marquess of Faber seeing the conclusion of peace between
the Prince of Liege, and the Electour of Collen, and Leopold the Archduke,
(whereby the first was obliged unto the second, by the article of the Treaty,
to endeavor what he could to cause the French Army to remove out of his
Territories, being (if gentle persuasions would not prevail) to join his forces
with the Arch Duke's, and force them, if they conceived it advantageous so to
do; presently removing from Limbourg, marched out of the Country of Liege the
same way he came, toward the Woods of Ardenne; yet having first the Paroll of
the Prince Electour, that neither the Spaniards, Lorrainers, or Prince of
Condee's forces, should attempt any thing against them by virtue of the said
peace. And in the mo^eth of Febr. after, the Arch Duke by special order of the
King of Spain, (whose Lieutenant he is in Flanders) exemplarily proceeded
against Charles Duke of Lorrain, not only by imprisoning his person in the
Castle of Antwerp, (though he were nobly entreated in his imprisonment) but by
taking from him the command of his Army, Dukedom, and Estate, and conferring
it on Francis his brother, who as soon as he was come from Vienna, was to have
the Command of his brother's Forces, and was called Duke Francis of Lorrain.
The cause whereof was, the thefts, robberies, rapes, etc. committed under the
conduct of his Army, the wracks of which destructions and devastations he
himself gathered up: and also his inconstancies, and pretended change of
judgment in resolves of warlique matters, and the alterations and delays he
gave in things, which (having been debated) were even at the very point of
execution: and which being important services, might (in all likelihood) have
had a happy issue: which tricks and artificies were at length grown so
notorious, that the Masters of the Camp, and all other Officers could point at
them, etc. The said Duke Charles (being now so confined) seeing no remedy,
resigned up unto the King of Spain and the Archduke, both his Person, his
Estate, and Army: which the Earl of Lignevill was to command, till the arrival
of the said Duke Francis at Brussels.

A little before the same time, the Spaniard received a check from the
Portugals by Land; for the Earl of Almarantio, Lieutenant General of the
Spanish horse, sending forth some of his Troops, November. 6. 1653, to pillage
between the Towns Arontium and Megretum, and to expect a conjunction of other
forces: Andrew Albuquercio, General of the Portugal horse, marching toward
them, the Spaniards seemed to retreat, that uniting with their main body, they
might fall on the Portugals: which these perceiving, a Portugal Governor
speeded with about 250 horsemen toward the enemies frontiers, not far from
Valentia, where after a short combat, he put 300 Spanish horsemen to flight;
and in the pursuit coming in sight of 400 other horse of the enemies, he being
over-numbred, and his Soldiers disordered in the pursuit, he was repulsed,
with the loss of some few; yet many wounded, and the Governor himself, with
two Ensigns taken: one Captain of the Spaniards being slain, and diverse
mortally wounded. Whereupon Albuquercio following the Spaniards betimes the
next morning, found them not far from Arontium very numerous, driving away 1200
head of Cattle. The Spaniards being 1500, the Portugals but 950 horse: where
after valor on both sides shown, the Portugals being conquerours, they pursued
them until night: many Spanish Commanders falling; among whom, was Almarantius
their Major General, 17 Colonels, and many wounded. There were slain in all 300
Spaniards, 400 taken prisoners. The Portugals having diverse wounded; but no
considerable loss.

But the Great Duke of Mascovy decreeing hostility against the kingdom of
Poland about the latter end of 1653, resolving also to invade the same with
three Armies, in three sundry places; and waging actual war accordingly, wrote
Letters about April 1654, unto the Queen of Sweden, signifying the two reasons
of his said War with the Polander: which seem not to be of weight sufficient
for such an attempt: the one being, because a certain Polander writing a
Narration of former Wars betwixt them, wherein the Polanders had the better,
said only, They had beaten the Muscovite; without adding his Title. The other,
because, he, in quoting something touching the Genealogy of the Muscovite's
Ancestors, named one as the father, which was the son. Wherefore, he demanding
the offender's head of the King; and it being denied, he warred on them, having
taken one of their Cities already, and besieged another of their most
considerable ones. But the Queen politickly answered, She neither approved, nor
disapproved his reasons, wishing he might have good satisfaction from the
Polander, and being troubled (she said) that Christian Princes should fall out.
But the Muscovite proceeding in his enterprise with a great power, after this,
took in the Polish Country even without resistance, the people where they came
seeking to save themselves by flight, and notwithstanding the great
contrioutions there granted, they had no considerable Army to stop them: so
that that Country was then looked on as deplorable. And about September
following, the Muscovites whole body falling upon Duke Radzivil's Army, (for he
was the Poland General) which consisted of about 15000 men; they totally routed
the same, Radzivil himself very hardly escaping: and so mysteriously were
things carried by the chief ones of that kingdom, at that time, that it was
thought by some (for they sat still) that certain of those prime ones were not
much discontented thereat; however, by this overthrow the whole Dukedom of
Littow was exposed to ruin and destruction. But Vitopits a little after,
beating off the Muscovite's three storms, took in Miloff, a Town situated on
the River Drina, where he perfidiously kept not the Articles; but slew all the
male Jews, and ancient women, and captivated the young men and women thereof.

About November following, the Town of Smolensko, accounted one of the best
fortified places in Europe, was after an indifferent long siege, surrendered
unto the grand Duke of Muscovy; and that through the Enemies policy, who
persuading the Palatine, that all Poland was lost, and that that place only
made resistance; the Palatine being stricken with a panick fear, and seeing no
less than an Army of 5 or 6 bodies encompassing him, was easily persuaded, yet
on as honorable terms as he could desire; but, immediately hereupon, no less
than 5000 of his men listed themselves under the Muscovite, and taking an oath
to be true unto him. Wherefore, seeing the place was both provided with
necessaries for a years siege, nor any powder wanting unto the besieged, the
King of Poland required the said Palatine to come unto him to Grodna, to give
him an account of his proceedings. The Muscoviter put a garrison of 10000 men
into the City. And indeed, such then was the success and progress of the
Muscovites also in Lithuania, that it raised such a jealousy in the king of
Sweden, that he sent to the City of Koningsberg, to demand passage for some
forces, that he might put his Frontiers thereabouts in a posture of defense, as
he had done in the Province of Liefland; for they so miserably wasted all those
quarters held by the Polanders in Lithuania, that for 40 leagues round
Smolensko, there was not to be discovered the least mark of any Town or
Village, they being all laid in ashes; whereby above 30000 families being
turned to the wide world, went for refuge toward wilda, to avoid the
Muscovite's cruelties, three other Towns, after the taking of Smolensko,
likewise yielded themselves, to wit, Skla, Horey, and Dabrowna. But Poland
having made a league with the grand Cham of Tartarie; he prepared them a relief
of 40000 men, who were to march under the Conduct of Sultan Kasy Galga, brother
to the then Cham Mehemet Gerey: and he sent Kaya Begio to go and relieve
Jurlenbeck and Murza, two places, which were then very much distressed by the
Cossacks also: who taking part with the Muscovites, and Chimelinsky, sending
Ambassadors to Court the Cham, he immediately taxing them of breach of faith
in taking the Muscovites part against Poland; commanded their Noses and Ears to
be cut off, and sent them thus back to their Master to tell him, That he was
for ever resolved against any reconcilement with him. Then also the Poland King
sent into Sweden to renew a Treaty for a perpetual peace between the two Crowns
of Poland and Swethland, according to a Treaty begun before at Lubeck,
proposing also to lay down all future claims of that Crown. Unto which the
Swedish King signified his inclination; and was daily in Counsel with his
Senators, about the Poland affairs, as being much inclined to an Alliance
offensive and defensive with that Crown, by reason of the progress which the
extraordinary numerous forces of the Muscovites made in Lithuania; and who not
only kept his frontiers well guarded with forces; but sent others into the
Archbishopric of Bremen, both to make good his pretensions there, and to
threaten war upon the Duke of Newburg.

At or about the same time, while the King of Poland lay at Grodna, the
Emperor of Germany sent him an Envoy, to demand a restoring of certain Towns,
which he held in Hungary, which were pawned unto Poland about 200 years before;
offering to reimburse the money for their redemption. But the King put him off
for an answer, to the next Diet or Assembly of the Kingdom, showing not much
disposure to yield thereunto.

But about the month of August, 1654, the Kingdom of Sweden dispatched Forces
to besiege the City of Bremen, for some insolence committed against that Crown
whom it was thought, (by the Swedes) that the Emperor and German Princes did
privately stir up against him; who else could not have been believed, to be so
bold, as (of themselves) to provoke against them so considerable an enemy.
Koningsmark had the managing of that siege; who about the beginning of
September, making show as if he intended to go over to Vegesak, drew a great
party of the Bremers thither; and after Sunset, taking a quite contrary march,
he caused a bridge to be made over the water called the Ham, and passed over it
in the night; and so over the Moors, (though with great difficulty, by reason
of the extreme deep and muddy ground) wherein, although several horses were
smothered, yet not one man lost; and this (notwithstanding they played with
their Canon out of the City) to the Bremers great admiration. As soon as he was
got over with about 100 men, (for the rest were necessitated to follow one by
one) the Bremers placing themselves with a considerable number not far from the
Swdes, yet beyond a deep Moor, so that they could only charge each upon other,
not come together. The Swedes growing stronger and stronger; the Bremers were
forced with the loss of a good many of their men, to retreat toward the City.
And soon after, some Troops of Bremish horse appearing, they were also beaten
by the Swedes to the very gates of the City, about 20 of them being slain. In
all which the Swedes are said to have lost but two men. This unexpected
enterprise put the City into a great straight and perplexity: which being
likewise increased by a Letter from the Emperor, (admonishing them to make
their composition as soon, and as good as they could; because through the
defeat of the Spanish Army before Arras, he could not succor or protect them,
which otherwise he intended to have done, with a considerable Army by the Duke
of Lorrain) they came to a Treaty or Conference at Stoade, by designed Deputies
of each party; the Lord Rosenhaan being for the Swedish King: and at length
concluded 15 Articles of Peace betwixt them: After which, (for the farther
assecuration of the King of Sweden) Rosenhaan and Koningsmark entering Bremen in
the month November following, with solemnity they saw the oath of inauguration
taken by two Senators of the City, deputed thereunto by the Senate, by holding
up their two first fingers after reading of the same oath, and swearing, that
they would inviolably observe and perform the Contents thereof.

Three or four months before which time, Christina Queen of Sweden, (for
reasons either voluntary, or constrained) resigned her Crown unto Charles
Gustave, her Cosen. After which, she undertook (having first secured her
yearly maintenance in Pomerania) several Peregrinations: among which, that to
Inspruck (a City in the Arch-Dutchy of Tirol, and seated among the Alps,
overlooking it on every side; and where the report of a Musket is said to be as
great as that of a piece of Ordnance) is most remarkable. Where being
entertained in an extraordinary manner by that Archduke, too large here
particularly to relate, and which was in or about the month October, 1655, the
next day but one after her arrival there, she made an open profession of the
Romish Catholic faith, in six heads or Sections; where Holstenius, Pope
Alexander the 7th his Nuntio (in presence of the Archduke, his Lady and
brother, and Spanish Ambassador, etc.) standing at the right side of the
Altar, (and she on the left) said, Pope Alexander understanding that Christina
Queen of Sweden being enlightened by the Holy Ghost, intended to put her self
into the bosom of the Church, had sent his Letters, testifying his Approbation
of her desires; and to receive her with his Apostolical Benediction, he being
there to know the truth thereof. Unto which she answering, It was so;
Holstenius giving the Pope's Letter to a Priest who read it aloud, desired she
would make profession of the said faith, and swear upon the holy Evangelist, to
keep it, before the Archduke, and the Spanish Ambassador. Which she doing,
and kissing the book, a Chair was set for Holstenius, and a Cushion laid at his
feet, upon which the Queen kneeling, he making the sign of the Cross over her
head, and embracing her shoulders, said, He did receive her into the Catholic
Church, and by virtue of an order from the Holy Father Pope Alexander the 7th,
and from the power given him by Christ, whose Vicar he was, he did absolve her
from all her sins she had committed, In the Name of the Father, etc. This being
done, their Te Deum, etc. was sung with most melodious voices, and all sorts of
Instruments, and Drums, in the very Chapel of the Franciscans or Archduke
where it was done; then 50 pieces of Ordnance being discharged, she returned as
she came. Charles Gustave not long after his Coronation, was married with great
Pomp and Solemnity unto the daughter of the Duke of Holstein, at Stockholm.

But about the month of June, 1654, there was sent over from England into
Holland, a Copy of the secret Articles agreed on by the States of Holland alone
in the Dutch Treaty, to the prejudice of the Prince of Orange: the effect
whereof was, That the Protector of England having often represented, That in
case the Prince of Orange or Posterity of the house of Stuart, should command
the Militia of that State, they might occasion great differences, or at least
great jealousies between the two Nations. The States of Holland, to remove that
apprehension, first debating the matter, concluded, That for the future, the
Prince of Orange, and all of his line, should be excluded from the Government
and Admiralship of the Province of Holland: and if the other Provinces would
choose him for Captain and Admiral-General, they would never consent to the
same. Which causing a great disturbance in the Assembly of the States General,
they ordered Copies thereof to be sent to the other Provinces, before they
resolved on any thing. The Commissioners of Holland in the mean time excusing
the business unto the Princess Dowager, telling her, They were constrained to
do what they did: hoping notwithstanding, that before the Prince were of age,
the affairs of that State might be subject to some alteration, which might
re-establish him into what they had then taken from him. But this action of
theirs produced diverse paper-combats from the other Provinces, who were against
his seclusion.

About the same time, the Venetian obtained a great Victory over the Turk,
having fought them two days together in the Archipelago or Dardanelles;
wherein they slew 6000 Turks, wounded the General, Amurath Bassa, to death;
taking also four Men of War, and 16 Galleys; yet not without the loss (on
their own part) of many brave ones, one Galliot, and 5 Galleys. The Turks also
the same year, in or about December, making an attempt by night upon the
Fortress of Vesprin in Hungary, as thinking to surprise it; found such
resistance, that they were forced to retire, with the loss of 900 killed and
taken.

Not long before which, the Grand Seignior of the Turks being advertised, that
the Vizier Bassa had long projected to make himself Emperor, through the
assistance of the Greeks who were to have rebelled also, by the straight
correspondence he held (for that purpose) with the Muscovites and Cossacks,
whom he promised to embrace the Greek Religion; he conventing him before a
private Council, and upbraiding him of his Treason, after so many benefits done
him; he was condemned to death, and strangled within five or six hours;
imprisoning also the Patriarch of Jerusalem.

Toward the latter end of this year also, through the Leavies continuing and
increasing in Germany, some rupture was feared in that Empire; for the Bishop
of Munster having a quarrel with the great Dean of his Diocese, was backed by
the Canons, yet residing without the City; but the Dean had the affection of
the Citizens, and was within the City: wherefore the Bishop armed against the
City, and they against him; who designing to take it by a surprizall, with 200
horse, and 400 foot, at the opening of the gates; the Ambuscado was discovered,
and the design frustrated.

The Prince Electour Palatine, had then also two quarrels with two German
Prelates: one with the Electour Archbishop of Ments, which was for the
jurisdiction of a Place, into which, the last would settle some Priests, as
belonging to him; but the Prince would have settled there Ministers of the
reformed Religion; saying, He ought to dispose thereof, as having been so many
years in possession; but the people the while remained unprovided of either.
The other was against the Bishop of Spiers; because those of that City ( Worms
also seconding them) had both yielded (in all probability) upon the account of
Religion, themselves into the Palatine's Protection. But the Emperor, who
himself was likewise then very busy in making great levies; forbade them to
proceed any further in their contention: but admonishing them to plead their
causes in Courts of Justice. The said Emperor, Jan. 2. 1654, commanding all
the chiefest of the Protestant Families of Vienna, and round about it, to meet
together at an appointed place; but, they not meeting, a new command came, for
them to meet at the place appointed; who then coming in great numbers, and most
of them 50 and 80 years old: they first were checked for not coming at the
first summons; and then had passports given them to depart out of his
hereditary dominions, and to retire to some other place than Hungary:

The same year the Duke of Pomerania (who was the last of that house) dying,
and his body being with great solemnity interred; his whole Estate was divided
betwixt Sweden and the Electour of Brandenburgh: the Commissioners of the
former, and the Elector, equally parting his broken Seal, and equally defraying
the charges of his Funeral.

Moreover, it may not be frivolous, to relate one treachery (among others)
which was discovered in Flanders about January, 1653; it was to betray and
deliver Armentiers, one of the chief Frontier Garrisons of that Country into
the French their hands, for a sum of money: which design was on this manner
laid; some of a Regiment of Irish there in garrison (knowing there were some of
their own Nation in the French garrisons of Bassee and Bethune, not far from
Armentiers, which is situated on the River Lisle,) running away discontented,
joined to the aforesaid garrisons of French; some Irish also of the other side,
came over to the Spaniards in Armentiers, and there listed themselves, speaking
very ill of the French Officers. These Runnagadoes agreed together at last to
deliver Armentiers into the hands of the Duke of Elbeuf; who being to possess
one of the Gates (when these were upon the guard) with 4 or 5000 men, which
were in a readiness at Beverie, a Village on this side Bethune; on the night of
execution hereof, one of the Irish Plotters being troubled about the
horriblenesse of the design, to put so many innocent creatures to the sword,
discovered the same to the Governor; who while he was talking with him of it,
a Sergeant brings him word, the enemy was near the Town: Whereupon, the
Governor doubling his guards; and the Duke perceiving the design was
frustrate, retreated. The contrivers (who were 4 Captains, 5 other Officers,
and 9 Soldiers, all Irish) being presently seized on to receive reward
according to their deserts.

But at Delph, a City situated between Roterdam and the Hague in Holland, and
3 miles from the Hague, happened a most sad and lamentable dysaster by an
unexpected blowing up the Gunpowder of its Magazine, October. 12. 1654, between
the hours of 10 and 11 in the forenoo^; which containing 6 or 700 barrels of
powder; (which was supposed, to be casually fired by the Keeper thereof, who
was seen to go in with another man about 10, striking open a barrel) so
levelled the Tower, that there was nothing to be seen of it; yea, not the very
place where it stood, it being changed into water; 300 houses were blown up and
utterly destroyed; the other houses and fine gardens very much damnified and
spoiled, and above 800 persons killed and wounded, besides many that might be
imagined to have been blown all to pieces, so that no account could be taken of
them: it shook the houses in the Hague, breaking their windows, and did some
spoil at Roterdam: yet one Child about 18 months old, lying 24 hours under the
ruins, was taken up, and not hurt at all.

Also at a D^et or general Assembly of the States of Poland at Warsovia, in
June 1655, a Senator striking one of his Fellow Members on the face in the
open Assembly, and who was, according to the Laws of that Land, to have both
his right hand and head struck off: through the Queens intercession, the
punishment was moderated, that asking pard ^n of the King, Assembly, and Pope's
Nuntio, he was to remain close prisoner in a dungeon, one year and 6 months:
but he representing this penalty to be worse than death, he only was to pay a
considerable sum of money toward the charges of the Wars.

The Swedish Queen Christina, a little before the same time, having sent into
Swethland, to demand the Arrears of the Pension there assigned to her; The
Chancellor of that Kingdom returned answer, That if she intended to receive
any, she might do well to return thither; the States being unwilling to suffer
any money to go out of the Kingdom.

But the Duke of Saxony was less just, and yet much more cruel unto a man in
his Country, (who killed a Dear) in the month of Febr. 1655, condemning him to
be bound with chains upon a Stag, his feet fast under the beas^'s belly, with
an iron chain soldered, and his hands also (in the same manner) chained to the
horns: and so let loose to run away with him. The Stag having run (as was
computed) near 100 English miles (upon a direct line) in 26 hours time, coming
near some Wagoners who came out of Silesia, fell down; wherefore the poor man
sitting on his back, told them the business: and earnestly begged of them to
shoot him, to put him out of his pain; but they durst not, fearing the Duke. In
the mean time, the Stag getting up, ran away with all his might: so that the
miseries that poor creature had undergone, and must undergo, if the Stag killed
him not in the running, cannot be expressed.

In the Isl^ of Malta, toward the latter end of 1655, Usman the great Turk's
brother, (who some years before, with the Sultan's Wives Mother, their family
and treasury, was taken at Sea, coming from Mecca, by those Knights, and
brought into the Island) made profession of Christianism, being christened with
great ceremonies, and rejoicing of the City, in the Dominicans Cloister; who
retaining his former name of Usman, was surnamed Dominicus.

But in England, in July 1656, Writs being issued forth for summoning another
Parliament, and a general election of the Members thereof, being made in August
following; they assembled at Westminster-Abbey, whither the Protector coming in
stately equipage, after their Sermon ended, and a speech made unto them by the
said Protector, they sat, electing Sir Tho: Widdrington for their Speaker:
this was on Sept. 17th, 1656; they sat from the time aforesaid, until about
the la^ter end of June, 1657, and then were adjourned until Jan. 20th
following. The chief matters done by this Grand Council, I find to be an Act
for Renouncing and disannulling the title of Charles Stuart unto the Nations of
England, Scotland, and Ireland. Then, an endeavor to settle the Title of King,
with a Crown the Emblem thereof, on the head of the Protector; which he, after
time of deliberation, positively refused: and openly declaring May the 8th,
1657, That he could not undertake the Government with the Title of King:
Wherefore laying aside the Title, the Parliament solemnly (by Act) invested him
into the power thereof, June 26 following, under the Name and Title of
Protector: the Speaker of the Parliament presenting unto him, in
Westminster Hall, (being attired in his Robes) four Emblems of Government; a
Purple Velvet Robe lined with Ermine; a large Bible with rich gilt and Bosses;
a Scepter of Gold, and a Sword, which he girt about him, descanting (by a
speech) upon all of them at the delivery thereof: also he taking an Oath. Then
while he thus sat, holding the Scepter in his hand, after the thrice sounding
of a Trumpet, a Herald standing aloft, proclaimed his Highness Lord Protector
of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, requiring all to yield
him due obedience. And then an Officer of Arms did the like. Soon after which,
he was so proclaimed in the three principal Cities of London, Edinburgh, and
Dublin.

The Peace of this Commonwealth, with the Kingdom of Portugal being ratified
July 10th of the same year, was (notwithstanding) not proclaimed until Jan. 17
following: within which space of time, some English Ships performed no small
service against the Spaniards West India Fleet within 4 leagues of the Bay of
Cadiz; they being 8 in number; whereof two were sunk, (one being the
Vice Admiral, containing in her a great quantity of silver) and two burnt; two
were likewise taken, the one, a very rich ship, but little silver therein; but
the other (according to the Spanis^ Captain's own relation who was taken)
having in her two millions of silver; the other two escaping into Cadiz: this
was in the month September; the silver of the Spanish Gallion being brought
into the Tower of London. November. 1. after, 1656. The young Marquess of Baden
or Baydex, (whose father the Marquess of Baydex Governor of Lima in Peru, with
his Wife, Children, and Family (except another son and two daughters) were
burnt in the Vice Admiral: for that Ship being taken by the English, the
Spaniards themselves firing her, she burnt down and sunk) with his younger
brother, being also brought into London prisoner, about or at the same time:
who having been examined, said; That presently after his father and family
departed out of Lima in Peru; which was above 5 months before the time of that
examination, the whole City of Lima was swallowed up and destroyed, and also
the City Calao, by a fearful-Earthquake, and most miraculous Rain of fire from
Heaven: there perishing in both places above 11000 Spaniards; but not above 100
Indians with them. The Spanish King losing also in Lima 100 millions of silver
(ready wrought up) thereby. Also the M^untainous Mines of Potosi (out of which
they dug their silver) were wonderfully destroyed, being become a Plain, nor
any possibility of having more silver or gold in Peru. And some of the
prisoners themselves who were taken in this achievement did acknowledge, that
this desolation and destruction befell the Spaniards for the cruelty which they
acted on the poor Indians, (they not sparing even those Indians who among them
professed the Roman Catholic Religion) so that they being beyond measure
oppressed and grieved with their sufferings, cried to Heaven for vengeance
against them.

But the following year 1657, produced a greater execution from the Navy under
General Blake against the Spaniard's West India Fleet before Santa Cruze, at
one of the Canatie Islands called Teneriffe, on April 20th. The Spaniards had 5
or 6 Galleons, (three whereof were Admiral, Vice Admiral, and Rear-Admiral)
with other considerable ships, to the number of 16. The English came so near
(to do their work) to the Castle, Forts, and shore, that many Spaniards were
shot from the ^hoar by their own Musketeers; yet in 4 hours they beating the
men out of their ships, and the ships all put on shore, except the Admiral, and
Vice Admiral, who made most resistance; one whereof was set on fire, and the
Admiral blown up: and before evening came, (except two that sunk downright)
all the rest were fired. They beat them likewise out of some of their Forts,
from their great guns. Neither was there, in this action, above 50 English
slain outright, and 120 wounded. Their ships also, by about 7 at night, got
safe out of the enemies command: although they supplied their Forts with fresh
men, for those that were killed, and beaten out in heat of the action. And
their ships damage received herein, was indifferently well repaired in two
days time; which as soon as they had done, the wind veering to the South-west,
(which is rare among those Islands) lasted to bring them just to their former
station, near Cape Mary's, where they arrived the second of May following.

In the year 1656, while the Parliament was sitting, was there another Plot and
Conspiracy discovered against the Protectour's life; the chief Actor wherein,
was one Miles Sindercomb, that had been one of the Army; who with one Cecill,
(others being also engaged therein) held correspondence with some in Flanders;
and for whose encouragement, Don Alonso (the late Ambassador of Spain in
England) returned them over sums of money, whereby they were enabled to
proceed: who hiring a house at Hammersmith (three miles from Westminster)
standing upon the Road in a narrow durty passage, where Coaches go but softly,
they by planting an Engine in a little banqueting room of the house, intended
by discharging of the same, when the Protector had passed by, going to, or
returning from Hampton Court, to have taken his life away. They sought also
other opportunities to shoot him, taking the air in Hide-Park, etc. And to give
a proof of their resolution beyond the Seas: they attempted to fire White Hall,
by placing a basket of combustible stuff (with two lighted matches aptly
placed) in the Chapel: But through the discovery of one of the Lifeguard, to
whom Sindercomb had revealed his secrets for his assistance in the thing,
(giving him 10 l. in hand, and promising him 1500 more) these two were
apprehended. Cecill casting himself on the Lord Protector's mercy; Sindercomb
otherwise called Fish, was brought to his Trial in Westminster Hall Febr. 9.
following; who pleading, Not Guilty, and all points of his Indictment being
proved by two Witnesses at the least, with aggravating circumstances, he was
sentenced to be hanged and quartered at Tyburn as a Traitor: but he to avert so
great open shame of the World, the night before his execution, Febr. 13,
snuffing up some poisonous powder into his head, within three hours after dyed.
Wherefore on the 17th day of the same month, he was as a felon against
himself, drawn at a horse's tail to Tower Hill; where, under the Scaffold, he
was turned into a hole naked, and a stake spiked with iron driven through him
into the Earth.

Peace having been concluded between England and France; but open War with
Spain, as aforesaid; the Protector joined in hostility with the French against
the Spaniards in Flanders, sending over thither 6000 Foot under the Command of
Sir John Reynolds their General, who on the 8th, 9th, and 16th of May 1657,
were wholly embarked for France; the General following after on the 17th day.
These Forces, being joined with the French, (after they had taken Montmedy and
St. Venant) took the strong Fort of Mardike (not far from Dunkirk) from the
Spaniard: which being afterward maintained by English; in the month October
of the same year 1657, the Spanish forces attempting to storm it; among whom,
2000 of the Scottish and Irish Reformadoes under the Scottish King, (who, with
his brother the Duke of York being excluded France, joined with the Spaniard)
made the first onsett, and that in three several places at once, getting into
the ditches, and ready for scaling: the English behaved themselves so
courageously all the time, (which continued 6 hours) that they were repulsed
with the loss of about 600 men. And more supplies going out of England, there
was a field-battle fought between the French and English with the Spanish
forces (being between 6 and 7000 foot, and 9000 horse) who came to relieve
Dunkirk, besieged by the English and French: in which (after some disputes)
both their wings being foiled, they fled: the English foot pursuing them about
two miles and an half; and the French horse down from the hill as far as Fern,
from whose Fort they were drawn. It was a great Victory; for most of the
Spanish foot were either slain or taken; all their guns, 6 in number, with the
baggage of the field; as also all the Officers of Charles Stuart's Regiment,
(with many more Officers of quality) with his own Coach; and about 17 colors:
(the Marshal of Hocquincourt (who had been the chief instrument in the revolt
of Hesdin) being slain as he was pickqueering a day or two before the battle)
the loss of the English being 80 slain, and about 300 wounded: this was in June
1658. After which, they returning with all diligence to the siege of Dunkirk,
which was environed both by Land and Sea, and now reduced to straits, and the
besieged sallying out June 23 after; in which sharp encounter with the
besiegers, the Marquess of Leyde, the Governor of Dunkirk, received his deaths
wound; and several terrifying Grenades being shot into the Town, (one whereof
lighted into the Marketplace) they soon came to a surrender upon 4 Articles;
marching out on the 25th day of the same month with 1000 horse and foot, and
700 more wounded, with Drums beating, Colors flying, two pieces of Ordnance,
and their baggage: Into which strong Seaport Town, the King of France, (who
signed the Articles) with the Cardinal, personally entering, put the possession
thereof into the hands of the Lord General Lockhart, (on the Protectour's
behalf, according to the conditions so made before the English Armie's first
going over) who garrisoned it with English Soldiers. After this, the French
possessed Fern, (a place which the Spaniards had quitted) and soon after became
Masters of two other Garrisons, Winoxbergen, and Dixmude. And not long after,
Graveline, another strong Sea-Town, having been besieged about three weeks, and
a Mine ready to spring under three Bastions of that Town; Marshal de la Ferte
Aug. 27, summoned the Spaniards to surrender, telling them, If they delayed
till the springing of the Mines, the utmost rigor of War was to be expected.
Wherefore they having time given them till the 29th day of the same month, to
send to Don John the Spanish General, (if he did not relieve them in that time)
they Capitulated with the Cardinal, to depart the Town on the 30th day of the
same, much according to the conditions of Dunkirk; which they did accordingly,
as not being relieved; although Don John, the Prince of Conde, and the Marquess
of Caracene, joined with resolution to have attempted it: who were prevented by
Marshal Turein his advance to lie betwixt Fern and Bergen. Then was a Council
of War called, wherein the Cardinal, Turein, and La Ferte (whose Armies, after
the taking of Graveline, were united) were present: and where they resolved
what Town next to besiege; which was believed to be Ypre.

But upon another dangerous Plot reported to be discovered, Apr. 9. 1657, four
persons of Note, to wit, M. General Harrison, Colonel Rich, Major Danvers, and
Captain Lawson, were secured the day following.

A little after, to wit, July 24, 1657, Colonel Edward Sexby, (who was a
principal man in promoting Miles Sindercomb's design, as abovesaid; and who
came into England in a disguised habit the better to effect it) was committed
to the Tower of London for high Treason; But within 10 days after his
commitment, he falling sick of an Ague and Vomiting, which turned into a
violent Fever, he dyed Jan. 13th after in the Tower; found by the Coronet's
Jury to be by Gods visitation, and by no other ways or means.

But the year following, which is this present year 1658, about the month of
May, was discovered another great and general Plot to embroyl England in new
Wars and Seditions, by levying war, betraying of the strong garrison of Hull;
promoting Charles Stuart to be King of England, Scotland, and Ireland, securing
the City of London, etc. For which, many were committed to the Tower and
Newgate; and a High Court of Justice being erected (who sat May 25) in
Westminster Hall, Sir Henry Slingsby on the same day, and Doctor Hewet, a
Divine, on June 1. following, were brought to their trial before them: the
Knight pleading, Not Guilty, was proved guilty by evidence. The Doctor refusing
to plead to his charge, and choosing rather to die, than own the Authority;
wherefore June 2d, they were adjudged to be hanged and quartered at Tyburn as
Traitors; but being (by the clemency of the Protector) to be beheaded,
execution was done on them accordingly on the 8th day of the same June 1658.
After which, one Sumner, and 6 others of the City of London, were tried upon
the same account: one being found as not guilty; but six condemned to be
executed for Traitors: two of whom, to wit, Colonel Ashton and Betteley in
several places of London, were executed on July the 7th after; one whose name
was Friar, (and who pleading Not Guilty, did upon the matter presently confess
it) being reprieved: and July 9th, one Stacie was also hanged, though not
quartered: Sumner and Allen (who confessed themselves guilty) being both
reprieved.

Moreover, three or four more than ordinary things happened in England within
two or three years last past. One was, October. 3. 1656, when as the River of
Thames, which usually ebbeth about 7 or 8 hours, and flows about 4 or 5, now
ebbed and flowed twice in 3 hours space. A lamentable accident by Gunpowder in
a Ship-Chandler's storehouse near the Hermitage in Ratcliff, July 3. 1657.
Also at Bickley in Cheshire, the ground sunk, July 8th, 1657, And on the first
or second of June, 1658, a Whale of about 58 or 59 foot in length, and of a
bulk proportionable, coming up the River of Thames, was taken and flain, a
little beyond Greenwich 4 miles from London: some of the multitude that went to
see this young Monster or King of Fishes, presaging (as it were) the death of a
great Person to ensue; for that in King James his time a little before the
death of Queen Anne, there was one, not so big, but seen about Blackwall, on
the said River.

In France, in Jan. 1654, there was an Assembly called of Prelates and other
Churchmen at the Louvre, in Cardinal Mazarine's Lodgings; himself being
present, and also the King's Deputy, with the Archbishop of Roven as the
President, upon occasion of a Brief received by that King from the Pope,
relating to a Bull of condemnation, set forth against the doctrine of Jansenus,
who was Bishop of Ypre in Flanders: which doctrine very nearly agreed with the
Protestants, touching Works, Free Will, etc. which the Author substantially
proving out of Augustine, it got no small ground both in France and the
Netherlands; so that it was conceived, the division thereupon made among the
Papists, had given a great wound unto the Papal interest: Wherefore the Pope
not being able to contain any longer, let loose his Bull in France. The
Archbishop declared the necessity of setting forth a Confession of Faith
according to the Roman Catholic Religion; yet notwithstanding, nothing was
concluded. The Cardinal also and the Archbishop fell out there, about the
Cardinal's imprisonment of Cardinal de Retz; he wondering how Mazarine durst
proceed so far against him, who was both a Priest, and Archbishop of Paris, the
head City of the Kingdom, etc. after words passing between them, they parted
in discontent at each other. The King of France about the same time setting
forth a general Declaration, That no other Religion be there entertained,
besides the Roman, and that called the Reformed: of which there had been a
toleration in times past.

But in 1655, about the month of April, the Protestants in the Valleys of
Angrogna, Lucerna, and St. Martin, in Piedmont, were sorely vexed and
persecuted by the Duke of Savoy, whose Subjects they were, through the
instigation of Priests and Jesuits, having set up a new Inquisition at Turin;
who first affrightning them with great threatenings, then proceeding to take
away their goods and estates, imprisoning them, and using all violence to make
them forsake their Religion; and perceiving they could avail nothing thereby;
the Duke was persuaded to send an Army of about 8000 under the Marquess de
Pianella, and the Earl of Quince, one of the French Lieutenant Generals; these
setting upon this poor people living quietly at home: They seeing themselves
thus assaulted, stood in their defense, making what resistance they could
against them: many of whom were slain, (and some of the enemy) many carried
away prisoners, on whom they used all manner of invented cruelties, and in many
corners, they shamefully abusing and tormenting many women, with their young
children, afterward cut off their heads; dashing also those children of 15
years old (that would not go to Mass) against the rocks; hanging others with
their feet upwards, and nailing them to Trees: which they were said to endure
with a most invincible resolution. A residue which escaped the slaughter, got
into the Mountains with their Wives and Children, enduring there much hunger
and cold; (some dying therewith) the enemy (the while) set fire on their
Temples, plundered their houses, and then fired them: a very small number, with
their families, got into Dausine in the French Dominions, and some others into
Switzerland. These are of those, who about 500 years ago being then called
Vaudois and Albigois, were cruelly persecuted by the Papists. Their sad
condition being represented abroad, the States of Holland, and Protector of
England, etc. seemed to be much affected therewith: there was also sending to
the King of France about the business, (Collections for their relief being
likewise made among the Protestants abroad) who having then a Treaty of Peace
in hand with England, not a little concerning his interest, became a Mediator
by his Ambassador Monsieur de Servient, (also four Ambassadors of Switzerland
as Mediators) in their behalf to the Duke: who in or about August following,
came to Articles of Agreement, for restoring the said Protestants to live in
his Dominions as formerly; with the same free exercise of their Religion: yet
were in many things cut short, and straightened more than before; as to have no
dwelling beyond the River Pelice, and some other places, except to the
Vineyards of Lucerna toward Rorata: and also to live at St. John's, but not to
have any public assembling place or preaching as before, etc. But one who
wrote (from Pigneroll) observations upon those Articles, calls the peace made
with his brethren of the Valleys and the Duke, to be far worse than the worst
of War; and that it was forced on them by the threatenings of the French
Ambassador, and the falsehood of others entrusted on their behalf in the
Treaty; saying also, That had they stayed so long, as to admit of any
interposer in the name of the Lord Protector, the matter would never have been
so ended. A little after, or about which time of agreement, the French
besieging the Spaniards in Pavia; the Marquess of Caracene came near the City
with his Auxiliary Spanish Forces to relieve it; and the besieged making a very
stout sally, and then joining with the Marquess, they fell upon the besiegers
within the lines of Circumvallation, and put them to the rout and flight: the
slain of whom, were most of the Savoy forces: among whom, were those bloody
ones who acted the cruelties on the Protestants of Piedmont. They were also so
soundly beaten at that time, that they were constrained to a shameful retreat;
not having of 24000, above 8000 left in a body of all the united forces of the
French and Savoyards, who were under Prince Thomas his Conduct of Savoy, and of
the Duke of Modena, who commanded his own. It was also certified about the same
time, that the Governor of San Domingo in Hispaniola, sending his Son into
Spain to the King, to make a relation of his Father's Services and Successes in
opposing the English there; the King made the Father a Marquess, giving him a
Pension of 5000 Ducats a year; and rewarded the Son with 1500 Ducats a year.

But in Sweden, after that Charles Gustave was crowned and established in that
Kingdom, and peace concluded with the Citizens of Bremen, great preparations
for War were making in diverse places of that Kingdom, and also in the
Archbishopric of Bremen, against the grand Duke of Moscovie: yet, in the mean
time, the King (for as much as the Great Duke, notwithstanding their refusal in
Sweden to give him his pretended Titles, had not as yet declared any design
upon that Crown) being unwilling to engage so far, if it might be avoided, in a
matter of so great importance, sent to the said Duke, to address unto him, and
feel what his purposes were toward his Frontiers of Ingermerland and Liefland,
and how he determined concerning them: who about the same time taking the
considerable Fort of Dunenbergh, 25 miles from Riga, from the Poles, was grown
so high, as to demand from the Swede, or Duke of Curland, a pass for 50000 men
through Liefland, or the others Dominions: whereby the Poles were not a little
animated, it being the only hopes they had, that, that proud enemy by such
insolent demeanor, would provoke the Crown of Sweden, or some other
considerable State, to come upon him, whereby he might be diverted from
bringing them to utter ruin and destruction; for the State of Poland was, by
means of that tyrannical enemy, then looked on as in a very sad and ill
condition: (whose Army although it were made up to a good number in Lithuania,
(wholly laid waste) yet were their divisions among its Commanders, which might
hinder them from doing then any great matter;) for the Muscovite taking (among
other miseries and mischiefs) the Town of Vitebsko, after a furious assault,
(having lost many Commanders and Soldiers during the siege, and in the
storming) in a rage, when he entered the Town, put all to the sword, not sparing
the women and children. These transactions were toward the latter end of 1654;
at which time, 40000 Tartars arrived from the grand Cham for Poland's
assistance; he sending also a new assurance with them, punctually to perform
whatever he had promised: and that because the Rivers were not frozen for
passage, therefore the Troops came no sooner: with which Tartarian succors,
the Poland forces (marching toward the City of Breslavia, to join) had a stiff
encounter with 13000 Cossacks, which lay there for defense of that place; but
they being forced to retreat in great disorder, the Capital City of that
Province returned to the obedience of their Sovereign: and soon after, the
Polish Army in Ukrain, prosecuting their advantages with resolution, gave a
defeat to another body of 6000 Cossacks; which so took down Chmielniskie's
stomach, that he being now inclined to terms of submission, sought by all means
to induce the King of Poland to a renewing of the Treaty for peace. About which
time, 4 Tartarian Lords arrived at Warsovia, bringing with them a ratification
of the Alliance made with the new Cham: who were to stay in that City in
hostage for the observation of the Treaty: whereby the King of Poland was
likewise obliged to send 4 Lords to reside with the Tartar in the City of Crim,
who also out of affection to Poland at that time, set at liberty all imprisoned
Polanders within his Dominions: And soon after these succors sent by the
Tartar, the Polish Generals in the Ukrain, passed over the River Bog with the
Tartars, with design to besiege the City Uman; that Chmielniski might thereby
be forced to take the field, and endeavor to relieve the same: wherefore they
sitting down before Uman, Febr. 19. 1654, they rose again on the 21 day, being
informed, that Chmielniski was coming with 40000 Cossacks, and 20000
Muscovites, to raise the siege: and preparing to meet them, the next day being
the 22, toward the Evening the battle began; wherein Chmielniskie's forces
were routed, and retreating with speed unto their strong holds; so that, the
Polanders and Tartars having pursued them all night, they retired to take care
of their wounded, and refresh themselves, being very much discommodated by the
frosty weather's extremity.

Prince Radzivil had likewise (about that time) no less success with his
forces in Lithuania: where he took the Town of Biskow by Assault, although
defended by about 20000 Cossacks; most of which were slain and taken prisoners.
About the same time also, the pestilence raging in the Royal City of Mosco,
hindered the grand Duke's retreat; so that he encamped near Smolensko with
20000 men.

But the expectation of a perpetual Peace, and a League offensive and defensive
between Sweden and Poland, (whose King by his Envoy declared his readiness to
renounce all Titles and Pretensions, claimed by his Predecessors, to the Crown
of Sweden) being (after more than one Ambassador sent from Poland to Sweden to
that purpose) frustrated: the King of Sweden (who a few months before had
ordered 12 Regiments toward the borders of Livonia, to defend them from an
Invasion of the Muscovites: against whom also a War was (at Stockholm) resolved
to be declared, in case the League forementioned, had (between the two
Kingdoms) been concluded: unto which also (upon the Polish Envoy's Proposals)
the Swedish King showed himself to be so much inclined, that, (the Muscovites
giving him fresh occasions of jealousy and discontent) he drew together 24000
men, who were to march into Livonia (as soon as the frozen passages were more
open) to attaque them by Land, whilst the Ships of Sweden should go round
about on purpose to obstruct the Moscovy Merchants, and disturb their Commerce.
The grand Duke also, by Merchants at Hamburgh (resolving on War with those two
Kings, who were then upon entering on a League offensive and defensive against
him) buying up no less than 40000 Muskets) makes great preparations both by
Sea and Land, having now his design bent both against Poland on the one hand,
and the Dukedom of Juliers and Bergh on the other; unto which Countries he had
pretenses: and drawing 8 Regiments of horse and foot toward Pomerania, the Duke
of Brandenburgh armed for defense; as well as the Dantzickers put in great
fear, that the Swede designed upon Prussia or some part near to it under the
Poles. But the King of Sweden coming to a Treaty with the Electour of
Brandenburgh, they (at length) joined in an offensive and defensive league
about the month of June, 1656; and meeting at the Town called Holland in
Prussia where they passed three days in most amicable conference; the
Brandenburgian being to furnish the Swede with 8000 armed men, with whom they
were to join.

But about the month of May 1655, most that was to do in Poland, was to make
preparations against the Swede, whom they believed, if he came into Prussia,
etc. would spoil them, and do what he pleased: the Muscovite making (to
increase Poland's misery) also great preparation. A consultation was also held
by the Polanders in this month of May, when they should be in action, for
defense of the Kingdom, and supplying the Frontiers with necessaries: but in
the mean time all Trading was there laid aside.

The King of Sweden sending an Army of 16 or 17000 horse and foot into the
Polander's Country near Kron, which lies next to Germany, about the latter end
of June, or the beginning of July, 1655, (as it appears) under the command of
General Wittenberg, they soon took diverse Castles and Garrisons in that
Country, and making progress as far as Wsee, in the Province of Posen; both the
two Palatinates of Posen and Calissen, together with the 4 Cities of Posen,
Calissen, Lesna, and Miedzierez, with an Army of 15000 men, renounced
allegiance to the King of Poland, came under the Protection of the King of
Sweden; and all this before July 15th, 1655, and without one blow struck: the
Articles between Radzieicouski Vice Chancellor of Poland, and General
Wittenberg, for surrender and agreement of and about the aforesaid two
Palatinates and Cities, being signed in the Camp at Wsee, in the same month of
July, 1655. And for which, Instructions were sent to the Bishops and
Superintendents in Sweden, to give thanks for the same, and observe a day of
supplication for future successes. About which time, there was a Declaration
set forth in Sweden, forbidding the Calvinists publicly to exercise their
Religion: which notwithstanding they then forbear to execute, out of respect
(as was then reported) to the English; for the Swedes had then an Ambassador
in England, to get men to carry on their War in Poland, or elsewhere; together
with the procuring of a more intimate alliance with the Protector. Soon after
this, two Waywoods more submitted themselves to the Swedes, taking Lissa and
Fraverstadt. From Stetin, the King of Sweden (who was expected to follow
General Wittenberg with his Army) marched with 10000 men, and a notable
Artillery, for Posen, and so for Warsovia and Thorn; entering Aug. 4. into that
part of the Polish Kingdom, properly called Poland. Then also Young Tromp
being sent into the Sound by the States of the United Provinces, Admiral
Wrangle had orders from the King of Sweden to sail thither with 9 stout Men of
War, to require a positive answer of him, whether he intended Peace or War,
(for these States began to engage, for tradings sake, in the business) and
what the Swedes might expect from him. About the fame time the King of Poland
set up his Standard at Warsovia, whither having summoned in the Country, he
made but 16000 men at the most, and such, as never saw the face of an enemy.

But the Duke of Muscovy, (the while) with the Cossacks, not only took in
Minsko, being forsaken by the Polish Garrison, (who finding themselves too
weak, quitted the place) but also beat the Littavish Army out of the field, and
possessing himself of that populous City, caused Prince Radzivil to flee for
his life; who notwithstanding advanced no farther, the King of Sweden sending
to let him know, That Lithuania was now under the Swedish protection, having
submitted to that Crown, by virtue of an agreement lately made; for all
Lithuania, and the remainder of Lif^land had submitted to the said King. Many
also of the Polish Nobility took an oath of fidelity to the Swedish King. The
Muscovites notwithstanding, went and burnt Cawne, and so retired again to the
Wild. And there arose some grudg between the Swedes and Muscovites, about the
devastation, spoil, and burning of the fine Palaces, Temples, and Works of
Vilna by the said Muscovites; whose Inhabitants they were reported likewise to
have put to the sword.

But the general Rendezvous of the King of Poland's Army being at Lowicks, some
36 miles from Warsow, the said King after a sword received from the Pope's
Nuntio, hallowed, departed from Warsow to the said Army in the month of
August, to try what virtue it would have against the Swedish King: where then
was arrived 10000 horse of the old Army which was at Ukrain, the Nobility and
Gentry then coming also in great number from all parts: about which time, the
Palatine of Siradia came under the protection of Sweden. And the Duke of
Radzvill seeing that his forces were thrunk into a small number, made his
agreement with the King of Sweden; as also the Bishop of Vilna, and many other
persons of note.

The King of Sweden going in August 1655, from Turpitz with a strong party of
horse, and 4 pieces of Ordnance, came to Klezki near Guesna, on the 20th, being
expected on the 21 day by General Wittenberg; that he might jointly march with
both Armies to Lowicks, and fight the Polish Army; which fell out accordingly
in September. following: In which battle the Victory falling to the Swedes, the
King of Poland fled to Cracovia: wherefore, the King of Sweden marching
thither, drew near the City Sept. 15, where the Polish king stood with three
Brigades; but the Swedes suddenly and unexpectedly approaching, the Poles
quitting their Camp, betook themselves to flight in great terror and
confusion, setting part of the Suburbs on fire: whereupon the king of Sweden
advancing to the City, took his Head quarter within a quarter of a mile thereof
at a Convent belonging to the Dominicans, the Subburbs burning all night: and
next day, September. 16, the Swedish king sending a party, they possessed
themselves of the Bridge over the River Weyssell; so entering the Suburbs, and
that with little opposition, but no loss, although the enemy playing on them
from the Castle, set some adjacent houses on fire thereby; and within two days
after, he giving order to frame a siege before both Castle and City, assigned
his Forces to their several Posts, plied the Castle with Grenades: which the
enemy answering with Grenades back again from the Castle, they set the
Cloister of Agnes on fire, which taking hold of many other houses, reduced them
to Cinders: and being in great hope of a surrender of that chief City, they
made batteries, which the Poles both by shot and sallies, endeavored to
hinder. The King of Sweden then also proclaimed unto all Provinces and
Palatinates of that kingdom, That the Estates of the Realm might not only
freely meet together at Warsow, either in person, or by their Deputies; but he
required them also speedily to assemble, promising them his Royal favor, and a
free exercise of their Religion.

Casimir the king of Poland being fled, a Polish servant who was brought in
prisoner, informed the Swedes, that Casimir was retreated from Tarnaw to
Tsionsick, to the very borders of Hungary, having no more than a few German
horse with him: Wherefore the Swedish king thought to have pursued him; but his
Counsels altering on the 25 day, he returned the same night unto before
Cracovia: but sending General Douglas (upon the prisoner's information) to see
what was become of king Casimir, he returning the same night, brought news,
that the said King was also fled from Tsionsick with a few toward Hungarie's
borders: only, that in and about the same Town of Tsionsick, lay about 8000
Gentlemen, who expecting the event of the business, were supposed no longer to
stand out, than a strong Party should be sent against them. In the mean time,
the Lord Leskynski, the Polish Ambassador, was busy in acquainting his
friends in Cracovia with the notable Successes the Swedish King had about that
City, taking in diverse Castles and smaller fortified Towns round about, and
reducing diverse Parties to submission, persuading them to be wise, in
surrendering the City, and save themselves: but Czarnecky the Governor being
obstinate, refusing to surrender, and continuing shooting and sallying, the
King making speedy preparation for a storm, sent in word to the said Czarnecky
the Governor, That if he would not yield unto an accommodation, but proceed in
his obstinacy; as soon as he should get him into his power, (which he doubted
not shortly to effect) he would give order to hang him up. Wherefore the
besieged suing to the King for their Commissioners to have letters of Conduct
to come and treat, in the month October. following Cracovia was surrendered;
there marching out the Garrison, being 3000 men, (with 600 Cart-loads of rich
movables, most part of which belonged to the Jews) who were conducted to the
Frontiers of Silesia, where having leave for a month to refresh themselves,
they might go to the King of Poland (then in Silesia) if they pleased; or else
list themselves in the Swedish Army: the Citizens also agreed to pay 300000
Rixdollars in a months time, to the Swedish King; who for the maintaining of
these new acquests, was very diligent in fortifying all parts, and
particularly, the two head Cities of Warsow and Cracovia, the King of Sweden
giving order to bring the River Weyssel round about Cracovia, whereby it should
become very strong.

But while Cracovia was besieging, an Envoy from Koniecpolski, Standard Bearer
to the Crown of Poland, came both to Congratulate (in his Master's name) the
Swedish King, and also to let him know, That since their King Casimir was fled
out of the borders of the kingdom, without their privity or consent, they had
in conscience good reason to provide them of another King, under whose
protection they might secure themselves; wherefore his Master, both for
himself, and in behalf of the Guarcian Militia, and Pospolitans, and States,
did willingly submit unto his Majesty, to acknowledge him for their Lord and
Master; and that to the same purpose, they would send Commissioners to any
place he should appoint: Which he very favorably accepting of, determined to
send notice of the time and place to the said Standardbearer. After which, came
news from Warsovia, from the Chancellor Oxienstern, that the Lord Steinbock
General of the Artillery, had subdued the rebellious Massovians: Also another
Messenger came from the Lord Dobicky Palatine of Sondecki, offering to embrace
the King's protection; desiring thereupon, that he would order no more waste to
be made in the kingdom; for seeing their King, whom they had stood to for the
preservation of their privileges, had deserted them, going out of their
borders, they were advising among themselves, to dispatch within six or eight
days, their Commissioners in the name of the whole Nobility, unto his Majesty,
to treat about the peace and safety of the Commonwealth. Wherefore the King
granted to Leszinski the great Treasurer, and the Palatine Sandomiriensis,
Letters of safe conduct for their free access unto him for that purpose. Who
after the reducement of Cracovia, bent his march toward Lublin, where the
Cossacks with their General, lay encamped: wherein he had a double design,
partly to make an agreement with them (who now professed a great willingness
to submit unto him); the Muscovites also being content to retain only the 3
Palatinates of Smolensko, Vitebsko, and Polosko, on the other side of the River
Boristhenes, and to abandon the rest of the great Dukedom of Lithuania to the
Swedes, whereby they would become Masters of all Poland; and partly to be nigh
Prussia, the better to feel the Duke of Brandenburg, (for he had not as yet
joined in the abovementioned league with the King) who (he was advised) had
been underhand solicited by the Emperor, to make a strong League with the
Estates of the same Province of Prussia, and some others of Poland, that had
not as yet absolutely declared themselves for the Swedes: he being likewise
advised, the Duke had sent a distinct body of an Army toward Thoren, to hinder
there the Swedes irruption; and another body toward Memmel, upon the frontiers
of Lithuania, while the remainder of his Army continued in the heart of
Prosfia. And indeed, before this time, the great progress of the Swedes in this
kingdom, did so startle all the Ministers of the Emperor, that thereupon he
(for a time) deferred his journey to Prague: and in the mean time, to give
satisfaction to the King of Sweden's Demands, which were held to be just. For
it was a most remarkable providence, that this King should in two or three
months time even overrun so vast and warlique a kingdom as Poland: but he had
as well great policy as valor in the design; for when he marched from Conin to
Colo, Aug. 17th; whence he sent parties to get intelligence of the enemies
station and posture, expecting to meet with the general Leavies at Ptantek: a
certain Colonel coming in the mean time as an Envoy from the King of Poland,
with Credentials from him; and audience being given him on the 18th of the
same, he offered certain Propositions in order to a Treaty, using these
expressions, (among other formalities) Pacem petimus, et bellum deprecamur, We
request peace, and renounce War; desiring for the present a Cessation of Arms,
and that the King would be pleased to stay there, and move on no farther: He
understanding the enemie's design of delay, because the Envoy was not furnished
with full power and instructions to conclude any thing, departed immediately
from Colo on the 21 day, to put his warlique designs into speedy execution.

Chmielniski assuring the King (by the Messenger sent unto him) that he would
wholly submit unto him, expecting only his commands, etc. having also quitted
Camietz Podolsky, as soon as he had notice of the king's march into Poland, and
advancing toward Reush Lomberg, he beat Podotsky, a Polonian, expecting also
the King's coming at Samoisky; all which, the King of Sweden himself certified
one of his chief Officers of, by a letter from the Camp before Cracovia, October.
14th, the king went toward him, as aforesaid, who was (after his encamping
before Lublin) to repair to Warsow, to assist at a general Diet of the
Palatines and other Lords of the kingdom of Poland, which was summoned by the
king, who appointed Count Erick Oxienstern his grand Chancellor, with Count
Benedict Oxienstern, and the Lord Berenklow, to be present therein as his
Commissioners. But in the mean time, the Cossacks (of whom, he was General)
coming before the said Lublin, October. 15. with a huge Army, reported to be
160000 men, hewed down the Jews, plundring out their houses, fired the
fore-Town, and compounded with the Town it self, to have all the Priests goods,
and those that were fled from Poland, and had brought their goods thither; and
a ransom for themselves; taking also an oath of them to be true to the
Muscoviter, and so departed on the 20th day.

Then were the Swedes busy in dispersing Polish parties that got together: as
Major General Steinbock, who understanding that some numbers of Massovians had
recollected themselves, he scattering them, they sent Deputies unto him for a
final accommodation. Also Lovenhaupt, another Major General, passed the River
Weyssel to encounter some Polish Troops that were again got together near
Lowick. Likewise 500 Polish horse under the command of one Jalouskie, being at
the small Town of Wratlaffskie, and doing some hurt to the Inhabitants, the
Duke of Saxon Lawenburg meeting with them, took Jalouskie and the chief of
them, dispersing the rest.

The King of Sweden coming to Warsovia, October. 30, continued not long there;
for understanding that the States and chief Cities of Prussia, not only
remained obstinate, but were making a strict League and Combination with the
Duke of Brandenburg against him, he committing the management of the business
of Poland with the States there present, unto the Rix-Chancellor and some
others, departed with some Regiments and the Quartians, unto his Army. At which
Warsovia, was a dangerous Conspiracy detected, which was to have poisoned the
King and his Nobles, with the whole Garrison, by infecting all the Conduits and
Fountains; for which, some great ones, engaged in the Plot, were apprehended,
and committed to Custody.

But the business of Prussia occasioned blows in a sharp conflict between the
Swedes and Duke of Brandenburg, wherein about 5 or 800 of the Brandenburgers
were slain. And which Quarrel, although it was looked on as ominous, it being
betwixt two Princes of the Reformed Religion, at such a time as that, because
it might have induced the Electour to some compliance or confederation with the
Polish King and the Emperor; yet the Swedish King proceeded with great
resolution, marching to Prussia, with whom also one Mr. Rolt came along, who
being sent from the English Protector, was received by the King very
honorably. Who sending Steinbock before him with his Army, he marching through
Marzuria, with great celerity possessed himself of Strasburg, the very Key of
Prussia, and of very great advantage to the Swedes. After which, Radzieffky was
sent with 3000 horse for Thoren; who when he came near the place, finding no
Brandenburgish forces thereabouts, sent back half his men to the Army, and went
with the rest before Thoren, admonishing them to obedience: who presently sent
Deputies to treat for an accommodation.

The Mascovites and Cossacks (in the mean time doing what they could to
maintain a good intelligence with the Swedish King) helped not a little to the
establishing and securing his new Conquests: most also of the Polish Lords who
fled with their King into Silesia, now returning to live under the Swedish
protection. About which time, to wit, about December, the King sent a Letter to
the Emperor, complaining, That he had underhand applied himself to diverse
Princes of the Empire, for engaging them in a League to his prejudice. The
Emperor dismissed the Messenger with a very civil answer, giving him a large
assurance of holding a good correspondence with the Crown of Sweden, etc. And a
Colonel being at that time sent from the king of Poland to raise men in the
Imperial Territories, the Emperor gave him (for that present) very strict
order against proceeding any further in making leavies. The City of Elbing in
Prussia was also yielded to the Swedes, without any resistance; for the King of
Sweden having given audience to the Imperial and Transylvanian Ambassadors at
the City of Thoren, went toward the Town of Margenfeldt: where the Deputies of
Elbing attending him, and craving some time, the better to consult with the
other Cities in so weighty an affair, he flatly denying them, they treated with
the Rix-Chancellor on the 9th of December; the agreement of whose submission
did much satisfy the King: who made the said Chancellor Governor of Prussia;
and General Linde Governor of Elbing, and the Militia of Prussia, who December.
12th, placed a considerable Garrison therein. On the 4th day of which month at
midnight, the King of Sweden had a lusty young Prince born unto him at
Stockholm: which was the day of his agreement with the City of Thoren;
whereinto he entered the day following.

But the City of Dantzick in Prussia being united in it self, in December. 1655,
resolved upon a defense, in case the Swede should make any Attempt that way:
sending also Instructions to their President with the Elector of Brandenburg;
by all means to make an Agreement with him, thereby to oblige him to relieve
them, if assaulted, and to assist them with some Troops for the present; in
order to which defense, they burnt all their Suburbs. And then also was the
Polish King (who had some new design on foot for recovery of his kingdom)
increasing his forces which he had on Silesio's borders: unto whom Czarneski
the Governor of Cracovia, went with some Troops to his service, contrary to
the agreement made with the King of Sweden, upon the surrender of the City. But
the great Cham of Tartary, who was thought would have assisted him to the same
purpose, wrote a Letter to the King of Sweden, assuring him, That not any
attempt should be made by him or his Soldiers, against his progress; but that
he was rather willing to help and destroy his enemies, and especially King
Casimir of Poland.

About the same time, a Proclamation was published in Denmark, against all
private meetings of all persons of any other Religion than what was publicly
professed in that kingdom. And the Pope's power of condemning doctrines,
received a deep wound in France, by the Sorbonne Doctors disputing with the
Jesuits in a public Assembly, (where the Chancellor of France sat as
Prefident on behalf of the King) in defense of the doctrine of Jansenus, at
Paris, about January, 1655; which doctrine spread it self very much in that
kingdom among moderate Papists: although the then late deceased Pope had openly
damned it. After much disputation, though the anthority of the Sea of Rome was
much pressed; yet when they come to give their Votes, the Sorbonne Doctors
alleged, That the Pope was not to be credited in any thing not agreeable to
the Scriptures and ancient Fathers: standing all, with one Doctor Arnaud, for
the Jansenian tenants, except two or three: so that the Assembly being put off,
the disadvantage remained on the Jesuits side.

General Steinbock being countermanded by his King toward Bromberg with 4000
men, Po^ocky and another Polish General (with part of the Quartians) revolting
in Poland, he upon his march thitherward, commanding Colonel Fabian against a
part of the enemy; he, after a hot dispute within a mile of Putske, put them to
flight, slaying and taking diverse prisoners, and furiously pursuing the Poles
to the very Walls of Putske.

The Swedes being now become Masters of all Prussia, except the four Cities of
Dantzick, Marienburg, Putzke, and Schlocow; Oxienstern the Governor sent to
Weyer, who held those places for the Polish king, offering him a Treaty in
order to a surrender, or else there would be proceeding to extremity.

But, great was the tyranny used in great Poland, and about Cracovia, about
this time, by the Poles; both when they lighted on the Swedish Soldiers, as
also dividing and cutting children asunder like sheep, cutting off women's
breasts, then dissecting them into four quarters; cutting off the hands and
feet of Protestant Ministers, then chopping off their heads, and dividing the
body into several quarters, and the hoggs dragging the bowels along the
streets; flinging corn also upon the slain men's flesh, so letting the hoggs run
unto it, for increasing the pleasure of the tragedy. Many of Steinbock's
Regiment being so served by this Tragicomedy at Wielun. Yet while this cruelty
was acting, Colonel Uxkell and another coming to their relief with 800 horse,
cut down above 300 Poles, and fired many of their Villages: after which, they
began to invite back the Inhabitants, who were fled toward Silesia, as being
treated in like pitiful manner.

In the month of February, the King of Sweden passed by Warsovia with three
considerable Armies toward the Ukrain against the Polanders, having a little
before proclaimed, That whosoever should protect King Casimir, or knowing where
he was, would give no notice thereof, should suffer death like a Rebel. And on
the 21 day of the same month, the Town of Marienburg was delivered up to the
Swedes; and the Castle (which holding out, thought to have burnt the City, but
was prevented by the Inhabitants) was after some days playing upon is,
surrendered likewise to the Swedes, the besieged understanding that an
Inhabitant of the City had discovered unto them those private ways and
passages, whereby they might easily make an approach: and also that the Swedes
had two Mines ready to spring. On the same day, Febr. 21, the Swedes obtained
no small Victory, whose King with 5000 men fighting the Poles near Lublin and
the River Weyssel, routed them, although they fought resolutely, engaging also
Poles against Poles in the action; Czarnecki, Cracovia's late Governor,
commanded the Polanders, a great number of whom were slain upon the place, and
many taken prisoners, with 12 or 13 Standards: the King also pursuing them
above two miles, killing several in the pursuit, and many of them were drowned
in the Rivers of Weyssel and Wyppera, and other waters whither they retreated.
Others report, that the Swedes had but sad work of it; for that, 8000 Swedes
encountered 20000 Poles. And that, as soon as the Cossacks (who beheld these
Combatants afar off) saw the Victory to incline to the Swedes, they helped to
pursue and cut the fugitive Poles down. After this, the King advanced to
Lublin, to take that City; thence presently toward Zamosse, instantly getting
that strong and fortified City upon accord: and being advanced not far from
Zamosse, they again meeting with a strong party of Polanders, beat them back,
dispersing them, and taking 7. Standards from them. Of which, Casimir hearing,
being at Reush Lemberg, about 8 miles of, and that the King of Sweden himself
was not far off, he hastened away with 1500 horsemen from Leopolis to Kamieniec
Poloski: about which time, there was published a Proclamation in Silesia, that
no Polander should come in sight there upon pain of death. While the King kept
his Headquarters in and about Jarislaw, much refreshing his Soldiery thereby,
he sent parties to see if the enemies any where did gather a head again; who
bringing intelligence, that the Poles were every where turned perjured Rebels,
endeavoring to hinder him in his march, cut off all passes, and striving by
private intelligence with Priests and Jesuits, to reduce the Swedish Garrisons
in great Poland, Warsovia, and Sandomiria, unto King Casimir's obedience the
King resolved to draw back with his Army to a place where they might the better
discover the enemies plots, and invite him to venture a head battle: and
sending two Commanders, March 21, 1655, with orders unto some following Troops,
to march back toward Warsovia, there to remain till his return; himself
arrived the same day before Sandomir: but hearing that some Polish Commanders
were the night before become Masters of the City Sandomir; though they could
not obtain the Castle: whose Governor (a Swede) afterward (in revenge)
setting the Jesuits College on fire, the whole Town was thereby burnt to ashes.
Yet it seems the truer relation, That the Poles themselves firing some houses
near the Castle; the fire taking hold of the Jesuits College, seized on the
City. Wherefore the King sending order to the said Governor to leave the
Castle and cross the River Weyssel with his men, he obeyed; but put a good
quantity of Powder and Ammunition (which he could not carry with him) into a
Vault locked up, applying thereto a burning match, which might take fire half
an hour after his departure. The Poles presently entering the Castle, displayed
their Colors, reviling the Governor; and searching into all corners, they
found this Vault: which the chief Commander would attribute to himself; and
being in hot dispute, the powder firing, blew 1200 Polanders, (some Swedes also
perishing) with the Castle roofs, into the air; the King on the other side of
the River being a spectator: who understanding on the 23 day, that
Keniecpoliski showed himself with about 12000 Quartians betwixt Landshut and
the King's Camp, drew out 16 Regiments of horse, and 14 Companies of Dragoons,
to meet the enemy, and charging them home, dispersed the whole Army, taking
many colors from them, beating also Witepski, who disputed the Pass over San,
to the King: after which, he purposed to pass the river Weyssel 10 miles
beyond Warsovia, to have a third bout with the Crown Marshal Lubomirski. There
having been two Ambassadors at Jarislaw from Chmielniski General of the
Cossacks, who arrived there the 8th of the same month, assuring the King by
letters, that as soon as the earth was endued with her green robes, he would
attend him with 50 thousand men.

April 11. following, 1656, the Marquess of Baden going from Warsovia with his
Troops to join with the King, he chanced to meet with about 12000 Poles under
Lubomirski's Banner, about 8. miles from the City, they were 10 for one; yet
the Marquesses men maintaining the fight above two hours before they quitted
the field, killed above 2000 Poles: then saving themselves by flight,
Field-Marshall Wrangle's Troops meeting with them, and securing them, they
saved likewise a good part of their baggage; yet these few were most cut in
pieces in the action, the Marquess himself very narrowly escaping.

The same month of April, the King beating and subduing the rebellious
Masures, with all that adhered to them, arrived toward the end of the month,
at Thoren: about which time, the Prince of Transylvania sent the King a letter
by an Envoy, assuring him of his real friendship, having 16000 men ready upon
the borders under Backos Gabor's command, who were at his service.

Then also in France, false news being there spread of the total defeat of the
Swedes, and the King himself being slain by the Polanders, the people of
Orleance were so transported with joy thereat; that they made solemn Feasts,
distributing a good sum of money to the poor on that account, whereby the vulgar
were emboldened to say, They must even take the same course with the Heretics
in France. But when through the Messenger's lamenesse in affirming they were
somewhat cooled, they were madly incensed again through the spreading of a
rumor, that the English had leave, and did begin to build a place of public
assembly at Rochel, saying, That they ever foresaw, if a peace were concluded
once with the Protector in England, it would tend to encourage and strengthen
the Hugonots; making them soon dare to attempt any thing that might subvert the
Catholic profession and interest: so that the Governor of Orleance was fain
(at the Protestants request) to appoint a guard; they not being safe in
repairing to the public assembly, by reason of the peoples fury. The new
Pope, Alexander the 7th, having also about the same time (for it was dated at
Rome, March 20th) sent a Brief or Letter to the general Assembly of the French
Clergy, exhorting them to stirt up the King to a general Peace: which was
judged to be but as a fire-ball thrown into France, under that pretense, to put
the Clergy and people into combustion: which by prudence was broken, and did no
hurt.

But the Castle of Branbergh in Peland being surrendered by the Swedes at
discretion, the Polanders branded them all with a mark on their foreheads;
which indignity was much resented by their party. The King of Sweden coming
into Elbing, May 28; and his Queen coming thither also the next day, after some
months safe delivery of a young Prince, the great Guns proclaimed great joy at
this meeting throughout the Swedish Garrisons in Prussia.

Prince Adelph, the King of Swede's Brother, and the Generalissimo of his
Armies, marching to Znin and Kszin, (having defeated (by his Quartermaster
General, sent thither aforehand) most of those Citizens and Inhabitants who
presented themselves in field against him) marched on to Malgasin, where
hearing that some Gentry and Peasants were in Arms in the Castle of Golensh, he
commanded the said Quartermaster General thither with some Companies, who
demanding their surrender, they found a hostile opposition, many of his men
being sorely wounded: wherefore through Ordnance playing hard upon the gate,
and the Swede's hard pressing on, they could not cast off their draw-bridg; so
that the Swedes coming on in the storming, to the very Palisadoes, cutting down
some, made entrance for the rest to let down the bridge, over which they
pressing furiously, killed all they found in arms, and utterly demolished the
Castle. Thence marching to Godzier Castle, the Gentry and Peasants therein,
after firing on those who were sent before, left the Castle. The enemy turning
toward Gnesen, after an intent to surprise Posen, (in which they were
prevented by the Citie's being well provided, and the Suburbs burnt down)
Staresta Braslowsky sent a Messenger to Wrsezewitz, whom Prince Adolph had sent
with a party toward Gnesen, that expecting the Swedish Army, they would stand
and give them battle. Wherefore Adolph sending the forlorn-hope to get some
priseners, (though they were repulsed) marching with his Army over a passage
unresisted, put his men into a Battalia; himself commanding the right wing,
Field-Marshal Wrangle the left: who at the advance approaching so nigh the
enemy, because the Princes not being able to come in at the side for the
moorishness of the place, the foremost squadrons were presently scattered:
which the enemie's Avant-Troops (too deeply engaged with the Swedish
Avant-Troops) perceiving, and being lustily played on by the Dragoons in ambush,
they beginning to retreat, came so directly between both the Swedish wings,
that most of them were destroyed: the right wing thereupon advancing, (and
because the enemy still retreated over a water to a Village called Gietzmarky,
where he rallyed again together with the Postpolitans) some Ordnance being
planted on a high ground, were discharged against the enemy, whilst the Swedes
getting over the water, came to a full Front; whereupon, the enemy coming
furiously on with a great shout, attempted sundry ways to disorder the Swedish
Army. But the Polanders (after several hot charges, and loss of many men)
confusedly fled, the main Body of the Swedes pursuing them a league; in which
flight, many were cut off also, the Swedes in their hot blood, giving no
quarter. This Action fell out, May the 8th* new Style, 1656, lasting 5 hours,
from 3 in the afternoon, till 8 at night* Czarnecky, Lubomirski, and Saphia,
were the three chief Commanders for the King of Poland in this engagement: the
p^^son^rs confessing, that great execution was done by shot, both great and
small, among them; 3 Starosties being slain, and Saph^a soot through the arm:
the Poles likewise carrying away many of their slain. The Prince after this on
the 10th day followed them to Uzesnie, they being but three leagues asunder,
where more action was expected.

A little before or about which time, the Waywood at Newgard caused some
Russians to be whipped to death; who divulged, that the great Duke resolved for
War against the Swedes.

The City of Elbing in Prussia being become as it were a Dantzick, Commodities
being now transported thither; for that Dantzick stood out against the Swedes:
some English Merchants of Dantzick desiring (about the month of May) in the
name of the English Nation, leave of the Electour of Brandenburg, to transport
their goods thence to Elbing through his Port of the Pillaw, he condescended
thereunto; giving leave also, that what goods the English did send home out of
their Pack-Chambers, should pass Custome-free; saying, That he yielded them
that, in honor of the English Protector, and in favor of the English Nation.

It shall not be amiss here briefly to give an account of the reported Revolt
of the Lithuanians from the Swedish obedience: unto the jurisdiction of whose
King, when the Principality of Samaiten, with the Provinces belonging, had
yielded; King Casimir highly endeavored both by public Edicts, and secretly
with Priests and Jesuits, to involve peaceable minds against their new chosen
King: whereby some dwelling in the Bishopric, in the beginning of the Spring
lurking in Forests together, by night, surprised a Company newly raised by
Rose, murdering some of them: and the Lieutenant who was sick and bedridden.
Wherefore Colonel Rebinder having order to persecute these Rebels, destroyed
some hundreds of them, by lying in wait with 400 horse; but the chief escaping
by flight, and closing with the Forest lurkers, surprised some new leavied
forces of Col. Igelstrome, destroying them (here and there quartered) in the
night; divulging also at the first, as if all Samaiten had been in rebellion.
But the Field-Marshal, learning that all Forces in that Principality were safe,
not so much as knowing of these rebels, he marching out of Janisky with 400
horse, encountered them, putting some hundreds to the sword; but the Bishop of
Samaiten and the chiefest of the States, severally intimated, that they were
ignorant thereof, giving sufficient security of their constant obedience: the
Rix-Treasurer and general Governor calling and citing also the States to come
to Byrsen, and to go with some commanded Soldiers, to try whether the rest
could be appeased by fair means; or to keep them in obedience by a Military
compulsion; so that it was certain, the Swedes loss in that stir, was not of
above 200 men.

The Swedish forces appearing (in the month of May) about Dantzick for a
Leaguer: fell upon the Fort in Gothland, hard by Dirshaw, (which I understand
another to call a Sconce lying by the river Vistula's side, otherwise called
Dantzickers Leaguer) the King, with his Artillery-General Steinbock, appearing
before it, and sending word to the Garrison, that they should presently yield;
and so should depart with their arms: but the Governor having 400 men with
him, refused, unless they might carry away their goods, and march with Drums
beating, and Colors flying: which being denied, they began within the Fort to
defend themselves. But two Swedes who served in that place, having raised a
party therein of 50 Soldiers, forced the Governor to an agreement: which
being confirmed, the King advanced near the place to speak with him; but a
certain Dragooner knowing the King, let fly his Musket at him, so that the
Bullet came by his hat, falling a little further; who thereupon commanded to
put all to the sword, with the Governor himself, so that very few escaped. On
the 23 day of which May, there happened a strange accident in the City of
Dantzick it self; for a Citizen striking with his Partisan at a Boy, missing
him; the steel of the Partisan falling into the earth with the point upwards,
and he at the same time falling with his right fide upon the point, which
piercing him unto the very backbone, he dyed lamentably.

But the King of Sweden ordering the Marquess of Baden, his Lievtenant-General,
to march with his men from Conitz to Buttow, and leaving Steinbock before
Dantzick, with an Army in a very good posture, himself intended to go to his
head-Army: where arriving, and hearing that Czarnecki stood 6 miles from
Bramberg with 12 Regiments; he hastening after him, met accidentally with him,
yet successfully; pursuing him above two miles, killing many of his men, with
two Waywods, and some other chief Officers being taken prisoners.

But the King of Poland (who not long before had sent to the Emperor of
Germany to be a Mediator for him to the King of Sweden; the which he showed a
readiness to do) having gotten together a numerous Army about this time,
besieged the City of Warsovia, although himself in person came not near it; for
which cause the King of Sweden went not personally to its relief, but returned
to Marienburg; ordering his Brother Adolph, and Field-Marshal Wrangell to go
for Warsovia, and oblige Czarnecky to a field battle: but the Poles finding the
whole Swedish Army there, withdrew themselves from before the City, about 3
miles from the place, having made seven attempts to take it by storm; but being
repelled with the loss of 3000 of his best Soldiers, and two pieces of
Ordnance in the encounters, the King could not persuade them to come on the 8th
time, although he promised each man 5 Ducats. And a little before this time,
the Swedes found a very great treasure in a Vault of Warsovia's Castle, there
being the Popish Images of Christ and the 12 Apostles, all of Massy silver
double gilt, (and other Relics very precious) amounting in value to betwixt 4
and 500000 Dollars, besides the relics. This was the time wherein the
forementioned strict League between the King and Duke of Brandenburg was
concluded: who having a supply of 6 or 8000 men from the Duke to march along
with him, he was enabled to continue Steinbock's siege before Dantzick, to
their trouble and discontent; the Swedes having before taken not only
Dantzicker Leaguer, but possessed themselves also of the Castle of Greppin and
the Hoff: about which time, to wit, in May, 1656, the said Dantzickers sending
an Embassy to the King, they could obtain no answer, but to be gone; for he
having sent those Citizens a Letter about submission, they returned a resolute
answer; the King of Poland having commended them for their constancy, and
encouraged them to continue. After which, the Duke of Croy (one of that Citie's
neighbour-Princes) writing a Letter to persuade them to a compliance with the
King of Sweden; wishing they had contented themselves with a simple
self-defence, and not took upon them to have hindered his progress; (for they,
whatever else, had endeavored to relieve Marienburgh Castle) also telling
them, after diverse considerations laid down, If they could reap no other
benefit by the expected success, in their designs, than the rooting out of the
Gospel of truth; and that, by the bringing in of the superstitious Roman
Religion again; might not only be feared the loss of their own souls, but
also a total ruin of their Trade, and the Citie's welfare: wherefore he could
not conjecture how they might excuse such dangerous enterprises and designs to
posterity. They returned diverse, not unsober, expressions in answer; saying,
They were assured in their consciences, that they have not afforded the least
occasion to that miserable War, etc. also mentioning 5 principal Maxims which
their Predecessors, and they, in imitation of them, had always made their
chiefest work to consider; 1. To maintain the Gospel of Truth. 2. To be
faithful to their King. 3. To keep firm to the Crown of Poland. 4. To defend
their Laws, Liberties, etc. 5. To preserve and increase the welfare of that
City. They said, they did confidently believe, that none could impute it to
them, as if God took pleasure in Apostates and Hypocrites, and as if he would
have Religion promoted in casting off the lawful Magistrate, and in the slender
esteem of a wellgrounded Government: and that according to their judgments,
there was nothing more wholesome and prosperous than Peace, to preserve and
propagate Religion, which the Prince of Peace had so earnestly recommended to
all those who would truly follow him. They adding moreover, That the Duke
himself (being perfectly well versed in History) would be pleased to call to
mind, how that at all times, by Wars, the spirits of men grew more barbarous
and inhumane; and how, the Wars for Religion, used commonly to extinguish
Religion. Concluding with a hope, that the Duke would be pleased, from their
abovesaid reasons, and his own interest, to cooperate to the mitigation of the
Swede's great spirits: and that they would do their best endeavors humbly to
perfwade their King of Polonia, and the Nobles of that Kingdom, not to refuse
reasonable means to attain peace; but rather to find out all possible means to
compass it: and not doubting, but their King and the States would be very
inclinable thereunto.

This Summer, 1656, there was such a mortal Pestilence in the City of Naples,
that some days 6000 people were said to dye of it therein. The Pestilence was
then also so raging in all places possessed by the Turks in the Island of
Candia, that they were forced to abandon diverse Towns which they there held,
and to leave them desolate.

About the same time, July 16, the French received a great loss before
Valenchienne, which they had besieged; for the Spaniards frequently showing as
if they would fall upon Marshal Turein's and the Lorrainer's quarter; at last
fell in good earnest upon Marshall de la Ferte's quarter: who coming resolutely
on, had three or four repulses by the French their notable resistance: and when
the Spaniard afterward had fallen in among them, they so fought it out, that
of 1200 in Du Plessis Regiment, there remained but 30 men. The whole Regiments
of Le Ferte and Piedmont; ten Companies of the King's guards, and the
Cardinai's guards, with La Ferte's Dragoons also which were near 800, and his
Regiment of horse, 1200, were all cut in pieces. Likewise the Switzers
Regiments, 800 of whom escaping the sword, were drowned by water coming into
their Trenches at the sudden opening of the sluices: and whereby, all commerce
betwixt the two bodies of the French Army was intercepted: so that Turein being
forced to stand all the while a Spectatour, at length drew off all his (being
about 12000) men to Quesnoy, a garrison about two leagues from Valenchienne,
where next morning came to him betwixt six and seven thousand recruits, who had
thought to have united with him at the siege. The Marquess of Estree was slain
in this overthrow, and the Count his brother taken prisoner, besides many
Marquesses, Counts, and other great persons, and Officers killed or taken: and
La Ferte himself, being wounded in the thigh, was taken prisoner.

Things in Germany went then worse with the Protestants than formerly; for at
Collen, in the same month of July, several families of them were distrained,
because that after three summons, they refused to pay their fine, for not
strewing Flowers before their houses on the Sacrament day, when the Host was
carried through the street; which had not been exacted in 30 years. It was
likewise moved and deliberated in the Council of that City, to turn all the
said Protestants after a years warning, out of the City, so soon as the Treaty
of Munster was expired.

But the Dane and the States of the United Provinces now understood each other,
as to providing that the Swede grew not too potent in or near the Baltic Seas:
and that King standing in very good terms with those States, gave their
Ambassadors hopes, that 10 of his Men of War should join with theirs upon
occasion.

In August following, against the Duke of Brandenburg, (who had a little before
declared to an Envoy, (sent unto him from the grand Cham of Tartarie, to
persuade him from any agreement with the Swedish King) that since he was
totally abandoned by the King of Poland, he thought himself concerned to take a
course for conservation of his Estates held in Prussia) a Sentence was
pronounced from a Verdict of the Imperial Chamber in Germany, in reference to
the War made in 1653, (as we have declared in the foregoing Chapter) against
the Duke of Newburgh; who being judged guilty of giving the first occasion
thereof, was condemned to pay toward the charges, 200000 Rixdollars to the
said Duke of Newburgh; and in default of payment, his Land of March should be
mortgaged.

But the King of Poland coming afresh upon the City of Warsovia after its
relief; it was yielded up to him July the first; the Swedes being to leave
their booties and plunder behind them, with the Artillery, and what belonged
thereunto; Genesis Wittenberg marching out with 4000 Swedes: the women were
civilly used, and had some inferior Officers granted them to bring them to the
Swedish Camp: yet all the conditions were not kept; which was to be attributed
to the roughness of the Polish Soldiery, rather than to King Casimir. At the
same time Cracovia also was beleagured and hardly put to it by the Queen of
Poland's Army; unto whose Camp the King her husband had sent 8000 men; and whom
to meet at Warsovia, she personally departed from before Cracovia. The King of
Sweden being still encamped at Nowedwor, (from whence came intelligence into
England, of some particular Successes against Polish parties, obtained by that
Army who marched from Thoren May 30th, to relieve Warsovia) where the Electour
of Brandenburg joined his Forces to his, July 7th; they resolving to fall
suddenly into King Casimir's Camp, although he gave out to be above 100000 men.
Who because of his great numbers, not much regarding the forces of the King of
Sweden and the Electour, on July 27, 1656, sent a Body of Tartars (for these
were united with him) to besiege Poltowsko: whereupon the Swedes seeing an
opportunity of action, drew out their forces to relieve the City: which was
performed with slaughter among the besieging Tartars. July 28, the King and the
Electour crossing the River Buck, drew up their Army in Battalia, advancing
toward the Poles: King Casimir standing (with 150000 or 120000) to receive
them: where, after some light skirmishes betwixt their forlorns, and more
engagements, till night parted them, and in which first encounters the Swedes
had the worst; (though they valiantly repulsed a body of Tartars sent to fall
on their rear) next day, July 29, a grand battle beginning, one of the Swedish
Wings at first, seemed to be declining; but recovering their wonted courage by
others sent to succor them, (though the Poles came on very numerously and
furiously) they kept their ground. The Battle continuing all this day, until
the next, July 30th, in the conclusion, the King and the Electour (who behaved
himself valiantly) had a mavelous Victory; for the Poland King losing a great
part of his foot, all his Ordnance and baggage, and leaving the City of
Warsovia open to the Swedes, fled after his horse, with a few in his company,
into Podlachia.

In August following, that strong and important Garrison of Conde in Flanders
was yielded up by the French to the Spaniard upon Articles after no short siege.

News being come to Stockholm, in July, that the Muscovites had broken into the
Province of Ingermanland, the Estates of Sweden here assembling, ordered all
Governors to provide, and speedily send all sorts of Ammunition into that
Province, as also into Finland and Liefland; and although they resolved not to
proceed against the Muscovite, before they saw he was become an absolute enemy;
yet in the mean time, they assured themselves of the Muscovites living in
Stockholm, beginning to seize all their Estates and Merchandises, and
imprisoning some, for imbezilling part of their goods: and hearing soon after,
that the Mascovite was entered into Liefland, and what he had done upon it, they
labored with all possible diligence to take some course for rescuing that
Province out of the Jaws of those devouring enemies; not only fending forces
to strengthen the most important Towns, but raising men in several parts of
Sweden: the Nobility and Citizens with great cheerfulness agreeing to
contribute twice as much (upon this occasion) as they were wont to do in the
foregoing years. And indeed, things went but ill with the Swedes in Poland now,
because (for that present) the King was constrained to draw a way the main of
his forces with speed into Liefland; though he left sufficient to maintain all
their Garrisons except Warsovia, which they slighted, demolishing its
fortifications; so, forsaking all on this side the River Weyssell. The Electour
of Brandenburgh was to secure Prussia; but Poland was left to the disposure of
providence: so that it was observed, that the Polish King had been (in all
probability) soon driven out of his Dominion, or forced to accept Conditions of
peace, had not this fierce invasion of the great Duke fallen out: who toward
the latter end of August, 1656, sat down before Riga, (the chief City of the
Province of Liefland) but about a stones cast from it, (and with an Army so
numerous, that the Consul of the City having gone up to the loftiest Tower
thereof, to view them at their approach beheld them with admiration, as
exceeding (he certified in his letter) the Grasshoppers in number) who sent in a
Trumpeter to the Citizens with a proud Message, That if they would submit and
supplicate for clemency, they might have it; but if obstinately standing out,
they must expect nothing but ruin and destruction. The Swedish Soldiers there
in Garrison were but 1500; but the Citizens being resolved men, listed 4000,
and persons of good estate, who were in arms: the City being also well provided
with necessaries, and their Fortifications completed, they said, they feared
no force; yet they expected relief from the King of Sweden: which the
Muscovites labored to prevent, by intending to build Forts between the City
and the mouth of the River Duna. And amongst other barbarous proceedings of the
Muscovite, taken for certain, the Count of Thurne (who married Bannier's Widow,
the great Swedish General in the German Wars, and sister to the Marquess of
Baden) being abroad out of Riga with a party of 300 horse, was at their first
coming thither met with: who being defeated and taken, they cut off his head,
and fixed it on a Spear to show it the befieged; though the trunk of his body
was by the enemies connivance conveyed into the City.

On the very same day, August 28, was the City and Castle of Cracovia said to
be surrendered to the Polish and Austrian forces; but on very good terms: as not
only for the Swedes to carry away what they could upon all the horses in the
City; but to be supplied with 200 more by the Polanders, to carry their
baggage, and to be conveyed with 1200 horse and foot to Gressen, etc. But as
for the Arians and Jews that were in the City, the former were to petition for
pardon, and having their goods exempted from confifcation, their persons to be
banished; but the latter were to be left to the King of Poland's mercy.

But about the beginning of Sept following, Prince Adolph with his forces
fuccessfully encountered 2000 sallyers out of Dantzick, (who had a design uyon
the Bridge under Dirshaw) with a small loss: the Dantzick norse and Dragoons
timely running, but the party of foot fighting stoutly: who notwithstanding,
had been all lost, if they had not met with a Marsh, to which they retreated;
five Colors, seven pieces of Ordnance, with all their Wagons, were taken, and
above 200 prisoners, but far more slain; 200 also retreating between the water,
where they were shut up, were expected soon to yield.

But that the King of Sweden (who had sufficiently engaged himself in
undertaking so great a Conquest as the Kingdom of Poland) might be deeper
engaged; the King of Denmark, who had before made preparations, was ^re this,
as a third enemy, come upon his back both by Sea and Land: so that, before the
middle of September there was a great fight at Sea between the Danish and
Swedish Fleets: the Swedes having 44 ships in all, to wit, 33 great Men of War,
the other somewhat less, with two fireships. Of the Danish Fleet I am not
certain of their number, (but 22 sail were seen not far from the Island Moan
before the fight began) who when they saw the Swedish about the Hilden Sea,
began to retreat, steering for Coppenhaguen; but being pursued by the Swedes,
they were forced to engage: the fight beginning about two of the clock in the
afternoon, and continuing till night, and a good while with much resolution on
each side; four ships being related to be blown up into the air, and the Swedes
getting the day.

The King of Poland possessing Cracovia, presently sent a Courrier or Post to
Dantzick, as to give them an account thereof, so promising them, that Czarnecky
should with his choycest horse, shortly strike into Pomerania, and Lubermisky
should with the Austrian forces fall into Prussia, to divert the King of
Sweden, and call him out of the Danish Dominions; wherefore the Swedish King
hastening to Wismar in Pomerania, to put all things there in a posture of
defense, came thither Sept. 14, he leaving his Army to carry on the War against
Denmark, under the Command of General Wrangell. And, to restore life and spirit
to the Swedish affairs then doubtful, if not drooping, one Father Daniel, an
Ambassador of the Cossacks, came from their General Chmielniski to the King of
Sweden some days before, to assure him, that the said General was upon his
march with 24000 men for his assistance, as was certified by a Post from Elbing
in Prussia to the City of Bremen, Sept. the 7th; who also brought news, that
the Prince of Transylvania was ready with an Army of 40000 men for some exploit
against the Polish King, or (for the Austrians were joined with the Poles)
against the Emperor.

About or in the month of April, 1656, there were great disorders and tumults
(raised by 20000 Janissaries and Saphies) at Constantinople, (said to be
occasioned through want of pay, and the obtruding on them a new Coin of a very
base Allay) who proceeded so far as to massacre diverse of the grand Seignior's
Divan or Council, and to depose and strangle the Vizier Bassa, whose carkase
they with scorn exposed in the Marketplace: forcing also the Sultana, Mother
of the grand Signior, to fly to the old Seraglio for security: the Mufti or
chief Priest being fain likewise to save himself by flight; not daring to trust
the words of those Mutineers, whose design was to have dethroned the grand
Seignior, and to have established his brother in his place. They laying aside
also all other principal Officers of the Empire, to secure themselves against a
deserved punishment, chose others in their places who were at their devotion:
and searched diligently after such great Officers who escaped their hands: and
all things there were then in so great confusion, that some strange alteration
of affairs among them was expected; so that although this might have been
enough to give a stop to the Turk's proceedings against the Venetians; yet the
new ones in power went on with their preparations against their interest in
Candia with more vigor than before; so that the Republique of Venice was fain
to send speedily away Prince Horatio Farnese, and other chief Commanders with
good numbers of men, and store of Ammunition for maintaining of what they held
in that Isle. The Turks also then coming together at Bagnaluch, making great
Magazines at Clivane, with eight great Artillery pieces, and 1000 yoaks of Oxen
to draw them for the besieging of Sebenico, they ordered Antonio Bernardo to go
with all speed into Dalmatia, as Commissary General, to assist the General Zeno.

But within two or three months after, those Tumults in Constantinople being
appeased, the Grand Seignior making a stately Cavalcate throughout the City, at
that time, gave order, for executing diverse of the Ringleaders in the said
disorders, for greater terror to the people in time to come: dispatching also
away a Courrier in all haste to the Bashaw of Damasco, requiring him speedily
to come away and take on him the slain grand Visier's Office; which great place
was conferred on him, although but 24 years of age, because of his great
abilities already shown in the places of his Government. Who about the month
of June, being fetched into Constantinople with great pomp and solemnities made
at his installing into the said Office; presently after, that Turkish Fleet was
recruited with men, money, and other necessaries; over which the Venetian Fleet
obtained a great and notable Victory, June 26, 1656, who having made one
months stay in the mouth of the Dardanelles, to wait for, and fight the enemy,
(seven Galleys of Malta arriving in the mean time) the Turk's Captain Bassa
appeared in sight of the Castles, his Fleet consisting of 28 great ships, 60
Galleys, 9 Galeasses, and other small Vessels. The Venetian Navy had 28 great
Ships, 24 Galleys, 7 Galeasses, (besides those of Malta aforesaid) commanded by
the Prior of Roccelia; who keeping in the narrowest part of the Channel, the
Turks could not come forth without accepting the offered battles. The Bassa (at
first) had raised two Batteries on Land on both sides the River, one on Natolia
side, the other on the side of Greece, as thinking to facilitate their own
going forth, by obliging the other to forsake their station: yet the Venetians
undauntedly resisting their shot, rendered that advantage of theirs
unprofitable: wherefore the Bassa (being expressly ordered to attempt going out)
on the 26th day in the morning, through a pleasant North Wind advanced all his
great Ships, who withdrew notwithstanding behind the Point of Barbiera; whither
the Bassa himself repaired with his Galleys: a few hours after, through a small
North-west wind, the Venetian Navy moving, Eleazar Moccenigo, now a Volunteer,
and commanding the left Wing, advancing and passing beyond the Turkish Fleet,
fought valiantly, endeavoring to hinder its retreat. The battle being begun,
Laurence Marcello the Venetian General, with him of Malta, intermingling with
the other Venetian Vessels, fell to it Pell-mell; so that the Turks being
hemmed in, and no place to escape, were forced to fight with the more
eagerness: but they were wholly routed by sword, fire, and water, the Captain
Bassa saving himself with only 14 Galleys; 40 Galleys were taken in the fight,
10 sunk and burnt; also 9 Mahones were taken; but the 28 great Ships were (for
the most) burnt. The number of the Turks slain could hardly be discovered: yet
5000 were judged to be killed; 4 or 5000 Christian slaves being released, and
4000 Turks made slaves. The Venetian's loss being their chief Captain Marcello,
300 Soldiers and Mariners; 3 Ships of theirs likewise were burnt, two in
fight, and one by an accident. After an extroardinary joy manifested by the
Duke and City of Venice, the Senate ordered for releasing of all prisoners for
debt; some of the Banditi being freed also: and Moccenigo, who had contributed
much to the gaining of the Victory, was the first that was Knighted by the
Senate, with a chain of gold of 2000 Crowns conferred on him; and then was
declared Generalissimo in the room of slain Marcello; in remembrance of whom, a
public service was ordered to be celebrated at the public charge.

About the months of July and August, the Emperor of Germany (whose Son, the
King of Hungary, assisted the Pole at the taking of Cracovia) was very strong
in forces, as if he intended some great design: the number of whose Regiments
of horse were 9550 men; of his foot 25300; and in the several places within his
Dominious which were Garrisoned, or to be made Garrisons, (to wit, in Bohemia,
Moravia, the Upper and Nether Silesia, and Hungary, there disposed in diverse
places, and upon the Turk's borders) were appointed to defend them, 19750 men:
who also about Sept. following sent 11 Regiments of Horse and foot out of his
Regiments, yet levying 10 new ones in his hereditary Countries in their stead;
44 Troops of the one, and 66 Companies of the other, under General Enkenford,
to aid the Spaniard in Millain of Italy, against the French and Duke of Modena;
resolving to set out a Manifesto concerning that design: The French having
lustily struggled against the Spaniards besieged by them, in the City of
Valentia, and the Duke of Modena preparing to meet the Empetour's forces with
great courage and resolution. A little before which, the said Emperor sending
an Express to demand of the King of France, the payment of three millions of
Crowns, which he was obliged to do by the Treaty of Munster, or else to
surrender up Brisac and all Alsatia, it occasioned the enemies of France to
raise rumors, that the Emperor intended to send an Army for recovery of
Alsatia.

About the same time, some Thieves in the Turkish Dominions set fire on the
Seraglio of Bosnia, 4000 houses, 4 Dovens of Custome-houses, and 3 Mosquees
being burned down to the ground, and the Jews quarter was plundered. And at the
City of Luca in Italy, one Pisani a Traitor was executed to death, for
attempting to kill all the Nobility, and change the Government of that little
Commonwealth.

But the Princes of the Empire were not well pleased with this so hasty
undertaking of the Emperor in Italy, and without demanding their advice in a
business so important, and prejudicial to the Empire; also so contrary to the
Treaty of Munster, and expressly mentioning, That the Dukes of Mantua and
Modena, shall be free to make War, the Emperor not to send any forces against
them, without the Princes Electours their consent: who were so far from that,
that they protested against this sending, as a manifest violation of that
Treaty of peace so solemnly sworn, and that which could have no other effect
than the troubling of Germany, and reviving of War: neither (it appears) were
(whatever the cause was) some of the Soldiers well pleased with their going;
for two Regiments at a general Muster of them, mutined and disbanded; although
some of them were therefore taken and hanged.

In the year 1655, September. 20, Pope Alexander the 7th (who had lately entered
into the Popedom, endeavored to bring about a general Peace among the Princes
addicted to him; writing Letters also to the Kings of France and Spain to that
end) wrote a Letter to all the Popish Clergy throughout Christendom, to stir
them up to use all means for procurement of a settlement of the said Peace.

But in Helvetia or Switzerland, (which Country being governed after a
Democratical form, is divided into 13 Cantons or Bailywicks, five of whom have
been esteemed wholly Papists, six wholly Protestants, and the other two mixed of
both: which division began about or in the year 1519, when Zuinglius, Minister
of Zurich or Tigurum, seconded Luther's beginning: which the rest of this
people not liking, moved War with them of Zurich, and the rest of the
Protestants, in which, Zuinglius himself was slain, (for it was the custom of
the place, for the Ministers to go in the Front of their Armies, and he also of
a bold spirit) and the Tigurines discomfited; yet in the year 1531, an absolute
Peace was concluded betwixt them: whereby notwithstanding the diversity of
Religion, they lived in unity the Protestant professors there, being first
offended, began ^o arm themselves against the Popish Cantons in 1655; for
besides the differences which the Capuchins there excited, and which every
where increased, diverse in the Popish Canton of Switz, as also some in Lucerne,
(who were called Nicodemites, because they at first secretly owned the
Protestant Articles of faith; yet afterward openly professed the same) were
imprisoned, (the Popish Cantons also solemnly swearing their religious alliance
against those in Lucerne) and by those of Switz very cruelly handled: some of
whom escaping out of the prisons, detested their cruelties and idolatry; which
confirmed the rest; the other yet in prison being also very constant in their
faith: one of the notablest young men named Sebastian Anna Mousnier, a prisoner
in the Town of Switz, escaping out at one of the Water-passages, as the Popish
were in the midst of their Bacchanalian revels, on the Sunday, after many
tortures and miseries undergone. The Nicodemites so called, coming out of Switz
into Zurick, made their profession very distinctly (about the beginning of
October there, 1655,) upon all the Articles of faith, and so laboring to
confirm them by Texts of Scripture. About the same time, those of Lucerne
released them that they had in prison; though upon what conditions was not then
known: yet those who were set at liberty, continued as firm and fervent as
ever: one was likewise laid hold on for reading the Bible.

Neither were the Papists themselves free from differences amongst each other;
for when the foresaid League was sworn against those at Lucerne, the swearers
chose one Charles Boromeo a Milanois, to be their Advocate and Patron,
publishing a Patent to that purpose, declaring the reasons of that their new
idolatry: at which, many of their Popish brethren were so offended, that they
entered into an oath and combination against that new Italian Patron, resolving
to adhere to the old. But the Popish Cantons (at first) arming themselves
insensibly, sought every way for friends and assistance; sending Deputies to
the Bishop of Basile, to procure him toswear their League against the
Protestants: Milain offering them men to the last, and Rome money; but the rest
of their friends would do but little.

About November following, the Zurickers had intelligence that some of the
Nicodemites were at Switz, to be executed to death, if the presence of the
Protestant Cantons Deputies did not hinder the same; wherefore they were
wonderously resolved to oppose that Fury: the mixed Canton of Appenzel, who were
then 5000 strong, and the Papists but 1500, resolving to turn out the Nuns,
which made the Monks to mourn, as to be deprived of their wonted visits. The
second Deputies being sent to Switz, had indeed a favorable Audience; But they
proposing restitution to be made of the goods of those departed from Switz, for
Religion sake, as it had been formerly done by the Protestant party, toward
all such as had relinquished the Protestant profession, whom they treated with
all civility when they were imprisoned on the like occasion: the Town of Switz
denied them, saying, They being in Sovereign State, had a right to proceed as
they judged meet against their Subjects; because those who deserted them were
perjured and Apostates, etc. and being legally cited, had refused to appear;
wherefore their goods were justly confiscated: and that with those whom they
had in prison for the same sault, they would proceed according to the nature of
their offenses. The Protestant Deputies being astonished hereat, after some
conference, propounded, that since they would not condescend in a friendly way,
they would refer the whole matter fordetermination, to the Law of all
Switzer-land: which they likewise peevishly and scornfully enough refusing, the
Deputies departed, but ill satified: and not only the other Protestant
Cantons, with no small regreat observed, but even 3 Popish ones did not approve
of the violence, wherewith the Switzers minds were possessed, and what
troubles they of Zurick endured from them, for above 2 years before, yet they
thought fit to own them in the quarrel of Religion: who then all armed apace,
and had done some affronts and injuries to the Protestant Cantons in a very
particular manner, (though their Magistrates offered Chastisement, seeming to
be displeased thereat) wherefore the Protestants putting themselves into a
posture, observed all their proceedings, and on the 14th of the said November,
appointed an Assembly to begin, to deliberate touching that great affair, and
also of the other grievances and oppressions. Also on of the 12th of this
month, most of the Deputies of the Cantons meeting at Baden, (diverse Papists
being absent, because of some Holidays by them observed) the French
Ambassador, De la Barde came thither from Saloturne, where, in a speech, he
earnestly exhorting them to union, afterward entertained them at a banquet.
But the Deputies of Zurick having declared their Complaints against Suitz: they
could get no other answer from them, but, that they were Sovereigns in their
own Country, and if they roasted their Subjects they needed not to give any
account of their Actions. The Zurickers replied, if ye give us not a better
answer, we shall be constrained to use such means as God has given us: So
offering to leave Baden, and go home to order their Army presently, to march
out of Zurick into the Field; but the other Protestant Deputies, and some also
of the more moderate Popish ones, prevailed with them to tarry: promising
their endeavor to draw Switz to some reason. Austria threatened the
Protestants; but their Neighbour-friends were very cold.

On the 16th day they had a hot dispute also at Baden: wherein, them of Switz
alleging the National peace formed in 1531; the Zurickers called for the
Records, and the instrument being distinctly read, one Waser a Burgomaster
largely declaring, Demonstrated that the Popish Cantons had never observed the
Principal Articles of that peace; but had since made all yances against them,
more accounting of those latter Covenants, than of their Ancient general
treaties: and that it deserved no better name then mere Conjuration, and sworn
Conspiracy against them: which they must no longer endure; Wherefore Zurick
standing to their first proposal, required the other Cantons to do justice
against Switz. About the same time (though all the Popish Cantons drew in one
string) (but some of the other Popish Deputies pretended an approving of
Zuricks demands, etc.) the Zurickers had intelligence, that Lucerne (which was
saved by Zurick from utter ruin in the last Rebellion) took notice of the
horrible slanders begun, to be spread concerning those of the Protestant
Religion; and had published an Edict, Commanding all their Subjects to abstain
from those slanders on pain of death, also they heard, that the Popish Deputies
offered to let all these Controversies be determined, by an equal number of
judges, of either Religion; but it was thought by some, to be but to gain time,
because the Protestants were a great deal more ready for the Field, then the
other thought they could be.

About January following, it was certified out of Switzer-Land into Engand,
that it clearly appeared, the Pope and his Emissaries to have been the
instruments of raising that quarrel among the Cantons: exasperating his
Catholics, to act such cruelties and injustice, as had dissolved the general
league of union that was between them: and promising supplies to carry on that
War, which was waging merely upon the account of Religion: wherefore the Popish
Cantons endeavored by Agents to estrange the scemingly neutral Cantons, from
the Potestants, and to draw them over to their own party: But the Protestants
being before them in preparations, and exceeding them in number, they intended
through the mountainousnesse of their Country, to stand on the defensive, so to
linger out time till spring, when as they expected help from their Popish
friends; but the Protestants were then beginning to March with a fair train of
Artillery, to provoke, or, if possible, to force the enemy to an open
engagement.

About the same time, was seen a declaration in England, of the judgment of the
Ministers of Cassel, the Court of the Lantgrave of Hesse, approving that work
of John Dury, a Scottish Mnister, who had renewed again his endeavors, for
procuring Concord among all of the reformed Religion, who had Cast off Romish
superstition: wherein among other things, they declared, that as manifold
experience had shown, all the Miseries of War, Perils of treachery, Dreadful
mischiefs, by Commotions of States and Kingdoms, do proceed from dissentions
and divisions in Religion as out of Pandora's box; so from religious and true
concord do spring all heavenly blessings, tranquillity, and all kind of
advantages: and that, although it had been openly maintained by some men, That
Agreement in Religion could not be pleasing to God; yet it was past all
question, That peace conjoined with truth, was most acceptable to God the
Author of both, etc. and as the wiser sort anciently held, That the best remedy
in case of Invasion by a common enemy, was to unite all parties, and take away
all enmities and divisions in the Commonwealth: Why then should it not be
thought the most advisable course to take the same care in Religious matters,
(seeing the common enemy, that is, the Pope, became more and more raging every
day) that all animosities and emulations being extinguished, and all
controversies and disputes about matters less necessary and weighty being
removed, a mutual Concord might be established by the common consent of all
Calvin and Lutheran Professors, as very little differing in the main things;
lest their dissentions should become their enemie's advantage, prejudice to
their friends, and open provocations of God's wrath: in order too which, and
the like, they showed, That whereas the resolution of the Estates of the Empire
convened at Franckfort in 1634, might serve to point out a way: a Conference at
Leipsick would be a means to give light in things of truth.

The Affairs of Switzerland being now in a very broken condition, the
Protestant Cantons had three days Assembly at Brugg, unanimously resolving
peremptorily to insist, at the next Diett to be held at Baden, on the right of
Alliance and agreement betwixt all the Cantons: and if reason were not done,
then to take the field immediately. Which they did; for in the very same
January, the Forces set out by Zurick, ( Werdmuller being their General)
marched abroad in several bodies, to the number of 10000 men: Werdmuller's
first booty was of the plunder of a very rich Cloister in Rynaw, a strong place
and passage which he took: then he took in Keyserstuel, a strong Pass upon the
Rhine: where some Zurickers were wounded: in the mean time, Ulrich the
Lieutenant General going into Turgow, took Fauchfield and its Castle, with the
Popish Bailiff and his Officers; but the people presently submitted. After
that, Werdmuller went toward Raperswill; which place being very well provided,
and the bridge so defended, he made some attempts to come near it, and the
enemies some salleys; yet both without effect. But departing thence to the
other side of the Lake, he took in the Island of Uffnaw, assaulting also the
very strong Castle of Pfesikan. Berne being likewise marching to divide toward
Lucerne, ( Geneva having sent them three good Companies of Soldiers) the
Cantons of Friburg and Soleure had endeavored by their Deputies to keep them
therefrom; but they came too late. Rappeswill being still besieged, and they
within shooting off many chained bullets, flints, and pieces of steel, wounding
and killing some Zurickers, they were mightily incensed: whose stout resolution
and courage was admired; who although the like cold weather had not been seen
in that Country for a long time, the horse and Ordance being scarce able to
pass: yet they would go on (to get as many places as they could) without
delay. At Zurick also came forth a Manifesto, concerning the Subject of that
War, whereby might be seen the great injustice, tyranny, and violence of the
Papists, and chiefly of the Canton of Switz.

In February following, Arnaud, one of the Sorbonne Doctors before mentioned,
was with his opinion, condemned and censured by the Molinists or Jesuits, and
numerous party of Monks, who had both writton and disputed in defense of the
Doctrine of Jansenus: (which matter had took up the observation and
expectations of the whole Kingdom of France concerning its event and issue) it
being put to the question, they damned his Propositions; the one as rash,
scandalous, and injurious to the Sea of Rome and the Bishops: the other, as
wicked, blasphemous and heretical: thereupon sentencing him to be rased out of
the number of Doctors, and degraded from all the functions and privileges of a
Doctor: and further concluding, That for the future, none should proceed
Doctor, who did not subscribe to the Censure. On the 13th of which February,
was the opening of the general Assembly of the Clergy of France.

The Protestants of Switzerland successfully proceeding in revenge of the
innocent blood of their massacred brethren, exceedingly strengthened
themselves. Some in that Country were Neutral, although Catholics; Basile
also being more inclined to peace than war, whose Ambassadors were then at
Berne: which Berners took Zug and beset it; so causing great perplexity in the
Switz, where, and in diverse places, diverse Popish families (apprehending the
Jesuits cruelty in egging them on, and pressing the Magistrate to hang, burn,
and quarter those that turn to the Protestant Religion) publicly professed
the same in the streets, and in great number daily flocked to the Protestants,
submitting to their protection. Zursach and Clognaw did now homage to the
Zurickers who had assured the Awe: those of Genff 6000 strong, joining to the
Berners; who were now 20000 strong, and expecting 3000 more to come unto them
out of Vaud. There being likewise at Bunthen 6000 Protestants ready to maintain
the Passes toward Tyroll and Italy. The Popish Canton Forces of Uri, Schaye,
and Underwalden, kept in a body, where they might have access at pleasure into
Rappeswill by the bridge: the besieged of which Town, very furiously sallying
out Jan. 16, with 1000 the choicest men as far as Warmspach Convent, were
chased in again by the Zurickers with great loss; Werdmuller raising the
spirits of his men by his valiant example: and Captain Eldibach, who kept
Warmspach, slaying a great number of them. Among them that were taken, were two
brothers, held as Goliahs among the Papists, and being the chief persecutors of
the Nicodemites: their father being one who passed sentence on a Widow, one of
them that were executed for Religion, (the Protestant Deputie's presence at
Switz, it seems, not saving them) and one to whom he owed a great sum of
money. Another of their most valiant Martial men who was shot and taken, dyed
about three days after, raging against the Zurick Army; who in that engagement
had but 10 men slain, and 40 wounded.

The Deputies of the Neuter Cantons having been at Zug, gave their judgment in
the Council of War belonging to the 4 Cantons, who resolved to make no
agreement, tarrying in Zurick, expecting their answer, that they might govern
themselves accordingly: the Deputies of the Protestant Cantons meeting at Araw,
to consult upon the whole; and the Papists at Mellinguen, who were not then
willing to meet with the Protestants. The Berners receiving a fall through the
imprudence of their Officers, took warning thereby, maintaining all places upon
the Lake very well, bestirring themselves also with a Galley upon it: But the
Soldiers of Ergow performing their duties very well, slew 500 of the enemies:
and the Zurickers before Rappenswill having now gotten near the Town on the
Land side, shooting Cannon at the wall toward the Starr, a great breach was
made, the day following made an assault, 50 getting into the Town; but the
enemy retrenching themselves on the other side of the breach, they were beaten
back, about 20 being killed, and 20 wounded.

At the same time, an Ambassador of Savoy having been at Araw, arrived at
Zurick; where he protested, That his Master the Duke would never take part with
the injustices of the Town of Switz; (yet himself could massacre his own
Subjects) saying also, That if the peace were not made, his Master would be
obliged to aid his Allies: the French Ambassador (who would willingly have
quickly seen an assembly of all the Cautons of Switzerland) saying just so.
Hereupon, there was a Truce betwixt the Cantons: which having been prolonged
for three days more than was at first appointed, was to end Febr. 20 after:
during which Truce, the Popish Cantons (about 3000) invading the Territory of
Zurick, there acted all manner of cruelties, by burning, Rapes, plunderings,
and slaying many both old and young: whereof General Wardmuller being
advertised, immediately crossing the Lake with some Troops, and charging them,
forced them to retire into the Territory of Switz and Zug, where they presently
falling to commit the like cruelties as before, Colonel Swyer (who commanded
the Popish forces) sent a Messenger to Wardmuller, desiring him to forbear;
pretending, what his men had done, was without his order: a thing hardly by the
Protestants to be believed.

Another relation of this matter (for by the time it appears to be one and the
same) is thus; Febr. 1. the Generals of the forces of Switz, Uri, Underwald,
and Zug, hearing there would be a Cessation of arms, (which begun the second of
February): as also the Conference of the Canton's Deputies at Baden, and
whither the Deputies of Zurick and Berne would not come, till the Papist and
Italian Garrison were thence removed; the French Ambassador mainly stirring to
find out some way of accommodation) resolved next day (being the same Febr. 2.)
to fall on the quarters of the Zurickers in five several places, picking out,
for that purpose, 4000 of their best men. The chiefest assault was made on the
side of Ritchtenschwild Orgen. The Zurickers forlorn guards stopped the
assaulters; but being overpowred by their number, they retired toward the body
of the Army, whither the other pursuing them, yet ran away at the first
discharge upon them; and in their retreat plundered some scattered houses in the
Mountains, burnt a small Village, carried away the Cattle, and practiced
several great cruelties upon the men, women, and children, cutting off their
noses and privy parts, and after killing them. Another assault was made on
Wadischwill side: the horse of Schaff. house, and some foot there in garrison
defending the place very well. A third was about Phirzel, nigh the river Sile:
whom Captain Lochman stoutly resisted; but they going about to shut him up, he
withdrew with his Cannon into a Wood: the enemy there plundring and burning
some houses, specially the Minister's. The fourth was about Cappel, where the
enemies were repulsed. The fifth was about the Cloister of Gnadenthall, which
was burnt down by the Zurickers. In all which, those of Zurich had the best,
losing but few men, in comparison of the assaulter's loss. The Zurickers
turned the siege of Rappeswill only into a blocking up, which was to be
maintained with some Regiments: in which Town, he that held Pavia against the
French the year before, (with many Spaniards) was.

But the Conference at Baden, and Cessation of Arms, ended in a peace; so that
in March following they began to disband forces, put the Counties of Turgow and
Baden again under the Government of the Cantons, and to restore prisoners: on
some of whom, the Papists had committed some unworthy actions: and on the 21 of
March, a day of fasting and prayer was kept in Zuricks Canton, for a blessing
on their State: their forces having been all kept in health and union, God
having abundantly supplied them with Victuals, and preserved them from so many
thousand shots before Rapperswill, where they lost but few, and few wounded,
notwithstanding their many skirmishes. The Zurickers having also but 150
wounded, and 100 slain in all that War.

Yet some Officers and Soldiers were not very well pleased at the news of the
peace; and the people would willingly have continued the War, to have
suppressed the Monks and Priests fury; but others thanked God for it, because
the Trade began to decay, and the Merchants to lose. But the Zurick Forces, in
all 19000, were in a posture to be up again at any time, and the Berners
resolved to have some foreign forces ready, that (with their own) they might
act more powerfully on all occasions; for all the Cantons were to meet March 22
at Baden, where the Mediators were to go about the settling of the Amnestie or
act of oblivion, and the deciding the grievances both Ecclesiastical,
Political, and Oeconomical, upon which great debates were expected, there being
above 200 Articles to be determined only about grievances in Religion: upon
which, the Monks and Priests ('it was thought) would hardly agree; so that the
Country might be set on fire again. But whereas some (through wrong
information) being much displeased, spread a report, That the two Protestant
Cantons of Zurick and Berne, had made a most disadvantagious peace with the
five Popish Cantons, not only prejudicial to themselves, but to all the
Protestants and their Cause; there was about the same time, a public Monition
there set forth for better information therein: declaring, That both the
obstinacy of the papists was much abated, and they willing to submit to the
Right, whereby all that was desired, might be determined without bloodshed: and
also, that the Pope was wroth against the Protestants, and generally the whole
Italian Clergy had their purses open for the Popish Cantons: that the Forces of
Italy, Naples, and Spain, were marching to their assistance, and to master
Switzerland: Also, that the Emperor had great forces on foot to trouble and
undo their Country; which considering the season of that last Winter, he might
have easily done. And that the Protestants were far from any assistance; which
though it might have been procured, yet would have come too late. By all which,
every one might judge how the Protestant Cantons were necessitated to accept of
that peace: which notwithstanding was not (said the Monition) quite decided,
but wanted something; and men might believe, the Protestant Cantons would not
relent, or abate any thing of redressment of their grievances, whether
Ecclesiastical or Political. After this, Jan. 30th, 1657, the Arbitrators of
the two common or mixed Bayliwicks of Basile and Appenzel, where both Religions
are professed, gave a deciding Sentence in sundry heads, both as touching
themselves, and also that the charges of the War between the other Cantons,
ought to be laid on that party who was the cause of it; which they judged to be
Switz. And as for taking of goods, burning of houses, barns, etc. by either
party, these (and other such things) should be buried in the Amnestie or
Oblivion.

In France, about the beginning of 1656, a little after the peace ratified
between that Kingdom and England, the Archbishop of Narbonne President of the
Clergie's Assembly there, went as Deputy, with some other Deputies, to the
Court; and not finding the King, (for he absented himself) they addressing
themselves to the Queen, desired among other things, that the Protestant's
public assembling-places, built by them since the last troubles and tumults
of Paris, might be demolished: Also, that they might not be put into Offices
and Employments, nor admitted to the governing of Cities and Provinces, nor to
Commands in Armies: desiring moreover, that the King would mind an establishing
of peace with Spain, rather than with England or Sweden. She answered, That the
King above all things desired and sought to maintain peace at home in his
Kingdom, and therefore expected that his Subjects of both Religions should live
in amity and union one with another; he intending the Protestants should enjoy
the exercise of their Religion in such places as had been allowed them: and
that he had no better or faithfuller Subjects and Servants than those. And as
to England, and other Allies of the Crown of France, the King had done, and
would do therein as he should judge most convenient, and would advise with his
Council touching such matters, in due season.

As to the King of Sweden's Affairs, there having been a Treaty between him and
the Hollandish Ambassadors; it was fully concluded and confirmed by
subscription at Elbing, Sept. 12, 1656, the City of Dantzick being so far
comprehended therein, that they were to agree with the King by themselves: they
not having then resolved touching the Neutrality upon the Articles that had
been propounded unto them.

In the same month and year, the City of Valentia in Italy was surrendered up
to the French, by the Spaniards: the Governor capitulating to have leave to
send to the Count of Fuensaldagne, That unless relief came within two days, he
must surrender: and no relief coming, he marched out thence on the 16th day,
with 800 horse and foot, six having Vizzards, that they might not be known, who
with their baggage and two Cannons, were conducted to Alexandria. The taking of
that City enabling the French to establish their Winter Quarters in the State
of Milan, to the great prejudice and indignation of the Spaniards.

A little before the same time, the Venetians took that considerable and
important Isle and Fort of Tenedos, about the mouth of the Dardanelles, from
the Turk; who not only vexing the Inhabitants of the Island with 26 Ordnance,
and 5 Morter-pieces; but also firing all their Munitions, and spoiling their
Wells, they surrendered; 800 men, and 300 women, Turks and Grecians, coming out
of it. The Turks being set ashore upon the Continent, and the Greeks remaining
in the Island: and through the fear and confusion which was then great among
the Turks, chiefly in Constantinople, they doubted not but soon to take the
Isle of Lemnos; besides diverse other places like to fall into their hands: the
Inhabitants of Scio sending Deputies at the same time to the Venetian Forces,
inviting them to draw near their Island, assuring them of an easy entrance
through the divisions of the Turkish Commanders there, who were by their
oppressions and cruelties become so insupportable to the Inhabitants, that they
always lay in hope of an opportunity of cutting the throats of their
oppressors.

But upon the retiring of the Swedish and Electoral Armies, the Poles getting
together, came on again in great numbers, cutting down what smaller Swedish
Troops they met with in the Country. And Aug. 24, 1656, Czarnecki meeting with
600 Swedish horse, and 300 Dragoons, cut them all down; they all dying manfully
in the field. This falling out after some overtures for peace had passed
between the two Kings. Neither were there those wanting (about that time) at
Vienna, who pressed the Emperor by all means to afford the Polish King that
assistance which he had so long demanded; but he would not then give ear
thereto.

The Muscovites who entered (as was said before) into Liefland with a great
Army, having layn some time before Dunenbourg, took it, and put all the Swedes
there in garrison (who were about 2000) to the sword. Thence encamping before
Riga, by a sally out of the City, he was repelled, and retired at some
distance; General Douglas being sent thither with ships and supplies. The
Muscovite, being in despair of taking Riga, caused him to carry away his
greatest guns the sooner; which the besieged perceiving, they sallyed out
October. 2d. about 5 in the morning, being 650 men, horse and foot: and falling
on a place called S. George, where the enemy was strongly entrenched, they
destroyed above 1000 of them; taking also 17 Colors, and some prisoners, among
whom was Col. Sencler, who through a shot received, dyed presently after. The
night following, he forsook S. George, and on the 5th of October, he quitted
the siege, leaving 17 Iron Ordnance, and 16 Lubish Gunpowder barrels (which he
buried under ground) behind him. And on the 17th of the same month, a Greek,
who was the Keeper of the great Duke's Wardrobe, coming over to those of Riga,
related, that his Master was mightily terrified by news brought him, That Field
Marshall Lowenhaupt the Swede did great mischief in Muscovie, having defeated
two Armies, and taken two Generals of his prisoners. There being also a Mutiny
in the City of Mosco, which forced both the Patriarch, and the great Duke's
Lady to flee thence, who were arrived at Polosko in White-Russia. And November.
5th following, there were solemn Thanksgivings at Stockholm, with discharging
all their great Guns, for joy of the Muscovite's quitting the siege of Riga,
and the Fortresses of Kakenhowen and Notembourg; of whose irruption into
Liefland there was then no farther appearance, than the visible remainders in
those desolations and spoils which they had made in the Country. The reason
likewise which induced the Muscovite to that hostile attempt against the
Swedes, was supposed to be this, because it was concluded in the Treaty made
between him and Poland, That the Polanders, after King Casimir's decease,
should freely choose, not only the son of the Muscovite; but himself also to
be next Successor to the Crown.

Before the middle of November. the Polish Army being in three Bodies, one body
of them consisting of 30000 Poles and Tartars, Scewsky being General, coming to
Prussia's borders near the City Leik, surprised the Electour of Brandenburgh
his Army under the Command of Count Waldek: the Tartars also crossing the
River, came behind them: there was indeed a sharp fight betwixt them; but the
Pole's forces being far greater in number, the Earl was forced to retreat as
far as Angerbourg, 1500 of his men being cut off, with the loss of six great
Guns, and all their baggage. Yet the King of Sweden nothing daunted herewith,
speedily collecting his Troops together, went and confirmed the rest of the
Brandenburgers, by uniting them to himself; which the enemy perceiving, durst
not come on to prosecute their success, but retreated into Podlachia. The
Electour himself being awakened by this great loss, (in which Prince Radzivil
was taken prisoner, M. G. Ritterhelm, Col. Rose, Col. Brunnel, with other chief
Officers, being slain,) called upon the Nobility of Prussia to arm for defense
of their Country: who turning their backs, said, They durst not bear arms
against the King of Poland.

But M. G. Golts at the same time (arriving at Tilse) fell upon the Samaytes,
standing in battalia two miles beyond, with very good success: who thinking at
first, that they were all well mounted and armed, encouraged his men to stand
to it: but when he perceived their subtilty, that they had no Muskets, but
long pieces of wood colored black, except a few who having Muskets, fired
immediately, he set on them so eagerly, that he got the Victory, slaying 1500
of them, and taking as many more prisoners, whereof was Crispin the General
himself, and 60 other noted ones, the rest being scattered and routed. Crispin
being brought to Tilse, was to be sent to Koningsberg.

The King of Denmark complaining of grievances from the Swedish King, (who had
concluded with the States of the Netherlands) having his Resident at the Hague
in the same October. 1656, obtained an answer of his business; which was, That
the States would not be wanting to recommend his Master's interest to the King
of Sweden, that he might receive satisfaction touching all the said grievances
of which he complained: and that they had written about the same to their
Ambassadors in Prussia.

The same year, before this time, even an unheard of mischievous invention to
destroy the lives of people, was practiced in the Lower Silesia; for some
buriers of people seeing they had but little work, plotted together, That one
of them should (by some fellowship with the evil one) learn to make a powder,
which he distributing, and they throwing in public assembling places, and
Fountains, caused great infection; so that at Krapis 2500 dyed thereby.
Whereupon the chiefest Families withdrawing into the Country; it afterward
chanced, that a hogg of one of the buriers getting out, ran to the Country
where the people was retired, where being shot, the said Burier becoming mad,
threatened all his men, that they should die very suddenly: who also told one
that lamented his lately dead Wife, that he wondered at him, so to lament, since
he was within a day to go the same way. The Magistrate being advised of all
those; this burier was apprehended, who upon the rack confessed his crime and
all his Accomplices, who according to desert, were put to death with great
tortures.

About the month November following: the Princes in Germany being jealous of
each other, every one of them levied Soldiers; for they all feared a new War,
which the French were like to make against the Empire; because there was no
satisfaction given at Franckford for breaking of the peace; for France
pretended, That the Empetour did contrary to the Peace made at Munster, in
sending Armies into Italy and the Netherlands; yet the Germans sent into Italy,
committing great insolences there, above what the French did, plundring many
Monasteries, and chiefly two, hard by Milane; burning down a Village, and
plundring the guards of the Milanois Governors; not sparing also the
Churchmen, but committing great violences on them, which forced many families
to leave their houses and goods, and to flee from that unlucky supply: the
affairs of that State could not be then in a worse condition. And then were the
Trained Bands, and some new levied Soldiers of the two Electours of Mentz and
Heydelburg in the fi^ld, marching one against another. Neither of the Princes
then yielding to other about the matter of the Customs; but it was believed
that some of their Neighbors would interpose.

But the King of Poland arrived Nov. 15. at the City of Dantzick, with his
Chancellor and Vice Chancellor, (being fetched in by 48 Companies of Citizens)
whose Army being 30000 strong, (12000 of whom were lusty fighting men) were to
be entrenched about that City; who soon felt the inconvenience of that numerous
Army, to their no small discontent, by reason of their plundring and stealing,
spoiling and ruinating all the Champion Country round about it, which was
expected to prove very chargeable to the Dantzickers, and breed great and many
inconveniences: they being likely to continue their Quarters under the Cannons
of their City, and King Casimir intending to stay there himself awhile:
Parties, in the mean time, of the Poles and Swedes every day meeting and
skirmishing. The Dutch Ambassadors having also conferred with the Poland King
at Dantzick, (for both they and the French Ambassadors were very serious and
diligent in mediating with him for an accommodation) pressed him so hard, that
they desired him to nominate a day to begin a Treaty of peace. Who answered, He
thought it needful first to know whether the Swedish King would admit of the
Emperor and Danish King to be Mediators; otherwise all would be to little
purpose. Next day, those Ambassadors addressing themselves to the Chancellonr
of Poland, he gave them the like answer, assuring them, They should find the
King and Estates very much inclined to an accommodation; but, he telling them
in conclusion, That before any Treaty began, it would be expected, the King of
Sweden should restore all places which he held in Prussia, in the same
condition as they were before (which was not to be so much as propounded to the
Swede) both the Ambassadour's endeavors, and the Pole's fair shows, vanished
in an instant.

The King of Poland being very earnest by his Ambassadors, for the Emperor of
Germany his assistance, had proposed the acceptance of the Polish Crown unto
him, (that is, after Casimir's decease) which, both the Emperor and his
Council, absolutely concluded to wave; they finding it then much more
convenient and conducible for the Empire, first to make sure of the Crown of
the Romans, and those hereditarily due unto the House of Austria, than to covet
after more foreign Crowns. And one of the gravest Imperial Counselors being
asked his advice also, what answer was to be returned, he is reported to have
answered, Quaerite primo Regnum Romanorum, et caetera adjicientur vobis; that
is, Seek ye first the Kingdom of the Romans, and others shall be added unto
you. Whose opinion all the rest did approve of, and agree unto.

On the 29 of October the same year, those of the Inquisition in Portugal burnt
four persons alive, who were accused and condemned of Judaism and Sodomie. And
November. 6. following, the King of Portugal departing this World, (through
obstruction of the Stone and gravel in his Kidneys) left his Queen, Regent of
the Kingdom, during the minority of her son Don Alsonso the first, who was
crowned the 15th of the same November. 1656.

November. 20th after, in a Treaty between the King of Sweden, and the Electour
of Brandenburg at Taplaw, a perpetual League and Confederacy was anew
transacted and agreed on: to which effect, the Earl of Slippenback, and
President Borenclaw departed from Koningsberg with the Instrument of that
League, to have it ratified by the King.

This year 1656, the Plague sorely afflicted Italy, so that not only at
Naples, but at Rome and Genoa it raged much: and at Benevento, in November. of
9000 people, there were not above 500 remaining.

But the Venetians after Tenedos, soon took Stalimene Island also from the
Turks: and having furnished the Fortress there, with all necessaries for
defense, their Proveditor General set sail with the Fleet toward Scio and Zia,
to refresh his men: about which time, the Turk cast away all thoughts of peace
with the Venetians, having wholly broken the Treaty that had been begun at
Constantinople by their Secretary Bellarini.

The King of Sweden (finding his Soldiers exceeding desirous to encounter with
the Polanders, before a greater Frost came, forcing them to take their Winter
quarters) toward the latter end of November breaking up from Hone, he crossed
the River with his Army, consisting of 16000 choice Soldiers: a little after
which, the Polonian Camp under Lubermiski was totally defeated before Cracovia,
which they had besieged; and the City relieved, which was brought to great
extremity.

About or in December. following, the once Polish Vice Chancellor Radziecouski
was brought (by the King of Sweden's command) a disgraced prisoner to
Marienburg Castle, upon the discovery of his treacherous carriages to the
Swedes: who (so soon as the rumor brake out, that the Swedish King had forced
War upon the King of Poland, under his pretense of a better Title, and nearer
Succession to the Crown of Swethland, and that the said King had passed with
all his Army in the Baltic Sea, landing in Pomerania) addressed himself unto
him, with great promise of his fidelity in all actions wherein he should be
employed: and having given at that very instant a great testimony of the
reality of his promises, when he had persuaded Posen and Calissen to accept of
Swedish protection, the King might in reason put no small trust and confidence
in him: he being a Counselor in all the principal Councels, and the chief
interpreter when the King's occasion required it. But it was then by his own
confession known; First, That he had been the only cause, why the Cossacks
(according to their offfers) did never appear with any reality in the Polish
War, and chiefly against the Muscovite. Secondly, That the Quartians and the
rest of the Polanders left the King of Sweden at his persuasion. Thirdly, That
he engaged himself to the Jesuits, that he would then have delivered the King
of Sweden into their hands. Fourthly, That he had an intimate correspondency
with the City of Dantzick, assuring them, that within a little time, he should
show himself a faithful Son of his Native Country. It was believed also, that
he had a design to betray Elbing and Hoft into King Casimir's hands. But then
it was hoped, their Affairs would take another face, and chiefly by the
approaching of Ragotzi Prince of Transylvania, at that time: as also the
constant desire that the Muscovite had for a peace with the Swedish King; for
which cause the King intended to send one Coyes with Instructions to make an
overture of the said peace. The said Radziecouski in or about June following,
1657, was imbarqued at Elbing to be transported into Sweden, there to be
imprisoned during his life.

A little after, the Chancellor of Poland had given the aforesaid answer to
the Dutch Ambassadors: the King of Poland and the City of Dantzick resolved,
that overtures of peace should be made with Sweden: whereupon, the French
Ambassador went instantly to the Swedish King, the Holland Ambassador being
to follow, the King being then at Marienburg to receive them, with their
Propositions from the Polish King: although it appears, that Negotiation was to
little or no purpose,

On May 18 following, 1657, the King of Sweden (whose Headquarters was at
Quavichest intended to go to the Hungarian Leaguer under Ragotsky Prince of
Transylvania, (who was now come to his assistance) upon the transaction and
agreement made touching the evacuation of the Garrison of Cracovia, which was
to be surrendered to the Hungarians: on the 16 day of which month, a Pole
escaping from Samoisci, brought Letters, that Marshal Wittenburg and the other
Swedish Lords there prisoners, were not transported from thence, as a rumor
was spread: he relating also, That there was then a great mutiny and dissension
among the Poles, diverse having torn their Standards in pieces, and run away,
yet the Polonish Generals kept the rest together, and were gone with them into
Lithuania. He likewise related, That Chmielniski, the Cossacks General, was
gone into Lithuania with great forces, taking diverse Towns by Arvisko, Arvilef,
and Bobrosko, and putting to the sword all the Muscovites and Lithuanian Gentry
therein.

But the Swedish Army being joined with Prince Ragotzi's Army, and passing the
River Bug into Lithuania, not far from Krzemein, and finding no forces of the
enemies, marched toward the strong City called Bizescie Litenky; who at his
approach summoning it with a sharp commination of total ruin upon not
surrendering, Zawicky the Governor answered, He intended to defend it to the
uttermost. The Earl of Waldek and Earl Jacob de la Gardie, drew near the Town
with some forces, and shot off two pieces of Canon, (the Swedish signal) which
passing into the Governor's Lodgings, he, terrified, and forgetting his former
resolution, next day humbly offered to parley, and yielded on composition: and
that, before the King and Ragotzi arrived there. So that, that strong and
important place was subdued without the loss of one man, and garrisoned by
Prince Ragotzi, to whom the King absolutely resigned the disposing thereof;
although the besieged wished to live always under the Swedish protection: most
of which Garrison having been in the service of the King of Sweden, the
Electour of Brandenburg, and Prince Radzvill, betaking themselves again to the
King's service: others Ragotzi got to his side, being raised by him: but the
Governor and some others, with some Artillery, were conducted to Stuzana.
After which, both Armies departed one from another, the King returning whence
he came; and the Prince crossing Bug, not far from Bizescie, where he a while
continued.

The Polonish and Lithuanian Armies under Lubermiski, Czarnecki, and Saphia,
till they were joined, were chased by the King of Sweden and the
Transylvanians; so that Czarnecki swimming over Weyssel with 10000 horse,
passed into great Poland, summoning up every where the Pospolite to make a
diversion into Pomerania; whereof 11 Colors appeared (June 10th) thereabouts
on the other side of Thorn bridge with usual bravadoes. The rest marching
toward Bizescie with 2000 Germans and Poles: but as soon as the King drew
night them, they fled in such haste toward Vohmien, that the pursuing parties
for 20 miles could not hear of them. In the mean time, the Poles entreating the
Muscovites for assistance out of Lithuania, they were flatly denied, with this
reproach, Thut the Poles had basely deceived the great Duke, by carrying the
Polonish Crown, which they offered to him, to Vienna; which affront they would
be revenged of: so that they must not expect help from them. Ragotzi marched
toward Samoise, whither Steinbock with 7000 Brandenburgian forces was drawing,
to visit the same strong Fortress, thereby to establish the Ragotzian line to
the very borders of Transylvania, and to stand firmly in Poland. But the King
keeping with him a body of 8000 men, intended to march into great Poland, to
scatter the forces brought thither by Czarneski, and to draw somewhat nearer to
Pomerania's borders, to join with Wrangle's 6000 men in Pomerania, in case the
Danes should do their worst: For in or about the same June, 1657, the King of
Denmark proclaiming War against Sweden, in Coppenhaguen, disparcht also a
Herald to Stockholm, to intimate there the War, or to the Swedish borders to
denounce it; setting forth also a large Declaration of the motives thereof;
Because the Swedes had by fraud and violence taken from him his Archbishopricks
of Bremen and Verden, and his Towns and Territories, plundring him of his
movables, and denying to give him any satisfaction herein; detaining likewise
from him, Irne and Zerne in Norway by force, and defrauding him several ways
of his Custom and Toll in the Ore Sound, and prejudicing him most highly in
his Prerogatives also, because the Swedes had taken away from him the whole
Trading by Sea, from Dantzick into Denmark: and instead of making reparation of
all those, the late appointed Treaty was broken off: the Danish King protesting
against the Calamities which that ensuing War might cause.

About the beginning of May, 1657, the Venetian Generalissimo Moccenigo, burned
10 Turkish Ships, and 14 Saiques, taking the Tribute of Rhodes to 200000
Crowns: yet losing 100 men, and 300 wounded; who afterward joining with the
Pope's Galleys, and those of Malta, they went again to the Dardanelles, to
hinder all Vessels carrying provision to Constantinople, and resolving to fight
the great Turkish Fleet, who intended to Rendezvous at Scio.

On the other hand, Monsieur Dureel, the Swedish Plenipotentiary, having used
all means to bring the Danish King to a fair accommodation with the Swedish,
and that proving vain, he left a Manifesto at Coppenhaguen, May 13, 1657,
containing a state of the differences betwixt them. The Swedish Plenipotentiary
protesting, That no occasion had been given on the Swedish side, to dissolve
and break off that Treaty.

War being thus begun in good earnest by the Danes, their Camp began to march
for the Archbishopric of Bremen, entering therein in June; in order to which,
they went to the Elbe, whose high waters, and tempestuous winds crossed their
transportation; yet some of their forces passing the Elbe above Hamborough,
through the Dominion of Linnenburg: in their going over, they gave the other
signs, burning pitched barrels; whereupon 3000 of the Danish Forces were
transported to the High-land, where they took a Fort, called the East-Sconce.

On the 9th day of the same June, the Swedish Camp in Liefland under Major
General Lowen; and the Muscovian Army under the Waywood of Pleskow, and the
General Szaremietow, had a great fight near the Town Walk; the Swedes having
the day, put four Companies of Dragoons to the sword which guarded some
passages. On the place of fighting, 1500 common Soldiers were slain, besides
many eminent ones: the rest being pursued: many of whom were knocked down by the
Peasants among the bushes: they took from them 4 Ensigns, 26 Cornets, 5 pair of
Kettle Drums, all their Artillery and baggage; Szaremietow the General was
taken prisoner, being wounded; also their Quartermaster General, with seven
eminent Boyars more from Pleskow, and many others. The remnant of the defeated
Muscovites rallying their forces about six miles from Adzell, Count Magnus
departed from Riga to the Swedish Army, (recruited with 800 brave Soldiers
sent from Prince Adolph out of Prussia, after the action) with full intent to
encounter them; who were before the 19th of the same again totally routed and
destroyed: upon which, those of the besieged Castle of Adzell despairing of
succor, blowing the same up, fled away; the which caused great perplexity
thereabouts, especially at Dorpt, which was said to expect no other but the
same destiny. Then also the Cossacks under Chmielnisky fell into Russia, making
great havoc there, taking all before them, without resistance.

But the Danes in Bremen having besieged Bremerford, the besiegers approaching
to the very Walls; and Stade being by them begirt, the King of Sweden made
toward them, coming July 10, to Stetin in Pomerania; and next day the Prince
Palatine of Sultzbach his Regiments of horse and foot being 5000 choice men,
passed over the River of Oder, to Stetin side. Upon the third day there being a
solemn Fast, with prayers throughout all that Land. On the 4th day many
Standards and Colors, both horse and Dragoons marched through that City; the
King's own Army of 10 or 12000 men, with a brave Train of Artillery, being to
follow after within few days: Which march and Expedition was only intended
against the King of Denmark.

About the same time, 12000 Polanders invaded that part of Hungary belonging to
Ragotzi Prince of Transylvania, burning down 36 Villages, giving quarter to
none. Then also (there having, at length, been an agreement of the Imperial
Court with Poland, upon six Articles) the Army appointed by the King of Hungary
and Bohemia marched for Silesia, and was advancing toward Cracovia. Three of
the Articles being, That betwixt the two Crowns, there should be an eternal
Friendship and Covenant, offensive and defensive. That the King of Hungary and
Bohemia should keep on foot for Poland 16000 men, (10000 foot, and 6000 horse)
and a sufficient Artillery: for which the Polish King was to provide
necessaries; provided, that the King of Hungary take from the Revenues of the
Polonian Salt-Mines 50000 Gilders; besides which, the King of Poland was to pay
that present month of June, 300000 Ducats in ready money: that, in that
Covenant, were comprehended the German and Spanish Houses of Austria, Denmark
Muscovia, and the Tartars; as also, all such Electorall Princes of the Empire
which were desirous to be received into it, chiefly Brandenburg, in case he
left the Swedish party.

A little after, the King of Sweden marched from Stetin in Pomerania with 10000
men against the Danish forces. And the Polonian and Austrian forces being
mustred, the former were 24000 strong, the latter 20000; a party whereof
marching against Prince Ragotski's Army, who having layn at Pintzaw, were now
advancing to the Town Opatawa: Prince Ragotski then seeming inclinable to
peace, sending an Ambassador to the King of Poland, soliciting for it; and
proffering, That upon conditions, he would quit Poland. The King answering, He
would send to the King of Hungary with all speed concerning it, to hear his
good intention therein.

About the same time, Bremerwerden in Bremen (after the decease of the chief
Commander) was surrendered to the Danes upon Articles. The Leaguer-Sconce, a
considerable place, being subdued by them also: The Dane lying likewise before
Borgh; and keeping Staden blockt up.

In the same month of July, 1657, Venice had bad news, to wit, That the Turks
having taken the Fort Bossina in Dalmatia, put 800 Christians to the sword. And
6000 Turks coming nigh to Spalatro, turned immediately to the passage of S.
Franchois, intending there to raise Forts: but Possidario sallying out, and
fighting a while stoutly, at last drove them quite away, with the loss of many
great Commanders: who in their retreat went to Salona, lying between Spalatro
and Clissa, where they were recruited with 6000 foot, and 4000 horse. But the
Turks under Ussaim Bassa's Command, having prepared for War a good while, came
on July 2d, in the night with storming Ladders, etc. pressing on the City of
Candia furiously to surprise it; but 500 of those in the City crying out,
Turks, Turks, the chains were thereupon drawn, and the Soldiers and Citizens
coming to a Body, fell on the Turks, and drove them out. Also issuing forth,
they disordering the Turks, put many of them to the sword; who left behind them
29 Ensigns, and 5 Cornets, which they had put up on the wall; 1400 Turks were
slain, and 2100 (with a great booty) taken.

There was also a fight toward the latter end of July, on the frontiers of
Schoneland, between the Danish forces and the Swedes, under the Command of
Horn, Douglas, and Gustave Oxienstern, raised to engage the Dane on the other
side next to Swethland: wherein the Danes had the worst.

But in Bremen, the Danish Army had almost no sooner possessed themselves of
diverse places there, but they began to be dispossessed again by the Swedes: for
the Swedish Armies coming on, made (in the very month of July) the Danish
forces to withdraw from Staden: time being then to show whether they would
quite forsake it, or keep it only blockt up: who sent then also a part of
their forces over the Elbe, to go into Holsatia: and the Swedish Field-Marshal
Wrangle (who Commanded in Bremen Dukedom) with his forces (only assisted with
one Regiment of Finlanders, whom he borrowed of the garrison of Staden)
recovered the two Forts of Butzflit and Swinga, putting most of the Danes
therein to the sword: whereby he encouraged, with all speed and care pursued
the other Danes in those parts, who were retreating in all haste to ship
themselves out of the Duchy of Bremen; and ov^rtaking them at the bank of the
River Oste, took most of them prisoners; but their Officers being gotten
aboard, set sail toward Gluckstad, leaving some of the smaller Vessels (which
should have transported the common sort) a prey to their enemy. But the Danes
then held Bremerwerden, and also a Fort seated at the mouth of the Weser: but
from the King of Sweden's coming thither, unto that time, the Danes had lost
2000 men. But at the King's entrance into Holstein, he pitched his Camp at
three several places, and finding the Danes did not stand, but still retreated,
he falling on the two Forts Krucker and Niestader, which protected those parts,
presently took them, killing and taking about 500, among whom was Col.
Benefield, a Germane. In the mean while, about 2000 Danish horse lightly armed,
and 800 Dragoons, who were quartered hard by, never came on, but retreated in
haste and disorder (before the Swedes coming) toward Gluckstad. While the King
of Sweden advanced toward Itzchow, most of the Danes horse galloped into
Jutland.

About the same time, the Emperor being deceased, there were differences in
Germany about the Vicariat or Vice-gerency of the Empire: which having been
transferred in the late Wars there, and since by the Pacification at Munster
settled on the House of Bavaria, that house pretended as if it were a
Prerogative inseparably annexed and belonging to their Electorate: when as the
Golden Bull, the fundamental Sanction of the Empire plainly confirmed it to
the House Palatine: which was invested and actually possessed with that
dignity, before ever there were Electours constituted in the Empire: and which
the Golden Bull of Charles the 5th did not bestow on the Electours Palatine, but
only farther ratified the same unto their House; soiemnly declaring to the
whole Empire and posterity, that it did belong unto them, by reason of their
Hereditary possession of the Principality or County Palatine of the Rhine.

Gestendorff Fort being likewise soon after taken from the Danes in Bremen,
that Dukedom was almost freed from them; so that in August, 1657, there was no
place (except Bremerwerden) which stood out against the Swedes. Wherefore
Wrangle leaving behind him a convenient force to secure that Country, and carry
on the reducement of Bremerwerden, he departed thence, to follow the King into
Holstein, where the Swedes had taken three Sconces from the Danes, and so got
into the Moorish Land of Holstein; which the Danes could not free from hostile
Invasions. Also, the King of Denmark arriving at Juiland, leavying forces for
the reinforcement of his Camp; and his Rix-Marshall Bille marching thither to
him with 2000 foot from Gluckstad, with other forces brought in from other
parts, his Army was looked on to be very considerable; and which, the Danish
Officers were then putting in a posture fit for battle: And they might expect
it, because the King of Sweden with the rest of his Army, advanced after the
Prince of Sulizbach, whom he had sent before toward Jutland with a strong
party.

About or in the same month of August, the Venetians obtained another signal
Victory against the Turkish Fleet, at the mouth of the Dardanelles, and that in
the sight of the great Turk himself, who was said to have come down thither to
see the fight. But that which sowred that great Success unto them, was the
loss of their General Moccenigo, who being in prosecution of the Victory, and
afterward endeavoring to return to the attaquing of the Isle of Scio, a tire
of great guns being discharged from the Castles of the Dardanelles; one of them
lighted into the Magazine of powder in his own Galley, and blew him (with many
more Nobles) up into the Air.

On the 9th of September following, Rosenwing, Envoy from the King of Denmark,
arrived at Amsterdam: whose business was to solicit the States for assistance
both by men and money: he relating also, That his King was assuredly with his
Army resolving to bid the Swedes battle; but he intended not to engage, till
the Poles should make their promised Invasion into Pomerania to divert the
Swedish forces.

About the beginning of July before, 1657, one Colonel Doyley Governor in
Jamaica Island for the English, wrote into England, concerning the good
condition the English were then in.

But there having been a difference risen in Germany between the City of
Munster and their Bishop: the Bishop besieged that City, (500 Soldiers of the
forces levied by the Ecclesiastical Electours, going to help their fellow
Bishop in that siege; and the Duke of Bavaria had sent thither 4000 men) but
(the Citizens continuing courageous, and resolving to abide the utmost
extremities, rather than to submit to such conditions as their Bishop would
have imposed upon them) it proved a very difficult siege; for the besieged
sallying forth notably, more than once, they slew a great number of the
Peasants which came thither to do service. They also finding their Governor to
be one holding correspondence with the enemy, brought him to Trial, and put
him to death; hanging and quartering four persons more upon the same account,
who had undertaken to set diverse of the chief streets of the City on fire. At
length by help of the States General of the United Provinces, (whose forces
were advancing toward the relief and vindication of the besieged Citizens) the
Bishop no sooner heard the news of the said forces advance, but he presently
began to give ear to the Citizens just demands, permitting unto them their
ancient Privileges, rights and immunities. Whereupon they immediately suffered
him to enter into Munster very honorably: the Garrison being disposed under
Genesis Remona's Command, he took an Oath of fidelity to the City; (for by a sure
agreement with the Bishop, the Garrison was wholly at the Citie's devotion).
The Bishop lost 1500 men during the siege; the Citizens not above 30, and about
200 wounded. This was in October. 1657. After which, the States General's forces
retired into their Garrisons from whence they came.

But the King of Sweden passing out of the Dukedom of Holstein, into Jutland,
(taking upon the way those that were willing into his protection, and dealing
with others as he saw meet) there was great perplexity among the Danes, because
of his so soon coming thither, and arriving at Alborgh, which is but 12 or 14
leagues on the other side of the Sea from Gottenburgh in Sweden; this was in
August; about which time, a Danish Major General having cast up a Sconce three
leagues from the said Gottenburgh on an Island called Tiurholmen, fortifying
the same with some Guns, and inferior Officers and Soldiers: the Earl Douglas
just then being coming thither, 400 of his Soldiers so saluted them, that they
presently left the same, leaving behind them a great quantity of provision.
Douglas advancing to Wennersborg, gathered his Troops together, intending to
continue his Expedition in Norway; but he was stayed therefrom by a Letter
from Viceroy Brahe, (out of Schonen) then Generalissimo by Land and Sea, that
he should transport himself into Prussia, to assist Duke Adolph, and command
the Army left there.

The Danes (the while) reinforcing themselves in Schonen, Victuals there
growing scant, the Viceroy with his 5000 men was constrained to retire to
Helmstadt: the Danes passing safely through the Wood Hallansoos into Laholm,
gave out, that they were 8 or 9000 men: wherefore Douglas received another
Order from Brahe, to take 1800 horse, and Col. Swynehead's foot, and to march
thither; Steinbock also having a few days before come out of Prussia to
encounter and endeavor to force them back into their own Country. But they
having assaulted Laholm Castle in Halland, and being thrice repulsed with the
loss of 500 men, retreated again into their Country Schoneland, because they
heard Earl Douglas was to join with the Swedish Army there.

Czarneski with his flying Army going into Pomerania, the King of Sweden was
thereby called away out of Jutland in haste; so that the Ambassadors of the
States General of the United Provinces going (after a sumptuous entertainment
by the Duke of Holstein in the Castle of Gottorf) Sept. 13. toward Flensbourg,
to meet with him,; he was gone ere they were aware: (the King of Denmark
arriving about the same time, from Jutland, at Coppenhaguen, having left
Fredericks-Ode and Fuenen in a good posture of defense) but the Swedish King
left his affairs in Jutland to be carried on by Wrangle; who commanding his
forces there, kept Fredericks-Ode still blockt up by Land: out of which, the
Danes having made several salleys; on Sept. 20th, they made two notable ones
with two whole Regiments; but they being repulsed by the Swedes, they pursued
them till they came under the Canon of the place, killing many, and taking
diverse prisoners. But the King of Sweden having sent Wrangle a Recruit of Foot
under Colonel Fersens Command (with an Order to try if possible he might carry
that Famous and strong Town and Fortress of Fredericks-Ode, situated on the
water toward the Sound) of 5000 men, thereby to overthrow the Danes design,
as also to consider which way he might successfully prosecute their expedition
into the Isle Fuenen, or give the Enemy a blow somewhere else; He, on October
23, (having first caused diverse experienced Corporalls, by night to crawle upon
their hands and feet, observing with all diligence, all particulars needful to
be known about the said place) calling a Council of War, and propounding the
Kings intention, after many discourses of pro and con, they generally Resolved
to make onset upon it (the Danes then not dreaming of such a thing) in 3
several places at once in the morning before break of day: which they doing,
and all the Officers and Soldiers behaving themselves with singular Courage,
it was in a short time, by that one assault (although the Danes disputed one
Bullwark after another with stout opposition, and making the greatest
resistance on those who gave the Onset on the Gate, in their Posts toward it)
reduced to the Swedish King's obedience, with the Garrison, 6 Lieut. Colonels,
8 Majors, 26 Captains, 27 Lievtenants, 26 Ensigns, 2 Engineers, 56 inferior
Officers, 13 Constables, etc. being killed and taken; above 2000 common
Soldiers were also taken prisoners, besides those that escaped into the Boggs;
and 1100 of the inferior Officers and common Soldiers slain; 33 Colors, with
6 Standards of Dragoons, being likewise taken. The Swedes had killed in the
action, 1 Adjutant Genesis 1 Capt. of horse, 1 Corporal, 19 Troopers: and of the
foot, 1 Lieut. Col. 4 Capt. 1 Lieutenant, 2 inferior Officers, 44 common
Soldiers, with a great many wounded. Rix Marshall Bille the Dane carried
himself so valiantly in that assault, that he had diverse wounds in his head;
but seeing all to be lost, he retreated with the Lord Hocke, a Danish Privy
Counselor, into the little Sconce, whither also most of the Officers were
gone, hoping to get over the water to Fuenen; but the contrary wind blowing
hard, he was forced to yield himself up like the rest, at discretion.

After this, the King of Sweden thinking it expedient and needful to undertake
a design suitable to the present Necessities, calling his chief Officers to
Kiel to confer with them there; himself departing from Wismar in Pomerania,
Jan. 5. 1657, arriving at Kiel on the 9th day: the result of whose serious
deliberation with Wrangle the Rix Admiral, and others, was, That a trial
should be made to get over into the Island of Fuenen one way or other, whether
the Frost held or not. Wherefore the frost holding, he sent the Admiral to
Fredericks-Ode, to order those Regiments in Jutland to draw together thither on
the 26 day: After the sending some to view the Ice beyond Fredericks Ode, and
nigh Fuenen, and over against the Island of Brosoe, (where the Swedish set
foot, for the better performance of their design) whose horses of the third
party sent, (the Ice breaking) were drowned, they with much ado saving their
lives: and after the King's ordering both Wings, and all things accordingly,
after some disputes, (this dysaster also happening unto the Swedes, that the
two Regiments of Waldek and Koningsmark sanck into the Ice; so that Col.
Boreman came to no action: and two Companies of Waldek's Regiment were drowned,
with some Troopers of Koningsmark and Boreman) the Danes were totally routed
and put to flight, Col. Jens, a valiant and experienced Soldier, desiring
quarter of the Rix-Admiral; those that were not put to the sword, being
immediately taken prisoners: only some few retreating upon the Ice, (some of
whom were drowned) (and of all the Danes forces not 200 escaping) were pursued
at the heels by some commanded forces. Whereupon M. G. Berendts was commanded
toward Langland and Swineburg to encounter 500 horse, who were to come from
thence to assist Col. Jens; and Col. Ashenberg had order to go to Middlefort to
beat up Col. Bilde with his 600 horse, but he was retreated before to Odensea.
Jens confessed, That the Dane's forces consisted in all of 3000 horse, besides
700 Germans, and 1500 Landforces, whereof all the Superior Officers (except
one Capt. Rumor, who was killed in the beginning) were taken prisoners: and
among these chief and public Officers, were five Senators; as also L. G.
Guldenlew, who all had fled to Odensea: there were likewise taken in diverse
places, about 60 pieces of Ordnance, with a great quantity of ammunition, and a
Magazine well furnished: and when the King of Sweden had sent the Rix Admiral
to Newburg, to seize on four Danish Men of War there, (a great number of small
Vessels and Boats being likewise seized on) he presently came unto Odensea.
This Island was taken Jan. 30. 1657.

But in or about October before, the Venetians lost again the Isle of Tenedos
to the Turks, though not without ruin to the Conqueror. The Venetian Fleet
being gone from the said Island to take in fresh water; the Turk's Fleet took
opportunity to land there a great body of men, who presently setting upon the
Fort of Tenedos by storm, were in the first attempt repulsed; but they
prepaparing for a new Onset, and being numerous, the Venetian Garrison working
a Mine under the Fort, disposed their powder therein with a match fitted to it,
and then quitting the place, the Turks taking possession thereof, were (Fort
and all) blown up into the Air. The Venetian Fleet returning, and perceiving
what had happened, and the Turks Freet being at hand, they prepared for an
encounter; which being performed resolutely on both sides, (for the Grand
Vizier encouraged the Turks, he having come purposely from Constantinople, to
see that Island regained, whose possession is of so great concernment to the
Commerce of that City) in the conclusion, the Venetians got a new notable
Victory, sinking 16 of the Turk's Men of War, with four that came from Tripoli
to serve the Grand Seignior; taking also four of their Galleys.

About the same time, 1500 Danes made an Incursion into Bremerwerden, hoping
thereby to have relieved Bremerwerden; but the Swedes resolutely playing their
parts thereabouts, made good the siege, rendering all the Danes enterprise
fruitless, both touching Bremerwerden, and other places in that Country.
Eggerick the Governor of Bremerwerden keeping in very close, after the attempt
made upon the Behlemer Sconce; from whence they were repelled by the Swedish
Garrison, with great loss.

But while the King of Sweden was thus struggling with the Dane, most inhumane
cruelties and persecutions were acted by the Papists and their party in Poland,
against the Protestants: The first City which they set upon being Lesna,
whither many Protestants had come for shelter; there being three Congregations
of them, to wit, the Polonian, Bohemian, and German. They intended to have put
all to the sword therein; but the Citizens having notice of their coming, left
the City and all their wealth behind them, fleeing through Woods and boggs into
Silesia. The enemy entering the City, found none but aged and bedridden persons,
whom they barbarously slew, and after plundring the City, burned it to ashes.
In other places also they cruelly murdered diverse Ministers, and people of all
ages and sexes.

Before the taking of Fuenen, the Swedish King being in Pomerania, he was
intent upon making new leavies to oppose the proceedings of the Poles under
Czarneski, who had then removed the War out of Poland, to their doors; for 4000
Poland Troopers fording the River Oder, and plundring Dowen, not far from
Stettin, set it on fire. Part of the forces in Holstein being also sent for by
the King to oppose the Polanders.

The King of Poland having had a Treaty with the Electour of Brandenburg, it
was brought to an issue; which was, That he could be no further prevailed with
by the King, than to stand Neutral betwixt the Poles and Swedes.

About the month of December, an Ambassador coming to Constantinople, from
the King of Persia, with a gallant Train, he presently went to his audience;
and at the making of his Proposition, he drew out his Shabel, saying, That in
case the Grand Seignior would not restore the lesser Babylon, and make
satisfaction for the Merchants goods which the Turks robbed, and the captivated
Persians, which (during the Treaty of peace) were carried away into slavery by
his Subjects; then in his King's Name he declared War. There was no answer
followed hereupon, but both the Ambassador and the chiefest of his Train being
cast into prison; his head was presently after severed from his body. So that
the Turks being sure of War with the Persians, there was to be but one Camp set
out with the Turk's great Ensign, against the Venetian Republique: The great
Prince being to stay at home to supply recruits, and to have a watchful eye
upon the Mascovites, who then spoke in Thunder to the Turkish Monarchy by their
warlique threatenings. Before which time, the son of the Grand Vizier being
enraged at the death of his father, swear, He would be revenged on the grand
Signior himself, and all that counseled him to put his Father to death.
Wherefore he rising up in rebellion, and making no small disturbance, some
advised, that he might be endeavored to be appeased by favorable promotions;
but others liked not that, because of giving encouragement to others in the
like case.

But the Jesuits who had been expelled from the City and Territories of Venice
the space of 50 years, were readmitted again by the Senate's authority, upon
the Pope's solicitation; for which he thanked them by his Nuntio.

The Poles having taken the City of Conitz from the Swedes, the King of Sweden
about this time retook it again.

In the month of January, the English surprised 600 Spaniards in Jamaica
Island, who had hid themselves among the Thickets and bushes, some whereof were
slain, some taken prisoners; and some other Spaniards fleeing away in a small
Vessel toward Cuba.

About February, Wrangle was appointed Protector of the Dukedom of Bremen.

And about the month of April, the King of Spain bent his mind above all other
affairs, upon the attaquing of Portugal, which he intended to set upon with an
Army in four Bodies. And to this end, the Nobility were preparing to attend
him. The grand Standard which used to be kept in the City of Soria, being
brought forth for that Expedition: which was principally undertaken, upon a
supposal (their King being deceased) of discontents and divisions in Portugal.

But Count Magnus de la Gardie (who governed the Province of Liefland for the
King of Sweden) being desirous to revenge the invasion which the Muscovites had
made the year before into that Country, caused 3000 men to be drawn out of the
Army there; and entering into the Muscovite's Country, laid near 100 Villages in
ashes, put 2000 men to the sword, took Besur, a place betwixt Dorpt and
Plotzko, which was the place of the Magazine for Arms and Ammunition, and set
fire on the Town. Whereupon the Muscovites being provoked, a body of them
pursued the Swedish as they were returning with their booty, which being
reinforced by an addition of 2000 Germans, it came to an Encounter; but the
Swedes being strengthened by some forces, sent them by the Governor of Revell,
got the better, forcing the enemy to retire in disorder, leaving 600 men dead
on the place, and 400 taken prisoners. With the loss of one Colonel, and about
60 horse to the Swedes. This fell out in April, 1657. About which time, the
mouth of Mount Aetna in Sicilie (now called Mungibal) foamed up an unheard of,
and most stupendous quantity of fire, covering the Island with ashes.

But that which in October. 1657, made things run to an extremity in Portugal,
was the excessive Demands of the States General of the United Provinces, by
their Commissioners, from that Kingdom: who in their Treaty at Lisbone,
(demanding possession of the Realm of Angola, and the Isle of S. Thomas; also
free Commerce in and with Brasile; some millions of money, and 13000 Chests of
Sugar, to be delivered in Amsterdam at the King of Portugal's charge) set an
end to all hope of any good by treating: For those particulars being denied
them, a War was begun with Portugal, the Dutch Fleet then lying thereabout to
watch for their Brasile Fleet: whose Commissioners returned to make report unto
their Superiors.

But Czarneski with 8000 Polish horse entering in the same October into
Pomerania, wasted that part of it which belonged to the Swede; and advancing as
far as betwixt Stetin and Anklam, they dealt most barbarously with the
Inhabitants: yea they came to Anklam it self, where they burnt the Horse-Mills,
(also a second time before Stettin, consuming and burning down all to the
ground thereabouts) and had not the overflowing of the River Pein hindered, they
would have made a farther spoil and progress; whereupon they returned back
again into the Marck: and the King of Sweden being then thereabouts, collecting
his forces to oppose them; (his men being mightily encouraged by the unexpected
news of the taking Fredericks Ode) they hearing the King was drawing an Army
together, went back again over the Oder. Czarneski afterward returning into
Poland.

About November, the Portugal Forces having rendezvouzed at Elvas, not only
passed the River of Guadiana; but coming before Moron, after four days siege,
constrained the Governor to surrender it upon Capitulation: which news moved
the King of Spain, in regard it was provided with all necessaries for a long
siege, and might have held out, till relief had been brought by the Duke of San
Germano, the Spanish General.

But at Constantinople all means was used to intercede for the Cossacks, that
they might be reconciled to the Crown of Poland; where likewise warlique
preparations both for Sea and Land were then eagerly followed. Then were the
Persians also stirring against the Turks; whose Landforces were to act against
them; (if they could not either make a cessation of arms with them, or find out
some other way for accommodation, which they desired) wherefore they then
blockt up Lemnos, which being reduced, their Landforces might be employed
either against the Persians, or some other parts. But the Venetian Commander in
Lemnos stoutly behaving himself, repulsed the Turks in 15 assaults: yet the
Turks at last taking the said Island of Stalimene or Lemnos, sent thither a
Garrison of 10000 men.

A little after which, the Austrian Court at Vienna resolved to proclaim the
King of Sweden for an open enemy, and to publish open war against him.

Philip the 4th King of Spain being aged, and almost beyond expectation, having
a young Prince, his Son and Heir, born unto him in November, 1657, Bonefires
were caused to be made throughout all the Spanish Dominions: all Officers being
to perform that solemnity in the most magnificent manner.

But the Poles continuing their Leaguer before Riga, the Governor Helmfield,
Jan. 12. 1657, assaulted the besieger's well fortified Leaguer with about 6000
men on the other side of the Duna; and successfully scaling it, he took 20
Colors, with all the Artillery and baggage, and 200 prisoners; among whom were
many Polish Lords, and persons of note; Col. Wigand their Commander was slain,
with diverse other Colonels, and 1800 common Soldiers also killed on the place.
The Conquerours finding such store of provisions and victuals there, that the
Inhabitants of the City were two days in carrying of it away; so that the
Pole's Leaguer was wholly ruined, and those of Riga set free again.

In or about February after, the Austrians and Poles going up further into the
Country of Prussia, committed great outrages and insolences in the Bishopric
of Ermland. They seized on Newark by treachery of a Popish Burgomaster; and
afterward the Castle Brazian. But those of Thoren having a design, sallyed out
upon the Poles, killing many, and taking a number of prisoners, with 4
fieldpieces, and much Ammunition.

A little before which time, all the people of Naples being discontented, as
not liking the Spanish Government, 8000 Bandits were on foot in that Kingdom,
their Leaders being of great Families: so that, the Tower of Annunciado was
said to be taken, and three garrisons put to the sword. But the Viceroy took
two Bishops which were among the Bandits, as also a man disguised in woman's
clothes, who privately carrying a Poniard to stab the said Viceroy, intended
thereupon to have raised a Tumult. And these Bandits continuing their
rebellion, one Capt. Martelli about Jan. meeting with a party of them, pursued
and took 20 of them, cutting off their heads; the rest taking Sanctuary in a
house at Pazano, long defended themselves: but at length they being constrained
to yield, were sent prisoners to Baia Castle. After which, the Viceroy sent a
Body of forces toward Salerne and La Poville, to endeavor the hindering of the
said Bandits from increasing their Troops that way; for they were grown very
insolent and audacious, being encouraged by hopes of succor the next Spring
out of France.

But the Swedes having taken not only Fuenen, but Langland, Laland, Phalster,
and Zealand, from the Danes; insomuch, that their forces were every where
defeated and reduced under the Swedish power; the two Kings came unto a Treaty
of Peace; in which, English Agents (the Danish King having accepted of the
Protectour's mediation) and French, with some Plenipotentiaries of the Danish
Rix-Senatours, (all others being excluded) were to mediate. But the Danish King
being reduced to a desperate condition, the agreement was made by the mediation
of an English Envoy, whom the said King prevailed with to interpose: the King
of Sweden giving but 24 hours parley; and it was done, upon very advantageous
conditions on the Swedish King's side; as also somewhat for his Father in law,
the Duke of Holstein. This Peace was concluded betwixt them, on Febr. 27. 1657.

On Febr. 20th, there began a Polish Convocation in Warsovia, where many
Senators appeared. A main Proposition there made, being concerning a Treaty of
Peace with Sweden; which if it could not be obtained, then means was to be
resolved on for pursuance of the War, and to make a League with the United
Netherland Provinces; and an agreement with the Cossacks, for a cessation of
Arms. The Senators then took an Oath, not to reveal any of their Consultations.
The Gentry likewise complained much against the quartering of the Austrian
forces, and the maintaining of their own Soldiers: for whom moneys were to be
raised. There was also another Proposition concerning the toleration of the
Protestant Religion; which the Gentry admitted, (though the Clergy accepted not
of it) declaring, That the Augustine and Reformed Religion should be tolerated,
but not the Socinian. They also resolved against the Clergies Protestation,
which would have no peace with Sweden, accepting of the French mediation
therein. Then also the Commander of the Austrian forces defiring an Oath of
fidelity to be made to him in the King of Hungary's name, in the City of
Cracow, the States of Poland were much offended.

There was likewise about this time, a meeting of the Clergy in Flunders, to
raise money for the King of Spain: The Bishop exhorting them, said, There was
great necessity, that a sum should be yearly raised to prosecute the War
against the English and French; alleging, that the Enemies aimed chiefly at
the Clergie's revenues; they being then upon the hazard of losing all: all
which might be prevented. Their Assembly brake up diverse times: at whose first
meeting, many of them declared, they being poor, had nothing to give; which
being known to the contrary, they afterward contributed, and subscribed large
sums.

But something not altogether inconsiderable, comes to be related out of the
East Indies, the state of the great Mogol; who there deceasing, in 1657, the
Indians lost such a precious treasure in him that was so wise and fortunate,
that they despaired of ever seeing a Successor to his Virtues; yet he lived to
the age of 73 years: who leaving behind him four sons, (and being by every one
a grandfather) they were all somewhat equally balanced in power, (by a
division of that vaste Empire, into a kind of Tetrarchy) being only subord
inate to their father while he lived: Neither could the right of primogeniture
extend the eldest his Dominions any farther, than by the sword, which was then
like to be the Arbitrator: so that whatever was done by the three Elder
brothers, the distance of the place, and difficulty of passage had then denied
intelligence to those of Surrat: but Morat Bux, the younger, having crowned
himself king of Guzarat, his Seat being at Abmadwad, (a great City 100 miles
from Surrat) sent in October, or about the beginning of November. 1657, an Army
under an Eunuch's command to reduce Surrat Castle, it being of very
considerable strength, and commanding the best Port of his Dominions, besides a
treasure of above 200000 l. sterling therein; but the Governor refusing to
deliver it to any but Dorroskokore the Eldest, who was King of Delly, the
Eunuch close besieging the same, and working three Mines under the brink of the
Meat, he sprang one of them, December. 20, blowing up 60 yards of the outward
wall; which although it would have little advantaged him, (had the Soldiers
continued resolute) yet the frights of danger, and promised indemnity, made
them constrain the said Governor to surrender it, December. the 4th after,
(though on honorable terms, and after much loss to the besiegers) That
division having almost put an end to the Trade of Surrat.

About the latter end of 1657, the Muscovites remaining about Jemma, which they
had besieged from the middle of Febr. before, with between 5 and 6000 men; M.
G. Horn, Governor of Ingermanland, approaching with but 800 men, and four
pieces of Cannon, took from them the Fort of Kakelwerck, putting 100 Muscovites
to the sword therein: whereupon, the main body drawing off from before Jemma,
he had opportunity to put Ammunition, Victuals, and fresh men into that Town,
without any opposition of the enemy.

The Cossacks and Tartars about the same time made an agreement. Peace also
between the Houses of Ottoman and Austria was confirmed: and it was hoped the
Cossacks and Poland would agree also. And likewise that a Peace would be made
between Poland and Sweden: For the Treaty in order to a composure went on in
April, 1658, betwixt their Commissioners; the success of a fair conclusion
being very probable: which thing not a little alarmed the great Duke of
Muscovy, who was very active to prosecute his design, fearing those two Kings
reconciliation might prove prejudicial to him; who sent an Express to the
Polish King, to demand an execution of the Treaty heretofore made at Vilna
betwixt them, particularly that point respecting the Muscovite's eldest son's
succession to the Crown of Poland: whereby the Polish king apprehending, that
the Muscovite did but seek a pretext for War, he therefore ordered one part of
his forces to observe the motion of the Muscovites.

But Czarneski, (who was then made Cracovian Palatine in the room of Miskowsky
deceased) was to have his Rendezvous Apr. 20, at Meyeritz it great Poland with
10000 men, with whom the Austrian forces joining, they were to march jointly
into Pomerania, if Sweden and Poland did not agree.

On the 19th day of which month, the Duchess of Newburgh was delivered of a
young Prince, which made the Court rejoice.

Two or three months before this, ^he Turks were more enraged against
Christians in the City of Jerusalem, than formerly, demanding of them and their
Merchants double Custom; threatening to turn them out, and lead them Captive,
if they would not pay, and not suffering any Christians to come thither; which
perplexed the poor Christians there very much; the Guardian having desired 20
months time to send the religious people into Christendom to gather Alms.

But in the same month of April, 1658, 800 foot Soldiers out of Polonish
Regiments passing over the River Weyssel about Dirshaw, with intent to take
post in a Sconce not far from the Village Lissaw, and so to invade the great
Werder: Prince Adolph summoning all the horse and foot to be had in Elbing and
Hooft, would forthwith have encountered them: But the Bridge being somewhat
damnified by the high water, he was hindered; so that the enemy had time to
fortify themselves with some Palisadoes: but as soon as the Swedish got over,
they advanced before the said Sconce of Lissaw, which the Polish (though they
made strong opposition, after L. Col. Plaw the Governor was killed, his forces
that entered therein 126 files, being diminished to 65, and all provision cut
off from the other side) within few days were forced to surrender it, Apr. 21,
upon discretion, with all the Men, Canons, and Ammunition that was left. Saphia
was coming to relieve the same, but hearing it was yielded, he retreated back
again.

May 4th after, 1658, the French, with some English assisting them, had a
defeat in attempting to surprise Ostend in Flanders, by a Plot laid with two
Burgomasters, and some others within the Town, one Spindeler, a Colonel,
banished formerly out of Flanders, being to be a chief actor in the business,
who was indeed their betrayer. The time being come, and all signs of a
surrender given, the Governor being pretended to be slain, etc. between 9 and
10 in the morning, the new Tide serving, Marshal D'Aumont going in, in Vessels,
with between 6 and 700 men, the small shot and great guns also now firing
apace, they were constrained to yield themselves prisoners: some, endeavoring
to run ashore on the Contribution side, being killed by the horse there on
purpose placed. Of the English that went to aid the Marshal in his landing,
were taken prisoners 110 men; of the Seamen that went ashore there being but
four wanting.

A little before the same time, the King of Sweden summoning an Assembly of all
the Provincial Governors of Sweden, with most of the Bishops, and a Deputy
from each City to Gottenburgh; Rosenham (they being met) Commander of
Stockholm, opened the Assembly with an elegant Oration, being followed therein
by the other Deputies, congratulating the King touching the prosperous success
of his Arms: and before May 17, we find him gone from Gottenburgh, having
obtained of the Estates of his Realm all that he demanded of them:
particularly, a Levy of 14000 men for securing of Pomerania. In the mean time,
M. G. Jephson the English Envoy, arrived at Berlin, where was the Electour of
Brandenburg his Court, as also an Ambassador from the Lantgrave of Hessen: The
first intimating thus much, That he who should be ^n enemy to the King of
Sweden, should also be so to the Lord Protector. The other's Commission seeming
to tend to the same effect; which was, To endeavor a hinderance of Jealousy
and difference (erept in between the said King and Electour) from breaking out;
and that a good understanding and constant friendship might be on both sides
preserved. For then in the said Electour's Dominions, diverse Magazines were to
be erected, a great quantity of provision being to be brought together to that
effect: he also leavied great forces, his design being not at first known; but
in July after, it was apparent, That between the King of Sweden and the
Electour, was nothing intended but open hostility: this last, publishing a
Manifesto of the grounds of his proceedings, in keeping his Army together, and
levying more forces, etc. who having desired the Swedish King both by Writing
and Ambassages, That the pretended Quarrel betwixt the King of Poland and
Sweden might be by fair means laid a side; proffering on his part all possible
means conducing thereunto: Also he earnestly endeavoring to procure just
satisfaction from the Polish King, who thereupon showed himself inclinable and
desirous of peace, (the Ambassadors of the Electoral College at Frankford
being, at the time of his Manifesto^'s publishing, with the Swedish King, about
laying aside of Controversies, and observing the Instrument of Peace, and other
ways by him used: Yet his Ambassadors were coorsly used, contrary to the Laws
and Customs of Nations, not being admitted to audience, though they had his
Letters of Credence; but rather were bid to be gone, to his great disgrace;
adding thereto great threatenings; for execution whereof, an Army then stood on
his Frontiers; and that, unless God turned it away, he must look either for a
sudden surprise, or a most destructive hostile march through the Empire and his
Territories. The said Duke of Brandenburg therein also charging strictly all
his Subjects to quit their warlique service out of the Empire, and to return
either to their own homes, or come to him or his Army without delay, upon
forfeiture of all that ever they had, whether movables or unmoveables.

But before this time it was perceived by prudent men, that the Austrians used
all manner of promises and shifts to the King of Poland, to continue the
division between Sweden and Poland, doing what they could to obstruct the
mediation of France for an accommodation: whereupon most of the Polish Estates,
chiefly the Prussian, appeared so ill satisfied, that most of them were on the
point to endeavor the summoning a Diett to Dantzick, to consider of ways and
means most advantageous for their affairs: and the rather, because Brandenburg
had then sent new assurances to the Swedes, that he would do nothing to their
prejudice. But we see afterward there was a manifest breach.

As concerning evacuation and restitution of places between the Dane and Swede,
the King of Denmark was to repossesse Fredericks-Ode, when the Castle of
Bremerwerden should be restored to the King of Sweden; and about the beginning
of May this present year, 1658, all Regiments of Sweden were transported out of
Zealand; but those in Fuenen were not to be removed till the Treaty of the
Danish King with the Duke of Holstein, (wherein there were some tergiversations
used on the Danish side) was brought to a final upshot.

But on July 18, 1658, Leopoldus King of Hungary and Bohemia (the former
Emperor deceasing April 2, 1657,) was chosen Emperor of Germany by the seven
Electours at the Imperial City of Eranckford.

And September. 3d following, (the very day on which the two memorable Victories
of Dunbar in Scotland, and Worcester in England against the Scottish King were
by him obtained) Oliver ^romwell, Lord Protector of the three Nations, after
about 14 days sickness, like an Ague in the beginning, about the hour of
three in the afternoon, departed from the living, having born that Supreme
Office almost five years. And the next day, Sept. 4. Richard, the eldest Son of
the said Oliver, was by the Privy Council's Command proclaimed Lord Protector
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, in his Father's stead. Which on the same day
was performed, first near the Council. Window in White Hall; then in the
Palace-Yard at Westminster; and after that in the City of London.

But about the middle of July, the Swedish forces invading Electoral Prussia,
and plundring some Villages, they killed the Duke of Brandendurg his
safe-guards which they there found, but one Col. Shoneck lying in wait for
them, met at last with a Swedish party of 200, near Rosenberg, bringing some of
them prisoners to Kingsberg.

Then also the Treaty betwixt Sweden and the Muscovite successfully going on,
the Governor of Riga wrote to the Swedish king, That he hoped there would be
no occasion to send force against him. But the Cham of Tartary sent to the king
of Poland, and congratulating him, proffered him assistance against all his
enemies.

This present year also, 1658, came intelligence into England, of the great
success which the English forces had in Jamaica Island against the Spaniards
landing there; as also, that the Spaniards Plate-Galleons which were bound from
Carthagena for Spain, were cast away by a Hirrecane; the Bermudans bringing
into Jamaica 20000 pieces of eight which they had taken in the Rack.

But Prince Ragotsky being returned out of Poland into Transylvania, the Great
Turk (having before commanded him in 1657, upon great penalty, not to proceed
in his march against Poland) sent to him, to resign his Principality of
Transylvania to his Cosen Reada; he at that present yielded thereto; (although
to resign up any of his Forts into the Turks hands, he utterly denied) and
reassuming his Principality again, without the said Turk's consent, he being
enraged against him, would try his utmost to divest him; and dispossess also
the Princes of Moldavia and Wallachia: wherefore, he ordering great forces
against him, about the latter end of April, 1658, the Turks totally defeated
the Prince of Wallachia, who was marching to Prince Ragotzi's aid, (who had
also sent to Vienna, to demand the promised aid by the King of Hungary against
those Turks) 8000 being slain upon the place, and a great number of prisoners
taken; among whom, were dives Boyars, the principal Officers of that Prince:
who thereupon fleeing into Transylvania, the Turks forced another to accept his
Principality. And the Grand Signior being still bent to dethrone the said
Ragotzi, sent about July rigorous Orders to the Moldavian and Wallachian
Princes, That they should endeavor to invade him. But to the Bashaw of Buda,
he sent more severe order for the same effect, with a threatening, That if he
did not his duty, he should be flead alive, and his skin placed on one of
Buda's Towers. Wherefore the Bashaw advancing about the beginning of July,
Prince Ragotski challenged him to a fight: who thereupon breaking up from
Lippa, and marching toward Arad Castle, the Transylvanians fired the Suburbs
near that Castle. The Turk's Officers who led the Avaunt, seeing the smoke and
fire, hastened directly to the Castle, whom the Hungarians following, put them
to flight, taking and putting many to the sword; Mustapha Beg being taken
prisoner. Wherefore the Transylvanians encouraged, drew near the Turks main
Army; the Turks thereupon discharged 3 great Guns as a warning, that their men
should retire within the Wagons placed so as to serve for a safeguard: but the
Transylvanians so roundly plied them with their great Guns, that they being
brought into confusion, fled into a Valley: whom the Transylvanians pursuing,
drove them into the River Mor, where they were drowned: and the whole Turkish
Army became a prey: this was on July 4th, 1658. The chief prisoners being
besides Mustapha, wounded, the Bassa of Agria, the Col. Aga of the Janissaries,
Col. Gyenely Aga at Buda, and the Beg of Lippa: Alai Beg of Waitzen being
trodden to death by the horse; the Bashaw was likewise so put to it in the
flight, that he was forced to run into the water: whom notwithstanding, a
Hussar pursued, catching him by the garment to take him; but he was rescued,
and the Hussar slain. The Prince's men pursuing them above 30 leagues to one of
their chief Cities, they returned with rich booties. The news of this rout
caused such an alteration at Constantinople, that (violating the Law of
Nations, and growing in a rage against the Christians) they imprisoned the
Imperial and French Ambassadors, charging the French of being complice with
his Son in his Letter in Ciphers, which they intercepted: and the other, That
his Master had suffered some German Companies to serve under Ragotski,
(although the Emperor's Deputies had demonstrated, it was without his consent;
and that the Turk for his money might have as many of them as he would).

In August following, the Austrians forces being apprehended to be on their
march toward the Frontiers of the Turks, to oppose their power, it was wished,
they might deal better with the Protestants in those parts, than the forces
under the Count of Dhona had done, who used them no otherwise, than the Turks
were used when over-powred.

But the Portugal having this Summer taken the field against the Spaniard,
about Elvas, they besieged and took the Fort of St. Christopher, before
Badaiox, and passing the River Guadiana, their General June 22, assaulted
another very strong Fort which the Spaniards had builded: and ordering the
General of horse to get between the Fort and City to demolish the Spaniards
lines, he put to the sword two Troops of horse, and two Companies of foot, whom
they had left behind, except two taken. There was 400 well armed in the Fort
with an Irish Commander, who courageously behaving themselves, and the enemy
coming (the mean time) out of the Town to hinder their design, 300 appointed
against the Portugals right Wing, were every man killed on the place; and the
like happening to them that were commanded for the left: thus after three hours
they were totally defeated and driven back, leaving 1200 on the place.
Whereupon the Fort was surrendered at the Portugals mercy; the Irish being
permitted only to come forth with swords; but all the Spaniards without arms.
The Portugals loss being of no consequence; only some Commanders wounded,
among whom was the Duke of Cadaval. After this, the Spaniard forsook another
great Fort made on the River, leaving all in it behind them; which these
taking, strongly garrisoned them both; and advancing to Badaiox, they wholly
besieged it.

The King of Sweden in or about the same August, embarquing 4000 horse, and
6000 foot, was found in that design to return again upon Denmark: The reason
whereof was variously censured; some being induced to believe, That some
underhand provocation had been given to that magnanimous King by some in
Denmark; for he landing at Corsoer a Port of Zealand, marched directly toward
Coppenhagen; and meeting (by the way) some Danish horse, they were content to
serve under him: who was generally believed to take that opportunity to do
himself right, and ensure all behind him; that he might safely return into
Prussia and Pomerania against the Poles and other his enemies. But since this
his invasion of Denmark, many stately Houses and Farms were seen on fire as
well toward Coppenhagen, as the Sound. The King of Sweden being at Ringstead,
the Danish King sent two Privy Counselors from Coppenhagen, about or on Aug.
10th, to demand the reason of that sudden alteration, who being admitted to his
presence, he with such grounded reasons demonstrated unto them the cause of
that his action, that they could not answer a word against it, but returned
back with tears in their eyes. On the 11th day, the King advancing about half a
league from Coppenhagen, from the hill on the left hand, they perceived the
Danish resolved to stand upon their defense, having set all the Suburbs on
fire. The King approaching the City, Aug. 13, saluted the same with two pieces
of Cannon; which being answered out of the Town with three, they fired without
intermission, to hinder their begun approaches; who had taken the Hospital on
one side; salleys being made without any great damage to either. Cronenburgh
Castle being likewise beleagured with three Regiments under Admiral Count
Wrangle. The Danes also designing to fire Helsenor, some Swedish horse being
sent to defend it, hindered the same. And Sept. 7. 1658, Cronenburgh Castle was
surrendered to the Swedish King, with a gallant. Artillery, and good store of
Ammunition: the King presently going to prosecute the si^ge against Coppenhagen
with greater vigor, resolving not to st^r till it were brought to an issue:
And as a help therein, a Dutch Fleet being designed to succor the Dane, was no
sooner out at Sea, but it being surprised by a storm, which spoiled most of
their Sails and Tackle; it gave some impediment to their Voyage, till they
could repair.

But the great Prince of Turkey proffering to the Cham of Tartary,
Transylvania, if he could win it, he resolved to that end to join his forces
with the Turks; but Wyhofsky General of the Cossacks, requesting him to aid him
against the Cossacks siding with the Muscovites; he ordered Kaarath Beg his
Kinsman to march to Ukrain with 20000 Tartars: with whom Wyhofsky joining with
20000 Cossacks, they should go against those in the Muscovite's service. But
being come over Boristhenes, the Cossacks under the Muscovites sent them
Commissioners, persuading them that through great scantnesse of provision and
forage, they were forced to separate from the Tartars, and to encamp
themselves apart: they dissemblingly treating with the Tartars; these two
parties of Cossacks uniting, fell on the Tartars Camp, slaying 15000 of them,
among whom Kaarath Beg was one. And then invading Nahaiish Tartary, they made
all havoc they could, and were like so to proceed. Thus the Cossacks (against
the Polanders and Wihofsky's will) became open enemies to the Tartars; which is
not easy to be reconciled with Poland and its confederates. Neither could the
Tartars be taken for trusty friends to Poland, because they strove, or are
still striving, to make peace with the Muscovites, whose Duke is an Arch-enemy
to the Tartars.

In Flanders the Spanish Army received a rout Sept. 3. 1658; for a body of
Spaniards (betwixt 4 and 5000 men) under the Prince of Ligne marching to join
with their other forces, thought to have visited Ypre by the way, and to put
succor therein; but they being engaged by the French, were wholly routed, the
Prince of Ligne having his arm shot off, 1200 being taken prisoners, the rest
slain and put to flight. Oudenard and Meenen was likewise about this time taken
from the Spaniard, and Armentiers likewise closely begirt. But on the 26 day of
the said September the Town of Ypre was delivered into the possession of Marshal
Turein: the Spaniards marching forth in the morning, about 7 or 800 men, with
their Arms, Baggage, and two pieces of Cannon, with three Princes, besides the
Governor. That City being one of the greatest and fairest of Flanders, was
quickly carried, by the valiant and resolute Onsets which the English forces
made upon their Conterscarps, and other Outworks; showing the like Courage
there, as they had done before at several other Towns.

The Brandenburgish, Austrian, and Polonian forces toward the latter end of
this last September, were drawing near the Swedish forces in Holstein; having
then already encountered with some Swedish parties: the Duke of Holstein going
to Tonningen, where the Swedes were drawing into a body. Of the Enemies, Spork
led the Avaunt, consisting of 3000 Austrian horse; the Brandenburgish forces
being 10000 horse, and 200 Dragoons; Czarneski being with the Polish foot, and
6000 horse commanded by the two Fieldmarshalls, who marched with the Artillery,
marching very slowly by reason of the bad ways: this Army was thus marching in
the beginning of this present month October. 1658: the Elector of Brandenburg
having published a Manifesto, assuring the Nobility of Holstein, That his
Soldiers should not be troubled in their houses, nor be damnified by them,
desiring only their Contribution, whereby the Soldiers might have some
accommodation.

Moreover, on the 4th of this present October, came an Account from Col. Doyley
Governor of Jamaica, of the prosperous success of the English against the
Spaniards there, who being 30 Foot-Companies landed at Rio Nova, a place in the
North of that Island: and being 12 days there before they were discovered, the
said Governor setting sail with 750 Officers and Soldiers, after a valorous
landing, June 22, he summoned the Fort; but the Governor Don Arnoldo and Sasi
sending a confident denial, the English, next morning, marching toward the
Fort, and climbing up an high Hill, advanced in sight of the said Rio Nova
Fort: where finding the Work on the Land side not finished to that height, as
to the Sea-ward, they receiving their shot, ran up the Flankers with their
forlorn, having hand-Granadoes, and gained it in a quarter of an hour; many of
the Spaniards running out of the Works, the English followed the chase about 3
or 4 miles, doing execution: the Seamen also seeing them run along the rocks,
coming out with their boats, killed many: so that above 300 persons were slain,
diverse Captains, two Priests, and their Sergeant Major: about 100 ordinary
prisoners being taken, and 6 Captains, whom they sent home, the King of Spain's
Standard, and 10 Colors: the rest, especially the strangers in the Woods,
being liable to perish. In that Fort was taken 10 barrels of powder, great
store of shot, 6 pieces of Ordnance, and great store of provisions.

In the same month October, the King of Sweden still lying before Coppenhagen,
and going in a Galliot to find out the passages to the Island of Amak, (joined
to that City by a bridge) it being somewhat groundy near the shore, he
embarked himself with the Rix-Admiral in a small Shallop of the Gallior, which
through the highness of the wind, and force of the stream, overran and
overwhelmed the Shallop; the Master being drowned, the King and the rest
narrowly escaping. And the King resolving to attaque the said Island, a Danish
Captain pretending a zeal to him, he entrusted him for his guide to the best
passages leading to the Town; but (as soon as he arrived there) the Captain ran
away, giving notice to the Danish King, that the King of Sweden being in Amak
with a small number, might be easily taken: Wherefore they sallying out, had
not the Rix-Admiral observed the Danish Troopers coming on the bridge, he had
narrowly escaped: whereas now, retiring a little, he killed, took, and
dispersed 1500 Danes: And the Island not being of strength for advantage, he
carried away on shipboard, and destroyed, all the Cattle and Victuals which he
found, that Copenhagen might have no supplies from thence.

Also Fieldmarshall Douglas retreating to the borders of Curland, expecting a
supply from that Duke, (who before had supplied the Muscovites and Lithuanians)
according to an agreement, A party of Lithuanians routed almost 600 of his
Rear-guard: wherefore the Duke, now (seeming a neuter) brake down all bridges
to his Town of Mittaw, summoning his Subjects against the Swedes: whereupon,
Douglas (lest the Lithuanians and Curlanders should join) sent 600 Soldiers by
night, down the river in 24 small Vessels, which he took, instructing the chief
Captain (speaking the Lithuanian tongue) how to proceed; who telling the first
Sentinel, that they were Lithuanians much wounded, (coming in the night,
(fearing the Swedes) for cure, passing by him, slew him; the second Sentinel
running away, without giving notice: but the third crying out, the Captain had
leisure to enter, and discharge two great Guns as a signal to Douglas: who
getting also in with little refistance, rook the Duke and Duchess, (the
Elector of Brandenburgh his sister) with the other Courtiers, prisoners. The
cause hereof was, for that there were Letters of the Duke of Curland's, sent
(contrary to his Neutrality) both to the Polish King, the Lithuanian General,
the Muscovian Governor of Kaken-housen, and also to the Duke of Brandenburg,
inviting them against the King of Sweden in Liefland, and elsewhere.

The Dutch Fleet having a design to bring relief into Coppenhagen; October. 29
coming almost within Cannon shot of Helsinge-Castle, fearing its reach, held
the Coast of Schonen, and being come up together with a favorable wind, went
by the Castle, being saluted from thence with two Cannons, and the Swedish
Fleet gaining up to them, after eight in the morning the Fight began, and
continued three hours. Admiral wrangell for some time defending himself against
six Dutch ships, at length (with a little damage) bearing toward the shore:
the other Swedish ships (the while) endeavoring to the utmost. The Dutch, to
avoid the brunt (from the beginning) giving the Swedes way, and gave place when
they strove to board them. The Dutch lost nine ships in all, the Swedes but
two. De Wit, the Dutch Admiral, his Ship being taken and spoiled, with
himself, who afterward dyed of a wound in his thigh; 210 prisoners taken, 100
slain, and 60 maimed in the same ship. No Swedish persons of quality were then
known to be mortally wounded. Yet whilst the fight lasted, the Dutch
Merchantmen passing through the Zound, put the designed Relief into
Coppenhagen: but the King of Sweden, who with his Queen were Spectators (from
Cronenburgh Castle) of the Fight, it being ended, presently hasted to see to
his Leaguer before Coppenhagen.

About the same time the Poles who had befieged Thoren in Prussia, after a near
approach, and some thousands lost before it, (their King and Queen residing
also in the Leaguer) deserted the siege.

But in Flanders the French General, Marshal Turein, transporting his Army over
the Scheld, took (in his march) and plundered the two Towns of Geerdberge and
Grammont; and afterward he took the small Town of Alest, between Brussels and
Gaunt, it being but meanly fortified; yet very remarkable for the abundance of
Hops growing about it.

I shall now insert 2. or 3. remarkable things, and so draw to a conclusion of
this our Appendice. The one, being a strange Apparition in Cornwall in the West
of England, about the month of August, 1657; it was of Hurlers, as they are
there called; and were seen by many in a field of standing Corn, about
Bosse-Castle; they being innumerable, and in white apparel; and at last they
hurled themselves into the Sea. Some of the Spectators going afterward into
the field, found the Corn no whit damnified; contrary to their expectation.
Another was, of a very strange Monster-Child or Children, (for it seemed to be
two) born (though living but few days) of a Soldier's Wife at Weerted on the
Elder-Sconce near Ardemburg: it was so strange, both for outward and inward
parts, as scarce has been heard of the like; for besides the two heads and two
necks, and four arms, the eyes of the female stood where the mouth should be;
and above the eyes, stood in the middle, a masculine member or Genital of an
ordinary bigness, hanging down to the right eye, etc. And for the male, there
were (when dissected) found therein, two Hearts, two Lungs, one great Liver,
and one Gall; two Stomachs, the biggest whereof had joined unto it a Milt and
two Kidneys, the right being bigger than the left; the female having only the
genitall parts: which had two firm teeth in its mouth under the chin, like a
fundament; but the male-body had a very little hole instead of a mouth, but
without a chin: the skin of which Monstrous body, both behind as well as
before, being found to be interlarded with fat.

But in the Gulf of Venice, in a Ship sailing to Venice, wherein were Turkish
and Armenian passengers; the envy of the Captain and the rest increasing
against two Englishment, Febr. 28 and 29, because they complied not with them
in their words and example, so that they were denied the Cook-Room to dress
their provision, and threatened to be set ashore on some Island; and one of them
by the Captain threatened, when they came to Venice, to be burnt; the next day
early in the morning, March 1. 1657, fire was rained down into the ship; which
not only split part of the Topmast, burning holes in the sayls; but slew
three on the Deck (besides diverse wounded): then it went down twice under Deck
like the noise of a Cannon, the Scuttles being shut, and (as if the ship was
fired) slew one Turk, and an Armenian; wounding others: Great was the peoples
cry; it being observable, That of five Nations, one of a sort was cut off.

In France diverse Protestants of eminency returning from Charenton to Paris,
the Boat breaking in two, were drowned; most of 60 being lost, of whom was the
Chancellour's son of Poland, and both the sons of the Marquess de Clerambant,
in 1653. There dyed also in France, the Archbishop of Paris, about the end of
1653, being 70 years of age. The King of the Romans, son to the German
Emperor, in 1654, June 29, about midnight. Also the Grand Cham of Tartary the
same year. The Duke of Joyeuse, dyed at Paris of his wounds received before
Arras, in or about Sept. 1654, to the King of France his great sorrow. Also the
Duke of Monthazon, who lived in four King's Reigns, being an old Soldier, and
aged 87 years of age, dyed in or about October following. Katherine Duchess of
Joyeuse, Febr. 25. 1655, at Paris. Likewise Pope Innocent the 10th, in whose
room was chose Alexander the 10th. Cardinal Sachetti, who had stood twice for
the Popedom, being then made Secretary of the Congregation of the Council; and
Sieur Bonelli Governor of the City of Rome. The Queen Mother of Sweden about
March 20, 1654: on which day, the Funerals of the Rix-Chancellor of Sweden were
solemnized. In 1655, about May, at Rome dyed Cardinal Francisco Peretti, called
Montalto, aged 60 years. And in England, at the beginning of the same year,
James Duke of Lenox: and at the latter end of the same year, March 21, that
most Learned Man, James Usher, Archbishop of Armagh, and Lord Primate of
Ireland, deceased. Also Cardinal Cutva, in Aug. 1655; and the Duke of Venice,
Apr. 30 before. Chevalier Bertucci Valier being chosen new Duke, and crowned
July 10th, 1656: but he dying of a Pleurisy about the beginning of 1658,
Pesaro the Procuratour was chosen in his stead. Also the Duke of Genoa in 1655;
the old Empress of Germany; and the King of Portugal, in 1656. The Duke of
Saxony, the same year; willing his eldest Son to succeed him. The Emperor of
Germany the year following, 1657. The Great Mogul the same year. Likewise the
Duke Coluzza, a Neopolitan, about December. 1657, slain by his own people as he
was hunting. The English Admiral, Blake, who was buried at Westminster Sept. 4.
1657. There dyed also this present year, 1658, the Earl of Warwick, about the
beginning of it. Likewise Kaarath Beg, a General of the Tartars. Also Oliver
Cromwell, Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland. Finally, Wit
wittenson, the Dutch-Admiral, slain in the aforesaid Sea-sight with the Swedes.

FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table of all the Memorable Things contained in this Book, of
An Account of Time.
A
A Aron, Page 11 Abaris. 80 Abas, a City of the Phoceases, 94 Abbo Abbot, 342
Abbo of Florence, 324 Abdiah Prophet, 45 Abdiramas King of Saracens, 307 Abiam
King of Judah, 41 Abibal of Tire, 49 Abimelech, 14 Abraham's Pedigree, his
deeds. 5. 7 Abydeni, 132 Acacius of Constantinople, 254, 255, 256. Acaemetes,
257 Accius. 146 Acephalians, 279 Acepsima, Martyr. 208 Achaeus, 19, 126, 128,
129. Achichore, 107 Achmet, Emperor, 384 Achaians flourish, 121 Achaick War,
143 Achilleus, 198 Acrisius, 10, 19, 23. Acron, 58 Acteon, 69 Actian fight. 162
Adalbert, Martyr. 340 Adam. 3 Adelades, 319 Adelbert, 328 Adelgarius. 338
Adelgisius, 318 Adolph, Earl of Nassaw, King of the Romans, degraded. 366
Adonibezek, 13 Adrastus, 19 Adrian 4th, Pope, 356 Adrian 6th, Pope, 402 Aeacid.
95 Aecaterina. 394 Egyptian Kings, 64, 65 Egypt revolts from Darius, 78.
becomes a Roman Province, 164 Aegestans perfidiously rob the Athenians, 90
Aegas. 298 Aegeas. 29 Aegidius. 237, 305 Aegystus. 24 Aelia Capitolina. 182
Aelianus Praenestinus. 186 Aelius Verus, 182 L. Aelius Verus. 183 Aemilianus.
192 Aemilius, Consul, worsted at Sea. 119 P. Aemilius. 134, 404 Aeneas Sylvius.
392, 394 Aeolicks. 18 Aeolus. 18 Aeolian Transplantation, 39 Aequi subdued, 87
Aerian heresy. 213 Aeschylus. 80, 89 Aesop. 73 Aetolians sack Messena, 219
Aetius Syrus. 213 Aetus withstands the Barbarians in France. 235, 236, 249
Agamemnon. 14, 19 Agapetus, Pope. 278 Agarista, 71 Agatha, Martyr. 195
Agathias, Historian. 280 Agatho, Pope. 274 Agathobulus. 186 Agathoclea, 128
Agathocles. 94, 128 Agathocles, Tyrant of Syracuse. 106 Agenor. 22 Agesilaus
President of Asia. 91, 92 Agerick of Virdunia. 280 Agides. 122 Agis condemned
by the Ephori. 122 Agnes. 201 Agentes. 358 Agobard of Lugdunum, 314 Agrarian
Law. 83 M. V. Agrippa. 164 Agrippa, son of Aristobulus. 173, 174 Agrippa
Castor. 185 Agrippina, Mother of Caligula. 171 Ahab, King of Israel. 42
vanquishes Benhadad, 43 Ahaz, King of Judah. 46 Ahaziah, King of Israel, 43
Aicha taken. 427 Aimerius. 215 Aion. 284 Aistulph. 312 Aithales, Martyr. 268
Akerslebe. 264 Alars. 229 Alaricus, King of Goths, 228, 233, 261, 263 Alba
built. 33 Alba-regia. 384 Albans overcome by Tullius. 58 Albert, Cardinal, sent
against the United Provinces. 413 Albert, Duke of Austria, Emperor, 366, 374
Albert of Austria, Second, Emperor, 390 Albertus Pighius, 404 Albertus Magnus.
366, 368 Albigian heretics. 372 C. Albinus. 187, 188 Albofledis. 262 Alboinus.
284, 287 Alcander. 50 Alcaeus. 72 Alcibiades. 90 Alcimadas. 60 Alcimius,
High Priest, 139 Alcion. 71 Alcman, a Poet. 72 Alcmaeones. 71 Alcmaeonides. 78
Alcmena. 23, 27 Alcuine. 312 Alderbert, 328 Alectus. 199 Alemans. 194 Alexander
of Aenson. 366 Alexander, son of Amyntas. 76 Alexander, Eastern Emp. 332
Alexander the Great, 99 his Expedition into Persia, 100, 101. his death. 102
Alexander, an Heretic, 179 Alexander Jannaeus. 156 Alexander Medicus. 185
Alexander, Pope. 185 Alexander second, Pope. 343 Alexander the 5th, Pope. 387
Alexander 7th, Pope. 561, 572 Alexander Ludovisius, 419 Alexander Farnesius,
Duke of Parma, 409, 410 Alexander Zabinas. 147 Alexander Pheraeus, 92
Alexandria, 208, 211, 212, 213, 219. built, 101 Alexandrians slaughtered, 188
Alexius Angelus, Emperor, 357, 359 Alexius the blind. 310 Alexius Comnenus.
348, 359 Alexius, Grecian Emperor, 344 Alexius, son of Manuel, 358 Alexius
Mursiphilus. 359 Alfred, son of Ethelred, 351, 352 Alienora, 360, 361 Alnetum
fight, 410 Alpheus, Martyr. 201 Alphonsus King of Arragon. 388, 391 Alphonsus
Tostatus. 390 Alphonsus Castus. 312 Alphonsus 7th, of Spain. 360 Alphonsus, K.
of Castile, an Astronomer. 366, 374 Alphonsus, Earl of Poitou, 373 Altanus. 335
Altenburgick, 426 Altorpe. 431 Altringe. 426 Alyater. 61 Alyattes. 62, 71
Amalaberga. 275 Amalaricus. 275 Amalasuntha. 272 Amasis. 64, 65 Amandus, of
Trajectum, 295 Amandus, of Bordeaux, 225 Amantius, 260 Amanus. 207 Amaziah,
King of Judah, 45 Amazons. 30 Ambrones. 150 Ambrosius. 229 Ambrosius
Catharinus. 404 Ambrose of Millain, 219, 221, 222. Amedeus. 389 Amelius, 197
Amenburg. 448 America discovered. 394 Amianus. 220 Amida. 259 Ammon King of
Judah, 47 Ammonius. 191 Amoerges. 68 Amos. 45 Amphictyons. 93 Amphitryo. 33
Amri King of Israel. 42 Amulasuntha. 239 Amulius K. of Latins. 57 Amurath, son
of Urchang. 381 Amurath, son of Muhammedes. 382 Amurath the third, Emp. 384
Amurath the 4th, Emp. 385 Amurath, Emp. 429, 445, 453 Amyntas. 68, 94
Anabalianus. 209 Anacletus, 179, 184, 185, 355 Anacreon, 80 Anastasius. 302
Anastasius Sinaita. 291 Anastasius, Pope. 265 Anastasius, Emperor. 265, 258.
Molested by the Jaurians and Persians, 259. His death. 260 Anatolius, of
Laodicea, 201 Anaxagoras. 88 Anaxicrates. 108 Anaximander. 73 Anaximenes. 73
Ancus Martius. 58 Ancyrane Council. 208 Andragatius. 221 Andreas. 260 Andreas
Charles, King of Hungary. 375 Andreas, King of Hungary. 271 Andrew Alciate. 404
Andrew Grunleyd. 438 Andrew Meralius. 402 Andriscus, an Impostor, 145
Androgeus. 29 Andromeda. 22, 23 Andronicus. 358 Andronicus son of Ducas, 347
Andronicus Palaeologus, 370 Andronicus, son of Michael, 370 Andronicus the
younger, 381 Angelus Politianus. 395 Angiers. 323 Angrivarians, 236 Ania of
Aurelia. 256 Anicetus, 185 Annas Eurgius. 406 Annius Verus. 182 Anomaean
heresy. 213 Anselm of Millain. 313 Anselm of Laudunum, 338 Ansegisus. 304
Anfivarians. 236 Anterus, Pope. 195 Anthemius, Emp. 251 Anthimus of
Constantinople. 278 Anthoninus of Padua, 365 Anthony Augustine. 411 Antigonus.
103 Antiochus. 121 Antiochus, Nephew of Seleucus Nicanor. 125 Antiochus Jeraces
the Great 125, 126. His wars, 127, 135. Antiochus of Syria. 133 Antiochus
Epiphanes. 135, 137, 138. his woeful death, 139 Antiochus Ellpater, 139
Antiochus Sydetes, 142, 147 Antiochus Grypus. 147 Antiochus Cyzicenus. 148, 152
Antiochus Pius. 152 Antiochus Asiaticus. 152 Antiochus, Tutor to Theodosius the
second. 227, 232 Antiochus a Monk. 294 Antipater, 102, 103 Antissidorians. 322
Antium. 171. destroyed, 87 Antioch, 334. Burnt, 273. Overthrown by Earthquakes.
181, 261. Antomnates. 57 Antonine, a Florentine, 395 M. Antonius, 161 C.
Antonius. 162 Antonius Pius. 182 M. Antonius Verus. 183 Antonius the Great.
197, 213 Antonius the Monk, 213 Aper. 187. 189 Apis. 10 Apollinarian heresy.
220 Apollinaris. 186 Apollinaris, of Laodicea, 220 Apollonia, Martyr. 195
Apollonius. 135, 191 Apollonius Chalcidicus, 186 Apollonius Thaneus. 180
Appian. 186 Appio. 180 Apries. 64, 65, 75 Apuleius. 186 M. Aquilius. 149
Aquila. 187 Aquileia demolished. 191 Aquisgrane Synod. 318 Arabians routed in
Spain, 200000 of them slain, 372 Aracus. 90 Arator, a Poet. 280 Aratus Sycio,
121. His deeds. 122, 124, 132 Arbaces King of Media. 50 Arbella fight. 101
Arbitianus. 213 Arbogastes. 222 Arcadia. 232 Arcadians vanquish the
Lacedaemonians. 92 Arcadius, son of Theodosius. 223, 226 Arcesilaus. 110
Archias. 68, 69 Archidamus. 122 Archilocus. 72 Archimedes. 116 Ardea. 59
Arduine, a Lombard, 344 Arelatensian Synod. 207 Areobinda. 271 Aretas, K. of
Arabia. 157 Areton of Guido, 342 Argentine, 428 Argile, a Scottish Cove nanter.
443 Argiller. 462 Argonautes. 27, 28, 29 Argyraspidi. 104 Argyrophilus of
Byzantium. 394 Argyrus the Roman. 345 Ariadne. 29 Arias Montanus. 411, 415
Ariathes King of Cappadocia. 140 Arienne. 62 Arimbas. 95 Aristagoras. 76
Aristides. 84, 186 Aristobulus, King of the Jews. 149, 156 Aristodemus. 34
Aristodemus, King of the Messenians. 60, 69 Aristogiton. 78 Aristomenes. 60
Aristonichus, son of Eumenes 149 Aristophanes. 99 Aristotle. 98 Armenians. 390
Armenian Monks. 278 Armentiers. 493, 540 Arnaud. 577 Arnheime. 426 Arnobius.
209 Arnoldus Brixianus. 355 Arnsgardis. 319 Arnulph. 320, 324, 349 Arnulph of
Metinum. 295 Arnulph of Medard. 352 Arontium fight. 535 Arphaxad, the same with
Deioces. 56 Arragon. 372 Arras besieged. 532, 533 Arre. 453 Arrian Synods. 213
Arrian Heresy. 211, 212, 215, 218, 223 Arrians called Porpoyrians. 207
Arrianus. 186 Arrius. 206, 207, 211 Arsaces, 120 Arsacius. 230 Arsenius, 225
Arsinoes. 127 Artabanus. 121 Artabanus, King of the Parthians. 188 Artabasdes.
308 Artaphernes. 77 Artaxerxes Longimanus. 86 Artaxerxes Mnemon 91 Artemius.
215 Artemius, called Anastasius. 303 Arundel Earl sent, etc. 434 Aruntes. 59
Asa. 41 Ascanius. 33 Ascoline of Laudanum. 338 Ascham. 499 Ascittine. 341
Asconius Bedianus. 180 Aschosius Bishop of Thessalonica. 223 Asianus. 190
Aspar. 215 Aspimarus. 301, 302 Assarbaddon. 47 Assimbeiores. 385 Assimbeius
Usumcassanes, 386 Assyrian Kingdom. 5, 54. Its Kings. 55 S. Asterius. 231
Astyages K. of Media. 51 Astyages son of Cyaxares, 62, 66 Athaliah. 44 Athamas
K. of Beotia: 19 Athanaricus. 221, 263 Athanasius the Great, Bishop of
Alexandria, 208, 211, 212, 215, 219 Athaulph. 229, 233 Athenagoras, 186
Athenians leave their Country, 83. prevail over the Corinthians, Epidaurians,
Laconians, Persians, and Samians, 86. invade Sicily, 90. oppressed with 30
Tyrants, 91 Athenodorus. 196 Atlas. 11 Atrebate. 452 Atreus. 24 Athalaricus.
272 Athenaides. 232 T.L. Atta. 161 Attalus. 120 Attalus, Martyr. 185 Attalus a
Grammarian. 146 Attalus, Emperor, 232 Attalus King in Asia. 140 Atticianus.
193 Atticus, a Monk. 230 Attila the Hunn. 236 invades Italy. 249 Avarians enter
Thrace, 292, 298, 312. Audeflenda. 261 Audianian Heresy. 213 Audoenus of
Rothomagum, 300 Audomar of Tarvenum, 300 Aventine. 58 Augusta. 426, 431, 478 S.
Augustine. 243 Augustulus the last Roman Emperor. 251 O. Augustus. 164, 169
Avidius Cassius. 184 Avignon, the Pope's Seat, 374, 375 Aviolas. 172 S. Avit of
Vienna. 264, 268 Avitus. 268 Avitus Gallus, Emp. 250 Avoida. 349 J. Aurata. 411
Aurelius Victor. 220 M. Aurelius Antonius, 182, 183, 184. Aurelianus, Emperor.
194 Aureolius, Tyrant. 193 Austregisil of Bituricenum. 295 Autbert of Cameraca.
300 Authbert. 305 Auxentius, Bishop of Millain. 219 Ayscue. 498, 520 Azariah,
K. of Judah. 45 Azincourt Fight. 395
B.
BAasha, K. of Israel. 41 Babylon taken by the Turks. 445 Bacaudes. 198
Bacchiadae. 58 Bacchides. 139 Bacchylides. 89 Bacchus. 25 Bactrians. 68 Bajazet
Gilderim, 382. 385 Bajazet the 2d, Emp. 383 Balaquere Fight. 474 Balbinus. 191
Baldus. 376 Baldwin, Earl. 317 Baldwin, Sicilian Admiral. 359 Baldwin, Earl of
Flanders, 359 Baldwin, Earl of Constantinople. 369 Baldwin. 411 Bambas, King.
300 Bamberg Church. 343 Bamberger. 431 Bannier, 427, 433, 434, 435, 447, 448.
Baramas. 283 Barbados. 515 Barbarossa. 384, 403 Barcelona Fight. 461
Barcocheba. 182 Barda. 326 Bardan. 315 Bardas Phocas. 345 Barmtham Fight. 461
Baronius, Cardinal. 415 Bartolus. 376 Barum Fight. 342 Barwick. 485, 488
Basianus Antoninus. 188 Basil, Bishop of Amasea. 206 Basil Councils. 383, 390
Basilides the Scythopoliran. 186 Basilides Alexandrinus, 187 Basiliscus. 246
Basilius, Bishop of Caesarea. 218, 219, 225 Basilius Macedo, Emp. 326
Successful against the Saracens. 327 Basius, son of Romanus, 334, 335
Basing-House. 472 Bassaea. 462, 493 Bathite. 300 Batho. 371 Bathonian War. 413
Battus. 70 Bavarians. 312 Bavo. 295 Bayard. 401 Bazajeth, Emperor. 377
Beamont. 491 S. Beatrix. 185 Beatrix. 361 Beckye. 444 V. Beda. 305 Belgic War.
407, 409, 413 Belgrade taken. 384 Belisarius, 269 sent against the Persians and
Vandals. 270 R. Bellarmine 419 Bellerophon. 19 Belshazzar. 63 Belus, King of
Assyria. 5 P. Bembus. 404 Bendish. 501 Benearme Expedition. 418 Benedict,
Abbot. 280 Benedict, Pope. 331. 374 Benedict. 342, 387 Benedict 12th, Pope. 375
Benedict 13th, Pope. 387 Beneventum. 343 Benhadad, 41, 43 Berengarius. 320, 328
Berengarius, heretic. 353 Berengarius the Second, 329, 331 Beresteck Fight.
518 Berimude. 239 S. Bernard. 355, 356 Bernard, son of Pipin. 313 Bernard of
Carevalla. 355 S. Bernard, Abbot. 360 Bernardus Saracensis. 390 Bernburg. 433
Bernice. 121 Bernice, Daughter of Ptolemy Philadelphus, 125 Bernon of
Gigniacia. 339 Berosus. 111 Bertine of Sythiena. 305 Bertrude. 294 P. Berull.
417 Bertrand Gueshin. 379 Berytenian Synod. 279 Bessario, Cardinal. 394 Besur.
597 Bethlem-Gabor. 417 Theod. Beza. 415 Bias. 19, 72 Bibrack. 427 Bingium. 447
Byrsa called Carthage. 49 Biskow. 550 Bituitus K. of the Averni, 150 Blandina.
185 BLAKE burns Prince Rupert's ships, 501. takes the Scilly Islands, 514.
Encounters with the Dutch, 520, 521. Chases the French Fleet, 521 Blake burns
the Ships at Tunis, 530. at Santa Cruze, 543. his death, 610 Blanch. 373, 391
Bleda. 236 Blechington-house, 471 Blesan Assembly. 429 Bochus K. of Mauritania,
151 Bodilo. 299 Boethius. 267, 269 Bogoris King of Bulgaria. 326 Bolgius. 107
Bolognion Marquess beheaded. 439 Bonaventure. 368 Boniface, Earl. 235
Boniface, Marquess of Montferrat. 369 Boniface, Pope. 307 Boniface 8th, Pope.
368, 372, 374 Boninghause, 427 Borbons in France. 411 Bornholm Island. 466
Borromaeus, Cardinal. 411 Bossina taken by the Turk 590 Bothericus slain. 222
Botfinasius, a Hungarian, 413 Bragadino. 408 Brainford fight. 460 Brandenburg's
Conflict with the Swede, 566. they agree, 588^ they again renew the War, 603
Braune Jelfe. 428, 431 Breda besieged. 419, 437 Breme, 445 Bremeroverd. 466
Breemes subdued. 466 Brennus. 107, 108 Breydenburg. 464 Bridget. 376 Brisack
fight. 440 Bristol. 461 Britain conquered by the Romans. 158, 172 Britains.
323 Brittannicus, son of Claudius. 172, 173 Lord Brook slain. 460 Bructerians.
236 Bruges. 453 Brunechild. 287, 288, 293, 294 Brunne. 456, 465 Bruno. 353
Brunt Island. 513 Brnoy. 456 Brutus. 82 Brutus kills Caesar. 159, 162, 163
Bucellinus. 276 Bucheyme. 456, 466 Bucquoius. 417 Buchwald. 466 Buding. 428
Bulgarians, 369. refiore Justinian, 302. Waste Thrace. 259. Burlington. 460
Burford fight. 468 Busyris. 22 Bythinia. 307 Byzantium taken, 77, 187. Rebuilt,
205. Besieged by the Saracens, 306
C.
CAbades King of Persia. 261 Cabillonian Council. 290 Cadmus. 25 S. Caecilia,
Martyr. 190 Caecilian. 207 Caecilius, a Poet. 146 Caelestius condemned with
Pelagius. 240 L. Caelius Antipater. 161 Caeninenses. 57 Caepio. 144, 150
Caesarius of Arles. 268, 278 Caesar's War with Pompey, 159, 161 Cajetan,
Cardinal. 404 Caius Julius. 176 Calabria and Apulia submit to the Saracens, 316
Calender Corrected. 410 C. Caligula Caesar. 171, 172 Calistus the second, Pope.
354 Calistus the third, Pope. 392 Calinorius. 517 Callimachus. 77, 132
Callinicus. 120, 121. Callipolis. 381 Calphurnius. 201 Calphurnius Pise. 145
Calvin. 405 Calvinists. 406 Cambaules, 107 Cambyses. 66, 74, 75 Cameneca. 517,
524 Camillus. 96 E. Campian. 409 Campodune. 427 Candelores. 385 Candy. 506. See
Crete. Canea fight. 493 Cannensian slaughter. 115 Canutus. 351 Capelianus. 191
Capell, 489. Beheaded, 491 J. Capello. 492 Capitolinus, an Historian, 201
Caprea. 58, 170 Caracalla. 188 Caramannores. 385 Carausius, 198, 199
Carilesius. 268 Carew beheaded. 477 Carinus. 198 Carlisle. 473, 485, 488
Carloman. 310, 311 Carlomannus, son of Lewis 319, 324 Carlotta. 395 Carneades.
160 Carneades the Academick, 146 Carpocrates. 187 Carrarisians. 385 Carthage
built, 49. demolisht, 144. taken by Belisarius, 271. and by the Saracens, 301
Carthaginian Synods. 196, 240 Carthaginians, 114. vanquished by Gelo. 84 M. A.
Carus Emperor, 198 Casale. 452 Casal besieged. 420 Casanes. 385 Casilian
slaughter. 276 Casimir, King of Poland. 553 Cassander. 103 Cassian. 244
Cassiodore. 269, 280 Cassius. 159, 162, 163 Castellatum fight. 462 Castile. 372
Castilion. 436, 437 Castlenauder Battle. 422 Castrine. 434 Catalonia. 452
Catalonian Battles. 249, 462 Catana. 69 Cataphrygians. 187 Catherine Senensis.
390 Catiline's Conspiracy. 156 Cato. 159 Catullus. 161 Catulus. 151 Cecrops. 11
Celestine the third, Pope, 356, 368 Celsus. 189 Celtica. 396 Censors first
Created. 88 Cephus. 26. Ceraunus. 120 Cerdo. 187 Cerethrius. 107 Cerinthus. 179
Cestius Gallus. 177 Cethegus. 156 Chabrias. 91, 93 Chagan, King of the
Arabians. 302 Chagan King of the Avarians. 308 Chalcedon built. 70 Chalcedonian
Councils, 253, 278 Challenor. 462 Chamarians. 236 Chamice. 448 Charetes. 129
Charibertus. 277 Charilaus. 50 Charles Martel. 304, 307 Charles the Great. 286,
311, 312 Charles the Bald. 314, 317, 318, 319, 323 Charles Crassus. 319 Charles
the Simple, 325, 334, 335 Charles the Lame. 367, 374 Charles Gustave. 482, 483,
484 Charles Gustave, King of Sweden, 539. Wars with the King of Poland, 551,
552. with the Muscovite, 549. Treats with the Duke of Brandenburg, 551. Wars
with the King of Denmark, 569, 588. with the Duke of Brandenburg, 603. invades
Denmark again. 606. Charles of Valois. 373, 374 Charles the Fair, King of France.
377 Charles the Fourth, Emperor. 375 Charles the Fifth, Emperor, 402, 403, 405.
Abdicateth himself. 405 Charles, son of Lewis Balbus. 320 Charles, son of Lewis
Transmarine. 338, 339 Charles, son of Lewis. 337 Charles Dyrrachinus. 376 Charles
of Bloyes. 378 Charles Bourbon. 402 403. Cardinal, 410, 412 Charles the Fifth,
King of France. 378 Charles the Sixth, King of France. 376 Charles the Seventh,
King of France. 393, 395 Charles the Eighth, King of of France. 398, 399 Charles
the Ninth, King of France. 406 Charles the First, King of Great Britain and
Ireland, prepares a great Fleet, 436. is molested by Civil Wars, 458. sold by
the Scots, 485. Conveyed to the Isle of Wight, 487. Beheaded. 491. Charles
Prince of Wales, 471. Proclaimed under the Title of Charles the Second, in
Scotland and Ireland, 491. takes the Scottish Covenant, 498. Brings an Army
into England, 713. is defeated at Worcester, 513. escapes into France, 514
Charles, Brother of Lewis the 9th, King of Sicily. 373 Charles, King of
Swethland, 413, 416 Charles, Duke of Orleance, 395, 396 Charles Emanuel, Duke of
Savoy, 410 Charles, Duke of the Allobrogians. 414 Charles Gontald, Duke of
Bironia. 414 Charles of Medua. 412 Charles of Austria. 436 Charles, Earl of Anjou,
367 Charles, Earl of Carolesia, 398 Chaereas. 148 Chaereas Cassius, 172
Chelonis. 122 Chemnice Battle. 441 Chersicrates. 69 Chersonites slain. 302
Childebertus. 275, 276, 277, 288, 293, 294. Childerick. 237, 299 Childerick the
third. 305 Chilperick. 286, to 299 Chilperick of Burgundy, 262 Chimaera. 22
Chimelinsky, 516, 517, 550 China invaded by the Cham. 505 Chios taken. 408
Chivase. 445 Chlodoveus. 298, 299 Chlodoveus, King of the Franks. 261, to 264
Chlodoveus the third. 304 Chlogius. 237 Chlotarius. 299 Chlotildes. 262
Chosroes. 261 CHRIST, 170. his picture on Coin. 334 Christian Affairs under the
Caesar's. 174, 179 Christian Legion. 184 S. Chrysostom. 230 Chramnus burnt. 277
Christianity planted in Britain. 290 Christina Queen of Sweden, 474. resigns
her Crown to Charles Gustave, 538 Christopher, son of Lecapenus. 333
Chrysaphius. 253 Chrysargirum abolished, 259 Chrysippus. 131 Chrysocoris. 327
Chus, King of Moab. 13 Chylo, a Lacedemonian, 73 Cibalian fight. 204 Cicero,
156, 161, 162. Banished, 159. Called home. 160 Cilices. 25 Cilix. 62 Cimbrians,
150 120000 of them slain, 151 Cimon, 79. his stratagem against the Persians, 85
Circasses. 383 Gistercian Order begins, 353 Claudianus, a Poet. 231 Claudius
Caesar. 172 Claudius of Vesontium, 268 Claudius, Emperor. 193, 194 Claudius, a
Goth. 288 S. Clara. 368 Cleander. 184 Clelia. 82 Cleobulus Lindius. 73
Cleombrotus. 92, 122 Cleomenes King of Lacedaemonians, 123. his War with the
Macedonians, 124. his death, 125 Cletus. 179 C. Clement. 184 Clement the 4th,
Pope. 367 Clement the 5th, 374, 375 Clement the 6th. 375 Clement the 7th. 376,
403 Clement the 8th. 388 Clipericus. 277 Clisthenes. 71 Clitus. 102 Clodia
Rampire. 376 Clodius. 160 Clodovaldus. 275 Clodoveus. 268 Clodovius, King. 237
Clomirus. 274 Clotharius. 275, 289, 293. Cluniacian Order begins, 339 Clusian
Battle. 378 Cocalus. 30 J. Cochlaeus. 404 Cnapheus. 254, 255 Coburge. 431
Codrus. 36 Colchester. 489 Colchians, 273 Colibria. 462 Colattus. 421 Colossus
of Rhodes. 129 Columban. 290, 295 C. Columbus. 394 Comani. 152 Comene. 493
Comestor. 361 Comet over Barcelona's head. 435 A. Commodus Antoninus, 184
Concinnus the Florentine slain. 415 Connodorus, King of the Almans. 210 Conon,
alias Leo. 306 Conon, Athenian. 91 Conrad, King of Germany. 330, 342, 355, 356
Conrad the third, Duke of Swedes. 355 Conrade, son of Frederick the 2d. 364,
366, 367 Conrade, son of Saphodine, 371 Conradine. 367, 368 Constance
Oecumenicall Council. 387 Constanita, 368 Constans. 209 Constantine the Great,
son of Helena, 203. sees an Apparition, 204. is baptized, 205. his sons
disagree. 209, 210 Constantine the third. 297 Constantine the 4th. 308
Constantine the 5th. 309, 310. Constantine the 8th. 381 Constantine Ducas. 333
Constantine the Tyrant. 233 Constantine, son of Heraclius, 296 Constantine
Porphyrius, 332 Constantine, son of Lecapenus. 333 Constantine, son of Leo. ib.
Constantine, son of Romanus. 334, 335 Constantine Monomach, 346, 381
Constantine, son of Ducas, 347 Constantinople built, 205. besieged by the
Saracens, 297. shaken by an Earthquake. 307. taken by the Latins, 359.
Recovered by the Greeks, 369. taken by the Turks, 381, 383. Burnt, 476
Constantius Chlorus. 199, 203 Constantinus. 209 Consuls created. 82 Copenhagen
besieged by the Swedes. 606 Copronymus. 308, 311 Corbulo. 173 Corcyra Island.
69 Corcyra built. 69 Corcyraeans. 70 Corfe Castle. 484 Corinth built, 19.
burnt, 143. taken by the Turks, 383 Corinthian Kingdom. 38 Coriolanus. 82
Cornelius, Pope. 195 Cornet Castle. 514 Cornuburg. 465 Corvinus. 391 Cosma. 201
Cosroes King of Persia wastes Syria, 273. is overcome by Justinus, 82. kills
his Father, 283. is retaliated by his own son, 292 Cossacks, 445. slay 280000
in Poland. 495 Councils Ecumenical. 4th, 252. 5th, 278, 279. 6th, 298. 7th,
309. Council of Agathus, 268. at Auvergnes, 268. at Antioch, 212. at
Constantinople, 308. at Ravenna, 320. at Pavia, 356. at Lions, 365. Cracovia
taken by the King of Sweden. 554 Cracovia yielded to the K. of Poland. 568
Crator. 110 Crassus. 156, 158 Craterus. 103 Crates. 110 Cratinus. 89, 99 Craze.
433 Croesus. 66, 67 Creon. 27 Crescentius. 337 Cresphontes. 34 Crete taken by
the Saracens. 316 Cretensis. 27 Crispin. 583 Crispus put to death. 205
Critheus. 28 Critolaus. 143 Critolaus the Peripatetick, 146 Crixus. 156
Croatians molest the Venetians, 416 St. Croix Cathedral in Orleance, 323
Cromwell, Lievtenant-General under the Lord Fairfax, 471. goes into Scotland,
490. goes into Ireland, 497. Invades Scotland, 499. Dissolves the great
Parliament, 522. is elected Lord Protector of Great Britain, etc. 522.
Concludes a Peace with the Dutch, 525. with the Swede, 526. with the Portugal,
527, 543. and with the French, 530, 544 Cromwell solemnly invested with Kingly
power, 542. His death, 604 Crossa, 427 Cross of Christ found by Helena. 208
Crustumini. 57 S. Cruze Action. 545 Ctesias, a Physician. 99 J. Cuiack, 411
Cullen burnt. 324 Cuma. 37 M. Curtius. 97 Q. Curtius. 180 Curtrasiensian Fight.
410 S. Cuthbert, 305 Cylo. 70 Cyprian. 196 Cyprus. 361, 384, 393, 408.
Cypselus, 71, 79 Cyrencester, 460 Cyrene built. 70 Cyrill. 241 Cyrill of
Alexandria. 244 Cyrus King of Persia. 63, 66, 67, 68 Cyrus the younger slain,
91 Cyrus a heretic. 298
D.
DUcia, a Roman Province. 181 Dagobert. 294, 298, 299, 304. Dalmatius, Brother
of Constantine. 209 Damascius. 280 Damascus. 284 Damasias. 72 Damasus. 219, 220
Danaus, 10, 22 Dandulus, Duke of Venice. 359 Danes, 336. suppressed, 313, 464,
466. their King usurps the Palatinate, 452. detains the English ships. 521
Daniel, called Chilperick. 304 Dannum. 441 Dantzick. 557, 564, 565, 569
Dardanelles Fight. 539, 592 Dardanus. 31 Darius the Mede. 67 Darius, son of
Hystaspis, 68, 76, 77 Darius Codomannus. 100 conquered by Alexander, 101
Darkness of 17 days, 310 Datis, 77 David. 16, 17 David Commenus. 383, 385
Deborah. 14 Decemviri. 87 Decentius. 210 Decius. 192 Deioces, King of Media, 51
Deion. 19 Delgibians. 236 Dellone. 426 Delph blown up. 541 Delphos Temple
spoiled. 94 Demaratus. 79 Demaratus Corinthus. 58 Demetrius Poliorcetes. 107
Demetrius Phalerius. 110 Demetrius Pharius, Prince of the Illyrians. 130
Demetrius Soter. 139 Demetrius Nicanor. 140, taken by the Parthians, 141.
restored, 147 Demetrius Eucaerus. 149, 152. Demetrius the Cynick. 180 Demetrius
Chalcondylas, 394 Demetrius, Prince in Musscovy. 414 Democritus. 88 Demophylus.
218 Demosthenes, a General in Sicilia for the Athenians. 90 Demosthenes the
Orator. 110 S. Denis. 195 Desiderius the last King of the Lombards in Italy.
286, 311. Deucalion King of Thessaly. 18, 19 Devizes. 461 Dexippus an
Historian. 197 Diadumenus. 189 Diaeus. 143 Diana's Temple burnt. 100, 193
Diasia. 70 Didymus of Alexandria. 219 Didymus a Grammarian. 261 Dido. 49
Dinckelsing-fight. 482 Dio Prusaeus. 186 Dioclesian Emperor. 198 lays down
the Imperial dignity. 199 Diodorus Siculus. 161 Diogenes the Stoic. 146
Diogenes a Phoenicean. 280 Diomedes. 19 Dionysius. 92 Dionysius a Tyrant and
Poet. 99 Dionysius Halicarnassus. 165 Dionysius Corinthus. 186 Dionysius
Bishop. 195 Dionysius of Alexandria 196, 197 Dionysius of Millain. 212
Dionysius Abbot. 280 Dionysius of Paris. 294 Dionysius Martyr. 299 Dionysius
Rikel. 390 Dioscorus of Alexandria. 252, 253 Dispargum. 237 Dixmude. 493 Dodo.
304 Dolabella. 162 Dole besieged. 434 S. Dominick of whom the the Dominicans
365 Dominick. 494 Domitian Caesar 178 Domitilla. 179 Domitius Chalderinus. 395
Domitius Labeo. 187 Donatists Schism. 201, 206, 207, 208. Donatus a Grammarian.
214 Doricks. 18 Dr. Dorislaus. 499 Dorotheus. 266 Dorstene. 448 Draco a
Lawgiver. 70 Drake. 410 Drocas fight. 407 Drogheda. 497 Drogo. 344 Drusenheym.
434 Drusius. 164 Dubabel. 427 Ducas Emperor. 347 Duclian. 344 Duderstade. 441
Duglas. 483 Duilius wins the first Seavictory for the Romans. 114 Dumnol of
Cenomania 291 Dunbar Fight. 500 Dunenburg taken by the Moscovites. 582
Dunkelspule. 467 Dunkirk taken by the Spaniards. 521. retaken by the English
and French 545 Dunkirk Sea Fight. 445 Durling fight. 457 Durocottorus of
Rhemes. 338 I. Dury. 575 Dutch-War with the English. 520
E.
EAdgina. 335 Earthquakes. 129, 181, 261, 307, and 543. Ebergardus. 320 Ebbo of
Rhemes. 314 Ebion. 179 Ebredunum. 287 Ebroine. 304 Ebruine. 299, 300 Ecbactana
built. 51, 56 Ecebolius. 215 Ecelinus. 364 I. Eckius. 404 Edinburgh Castle
taken. 500 Edessa. 355, 357 Edg-hill Fight. 459 Edith. 352 Edward son of
Ethelred 351, 352. Edward the second, King of England. 374 Edward third, King
of England. 377 Edward Prince of Wales. 378 Edward sixth, King of England. 406
Edward Duke of Bregance. 449 Eglon King of Moah. 13 Egmunda. 407 Ehud. 13, 22.
Einebeck. 448 Eislebe. 464 Elam King of Isracl. 42 Elbing surrendered to the
Swede. 557 Eleans. 53 Eleusius. 218 Eleutherius Pope. 185, 190 195 Eli. 15
Eligius of Novionum. 300 Elijah a Prophet. 43 Elipandus of Toledo. 312 Elisha a
Prophet. 43. dies 45 Elizabeth of Thuringem. 366 Elizabeth Queen of England.
406, 408, 409, 413. Ely. 432 Elpais. 304 Elxais. 187 Embden. 431 Emengard. 339
Emma. 336, 351, 352 Emmanuel Chrysolorius. 390. Emmanuel King of Lusitania. 402
Empedocles. 88 Empire divided by the sons of Lewis. 317 England subjected to
the Pope. 362. shakes off its yoke. 403 English Wars with the French. 361, 373,
395, 396 English Covenant. 462 English Engagement. 498, 499 English Plantations
revolt. 498 English Sea-War with the Dutch. 520. its conclusion. 525 English
Expedition into Flauders against the Spaniard. 545 Enhuse. 426 Enkenford. 572
Enkfort. 464 Q. Ennius. 132. 146 Ennodius of Ticena. 268 Epaminondas a Theban.
91 Epaonian Synod. 268 Epapus. 22 Eparchius of Ingolisma. 291 Ephesian Council.
241. depose Nestorius. 242 Ephesian Synod. 268 Ephorus the Cumaean. 99 Ephree.
64 Epicurus. 110 Epidamus built. 70 Epimenides. 73 S. Epiphanes. 219 S.
Epiphanes. 219 Epiphanius of Salamina, 230 Epiphanius of Ticinum, 256
Epiphanius of Constantinople. 278 S. Equitius. 269 Eraricus. 272 D. Erasmus.
404 Eratosthenes. 132 Erberstein. 455, 457 Erchenwald. 298, 299 Erford. 434,
448 Erichtheus. 19 Ernest of Austria. 413 Ernest of Mansfield. 417 Eros
accuses Pelagius. 240 Erystheus. 10 Esau. 8 Espernon. 504 Earl of Essex,
General, 458, 459, 486 Estensis. 375 Ethelred, King of England. 317, 351
Etruscians, 82. subdued, 109 Evagrius. 218 Evaristus, Pope. 185 Euboea taken.
383 Eucherius. 228 Eudo, Prince of Vascoins, 305. Invites the Saracens. 307
Eudocia. 245, 347 Eudoxia. 230 Eudoxia, Wife of Theodosius. 232 Eudoxias. 218
Eudoxus Cnidius. 98 Eugenius. 356 Eugenius, a Tyrant. 222 Eugenius the third,
Pope. 355 Eugenius the 4th, Pope, condemned in a Council. 389 Evilmerodach. 63
Eulamius. 280 Eulenburg. 456 Eulogius of Alexandria, 291 Eumenes. 103, 120
Eumenes of Asia. 142 Eunius Mummolus. 287 Eunomian heresy. 213 Eunomaeus,
Prince of the Anomaeans created Bishop. 218 Eunomius. 223 Eunus kindled the
Servile War. 145 Eupanius, an Historian, 231 Euphues. 60 Euphemius. 265, 266,
316 Euphemius of Chalcedon, 258 Euphrates the Stoic. 186 Eupolis, a Poet. 99
Euripides. 89 Euristheus. 34 Europa. 24 Eurybatus. 66 Eusebia. 210 Eusebius of
Samos. 219 Eusebius of Verselles, 214, 219 Eusebius of Nicomedia, 207, 211
Eusebius of Caesarea. 214 Eusebius of Dorilaum, 252 Eusoius. 210, 211
Eustachius of Bononia, 351 Eustathius of Thessalonica. 358 Eustathius of
Antioch, 208, 214, 215. Eustochium. 245 Euthymius. 316 Euthymius, Patriarch.
332 Eutychius. 187, 274, 290. Eutyches. 252, 279 Excise, alias the Dutch-Devil.
462 Exclusiana. 463 Exeter. 461 Exuperius of Toulouse, 225 Ezekiel. 48
F.
FAbianus, Pope. 195 Fabii, 600 of them slain. 87 Fabius Maximus. 115 Facundius
of Hermania, 280 Foelix, Bishop of Rome. 254 Foelix the 5th, Pope, lays down
the triple Crown, 389 Lord Fairfax, 461, 486, 487, 497. lays down his
Commission. 499 Falisci subjugated by Camillus. 96 Falkmane. 480 Famagusta. 393
Farenstsbeck. 426 Favorinus. 186 Fausta smothered. 205 Faustinus. 185 Faustus
Reginensis. 255 Faunus. 32 Dr. Featley. 477 Feckier. 444 Felicissimus, a
Schismatic, 196 Felix, 207 Ferdinand, King of Naples. 392, 393 Ferdinand, King
of Spain, 394, 399, 401. Ferdinand the First, Emperor. 406 Ferdinand the
second, Emperor. 417, 438 Ferdinand, Archduke of Austria. 416 Ferdinand, Duke
of Albania, 407 Ferian. 436 Fern taken. 545 J. Fernelius. 411 Ferrand Diaconus.
267 Ferraria. 375 Fidenates, 57. they revolt, 87. Fight at Naupactium, 408
Firmilianus of Caesarca, 196 Firmus, a Tyrant. 217 Flaccilla. 223 Flacella. 232
Flavian. 252, 253 Flavinius. 224 Flavius of Rhemes. 268 Flavius Blondus. 390,
395 Flemings. 379 Florence Council. 390 Florianus. 194 Florus of Lions. 321
Foggio Battle. 505 Foi^anus. 300 Fontinell. 305 Forcheym besieged, 427. famous
for a Complicated murder in the year 1640. 454, 455. Formosius, Pope. 320
Foscol. 495 S. Francis, of whom the Franciscans. 365 Francis Petrarcha. 376
Francis Gonzaga. 389 Francis Sfortia. 391 Francis Philadelphus. 395 Francis
Paulinus. 398 Francis Duke of Britain, 398 Francis, Duke of the Valesians,
401. and King of France, his War with Charles the 5th, 402. dies. 404 Francis
of Guise. 406, 407 Francis, son of Henry the second, King of France, 406
Francis Alenconius. 409 Francis of Mantua. 416 Franco. 352 Frankford Assembly.
312 Frankford taken and retaken. 426, 427 Franks enlarge their Kingdom, 262.
are subdued, 235. establish a Kingdom in Gaul. 256 Fredegund. 288 Frederick
Aenobardus. 356 Frederick the second, son of Henry 6th, anathematized, 364.
degraded, 366 Frederick the third, Emperor. 390, 391, 394 Frederick,
Archbishop of Rhemes, Crowned King of Denmark. 495 Frederick. 356 Frederick,
son of Alexius, 357 Frederick Aenobardus. 357 Frederick, son of Pheletheus. 252
Frederick, Cardinal. 346 Frederick of Arragon. 368 Frederick of Austria. 375
Frederick, Duke of Saxony. 405 Frederick, Elector Palatine. 417 French War with
the Romans, 150. are slaughtered, 312. Proclaim War against Spain. 436, 444
Freyberg. 456 Fridberg. 428 Fridland. 426, 427 Frisians, 236. the Gospel is
preached to them. 305 Frontarabe. 444 Fronto. 186 Frumentius Tyrius preached to
the Indians. 208 Fulgentius. 267 Fulcade, an Abbot. 311 Fulvius Flaccus. 145,
150 Funce. 434 Fuscianus. 195 Furne taken by the Spaniard. 494 Furnes Battle.
374 Furseus. 300
G.
GAbinius. 152, 157 Gabor, the Transylvanian. 420 Gabriel Bathor. 417 Gaese.
440 Gaimar. 340, 341 Gainas. 227 Gaison. 210 Galasse. 427, 431, 464 Galba
Caesar. 176 Galeacius, Duke of Millain. 386 Galerius Maximianus, 199, 204
Galerius Maximinus. 206 Galen. 186 Galienus. 193 Gallus Caesar. 210 Gallus
Hostilius. 192 Gangrian Synod. 208 Guard. 435 Gartise. 440 Gavisius. 419 Gauls
invade Italy, 96, 109, 114. Greece, 107. Asia, 108. are overthrown by Prusias,
128. Gedaliah. 48 Geise. 483 Geisericus with 80000 subdues Africa, 235, invades
Italy, and takes Rome, 250 Gelasius of Caesarea in Palestine. 225 Gelasius,
Pope. 265 Gelasius the second, Pope. 354 Geleen. 434 Geliber. 271 Gelo. 84, 116
Geminus. 161 Gennadius of Constantinople. 257 Genoan War. 415 S. Genovesa. 269
Genovesa. 244 Gentius, King of Illyria, 134 Genua. 393 Genua Fight. 444 George
Moniac. 345, 346 George Trapezunt. 394 Gepides. 284 Gerbert. 340 German of
Paris. 291 German of Cyzicum. 303 Germanus of Capua. 266 German Patriarch. 308
German War in Bohemia, 417 German Troubles. 422 Germans treat of Peace with the
Swede. 450, 495. Germanicus. 164, 171. Poisoned. 170 Germanus of Antissiodore,
244 Gerona taken. 373 Gerson. 390 Gersdorf. 465 Gestendorf taken. 591
Gibellines. 364, 367, 374. Gideon. 14 Gildare of Rhothomagi, 280 Gisibert. 331
Gislebert. 341 Gisla. 324 Glaucus. 19 Gloucester. 461 Glycerius, Emperor, made
a Bishop. 257 Gnidus. 91 Gnostics. 187 Godefride, King of Danes, 313
Godefridus. 324 Gidegisilus. 262 Godescalus of Orbs. 320, 321 Godfrey of
Bulloigne, 351 Godfrey Crook-back. 351 Godomar. 275 Godomarus. 262 Godwin. 352
Goliath. 16 Gonatas. 123 Gonsalve. 401 Gonzages. 375 Gordians. 191 Gorgias. 85
Goring. 489 Gorlice. 448 Gosline, Bishop. 324 Gothe. 431 Gothelo. 342 Goths
defeated, 228. Invade France, 233. Their Original and Kingdoms in Gaul,
Spain, and Italy, 238. their Wars. 269 Gracchian Sedition. 150 Grecian
Kingdom. 10, 18. restored to Liberty, 122. Its Empire begins, 101. is divided
into 12 parts, 103. four Dominions. 105 Granada Kingdom. 372 Granicus Battle.
100 Granse. 431 Gratian. 217, 221 Gratianus, a Bishop, 195 Gratianus, a Friar.
356 Graveling taken by the French, 473. by the Spaniard, 521. and again by the
French, 546 Gregorius Cappadox. 212 Gregorius Thaumaturgus, 191, 197 Gregorius
of Neocaesaria, 196 Gregory Nyssene. 218 Gregory of Turin. 263, 291. Gregory
Nazianzen. 219, 223, 225. Gregory, Pope. 291, 294 Gregory the second, Pope. 306
Gregory the 5th, Pope. 239, 340 Gregory the 7th, Pope. 343, 344 Gregory the
9th, Pope. 364 Gregory the 10th, Pope, 366, 367 Gregory 11th, Pope. 376 Gregory
12th, Pope. 387 Gregory the 13th, Pope, 410 Gregory the 15th, Pope, 419 Greeks
and Latins are reconciled. 390 Green. 502 Gressling. 437 Grevenbruge Fight.
483 Grimmane. 495 Grimoald. 298, 299 Gripho. 310 Grisons. 418 Groves beheaded.
529 Gryphina. 147 Guadicarius. 235 Gubaza. 273 Guebrian. 448, 451, 455.
Guelsians. 364 Guibert, Bishop of Ravenna. 343, 344 Guibert of Nongentum, 353
Guicciardine. 404 Guido, Earl of Flanders, 374 Guido Lusitanus. 393 Guines. 386
Gunderick. 262 Gundobald. 262 Gundomarus. Guns invented. 236 Guntharus, Tyrant
in Africa. 271 Guntramnus. 277, 287, 288. Guntsburg. 481 Gustave, Lord of
Osnabrugense. 427 Gustavus, King of Sweden. 416 Guyanians. 322 Gylippus. 90
H.
HAdrianople. 382 A. Hadrianus. 181, 182 Haganon. 335 Haginius. 185 Hailbrunne
Assembly. 426 Halberstade Assembly. 427 Hales, 385, 386 Hanan. 41 Hamilton goes
into Scotland, 442 Invades England. 489 defeated and taken prisoner, 490.
Beheaded, 491 Hannibal begins the second Punick War. 115. brings his Army to
Rome, 117. is called into Africa, and defeated by Scipio, 118. his death, 133.
Harald, son of Canutus, 351, 352 Harduel. 386 Harida. 339 Harmodius. 78
Harpagus. 66, 67 Hasarub Il. 116, 117 Hasting. 322, 323 Hatfield. 433, 434,
444. Haveberge. 434 Hazael, King of Syria, 44 Heberne. 322 Hebrews go into
Egypt, 9. their departure thence, 11, 12 Hegesippus. 186 Helena. 393 Heliodorus
scourged. 135 Heliogabalus. 189 Hellen. 18 Helvidius Priscus. 176 Henoticus.
255 Henry of England. 361, 380 Henry the 5th, King of England. 395, 396, 397
Henry the 6th, King of England. 396, 397 Henry the 7th, King of England. 397
Henry the 8th, King of England. 404, to 404 Henry the second, Emperor. 343
Henry the third, Emperor, contends with the Pope, 343 Henry the 4th. 356, 357
Henry the 5th. 354 Henry the 6th. 363 Henry the 7th of Lutzemburg, Emperor.
374 Henry the First, King of France. 350 Henry, the son of Francis, King of
France. 405, 406. Henry the third, King of France. 408 Henry the 4th, King of
France. 413, 414 Henry the Fowler, King of Germany. 330, 336. Henry the
Bavarian. 340 Henry Auceps. 349 Henry, son of Frederick the second, 364.
rebelleth against his father. 365 Henry Landgrave of Hassia, Emperor. 365
Henry of Guise, 410 Henry Bourbon, King of Navarr. 407, 410 Henry Stuart, Duke
of Lenox. 408 Henry Bourbon, King of Vascoines. 409, 410 Henry of Conde. 409,
410, 415, 418 Henry, Cardinal. 409 Henry, Brother of Baldwin, Emp. 369 Henry,
Duke of Medua, 419 Heracleonas, Emperor. 296, 297 Heracles. 191 Heraclides.
10, 34, 35 Heraclianus. 233 Heraclitus. 81 Heraclius. 291, 292, 293.
Herbipolis. 423, 428, 431 Hercules. 10, 27, 33 Hereford. 472 Heribert, Earl of
Verone, 334 Heribert, Earl of the Viromanduans. 336 Heribet of Colonia, 342
Heriveus of Rhemes. 335 Hermanaricus. 239 Hermane of Lorain. 344 Hermenefridus.
275 Hermeniscus. 277 Hermenigild. 289 Hermenfride. 304 Hermer of Rhemigium, 350
Hermetrude. 317 Hermias. 126, 280 Hermiges. 284, 285 Hermogenes. 186 Hermolaus
Barbarus. 395 Herod, 165 his story, 166 Herod Antipater. 174 Herodes the
Athenian, 186 Herodias. 174 Hesdin. 444 Hesiode. 37 Hesion. 28 Dr. Hewit
beheaded. 546 Heydelberg. 428, 431 Hezekiah King of Judah, 46 Hide beheaded.
501 Hiempsal. 151 Hierome of Prague. 387 Hilarious of Poitier. 214, 219, 220
Hilary, Bishop of Arelata, 243 Hilary succeeds Leo. 256 Hildebert. 299
Hilderick. 299 Hilderick, last King of the Merowingians. 311 Hilperick. 352
Hiero, King of Syracuse, 85 Himera Fight. 84 Hincmarus. 262 Hincmarus of
Rhemes, 321 Hiram, King of Tire, 49 Hipparchus. 78 Hipparchus, an Astronomer.
146 Hippias. 78, 89 Hippocoontes. 35 Hippocrates. 89 Hippolita, an Amazon, 27
Hippolita. 391 Hippolitus. 196 Hipponax, a Poet. 72 Hircanus, High Priest, 147,
149 Hirtius. 162 Hispaniola attempted by the English. 527, 528 Histiaeus
Milesius. 76 Holophernes. 47 Earl of Holland beheaded, 491 Hollanders. 428, 429
Holtsapfel. 480 Holy Wars. 355, 356, 360 Holy War in Tolouse. 370 Homarus
Mahoncet. 385 Homburg Battle. 448 Homer. 37 Homisda, Pope. 260, 266 Honorius.
228, 232, 334. Honorius, Pope. 354, 364 Honorius the third, Pope. 369 Horatius.
82 Horn. 425, 433, 456, 464. Horna. 407 Hortensius Cocles. 82 Hortensius. 157,
161 Hoseah, King of Israel, 46 Hosea, Prophet. 45 Hosius. 207 Hosomonaeans. 167
Hospitius of Nicaea. 291 Hotham, 457. beheaded, 470 Hoy Fight. 436 Hubert. 307
Hugo St. Victor. 360 Hugo Grationopolitan, 360, 353 Hugo Abbas. 323 Hugo in
Italy. 329 Hugo, son of Rutbert, 334 Hugo Capetz. 338, 349, 350 Hugo of
Marches. 372 Hugonots. 406 Hull. 457, 461 Hulst. 437, 453, 463 Humbert of
Sylvia. 346 Humbert, Prince of Vienna. 378 Humbert, Cardinal. 352 Hunfride. 344
Hungarians, 357. waste Germany, 330. become Christians, 340. their Wars. 382
Hunnericus. 256 J. Huniades. 382, 383, 391, 392. Hunnimund. 239 Huns invade
Pannonia, 235. Scythia, 236. subdue the Ostrogoths, 239. Overrun Armenia and
Cappadocia, 260. Pillage Thracia, 236, 273. J. Huss condemned, 387, 388 Hyarba.
49 Hybreas an Orator. 165 Hymenaeus. 179 Hyginus, a Grammarian, 165 Hypatia.
245
I.
JAbin King of Canaan, 14 Jacob. 8 Jacupp. 385 Jamaica taken by the English.
528, 529, 592, 597, 608. Jamblicus. 80 S. James, Bishop of Nisibis, 214. his
prevalent prayers. 211 James, King of Great Britain. 413 James of Nicosia. 393
James the younger. 175, killed. 174 James of Sicily. 368 James of Bourbon. 388
Janiculum. 58 C. Jansenius. 411, 547, 558 Janissaries raise tumults in
Constantinople. 570 Janus. 32 Jareb, High Priest. 138 Jarnatum fight. 407
Jason. 18, 27, 28, 135 Jasus. 10 Ibus of Edessenum. 278, 279 Iboreas. 284
Ibrahim, Emperor. 453 Icarus. 19 Idumaeans subdued by Hircanus. 149 Jecboniah,
King of Judah, the same with Joakim, 48 Jehoahaz, King of Israel, 45 Jehoahaz
King of Judah, the same with Joakim, 48 Jehojadah, High Priest 44 Jehosaphat,
King of Judah. 42 Jehu. 44 Jeptha. 14 Jeremiah. 48 Jeroboam, King of Israel. 40
S. Jerome. 243 Jersey. 514 Jerusalem destroyed by the Romans, 177. repaired,
182. taken by the Persians, 291. by the Saracens. 361 Jesuits Order begins,
376, 404. are recalled into France, 414. into Venice, 597 Jewish War. 177 Jews
persecuted by Antiochus, 138. tributary to Rome, 157. Banished Rome, 172.
rebel, and are crushed, 181, 182. are banished Jerusalem, 182. help the Turks,
493. are slaughtered in Poland. 495. Jezabel. 42, 43, 44 Jezdegirdus, King of
the Persians. 291 Ignatius martyred. 185 S. Ignatius, Patriarch, 326 Ignatius.
404, 411, 414. Ildebaldus. 272 Ildephonsus of Toleto, 301 Image Worship
forbidden, 312 Images. 326 Imilton. 92 Immanuel, Emperor, 382 Immanuel Sophus.
385 Inachus, 10 Inarus. 86 Inchigarney Castle surrendered. 512 Indictions, 205.
their Original and number. 206 Ingelgerius. 322 Ingund. 289 Innocent the third.
364 Innocent the 14th. 476, 609 Intaphernes. 73 Insuber Gallus. 146 Jo. 19
Joachim Abbot. 364 Joakim, King of Judah, 47 Joan Durcia. 396 Joanna, Popesse.
320 Joanna, Wife of Robert King of Naples. 375, 376 Joanna, Queen. 388 Joash,
King of Judah, 44, 45 Joash King of Israel. 45 Job. 9 Jocasta. 26 Jocles. 19
Jodocus. 300 Joel, Prophet. 45 Johanan, son of Josiah, 47 S. John. 179 John.
393 John of Austria, 409 John, an Anchorete. 225 John of Antioch. 278 John of
Alexandria, 294 John, Brother of Albert, 374 John, Duke of Aquitane, 379 John
Bellaius. 404 John Brennus. 364 John, King of Bulgaria, 369 John Brennus of
Jerusalem. 371 John Boscasius. 376 John Castmir, King of Poland. 495 John
Capistranus. 392 John Comnenus. 357 S. John of Constantinople, 229 John
Cappadox. 270 John Columbinus. 376 John Cantacuzenus. 381 John Ducas. 370 John,
King of France, 378 John Guttemberg. 395 John Galeatus, Duke of Millain. 376
John Heret. 303 John de Monte-regio, 395 John Maria. 389 John Montfort, 378,
379 John, son of Manuel, 381 John of Nevers. 382 John the 12th, Pope. 331
John the 22d, Pope. 375 John the 23d, Pope. 387 John Palaeologus. 381 John,
son of Renate, 393 John, possesses Ravenna, 234 John the third, King of
Swethland, 413 S. John Silentiarius. 268 John Scotus. 321 John of Turncremata,
390 John of Thessalonica, 266 John Tzimisces. 334 John, Without Land, 362 John
Xiphiline. 347, 348 Johnsbrode Fight. 441 B. Johnson. 472 S. Johnstown. 513
Jolanta. 364 Jonathan. 16 Jonathas. 139, 140, 141. Ionicks. 18 Ionick
Transplantation, 36 Joram, King of Judah, 44 Joram, King of Israel. 43 Joseph
the Patriarch. 9 Joseph of Thessalonica, 315 Josephus Comes. 214 Josephus, the
Historian, 177, 180 Joshua. 12 Jotham, King of Judah, 46 Jovian. 216 Jovinian
heresy. 226 Jovinian, an Heretic, 243 Jovinus. 223 Jovita. 185 P. Jovius. 404
Iphicrates. 91 Iphitus. 35, 92 Ipra. 503 Ireland subjected to the Pope, 362
Irene, daughter of Isaac, 369 Irenaeus. 190 Ireton, Deputy of Ireland, 525
Irish Rebellion. 451, 457, 463. Irmingard. 314 Isaac Angelus. 258, 259. Isaac
Comnenus. 347, 359. Isabella of Arragon. 373, 377. Isabella of Belgium. 438
Isabella, Keyner's Wife, 389 Isaiah. 45 Isaura Battle. 150 Isaurick War. 259
Isawlisk. 433 Isazeball, Emperor of the Turks. 382 Ishbosheth, son of Saul, 16
Ishmael. 7 Isidore of Gaza. 280 Isidore of Hispalenum, 295 Isidore, a Spaniard,
414 Isocrates. 99 Issum Battle. 100 Ismael Sophus. 386 Istmian Games. 132
Ithacius. 224 Itta. 300 Juda invaded by Sennacharib. 46 Judas Macchabaeus his
death. 139 Jugurthin War. 151 Julian, Brother of Gallus, 210 Julian, Emperor,
persecutes Athanasius, 215 Julian, a Pelagian. 241 Julian of Halicarnassus,
266, 267 Juliack besieged. 416 D. Julianus. 187 Julianus, Cardinal. 391
Juliomagus of Angier, 322 Julius, Pope. 211 Julius 2d, Pope. 401 Julias
Affricanus. 191 Julius succeeds Glycerius, 251 S. Ivo. 368 Ivo of Carnotta. 353
Ivon of Chartres. 360 Jupiter Capitolinus. 59 Juriacan Battle. 412 Justin
Martyr. 185 Justine succeeds Athanasius. 260, 261 Justine, Emperor. 266
Justinian, Emperor. 266, 269, 270, 271, 273. Justinian the second. 301, 302
Justinus. 186 Justinus the second, 281. a noble act of his, 281. his War with
Cosroes, 282 Justus Tiberiadensis, 180 Juvencus, a Poet. 209 Juvenal, a Poet.
180 Juvenal of Jerusalem, 253
K.
KAtherine. 376 Kaufber. 427 Earl of Kenmore. 526 Kerper, 445 Kilsieth Battle.
473 Kiphuse. 425, 433 Knights of Malta. 402 Koniecpolski. 594 Koningsmark. 441,
455, 464, 466. Kunegunde. 343
L.
LAborossarchod. 63 Labynitus. 62 Lacedemonian Kingdom, 37 Lacedaemonians
defeated by Antipater. 102 Lactantius. 209 Lacydes, a Cyrenian. 131 Ladislaus,
King of Apulia, 387, 388, Ladislaus, King of Hungary. 391 Ladre. 436 Laevine in
Sicily repells Philip, 116 Lagida. 111 J. Lainez. 411 Laius. 26 Lamachus. 90
Lambert of Trajectum. 300 Lambert. 328 Lambinus. 411 Lamboy taken. 431, 434,
455, 483 Lamian War. 103 Lampridius, an Historian, 201 Lancaster Family in
England. 296, 297 Landerick. 299 Landresse. 493 Lanshute, 482 Lanfrank. 352
Langwile destroyed. 464 Lanthileis. 262 Laodemon the Mitylenean. 103 Laodice,
121. kills her Husband Antiochus, 125 Laomedon. 28 Lared. 445 Lateran Council.
318, 364, 402 Latins. 58 Latinus, King of Latium, 33 W. Laud, Bishop of
London, 429. afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, 430. is sequestered, 450.
beheaded, 470 Lavinia. 33 Lavinium built. 33 Launomarus of Caunton, 268 S.
Laurence, 196 Laurentius Justinianus, 390 Laurentius Valla. 395 Lauretta. 463
Lautrenus. 403 Lawenburgick. 427 Lazarus informs against Pelagius. 240
Laziceans. 270 Leander of Hispatia, 291 Lecapenus. 333 Lediguer. 419 Leherick
Fight. 398 Leicester besieged, 471, 472 Lemberg. 456 Lemnos taken. 383 Lense.
493, 494 Lentulus. 156 Leo, Emperor. 145 Leo the third, Emperor, 309 Leo the
Philosopher, Emperor, 332 Leo, Pope. 200, 243, 254. Leo the Great. 256 Leo the
third, Pope. 313 Leo the 4th, Pope. 321 Leo the 10th, Pope. 401, 402 Leo
Isaurus, 303, 306 Leo of Armenia, 316, 326 Leo Phocas. 333 Leodegar. 00
Leonidas. 83, 122 Leonides. 190 Leonnatus. 103 Leontius, a Philosopher, 232
Leontius. 301, 302 Leotychides. 79 Leovigild. 289 Leody. 437 Leonard
Torsthenson, 525 Leonard Aretinus. 390 Leopold, King of Hungary and Bohemia,
Elected Emperor of Germany, 604 Leopold, Duke of Austria, 371 Lepantine Fight.
408 Lepidus. 154, 162, 163. Leporinus, a Nestorian, 242 Lerida, 474, 494 D.
Lesly. 443, 473 Lesna burnt. 596 Leubovera. 290 Leuctra Battle. 92 Leudesius.
300 Levellers. 496, 497 Leutharis. Lewis the second, 318 Lewis Balbus. 319
Lewis Calvus. 319 Lewis, the son of Lewis, 319 Lewis, King of France, 355, 356
Lewis, son of Charles. 335, 336 Lewis the 7th, 360 Lewis the 8th, King of
France. 372 Lewis the 9th. 372 Lewis the 11th. 393, 397. Lewis the 13th. 415,
417, 418, 420, 476. Lewis Huttin, King of France. 377 Lewis of Bavaria,
Emperor, 376. anathematized. 375 Lewis of Brabant. 373 Lewis of Orleance. 376,
379, 380 Lewis of Anjou. 376, 379, 388 S. Lewis of Tolouse. 368 Lewis King of
Hungary, 375, 384 Lewis King of Germany, 318, 330 Lewis the Gross. 360 Lewis
of Tarentum. 375 Lewis of Flanders. 379 Lewis, Duke of Ardes, 387 Libanius. 215
Liberatus of Carthage. 208 Liberius, Pope. 212 Licca. 495 Lidian War, 61, 66,
67. Ligurians. 356 J. Lilburn. 442, 498, 523. Lima destroyed by an Earthquake.
543 Limburg. 428 W. Lindane. 411 Earl of Lindsey, General for King Charles. 459
Linseus. 22 Linus. 175, 179 Lions burnt. 188 Lipsta, 455. besieged. 423 Lipsian
Assembly. 423 Lipsian Fight. 423 J. Lipsius. 415 Lisle. 489 Lithuanians revolt
from the Swede. 563 Livia, Mother of Tiberius. 170 Livius Drusius, 151 Livius,
a Poet. 132 Livius Salinator. 117 Lockier shot to death, 497 Lollius. 213 P.
Lombard. 361 Lombards, 284. enters Italy. 284, 285, 286. London Bridge. 430
Longinus. 197 Longinus, General. 259 Lorain, 317. a Kingdom, 331 Lotharius. 318
Lotharius the Saxon. 355 Lotharius, son of Rodulphus. 328, 329 Lotharius, son
of Lewis, 337 Lublin Fight. 559 Luca. 572 Lucan the Poet. 173, 180 Lucas. 489
Lucia. 201 Lucian, Martyr. 201, 206 Lucianus. 186 Lucifer Calaritanus. 211,
215, 219, 220 Luciferanian Schism. 215 Lucilius, a Poet. 173, 180 Lucilla. 183,
184, 207. Lucinius, 204. his death, 205 Lucius, Bishop of Alexandria. 219
Lucius, Pope. 1^5 Lucretia. 59 Lucretius. 161 Lucullus. 152, 155, 158 Lucumo.
58 Ludersheyme. 433 Ludovick, son of Lotharius. 337 Ludovick Transmarine, 336,
338 Ludovick Sfortius. 400, 401 Ludovick Bourbon, Prince of Conde. 406
Ludovicus Pius, 313. his sons rebel. 314 Luna four times taken, 427
Luneburgick. 425 Luitprandus. 334 Lupicinus. 217 Lupus Trecensis. 244 Lupus of
Senonenum, 295 Lusitania. 372 Luther. 402, 403, 405 Lutherans. 405 Lutprand,
307 Lutzen Fight. 423 Lycurgus. 19 Lycophron, son of Lysedes, 71 Lycurgus, a
Lawmakers. 49 his death. 50 Lysander, 90 Lysias, an Orator. 139 Lysides. 71
Lysimachus. 103 Lysimachus Priest. 137 Lysippus. 129
M.
MAcedonian Kingdom founded by Ceranus. 51 Macedonian Wars. 132, 145
Macedonian heresy. 213 Macedonius. 266 Macquine. 477 Macrinus. 189 Macro. 171
Macrobius. 226 Maecenas. 164 Magdeburg, 433. burnt, 423 Magi. 189 Magnentius.
210 Magus. 75 Mahomet, Prince of the Arabians. 293 Mahomet the second, 385
Mahomet the third. 384 Maidstone Fight. 489 Maiol, Abbot. 340 Majorian,
Emperor, 250. his death, 251 Majorinus. 207 Malchus. 197 Malchus, King of
Arabia, 141 Malta Knights. 402 Malta besieged. 408 Mammalucks. 383 Mamilius. 82
Man Island. 514 Manasseh, King of Judah, 46, 47 Mancinus. 145 Mandanes. 66
Manichean heresy. 200 Manichees. 315, 327 Manlian Law. 155 Manfredus. 367
Manlius. 96, 150 Mansfield. 419, 432, 434, 440. Mantinean Conflict. 92 Mantua.
375 Mantuan War. 416, 422 Manuel. 381 Manuel Comnenus. 358 P. Manute. 411
Maphaeus Barberine. 419 Marathonian Battle. 77 S. Marcella. 231 Marcellus. 116,
117, 172. Marcellians. 213 Marcellian. 201 Marcellinus, Pope. 201 Marcello. 571
Marcellinus, an Earl, 280 Marcius. 116 Marcius Ponticus. 187 Marcian, Emperor.
245 Marcilius Ficinus. 395 Marcoman Wars. 183 Marcodure, 456 Marcus, 201 Marcus
Valerius Laevinus, 131 Marcus Cornelius. 394 Mardonius. 77, 84 Mardian Fight.
204 Marduites. 301 Mardike, 474, 492, 545 Margaret. 361, 397 Margaret,
Governesse of Belgium. 407 C. Marius. 151, 154 Mariamnes. 167 Marinus Syrus,
260 Maris the Persian. 278 Marian, a Chronologer, 343 Marienburg. 559 Marosia,
the Pope's Strumpet. 329 Marsian War- 153 Marston-Moore Fight, 468 S. Martin
of Turin. 219, 229. Martial, a Poet. 180 Martius Turbo. 181 182 S. Martin. 264,
322 Martin of Gallecia. 291 Martina, Empress. 296 Martin Azpimelt. 411 Martin.
Trump. 445 Martin, Pope, 297 Martin the 5th, Pope, 388, 389 Mary, Sister of
Theodosius, 232 Mary, Empress, 339, 340 Mary Oegniacensis. 366 Mary, Queen of
England, 406 Mary Stuart, Queen of Scotland. 407, 408, 413. Masanissa, 143.
dies, leaving 44 sons. 144 Mascezeles. 227 Massacre at Paris, 407 Massaget. 67
Massilia built, 67 Mathematicians banished Rome. 172 Mathild. 354 Mathildis. 377
Mattathias, 138 Matthias, Emperor. 416, 417 Matthew. 175 Matthew Palmerius.
395 Maurice. 201, 409, 413, 416 Prince Maurice, 461, 486 Mavortius. 169
Mauricius, Emperor, himself, his Wife and Children slain by Phocas, 283
Maurice of Anjou. 225 Mausolus. 93 Mauvia, Queen of Saracens. 219 J. Maxentius.
269 Maxentius, son of Herculius. 203 Maxentius, a Monk. 267 Maximian Herculian,
198 Maximian succeeds deposed Nesto^ius. 242 Maximilian the First, Emperor.
394, 399, 400, 402 Maximilian the second, Emperor. 407 Maximilla. 187, 190
Maximinus of Orleance, 268 Maximinus. 191 Maximinus Papienus. 191 Maximus, a
Tyrant. 221 Maximus, a Cynick. 223 Maximus. 268 Maximus, a Philosopher, 215
Maximus Tyrius. 186 Mazarine. 421, 434, 463, 504 Medard of Suaesonia, 280
Medaea. 28 Mediolanum. 400 Megabazus. 76 Megacles. 71 Megalopolis demolisht,
124 Megapenthe. 23 Megarensis. 70 Melampos. 18 Melania. 220 Melchiades. 207,
208 Melchisedeck. 7 Meldrum. 459 Meleager. 103 Meletian Schism in Egypt, 206,
207, 215 Meletius of Antioch. 218 Meletius, Bishop of Lyeopolis. 207 Melissa.
71 Melissus. 68, 89 Melito of Sardis. 186 Menander, a Poet. 110 Menander. 179
Menelaus, a Mathematician. 186 Menna. 278 Mennas of Constantinople, 279
Mensurius, Bishop of Carthage. 207 Merce. 457 Meonia. 31 Meppene. 444 Meroveus.
237, 288 Messala. 181 Messalina, Wife of Claudius. 172 Messenii and Helotes
rained by an Earthquake, 85 Messenian War. 59 Metellus. 144, 145, 151. Metellus
Numidicus. 151 Metellus Creticus. 157 Metensian Synod. 318 Methodius of
Olympus-Licia. 201 Methodius. 316 Methodius, Patriarch. 326, 237 Meto, an
Astronomer. 89 Metrodorus. 161 Mets. 264, 275, 444 Mettennich. 431 Metus
Huffetius. 58 Micha. 13 Michael Temple. 305 Michael Curopalates. 315 Michael
Balbus. 316 Michael, Emperor. 326 Michael. 345 Michael Calephate. 346 Michael
Cerular. 346 Michael Stratiocus. 347 Michael, son of Ducas, 347 Michael
Parapinace. 348 Michael Palaeologian, 367 Michael Palaeologus Comnenus. 370
Micia's Monastery. 268 Micipsa. 151 Miletus. 77 Miltiades. 77, 79, 190 Milo. 81
Minervina. 205 Minians. 36 Minos. 29 Minotaure in Creet. 29 Minutius Foelix.
191 Mirabell. 495 Miramolinus, King of Tunis. 372 Mithridates War with Rome.
153, 155 Mitylena taken. 383 Mizael. 62 Mnestheus. 194 Moccenigo. 571, 592
Moccenigo. 505 Modestinus. 189 Mogol. 600, 610 Moguntia taken. 423 Moguntianum.
190 Fr. Molino. 492 Molugel. 341 Moors in Italy. 313 Moncontorium Fight. 407
Monica. 225 Monothelites. 293, 297, 298, 302 Monsone. 463 Montanus. 187
Montanus Priscilla. 190 J. Montfort. 378, 379 Montemorence. 422 Montrosse. 473,
499 T. Moor. 403 Moors, 313. driven out of Spain. 416 Mose Fight. 463 Moses. 11
Moses the Hermit. 219 Motte. 474 Mount Albane besieged, 419 Mucianus. 176
Muhammedes. 358 Muhammedes son of Amurath. 382 Muhammedes, Emperor of the
Turks. 382 Muleassus. 403 Muleius. 409 L. Mummius. 143 Munster agreement. 484
Muphti hanged. 429 M. A. Muretus Lemovir, 411 Musa, Emperor of the Turks. 383
Musalmas, Prince of the Saracens. 303 Muscovites invade Poland. 535, 536
Music. 342 Musonius. 177 Musonius Tyrrhenus. 180 Mustapha, Emperor. 384, 385
Matius Scaevola. 82 Mycoeni. 10, 19, 29, destroyed. 85 Mycale Fight. 84
Mysenus. 255 Myson of Chenas. 73
N.
NAash, King of Ammon. 16 Nabis, Tyrant of Lacedemon. 133 Nabonassar. 62
Nabonidas. 63, 67 Nabopollazar. 47, 62 Naevius, 132 Namslave. 426 Naples. 399,
400, 565 Narcissus. 172 Narney. 180 Narses, King of Persia, 199 Narses Spado
overcomes the Goth Totilas. 272. invites the Lombards into Italy. 285 Naseby
Fight. 471 Navarre. 372 Naumberge. 434 Nazantius. 218 Nazarius, an Orator. 209
Naxus built. 69 Neapolis. 403 Nebuchadnezzar. 47, 48, 62 Necho, King of Egypt,
47, 64 Nectarius. 224 Nemean Sports. 124, 125, 132 Nemesianus. 201 Neoburge.
432 C. Nepos. 165 Nepotianus. 209 Neptune. 19 Neratius Priscus. 186
Neriglossar. 63 Cl. Nero. 117 Nero Caesar, 172. his Cruelties. 173 Nerva. 180
Nestorius. 239, 241, 278. Newark. 485 Newberry first Battle, 461. second
Battle, 469 New Castle. 485 New-Rome. 205 Nicaea, 307. the Seat of an Emperor,
369. burnt, 193 Nicanor. 139 Nicene Council. 207 Nicephorus the Blind. 310, 315
Nicephorus Phocas. 331, 333 Nicephorus Botoniates, 348 Nicephorus Briennius.
348 Nicetas Studiensis. 346 Nicholaus, Bishop of Mira, 208 Nicholaus de
Tudescis, 390 Nicholaus Perotus. 395 Nicholaus, Pope. 318 Nicholaus the 4th,
Pope, 360 Nicholaus the 5th, Pope, 375, 389, 392 Nicias. 90 Nicodemites. 573
Nicolaitans. 179 Nicolaus Damascenus, 165 Nicomedia, 307 Nicopolitan Battle.
377 Nidek. 479 Nimrod. 6 Ninias. 6 Ninus, 6 Nineveh built. 6 Niobe. 26 Nisibis
besieged, 211 Nitetis. 74 Noah, 4 Nogoretus. 374 Nola, 169 Novatian Schism. 195
Novatus, 195 Nordling Fight, 428 Norimberg Assembly. 446 Normans, 335, 340,
341, 344. they molest France, 321, to 325. Noviograde, 492 Numa, King of Rome,
58 Numentia destroyed. 145 Numantine War, 144 Numerianus. 198 Numitor. 57
O.
OCkam, 376 Ocrisia Corniculata, 59 Octavius Caesar, 162, 163, 164 Odenatus,
199 Odesloe Battle. 464 Odilo of Avernus. 353 Odo. 320, 323, 324 Odo of
Campania. 342 Gdo of Collen. 388 Odovacre, King of the Turcilingians. 251, 252,
361 Odovacrius. 238, 239 Oebares. 75 Oedipus. 26, 30 Oelsa. 456 Oenanthes. 128
Oenomaus. 186 Ogyges, King of Attica, 10 Olibrius succeeds Anthemius, 251
Olmuce. 465 Olympias. 95 Olympic Games. 29. 52 Onesimus, Martyr. 185 Onias,
High Priest. 131, 135, 137, 178 Onomarchus. 94 Onuphrius Panuine. 411 Opheltes.
19 P. Optatianus Porphyrius, 209 Optatus of Milevium, 220 Oraetes. 75 Orange.
428 Orange Synod. 278 Prince of Orange excluded from the Government of Holland.
539 Order of the Purple-gown Prelates. 389 Orestes. 10, 251 Orgelitanus of
Toledo, 312 Oribasius. 215 Origin. 190, 191, 195, 201. favors Pelagius, 240.
is condemned, 279. his followers. Origenes Aquilinus. 197 Origenists.
Condemned. 230 Orleance Maid. 396 Orleans destroyed. 323 Orosius. 244 Orphites.
193 A. Ortelius. 415 Ortygia. 68 Osman, son of Achmet, Emperor. 384 Osmund
Drengore. 341 Ossens. 187 Ostend besieged. 413 Ostrogoths. 238 Ostermanne. 506
S. Oswald. 300 Otho Caesar, 176 Otho, Emperor. 362 Otho, son of Henry, 330
subdues the Sclavonians. 331 Otho the Great. 331 Otho the second. 332 Otho the
third, 339. King of Germany, 340 Otho of Bamberg. 354 Otho, Duke of Saxony,
Emperor. 363, 364 Othoman Family. 381, etc. Othoniel, 13 Otronta taken, 383
Otto. 320 Ottones, son of Charles 339 Ovid. 165 Oxienstern, Chancellor of
Sweden. 425, 428, 432. Oxford. 460, 471, 484, 485 Oxilus. 34, 35
P.
PAcuvius. 146 Pade Fight. 494 Paderborn. 478, 481 Palaepolitans. 109
Palladius. 244 Palladius, a Gallatian. 230 Pallantes. 172 Palatinate. 444 J.
Pamell. 411 Pamphylus, Martyr. 201, 206 Pampilona. 312 Panaeus, a Painter. 53
Pandulph of Capua. 341 Panormitanus, Archbishop. 396 Pansas. 162 Pantalion Sa,
Beheaded, 527 Papenheim. 423, 428 Paphlago. 346 Paphnutius, Bishop of Thebes.
208 Papianilla. 256 Papias. 186 Papinianus. 188 Papyrus. 108 Paradise. 3
Pardons. 402 Paris. 264 Parisian Nuptials, 407 Parliaments in England, 449,
450, 471, 527, 542. in Scotland, 443. in Ireland, 443. Parma besieged. 365
Parmenianus. 220 Parmenides. 89 Parmenion. 102 Parthenians. 69 Parthenopaeus.
26 Parthian Kingdom begins, 120 Parthians vanquish Crassus, 158. are Conquered,
183 Paschal Controversy. 207 Paschal, Pope. 354 J. Passeratius. 411 Patera,
Orator, 209 Patricii. 96 Patricius. 245 S. Patrick of Ireland. 268 Paula. 226,
231 Paul, 171. his death, 175. Paul the Hermit. 197, 213. Paul, Bishop of
Constantinople, 212 Paul of Burges. 390 Paul the third, Pope. 405 Paul the 5th,
Pope. 417, 419. Paulinus of Trevire, 214 Paulinus, Bishop of Nola. 243 Paul's
Cathedral in London. 429 Paulus, a Lawyer. 189 Paulus an heretic. 298
Pausanius, General for the Lacedaemonians. 84 Pausanias, an Historian, 186 Pedo.
181 Pelagius. 280, 239. Condemned in a Council. 240 Pelagius, a Captain in
Spain. 305 Pelius. 19 Pelopides. 10, 24 Pelopidas, a Theban, 91 Peloponnesian
Kingdom, 10, 37 Peloponnesian War. 89 Pelops, son of Tantalus, 52 Pelusian
Fight. 136 Pembroke Castle. 489 Pen, General at Sea. 527, 529 Penruddock
beheaded, 529 Pentapolis, 311 Penthilus. 10 Perdiccas. 103 Peregrinus Proteus.
186 Periander. 71 Pericles. 89 J. Perron. 412 Perperna, Consul. 149 Perpinian.
462 Persecution in Persia, 208, 242. in Africa, 242 Persecution the first, 175.
the second, 184. the third, 184. the 6th, 195. the 7th, 195. the 9th, 197. the
10th, 200. Persamenians. 357 Persepolis. 102 Perseus. 10 Perseus, King of
Macedon, 51 Perseus, a Stoic. 122 Perseus, King of Macedon, subdued by the
Romans, 134 Persia. 386 Persians, their Original, 24. their Empire repaired,
189. defeated, 193. rise, 259. win much from Heraclius, 292. War with the
Turks, 437 Persius, a Poet. 180 Pertinax. 187 Perusia. 311 Pescennius Niger.
187 Peter. 175, 176 Peter of Alexandria. 206, 207 Peter Chrysologus. 244 Peter
Fullo. 247 Peter Moggus. 253, 255 Peter Cnapheus. 255 Peter K. of Bulgaria. 333
Peter, King of Hungary, 343 Peter Damian. 343 Peter of Amalphitania, 346 Peter,
King of Arragon, 367 Peter Martyr. 368 Peter, King of Arragon, Excommunicated.
373 Peter of Corbey. 375 Peter Cunerius. 378 Peter Bertrand. 378 Peter of
Castile, 379 Peter Lunensis 387. 387 Peter of Alenson. 390 Peter Cauchonius.
396 Petronius. 174 Phaebidas. 91 Phaenices. 25 Phalantus. 70 Phalaris. 71
Phaortes. 61 Pharamund. 237 Pharnabazus. 91 Pharaoh, King of Egypt, 11
Pharsalian battle. 159 Pheletheus, King of the Rugians, overthrown, 252
Pherecides, a Philosopher, 73 Pheres. 19 Phidias. 53 Phido. 68 Phidon. 51
Philadelpho Monathon, 611 Philasterius of Brcur. 225 Philetus. 79 Philip of
Macedon. 94, 95 Philip, successor of Antigonus. 129, 130, 132 Philip of
Adeodatus. 361 Philip, son of Henry the First, 350 Philip, Emperor of Germany,
359 Philip, Emperor, Brother of Henry the 6th. 363 Philip of France. 364, 368,
372 Philip the Hard, King of France. 373 Philip the Fair, King of France. 373
Philip the 8th, Excommunicated. 374 Philip, Duke of Burgundy, 377-380, 395.
Philip the Long, King of France, 377, 388 Philip of Valois. 377 Philip
Artevellius. 379 Philip the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy. 379 Philip the Bold, 380
Philip Maria. 389 Philip, Prince of Millain, 391 Philip, King of Spain, 406,
409. condemns his son Charles. 407 Philip Nerius, 414 Philip the third, of
Spain, 419 Philippian Conventicle, 212 Philippiburg. 426, 428, 431. Philippine.
428, 457 Philippus the Arabian, 192 Philip Bardanes. 302 Philistus. 99 Philo
the Jew. 174, 180 Philomelus. 94 Philopomenen. 131, 133 Philostratus. 186
Philotas. 102, 103 Philoxenus Cythereius. 99 Phocas, Emperor. 283, 291
Phoceans. 67 Phocensian War. 94 Phocilides. 80 Phocis. 19 Photinians. 213
Photinus. 185 Phoroneus, 10 Photius, Patriarch. 327 Phrixus. 25 Phul, King of
Assyria, 54 Phygellus. 179 Phyalus. 94 Piccolomine. 444, 456, 462. P^cts invade
Britain, 236 Picus. 32 J. Picus Mirandula. 395 Pierius of Alexandria, 201
Pilate, 174 Pindar, a Poet. 89 Pinnenburg. 464 Pipin. 298, 304, 305, 307, 310,
311 Pipin, son of Lewis. 314, 317. Pirates raise Troubles, 156 Pirenian War.
113 Pisates. 52 Pisistratus. 71 C. Piso in Syria, 170 Piso's Conspiracy. 175
Piso adopted, 176 Pissiack Assembly. 406 Pitana. 110 Pythagoras. 80, 81
Pittachus. 72 Pius. 185 Pius the second, Pope. 392, 393, 394 Pius the 4th,
Pope. 405 Pius the 5th, Pope. 408 Placidia. 229, 233, 234. Plane Battle. 480
Plataean Battle. 84 Platina. 395 Plato. 98, 310 Plautianus. 188 Plautilla. 188
Plautus. 132 Plebcian Consuls, first appointed. 97 Plectrude. 304, 307 Pliny
the elder. 180 Pliny the younger. 180, 185. C. Plinius. 185 Plotina, Wife of
Trajan, 181 Plotinus Lycopolitanus, 191, 197 Plutarch the Chaeronear, 186
Pneumatomachians. 213 Poland, 384. Concludes a peace of 24 years with the
Swede, 435. Victorious over the Cossacks and Tartars. 516, 517, 518. Polemo.
110 Polemo Philosophus, 186 Pollio. 187 Poltosko Fight. 567 Polycrates. 75
Polydectus, King. 49 Polycrates, Bishop. 191 Polydectus, Patriarch, 334
Polynices. 19 Pomara. 445 Pomeranians. 354 Pometheus. 11 Pompey, 152, 157, 158,
159 C. Pompey, 163 Pompeiopolis. 373 Pomponius. 189 Pontarly. 441 Pontfract.
488, 494. Pontianus, Pope. 195 Popham, General at Sea, 525 M. Popilius. 145
Poppaea. 173 Porphyrians. 207 Porphyrius. 197, 201 S. Porphyrius of Gaza, 231
Porsenna, 82 Portius Latro. 165 Portologona. 492 Portsmouth. 459 Possessor in
Africa. 269 Posthumous, 82. Condemns his son, 88 S. Potamieno of Alexandria,
206 Powder Invented. 376 Prague, 484 Predestinatian heresy. 255 Priesthood of
the Jews bought and sold, 137 Premonstratensian Order begins. 360 Prexaspes.
75 Princes divide the Empire, 363 Principius of Suessiona, 256 Printing
Invented. 395 Priscian. 280 Priscilla. 187 Priscillianus. 224 Probus, Emperor.
197, 198 Procopius Silen, subdued, 217 Procopius, Martyr. 201, 206. Procopius,
an Historian, 280 Procles. 71 Proclus, a Mathematician. 260 Proculus. 184
Proculus Siccensis. 187 Prodicus. 89, 187 Prodigies. 431, 435, 437, 438, 453,
454, 476, 506, 523, 547, 609. Prohaerefius. 215 Prompalus, an Impoflor, 140
Prosper of Aquitane. 244 Prosper Adurnus. 393 Protagoras. 88 S. Protasius's
relics. 224 Proterius. 253 Protestant Fights in France, 407, 410 Prudentius,
a Poet. 231 Prusa. 381 Prusius, King of Bythinia, 128, 130, 142. Psammeticus.
64, 75 Psammis. 64 Ptolemais Lagida. 111 Ptolemy Euergetes. 125, 135, 148
Ptolemy Philopater. 126, 127, 128 Ptolemy Epiphanes. 131 Ptolemy Philometer.
135, 136, 137 Ptolemy Auletes. 152 Ptolemy Bacchus. 153 Ptolemy son of Lagus.
103, 106 Ptolemy Lathurus. 148, 152 Ptolemy Alexander. 148 Ptolemy Appio. 148
Ptolemy the Astronomer, 186 Pulcheria. 232 Punick Wars. 113, 115, 143 Putske
Conflict. 558 Pygmalion, King of Tire, 49 Pyrrhus. 107, 113, 119, 120. Pyrrhus,
a heretic. 298 Pythian Games. 94 Pythias. 79 Pythodemus. 100 Python. 103
Q.
QUades. 183 Quadratus. 186 Quinquagentians. 199 Quintilian. 180 Quintillus.
194 Quintine of Belvacum, 353 S. Quintins. 195
R.
RAbenhaupt. 483 Rabshakeh. 46 Rabulas of Edessenum, 278 Rachisius. 311
Radagaisus, Prince of Goths, invades Italy, 228 Radamanthus. 26 Radegundis.
280, 290 Radzieicouski. 551, 586 Radzivil. 550, 552 Raginfred. 304, 307
Ragintruda. 298 Ragotzi, Prince of Transylvania. 466, 473, 605. Raimundus
Lullius. 368 Rainold. 355 Rainsborough, 488 Rainulph. 341 Rambervill. 434
Raphian Battle. 127 Ratherave, 434 Rathobod. 304 Ratisbone. 426, 427 Ratisbone
Synods, 312, 446. Rava. 437 Ravenna. 401 Ravensburg Battle. 457 Rehoboam, King
of Judah. 40, 41 Reiner. 388, 389 Renaclus of Trajectum, 300 Renatus, Duke of
the Andegavians. 397 Renatus, Duke of Lorain, 398 Rhabanus Maurus. 321
Rhadasis. 277 Rhaeticus the Augustodinian. 208 Rhee reduced. 419, 420 Rhemigius
of Rhemes, 256, 262, 268 Rhetians. 417 Rheinfield. 426, 439, 452. Rheinberck.
428 Rhodes shaken by an Earthquake, 129. taken, 384 Richard of England. 361,
357, 364, 393, 380 Richard the second, of England. 396 Richard the third, of
England, 397 Richard of York, 397 Richard, Earl of March, 397 Richard, Prince
of Cornwall, King of the Romans. 366 Richard, son of Willielm. 336 Richard,
Sicilian Admiral. 359 Richard, Protector of England. 604 Richelieu. 420, 421,
422, Richildis. 319 Ricimer. 251 Riga befieged by the Muscovites, 568, 583
Robert King. 335 Robert Wiscard. 344 Robert Guiscard. 348 Robert, Emperor. 368
Robert Sorbona. 374 Robert King of Naples, 374, 375 Robert, Earl of Artois, 377
Robert, Duke of Bavaria, Emperor. 386, 387 Robert of Bullein. 410 S. Roche.
368 Rochel demolished, 372. besieged. 408, 420 Rocroy Fight. 463 Rodulph, King
of Burgundy takes the Kingdom of Italy. 328 Rodulph, Dake of Burgundy. 335,
341 Rodulph, Duke of Suevia, 343 Rodulph of Alsatia, Emperor, 366 Rodulph
Agricola. 395 Rodulph, Emperor. 416 Roger, 355 Roger, first King of Sicily.
356, 358 Rollo. 325 Roman Synods. 265 Roman Seat demonstrated, 175. removed to
Avignion, 374, 375 Romans slaughtered in France, 150. pay tribute to the
Persians, 273 Romanus Diogenes. 347, 348. Romanus Lecapenus. 333 Rome built,
57. endangered by the Gauls, 76. molested with factions, 154, 155, 156. fired
by Nero, 173. Its Empire divided, 200. taken by the Goths, 228. by Charles
Bourbon, 403 Romuald. 340 Romulus and Remus. 57 Rondelet. 411 Ronsard. 411
Rosamunde. 284, 285 Rosate. 474 Rose. 481 Rothweile. 457 Rotrude. 309
Rouston-Heath Fight, 473 Ruard Tapper. 411 Ruderick. 305 Ruffinus. 220, 226,
227. Ruffinus of Aquileia. 230, 231 J. Ruffinus of Jerusalem, 240 Rugye. 440
Prince Rupert, 468, 484, 486. P. Rupilius. 145 Rustanus, King of Persia, 386
Rusticus, a Martyr. 195 Rutbert. 323, 334 Rutland. 312
S.
S. Sabbas the Friar. 268 Sabbas, Abbot. 280 Sabellicus. 395 Sabellius. 196,
213 Sabines. 57, 58 Sacchaeans, 68 Sacred War in Greece, 93 J. Sadolet. 404
Sagittarius of Ebreduna, 290 Saguntum demolisht. 115 Saladine. 356 Salamine
besieged. 408 Salamis. 83, 393 Salentines subdued by the Romans. 119 Salernum
besieged, 340 Saleucia taken by the Duke of Savoy, 410 Salmanassar, King of
Assyria. 46 Salmoners. 19 Salome. 156 Salonius of Vapinga. 290 Salsa. 445
Salvius Julianus. 187 Salvius of Albigenum, 291 Salust. 161 Samians. 86 Samnian
War. 97 P. Samosatene. 196 Sampson. 14, 15 Samuel. 15 Samuel, King of Bulgaria,
345 Sandersleve Fight. 433 Sandesideria. 404 Sangihan, King of the Alanians.
248 Santabarenus. 327 Sapor. 192, 193 Sapores. 208, 211 Sappho. 72 Saracens.
317, 318, 321, 334, 340, 341, 355, 360, 361, 372, 409. invade Spain, 305.
375000 of them slain, 307. Saragossa besieged, 276 Sardanapalus, King of
Assyria. 50 Sardis taken by Cyrus, 73 Sargon, King of Assyria, 56 Sarmates. 183
Saturninus. 190 Saturninus, Bishop. 195 Saturninus Antiochenus, 187 Saturnus.
32 Savil. 439 Saul. 16 Savoy Earldome, created Dukedom. 388 Duke of Savoy
persecutes the Protestants in the Valleys of Piedmont, 547, 548 Saura
Columnensis. 374 Saxons subdued. 311 Duke of Saxony's strange punishment on,
etc. 541, 542 Scaffgith. 433 Ju. C. Scaliger. 411 Jos. Scaliger. 415
Scaligerians. 387 Scaligers. 375 Scamander. 31 Scanderbeg, King of Epirus. 383,
391, 392, 393. Scapula. 190 Scarlet Cap. 365 Scaurus. 150 Schaeus. 49
Schafgotsch. 427 Schism of 40 years continuance amongst the Popes, 376. another
Schism, 387, 388 Schlange. 448 Schonberg. 420, 422 Scilly Islands. 514 Scipio
Affricanus. 117, 118, 133 Scipio Asiaticus. 133 Sclavonians. 312 Scottish
Covenant. 442 Scots invade England, 443, 449, 467. they sell their King, 485
Scythians. 61, 67, 208, 357 Sebastenus Eustathius, 218 Sebastian, King of
Portugal. 409 Sebastianus. 233 Sedecias the Jew. 318 Ae. Sejanus. 170
Selentinian War. 113 Selestade. 426 Seleucus. 103 Seleucus Callinicus. 125
Seleucus Philopater. 135 Seleucus, son of Demetrius Nicanor, 147 Seleucus, son
of Antiochus Gripha, burnt. 152 Selimus, son of Bajazet the second, Emperor,
383 Selimus the second, Emperor. 384 Selinuns. 181 Semiamira. 189
Semi-Pelagians. 241 Semiramis. 6 Semirianians. 213, 216 Semprone Assembly. 432
Seneca the Philosopher, 173, 180 Sennacherib, King of Assyria, 46, 64 Sergius.
298 Sergius, Associate with Mahomet. 292 Sergius of Constantinople. 293 Sergius
the third, Pope. 329 Sertorius. 154 Servile Wars. 145, 156 Q. Servilius. 153
Servius Tullius. 59 Sesack, King of Egypt, 41 Sethon. 64 Severian. 289
Severianus Gabalitanus, 231 Severinus of Noricum, 257 Severinus, Abbot. 268
Severus under Hadrian, 182 S. Severus. 187, 188 Severus. 203 Severus of
Trevire. 244 Severus, Emperor. 251 Severus of Antioch. 266 L. Sextius. 97
Sextius. 186 Shallum, King of Judah, 47 Sherburn Fight. 473 Sicaidares. 386
Sichild. 294 Sicilian Vespers. 367, 370. Siculus. 201 Sicyonian Kingdom. 6
Sidonius Apollinaris, 256 Sigebert. 286, 298, 299. Sigebert, King of the
Metenians. 289 Sigericus. 234 Sigismund Gundibalus, 274 Sigismund, Emperor.
387, 389 Sigismund, King of Hungary. 377, 382 Sigismund, K. of Poland, 413, 416
Sigismund the third, King of Poland. 438 Sigismund Bathor, Prince of
Transylvania. 415 Sigismultus. 235 C. Sigonius. 411 M. Silanus. 150 Silesia.
583 Silius, 172 Silius, a Poet. 180 Silk. 274 Sillinges. 229 Silphius. 70
Silverius, Pope. 278 Silvester the second, Pope, 340 Simeon Crucified. 185
Simeon Stilites. 245, 257 Simeon, King of Bulgaria, 333 Simon, High Priest, 141
Simon Magus. 173, 179 Simon Montford. 372 Simplicius. 280 Simplicius of Vienna,
225 Sindercomb. 544 Sion Tower. 17 Sirves, a Persian. 292 Sisyphus. 18, 19
Sittavia. 456 Sixtus. 185 Sixtus, Pope. 196 Sixtus the 5th, Pope. 410 Sir Henry
Slingsby beheaded. 546 Sluse. 453 Smalcand subdued. 479 Smerdis. 75 Smidberger.
426 Smolensko taken. 416, 536 Smyndirides. 72 Smyrna built. 37 Social Wars.
93, 130, 153. Socrates, 88 Sodom. 7 Soissons. 264 Solemnis Carnotensis. 256
Solomon, 17. builds the Temple. 39 Solomon, King of Guien, 323 Solon. 67, 72
Solosontes. 80 Solomon. 402, 403 Solomon, Emperor. 382 Solomon, son of
Selimus, 384 Sophias. 282 Sophocles, a Poet. 89 Sophus. 386 Sosthenes. 107
Sorbon College, founded, 374 Spaniard's Neapolitan Fleet, ruined by Tempests.
437 Spanish Armado in 1588, 410 Sparta built. 11 Spartacus. 156 Speusippus. 98
Spinola. 413, 419, 421. Spira surrendered. 431 S. Spiridio, Bishop of
Trimitunth. 208, 211 Spork. 447, 480 Spotswood. 499 Spurius Cassius. 83
Stalhanse. 455 Stalimene taken by the Venetians. 585 T. Stapleton. 415 Star in
Cassiopeia. 408 Statius, a Poet. 180 Stauracius. 310, 315 Steinford. 427
Stellat. 428 Stena besieged. 532 Stenichorus. 72 S. Stephen, 171. his relics.
244 S. Stephen Island. 428 Stephen King of Hungary. 340 Stephen, son of
Lecapenus. 333 Sthephen, Pope. 195, 196. Stephen the 5th, Pope, 313 Stephen,
Pope, violates the ashes of his Predecessor. 320 Stilichon. 227, 228 Strabo, a
Philosopher, 180 Earl of Strafford. 450 Strato Lampsacenus. 131 Strigonius. 384
Strymon Battle. 359 Studius. 257 Suenice. 463 Sueno, King of Denmark, 351
Sueno, son of Canutus, 351 Suetonius. 180 Sumner. 546 Sundgore slaughter. 426
L. Surius. 411 Swedes. 183, 229 Swenice. 455 Swethland usurped by Charles. 413
Switzerland, 572 Syagrius. 262 Sybaritans. 81 Sylvanus. 240 Sylvius, Daughter
of Numitor. 57 Symmachus. 187, 226, 264, 265, 267 Symonides. 70 Synesius, a
Cyrenian. 244 Synod. 278 Synod at Constantinople, 223, 303, 327. at
Carevalentia, 360. at Sylvanectum, 362. at Sardis, 212. Chalcedon, 230.
Diospolis, 240. Milevum, 240, 241. Orleans. 264. Rome, 265. Nicaea, 390
Gentiliacum, 312. Divodunum, 318. Ments, 321 Syphax and Hasdruball overthrown
by Scipio, 118 Syracuse built. 68 Syracuse taken by Marcellus. 116 Syria
possessed by the Turks, 371
T.
TAcitus. 180 Tacitus, Emperor, 194 Talbot. 396 Tamerlane. 382, 385, 386
Tancrede, 341, 344 Tantalus. 26, 52 Taphon built. 23 Tarasius. 309, 310
Tarentine. 112 Tarentum built. 70 Tarquinius Priscus, 58 Tarquinius Superbus.
59, 81, 82 Tarragon. 452 Tartars erect an Empire, 370, 371. invade Poland. 474,
494 Tassilio, Duke. 312 Tatianus. 187, 190 Tatius, Captain of Sabines. 57
Taunton. 472 Taurus Beritius. 186 Techelles Sicaidares. 386 Telamon. 491
Teleclus. 60 Telephasta. 24, 25 Telephus. 68 Telesphorus, 105 Telestes. 99
Telline Valley. 431 Tellinian War. 418 Temenus. 34 Temple of Jerusalem rob bed,
136. Overthrown by the Saracens. 346 Templars. 374 Tencteres. 236 Tenedos taken
by the Venetians, 581 Terence. 146 Teresia. 411 Tertullian. 191 Tetrapolis
built. 19 Tetricus, Tyrant. 194 Teucer. 31 Teuta. 114 Teutonians. 150 Thaboris
built. 388 Thales Mylesius. 72 Thebes bullt. 25 Theban Martyrs. 201 Theban War
with Athens, 92. their City destroyed by Alexander, 100 Thelchines. 10
Thelxion. 10 Themistius. 215 Themistius Euphrades. 220 Themistocles. 85
Theobald. 353 Theobald, Earl of Champagne, 372 Theobard of Trajectum, 300
Theocritus. 260 Theodatus, King of Goths, 277 Theodebert. 275, 293 Theodomir.
239 Theodorick the Goth, 239, 261, 264, 275 Theodora, 269, 273 Theodoret. 279
Theodore of Caesarea. 279 Theodore of Mopsuestia, 279 Theodore Calliapus. 297
Theodorick. 299, 304, 305. Theodore Stuita. 310 Theodora. 326, 346 Theodorus,
Prince of Dyrrachium. 369 Theodorus Lascaris, Emperor. 369 Theodore Lascaris
the second, 370 Theodore Gaza. 394 Theodosius, Emperor, 221. is baptized, 223.
abolishes Idolatry, 225. Theodosius the second, 227, 232 Theodosius, Bishop of
Cyris in Syria, 245 Theodosius the third, of Adramytryum. 303 Theodotus. 121,
191 Theodota. 310 Theodovaldus. 275 Theodulph of Aurelia, 314 Theognis. 72
Theonsville. 444, 463 Theopascites. 254 Theophania. 332 Theophanon. 334
Theophylact, son of Lecapenus, 333 Theophilus, son of Leo, 316 Theophilus,
Emperor, 326 Theophilus of Alexandria, 230 Theopompus. 99 Theophrastus
Eresius. 110 Thermopylae. 83, 108 Theseus. 29, 30 Thessalonice. 104, 369
Thessalus. 78 S. Thomas of Canterbury. 361 Thomas, Tyrant. 316 Thomas Aquinas,
368 Thomas Valdensis. 390 Thomas of Vio. 462 Thomkins. 462 Thompson 497
Thoringia. 275 Thorismund. 239 Thracia. 307 Thraseas. 177 Thrasibulus. 71, 85,
91 Thrasumene Overthrown, 115 Thucles. 69 Thucydides. 98 Thurgandus of
Treveris, 318 Thuringe. 434 Thyestes. 24 Thymetes, King of Athens, 35 Tiberius,
Tribune. 165 Tiberius Caesar. 170 Tiberius Varro. 170 Tiberius Aspimaras. 301,
302 Tiberius succeeds Justinus, 282 Tiberius, son of Justinian, 302 Tiberius of
Sicily. 306 Tiburtines. 97 Tibullus. 165 Ticine Battle. 115 Ticinum, 311, 402.
besieged. 284 Tigranes wins Syria, 152 Tilly. 420, 438 Timaeus, an Historian.
111 Timocharis. 110 Timoleon deposes Dionysius. 93 Timothy. 91 Timothy of
Alexandria. 224, 267 Timothy Aelurus. 247, 253 Timothy Solophaciolus. 254 A.
Tiraquell. 411 Tiridates. 121, 173 Tisamenus. 10 hernes. 91 Titus Q. Flaminius
subdues Macedon. 132 titus Caesar. 178 Tlesias, 60 Toirase. 420, 421 Tolbiacum
Fight. 262 Fr. Tollet. 412, 415 Tommambaisus Sultan, 383 Tomyris. 67 Torgrave.
434 Torsthenson. 448, 455, 456, 463, 464, 465, 466. Tortenson. 441 Tortone. 463
Torwood Fight. 512 Totilas takes Rome. 272 Traditores. 201 Tragolipace
Mucalette. 346 Tragosius. 393 Trajan. 181 Trajanopolis. 181 Trajectum taken.
428 Transubstantiation. 364 Transylvanians. 340 Trapezonda, 278. taken by the
Turks. 383 Trapezont, Emperor, 386 Trebeian Battle. 115 Trebenianus Gallus.
192 Trebonius. 162 Trevers burnt. 324 Trevire. 431 Tribonianus. 270 Tribunes
first created. 83 Trichorachatos. 299 Tridentine Council. 405 Trigibildus. 227
Triapas. 10, 11 Trisagium Hymn. 259, 260. Triumviri. 162 Troppane. 479 Troy.
31 Tryphoena. 147 Tryphon. 141 Tuburtius, Martyr. 190 Tuertina. 181 Tullus
Hostilius. 58 Tunaxarxces. 68 Tunis taken by Barbaressa. 384 Turingians
subdued. Turks, 408. defeated, 369, 371, 492. take Constantinople; 200000 of
them slain by Tamerlaine, 382 A. Turnebus, 411 Turpilius, a Poet. 161 Tusculum.
356 Tydius. 19 Tire built, 49. besieged, 62. taken by Alexander, 101. Tzathes.
273 Tzathius, King of the Lazores. 261
V.
VAipharius, Duke of Aquitane. 311 Valenchienne Fight, 505 Valens, Emperor.
217 Valentinian, 216, 235 Valentinian the third, 232, 248, 249 Valentine
Council. 256 Valentinians Epoche. 220 Valeria Faustina. 183 Valerian, 193
Valerianus, Martyr. 190 Valerius Corvinus. 97 Valesians in France. 411
Valettane. 434, 493 Vandalls, 183, 229. utterly broken in Africa, 271
Vandregisil. 305 Vantrump. 520, 521 M. T. Varro. 161 P. T. Varro. 161 Varien.
426, 427, 428, 431, 434, 439. Vascoines. 312, 373 Vascony. 294 Vascus Jannas.
394 Vaslo Flustas, Duke of Nemora. 401 F. Vatablus. 404 Vatican Library
erected, 392 S. Udalricus. 331 S. Vedastus relics. 300 Vedastus of Atrcbatum,
256 A. Vega. 411 Veian War. 87 Veienses. 57 Venables. 527, 529 Venetian
Merchant hanged for, etc. 429 Venetians, 276, 313. their beginning, 249. their
Wars, 416. prevail against the Turks, 495, 570, 571. Venloe. 428 Venuleius.
189 Vercella. 417, 445 Verina. 246 Verona. 375 Veronian Battle. 252 Vespasian
Caesar. 176 Vesprin. 539 Vesuvius. 178, 424, 438 Vetilius. 144 Vetranius. 210
Victor, Pope. 191 Victor Cabades. 259 Victor of Capua. 280 Victor of Tunis. 280
P. Victor. 411 Victorinus. 195, 214 Victorinus of Aquitane, 256 Videmir. 239
Vido, 328 Vienna. 262 Vigelane. 474 S. Vigil of Trent. 231 Vigil, Pope. 278,
279, 280 Vigilantia. 281 Vilna. 476 S. Vincent's Garment, 276 Vincent of
Belvasia. 366 Vincent of Ferrara. 390 Vincentius. 201 Vincentius Lyrinensis,
244 Vinnicia. 517 Virgil. 161 B. Virgin Mary. 301, 308, 325, 334, 357, 465,
474, 480. Virginia. 87 Visegoths. 238, 239 Vitalian. 260 Vitalis. 220 Vitalis
Troetius. 255 Vitellius. 174 Vitellius Caesar. 176 Vitigis, 272, 277
Vitikindus. 330, 349 Vitriacan Kingdom. 350 Vitulcanus, 259. his Navy burnt
with brass Prospectives. 260 Uladislaus, King of Hungary. 382, 391 Uladislaus,
K. of Poland, 423, 429 Uladislaus, Duke of Mosch, 416 Ulefield. 433 Ulphila.
238, 263 Ulpianus. 189 Ulrich. 576 Ultan. 300 Vocladian Fight. 263 Voldamar.
463 Vole Gulf. 506 Vologesis. 173 Volsci. 82, 83 Volscian War. 87 Volusianus.
192, 207 Volusius Maetianus. 187 Urban, Pope. 351 Urban the 4th, Pope. 367
Urban the 5th, Pope. 376 Urban the 6th, Pope. 376 Urban the 8th, Pope. 418,
419, 476 Urchanus, Emperor. 381 Urcisinus. 219 Uriathick War. 144 Utrey. 499
Ursmar of Lobia. 305 Usabell. 339 Usipians. 236 Usman Dominicus, Brother of the
great Turk, baptized. 542 Usumcassanes. 385 Uvalamir. 239 Uvalstein. 423
Uvillebrod. 305 Uvillelm. 350 Uvillelm Repostellus. 341 Uvinomadus. 237
Vulsoaldus. 304 Uzref Bashaw. 429
W.
WAgstaff. 528 Walachus. 391 Wales. 452 Walk Fight. 589 Waller, Knight, 459,
461, 473, 486. Wallia, the Goth. 234 Warbman. 440 Warsovia. 566 Wartenburg. 426
Earl of Warwick. 458, 491. Weide. 432 Wenceslaus, Emperor, 377, 379, 386
Werdmuller. 576, 578 Werth. 480 West-Chester. 472 Westminster Synod. 470
Wicklist. 383 Whale on the Coasis of France, 453. and in the River of Thames,
547 Wido. 320 William, Earl of Poictiers 360 William, son of Tancred, 344
William the Conqueror. 352 William Earl of Holland, Emperor, 365, 366 William
of Paris. 366 William Budaeus. 404 William of Orange. 409 William of Nassaw,
428 Wiltzburg. 426 Witgenstein. 457 Wittistock Fight. 433 Wohlave. 463 Wolgast.
404 Worms. 366 Wortisberg. 466 Wrangle. 434, 466, 479
X.
XAnthippus. 113 Xanthus, King of the Boetians. 35 Xaverius. 404, 411, 415
Xenaia of Constantinople. 266 Xenais, Bishop of Jerapolis, 255 Xenocrates. 110
Xenoetas. 126 Xenophanes. 73, 80 Xenophon. 98 Xerxes. 78, 83, 85
Y.
YEarly Account altered. 407 York, 188, 203. besieged, 468 York Family. 396,
397 Ypre taken by the French and English. 608
Z.
Zaccheus, Martyr, 201 Zachary, Prophet. 44 Zachary, Bishop. 310 Zancles. 61
Zant. 492 Zedekiah, King of Judah, 48 Zeize. 464 Zeno Eleates. 81 Zeno the
Stoic. 110 Zeno, Emperor. 239, 246. Zenobia Conquered. 194, 197. Zenocrates.
98 Zenodia. 246 Zimisces. 345 Zimri, King of Israel, 42 Ziska. 388 Zoe. 332,
333, 345 Zopyrus. 76 Zoroastes, King of the Bactrians, 6 Zosimus. 240, 241, 268
Zosimus, an Historian, 231 Zuinglius. 413, 573 Zurick. 574, 575, 579 Zwiccave.
448
FINIS
A Geographicall Description OF THE WORLD.

DESCRIBING Europe, Asia, Africa, and America.

With all its Kingdoms, Countries, and Commonwealths. Their Scituations,
Manners of the People, Customs, Fashions, Religions, and GOVERNMENTS.

TOGETHER, With many Notable Historical Discourses therein contained.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, 1659.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. Line 9. for, Thamis, read Thanais. line 18. for, buts, r. but: putting
from before its. p. 6. l. 1. after Scotland, r. one of whose Isles Hethy, use
the Gothish Tongue from the Norwegians. and l. 3. after Ancients, r. by reason
of its situation. p. 42. l. 2. for, new, r. now. p. 44. l. 9. join Syra,
Phoenicia, together, and r. Syrophoenicia. p. 49. l. 14. for, 1350, r. 3350. p.
63. l. 39. for, fabulous, r. Sabulous. p. 66. l. 13. make Aethiopia Asiatica
one word, and put a period before Chaldea. p. 91. l. 30. after it, r. is. page
94. l. 1. put a period at outward. p. 94. l. 28. and 29. r. the death of his
son Micipsa, Jugurtha Micipsa's adopted son. p. 97. l. 41. for Town r. Tower.
p. 102. l. 16. after Odman, dele comma. p. 115. l. 19. after Wine, put a comma.
p. 123. l. 26. after them, r. thither. p. 128. l. 46. before whose, r. with. p.
131. l. 41. for Caba, r. Cuba. p. 132. l. 20. for 1467, r. 1497. p. 147. l. 15.
after sound, r. or their extraordinary bigness. p. 153. l. 23. before Supper,
r. the. p. 169. l. 46. for, the, r. them.

Here place the Map of the World.

A NEW AND ACCVRAT MAP OF THE WORLD Drawn according to ye truest De scriptions
latest Discoueries and best Observations yt have been made by English or
Strangers


The Eclipse of the Sunn




The Eclipse of the Moon


A Geographicall Description OF THE WORLD.
THe ancient Geographers; and Poets, Orators, and Historians (who learned the
parts of the World's situation from them) have described only those Lands
which they knew, and which they judged habitable. We profess, that many places
were to them unknown: and those which they believed were forsaken either
through heat or cold, we know are inhabited in many places. There are six
general Parts of the World: the Arctique or North; Antarctique or South;
Europe, Africa, Asia, called the old parts, because they were known to the
Ancients, and America, (comprehending under it Magellanica) called the New
World, because newly discovered within this two hundred years.

To the Arctique belong, 1. The Country under the North Pole, unknown. 2.
Greenland, which lying at 80 degrees of Latitude, bears grass and green herbs,
from whence also it took its name. 3. Newland. 4. Iceland, which is now subject
to the King of Denmark. 5. Nova Zemla, (which though it be four degrees more
Southerly than Greenland; yet it is altogether naked, and without pasture, an
Island stinking with flesh-devouring beasts) with the Hyperborean Sea, and two
Narrow Seas. Waygaz and Davis, whereof the one is more Easterly, the other
bending more to the West.

To the Antarctique are to be referred those vast Countries, which lying under
the South Pole, are longly and largely extended through the cold, temperate,
and torrid Zone: where not only Peter Ferdinand a Spaniard preached; but also
are commendable for the constitution of the Air and soil, and largeness of
the Countries; equalizing Europe and Africa taken both together.

But the disposure and order of the other four parts is on this wise; Asia is
to the East, to which Africa is joined from the South, and partly also to the
West. Europe is joined to Asia from the West and North. America, a little
farther toward the West; and lastly, Magellanica, directly toward the South. In
all parts of the World are to be considered, first, their bounds toward the
climates, and so a distinction from other neighboring parts; after that, their
chief accidents: And lastly, their natural portions, to wit, the chief
Mountains, Seas and Rivers.

EUROPE (which is thought to have taken its name from Europa a Tyrian; whom
some make the daughter of Agenor; others of Phoenix; others, a Nymph of the
Ocean, as the Poets in their fables) is reckoned the first among the parts of
the World, both because we inhabit it, and some chief Geographers have
inhabited therein; also because it is more manured than other parts, and
because it is more famous for the warlike deeds of the Macedonians and Romans.
It is partly Northern, partly Western, between the Tropic of Cancer and the
Pole Artique. Its longitude begins from the utmost part of Spain and the
Atlantic Ocean, and ends at the River Thanais, now called Assaw. But that
length of Europe is limited by some to 60 degrees, to one of which (passing
through the midst of Europe) do answer almost 10 German miles. Others have
computed Europe's longitude from the River Thanais to Hercules strait, to
continue 760 German miles. But others measure the length thereof by fewer
miles, to wit, from the City Compostella to Constantinople, which is 600 German
miles. But from its latitude, that is, from South to North, according to most,
is contained only 44 degrees, beginning from Sicilie, where the Elevation of
the Pole is 80 degrees, even to that region of the North in which the elevation
of the Pole is 80 degrees: so that Europe has 660 German miles in breadth; and
so it is longer than broader. But others extend its breadth to 54 degrees, to
wit, from Sicilie even to the very North Pole it self. It is also bounded
almost on every side with the Sea. From the East which lies to Asia, it is
bounded with the Aegean Sea, likewise with the Euxine Sea, with Moeotis fenne,
and the River Thanais. From the West it is terminated with the Atlantic strait
or narrow Sea. From the South, with the Mediterranean and Hercules strait. From
the North it is bounded with the Britain Sea; but now others shut up Europe
with the utmost bounds of the Icie Sea. Europe falls into the 4th and 9th
Climate, between 10 and 20 Parallels. It is the least of all parts of the
World; yet the most worthy part: which its excellency depends, 1. On the
temperature of the air. 2. On the fruitfulness of all things. 3. From the
endeavor of Tillage, which is here greater then in others. 4. From its
populousness. 5. From the study of Mechanic Arts: for there are more cunning
Workmen and Architects in Europe, than in any other part of the World. 6. From
the study of liberal Arts, which both in respect of Languages, and also of
Disciplines, do more flourish in Europe; so that in no part of the World more
famous books are written and set forth, Schools do no where more flourish, than
in Europe. Seventhly, From its Empires, which are no where greater and famouser
than in EUROPE: and so from its Justice or Right, Discipline or Government, and
Laws. Eighthly and lastly, from Christ's Religion, which is no where more
frequently and freely preached and professed than there. And Pliny long ago
said, Europe was the nourisher of the Conquering people of all Nations, not to
be compared to Asia, and Africa in bigness, but in virtue: It Is Countries are
partly Continents, partly Pen-insulae or almost Islands, and Islands. The
Countries that are Continents, are Spain, France, Germany, Italy, Sclavonia,
Greece, Hungary, Poland, with Lituania, and Boruscia, Russia, under which is
contained Muscovy, or white Russia. It Is Peninsulae are chiefly Norway,
Swethland, Gothland. The Islands in the Ocean, are England and Scotland,
Ireland. In the Mediterranean Sea, Sicily, Sardinia; Corsica, Creet, at this
day called Candy, Majorica Island, and Minorica. Kingdoms in Europe, are
chiefly Ten, 1. The Spanish. 2. The English, under which are the Scottish and
Irish; now having changed the name of Kingdom into a Protectourship. 3. The
Danish, under which is Norway. 4. The Swedish, under which is the Gothish. 5.
The Polonian. 6. The Hungarian. 7. The Bohemian. 8. The German. 9. The French.
To which may be added the Italian, although (at this day) it fall not under the
name of a Kingdom. But the head of Europe was once called Rome toward the
West, but Constantinople toward the East; whence some think the Roman Emperor
sets a two headed Eagle in his Arms; to wit, that one may look toward the East,
to Constantinople; the other toward the West, to Rome. Tongues throughout
Europe are especially three. The Roman with the Italians, French, and
Spaniards. The Teutonick, among the Helvetians, Germans, Bavarians, Swedes,
Norwegians, Danes, English, and most of the Belgians or Low Countries. The
Sclavonian in Sclavonia, Polonia, Bohemia, Hungary. But all particular
Countries have diverse Dialects in their own Tongue, and in some places
Languages are heard, whereof there is no commerce or agreement with others; as
in Britain, Armorica, Navarre, etc. The Seas of Europe are three. 1. The Ocean.
2. The Mediterranean Sea, which beginning from the outmost part of Spain, about
the Islands Gades, is carried from the West, through the South into the North,
where afterward it is called the Euxine-Sea, although some may think the
Mediterranean to flow from the Euxine-Sea. Lastly, the third Sea of Europe, is
the Baltic, which beginning from the Danish Hellespont, and the City Lubeck,
is extended about an hundred and fifty Miles between Saxony, Pomerania,
Swethland, Borussia, Livonia, and the opposite shores of Denmark, and Finland,
even to Wiburg toward the East. The chief Rivers of Europe, are Danubius, which
extends it self to 300 Germane Miles, and rising six Miles above Tubinge,
receiving sixty small Rivers into it, poures forth it self through Germany,
Hungary, Bulgaria, Servia, Thrace, with seven Mouths into the Euxine Sea.
Another River is Rhene (separating France from Germany): after that follows
Albis, Istula, Borysthenes, Thamis. The principal Mountains in Europe, are the
Alps, which separate Germany, and Spain, from Italy; then follow the Pyrenean
Mountains, which separate France from Spain, likewise the Carpathian Mountains.
And let these things fuffice of Europe in general: The situation, Riches, and
commodities of whose several Countries, together with their Religion, I shall
(for brevity sake) but only name.

BRITAIN (which was once called Albion, not so much from the fabulous reports
of the Grecians, from Albion the son of Neptune; buts according to the Latins,
ab albis rupibus, its white rocks seen on the shore) is, though not the King,
yet Queen of Islands, being the very biggest in the World, except Java, being
1835 miles about; and is bounded on the South with France; on the North with
the Northern Ocean: it was called Britain, from Brit, signifying colored or
painted; and Tayn, a Nation: (for the Inhabitants were wont to paint their
bodies, to appear the more fearful to their enemies): Brutus the Trojan's
coming thither, and denominating the same, being not so well grounded on true
History. It is divided into three parts in general; England, Scotland, and
Wales. England (so named, from the Angles, or English Saxons enjoying it) is
the chief Country of the three, whose head-City, London, is both ancient, as
being built by Lud diverse years before Rome, and also populous, and very
Merchantable by reason of the fair and sweet fresh River Thames: which by the
Seas force ebbeth and flows above 60 miles into the Land, more than any in
Europe: of whose beautiful Towns, stately Buildings and Gardens about it, a
German said, We saw so many Woods and Princely Bowers,
Sweet fields, brave Palaces, and stately Towers:
So many Gardens dressed with curious care,
That Thames with Royal Tiber may compare.


SCOTLAND (sometimes called Albania, and whose Scottish-men which keep their
ancient speech still, call it Albain) is the Northern part of Britain: which
the two Rivers Tweed and Solvay divide from England toward the South. It was
named Scotland, from Scoti, Scitti, or Scythi, a people of Germany, unto whose
Northern parts, even the name of Scythia was given: which people seizing on a
part of Spain, and then on Ireland, possessed the West part of this Country in
the year 424. The people are divided into Highlanders and Lowlanders, according
to the Countrie's situation: many of the former being uncivil, if not
barbarous. Among the many Provinces herein, is Louden, (once called Pictland,
or a Country, hilly, and without trees) in which stands Edenborough, the Mother
City, the abode of the Scottish Kings, before that, after the death of
England's Queen, Elizabeth, all Britain was (by King James of Scotland, who
was next heir to England's Crown) united under one King: and since more than
that, made one Commonwealth, under a Protector, through the Conquest of
Scotland by the English. It is 480 miles in length, (though narrow) and 160
longer than England, which yet is much broader than it.

WALES (separated from England on the East; whose most certain limit, is a
great Ditch reaching from the River Wie's flowing into Severn unto Chester,
where Dee runs into the Sea; and called Claudh Offa, or Offa's Ditch, King of
the Mercians, by whom it was made,) is generally conceived to be so named, from
the Britains fleeing thither from the Saxons, who had seizure of England:
Walls or Welshmen, importing Aliens. Some derive it from Idwallo, Cadwallader's
son, who retired hither with his few Britains. But the Brittons bringing their
pedigree from the Gauls, whom the French still call Galloys, and the Country,
Galls, (thence Saxon-like, G. being changed into W, is Walloys or Walls, and
so wales, (some also of France being called Walloons) makes some to be of this
opinion. It is the least of the three Countries, containing four Cities: and
was called a dominion or Princedome, a Title given to the English Kings eldest
son: by means of Edward the first, who caused his Wife to be delivered at
Carnarvon of a young son Edward; whom the British Lords swear to obey; when as
before they mainly withstood to have a general English Vicegerent over them.

The chief Merchandises are, Wool, Englands staple commodity, whose Cloth
diverse Nations buy before any other; Tin, Lead, Beer; (Gold and Silver Mines
there are none); besides plenty of Corn and Cattle, especially in England and
Wales, for Scotland is in some places lean and barren; Wolves also the whole
Island is free of. Their Religion, since deserting Rome, is Calvinism
generally; Yet England (in its Bishops times) had the doctrine of Geneva, but
the Ceremonies of Rome; from which (then) there were some dissenters. Scotland
came nearer to Geneva in both. But of late years, though the Ceremonics be laid
aside also; yet are there many who make separation both in doctrine and
discipline, from that Church.

There are also many lesser Islands belonging to Britain, as the thirty two
Isles of Orkney, or Orcades, Northward of Scotland, whose chief is Pomonia;
whose head town is Kirkwall; who in latter times were held by the Normans, or
Norwegians, till that King in 1266, surrendered them to Alexander King of
Scotland, by reason of its situation. North of these is Shetland, supposed by
many to be Thule, the utmost Island known to the ancients, one of whose Isles,
Hethy, use the Gothish tongue from the Norwegians: and for that Mariners call
it Thylensell, under which Thule is couched: Yet Iceland (of which hereafter)
is generally conceived to be Thule, it being the remotest part of the Northern
World: but weightier reason out of Solinus and Tacitus, are against it.
Likewise there are 44 Hebrides or Western Islands, on the West of Scotland,
bought also of Magnus of Norway, by Alexander, whose Inhabitants called
Red-shanks, are like the wild Irish in behavior and speech; in one of which,
(to wit) Jona, is the chief Town Sodore, notable for the Scottish Kings
Sepulchers. Scilly Islands situated 24 miles from the West of Corn wall in
England, are 145 in all, ten whereof are only esteemed, as Scilly; the others
Denominater, Armath, etc. Whither also the Romans banished condemned men, to
work in their Mines. The Dutch call them Sorlings. Other Islands lie dispersed,
and belong to Englands Commonwealth: whereof the chief are five; two whereof,
Jersey, and Guarnsey, are the only remainders of France to the English. Jersey
being the bigger and fruitfuller, containing twelve Towns or Villages; the
other, 10 Parishes. They are 20 Miles assunder, lying nigh to Normandy and
Britain in France, and using the French tongue. Wight Island (which being
severed from the main Land by a narrow strait of the Sea, and but a mile over
in one place, may well be said to be of England, though not in England) lies
Southward from thence, being 20. or 21 miles long, and 12 broad, and is
strongly seated and strengthened, whose chief Town at this day is Newport, a
small mile from whence is Carisbrook Castle, very strongly situated: there was
wont to be arms therein for 5000 men: and in every Village a piece of Ordnance
for defense. It belongs to Hampshire; and did (it seems) appertain to the
Britains, from whom it was taken by Wolphar King of Mercia. Anglesey (once the
seat of the Druides, and bordering on Carnarvonshire of Wales) is accounted a
shire thereof: which containing formerly a multitude of Towns and Villages in
so little room, being but 20 miles long, and seventeen broad, has now the
chief, Newburg, Beaumorris, and Aberfraw on its South Side. Man-Island,
situated 25 miles from the South of Cumberland, the North of England, is
thirty miles long, and fifteen broad in the broadest place: and whose chief
Towns are Russin, or Castle Town: and Balacuri. It has seventeen Parishes.
Their Language is Norwegian and Irish, mixed; they are said to have two good
properties; to hate thieving and begging. On a Hill herein called Sceafull,
both England, Ireland, and Scotland, may (in clear weather) be seen. This
Country preserving venomous creatures alive brought into it, ended the
controversy between England and Ireland concerning it. And here also is that
wonderful thing wherewith Gerard the Herbarist ends his book, to wit,
Geesebred of rotten Wood, falling (from Trees) into the Water. It belonged
(after diverse seizures, sale, and gift) unto the Stanlies, Earls of Darby,
called Kings of Man, the last of whom, being beheaded (a few years since) for
engaging against Englands Common wealth: the power they there had, was lost, if
not the very title, together with his life.

There are (moreover) Northern Islands lying in the Scythick Sea or Icy Ocean
so called: by the Cymbrians, the dead; by Tacitus, the dull or slow Sea: the
chief whereof are Greenland under the cold Zone; yet known to have grass; and
they say, there are people that dwell in Caves, delighting in witchcraft.
Iceland, to be mentioned elsewhere. Freezland, not Frizia in Belgium, almost as
big as Ireland. Nova Zemla: And lastly, that which Sir Hugh Willoughby
discovered in 1553; whereabouts, he was with his men frozen to death, going to
find out a new way toward Cathaia and China: which design, others prosecuting,
have gone to the River Obi, the Eastern Confines of Muscovie, which is
notwithstanding, but half way to China.

These Islands have their several Commodities even as Britain to whom they
appertain. The Orcades are in a measure populous and fertile, and Pomonia is
well stored with Tin and Lead. Scilly Islands are stored with Grass, Grain,
and Lead. St. Mary's being sufficiently fruitful. Man has not only enough
Corn, Cattle and Fish for it self, but sends good store into other Countries.
Anglesey, for its abundance of necessaries for man's life, is called Mam Cymry,
that is, the Mother of Wales. Wight has plenty of all sustenance, whose sheep
bear fine Wool, and Trees, store of fruit. Jarsey abounds in grain; and of
sheep, most, with 4 horns, of whose Wool they make Jarsey-stockings. Garnsey
(formerly Sarnia) is well enough, though inferior (as was said) to Jarsey in
fruitfulness. As for their Religion, it is according to that of the main
Island, only Jarsey and Garnsey have long followed Geneva's Church Discipline:
which is much affected by the Protestant Ministers of France.

IRELAND (called by some Ancients, Hiberniae, also Juernia, Jerne, Ogygia, etc.
and by the Irish, Erin. Yet it has (by some) been termed Scotia, because the
Scotti came from Spain, and dwelt here) lies between great Britain (for
Ptolomy calls it little Britain) and Spain, having England on the East, divided
by a Tempestuous Sea, of about a days sailing. Cambden says its 400 miles
long, and 200 broad. And some do affirm; that from Knockbrandon unto Carnagh in
the North of Ulster (which is the length) is 320 Irish miles: and from Dublin
to Crough Patrick, by West of Galloway (which is the breadth) is 200 Miles. It
has five principal Provinces, Lemster on the East, in whose County of Dublin,
stands Dublin, the Mother City of that Nation: built by Harald Hasager; the
first King of Norway: Which was (after the English Conquest) peopled by
Bristoll men; here the Deputy of Ireland resides: where is also an University.
Munster, on the South: Conaught on the West, Ulster on the North, and Mead in
the Mid-land. John of England, was first entitled Lord of Ireland; Henry the
eighth, in 1542 was in an Irish Parliament declared King hereof: yet Ireland
stood in terms of wildness and nonsubjection, (too tedious here particularly
to express) till the Rebellion of Tirone, toward the end of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth; which ending in his own overthrow, crushed the Irish
Nobilities overpower, and made a full conquest of the whole land. But it of
late years bloudily breaking out again, occasioned a second Conquest of that
people, and a confinement of them unto one Province. Some are conformable to
civility, but the Kerns or wild Irish exceeding barbarous. They are generally
strong and nimble: and will skip over the bogs (of which there are many)
without sinking, whereas others cannot do so. The Air being Rainy, is moist
and Rheumatick; so that both inhabitants, as well as strangers, are much
troubled with Catarrhs, and the Bloody Flux: It is hilly, Moorish, and full of
Woods, exposed to Winds, and many pools, even in the top of the highest
Mountains. There is much Cattle, wherefore they abound in Milk, Cheese, and
Butter; their Corn is but short and small; and through the cold winds there
blowing, and the Suns want of force in Autumn, the Grapes do not very well
Ripen. Yet they neither much seek shade in Summer, nor fire through Winters
rigor. There are good Horses, and light, for that Countries journies, called
Hobbeys. They abound in fish, both of Sea and fresh Water; The chief River
being Shennin, Sinei, or Shannon, which runs from Ulster, two hundred miles, to
the Vergivian Sea, and is Navigable sixty miles. Much Fowl there is, but no
Storks, Pies, or Nightingales. No hurtful beasts are there, besides Wolves and
Foxes. But there is no venomous beast or Serpent at all. Whence one has truly
spoken in her behalf, although somewhat Heathennishly -- I am that Island,
which in times of old,
The Greeks did call, Hibernia, Icie cold.
Secured by God and Nature from this fear,
Which gift was given to Creet, Jove's Mother dear,
That poisonous Snakes should never here be bred,
Or dare to hiss, or hurtful venom shed.


From the time that this Island received an outward profession of Christianity,
which was in 335, by means of a woman among the Picts, (when Fincomare reigned
in Scotland) who preached to its Queen, being familiar with her, who winning
the King, the people were thereby disposed to receive a baptism; who lived in
the Romish Religion till Henry the eighth his time: for then Protestant
Religion began to be preached; and since, there planted by Queen Elizabeth: who
notwithstanding being generally addicted to the former, have made that the
subject of two notable Rebellions. Now there is the same toleration as to sects
and opinions as in England; it having renewed its Plantations by English;
(only the most exact and innocent ones still suffer in both) for it is all but
one Commonwealth.

FRANCE (called at first Gallia, whose ancient Inhabitants were called Gauls,
from (...), milk, they being of a white color,) is of large extent, according
to the old division of Gaul Cisalpine, and Transalpine. Caesar in his
Commentaries divides it into Gaul Belgic, Celtick, and Aquitanick. But to
take the whole Realm of France as it is now taken; and measuring it from East
to West directly, that is, from the Isle of Heissant, unto the banks of Rhine
which divides from Germany, it is little more in length, than 300 French
leagues, that is, 600 English miles. On the East lie the Alps, dividing it from
Italy; as does Mount Jura, separating it from the Suisses. On the South where
it joins to Spain, it has the Pyrenean Mountains; and in more large places,
the Mediterranean Sea: on the North, the British Ocean: on the West, the
Aquitane Sea. To say little or nothing of the warlike offspring of Japhet,
whose sixth son, Mesech, is reported to have first peopled it in the year of
the World, 1806, (and who were then very sparing in their diet: with whom, the
Romans at first fought rather to preserve themselves, than in hope of conquest:
and who under the conduct of Brennus, (365 years after the building of Rome)
discomfiting the Romans at the River Allia, sacked the City, and besieged the
Capitol: so that for terror of them, after their expulsion by Camillus, they
made a Law, That if ever the Gauls came again, the very Priests should be
forced to war, and their (afterward) spoiling and ransancking the Temple at
Delphos, where the Pestilence visiting the survivers going into Asia, gave name
to the Country called Gallatia. It was called France, from the Francones, a
people of Germany, who with the Burgundians and Goths, wrested it from the
Roman Monarchy in its declining state: ( Caesar after 40 years resistance,
having by valor and fortune (but more through their own divisions) brought
them under tribute) and dividing it into three parts amongst them, Charlemain
King of the Francones, or Franks, quite ruining the Goths Kingdom: his
successors by degrees, almost nullified the Burgundian also; who are now a
very populous Nation: overmuch headlong and rash in both Martial and Civil
affairs, as was observed also in Caesar's time. Florus saying, That their first
onsett was greater or fiercer than of men, but the second less than of women.
It is divided into many Provinces, the chief whereof are 24, (leaving out
Lorrain, Savoy, and Geneva's Signiory) as Aquitane, Anjou, Normandy, Burgundy,
the Isle of France, etc. in which stands the Metropolis Paris, called of old
Lutetia, from its clayey-soyl, said to be 10 miles in compass, and to be built
in Amaziah's time, King of Judah; the Provinces are governed by eight principal
Parliaments. They are given very much to Tennis, and exceedingly to dancing;
whose poor Peasants are kept as low in slavery, as their Gentry exalted in
pride and vanity; inventing and following abundance of fashions in their
apparel, to please their giddy phansies: and of which the English are too much
their imitators: between whom at this day, there is a solemn League, joining
against the Spaniard vi and armis, with might and main. Amongst all the battles
that this Nation has fought both with the English, Spaniard, and others: they
never had any very famous Captains besides Charles the Great; who was (by the
Pope's Donative) the founder of the Western Empire, and called, One of the
three Christian Worthies: and also Henry the 4th, their King, in whose modern
valor France glories.

France, its Riches (besides Pariis the Metropolis, which draws to it most of
the Silver of France, and also much from Italy, Spain, England, Germany, and
almost all Europe) are various, according to the diverse Provinces thereof; fine
Flax, linen Cloth, Wines, Iron, Steel, Serges, Hair-cloath, Chamlets,
Tapestries, oil of Walnuts, Corn, Cheese, Woad, Parchment, enameled works,
Hoggs, Horses, and other Cattle, Hemp, etc. All the soil of France being good
for somewhat. Their Religion is of two sorts, the Romish and Calvinist; they of
the latter being called Hugonotts, from Hugo's gate in Tours, where they first
began, and at which they went out to private assemblies; at whose first rise
the Romanists began to root them out by the sword, as they did them; (And they
massacring these Protestants three times, at Merindoll in 1545. Chabriers, with
whose young Women and Maids they so inhumanely dealt, that most dyed suddenly
after. At Paris in 1572, more closely contrived: for, a marriage being
solemnized between Henry of Navarre chief of the Protestant party, and the
King's sister Margaret, as an assurance of peace made with the Protestants: at
which, the Prince of Conde, Admiral Coligni, etc. were present. At midnight,
the bell ringing out, the King of Navarre and Conde were taken prisoners, the
Admiral villanously slain in his bed, with 30000 and upward, of the chief of
that Religion;) but for one head cut off, there coming up seven; and the King
considering they were all his Subjects, in the end renewed his predecessour's
Edict of Pacification, allowing that called the Reformed Religion, where it had
been formerly practiced; and the Mass to be restored, from whence the enemies
had banished it.

SPAIN (the most Western Country of Europe's Continent, lying near Africa) is
compassed on all sides with the Sea, except toward France, and has been
diversely named; as Hesperia, either from Hesperus supposed ^o have been a King
hereof; or from Hesperus the Evening Star, as ^eing the farthest Country
Westward then known. And Hispania, (according to the best judgments) from Panus
an Iberian Captain. Iberia, from the River Iberius; or Iberi, who are the
Georgians in Asia. This People being in old time governed by Kings, Lords, yea
and by Themselves, lived so a while honorably and peaceably, till the
Carthaginians (mastering much of Africa) came into this Country; and joining
with some of those divided people to the others ruin, they forced a great part
of the Country to submit to Carthage Commonwealth; Against whom, the Romans
opposing diverse Armies, after long and bloody wars, the Carthaginians were
expelled, the Romans enjoying it. But in Honorius his time, the African-Vandals
chased away the Romans; whom notwithstanding, the Goths dispossessed, peaceably
reigning over it all for many years. But in the end the Moors and Saracens
mightily in vading Spain out of Africa, they ruined the Gothish Kingdom; some
remainders of whom, notwithstanding, retiring into the Mountains, made head,
and so prevailed, that in time they have driven the Moors quite out of the
Country: yet they are said to be a mixed people descending from Goths, Saracens,
and Jews: they are great braggers, and very proud, in the lowest ebb of
fortune: and they say, The Spaniard never had footing of any place or strong
hold, that ever he yielded on Composition.

It fell into a division of 12 Kingdoms and proprietary Estates, as Leon and
Oviedo, having Biscay on the East, and called anciently Asturia, from its
Inhabitants the Asturs: whose small and swift horses the Romans called
Asturcones. Two chief Towns of which are Oviedo and Leon. Navarre, having the
Pyrenean Mountains on the East, on the South Arragon; so named either from
Navarrin, a Town among the Mountains, or from Navois, a Champian Country: the
old Inhabitants being called Vascones. Its Mother-City is Pampelune, a Town (as
one says) bandied by the racket of fortune into the hazard of Goths, Moors,
Navarrois, French, and now Castilians. Corduba, comprehending Andaluzia,
Granada, and Estremadura. Andalusia, quasi Vandalusia, from the Vandals long
possessing it, is the fruitfullest Country of Spain, in whose City Corduba, the
seat of the Moorish Kings, was born Lucan, and both the Seneca's, hence is the
true Cordovan Leather: not far from whose Wood 30 miles long, being nothing but
Olive Trees, was fought a notable battle between Caesar and Pompey's sons: who
(having the day, though not without great loss) was not long after murdered
in the Senate House. Medina, another City, whose Duke was General of the Great
Armado in 1588. Sevill, whence come the Sevill (not civil) Oranges, and where
the dead body of Christopher Columbus lies. Granada, having Andalusia on the
West, whose fine and stately City Granada is replenished with pleasant Springs;
That, and Valadolittis being the ordinary Courts of Justice for the South and
North parts of Spain. That of Madrid being the highest Parliament, receiving
Appeals from both Malaga or Malaca, a great Port-Town, sacked by Crassus the
Roman: where is a cruel torturing Inquisition, where Lithgow was miserably
tormented in King James his time: and from which, two harmless women of the
English Nation, called Quakers, were delivered within this few months, by a
high hand. Hence comes the Malaga Sack. Estremedura, having Portugal on the
West, once called Boeturia, from the River Boetis therein, nigh whose City
Merida, Vallia King of the Goths vanquishing Atace King of the Alanes and
Vandals, these left their first footing in Spain. Gallicia, having on the East
the Asturia's and Mountainous places like unto them. Whose Cities are
Compostella, an Archbishops seat, and a University, called St. Jago, in honor
of S. James, whose relics are in a Temple, here worshipped and visited with
incredible zeal and concourse. Biscay, so named from the Vascones, who coming
hither, named it Vascaia, then Viscaia, now Biscaia, was formerly called
Cantabria, and lies betwixt Castile, Navarre, and Leon; whose ancient
Cantabrians defended their liberty, when the Romans had subdued the rest of
Spain; being at last vanquished by Augustus not without much bloodshed: for
such Mountainous Countries are always last conquered. They differ from the rest
of Spain, both in language and customs, yielding their bodies, but not their
purses to the King, nor suffering any Bishop to come amongst them, and causing
their women always (in meetings) to drink first, because Ogno a Countess, would
have poisoned her son Sancho. In this Province, stands the City Toulouse: Also
Bilbo, two miles from the Main, (once Flavionavia) a Town of great Traffic.
Out of the hills of this Country arise the two chief Rivers, Iberus and Duerus;
they have excellent Timber for ships; and for its much Iron, called, The Armory
of Spain. Toledo the ancient seat of the Carpentani, is now accounted a part of
New Castile, and extends over the South-East of Castile toward Murcia: whose
chief City is Toledo, seated on the River Tagus, and almost in the Center of
Spain, inhabited by Nobles, Merchants, and men of war. It was the seat of the
Gothish Kings, which their King Bamba walled: then the Moorish Princes seats;
now of the Spanish Archbishop's, the chief Prelates of Spain, and most times
Presidents of the bloody Inquisition. Murcia, environed with New Castile on the
West, whose chief River is Guadalaquir, and whose three chief Towns are Murcia
or Murgis, whence the Country is named Alicante: whence is true Alicant Wine
made of the juice of Mulberries, plentifully growing here; it is also a fair
harbor. Cartagena or new Carthage, built by Asdruball of Carthage, but ruined
in the second Punick, war by Scipio Africanus.

CASTILE, bounded on the West with Portugal, is divided into old and new. The
old, situated on the North of the new, has the City Salamanca, for its
chiefest University: built by King Ferdinand the second, in 1240, and by Popes
edicts, with Oxford, Paris, and Bononia, ordained a place of general study.
Another I cannot pass by, which is Numantia or Soria, where 4000 withstanding
40000 Romans 14 years; and at last, laying all their Armor goods and money
upon a pile, burnt it with themselves in the flame. Here is also Valadolit, one
of Spains seven Universities; and the birthplace of Philip the second, who
restoring it, built a College for English fugitives. Duerus the violentest
River of Spain, runs in this Province. The new Castile, on South of the other,
has the River Tagus in its bowels, whose chief City is Madrid, the King and
Councels seat; which by the Kings residence there, is become of a Village, the
most populous of Spain, (yet the Country is neither fruitful nor pleasant)
whose upper stories of houses without composition, belong to the King. Here is
also Guenca, whose Monastery of Laurence built by Philip the II. is of that
magnificence, that no building past or present, is comparable thereunto. The
name of Castile cannot be fetched from the old inhabitants, the Vaccai, etc.
but either from the Castellani, once the inhabitants of Catelogne; or from some
fortified Castle thereabouts.

PORTUGAL bounded on the East with the Castiles, is so called from the Haven
Town Porto, and the Gauls, who landed there with their Merchandise. It was
formerly named Lusitania: whose ancient inhabitants were the Oritani, Veliones;
etc. whose chief City for traffic, is Lisbon, from whence all the Portugalls
set to Sea. It Is said to be seven miles in compass, having above 20000 neat
houses, sixty seven Towers and Turrets upon the walls, twenty two Gates on the
Seaside, and sixteen toward the continent; but Braga is it is Metropolis; and
Conimbra the University; whose Masters made the Commentary on the most of
Aristotle. Philip the second of Spain, pretended a right to this Crown; and by
main force took it and kept it, till the Portugalls killing or driving thence
the Viceroy, set up a King of their own, as formerly; so that, although the
Spaniards call (in their Proverb) the Portugals, Pocos y locos, that is, Few
and Foolish, yet they were wise enough to free themselves from under that Kings
power.

Valentia, lying between Castile, Arragon, and Murcia, had its former
inhabitants the Aeliani, and Bastiani, etc. in which stands the City Saguntum,
but now Movedre; whose people being besieged by Hanniball, chose rather to burn
themselves, than yield; out of faithfulness to the Romans. Valentia the
denominating City of the whole Province, heretofore (they say) named Roma,
signifying strength, which the Romans conquering, called Valentia, to
distinguish it from Rome, a word equivalent in the Latin to (...) in Greek.
Herein also is the Promontory of Terraria the refuge of Sertorius in his wars
against the old and young Soldiers, Metellus and Pompey. Catelogne or
Catalonia, having Arragon on the West, has its name diversely and equally
probably derived from Gothalonia, Castellani, or Cattalones who dwelt here.
Achief City whereof is Barcellona a strong Sea-Town, and Ancient. Perpigna, in
the County of Rossillon, which Town and Country was engaged by John of Arragon,
to the French, for a great mass of money; and then restored to the King of
Spain by Charles the eighth, promising not to hinder his enter prise of Naples.
Girone is another City seated on the River Baetulus, and the Title of the
Arragonian Prince. Lastly, Arragon, limited Southward with Valentia, Northward
with Navarre, through the very midst whereof, Iberus runs; whose old
inhabitants were the Lucenses, Jaccetani, and Celtiberi, these last descending
from the Iberians, and the Celtae mixed, who were the most puissant of all
Gaul: whence this Nation was called the Celtiberi according to the Poet Lucan.
Its present name is from Tarragon, a City confined with Catalonia, on the
borders hereof. Herein is the City Lerida, dividing Catelogne from Arragon,
situate on the River Cinga, and an University. The City Huesca called of old
Osca, may not be forgotten, an ancient University. whither Sertorius causing
all the Noblemens Children of Spain to be brought, and providing them Greek and
Latin Schoolmasters, pretended he did it only to fit them for charge in the
Commonwealth; but indeed it was that they might be his hostages, for their
fathers faith and loyalty toward him. All Spain is divided at this day into
three Governments; Arragon, Castile, and Portugal; and is a Monarchy of a
great revenue.

Spain, whose wealth consists in Wine, Oil, Wax, Honey, Sugar, Saffron, fruits
of all sorts; in a manner, furnishing all the Northern Regions, especially with
Olives, Oranges, Lemmons, Figs, etc. Silk, Spanish-wool, (sheep being at first
sent thither, out of Glocestershire in England) Quicksilver. Portugal also
sends forth Silk, Salt and Tonny, which they fish there, most coming out of
the Country of Algarb, whose chief City and Port Lisbon is, the aboard of all
the Merchandise, etc. Naples also (belonging to Spain, which might hold
themselves as happy as any in Europe, if they were not so oppressed by
Officers) has abundance of all things; selling to strangers great store of
Nuts, and Almonds: vending Saffron, Silks, Oil, Wines, Horses, Lambs, Sheep:
Poville furnishing Venice, Sclavonia, and Tuscain, with flesh: Calabria sends
forth Coral, and the best esteemed Manna, called in Apothecaries shops, Manna
Calabria. The Island of Sicily (being a hundred miles, or after Strabo, and
Ptolomy, a 180. miles long) though full of fire, casting it out abundantly; yet
yields store of all sorts of fruits, in old time called the Garner of Italy,
chiefly of Rome, as many times at this day; so that the Sicilians make much
money of Corn, also of Oils and Silk, whereof they have great quantity.
Sardinia, (almost like Sicily) makes store of money of Wine to Rome, and of
courageous Horses to strangers. They also carry some Muscrions skins into
Italy. The Duchy of Milane (about three hundred Miles in compass) being full
of Artizans of all sorts, whatsoever goes from that City (as Harquebusses, all
sorts of Arms, Hilts of Swords, Girdles and Hangers, Lace Emboideries) is
greatly esteemed: as also their Silk Stockings, Rice, store of Cheese;
furnishing the Grisons, and Suisses with much of her fruit; Yet the King
drawing as much as possible from this Estate; it is a Proverb in Italy, that The
Officer of Sicily does gnaw, he of Naples does eat, but he of Millan does
devour. Lastly, the Canaries, or fortunate Islands (reckoned seven in number,
others adding six more thereto) do vent their excellent Wines into all Europe;
also Sugars, transported by the Spanish and ^alian Merchant, from the Stapela,
into other places. All Spain follow the Romish Church (with those particular
Provinces and Islands he possesses, or claims) and the Protestant Religion
is so hated there, that they have set up cruel Inquisitions, lest it should
get any belief among them; (for which cause, as not the least, the King of
Spain perhaps is called by the Pope, the Catholic King) yea, the people of the
Canaries, who formerly worshipped the Sun, Moon, and Stars, (which though in
Africa, yet here I mention) the Spaniards mastering it in 1404, settled there
their Faith with their dominion; so that the Bishop thereof residing in the
great Canaria, has his Inquisitors of the Faith.

LORRAIN, or Lotharingia, (so called from Lothaire eldest son of Lewis the
Gentle) and is a Dukedom distinct from France in Government: whose Religion
being according to France; Yet it makes great profit of Azure-stones, and of
Pearls fished at the Mountain Vogese, it is foot; also of a matter to make
Lookingglasses, and others: Cassidonie stones for Cups; Horses, besides Linen
Cloth, and transported works: Mines of Silver likewise are beneficial thereto:
It Is Duke also has six Salt-pans, yielding him 200000 Crowns yearly.

THe Low Countries, or Lower Germany, is encompassed with Belgium. Alsatia,
Burgundy, and Champagne, (called by Julius Caesar, Gaul-Belgick) is bounded on
the North with East- Friezland, on the South with Lorrain, etc. and containing
seventeen Provinces. Those, and the parts thereof that are under the command of
the Archduke, or house of Austria; their commodities are Silks, Serges,
Tapestry-work, Porpasses, and Salmons, barrelled and Salted, with abundance of
Herring and barrel-Cod. Throughout all these estates, there is none but the
Romish Religion; yet are there a few Towns (chiefly those formerly revolted)
where there are not many Protestants, and those not daring to make open
profession thereof; being restrained, and ready to be punished if it be known.

THe UNITED-PROVINCES of the NETHERLANDS, being a kind of Commonweal, (with
whose General Estates the King of Spain, and Archdukes have treated as with
Sovereigns) are, Zeland, Holland, Friseland, Utrecht, Groningue, and
thereabouts, Overyssell, Drent, the County of Zutphen, and three parts of
Gueldres, with some of Brabant, and Flanders; all which heretofore contributed
to the Wars; whose Riches are very great through Sea-traffique, and great
customs of fishingtrade. But their natural wealth is in Horses, Oxen, and
Kine, yielding abundance of Milk for Butter and Cheese, Meedcrap or red Madder.
They have also an excellent Art to boil Bay Salt as white as Snow: putting Salt
water to the Bay Salt of Spain and France, and refining it with greater
increase, which they send into all parts of Europe. In all these Countries,
they suffering no exercise of the Romish Religion, but the Protestant only in
their Temples, if any be found exercising it in secret (which daily happens in
Utrecht) they are fined. The Protestant Religion entered when Luther, about
1521, preaching against the Pope and his doctrine; Charles the fifth, Emperor,
to root Luther's doctrine out of the Netherlands, (having taken good footing)
would (after many put to death for small causes) have brought in the Spanish
inquisition; whose son Philip, the better to strengthen an Inquisition,
procured the Pope to erect 14 new Bishoprics there: against which the
Provinces opposing; the King of Spain in 1565, made known his pleasure touching
Religion: and after the Duke of Alvaes coming thither with an Army, and
beheading the Earls of Egmont and Horn; also in 1570, seeking to exact the
tenth, 20th and 100th penny, he made himself odious to the people: whereby the
Prince of Orange, (who before was forced to leave the Country, by the Duke
with a great Army) now being invited by some inhabitans, surprised Flushing,
Briele, etc. and afterward the Estates declaring against Philip the second of
Spain, and taking all the Government on themselves, and amazed at their
favorable success: they put themselves under Queen Elizabeth of England, her
Protection; Whereby they took many places of consequence; and in the end,
recovered their Sovereign Authority: who (since) have (for Policy-sake) given
liberty to other Professions of Religion: as those of the Separation, Baptists,
Jews, etc.

GENEVA (pleasantly situated within the limits of Savoy toward La Bresse, and
being as it were two Towns, through which the River Rhosne does pass) has the
soil near it fruitful, yielding Corn, Wine, Turnips, and other roots, Melons,
all pulse, Barley, Oats, Hay, Apples, Pears, etc. taking goodly fish in the
Lake, especially Salmons, Trouts, which they carry to other places. Yet the
Inhabitants of Geneva are not very rich, and have enough to do (by toil) to
preserve an honest liberty: taking great pains in printing all sorts of books,
making Silks, using (withal) temperance; for sparingnesse is in a manner their
greatest revenue: So that they send Cheeses, Capons, and good gold thread into
other parts. It makes profession of the Protestant Religion, wherein they were
instructed and confirmed by John Calvin and others: Yet their Town is a retrait
to all Rome's opposers. They banished the Mass about 1539. Their Ministers
being not maintained by Tithes, but a common Treasury.

HELVETIA, or SWITZERLAND, (a Province of Germany, bounded on the West with
France, on the North with Lorrein, is so named from one of the 13 Cantons
therein, called Switz) is a Nation even united into one body by confederation
and intelligence, whom none has attempted to invade; or if he has, without
effect: To whom also the three leagues of the Grisons are allied. Its
situation hinders it from being a rich Country; yet it nourishes all the
Inhabitants, whose sparing is a good revenue; they also sometimes make much
money of feeding their cattle, and pasture; and Wheat is sold at Zurich in
great abundance; the River Rhyne is commodious for Basil's concourse of
Merchants, from whence many printed books are carried into all parts of Europe.
Of these Cantons, some are in Religion wholly Romanists, others altogether
Protestants; some mixed. The first that received the Protestant Religion, was
the Canton of Zurich, which they say, was through coffeehouse for want of
pa^, pretended due to them from Pope Julius the second, (for Nature and
necessity having fashioned and applied the Swisses to arms, neighbor Princes
pay dear for their alliance,) incited thereto by Zwinglius: So that in 1526,
they abolished the Mass there; and in 1528, it extending it self to the
Cantons of Fribourg and Basil after long dispute before the Senate at Bearn;
they overthrew their Images, and rooted out the Mass of the Grisons: they of
Grise are most Catholics, the rest almost all Protestants. But its lawful for
every one among them to follow what Religion he please; yet many times the
Protestants insult over the Papists: for though themselves have; yet they will
not suffer Papists to have any strangers, Priests: they of the Country being
also subject to outrages.

SAVOY (confined on Bresse and Switzerland, the chief City whereof is
Chamberie, the Seat of the Duke when sojourning here,) being a Duchy, contains
under it the Earldom and Country of Maurienne, with the Marquisate of Suse;
Piedmont, and the County of Nizze; it confines upon the North with the Swisses
of Bearn and Frtbourg. Savoy has great store of Corn in the Valleys, and much
pasture in the Mountains, which are many and great; in some places very good
wine, and some Lakes abounding with fish: yet it makes little money of any
thing sent to foreign parts. But Piedmont sends forth Corn, Cattle, much Hemp,
store of Rice, Cheese, Wine, Paper, Fustian, and raw Silk. In which, the Armies
of France and Spain continuing 23 years with great garrisons of either side,
they never wanted victuals. In the Valley of Ost, are Mines of gold and silver.
They of Salusses, trade with Provence in Iron and Cattle. There is also within
the Provinces trade of Cloth, Arms which they make, Hides, Oil, Wine, all
sorts of Fruits, Pulses, store of Thread, coorse cloth of many kinds, saltfish,
some small excellent Honey, Firr-Trees for Masts. Their Religion is generally
Romish: for from this Duke's obedience, Geneva retired in the year 1535. Yet
there are Protestants in his Dominion, on whom he ravened cruelly like a Wolf,
in 1645.

ROME (the Metropolis of Italy, built on seven hills, and the Pope's Seat) has
belonging to the Church's estate, (so called) the Countries of Ferrara,
Bolognia, Romagnia, Ancona, Umbria, Sabina Perugia, part of Tuscanie, the
Patrimony, Latium or Campania of Rome; which abound so in Corn, and all
Commodities, as any want scarce happens through defect of the soil; it being
divided into Plains and Mountains. It furnishes other Countries with Corn,
Wine, and Oil. Its Religion is known, for it is the head of the Papacy.

FLORENCE; whose Dukes (having united the Commonwealth of Pisa and Syena with
that, into one) do possess the greatest and goodliest part of Tuscanie: in
which though the State of Florence want Wheat, (otherwise very fruitful in
wine, flesh, and other necessaries) yet that of Syena, not only supplyeth
Florence its necessity, but sometimes relieveth other places: so that Syena's
Inhabitants are rich in rents: and that of Florence, through industry, whose
City is full of Artificers of all sorts, making diligently and workmanly,
Serges, Silks, and cloth of gold and silver; they exercise chiefly the art of
Silk and Wool. All the Inhabitants of this State are Romish Catholics; they
of Syena being the more devout.

THe Dukedom of URBIN (about 60 miles long, and 35 broad) confines, yea
intermixes with the estate of the Church; which City Urbin, is one of the
ancientest of Italy, about which the Territory is exceeding good, and generally
fertile. This Estate having plenty of all things needful for the life of Man, a
good part whereof lying on the Adriatique shore, is of great profit for
bringing many things thither from all parts. Their Religion is undoubtedly
Romish.

THe Dukedom of MANTOVA or MANTUA, is all that which anciently belonged to the
Duke of Tuscanie; with the Marquesdome of Montferrat, greater than that. Its
City Mantua in Lombardy beyond the River Po, being built 60 years before the
Trojan War. Mantova yields all sorts of Fruits. Montferrate is uneven, but
yields all necessaries, and in some places store of Wheat, Wines, and other
Fruits: yet this Dukedom is not able to make any great Traffic, or grow by
their Commodities. Its Religion is Romish.

THe Dukedom of FERRARA or MODENA, (out of which, the pope (pretending the
City Ferrara to be a fee of the Church) thrust Don Caesar Alphonso (the Duke
thereof, his base son, after his Father's death) has the Territory about
Modena abounding with Corn, Beans, and other necessaries, with excellent wine.
Reggium's soil is also exceeding fertile of Wheat, Barley, Beans, etc. with
white wines: which two Towns are reasonably rich.

LUCA (situate in Tuscanie, and so called of Lucumon King of the Tuscanes) is
a Commonwealth, whose Territory, although of small extent, yet the soil is
good, and yields much to the owners. The Citizens of Luca using great
Traffic, chiefly in Silk, excelling also in making cloth of gold, many
private men are exceeding rich. The Commonwealth being but small, is not rich:
The foundation whereof is the Council of 160, and (most commonly) 120 Citizens.

THe Commonwealth of GENOA (properly called Luguria beyond Po, to distinguish
it from Liguria on this side Po, which is Montferrat,) extends about 160 miles:
for the most part rough and hilly, and (as Strabo says) in old time very
barren. But being now better manured, there is great store of very good Wine
and Oil, some years 20000 barrels. The whole Country is pleasant by reason of
Citrons, Oranges, Palms, Lemons, and other Trees: which Citrons, etc. with
their oil, yield them much profit. There were huge Trees, as at this day, which
they (making ships of) robbed and spoiled to Gibralter straits. But now
(shaking off their brutishness) they are very industrious, quick-witted, and
subtle. The Corsicans which belong to the Genevois, carry wine to Rome, and
being much esteemed, they receive great sums for it. There grows in this
Island and Genoa little grain. Yet Corsica abounds in honey, wax, rosin, oil,
and figgs; store of Box. It breeds strong horses, full of courage. There are
also Salt Pits. A kind of Ram there is also called Muffolt, haired like a Goat
instead of Wool. The Genevois and Corsicans are all Romish Catholics, as the
other forementioned.

THe Commonwealth of VENICE (whose chief Magistrate is called Duke, admirable
among all the Towns of Europe, whose City is strangely and securely situated
in the most inward part of the Gulf of the Adriatic,) does hold in Lombardy
and the Marquisate, besides Venice, 6 great, rich, and populous Towns, besides
many goodly places and Castles. They are Masters almost, of all Friuli and
Istria, the last Province of the North side of Italy. They command also, almost
all the shore and Island of Dalmatia and Sclavonia. In the mouth of the
Adriatick-Sea, (likewise) the Isle of Corfeu, and the Islands of Cefalonia,
Zante, Cerigo, and Lucerigo; the Isle of Zarra in the Archipelago; and beyond
these, Candie. There are within the verge of this Signiory, all necessaries for
sustenance, as well as barrenness. Candie's fruitful Valleys, and goodly
Cyprus Trees, with other Timber for ships, are known. It draws yearly in time
of peace from the Estates subject unto it, two millions of gold. The Venetians,
with all their Subjects in Italy, are firm Romish Catholics; but Corfou's
Inhabitants follow the religion of the Greeks, accounted Schismatics, whom
they impeach not therein, for fear of a mutiny: yet the Signiory has curbed
them by a Fort and Garrison. In Candie also the people do wonderfully hate the
Latins name and religion; yet some of them are affected to the Roman Church.

THe Commonwealth of RAGOUSE (being a City situated on the Gulf of Venice in
Sclavonia, the ancient Dalmatia, and called in old time Epidaurum, of which
name, there were three Towns along the Sea, between Venice and Corinth,)
maintains it self in liberty, paying 14000 Zequins yearly to the Turk; and as
much more in Presents and lodging of Turks. It has a small Territory on the
firm Land; but some small Islands reasonably good, lying betwixt Curzole and
the gulf of Catarro. The soil is barren; but the Ragousans through much labor
bestowed, have oil, wine, and excellent fruits. They have a Valley, that makes
a Lake at Winter, which nourishes fish so fat, as to fry without oil: wherein
at Spring, the waters drying up, they sow Corn, growing abundantly: so one
place yields them fish and corn in one year. And among diverse Sea-industries,
they make their Trees bring them Oysters, by bending down their boughs, and
staying them under water with stones: so that in two years time, there are a
multitude fastened thereto: yet but in a manner good to eat the third year. In
their Island Gravosa, are many gardens of Orange, Lemon, and Pomgranate-Trees.
The Country about Ragouse is scarce able to maintain them, though they live
sparingly; their greatest wealth grows by great Traffic. They are in
Religion all Romanists. The City has a Bishop ordinarily there residing. Also
three Overseers of the Cathedral, who continue therein during life, and may be
Rectors, Counselors, Treasurers, and other Officers.

GERMANY the Great, Upper, or that situate beyond Rhene, is called by the
French at this day Almanie or Almaine: one Nation thereof, who being situated
at the Fountains of Danubius, have their name from the word man, as in Norman,
Herman, etc. or from the River Alemon. It was included under the Roman Empire,
which extended it self far and near, till Leo the third (the Empire being
before translated from Rome to Constantinople, by Constantine the Great, the
Mahometan's sect and arms afflicting it on every side; the West part being
ruined, and the East so weakened, as hardly could defend it self,) well
considering, (besides the Emperors of Greece nourishing impieties, and
accounted heresies) gave the Empire of the West to Charlemain, King of France,
in the year 800, (the Venetians being free) who, some say, transported the
Empire to the Germans, Charles being a German by blood and Nation, as all the
Francks which came into Gaul, were of Francony a Province thereof. The
Countries which acknowledge this Emperor, are Alsatia, High and Low;
Wittemberg, Francony, Suevia, or Suaube, the highest part of all Germany, in
which Country the spring or head of Danubius is, Bohemia, which lies within
Germantes limits; Moravia, Bavaria, commonly called Bayerne; Austria, or
Osterland, that is, the East Country, (whose chief City is Vienna) the Country
of Tirol, Stiria, anciently Valeria, Carinthia, commonly called Kaerndren, two
Carnioles the one called Dry, vulgarly, Underkrain: the other, Oderkrain,
Westphalia taken by some for the true and ancient Saxony. The Duchy of Cleves,
the Country of Juliers or Gulich; the Lantgrave of Hessen, Turinge, the
Palatinate, containing 48 Towns, whereof Heidelberg is the chief; High Saxony,
whose chief Town is Wittemberg on the River Elb; base or low Saxony, whose
chief Town is Alba. The Marquisate of Brandenburg divided into two parts; the
Marquess residing at Berlin; the County of Mansfield a part of old Saxony,
Lusatia, Silefia, Misnia, the Duchy and Bishopric of Liege, the
Archbishopric of Treves, commonly called Trier. whose chief Town Treves, is
one of the most ancient in the world. Holsatia, (which belonging to the King of
Denmark, must be particularly discoursed of) also Bescancon, an Imperial Town
in Burgundy, sometime called Chrysopolis, that is, a golden City. Although
Tacitus writes, the air is troublesome; and Seneca, that it is always winter:
yet the air is reasonably mild and temperate, somewhat cold, making them
healthy and strong. Its soil bears wheat, barley, rye, oats, and all kind of
grain and pulse in abundance; the fields fertile, and the Meadows bearing much
grass. Also there is many silver, copper, iron, lead, and other Mines; yea, of
gold in some places. Also fair Gardens, and Orchards very pleasing; VVines
also, called High-Country Wine, very good and choice. Germany must needs be
rich, who, besides these, are given much to the trade of Merchandise, and
giving themselves to diverse Arts and Trades, whereby they make wonderful and
rare works, They have great and Navigable Rivers; likewise Fountains and Pits
of salt water, whereof they make excellent Salt. Unto their Fairs (especially
those of Franckford) Merchants come from all parts of Europe, and sometimes out
of Asia and Africa. Through the late diverse years depopulating-wars, their
Country in many places was ruined, and much spoiled, and trade hindered. But
now there is opportunity (through a concluded peace) of restoring and enjoying
both. It Is much divided in Religion, some are Papists, some Lutherant, others
Calvinists. Pope Leo sending forth his Pardons and Indulgencies about 1517,
Luther, an Augustine Friar exclaimed against the Clergies dissoluteness and
excess: writing also books against the Mass, and the Church of Romes
superstitions, and against the disordered life of the Pope and his Clergy,
against justification by works, as being by Faith only; whose doctrine was
soon embraced and followed by diverse Princes, and free Towns of Germany; Most
of whose Princes follow Calvin or Luthers profession, (differing in some
points, not here to be named particularly) Calvin being followed by the
Palatinates of Rhine, those of Strasburg, and most Sea-Townes. Munster had many
called Anabaptists, who were extinct, and the Town as formerly.

HUNGARY, (so named from the Huns or Hongres, a Scythian people that dwelt
there, and divided upon the North from Polonia and Russia, by the Mountain of
Carpatia) is a Realm embracing also that part of Dacia, called Transylvania, it
being environed with high Hills and Woods, as with Walls, which notwithstanding
has Vayuods, or Princes of its own, not obeying Hungaries King. It Is chief
City is Buda, in the Turks possession, with the best part thereof. It is (by
nature) provided for of all things, for there grows all sorts of grain, and
diverse fruits, in abundance: it brings forth Corn (in a manner) without
tillage, and the Wheat changes every third year to a better kind. It yields
also diverse forts of VVines, some whereof are very wholesome, and excellent as
them of Candy. It so abounds in Oxen and Sheep as is admirable: also great
store of Hares, Fallow Deer, Goats, etc. Likewise diverse forts of birds, as
Goshauks, Partridges, and Pheasants, store of Fish in Rivers, Veins of Gold,
Silver, Copper, Steel, and Iron, also they find Gold in the sand of Rivers;
there is a little Tin and Lead. It abounds in Mineral Salt at Maromarusia, and
other places, they cutting it like a stone: there is a Fountain whose water
falling on the ground, turns into a stone. Yet we cannot say this Realm is very
rich, as not much given to Arts and Trades, but practicing Arms, and strong in
war. That great part of the Country which the Turks are Masters of, is not so
well-manured, nor yielding so plentifully as formerly. As to Religion besides
Mahometanisme, which by reason of the Turks, is much dispersed, there are many
opinions; all those that are in Germany, and also Arrianism has got footing,
and Atheism crept in. The Towns under the Turk have little of that accounted
Heresy: the Christians much, for those called Heretics are in fear of being
impaled by the Barbarians, if too insolent.

POLONIA, or POLAND, (so called from its Plains, in their Language named Poles,
situate from Moravia toward the East, and in a manner separated from Silesia,
by the River Odera, and whose chief City is Cracovia) is at this day bigger
then ever: Lituania, and Livonia, having been added to that Kingdom; so as
from Silesia to Muscovy, it conteins almost 120 Germane Leagues, and as much
from Livonia to Hungary. Its climate being cold, they have neither Olives nor
Vines; but it abounds in all other things which the Earth is accustomed to
bring forth; also in all sorts of Cattle, and in Fish; so that remore Countries
taste of her fruitfulness. It conteins great Provinces, Poland, High, and Low,
Livonia, Lituania, Samogithia, Masovia, Volhinia, Podolia, Russia the black,
and according to some, the Red, or Southern, Podlassia, Pomerania, Prussia,
which some call Borussia now divided into two parts, one belonging to the Duke
or Marquess of Brandenburg, Albert being the first thereof; the other to the
King of Poland; of whose part, Mariemburg is the chief Town: a little above
which, the River Vistula dividing it self, makes an Island excellent for
fertility, and a great number of Villages and houses. Some place Dantzick in
Prussia, much esteemed for shipping, and abundance of all Merchandise brought
by Sea from the West and North parts, and by land, and by Vistula, running
through the midst thereof. They make much money of their Honey, Wax, Flax, Hemp,
Beeves, Sheep, Horses, and Bugles. But their greatest profit grows by the
Salt Pits of Ocen, Viliguse, and diverse parts of Russia; likewise of Azure, and
of Mines, of Amber gathered on the shore with little Nets, by men going naked
into the Sea. John Huss, his opinion began at the first to disperse it self
through the Countries subject to this Crown, which Ladislaus violently opposed;
For, refusing the offered Crown of Bohemia, and making a decree in a general
Diet against it, he stopped its passage out of Bohemia into Poland, Sigismund
also forbidding young men to go and study at Lipsie, and Wittemberg, in the
time of Luthers doctrine, somewhat stayed the course thereof. But the Provinces
near the Baltic Sea, participate much with the opinions of Germany: those
confining with Silesia, Moravia, and Hungary, of their neighbors heresies:
those advancing toward South and East, for the most part of the Grecians, and
are not free from the opinions of the times.

DENMARK, or Danemark, or the Danes Country (so called from Dan, the first Lord
thereof, long before Christ, which is bounded on the West by the Germane-Sea,
toward the North by Norway; and whose Kings seat, and chief City is reckned
Haffnie or Copenhagen) consists of many parts, besides the Islands near them;
Jutia, or Jutland, is called the Cimbrick-Chersonesse, or almost an Island,
first inhabited by the Cimbrians, the Bishopric of Rip, Arrhus, Vandalia:
Weynsysell, or Vensilia; that is, the land or seat of the Vandalls, South
Jutia, called Nordalbinge, comprehending, the Dukedom of Schleswick, (taking
its name from the chief Town) and the Dukedom of Holsatia, so named from
abundance of Wood, (therein) called Holt in the Germane tongue: Scania, a great
Province, and joining to Denmark by an Arm of land only, which some call
Scandanavia, instead of Scondania, that is, the pleasant Dania; The Islands of
Seeland, or Sialand, the greatest of those of Denmark, in which Copenhagen
stands: Fiona commonly Fuynen, taking its name of its beauty, and for what it
yields, ninety Islands being comprehended under it, lying Southward, and most
habitable; Tassing, or Tossing, a chief one among others; Aroe with diverse
Islands near it; Also the Island of Huene, in which is the Castle of
Uranibourg, full of Mathematical instruments, very admirable and sure. The
little Isle Malmogie, but very good. Norway, (which is subject also to the King
of Denmark, though once a flourishing Realm) and borders on Denmark upon the
South; upon the North, Lapland; its Metropolis was in old time called Trondon,
now Trundtheim, and reduced to a Borough, the chief Town now of traffic, and
where the Governor and Bishop remain, is Berg, or Bergue. Iceland (which some
taking for Thule, are contradicted by diverse others) is situate not under the
first Meridian, but eight degrees beyond it; It Is a hundred Germane leagues
long, and 65 broad, whose inhabitants have Mountains instead of Towns,
exceedingly cold, and mostly unmanured, especially toward the North; whose
vehement winds suffer naught to grow. It Is frozen eight Months, yet many
places full of heat and fire underground, by an Antiperistasis of cold stopping
the pores of the Earth. Jutia sends much Cattle, Butter, Cheese, Tallow, Hides,
and many Horses into other parts, making much money of Fish, especially
Herrings. Holsatia sends forth many Horses. Fionia makes great profit of Fish,
and Wheat, chiefly Rye and Barley, also they send forth many Horses, and Oxen.
Scania vents store of Fish, Silver, Copper, and Lead; Gothland, much Wheat,
Cheese, Butter, Skins, Firre-Trees for Masts, and much Lime. Norway has much
money for the Fish Berg, very delicate, also for God, goodly skins, Butter,
Tallow, Hides, fat of Whales, Tar, Rafters, Masts, and boards. The King of
Denmark maintains Luthers Doctrine throughout his Dominions, for Christiern the
second, giving passage thereto into Swethland, caused it to be dispersed over
all Denmark, being soon discovered after his return from Sweden, to be a
Lutheran; but was expelled by his Subjects, with his Wife and three Children in
1523. Yet Christiern who succeeded him, marrying the Duke of Saxonies Sister,
Luther's favourer, gave himself wholly to root out the Romish Religion, which
he easily effected.

THe Realm of SWEDEN, (belonging formerly to Sigismond King of Poland, having
Norway for its bounds on the West, whose chief City is Stockholm) comprehends
the Duchy of Finland, Gothland, Boddia, or Bothnia, a part of Lapland,
Stricfinia, a part of Corelia, the Islands Alandes, and some others of small
esteem, so that those that have gone the length and breadth of Sweden, hold it
much greater then all Italy and France, Lapland, and Finland being added.
Sweden it self is the most fertile Province of all those of the North, bearing
great store of grain; there is much Honey, Silver, Copper, Lead, Steel, and
Iron, abounding wonderfully in fish; seldom any beggars seen among them. Yet
in many places (through the cragginesse of the Mountains, moistness, and
moorishnesse, it is more barren. The Air is commonly pure, nor the cold so
violent as some persuade themselves; they live (most commonly) long, attaining
an hundred and thirty, and an hundred and forty years, especially on the
Mountains, and places more toward the Northern winds. They take store of very
great Bugles. Gothland abounds in Corn, Cattle, pasture, horses, Fish, Lead,
Iron, and Silver, Latten, and in one place good Iron. Finland is more pleasing
then Sweden, and yields more Corn, being mostly in plains. Bothnia is not very
fruitful, having many beasts with excellent skins, and much Fish. Lapland has
no Corn, but White Bears, and Ermines: Raine-Deer, for Horses, as big as a
Mule; who will draw little Carts an hundred and fifty Miles in a day and night:
they have night three Months together in winter, with a few hours little
light. King Gustave brought Luthers Doctrine into Sweden, seizing upon what
goods of the Church he pleased. Yet Calvinism was received by Charles his third
son, who was Duke of Vermeland, Sudermania, and Nericia: Henry, Gustaves
succeslour, opposed not himself. John his brother succeeding him, was of
another opinion, but durst not discover himself. Yet his Wife Katherine the
King of Polands daughter, made him observe many Catholic customs. Yea the
Queen (who had free exercise of her Religion) obtained some Jesuits for the
people, in credit till her death, in one thousand five hundred eighty three.
But they being soon after expelled, few remain of the Romish Religion. Charles
uncle to Sigismund, John, and Katherine's son, usurping his Nephews Realm of
Sweden, wholly advanced Calvin's Doctrine; yet there are many of the Lutheran's
remaining.

MUSCOVY (lying in the midst of Russia the White) from whence all the Estates
of this Empire draw their name, and are confined by Lithuania on the South,
Livonia and Finland on the West; its chief City as of the whole Empire is
called Muskuva or Mosko, whose houses are most of wood; it is great, but very
myrie. The length of this Empire is 3000 miles, the breadth 1500; the longest
day in the most Southerly part being but 16 hours and a half: but in the most
Northerly 22 hours and a half; it is part in Europe, part in Asia. So that
considering what it contains, he might have a higher style than they commonly
give him, which is, The great Duke or Knez of Muscovie: yet when they are
sufficiently informed of the Countrie's yielding him obedience, they term him
Emperor, and give him as much honor as ever was done to any Prince. The
Provinces besides Muscovia it self, are the Duchy of Volodimer, and Base
Novograd, in which are two Towns of wood, of the same names: the Province of
Rezan, the Duchy of Vorotina; the Province of Severe, very great, containing
many Towns: the Province of Smolensko, (situate on the river Neper or
Borysthenes) taken from Poland's King by Basilius the great Duke, whose chief
Town is Smolensko. Mosaiski, taken from King Alexander of Poland, by John
Basilius his predecessor. Biele or Bielski, with a Town of the same name upon
the River Opske: the Duchy of Roschove, whose Town stands upon the famous
river Volgas. Tuver, one of the greatest in Russia, whose Town Tuverde is
greater and statelier than Mosko. Plescovia or Pleskonia, its chief Town being
Pleskouu, powerful and walled, which the other Towns want. Novogrod the great,
the greatest Duchy of Russia, taking its name from Novogrod, the greatest and
richest Town of all toward the North. The Country of Volske or Votske, the
Province of Corelle, extending to the frozen Sea, so as they have not any dark
night. Bieleiezioro or Biolysero, having a Town so called, in whose impregnable
Fort the great Duke commonly lodges his Treasure, and whither he retires, when
pressed by enemies. Volokde, the Duchy of Jaroslave, with a Town and Castle so
called, on the river Volga; also the Principality of Rostonu; the Province of
Duvine, so called from the river watering it, which comes from two rivers,
Duvine in the tongue signifying two. The Sun in the Summer Solstice shines
there 21 hours and a half, but two hours and a half in the winter solstice. The
Province of Susdali, having a Bishop's See; but now (through the Tartars
incursions) in a manner desert. The province of Vuiathka, which was taken from
the Tartars by the great Duke Basilius. Permia, having a Town of the same name
on the river Vischore. Jugre or Jugaria, from whence the Hungarians coming,
seized on Pannonia, calling it from Jugaria, Hungary. Petzore, very long
bending to the frozen Sea, whose longest day is 22 hours. The Cneremisses are
also under him, and Nordues; other Northern Countries acknowledge him, as
Obdore, Condore, Culomorie, and Lappia; likewise certain Hoords of Tartarians,
as Casan, etc. They have great store of skins of Elks, Staggs, Bears, Wolves,
and Sables, which they sell into Europe, also Flax and Hemp. They send great
store of Corn toward the Caspian and Euxine Seas, besides Iron, Wax, Tallow,
Wood, Ashes, whereof they sell abundance to strangers. Nicholas Port is of
great Traffic, whither the English trade much. They exchange the Commodities
of their Country for cloth, which the Armenians bring to Astracan, and the
English to Nicholas Port. The Knez his riches may easily be conjectured great,
he being Lord and absolute Master of all things. They received Religion from
the Greeks in 987, or 942, in the which although persisting, yet they have
added (in time) many superstitions. They say, themselves and the Greeks are
only true Christians: that the Romans and others are fallen from the primitive
Church: They celebrate their Mass and ceremonies in their own language, which
is the Sclavonian tongue; they suffer not Jews to live among them. Processions
are very frequent there, and though it be exceeding cold, yet they go far. They
never pass before a Monastery, Temple, or Cross, (whereof the streets are
full) but horsemen (alighting) and footmen also, kneel down, making the sign of
the Cross, saying thrice, Miloy Hospodi, or Lord have mercy upon us. It Is
lawful for Priests to marry but once. They deny Purgatory, yet pray for the
deceased faithful. They hold it not lawful to celebrate any Councels, but the
first seven, whence grows their discord with the Sea of Rome. They have a
Metropolitan, to whom they attribute as much as Papists do to the Pope: and
without whose advice, the Prince determines not of any important thing; yet
they say, the Metropolitan should depend on the Patriarch of Constantinople.
The Prince strictly observes all Ceremonies of their religion: for when they
change a dish at Table, or give him drink, he makes many signs of the cross.
He fails not at any fast, and beats the ground with his forehead through
devotion, as the rest do, especially at the elevation of the Sacrament.

The Nordovois on Muscovie's frontiers use circumcision; worshipping no Idols,
as the Pagans, nor are they baptized; worshipping one only God Creator of all:
going into the field, (which is seldom) they eating and drinking together,
offer to God the first of all, casting it against Heaven, as of any thing they
gather.

DACIA (bounded on the West with Hungary, and so named from the Daci first
inhabiting it after the Moesi, who gave them place) is divided into
Transylvania, Moldavia, Walachia, Servia, Rascia, Bulgaria, Bosnia.

TRANSYLVANIA (of which before in Hungary) whose chief Town is Alba Julia, was
committed unto Bethlem-Gabor by the Sultan Achmet, after the death of Gabriel
Batour, who succeeded Justine Botscay, in 1609.

MOLDAVIA (situated on the North end of Transylvania, whose chief City is
Occazonia) was utterly subjected (in 1574) to the Turks by Selimus the second;
which revolting and combining with the Transylvanian and Walachian, they have
since prosecuted it with great alteration. To this belongs little Bessarabia,
between Mount Hoemus South, and Lithuania North; so called from the Bessi,
whose chief Town is Kilim, made a Turkish Province, in 1485.

WALACHIA, to be called Flaccia, from Flaccus, who planted here a Roman
Colonie, seated between Transylvania and Danubius: The chief City being
Sabinium. It abounds in all necessaries for the life of man: Mines of gold,
silver, and iron; Salt Pits, wine, Cattle, chiefly a number of good and great
horses, pure refined brimstone; it joined with Moldavia, upon Amurath the
third's requiring the tribute of 60000 Ducats to be doubled, in 1594.

SERVIA (lying between Bosnia and Rascia) whose chief City is Stoniburg, once
the Despot's seat distinct from Rascia, lying between Servia and Bulgaria,
which had also a Despot of its own. But one George, a Christian by profession,
and Turk by affection, being Despot of both, and the Turks tributary, after his
son Lazarus his death, who succeeded him, Mahomet united them to his Empire in
1454.

BULGARIA (having on the West, Rascia; on the South, Thrace; whose Mother-City
is Sophia, now the Turkish Beglerbeg's seat of Greece) is so called from the
Scythians of Bulgar, who conquered it; who were bitter enemies to the
Christians, till the King thereof, with all his people, were baptized in 868;
over which Theophylact was chief Bishop. It was of a Kingdom made a province by
the Turk in 1396.

BOSNIA, so called of the Bossi of Bulgaria, and bounded on he East with
Servia, its chief City is Cazachium. It was erected a Kingdom in 1420, and not
long after, Stephen the King, being taken and flayed alive, by Mahomet the
great, it was turned into a Mohammedan Province in 1464.

SCLAVONIA (having Hungary on the North; on the West, part of Italy; so called
from the Sclavi; before, Illyricum, a courageous, proud, and stubborn people)
is now divided into Illiris, Dalmatia, and Croatia.

Illiris (whose general name is now given to one part thereof, and commonly
called Windismarch) is bounded on the East with Danubius, whose chief City is
Zatha on Danubius, and now a member of Hungary.

Dalmatia, having on the East the River Drinus; on the West, Croatia, (for
whose Town Zara or Jadara (standing on the Seashore) there has been great Wars
betwixt the Hungarians and Venetians) (as of great importance) its Inhabitants
were the Dalmatiae, whose Metropolis was Dalminium on Drinus. It was made
tributary to the Venetians, upon their new Lords the Hungarians ravishing some
Venetian Damsels. But now is divided between the Turk and Venetian who yet
has the greatest part.

Croatia, called anciently Liburnia and Valeria, and having on the East
Dalmatia, whose chief City is Gardiska, on the River Savus. The Croatians are
corruptly called Corbats; it is entitled a Dukedom; but subject both to the
Austrians and Venetians, who entered it in 1007. These three Countries thus
called Sclavonia, use their own Sclavonian tongue, and is observed to be used
by all the Turkish Emperors, Captains and Soldiers. The Country is most fit
for grazing; whose Sheep and other Cattle bring forth young twice a year, the
sheep being shorn four times. They are by outward profession of Religion,
Christians, following the Greek Church.

GREECE (so called from Graecus, who founded Athens, and accounted the Mother
of Arts and Sciences, except the Mathematiques) was given a name only to the
Country about Attica, till the Macedonian Empire had swallowed up the other
Commonwealths; but now including Peloponnesus, Achaia, Epirus, Alhania,
Macedonia and Thessalie, Migdonia, and Thrace, beholds Italy on the West; the
Aegean-Sea, etc. on the East. The Greeks were diversely called, Achivi,
Myrmidones, etc. They were once brave men for war, learning, virtue, government
and behavior; for which, they scornfully called other Nations Barbarians; now
most fit for the Graecians themselves, being unconstant, illiterate, uncivil,
riorous, and lazy. They spoke Greek, whereof there were 5 dialects. The
Common, Attick, Dorick, Aeolick, Ionick. Peloponnesus is a Peninsula, tied to
the main land, but with an Isthmus of 6 miles broad, so called of Pelops, and
(...), which signifies an Island. It contains 6 Provinces; Elis, having Arcadia
on the East, whose chief City is Elis; another is Olympia, where was the Statue
of Jupiter Olympicus 60 cubits high; in honor of whom, the Olympic games were
begun by Hercules. Messenia, having Elis on the North, whose Metropolis is
Messene, wherein Menelaus (Helena's husband, who occasioned Troy's destruction)
reigned. Arcadia, (so named from Arcas, formerly Pelasgia) which has Elis and
Messenia on the West; Its chief City being Psophis. Laconia, on the West of
which lies Arcadia; whose chief City is Lacedemon, once a famous Commonwealth
by means of the Laws of Lycurgus, which being kept almost 700 years, it
flourished all the while. They were accounted the chief of all the Graecians:
But the Athenians beginning to eclipse their glory by conquest in Asia, they
warred against them, and after many losses took and dismantled the City.
Argolis, denominated from its chief City Argos, built by King Argus, and
bounded on the South with Laconia; in which was born Agamemnon, Captain of the
Greek Army before Troy, in which Army were 69 Kings carried over by 1224 ships.
Achaia Propria, having Elis, Arcadia, and Argolis on the South. Its chief City
is Corinth, at the foot of the Acro-Corinthian hills, built and named by
Corinthus the son of Pelops; which flourishing by reason of its commodious
situation, (the Sea washing its walls on both sides) abused some Roman
Ambassadors sent them: for which, Lucius Mummius (taking it) burnt it to the
ground: and now is of small note, and called Crato. Peloponnesus was conquered
by the Turk in 1460.

ACHAIA (once named Hellas, from Helles, Deucalion's son) is divided into
Attica, which has on the West, Megaris, whose chief City Athens being built by
Cecrops, was called Cecropia, but took its name from Athena, which is Minerva,
famous for three special things: the Citizens inviolable faith, and unfeigned
affection: for Scholars, from whose University learning was dispersed
throughout all Europe: for valiant Captains, as Alcibiades, Aristides,
Themistocles, Pericles, etc. who notwithstanding dyed in banishment, or
violently at home.

Megaris, (having on the South Boeotia) whose chief City is Megara of Megra,
where Euclide the Geometrician taught. This Country having shaken off the
Cretans, came to a height of prosperity: which lasted not long in that degree;
yet were a free people till the coming of the Macedonians.

Boeotia, which has Attica on the East, taking its name from (...), signifying
an Ox. Its chief City is Thebes, built by Cadmus a Phoenician; in which Town
dwelt Pelopidas and Epaminondas, who so crushed the Lacedaemonians in two
battles, that they never reobtained their former puissance. Philip of Macedon
first got footing in Greece, by making this flourishing Commonwealth submit to
his mercy.

Phocis, having Boeotia on the East, (whose chief Town is Cyrra, as also
Antycira, famous for its Ellebore very Medicinal for madness); in it is, Mount
Helicon consecrated to the Muses, also the hill Citheron, both striving with
Parnassus, whose two tops even kiss the Clouds.

Locris, bounded on the East with Aetolia, whose chief City is Naupactum, now
called Lepanto.

Aetolia, (bounded on the West with Epirus) its chief Town is Chalcis: The
Aetolians were the most turbulent people of Greece, never at peace with their
Neighbors, seldom with themselves.

Doris, which has Boeotia on the East; its chief City is Amphissa. This people
causing Philip to return into Greece: Demosthenes whetting on the Athenians by
his biting Philippica against him: their Armies meeting, and the Athenians
being vanquished, Philip was made Captain of all Greece.

Epirus, bounded on the North with Macedon, whose Eastern part is called
Acarnania; its western, Chaonia; and in which Country Olympias ( Alexander the
Great his Mother) was born, as also Pyrrhus, who warring with the Romans, it
was after his death subdued by Paulus Aemilius, who destroyed 70 Cities thereof
in one day; in which is the City Nicopolis, built by Augustus, and Actium, nigh
which, he and Anthony fought for the World's Empire.

Albania, bounded on the South with Epirus; in which is the City Albanopolis;
and Durazzo at first called Epidamnum, and then Dyrrhachium, under whose Walls
was the first bickering between Caesar and Pompey's Soldiers. Its chief City
was Croia in George Castriot's time, named Scanderbeg; under whose walls
Amurath the second, having with very great loss besieged it, sorrowfully and
wretchedly dyed.

MACEDONIA (whose Southern part is Thessaly) is bounded on the East with
Migdonia, and called Aemathia from King Aemathus; Hoemonia, from Mount Hoemus;
Macedonia, from King Macedo: the first City whereof is Scydra, another is
Pella, where Alexander the Great was born. It was never very famous, till King
Philip and his son Alexander's days.

THESE ALIE, (wherein is the exceeding high Hill Olympus, being by Poets taken
for Heaven) in which pleasant and fruitful Country, was situate the delightful
Valley, Tempe, five miles broad, and six long, whose chief City is Tricca,
where Heliodorus was Bishop: another is Pharsalis, nigh which, Caesar and
Pompey fought for the Lordship of the World, Caesar being Conqueror.

MIGDONIA, (having on the North Thrace, and in which is the Hill Athos, 75
miles about; and so high, that its shadow reaches to Lemnos, 40 miles) its
chief City is Stagira, where famous Aristotle was born.

THRACE, now called Romeli or Romania, from Roman Colonies there planted, and
Constantinople's being called New Rome; (bounded on the East with Macedon)
wherein stands Constantinople, which being built by Pausanias a Lacedemonian
Captain 663 years before Christ, was by him called Byzantium; it is in compass
18 miles, most fitly seated for an Empire; as overlooking Europe and Asia, and
commanding the Euxine-Sea, Propontis, and Hellespont. It was taken by Mahomet
the Great Turk, in 1453. Being rebuilt by a Constantine, called the Great,
(therefore called Constantinople) the son of a Helena, a Gregory being
Patriarch thereof; and it was lost by a Constantine, surnamed Paleologus, the
son of a Helena, a Gregory being also Patriarch. Its people were accounted very
bold and valiant, who were called by some (...), because every one was a law to
himself; which had they been of one mind, and under one King, Herodotus says,
they had been invincible; but two brothers striving for the Kingdom, and at
last appealing to Philip of Macedon; he taking an advantage, seized on it, and
kept it. The Town of Sestos on Hellespont was also in this Country, right over
against Abydos, on Asia side, which two places were famous for the love of Hero
and Leander; in whose room stands two Castles, who examine all ships passing
that way, and receiving the grand Signior's customs.

IN the AEGEAN Sea (which receives Hellespont's waters after 40 miles course)
also (whether so called from Aegeus, Theseus his father, who here drowned
himself; or from Aege, once a chief City in Euboa Island; or that the Islands
lie scattering like the leaps of a Goat, from (...), so signifying,) are diverse
Greek Islands, the chief whereof are, Samothracia, where Pythagoras, and Samo a
Sybill were born, whose chief Town is Samia.

Lemnos, once called Diospolis, from its two chief Cities Hephestia, wholly
decayed; and Lemnos or Myrina yet continuing; where also the sovereign Mineral
called Terra Lemnia is dug.

Lesbos, so called of Lesbos, who married Mitylene; of which name is a chief
City therein. In this Island, Sappho, who invented the Sapphick verse, Pittacus
a wise man of Greece, and Theophrastus a notable Physician, were born.

Chios, (whether so named from Chione a Nymph, or from (...), snow; or from
Chio (now called Sio) the chief City; so called from the Greek letter, in whose
fashion it was built. Herein chiefly or only grows the gum Mastich.

Euboa, now Nigropont, which was rent from Achaia's Continent by an Earthquake,
between which, is but a little Euripus: the cause of whose ebbing and flowing
seven times a day, Aristotle not finding, is said to throw himself into the
Sea, with these words; Because I cannot comprehend thee, thou shall comprehend
me. Its chief Cities are Chalcis, once joined by a bridge to the Continent.
Scyros, Achilles his lurking place, sent thither by his Mother, being
forewarned he should be slain in the Trojan war.

Salamis, nigh Megaris, noted for Xerxes his numerous Navy, overthrown by the
Athenians and their Allies. For which Isle also, there was much contending
between the Athenians and Megarenses.

The Sporades, so called from (...), to disperse, because they are scattered
about the Sea; their number is 12, The principal of which is named Melos, from
its much honey.

The Cyclades (so denominated, because they lay in a circle about Delos, the
chief of them, noted for the Temple of Apollo, and for not suffering any to die
or be born therein) are 53 in number, whereof (besides Delos) these four are
remarkable; Samos, where the Tyrant Polycrates lived without any mischance,
till (at last) he was miserably put to death by Orontes.

Coos, (but now Lange) in which Hippocrates the reviver of Physic was born;
where also Aesculapius was worshipped: Its chief Town is Coos.

Glaros, but small, whither the Romans were wont to banish delinquents. The 69
Kings at Troy's siege, were Kings but of these small Islands: which stand so
close together, that 20 may be seen (in a clear day) at one time; yet are they
part in Europe, part in Asia; called also the Islands of the Arches, as being
in the sea called Archi-pelagus.

Creet or Candie, (once called Hecatompolis, as having 100 Cities therein,
whose Metropolis Candie is much inhabited by the Venetians) which is situate
in the mouth of the Aegean Sea, (in length 270 miles, in breadth 50) was above
mentioned in the Venetian Commonwealth, to whom it is subject; whose ancient
Inhabitants were much addicted to lying, as appears by Paul's citing Epimenides
words, Tit. 1. v, 12. yet were excellent sailers. The Island is very populous,
and fruitful of Wines, together with Gum, Honey, Sugar, Olives, Dates, Apples,
Orenges, Lemmons, Raisins, Mellons, Citrons, Pomegranats; but, through its
heat, deficient in Corn; other Islands there are also in this Sea, as Claudi,
Dio, and Aegilia.

The chief Islands of the Ionian Sea (named either from Ionius, whom Hercules
killing, here drowned, or from the Region Iona, in the utmost part of Calabria,
or from Io daughter of Inachus) are, Cithera, now Cerigo, (mentioned before).
It was formerly called Porphyris, from abundance of Marble therein, and has a
Town of the same name with the Island, out of whose Temple dedicated to Venus,
Helena was willingly ravished by Paris, it is also environed with Rocks.

Strophades, being two Islands lying against Messenia, whose ravenous birds,
the Harpies, were driven away by Zethus and Calanus. They are now inhabited
only by Greek Friars, called Caloyres, that is, good Priests.

Zacinthus or Zant, so called of Zacinthus, son to Dardanus; whose chief City
is called also Zant, 60 miles from Peloponnesus, for the Custom of whose very
Currants they pay 18000 yearly Dollars to the Venetians. They being weary
frequently troubled with Earthquakes, build their houses very low. Over the
judgment Hall door of whose City Zant; there are written Latin Verses to this
purport -- This place does hate, love, punish, keep, requite;
Voluptuous riot, peace, crimes, Laws the upright.


THe ECHINADES, little Isles, five in number, only famous for the battle of
Lepanto. Cephalenia over against Acharnania, called at first Melena, then
Teleboas; but Cephalenia, from Cephalus. Corcyra, now Corfu, so called from the
Virgin Corfu; it is but twelve miles from Epirus; whose chief City Corfu, the
Turks have found impregnable through two unaccessible Fortresses on its top,
esteemed the chief Bulwarks of Venice, whose two Captains are sworn during
their two years command, to have no converse or intelligence with each other.
Ithaca, now Val de Campare, on the North-East of Cephalonia, in which Ulysses
was born. Leucadia, of the white Rocks between it and Cephalonia, its chief
City is Saint Maure, most inhabited by Jews. All these Islands (besides this
Leucadia, lost to the Turks) have been defended by the Venetians.

THe MEDITERRANEAN Isles, (from the Mediterranean Sea, so called, because it
runs in the middle of the Earth, and called by late Writers, the Levant-Seas,
(because they are toward the East of France, Spain, etc. Levant, in French
signifying the Sunrising) are; Sicily (of which before in Spain) called at
first Trinacria, for being triangular, it butteth into the Sea with three
Promontories. Its narrow Seas between it and Italy, being but a mile and half
broad, on each side of which are Scylla, and Charibdis: Scylla being a
dangerous Rock on Italy side, and Charibdis a devouring Gulf on Sicily side; It
is seven hundred miles in compass, and had seventy two Cities therein, now but
twelve. The chief being Palermo, where the Spanish Viceroy resides, which
stands in Mazara, the Western Province of the three, (in one of whose Cities
the Tyrant Phalaris lived, that tortured Perillus another Tyrant, in his omn
Brazen Bull which he had made to torment others in) the other two being Vallis
de Noto, and Mona. Malta, (formerly Melita, where Paul shook off the Viper
without hurt) is but sixty miles from Sicilia, and as much in Circuit, barren,
as being situate on a Rock, covered but with three foot of carth; yet there is
abundance of Cotton Wool, and store of Pomegranates, Citrons, etc. It was
given to the Knights of the Rhodes, being expelled thence by the Turk, in 1522,
who now being called Knights of Malta, have ever since defended it against the
said Turk. They are 1000 in number, and at their admittance into that order,
are sworn to defend the Church of Rome, to obey their superiors, live on their
Orders revenues, and live chastely. Their great Master, though a Friar, has a
high style; who is chosen out of the sixteen calied Crosses, who are of great
authority among them.

Corsica, of which in the state of Genoa, was first called Cyrnus, (now Corsica
from a Woman of that name) its chief City being Bastia, on the North East, upon
a commodious Haven, where Genoa's Governor resides, with a strong Garrison.
It Is 120 miles long, and seventy broad.

Sardinia, (lying South from Corsica, and but seven miles from it) is divided
into Cape Lugudory toward Corsica, mountainous and barren, belonging to the
Genoans, and Cape Caligary toward Asrick, larger and fruitful, appertaining to
the Pisans, who disagreeing about their bounds, Pope Boniface the eighth,
giving it to James King of Arragon, and his successors; they drove them
thence, and made themselves Lords thereof in 1324. Its chief City is Caliaris,
built by the Pisans, where the Spanish Viceroy has his residence. Yet this
City is governed by a Council of its own Citizens.

The Baleares, (so called from the Greek word (...) to cast, because they were
very excellent slingers) are two; Majorca or the greater, which is sixty miles
from Spain, and 300 miles in compass, whose chief Cities are, Majorca, a
University, and Palma, in which Raymundus Lullius was born.

Minorca, or the less, is nine miles from the other; and 150 miles about;
whose chief Town is Minorca: both which Islands, (through the Romans teaching
them the use of Ferrets) destroyed the multitude of Conies, who undermined
their Houses and Walls.

Nigh these are two small ones; Ebuisia, whose chief City is Yvica: Salt is its
chief commodity; and Olhiusa, called Frumentaria; Both whose men and women, as
of an adjoining Islet, are very good swimmers: Pedro the fourth King of
Arragon, united all these four to his Crown, in 1343.

There are also less Islands hereabouts; The Vulcanian or Aeolian, being
eleven in number; the two chief of whom, are Lipara, from whence the rest are
now named.

Vulcania, where Vulcan was worshipped: near these, was the first Sea fight
between the Romans and Carthaginians.

The Isles of Naples, being eighteen, the chief whereof are Ischia, whose chief
Town is so called: Caprea, and Aenaria.

The Ligurian Isles; whereof the principal are Elba, or Ilva; whose chief City
Cosmopolis, Cosmi of Medices builded.

Gallinaria, from its many wild Hens, and Giglio.

Gades, or Cales, situate without the Mouth of the strait of Gibralter (called
of old Fretum Herculeum, on whose South Side upon Mount Abiba, Hercules placed
his Pillars, on which he inscribed Nilultra, or no farther) as being from Gibal
Tariff, a chief leader of the Moors into Spain, then the Western bound of the
World; and in which there was a Temple consecrated to Hercules, that great
traveller. The English took it (in 1596) in one day.

The British Isles (with those of Zealand, and Denmark) are called the Isles
of the Ocean; of which before.

Little is to be said of the riches or fruitfullnesse of either Bosnia,
Bulgaria, Servia, or Rascia, as being for the most part full of Mountains,
yielding little; and most of the plains and valleys in Bulgaria, are full of
thick Woods, and its middle part more stony and rough then the rest; but Bosnia
has much Silver Mine, and Servia Mines of Gold. They were of the Religion of
the Greeks, in which Countries now Mahometism bears most sway, they being
subjected to the Turk.

As for Greece, it formerly exceeded all others in Europe, both for the Ayr's
temperature, and goodness, and the soils delightsome fertility, bringing forth
all sorts of fruits, and nourishing much Cattle; also Fish abounded in its
Sea's and Rivers; with all Plenty and Wealth, for that it was so easily to be
arrived at, through its Gulfs, Ports, Isles, Demi Isles and Rivers; and
questionless, would still yield great profit to the Husbandman, if pains were
taken in the tillage thereof: but the Greeks (knowing nothing certainly to be
their own, but all subject to the Great Turk and his soldiers) omit the same:
yet they transport and send into other parts, Wines, Oil, Copper, Vitriol, some
Gold and Silver, Damasks, Velvets, Grograms, etc.

Pliny commends Thrace for fertility, and its Corn for weight and substance, of
which they reap store in diverse goodly plains; but it is mostly cold, and in
the days of Copronymus the Emperor, Thra^ius Bosphorus (by which
Constantinople is situated, and which comprehends thirty good Ports in Asia
and Europe (though most on Europe side) was (with a part of the great Sea) so
frozen, that the Ice was twenty five Cubits thick, (with a great quantity of
Snow thereon) and being increased 20 Cubits above the face of the Sea, men
might travail, and Wagons laden, out of Europe into Asia, and from
Constantinople, to the entry of Danubius, as on dry land) whereby it is not (of
it self) a rich soil, nor of a pleasant Air, the seeds ripening leisurely, and
the Vines and Trees yielding more leaves then juice and fruit. To leave the
ancient Religion of the Greeks (when, notwithstanding all their humane wisdom)
they in a Pagan manner worshipped an unknown God, in various manners, and under
the name of diverse gods; the Faith of Christ was received in some part thereof
(as in Thessalonica) soon after the departure of Christ to the Father, and the
spirits Baptism given, as it was in Rome, to which Church Paul wrote also an
Epistle; but degenerating from the power into the form of Religion; all the
Greeks became Christians in name and profession; who withdrawing themselves
long ago from the Church of Rome, upon some points, as the manner of the
administering the Supper, etc. (some of which were mentioned in Muscovy) and not
acknowledging the absolute supremacy of the Roman Bishops, set up Patriarchs,
that is, chief fathers of their own, whom they acknowledged for their heads,
and spiritual Governors: of which there are four. The Patriarch of Jerusalem
over the Greeks of Palestina; of Alexandria, over Arabia and Egypt: of Antioch
presiding over Syria, Armenia, and Cilicia; of Constantinople, whom the Country
and territory of Greece acknowledge, together with Sclavonia, Dacia, part of
Poland, the Adriatique and Aegean Ifles, as also Creet, and Cyprus, and Rhodes,
of whom in Asia. There are many Caloyers, or Greek Priests or Monks, dispersed
over all Greece, where (for a tribute to the Turk) they are permitted free
exercise of Religion; yet not without 1000 indignities from the domineering
Turks. About 6000 of these Caloyers inhabit Mount Athos, a privilege formerly
granted to them of Basils Order, only to dwell in; where are Monasteries and
Relics, visited from all parts, also stately and adorned Temples, which
Mountain the Greeks as much esteem as the Latins do Rome. They all do
something, or exercise some Mechanic Trade, laboring to maintain the whole
family, by going out of the Monastery to work. They wear woollen shirts which
they make themselves; being apparelled almost like Hermites. They are so little
given to Learning, that many of them can neither write nor read. If any pass
over the Mountain on any occasion, they furnish him with victuals without any
money; These the Turks hold in such esteem, that they are very charitable
toward them.

A Description of ASIA.
ASIA, which is also called (by the Poets) Lydia, by a Synechdoche of a part
for the whole; according to some, takes its name from the Fenne Asia; after
others, from Asia the Mother of Prometheus: according to Hippias with
Eustathius, from Asius a certain Nobleman: after others, from Asia the
fabulous Daughter of the Ocean and Thetys. It is the greatest among all the
parts of the world known to the Ancients, containing from East to West, 130
degrees of the great Circle, taking its beginning from that Meridian, whose
distance from the Fortunate or Canary Islands is 70 degrees, even to that
Meridian which is distant from the Fortunate Islands 200 degrees: which 130
degrees being numbered in the 30th Parallel, which cuts almost through the midst
of Asia, do make above 1300 German miles. It is the East part of the World,
both in respect of Africa and Europe; whence perhaps it is called Natolia, from
the Greek word (...), which signifies the East. It is disjoined from Europe by
the River Tanais, and also by the Euxine and Aegean Sea: but it is disbounded
from Africa (not according to some) with the River Nilus: but with the Sinus
Arabicus, or bosom of Arabia, and by a line which is brought out from thence
into the Mediterranean Sea. It cleaves to Africa by an Isthmus or a piece of
land of 18 German miles; and is washed toward the West with the Mediterranean
Sea, and is compassed in its other parts with the Eoan, Scythick, and Indian
Ocean. It is also divided into the greater and less; the lesser is next to
Europe; and by a special name called Natolia, and likewise Turcomania, because
the Turks hold it all at this day; whose Countries are, Cilicia, Pamphilia,
Caria, Lycia, Ionia, (which with Strabo is strictly called Asia, Lydia. Aeolia,
both Mysia's, Phrygia the less, and greater, Bithynia and Pontus, Paphlagonia,
Cappadocia, Galatia, Lycaonia, Pisidia, and Armenia minor; Greater Asia, is
that which is more remote from Europe toward the East, whose chief parts are,
1. Syria, Palestina. 2. Armenia the greater. 3. Chaldea. 4. Arabia, which is
threefold, Petraea, or the stony; Deserta, or the wilderness; and Foelix, or
the happy Arabia. 5. Persia; and then Tartaria, Hyrcania, Bactriana, Parthia,
and lastly, India; which India is divided into the Old and New. The bound of
Old India in the East, was the Country of the Sinans; and is divided into that
which is within the River Ganges, or the Western: Whose chief or greatest City
is Calicut: and into that which is without Ganges, or the Eastern, which is
extended even to the golden Chersonesse or Malaqua. The Eastern part of New
India, is the Kingdom of Catay or Cathaia, which is called Upper India: but the
Southern part is the Country of the Chinoys, and likewise Japonia, with other
parts found out by the Portugals, which embrace the Lower India.

But Asia is divided into five Empires; the Moscovite, part whereof is only
therein as aforesaid: the Ottoman or Turkish; the Persian, the Tartarian; and
the Indian. Its Seas are, the Mediterranean, and the Ocean; and its chief
Rivers, Euphrates, Ganges, and Indus. The greatest Mountain of Asia, and as it
were the father of the other Mountains there, is Taurus: which reckoning his
bendings and windings, is 6250 miles long, and 375 broad; having diverse names
in diversity of places, as Caucasus, Sarpedon, etc. and according to some,
Imaus: yet Imaus may be accounted a second distinct Mountain in Asia; for
although it cross Taurus even (as it were) with right angles; yet as Taurus
divides (beginning about Caria and Cilicia) the North of Asia from the South:
so Imaus (beginning in the North shore) does the East from the West: so making
Scythia within Imaus, and Scythia without Imaus. Asia (from the beginning) was
the most excellent part of the world: both in regard (as is believed by most)
of the Creation of mankind there; and also, for all the matter of history of
the Old and New Testament there done, except a few his^ories of the Apostles:
and so because there the true Church was first gathered; because Christ (whose
light and life is the Savior of Mankind) there preached, dyed, and rose again.
Likewise for that in the same place, were established the Monarchies of the
Assyrians, Persians, Babylonians and Medes. And lastly, because in Asia was the
first original of all Nations, as also of all tongues and arts. This indeed was
once its dignity and prerogative, but at this day it is a fold for Turks, and
other blasphemous and very wicked Gentiles. Its head or chief City was once
called Troy; but now the Cities therein are not so fair and decked, unless for
the astonishing things related of the City Quinsay; which may be reckoned the
greatest in the World. And thus much of Asia in general.

ANATOLIA, or Natolia, (called Asia the Less, in which were John's seven
Churches, to wit, Ephesus, Smyrna, Thyatira, Laodicea, Pergamus, Philadelphia,
and Sardis) its first Country to be mentioned is CILICIA, on the South-East;
whose chief Cities are, Nicopalis, built by Alexander the Great, for his
victory over Darius of Persia, (its name signifying a City of victory) nigh the
straights of Antitaurus, called Pilae Ciliciae; wherein with 30000 he slew
110000 of Darius his men, who were in all 600000. Pompeiopolis, built by Pompey
after vanquishing the Pirates, who spoiled even Italy's Villages it self.
Alexandria, built also by Alexander, distinct from that in Egypt, therefore
named Alexandretta. And Tarsus or Tarshish, where Paul was born, and whither
Jonah would have fled when sent to Nineveh. In the waters also of this
Countrie's River, Cidmus, was the Emperor Frederick the First, drowned, when
bathing himself.

PAMPHILIA, frontier'd on the East by Cilicia, and part of Cappadocia; called
(says one) by the Arabians, Zina. A chief Town tnereof is Perga, in the midst
of the Country, where Diana was worshipped. Phaselis, Aetalia is the greatest
and strongest of its Towns, being Maritime; and is now called Satalia, giving
also her name to the adjoining gulf. Nigh the River Eurymedon herein, Cymon
the Athenian Captain overthrew, first the Sea-forces of the Persians, then
their Landforces, (by attiring his men in the Persians habit, stowed in their
taken ships, and waving their colors) in one day.

LYCIA, watered with the River Xanthus, (whence they thereabout were called
Xanthi) bordereth on the West of Pamphilia; afterward called Lycii, from
Pandion's son, Lycus, whose chief Town now is Patras: also Phaselis, formerly
as much enriched and haunted by Pirates, as Algiers is now. Before the Romans
conquered this Province, they were governed by 23 men chosen out of their 23
Cities.

CARIA (denominated from Cara its King, who invented Augury or divination by
birds flying) is on the West of Lycia; whose chief Cities are Mindum, which
though but small, had wide gates. Halicarnassus, where Dionysius (who wrote
Rome's first 300 years history) was born: also Magnesia, which Xerxes assigned
to Themistocles, (when banished) to whom he fled for entertainment: for joy of
whom, Xerxes cried out oft-times in his sleep, Habeo Themistoclem Atheniensem,
I have Themistocles the A henian on my side. All which Countries are now called
Caramania, from one Caramon, Aladine's Captain, the Zelzuccian. Now a
Sanzackship of the Oguzian Turk.

IONIA (which has been taken for Asia Propria, alone, although that include
likewise, Caria, Lydia, Aeolia, and both Phrygia's, and of which Asia, Acts
19.10, 27. must be understood) lies on the North of Caria; in which, seven
Cities (whereof Smyrna was one) strove for the birthplace of Homer. Ephesus
(standing by the Seacoast, and said to be now called Figena or Fiena) is also
a principal City hereof, to whose Gospel Church, Paul wrote a lively Epistle:
it is accounted also John the Evangelist's burial place; wherein also was
Diana's Temple, which being contrived by Ctesiphon, and 200 years in building,
was for its largeness, furniture, and workmanship numbered among the Seven
Wonders of the World, and was set on fire by Erostratus, (the night that
Alexander was born, after 6 times firing before) who did it to make himself
famous by doing evil, since he could not by good. These Ionians rebelling
against Darius Hystaspis, having before been subdued by Harpagus, Cyrus his
Lieutenant, and the Athenians assisting them therein, chiefly moved Darius to
invade vade Greece. Little Doris borders on its South Side; whose chief Towns
are Cnidis and Ceraunus. Ionia is now called Sarachan, from one of Aladine's
successors, of that name.

LYDIA (which was also called Meonia) took its name either from Lydus a
Nobleman, or from Lud, who was Sem's son, and bordereth on the North-East of
Ionia, wherein stand the Cities of Sardis, (which being ruined by an
Earthquake, was rebuilt by Tiberius); Pergamus, where parchment called
Pergamenum, was in vented; where also Galen was born, who lived in health 140
years. Laodicea, Thyatira, and Philadelphia; of which Sardis was the strongest.
It was a Kingdom before Rome's building, whose last King was Croesus, one of
the richest of old; who after subduing Doris and Aeolis, was with his Kingdom
subdued by Cyrus. But the Lydians rebelling afterward, he subduing them,
dispoyled them of all instruments of war, training that powerful Nation in all
loose and effeminate living. In this Country runs the River Maeander with his
winding banks. They are said to be the first coyners of money, and inventers of
dice, ball, and Chess, etc. to beguile hunger (for 22 years) every second day;
Till they being more fruitful than the soil, sent a Colony under Tyrrhenus into
Italy, which their plantation is called, not now Tyrrhenia, but Tuscanie.

AEOLIS (South from Lydia, and lying on the Aegean Coast, whose people together
with the Dorians and Ionians of Asia, were of old only accounted Greeks: the
other Asians, Barbarians) has three Maritine Towns; Myrina, and Cuma, now
called Castri; and Focea, now named Foglia Vecchia, that is, the old leaf.

NIgh unto Aeolis, are the high and low MYSIA; whose chief City was of old
called Lampsaca, in which Priapus a god was worshipped in a beastly manner and
form. Cyzicus also was another City therein. The River Granica, called also
Lascara, is in this Country where Alexander vanquished Darius his Lievtenants.
There was also formerly the Town of Adramittium an Athenian Colonie, now named
Landermitti. This people are said to be so base of condition, that one of no
worth was called Mysiorum postremus, or the worst of Mysians.

PHRYGIA minor or the less (called Phrygia from Phryxus, who fleeing from his
Mother Ino Queen of Thebes her treacheries, seated himself here; and now
called, they say, Sarcum) lies on the North East of Aeolia; whose chief City
was Troy, (called Ilium) so named from Tros the third King thereof; but it was
built by Dardanus, (who fled into this Country out of Corinth, having killed
his brother Jaseus) and called Dardania, in the year of the World 2487; for in
the once-famousnesse of this people, many or most Nations would from them draw
their original. There are yet (as some say) the admirable ruins of great and
old Troy to be seen: whose length may be discerned (by the walls foundations
yet extant) to have been about 20 Italian miles in length, reckoned 15 of
English, yet but two miles in breadth, lying along the Seaside between the
three Papes of Mount Ida, (here situated, and now called Gargara) and the
farthest end, Eastward, of the River Simois; whose delightful and fruitful
plain, abounding in Corn, fruits, and delicate wines, may be called the garden
of Natolia: the Inhabitants of whose 5 scattered Villages, are most Greeks, the
other Jews and Turks. Priamus the 6th King thereof, giving leave to his son
Paris to ravish Helena Wife of Menelaus King of Sparta, made the Greeks renew a
former quarrel, who after ten years siege, possessed the Town, and burned it
with fire; having lost in that time the best part of a million of men: and the
Trojans even (as is reported) an incredible multitude more. Some place the City
Adramittium, mentioned in Acts 17.2. and also Pergama or Pergamus, in Phrygia
the less: the one whereof we have placed in Mysia, the other in Lydia. This
Province (with Aeolis, and a part of Lydia) are named Carausia from Carasus,
one of Aladine's sharers; and have a long time been subjected to the Ottoman
Turk.

PHRYGIA Major, or the Greater, lies on the East of Phrygia minor, whose City
Appamia, called formerly Sibotis, was the greatest of the Country. Midaia, or
Midaeium, the seat of King Midas the son of Gordius, whose seat was the City
Gordion: he being of a Plowman chosen King of this kingdom. Also the City
Colosse was here, to whose Colossians Paul wrote an Epistle. Pesinus, where
Cibele their goddess was worshipped, and thence called Dea Pesinuntia.
Psamneticus king of Egypt gave verdict of this peoples greatest antiquity; by
shutting up two children, who were suckled by Goats, and all humane company
forbidden them: who learned only the word Bec of the Goats cry; which in the
Phrygians language signifies bread, and nothing at all in any other tongue.
This with the other part of Lydia was called Aidinia, from Aidin, another of
Aladine's successors. The River Sangarius runs near the City Mysaia, and in
Bythinia.

BYTHINIA (nigh whose River Granvicus, Alexander obtained his first victory
over the Persians, slaying 20000) is on the North side of Phrygia, and bounded
on the West by the mouth of Pontus; whose famous Towns were Nicomedia, founded
by Nicomedes King hereof, an ancient Town pleasantly seated on a little hill,
with many springs of water, (though it be ruined) where many Turks and Greeks
inhabit. Chalcedon, where was the 4th General Council against Nestorius his
heresy. Nice, now called Nichia, or as others Isnich, where was held the first
General Council in 314 against the Arrians; as also another by Irene the
Empress, wherein the lawfulness of worshipping Images was established: and
(as was thought) by substantial Arguments. Prusa, new Burse; a great City near
Mount Olympus, a long time the seat of the Othoman Kings, till Mahomet the
First removed it to Hadrianople in Thrace. Herein also is Mount Stella; both
where Pompey the Roman General overthrew Mithridates; and also where Tamerlain
the Tartar vanquished Bajazet the Turk, who being taken, after two years close
confinement, ended his days by breaking out his brains against an iron Cage,
wherein he was enclosed.

PONTUS (on whose South-East Bythinia is situate) and which (being divided
from Bythinia by the River Sangar) was a distinct Province from it: but they
being afterward reduced into one, are now called Bursia, as one says; or
Bechsangiall, as another. Its principal Towns are Tomos, whither Ovid was
banished by Augustus Caesar, of which (whatever was the true) the cause
pretended was his lascivious books, of the Art of Loving. Claudiopolis,
Flaviopolis, and Pithius, where John Chrysostom remained, when he was
banished. The King of this Country was Mithridates; who being once a friend,
and Allie of the Roman Commonwealth, (in hope of the Monarchy of Asia) wrought
(by a plot) the death of 150000 Roman Soldiers, scattered through Anatolia, in
a night: dispossessing two or three Neighbout-Princes of their estates, for
their faithfulness to the Romans: and stirring up the Greeks with all the
Islands, (but Rhodes) to rebel. So that after 40 years much shaking their
estate, he was with much ado conquered. But when his son Pharnaces rebelled
against him, he killed himself, having first (as is reported) attempted to
poison himself, which he could not do, for the Electuary called Mithridate,
which he invented, and long used. The River Parthus waters this Country.

NExt is PAPHLAGONIA, (on the East of Pontus: and which small Country
heretofore contained four different Nations; one of whom never warred, but they
certified their enemy first of the time and place of fight) whose chief City is
Pompeiopolis, as being built by Pompey. Sinope is also there noted for store of
Brass, Lead, etc. Likewise Citros, built by Citorus the son of Phryxus. It is
called Paphlagonia, from Paphlago, the son of Phineus; and in whose bowels runs
the River Parthenius.

GALATIA or Gallograecia, (wherein in Paul's time was a gathered Church) is
bounded with Paphlagonia on the North, and was so called from the Gauls, who
came hither under Brennus, three of whose Towns are remarkable for somewhat:
Ancyra, for a Synod there holden; and now for making Chamlets, and is called
Angouri. Tavium, in which Jupiter's Temple was a privileged Sanctuary. And
Pisius, a place of great Traffic. This valorous people were by degrees
weakened by Asian pleasures; who (as one observes) were so far from assailing
the Romans in the Capitol, that they lost their own Country to Manlius a Roman
General; Deiotarus being their King.

LEUCOSYRIA, or CAPPADOCIA, stands on the East side of Galatia; about the banks
of whose River Thermodon, dwelt the Amazons, Women of Scythia, who came from
thence hither with their Husbands, in Sesostris his time, King of Egypt. But
the men being treacherously murdered by the inhabitants, called Themiscyrii,
whom they held a strict hand over: they (through desperateness) both overthrew
the Conquerours, and greatly enlarged their dominions; and going to men their
neighbors thrice a year: they sent the Males to their Fathers, keeping and
trayning up the Females in warlike Discipline; whose right breasts (it is said)
they cut off, that they might not be hindered in fighting. Six Cities are here
of note; Amasia, whither the Turkish Emperors send their eldest sons (after
Circumcision) till their death. Mazaca or Neo-caesarea, where Basil the Author
of Monastical lives lived; Nazianzum, where Gregory Nazienzen was Bishop;
Erzyrum on great Armenia's confines, and so the Turks randevouz in their
Persian expedition, when Constantinople was possessed by the Laines, which
Mahomet the great took from David, the last Emperor in 1461. Sebastia, where
Tamerlane is said to have buried 12000 alive. Trupezond the Comnens Imperial
seat.

LYCAONIA is bounded on the North with Cappadocia, whose most eminent Cities
are Iconium, where the Selzuccian Aladine Kings formerly kept their Court;
Derbe mentioned in the Acts, together with Lystra; by whose inhabitants, Paul
and Barnabas curing a Criple, were admired as gods. This Province is watered
with the River Lycus: and in whose Southpart is the Hill Chimera; on whose top,
Lions roaring; in whose middle, Goats grazing; and in whose lower part,
Serpents lurking: Poets have feigned it to be a Monster.

PISIDIA has Lycanoiae on the West. Its Cities are Lysamis, and Antiochia,
called in the Acts, Antiochia of Pisidia. Xenophon, the Greek Historian aiding
Cyrus in war (against his brother Artaxerxes Memnon, with 12000 Grecians) who
was by him overcome and slain; Xenophon retired home, the best of them being
lost; yet by this example, he animated the Spartans, and afterward the
Macedonians to attempt Persia's Conquest.

ARMENIA Minor, or the less, (to which Pisidia is joined Westward, and whose
Eastern bounds is the River Euphrates) is thought to be the land of the
Mountains of Ararat, where the Ark rested; the territory of whose chief Town
Malexona abounds in Wine and Oil; and which Province long remained under the
Romans, they having forced Antiochus the Great out of Asia by Scipio, and
possessed the same: But the Turks at length wrested it (as they did all lesser
Asia) by degrees from the Greek Empire.

AS for ASIA-Major, or the greater; Syria therein, which has on the East
Euphrates, is first to be briefly surveyed; which some divide into five
Provinces; Palestina, Phoenicia, Coelosyria, Suria, and Camogena. We will
contein under it only three, (to wit) Phoenicia, Coelosyria, and Syra,
Phoenicia; speaking of Palestina as a distinct Country. In Syria is Mount
Libanus, so famous for Cedars. But by one that traveled to the place where the
Cedars formerly grew, there was but 24 to be seen, and seventeen more nine
miles Westward, on the Mountain. Phoenicia (which lies all upon the Sea, South
toward Judaea) her chief Towns were Tire, now called Sait, an Island indeed;
but so near the main land, that Alexander filled up the Sea-passage with earth
when he besieged the Town; at last taking it, though with extraordinary expense
of men, Money, and toil: it was once famous for her Purples and Merchandise;
whose Kingdom was very ancient, and of long continuance; dispersing also many
Colonies over the World; and whose two Kings of most note, were, Hiram,
Solomon's strict confederate, and Pigmaleon, Dido's brother, who built Carthage.
Sidon, now Sur, in a manner, equal in beauty and power to Tire, and both so
noted for dying of Purple, that the Poets sometimes call it Tyrien, sometimes
Sydonien. It is now governed by an Emir or Prince of the Drusians; the
offspring of the Christians under Godfrey of Bullein, who though they have (as
it were) forgot their Religion, do still maintain their freedom against the
Turks. Ptolemais or Acon, or Acre: a place almost in vincible, when besieged by
so many Christian Princes, in the time of the holy War, so called: two of whom
were Richard the first, and Edward the first, Kings of England. Joppa, whence
Peter was sent for, by Cornelius: which still retains its name, of which
Cities, (says one) scarce any remainders are to be seen at this day, more than
of Joppa and Acre. Sarepta also was here, whose Widows son Eliah raised from
the dead, having been sustained by her in famine; the lower part of which
Country was Ashers seat; it abounding with Wheat, Oil, Honey, and Balm.

COELOSYRIA, (which, some say, is properly the Countries between Libanon, and
Anti-Libanon, whence springs the River Orontes, now called Farsara) Its head or
chief City is Damascus; which being so pleasantly and fruitfully situated;
Mahomet would not enter therein, lest being carried away with its pleasures, he
should forget the business whereabout he was sent. Abraham's servants founded
it, and Paul was convinced nigh it, and converted and comforted in it.
Benhadad, etc. were Kings of this Syria; also the City Hieropolis was herein,
where was the Heathenish Temple of the Syrian Goddess: whose Priests used
juggling tricks to deceive the people.

SYROPHEONICIA, is the third of Syria, whose Metropolis of all Syria, was
Antioch, where the converted Gentiles were first called Christians; which name
and profession, the Heathen so hated; that in forty years time, there being a
great number of that name, they were afflicted with ten persecutions; which
were so cruel, that (except on Jan. the first) there were some thousands pu^
to death every day: But Constantine the great, (not only favoring them, but
becoming of the same profession) put an end to all these persecutions. Antioch
is now rather a heap of ruins than any thing else. Aleppo, so called from
abundance of milk thereabouts, a place now of wonderful traffic from all
parts; in the Scripture it is called Aram Sobab. Tripolis, so called for that
it was thrice built, (standing a mile from the Seaside, near the foot of Mount
Libanus) and removed into three sundry places. The Town and Province of
Palmyra, was likewise in Syria, the which Zenobia a worthy Woman governed: who
swaying those Eastern parts, and standing in opposition with Gallien for the
Empite; Aurelian the Emperor taking her, led her triumphantly through Rome,
and that in such pomp, as never was (in triumphs) greater to be seen. The
Syrians were called Aramites; whose King Tigranes, by Election, ( Seleucus his
stock failing through civil wars) joining with Mithridates against the Romans,
was vanquished by Lucullus, an 100000 being said to be flain, but with the
loss of five Romans, and an hundred wounded. Then again, by the same Lucullus;
and at length, yielded to Pompey, leaving all Syria to the Romans, and
contenting himself with Armenia, and Media only. But it was wrenched by the
Saracens out of the Romans hands.

PALESTINA, which lies between the Mediterranean Sea on the West, and Arabia
on the South, and being situated between the third and fourth climates; its
longest day is fourteen hours and a quarter) is divided into two parts by the
River Jordan, which rises at Mount Libanus foot, from two fountains called
Jor, and Dan. Where, of the Israelites, Reuben, and half of Manasseh dwelt
beyond it, the other on this side thereof; which latter part is subdivided into
Judea, properly so called, Samaria, and Galilee, and Idumea; for when the men
of Judah returned from captivity out of Babylon, then began they first to be
called Jews (even as the new comers out of Assyria, at the Israelites first
transportation, were called Samaritanes from Samaria the Chief City) and then
this Country was first divided into the four Provinces abovesaid. It has had
diverse names, as Canaan from Cham's son so called; the promised land from Gods
promise to Abraham; of Israel, from Jacob surnamed Israel for his faith. Judea,
from the Jews, or Tribe of Judah, the chief of the twelve; and Falestine from
the Philistines a powerful Nation therein; and since Christ it has been called
the Holy Land. Here are two Lakes by which Jordan passes, of Galilee the
Less, and of Tiberias or Genezareth the Greater; also the dead Sea (into which
Jordan falls at last) called by the Greeks the Lake of Asphaltites, and the
dead Sea, because no living creature can endure its bituminous or slimy savor;
nigh which once stood Sodom and Gomorrah; where (as some have written) a Tree
grows with Apples very fair to behold; but being touched, they moulder to
nothing.

TO begin with GALILEE, for that it is the very North part of Palestine, it is
divided into the upper and lower. In the upper were the two Tribes of Asher and
Napthali (with a part of Dan) seated, four of Ashers chief Cities were
mentioned in Phaenicia; another was Aphek, by whose Wall falling, we 27000 of
Benhadads men slain; when as Ahab had slain (in battle) 100000 of them before;
also Giscala. The Cities of note in Napthali, were Capernaum by the Sea of
Galilee, which (Christ said) though lifted up to Heaven, should be brought down
to Hell. Cinnereth, then Genesareth, whose Lake was so called. Jabin, at which
Joshua met twenty four Kings in battle. Leshem being understood of Laish; which
the Danites took, Josh. 19.47 proves that a part of Dan were here seated also.
This was called Galilee of the Gentiles, either as being the nearest to the
Gentiles of Palestina, or because Solomon gave it to King Hiram. The Lower,
which beginning at the Sea of Tiberiades, is but twelve miles long, and five
broad, in whose center, Nazareth (from which City Christ was called Jesus of
Nazareth, and where Mary was saluted by the Angel) almost stands; from the
several miraculous removes and transportations of which Chamber of Mary there,
is begun that deceitful imposture of the Lady of Loretto; over which they
would have to be believed, Paul the second built a most stately Temple; Here
was also, Cana, Bethsaida, Tiberias, Gaba, since Hippopolis, from Herod's
Garrisonning horse therein: Enhadda, nigh which Saul slew himself; Daberoth, in
the Valley of Israel, famous for many battles fought in it; which two last
Cities were in Issachars Tribe, the rest were in Zabulon, both which possessed
this Country, in which also was Mount Tabor, where Christ was transfigured, and
the brook or River Chison; Julian the Apostate called Christ a Galilean in
contempt, because of his much conversing in this Lower Galilee.

SAMARIA (taken here for the Province of Samaria, lying between Galilee and
Judea, not for all the ten Tribes) contains Ephraim, Gad, Reuben, and the
Tribe of Manasseh, one half whereof was situate beyond Jordan, as was said,
the other on the Mediterranean Sea; chief Cities of which latter, were Bethsan,
on whose walls, Readiness dead body was hung; and which (being long after rebuilt
by the Scythians) was named Scythopolis; Caesarea, Palestina; before, Straton:
Herod repairing it and calling it by Caesar's name, where Herod Agrippa was for
his thetoricall pride, eaten of worms; and where Naboth was stoned. Thebes,
from whose wall, Abimereel, where Naboth was stoned. Thebes, from whose wall,
Abimelech (who nigh the City Ephra, had before slain seventy of his brethren)
was mortally wounded with a stone. Here stood also Endor, where Saul asked
counsel of a Witch in his distress.

The Metropolis of Ephraim was called Samaria, a stately City. It stood on a
Hill, built by Omri King of Israel, and denominated from Shemer, of whom the
Hill was bought. It being afterward razed, was repaired by Herod, and called
Sebaste from Sebastos, the Greeks word for Augustus. Bethel was another of its
Cities, which signifying the house of God, was by Jeroboams Calves there
erected and the Idolatry there committed, called by the Prophet Bethaven, that
is, the house of vanity. Sichem, nigh which Judas Maccabaeus overthrew Lysias.
Lydda, since Diospolis; where George for England was said to be beheaded. Here
was also Ramatha, Joseph of Arimathea's City: and Shiloh, or Silo, (on a hill)
where the Ark was, till taken by the Philistines. Gad, beyond Jordan, contained
the chief Towns, Gadara, and Gergesa, two distinct neighboring Cities; but
both one in desiring Christ to depart their coasts; also Ramoth Giliad fatal
to wicked and wilful Ahab, seeking to recover it from the Syrians. Here stood
also Succoth, and Gabosh Gilead, where Saul and his sons were buried, and
Rabba, where Uriah was slain; likewise Betharam, which Herod rebuilding also,
called Julia in honor of Augustus Wife, now of the Julian family. In the other
half of Manass^h; (which Country was called Basan, Og the Giant being its last
King) and also part of that country called Decapolis (diverse times mentioned
in Matthew, Mark, etc. from its ten chief Cities) some of whose principal Towns
were Edrey, Ogs seat, Ashtaroth, where the Goddess Ashtaroth was worshipped in
form of a sheep; and Hus, or Jobs birthplace. In the Tribe of Reuben, was
strong Machaerus, (on a Rock) where John Baptist was beheaded, Bethbara where
Moses exhorted the Israelites, and John long after baptized. Ramath Baal,
whither Balaam was brought to curse the people, and whose god Baal (some have
said) was beastly Priapus aforementioned, finally Abel, Sittim, in Moabs
plains, where the Isra^lites last encamped, and where the wood grew whereof the
Ark was made. The Samaritanes were (after the ten Tribes carried away)
Assyrians sent thither by Salmanassar, who being deceitful, were deadly
enemies to the Jews in distress, but in their rest and prosperity, they would
be their Cousins; so that they were for their mungrel Religion, not only
accounted Schismatiques, but also reprobates, with whom the Jews conversed not;
and accounted the word Samaritane among the worst they could give to Christ.

JUDEA contained the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, and is now accounted as
large as them: all the remarkable Cities of which two great Tribes, to speak of
particularly, would be too tedious. In Judah was Jethir; near which, King Asa
(by his God's help) overthrew Zerah King (not of the Aethiopians beyond Egypt,
but) of the Arabians nearer home, having 1000000 men. Hebron, a very ancient
Seat of the sons of Anak; which Anak (the word signifying a chain for ornament)
it appears, wore such a chain; the Giant being enriched with his enemie's
spoils. Near this Town was also the Plain of Mamre; whither the Angels came to
Abraham: here also was David anointed King by the Tribes; and kept his Regal
Seat before the taking of Jebus, afterward called Jerusalem. Tekoa, where the
Prophet Amos dwelt; in whose wilderness, the Lord destroyed the Moabites,
Ammonites, and men of Mount-Seir, in Jehosophat's time, by setting the two
former against the latter: and then against each other. Bethlem-Judah (for
there was another Bethlem in Zabulon) where Christ was born; and the Infants
suffered by Herod: amongst whom, Herod's own son, at nurse, being slain,
Augustus Caesar said, He had rather be Herod's hogg, than his son. Emaus,
(afterward Nicopolis) where Christ made himself known to two disciples; when
their hearts had burned within them, as they traveled reasoning with him.
Herein likewise, are the hills of Engedi, at whose feet were Gardens of
Balsamum or Opobalsamum: for whose Trees, Cleopatra sending to Herod to plant
them in Egypt, he, as not daring to refuse, plucked them up and sent them. In a
Cave of these hills also David cutting off the lap of Readiness garment, his heart
(by God's witness in his conscience) smote him for it.

Benjamin's Cities were Gilgal, where Joshua, after Moses's death performed
several acts as preparatories to his success and conquest of Canaan; as,
circumcising the people, keeping the Passover; pitching 12 stones near it; a
memorial of dividing Jordan to give them passage; eating of the fruits of the
land; and where Agag was hewn in pieces by Samuel. Strong Ai, where the
Israelites (purging the Camp of Achan the thief) seized the City by a
stratagem, having been first discomfited- Mispeh, even in the midst of the Land
and peoples common assembling place, was with Gilgal, made the Judgment-Sear,
whither Samuel went yearly for that purpose. Gibbah, where, in the quarrel of
the Priest's daughter being forced, that Tribe was almost extirpated. Gibon,
whose Gibeonites obtaining peace of Joshua, and Saul afterward killing some of
them, a famine came on the Land, and was not appeased but with the hanging of
his seven sons by them. Jericho, whose Walls falling down at the sound of
rams-horns, it was razed, and a curse denounced on the builder thereof; which
being attempted in Ahab's time by Hiel a Bethelite, for the pleasantness of
the place, he lost his eldest son at the foundation of its Walls; and his
youngest at the setting up it is Gates. On the other side Jordan against this
Jericho, is Mount-Nebo, where God having shown Moses the promised Land, took
him away, not suffering him to enter therein. Lastly, Jerusalem; built by
Melchizedeck, that is, a King of righteousness in spirit and figure; and King
of Salem, that is, King of peace, the effect of the former: which standing
among the Jebusites, was named Jebusalem; and, a letter being altered,
Jerusalem, or a City of peace. It was built on Mount Sion, having a ditch
about it cut out of a rock: which was not conquered, till David (by Joab) took
it, although the Citizens covertly and presumptuously said, their blind and
lame could defend it. Then was this the Royal Seat; In which Solomon built the
magnificent Temple, the place of general worship: which being destroyed by
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon in the 1350th year of the World, was (after the
Jews return from Captivity) rebuilt; the Workmen holding their swords in one
hand, and tools in the other, through the great opposition of the Samaritans.
Yet was it not outwardly in diverse respects so glorious as the former: But the
Lord promised (by the Prophet) it should be more glorious: which was fulfilled
not only by Christ the light of the World, his personal preaching glad tidings
therein; but especially by dwelling in his Saints, of whose bodies (which are
his Temple) that was but a type. Herod the Ascalonite, in favor of the Jews,
plucking it down, made it much exceed the second, though somewhat inferior to
the first. But it was again destroyed by Titus, Vespasian's son, Aug. 10. (on
which very day, Nebuchadnezzar burnt the first with fire) which City, to be
besieged, the Jews their rebellion and obstinacy against the Roman Emperor,
(under whose power they were) to fulfill their own wish in crucifying Christ,
that his blood might be upon them and their children, after some years, caused;
and at the time whereof, there dyed by sword and famine above a million of
people in the City it self, besides near 100000 taken prisoners at the taking
it, and in other Cities well nigh a million more: and all this from the 12th
year of Nero, onto the second of Vespasian, which was within 4 years time. And
in the 136 year of Christ, (through 2 rebellions by them raised) they were by
Adrian the Emperor, in general banished never there to inhabit but as
strangers: since which, they being dispersed over the Earth, have been banished
out of England first; then out of France, Spain, Portugal, Naples, and Sicily.
Yet are there many in Germany, Poland, Amsterdam in Holland, (where they have a
Synagogue) Italy, and chiefly Rome it self, with the Pope's jurisdiction of
Avignion: which permission of them under the Pope, although an expectation of
their conversion be the declared reason; yet considering the Papists
Image Worship, whereby they are stumbled: and they also not being suffered to
see so much as the New Testament: as also, that at their conversion, they must
likewise convert all their goods to the Church, as ill-gotten; it may be rather
judged to be from profit hereby arising. When Julian the Apostate would (to
increase the Jews number, and diminish the Christians) have rebuilt built this
Temple; an Earthquake casting up the foundations, and fire from Heaven
consuming the timber-work, hindered that design. Yet the City was re-edified by
the Emperor Aelius Adrianus, (who calling it after his own name Aelia, gave it
to the Christians) though not in the very place of the old, every way: for,
according to the relation of an eyewitness, on its South Side, much of
Mount-Sion is left without the walls, which was anciently the heart of the old
City; taking in also now, both Mount-Calvary, and Christ's Sepulcher, called
the holy grave, within those Walls that were built by Selimus the Turk: so that
(says he) a man may boldly assirm, the most part to be built on that place,
where the first Jerusalem was; as appears by the Mountains mentioned in
Scripture, whereon Jerusalem is both situated and environed; who reserve their
same names to this day; as Mount Sion, Calvary, Moriah, and Olivet, which last
Mountain the Valley of Jehosaphat divides from the City. There is in it also
the Temple of the Sepulcher built by Helena, (Mother to Constantine the Great)
with a little Chapel over it: and in the place of the Temple, burnt by Titus,
is another great Temple builded by Sultan Selim Seliman, reserved and highly
regarded by the Turks out of their respect to Solomon: near which, or within
whose Courts, none (called a Christian) may enter, under pain of losing his
head. The Temple of the Sepulcher, has been, and is much reverenced and
resorted unto; for the sight of which every one pays 9 Crowns tribute to the
Turk, or (as a Traveller thither says) 12 chickens of gold, was dispatched
from each of them for the Turk, as tribute for going into the holy grave.

The Levites (of whom there were four sorts, Punies or younglings till 25 years
old; Graduates, who after 4 years study might oppose and answer in the Law;
Licenciates, who exercised the Priest's Office; And Rabbis or Doctors, the
highest, who expounded the Law) had 48 Cities allotted them, out of every
Tribe, and were reckoned of that Tribe where their City was. Simeon also
inhabited only a part of Judah's portion; according to their father's
prophecy, That he would divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel: so
that Joseph's sons, Ephraim and Manasses, made up the 12 Tribes. They were
called Hebrews from Heber, who was before Abraham: and of 70 souls when Jacob
went down into Egypt, grew a multitude in 215 years space, notwithstanding
their oppression. Neither was any Province thought to be so proportionably
peopled, as Palestina; in which (being not above 160 miles long, and 60 broad,
the length being reckoned from Dan to Beersheba) when David numbered the people,
they found a million and 300000 fighting men, besides Benjamin; but now stripped
even of all ornaments, except the beauty and bounty of the soil, which is
defective also. The Jews had 16 Judges, 415 years; Moses being the first, and
Samuel the last: who having judged them four years; in the year of the World
2873, they desired a King like other Nations. They had three Kings before the
kingdom was divided, Saul, David, and Solomon. There were 17 Kings of Israel,
Jeroboam the son of Nebat being the first, and Hosea the last; who being
overcome by Salmanassar, the Israelites were carried captive into Assyria in
3232; whence those ten Tribes never (as we find) returned. The Kings of Judah
were 20. Rehoboam, Solomon's son, was the first, from whom the ten Tribes rent;
Zedekias was the last, in whose reign, Nebuchadnezzar the Proud, destroying
Jerusalem, captivated the people into Babylon his kingdom; (two Kings having
reigned in Judah after Israel's captivity). Who so remaining 70 years, Cyrus
King of Persia (to whom the Babylonians were now subject) gave them liberty to
return, and build the City and Temple: which finished, they chose them
Governors of the chief of David's house; whereof Zorobabel was the first of
the 15, Johannes Hircanus the last, of them that were of David's stock.

But the Dominion of Jewry being vexed by the Egyptians on one side, and the
Syrians on the other, during their governments; compelling them withal, to eat
Swines-flesh, etc; Mattathias and his five sons were stirred up to resist
Antiochus Epiphanes, and the Syrians; who having been very victorious over
them, Judas Macchabeus (reckoned one of the Nine Worthies) was chosen Captain
of the Jews; in the year of the World 3799; who vanquished three of Antiochus
his great Captains, with their three numerous Armies. Three Princes of Judea
there were after him, Johannes Hircanus being the last, in 3831. Then were
there four Macchabaean Kings of Judah: Aristobulus, the first, who starving his
Mother, slew his brother. Alexander was the second; a bloody Tyrant both to
subjects and enemies. Then a woman, Alexandra or Solome, the Tyrant's wife.
Lastly, Hircanus, who being disturbed by his younger brother Aristobulus, was
established by Pompey the Roman, in his Throne, he with his sons being
imprisoned at Rome; one of whom (Alexander) escaping and disquieting his
Country, was seized on and slain. But Julius Caesar ( Pompey's victorious
competitor) freeing the other brother Antigonus, he deposing Hircanus, cut off
his ears; who suddenly after, was slain by Mark-Anthony, and a stranger had the
kingdom in 3930. Of which strangers, there were five Kings. Herod the
Ascalonite an Idumean, being the first, made so by Augustus: and at which time
Christ was born; and Agrippa minor, or the Less, who was the last: before whom
with Festus, Paul pleaded, and in whose time Jerusalem was destroyed; and the
kingdom made a Roman Province, in the year 73 after the birth of Christ: which
being re-edified (as was said) by Aelius Adrianus, and given to the Christians:
Cosroes King of Persia took it from them in 615; from whom the Saracens
wresting it in 637; and the Turks from them in 1009, one Peter a French Hermit
stirred up the Princes of the West to relieve the oppressed Christians; who
came at last to Jerusalem, and took it. Godfrey Duke of Bulloign for his merits
therein, was saluted the first King of Jerusalem and Palestine, in 1099; of
which (though he would not in that place where Christ wore a Crown of Thorns,
be Crowned with Gold, yet (for the common goods sake, he took the title; there
was nine of these Kings whereof Guy of Lusignan was the last; for in his time,
Saladine Sultan of Egypt in 1187, won that Kingdom, which his successors
defended, until that in 1517, Selimus the first, Turkish Emperor, added both
Palestine and Egypt also to his Empire. Yet after that Saladine had taken
Jerusalem; the Christians retiring into some Towns thereof, made them good
against the Turk; under Conrade of Montferrat, Henry Earl of Champaigne, and
John di Brenne, who was the last Christian King that possessed any thing in
Palestine or Syria; yet Yoland, Brenn his daughter, marrying Frederick King of
Naples, he entitled himself King of Jerusalem in her right; whereupon the
Kings of Spain, being heirs and possessours of Naples, do now assume that empty
title. Three Orders of Knighthood were also erected for defense of the Holy
land so called, against infidells. The first, by Helena, Constantine the Great
his Mother, and called Knights of the Sepulcher. The second by one Gerard in
1124. named Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, (which was also confirmed by
the Pope) who being expelled Palestine, seized on Rhodes, and being forced
thence also (at length) by the Turk, are now in the Isle of Malta, and called
Knights thereof. The third were Templers by Hugh of Payennes in 1113, confirmed
also by the Pope: who possessing very many Lordships, even in all Provinces of
Europe; their great revenue was not the least cause of their dissolving; yet
were there crimes proved against this order, as revolting from obedience to the
Patriarch of Jerusalem, their visitour, unspeakable pride, and also sins
against nature; so that, being dissolved, their lands were given to the
Hospitallers, or Knight of St. John.

IDUMEA, (which the Edomites, Esau's offspring once inhabited, as also Mount
Seir, or wilderness of Edom, counted part of stony Arabia, where the
Israelites were stung with fiery Serpents) was in part possessed by the
Philistines; who very much vexed the Israelites: and although they, with the
Edomites were made subject by David, yet could not be expelled the land. The
Edomites revolting in Jorams time, and remaining free, till the time of
Hircanus the High Priest after the Captivity, he subjecting them, forced them
to be circumcised, and so were accounted as Jews. In Idumea were Dan and
Simeons Tribes. Dan's chief Cities were Kiriathjearim, where the Ark was kept
in Aminadabs house 20 years; Eckron where they worshipped Baalzebub, or the god
of flies; Asotos, Azotus, or Asdad, where was Dagons sumptuous Temple: and near
which Judas Macchabaeus was slain in hard fight. Gath, Goliahs City: and Joppa,
or as some now, Jaffa, reported to have been built before the flood; whence
Jonah took shipping to flee to Tarsus, where Peter raised Dorcas, and where he
saw a Vision of the Gentiles conversion in Simon the Tanners house. Simeon's
principal Cities are, strong Gaza, which from the Persians laying their Western
tributes and customs there, all Riches are called Gazae; Ascalon, where Queen
Semiramis who built Babylon; and also long after, Herod that slew the Infants
was born. Beersheba, which was the Southern limit of Palestine, as Dan, or
Laish, was the North, and was well fortifyed by the Warring Christians, as
bounding on Arabia. Abraham and Abimelech here swear to each other. Hagar
wandered hither with Ishmael, and Isaac there long dwelt. Cariathsepher, whose
name signifying a City of books; some would have it to be anciently Palestine's
University.

ARMENIA Major, or the greater, which has on the North, Tartary, and on the
South, Mesopotamia, called at this day Mingrelia, has Mountains lying on the
East of Euphrates, which divide it from Anatolia, called Scodrisci, Periadres,
and Amamus, whose Inhabitants having want of all things, are stout, cruel and
Warlike, living (in that so barren soil) by hunting and stealing. It is divided
into three Provinces; whereof the first to be mentioned is Colchis, now called
Diarbec, situate North and West on the Euxine Sea, two of whose chief Towns
are Phasis, or Fassum, on the River Phasis its banks; and Dioscurias, where
the Romans (in their time) kept 30 Interpreters to stand between the Governor
and people, because of 30 languages there spoken, through the Merchants of all
Nations. In Colchis also Aetas was King, from whom Jason is said to have
stolen the golden Fleece by Medea's aid and sorceries. Georgia (otherwise
called Gurgestan, and formerly Iberia; for it comprehends the ancient Iberia
with a part of high Armenia) was not so named from St. George, (although they
highly esteem him) but from the Georgi inhabiting long before George, the
adjoining Countries. It is situated on the East of Colchis, and on the North
of Turcomania. This people being good Soldiers, have always maintained their
liberty, by joining sometimes with the Persians, and sometimes with the Turks;
of whose Country also there have been many Lords: but now it is mostly under the
Turk, and has many good and strong Towns: (one whereof is called Teslis,
exceedingly fortified by the Turks, to defend their new Conquests against the
Persians) also Loca, Toman, etc. Hence the Sultans of Egypt choosing their
Mamalucks; they at length proudly assumed, and long defended that Kingdom.

TURCOMANIA (formerly and properly called Armenia the greater, to distinguish
it from the lesser in Natolia) is confined upon the North with Colchis; on the
West with Euphrates, and the lesser Armenia, and took this name from the Turks,
(in the Hebrew signifying, banished men) who breaking through the Caspian
straights out of barren and cold Scythia, seated themselves in this Country in
844, where reaming up and down after the manner of the Scythian Nomades, and
being an unregarded people; at length, Mahomet the Persian Sultan, a Saracen,
sending for some of them to aid him against the Caliph of Babylon, (by whose
valor he got the victory) and hindering their return home; they first retiring
into the Woods, by open arms fought the Persians: where Mahomet by unadvised
riding to and fro to encourage his Soldiers, breaking his neck with a fall
from his horse: Trangolipix the Turks Leader, was (by common confent of both
Armies) proclaimed Sultan of Persia, whereby, at first, by the Zelzuccian
family, and then by the Ottoman swallowing up the other, the large Turkish
Monarchy has been (by degrees) erected both in Europe, Asia, and Africa: So
that as 'twas said of the people of Rome, that of a small beginning, they grew
up to such a greatness; so may it be said of these Scythian Turks: but as it
is with the Moon her self, which increases, and again diminishes; so also is
it with all Empires placed under her, which have their time to rise, and must
have their time to fall. The Metropolis or Mother-City of Turcomania was once
Artaxata, denominated either from the River Araxis, (which divides Armenia and
Persia) as being seated thereon, or rather from Artaxes before Tigranes who
founded it; then Esechia, and now called Coy: nigh which Lucullus the Roman
overcame Mithridates and Tigranes his son in law; and Selimus the Turk, Hismael
the Persian Sophie, in 1514, though with the loss of 30000 choice men, and
such a general terror, that they still call it, The day of Doom. Arminig is
now its chief City. There is also Tigranocerta built by Tigranes, one of the
mightiest Kings of this Armenia; whose new City, Lucullus taking by siege,
found beside other wealth therein, 3000 talents in money. Van, which both by
Nature and Art is a strong Bulwark against Invasions of the Persians. Lastly,
Sebastia, where the Patriarch of Armenia resides.

ARABIA (taking it altogether) is a very spacious Country, and is shut up on
the West with the Arabian Gulf, or the Red Sea; on the East with the Persian
Gulf; on the South with the Ocean; and on the North with Palestine, and famous
Euphrates: So that it is in the form of a Peninsula, and is divided into three
parts, Arabia Deserta, or the Wilderness, Petrosa, or the Stony; and Foelix,
or the Happy. Though the Arabians are very much given to theft, and hate all
Science; yet they boast much of their Nobility. They of Arabia Foelix, the
civillest of the three, had many barbarous customs. The Arabic tongue which
they all use, extends also through Syria, Palestine, Egypt, Mesopotamia, and
(Morocco excepted) all Barbary: which language the Mahometans account sacred.

ARabia the Desert (which has three several Epithites given to it by
Aristides, Servius, and Lucian) is called by the Hebrews Kedar, and is the
Wilderness wherein the Israelites coming out of Egypt, wandered 40 years under
Moses. It is bounded on the East with the Mountains of Babylon. It being
covered with a dry and thick sand, is not fit for herbage or tillage: the chief
City of whose few Inhabitants is called Bassora. Their traveling beasts here
are Camels, whom little food suffices; yet will they carry 600, and sometimes
1000 weight.

PETROSA, or the Stony, (which confines with the Desert on the East, and on the
South with the Happy) is so called either from its rockinesse, or from Petra
the chief Town thereof, though now named Rathalalah: which having been
straightly besieged by the Roman Emperors Severus and Trajan, they were in all
attempts worsted. Trajan being glad to flee for his life, and the man next him
being slain with a dart. Yet this Arabia was subdued by Palma Lieutenant of
Syria under the said Trajan:

Here is also Ezion-Geber on the Red Sea, where Solomon's ships stayed both
before and after their sailing to Ophir. This Country was called by Pliny and
others, Nabathea; (for it contains the two Regions of Nabathea, and Agara, so
called, because the Sararens or Hagarens of Hagar possessed it: where also
dwelt the Enims and Zanzummims, as also the Madianites, to whom Moses fled) now
it is called either Barra, as one; Bangaucal, as another; or Battha, as a
third. The two Mountains of Sinay and Horeb are herein; of which, Sinay is the
highest, which being very troublesome to ascend, stairs are cut in the rock,
that beasts might more easily pass. There is also in this Mountain, a Covent
of Monks, 50 in number, called Maronites, living after the Grecian manner; and
who receive Christian Pilgrims (so called) who go thither for devotion. Many
would have Petra to be the very Mecca where Mahomet was born: but it is rather
that which (in Mapps) is called Petra of Est: for Mecca is reckoned to be in
Arabia the Happy. Of all Vegetables, the Palm Tree only grows in this barren
Province. Store of Dromedaries there are, which, they say, will (through
swiftness) bear a man 1000 miles in one day. The Ostrich also (who is said to
digest Iron) is plenty here.

FOELIX or the Happy, joins to the other two like a Peninsula, betwixt the
Arabian and Persian Gulf, and bordering with the Indian Sea; and is so called,
(I may well suppose) for that it is the most pleasant and fruitful Country of
Asia, abounding with Balsome, Myrrh, and Frankincense, Gold and Pearls,
especially (says a Traveller) about Medina the second City to Mecha; now it
carries the name of Yaman or Gyamen. Some will have Saba the principal City:
but however, hence were the Sabeans that afflicted Job. Medina Tanalbi, that
is, the Prophet's City is situated near Arabia Petrea, and well peopled, and
was the first Town that yielded to Mahomet, when by arms he began to establish
his Religion: in or nigh which he composed the model thereof: here the
Iron-Coffin of this false prophet, with his enclosed body, is said to hang,
being held by an Adamant up to the roof of the Temple, near which they also say
are always about 3000 burning lamps. Mecha is the chief City; wherein Mahomet
was born: which two Cities are remarkable places for Mohammedan Pilgrims: there
coming also three Caravans or Captains yearly, which part from Cair, Damas, and
the Indies, and go to Mecha for devotion, in honor of Mahomet's birth; thence
to Medina, in honor of his Sepulcher: and into which no Christian is suffered
to enter. The other Towns of note are Horan, the chief Port of the South Ocean;
and Alteroch or Elter, the only Town in that Country where Christians, so
called, are in greatest number. There is Zidon, a Sea-Town 40 miles from Mecha,
without walls, but indifferent fair houses: also Aden seated on the borders of
the Red Sea, near the strait of Babel Mandel; and said to be the fairest Town
of Arabia, strong by situation, as well as Art: which Town the Turks took, and
the whole Realm by policy, in 1538, and they lost their King. Zebeth or Zibit
also is a good Town standing in a Plain between two Mountains, and on a River
of the same name half a days journey from the Red Sea; which being taken by
the Turk after Aden, he sent thither a Begliarbey with great forces. One
barbarous custom which they had formerly in this Arabia, was the community of
one Wife alone among a whole kindred, and if she accompanied any other man,
they both dyed. The Turkish Alcoran composed by Osmen the 4th Caliph, and
commanded by him to be only received as Canonical throughout his Dominions, is
an exposition on Mahomet's eight Commandments: which are, 1. Every one ought
to believe that God is a great God, and one only God, and Mahomet to be his
Prophet. 2. Every one must marry to increase Mahomet's followers. 3. Every one
must give of his wealth to the poor. 4. Every one must make his prayers five
times a day. 5. Every one must keep a Lent one month in a year. 6. Be obedient
to thy Parents. 7. Thou shall not kill. 8. Do unto others, as thou would be
done unto thy self. Which Religion of his (he promising a carnal and voluptuous
Paradise to those that kept these Laws) was greedily received by the Saracens,
(of Arabia the Desert) so called (not of Sara, but) either of Saharra, which
signifies a Wilderness, and Saken, to inhabit; or from Sarak, thieves, a name
agreeable to their natures. Mahomet was born in 572, and some say not at Mecha,
but in a Village of Arabia called Itrarip; his father was a Pagan, and his
mother a Jew; he was married to his Mistress at 25 years old, and began to
affect the name of a Prophet at 38 years of age; and by policies strengthening
himself with the Arabians, who freed themselves from obedience to the Greek
Empire: he was driven from Mecha's Territories by their Nobility; the which he
(ere long) subduing, expelled thence the Greek Officers. From whose flight from
Mecha, the Saracen's Hegira, or computation of years (so called from Hegirathi,
which (from the Arabic) is rendered, a persecution raised about Religion)
began; which was about the year of Christ 617. Although Selimus the First,
subdued the Arabians to the Turk; yet are they rather tributaries than
provinces of that Empire; for they have two Kings of their own, one whereof
lives on Euphrates, the deserts of Mesopotamia; sometimes in Arabia Foelix,
and in some parts of Syria: the other wandreth with his tribes or wild theevish
Arabs, tents, and Bestial, one while in Petraea and Deserta; sometimes in
Palestine, as he finds good pastorage and fresh fountains; which makes the
travail to and in Palestine, so dangerous. These two Kings are mortal enemies;
and if by chance they meet, they bring damage, rapine, and destruction to
themselves and their followers: for being untamed Savages, they cannot bridle
their inordinate passions.

These Countries are all subject to the Turkish Empire, which did also possess
part of Media, with its chief City Taurus: but some think the Sophi of Persia
has recovered the greatest part thereof. The Turk also holds almost all
Mesopotamia and Diarbeck; being Master of Chaldea, and part of Assyria: But
since the Persian Sophi has daily won from him, recovering his estate by
little and little, as also that many of these Countries do (hereby) change
their masters daily.

We will briefly mention the Riches, Fruitfulness and Religion of the
forementioned places: and then (that we run not into a labarinth) in brief
survey the other Countries also.

Anatolia, or Lesser Asia enjoying a sweet and temperate Air, did abound
likewise with grain, having store of good pastures for Cattle; and had more
than sufficiency for the life of man. But now it is not so fruitful, as not so
well manured; yet it is more fertile in places near the Sea; and as the land is
better husbanded, so it yields the more. In the great Plains within the heart
of the Country, they sow Wheat, Barley, and Cotton. Natolia has the benefit of
many Rivers watering it; whereof five of the principal discharge themselves
into the Euxine Sea; three into the Propontides; one into Hellespont; four into
the Archipelago: one runs into Euphrates; and diverse others into the
Mediterranean Sea. But the chief revenue of Natolia is by Cotton, whereof there
grows abundance.

Bythinia imparts its Orpiment to other Nations. Galatia has great yearly
profit by Copper-Mines. Caria a good revenue by the Adamant stone. The
Pamphilians make the best of Chamlets, and have great sums of money for them.
Cappadocia is enriched by Silver, Iron, Allom, Jasper, Crystal, Alabaster, and
the Onyx stone. And Cilicia receives much money for its store of Chamlets made
of Goats-hair, which is there very soft, and delicate as silk. Judea reaps much
profit by Pilgrims going yearly to the Holy Sepulcher. Phoenicia is much
frequented for its great traffic: But Arabia the Happy exceeds them all in
Merchandise, and by reason of the Spices, precious stones, and Pearls there
sold to strange Merchants, is exceeding rich; and it yields Incense for all the
World. Mecha has great traffic, unto which Ethiopian, Indian, and other
Merchants come; and (together with Medina) is enricht yearly by Pilgrimages.
Aden exceeds any other in traffic for the abundance of Commodities brought
thither from India, Persia, and Aethiopia, which are fetched and sold from
thence at a dear rate; for they are a witty people in Merchandising matters. As
touching Religion, there are many of diverse Religions and sects in these
Countries besides the Mahometans. Jews are dispersed all over them: and those
that profess themselves Christians, some obey, and others are divided from the
Church of Rome. The first sort, are great numbers of Merchants of Venice,
Ragouse, France, etc. trading to Tripoli, Damasco, Aleppo, etc. being assisted
by them of the Order of Francis who dwell in Jerusalem and Bethelem: and a few
among the Armenians also, are found following the Latin Church. There was 25
Villages under the jurisdiction of Alangiacana-Castle, two days journey from
Tauris, who (though they spoke the Armenian tongue) acknowledged Rome. This was
in 1337; which Inhabitants are said to be then converted by one Bartholomew a
Dominican, who was made Bishop of Armenia (I suppose the lesser); but now 12
only do persist in obedience thereunto: some of the other 13 having submitted
to the Patriarch of the greater Armenia, and the others being ruined during the
Turkish and Persian Wars. The 12 Villages are assisted in religious matters by
the Dominicans under an Archbishop of that order, who being made by their
Chapter, and the chief of the Villages, is confirmed by the Pope. The Latins
had also Synagogues at Bursia and Trebysond or Trapezond; but they with the
Latin Ceremonies being lost for lack of Priests to officiate, either the
Grecian or Armenian Religion has succeeded. For the Armenians differ from
them, 1. In receiving Infants to the Supper immediately after Baptism. 2. In
abstinence from unclean beasts. 3. In fasting on Christmas Day so called. 4. In
holding their children over the fire in Baptism, as a needful circumstance,
because John told the people, That Christ should baptize them with the holy
Spirit and fire. The other sorts are divided into three sects, Melchites, so
named from Melech, that is, a King or Prince, as following the Emperor's of
Constantinople's example: Such are all they of the Greeks religion in Asia
under the four forementioned Patriarchs of Constantinople, Jerusalem,
Alexandria, and Antioch; this last residing at Damasco: who being chosen by the
Country Bishops, seek not now the Pope's confirmation, (as formerly) but a
liberty to choose, from the Turkish Bashaw, and the Turks own confirming,
exercising their power under his authority. These choose and consecrate the
Archbishops and Bishops under them: some of whom have recourse to the Pope for
confirmation. They are all Monks of Basil; the famousest of which many Covents
throughout the Levant, are those in Jerusalem, on Mount Sinai, and the holy
Mountain upon the Archipelago. These hold all that the Greeks of old condemned
as erroneous at the Council of Florence; and are thought to be more than all
the rest, Natolia and Syria being full of them; they extending also into Egypt,
and Corazzan of Persia. Some also place the Georgians among them: who (as one)
acknowledge the Patriarch of Constantinople's authority: yet some say, they
agree in most doctrinal points with the Greeks, but not acknowledging the said
Patriarch; but have one of their own: who being mostly resident on Mount Sinai,
has 18 Bishops under him. They call ('it is said) on St. George as their
Advocate: But take not their name from him, as was before shown. Some of them
have turned Mahometans. Nestorians are also in these Countries, so called from
Nestorius the Leader of their formerly condemned heresy: who speaking the
languages of the places where they live, do notwithstanding celebrate their
Liturgy in the Chaldean tongue. The third sect are Dioscoriens, which are
likewise divided into three Armenians, who although they give the title of
Patriarch to many of their Prelates who farm the Turk's Armenian tributes, and
are made partly by his favor; yet call but two Universal Patriarchs, the one
being over the high, the other over the Low-Armenia. They are not much less in
number than the Melchites; who have great liberty in all the Turk's estate,
both for their policy in Trade, and for some testimonies of their
predecessour's affection to Mahomet: who passionately recommended them to his
successors. They have no Images, but crosses of brass and iron, yet have they
diverse relics in shrines of silver: they say Service in their own language.
Those things wherein they differ from the other Dioscoriens are, 1. Celebrating
their Sacrament with unleavened bread, therein being conformable to Rome beyond
all the Eastern Sectaries: they put also no water in their wine, saying, the
Latin Church used anciently the same; they eat figgs and milk on Saturday
night before Easter; eating also flesh every Friday from Easter to the
Ascension. They differ in the time of celebrating the Annunciation and
Nativity. They say, Christ was exempt from passions, and necessities of humane
nature. They make the sign of the Cross with two fingers, first on the right
side, then on the left, contrary to the Jacobites.

For their killing nor buying any flesh five Saturdayes of the year, in
remembrance of the Idolaters sacrificing their children to Idols, and in a
different ordering the Lamb in their Mass for the dead before they kill it;
some call them Sabbatins and Julianists. Yet they remember their first union
with Rome's Church, in Pope Silvester, and Constantine the Great's time.
Jacobites, denominated from one Jacob, a Syrian, a follower of Dioscores and
Eutyches; the chief of whom are in Aleppo, Caramit, and Tur, a Mountain of
Mesopotamia. They had two Patriarchs; now but one; which is (...) the Monastery
of Gifran, yet living at Caromit: who has under him two Metropolitans, one
being in Jerusalem; diverse Archbishops, and many Monasteries of Anthonie's
Order. They celebrate in the Chaldean tongue, and differ from the Armenians; in
making the sign of the cross with the forefinger only, to signify a
oneness of nature, will, and operation in Christ. They eat also milk and flesh
on Wednesday and Friday night after Sunset, saying, Then the term of
abstinence is past: eating flesh all the year long but in Lent. Some Arabians
living among them, have joined to them, who ar^^lled Solares, because they
worship (among other superstitions the Sun. The Maronites (some think) are a
branch of the Jacobites; for they were both (of old) subject to the Antiochian
Patriarch; the which Patriarchship, both pretend; though it be now in the hands
of the Melchites: they both use the Chaldean tongue, and had the same opinion
of the unity of will, nature and operation of Christ. It is the least of all
the Eastern sects, there being not above 12000 households, most of whom are
poor; yet they are the most affected to the Sea of Rome, whose Patriarch being
of Anthonies Order, and chosen by their Bishops and Religious on^^ is confirmed
by the Pope, and resides at Tripoli of Syria, the Town^ of Syria and Villages
of Mount Libanon being the abode of the Maronites. Yet are there some convents
of Anthony, and a few Bishops, who having no certain abode, are as it were his
assistants. They pray to Maron, not (say they) the Arch-heretique, (from whom,
it is generally held, they derive their name) but an Abbot of a very holy life:
or else are so called from Marona a Village of Mount Libanon. Some are found
among these, called White: who not being baptized, and in outward show
Mahometans, do call themselves Christians, confessing and communicating in
secret. The third sort of Dioscorians, are Costs or Curdes: who being
wonderful ignorant, are mostly Nestorians and Jacobites; but have diverse other
opinions: many Mahometans being also among them.

Before I pass to Assyria, etc. I shall strike in with those two noted Islands
of the Mediterranean Sea, Rhodes and Cyprus. Rhodes lying in the Carpathian Sea
over against Caria, had of old diverse names, as Ithrea, Trinacria, etc. But
(according to Pliny) called Rhodes, from the fields of Roses therein, from
(...), signifying a Rose; nigh whose chief City Rhodes (which stands on the
East part of the Isle, the side of a hill, and part on the Seashore, enjoying
a fair and safe Haven, having also two or three Walls, five Castles, 13 high
Towers, and some other Forts, making it even impregnable) at the entry of the
Haven, stood that huge Idol of brass, (in a man's image) called Colossus, one
of the world's seven Wonders: whose thumb was so big, that no man could embrace
it with both arms; and its little finger as big as an ordinary man. Some say it
was built by Canete Lindo in 12 years space; others, by Callasses Lysippus his
Scholar, taking the name Colossus of him. It was 80 cubits high, and erected
in honor of the Sun; (which is said, once a day to shine on this Island,
though never so cloudy in other places) between whose legs, (it standing in
the Harbour's mouth) ships with sails were wont to pass under. Whether the
people were hence called Colossians, is uncertain; but those Colossians to whom
Paul wrote, were dwellers in Anatolia, of which mention has been made. Mnavi
Caliph, Osman's General, uniting this Isle to the Mohammedan Empire, he brake
down most of this Image, the brass whereof is said to have loaded 900 Camels:
yet its relics were seen within this 60 or 80 years by a travailler into
Rhodes. When the Knights of John of Jerusalem were driven out of Palestine by
the Turks, this Island was given by the Constantinopolitan Emperor unto them,
who expelled the Saracens from thence in 1308, who formerly took it from the
divided Greeks; who having sorely infested the Turks nigh 200 years, Solomon
the magnificent invading it, and besieging Lilladamus Villiers (with about 500
of his Knights, 5000 Rhodians assisting them) by an Army of 200000 Turks, and
300 Galleys, 6 months; in one of the two strong Fortresses of the City, they
resolutely defended it to the utmost of valor or warlike policy, till
multitude over-mastering both, Solomon entered the Town on Christmas day so
called, in 1522: the Knights yielding it on condition to depart, with liberty,
goods, and transportation; and the Countrie's Inhabitants to continue there
still if they would: yet the Turk lost so many of his best Soldiers, and brave
Commanders, that (as one says) he might have said with Pyrrhus, Such another
Victory would have utterly undone him. They remained long after without a
habitation; till the King of Spain gave them the barren Isle of Malta. Rhodes
has been much subject to overflowing of waters, wherewith in 25 years space it
was three times afflicted, and mightily endangered by continual storms of
rain; the last of which beginning (when Antigonus vanquished Eumenes) with hail
at the entrance of the spring, the whole Island was covered with water, and the
inhabitants drowned; many houses were beaten down, many killed, and the Town in
a manner ruined thereby, but they since laboring to drain the waters, and dry
up the moors, the Country has been fruitful, and not subject to such
inundations. It abounds in pastures, great store of Olive Trees, Olives, and
Citrons, with other Trees, continually green, and near the Town it self, there
are many Valleys and small hills, with store of Fruit Trees and Vines; but they
grow all by industry, not naturally. These Islanders were so expert in
Sea-affairs, that Florus calls them Populus Nauticus, or a Sea-people; they
made courageous defense against the Romans, before subjected unto them; but
then ever faithful, who (of all the Mediterranean Isles, that revolted in
Mithridates his time) stood only fast to the Romans, so that Velleius
Paterculus makes it almost a miracle, that (in the Romans hard wars with
Perseus King of Macedon) the very Rhodians that before were most faithful to
the Romans, now (by a doubtful faith) seemed to be more inclinable to the
Kings part. The Town is only inhabited by Turks, and Jews; Christians may not
abide therein in the night on pain of death, for fear of sedition or Treason;
by day, they may either continue, or trade there without exception. But those
in the Villages are most Christians, and those Greeks who manure their fields,
and dress their Vines and Gardens; and whose manner of living is mostly like
other Grecians; I suppose the Authors meaning is, both in Religion and
behavior. Rhodes was an old Academy of the Roman Monarchy, on the West side of
which Isle (which is 120 miles in circuit) lies Carpathos, now Scarpanto, 70
miles in compass; eminent only for giving the name of the Carpathian Sea to
the adjoining waters.

CYPRUS (situated according to Ptolomy, in the midst of the Issick-bay, called
the Gulf of Laiazza) lies between Cilicia, and Syria's Coasts, and is about an
100 miles from Syria Southward, having Egypt on the West, and Cilicia on the
East. It Is length extending from East to West, is (by a traveller thither)
reputed 210 miles, 60 broad, and 600 in circuit. It fell into the Romans hands,
after the Assyrian Monarchies extinguishment, (which before was under the
dominion of Greek Tyrants) by whose means the Ptolomies of Egypt commanded it.
Then returning again under the Romans by M. Cato, who conquered it, and found
therein 7000 Talents in money and goods; which sum, fearing to lose, in
bringing it to Rome by Sea, he put it into several boxes, to wit, two Talents
and fifty drachms in a box: at the end whereof, he fastening a long rope, with
a piece of Cork at the end, that, if it suffered shipwreck, it might be espied.
Upon the division of the Roman Empire, the Emperors of Constantinople
possessed it; whither Isaac Comnen (fleeing from Andronicus Comnen, the usurper
of the Greek Empire, ruled as its King till 1191, when as Richard the first, of
England, going to the Holy War (so called) against the Turks, his soldiers
being by the Islanders, some slain, and some taken Prisoners, who in two ships
were there driven on ground, having hardly escaped the Sea's danger: and the
rest of his fleet there arriving, being forbidden to land also; he moved
therewith, and by force landing his men, took Isaac Comnen Prisoner, (whom he
sent bound in Silver Chains into Syria) and speedily overran and subdued the
whole Island; exchanging it afterward with Guy of France, of the Family of
Lusignan, for the lost and titulary kingdom of Jerusalem; in whose posterity
it remained till 1423. Then the Sultan of Egypt invading it, and taking John
its King Prisoner, yet restored him (after a round ransom) for 40000. Crowns
yearly Tribute. Then it came under the Venetians subjection in 1473, by means
of James an illegitimate son, who having dispossessed his sister Carlotte of
the Crown, married one Catherina adopted daughter of the Senate of Venice, whom
he leaving his heir, she resigned her Scepter to the Senate, which defended it
(only paying the Tribute) till Mustapha, Selimus the Second, his General,
wrested it in 1570 out of their hands, Bragadino their Governor making good to
the utmost the Town of Famagusta (the which and Rhodes are said to be the two
strongest holds in all the Turks Empire) yielding at last on honorable
conditions: which Mustapha kept not; but murdering the chiefest men of the
Town, he cut off Bragadinoes ears, fleaing him alive, etc. and sending the
chief prisoners and spoils unto Selim: A Cyprian Lady appointed for his lust,
firing Gunpowder, partly burnt and partly drowned the two Vessels, and booty,
so that he never saw them. Yet the next year the Venetians won the battle of
Lepanto. This Island was formerly called Achamantis or Achametide, Macaria,
that is, blessed or happy, from its fruitfulness; Cerastis, either for the
many Mountains therein, whose tops are sharp like horns: or because it butted
toward the East with one horn; and one says, it was named Crypta, that is
hidden; lying so low as if the waves of the Sea did cover it. But Cyprus, from
its abundance of Cyprus Trees. There are six Capital Cities or Towns therein;
Paphos, said to be built by Cineras, who called it after his fathers name,
wherein (of old) was the Temple of Venus; for the Gentiles consecraced this
Island to that imagined Goddess of beauty. Famagusta (formerly Salamus) on the
South Sea: at whose siege the Turks spent 118000 great Bullets. Nicosia, in the
plain of Massara, 34 miles from Famagusta, and of old called Fremitus, and
Leucetum. Ceraunea, now Cerienes; which Cyrus built after vanquishing the nine
petty Kings, into which it was once divided. Amathus, whence the Island was
called Amathusia, where Venus was also worshipped. Lescare, anciently Arsinoe,
highly noted for Jupiters Groves. Here was born five noted Gentiles; Xenophon
the Historian, Zeno, Appollonius the Philosopler, Aesclepiades, whence the
Aesclepiad Verses, and Solon, one of the seven wise men of Greece, who gave
laws to the Athenians. The Cypriots are very courteous and affable to all
strangers, except Jews, of whom (because in Trajane his time, they under
Artemio their Captain, desolated this Island, killing 240000 therein (who yet
were quickly overcome and slain by the Romans Lieutenant) if any come, or are
forced in thither, ('it is said) they execute him. Their greatest want is of
water, but too much plenty of scorching heat (the longest day there, being
about fourteen hours and an half) and fabulous grounds, (whose heat
notwithstanding the Northern winds strongly blowing in Cerines Borough, does
moderate; the Air also on the Mountains being very subtle) and it is recorded,
that the Isle was utterly abandoned in Constantine the Great his days, for
that it rained not in thirty six years. It was formerly (as Ptolomy teaches)
divided into four parts; Salaminia, Paphia, Amathusia, Lapathia; but now into
twelve parts, called Provinces or Countries, Strabo says, Cyprus in his time
yielded abundance of Wine, and Oil, and Wheat enough to feed the Inhabitants.
At this day it is exceeding fertile, having all things needful for man's life,
their Wine is excellent, keeping 80 years, of a pleasing taste, and of black (in
that time) becoming white; but a travailer says, they having no barrels, but
keeping it in great Earthen jars enclosed all (save their open mouths) within
the ground, and interlarded with pitch within, to preserve them from breaking
by the Wines force; it favors of the Pitch, and makes it too heady for the
brain. The black great Raysin called Zibile, comes here hence; they gather all
kinds of fruit (except Chestnuts, Services, and Cherries) especially Oranges,
Lemons, and Citrons, excelling all others in taste. They have Dates, Saffron,
abundance of Corianderseed, also Mastick. It yields medicinable things, as
Rubarb, Turpentine the best of all; and some say Coloquintida, and Scammony.
Here are also Mines of Gold, Chrysocolla, Calthante, Allome, Iron, and
exceeding good Copper. Besides which, are precious stones found, as Diamonds,
Emeraulds, Crystal, white and red Coral, and the Amiant stone, of which they
making Linen Cloth; the fire will not burn it (though cast into it) but
purifies and whitens it. They have Goats hair, wherewith they make Chamlets.
There is a Lake not far from the Sea, 12 miles about, into which runs a small
River falling from Mount Olympus, out of which they draw store of salt;
excellent and white Honey have they, also Wool; But it appears, their chief
commodities are Sugar, which they draw out of Canes, and Cotton, for, as one
says, Cyprus, Candy, and Sicily, are the Monarchall Isles of the Mediterranean
Sea; resembling each other in length, breadth, circuit and fertility, only
Candy is somewhat narrower than the other two, and more sassinous and hilly;
yet for Oils and Wines, she is the Mother of both the other, Sicily being for
Grain and Silks the Empress of all, and Cyprus for Sugar and Cotton-wool, a
darling sister to both, giving likewise this Character of their Inhabitants;
they of Sicily Isle are the most civil: the Cypriots indifferent, the Candiots
rudest of all. Besides the Latin and Greek Churches, whereof there are 4
Bishoprics, yet double, the one Greek, the other Latin; of Nicosia, Paphee,
Famagusta, and Limissa; there are other sects in this Island, as Armenians,
Coftes, Maronites, Indians, Nestorians, Georgians, and Jacobites; every one
having their Bishop, and were expelled by Saladine (after the taking of
Jerusalem) for the Turks here (as in other Countries) give liberty of
Conscience, only for a yearly exacted Tribute. There are many Monasteries on
the chiefest and highest Mountain in this Isle, called Trohodos, 8 miles high,
and 48 in compass, whose people are of Basil's Order, and called Colieros, or
rather Caloires, that is, good Priests. The Latin Bishops have their
buroughs, and Tithes; but the Greek, a yearly sum of the Priests and Deacons
under them, as in other Provinces. Also the Greek did acknowledge the Latin
Bishops for their superiors, etc. But the Latin Archbishop of Nicosia
(called Archbishop of Cyprus) depended immediately of the Pope, not on any
Patriarch, until the Signiors of Venice, under Pope Pius the 4th, becoming
Patrons of this Archbishopric, chose 4, one whereof the Pope named Archbishop.

ASSYRIA (so called from Assure, one of Sem's five sons who peopled it) is by
diverse, diversely named; as Adrinsa, or Adrise, Azemie, Mosul, Sarh, Arzerum,
and by some, Cussestan and lies between Armenia Major on the North, and
Susiana, in Persia, on the South. This Country was of old in reputation, for
the Empire there settled, whose King Salmanassar carried away the ten Tribes:
and of the chief City Nineveh (built by Ninus the third Assyrian Monarch):
whither Jonah was sent to preach repentance; it was 60 miles about, whose walls
were 100 foot high, 200 foot high was every Tower in the walls, whereof there
were 1500, and the walls were so broad, that three Carts might be contained a
breast: it was seated near the River Tigris, and bigger than Babylon; but is
now almost quite ruined. Here is also the City Arzeri, whence the whole Region
is denominated, and Arvela, nigh which Alexander in his third and last battle
with Darius, having 800000, got a great Victory, and was installed in the
Monarchy of Persia. Darius dying not long after. It formerly contained the
Provinces of Arapachit, Adiaben, and Sittacen, which some (says one) at this
day call Botan, Sarca, and Rabia. Through Nineveh also ran Euphrates.

MESOPOTAMIA, (so called because it is situated betwixt the two famous Rivers,
Euphrates and Tigris) is in Scripture called Padan Aram, now Diarbech,
according to Mercator, and has toward the West Syria, toward the East Assyria,
divided by Tigris; which for its swiftness, is so called, Tigris in the Medes
language signifying an Arrow. Whose chief Towns were Edessa, now (they say)
called Rechais; whose Governor Agbarus, writing an Epistle to Christ, received
an answer from him, whereof Eusebius has set down the Coppies. Near which also
Caracalla, Severus the Emperor his son, was slain by Macrinus his appointment,
Captain of the Guard, who intended to have took off his head, for that the
Magicians returned their answer, that Macrinus should succeed him. And it is
observed by history, that all or most of the 40 Emperors between Julius
Caesar, and Constantine, dyed unnatural deaths, either killing themselves, or
being killed. When the Christians had recovered this Country and Palestine from
the Turks, they divided their whole conquest into four Tetrarchies, Jerusalem,
Antioch, Tripolis, and Edessa: every one whereof had subordinate Lords, and
were all subject to the Kings of Jerusalem. Carra, in Scripture Haran, where
Abraham dwelt, when he left Ur of the Chaldeans: this Town is now called
Caramit, that is, a black Town, where resides a Turkish Bassa of great power:
it was of old named Amida, and stands in the chief Country of Mesopotamia,
called Alech, and was taken by Selimus the Turk. The Pagans here once
worshipped the Moon, some as a Female; others as a Male. Orse, said to be seven
miles in compass, and famous by the death of Crassus the Roman Lieutenant, who
was worth 7100 talents, when he had offered the 10th to Hercules, and given
three months corn to the poor. But he was vanquished by King Herodes and his
Parthians nigh unto Carra. Herein also stands Merdin the Chaldean Patriarch's
Seat: and Mosus the Nestorian Patriarch's residing place, whose authority
extends even to Cathaia, and the Indies. Here was Abraham born; whither also he
sent his servant to choose Isaac a Wife: unto whose brother Laban in this
Country, Jacob fled from his brother Esau: The earthly Paradise is judged to
have been in an Island of this Region made by Tigris and Euphrates, and
branches running from them: whose uppermost is said to be Pison, watering
Havilah, now Susiana, the lowermost G^hon, running through Aethiopia, Asiatica,
Chaldea, (whose first Inhabitants descended from Arphaxad, Sem's third son,
according to Dubartas -- And Chaldee fell to learned Arphaxad) is situated on
the West of Assyria, and on the East of Syria; two of whose principal Cities
were Ur; yet now called Horrea.

Babylon, whose Tower of Babel, that is, confusion, (begun by Nimrod the son of
Chus soon after the flood, to secure themselves from a second deluge) (though
Heber and his family contradicted it) is said to have been raised 5164 paces
from the ground, whose circumference was equal to its height, etc. which God
beholding, made of one language, 72; so hindering the proceedings of that proud
and fond attempt; who being about 24000 men, besides women and children: 27 of
those languages, Sem's posterity, dispersed themselves over Asia; 15, being
Japhet's ^ssue, went toward Europe and Asia the Less: the other 30, of Cham's
loins, peopled Africa) which was nevertheless finished by Semiramis, a woman
of insatiable lusts, born at Ascalon a Town of Syria, and the 4th Chaldean
Monarch, who being taken to Ninus's bed, who granted her the Empires command
for five days: she putting on the Royal robes, commanded the King to be slain.
And whose walls being in circuit 60 miles, were also 200 foot high, and 50
Cubits in breadth. News being brought to this Semiramis, of this Citie's
revolt; she, leaving her head half undrest, never platted the rest of her hair,
till she by siege had recovered it. Cyrus took this Town, by cutting many deep
channels; so emptying Euphrates that ran through it, and conveying his forces
along the emptied River into the Town. Which revolting from the Persians in
Darius Histaspis his time; Zopirus, Darius his Captain, (after twenty months
siege, and still less hope to prevail) cutting off his nose and ears, and
mangling his body, fled in policy to the Babylonians, complaining of his King's
tyranny: who crediting his words, and committing to him their whole Army, he
delivered Soldiers and Town into his Sovereign's hands. Here Alexander the
Great ended his days; by whose Greek Army it being taken, one part only took
cognizance thereof in three days space. Bugiafer Caliph of the Saracens,
rebuilt this City, expending 18 millions of gold therein, calling it Bagdet
from Baga, the Arabic word for a a garden; of which it contained many. Between
this Town and Aleppo is still a great Trade of Carriers with laden Camels,
between which also they are wont to send letters in haste by post-Pidgeons. In
Chaldea flourished many and the first Astronomers: whose two helps herein,
were, the Countrie's plainness affording a fair Horizon: and a long life, with
sufficient experience of all the Stars and Planets motions; and the three Wise
men of the East, who worshipped and presented gifts to Christ, are thought to
have come from hence. Belochus Priscus, the 10th Assyrian King, was the first
author of divination by birds flying, called Auspicium: besides which, the
Gentiles had three other kinds; Araspicium, or a looking on or into beasts that
came to be sacrificed. Tripudium or by the rebounding of crumbs cast to
chickens. Augurium, or by the chirping or chattering of birds: as also from
unknown sounds and voices. Sardanapalus the 38th Monarch, for his effeminacy,
being besieged in Nineveh by Arbaces, Governor of Media; and Belochus, of
Babylon: he burned himself with all his riches. Justine saying, that by this
deed only he imitated a man. After whose death, Arbaces taking Media and
Persia with the confining Provinces; Belochus seized on Assyria, Chaldea, and
the Countries adjacent; whose Kingdom was called the new Kingdom of Assyria:
the 9th of which new Monarchs was Nebuchadonosor, who conquering Egypt,
destroying Nineveh, repairing Babylon, and in the 18th year of his reign
destroying Jerusalem, and captivating the Jews to Babylon, was called commonly,
The Hercules of the East. But toward his latter end was distracted seven years,
living like a beast: and being restored to his senses, and thereby somewhat
humbled, he dyed, having reigned 44 years; whose grandchild Balthazar, (the son
of Evilmerodach, who was slain by Astyages King of the Medes) a dissolute and
cruel Prince, had his Kingdom taken from him, and himself slain by Darius and
Cyrus, Astyages's successors: after which, it was subject to the Persians,
Graecians, Romans, (who yet hardly extended their borders beyond Euphrates)
Parthians, Saracens, Persian Sophies; and last of all to the Turk, by Solomon
the magnificent, who in 1545, caused the titulary Caliph of Bagdet to crown him
King thereof.

MEDIA (now called Servan or Shirvan) confines toward the South with Persia,
on the West with high Armenia and Assyria; to the North with the Caspian Sea,
so called from the Caspii, a people of Scythia Southerly bordering herein. Its
people were formerly the most powerful of all Asia: and it was divided into
high Media, and Atropatia, the most Northerly part of Media. The chief Cities
are Servan, whence the whole Region is denominated. Tauris or Tabris, which
some believe to be Ecbatane, and is seated at the foot of Mount Oronte about
eight days journey from the Sea of Bacu or Caspian Sea: whose air being very
wholesome, though cold and windy, it contained in its 16 miles compass about
200000 Inhabitants: but Amurath the Third, taking it in 1585, (for it was
thrice taken by the Turk) some hold, that since it is much decayed: Here was
formerly the Persian Sophie's Seat, (in Summer) till Tamas transported it to
Tasbin their last abode, which lies more Southerly than Tauris. Sultania, where
is the fairest Mosque or Mohammedan Temple of the East. Also Nassivan, which
some think to be the ancient Artaxata or Nasuana. Ardoville, in which Guinet
and Sederdin, (whom some call Bunie and Aider) the first authors of the
Sophie's Sect and Empire, with some other authors of that sect, have reigned.
Some also make reckoning of Marant in high Media, noted for the war that has
been between Amurath the Turk, and the Persian Sophies. And (as one says)
although the Turk has held part of this Country somewhat long, yet it may well
be attributed to the Persian King, seeing he has of late recovered almost all
from the Turk. Symmachia, or Sumaquie in Atropatia, said to be the strongest
place in Media, taken by the Turk in 1578, and made the Seat of a Turkish
Bassa. Here stand also the Towns of Sechi on the frontiers of Gurgestan: Javat
on the confines of high Media; and Eres, famous formerly, for the great store
of silk coming thence. They once made a liquor in Media, called oil of Media,
with which they envenoming their arrows, and shooting them, not in a strong,
but slacker bow, it burnt the flesh with such violence, that water allayed not,
but rather increased, the torment: only dust could mitigate it. There is also
Derbent (anciently named Caucasiae Portae, built hard by the hill Caucasus,
called by Pliny, a great miracle of nature, as being environed with two walls,
and having gates of iron, the chief City in Albania, but now called Zuiria, a
Country lying on the North of Media: a chief River whereof Arasse; and an
ancient City whereof was called Laodicea.

THe particular Province of PERSIA (in old time called Panchaia, from King
Panchee; then, from the Greeks, Cephene: but Persia, from King Perseus,
(changing the name of Elamites into Persians) who passing over from Greece into
Asia, there tamed the barbarous Nations by a great and daily war, and gave the
Conquerour's name to this subdued Country) is bounded on the North with Media,
on the South with the Persian gulf; which takes its name of this Province; and
runs along 600 miles: The two chief Cities are Siras, in ancient time,
Persepolis, built by Perses, Perseus his son; some say, that it was named
Cyropolis, and was the abode of the wise Kings of the East; it is seated on the
River Bindimir, and is now one of the beautifullest Towns of the East, being
(with the Suburbs, 20 miles about, and containing 60000 houses. Alexander at
the request of his lewd Lais, set it on fire; but repenting his folly, he
afterward rebuilt it. Casbin or Tasbin, whither Tamas (as was said) brought
the Sophie's residence from Tauris; it is called also Hispian, and said to be a
days journey about on horseback. This is well walled, (though Tauris has
none) and is beautified with two Seraglio's, whose Walls are of red Marble, and
paved with Mosaique work; where also does the Sophie sometime personally
administer Justice.

SUSIANA (called Chus and Cusistan, has for bounds on the West, Chaldea; on
the South, the Persian gulf. It (says one) took this name from its famous
City Suses, called Chus and Sustre; but it may be called Sufiana (as if to say,
Chusiana) from Chus, Ham's son, who first peopling here, withdrew to the three
Arabia's, calling them after his own name, the Land of Chus, which is
Aethiopia, (not of Africa, but of Asia) which the River Gihon is said to
encompasse. Chus leaving this Country to his son Havilah: it is called in
Scriptures, the Land of Havilah, where is gold; which Pison (the Southern
branch of the River Tigris or Hiddekel, as Gihon is the most Western branch of
Euphrates) is said to compass. For it is evident from 1 Samuel 15.7. that there
was another Land of Havilah, besides that of India. Suses the chief City is
built upon the River Enele, now called Tirtir: being of a long form, and 15
miles in compass: where the Persian Kings also (of old) kept Court in Winter;
for that it stood more Southerly than Tauris or Echatane.

CARMANIA, now called CHIRMAN, has been divided into two parts; the one called
by some at this day, Dulcinde, or Carmania the Desert; whose limits are on the
North Parthia, toward the South, the other Carmania: it has no Towns, but
only some scattering Villages. The other lying betwixt Gedrosia the Desert,
part of Persia, and the Indian-Sea, and is called high or great Carmania. Whose
chief City is Chirman, famous for its cloth of Gold, and making of the best
Scimitars; which the Mahometans so prize, that those who were taken at their
overthrow of Lepanto, cast them into the Sea, that the Christians might not
have such weapons. This Province extends 200 leagues, and is near the Sea; but
(they say) there is no safe Port, or coming for ships, for the sands and
Rocks. Yet the more Westerly, has the more commodious Ports and many Towns,
but the Easterly is ill inhabited. Here Alexander returning out of India, kept
his feasts in imitation of Bacchus, who first conquered that Nation. They
continued seven days, night and day in a sottish, drunken, and foolish manner,
as they marched through it. In the Army was no weapon to be seen, but Cups,
Barrels, and Flagons; and eating, drinking, laughing, and singing, instead of
skirmishing, etc. so that the Historian observes, a 1000 sober Persians, (if
their courage had been according to the occasion offered them by this drunken
army) might have defeated them, and recovered the Countries freedom.

GEDROSIA, now CHARMAN, Circan, and Gest, has toward the East the Realm of
Camboy, or part of the Indies, on the West Carmania, from which it is parted by
the River Ilment: whose chief City is called Gedroson, or Gest. Alexander here
(to immortalize his fame) making all the Monuments of his Indian conquest
larger and bigger than what they represented, occasioned many to suspect, his
actions were less than is thought, since (hereby) he would have them thought
more then they were.

DRANGIANA, (divided by the River Drangie, called in new Maps Ilment) is now
called SIGESTAN; yet Niger says, that Drangiana with Arachosia is so called.
Some will have this to be Cabul on the Sophies frontiers Westward, having a
particular Mohammedan King. It is bounded on the North and West with Aria, under
the Mountain Bagoe, and on the East with Aracosia, and is so enclosed with
Mountains, that the River scarce finds passage; two Cities hereof are, Sige,
whence it is named Sigestan, and Mulebet, where Aladine a seditious Persian,
promised an eternal earthly fools Paradise to all that took his part, who
swearing to venture their lives in his quarrels, he appointed them to Massacre
such neighbor Princes as probably might prove bad to him, which thing they
did; whom the Italians calling Assassines, that is, theives, and cutthroats,
we use the word to Assassinate. Some indeed attribute this unto Aladeules, King
of Antitaurus, whom Selym the first vanquished; but Paulus Venetus relates the
full story concerning Aladine.

ARIA (by others, Eri, Sablestam, Sargutzar, Corsan, and Semere) has on the
West Parthia, and Carmania the Desert, on the East the Country of Parapomisus.
Here are three principal Rivers Aria, Arapen, and Tonelet; also the Marish of
Arien, now called the Burgian Lake. Its chief City is Eri, or Aria, thirteen
miles about; Sartibarzanes was once Governor of this Country; who revolting
from, and joining battle with Alexander, challenged to fight hand to hand with
any of his commanders: the which one Eriguis an aged, but mettalsome soldier,
undertaking, and having cried aloud, I will show what soldiers Alexander had,
came on, and at the second onset, slew Sartibarzanes; and then the Arians
re-obeyed Alexander; who at another time having rebelled; and being by
Alexander forced to hide in a Cave, on the top of an inaccessible Rock, he
piling up wood eeven with the Cavesmouth, set it on fire with the wind;
whereby, some, by the heat and smoke, being half burnt and stifled, the rest
yielded to his mercy.

ARACHOSIA, (which has on the West Drangiana, on the East, India) is, they
say, called (of it self) Cabull; whose chief City is Cabull, formerly called
Alexandria of Arachosia; Alexander built it at the foot of the Hill Caucasus,
(Taurus taking this name here) and left 7000 Macedonian soldiers to people the
same. On this Mount the Tragedy of Prometheus is said to be acted, which is far
diversely related by Augustine, then according to the vulgar Fable.

PARAPOMISUS, so called for that it is fashioned like an Island, with Rivers
running almost about it, is named Dache by one, but by another Candahar; yet
others will have this called Sablestan. It is bounded on the South with
Arachosia, on the North with the Mountains of Taurus, dividing it from Tartary;
here called the Mountain of Parapomise. It is so mountainous, that in
Alexanders times, it was scarce known to its neighbor Countries, and the
people being so barbarous that they were not held worthy of acquaintance; whose
Valleys (though said to be indifferent fruitful) were so shadowed with the
high hills; that it much Eclipsed their clearest day. Their chief Town, and a
frequented Market is Candahar, or rather now called Condatura.

SACA, whose people Sacae, seating themselves North in Germany, gave name to
the Saxons, increasing there both in number and valor. They are reported still
to live here barbarously in Caves, living mostly by theft. The Country is
situated more Northerly than Parapomisus, on the borders of Scythia, or
Tartary.

HIRCANIA has diverse names, as Girgiam, Corcam, Mesandre, Hyrach, Strave,
Diargument; and ^ath on the North the Hircanian, or Caspian Sea, and on the
South, Aria, and Parthia. its chief City is Hircan, very strongly situated,
and called by the Scythians, Charizat. In it also is the Town Nobarca, once
famous for an Oracle therein, When Alexander conquered this country, (it being
in a manner a Forest) the Hircanians tying the boughs together, he could not
come at them. But causing his Soldiers to cut down the Wood, which they
thought his affairs would not have permitted him to do, they yielded. Abundance
of fierce Tigers lurking in these Forests, occasioned that Proverb of cruel
men; That they had sucked an Hircanian Tiger. There are Rivers in these
forementioned Provinces, some whereof (they say) have even an incredible steep
fall into the Sea, and the River Zioberis in this Hircania, in his course out
of the Hills, is hid 38. miles underground, rising again into another river,
the which, Alexander, by casting two Oxen therein, the stream casting them up
at its rising, made trial of.

THere is also included within the Realm of PERSIA, the Island ORMUS (for
Persia contains the eleven mentioned Provinces, bounded in the general with
the Main Ocean on the South, and the Caspian Sea, with the River Oxus, on the
North, which Oxus, (as may be shown hereafter, is a bound fatal to Monarchies)
about twelve miles from the continent, not great, and yet barren. They say it
is tributary to the Portugalls ever since 1506. But its convenient situation,
for the Trade both of Arabia, Persia, and India: occasioned these Verses by the
Arabians.

If all the World should be a Ring; the stone,
And Gemme thereof, were Ormus Isle alone.
So that, the Customs of its Merchandise affords a great Sum to the Mohammedan
Vice, or under King thereof, unto whose Crown the Isle Bolsaria not far off,
and also some of Arabia the happy, is said to belong.

THis is the ordinary and received Description, and Division of Persia, but one
that has written a brief relation of the chief Provinces thereof, and which
have continued longest under the Persians command, says, that Persia, which
those born in the Country call Parc, or Agem, and whose inhabitants are named
Pary, or Agemy, being one of the greatest Monarchies (for before the renting
Media, and Armenia from it, it was 4560 miles in compass) and the most famous
and best people in the World, cannot be discovered, or have any certain bounds
given unto it for the variety found in that Kings dominions, the Realms, and
Provinces whereof, have been sometimes very great, sometimes of small extent.

After Sardanapalus his death, the Empire was divided into the Assyrian,
Chaldean, and Median Monarchy, of which last the founder was Arbaces, in the
year of the World 3146, the seventh of which Monarchs of the Medes, was
Phraortes, who being of great prowess, and reigning 22 years, compelled the
Persians to be his Tributaries. But Cyrus Astiages his Grandchild, having no
quarrel at all against Cyaxares his Uncle (who is plainly Darius the Mede with
Daniel,) left him the Kingdom of Media, and himself took Persia; yet so, that
Cyrus marrying Cyazares his only daughter, should be his heir both of what he
then had, and what they should mutually win in Cyaxares his life time. So that
although the Greeks attribute the taking of Babylon, and slaying of Baltazzar
unto Cyrus only; yet the Scripture gives it wholly to Darius; as being the
elder, the Medes Empire the more famous of the two; and the Uncle being before
the Nephew, unto whom also what they both won, was to belong, till after death;
Cyrus succeeding him, and incorporating thereby, the Medes and Persians into
one, joined also the Assyrian Monarchy, besides Armenia and three other
Countries to his Empire: whose successor Cambyses (a cruel tyrant making an
expedition into Egypt, in which he dyed; although he subdued Psamniticus the
last King thereof, uniting it to his Empire) the Viceroy, a Magus, set up his
own son, the false Smerdis as Cambyses his brother; till O^anes a Nobleman,
being informed by his daughter the King's Concubine, that he had no ears, the
deceit being discovered, this false Smerdis was slain in the 8th month of his
reign; and the seven Nobles chose one among them to be King, whose horse first
neighed in the Palace-Green before Sunrising: which by the sleight of his
Groom fell to Darius called Hystaspes; whose two immediate Successors were
Xerxes, who to his own overthrow, attempted to subdue the Greeks; and
Artaxerxes Longimanus, who is called in Scripture Abasuerosh: The 5th after
whom, being Darius Governor of Media, he was vanquished by Alexander the Great
in three battles, whereby the Median and Persian Empire was passed over to the
Macedonian, which was in the year of the World 3635. At which Conquest,
Alexander is reported to have loaded 10000 Mules, and 5000 Camels, with the
gold and wealth taken therein, beside what every Soldier particularly had.
Hereupon, the Persian Monarchy was obscured, till the year of Christ 228, that
is, 535 years; 83 years under Alexander's successors of Syria; 452 under the
Parthian kings: for Arsaces a Parthian Noble persuading the Eastern people with
the Persians, to break the Greek yoke, took the Diadem: although in that they
changed only the Tyrant, not the tyranny. But at length Artaxerxes a Persian
taking an opportunity, by the massacring and breaking of the Parthians by
Caracalla and Macrinus, slaying Artabanus the last Parthian King, he raised
again the royal Seat of Persia, though not without three days cruel fight.
Artaxerxes hereupon, sending to Severus the Roman Emperor, for all the
Provinces of Asia belonging to the Persian Monarchy, to be delivered him,
Severus went against him with an Army, dividing it into three parts; two
whereof the Persians breaking, he hastily and dangerously retired with the
third. So that, Valerianus being after this overcome and taken by Sapores the
second of that Persian race: their name growing terrible, Constantine the
Great, brought both the Garrisons and Colonies of the North-West into the East,
removing also the Empire's Seat from Rome to Constantinople, lest the Persians
should entrench too far on the Roman Provinces. They continued in Sovereignty
under 28 Kings, till the year 634, in which, Haumar the Saracen vanquishing
Hormisda the second, the Persians were buried under infamy by the Saracens; who
gave to their Deputies here kept, the name of Sultan or Sultan, who remained
till the year 1030; in which Tangrolipix the Turk coming out of Armenia for
assistance to Mahomet the Persian Sultan, was invested King of Persia through
the said Mahomet's unhappy death. The third that is read of, from Tangrolipix,
was Cussanes; who being conquered by the great Cham of Tartarie in the year
1202, Haalon was ordained the first Tartarian King of Persia; the 9th from whom
was Abuzaid: who dying, the Tartarian Princes civilly dissenting about seizures
on several parts thereof; Gempsas a Parthian took occasion to free both his own
subjects and the Persians from their bondage: which he effecting, was chosen
Sultan or King of Persia; whose Issue not long enjoyed it; Violent Tamerlane
the Tartar dispossessing that race; whose issue also, after his death soon lost
this kingdom: for Usun Cassanes the Armenian rooted out Malaoncres the last of
his line, in 1431, and possessed the kingdom; during whose reign, he gave his
daughter in marriage to one Aider Sophie, the son of Guine Sophie; who (in
1360) deriving his birth from Musa Ceresin one of the twelve sons of Ocean
Halies son, (who marrying their prophet Mahomet's daughter, he bequeathed to
the said Hali all his estate; with the title of Caliph or Emperor) contrived
an establishment of the Caliphateship in his own family. Jacup Usun Cassanes
his son fearing Aider's glory, had him slain, casting his sons Ishmael and
Solomon into prison; who notwithstanding being well educated, and having
liberty afforded them by Amazar to whom they were delivered, Ishmael
vanquishing and killing Jacup, with his son Eluan, was both crowned King of
Persia, and as to religion, made Hali and himself Mahomet's true successors:
rejecting Abubequer or Abuzezer, Ormar or Haumar, and Odman or Osmen, together
with the Turks who followed them, (for being powerful men, and great assistants
to Mahomet, they all pretended themselves his true successors) as schismatical
Rebels: whence has proceeded those mortal jarrs between the Turks and them,
though to their loss, who have (since Ishmael Sophie, who began the 7th race
of the Persian Kings in 1495) successively maintained wars with the Turk; unto
whom they lost Babylon, with a great slaughter of the defendants in 1639. The
contention between Hali and the three abovementioned, about the succession,
was the rise of four sects; The Persians having the best reason for their
claim; and by Ishmael Sophie's valor, challenging the race of Hali, he brought
his sect into credit, proclaiming war against his neighbors that would not
embrace the same. He wore a red Turban with twelve points, in remembrance of
Ocen or Ossan's twelve sons, the son of Hali, and commanding all his followers
to wear the like. Many Nations followed him and his sect, and all people
between Euphrates and Abian, the Caspian Sea and Persian gulf, are settled in
this opinion, differing also in some other ceremonies or circumstances from the
Turkish Mahometans. In the Sophie's Dominions are likewise some Jews, of those
that remained in Assyria, when Nehemiah and Ezra led back the rest into
Palestine; who choosing a head of David's house, called him, The Head of the
banished, and built a Town on Euphrates banks, which they named Neardo^, or a
flood of Sciences. In the Province Corasan, there are Melchites
(aforementioned) who obey the Patriarch of Antioch. Cosroes also the Persian
King chasing away those called Catholics, in despite of the Emperor
Heraclius, who had defeated him, planted Nestorians in Persia, who (they say)
live mixed among the Assyrians, Medes, Mesopotamians, and Parthians, of whom we
are next to speak. Many Armenians have also passed into Persia for fear of the
Turk's cruelty, acknowledging two Patriarchs: the Superior being in the
greater Armenia, near Ervan in Persia; the other in the lesser Armenia in Sis
of Caramania. As to the Quality and Riches of these Countries, there is found
great difference in the soil. Assyria is a plain Country abounding in Rivers,
and exceeding fruitful. Mesopotamia is wondrous fertile in some parts;
yielding (if it may be credited) 200, and in some places 300 fold, and fit for
breeding of Cattle: but in some others is so subject to heat, as many beasts
cannot endure its extremity. Here being few Fountains, which the Inhabitants
either out of malice or subtilty do hide; but the fertile places are overflown
with Tigris and Euphrates, as Egypt is with Nilus. Its very miry here in
Winter. Herein also are great Desert places, all sandy, without fruit: yet even
there is gathered the sweet Ammomum, and store of Naphte or liquid Bitumen; and
about the Town Merdin is abundance of Cotton. Media is generally hilly and
cold, especially toward the North, and therefore barren; and little Corn
growing, making their bread mostly of dried Almonds, and their drink of the
roots of some herbs; eating ordinarily Venison, for they have here scarce any
thing but Fruit Trees, and wild beasts, tame beasts none: but the South part
abounds both in Wheat, Wine, and tame beasts; and the soil about Tauris is
fruitful in all things. So that of this part of Media, he may be understood,
who says, There be some grassie plains so big, that 50000 horses may pasture
on them. Atropatia is very fruitful by reason of the Rivers Araxe or Arasse,
and Cire or Ciro which water it; wherein (in old time) was great store of
Silks: and it appears to be the same, that another calls Zuiria, as abovesaid,
whose Country he says is little beholding to the Husband-man's industry;
yielding for one sowing, most times two, sometimes three reapings. Susiana has
in it many Serpents, doing men much harm; it being (toward the Persian gulf)
very Moorish; and exceeding hot, by reason of some high Mountains keeping off
the Northerly winds. Yet it yields store of Wheat, and abundance of Barley; but
some places having much Bitumen or sulphurous slime; the waters both savor
thereof, causing a pain in the bowels; and so short ening men's lives; and also
Plants grow with difficulty. Near the Town Sus^e, is dug much Naphte.
Persis, or the Province particularly named Persia, has its North part cold and
hilly, not fit for fruits. They have here Emeraulds, though not the clearest;
and some say it has much gold and silvermine. But its middle part is plain,
having many Lakes and Rivers, and yielding abundance of all things; whose
Southern part, toward the Persian gulf, being windy, hot and moorish, bears
no fruit besides Palmtrees yielding Dates. Hircania toward the North, being
full of great Forests, has store of Tigers; also Panthers and Leopards: but
the other part is said to be plain and fruitful in Wheat, Wine, Figgs, and
other fruits, having Trees from whence honey distilleth; and that part near the
Caspian Sea, through the fresh water, from rocks, is always full of grass and
flowers. Much silk is also made here. Carmania in the middle part thereof is
indifferent good, bearing much fruit, and good wine. But the Desert is hot and
barren: and in the Maritine parts of the upper there is no Trees, besides
Bushes and some Palms. Gedrosia affords Nard and Myrrh; but being full of
sand, it is mostly a desert: and through the Sun's heat greatly wants water,
though it has rain in Summer. Aria has some fields bearing fruit; but they
are near the Mountains, defending them from the Sun's heat: wherein also there
grows Vines yielding wine, which is reported to keep 90 years. Here are also
black, and some yellowish Saphires, and a drugg like Myrrh. But this Province
is greatly subject to heat, and environed with Mountains, Forests, and
Deserts. Whence it appears, that the Provinces of Persia, their Trade and
Riches is from Silks, (of which they sell and carry much into all the Eastern
Countries; yea, as far as Syria) also from Pearls and precious stones. Chirman
in Carmania venting likewise great store of cloth of gold and silver, which
the Inhabitants there make.

PARTHIA (called Charassen from the Town Charas, also Arach, and Jex,)
confineth on the East with Aria, and on the West with Media. Chief Towns
whereof are Cassan, very rich. Tigranocerta, from Tigranes the Armenian King
who built it. Ctesiphon, once the royal Seat, which was diverse times besieged
by the Roman Emperors, though mostly without success: before which, Julian
(called the Apostate) ended his days. There are also diverse other Towns of
note. But the principal City is Hispaham or Hispaan, which some say, was the
ancient Hecatompylis, and is so beautiful and great, that the Persians term it
half the World. The Parthians are said to have their descent from the
Scythians, whose language they keep, though with some mixture of the Median:
their name implies as much as Exiles; they were accounted the expertest
Archers in the World; and in their dismal retreats, would shoot sometimes from
between their legs, and sometimes backward. They were likewise skillfull
horsemen: for the ayr's dryness seasoned their bow-strings; and the Countrie's
plainness exercised their horse. The first King was Arsaces, beginning his
reign in the year of the World 3718, who brought them into conformity and
discipline; before, a base and rude people. The 9th King was Herodes; who
overcoming Crassus, caused molten gold to be powered down his throat, for his
covetousness. The 10th was Phraortes, who having greatly worsted Antonius: yet
submitted to Augustus Caesar, restoring the Captives and Ensigns taken at the
victory over Crassus: which sign of subjection being a receiving the Parthian
Kings by the Emperor's and Senate's appointment, continued but till Tiridates
the 4th, from the said Phraortes; for Artabanus a stranger took away his life
and kingdom: the 11th from which Artabanus was the very last Parthian King; who
in the year of Christ 228, was conquered by Artaxe^xes the first of the second
race of the Kings of Persia, Parthia continuing a member of that Monarchy: till
that under the Saracen Caliphs, they had Sultans of their own; one of which,
Gempsas, subdued the Persians, and are now (both Persia and Parthia) under the
command of the Sophies. This Country is subject to great heat, yet bears
(says one) all things, especially great Trees; for it is full of Woods, but
without any Olives. It is encompassed with very high Mountains, and watered
with many streams. I refer its Relion to that of Persia.

TARTARIA (known of old by the name of Scythia, from their first King Scythus;
and who were at first called Magogins, from Magog, Japhet's son: whose
posterity its Inhabitants were) is called by the Inhabitants Mongul: but
Tartaria, from the River Tartar, watering a great part of it. It is a great
Empire, (not yielding to any other in largeness of Countries, but to the King
of Spain's Dominions: whom also it exceeds, in that it is all united by some
bond: whereas the other are very much disjoined) extending 5400 miles from East
to West, and 3600 from North to South; so that the great Cham or Emperor
hereof, has many great Realms and Provinces under him, containing a great
number of good Towns. It is bounded on the East with China, the Sea of Cin or
Eastern Ocean, and the strait of Anian: on the West with the Mountain Imaus;
(yet there are some Hordes of Tartars on this side of it, who acknowledge the
great Cham) on the South with the River Ganges and Oxus (now Abiam) Indostan,
and the upper part of China: or (according to some) with the hill Taurus, the
Caspian Sea, and the wall of China; on the North with the Scythick or frozen
Ocean; the Country of whose shore is so cold, that it is held unhabited.
Besides the rich and great Kingdom of Cathaia, (in whose center, the City
Cambala or Cambula (24 Italian miles in circuit on the river Polisangi) is, as
it were, seated) there are the Realms of Tangust, Tenduc, Camal, Tainfur, and
Thebet, with the Town and Province of Caindo. But Tartaria is now commonly
distributed into five Provinces.

1. Precopensis, containing the Asiatican banks of the River Tanais with all
Taurica Chersonesus, two of whose chief Cities are Crim: whence the Rulers
there feated, were called Crim Tartars: and Precops, which denominates the
Country. These Tartars are to aid the Turk with 60000 men, without pay, upon
any occasion: for which, the Tartar (the Turk's issue male failing) is to
succeed in his Empire.

2. Asiatica, called also Muscovitica, and the Desert Tartaria, situated about
Volga's banks; whose people living mostly in Tents, are in Troops, called
Hordes; who stay no longer in a place, than there is pasture for their Cattle;
and in their removes, observe the Pole Star. These are now united under one
Prince, who is the Muscovite's tributary. Here are the Citie's, Astrachan;
(near which, Selimus the second, Turk, was vanquished by Basiliades the
Muscovite) and Noyhan, whose most Northerly Horde, the Noyacenses, has the
most warlique people.

3. The ancient Tartaria, their old habitation; from whence, they violently
spread themselves over Asia and Europe. It butts upon the frozen Ocean: the
common sort lying in Tents of skin, or under their Carts; yet are there 4
Cities therein, one whereof is Choras, noted for the Tartarian Cham's
Sepulchers. The Wilderness of Lop is in this Province, whence King Tabor
coming, and persuading the people to Judaism; Charles the 5th burnt him at
Mantua in 1540.

4. Zagathai, which is subdivided into Bactria, bounded on the North and East
with Sogdiana, near the river Oxus; on the South with Aria, in which were
anciently goodly Towns, some being built, and others ruined by Alexander; three
of whose Cities, at this day, are Chorazzan, whence the whole Country is named
Chorazzan or Charassan. Bactra denominated from a river now called Bochara, in
which Avicen the Physician was born; and also Zoroastes, who in Ninus his time
reigned the first King of this Country: unto whom, some have imputed the
invention of Astronomy. Istigias, which some say is the chief City of this
Province, and one of the pleasantest of the East. Margiana, having on the East
Bactria, on the West Hircania; (yet some say it lies North to Hircania). It is
called Tremigan and Jeselbas, from the peoples great turbants; whose chief City
is Antioch; (for Antiochus Soter King of Syria did fortify it with a strong
wall) the which at this day some name Indioy or Indion, and was once called
Alexandria Margiana. Here is also Maran, near which Ishmael the Sophie overcame
the great Cham. The Marshes of Oxiane, now called the Lake of Barbacamber, or
of Maru, are placed in this Country. Sogdiana, situate on the West side of
Bactria; two of whose Cities are Oxiana, standing on the River Oxus; and
Alexandria Sogdiana, which Alexander built when he went to India; in which also
was Cyropolis, a strong City built by Cyrus; under whose walls Alexander, with
a blow on his neck with a stone, fell to the ground, his Army giving him for
dead. Turchestan, where the Turks inhabited before they brake into Armenia in
844, barrenness and want enforcing them thereunto. Here are two Cities, Galba
and Ocerra; of whose eminency or fame, I find nothing reported.

Lastly, Zagataie, lying Northward of all the other four; so named, from one
Sachetaie, a Tartarian Noble; and now gives name to all the Provinces. Ogg,
Tamerlane's father, was Sachetaie's successor: which Tamerlane, (called, Gods
Wrath, and the Worlds Terror) by marrying Gino, Cham's daughter and heir, had
the Tartarian Empire: which he dividing among his sons, they (after his death)
soon lost all that he conquered. A chief City hereof is Sarmachand, Tamerlane's
place of residence: the which he enriched with the spoils of his manifold
victories; as also Bochara, where the Governor of the Province (under the
Cham) resides.

5. Cathaia (which was, of old, called Scythia without the Mountain Imaus, as
Zagataie, Scythia within Imaus) took its name from the Cathey, whom Strabo here
places; and has for bounds, China on the South, the Scythick Sea on the
North, lying also Eastward from the Tartarian Provinces. The Seres were thought
anciently to inhabit here, who being very expert in weaving silks made of a
fine wool, on the leaves of Trees, caused silk to be called (in Latin)
Serica. The Cathaians and Zagataians are the Noblest and Civillest among the
Tartars, and lovers of all arts. Herein are diverse fair Cities; whereof Cambalu
28 miles about, besides the Suburbs, as some say, (though others say, about 24
Italian miles, as aforesaid) is the chief: here the great Cham resides. But in
Xaindu he has a Palace almost of incredible largeness and stateliness. The
first of the great Chams or Emperors of Tartarie was Cingis or Zingis in 1162,
who subduing Uncham the last King of Tenduch and Cathaia, changed the name of
Scythia into Tartaria: the 5th from whom was Tamerlane or Tamir Cham, in whose
time this Monarchy was at the height: the 9th was Tamor, since whom it is not
known amongst us who have reigned, or what memorable things have been acted
among them: for (they say) that neither the Tartar, Muscovite, or King of
China, will suffer any besides Merchants or Ambassadors to enter their
Dominions, nor their own Subjects to travel forth of them. But it is known,
that this Government is tyrannical: life and death consisting in the Emperor's
word; whom some of the simple sort call, The shadow of Spirits, and son of the
immortal God. Amongst the diverse Rivers of note therein, is Oxus in Zagataie,
arising out of Mount Taurus; which the Persians never passed over to enlarge
their Dominions, but were notably overthrown; and so was it with the Tartars in
attempting the same thing. The Scythians were a valorous, populous, and ancient
people, being never subdued, and but seldom assaulted to be subdued: and when
there had been a long controversy between the Egyptians and these for
antiquity; it was at last pronounced, The Scythian Nation was always the
ancientest. And for their populousness, some have called them, The Mother of
all inundations, etc. Anacharsis the Philosopher was born in this Country;
which extends also to the Regions North of Danubius, named Sarmatia and Scythia
of Europe. As to the quality, fertility and riches ^ereof, it is said to have
been (through its many rivers) very much abounding in grass; but so deficient
in fuel, that they burnt bones instead of wood: they have stones also in
Cathaie, which burn: which Country is said to abound in Rice, Wheat, etc.
though the air be cold; having likewise great store of Wool, Silk, Hemp,
Rhubarb, Musk, fine Chamlets, Gold, Beasts, and all necessaries, not only
barely to live, but with delight: there Thunder and Lightning is very strange
and terrible. It is sometimes extreme hot, and suddenly very cold, much snow
falling; their winds also most strong and violent. In the Realm of Tangut
grows much Rhubarb transported through the World. In Tenduch are found rich
golden Mines, and Azure. But Tainfur being better manured, abounds in Vines.
Thebet is Moorish, full of Forests and wild beasts, yet abounding in Coral;
where is also much Musk, Cynamon, and other Spices; so that (this Countrie's
Merchandise being Rice, Wool, Silk, Hemp, Rhubarb, Musk, and excellent
Chamlets of Camels hair, besides their Countrie's commodious situation for
Traffic of one Town with another, (there being also sent to Cambalu from
China 10000 Carts yearly, laden with Silk, besides other merchandises) to which
may be added, their many incursions into Europe and Asia, their great spoils
carried out of Muscovie and other parts, especially from China, of a long
time,) we cannot conclude, but that the Tartars are very rich. Yet those who
live toward the North, want many necessaries for man's life, whereas their
neighbors (and all subject to one Prince) have plenty. As for the Tartarian's
Religion, some are Mahometans, crying daily, there is but one God. In Cathay
there are many more gross Idolaters than Mahometans; who hold two gods; one of
Heaven, of whom they desire health and understanding: the other of Earth; whom
they say has a Wife and Children caring for their cattle, corn, etc. and
therefore they ask such things of him: rubbing his Idol's mouth with the
fattest of the meat when they eat, and of the wife and children, (which are the
little Images in their houses) but cast the broth out of the house to the
spirits. Keeping also their god of Heaven in a high place, and that of the
earth in a low. They believe men's souls are immortal; but passing from one body
to another, according to Pythagoras. They worship also the Sun, Moon, and four
Elements; calling the Pope and all Christians, Pagans, Infidels, Dogs, and
Idolaters. They never fast in, or solemnize, one day more than another. There
are likewise some Jews and Christians, although but few: these being
Nestorians, who differ from the Romish and Greek Church, in putting Christ in
two persons; in saying, that Mary the Virgin is not God's mother; in that their
Priests may marry as often as they will. They say also, it is one thing to be
God the Word, and another thing to be Christ; neither own they the two Councels
of Ephesus. Their Patriarch also who resides at Musal in Mesopotamia is not
elected, but the son succeeds the father, being first created Archbishop. They
have one sore and unnatural practice among them: feeding their old parents,
with more fat than enough to dispatch them out of the World, and burning their
dead bodies, they carefully gather and keep the ashes as precious, putting it
on their meat when they eat. Prester Jean King of Hatay or Tenduc, was ruined
by the great Tartar Chingis, in 1162, 40 years after he received the Nestorian
opinion: yet was still Lord of a small estate. These Christian Nestorians so
called, extend unto the Town of Campion, some of whom remain at Tangut, Sucvir,
Cambalu, and in other Towns:

INDIA (whose ancient Inhabitants were the Daedalae, Mazagae, Malli, Oxydracae,
Gangarides, and diverse others, (all of whom Alexander is said to have conquered
in his Expedition hither) is so called from the river Indus, which it has on
its West side, as China on the East, and Tartaria on the South; whose longest
day in the North is 15 hours and a half; but in the South, but 12 hours, for it
is 3600 miles long: whose chief river is Ganges, rising in the Scythian hills,
of a great depth and breadth, and dividing India into two parts; the Western
part whereof next the Persians, is called India within Ganges; the other part,
India without Ganges. This river overflowing the Country, enricheth it as Nilus
does Egypt: and is not that which the Scripture calls Pison, compassing the
Land of Havilah; for there were two Havilah's: the one inhabited by Havilah,
Ophir, and Jobab, Joctan's sons, which is this India, or part thereof: the
other, denominated from Havilah, Chush his son; of which before. That India
within Ganges which (at this day) they call Indostan, is that part contained
between Mount Caucasus, now Dallenquer or Naugrocot, and the Sea, and between
the rivers Ganges and Indus or Inder; the greatest part whereof, the great
Mogor Mogul or Mogull commands; reckoned by some to be 47 Provinces or
Realms, (although there are two lately erected Princes here, to wit, of
Nissamaluc and Idalcan, (one whereof resides in Danager, the other in Visapore,
who hold the Country of Decan, being 250 miles long, on the Seacoast) whose
second Town of note, Decan (next to the chief Town of the Realm, Bider)
denominates the whole Country: and of which two Princes, near the Mogor, there
can be no particular relation) five whereof are (by some) reckoned for the
chief; to wit, Cambaia, Dely or Dellie, Sangue, Mandao, and Bengala. Cambaia
(called also Guzarate) has on the East Mandao, on the West the Nautaces or
G^drosians, extending it self 500 miles upon the Seacoast; and is so full of
Towns, Villages, and Inhabitants, that 60000 places are said to be peopled:
five of whose chief Towns are Campanel, the King's ancient residing place,
seated on the top of a high Mountain, and encompassed with seven walls. Daman
and Bandore, sometimes ruined by the Portugalls. Diu, held by the Portugalls,
as also is Daman. Cambaia, the Realms denominator, a goodly City of nigh 130000
families, and therefore called Cair of the Indies. Mandao, so named from its
chief City Mandao, twelve miles about, which was not surrendered unto Merhumed,
the Mogul of Zagatai till after a siege of twelve years, which Kingdom the
said Mogul took occasion to seize on, by Badurius King of Cambaia, his unjuslly
warring on it; subduing also Badurius his Kingdom therewith, although he had
in his Army 500000 foot, 150000 horse, 1000 pieces of Ordnance, 500 Wagons of
Gunpowder, and bullets, 200 Elephants, and 500 Chests of Gold and Silver.
Dellie, situated betwixt the Realms of Decan, and Narsingia, and divided from
Cambaia, by the Mountains; which (the Mogulls taking from the Saracens, who had
also sub dued Canora, or Decan, they made Dellie the chief City thereof their
place of residence, another City is Chesmer, where Magic is much studied. The
Amazons which were valiant women formerly, here dwelt, there being also some
who yet ride on horseback in manner of men; and a Mohammedan King lately here
reigning, had a Wife which marched commonly with 2000 women on Horseback.
Bengala, a great realm of twelve leagues in length, and also breadth, having
many, both land and Sea-Towns. I^'s City Gauro was the abode of its Kings, as
also Bengala the Provincial Town, reckoned one of the greatest and fairest of
all in the Indies. Sangue which some call Citor, and whose chief City is Citor,
twelve miles in compass, seated in an advantageous place, and very strongly
fortified. This Province was (but lately) subject unto a fair and courageous
woman named Crementina, yet a Tributary to Badurius of Cambaia, from whom she
revolting, he dispossessed her of the Town, where she had fortified her self
with no less then 30000 foot and 2000 horse. There is also the Kingdom of
Bocan, or Balassia, which has two Cities of the same names; and which
contains inexhaustible Mines of Gold and Silver. This Empire has been
conquered and contracted into one, by the great Mogulls, about 120 years or
more: who were so called from the Mongull Tartars, from whom they descended by
cutting off a Letter, and so likewise (I suppose) Mogors. This Country has
been notable, for abundance of, both necessaries for life, and also of
pleasure; likewise for sundry beasts, as Apes, Dragons, Camells, Serpents,
Rhicinerots; and Elephants. Cambaia abounds in Wheat, Rice, Sugar, all sorts of
fruits, Spices, and Incense, fraughting also sometimes 40 or 50 ships (to
transport into other parts) with their great store of Cotton, and Silk. Here is
also found the Onyx stone, called Cornallina, many Diamonds and Chalcedonies;
it abounds also in liquid Storax. It is watered chiefly with the River Indus,
coming from Mount Caucosus. Bengala also has great store of Rice, Wheat,
Sugar, very good Ginger, and long Pepper, no Country having more flesh or
Fish, or more Silk and Cotton, besides its sweet and temperate Air, attracting
many people thither. And the Jews and Mahometans there dwelling, believe that
the sweet and pleasant fruit of their Trees called Moses, was that which
tempted Adam. Here are Canes so big, that they serve for barrels, etc. Dellie
also abounds in Horses, Dromedaries, which some call Abades, twice as big as a
Bull, and Elephants, besides the commodities of other Realms; So that the
enriching Merchandises of this Empire, which they send into remote Countries,
are, abundance of Cotton and Silks, Spices and precious stones; their Mogor
also having undoubtedly vast treasures, as having conquered Badurius (who
brought 500 Chests or Tuns of Gold and Silver, as was said, to pay his Army)
and a great number of other Provinces. As to Religion, the Mogors Empire is for
the most part Mahometans; also there are many gross idolaters, as may
straightway be declared. There are also many Jews, and some called Christians,
Abyssins, whom traffic and gain draw hither. There are also within Ganges,
the two Kingdoms of Narsinge and Calicute, governed by their own Princes. The
first whereof, Narsinge, lies between the Gulf of Bengala on the East, and the
Mountains of Gate on the West; and is in length 600 miles, wherein are two
royal Towns, Narsinge, and Bisnagar, or Besenagal (having three walls, and
famous for traffic, yet it was burnt by Saracenicall confederates in 1567) by
reason whereof, they call this Prince sometimes King of Narsinge, sometimes of
Bisnagar. The City of Tanassar (some say) belongs to this Kingdom, though the
King of Barma now holds it. The Portugals have seized on one principal
sea-Town hereof; namely Onor, and made another (to wit) Batticale their
tributary, but these are in the Province of Canara, or Concan, being some part
of Decan, which the King of Narsinge does enjoy; who has (likewise) the King
of Travancor, in the Province of Malabar, subject unto him. But two Sea-Towns
in Narsinge it self, Coromandel and Malipur are inhabited by Christians, the
Portugalls holding them also. This King led an Army against Idalcan (a
neighbor Prince) of 31690 horse, 558 Elephants, and 60000 foot, and vanquished
him. In this Country is great plenty of Corn, Sugar, Ginger, and other spices;
no place abounding more in Silk and Cotton than it. Canara, yields Rice, Sugar,
Nuts, and Figs; but no Wheat, Barley, nor Pulse. Bisnagars Territory is very
fruitful, nigh which are very pleasant Forests. But Travancors soil is lean.
This King has twelve Millions of Gold or Ducats yearly. For in this Country
(as in most of the East) all the lands Forests, Mines, yea, and the Water of
some Rivers are the Princes: so that every one washing himself in Ganges,
running through Bengala, or that of Gangue flowing through Orissa, must pay a sum
to their Kings. This people do believe, first in one God; then in Devils, the
Authors of all evil, whom they most honoring, build stately Pagodes, or
Temples unto them: and two sorts of people, to wit, the Banean, and Bramans, or
Bramins do govern in a manner the Idolatrous Religion throughout the Indies. To
speak of all whose vanities and foolish superstitions, might seem as
superfluous, as tedious. The Bramans are much more esteemed than the other, and
are of two sects, either those who marry, and live in Towns, called Bramanes;
or those who never marry, living on Alms, and going up and down like Pilgrims,
etc. for a time, till becoming Abduts, that is, men exempt from Laws, they
commit all beastliness, and villainy, and take all kind of pleasures, and these
are called Joques, whose Commander distributes sometimes a great revenue,
sending them up and down to preach their folly. They worship and esteem of Oxen
and Kine more than any beasts, because they think dead men's Souls pass rather
into them than into any other. They hold God to be black, as the goodliest
color; wherefore their Idols are black, and so deformed, that they affright
the beholders, persuading the people, they are great eaters; by which lying,
they get much money and meat to make good cheer withal, they know the
explication of the 10 Commandments: and the first thing they enjoin their
received Disciples; is never to publish, one God Creator of all things to be
worshipped. In their Sabbath's service, their Doctors repeat often these words,
I worship thee, O God, with thy grace and succors eternally. Also to receive
meat from Christians, they account it sacrilege.

CALICUTE is the chief Realm of the Country of Malabar, which is the Western
part of Aurea Chersonesus of old, which is 900 miles long, from the Mountain
Guate on the East, to the Indian Ocean East; yet narrow. It contains seven
Provinces; two of whom, to wit, Cononor and Calicute, obey the King of
Calicute, a Prince so powerful, that they call him Zamorim or Emperor;
although the Realm be but 25 leagues long, and 10 broad: for Pereimall King of
Malabar going to a Mohammedan Mecha, to finish his days, divided his estate
into as many parts as Provinces, leaving this name to this King of Calicute.
Its denominating City Calicute reaches three miles along the Seaside, without
walls, the houses being some distance from each other; yet the staple-Town of
all the Indian Traffic. Cononor is a City also, having a safe and large
Harbor, and so fit for traffic 30 miles from Calicute: But Cochin is 30
leagues from the same, whence are the best scarlet dies; whose Governor is the
High Priest of the Brachmanes or Bramins: unto whom, they say, the King uses to
grant the hansel of his marriage bed, wherefore his sister's sons succeed him,
as being more certainly of the royal blood. The houses of Calicute are built
low, equal to a man on horseback, because soon finding water, they cannot lay
deep foundations. This soil yields much Pepper and Ginger: in the Plains, is a
fruit like the Myrobolan; but in the reddish soiles, are gathered all sorts
thereof. They have diverse shrubs and fruits, among which some (unknown to us)
taste like Peaches, Damask-Prunes, Figgs, and Melons. Aloes called
Succo-citrini, grows here, and is a gum gathered from a shrub, having but
one root, like a staff. They have a Tree yielding Dates like the Palm, wood
for fuel, nuts well-tasted: ropes and fine cloth are made of it; Wine, Sugar,
and oil are drawn from it. Another Tree bears Cotton, Cypres or Cobweb-lawn, of
whose leaves they make stuff somewhat like to Satin or Taffata; making ropes
of its bark being spun, under whose latter bark, is a nut as big as ones little
finger, in whose inward part, water growing, not much unlike Rose Water: they
make fat oil thereof. They draw mornings and evenings a liquor from this Tree
by incision, which is to them as sweet wines. The whole year seems always here
as a Spring, through the air its temperatenesse and sweetness. Here are
likewise many beasts, as Lions, Bugles, Elephants, Bears, Wolves, Stags, Goats,
Oxen, though some say they breed not here. Parrots there are of diverse colors,
and the bird Saran somewhat less than Parrots. Store of Apes and Monkeys, who
running up those Trees (like Nut-trees) spoil the liquor whereof the Indians
make drink, overthrowing the vessels in which they receive it. Three sorts of
Serpents are in this Country, two whereof are poysonsome in their bitings: but
the other which are very great, living in Moorish places; having very long
feet, are said to have no poison in them. The Calicutes selling not only their
own Pepper and Ginger to Merchants: but Spices, Musk, Incense, Aloes, and
Camphir, Brasil, Pearls, and Cassia, which come to this City from other places,
makes it one of the richest in the Indies. They believe one God the Creator and
first cause of all: but they say, He, to rest himself has committed the
Earth's Government, Judgment, and Punishment unto the Devil, whom they call
Deume, or the god Tameran, holding him to be celestial. The King has many
figures of Devils in a place of his Palace; and in his Chapel a gaping ghastly
brazen Devil is set on a Throne of brass; who holds the soul of a man in his
throat, and another in his hand to devour him. Their sacrificers are called
Bramins, who (to let pass their many superstitions) promise a general pardon
to the people of their faults once a year, in December; which continuing for
three days, their Idol-Temple (whither they resort from all neighboring
Provinces: and into which none may enter, to worship or be sprinkled with the
lamp-oyl by the Bramins, till he has washed himself in the Lake in which the
Temple stands) is as a Sanctuary for all, so that none dare either pursue an
offender, do wrong, or revenge for wrong done.

India without Ganges, is situated between the other India Westward, and China
on the East, and was formerly divided between 12 rich and puissant Princes; but
now they are all subjected to the King of Brama or Barma, or of Pegu: some
reckoning up 14 Realms which he possesses at this day: But the most remarkable
of the 12, into which it was once divided, are seven; 1. Siam, or the King dome
of Sorna, made subject to the King of Barma in 1565; three of whose chief
Cities are, Siam, seated on the bank of the broad and deep river Menam, a
stately and pleasing City, also very populous; and wherein nigh 30000 families
of Moots, Merchants, are estimated to dwell: the River overflowes the Country
120 miles every year; whereby the King of Pegu besieging it in 1567, brought
but 70000 of 900000 Soldiers with him our of the waters. Odie, bigger than
Siam, for they reckon therein near 400000 houses; and 200000 boats are said to
be there, in which they may pass through every street, as in Venice. Malacca,
subject to the Portugals, who have here an Archbishop, with a College of
Jesuits: it is eminent for the Trade of Spices, and 20 miles about. 2. Barma,
whose Kings were but Lievtenants to the Kings of Pegu, till about 100 years
since, or more: when as a Barmian Prince seized on four Kingdoms; and since,
these Barmians have won the City Pegu, forced Odie, and totally subdued Siam,
making all the rest do them homage. 3. Pegu, so called from the river Pegu
running through the midst of the Country, and on which, the most fair and
elegant City of India of the same name, stands, distant 25 miles from the
Sea. In this Country, by means of the titulary King of Siam his coming and
burning up corn, grass, and fruits, a most insupportable famine consumed all
the Inhabitants of this kingdom; except those that were preserved by the
storehouses of the City in 1598. 4. Macin, whose chief City is Macin; which
Country also is notable for the sweet wood Aloes; held by the Indians a most
excellent remedy for many grievous maladies. 5. Aracham or Arrachan, situated
North from Bengala near the River Chabery, on which the chief Town Arrachan
stands, and is 45 miles from the Sea. Ava is also another City hereof,
remarkable for its many Gems. 6. Camboye, which takes its name from the
principal City so called, which stands on the river Menon: which receiving
into it many rivers, in its flowing out of China where it arises, makes 100
Islands; and a Lake about 200 miles in compass. 7. Cauchin China, a few of
whose people are said to be Man-eaters: Its chief City of the same name being
situate on the Sea, is much frequented for China dishes, or Proceline. In the
several Provinces are to be found several Commodities; great store of Rice,
Elephants, little horses, Parrots, Civet-Catts, huge Canes, many Rubies, much
Lacca, (which some say is the Gum of a Tree; others, that they gather it upon
leaves) Corn, Pepper, Benjoyn, Gold, Silver, Tinn, and other metals, plenty of
Musk; in some places great Forests, where live many Tygres, Lions, and wild
beasts. There is both flesh and fish, and in one place or other all things
needful for the life of man: for the Country being plain, and watered with many
goodly Rivers, all things abound beyond what is spoken. Merchants coming
thither from all parts, do carry many Commodities forementioned into several
parts: so that the wealth of these Realms may easily be conceived by their
fruitfulness; and that the King of Barma has store of treasure. From the
false and foolish principles of those of Pegu, spring so many vain opinions and
ceremonies, that they are hardly to be expressed. They have Convents of Priests
near their Idol-Temples above 300 in a place; who have head and chin shaven,
wearing long Gowns with sleeves hanging to the ground. Those of Siam are held,
as it were, authors of all superstitions in these Countries; yet hold God for
the Creator of all things, who shall recompense the good, and punish the evil:
believing also, a man to have about him, both a good Spirit guiding him to
good, and keeping him; and another tempting, and afflicting him. They much
honor their Priests, who are attired in yellow cloth; for all of that color
(it resembling the Sun and gold) is dedicated to God. Many are the number of
their Idols; worshipping also the four Elements: so that he who in his
lifetime adored the earth, chooses to be buried; he that honored fire, to be
burnt: who the air, to be hung, and devoured by birds: and who the water, to be
drowned. We should exceed our present purpose of brevity, if we should repeat
all their vanity.

CHINA, so called, by corruption of the word Sina (whose people, the Sinois,
here inhabited) is a very great and ancient Realm; for (according to the
Chinoi's own account in their books, and by the computation of an excellent
Geometrician and Cosmographer, it has 3000 leagues in circuit, and 1800 in
length: and if we credit their own relations, their Kings from the first called
Vitei, have successively reigned above 4000 years, being never conquered, till
that in Farfar's time, the 242 King, Chisanbaan the Tartar's Lieutenant (his
name signifying 100 eyes) deprived him of his kingdom, according to a foretold
Prophecy; yet by one Combu chosen their 251 King, after 93 years, they were
delivered from the Tartar's Government. China lies the most Eastward of any
Continent in Asia, having the Ocean Del Zur, the Isles Corea and Japon on the
East; on the West India, and part of Tartarie: on the North Tartarie only,
from which it is divided, partly by Mountains, partly by a Wall; which being
500 leagues long, was made by King Tzainton, and begins in Canton, but ends in
Susuan Province; 100 leagues whereof lying quite open betwixt the Mountains:
the wall is there of freestone, seven fathom broad from bottom to top. Almost
the third part of China's Inhabitants dyed in this toil; for which proud work,
the whole kingdom revolting, they slew the King, and also his son Agntzi. It is
distributed also into 15 Provinces; to wit, Pasquia or Pagnia, Foquien or
Fegvien, Canton, Olam, Tolanchia, Sisnam or Susuam, Cansay, Oquiam, Honam,
Sincay, Ancheo, Quicheu or Quinchen, Chequeam or Chegvian, Xanton and Quinsay;
every one of which, is bigger than the biggest Realm in Europe: in two whereof,
Pasquia and Tolanchia, the King and his Council do always reside, not only
because they are the greatest and best peopled; but by reason also of the
Tartarian's Neighborhood, with whom the Chinois are in continual war. In all
these Countries are many Towns and Cities: (Every Town of note being built
after one manner, to wit, two great, broad and straight streets crossing each
other, which end at four Gates equally distant, all garnished with iron, and
stately, besides other smaller streets with public and private buildings) and
the Villages are so many and near each other, that their number is unknown; so
that here are judged to inhabit 70 millions of people: for they are born, and
do die, buy and sell in ships, as if in a City. The two chief Rivers of this
Country, are Polysango and Cacamacan; on which are 12000 stately bridges, under
whose arches ships top and top gallant, do usually pass. The principal Cities
are, Quinsay or Suntien, in their language an Ecclesiastical City, which is so
large, that a horseman must make speed to ride, from one gate to another in a
day, the Suburbs being also almost as great as the City. The King has here
three Palaces; whereof that which stands toward the East at the Citie's entry
is so big and full of singularities, that some report, it cannot be exactly
viewed under four days time. It is encompassed with seven Walls, of a great
space asunder; it has 79 stately and admirable artificial Halls, four whereof
are the principal, in which Ambassadors have audience; (and likewise his Lords
and Governors, when he keeps his Court; yet he seldom shows himself to his
people out of his lodging, and is scarce ever seen, but through a glass). The
first is of metal curiously cast, with a many figures. The second has a
floor of Silver of great value. The third of pure enameld Gold. The fourth far
exceeds the other three, wherefore they call it the Hall of the Kings treasure;
in which are also many inestimable Jewels and the Kings Chair made of Marble;
and set with many precious stones, and Carbuncles so rich, that by night they
shine as if there were Candles; and indeed this Hall conteins whatever is rich
and rare. Paquin where the King also resideth, either for the health of the
Air, or nearness to the Tartars, whose Palace, though compassed with a
triple Wall, within which, besides lodgings, are Hills, Groves, Rivers,
Fountains, yet is it not equal in workmanship to the European Palaces.
Nanquin, in Circuit thirty miles, and is seated twenty seven miles from the
Sea, on a fair Navigable River; on which, besides private men's, ride 10000 of
the Kings Ships for the most part. Colius, famous for Porceline. Xaiton,
always harboring 500 ships. Suchean, a goodly City, and of great traffic,
whose situation is in the Marshes, like unto Venice. There are no less than
160000 Eunuchs, gelded in their infancy by their Parents belonging to this
Prince as his chiefeft Courtiers. For that they have had Printing (which is
from the top to the bottom of the leaf) and Guns also, long before known in
Europe, they say in conceit of themselves, they have two eyes; the Europaeans
one; and others none: They are said to be both Politic, ingenuous, and
excellent Artificers; for the son is bound not to rove idly, but to follow his
fathers occupation. This Empire once commanded all the Eastern Islands, But
receiving a great loss and overthrow nigh Zeilan, of 800 ships, they freed
them all from their obedience, as being contented with natures bounds. Those of
Canton, and on all that coast, are black like those in Barbary, as being with
them in the same Parallel; but the other within the land are mostly white, yet
some more than others according as they advance into the cold Country; yet
China cannot be said to be either hot or cold, as lying within the temperate
Zone, and extending toward the same climate with Italy. There are but few
Mountains, but Plains 300 miles about, (their Seas also being very calm); in
which, being tilled, and sowed with all kind of fruit, of excellent perfection,
do grow not only sufficient for themselves, but wherewith to furnish
neighbors, and remote Countries; so that they carry out of China from their
many good and commodious Ports and Havens, Flax, Wool, Cotton, Silk, and all
sorts of stuff; much Sugar, Honey, Wax, Rubarb, Camphir, Vermilion, Diers
Wood, and abundance of Musk; besides, plenty of Rice and Barley for themselves.
They dig store of Gold; Silver, and other Mettalls out of their Mines, carrying
forth much Pearl, Porcelain Vessels, and rich Furs. They have likewise (they
say) Wood, and all kinds of spices; and Salt, whose custom in one only Town,
amounts to very much. They press a delicate juice out of an herb, serving
them for Wine, and preserving their health; whose Kings revenues are averred to
be 120 Millions of Gold yearly, considering the spatiousnesse of so many
Provinces, the multitude of people, contributions for every head, Customs of
Merchandise, T^^^^es of all fruits, revenues of Mines, with all other Taxes,
aid^^ imposts, and subventions. Wherefore this Country is believed to be one
of the richest and greatest, if not the very richest and greatest in the whole
World. Yet are they all gross and sottish Idolaters, (except a very few that
Jesuits have turned to the Romish Religion) believing the Heaven to be the
Creator of all things, visible and invisible, which has a Governor uncreated
who is a spirit, him they call Laacon Tzantey, that is, The Governor of the
great God; saying, there is another spirit which they call Cansay, who has
charge of things on earth, and the power of life and death, and that he has
three Assisting spirits under him, Tanquam, Teiquam, and Tzuiquam, who have
their distinct charges. They worship several Idols, one with three heads,
others marked for the twelve Apostles, who, they say were great Philosophers,
virtuous livers, and were made Angels in Heaven. They have also the picture of
an exceeding fair Woman, with a child in her Arms; of which, they said, she was
delivered, being a Virgin, and a great King's daughter. They account many for
Saints, who have exceeded in valor, Knowledge, Industry, or Austerity of life.
They use several lots, and when any affliction befalls them, have recourse unto
the Devil in an absurd manner. Tain (they say) first created Panzon, and
Panzona, whose Posterity being after many thousands of years destroyed for
wickedness, Tain created Lutitzam, from whose right-Horn came men, and from
the left, Women. The immortality of the Soul is generally believed by them, and
the reward or punishment in another life for ever; holding also a place for
Souls who shall be Angels, to purge themselves in from all evil. There are in
their Towns and Buroughs many places in which men and Women live together as
in Monasteries, of whom there are four Orders, every one having his General,
called Tricon; who reside commonly in Suntien, who provide a Provincial in
every Province, who visits all covents, correcting misdemeaners, and appointing
a Prior in every covent, whom they are all bound to obey. The King and his
Council nominate the Generals, who hold their place during life, unless they
deserve to be deprived. The eldest son of a Family can be no Religious man by
their law, because bound to feed his Parents when old. They offer Incense,
Benjoin, and the Wood Alloes, with other odoriferous things and pasts, morning
and evening, to their Idols. When any V^ssell is put to Sea, their Religious
men do sacrifices in the poop, and perform other fopperies before their Idols,
supposing that hereby the Ship is sanctified, and that those who go in her
shall have good success. And when any of them pray, they speak to heaven as
their God, and to one whom they call Sinquian, saying, he is a Saint, and
invented this their manner of life.

NExt are those called the Oriental or Eastern Islands to be ^riefly surveyed;
the first whereof is JAPON, or Japan, called in old time CHRIST, and Zipangry.
It is a Kingdom composed of many Islands, divided by many small Gulfs, and
narrow turnings of the Sea. It looks Eastward toward that called New- Spain. On
the West it has China, on the North Tartaria, with other unknown Savage
people, and to the South certain unknown lands, between which a spacious Sea
runs. All the Country is near 600 miles long; but thirty miles, in some
places, at the most but ninety broad. There are in it sixty six small Realms,
whereof the first called chief Japon, contains fifty three of them; another
called Ximo, includes nine, a third called Xicoum, four. He that has made
himself Lord of Coquina, the most famous Principality of them all, and is
called Prince of Tenze (in which are five Realms about the City Meaco) styles
himself sovereign of Japon, as was Taicosama some years since, who to assure
his new Conquest of fifty Realms, transported the vanquished kings from one
Country to another. Meaco is the principal City hereof, standing in Coquina,
which was 21 miles in compass; but now much less through civil wars. Here the
three Sovereign Magistrates remain. Bandum is another City, a University, and
said to be bigger then Paris. Ossacaye also is a great City, and some hold it
the richest of the East. This Island was discovered by the Portugalls in 1542.
It has two Mountains in it, one whereof transcends the Clouds, and is named
Figenciama, the other burns casting forth flames continually. It abounds in
Rice, so that they fraught many strange ships therewith; and the king has two
Millions of Gold yearly rent for Rice gathered ^ut of his own possessions. Also
store of round, great, and red Pearl; which is as much or more esteemed than
the white; and their abundance of Gold and precious stones, do enrich this
Realm. They are given to all kind of impiety. Their Bonzes or Priests and
Doctors are divided into eleven sects, yet all deny the providence of God, and
Soul's immortality, communicating the same only to noble men, but treating
with the vulgar, of the other life and pains of Hell. Their Gods most esteemed
are the Fotoques for their doctrine, and strict life, who were for the most
part Bonzes, wherefore they desire of them goods of the other World; and Cames,
who were Princes and great persons, accounted Gods for their exploits, and
singular inventions; of whom they require earthly blessings. But some of the
Japonites adore also the Sun and Stars, others the Heavens, and some Stags and
wild beasts. The Devil (likewise) uses diverse ways, too tedious here to set
down, that he may be adored by these Infidells. This Island, since discovered
(as was said) by the Portugalls, is much frequented by Jesuits, one Xavier,
and also Turian first laboring there to turn many to an outward profession of
Christianity; who are said to be more zealous than those in Europe: so that
many Neophyts, or new Converts, being brought over (as also some kings) in
diverse places, from the year 1556. unto 1590. there have been since, great Wars
and Persecutions against them by Taycosama, and the kings of Tenze, putting
many to death, and inflicting torments and punishments on them, many of whom
notwithstanding, would not abandon their embraced Religion; but their belief is
said to flourish still, and enlarge it self in many places.

There are also two Islands called JAVA; the greater of whom is the biggest in
the World, for it 3000 miles in Circuit, the lesser is 2000. The chief Cities
of the greater Java are four, Paliban, Agacin, Ballambua, and Megapeger. The
barbarous Indians of this Country (they say) use to eat the dead bodies of
their friends; as also do many of the other Indians; yet is it so wondrous
fruitful, that it is called the Worlds Epitome. Eight Kings rule in the Lesser
Java, whose chief Cities are Samara, Lambri, and Basnia, These are good Seamen,
but great Pirates.

ZEILAN is an Isle lying in the Gulf of Bengala, 250 miles ong, 140 broad;
whose six Kings are Tributaries to the Great Mogull. Its chief Cities are
Zeilan, and Columbus. The inhabitants are skillfull juglers, by which, and the
hobby horse, they get money in all India's continent. It is very fruitful; for
Trees do bear fruit, and Grass grows all the year long.

BORNEO is an Island containing two Kingdoms or dominions; of Borneo on the
North, and of Laus on the South, the which the Aequinoctial line divides
asunder. They worship the Sun when he rises, (repeating certain Verses) with
great reverence; the Moon also and Stars whom they account for his Wife and
Children. Their Counselors of state consult not of public affairs but in the
night; and before their sitting, they go up a Tree, beholding the Heavens till
the rising of the Moon.

SUMMATRA is a great Island, 700 miles long, and 200 broad, but not the biggest
in the World, as Aristotle then thought, he calls it Taprobane. Its principal
Cities are Pazzen, Androgeda, and Daren. The subjects of whose twenty nine
Kings do eat their enemies, using their skulls instead of money. It abounds in
Gold, Silver, and Silk, Ginger, Pepper, Aloes, and Cassia.

The MOLUCCOES are in number five; three of the chief, to wit, Terenate and two
others, are 18 miles in circuit: which King of Terenate has 70 Islands under
him, bearing pleasant Commodities. There is also the adjoining Isle Bantan or
Banda, much visited for its Nutmegs, wherewith it more abounds than any
Island of India. These Moluccoes abound in all sorts of Spices; and both in
Banda, and the Moluccoes, the Romish Religion has for some years begun to take
deep root.

Lastly, the PHILIPPINAE or Philip's Islands, because they were discovered by a
Spaniard in 1564, Philip the Second reigning in Spain. The Chinoys were Lords
of them, till they abandoned them. They are said to be no less in all than
110000 30 whereof being subject to the King of Spain, have embraced whether
voluntarily or forcibly, his Religion. Mariners say, there are besides these
127000 Isles about India: and 7448 which lay against China, all pagans; which
stand so near together, that they seem afar off to be one Continent. Of which
and the other Indian Isles, Travelers have related many fables. The Spaniards
hold many Castles, Towns and Islands, in the Eastern Countries, whereby
although they are a terror to the Native and Neighboring Princes; yet the
English and Dutch are not hereby hindered of trassiquing with the Indians.

A Description of AFRICA.
AFRICA (which some will have so called, from one Afrus, a Companion of
Hercules against Gerion: others from Africus, a King of the Arabians; whence it
is by the Arabians at this day called Africia. But others, from the Greek
privative particle [(...)] and [(...),] signifying cold; as much as to say, A
Country without cold. Lastly, Josephus says, it was so named from Afrus, one
of Abraham's posterity, who leading an Army into Lybia, and overcoming his
enemies, there sat down: and Africa by the Greeks is called Lybia) bends
partly to the South, partly to the West; and is a Peninsula shut up from the
North with the Mediterranean Sea; from the West with the Atlantic and
Aethiopick Ocean; from the South with the Indian Ocean; from the East with the
Red Sea: so that in this part which bends toward the East, it is knit to Asia
by an Isthmus or narrow tract of land, but 60 miles over; so that it is
separated from Asia by a bosom of the red Sea, a line being thence drawn into
the Mediterranean, but from Europe it is disjoined by Hercules strait. The
Equator cuts Africa almost in the middle, and it is extended beyond the
Tropic of Cancer, even to 45 degrees of the Pole Ant-artick. It is much less
then Asia, for it has both in length, and breadth also, but 70 Degrees, which
make 1050 Germane miles. Its figure is almost Quadrangular, or four square, but
that it runs along toward the South, with a longer point. It has been no
small controversy among Geographers, whether the River Nilus does divide Asia
from Africa, and so, whether Egypt, and Aethiopia, ought rather to be referred
to Asia than to Africa; but since thence it would follow, that Egypt should be
partly attributed to Africa, partly to Asia, which thing Ptolomy holds not
convenient, and seeing all do at this day reckon the true Aethiopia, which is
Presbyter John's Empire, to be in Africa, it is judged not to be circumscribed
by Nile, but rather by the Mediterranean and Ocean. Africa is a very wast and
uninhabited part of the World. But it had once the City Carthage therein for
its head, which strove with Romes Empire for Masterdome. The two chief Seas
(which notwithstanding belong to it but in a part) are the Atlantic Main, and
on the other side the Indian Sea. Its greatest River is Nilus, which also
Geographers call the greatest of the whole World, for it flows about 700
Islands. Of which also Ramnusius and Fracastorius do relate diverse, yea many
wonders. It is divided into four parts, in the general; Barbary, Numidia,
Lybia, specially so called, and the land of the Negroes, or Blacks. Others make
seven parts thereof; Barbary, Numidia, Lybia, the land of the Negroes,
Aethiopia, the upper or more inward; Ae^hiopia the nether or more outward
Egypt; unto which is added an eighth, to wit, the African Isles.

BARBARY took its name from the Saracens, unto whom the conquered Inhabitants
language was as a murmuring sound; for so much the word Barbar imports: and is
bounded on the North with the Mediterranean, on the South with Mount Atlas. It
contains four Kingdoms known at this day by the names of, 1. Tunis, which has
on the West Algiers; on the East the Country Cyrenaica, also called
Pentapolitana; and contains five Provinces, which lay between the great
river, and the river of the Country of Mesrat; and was formerly called Numidia,
and Africa Propria, or the lesser Africa, or at leastwise included this lesser
Africa within it self. The Provinces are, Bugia, which beginning at the great
river, extends 150 miles, even to the Mountains of Constantine, and is nigh 40
miles broad; it was once a Kingdom of it self. The chief City is Bugia, of
great antiquity, and was built by the Romans on a high Mountain near the Sea.
Falzal is another City therein; which the most judicious hold to be Igilgili,
as being very like it in situation: in which were anciently fair Temples,
Colleges, stately Lodgings, Monasteries, and Hospitals; but since Peter of
Navarr took it in 1508; it has remained without beauty or ornament. The
Country of Constantine, which lies between the Mountain of Constantine and
Tunis, near the river Guadilbarbar; and whose chief City is Constantine, which
some hold to be Certe, called by Ptolemie Julia, and the ancient abode of old
King Masinissa (who being King of this Numidia antiqua, lived and dyed in amity
with the Roman Senate, after whose death, Micipsa's Jugurtha, and the death of
his son Micipsa, his adopted sou killing his two natural sons Adherbal and
Hiempsal opposed the Romans, till at length being delivered into Sylla's hands
by King Boccus, and led in triumph to Rome, he was there starved in prison).
This Town is environed with high Mountains and Rocks, consisting now of about
8000 families. Here is also the Town Bosne, otherwise Hippo, where Augustine
was Bishop. Tripoli, so called from three principal Cities therein: which
beginning at the river and gulf of Capes, extends beyond the Town of Tripoli,
near the Country of Mesrat. The chief Town is New Tripoli, or Tripoli of
Barbary: which being taken from the Knights of Malta by Sinan Bassa, Selimus
his Lieutenant, in 1551; Pirates live there, which annoy all the Coasts of
Italy: whereas in former time there was great concourse of Genoan, Venetian,
and Sicilian Merchants, as also from other places. Ezzabe, which lies beyond
Tripolis, toward the East, in which stands the City Cairaon, built by Hucba
General to Osmen the fourth, Caliph of the Saracens, and who subdued all
Barbary. The chief Country of this Province is Mesrat near the Mediterranean,
and about an 100 miles from Tripolis: which has in it many Towns and Villages,
both on the Mountains and plains. Lastly, The Country of Tunis, which lies
betwixt the River Guadilbarbar, called by the ancients the pool of Hipponita,
and the River of Capes. Carthage was the antientest City hereof, and once the
chief of all Africa; built by Dido, in the year of the World 3078, 135 years
before Rome, or as some hold, but seventy two years before Rome (yet this
Country was peopled by the Phaenicians long before, who fled hither from the
sword of Joshuah, unto whom Dido (with her Tyrians) joined her self). After
three several wars which the potent Carthaginians waged with the Romans; this
City was utterly razed, being taken and burnt by Scipio; but being afterward
rebuilt by Caesar, he transplanted a Roman Colony hither, so that it
flourished again; yet far from her ancient reputation, and has since been so
ill entreated by Vandals, Goths, and Saracens, that scarce a twentieth part of
the Town remains inhabited; some say it was 21 or 22 miles in compass; almost
environed with the Sea, in the midst of which was a Fort called Byrses;
containing little less than two miles. The Carthaginians were named Paeni, or
Phaeni: whence may be proved that they came from the Phaenicians, they were
almay be proved in their time for perjury, and false dealing. But the chief of
the many fair Towns, here is Tunis, called by Ptolemy, Themise, or Thunise,
which being at first but small; after Carthage was ruined, it began to be so
enlarged and enriched; that now its held for the chief of the whole Country,
having in it about ten thousand Families, and near five miles in Circuit, it is
seated near a very safe harbor; which the Spaniards strengthened with the Fort
called Goletta; which being forty years in finishing; the Turks by their
Herculian labor, equalled with the ground in 39. days space. This Kingdom
generally considered, is fruitful enough; for Bugia in some places yields
store of grain and fruit, although in other places it be exceeding barren.
There are also many Forests, and Fountains on the high and rough Mountains,
with plenty of Oxen, Goats, and Horses. Constan^ine has store of O^l, with
great plenty of Butter through their much Cattle; also much Corn; for near
Bone (the Town where Augustine was born) there is one plain 40 miles long, and
25 broad, where grows abundance. Tripoli ^ath store of all kind of fruits, and
Dates; also plenty of Wheat, but no other Corn. Ezzabe has abundance of
O^ives, Dates, and diverse other fruits in its goodly plains, but no grain. The
Province of Tunis, four or five miles within the Town so called, has plains
full of Olive Trees; but they dare not manure the land about the Town for any
corn, because of the daily incursions of the Arabes. The Turks commanding the
inhabitants of this Country, they all make open profession of Mahomet and his
law. Christians live there in their Religion, but as slaves, and with many
miseries; being worse used than in the Emperor of Moroccoe's dominions,

Secondly, ARGIERS, or ALGIERS; It is the Realm of Tremisen, or Telensin, and
was called in the Romans time Mauritania Caesariensis, for that the Mauri or
Moors inhabited here, as also the Western part of Barbary, and from Caesarea
the principal city herein. It is bounded on the West with Fez, and Morocco,
from which it is divided by the River Mulvia; on the East with Tunis, and
divided by the River Ampsaga; on the North it has the Mediterranean looking
toward the Island Sardinia; and on the South the Numidians, called Getulians.
Caesarea was of old called Jol, where King Boccus (who betrayed Jagurth his
friend unto Sylla) resided. But now this Kingdom contains five other
principal Cities, the two chief whereof are Tremisen, or Telensine, which
formerly contained 16000 or 17000 Families; but (what by Joseph King of Fez,
who besieged it seven years; what by the War of Charles the fifth Emperor, who
took it into his protection; what by the Turks, who in the end mastered it; and
also by the war betwixt the Serif, or King there, and the Turk) it is much
decayed, yet it is said to have in it diverse fair Temples, and five dainty
Colleges, wrought curiously with M^saique work. Algier, formerly under the
Realm of Tremisen; but through insupportable charges, it revolted to the King
of Bugio. Then it belonged to the King of Spain, from whom Barbarossa took it
in 1515. But being now reduced under the Turk, it is grown both rich and
famous, and made by them almost impregnable (though not so large as strong;
esteemed to contain about 4000 families, standing on the declining of certain
hills, and three miles in Circuit) and is a retreat for abundance of Pirates,
bringing thither their prizes, for which cause the Turk has a Lieutenant
there. There are also two other Towns of note in this Country of Tremisen.
Cran, taken for the Spaniards by Peter of Navarre in 1509, and b^si^ged by the
Turk (though in vain) in 1562. It contains 10000 Families, and Masalquivir,
taken likewise by the Spaniards about the same time, and is a famous Haven
Town. A traveller some years since passing between the Town of Algier, and the
City Fez, found (he says) strong Wines, much excellent bread, the very best
and biggest of Hens, plenty of Figs, Fruits, Olives, and delicious Oil; and
when past the Plains (in which were innumerable Villages and houses, all of
mud, and platformed on the top, as they are all over Africa, and also in Asia)
he entering into a hilly Country, saw the fields over-clad with flocks of Goats,
and sheep; the sheep being so great, that some of their broad and thick tails
which hang to the ground, will weigh sixteen, eighteen, or twenty pound weight;
so that (if not from this hilly region, yet) from the Plains (some, if not all,
whereof belong to the Realm of Algier) we conclude this Country fertile enough,
and not unlike the Kingdom of Tunis. It Is Religion the same, and the Christian
slaves after the same manner.

Thirdly, Fez; and fourthly, Morocco; which being two kingdoms, yet are subject
unto one Xerife, King or Emperor, called the Emperor of Morocco. These
Countries were once called Mauritania Tingitana, from the Town Tingis or
Tanger; (nigh which the Phoenicians coming into Barbary, are said to have
engraven in their language on two Marble Pillars, these words; We flee from the
face of Joshuah the robber, the son of Nave). This State, has for some years
past endured even many incredible changes, by the Princes of one family, who by
many wicked and unworthy acts, have fought against and expelled each other.
They are both divided into seven Provinces. Morocco, which takes its name from
the chief City so called, is situated between Mount Atlas and the Atlantic
Sea; whose seven Provinces are,

1. He, bounded on the North with the Ocean; on the South with Mount A^las:
Its most ancient Town of He, is now called Tednest, standing in a goodly Plain
on the river Tensist; yet is it not well inhabited, yea rather abandoned by the
Inhabitants, who about 1514, hearing that the Arabians would sell it to the
Portugalls, intended to flee, although many of them were therein put to the
sword; another Town being so served. There is here amongst other places, one
called in their language, The Fort of Disciples; because a Sectary of Mahomet
there kept with his disciples, preaching his doctrine, and defending it against
the King of Morocco.

2. Suz, which lies betwixt Mount Atlas and Africa properly so called; having
the Lybian Deserts on the South; and on the East the great river Suz. The chief
City is Messa or Massa situated on the Cape of Gilon; and is as it were three
Towns, betwixt whom, the river Suz passes: yet is it of little or no worth, by
reason of the bad soil. But amongst others, Tavagost is the farthest, and
greatest Town of Suz, which is seated in a Plain, and whose Inhabitants are
very rich.

3. The particular Province of Morocco is made of a triangular form by the
Mountain of Nesise, bounding it on the West, East, and North, and is separated
from He, by the river Asifinuad, unto which the river Tensisit or Tensist
joyneth. The City Morocco is not so beautiful as formerly; the Castle and
Palace of King Almansor, as big as a Town, being all of note that is now to be
seen. It was built by Abderamen, and once contained 100000 households: but now
every way inferior to Fez. Yet its great Temple has a Town so high, that the
hills Azafi 130 miles distant, may be easily discerned. Here are also the Towns
of Tenezz, and D^lgumuba, which is strongly built on a very high Mountain. Also
I^^^^misi, seated on a rock of Mount Atlas, near which, is a narrow paslage of
the same Mount, named Burris, through which, he that goes into Guzule, must
needs pass; it is somewhat spacious, but decays daily.

4. Guzule, having on the West, the Mountain Ilde; on the East, He; and
confines with Suz. Here is neither City, Town, or Castle, only some Villages.

5. Ducalia, near the Ocean and the Cape Cantin on the West, the Country of
Tedle on the East. Its few walled Towns are almost all held by the Portugals;
and diverse Towns here were abandoned by their Inhabitants, which were sacked
and ruined when the Portugals took the Town of Azamor (seated at the mouth of
the River Ommirabili) in 1513.

6. Hascora, which beginning at Ducalia's Mountains toward the North, confines
with Morocco on the South. Here are four Towns, whereof Elvimua is a new Town,
and Bzo, an ancient one, situate on a high Mountain.

7. Tedle, of a triangular form, bounded with the river Quadelhabib, that is, a
river of Slaves, on the West, and that of Ommirabili toward the East. The
chief City is Tesza, standing on the river Deyme, an ancient Town, so called,
as being built with stones of the same name. Elfza, (built on Ommirabili, into
which Deyme runs, both flowing from Mount Atlas) is near Tesza, and also
under its jurisdiction. Then is there Chythite, having long maintained war
against the King of Fez, Lastly, Eithiad, which abounds in all kind of Victuals.

The seven Provinces of Fez (which are bounded on the North with the strait of
Gibralter, and the Mediterranean Sea, with part also of the Atlantic Sea, and
with Morocco on the South) are, 1. Tenesme, beginning on the Atlantic toward
the West, and bounded with the Buragrag on the East; whose Inhabitants Ptolemy
calls Caunes. This Province was (of old) the flowr of Mauritania Tingitana,
containing above 400 Towns, and 300 Castles and Villages, and is 120 miles
long, although narrower. Some of whose Towns are, Amsa, built anciently by the
Romans on the Seashore; and has been almost ruined by the Portugals; as also
Mansor, a Town nigh this. When the Mahometans contended about the differences
of the Doctors of their Law, the Town Adendum, like the rest of Mauritania,
felt the ruining fury of the War. This Country is as it were a Land of
conquest; for the Arabians, or rather the strongest party, command here. There
is also Rabat or Rubut, seated at the mouth of Buragrag near the Sea, and
founded by Almansor; in whose time it was one of the populousest of Africa; but
now not above 500 households, and naught but Gardens, Vines, and Meadows within
the walls. Sala, called by the Barbarians Zale, is a Town toward Gibralter
strait, in which is a Palace, wherein the Kings and Royal Princes were
interred. Marmora, a mile and half from the Sea, where the Portugal Army
(though Christians kept the Town) was defeated by the King of Fez, through the
bad intelligence between the Generals of the Portugal and Castilian Armies.
Macnase seated on the River Subu, in a goodly Plain, 15 or 16 miles from Fez.
It Is well peopled, reasonably strong and great, having broad streets, and
abundance of water by an aqueduct through the old industry of the Romans.

Secondly, Fez bounded with the rivers Buragrag, Inave, and Subu on the West,
East, and North; and with Mount Atlas on the South, and is about 100 miles in
length. Here is the Town Gualili showing it self upon Mount Zarbon, ruined by
the Africans, but rebuilt by Idris, who is buried there, and honored as a holy
man. Near this is an ancient Town called Pharaoh's Palace, although the
Egyptians never commanded over this Country. But the Metropolis is the great
and stately City of Fez or Fesse, called by Ptolemy, Silde; but Fesse, from
Fesse, signifying, Gold, whereof they found abundance, in digging its
foundation. It is situated like Grenada in Andelusia of Spain, to wit, on the
bodies and twice double devalling faces of two Hills, the low Valley between
(through which the torrid River of Marraheba runs Southward) being the
Center and chief place thereof; for it is the most beautiful and populous part
of the City: whose situation (as of the whole) is judged to be right under the
Tropic of Cancer. The Valley is two miles long, and half a mile broad: in
which are five Marketplaces, stately Temples, Colleges and Hospitals, and 100
Taverns, that may lodge a Monarchick Train; on the River are 67 bridges of
Timber and stone, which are passages for open streets on both sides: most part
of the forementioned buildings are three or four stories high, adorned with
large and open windows, long galleries, spacious Chambers, and square
platforms. It was first divided into two, both parts of each side of the river
having his Mohammedan Lord, and Mufti or chief Priest; but the King of Luntana,
or of the Lantune family, sacking these two Towns, put the Mofiz to death, and
made them but one. Also Jacob, son to Abdulach the first King of the
Meennon-family, divided Fez into three parts, and with three several Walls, but
now (says a traveller) environed only with one, and that broken down in
sundry parts. On the two Hills of the City, ^ast, and West are streets and
houses of two stories-high, with delicate Gardens on their outmost devalling
parts, as also numbers of Mosquees or Saracenical Temples and Watch-Towers: on
which heighths, and round the Town, stand about 300 Wind-Mills, most whereof
belong to the Mosquees, and the two magnifick Colleges foreducating children
in the Mahometan-Law, built by Kings of the Marine or Murin family; one whereof
called Amarodoc, (having three Cloisters of great beauty, whose gates are of
brass, and the private doors of Chambers of in-laid work, etc. cost King Haba
Hennor or Habu Henon 480000 Crowns, or 460000 Ducats in the building of it.
The chief Mosquee is called Mammo Currarad, which signifies, The glory of
Mahomet; which is an Italian mile in circuit, having 17 high ground Steeples,
besides Turrets and Towers, 34 entering Doors, supported within by the length
with 48 pillars, and about 23 ranges of pillars in breadth, besides many Isles,
Quires, and Circles: Every pillar has a lamp of oil burning thereat, where,
and through the whole Mosquee, are every night 900 lamps lighted; and to
maintain them, with 100 Totsecks and preaching Talsumans, it has 200 Ducats
daily rent: yet some say, this great Mosquee (no more than the rest) has but
one Priest, whose office is to say the prayers, and take care of the Temple's
revenues; the which he distributes to the Ministers thereof, and for all
necessaries; furnishing also other Temples that have no means, with
necessaries. The rest going to the common profit of the Town, because it has
no revenues. The Citizens are said to be very modest and zealous at their
worship, but great dancers and revellers on their solemn Festivals. Here were
in times past, the Kings Almansor, Maunon, and Hucceph, both learned and civil
men, and accounted excellent in their superstition; in whose times also
flourished Avicen, Rasis, Albumazar, and Averroes, the famousest Physicians and
Philosophers among the Pagans: with many others maintained by the Kings of
Morocco, who with their Moors were then Masters of all Barbary and Spain. There
are now in Fez a great number of Poets making diverse songs, chiefly on Love and
Lovers, whom they openly name: All which once a year against Mahomet's
birthday, make rymes to his praise; and on that Feast Day in the afternoon, in
the Marketplace is a desked Chair prepared for them; whereon they ascend one
after another to recite their verses in audience of the people; and he that is
judged the best, has all the year this Epithete above the rest, The Prince of
Poets; and is by the Vicegerent and Town rewarded. But there are also 12000
Brothel-houses allowed in this City, whose Curtezans are neatly kept, and
weekly looked to by Physicians, and (which is worse) they (in Summer) give open
license for 3000 stews of Sodomiticall boys. Nay (says one) I have seen at
Midday in the very Market places, the Moors buggering these filthy Carrions,
and without any shame or bodily punishment infflicted on them, go freely away.

Thirdly, The Province of Azgar, which has on the West the River Buragrag,
anciently called Lix; on the East the Mountains of Cumera, and a part of
Zarbon, and Zelag, which divide it from the Country of Fez. Its an 120 miles
long, and ninety broad. Two Towns are found herein, Laras, or Lorache, on the
River Luccus, where the Port is good, though the entry difficult: and Caesar
Elcabir signifying the great Palace of the foundation, built by King Mansor,
or Almansor. But of the Town Giumba, which was built by the ancient Africans,
is nothing now to be seen but the ditches.

Fourthly, Habat, Elhabet, or Ellabat, bounded on the East with the mountains
near Gibralter strait, on the West with the Marshes of Azgar, and is larger
than Azgar. A chief Town hereof is Exagen, seated nigh the River Guarga, or
Zuerga, on a Mountain's top; whose inhaoitants have commonly four hundred horse
in Garrison, because of the Portugalls inroads. Here is also among others,
Homar, once well-peopled; but now little inhabited, the Portugalls commanding
on that coast.

Fifthly, Erif, which runs 70 leagues from Gibralter's strait Westward, to the
River Nochor Eastward. Here is Belis, having a good Port, and seated betwixt
two Mountains. There is also Tergai with three other Towns that are situated
on a Mountain. But the Villages of this Province are many, although the Towns
but few.

Sixthly, Garet, which bordereth on the River Mulvia, and part of Chauz to the
East, on the River Nochor, and part of Erif toward the West; and is about 75
miles long, and sixty broad, in one part whereof are Towns, in the other
Mountains, in the third a Desert; the chief Towns being Tezzora, seated on a
little hill, and but one passage thereto. Miggeo, and Jafferin by the Sea,
built not many years (...) by the Mahometans, of the race of Marin.

Seventhly, Chauz, 190 miles long, from East to West, and 170 broad, for it
contains all that from Mount Atlas toward Mauritania, and no small part of the
Country joining to Lybia. Herein is Tezo, seated in a plain at the foot of
Mount Dubdu, on the River Mululo, and is a City strong and rich, being also as
a University, having Colleges like Fez. Teurert, a Town on a hill in a large
Plain, and encompassed with Deserts. And amongst others, stands little
Tezergue, subject to the Arabians, being near Cunaigel Cherben a Mountain,
signifying the passage of Ravens. Mahomet, the second Xeriff of Barbary, who
beginning his reign in 1550, united the Kingdoms of Fez, and Morocco, for
which Kingdom, the three sons of Hamet contended in 1603; two of which
brothren dying in those wars, Abdela, son to one of the slain brothers,
maintained the war against Sidan the surviving brother: During which one Sidan
Amet, a Hermit, seized on the City Morocco, the which, Sidan, and Side-Hean
also, a Hermit, forced him to leave in 1616, So that whatever the event has
been since; then was the Xerifate greatly distracted; for Sidan possessed
Morocco; Side-Hean fortified himself in Taradant; Abdela lived by robberies;
Fez stood on its Guard; and the other Towns were governed by particular
Magistrates of their own. These people are Tawny, but some more than the other;
they are also somewhat more civil, or else, much of the conditions of the
Arabians; they are wondrous ambitious, unconstant, subtle, and treacherous,
also very choleric, great braggers, suspicious, and exceeding jealous. This
Realm in general (for to speak particularly of the fourteen Provinces, would be
too tedious) is said to abound in Corn, Fruit, Oil, Honey, Wax, Sugar,
Goats-hair, whereof Chamlets are made, and their skins, which being dressed
they call Marroquin-skins, and we Spanish-Leather; there is also much Cattle in
diverse places, also in Suz great store of fine Amber is found; so that although
some places are rough and stony, yet these inhabitants have all things needful
for life, one Country abounding in what another wants; and if they had not war
on every occasion, hindering a settled peace; this Empire would be very happy,
and not envy any others commodities, for in their Mountains they feed great
store of Cattle, and they have likewise plenty of Corn; but their Plains yield
so much corn, and fruit, that they furnish other places with Citrons, Oranges,
Sugar, and Olives. Yea, they transport into foreign Countries, Chamlets,
Barbary-skins, Cotton-Cloath, and Sugar, whereof they make great profit. And
for the Emperors Revenues, he is Master both of all his subjects goods and
persons, none daring to oppose any impositions laid (by him) on them; Yet the
Empires usurpation, the continual wavering of affairs, with the fear of an
accident like that of Muley Cheq, makes him seek to govern them the milder,
that they may desire to live always under his command. All here are Mahometans
except the slaves, which doctrine of Mahomet entered into Egypt, in 637,
through the Conquests of Omar, then a Captain of Odman, first passed into
Africa, in 650, with 80000 men, who defeating Gregory Patricius, they chased
the Romans with the troops of Leo the Emperor, and Absimachus, quite out of
Africa, becoming Masters of Barbary, which the Arabians increased, first by
Arms, and those not prevailing, by Preaching and Traffic. The Goths and
Vandalls who inhabited Africa, being infected with the Arian opinion, much
helped herein; for they brought in the Arabian letters and language, building
Universities at Morocco and Fez, adding also great Revenues thereto; But
nothing has more advanced Mahomets sect than the Victories of the Miramamolins
of Africa. But of these Mahometans are many sects also, who have their Heads,
and Doctors to defend them, for diverse have commented upon the Alcaron, not
directly allowing of what it prescribes, but contradict it in many things; of
all which different sects, and Orders, with their leaders, (some of whom differ
not only from the rest in their law, but also in faith) may be seen in the
book entitled, A description of Estates, Empires, and Principalities. But
among other differences of the Law and Religion between the Moors of Fez, and
Morocco, this is one, that they submit to the Califf of Bagdet, and not to him
of Cair, to whom the Turks yield obedience. Here are also Jews, who having
multiplied in Spain, came by degrees into Africa; and afterward there
increased, when Ferdinand of Spain, called the Catholic, and Emmanuel, King
of Portugal, expelled them their Kingdoms; many of whom coming, brought the
Trades and Arts of Europe with them, which were before unknown unto the
Barbarians. The Jews practice much the Art of the Goldsmiths (which is
forbidden by Mahomets law) and especially of Smiths. There are but few called
Christians in the Realms of Fez, and Morocco, besides slaves, (except such as
live in places possessed by the Portugalls) whose state is deservedly to be
pitied; enduring more pain among these Barbarians, than beasts do among us. But
Spain (most of those slaves being that Kings subject's) has two Religious
Orders, (the one called de la Merced, in Arragon; the other much greater,
having the name of the Redemption of Captives) appointed purposely for
Redeeming them; who gather great Sums of Money yearly, wherewith they free a
great number, for they send diligent and faithful men to Fez, Morocco, and
Algier, who first redeeming Priests and Religious men, then free the other
sort: first the King of Spain's Subject, then the rest; and there is always
one of the Religious of Spain, at Fez, who informing himself of the quality and
necessity of slaves, prepares a way for their delivery the year following. And
to conclude of Barbary; The great Turk has therein three Beglerbegs, or great
Bassaes, proudly styled, Lords of Lords; the first whereof is at Tripolis,
(which was taken in by Sinan Bassa from the Knights of Malta in 1551) and he
commands under him 8000 Timariots, and 6000 Janissaries. The second at Tunis,
or Tunneis, who being of great authority, commands under him twelve Sanzacks,
or Lords, Governors, and 35000 Timariots. The third at Algier, who has under
him fourteen Sanzacks, and 40000 Timariots. These are all he has in Africa,
except the great Vizier Bassa of Egypt; But in Asia, the Greater and the
Less, he commands 30 Beglerbegs or Bassaes.

Next to Barbary is Numidia (not that spoken of so much in the Roman History,
for that is a part of Tunis); on the North whereof is Mount Atlas, so high that
they say its top cannot be seen, and was so called from Atlas a King of
Mauritania, (who being of a great stature, was feigned by Poets to bear up
Heaven with his shoulders; either for his skill in Astronomy, or for the great
height of the Hill). It is now named Anchisae, or Montes Clari, that is, famous
mountains, on its South Side Lybia, and may be called Numidia, from the manner
of its inhabitants, the Numidae, there living, it being like the Scythian
Nomades: for these are said to spend their time in hunting, and to stay no
longer in one place than there is grass for their Camells, so that they are a
base, theevish, murderous, and ignorant people; although the Arabians who are
mixed among them, are more liberal, civil, and ingenuous. The Country is
meanly peopled; for Teffet, accounted by them a great City, has in it not
above 400 families; nor (if we believe reports) have no neighbors within three
hundred miles thereof.

LYBIA (which is AFRICA, properly so called, and is so named either from Lybs
formerly a Moorish King, or from Lybia a Queen hereof, or from Lyns fignifying
the South Wind, which gently blows from these parts) is bounded with Nilus on
the East, the Atlantic Ocean on the West, and is now called Sarra, that is, a
Desert; for it is full of vast sandy Deserts, (being also under the torrid
Zone, or scorching heat of the Sun). In one of these Deserts it was that
William Lithgow, the Scottish Traveller in King James his days, endured (as he
says) both hunger and great drought, for seven or eight days, as he went from
Fez toward Arracon, a great Town on the Frontiers of Northern Aethiopia, with
one Chatteline a French lapidatour, who would go thither to buy Diamonds and
precious stones, Chatteline on the eighth day, in the night, falling sick of a
burning Fever, and mindful to return, Lithgow left him at Ahetzo, the
farthest Town Southward of the Kingdom of Fez, (well fortified with Walls, and
a Garrison of Moors therein) and with his Dragoman Moor, went forward, entering
the Agaroes Country, whose better sort of inhabitants were half clad, the
vulgars naked, who had an Emeer or Prince of their own, subject to none but his
own passion;, yet had they a bastard show of Mahometanicall Religion. They
toyled six days in traversing this Country, whose salvages both snarled on
them, and sometimes gave them bastinado's; yea, and enough was it for the
Dragoman to save Lithgow's life and liberty from them, who were still inquirous
what he was, and whither he went. On the seventh day, they came into the soil
of the Hagans, and the Jamnites, most part whereof were White Moors, some of
whose better sort, (and chief among them) had their Members covered, but far
more wickedly conditioned than the former; who were ruled by a Xeriff, having
his Guard made up of young Balars, or Pages; and Women, who seemed rather to
live without any Religion, then to acknowledge any Deity. Then were they led by
a Hagan Guide five days together South-Eastward, almost contrary to the
borders of Aethiopia, whither they were bent: who stealing from them on the 6th
night; they the next day continuing their faces the same way, were long ere
night involved in a dis-inhabited Country, being both a vaste Wilderness,
(and a part of the Berdoan's Country, one of the four Tribes of the old
Lybians; the Sabuncks, Carmines, and South- Garolines, being the other three)
and also mountainous and dangerous for wild beasts, whom to affrighten, they
burnt (every night) shrubs of Tara. But the day after their first entrance
herein, they proceeded farther, thinking to find People and Tents to relieve
them with victuals, and inform them of the Country; but they found none, nor
seven days after; so that their victual and water being done, they relied on
Tobacco, and drank their own piss for the time aforesaid. This soil was
covered with hard and soft sands, (and those full of Serpents) whose
interlarding rockey hights were faced with Caves and Dens of wild beasts; whose
hollow cries, they both heard in the night, and sighted them often in the day,
especially Jackals, Bears and Boars, and sometimes Cymbers, Tigers, and
Leopards, against whom when approaching, they either shot off a Harquebus, or
flashed some powder in the Air. The Dragoman (on the 4th day of their seven,
being there) wondering to see him endure such heat, hunger, and toil,
despairing, threatened him with death, to make him seek back for their nearest
refuge. So Lithgow holding his course North-East, met (early on the 8th day)
with 900 Savages, or naked Lybian Sabunks, 500 being women, armed with Bows
and Arrows; who with their accomplices had put the night before, 300 Berdoans,
their neighbor Tribe, to the sword, and brought away 600 sheep and goats,
besides other bestiall. Their Emeere or Prince came in the Rear with 100
horsemen, having half pikes, sharply headed at both ends with steel; he was
clothed only with a vail of Crimson Silk, hanging on his naked shoulders with
colored Ribbans, from his breasts to his middle thigh, and on his head a
party-colored shash set like a Garland; both knees being bare, as also his
anckles; the calves of his legs were girded with crimson silk, and on his feet
were yellow shoes, his face and beard burnt with the Sun, and about the age of
33 years. His Page was even covered like himself; but all his followers stark
naked. He and all the four Tribes of Lybia worship Garlic only for their God,
it being a strong thing, and most part of their food; unto which they annex
Altars, Priests, and superstitious rites. He gave them both liberty of life,
and relief of food; and after an hours parley with them, gave unto Lithgow his
Bow, and a Quiver of Arrows. He also telling them, that Tunis was their best
and nearest recourse, sent a guide with them for four days journey, for 5
Sultans or 35 s. who brought them through the most habitable and best Tented
passages of the Country: where once a day they found Bread, Water, Garlic,
Onions, and sometimes Hens, which (says he) if truth may have credit, we would
Roast or Scorch dry at the very face of the Sun, and so eat them. Their guide on
the 5th day left them among 400 Tents of Numidian Moors or bastard Arabians,
pitched in a pleasant Valley between two sources of water, where they reposed
some 9 days; and where likewise, he affirms to have seen Smiths work Nails
and Horse-shooes out of cold iron, softened only by the vigorous heat of the
Sun, and the hard hammering of hands on the Anvile; as also he saw it in Asia.
So renewing their guides from place to place, they descended from Savage, to
Civil Moors, and arrived safely, (though with great difficulty and danger) at
Tunis. The Garamantes, who were thought to be the farthest people Southward,
lived in this Country: and those called the Psylli, who (if it may be believed)
were of so venomous a nature, that they could poison a Snake. Herodotus also
tells of an Expedition that this people made against the South Wind; for that,
it (blowing abroad the sands) had dried up those small waters among them: but
the wind encountering them with a volley of sand, overwhelmed and slew them all.
Arius, who denied Christ to be one substance with the Father, was born here.
The Lybians seem rather to be worse than the Numidian Moors: their chief Cities
being Guargata, Toberraum and Huaden. Some report, that these two Nations have
neither King nor Laws, but are governed by the chief men of every Tribe; but
this agrees not with our Traveller's relation. And whereas they are said to
worship a god called Psaphon: who teaching diverse birds which he caught, to
say, Psaphon was a Great God, the simple people yielded him divine worship: he
says, the Lybians do all worship Garlic: But that they are mostly gross
idolatrous Pagans, is plain, and that among some of the Naturals, the Saracens
from Arabia and Barbary have planted their Mohammedan superstition, we deny not.

THe Land of the NEGROES (so called, either from the River Niger, which in
Latin signifies Black; or because its people are of a black color) is
bounded on the North with Lybia, on the South with Congo or Manicongo, a
Kingdom in the Lower Aethiopia. It contains 25 Provinces, the chief whereof
are 11, to wit, Guala, Guinea, Tombutum, Melli, Cano, Benin, Nubia, Gialofi,
Ganaga, Goaga and Bornum; two of whose chief Cities are Tombutum and Chovinum,
said to be the third City for esteem, of all Africa. There are four Kingdoms
herein, whereof that of Tombutum (whose first King was Ichia, who in 1526, slew
Soni Halin their last Lybian Lord; for in the year 908, when the Mohammedan
Priests came out of zeal into these parts, they had neither King nor
Commonwealth) is the greatest, whose King is very rich, keeps a Royal Palace,
with a very great guard, always maintaining a great number of learned men,
and, they say, causing all who have any Commerce with the Jews, to be slain.
That of Bornum, which is somewhat less; that of Goaga, and that of Gualata,
consisting but of that one Province. These people are best conceited with their
native beauty or black color, and therefore are said to paint the Devil white,
in disdain of him. They were so blockish, that when the Portugals first sailed
hither, they took their ships for great birds with white wings: the painted
eyes on the beaks of their ships, to be their directours in their course;
bag-pipes to be living creatures; yea, after they had felt them: and Guns for
their hideous noise, to be the Devil's works. Both males and females use to go
naked till they are married, and then to cloth themselves from the waste to
the knees. What the fruitfulness of these Countries are, is hard exactly to
know: yet the fields adjacent to the River Niger, being 40 days (yearly)
overflown by the said river, the Country is the more fertile for its
inundations; which else could be little, through the dryness of the soil,
affording no exhalations for clouds to give rain: The Province of Cano
abounds in Lemmons and Pomegranats, and those of Melli, (whose Country is 300
miles long) are said to be the civillest, industriousest, and richest of all
the Negroes. And in Nubia there is a mortal poison, at 100 Ducats the ounce,
of which the very 10th part of a grain will end one in a quarter of an hours
time. But for pure gold and silver, the Country of these Nigrites is abundantly
stored. Touching Religion, they are gross Idolatrous Pagans; yet with some
mixture of Mahometans jand outward Christians: with which last, Nubia is
reported to have been wholly peopled; but now for want of Ministers, fallen to
the former Paganism; for they once sending to the Ethiopian Emperor for
instructers, were unworthily (whatsoever the cause was) rejected by him.

COme we now to AETHIOPIA, (taking its name from the Greeks, from (...), to
burn, and (...), a countenance: the Sun's heat Scorching the faces of its
Inhabitants) which is to be divided into that of Asia, containing Arabia the
Desert, the Stony, and part of the Happy; of which before: and that in Africa,
of which in this place. And it is divided into Aethiopia the Upper or more
inward; and the Lower or more outward Aethiopia. The Upper is called also
Abasine or Abyssine, either from an Egyptian word, signifying, scattered
Nations; or from Abas, one of its chief Rivers. Nilus also is supposed to arise
out of the lake of Zemre in this Country: which taking its course toward
Egypt; and meeting in diverse places with lower Valleys, falls down with great
noise and force. It seems to be named the upper, not so much for its being
higher situated than the other, as for that it is more Northerly; and the
inward, as being environed with the lower, except where it confines with the
Negroes Country, and Lybia. The Prince hereof is called the Emperor of
Abyssins, by the Arabians, Aticlabassa: some of his Subjects name him Bell or
Belul Gian, that is, a powerful Prince: and we name him, whether by corruption
of language or not, Prete, or Presbyter John; but others say, all these
Emperor's since the Eunuch was baptized by Philip, were called Philips; till
that one John that was religious, reigned, and was entitled Saint: since whom
they have been called John's, with the word Presbyter prefixed; for that he
executes the Priestly as well as the Kingly Office: But his Subjects calling
him Prete-Gian, importing as much as Precious Prince, makes the name of
Presbyter from the cause aforesaid, to be the more improbable. Diverse have
given diverse bounds to this his Empire. But one Hugh Linscott says in his
Navigations, That it extends from the Red-Sea's entrance, unto the Island of
Siena, under the Tropic of Cancer, except the side of the Barbarian gulf,
which the Turk has held diverse years; so that Prete-Gian, or Presbyter-John's
Dominions should be bounded with the Red Sea on the East; on the North with
Egypt and the Deserts of Nubia; on the South with the Realm of Monoemugi; thus
having about 400 Italian miles under his command: yet some affirm this Country
to be as big as Italy, France and Germany, put together, although not very well
peopled: the ground's dry barrenness, and the climate's distemperature not
admitting a multitude. But (however) this Prince attributes to himself many and
great Titles, as Emperor of the higher and lower Aethiopia, King of Go
Caffates Fatigar, etc. of Sabaim, the Queen of Saba's Country, saying, he is
issued from David; who being said to have 70 Tributary Provinces under his
Empire, we will briefly mention the chief; among which, none is better known
among us than Barnagas, for its neighborhood to the Red Sea, extending from
Suaquem almost unto the entry of the strait. Its chief Town is Beroe or Barue,
seated on a pleasant River. It has but one Sea-Port-Town, which is Ercocco. On
the Western part of this Province is a Mountain first spacious, then narrowing,
and enlarging again, and a small league in compass, on whose top are a Temple,
Monastery, with royal buildings, and two huge Cisterns: with a large plot of
ground to entertain 500 persons, for provision grows there. There is but one
passage to it, and that reaching to a mark: beyond which they must ascend by
cords and baskets; so that this place can neither be taken by force or famine.
The Turks some years since, (on whom Barnagas bordereth, and who are said to
receive hence 1000 Crowns yearly tribute) greatly spoiled here, carrying away
many prisoners: yet at length he agreed with the Bassa of Abassia (residing at
Suaquem) for 1000 ounces of gold. Betwixt the South and East from Barnagas, lay
diverse Mountains, dividing Prete-Gian's Empire from the Kingdom of Adel.
Ercocco stands in the Province of Dafila, included in the Realm of Barnagas;
where are also other Towns, as Sautar, Abarach, etc. The Gulf of Erocco
bending to Adulite of old, which is the point of Erocco, extends to Bebul, with
a nook made by the Sea toward Arabia, on the beginning of the strait, whereby
they come out of the Red Sea or Arabian gulf; which place is very narrow,
shallow, and full of Islands: beyond Ercocco are Zagnanie and Zama of the
Province of Lacca; then the Port of Velle, once called Antifila. Beyond the
aforesaid point are two Lakes wherein Crocodiles do live: beyond which is the
Port and Promontory of Mosylon, now the Cape Docono, in the Country of Dangali,
where the Sea making a little Gulf, suddenly straitens again, in which Channel,
about thirty or thirty six miles broad, are five or six Islands; to avoid whose
Rocks, Sailers must have good experience. Next to Dangali, are the Ports
Zeiloi, and ancient Daphne, where stands the Town Barbara near Mount Fellez;
after which is the Cape Guardafuni; where Met, formerly Accanne, is
situated; here sailers doubling the Cape, run from East toward the South, on
which Coast is Carfur, once Opene, and the Cape Zingi: then they bend toward
Azun, and Zazelle; thence to Magadazo, where the Portugalls traffic. Lastly,
to Barris, which Province has Pate, and Brave, two Towns on the Sea, dividing
Prete-Gians country from the King of Melinde's. But to come up into the
main-land. Trigremahon is a Realm lying betwixt Nile the Red Sea, and the Realm
of Angotte, whose King being Presbyter John's tributary, it is put among his
dominions; in whose good Town Caxumo, Maqueda the Queen of Sabba, or Sheba,
(who coming to hear Solomon's Wisdom, had (they say) by him a son called
Meilec) and also the Queen of Candace, were said to abide. Angotte is set
between Tigremahon and Amaran, in which Realm are diverse Provinces; whose chief
City Angotte stands upon the River Ancona, near which, is another Town called
Saint Peter. This people are reported to use Pepper, Salt, and Iron, instead of
money, which formerly was the only way of Exchange among many people: Next is
Amara, bounded on the North with Angote; on the South with Damut; and by some
said to be situated in the middle of the Country. Herein is a Hill called
Amara, ninety miles in compass; and it seems exceeding high (I will not say a
days journey) on whose top are sundry Palaces, wherein (to prevent sedition)
the Emperor of Aethiopia's younger sons are always kept and educated in a
Princely manner; and in one whereof, is a Library said to be, wherein are many
Books as Enoch's Oracles, all Livies works, etc. to us in part or wholly lost.
It has been put to this use ever since the year 470. It is made even
impregnable, having but one way of ascent. Sagamedre is the greatest country of
this Aethiopia: for it extends from Goyame, beyond the Island Guequere which is
600 miles. Gueguere, or the Island of Meroe, is compassed by the River Nilus,
175 miles long, and 125 broad. Whose principal City is named Meroe, built by
Cambyses in memory of his Mother Meroe. This Isle (although in the upper
Aethiopia) is not subject as some suppose, to Presbyter John, but is inhabited
by Mahometans, who are utter enemies to the Abyssine Aethiopians. Xoa is
situate betwixt Amara, Damut, and Fatigar. Fatigar lies between Xoa, and Adel.
Damut is nigh to Xoa, lying betwixt the Province of Zanquebara, and the Lake of
Barcena; yet some more probably hold Damut to lie Westward, beyond the Realms
of Vangue and Goyame. Most Cosmographers (by reason of the Abyssines ignorant
reports) describe this Empire conjecturally; whose Emperor has not his chief
abode in Caxumo; but according to Hugh Linscot, (who sailed along all the Coast
of Aethiopia) his ordinary and almost constant residence is in the Town of
Beimalechi. Yet according to an ancient custom (for we find nothing of this
Emperors stately Palaces, unless at the Town of Zemra, nigh the Lake so
called, where Workmen sent by Francis Duke of Florence, built a Royal Palace
in 1570, where the Emperor is said sometimes to be present) He sometimes in
one place, sometimes in another, lives (most commonly, in the open fields under
Tents, 6000 whereof are carried with him, with great store of gold and silver
vessels, and other rich movables) whereby his Court, every man being lodged,
overspreadeth the compass of 10 or 12 miles. Some report these Aethiopians (as
they are black, so) ignorant and void of all Learning: But Escala his learned
Book, of The Correction of Times, is a witness, they are not so ignorant as
some hold them to be: yet it appears, they are for the most part slow and dull
of wit: in that having flax, they can make no cloth; having Sugarcanes, and
cannot draw it out; iron, and cannot work it; holding Smiths for Sorcerers and
wicked men. Yet are they much given to Navigation: so that they are employed in
the Merchants ships of Goa, Bengala, China, and other places; serving herein
for little money, and differing very little from slaves, as being ready for all
drudgeries, and enduring whipping, etc. very patiently. They are kept by their
Emperial Monarch in wonderful awe, both high and low; who entreats them more
like slaves then subjects, taking away, and giving whole Siegnuries, to whom he
pleases, none daring to show any discontent, for he is held by them for a
sacred and divine person; (whose color also is said to be whiter than the
rest) who was wont to show himself but once a year to his subjects. Then he
appeared thrice a year; but since (it is said) more familiarly. But they so
honor his name, that hearing thereof, they bend themselves, and touch the
ground with their hands, reverencing also his Tent, although he be not in it.
These Countries have two Summers, and two Winters yearly; not distinguished by
heat, and cold, but by continual showers, and fair weather. They are generally
very fertile; yielding Barley, Pease, Beans, Millet and other Pulses, though
but little Wheat, likewise abundance of Sugar, if they knew now to refine it.
There are almost an incredible number of Oranges, Lemons, and Citrons, and
great store of Vines; but no Melons roots, nor Olives, but they make Oil of a
fruit called Gove. They have abundance of Honey, and Wax enough to serve the
Country with Candles, without Tallow. Flax they have, yet not the Art of making
Linen Cloth therewith; Yet they make it of Cotton, whereof there is
abundance. They have almost all sorts of beasts, and Fowl, as we in Europe; as
Oxen, Asses, Horses, (though but small) Camells, Sheep; also Elephants, Lions,
Tigres, Onces, and Stags, but no Bears, nor Conyes, neither is there any
Bulfinch. Mines of Gold, Silver, Iron, and Brass, are not wanting; which they
know not how to draw; Yet in Zagamedra, they draw their pure Mines of Silver by
fire, making it run like rods; and in Damat they draw it, and refine it
something better. Their fields are full of Geese, Partridges, and Hares,
because they never hunt; so that their Country is bountiful, if they knew how
to use such a happiness. But there is sometimes one inconvenience; to wit,
multitudes of Grasshoppers, even darkning the Air, spoiling one Province or
another by eating the leaves and barks of Trees, and devouring their Harvest.
Their Prince's revenue arises three ways; From the Fruits of his demeans,
manured by Oxen and Slaves; From his Subjects, who pay him for every fire, and
the tenth of all Mineralls which they draw; and from the Princes subject unto
him; some giving him Horses, others Oxen, Cotton, and other things; So that it
is conceived he has great places full of Gold, precious stones, and Cloth.
His Subjects (as to Religion) are most outside Christians; yet are there some
Mahometans also, his tributaries; who are always seeking to revolt. The
Abyssines say there is an old Chronicle kept in Caxumo, which says, they at
first received Judaism, through Meilech, Solomon's son, by Queen Maqueda, and
the Jews accompanying him. But Christianity was here received by means of Queen
Candaces her Eunuch, whom Philip Baptized, and that, first at Tygia, in which
Tongue they frame all their public writings. But they acknowledging the
Patriarch of Alexandria for their head, (from whom also they receive their
Patriarch or Abuna) fell with the Cosites of Egypt, into the opinion of
Eutyches; holding but one nature and will in CHRIST; for they could have no
intercourse with Rome, but by means of Egypt. They hold diverse other
impertinencies (which increase by conversing with gross Idolaters, and
Mahometans round about them; many also of these Idolaters living among them, as
in Damut, Agaos, and Corague) as Circumcising both Males and Females. Then
Baptizing the Males forty, the Females sixty days after their Circumcision;
they eat not of any beast that is cloven-footed; they follow the Jews in
observing the last day of the Week's Sabbath, more then the first; they accept
only of the three first General Councels. Their Priests may marry but once,
according to the Muscovites, and not that, after Orders received; whom (they
say) do live by the labor of their hands; they allowing them nothing, nor
suffering them to beg. They Baptize not, but on the last and first days of the
Week, presently giving the Bread and Wine to the Baptized, rebaptizing
themselves also in Pools and little Lakes, every year on Twelf-day, in
remembrance of Christ's Baptism, on which day they suppose him to have been
Baptized by John in Jordan. Their Sacraments are administered by the Patriarch;
not spitting, as ^rerewood says, after receipt of the Eucharist, (in which they
com-Punicate in both kinds, and with unleavened bread) until Sun^^; nor in
their Temples at all, putting off their shoes when they enter therein, nor
suffering any beast to enter. But of these things, and other Ceremonious
superstitions; with Presbyter John his overtures, as to reconciliation with the
Church of Rome, etc; I refer you unto the aforesaid Book, Entitled, The
Description of Estates, Empires, and Principalities.

AETHIOPIA the Nether, or more outward, which is reported to be mountainous
toward the West, sandy in the midst, and Desert toward the East, is bounded on
the North with the land of the Negroes, and Aethiopia the inward, and on the
South with the Southern Ocean; and is divided in five principal Countries. 1.
Monotapa, or the Realm of Benomotana, or Benomotaxa, obeying one Prince called
Monotapa, that is, Empire in that language. It is fashioned like an Island,
betwixt two branches of a great River, running from the Lake of Zemre,
Southward. Nile, which springs from this Lake, running East and North, and
Zaire toward the West. Some hold it is 3000 Italian miles in compass; yet
others, but 450 miles. The chief Provinces hereof are six. The chief City is
Benomotaxa, where the King ordinarily resides, yet some say his seat is at
Tongum, besides which there is another Town named Simbas. This Kings Dominions
extend far beyond the Island, even to the Capes Mozambique and Bonne Esperance,
or the Cape of good Hope (all which perhaps may make up the number of 3000
Italian miles) many neighboring Kings being his Tributaries; among which is he
of Torre, or Burue, running from the River of Spirito Sancto, to the Cape of
Courantes, and far within the land also. Monotapa is watered by diverse Rivers,
as Panami and others, which are said to carry Gold with them; and in all this
Estate is great store of Gold, both in Mines and Rocks. The Air is temperate,
the Country good and pleasant, abounding in grain; yet is it full of Forests,
having in it many beasts, great and small, especially Elephants, whereof 5000
are said to be killed yearly for their Teeth-sake. Burue is very rich in Mines
of Gold, and has very good pastures, but wanting Wood. They having such store
of Metal (so much by men desired) cannot but be very rich. The King also
exacting no Tribute, but certain days service from his People; yet without
presents, none may show himself before him. He has likewise no Prisons, all
causes being straightway decided by witnesses, neither do they punish any
crimes so severely, as Sorcery, Adultery, and Theft. They are of mean stature,
black, but active and Valiant, yet ill armed. This Prince is Politic, keeping
with him his Vassal Princes Heirs, to assure himself of them. They worship
here one only God, which they call Mozimo, and in 1560, Gonsalvo a Jesuit,
Baptized a Vassal to Monotapa, called the King of Inanior: and soon after
young Monotapa and his Wife. But four Mahometans his favorites, persuading
him, Gonsalvo (...) be a Magician, a ruiner of Kingdoms, and a Spy, to cause
a (...) volt by his subjects, he had him slain and cast into the River
M^sigina, nigh which fifty of his new converts were slain also. But when some
Portugalls, and chief of the Realm bad shown him his error, he slew some of
those four, seeking for the rest, who were hidden. But the Portugalls now not
sending new Preachers hither, but sending an Army by Sea under Francis Barret,
to be revenged, the affrighted King sent for peace to Barret, who aiming at the
gold, rejected all conditions. But through the Ayr's intemperature unto them of
Europe, this Army was consumed: since which, some few, called Christians, have
there remained.

2. Conga or Manicongo, which is a Realm extending from two degrees and an half
from the Aequinoctial toward the South, that is, from Katherines Cape, to the
Cape of Leo; and has on the North the Province or Realm of Benin in the
Negroes Land; and on the South, Lunae Montes, or the Mountains of the Moon. It
contains (according to those who compute its situation) about 660 Italian
miles, and is divided into six eminent Provinces; whose King also commands in
the Island of Loande, seated betwixt a branch of the river Dande, now Bengo;
and the river Coanze. He has likewise some Islands upon the river Zaire, his
feudetaries. Those Provinces are, Bamba, on the Seacoast, from the river
Ambrisi unto Coanze, and has many Signiories. The chiefest City is Bamba,
standing between Ambrisi and the river Lose; being about 100 Italian miles from
the Sea. Songo, which extends toward the North, to Ambrisi, and ending near
the red rocks of the Realm of Loangoes frontier: its chief City being Songo.
Sunde, whose principal Town is Sunde; it extends from about the Town of Congo
(now named by the Portugals, S. Savior) unto Zaire river, which is 40 Italian
miles. Pango, once a Realm, not subject to the King of Congo: confining with
Sunde on the North; with Batte on the South. Its head City is Pango, situated
toward the West part of the river Barbela coming from the Lake whence Nile
springs. Batte, whose chief Town is also Batta. This Province confines with
Pango on the North, and joining to Barbela on the South of the Mountains of
Aphronitre, as far as the burnt Mountain. It extends to the Mountains of the
Sun, confining it self on Barbela toward the East. Lastly, Pemba, in which
stands the City of Congo, seated on a Mountain, and about 150 Italian miles
from the Sea. It was once named Banze, that is, a Court; now S. Savior. Here
is a Mountain indifferent high, so full of houses and Villages, that it is said
to comprehend about 100000 persons, although but two German leagues, or 10
Italian miles (taking 5 miles for a league) in quantity. So that it may be
true, which is reported of these Countries populousness; they felling (as is
supposed) 28000 slaves yearly unto the Portugals: who are carried to Brasil to
work in the Mines. This Country is watered with six rivers. This King has a
swelling title of 18 particular Provinces and Countries: some of whom are (they
say) Anthropophagi or Men-eaters: having shambles of men's flesh, as we of other
meats. But Angolia is most esteemed of the Civil Provinces; which some years
since revolted from the King of Congo, and is concluded to be very populous;
for in 1582, the King hereof had 1200000 in an Army against Paul Diaz the
Portugal Leader; who with his few, wisely ordered, fatally and dismally
overthrew him. Edward Loope a Portugal, who lived long in these parts, reports
their Winter to be like Autumn, at Rome: yea, generally (through the rain
continually falling, especially for two hours before noon, and as much after)
the heat is greater in Winter than in Summer: which heat is most insupportable
to the men of Europe. Their Winter begins on March 15, so that for five months,
a clear day is seldom seen. Their Summer, in the midst of September. They also
observe very small difference in night and day, being in a manner equal. Their
Summer is as dry, as their Winter moist: whereby the overflowing rivers leaves
on the land a gross and muddy humor. They have the common winds called by
Hippocrates, Etesies: which causing continual rain by agitation of mists on the
tops of Mountains during our Summer, both in Congo and Prete-gian's Country,
make the rivers Nile, Niger, and Senega, etc. to swell, whereby they
overflowing, do fatten those Countries which they water: for it is not the
melting of snow which causes the rivers increase, because no snow falls on the
Mountains of Aethiopia and Congo, or the neighbor Countries, except on those
called the Mountains of Snow; or those toward the Cape of good Hope. The West
and Northwest winds in their Winter, does temper the hot mists and vapors. But
in Summer their winds are South-East, or North-East: which unless they did
cool and refresh Aethiopia and Congo, the heat would be insupportable. Greece,
Candie, Cyprus, Anatolia, Syria and Egypt, enjoying the same winds. Zaire is
Congo's greatest river, and has such abundance of water, (being 5 miles and a
half broad) that entering the salt Ocean, it keeps its freshness for 8, 10, yea
16 leagues: whereby Seamen easily know where they are. But to be brief; Bamba
has many silver Mines and other metals in a Mountain thereof, also many
exceeding great Elephants (through its many Forests and Rivers) which live
commonly 150 years, and grow to the midst of their age: some of whose teeth
have been 200 weight. The Ancients said, the Elephant could not bend his hamme,
but were taken leaning on some Tree asleep. But the Flemings and Porrugals
seeing them get up into Trees, drawing up their haunches, to gather leaves, and
stooping easily down to drink where the water is low, makes it evident, that
they have joints.

Here are also Tigers, whom the Congoans call Engoi, who through hunger's
sharpness, finding naught in the field, do fall upon tame Cattle; and as Loope
testifies, never set upon White men, but oft-times the Blacks. The beast
called Zabree, breeds in this Province; and is like a mule, but it ingenders
and multiplyes greatly, having young every year: whose hair having from the
ridge of the back to the belly streaks of white, black and yellow, is very
strange; they are exceeding swift, and wild; whom if the Inhabitants had art to
tame, might serve instead of horses which this Country wants: whose office
notwithstanding men do perform by carrying them, who speedily journey, in
litters or chairs, the bearers being often changed. Beasts called Empalanges,
some as big as an Ox, others less, are here also. To conclude, they have wild
Bugles or Oxen, Wolves smelling afar off, Foxes, Goats, Stags, Hares, and
Conies in abundance; for they hunt them not to death, as in Europe. They have
many Civit-Cats, whom they keep tame for their pleasing sent. There are diverse
kinds of Serpents and Vipers, some being 25 foot long, 5 broad, with a very
large belly and throat, that (if we can credit it) will devour a beast as big
as a Stag. They kill them sleeping, and hold the food of their flesh better
than of any fowl. But some Vipers are so poysonsome, that any one bitten dies
within 25 hours. There is likewise a strange beast as big as a ram, with wings
like a Dragon, a tail, long beak, many rows of teeth, two legs, whose skin is
red, mixed with green and blew, and who eat raw flesh. It has Camelions,
Parrots green and gray; very fair red birds, and many sorts of small ones
singing like Canarie-birds: finally, great store of Hens, Ducks, Geese,
Turkies, Peacocks, Partridges wild and tame, Turtles, Pigeons, Faulcons,
Sparrowhawks, Eagles, and Pelicans. The Province of Congo has many Elephants,
and diverse sorts of imitating Apes, many Kine, with diverse beasts
forementioned: also store of Crystal and other mertals; but preferring Iron,
which is found in the aforesaid fruitful Mountain; whose water is excellent
good, not hurting any one: which is stored with grass, much Cattle,
Fruit Trees always green, yielding all kind of grain, chiefly that called Luco,
whose bread is as good as ours; abundance of white Millet called Mazze; also
Meaz or Turkey Wheat, and store of Rice; but they little esteem these. Bananes,
which some take to be Muse; and others, Indian Figs, a pleasing and good food
grow here; also Limons and Citrons exceeding pleasant, whereof the poor live.
There are three sorts of Palm Trees: from one whereof they draw Oil,
Wine-Vinegar, Fruit, and Bread. Other Trees bear a Fruit called Cola, as big as
a Pineapple: and other wild Palms, whose fruit are good to eat, and with whose
leaves they cover their Cottages, and make baskets, etc. This Province has
abundance of Melons and Cucumbers; also Tamarinds and Cassia, which serve both
the Moors and Turks for Physic. The River Leonde ingenders Crocodiles, and the
Hog-fish, so big and fat, that some weigh 500 weight and more: also Sea-horses,
or the River-horse, which is tawny, having little hair, leaping to land, and
feeding, and by day living in the river; some of whom the Africans do tame: and
they are exceeding swift, but they must not pass over deep rivers, because
they will presently dive. But this river which runs at the foot of the Mountain
where the royal Town of Congo is built, so dries up when the rain cease, that
one may easily wade it. On the shore of whose Island Leonde, are found gray
Cockles very glistering, and better esteemed than those on the other shoars:
where also is a Tree called Ensanda, always green, and, having many virtues,
strangely multiplyeth, to wit, by some small threads hanging down from the high
branches, and rooting in the ground; whose upper bark being made clean, is a
kind of linen cloth, making garm^nts for the common people: and in that part
nearest to the firm land do trees grow, at whose foot salt water springs. Here
are likewise big Oysters, which they call Ambizimitare, that is, fish of a
stone. They find here also diverse fishes, as Pilchards, Soles, Crafishes, etc.
And about the outward part of this Island are many black Whales; who fighting,
many die: whose fat being taken and mixed with Pitch, the Inhabitants calk their
ships. Moreover, we must not forget the great store of stone, and goodly Marble
Mountains, besides the Jasper and Porphyrie, with the white Marble, and of
other colors, called at Rome, Numidian and African Marble: in some Mountains
also of this Province of Pemba, grow Jacinths; and in other rocks they find
metals, as brass, yellow and green, whereof they make Statues, etc. So that,
if we look on the abundance of metals in this Realm, as also their Elephants,
and Civit-Cats, wherewith they abound, Sea-cockles serving instead of coin,
traffic of Slaves, linen cloth of Songo, and Sunde made of Indian
Palm Trees, Crystal, though not altogether so profitable; we may soon see how
they are sought to by foreign Merchants, whereby their wealth may be
conjectured. And as for the King, none would doubt, but that he (having all
these Countries under him) is exceeding rich: of whom, one thing is reported to
his commendation, That he does Justice publicly, without any formality; for
that all things are debated before him in few words. As to their religious
belief, they are so full of vanities, that they scarce know what they believe:
for, although an outward profession of Christianity be crept into this Realm,
yet is it full of gross Idolaters: some worshipping the Sun as Husband to the
Moon; and the Moon as his Wife in the second place. Others worship those beasts
like Dragons abovementioned. Some the Earth, as Mother of all, etc. How a
Christian profession was brought first hither by the Portugals, ( James Cano or
Diego Can, Captain to D. John the second, King of Portugal, discovering these
Countries of the Nether Aethiopia in 1486) I leave to read in the book, Of
Estates, Empires, etc. Only thus much I say, That King John sending three
Dominick Friars to instruct them; the King of Congo's Uncle and his son first;
then the King and Queen were baptized; (whose eldest son was Alphonso) and who
endeavored lovingly and zealously to turn the Subjects: But these Friars
(beside the consuming heat, and ayr's malignity) were ill-intreated by them of
Congo: who seemed tractable while they spoke of ceremonies and mysteries; but
when they began to speak of temperance, continency, restitution of goods,
pardon of offenses received, with articles of Christian profession, they showed
opposition. The King also growing from zealous, to be cold: for they were loath
to leave their Sooth-saying and Sorceries, especially their many Wives, and
which Women troubled the Court and City of its abode. Then, the King dying,
Alphonso the eldest, and Panze Aquitime his second son, who would not be
Baptized, fell to Arms; Alphonso defeating, and taking him (they say) by
apparent miracles; who afterward caused all the Idols to be burnt on the top
of an high Mountain, and reigned fifty years in peace; and in the midst of
after troubles in Aluaro's time (through the Giaguas entering Congo's Realm in
great numbers, and putting this King to flight- etc.) Jesuits came into Congo,
and preached to the people, building a Religious house, so called in the Island
of Leonde, where six or seven Priests remained, or still do remain, going up
and down where necessity calls them. Aluaro (Granchild of the first Aluaro,
whose son was also of the same name) being illegitimately born, was slighted of
most of his Subjects; wherefore in 1587, he would have one of these Priests
near him, whereby he purchased honor. And then defeating his sister by the
Father, with her brother, in a great battle, slaying the General; he built a
Temple in the same place, setting the first hand thereto to encourage others,
and by Edicts advanced these Priests Preaching and enterprise. But it is time to
hasten to the third part of Aethiopia the lower, to wit, Aian, which (including
Abex, and Adell, two Kingdoms) is situated betwixt the River Calimanca, and
the Mouth of the Red Sea. Abex is also called Adea, and lies situated between
Habassia, and Adel; unto which first it is said to be tributary, two of whose
chief Towns, to wit, Pate, and Gogia, the Portugalls took under the command and
conduct of Tristran de Cugna. The other principal Town is Brave Adell, is that
of which Grand Amada was King, who had a great hand over the Emperor of the
Habassines, it is situated more upon the Coast of the Red Sea than Abex, and
whose three chief Cities are A^ar, Borbora, and Zeila, all seated without the
Red-Seas straights, the which Merchants do much frequent; for besides the Corn,
flesh, Honey, and Wax, store of sheep, (whose tails are said to weigh 25 pound)
wherewith this Country abounds, they have also much Gold, and Ivory. But Zeila
the chief of the three, standing near the Bay called the Bosom, or nook of the
Avalites, or Abalites, who dwelt thereabout, was sacked and burned by the
Portugalls in 1516. 4. Zanzibar, which extends from Mono^apa, unto the River
Quilimanci, (whose chief Rivers are Coava, and two other) it must needs be a
large Province; for it con^aineth fifteen Kingdoms, whose chief Cities,
Corova, Monculo, Anzuga, Badin, Calen, Qulao, Momboza, Melinda, Mombara,
Monbizo, Embroe, M^sambique, Macaos, Mordomugi, and Safila, denominate the
Countries, and that of Safila (abounding much in Gold and Ivory) is thought to
be the land of Ophir; but seeing Ophir is planted in the East, and Safila
stands South-West from Chaldaea, where the People's scattering began; as also
since Solomon's Navy of Tarshish, with the Navy of Hiram came from Ophir but
once in three years, as 1 Kings chapter 10. Verses 11. and 22. do demonstrate,
Ophir was certainly farther off; to wit, in India, although what par^i^ular
Province or Islands thereof, it is not determined. Abraha^^ King of Quilao,
suffered the Portugalls to build Forts in his Country in 1500, whom they
presumptuously ni^e years after deposing, the Arabians (for he Zanzibars, and
Aians on the Seaside, are said to descend from them) demolished their
fortresses, The true Natives are the more inland people of Zanzibar, and
gross Gentiles as to Religion. But those on the shore side (as of Aian) have
received the Mohammedan superstition of the Arabians from whom they descended.

Fifthly, Cafaria, (so named from the Cafars, that is, Heretics, a name
appropriated unto these Heathen for want of another) has on the South and
West; the Ocean, on the North, the Mountains of the Moon. I find no City or
Town in this Province, only they are said to have some Villages; in every of
which is a Lord or Ruler. Some represent also, the manners of this people to be
as ill-favored as their bodies, and faces; for being cole-black, with thick
Lips, and flat Noses, they likewise live like beasts. The long Southern
Promontory called The Cape of Good Hope, (whose top has a fair Plain covered
with Grass and various flowers, named the Table of the Cape, and largely
overlooking the Sea on all sides; which here being very rough and tempestuous,
has often vexed the Spaniards) is of this Region, and was discovered by Vasco
di Games in 1497.

Moreover, before we speak of Egypt, we will look over the African Islands,
which are those in the Atlantic Ocean, or in the Ethiopian Sea. In the former
are to be noted. 1. That called the Princes Island, seated between the
Equator, and Tropic of Capricorn, and so named, because the Prince of
Portugal was to have its Revenues when his Portugalls had conquered it. Nigh
this, is that called the Isle of Saint Helen, which they so named from their
Saint Helen, on whose day it was discovered, and over which (as the other) the
Spaniards do command. 2. The Gorgades, of old the Gorgons, they are nine in
number, now called the Islands of the Green Cape, for that they lie near the
said Cape, in the Negroes Land. James Island is the chief of these, whose
principal Town is Ribiera, fortyfied by the Spaniards. Medusa dwelt here, who
is reported to be a Woman exceeding beautiful, but molesting the European Seas
by Piracy, she was invaded by Perseus and his Greeks. He slaying Her in a
single Combat, struck off her Head, and carrying it into Greece, the people
exceedingly admired both her Face and Hair. Goats are the chief thing these
Islands abound with. 3. The Canaries, of which before in Spain, which for their
fruitfullnesse, etc. were of old called the Fortunate-Islands. But the
Canaries, from the chiefest Isle Canaria, or from the Dogs, in which the
Spaniards found them to abound: They are accounted by some, but seven in
number; three whereof, to wit, the Isle Canarie, Palma, (where ships use to
touch going to America) and Tenariff, 90 miles in circuit, are the chief; in
which Tenariff, neither shower nor river is said to be; but their water is
conveyed into diverse parts from a high Mountain, having a Tree always covered
with a moist cloud, which every noontide dissolveth. The Commodities hereof
are well enough known to be sublime Sacks, fine Sugars, and Canarie-birds.

4. The Azores 9 in number, whereof the chief Tercera, makes them all now to be
called the Terceraes; unto whose second Isle of note, S. Michael, Geographers
have removed the first Meridian, dividing the Eastern World from the West.
Mariners also observing the Compass coming under this Isle's Meridian line,
not to vary at all from the North. Faiall is the third of note, which Sir
Walter Rawleigh taking from the Spaniard against all opposition (for two
reasons) in 1597, made the booty of this Expedition (called the Island-Voyage)
worth 400000 Crowns, although the English kept not what they won. Although the
Flemings first discovered these Islands, and thence were called the Flemish
Islands; yet the Portugals subdued them all under Prince Henry's Conduct in
1444. Tercera it self has been called by us the Island Oade, because it
abounds in Oade.

5. The Hesperides, Happy Islands, whereof Poets making frequent mention,
placed here the Elyzian fields. They are two in number, seated not far from the
Gorgades, and divided asunder by a small straight, being, according to
Plutarch, 10000 furlongs from the Continent of Africa. The air and seasons are
said to be here always temperate: The weather fair; for they have rain very
seldom, sweet dews making the earth very fruitful with small pains; and where
Sertorius the Roman earnestly desired to spend the remainder of his life in
peace. In the latter Sea are, 1. Magadascar, situated under the Southern
Tropic, and reported to be 1200 miles long, and 4000 in compass (which if so,
Britain must take but the third place of the Islands of the known World, for
bigness). Their chief Town or City is of the same name. It is called St.
Lawrence, which name I suppose the Portugals gave it, when they discovered it
in 1506. The people are but of a dusky color. It is (by relation) a goodly
Country, abounding with beasts both wild and tame, and all kinds of fruits;
also Ginger, Cloves, and likewise with Silver. It has both fair Rivers, and
safe Harbors; yet they would neither trade, nor be traded with by others; yet
the Portugals have gained a little traffic with them, whom yet they suffer
not to come on shore. These people keep to one Wife; but for other things, said
to be inhospitable and treacherous, and not only ignorant of prayer, but of
years, months, yea and weekly days distinction.

2. Zocotara, which is 60 miles long, 24 broad, and is situated at the very
mouth of the Red Sea. Its chief City is so called where the King resides. This
Island, through much winds and dryness, is deficient in most necessaries for
life; yet has it plenty of Physical Drugs, especially of Aloes; called (if
true) Zacatrina (not Succotrina) from this place. Two of their Towns, Benin and
Coro, the Portugals have taken and fortified; before whose arrival here, the
Inhabitants (who are ash-colored and tall) were a kind of outward Christians
called Jacobites. Whether there are two Islands nigh this, which men alone, and
women alone do inhabit; who are said to meet sometimes, though not to stay long
together, through the ayr's antipathy to each other; I leave (as ambiguous)
unto Traveller's experience to determine.

3. The Isle of St. Thomas, seated just under the Aequinoctial, and of a
roundish figure. It Is 180 miles about; the principal Town being Pavoasan. At
its first discovery, the Portugals found it a Wood; who with the Negroes now
dwell there. It is so plentiful in Sugar, that they load 40 ships yearly: But
as for fruit which has a stone therein, it will bear none; neither will Wheat
come to good. Although the Portugals be masters here, yet in this the Negroes
are above them; that they are reported to live (diverse times) 100 years: when
as the Portugals never exceed 50; where there is no water for 8 days journey.

EGYPT is bounded on the East with the Arabian Desert, lying betwixt it and
the red Sea; on the West with the Deserts of Lybia, Numidia, Barze, and Nubia:
on the South Bugia; or as others, the Cataracts, which being very narrow
steeps, Nile powrs down his waters with a wonderful force; (although I greatly
suspect, whether the adjoining Inhabitants are deafned with the noise) and on
the North the Mediterranean, which from its joining unto Egypt, is there called
the Egyptian Sea: and which shows, that the Ancients have accounted that
only Egypt, which Nile waters, beginning (according to Ptolemy) on that
side near the Town Siena (now Asne), unto the Mediterranean Sea, which is 562
miles in leagth: although in the broadest place, to wit, from Damiata East, to
Rosetta West, it be but 140 broad, in some places but 37, and at the bottom or
point but 4. Some would have this Country distinct from Africa and Asia,
containing it betwixt both. Others taking Nile for Asia and Africk^s bounds,
put part thereof in either. But Ptolemy, and many others making the Red Sea or
Arabian Gulf, Aegypt's commodious bound, have placed it in Africa. Egypt
being first inhabited by Misraim the son of Chus, was called by the Hebrews
Misreia, and the Arabians are said now to call it Misre. It has had diverse
names not very material here to repeat; But it was named Egypt, either from the
river Nilus, once called Egypt; or from the people descending from Chams race,
who, as Josephus says, were called Egyptians; or from one of their Kings
surnamed Aegyptus, and named Rameses, the brother of Danaus. It was (of old)
divided into high and low, (though others have divided it into High, Middle,
and Low). High Egypt being long and strait, beginning at the Cataracts beyond
Siena, on Aethiopia's Frontiers, and ending near Cair. Low Egypt containing
that which has the form of an Island made by the two Channels of Nile and the
Sea, extending from Caire unto the Mediterranean, Northward, and is as Strabo
says, about 3000 stades in Circuit, that is 375 Italian Miles, and was named [
Delta] from its triangular form, or resemblance to the Greek letter so called.
It Is situation is near the Tropic of Cancer, bending toward the Northern or
Artick Circle, betwixt the seventh and tenth Parallel, especially under the
second climate, whereby the longest day is thirteen hours and an half, nor in
most Northern parts above fourteen. Some have affirmed there were two thonsand
Cities and Towns, others 1020, in this Country; But Ortelius who was diligent
in the search, found but 300. yet the Wars with Aethiopia, Syria, and the
Romans, might ruin many Towns therein; But we will mention only some of the
chief of them; as 1. Siena, now called Asne, the most Southern City thereof,
and said to be exactly under the Tropic of Cancer; for Ptolemy says, they
making a very great pit, there was no shadow of the Sun, when he entered into
Cancer. 2. Memphis situated beyond Nile Westward, where the Egyptian Princes
resided; in whose place Caire succeeded, and was the abode of the Sultans.
Caire is a great City, distant from Jerusalem about 240 of our miles, which a
traveller thither, calls (for its admirablenesse and greatness) the little
World, being, (says he) thrice as large as Constantinople, and as populous,
though not so well builded, being situate in a pleasant plain, and in the
heart of Egypt, kissing Nilus at some parts. It Is divided into five parts. 1.
New- Cair, the principal of the other, and lying in the midst of them, and
contains all the chief Merchandise and Marketplaces, it has walls and Ports,
and is in Circuit twenty two miles. 2. Old Caire, where Memphis anciently so
called, stood, also named Babylon of the Egyptians. This was the farthest
place Ulysses visited in his travells, which Homer so memorizeth, yet (says
Lithgow) they were not answerable to the fifth part of mine. 3. Medin, which
joins to the back side of Old Caire, toward the Piramides (which are not far
from hence) 4. Boulake running a great length along the River side; which has
three Market places of no small account. 5. Caraffar, a great Town bending
Southward in the way of the Red Sea, for many miles. All which four, are (says
he) but as Suburbs to the New Caire, making up a Country rather than a City,
yet all touch one with another either to the right or left hand, or to both,
with a multitude of streets: whose length in all, from the lowest end of
Boulake, to the Southmost part of Caraffar, is 28 English miles, and 14 in
breadth; for trial whereof, he says, he trod it one day on foot from Sun to
Sun, being guided and guarded by a riding Janizary, which, for his bruised feet
on the streets, was one of the sorest days journey that ever he had in his
life. Here are three principal gates in New Caire; Babeh Mamstek, looking
toward the Wilderness, and Red Sea; Bebzavillah toward Nilus; and Babell
Eutuch, toward the fields. The streets are narrow, and all almost covered to
save them from the parching heat, with open vents for light, and their
buildings are commonly two stories high, made either of mud or brick, and
plat-forms on the tops, whereon they sleep usually in the night, to receive the
fresh and cooling Air. Here is a great Palace where the Beglerbeg or Turkish
Vicegerent constantly resides, and on a moderate height, from whence a sull
prospect of the better part of the Town, Gardens and Villages, bordering on
Nile, with a great part of the lower plains of Egypt, may be taken. There is
likewise said to be in this City, a Tower, whereby (by observing how high Nile
rises, for there are diverse marks in it by which they judge) they know how
fruitful it will be every year in Egypt; for if the River swell unto the
highest hole of the Tower, they have abundance of Corn. Another says it was in
a Mosque, or Turkish Temple called Eschiall, whereas they measured how much
Nile rose, by a Pillar there; But another in his Peregrination says, they go
into an Island nigh Caire, where they observe the height of this River. 3.
Alexandria, so called from Alexander the Great, who built it, and now
Scanderia; it is a Town of great traffic, and was formerly one of the chief
Cities of the World, not yielding to Rome for inhabitants; and was in the time
of the Nicene Council, appointed (by them) one of the four Patriarchal Cities,
Antioch, Rome, and Constantinople being the other three. It is divided into Old
and New, and is seated in a sandy Country on the Sea shore, more broad than
long, and like a half Moon: The Old is three miles long, having within it
(besides other rare things) two Mountains of enclosed sand. The ancient Walls
are yet standing, but little inhabited within; four things more, among others,
are here eminent; the Cisterns bringing water from an Arm of Nile called
Calis, and supported by Marble Pillars; two Spires near the Walls of the Port
almost alike, Graven with Hierogliphycall letters, one whereof lies along,
almost covered with earth; the other standing ten fadome high without the
ground, and is eleven foot square: A little above which, is the place as by the
ruins does appear, where Cleopatra's Palace of old stood, where she had a
Gallery advanced over the Sea; and lastly, without the Town stands a Pillar
which Caesar erected in memory of Pompey his defeat; it is of Marble, eighty
foot high, and twenty in Circuit. The New is seated somewhat more pleasant, on
the right hand of the Old Port, which has a Castle of the Old Town for
defense, but (through difficulty) they use it only sometimes to lodge their
Foists and Galleys. The New Port is on its right hand, and is but an open road
subject to the Northern Winds, but defended by two Castles (on both sides)
called Farilos one standing on a little Peninsula; the other right against it;
so that all Ships must needs pass within shot of these Castles; without which
two Ports (through the Airs bandnesse) the very Town (it is judged) would be
soon abandoned. Two things are remarkable of this City. That the people were so
licentious, that they would neither spare personally and verbally to abuse
their Governor; nor Roman Emperors, their Lords themselves: for which cause
Caracalla coming to the City, and impatient of the same, assembled the youths
of the City, as if to choose some for attending on his person, and suddenly
commanded his soldiers to put them all to the Sword; and that, one Gautenus
reading Divinity and Philosophy in this Town in 180. thence it is thought the
setting up Universities first began in Christendom, Right against Alexandria
they place the little Isle Pharos, in Caesar and Ptolemies time, but now it
joins to the Continent; and whose Pharus or Watchtower (built by Ptolemy
Philadelphus for benefit of Sailers, too tedious here particularly to describe)
was accounted one of the Worlds seven Wonders. The Mausolaeum, which signifies
a Sepulcher or Monument for the dead: Babylon, not of Egypt, but that of
Assyria, its Walls; Diana's Temple of Ephesus. The Colossus of Rhodes, and the
statue or Image of Jupiter Olympicus, and the Piramides of Egypt, being the
other six. It was called by Oppius, one of Aegypts two Cloisters, or doors to
shut it up, to wit by Sea; the other by land, being Pelusium. This seems to me
to be the same which the Describer of Estates and Principalities, etc. calls
the Castle, which (says he) is very incommodious, in that they must carry
water thither from Alexandria's Cisterns, upon Camells backs. 4. Pelusium, now
called Damiata, and seated near the Mediterranean Sea, it was also named
Eliopolis, of the Prince Ely, or Aly, who had environed it with three VValls;
(but one thinks it to be that now called Teneze) This key of Egypt, (as Suidas
calls it) was more then once besieged by Christian Armies, in the time of that
called the Holy War; The most remarkable whereof was the eighteen Months siege
of John de Brenne (the entitled King of Jerusalem) with the European Princes
in 1220, concerning the mortality of whose besieged, through raging Plague and
Famine, and the unexpected seizure thereof, (by two ventrous soldiers scaling
the Walls, as admiring the peoples silence) ye may read at large in the Turkish
History. Besides these Cities, are two others, said to be almost as big as
Caire; also Thebes, which the Tyrant Busiris builded, 17 miles in compass, and
having a hundred Gates; Arsinoe, or the City of Crocodiles; now Sues, and
almost abandoned, though in the Ptolemies time, a Haven Town of great commerce;
yet the Turks building their Galleys at Caire, bring them, when taken in
pieces, on Camells backs. Here is is also Bubastis, where Diana was worshipped.
Nicopolis, now called M^nia. Heliopolis, now Bethsamie, and of which Potipharah
was Prtest, whose daughter Asenath, Pharaoh gave to Joseph in marriage, and
Canopus, where was Osiris his chief Temple; four of these Cities, to wit,
Alexandria, Pelusium, Bubastis, and Heliopolis, are known by other names in
Ezechiel the thirtieth, as No, Phisebeth, Shin, and Aven. The ancient
Egyptians were said to be the first inventers of the Mathematical Sciences;
Great Magicians and Astrologers being yet of a dextrous with, Merry, great
Singers, and sociable companions; but somewhat sloathfull, and given to Riot
and Luxury, neither do they live long in regard of the great heat (for they lie
in the same climate with Barbary) seldom attayning 60 years; yet are they not
black, but tawny and brown. Two of the chief Monuments of Egypt, were first,
the Piramides, in regard of whose wonderful Masses of stone, the ancient works
of the Romans were of small moment; they begin to be seen forty miles off.
They stand in a Desert place, four miles from Caire, about three stones cast
from Nile, the biggest whereof, (built by Cheops) is three hundred paces square
(that is) 1200 round, at the foot, whose height may be 600 foot, though some
have reported it was 1000. the stones are three foot long, and two foot broad,
and of the same thickness; and although the top seems to be sharp, for so much
the word Pyramid does imply) yet is it there 21. foot square. Josephus reports
the Israelites to make Bricks partly for such Pyramides. Secondly, Psamniticus
his Labarinth which he built, containing 1000 houses and twelve Palaces within
one Wall, whose building was most under the Earth; no wood nor cement being
employed in that Marble Fabric. The Chamber doors in opening sounded as
Thunder, and though there was but one passage into it, which was of white
Marble, with stately Pillars, and most curious works of Imagery; yet having a
multitude of turnings, and returnings within, it-was even invious to one that
was unacquainted. This stood on Nile's banks toward Alexandria. The Egyptians
also made Paper of the sedgy weeds Papyri, which grows on the banks of NILE,
whereby Ptolemy Philadelphus the more easily made up his Library of 700000
Volumes at Alexandria, causing likewise the 72 Interpreters to translate the
Bible. The Priests also, who in time of ancient heathenism, were honored as
their Kings, expressed all their conceits by Hieroglyphics; or the shapes of
things in the Creation. For eternity painting the Sun and Moon; for a year, a
Snake with his tail in mouth: to show an endless circle of years. For
integrity, fire and water, because they are pure, and purify other things,
etc. The Red Sea is on the East of Egypt; so called from the red color of the
sands: also Sinus Arabicus, or the Arabian gulf, being 1600 miles long: through
which India's and Arabia's Spices were brought to Alexandria, and so dispersed
throughout all parts by the Venetians. It is also named the Erythraean Sea, as
much as red, nigh which, the Sybill called Erythraea, dwelt: for there were 10
of them, of whom Cumana is affirmed to have written the 9 books of the Sybills:
which being burned by one Stilico, those Prophecies now extant, are only drawn
out of others writings wherein they were quoted: Now they manifestly foretold
of Christ's Name, Birth, Death and Kingdom, and somewhat of Antichrist's
destruction. Before we come to the quality, riches, and Religion of this
Country, we will make mention of Cyrene, anciently named Pentapolitana, from
its five Cities; (for it is reckoned a part of Egypt, and seems to me, that
which modern Writers call Arabia Trogloditica) which has Tunis on the West,
and Egypt on the East. Its chief Cities are now Fessan, Barca, from whence the
Country is called Barca Marmorica, and Cyrene, which once striving with
Carthage for greatness and extent of bounds, two men of each side were
appointed to end the Controversy, by coming toward each other's City; for
where they met, was to be the boundaries: But the Phileni of Carthage Getting
far into Cyrenia before the other met them, they (enraged) killed them because
they would not depart their Country: which occasioned the Carthaginians (in
honor of them) to raise the Acae Philenorum, or Altars of the Philenians in
Cyrene's Borders. Here stood also the Oracle of Jupiter-Hammon; whose Temple,
when Cambyses King of Persia (in his Conquest of Egypt) would (by his Army)
overthrow: they were (in the way) smothered with the light sands of this
Country, although 500000 men. Although this people were rude and theevish, yet
Aristippus the Philosopher, Eratosthenes the Mathematician, and Callimachus the
Poet, were born here; as also Simon of Cyrene, who was forced to carry the
Cross on which Christ suffered. Some call the chief Towns hereof by another
name, as Grondall or Corandall, having an indifferent good Port. Alcosser or
Chozair, which some take for Berenice, one of the five ancient Cities; and
where is (by the Mountain's opening) passage for fruits brought out of
Aethiopia the Upper. Suaquen is the name of another, which Ortolius thinks to
be the Ptolemais of Mela; near which, is a very good Port: and where is also
commonly a Turkish Bassa, who commands the Country. Even in the head of the
Arabian gulf stands Suez, which some take for Arsinoe (one of the five ancient
Cities of Cyrene); others for Potidia; and some for Hero or Heroes, which in the
Ptolemies and the Romans time, very much flourished for Indian and Arabian
Merchandise, transported thence into Egypt by Caire and Alexandria; but
although the Turk has used all means to people it, yet is it not much
inhabited, nor of any great traffic, by reason of the great difficulty of all
things. Egypt is an ancient Kingdom; for there is a Catalogue made of 300
Kings, save eight, who reigned before Amasis in 17 Dunasties; of whom Osiris is
only to be mentioned, who with his successors were called Pharaohs, and in
whose time Abraham is thought to have gone down into Egypt. But of the 18th
Dunastie or Lordship of great power, there were 16 Kings; Amasis being the
first, and beginning his reign in the year of the World, 2242. Menophis or
Miris being the last. Of the 19th Dunastie were only five, who were called the
Latti: Zetus was the first, in the year 2590; and Thuoris the last: two of
which five, to wit, Amenophis and Sesostris or Vexores, are of fame. The 20th
Dunastie remained 177 years under the Diapolitane Princes: and of the 21
Dunastie were 18 Kings, the first of whom was Smendes, beginning to reign in
the year 2961, and called in Scripture Sesac: the 15th was Pharaoh Neco, who
slew Josiah at the ba^^le of Megiddo: and Psamnenites or Psamniticus was the
last, in whose days Cambyses (as was said in Persia, subdued Egypt under his
Empire: from which it revolted in Darius Nothus his time the 6th Persian King,
they choosing one of their own called Amertheus, in 3558: the sixth from whom,
was Nectanebos the second; in the 18th year of whose reign, Ochus the 8th
Persian Emperor recovered it again. But Alexander vanquishing Darius, he won
Egypt without blood; after whose death, Ptolemy the son of Lagi sharing this
Country, all the following Kings were named Ptolemies: of whom there were 12,
Lagi being the first, and beginning his reign in the year of the World 3641,
and called in Daniel the King of the South. Cleopatra, a woman exceeding
beautiful being the last, who (being in love with Marcus Antonius, killed her
se^f to avoid leading through Rome in triumph: After whose death it was made a
Roman Province, and was as warily looked to, as highly prized: no Senator but
only a Gentleman of Rome being Governor. The Roman Empire being divided, this
Country was subject to the Constantinopolitan Emperor, till the Egyptians
being overburthened, craved the Saracen's aid who made them Tributaries unto
Haumer the third Caliph or Saracenical Pope of Babylon or Bagdet; the Grecian
Garrisons being first expelled: who afterward choosing a Caliph out of their
own people, there were two, one at Bagdet, to whom the Asian; and another at
Caire, to whom the European and African Saracens submitted. The first Egyptian
Caliph was Achmades, beginning to rule in the year of Christ 870; the 15th and
last being Elphaiz, (although there be one, who adds seven others) who
sending to Noradine the Turkish King of Damasco for aid against Almericus King
of Jerusalem, he sent him valiant Sarracon, who, after clearing Egypt of
Almericus his forces, made himself King, and to confirm his estate, dashed out
Elphaiz his brains with his horseman's mace, and rooting out all his kinn, as
we read in the Turkish history. Of these Turkish Kings were five; Sarracon the
first, beginning his unjust reign in 1153. Melechsala the last, who (going with
Lewis the 9th of France toward Damiata, when he had vanquished him) was slain
by the Mamalucks, slaves whom he bought and bred up for Soldiers, to supply
the deficiency of the soft Egyptians: they came from Colchis and Georgia, and
were commonly called Circussians: they also set up Turquimenus, a Mamaluck, in
Melechsala's room, of which Mamaluck Sultans, there were 12, Turquimenus, the
first, beginning his rule in 1250, (who although he released King Lewis, is
said not to have performed half his conditions of peace with him made)
Tonombeius, the last, who being overcome by Selimus the first in 1517, Egypt
was made a Turkish Province, as it still remains. The Country is low, plain,
and not mountainous; wherefore they have built their Villages (though far from
Nile) in high places, to avoid Nilus his overflowing, which makes Egypt
exceeding fruitful; and for want whereof, the dearth is very great; (for they
have no rain, as is read in Zech. 14. v. 18; or if they chance to have any, it
is said to turn to diverse inconveniences, as sores, etc.) it beginning to swell
about June 17, and continuing 40 days, (and falling the like time) which is
said to happen when Aethiopia has most rain, especially in the farther
Mountains. The Greek letters of this river's name containing in them, all the
days of the year; (for N stands for 50, E for 5, I for 10, L for 30, O for 70,
S for 200, which make 365,) and the manner of whose inundation Lithgow
undertakes to show, because he says many learned men are merely mistaken about
its flowing. He says, there is a dry pond dug near the river's brink,
called Machash, wherein stands a pillar as high as this ditch is deep, that is,
18 cubits: whereby they know the river's increasing (and so the plenty or
scarcity of things the year following) after this manner: between the river and
this pond are six passages dug through the bank, where when the river begins
to swell, it falls down through the lowest passage into the pond; (and then come
forth certain Priests called Darvishes, accompanied with 100 Janissaries,
pitching their Tents about this Quadrangled pit. In all which time of the
inundation, they make great feasting, rare solemnties, with dancing, singing,
touching of Kettle-Drums, sounding of Trumpets, and other ostentations of joy.
As the water grows in the river, so also (now) upon the Pillar, which is marked
from bottom to top, with Brases, handfuls, a foot, a span, and an inch. If the
water rise but to 10 brases, it prefageth, there will be great dearth,
Pestilence and famine: If to 12 Cubits, the year will be indifferent: if to 15
Brases, then plenty and abundance: if to 18, then the whole Country is in
danger to be drowned and destroyed. Also, from the body of Nile, there are
(says he) about 3000 channels drawn through the plain, on which passing Ditches
are all the Boroughs and Towns builded; and through which channels, the river
spreads it self throughout all the Kingdom: which when scowred of filth and
Worms, and the water become clear, every house opening their Cistern window,
receives as much water as will suffice them till the next inundation: Neither
does ever the River flow any where above the banks; for if it should, it would
overwhelm the whole Kingdom. All which Channels here or there, do make
intercourse for their streams again, to the body and branches of Nilus; so that
he calls them S^oical fools, who hold, that it overfloweth the whole face of
the Land; for then I pray you (says he) what would become of their houses,
Bestials; Corn, and Fruits; for the nature of violent streams do ever deface,
transplant, and destroy all that they debord upon, leaving slime, mud, and sand
behind their breaches; and therefore such inunding cannot be called
cherishings. Yet Ovid sang thus of Nile, Namque ubi deseruit, etc.
For when the seven-mouth'd Nile the fields forsakes,
Whose Rivers to the old belly them betakes:
The tillers many living creatures find,
In The turned up muddie clodds that is left behind.


Now here the Poet indeed affirms muddy clodds to be left behind, and (which is
strange) very many live creatures therein found: but this overflowing may seem
by his words, to be the channel's watering the Country by a moderate
overflowing, and not the main body or belly of Nile drowning all like a Sea:
and whereas he calls it Seven-mouth'd Nile; although some will have seven
mouths therein, (and others nine) yet the Moderns assure there are but 3 or 4,
two of whom, report what they have seen; for it divides it self into 4
branches, four miles from Caire, two whereof make the two chief and Navigable
mouths of Damietta and Rosetta; yet when it overflowes, many brooks (or
channels, into which it is divided) are Navigable. There are abundance of
venomous creatures bred (also) in this river, as Crocodiles, Scorpions,
Water-Snakes, grievous misshapen worms, and other monstrous things, who do often
annoy the Inhabitants, and those who traffic on the water, yet it breeds
likewise very excellent fish, and is wonderful fruitful therein. It is also
reported to be almost 3000 miles long, and said to have its beginning under the
Aequinoctial line from the Mountains of the Moon; but more truly from the
Zembrian Lake in the more inward Aethiopia, and in a place of the outward
Ethiopian Alps called Catadupa. Nile's water is said to be mavelous sweet
above all others, the cause whereof is the extreme force of the Sun beating
always on it, and making it the lighter, purer, and simpler; as also his long
course arrousing so many soiles. Egypt is not subject to Earthquakes, and is so
fertile for all necessaries for man's life, that some Ancients have called it,
The Storehouse of the Earth. It was likewise called when the Romans had it,
Horreum Romanum, or the Roman Garnerieor Barn. It abounds with all sorts of
grain and pulses, good pastures, and abundance of Olive Trees, and with herbs
good to eat, that they may the more easily forbear Corn; there is also in the
Western part of Lower Egypt store of Cotton and Sugar. Some report, there is
very good Wine in diverse places, keeping very long, as near the Lake Meotides.
But another says, it produces no Wines; for these Mahometanical Moors
observing strictly the law of their Alcoran, will neither plant, nor suffer
Vines to be planted, accounting it a deadly sin to drink Wine: But for Coffa,
and Sherpe, which are composed Liquors, he says, they drink enough. Palm Trees
also wonderful high, do grow throughout all Egypt; 20 great Trees, having been
said to be seen coming out of one body. Their gardens are replenished with
Siccamores, Cassia, Pomegranates, Oranges and Tamaris, the greatest part
whereof are exceeding high, and the Siccamores exceeding green. The garden of
their Balsamo lies near the South side of Caire, six miles in compass; the
Tree being but of three foot high, always green of color, with a broad
three-pointed leaf; and being cut into the body, and branches thrice a year, it
yields a red water dropping into earthen vessels, which is the natural Balsom:
Not far from which Garden in a sandy Desert, is the place called Mommeis: which
are a multitude of Caves cut out of a Rock, wherein most men's Corpses of Caire
are interred: which remain always unputrified, nor yielding a stinking smell:
experiments whereof are, by Merchants bringing whole bodies hands, etc. from
thence, which makes the Apothecarie's Mummia, whose color is very black, and
the flesh clung to the bones. Here is a shrub called Alcana, whose leaves being
yellow when dried, the women in the Turk's Country die their hands and feet,
with a part of their hair. There is great store of smelling flowrs; yet Pliny
affirms, they do not commonly smell very well, through the fogginesse of the
air, fromthe river Nile. Besides hurtful beasts, it breeds also a great number
of tame cattle, as Bugles, Oxen, Camels, Horses, Asses, Goats, and Sheep: all
which grow very great; but the sheep are exceeding great and fat, whose Wool
is black, and their thick tails hanging unto the ground.

Here are many Fowl (for Egypt is very Moorish in VVinter) especially Storks;
wherewith in some places the fields are even covered: and who devour the
abundance of Frogs which are here bred. There are also many Camelions found
among the shrubs, which (says the Author) live not of the wind as many have
written; yet will they continue a whole year without eating any sustenance.
Hens (are said) not to hatch their Chickens here; but they do it by the heat of
Furnaces. Egypt has always abounded with Mettalls, chiefly near Aethiopia;
there is likewise the Amethyst with many other precious stones, and such store
of Aetites or the Eagle-stone is found near to Alexandria, that they load whole
ships therewith. Their Women are very fruitful, having many times three or
four children at a birth; neither, as it has been observed, are the
eight-Moneths Children in danger of death as in other places. There are also
Lemons, Citrons, Cherries, Figs, and other fruits, as in our Countries. Cyrene,
or Arabia Trogloditica, is sick of Numidia, and Lybia's disease, being barren,
both of fruits, and water, Sandy, Desert, and little inhabited, for when
Alexander traveled to the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon, he saw neither, Man,
Beast, Bird, Tree, nor River. And as for Suez, there is no water within two
miles about it; but two miles distant they dig it out of a pit, it being
saltish and bitterish, and brought upon Camells backs. There is great commerce
in Egypt, and at Caire, with very many Nations; for the Country abounds so, as
to sell Silks, Corns, Fruits, Wax, Honey, and the Sovereign Balsome, besides
many other commodities of Cotton-wool, Cloth of Gold and Silver: and the best
Sattins, Damask, Taffaties, and Grograins that are, are here made. Their King's
revenues in the Ptolemies time were 12000 Talents. The Turk now (what through
tyrannical Government, what through the discontinuance of the usual traffic
through the red Sea, receives only three millions; one whereof his Vizier Bassa
has to support his charge: the other his garrison-Souldiers, etc. the third he
Coffers up, being guarded by land to Constantinople, he not daring to adventure
it by Sea, for fear of the Florentines. Egypt (where at this day are but few of
the right Egyptians remaining) is peopled by Mahometans, outward Christians,
and Jews in a small number. Those called Christians, are strangers or Natives.
The strangers come thither (especially to Alexandria and Caire) by reason of
traffic; for it is called, as it were, a ladder, by which the treasures of
the Indies and the East, do pass into Asia, Europe, and Africa. Those born in
the Country which have remained since the inundation of Barbarians and cruelty
of Saracens, Mamalucks and Turks, do not exceed 50000, which dwell dispersed
here and there, especially in Caire, Messia, etc. they are called Cofites or
Copties, and Christians of the girdle, for they are both baptized and
circumcised. They also following Eutyches's opinion above this 1000 years,
admitting but one Nature in Christ, separate themselves from union with others:
which schism, the bad Council of Ephesus (called, if I mistake not, (...), or a
Council of Robbers) occasioned. Many of them live in Mima's Territories,
wherein are diverse Monasteries; but three of their chiefest Monasteries are,
that of Anthony, (which is in the Troglodite's Country) Paul, and Machaire.
They obey the Patriarch of Alexandria, saying, They have their faith from
Prete-Jean. They say Mass in the Chaldean tongue; reading their Gospel first
in Chaldee, then in Arabic. When the Priest says, Peace be with, or given
unto you, the youngest of the assistants going, touches the hand of all the
assistants at that Mass: and after the consecration so called, they give to
every one of the Assistants a little piece of bread.

But toward the New World turn (my Pen) thy style,
From the Countries of Danube, Euphrate, and Nyle.
We have briefly viewed the Old World, (so called) let us also survey the New;
New I say, not according to the nature of things, but in respect of men's
skillfullnesse in discovery. That part of the Earth is called the New world,
which almost by a middle space, is extended between the shoars of Spain, and
Africa, and the utmost part of India from the North thorough the Ocean, washing
on it on both sides, under the form of two Peninsulaes, which Peninsulaes or
almost Islands, are conjoined by a slender Isthmus, or tract of land, in such a
manner, that in what part it lies under the Equator, or is not so far from
it, it is made narrow. Thence it is again dilated, until (the figure of a
Pyramide or Spire being stretched forth into the South) it contains the
Magellanick Strait, or Narrow Sea, with other parts yet unknown. And although
this continent, be not as yet altogether searched out, yet from those parts
which are already known, it may easily be concluded, that this part of the
World is greater than the other parts. They sail about it at this day, beside
that utmost tract, which looks to the North. Of this new World are also two
questions raised; first, Whether it were known to the Ancients, or not? But
Keckerman repeating the probable arguments on both sides, rather gives his
judgment on the affirmative. Secondly, Whether it cleave to Europe and Asia, or
whether it be an Island separated from them both? Chynaeus says, it is not
certain whether it be an Island or a Continent; Frisius leaves it in doubt: Yet
out of the Navigations of Paulus Venetus, he says, it may probably be drawn
that it is an Island. Most Geographers vote it to be an Island. But then
whereas another difficult question arises from this, being granted, to wit,
Seeing men were in the beginning created in Asia, and living creatures also,
were put into Asia out of Noah's Ark, how should both men and other living
creatures come into this New World? One Joseph of Costa disputes thereof in the
twentieth Chapter of his first book of the New World; But this I say, that men
lose precious time in disputing, and not believing; and also that if this be
now an Island, yet, it might not from the beginning be so, for it both seems to
Cross the very History of the Creation, and also we know, that many Islands
have in length of time been made by the washing of the Sea. But why does any
raise a question at all from a thing that is not in it self certainly known?
And as for the West side of America, if it (says one) be not a continent with
Tartary, it is yet disjoined by a very small straight, as may be perceived in
all our Maps and Cards, as also in the Description of these Countries; so that
there is into them a very quick and easy passage. Two things also are observed
in the discovery hereof, that it was discovered about the very same time
wherein Arts and Tongues began to flourish in Europe, and also some Doctrines
of the Roman Church to be purged from their gross drossinesse; and that this
New World does in many things prosit, and in many things also hurt the Old
World, for from the time that it was found, both all things were dearer in the
Old, and also greater allurements were afforded unto men, of Luxury and
covetousness, but this latter must be imputed unto Man's Corruption. The time
of its first descrying was by Christopher Columbus, (born at Nervi in Genoa of
Italy) in one thousand four hundred ninety two, who considering the Suns
motion, was persuaded, there was another World, which the Sun gave light unto,
after its departure from us, and being rejected by the Genowaies, to whom he
first opened his intent in 1486. he sent his brother to motion the business to
our Henry the seventh, who being taken and detained over long by Pirates,
Columbus made his desires known to the Spanish Court, where, at length being
furnished with two Ships only, he is said to have sailed on the Ocean above
sixty days, and could descry no land; so that the Spaniards discontented, as
desirous to return, began to mutiny. The Italian wary, perceiving the Clouds
somewhat clearer than before, thought some inhabited place was nigh.
Wherefore, staying their return for three days longer; at the end of them,
one descryed fire, and straightway after an apparent Country was discerned:
which being an Island, Columbus in honor of the Spaniards, named HISPANIOLA,
but the Natives called it HAITIE. Then discovering CABA also, he returned
toward SPAIN, and after two eminent Navigations more, he died, and was buried
at SEVILL, in SPAIN. But it is divided into AMERICA, and MAGELLANICA; the
former being denominated from Americus Vesputius, who followed Columbus
afterward in these attempts, and whose shores have their Bounds and Borders
(from the East indeed, whereas it looks toward Europe, and Africa) the
Atlantic Ocean; from the West, Mare or the Sea Del Zur; the latter (which is
that part situated to the South, and the Pole Antartick) being so named from
Ferdinand Magellane, who first pierced into this part of the world in one
thousand five hundred and twenty. America is distinguished into two general
parts, or Peninsulaes, one whereof is the more Northern tract, and called
Mexicana; the other more the Southern, and called Peruana. They are two
Peninsulaes joined by an Isthmus or tongue of land seven leagues long, betwixt
Nombre de Dios, and Panama; for the 11 leagues commonly made betwixt these two
places, is through their turnings to find out a more convenient passage.
Mexicana is the Northern Peninsula or tract, whose circumference is reckoned
16000 miles, and 4000 in length from East to West, the North bounds being not
yet known, and contains 10 distinct Provinces or Countries: as, 1. Florida,
bounded on the East with Bahaman, and the Isles of Lucayes, or (as one) with
the Sea, Del Nort, on the West with Mexico, on the South with Cuba and Jucatan,
and, as one says, with Virginia: on the North with New France; and also as one
affirms, with Canada and Virginia. It is 400 miles long, and 80 miles broad:
and was discovered by the English under the Conduct of one Sebastian Cabot in
1467. But was called Florida, by John Ponce a Spaniard, who possessed it
afterward in 1527; either because it was a flourishing Country; or for that he
came thereunto on the Spaniard's Pascha Florida, or Easter Day. It Is under the
same Parallel with Mauritania; (and though a great part of this New World lies
under the same Parallel with Aethiopia, Lybia, and Numidia, yet are the
Inhabitants of a reasonable fair complexion; of which I see no true natural
cause rendered, but God's particular will;) its coast is rough and rocky,
chiefly against the point called the Martires. After Ponce, it fell to the
French in 1562; But the Spaniards warred with them so long, till not a man
being left, it was again abandoned in 1567. Here are three chief Towns, the one
called Arx Carolina, or Charles his Tower, which the French building: the
Spaniard ruined: and S. Matthew's and S. Helen's, which the Spaniard built: who
has three, and but three Forts in this Country: one whereof, called S.
Augustine, being taken and burnt by Drake in 1586, was again repaired. It is
reported, That when Ferdinando Soto (a Spaniard) would persuade the Natives,
that he was the Son of God, and came to teach them the Law: One of them
answered, Not so; for God never bid thee kill and slay us, and work all kind of
mischief against us. This Province has diverse fruits, and many kinds of
beasts; it would also bear any grain and fruit, if manured; their Kine here
also, have a bunch on their backs like a Camel, and hair like horses. Many
Hermophrodites are said to be here, whom they put to all drudgery. It has good
quantity of gold and silver, which the Inhabitants gathering up in the water,
by cutting rivers with little ditches, carry it to the Seaside to sell, which
is also their chief Traffic; likewise Emeralds. Turquoysies, and Pearls have
been here found. They are gross and Pagan Idolaters, yet are said to have a
belief of the Soul's immortality: But naturally loving war and revenge.

Secondly, Mexico, which (denominating half America) extends from Florida unto
the Sea of California or Mare Vermiglio on the West, and having on the East
Jucatan, and the Gulf of Mexi^^ on the South Peruana, or (as another says)
Guatimala and Jucatan: the Northern bounds being unknown, it is not certain,
whether it be a Continent, or an Island separated from the Old World, it is
called New Spain, and was very populous, before the Spaniards, by tormenting
deaths, slew (as they say) no less than six millions in 17 years. It was
subdued by Ferdinand Cortez in 1518; and contains four noted Regions: 1.
Gallicia Nova (called formerly by the Inhabitants, Xalisque) and where Nugno de
Gusman built diverse Cities; after that, by taking the City Xalisco, he had
subdued all the Province: which being watered by the River of Piastle; that
part which is enclosed by these rivers and S. Sebastian, is named Couliacan,
whose chief City or Town being Couliacan: the Spaniards planting a Colonie
there, it is called S. Michael: then coming to the red Sea, or of California by
Sibole and Grenado, hitherto the Spaniards trade, and the Country is inhabited.
One Francis Coronado came to Sibole in 1579, but returned with his Soldiers to
Mexico, as finding little profit. This Province is mostly rough and stony; yet
there is that, fit to bear of all fruits; and they do catch much fish in the
Sea, having also many wild beasts in their Forests: those on the Sea-shoar
living of the one; and the inland Savages, on flesh, taken by hunting. Some say
likewise, they do sometimes eat man's flesh. They go for the most partnaked, and
acknowledging no Ruler, till the Spaniards brought them under Dominion. 2.
Mechouachan or Mechuacan about 50 leagues from the Province of Mexico, and
having 240 miles in compass, three of whose chief Towns are Sinsonse, large
and populous, where their Kings made their abode. Pascuar, where the Bishop
(that is, I suppose, of the Spaniards) first remained; and Valadolit or
Valladolid, where he is now said to make his residence. The language of this
people, is both copious, figurative, and artificial, and preferred by those who
understand it, before Latin: they are all tall, strong, and active of body,
and witty, as appears by diverse things coming from thence: also of a good
complexion, and long life. Here is a swift stream which always turning as it
goes, and receiving 12 rivers into it, enters into the Cephalique Sea of 150
miles about, from whence going, it falls suddenly into a very deep Valley, and
continuing its winding course, enters with abundance of waters (ingendring
Crocodiles) into the South Sea: and a little backward is Sacatule, within which
is Colima, and a Town called the Purification: the three Ports of James,
Anthony, and of the Nativity or Jago, being upon the Sea-shoar. It is said to
be one of the best Countries of New Spain, bearing abundance of Cotton,
Cutchaneel, Mulberry-Trees, Silk, store of gold and silver, (though coorse)
much Wax, Honey, Amber that is black, Salt, and Fish: whence (the name hereof
implying a place of fishing) it was so called. Diverse fruits are said to ripon
here twice a year: and one Francis, of 4 quarts of grain sown, reaped 600. 3.
Mexico, or the Province of Tremistitan, said not ^^^ly to be both the greatest
and most pleasing and fertile of these 4 Provinces; but (as Acosta thinks)
one of the best in the World. It takes its name from the chief City Mexico,
being an hundred degrees from the Fortunate Islands; and was taken by one
Cortez, in 1521, leading to this enterprise 200000 or 100000 Indians. It
contains about 6000 Epanish Families, but 60000 of Indians, dwelling in the
Suburbs. It Is seated in a great Plain about 7 miles in circuit, and encompassed
with high Mountains, on which is Snow continually. There are also in the Plain
two Lakes, one fresh, the other salt; on the banks whereof, not only is
Mexico, but there were almost 50 good Towns, Tescuto, yielding little to
Mexico: and on the bank of Mexico's Lake, which is 50 miles about, stand
pleasant Towns, and diverse houses, 50000 Wherries being still (they say) plying
in the Lake. This City is six miles in compass, and is the seat of the Spanish
Viceroy, and of an Archbishop; They having therein both a Mint, Printing, and
an University. Moreover there is Anges, a Town with a very fertile soil; Tulle,
Tuluca, Tavasco, a great Town, yet the houses stand scattering for fear of
fire; which had, say some, 25000 houses, of Lime, and fat Earth, Zempoloan,
that is called the true; Cross by which places runs the River Aluarada, and
entering into the Sea by three mouths. Lastly, Ulathan, a great In-land-Town.
The Gulf of Mexico is nigh the City so called, 900 miles about, of a heady and
swift current, that ships cannot pass directly; and has two Ports, one
between the farthest part of Jucatan, and the Isle of Cuba, where the Tide
violently enters, the other betwixt Cuba, and the utmost point of Florida,
where it forcibly goes forth. The Sea has but only two safe Ports, Havana,
on the North, John de Lua on the South, which the Spaniards have strongly
fortified; for the Seas are very tempestuous. The Mexicans are full of courage,
also industrious, and witty, sober, and given to traffic; feeding many
Silkworms, and making many toys of wood and feathers. The Country is likewise
exceeding temperate, having many Mulberry Trees; and do now feed many Horses,
Asses, and Flocks of Sheep, having also some Mines. And victuals there does so
abound, that 28 pound of Beef is worth but three pence, and a Hog one shilling,
or 1 s. and 6 d. Out of the fresh Lake, they draw an herb, cut every Moon, and
worth to the Inhabitants 20000 Crowns yearly. New Spain also traffiques with
China; it vents likewise in Woollen Cloth, Silks, Linen Cloth, and Tables to
Peru, for a million of crowns. Finally, if Peru (says one) exceeds this
Country in abundance of gold and silver, which is very fine: yet this is richer
than Peru in fruits and Cattle, and exceeds it in Arts. The Indians pay to the
King and feudetaries 6 s. for a head, and nothing else. Their Kings succeeded
not by right of blood, but by election: whom they held lawful to kill, if they
were reputed cowards: for they used slings and arrows in their wars. They were
seven Tribes in all, ruling in an Aristocracy or Government of the Nobles and
chief men, until that the mightiest Tribe chose a King, to whom they all
submitted: of these Kings, we find ten mentioned, Vizilovitli being the first,
Quabutimoc the last, yet they say Izcoalt the 4th King brought the six Tribes
under the Mexican Kings. The two last were vanquished by Cortez as aforesaid,
whose number of Indians (besides his 900 Spaniards, etc.) which he employed
therein, were most of the City and Territory of Tlascalan, never good friends
to the Mexicans: wherefore, the Spaniards have granted diverse immunities to the
said City Tlascalan. And to conclude, the Mexicans since they received the
Spaniards baptism, (and so their religion) they have accustomed themselves for
the most part, to the Spanish fashions. 4. Gastecan or Guastachan, so called
from the Captains of Cortez, and also the river of Panuco; but before these
Captains subdued it, Francis Garai had 400 of his men slain by the barbarous
people, who sacrificing and eating some of them, hanged their dried skins in
their Idol-Temples. There is a place called Zimatatao, where, at the foot of a
Mountain, are two fountains, one of black pitch, and the other of red, very
hot; as also in the Isle of Wolves near Lima is a fountain of Bitumen or slime
like Pitch: and another at S. Helen's point, (in which Province, although the
Spaniards have a Fort at the Cape, yet the French have planted Colonies
therein) wherewith they calk their ships exceeding well. (Also there is in the
Country of Mexico (but whether in this Province I wist not) the Mountain
Propochampeche, of the same burning nature with Aetna and Vesuvius). The two
Cities here are, 1. Tlascalan, yielding precedencie only to Mexico in all
these parts; and is seated in the pleasantest place of all the Country,
(although Guastachan be said to be very poor in the natural Commodities of the
soil) being also rich and populous, and governed under the King of Spain's
protection in form of a Commonwealth. 2. Villeriche, or the Rich Town: so
called, for that it is a Port through which all Traffic betwixt Old and New
Spain does pass; one Don Anthony making also a good way from hence to Mexico,
the more easily to conduct their merchandise. Yet was it afterward transported
to the Town of True Cross for more Commodity. The two Colonies which the
Spaniards have here, are called James of the Valley and Panuco.

The third Province of Northern America is Jucatan, lying opposite to the
Island of Cuba, called by the Inhabitants, Maiathan, or Maiapar: but the
Spaniards ( Francis Hernandes de Cordova discovering it in 1517) named it
Jucutan, that is, What say you; because when they asked the Countrie's name,
the people not understanding them, answered, Jucutan. It is a great Peninsula,
being 900 miles about; and the more it advances into the Sea, the more it
enlarges it self with two Capes; the Red being toward the North, and Cotoque
toward the South: it is also distinguished into, 1. Jucatan, having two noted
Cities; one whereof for its beauty and greatness they call Caire. 2.
Guatimala, lying betwixt Jucata and Nicaraqua; besides whose Town so called, or
of S. James, are three others, Colonies of the Spaniards; the air of which
Territory is sweet and pleasant, having Mountains and Valleys yielding store of
fruit: and whose Inhabitants (they say) have lost 500000 of their friends by
the Spaniard's cruel dealing. 3. Acasamil, an Isle opposite to Guatimala, whose
chief Town is Santa Cruza, as the Island it self is commonly called. There are
many Deserts in Jucatan, yet rich in many places in Corn, Fruits, Honey, Wax,
Stags, Hares, Geese, and Poultry; it has no rivers, yet remaining always fresh,
because it being stony two or three foot under ground, little Springs and
Brooks flow out. Guatimala (among other herbs and fruits) abounds in a Tree
whose fruit is like an Almond, but not round, serving the Indians for meat,
drink, and also for money; 20000 Cacaos being worth 120 Rialls or 3. l. in
Guatimala, and 200 in Mexico. There is a Lake in this Country 100 miles long,
and 20 broad, etc. The Town through the hills or a Vulcanoe's casting forth
flames of fire, at whose foot it was built, which happened in 1540, December. 20.
it was transported two miles off; But in 1581, there was such an irruption of
fire about two miles from the Town, as if all would have been consumed: and the
next day, filling the Valley with abundance of ashes, it almost buried the
Town. And the year following, this Vulcanoe's fire running downwards 24 hours
space, like a furious torrent, burned rocks and stones, and so heating five
streams, that they were not passable: and some write they were dried up. And
while this was doing beneath, they heard fearful thunders, seeing flames and
lightnings in the air, wonderfully terrifying them. The Jucatans are generous
and warlique, living longer than them of New Spain. They seemed to be more
civil than other Indians; for they did not eat their enemies taken in war,
though they sacrificed them: yea, they abhorred the Mexicans for the same: Also
the Spaniards found a great Town here artificially built of Stone and Lime,
with fair Marketplaces; they had also laws, traffiquing by exchange, without
money. And as to Religion, they had fair Temples, many of whom used
circumcision. In the much frequenting of whose Temples, and their great
Idolatries, they are said to have worshipped the Cross to obtain rain. And
some report, That they told the Spaniards, A beaurifull man had left with them
Crosses for a remembrance, which they found amongst them.

The fourth is Nicaraqua, lying next to Mexico or New Spain, toward the
South-East; which has many places well peopled, but they are small. The two
best Towns therein are esteemed to be, Leon, where they have a Bishop's See;
and New Granado. They say, the Spaniards call this Province (for its
pleasantness and fruitfulness) Mahomet's Paradise; yet is it sandy, and so
burnt with heat in Summer, that a man can scarce travel by day, but by night.
There are in some places, Trees so big, that six men can scarce fathom them:
and some trees are of so delicate a nature, that its branches wither as soon as
they are touched. It is as much annoyed with Parrots, as our Country is with
Crows and Rooks. About 35 miles from Leon, there is a Vulcano or fiery hill,
whose flames may both be seen far in the night; and also that the hole from
whence the fire proceeds, is 250 yards deep, as some have written. These
Nicaraguans are more White than Olive of complexion, and of a good stature: yet
their Country which thus abounds in all things, is not great. Before the
Spaniards made them outwardly Christians, they had a good way of punishment for
theft; the thief to be slave to the robbed till he had made satisfaction. But
for him that should kill the Cacique or Prince, no punishment was by a law
ordained; because they said, such a thing could not happen: Even as Solon
instituted no law for murderers of Parents; for they thought persons were not
so unnatural.

Fifthly, Quivira, whose bound from the rest of Mexicana, is Mare Vermiglio;
and which being situated on the West of America, is divided into Cibola, the
Eastern part, which takes its name from the chief City Cibola therein: and has
another called Totontoa, seated on a river of the same name. Vasquez Dicoronado
subjecting this Province to the Spanish King in 1540, burned Tinquez another
Town or City thereof: and secondly, Nova, or New Albion, the Western part,
lying just over against Tartarie, whence it is thought, the Inhabitants came
first into this New World. Sir Francis Drake discovering this Country in 1585,
and the King thereof willingly submitting himself to Queen Elizabeth, he called
it, New Albion, a name of Great Britain; and whose chief Town is so called.
Some of these people are said to be Canibals; yet has Quivira a temperate air,
and plenty of pasture: wherefore they have store of Kine, which are their
chiefest riches; whose Hides (they say) cover their houses, their flesh yields
meat; their bones, bodkins; their sinews, ropes; their maws, bladders; and
horns, vessels; their hair, thread; their dung, fire; their blood, drink: and
the skins of their Calves, budgets or buckets to draw and keep water. Vasques a
Spaniard, when he conquered this Country, seeing some ships on the farther Sea,
well made, and laden, they conjectured there was traffic from Cathaia and
China hither. And as for New Albion in particular, it is said to be pleasant
both to eye and palate, as abounding in Fruits. There is reported also, to be a
strange kind of Hare, like a Cat in his tail, a Want in his feet, with a bag
under his chin, wherein, after his belly is full, he keeps the rest of his
provision. These Inhabitants are said to be hospitable; yet worshipping devils,
and so given to Witchcraft.

Sixthly, Virginia, which has Florida on the South, Norumbega on the North;
the Sea Del Noort on the East; but the Western limit is unknown. The Natives
called this Country Apalchen; But the English discovering it through Sir Walter
Rawleigh's charges and directions in 1584, in honor of the Maiden-Queen,
Elizabeth, it was named Virginia. There are two Capes on both sides of it, that
of Charles and Henry, and as it were fortified; but one only entrance into it
by Sea, at the mouth of a goodly Bay, two rivers water it; and there are three
chief Towns therein, one being James-Town. Our English went over diverse times
to inhabit it; some returning, as not liking the Country, not so much for its
barrenness, as for unsuitablenesse of the Climate: There were a pretty number;
then were they not a little diminished, for the barbarous Natives slew 300 by
treachery in 1622; but it has been even yearly inhabited since that, by the
English, and diverse plantations made, and houses built; so that they have a
Government, yet acknowledging England's Commonwealth as Supreme; and is very
eminent for the Trade of Tobacco there planted: yet the Country affords other
things, as Pitch, Tar, Rozen, Turpentine, Allom, store of Cedar, Oil, Grapes,
plenty of sweet Gums, Dies, Timber, Iron, and Copper-Mines: and for the land,
(when tilled) it is said, that two acres of some, has brought forth 400
bushels of Corn; they have also abundance of Maize, likewise Beasts, Fowl,
(whereof, as in Marie-land, joining to Virginia, and planted also by English)
their great and goodly Turkies have been commended) fish and fruit. The
natural Inhabitants have their clothing in a mantle of Deer-skin, and before
their privities, an apron of the same; and are reported usually to paint their
bodies with pictures of Serpents, and ugly beasts; worshipping all things,
especially things able to do them hurt, as fire, water, thunder, etc.
New England, which is accounted the North part of Virginia, comes here to be
mentioned, which in a short time (in comparison) (though not without
difficulties and dangers of Natives) grew up to a flourishing plantation, being
now full of good Towns; and for the fruits of the earth, is fitly called
another England. Boston (the name of the chief Town in Lincolnshire) being
their Metropolis. Those who went hence, thither, at the first, were chiefly
such as (both Ministers and people) could not conform to our Bishop's
ceremonies; but were zealous both in preaching and hearing. I take their civil
Government to be a Democracy, or men chose out of the people to govern. And as
for their Church Government, it is a kind of a mixed, between Presbytery and
Independency: whether term of time has not made them colder, and less
conscientious and tender, than at the beginning, I much question; by God's
light and truth, (more clearly breaking forth in this his day) he comes to try
the children of men; for besides the opposition which some among themselves
have found, for differing in points of Religion from the generality, some that
have lately in Gods fear, and from a good intent gone over to them, have found
but coorse entertainment. But Old- England has not so dealt with the Ministers
who have (though not from the necessity that we had here of them) come from
thence hither of late years.

Seventhly, Norumbega, bounded on the South with Virginia, and on the North
with Nova Francia, or New France; whose chief Town named Norumbega, the French
possess and inhabit. The people hereof are said to be indifferently civil;
yet painting their faces, both male and female, and dance much, sometimes stark
naked for agility sake: also much affected to hunting: and whose Wives are
loving and chaste to their Husbands. The Air being also temperate, and the
Countrie's soil fruitful.

Eighthly, New France, discovered by one Jaques Cartier, a Frenchman, in 1534;
where, besides the Native Inhabitants, some few French remain: for the Province
is said to be but barren, and the people baroarous Pagans; yet it has three
chief Towns; two whereof being situate on two rivers, Canada and Sanguinai,
are so called themselves; and Hochelaga, of a round form, and environed with
three Timber rampires within each other, two rods high, and sharp at top,
having but one gate, shut up with bars and piles, and containing but about 50
great houses. Those who dwell not in the Towns, live in Boats, and lying under
them, I suppose, when they sleep. They are also reported to have a conceit of
an earthly Paradise after death, thinking they shall first ascend to the Stars,
and thence be carried into green Fields, beautified with Trees and Flowers, etc.

Ninthly, Terra, or the Land Corterialis, so called from a Portugal named
Gasper Corterialis, who first found it in 1500, it is also called Di
Laborodora, and is bounded on the South with the forementioned River Canada,
and on the North with Estotiland. I find not any Towns this people have, but
their principal Villages are three, Sunta Maria, Breast, and Cabo Marzo.
Canada is a great River 900 miles long, 800 whereof are Navigable, and He has
his rise out of the Hill Hombuedo, being also, at highest overflowing, said to
be 105 miles broad. Some call it Laurence his River, and likewise the River of
the three Brothers. The Natives are said to be brown, swift, good Archers, but
barbarous, living in low Cottages and Caves, (yet they wear Brass, and Silver
Bracelets, as Ornaments) neither seems the Country to be fertile, for that they
feed generally on fish.

Tenthly, And Lastly, Estotiland, the most Northern tract of America as yet
discovered, and called by us New Foundland, on whose South Side, lies the
Land Croterialis, and on a North part thereof, Davis his straits, from one John
Davis, who seeking to find a quicket passage (then before found) by the North
of America, unto Cathaia, and China, performed it not with such prosperous
success as he began it. Yet two others, to wit, Cabot, and Frobisher, were
before him in that design, the one in 1497, the other in 1576, which last,
making three Voyages, and bringing home a great deal of Ore, not worth his
pains, and some of the Natives; he called a great Promontory of this Country,
Queen Elizabeth's Foreland; and the adjoining Sea, Frobishers, Straits. But the
shore of this Region was (so far as I find) first descryed by two brothers,
sent by Zichmi a King of Friezland not far from Groenland; which lies on the
other side of these Straits, in 1390. But there was since these, a re-discovery
hereof, by some of our English, in 1527, since which, it has been much visited
for Fish, called Newfound-land-Fish; wherewith the Seas thereof do so abound,
that they will, in the Summer-Moneths of fishing for this is a cold Country)
take two or three hundred of them in four hours time; whence in our English
ships (called Sacks) they are carried into other parts, especially into Spain;
though present War with that Nation, may hinder that Trade. I have heard some
common Seamen complain of the hardness and barrenness of this Voyage, as also
the toilsomenesse thereof, and that if one fall sick there, while they are at
their work of fishing, he is little better respected then a Dog amongst them,
etc. For the Merchant and Master, carrying away the profit, the very common men
are apt to be cruel to each other, as being earnest to have their voyage made
as much as they can. The Natives also fishing on the Ocean in small Leathern
Boats, carry home under their Arms what they have caught. This soil is said to
be naturally good enough; whose inhabitants some will have, more Witty, and
also judicious then the other Americans.

The Southern Peninsula, called Peruana, extends from Nombrede Dios, and
Panama, unto the Gulfs of Uraba and Michael; Nombre de Dios, standing on the
North Sea, and Panama on the South, which are the two chief Ports of Peruana,
because all traffic between Spain and Peru, must needs pass thereby; The
straight of Land, or Isthmus, whereby it is tied to Mexicana, is called that of
Darien but 17 miles broad, and (as others) but twelve; wherefore some have
moved to Spains Council, that a Navigable Channel may be cut through it to
shorten the common Voyages to China, and the Molucco Islands; but for some
reasons, it has not yet been attempted. This part of America is 17000 miles in
Circuit; containing five principal Provinces or Countries.

First, Castella Aurea, or Golden Castile, comprehending the North part of
Peruana, with part of the Isthmus, and was so called from it is abundance of
Gold. Nombre de dios, and Panama, but now mentioned, must have reference unto
this Country, as also Uraba's and Michaells Gulfs: which are the extent
thereof, and not of all Peruana. This is subdivided into four Provinces. 1.
Castella Del Oro, seated in the very Isthmus; whose two chief Cities built by
one Didacus Niquesa, are, Theonyma, according to the Greek language, or Nombre
de Dios, after the Spanish (so named for that the said Didacus having been
diverse times dismally crossed, bade his men go on shore here, In the name of
God, which those words do signify) and is on the East; and Panama situate on
the West. Secondly, Nova or new Andaluzia, bounded on the South with Peru, on
the North with Castella del Oro; two of whose best Cities are Santa Espritta,
and Saint Margarets, once called Tocoia. Thirdly, Nova, or new Granada, lying
on the South of Cumana, or Cartagena: whose chief Towns are Saint Foye, where
is a Court of Justice, and the seat of an Archbishop; here are also Tungia,
Palma, Veluz, Merida, and Saint Christophers, etc. here is a Sea- Cape, almost
triangular; between whose Western Angle called Araniaes point on the Eastern,
called Salines point, is the Angle named the Three-points. Fourthly, Cartagena,
which has five Cities therein. Cartagena, which the Natives called Calamur,
which Sir Francis Drake seizing on, took vaste sums of Money, and 240 Pieces of
Ordinance in 1585. Also Abvida, Saint Martha, on the River Abvida, having also
other names; New Calet, and Venezuela, They call these three last mentioned
countries; Terra Firma, or the firm land. Neither Panama, nor Nombre de Dios,
have a good Air; but the latter is found the worse of the two, and is commonly
called the Spaniards Sepulcher. Wherefore the King of Spain ordered (in 1584)
Nombrede Dios, to be transported to a lower place, and to name it Saint Philip.
Panama's Air is likewise unwholesome, and it is heat said to be insupportable:
Yea, the whole Country of Golden Castile is but little inhabited; and that,
both for the Ayre's badnesse, proceeding from many dead waters (perhaps like
some lakes, that are in Aethiopia the upper, of whom Ovid speaks; that
whosoever drinks of their waters, either grows mad, or is possessed with a
wonderful heavy drowsinesse) or for the bad ordering or government of the
first discoverers, who brought many to their ends, as in other places. And as
for its fruitfullnesse, Maize grows abundantly, (although wheat does not
ripen there) they have also much Seafish, and fish of Rivers; wherein are
Crocodiles, some being twenty five foot long. It is observed, that our seeds
and plants, become less and worse at Panama, and Nombre de dios, (Coleworts
and Lettices being thrice sown, becoming naught worth, as even changing their
kind) whereas they become better in many parts of New Spain, and Peru. New
Granada is environed very strongly with Rocky Mountains, yet is mostly full of
pleasing Valleys which bear fruit. Near Tungia are Golden Mines, and Emeralds;
and nigh the Cape of the three points, are found store of Pearls, growing in
the fish of Oysters, and called Unions, because two are seldom found alike,
whose price is much fallen, through the great quantity sent thence into Europe;
and also of the Emeraulds, great store of them being drawn not only here, but
also at Portueil, and about Mante in Peru.

Secondly, Guiana, or Guinee, situated under the Aequinoctial line, or, as
some have described it, to be five degrees from it, and that (as one supposes)
toward the South, it has on the South and East the River Maragnon, (named
also Amazone, from the Amazones fabulously reported to have lived here); and
Orellana, from one so called, who first sailed therein in 1543, it is said to
be toward the Sea 200 miles broad, and Navigable 6000 miles) on the West, the
Mountains of Peru, and on the North, the River Orenoque, also called Raliana,
from Sir Walter Rawleigh, who in 1595, made a full survey of this Country;
Ships of Burden will Sail here one thousand miles, and Pinnases and Boats
almost two thousand. The chief Cities and Towns are Manao, called by the
Spaniards Eldorada, that is, the gilded City, from the abundance of Gold that
Deigo Ordas saw therein; this City is so large, that the said Deigo is reported
to have traveled from Noon that he entered it, all that day, and the next day
till night before he could come to the Kings Palace; it is seated on a Salt
Lake 600 miles long. Winicapora, Morequito, which is a safe Harbor, and Saint
Thome, built with dirt and sticks, and which occasioned the undoing of Sir
Walter Rawleigh. The Natives use to dwell in Trees in Winter time for fear of
inundations, on which they do Artificially make ranks of building; (they say
also it is so in Golden Castile, and Brasile) for there is store of River, and
Fresh waters in every part thereof, so that this Country is reported to be
exceeding fruitful, and as green and pleasant to the eye as any in the World.
Experience has and does find it to be stored with Golden Mines. Whence not
only good Gold, but Elephants Teeth are brought. The People being it seems
Black of Color, whom ENGLISH Merchants buy, and sell again as slaves to Work
in other Plantations. The Voyage also hither being accounted sickly.

Thirdly, Brasile, (so called, from a red wood abundantly there growing) was
discovered accidentally, by Peter Alvares Cabral, in 1501, and has on the East
the Vergivian Sea, on the West the Andes or Mountains of Peru, (which are unto
Peruana, as Taurus is to Asia) it begins at the river Maragnon, and extends to
that of Plata or of silver. Among the chief places of Brasile are, Pariba, on
this side of Augustine's Cape, called also, The City of Snow. Parnabuco, or
Pernanambuck, a good Town; whence the Brasile wood used in Europe in dying
clothes, is with us called Fernanbuck. Here are also the Towns Astensio, and
Anna Equitum; and The Bay of all Saints; which Town is seated on a gulf 9
miles broad at the mouth, and 30 in compass, where Whales do enter and sport
themselves; where is also the Governor of the Province, and the Bishop.
Augustine's Cape has 8 degrees and a half of height of the South Pole, and is
the nearest to Africa of any in the New World, not being held above 1000 miles
therefrom. The people are most exceeding brutish and barbarous; the greatest
part living without law, learning, or religion, nor acknowledging any Prince:
they also go generally naked. They are much given to Sooth saying, and are
accounted very great Sorcerers: not loving labor; but affecting idleness,
sports, feasts, and dancing; yet they undertake not war to extend their bounds,
but for honor, when they think themselves wronged, and follow him therein,
whom they hold the most valiant; and eating with solemn feasts, those they take
in war: They seem however, to have a pretty understanding, who blaming the
Spaniard's covetousness in coming from the other World to dig for gold, held
up a wedge of it, and cried out, Behold the God of the Christians. They sound
not L.F. nor R. in their language: one of them declaring the reason of that to
be, because they had neither Law, Faith, nor Rulers among them. The Air of this
Country is delicate, and the Country it self pleasant, being full of Mountains,
Rivers, and Forests, and is distinguished into Plains and Hills always green,
with many plants and various creatures unknown to us of Europe: And besides
their huge Brasile Trees, there is the Plant Copiba, whose bark being cut,
sends forth Balm; unto which remedy, the very beasts when they are bitten with
Serpents and other beasts, (for the hills are high, craggy, and very barren,
and full of ravenous beasts, and poysonsome Serpents) have recourse; so that,
many of these plants are almost without barque. The Cedar also is an ordinary
tree there. The people feed on all kinds of beasts, Apes, Lizards, Serpents,
and Rats; and make their bread of the root of an nerb as big as Purslain, by
first pressing out its deadly juice; then drying it in the Sun, and making meal
thereof; also drink of the same meal, like unto Beer. But the greatest riches
drawn out of Brasile, are very fine Cotton, and excellent Sugars; unto which
traffic, the Portugals are much given, having built diverse places to boil and
refine their Sugar, and entertaining many slaves from Guinee and Congo.
Wonderful rich Mines are also said to be some of the finews of this Region.

Fourthly, Chile, (so called, of a principal Valley, and which word signifies
nipping cold) has for bounds on the North, Peru; on the South, the Magellane
straights. In the 30th degree, (for Chile extends unto the 27th from the height
of 25 and an half, from the South toward the North) is the famous Valley of
Arauco, whose Inhabitants furiously defended themselves, and maintained their
freedom many years. The Metropolitan Town is St. James, built on the river
Parais, in the valley of Mapoco, built by the Spaniards; who have diverse
Colonies here: among which, that of the Imperial is one of the best, which
before the war of the Arauques, had 300000 men of service, as Valdivia had
100000. Arepiqna was one of their fairest Towns, also, which (by a strange
earthquake in 1562, overthrowing Mountains, and stopping rivers passages) was
much defaced, if not ruined; and was said to ruin 300 leagues along the Sea
coast; and renewing again in 1575, it overthrew the Town of Valdivia. This
Country was discovered by one Almagrus, but subdued by Baldivia; whom the
Chilois taking prisoner, they as enraged choked him with melted gold. They are
very warlique, and of a great stature, yet I cannot say (as one) 11 foot high.
This Province has a river (and some say its rivers are such) running violently
by day; but in the night has no water: for it is fed by snow melting from the
mountains, which through night's coldness, congealeth: for the Ayr's piercing
cold (they say) has caused some unsensibly to lose their members in the
Deserts, or else to fall down dead. Chile being without the burning Zone is
like to European Countries, yielding store of Corn, very good Wines, and all
sorts of Fruits that are to be seen in Spain. They have also good pastures,
many Oxen and Sheep, and horses: their Summer being our Winter: But the wars
with them of Arauco (the Spaniards deadly enemies) has made it not to be well
peopled; whose Inhabitants that are, are attired in wild beast's and Seals
skins, and armed with Bows and Arrows.

Fifthly, Peru is bounded on the South with Chile, and on the North with Golden
Castile, and is divided into three parts, Mountains, Plains, and Andes: along
the Sea it is plain and low, with many Valleys, and is 1500 miles long, and but
30 or 45 broad. Toward the East are the Andes or two chains of Mountains in
view of each other, and are said to run from the Magellan strait, where they
begin, between Nombre de Dios and Panama, unto the firm land; called also
Cordeliere: Westward is Sierra or the Mountain, their breadth being not above
60 miles; so that Peru is not above 120 miles broad in all: and has about 50
Valleys, the chief being Xauxa, (42 miles long, and 15 broad) with 3 others.
This Country takes its name from the river Peru, with which it is likewise
bounded on the North side; but the principal Rivers are Maragnon Guaiachil, and
Rio di la Plate; which last is said to be 2000 miles in length, and 150 broad
at the mouth. All the Natives are distinguished chiefly by three sorts, whose
languages are distinct: and every one contains many other people under them,
differing in names. They used to war against each other, till by the victory of
Ginacave, (whom I take to be Guaimacapa, the 5th King of Peru, that we have
knowledge of) the cause of that contention was taken away: eight Kings we find
mentioned, Ingoraia being the first, Amare the last; which election of a King
among them is conjectured, by their own computation, to be in 1280, or somewhat
thereabouts: and that, before, their Government was Aristocratical. Francisco
Pizarre seized on this Kingdom for the Spanish King, so ending the Controversy
between Guascar and Atabalipa, Guaimacapa's sons, who strove for Empire,
killing Guascar, and vanquishing Atabalipa nigh the City Caximaca: who after a
vast slaughter of his men, continued a prisoner, and treacherously slew him,
after they had received from him a house full of pure gold and silver, worth
about 10 millions, for the ransom of his life; this was in 1533. Peru's
principal Towns or Cities are 8. Cusco, being the seat of the Kings of the
Nation; beautified (by their command) with Noblemens residing Palaces, and in
which is a fair Marketplace; in which, two highways, straight and level,
and crossing the Country, being 2000 miles long, do thwart one another. Here is
S. Michaels, which was the first Colonie the Spaniards planted here: also
Arequipa, which being situated on the river Plata, is the Haven-Town to Cusce:
likewise Portoveio, where (if it may be credited) the grave-diggers light many
times on men's teeth, which are three fingers broad: Then Lima, the seat of the
Viceroy, and the Sea of an Archhishop: the Town is artificially built, neither
is there scarce a private house whereinto water is not conveyed from the River.
To speak here of their manners, I shall forbear; only this, when they
conquered any Country, they allotted the first part to the service of their
gods, the second to their King's revenues; and the third to the poors relief
and maintenance: But as for the Countrie's quality, one thing is even to be
admired, that in so small a distance as in the breadth of Peru, it neither
rains, snows, nor thunders in the plains: and on the Sierra, the seasons have
their course, as in Europe, and on the Andes it rains almost all the Winter.
The tillage of the Valleys is but a league on either side distant from the
rivers; and though it rain not on these plains in Winter; yet the Sky is full
of thin mists, whence falls a thin humor, which although it scarce wet the
dust, yet makes much for the bringing that to perfection which is sown: also
nigh Lima these mists do without other water, cause some places to flourish,
and to be full of good pastures. There are also some parts of the plains where
no rivers being, abundance of Corn grows, and all kinds of fruit; which must
be either from moisture from the Sea, or which rivers put forth, or from their
being lost in the sand. Sierra abounds in Pastures and Forests, where do feed
a multitude of Vicagnes, like Goats, and Guanacos, and Pacos, which is a kind
of Indian sheep, who use to bear their burdens. The Andes have great store of
diverse sorts of Apes and Monkeys, also Parrots. But their herb Coca (much
esteemed) yields them yearly, at Potosi, whither it is sent, 500000 Crowns: in
sum, the soil, says one, is luxuriant in all manner of grain, whose
Inhabitants are civil, their Cities frequent, and their air wholesome: they
have also great store of Tobacco, which our Gerard the Herbalist calls (I take
it) Henbane of Peru: But as for gold and silver, it has more than any Province
in America: whose Mines (one says) in some places yield more of these metals,
than earth: and besides other Merchandise, they do draw abundance of these
metals; yet New Spain has the other richer merchandises. Yet Peru's riches
does commonly furnish two third parts of all, which come from America: and
among Peru's treasures, two are most eminent: the one is, the exceeding
quantity of silver Mine of Potosi: the other, the Mines of Guancavelque, where
is found much Quicksilver; the one being discovered in 1545, the other in 1567.

CAPUT VICTORIAE, or the Cape of Victory, is accounted the very Pyris or Spear
of the American Pyramid; and was so called, from the Ship called the Victory;
in which, some of Magellanus his Soldiers did pass, when they first compassed
the World. For Magellanus, a Spaniard, addressed himself to a Voyage in 1520,
to find, if it were possible, a nearer cut to the Moluccoes; who passing along
by this Cape, and so through narrow Seas, called, from him, Magellan's
Straights, arrived at those Moluccoes; but was slain in a battle against the
Islanders: yet the Ship named the Victory, is said to have returned safely into
Spain. So that although Sir Francis Drake is said usually, and by John Lyrius,
to be the first who sailed round the World, when he passed through these
Straights, and thence to the Molucco Islands; and then homeward from the East
by Africa: (wherefore, he gave the Globe of the Earth with this Motto, Tu
primus circumdedisti me, that is, Thou first have encompassed me): Yet it must
not simply be understood, that none had gone round before him; but that never
any of fame; because Magellane was killed as aforesaid. It is also observable,
That Drake's Navigation was finished in two years and a halfs time, with great
fortune, being begun in 1577. But to come to Magellanica; the second general
part of the New World: All that situated to the South and Pole Antarctique is
so called from these Magellan Straights, which by one, that says he knew every
Creek therein, are said to be three. The first lying 14 leagues within S.
Marie's Cape, three leagues in length, ebbing both violently and swiftly; and
whose first fall (for it is not fully half a mile broad) is very dangerous:
then after, a Sea eight miles both in breadth and length, is the second strait,
a dangerous and unpleasing passage, three leagues long, a mile broad: which
opening it self into another Sea, reaches even to the Cape of Victory. The
third, properly called Magellan's Strait, enters, whose length is 40 leagues,
two leagues broad in some, but in other places not half a mile; which way
soever a man turn, here, the wind will be surely against him; for on both sides
are high Mountains always covered with snow; whence those counter-winds, beating
on all sides, do issue forth. The waters course is here, likewise, full of
turnings and changings: nor any anchorage to be expected, the channel being on
the shore side 200 fathom. But Magellanica is situated beyond the 53d degree
from the Aequinoctial; so that, that place of Magellanica unto which Magellane
pierced, does agree to the Elevation of our Pole, says Keckerman; for on the
further side of the Straights to the South of Peru, Magellane found a huge land
toward the South Pole, and touched on it again before he came to the
Moluccoes: since whom, the Portugals trading toward Calecute and the
East Indies, some of them have been driven by tempest so far, as to that now
called the South Continent: diverse also of sundry Nations have upon occasion
touched on it: it is certainly discovered in some places to come up toward the
North, to the Tropic of Capricorn: and is conjectured to go Southward as far
as to the Pole: the reason is, because none ever perceived the Sea to pass
through any part thereof: neither has so much as any great River been descryed
to come out of it into the Ocean: so that, if this be so, this lump of earth is
as big as Asia, Europe, Africa, and America put all together. There are yet
reported very few memorable things hereof; some write there be very vast
Countries and Wildernesses over against the Moluccoes; (but no mention of any
Inhabitants). James Chynaeus says, there are five parts numbered (by some) of
Magellanica, who have followed rather conjectures, than sure experience: these
are, 1. Terra, or the Land, Del Fuogo, or Feuga, lying on the South of these
Straits, and, says one, here to forethought to be a part of the South unknown
Continent; but is now discovered to be an Island, by two Hollanders, who Jan.
25. 1615, entered the Strait, which separated it from the South Continent: they
called it Fretum le Mayre or Mayre's Strait, the name of one of the
discoverers. It is 28 English miles long, of a fair and equal breadth, where is
plenty of good fish, especially Whales and Sea-calves. 2. Regio Patalis, or the
Patalian Country. The third is, Regio Psittacorum, or the Parrets Country, from
the abundance there found. Fourthly, Regio, or the Country of Locah. Fifthly,
Z^nzibar; however Keckerman lays it down for one of his theoremes, that this
part of the World is nothing as yet searched out, besides the shoars which are
wathed with the Magellanick strait, that is, says he, besides the Seaey-parts;
which notwithstanding, may be those five particular places mentioned. And
whereas a great Mathematician has found fault with some Map-makers, because in
describing this Continent, they mention not Cities, Kingdoms, nor
Commonwealths here seated, whereof he seemed in words confidently to avouch,
that there are many; and that it is as good a Country as almost any in the
World, yet he delivered not his grounds, why he gathered it so to be; yet we
may think (the premises being granted to be true) that the Creator framed not
so huge a Mass, but that he appointed likewise some of mankind to inhabit the
same.

But before we mention the American Islands, we will take notice of three or
four places in South America, which although the Spaniards possess; yet their
names seem not to be so frequent among us; as first the Province of Quito, 200
miles long, and 100 broad, more cold then hot, thoug^ situated under the
Equator; It Is chief Town is called Saint Francis, built in 1534, seated in a
Valley among Mountains, and is 80 leagues, both from Saint James's Town, and
Saint Michael, they have Summer here from April to November. The Natives are
mean of statute, yet are said to be both good for Tillage, and ordering of
Catrell, and their Goats have three, and sometimes five Kids at a time, they
have found one Mine of Quicksilver, besides the ordinary Mines, which is
yellow, and smelling like Brimstone, when put into the fire. On the East of
Saint Francis Town, is a country called Canelle of the Cinnamon, which differs
from the ordinary sort, and whos^ Tree we shall not here describe; but fruits
and beasts of Europe (especially fruits, Sugars, and Oranges) do profit in no
part of Peru, berter then in Quito; which in 1587, was much ruined by an
Earthquake, and amongst others, there is one place which thrusts forth so much
fire as it exceeds the noise of Thunder; and is seen above three hundred miles,
whose abundance of Ashes are said sometimes to cover the Country 200 miles
about. Secondly, S. Croix of the Mount, on a small Mountain, a Town held by the
Spaniards, and by them built, 400 miles from Plata, toward the North of a
Country, where there is not a stone so big as a Nut, either on the Land, or
within the Water; But before they descend hereinto, they pass a Mountain
betwixt the Rivers Orillagno, and Plata, which being a branch of the Andes,
extends to the Magellane strait, whose top is always covered with Snow and Ice,
and seems to be the abode of the Cerigans. Here is a River called the River of
Vapai, rising and falling like Nile, (but running slow) whereby the plain
Country is subject to inundations. Wherefore the Ants to defend their Harvest
(chiefly at Vapai) do make many small rampires, about one Cubit high, and
twelve or fifteen in Circuit: whither passengers do retire, when the waters
surprise them. The Country yields abundance of Rice, Maize, diverse fruits and
Cotton; but neither Wheat, nor Wine. They have also many beasts different
from ours, but Vipers, very great, long, and strange of condition; and many
Ostriches. Their Lakes are full of Fish also; and at Saint Croix; (which is
strange) is a small River, but two fadome broad, and very shallow, not running
above a League (for it is suddenly lost in the sand) furnishing the Town both
with water, and all sorts of good Fish, so that they can take them with their
hands, or a pail; and it lasts from February to May, but afterward there is
but little seen. Amongst the diverse barbarous people here, are the Cerigans and
Vayracans, who either always war with each other, or fight against the
Spaniards, seeking to their utmost to hinder their passage; they eat man's flesh
as we do Mutton. To speak of all their manners, would be here too tyresome;
only I observe that the Varayes language extends it self both to Brasile, and
Paraguay unto the Garayes, and their Neighbors Country. So that, as one may
in a manner travel through the World with the Latin, Arabian, and Sclavonian
Tongues; so with the Varayes Tongue, that of Cusco and Mexico, they may in a
manner pass over all the New World. Also, that these Varayes, although they
say, they are all equal among themselves; yet greater than their neighbors,
whom they so despise, that they demanded of a Priest, whether they would
baptize them with the same water they did others, if so be they became
Christians. Thirdly, Tucuma, which is a Realm extending 600 miles betwixt
Brasile, Chile, St. Croix, and Paragua, where the Spaniards planted five
Colonies. 1. Salta, the last place of Peru, standing in a Valley eighty four
miles long, and thirty broad; near which is the Valley Calchioqui, ninety miles
long from North to South, full of Rivers, and courageous people, who fighting
diverse years with the Spaniards, at length, the Prince was (by friendship) made
obedient to the Spaniard, making himself a Christian, but through bad usage he
revolted, till after twenty seven years, one with three hundred Peruan Archers,
five hundred Horse, and 100 Spanish foot, ended that enterprise. 2. Steco. 3.
Saint James, 150 miles from Steco, where the Governor and Bishop reside.
Fourthly, Cordova in Spains situation, though colder in winter, and more
temperate in Summer; it is 180 miles from Chile. Fifthly, St. Michael. The
Country is generally plain, it rains much, the Rivers easily overflowing, and
the Winds very violent, Salta's Valleys abounds with fish; a good soil feeding
much Cattle, the Air is very temperate, and it wants therein nothing but
people, Stecoes Territory has store of Cotton, Corn, Cattle, and Fruit. 4.
Paragua, whose Inhabitants dwell on the Confines of Tucuma, and take their name
from the river along which they dwell. This river is very spacious, over which
they pass in boats made hollow of a Tree fitly growing for that purpose,
called Zaine. Here are 6 Towns, the chief whereof is called Vray Foy, or the
true faith. The Country was first discovered by the North Sea, by Sebastian
Cabot, and diverse Spanish Captains; then by Diego Roias and others, by the way
of Peru.

Coast we a little the American Islands, and so draw to a Conclusion. These are
either those lying in Mare del Zur, or the Pacifique Sea, or in the Vergivian
Ocean, or Mare del Noorte, so called, from one Noorte a Dutchman, who first
thoroughly searched it. Those lying in the former Sea, are either the Insulae
Latronum, or the Islands of Robbers, and commonly called Latrones, they are two
in number, a good distance from the Moluccoes; which name, Magellane, who
discovered them, is said to give them, because the Native Islanders stole away
his Cockboat. But says one, when the Spaniards had once found out an ordinary
passage from the South Sea, toward the Moluccoes, they never ceased to travail
that way, and discover more and more, whereby they found out diverse Islands not
formerly known; as two, a good distance from the Moluccoes; which, because they
be inhabited by men who not only steal from each other, but pilfer away all
they can from strangers landing thereabouts; they are called Insulae Latronum,
or the Islands of Robbers. Or the Insulae Salomonis, Salomon's Isles; which are
nearer to the East Indies: these are said to be many in number, 18 whereof are
worth the minding: and of those, S. Thome, S. Isabella, and Gaudalcanall are
the three biggest. Lope Garcia discovered these in 1567, and mistaking them for
the the Land of Ophir, whither Solomon sent for gold, he so named them: yet (it
seems) he found store of gold to be in them, or else he could not have had a
pretense for the same. The Inhabitants are said to go naked, and to be
yellowish in color. Some other Islands also, Magellane himself descryed: at
which, he landing, as thinking to furnish himself with Victuals and fresh
water, in his passage to the Moluccoes, found the places wholly barren and
uninhabited; wherefore he called the Insula's, Infortunatas, or Unhappy
Islands, as being contrary in quality to the Canaries, which are termed, The
Fortunate or Happy Islands. Those in the Vergivian Sea, which is so called, a
Vergendo, from bending, are reckoned 9 in number: as, 1. Hispaniola, called by
the Natives Haitie and Quisquaia; and by the Spaniards, Hispaniola, and S.
Dominico, from the chief Town they have built there. It was (as aforesaid) the
first place of the New World that was descryed, and is 500 miles long; the
breadth being diverse, in the largest place, about 300 miles. Here at Dominico,
is a President, an Archbishop, and a Court and Seat of Justice, with 5
Monasteries. The Spaniards are said to have murdered 3 millions of her
Inhabitants. There are other Towns, as S. John, Port Royal, Port of Plata,
Cavana, Xaragua, with some others which the Spaniards builded not. The late
Voyage and design of our English thither, is too too fresh in memory amongst
us, by reason of the bad success, and repulse there received. The air of this
Island is said to be temperate; for, all plants brought out of Spain, do
wonderfully grow and increase there; but Wheat comes better in hilly places:
and they report, that roots as well as herbs will ripen and be fit to eat in 16
days. It has many Havens, and Rivers, especially 4 great rivers coming from
the tops of Mountains, which being about the midst of the Island, they run
several ways. They draw abundance of salt out of the Mountains like Crystal.
In the midst of the great Lake Haquey Gabon, whose water is salt, is the Island
Guarizanta, very fit for fishing. The Island also yields gold, and in the
Cabanien Mountains are said to be Mines exceeding full: There is likewise great
abundance of Sugar, Cassia, Ginger, Mastick the wood Aloes, and Cinnamon; also
they have Azure. Now also they have so many tame beasts, that they transport a
multitude of Hides from thence into Spain; whereas before the coming of the
Spaniards thither, there was but three kinds of four-footed beasts. The Natives
go naked, are sloathfull, living only of their fishing: But the Inhabitants
have now great traffic, growing rich, since Sugarcanes have been brought
thither, whereby they have made Mills and shops. 2. Cuba, called also
Ferdinand, which lies on the West of Hispaniola: it is 300 leagues long from
East to West, and 65 broad, but in many places not 20. Here are six Towns, the
principal being that of S. James, where a Bishop resides: also there is Havana,
most frequented of all the Island, it being a safe rode for shipping, and the
Staple Town for Merchandise; the other are held not to be very well peopled;
But at Havana rides the King of Spain's Fleet, till the season and the wind do
join to wafte them homeward. S. James or Jago, was so named of James de Valasco
who built it; both these Towns being also seated on the Northern shore of the
Island. There are many dangerous shelves about it: it is likewise hilly and
full of Forests and Rivers, having many Lakes both fresh and salt. The
Natives, before it was discovered, lived all in common, as content with what
nature brought forth, delighting also to tame Serpents, (of which there are
many here) and went naked as them in Hispaniola. The air here is said to be
temperate: having fine brass and Mines of gold in the Mountains, and the
gravel of rivers almost all gold, which is yet said to be somewhat drossie. It
is reported to abound with Ginger, Cassia, Mastick, the wood Aloes, Cinnamon,
and Sugar; 15 miles from Saint James Town, is a Valley covered naturally with
great bowls of stone, which seem as if set for pleasure; and nigh the Princes
Port, is a Spring casting forth Pitch continually. Thirdly Jamaica, or Saint
James his Island, which has Cuba on the North, Hispaniola on the East. It is
fifty Leagues, or as one says, two hundred and eighty miles long, and about
twenty five leagues or as another, 70 miles broad. Whether Columbus himself
discovered i^, I will not dispute; but Didaque his son subdued it to Spain in
1509. Its two Towns of note being Oristagne, and Sevill; in which is a Temple
called an Abbey. The Natives were either like, or more cruel then them of
Hispaniola, and Cuba, in their manners. The Air is said to be good, the
Country fruitful in great numbers of Cattle, by reason of their waters, and
pastures. Mines of Gold are said also to be there; their Rivers and Lakes
abounding in Fish, and having much Sugar and Cotton. This place is known to
have been a retreat for our repulsed and diminished men at Hispaniola, who are
now in possession thereof; yet many men have died since their landing there,
bu^ the Country may prove (through time and custom) propitious enough unto our
Country men, for many go over, and the Island has in it self (for fertility) a
good commendation. Fourthly, The Canniballs, or Caribe Islands which are all
those stretching out in a double rank from the East, to the South of
Hispaniola, in view of the main or firm land. Most of them are not inhabited;
but of those which are, Saint John's Island is the chief, and is called by the
Natives Boriquen, lying near Hispaniola on the East, and situated North from
Guiana, of whose length and breadth, I find great difference in relating; some,
that it is 300 miles long, and seventy broad; others that it is but fifty miles
long, and eighteen broad. It is also said to be divided into two parts; whereof
the North has most plenty of Gold, and the South part of Corn, Fruit, and
Cattle; it abounds also in Fish, and they find very good Gayac. John Ponce the
Spaniard first set foot hereon in 1527. The chief Town is Saint John's where is
a very good Haven; then Port Rico, which the Earl of Cumberland ruined in 1597.
Fifthly Cubagna: and sixthly Margarita; the first lying next to Saint John's,
and both situated near Golden Castile, and are wanting in Grass, Trees, Corn,
and Water. But if it be true, that this people sometimes gladly Exchange a
Tun of Wine for a Tu^ of Water, I think they have great store of that; but
they abound in Pearls; whence one is called Margarita, that is, a Pearl; It
yields especially the Gems called Unions, because they always grow in Couples.
The Natives of all the Caribes are brown colored, having little Hair, cruel,
eating man's flesh, their Arrows are poisoned, and using to go to Sea in little
Skiffs of one piece, which they call Canoes. Seventhly, Trinidado, not far
distant from these, which is stored with good Tobacco, called by Gerard Tobacco
of Trinidado. Columbus discovered it in his last Voyage, in the year 1497. This
Island I take to be about a hundred or two hundred leagues from Barbados, and
whither, about the beginning of our late Wars, some went for liberty of
Conscience sake, as thinking here would not be liberty granted; but the Voyage
proved not answerable to their expectation, most of whom I think returned to
England. Eighthly, The Bacalaos, which are some Isles seated nigh the land
Corterialis. These people have a King, whom they are said to reverence by
stroaking their foreheads, and rubbing their Noses; whom if the King means to
grace, as accepting of them, he turns his head to his left shoulder, as a
token of special favor. Sebastian Cabot first descried these in 1447.
Ninthly, The Bermudas, called Summer Islands, from one Sir Thomas Summers, who
gave the most exact description of them; But he that gave the first cognizance
thereof, was John Bermudas: they are in all 400; the biggest whereof is planted
with an English Colony, and is in form like a half Moon, It is reported to be
agreeable to the nature of Englishmen, and a very fruitful place. We must not
forget two other known Islands, to wit, Saint Christophers, and the Barbados;
the former being inhabited by French, and English, and though of no vast
greatness yet indifferently good, where is Cotton, and Tobacco, though
somewhat heady; they have likewise other fruits, as Orenges, etc. The latter
the English are sole Masters of, which was taken from the Spaniard within this
thirty years, and through industry become (according to the bigness of the
place) an eminent Plantation, for Cotton and Brown Sugar: they have also
Tobacco, but it is of the worst sort, wherefore they scarce now plant it; also
Ginger in good quantity. The chief Town is called Indian-bridge, whither
Vessels for traffic and otherwise do come; and wherein are shops and
handicrafts men, but their houses are built low, by reason of winds called
Hirricanes; amongst other food, they have much of the fish called Tortle; which
is a good meat, and being dressed, eats like Veal.

The Indians have a convincement (though barbarous) of a God, lifting up their
eyes to Heaven in adversity, etc. But their foolish minds being darkened, they
had many foolish customs toward the deceased; for those of Peru, and the
neighbor Countries, holding that men use to eat, drink, and wantonize with
women after burial, did commonly either kill, or bury quick some of the
deceased, his best beloved wife and servants, to wait on him in the other
world: they also under the figure of Idols of stone, and wood of terrible
shapes, worshipped Devils for fear of harm they did, or might do them. The
Devil being said to speak in diverse of these Images, and give answer to their
Priests. But the Mexicans (besides their Images) would sometimes worship living
Idols; as a Prisoner, whom they attiring, and trimming like an Idol, would
sacrifice, etc. unto him: at length, when the Comedy was ended, and he grown
fat in a Cage, they slaying him for sacrifice, made a Feast among themselves.
They of Peru had some Guacoes or Temples common to the whole Realm, and others
private to every Province; But the Mexicans exceeded them of Peru much in
greatness of Temples and ceremonies: whose Priests were divided into the
little, greater, greatest of all, which were called Popes: they sacrificed in
their Temples, every one according to his degree; whose continual exercise was
to cast incense on their Idols; at Sunrising, or Sunsetting, at noon, or at
midnight. And besides Priests, there were Monasteries of women: in Peru one in
every Province, in which were two sorts of women, some young Virgins, others
called Mamacones, of ripe age, who commanded and instructed the others. The
Mexicans had also a sort of religious, called the daughters of Penance, not
above 13 years of age, and whose profession lasted but a year: who were shut up
in chastity, swept the Temple, prepared meat set before the Idol, which his
Ministers did eat. The Peruans sacrificed whatsoever they had good or goodly to
their gods: But the Mexicans did not sacrifice any men-children or Virgins, but
what they took in war: wherefore, that they might have a great number, they
subdued the Town Tlascala, most paganly entreating them. Those of Cusco
counterfeited Supper, as a Sacrament of confederation and union with the Sun,
and the Ingua or Prince. The Mexicans (most remarkably) made an Idol of roasted
Maize and Blite seed, mixed with honey, which they carried in procession with
merry ceremonies; then stripping the Idol, distributed pieces of the paste to
the people, who received them with great reverence, saying, They did eat the
flesh and bones of their god. They in Peru counterfeited confession, having
Priests to hear it, holding it also a great offense to conceal any sin in
confession; they went to it in adversity, and when the Ingua was sick: But the
Ingua confessed not his sins to a Priest, but to the Sun, that he might tell
them to Vira coca; then entering into a running brook, he said, I have confessed
my sins unto the Sun; thou river carry them into the Sea, where they may remain
for ever drowned. They worshipped also three Images of the Sun: naming one the
Father, another the Son, the third, the Brother: and of their god of thunder,
named Chuchille, they had three Statues, unto whom they attributed the same
names. Likewise as to marriage, those of S. Croix of the Mount, hinder
marriages in some causes, and dissolve that which is contracted; and in some
causes, the joined, cannot be separated, though it be unlawful. But as for the
Government of the New World; since the Spaniard's masterdome: there are in all
two Vice-royes; the one at Mexico in New Spain; the other of Peru, residing at
Lima: this last having the greatest authority. There are likewise 5 Sovereign
Courts both in New Spain, and Peru, at 5 several Towns, unto which both
Spaniards and Indians have equal recourse, and from which none may appeal.
Here are likewise four Archbishopricks: one at St. Dominico, another at Mexico,
a third at Lima, the fourth at S. Foy in the New Realm: the first having three
Bishops under him; the second, 10; the third, 9; the fourth also 3. Five sorts
of Popish Orders they have also in the New World, of Francis, Dominick,
Augustine, De la Merced, and Jesuits. There are moreover two Inquisitions; the
one at Lima, the other at Mexico. Also two Universities in the same Towns. And
it is also observed, that the Indians are not admitted to their communion, but
after long proof; and with more difficulty at Peru, than at Mexico: neither do
they suffer them commonly to study either Divinity or Philosophy: and seldom
admitting them to any Orders, because of their inclination to drunkenness.

FINIS.
AN Alphabetical Table of the Empires, Kingdoms, Provinces, and
Commonwealths, contained in this Geographicall Description of the World.
A In EUROPE.
ASTURIA. 11 Andaluzia. ib. Arragon. 14 Ancona. 18 Alsatia High, and Low. 21
Austria. ib. Aroe. 24 The Islands Alandes. ib. Achaia. 29 Albania. ib. Arcadia.
ib. Argolis. ib. Achaia propria. ib. Achaia. ib. Aetolia. 30 Albania. ib. The
Aegean Sea. 31
In ASIA.
Aeolia. 37 The three Arabia's. ib. Aeolis. 40 Armenia Minor. 42 Asia Major. 44
Armenia Major. 53 Arabia. 54 Agara. ib. Asia Minor, or Anatolia. 57 Assyria.
65, and 75. Aria. 70, and 76. Arachosia. 71 Asiatica. 78 The Amazons. 82
Aracham. 86 Ancheo. 87
In AFRICA.
Argiers. 96 Azgar. 100 Aethiopia the Upper. 107, and 110 Angotte. 109 Amara.
ib. Aethiopia the Nether, 111 Ajan. 117 Abex. ib. Adel. ib. The African
Islands. ib. The Azoers. 118 Egypt. 120
In AMERICA.
Acasamil. 136 Nova Andaluzia. 140
B In EUROPE.
BRITAIN. 4 Biscay. 12 Brabant. 15 Bolognia. 18 Bohemia. 21 Bavaria. ib.
Brandenburg. ib. Bothnia. 24 Bezan. 25 Biolysero. 26 Bulgaria. 28 Bosnia. ib.
Baeotia. 30 The Baleares. 34 The British Isles. 35
In ASIA.
Bythinia. 37, and 41 Bengala. 82 Bocan or Balassia. ib. Barma. 86 Borneo. 92
In AFRICA.
Barbary. 93, 94. Bugia. ib. Benin. 106 Burnum. ib. Barnagas. 108 Barris. ib.
Bamba. 113 Batte. ib.
In AMERICA.
Brasile. 142 The Batalao's Islands. 150 The Bermudas Islands being 400. ib.
The Barbados. ib.
C In EUROPE.
COrduba. 11 Castile. 12 Catalonia, 13 Calabria. 14 Carinthia. 21 Two
Carnioles. ib Croatia. 28 Chios. 32 The Cyclades. ib. Coos. ib. Creet. ib.
Cephalenia. 33 Corfu. ib. Corsica. 34
In ASIA.
Cilicia, 57 Caria, ib. Cappadocia, ib. Chaldea, ib. Coelosyria, 44 Camogena,
ib. Cyprus, 62 Carmania, 69, and 76 Cathaia, 79 Cambaia, 81 Calicute, 84
Camboye, 86 Cauchin China, ib. and 87 Canton, 87 Cansay, ib. Chequeam, ib.
In AFRICA.
The Country of Constantine, 94 Chauz, 101 Cano, 106 Conga, 112 Cafaria, 117
The Canaries, 118
In AMERICA.
Castella Aurea, 140 Castella del Oro, ib. Cartagena, 141 Chile, 143 Caput
Victoriae, 145 St. Croix, 148 Cordova, 149 Cuba, 150 The Caribe Islands, ib.
Cubagna, ib. St. Christophers Island. ib.
D In EUROPE.
DRent, 15 Denmark, 23 Davine, 26 Dacia, 27 Dalmatia, 28 Doris, 30
In ASIA.
Drangiara, 70
In AFRICA.
Ducalia, 98 Damut, 109
E In EUROPE.
EPirus, 29 Elis, ib. Eubva, 32 The Echinades, 33 Ebuisia. 35
In AFRICA.
Ezzabe, 94
In AMERICA.
Estotiland, 139
F In EUROPE.
FRance, 9 Friseland, 15 Flanders, ib. Ferrara, 18, 19 Florence, ib. Francony,
21 Fiona, 24 Finland, ib.
In ASIA.
Foquien, 87 Fez, 97, and 99
In AMERICA.
Florida, 131 New France, 139
G In EUROPE.
GRanada, 11 Gallicia. 12 Groningue, 15 Gueldres, ib. Geneva, 16 Genoa, 19
Germany the Great, 20 Gothland, 24 Greece, 29 Gallinaria, 35 Gades, ib.
In ASIA.
Galatia, 37, 42 Galilee, 46 Gedrosia, 70, 76
In AFRICA.
Guzule, 98 Garet, 101 Guinea, 106 Guala, ib. Gialosi, ib. Ganaga, ib. Goaga,
ib. Gueguere, 109 Gorgades, 118
In AMERICA.
Galicia Nova, 133 Gasteran, 135 Guatimala, 136 Guiana, 141
H In EUROPE.
HOlland, 15 Helvetia, or Switzerland, 17 Holsatia, 21, and 24 Hungary, 22
In ASIA.
Hyrcania, 37, 71, and 76 Honam, 87
In AFRICA.
He, 97 Hascora, 98 Habat, 100 The Hesperides, 119
In AMERICA.
Hispaniola, 31, and 50
I In EUROPE.
IReland, 7 Jutia, 24 Jugaria, 26 Illiris, 29 The Ionian Islands, 33 Ithaca,
ib.
In ASIA.
Ionia, 37, 39 India, 81 Judea, 48 Idumaea, 52 Japon, 90 The Islands Java, 91
In AMERICA.
Jucatan, 135, 136 St. James, 149 Insula Infortunata, ib. Jamaica, 151
L In EUROPE.
LOrrain, 15 The Low Countries, or Lower-Germany, ib. Latium, or Campania, 18
Luca. ib. The Lantgrave of Hessen, 21 Lusatia, ib. Lapland, 24 Locris, 30
Lemnos, 32 Lesbos, ib. Leucadia, 33 The Ligurian Isles, 35
In ASIA.
Lycia, 37, 39 Lydia. 40 Lycaonia. 43 Leucosyria. ib. La-us. 92
In AFRICA.
Lybia. 93
In AMERICA.
The Country of Locah. 147 Insulae Latronum. 149
M In EUROPE.
MUrcia. 12 Millane. 14 Mantua. 18 Moravia. 21 Misnia. ib. Muscovy. 25
Mosaiski. 26 Moldavia, 27 Macedonia. 29, 31 Migdonia. ib. Messenia. 29 Megaris.
30 The Mediterranean Isles. 33
In ASIA.
Both the Mysia's. 37, 40 Mesopotamia. 65, and 75 Media. 67, 75. Mandoa. 82
Macia. 86 The Moluccoes. 92
In AFRICA.
Morocco. 97 M^lli. 106 Monotapa. 111 Magadascar, 119
In AMERICA.
Magellanica, 131 Mexicana, 132 Mexico, 133, 134 Mechovachan, ib.
N In EUROPE.
NAvarre, 11 Naples, 14 The United Provinces or Netherlands, 15 Norway, 24
Novagrod, 26 The Isles of Naples, 35
In ASIA.
Natolia, 38 Nabathea, 55
In AFRICA.
Numidia, 103 The Land of Negroes, 106 Nubia, ib.
In AMERICA.
Nicaraqua, 136 Norumbega, 139
O In EUROPE.
OVeryssell, 15 Oderkrain, 21 Olympia, 31
In ASIA.
The Isle Ormus, 72 Olam, 87 Oquiam. ib. The Oriental Islands, 90
P In EUROPE.
POrtugal, 13 Perpigna, ib. Poville, 14 The Patrimony, 18 Palatinate, 21
Polonia, 22 Plescovia, 26 Pernia, ib. Petzore, ib. Peleponnesus, 29
In ASIA.
Pamphilia, 39 Both Phrygia's, 41 Pontus, 42 Paphlagonia. ib. Pisidia. 43
Phoenicia, 44 Palaestina, 45 Persia, 68 Parapomisus. 71 Parthia, 76
Procopensis, 77 Pegu, 86 Pasquia. 87 The Islands, Philippinae, 92
In AFRICA.
Pango, 113 Pemba. ib.
In AMERICA.
Peruana, 140 Peru, 144 Regio Patalis, 147 The Parrot's Country. ib. Paragua,
149
Q In ASIA.
QUinckeu, 87 Quinsay. ib.
In AMERICA.
Quivira, 137 Quito, 147
R In EUROPE.
ROme, 18 Romagnia, ib. Ragouse, 20
S In EUROPE.
SCotland, 4 Spain, 10 The Isle of Sicily, 14 Sardinia. ib. Savoy, 17 Sabina
Perugia. 18 Suevia or Suaube, 21 Stiria, ib. Both Saxony 's. ib. Silesia. ib.
Scania, 23 The Island of Seeland. ib. Sweden. 24 Strickfinia. ib. Smolensko,
ib. Susdali. ib. Servia, 28 Sclavonia. ib. Samothracia, 31 Salamis, ib. The
Sporades, ib. Strophades, 33 S^cily, ibid. Sardinia. 34
In ASIA.
Syrophoenicia, 45 Samaria. 46 Susiana, 69 Saca, 71 Sangue, 82 Siam, 84 Sisnam,
87 Sincay. ib. Sammatra, 92
In AFRICA.
Sagamedre. 109 Songa. 113 Sunde. ibid.
In AMERICA.
Salta. 148 Steco. 149 Insula Salomonis. ib.
T In EUROPE.
TOledo, 12 Tuscany, 18 Tirol, 21 Turing. ib. Trier. ib. Tuver. 26
Transylvania, 27 Thessaly, 31 Thrace, ib.
In ASIA.
Turcomania, 53 Tartaria. 77 Tolanchia. 87
In AFRICA.
Tombutum, 106 Trigremabon. 108 The Isle of St. Thomas, 119
In AMERICA.
Terra. 147 Tucuma. 148
V In EUROPE.
VAlentia. 13 Utrecht. 15 Umbria. 18 Urbin, ib. Venice. 19 Underkrain. 21
Volodimer. 25 Vorativa; ib. Volsko. 26 Volokde. ib. Uviathka. ib. The Vulcanian
Isles. 35
In AMERICA.
Virginia. 137
W In EUROPE.
WAles, 5 Wittemberg, 21 Westphalia. 21 Walachia. 27
X In ASIA.
XAnton. 87 Ximo, 90 Xicoum. ib.
In AFRICA.
Xoa. 109
Z In EUROPE:
ZEaland, 15 Zutphen, ib. Zacinthus, 33
In ASIA.
Zagathai. 78 Zeilan. 91
In AFRICA.
Zair. 112 Zanzibar, 117 Zocotare, 119
In AMERICA.
Zenzibar. 147

FINIS.

