PERROT AGAINST THE POPE: OR A true Copy of John Perrot the Quakers Letter and
Challenge to the Pope.

With his Holiness's Answer thereto.

And an Account of the Quakers Proceedings and entertainment at Rome.

Jer. 46.3. Order ye the Buckler and the Shield, and draw near to Battle.

LONDON, Printed the 9th. day of the 4th. month called June, 1662.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
SOme Sober persons will not easily believe (though it be most true) that the
phanatick Spirit of Enthusiasm had in the year 1658. so far possessed John
Perrot, an English Quaker, that, whilst (to use his own phrase) he stood in the
gap for Rome, he must needs go thither in person to convert the Pope; And being
arrived at the wished end of his long journey, he made great means to have
audience of his Holiness: But it being pleasantly objected, that a disputation
with the Pope would prove ineffectual, in regard the one understood no English,
and the other nothing but English; Perrot answered, If the Pope have the Spirit
of God in him, he will understand what I shall deliver.

Thereupon the Pope being moved, was content to admit him to his presence;
Ecclus. 4.7.
John (forgetting that Scripture, which bids him bow his head to a great man)
came stiffly in with his Hat on, and began presently, without other ceremony, in
this blu^t English; Pope of Rome, etc. Others say he condescended so far
against his Principles as to call him Mr. Pope, and went on in his spiritual
canting, of which the Pope understood not a word, but by interpretation; at
length, when he had seen the sad effects of this Quakerism, his Holiness said,
costui e veramente Fanatico, this man is a Fanatic indeed; and gave order he
should be sent to the Pazzarella, (which is of the same nature with our Bedlam)
but with directions, that if the Fanatic would peaceably depart thence to his
own Country, he should have the permission.

The Quaker would by no persuasions leave Rome, till he had effected the great
work for which the Lord had sent him, that is, converted the Pope; so he was
detained in the Pazzarella for a long time, and from thence found means to
send a Letter to the Pope, with this superscription, John Perrot, the Lamb of
Christ, to Fabius Ghisius; vulgarly called Pope of Rome; the effect of it you
may imagine.

Perrot had a Doxy with him of his own Tribe, called Jane Stoakes, who being
asked by an English Gentleman there, in what part of England she was born?
answered, at Oxford, near the nest of unclean birds, called John's.

Another of his Companions (for they were four in all, who went in this mission
or pilgrimage to Rome) voluntarily fasted himself to death in the Pazzarella,
as James Parnell, a brother, had done before him in Colchester Goal, May 1656.

After above two years spent by this zealous Quaker in bondage at Rome, at
last his heat began to cool, so that, upon his promise to return peaceably to
his own Country, he was released. And being arrived at London, in the year
1661. the Spirit again moov'd him to have another bout with Mr. Pope, and to
that purpose, he finds means to convey the following Propositions, by way of
Challenge, in a Letter to Rome; which, with the Popes Answer, (faithfully
translated out of the Original Latin) I here present the Reader verbatim, as
they came to my hands, from a Virtuoso at Rome, and leave it to Discretion, to
judge, whether is like to carry the victory, Fabius Ghisius, or John Perrot;
the Pope of Rome, or Quaker of London.

PROPOSITIONS TO THE POPE, FOR THE Proving his Power of Remitting Sins, and
other Doctrines of his Church, as Principles destroying Souls in Darkness, and
undeterminable Death.
To Fabius Guisius, Pope, at his Palace in Monte Cavallo in Roma.
POPE of ROME It is not unknown, that for the space of three years, wanting
less than seven days, I was held in most cruel Bonds under thy Hands; where
by the mighty power of God I was borne, and carried through ignominious and
opprobrious scoffs and mocks, threats of Death diverse ways, and of perpetual
Slavery oftentimes: Besides other times most cruelly and inhumanely tortured,
bruised, and exceedingly wounded in my fleshly Body; for none other cause (the
God of Righteousness knows, and that of God in all men's Consciences in that
City of Rome can bear me witness, which saw my Conversation from the first to
the last of my imprisonment) but honestly, simply, and purely, for
Righteousness sake, viz. because I Exhorted All men to Repentance; and warned
them in Season, to take heed to their ways, lest a sore Evil should come upon
them; I say, for this love of my tender Soul, toward Thine, and their Souls
and Bodies, was I so inhumanely requited both by Thee and Them, which the
Righteous LORD of Heaven knows, and Thou in thy Conscience know it; as
many others of the Heads, Rulers, Priests, Doctors, Friars, Jesuits, and People
of Rome do know the same thing; and after many Wrongs which I bare, and bruises
and wounds that I suffered, shut up in a Room, where there was scarce a
Breathing place, chained in Irons, mocked of the Wicked, because my natural
eyes could see neither visible Sun nor Moon; where moreover, I was tempted with
the World, and proffered all the Pleasures which ever my Heart could desire, so
that I would be, but as thy Priests were, which daily tempted me unto Idolatry.
(I say) all which I suffered, until at length my Innocent patient Soul had worn
out, and overcome, all the Cruelty toward me, which was Exercised upon me, by
the Unreasonable Hands of Sinners: and that the Lord arose to plead my Cause
for me, and stirred up such, as I neither desired, nay, nor in the least
outwardly knew, to appear in my Behalf; and made some of his Servants to offer
up their lives for my Redemption, which were known to be freely sacrificed in
Rome; for whose Live unto me, they were also Imprisoned by Thy power, who,
below the Law of Heathens, stood not openly to show us any cause of our
Sufferings.

Yet, after all this, (though I am a man wholly given unto my God, having given
all things else unto Him who made them) if it were the will of my Father,
commanding me unto Silence, and to sit down as him that is Dumb, and never to
open my mouth, nor lead on my Pen on Paper, to Remonstrate the things that are
past, concerning my Suffering days, verily, I should Obey, and say Good is the
Will of my God, who teaches me Subjection. But being commanded unto this
thing, I can of a pure heart, in the sight of my Almighty God, say, that I
write not to take a Revenge of my Cause, having committed Vengeance unto him
that repayeth in Righteousness. (Whom, I pray for mercy, to be manifested unto
you All, having a long time stood in the Gap for Rome; with many Tears,
offering my Life for the Inhabitants of that City, which the God of Heaven
knows, and that I can at (...) to serve them all in the way wherein my Father
leads me But O Pope for thy ^ouls sake, and the peoples Souls sakes which
have a dependence upon thy Power, I am contrained to write this time unto thee
in this manner, showing that in the Name and holy Fear of the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth, who has led me in my Pilgrimage, by his Right Hand of Power,
and pleaded my Cause with my Enemies, by reigning down fire from Heaven upon
them, and by diverse Judgments in Rome, whilst there the people oppressed my
Innocent Soul with Cruelty; which may as is needful hereafter) be more at large
spoken of. I proptmd it unto Thee, (as being the HEAD of that people, which are
called the Roman Catholic Church) to Constitute, Order, and appoint one
hundred of thy Chiefest and Propoundest Jesuits or Doctors of Divinity, (so
called by thee) to give me a fair, open and public Meeting, in England,
Germany, France, Italy or Turkey, (viz.) in the most expedient place, for the
advantage of the Glory of God (who Created the whole earth for that end as a
way may be made to attain a License from the Powers of the said Nations, to
effect the said Meeting. I say, choose thee thy hundred or more persons for thy
defense, and in the Name of the Lord God and in his Council, I shall stand in
the face of a Nation, or many Nations, to prove to that of God in every
Conscience upon the face of the Earth, That thy pretended power of Remission of
Sins, is of the old Serpent the Devil, drowning Souls in the Lake of Hell and
Perdition.

1st. By the time of the coming in of Popes. 2dly. By the manner of choosing
Popes. 3dly. By the matter of the precepts of Popes. viz.
First, That the Doctrine of teaching people to pray unto the Virgin Mary is
damnable, drowning the Soul in the pit Hell.

Secondly, That the Doctrine of teaching of the people to call on more
Advocates, Mediators, and Intercessors, Than looking upon the One MEDIATOR
JESUS, is of the pit of (...) blinding and binding souls in the blackness of
the night of death.

Thirdly, That the Invention of Pictures and Images in your Worships, is of the
destroying Spirit, of the power of Darkness, chaining Souls in the Pit.

Fourthly, That your manner of Consecrating Waffers, Wine, and Water, praying
upon Beads, worshipping in Idols Temples, your diverse Friars Garments, and
Titled Orders, your observations of Days, and Meats, your Penance and
Processions, are not of God; but contrariwise of the Spirit of Delusion,
Heresy, Deceit, and Iniquity, which drowneth Souls in perdition.

For which Cause, if thou love the Salvation of Souls, more than their
Damnation, through a Covetous end of an Earthly Kingdom in thy Heart, then I am
sure Thou will not scruple, to send such persons as Thou may appoint, to
Meet me according to this Proposal; which else, All Nations will see thy Cloak
to be Rent a sunder, and no longer able to cover and hide the Abominations
which are concealed under Thy Skirts: for except Thou sendest me an Answer, or
causest an Answer to be sent unto me, in the space of Four Months after the
Date of this, then must I Manifest it unto All Nations, as far as it can be
conveniently Spread, even unto the ends of the Earth; which, until then, I may
not do, that Thou may Know, that my End, is not to Infamize Thee, and Thy
Authority, but Righteously to Glorify the Lord God Almighty, my Holy Father of
Life.

LONDON, the 20th. day of the 7th Month called September 1661. Who am called
the English Quaker, that was Prisoner in Bedlam of Rome, and also outwardly
named JOHN PERROT.

FABIUS GHISIUS POPE of ROME TO JOHN PERROT QUAKER of LONDON.
John Quaker!
THy Letter and Propositions (bearing date the 20th. day of the 7th. month)
came not to my hands till the 10th. day of this, therefore I hope thou will not
proscribe me, for elapsing the time limited in thy Letter, which was not
through my fault; And because I know thou have a perverse unbelieving Spirit in
thee, I forbear in usual form to salute thee with Apostolical Benediction, but
without further Ceremony apply my self to answer thy Letter.

1. It Is true thou wast detained in the Pazzarella here, a place most fit for
thee, and thy mad Brethren, where had both thou and they been timely put, as
you might have been in Justice, and should have been in Prudence, all the late
miseries and abominable wickednesses of England, had in all likelihood been
prevented; Nor was it without evident reason, That my Officers shut thee up in
Bedlam; Thou came out of a Rebellious Country, (where thou and thy Fanatic
Brethren committed a Wonderful and Horrible thing, Jer. 5.30. Ezekiel. 11.2.
Murdered your lawful King) to devise mischief and give wicked Council in this
City; Thou did pretend a Spiritual Call, and I know not what Revelation,
which proved a false vision and divination, Jer. 14.14.
a thing of naught, and th deceit of thy heart, far surpassing the frenzy of
the more ancient Enthusiasts; When thou wast soberly admonished to abandon that
deluding Spirit (which leads thee and thy Brethren into so many exorhitancies)
and set thy face toward London, Ezekiel. 21.2.
thou did ^ost pertinaciously contemn that good Council, and persist in thy
ways of Abomination, refusing to depart out of my City, Rome; forgetting those
words, Rev. 18.4.
thou have so often misinterpreted, Go out of her my people, lest thou partake
of her sins, and receive of her punishments. Why could thou not take heed
and more warily understand a Text so plainly fore warning thee to fly from
her, Ezekiel 13.3
left she should punish thee? Thus says the Lord God, woe unto the foolish
Prophets that follow their own Spirit and have seen nothing. While thou were
kept in the Roman Bedlam, was not the Discipline of the place, exactly observed
to thee, Jer. 4.18. Ezekiel. 14.10.
as well as to the rest of thy fellow Bedlams, did thou want any thing there,
but thine own wire? Thus therefore it came to pass that thy way and thy doings
procured these things unto thee; it being just that thou should bear the
punishment of thine iniquity.

2. Thou say my Priests did daily with all the pleasures thy heart could
desire, tempt thee to be as they were* And were they not very courteous to make
thee so kind an offer? were they not very patient to treat with thee thus
daily? Ungrateful John! why do thou complain of those who used thee so
civilly? and all this, only to make thee be as they were; Verily, verily, John,
thou were shrewdly hurt, do thou not usually (though falsely) charge them to
lead lives of ease and honor, and can thou take it ill, they should offer
thee a share with themselves, to be as they were.

Moreover I say unto thee, thou do me and my people very great wrong, by
affirming in thy Letter, that my Priests did daily tempt thee to Idolatry; yet
I commend thee John, for hating that, which I abominate with all my Soul; Do
thou think I adore a carved stone, as my God, or a painted canvas, as my
Savior? or is any thing Idolatry, but the adoring a Creature, as our Creator;
and the making to our selves a God of a graven Image? which if I did I were as
mad as thou. No, John, I worship only one God, I acknowledge only one Mediator
betwixt God and Man, the God-and-Man JESUS CHRIST; though I believe it both
lawful and profitable to desire the Prayers of his Holy Saints, who reign with
him, and continually assist at his holy Throne; and the Charity of his glorious
Angels, Heb. 1.14.
who behold his face and are sent forth as ministering Spirits for the good of
the Elect.

As for Pictures, I believe neither any Divinity nor Sanctity to be in them,
but I consider them as fit Instruments to help the memory, to recollect the
fancy, and stir up the affection; giving them such respect as thy soberer
Neighbor Protestants do to their Communion Table, whom I hope thou art not so
bold to charge with Idolatry, or if thou do, convert them first, and then
come again to me. Thou know it is one of the great Commands, Exodus 20.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy Neighbor. Isay. 5.23.
And it is written, woe be to you that r^b the just man of his justice, for as
fire devoureth the stubble, so shall the root of these men be ashes.

3. For the power of remitting Sins, which thy serpentine spirit so much
stumbles at, what more plain in Scripture? where our Savior says expressly to
his disciples; Whatever ye shall bind on Earth, shall be bound in Heaven, Mat.
16.19. John 20.23.
and whatever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven; And again.
Whose sins ye shall forgive they are forgiven; and whose ye retain, they are
retained. What can be said more clear and plain? do not thou thy self hold
many doctrines less evidently in Scripture than this? tell me thy thoughts of
this point in thy next Letter. But thou have chosen three strange Mediums to
disprove this Power.

1. By the time of the coming in of Popes. 2. By the manner of choosing Popes.
3. By the matter of the Precepts of Popes.
Truly John, thou deserve, for these three lines of nonsense, at least three
months more of the Pazzarella, Too little Learning I see has made thee mad.
Acts 26.24


The other Points, when thou and my Champion meet, shall be at large discussed.

4. Now to thy Challenge of me, to send a hundred of my profoundest Jesuits,
or Doctors, to meet thee at any place of Christendom or Turkey; since thou art
so civil to leave the nomination of the place to me, I do, for thy ease,
appoint AMSTERDAM, an indifferent place, to all Professions, where thou shall
have as fair play as I, and any body else, as either of us. And since thou have
presumed thus proudly to defy the Armies of the living God, and, confiding in
thy weavers beam, provokest us to Battle, I promise to send one only Jesuit,
the youngest of my Children, to meet thee there on the 20th. day of the sixth
month, vulgarly called August; 1 Samuel 17.
Despise not his little stature, for know, he has slain the Lion and the Bear,
and the unbaptized Quaker shall be as one of them. He shall come down to thee
with the light armor of a sling and a few smooth stones and smite thee on thy
forehead, and thou shall fall on thy face to the earth; he shall be armed with
the dreadful weapons of Excommunication, and with Bell, 1 Cor 5.5.
Book and Candle, deliver thee to the Devil, for the destruction of thy fleshly
body, that thy Spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord JESUS. The hearty
wish of him --

Given under the Seal-ring of the Fisherman, at our Palace of Monte Cavallo, in
the year of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1662/1. Indiction the 15th March the 4th.
and in the seventh year of our Pontificat. Who, according to the Flesh, is
named, FABIVS GHISIVS, But in a Spiritual way, Alexander the seventh POPE of
ROME, and Servant of the Servants of God.

FINIS.

