SUCCINCT GENEALOGIES OF THE Noble and Ancient Houses of Alno or de Alneto.
Broc of Shephale. Latimer of Duntish. Drayton of Drayton. Mauduit of
Werminster. Green of Drayton. Vere of Addington. Fitz-Lewes of Westhornedon.
Howard of Effingham. And Mordaunt of Turvey.


Justified by Public Records, Ancient and Extant Charters, Histories and other
Authentic Proofs, and Enriched with diverse Sculptures of Tombs, Images, Seals,
and other Curiosities.

By ROBERT HALSTEAD.

HONI SOIT QUI MAL Y PENSE LUCEM TUAM DA NOBIS blazon or coat of arms of John
Mordaunt

LONDON, Printed in the Year of Our Lord, MDCLXXXV. W. BURRELL

To my LORD, THE Lord HENRY, EARL of PETERBOROW, PEER of ENGLAND, LORD
MORDAVNT, Lord Baron of TVRVEY, Groom of the Stole, and First Gentleman of His
Majesty's Bedchamber, Lord High Steward to the QUEEN, Lord Lieutenant of the
County of NORTHAMPTON, one of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, and Knight of the Most Noble Order of the GARTER.
My LORD,
THE Love and Protection Your Lordship has ever shown to Letters and Antiquity,
has long since demanded some return from the Melancholy Porers upon Wax and
Parchment. Ours is not gay and enlightened like the Muse of Poetry: It may want
Flattery, and Wit, but it is very Capable of Truth and Gratitude: We aspire not
to the imitation of Oracles, foretelling Greatnesses that are to come, but in a
heavy way, of pusling on old Characters, revive dead Glories that have long
been lost, and by a kind of Sacred Magic, salute Men's Eyes with the dear
Images of Famous Ancestors. Your Lordship that has such a share in our
Antiquities, cannot but delight to see several Famous Knights, whence You
descend, enter this Nation with the Great Norman; and by their Valor win those
Lands, which from them have devolved unto your Lordship: Nor will it be less
pleasing to perceive a perseverance in those Virtues from their Successors,
showing on several Occasions, Magnanimity, Valor, Fidelity, Prudence, and
other Effects of estimable Wisdom, and Generosity, that have so long preserved
the Fruits of their first Labors to Your Lordship's use.

I am sure it will be agreeable to Your Lordship, at least so far as to procure
Your Pardon for any Errors may have unwillingly fallen into the Endeavors of,

My LORD, Your Lordship's most obedient and most humble Servant, ROB. HALSTEAD.

THE PREFACE.
THERE is here presented to the view of the Reader, a Genealogical Description
of certain Ancient and Noble Houses; of which, though I have seen several
Pedigrees deduced, yet they, being old, wanted those necessary and real
Ornaments, the Curiosity and Learning of these latter times have afforded
Compositions of this Nature, there having been omitted in them, an insertion of
proofs; the material Circumstance, which has only power to make considerable
any effect of the Heroic Science. Wherefore these being Families in reality
and truth, so rich in Records and Evidence, the Proofs of whose own Antiquity,
with the Greatness and Splendour of their Alliances being so numerous, and so
unquestionable, I have thought it a Debt to Truth and History, having come,
through my Curiosity in matters of this kind, to a Sight and Knowledge of them,
to be a means they should be exposed unto the World, for the Entertainment and
Instruction of such as may delight in things of this Nature, and the Honor of
those Families that are descended from them.

But to prevent a Suspicion of any such affectation of Greatness, or Antiquity,
as in others may have caused a Deduction of Genealogies, by corrupt and
prostituted Art, from before the Conquest, before the Danes, before the Saxons,
from some British or other Potentates, I desire it should be known, that I am
an Antiquary by Inclination, not Profession; that although I have purchased
verity out of Ancient and Authentic Records, I sell no Fables from my own
Brain, and less from the Phancies of others; that I esteem nothing but Truths,
and those so much, as if any have lost their Proofs, though there I pity them,
I use them not, but consider them as unhappy Orphans out of the Guard of their
Parents, in a possibility at least to have been corrupted.

And truly the endeavors of many Artists to give specious beginnings unto
Pedigrees, whose heads by just Proofs they could not attain unto, has not only
among the knowing brought the Science under much Scandal, but even prejudiced
the Esteem and Opinion of those Families; the streams of whose Story, from the
Impurity of the Head, have been judged to be corrupted all along.

So as certainly, it is not the business of any Genealogy to be put to the
hazard of blushing for a false Original, since those have been esteemed the
Noblest Families, unto which a beginning could not be found at all; but that,
as far as Truths could possibly be traced, have always continued in their
Countries under a Noble Name, and Signalized in the Provinces where they lived;
and that, when as by a Succession, lawfully proved, of between four and five
hundred Years, they give to the top of a Pedigree a Gentleman of Name and Arms.
It is enough not to have Him denied, that thence shall be so descended, through
a Succession of Great and Illustrious Alliances, to be within the Highest Rank
of Honor and Nobility. Therefore such as have so much truth for the Ornament
of their Houses, and because some few have more, will have recourse to Fable
for its assistance to a vain and unjust Ambition, deserve the inseparable
reward of their Folly, which will be (the abuse being discovered) to have,
together with the Impostures, even the veritable part involved in Contempt and
Disesteem.

For these reasons, there is not here pretended any primary Extractions from
such supposed Originals, whence, like others, I should have been forced to
bring them down by Invention, and not by Proof, introducing an Unfortunate
Wanderer, Younger Brother, or Nephew unto some Unhappy Prince, that for a
disastrous reason, fled his Country and changed his Name, because I can prove
no such thing any more than many that notwithstanding their probabilities were
less than those, which the large Rewards they received for their Services, the
Noble kind of style they used in their Donations, the Dignity that appeared in
their Seals, and the Marks of their own great Bounties, would have afforded to
the Concluders of an Extraordinary Greatness, in the Persons of whom I am to
treat, have yet taken pretense with much Ceremony and Ornament to abuse
Tradition with such Romances.

But you shall be here presented with several Great and Famous Knights; most of
which were Countrymen, or Companions of the Conqueror, but all of them, Men
notable for Valor, and Virtue, in the Reigns of those Princes under whom they
flourished.

And now as concerning their Names, to manifest, they need not yield to the
Antiquity of any, Cambden's Remains in his Treatise of Sirnames, page 131, 135,
136, 137.
You shall see what the Learned Cambden affirms; He says, That Sirnames, given
for difference in Families, and continued as Hereditary in them, were used in
no Nation anciently, but among the Romans, and were taken up in France and
England only about the Conquest, or a little before, under King Edward the
Confessor; and in Scotland not before that time, unto which the Learned of that
Nation do refer the Antiquity of their Sirnames, although Buchanan does suppose
they were not in use in that Kingdom many years after: likewise he says, That
the better sort, even from the Conquest, by little and little, took Sirnames,
so as they were not settled among the common people fully, till about the time
of Edward the Second, but still varied according to the Father's Name, as
Richardson, if the Father were Richard; Hodgson, if the Father were Roger, or
in some other respect: And from thenceforth began to be established upon their
Posterity.

This, he says, will seem strange to some of the English, and of the Scottish
Nations, who, like the Arcadians, think their Sirnames as Ancient as the Moon,
or at least to reach many an Age before the Conquest. But they that think it
most strange, he says, will hardly find any Sirnames that descended to their
Posterity before that time; neither have they seen, he fears, any Deed or
Donation before the Conquest, but subsigned with Crosses and single Names in
this manner, Ego Eadredus confirmavi, Ego Edmundus consolidavi: likewise for
Scotland, in an old Book of Duresm, in the Charter whereby Edgar, Son of King
Malcome, gave Lands near Coldingham to that Church, in the Year One thousand
ninety seven, the Scottish Nobility, witnesses thereunto, had no other Sirnames
than the Christian Names of their Fathers; for they Signed, Gulphi filii
Memani, Culverti filii Donecani, Olavi filii Oghe. As for himself, he says, he
never found any Hereditary Names before the Conquest, neither any that he knew;
and yet both he, and diverse of his acquaintance had pored and pusled over many
an old Record and Evidence, to satisfy themselves therein. But he says, about
the time of the Conquest he observed the very Beginning, as it were, of many
Sirnames, which are thought very Ancient; whereas it may be proved, That their
lineal Progenitors bore other Names within these Six Hundred Years. Warren and
Mortimer, he says, are accounted Names of Great Antiquity, yet the Father of
them (for they were Brethren) which first bore those Names, was Walter de
Sancto Martino. He that first bore the Name of Clifford, from his Habitation,
was the Son of Richard the Son of Puntz, a Noble Norman, who had no other Name;
and so having instanced in many, he concludes, he could exemplify in sundry
more, which shortly after the Conquest took these Sirnames, when their Fathers
had none at all, or else most different, whatsoever their Posterity do overwene
of the Antiquity of their Names, as if in the continual Mutability of the
World, Conversion of States, and fatal Periods of Families, Five Hundred Years
were not a sufficient continuance for a Name, when but very few have reached
thereunto.

These are the words of the Famous Cambden, that Oracle of Antiquity, in his
Treatise of Sirnames, amongst others of his Remains, which I have thought fit
to set down, that the peruser of these my ensuing Genealogies, being
prepossessed with a of what length of time can by Proof be afforded to any such
pretense, there having been, assuredly, no Sirnames before the Conquest, may
upon comparison be fit to make a Difference between what shall be here exposed,
without other Ornaments than the unquestionable Truths their extant Evidences
shall impose upon them, and those other specious Fables, which Fast and
Flattery have produced to the Prejudice of ancient Probity, undervaluing of
true Nobleness, and Scandal of the Heroic Science.

So there remains to speak but of the Etymologies or Derivations of these
Names, which their great Age, and Continuance, has left very uncertain, having
been taken up (as will be proved) among the first of Sirnames. I shall only
offer, as grounds of a probable conjecture thereupon, That as Names were
usually taken from Places, from Offices, from Actions, from Conditions of the
Mind, Complexions of the Body, and sundry other means, as you will find in this
rare Antiquary's Treatise thereof, and as Noble of the one, as of the other: So
the marks between them seem to have been but the words of De and Le preceding;
the first intimating the Derivation from a place either of the persons
Possession, or of his Birth; the latter of an Office or occasional Sobriquet
upon some incidence or action, which was in that beginning of Names amongst the
greatest very usual; as for Example, whereas Jeffrey de Mandeville, Bertran de
Verdun, William de Warren, and Roger de Mortimer, were so named from Places;
William Le Marshall, Walter Le Steward, William Le Latimer, and Robert Le
Despencer, with other great Families, were of Offices; Hugh Le Bigot, Robert Le
Manduit, Hamon Le Strange, and Robert Le Blond, upon incidents of the Mind, the
Manners of the fortune and of the Person, received livewise the Appellations
which afterward remained to their Posterity.

And thus, although a positive Derivation I shall not undertake to give unto
the words, it may be supposed upon some like occasion to these latter, the
Names of which we treat, did first arise, since they had in the Assumers of
them the Additions of Le, or De, and all of them we find under these
Appellations to have received from their Princes, their Parents, or their
Relations, the Lands and Lordships of which they were first possessed, as
shall, with the Succession of their Posterities, and their Inherited Houses, be
herein demonstrated, and from them an uninterrupted Succession, by which their
Arms and Lands were engrafted into the House of Mordaunt. There shall be set
forth the Arms that are ascribed to them, and which were born by their
Descendants, the Actions they achieved, the Dignities with which they were
honored, and the Lands and Lordships they did acquire, with diverse of their
Seals, Tombs, and Images.

I shall begin with the first Alliance, from whose Heir General there descended
Arms and Land, the Description whereof I shall set forth to the Conjunction
with the Paternal House; after which shall be exposed, in a Genealogical Line,
the Arms of the Descent and its Alliances, whereunto shall succeed all the
Proofs of the first House, and in the same Method, what concerns the rest of
the Inherited Houses in their Order.

In the Ornaments of Arms and Distinctions in Heraldry, there may be in this
Treatise a difference from what in some kinds is generally practiced in this
Country. But they being according to the use of those Nations, that at present
in things of this Nature are very curious and refined, and altogether
concordant with reason, and the proportion of things and qualities; I hope that
difference will give occasion for no exception.

After all, in this Method I suppose that Men may find a certain way to
perserve the Memory and Esteem of Ancient Families; as also that for any
Advantage, or Prerogative, the House of Mordaunt is obliged but only to Virtue,
to Antiquity, and to Truth.

A SUCCINCT GENEALOGY OF THE House of Alno or Alneto, Justified by Public
Records, Ancient and Extant Charters, Histories, and other Authentic Proofs.
By ROBERT HALSTEAD.
To the House of Alno or Alneto, is ascribed for Arms Argent, a Lion Rampant
Gules, charged on the Shoulder, with a Shield bearing Or three Martlets Azure.

blazon or coat of arms of the house of Alno

Of the Name, Antiquity, Greatness, Alliances, Posssesions, and Arms of the
House of Alno or de Alneto.
THE Lords of this House received their Appellation from Alnetum a Town in
France; of which, at the time of the Conquest, or a little before, they had the
Dominion. In those elder and little curious times, they were often
indifferently called of Alno, Alnoto, and Alneto, and the Antiquity of this
Name hereby appears to be so great, as there are few that by just proofs can be
traced to a higher Degree.

The Quality, Prerogative, and Greatness of this House was such, as, besides
the Liberties they had upon their own Lands, of peculiar Courts, and particular
Justice, the Chief thereof had the Privilege of Banner-bearing, Ferendi
Banneriam, which was the same as is called in high Dutch, a Banner here, and
was at that time the greatest that could be in the Fortune of any Man, who was
not an immediate Sovereign, and (as much as to say) a Power of obliging his
Kindred, his Relations, and his Vassals, to follow him to those Wars whereunto
he should be pleased to engage. There did belong unto it in Propriety within
the Duchy of Normandy, a Town and Castle, called at that time Alnetum: they
had great Lands in the Territory of Pont-Audomare, and large Possessions in the
Vicounty of Contonville. In the Style used by this Family in their Deeds and
Transactions after they came into England, whereof I have seen diverse that are
extant, and well preserved, are all the circumstances of Dignity; as omnibus
hominibus suis, tam Francis quam Anglicis; and in their Seals were engraven
their Images, like Knights at Arms in Military Postures, as was then in
peculiar use with the great men of that time. Their Alliances did also answer
all the other parts of their Greatness; for of four they contracted after their
Arrival in this Country, one was with a very Famous House, and the other three
with Families of the greatest and most eminent Nobility. Vide Came. Re. p. 276.
But I am so far from undertaking to ascertain the Arms they bore, as I am
obliged to say, I believe there were very few, if any, in Hereditary use at
that time of their Conjunction with the House of Mordaunt, which was about the
end of the Reign of Henry the Second, or in the beginning of King Richard the
First; Yet I shall not forbear to apply those that have been ascribed to them
from very many Ages, as may appear by several Pedegrees, with other pieces of
Sculpture and Painting, remaining at this day in diverse Churches and Noble
Houses of this Kingdom, which were Argent, a Lion Rampant Gules, charged on the
Shoulder, with a Shield bearing in a Field Or three Martlets Azure.

PAIN of ALNO or de ALNETO, Lord of Turvey, Maydford, and other Lands and
Lordships.
PAIN of ALNO or de ALNETO, was one of those Illustrious Adventurers which
came over with William Duke of Normandy, to the Conquest of England: in whose
Service the Valor of our Hero proved so considerable, as in the Partition this
Prince did after make to his Followers, he had allotted to him (for his share)
several fair Lands and large Possessions, and among the rest, the Noble
Lordship of Turvey in the County of Bedford, with the Royalties and Privileges
belonging thereunto: As, the Advowson of the Church, the Jurisdiction of many
Families that held thereof in Villanage, the particular Courts Leet and Baron,
the right of Free Warren and Free-Fishing for a long and great Tract, with
those of Waifs, Strays, and Felons Goods; It containing in the whole, Four
Thousand, Five Hundred, Fifty five Aeres of rich and fertile Land, with a
Treasure of fair Woods growing upon the same. After that (to the disorder of
the War) there had succeeded a Settlement in the Kingdom, Pain of Alno did
receive in Marriage (as the Crown of all his Virtue) Emelina de Burdet from the
hands of her Father Sir Hugh de Burdet, another great Companion of this
Conquest, and (as her Portion) the Town and Lordship of Maydford in the County
of Northampton, being part of those Lands, which the said Sir Hugh had received
for his Service from the Bounty and Acknowledgment of King William the First.
This Family of Burdet was of great Antiquity, having possessed a very
Honorable Rank in the Duchy of Normandy, before the Conquest. For we find Sir
William de Burdet Father or Ancestor to this Sir Hugh de Burdet, to be
mentioned in that ancient Roll, which contains the Names of all the Lords that
owed Knights-Service to the Dukes of that Country; and it had the Fortune for
many Ages to produce men Famous and Renowned for Military Valor and Virtue.

Their Issue.
Henry of Alneto Lord of Turvey and Maydford. Herbert of Alneto that was a
Witness to a Charter whereby King Henry the First gave Lands to St. Peter's and
St. Mary's in Exeter.


HENRY de ALNETO Succeeded his Father in his Lands and Lordships; for we find
by a Charter which is extant, how be did confirm several Grants of Lands in
Turvey, that had been given to the Church of St. James in Northampton, and to
the Canons of that place by Robert the Son of Durand, and his Heirs, by his
Brother Herbert, and by others. It appears that he gave to the Priory of our
Blessed Lady of Luffield, within the County of Northampton, in the Forest of
Whittlewood, one Message with the Appurtenances in the Town of Maydford. He
married into the House of Lisors Lizures or de Lusoris, as is seen by a Deed,
wherein Ralph de Caines does Witness, that he was present, when the Lord
William de Lizures did give to Sir Henry of Alneto his Lands in Lichborow and
Everton, to him and to his Heirs to be begotten on the Body of his Daughter
Agnes, on Condition, That if it did so fall out as he should die without Issue
of the said Agnes, they should then revert to him, and his lawful Successors.
This William de Lizures was a great Baron at that time, Chief Forester of the
County of Northampton, and of so great Authority in that Country, as it
occasioned a Letter to be written to him from Queen Elianor the Wife of King
Henry the First, wherein she prays him for the Love of her, to protect one
Malgerius a Monk, and his Followers, at that time retired within his
Jurisdiction. He was the Son of the Lord Foulke de Lizures, that in the time of
Henry the First, had the Custody of the Forests of Rokingham, Selveston and
Huntingdon, and that was Heir to another William that came in with the
Conqueror, and held by Baronage several great Possessions. We find no further
of this Henry of Alneto, than that he left for the Support of his House and
Succession, Halenald of Alneto Lord of Turvey and Maydford. Hugh de Alneto.


HALENALD of ALNETO, flourished in the Reign of King Stephen, and the Second
Henry. He was a great Benefactor to the Monasteries of St. Needs and Caldwell
in the County of Bedford, to which he gave several fair Possessions, for the
good of his Soul, and those of his Father and Mother, whose Bodies he expresses
did rest in the first of those places. He married the Lady Philippa of Pinkney,
one of the Daughters of Gilbert de Pinkney, a very great Lord of that Age, and
who held by Baronage the Lordships of Wappiam and Wedon. This Gilbert being the
Son of Ralph, the Son of Gilo, that came into England with so great Power in
the Service and Company of King William the First. Of the Decease of Halenald
of Alneto there is no mention, but he had Issue, William of Alneto, Lord of
Turvey and Maydford. Hugh of Alneto. Alexander of Alneto.


SIR WILLIAM of ALNETO, with Sir Adam de Bavent, and Sir Ranulph de Archis,
Knights, as they are termed in the Charter, were Witnesses to a Deed made by
Bartholomew de Crec, in the Reign of King Henry the Second, wherein he gave
Lands to the Monastery of St. Osithes in Chich, for the Soul of Hervey de
Glanvill his Mothers Grandfather. This Sir William, besides his other fair
Possessions, held of Robert de Beamount Earl of Leicester, the Castle of
Raunston, and it seems being a bold and active man, he happened to have so
offended Ranulph, the great Earl of Chester, upon some of whose Jurisdictions
he was a Borderer, as obliged that Earl in the memorable Agreement made between
him and that forementioned Earl Robert, to insist upon the demolishing of the
Castle of Raunston, and bringing of William of Alneto to a Trial in his Court,
if he should have cause of action against him, unless for the said Demolishment
and endeavor of Trial, William of Alneto should recede from his Fidelity to
the Earl of Leicester. In which case he obliged himself to give him afterward
no Protection.

This William of Alneto was one of the Noble Knights that did Accompany King
Richard the First in his Voyage to the Holy Land, for which we find he made
very Honorable preparations. Of his Success, or Return, we are ignorant; but
after his Death it appears, that his Brother Hugh was obliged to Testify of the
Dower and Marriage of his Wife, the Lady Joyce of Engain, who was Daughter of
Richard, the Fourth Lord of that Family. This House of Engain or de Ingannio
held Blatherweeke, Colon, and diverse other Lordships, by the Tenure of
Baronage. They were then, and many Ages after, of great Power and Dignity in
this Kingdom. It appears, She had afterward a Difference with the Prior and
Monks of Luffield, about a Wood called Harts-Grove, which was composed,
according to the Expression of the Deed, by the Interposition of good men.

Their Issue.
Hugh de Alneto. Alice of Alneto. Sarah of Alneto.


HUGH the Son of Sir William of Alneto, did in his time become possessed of the
Lordship of Turvey and Maydford, with the other Lands and Interest belonging to
that Family. It may be conjectured he did never marry; certain it is, he left
no lawful Issue, his Estate coming to be inherited by his two Sisters, and
there remains of him only a Testimony of his Continuance in that Piety, which
was Hereditary to his Family, and his particular Addiction to the Church of St.
Neods, by his large concession of several Lands to that Monastery.

ALICIA the Eldest Sister of Hugh de Alneto, was the Wife of Eustace Mordaunt,
and after the Death of her Brother, inherited the Moiety of the Noble Lordship
of Turvey, and of all the Royalties and Privileges that did belong unto it. By
reason of the Division with Sarah of Alneto, the other Sister, that married
Robert of Ardres, this Lordship continued after, for some years, under the Laws
and Privileges of two distinct Manors; The one called Mordaunts-Mannor; the
other Ardres-Mannor, until the fourteenth year of Edward the Third, at what
time they were reunited by the Care and Industry of Robert Mordaunt, who did
exchange with Thomas of Ardres, his Manor of Shephale, in the County of
Hertford, for the Lands and Manors of the said Thomas in Turvey.

Their Issue,
William Mordaunt, Lord of Turvey, Radwell, Felmersham, Esthall, and Yerdley.
Agnes Mordaunt.


Concerning the House of Ardres.
AND now by reason of the Alliance of Robert of Ardres, and Eustace Mordaunt,
proceeding from the Marriages of these two Sisters, and the Kindred that thence
did after grow among their Descendants, I think it very proper, to mention the
Honorable Original of this Family in England, which after subsisted with much
reputation here, for many Generations.

Arnold the Second called the Old, Lord of the Castle, Town and Territory of
Ardres in Picardy, was a Nobleman of Great Renown, Reputation, and Authority;
and that held his Lands with Sovereign Jurisdiction; making War on his
Neighbors, and giving Laws to his own Subjects at his pleasure, as may be
found in the History of this Family, written by Andrew du Chesne.

At the undertaking of the Conquest of England, he was introduced by Eustace
Earl of Bologne, with his Brother Sir Jeffrey of Ardres, into the Service of
King William the First; who for their great and useful endeavors, bestowed
upon them (besides their Stipends, and other considerable allowances)
Stevinton, Dokesford, Tedford, Toleshond, and Hoiland, of which Sir Jeffrey of
Ardres, did afterward exchange his part with his Brother Arnold, for the Land
of Markisis in France; of which He, and his Descendants, had from that time
their Appellations; and the Lands in England were left by Arnold Lord of
Ardres, to his two Younger Sons, Elinantus, and William, who (as the History
relates) were begotten of an English Virgin, during his abode in this Kingdom:
and it is certain, that one of these Lordships (particularly that of Stevinton)
was enjoyed by this Family, their Descendants, under the Name of Ardres, many
Ages afterward.

knight on horseback bearing the colors of the family, and a family tree
showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors PAGANUS DE ALNETO. To
whom King WILLIAM gave the Lordshipp of Turvey And Hugh de Burdett 10th his
daughter Emetina the town of Maydford HENRY de Alneto Ld. of Turvey Agness de
Lisures HERBERT de Alneto ALAN de Alneto Ld. of Turvey Phillippa de Pinkney
HENRY de Alneto HUGH de Alneto WILLIAM de Alneto Ld of Turvey Joyce of Engain
ALEXANDER de Alneto ALICE de Alneto EUSTACE de Alordaunt HUGH de Alneto Lord of
Turvey died without Issue




GENEALOGICAL PROOFS Of the HOUSE of Alno or de Alneto, Drawn out of Extant
Charters, Records, Histories, and other Authentic Testimonies.

GENEALOGICAL PROOFS Of the HOUSE of Alno or de Alneto.
Historiae Normannorum Scriptores antiqui, Page 1031. Inter nomina Militum
ferentium Bannerias in Normannia.

Fulco de Alneto.

In the same Book, Page 1040. under the Title of Feoda Normanniae, Ballia
Pontis-Audomari. Hugo de Alneto, tertium Militem.

In the same Book under the same Title, Page 1041. Milites de Honor
Pontis-Audomari in Feodo Comitis de Mellent. Johan. de Alneto tertium Militem
Rex habet.

In the same Book under the Title of Scriptum de Servitiis Militum, quae
debentur Duci Normanniae, Page 1046. in Feodo Moritonii. Simon de Alneto ii.
Milites, and ad suum Servitium, 4. Milit.


PAIN of ALNO, or de ALNETO, Lord of TVRVEY, and of MAYDFORD.
Charta Pagani de Alneto.
EGO Paganus de Alneto, notum facio omnibus hominibus meis de Turveia, Quod
dilecto meo Richardo Mansell, dedi and concessi in feodo, omnia Tenementa Adami
le Croile, sicut ipse Adam eadem (dum viveret) tenebat, quod ut firmum
habeatur, praedicto Richardo tradidi praesentem Chartulam, Sigilli mei
Charactere munitam. His Testibus, Stephano de Bidun, Galfrido Filio Rogeri,
Willielmo fratre ejus, Thoma Kaun, Richardo filio Stephani, Herveyo de Sancto
Georgio, Stephano de Bosco, Richardo Camerario.

Charta Pagani de Alneto.
PAganus de Alneto,
omnibus hominibus suis, tam Francis, quam Anglicis, salutem.
Sciatis, quod Ego (assentiente Henrico filio meo) concessi dilecto meo, and
fideli, Gerino de Sayfeild Scutifero, omnia Tenementa, quae Nicolaus Gerin, and
Baldewinus Ribell tenuerunt in Turveia; sibi and Haeredibus suis, tenenda de
me, and haeredibus meis, per Servitium duodecim sagittas reddendi annuatim ad
Natalis Festum, pro omni Servitio. His Testibus, Johanne de Escalers, Reginaldo
de Papia, Roberto de Norho, Thoma filio ejus, Stephano de Pixhull, Rogero Moly,
Andreo Selvage, Roberto filio Thomae, Ricardo filio Roberti, Johanne Clerico.

Inter Fines de Rege Ricardo Primo.
Pagano de Alneto, Hugo de Burdet dedit villam de Maydford.

Charta Hugonis de Burdet.
HUgo de Burdet
omnibus hominibus meis, Francis and Anglicis, salutem.
Sciatis, me dedisse Pagano de Alneto, cum Emelina filia mea, villam meam de
Maydford, tam liberam quam illam recepi, ex Donatione Domini mei Willielmi
Regis, honorifice and haereditarie, ab omni servitio salvo quod ad Dominum
Regem pertinet, sibi and Haeredibus suis, de dicta Emelina exeuntibus, in
perpetuum. His Testibus, Domino Stephano de Valoniis, Domino Ricardo de
Lusoris, Ricardo de Alno, Thoma filio Johannis, Ernulpho de Eggelfeld, Henrico
de Bradden, Herveyo filio Ricardi, Stephano filio Thomae; Ricardo Camerario,
Hugone filio Ernulphi, Johanne filio Pagani, Thoma Camerario, Willielmo Clerico.

Charta Pagani de Alneto.
PAganus de Alneto,
Omnibus hominibus suis and amicis, tam Francis, quam Anglicis, Salutem.
Notum sit vobis, me dedisse and concessisse (assentiente Uxore mea Emelina,
and Henrico filio meo primogenito) Herberto filio meo, pro homagio suo, Terram
meam in Lavendena, per Servitium tertiae partis Militis, libere, quiet, and
honorifice, pro omnibus Servitiis: quare volo and firmiter praecipio, Quod
praedictus Herbertus habeat praedictam Terram de me, and haeredibus meis, cum
omnibus pertinentiis praedictae Terrae pertinentibus, in omnibus rebus per
praenominatum Servitium: and hanc Terram Ego Paganus de Alneto, and haeredes
mei warrantizabimus praenominato Herberto filio meo, and haeredibus suis. His
Testibus, Philippo de Clunes, Thoma de Lichebury, Roberto de Cameris, Rogero
filio Roberti, Willielmo fratre ejus, Philippo filio Rogeri, Radulpho parvo,
Nicolao Beco, Thoma de Bosumer.

Monasticon Anglicanum, Pars secunda, Folio 231.
To a Charter of King Henry the First, giving Lands to St. Peter, and St.
Mary's in Exeter, is a Witness, Herbertus de Alneto. Historiae Normannorum
Scriptores antiqui page 1033. in the Catalogue of their Names that came over
with the Conqueror, Hugo de Burdet. In eodem Libro. William Burdet held Lands
in Normandy, in Ballia de Bleville. Burtons Description of Leicestershire,
Folio 196. Sir William Burdet undertakes a Voyage to the Holy Land, about the
End of Henry the Second. In eodem Libro, Folio 32. Sir William, and Sir Robert
Burdet, Served in the long Wars of King Edward the First. In eodem Libro, Folio
197. Sir Nicholas Burdet Governor of Eureux, and Chief Butler of Normandy, was
Slain at the Battle of Pontoize. In eodem Libro and in eodem Folio. Thomas
Burdet was Beheaded by King Edward the Fourth, for his faithful Friendship to
George Duke of Clarence, under pretense of the words spoken concerning the
Horns of the white Buck of Arrow.
HENRY of ALNETO, Lord of TVRVEY, and MAYDFORD.
Charta Henrici de Alneto.
NOtum sit omnibus hominibus meis and amicis, Quod Ego Henricus de Alneto
concedo, and Sigilli mei munimine confirmo Donationem, quam Robertus filius
Durandi, and Gilbertus Haeres suus, secerunt Ecclesiae Sancti Jacobi de
Northampton, and Canonicis ejusdem loci, in perpetuam Eleemosynam, (scilicet)
quatuor acras Terrae ad Pirum; propter quam Donationem, Canonici praedicti
dederunt quatuordecem Solidos, sicuti Charta sua testatur. Praeterea confirmo
praedictae Ecclesiae octo acras Terrae, and unam de Bosco, quas Herbertus
Frater meus dedit praedictae Ecclesiae in perpetuam Eleemosynam, propter quam
Donationem Canonici dederunt ei, and Uxori ejus (de cujus dote fuit illa Terra)
viginti duos Solidos, sicuti Charta Herberti Domini sui testatur. Confirmo
etiam dictae Ecclesiae, unam acram Terrae, quam Ricardus de Papia dedit
Canonicis ejusdem Ecclesiae in Eleemosynam perpetuam, quae jacet in Pixhulla
juxta octo acras quas Herbertus dedit eis, propter quam dederunt eidem Ricardo
duos solidos. Hujus Confirmationis sunt Testes, Willielmus Sacerdos de Brumham,
Ricardus Sacerdos de Turveia, Willielmus Sacerdos de Stevinton, Willielmus de
Blosvilla, Alexander Dalnod, Radulphus Mansell, Nicolaus de Staggesden.

Charta Radulphi de Kaines.
OMnibus Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae Filiis, hoc Scriptum praesens visuris vel
audituris, Radulphus de Kaines
Salutem.
Sciatis, quod obligatus ad respondendum non possum dediscere, quin praesens
fui, quando bonae memoriae Dominus Willielmus de Lusoris, Charta quadam
Authentica, Sigilli sui Munimine roborata, Dedit and concessit Domino Henrico
de Alneto, Terras suas in Lichborough and Everton, sibi and haeredibus suis, ex
corpore Agnetae, filiae ipsius Willielmi procreandis, Ea Condition, Quod si
pervenisset, ut dictus Dominus Henricus obiret, sine haerede de corpore
praedictae Agnetae procreatae, tunc Terrae istae redirent sibi, Domino
Willielmo, and rectis haeredibus suis. In cujus rei Testimonium Sigillum meum
apposui. His Testibus, Widone filio Walerani, Radulpho filio Stephani, Nicolao
de Overton, Willielmo de Stanford, Nicolao Serviente, Osberto Clerico.

Out of the Register of the Monastery of our Blessed Lady of Luffield, in the
County of Northampton, within the Forest of Whittlewood.
Henricus de Alneto dedit ibidem, unum Messuagium cum Pertinentiis, Priorat. de
Luffield.

In the forementioned Register of our Blessed Lady of Luffield, under the Title
of Maydford, is thus contained.
Henry the Son of Henry of Alneto, Lord of Maydford, gave a Message, with the
Appurtenances, in that place to Galfrid of Bradden, the Son of Henry of Norton.
Witness, Sir Ralph de Blompton, Baldwin de Norton, William de Clairvall,
William de Pinkney, Robert de Alneto, and others.

Charta Matildae Reginae.
MAtilda Angliae Regina, Monasticon dnglicanum, Pars prima, fol. 521.
Vitali Ingannio, and Willielmo de Lusoris Salutem. Mando vobis, and precor, ut
pro amore mei deportetis istum Malgerium Monachum, and Servientes suos in
Luffildam, quando hoc est, quod Rex ei ibi remanere concessit, and ita ut inde
vobis grates faciam. Test Episcopo Lincolniae apud Oxenford.

The Baronage of England, Page 597.
In the time of Henry the First, Foulk the Son of William de Lizures, confirmed
that Grant which had been made by Roger de Stibington, of all his Tithes, to
the Monks of Thorney, and in the fifth of Henry the Second, he had the Custody
of all the Forests of Rockingham, Selveston, and Huntingdon.

By Alice his Wife, Sister of William de Auberville, he left William his Son
and Heir, who gave two hundred Marks for the Forestership of Northampton, by
which Office he was obliged to follow the King to his Wars, well provided with
Horse and Arms, with his Horn hanging about his Neck.

Of this Family was Hugh de Lizures; by reason of whose Debts to the Chequer,
King John in the Fourteenth of his Reign, Granted his Castle of Benefield in
Comitatu Northampton, and all his Lands, with all the Stock therein, unto John
de Bassingburn, for satisfaction of them.

Halenald de Alno, or of Alneto, Lord of TVRVEY and MAYDFORD.
Charta Alnoti de Alnoto.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, Quod Ego Alnotus filius Domini Henrici de
Alnoto, Concessi and Dedi, and hac mea Charta Confirmavi, Deo, and Ecclesiae
Sancti Neoti, and Monachis ibi Deo recte famulantibus, pro Animabus patris and
matris meae (quorum corpora ibi requiescunt) and pro Salute mei, and omnium
meorum, in perpetuam, puram, and liberam Eleemosynam in villa de Turveia,
tresdecem Acras Terrae de Dominio meo, (scilicet) totam illam Terram, quae
vocatur Gores; and totam illam dimidiam Virgatam Terrae, quam tenuit de me
Ranulphus Butero; and illam quadrantem Terrae, quam de me Gilbertus filius
Gaufridi; and totam illam demedietatem Terrae, quam tenuit de me Radulphus
Coquus: Quare volo, and firmiter praecipio, quatenus praedicti Monachi,
praedictas Terras habeant, and in perpetuum possideant libere, quiet,
pacifice, and honorifice, in messuagiis, in terris, in pratis, in pascuis, in
exitibus, in communitatibus and in omnibus aliis suis pertinentiis. Hi sunt
Testes, Ewanus Clericus, Eustachius Capellanus Sancti Neoti, Rogerus Presbyter
de Turveia, Robertus de Bid --, Willielmus filius Rogeri, Henricus frater ejus,
Helias de Alnot, Henricus frater ejus, Radulphus de Sayfield, Rogerus de
Escalariis, Johannes de Papia, Adam Caun, Willielmus filius Alexandri de
Coldington, cum multis aliis.

Charta Halenaldi de Alno.
NOtum est omnibus tam praesentibus quam futuris, Quod Ego Halenald de Alno,
Dedi and Concessi, in liberam and perpetuam Eleemosynam, pro Salute animae
meae, and meorum antecessorum, Deo, and Ecclesiae Sancti Johannis Baptistae de
Caldiwell, and Canonicis Deo ibidem famulantibus, december acras Terrae arabilis
in Turveia, in Cultura mea, quae vocatur Swethmanstoching, coram me, and
Roberto Priore de Caldewell, and pluribus aliis, per perticam mensuratas, quae
jacent simul ex part Occidentali, and ita, Quod Ego, haeredesque mei,
defendemus, and warrantizabimus hanc Terram eis, ut puram Eleemosynam, erga
omnes homines; and concessimus, and warrantizare debemus, ut libere intrent,
and redeant, ad praedictam Terram colendam, and inde portandam (sicuti
voluerunt) absque damno bladi nostri; volo igitur, haec Concessio, and
Conventio eis firma, stabilisque permaneat in perpetuum, and Ego Halinald id
tenere Juravi, and praesenti Charta Sigilli mei Testimonio confirmavi: Quod si
Ego, vel aliquis haeredum meorum, Donationem praedictam temerarie perfregerit,
excommunicatus permaneat, quoad praedictae Ecclesiae Satisfactionem perfecerit.
Hujus Donationis sunt Testes Nicolaus Archiaconus de Bedford, Robertus Clericus
de Wilshamsted, Magister Johannes Ascaneus Decanus, Bodin Decanus, Nicolaus
Decanus, Ricardus Capellanus de Salden, and multi alii.

SIGILL HALENALDI DAVNO

seal of Halenald de Alno

Charta Halenaldi de Alneto.
NOtum est omnibus, tam futuris, quam praesentibus, Quod Ego Halenald de Alno,
fateor me recepisse, de Domino Henrico de Pinkney fratre meo, octingentas
marcas legalis Monetae, ad liberandam Terram suam de Mortona, quae mihi pro
tanta pecunia obligata stabat, per Dominum Gilbertum Patrem ejus, quando
Philippam filiam suam mihi dedit in Maritagium. De qua quidem Solutione,
fideliter soluta, fateor me plenarie esse solutum; and praedictum Dominum
Henricum de Pinkney, and quoscunque suos, per praesentes, in perpetuum fore
quietos. In cujus rei Testimonium, praesentibus sigillum meum apposui. His
Testibus, Domino Henrico de claris Vallibus, Domino Thoma de Blompton, Ricardo
de Molesford, Nicolao Wac, Thoma filio Ricardi, Thoma de Finoden, Johanne
Weston, cum multis aliis.

Inter Certificationes factas de Feodis Militum, per totam Angliam, remanen. in
Scaccario.
Charta Alexandri de Alno.
DOmino suo, Regi Anglorum, Alexander de Alno Salutem, and Servitia.
Praecepistis mihi, quatenus vobis intimarem Servitium feodi mei, perinde vestra
ratum habeat Reverentia, quomodo totum (quod feodi mei est) per Servitium unius
Militis se defendit, and sic tantum Antecessores mei, vestris Antecessoribus
fecerunt. Item sciat vestra Dignitas, Quod Ego post mortem Regis Henrici,
nullum Militem feoffavi; Sed pater meus, fratri suo Hugoni de Alno, partem
Terrae de suo Dominico dedit, ut si necesse esset, Servitium unius Militis
faceret ad totam Terram patris mei defendendam; and ista Donatio ita fuit illi,
and haeredibus suis, in tempore Willielmi Regis.

Baronage of England, Folio 556.
IN the time of King Henry the first, Gilo de Pinkney, gave certain Lands,
lying in Wedon, in the County of Northampton, to the Monks of St. Lucian, at
Belvare, in France. This Gilo had Issue Ralph his Son and Heir, who in the
fifth of King Stephen, gave a Fine to the King, for Livery of his Fathers
Lands. To this Ralph, Succeeded Gilbert de Pinkney his Son and Heir, who in the
third, fifth, and sixth of Henry the Second, was Sheriff of Barkshire; and in
the twelfth of Henry the Second, upon the Assessment of that Aid, levied for
marrying the Kings Daughter, Certified his Knight-Fees to be, ex vetere
Feoffamento, eleven in Number, and in those, de novo, three and a half. To this
Gilbert, Succeeded Henry; to that Henry, Robert; and to him, diverse others;
until the time of that Henry de Pinkney, who made King Edward the first, his
Heir, and enfeoffed him with all his Lands and Lordships.

Atlas novus, Pars Quarta, or Britannia Cambdeni, Folio 236.
ET inde Wedon and Napiham vidimus, quos Familia de Pinkney per Baroniam
tenuerunt, donec Henricus de Pinkney, Regem Edwardum primum haeredem
scripsisset, quem optimum Principem multi mali haeredem scripserunt.

Willielmus de Alnoto, or Alneto, Lord of TVRVEY and MAYDFORD.
Charta Willielmi de Alneto.
SCIANT praesentes and futuri, Quod Ego Willielmus, filius Halenaldi de Alnoto,
Concessi, and hac mea Charta Confirmavi, in perpetuam and liberam Eleemosynam,
Deo, and Ecclesiae Sancti Neoti, and Monachis de Becoi, in ea Deo servientibus,
pro Salute mei, and meorum, Donationem patris mei, quam ipse fecit eidem
Ecclesiae, de Terris illius hidae in villa de Turveia, quae vocantur Muclepit,
(scilicet) Tredecim acras, quae vocantur Gores de Dominio, and illam dimidiam
virgatam Terrae, quam tenuit Robertus filius Ailmari, and in quadrantes Terrae,
unam quam tenuit Radulphus Dulcere, and unam quam tenuit Gilbertus filius
Gaufridi, and unam quam tenuit Radulphus Coquus, sic Charta Patris mei
testatur; Quare volo, praedicti Monachi praedictas Terras habeant, and teneant
in perpetuum, libere, quiet, pacifice, and honorifice, cum omnibus illarum
Terrarum pertinentiis. Hi sunt Testes, Hugo filius Willielmi, Robertus de
sancto Georgio, Robertus Persona de Hacley, Eustachius Capellanus, Ricardus
Francis, Willielmus Harell, Elias de Alnotho, Willielmus Igellry, Hugo de
Alnotho, Johannes de Wimbis, Bertramus de Gebrug, Marcinus.

SIGILLVM WILLI FILII HALENALDI DANO

seal of William de Alneto or Alnoto

The Baronage of England, Page 38.
In the Articles made between Ranulph Earl of Chester, and Robert Earl of
Leicester.
MOreover, that Rauston-Castle should be demolished, unless Earl Ranulph should
be otherwise content, and if any person should hold that Castle against the
Earl of Leicester, Earl Ranulph to give his real Assistance for the destroying
it.

That if Earl Ranulph should have cause of Action against William of Alneto,
the Earl of Leicester should bring him to Trial in his Court, so long as he
should hold any Lands of him; and in case the said William should recede from
his Fidelity unto the Earl of Leicester, for demolishing that Castle, or for
bringing him to such Trial in his Court, Earl Ranulph not to give William de
Alneto any Protection.

Charta Willielmi de Alnotho.
EGO Willielmus de Alnotho, Dominus de Turveia, Notum omnibus fieri volo, Quod
dum arriperem iter Jerusalem, in Capitulo sancti Neoti constitutus, pro salute
animae meae, and Antecessorum meorum Concessi, and hac Charta mea Confirmavi,
in perpetuam and liberam Eleemosynam, omnes Donationes, quas Pater meus and
Avus, vel aliquis Parentum meorum aliquo tempore dederunt, and concesserunt,
Deo, and Ecclesiae sancti Neoti, and Monachis de Becoi in ea Deo servientibus.
Concessi etiam iisdem Monachis Decimas omnium Boscorum meorum, and Nemorum,
consistentium in Turveia: Concessi etiam iisdem Monachis, summarium unum habere
in Nemore, quod dicitur Hudwike, ad mortuum Nemus, and in meis aliis Nemoribus.
Ut autem haec Concessio, rata and inconcussa permaneat, praesentem cartulam
sigilli mei munimine roboravi. Data anno Gratiae M.C.XC. His Testibus,
Willielmo Ruffo Vice-Comite de Bedford, Fulcone de Trailly, Thoma de Lega,
Stephano de Oreby, Gervasio de Hobrigg, Thoma de Papia, Johanne de Elnesto,
Ogero filio Stephani, Ernulpho Presbytero, Ricardo Dapifero.

Charta Hugonis de Alno.
IN Nomine sanctae and Individuae Trinitatis. Ego Hugo de Alneto notum facio
praesentibus and futuris, Fratrem meum Willielmum de Alneto, in Uxorem
accepisse Dominam Jocosam de Engannio, and secundum Ecclesiae morem, ei Dotem
assignasse Maydford, (videlicet) cum principali situ, and totum Manerium cum
omnibus Appenditiis, quam Dotem ipse in praesentia mea illi recognovit. Prece
igitur Domini Ricardi fratris ejus, pro honestate Dominae, and Honestatis
ipsius Testimonio, praesentibus sigillum meum apposui. His Testibus, Domino
Stephano de Bellocampo, Domino Thoma de Kaines, Gervasio Le Fitz Nigell, Hugone
de Deringhall, Ricardo de Bedford, Henrico de Billing, Stephano Forrestario,
and multis aliis.

Charta Jocosae Dominae de Maydford.
JOcosa Domina de Maydford, Uxor quondam Domini Willielmi de Alno, Omnibus ad
quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, salutem. Noveritis, quod cum querela
verteretur inter Me ex una part, and Monachos de sancta Maria de Luffield ex
altera part, super quaedam nemora quae sunt in Dominio de Maydford, quorum
(videlicet) Nemorum unum vocatur Hartsgrove, and alterum vocatur Maydenwood,
tandem bonis viris intervenientibus, compositum est in hunc modum. Praedictum
Nemus de Maydenwood, remaneat in Forresta, and vendetur, de Septimo anno in
Septimum annum, and accipiemus, Ego and haeredes mei, post decessum meum,
medietatem denariorum istius Venditionis, and Prior, and dicti Monachi alteram
medietatem. Actum apud Maydford, Anno Gratiae, MCXCIV.

Hugo de Alnoto. Lord of TVRVEY, and of MAYDFORD.
OMnibus Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filiis, Hugo de Alnoto, filius Willielmi de
Alnoto,
Salutem.
Noverit Universitas vestra me concessisse, and praesenti Charta mea
confirmasse, Ecclesiae Sancti Neoti, and Monachis in ea Deo Servientibus, illam
virgatam Terrae, quam tenuit Willielmus Faber, in villa de Turveia, and
Messuagium cum Crosto, quod est juxta illud Messuagium, quod fuit Aliciae
Camerariae, and illam quarteram terrae, quam tenuit Johannes, filius Roberti,
filii Baldewini, quatuor acras, ad implementum praedictae quarterae, pro prato
and Messuagio, quod ei deerant, (scilicet) duas acras ad Kokesfort, quas Alicia
Cameraria tenuit integras, sicut jacent, and duas acras in Langfurlong juxta
Culturam, quae vocatur Hangre, ex part Aquilonis. Has Terras Concessi, and
confirmavi, praedictis Monachis tenendas, libere, quiet, salvo Servitio Domini
Regis. Insuper Concessi and Confirmavi jam dictis Monachis, illam dimidiam
virgatam Terrae, quam tenuit Leverius Presbyter cum prato adjacenti, and cum
omnibus ejus Pertinentiis, ita libere, and quiet, integre and plenarie, sicut
ipse Leverius eam unquam, melius, liberius, and before tenuit, Reddendo
annuatim tres denarios, pro omnibus Secularibus Servitiis, ad Servitium Domini
Regis. Adhunc etiam Concessi and Confirmavi iisdem Monachis totam illam
Culturam, in villa de Turveia, quae vocatur Mildelho, tenendam in liberam
Eleemosynam, quietam ab omni Servitio, excepto Servitio Domini Feodi illius,
(Scilicet) una libra Piperis, vel sex denariis; has autem Terras Concessi and
Confirmavi saepedictis Monachis, in perpetuam Eleemosynam, per praescripta
Servitia. His Testibus, Willielmo Rufo Vicecomite de Bedford, Fulcone Bamvill
Subvicecomite, Bartholomeo de Lale, Willielmo de Sidenham, and Gaufredo, and
Jocelino filiis ejus, Willielmo Daco, Johanne de Harcomada, Roberto de Sancto
Georgio, Reginaldo de Baa, and Ricardo fratre ejus, Willielmo de Bretiville,
Ricardo Frances, Willielmo aurifabro Magistro, Rogero Camberling, Georgio filio
Michaelis, Johanne Curpell.

SIGILLVM HUGONI DAVNO

seal of Hugo de Alneto or Alnoto

OMnibus Christi fidelibus, ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Hugo Prior de
Sancto Neoto, and ejusdem loci conventus, salutem in Domino. Noverit
universitas vestra, nos Charitatis intuitu, Concessisse Domino Hugoni de
Alneto, quod pro anima ejus and Uxoris suae, and Antecessorum suorum, and pro
Animabus Benefactorum nostrorum, and omnium fidelium defunctorum singulis
diebus, in perpetuum, primum de Monachis nostris, unam missam celebrare
faciemus: promittimus etiam nos, hanc concessionem fideliter servaturos,
subjicientes nos jurisdictioni, and coercioni Domini Archidiaconi de Bedford,
quicumque pro Tempore erit, ut ipse nos compellere possit, mediante justitia,
ad praefatam concessionem observandum, si a praedicta, quod absit, celebratione
cessaverimus. Tantummodo per ipsum redditum, quem jam dictus Hugo dedit nobis
in villa de Turveia, in perpetnam Eleemosynam, videlicet, per tres quarteras
Terrae, quas Robertus miles, and Henricus Berner, quondam tenuerunt, and per
illud Croftum quod Rodulphus, filius Gilberti, quondam tenuit in villa de
Turveia, sicut Charta jam dicti Hugonis protestat. Et ut haec nostra Concessio,
rata and stabilis, in perpetuum, perseveret, praesentem paginam sigillo nostro
-- roborandam. His testibus, Domino Johanne de Lega, Domino Thoma Capellano de
Sancto Neoto, Domino Willielmo de Sancto Georgio, milite, Waltero de Sancto
Ivone, Bogo Coco, Philippo Portitore, and multis aliis. Actum anno Gratiae
1230. mense Januario.

Charta Hugonis de Alno.
SCiant tam praesentes quam futuri, quod Ego Hugo de Alno, Concessi and Demisi
Gilberto Flandrensi december acras Terrae meae (scilicet) de Lasscroft, quae
jacent intra Boscum Del ho, cum omnibus pertinentiis, a Festo Sancti Michaelis
proxime post mortem Henrici Regis filii Matildis Imperatricis, in december annos,
pro quadraginta octo Solidis, quos mihi dedit, and in fine december praedictorum
annorum recipiam Terram meam quietam; hanc autem Conventionem tenendam and
warrantizandam, Gilberto, and haeredibus suis pro me, and haeredibus meis
affidavi: and hoc sciendum est, si Gilbertus infra Terminum praedictum in fata
decesserit, praedictam Terram cui voluerit, attornabit. His Testibus, Ogo filio
Ogi, Roberto de Lucey, Elio Clerico de Hinton, Adamo de Bedford, Asce Clerico
de Bedford, Johanne de Curton, Willielmo de Bretivel, Stephano de Winchendon.

Charta Hugonis de Alno.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Hugo de Alno Dedi, Concessi, and hac
mea Charta Confirmavi, Ricardo, filio Sarae Sororis meae, medietatem Terrae
meae de Turveia, cum omnibus libertatibus and pertinentiis, tenendam, and
habendam illi, and Haeredibus suis, vel cui assignare voluerit, praeter in
Religionem, de me and haeredibus meis, libere, quiet, and haereditarie, vere,
and in pace, ab omni servitio, Salvo quod ad Dominum Regem pertinet, pro tanta
Terra ejusdem Feodi; and ut haec mea Donatio, Concessio, and Confirmatio rata,
and inconcussa permaneat, huic scripto praesenti Sigillum meum apposui. His
Testibus, Eustachio Le Mordaunt, Willielmo de Blsvilla, Ogo filio Ogi, Simone
Druell, Willielmo filio Roberti, Waltero de Norho, Radulpho filio ejus, Ricardo
Pain, Roberto Clerico.

Charta Eustachii Le Mordaunt.
NOtum sit omnibus filiis Matris Ecclesiae, and omnibus hominibus meis and
amicis, tam praesentibus quam futuris, quod Ego Eustachius Le Mordaunt, Dedi,
and Concessi, consensu fratris mei Roberti, Aliciae Sponsae meae, in Durarium,
totam Terram illam, quam Osmundus, pater meus, tenuit in Wahull, and Servitia
Nicolai Basset, Rogeri de Croc, Thomae, filii Stephani, and Roberti Pecham, and
insuper medietatem Terrae meae de Radwell, and servitia Gerardi Fabri, Johannis
Sporke, Ricardi Grisell, and Edmundi Beech, Salvo hoc, quod haeredi meo
pertinet; and haec sibi dedi in Creis, postquam Lectum meum ascendit. Hujus rei
sunt Testes, Dominus Hugo de Alno, Dominus Willielmus de Blosvilla, Dominus
Simon de Borheard, Robertus de Patshull, Girardus de Coudrey, Hugo de Delton;
isti praedicti ad Sponsalia fuerunt. Isti sunt Testes de Creis, Osmundus,
filius Philippae Dominae, Gervasius de Albeni, Gislebertus de Blosvilla,
Stephanus Moly, Galfridus, filius Ewani, Robertus de Hacley, Hugo de Philgrave,
Willielmus Venator.

Charta Eustachii Le Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Eustachius Le Mordaunt, and Alicia Uxor
mea, Dedimus, Concessimus, and hac praesenti Charta nostra Confirmavimus,
Reginald, filio Simonis Le Brayeur, de Turveia, quadraginta acras Terrae
nostrae, cum duobus Thoftis, and uno Messuagio, quae Simon, Pater praedicti
Reginaldi, tenuit de Domino Willielmo de Alneto, patre nostro, in Turveia,
habendas, and tenendas de Nobis and Haeredibus nostris, sibi and haeredibus
suis, qui exibunt de Sibylla uxore praedicti Reginaldi; reddendo inde annuatim
nobis, and haeredibus nostris, ipse, and Haeredes sui, qui de praedicta Sibylla
exibunt, duodecim Solidos pro omni servitio, nobis, and haeredibus nostris
pertinente (scilicet) ad Pascham sex solidos, and ad Festum Sancti Michaelis
sex Solios, salvo forinseco Servitio Domini Regis, quantum pertinet ad tantam
Terram ejusdem Feodi, in eadem Villa: Ita tamen, quod si praedictus Reginaldus,
and Sibylla, haeredes a se non habeant, praedictae Terrae, cum pertinentiis,
praedicto Eustachio, and Aliciae, vel haeredibus eorum, sine molestia vel
contradictione redeant. Ut autem haec nostra Donatio rata, and stabilis
permaneat, praesenti scripto Sigilla nostra apposuimus. His Testibus, Roberto
de Ardres, Simone de Blosvilla, Stephano de Lega, Johanne de Lega, Willielmo de
sancto Georgio, Willielmo Mancell, Galfrido de Bosco, Petro Matherbe, Andreo de
Aversham, Thoma filio Stephani, Petro Camerario, Roberto Harlac.

Concerning the House of Ardres.
Histoire de la Maison de Gand and de Guisnes, par Andre du Chesne, Page 29.
ARnoal premier du nom, Seigneur d'Ardres, succeda Arnoal dit le Viel, fitz de
luy, and de Mahaut de Marquise sa premiere femme, du vivant de son pere, il fut
introduit par Eustache, Conte de Bologne, au Service de Guilliaume le
Conquerant Roy d'Angleterre, qui en recompense de ses bons, and agreables
Services, luy donna plusieurs belles terres en son Royaume.

Dans la mesme Histoire, Page 97.
Enfans naturells d'Arnoal 2d dit le Viel, Seigneur d'Ardres.
ELinant d'Ardres nasquist en Angleterre, au Temps qu' Arnoal son pere y
demeuroit suivant la cour de Guilliaume le Conquerant, and pour sa Valleur
merita d'estre Honor de l'Ordre de Chevallerie, Guilliaume d'Ardres fut aussi
procree en Angleterre, and faict Chevallier.

Preuves du livre troisieme de l' Histoire de la Maison de Guisnes, Page 149.
Quomodo Arnoldus, filius Arnoldi, acquisivit Terram in Anglia.
ARnoldus autem filius ejus, adolescentes jam exsuperans annos, in robur coepit
crescere virile, and jam factus miles, patris sui Arnoldi per omnia mores
sequens vestigia, a patre parum aut nihil in militiae gloria discrepare
videbatur: Fuit igitur Arnoldus, filius Arnoldi, miles in armis strenuissimus.
Unde, and opitulante Boloniensi Comite, Eustachio, inter commilitones Anglorum
Regis Willielmi, qui Angliam bello and armis, and in virorum viribus debellavit
and acquisivit, annumeratus est primus, and ei plurimis servivit annis. Vocatus
est autem, and ab eodem Rege Willielmo, Gaufridus, frater ejusdem Arnoldi, qui
simul sub Hectorinae Probitatis Clypeo diutius ei servierunt. Servientes igitur
ambo fratres, (Arnoldus videlicet and Gaufridus) jam dicto Regi, tantam ejus
adepti sunt gratiam, quod (praeter quotidiana stipendia and munuscula, quae
ipsis contulit, innumerabilia) contulit and eis, and in perpetuitatis concessit
Feodum, Stebingtoniam, and pertinentias ejus, Dokesvuordiam, Tropintoniam,
Ledefordiam, Toleshondiam, and Hoilandiam. Interim autem (dum in Anglia in
Servitio Regis moram faceret Arnoldus) tres filios, in tribus puellis genuit.
Quarum Elinantus, and Willielmus milites fuerunt.

Quomodo Arnoldus, senex, dedit Gaufrido, Fratri suo, Terram de Markisia, and
Gaufridus reliquit ei partem Terrae suae in Anglia, Page 157.
ARnoldus autem, filius ejusdem Arnulphi Advocati, cognomento senex, vel
vetulus, accepta satis prudenter de morte patris consolatione, Ardeae Dominus
effectus est, and Ardensis Ecclesiae praepositus, and commutata quantoties a
fratre suo Gaufrido, and comparata, quam pro militiae servitio Munus, and
Munium a Rege supranominato Angliae, in Anglia perquisierant, and simul
acceperant, Terra; fratri suo Gaufrido, Terram Markisiae cum pertinentiis ejus
(quae ex part matris ejus ei contigerat) haereditario jure concessit habendam.
Sicque Gaufrido and haeredibus ejus deputata est Markisia. Arnoldus igitur
Ardeae factus Dominus, and Flandrensis Curiae compar and Socius, Flandrensem
Curiam frequentavit, Flandrensium Nobiles quanto potuit studio honoravit, ut
eorum Opitulatione Hinniacenses and Exclusenses ipsum -- and perfidiae nefas
dedignantes, and in illum contumaces, and rebels apud Flandrensem Comitem
maxim sibi acquireret.

A SUCCINCT GENEALOGY OF THE House of BROC: Justified by Extant Charters,
Records, Histories, and other Authentic Proofs.
By ROBERT HALSTEAD.
The Arms of the House of Broc, were Argent, upon a Bend Sable, a Luer Or.

blazon or coat of arms of the house of Broc

Of the Name, Antiquity, Greatness, Succession, Alliances, Possessions, and
Arms, of the House of Broc.
ALthough we cannot find the Original of the House of Broc, nor under what
Advantages it came into this Kingdom, yet in the first mention thereof, it
appears with such Prerogatives, as cannot but render it very considerable.

The Chief of it, Sir Ralph de Broc, is represented to Us in Story, to have
been a Lord of Castles, Manors, Lands, Lordships, and great Possessions, to
have been trusted with the Government of Royal Places, to have been a Valiant,
a Faithful, and a Renowned Knight, and to have been of near Confidence, Trust
and Employment, under one of the Greatest of the English Kings.

His own Alliance was very advantageous; that of his Children contracted with
Great Men, and Famous Houses, and the Marriages of his whole Succession,
Honorable and Useful.

There had been in the Possession of this Family, from the Reign of King Henry
the Second, at what time lived Sir Ralph de Broc, to the twenty ninth Year of
Edward the Third, when the Lands thereof fell to Heirs Female, the Castle and
Lordship of Agenet, in the County of Suffolk; the Lands of Staplehurst, and
Cambdene in Kent; the Manor of Fealburgh in Hampshire; the Lordship of
Ravensdene in Bedfordshire; the Lands of Bridsthorne, Herdwick, Wedon,
Chessham, and Aumondsham, in the County of Buckingham; the Manor of Shephale
in Hertfordshire, with those of Treversham, and Fulborne, in the County of
Cambridge.

So as the Antiquity of this Family considered, the Esteem wherein diverse
famous Knights thereof were held, by several of the Greatest Kings, its
Opulence, and the Noble Houses whereunto it was Allied, it cannot but be
thought Worthy by its Blood, and Arms, to Honor any Family, that shall be
descended from it. In order whereunto the subsequent Succinct Genealogy is here
transmitted to Posterity.

RANULPH de BROC, Lord of the Castle of Agenet, and Constable of the Castle and
Honor of Saltwood.
SIR RALPH de BROC, Lord of the Castle of Agenet in the County of Suffolk,
lived in the Reign of King Henry the Second, and by his Fortune, and his
Valor, acquired a particular Interest in the Favor and Confidence of that
King. After the disgrace of Henry of Essex, who was vanquished in Combat by
Robert of Montford, by whom he had been Challenged, for having cast down the
Kings Standard, and fled at the Fight of Kinsilth in Wales, the Constableship
of the Castle and Honor of Saltwood, having been confiscate, with the rest of
his Estate and Offices, was by the Kings Bounty conferred upon Sir Ralph de
Broc, who had done remarkable Service in that Occasion; wherein after he had
been sometime settled, it fell out, that the famous Becket (having left the
Seals and Ministry of England, and become Archbishop of Canterbury,) began to
competize with his old Master, from a pretended Sovereignty of Spiritual
Jurisdiction. He did endeavor, not only to uphold all the pretenses of the
Church, to Powers that did much diminish the Authority of the Crown, but did
stretch them to the utmost Rigor; and in matters, wherein his Predecessors had
submitted to the foregoing resolute Princes, he renewed old Claims, much to the
displeasure and discontent of the King. Among the rest he revived an ancient
pretense of the Sea of Canterbury to the Castle and Honor of Saltwood, which
Sir Ralph de Broc (for his own as well as the Kings Interest) did peremptorily
oppose. From hence great and personal Enmities did arise between the Archbishop
and himself, to that Degree, as the King (in the subsequent variances that fell
out afterward between Becket and him) could reasonably find no man so proper to
oppose unto his insolent Arrogance, as Sir Ralph de Broc, who had a Reputation
and Interest in that County, Superior to most of his time, and the Conscience
of a Soldier, not apt to be puzl'd, or obstructed, with Scruples incident to
men of milder Callings; hence it was, that he was made the man of Terror, of
Seizure, and Chastisement to the Archbishop, and all his Adherents, when their
Endeavors were in Opposition to the King, and his Authority: and this was the
reason of all the reprobate Characters he did receive, from several Monkish
Authors of that time, which may be perused amongst the proofs. He died
(notwithstanding) happy and safe from all their Censures, in the favor and
service of his Prince, and in Marriage of a Lady called Damata, the Daughter of
one William de Gorom; who (by the Style of his Charter) appears to have been a
man of much Dignity and Power in those days; from whom he received in free
Gift, to him, his Wife, and their Heirs, the Land of Staplehurst.

Their Issue.
Robert de Broc. Edelina de Broc, Married to Stephen of Turnam, a great Baron,
and in much Authority in the Reign of King John, being at that time Seneschall
of Poictou in the Kingdom of France.
ROBERT the Son of Ralph de Broc, at the Arrival of the Insolent Archbishop out
of banishment, received early marks of his Revenge, and Indignation. For upon
Christmas day, in the Seventeenth Year of King Henry the Second, we find he was
Excommunicated by his own mouth, together with Nigell de Sackville, for some
Offenses pretended to have been done to that Prelate, during the late Contests:
whose Death, soon after, Executed by certain Knights of the Court, set himself
and his Family, out of the reach of his farther displeasure.

This Sir Robert de Broc became a famous Knight, and in much Employment under
King Richard the First; in whose Reign (we find) he was styled Marshal of
England. He Married to his first Wife, Margaret of Beauchamp, or de bello
Campo, one of the Daughters of Richard de Beauchamp, who gave in free Marriage,
besides other things, certain Lands and Rents in the Town of Chestersham.

His Second Wife was Margery de Crec; who becoming the Heir of Walter her
Father, by occasion that her Brother William happened to suffer under the Laws;
brought unto him the Forrestership of Cannoc, and the Lordship of Misterton, in
the County of Warwick; which preferment was procured unto him by the particular
favor of the King.

Issue by his first Wife.
Laurence de Broc. Issue by his second Wife. Margery Married to Hugh de Loges,
to whom descended Misterton, and all the Lands of their Mothers Inheritance.
SIR Laurence de Broc flourished in the Reign of King John, and King Henry the
Third, to whose Interests he did constantly adhere. The Reputation and
Authority which he had in the Counties of Suffolk, Cambridge, Huntington, and
Buckingham, were of no small use to the Affairs of the Crown, during the
various Troubles of that long Reign. He augmented (notwithstanding) the Fortune
left him by his Predecessors, having purchased the Manors of Bridsthorn,
Herdwick, and Wedon, from the Prior of Saint Saviors of Bermundsey, and
received from Robert Mallet (a Lord of that Age) in Marriage with his Daughter
Milicent, certain Lands in the Counties of Huntingdon, and Cambridge, on
condition; That if they did not prove to the value they were asserted to be
worth, their Deficiency was then to be made good, out of the Lands that were
held by the said Robert Mallet, in Quenton, in the County of Buckingham.

Their Issue.
Hugh de Broc.
SIR Hugh de Broc succeeded his Father in his Lands and Lordships, and we find
he followed the famous King Edward the First, in diverse of his Wars, his Name
being upon the Lists of several Expeditions, which were made in that Reign,
into Wales, Gascony, and Scotland. He Married Agnes de Montepiconis, a Lady
descended from one of the most ancient and Noble Families that was among the
Normans, as whose Predecessors had been Lords of the Honor, which bare that
name, in the Duchy of Normandy, and whose immediate Ancestor came over with
King William the First, in quality of his Dapifer, or Sewer, an Office of
Eminent Dignity, at that time, in the Kings House.

Their Issue.
Laurence de Broc.
SIR Laurence de Broc, Lord of Shephale, after the decease of his first Wife,
whose Christian Name was Ellen, Married another Lady of the same appellation,
that was the Daughter of Sir Ralph Pirot, and of Cassandra, one of the Heirs of
the Famous Knight, Sir Giles of Argentine; who gave him the Manor of Maudlins,
and other Lands, as a Portion; to which end, a Fine was suffered, in the
Thirtieth Year of Edward the First. In the third Year of King Edward the
Second, a Patent passed unto this Sir Laurence de Broc, to have Free Warren,
and all the Rights thereof, upon his Lands in Chessham, Aumondsham, Bridsthorn,
Hardwick, and Wedon, in the County of Buckingham; and in the seventh of the
same Reign, he Levied a Fine to his Son Ralph, and Elizabeth his Wife: He lived
unto the Reign of King Edward the Third, and left to Inherit his Lands and
Lordships, Sir Ralph de Broc, Lord of Shephale.


OF this Ralph de Broc, or the Transactions of his Life, there remains little
Testimony. So, whether he died early, or that the Evidences of them cannot
appear, by reason of the length of time, since the Alienation of these Lands,
it is uncertain: but true it is, That in him did terminate this Name and
Family; who having Married Elizabeth the Daughter of Sir John Hussy, left no
Male-Issue, and only three Daughters,

Joanne, Married to Thomas Rokesby, that died without Issue. Elena, Married to
Edmund Mordaunt, Lord of Turvey. Agnes, Married to Sir Henry of Brussels.
ELena de Broc, was in the Seven and twentieth Year of King Edward the Third,
Married to Edmund Mordaunt, that was Lord of Turvey, in the County of Bedford,
and of diverse other Lordships. She brought into his House, the Moity of all her
Fathers Lands; there accruing to her Husband for her Share in Cambridgshire,
half the Manor of Mallots, with several Lands in Cambridge, Treversham, and
Fulborn, in Buckinghamshire, diverse Lands in Elsburg, Bridsthorn, Herdwick,
Wedon, Chessham, and Aumondsham, with sundry other Lands in Hartfordshire, and
the entire Manor of Shephale.

Their Issue.
Robert Mordaunt, Lord of Turvey.
knight on horseback bearing the colors of the family, and a family tree
showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors Sr. RANULPH de BROC
Governor of the Castle of Agenet and Constable of the Castle and Honor of
Saltwood. Damata de Gorum. Edelina de Broc. Stephen of Turnam. Sr. ROBERT de
BROC Marshall of England and Forrester of Cannock. Margaret of Beauchamp. Sr.
Laurence de Broc Ld of Shephale. Milicent de Mallet. Sr. Hugh de Broc Ld. of
Shephale Agnes de Montepiconis. Sr. Laurence de Broc Ld. of Shephale Elena de
Pirot. Sr. Rauf de Broc Ld. of Shephale Elizabeth Hussy. Johanna de Broc
Thomas Rokeshy Ellena de Broc Edmond Mordaunt Ld of Turvey Agnes de Broc Henry
de Brussels




GENEALOGICAL PROOFS OF THE House of BROC: Drawn out of Extant Charters,
Records, Histories, and other Authentic Testimonies.

GENEALOGICAL PROOFS OF THE House of BROC.
RANULPH de BROC, Lord of the Castle of Agenet, and Constable of the Castle and
Honor of Saltwood.
Hollinshead, Page 89, 60.
THE Earl of Leicester therefore Landing at Walton, the 21. of September,
passed thorough the County, at Fremmingham; where he was received of Hugh
Bigod, Earl of Norfolk: and, after that another Fleet of Flemmings were arrived
for their Aid, they went to Ipswich: where, when they had remained a few days,
and augmented their Forces, by certain Bands of Men of War, that belonged to
Earl Bigod, they went to the Castle of Agenet, that belonged to Ralph de Broc,
which they took, spoiled, and burned, and then returned to Fremmingham.

Doctor Powells History of Wales, Page 207.
IN this first Voyage of King Henry, against the Welshmen, he was put in great
danger of his Life, in a Straight at Counsilth, not far from Flint; where Henry
of Essex, whose Office, by Inheritance, was to bear the Standard of England,
cast down the same, and fled: which thing encouraged the Welshmen, in such
sort, that the King, being sore distressed, had much ado to save himself; and
(as the French Chronicle says) was fain to Flee: of whose part Eustace fitz
John, and Robert de Courcey, Two Worthy Knights, with diverse other Noblemen and
Gentlemen, were Slain.

Hollinshead, History of England, Page 67.
THose which escaped in returning back, not knowing that the King passed
through the Streights without danger, declared to their Fellows that followed,
and were approaching to the said Streights, that the King and all the residue
was lost. These News so discomforted the Companies, that Henry of Essex, that
bore the King's Standard, by right of Inheritance, threw down the same, and
fled; which dishonorable Deed was afterward laid to his Charge, by one Robert
de Montford; with whom (by Order of the King) he fought a Combat in Trial of
the Quarrel, and was overcome: but yet the King qualifying the rigor of the
Judgment, by mercy, pardoned his Life, and appointed him to be Shorn a Monk,
and put into the Abbey at Reading, taking his Lands and Possessions into his
hands, as forfeited.

Villare Cantianum, Folio 298.
Concerning the Castle and Honor of Saltwood.
THere was here formerly a Magnificent Castle, which time has much demolished,
and a Park well stored with Deer, now vanished and gone. Many Manors in this
Tract are held thereof, by Knights Service, which justly made it accounted, and
called, an Honor. In the time of King Henry the Second, Henry of Essex, Baron
of Raleigh, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, pro tempore, and the King's
Standard Bearer, by Right of Inheritance, held this Castle of the Archbishop:
Who, having in a light Skirmish against the Welsh, in Flintshire, not only cast
away his Courage, but his Standard also, was appealed of High Treason; and, in
a Legal Duel, vanquished by his Challenger; and being possessed with Regret
and Shame, contracted from his Defeat, shrouded himself in a Cloister, and put
on a Monk's Coul; forfeiting a goodly Patrimony and Livelihood, which was
Escheated to King Henry the Second.

Charta Regis Henrici Secundi.
HENRICUS, Rex Angliae, and Dux Normanniae and Aquitaniae, and Comes Andegaviae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus, Baronibus, Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus,
Ministris, and Fidelibus suis totius Angliae, Salutem.
Sciatis me Dedisse and Concessisse Ranulpho de Broc, Officium Constabularii,
in Castro and Honor de Saltwood, cum omnibus Libertatibus and Proficuis eidem
Officio pertinentibus, Tenendum sibi pro toto tempore vitae suae: Quare volo
and firmiter praecipio quod ipse hoc praedictum habeat, and teneat, been, in
pace, honorifice, and libere, sicut illud unquam Henricus de Essex melius and
liberius tenuit. Testibus, Ricardo de Humet, Constabulario, Roberto Marmion,
Widone de Sancto Walerico, Willielmo de Porth, Gerardo de Camvillo, Manasero
Bisset, Dapifero.

Historiae Anglicanae december Scriptores, Page 1314.
QUAe etiam tunc temporis Ecclesia habuit, cum tempore exilii Sancti Thomae,
Tyrannus ille Radulphus de Broc, ex praecepto Regis custodiret Episcopatum.

Historiae Anglicanae december Scriptores in Chronica Gervasii, Page 1398.
REX autem Angliae, Henricus, admodum and supra modum iratus, eo quod ipse in
Nuntiis suis, and Petitionibus, tam a Rege Franciae, quam a Domino Papa esset
repulsus, jussit, furore plenus, res and reditus Archiepiscopi, and omnium
suorum confiscari; totamque Cognationem suam, and omnes qui, cum quovis Titulo,
contingebant, exilio damnari: nulli igitur Statui, Fortunae, vel Ordini, ista
crudelitas pepercit. Nam Mulieres in puerperio decumbentes, pueri quoque
jacentes in Cunis, acti sunt in Exilium: Senes, cum Junioribus propulsi sunt,
domibus eorum and rebus, in exterminium datis: adulti quoque coacti sunt
jurare, quod absque diversione, vel diverticulo, Pontiniacum peterent, and
Archiepiscopo suo, Regis autem proditori, se praesentarent; ut ipse solus, tot
angustias Cordis sustineret, quot, causa sui, coexules egentes viderit.
Processit ulterior furor immanis; nam public terrore Laicae prohibitum est, ne
quis eum (non dico, Donis, vel Scriptis) visitaret; sed ne quis, pro eo, in
Anglicana Ecclesia, oraret. Exercebantur istae and hujusmodi Enormitates, per
quendam filium Perditionis, Ranulphum de Broc, quem Rex, ad custodiendum, imo
ad destruendum, commendaverat Archiepiscopatum. Hac itaque accepta potestate,
associatis sibi nequioribus, se circumquaque grassabantur. Oderat enim
Archiepiscopum ex antiquo, ideoque crudelitate non poterat satiari.

In eadem Chronica Gervasii, Page 1414.
ERant autem hi quatuor, Generis Nobilitate conspicui, militia praeclari, and
Regi admodum familiares, ut Socii, quorum Nomina sunt haec; Reginaldus, filius
Ursi, Willielmus de Tracy, Ricardus Brito, Hugo de Morvilla; cum festinatione
nimia descenderunt praedicti quatuor milites ad Mare, and sine impedimento
aliquo, vel mora transpositi, applicuerunt juxta Dovariam, in loco qui portus
Canum appellatur, gloriabantur admodum de tam facili transitu, ut si Deo,
malignitatis suae placeret conspiratio, adeoque liberum eis praeparasset
introitum, noctem illam in Castro de Saltwood (quod erat in Custodia Ranulphi
de Broc) duxerunt insomnem.

Charta Willielmi de Goram.
OMnibus hominibus suis and amicis, tam Francis quam Anglicis, tam futuris quam
praesentibus, Willielmus de Goram,
Salutem.
Sciatis me dedisse Terram meam de Staplehurst, Terram illam quam teneo de
Willielmo Comite, Ranulpho de Broc, and Damatae, filiae meae, and haeredibus
eorum, tenendum, tam libere, and quiet, quam illam Ego teneo, de praedicto
Willielmo Comite, (scilicet) Servitium faciendo dimidiae partis unius militis.
His Testibus, Gervasio, filio Bernardi, Henrico, filio Thomae, Willielmo de
Harlec, Alano de Criol, Stephano de Poisoter, Henrico de Bertsted, Roberto
Selvage, cum multis aliis.

Charta Damatae de Broc.
SCiant tam futuri quam praesentes, Quod Ego Damata, Uxor quondam Domini
Ranulphi de Broc, and Robertus de Broc, filius meus, fuimus in illo loco, in
quo dictus Ranulphus, vir meus and Dominus, dedit Fulconi de Bollard, Terram
suam in Combdena, in feodo and haereditate, cum omnibus pertinentiis, tenendum
ab eo and haeredibus suis: and homagium suum cepit, and accipitrem quandam, in
recognitionem, ei dedit, Servitio quartae partis militis. Ego vero Damata, and
Robertus, filius meus, hanc Donationem, per istam Chartam, confirmamus, and
concedimus petitionem Fulconis de Bollard. Testibus, Willielmo de Sancta
Mardalia, Roberto de Bethrinden, Thoma de Harlebec, Ricardo de Auberville,
Henrico de la Hyde, Roberto de Ham, Andreo, filio Thomae, Stephano Tore,
Johanne Clerico.

Inter Placita coram Concilio Regis, die Sancti Johannis Baptistae, in tres
Septimanas, anno vigesimo Septimo Henrici Tertii, Rotul. 20.
EDelina de Broc opponit versus Sibyllam de Broc, quod tenebat Finem, factum
apud Winton. Tempore Regis Johannis, inter ipsam Sibyllam, and Stephanum de
Turnham, and ipsam Edelinam, de rationabili part, quae clamat versus ipsos,
Stephanum and Edelinam, de haereditate Ranulphi de Broc, Patris Edelinae and
Sibyllae, and de rationabili part Sibyllae, quam ipsa clamat versus eosdem
Stephanum and Edelinam, de tota haereditate Damatae de Goram, matris ipsorum
Edelinae and Sibyllae, and Sibylla non venit.

Baronage of England, Page 663.
I Come now to Stephen of Turnham, Brother of the forementioned Robert. This
Stephen ratified his Fathers Grants, to the Canons of Combwell, for the health
of the Souls of King Henry the Second, King Richard the First, his own Soul,
and the Soul of his Wife. In the three and thirtieth of Henry the Second, this
Stephen, being Seneschal of Poictou, observing that the King of France had won
Four Castles, belonging to the King of England, and thereupon marched to Maine,
with purpose to gain it by assault, set fire upon the Suburbs: by which means
the Flames getting over the Walls, almost consumed the whole City. In the Sixth
of King John, with Edelina his Wife, he had Livery of the Manor of Fealburgh,
in the County of Southampton, which was the inheritance of Damieta, her Mother,
then Deceased; but departed this Life, in the Sixteenth of that Kings Reign:
for then did the same Edelina, his Widow, give Sixty Marks, and one Palfrey,
for liberty to Marry with whom she should like best.

Robert de Broc, That was Styled Marshal of England, and Forrester of Cannoc.
Rogerus de Hoveden, part posteriori, Page 299.
BEatus vero Thomas, Archiepiscopus, eo die, Cantuariae residens, post
Sermonem, ad populum, factum, excommunicavit Robertum de Broc, qui die
praecedente amputaverat caudam Sommerii sui.

Imagines Historiarum, Authore Radulpho de Diceto, Page 555.
DIE Natalis Domini, Thomas, Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus, Sermonem habiturus
ad populum, ascendit in Pulpitum: Sermon completo, orationibus consuetis
(scilicet) pro Domino Papa, pro Rege, populique salute, fusis ad Dominum;
Nigellum de Sackville, Robertum quoque de Broc, qui Equam quandam ipsius
Archiepiscopi, ad dedecus and ignominiam ejus, decurtaverant, accensis candelis
solemniter excommunicavit.

Charta Roberti de Broc.
NOtum sit omnibus Sanctae Ecclesiae Fidelibus, tam praesentibus quam futuris,
Quod Ego Robertus de Broc, pro salute mea, and Margaritae, Uxoris meae, Domini
Ranulphi de Broc, patris mei, and Laurentii, filii mei; and pro anima Domini
Ricardi de Bellocampo, patris Margaritae, Uxoris meae, Dedi Ecclesiae Sancti
Pauli, de Newnham, and Canonicis regularibus, ibidem Deo servientibus,
Ecclesiam meam de Ravensden, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis: and praecipio quod
de me, and haeredibus meis, aeterne, in pace teneant. His Testibus, Domino
Stephano de Turnham, Domino Roberto de Lega, Domino Thoma Basset, Elia, filio
Ricardi, Johanne, filio Stephani, Gervasio de Ambly, Thoma de Stowbridge,
Willielmo, filio Willielmi, Nicolao, filio Rogeri, Andreo Clerico.

Antiquities of Warwickshire, Page 347.
Speaking of Walter de Broc, Lord of Chesterton.
TO this Walter succeeded William, his Son and Heir, who gave to the Monks of
Radmore, in the same Forest of Cannoc, (afterward translated to Stonly) all
his Lands in Werly, in the County of Stafford. In Consideration whereof, he was
made partaker of the whole benefit of the Cestertian Order, and promised that
his Body should have Sepulture in their Monastery. On the Canons of
Killingworth he conferred the Church of Chesterton, and granted to the Knights
Templars, a Yard Land, in this Lordship: but ill fate attended him: for he
suffered under the hand of Justice, though for what appears not. Whereupon the
Lands were Seized into the Kings hands; who gave them in Marriage to one Robert
de Broc, being a man of note in his days: For he is styled Marescallus Angliae,
and Forrestarius de Cannoc: who gave to the Monastery of Stonly, a Message,
and half a Yard Land, lying in Radway, in this County; and died in the Fifth
Year of Richard the First: leaving Issue, Margery, his Daughter and Heir,
Married to Hugh de Loges; who, in the Seventh of that King, paid sixty Marks
Fine toward raising that great Sum of Money, for the Kings Redemption; for
which he had the Custody of the Forest of Cannoc, with his House of
Grimbaldsdon.

Sir Laurence de Broc, Lord of Shephale.
Charta Domini Roberti Mallet.
ROBERTUS MALLET,
omnibus hominibus and amicis suis, Salutem;
Sciatis me, memetipsum, and haeredes meos obligasse, perfacere Laurentio de
Broc, in libero maritagio cum Milicenta filia mea, ducentos solidatos Terrae,
in loco competenti ex illis quos teneo, in Comitatibus Cantabrigiae and
Huntingdoniae, sibi and haeredibus suis de dicta Milicenta filia mea
exeuntibus: and hoc erit circa Festum beatae Mariae Virginis, Anno Regni Regis
Henrici, Vigesimo Septimo. Et si Ego Robertus Mallet, vel haeredes mei,
praedictos ducentos Solidatos Terrae, in iisdem Comitatibus, praedicto
Laurentio de Broc, and haeredibus suis de dicta Milicenta filia mea exeuntibus,
warrantizare non possumus: Ego Robertus Mallet and haeredes mei, faciemus
praedicto Laurentio de Broc, and haeredibus suis, de Terris meis in Quenton in
Comitatu Buckinghamiae, ad Valorem praedictorum ducentorum Solidorum reditus,
in Comitatibus Cantabrigiae and Huntingdoniae. Quare volo, and firmiter
praecipio, Quod praedictus Laurentius de Broc, and haeredes sui, de Milicenta
filia mea exeuntes, habeant and teneant praedictos ducentos solidatos Terrae,
been, in pace, libere, and quiet, integre, and honorifice in perpetuum. Et ut
haec mea Donatio and Concessio rata sit, and stabilis in posterum, praesentem
Chartam, sigilli mei appositione, roboravi; His Testibus, Domino Waltero de
Patshull, Stephano de Lega, Thoma de Grimbald, Nicolao de Bello Campo,
Gervasio, filio Reginaldi, Matthaeo de Paddington, Johanne de la Mole,
Willielmo, filio Johannis, Thoma de Erdley.

Inter placita coram Concilio Regis, a die Sancti Johannis Baptistae, in tres
septimanas, Anno vigesimo septimo Henrici tertii Regis -- Hunt.
ROBERTUS MALLET venit and convenit, quod dedit Laurentio de Broc december
libratas Terrae, per extentum Domini Regis, in Huntingdonia, and in
Cantabrigia, and sinon erit tantum ibidem, habebit in Quenton, in Comitatu
Buckinghamiae.

Out of an Ancient Manuscript among the Evidences of the Earl of Peterborow.
LAURENTIUS de BROC perquisivit december marcas reditus, in villis de Bridsthorne,
Herdwick, and Wedon, de Priore Sancti Salvatoris, de Bermundseya, tenendas de
dicto Priore, pro uno clavo Garyophylli, pro omnibus servitiis.

Inquisitio post mortem Laurentii de Broc.
INquisitio apud Cestresham, in Comitatu Bucks, die Lunae post Festum
Epiphaniae Domini, Anno tertio Edwardi primi. Laurentius Brook nihil tenuit de
Domino Rege die quo obiit, sed tenuit duas virgatas Terrae in Cestresham, de
Comite Oxoniae, pro tricesimis septimis denariis, and valent quinque Marcas.
Item tenet unam virgatam, videlicet de Terra and Bosco, de haeredibus Rogeri
Syfrewest, per tredecim denarios, and valet quadraginta solidos, per annum.
Item tenet centum solidos reditus de Abbate de Redyng, in eadem villa, pro uno
denario annui reditus. Item tenet in eadem villa unam Virgatam Terrae, de
Domino Stephano de Cheyndut, pro una Marca per annum. Item tenet in eadem villa
unum Molendinum de Andreo Bakewell reddendo per annum, unum denarium. Idem
Laurentius coepit quindecim solidos annuatim de Abbate de Mussenden pro uno
Molendino, dicto Painesmill, in eadem villa. Item tenet in eadem dimidiam
virgatam Terrae, de praedicto Abbate de Mussenden, pro uno denario per annum.
Item tenet quatuor acras prati, ex haeredibus Johannis de Can, in villa de
Agmondesham. Item tenet quadraginta solidos Reditus, in villa de Cestresham, de
Ricardo de Bello Campo, and inde nihil solvit, quia primo provenit de lb ero
Maritagio. Item tenet unam virgatam Terrae, de Henrico Bune, in villa de
Agmondesham pro uno pari Calcarium deauratorum, vel sexdecim denariis. Item
tenet dimidiam virgatam Terrae, de Domino Willielmo de Derneford, in parva
Mussenden, pro uno denario per annum. Item tenet sex marcas annui reditus, de
Nicolao Cantilupo, in Esslebreg, pro uno clavo Garyophylli per annum. Item
tenet december marcatas annui Reditus de Priore de Bermondsey in Wedon, Herdwic,
and Brydesthorne, pro uno denario per annum. Item tenet unam Carucatam Terrae,
de dicto Willielmo de Bello Campo de Bedfordia in Southcote, pro una Rosa per
annum. Item tenet quadraginta solidos annui reditus, de Galfrido de Lucy, apud
le Grane juxta Lecton, pro denario per annum. Item tenet de Comite Warrenae
viginti sex acras Terrae apud Weng, pro uno pari Chirothecarum. Item tenet unam
Carucatam Terrae, de Johanne de Brook, apud le Brook per december solidos. Item
tenet de Johanne de Bune in Denham sexdecim solidos and quatuor denarios per
annum, pro uno pari Calcarium deauratorum, and sex denariis per annum. Item
tenet octodecim acras Prati apud Quenton, de Roberto Mallet, pro uno pari
Chirothecarum; and dicunt quod quidam Hugo de Brook est filius primogenitus and
haeres propinquior praedicto Laurentio, and plenae aetatis.

Sir Hugh de Broc, Lord of Shephale, Maudelins, and other Lands and Lordships.
Charta Hugonis de Broc.
EGO Hugo de Broc, Dominus de Shephale, notum facio praesentibus and futuris,
quod dedi, and concessi, and hac praesenti Charta confirmavi, Roberto de
Tarrevil, consanguineo meo, unum annualem reditum december marcarum legalis
Monetae, percipiendum annuatim, ex omnibus Terris and tenementis, reditibus and
servitiis meis, quae habeo in villis and Campis de Herdwick, Wedon, and
Bridsthorne, percipiendum ad duos anni Terminos (videlicet) ad Festum sancti
Michaelis Archangeli, and Annunciationis beatae Mariae Virginis, per aequales
portiones. Et si contingat praedictum annualem reditum december Marcarum, a retro
esse, in part, vel in toto, per unum mensem, post aliquem terminum praedictum,
tunc been licebit praedicto Roberto de Tarrevill, in omnibus praedictis Terris,
tenementis, reditibus and servitiis, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis,
distringere, and districtiones retinere, donec de dicto annuali reditu plenarie
fuit sibi satisfactum. Et Ego Hugo de Broc, and haeredes mei, praedictum
annualem reditum december Marcarum, in forma praedicta eidem Roberto de Tarrevill,
ad totum terminum vitae suae, contra omnes gentes warrantizabo and defendam. In
cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti Chartae sigillum meum apposui. His
Testibus.

seal of Hugo de Broc SIGILLVM DNI HVGONIS DE BROC



Charta Agnetis de Broc.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod ego Agnes de Broc dedi, and concessi, and
hac praesenti Charta confirmavi Margaritae de Broc, filiae meae, sex virgatas
terrae, cum pertinentiis, in villa de Berkhamstead, quas Hugo de Montepiconis
pater meus, quondam emit de Willielmo de Lamburne, and mihi, inter alia, dedit
in liberum Maritagium, tenendas and habendas sibi, and Haeredibus suis, de me,
and haeredibus meis, libere, quiet, been, and in pace, in perpetuum, reddendo
inde annuatim, ipsa, and haeredes suae, mihi, and haeredibus meis, unum
denarium, ad Festum Nativitatis sancti Johannis Baptistae, pro omnibus
servitiis, sectis curiarum, wardis, releviis, and omnibus aliis secularibus
exactionibus, quae contingere possint. Et ego vero dicta Agnes and haeredes mei
dictas sex virgatas terrae, cum pertinentiis, dictae Margaritae, contra omnes
mortales per praedictum servitium in perpetuum warrantizabimus, acquietabimus,
and defendemus: Et ut haec mea donatio, concessio, and praesentis Chartae meae
confirmatio perpetuae firmitatis robur obtineant, praesentem chartam, Sigilli
impressione roboravi. His Testibus, Waltero de Baud, Thoma de Udon, Ricardo de
Goldingham, Thoma filio Petri, Stephano Pevere, Andreo Boxtead, Roberto Sigill,
Oliverio Sutton, Petro de Stevenage, Willielmo Clerico.

seal of Agnes de Broc S. DNAE AGNETIS BROC



Odericus Vitalis, Page 1047.
Scriptis de servitiis militum, quae debentur Duci Normanniae.
HUgo de Montepiconis tres milites, and ad suum servitium duodecim, de Honor
de Montepiconis, Garimus de Glapion habet.

Odericus Vitalis, Page 585.
RAdulphus de Montepincionis, Dapifer Guilielmi Magni Regis Anglorum, se ex
toto fideliter sancto Eberulpho devovit, and a Domino Manerio Abbate
suppliciter postulavit, ut aliquis in Uticensi coenobio Clericus ad Dei
servitium idoneus, ad Monachatum susciperetur, qui pro salute ipsius,
conjugisque suae, Deum fideliter deprecaretur, quod and factum est. Nam Dei
nutu tunc oppetebat Monachatum quidam Rhemensis Scholasticus, nomine Johannes,
qui ad Curiam Regis ductus, praedicto militi suas concessit orationes, and quos
pro Christo passurus erat labores. Ille vero super hoc exhilaratus, palam
cunctis pedes ejus humiliter est osculatus. Deinde Monachi praedictum Johannem
libenter susceperunt, eoque suscepto valde laetati sunt, quia grammaticae Artis
erat peritus, bonisque studiis usque ad senium pertinaciter intentus. Praefatus
Heroes ad victum ejus perenniter dedit sancto Eberulpho, decimam quinque
molendinorum, trium (scilicet) de Jort, and quarti loco qui Hurtavent vulgo
dicitur, and quinti, de Montepincionis, duasque garbas decimae, villanorum de
Galdreflogiis, medietatemque decimae de Spanaio, and apud Ermentrudis villam
duas acras prati.

A Fine suffered for the Manor of Maudelins.
HAec est finalis concordia, facta in Curia Domini Regis, apud Eboracum, a die
Sancti Martini, in quindecim dies, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi, filii Regis
Henrici, Tricesimo; coram Radulpho de Hengham, Gulielmo de Bereford, Elia de
Bekingham, Petro Malore, Gulielmo Howard, and Lamberto de Trikingham,
Justiciariis, and aliis Domini Regis fidelibus, tunc ibi praesentibus, Inter
Laurentium de Broc, and Elenam, uxorem ejus, quaerentes, per Hugonem de
Crumpton, positum loco eorum ad lucrandum and perdendum, and Radulphum Pirot
Deforciantem per Thomam le Soks, positum loco suo ad lucrandum and perdendum,
de Manerio de Maudelyns, cum pertinentiis: unde placitum Conventionis
summonitum fuit inter eos in eadem Curia (scilicet) quod praedictus Laurentius
recognovit praedictum Manerium cum pertinentiis, esse Jus ipsius Radulphi; and
pro hac recognitione, fine and concordia, idem Radulphus concessit praedictis
Laurentio and Elenae, praedictum Manerium cum pertinentiis, habendum and
tenendum eisdem Laurentio and Elenae, and haeredibus, quos idem Laurentius de
corpore ipsius Elenae procreaverit, de Capitalibus Dominis Feodi illius per
servitia, quae ad illud manerium pertinent, in perpetuum. Et si contingat quod
praedictus Laurentius obiret sine haerede, de Corpore ipsius Elenae procreato,
tunc post decessum ipsius Laurentii, and Elenae, praedictum Manerium, cum
pertinentiis, integre remanebunt rectis haeredibus ipsius Laurentii, tenendum
de Capitalibus Dominis Feodi illius per servitia, quae ad illud Manerium
pertinent, in perpetuum.

Out of the forementioned Manuscript, remaining with the Earl of Peterborow.
RAdulphus Pirot, per finem dedit Laurentio de Broc, and Helenae uxori ejus
Manerium de Maudlins.

Charta Radulphi Pirot.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Radulphus Pirot dedi and concessi and
hac praesenti charta mea confirmavi, Domino Laurentio de Broc Militi, cum
Helena, filia mea, Manerium meum de Maudlins, cum pertinentiis suis and
libertatibus, tenendum and habendum sibi and haeredibus suis, de dicta Helena
filia mea exeuntibus, de me and haeredibus meis, libere, quiet, been, and in
pace, in perpetuum. Et ego vero dictus Radulphus and haeredes mei dictum
Manerium cum pertinentiis suis, and libertatibus, dicto Domino Laurentio, and
haeredibus ejus, contra omnes mortales, warrantizabimus, acquietabimus, and
defendemus; and ut haec mea donatio and concessio, and praesentis meae Chartae
confirmatio perpetuae firmitatis robur obtineant, praesentem chartam sigilli
mei impressione roboravi. His Testibus, Domino Johanne de Pavenham, Ingleramo
de Belenger, Thoma de Wac, Rogero Cave, Thoma, filio Stephani, Stephano de
Salford, Roberto Sagan, Andreo Halby, and multis aliis.

Sir Laurence de Broc, Lord of Shephale, and other Lands and Lordships.
Out of the forementioned Manuscript, among the Evidences of the Earl of
Peterborow.
LAurentius de Broc leva fin a Rauf de Broc son fitz, and a Elizabeth sa feme,
devant l'an septiesme le Roy Edward Second. Agnes de Montepiconis fut sa mere.

Charta Regis Edwardi Secundi.
EDWARDUS, Dei Gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae;
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ministris, and omnibus Balivis, and
Fidelibus suis; Salutem. Sciatis, Nos, de nostra gratia speciali, concessisse,
and hac Charta nostra confirmasse, dilecto, and fideli nostro, Laurentio de
Broc, Militi; quod ipse, and haeredes sui, in perpetuum, habeant liberam
Warrenam, in omnibus Dominicis terris suis, de Shephale, in Comitatu
Hertfordiae, in Bridsthorne, Herdwick, Wedon, Chessam, and Aumondsham, in
Comitatu Buckinghamiae; and de Fulborne, and Treversham, in Comitatu
Cantabrigiae: veruntamen terrae illae non sunt intra metas Forestae nostrae,
ita quod terras illas nullus intrat, ad fugandum in eis; vel ad aliquid
capiendum, quod ad Warrenam pertinet, sine licentia and voluntate ipsius
Laurentii, vel haeredum suorum. Quare volumus, and firmiter praecipimus, pro
nobis and haeredibus nostris; quod praedictus Laurentius, and haeredes sui, in
perpetuum habeant liberam Warrenam, in omnibus dominicis terris suis
praedictis: veruntamen terrae illae non sunt intra metas Forestae nostrae; ita
quod nullus intrat in terras illas ad fugandum in eis, vel ad capiendum
aliquid, quod ad Warrenam pertinet, sine Licentia and voluntate ipsius Simonis,
vel haeredum suorum; super forisfacturam nostram december librarum, ut praedictum
est. His Testibus, venerabili Patre, Archiepiscopo Eboracensi, Angliae Primate,
Thoma, Comite Norfolciae, Edmundo, Comite Cantiae, Edomareo, Comite
Pembrochiae, Edmundo, Comite Arundeliae, Hugone, Comite Wincestriae, and aliis.
Datum per manum nostram, apud Eboracum, vicesimo die Junii, anno Regni nostri
decimo quinto.

Out of the forementioned Manuscript, remaining with the Earl of Peterborow.
MAgister Thomas Pirot dedit, per finem, Domino Laurentio de Broc, and Helenae
uxori ejus, centum Solidatos reditus, in Esalburg, anno Regni Regis Edwardi,
filii Regis Edwardi, tertio.

Sir Ralph de Broc, Lord of Shephale, Maudelins, and other Lands and Lordships.
Charta Petri Carbonell.
OMnibus Christi Fidelibus, ad quos praesentes litterae pervenerint, Petrus
Carbonell, Salutem in Domino. Sciatis, quod cum Ego, praedictus Petrus, teneo
centum Acras terrae, in Cantabrigia, jacentes in quodam Campo, vocato
Swinesfield, quae mihi descendebant haereditarie, post mortem Gulielmi Patris
mei, in eadem villa: qui quidem Gulielmus, praedictam terram habuit, ex Dono,
and Feoffamento Domini Radulphi de Broc; qui eandem tenuit, in feodo talliato,
ex Concessione Domini Laurentii de Broc, Patris praedicti Radulphi, per finem
in Curia Domini Regis, inter eos, inde levatum Et ea de causa noveritis, me,
praedictum Petrum, praedictam terram, cum pertinentiis, concessisse, and pro
me, and haeredibus meis, sursum reddidisse, Henrico de Brussells, and Agneti
uxori ejus, and Edmundo Mordaunt, and Helenae uxori ejus; praedictis Agneti,
and Helenae, ut Filiabus, and haeredibus praedicti Radulphi, Habendum and
tenendum praedictam terram, cum pertinentiis, praedictis Henrico de Brussell,
and Agneti, uxori ejus, and Edmundo Mordaunt, and Helenae, uxori ejus, and
haeredibus eorum, in perpetuum, de Capitalibus Dominis Feodi, per servitia inde
debita. In cujus rei testimonium Sigillum meum apposui; Data apud Cantabrigiam,
Die Dominico, in crastino Festi Exaltationis Sanctae Crucis, Anno Regni Regis
Edwardi, tertii a Conquestu, vicesimo Septimo.

Charta Edmundi Mordaunt, and Henrici de Brusselle.
A Tous yceux que cettes lettres verront, ou orront, Edmund Mordaunt, and
Ellene sa feme, and Henry de Brusselle, e Agnes sa feme; Sallutz en Dieu.
Saches nous avoir ordoigne nostre cher, and bien aim, Jean Baynard, nostre
attorne, a recevoir la sesine quelle Peiris Carbonell a nous Liurera, and
Surrendra, de cent acres de terre, ove les appertenences, en Cantabrigia: queux
sont del heritage de l'avant dit Ellene, and Agnes per finem, le court nostre
Seigneur le Roy, de ceo leve, en form de taill, seant firm, and stable,
quicunque le det jean Baynard, de ce fera, en nostre nom. En temognence de
quelle chose, a cestes nos presents lettres, avons mis nos Sealls, escrit a la
Maudelaine, Mardy prochaine apres la feste nostre Dame, L'an le Roy Edward
tierce, puis la conqueste, vint and septiesme.

Charta Domini Henrici de Hussy.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego, Henricus de Hussy, dedi, concessi,
and, hac praesenti charta, confirmavi, Elizabethae de Broc, sorori meae,
Mannerium de Stevintho, quod frater meus Gulielmus tenuit, and licentia mea in
ultima voluntate sua, ei dedit, and reliquit; and erit sine ullo retinemento
mei, vel haeredum meorum: Habendum and tenendum, sibi and haeredibus suis; vel
cui assignare voluerit, loco religioso, vel alibi, in perpetuum, libere,
quiet, pacifice; sicut dictus Gulielmus illud melius unquam tenuit, de
Capitalibus Dominis feodi, per servitia inde debita, and consueta. Et ut haec
mea donatio, and concessio, rata, and inconcussa permaneat; huic scripto
sigillum meum apposui. His Testibus, Domino Ricardo Perers, Domino Thoma de la
Hay, Willielmo de Coggeshall, Stephano, fratre ejus, Thoma Bernac, Hamo
Coudray, Roberto filio Thomae, Willielmo de Selby, and multis aliis.

The Partition of Lands.
CEttez Indenture, feitez en trois parties, enter Thomas de Rokesle, and Johan
sa femme, d'une party, Agnes soeur mesme d'ycelle Johan, d'autre party; and
Edmond Mordaunt, and Elene sa femme, soeur mesme d'ycelle Johan, and Agnes, de
tierce party; filles and heritiers de Rauff de Broke: del' heritage mesme cest
Rauff southecrit, tesmoigne la purpartie, enter les parties avantdits, en la
mannere qui s'ensuit; cest assavoir,

Pars Thomae de Rokesle, and Johan sa femme.
QUE les ditz Thomas, and Johan sa femme, auront, en purpartie, del heritage
del dit Johan, le Columber de Chesham, and viii l. viii s. iv d. de rent, ove
les appartenances, jadis appartenant a la mannere de la Maudeleyn. Et, en
mannere de la Maudelyn iii. maisons, cest assavoir, une Grange, une novell
etable, and un novelle chamber de mariesme, a sa volonte: cest assavoir, l. s.
d. ob. q. De Alice Edrich. 0 0 vi 0 0 De Johanne Child. 0 i iv 0 0 De Johanna
Prestmere. 0 ii 0 0 0 De Ricardo Witringden. 0 i iv 0 0 De Thoma Prat. 0 viii
iv 0 0 De Johanna at Thorn. i vii ix 0 0 De dame Johanne de Badden. Et una
libra de Cumyn. 0 v vi 0 0 De Edmundo Colt. 0 vi xi 0 0 De Johanna Colle. 0 vi
xi 0 0 De Johanna Assbiry. 0 vi 0 0 0 De Ricardo Carter. 0 x 0 0 0 De Johanna
Cole. 0 i vii 0 0 De Johanna at dene. 0 vi 0 0 0 De Luce le Well. 0 i vi 0 0
De Willielmo Hikelond. 0 i 0 0 0 De Johanna Marshall. 0 iii 0 0 0 De Hugone
Wine. 0 0 x 0 0 De Edellyne de Welpele. 0 ii 0 0 0 De Johan Guess. 0 i 0 0 0 De
Elene Reivie. 0 0 ix 0 0 De Elene Alot. 0 i iv 0 0 De Willielmo Draper. 0 ii 0
0 0 De Johanne Welpele. 0 0 viii 0 0 De Johanne Prat. 0 i viii 0 0 De Henrico
Blake. 0 vi vi 0 0 De Johanne Rokmarsey. 0 vi ii 0 0 De Johanne Fitz Nichol
Ashele. 0 0 vi 0 0 De Johanne Somerton. 0 i iv 0 0 De Rogero Toryny Chevalier.
0 viii iv 0 0 De Johanne Child. 0 0 i 0 0 De Willielmo Coke. 0 iii ix 0 0 De
Johanne Blakwell Shephire. 0 ii 0 0 0 De Johanne le long. 0 xi v 0 0 De Simone
Stonherd. 0 x iii 0 0 De Johanne Gardener. 0 xiv vi 0 0 De Johanne Gardener. 0
0 vi 0 0 De Johanne Baker. 0 iii 0 0 0 De Agnete Pennyfader. 0 ii 0 0 0

Ove lour homages and services. Et le manner de Stevenach forpris la terre in
Rygemerefeld, and le Blakelond que est assign a le manner de Shephale

Pars Agnetis Brussells.
ET l'avant dit Agneyse, autre des parteners susditz, averoit le site de manner
de Maudeleyns, ove toute les terres, boys and pastures, iiii l. viii s. iii d.
de rent; mesme le manner de Maudelyn, cest assavoir, l. s. d. ob. q. De Johanne
Cokeregge. 0 vii iv 0 0 De Stevenne Chaumpeneys. 0 xiii iv 0 0 De les tenants
de Berkhamstede. 0 xxxvi 0 0 0 De la dame Portrer. 0 viii 0 0 0 De Johanne
Pedifat. 0 0 xii 0 0 De Willielmo Cohesdele. 0 ii vii 0 0 De Johanne Redbourn.
0 ii 0 0 0 De Johanne Cokevyle. 0 0 xii 0 0 De Willielmo de Asheld. 0 xiv 0 0 0
De Roberto at Shore. 0 xvi x 0 0

Ove lour homages, services and custumez forpris Grenelands, and iii. measons,
devant nomes.

Pars Edmundi Mordaunt, and Elene sa femme.
ET les avanditz Edmunde, and Elyn, averont del' heritage Elene, le Manner de
Shephale, ove les appartenantz, and les terres, de Rigmerfeld and Blakelond,
avaunt nomes, jades parcel de Stevenach; and de la rent du Manor de Maudelyn,
vii l. xiv s. 1 d. ob. quadrans. Cest assavoir, l. s. d. ob. q. De Waltero
Powell. 0 0 x 0 0 De Johanne Sokereseyn. 0 iii x 0 0 De -- John 0 ii 0 0 0 De
Nicolao Oysell. 0 vi i 0 0 De Johanne Mollyns Chevalier. 0 viii viii 0 0 De
Roberto Gravely. 0 ii 0 0 0 De Johanne Carrier. 0 0 iii 0 0 De Johanne -- 0 0
xviii 0 0 De Johanne Godele. 0 iv iv 0 0 De Waltero Garnhon. 0 0 xviii 0 0 De
Stevenne Marten. 0 0 iii 0 0 De Johanne Gardener. 0 0 xvii 0 0 De Johanne
Drake. 0 ii viii 0 0 Del molen lable de Mussenden. 0 xv 0 0 0 De Waltero
Blakwell. 0 vi vi i 0 De Thoma Shepherd. 0 0 xvii 0 0 De Johanne Blakwell. 0 xi
i 0 0 De Juliana Blakwell. 0 0 xv 0 0 De Rauff Glarnik. 0 0 xxii 0 0 De
Elizabetha Blakwell. 0 0 xx 0 0 De Raff Coke. 0 viii v i 0 De Johanne White. 0
0 xii 0 0 De Willielmo May. 0 0 ix 0 0 De Johanne Cole. 0 0 ix 0 0 Et de les
tenantz de Esylbirghe. iii ix viii 0 0

Ove lour homages, services and lour Custumes.

ET aussy, si les advantdits Thomas, Johan, Edmunde and Elyne, ou aucun d'eux,
sont distourbes, par les fermiers de Stevenach, and de Shephale, de mesme les
Manors; a la fine de v. ans, apres la fesance de cestes, en deinz le term de
leur ferme, de xviii. Marcz, par an; donque voet, ladite Agneyse, que soit a
volonte les avantdits Thomas, Johan, Edmunde and Elyne, de reentre les
Tenements advantdits, and aller a novell, departisment nient contredisants: Et
touts les reversions de quelle party que eux sont, sont purparties enter les
parties avantdits, quant eus escherront, ou null d'eux escherra, and quant iiii
s. de rent, issant de la terre de William le Shepherd, and xx s. rent issant
de la terre que Thomas Trayerr tient, demeureront en commun, enter les
parteners avantdits, a departir, quant il leur plaira: En Tesmoignage de quelle
chose, les parteners susdits, entrechangeablement ont mis leur seaulx; Date a
Maudelyn, le lundy prochain devant la feste de la Conversion de St. Paul, L'an
du Reign Edward troisieme apres la Conqueste vintisme.

Out of an Ancient Pedigree among the Evidences of the Earl of Peterborow.
IN tempore Regis Henrici secundi, Vir erat praepotens and maximae
Authoritatis, Nomine Ranulphus de Broc, qui Castellanus erat Castri de Agenet,
and Constabularius Castri and Honoris de Saltwood. Iste Ranulphus habuit
exitum, Robertum de Broc, qui suo tempore Marescallus fuit Angliae, and floruit
regnantibus Ricardo primo, and Johanne Regibus. Robertus habuit exitum
Laurentium de Broc; qui fuit tempore Henrici tertii, qui habuit exitum Hugonem,
qui fuit plenae aetatis anno tertio Edwardi primi: postea Hugo habuit exitum
Laurentium, qui fuit decimo quinto Edwardi Secundi and ante; qui quidem
Laurentius habuit exitum Ranulphum; qui duxit, in uxorem, Elizabetham Hussy;
qui peperit Elenam, quae fuit uxor Edmundi Mordaunt; Agnetem uxorem Domini
Henrici de Bruxells, and Johannam, and praedicta Johanna obiit sine prole.

A SUCCINCT GENEALOGY Of the HOUSE of LATIMER of Duntish: Justified by Public
Records, Extant Charters, Histories, and other Authentic Proofs.
By ROBERT HALSTEAD.
blazon or coat of arms of the house of Latimer The Arms of the House of
Latimer, were Gules, a Cross Fleure Or.



Of the Name, Antiquity, Descent, Greatness, Succession, Possessions,
Alliances, and Arms of the House of Latimer, that were Lords of Duntish and
Estpullham.
THE Name of Latimer had ever of old, in all Histories, Charters, and other
Occasions of being mentioned, the Addition of le preceding to it, as Willielmus
le Latimer; and the English of that word which is in its proper Language
Latimer, is by Antiquaries rendered to be Interpreter. Also by all the
Histories, Records and Catalogues, that mention the Lords and Knights, who
entered England with the Conqueror; it is testified, that a Nobleman bearing
this Name (whether from his Office or otherwise) was a Companion in that
Glorious Enterprise. From which time they flourished upon the Lands and
Lordships acquired in that Occasion, so, as about the Reign of King Richard the
First, they became ranked among the greatest, and most Eminent of the Nobility
of England, and for several Generations, there were not any had a greater share
in the Commands, Employments and Counsels of the Crown; it producing Famous and
Victorious Generals, Wise and Happy Counselors and Officers, that proved of
great Honor and Advantage, to all the Affairs wherein they were employed. From
William Lord Latimer, who was Chief of this House, and a great Baron in the
Reign of King Edward the First, did descend those Latimers of which I treat, by
Sir John Latimer his second Son, who were Lords of Govis, a Noble Signiory in
the Duchy of Normandy, under the Jurisdiction of the Balliage of Caen, of the
Manors and Lordships of Duntish, Divelish, Estpullham, Childeckford,
Winterborne, Till, Rivell, Bocland and Whitchurch in the County of Dorset;
Cravestock with Lands in Estshene, Mortlack, and Wimbledon in the County of
Surrey. They had Possessions in Bisbey and Hartsned in Hertfordshire; they had
the Lordship of Wolwich in Kent, and of the free passage over the River of
Thames in that place. In possession of most whereof, they long lived, with
great Honor, often performing, with much Reputation, the principal Offices of
those Countries, when they were called unto them for the Service of their Kings
and the Kingdom; and unto these at last became Heir and Successor, John the
first Lord Mordaunt, by his Mother the Lady Edith, sole Daughter and Heir of
Sir Nicholas Latimer, the last of this Branch; who for their Arms bare ever,
Gules, a Cross Fleure Or, being the same with that was given by the Ancient
and Illustrious House of which they were Descended.

WILLIAM Lord LATIMER Lord Baron of CORBY.
THE Original and History of the Ancient Lords of the Name of Latimer, having
been the concern of a great Author, who has transferred to Posterity the
Memorials of the Baronage of England, I shall undertake to write nothing, but
what may immediately appertain to those Latimers that were Lords of Duntish in
the County of Dorset; and in whose Lands and Blood, by an Hereditary Descent,
the House of Mordaunt has had so near an Interest.

For an Introduction hereunto, I must (notwithstanding) relate, how in the
Reign of King Edward the First, there flourished in this Realm a famous Baron
called William Latimer, who had diverse great Possessions devolved unto him by
right of his Ancestors, and sundry others by the Acquisition of his own Valor
and Virtue. He had been bred a Companion in Arms to that Prince, from the time
he was first made Knight, and served with him in his Fathers Defense, during
all the Civil Wars of that Kings Reign. He assumed in his Company the Sacred
Cross, and became Partaker of his Journey to the Holy Land: and after King
Henry's Death he continued with his Famous Master under the greatest Esteem for
Valor and all Military Virtue of any Knight in his time. This William Latimer
was one of the Kings Chief Captains in those Wars, which produced the final
Subduction of Wales, and particularly in that occasion where the Isle of
Anglice was won, in the eleventh year of his Reign; and when his Affairs in
Gascony began so to sink, as it seemed necessary for their Support, to employ
the Experience and Vigor of a great Commander, the Lord William Latimer was
Chosen by the King, in the twenty second year of his Reign, to be joined to the
Youth and Heat of his Nephew the Lord John of Britain, in the Government of
that Country, and the Forces to be sent into it; he being upon this occasion
termed in the History of Henry Knighton, Canon of Leicester, de Eventibus
Angliae, Miles ille strenuissimus Willielmus le Latimer. The year following he
attended thither again the King himself, in his great Expedition, as he did in
most of his Wars against the Scots, particularly at Faukerk, where he was
Victorious. After which, he was appointed Commissioner to fortify the Castles
of that Realm. And as he was Eminent in all the happy Actions of War, achieved
in that Age, we find him so, no less, in every great Affair of State. It
appearing he signed (amongst the great Barons of the Kingdom) several public
Instruments, (as particularly that Letter written to Pope Boniface the Eighth,
about the Kings Right to be Superior Lord of the Kingdom of Scotland.) He
Married Alicia de Ledet, one of the Heirs of Walter de Ledet, a great Baron of
that time, and that was Lord of Braybrooke in the County of Northampton; who
brought into his Family her part of a large and rich Inheritance.

Their Issue.
William Lord Latimer Baron of Corby. Sir John Latimer Lord of Duntish,
Estpullham, and other Lands and Lordships. Thomas Latimer that died without
Issue. Nicholas Latimer to whom his Mother after the Death of her Husband, gave
all the Lands of her Inheritance in the Counties of Leicester and Northampton.


THE Descent of the Latimers that were Lords of Duntish and Estpullham, being
the business of my Intention, I shall here proceed with Sir John Latimer, the
second Son of the aforementioned Lord William, who flourished in the Reign of
King Edward the Second, in Possession of several Noble Lordships, that were
left to his Inheritance by the Care and Kindness of his Father: he had Lands in
Eastshene, in Mortlac, and in Wimbledon in the County of Surrey, in Wolwich in
Kent, besides great Possessions in Dorsetshire; which latter did devolve to him
in the Right of the Lady Joan de Govis his Wife, who was one of the Daughters
of Sir William de Govis, a Lord of a Noble Patrimony in the Kingdom of France;
and that had likewise fair Lands in England, which he Inherited from his Mother
the Lady Beatrice of Lincoln, one of the Heirs of a great House, that had been
very famous in the foregoing Ages. From this Marriage arose the most notorious
Contention of that time, between this Sir John Latimer, and Sir Peter
Desmonstiers, of the Duchy of Normandy, about the Fief and Lordships of Govis
in that Country, having been the Chief Seat, and part of the Inheritance of Sir
William de Govis, that was Father-in-Law to them both. Whereupon diverse
Transactions past in the Courts of Judicature of either Kingdom, and there are
Extant (relating to this difference) several Orders, Grants and Instruments,
under the Seals of both the Kings, Edward the Second, and King Philip.

Their Issue.
Sir Robert Latimer. William Latimer. Nicholas Latimer.


ROBERT the Son of Sir John Latimer, after the Decease of his Father, became
possessed of all his Estate and Interests. To which, by his Marriage with
Catharine the Daughter and Heir of Sir Robert Hull, he did join diverse other
fair Possessions, as, the Manor of Childeckford and Estpullham in the County
of Dorset, and Estoket in Somersetshire; all which, in the thirty second year
of Edward the Third, he did receive from John Gurthop, and Edward Mundeine, who
(it should seem) were possessed thereof in trust, on Condition, that if he
should die without Issue of the said Catharine, they would then return to her
right Heirs. This Robert Latimer had very honorably served King Edward the
Third in several Military Occasions, wherein he achieved the Honor of
Knighthood; and having returned in safety from the Battle of Poictiers,
Deceased at his Manor of Duntish in the thirtieth year of that Kings Reign,
leaving Issue Sir Robert Latimer. Margaret Latimer.


SIR ROBERT LATIMER being under Age at the Death of his Father, was by King
Edward the Third granted in Wardship, with all the Lordships of his
Inheritance, to Ralph of Ergum then Bishop of Salisbury, who transmitted the
same to William Latimer the Uncle of this Robert. The King afterward
ignorantly (as is supposed) granted again the Wardship to Sir John de Lee, who
was at that time Steward of his House; which Sir John presuming of his Credit
and Power in Court, sent for William Latimer to London, and by Duress of
Imprisonment forced him to Surrender the Estate in that Wardship unto him.
William Latimer complained to the Parliament then sitting in the forty second
year of that King; unto which Sir John would have excused himself from the
Grant that had been made him by his Master; but it was not allowed, because
William Latimer was not put out by due Process of Law; for which and other
things Sir John de Lee was Committed to the Tower; afterward, when it had born
several Debates in the Council, it was Ordered, that the Wardship should be
reseized into the King's hands, and delivered to William Latimer according to
the Grant made by the Bishop; and that all Recognizances and Conveyances made
by this William to the said Sir John should be void, saving to the King his
Right. When Robert Latimer came at Age, he Entered into Possession of the
Lordships of Estpullham, Westpullham, Childeckford, Divelish, Duntish,
Winterborn, Whitechurch and Newton in the County of Dorset, and of Estoket in
Somersetshire. His Wife was Margaret de Peche, the Daughter of Sir William de
Peche Knight, who was Descended from that Gilbert de Peche that was a great
Look the Barons Letter to the Pope.
Baron in the time of King Edward the First.

Their Issue.
Sir John Latimer.


SIR JOHN LATIMER, who is styled in his Charters Lord of Estpullham, had a
Contest with his own Father about certain Lands, which by Articles Sir Robert
Latimer had bound himself to establish upon his Heirs at the time of his
Marriage, with Margaret the Mother of this Sir John, who was the Daughter of
Sir William Peche Knight, by reason Sir Robert had burnt the Writings,
whereupon the Interest of these Lands did depend, to make them appear free, for
an Advantage he intended to himself in a second Marriage, which he did at that
time design. There is Extant a Bill Exhibited by Sir John Latimer, complaining
thereof to Thomas Langley Bishop of Durham and High Chancellor of England, in
the sixth year of King Henry the Fifth. This Sir John Latimer Married Catharine
the Daughter of Sir John Pypard, by whom he left Issue Sir Nicholas Latimer.


SIR Nicholas Latimer we find to have been High Sheriff of the County of Dorset
once, in the thirty second of Henry the Sixth, and again in the eleventh year
of King Edward the Fourth; and in those turbulent and difficult times this
Office might have been indeed properly called Onus cum honor: for the men so
employed, were at that time sought out among the richest, the most popular and
the most powerful, that the Country would not only obey at home but follow
abroad; and men then depending upon the Bounty and Hospitality of the Great,
their Inclinations and Example were of more force than all the Cases of Law and
Conscience: The Prudence (notwithstanding) and good Fortune of Sir Nicholas
Latimer did happily conduct him through the violent Reigns of three very active
Princes, King Henry, King Edward, and King Richard the Third, and brought him
peacefully to rest with his Fathers, in the Twentieth year of King Henry the
Seventh, at a very great Age, although with that Circumstance, of leaving no
Heir Male to Inherit his Lands and Family; and for only Issue of the Lady Joan
his Wife, the Daughter of Sir John Hoddy, Edith Latimer Lady Mordaunt.


EDITH LATIMER Lady MORDAVNT, Lady of Duntish, Divelish, Estpullham,
Childeckford, Estoket, and other Lands and Lordships.
EDITH LATIMER was by the Consent and Direction of her Father Married to Sir
John Mordaunt in the fourteenth year of King Edward the Fourth; between whom
and Sir Nicholas Latimer, several Agreements were made concerning his
Inheritance. But the hope of Male Issue, and his Engagement in a second
Marriage, caused him so to protract the Settlement, as being surpised with
Death he left his Estate under several great Encumbrances; which
(notwithstanding the Kings Interest in the same, upon pretense of some Debts
due to him from the said Sir Nicholas) were at last overcome and mastered by
the Industry and Prudence of Sir John Mordaunt, and the Lands and Lordships of
Duntish, Divelish, Estpullham, Childeckford and Estoket left by him to the
Lords Mordaunts, that were his Successors. She outlived her first Husband, and
was again Married to Sir Thomas Carew of Devonshire, who was slain in a
Sea Fight on the Coast of Britain, in the fourth year of King Henry the Eighth,
being at that time Captain of the Noble Ship called the Regent, which was burnt
in the same Occasion.

Issue by her first Husband.
John the first Lord Mordaunt. Robert Mordaunt. William Mordaunt. Joan Mordaunt
Married to Sir Giles Strangeways of Dorsetshire.


knight on horseback bearing the colors of the family, and a family tree
showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors WILLIAM Lord Latimer
Surnamed le Rich, ALICIA de Ledet. William Ld. Latimer Sibill de Huntingfeild.
Sr. John Latimer Second Son. Ioane de Govis. Sr. Nicolas Latimer. William Ld.
Latimer Elizabeth de Botetort. Sr. Robert Latimer. Catherine Hull. William
Latimer. William Ld. Latimer Chamberlain to E.3 Elizabeth Fitz Allan Sr.
Robert Latimer Margeret Peche Margeret Latimer Elizabeth Latimer Daughter and
Heir John Lord Nevill. Sr. John Latimer Catherine Pipard Sr Nicolas Latimer
Ioane Hoddy Edith Latimer Sr. John Mordaunt




GENEALOGICAL PROOFS Of the HOUSE of LATIMER of Duntish, Drawn out of Extant
Charters, Records, Histories, and other Authentic Testimonies.

GENEALOGICAL PROOFS Of the HOUSE of LATIMER of Duntish.
WILLIAM Lord LATIMER Lord Baron of CORBY.
Hollinshead, Page
ON the Kings part these persons are named to stand with him against the
Barons. First Roger Bigod Earl of Norfolk and Suffolk, Humphrey de Bohun Earl
of Hereford, Hugh Bigod Lord Chief Justice, Philip Basset, William de Valence,
Jeffrey de Lusignian, Peter de Savoy, Robert Wallerand, John Mancell, Jeffrey
Langley, John Gray, William Latimer, Henry Percy.

Doctor Powel's History of Wales, Page 371.
WHen the Archbishop could not conclude a Peace, he denounced the Prince and
his Accomplices Accursed. Then the King sent his Army by Sea to the Isle of Man
or Anglesey, which they won, and slew such as resisted them; for the chiefest
men served the King as their Oath was. So they came over against Bangor, where
the Arm of the Sea called Menay, which divides the Isle from the main Land, is
narrowest, at the place called Moely-donn, and there made a Bridge of Boats and
Planks over the Water; where before Julius Agricola did the like, when he
subdued the Isle to the Romans, and not between Man and Britain, as Polydore
Virgil ignorantly affirms. This Bridge accomplished so, that well threescore
men might pass over in a Front, William Latimer with a great number of the best
Soldiers, and Lucas de Thany Steward of Gascony with his Gascoins and
Spaniards (whereof a great number was come to serve the King) passed over the
Bridge, and there saw no stir of Enemies; but as soon as the Sea began to flow,
down came the Welshmen from the Hills, and set upon them fiercely, and either
slew or chased them to the Sea to drown themselves; for the Water was so high
they could not attain the Bridge, saving William Latimer alone, whose Horse
carried him to the Bridge, and so he escaped.

Henricus Knighton Canonicus Leicestriensis de Eventibus Angliae, Page 2497.
HIS auditis, mox Rex Edwardus quingentos armatos, and viginti mill peditum
misit in Vasconium cum Domino Johanne de Sancto Johanne, qui ejusdem Terrae
olim Senescallus extiterat; and cum Domino Johanne de Britannia and illo Milite
strenuissimo Willielmo le Latimer, qui apud Portsmouth, omnibus ad Expeditionem
tantam necessariis paratis, posuerunt se in mare circa Festum beati Petri ad
vincula, and irruente vento contrario dispersae sunt naves per parts
Cornubiae, iterumque collectae apud Plumeneye circa Festum beati Dionysii
ventis vela iterum relaxabant: and post multa variaque Tempestatum discrimina,
tandem circa Festum Apostolorum, Simonis and Judae, applicuerunt in Vasconia
apud Castellam quae situatur in littore fluminis de Gerunde, deditque se eis
and Regi Angliae Dominus Urbis illius, and eos cum laetitia magna suscepit and
benign tractavit.

In eodem, Page 2498.
ET tunc primo Angli extraxerunt equos e navibus, cum in mari mansissent december
septem Hebdomadas and aliquos dies, tandem vero refocillatis hominibus and
equis, demiserunt etiam se Angli quasi in duas parts, remanseruntque in eodem
loco, ut populum Terrae sibi attraherent, Dominus Johannes de Britannia, and
Dominus Willielmus le Latimer, cum trecentis equestribus and septem millibus
Electorum.

Hollinshead, Page 310.
IN the nine and twentieth of King Edward the First, the Barons of England
wrote a Letter to Pope Boniface about certain Liberties of the Crown, which
among the rest was signed by William Lord Latimer Baron of Corby.

Monasticon Anglicanum, Pars prima, Folio 678.
RObertus de Braybrooke quondam Vicecomes Northamptoniae, emit de vetere
Eustachio de Watford pratum quod vocatur Sandford, reddendo inde annuatim duos
solidos. Iste Robertus genuit Henricum de Braybrooke, qui Henricus dedit dictum
pratum Domui de Daventree ad firmam perpetuam, pro sex marcis, and dimidia,
annuatim sibi and haeredibus suis solvendis, centum annis elapsis and ultra.
Dictus Henricus genuit Wiscardum Ledet, qui sumpsit cognomen ex matre sua
Christiana Ledet Domina de Warden. Iste Wiscardus genuit Walterum Ledet, and
iste Walterus genuit de Ermendrua de Insula duas filias (videlicet) Aliciam and
Christianam sorores. Alicia desponsata fuit Domino Willielmo le Latimer, qui
genuit ex ea quatuor filios (videlicet) Dominum Willielmum, Dominum Johannem,
Dominum Thomam, and Dominum Nicolaum, Milites: Cui Nicolao Domina matter sua
Alicia post mortem mariti sui Domini Willielmi, dedit omnes Terras suas and
Tenementa quae habuit in Comitatibus Northamptoniae and Leicestriae.

Sir JOHN LATIMER second Son of WILLIAM Lord LATIMER.
The Baronage of England, Page 413. mentioning Aluered of Lincoln.
TO this last mentioned succeeded another Aluered, who in the first of King
John was one that held the Castle of Winchester for the King; and to him,
another Aluered, his Son and Heir. Which Aluered in the twenty fourth of Henry
the Third paid a hundred pounds for his relief; and in the forty second of
Henry the Third, had Summons to attend the King at Chester, well furnished with
Horse and Arms, to restrain the Incursions of the Welsh; but died in the forty
eighth of that King, being seized of the Manors of Winterborne and Langton in
the County of Dorset, with the Advowson of the Church of Ackford, Duntish, and
the Chapel of Duntish; as also of the Manor of Celles, which was given in
frank-Marriage with Maud his Mother. Likewise the Manor of Norton, also given
in frank-Marriage with Albreda his Grandmother, and two Knights Fees in
Bardolston and Pinford; leaving Robert Fitzpaine, Son of Margery his Eldest
Sister, Beatrice the Wife of William de Govis his second Sister, and Albreda de
Lincoln his third Sister, his Heirs (all of full Age) and Joan his Wife
surviving, who had the Manors of Ackford and Duntish, with the Advowsons of
the Churches of those Lordships assigned for her Dower: which Robert Fitzpain
and William de Govis, for their good Service on the Kings behalf in the Battle
of Jews, were in the forty eighth of Henry the Third acquitted from the
payment of the relief due upon the Death of the before-specified Aluered of
Lincoln their Uncle.

An ancient Letter to Sir John Latimer from Gervaise de Cingal his Steward.
AMon treschier Seigneur Jean le Latimer, Gervaise de Cingal, son Seneshal
salutz. Je vous fais a scavoir que le Baillif de Caen rapella vostre cause,
qu'estoit en l'Assise de Cornue, and la mist en l'Assise de Fallaise, qui fust
le Jeudy avaunt la Saint Croix en Septembre, and il nous la renvoya de Jeudy en
Jeudy ensuivant, encontre ma volonte. Et le Baillif ne fust pas a la dite
journe, and si y fust Monseigneur de la Miafle, and Monseigneur Eustace de
Piron, and Monseigneur Robert des Monstiers le jeune, and l'Attorney Madame sa
Feme qui requirent le Viconte qui estoit au lieu du Baillif, que Monseigneur
Jean le Latimer and Madame sa Feme leur fussent appelle. Et vostre Attorney si
apparut pour vous, and dit, ledit Attorney, qu'il ne tenoit point le Viconte
pour Juge en la cause de son Maistre. Et que le Baillif en est Juge comme
connoisses, and sur ce le Viconte nous renvoya par devant son Maistre le
Baillif de son office a Baieux, au Mardy devant le Saint Michel, a laquelle
journe je fus, moy and vostre Attorney, and nous nous compleimismes du Viconte
de Fallaise, qu'on avoit remise vostre cause horse du Siege de Fallaise, ou elle
se devoit determiner de son droit, and plusieurs raisons proposa devant le
Baillif don't nous mismes en conseil a la presence de Monsieur Robert des
Monstiers le jeune and de l'Attorney sa feme and de Monsieur Piere de la Miafle
and de Monsieur Eustace de Piron; and fut juge par Conseil que nous ne disions
chose par quoy les Chevaliers ne
deusent..............................................................
lesquelles leur fist jurer sur les Saints Evangiles qu'il diroit bien and
loyaument sur ce qu'en estoit contenu en un memoire d'Eschequier: Et si
c'estoit leur entente, que le Contract qu'avoit este faict enter vous and
Monsieur des Monstiers: Et si c'estoit leur entente que le payement se fist en
la foible monoye ou en la forte, and si eux reconnoissoyent que se fussent
leurs Sceaux qui estoit a une lettre qu'eux avoyent envoye a Laurens la Reuide,
eux dirent que ouy, and leur de mandat' on si eux avoyent dit en la maniere qui
estoit contenue en la dite lettre, and eux dirent que ouy, and si euxvouloyent
perseverer, and vous condamnerent en la sum de mill livres en la forte
monoye, and sur ce eux requistrent que vostre Attorney fist emmende du desbat
que vous metties que la forte monoye ne fut pay en l'Eschequier, and sur ce
l'Attorney ammanda contre ma volonte, and apres que l'ammande fust faict eux
redirent que vostre desbat fust chest............ cella comme elle avoit este
faite............ nos raisons. Et il fut regard par conseil qu'eux auroyent la
saisine de la jure, and leur en fust ballie la saisine le Mardy avaunt la Saint
Michel, pour quoy je vous mande que vous vous hasties de venir au plus tossed que
pourries, aveque toute la sum de mill livres, and si vous n'y estes dedans
quarante jours vostre Heritage est perdue, and si seroit mise en la sesine and
a heritage, and si il me faut croire de cette besogne, dieux soit guarde de
vous and de Madame.

Charta Vicecomitis de Baieux.
Done par Copy sous le Seel des Obligations de la Viconte de Rouen. A tous
ceux que ces Lettres verront le Viconte de Baieux Salut. Comme Noble Homme
Monsieur Jean le Latimer and Madame Jehanne sa feme, Monsieur Robert des
Monstiers and Madame Aelis sa feme, eussent parties enter eux tout l'heritage
qui fut jadis a Monsieur Guillem de Govis Chevalier pere des dites Dames, jadis
mort ainsi que les Monsieur Jehan and sa feme ayent tout l'heritage qui fut ou
pouvoit estre au dit Monsieur Guillem soit escheet ou a escheer, and qui que le
tiegue au Royaume d'Angleterre, and tout le fief de Haubert de Govis; and les
dits Monsieur Robert des Monstiers and sa feme ayent tout l'Heritage que le dit
Monsieur Guillem avoit and pouvoit avoir, and tout l'heritage a la mere des
dites femes, and tout l'heritage des dites Dames qui leur peut and doit escheer
and a leurs Heirs tant du temps d'apresent comme de celuy avenir, and
quiconque les tienne, au Royaume de France. Scaches que par devant nous furent
presents les dites parties, and s'accorderent en la maniere qui s'ensuit. C'est
a scavoir que Noble Hommes Monsieur Estont d'Estonteville and Monsieur Jean
Dorbret regarderont bien and diligemment ledit Fief de Haubert de Govis, and
scauront combien il peut vallier en assiete de Terre, and s'ils treuvent dedans
la Saint Michel prochain a venir, que ledit Fief de Haubert de Govis vaille
plus de cinquante livres de Terre a l'anciene coustume and a l'assiette la ou
ledit Fief siest, tout le outreplus qui y seroit treuve seroit a dits Monsieur
Robert and a sa Feme and a leurs Heirs en accroissant leur party; Aussi que
ledit Monsieur Jehan, sa Feme and leurs Heirs seront tenus leur payer chacun
an a la Saint Michel en Septembre par leur main tout l'outreplus que y seroit
trouve par lesdits Monsieur Estont and Monsieur Jehan Dorbet, jusques a tant
que lesdits Monsieur Jehan le Latimer and sa Feme leur eussent eschange
convenablement vallue a vallue de ce que il seroit treuve que l'outreplus
vaudroit es Balliages de Caen and de Constantin. Item lesdits Monsieur Robert
and sa Feme reconnoissent que ils quittent and ont quitte a dit Monsieur Jehan
and a sa Feme toutes les leves, leve ou a lever quelconques de tout I heritage
que fust a dit Monsieur Guillem en quelconque lieue que il soit de tout le
temps pass dessi aujourduy, pour ce que lesdits Monsieur Jehan and sa Feme ont
quitte, and quittent claim lesdits Monsieur Robert and sa Feme de tout ce que
ils leur peussent ou pourront demander par quelconque raison que ce fust de
tout le temps pass, and sont tenus lesdits Monsieur Jehan, Monsieur Robert and
leurs Femes, fair venir lesdits Chevaliers pour voir ledit Fief dans ledit
term, c'est a scavoir, ledit Monsieur Jehan and sa Feme, ledit Monsieur
Estont, and ledit Monsieur Robert and sa Feme, ledit Monsieur Jehan Dorbet, and
se il avenoit que ils ne les y peussent amener celuy sur qui il defaudroit y
pourroit mettre quel Chevalier il voudroit pour regarder ledit Fief, si comme
il est devant dit, sans nulle contredit. Et en somment lesdits Monsieur Robert
and sa feme sont tenus, and doivent dedans le temps de Pasques prochain a venir
en quatre ans aller en Angleterre, and revenir au despens desdits Monsieur
Jehan and sa feme, pour leur fair des chooses dessus-dits tells Lettres, soit
du Roy ou de l'Eglise, comme leur conseil avisera, and comme ils voudront par
la coustume d'Angleterre toutes les fois que lesdits Monsieur Jehan and sa feme
les en requerront soufizament dedans ledit term. Et pour tous les Covenants
tenir fermes and entiers, comme sont de devant devises, lesdits Monsieur Robert
and sa feme obligerent par devant nous, chacun pour tout leur corpse a tenir en
prison, and tous leurs biens, meubles and heritages presents and a venir qui
ils en metterent en la main du Roy, a prendre, a lever, a vendre and a
despendre par justice le Roy, si mestier estoit, sans essoine, sans defauts and
sans errement des Pleas, des autans que ces Covenants soyent tous tenus,
fournis and entremis a dit Monsieur Jehan and sa feme and a leurs Heirs, and
leurs cousts and domages rendues and restores que ils auroyent faictes par
defaut des Covenants entreseigner, des queux ils seront leves par leur serment
sans autre preuve renonsans a tout faict de Droit, a toutes coustumes, and a
toutes Graces de Prince, octroye, ou a octroyer, au droit, que dit General
renonciation peut valoir, a toutes bars, defenses, obligations, cavillations,
raisons, a tous privileges pris ou a prendre, and a tous autres exceptions pour
quoy ces Covenants pourroyent estre retardes, ou empesches par aucun maniere.
Et ladite Madame Aelis a l'antorite de son mary, and en la presence de Monsieur
des Monstiers Chevalier pere du dit Monsieur Robert jura par devant nous sur
les Saints Evangiles, and promised par sa foy a tous les Covenants tenir and
fournir, and que elle n'ira encontre par raison de Marriage, encombre de Douere,
de Heritage ni de autre chose, and en tesmogne de ce, cette Lettre and selle du
Seel de la Viconte de Bayeux a la request des parties soue le droit du Roy. Ce
fust faict l'an de Grace MCCCV. le Mecredy avaunt la Vanchetrue.

Charta Vicecomitis de Baieux.
A Tous qui verront ces presents Lettres le Viconte de Baieux Salut. Saches
que Monsieur Jehan le Latimer Chevalier du Royaume d'Angleterre Heir aisne de
par sa feme de l'heritage, Monsieur Guillem de Govis Chevalier jadis mort a
present en droit devant nous reconnoit qu'il doit a Monsieur Robert des
Monstiers Chevalier le jeune Heir puisne en party del dit Heritage par raison
de sa feme, c'est a scavoir mill livres de torn pour le recour dudit
heritage, and des parties faictes enter eux d'iceluy par l'accord de leurs amiss
a payer and a render en la ville de Caen audit Monsieur Robert ou a son
commendement portent ces Lettres, a Pasques prochain a venir cent cinquante
livres, a la Saint Jehan ensuivant apres cinquante livres, a la Saint Michel
apres ensuivant trois cens livres, and a Noel apres ensuivant cinq cens livres.
Et pour lesdits deniers a payer and render a dits terms ledit Monsieur Jehan
oblige par devant nous soy and ses Heirs, son corpse a tenir prison en quel
lieu que il soit treuve, and tous ses biens, meubles and non meubles, ou que
ils soyent presents ou a venir au Royaume d'Angleterre, ou par tous autres
lieux, a prendre, a vendre, and a despendre d'Office de Justice sans essoine,
and sans defauts, and sans errement de plaits, dessi a tant que lesdits deniers
seront tous pays and rendus audit Monsieur Robert, and les cousts and domages
rendus and restores que il auroit faict par defaut de payment, dequoy il seroit
creue par son serment sans autre preuve. Et ledit Monsieur Jehan en met de son
droit comme son heritage en la main du Roy qui empecheroit pour chose qu'il
puisse estre, que il faict doresenavant qu'il ne le pourroit vendre, ni fair
vendre que pour son payment. Et le Roy empechera expressement a tout faict de
Droit, a toutes Coustumes, a toutes Graces a present octroye ou a octroyer, a
toutes bars, defenses, raisons, allegations, cavillations, and contre autres
exceptions and privileges pris and a prendre, par quoy les payments pourroyent
estre retardes; and ne sera creu de payment qu'il propose avoir faict, se il ne
le peut monstrer par faict apposant Seel de Justice. Et en tesmoigne de ce
cette Lettre estre soue du Seel du Viconte de Baieux sans le droit du Roy, ce
fust faict l'an de Grace MCCCV. le Mecredy avaunt la Nostre Dame de Mars.

Charta Ballivi de Caen.
A Tous ceux que ces Lettres verront le Baillif de Caen Salut. Nous faisons
scavoir que devant nous fust present Monsieur Pierre des Monstiers Prestre,
person de Gurberville Attorney Monsieur Robert des Monstiers Chevalier le
jeune, a chooses qui s'ensuit si que il est contenu en la Copy de l'attorne a
laquelle cette present Memoire est annexe, and connoit ledit Attorney soy
avoir receue de Monsieur Jehan le Latimer Seigneur de Govis par la main de Raul
Quemin dit des Senteaux deux cens and cinquante livres de torn pour vente de
Bois a ce qui on disoit, des queux ledit Attorney au nom de son Maistre quitta
ledit Monsieur Jehan, sans ce que ledit Monsieur Robert ne autre puisse plus
rien demander audit Monsieur Jehan de ces deux cens livres dessusdit. Done le
Jeudi apres quasimode l'an de Grace MCCCVI.

Charta Ballivi de Caen.
LE Baillif de Caen a Viconte de Fallaise ou a son Lieutenant, se il n'estoit
treuve, a Guillaume de Combour Salut. Monsieur Jehan le Latimer and sa feme
d'une part, and Monsieur Robert des Monstiers le jeune and sa feme d'autre part
ont faict aucuns Covenants d'Heritage enter eux, and de ce sont lies les uns
verse les autres par Lettre de Baillie, and est venu ledit Monsieur Robert a
moy, and m'a done a entendre que ledit Monsieur Jean a vendu des bois
croissans sur l'Heritage don't ils s'estoyent lies les uns verse les autres, en
venans contre les Assignements and Covenants faicts enter eux, and ayant veue
la Lettre qui port les Covenants, il me semble qu'il ne peut la vente fair
sans aller contre les
Covenants.................................................................. qui
vous sachies se la vente est faicte, and a quel person, and le dit Monsieur
Robert vous fera scavoir qui il est qui l'achapt doit avoir faict, and si vous
trouves que la vente est faicte, saisir la vente en la main du Roy, and
Justicier, ledit Monsieur Jehan par ses biens la ou vous les treuves jusques a
tant que la vente qui est faict contre les Covenants soit rappelles ou mise en
estat don't luy ou autre suffisement fond pour luy, n'offre a dire cause pour
quoy ce ne doit estre faict, and se il offer a dire ou autre pour luy mettes
jour vous Sergeant par devant le Viconte pour fair ce que raison sera done le
Vendredi apres quasimode l'an MCCC. and sis.

Charta Regis Edwardi Secundi.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Aquitaniae, omnibus ad
quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis quod nos super octavo die
Septembris anno Domini millesimo trecentesimo nono, tam propter expeditionem
versus regnum Scotiae, quam propter alias certas causas, de Consilio nostro
ordinavimus quod nullus Comes, Baro, Miles, seu aliqua alia notabilis persona
de regno nostro ad parts transmarinas se transferret sine licentia nostra
speciali. Ac licet dilectus noster and fidelis Johannes le Latimer nos saepius
requisierit ut sibi licentiam nostram concederemus ad dictas parts pro
quibusdam negotiis ipsum ratione terrarum and tenementorum suorum ibidem
contingentibus, transeundi: Nos tamen hujusmodi licentiam certa de causa ei
nondum duximus concedendum; sic ut idem Johannes virtute ordinationis nostrae
praedictae post dictum diem transfer se non potuit ad parts supradictas, and
omnibus and singulis innotuimus per praesentes. In cujus rei testimonium has
literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Test meipso apud Westmonasterium
vicesimo quinto die Januarii, anno regni nostri tertio.

Per breve de privato Sigillo.

Aussi tossed que ledit Jehan pouvoit passer la mer pour la defense du Roy
d'Angleterre, il se transporta ver la Court le Roy de France, and impetra
Lettres contenans la form qui s'ensuit.

Charta Domini Johannis Latimer.
PAteat universis per praesentes, me Johannem Latimer Militem, in omnibus
causis and negotiis motis vel movendis, personam meam qualitercumque
contingentibus coram quibuscumque Judicibus, Ordinariis, Delegatis, vel coram
Commissariis qualemcumque cognitionem seu jurisdictionem habentibus,
quibuscumque diebus and locis quoties me abesse vel adesse contigerit, dilectos
mihi in Christo Ricardum James, Walterum Scot, Willielmum Hull, Gervasium
Gerrard conjunctim and divisim and quemlibet eorum in solidum, ita quod non
melior conditio occupantis, sed quod unus eorum inceperit, alius prosequi
valeat and finire, meos veros and legitimos ordino and facio and constituo
Procuratores, dans eisdem and eorum cuilibet potestatem generalem and mandatum
speciale nomine meo agendi, defendendi, excipiendi, replicandi, ponendi,
positionibus respondendi, litem contestandi, juramentum tam de calumnia quam de
veritate dicendi, and quodlibet aliud genus liciti Sacramenti in animam meam
praestandi, crimina and defectus objiciendi, status mei reformationem, in
integrum restitutionem, damnorum restitutionem, expensas ac interesse petendi
and recipiendi, provocandi, appellandi provocationum and appellationum causas,
prosequendi alium vel alios, Procuratorem vel Procuratores loco eorum and
cujuslibet eorundem substituendi, and substituendum vel substituendos
revocandi, officiumque procuratoris reassumendi, nec non omnia alia and singula
faciendi, expediendi and exercendi quae per veros and legitimos Procuratores
fieri potuerint seu expediri, etiam si mandatum exigunt speciale pro eisdem
Procuratoribus meis and eorum quolibet, ac substituendo and substituendis ab
eisdem and quolibet eorundem rem ratam haberi and judicatam solum sub.......
cum rerum mearum promitto and expono cautiones. In cujus rei testimonium quia
Sigillum meum pluribus est incognitum, Sigillum Officialitatis London
Praesentibus apponi procuravi, and nos Officiarii London ad requisitionem
personalem Domini Johannis Latimer Sigillum Officii nostri praesentibus
apposuimus. Dat. London 10 Calend. Maii, Anno Domini 1308.

Charta Vicecomitis de Caen.
Copy sans le Seel de la Viconte de Caen en la form qui ensuit. Le Bailliff
de Caen a Henry Clay nostre Clerc Salut. Nous avons receu le Mandement de
nostre Seigneur le Roy contenant la form qui ensuit. Philippus Dei Gratia
Franciae Rex, Ballivo Caen, vel ejus locum tenenti, Salutem. Significavit nobis
Johannes Latimer Miles, quod cum vos vel Praedecessor vester ipsum ex Regno
Angliae exeuntem ad instantiam Roberti de Monasteriis Militis coram vobis
feceritis adjornari, and dilectus and fidelis noster Rex Angliae illustris,
charissimus filius noster, omnibus Nobilibus and subditis Regni sui ex certa
causa sub certis poenis inhibuisset tempore adjornamenti praedicti, ne quis
Regnum exiret praedictum, vos seu Praedecessor vester pro eo, quod Johannes
ipse non audens dictum transgredi interdictum, coram vobis vel Praedecessore
vestro non comparuit adjornatus, contra ipsum ad suorum venditionem bonorum
mobilium and immobilium and multa alia processistis in ipsius praejudicium and
gravamen. Quare vobis mandamus quatenus si per literas dicti Regis vel aliter
legitime vobis constiterit, quod hujusmodi Occasion interdicti Miles ipse ad
terminos assignatos eidem coram vobis seu Praedecessore vestro non potuit
comparere, praedictorum venditionem bonorum, omnesque processus quos contra eum
fecistis, vos vel Praedecessor vester tempore absentiae supradictae, revocetis
penitus and annulletis: quibus ad statum pristinum repositis, si Robertus ipse
coram vobis contra dictum Johannem voluerit experiri, vocatis partibus and
auditis hinc and inde, faciatis eidem and caeteris Justitiae complementum.
Datum Pontisae die vigesimo septimo Junii, Anno Domini Millesimo Trecentesimo
Decimo Tertio. Si vous mandons a vous comme tant par nous, and en lieu de nous
vous causes ledit process estre anulles and rappelles, and les chooses estre mis
en le premier estat ou ils estoit si comme en dit mandement est contenu, au
surplus, appelles ceux qui sont a appeller, selon la raison and le dit
mandement Dieu vous guard a Caen l' an dessus dit le Mardi apres le Saint
Martin d' este. Par la virtue de laquelle Commission j'ay eu le dit Henry Clay,
sur le lieu, a Govis, and en la presence de grand foison de bonnes Gens, and de
Jehan de Melun Sergeant j' en vis and leave les lettres des dits, nos Sires, les
Roys and les memoires qui faisoit au faict, and vis, and considera, tant que du
commandment le Roy nostre Sire je rappellois toutes les ventes, tous les
process, and toutes les chooses qui avoyent este faictes contre ledit Monsieur
Jehan au temps de son absence, qu'il ne peut venir au parties par deca pour la
defense du Roy d' Angleterre, and mettois tous les process and toutes les chooses
faictes en cet temps en l'estat ou ils estoit au devant, and je dis que se
ledit Monsieur Robert vouloit aucune chose demander au dit Monsieur Jehan, il
le fist convenir devant Monsieur le Bailliff and de leur raisons proposees d'
une part and d'autre, il leur fist volontiers accomplisement de Justice. Et ce
faict ledit Monsieur Jehan entra en la Saisine du Mannoir de Govis and toutes
ses apertinences moy present, sans ce que aucun y mist debat ni empechement
aucun. Ce fust faict and done l' an dessus dit le Jeudy devant le Saint
Arnoulfe sous le Seel de la dit Viconte.

Charta Vicecomitis de Fallaise.
A Tous ceux qui ces Lettres verront ou orront le Viconte de Fallaise Salut.
Sachies que l'an de Grace MCCCVII. le Mecredy Feste de Saint Croix en May
furent presents Monsieur Jehan le Latimer and Madame Jeanne sa feme, qui firent
and attornerent pour eux and en leur nom Monsieur Jehan de Sancrey Chevalier en
lieu de Monsieur Estont d'Estonteville a ver la valeur du Fief de Govis, aveque
l'home de Monsieur Robert des Monstiers and de Madame sa Feme, and veulent
ledit Monsieur Jehan and Madame sa Feme que ledit Monsieur Jehan faira autant
en cas dessus dit comme ledit Estont d'Estonteville se present il estoit, and
promistrent ledit Monsieur Jehan and sa feme avoir ferme and agreeable tout ce
que ledit Attorne feroit pour eux ou contre eux, soi obligeans de tout leur
biens, meubles and heritages en quoy que ce soit a vendre and despendre, se il
venoit annoncer que eux allassent de riens encontre les chooses dites, donnes
comme dessus.

Charta Magistrorum Scaccarij.
LES Maistres tennans les Chiquier de Pasques a Rouen l'an de Grace MCCC and
sis, a leur aim le Baillif de Caen Salut. Comme nous avous done a Monseigneur
Jehan le Latimer Chevalier conge de vendre de ses bois assis a Govis jusques a
la sum de trois cens livers de Torneis sans le tiers and le danger nostre
Seigneur le Roy, nous vous mandons que vous recevans suffisant Caution de payer
tiers and danger a terms accoustumes luy lasses vendre du bois jusques a la
sum dessus dit. Done l'an and en l'Eschiquer dessus dit.

Charta Philippi Regis Franciae.
PHilippus Dei Gratia Franciae Rex, Balivo Cadon and ejus locum tenenti
salutem. Cum inter Dominum Johannem le Latimer Militem ex una part, and
Robertum de Monasteriis juniorem ex altera part, quaestio moveretur super
residuum mill librarum Turon' occasion terrae ipsius vocatae de sonnis,
Gentesque Scaccarii tibi mandaverint, quod si constaret tibi, ipsum Johannem
per Eustachium de Piren and Petrum de la Miafle Milites, super his de consensu
partium ut dicitur electos, per eorum sententiam arbitralem condemnasse ad
solvendum residuum dictarum mill librarum in forti moneta, eundem Johannem ad
hoc compelleres. Praetextu quorum mandati and Sententiae ipsam Terram dicto
Roberto tradidisti, and octo viginti libras Turon' ipsius Militis quas in manu
nostra posuerat, occasion hujus cepisti, licet sicut dicitur idem Johannes
eandem pecuniae summam est paratus solvere cum effectu, leveiis tamen ejusdem
terrae deductis and in solutione praefati debiti applicatis. Quare mandamus
tibi quod coram te partibus vocatis habitoque inter parts finali and legali
computo de praemissis, leveiisque ejusdem terrae ut justum fuerit deductis pro
tempore quo dictus Robertus dictam terram tenuit, and in dicti solutione debiti
applicatis, ac de residuo dictarum mill librarum eidem Roberto integraliter
satisfacto, eidem Johanni terram tradi and liberari ac dictas octo viginti
libras in solutione hujus debiti deductas praevia ratione. Datum Paris. 15 die
Aprilis, Anno Domini millesimo trecentesimo nono.

Sur ce le Bailliff de Caen manda ces lettres au Sergeant de Bertville
contenant la form qui suit:

Le Bailiff de Caen a Guilliaume de Cumbeour ou a son soeur Sergeant Salut.
Nous vous mandons que vous ajournies and donnies jour a Monsieur Robert des
Monstiers Chevalier le jeune devant vous ou vostre Lieutenant a Caen pour venir
conter and pour aller avaunt jouxte la tenor du mandemant nostre Sire le Roy
que nous a aporte Monsire Jean le Latimer Chevalier, a la Copy duquel
mandement cette lettre est anexee au prochien Mecredy apres la feste de la
Saint Croix........................... si en aures nous vene rapporter de
bouche ou nous escrives sous seel que nous poissions. Done le Dimanche de
quasimode l'an MCCC. dis.

Charta Philippi Regis Franciae.
PHilippus Dei Gratia Franciae Rex Balivo Cadomen' vel ejus locum tenenti
salutem. Cum ratione cujusdam pacis inter Johannem le Latimer Militem ex una
part, and Robertum de Monasteriis juniorem Militem ex altera part dudum
factae, moneta debile tunc currente, dictus Johannes dicto Roberto in mill
libris Turon' tenetur certis tunc futuris terminis persolvendis, dictusque
Johannes pro terminis quibus curreret moneta debilis, cum moneta eadem
satisfecerit praefato Roberto, and similiter pro aliis terminis satisfacere se
paratum obtulit cum effectu, and per eundem Robertum stetit quod sibi de
restantia dictae summae non fuerit satisfactum iu moneta qui dictae pacis
tempore cursum........ communem. Et super hoc alias nostras literas tibi
dedimus mandatis, ut praedictum Johannem ad solvendum restantiam dictae summae
aliter quam in moneta debili non compellas. Iterato mandamus tibi quod dictum
Robertum restantia summae praedictae solvenda in dicta moneta debili compellas
esse contentum, non obstante decreto seu pronuntiatione arbitrali per Petrum de
Miafle, and Eustachium de Pyron Milites factis in absentia praefati Johannis
and contra Patriae consuetudinem prout dicitur. Et si super hoc occurrat tibi
dubium vel obscurum, Diem coram Gentibus nostris instantis Scaccarii Roch.
super hujusmodi privilegiis assigns aut facias assignari. Datum apud Enginam
ultimo die Julii, Anno Domini millesimo trecentesimo octavo.

A Fine suffered by Sir John Latimer and the Lady Joan his Wife in the
Fourteenth Year of King Edward the Second.
HAEC est finalis concordia facta in Curia Domini Regis apud Westmonasterium a
die Paschae in unum Mensem, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi, Filii Regis Edwardi,
quarto decimo, coram Willielmo de Bereford, Johanne Matford, and Johanne
Stonore, Justiciariis, and aliis Domini Regis fidelibus tunc ibi Praesentibus,
inter Johannem Latimer, and Joannam Uxorem ejus, and Robertum Filium ejusdem
Johannis quaerentes, and Lambertum de Trykingham deforcientem, de tribus
Messuagiis, sexaginta Acris Terrae, quatuor Acris Prati, quatuor Acris Bosci
and december and octo solidatis redditus cum pertinentiis in Estshene, Mortlake
and Wimbledon in Comitatu Surrey, and de una carucata Terrae and sex Acris
Prati cum pertinentiis in Bisbeye and Harteshened in Comitatu Hertford, and de
uno Messuagio, quinquaginta Acris Terrae, quadraginta Acris Bosci, quadraginta
Acris Bruerae, quatuordecim solidatis redditus, and de passagio ultra aquam
Tamisiae cum pertinentiis in Wolwiche in Comitatu Kanciae: Unde placitum
Conventionis summonitum fuit inter eos in eadem Curia, scilicet quod praedictus
Johannes recognovit praedicta Tenementa and Passagium praedictum cum
pertinentiis esse jus ipsius Lamberti, ut illa quae idem Lambertus concessit
eisdem Johanni and Joannae praedicta Tenementa and Passagium praedictum cum
pertinentiis, and illa eis reddidit in eadem Curia, habendum and tenendum
eisdem Johanni and Joannae de Capitalibus Dominis Feodi illius per Servitia
inde, quodque praedicta Tenementa and Passagium praedictum cum pertinentiis
integre remanebunt praedicto Roberto and Haeredibus de corpore suo procreatis,
tenendum de capitalibus Dominis Feodi illius per Servitia quae ad praedicta
Tenementa and Passagium praedictum pertinent imperpetuum. Et si contingat quod
idem Robertus obierit sine Haerede de corpore suo procreato, tunc post decessum
ipsius Roberti praedicta Tenementa and Passagium praedictum cum pertinentiis
integre remanebunt rectis Haeredibns praedicti Johannis, tenendum de
Capitalibus Dominis Feodi illius per Servitia quae ad praedicta Tenementa and
Passagium praedictum pertinent imperpetuum.

Surrey. Hertford. Kanciae.


Charta Joannae quae fuit Uxor Johannis le Latimer Militis.
NOverint universi per praesentes quod ego Joanna quae fui Uxor Johannis le
Latimer Militis, recepi de Thoma Herewauld quadraginta and tres solidos and
quatuor denarios de redditu Paschae, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi tertii post
conquestum undecimo, proveniente de terris and tenementis quae de me tenet in
Wolwich; de quibus quidem quadraginta solidis and quatuor denariis, fateor me
esse plenarie pacatum, and praedictum Thomam esse quietum per praesentes.

In cujus rei Testimonium praesentibus Sigillum meum apposui. Datum apud
Westmonasterium die Martis proxima post Festum Sancti Barnabae Apostoli, Anno
Regni Regis supradicto. SIGILLVM DNAE IOHANNAE LATIMER

seal of Joanna Latimer

Sir Robert Latimer, Lord of Duntish, and other Lands and Lordships.
Charta Johannis Mundayne, and Nicolai Gurthop Capellanorum.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, Quod nos Johannes Mundayne and Nicolaus Gurthop
Capellani, tradidimus and concessimus Roberto Latimer Chivalier, and Catharinae
Uxori ejus, medietatem Manerii de Childeckford cum pertinentiis, habendum and
tenendum iisdem Roberto and Catharinae and haeredibus de corpore ipsius
Catharinae exeuntibus de Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius per servitia inde
debita and consueta in perpetuum. Et si contingat quod praedicta Catharina
obierit sine haerede de Corpore suo exeunte, tunc omnia praedicta tenementa cum
pertinentiis integre remaneant rectis haeredibus ejusdem Catharinae, tenenda de
Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius per Servitia inde debita and consueta in
perpetuum. In cujus rei Testimonium Sigilla nostra praesentibus apposuimus. His
Testibus, Richardo Turberville, Johanne Attehall Militibus, Johanne Moore,
Johanne Stippleton, and Thoma de la Were and aliis. Datum apud Childeckford in
Festo Sancti Johannis Baptistae, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi tertii post
Conquestum Tricesimo Secundo.

Charta Catharinae Latimer.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod ego Catharina quondam Uxor Domini Roberti
Latimer in pura and ligea viduitate mea dedi and concessi, and hac praesenti
charta confirmavi Margaretae filiae meae pro homagio and servitio suo totam
Terram meam cum homagiis and servitiis liberorum hominum and villanorum, quam
habui in Rotherhead, quae mihi accidebat Jure haereditario ex part Domini
Roberti de Hull patris mei, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis ad dictam Terram
spectantibus, vel quae de jure in posterum spectare poterunt, in viis, semitis,
pratis, pascuis, pasturis, boscis and caeteris aliis locis, libertatibus, and
liberis consuetudinibus dictis Terris pertinentibus, habendum and tenendum
dictam Terram cum omnibus suis pertinentiis de me and Haeredibus meis sibi and
haeredibus suis, libere, quiet, pacifice, honorifice, integre and haereditarie
in perpetuum; Reddendo inde annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis a dicta Margareta
and haeredibus suis unum par Chirothecarum de pretio unius denarii, vel unum
denarium in Festo Paschae, pro omni servitio seculari, exactione and demanda
omnimodo mihi pertinente. Salvo tamen servitio Regali quantum pertinet ad
tantam Terram in eodem feodo. Et si praedicta Catharina sine haerede de se
exeunte in fata decesserit, tota praedicta Terra cum pertinentiis ad Robertum
Latimer Fratrem suum vel haeredes suos revertatur. Ego vero Catharina
praedictam totam Terram cum omnibus praenominatis pertinentiis, servitiis tam
liberorum quam villanorum, dictae Catharinae and haeredibus suis ut praedictum
est, exeuntibus, contra omnes homines and foeminas pro praedicto servitio
warrantizabo, acquietabo and defendam in perpetuum. Et ut haec mea Donatio and
Concessio, and praesentis Chartae Confirmatio rata sit and stabilis, hanc
praesentem Chartam Sigilli mei Impressione roboravi. His Testibus, Radulpho de
Rochford, Ricardo de Turberville, Rogero de Attehall Militibus, Willielmo
Jolliot, Johanne Strode, Elisa Martin, Thoma de Winterborne, Roberto Clerico,
and aliis. Datum apud Rotherheath die Lunae proxima post Festum Purificationis
Beatae Mariae Virginis, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post conquestum
Tricesimo quarto.

Sir Robert Latimer Knight, Lord of Duntish, and other Lands and Lordships.
Mr Prinn's Abridgment of Records, Page 106.
THE 21th day of May, the King gave thanks to the Lords and Commons for their
coming, and aid granted, on which day all the Lords, and sundry of the Commons
Dined with the King: after which Dinner, Sir John de Lee was brought before the
King, Lords and Commons next aforesaid, to Answer to certain Objections
following, and first to the Complaint of William Latimer, as follows.

The King had granted the Wardship of Robert Latimer, the Son and Heir of Sir
Robert Latimer, with certain Manors, during the same Minority, to the Bishop
of Sarum, whose Estate the same William had, and after the King granted the
same to Sir John de Lee. The same William surmised that the said Sir John being
of Power, sent for him to London, where he by duress of Imprisonment enforced
the said William to Surrender his Estate to him.

And by Recognizance therefore, the same Sir John excuses himself, for that
the Grant was made unto him; the which was not allowed, for that the said
William was not put out by due Process of Law.

Another matter was objected against the said Sir John, for that during such
time as he was Steward of the Kings House, he should cause sundry men to be
attached, and to come before him, as before the Kings Council, in places where
he pleased, where being out of Council, he caused men to answer as to things
before the Council.

That he as Steward, having thereby Authority only within the Verge, did
notwithstanding cause sundry to be attached out of the Verge, as John Goddard
and others, making them to Answer in the Marshalsey, of things done out of the
Verge, and othersome committed to the Tower of his own Authority, as John
Sibill, Edmund Urdsales, and others.

That he had of his own Authority, against the Justices Commandment, discharged
out of Newgate, Hugh Lavenham Purveyor, who had appealed sundry men of Felony.

That he bargained with Sir Nicholas Lovayn for the Keeping of the Manor of
Rainham in Kent, the which the same Sir Nicholas claimed to hold during the
Minority of the Son and Heir of John Saunton, where the said John of Lee knew
that the said Manor was holden of the King in Chief, as of the Castle of Dover.

Of all which points, for that the same Sir John could not purge himself, he
was Commanded to the Tower of London, there to remain as Prisoner, until he had
made Fines at the Kings Will; and Commandment given to Sir Allen of Buxhal,
Constable of the Tower, to keep him accordingly. And so the Lords and Commons
departed.

After that, the said Sir John being brought to Westminster before the Kings
Council, and being there demanded of the same William Latimer, made Answer,
That as freely as the King had granted to him the Wardship aforesaid, so freely
did he Surrender the same into the Kings hands. Whereupon by the same Council
it was Ordered, that the Wardship aforesaid should be reseized into the Kings
hands, and delivered unto the said William Latimer, according to the Grant made
to the said Bishop, and that all Recognizances and Conveyances made by the said
William to the said Sir John, should be void, saving the Kings Right.

Charta Johannis de Rochford.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Johannes de Rochford, Consanguineus
Roberti de Hull Militis, dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea
confirmavi Roberto filio Roberti Latimer Militi Manerium de Stoket juxta villam
de monte acuto in Comitatu Somersetiae cum pertinentiis, and medietatem Manerii
de Childakford cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Dorsetiae, una cum Feodis Militum
and Advocationibus Ecclesiarum quae ad praedictum Manerium and medietatem
Manerii pertinent seu pertinere possunt: Habendum and tenendum omnia praedicta,
Manerium de Stoket and medietatem Manerii de Childakford, una cum Feodis
Militum and Advocationibus Ecclesiarum praedictarum cum omnibus eorum
pertinentiis praedicto Roberto filio Roberti and haeredibus de Corpore suo
legitime procreatis in perpetuum, de Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius, per
servitia inde debita and consueta. Et si contingat praedictum Robertum filium
Roberti sine haerede de corpore suo procreato decedere, Volo and Concedo, quod
omnia praedicta, Manerium de Stoket and medietas Manerii de Childakford, una
cum Feodis Militum and Advocatione Ecclesiarum praedictarum cum omnibus eorum
pertinentiis, Margaretae Sorori praedicti Roberti filii Roberti, and haeredibus
de corpore suo legitime procreatis remaneant in perpetuum, Tenenda de
Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius per servitia inde debita and de jure consueta.
Et si contingat praedictam Margaretam sine haerede de corpore suo legitime
procreato decedere, Volo, Quod omnia praedicta, Manerium de Stoket, and
medietas Manerii de Childakford, una cum feodis Militum and Advocationibus
Ecclesiarum praedictarum ac omnibus eorum pertinentiis, mihi, and haeredibus
meis remaneant in perpetuum. Et ego vero praedictus Johannes and haeredes mei,
omnia praedicta, Manerium de Stoket and Medietatem Manerii de Childakford, una
cum Feodis Militum and Advocationibus Ecclesiarum praedictarum cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis praedictis, Roberto filio Roberti, and Margaretae Sorori ejus in
forma praedicta warrantizabimus, acquietabimus, and defendemus in perpetuum.
His Testibus, Johanne Chydyok, Johanne Atte-Hale Militibus, Willielmo
Winterborne, Johanne Briming, Henry Atte-Moure, Henry Alleyn, Johanne Spencer,
and aliis. Data apud Childakford Die Jovis proxima post Festum Sancti Martini,
Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum Tricesimo Sexto.

Protestatio per Dominum Robertum Latimer in Cancellaria facta.
MEmorandum, Quod cum per quandam Inquisitionem coram Thoma de la Bear, virtute
Commissionis Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae avi Domini Regis nunc, eidem
Thomae direct retornatam compertum fuisset, Quod Catharina, quae fuit Uxor
Roberti Latimer Chivalier, obiit seisita in Dominico suo ut de feodo de
medietate Manerii de Childakford cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Dorsetiae and de
medietate Advocationis Ecclesiae ejusdem villae, Et quod Robertus filius
Roberti Latimer Chivalier est haeres propinquior ejusdem Catharinae, Idem
Robertus filius Roberti sperans aliud Jus sibi ad medietatem dicti Manerii and
Advocationis praedictae competere, quam per dictam Inquisitionem est compertum,
petit liberationem dictae medietatis Manerii cum pertinentiis, ac Advocationis
praedictae; Protestando, quod si imposterum sibi constare poterit, ipsum
Robertum aliud Jus seu Titulum in Tenementis praedictis habere quam supra
compertum, and quod ipse intendit esse ad largum suum dictam medietatem Manerii
cum pertinentiis, and Advocationem praedictam meliori Jure and Titulo quae sibi
competere poterint clamare, liberatione ejusdem medietatis Manerii ac
Advocationis praedictae sibi in eadem Cancellaria ad prosecutionem suam facta
non obstante, nec sibi seu haeredibus suis praejudicante. Quae quidem
Protestatio sibi in Cancellaria praedicta de assensu Curiae conceditur.

Indentura inter Dominum Robertum Latimer, and Margaretam uxorem ejus ex una
part, and Willielmum Cadbury, and Johannem Pury ex altera.
HAEC Indentura facta apud Duntish die Lunae in Festo Sancti Michaelis
Archangeli, Anno Regni Regis Henrici quarti post Conquestum Quinto, inter
Robertum Latimer and Margaretam uxorem ejus ex una part, and Willielmum
Cadbury and Johannem Pury ex altera part, Testatur, Quod die and Anno
supradictis praefati Robertus and Margareta Uxor ejus tradiderunt, and ad
firmam concesserunt praedictis Willielmo Cadbury and Johanni Pury, totum
Manerium suum de Stoket cum pertinentiis suis in Stoket praedicta, ad terminum
vitae praedictorum Willielmi and Johannis, Salvis in omnibus eisdem Roberto and
Margaretae, Wardis, Releviis, Maritagiis, Escaetis, Servitiis, Redditibus
quibuscunque proventuris liberorum Tenentium, Salvis etiam praedictis Roberto
and Margaretae and haeredibus ipsius Roberti Finibus, Herietis, simul cum
amerciamentis Tenentium in Villanagio pro eorum ruinositate Tenementorum;
Excepto tamen, quod idem Willielmus and Johannes recipient and habebunt ex
concessione gratiosa praedictorum Roberti and Margaretae unam Libram Cerae, duo
paria Chirothecarum, unam Libram and dimidiam Cumini de libero reditu
proventuro ex certis parcellis dicto Manerio ab antiquo incumbentibus.
Praedicti item Robertus and Margareta concesserunt eisdem Willielmo and Johanni
annuum reditum sexdecim denariorum recepturum de quodam libero Tenemento Thomae
Bolar, una cum reditu annuo octo denariorum proventuro de libero Tenemento
Johannis Gregory; Ita tamen, Quod cum Seneschallus praedictorum Roberti and
Margaretae ad dictum Manerium de Stoket praedicta accesserit pro Curiis inibi
tenendis, praefati Willielmus Cadbury and Johannes Pury pro se and suis micas
and expensas Statibus competentibus illorum, sumptibus eorum propriis
supportabunt, Ita quod praedicti Willielmus and Johannes nulli tradent Statum
suum in part neque in toto, absque licentia speciali praedictorum Roberti and
Margaretae, nec ullum facient vastum nec destructionem in aliquo, per quod
vastum vel destruction possit reperiri. Praedicti quoque Willielmus Cadbury and
Johannes Pury domos and aedificia in dicto Manerio de Stoket constructa been
and competenter sumptibus eorum propriis manutenebunt, sustinebunt, and adeo
bono statu quo illa receperunt, seu meliore, in fine dimittent; Habendum and
tenendum praedictum Manerium de Stoket praedicta cum pertinentiis suis, ut
saepe dictum est, praedictis Willielmo Cadbury, and Johanni Pury ad terminum
vitae utriusque eorum, and uni eorum qui diutius vixerit, de praedictis
Roberto, Margareta and haeredibus ipsius Roberti, reddendo inde annuatim
praefatis Roberto, Margaretae, and haeredibus ipsius Roberti octo marcas
legalis monetae ad quatuor anni terminos principales per aequales portiones. Et
praedicti Willielmus and Johannes supportabunt sumptibus eorum propriis omnia
onera dicto Manerio incumbentia qualiacunque fuerint. Et si praedictus reditus
octo Marcarum in part vel in toto post aliquem terminum aretro fuerit, tunc
been liceat praedictis Roberto, Margaretae, and haeredibus sive assignatis
ipsius Roberti, in praedicto Manerio distringere, and quascunque districtiones
in dicto Manerio inventas and in hac part captas secum abinde ducere, and
penes se retinere, donec reditus aretro simul cum arreragiis, expensis and
dampnis eis fuerit satisfactum. Et si praedictus reditus octo marcarum fuerit
aretro, in part vel in toto, post aliquem terminum per tres septimanas, aut
Statum suum absque licentia speciali praedictorum Roberti and Margaretae in
part vel in toto alicui tradiderint, seu vastum vel destructionem, in Domibus,
Arboribus, Terris, Tenementis, Clausis, Clausuris, Pratis, Pascuis, seu
Pasturis, aut aliis quibuscunque, per quod vastum seu destruction reperiri
possint, fecerint; vel si singula Onera dicto Manerio incumbentia non
solverint, tunc been liceat praedictis Roberto, Margaretae, and haeredibus
ipsius Roberti in dicto Manerio suo de Stoket saepe dicta cum omnibus and
singulis suis pertinentiis reintrare, and ad libitum illorum penes se retinere,
ut in statu suo pristino, his scriptis indentatis interim non obstantibus. Et
praedicti Robertus, Margareta, and haeredes and Assignati ipsius Roberti
memoratum Manerium de Stoket cum pertinentiis suis praefatis Willielmo Cadbury
and Johanni Pury in forma supradicta ad terminum vitae utriusque eorum, seu
unius diutius viventis, contra omnes Gentes warrantizabunt, acquietabunt and
defendent. In cujus rei Testimonium parts praedictae his scriptis bipartitis
Sigilla sua alternatim apposuerunt. His Testibus Yvo fitz Warren, Johanne
Moigae Militibus, Waltero Tongues, Johanne de la Lynde, and multis aliis. Data
die, Anno and loco supradictis.

Charta Roberti Latimer.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Robertus Latimer and Margareta Uxor
mea, assensu and consensu Domini Willielmi Peche patris dictae Margaretae,
concessimus and remisimus, and omnino quietum clamavimus pro nobis and
haeredibus nostris Domino Willielmo Atte-hall totum servitium and Escaieta de
toto Tenemento, quod Nicolaus de Palton, and Elizabetha Uxor ejus habuerunt de
Feoffamento nostro in Winterborne cum omnibus ejus pertinentiis. Concessimus
etiam and remisimus eidem Domino Willielmo Custodiam and Maritagium Terrarum
and haeredum dicti Nicolai de omnibus Terris quas Robertus habuit in praedicta
villa cum suis pertinentiis; Habendum and Tenendum dicto Domino Willielmo omnia
praedicta, tam in Servitiis, Wardis, Releviis, Maritagiis, Escaietis, cum
omnibus suis pertinentiis, omnibus diebus vitae suae, sicut ego vel haeredes
mei in aliquo casu habere poterimus. In cujus rei Testimonium has literas meas
feci patentes, Sigillo meo Sigillatas. His Testibus, Johanne de Copleston
Vicecomite, Roberto de Turberville, Johanne de Raleigh Militibus, Roberto
Martin, Thoma Hussy, Nicolao de la Linde, Thoma Frampton, and multis aliis.
Data apud Winterborne die Lunae proxima ante Festum Simonis and Judae, Anno
Regni Regis Richardi Secundi Nono.

Sir John Latimer Knight, Lord of Duntish, and other Lands and Lordships.
Billa Johannis Latimer exhibita in Cancellaria.
A tres Reverend Pere en Dieu l'Eveque de Duresme, Chancellier d'Angleterre.
Supply humblement Jean Latimer fitz au Robert Latimer Chevallier, que comme
sur le treat del Marriage faict per enter le dit Robert pere al dit suppliant
and Margaret sa mere, la fille Sire Guilliaume de Peche, devant le Marriage
enter eux faict par leurs amiss, pour fair les Heirs des les Corpse de dits pere
and mere enheritable de les Mannoirs, etc. par bargayn and accord faitz per
enter eux and pour graunde sum d'argent, c'est assavoir, etc. al dit Pere del
suppliant avaunt dit pour le marriage sa mere don't il estoit pleynement premys,
and affirm que le dit Robert Latimer al dit suppliant enfeffera de les dites
Mannoirs, etc. W. and B. en fee, and reprendreit un estat a luy and a dit sa
femme and a les heirs de leur Corpse engendrez, les queux feffement and reprise
de estat ent furent faites accordant a les bargayn and promise avant-dites.
Puys apres les dites Robert Latimer and la dite sa femme avoient issu de leur
corpse engendrez leur fitz d'issue and heir apparent le suppliant avant-dit, and
la dite morust, apres quelle mort, le dit Robert Pere audit suppliant par
maluys excitation des diverses persons pour disheriter le dit suppliant, and
pour fair enheritables issues de celle que le dit Robert al pris depuys, en ce
a faict comburer les faites de les feffements and reprise del estat avaunt dit.
Et sur ceo ent a fait alienation a diverses persons en verisemble disherison
du dit suppliant si Dieu luy doigne de survivre son dit Pere, en tant que les
ditez faitz de feffement and reprise d'estates sont destructes, s'il n' ast
vostre tresgracieux socours en ceste party, que pleise, etc. de considerer les
premises, and sur ceo pourvoir pour le dit Robert par Breve nostre Seigneur le
Roy, par vostre tressage discretion en affair de comparer devant vous en la
Chancellarie nostre Seigneur le Roy au certain jour d'estre examine de les
premises perissent qu'il poet estre conuz de record de sa conisance qu'il y
avoit fiels faites de feffement and reprise de estats accordantz la bargain de
marriage and promise avaunt ditz, Et sur ceo de ordeyner just and due redress
and remedy al dit suppliant solon ceo que droit and bon conscience demandent
pour Dieu and en oeuvre de charity considerant tres-gracious Seigneur, que le
dit suppliant a null remedy al comen ley de la combustion des faites
avantdites, and que son dit pere and govern, and amesne par gentz qui n'ont
consideration de verite.

Charta Roberti Pipard.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit, Robertus
filius Johannis Pipard Militis, Salutem in Domino. Noveritis me remisisse,
relaxasse, and omnino pro me and haeredibus meis quietum clamasse Johanni
Latimer Domino de Estpullham, and haeredibus suis, totum Jus and clameum quod
habeo, seu aliquo modo habere potero in omnibus illis Terris and Tenementis,
quae idem Johannes tenet in Loxton in Comitatu Somersetiae, ex dimissione and
concessione Domini Johannis Pipard Militis patris mei ad terminum vitae
Margaretae Sororis meae, modo Uxoris dicti Johannis Latimer. Ita quod nec ego
praedictus Robertus, nec haeredes mei, nec aliquis alius nomine nostro versus
praedictum Johannem vel haeredes suos aliquam actionem habere poterimus in
futurum. Et ego praedictus Robertus, and haeredes mei, omnia praedicta Terras
and Tenementa praedicto Johanni Latimer, and haeredibus suis, and Assignatis,
contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in perpetuum. In cujus rei Testimonium huic
praesenti scripto Sigillum meum apposui. His Testibus, Stephano de Bingham,
Jacobo Trussell, Ricardo Moore, Thoma Frampton, and multis aliis.

Charta Johannis Latimer, and Nicolai Latimer filii ejus.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Johannes
Latimer Armiger, Dominus de Estpullham in Comitatu Dorsetiae, and Nicolaus
Latimer Armiger, filius and haeres praedicti Johannis, Salutem in Domino.
Noveritis nos manumisisse, and liberum fecisse, and ab omni jugo Nativitatis,
Servitutis, seu villanagii before liberasse, Walterum Janin Nativum nostrum ad
Manerium nostrum de Estpullham praedictum spectantem and pertinentem cum tota
sequela sua procreata, seu in posterum procreanda, Ita quod nec nos praefatus
Johannes, and Nicolaus, nec haeredes nostri aliquod Jus, Clameum, Actionem, seu
Calumniam in praedicto Waltero ratione Nativitatis, servitutis, seu villanagii
praedictorum, seu sequelarum suarum praedictarum procreatarum, seu in posterum
procreandarum, aut in bonis seu catallis suis quibuscunque de caetero habere,
exigere, seu vendicare poterimus in futurum, sed ab omni action hujusmodi
Nativitatis, Servitutis, and villanagii sumus exclusi per praesentes in
perpetuum. In cujus rei Testimonium praesentibus Sigilla nostra apposuimus,
Datis apud Estpullham praedictam in Festo Conversionis Sancti Pauli Apostoli,
Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti post Conquestum Vicesimo primo.

Sir Nicholas Latimer Knight, Lord of Duntish, and other Lands and Lordships.
Charta Nicolai Latimer.
OMnibus ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Nicolaus Latimer filius and
haeres Johannis Latimer Armigeri jam defuncti, Salutem in Domino. Cum Richardus
Whittington Cives Londini, Edwardus Read, Robertus Andrew, Robertus James,
Johannes Forde, Thomas Rothwell, Johannes York, and Henricus Villere Clericus,
nuper per quandam Chartam suam indentatam, cujus Data est apud Childeckford
quinto Die Maii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici quinti post Conquestum Nono,
dimiserint, tradiderint, and Charta illa confirmaverint praedicto Johanni
Latimer filio Roberti Latimer Militis, and Margaretae Uxori ejusdem Johannis,
and Haeredibus de Corporibus eorum exeuntibus, Manerium de Childeckford cum
suis pertinentiis in Comitatu Dorsetiae, una cum Advocatione Ecclesiae ejusdem;
necnon omnia Terras and Tenementa, Redditus, Servitia and Reversiones, cum suis
pertinentiis in Childeckford praedicta, ac Manerium de Crawestoke cum
pertinentiis in Comitatu Surriae, necnon omnia Terras and Tenementa, redditus,
servitia and reversiones cum pertinentiis in Crawestoke praedicta. Virtute
quarum Dimissionis, Traditionis and Confirmationis praedictarum praedicti
Johannes Latimer and Margareta fuerunt inde seisiti: Et postea idem Johannes de
tali Statu seisitus inde obiit; post cujus mortem praedicta Margareta se tenuit
in Maneriis, Terris, and Tenementis praedictis, and inde fuit seisita, and
Possessionem inde suam usque modo continuavit, and sic jam in praesenti inde
seisita existit. Ac tam praedicti Richardus Whittington, Edwardus Read,
Robertus Andrew, Robertus James, Johannes Forde, Thomas Rothwell, Johannes
York, and Henricus in quandam aliam Chartam suam indentatam, cujus data est
apud Duntish in Comitatu Dorsetiae, ultimo Die Julii, Anno praedicti Regis
Nono, dederint and concesserint praefatis Johanni Latimer and Margaretae Uxori
ejus, Reversionem Maneriorum de Duntish, Tille, and Rivell, cum pertinentiis in
Comitatu Dorsetiae; Necnon Reversionem omnium Terrarum, Tenementorum,
Reddituum, Servitiorum, and Reversionum, cum suis pertinentiis in Duntish, ac
de and in villis de Bokeland, Winterne, Whichurch cum suis pertinentiis in
Comitatu Dorsetiae, inter alia Maneria, Terras, and Tenementa, quae Robertus
Latimer Miles tenuit ad Terminum vitae suae, habenda and tenenda eisdem Johanni
and Margaretae, and haeredibus de corporibus eorum exeuntibus, cum post mortem
praedicti Roberti Latimer Militis acciderint, virtute quorundam Doni and
Concessionis quae idem Robertus Latimer praefatis Johanni and Margaretae de
iisdem Maneriis, Terris, and Tenementis attornavit. Et postea idem Robertus
Latimer de tali Statu inde obiit seisitus; post cujus mortem dicti Johannes and
Margareta in eisdem Maneriis, Terris, and Tenementis cum suis pertinentiis,
intraverint virtute Doni and Concessionis praedictarum, and sic inde seisiti
fuerunt: Et de tali Statu idem Johannes Latimer postea inde obiit seisitus;
post cujus mortem dicta Margareta se tenuit in eisdem Maneriis, Terris, and
Tenementis cum pertinentiis, and inde seisita fuit, and sic jam in praesenti
seisita existit. Ac cum Walterus Baylye Capellanus, Johannes Rafe, and
Richardus Long per quoddam Scriptum eorum indentatum, cujus data est apud
Estpullham in Festo Nativitatis beatae Mariae Virginis, Anno dicti Regis nono,
tradiderunt, dimiserunt, and Scripto illo confirmaverunt praefato Roberto
Latimer Militi Manerium de Estpullham cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Dorsetiae,
Necnon omnia Terras, and Tenementa, Redditus, Servitia, and Reversiones cum
suis pertinentiis in Estpullham praedicta and Newton infra Manerium five
Parochiam de Helton in eodem Comitatu, habenda and tenenda eidem Roberto ad
Terminum vitae suae, remanere inde per idem Scriptum praedicto Johanni Latimer
filio dicti Roberti, and dictae Margaretae Uxori ejusdem Johannis, and
haeredibus de Corporibus ipsorum Johannis and Margaretae exeuntibus; Et pro
defectu hujusmodi haeredum, remanere inde rectis haeredibus ejusdem Roberti
Latimer in perpetuum. Virtute quarundam Traditionis, Dimissionis, and
Confirmationis, idem Robertus Latimer fuit inde seisitus, and de tali Statu
inde obiit seisitus; post cujus mortem dictus Johannes Latimer in eisdem
Manerio, Terris, and Tenementis cum pertinentiis, ut in remanere suum
praedictum introivit, and inde seisitus fuit. Et postea idem Johannes Latimer
de tali Statu inde obiit seisitus; post cujus mortem dicta Margareta se tenuit
in eisdem Maneriis, Terris, and Tenementis, and inde seisita fuit, and sic jam
in praesenti inde seisita existit. Noveritis me praedictum Nicolaum Latimer
ratificasse, approbasse, and per praesentes confirmasse praefatae Margaretae
Matri meae, Statum, Possessionem, Jus, Titulum, and interesse, quae and quos
eadem Margareta habet and tenet de and in omnibus and singulis Maneriis,
Terris, and Tenementis, Redditibus, Servitiis, and Reversionibus cum suis
pertinentiis, secundum formam Concessionis praedictae, remanere inde mihi and
haeredibus meis in perpetuum. Et ego vero praefatus Nicolaus, and haeres meus,
omnia and singula praedicta Maneria, Terras, and Tenementa, Redditus, Servitia,
and Reversiones cum suis pertinentiis praefatae Margaretae contra omnes Gentes
Warrantizabimus, Acquietabimus, and in perpetuum per praesentes defendemus. In
cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti Scripto meo Sigillum meum apposui. Datum
Vicesimo Die Julii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti post Conquestum Vicesimo
septimo.

SIGILLVM NICOLAI LATIMER MILITIS

seal of Sir Nicholas Latimer

An Arbitration made by George Duke of Clarence, upon a reference between Sir
Nicholas Latimer and Sir Edward Gray.
GEORGE Duke of Clarence and Lord of Richmond, To all those to whom our Writing
Indented shall come, Greeting. Where certain variances and debates have been
hanging betwixt Edward Gray Knight, and Nicholas Latimer Knight, of and upon
the Right, Title and Possession of the Manor of Lokston, with the
Appurtenances in the County of Somerset: For which Variances and Debates to be
appeased, the Parties aforesaid have compromitted, and also bound them to stand
to the Arbitrament, Ordinance and Judgment of us the said Duke, like as in two
Obligations, in one of which the said Edward is bounden to the said Nicholas,
and in the other the said Nicholas is bounden to the said Edward in two hundred
pounds, with several Conditions to abide our Award, as in the premises more
plainly is contained. We the said Duke taking upon us to Arbitre in the
premises, have heard the Allegations, Titles and Replications of the said
Parties of and in the premises, and by good deliberation them understanding:
Wherefore we Award, Ordain and deem, that the said Nicholas Latimer Knight,
shall have, occupy, and peaceably enjoy the said Manor of Lokston with the
Appurtenances to him and his Heirs, without interruption or claim of the said
Edward and his Heirs. For the which premises we Award, Ordain and deem, that
the said Nicholas shall be bound in a Statute of the Staple before the Feast of
the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next coming, to the said Edward in an
hundred pounds to be paid to him in Michaelmas next coming, and the said Edward
before the said Feast shall by his Deed grant to the said Nicholas, that if the
said Nicholas or his Executors pay or do to be paid to the said Edward or his
Assigns at the Feast of Saint Michael next coming after the date hereof, or
within a Month then next following, twenty five pounds in the Parish Church of
Saint Ewing next within Newgate of London; and at the Feast of Pasch then next
following, or within a Month then next ensuing, in the same Church twelve
pounds ten shillings; and at the Feast of Saint Michael then next following, or
within a Month then next ensuing, in the same Church other twelve pounds ten
shillings; and at the Feast of Pasch then next following, or within a Month
next ensuing, in the same Church other twelve pounds ten shillings; and at the
Feast of Saint Michael next following, or within a Month next ensuing, in the
same Church other twelve pounds ten shillings; and at the Feast of Pasch next
following, or within a Month next ensuing, in the same Church other twelve
pounds ten shillings; and at the Feast of Saint Michael next following, or
within a Month next ensuing, in the same Church other twelve pounds ten
shillings: that then the same Statute to be void and of none effect, or else to
stand in his strength and virtue. Also we Award that the said Edward shall at
every day of payment aforesaid deliver to the Bearer of the said money toward
his cost, six shillings eight pence. In Witness to which thing to either part
of this our Award Indented we have set our Seal. Given the twentieth day of
June, in the eighth year of my Lords Reign King Edward the Fourth.

seal of George, duke of Clarence

Doctor Fullers History of the Worthies of England, Page 287. In his Catalogue
of Sheriffs for Dorsetshire.
SIR Nicholas Latimer was High Sheriff of Dorsetshire in the thirty second year
of King Henry the Sixth, and again in the eleventh year of King Edward the
Fourth.

The Title of Sir John Mordaunt Knight, to the Manors of Duntish and Devilish
in the County of Dorset, and Estoket in Somersetshire; which late were Sir
Nicholas Latimers.
FIrst the said Sir Nicholas bargained with William Hardyng for the Manor of
Devilish, and Enfeoffed him Sole of the same; so that by that Hardyng was
Entitled to that Manor in Anno xivo Ed. ivti, whose bargain was unknown to
Sir John Mordaunt till Anno viijo of Henry vijth, at which time he bought the
Moity of the Title of Hardyng therein.

Anno ijdo Ricardi Tertii, Sir John Mordaunt and Sir Nicholas Bargained for the
Manor of Devilish, that the Feoffees thereof should stand seized of the same
Manor to the use of the said Sir Nicholas for Term of his Life; And if he
happen to have Issue Male, then after the Death of Sir Nicholas they should
stand seized thereof to the use of that Issue Male, and of the Heirs Males of
his Body begotten; and for lack of such Issue, to the use of the said John
Mordaunt, and Edith, and of the Heirs of the Body of the said Edith begotten.

Then in Anno vijto of King Henry the Seventh, it was Bargained between the
said Sir Nicholas (contrary to the said former Bargains) and Sir John
Turbervile, That Sir Nicholas should Enfeoffee John Talower, as well of the
said Manor of Devilish as of all the said other Manors, and of the Manor of
Estpullham in Fee. Against whom John Smith should recover the same Manors, and
after that Recovery should make Estate by Deed and by Fine to Sir Nicholas, of
all the Manors to him, and the Heirs Males of his Body begotten; the Remainder
to Sir John Turbervile and his Heirs; which Estate was made to Talower, against
whom John Smith sued several Writs of Entry to recover the Premises
accordingly.

Hanging this Writ of Entry, Sir John Mordaunt sued a Subpoena against Sir
Nicholas, Sir John Turbervile, and John Smith, and disclosed his Bargain of
Devilish, and desired an Injunction in Chancery thereof, that they should not
proceed in the Recovery: So he had an Injunction for two or three Terms; and
when Sir John Mordaunt had proved his Bargain by the great favor that my Lord
Chancellor bore to Turbervile, the Injunction was Released, and Smith proceeded
in the Recoveries, and had Judgment against all Conscience and all Precedents
like before that time (as it was said): And I think it appeared in Chancery
that Turbervile and Smith had knowledge of the Bargains between Sir Nicholas,
and Hardyng, and Mordaunt, before the Bargain made between him and Sir Nicholas.

After these Recoveries, Sir Nicholas sued a Subpoena against John Smith to
Execute the State Tail to Sir Nicholas, according to the trust and express
words of the Indenture, which Estate he would never Execute, nor Sir Nicholas
could ever have Judgment thereof in the Chancery, by the labor of Sir John
Turbervile and the great favor that my Lord Chancellor bare to Turbervile;
which favor appears in as much as before the Recovery, and after the
Recovery, all the time of that Suit hanging, during the Life of the said Lord
Chancellor it appeared of Record in the Chancery, and was confessed by all
Parties, That that Estate should have been made to Sir Nicholas by express
words in the Indenture.

When Sir John Mordaunt perceived that Sir Nicholas could not obtain his Estate
then in the fifteenth year of Henry the Seventh, he bought Hardyngs whole Title
to Devilish of Nicholas Hardyng Heir to William Hardyng. Then died my Lord
Chancellor after that Bargain, and then died the Wife of Sir Nicholas Latimer
that was old and past Childbearing; but she was like to have over-liv'd Sir
Nicholas. And then in the end of Anno xvo Sir John Mordaunt was called into the
Kings House, and went thither wholly at Michaelmas, Anno xvio.

Then Married Sir Nicholas a young Gentlewoman of twenty years of Age; by the
which it was doubted as well by Sir John Turbervile, as by Sir John Mordaunt,
That Sir Nicholas's Wife might have Issue Male, and for that neither of them
trusted so surely to come to the Inheritance according to the Title that either
of them had as they did in the Life of the old Wife of Sir Nicholas.

And from the Death of the Lord Morton, and of Sir Nicholas's Wife, Sir John
Turbervile feared that Sir Nicholas, by help of Sir John Mordaunt, should cause
the State Tail to be Executed to Sir Nicholas: and that was one cause that he
was glad to Bargain with John Smith, that though such Judgment had been given,
John Smith should not Execute it, but stand still seized to the use that he
recovered it for. And that for his so doing, if Sir John Turbervile died
without Issue of his Body begotten, John Smith should have the Fee-Simple of
all the same Manors to the use of the same John Smith, and his Heirs for ever.

Another Consideration why Sir John Turbervile should depart with the
Fee-Simple to John Smith, was, for that John Smith should labor Sir Nicholas
with more diligence, for his own Interest in the Fee-Simple, to have changed
his Estate in Tail to a State for Term of Life, and for that he should have the
Fee-Simple for lack of Issue of Sir John Turbervile.

At this time was not the Fee-Simple so greatly to be regarded, for that it was
openly known, that Mr. Turbervile intended to Marry where he might have Issue.
And also Sir John Turbervile feared that my Lady Latimer should have had Issue
Male, and for that should John Smith labor to have the Estate of Sir Nicholas
changed to a State for Term of Life.

Upon these Considerations and others, and for other things here underwritten,
It was Covenanted and Bargained between Sir John Turbervile and John Smith in
Winter, Anno xviio of Henry the Seventh, That for the Reversion of the Manor
of Snodland in Kent of the yearly value of twenty Marks (as it is said) which
Sir John Turbervile had to him and to the Heirs of his Body, and for lack of
such Issue it should remain to John Smith in Fee; which Reversion John Smith
should Surrender, and Release all his Right therein to such use as Sir John
Turbervile would Assign: And for that also that John Smith should Release an
Annuity of ten Marks which he had for Term of Life out of the same Manor, It
was Covenanted, That John Smith should stand still seized of all the said
Latimers Lands to the use of Sir John Turbervile, and of the Heirs of his Body
begotten, and for lack of such Issue, to the use of John Smith, and his Heirs
in Fee, of which Bargain Sir John Mordaunt knew not till September Anno xviijo
of Henry the Seventh.

But William Mordaunt Brother to Sir John Mordaunt, which at the Commandment of
the said Sir John had many times broken with John Smith, that Sir John Mordaunt
his Brother might redeem the Title of Sir John Turbervile in the Premises, by
the means of the said John Smith (without whom Sir John Turbervile would make
no Bargain) Agreed and Bargained with John Smith in Trinity Term, or else
Easter Term, Anno xviio Henrici viimi, That for the Manor of Estpulham to be
made sure to John Smith, and his Heirs, from Sir John Mordaunt and his Heirs,
discharged of the Title of one John Crokerne, which Crokerne pretended Title to
the Moity thereof, whether Sir John Turbervile lived or died: If Sir Nicholas
died without Issue Male, That (for lack of Issue of Sir John Turbervile
lawfully begotten) John Mordaunt should have all the Residue of Latimers Lands
to him and to his Heirs for ever.

This Bargain and Agreement John Smith rehearsed and agreed to at the Duchy
Chamber Door, in the Life of Sir John Turbervile, to Sir John Mordaunt, in the
presence of William Mordaunt, on the Morrow after the Agreement between William
and John Smith had. And the said William at the first Agreement, and on the
Morrow the said John Mordaunt also desired to know of John Smith how he could
make that sure, if Sir John Turbervile died. And thereto John Smith Answered,
That they should know that another time, but not then, and said, Doubt ye not,
but (live he, or die he) ye shall be sure of that I have said; and thus they
departed. And before the next Term died Sir John Turbervile in the beginning of
Anno xviiio of Henry the Seventh.

After the said Bargain Agreed between John Mordaunt and John Smith, by the
means of William Mordaunt, the sixth day of September after Turberviles Death,
John Mordaunt sent word to Smith into the West Country of Turberviles death,
willed him to come to London as soon as he might, and to finish in Writing the
said Bargain. And Smith by his Letter dated the fourteenth day of September
sent Answer to John Mordaunt, and disclosed upon what ground he had made such
Agreement and Bargain to John Mordaunt, and William, and then disclosed his
Bargain made to him by Sir John Turbervile, which he had under his Sign Manual
and his Seal; and upon that in Michaelmas Term following, Anno xviijo John
Mordaunt and Smith engrossed their Indenture, and accomplished their Bargain,
and their Bargain was known and spoken of both in Court and other places also.
And the Kings Grace nothing said nor did, nor showed any thing to John Mordaunt
till Hilary Term then next.

In Hilary Term Anno xviijo the King took displeasure with Mordaunt, that he
would intermeddle with the Lands, and make not him privy, thinking, that John
Smith at the Death of Turbervile had stood seized of the Lands to the use of
Turbervile in Fee, for lack of Issue Male of Latimer then living, and said,
That Turbervile ought him great Money, and that he would have the Reversion in
recompense of his Money; and willed John Mordaunt to forsake his Bargain; which
he would not do. Wherefore the King was sore displeased with him, and caused
Smith to come by Privy Seal to make a Feoffment to the Kings use of the Lands,
which he would not, but disclosed to the King all the Premises that be here in
Writing (as he has said and reported;) And the same Smith sometime threatened,
and sometime entreated, gave Attendance upon the King till he agreed to make a
Feoffment as the King would desire.

Whereupon a Deed was devised in Paper, by which John Smith should Enfeoffe
Lord Daubeny, Master Lovell, Master Bray, and Master Seymore in Fee, and Sir
William Seymore would have had it to the Kings use, whereto John Smith would
not agree; then it was drawn, and no use expressed; and at the desire of John
Mordaunt the Copy was sent to William Mordaunt to see, and he entertained. [To
the same use that John Smith then was seized.] And with great difficulty the
Deed was so made by Smith and sealed in Trinity Term Anno decimo octavo. About
Michaelmas Anno decimo nono, Lord Aubeny, and Master Lovell took a State by
that Deed, at that time Master Bray and Master Seymore being dead. And thus it
continued all the Life of John Mordaunt, who died in September Anno vicesimo,
and all the Life of Sir Nicholas Latimer, who died without Issue Male at Lent,
Anno vicesimo.

From the Death of Sir Nicholas, by Color of the said Feoffment, and by Color
that the Kings Grace said Sir John Turbervile should owe him much Money at his
Decease, without any Title, and against Law and Conscience, of his Royal Power,
the Kings Grace took the Profits of these Lands till Summer Anno vicesimo primo
in Trinity Term. And because the Heir, and William Mordaunt, and William
Gascoigne, Executors to John Mordaunt, were so far in Debt to the King, and
sued, and on Exigent for the same, were so troubled with the King, and about
the Testament of John Mordaunt, that they minded not Latimers Lands to trouble
the King nor them by Suit, till they had somewhat pacified their other
troubles: And in Trinity Term Anno vicesimo primo, the Lord Aubeny and others
sued several Writs of Subpoena against the said Executors, and Heir, and
against John Smith, to have compelled them to deliver the Evidences; upon
Livery of which Writs upon Suit made to the King by the Executors, the King
Commanded them to sue to Dudley; and though the Executors showed the King, that
they had as good leave the Land for the hard dealing they knew of Dudley, the
King compelled them to sue to Dudley, who Ordered them to pay the Kings
Majesty, and to pay two hundred pounds yearly, or else they must have delivered
the Evidences, and abidden the Kings Displeasure (as Dudley said) and also must
have Released: and for Surety of Payment thereof there was Land recovered by my
Lord of Winchester, and Sir Robert Throgmorton and others named for the Heir of
Mordaunt. Of which Money the Executors paid to the King four hundred pounds,
whereby the Will of John Mordaunt is yet not performed, whereof they are now to
have Restitution, and to be discharged of two hundred pounds more residue. And
that my Lord of Winchester and others may Release to the persons named in the
Recoveries to the use of the Heir of Mordaunt, according to Right, and good
Conscience.

And Dudley said expressly, the Deed was to the Kings Use, and the Executors
fearing whether Smith had made any new Deed or not, and also not knowing
whether the Estate had been delivered by the Deed, in which the use was
expressed or not, desired to see the Deed, and he showed it; and thereby it
appeared the use was to the same use as Smith was Enfeoffed, and that
notwithstanding by the Menaces and Craft of Dudley, they were compelled to
agree and indent to give the King, etc.

The Report of Richard Eliott the Kings Sergeant at Law, John Erneley the Kings
Attorney, and of John Port the Kings Solicitor, upon the sight of the
Evidence of Sir John Mordaunt, for all such Manors, Lands and Tenements as
were late Sir Nicholas Latimer's Knight.
FIrst, It appears that Sir Nicholas Latimer Knight by his Deed Enfeoffed
William Hardyng of the same Manor above-written in Fee, Dated decimo sexto die
Januarii Anno Edwardi quarti decimo quarto.

Item, After that by his Indenture bearing date the same Year and the
seventeenth day of January, rehearsing the said Feoffment, The said William
Harding granted, that if the said Sir Nicholas within twelve Years then next
following paid to the said William Hardyng one hundred and twenty pounds, that
then the said Sir Nicholas should have again the said Manor to him and to his
Heirs.

Item, (the Premises notwithstanding) The said Sir Nicholas by Indenture
bargained and sold the said Manor to Sir John Mordaunt Knight, and Edith his
Wife, Daughter of the said Sir Nicholas and to the Heirs of their Body begotten
for lack of Issue Male of the Body of the said Sir Nicholas lawfully begotten,
etc. Dated the second of Richard the Third.

Memorandum, That Sir John Mordaunt after bargained with the same William
Hardyng and Nicholas his Son, for their Interest and Title that they had in the
said Manor of Devilish, as by Indenture thereof made, plainly may appear. For
the Manors of Devilish. For the Manors of Duntish. For the Manors of
Estpullham. For the Manors of Estoket.



First, It appears that the said Sir Nicholas Latimer bargained and sold all
these said Manors above-written to Sir John Turbervile and his Heirs, for the
sum of a thousand Marks, upon Condition, That if the said Sir Nicholas died
without Heir Male of his Body lawfully begotten.

And upon the same Bargain it was Covenanted, That John Smith should recover
the said Manors, and Execute the Estates according to the same Covenants to
Sir Nicholas Latimer and to the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten with
the remainder (as is abovesaid.) Data Indentura Anno septimo Henrici Septimi.

Item, It appears by Writing in Paper Sealed and Subscribed with the hand of
Sir John Turbervile, That he granted a Bargain with John Smith for certain
Lands in the County of Kent, That if the said Sir John Turbervile died without
Issue of his Body lawfully begotten, That then the said John Smith should have
all the said Manors to him and to his Heirs. Dated decimo quarto die Octobris,
Anno decimo septimo Henrici Septimi.

Item, After the said Bargain so made between John Turbervile and John Smith,
the said John Smith bargained and sold all the said Manors to Sir John
Mordaunt Knight, and his Heirs, except the Manor of Estpullham, with diverse
Covenants, as it appears by the said Indenture, Data Anno decimo octavo
Henrici Septimi.

Item, After the said Bargain, the Kings Grace that dead is, without Cause or
Color, would have caused John Smith to have Enfeoffed the Lord Daubeny, and
other of the said Manors to the use of the Kings Grace and his Heirs; which he
refused so to do, because he had made the former Bargain, and by Advice of the
Council of the said King. And to satisfy the same Kings Appetite for the time,
the said John Smith Enfeoffed Giles Lord Daubeny and others, to them, and their
Heirs and Assigns, to the use following, That was, Ad eosdem and hujusmodi usus
and intentiones, prout ego praefatus Johannes Smith die Confectionis
praesentium in eisdem seisitus existo, and in praesens habeo, in praemissis,
vel in aliquo praemissorum: Which uses and intents upon the true Examination of
the Premises, appear plainly to be to the use of Sir John Mordaunt Knight, and
of his Heirs for ever.

Memorandum, That we the said Richard Eliott, John Ernley, and John Port,
having seen and examined all and every of the Premises, and by the tenor and
sight of all the Premises, it appears evidently, That the King had no Title,
nor at any time had, to any of the said Manors, nor to any part of them.

And all that is here underwritten is to show the truth, as appears after by
the showing of John Mordaunt, Son and Heir of the said Sir John Mordaunt Knight.
ITem, (All the Premises notwithstanding) the Kings Grace (after the Decease
of the said Sir John Mordaunt, and of Sir Nicholas Latimer) caused the said
Lord Daubeny and others, to sue several Writs of Subpoena, as well against John
Mordaunt Son and Heir of the said Sir John and William Mordaunt, one of the
Executors of the said Sir John, as against the said John Smith. The said Lord
Daubeny and other, surmizing by their Bill in the Chancery, That they had
bought all such Right, as one Walter Turbervile should have, to the said
Manors, as Cozen and next Heir to the said Sir John Turbervile; Whereas the
said Lord Daubeny and others had never any such Bargain of the said Walter. And
though he had made such Bargain with the said Lord, it had been clearly void;
because the said Sir John Turbervile (before his death) sold all the said
Manors, as above is expressed.

Item, The Subpoena was sued to the intent, That the said John Mordaunt the
Son, William Mordaunt, and John Smith, should have been compelled to deliver
all such Evidences, as they or any of them had concerning the same Manors, to
the Use of the King, and of his Heirs. And also, that the said John Mordaunt
the Son, and John Smith, should release to the said Lord Daubeny and others,
all such Right as they or any of them had in the said Manors, to the Use of
the King, and of his Heirs; except that they would compound with the King to
give him such Moneys as he would desire.

Item, The said William perceiving the Premises, and that the Kings Grace
against all good Right and Conscience desired, and would have the Premises
performed, sued to the Kings Grace to have him good Lord to the said John
Mordaunt the Son, and that he should not be compelled against all Right and
good Conscience to release his said Right, nor to deliver any such Evidences.
And by that Suit he was commanded to sue to Edward Dudley to know farther the
Kings Pleasure: by the which Edward, it was showed to the said John Mordaunt
and William, That the Kings Grace would have Twelve Hundred Pounds, or else the
Lands and the Evidences. And for fear of the loss of the Lands, and that they
should have been compelled to deliver the Evidences, the said John Mordaunt the
Son was agreeable to indent with the Kings Grace to give him a Thousand Pounds;
and Master Dudley said, that he would pay the Two Hundred Pounds residue in
hand; And to have therefore the said John Mordaunt the Sons Interest in
Estpullham, whereto the said John Mordaunt had no Title.

Item, Upon this Master Dudley caused the Indenture to be made up; by the which
Indenture John Mordaunt should have had a years Rent and a half then remaining
in the Kings hands, which he never had.

And also the Thousand Pounds should not have been paid till certain Covenants,
contained in the same Indenture, had been performed on the Kings part, which to
this day was never performed, and no penny ought to have been paid by the
Indenture.

And yet (that notwithstanding) they were called upon, and were compelled to
pay Four Hundred Pounds thereof at several times, for the which Money they have
sued to have restitution, and to be discharged of the residue, and to have the
Indenture delivered, because it appears, That there is no cause that the
Kings Grace should have had any penny; which Restitution and Indenture with a
Release of the Right of the Persons named for the King in the same Indenture,
she said John Mordaunt yet desires, for Charity, and in discharging of the
Kings Soul that dead is.

A Letter from Sir Giles Strangewayes.
To my Right Worshipful Brother Mordaunt.
RIght Worshipful Brother, I heartily recommend me unto you. Sir, As touching
the Releases of John Latimer, I have them ready Sealed by him, and all the
names of them that were present at his release and delivery of the same. Sir, I
would ere this time have sent it you, but I durst trust no Messenger but my
self. For with Gods good Grace I trust this Term to be at London, and then to
bring it to you my self. Also as touching the Land that ye have lately bought
of one Narborow within Devilish; according to your desire and writing I my self
have taken possession thereof for your behoof, and also retained the Tenants to
you by a penny, in the presence of Sir Thomas Trenchard Knight, Robert Sturges
Esquire, and others. Also as for the Pedigree of William Juell and Thomas Land,
I have done the best that in me lies to have known it, howbeit I can find no
man who can speak in it to your profit. But as touching the Pedigree of John
Camel and Richard Garnsay, I have Examined as follows; that is to say,
Richard Garnsay Son and Heir of the aforesaid Richard says, that he once had
certain Evidence concerning the Land that Moleyns laid claim unto, which
Evidence with a Release made by him, he delivered to Sir Nicholas Latimer,
promising him thirty three shillings four pence, which money he never had;
notwithstanding at my desire, if you think his Title may do you good, or
profit, he is contented to do for you as much as in him lies, and farther I
cannot know of either of your Pedigrees, but as I have before written to you.
Also as touching John Read that you writ to me, which gave Moleyns the Land in
Fee Tail, I can in no wise hear of the same Read; but the Country says, that
one Moleyns was in possession a while there, but he was Disseised by Sir
Nicholas Latimer, again, but farther I cannot know. Also my Lady your Mother
has given Giles Penny the Buck that you wrote to her for. Sir, Also I have
moved my Lady many times that you might have Latimers Lands to Farm, which in
no wise she will agree unto yet. I have done therein as much as I can, for she
says that she will be Mistress of her own Lands during her Life. Farther, I
pray you to have me recommended to my Sister your Wife, and to my Uncle William
Mordaunt. And I yours to my little power, as knows Jesus, who always preserve
you.

From Dorchester the third day of October Anno Regni Regis Henrici Octavi
quinto. By me Yours, Giles Strangeways.

The Petition of the Lady Edith Carewe.
To the King our Sovereign Lord.
IN most humble wise beseeches Your Highness, and most Noble Grace your poor
Oratrice Dame Edith Carewe Widow, sometime the wife of Sir John Mordaunt
Knight, That whereas the same Sir John Mordaunt at the time of his Death, left
and gave to your said Oratrice, then his Wife, in Plate, Jewels, ready Money,
and Stuff, to the value of a Thousand Marks and above, to have to her own
proper Use and Behove; By force whereof she was thereof possessed accordingly,
and afterward she being possessed thereof, took to Husband your late Servant
Sir John Carewe Knight; which Sir John Carewe afterward (by Chance of War) was
perished and lost on the Sea, in the Service of Your Grace. At which time he
lost not only his Personage on the Sea, but also lost his substance of such
Goods, as to your said Oratrice was left by her former Husband, which the said
Sir John Carewe then had with him to Sea, both Plate, Money, and also his
Apparel, as well necessary Apparel to his Body, as other Apparel that he had
bought with the said Goods, for the defense of his Body in your said Wars. By
means whereof your said Oratrice is left little or nothing worth in substance
of Goods. And the aforesaid Sir John Carewe in his life borrowed and had of
your Grace by way of Pressed, Two Hundred Pounds: for the repayment whereof, he
was and stood bound by his Writing Obligatory to the Use of your Grace. And so
it is, Gracious Sovereign Lord, that the most Reverend Father in God, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, as Ordinary, has sequestered and made Seizure of all
the Goods that belonged to the said Sir John Carewe within this your Realm, at
the time of his death; which Goods by a true Inventory taken, have been
extended and valued to the Sum of one Hundred and Fourscore Pounds. And
forasmuch as your said Oratrice is now left a poor Widow, by reason of the
Premises, and never had nor has any Preferment, nor other Benefit by the said
Sir John Carewe, neither in Possessions, nor in Goods; in consideration
whereof, That it would please your Highness, of your abundant grace and benign
pity, to direct your gracious Letters missive to the said Archbishop of
Canterbury, reciting by the same Letters, That the mind and pleasure of your
Grace is, to accept and take the aforesaid Hundred and Fourscore Pounds, in
full recompense and satisfaction as well of the said Two Hundred Pounds, as of
all other Debts which the said Sir John Carewe ought unto your Grace at the
time of his Death; which Debts ought to have first preferment in payment by the
Order of your Laws before any payment of any Debts that the said Sir John
Carewe ought at the time of his death to any persons. And further by the same
your Gracious Letters to command the aforesaid Archbishop of Canterbury, to
deliver, or cause to be delivered the aforesaid Goods, attaining the Sum of
one Hundred and Fourscore Pounds, to your said Oratrix, to have to her own
proper use of the gift of you. And farther, that it may please your Gracious
Highness to direct your Warrant to be signed with your most victorious hand
unto your Servant John Heyron, commanding him by the same to deliver or cause
to be delivered the foresaid Writings Obligatory of Two Hundred Pounds to your
said Oratrix, to the intent that she may deliver them to the said Archbishop of
Canterbury for his discharge as Ordinary, of and for the payment and delivery
of the said Hundred and Fourscore Pounds. And this at the Reverence of God, and
in the way of Charity. And your said Oratrix shall pray to God for the
prosperous continuance of your Royal Estate, and for the preservation of the
same.

The Kings Warrant signed with his hand to Thomas Lucas, to release unto Sir
John Mordaunt the Latimers Lands that had stood engaged to King Henry the
Seventh for a thousand pounds.
HENRY the Eighth, by the Grace of God of England and France King, Defender of
the Faith, and Lord of Ireland, To Thomas Lucas Esquire, Greeting. Where ye and
the Right Reverend Father in God our Right Trusty and Well-beloved Councellor
Richard Bishop of Winchester, with Sir William Gascoigne Knight and others now
Deceased, by diverse Writs of Entry in the post recovered the Manors of
Devilish, Estpullham and Duntish, with the Appurtenances in the County of
Dorset, and certain other Lands and Tenements in Devilish, Estpullham and
Duntish aforesaid, Bokeland, Helton and Milborn Saint Andrew in the said County
of Dorset; And also the Manor of Estoket with the Appurtenances in the County
of Somerset, the Manor of Turvey with the Appurtenances in the County of
Bedford, and also certain other Lands and Tenements in Turvey aforesaid; And
also the Manor of Burnton and Newton per mare, with the Appurtenances in the
County of Northumberland, and certain other Lands and Tenements with the
Appurtenances in the said County of Northumberland, against Sir John Mordaunt
by the name of John Mordaunt Esquire, John Jenor and others, as by the Records
thereof exemplified under the Seal of our Common-Bench, and also by two
Releases, (which Releases the said John Mordaunt shall show unto you signed
with our hand) more plainly shall appear. Which recoveries of the said Manors
and other the premises were had for the only surety of payment of one thousand
pounds to the use of the late noble King of Memory Henry the Seventh our most
dear Father, by the said John Mordaunt Son and Heir of John Mordaunt Knight
Deceased, to be paid. And after the said thousand pounds were fully content and
paid, then ye and your joint Recoverers should be Recoverers or Feoffees to the
use of the said Sir John Mordaunt the Son and his Heirs for ever, as by certain
and diverse Covenants in certain Indentures specified between Giles Dawbeny late
Lord Dawbeny for the part of our said dearest Father of the one party, and the
said Sir John Mordaunt the Son of the other party, made the xxth day of January
the year of the Reign of our said Father the twenty second, more plainly may
appear. Of the which sum of a thousand pounds, four hundred pounds were paid to
the use of our said Father to John Heyron Knight, late Treasurer of the Chamber
of our said Father, by the said John Mordaunt the Son. And we for certain
Causes and Considerations us moving, have remised and pardoned two hundred
pounds parcel of the said thousand pounds to the same Sir John Mordaunt the
Son. And one hundred pounds parcel of the said thousand pounds the said Sir
John Mordaunt the Son has paid to Sir Harry Wyat Knight Treasurer of our
Chamber to our use. And for three hundred pounds residue of the said thousand
pounds, the same John Mordaunt the Son, by the name of John Mordaunt Knight, is
bounden by several Obligations to certain persons to our use for the sure
payment of the same three hundred pounds to be paid to our use, as by the same
several Obligations thereof made and remaining with the same Sir Harry Wyat to
our use it may appear. Wherefore we signify unto you that our Pleasure is, and
we will and Command you, that ye without any delay do seal the said two
Releases, and deliver them as your Deeds to the bringer of them, to the use of
the said Sir John the Son. And these our Letters Signed with our Hand and
Sealed with our Seal shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in that
behalf. Yeven under our Signet at our Manor of Greenwich the (...)

A SUCCINCT GENEALOGY Of the HOUSE of DRAYTON, Justified by Ancient and Extant
Charters, Public Records, Histories, and other Authentic Proofs.
By ROBERT HALSTEAD.
blazon or coat of arms of the house of Drayton The Arms of the House of
Drayton, were Argent a Cross Engrailed Gules.



Of the Name, Original, Descent, Possessions, Alliances, and Arms of the House
of Drayton.
THE Manor of Drayton being one of the fairest and most Noble of the Country
wherein it lies, both for its Commodities, Situation, and the Royalties
belonging thereunto, was in the days of those Kings that did precede the
Conquest, among the Possessions of one Oswinus a famous Saxon. But upon the
distribution of the Lands acquired by King William, it became part of the
Estate of Aubrey de Vere, who first Entered England with that Prince. From this
Earl Aubrey the Elder (for so he was termed) the Lordship of Drayton did
descend to Earl Aubrey the Second, who was Father to the first Earl of Oxford,
Great Chamberlain to King Henry the First, and Lord Chief Justice of England,
and from him it was given in Partage (as a Foundation of his Fortune) to Robert
his second Son, with the Lordships of Adington the greater and the less, as
likewise the Lands he held in Twyvell of the Abbey of Thorney, and other fair
possessions. This Manor and Lordship consisted at that time of a fair ancient
Castle, encompassed with four large high Walls, Embattailed round with such
Fortifications as were necessary, both for resistance and offense. It had (as
parcels thereof) very useful Demesnes, a Park, a Warren, and flourishing Woods,
besides the Villages of Luffwick, Islip, Slipton, and certain Lands in the
Parishes of Aldwinkle and Tichmarsh, in each of which the Lords had Courts of
their own, the Advowsons of the three Churches belonging thereunto, with free
Warren upon all those Lands, and free Fishing for a long Tract upon the River
of Avon.

To this Robert de Vere Lord of Drayton did succeed Sir Henry de Vere, who left
his Inheritance to Sir Walter de Vere his Son; who from the Excellency of the
place, and his great love thereunto, did assume the Name thereof, to remain to
him and his Posterity ever after. A thing in those days very usual, as may be
instanced in several Examples too long for this Occasion.

This Sir Walter de Vere having among other Heroes of that time designed his
Application to the Holy War, took for his Arms (as a mark of his Intention)
Argent a Cross Engrailed Gules, which was afterward constantly born by the
Successors of this Family; and under that same Name and Ensign did flourish a
fair Posterity of several Noble Knights, which upon this Lordship of Drayton
did long live, in much honor and opulency, in possession of that Noble Manor,
with other Lands in Sudborow, in Brigstock, and in Irtlingborow, in the County
of Northampton, of fair possessions in Luton, and Flamstead in Bedfordshire, of
the Manors of Bottlebrigg, and Stoke-Goldington in the County of Huntingdon,
and of the Lordship of Southnewenton in Oxfordshire.

Their Alliances were not less Illustrious than their Original; they having
been contracted with the Houses of Bassett, and de la Zouch of the great and
ancient Baronage, and other Families, famous for high Actions, and the faithful
Service of their Princes. This Lordship notwithstanding, with its Name and
Arms, came afterward to be incorporate into the House of Green, and by them
(as to what is most remarkable,) through a fatal revolution of humane things,
after near four hundred years unto the Original Veres again, by Isabella
Green; who being Married to Sir Richard Vere, (that was Lord of Thrapston and
Adington) and descended from Robert Brother of that Walter we first mentioned,
by the Issue which she brought, Created such a Title, as for default of
Posterity from Constance Countess of Wiltshire, the Daughter of the last Sir
Henry Green, the Lordship of Drayton came to Elizabeth, Grandchild of this
Richard Vere, and by her to the Mordaunts, that were descended from her.

Sir WALTER of DRAYTON, Lord of Drayton, Luffwick, Islip, Addington, Twyvell,
and other Lands and Lordships.
WAlter de Vere, the eldest Son of Henry, the Son of Robert, that was second
Son of Aubrey Great Chamberlain to King Henry the First, and Chief Justice of
England, being then very young, and in the Lifetime of Sir Henry his Father,
did attend King Richard the First into the Holy Land, and on that Occasion
assumed for his Arms Argent a Cross Engrail'd Gules. After he had there won his
Spurs by diverse generous Actions, and received the Honor of Knighthood at the
hand of that victorious King, he returned home with several Companions of that
Illustrious Enterprise, and soon after his Arrival was married to Lucy, one of
the Daughters of the Lord Gilbert Basset of Welden, a Neighbor to his Fathers
Lordship of Drayton, and who was at that time a great Baron in England. After
the Death of Sir Henry his Father (which happened about the fifth year of this
Reign) he became possessed of the Lordship of Drayton, and the rest of his
Inheritance; and from that his chief Seat (as was in those days very usual) did
assume the name of Drayton, to remain to him and his Descendants ever after. It
appears by a Charter of his which is extant, that under the name of Walter the
Son of Henry the Son of Robert, he did give and grant to his Uncle William de
Vere all the Lands of Twyvel which his Grandfather Robert held the day he dyed,
for half a Knights Fee, and all the Land of Addington, which was likewise held
by his said Grandfather, for a quarter of a Knights Fee, to him and the Heirs
of his Body lawfully begotten; on condition, That for default of such Heirs,
they should return to him and his Successors. For the Entrance, Gift, and
Recognition whereof, the Charter expresses the foresaid William to have given
one Ring of Gold. In the sixth year of King Richard the First he paid his
Suitage toward Redemption of the King, so he did toward the War of Normandy
for the Fee of Robert the Son of Aubrey the Chamberlain. And in the first of
King John he paid Suitage for half a Knights Fee to another Norman Expedition.
He either built or restored the fair Church of Saint Peter's in Luffwick; and we
find an Ancient Monument yet remaining in a Glass-window of the North-side of
that Church, representing the Image of a Knight kneeling before the Altar, all
Armed after the manner of that Age, bearing the Arms he had assumed, and
presenting thereunto, the exact Model of that Church; under which is written
(as will appear in the Proofs) Walterus de Draytona. He died in the Twelfth
Year of that King, leaving Issue by the forementioned Lucy his Wife, Sir Henry
of Drayton.


Sir Henry of Drayton, Lord of Drayton and other Lands and Lordships.
SIR Henry of Drayton was under Age at the Death of his Father; but succeeded
afterward to all his Lands and Lordships. He became a Knight of much esteem in
his time, and was in all transactions treated with the style of Dominus
Henricus de Draytona. Several of which are extant, as a Quit-claim of certain
Lands from Ismena the Daughter of Gervise of Luffwick. A Deed of Exchange of
Lands in Luffwick, with William the Son of Robert of Drayton, for others in the
Lordship of Woodford. Another Relaxation from one Henry the Son of Thomas of
Drayton, and a Demise of certain Lands from William de Musta. His Wife Ivetta
was the Daughter of Sir William de Bourdon; and in the Twelfth of Henry the
Third, the King received his Homage for half a Knights Fee that accru'd to him
in her right: which Lands her Father had held in Capite. We find that he
Deceased in the Thirty fourth Year of that King.

His Issue
Sir Baldwin of Drayton.


Sir Baldwin of Drayton, Lord of Drayton and other Lands and Lordships.
AFter the decease of Sir Henry of Drayton, his Son Baldwin became possessed of
all his Lands by Right of Inheritance, and he did Homage to the King for those
Lordships that he held of him in Capite. Whereupon was issued out a Mandate to
that Abbot of Persore, and to James Frizill the Kings Escheator, that he should
receive Security of the foresaid Baldwin for a hundred Shillings for his
relief; unto which was Witness Eleanor the Queen. In the same year, which was
that of One thousand two hundred fifty two, he purchased of Clement de Leighton
the Wardship of William the Son of Peter the Son of Joselin, and of all the
Heirs of the said William in Succession. And in the first year of the Reign of
King Edward the First he made over to one Roger of Stow-Merchant the profits of
the Lands and Lordships which appertained to Robert the Son of Baldwin de Vere,
whose Custody by reason of the Minority of the said Robert did belong to him.
There flourished in his time in the Counties of Huntingdon and Cambridge a
Noble Knight called Robert of Gimeges in possession of a fair Inheritance; who
dying without Issue-Male, his Lands came to be divided between his two
Daughters, of which Idonea was married to Sir Baldwin of Drayton, and Emma to
Sir Hugh de Bovi: which Baldwin and Idonea had Issue Sir John of Drayton.


Sir John of Drayton, Lord of Drayton, and other Lands and Lordships.
SIR John of Drayton was at the death of his Father twenty two years old, as by
his Office does appear. He lived unto the twentieth year of King Edward the I.
being the thirty eighth of his own Age, having allied himself to a Family at
that time very considerable for great interest and reputation, by taking to
Wife Philippe, the Daughter of Sir Ralph, and Sister to Sir Robert of Arderne;
than both of which there was not any among the Gentlemen of England that had
served the King or his Father more considerably in the Civil Wars of that time.
Their Issue Sir Simon of Drayton, Katharine of Drayton, married to Sir Henry
Green Chief Justice of England.


Sir Simon of Drayton, Lord of Drayton, and other Lands and Lordships.
AT the death of Sir John of Drayton, Simon his Son and Heir was nine years
old, King Edward the First then reigning in his twentieth Year, who sent
Precepts to the Sheriffs of those Countries wherein he had Lands, to seize them
into his hands till he should give other directions. We hear no more of this
Simon until the Fifteenth of King Edward the Second, at which time we find him
in possession of his Lordship of Drayton by a Fine he suffered in that year,
whereby he acknowledged the right thereof to be in one Robert le Penitour
Clerk; which Robert yielded the same Manor again to the said Simon and
Margaret his Wife, to hold of our Lord the King by the services due during
their times: and after their decease to remain to John, Son of the said Simon,
and the Heirs of his Body begotten; and for default of such Issue, to remain to
the Heirs of the Bodies of the said Simon and Margaret: and for default of such
Issue, then to the right Heirs of the said Simon.

We find him afterward possessed in the beginning of King Edward the Third, of
the Lordships of Luffwick, Islipp, and Slipton; that he had Lands in
Irtlingborow, in Sudborow, and in Brigstock, in the County of Northampton; how
he held the Lordships of Bottlebridge, Stoke-Goldington, Overton, Longville,
and Molesworth in Huntingdon-shire; and that he had also fair Possessions in
Luton, and Flamstead in the County of Bedford: In most of which that he might
have free Warren, and the privileges thereof, King Edward the Third granted
him a Patent to that effect in the first year of his Reign.

He had been Seneschal to Queen Isabel, the Kings Mother, in all her Forests
between Stamford and Oxford, as appears by a Brieve directed to him by the King
for the tenth of all the Venison that should be taken in the County of
Northampton, to be delivered to the Abbot of Peterborow, according as had been
granted by his Ancestors.

He was pardoned by that same King, with his Son John, William the Son of
Thomas Seymar, Richard Molesworth, Simon his Squire, and other of his friends,
for his breach of the Kings peace, and the death of John of Overton Longville,
whom he had slain in a Quarrel, with other circumstances that certify the
particular favor was born him by that Prince.

He was afterward with one Sr William Nocton, as being one of the most eminent
Knights in the Bishopric of Ely, joined with Sir William Shareshull, Sir Henry
Green, and Sir William Thorpe, in the Kings Commission, to hear and determine
of the felony and misdemeanour of Thomas Lild, Bishop of that Diocese, who was
not only esteemed accessory to the death of William Holmes, Servant to the Lady
Wake of Lydell, that was killed by his Officer Ralph Carcless, She being a
Princess of that time eminent for great birth as well as Beauty, and rare
Qualities, and the Daughter of Henry Plantagenet Earl of Lancaster; but that
moreover stood in great and exemplary Contempt against the King himself. For
the demeanor of Sir Simon in which matter in his duty and compliance to the
Kings Commands and Interest, he incurred with the rest of the Commissioners,
the several censures and indignation of the Pope, which proceeded even to
Excommunication, and other great Penalties, from which his merit toward the
King by his Conduct in that Affair, nor the Power of so great a Prince was able
to protect him.

He did finally give and grant, in the eighteenth year of King Edward the
Third, unto Robert, the Prior of the Church of Saint Mary's of Pavenston, and
to the Covent of that place, two parts of his Manor of Stoke-Goldington, with
the Advowson of the Church of that Town, out of Devotion to God and the Blessed
Virgin, and for the good of his Soul to be there prayed for, and for the Souls
of his Ancestors and Benefactors. His Wife was Margaret Daughter to Sir John
and Sister to Sir Gilbert of Lindsey. Their Issue, Sir John of Drayton.


Sir John of Drayton, Lord of Drayton, and other Lands and Lordships.
UNto Sir Simon of Drayton did succeed Sir John of Drayton his Son, in the sole
Lordship of that place, as also in his other Possessions in the Counties of
Northampton, Huntingdon, and Oxford. Moved by what inducement it does not
appear, but this Sir John of Drayton did in the eighth year of King Edward the
Third, purchase a License of Alienation, for enabling him to settle upon Sir
Henry Green, then Chief Justice of England, and that had Married his Fathers
Sister, his ancient Manor and Lordship of Drayton, with those Lands in the
Towns adjoining that did belong unto it. In consequence whereof it was conveyed
unto him, with the Reversion to Henry the second Son of the said Sir Henry
Green, whom he calls his Cousin: and for default of Issue in him, to the right
Heirs of Sir Henry the Father. But it is found notwithstanding by a Deed of
this Sir John, that in the Lifetime of Sir Henry Green, the Chief Justice, he
did render the Possession of the Chief Seat and the Manor of Drayton, with all
the Demesnes, the Lands, Meadows, Pastures, and the Park thereunto belonging,
unto Sir Henry Green his Cousin, the Son of the Chief Justice, on Condition,
that he should ever after bear his Name and his Arms, in performance of that
Agreement that had before been made between the Father of the said Sir Henry
and himself; which was the reason why the Greenes of Drayton instead of Azure
three Bucks Or, which was the Arms of their Family, and those born by the
Greenes of Norton, descended from Sir Thomas Green the Elder Brother, did bear
ever after for their Coat, Argent a Cross Engrailed Gules, being that of
Drayton, which by this Agreement they were obliged to assume. The Wife of Sir
John of Drayton was Christian, the Daughter of Sir Gilbert of Lindsey, his
Mothers Niece.

Their Issue,
Baldwin of Drayton, whose Posterity for diverse Ages did flourish afterward,
Possessors of the Lordships of Stoke-Goldington, Bottlebrigg, Molesworth, and
Overton Longville in the County of Huntingdon, and South-Newington in
Oxfordshire, where they had a fair Patrimony, and lived in great Estimation.


knight on horseback bearing the colors of the family, and a family tree
showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors WALTER de VERE The Eldest
son of Henry ye. son of Robert that was ye. second son of AUBERY de Vere
Great Chamberlain and Lord Chief Justice of England who from his Chief Seat
Assumed that Name to him and his decendants. Lucie Bassett. Sr. HENRY of
Drayton Iuetta de Bourdon Sr. Baldwin of Drayton Idonia de Gimeges Sr. John of
Drayton Philipa of Arderne Sr. Simon of Drayton Margaret of Lindsey. Catharine
of Drayton Sr. Henry Green. Sr John of Drayton Cristian of Lindsey Sr Henry
Green Matilda de Mandnir Sr Thomas Green Lord of Norton Marie Talbot Baldwin
of Drayton




GENEALOGICAL PROOFS OF THE DESCENT and SUCCESSION Of the HOUSE of DRAYTON,
Drawn out of Extant Charters, Records, Histories, and other Authentic
Testimonies.

GENEALOGICAL PROOFS OF THE DESCENT and SUCCESSION Of the HOUSE of DRAYTON.
Rerum Anglicarum Scriptores. Historia Ingulphi Abbatis Croilandiae, Page 488.
inter Confirmationes Regis Witlafii.
ITem Domum Oswini Militis in Draytona, videlicet, octo Hidas terrae, and
quatuor Virgatas, and Ecclesiam ejusdem Villae.

Quinque lineae infra.
ET Donum Wulnoti Dapiferi mei in Adingtona, videlicet, duas Hidas terrae, and
Piscariam, cum Advocatione Ecclesiae ejusdem Villae; and in alia Adingtona, ex
dono ejusdem, unam Virgatam terrae.

Rerum Anglicarum Scriptores. Historia Ingulphi Abbatis Croilandiae, Page 492.
inter Confirmationes Beoredi Regis.
SImiliter confirmo praedicto Monasterio de Croilandia, de dono Oswini Militis
in Draytona, octo Hidas terrae, and quatuor Virgatas, and Ecclesiam ejusdem
Villae.

Rerum Anglicarum Scriptores. Historia Ingulphi Abbatis Croilandiae, Page 498.
inter Confirmationes Abbatis Turketuli Abbatiae Croilandiae.
IN Draytona unam Carucatam terrae, sex Acras Prati, quatuor Salinas.

AUBREY de VERE, Great Chamberlain to King Henry the First, and Chief Justice
of ENGLAND.
The Baronage of England, Page 190.
THis last mentioned Albery, called Albericus Junior, confirmed all those
Grants made by his Fater to the Monks of Abington, and being in high Esteem
with King Henry the First, was by him made Lord great Chamberlain of all
England, to hold the same Office in Fee to himself and his Heirs, with all
Dignities and Liberties thereto belonging, as honorably as Robert Mallet Lord
of the Honor of Eye in Suffolk, or any other before or after him held the
same, and with such Liveries and Lodgings of his Court as belonged to that
Office. Being also one of the Kings Justices.

Monasticon Anglicanum, pars prima, Page 248.
Charta Alberici Regis Camerarii.
EGO Albericus, Regis Camerarius, Terram de Twivell quamdiu vixero de Domino
Abbate Guntero and Monachis de Thorneya per talem conventionem teneo ad firmam,
ut per unumquemque annum eis sex libras pro ea reddam, ante Nativitatem
quadraginta solidos, ante Pascham quadraginta solidos, and ad Vincula Sancti
Petri extremos quadraginta solidos. Insuper pro remissione peccatorum meorum,
illis de una mea Decima, scilicet de Islip, unoquoque anno ad Festivitatem
Sancti Michaelis december solidos reddam. Totum vero surplus quod miserim in eadem
Villa ultra quam recepi, in extremo die vitae meae, pro salvatione animae meae,
Sanctae Mariae Patribusque meis simul cum terra eorum concedo solidum and
quietum ab omni Calumnia. De alia Terra quam pro servitio dimidii Militis in
eadem Villa de Willielmo de Blosvilla teneo in feudo, and de dimidio unius
Hidae quam certe emi pretio, Sanctam Mariam, meosque Fratres post me concedo
esse Haeredes, in quantum id eis concedere possum.

Hujus Conventionis sunt Testes Hardewin de Escatere, Radulphus Dapifer,
Willielmus de Whitlesege, and Simo, imo omnes Fratres illius loci and alii
quamplures.

Ex antiquo Pergameni Rotulo penes Comitem de Peterborow.
ALbericus de Twivell Camerarius Regis dedit Ecclesiae de Thorney duas Garbas
Decimae trium Villarum, de Islip, Adington and Drayton, de Dominico suo.

The Baronage of England, Page 190.
HE in the Fifth of King Stephen with Richard Basset then Justice of England
executed the Sheriffs Office for the Counties of Surrey, Cambridge, Huntingdon,
Essex, Hartford, Northampton, Leicester, Norfolk, Suffolk, Buckingham, and
Beadford, and gave to the Monks of Thorney in Com. Canter. certain Lands in
Islip. But before the end of this year he was killed in London, His Wife was
Adeliza de Clare.
leaving Issue by Adeliza his Wife, Daughter of Gilbert of Clare, three Sons,
Alberic his Son and Heir........ a Cannon of Saint Osiths in Chieche, and
Robert; which Robert in the twelfth of Henry the Second, upon levying the aid
for marrying the Kings Daughter, certified, that he then held half a Knights
Fee. He also held the Lordship of Twivell in the County of Northampton of the
Monks of Thorney in Fee-Farm as his Father did.

ROBERT de VERE, Second Son of Alberic de Vere, Great Chamberlain and Chief
Justice of England.
Monasticon Anglicanum, pars prima, Page 417.
ANNO Millesimo Centesimo Tricesimo Quinto Rex Henricus primus obiit apud
Castrum Leonis, and sepultus fuit apud Radingas, ubi Coenobium Ducentorum
Monachorum condiderat in Honorem Sanctae and Individuae Trinitatis. Robertus de
Vere and alii Milites de Anglia and Satellites and Ministri Regis apud Pontem
Audomari atque bonam Villam Feretrum Regis apud Caddomum adduxerunt.

Baronage of England, page 190. Second Column.
Speaking of Maud the Empress.
SHE likewise gave to Robert de Vere, the other brother of this Earl Alberic, a
Barony, to the value of that so given to Jeffrey, and other Lands of equal
worth, to possess within a Year after she should enjoy the Realm of England.

Monasticon Anglicanum, pars prima, Page 248.
Charta Roberti Filii Alberici Camerarii Regis.
EGO Robertus filius Alberici (Camerarii Regis) Terram de Twivell, quamdiu
vixero, de Domino Abbate Roberto and Monachis de Thorneia per eandem
Conventionem in feodi firmam teneo, per quam conventionem pater meus ante me
tenuit; and Decimas de quinque Carucis, quas pater meus Deo and Sanctae Mariae
Thorneyae concessit, scilicet Drayton, and Islip, and Edington, Deo atque
Sanctae Mariae atque Monachis Thorneiae concedo.

Hujus conventionis sunt Testes Robertus de Jakesley, Ertnoldus, Willielmus de
Cesterton, Ogerus Terri de hominibus ipsius Roberti, Hugo Waze, Adam, imo omnes
fratres ipsius loci.

Ex antiquo Pergameno, penes Comitem de Peterborow.
RObertus filius Alberici Anno primo Imperii Henrici Regis Junioris feria
quinta, in Hebdomada Pentecostes, tempore Galterii Abbatis qui successit
Gilbertum Abbatem ejusdem loci, anno Domini Millesimo Centesimo Quinquagesimo
quarto, in praesentia Henrici filii sui quietum clamavit Manerium de Twivel
Monasterio de Thorney. Alexander tertius Papa Donationem confirmavit Abbati de
Twivel, videlicet, de duabus garbis Decimarum trium villarum Islip, Drayton,
and Edington.

In libro rubro Feodorum de Scaccario, inter Chartas Dominorum irrotulatas, de
annis septimo, octavo, decimo quarto, decimo octavo Henrici Secundi, a secundo
and octavo Richardi Primi.
DOmino suo Charissimo Henrico Regi Angliae, Robertus filius Alberici Camerarii
Salutem. Sciatis Domine, quod Ego teneo de vobis feodum dimidium Militis.
Valeat.

In Anno octavo, in Northamptonshire, Robertus filius Alberici dimidium Militis.

In Anno decimo quarto, in Northamptonshire, Robertus filius Alberici Camerarii
dimidium Militis.

In Anno decimo octavo, in Northamptonshire, Robertus filius Alberici december
solidos.

In Anno secundo Regis Richardi, fecit Scutagium Walliae, assessum ad december
solidos.

In Northamptonshire Robertus filius Alberici quinque solidos dimidii Militis.

In Anno octavo Regis Richardi, Scutagium Normanniae ad viginti solidos.

Rotulo duodecimo adhuc communi de Termino Pasch. (de Anno tricesimo octavo
Henrici Tertii) Consideratio contra Monachos de Hortune.
HEnricus Avus Domini Regis concessit, and Charta sua confirmavit Deo and
Ecclesiae Sancti Johannis Apostoli and Evangelistae de Hortune, and Monachis
ibidem Deo servientibus, Tintonam and Hortunam cum pertinentiis, habendum and
tenendum cum omnibus Libertatibus and liberis Consuetudinibus, in quibus
Robertus de Vere, and Adelina uxor ejus melius and liberius tenuerunt, and
iisdem Monachis (per Chartam suam) confirmaverunt. Et ideo consideratum est,
quod praedicti Monachi facient Domino Regi pro praedictis Maneriis illud idem
servitium, quod praedictus Robertus and Adelina facere consueverint.

Sir HENRY de VERE, the Son of Robert, the second Son of Alberic Great
Chamberlain of England.
Hollinsheads Chronicle, Page 110.
BUT in the mean time it chanced that Sir Richard de Walls, a Knight of the
Realm of France, went about to fortify a Castle in a Village that belonged to
him, called Walls, situate between Try and Gisors: whereupon Henry de Vere
Constable of Gisors under William Earl of Albemarle, was nothing content
therewith; and therefore got a Company together, and went forth to disturb the
work. Upon this occasion the Servants of the said Sir Richard Walls came forth
and encountered with him in the field, insomuch that Ralph the Son of Sir
Richard de Walls was slain, and the residue that were with him fled, many of
them being sore beaten and wounded.

Historiae Anglicanae Scriptores december ex Imaginibus Historiarum Radulphi de
Diceto, page 631.
RAdulphus filius Hugonis de Vallibus habitationem habens cum patre suo prope
Gisortium infra Limits Regis Francorum, Willielmum de magna villa Illustrem
Comitem de Albemarle verbis dehonestavit amaris. In ultionem Contuemliae
postmodum Henricus de Vere interfecit Radulphum in Kal. Decembris; quod
Injuriam Regis Francorum esse factum aliqui reputantes, Garnerium quendam
Anglorum Regi familiarissimum and intra muros Gisortii domicilium a diebus
multis habentem, paratis insidiis crudeliter trucidaverunt, ut sic paria
delicta compensatione mutua delerentur.

Monasticon Anglicanum, pars prima, fol. 52, 53.
In the declaration of the sickness and last intention of William Earl of Essex
and Albemarle.
ILLI vero obstupescentes, and sese mutuo silentio aliquamdiu adspicientes,
tandem unus pro omnibus, Henricus (scilicet) de Vere ejus consobrinus, in haec
verba prorupit.

Rotulo Secundo adhuc de Communi Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno vicesimo
septimo Henrici Tertii, Norfolk and Suffolk.
REX Vicecomiti. Constat vobis per Inquisitionem factam tempore Johannis Regis
Patris Nostri, quod Rex Henricus noster proavus dedit Balduco de Boxo manerium
de Mutford pro triginta libratis terrae in Amptone Baroniae suae de Bouden,
quod quidem Manerium tenuit postmodum Hildeburga Haeres praedicti Balduci, qui
terram illam dedit Henrico de Vere cum filia sua, and Stephano de Lulham cum
alia filia sua.

Sir WALTER de VERE who from his chief Seat took the Name of Drayton to remain
to him and his Descendants ever after.
Charta Walteri de Draytona.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Walterus filius Henrici filii Roberti,
dedi, concessi and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Willielmo Patrunculo meo
totam terram de Twivell, quam Robertus Avus meus tenuit die quo obiit per
servitium dimidii feodi Militis, and totam terram de Adington quam praedictus
Robertus tenuit die quo obiit per servitium quartae partis feodi unius Militis:
Tenendum sibi and Haeredibus suis legitime procreatis de me and Haeredibus meis
libere and quiet pro istis praenominatis servitiis. Et si forte praedictus
Willielmus sine Haerede quam habuerit de uxore desponsata obierit, praedictae
terrae ad me and Haeredes meos redibunt. Pro hac autem intratione, recognitione
and donatione praedictus Willielmus mihi homagium fecit, and unum anulum aureum
dedit.

Hiis Testibus, Richardo Basset, Radulpho Dandelin, Willielmo de Sidenham,
Osmondo de Charleton, Willielmo de Aiston, Gervasio de Southorne, Rogero
Monacho, Roberto de Sancto Marco, Rogero filio Paganii, Richardo de Aldwinckle,
Willielmo de Musta, Gilberto Flameus, Elia de Carletun, Alano de Hale, Gervasio
de Barnac, Roberto de Vere, Henrico de Tichmarsh and aliis.

Charta Willielmi filii Roberti filii Albricii.
SCiant omnes tam praesentes quam futuri, quod ego Willielmus filius Roberti
filii Aubri consensu and assensu Haeredum meorum concessi, and hac mea
praesenti Charta confirmavi Hospitali sancti Johannis de Northamtonia and
fratribus ibidem Deo servientibus in perpetuam eleemosynam, pro salute animae
meae and patris mei and matris meae and antecessorum meorum, donationem quam
Radulfus de Stanhern and Leza uxor ejus, quae fuit filia Wiberdi, fecerunt
praedicto Hospitali, scilicet tres virgatas terrae in Slipton, quas praedictus
Wiberdus pater praedictae Lezaetenuit, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, sine
aliquo retinamento, tenendas de me and haeredibus meis libere and quiet,
honorifice ab omni servitio praeter forinsecum servitium, scilicet quantum
pertinet ad servitium feodi tertiae partis dimidii Militis: hanc vero terram
praedictam ego and haeredes mei warrantizabimus praedicto Hospitali and
fratribus praedictis contra omnes homines. Praeterea si forte contigerit quod
ego vel haeredes mei warrantizare non poterimus praedictam terram Hospitali
praedicto and praedictis fratribus, dabimus eis escambia in dominica
haereditate nostra in Anglia ad valentiam praedictae terrae in omnibus rebus.

Hiis Testibus, Ranulfo Decano Northamtoniae and Helia fratre ejus, Willielmo
Clerico de Buckingham and Roberto fratre suo, and Roberto Bidun and Roberto de
Nuers, Hugone de Hannou, Bartholomeo filio Jordani, Willielmo Ruffo, Philippo
filio Jordani, Henrico filio Hugonis, Radulpho filio Bodwini, Richardo filio
Walteri, Johanne Flamang and Michaele fratre ejus, Roberto de Harwemeda, Rogero
de Nugun and Aubro fratre ejus.

Charta Williehni filii Roberti.
SCiant tam praesentes quam futuri, quod ego Willielmus filius Roberti dedi and
concessi and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Deo and Sanctae Mariae and
Sancto Johanni Baptistae, and beatis pauperibus Hospitalis Sancti Johannis de
Northamtonia and fratribus ibidem Deo servientibus, sex seliones terrae cum
cheveciis de meo dominio in agris Twivelliae, illos scilicet qui jacent juxta
Fulewellemor, in liberam and puram and perpetuam eleemosynam, pro salute animae
meae and uxoris meae and pro animabus omnium antecessorum and successorum
meorum.

Hiis Testibus, Roberto de Leicestria, Willielmo de Perie, Waltero filio ejus,
Anketill de Passeha, Richardo Pellipario, Ricardo filio Radulfi Capellani,
Philippo Clerico, Vernalio Clerico, and multis aliis.

Northampton-scira. In magno Rotulo de Anno sexto Richardi primi.
DE Scutagio Militum ad redemptionem Domini Regis Walterus de Drayton reddit
computum de december solidis de scutagio suo, in Thesaur. liberavit and quietus
est.

In Rubro libro feodorum de Scaccario sub Titulo, Incipit annus octavus Regis
Richardi.
SCutagium Normanniae ad viginti solidos in Northamptonshire, Walterus de
Drayton december solidos dimidii Militis de feodo Roberti filii Alberici Camerarii.

In eodem libro.
ANNO primo Regis Johannis scutagium Normanniae assisum ad duas marcas in
Northamptonshire, Walterus de Drayton unam marcam dimidii Militis.

Carta Alani Basset.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Alanus Basset dedi, concessi and hac
praesenti carta mea confirmavi Waltero de Drayton and Lucae Uxori ejus, filiae
Domini Richardi Basset fratris mei, and haeredibus de Corporibus eorum legitime
procreatis, omnes terras and tenementa in Villa de Pightesli; Habenda and
tenenda omnia praedicta terras and tenementa cum omnibus suis pertinentiis
praedictis Waltero and Luciae and haeredibus inter eosdem legitime procreatis,
libere and in pace in perpetuum de Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius per
servitia inde debita and consueta, and reddendo inde annuatim mihi in totam
vitam meam viginti solidos ad quatuor anni terminos principales aequis
portionibus. Et ego vero praedictus Alanus Basset omnia praedicta terras and
Tenementa cum omnibus suis pertinentiis praedictis Waltero and Luciae Uxori
suae and Haeredibus suis inter eosdem legitime procreatis contra omnes mortales
warrantizabo in perpetuum. Et si contingat praedictos Walterum and Luciam
absque haeredibus inter eosdem legitime procreatis decedere, volo quod omnia
predicta terrae and Tenementa cum omnibus suis pertinentiis mihi and haeredibus
meis, vel meis Assignatis absque impedimento vel contradictione alicujus
revertentur.

In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti cartae indentatae Sigilla nostra
alternatim apposuimus.
His testibus, Dominis Willielmo de Pinkeney, Richardo de Engain Militibus,
Henrico Gubion, Thoma de Loton, Willielmo de Weston, Gervasio de Everdon,
Gilberto de Herdwick, Roberto Bernac, Henrico de Avenell, Anselmo de Clopton,
Stephano de Philgrave, Thoma de Tichmerch, Andrea filio Stephani, Herberto
filio Willielmi, Richardo filio Herberti and aliis.

Carta Walteri de Draytona.
OMnibus Sanctae matris Ecclesiae filiis tam praesentibus quam futuris ad quos
praesens scriptum pervenerit, Walterus de Drayton Salutem. Noveritis
Universitas vestra me concessisse and hac praesenti carta meac onfirmasse pro
salute animae meae and Uxoris meae and omnium antecessorum and successorum
meorum, Deo and Sanctae Mariae and Sancto Johanni Baptistae, and beatis
pauperibus Hospitalis Sancti Johannis de Northhampton and fratribus ibidem Deo
servientibus, totam terram de feodo meo de Sliptona, quam Willielmus Avunculus
meus dedit praedicto Hospitali in liberam and perpetuam eleemosynam, salvo
servitio meo.

His Testibus, Domino Gervasio de Suthbroc, Henrico de Atenestone, Hugone
fratre suo, Radulpho Capellano, Richardo filio suo, Philippo Diacono, Willielmo
Clerico de Upton, and multis aliis.

WALTERUS de DRAYTONA
This Effigies of Ancient Painting upon Glass, is at this time extant in the
further Windoe of the North Isle of St. Peter's Church in Luffwick, being the
Parish Church and Parcel of the Noble Manor of Drayton, whence this same
WALTER being the son of Henry the son of Robert the second son of Earl
AUBERY de VERE Great Chamberlain and Lord Chief Justice of England did first
assume his Name.

Walter of Drayton, in chainmail, armor, shield and sword, kneels, presenting
a model of the St Peter's church, Lowick

Sir HENRY of DRAYTON, Lord of Drayton, and other Lands and Lordships.
In magno Rotulo de Anno decimo tertio Regis Johannis de Scutagio Scotiae
assiso ad viginti solidos.
HAeredes Walteri de Drayton de feodo dimidii Militis, de feodo quod fuit
Roberti filii Alberici, december solidos.

Ibidem sub Titulo de Scutagio Walliae assiso ad duas marcas.
HAeredes Walteri de Drayton reddiderunt compotum de una marca de dimidio feodi.

Anno secundo Henrici Tertii de primo Scutagio assiso ad duas marcas.
VIcecomes reddidit compotum de duabus marcis and de una marca de Haerede
Walteri de Drayton.

In Libro rubro feodorum de Scaccario.
HEnricus de Drayton tenet in Islip, Adington, Drayton dimidium feodi Militis.
Et Baldwinus de Vere tenet inde quartam partem de dimidio feodi in Adington.

Northamptonshire. In magno Rotulo de Anno vicesimo nono Henrici Tertii.
AUxilium Regis ad primogenitam filiam ejus maritandam, scilicet de quolibet
Scutagio viginti solidos. Idem Vicecomes reddit compotum de december solidis de
Henrico de Drayton de dimidio feodi.

Fines tricesimo primo Henrici Tertii, MS.
REX cepit homagium Henrici de Drayton, qui duxit Uxorem Ivettam filiam and
alteram Haeredum Willielmi Burdon, de medietate feodi Militis (videlicet) quod
dictus Willielmus tenuit de Rege in Capite.

Carta Willielmi filii Roberti de Drayton.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Willielmus filius Roberti de Drayton,
concessi and praesenti carta mea confirmavi, Domino Henrico de Drayton, quatuor
seliones in Campo de la Lound super le Plegsland, inter terram ejusdem Henrici
and terram Dominae Isabellae de Bournebon, in escambium trium selionum in le
Woodfield abuttantium in Plumpwell Broc, inter terram Willielmi filii Matildae
de Luffwick and terram Hugonis Wacestare de Slipton: Tenendum and habendum
dicto Henrico and Haeredibus suis and suis Assignatis, de me and haeredibus
meis libere, quiet, been, and in pace, nomine excambii pro omni consuetudine
seculari and exactione. Ego vero dictus Willielmus and Haeredes mei dicto
Henrico and Haeredibus suis and eorum Assignatis dictas quatuor seliones contra
omnes gentes warrantizabimus, acquietabimus and defendemus. Ut autem haec
Concessio and hujus praesentis cartae Confirmatio rata and stabilis in
perpetuum perseveret, praesens scriptum Impressione sigilli mei corroboravi.

His Testibus, Radulpho de Blossvilla, Willielmo filio Osmondi de Sudbury,
Waltero Novo-homine, Galfrido de Drayton, Hugone Waycestare, Johanne filio
Simonis and aliis.

Carta Henrici filii Thomae de Drayton.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Henricus filius Thomae de Drayton
quietum clamavi and relaxavi Domino Henrico de Drayton Militi, pro una marca
argenti quam mihi dedit prae manibus, totum Jus and clameum quod habui vel
habere potui in una dimidia virgata terrae in Campis de Drayton, cum tofto and
crofto in dicta villa de Drayton, and omnibus aliis dictae terrae pertinentiis,
quod etiam Jus mihi contingebat nomine haereditatis dicti Thomae quondam Patris
mei, cujus haeres propinquior sum. Ita etiam quod ego nunquam nec aliquis
haeredum meorum, nec aliquis pro nobis, in dicta virgata terrae cum dictis
pertinentiis clameum vel calumniam imponemus, per quod dictus Dominus Henricus
vel Haeredes sui vel eorum Assignati elongentur vel implacitentur. Et ego vero
dictus Henricus and Haeredes mei dicto Domino Henrico and Haeredibus suis and
eorum Assignatis nominatam Terram cum dictis pertinentiis contra omnes gentes
in perpetuum warrantizabimus. Et ut haec quieta clamatio and relaxatio rata and
stabilis perseverer,

huic scripto praesenti Impressionem Sigilli mei apposui. His Testibus,
Radulpho de Blossvilla, Willielmo Novo-homine, Roberto filio Walteri, Petro de
Holt Henrico Clerico de Islip, Willielmo de Drayton, Johanne filio Simonis.

Carta Willielmi de Musta.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Willielmus de Musta de Aldewincle
demisi and concessi and praesenti carta mea confirmavi Domino Henrico de
Drayton sex seliones terrae in Campis de Luffwic cum pertinentiis, de quibus
scilicet quinque jacent supra Drayton, in Campo scilicet de Burweden inter
diviram and croftum Palini, in escambia septem selionum terrae quas idem
Henricus mihi dedit pro iisdem quinque selionibus praedictis: Tenendum and
habendum dicto Henrico and Haeredibus suis libere, quiet and haereditarie; Et
quod ego and haeredes mei vel aliquis per nos clameum vel calumpniam in
praedictis sex selionibus habere non possimus in posterum.

In testimonium hujus, praesenti scripto Impressionem Sigilli mei apposui. His
Testibus, Willielmo de Drayton, Galfrido fratre suo, Roberto filio Walteri,
Petro de Holt, Henrico Duffen, Willielmo Chauntrell, Willielmo filio ejus
Clerico and aliis.

Charta Henrici filii Walteri de Drayton.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Henricus filius Walteri de Draytona
dedi and concessi, and hac praesenti carta mea confirmavi Deo and Sanctae
Mariae, and Hospitali Sancti Johannis Baptistae de Northamptona and Fratribus
ibidem Deo servientibus, pro salute animae meae and omnium Antecessorum and
Successorum meorum, in liberam, puram and perpetuam eleemosynam, sex seliones
terrae in Campo de Luffwic ad Hardesmede juxta pratum praedicti Hospitalis,
Tenendas and habendas libere and quiet de me and haeredibus meis sibi and
successoribus suis in perpetuum. Et ego praedictus Henricus and haeredes mei
praedictam terram praedicto Hospitali and praedictis fratribus contra omnes
gentes de omnibus secularibus servitiis acquietabimus and defendemus and
exactionibus: Quod autem ratum and stabile permaneat, praesenti scripto meum
apposui Sigillum.

Hiis Testibus, Domino Richardo de Watervilla, Hugone filio Baldewini de
Luffwic, Symone filio Galfridi de Sliptona, Thoma Clerico de Sliptona, Simone
filio Willielmi Heward, Philippo de Adington, and multis aliis.

Ex Bundello Escaetorum de Anno tricesimo septimo Henrici Tertii, Numero 52.
INquisitio facta Anno Regni Regis Henrici tricesimo, septimo die Jovis proximo
ante festum Sancti Bartholomei Apostoli, apud Drayton per sacramentum proborum
and legalium hominum subscriptorum, videlicet, Richardi de Aldwincle, Radulphi
de Craneford, Radulphi Basset de Islipton, Henrici Clerici de eadem, Roberti
filii Willielmi de Luffwic, Walteri de Hemyan de eadem, Willielmi de Drayton,
Hugonis de Akell, Roberti de Sutton, Walteri de Fleming, Richardi Knight de
Wykingstorp and Walteri filii Hugonis, quantum terrae Henricus de Drayton de
Domino Rege tenuit in Capite, and quantum de aliis, and per quod servitium, and
quantum terrae illae valiant per annum in omnibus terrae exitibus, and quis
propinquior Haeres ejus sit, and cujus aetatis. Qui Juratores dicunt quod
praedictus Henricus tenuit in Capite de Domino Rege in Drayton and Islep duas
carucatas terrae cum uno tofto in Drayton, de Roberto filio Willielmi de
Luffwic, per unum denarium per annum and homagium in iisdem and in Adington,
Twyvell and Reseburgh per servitium dimidii feodi Militis: Et dicunt quod omnes
praedictae terrae dicti Henrici valent per annum in omnibus exitibus terrae
quindecim libras: Et quod Baldewinus filius dicti Henrici propinquior ejus
haeres est, and quod est aetatis triginta annorum.

Et in testimonium hujus, praedicti Inquisitores huic Inquisitioni Sigilla sua
apposuerunt. Datum die, anno and loco supradictis. Convenit cum Recordo.

Guilielmus Ryley.



Sir BALDWIN of DRAYTON, Lord of Drayton and other Lands and Lordships.
Ex antiquo Pergameni Rotulo penes Comitem de Peterborow.
BAldewinus filius and haeres Henrici de Drayton fecit Regi fidelitatem de
omnibus terris and tenementis quae idem Henricus tenuit de Rege in Capite; and
mandatum est Abbati de Persore and Jacobo Frisell Escaetori Regis, quod capiant
securitatem de praedicto Baldewino de Centum solidis pro Relevio suo.

Test Alianora Regina.
Et habet terram in Comitatu Northampton.
Ex Bundello Escaetorum de Anno 37. Henrici Tertii. Pipe Nota oblata Northampt.
BAldewinus filius and haeres Henrici de Drayton quinquaginta solidos pro
Relevio suo de omnibus terris and tenementis, quae idem Henricus tenuit de Rege
in Capite.

Conventio inter Clementem de Leyton and Baldewinum de Drayton.
ANNO ab Incarnatione Domini millesimo ducentesimo quinquagesimo secundo, ad
festum Sancti Michaelis, facta est Conventio inter Clementem de Leyton ex una
part and Baldewinum filium Domini Henrici de Drayton ex altera part,
videlicet, quod idem Clemens assensu and spontanea voluntate Ceciliae uxoris
suae tradidit and demisit praedicto Baldewino pro viginti sex Marcis Argenti,
quas ipse Baldewinus eidem Clementi dedit prae manibus, wardum and Maritagium
Willielmi filii Joselini de Islep and omnium haeredum praedicti Willielmi
succedentium, casu contingente quod praedictus infra plenam aetatem obierit,
cum toto tenemento and redditu and Escaetis sine ullo retinamento, quae
descensa fuerint, vel eisdem haeredibus infra praedictam plenam aetatem
descendere poterint. Et cum tota dote dictae Ceciliae eidem pertinente in dicta
villa de Islep de praedicto tenemento. Hoc tamen adjecto, quod praedictus
Willielmus, secundum quod decet, de Consilio and Consensu praedictorum
Clementis and Ceciliae maritetur. Ita scilicet quod praedicta Consilium and
consensus dictorum Clementis and Ceciliae nihil impediant, quin praenotatus
Baldewinus de praedicto Maritagio se possit approbare in omni loco quo
praedictus Willielmus per Maritagium sui non disparagetur. Habendum and
tenendum praedictum tenementum tam de praedicto wardo quam de praedicta dote
cum maritagio praedicti Willielmi sive aliorum haeredum praedictum Willielmum
succedentium, casu contingente quod ipse Willielmus infra plenam aetatem
moriatur, usque ad plenam aetatem eorundem haeredum, faciendo Dominis
Capitalibus feodi servitium eidem tenemento annexum; finita autem plena aetate
praedicti Willielmi vel aliorum haeredum, totum praenominatum tenementum cum
domibus haeredi tunc temporis proximo, vel praedictis Clementi and Ceciliae, eo
statu quo illud recepit vel meliori, integre cum praedictis pertinentiis, sine
ulla molestia vel contradictione, praedictus Baldewinus. vel haeredes sui vel
eorum assignati plene restituent. Et vero praedictus Clemens and haeredes sui
praedicto Baldewino and haeredibus suis vel eorum assignatis, sicut supradictum
est, contra omnes homines and foeminas warrantizabunt praedictum tenementum cum
praedicto Maritagio. Ut autem ista Conventio rata and stabilis perseveret,
praedicti Clemens and Baldewinus affidaverunt; and ad majorem hujus rei
securitatem, tam Baldewinus quam Clemens hujusmodi scrptis Conventionibus
impressiones sigillorum suorum mutuo apposuerunt.

Hiis testibus, Domino Reginaldo de Watervil, Domino Rogero de Hyda, Domino
Gilberto de Daneford, Richardo de Audewincle, Reginaldo de Beumer, Roberto
filio Fulconis, Luca de Trapston, Johanne Walleraunde, Johanne Clerico de
Luffwic, Henrico de Islip Clerico, and aliis.

Pipe nota oblata quadragesimo secundo Henrici Tertii, Scutagium Walliae.
HEnricus de Drayton debet viginti solidos de dimidio Feodi. Baldewinus filius
and haeres habet quietantiam Regis.

Tower Escheats, 6 E. 1. no 16.
BAldewinus de Drayton tenet Drayton, Luffwick, Islip in Comitatu Northampton.

Conventio inter Dominum Baldewinum de Drayton and Rogerum de Stowmarcant.
ANno Regni Regis Edwardi, Filii Regis Henrici, primo, ad Festum Sancti
Michaelis convenit inter Dominum Baldewinum de Drayton Militem ex una part,
and Rogerum de Stowmarcant Clericum ex altera, videlicet, quod dictus Dominus
Baldewinus tradidit, vendidit and demisit ad firmam dicto Rogero, and
quibuscunque assignatis suis, terram Dominicam suam cum omnibus pertinentiis
suis Adinton, quam idem Baldewinus habuit ex warda filii bonae memoriae
Baldewini de Vere, cum Curiae aedificiis, terris, Homagiis, redditibus,
Eschaetis, wardis, releviis, herietis, pratis, pascuis, pasturis, and omnibus
aliis ad dictum Dominicum pertinentibus; excepto servitio Domini Johannis de
Vere, Warda and Relevia ejusdem, si contigerit. Habendum and tenendum dicto
Rogero and suis Assignatis, de dicto Domino Baldewino de Drayton and haeredibus
suis, been, in pace, libere and quiet, a dicto Festo Sancti Michaelis usque ad
finem termini duodecim annorum proxime sequentium plene complendorum. Dictus
vero Dominus Baldewinus and haeredes sui eidem Rogero and suis quibuscunque
assignatis totum dictum Dominicum cum omnibus suis pertinentris, ut praedictum
est, quae ad ipsum pertinent ratione praedictae wardae, usque ad finem dicti
termini super omnes terras and tenementa sua contra omnes gentes warrantizabunt
and defendent, and a Sectis universarum Curiarum and Hundredorum acquietabunt.
Pro hac autem traditione, venditione, dimissione, and dicti tenementi
warrantizatione, dedit dictus Rogerus dicto Domino Baldewino centum marcas
Argenti prae manibus. Praeterea Dominus Baldewinus concessit eidem Rogero and
suis assignatis tertiam partem Dominici in Adington, quam habuit nomine dotis,
de Matilda, relicta quondam Baldewini Vere defuncti, prout continetur in quodam
Scripto inter Dominum Nicholaum Dodingesel virum dictae Matildae and ipsum
Dominum Baldewinum de Drayton confecto, and sigillo Nicholai appenso. Et dictus
Rogerus dictam partem Dominici sumptibus suis usque ad terminum praedictorum
annorum in tali statu quo recepit secundum visum Bonorum and Legalium virorum
sustinebit.

In hujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Scripto ad modum Chirographi confecto,
mutuo sigilla sua apposuerunt. Hiis testibus, Domino Reginaldo de Wahul, Domino
Willielmo Hay, Domino Johanne de Vere, Domino Symone de Watervil, Domino Symone
de Eyleswritch, Rectore Ecclesiae de Trapston, Rogero de Venneng, Rogero de
Tingwick, and aliis.

Out of the Collection of Mr. Roger Dodsworth is this Ancient Pedigree of the
Draytons.
SIR Robert of Gimeges held Staggesden in the County of Bedford of the King in
Capite by the third part of a Knights Fee, and he held the Manors of
Bottlebrigg and Overton-Longville in Norman Cross Hundred in the County of
Huntington by the service of half a Knights Fee. He married Sibyl the Daughter
of Hugh de Lizures, who lived after him, as appears by an Inquisition of the
fortieth year of Henry the Third. He gave to Sir Hugh de Bovi with his Daughter
Emma the Moity of the Manor of Bottlebrigg, and to Baldwin of Drayton with
Idonea another of his Daughters, the other Moity. William his Son and Heir was
Lord of Staggesden, and had Issue Robert of Gimeges that dyed without Issue.

Robert of Gimeges Lord of Staggesden and Bottelbrigg.
Emma of Gimeges Hugh de Bovi William of Gimeges Robert of Gimeges dyed without
Issue, 8 E. 3.
Idonea of Gimeges. Baldwin of Drayton. Sir John of Drayton. Philip of Arderne.

Escaetria de Anno sexto Edwardi Primi, numero decimo sexto.
INquisitio facta apud Bottlebrigg die Jovis in Crastino Apostolorum Petri and
Pauli, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi sexto, per praeceptum Domini Regis coram
Willielmo le Moigne Vicecomite Huntingdon, Reginaldo Thurnston de Swangrit,
Johanne de Fraunchome de Stilton, Willielmo de Menill, Galfrido de Welledon,
Galfrido Stockman, Willielmo Cokelm, Roberto le Frankhome, Roberto de
Bedhampton, Galfrido le Hunt, Johanne Lokerel, Johanne Cocum, and Idone de
Gathe. Qui dicunt per Sacramentum suum, quod Baldewinus de Drayton tenuit in
Comitatu Huntingdon, de Roberto de Gimeges, quatuor viginti acras Terrae, and
quoddam Messuagium and septem acras prati, unius pretium acrae terrae arabilis,
sex denarii, pretium Messuagii quatuor solidi, pretium acrae prati quatuor
solidi. Piscaria valent per annum duos solidos. Tolnetum per aquam and terram
valet sex denarios. Sunt ibi quatuor liberi homines, quorum redditus est per
annum sex solidi and sex denarii. Item perquisita Curiae de Bottlebrigg valent
per annum duos solidos. Haec omnia praedicta tenuit de Roberto de Gimeges. Item
idem tenuit in Villa de Overton-Longville, de Domino Willielmo de Karby, unum
Messuagium, quod valet per annum duodecim denarios, unum Columbarium quod valet
per annum duos solidos, and quatuor viginti acras Terrae, pretium acrae sex
denarii, and septem acras prati, pretium acrae quatuor solidi. Item sunt ibi
redditus and consuetudines septem liberorum hominum in Overton, and valent per
annum quinquaginta sex solidos and sex denarios. Et dicunt quod Johannes filius
dicti Baldewini est ejus haeres propinquior, and est de aetate viginti duorum
annorum and amplius.

Convenit cum Recordo,

Guilielmus Ryley.



Sir JOHN of DRAYTON, first of that Name, Lord of Drayton, and other Lands and
Lordships.
Charta Roberti de Arderne.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus de Arderne dedi, concessi, and
hac mea praesenti Charta confirmavi Johanni filio Domini Baldewini de Drayton,
cum Philippa filia mea, totam Terram meam in Wappenham, quae fuit de Jure
Dominae Aliciae matris meae, and mihi ab ea haereditarie descendebat, cum
omnibus pertinentiis suis and libertatibus, Tenendam de me and haeredibus meis,
sibi and haeredibus suis de dicta Philippa filia mea exeuntibus, libere,
haereditarie and honorifice per servitium tertiae partis unius Militis.

In cujus donationis and concessionis testimonium, Sigillum meum apposui, his
testibus, Domino Johanne de Ashton, Thoma de Buckton, Richardo de Willoughby,
Hugone de Pavi, Eustachio de Wall, Andrea de Capello, Stephano Baynell, Hugone
Forrestario, Andrea Clerico.

Ex bundello Escaetorum de Anno vicesimo Edwardi Primi, number. 19.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
dilecto Clerico suo Malculino de Harledg Escaetori suo citra Trentam, Salutem.
Quia Johannes de Drayton, qui de nobis tenuit in Capite, diem clausit extremum,
ut accepimus, Vobis mandamus, quod omnes terras and tenementa, de quibus
praedictus Johannes fuit seisitus in Dominico suo ut de feodo in Balliva
vestra, die quo obiit, fine dilatione capiatis in manum nostram, and ea salvo
custodiri faciatis, donec aliud inde praeceperimus; and per Sacramentum
proborum and legalium hominum de Balliva vestra, per quos rei veritas melius
sciri poterit, diligenter inquiratis, quantum terrae idem Johannes tenuit de
nobis in Capite in Balliva vestra die quo obiit, and quantum de aliis, and per
quod servitium, and quantum terrae illae valent per annum in omnibus Exitibus,
and quis propinquior haeres ejus sit, and cujus aetatis; and inquisitionem inde
distinct and aperte factam nobis sub Sigillo vestro, and Sigillis eorum per
quos facta fuerit, sine dilatione mittatis, and hoc Breve.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo octavo die Januarii, Anno Regni
nostri vicesimo.
Inquisitio post mortem Johannis de Drayton.
INquisitio facta apud Northampton die Lunae proximo post Festum Sancti
Valentini, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi vicesimo, de Terris and Tenementis quae
fuerunt Johannis de Drayton in Comitatu Northamptoniae, per Sacramentum Roberti
filii Roberti de Roffwick, Johannis de Lyndesey de eadem, Willielmi de la Zouch
de eadem, Willielmi filii Gervasii de Drayton, Henrici filii Henrici de eadem,
Petri de Twyvell, Roberti le Panner de eadem, Roberti Franceis de Ruliburg,
Willielmi Noreis de Islip, Eliae in Angulo de eadem, Radulphi le Peyntor de
eadem, Willielmi Jossell de eadem, qui dicunt super Sacramentum suum, quod
dictus Johannes tenuit Manerium de Drayton cum pertinentiis de Domino Rege in
Capite per servitium dimidii feodi Militis, and etiam reddendo Domino Regi in
Manerio de Getinton, xiijs ivd, and etiam saciendo sectam Curiae de Getinton a
tribus septimanis in tres septimanas. Item dicunt, quod Capitale Messuagium cum
Columbario, Gardino and Vivario valet per annum xxs. Item dicunt, quod idem
tenuit in Islip quoddam Messuagium cum Gardino and Columbario pertinens ad
dictum Manerium, and valet per annum vis viiid. Item dicunt, quod sunt ibidem
ducentae and viginti acrae terrae arabilis, and quatuor acrae, and valent per
annum viil ixs ivd, pretium acrae viiid. Item dicunt, quod sunt ibidem xvii
acrae prati falcabilis, and valent per annum lis, pretium acrae iiis. Item sunt
ibidem december acrae pasturae, and valent per annum xxs, pretium acrae iis. Item
dicunt, quod sunt in dicto Manerio de redditu Assisae liberorum tenentium viil
iis ixd, viz. ad Festum Sanctae Andreae xxxixs vid ob. Ad Festum Paschae xliis
ivd ob. Ad Pentecosten xs viid ob. Ad Festum Sanctorum Petri and Pauli xxxixs
viiid. Et ad Festum Sancti Michaelis xs viiid ob. Item dicunt, quod sunt ibidem
duo homines qui reddunt ad Natale december Capones qui valent xd, pretium Caponis
1d and unam libram Cumini, pretium 1d, ad eundem terminum. Item sunt ibi tres
homines qui falcabunt in prato Domini per unum diem, and valet opus xiid. Et
metent in Blado Domini per unum diem, and valet opus iiid. Dicunt etiam, quod
Simon filius dicti Johannis de Drayton est ejus propinquior Haeres, and est de
aetate novem annorum and amplius a Festo Commemorationis Sanctorum Petri and
Pauli usque adhuc. In cujus rei testimonium omnes praejurati Sigilla sua
apposuerunt.

Summa summarum xixl xiis ixd, de quibus solvuntur Domino Regi in Manerio de
Getinton annuatim xiiis ivd. Summa de Claro xviiil xixs vd.
Convenit cum Recordo,

Guilielmus Ryley.



Sir SIMON of DRAYTON, Lord of Drayton and other Lands and Lordships.
Part of the Articles of Remembrance of the Manor of Drayton in the County of
Northampton.
FIRST, This Manor in the time of King Edward the Second belonged unto one
Symond Drayton, as appears by Fine of the 15th year of the same King, by
which the said Symond knowledged the Right to be in one Robert Peyntor Clerk,
which Robert yielded the same Manor again to the said Symond and Margaret his
Wife, To hold of our Lord the King by the service due during their lives; and
after their decease to remain to John Son of the said Symond, and the Heirs of
his body begotten; and for default of such Issue, to remain to the Heirs of the
body of the said Symond and Margaret begotten; and for default of such Issue,
to remain to the right Heirs of the said Symond.

And upon forty years after this Fine, appears that one John Drayton the
thirty fifth year of King Edward the Third by Fine knowledged the Manor of
Drayton, except a Mese, a Toft, a Mill, seven Cotages and two Carews of Land,
two Acres of Meadow, one Knights Fee and xl Rent, to be the right of Henry
Green, Richard Bolleshowre Parson of the Church of Pysseforth, John Keteryng
Parson of the Church of Boketon, William of Assheley Parson of the Church of
Morton, Nicholas Green and Nicholas Thenford. And over that granted the said
Knights Fee and Rents, with the Homage and Services of Robert Vere and
Millisent of Yselipe and their Heirs, of all the Tenements which they before
held of the said John in the said Manor, to have to them in Fee. And over this
the foresaid Mese, Tossed, Cotages, Lands and Meadow before except, which the
said Millisent holds for term of forty years. And the foresaid Mill that the
said Millisent and Robert Etebred hold for term of sive years of the Less of
the said John Drayton, and which after the said Less to him and his Heirs
shall revert wholly to remain to the said Henry, Richard, John Keteryng,
William, Nicholas, and Nicholas, and their Heirs, to hold together with the
aforesaid Manor, Fee and Rents of our Sovereign Lord the King, etc. with
Warranty of the said Drayton for two hundred Marks of Silver, etc.

Then Anno xxxviij Edwardi Tertii the King by his Letters Patents, reciting
where he before had gyffen Licens to John Dreyton, that he of the Manor of
Drayton which of the King is holden in Capite, might enfesse Henry Green and
his Cofeoffees before-named in the Fine precedent, as in our Letters Patents
more plainly appears. Which said Henry Green and his Cofeoffees be thereof
jointly seized, as we be informed. We of our special grace have granted and
licens gyffen to the foresaid Henry Green, to relesse all his Estate to his
Cofeoffees; And that the said Cofeoffees after such relesse to them made, the
same Feffees to gyffe the same Manor to the foresaid Henry Green and to Henry
his Son, to have to the same Henry and Henry his Son, and to the heirs of the
body of the same Henry the Son begotten; so that if the said Henry the Son dye
withowte heirs of his body, then to remeyne to Thomas Brother of the said
Henry, and the heirs of his body, etc. And for default of such issue, to the
right heirs of the said Henry Green, etc.

Charta Roberti le Peyntour.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Robertus le Peyntour Capellanus dedi,
concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Domino Symoni de Drayton
Militi, and Margaretae uxori ejus, and haeredibus ipsius Symonis and
assignatis, omnia Messuagia, terras and tenementa, prata and pasturas, quae
habeo ex dono and feoffamento ipsius Simonis in Luffwick, Drayton, Slipton and
Grafton, prout jacent in diversis culturis and in diversis locis, simul cum
homagiis, servitiis and redditibus omnium liberorum tenentium meorum in
praedicta Villa de Luffwick, videlicet, de Olivero de Nowers viginti solidos,
simul cum homagio and servitio praedicti Oliveri; de Johanne Jolinet duos
solidos, simul cum homagio and servitio dicti Johannis; de Johanne filio
Johannis Magesons december solidos, simul cum homagio and servitio dicti Johannis;
de Alicia Hende quatuor solidos and octo denarios, simul cum homagio and
servitio praedictae Aliciae; de Johanne Hende duos solidos and sex denarios,
simul cum homagio and servitio dicti Johannis; de Roberto de Blossevile
sexdecim denarios, simul cum homagio and servitio dicti Roberti; de Olivero de
Drayton sexdecim denarios, cum homagio and servitio dicti Oliveri; de Johanne
Turvey quatuor denarios, simul cum homagio and servitio praedicti Johannis; de
Johanne de Drayton duos denarios, simul cum homagio and servitio dicti
Johannis; de Thoma de Lord unum denarium, simul cum homagio and servitio dicti
Thomae; de Hugone Wimond duos denarios, simul cum homagio and servitio dicti
Hugonis; de Johanne de Lord unum denarium, simul cum homagio and servitio
dicti Johannis; de Richardo Molendinario unum denarium, simul cum homagio and
servitio dicti Richardi; de Thoma in the lane Capellano sex denarios, simul cum
homagio and servitio dicti Thomae; de Johannis; de Galfrido Duffen octo
denarios, simul cum homagio and servitio dicti Johannis; de Galfrido Duffen
octo denarios, simul cum homagio and servitio dicti Galfridi; de Henrico de
Weston unum obolum, simul cum homagio and servitio dicti Henrici; and de Adam
le Taylour sex denarios and obolum, and duos Capones, simul cum homagio and
servitio dicti Adami. Dedi etiam and concessi eisdem Simoni and Margaretae
uxori ejus, and haeredibus ipsius and assignatis, reversionem omnium terrarum
and tenementorum, quae de me tenent ad terminum vitae, diversorum hominum in
Luffwick and Slipton, cum redditibus eorundem; videlicet, de Henrico Wardicorps
Capellano tresdecim solidos and quatuor denarios, cum reversione octodecim
acrarum terrae post mortem praedicti Hugonis and Aliciae uxoris ejus; de
Roberto filio Johannis and Johanne fratre suo sex solidos, cum reversione
quatuor acrarum post mortem praedictorum Roberti and Johannis; and de Roberto
de Grafton quatuor solidos and sex denarios, cum reversione trium acrarum
terrae post mortem praedicti Roberti and Rosae uxoris ejus; de Simone le Wright
tres solidos, cum reversione duarum acrarum terrae post mortem dicti Simonis;
and de Rogero le Sonter duos solidos, cum reversione unius Cottagii post mortem
praedicti Rogeri; de Roberto le Tylor duos solidos and sex denarios, cum
reversione unius Cottagii post mortem dicti Roberti: Habendum and tenendum
omnia praedicta Messuagia, terras and tenementa, prata and pasturas, cum
homagiis and servitiis, redditibus and reversionibus quando acciderint, and
omnibus aliis pertinentiis, praefatis Simoni and Margaretae uxori ejus, and
haeredibus ipsius Simonis and assignatis, de Capitalibus Dominis feodorum
illorum, per servitia inde debita and de jure consueta.

In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Chartae Sigillum meum apposui: hiis
testibus, Roberto Alleyn de Luffwick, Johanne de Lord de eadem, Olivero de
Nowers de eadem, and Simoni Granlans de Islip, Henrico de Colsol de eadem.
Datum apud Drayton die Dominico proximo post Festum Sancti Gregorii Papae,
Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum primo.
Ex Chartis primi Edwardi Tertii, n. 23.
REX concessit Simoni de Drayton and Margaretae uxori ejus, and Gilberto de
Lyndesey, and haeredibus ipsius Gilberti, liberam warrennam in Manerio de
Mollesworth in Comitatu Huntingtoniae.

Charta Regis Edwardi Tertii pro libera Warrenna in Drayton.
EDwardus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ministris, and omnibus Ballivis and
fidelibus suis, Salutem. Sciatis, Nos de gratia nostra speciali concessisse,
and hac Charta nostra confirmasse dilecto and fideli nostro Simoni de Drayton,
quod ipse and Haeredes sui in perpetuum habeant liberam warrennam in omnibus
Dominicis terris suis de Drayton, Islip, Luffwick, and Irthlingburg in Comitatu
Northamptoniae, de Bottlebrigg in Comitatu Huntingdoniae, and de
Stoke-goldington in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, dum tamen terrae illae non sunt
infra metas Forestae nostrae. Ita quod nullus intret terras illas ad fugandum
in eis, vel ad aliquid capiendum quod ad Warrennam pertinet, sine licentia and
voluntate ipsius Simonis vel haeredum suorum, per forisfacturam nostram december
librarum. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus pro nobis and haeredibus
nostris, quod praedictus Simon and haeredes sui in perpetuum habeant liberam
Warrennam in omnibus Dominicis terris suis praedictis, dum tamen terrae non
sunt infra metas Forestae nostrae. Ita quod nullus intret in terras illas ad
fugandum in eis, vel ad aliquid capiendum quod ad Warrennam pertineat, sine
licentia and voluntate ipsius Simonis vel haeredum suorum super forisfacturam
nostram december librarum, ut praedictum est.

Hiis Testibus, venerabilibus Patribus W. Archiepiscopo Eboracensi Angliae
Primate, R. Coventriae and Lich. Episcopo, Edmundo Comite Kantiae, Henrico
Comite Lancastriae, Johanne de Warrenna Comite Surriae, Rogero de Mortuo Mari
de Wiggmore, Thoma Wake, Willielmo de Rosse, Johanne de Rosse Senescallo
Hospitii nostri, and aliis.
Datum per manum nostram apud Eboracum primo die Junii, Anno Regni nostri
primo.
Trs. R. number. 4. fol. 29. Anno 4 E. 3.
BReve Regis directum Simoni de Drayton, Senescallo Forestae Isabellae Reginae,
Matris Domini Regis, inter parts Stamford and Oxon, pro decima totius
venationis quae capiuntur in Comitatu Northamptoniae, Abbati de Burgo Sancti
Petri, sicut Antecessores ejus concesserunt.

At the Tower Escheats, 4 E. 3. number. 17.
SImon de Drayton tenet terras in Luton and Flamstedde in Comitatu Bedford.

12 E. 3. number. 62.
SImon de Drayton tenet Drayton and Luffwick in Comitatu Northamptoniae.

29 E. 3. number. 1.
SImon de Drayton tenet terras in Brigstock, Luffwick, Drayton in Comitatu
Northamptoniae.

Charta Regis Edwardi Tertii.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
Omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint,
Salutem. Sciatis, quod de gratia nostra speciali, and per Finem viginti
librarum, quem Simon de Drayton Miles nobis solvit ad Scaccarium nostrum,
Pardonavimus eidem Simoni, and Johanni filio ejus, Willielmo filio Thomae
Seymor, Simoni le Squier de Drayton, and Richardo de Mollesworth, sectam pacis
nostrae quae ad nos pertinet pro morte Johannis de Overton-Longville; Et pro
omnibus aliis Homicidiis, Feloniis, Roberiis, Latrociniis and transgressionibus
quibuscunque per ipsos, vel eorum aliquem in Regno nostro, contra pacem nostram
factis, unde indictati, rectati, vel appellati existunt; Et etiam Utlagarias si
quae in ipsos, vel eorum aliquem hiis actionibus fuerint promulgatae; and
firmam pacem nostram eis inde concedimus; Ita tamen quod stent recti in Curia
nostra, si qui versus ipsos, vel eorum aliquem loqui voluerint de morte,
Homicidiis, Feloniis, Roberiis, Latrociniis and transgressionibus supradictis.
In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test
Edwardo Duce Cornubiae, and Comite Cestriae filio nostro charissimo, Custode
Angliae.

Apud Berkhamstedde decimo septimo die Aprilis, Anno Regni nostri tertio
decimo. Per Literam ipsius Custodis.
Irrotulatur coram Domino Rege in Rotulo de Termino Paschae, Anno Regni Regis
Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum duodecimo, Rotulo sexto inter Placita Coronae.
Pardonatio Simonis de Drayton.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, Omnibus
Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali pardonavimus Simoni de Drayton Militi
sectam pacis nostrae, quae ad nos pertinet, pro omnimodis Homicidiis, Roberiis,
Latrociniis, and Feloniis, ac receptamentis Felonum, per ipsum in Regno nostro
Angliae factis, contra pacem Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae Patris nostri,
and nostram, and etiam quicquid ad nos pertinet, de Oppressionibus,
Extortionibus, Dampnis, Gravaminibus, Gonfoederationibus, Conspirationibus,
Allegiantiis, Maintenenciis querelarum and campi partium, necnon pro
ductionibus lanarum ad parts transmarinas absque Sigillo nostro, quod dicitur
Coket, apposito, seu custumis nobis inde solutis, and pro omnibus aliis
transgressionibus and excessibus, unde indictatus, rectatus, seu appellatus
existit; and etiam Utlagarias, si quae in ipsum actionibus fuerint promulgatae,
and firmam pacem nostram ei inde concedimus. Ita tamen quod stet rectus in
Curia nostra, si quis versus eum loqui voluerit in hac part. Et insuper
concessimus and restituimus eidem Simoni de hujusmodi gratia nostra speciali
Catalla and Bona sua, si qua nobis occasion praemissa fuerint forisfacta.

In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.
Test meipso apud Sandwicum quinto die Octobris, Anno Regni nostri Angliae
sexto decimo, Regni vero nostri Franciae tertio. Per ipsum Regem.

Charta Regis Edwardi Tertii confirmans Pardonationem Simonis de Drayton.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, Omnibus
Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Sciatis quod cum nuper de gratia nostra speciali pardonavimus Simoni de Drayton
Militi and Johanni filio ejus, Willielmo filio Thomae Seymore, Simoni le Squier
de Drayton, and Richardo de Mollesworth sectam pacis nostrae, quae ad nos
pertinet pro morte Johannis de Overton-Longville, prout in Literis nostris
Patentibus inde confectis before continetur; Eaedemque Literae coram
Justiciariis nostris ad placita coram nobis tenenda assignatis allocatae
fuerint: Ita quod praedicti Simon, Johannes, Willielmus and Richardus de morte
praedicta per considerationem Curiae nostrae recesserunt quieti, ut dicitur.
Nos autem Literas nostras praedictas and Judicium praedictum rata habentes and
grata, ea pro nobis and haeredibus nostris pro majori securitate praedictorum
Simonis, Johannis, Willielmi and Richardi in hac part concedimus, confirmamus,
ratificamus and approbamus.

In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test
meipso apud Sandwicum quinto die Octobris, Anno Regni nostri Angliae sexto
decimo, Regni vero nostri Franciae tertio. Per ipsum Regem.

Charta Domini Simonis de Drayton.
PRaesens Indentura facta inter Dominum Simonem de Drayton Militem ex part
una, ac Fratrem Robertum Priorem Ecclesiae beatae Mariae de Raveneston and
ejusdem loci Conventum ex altera, Testatur, quod cum praedictus Dominus Simon
Miles ob causam piae devotionis, quam ad gloriosam Virginem and Matrem Dei
Mariam, in cujus honor praedicta Ecclesia est fundata, ac etiam affectionis
specialis quam ad eosdem Priorem and Conventum gerit, qui Deo and praedictae
Virgini gloriosae in eadem Ecclesia continuo cum honestate commendabili
famulantur, dederit, concesserit, and sua Charta confirmaverit pro salute
animae suae ac progenitorum, successorum and liberorum suorum, ac specialiter
pro salute animae bonae memoriae Domini Johannis de Hothom, quondam Eliensis
Episcopi defuncti, ac animarum omnium benefactorum eorundem, praedictis Priori
and Conventui and Ecclesiae Conventuali praedictae beatae Mariae de Raveneston,
duas parts duarum partium medietatis Manerii de Stoke-goldington cum
pertinentiis, and cum advocatione Ecclesiae ejusdem Villae, cum Reversione
tertiae partis earundem duarum partium medietatis dictarum duarum partium
Manerii praedicti, quam Matilda, quae fuit uxor Johannis Pycard, nomine dotis
tenet: Habendas eisdem Priori and Conventui and Ecclesiae praedictae, ac
imperpetuum tenendas secundum formam Chartae Originalis praedicti Domini
Simonis super hujusmodi Donatione and Concessione eisdem factae, prout in dicta
Charta Originali before continetur: Concesserunt praedicti Prior and Conventus
pro se and successoribus suis praedicto Domino Simoni tres Cantarias trium
Canonicorum suorum regularium divina officia pro anima sua and pro animabus
omnium praedictorum in dicta Ecclesia sua celebraturorum, habendas, and sub
modis inferius designatis imperpetuum fideliter faciendas. Ita videlicet quod
liceat praedicto Domino Simoni, quam citius hoc duxerit faciendum, tres viros
idoneos, and Religioni aptos, dictis Priori and Conventui praesentare, in
Confratres and Canonicos per eosdem Priorem and Conventum admittendos; quos
iidem Prior and Conventus habitu suo regulari sumptibus sic admissos induere,
and in Fratres and Canonicos admittere teneantur cum effectu; Quodque eisdem
praesentatis ac in Confratres and Canonicos admissis ac legitime professis, and
in Presbyteros ordinatis de ipsis and toto Conventu Ecclesiae praedictae, tres
Canonici per menses, hebdomadas, aut dies, vel alias pro dispositione Prioris
ejusdem loci sumendi vel assignandi, pro animabus praedicti Domini Simonis and
animabus omnium praedictorum in Ecclesia Conventuali praedicta divina officia
celebrabunt, and singulis diebus celebrare imperpetuum tenebuntur. Praedictis
vero Canonicis praesentatis and admissis, vel eorum aliquo defunctis vel
defuncto, sive a dicta Ecclesia migrantibus, aut quovis modo alio translatis
vel amotis totaliter imperpetuum, praedictus Dominus Simon ad totam vitam suam
in locum Canonici defuncti cujuslibet seu migrantis aut translati vel amoti ut
praedicitur, usque ad numerum trium Canonicorum semper in dicta Ecclesia suo
nomine, ut praemittitur, habendorum, alium vel alios Religioni idoneum vel
idoneos praedictis Priori and Conventui denuo praesentabit, admittendum per
eosdem vel admittendos, and loco alterius aut aliorum subrogandum vel
subrogandos. Post decessum vero praedicti Domini Simonis Militis praesentatio
dictorum trium Canonicorum and singulorum eorum deficientium, quando vel
quotiens contigerit, praedictis Priori and Conventui facienda, ad Dominum
Abbatem Monasterii de Lavenden modo qui sequitur facienda, perpetuo pertinebit.
Praedicti siquidem Prior and Conventus de Raveneston, defuncto aliquo hujusmodi
Canonico vel alias deficiente, ut praedicitur, virum sibi habilem and idoneum
perquirent, quem mittentes praedicto domino Abbati de Lavenden, vel Monasterio
vacant, Priori ejusdem loci, vel eo deficiente, loci Conventui Praesidenti,
infra quadraginta dies a tempore mortis cujuscunque Canonici praedicti, vel
migrationis, seu alterius amotionis ejusdem, ut praedicitur, suis literis
nominabunt; Qui quidem Dominus Abbas, Prior vel Praesidens praedictum virum
nominatum eisdem Priori and Conventui de Raveneston infra sex dies extunc
continuo sequentes praesentabunt in Canonicum admittendum; Qua vero nominatione
per quadraginta dies cessante, praedicti Dominus Abbas de Lavenden, Prior
ejusdem vel Conventui Praesidens, virum religioni habilem praedictis Priori and
Conventui de Raveneston, nulla nominatione ulterius expectata, ea vice
prasentabunt suo jure, per eosdem Priorem and Conventum de Raveneston in
Canonicum, cognita prius ipsius humilitate, necessario admittendum. Et si
Dominus Abbas de Lavenden, Prior aut Praesidens hujusmodi praesentationem
faciendam distulerint ultra mensem, Praesentatio dicti Canonici deficientis ea
vice facienda ad Capitulum Cathedrale Ecclesiae Lincolniae devolvatur. Ad
praemissa namque omnia and singula fideliter facienda absque omni dolo vel
fraud suis temporibus in futurum diligenter exequenda, praefatus Robertus nunc
Prior Ecclesiae de Raveneston tactis sacrosanctis Evangeliis Juramentum
praestitit Corporale; singulique ejusdem Prioratus Canonici de ejusdem Prioris
Authoritate, licentia and Consensu, quod haec omnia and singula, omni
simulatione and fraud postposita, and cujuscunque obstaculi Machinatione
remota, suis temporibus observabunt, observarique and fieri procurabunt and
facient in futurum, Juramentum consimile praestiterunt, affirmantes subditos
vinculo Juramenti se futuros, and cum omni diligentia curaturos, quod singuli
Prioris dictae Ecclesiae de Raveneston ^aturi in suis Confirmationibus vel
aliis praesentationibus eorundem, pro praemissis omnibus and singulis futuris
temporibus observandis, faciendis and fideliter exequendis, singulique Canonici
ejusdem Ecclesiae exnunc imposterum assumendi in actu professionis eorundem vel
antea praestabunt and facient corporaliter hujusmodi Juramentum. Ad quod quidem
Juramentum faciendum and praestandum virtute hujus Indenturae ac ordinationis
praesentis and partium condicti sint omnes successores in dicta Ecclesia
arctati in futurum ac perpetuo teneantur. Concessitque praedictus Dominus Simon
de Drayton Miles pro se and haeredibus suis, quod occasion praedictae
donationis Prioratum de Raveneston praedictum in equis aut canibus ibidem
mittendis, seu corrodiis, liberationibus aut famulorum stipendiis exigendis,
seu aliis exactionibus indebitis quibuscunque iidem dictus Simon and haeredes
sui onerare, gravare vel quovis alio modo opprimere non praesument, sed ipsum
ac ipsos ab hujusmodi omnibus gravaminibus seu oppressionibus imperpetuum
defendent.

In cujus rei testimonium parti hujus Indenturae penes praedictos Priorem and
Conventum residenti praedictus Simon Sigillum suum apposuit, and parti penes
praefatum Simonem residenti praedicti Prior and Conventus Sigillum suum commune
apposuerunt. Datum apud Raveneston die Lunae in Vigilia Apostolorum Petri and
Pauli, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii a Conquestu decimo octavo.
Charta Egidii de Arderne.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus, ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit, Egidius
filius and haeres Domini Roberti de Arderne Chevalier, Salutem in Domino.
Noveritis me remisisse, relaxasse and omnino pro me and haeredibus meis
imperpetuum quietum clamasse Domnio Simoni de Drayton Chevalier, and haeredibus
suis totum Jus and Clameum quod habeo seu aliquo modo habere potero in Manerio
de Sudburgh juxta Luffwick cum pertinentiis, quod quidem Manerium idem Dominus
Simon habet ex dimissione and concessione Domini Thomae Wale Militis ad
terminum vitae Nicholaae uxoris ejusdem Domini Thomae, tenendum de Capitalibus
Dominis feodi per servitia quae ad praedictum Manerium pertinent imperpetuum.
Concessi etiam eidem Domino Simoni and haeredibus suis reversionem omnium
illorum terrarum and tenementorum quae Johannes de Werrughby and Isabella uxor
ejus tenent in Sudburgh de haereditate mea ad terminum vitae ejusdem Isabellae;
Et quae post mortem ejusdem Isabellae mihi and haeredibus meis reverti
deberent, integre remaneant praedicto Domino Simoni and haeredibus suis,
tenenda de Capitalibus Dominis feodi per servitia quae ad praedicta tenementa
pertinent imperpetuum. Et ego praedictus Egidius and haeredes mei praedictum
Manerium cum pertinentiis una cum reversione praedictorum tenementorum
praedicto Domino Simoni, haeredibus and assignatis suis contra omnes gentes
Warrantizabimus imperpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti scripto
Sigillum meum apposui.

Hiis Testibus, Domino Thoma de Verdun, Roberto Paynly, Thoma de Wickson,
Roberto de Daventre Militibus; Nicholao de Vyeleston, Johanne de Cranestee, and
Willielmo de Seymor de Bughton, qui in testimonium huic scripto Sigilla sua
apposuerunt.
Datum apud Sudburgh die Jovis proximo post Festum Sancti Ambrosii, Anno Regni
Regis Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum decimo nono.
Charta Regis Edwardi Tertii.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, Dominus Hiberniae,
Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Sciatis quod pro duabus marcis quas dilectus and fidelis noster Simon de
Drayton nobis solvit, pardonavimus eidem Simoni transgressionem quam fecit
acquirendo sibi and haeredibus suis sexaginta and duas acras terrae de Magistro
Willielmo de la Sancerie, quadraginta and octo acras terrae de Roberto de
Werketon, quindecem acras terrae de Johanne de Seymor, and octo acras terrae de
Thoma de Chetyngton, cum pertinentiis in Brigstoke and Luffwick, quae de nobis
tenent in Capite ut dicitur, and eas ingrediendo, licentia nostra super hoc non
optenta. Et concessimus pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, quantum in nobis est,
eidem Simoni, quod ipse terram praedictam cum pertinentiis habeat and teneat
sibi and haeredibus suis de nobis and haeredibus nostris per servitia inde
debita and consueta imperpetuum, sine occasion vel impedimento nostri vel
haeredum nostrorum, Justiciariorum, Escaetorum, Vicecomitum, aut aliorum
Ballivorum seu Ministrorum nostrorum quorumcunque. Concessimus etiam eidem
Simoni quod ipse de terra praedicta cum pertinentiis, nec non de Centum and
quatuor viginti acris terrae, and quinquaginta acris bosci cum pertinentiis in
eisdem Villis, quas similiter de nobis tenet in Capite ut dicitur, feoffare
possit Willielmum Parsonam Ecclesiae de Conyngton, Johannem de Sulgrave
Parsonam Ecclesiae de Langeport, and Johannem de Rynstede Parsonam Ecclesiae de
Horpol: Habendum and tenendum eisdem Willielmo Parsonae Ecclesiae de Conyngton,
Johanni de Sulgrave and Johanni de Ryngstede, and haeredibus suis, de nobis and
haeredibus nostris per servitia inde debita and consueta imperpetuum. Et eisdem
Willielmo Parsonae Ecclesiae de Conyngton, Johanni de Sulgrave and Johanni de
Ryngstede, quod ipsi habita inde plena and pacifica seisina, dare possint and
concedere praedictos terram and boscum cum pertinentiis praedicto Simoni and
Margaretae uxori ejus: Habendum and tenendum eisdem Simoni and Margaretae ad
totam vitam suam de nobis and haeredibus nostris per servitia inde debita, and
post mortem eorumdem Simonis and Margaretae praedicti terrae and boscus cum
pertinentiis Baldewino de Drayton and Aliciae uxori ejus and haeredidibus eorum
Baldewini and Aliciae exeuntibus remaneant, tenendi de nobis and haeredibus
nostris imperpetuum. Et si iidem Baldewinus and Alicia sine haerede de
corporibus suis exeunte obierint, tunc post mortem eorumdem Baldewini and
Aliciae terra and boscus praedicti cum pertinentiis Gilberto fratri praedicti
Baldewini and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus remaneant, tenendi de nobis
and haeredibus nostris per servitia praedicta imperpetuum. Et si idem Gilbertus
sine haerede de corpore suo exeunte obierit, tunc post mortem ejusdem Gilberti
terra and boscus praedicti cum pertinentiis rectis haeredibus ipsius Simonis
integre remaneant, tenendi de nobis and haeredibus nostris per servitia
predicta imperpetuum. Et eisdem Willielmo Parsonae Ecclesiae de Conyngton,
Johanni de Sulgrave and Johanni de Rynstede, quod ipsi terram and boscum
praedictos cum pertinentiis a praefato Simone recipere possint and tenere sibi
and haeredibus suis de nobis and haeredibus nostris per servitia praedicta
imperpetuum, sicut praedictum est, tenore praesentium similite^ ^^^entiam (...)
limus specialem. Nolentes quod praedictus Simon vel haeredes sui, aut praefati
Willielmus Parsona Ecclesiae de Conyngton, Johannes de Sulgrave and Johannes de
Rynstede seu haeredes sui ratione praemissorum per nos vel haeredes nostros,
Justiciarios, Escaetores, Vicecomites, aut alios Ballivos seu Ministros nostros
quoscunque, occasionentur, molestentur in aliquo, seu graventur.

In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test
meipso apud Westmonasterium primo die Augusti, Anno Regni nostri Angliae
vicesimo nono, Regni vero nostri Franciae sexto decimo.
Charta Domini Simonis de Drayton.
HAEC Indentura testatur, quod Dominus Simon de Drayton Miles concessit,
confirmavit, and omnino de se and haeredibus suis imperpetuum remisit and
quietum clamavit Nobili viro Domino Thomae de Wake, Domino de Lydell,
haeredibus and assignatis suis, Maritagium cum custodia corporis Johannis de
Vere infra aetatem, and in custodia ejusdem Domini Thomae existentis ratione
minoris aetatis suae post mortem Domini Johannis de Vere Militis defuncti
Patris praedicti Johannis haeredis sui; Eo quod dictus Dominus Johannes pater
ejusdem haeredis dum vixit, Manerium de Thrapston cum pertinentiis per
servitium militare prius tenuit de dicto Domino Thoma Wake and Antecessoribus
suis, and de illis quorum statum idem Dominus Thomas modo habet, quam Manerium
de Magna Adyngton seu alia terras and tenementa in Comitatu Northamptoniae cum
pertinentiis de dicto Domino Simone seu antecessoribus suis, seu de illis
quorum statum praedictus Dominus Simon modo habet, per servitium militare
tenuit; salvis dicto Domino Simoni servitiis de terris and tenementis suis
praedictis and custodia eorundem quae de se tenentur in Comitatu
Northamptoniae, quae sunt de haereditate praedicti haeredis, quae quidem
servitia and custodia terrarum and tenementorum per praesentes non remittentur
sed solummodo custodia Corporis and Maritagium dicti haeredis, ut superius
dictum est. Ita quod nec praedictus Dominus Simon nec haeredes sui, nec aliquis
nomine eorundem, in Maritagium seu custodiam corporis Johannis haeredis
antedicti aut haeredum suorum aliquod Jus seu Clameum exigere de caetero vel
vindicare poterint in futuro, sed ab omni action habenda in hac part omnino
sint exclusi imperpetuum per praesentes. Et dictus Dominus Simon and haeredes
sui maritagium and custodiam corporis dicti Johannis haeredis and haeredum
suorum praefato Domino Thomae, haeredibus and assignatis suis Warrantizabunt
and defendent a quacunque action vel demando per praedictum Dominum Simonem
vel haeredes suos in posterum utenda vel habenda. Ita quod si aliqua actio vel
demandum per aliquam aliam personam extraneam de praedictis Maritagio and
custodia mota fuerit versus praefatum Dominum Thomam vel haeredes suos, dictus
Dominus Simon nec haeredes sui non teneantur Warrantizare.

In cujus rei testimonium parts partibus hujus Indenturae Sigilla sua
alternatim apposuerunt. Hiis Testibus, Dominis Johanne Bengayne, Roberto de
Holland, Willielmo Moine, Johanne Pittoc, Richardo Chamberleyne and Johanne
Paynell Militibus; Henrico Thraylly, Richardo Fuych and aliis.
Data apud Huntingdon die Mercurii in crastino Epiphaniae Domini, Anno Domini
millesimo trecentesimo, quadragesimo octavo, and anno Regni Regis Edwardi
Tertii vicesimo secundo. seal of Simon of Drayton SIGILLVM DMI SIMONIS DE
DRAYTONA



Escheat 32 Edwardi Tertii no 42o.
MArgareta, quae fuit uxor Simonis de Drayton, tenuit Manerium de Mollesworth
praedicto ad terminum vitae, de Willielmo de Lyndesey, pro servitio unius paris
calcarium deauratorum, spectante reversione ejusdem Manerii Christianae uxori
Johannis de Drayton ut filiae and unius haeredum Gilberti de Lindesey, and
Thomae Dacre filio Isabellae filiae praedicti Gilberti ut consanguini and
cohaeredi.

Goodwinus de Praesulibus Angliae, Page 320. lin. 8.
ANTE Mortem ejus Anno uno aut altero, plurimum illi molestiae exhibitum est
per foeminam quandam praenobilem Blanchiam Wake, Regis propinquam, cujus rei
Historiam paucis commemorare non pigebit. Haec mulier praedia habuit nonnulla,
aedibus Episcopalibus vicina, unde fiebat ut de finibus subinde aut rebus
consimilibus lites inter eos orirentur. Episcopus moribus erat paulo asperior,
and a Comitate aulica ita alienus, ut injurias perferre aut comiter expostulare
nesciret, quales praesertim illaturam credibile erat Dominam Genere, Divitiis
and Regis propinquitate tumentem. Ex altercationibus igitur ad simultatem cito
perventum, and a simultate ad inimicitias ac odium capitale. Quare Iracundiae
Mulier, ut facile solet ille sexus, indulgens, and animi vindictae, cupiditate
flagrantis, explendi occasionem captans, hujusmodi tandem nacta est. Papa, Rege
petente, aut potius fortassis, Edwardo Principe filio ejus, ad Episcopatum
Lichfeldensem quendam Robertum Stretton consecrari mandaverat, hominem multas
ob Causas tanto munere indignissimum; bonus iste Praesul Eliensis inquam
noster, Baptistae aemulus, ad Regem accedens, veritus non est illum eam ob rem
acriter increpare; quod ille ferens iniquissime, facessere hominem jussit and
praesentia sua in posterum eum prohibuit nisi accerseretur. Wakia jam Domina
praedicta, iracundiae Regiae opportunitatem non amittendam rata, Episcopum in
jus vocat, litis hanc causam pretexens: Homines quidam leves, per temulentiam
fortassis, nescio quid aedificii ad illam spectantis incenderant, and
deprehensi, ut gratiam ejus demererentur, mendacio parum verisimili, Episcopi
consilio hoc facinus perpetratum asserebant. Episcopo igitur ob hoc Damnum Dica
impingitur, sed Clanculum adeo, ut prius quam aliquid illam adversus se moliri
intelligerit a duodecem-viris inauditus damnatus fuerit, and libras ille
pendere nongentas jussus, id quod oportuit illum facere, prout paulo post
fecit. Pecunia numerata, quae quamvis grandis esset, magis tamen dedecore and
ignominia stimulatus quam nummorum jactura, impetrata licentia Regem adiit,
eumque supplex obtestatus est, ut sua authoritate a duodecem-viris ac testibus
contra se productis Judicii testimoniique lati rationem exigendam curaret: Et
ille sive defervescente iracundia, sive justa petenti obsecundandum ratus,
annuit quidem, sed irrito effectu. Nam cum praestituto publicis judiciis
tempore Huntingdoniae res esset tractanda, mulieris maliciosae technis effectum
est, ut prioris Judicii formulam sive exemplar is non potuerit impetrare,
adeoque omnis hic conatus in nihilum reciderit. Unde ira doloreque justissimo
percitus, apud Regem acriter conquestus est de hac tanta Injuria, obsecrans
vehementer, uti sicut legum vita esset ac dux, se tam injuste contra fas and
aequum opprimi non pateretur. Quae verba incompte ut Regi visum and aspere
enunciata, atque ita ut Regi nonnullae injustitiae labem inurere videretur,
veterem Iracundiae Flammam sopitam antea sic visam, ita rursus suscitarunt, ut
ad Parliamentum tum forte nuper coactum querimoniam de Episcopo detulerit. Et
huic quidem ingestum est quicquid Calumniarum inimicorum ingenio probabiliter
excogitari potuit, unde illi conflarent invidiam. Objectorum nonnulla partim is
negavit, partim excusavit; Rege vero in verbo regio multa tanquam sibi comperta
asserente, and nonnunquam testium faciente mentionem, de probationis validitate
nemo ausus est ambigere. Ita Parliamenti Judicio condemnatus, poena, nescio an
alia haec certe inflicta est, ut Regis praesentia imperpetuum arceretur. Non
multo deinde tempore intercedente, contigit Episcopi famulis nonnullis,
Wakianis quibusdam invia factis obviam, tumultum inter eos excitari, in quo
Wakiae famulorum unus interemptus est. Hujusce caedis Episcopum conscium
censeri placet, eamque ob rem illico accusandum, qui quanquam ab eo scelere
immunem se probe cognosceret, arbitratus tamen hujusce litis non meliorem fore
successum quam earum quae nuper ipsi fuerant intentatae, bonis omnibus
mobilibus divenditis, pecuniam ab iis collectam amicorum fidissimis servandam
commisit, seque apud illos occultavit. Ille nihilo secius per Inquisitionem a
Coronatore factam damnatus est, and Episcopatus redditus omnes aerario publico
addicti, sive ut more nostro loquar, temporalia in manum Regis seisita. Tum a
Regis Judicibus citatus, ut pro Tribunali hanc causam ipse ageret, Cantuariensi
and nonnullis aliis Episcopis comitatus comparuit; cumque declinatoriis
exceptionibus subterfugere Laicorum judicium non posset, homicidium objectum
non solum perpetrasse se negavit, sed vel consultorem vel conscium fuisse, aut
ipsum homicidam vidisse postea, a se aliove quoquam, mandato suo receptum,
occultatum, vel quovis modo adjutum. De quo petit ut per Pares suos, cum ipse
de Paribus Regni unus esset, discerneretur. Id quod illi Judices in Regis
gratiam infensi, and his nostri temporis ob integritatem credo non conferendi
denegarunt illi, ut ex levissimis nebulonibus duodecem-viratu conflato insontem
damnarent. Quod ea ratione haud aegre praestiterunt. Isti enim boni viri
duodecem-viri inquam edita sententia damnandum pronunciant Episcopum, non
caedis perpetratae, aut quasi conscium antequam ea esset perpetrata, sed quod
Radulphum Carles Camerarium suum, qui Gulielmum Holmes Wakiae famulum
occiderat, (ipsorum jam verbis utar, prout tradita reperi) post perpetratam
feloniam receptasse scienter; id quod ille, vir non malus, ad ultimum usque
halitum constantissime semper and magna cum asseveratione pernegavit. Ita
judicio de eo, tanquam sonte perlato, injuriae atrocitate, ac praesertim
ignominiae turpitudine commotus, ut hanc dilueret, ab Archiepiscopo petit, uti
coram illo se liceret a tam famoso crimine immunem per Canonicam purgationem
declarare. Quod ille aliquandiu visus est annuere, and Proclamationibus pro
more editis aliquousque res processerat, quando eum Archiepiscopus monere
coepit, ut tentaret si ad gratiam Regis ullo pacto posset aditum reperire. Hinc
Episcopus conscience non ausum Archiepiscopum secum agere secundum aequum and
jus, ne Regem offenderet, ad Papam decrevit confugere. Cui Avenionem profectus
rem omnem aperuit, qui Episcopi misertus, non solum adversarios, sed praeclaros
illos Judices Regios, quamvis Milites essent Aurati, Edictis in valvis
Ecclesiae Paulinae propositis ad Curiam suam citandos mandavit; videlicet
Gulielmum Shareshull, Gulielmum Thorp, Henricum Green, Gulielmum Nocton, and
Symonem Drayton. Ex quorum posteris vix credo quenquam hodie superesse; and
unde id conjiciam, si perconteris, hanc accipe rationem: Si parentum carnalium
Cultoribus Deus mercedem proponit vitam longaevam, Contemptoribus vero mortem
minitatur immaturam; quanto magis hujusmodi homunciones (nam hominum vix dignor
appellatione) quibus pro ludo est illis contumeliam irrogare, quos and patres
suspicere deberent ac venerari, si illud Christi attenderent, Qui vos spernit,
me spernit; quanto magis, inquam, putemus hos Deum plectere, nec in se tantum,
sed in posteris quoque, qui impietatem etiam a posteris luendam denunciavit
usque ad tertiam and quartam generationem. Vos igitur qui tales estis, si qui
tales, (sed nunquam, ut auguror, pauciores) utcunque inique agendo divitias
forsitan accumuletis, nolite putare post ducentesimum annum illustriores fore
posteros vestros quam Shareshullorum aut Noctonorum, quos hodie, opinor, novit
nemo, aut memoriam vestram quam illorum futuram gratiorem, quos pauci credo
sine execratione memorant. Sed haec, quod aiunt, extra oleas. Qui ad Tribunal
Pontificium citati sunt, non comparuerunt, and ob contumaciam excommunicati
sunt. Lincolniensi Episcopo mandatum, ut hanc Excommunicationem promulgaret; id
quod ille fecit, quamvis inde Regis offensam gravissimam incurrerit. Ac deinde
ut si illorum quisquam interea temporis obiisset, (obierant autem nonnulli, ac
imprimis bonorum Judicum unus, Simon Draytonus) exhumatus sacrata terra
protinus ejiceretur. Citati vero cum nihilominus in contumacia persisterent,
agros illorum omnes ac praedia. Interdicto Papa supposuit. Regem haec
vehementer pupugerunt, adeo ut non minus Pontifici quam Eliensi iratus, Edicto
proscripserit omnes qui Literas aut Censuras Papales quascunque aut importarent
in Regnum, aut promulgarent. Cumque non deessent qui Episcopo Roffensi Angliae
tunc Thesaurario, Literas tamen Pontificias hisce de rebus traderent, seque
armis antequam id facerent, munirent, se tamen ocyius subducerent; perquisiti
ii ac deprehensi variis affecti sunt poenis, aliis membrorum mutilatione, aliis
diuturno carcere, aliis nonnullis vero suspendio mulctatis. Qua re nunciata,
excanduit vehementer Pontifex, and Literis illico perscriptis mandavit, ut de
injuriis, quibus Eliensis Episcopus ab iniquis Judicibus and aliis Ministris
Regis fuerat affectus, sine mora satisfactionem fieri curaret. Id si facere
supersederet, atrocissima quaeque minabatur. Rex autem Bello petitus undique,
ne domi tumultum Papa concitaret veritus, ad hanc tam gravem litem componendam
Legatos misit, qui ad Romanam Curiam pervenientes, cum Eliensi Episcopo
Colloquium habuerunt. Cum vero ad Concordiam res spectare videretur, and fere
esset transacta, Eliensis tam diuturnae controversiae molestiis fatigatus,
vitaeque pene taedio confectus, mortem obiit, Junii nimirum 23o 1361. and in
illis Regionibus sepultus est. Collegio sive Hospitio S. Petri Cantabrigiae hic
Praesul Benefactor censetur egregius.

Henricus de Knighton Canonicus Leicestrensis de Eventibus Angliae, Page 20, 26.
PArum ante haec tempora orta est discordia inter fratrem Thomam de Lyle
Heliensem Episcopum and Dominam la Wake; nam homines Episcopi succenderant unum
Manerium Dominae la Wake, and homines ejus interfecerant, and Domina conquesta
est Regi de suo gravamine, and Justiciarii missi sunt ad inquirendum in causa,
scilicet Dominus Henricus Green, Dominus Willielmus de Schardeshull, and alii.
Et Episcopus venit coram eis, and compertum est quod fuit in toto culpabilis;
unde attachiatus est per temporalia sua, sicut Lex dictat, and traditus est
Episcopis, qui eum custodirent, and pro eo ad Legem responderent. At ipse
statim transivit ad Curiam Romanam, and dedit Papae intelligere, quod Rex
incarceraverat eum, and tulerat ab eo sua Temporalia contra Jura Ecclesiae.
Quam ob causam missa est sententia per Bullam Papalem super Justiciarios, and
omnes suos fautores and eis adhaerentes ac coadjutores vel consiliatores in hac
causa. Et missa fuit Bulla ad Johannem de Rynwell Episcopum Lincolniensem ad
publicandum populo, and exhumare corpora eorum si mortui essent, and projicere
extra Coemeterium. Qui continuo perrexit ad quendam Symonem de Drayton, and
exhumavit eum, and fregit parietem Ecclesiae, and extraxit corpus per foramen,
and ejecit extra Coemeterium. Et Episcopus Lincolniensis mandavit Abbati de
Burgo, idem faceret de corpore Domini Johannis de Engain Militis, sed impeditus
est per virtutem a filio dicti Militis. Cum igitur Rex ista audisset, graviter
tulit, and mandavit Papae, quod nil actum contra Episcopum citra Leges and
Consuetudines Regni. Et sic tandem, cum difficultate tamen and auxilio
Cardinalium, habuit pro eis absolutionem.

Sir JOHN of DRAYTON, Lord of Drayton and other Lands and Lordships.
Charta Domini Johannis de Drayton.
A Tous ceux qui ces Lettres verront ou orront, Johan de Drayton Chevalier,
fitz and heir de Monsieur Simon de Drayton, Salutz en Dieu. Come autrefois que
j'ay grant a Monsieur Henry Grene d'enfeffer certeyns persons, que le dit
Monsieur Henry moy voudreyt nomer, del Manoir de Drayton aussi entierement come
je l'avey per descente apres la mort de mon dit pere, ou en nulle manner aver
pourroy, a aver a eux and a leur heirs a tousiours, issint que ceux queus
auront enfeffes, refefferont moy le dit Johan a term de ma vie, and le
remeyndre apres mon decesse, a Henry le fitz dudit Monsieur Henry and a ses
heirs a tousiours. Et le dit Monsieur Henry purchasera le conge du Roy a ses
propres coustages, lequel dit grant je le dit Johan per ceo fait ratify, and
de novele regraunte and promette en ma foy and lealte a ceo, lealment tener,
and perfourmer, quel heure il plerra a dit Monsieur Henry. Et grant per cet
effet outre a dit Monsieur Henry, que s'il pourra trover asqun bon acheter de
dit Manoir qui pourra and voudra fair a moy pour term de ma vie, un greyndre
profit and plus en value a dit Henry fitz de Henry apres moy pour le Manoir,
que je purfourmeroy de ceo, come le dit Monsieur Henry voudra ordeyner issint
toutefois que je sey seur d'un greynour profit pour term de ma vie. Et grant
outre per ceo fet, a dit Monsieur Henry, que je ne fairroy less de dit Manoir,
ne de null percel de ceo, ne de nulle person a term d'ans, n'autrement a term
de vie, en nule autre manner; and que je ne feray Reles a nully dudit Manoir,
ne de null parcel de ceo en Drayton, n'en Islip, n'en aylour, de nule Rent, ne
de null autre parcel per moy ou per null autre Less a term d'ans ou a term de
vie, ou nule autre manner, sans le bon conge and volonte dudit Monsieur Henry.
Et ceste promise and Covenant bien and lealement tener, j'ay plevi ma foy en
la main dudit Monsieur Henry, and grant, que si je voygne a l'encontre, qu'un
fait d'un annuyte de cent livres and un obligation de mill livres, ou de mill
Marez, autrefois fetz a dit Monsieur Henry, seroit en lour force.

En testmonance de cestes j'ay mis mon Sele.
Done a Cottes le Mardy prochein apres la Feste de S. Laurence, l'an du Regne
du Roy Edward tierce apres la Conqueste trentisme quart.
Accord enter Monsieur Johan de Drayton and Baudewin de Drayton.
COme chose soit a toutes gens connues, come debat fust meue enter Monsieur
Johan de Drayton and Baldewin de Drayton, de certeines Terres, Rentes, Bois en
Luffwick, Brigstoke, Sudburgh, Twywell and Islip, quels le dit Monsieur Johan
clama estre percelles de son Manoir de Drayton, and taille a luy per fyn leve
l'an du Reign du Roy Edward Fitz du Roy Edward Quinisime, enter Robert le
Peyntour Chapelin, and Simon de Drayton and Margarette sa feme, avaunt quel fyn
le dit Monsieur Simon enfeffa le dit Robert de son Manoir de Drayton and Islip,
and de toutes les autres Terres queux il avoit en Luffwick, Slipton and
Grafton, and specify en son fait les percelles des Terres, Mees, Rentes,
Reversions and Prees, come piert par la copy a file a ce fait, and par un
autre fait en seal de refeffment dudit Robert, que comprent mesmes les
percelles. Et sur ce le dit Robert per fin refeffa les dites Monsieur Simon and
Margarette de toutes les Terres and surdits per nom de Manoir de Drayton, and
pro celle cause le dit Monsieur Johan les clama come percelles. Et le dit
Baldewin dit, que celles Terres and Bois and Rentes fuerent son droit, and
compriz dans fyn leave en temps du Roy Edward tierz puis la Conqueste vint and
neofisme, pur quels fyn le dit Monsieur Simon graunta certain Mees, cinquante
acres du Bois, quatre centz quatrevintz and treze acres de Terre, un Molin a
woretz, and quatre livres de Rent en Brigstoke and Luffwick soulement a Johan
de Ringsted, and al autres, and eux renderont a rere a Monsieur Simon and
Margarette sa feme a term de leurs vies, and le remaindre outre a Baldewin,
quelles Terres Simon perchesa puis le primier fyn, a ce qu'il dit; mais les
Chapelins onques ne auront seisin de son don devaunt ceste fyn, come le dit
Johan de Ringsted, que feust party a la fyn, conust expressement, quel debat
est ainsi apese, que pertant que le dit Monsieur Johan ad apertement monstre,
que le bois en le Park appelle Oldsale and Neusale, que le dit Baldewin clama,
estre le cinquante acres comprize en sa fyn, fuerent purchase avaunt le primier
fyn, and donnez a Robert le Peyntour and le dit Robert come percel du Manoir,
les reddona a Simon and Margarette, accord est que celles Bois demeure verse le
dit Monsieur Johan, and aussi tout le remenant du Park demeure a dit Monsieur
Johan, pertant que ce est en les Villes de Sudburg and Twywell, quels Villes ne
sont pas compriz en la fyn du Baldewin; and en droit de la Rent en Luffwick,
accord est que Baldewin aura la Rent and Terre appelle Getyndones Land, and
aussi la Terre que fuest a Robert Aleyn and un William in the Lane, c'est
assavoir, de quiconque fuest purchase de eux and mise la per fyn, and queux ne
sont pas compris en le primier fyn. Et le dit Monsieur Johan aura and retiendra
devers luy toutes autres Rentes, Terres and Tenements quiconque en la dite
Ville per le primier fyn, and come heir Simon, and ainsi que toutz les
Tenements quiconques en Brigstoke forpuis le dit Bois demeure a dit Baldewin
par la fyn ensemblement, ove les autres Terres queux sont del auncienne
demeine, sauve au dit Monsieur Johan son term, and sauve au dit Monsieur Johan
son action du trespass, quelle ils avoient devaunt la confection de ceste fait,
de quiconques chooses. Et le dit Baldewin par ceo fait relesse and quite claim
au dit Monsieur Johan toutes claims du droit qu'il pourra aver en touz les
Tenements susdits, queux sont a demeure avec luy par cest accord, ou par autre
maniere. Cest accord fuest fait en la presence de Monsieur Henry Green, Johan
Harrawden, John de Ringsted Parson de Luffwick, William de Luffwick Parson de
Aldewincle, Robert Luffenham, Reinald Tikessore, Nicholas Green, John de la
Karnaily, Thomas Paucley, Oliver Duffin, and toutes les bones gentz de Luffwick
en l'Eglise de Luffwick.

A ceo Tesmoignent les parties susdites ont mis leur Seal.
Done a Luffwick le Dimenche en la Feste Saint Pierre ad vincula, l'an du
Reign du Roy Edward tierz puis la Conqueste trentiesme quint.
Finis factus inter Johannem de Drayton and Henricum Green, and alios.
HAEC est finalis Concordia facta in Curia Domini Regis apud Westmonasterium in
Crastino Ascensionis Domini, Anno Regnorum Edwardi Regis Angliae and Franciae
Tertii, a Conquestu tricesimo quinto, coram, etc. Inter Henricum Green,
Richardum de Bollesore Parsonam Ecclesiae de Pisford, Johannem de Keteryng
Parsonam Ecclesiae de Boketon, Willielmum de Ashell Parsonam Ecclesiae de
Morton, Nicolaum Green and Nicolaum de Thenford querentes, and Robertum de
Isham positum loco ipsorum Richardi, Johannis, Willielmi and Nicolai de
Thenford ad lucrand. etc. and Johannem Drayton deforc. de Manerio de Drayton
cum pertinentiis, unde placitum Conventionis summonitum fuit inter eos in eadem
Curia, scilicet quod praedictus Johannes de Drayton recognovit praedictum
Manerium cum pertinentiis esse jus ipsorum Henrici, Richardi, Johannis de
Keteryng, Willielmi, Nicolai and Nicolai, and illud eis reddidit in eadem
Curia, exceptis uno messuagio, duobus toftis, uno molindino, septem cotagiis,
duabus carucatis terrae, duabus acris prati, uno feodo Militis and december
solidatis in eodem Manerio. Et concessit praedictus Henricus Richardo, Johanni
de Keteryng, Willielmo, Nicolao and Nicolao praedictum feodum and redditum cum
pertinentiis simul cum homagiis and totis servitiis Roberti de Vere and
Milisentae de Islip and haeredum suorum, de totis tenementis quae de praedicto
Johanne de Drayton prius tenuerint in praedicto Manerio: Habendum and tenendum
eisdem Henrico, Richardo, Johanni de Keteryng, Willielmo, Nicolao and Nicolao
and haeredibus suis, de Domino Rege and Haeredibus suis, per servitia quae ad
praedicta Manerium, feodum and redditum, sicut praedictum est, pertinent,
imperpetuum. Et praeterea idem Johannes Drayton concessit pro se and haeredibus
suis, quod praedicta messuagium, toftum, cotagia, terra and pratum cum
pertinentiis superius excepta, quae praedicta Milisenta tenuit ad terminum
quadraginta annorum, Et etiam quod praedictum molendinum cum pertinentiis, quod
pro eadem Milisenta and Robertus Etebred tenuerunt ad terminum quinque annorum,
ex dimissione praedicti Johannis de Drayton in praedicto Manerio, die quo haec
concordia facta fuit, and quae post terminos praedictos ad praedictum Johannem
de Drayton and haeredes suos debuerunt reverti, post terminos praedictos
integre remaneant praedictis Henrico, Johanni de Keteryng, Willielmo, Nicolao
and Nicolao and haeredibus suis, tenenda simul cum praedictis Manerio, feodo
and redditu, sicut praedictum est, quae eis per finem istum remanent, de Domino
Rege and Haeredibus suis, per servitia quae ad illa tenementa pertinent,
imperpetuum. Et praedictus Johannes de Drayton and haeredes sui warrantizabunt
praedictis Henrico, Richardo, Johanni de Keteryng, Willielmo, Nicolao and
Nicolao and haeredibus suis praedictum Manerium cum pertinentiis, sicut
praedictum est, contra omnes homines imperpetuum. Et pro hac recognitione,
redditione, concessione, Warrantizatione, fine and concordia iidem Henricus,
Johannes de Keteryng, Willielmus, Nicolaus, and Nicolaus dederunt praedicto
Johanni de Drayton ducentas marcas Argenti.

Charta Domini Johannis de Drayton.
A Tous ceux, que cestes verront, Johan de Drayton Chevalier Salutz en Dieu.
Sachez moy avoir grante, rendu, and per ceste present escrite confirm, a
Henry fitz. de Monsieur Henry Green mon Cousin, le chief Mees and site du
Manoir de Drayton, les Demeynes, Terres, Prez, Pastures, Parks, Bois, and
toutes autres chooses a ceo appurtenentes, sauve la rent du dit Manoir, c'est
assavoir, en Islip, Luffwick, Slipton, pour le term de trente ans, si je vive
tant longement; and si ne vive, que apres ma mort meintenant il retournera a
dit Henry mon Cousin and a ses heirs de son corpse engendrez. Et s'il devient
sans heir, a Thomas son friar and a ses heirs a tousiours. Et mon dit Cousin
portera mes arms, and mon surnom, come autrefois fust accord enter son pere
and moy. Et le dit Monsieur Henry, and les autres qui sont feffez pour moy, per
fyn en la Court du Roy, enfefferont le dit Henry mon Cousin au Manoir susdit
sans null delay.

En tesmognance de cestes, j'ai mis mon Sele.
Done a Buckton le Mecredy procheyn apres la Feste de Pentecoste, l'an du
Reign du Roy Edward Tierce puis le Conquest trentisme sysme. SIGILLVM IOHANNIS
DE DRAYTONA MILITIS

seal of Sir John de Drayton

Indentura inter Johannem de Drayton, and alios.
CEste Endenture tesmoigne, come Monsieur Johan de Drayton donna per fyn a
Monsieur Henry Green, Richard de Bollesore Parson de l'Esglise de Buckton,
William de Ashell Parson de l'Esglise de Morton, Nicholas Green, and Nicholas
de Thenford, son Manoir de Drayton ove les appurtenences; and accord fust que
le dit Monfieur Johan auroit estate a term de sa vie en le dit Manoir ove les
appurtenences, and la reversion a Henry fitz du dit Monsieur Henry, and a ses
heirs de son corpse engendres, and defaut de issu, a d'avtres heirs du dit
Monsieur Henry and a ses heirs de son corpse engendrez, and en defaut de issu,
a d'autres heirs du dit Monsieur Henry. Et puis accord est sur les fesaimcez
de ceste endenture, que le dit Monsieur Johan susrenda, grantera and relessera
ausdits Monsieur Henry, Richard, William, Nicholas, and Nicholas tout le droit
qu'il a en le dit Manoir ove les appurtenences, and en le Park de Drayton, and
Forests Bois, and en toutes les parcelles encloses dedans le dit Park and
Manoir de queconque temps purchasez, and en toutes les Terres, Tenements, Prez,
Pastures, Rentes, Suites and Custumes, Molins, Reversions, Vileins and leurs
Suites, in Islip, Luffwick, Twywell and Slipton, quite du dit Monsieur Johan
and ses heirs a tousiours, and prendra, and aura estate de toute la rent du
dit Manoir en Islip and Luffwick a term de trente ans, sauvant Reversion au
dit Monsieur Henry, Richard, William, Nicholas and Nicholas, and a leurs
assigns, a quel heure, que le dit Monsieur Johan devye dans le temps de trente
ans susdit: Sur quoy le dit Monsieur Johan suffrent, grant, and remet per y
cestes ausdits Monsieur Henry, Richard, William, Nicholas and Nicholas en leur
possession tout le droit qu'il a sur le dit Manoir, Terres, Tenements, Rentes,
Suites, Customs, Prez, Pastures, Molins, Reversions, Vileins ou leurs Suites,
Bois, Parks, and percelles susdits, ove toutes leurs appurtenences quites de
luy and de ses heirs a tousiours, sauvant solement a luy sa Rent sec pour le
term susdit, come dessus est dit. Pour quel enfrendre, grante, and relesse le
dit Monsieur Henry a l'avandit Monsieur Johan quarrent livers, and le dit
Monsieur Henry avoir tous les blez croissans sur les demeyns terres du dit
Manoir.

En tesmoignance de cestes, les parties susdits enterchangeablement ont mis
leurs Seles per iceuz tesmoignes, Thomas Pavely, Oliver Duffin, Robert de Isham
and autres.
Done a Buckton le Samedy prochain devant la Feste de Saint Mark, l'an du
Reign du Roy Edward tirez puis la Conqueste trintisme sisme.
Charta Regis Edwardi Tertii.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae and Aquitaniae, omnibus ad
quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis quod cum nuper de gratia
nostra speciali concessermus and licentiam dederimus pro nobis and haeredibus
nostris, puantum in nobis est, dilecto and fideli nostro Johanni de Drayton,
quod ipse de Manerio de Drayton cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Northamptoniae,
quod de nobis tenetur in Capite ut dicitur, feoffare possit dilectum and
fidelem nostrum Henricum Green, Richardum de Bollesore Parsonam Ecclesiae de
Pisford, Johannem Keteryng Parsonam Ecclesiae de Boketon, Willielmum de Ashell
Parsonam Ecclesiae de Morton, Nicolaum Green and Nicolaum de Thenford: Habendum
and tenendum sibi and haeredibus suis de nobis and haeredibus nostris per
servitia inde debita and consueta imperpetuum. Et eisdem Henrico, Richardo,
Johanni de Keteryng, Willielmo, Nicolao and Nicolao, quod ipsum Manerium
praedictum cum pertinentiis a praefato Johanne de Drayton recipere possint and
tenere, sibi and heredibus suis de nobis and haeredibus nostris, per servitia
praedicta, imperpetuum, similiter licentiam dedimus specialem, prout in Literis
nostris Patentibus inde confectis before continetur. Qui quidem Henricus,
Richardus, Johannes de Keteryng, Willielmus, Nicolaus and Nicolaus Manerium
praedictum cum pertinentiis virtute feoffamenti praedicti Johannis de Drayton,
sibi de eodem Manerio de licentia nostra praebicta facti, sunt ingressi, and
illud ita conjunctim, feoffati ut praemittitur tenent in praesenti, sicut sumus
before informati. Nos volentes praefato Henrico gratiam facere specialem,
concessimus and licentiam dedimus pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, quantum in
nobis est, praefato Henrico, quod ipse totum statum quem in eodem Manerio cum
pertinentiis virtute Feoffamenti praedicti sic habet, praefatis Richardo,
Johanni de Keteryng, Willielmo, Nicolao and Nicolao and haeredibus suis
remittere and relaxare possit imperpetuum; and eisdem Richardo, Johanni de
Keteryng, Willielmo, Nicolao and Nicolao, quod ipsi, facta eis prius per
praefatum Henricum remissione praedicta, dare possint and concedere dictum
Manerium cum pertinentiis praefatio Henrico and Henrico filio ejusdem Henrici:
Habendum and tenendum eisdem Henrico and Henrico, and haeredibus de Corpore
ipsius Henrici filii exeuntibus, de nobis and haeredibus nostris, per servitia
praedicta imperpetuum; Ita quod si idem Henricus filius sine haerede de Corpore
suo exeunte obierit, tunc post mortem praedictorum Henrici and Henrici,
Manerium praedictum cum pertinentiis Thomae fratri ejusdem Henrici filii, and
haeredibus de Corpore ipsius Thomae exeuntibus; Et post decessum ejusdem
Thomae, si ipse sine haerede de Corpore suo exeunte obierit, rectis haeredibus
praedicti Henrici Green remaneat; tenendum sibi and haeredibus suis de nobis
and haeredibus nostris per servitia praedicta imperpetuum. Et eisdem Henrico
and Henrico, quod ipsi Manerium praedictum cum pertinentiis a praefatis
Richardo, Johanne de Keteryng, Willielmo, Nicolao and Nicolao recipere possint
and tenere sibi and haeredibus de Corpore praedicti Henrici filii exeuntibus,
de nobis and haeredibus nostris, per servitia praedicta imperpetuum, ut
praedictum est, tenore praesentium similiter Licentiam dedimus specialem,
nolentes quod praefati Henricus and Henricus vel haeredes sui, aut praefati
Richardus, Johannes de Keteryng, Willielmus, Nicolaus and Nicolaus, vel
haeredes sui, ratione praemissorum, per nos vel haeredes nostros, Justiciarios,
Escaetores, Vicecomites, aut alios Ballivos suos, ministros nostros quoscunque,
occasionentur, molestentur in aliquo seugraventur. In cujus rei testimonium has
Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium undecimo die Decembris, Anno Regni nostri
tricesimo octavo. Per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Charta Richardi Wollessore and aliorum.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod cum Johannes de Drayton miles nuper dederit
and concesserit per Cartam Domini Regis, de licentia and in Curia Domini Regis,
per finem levatam, Henrico Green militi, Johanni Keteryng qui nunc mortuus est,
Richardo Bollesore Parsonae Ecclesiae de Buckton, Willielmo de Ashell Parsonae
Ecclesiae de Moreton, Nicolao Green and Nicolao Thenford, Manerium de Drayton
cum suis pertinentiis: Habendum and tenendum praedictis Henrico, Johanni,
Richardo, Willielmo, Nicolao and Nicolao and eorum haeredibus and assignatis
imperpetuum, ut per praedictum finem and Cartam inde confectas before apparet,
de Domino Rege and aliis Dominis feodi illius per servitia inde debita and
consueta. Et postmodum praefatus Henricus relaxavit per factum suum praedictis
Richardo, Willielmo, Nicolao and Nicolao in plena and pacifica seisina
eorundem, post mortem praedicti Johannis, totum jus suum and clameum quod
habuit in Manerio praedicto cum omnibus suis pertinentiis. Nos tamen dicti
Richardus, Willielmus, Nicolaus and Nicolaus per praesens Scriptum concessimus
and confirmavimus praedicto Henrico and Henrico filio ejusdem Henrici Manerium
praedictum cum suis pertinentiis: Habendum and tenendum praefato Henrico and
Henrico filio suo, and haeredibus ipsius Henrici filii Henrici de Corpore suo
exeuntibus, de Domino Rege and aliis Dominis feodi illius per servitia inde
debita and de jure consueta; Ita quod si idem Henricus filius Henrici obierit
sine haerede de Corpore suo exeunte, tunc praedictum Manerium cum suis
pertinentiis post mortem Henrici and Henrici, Thomae fratri ejusdem Henrici,
filii Henrici, and haeredibus de Corpore suo exeuntibus remaneat imperpetuum,
tenendum de Domino Rege and aliis Dominis feodi illius in forma praedicta. Ita
quod si idem Thomas sine haerede de Corpore suo exeunte obierit, quod extunc
Manerium praedictum rectis haeredibus dicti Henrici patris remaneat
imperpetuum, Licentia Domini Regis de praedicta relaxatione and hoc Feoffamento
obtenta, prout pateat per Cartam ipsius Domini Regis inde confectam Anno Regni
sui post Conquestum tricesimo octavo, termino Michaelis. Dedimus etiam
praedictis Henrico and Henrico, and haeredibus suis supradictis, omnia alia
Tenementa, Boscos and Assarta, quae habuimus de dono sive de confirmatione
ipsius Johannis de Drayton in Sudburgh and Twywell, Brigstock, Slipton and
Luffwick cum suis pertinentiis: Habendum eisdem Henrico and Henrico and eorum
haeredibus supradictis. Et si contingat praedictum Henricum filium Henrici
obire sine haeredibus ut supradictum est, quod extunc remaneant praefato Thomae
fratri praedicti Henrici and Haeredibus suis praedictis. In cujus rei
testimonium praesentibus Sigillum meum apposui.

Hiis Testibus, Roberto de Holland, Johanne de Verdon, Richardo Chamberlen
militibus; Roberto de Vere, Gilberto Lord, Johanne Chamberlen de Luffwick, and
aliis.
Data apud Drayton die Veneris in Vigilia Sancti Thomae Apostoli, Anno Regni
Regis Edwardi Tertii a conquestu tricesimo octavo.
Charta Johannis de Drayton.
A Tous ceux que cestes Lettres verront, Johan de Drayton Salutz en Dieu. Come
naugareis jeo grant and rendu per fyn per conge de nostre Sire le Roy le
Manoir de Drayton ove les appurtenences, a Monsieur Henry Green, Nicholas
Green, Nicholas de Thenford, Richard de Bollesore Parson de l'Esglise de
Bukton, and William de Ashell Parson de l'Esglise de Morton, a avoir and tenir
a eux and a leurs heirs: Et puis les avant-dits Monsieur Henry, Nicholas,
Nicholas, Richard and William granteront and lesseront a moy le dit Johan toute
la Rent ensemblement ove les Services, Seigneuries, Custumes and autres
appurtenences en Islip, que fust parcel de dit Manoir, a tenir a temps de
trente ans: Sachez moy avoir grante and rendu a dit Monsieur Henry toute le
Rent susdit ensemblement ove les Services, Seigneuries, Custumes and autres
appurtenences, a avoir and tenir a dit Monsieur Henry and a ses heirs quites
de moy and de mes heirs a tousjours. Et aussi jeo relesse a dit Monsieur Henry
tout le droit que j'avois en le Manoir de Drayton, and en null parcel de ceo,
and en tous autres Tenements queux fueront a Monsieur mon Pere, and que sont en
la main dudit Monsieur Henry, c'est assavoir, en Sudburgh, Slipton and toutes
parts aillours, frospice la rent en Luffwick, quitment sans rien chalenger en
icelle desorenavant. En tesmoigne del cestes j'ay mis mon Seal per y ceux
tesmoignes, Monsieur Richard Chamberleyne, Robert Vere, Nicholas Green, Thomas
Paucely, Robert de Isham and autres. Done a Cottes le Dimanche prochain apres
la Feste del decollation de Saint John le Baptiste, l'an du Reign du Roy Edward
Tirce puis la Conqueste trentoytisme.

Charta Johannis de Drayton and Margaretae filiae Johannis de Nowers.
A Tous y ceux que ceste Lettre verront ou orront, Johan de Drayton Chevalier
and Margarette la fille, John de Nowers de Luffwick Salutez en Dieu. Sachez
nous avoir relesse, rendu, and quite clame, quites de nous and de nos heirs a
Monsieur Henry Green pour temps de la vie du dit Henry, and apres son decez a
Henry fills mesme cest Henry and ses heirs de son corpse engendrez, and sil devye
sans heir de son corpse engendre, a droit heirs Henry le pier, tout le droit
que nous avons en les Rentes, Terres, Prez and Pastures, and toutes les
appurtenences en Luffwick, sibien en queconque Tenement qui sont compris en la
Chartre, and fyn fait a Robert le Peyntour, come en les Terres, Rentes, Prez,
puis cel fyn leve, and Chartre fait, puis enterchangez per Monsieur Symond de
Drayton pour auscuns des Tenementz compris dans le fyn and Chartre, quels come
parcel du Manoir demoreront dans les dits Henry, Henry and Thomas en lieu des
autres Tenements, ainsi que nous les avaunt dits Johan and Margarette deors ne
clament rien en les avaunt dites Rentes, Terres, Prez and Pastures ove les
appurtenences, pour eux chalenger ne claimer, mais soyons forclos a tousiours.
En tesmoignance de quelle chose a y cestes nous avons mis nos Seals.

Done a Luffwick le Samedy prochain a la Feste de Saint Jaques, l'an du Reign
du Roy Edward de Tierz depuis la Conqueste trente neofyme, par iceux
tesmoignez, Johan Nicol, Thomas Pavely, Gilbert Lord, Johan Chamberlain de
Luffwick, Oliver Duffin and autres.

Sir BALDWIN of DRAYTON, Lord of Stoke-goldington, Bottlebrigg in the County of
Huntington, and South-Newington in the County of Oxford.
Memorandum, quod copia Chartae Simonis de Drayton Roberto le Seymor Capellano
de qua infra fit mentio, remanet penes Edwardum de Thrapstone. Fact. Sigillat'
sic.
ITEM memorandum, quod in ista concordia subito per aliqua verba contumeliosa
tunc locuta inter Johannem Parsonam de Luffwick and Bawdewynum, cognita and
declarata fuit tota falsitas cujusdam Scripti post mortem Simonis de Drayton,
facti apud Bottlebrigg. Quodam die in aurora diei jacebant in lectis suis simul
Valectus and Clericus Simonis de Witcleysye, qui scripsit praedictum falsum
scriptum. Praedictus Johannes Parsona dixit Bawdewyno, Quid dabitis mihi and
ego faciam tibi unum magnum commodum and proficuum? Respondit Johannes de
Luffwick, Ego faciam tibi bonum regardum. Et dixit Johannes Parsona, Dominus
meus Simon de Drayton est mortuus, and ego habeo Sigillum suum adhuc integrum,
and ipse Simon magnum fecit in vita tibi Bawdewyno malefactum de aliquibus
parcellis and tenementis quae vos debueritis habere per Maritagium vestrum, nam
ipse Simon magnum fecit scriptum mihi Johanni Parsonae, and sociis in fine
vestro nominatis. Faciamus quoddam factum sub nomine dicti Simonis, Willielmo
de Islip Parsonae Ecclesiae de Kenyngton, Johanni de Sulgrave Parsonae
Ecclesiae de Langport, and mihi Johanni Parsonae Ecclesiae de Horpol, de terris
quae recitatae sunt in fine vestro, and specificemus in eadem carta omnia
terras and tenementa, servitia and redditus quae vos vultis habere, and metas
and bundas, sicut volueritis, in Manerio de Drayton; and ego dictum scriptum
sic sactum sigillabo ante fractionem Sigilli Domini mei. Et praedictus
Bawdewynus and Johannes praesentes totum hoc dictum and scriptum falsum esse
sactum cognoverint.

Escheat 32 Edwardi Tertii.
JOhannes filius Domini Simonis de Drayton Militis, salutem in Domino.
Noveritis me remisisse, relaxasse and quietum clamasse Baldewino de Drayton,
filio meo and Aliciae Uxori ejus, etc. totum jus and clameum quae habeo, seu
quovis modo habere potero, in Manerio de Bottelbrig, etc. Etiam Overton
Longville, sine aliquo mihi reservando.

Datum apud Bottelbrig die Sabbathi in Festo Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, anno
Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum tricesimo secundo.
Charta Baldewini de Drayton.
PAteat universis per praesentes, me Baldewinum de Drayton remisisse,
relaxasse, and omnino pro me and haeredibus meis quietum clamasse Henrico
Green, filio Henrici Green Militis, totum jus meum and clameum quod habeo seu
quovis modo habere potero in Manerio de Drayton cum omnibus suis pertinentris,
and in omnibus terris and tenementis, redditibus, serviciis, boscis and
reversionibus quae praedictus Henricus tenet in Brigstok, Sudburgh, Twywell,
Slipton and Islip praefato Henrico filio Henrici, haeredibus and assignatis
suis imperpetuum; Ita quod nec ego dictus Baldewinus, nec haeredes mei, nec
aliquis alius nomine nostro, in Manerio praedicto cum suis pertinentiis, nec in
omnibus terris and tenementis, vel boscis praedictis, ut praedictum est,
aliquod jus vel clameum exigere vel vindicare poterimus in futurum, sed ab omni
action nostra sumus exclusi per praesentes. Et ego vero praedictus Baldewinus
(...) haeredes mei praedictum Manerium cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, terris
and tenementis, redditibus, serviciis, boscis and reversionibus, ut praedictum
est, praedicto Henrico filio Henrici, haeredibus and assignatis suis contra
omnes gentes warrantizabimus imperpetuum.

In cujus rei testimonium praesenti scripto Sigillum meum apposui,
hiis Testibus, Willielmo la Souche de Bramfield, Thoma Pavely, Roberto de
Isham, Willielmo Thernyng, Johanne Luffwick seniore, Willielmo de Islip, and
Johanne Luffwick juniore, and aliis.
Data apud Drayton die Veneris proxima post Festum Sancti Ambrosii, Anno Regni
Regis Edwardi Tertii, post Conquestum Angliae quadragesimo sexto. SIGILLVM
BALDEWINI DE DRAYTONA

seal of Baldwin of Drayton

Charta Henrici Green.
HEnricus Green Chevalier dat Domino Regi pro licentia concordandi cum
Baldewino de Drayton and Alicia Uxore ejus, de duobus messuagiis, duobus
toftis, una acra terrae and octo denaratis redditus cum pertinentiis in
Luffwick..... and est concordia talis, quod praedicti Baldewinus and Alicia
recognoverunt tenementa and redditus praedicta cum pertinentiis esse jus ipsius
Henrici, de quibus idem Henricus habet duo tosta cum pertinentiis de dono
praedictorum Baldewini and Aliciae; and concedunt quod unum messuagium de
tenementis praedictis quod Willielmus Gelleson and Rosa uxor ejus, and Johannes
filius eorum, tenent ad terminum vitae eorum, and quod unum messuagium cum
pertinentiis de tenementis praedictis quod Hugo Taillor and Thoma filius ejus
tenent ad totam vitam eorum, quod una acra terrae cum pertinentiis quam
Johannes Church, Johanna uxor ejus and Johannes filius eorum and Johanna filia
eorum tenent ad terminum vitae eorum de haeredibus praedicti Bawdewini, and
quae post mortem, etc. ad praedictos Bawdewinum and Aliciam and haeredes ipsius
Bawdewini revertere deberent, remaneant praefato Henrico and haeredibus suis,
tenenda simul and cum, de capitalibus Dominis, etc. Et praedictus idem
Bawdewinus and Alicia concedunt eidem Henrico totum redditum praedictum cum
pertinentiis, simul cum homagiis and totis serviciis Margerae Clark, Johannis
Webster, Johannis Ob.... Willielmi Ludewel, and haeredum suorum, habendum and
tenendum simul and cum, praedicto Henrico and haeredibus suis, de capitalibus
Dominis, etc........ and eidem Bawdewino and Aliciae, and haeredibus Bawdewini.

Altera Reliquia Draytoniana.
Charta Willielmi de Drayton.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc praesens scriptum pervenerit, Willielmus
Drayton de South-Newington in Comitatu Oxon. Armiger, filius and haeres Annae,
quae fuit uxor Thomae Halle, nuper uxoris Johannis Drayton Armigeri, patris
praedicti Willielmi, salutem in Domino. Noveritis me praefatum Willielmum
remisisse, relaxasse and omnino pro me and haeredibus meis imperpetuum quietum
clamasse Willielmo Lucy Militi, Willielmo Catesby Militi, Thomae Wake Armigero,
Willielmo Vaux Armigero, Roberto Tanfield, Simoni Burton and Willielmo
Aldewincle Armigero, haeredibus and assignatis suis, totum jus meum, titulum
and clameum quae habeo in Manerio de Drayton cum suis pertinentiis, ac in
omnibus terris, tenementis, redditibus and serviciis in Drayton, Luffwick and
Brigstoke, cum suis pertinentiis in Comitatu Northamptoniae; Ita videlicet quod
nec ego praefatus Willielmus Drayton nec haeredes mei, nec aliquis alius nomine
nostro, aliquod jus, titulum vel clameum in praedictis Manerio, terris,
tenementis, redditibus and serviciis cum suis pertinentiis exigere, clamare vel
vindicare poterimus in futuro, sed ab omni action nostra, titulo and clameo
inde sumus exclusi imperpetuum per praesentes. Et ego vero praedictus
Willielmus Drayton and haeredes mei omnia praedicta Manerium, terras,
tenementa, redditus and servicia cum suis pertinentiis praefatis Willielmo
Lucy, Willielmo Catesby, Thomae Wake, Willielmo Vaux, Roberto, Simoni and
Willielmo Aldwyncle, haeredibus and assignatis suis, contra Edmundum Abbatem
Westmonasterii and successores suos warrantizabimus, and imperpetuum
defendemus. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti scripto Sigillum meum
apposui. Datum vicesimo quarto die Maii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti, post
Conquestum Angliae tricesimo secundo.

Monasticon Anglicanum, 2 Pars, fol. 197, 40, 198, 11.
De Dorchester in Agro Oxoniensi.
IN Australi Chori insula viri tres generosi, Draytonorum familiae, sub planis
lapidibus marmoreis sibi proximi jacent. Dominus Berentine quasdam eorundem
Draytonorum terras possidet. Ad istorum Draytonorum caput sub marmore plano
jacet vir quidam generosus Gilbertus Segrave.

A SUCCINCT GENEALOGY Of the HOUSE of MAUDUIT, THAT WERE LORDS of WERMINSTER
Justified by Public Records, Extant Charters, Histories, and other Authentic
Proofs.
By ROBERT HALSTEAD.
The Arms of the House of Mauduit, were Chequy Or and Azure a Bordure Gules.

blazon or coat of arms of the house of Mauduit

Of the Original, Descent, Greatness, Possessions, Honors, Alliances and Arms
of the House of Mauduit that were Lords of Werminster.
THIS House was originally of the Dukedom of Normandy, where it flourished
before the Conquest under the name of Mauduit, Manduit or Malduith, as much as
to say, Evil taught, and upon occait was written in the Latin tongue
Maledoctus; a sobriquet of which the grounds do not remain in story. A Lord of
this name came over with King William the First, under the appearance of much
reputation and interest. He is recorded to have been in immediate service at
the Battle where King Harold was slain, and to have been one of those Lords to
whom the Conqueror gave Lands for their notable services. The Actions
performed by those of this House have been famous, their successes various, the
remembrance of their Lords illustrating story with the variety of their
fortunes. There had been in this Family great marks of the love and confidence
of their Princes. They were promoted to Dignities, and trusted in employments
of most importance. There were of them had been Lords of much power, that had
been Governors of Provinces, that had been Chamberlains and held the highest
Offices in the Houses of their Kings, that had been great Earls, and all of
them allied to Families of most Power and Nobleness. After the introduction of
the hereditary use of Arms, in this House they were differently born; for
William Lord Mauduit, who was Earl of Warwick, bore in a Field Argent two Bar
Gules in the time of King Henry the Third: But William Lord Mauduit his Cousin
and contemporary, from whom the Lords of Werminster did descend, gave in a
Bordure Gules Chequy Or and Azure. This House notwithstanding and all its
greatness took an end about the beginning of King Richard the Second, leaving
only to inherit their Name, Arms and Possessions, Matilda de Mauduit, that was
married to Sir Henry Green of Drayton, from whom to the Veres that were Lords
of Adington, descended all their pretensions, and from them to the Mordaunts,
that by the marriage of Elizabeth Vere came to inherit the Arms and Lands of
those two Noble Families.

WILLIAM Lord MAVDVIT, Chamberlain to King Henry the First, Lord of Hanslape
and other Great Lands and Lordships.
AMong those Heroes that did accompany King William the First unto the Conquest
of England, was a Lord of the Name of Mauduit, Manduit, or Malduith, in the
Latin termed Maledoctus. Whether it was the William here mentioned, or his
Father, it matters not: but sure we are, that at the time of the general
Surveigh, i^ the Reign of that King, this William Lord Mauduit is found to have
possessed seven fa^^ Lordships in Hampshire. And coming afterward by the merit
of many great Service^ and the favor of King Henry the First to be his
Chamberlain, he obtained from hi^ a Grant of all the Lands whereof Micael de
Hanslape dyed seized, with Maude the Daughter of the said Micael in Marriage.

Their Issue,
Robert Mauduit. William Mauduit.


ROBERT MAUDUIT succeeded his Father in all his Lands and Lordships, as also in
the Office of Chamberlain: but the near trust wherein he lived with King Henry
the First, having caused him to be one of those Lords that were appointed to
accompany his Children in their return out of France, he was drowned in that
unhappy passage from Harflew into England with those unfortunate and much
lamented Princes.

FOR want of Issue male of the Lord Robert Mauduit, WILLIAM his younger Brother
came to inherit the Estate that he had left; and the Office of Chamberlain was
likewise bestowed upon him by Henry Duke of Normandy (afterward King, by the
name of Henry the Second) with all the Lands belonging thereunto as well in
Normandy as in England. This William had likewise by Grant of the said Duke the
Chamberlainship of his Treasury, that is of his Exchequer, with livery and all
other its appurtenances. He had moreover, in consideration of his good
services, diverse other great Lordships bestowed upon him, and also the
Constablery of Richege in Fee. And after Henry, by the death of King Stephen,
obtained the Crown, he confirmed to this William all the premises. When he
dyed I find not, but he left Issue Robert Lord Mauduit.


AFter the Death of William Lord Mauduit, the second of that name, ROBERT his
Son came to inherit all his great Possessions, as likewise the Office of
Chamberlain, with what ever did belong thereunto. And as an addition to his
Fortunes King Henry the Second bestowed upon him, by his Charter, the noble
Manor of Werminster, a Lordship at that time of much value and greatly
privileged; which by another Charter was after confirmed by King Richard the
First, eldest Son and successor to King Henry. After the Death of which King
Richard, upon what motives we do not find, this Robert Lord Mauduit became
involved in Confederacy with many of the great Barons, who were at that time in
Rebellion against King John. And in the first year of King Henry the Third, the
Honor of Hanslape with its appurtenances, which was the head of his Barony,
appears to have been granted away to Robert de Braboef for support in the Kings
service, during his pleasure. But before the sixth year of that King, this
Robert Mauduit died, leaving Issue by his Wife Isabella, the Daughter of the
Lord Thurstan Bassett, William Lord Mauduit. Robert Mauduit, to whom his Father
gave the noble Lordship of Werminster.


WILLIAM Lord MAUDUIT the third of that name, after the death of his Father,
was Lord of the Honor of Hanslape, and diverse other fair Lands and Lordships;
as also hereditary Chamberlain of the Exchequer. Having been bred under his
Father and in the rebellion of those Lords that made War in the time of King
John, he continued the same course after that Lords decease, fortifying his
Castles and his Houses in favor of the associated Barons, particularly that of
Hanslape, which was taken and demolished by Falcatius de Breant, a renouned
Soldier of that Age, and a bold asserter of the Kings Authority: For which and
other contumacies he was with other of the Lords Excommunicated by the Pope.
But all this allayed not his turbulent spirit, but he still persisting in his
Rebellion, was actually at the Battle of Lincoln, where the power of the Lords
being totally vanquished, he was taken Prisoner. But after this he returned to
his obedience, and enjoyed his Estate by the Kings Grace; and in the
seventeenth Year of Henry the Third he obliged himself by a special writing to
serve the King faithfully all his life, and never more to oppose him or his
Heirs. For securing of which promise he delivered up his Son William in
Hostage, who was after returned as an assurance of the Kings trust. He departed
this life in the One and fortieth year of Henry the Third, leaving Issue by
Alice his Wife, Daughter of Waleran de Newburgh Earl of Warwick, William Lord
Mauduit, afterward Earl of Warwick.


AT the Death of his Father, WILLIAM Lord MAUDUIT the fourth of that name, was
thirty six years old, upon the possession of the Estate and Dignity of his
Ancestors, he received early testimonies of the Kings trust and favor, by the
acceptance of a moderate relief for his Barony and his Sergeantry, and
reasonable time for the payment. The Lords of his Family had ever the
reputation of being Martial, and himself was esteemed active and vigorous, so
as he was usually summoned to attend the King in most of his Expeditions with
his power and followers. In the forty seventh Year of King Henry the Third,
doing his homage, and paying an hundred pounds for his relief, as Son and Heir
to Alice, the Daughter of Waleran Earl of Warwick; he had livery of all the
Lands belonging to that Earldom, whereof John de Plessets, Earl of Warwick dyed
seized, and which by hereditary right were descended to him, that is to say,
the Castle and Honor of Warwick, and all the Manors and Lands thereto
belonging. Whereupon by the Title of Earl of Warwick he had summons that year
to attend the King at Worcester, on the Feast Day of St. Peter ad Vincula, well
fitted with Horse and Arms, thence to march into Wales against Lewelin ap
Gryffin, at that time in Hostility. But soon after the King was necessitated to
leave of his Welsh Expedition to provide against the power and insolence of his
Barons, who were then gathering together against him at Northampton. He sent
therefore this Earl to make sure of his Castle of Warwick, a place at that time
very considerable: but such was his unhappiness, as wanting diligent Guards,
they issued out of Kenilworth under the Command of John Giffard, Governor of
that Castle, and surprising this at Warwick, slew diverse of the Earls men and
carried him and his Lady Prisoners to Kenilworth, out of which place before he
could be delivered, they forced him to pay nineteen hundred Marks for his
Ransom, and threw down the Walls of Warwick-Castle. After this unhappy
accident I find no more of him than that he married Alice the Daughter of
Gilbert de Segrave, and dyed without Issue, the Eighth of Jan. Anno 1267. 52
Hen. III.

ROBERT MAVDVIT Lord of Werminster, second Son to Robert Lord Mauduit
Chamberlain to King Henry the Second.
THE direct line of those Mauduits who were Lords of Hanslape, and hereditary
Chamberlains of the Exchequer, ending in William Lord Mauduit, who came to be
also Earl of Warwick, and that dyed without Issue; I must return to Robert the
second Son of Robert Lord Mauduit, who was Chamberlain to King Henry the
Second, to carry on the Genealogical description of that branch of these
Mauduits, who were Lords of Werminster, from whom the Greene's of Drayton did
Descend, and that did flourish for many Ages in this Nation under great
reputation and Authority.

Unto Robert Lord Mauduit, who was Lord of Hanslape in the days of Henry the
Second, King Richard and King John, there were born of the Lady Isabella
Bassett two Sons, William and Robert, the latter of which was a Youth so
esteemed for his Valor and Martial inclinations, and particularly by his
Father, as for a foundation of a greater fortune he bestowed upon him the noble
Lordship of Werminster, which he had received from the Gift of his old Master
King Henry the Second; and his Elder Brother, the Lord William Mauduit, was so
far from repining at the Gift, as he added to his Estate, of his own Grant, the
Manor of Shaudedene now called Scaldene. And he had moreover from the kindness
of Robert de la Mare, a great Lord of that Age, diverse Lands in Bushopstre and
Tarenta, in Marriage with his Daughter Agnes, by whom he left Issue William
Mauduit Lord of Werminster.


WILLIAM MAUDUIT Lord of Werminster became possessed, by Inheritance from his
Father, his Marriage, and his own acquests, of the Lordships of Werminster,
Scaldene, Samborne and Grately in the County of Wilts, as also of Lands in
Bushopstre, Tarenta and Castle-Holgot in the County of Salop, which last were
of his Mothers Inheritance. In the Fourteenth of King Henry the Third he was
sued, with Eugenia his Wife, by Robert de Passlieu, for detaining one Henry the
Son of Henry de Cromwell, whose custody he pretended to belong to him by reason
of the Kings Commission: but because the said Robert did not produce the same,
it was ordered in Court, That Henry de Cromwell should remain in the Keeping of
William Mauduit and his Wife Eugenia. This William gave Lands in Samborne to
Thomas the Son of Simon of Deene, and he demised the Manor of Grately to
Galfred of Winelford. There is extant a Grant unto him of a Fair yearly to be
held for three days at his Lordship of Werminster, that is to say, on the
vigil, the day and the morrow of St. Lawrence; and of a Market to be held every
Thursday at his Manor of Castle-Holgot in the County of Salop. He married
Eugenia Daughter to that Foulke Lord Fitz-Warren, who was a Lord of much fame
in the days of King John and of his Son Henry, and left Issue Warren Mauduit
Lord of Werminster. Sir John Mauduit.


WARREN MAUDUIT Lord of Werminster received his Christian Name, as has been
very usual, from that Noble Family of which his Mother was descended; and much
deference and respect was due from him thereunto, as from one whence he did
derive a great part of his Inheritance, as the Manors of Westbury, Lie, and
other Lordships. He was one of those Lords that accompanied King Edward the
First into the Holy Land, when he was yet but Prince; and we find him to have
lived much in his esteem and favor, as one by whom he was accompanied in most
of his Warlike Expeditions. He was summoned to many of those Parliaments that
were called in his Reign, toward the latter end whereof he departed this life,
leaving Issue by his Wife Elizabeth de Lisle Thomas Mauduit Lord of Werminster.


THOMAS Lord MAUDUIT succeeded his Father in the Lordships of Werminster,
Westbury, Grately, Scalden, Samborne, West-Hacley, Lie, Castle-Helgot and other
great Possessions, so as at that time he was accounted one of the most powerful
Lords of his rank. He received in the Eleventh year of King Edward the Second,
a Charter from that King, of Free Warren for him and his Heirs, to have as well
upon all his Lands in Westbury, Lie and Chaldcoate in the County of Wilts, as
upon those of Deene and Grately in the County of Southampton. These are the
words of the Patent. He was a Lord of such fame in those days for his Valor,
his Wisdom and his Authority, as his Engagement with the Earl of Lancaster was
esteemed a great Accession to that Prince, and the Lords of his party, which
did at that time conspire against the favor, the oppression and the ill
conduct of the Spencers, who governed all things under King Edward the Second.
But his Courage, his Fidelity to his Friends, and his zeal to the Quarrel he
did abett, carrying him into the unsuccessful Fight at Burrow-Bridge, it was
his fortune to be taken Prisoner, involved in the general fate of that Action,
and to suffer Death at the pleasure of the Conqueror, by whose Laws being
attainted, his Estate was Confiscated, with those of the other Lords of that
Confederacy. His Wife was Eleanor de Knoville, Daughter of that Bogo a Lord
very famous in the Reign of King Edward the First.

Their Issue
John Mauduit Lord of Werminster.


AT the Execution, Attaindor and Confiscation of the Lord Thomas Mauduit, JOHN
MAUDUIT his Son was under Age; The custody of whose person and Estate was
during the Reign of King Edward the Second conferred upon one Sir John de
Kingston. But in the first year of King Edward the Third he was restored to his
whole Inheritance by an Act of Parliament, wherein it was so provided for all
those who had lost their Lands by having taken up Arms against the Spencers in
the Quarrel of the Earl of Lancaster. He became afterward a farther partaker
of this Kings favor, receiving at his hands the Honor of Knighthood. And we
find him to have served that then Honorable Office of High Sheriff of
Wiltshire in the third, in the seventh, in the eighth, in the twelfth and in
the sixteenth years of King Edward the Third. He Married Julian of Bockland, by
whom he had Issue Thomas Mauduit that died before his Father.


OF THOMAS MAUDUIT the Son of Sir John there is found little other mention than
that he dyed in the life of his Father, having first Married Joane the Daughter
of Sir.... of Basingborne, by whom he had Issue and his sole Heir of the Lands,
Arms and Name of this Noble and Ancient Family, Matilda de Mauduit.


MATILDA de MAUDUIT, the Daughter and Sole Heir of Thomas, inherited the Noble
Lordships of Werminster, Westbury, Grately, Samborne, Dychurch, Buckworth and
many other great Possessions; being after Married to Sir Henry Green Lord of
Drayton, and one of the Favorites and Privy Counselors to King Richard the
Second, who afterward lost his life for his Fidelity to that Prince, that had
been his Master and Benefactor.

knight on horseback bearing the colors of the family, and a family tree
showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors William Lord MAUDUIT.
Maud de Hanslop. William Lord Mauduit. Robert Lord Mauduit. Robert Lord Mauduit
Izabell Basset William Mauduit Ld. of Hanslop Alice de Newborow. Robert Mauduit
Lord of Werminster. Agnes de la Mara. Izabell Mauduit William Beauchamp Earl
of Warwick. William Lord Mauduit Earl of Warwick Alice de Seagrave. William
Mauduit Ld. of Werminster Eugenia Fitzwarrin. Warrin Ld. Mauduit Ld. of
Werminster Elizabeth de Lisle. Thomas Ld Mauduit Ld. of Werminster Eleanora de
Knovile. Sr. John Mauduit. Ld. of Werminster Juliana de Bockland. Thomas
Mauduit Mortuus ante Latrem Joanne of Bassingbome Matilde de Mauduit Lady of
Werminster Sr. Henry Green Lord of Drayton




GENEALOGICAL PROOFS Of that HOUSE of MAUDUIT Whence were the Lords of
Werminster, Drawn out of Extant Charters, Records, Histories and other
Authentic Proofs.

GENEALOGICAL PROOFS Of the HOUSE of MAUDUIT.
Of the House of MAVDVIT.
THAT a Lord of the Name of Mauduit came over with the Conqueror, you will find
in le Gras his Catalogue in the History of Normandy, in the Roll of Battaille
Abbey and other places; But more particularly in the Chronicle of John Brompton
amongst the rest of the Ten Writers lately published, fol. 963. wherein it is
contained as follows.

Et tunc Rex Willielmus terras Anglorum Magnatibus and Militibus and aliis
hominibus suis Franciae and Normanniae, qui secum in Conquestu suo extiterant,
donavit: quorum plurima cognomina adhuc in Anglia satis cognita and
frequentata, sicut ea reperi scripta, hic inserere dignum duxi.

Vous que desires a assaver
Les noms des Grants dela la mer
Que vindrent od le Conqueror
William Bastard de grand vigeur
Leurs surnoms icy vous devis
Come je les trovay par escris;
Car des propres noms force ny a,
Pource qu'ils sont changes ca and la,
Come de Eumond en Edward,
De Bawduin en Barnard,
De Godwin en Godard,
De Ellis en Edwin,
Et issint de tous autres noms
Comme ils sont leve du fons
Porce leur surnoms ne sont uses,
Et ne sont pas sounent changes
Vous ay escrit ore escoutes
Si vous oir les voullies:
Mandeville and Dandeville.
Ounfreville and Dounfreville.
Botuille and Bascarville.
Eville and Cleville.
And so he goes on till he comes to

Valens and Vaus.
Clarel and Claraous.
Auberville and S. Amans.
Agantes and Dragants.
Malherbe and Mauduit.
Brewes and Chanduit.
And so the Author proceeds to diverse others that are from our purpose.

WILLIAM Lord MAVDVIT, Chamberlain to King Henry the First, Lord of Hanslape
and many other Lands and Lordships.
The Baronage of England, Page 398.
AT the time of the Conquerors general Surveigh of this Realm William Mauduit
had seven Lordships in Hampshire, and being afterward Chamberlain to King Henry
the First, obtained a Grant from him of all the Lands whereof Micael of
Hanslape died seized, the Inheritance whereof, the said Micael had in his life
time yielded to that King, with Maude his Daughter, who thereupon gave her in
Marriage with all those Lands unto this William, which William had Issue by her
two Sons, Robert Mauduit, and William Mauduit.

ROBERT Lord MAVDVIT Chamberlain to King Henry the First, Lord of Hanslape and
diverse other Lands and Lordships.
Baronage of England, the same page, line 15.
OF these, Robert succeeding in the Inheritance of his Lands, enjoyed also the
Office of Chamberlain, leaving a Daughter, for whose Wardship and the exercise
of that Office the Sheriff of Hampshire accounted a thousand Marks into the
Exchequer.

Historiae Anglicanae Scriptores december, Page 242.
ITaque Rex, omnibus qui contra se insurrexerant, vel devictis vel
repacificatis, ^^^^tisque ad votum prospere peractis, quinto profectionis suae
anno necdum compreto, laetior solito, in Angliam multo Navigio revehitur.
Delegaverat autem filio cunctoque illius Comitatui, Navem qua nulla in tota
class videbatur melior; sed, ut Eventus ostendit, nulla infelicior. Patre
namque praeeunte, paulo tardius sed infelicius sequebatur Filius. Nave quippe,
non long a terra, in ipso velificationis impetu super scopulos in ipso Exitu
delata and dissoluta, Filius Regis, cum omnibus qui secum erant, interiit vi.
Kal. Decembris, Feria quinta, noctis initio, apud Barbafleet: Mane facto,
Thesaurus Regis qui in Nave fuerat invenitur per Arenas: Corpora vero
pereuntium nulla. Perierunt etiam cum Filio Regis, Frater suus, Ricardus Nothus
Comes, cum Filia Regis quae fuerat Uxor Rotronis, and Ricardus Comes Cestrensis
cum Uxore sua, Nepte Regis, Sorore Theobaldi Comitis Nepotis Regis. Periit and
Othoel Magister filii Regis, and Galfridus Ridel, and Robertus Malduit, and
Willielmus Bigot, multique alii principales Viri, Nobiles quoque foeminae
quamplures, cum Regiis pueris non paucis, Militaris numeri C. XL. and Nautarum
L. cum tribus Gubernatoribus Navis. Solus quidem Macellarius tabula Naufragii
pendens evasit.

WILLIAM Lord MAVDVIT Chamberlain to King Henry the Second, Lord of Hanslape
and other Lands and Lordships.
Baronage of England, Page 398.
WHat became of this Daughter I find not, but the Office of Chamberlain Henry
Duke of Normandy (afterward King, by the Name of Henry the Second) bestowed on
William Brother to that Robert, and likewise all the Lands belonging thereto,
as well in Normandy as in England; and in particular the Castle and Honor of
Portchester with all the Lands of Micael de Hanslape, in as ample manner as
King Henry the First had given them to his Father; as also Bergedon now called
Berwedon in the County of Rutland with the whole Soake which Queen Maude gave
to the afore-specified Maude, and which Maude the Empress restored to the said
William.

Furthermore this William had by the Grant of the said Duke, the
Chamberlainship of his Treasury, id est, of the Exchequer, with Livery and all
other its appurtenances, viz. the Castle of Portchester, and all the Lands to
the said Chamberlainship and Castle appertaining both in England and Normandy,
in as full a manner, as William his Father and Robert his Brother ever held
them.

And after Henry by the Death of King Stephen had obtained the Crown, he
confirmed to this William the whole Barony of which his Father dyed seized, as
well in England as in Normandy, viz. Hanslape (in Com. Buck.) with its
appurtenances, Bergedon with the Hundred (in Com. Rut.) and Maneton (in
Com......) with all others the Lands which he had formerly given his Father at
Nottingham, as also Scaldene and Herleby with their appurtenances, with the
Land at Roan and all other Lands and Tenures in Normandy. When he dyed, I find
not, but to him succeeded Robert.

ROBERT MAVDVIT Chamberlain to King Henry the Second, Lord of Hanslape,
Werminster and other Lands and Lordships.
Carta Regis Henrici Secundi.
HEnricus Rex Anglorum
omnibus fidelibus suis Francis and Anglis Salutem.
Sciatis me dedisse and praesenti Carta confirmasse Roberto Mauduit Camerario
meo, pro servitio suo Manerium de Werminster, sibi and Haeredibus suis,
tenendum quidquid ibi habebam de me and Haeredibus meis per servitium unius
Militis. Quare volo and firmiter praecipio, quod idem Robertus and Haeredes sui
post eum, manerium illud habeant and teneant de me and Haeredibus meis, sicut
illud tenebam, been and in pace, libere and quiet, integre, plenarie and
honorifice, per praedictum servitium, in bosco and plano, in pratis and
pascuis, in aquis and Molendinis, in vivariis and stagnis and piscariis, in
viis and semitis, and in omnibus aliis locis and aliis rebus ad illud
pertinentibus, cum omnibus libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus suis.

Testibus T. Eliensi, J. Norwicensi, and B. Exoniensi Episcopis.
Convenit cum Recordo, Gulielmis Prinne.

Carta Regis Ricardi Primi.
RIcardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dux Normanniae and Aquitaniae, Comes
Andegaviae, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Ministris, and omnibus fidelibus totius Angliae
Salutem. Sciatis me concessisse and hac praesenti Carta confirmasse Roberto
Mauduit Camerario meo pro servitio suo Manerium de Werminster, quod Dominus Rex
pater meus ei dedit, tenendum sibi and Haeredibus suis de me and Haeredibus
meis per servitium unius Militis. Quare volo and firmiter praecipio, quod idem
Robertus and Haeredes sui post eum Manerium illud habeant and teneant de nobis
and haeredibus nostris, sicut illud dominus Rex pater noster tenebat, been, and
in pace, libere and quiet, integre, plenarie and honorifice per praedictum
servitium, in bosco and in plano, in pratis and in pascuis, in aquis and in
molendinis, in vivariis and stagnis, and piscariis, in viis and semitis, and in
omnibus aliis locis and rebus ad illud pertinentibus, cum omnibus libertatibus
and liberis consuetudinibus suis. Testibus H. Dunelmensi, H. Sarisburiensi, J.
Norwicensi Episcopis, Galfrido filio Petri, Waltero filio Roberti.

The Baronage of England, Page 398.
WHen he dyed I find not, but to him succeeded Robert, who took part with the
Rebellious Barons in King John's time, as it seems, for it appears that in the
first of Henry the Third the King Granted his whole Honor, id est, the Barony
of Hanslape with its appurtenances, to Henry de Braboef for his support in his
service during pleasure. But before the sixth of Henry the Third this Robert
dyed, whereupon Isabella his Widow, one of the Heirs to Thurstan Basset gave
twenty Marks for her purparty of her Fathers Lands, leaving William his Son and
Heir, who before the end of the year giving security for payment of his Relief,
viz. a hundred Pounds, had Livery of his Lands.

WILLIAM MAVDVIT, Hereditary Chamberlain of the Exchequer, Lord of Hanslape and
other Lands and Lordships.
Baronage of England, Page 398.
THis William in the seventeenth of King John was constituted Governor of
Rokingham Castle: But the same year taking part with the Rebellious Barons, he
made a Garrison of his House of Hanslape, as it seems, for it is said, that the
next ensuing year Falcatius de Breant (who was then a bold Soldier, and one
that stood stoutly to the King) took it and demolished it upon the fourth of
the Calends of December. Which hardening him in his Rebellious Actings, he was
amongst others of that party Excommunicated by the Pope. Nor did the death of
King John, which happened the same year, allay the heat of his turbulent
disposition; for it is apparent that he still persisted therein, and being in
Arms against King Henry the Third in the Battle of Lincoln, in the first of
Henry the Third, the whole power of that Rebellious party being utterly
vanquished, he was there taken Prisoner. But after this, returning to his due
obedience, he enjoyed his Estate, and in the seventh of Henry the Third making
a Park at his Manor of Hanslape, had out of Salcey Forest, of the Kings Gift,
five Does, for storing of the same. In the tenth of Henry the Third doing his
Homage for those Lands that descended to him by the Death of Isabella Basset
his Mother, he had Livery of them; and in the seventeenth of Henry the Third
obliging himself by a special Writing to serve the King faithfully all the days
of his life, and never to oppose him or his Heirs, for the better securing of
that promise he delivered up William his Son in Hostage. Whereupon the King
soon after so far trusted him, that he restored back that Hostage the next
ensuing year.

Antiquities of Warwickshire, fol. 305, 306. Of Waleran the Earl of Warwick.
HE had two Wives, Margaret the Daughter of Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford,
and Alice Daughter of John de Harcourt, but Widow of John de Limesie before
mentioned; and departing this life in the sixth of King John, left diverse
Children, of which Henry his eldest Son succeeded in the Earldom; Waleran
another Son had the Manors of Gretham and Cottesmore in the County of Rutland,
with certain Lands in Worcestershire, but dyed without Issue. Alice his
Daughter, by Alice his last Wife, wedded William Mauduit of Hanslape in the
County of Bucks, and had by her Fathers appointment the Manor of Wanton, now
called Walton Mauduit, in this County, for her Marriage Portion, as is evident
by King John's confirmation thereof to him, bearing Date the thirtieth of
November in the tenth year of his Reign.

WILLIAM MAVDVIT Earl of Warwick, Hereditary Chamberlain of the Exchequer, Lord
of Hanslape and diverse other Lordships.
Baronage of England, Page 399.
BUT in the one and fortieth of Henry the Third he departed this life, being
then seized of the Manor of Hanslape in the County of Bucks, as also of the
Manor of Bergedon and Hundred of Wrangedike, with certain Lands of thirty
pounds per annum value, lying in Cottesmore and Gretham in the County of
Rutland; as likewise of four Carucates of Land in Hartleigh in the County of
Southampton; leaving Issue by Alice his Wife, Daughter of Waleran Earl of
Warwick, William his Son and Heir, at that time thirty six years of Age. Which
William in the forty first year of Henry the Third had so much favor from the
King in payment of a Debt of two hundred Marks due from him, as well for his
Relief, as for the Serjeanty he held, ( videlicet, a hundred Pounds for his
Relief of his Barony, and fifty Marks for his Serjeanty) as that it was
accepted of fifty Marks per annum.

The next year following this William had Summons to attend the King at
Chester, well accoutred with Horse and Arms to oppose the Incursions of the
Welsh; and in the forty seventh of Henry the Third doing his Homage and paying
a hundred pounds for his Relief, as Son and Heir to Alice the Daughter of
Waleran Earl of Warwick, had Livery of all the Lands belonging to that Earldom,
whereof John de Plessets Earl of Warwick dyed seized, and which by hereditary
right were descended to him, videlicet, the Castle and Honor of Warwick, and
all the Lands and Manors thereto belonging. Whereupon by the Title of Earl of
Warwick he had the same year summons to attend the King at Worcester on the
Feast day of St. Peter ad Vincula, well fitted with Horse and Arms, thence to
march into Wales against Lewelin ap Gryffin, at that time in Hostility.

Mill 's Catalogue of Honor, page 798.
William Maledoctus, commonly called Mauduit, Lord and Baron of Hanslape,
Cousin and Heir to Margery Countess of Warwick, videlicet, the Son of Alice,
the Sister of Henry, the Father of the said Margery, became Earl of Warwick,
after the Death of the foresaid Margery, in the Reign of Henry the Third, who
long before had honored him with the Sword of Knighthood in the year 1233. and
in the eighteenth of his Reign. He dyed without Issue, the fourth day of the
Ides of January, in the year 1268. and of Henry the Third the fifty second,
leaving his Sister Isabell his Heir, Alice the Daughter of Gilbert Lord
Segrave, was Wife to William Mauduit Earl of Warwick.

ROBERT MAVDVIT Lord of Werminster, second Son to Robert Lord Mauduit, that was
Chamberlain to King Henry the Second.
Carta Domini Roberti Mauduit.
RObertus Mauduit Domini Regis Camerarius, omnibus hominibus meis Francis and
Anglicis Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse Roberto Mauduit, filio meo juniori,
Manerium and totam terram meam de Werminster, quae Rex Henricus Dominus meus
mihi concessit, tenendum sibi and haeredibus suis in perpetuum, libere, quiet,
integre, plenarie and honorifice ab omni servitio, salvo quod domino Regi
pertinet, in bosco, in plano, in pratis, in pascuis, in aquis and in
molendinis, in vivariis and stagnis and piscariis, in viis and semitis, and in
omnibus aliis locis and rebus ad illud pertinentibus, cum omnibus libertatibus,
and liberis consuetudinibus suis. Isti sunt Testes, Dominus Johannes de
Knovill, Dominus Ricardus de Verdun, Robertus de Sancto Laudo, Alexander
Pipard, Thomas filius Johannis, Henricus Transard, Stephanus Camerarius,
Herveius Dapifer.

seal of Sir Robert Mauduit SIGILLVM DNI ROBERTI MAUDUIT



Carta Domini Willielmi Mauduit Camerarii Regis.
WIllielmus Mauduit domini Regis Camerarius, omnibus hominibus suis tam Francis
quam Anglicis Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse and hac carta mea
praesenti confirmasse, Fratri meo Roberto Mauduit, pro servitio suo, Manerium
de Scaudedene cum omnibus pertinentiis and libertatibus suis, sibi and
Haeredibus suis, tenendum de me and Haeredibus meis, libere, quiet, and
honorifice, in bosco, in campis, in pratis, in pascuis, in viis, in semitis,
and in omnibus ad Manerium illud pertinentibus, per servitium dimidiae partis
feodi unius Militis. Testibus Ranulpho de Glanvilla, Gilberto Pipard, Bertram
de Verdun, Willielmo de Bend, Radulpho filio Stephani, Eustachio filio
Stephani, Johanne Mauduit, Beberto filio Richardi, Gaufrido de Insula, Roberto
Burell, Roberto Mauncell, Roberto Mauduit filio meo, Willielmo filio Walteri,
Willielmo Nepote and aliis multis.

seal of Sir William Mauduit SIGILLVM DNI WILLI MAUDUIT CAMERARII REGIS



Monasticon Anglicanum, Pars Secunda, page 409. 36. 43. inter concessiones de
Maiden Bradley.
EX dono Roberti Mauduit unam virgatam Terrae cum pertinentiis in Bushopstree.

Ex dono Agnetis de la Mare quae fuit Uxor Roberti Mauduit, unam virgatam
Terrae cum messuagio and Curtelagio in Tarrenta.

WILLIAM MAVDVIT, Lord of Werminster and other Lands and Lordships.
Placita de Banco, Term. Pasch. Anno 14 H. III. in pella Scaccarii Regis
remanent. Rot. 15.
RObertus de Passleu per Attornatum suum petit versus Willielmum Mauduit and
Eugeniam Uxorem ejus, quod reddant ei Henricum filium and haeredem Henrici
Cromwell, cujus custodia ad eum pertinet ratione commissionis Domini Regis quod
inde and fecit and dicit, etc. Sed quia dictus Robertus non ostendit dictam
commissionem, dicta custodia remansit penes dictos Willielmum and Eugeniam.

Charta Regis Henrici Tertii.
HEnricus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normanniae,
Aquitaniae, and Comes Andegaviae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ministris, and omnibus Balivis and
fidelibus suis Salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse and hac Carta nostra confirmasse pro nobis and
Haeredibus nostris dilecto and fideli nostro Willielmo Mauduit, quod ipse and
Haeredes sui habeant in perpetuum singulis annis unam Feriam apud Manerium suum
de Werminster duraturam per tres dies, videlicet in vigilio, in die, and in
crastino Sancti Laurentii, nisi Feria illa sit ad nocumentum vicinarum
feriarum, and quod habeant unum Mercatum singulis Septimanis per diem Jovis
apud Manerium suum de Castle-Holgot, nisi Mercatum illud sit ad nocumentum
vicinorum mercatorum. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus pro nobis and
Haeredibus nostris quod praedictus Willielmus and Haeredes sui habeant in
perpetuum unam Feriam apud praedictum Manerium suum de Werminster duraturam per
tres dies, videlicet in vigilio, in die and in crastino Sancti Laurentii, and
etiam unum Mercatum singulis septimanis per diem Jovis apud Manerium suum de
Castle-Holgot, nisi Feria illa and Mercatum illud sint ad nocumentum vicinarum
feriarum vel vicinorum Mercatorum, ficut praedictum est. His Testibus, Ricardo
Fratre nostro Comite Cornubiae, Willielmo Comite de Warrenna, Willielmo Comite
de Albemarle, Petro de Sabaudia, Warrenna de Monte Canisio, Philippo de
Albaniaco, Briano de Insula, Petro de Malolacu, Roberto filio Sweini de Essex.

Datum per Manum nostram apud Westmonasterium vicesimo die Aprilis Anno Regni
nostri vicesimo quinto.
Carta Fulconis filii Warrini.
OMnibus ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Fulco filius Warrini Salutem.
Noverit universitas vestra, nos concessisse and confirmasse Eudoni filio
Warrini fratri nostro Terram de Westbury cum pertinentiis, quam Havisia de
Dinant matter nostra ei dedit and concessit, sicut in Carta sua continetur, quam
idem Eudo habet de dicta Havisia matre nostra. Et ut haec concessio and
confirmatio nostra rata and inconcussa permaneat, eam praesenti Scripto,
Sigilli nostri appositione roboravi. His Testibus, Willielmo Longespe Comite de
Salisburia, Willielmo Mareschall filio Willielmi Mareschall Comite de Pembroc,
Reginaldo de Albo Monasterio, Willielmo Talebot, Willielmo Grasso, Henrico
filio Ricardi..... Ricardo Sumard, Galfrido de Sancto Leodegario, Mano filio
Warrini, Ricardo Talebot, Thoma Corbet, Willielmo Panton, Thoma Wikes, and
multis aliis.

seal of Fulco de Mauduit SIGILLUM FULCONIS FILII WARINI

SECRETUM FULCONIS FILII WARINI



Carta Eudoni filiis Warrini.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Eudo filius Warrini dedi and concessi
and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Eugeniae de Mauduit sorori meae, pro
Homagio and servitio suo, totam Terram meam de Westbury and de Lie cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis in Villa de Westbury and Lie, and extra, sine ullo
retinemento meo vel Haeredum meorum, habendam and tenendam sibi and haeredibus
suis, vel cui assignare voluerit, loco religioso vel alibi, de me and
haeredibus meis in perpetuum, libere, quiet, and pacifice, faciendo inde mihi
and haeredibus meis, ipsa and haeredes sui vel ejus assignati, servitium quod
ad dictam Terram pertinet, pro omni consuetudine and demanda. Pro hac autem
donatione and concessione dedit mihi dicta Eugenia prae manibus ducentas and
quatuor viginti Marcas. Et ut haec mea donatio and concessio rata and
inconcussa permaneat, huic scripto Sigillum meum apposui, his Testibus, Fulcone
filio Warrini, Reginaldo de Albo Monasterio, Henrico de Tracy, Waltero de
Pavely, Willielmo de Pipard, Philippo Bret, Hugone de Shuggford, Willielmo de
Hodenet, Philippo Marmion, Magistro Nicolao and multis aliis.

SIGILLUM EUDONIS FILII WARINI

seal of Eudonis de Mauduit

WARREN MAVDVIT, Lord of Werminster and other Lands and Lordships.
Carta Warrini de Mauduit.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus praesens Scriptum visuris vel audituris Warrinus
filius and Haeres Domini Willielmi Mauduit Salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Noverit Universitas vestra me dedisse, concessisse and hoc praesenti Scripto
meo confirmasse Rogero de la Grane filio Radulphi de la Grane omnibus diebus
vitae suae totum tenementum meum quod habui in Villa de Grafton, cum omnibus
curtilagiis, terris arabilibus, pratis pascuis, pasturis cum redditibus and
serviciis Tenentium meorum tam Liberorum quam Villanorum in eadem Villa. Dedi
etiam and Concessi eidem Rogero omnibus Diebus vitae suae molendinum meum
aquaticum apud Angford cum redditibus and serviciis omnium Tenentium meorum
ibidem tam liberorum quam villanorum, cum eorum pertinentiis, Habendum and
tenendum omnia praedicta Tenementa cum eorum pertinentiis praedicto Rogero
omnibus diebus vitae suae de me and haeredibus meis vel meis assignatis libere,
quiet, been and in pace, reddendo inde annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis vel
meis assignatis unum denarium ad Festum omnium Sanctorum, and Capitalibus
Dominis feodi illius inde servitia debita and consueta pro omnibus servitiis
secularibus, exactionibus and Demandis. Et ego vero dictus Warrinus and Heredes
mei vel mei assignati omnia praedicta tenementa cum omnibus and singulis eorum
pertinentiis praedicto Rogero omnibus diebus vitae suae contra omnes mortales
warrantizabimus, acquietabimus and defendemus. In cujus rei testimonium huic
prasenti Scripto tripartito Sigilla nostra alternatim sunt appensa. His
Testibus, Domino Warrino de Bassingburne, Domino Willielmo de la Grane
Militibus, Thoma de Knighton, Henrico de Littleton, Hugone de Everdon, Richardo
de la More, Thoma de Stongrave, Henrico Revell, Andreo Cavarell, and aliis.

Carta Edwardi Principis, Primogeniti Regis Henrici Tertii.
EDwardus illustrissimi Regis Angliae Primogenitus, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, Justiciariis,
Praepositis, Ministris ac omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos
praesentes literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis nos dedisse and concessisse
dilecto and fideli nostro Domino Warino Mauduit pro Homagio and servitio suo
totum illam terram and tenementum quae habuimus in Villa de Gravenshull, quam
quidem terram septem villani nostri de nobis tenere consueverunt: habenda and
tenenda eidem Warino and Haeredibus suis de nobis and Haeredibus nostris
libere, quiet and integre sine aliquo retenemento, faciendo inde nobis and
haeredibus nostris servitium vicesimae partis feodi unius Militis pro omni
servitio and exactione seculari in perpetuum. Quare volumus and firmiter
praecipimus pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, quod praedictus Warinus Mauduit
and Haeredes sui habeant and teneant totam terram illam and tenementum quae
habuimus in Villa de Gravenshull, quam quidem terram septem villani nostri
tenere consueverint, libere, quiet, integre, sine aliquo retenemento, cum
omnibus suis pertinentiis, faciendo inde nobis and haeredibus nostris servitium
vicesimae partis feodi unius Militis pro omni servitio and exactione seculari
in perpetuum, ut praedictum est. His Testibus, Domino Thoma de Clare, Johanne
de Muscegros, Roberto de Turberville, Hugone de Turberville, Hugone filio
Otonis, Roberto de Turberville filio, Rogero de Reymes, and aliis. Datum per
manum nostram apud Bristol nono die Decembris, Anno Regni Domini Regis patris
nostri quinquagesimo secundo.

seal of Edward I

Carta Dominae Margeriae de Insula.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Margeria de Insula, dedi, concessi and
hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Elizabethae de Mauduit filiae meae totam
illam terram and tenementum quae habui in Villa de Kildewate, quam quidem
terram pater meus Johannes de Verdon quondam emit de Domino Roberto de
Muscegros, and mihi dedit in liberum Maritagium, tenenda and habenda sibi and
haeredibus suis de me and haeredibus meis libere, quiet, been and in pace in
perpetuum, reddendo inde annuatim ipsa and haeredes sui mihi and haeredibus
meis unum obulum ad festum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae pro omnibus
servitiis, Sectis Curiarum, wardis, releviis, and omnibus aliis secularibus
exactionibus quae contingere possunt. Et ego vero dicta Margeria and haeredes
mei dictam terram and tenementum cum pertinentiis dictae Elizabethae and
haeredibus suis contra omnes mortales per praedictum servitium in perpetuum
warrantizabimus, acquietabimus and defendemus. Et ut haec mea Donatio,
Concessio and praesentis Cartae meae confirmatio perpetuae firmitatis robur
obtineant, praesentem Cartam Sigilli mei impressione roboravi. His Testibus,
Domino Warino de Bassingburne, Hugone Lovel, Waltero Simenhede, Johanne Russell
Militibus, Johanne de la Grane, Petro de Stane, Johanne de Stane, Galfrido de
Bolyntom, Willielmo de Sandhurst, and aliis.

Declaratio Domini Warini Mauduit de homagio Petri de Langford.
PAteat universis per praesentes, quod ego Warinus Mauduit Capitalus Dominus de
parva Tenton, die Mercurii proxima post Festum Sancti Johannis Baptistae, Anno
Regni Regis Edwardi vicesimo, in aula mea. De Werminster recepi Homagium Petri
de Langford Tenentis mei pro terra de parva Tenton praedicta, praesentibus
Domino Johanne de Muscegros, Thoma Mauduit filio meo, Henrico Pennistone,
Waltero Setwale, Simone de Harwell, Waltero Leffry, Johanne Berenford, Thoma de
Redland, and aliis. In cujus rei Memoriam praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum
apposui. Datum apud Werminster die and Anno supradictis.

OUT of a very Ancient Manuscript, and a List therein of those Knights that
accompanied King Edward the First into the Holy Land, is Dominus Warinus
Mauduit.

THOMAS MAVDVIT, Lord Werminster and other Lands and Lordships.
Carta Domini Thomae Mauduit.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Thomas Mauduit filius Domini Warini
Mauduit dedi and concessi, and hac praesenti Carta confirmavi Waltero Stoner
libero homini meo, unam virgatam terrae in Scaldene, cum omnibus pertinentiis
suis, pro Homagio and servitio suo, illam scilicet dimidiam virgatam terrae
quam Radulphus Junnens quondam tenuit cum Messuagio and Curtelagio, and cum una
Crofta, and cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis, and illam dimidiam virgatam
terrae quam Robertus Made tenuit cum omnibus pertinentiis suis sine Messuagio
and Curtelagio: Habendum and tenendum de me and haeredibus meis vel meis
assignatis sibi and haeredibus suis vel suis assignatis, libere, quiet and
pacifice in Bosco and in plano, in viis, in semitis, in pasturis, and in
omnibus aliis locis exceptis a Curia mea and segetibus meis. Habebunt etiam
dictus Walterus and Beatricia Uxor sua and haeredes sui vel assignati centum
oves and unum Multonem quieto de Herbagio, seu cujusmodi animalia voluerint, in
pasturis ejusdem villae, and december Boves vel Vaccas sive aliqua animalia
cujusmodi voluerint quietos de Herbagio, and december porcos quietos de Panagio,
ubicumque porci Liberorum Hominum pascent, and duos equos vel equas quietos de
Herbagio: Habendum and tenendum libere, quiet, and pacifice, sicut
praenominatum est, pro omni servitio, exactione and demanda ad me vel ad
haeredes meos pertinentibus, reddendo inde annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis
vel meis assignatis ipsi and haeredes sui vel sui assignati unum Par albarum
Chirothecarum, vel unum denarium ad Pascha, vel infra octavas Paschae sine
Calumnia. Volo etiam and concedo, quod dictus Walterus and haeredes sui vel
assignati habeant liberum introitum and exitum ad omnes terras sine Calumnia.
Et si ita forte contigerit quod dictus Walterus sine Haerede de Beatrice Uxore
sua decesserit, supradicta Beatricia totam praedictam terram cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis, sicut praenominatum est, habeat, and cuicumque voluerit
superstite, and concessum est legat' vel Assignat' excepta Domo Religiosa. Et
ut haec mea Donatio, Concessio and Cartae meae Confirmatio firma and stabilis
in perpetuum permaneat, praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum apposui, his Testibus,
Radulpho de Rale, Willielmo de Grimsted, Symone de Melbourne, Willielmo filio
Gervasii, Ada de la Hyde, Thoma Spencer, Andreo Camerario and aliis multis.
Datum apud Scaldene die Annuntiationis beatae Virginis, Anno Regni Regis
Edwardi filii Regis Henrici.

seal of Sir Thomas Mauduit SIGILLVM DNI THOMAE MAUDUIT



Carta Roberti Mauduit.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus Mauduit concessi and quietam
clamavi de me and haeredibus meis Domino Thomae Mauduit fratri meo and
haeredibus suis, totam terram meam de Westhastie cum toto adquestu meo, sine
ullo retinemento in excambiis terrae suae de Knovenhill, quam ipse Thomas
Mauduit dominus meus and frater and haeredes sui mihi and haeredibus meis de
Uxore mea progenitis concesserunt and quietam clamaverunt and Carta sua
confirmaverunt. Itaque nolo quod praedictus Thomas Mauduit Dominus meus and
frater vel haeredes sui per me vel per aliq^^^^ haeredum meorum in aliquo
vexentur. Hanc concessionem and quietam Clamation ^^ praesenti Scripto and
Sigilli mei munimine confirmavi, his Testibus, Willielmo de Warblintune,
Nicholao de Haveresham, Willielmo de la Mare, Nicholao de la Mare, Waltero de
la Mare, Willielmo Parsona de Gratele, Richardo filio Alveredi, Hugone de
Ho..., Richardo de Aulvine, Petro de Warblintune and multis aliis.

Carta Thomae Mauduit.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Thomas Mauduit dedi and concessi and
hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Nicholao de Haversham, pro homagio suo and
servitio suo, totam terram cum toto Messuagio quam Willielmus Mauduit frater
meus tenuit in Westhacke, cum omnibus hominibus and sectis eorum, videlicit
Willielmum Peliper cum secta sua, excepta illa virgata terrae cum toto
messuagio quam Ida tenuit and dimidia virgata terrae quam dedi domui de Hazeman
cum Corpore Willielmi Mauduit fratris mei. Concessi etiam and dedi ipsi
Nicholao de Haversham totum Boscum meum a regali via qua itur ab Andevere
versus Basingstoke apud Modelingsham, and sic per Modelingsham peie, and ita
per semitam quae praetenditur a Modelingsham peie usque in Westmyste scorte
peie, and a Westmyste scorte peie usque in Vine peie, and sic per Vine peie
usque ad Vinam, and ita a Vina sicut nemus extenditur juxta la Breach usque ad
Regalem viam, and ita a Regali via usque ad Modelingsham. Haec omnia praedicta
dedi and concessi Nicholao de Haversham and haeredibus suis, habenda and
tenenda de me and de haeredibus meis in bosco, in plano, in viis, in semitis,
in aquis, in stagnis, in molendinis ac in omnibus libertatibus ad istam terram
pertinentibus. Praeterea dedi and concessi ipsi Nicholao and haeredibus suis in
propria pastura mea de Dene hujusmodi centum Oves and quinque Arietes and octo
Boves and duos Tauros and quatuor Vaccas cum Vitulis suis, quousque
superannuentur; Et in bosco meo de Dene and in pastura mea de Dene propria
concessi praedicto Nicholao, Habendum duodecim porcos quietos de Pannagio, in
duna de Dene unum Equum in pastura mea, and in communi pastura mea de Dene
centum Oves and quinque Arietes. Has omnes praedictas terras and homines cum
omnibus pertinentiis suis and libertates praedictas dedi and concessi praedicto
Nicholao and haeredibus suis tenendas and habendas Jure haereditario de me and
de haeredibus meis liberas and quietas ab omnibus servitiis and
consuetudinibus, salvo servitio regali: Reddendo inde annuatim ipse and
haeredes sui mihi and haeredibus meis unum Par Calcarium deauratorum de sex
denariis, vel sex denarios in Curia mea de Dene, scilicet ad Pascha. Et pro
Concessione and donatione mea dedit mihi praedictus Nicholaus de Haversham
viginti Marcas Sterlingorum de Gersume. Hanc vero Donationem and Concessionem
Ego Thomas Mauduit and Haeredes mei supradicto Nicholao and Haeredibus suis
contra omnes homines and foeminas warrantizare debemus. Et ut haec Donatio and
concessio mea rata and stabilis permaneat, eam praesenti Carta and Sigillo meo
confirmavi. His Testibus, Willielmo de Warblintune, Olivero de Hastings,
Roberto Mauduit, Richardo de Manerio, Galfrido Luiveres, Roberto de Arundell,
Waltero Trenchfull, Roberto de Manerio, Richardo filio Alured, Gilberto de
Aula, Waltero de la Mare, Richardo de Aultune, Petro de Warblintune, and multis
aliis.

Carta Roberti Pentour.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus filius Henrici Pentour
consensu and assensu Uxoris meae and Haeredum meorum vendidi and quietam
clamavi unam partem terrae meae in Castello Holegoti Domino meo Thomae Malduit
and haeredibus suis pro octodecim solidis quos mihi dedit, scilicet messuagium
quod est inter messuagium meum and messuagium quod fuit Willielmi Molendinarii,
cum tofto and crofto and cum sex acris terrae, scilicet unam acram ad
Copfurlong, secundam acram juxta viam quae ducat ad Cliiam, and tertiam acram
ad Rivulum Martini, and quartam acram sub Lawre, and dua acras juxta terram
Trenchevent in Bradmore apud Joodelond, tenendum and habendum imperpetuum sibi
and haeredibus suis de me and haeredibus meis libere and quiet ab omnibus de
me and de meis. Ita quod haec mea venditio and quieta Clamatio a (...)
haeredibus meis firma and stabilis permaneat, praesentis Scripti mei testimonio
and Sigilli mei Impressione confirmavi. His Testibus, Willielmo de Tuonelond,
Hugone de Huptun, Roberto filio Nicholai, Willielmo Bactan, Henrico
Trenchevant, and multis aliis.

Carta Willielmi Vicarii de Dudelbery and Johannis fratris ejus.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Willielmus Vicarius de Dudelbery and
Johannes frater meus nos obligavimus fide media Domino Thomae Mauduit and
haeredibus suis, quod eisdem nec hominibus suis de Sutton injuste non
insurgamus, nec in aliquo vel aliquibus eos contra Justitiam gravare vel
molestare attemptabimus. Praeterea eadem fide nos obligavimus dicto Thomae,
videlicet quod per Testamentum and Assignationem Domini Alexandri fratris
nostri, qui quondam Capellae suae de Sutton, deservivit septem acras terrae cum
pertinentiis in Villa de Sutton, in puram and perpetuam Eleemosynam, dictae
Capellae habere faciemus, and Cartas de praedictis terris eidem Domino Thomae
vel suo assignato sine dilatione trademus, qui bona fide promisit ad
indempnitatem dictae Capellae easdem observare. Praeterea unum Missale, quod
dictus Alexander Capellanus legavit dictae Capellae sine aliqua dilatione vel
contradictione in eadem Capella ad eam deserviendam remanere concessimus.
Insuper Confirmationem Cartae venerabilis quondam Patris nostri bonae memoriae
Domini H. Foliot Herefordiae quondam Episcopi de dicta Capellaria ei vel suo
assignato trademus. Haec autem omnia praenominata firmiter and fideliter tenere
fide media nos obligamus, and Cartam nostram praesentem ei fecimus, and
Sigillis nostris confirmavimus. His Testibus, Domino Petro de Dudemanel,
Johanne Parsona de Dene, Waltero Barnard, Johanne Gupil, Nichola serviente, and
multis aliis.

Carta Roberti Renand.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus Renand de Westbury dedi,
concessi and hac praesenti carta mea confirmavi Domino Thomae Mauduit Domino de
Werminster and Elizabethae Uxori suae and Johanni filio eorum, omnes illas
terras and tenementa illa cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, quae terra and
tenementa cum suis pertinentiis mihi acciderunt in Brocwege inter Boscum de la
Halse and tenementa de Shoterstreete, per descensum Haereditatis per decessum
Richardi Renand fratris mei, una cum tertia part praedictarum terrarum and
dictorum tenementorum cum omnibus suis pertinentiis cum acciderit, quam
Christiana quae fuit Uxor Walteri de Brocwege tenet nomine dotis: Habendum and
tenendum praedictas terras and tenementa cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, una cum
tertia part dictarum terrarum and dictorum tenementorum cum suis pertinentiis
cum acciderit, supradictis Domino Thomae and Elizabethae Uxori suae and Johanni
filio eorum and haeredibus supradicti Domini Thomae, de Dominis Capitalibus
feodorum, libere, quiet, been and in pace; Jure haereditario imperpetuum per
servitia inde debita and consueta. Et Ego praedictus Robertus and haeredes mei
omnia praedicta terras and tenementa cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, una cum
tertia part supradictarum terrarum and dictorum tenementorum cum suis
pertinentiis cum acciderit, supradictis Domino Thomae and Elizabethae Uxori
suae and Johanni filio eorum and haeredibus supradicti Domini Thomae contra
omnes mortales warrantizabimus and imperpetuum defendemus. Et ut haec mea
Donatio, concessio and praesentis Cartae meae Confirmatio ratae and stabiles
imperpetuum permaneant, istam praesentem Cartam Sigilli mei impressione
roboravi. His Testibus, Willielmo de Mandeville, Johanne Hussege, Roberto
Plagenet, Waltero Setwale, Rogero Marnion, Roberto Swotyng, Johanne Bernard,
and aliis. Data apud Westbury die Veneris proximo ante Festum beatae Margaretae
Virginis, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi filii Regis Edwardi Nono.

Hollinshed his Chronicle of England, Page 329.
THere were Letters intercepted about the same time, which a Messenger brought
out of Scotland, three closed and three open, for there were six in all. The
King sent them to the Archbishop of Canterbury, who by his commandment
published them in open Audience at London. The first was closed with the Seal
of the Lord Thomas Randulfe Earl of Murrey, Lord of Annandale and of Man,
Lieutenant to Robert le Bruce, King of Scotland, which contained a Sase-conduct
for Sir Thomas Topclive Chaplain, and one to be Associate with him, to come
into Scotland, and to return from thence in safety. The second was sealed with
the Seal of Sir James Douglas for a like Safe Conduct for the same persons. The
third was closed with the Seal of the said Earl of Murrey for the Safe Conduct
of the Lord John de Mowbray, and the Lord John de Clifford, and forty Horses,
with their Pages, for their safe coming unto the said Earl into Scotland, for
their abiding there and returning back. The fourth was closed with the Seal of
James Douglas, directed to King Arthur. The fifth was closed with the Seal of
James Douglas, directed unto the Lord Ralph Nevill. The sixth had no direction,
but the tenor thereof was this as follows: You shall understand, my Lord,
that the communication beforehand had, is now brought to effect; for the Earl
of Hereford, the Lords Roger Damoriae, Hugh de Audelie the younger, Bartholomew
de Badelismere, Roger de Clifford, John Gifford, Henry Teis, Thomas Mauduit,
John de Willington and all others are come to Pomfret, and are ready to make
you good assurance, so that you will perform Covenant with them (to wit, for
your coming to aid us and to go with us into England and Wales to live and dye
with us in our quarrel.) We therefore beseech you to assign us day and place
where we may meet, and we will be ready to accomplish fully our business; and
we beseech you to make us a Safe Conduct for thirty Horses that we may with
safety come to your parts.

Again in the same Chronicle, Page 330.
IN this Fight was slain the Earl of Hereford, the Lord William de Sullye, with
Sir Roger de Bunghfeild and diverse others; and there were taken Thomas Earl of
Lancaster, the Lord Roger Clifford, Son to that Roger which dyed in the Battle
of Bannocksborne in Scotland, the Lord Gilbert Talbot, the Lord John Mowbray,
the Lord Hugh de Willington, the Lord Thomas Mauduit, the Lord Warren de Lisle,
the Lord Philip Darey, the Lord Thomas Wither, the Lord Henry de Willington,
the Lord Hugh de Knovill, the Lord Philip de Beche, the Lord Henry de Leiburne,
the Lord Henry de Bradburne, the Lord John de Beckes, the Lord Thomas Lovell,
the Lord William Fitz-William, Robert de Waterville, John de Strickland, Odnell
Heron, Walter Pavely of Stretton, and a great number of other Esquires and
Gentlemen. This Battle was fought on the fifteenth day of March, in the year
1322. after the account of them that begin the year at the Circumcision, which
was in the said fifteenth year of this Kings Reign.

And again, Page 331. of the same Chronicle.
ON the same day the Lord William Tuchet, the Lord William Fitz-William, the
Lord Warren de Lisle, the Lord Henry Bradborne and the Lord William Chenie
Barons, with John Page an Esquire, were drawn and hanged at Pomfret aforesaid;
and then shortly after Roger Lord Clifford, John Lord Mowbray and Sir Gosein de
Eevill Barons, were drawn and hanged at York. At Bristol were executed in like
manner Sir Henry de Willington, and Sir Henry Mountfort Baronets. And at
Gloucester, the Lord John Gifford, and Sir William Elmebrige Knight. And at
London, the Lord Henry Teies Baron. At Winchelsey, Sir Thomas Culpepper Knight.
At Windsor, the Lord Francis de Aldham Baron. And at Canterbury, the Lord
Bartholomew de Badelismere, and the Lord Bartholomew de Ashborneham Barons.
Also at Cardif in Wales, Sir William Fleminge Knight was executed. Diverse were
executed in their Countries, as Sir Thomas Mauduit and others.

Historiae Anglicanae Scriptores December, Page 2547.
Ex Henrici Knighton Canonici Leicestrensis Chronico de Eventibus Angliae.
Part of the Charge against Hugh le Despenser at his Arraignment.
ET Faitez prendre mon tres honorable Seignour le bon Count de Lancastre
Thomas, que estoit cousin Germain a nostre Seigneur le Roy, and de ses freres,
Uncle a tres honorable de France, and de sa soere Madame Isabelle Royne d'
Angleterre: si lui faitez faussement emprisoner and despoilier and touz lez
sons en sa sale proprement deins sa Castele de Pomfrete par vostre real
povare, que vous avez purpris nostre Seigneur le Roy, and luy faitez juger par
une faulse record encontre leye and resone and la grant Chartre, and Ensi
faites mordrer, martirizer, and moirir de dure morte and piteouse. Et cest
malvys cruelte and tirantie faistez al si digne person ne vous poez sauler del
sanck dez cristenez espandier Ency faitez en mesme tiele journeye pour mon dit
Seigneur plus tormentyr sez Baronz, sez chivaleuz, se enaux vennancez trayner
and pendre, and puis juger al mort par cel fausse record encontre leye and
resone, and pendre dispituosement sans mercy, come Monsieur Wareyne del Lyle,
Monsieur William Tocher, Monsieur Thomas Maydut, Monsieur Henry de Bradburne,
Monsieur William Chornel, Monsieur Bartholomew de Ashburne: a Londres, Monsieur
Henry Teies: a Windesore, Monsieur Francis de Aldham: a Gloucester, le Seignour
Gifforde, and Monsieur Roger de Elmesbrigge: a Bristoll, Monsieur Henry de
Willington, and Monsieur Henry de Mountfort: a Winchelseye, Monsieur Thomas
Colpeyre, and plusiours grantz, and altre grantz feistez mestre endure prisone
pur lez mordrer sans cause pur Covetyse de lour terrez si come le Seignour de
Mortimer le cousin and le uncle le Seignour de Kyrkeleye, Monsieur Hugh
Dandeleye le pere and le fitz lez enfantz, le Conte de Hereforde nevoutz nostre
Seignour le Roy, and lez grandes Dames femmes a sez Seignours elours enfantz en
prison en orphanye puis la mort lour Seigneurs: E lez veuz Dames, come Dame
Barreter que vous ensuyt pur grace avoire. Et vous contyraunt la feistes Batre
de vous ribaudes, and debryser bras and jambes trop dispiteousement encontre
l'order de Chivaler, and contre leye and resone, par quoy la bonne Dame est a
tousiours a solee and perdue and plusours de ycelz avez fait sure la Court a
pee and a grant poverte sans pity and mercy, que solent estre Dames de grant
Honor. Et tousiours eaux usez en si grant vilte ten ne feust que Dieu pour
sa mercy envoya nostre bonne Dame and son filz en terre, and les bonnes gens
qui sont venus en lour aid par quoy le realm est succurra.

Carta Regis Edwardi Secundi.
REX dilecto sibi Roberto de Hungerford custodi quarundam terrarum and
tenementorum in Comitatu Wilts in manu nostra existentium, Salutem. Cum nuper
volentes certiorari super causam Captionis terrarum and tenementorum quae
fuerant Thomae filii Willielmi Mauduit in Tydecomube and Werminster per vos ut
dicebatur in manum nostram, vobis mandavimus quod nos super causam praedictam
sub Sigillo vestro distinct and aperte redderetis certiores, ac vos nobis
retornaveritis quod terrae and tenementa praedicta capta fuerunt in manum
nostram per Johannem de Tichburne quondam Vicecomitem Wilts, pro eo quod idem
Thomas una cum Thoma Mauduit Milite nuper inimico and Rebelli nostro, averia
Hugonis le Despenser senioris in Manerio suo de Ashmere cepit and abduxit. Et
pro eo quod idem Thomas filius Willielmi non venit apud Coventre ad nos in
obsequium nostrum, sicut ex part Nostra fuit praemunitus: Et quod idem
Vicecomes tenementa illa in manus nostras occasion praedicta capta vobis
liberavit ad mandatum nostrum custodiendum: Et quia per literas ipsius Hugonis
in Cancellariam nostram inde missas vobis constat, quod praefatus Thomas filius
Willielmi eidem Hugoni de transgressione sibi in hac part facta satisfecit: Et
ex testimonio accepimus fide digno quod praefatus Thomas tempore quo ad
Coventre fueramus, and per magnum tempus postmodum, adeo languidus and impotens
sui extitit, quod non potuit laborare: Vobis mandamus, quod de terris and
tenementis praedictis, si occasionibus praedictis and non alia de causa in manu
nostra existant, vos ulterius non intromittatis, exitus per vos inde receptos
praefato Thomae filio Willielmi sine diminutione aliqua liberantes. Test Rege
apud Turrim London duodecimo die Aprilis, Anno sextodecimo Regis Edwardi
Secundi.

Eschaet. Ao 36 E. 3. post mortem Margaretae quae fuit uxor Thomae Moigne Com.
Glouc. and Marchii Walliae.
BOgo de Knoville pater Elizabethae, Uxoris Thomae Mauduit, patris Johannis
Mauduit.

Carta Dominae Elizabethae Mauduit.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Elizabetha filia Domini Bogoni de
Knoville and Uxor quondam Domini Thomae Mauduit, in libera viduitate mea
concessi, tradidi, and ad firmam demisi Waltero de Grimsted unum messuagium in
Chaldcoate in Hundredo de Westbury, simul cum tota terra sua arabili, pratis,
pascuis and pasturis, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, quae mihi acciderunt
nomine dotis apud Westbury and Chaldcoate post decessum Domini Thomae Mauduit
viri mei: Exceptis redditibus and servitiis tam liberorum hominum quam
villanorum. Habendum and tenendum praedicto Waltero vel suis Assignatis
praedictum messuagium cum tota terra praedicta, pratis, pascuis and pasturis,
de me praedicta Elizabetha a Festo Annunciationis beatae Virginis usque ad
terminum duorum annorum proxime subsequentium plenarie completorum, libere,
quiet been and in pace, reddendo inde per Annum mihi praedictae Elizabethae
vel meo certo Attornato literas meas deferenti potentes, quatuor libras bonae
and legalis monetae ad duos anni terminos, scilicet ad Festa Sancti Michaelis
Archangeli and Annunciationis beatae Mariae Virginis aequalibus portionibus
sine dilatione ulteriori. Et si contingat quod praedictus Walterus vel sui
Assignati in toto vel in part solutionem dictae pecuniae terminis praedictis
deficiant, obligat se dictus Walterus pro se and suis assignatis bona and
Catalla sua mobilia and immobilia super praedictas terras and tenementa inventa
in districtionem mei praedictae Elizabethae and Ballivorum meorum ad
districtiones Catallorum in eisdem inventorum capiendum and contra vadum and
plegium retinendum, and dictum messuagium cum tota terra praedicta, pratis,
pascuis and pasturis praedictis, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, resumendis,
quousque de solutionibus dictae pecuniae quae aretro fuerint, plenarie sibi
fuerit satisfactum. Praedicta Elizabetha praedictum messuagium cum tota terra
praedicta, pratis, pascuis and pasturis, praedicto Waltero vel suis assignatis
per praedictum terminum duorum annorum proxime subsequentium plenarie
completorum, contra omnes mortales warrantizabit, acquietabit and defendet,
salvo tamen cumpostata faldae una cum fructibus pratorum and Warrennae post
Festum Annunciationis beatae Mariae, vicesimo quinto die Martii ultimi Anni,
mihi praedictae Elizabethae, and etiam quadraginta solidis de praedicto redditu
ad Festum Sancti Michaelis Archangeli Anni ejusdem ultimi. Ita tamen quod
fructus in dictis terris arabilibus crescentes ejusdem Anni ultimi praedicto
Waltero vel ejus assignatis remanebunt in forma praedicta. In cujus rei
testimonium praesenti scripto in modum Chirographi confecto sigillum meum
apposui. His Testibus, Roberto Plugnel, Nicholao Malemains, Roberto Mauduit,
Thoma Somerford, Waltero Rottings, Nicholao de Doderidge and aliis.

seal of Elizabeth de Knowle SIGILLVM DNAE ELIZABETHA DE KNOVILE



Sir JOHN MAVDVIT, Lord of Werminster and other Lands and Lordships.
Carta Regis Edwardii Tertii.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Aquitaniae, dilecto
sibi Thomae de Harpeden Escaetori suo in Comitatu Wilts, Southampton, Oxon,
Berks, Bedford and Bucks, Salutem. Quia Thomas Mauduit, qui de Domino Edwardo
nuper Rege Angliae patre nostro tenuit in Capite tempore dicti patris nostri,
diem clausit extremum, ut accepimus, vobis mandamus quod omnes terras and
temementa de quibus idem Thomas fuit seisitus in Dominico suo and de feodo, in
Balliva vestra, die quo obiit, sine dilatione capiatis in manum nostram, and ea
salvo custodiri faciatis, donec aliud inde praeceperimus. Et per Sacramentum
proborum and legalium hominum de Balliva vestra, per quos rei veritas melius
sciri poterit, diligenter inquiratis, quantum terrae idem Thomas tenuit de
dicto patre nostro in Capite in Balliva vestra die quo obiit, and quantum de
aliis, and per quod servitium, and quantum terrae illae valiant per Annum in
omnibus exitibus, and quis propinquior haeres ejus sit, and cujus aetatis. Et
inquisitionem inde distinct and aperte factam nobis sub sigillo vestro and
sigillis eorum per quos facta fuerit, sine dilatione mittatis, and hoc breve.
Test meipso apud Westmonasterium undecimo die Februarii Anno Regni nostri
primo.

Inquisitio facta post mortem Thomae Mauduit.
INquisitio facta apud Werminster coram Thoma de Harpeden Escaetore Regis in
Comitatu Wilts, Southampton, Oxon, Berks, Bedford and Bucks, tertio die Martii
Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum primo, per Sacramentum Roberti
Swetynge, Richardi de Langford, Willielmi Winebald, Johannis Leverich, Johannis
Campo, Gostelini at Milne, Petri Skarlet, Thomae de Holinesford, Johannis
Styward, Rogeri Styward, Henrici le Corner, Thomae Gostelyn, Adae le Clerk,
Adae Boneton, Gostelini le Tannere, Johannis Gery, Simonis Arnald, Rogeri
Wynebald, Walteri Wicklecot, Johannis Michell, Galfridi le Knighton and
Johannis Goll. Qui dicunt quod Thomas Mauduit obiit seisitus in Dominico suo
and feodo de Maneriis de Werminster and Westbury cum pertinentiis in Comitatu
Wilts: Item dicunt quod tenentur de Domino Rege in Capite per servitium feodi
unius militis pro omni servitio. Et dicunt quod idem Manerium de Werminster
valet per annum in omnibus exitibus juxta verum valorem quadraginta and octo
libras, octo solidos and duos denarios, videlicet Messuagium cum Gardino and
Columbario valet per Annum ultra reprisam centum solidos. Sunt ibidem de terra
arabili quadringenti acrae, unde ducenti valent per Annum centum solidos, per
Acram sex denarios; Et ducenti acrae valent per Annum triginta tres solidos and
quatuor denarios, per Acram..... Sunt ibidem triginta Acrae prati, and valent
per Annum sexaginta solidos, pretium Acrae duos solidos. Item est ibidem
quaedam pastura communis pro trecentis videlicet, and valet per Annum duodecim
solidos sex denarios, pretium Capitis ob. Item est ibidem quoddam Molendinum
aquaticum and valet per Annum quatuordecim solidos. Item dicunt quod Tolnetum
feriae cum nundinis valent per Annum centum solidos. Item dicunt quod placita
and perquisitiones Hundredi Curiae and pertomotorum valent per Annum december
libras. Sunt and ibidem triginta Tenentes liberi qui reddunt per Annum octo
libras, sexdecim solidos and tres denarios, videlicet ad quatuor Anni terminos
principales. Item sunt ibidem octo customarii qui vocantur Buri, quorum
quilibet tenet unam virgatam terrae, and reddit per Annum quatuor libras, sex
solidos and quinque denarios ad quatuor terminos Anni, and dant Domino annuatim
ad auxilium ad Festum Sancti Egidii viginti sex solidos and octo denarios. Sunt
and ibidem quinque Semi-Virgatarii, and reddunt per Annum ad eosdem terminos
triginta solidos. Sunt ibidem sex Coterelli, qui reddunt per Annum december
solidos ad eosdem terminos; de quibus custumariis and Coterellis dantur Domino
annuatim octo Churchet and valent quatuor solidos. Item dicunt quod omnes
custumarii debent operari per Annum cum summoniti sint, and valent opera
sexaginta quatuor solidos. Sunt ibidem octoginta acrae Bosci, quarum sexaginta
acrae Subbosci, and valent per Annum quinque solidos. Item dicunt quod
consuetudines per aestimationem pro licentia habenda pro brevera tractanda ad
Festum Natalis Domini, quadraginta gallinae pretii quinque solidorum. Item
dicunt quod praedictum Manerium de Westbury valet per Annum juxta verum valorem
ejusdem Novem libras, quatuor solidos, unum denarium and obolum, videlicet in
uno messuagio cum curtilagio and Gardino quae valent per annum tres solidos. Et
ibidem est quoddam Columbarium, and valet per Annum duos solidos, sex denarios.
Sunt ibidem centum and viginti acrae terrae arabilis in Chaldcote, Hankeryg and
Upedonne, quae valent per Annum triginta solidos, pretium acrae tres denarii.
Sunt ibidem sex acrae prati, and valent per Annum duodecim solidos, pretium
acrae..... Est ibidem quaedam pastura super montem and apud Chaldecote pro
ducentis videlicet and pro duodecim bobus, and valet per Annum quatuordecim
solidos, quatuor denarios. Sunt ibidem viginti acrae bosci in quo nullus est
subboscus, and non potest vendi sine vasto, and tamen valet per Annum tres
solidos, quatuor denarios. Sunt and ibidem triginta and unum Tenentes liberi,
qui reddunt per Annum ad quatuor Anni terminos principales quindecim and unum
solidos and duos denarios. Sunt ibidem quatuordecim Nativi qui reddunt per
Annum ad praedictos terminos quinquaginta quinque solidos, undecim denarios and
obolum de operibus eorum cum Churchsthutto, videlicet novem Galli and viginti
quinque Gallinae, quinque solidos, unum denarium and obolum. Item placita and
perquisitiones Curiae ibidem valent per Annum sex solidos, octo denarios.
Dicunt and quod Johannes Mauduit filius praedicti Thomae Mauduit est
propinquior haeres ejus, and est aetatis sexdecim Annorum and amplius. Item
dicunt quod praedictus Thomas nullas terras nec tenementa tenuit die quo obiit
in Comitatu praedicto ultra Maneria praedicta. In cujus rei Testimonium
supradicti jurati huic Inquisitioni Sigilla sua apposuerunt. Data die and Anno
supradictis.

Custodia Concessa.
REX omnibus ad quos, etc. Sciatis quod concessimus dilecto and fideli nostro
Johanni de Kingston Custodiam Terrarum and Tenementorum quae fuerunt Thomae
Mauduit defuncti, qui de Domino Edwardo nuper Rege Angliae patre nostro tenuit
in Capite, and quae ratione minoris aetatis Johannis filii and haeredis
praedicti Thomae in manu nostra existunt, Habendam cum omnibus ad custodiam
illam spectantibus usque ad legitimam aetatem ejusdem haeredis, reddendo inde
nobis per Annum ad scaccarium nostrum tantum quantum alii nobis inde reddere
voluerint. In cujus rei Testimonium, etc. Test Rege apud Westmonasterium sexto
die Martii, Anno primo Edwardi Tertii. Per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Carta Regis Edwardi Tertii.
REX Thesaurariis and Baronibus suis de scaccario Salutem.............. in
praesenti Parliamento nostro apud Westmonasterium convocato per Nos, Praelatos,
Comites, Barons, Magnates and....... Regni nostri ibidem existentes, est inter
alia concordatum, quod omnes illi qui tempore Domini Edwardi nuper Regis
Angliae Patris nostri de querela Thomae tunc Comitis Lancastriae fuerunt ad
persequendum Hugonem le Despenser Seniorem, and Hugonem le Despenser Juniorem,
re-habeant Terras and Tenementa sua cum pertinentiis suis, quae occasion
dictae querelae in manus dicti patris nostri tanquam sibi forisfacta, capta,
and seisita fuerunt, una cum exitibus and areragiis firmarum de quibus dicto
patri nostro responsum non fuerit, and quod fines pro transgressionibus,
obligationes, recognitiones, poenae, and redemptiones in Cancellaria dicti
patris nostri occasion querelae praedictae facti, cancellentur and
adnullentur, quodque ipse de querela praedicta brevia de Cancellaria nostra ad
scaccarium nostrum and alias placeas nostras ubi hujusmodi fines, obligationes,
recognitiones, poenae, and redemptiones factae fuerunt, ad eosdem fines,
obligationes, recognitiones, poenas and redemptiones adnullanda, pro eo quod
querela praedicta in dicto Parliamento nostro per Nos and totum Parliamentum,
bona and justa judicata est, and judicia versus illos quae de dicta querela
fuerunt reddita, penitus adnullata, Vobis mandamus quod Johanni Mauduit, qui
pro eo quod de dicta querela fuit, finem fecit cum Domino patre nostro in
Cancellaria sua per mill Marcas pro vita sua solvendum and pro tenementis suis
rehabendis, and inde in eadem Cancellaria certos invenit manucaptores de eo
quod de summa praedicta adhuc restat solvendum ad dictum scaccarium.......
ipsumque Johannem and Manucaptores praedictos inde quietos esse factos, and
districtionem siquam eis ea occasion fieri feceritis, sine dilatione relaxari
faciatis eisdem. Et Nos enim recognitiones and manucaptiones praedictas in
Cancellaria nostra fecimus adnullari juxta concordiam supradictam. Test Rege
apud Westmonasterium decimo quarto Februarii Anno primo Edwardi Tertii.

Carta Regis Edwardi Tertii.
REX omnibus ad quos, etc. Salutem. Sciatis quod per finem quem Johannes filius
Thomae Mauduit fecit nobiscum, Concessimus and Licentiam dedimus pro nobis and
haeredibus nostris, quantum in nobis est, eidem Johanni, quod ipse de duabus
partibus Manerii and Hundredi de Werminstre cum pertinentiis, and unius
messuagii duarum carucatarum terrae, viginti acrarum prati, centum acrarum
bosci, and centum solidatarum redditus cum pertinentiis in Westbury, and de
Advocatione Capellae ejusdem Manerii quae de nobis tenentur in Capite; feoffare
possit Robertum le Roer and Johannem de Tidecombe, Habendum and tenendum sibi
and haeredibus suis de nobis and haeredibus nostris per servitia inde debita
and consueta imperpetuum. Et quod idem Johannes filius Thomae concedere possit,
quod tertia pars praedictorum Manerii, Hundredi, messuagii, terrae, prati,
bosci and redditus cum pertinentiis, and redditus unius clavis gariophili cum
pertinentiis in eodem Manerio quae Richardus de Perers and Alianora Uxor ejus
tenent in dotem ipsius Alianorae, de haereditate praedicti Johannis filii
Thomae, and quae post mortem praedictae Alianorae ad praefatum Johannem filium
Thomae, and haeredes suos reverti deberent, post mortem ejusdem Alianorae
remaneant praefatis Roberto and Johanni de Tidecombe, habendum and tenendum
sibi and haeredibus suis de nobis and haeredibus nostris per servitia inde
debita and consueta imperpetuum. Et eisdem Roberto and Johanni de Tidecombe
tenore praesentium similiter licentiam dedimus specialem, quod ipsi habita de
praedictis duabus partibus cum pertinentiis and advocatione praedicta plena and
pacifica seisina, dare possint and concedere praedictas duas parts cum
pertinentiis and advocationem praedictam praefato Johanni filio Thomae, and
Julianae Uxori ejus, habendum and tenendum sibi and haeredibus suis de
corporibus suis exeuntibus de nobis and haeredibus nostris per servitia
praedicta imperpetuum. Ac etiam recepto Attornamento praedictorum Richardi and
Alianorae de praedictis tertia part and redditu, concedere possint quod
praedicti tertia pars and redditus cum pertinentiis, qui post mortem praedictae
Alianorae praefatis Roberto and Johanni de Tidecombe and haeredibus suis
virtute Concessionis and Attornamenti praedictorum remanere deberent, post
decessum ejusdem Alianorae remaneant praefatis Johanni filio Thomae, and
Julianae, habendum and tenendum una cum praedictis duabus partibus and
advocatione praedicta sibi and haeredibus de corporibus suis exeuntibus de
nobis and haeredibus nostris per servitia praedicta imperpetuum. Ita quod si
iidem Johannes filius Thomae, and Juliana, sine haerede de corporibus suis
exeunte obierint, tunc praedictae duae parts cum pertinentiis and Advocatio
praedicta post mortem praedictorum Johannis filii Thomae, and Julianae, and
praedicti tertia pars and redditus cum pertinentiis post mortem eorundem
Johannis filii Thomae, Julianae and Alianorae rectis haeredibus ipsius Johannis
filii Thomae remaneant, tenendum de nobis and haeredibus nostris per servitia
supradicta imperpetuum, sicut praedictum est. Nolentes quod praedicti Johannes
filius Thomae, and Juliana, vel haeredes sui, aut praefati Robertus and
Johannes de Tydecombe seu haeredes sui ratione praemissorum per Nos vel
haeredes nostros, Justiciarios, Escaetores, Vicecomites aut alios Ballivos seu
Ministros nostros quoscunque occasionentur, molestentur in aliquo seu
graventur. In cujus, etc. Test Rege apud Wodestock octavo die Julii, Anno
sexto Regis Edwardi Tertii.

Per finem december Librarum.

Carta Elizabethae Mauduit.
UNiversis pateat per praesentes, quod ego Elizabetha Mauduit in ligea
viduitate mea remisi, relaxavi and omnino quietum clamavi Domino Johanni
Mauduit, Domino de Werminster, and haeredibus vel Assignatis suis, totum jus
and clameum quod habui vel aliquo modo habere potui in omnibus terris and
tenementis, redditibus and serviciis tam liberorum quam nativorum cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis, quae idem Johannes modo tenet in Westbury. Ita quod nec ego
dicta Elizabetha nec aliquis nomine meo in omnibus nec aliquibus de praedictis
terris, tenementis, redditibus and servitiis liberorum hominum aut Nativorum ac
omnibus pertinentiis suis aliquid Juris aut clamei vel actionem aliquam versus
dictum Dominum Johannem de caetero exigere vel vindicare poterimus in futurum,
sed ab omni Juris action and clamei totaliter simus exclusi imperpetuum. In
cujus rei testimonium huic Scripto and quietae clamanciae Sigillum meum
apposui, his Testibus, Dominis Johanne Mauduit de Somerford, Petro Escuadamour
Militibus, Thoma de Langesford Whitelive, Waltero de Sherveton, Johanne
Talbott, Willielmo de Grymstede and aliis. Datum apud Westury die Mercurii in
Festo Sancti Dunstani, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii a Conquestu tertiodecimo.

Carta Domini Johannis Mauduit.
CEste Endentre fait a Werminstre le Lunday prochein avaunt la Feiste Saint
Matheu l'Evangelist l'an du Regne le Roy Edward Tierce puis le Conquest vint
and tierce, testmoign, cestassavoir, que Johan Maduit Seignour de Werminstre
avantdit ad relesse and per icestes Endentures pardonne a Henry Mountfort and
Cecile sa femme, file and une des heirs Johan de la Mare, a Richard Scammel
and a Johanne sa femme aultre delz files and heirs mesme ceste Johan de la
Mare, tuttes maneres, actions de forfature, de Marriagez, and de reliefs, queux
il avoit verse les dites Cecile and Johanne; Donaunt a euz conge d'entrer en les
deux parties delz terrez and tenementez que le dit Johan de la Mare del avaunt
dit Johan Mauduit tient a eux afferant de lour heritage en Werminstre
Wyshopstowne en la Count de Wilts, and en Tarente Gondevyle en la Count de
Dorset, a tener de lui and de ses heirs par les servicez de ceo duez and
custumables. En testmoign de quele chose les avantditz entrechangeablement ount
mys lours Seals. Done a Werminstre jour and an avantditz.

seal of Sir John Mauduit SIGILLVM IOHANNIS MANDVIT MILITIS



Carta Domini Johannis Mauduit.
AToutz a ceux que ceste Escrit verront ou orront, Johan Mauduit Chivaler and
Seignour de Werminstre, Saluz en Dieu. Sachetz moy avoir grant a Johan Hugyn
la guard and le Marriage de Thomas fitz and heir Johan de Lie and d'une sale
une gardyn, un Molyn and Weretz, and tutte la terre, pree and pasture, and de
tuttes altres chooses que le dit Johan de Lie de moy tint en Lie and Westbury,
come en rentes and services queconques, A aver and tener la dit guard and la
Marriage al dit Johan Hugyn and ses executrez tanque al pleine age le dit
Thomas, fesaunce a Chapeleyn de Hewode and altrez lez servicez duez. En
tesmoignance de quele chose a ceste Escrit Endentre entrechangablement avons
mys nos Sealz. Escrit a Werminstre le Mekredye en la Feste Saint Martyne, l'an
du Regne le Roy Edward Tierce puis le Conquest xxiii.

Eschaet. Ao 43 E. 3. post-mortem Agnetis Mauduit in Com. Ox. and Wilts.
JUliana nupta Johanni Mauduit de jure and haereditate Katharinae Bockland
matris suae.

THOMAS MAVDVIT, Son of Sir John Mauduit Lord of Werminster and other Lands and
Lordships.
Inquisitio post mortem Domini Johannis Mauduit.
INquisitio facta in Civitate Novae Sarum in Comitatu Wilts die Martis, ultimo
die Mensis Aprilis, Anno Regn Riegis Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum tricesimo
octavo, coram Johanne de Evesham Escaetore Domini Regis in Comitatu praedicto,
virtute brevis dicti Domini Regis eidem Escaetori directi and praesentibus
consuti per Sacramentum Nicholai Brock and aliorum, Qui dicunt super
Sacramentum suum, quod Johannes Mauduit non tenuit aliqua terras seu tenementa
in Comitatu praedicto die quo obiit in Dominico suo ut de feodo, set tamen
tenuit die praedicto de Domino Rege in Capite conjunctim feoffatus cum Juliana
Uxore ejus adhuc superstite per finem in Curia Domini Regis levatam per
servitium Militare Manerium de Wermynstre cum pertinentiis, quod valet per
Annum quadraginta Marcas in omnibus Exitibus. Et dicunt quod praedictus
Johannes tenuit die praedicto conjunctim feoffatus cum praedicta Juliana Uxore
sua per finem praedictam de Domino Rege in Capite per servitium Militare unum
Messuagium, duas carucatas terrae, viginti acras prati, centum acras bosci,
centum solidatos redditus cum pertinentiis in Westbury, and cum Advocatione
Capellae ejusdem Villae quae valet per Annum in omnibus exitibus december Marcas.
Et dicunt quod praedictus Johannes non tenuit aliqua alia terras seu tenementa
in Comitatu praedicto die quo obiit de Domino Rege in Capite, nec de aliis. Et
quod idem Johannes defunctus obiit primo die Aprilis ultimo praeterito. Et quod
Matill filia Thomae Mauduit filii praedicti Johannis aetatis novem annorum in
Festo Sancti Leonardi proximo praeterito est haeres ejusdem Johannis defuncti
propinquior. In cujus rei testimonium Sigilla praedictorum Juratorum
praesentibus sunt appensa. Datum loco, die and anno supradictis.

Inquisitio post mortem Julianae Uxoris Johannis Mauduit.
INquisitio capta apud Wermynstre in Comitatu Wilts duodecimo die Maii, Anno
Regni Regis Richardi Secundi post Conquestum secundo, coram Thoma Illeston
Escaetore Domini Regis in Comitatu praedicto per Sacramentum Thomae Osborn and
aliorum onerati and jurati virtute brevis Domini Regis eidem Escaetori inde
directi and huic Inquisitioni consuti, Qui dicunt super Sacramentum suum, quod
Juliana quae fuit Uxor Johannis Mauduit defuncta in dicto breve contenta non
tenuit aliqua terras sive tenementa in Dominico suo ut de feodo simplici dicto
die quo obiit de Domino Rege in Capite, nec de aliquo alio, set dicunt quod
dicto die quo obiit, tenuit de Domino Rege in Capite conjunctim feoffata cum
Johanne Mauduit quondam viro suo similiter defuncto sibi and haeredibus de
corporibus eorum exeuntibus per finem in Curia Domini Regis inde levatam per
servitium Militare Manerium de Wermynstre cum pertinentiis, quod valet per
Annum in omnibus exitibus quadraginta Marcas. Et dicunt etiam quod praedicta
Juliana tenuit praedicto die conjunctim feoffata cum praedicto Johanne viro suo
similiter defuncto sibi and haeredibus de corporibus eorum exeuntibus per finem
praedictam de Domino Rege in Capite per servitium Militare unum Messuagium,
duas carucatas terrae, viginti acras prati, centum acras bosci, centum
solidatos redditus cum pertinentiis in Westbury, and cum Advocatione Capellae
ejusdem Villae quae valet per Annum in omnibus exitibus december Marcas. Tenuit
etiam in Comitatu praedicto ad terminum vitae suae nomine dotis ex dotatione
Johannis Mauduit nuper Viri sui similiter defuncti tertiam partem medietatis
Manerii de Dycherych quae valet per Annum in omnibus exitibus viginti solidos,
Reversione inde spectante post decessum dictae Julianae rectis haeredibus
praedicti Johannis Mauduit, quae quidem tertia pars tenetur de Domino Rege ut
de Manerio suo de Hampstead Marchal per servitium Militare. Et dicunt quod non
tenuit aliqua alia terras sive tenementa dicto die quo obiit de Domino Rege in
Capite in Dominico suo ut de feodo, nec in servitio, nec de aliquo alio in
Comitatu praedicto. Et dicunt quod praedicta Juliana obiit Vicesimo die Aprilis
proximo praeterito. Et dicunt quod Matill Uxor Henrici Green Militis aetatis
viginti quatuor annorum and amplius, est consanginea and haeres praedictorum
Johannis and Julianae, videlicet filia Thomae Mauduit filii and haeredis
Johannis Mauduit and Julianae, and est haeres propinquior tam praedicto Johanni
quam praedictae Julianae. In cujus rei testimonium praedicti Jurati huic
Inquisitioni Sigilla sua apposuerunt. Data die, Anno and loco supradictis.

Altera Inquisitio post mortem Julianae Uxoris Johannis Mauduit.
INquisitio capta apud Andevere decimo die Maii, Anno Regni Regis Richardi
Secundi post Conquestum secundo, coram Thoma Illeston Escaetore Domini Regis in
Comitatu Southampton virtute brevis Domini Regis eidem Escaetori inde directi
and huic Inquisitioni consuti per Sacramentum Thomae Bockland and aliorum
onerati and jurati super Sacramentum suum dicunt, quod Juliana, quae fuit Uxor
Johannis Mauduit, non tenuit aliqua terras sive tenementa in Dominico suo ut de
feodo die quo obiit de haereditate Comitis Hereford in Capite, ut conjunctim
feoffata cum Johanne Mauduit nuper viro suo similiter defuncto, sibi and
praefato Johanni and haeredibus dicti Johannis Mauduit de Croceke cum
pertinentiis in Comitatu praedicto per servitium Militare, quod quidem Manerium
valet per Annum in omnibus exitibus december Marcas. Et dicunt quod non sunt
aliqua alia terrae sive tenementa in Comitatu praedicto de Domino Rege in
Capite nec in servitio, nec de aliquo alio dicto die quo obiit. Et dicunt quod
praedicta Juliana obiit vicesimo die Aprilis proximo praeterito. Et dicunt quod
Matill Uxor Henrici Green Militis aetatis viginti quatuor annorum and amplius
est consanguinea and haeres propinquior tam praefato Johanni quam praefatae
Julianae, videlicet filia Thomae Mauduit filii and haeredis praedictorum
Johannis Mauduit and Julianae. In cujus rei testimonium praedicti Juratores
huic inquisitioni Sigilla sua apposuerunt. Data die, loco and Anno supradictis.

Praeceptum Regis Vicecomiti ad liberandum Henrico Green Militi and marito
Matildae de Mauduit diversa Maneria.
REX dilecto sibi Thomae de Illeston Escaetori suo in Comitatu Wilts and
Southhampton. Quia accepimus per Inquisitionem quam per te fieri fecimus, quod
Juliana quae fuit Uxor Johannis Mauduit defuncta non tenuit aliqua terras seu
tenementa in Dominico suo ut de feodo in Comitatibus praedictis die quo obiit,
set quod tenuit de praedicto conjunctim feoffata cum Johanne Mauduit quondam
viro suo similiter defuncto sibi and haeredibus de corporibus suis exeuntibus
Manerium de Werminstre cum pertinentiis, ac unum messuagium, duas carucatas
terrae, viginti acras prati, centum acras bosci, and centum solidatas redditus
cum pertinentiis in Westbury, and Advocationem Capellae ejusdem villae de nobis
in Capite per servitium Militare per finem inde in Curia Domini Edwardi nuper
Regis Angliae avi nostri de licentia sua levatum, ac tertiam partem medietatis
Manerii de Dicherich in dicto Comitatu Wilts in dorem post mortem praedicti
Johannis de haereditate ejusdem Johannis similiter de nobis ut de Manerio
nostro de Hampstead Marchal per servitium Militare, nec non Manerium de Cracele
cum pertinentiis in dicto Comitatu Southampton similiter ut conjunctim feoffata
cum praefato Johanne sibi and haeredibus dicti Johannis de haeredibus Humfridi
de Bohun nuper Comitis Hereford infra aetatem and in custodia nostra
existentibus per servitium Militare, quodque Matilla filia Thomae Mauduit filii
and haeredis praedictorum Johannis and Julianae quam Henricus Green Miles
duxit in Uxorem, est haeres eorundem Johannis and Julianae propinquior and
plenae aetatis, cepimus homagium and fidelitatem praefati Henrici nobis in hac
part debita ratione prolis inter ipsum and praefatam Matill procreatae, and
eisdem Henrico and Matillae Maneria, terras, tenementa, and medietatem
praedicta cum pertinentiis ac Advocationem praedictam reddidimus. Et ideo tibi
praecipimus quod accepta securitate a praefatis Henrico and Matilla de
rationabili relevio suo nobis solvendo ad scaccarium nostrum, eisdem Henrico
and Matillae de Maneriis, terris, tenementis, and medietate praedictis cum
pertinentiis in balliva tua ac Advocationem praedictam quae per morten
praefatae Julianae capta sunt in manum nostram, plenam seisinam habere facias,
salvo jure cujuslibet.

Test Rege aqud Westmonasterium decimo nono die Maii, Anno Regis Richardi
Secundi secundo. Per breve de privato Sigillo.

A SUCCINCT GENEALOGY Of the HOUSE of GREEN, THAT WERE LORDS of DRAYTON,
Justified by Public Records, Ancient and Extant Charters, Histories, and other
Authentic Proofs.
By ROBERT HALSTEAD.
The Arms of the House of Green were Azure, Three Bucks Trippant Or, of the
Lords of Drayton of that Name, Drayton and Mauduit quarterly.

blazon or coat of arms of the house of Green

Of the Original, Antiquity, Name, Arms, Alliances, Greatness, and Possessions
of the house of Green.
OF the Original of the House of Green we have no certain information, but it
is apparent they assumed their Name and Arms from an allusion to their
principal and beloved Lordship, which was Buckton or the Town of Bucks in the
County of Northampton, being in the Hundred of Spellho, a place memorable for
the excellency of its soil and situation, as a spacious and delightful Green,
upon which at the desire of the Lords was yearly held and exercised a Fair,
with particular and extraordinary privileges. Hence they were called Green,
or of the Green. And from Buckton or the Town of Bucks, they have assumed for
their Arms in a Field Azure three Bucks trippant Or, until the division of the
Family in the two Sons of Sir Henry Green the great Chief Justice; the second
whereof Sir Henry Green the younger, had been obliged by his Cousin Sir John
of Drayton upon his becoming invested in that Lordship, to change his own Arms
and assume those of his Family, which were Argent a Cross Engrailed Gules to
him and his posterity ever after.

In the first mention of this Family we find it in a very flourishing
condition, possessed of the Manor of Buckton, from which the Lords thereof did
take their usual style, as also of the Lordships of Hey-borne, Heydmoncourt,
Dodington, Ashby Mares and Greenes Norton, the latter whereof was held by
particular obligation of holding up the Lord's right hand toward the King upon
Christmas day wherever he should be at that time in England. And of these was
Lord Sir Thomas of Buckton, or Sir Thomas Green of Buckton, who lived in the
Reign of King Edward the First. Of these Greenes we find diverse to have been
qualified from their riches, their power and the esteem they held, for the
principal employments in the Countries where they lived. One Sir Thomas Green
being recorded to have been High Sheriff of the County of Northampton in the
third year of King Edward the Third, an age when that Office was not as in
these days, but esteemed equal even to the care of Princes. His Son Sir Henry
Green came nearer to the Throne. He was employed in the gravest actions of
State. He had been a Counselor to the famous King Edward the Third, and came
at last to be Lord Chief Justice of England. There was another, even a second
Son to this Chief Justice, Sir Henry Green of Drayton, who came to try all the
vicissitudes within the power of fortune, that in his time had been an object
of the nearest favor and confidence of a great King, that had participated of
the Honors, the delights and riches of the Courts, and came at last to be
overwhelmed and to lose his life in the disasters of an unhappy Master.

There were also of these Greenes that from the examples of others came to
understand the happiness of retired lives, that giving themselves to the
practice of Oeconomical Virtues, became repairers of those ruins which
ambition and unquietness do often make in well established fortunes, and that
became afterward famous for extraordinary Wealth and Prudence, and to deserve
the following characters from the Learn- Camden in his description of Britain,
Page 237. writing of Northamptonshire.

Magis ad ortum viculis omnia sunt aspersa, inter quos nominatissimi sunt
Blisworth seeds Wakorum, qui ex illustri illa prosapia Baronum de Wake and
Estotevile enati; Pateshull, quae clarissimae quondam familiae nomen fecit;
Greenes Norton, a Greenis viris superiori seculo ob opes clarissimis
denominata, antea, nisi me fallo, Norton Dany, quod tenebatur in Capite a Rege
per servitium levandi manum dextram erga regem annuatim in die natalis Domini
ubicunque fuerit in Anglia.

And again, Page 239.

Inde Adington, olim Verorum, and Thorpston vulgo Thrapston Alluit, huicque
appositum Drayton, aedes superiori seculo Henrici Green, postea per filiam
ejus Johannis and Edwardi Stafford Comitum Wiltoniae, nunc vero Baronis
Mordaunt, ad quem a Greenis maximi nominis in hoc agro nobilibus haereditario
devenit.

Among the other advantages of this House, the great blood of which it was
participant did honor it very much, it having had the fortune to ally it self
to the great Houses of Stafford, de la Zouch, Mauduit, Talbot, Ferrers of
Chartley and Rosse, all of the illustrious and old Nobility. But at last coming
to the fortune of all transitory things, it concluded in another Sir Henry
Green, who dying without Issue male, the Arms, blood and inheritance of this
Family came by a Daughter to the Veres that were Lords of Adington, and from
them by another Heir to the present Earl of Peterborow.

Sir THOMAS GREEN Lord of Buckton and other Lands and Lordships.
A Knight of this Family named Sir Thomas Green, that was Lord of Buckton and
other fair Possessions, flourished in the County of Northampton about the
beginning of King Edward the First. We find him recited in an ancient Catalogue
of the Knights who followed that King in his first expedition against the
Scots. The Name of his Wife does not appear, but he had Issue Sir Thomas Green
Lord of Buckton.


THomas of Buckton, who was indeed Sir THOMAS GREEN of Buckton, is recorded to
have been High Sheriff for the County of Northampton in the fifth year of
Edward the Third, an Office that unto those days had been of great trust and
reputation, and was justly esteemed honos sine onere. He Married Lucie the
Daughter of Eudo or Ivon de la Zouch and of Millesent, one of the Sisters and
Heirs of George de Cantelupe Lord of Abergavenny, with whom he had in free
Marriage nine Messuages, one Toft and four Virgates of Land with their
appurtenances in Harringworth, which House of de la Zouch was lineally
descended from the famous Alan, who was once Earl and Sovereign of Little
Britain. He had after her decease, to his second Wife Christian of Ireby.

Children by his first Wife, Sir Henry Green. By his second Wife, Nicholas
Green who Married one of the Heirs of Bruce of Exton.


THE first mention that we find of this Sir HENRY GREEN was upon an occasion
where in the Reign of King Edward the Third he was joined a Commissioner with
the Earl of Oxford to examine certain abuses whereof there was great complaint
in the Diocese of Canterbury. He was much employed, and in special trust and
authority under those Ministers the King left to govern the Land here during
his absence in all the long Wars he made in France; and in the thirty fourth
year of his Reign he was sent with Sir William Shardshall, a man of great
credit in those days, to enquire into that great cause of Thomas Lild the
turbulent Bishop of Ely, against whom the Lady Wake of Lydell, the Kings
nearest Cousin and a Princess of great merit and interest, did complain for the
murder of her Servant William Holmes, and other misdemeanors. About this time
the testimony he had given during a long service of his integrity, wisdom and
great abilities, did occasion his advancement to the Office of Lord Chief
Justice of England. He was Speaker of the House of Lords in the two Parliaments
of the thirty sixth and thirty seventh of the same King's Reign. He became at
last of the King's nearest Councels; and such was his good fortune and the
effects of the worthy and industrious endeavors of his life, as made the
Estate he left to his Posterity, one of the most considerable in that Age: He
dying possessed of his ancient Manor of Buckton, Greenes Norton, East Neaston,
Heydmoncourt, Heyborne, Ashby Mares, and Dodington, with Lands in Whittlebury,
Paulespery, Pisford and Northampton; the Lordships of Drayton, Luffwick, Islip,
Slipton, Wolston, Wamingdon, Chalton, Haughton, Boteshaseall, with Lands in
Harringworth, Cottingham, Middleton, Carlton, Isham, Pichteley, Harrowden,
Hardwick, Raunds, Ringstead, Coats, Titchmarsh and sundry other places, full
of years, riches, and estimation, in the forty third year of King Edward the
Third. The Wife of Sir Henry Green was Katharine the Daughter of Sir John and
Sister of Sir Simon of Drayton.

Their Issue Sir Thomas Green Lord of Norton, that Married Mary Daughter of
Richard Lord Talbot and Sister to John the first Earl of Shrewsbury, from whom
were those Greenes that for several generations flourished afterward at that
place in great reputation. Henry Green Lord of Drayton. Margaret Green
Married to William Lord Zouch of Totnes. Nicholas Green. Richard Green.
Amabila Green Married to Sir Ralph Reins Lord of Clifton.


HAving only exposed the descent and succession of those Greenes that were
Lords of Drayton, I shall proceed to HENRY the second Son of Sir Henry Green,
who in his Father's lifetime and by his procurement was invested by his Cousin
Sir John of Drayton in the chief seat and Lordship of that place, with all the
Towns, Lands, Liberties and Privileges belonging thereunto, upon condition
that from thenceforth he should bear his Name and his Arms, according as to
that purpose, the same Sir John had formerly covenanted with Sir Henry the
Father of this Sir Henry Green. Now this being among his other Children the
delight and hopes of his old Father, he was by him endowed with great and noble
possessions, as besides the Manor of Drayton, of which were parcels the Towns
of Luffwick, Islip, and Slipton with certain Lands in Titchmarsh and Aldwincle;
those of Wolston, Wamingdon, Chalton, Haughton, Batteshaseall, with Lands in
Harringworth, Cottington, Middleton, Carlton, Isham, Pichteley, Harrowden,
Hardwick, Raunds, Ringstead, Coats, Titchmarsh, and sundry other places, and
he was moreover by his provident care, Married to Matilda Daughter and sole
heiress of Sir Thomas Mauduit that was Lord of Werminster, Westbury, Lie,
Grateley, Dychurch, and other fair Possessions, all which with the blood and
Arms of that Ancient and Noble House by this Alliance devolved into his Family.
The ambition of the young Henry Green fomented by these favors of fortune,
drew him to the Court, where he resolutely joined his hopes and expectations to
the fate of that unhappy Prince King Richard the Second, at whose hand he had
received the honor of Knighthood. The merits of his person soon acquired him
the nearest favor of this King, and those of his mind, the approbation and
encouragement of all his Council, into the number whereof he was chosen for his
great faithfulness and abilities. And when the Conspiracies of diverse of the
turbulent and seditious Lords had obliged the King to condemn some and banish
others, he conferred several parcels of their confiscated Lands upon Sir Henry
Green, as the Manors of Kibworth, Cotgrave and Preston Capes, that
appertained to Thomas Earl of Warwick; those of Knighton, Cuvelle and
Bulkington in the County of Wilts, by reason of the attainder of Richard Earl
of Arundell; and the Place of the Lord Cobham in London with all its furniture;
to the end he might secure the fidelity of those about him by exemplary
satisfaction for their services and hazards. And indeed had not the perverseness
of this Kings Planet (which obstinately prosper'd the Rebellion of his Enemies)
overwhelmed all his hopes, there was not any greatness unto which the deserts
of this Sir Henry might not have well attained. But at last when the Duke of
Lancaster's fortune came like a torrent bearing down all before it, Sir Henry
Green, that had possessed himself of the Castle of Bristol, and meant to
defend it for his Master to the uttermost, was taken by his perfidious
Garrison, and delivered bound to the Duke, who knowing his constancy to be
dangerous and unchangeable, caused him to be beheaded the next day with the
Earl of Wiltshire and Sir John Bushey.

His Issue Ralph Green Lord of Drayton. John Green, who by his Brothers death
without Issue became after Lord of that place. Mary Green Married to Sir
Jeffrey Lutterill. Eleanor Green Married to John Fitz-Williams of Sprofsburgh.


SIR Henry Green had in his lifetime made such generous use of his fortune
and the favor of King Richard, as found its reward from the gratitude of
several great men he had obliged, who contributed their instigations to the
inclination of the succeeding King, which was much bent to favor the
unfortunate Family of the deceased Gentleman, whose person, fidelity and
gratitude had been so exemplary, and who lost his life but for his adherence to
a King that had been his Master and Benefactor. In the very first year
therefore of King Henry the Fourth, his eldest Son RALPH GREEN was restored by
Act of Parliament to the Lordship of Drayton and all the rest of those Lands
that were the inheritance of his Father, or his Mother the Lady Matilda de
Mauduit. And several Instruments are extant of the grace and clemency of this
Prince to himself and the other Children of Sir Henry Green. This Family
coming again to flourish in the County of Northampton, Ralph Green was in the
eight year of King Henry the Fourth chosen to serve in the then considerable
Office of High Sheriff for that Shire; and he is found to have been employed in
diverse important occasions for the service of King Henry the Fifth, and
particularly in the first year of his Reign, to have been joined in Commission
with William Lord Roos of Hamlock for suppressing the Rebellion and
Insurrections of William Perwich and his adherents, who in a Hostile manner had
fallen upon several of the Kings Subjects and Officers, more especially on
James Bellers in his return from the last Parliament where he had served for
Knight of the Shire; as also to have been again Sheriff in the second of that
King. At last having by a provident care and many generous endeavors restored
his Family to its ancient splendour and those great Possessions belonging
thereunto; he dyed in the sixth year of Henry the Fifth without any Issue of
his Wife, who was Catharine the Daughter of Ankitell Malliory Lord of Winwick,
and that took after to her second Husband the famous Sir Simon Felbrigg, who in
the Reign of King Henry the Fifth was one of the Knights and Companions of the
most Noble Order of the Garter.

JOHN GEENE for want of Issue from his Brother Ralph, came to possess the Lands
and Lordships belonging to that Family, except what was comprehended in the
Jointure of the Lady Felbrigg who had been his Brothers Wife. Concerning whom
there are extant diverse transactions as testimonies of the considerable
provision had been made for her in that Estate, and as one whom his Fathers
misfortunes had prepared for the love of a private life, he applied himself to
enjoy the happiness of his House and Country, living in a free Estate and
fortunate Marriage with Margaret the Daughter of Walter Green of Bridgnorth,
till he departed this life in the eleventh year of King Henry the Sixth. He
left Issue. Ralph Green that dyed in his youth. Henry Green afterward Lord
of Drayton. Margery Green Married to Sir Henry Huddlestone. Isabella Green
Married to Sir Richard Veere Lord of Thrapston and Adington, unto whose
posterity, as you will find, for default of Issue in the Heirs of Henry and
Margery, descended afterward all the Lands of the Greenes and the Mauduits.


SIR HENRY GREEN by the death of John his Father became possessed of the
Lordship of Drayton, whereof were parcels the Towns of Luffwick, Islip, and
Slipton, with Lands in Titchmarsh and Aldwincle, of those of Grafton, Hardwick,
Sudborow, with Lands in Harringworth and Irtlingburgh, all of them in the
County of Northampton; of Wamingdon and Emerton in the County of Buckingham,
Chalton in Bedfordshire, Buckworth in Huntingtonshire, of Werminster, Westbury,
Lie, Dychurch and other Lands in Wiltshire, and of Grateley in the County of
Southampton: which together did at that time make up one of the most
considerable Estates that was then in the possession of any Gentleman in the
Kingdom of England. He lived upon his Manor and Lordship of Drayton in the
County of Northampton in much estimation and authority, the most considerable
Office of which Country he did exercise in very difficult and different Reigns,
being High Sheriff therein in the thirteenth of Henry the Sixth, and again in
the fifth year of King Edward the Fourth; in both whereof he was by his good
fortune preserved from that ruin under which many Gentlemen and their Estates
did sink, through those accidents that were incident to the disastrous
partialities of that uncertain Age. He had been engaged in the Marriage of two
Wives, the first was Constance Pawlett, the second Margaret Roos; from the
first whereof he had no Issue, and from the latter only one Daughter named
Constance, who after having been sought in vain by the greatest men of that
Age, became at last (from her Fathers love to the illustrious House of
Buckingham) the possession of the Lord John Stafford, second Son to the High
and Mighty Prince Humphrey Duke of Buckingham (for so he was ever styled) unto
whom she brought all those fair Possessions that were of her Fathers
Inheritance.

CONSTANCE GREEN, according to her Fathers intention, did after his Death
bring to the Possession of her Husband the Lord John Stafford the Lordship of
Drayton, and the rest of those Lands that had belonged to the Families of the
Greenes and the Mauduits, which by her Father had been settled upon her and her
Heirs, so as for default of such they should revert to the right Heirs of Henry
Green. The Lord John Stafford, who had been himself, as well as the Duke his
Father and his Family, engaged all along in the Lancastrian Faction in diverse
of their Battles, had yet the fortune upon the establishment of King Edward the
Fourth, to acquire such a part in the favor of that Valiant and Victorious
King, as induced him in the ninth year of his Reign to create him Earl of
Wiltshire, to make him afterward one of the Knights of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, and employ him during his life in several actions of greatest trust
and confidence, as joining him a Commissioner with the Earl of Northumberland
to treat with the Ambassadors of James the Third King of Scotland, upon certain
complaints of grievances of both Realms; who after having lived in great
reputation for valor and prudence, departed this life in the thirteenth year
of that King, leaving Issue by his Wife Constance, Edward Stafford Earl of
Wiltshire.


EDWARD Earl of Wiltshire was a Minor at the Death of his Father, and his
Estate and interests for several years governed by the Executors, which we find
to have been very great, as composed between forty and fifty fair Manors, of
the Inheritance of his Father and of his Mother the Lady Constance Green. When
he came to Age, he proved a Nobleman of exceeding hopes, and much addicted to
all the generous ways of Arms and Chivalry; but it happened, that being earnest
to go assist the King at Black Heath field against the Cornish Rebels, at that
time headed by the Lord Audeley, in the thirteenth year of his Reign, whither
he carried a noble band of men picked out of his Tenants and Countrymen, it so
fell out as, by over-heating himself or other excess of exercise occasioned in
that action, he fell into such a sickness as could never after be mastered to
any degree of recovery, and that after having permitted him to languish for
some time, took him out of this world in the..... year of his Age and of that
Kings Reign the fourteenth. He Married Margaret the Daughter of John the second
Viscount Lisle, by whom he had no Issue; so as those fair Lordships and
Possessions belonging aforetime to the Mauduits and the Greenes, did of course
descend to Elizabeth, Anne, Constance and Etheldred the Daughters and Coheirs
of Sir Henry Vere that had been Lord of Adington and Thrapston, as next of kin
to Sir Henry Green, being Grandchildren to his Sister Isabella the Wife of Sir
Richard Vere; the successors of Margery his other Sister, leaving no Issue
after them.

knight on horseback bearing the colors of the family, and a family tree
showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors Sr. THOMAS GREEN Lord of
Buckton and other lands and Lordships. Sr. Thomas Green Lord of Buckton Lucie
de la Zouch Sr. Henry Green Lord of Buckton. Catharine of Drayto Amabila
Green Sr. Richard Reins Lord of Clifton. Sr. Thomas Green Lord of Norton
Marie Talbot. Sr. Henry Green Lord of Drayton Matilda de Manduit. Sr. Nicholas
Green Mary Bruce of Exton. Margaret Green William Lord Zouch of Totnes.
Elenor Green Sr. John Fitzivilliams of Sprotsburgh. Marie Green Sr. Ieffery
Lutterell. John Green Ld. of Drayton by the Death of his brother Margaret
Green of Bridgnorth. Rauf Green Ld. of Drayton Catherine Mallory S. P.
Elizabeth Green Thomas Cotton of Lancashire. Margery Green Sr. Henry
Huddleston Isabella Green. Sr. Richard Vere Ld. of Adington. Henry Green Lord
of Drayton Margaret Roos. Elizabeth Huddleston Sr. Thomas Cheney S. P. Sr.
Henry Vere Ld. of Adington, Isabella Tresham. Censtance Green Lady of Drayton,
John Stafford Earl of Wiltsheir. Elizabeth Vere by ye death of ye E of Wilt:
Their Lady of Drayton John Ld. Mordaunt. Edward Stafford Earl of Wiltsheire
and Lord of Drayton Margaret Gray. S. P. John 2d. Ld. Mordaut Lord of Drayton
Elly Fitzlewis.




GENEALOGICAL PROOFS Of the HOUSE of GREEN THAT WERE Lords of Drayton, Drawn
out of Extant Charters, Records, Histories and other Authentic Proofs.

GENEALOGICAL PROOFS Of the HOUSE of GREEN.
Sir THOMAS GREEN Lord of Buckton and other Lands and Lordships.
IN an Ancient Pedigree of this Family, among the Evidences of the Earl of
Peterborow, is placed, as the head thereof, Sir Thomas Green, Lord of Buckton,
affirmed to have lived upon that Lordship in the time of King Edward the First.

Sir THOMAS GREEN, second of that Name, Lord of Buckton and other Lands and
Lordships.
Doctor Fuller's History of the Worthies of England, Page 295.
ONE Thomas de Buckton, which was in truth Thomas Green de Buckton, is
recorded, in the Catalogue of those Officers, to have been High Sheriff of
Northhamptonshire in the fifth year of Edward the Third.

Out of an Ancient Manuscript remaining with the Earl of Peterborow.
DOminus Ivo de la Zouch dedit novem Messuagia, unum Thostum, quatuor Virgatas
terrae in Harringworth cum pertinentiis, Thomae Green de Buckton cum Lucia
filia sua.

Again out of the same Manuscript.
HEnricus Green de Buckton tenuit novem Messuagia, unum Thoftum, quatuor
Virgatas terrae and duodecim acras prati in Harringworth, de Domino Willielmo
de la Zouch de Harringworth, quae pater ejus Thomas Green Miles habuit inter
alia in maritagium cum Lucia filia Ivonis and sorore istius Domini Willielmi.

Out of an Office of Sir Henry Green found in the 42. of Edward the third
toward the later end.
ET dicunt quod praedictus Henricus Green Chivalier dedit Richardo de
Bollesore and Willielmo Thirning Manerium suum de Luffwick cum advocatione
ejusdem Villae, and novem Messuagia, unum Thoftum, quatuor Virgatas terrae and
quatuordecim acras prati cum pertinentiis in Harringworth, cum aliis terris and
tenementis suis in Comitatibus Buckinghamiae and Bedfordiae, tenenda ad totam
vitam ipsius Henrici, ita quod post mortem suam remaneant Henrico filio ejusdem
Henrici and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus, tenenda de praefato Henrico
Green and haeredibus suis per servitium medietatis unius feodi militis: Ita
quod si praedictus Henricus Green filius obierit sine haerede de corpore suo
exeunte, rectis haeredibus ipsius Henrici Green revertentur. De quibus
servitiis and reversione praedicta praedictus Henricus Green Chevalier obiit
seisitus. Et dicunt quod Manerium praedictum de Luffwick ante feoffamentum
tenebatur de Rogero Comite de Stafford, per quae servitia ignorant. Et dicunt
tenementa in Harringworth tenebantur ante dictum feoffamentum de Willielmo de
la Zouch de Harringworth, per quae servitia ignorant.

IN the Ancient Chapel of Drayton are empayled, as in the Church in Luffwick
in diverse places, the Arms of Green and de la Zouch.

Sir HENRY GREEN, Lord of Buckton and other Lands and Lordships.
Carta pro Feria in Buckton, De Anno 25o Regis Edwardi Tertii.
REX Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, etc. Salutem. Sciatis Nos de gratia nostra
speciali concessisse and hac Carta nostra confirmasse dilecto nobis Henrico
Green, quod ipse and haeredes sui imperpetuum habeant singulis annis unam
Feriam apud Manerium suum de Buckton in Comitatu Northamptoniae per tres dies
duraturam, videlicet in Vigilia and in Die and in Crastino Nativitatis Sancti
Johannis Baptistae, nisi Feria illa sit ad nocumentum vicinarum Feriarum. Quare
volumus and firmiter praecipimus pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, quod
praedictus Henricus and haeredes sui praedicti imperpetuum habeant Feriam
praedictam apud Manerium suum praedictum cum omnibus libertatibus and liberis
consuetudinibus in hujusmodi Feriam pertinentibus, nisi Feria illa sit ad
nocumentum vicinarum Feriarum, sicut praedictum. His Testibus, Venerabilibus
Patribus S. Cantuar. Archiepiscopo, totius Angliae Primate, R. London, J.
Wigorn. Cancellario nostro, Episcopis; Will. de Bohun North' Will. de Clynton
Huntingdon Comitibus; Radulph. Barone Stafford, Joh. de Gray de Rotherfield,
Senescallo Hospitii nostri, and aliis. Dat. per manum nostram apud
Westmonasterium vicesimo octavo die Februarii.

Per breve de privato Sigillo.

Carta Willielmi de Pateshull.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Willielmus de Pateshull Dominus de
Bletnesho dedi, concessi and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Henrico de
Green and Thomae filio ejusdem Henrici, and haeredibus de corpore ipsius
Henrici exeuntibus, Manerium meum de la Heyburne cum pertinentiis in
Comitatibus Buckinghamiae and Northhamptoniae, cum boscis and aliis
pertinentiis suis: Habendum and tenendum eisdem Henrico and Thomae and
haeredibus ipsius Henrici praedictis de Capitalibus Dominis per servitia
debita. Et si praedictus Henricus obierit sine haerede de corpore suo exeunte,
quod praedictum cum Manerium pertinentiis remaneat Nicholao de Green Nepoti
praedicti Henrici and haeredibus suis de corpore suo exeuntibus. Et si
praedictus Nicolaus obierit sine haerede de corpore suo exeunte, quod
praedictum Manerium cum pertinentiis suis integre remaneat rectis haeredibus
ipsius Henrici. Et ego vero praedictus Willielmus and haeredes mei praedictum
Manerium cum pertinentiis suis praedictis, Henrico and Thomae and Nicholao and
haeredibus eorum praedictis, contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus imperpetuum.
In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Cartae meae Sigillum meum apposui, His
Testibus, Richardo de Woodvill, Thoma de Paveley, Nicholao de Blisworth,
Henrico de Morton, Elia Cut, and aliis. Data apud Northampton die Veneris in
Septimana Paschae, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum vicesimo
sexto.

Ex Chronica Guilielmi Thorn, Monachi Sancti Augustini Cantuariensis, de rebus
gestis Abbatum Sancti Augustini Cantuariae, Page 2068.
ANNO Domini MCCCXXXV fuit idem Abbas Collector decimae and quintaedecimae in
Dioecesi Cantuariensi and Jurisdictionibus immediate subjectis, in magnum
scandalum, dampnum and gravamen. Abbate vero hujus facti inconscio, Ordinavit
denique quendam Monachum nomine Salomonem de Ripple Receptorem denariorum in
hujusmodi collectione levandorum. Qui vero Solomon hujus seculi prudens
fabricavit sibi stateram Abbati and Conventui postea dolosam and abominabilem,
quae dicitur Penypise, and cum illa triavit viginti solidos in denariis
antiquis ponderis maximi, cum quibus aequa lance recipiebat denarios
quorumcunque. Et qui sperabat se per viginti solidos acquietare, invitus ex
superabundanti arctabatur infundere quinque solidos vel tres solidos and
quatuor denarios ad minus. Et cujus pars decimae and quintaedecimae plus
contingebat, plus ab eo extorquebatur: Tandem vero tota Dioecesis super hiis
injuste gravata ad remedium consequendum Consilio Domini Regis querimoniam
deposuerunt, Unde Dominus Rex ordinavit apud Roffam hujusmodi causam audiendam
and terminandam. Et fuerunt Justiciarii ad hoc specialiter limitati, Comes
Oxoniae and Dominus Henricus Green, coram quibus vocatus est Abbas; and coram
eis stans apud Barras, poenam excessus sui Monachi recepturus, Condemnatus est
ergo versus Regem pro illa offensa in quinquaginta and tribus libris, suis
expensis and amplis muneribus ob hanc causam habitis minime computatis. Et
praeter hoc jussus est refundere and satisfacere petitioni cujuscunque. Et
inventis plegiis, scilicet Dominis Johanne Griell and Stephano de Wallans
Militibus, de stando judicio coram, licentiatus remeavit.

Carta Domini Henrici Green.
A Touz ceux que cestes lettres verrount, Henry Green Salutz en Dieu. Come
Monsieur Johan de Drayton granta and rendi a moi tote la rent ensemblement ove
les services, seignoures, custums and altres appurtinances quele il auvit en
Islip, que fut parcel de Manor de Drayton, A avoir and tener a moi and a mes
heirs a tousiours; Le quele rent le dit, Monsieur Johan avoit de mon lees and
altres mes confeffes del dit Manoir, a tener a term de trente anz. Nient
meins, jeo voit and grant per cet fait, que si le dit Monsieur Johan moi pay
cessant livores lendemain del Feste de Saint Michael l'Archangel apres les
trente anz procheins a vener pleinment passes, le primer term de trente annz
comenseant al Feste de Saint Michael prochein apres la date dicestes, de
refeffer le dit Monsieur Johan del rent susdite ensemblement ove les services,
seignories custumes and autres appurtenances, a tener tanque a les trente annz
susditz pleinment accomples, sur les conditions contenuz en le primer fait du
lees del term des trent annz susditz. En tesmoignance dicestes, le dit
Monsieur Johan a ycestes ad mys son Seal per yceux testmoignes, Nicholas
Green, Thomas Pavely, Robert de Isham and altres. Done a Cotes le Lundi
procheine apres le Feste del Decollation de Saint Johan le Baptiste l'an du
Reign le Roy Edward Tierce puis le Conquest trente ouitiesme.

Cotton's Abridgment of Records Page 92. Anno 36o Edwardi Tertii.
AT this day, for that sundry of the Lords were not come in the presence of the
King and the Lords, the Parliament was adjourned unto another day.

At which day Sir Henry Green the Kings Chief Justice in the presence of the
King Lords and Commons, declared the causes of the Parliament, viz. for redress
of matters touching the Church, for observation of the peace, for the affairs
of Scotland, and for enhauncing the prices of Wool.

Out of the same Abridgment Page 96. Anno 37 Edwardi Tertii.
FOR that sundryof both Houses were not the same day come, Sir Henry Green the
Kings Chief Justice, in the presence of the King, Lords and Commons, continued
the Parliament until Friday ensuing.

Carta Domini Henrici Green.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Henricus Green Miles, dedi, concessi,
and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Henrico filio meo, and Matildae Uxori
ejus, and haeredibus de corporibus eorum legitime procreatis, Manerium meum de
Buckton in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, cum omnibus servitiis omnium liberorum
tenentium meorum and villanorum, simul cum omnibus reversionibus tenentium
meorum ad terminum vitae vel annorum in Manerio praedicto, sive in Villa
praedicta, ac etiam omnia alia terras and tenementa, redditus and servitia,
simul cum omnibus reversionibus tenentium meorum ad terminum vitae vel annorum,
quae habeo in Crowley, Chichley, Schirrinthon, Olney, and Filgrave: Habenda
omnia praedicta Maneria, terras, tenementa, redditus, and servitia simul cum
reversionibus omnium tenentium meorum ad terminum vitae vel annorum, praedictis
Henrico filio meo, and Matildae Uxori ejus, and haeredibus de corporibus eorum
legitime procreatis, sub hac condition, quod si praedictus Henricus filius
meus obierit sine haerede de praedicta Matilda Uxore sua exeunte, vel exitus
(si quis fuerit) obierit, and praedicta Matilda habuerit rationabilem dotem
suam de centum marcatis terrae, tenementorum vel redditus (in quibus praedictus
Henricus filius meus and vir praedictae Matildae est, vel erit, feoffatus in
feodo per me, vel per alios nomine meo) and etiam omnia tenementa de
haereditate praedictae Matildae, quae sibi post mortem Johannis Mauduit avi
sui, and post mortem Thomae Mauduit patris sui, jure haereditario descendebant;
Et quae Juliana Uxor Johannis Mauduit, and Johanna Uxor Thomae Mauduit tenent
separatim ad terminum vitae, vel feodo talliato sunt eidem Matildae descensa,
Et ipsa de eisdem corporaliter possessa; Tunc omnia praedicta tenementa,
redditus and servitia, similiter cum reversionibus omnium tenentium meorum ad
terminum vitae vel annorum, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, praedictis Henrico
and Matildae, and haeredibus de corporibus suis exeuntibus, sub condition and
forma praenominata, de me and haeredibus meis, per servitium unius Rosae per
annum ad Festum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae annuatim solvendum; Et
faciendo pro me and haeredibus meis Capitalibus Dominis feodorum servitia inde
debita and consueta. Ita quod si obierint sine haerede de corporibus suis
exeunte, tunc omnia praedicta Maneria, terrae, tenementa, redditus and
servitia, similiter cum reversionibus, mihi and haeredibus meis revertantur. Et
Ego vero praefatus Henricus and haeredes mei omnia praedicta Maneria, terras,
tenementa, redditus, and servitia, simul cum omnibus reversionibus supradictis,
praefatis Henrico filio meo and Matildae Uxori suae, and haeredibus de
corporibus eorum legitime procreatis, sub forma and conditionibus supradictis
warrantizabimus and defendemus imperpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic
praesenti Cartae Sigillum meum apposui, His Testibus, Reginaldo de Gray Domino
de Wilton super Wayam, Henrico filio ejus, Willielmo la Zouch de Braumfield,
Thoma Reins, Willielmo de Quinton Militibus; Johanne de Drayton, and Johanne
de Olney, and aliis. Datum apud Buckton die Jovis in Festo Assumptionis beatae
Mariae Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii a Conquestu tricesimo octavo.

Ex Henrici Knighton Canonici Leicestrensis Chronica de Eventibus Angliae.
PArum ante haec tempora orta est discordia inter fratrem Thomam de Lysle
Heliensem Episcopum, and Dominam la Wake: Nam homines Episcopi succenderant
unum Manerium Dominae la Wake, and homines ejus interfecerant; Et Domina
Conquesta est Regi de suo gravamine, and Justiciarii missi sunt ad inquirendum
in causa, scilicet, Dominus Henricus Green, Dominus Willielmus Schardeshull,
and alii; Et Episcopus venit coram eis, and compertum est quod fuit in toto
culpabilis.

Carta Domini Henrici Green.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Henricus Green Miles, dedi, concessi,
and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Henrico filio meo and Matildae Uxori
ejus, and haerebus de corporibus eorum legitime procreatis, Manerium meum de
Emberton in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, cum omnibus servitiis omnium liberorum
tenentium meorum and Villanorum, simul cum reversionibus omnium tenentium
meorum ad terminum vitae vel annorum in Manerio praedicto sive in Villa
praedicta, ac etiam omnia alia terras, tenementa, redditus, and servitia, simul
cum omnibus reversionibus tenentium meorum ad terminum vitae vel annorum, quae
habeo in Crowley, Chichley, Schirringthon, Olney, and Filgrave: Habenda omnia
praedicta, Manerium, terras, tenementa, redditus, and servitia, simul cum
reversionibus omnium tenentium meorum ad terminum vitae vel annorum praedictis
Henrico filio meo and Matildae Uxori ejus, and haeredibus de corporibus eorum
legitime procreatis, sub hac condition, Quod si praedictus Henricus filius
meus obierit sine haerede de praedicta Matilda Uxore sua exeunte, vel exitus
(si quis fuerit) obierit, and praedicta Matilda habuerit rationabilem dotem
suam de centum Marcatis terrae, tenementorum, vel redditus (in quibus
praedictus Henricus filius meus and vir praedictae Matildae est, vel erit,
feoffatus in feodo per me vel per alios nomine meo) Et etiam omnia tenementa de
haereditate praedictae Matildae quae sibi post mortem Johannis Mauduit avi sui,
and post mortem Thomae Mauduit patris sui jure haereditario descendebant, and
quae Juliana Uxor Johannis Mauduit and Johanna Uxor Thomae Mauduit tenent
separatim ad terminum vitae vel feodo talliato, sive eidem Matildae discensa
and ipsa de eisdem corporaliter possessa, Tunc omnia praedicta tenementa eisdem
Henrico and Matildae in feodum talliatum data, mihi and haeredibus revertantur:
Tenendum omnia praedicta Manerium, terras, tenementa, redditus and servitia
simul cum reversionibus omnium tenentium meorum ad terminum vitae vel annorum
cum omnibus suis pertinentiis praedictis Henrico and Matildae and haeredibus de
corporibus suis exeuntibus, sub condition and forma praenominata, de me and
haeredibus meis per servitium unius Rosae per annum ad Festum Nativitatis
Sancti Johannis Baptistae annuatim solvendum, and faciendo pro me and
haeredibus meis Capitalibus Dominis feodorum servitia inde debita and consueta.
Ita quod si obierint sine haerede de corporibus suis exeunte, tunc omnia
praedicta Manerium, terrae, tenementa, redditus and servitia simul cum
reversionibus, mihi and haeredibus meis revertantur. Et Ego vero praefatus
Henricus and haeredes mei omnia praedicta Manerium, terras tenementa, redditus,
and servitia simul cum omnibus reversionibus supradictis praefatis Henrico
filio meo and Matildae Uxori suae and haeredibus de corporibus eorum legitime
procreatis sub forma and conditionibus supradictis warrantizabimus and
defendemus imperpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Cartae Sigillum
meum apposui, His Testibus, Reginaldo de Gray Domino de Wilton super Wayam,
Henrico filio ejus, Willielmo la Zouch de Braumfield, Thoma Reins, Willielmo
de Quintone, Militibus; Johanne de Drayton and Johanne de Olney and aliis.
Datum apud Buckton die Jovis in Festo Assumptionis beatae Mariae, Anno Regni
Regis Edwardi Tertii a Conquestu tricesimo octavo.

seal of Sir Henry Green SIGILLVM HENRICI GRENE MILITIS



Carta Domini Henrici Green.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Henricus Green de Buckton Miles, dedi,
concessi and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Willielmo Thirnyng and Richardo
Bollesore Clerico Maneria mea de Wolston, Wamingdon, Chalton and Luffwick, cum
advocationibus Ecclesiarum de Wolston and Luffwick, and Capella de Chalton, cum
omnibus aliis terris and Tenementis meis, redditibus, reversionibus nativis,
visibus Franciae Plegiae, and aliis libertatibus quibuscunque in eisdem Villis,
and in Villis de Todingdon and Harringworth cum omnibus suis pertinentiis,
excepta advocatione Ecclesiae de Wamingdon praedicta: Habendum and tenendum
praedictis Willielmo and Richardo ad terminum vitae mei praedicti Henrici de me
and haeredibus meis per servitia medietatis unius feodi Militis, and faciendo
Capitalibus Dominis feodorum illorum servitia inde debita and consueta. In
cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Cartae Sigillum meum apposui, Hiis
Testibus, Willielmo Bainton Milite, Johanne Gainton, Thoma Paveley, Nicholao de
Thenford, Thoma Hauton de Pisford and aliis. Datum apud Buckton die Veneris
proximo post Festum Sancti Ambrosii Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post
Conquestum quadragesimo primo.

Carta Domini Henrici Green.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Henricus Green de Buckton Miles, dedi,
concessi and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Willielmo Thyrnyng and Richardo
Bollesore Clerico Maneria mea de Luffwick, Wolston, Wamingdon and Chalton, cum
advocationibus Ecclesiarum de Luffwick and Wolston and Capella de Chalton, cum
omnibus aliis terris and tenementis meis, redditibus, reversionibus nativis,
visibus Franciae Plegiae, and aliis libertatibus quibuscunque in eisdem Villis,
and in Villis de Harringworth and Todington cum omnibus suis pertinentiis
(Excepta advocatione Ecclesiae de Wamingdon praedicta) Quas omnes parcellas,
quae fuerunt de perquisito meo in Villa de Todington praedicta, cum
pertinentiis suis praedicto Manerio de Chalton annexas, and parcellam praedicti
Manerii per hoc scriptum meum facio, and de eisdem ut parcellis ejusdem Manerii
de Chalton seisinam libero: Habendum and tenendum praedictis Willielmo and
Richardo ad terminum vitae mei praedicti Henrici de me and haeredibus meis per
servitium medietatis unius feodi Militis, and faciendo Capitalibus Dominis
feodorum illorum servitia inde debita and consueta: Ita quod post decessum mei
praedicti Henrici omnia praedicta Maneria cum advocationibus Ecclesiarum and
Capellae cum omnibus aliis terris and tenementis, redditibus, reversionibus
nativis, visibus Franciae Plegiae, and aliis libertatibus quibuscunque in
Villis praedictis cum omnibus suis pertinentiis (Excepta advocatione Ecclesiae
de Wamingdon praedicta) integre remaneant Henrico filio meo and haeredibus de
corpore suo legitime procreatis, Tenenda de me and haeredibus meis per
servitium medietatis unius feodi Militis, and faciendo Capitalibus Dominis
feodorum illorum servitia inde debita and consueta. Et si contingat quod
praedictus Henricus filius men's obierit sine haeredibus de corpore suo legitime
procreatis, tunc post decessum ipsius Henrici omnia praedicta Maneria cum
advocationibus Ecclesiarum and Capellae, cum omnibus aliis terris, tenementis,
redditibus, reversionibus nativis, visibus Franciae Plegiae, and aliis
libertatibus quibuscunque in Villis praedictis, mihi and haeredibus meis
integre revertantur, Tenenda de Capitalibus Dominis feodorum illorum per
servitia inde debita and de jure consueta. Et Ego vero praedictus Henricus
Green Miles and haeredes mei praedicta Maneria cum advocationibus Ecclesiarum
and Capellae, cum omnibus aliis terris and tenementis, redditibus,
reversionibus nativis, visibus Franciae Plegiae and aliis libertatibus
quibuscunque in Villis praedictis cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, praefatis
Willielmo and Richardo, ac etiam praedictis Henrico filio meo and haeredibus de
corpore suo legitime procreatis, in forma praedicta contra omnes gentes
warrantizabimus imperpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium praesenti Cartae Sigillum
meum apposui, Hiis Testibus, Willielmo la Zouch de Braumfield, Thoma Reins,
Willielmo de Quintone Militibus; Johanne Gaytone, Thoma Paveley, Richardo de
Thenford, Thoma Hinton de Pisford and aliis. Datum apud Buckton die Veneris
proximo post Festum Sancti Ambrosii, Anno Regni Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum
quadragesimo primo.

Exemplificatio Inquisitionis captae post mortem Henrici Green Militis.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae,
omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint Salutem.
Inspeximus quandam Inquisitionem captam coram Richardo de Wydevill Escaetore
Domini Regis Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae Tertii, progenitoris nostri, apud
Northampton vicesimo quarto die Augusti, Anno Regni praedicti nuper Regis
quadragesimo tertio, virtute cujusdam brevis ejusdem nuper Regis eidem
Escaetori directi in filatiis Cancellariae nostrae de Recordo residentis in
haec verba. Inquisitio capta coram Ricardo de Wydevill Escaetore Domini Regis
in Comitatu Northamptoniae apud Northampton vicesimo quarto die Augusti, Anno
Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum quadragesimo tertio, virtute
cujusdam brevis Domini Regis eidem Escaetori directi and huic Inquisitioni
consuti, per Sacramentum Willielmi de Missenden, Johannis Blanch, Willielmi
Turvile senioris, Willielmi Hunred, Johannis Sywell, Johannis Launden,
Willielmi Turvile junioris, Simonis Clear, Willielmi at Brigge, Henrici at
Well, Johannis Punne and Adae Stalwarthman: Qui dicunt super Sacramentum suum,
quod Henricus Green Chivaler tenuit die quo obiit Manerium de Norton Dauny cum
Hundredo eidem Manerio pertinente and aliis pertinentiis (excepta advocatione
Ecclesiae ejusdem Manerii) conjunctim cum Thoma filio suo, videlicet sibi and
haeredibus ipsius Henrici de corpore suo exeuntibus: Et si idem Henricus
obierit sine haerede de corpore suo exeunte, praedictum Manerium cum Hundredo
(excepta advocatione Ecclesiae ejusdem Manerii praedicta) rectis haeredibus
ipsius Henrici Green remaneret per finem in Curia Domini Regis levatam
(licentia Domini Regis super hoc optenta:) Tenendum praedictum Manerium cum
advocatione de Domino Rege and haeredibus suis per servitium militare, and
praedictum Hundredum per servitium reddendi ad scaccarium Domini Regis per
manus Vicecomitis Northamptoniae (qui pro tempore fuit) quinquaginta and
quatuor solidos (quae vocatur alba firma.) Et dicunt quod praedictus Henricus
Green tenuit die quo obiit, praedictam advocationem sibi and haeredibus suis
in feodo simplici. Et praedictum Manerium cum praedicta advocatione valet per
annum in omnibus exitibus juxta verum valorem eorundem december libras. Et dictum
Hundredum nihil valet ultra redditum praedictum resolutum. Item dicunt quod
idem Henricus obiit seisitus in feodo simplici de reversione unius gardini and
quinque acrarum terrae cum pertinentiis in Norton, quae Johannes Betton and
Elena Uxor ejus tenent ad terminum vitae eorum post mortem eorundem Johannis
and Elenae ex concessione Thomae Fox de Norton: Qui quidem Thomas praedicta
tenementa tenuit de Manerio de Norton. Item dicunt quod idem Henricus Green
tenuit die quo obiit conjunctim cum praefato Thoma in forma praedicta Manerium
de Estneston cum pertinentiis, and advocationem de Sewardesle (quae tenentur de
Comite Cornubiae) per quae servitia ignorant, quae valent per annum in omnibus
exitibus juxta verum valorem eorundem quatuordecim solidos. Item dicunt quod
idem Henricus Green tenuit die quo obiit conjunctim cum praefato Thoma in
forma praedicta, unum Messuagium, unam Carucatam terrae cum pertinentiis in
Wittelbury and Sibieston, quae tenentur de Abbissa de Burnham per servitium
quatuor solidorum pro omni servitio, Et valent per annum in omnibus exitibus
juxta verum valorem december solidos. Item dicunt quod praedictus Henricus tenuit
die quo obiit conjunctim cum praefato Thoma in forma praedicta unam peciam
prati vocatam Hubberdsmede in Toucester quae tenetur de Comite Pembrochiae per
servitium quatuor solidorum, and valet per annum ultra redditum praedictum in
omnibus exitibus juxta verum valorem ejusdem quatuor solidos. Item dicunt quod
Henricus Green tenuit die quo obiit conjunctim cum praefato Thoma in forma
praedicta Manerium de Heymondcote cum pertinentiis quod tenetur de Johanne
Paveley Chivaler per servitium octo denariorum per annum, and valet per annum
ultra reprisas in omnibus exitibus juxta verum valorem ejusdem quadraginta
solidos. Item dicunt quod praedictus Henricus Green tenuit sibi and haeredibus
suis die quo obiit tres acras terrae in Paulesperye, quae tenentur de Johanne
Paveley Chivaler in Soccagio, and nihil valent per annum quia jacent sub
foresta de Whittlewode, and destruuntur per feras Regis. Item dicunt quod idem
Henricus in feodo simplici tenuit die quo obiit Manerium de Heyberne, quod est
in Comitatibus Northamptoniae and Buckinghamiae; Et dicunt quod Manerium
praedictum tenetur de Rogero Dayrell per servitium duorum denariorum per annum
pro omni servitio. Et dicunt quod illa pars quae est in Comitatu
Northamptoniae, valet per annum dimidium Marcae and non plus, eo quod jacet in
Foresta de Whittlewode, and disquietur per feras Regis. Item dicunt quod
praedictus Henricus Green tenit in feodo simplici, die quo obiit, Manerium de
Ashby Mares cum pertinentiis, unde medietas tenetur de Domino Rege, per
servitium levandi manum suam dextram erga Dominum Regem in Festo Natalis Domini
ubicunque fuerit in Anglia: Et alia medietas tenetur de Comite Pembrochiae per
servitium militare. Et Manerium praedictum valet per annum in omnibus exitibus
juxta verum valorem ejusdem ultra reprisas december libras. Item dicunt quod
praedictus Henricus Green tenuit die quo obiit in feodo simplici Manerium de
Dodington cum pertinentiis de Comite Pembrochiae per servitium militare, and
valet per annum in omnibus exitibus juxta verum valorem ejusdem ultra reprisas
december marcas. Item dicunt quod idem Henricus tenuit die quo obiit Manerium de
Drayton cum pertinentiis, sibi and Henrico filio suo and haeredibus de corpore
ipsius Henrici filii Henrici exeuntibus, de Domino Rege in Capite per servitium
militare: Ita quod si Henricus filius obierit sine haerede de corpore suo
exeunte, tunc post mortem dictorum Henrici and Henrici, praedictum Manerium cum
pertinentiis Thomae fratri ejusdem Henrici filii and haeredibus de corpore
ipsius Thomae exeuntibus; Et post decessum ipsius Thomae (si ipse sine haerede
de corpore suo exeunte obierit) Manerium praedictum cum pertinentiis rectis
haeredibus ipsius Henrici Green Chivaler remaneret: Tenendum sibi and
haeredibus suis de Domino Rege and haeredibus suis per servitium praedictum
imperpetuum, Licentia Domini Regis super hoc optenta. Et dicunt quod dictum
Manerium valet per annum in omnibus exitibus ultra reprisas centum solidos.
Item dicunt quod praedictus Henricus Green Chivaler tenuit in feodo simplici
die quo obiit advocationem Ecclesiae de Buckton de Comite Pembrochiae, per quae
servitia ignorant. Item dicunt quod idem Henricus Green Chivaler dimisit
Johanni de Den Camerario suo, and Johanni filio suo, ad terminum vitae eorum,
unum Messuagium and duas virgatas terrae and prati cum pertinentiis in Buckton,
reddendo inde per annum unum denarium ad Festum Natalis Sancti Johannis
Baptistae praefato Henrico and Haeredibus suis, reversione eorundem post mortem
praedictorum Johannis and Johannis ad praefatum Henricum and haeredes suos
spectante. Et sic idem Henricus de redditu and reversione praedictis obiit
seisitus, quae tenentur a praedicto Comite, per quae servitia ignorant. Item
dicunt quod praedictus Henricus Green Chivaler tenuit in feodo die quo obiit
duo Messuagia, duas Virgatas terrae cum pertinentiis in Pissford de haeredibus
Johannis nuper Baronis de Woodhull, per quae servitia ignorant, and valent per
annum in omnibus exitibus juxta verum valorem eorundem ultra reprisas viginti
solidos. Item dicunt quod idem Henricus Green Chivaler tenuit in feodo die quo
obiit duo Messuagia, quinque acras terrae cum pertinentiis in Buckton, quae
tenentur de Comite Pembrochiae, per quae servitia ignorant, and valent per
annum in omnibus exitibus ultra reprisas quatuor solidos. Item dicunt quod idem
Henricus Green dedit Henrico de Hull and haeredibus suis de corpore suo
exeuntibus quoddam Messuagium cum quibusdam Schoppis eisdem annexis in
Northampton, Tenendum de praefato Henrico Green Chivaler and haeredibus suis
per servitium unius Rosae per annum ad Festum Natalis Sancti Johannis Baptistae
pro omni servitio per totam vitam ipsius Henrici de Hull; Et post mortem ipsius
Henrici de Hull haeredes sui reddent praefato Henrico Green Chivaler and
haeredibus suis annuatim quadraginta solidos: Et si idem Henricus de Hull
obierit sine haerede de corpore suo exeunte, tunc omnia praedicta tenementa cum
suis pertinentiis ad praefatum Henricum Green Chivaler and haeredes suos
reverterent. Et dicunt quod idem Henricus Green Chivaler de redditu Rosae and
reversione praedicta obiit seisitus in feodo, and tenentur in feodo de
Praeposituro Villae Northamptoniae tanquam liberum Burgagium. Item dicunt quod
praedictus Henricus Green Chivaler dedit Richardo de Bollesore and Willielmo
Thyrnyng Manerium suum de Luffwick cum advocatione ejusdem Villae, and novem
Messuagia, unum toftum, quatuor virgatas terrae and duodecim acras prati cum
pertinentiis in Harringworth, cum aliis terris and tenementis suis in
Comitatibus Buckinghamiae and Bedfordiae, tenenda ad totam vitam ipsius
Henrici; Ita quod post mortem suam remanerent Henrico filio ejusdem Henrici and
haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus, Tenenda de praefato Henrico Green and
haeredibus suis per servitium medietatis unius feodi Militis: Ita quod si
supradictus Henricus Green filius obierit sine haerede de corpore suo exeunte,
rectis haeredibus ipsius Henrici Green patris revertantur. De quibus servitiis
and reversione praedicta praedictus Henricus Green Chivaler obiit seisitus. Et
dicunt quod Manerium praedictum de Luffwick ante feoffamentum praedictum
tenebatur de Rogero Comite Stafford, per quae servitia ignorant. Et dicunt quod
tenementa in Harringworth tenebantur ante dictum feoffamentum de Willielmo la
Zouch de Harringworth, per quae servitia ignorant. Item dicunt quod idem
Henricus Green Chivaler dedit Thomae Paveley and Willielmo de Ashele unam
partem Manerii de Magna Houghton in tres parts divisi, quatuor Messuagia, unam
carucatam terrae, tres Virgatas and dimidiam, duas acras, unam rodam and
dimidiam prati, sex solidos and octo denarios redditus cum pertinentiis in
eadem Villa, scilicet cum aliis terris and tenementis in Comitatibus
Buckinghamiae and Bedfordiae, tenenda ad totam vitam ipsius Henrici; Ita quod
post mortem suam remanerent Henrico filio ejusdem Henrici and haeredibus de
corpore ipsius Henrici filii Henrici exeuntibus, Tenenda de praefato Henrico
Green Chivaler and haeredibus suis per servitium unius feodi Militis: Ita quod
si Henricus filius Henrici obierit sine haerede de corpore suo exeunte, rectis
haeredibus ipsius Henrici Green Chivaler revertantur. Et sic idem Henricus
Green Chivaler de praedictis servitiis and reversione obiit seisitus. Et
dicunt quod unum Messuagium, una Virgata and dimidia terrae de tenementis
praedictis tenebantur ante feoffamentum praedictum de Johanne Paveley Chivaler,
per quae servitia ignorant, and residuum tenementorum praedictorum tenebatur de
Comite Pembrochiae. Item dicunt quod praedictus Henricus Green Chivaler obiit
seisitus in feodo simplici de tertia part Manerii de Houghton Magna, and de
una part ejusdem Manerii in tres parts divisi, scilicet cum advocatione
Ecclesiae ejusdem Manerii, quae tenentur de Comite Pembrochiae, per quae
servitia ignorant, Et valent per annum in omnibus exitibus juxta verum valorem
eorundem quatuor libras. Et dicunt quod praedictus Henricus Green Chivaler non
tenuit aliquas alias terras seu tenementa in Balliva sua die quo obiit in
Dominico suo ut de feodo, aut in reversione, dicto die quo obiit in Comitatu
praedicto. Et dicunt quod praedictus Henricus Green Chivaler obiit die Lunae
proximo ante Festum Sancti Laurentii ultimo praeterito, and quod Thomas Green
est filius and haeres ejus propinquior, and est aetatis viginti quinque annorum
and amplius. In cujus rei Testimonium tam praedictus Escaetor quam praedicti
Juratores huic Inquisitioni indentatae Sigilla sua alternatim apposuerunt. Nos
autem tenorem Inquisitionis praedictae ad requisitionem dilectorum Nobis
Johannis Mordaunt, Humfridi Brown and Johannis Brown duximus exemplificandum
per praesentes. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus
Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium septimo die Decembris Anno Regni nostri
quinto.
In Greens Norton Churchs. The Tomb of Sr. Henry Green Ld. Chief Justice of
England.
tomb of Sir Henry and Catherine (nee Drayton) Green

In Greens Norton Church.
Hic iacet Thomas Green Miles fili: et Here Is Thomas Green Milit; fili et
here is Henrici Green Milit: quondm^ Dm Iusticiariorum: Dni Regis Edwardi tertii
et Maria de eius filia Dni Talbot quoru^ animabus propitietur Deus Amen.

tomb of Sir Thomas and Maud (or Margery, nee Mablethorpe) Green

In Greens Norton Church The Tomb of Sr. Thomas Green and the Lady Phillipa
his wife daughter to the Ld. Ferrars of Chartley.
tomb of Sir Thomas and Philippa (nee Ferrers) Green hic jacett Thomas Green
Miles Dn^s de Norton et Matildm Vx^m ejus Dni Vero Thomas fuit filim et here is
Thome Green Militm, dn^i de eodm^ et Philippe vx^is ejus filie Roberti Dn^i
fferrarrs, de Charteley, elizabeth Vx^is ejus filie Thome Dn^i le spencer qui
quide^ Thomas Green pater predicte Thome Green fuit filius et here is Thome
Green Militis, Dn^i de Norton predico^ et Marie Vx^is ejus filie Rici dn^i
Talbot et Ankerete vx^is ejus filie et heredm Iohanis dn^i strange de Blakmere.
Qui quidem perfutus Thomas filius perdicorm Thome et Philippe obijt ixo. die
mensis septembris anno Dn^i Millimo ^ CCCC lxjjo. et prefuta Matilda una
filiarum Iohi^s Throkmorton Armigere, quondu^ sub Thesaurarij Anglim. obijt die
mensis Anno Dn^i millo CCCC. quorum animabus perpicietur Deus Amen.



In Greens Norton Church.
tomb of Sir Thomas and Matilda (Maud) Throckmorton

Sir HENRY GREEN, Lord of Drayton and other Lands and Lordships.
Carta Bawdewini de Drayton.
PAteat Universis per praesentes, me Bawdewinum de Drayton remisisse,
relaxasse, and omnino pro me and haeredibus meis quietum clamasse Henrico
Green, filio Henrici Green Militis, totum jus meum and clameum quod habeo seu
quovis modo habere potero in Manerio de Drayton cum omnibus suis pertinentiis,
and in omnibus terris and tenementis, redditibus, servitiis, boscis and
reversionibus quae praedictus Henricus tenet in Brigstock, Sudburgh, Luffwick,
Twywell, Slipton and Islip, praefato Henrico filio Henrici, haeredibus and
assignatis suis imperpetuum: Ita quod nec Ego dictus Bawdewinus nec haeredes
mei, nec aliquis alius nomine nostro, in Manerio praedicto cum suis
pertinentiis, nec in omnibus terris, tenementis, and boscis praedictis, ut
praedictum est, aliquod jus vel clameum exigere vel vendicare poterimus in
futurum, sed ab omni action juris sumus exclusi per praesentes. Et Ego vero
praedictus Bawdewinus and haeredes mei praedictum Manerium cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis, terris and tenementis, redditibus and servitiis, boscis and
reversionibus, ut praedictum est, praedicto Henrico filio Henrici, haeredibus
and assignatis suis contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus imperpetuum. In cujus
rei testimonium praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum apposui, Hiis Testibus,
Willielmo la Zouch de Braumfield, Thoma Paveley, Roberto de Isham, Willielmo
Thirnyng, Johanne Luffwick seniore, Willielmo de Ishp, and Johanne Luffwick
juniore, and aliis. Data apud Drayton die Veneris proxima post Festum Sancti
Ambrosii, Anno Regni Regis Edvardi Tertii, post Conquestum Angliae quadragesimo
sexto.

Carta Johannis Hayward.
PAteat Universis per praesentes, me Johannem Hayward de Ankleworth attornasse
and loco meo posuisse Johannem Sampson Attornatum meum ad deliberandum plenam
seisinam nomine meo Domino Henrico Green Domino de Werminstre, vel suo certo
Attornato, de omnibus terris and tenementis meis, redditibus and servitiis, cum
reversionibus and aliis pertinentiis suis in Werminstre, Samburne, Angeley and
Smalbrock in Comitatu Wilts, ratum and gratum habiturum quicquid idem Johannes
fecerit nomine meo in praemissis. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti
Scripto Sigillum meum apposui. Datum apud Werminstre decimo die Novembris, Anno
Regni Regis Ricardi Secundi post Conquestum septimo.

Carta Domini Henrici Green.
PAteat Universis per praesentes, me Henricum Green Militem attornasse and in
loco meo posuisse Thomam Lauffull, and Rogerum at Park, Attornatos meos
conjunctim and divisim ad recipiendum plenam seisinam nomine meo de omnibus
terris, and tenementis, redditibus, and servitiis, cum reversionibus and aliis
pertinentiis in Werminstre, Samburne, Angeley, and Smalbrock, quae fuerant
Johannis Hayward de Aukworth, ratum and gratum habiturum quicquid idem Thomas
and Rogerus nomine meo seu unus eorum fecerit. In cujus rei testimonium huic
praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum apposui. Datum apud Werminstre decimo die
Novembris, Anno Regni Regis Ricardi Secundi septimo.

Carta Domini Henrici Green.
HAEC Indentura testatur, quod Henricus Green Miles Dominus de Werminstre
concessit and dimisit Johanni Westbury and Agneti Uxori suae Manerium suum de
Westbury cum pertinentiis, exceptis Curia, Releviis, Finibus, Escaetis, Boscis,
Brokwy's Close, and advocatione Capellae ejusdem Manerii cum suis pertinentiis:
Habendum and tenendum praedictum Manerium cum pertinentiis (exceptis hiis quae
superius excipiuntur) praefatis Johanni and Agneti ad terminum vitae suae de
Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius per servitia inde debita and consueta,
reddendo inde annuatim praedicto Henrico and haeredibus suis octodecim libras
legalis monetae ad Festa Sancti Michaelis and Annuntiationis beatae Mariae,
aequis portionibus; Necnon faciendo inde omnia alia onera and servitia facienda
per totum terminum praedictum, and statum suum praedictum nulli dimittere sine
licentia praedicti Henrici vel haeredum suorum. Et si praedictus redditus
aretro sit per tres septimanas post aliquem terminorum praedictorum, vel si
aliquod vastum inde factum fuerit, seu si iidem Johannes and Agnes statum suum
praedictum dimiserint sine licentia praedicti Henrici vel haeredum suorum, been
liceat praedicto Henrico and haeredibus suis praedictum Manerium cum
pertinentiis reintrare, and illud in pristino statu suo retinere, vel pro
redditu praedicto distringere in omnibus terris and tenementis praedictorum
Johannis and Agnetis, and districtiones captas asportare and fugare quocunque
sibi placuerit. Et praedictus Henricus and haeredes sui Manerium praedictum cum
pertinentiis (exceptis hiis quae superius excipiuntur) praefatis Johanni and
Agneti modo and forma supradictis contra omnes gentes warrantizabit. In cujus
rei Testimonium praedicti Henricus and Agnes hiis Indenturis Sigilla sua
alternatim apposuerunt, Hiis Testibus, Thoma Cutting, Thoma Laughfull, Thoma
Eskerne and aliis. Datae apud Werminstre octavo die mensis Maii, Anno Regni
Regis Ricardi Secundi, post Conquestum nono.

SIGILLVM HENRICI GRENE

seal of Sir Henry Green

Carta Regis Ricardi Secundi pro Mercato and Feria and libera Warrenna in
Luffwick.
RIcardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Ducibus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ministris, and omnibus Ballivis and
fidelibus suis Salutem. Sciatis Nos de gratia nostra speciali concessisse and
hac Carta nostra confirmasse dilecto and fideli nostro Henrico Green Chivaler,
quod ipse and haeredes sui imperpetuum habeant Mercatum singulis septimanis per
diem Jovis in Villa sua de Luffwick, and unam Feriam ibidem singulis annis per
tres dies duraturam, videlicet in vigilia and in die and crastino Pentecostes,
cum omnibus libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus ad hujusmodi Mercatum and
Feriam pertinentibus, nisi Mercatum illud and Feria illa sint ad nocumentum
vicinorum Mercatorum vel vicinarum Feriarum. Et quod habeant liberam Warrennam
in omnibus Dominicis terris suis de Luffwick and Islip (dum tamen terrae illae
non sunt intra metas Forestae nostrae) Ita quod nullus intret terras illas ad
fugandum in eis, vel ad aliquod capiendum quod ad Warrennam pertineat, sine
licentia and voluntate ipsius Henrici vel haeredum suorum, super forisfacturum
nostram december librarum. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus pro nobis and
haeredibus nostris, quod praedictus Henricus and haeredes sui imperpetuum
habeant praedictum Mercatum and Feriam apud Villam de Luffwick, cum omnibus
libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus ad hujusmodi Mercatum and Feriam
pertinentibus, Nisi Mercatum illud and Feria illa sunt ad nocumentum vicinorum
Mercatorum vel vicinarum Feriarum; Et quod habeant liberam Warrennam in omnibus
Dominicis terris suis praedictis, dum tamen terrae illae non sunt intra metas
forestae nostrae; Ita quod nullus intret terras illas ad fugandum in eis, vel
ad aliquod capiendum quod ad Warrennam pertineat, sine licentia and voluntate
ipsius Henrici vel haeredum suorum, super forisfacturam nostram december librarum
sicut praedictum est. Hiis Testibus, Venerabilibus Patribus Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi, totius Angliae Primate, R. Londoniensi, W. Wintoniensi Episcopis;
Johanne Rege Castellae and Legionis, Duce Lancastriae, Edmundo Eboraci, Thoma
Gloucestriae Ducibus, Avunculis nostris charissimis; Roberto Marchione
Dublinense, Ricardo Arundeliae, Thoma Warwici, Hugone Staffordiae Comitibus;
Michaele de la Poole Comite Suffolchiae Cancellario, Hugone de Segrave
Thesaurario Nostro, Magistro Waltero Skirlaw Electo Coventriae and
Litchfeldiae, Custode privati Sigilli nostri, Johanne de Monte Acuto
Seneschallo Hospitii and aliis.

Datum per manum nostram apud Westmonasterium sexto die Decembris Anno Regni
nostri nono. Burton. Per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Carta Domini Henrici Green.
HAEC Indentura testatur, quod Henricus Green Miles, Dominus de Drayton,
concessit and dimisit Johanni Donkon de Raunds unum Messuagium in Raunds
praedicta, and quinque Acras terrae, quae Ricardus Dich nuper ibidem tenuit:
Habendum and tenendum praedictum Messuagium and quinque Acras terrae cum suis
pertinentiis ad terminum vitae praedicti Johannis Donkon, Mariae Uxoris ejus
and Johannis filii eorum, reddendo inde annuatim praefato Henrico and
haeredibus suis quatuor solidos ad Festa Natalis Domini, Paschae, Nativitatis
Sancti Johannis Baptistae, and Sancti Michaelis, per aequales portiones. Et si
contingat praedictum redditum aretro fore in part vel in toto per quindenam
post aliquem terminorum praedictorum, seu aliquod vastum vel destructionem in
praedicto Messuagio fecerint, seu statum illorum alicui alii sine licentia
Domini dimiserint; Tum liceat praefato Henrico and haeredibus suis in
Messuagium and terras praedictas reintrare, and pristinum statum suum
reassumere, istis Indenturis non obstantibus. Et Ego vero praefatus Henricus
and haeredes mei praedictum Messuagium cum terris and suis pertinentiis modo
supradictis contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus. In cujus rei Testimonium
parts praedictae Sigilla sua alternatim apposuerunt, Hiis Testibus,
Johanne..... Willielmo...... Willielmo Kete and aliis. Datum apud Drayton die
lunae proximo post Festum Sancti Gregorii Papae, Anno Regni Regis Ricardi
Secundi post Conquestum duodecimo.

Carta Edwardi de Everwick Comitis de Rutland.
SAchent touz gentz nouz Edward de Everwick Count de Rutland avoir receu la
jour de la fesaunce d'icestes de nostre tresbien ame Bacheleir and Chamberlayne
Sire Henry Green une Ceynture de perles and une ouche etant six saffiers and
six perles, and en le moyen une Baloys, les queux il receust en nostre nom de
Sire William Galaundre executour del testament de nostre tres-honuoree Dame and
Miere que dieux assoile Isabell jadis Duches de Everwick, les queux ceynture
and ouche nos connois que nous avons receu and tennons le dit Sire Henry ses
heirs and executours en quites per ycestes. En testmoignance du quelle chose a
ycestes nous lettres d'acquitance nous avons fait mettre nostre Seal. Done a
Drayton le xviij. jour de Decembre, l'an du Regne le Roy Richard Secounde puis
le Conquest dixe and septisme.

Carta Edwardi de Everwick Comitis de Rutland.
SAchent touz gentz nouz Edward Count de Rutland avoir receu le jour de la
fesaunce d'icestes de Sire Henry Green une mirour garny d'or ove six saffiers
and six troches de Perles chescun troche de trois perles, and en chescun
troche un plat diamant countrefait, un couppe d'or avesque les arms de nostre
Dame and Miere, que dieux perdoynt en le moyen, and un covercle d'or a mesme le
couppe, and un eawer d'or ovesque cink perles sur le covercle, les queulx
mirror couppe and eawer nostre dit Dame and Miere nous devisa per son
testament, and tennons le dit Sire Henry and ses heirs and executours enter
quites per ycestes. En testmoignance du quelle chose nous avons mis nostre
Seal. Done a Drayton le dixe and septisme jour de Janyuer, l'an du Regne le
Roy Richard Secounde puis le Conquest dixe and septisme.

Carta Regis Ricardi Secundi.
RIcardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae, omnibus ad
quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis quod cum vicesimo octavo
die Septembris proximo praeterito de gratia nostra speciali commiserimus
dilecto and fideli Militi nostro Henrico Green Manerium de Kibworth cum
omnibus pertinentiis suis, feodis, advocationibus, libertatibus and franchesiis
quibuscunque ad dictum Manerium spectantibus, Reddendo inde nobis annuatim ad
scaccarium nostrum quadraginta libras durante vita Thomae nuper Comitis
Warwici: In quo quidem Manerio Comitissa Warwici cum praefato Thoma conjunctim
feoffata existit: Et ejus reversionem per Literas nostras Patentes praefato
Henrico and haeredibus masculis de corpore suo exeuntibus, dedimus and
concessimus, prout per inspectionem Rotulorum Cancellariae nostrae Nobis
constat: Nos volentes uberiorem in hac part gratiam impartiri, de gratia
nostra speciali commisimus praefato Henrico Manerium praedictum cum
pertinentiis, feodis, advocationibus, libertatibus and franchesiis quibuscunque
ad dictum Manerium spectantibus: Habendum a praedicto vicesimo octavo die
Septembris durante vita praedicti nuper Comitis, absque aliquo Nobis inde
reddendo, reversione ejusdem Manerii post mortem ejusdem Comitissae praefato
Henrico and haeredibus masculis de corpore suo exeuntibus, ut praedictum est,
remanente. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium quarto die Aprilis, Anno Regni nostri
vicesimo primo. Roderham. Per ipsum Regem.

Carta Regis Ricardi Secundi.
RIcardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, Dominus Hiberniae, omnibus ad
quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis quod de gratia nostra
speciali concessimus dilecto and fideli Militi nostro Henrico Green Maneria de
Knighton and Cuvele, cum Bulkington eidem Manerio de Cuvele pertinente, cum
pertinentiis in Comitatu Wilts, quae ad manus nostras ratione forisfacturae
Richardi Comitis Arundeliae devenerunt, ac etiam Manerium de Sudbrock in
Comitatu Warwici and Grovam cum pertinentiis, quae ad manus nostras ratione
forisfacturae Thomae Comitis Warwici similiter devenerunt: Habendum and
tenendum eadem Maneria cum Grova cum pertinentiis praefato Henrico pro termino
vitae suae absque aliquo Nobis inde reddendo in recompensationem feodi annui
quod idem Henricus virtute Literarum nostrarum Patentium sibi inde confectarum
(quas idem Henricus Nobis in Cancellariam nostram restituit cancellandam) de
Nobis ad scaccarium nostrum percipit; pro eo quod ipsum Henricum penes Nos pro
termino vitae suae retinuimus moraturum. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas
nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo septimo die Septembris, Anno Regni
nostri vicesimo primo. Roderham. Per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Carta Regis Ricardi Secundi.
RIcardus Dei gratia Angliae and Franciae Rex and Dominus Hiberniae, omnibus ad
quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis quod de gratia nostra
speciali concessimus dilecto and fideli Militi nostro Henrico Green Maneria de
Knighton and Cuvele, cum Bulkington eidem Manerio de Cuvele pertinente cum
pertinentiis in Comitatu Wilts, Nobis occasion judicii contra Ricardum nuper
Comitem Arundeliae in Parliamento nostro redditi forisfacta, ac etiam Manerium
de Sudbrock in Comitatu Warwici and Grovam cum pertinentiis cum feodis Militum,
advocationibus Ecclesiarum, and omnibus aliis franchesiis and libertatibus ad
eadem maneria pertinentibus sive spectantibus, quae quidem Maneria de Sudbrock
and Grova nobis occasion judicii versus Thomam nuper Comitem Warwici in eodem
Parliamento nostro redditi forisfacta existunt: Habendum and tenendum praedicta
Maneria de Bulkington and Grovam cum pertinentiis una cum feodis,
advocationibus, franchesiis and Libertatibus praedictis praefato Henrico and
haeredibus masculis de corpore suo exeuntibus, de Nobis and haeredibus nostris
ac aliis Dominis feodorum per servitia inde debita and consueta, adeo libere
and integre sicut praedicti Comites ea ante haec tempora habuerunt and
tenuerunt, in recompensationem feodi annui quod idem Henricus de Nobis percipit
ad scaccarium nostrum virtute Literarum nostrarum Patentium sibi inde
confectarum, quas idem Henricus Nobis in Cancellariam nostram restituit
cancellandas. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus
Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo octavo die Septembris, Anno Regni
nostri vicesimo primo. Roderham. Per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Carta Regis Ricardi Secundi.
RIcardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae, omnibus
Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Sciatis quod cum ad Parliamentum nostrum apud Westmonasterium primo die
Octobris Anno Regni nostri decimo tentum, Thomas nuper Dux Gloucestriae and
Ricardus nuper Comes Arundel attrahentes sibi regiam potestatem, fieri fecerint
quandam Commissionem sub magno Sigillo nostro sibi ipsis and aliis ad eorum
denominationem directam ad gubernationem Nostri and Regni nostri habendum, and
dicta Commissione usi fuerint, Jurisdictionem Regiam inde super eos capientes,
Quae quidem Commissio prejudicialis fuit and derogatio Nobis and Coronae
nostrae, and usurpatio nostrae Regaliae and Regiae potestatis: Et super hoc
praedicti Dux and Comes eorum iniquum propositum and regiam potestatem color
dictae Commissionis continuantes attraxerunt eis Thomam tunc Comitem Warwici:
Et ipsi tres insimul manu forti modo guerrino cum magna potestate and
multitudine ligeorum nostrorum insurrexerint, and apud Haringey and alibi se
congregaverint, and sic cum tali vi ad nostram praesentiam in palatio nostro
apud Westmonasterium venerunt, and ulterius plures ligeos nostros in diversis
partibus Regni nostri depraedati fuerint, imprisonaverint and interfecerint,
and alia plura horribilia facta (prout eis placuit) perpetraverint contra eorum
ligeantiam ac nostrum regalem statum and dignitatem: Quae quidem Commissio cum
usu and exercitio ejusdem, and levatio gentium contra Nos and eorum ligeantiam
and nostram Regaliam sic factae, in ultimo Parliamento nostro alta Proditio
judicantur, and praedicti Dux and Comites tanquam Proditores inde sint
convicti, prout in Recordo Parliamenti inde confecto before apparet. Nos
volentes ex nostra regia benignitate gratiam facere in hac part, de gratia
nostra speciali and ex certa scientia nostra and mero motu nostro and libera
voluntate, de matura deliberatione pardonavimus Henrico Green Chivaler sectam
pacis nostrae, quae ad Nos versus ipsum quovis modo pertinet aut pertinere
poterit aut deberet occasion dictae Commissionis and Exercitii ejusdem, ac
congregationis, insurrectionis, equitationis, itineris, depraedationis,
imprisonamenti, interfectionis and arsurae per ipsum seu per alios quoscunque
de ejus missione, mandato, excitatione, procuratione vel abbettamento in
Comitiva praedictorum Ducis and Comitum, vel per ipsum solum qualitercunque in
hac part factorum sive perpetratorum. Et de eo quod ipse fuit de assensu,
consilio, favore, abbettamento, Comitiva, vi, retinentia seu adhaesione
praedictorum Ducis and Comitum in materiis praedictis vel earum aliqua seu
aliqua parcella aut aliquibus dependentiis earundem, ac pro omnibus aliis
proditionibus, seditionibus, insurrectionibus, feloniis, murdris, raptibus
mulierum, roberiis, depraedationibus, latrociniis, homicidiis, incendiis,
transgressionibus, inobedientiis, rebellionibus, forstallariis,
confoederationibus, conspirationibus, cambipartiis, ambidextriis, falsitatibus,
negligentiis and deceptionibus quibuscunque Nobis seu alicui de regno nostro
actis vel illatis, unde idem Henricus judicatus, impetitus, rectatus, accusatus
vel appellatus existit vel esse poterit quoquo modo in futuo; Et etiam
Utlagariis, si quae in ipsum hiis actionibus fuerint promulgatae, and firmam
pacem nostram ei inde concedimus: Nolentes quod praefatus Henricus aut haeredes
vel executores sui, aut terrarum suarum Tenentes ratione aliquorum praemissorum
seu alicujus eorundem coram Nobis and haeredibus nostris in Parliamentis
nostris vel haeredum nostrorum, vel in quibuscunque aliis locis vel placeis
nostris coram quibuscunque Judicibus, Justiciariis, Ministris vel Officiariis
Nostris vel haeredum nostrorum quibuscunque inde futuris temporibus impetantur,
occasionentur, inquietentur, molestentur in aliquo seu graventur, sed ab
omnibus praemissis penitus sint quieti, absoluti and exonerati imperpetuum,
aliquo statuto seu ordinatione in contrarium praemissorum seu alicujus eorundem
quovis modo factis non obstantibus. Ita tamen quod stet rectus in Curia nostra,
si qui versus eum loqui voluerint de praemissis seu aliquo praemissorum. In
cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium primo die Maii, Anno Regni nostri vicesimo
primo. Roderham. Per ipsum Regem.

Carta Regis Ricardi Secundi.
RIcardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae, omnibus ad
quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis quod de gratia nostra
speciali concessimus dilecto and fideli Militi nostro Henrico Green Maneria de
Cosgrave and Preston Capes in Comitatu Northamptoniae cum pertinentiis, ac
reversionem Manerii de Kibworth in Comitatu Leicestriae cum pertinentiis, cum
feodis Militum, advocationibus Ecclesiarum, and omnibus aliis franchesiis and
libertatibus ad Maneria illa pertinentibus sive spectantibus, quae quidem
Maneria Thomae nuper Comitis Warwici extiterunt, and Nobis ratione judicii
contra ipsum in Parliamento nostro redditi forisfacta existunt: Habendum and
tenendum praefato Henrico and haeredibus masculis de corpore suo exeuntibus
praedicta Maneria cum pertinentiis, cum feodis, advocationibus, franchesiis and
libertatibus praedictis de Nobis and haeredibus nostris and aliis Dominis
feodorum per servitia inde debita and consueta, adeo libere and integre sicut
praedictus Thomas ante haec tempora habuit ac tenuit Maneria supradicta. In
cujus rei Testimonium has Literas Nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo octavo die Septembris, Anno Regni
nostri vicesimo primo. Roderham. Per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Carta Regis Ricardi Secundi.
RIcardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae, omnibus ad
quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis quod de gratia nostra
speciali concessimus dilectis and fidelibus Militibus nostris Johanni Bussy and
Henrico Green placeam vel Hospitium quae vel quod fuit Johannis Domini de
Cobham infra Civitatem nostram Londini, and ad Nos pertinet per forisfacturam
ejusdem Johannis Domini de Cobham: Habendum dictis Johanni Bussy and Henrico
Green pro termino vitae eorum and alterius eorum diutius viventis dictam
placeam sive Hospitium, una cum omnibus Schoppis, sellariis and solariis eisdem
Hospitio sive placeae adjacentibus, ac cum omni redditu ad dictam Placeam sive
Hospitium aliquo modo pertinente, Et cum stuffura in eadem placea sive Hospitio
existente. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Salopiam tricesimo die Januarii, Anno Regni nostri vicesimo
primo. Roderham. Per ipsum Regem.

Hollinshead in Chronicle of England, Page 498.
WHen the Lord Governor Edmund Duke of York was advertised that the Duke of
Lancaster kept still the Sea and was ready to arrive, (but where he meant first
to set foot on land there was not any that understood the certainty) he sent
for the Lord Chancellor Edmund Stafford Bishop of Exeter, and for the Lord
Treasurer William Scroope Earl of Wiltshire, and other of the King's Privy
Council, as John Bushie, William Bagot, Henry Green and John Russell Knights.
Of these he required to know what they thought good to be done in this matter
concerning the Duke of Lancaster being in the Seas. Their advice was, To depart
from London to St. Albans, and there to gather an Army to resist the Duke in
his landing. But to how small purpose their Counsel served, the conclusion
thereof plainly declared; for the most part that were called, when they came,
protested, that they would not fight against the Duke of Lancaster, whom they
knew to be evil dealt withal.

The Lord Treasurer, Bagot, Bushie and Green perceiving that the Commons would
cleave unto and take part with the Duke, slipped away, leaving the Lord
Governor of the Realm and the Lord Chancellor to make what shift they could
for themselves. Bagot got him to Chester, and so escaped into Ireland; the
other fled to the Castle of Bristol in hopes there to be in safety.

Again out of the same Chronicle and the same Page.
AT the same present there was arrested and committed to safe custody the
Bishop of Norwich, Sir William Elman and Sir Walter Burley Knights, Lawrence
Drew and John Golofer Esquires. On the morrow after, the foresaid Dukes with
their power went toward Bristol, where at their coming they showed themselves
before the Town and Castle being a huge multitude of people. There were
enclosed within the Castle the Lord William Scroope Earl of Wiltshire and
Treasurer of England, Sir Henry Green and Sir John Bushie Knights, who
prepared to make resistance; but when it would not prevail, they were taken and
brought forth bound as Prisoners into the Camp before the Duke of Lancaster. On
the morrow next ensuing they were arraigned before the Constable and Marshal,
and found guilty of Treason for misgoverning the King and Realm, and forthwith
had their heads smit off.

Doctor Fuller's History of the Worthies of England, page 49. treating of Coats
of Arms and of the different Bearing of them by persons of the same Name and
Family.
THE same Name in the same Shire being distinct Families give different Coats,
as in Northamptonshire,

Green of Greens-Norton, Azure Three Bucks Trippant Or. Green of Drayton,
Argent a Cross Engrailed Gules.
Leland's Itinerary, Vol. 1. Page 5.
THence a quarter of a Mile to Thrapston-Bridge, having an eight Arches of
Stone. Avon runs under this Bridge. From Fotheringay to this Bridge I left
Avon on my right hand, and after still on to Northampton on the left hand a
lofe. At the very end of Thrapston-Bridge stand Ruins of a very large
Hermitage, and principally well builded, but a late discovered and suppressed;
and hard by is the Town of Islip on Avon, as upon the farther Ripe. And about a
Mile farther, but not upon Avon Ripe is Drayton Village and Castle, the
prettiest place in all those quarters, longing as Islip does, in Copartition,
unto the Lord Mordaunt.

Stafford Earl of Wiltshire, Uncle to the late Edward Duke of Buckingham, had
Drayton by an Heir general of the younger Green, and kept his House on it.

The Great Green gave to his Eldest Son, Greens-Norton with a great portion of
Lands; And he gave Drayton with other Lands to his younger Son.

This Drayton Castle was most builded by Green that was so great a Man in King
Richard the Second's days. His Lands came to two Daughters, and one of those
Daughters parts came to three Daughters.

Sir RALPH GREEN, Lord of Drayton and other Lands and Lordships.
Carta Regis Henrici Quarti.
REX, etc. dilectis sibi Edmundo Ford ac Escaetori and Vicecomiti suis in
Comitatu Gloucestriae, and Marchiis Walliae eidem Comitatui adjacentibus,
Salutem. Supplicavit Nobis Radulphus Green filius and haeres Henrici Green
Militis and Matildae uxoris ejus defunctorum, Ut cum idem Henricus tendit die
quo obiit diversa Maneria, terras and tenementa in feodo talliato in diversis
Comitatibus regni nostri Angliae ex dono and concessione Henrici Green
Militis, Patris praedicti Henrici, eidem Henrico filto and haeredibus de
corpore suo exeuntibus inde factis, prout per diversos fines and Cartas inde
confectas before poterit apparere, ac dicta Maneria, terras and tenementa per
legem Angliae, ut de jure and haereditate praedictae Matildae uxoris suae (quae
quidem Maneria, terrae and tenementa occasion forisfacturae praedicti Henrici
filii capta sunt in manum Nostram) Volumus eidem Radulpho tam Maneria, terras
and tenementa praedicta, quae praefatus Henricus pater suus sic tenuit ni feodo
talliato, quam dicta Maneria, terras and tenementa quae idem Henricus sic
tenuit per legem Angliae de jure and haereditate praedictae Matildae, liberare
gratiose (forisfactura praedicti Henrici Patris sui non obstante) Nos ut in hac
part facere valeamus quod est justum, Volentes per Vos super praemissis
before certiorari, assignavimus Vos and duos vestrum ad inquirendum per
sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum de Comitatu praedicto, per quos rei
veritas melius sciri poterit, quantum terrarum and tenementorum idem Henricus
filius tenuit de Domino Ricardo nuper Rege Angliae secundo post Conquestum in
Capite, tam in feodo talliato quam de jure and haereditate praedictae Matildae
nuper uxoris suae, in Comitatu praedicto, die quo obiit, and quantum de aliis,
and quem statum eadem Matilda in terris and tenementis hujusmodi habuit, and
qualiter and quomodo, and per quod servitium, and quantum terrae and tenementa
illa valent per annum in omnibus exitibus, and quo die idem Henricus filius
obiit, and quis propinquior haeres tam praedicti Henrici filii quam praedictae
Matildae de terris and tenementis praedictis existit, and cujus aetatis. Et
ideo vobis mandamus quod ad certos dies and loca, quos vos vel duo vestrum ad
hoc provideritis, diligenter super praemissis faciatis Inquisitiones, and eas
distinct and aperte factas Nobis in Cancellariam nostram sub Sigillis vestris
vel duorum vestrum and Sigillis eorum per quos factae fuerint sine dilatione
mittatis, and hoc breve. Et tu praefatus Vicecomes ad dies and loca praedicta
venire facias coram Vobis vel duobus vestrum, tot and tales probos and legales
homines de balliva tua, per quos rei veritas in praemissis melius sciri poterit
and inquiri. In cujus rei, etc. has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test, etc. vicesimo sexto die Maii, Anno Regni nostri primo.
Carta Regis Henrici Quarti.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae,
omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali and pro eo quod Thomas, Johannes and
Henricus filii and Maria and Philippa filiae Henrici Green Chivaler defuncti,
Nos de mediocri statu suo ac etiam de magno debito patris sui praedicti
informarunt, Concessimus eis omnia bona, Catalla and debita quae suerunt dicti
patris sui, quae ante vicesimum sextum diem Angusti ultimo praeteriti alteri
non dedimus, una cum redditu omnium terrarum and tenementorum quae fuerunt
praedicti Henrici Patris de termino Sancti Michaelis extunc proxime sequente,
de quibus donum aut concessionem ante praedictum vicesimum sextum diem Augusti
non fecimus, simul cum arreragiis si quae inde de anno proxime praeterito
aretro existunt; Certis vasis Argenteis, quae dilecto Clerico nostro Simoni
Bache receptori nostro Honoris nostri Leycestrae de mandato nostro
deliberantur, exceptis. Dantes ulterius and concedentes dictis filiis and
filiabus and eorum attornatis potestatem and authoritatem sufficientes dicta
bona and Catalla administrandi and commodum suum inde faciendi, ac etiam
praedicta redditus and debita levandi and colligendi, and si necesse fuerit,
pro eisdem secundum juris exigentiam prosequendi, absque impetitione, dampno
aut gravamine nostri aut officiariorum seu Ministrorum nostrorum quorumcunque
in futuro. Ita semper quod iidem filii juxta posse suum solvi faciant debita
patris sui praedicti. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri
fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo primo die Octobris, Anno Regni
nostri primo. London. Per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Carta Regis Henrici Quarti.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae,
omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Sciatis quod Nos considerantes quod bona liberis Henrici Green Chivaler
defuncti per Nos ante haec tempora in auxilium sustentationis suae and
solutionis debitorum dicti patris sui concessa in magna part ad hoc non
sufficient ut accepimus, de gratia nostra speciali, and ad supplicationem
eorundem liberorum concessimus eis exitus and proficua de omnibus terris and
tenementis quae fuerunt dicti patris sui (terris and tenementis aliis personis
per Nos prius concessis exceptis) provenientia, quae Nobis pro terminis Natalis
Domini and Paschae proxime futurae solvi deberent, in casu quo terrae and
tenementa illa ante dictum terminum Paschae extra manus nostras per haeredem
praedicti Henrici qui plenae aetatis est, ut dicitur, minime prosecuta
existant, habenda absque aliquo Nobis inde reddendo. In cujus rei Testimonium
has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quinto die Novembris, Anno Regni
nostri primo. London. Per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Carta Regis Henrici Quarti.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae,
omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint,
Salutem.
Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali pardonavimus Radulpho Green Armigero
Domino de Drayton in Comitatu Northamptoniae sectam pacis nostrae quae ad Nos
versus ipsum pertinet, pro omnimodis proditionibus, insurrectionibus,
rebellionibus and feloniis per ipsum ante nonum diem Aprilis ultimo praeteriti
qualitercunque factis sive perpetratis (murdris and raptu mulierum exceptis)
unde indictatus, rectatus vel appellatus existit, ac etiam Utlagarias, si quae
in ipsum hiis occasionibus fuerint promulgatae, and firmam pacem nostram ei
inde concedimus. Ita tamen quod idem Radulphus dicto nono die Aprilis in
prisona absque manucaptione seu traditione in Ballivum pro causis praemissis
vel aliqua earundem detentus non fuerit nec probatur aut dampnatus, and quod
stet rectus in Curia nostra si qui versus eum loqui voluerint de praemissis vel
aliquo praemissorum (forisfacturis tamen terrarum and tenementorum ac bonorum
and Catallorum Nobis in hac part incursis (si quae fuerint) Nobis semper
salvis.) Et ulterius de uberiori gratia Nostra pardonavimus and remisimus eidem
Radulpho sectam nostram quae ad Nos versus ipsum pertinet pro omnimodis
catallis feloniorum and fugitivorum minime de recordo, ac omnimodis
transgressionibus, negligentiis, misprisionibus and contemptibus, ac omnimoda
venditione boscorum infra bundas forestarum nostrarum, omnimodisque
transgressionibus de viridi and venatione infra forestas nostras and porellias
earundem, ac omnimodis finibus pro transgressionibus minime adjudicatis, necnon
omnimodis concelamentis per ipsum ante primum diem ultimi Parliamenti nostri
videlicet quintum decimum diem Maii ultimo praeteriti factis and perpetratis
(concelamentis illis, si quae per ipsum, dum officiarius nostri aut carissimi
Domini and patris nostri defuncti computabilis extitit, facta fuerint,
exceptis) unde indictatus vel rectatus existit, ac etiam Utlagariis, si quae in
ipsum hiis occasionibus ad sectam nostram fuerint promulgatae, and firmam pacem
nostram ei inde concedimus. Pardonavimus etiam and remisimus eidem Radulpho
omnimodas donationes, alienationes and perquisitiones per ipsum de terris and
tenementis de Nobis in Capite tentis sine licentia regia ante praedictum
quintum decimum diem Maii factas: Necnon omnimodos ingressus si qui in
haereditatem suam post mortem antecessorum suorum absque prosecutione ejusdem
per debitum processum extra manus Regias ante eundem quintum decimum diem Maii
facti existant (exceptis illis terris and tenementis quae ad manum mortuam
absque licentia Regia alienantur.) Ita tamen quod ipse unus de illis
Officiariis vel Ministris misterae monetae, cunagii sive Escambii in Turri and
Civitate nostris London and Villa Cales, qui ad standum recti super hiis quae
sibi objicientur, securitatem Nobis in Cancellariam nostram non invenerunt
(quos propter certos defectus and impetitiones eis in ultimo Parliamento
praedicti patris nostri impositos, unde nondum plenarie excusantur,
praesentibus pardonationibus nostris, eo quod dictae impetitiones communem
utilitatem populi nostri manifest concernunt, gaudere nolumus) non existat. In
cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo die Decembris, Anno Regni nostri
primo. Per ipsum Regem. Manpus.

Carta Regis Henrici Quarti.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae,
omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint,
Salutem.
Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali, de assensu Dominorum spiritualium and
temporalium, ac ad requisitionem communitatum Regni nostri Angliae in ultimo
Parliamento nostro existentium, pardonavimus and relaxavimus Radulpho Green
Armigero, alias dicto Radulpho Green Armigero quocunque nomine censeatur,
omnimodas transgressiones, offensas, misprisiones, contemptus and impetitiones
per ipsum ante octavum diem Decembris ultimo praeteriti contra formam
Statutorum de libertatibus pannorum and capiciorum factos sive perpetratos,
unde punitio caderet in finem and redemptionem aut in alias poenas pecuniarias
seu imprisonamenta, Statutis praedictis non obstantibus; Ita tamen quod
praesentes Pardonatio and relaxatio non cedant in dampnum, praejudicium vel
derogationem alicujus alterius personae quam nostrae duntaxat. Et insuper ex
mero motu nostro ob reverentiam Dei and caritatis intuitu pardonavimus eidem
Radulpho sectam pacis nostrae, quae ad Nos versus ipsum pertinet, pro omnimodis
proditionibus, murdris, raptibus mulierum, rebellionibus, insurrectionibus,
feloniis, conspirationibus, ac aliis transgressionibus, offensis, negligentiis,
extortionibus, misprisionibus, ignorantiis, contemptibus, concelamentis and
deceptionibus per ipsum ante dictum octavum diem Decembris qualitercunque
factis sive perpetratis, (murdris per ipsum post decimum nonum diem Novembris
ultimo praeteriti perpetratis (si quae fuerint) exceptis) unde indictatus,
rectatus vel appellatus existit, ac etiam Utlagariis, si quae in ipsum hiis
occasionibus fuerint promulgatae, and firmam pacom nostram ei inde concedimus;
Dum tamen idem Radulphus controfactor misterae monetae, and cunagii,
muliplicator, and lotor auri and argenti cum cuneo nostro cunati, and tonsor
monetae nostrae, probator communis and notorius latro seu felo, qui
abjurationem secerat, non existat. Ita tamen quod stet rectus in curia nostra
si quis versus eum loqui voluerit de praemissis vel aliquo praemissorum. Et
ulterius de uberiori gratia nostra pardonavimus and relaxavimus eidem Radulpho
omnimoda escapia, felonium, catalla felonum and fugitivorum, catalla
Utlagatorum and felonum de se, deodanda, vasta, impetitiones, and omnimodos
articulos itineris, destructiones, and transgressiones de viridi vel venatione,
venditionem boscorum infra forestas and extra, and aliarum rerum quarumcunque
ante dictum octavum diem Decembris infra Regnum nostrum Angliae and parts
Walliae evenientia and eventa, unde punitio caderet in demandam, debitum seu in
finem and redemptionem, aut in alias poenas pecuniarias, seu in forisfacturam
bonorum and catallorum, aut imprisonamenta seu amerciamenta Comitatuum,
villarum vel singularium personarum, vel in onerationem liberi tenementi eorum
qui nunquam transgressi fuerunt, ut haeredum, Executorum vel terrae tenentium,
Escaetorum, Vicecomitum, Coronatorum and aliorum hujusmodi, and omne id quod ad
Nos versus ipsum pertinere posset ex causis supradictis, ac etiam omnimodas
donationes, alienationes and perquisitiones per ipsum de terris and tenementis
de Nobis vel progenitoribus nostris quondam Regibus Angliae in Capite tentis,
ac etiam donationes, alienationes and perquisitiones ad manum mortuam factas
and habitas, absque licentia regia, necnon omnimodas intrusiones and ingressus
per ipsum in haereditatem suam in part vel in toto post mortem antecessorum
suorum absque debita prosecutione ejusdem extra manum Regiam ante eundem
octavum diem Decembris factos, una cum exitibus and proficuis jude medio
tempore perceptis. Ac etiam pardonavimus and relaxavimus praefato Radulpho
omnimodos fines adjudicatos, amerciamenta, exitus forisfactos, relevia,
scutagia, ac omnimoda debita, compota praestita, arreragia firmarum and
Compotorum, Nobis vicesimo primo die Martii Anno Regni nostri primo
qualitercunque debita and pertinentia; Necnon omnimodas actiones and demandas
quas Nos solus versus ipsum vel Nos conjunctim cum aliis personis seu persona
habemus seu habere poterimus: Ac etiam Ut lagarias in ipsum promulgatas pro
aliqua causarum supradictarum. Et insuper pardonavimus and relaxavimus eidem
Radulpho omnimodas poenas ante eundem octavum diem Decembris forisfactas coram
Nobis seu Concilio nostro, Cancellario, Thesaurario, seu aliquo Judicum
Nostrorum pro aliqua causa, and omnes alias poenas tam Nobis quam carissimo
nostro Patri defuncto pro aliqua causa ante eundem octavum diem Decembris
forisfactas, and ad opus nostrum levandas: Ac etiam omnimodas securitates pacis
ante illum octavum diem Decembris similiter forisfactas. Ita quod praesens
pardonatio nostra quoad praemissa seu aliquod praemissorum non cedat in
dampnum, praejudicium vel derogationem alicujus alterius personae quam personae
nostrae duntaxat. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus
Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo primo die Julii, Anno Regni nostri
tertio. Kays.

Carta Radulphi Green.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Radulphus Green dedi, concessi and hac
praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Johanni Holt Chivaler, Johanni Mulso, Johanni
Styvecte, Waltero de Sancto Germano Clerico, Nicholao Hankerig Clerico, and
Willielmo Hemmington, Maneria de Chalton in Comitatu Bedfordiae, Wamyndon and
Emberton in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, Medietatem Manerii de Fishyde juxta
Lavinton in Comitatu Wilts, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, and omnia terras and
tenementa mea in Harringworth cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Northamptoniae, Una
cum omnibus aliis terris and tenementiis meis in Comitatibus praedictis cum
pertinentiis suis, exceptis illis quae de Rege tenentur in Capite sive
immediate de honor Gloucestriae: Habendum and tenendum omnia praedicta Maneria
and medietatem, ac omnia alia terras and tenementa una cum suis pertinentiis in
Comitatibus praedictis (exceptis supra exceptis) praefatis Johanni, Johanni,
Johanni, Waltero, Nicholao and Willielmo, haeredibus and assignatis suis, de
Capitalibus Dominis feodorum illorum per servitia inde debita and de jure
consueta imperpetuum. Et Ego vero praedictus Radulphus and haeredes mei
praedicta Maneria and Medietatem, ac omnia alia terras and tenementa mea cum
suis pertinentiis in Comitatibus praedictis (exceptis praeexceptis) praefatis
Johanni, Johanni, Johanni, Waltero, Nicholao and Willielmo and haeredibus and
assignatis suis contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus and defendemus imperpetuum.
In cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti Cartae meae Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis
Testibus, Thoma Peynre, Johanne Passelew, Johanne Olney, Johanne Tyndale,
Willielmo Aldwincle and aliis.

Dat' die Jovis proximo post Festum Paschae, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Quarti
post Conquestum quarto. seal of Radulph Green SIGILLVM RADVLPHI GRENE



Carta Radulphi Green.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Radulphus Green dedi, concessi and hac
praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Johanni Holt Militi, Johanni Mulso, Nicholao
Hankerig Parsonae Ecclesiae de Normanton super Sore, Willielmo Hemyngton and
Johanni Folcus, Maneria mea de Buckworth and Grateley cum pertinentiis, una cum
advocationibus Ecclesiarum de Buckworth and Grateley praedictis; Necnon omnes
reversiones quorumcunque tenentium eisdem Maneriis pertinentium seu ex
quacunque causa spectantium: Habendum and tenendum praedicta Maneria cum
pertinentiis una cum advocationibus and reversionibus supradictis eisdem
Johanni, Johanni, Nicholao, Willielmo and Johanni, and haeredibus and
assignatis suis imperpetuum de Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius per servitia
inde debita and de jure consueta. Et Ego vero praedictus Radulphus and haeredes
mei Maneria praedicta cum pertinentiis una cum advocationibus and reversionibus
praedictis, praefatis Johanni, Johanni, Nicholao, Willielmo and Johanni,
haeredibus and assignatis suis contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus imperpetuum.
In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Cartae Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis
Testibus, Johanne Styvecte, Johanne Knyvet, Johanne Master, Johanne Rothwell,
Johanne Hurst, and aliis.

Dat' apud Bukworth vicesimo die Julii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Quarti post
Conquestum quarto.
Carta Radulphi Green.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Radulphus Green dedi, concessi, and
hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Johanni Holt Militi, Johanni Mulso, Johanni
Styvecte, Waltero de Sancto Germano, Nicholao Hankerig Clerico, and Willielmo
Hemyngton Medietatem meam Manerii de Matherne cum pertinentiis in Wallia:
Habendum and tenendum praedictam Medietatem cum pertinentiis eisdem Johanni,
Johanni, Johanni, Waltero, Nicholao and Willielmo, haeredibus and assignatis
suis imperpetuum de Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius per servitia inde debita
and de jure consueta. Et Ego vero praedictus Radulphus and haeredes mei
medietatem praedictam cum pertinentiis, praefatis Johanni, Johanni, Johanni,
Waltero, Nicholao and Willielmo, haeredibus and assignatis suis contra omnes
gentes warrantizabimus imperpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti
Cartae meae Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis Testibus, Johanne Lassell, Roberto ap
Thomelyn, Johanne Kybyore and aliis.

Dat' apud Drayton decimo die Aprilis, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Quarti post
Conquestum quinto.
Carta Radulphi Green.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens hoc Scriptum indentatum pervenerit,
Radulphus Green filius Henrici Green Militis,
Salutem in Domino.
Cum Johannes Westbury senior habeat and teneat quoddam Manerium in Westbury,
vocatum le Mauduits Manner, cum suis pertinentiis, Exceptis Curia, releviis,
finibus, escaetis, boscis, Brokwyselis, and advocatione Capellae ejusdem
Manerii cum suis pertinentiis, ad terminum vitae praedicti Johannis, ex
dimissione Henrici Green patris mei, Radulphi Green: Noveritis me praedictum
Radulphum concessisse reversionem praedicti Manerii cum suis pertinentiis
(exceptis superius exceptis) post mortem praedicti Johannis, Willielmo Westbury
and Johanni Westbury filiis praedicti Johannis Westbury senioris: Habendum and
tenendum ad terminum vitae eorundem de Capitalibus Dominis seodi illius per
servitia inde debita and consueta; Reddendo inde annuation praedicto Radulpho
and haeredibus suis octodecim libras legalis monetae ad Festa Sancti Michaelis
and Annuntiationis beatae Mariae aequis portionibus, necnon faciendo inde omnia
alia onera and servitia dicto Manerio incumbentia, durante termino vitae
praedictorum Willielmi and Johannis; Et praedicti Willielmus and Johannes
sustentabunt dictum Manerium competenter sine vasto vel destructione faciendo
per totum terminum praedictum, and statum suum praedictum nulli dimittent sine
licentia praedicti Radulphi vel haeredum suorum. Et si praedictus Redditus
aretro sit per unum mensem post aliquem terminorum praedictorum, vel si aliquod
vastum inde factum suerit, seu si praedicti Willielmus and Johannes statum suum
praedictum alicui dimiserint sine licentia praedicti Radulphi vel haeredum
suorum, been liceat praedicto Radulpho and haeredibus suis praedictum Manerium
cum pertinentiis reintrare, and illud in pristino statu suo tenere, vel pro
redditu praedicto in eodem Manerio distringere si maluerint, and districtiones
sic captas asportare and fugare quocunque sibi placuerit. Et praedictus
Radulphus and haeredes sui praedictum Manerium cum suis pertinentiis, exceptis
hiis quae superius excipiuntur, praefatis Willielmo and Johanni post mortem
praedicti Johannis Westbury senioris modo and forma supradictis contra omnes
gentes warrantizabunt, acquietabunt and defendent. In cujus rei testimonium
parts praedictae hiis Indenturis Sigilla sua apposuerunt.

Dat' in Festo Apostolorum Simonis and Judae, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Quarti
post Conquestum octavo. seal of Ralph Green SIGILLVM RADVLPHI GRENE



Doctor Fuller's History of the Worthies of England, Page 295.
RAlph Green was High Sheriff of the County of Northampton in the eighth year
of King Henry the Fourth, and in the second year of King Henry the Fifth.

Carta Regis Henrici Quarti.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae,
omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint,
Salutem.
Sciatis quod dum summi Regis gratiam Nobis, postquam Regni gubernacula
suscepimus, non nostris meritis sed sua ineffabili bonitate vary infusam,
claro oculo conspicimus, ad gratiarum munera nostris subditis impendenda
solertius excitamur: Ut igitur nostri affectus affectum sortiatur, caritasque
mutua (sine qua frustra habentur caetera) inter cunctos ligeos Nostros diversis
dissentionibus in Regno nostro nuper subortis, earum instigante auctore, non
modice perturbatos, and nisi manum remedii apponamus, veresimiliter
perturbandos in futurum, celerius vigeat and constantius solidetur, dicti etiam
ligei nostri corda assumant alacriora erga Nos and haeredes nostros in fide and
dilectione fidelius permanere, de gratia nostra speciali pardonavimus Radulpho
Green Armigero ligeo nostro Angliae sectam pacis nostrae quae ad Nos versus
ipsum pertinet, pro omnimodis proditionibus, insurrectionibus, rebellionibus,
feloniis, misprisionibus, offensis, impetitionibus and transgressionibus per
ipsum ante Festum Conversionis Sancti Pauli proxime praeteritum factis sive
perpetratis (murdris and raptibus mulierum exceptis) unde indictatus, rectatus
vel appellatus existit, Ac etiam Utlagariis si quae in ipsum hiis occasionibus
fuerint promulgatae, and firmam pacem nostram ei inde concedimus, Dum tamen
idem Radulphus non sit probator, notorius Latro, in prisona pro latrociniis
absque debita manucaptione seu traditione in Ballivum. Ita tamen quod stet
rectus in Curia nostra si qui versus eum loqui voluerint de praemissis vel
aliquo praemissorum. Pardonavimus etiam eidem Radulpho omnimoda escapia selonum
ante festum praedictum minime adjudicata, ac omnimodas donationes, alienationes
and perquisitiones per ipsum de aliquibus terris and tenementis de Nobis in
Capite tentis absque licentia Regia, Ac omnimodos ingressus per ipsum in
haereditatem suam post mortem antecessorum suorum absque debita prosecutione
ejusdem extra manus Regias ante idem festum factos (exceptis illis terris and
tenementis quae ad manum mortuam absque licentia Regia alienantur.) In cujus
rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo quinto die Julii, Anno Regni nostri
decimo. Hogham. Per ipsum Regem,

Carta Regis Henrici Quarti.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae,
Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Sciatis quod cum Anno Regni nostri primo Dilectus Armiger noster Radulphus
Green liberationem habuerit in Cancellaria nostra per brevia nostra, ut filius
and haeres in talliato Henrici Green Chivaler, qui ad mortem apud Bristol
vicesimo nono die Julii Anno Regni carissimi Domini and Consanguinei nostri
Richardi nuper Regis Angliae ultimi praedecessoris nostri defuncti vicesimo
tertio adjudicatus fuit, de omnibus Maneris, tenementis, redditibus, servitiis
and reversionibus, cum omnibus feodis, homagiis, wardis, maritagiis,
advocationibus, franchesiis, juribus and libertatibus quibuscunque eisdem
aliqualiter spectantibus, cum pertinentiis suis quae fuerunt praedicti Henrici
in Anglia, tam de illis in quibus ipse statum habuit sibi and haeredibus de
corpore suo procreatis, quam de illis quae tenuit per legem Angliae de jure
praedicti Radulphi post mortem Matildae nuper Uxoris praedicti Henrici matris
praedicti Radulphi, ac in Parliamento tento apud Westmonasterium decimo nono
die Novembris Anno Regni nostri primo judicium praedictum ad requisitionem
Communitatum in Parliamento praedicto per Nos cum assensu Dominorum
spiritualium and temporalium in eodem Parliamento existentium pro bono judicio
affirmatum existit; Et Nos postmodum in eodem Parliamento declaravimus tenere
Nobis per viam Conquestus omnia Maneria, terras, tenementa, feoda, homagia,
wardas, maritagia, advocationes, jura, franchesias and libertates praedicta cum
pertinentiis suis quae tunc fuerunt praedicti Henrici; Ac etiam sexto die
Septembris Anno Regni nostri primo per Literas Nostras Patentes concesserimus
praefato Radulpho omnia Exitus and proficua provenientia de terris and
tenementis quae Henricus Green Pater suus tenuit sibi and haeredibus suis de
corpore suo procreatis, vel per legem Angliae de haereditate Matildae nuper
Uxoris suae, matris praedicti Radulphi: Nos de gratia nostra speciali
concessimus eidem Radulpho and haeredibus suis, quod praedicta liberatio
Maneriorum, terrarum and tenementorum, feodorum, homagiorum, wardarum,
maritagiorum and advocationum, jurium, franchesiarum and libertatum
praedictarum cum pertinentiis eidem Radulpho extra manus nostras facta, sit
bona, effectualis and valida sibi and haeredibus suis. Et ulterius de uberiori
gratia nostra pardonavimus praefato Radulpho and haeredibus suis ingressum in
Maneria, terras and tenementa, wardas, maritagia and advocationes, franchesias,
jura and libertates praedicta cum pertinentiis suis, quae habuit per
liberationem supradictam and occupationem extunc eorundem; Licet hujusmodi
liberatio praedicto Radulpho debite facta seu prosecuta non existit, vel aliter
facta sine speciali petitione Nobis per ipsum prosecuta and per Nos sibi
concessa. Sed quod praedictus Radulphus and haeredes sui sint habiles, and
personae habiles ad gaudendum haereditate Maneriorum, terrarum and
tenementorum, feodorum, homagiorum, wardarum, maritagiorum and advocationum,
jurium, franchesiarum and libertarum praedictorum cum pertinentiis suis in
successione and haereditate modo quo ipse habet liberationem inde sibi factam.
Et quod ipse and haeredes sui sint personae habiles ad habendum and
prosequendum quamcunque actionem antecessoriam, and ad habendum haereditatem
per descensum a praefato Henrico and aliis antecessoribus suis, unde (...) fiet
per eosdem gradus per praedictum Henricum. Ac etiam pardonavimus (...) Radulpho
omnia exitus and proficua capta vel levata de praedictis Maneriis, terris
^^^^entis, feodis and homagiis, wardis, maritagiis and advocationibus,
franchesiis, (...) and libertatibus cum pertinentiis suis, judicio and
affirmatione judicii, ac Conquestu seu declaratione Conquestuum praedictis non
obstantibus. Ac insuper de uberiori gratia Nostra pardonavimus and relaxavimus
praefato Radulpho and haeredibus suis totum jus and clameum quae habemus, aut
Nobis vel haeredibus Nostris pertinent seu pertinere poterint ratione judicii,
affirmationis, judicii and Conquestus seu declarationis Conquestuum
praedictorum aut aliarum ordinationum quarumcunque, in omnibus Maneriis,
terris, tenementis, feodis, homagiis, wardis, maritagiis, advocationibus,
franchesiis, libertatibus, juribus and proficuis quibuscunque praedictis cum
pertinentiis, salvis semper servitiis Nobis and haeredibus nostris inde ab
antiquo debitis. In cujus rei Testimonum has Literas Nostras fieri fecimus
Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium decimo nono die Martii, Anno Regni nostri
duodecimo. Wakering. Per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Exemplificatio Petitionis Radulphi Green in Parliamento.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae,
omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Inspeximus tenorem cujusdam Petitionis Nobis in ultimo Parliamento nostro apud
Westmonasterium tento per Radulphum Green exhibitae in haec verba:

Tres-excellent and tres-redoute Seignour, nostre Seignour le Roy,
supply tres-humblement vostre humble liege Rauf Green Esquier, que come en
l'an primer de vostre gratiouse Regne le avantdit Rauf avoit livere en vostre
Chancellarie per voz briefs come fitz and heir en le tail de Monsieur Henry
Green, qui feust adjugges a la mort a Bristuit le xxix jour de Julet l'an du
Regne le darrein Roy Richard que feust xxiij, de touz les manoirs, terres,
tenementz, rentes, fervices and reversions, ove tous fees, homages, gardes,
marriages, avowsons, franchises, droites and libertees queconques a iceux
appendantz ou appertenantz en ascun manner, ove lour appertenantz, queux feurent
au dit Monsieur Henry Green en Engleterre, cibien de ceux en queux le dit
Henry avoit estat a luy and a ses heirs de son corpse engendres, come de ceux
q'il tient par la courtesy d'Engleterre de droit, le dit suppliant apres la
mort Maude Nadgairs feme l'avantdit Monsieur Henry, mier l'avantdit Rauf, and
come ency soit que a la Parliament tenuz a Westminestre le xix jour de Novembre
l'an de voz Regnes primer, l'avantdit jugement a prier des Commens en le dit
Parliament per vouz, ove l'assent des Seigneurs Esperituelx and Temporelx en
mesme le Parliament esteantz, pur bone jugement feust affirms, and puis pluist
a vous en mesme le Parliament a declarer de tener a vouz pur voie de Conquest
toutz les Manoirs, terres, tenementz, fees, homages, gardes, marriages,
avowsons, franchises, droites and libertees avantditz, ove lour appurtenantz,
queux alors feurent au dit Henry. Et come auxint de vostre grace le sisme jour
de Septembre l'an primer de vos regnes per vous Lettres Patentes vous
grauntastes a dit suppliant toutz les issues and profitz provenantz de terres
and tenementz que Henry Green son pier tenoit a luy and a ses heirs de son
corpse engendrez, ove per ley d'Engleterre, del heritage Maude Nadgairs sa
Femme, mier a dit Rauf: Quo pleise a vous tres Sovereign Seigneur, de vostre
grace especiale passent de les Seigneurs Esperituelx and Temporelx en ceste
present Parliament esteauntz and per auctorite de mesme le Parliament, de
graunter au dit Rauf and a ses heirs que l'avantdit livere de les Manoirs,
terres and tenementz, rentes and services ove toutz fees, homages, gardes,
marriages, avowsons, droitz, franchises and libertees avantditz ove lour
appurtenantz fait horse de voz mains a l'avandit Rauf, soit bone and effectuele
and vailable au dit Rauf and a ses heirs a tener come desus, and pleinement
pardoner per assent des ditz Seigneurs and per auctorite de cest present
Parliament au dit Rauf and a ses heirs l'entree (...) les Manoir, terres and
tenementz, fees, homages, gardes, marriages, avowsons, d^^its, franchises and
libertees avantditz ove lour appurtenantz, qu'il avoit per le livere avantdit
and l'occupation di ceux puis en ceo coment qui tiel livere a dit Rauf ne fuist
pas duement fait ou pursuez ou autrement fait saunz petition especial a vous
per luy pursues and per vous a luy attroyez, and outre come le dit Rauf soit
entree en diverses Manoirs, terres, tenementz, rentes, services, reversions,
fees, homages, gardes, marriages, avowsons, franchises, droitz and libertees
queux le dit Henry Green son pier tenoit a luy and a ses heirs males de son
corpse engendrez saunz ascun livere horse de voz mains suer ou per petition a
vouz fait: Que pleise a vous de vostre grace especiale ove del assent les dit
Seigneurs en cest present Parliament esteantz and per auctorite de mesme le
Parliament, de pardoner a dit suppliant and a ses heirs les ditz entrees en
toutz les Manoirs, terres, tenementz, rentes, services, reversions, fees,
homages, gardes, marriages, avowsons, franchises, droitz and libertees
queconques ove toutz lour appurtenantz queux le dit Henry Green tenoit a luy
and a ses heirs males de son corpse engendrez, and que l'avantdit Rauf and ses
heirs soient ables and personesables de movoir and avoir l'enheritance de toutz
les Manoirs, terres and tenementz, fees, homages, gardes, marriages and
avowsons, droitz, franchises and libertees avantditz ove lour appurtenances en
succession ou en inheritance en le manner come il a ent livere a luy fait, and
come il les tient, and qu'il and ses heirs soient personesables and ables
destre heirs a dit Henry and a toutz ses auncestres d'avoir and pursuer chescun
action auncestrel and d'avoir enheritance per descent du dit Henry ou de autres
lour auncestres dount a descent serra fait per mesmes degrees de part le dit
Henry, and de pardoner per auctorite de cest Parliament per assent des ditz
Seigneurs au dit Rauf toutz les issues and profitz prisez ou leves de les
Manoirs, terres and tenementz, fees, homages, gardes, marriages and avowsons,
franchises, droitz and libertees avantditz ove lour appurtenantz les jugement
and affirmance de jugement, conquest ou declaration des conquestes avantditz,
statutz ou autres ordinances queconques a contraire faitz, ove ceo que le sank
fuist corrumpe perentre le dit Henry and le dit Rauf non obstantz; Et autre de
vostre pluis habundante grace de pardoner and relesser per auctorite de cest
Parliament per assent des ditz Seigneurs au dit Rauf and ses heirs tout le droit
and claim que vous aves appertinant ou apperteigner pur ou purroit a cause de
jugement avantdit, affirmaunce de jugement ou conquest avantditz en toutz les
Manoirs, terres, tenementz, rentz, services, reversions, fees, homages, gardes,
marriages, avowsons, franchises, libertees, droits and profitz queconques
avantditz ove lour appurtenantz: Exceptez and reservez tout temps les services
en d'auncien temps a vouz and a voz heirs dues, ascuns estatutes, declaration
ou ordinances faitz au contrariement obstantz pur Dieu and en ocure de charity.
Inspeximus etiam tenorem responsionis ejusdem Petitionis in haec verba: Le Roy
de l'advys and assent des Seigneurs Espirituelx and Temporelx en cest present
Parliament ad ottroiez ceste Petition.

Nos autem tenorem Petitionis and responsionis praedictarum ad requisitionem
praefati Radulphi duximus exemplificandum per praesentes. In cujus rei
Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium septimo die Februarii Anno Regni nostri
tertio decimo. Wissingfere.

Carta Regis Henrici Quinti.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae,
Dilecto and fideli suo Willielmo Roos de Hamelak and Dilectis sibi Radulpho
Green, Thomae Mulso and Willielmo Palmere, Salutem.
Quia datum est Nobis intelligi quod Willielmus Perwiche ac quamplures alii
malefactores and pacis nostrae perturbatores armati and modo guerrino arraiati
and in diversis Congregationibus ac aliis Conventiculis illicitis in diversis
Comitatibus regni nostri Angliae ad invicem congregati, in Jacobum Bellers unum
Custodum Pacis nostrae and Justiciariorum nostrorum ad diversa felonias,
transgressiones and malefacta in Comitatu Leycestriae audiendum and terminandum
assignatum, ac Escaetorem nostrum in eodem Comitatu, Necnon unum Militum
Comitatus praedicti qui de summonitione nostra ad Parliamentum nostrum apud
Westmonasterium ultimo tentum venit, ab eodem Parliamento versus domum suam
propriam redeundo vi and Armis insultum fecerunt, and ipsum verberaverunt,
vulneraverunt and male tractaverunt, ac ipsum pro mortuo reliquerunt,
postmodumque ad diversa loca ejusdem Regni nostri fugientes se in hujusmodi
Conventionibus and Conventiculis tenuerunt, and adhuc tenent, quamplurima mala
and alia facinora diversis ligeis and subditis nostris indies perpetrando in
nostrum contemptum and praejudicium ac pacis nostrae laesionem, necnon fidelium
ligeorum and subditorum nostrorum terrorem and commotionem manifestam. Nos
hujusmodi malefactores juxta eorum demerita in hac part castigari volentes and
puniri, assignavimus vos conjunctim and divisim ad praefatum Willielmum ac
quoscunque hujusmodi malefactores in hujusmodi Congregationibus and
Conventiculis sic se tenentes, and eidem Willielmo in hac part adhaerentes,
ubicunque inventi fuerint infra libertates and extra, sine dilatione
arrestandum and capiendum, ac praefatum Willielmum coram Nobis and Concilio
nostro ducendum; Necnon hujusmodi malefactores in hujusmodi Congregationibus
and Conventiculis sic se tenentes and praefato Willielmo in hac part
adhaerentes, proximis Prisonis nostris committendum, in eisdem moraturis
quousque pro eorum deliberatione aliter duximus demandandum. Et ideo Vobis and
cuilibet vestrum mandamus quod circa praemissa diligenter intendatis, and ea
faciatis quae minus in forma praedicta. Damus autem Universis and singulis
Vicecomitibus, Majoribus, Ballivis, Constabulariis, Ministris and aliis
fidelibus and subditis nostris tam infra Libertates quam extra, tenore
praesentium, firmiter in Mandatis, quod Vobis and cuilibet vestrum in
executione praemissorum intendentes sint, consulentes and auxiliantes prout
decet. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo sexto die Junii Anno Regni nostri
primo. Per Concilium. Clerk.

Finis inter Willielmum Islip and alios Querentes, and Radulphum Green
Deforcientem.
HAEC est finalis Concordia facta in Curia Domini Regis apud Westmonasterium in
Octabis Purificationis beatae Mariae Anno Regnorum Henrici filii Regis Henrici
Regis Angliae and Franciae capta coram Ricardo Norton, Roberto Hull, Johanne
Cokayne, Willielmo Luddington and Johanne Preston Justiciariis, and postea a
die Paschae in quindecim dies Anno Regnorum ejusdem Regis Henrici quarto ibidem
concessa and recordata coram eisdem Justiciariis and aliis Domini Regis
fidelibus tunc ibi praesentibus inter Willielmum Islip Parsonam Ecclesiae de
Conyngton, Willielmum Marshall Parsonam Ecclesiae de Rothyng, Nicolaum Morys
and Willielmum Aldwyncle Querentes, and Radulphum Green Armigerum
Deforcientem, de Maneriis de Drayton, Luffwick, Houghton, Cotes and Raundes, ac
de sex Virgatis terrae and tribus Cotagiis in Harring worth cum pertinentiis in
Comitatu Northamptoniae, and de Maneriis de Webenden, Wolston and Emberton cum
pertinentiis in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, and de Maneriis de Chalton and
Cobworth, ac de viginti solidatis redditus in Faryndysh cum pertinentiis in
Comitatu Bedfordiae, and de Manerio de Buckworth cum pertinentiis in Comitatu
Huntingtoniae, and de Manerio de Emberton cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Cantiae,
unde placitum Conventionis factum fuit inter (...) in eadem Curia, scilicet
quod praedictus Radulphus recognovit praedicta Maneria and tenementa cum
pertinentiis esse jus ipsius Willielmi Islip, ut illa quae iidem Willielmus,
Willielmus Marshall, Nicolaus and Willielmus Aldwyncle habent de dono praedicti
Radulphi, and pro hac recognitione, fine and concordia iidem Willielmus,
Willielmus, Nicolaus and Willelmus concesserunt praedictis Radulpho and
Katherinae uxori ejus praedicta Maneria and tenementa cum pertinentiis, and
illa eis reddiderunt in eadem Curia: Habenda and tenenda eisdem Radulpho and
Katherinae and haeredibus ipsius Radulphi de corpore suo procreatis de
praedictis Willielmo, Willielmo, Nicolao and Willielmo and haeredibus ipsius
Willielmi Islip imperpetuum; Reddendo inde per Annum unam Rosam ad Festum
Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae pro omni servitio, consuetudinibus and
exactione ad praedictos Willielmum, Willielmum, Nicolaum and Willielmum and
haeredes ipsius Willielmi Islip pertinente, and faciendo inde capitalibus
Dominis feodi illius pro praedictis Willielmo, Willielmo, Nicolao and Willielmo
and haeredibus ipsius Willielmi Islip omnia alia servitia quae ad praedicta
Maneria and tenementa pertinent imperpetuum. Et si contingat quod idem
Radulphus obierit sine haeredibus de corpore suo procreatis, tunc post decessum
ipsorum Radulphi and Katherinae praedicta Maneria and tenementa cum
pertinentiis integre revertantur ad praedictos Willielmum, Willielmum, Nicolaum
and Willielmum and haeredes ipsius Willielmi Islip quiet de aliis haeredibus
praedictorum Radulphi and Katherinae, tenenda de Capitalibus Dominis feodi
illius per servitia quae ad praedicta Maneria and tenementa pertinent
imperpetuum.

Inquisitio capta post mortem Radulphi Green.
INquisitio capta apud Thrapston die Martis proximo post Festum Sancti Hilarii
Anno Regni Regis Henrici Quinti post Conquestum quinto, coram Johanne Spriggy
Escaetore Domini Regis in Comitatu Northamptoniae, virtute cujusdam brevis
Domini Regis eidem Escaetori directi and huic Inquisitioni consuti, per
Sacramentum, etc. Qui dicunt super Sacramentum suum, quod Radulphus Green in
dicto brevi Domini Regis nominatus nulla terras seu tenementa tenuit de Domino
Rege in Capite dicto die quo obiit in Dominico suo ut de feodo nec in servitio
in Comitatu praedicto, sed dicunt quod praedictus Radulphus tenuit die quo
obiit conjunctim feoffatus cum Katherina uxore sua adhuc superstite Maneria de
Drayton, Luffwick, Houghton, Cotes and Raundes, ac sex Virgatas terrae and tria
Cotagia in Harringworth cum pertinentiis in Comitatu praedicto ex concessione
Willielmi Islip Parsonae Ecclesiae de Conyngton, Willielmi Marshall Parsonae
Ecclesiae de Rothing, Nicolai Morice and Willielmi Aldwyncle per quandam Finem
in Curia Domini Regis de Maneriis and tenementis praedictis inter praefatos
Willielmum Islip, Willielmum Marshal, Nicolaum and Willielmum Aldwyncle
Querentes and praefatos Radulphum and Katherinam Deforcientes levatam: Tenenda
eisdem Radulpho and Katherinae and haeredibus de corpore praedicti Radulphi
procreatis de praedictis Willielmo Islip, Willielmo Marshall, Nicolao and
Willielmo Aldwyncle and haeredibus ipsius Willielmi Islip imperpetuum, Reddendo
inde per annum unam Rosam ad Festum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae pro
omni servitio, consuetudinibus and exactione ad praefatos Willielmum Islip,
Willielmum Marshall, Nicolaum and Willielmum Aldwyncle and haeredes ipsius
Willielmi Islip imperpetuum pertinentibus, Et faciendo inde Capitalibus Dominis
feodi illius pro dictis Willielmo Islip, Willielmo Marshall, Nicolao and
Willielmo Aldwyncle and haeredibus ipsius Willielmi Islip omnia alia servitia
quae ad praedicta Maneria and tenementa pertinent imperpetuum. Et si contingat
quod idem Radulphus obierit sine haeredibus de corpore suo procreatis, tunc
post decessum ipsorum Radulphi and Katherinae, Maneria praedicta and tenementa
cum pertinentiis integre revertantur ad praedictos Willielmum Islip, Willielmum
Marshall, Nicolaum and Willielmum Aldwyncle and haeredes ipsius Willielmi Islip
quieta de aliis haeredibus praedictorum Radulphi and Katherinae, Tenenda de
Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius per servitia quae ad praedicta Maneria and
tenementa pertinent imperpetuum. Item praefati Juratores dicunt quod dictum
Manerium de Drayton cum pertinentiis tenetur de Johanna Regina Angliae ut de
Manerio suo de Gerdington per servitium reddendi per annum tresdecim solidos
and quatuor denarios and sectam Curiae pro omni servitio; Et valet per annum
ultra reprisas quadraginta solidos. Et quod dictum Manerium de Luffwick tenetur
de Thoma Green Milite per servitium militare, and valet per annum ultra
reprisas december libras. Et quod praedictum Manerium de Houghton cum pertinentiis
tenetur de praefato Thoma Green per servitium militare, and valet per annum
ultra reprisas centum solidos. Et quod Maneria de Cotes and Raundes tenentur de
dicto Thoma Green per servitium militare, and quod valent per Annum ultra
reprisas quatuordecim libras. Ac etiam dicunt quod dictae sex Virgatae terrae
and tria Cotagia in Harringworth cum pertinentiis tenentur de Domino le Zouch
per servitium militare, and valent per Annum ultra reprisas tres libras. Et
ulterius dicunt quod praedictus Radulphus non tenuit aliqua alia terras seu
tenementa die quo obiit de Domino Rege in Capite nec de aliquo alio in Comitatu
praedicto. Ac etiam dicunt quod idem Radulphus obiit vicesimo quarto die
Octobris ultimo praeterito. Et quod Johannes Green Armiger frater dicti
Radulphi est haeres ejus propinquior, and aetatis triginta annorum and amplius.
In cujus rei testimonium, etc.

Indentura inter Katherinam uxorem Radulphi Green and Thomam Prentys and
Robertum Sutton de Chelaston, Kervers.
CEste Endentre faite perentres Katherine que fuist la feme Rauf Green
Esquier, William Aldwyncle and William Marchall Clerk d'un part, and Thomas
Prentys and Robert Sutton de Chelaston en Count de Derbie Kervers, d'autre
part testmoigne, que les ditz Kervers ount covenantez and empris pur fair and
entailler bien, honestement and profitablement, une tomb de piere appelle
alabastre bon, fyn and pure, contenent en longure ix pees d'assise, and en
largure iiij pees and deux d'assise, sur quele tomb seront faitz deux images
d'alabastre, l'un counterfeit a un Esquier en Arms en toutz pointz, contenent
en lo ngure vij pees d'assise, avec un helm de soubs son chief, and un ours a
ses pees, and l'autre image serra countrefait a une dame gisant en sa surcote
overte, avec deux Anges tenants un pilow de soubz sa test, and deux petitz
chiens a ses pees, l'un des ditz images tenant l'autre per la main, avec deux
tabernacles appelles gablettes a lour testes, quele tomb conteindra per les
costs avec le leggement trois pees d'assife, sur queux costs seront images
d'Anges ove tabernacles portantz escutz, selont la devise des ditz Katherine,
William and William. Et auxi ferront les ditz Kervers un arche d'alabastre
amounte tout la dite tomb, en longure, and largure, avec pendantz and knottes,
and une crest de foytes and autre ourages appertinent au tiele tomb, les queux
image tomb and arche serront proportionez endorres peintes and arraies ove
colors bien and sufficientment en le pure honest and profitable manner come
appertient a tiel overage. Et seront toutz les ditz overages prestment faitz,
and perfourmez, en toutz poyntz, en manner suisdite, and surmis and enhaute,
per les ditz Thomas and Robert en l'esglise parochiel de Luffwick, en Count de
Northamton, as costages and peril des ditz Thomas and Robert, en toutz maneres
chooses, perentre cy and le fest de Pasque serra l'en de grace Mccccxx. Pur
quelles overages en manner avantdit affair and performers les ditz Katherine,
William, and William, paieront ou feront paier as ditz Thomas and Robert ou
l'autre deulx; quarant livers desterlings, don't seront paiez al fesance di
cestes dys marcs and al fest de Pasque ore prochein avener dix marcs, and al
fest del Nativite de Seint John Baptiftre adonque prochein ensuant, dys marcs
and at fest de Saint Michell adonque prochein ensuant dys marcs, and les dix
marcs remanantz seront paiez quant toutz les ditz overages seront faitz and
surmys, en manner avantdit; pur toutz quelles convenantz avantditz and chescun
deulx, de part les ditz Thomas and Robert faites, a performer mesmes Thomas and
Robert eux obligent, and chescun deulx per soy, en lentier, lour heirs and
executors as ditz Katherine, William, and William, en cessant livres per y
cestes. En tesmoignance de quele chose les parties avantditz a y cestes
Endentres enterchangeablement ount myslours Sealx. Done le xiiij jour le
Feverer l'an du Regne du Roy Henry Quint puis le Conquest sisme.

The Tomb of Rauf Green Lord of Drayton Extant in the Church of St. Peter in
Luffwick in ye County of Nerthampton.
tomb of Sir Ralph and Catherine (nee Malory) Green

JOHN GREEN, Lord of Drayton and other Lands and Lordships.
Carta Willielmi Seymour.
NOverint Universi per Praesentes me Willielmum Seymour de Halton juxta
Spillesby remisisse, relaxasse, and omnino pro me and haeredibus meis
imperpetuum quietum clamasse Johanni Green quondam filio Henrici Green de
Drayton Militis totum jus meum and clameum quae unquam habui, habeo, seu quovis
modo habere potero in omnibus terris and tenementis, redditibus and servitiis,
pratis, pascuis and pasturis, cum omnibus and singulis suis pertinentiis infra
Comitatum Northamptoniae; Ita videlicet quod nec Ego praedictus Willielmus nec
haeredes mei nec aliquis alius nomine nostro aliquod jus seu clameum in
praedictis terris and tenementis, redditibus and servitiis, pratis, pascuis and
pasturis cum omnibus and singulis suis pertinentiis de caetero exigere seu
vendicare poterimus in suturum, sed ab omni action juris and Clamei inde
maneamus exclusi per Praesentes. Et ego praedictus Willielmus Seymour and
haeredes mei omnia praedicta terras and tenementa, redditus and servitia,
prata, pascua and pasturas cum omnibus and singulis suis pertinentiis praefato
Johanni Green, haeredibus and assignatis suis in forma praedicta contra omnes
gentes warrantizabimus and defendemus imperpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium
huic praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum apposui.

Dat' apud Halton die Lunae in Crastino Sanctae Trinitatis Anno Regni Regis
Henrici Quarti post Conquestum septimo.
Carta Regis Henrici Sexti.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae
omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes, Literae pervenerint
Salutem.
Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali pardonavimus Johanni Green de Comitatu
Northamptoniae Armigero sectam pacis nostrae quae ad nos versus ipsum pertinet
pro omnimodis proditionibus, insurrectionibus, rebellionibus and feloniis per
ipsum ante nonum diem Aprilis ultimo praeteritum qualitercunque factis sive
perpetratis (murdris and raptu mulierum exceptis) unde indictatus, rectatus vel
appellatus existit; ac etiam Utlagariis si quae in ipsum hiis occasionibus
fuerint promulgatae; Et firmam pacem nostram ei inde concedimus; Ita tamen quod
idem Johannes dicto nono die Aprilis in prisona absque manucaptione seu
traditione in Ballivum pro causis praedictis vel aliqua earundem detentus non
fuerit nec probatus aut dampnatus, and quod stet rectus in curia nostra si qui
versus eum loqui voluerint de praemissis vel aliquo praemissorum, forisfacturis
tamen terrarum and tenementorum ac Bonorum and Catallorum Nobis in hac part
incursis, si quae fuerint, nobis semper salvis. Et ulterius de uberiori gratia
pardonavimus and remisimus praefato Johanni sectam nostram quae ad nos versus
ipsum pertinet pro omnibus catallis felonum and fugitivorum minime de recordo,
ac omnimodis transgressionibus, negligentiis, misprisionibus and contemptibus,
ac omnimoda venditione boscorum infra bundas forestarum nostrarum, omnimodisque
transgressionibus de viridi and venatione infra forestas nostras and porellias
earundem, ac omnimodis finibus pro transgressionibus minime adjudicatis, Necnon
omnimodis concelamentis per ipsum ante primum diem ultimi Parliamenti nostri,
videlicet quintum decimum diem Maii ultimo praeteritum, factis and perpetratis;
(Concelamentis illis si quae per ipsum dum Officiarius noster vel carissimi
Domini and patris nostri defuncti computabilis extitit facta fuerint, exceptis)
Unde indictatus vel rectatus existit; Ac etiam Utlagarias si quae in ipsum hiis
occasionibus fuerint promulgatae, and firmam pacem nostram ei inde concedimus.
Pardonavimus etiam and remisimus eidem Johanni omnimodas donationes,
alienationes and perquisitiones per inpsum de terris and tenementis de Nobis in
Capite tentis sine licentia regia ante praedictum quintum decimum diem Maii
factas; Necnon omnimodos ingressus si qui in haereditatem suam post mortem
Antecessorum suorum absque prosecutione ejusdem per debitum processum extra
manus Regias ante eundem quintum decimum diem Maii facti existant: exceptis
illis terris and tenementis quae ad manum mortuam absque licentia regia
alienantur. Ita tamen quod idem Johannes unus de illis Officiariis vel
Ministris misterae monetae, cunagii vel excambii in Turri and Civitate nostris
London and in Villa Cales, qui ad standum recto super hiis quae sibi
objicientur, securitatem Nobis in Cancellaria nostra non invenerint, quos
propter certos defectus and impetitiones communem utilitatem populi nostri
manifest concernent' gaudere nolumus, non existat. In cujus rei testimonium
has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo die Decembris Anno Regni nostri
primo. Manpus. Per ipsum Regem.

Carta Johannis Green.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Johannes Green Armiger dedi, concessi
and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Philippo Morgon Episcopo Eliensi, Thomae
Sydenill, Willielmo Tresham, Waltero Green, Thomae Cotton, Roberto Isham,
Willielmo Aldwyncle and Johanni Warner totum Manerium meum de Grafton in
Comitatu Northamptoniae, cum omnibus terris, tenementis, redditibus,
reversionibus, servitiis, wardis, maritagiis, releviis, herietis, Escaetis
pratis, pascuis, pasturis, boscis, aquis, piscariis, una cum advocatione
Ecclesiae de Grafton praedicta cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis dicto Manerio
spectantibus: Habendum and tenendum praedictum Manerium cum omnibus terris,
tenementis, redditibus, reversionibus, servitiis, wardis, maritagiis, releviis,
herietis, Escaetis, pratis, pascuis, pasturis, boscis, aquis, piscariis, una
cum advocatione Ecclesiae praedictae and omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis ut
praedictum est, praefatis Philippo, Thomae, Willielmo, Waltero, Thomae,
Roberto, Willielmo and Johanni Warner, haeredibus and assignatis eorum
imperpetuum, de Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius per servitia inde debita and
de jure consueta. Et Ego vero praedictus Johannes Green and haeredes mei
praedictum Manerium cum omnibus terris, tenementis, redditibus, reversionibus,
servitiis, wardis, maritagiis, releviis, herietis, escaetis, pratis, pascuis,
pasturis, boscis, aquis, piscariis, una cum advocatione Ecclesiae praedictae
and omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis, praefatis Philippo, Thomae, Willielmo,
Waltero, Thomae, Roberto, Willielmo and Johanni Warner, haeredibus and
assignatis eorum contra omnes gentes Warrantizabimus imperpetuum. In cujus rei
testimonium huic praesenti Cartae meae Sigillum meum apposui.

Dat' apud Grafton praedictam vicesimo septimo die mensis Januarii, Anno Regni
Regis Henrici Sexti post Conquestum undecimo. Hiis Testibus Johanne Bever,
Johanne Green de Sudburgh, Johanne Duffyn, Roberto Fisher, Petro Andrewe and
multis aliis. seal of Sir John Green SIGILLVM IOHANNIS GRENE



Carta Johannis Green.
NOverint Universi per Praesentes me Johannem Green Armigerum ordinasse,
fecisse and loco meo posuisse Dilectum mihi in Christo Johannem Trayle Clericum
Attornatum meum specialem ad liberandum nomine meo Philippo Morgon Episcopo
Eliensi, Thomae Wydevyll, Willielmo Tresham, Waltero Green, Thomae Cotton,
Roberto Isham, Willielmo Aldwyncle and Johanni Warner plenam and pacificam
seisinam in and de Manerio de Graston in Comitatu Northamptoniae cum omnibus
terris, tenementis, redditibus, reversionibus, servitiis, wardis, maritagiis,
releviis, herietis, escaetis, pratis, pascuis, pasturis, boscis, aquis,
piscariis, una cum advocatione Ecclesiae de Grafton praedicta and omnibus aliis
pertinentiis suis secundum vim, formam and effectum cujusdam Cartae meae
simplicis feodi inde eis confectae: Ratum habiturus and gratum id quod dictus
Attornatus meus nomine meo fecerit in praemissis per Praesentes Sigillo meo
Signatas.

Dat' vicesimo septimo die mensis Januarii Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti post
Conquestum undecimo.
Ultima Voluntas Johannis Green.
IN Dei nomine, Amen. This is the Will of me John Green of Herdwyk Esquire,
made the twenty eight day of January, the eleventh year of King Herry VI. First
I will that Margaret my Wife have the term of her life my Manners of Herdwyk
and Grafton, with the avowson of the Church of Grafton and all the
appurtenances, and with all my Londs, Tenements and Rents with the
appurtenances in Irtlyngburgh in Northhamptonshire; and the Manner of Grateley
with the avowson of the Church and the appurtenances in Hampshire, with the
Manner of Matherne in Wales with the appurtenances: And I will that my Feoffes
anon after my Decease maken sufficient and sure estate to the said Margaret my
Wife of the Manners, Lands, Tenements and Rents abovesaid with avowsons and all
the appurtenances during her life without empeachment of any waste, what time
my said Feoffes or any of them by the said Margaret or by her Council been
required. Also I will that anon after the decease of the said Margaret my Wife,
that the foresaid Manners of Herdwyk and Grafton with the avowson of the
Church of Grafton with all the appurtenances, and with all the said Londs and
Tenements with the Rents and appurtenances in Irtlingburgh, remain to Rauf
Green my Son, and to his Heirs of his body coming, be sufficient and sure
Estate to him by my said Feoffes to be made; and for default of issue of the
body of the said Rauf, the remainder to my right heirs in tail. Also I will
that anon after the decease of the said Margaret, that the foresaid Manners of
Grateley and Matherne with the avowson and appurtenances remain to Herry Green
my Son and to the heirs of his body begotten; and for default of issue of the
body of the said Herry, the remainder to my right heirs in tail. And in case
that anon after the decease of the said Margaret, if the said Herry my Son
desire rather to have the said Manner of Herdwyk than the said Manner of
Grateley, I will that then the said Herry have the said Manner of Herdwyk to
him and to his heirs of his body begotten; and for default of issue of the said
Herry, the remainder to my right heirs in tail be sufficient estate by the said
Feoffes to him to be made. Also I will that then the said Rauf my Son have the
said Manner of Grateley with the avowson and appurtenances to him and to his
heirs in tail; and for default of issue of his body, the remainder to my right
heirs intail be sure and sufficient Estate to him be my said Feoffes to be
made. Also I will that there be rered and sold out of my Woods of Herdwyk and
Grafton to the value of the sum of two hundred pounds to the marriages of
Margery and Isabell my Daughters, even to be departed between them; and if the
tone dye not married, then the the other to have the whole sum of two hundred
pounds, so that they will be married by the counseil and ordinance of the said
Margaret my Wife, Thomas Wydevyll, William Tresham, Walter Green and William
Aldwyncle. Also I will that Margaret my Wife, Thomas Wydevill, William Tresham,
Walter Green and William Aldwyncle have the governance, ordinance and
oversight of the sale of the said woods for the said sum to be rered. And
after that sum so rered, I will that the said Magaret my Wife have all the
remainant of the said woods to her awn use, to fell it down, and do therewith
what she will, without peachment of waste. Also I will that the said Margaret
have the keeping, cost and charge of my said Daughters till time that they be
married. Also I will that the said Margaret my Wife have her Dowry of all my
Manners, Londs, Tenements and Rents, with all the appurtenances in Wiltshire.
Moreover in case that my Sister my Lady Felbrigg dye, mine heir being within
age, I will that then William Aldwyncle and William Marshall Clerk, Feoffes of
the Manners, Londs and Tenements, with appurtenances that shall fall to me and
to mine heirs, after the decease of my said Lady Felbrigg, do rere and gather
up yearly, all the Rents and profits coming of the said Manners, Londs and
Tenements to the marriages of my said Daughters, till the time that mine heir
be of age. And furthermore I charge mine heir by my blessing, that he let none
this Will to be performed, nor be not against it, in no manner or wise. And if
mine heir will let this Will or do the contrary there against, in any manner or
degree, I will that then my said Feoffes hold and keep, in their own hands and
possession, all the said Manners, Londs, Tenements and Rents with all the
appurtenances, to dispose them for my soul, and for the souls of my auncesters,
after their discretions. And moreover I will that Margaret my Wife have all my
goods moveable and unmovable to her own profit and disposition at her own list.

HENRY GREEN, third of that name, Lord of Drayton and other Lands and
Lordships.
Doctor Fuller's History of the Worthies of England, Page 296.
HENRY Green of Drayton, who gave for his Arms, Argent a Cross Engrailed
Gules, was High Sheriff of the County of Northampton in the twenty third of
Henry VI. and again in the fourth year of Edward IV.

Carta Henrici Green.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens Scriptum indentatum pervenerit,
Henricus Green Armiger, Willielmus Aldwyncle and Galfridus de Sancto Germano
de Broughton
Salutem.
Cum Domina Katherina Felbrigg nuper uxor Radulphi Green de Drayton in Comitatu
Northamptoniae Armigeri, Willielmus Yelverton unus Justiciarius Domini Regis,
Nicolaus Appylyerd and Johannes Dam habeant and teneant Maneria de Buckworth in
Comitatu Huntingtoniae, Manerium de Emberton in Comitatu Cantabrigiae, Manerium
de Alba Rothyng in Comitatu Essexiae, Maneria de Chalton and Culworth cum
redditibus in Farendysh in Comitatu Bedfordiae, Manerium de Wabenden vocatum
Greenes Manner, Manerium de Wolfton and Manerium de Emberton in Comitatu
Buckinghamiae cum pertinentiis ad terminum vitae dictae Katherinae, Reversione
inde Nobis praefatis Henrico, Willielmo Aldwyncle and Galfrido spectante:
Noveritis nos praefatos Henricum, Willielmum Aldwyncle and Galfridum statum and
possessionem praedictae Dominae Katherinae, Willielmi Yelverton, Nicolai and
Johannis Dam de and in omnibus and singulis Maneriis supradictis cum
pertinentiis ratificasse, approbasse and tenore praesentium confirmasse:
Habenda and tenenda eadem Maneria cum omnibus and singulis eorum pertinentiis
praefatis Dominae Katherinae, Willielmo Yelverton, Nicolao and Johanni Dam ad
terminum vitae dictae Katherinae. Et ulterius concessimus pro Nobis and
haeredibus nostris praedictae Dominae Katherinae, Willielmo Yelverton, Nicolao
and Johanni Dam quod pro aliquo vasto in aliquo Manerio Maneriorum praedictorum
faciendo usque ad summam quadraginta solidorum de caetero non impetantur,
graventur nec molestentur. Et insuper noveritis Nos praefatum Henricum,
Willielmum Aldwyncle and Galfridum concessisse antedictis Dominae Katherinae,
Willielmo Yelverton, Nicolao and Johanni quod been licebit eisdem Dominae
Katherinae, Willielmo Yelverton, Nicolao and Johanni durante vita dictae
Katherinae prostituere maeremium ad reparandum Maneria praedicta and tenementa
eisdem Maneriis pertinentia; Necnon subboscum, Wrangles and Sheredelbode pro
clausuris in Maneriis praedictis fiendis, and pro focali suo ibidem ardendo
prostituere and succidere absque impetitione vasti inde per Nos vel haeredes
nostros vel per aliquos nostrum versus ipsam Dominam Katherinam, Willielmum
Yelverton, Nicolaum and Johannem prosequenda. Ac insuper Noveritis Nos
praefatum Henricum, Willielmum Aldwyncle and Galfridum remisisse, relaxasse and
omnino pro Nobis and haeredibus nostris imperpetuum quietum clamasse praefatis
Dominae Katherinae, Willielmo Yelverton, Nicolao and Johanni omnimodas actiones
reales and personales ratione alicujus vasti ante datum praesentium facti, quas
versus ipsos Dominam Katherinam, Willielmum Yelverton, Nicolaum and Johannem
unquam habuimus, habemus seu quovismodo habere poterimus in futurum a principio
mundi usque in diem Confectionis praesentium. In cujus rei testimonium uni
parti hujus Scripti indentati penes praefatam Dominam Katherinam, Willielmum
Yelverton, Nicolaum and Johannem remanenti, Nos praedicti Henricus, Willielmus
Aldwyncle and Galfridus Sigilla nostra apposuimus; Alteri vero parti ejusdem
Scripti indentati penes Nos residenti dicta Domina Katherina, Willielmus
Yelverton, Nicolaus and Johannes Dam Sigilla sua apposuerunt.

Dat' septimo die Maii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti post Conquestum
tricesimo primo. Froddesham.

Carta Henrici Green.
TO all manner of men to whom this Writing may come, be it known, where before
this time that William Aldwincle Esquire has enfeffed Master Walter Dove and
other in two Assartes called Langhill and Ferthingeshaw in the County of
Northampton to the use of the same William, to have and to hold to them and to
their heirs for evermore; And now on late time the said Master Walter and other
Feffees of the said William by the desire and agreement of the same William
have made a state of the said two Assartes to William Lord Lovell Knight and
other to the use of Henry Green Esquire, to have and to hold, to them and to
their heirs for evermore: Also that where before this time that the same Henry
has enfeffed the said William Aldwyncle in his Manner of Luffwick, with all
his other Lands, Tenements and their appurtenances in Luffwyck, to have and to
hold them to him for term of his life, the remainder of them to William Lucy
Knight and others, to them and to their heirs for evermore, to the use of the
said Henry; And afterward the said William Aldwyncle, at the desire of the said
Henry, surrendered all his Estate and released all right and claim that he had
in the same Manner, Lands and Tenements with their appurtenances to the said
William Lucy and other Feffees to the said Henry: Nevertheless, I the said
Henry grant to the said William Aldwyncle the said two Assartes for term of his
life without impeachment of any waste, and the said Manner, Lands and Tenements
with their appurtenances for term of his life; and over that I pray and require
as well my said Feffees that now be in the said Manner, Lands, Tenements and
Assartes, and over each of them as any other that shall be hereafter to the use
of me or my heirs, to make a state to the said William Aldwyncle in the said
Manner, Lands, Tenements and Assartes with their appurtenance for the term of
his life in the form abovesaid at such time reasonable as he shall desire of
them so to do. In witness hereof I the same Henry set to the Seal of my Arms.

Given the tenth day of October the year of King Henry the VI. after the
Conquest the three and thirtieth.
Carta Regis Henrici Sexti.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae,
omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint
Salutem.
Sciatis quod de gratia Nostra speciali and ex certa scientia and mero motu
nostris pardonavimus, remisimus and relaxavimus Henrico Green Armigero, alias
dicto Henrico Green Armigero filio and haeredi Johannis Green, alias dicto
Henrico Green Armigero Consanguineo and haeredi Radulphi Green, alias dicto
Henrico Green nuper Vicecomiti Northamptoniae, seu quocunque alio nomine
censeatur, omnimodas transgressiones, offensas, misprisiones, contemptus and
impetitiones per ipsum Henricum ante nonum diem Julii ultimo praeteritum contra
formam statutorum de libertatibus pannorum and capitiorum factos sive
perpetratos unde punitio caderet in demandam, debitum, seu in finem,
redemptionem, aut in alias poenas pecuniarias, seu imprisonamenta, statutis
praedictis non obstantibus. Et insuper ex motu and scientia nostris praedictis
pardonavimus, remisimus and relaxavimus eidem Henrico sectam pacis, nostrae
quae ad Nos versus ipsum pertinet pro omnimodis proditionibus, murdris,
raptibus mulierum, rebellionibus, insurrectionibus, feloniis, conspirationibus,
Cambipartiis, manutenentiis and imbraciariis, ac aliis transgressionibus,
negligentiis, offensis, extortionibus, misprisionibus, ignorantiis,
contemptibus, concelamentis, forisfacturis and deceptionibus per ipsum Henricum
ante dictum nonum diem Julii qualitercunque factis sive perpetratis, ac etiam
Utlagarias si quae in ipsum Henricum hiis occasionibus seu earum aliqua fuerint
promulgatae, and firmam pacem nostram ei inde concedimus: Ita tamen quod stet
rectus in Curia nostra si qui versus eum loqui voluerint de praemissis vel
aliquo praemissorum. Et ulterius pardonavimus, remisimus and relaxavimus eidem
Henrico omnimoda Escapia felonum, Catalla felonum and fugitivorum, Catalla
Utlagatorum and felonum de se, deodanda, vasta, impetitiones ac omnimodos
articulos itineris, destructiones and transgressiones de viridi vel venatione,
venditiones boscorum infra forestas and extra, and aliarum rerum quarumcunque
ante dictum nonum diem Julii infra Regnum nostrum Angliae and Marchias Walliae
eventa and evenientia, Unde punitio caderet in demandam, debitum, seu in finem
and redemptionem aut in alias poenas pecuniarias, seu in forisfacturas bonorum
and catallorum, aut imprisonamenta seu amerciamenta Comitatuum villarum vel
singularium personarum, vel in onerationem liberi tenementi eorum qui nunquam
transgressi fuerunt, ut haeredum, executorum vel terrae tenentium, Escaetorum,
Vicecomitum, Coronatorum and aliorum hujusmodi, and omne id quod ad Nos versus
ipsum Henricum pertinet seu pertinere poterit ex causis supradictis. Ac etiam
pardonavimus, remisimus and relaxavimus eidem Henrico omnimodas donationes,
alienationes and perquisitiones per ipsum de terris and tenementis de Nobis vel
progenitoribus nostris quondam Regibus Angliae in Capite tentis, ac etiam
omnimodas donationes and perquisitiones ad manum mortuam factas and habitas
absque licentia Regia, Necnon omnimodas inquisitiones and ingressus in
haereditatem suam in part vel in toto post mortem Antecessorum suorum absque
debita prosecutione ejusdem extra manum regiam ante eundem nonum diem Julii
factos, una cum exitibus and proficuis inde medio tempore perceptis. Et insuper
pardonavimus, remisimus and relaxavimus eidem Henrico omnimodas poenas ante
dictum nonum diem Julii forisfactas coram Nobis seu Concilio nostro,
Cancellario, Thesaurario seu aliquo Judicum nostrorum pro aliqua causa, and
omnes alias poenas tam Nobis quam carissimo nostro Patri defuncto per ipsum
Henricum pro aliqua causa ante eundum nonum diem Julii forisfactas, and ad opus
nostrum levandas, ac omnimodas securitates pacis ante eundem nonum diem Julii
similiter forisfactas, ac etiam tertias and tertiarum tertias omnimodorum
prisonariorum in guerra captorum Nobis dicto nono die Julii qualitercunque
debitas, pertinentes seu spectantes per eundem Henricum; Necnon omnimodas
transgressiones, offensas, misprisiones, contemptus and impetitiones per ipsum
Henricum ante eundem nonum diem Julii contra formam tam quorumcunque
statutorum, ordinationum and provisionum ante dictum nonum diem Julii factorum
seu editorum de perquisitionibus, acceptationibus, lectionibus,
publicationibus, notificationibus and executionibus quibuscunque, quarumcunque
literarum and bullarum Apostolicarum ante dictum nonum diem Julii and omnium
aliorum statutorum, ordinationum and provisionum, praetextu quorum aliqua secta
versus eundem Henricum per billam vel per breve de praemunire facta seu alio
modo quocunque pro aliqua materia ante eundem nonum diem Julii fieri valeat,
quam quorumcunque aliorum statutorum fact' sive perpetrat', statutis,
ordinationibus and provisionibus illis non obstantibus, literis and bullis de
exemptionibus duntaxat exceptis. Ac etiam pardonavimus, remisimus and
relaxavimus eidem Henrico omnimodos fines adjudicatos, amerciamenta, exitus
forisfactos, relevia, scutagia, ac omnimoda debita, compota praestita and
arreragia firmarum and compotorum Nobis ante octavum diem Julii Anno Regni
nostri vicesimo sexto qualitercunque debita and pertinentia; Necnon omnimodas
actiones and demandas quas Nos solus vel Nos conjunctim cum aliis personis vel
alia persona habemus seu habere poterimus versus ipsum Henricum pro aliquibus
hujusmodi finibus, amerciamentis, exitibus, releviis, scutagiis, debitis,
compotis praestitis and arreragiis ante eundem octavum diem Julii Nobis
debitis, ac etiam Utlagariis in ipsum Henricum promulgatis pro aliqua causarum
supradictarum, omnimodis debitis and compotis Nobis debitis and pertinentibus
quae vigore literarum nostrarum Patentium seu brevium nostrorum de magno vel
privato Sigillo aut per estallamenta sive assignationes respectuata existunt
omnino exceptis. Et quod praesens pardonatio nostra quoad praemissa seu aliquod
praemissorum non cedat in dampnum, praejudicium vel derogationem alicujus
alterius personae quam personae nostrae duntaxat, nec quod praesens pardonatio
nostra nec aliqua hujusmodi pardonatio nostra ad aliquos magnos computantes
nostros qui nunc sunt vel qui nuper fuerunt, videlicet ad Thesaurarium Cales
and Hospitii nostri, Vitellarios Cales, Camerarios Cestriae, North Walliae and
South Walliae, Custodes Gardrobae, Hospitii nostri aut Custodes magnae
Gardrobae nostrae, aut Custodes sive Clericos operationum nostrarum,
Constabularios, Burdegales, Thesaurarium terrae nostrae Hiberniae, and
receptores Ducatus nostri Lancastriae and Ducatus nostri Cornubiae tam
generales quam particulares quo ad aliqua hujusmodi officia sua seu hujusmodi
occupationes suas aut alicujus earundem tangentia ullo modo se extendat. In
cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium quarto decimo die Octobris Anno Regni nostri
tricesimo quarto. Kirkeham.
Per ipsum Regem.



Indentura inter Ducem Buckinghamiae and Henricum Green pro maritagia
Constanciae filiae praedicti Henrici.
THIS Indenture made the nineteenth day of January in the year of the Reign of
King Henry the Sixth, after the Conquest the six and thirtieth, between the
high and mighty Prince Humfrey Duc of Buks on that oon party and Henry Green
Squire on that other party Witnesses, That it is accorded and agreed between
the said parties in the form that follows, that is, to wite, That John, oon
of the Sons of the said Duc, shall by the grace of God wedde and take to wife
Constance Daughter and heir apparent to the said Henry Green; before the fest
of Lammasse next coming, and the said Constance shall take to Husband the said
John before the same fest, and the said Duc shall bear all the costs of the
same Marriage. And the said Duc grants by these presents for the said marriage
to be had in the form aforesaid, that he shall make, or do to be made before
the fest of the Nativite of Saint John Baptiste next coming to William Katesby
Knight, Henry Green, Squire, Thomas Littilton, Thomas Bylling Serjaunts of
Law, Thomas Wake Squire, Robert Tanfeld and William Cumberford, a sufficient
and lawful Estate in and of Manoirs, Londs and Tenements, to the yearly value
of four hundred marks over all manner, charges, and repryses, the ordinary
charges of ordinary officers only except, to have to theyme and to their
heirs for evermore. And the said Duc and my Lady his wife shall before the said
fest of Saint John, by Fine to be rered in the Kings Court, at the costs of
the said Duc between theyme and the said William Catesby, Henry Green, Thomas
Littilton, Thomas Billyng, Thomas Wake, Robert Tanfeld and William Cumberford
beying seized of the same Manoirs, Londs and Tenements before the said
feoffament made to theyme, knowlage the same Monoirs, Londs and Tenements to be
the right of the said William Catesby, as tho that the same William, Henry,
Thomas, Thomas, Thomas, Robert and William have of the yeft of the said Duc and
my Lady his wife: And the same Duc, and my Lady, and the heirs of my said Lady,
shall warant the said Manoirs, Londs and Tenements to the said William, Henry,
Thomas, Thomas, Thomas, Robert and William and to the heirs of the said Willam
Catesby for evermore.

Item, The said Duc shall do and cause Humfrey his son and heir apparaunt
by his deed sufficient in Law enrolled in the Kings Court of Record to ratefye
and confirm the state of the said William Catesby, Henry Green, Thomas
Littilton, Thomas Billyng, Thomas Wake, Robert Tanfeld and William Cumberford,
and to the heirs of oon of theyme according to the said fine of and in the
Londs and Tenements comprised in the same fine, with a clause of Warantie
according to the same.

Item, The said William Catesby, Henry Green, Thomas Littilton, Thomas
Billyng, Thomas Wake, Robert Tanfeld and William Cumberford so being seized of
the said Manoirs, Londs and Tenements shall grant sufficiently by their deed
to such persons as the said Henry Green shall name, an annuyte of three
hundred marks goying out of all the said Londs and Tenements to be perceyved
for term of the lyfes of Margaret wife to the said Henry, John and Constance
and everyche of theyme longest lyvyng, the same annuyte to begin to be
levable at such times as the same John and Constance, or outher of theyme, or
any outher by the sturringe, excitation, or commandemente of theyme, or of
outher of theyme during the life of the said John, or else the said Constance
after the decesse of the said John being not relyvered to her said Fader as is
hereafter written, disturb, or interrupte in any wise, after the death of the
said Henry, the Estates made or to be made by the said Henry, or by other at
his desire, to the said Margaret his wife, or to other his servants, for term
of their lyfes of three hundred marks worth land by year, beneth excepted, or
any part thereof, or else disturb or interrupte the last will of the said
Henry to be made by hyme of Londs by hyme purchased, or to be purchased, or of
his movable goods; and if noe such disturbance or interruption be, the said
grant to be void.

Item, The said William Catesby, Henry Green, Thomas Littilton, Thomas
Billyng, Thomas Wake, Robert Tanfeld and William Cumberford so being seized of
the said Manoirs, Londs and Tenements after the said grant of Annuyte and
within three months after the said marriage had, shall make Estate by deed
endented of all the said Manoirs, Londs and Tenements to the said Duc, to have
to him for term of his life, without impechment of waste; the remayndre
thereof after his decesse to the said John and Constance, and to the heirs of
their two bodies begotyn, the remayndre thereof, for defaute of such heirs,
to the right heirs of the said Duc.

Item, Hit is agreed and accorded between the said parties, that the said Duc
and my Lady his wife, shall have the rule and governaunce of the said Constance
after the said marriage had, duringe the spousel between the said John and
Constance, and find her at the costs of the same Duc.

Item, The said Henry grants by these Presents, that the said Constance his
Daughter, shall have after his decesse, and after the decesse of such person
or persons as now has, or by the said Henry, or by his Feoffees at his desire
shall have, any Londs or Tenements for term of life, whereof the reversion is
or shall be to the same Henry, or to any other to his use, all the issues and
profits of all the Londs and Tenements that he, or any to his use, has without
diminution or abregement; and the Feoffees in and of the same Londs and
Tenements that now be, or shall be, shall within six months after the death
of the same Henry, make thereof Estate to the said Constance, and to her heirs
if they be thereto required, except that it shall be lawful to the said Henry
to grant, or do to be granted, to Margaret his wife, and to other his
servants, Londs and Tenements of the same to the yearly value of three hundred
marks, to have to theyme only for term of life of theyme that the said
Grauntes shall be made unto, so that the reversion thereof, after the decesse
of the said Henry, and of such persons as the said Grauntes shall be made
unto, shall come to the said Constance and to her heirs; Except also that hit
shall be lawful to the said Henry for to do and aleyne at his will and
pleasure, all such Londs and Tenements as he has purchased before this time,
now being in his hands, or in any other man's to his use; and also all such
Londs and Tenements as he shall purchase hereafter, not being at this day in
his own hands, nor in none other persons to his use; Except also other Londs
and Tenements to the yearly value of two hundred marks, whereof the Feoffees of
the said Henry that now been, or shall be after the decesse of the said Henry,
shall suffer the said John and Constance to take the profits unto the time that
the same John and Constance, or outher of theyme, or any other by their
excitation, sturryng or commandment, let, disturb or interrupte, in any
wise, the Estates made or to be made by the said Henry, or by any other at his
desire to the said Margaret his wife, or to other his servaunts for term of
their lyfes, of the said three hundred marks worth Land above except, or any
part thereof, or else disturb or interrupte the last will of the said Henry
to be made by him of the said Londs by him purchased, or to be purchased, or of
his moveable goods; and if any such disturbaunce or interruption be, then the
said Feoffees shall restreyne the said John and Constance of taking of any
profits of the said two hundred marks worth Land, and shall apply the
profits thereof for the soul hele of the said Henry, or else for
perfourmynge of such will as the said Henry shall thereof declare.

For seen always, that if the said Henry happen hereafter to have any other
issue by the said Margaret his wife, that then all his said Londs and
Tenements, except thereof one hundred pounds worth land by year, and except the
said Londs and Tenements purchased and to be purchased after the form
aforesaid, shall descend or come to such as the Common Law will shall be heir
to the said Henry of the body of the said Margaret begotyn. And the said Henry
grants that if hit happen him hereafter to have issue male by the said
Margaret his wife, that notwithstondyng the said Constance shall have to her
and to her heirs after the death of the said Henry one hundred pounds worth
Londs above except of the said Londs and Tenements. And if hit happen hereafter
the said Henry to have other issue female by the said Margaret, and dye
without issue male begotyn of the body of the same Margaret, then the said
Constance shall have, after the death of the same Henry, one hundred pounds
worth Land by year of the said Londs and Tenements, over such part as should
come to her by the death of the said Henry her Fader, after the course of the
Common Law, and the same Henry shall not hereafter make any will to the
contrary of the premises.

Item, The said Henry grants that he shall be bounden to the said Duc by his
obligation to be enrolled in the Kings Court, at the costs of the said Duc,
in two thousand marks, upon condition to be contained in the same obligation,
that he shall not alien, ne discontynue, ne make to be aliened or discontynued
any Londs or Tenements, which he or any other person or persons to his use
has in demene or reversion, otherwise than is abovesaid, but if hit be to the
entente abovesaid, ne any thing else do or cause to be done touching the said
Londs and Tenements, that shall be in derogation or prejudice of the premises,
or contrary to the entente abovesaid.

Item, The said Duc grants by these presents, that if hit happen hereafter
(as God defend) the said John his Son to dye after the said marriage had
lyvyng the said Duc and Constance, then the said Duc within two months after
the decesse of the said John, shall delyver or do to be delyvered to the said
Henry, or to his Executours, at Milton in the Shire of Northampton, at the
costs of the said Henry or of his Executours, the said Constance unmaried and
unassured of marriage to any other person by the sturryng, procuring, will or
assent of the said Duc; and the same Duc shall do his part for to let the
said Constance to be married, or assured of marriage, to any other person
before the said livere of her made to the said Henry or to his Executours.

Item, The said Duc grants that he shall deliver within a half year after
the said marriage to the said Henry to the use of the said John and Constance,
all the Evidences that the same Duc or any other to his behof has concerning
only the said Londs and Tenements, whereof the same Duc shall make or do to
be made a state to the said William Catesby, Henry Green, Thomas, Thomas,
Thomas, Robert and William Cumberford as is abovesaid; and if any Evidences
there be concerning to the same Londs and Tenements, or any part of theyme and
other Londs and Tenements, that then the said Henry shall have the
Exemplification of theyme at the costs of the said Duc if the said Henry
desire them.

In witness whereof to that one part of these Endentures with the said Duc
remaining the foresaid Henry Green has set his Seall, and to that other
part of the same Endentures with the said Henry remaining, the said Duc has
set his Seall. Yeven the day and year abovesaid.
Ultima Voluntas Henrici Green.
THIS is the Will of me Henry Green Squire, made the third day of September,
the seventh year of the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, upon the Manner of
Sudburgh and all the Londs and Tenements with their appurtenances that been of
my purchase in Sudburgh aforesaid in the Count of Northampton, Thorpe, beside
Petirburgh, Marham, Wittelsey, Southorp and Luffwyck, and of the woods called
Langhyll and Ferthyngshaw in the same Count, and of all other woods wh^che I
bought of William Aldwyncle, and in the hands of diverse persons by Testemen^
made to theyme for mine use, as it appears in several deeds to perform my
will.

Whereupon first I will that my Feoffes of and in my Londs and Tenements in
Thorpe, beside Petirburgh after my decesse make estate of theyme to Margaret my
wife for term of her lyve, the remaindre thereof to Constance my Daughter, to
have to her and to the heirs of her body begotyn, and for defaute of such
issue the remaindre thereof to my right heirs.

Item, I will that my Feoffes of the Londs and Tenements in Wittelsey, Southorp
and Marham of my purchase after my decesse make estate of them to Margaret my
wife for term of her life, the remaindre thereof to Robert Wittelbury and to
the heirs of his body begotyn, and for defaute of such issue the remaindre
thereof to my right heirs.

And I will that my Feoffes of the Londs and Tenements in Luffwyk of my
purchase called Coals, Thing and Befviles Thing after my decesse, make estate
to my Lord John of Buckingham, and to my Lady his wife, and to the heirs
coming betwix theyme, and for defaute of such issue the remaindre thereof to
my right heirs for ever, if my said Lord nor Lady, nor their heirs, nor any
other by theyme procuryng, assentyng, or commandment in any part hereof let
not my will to be performyd, and if they or any of theyme let my said will to
be performyd, then I will that their estate thereyn be void, and that the same
Londs and Tenements be sold and disposed by mine Executours in deeds of Charity.

Item, I will that two Priests shall be made sure, either of them to have
fourtene marks yearly on the charges of my purchased Londs or Rentes,
perpetually to sing in the Parysh Church of Luffwyk, and to do other devyne
service there and pray for the sowles of me and of Sir Henry Green Justice,
and other of mine Auncestres and Benefactors, and all Crystyn sowles. And if
hit shall happyn no such xxiiij marks yearly to be purchesid hereafter be me,
then I will they shall have sewerly to theyme and their successors for
evermore xxiiij marks yearly perpetuelly of my Manner of Sudburgh.

Item, I will that Thomas Haldenby shall have a sufficiant grant of one
annuite of xiiij marks to have to him for term of his life, to be taken of the
revenue of my Manner of Houghton in the Count of Northampton, if he make his
Lettres Patents that he has of like grant by me made to him, to be taken of
the Manners of Hardewyk and Grateley to be surrendid and cancellid, and he to
do like service as is contenyd in his said first Lettres Patentes.

Item, I will that Margaret my wife, after my decesse, have the Maneres of
Buckworth in the Count of Huntyngton, and Herdewyk in the Count of
Northampton with other Londs and Tenements before expressed for term of her
lyve, the remayndre of theyme to my right heirs.

Item, I will that my Feoffees of my Woods and Assartes called Langhill, and
Farthingshaw, and Tolkithorpewoode, after my decesse make a state of my said
Lord John and Dame Constance his wife, my Daughter, and to the heirs of the
body of the same Dame Constance coming, and for defaute of such issue, the
remayndre of theyme to the right heirs of me the said Henry Green.

In witness whereof to these Presents I set the Seal of mine Arms. Yeven the
day and year abovesaid. seal of Sir Henry Green SIGILLVM HENRICI GRENE
ARMIGIRI



Carta Margaretae Relictae Henrici Green.
NOverint Universi per Praesentes me Margaretam quae sui uxor Henrici Green
Armigeri defuncti fecisse, ordinasse and loco meo posuisse Dilectos mihi in
Christo Robertum Wittelbury Armigerum and Jacobum Barlowe meos veros and
legitimos Attornatos conjunctim and divisim ad recipiendum pro me and nomine
meo de Thoma Lenton and Katherina filia Roberti Long consanguinea and haerede
Willielmi Aldwyncle Armigeri defuncti, vel de eorum in hac part Attornatis,
plenam and pacificam possessionem and seisinam de and in Manerio de Comberton
cum suis pertinentiis in Comitatu Cantabrigiae secundum vim, formam and
effectum cujusdam Cartae indentatae per praefatum Thomam and Katherinam mihi
prefatae Margaretae ad terminum vitae meae inde confectae, Ratum and gratum
habens and habitura totum and quicquid praedicti Attornati mei nomine meo
fecerint aut alter eorum fecerit in praemissis. In cujus rei Testimonium
Praesentibus Sigillum meum apposui.

Datum vicesimo sexto die mensis Maii Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Quarti post
Conquestum nono.
The Tomb of Henry Green Lord of Drayton Extant in St. Peter's Church in
Luffwick
tomb of Sir Henry and Constance (nee Poynings) Green
CONSTANCE GREEN, Countess of Wiltshire, Lady of Drayton and other Lands and
Lordships.
Antiquities of Warwickshire, Page 729. Writing of Maxton- Castle.
WITHIN the body thereof is a little Chapel, in which by special dispensation
of Reynold Boaters, then Bishop of this Diocese, was solemnized the Marriages
of John Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury and Katharine Stafford, one of the Daughters
of the said Duke, in the thirty sixth year of King Henry the Sixth; and of John
Stafford one of his younger Sons, after created Earl of Wiltshire, and
Constance the Daughter of Henry Green Esquire.

Baronage of England, Page 174. Stafford Earl of Wiltshire.
IN the ninth of Edward the Fourth, the fifth of January, John Stafford a
younger Son to Humphrey Duke of Buckingham was created Earl of Wiltshire, and
in the twelfth of Edward the Fourth joined in Commission with the Earl of
Northumberland and others, to treat with the Ambassadors of James the third
King of Scotland, upon certain complaints of grievances from each Realm. And
having married Constance the Daughter and heir of Sir Henry Green of Drayton
in the County of Northampton Knight, departed this life the eight of May, the
thirteenth of Edward the Fourth, leaving Edward his Son three years of age,
being then seized jointly with the said Constance of the Manors of Southo in
Com. Hunt. of Newinton-Blosmaville, Clifton and Pollicote in Comitatu Bucks, of
the Manors of Stamford, Rivers, Tracies, Suttons, Piggesland, Bottelles, and
Briggs, in Comitatu Essexiae; Effingham, Shepestead, Tillingdon, Porkley,
Waldingham, Upwoode, Gatyers and Fallingburg, in Comitatu Surriae.

Carta Regis Edwardi Quarti.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae,
omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint Salutem.
Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali and absque fine seu feodo Nobis in
Hanapario Cancellariae nostrae solvendo concessimus and licentiam dedimus pro
Nobis and haeredibus nostris quantum in Nobis est praedilecto Consanguino
nostro Johanni Stafford Militi, filio Humfridi nuper Ducis Buckinghamiae, and
Constanciae uxori ejusdem Johannis, filiae and haeredis Henrici Green Armigeri
defuncti, quod ipsi Manerium de Grafton juxta Gedyngton cum pertinentiis in
Comitatu Northamptoniae, and Manerium de Hardwyke cum pertinentiis in eodem
Comitatu, quae de Nobis tenentur in Capite, ut dicitur, dare possint and
concedere Richardo Heton, Willielmo Comberford, Johanni Jefferey Clerico, and
Olivero Sutton; Habendum and tenendum sibi and haeredibus suis de Nobis and
haeredibus nostris per servitia inde debita and consueta imperpetuum: Ita quod
ipsi habita inde plena and pacifica seisina dictum Manerium de Grafton juxta
Gedyngton cum pertinentiis dare possint and concedere praefatis Johanni
Stafford and Constanciae, Habendum and tenendum sibi and haeredibus ipsius
Constanciae de Nobis and haeredibus nostris praedictis per servitia praedicta
imperpetuum. Et dictum Manerium de Hardewike cum pertinentiis dare possint and
concedere Margaretae quae fuit uxor praedicti Henrici Green Armigeri, Habendum
and tenendum eidem Margaretae pro termino vitae suae de Nobis and haeredibus
nostris per servitia praedicta; Ita quod post mortem ejusdem Margaretae idem
Manerium de Hardewike cum pertinentiis integre remaneat praefato Johanni
Stafford and Constanciae; Habendum and tenendum sibi and haeredibus ipsius
Constanciae de Nobis and haeredibus nostris praedictis per servitia praedicta
imperpetuum. Ac etiam tam eisdem Richardo, Willielmo, Johanni Jefferey and
Olivero, quod ipsi Maneria praedicta cum pertinentiis a praefatis Johanne
Stafford and Constancia recipere possint and tenere sibi and haeredibus suis
praedictis de Nobis and haeredibus nostris praedictis per servitia praedicta
imperpetuum, quam eisdem Johanni Stafford and Constanciae quod ipsi dictum
Manerium de Grafton juxta Gedyngton cum pertinentiis a praefatis Richardo,
Willielmo, Johanne, Jefferey and Olivero similiter recipere possint and tenere
sibi and haeredibus ipsius Constanciae de Nobis and haeredibus nostris
praedictis per servitia praedicta imperpetuum. Ac eidem Margaretae quod ipsa
dictum Manerium de Hardewicke cum pertinentiis a praefatis Richardo, Willielmo,
Johanne, Jefferey and Olivero recipere possit, and tenere sibi pro termino
vitae suae de Nobis and haeredibus nostris praedictis per servitia praedicta;
Ita quod post mortem ejusdem Margaretae idem Manerium de Hardewicke cum
pertinentiis integre remaneat praefatis Johanni Stafford and Constanciae,
Habendem and tenendum sibi and haeredibus ipsius Constanciae de Nobis and
haeredibus nostris praedictis per servitia predicta sicut praedictum est,
imperpetuum, tenore praesentium similiter licentiam dedimus specialem. Nolentes
quod praefati Johannes Stafford and Constancia vel haeredes ipsius Constanciae,
aut praefati Richardus, Willielmus, Johannes Jefferey and Oliverus vel haeredes
sui, aut praefata Margareta per Nos vel haeredes nostros, Justiciarios,
Escaetores, Vicecomites, Coronatores aut alios Ballivos seu Ministros nostros
vel haeredum nostrorum quoscunque ratione praemissorum occasionentur,
molestentur, impetantur in aliquo seu graventur, aut eorum aliquis
occasionetur, molestetur, impetatur in aliquo seu gravetur. In cujus rei
Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium decimo octavo die Maii Anno Regni nostri
nono. Iver. Per breve de privato Sigillo and de data praedicta auctoritate
Parliamenti.

Carta Regis Edwardi Quarti.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae,
Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint Salutem.
Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali and absque fine seu feodo Nobis in
Hanapario Cancellariae nostrae solvendo Concessimus and licentiam dedimus pro
Nobis and haeredibus nostris quantum in Nobis est, Thomae Lenton and Katherinae
filiae Roberti Long Consanguineis and haeredibus Willielmi Aldwyncle Armigeri
defuncti, quod ipsi Manerium de Alba Rothynge cum pertinentiis in Comitatu
Essexiae ac advocationem Ecclesiae de Alba Rothynge quae de Nobis tenetur in
Capite ut dicitur, dare possint and concedere praedilecto Consanguineo nostro
Johanni Stafford Militi, filio Humfridi nuper Ducis Buckinghamiae, and
Constanciae uxori ejusdem Johannis filiae and haeredi Henrici Green Armigeri
desuncti, Habendum and tenendum eisdem Johanni Stafford and Constanciae and
haeredibus ipsius Constanciae de Nobis and haeredibus nostris per servitia inde
debita and consueta imperpetuum. Et quod dicti Thomas and Katherina Manerium de
Comberton cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Cantabrigiae quod de Nobis similiter
tenetur in Capite ut dicitur, dare possint and concedere Margaretae quae fuit
uxor praedicti Henrici Green Armigeri, Habendum and tenendum eidem Margaretae
pro termino vitae suae de Nobis and haeredibus nostris praedictis per servitia
praedicta; Ita quod post mortem ejusdem Margaretae idem Manerium de Comberton
cum pertinentiis integre remaneat praefatis Johanni Stafford and Constanciae,
Habendum and tenendum sibi and haeredibus ipsius Constanciae de Nobis and
haeredibus nostris per servitia praedicta imperpetuum. Et tam eisdem Johanni
Stafford and Constanciae, quod ipsi dictum Manerium de Alba Rothynge cum
pertinentiis ac dictam advocationem Ecclesiae de Alba Rothynge a praedictis
Thoma and Katherina recipere possint and tenere sibi and haeredibus ipsius
Constanciae de Nobis and haeredibus nostris praedictis per servitia praedicta
imperpetuum, quam eidem Margaretae, quod ipsa dictum Manerium de Comberton cum
pertinentiis a praefatis Thoma and Katherina recipere possit and tenere sibi
pro termino vitae suae de Nobis and haeredibus nostris praedictis per servitia
praedicta; Ita quod post mortem ejusdem Margaretae idem Manerium de Comberton
cum pertinentiis integre remaneat praefatis Johanni Stafford and Constanciae,
Habendum and tenendum sibi and haeredibus ipsius Constanciae de Nobis and
haeredibus nostris praedictis per servitia praedicta sicut praedictum est,
imperpetuum, tenore praesentium similiter licentiam dedimus specialem: Nolentes
quod praefati Thomas and Katherina vel haeredes sui, aut praefati Johannes
Stafford and Constancia vel haeredes ipsius Constanciae, aut praefata Margareta
per Nos vel haeredes nostros, Justiciarios, Escaetores, Vicecomites,
Coronatores aut alios Ballivos seu Ministros nostros quoscunque ratione
praemissorum occasionentur, molestentur, impetantur in aliquo seu, graventur,
aut eorum aliquis occasionetur, molestetur, impetatur in aliquo, seu gravetur.
In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium decimo octavo die Maii Anno Regni nostri
nono. Iver. Per breve de privato Sigillo and de data praedicta auctoritate
Parliamenti.

Carta Thomae Lenton and Katherinae filiae Roberti Long.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Nos Thomas Lenton and Katherina filia
Roberti Long Consanguinea and haeres Willielmi Aldwyncle Armigeri defuncti, de
licentia Domini nostri Regis Edwardi Quarti per Literas suas Patentes concessa,
tradidimus, dimisimus and hac praesenti Carta nostra confirmavimus Johanni
Stafford Militi filio Humfridi nuper Ducis Buckinghamiae, and Constanciae uxori
ejusdem Johannis filiae and haeredis Henrici Green Armigeri defuncti, Manerium
de Alba Rothynge cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Essexiae ac advocationem
Ecclesiae de Alba Rothynge praedicta, Habendum and tenendum eisdem Johanni
Stafford and Constanciae and haeredibus ipsius Constanciae de dicto Domino Rege
and haeredibus suis per servitia inde debita and de jure consuera imperpetuum.
Fecimus etiam and constituimus dilectos Nobis in Christo Willielmum Warner and
Johannem Gissynge nostros veros and legitimos Attornatos conjunctim and divisim
ad deliberandum pro Nobis and nominibus nostris praefatis Johanni Stafford and
Constanciae vel eorum in hac part Attornato plenam and pacificam possessionem
and seisinam de and in Manerio ac advocatione praedictis cum suis pertinentiis
secundum vim, formam and effectum istius Cartae nostrae, Ratum and gratum
habentes and habituri totum and quicquid praedicti Attornati nostri fecerint
aut eorum alter fecerit in praemissis. In cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti
Cartae nostrae Sigilla nostra apposuimus, Hiis Testibus, Thoma Tyrell,
Willielmo Tyrell seniore, Willielmo Tyrell juniore, Militibus; Waltero Writell
Armigero, and multis aliis.

Dat' vicesimo sexto die mensis Maii, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Quarti
supradicti post Conquestum nono.
Ultima Voluntas Johannis Comitis Wilts
IN the name of God Amen. The one and twentyeth day of the month of April, the
year of our Lord God one thousand four hundred seaventy and three, I John Earl
of Wyltshyre, of holle mind and in good memory, bequeth my soul to Allmithi
Good my Creatur and Savior, to our Lady Saint Mary and to all the Holy Saints
in Heven, and my body to be beried in the Colage of Plassy, in the midell Arch.
And I will that mine Executors cause a convenient Tomb there to be made for me
of marble plain, with an image gilte like a Knight of the Garter thereupon,
with such Arms as I bear by mine Auncestres. Also I will that twelve marks of
the Manoir of Grimmisbry in the Count of Bedford be disposed unto a Pressed,
perpetually to sing for my soul within the said Colage of Plassy, chargyng on
Gods behalf, the Master there now being, or any other that hereafter shall
be, that they and ever ich of them chese allway a good and able Pressed to be
bounden to the service and customs of the same Colage as largely in all
things as any Fellow of the same been. Also I will that my servant Edward
Mandeby have forty shillings yearly during his life of the said Manoir of
Grimmesbry. And I will that my said Manoir the residue hereof yearly be
disposed to a poor man, to pray for me within the said Parish of Plassy. And
with the residue over that, if any be, I will yearly to be disposed for mine
obite. And also I will that the land I purchased of William Heton, the which
joyneth unto my Lordship of Newenton, remain unto my Son and heir, that it
be not put from the Lordship of Newenton, in recompense of the Lordship of
Gretwell in Lyncolnshire; and I have put in exchaunging for this, Lislode and
other. Also I will that all such plate as I had by wife, remain still again to
the use of her and my Son and hers. And as for the two gilte potis, six new
bollis gylte, two gylte basynnes that I bought, and a gylte cup being in the
kepeing of Oliver Sutton, with all other plate that is mine undisposed, be sold
to the most avayle, and with the money thereof coming my depts to be paid. And
I bequeth to my Sister of Shrewsbury two gilte Saltes that I bought. For all
such stuff as I bought my self, beding or any other thing, be at the
disposition of my Executors; so all that comen by my Fader-in-Law and my wife
remain still to the use of my said wife term of her life, and after to my
Son and heir. And I bequeth unto Berushaw my manne and servant, my long
black Gown furryed with blake lamb, and three pounds six shillings eight
pence in money; and I beseech my Lady my Mother to be his good Lady, and that
it will please her to take him to service. Also I bequeth unto the Parish
Church of Luffwyk an hole Gown of blake velvet. And I bequeth the Gowns of
silk unto the Colage of Plassy. Also bequeth my gray Coarser and Alisaunder my
henchman unto my Lord my Nevue. And as for my blake coarser I bequeath him unto
my Lady my Mother. And if it please the Kings good grace for all the true
service that ever I did him, I desire that my Lady my Mother may have the
keeping of my said Son, and I beseech the Kings good grace that my said
Son be never married under the estate of a Baron. Also I bequeth unto Thomas
Cheney the next bay coarser after my Lady my Mother have chosen. Also I will
pray William Merbury to be attendaunt unto my Son, and he to have rule about
him. Also I bequeth unto my Mother-in-law the cope that I had of my Sister
Veere. Also I bequeth unto Anne Wittelbury the cheyne of Gold that Cornish
has in pleage. Also I bequeth unto every Gentylman and Gentylwoman whit in my
howsehold five marks of money, and to every Yoman twenty shillings, to every
Groom thirteen shillinges four pence, and to every Page three shillings four
pence. Also I bequeth unto Bertelmew Chesnale my bay Geldynge. And I will that
all my detts which I owe to any person of right be duly and truly paid, of the
which I have put a great part to my knowlage in a bill hereunto annexid.
And if my detts may be paid of mine own goods by the mean of mine Executors
without the sale of my Manoir of Babenho, Then I will that the revenues and
profits of the said Manoir with the appurtenancas be left in the rule of mine
Executors to such time as my detts be paid; And that so done, I will that
the revenues and profits of the said Manoir with the appurtenaunces yearly
remain to the rule of my said Executors to the use and profit of my son and
heir during the time and space of his nonage; And than the said Manoir with
the appurtenaunces be delivered to my son and heir, and to the right heirs
of his body lawfully coming; And for lak of such issue to my Nevue Thomas
Talbot and to the heirs of his body lawfully coming; And for lak of such issue,
the remayner to my Lord, my Nevue of Buckingham, and to the right heirs of
him. And whereas any manner of dett or dute is owyng to me by obligation or
otherwise, with all such arrerages as be behind due to me of all my Lyflode or
possessions with all such issues and profits and revenues as is grown of
lyvelode of this Ester Term last paste, I will it be gadered and levied by
mine Executors to the performyng of my Will, and it for to be disposid for me
as theyme think it best. And the residue all my Goods and Catalles moveable,
wheresoever they be, after my Fynurell expenses and all costs and charges
performed and done, and all my bequstes within written well and trewly done and
fulfyllyd, I give then to the discretion of mine Executors to be done for me as
theyme seems best and most health of my soul. And of this my present Testament
I make and ordeyne mine Executors, that is to say, the most Reverent Fader in
God my Lord Cardenall, and my most interest beloved Lady and Mother my cheff
Executors; my Fader Walter, my Lord Mountjoy, the Master of the Colage of
Foderingham, Master John Geoffrey, Oliver Sutton, William Merbury and Rauf
Tykhull.

Indentura facta inter Constanciam Comitissam de Wilts and Thomam Billing
Capitalem Justiciar. Dom. Regis ad Placita, etc. and alios, facta.
HAEC Indentura facta inter Constanciam Comitissam Wilts ex part una and
Thomam Billing Capitalem Justiciarium Domini Regis ad Placita coram ipso Rege
tenenda, Richardum Tunstall Militem, Willielmum Catesby Militem, Johannem
Catesby Servientem Domini Regis ad legem, Nicolaum Griffen Armigerum, Robertum
Wittelbury Armigerum, Willielmum Catesby Armigerum, Thomam Merys Armigerum,
Richardum Welby, Thomam Babyngton, Oliverum Sutton and Simonem Burton ex part
altera testatur, Quod praefata Comitissa tradidit and ad firmam dimisit
praefatis Thomae, Richardo, Willielmo, Johanni, Nicolao, Roberto, Willielmo,
Thomae, Richardo, Thomae, Olivero and Simoni Manerium suum de Alba Rothynge cum
pertinentiis in Comitatu Essexiae una cum advocatione Ecclesiae ejusdem,
Manerium de Grafton juxta Warton cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Northamptoniae
una cum advocatione Ecclesiae ejusdem, Maneria de Warminster, Westbury and
Dycherigge cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Wilts, Habenda and tenenda praedicta
Maneria cum omnibus and singulis eorum pertinentiis una cum advocationibus
Ecclesiarum praedictarum praedictis Thomae, Richardo, Willielmo, Johanni,
Nicolao, Roberto, Willielmo, Thomae, Richardo, Thomae, Olivero and Simoni and
assignatis suis a festo Sancti Michaelis Archangeli ultimo praeterito ante
datum praesentium usque ad finem and terminum septem annorum extunc proxime
sequentium and plenarie completorum, Reddendo inde praefatae Comitissae vel
Assignatis suis centum and viginti libras legalis monetae Angliae annuatim
durante termino praedicto ad duos anni terminos, videlicet, ad festa Paschae
and Sancti Michaelis Archangeli per aequales portiones. Et si contingat dictam
annuam firmam centum and viginti librarum aretro fore in part vel in toto post
aliquod festum festorum praedictorum quo solvi debeat per sex septimanas, tunc
been liceat and licebit praedictae Comitissae and assignatis suis in omnibus
praedictis Maneriis cum omnibus and singulis eorum pertinentiis and in qualibet
parcella eorundem distringere and districtiones sic captas licite abducere,
effugare, asportare and penes se retinere quousque de praedicto annuali redditu
una cum arreragiis si quae fuerint, plenarie sibi fuerit satisfactum and
persolutum. In cujus rei Testimonium tam praefata Comitissa quam praefati
Thomas, Richardus, Willielmus, Johannes, Nicolaus, Robertus, Willielmus,
Thomas, Richardus, Thomas, Oliverus and Simon praesentibus Indenturis Sigilla
sua alternatim apponi fecerunt.

Dat' vicesimo die Martii Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Quarti post Conquestum
quarto decimo.
EDWARD STAFFORD Earl of Wiltshire, Lord of Drayton and other Lands and
Lordships.
Among the Evidences of the Earl of Peterborow.
MEmorandum, That in the sixth year of the Reign of our Sovereigne Lord King
Henry the Seventh, the Tennants and Inhabitants of Luffwycke and Sudburgh were
in variance, strife, and debate for the occupation of Luffwyke Leyse perteynyng
to Luffwycke, and for the occupation of Brigsyleyes perteyning to Sudburgh,
insomuch that the Tennants and Inhabitants of Luffwycke did impounde a flock of
Sheep of Sudburgh, sayeing, that they had noe Common of their Leyse: And in
like wise the Tennants and Inhabitants of Sudburgh did impounde a flock of
Sheep of Luffwycke, sayeing, that they had noe Common of their said
Brigsyleyes. And for as much as the Earl of Wiltes was chief Lord of both
the Lordships, the Inhabitants of both Towns sued to him and his Council for
reformation and pacefyeing of the said variance, strife, and debate. And when
he had heard their request, he said to them, that he would by the advice of his
Council take a good and an indifferent direction and order betwixt the said
parties. And then he commanded his Council to go to the said Leyes in
variance, and call before them the Inhabitants of both Towns, and view the
ground and set such directions betwixt the said Inhabitants of both Towns,
that there should be noe more variance for Common of the said Leyes after that
time. The which Councellers took a direction, that the Tennants of Luffwycke
should have and occupy their own Leyes in peace without disturbance or claim
of Common of the Tennants of Sudburgh; And in like wise the Tennants of
Sudburgh should have and occupy the said Brigsyleyes in peace without
disturbance or claim of Common of the Tennants of Luffwycke. And over that
they said, Ye been all my Lords Tennants, and it is his pleasure that ye
shall live in rest, as good neighbors should do. And after the said order and
direction it have been used and kept from the said sixth year till Midsommer
now last past.

Carta Edwardi Comitis Wilts.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Edwardus Comes Wilts dedi and concessi
and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Roberto Wittelbury Armigero, Willielmo
Marbury Armigero, Willielmo Field Clerico, Roberto Bayston Clerico, Thomae
Montegu and Johanni Freeman Maneria mea de Nauseby Church, Brampton, Houghton
magna, Hakelton, Pedyngton, Luffwyck, Islip, Sudburgh, Lenden, Haringworth,
Raundes, Stanwycke, Ringstede, Aldwyncle cum pertinentiis in Comitatu
Northamptoniae, Southo cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Huntingtoniae, Neuton,
Blosmevile, Clyfton, Reins, Policote, Wanden, Emberton, Wolston magna cum
pertinentiis in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, Grimmesbury, Bakenho, Chalton cum
pertinentiis in Comitatu Bedfordiae, Suttons, Piggeslonde, Bryggelonde,
Tracyes, Stamford Ryvers cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Essexiae, Chypstede,
Waldingham, Effingham cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Surriae, Warminstre,
Westbury, Grateley, Dychirche cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Wiltoniae, cum
advocationibus Ecclesiarum, Capellarum and Cantariarum eisdem Maneriis and
eorum cuilibet pertinentibus; ac etiam omnia alia terras and tenementa,
redditus, reversiones and proficua, advocationes Ecclesiarum and haereditamenta
quaecunque cum pertinentiis in Comitatibus praedictis quae nuper fuerunt
Johannis nuper Comitis Wilts sive Constanciae nuper uxoris ipsius Comitis, vel
aliquorum aliorum ad eorum sive eorum alterius usum in Comitatibus praedictis,
ac omnia terras, and tenementa mea in Comitatibus praedictis; Exceptis omnibus
illis terris and tenementis in eisdem Comitatibus cum pertinentiis quae de
Domino Rege immediate tenentur in Capite: Habenda and tenenda omnia praedicta
Maneria, terras and tenementa, redditus, reversiones and proficua cum omnibus
suis pertinentiis in Comitatibus praedictis (exceptis praeexceptis) praefato
Roberto Wittelbury, Willielmo Field, Roberto Bayston, Thomae Montegu and
Johanni Freeman, haeredibus and assignatis suis imperpetuum ad usum mei
praefati Comitis and haeredum meorum de Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius per
servitia inde debita and de jure consueta. Et Ego vero praedictus Comes and
haeredes mei omnia praedicta Maneria, terras and tenementa, redditus,
reversiones and proficua cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, advocationes
Ecclesiarum and haereditamenta supradicta cum omnibus suis pertinentiis,
exceptis praeexceptis, praefatis Roberto Wittelbury, Willielmo Marbury,
Willielmo Field, Robert Bayston, Thomae Montegu and Johanni Freeman, haeredibus
and assignatis suis contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus, acquietabimus and
imperpetuum defendemus. Noveritis insuper Nos praefatum Comitem ordinasse,
constituisse, attornasse, and in loco meo posuisse dilectum mihi in Christo
Thomam Chafyn Gentilman, Robertum Wilkinson, Thomam Hawbury, Edwardum Browet,
Thomam Leder and Thomam Dele meos veros and legitimos Attornatos conjunctim and
divisim ad intrandum in omnia praedicta maneria, terras, tenementa, redditus,
reversiones and proficua and caetera praemissa, exceptis praeexceptis, and ad
deliberandum seisinam de and in eisdem Maneriis, terris and tenementis, and
caeteris praemissis cum pertinentiis, exceptis praeexceptis, praefatis Roberto
Wittelbury, Willielmo Marbury, Willielmo Field, Roberto Bayston, Thomae Montegu
and Johanni Freeman, haeredibus and assignatis suis secundum vim, formam and
effectum hujus praesentis Cartae inde, ratum and gratum habens and habiturus
totum and quicquid dicti Attornati mei sive eorum aliquis nomine meo fecerit in
praemissis, seu in aliquo praemissorum. In cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti
Cartae meae Sigillum apposui, hiis testibus Georgio Comite Kantiae, Johanne
Gray Domino de Wilton, Thoma Green Milite, Johanne Wake Milite, and multis
aliis.

Dat' vicesimo quarto die mensis Maii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Septimi post
Conquestum Angliae nono.
Carta Edwardi Comitis Wilts.
EDwardus Comes Wilts
Omnibus ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit Salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Sciatis Nos praefatum Edwardum tum pro bono and fideli servitio Nobis per
Dilectum nostrum Willielmum Pemberton impensum quam imposterum impendendum tam
tempore pacis quam tempore guerrae, dedisse and per praesens Scriptum nostrum
concessisse praefato Willielmo unum annualem redditum sive feodum centum
solidorum legalis monetae Angliae recipiendum annuatim de and in omnibus terris
and tenementis nostris in Ranes in Comitatu Northamptoniae cum pertinentiis per
manus Receptorum, Ballivorum, Firmariorum seu aliorum occupatorum pro tempore
existent' pro termino vitae dicti Willielmi, videlicet ad festa Paschae and
Sancti Michaelis Archangeli per aequales portiones; Et si contingat dictum
annualem redditum sive feodum centum solidorum sive aliquam inde parcellam
aretro fore in part vel in toto post aliquod festum festorum praedictorum per
unum mensem durante vita dicti Willielmi, tunc been licebit praefato Willielmo
and assignatis suis in dictis terris and tenementis praedictis cum pertinentiis
and qualibet inde parcella intrare and distringere, and districtiones sic
captas abducere, asportare, effugare, and penes se retinere quousque de
praedicto annuali redditu sive feodo centum solidorum and qualibet inde
parcella cum arreragiis, misis and expensis ejusdem si quae fuerint, eidem
Willielmo plenarie fuerit satisfactum and persolutum. In cujus rei testimonium
praesentibus Sigillum nostrum apposuimus.

Dat' apud Manerium nostrum de Drayton sexto die Martii, Anno Regni Regis
Henrci Septimi post Conquestum duodecimo.
Carta Regis Henrici Septimi.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae
Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint Salutem.
Sciatis quod Nos de gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia and mero motu
nostris concessimus and licentiam dedimus pro Nobis and haeredibus nostris
quantum in Nobis est, Edwardo Comiti Wilts, quod ipse seu Executores sui seu
eorum aliquis vel aliqui ad laudem Dei and divini cultus augmentum duas
Cantarias videlicet unam Cantariam perpetuam de duobis Capellanis divina in
Ecclesia parochiali Sancti Petri de Luffwyck in Comitatu Northamptoniae, and
aliam Cantariam perpetuam de uno Capellano in Ecclesiae beatae Mariae de
Plasshe in Comitatu Essexiae pro salubri statu nostro and carissimae consortis
nostrae Elizabethae Reginae Angliae dum vixerimus, and pro animabus nostris cum
ab hac luce migravimus, ac pro animabus Johannis nuper Comitis Wilts and
Constanciae uxoris suae parentum ipsius Edwardi nunc Comitis, ac pro animabus
Henrici Green and Margaretae uxoris ejus parentum ipsius Constanciae, ac pro
animabus omnium fidelium defunctorum juxta ordinationem ipsius nunc Comitis vel
Executorum suorum aut eorum alicujus in hac part fiendas celebraturis facere,
fundare, erigere, creare and stabilire possit and possint futuris temporibus
duraturam: Et pro Cantaria in dicta Ecclesia Sancti Petri de Luffwyck, cum sic
erecta, facta, fundata, creata and stabilita fuerit, Cantaria Edwardi Comitis
Wilts in Ecclesia parochiali Sancti Petri de Luffwyck pro perpetuo nuncupetur.
Et quod Capellani Cantariae illius and successores sui Capellani ejusdem
Cantariae sint bonum corpus corporatum in re and nomine, habeantque
successionem perpetuam, and sint personae habiles and capaces in lege; Et quod
Capellani ejusdem Cantariae and successores sui Capellani Cantariae illius per
nomen and sub nomine Capellanorum Comitis Wilts in Ecclesia parochiali Sancti
Petri de Luffwyck placitare possint and implacitari, Necnon omnimodas actiones,
sectas, querelas and causas reales, personales and mixtas cujuscunque generis
fuerint and naturae, coram quibuscunque Justiciariis, Judicibus spiritualibus
and secularibus seu aliis personis quibuscunque prosequi, ac in eisdem
respondere and responderi, easque defendere possint, Ac per idem nomen terras
ac tenementa ac alias possessiones and res quascunque peragere, habere, gaudere
and possidere sibi and successoribus suis possint imperpetuum; Et ad omnia alia
faciendum, agendum and recipiendum prout and in eodem modo quo caeteri ligei
nostri personae habiles and capaces infra Regnun nostrum Angliae facere, agere
and recipere possint. Et ulterius de abundanti gratia nostra concessimus and
licentiam dedimus pro Nobis and haeredibus nostris praefato nunc Comiti,
executoribus and assignatis suis and eorum cuilibet, quod ipsi vel eorum
aliquis aut aliqui terras and tenementa cum pertinentiis ad valorem annuum
tresdecim librarum, sex solidorum and octo denariorum ultra omnia onera and
reprisas quae de Nobis non tenentur in Capite, dare and concedere possit and
possint Capellanis illis ejusdem Cantariae de Luffwyck and successoribus suis
praedictis habendum and tenendum hujusmodi terras and tenementa cum
pertinentiis eisdem Capellanis and successoribus suis imperpetuum juxta
ordinationem praedicti nunc Comitis seu executorum suorum vel eorum aliquorum
seu alicujus inde fiendam; Et eisdem Capellanis ejusdem Cantariae de Luffwyck,
quod ipsi and successores sui eadem terras and tenementa cum pertinentiis a
praefato nunc Comite, Executoribus seu assignatis suis seu eorum aliquibus aut
aliquo recipere possint, tenenda sibi and successoribus suis praedictis juxta
eandem ordinationem ut praemittitur fiendam sicut supradictum est imperpetuum,
tenore praesentium similiter licentiam dedimus specialem. Et quod praedicta
Cantaria de uno Capellano cum sic in dicta Ecclesia beatae Mariae de Plasshe
erecta, facta, fundata, creata and stabilita fuerit, Cantaria Edwardi Comitis
Wilts in Ecclesia beatae Mariae de Plasshe pro perpetuo nuncupetur; Et quod
Capellanus Cantariae illius and successores sui Capellani ejusdem Cantariae
sint bonum corpus corporatum in re and nomine habeantque successionem perpetuam
ac sint personae habiles and capaces in lege; Et quod Capellanus ejusdem
Cantariae and successores sui Capellani Cantariae illius per nomen and sub
nomine Capellani Comitis Wilts in Ecclesia beatae Mariae de Plasshe placitare
possit and implacitari, Necnon omnimodas actiones, sectas, querelas and causas
reales, personales and mixtas cujuscunque generis fuerint and naturae coram
quibuscunque Justiciariis, Judicibus spiritualibus and secularibus seu aliis
personis quibuscunque prosequi ac in eisdem respondere, and responderi, easque
defendere possint, ac per idem nomen, terras, tenementa and alias possessiones
and res quascunque habere, gaudere and possidere sibi and successoribus suis
possit imperpetuum, Et ad omnia alia faciendum, agendum and recipiendum prout
and in eodem modo quo caeteri ligei nostri personae habiles and capaces infra
Regnum Nostrum Angliae facere, agere and recipere possint. Et ulterius ex
abundanti gratia nostra concessimus and licentiam dedimus pro Nobis and
haeredibus nostris praefato nunc Comiti, executoribus and assignatis suis and
eorum cuilibet, quod ipsi vel eorum aliquis aut aliqui terras and tenementa cum
pertinentiis ad valorem annuum tresdecim Librarum and quatuor Solidorum ultra
omnia onera and reprisas, quae de Nobis non tenentur in Capite, dare and
concedere possit and possint eidem Capellano ejusdem Cantariae de Plasshe and
successoribus suis praedictis, Habendum and Tenendum hujusmodi terras and
tenementa cum pertinentiis eidem Capellano and successoribus suis imperpetuum
juxta ordinationem praedicti nunc Comitis seu executorum suorum vel eorum
aliquorum seu alicujus inde fiendam; Et eidem Capellano ejusdem Cantariae de
Plasshe, quod ipse and successores sui eadem terras and tenementa cum
pertinentiis a praefato nunc Comite, Executoribus seu assignatis suis seu eorum
aliquibus aut aliquo recipere possit and possint tenenda sibi and successoribus
suis praedictis juxta ordinationem ut praemittitur fiendam sicut supradictum
est imperpetuum, tenore praesentium similiter licetiam dedimus specialem,
absque molestatione, impedimento vel perturbatione nostri vel haeredum
nostrorum, Justiciariorum, Escaetorum, Vicecomitum, Coronatorum seu Ministrorum
vel haeredum nostrorum quorumcunque, and absque aliquo fine in Hanapario nostro
seu aliter ad opus nostrum seu haeredum nostrorum reddendo aut solvendo,
statuto de terris and tenementis ad manum mortuam non ponendis edito, aut eo
quod expressa mentio de vero valor annuo aut certitudine praemissorum seu
eorum alicujus sive de aliis donis aut concessionibus per Nos eidem nunc Comiti
antea factis, aut aliquo statuto, actu, ordinatione vel promissione in
contrarium factis, editis, ordinatis aut provisis, aut aliqua re, causa vel
materia quacunque in aliquo non obstante. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas
nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo primo die Novembris Anno Regni
nostri quarto decimo. Kelet. Per breve de privato Sigillo and de data praedicta
auctoritate Parliamenti pro viginti Martis solutis in Hanapario.

Carta Johannae Vicecomitissae Lisle and aliorum.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Johanna
Vicecomitissa Lisle, Johannes Vicecomes Lisle, Thomas Gray Armiger, Thomas
Kevell serviens Domini Regis ad legem, Edwardus Hungerford Armiger, Humfridus
Conyngesby, Thomas Frowyk, Johannes Titchbourne, Johannes Smyth, Johannes
Gardyner, Thomas Byall and Thomas Heywoode
salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Cum Robertus Wittelbury Armiger, Thomas Mountegu and Johannes Freeman per
Cartam suam indentatam cujus data est tertio die mensis Julii Anno Regni Regis
Henrici Septimi nono, dimiserint, feoffaverint, liberaverint and eadem Carta
sua confirmaverint Edwardo Comiti Wilts and Margaretae uxori suae per nomen
Margaretae Gray filiae Edwardi nuper Vicecomitis Lisle and Elizabethae uxoris
ejus, ac Nobis praefatae Johannae Vicecomitissae Lisle, Thomae Gray Armigero,
Thomae Kevell servienti Domini Regis ad legem, Edwardo Hungerford Armigero,
Humfrido Conyngesby, Thomae Frowyk, Johanni Titchbourne, Johanni Smyth, Johanni
Gardyner, Thomae Byall and Thomae Heywoode Maneria sua de Waterhale, Brafeld,
Pollycote, Wanden, Emberton and Wolston magna cum pertinentiis in Comitatu
Buckinghamiae, ac Manerium suum de Chalton cum pertinentiis in Comitatu
Bedfordiae, ac etiam Maneria sua de Suttons, Pyggesland, Tracyes and Stamford
Ryvers cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Essexiae, Necnon omnia terras and
tenementa, redditus, reversiones and servitia cum suis pertinentiis in
Comitatibus praedictis quae inter alia praefatus Robertus Wittelbury Armiger,
Willielmus Marbury Armiger, Thomas Mountegu and Johannes Freeman ac Willielmus
Feld Clericus and Robertus Bayston Clericus nuper habuerunt sibi and haeredibus
suis ex dono and feoffamento dicti Comitis, prout per quandam Cartam sibi inde
confectam before apparet; qui quidem Willielmus Feld and Robertus Bayston
totum jus suum in maneriis, terris and tenementis praedictis ac caeteris
praemissis praefatis Roberto Wittelbury, Willelmo Marbury, Thomae Mountegu and
Johanni Freeman remiserunt and relaxaverunt, prout per eorum scriptum inde sibi
confectum similiter apparet: Habendum and tenendum praedicta Maneria, terras
and tenementa, redditus, reversiones and servitia cum pertinentiis praefatis
Comiti and Margaretae uxori suae, ac Nobis praesatae Johannae, Johanni
Vicecomiti Lisle, Thomae Gray, Thomae Kevell, Edwardo Hungerford, Humfrido
Conyngesby, Thomae Frowyk, Johanni Titchbourne, Johanni Smyth, Johanni
Gardyner, Thomae Byall and Thomae Heywoode pro termino vitae ejusdem Margaretae
remanere inde praefato Comiti, haeredibus and assignatis ejusdem Comitis
imperpetuum, prout in eadem carta before liquet: Noveritis Nos praefatos
Johannam Vicecomitissam Lisle, Johannem Vicecomitem Lisle, Thomam Gray, Thomam
Kevell, Edwardum Hungerford, Humfridum Conyngesby, Thomam Frowyk, Johannem
Titchbourne, Johannem Smyth, Johannem Gardyner, Thomam Byall and Thomam
Heywoode remisisse, relaxasse and omnino pro Nobis and haeredibus nostris
imperpetuum quietum clamasse praefato Edwardo Comiti Wilts and Margaretae uxori
suae totum jus, titulum, clameum, demaundam and interesse nostra de and in
omnibus praedictis Maneriis de Waterhall, Brafeld, Pollycote, Wanden, Emberton
and Wolston magna cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, ac Manerio de
Chalton cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Bedfordiae, ac etiam Maneriis de Suttons,
Pyggesland, Tracyes, and Stamford Ryvers cum pertinentiis in Comitatu Essexiae;
Necnon de omnibus terris, tenementis, redditibus, reversionibus cum suis
pertinentiis in Comitatibus praedictis: Ita quod nec Nos praefati Johanna
Vicecomitissa Lisle, Johannes Vicecomes Lisle, Thomas Gray, Thomas Kevell,
Edwardus Hungerford, Humfridus Conyngesby, Thomas Frowyk, Johannes Titchbourne,
Johannes Smyth, Johannes Gardyner, Thomas Byall, and Thomas Heywoode nec
haeredes nostri, nec aliquis alius pro Nobis seu nomine nostro aliquid juris
vel clamei in praedictis Maneriis, terris, tenementis, redditibus,
reversionibus praedictis and caeteris praemissis cum omnibus suis pertinentiis
de caetero exigere seu vendicare poterimus in futuro, set ab omni action
juris, clamei seu aliquid inde petendi sumus exclusi imperpetuum per praesentes.

In cujus rei testimonium Sigilla nostra apposuimus....... die mensis.......
Anno Regni Regis Henrici Septimi post Conquestum Angliae quarto decimo.
Ultima Voluntas Edwardi Comitis Wilts.
IN the name of God Amen. The two and twentieth day of March in the year of
our Lord one thousand four hundred nynety and eight: I Edward Earl of
Wyltshire of hole mind and good memory bequeth my soul to Almighty God my
Creator and Savior, to our Lady Seint Marie, and to all the holy company of
Hevyn, and my body to be beryed within the Church of Seint Peter in Luffwycke
in our Lady I Will, by me Graundfader Green, and will mine Executors make a
convenient Tomb to be made for me. Item, I will that the last Will of my Lord
my Fader, my Lady my Mother, and my Graundfader Green be performed. Item, I
will that where Robert Wittelbury, William Merbury Esquires, William Feld
Clarke, Robert Bayston Clarke, Thomas Mountegu and John Freeman been seasid of
the Manors of Buckworth, Comberton, Raundes, Ryngsted, Irtlingborough,
Haringworth and Hardewyke in the Counties of Huntingdon, Cambridge and
Northampton, and of oder Lands and Tenements, Woods, Meadows and Pastures in
Buckworth, Comberton, Raundes, Rygsted, Irtlingborough, Hardewycke and
Haringworth in the Counties aforesaid, in there Demesne as of Fee to the use of
me and mine heirs; and whereas Margaret my Wife, John Viscounte Lisle and
other Cofeffes been seasid of the Manors of Stamford Ryvers, Piggesland,
Tracyes and Suttons in the County of Essex, and of the Manors of Newington,
Blosmavyle and Pollicote in the County of Bucks, and of certain Lands and
tenements, woods, meadows and pastures belongyng and appartaynyng unto the
seid Manors in their demesne, as of Fee to the use of me and of Margaret my
wife for term of hur life; for certain causes and considerations I will that
the seid Robert Wittelbury, William Merbury, William Feld Clarke, Robert
Bayston Clarke, Thomas Mountagu and John Freeman, that the foreseid Robert
Wittelbury and all the seid Cofeoffes abovenamed, and all other Feoffes in the
seid Manors, Lands and tenements, woods, meadows and pastures shall be and
stand Feoffes in all the seid Manors, Londs and tenements, meadows and pastures
in Buckworth, Comberton, Raundes, Ringsted, Irtlingborough, Hardwyke and
Haringworth to the intent following; That is to sey, That I will the seid
Margaret my wife shall have and enjoy all the profits and revenues of the seid
Manors of Buckworth, Comberton, Ringsted, Irtlingborough, Hardwyck and
Haringworth with their appurtynances for term of her life, with this
condition, that she make no title, cleyme nor interesse in noon of the Manors
of Stamford Ryvers, Pyggesland, Tracyes, Suttons, Newenton, Blosmavile and
Policote, the which I will shall descend unto my Lord of Buckingham and his
heirs, and I beseech my seid Lord to suffer my wife to have the Manors of
Newynton, Blosmavile, for term of her life, and to be good Lord unto her and
my Servaunts. Item, I will that all such Annuities and Fees as be granted by
Deed or Patentes by my Lord my Fader, my Lady my Mother, my Grandfader Green
and me, be had ferme and stable for term of their life, without let or
interruption. Item, I will that my Feoffes that now been, or hereafter shall
be, suffer William Merbury and Thomas Mountegu to take and receyve the revenues
and profits of my Lands, Tenements, Woods, Meadows and Pastures in Luffewicke
and Islip unto they be content, and saved harmless against the King for the
Det of One hundred and twenty nine Pounds, one Shilling and four Pence,
wherefore they be bound by obligation to Sir Reynold Bray, and to Sir Thomas
Lovel to pay and content before the Fest of Christmas next following, to the
Kings use for the lycense of the mortisment of two Chauntries in Plasshe and
Luffwick, and after that done, and the said William and Thomas saved harmless
as I have indentyd with them, the which will appear, and furthermore suertie
for ready payment, I will the said William Merbury and Thomas Mountegu have in
their keeping my two Flaggons, two gylte Potts, six Bollys gylt with Covers and
other Plate to make Chevysaunce to pay the King, and they so savyd harmless,
then I will my Feoffes stand and be Feoffes unto the perfourment of this my
last Will, as well of these as of other; and I will the seid my Executours to
sell my woods at Langhyll, Farthyngshawe, Hotland, Bullaks and Colys wood,
and all my woods growing, being and belongyng to Bakenho, Grymsbury, Malberne,
or any oder place such as was purchased of William Eton by my Lord my Fader.
Item, I will my Executours have all my moveable Goods unbequeathed, as well
Juels, Plate, Stuff to pay my Detts, and to perform this my last Will. Item,
I will my Lord of Buckingham have all my Stuff that I left in his place in
Bredstrede except my Robys of Astate, and Robys of Parliament, the which Robys
of Astate I will they be gevyn to Churches whereas I was Patron, there as most
need is by the discretion of mine Executours; and the other Robys and Furris to
be sold, and the money takyn to pay my Detts, and perform my Will. Item, I
will my Lord and Cossen of Shrewsbury have my Collar of the Kings Livery, and
my Unkyll Wittelbury oon of my Bollys of Silver with a Cover that I bought
last; mine Aunte his Wife to have a plain stonding cup of Silver gylt that is
used to be carried with me. Item, I will the Church of Luffwyck have my Trapper
of Cloth of Gold, and my auter Clothes of Tawney Damask. Item, I will the
Church of Newenton have the outside of my Goune of Crymson Velvet to make a
Cope; and I will the Church of Graston have the lynyng of black Damask in the
same to make a Vestyment and a Cope. Item, I will that Margret my wife have as
much Plate as I had with her in marriage, my Fether-bed in the Chapel Chamber,
the Tester, Sealer and Counterpoynt of the same, Carpets of the same, my two
great Carpets, two Cushyns of tawny Damask, two Payr of fine Shetes and three
Payr of other Shetes, my fine cloth of Diaper, my Bed of Cloth of Gold and
Velvet that was in London, and my Pelows of the best, so that my Detts may be
content with other my Goods and revenues of my Lands, and with that she leve
and take not the third part of my Goods, but suffer mine Executours to have
them at their liberty to perform my will. Item, I will that every Gentilman
and Gentilwoman have forty shillings, every Yeoman twenty shillings, and every
Grome ten shillings. Item, I will that my howsold be kept thirty days after my
decesse, if there be whereof so to do. Item, I will that Mr. William Feld
Master of the Collage of Foderinghay have oon of my bollys of Silver that I
bought last. Item, I will that my Detts and my revenues of my Lands be
receyved by mine Executours to pay my Detts and perform my will. Item, I will
that my poor Kin and Servaunts have and be relyved before any other by the
discretion of mine Executours. Item, I will that my Executours give and grant
a annuite of forty Shillings by Deed, out of my Lands that my Lord my Fader
purchased of William Eton in Bedfordshire unto my welbeloved Servaunt Edward
Bruet, and the kepeing of my Manor and Conynger of Drayton, for term of his
life. Item, I will that all my Juells, Plate and other stuff unbequethed be
sold by mine Excutours to perform this my last Will. Item, I will that all my
Brigandyrs and Harnes be distributed among my Yomen and Gromes, after the
discretion of my Executours. And of this my present last Will I make my
Executors, my entireley belovid Uncle Robert Wittelbury, Mr. William Feld
Master of the Collage of Fotheringhay, William Merbury, Thomas Mountegu and
John Blake. Item, I desire and pray my good Lord and Cossen the Earl of
Shrewsbury to be surveyer of this my last Will, and to be good Lord unto my
wife and pore servauntes, as my singular trust is in him; And I will that every
of mine Executours, that will minister this my last Will, to have six Pounds,
thirteen Shillinges and four Pence. In witness whereof I the said Earl have
put to my Seal.

Item, I will that my Feoffes grant by Deed or Patent a Annuite unto my right
welbeloved Servaunt Philip Frost, of fifty three Shillings four Pence, for
term of his life, out of my Lands and Tenements in Luffwycke, for the good
and long service that he has done unto me. Item, I will that my Lands and
Tenements that I purchased in Luffwycke, of the wife of William Chamber, called
Cottingham's Tenement and Ridayes Close with the appurtenances, and the Lands
and Tenements in the same Town, that I purchased of the heirs of Oliver
Sutton, be sold to pay my Detts, and to perform this my last Will. Item, That
my welbeloved Servaunt Robert Wilkinson, have forty Shillings out of my Lands
in Islip, for term of his life.

The Tomb of Edward Stafford Earl of Wiltsheire, and Lord of Drayton Extant
in S.t Peter's Church in Luffwick.
tomb of Edward Stafford, 2nd earl of Wiltshire
Copia Statutorum Cantariae Edwardi Comitis Wilts de Villa Luffwycke.
UNiversis Sanctae matris Ecclesiae filiis ad quos praesentes Literae
pervenerint, Robertus Wittelbury Armiger, Willielmus Marbury Armiger, and
Thomas Mountagu Gentilman Executores testamenti and ultimae Voluntatis nobilis
memoriae Edwardi Stafford nuper Comitis Wiltshyre defuncti, Salutem in Domino
sempiternam. Ad Universitatis vestrae notitiam deducimus, ac tenore praesentium
volumus deduci quod praefatus nobilis Dominus Edwardus nuper Comes Wiltshyre
duas Cantarias perpetuas, unam videlicet Cantariam perpetuam de duobus
Capellanis divina in Ecclesia parochiali de Luffwycke in Comitatu
Northamptoniae Lincolniensis Dioceseos, and aliam Cantariam perpetuam de uno
Capellano in Ecclesia beatae Mariae de Plassey in Comitatu Essexiae pro salubri
statu Domini nostri Regis Henrici Septimi moderni and Dominae Elizabethae
Reginae Angliae praefatique Edwardi Comitis Wiltshyre dum viverent, and pro
animabus ipsorum postquam ab hac luce subtracti fuerint, and pro animabus
certarum aliarum personarum per ipsum Comitem nominatarum and inferius
expressatarum and omnium fidelium defunctorum juxta ordinationem in ea part
faciendam celebraturis, facere, fundare, creare, erigere and stabilire voluit,
intendebat, and ad hoc se disposuit; Atque certas Literas Regias Patentes a
praefato serenissimo Domino nostro Rege Henrico Septimo concessas, continentes
inter alia, licentiam and consensum ipsius Domini nostri Regis ad hujusmodi
Cantarias sub certis modo and forma in ipsis Literis Regiis (ad quas Nos
Executores praedicti referimus, and eas quatenus expedit hic haberi volumus)
pro insertis before expressatis faciendas, erigendas, fundandas and
stabiliendas eidem Domino Edwardo Comiti and Executoribus suis concedi and
haberi etiam procuravit and obtinuit: Idem tamen nobilis vir Edwardus Comes
Wiltshyre in hujusmodi suo pio and laudabili proposito morte naturali
praeventus ad erectionem and fundationem dictarum Cantariarum nullatenus
processit, sicque hujusmodi erectionem and fundationem Nobis Executoribus suis
praedictis reliquit and omnino dimisit. Nos igitur Robertus Wittelbury,
Willielmus Marbury and Thomas Mountagu Executores praedicti piam intentionem
and laudabile propositum dicti Comitis defuncti multipliciter in Domino
commendantes, attendentesque quod fundationes and erectiones dictarum
Cantariarum in augmentum cultus divini ac salutem animarum tam ipsius Comitis
defuncti quam parentum and amicorum suorum ac aliorum omnium Christi dilectorum
defunctorum tendere omnino videntur; Cupientes propterea quantum cum Deo
possumus id quod ipse nobilis vir in vita sua salubriter fieri proposuit post
mortem suam juxta ipsius ultimam Voluntatem Nobis in ea part per eundem
saepius declaratam stabilire and perficere, ad fundationem, erectionem,
creationem and stabilimentum dictae Cantariae perpetuae in praefata parochiali
Ecclesia de Luffwycke Lincolniensis Dioceseos juxta omnem vim formam and
effectum licentiae regiae dicto Comiti and Executoribus suis in hac part
concessae, and prout ipse Comes in vita sua desuper express fieri voluerit,
procedimus in hunc modum. Imprimis Nos Robertus Wittelbury, Willielmus Marbury
and Thomas Mountagu Executores testamenti and ultimae Voluntatis nobilis
memoriae Domini Edwardi Stafford nuper Comitis Wiltshyre defuncti, ad laudem
and honorem omnipotentis Dei ac beatissimae Virginis Mariae matris suae
gloriosae, ac ad salutem animarum dicti Comitis and aliorum infra nominatorum,
deque licentia and consensu metuendissimi Domini nostri Regis Henrici Septimi
moderni concurrentibus, etiam consensu and assensu omnium and singulorum quorum
interest in hac part, facimus, creamus, erigimus and fundamus nomine
Executorio praefati nobilis Comitis defuncti, ac vice, voluntate and mandato
ejusdem unam perpetuam Cantariam duorum Capellanorum secularium in Ecclesia
parochiali Sancti Petri de Luffwycke Lincolniensis Dioceseos divina in eadem
Ecclesia ad altar Sancti Petri ibidem pro salubri statu praefati Domini nostri
Regis Angliae ac praeclarissimae Dominae Dominae Elizabethae Reginae Angliae
modernae nostrumque Executorum praenominatorum dum vixerimus, ac pro animabus
eorundem Domini nostri Regis and Reginae postquam ab hac luce subtracti
fuerint, ac pro anima dicti Domini Edwardi Stafford nuper Comitis Wiltshyre and
animabus Johannis Stafford nuper Comitis Wiltshyre and Constanciae uxoris suae
parentum ipsius Domini Edwardi nuper Comitis, ac pro animabus Henrici Green
Armigeri and Margaretae uxoris suae parentum ipsius Constanciae, pro animabus
Johannis Wittelbury Armigeri, Humfridi Stafford nuper Ducis Buckinghamiae,
Humfridi Stafford nuper Comitis Stafford, Henrici Green Militis and Dominae
Amabilae uxoris suae, Henrici Green Militis and Matildis uxoris suae, Johannis
Green Armigeri and Margaretae uxoris suae, Radulphi Green and Dominae
Catharinae uxoris suae, Roberti Ross Militis and Dominae Johannae uxoris suae,
Johannis Marbury and Elianorae uxoris suae, Oliveri Sutton and Graciae uxoris
suae, ac pro animabus nostrum praefatorum Roberti Wittelbury and Annae uxoris
meae, Willielmi Marbury and Annae uxoris meae, Thomae Mountagu and Mariae
uxoris meae, Necnon pro animabus parentum and omnium amicorum and benefactorum
praefati Henrici Green Armigeri and omnium fidelium defunctorum singulis
diebus juxta ordinationem nostram inferius descriptam perpetuo celebratorum.
Ita tamen quod iidem Capellani pro tempore quo in eadem Cantaria intitulati
fuerint, nullum beneficium Ecclesiasticum alibi quovismodo habeant aut
occupent, sed eidem Cantariae tantum deserviant and intendant, ac in eadem
personaliter and continuo juxta modum inferius specificatum resideant debite
cum effectu. Quam quidem Cantariam, perpetuam Cantariam Edwardi nuper Comitis
Wiltshyre in Ecclesia parochiali Sancti Petri de Luffwycke, pro perpetuo
nuncupari and esse volumus, fundamus and ordinamus per praesentes. Volumus
quoque insuper, fundamus and ordimus vice, nomine and voluntate dicti Domini
Edwardi Stafford nuper Comitis Wiltshyre, etiam ex licentia dicti Domini nostri
Regis, quod Capellani praedicti and successores sui Capellani dictae Cantariae
sint corpus unum incorporatum in re and nomine, habeantque successionem
perpetuam, and sint personae habiles and capaces in lege; Et quod ipsi
Capellani and eorum successores in eadem Cantaria pro nomine and sub nomine
Capellanorum Comitis Wiltshyre, in Ecclesia parochiali Sancti Petri de
Luffwycke possint-placitare and placitari, Necnon omnimodas actiones, sectas,
querelas and causas reales, personales and mixtas, cujuscunque generis fuerint
and naturae, coram quibuscunque Justiciariis, Judicibus spiritualibus and
secularibus seu aliis personis prosequi, and in eisdem respondere ac agere and
defendere; Ac per idem nomen, terras and tenementa ac alias possessiones and
res quascunque perquirere, habere, gaudere, possidere possint sibi and
successoribus suis imperpetuum; Et ad omnia alia facienda agenda and recipienda
prout and in eodem modo sicut caeteri ligei Domini nostri Regis personae
habiles and capaces infra regnum Angliae facere, agere and recipere possint
juxta and secundum vim, formam, tenorem and effectum literarum patentium Domini
nostri Regis praedicti desuper factarum and concessarum. Volumus quoque
insuper, statuimus and ordinamus Nos Executores supranominati, quod Capellani
dictae Cantariae praesententur and uterque ipsorum praesentetur per Nos
Executores praedictos, quamdiu aliquis nostrum vixerit, Domino Episcopo
Lincolniensi sede plena, vel sede vacant Officiali Lincolniensi qui pro
tempore fuerit, and per eundem Dominum Episcopum vel Officialem admittantur and
instituantur, ac per Rectorem Ecclesiae parochialis de Luffwycke si praesens
fuerit, vel eo absente per ejus Vicegerentem in possessionem dictae Cantariae
ad mandatum dicti Domini Episcopi inducantur; Et post mortem nostram and
cujuslibet nostrum praesentatio hujusmodi Capellanorum and eorum utriusque in
omni vacationis vice pertineat magistro Roberto Barnard magistro Collegii de
Foderinghay and successoribus suis imperpetuum; Ita quod ipse magister infra
mensem immediate sequentem postquam sibi de vacatione alicujus partis dictae
Cantariae constiterit, aliquem Capellanum honestum and idoneum alibi non
beneficiatum praefato Domino Episcopo Lincolniensi sede plena, vel Officiali
Lincolniensi sede Episcopali vacant, literatorie and cum effectu praesentet.
Et si sic praesentare ultra dictum mensem distulerit, tunc praesentatio ad
istam partem Cantariae sic vacantem pro illa vacationis vice pertineat ad
Dominum Abbatem Monasterii Sancti Petri de Burgo Lincolniensis Dioceseos qui
pro tempore fuerit; Ita tamen quod idem Dominus Abbas infra mensem postquam
constiterit eidem quod jus praesentandi sibi ut praefertur devolutum fuerit,
reale and literatorie praesentet ad illam partem dictae Cantariae tunc vacantem
honestum and idoneum Capellanum alibi non beneficiatum Domino Episcopo
Lincolniensi sede plena, seu sede Episcopali vacant Officiali Lincolniensi qui
pro tempore fuerit. Et si dictus Dominus Abbas ultra dictum mensem sic
praesentare distulerit seu omiserit, quod tunc been liceat Domino Episcopo
Lincolniensi pro tempore existenti sede plena, seu Officiali Lincolniensi sede
vacant, dictam Cantariam sic tunc vacantem alicui Capellano idoneo alibi non
beneficiato pro illa vacationis vice confer and ipsum admittere and
instituere Canonice in eadem. Et si idem Dominus Episcopus plena, vel Dominus
Officialis Lincolniensis Dioceseos sede vacant non contulerit infra mensem
postquam notitiam habuerit de vacatione alicujus partis dictae Cantariae and de
devolutione juris patronatus ad eandem, quod tunc praesentatio ad illam partem
Cantariae sic vacantem redeat ad Magistrum dicti Collegii de Foderinghay, Et
istum cursum sive ordinem praesentandi ad dictam Cantariam and providendi eidem
volumus and ordinamus sub praemissis modo and forma quotiescunque, quandocunque
and quomodocunque dictam Cantariam aut aliquam partem ejusdem post mortem
nostrum Executorum praedictorum and cujuslibet nostrum vacare contigerit,
perpetuis futuris temporibus observari. Volumus insuper and pro perpetuo
ordinamus Nos Executores supranominati, quod uterque dictorum Capellanorum
praefatae Cantariae tempore admissionis suae ad eandem, cumque inducatur in
realem possessionem ejusdem, juramentum praestet corporale tactis sacrosanctis
Evangeliis coram Nobis Executoribus praedictis aut aliquo nostrum diutius
vivente, ac post mortem cujuslibet nostrum coram magistro Collegii de
Foderinghay pro tempore existente, quod in praefata Cantaria quamdiu in eadem
intitulatus fuerit, continuo residebit and personaliter deserviet eidem, ac
fundationem and ordinationem ejusdem Cantariae and omnia in eis contenta pro
viribus and posse suis inviolabiliter observabit quatenus ad ipsam Cantariam
pertineat. Volumus insuper and ordinamus quod non liceat alicui Capellanorum
dictae Cantariae se absentare ab eadem ultra triginta dies in anno simul vel
interpolatis vicibus numerandos sive capiendos; Ita tamen quod ambo Capellani
nunquam sint simul absentes, sed tempore absentiae unius Capellanorum alter
Capellanus sit praesens in dicta Cantaria, and eidem debite deserviat. Et si
quis dictorum Capellanorum secum non residendo in dicta Cantaria contra
effectum and tenorem ordinationis ejusdem aut de habendo una cum eadem Cantaria
aliud beneficium Ecclesiasticum quodcunque sive qualitercunque fuerit,
dispensari procuraverit seu obtinuerit, ipso facto eundem Capellanum dicta
Cantaria privatum and ab eadem extunc pro perpetuo amotum esse ordinamus,
volumus and statuimus per praesentes, and in eo casu alius Capellanus ideoneus
loco ipsius Capellani sic amoti intituletur in dicta Cantaria juxta modum and
formam superius annotatum. Ordinamus insuper, volumus and statuimus, quod
nomina dicti Domini nostri Henrici Regis Angliae Septimi, Dominae Elizabethae
Reginae Angliae modernae, ac nomina and cognomina praefati Domini Edwardi
Stafford nuper Comitis Wiltshyre praecipui fundatoris hujus Cantariae,
nostrumque Executorum praenominatorum, Necnon caeterorum omnium and singulorum
superius in primo statuo sive prima part hujus ordinationis nominatim and
specifice expressatorum, in una tabula decenti and honesta inscribantur and
intitulentur, Et quod ipsa tabula ponatur and collocetur super Altar ad quod
dicta Cantaria infra dictam parochialem Ecclesiam fundatur, ad effectum, ut
Capellani ejusdem Cantariae perpetuis futuris temporibus in fingulis missis
suis ibidem celebrandis Dominum devote and specialiter deprecentur pro felici
statu dictorum Domini nostri Regis moderni and Dominae nostrae Reginae
modernae, ac pro bono statu nostrum Executorum supranominatorum quamdiu aliquis
nostrum vixerit, ac pro animabus ipsorum Domini nostri Regis and Reginae ac
animabus nostrum Executorum praedictorum postquam ab hac luce subtracti
fuerimus, necnon animabus omnium and singulorum superius nominatorum and omnium
fidelium defunctorum, ac ipsos in specie and nominatim in missis hujusmodi
habeant devote recommendatos. Ordinamus insuper, volumus and statuimus, quod
neuter Capellanorum praedictorum aliqua terras seu tenementa aut alias
possessiones, seu alia bona mobilia seu immobilia quae dictae Cantariae
pertinent aut imposterum quovismodo pertinebunt, alienet, vendat seu
impignoret, Et si sic fecerit, ipsum in vigniti solidis eidem Cantariae ad opus
reparationis ornamentorum ejusdem convertendos and persolvendos ipso facto
ordinamus condemnari. Et ad solutionem hujusmodi viginti solidorum totiens
quotiens sic fecerit, and ad restitutionem bonorum hujusmodi sic alienatorum,
venditorum seu impignoratorum, seu saltem competentem satisfactionem pro
eisdem, ad prosecutionem seu sectam alterius Capellani sui vel magistri
Collegii de Foderinghay pro tempore existentis modo and forma quibus celerius
and efficacius fieri possit, cogatur and compellatur; alioquin si sic solvere,
restituere seu satisfacere recusaverit seu indebite distulerit, ipsum sic
alienantem, vendentem seu impignorantem propter alienationem, venditionem seu
impignorationem hujusmodi a dicta Cantaria ipso facto ordinamus esse amotum,
and in loco illius sic amoti volumus and ordinamus alium Capellanum in dicta
Cantaria Canonice intitulari juxta formam superius annotatam. Volumus insuper,
statuimus and ordinamus, quod dicti Capellani and eorum successores in vim
juramenti per eos and eorum quemlibet in admissione sua ad dictam Cantariam
praestiti and praestandi, been, honest and pacifice mutuo se habeant atque
gerant, and quod neuter ipsorum Capellanorum cum altero Capellano socio suo
verbosus sit vel contumeliosus, neque rixas aut verba opprobriosa seu
contumeliosa quoquomodo inter se seminaverit. Volumus insuper, statuimus and
ordinamus Nos Executores supranominati, quod praemissa omnia and singula per
Nos ut praefertur statuta and ordinata, caeteraque imposterum statuenda and
ordinanda quaecunque per dictos duos Capellanos eorumque successores quoscunque
praefatae Cantariae Capellanos, perpetuis futuris temporibus plene, fideliter
and inviolabiliter observentur, quatenus facultates possessionum and bonorum
dictae Cantariae sufficere valiant in hac part; facultatem tamen and
potestatem praemissa omnia and singula per Nos ut praemittitur statuta and
ordinata ac imposterum statuenda and ordinanda interpretandi and declarandi,
eisdemque addendi ac ea corrigendi, emendandi and reformandi, Nobis
Executoribus antedictis and duobus nostrum reservamus per praesentes. In cujus
rei Testimonium Sigilla nostra praesentibus apposuimus. Dat' primo die mensis
Martii, Anno Domini Milesimo quingentesimo primo, and Anno Regni Regis dicti
Domini nostri Henrici Septimi post Conquestum Angliae decimo septimo.

ET Nos Willielmus permissione divina Lincolniensis Episcopus, dictae Cantariae
erectionem, fundationem and ordinationem superius expressatas vidimus and
inspeximus; Et quia Nobis evidenter constat hujusmodi Cantariae fundationem and
ordinationem tendere in divini cultus augmentum, ac salutem animarum omnium
fidelium defunctorum, and praesertim nobilis Domini Edwardi Stafford nuper
Comitis Wiltshyre and aliarum Nobilium personarum in dicta fundatione
specialiter expressarum, Idcirco ejusdem Cantariae fundationem, ordinationem
and erectionem supra specificatam, ac omnia and singula in eis statuta,
ordinata and contenta, auctoritate nostra ordinaria and pontificiali pro Nobis
and successoribus nostris quantum in Nobis est, and ad forum spectat
Ecclesiasticum, ex certa scientia ac ad omnem juris effectum qui inde sequi
poterit quomodolibet seu debebit in futurum, ratificamus, approbamus and
confirmamus, ac vires perpetuae firmitatis obtinere volumus. In quorum
testimonium praemissorum Sigillum nostrum praesentibus est appensum.

Dat' in Pallatio nostro Lincolniensi vicesimo octavo die mensis Martii, Anno
Domini Milesimo quingentesimo secundo and nostrae translationis anno septimo.
Depositions of Robert Merbury and others.
Facta fuit sequens examinatio secret and sigillatim testium subscriptorum
octavo die Februarii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Octavi secundo, in quadam alta
Camera Domus solite residentiae venerabilis viri Magistri Johannis Young,
Magistri sive Custodis Rotulorum Cancellariae dicti Domini Regis, per eundem
Magistrum Johannem and Guidonem Palms servientem ad Legem, Johannem Grueleye
Attornatum dicti Domini Regis, Johannem Port Solicitatorem causarum ejusdem
Domini Regis, and Antonium Babyngton Generosum, de and super ultima voluntate
Edwardi Stafford nuper Comitis Wiltshyre, concernente Manerium suum de Drayton
in Comitatu Northamptoniae, ac omnia alia terras and tenementa sua in feodo
simplici existentia.
RObert Merbury Esquyer, of the age of sixty one years, or more, sworn and
examyned the day and year aboveseid, seith and deposes on his oath, that he
was servaunt to Edward Stafford, late Earl of Wiltshyre, in the rome of
Gentilman-usher of his Chamber, by the space of twenty five years or more,
which was at the time of the decese of the seid Earl. Also he seith, that the
seid Earl, about such time that he should ride towerd Blackhethe Feld, had
caused a Deed to be made of his seid Manor of Drayton, to the use of my Lady
his Wife, for term of her life; forsomuche the seid Earl in the morning when
he should depart towerd the seid Feld, being in the Chapel Chamber, this
Deponent being present, called his seid Lady to him, deliveryng the seid Deed
to her: Whereupon she then looked and kest it from her unto the floor, saying,
that she would not say gramercy therefore, except she should have Warmester,
and then she, as she seid, would thank him therefore. Whereupon this Deponent,
at the commandment of the seid Earl, took up the seid Deed, and delivered it
to the seid Earl, which Earl then broke the Seall from it, and did cast it
out of the window into the Moote there, saying to his seid Lady, that such a
person should have it of his gift, which he trusted should yeve to him a better
gramercy for it than she did; which Earl then departed into the great Chamber,
and called this Deponent to him, commaundyng and chargyng this Deponent, as he
should answer before God to testifye, bear witness, and openly declare, if
ought then good should come to the said Earl at the seid Feld, that his full
mind and last Will was, and should be, that his Cossyn Earl of Shrewsbury should
have to him and to his heirs for ever, the seid Manor of Drayton, and all his
other Fee simple Lands, after his detts were paid and his Will performed. And
so the said Earl departed, then taking his horse, towerd the seid Feld, at
which time this Deponent rode with him a certain space of the way. Whereupon
at such time that this Deponent should take his leave of the seid Earl, he
seid to this Deponent, Robert, forget not to bear witness of that thing
whereof I spoke to thee in the great Chamber concerning my Manoir of Drayton
and all my other Fee simple Lands; to whom this Deponent answeryng seid, that
he would remember his Commandment, and so departed from the seid Earl,
returnyng to Drayton foreseid, to wait upon the foreseid Lady according to the
commandment of the seid Earl. And he seith, that immediately after the
comeynge of the seid Earl from Blackhethe Feld to Drayton foreseid, and
as soon as his Boots were drawn of, he called to him this Deponent, demanding
of this Deponent whether he remembered the words which the seid Earl spoke to
him before that time in the seid great Chamber, when he was going toward
Blackhethe Feld, concerning Drayton and his other Fee simple Lands. Whereunto
this Deponent answeryng seid, that he remembered them well, desireyng the seid
Earl to know, wheder it were his pleasure to contynewe still in the same mind
or nay. Which Earl then seid, that he contynewed in that mind, and so would
do while he lyved, charging this Deponent to bear witness thereof, whatsoever
soden aventur or chance should happen or come to the seid Earl. Also this
Deponent seith, that after the seid words spoken he was contynewelly in
howsehold with the seid Earl duringe his life, and never knew him change his
seid mind in that behalf; forsomoche this Deponent diverse times would say to
the seid Earl, my Lord, for Gods love remember that ye put not your soul in
charge in yevynge your Lands from the heirs. Whereunto the seid Earl at all
times answered and said to this Deponent, Robert, I may as well yeve these
Lands where I will, as I may yeve the Gown of my back; For as for the heirs
of Veere, they shall never inherit them. Also this Deponent seith, that at
such time that the seid Earl was sick, this Deponent contynewelly abode with
him, by which seasson this Deponent never knew the seid Earl change his mind
in this behalf. And this Deponent also seith, that on Pahne-Sunday eve, which
was the eve of our Lady-daye of the Annuntiation, and also which was the day
next before the decesse of the seid Earl, this Deponent asked of the seid Earl
whether he had made his Will or nay, which Earl then seid, that he had made
noon as yet, but that he would do. And that this Deponent asked how his
Lordship was minded with Drayton and with all his Fee simple Lands, whereof he
commanded this Deponent before that time to bear witness; which Earl then
seid, that it was oon of the greatest causes why he would change his Will, for
as his mind had been to his Cossen Earl of Shrewsbury, so should it contynewe
for ever; commanding this Deponent and other there present to testifye, that
his last Will was and should be, that his Cossen George Earl of Shrewsbury
should have his Manoir of Drayton and all other his Fee simple Lands to him
and to his heirs for ever, after the detts paid and the Will of the seid Earl
performed. Then present at the speaking of the seid words William Pemberton
yet lyving, and diverse others decessed. Whereupon the seid Earl went to other
cogitations, at what time noe man thought that the seid Earl should have
decessed so shortly as he did, but trusted that the seid Earl should have lyved
much longer than he did; albeit on the morrow about ten of the clock, what
time the Priest was at Mass and reding of the Passion, the sed Earl departed
to Gods mercy without any chaungyng of his Will or mind concerning the
premises, as far as this Deponent knew or understood. But this Deponent
seith, that about seven of the Clock in the morning of the seid Palme-Sunday
John Mordaunt Serjeaunt at Law came to the seid Earl, and asked him how he did;
which Earl then seid, well as it pleases God; and then the seid Mordaunt
departed again from thence. And about ten of the Clock then next followyng the
seid Mordaunt came again to the seid Earl with a Will made in the name of the
seid Earl, which Will the seid Mordaunt then red to the seid Earl when he was
anoyled and in extreme peynes of death, so that the seid Earl neither herd nor
understode what the said Mordaunt red, wherein as by the seid redyng it
appeared to this Deponent, that nether the Manoir of Drayton, nether any part
of the Fee simple Lands of the seid Earl were expressed in the seid Will. And
after the seid redyng of the seid Will the seid Earl was deed, or a man
perfetly might seye a Pater Noster and Ave Maria and oon Creed. And more he
knows not.

Deposition of William Pemberton.
WIlliam Pemberton Gentilman, of the age of forty years or more, sworn and
examined seith, that he was brought up of a chyeld with Edward Stafford late
Earl of Wiltshyre, and in his servyse, as sum time his kerver, and sum times
lay in bed with the seid Earl when it pleased him, by the space of twenty years
and more, which was to the time of his decesse, Also he seith, that many and
diverse times the seid Earl showed and reported to this Deponent, that noon of
the chylderen or heirs of Vere should inheret his Manoir of Drayton, or any
part of his other Fee simple Lands, but that his Cossen the Earl of
Shrewsbury should have to him and to his heirs for ever the seid Manoir, with
all his other Fee simple Lands, all his detts paid and his Will performed. Also
this Deponent seith, that the day next before the decesse of the seid Earl, the
seid Earl rehearsed the seid words before this Deponent, Robert Merbury and
others now decessed, wyllinge and charging them to bear witness whenever
ever they should be called, that his full myend and last Will was and should be,
that his Cossyn George Earl of Shrewsbury should have his Manoir of Drayton with
all his other Fee simple Lands, to him and to his heirs for ever, after his
detts paid and his Will performed. And he seith, in virtue of his oath, and as
he shall answer before God, he was continewelly present with the seid Earl
from the seid time of the foreseid speking of the seid words by the seid Earl
unto that the seid Earl was deed, about ten of the Clock before noon on
Palm-Sondaye, and which was our Lady day Annuntiation, about which time the
Priest being at Mass, was redyng of the Passion, by all which seasson this
Deponent never knew, herd, or understoode that the seid Earl changed his will
or myend either in word or deed in that behalf. And more he knows not.

Deposition of Henry Caine.
HEnry Caine Yoman, of the age of eight and forty years and more, sworn and
examyned seith, that he was Grome of the Chamber to the seid Earl by the space
of seven years; and after that this Deponent was Yoman of the Chamber with the
seid Earl by the space of other seven years and more, which was to the time of
the decesse of the seid Earl, by which seasson after Blackhethe Feld as well
at Drayton as at Palenall and diverse other places, this Deponent diverse and
meny times has herd the seid Earl openly declare, for his will, before this
Deponent and diverse others of his fellows both Yomen and Gromes of the
Chamber, that his Cossyn Earl of Shrewsbury should have to him and to his heirs
for ever the Manoir of Drayton and other his Fee simple Lands, after his Detts
paid and his Will performed, commaundnig this Deponent and other his fellows
to record and testifye the premysses. Also this Deponent seith, that the seid
Earl about a month before his decesse gave lycense to this Deponent to go to
Newark upon Trent for such besinesses as this Deponent there had to do, about
which seasson this Deponent came to the Earl of Shrewsbury, lyeing at Wynfeld,
at whose coming the seid Earl demanded of this Deponent, how his Cossyn Earl
of Wiltshyre did; Whereunto this Deponent aunswering seid, that at his
departing from the seid Earl of Wiltshyre he was metely in good health: which
Earl of Shrewsbury then seid, that the understode that the seid Earl of
Wiltshyre should be decessed. And then this Deponent seid, that he would ride
streyht to his seid Lords place to know the certente, and to bring ready word
again to the seid Earl of Shrewsbury. Whereupon at the coming of this Deponent
to Drayton his seid Lord was deed and buried, and diverse of his fellows, both
Yomen and Gromes of the Chamber, now decessed, without asking of any question
by this Deponent, seid to him, that their Lord and Master had yeven and
bequethed to the Earl of Shrewsbury and to his heirs for ever his Manoir of
Drayton with all his other Fee simple Lands, after his Detts paid and his Will
performed: And that the seid Earl of Wiltshyre had required the seid Earl of
Shrewesbury to be good Lord and Master to them, as he trusted verelye he would
be. Whereupon this Deponent took his Horse and returned to Wynfeld foresaid,
where this Deponent showed to the seid Earl of Shrewsbury, how the seid Earl of
Wilteshyre had bequeathed and wylled to him Drayton with other his Fee simple
Lands, in manner and form as he has above deposed. And more he cannot depose.

Deposition of William Boys.
WIlliam Boys Yoman, of the age of eight and forty years and more, sworn and
examyned seith, that he was Servant to the seid Earl of Wilteshyre as being
Usher of his Hall, and keeper of his Park at Drayton, by the space of twenty
years and more, which was to the time of his decesse. Also this Deponent
seith, that the seid Earl about two days before he leyd him down of the
sycknesse whereof he dyed, walked into his Park of Drayton and seid to this
Deponent, that his mind and last Will was and should be, that his Cossyn Earl
of Shrewsbury should have his Manoir of Drayton, with all his other Lands in
Fee simple, to have to hyme and to his Heirs for ever, after his Detts paid
and his Will performyd; which words this Deponent, as he seith, has herd the
seid Earl speak above forty times, commandynge this Deponent to beer witness
thereof; sayeing also, that he would have his seid Cossyn Shrewsbury to socor
and help this Deponent and other his feloes, if theye should need of Mastershyp
or Lordshyp, and so he woold require his seid Cossyn so to do. Also he
seith, that he never knew or herd that the seid Earl any time changed his seid
mind and Will in any poyent thereof, but that he ever contynewed in the same
mind during his life: And more he knows not.

Deposition of Chrystopher Myddylton.
CHrystopher Myddylton, of the age of forty five years and above, sworn and
examyned, seith in virtue of his oath, that he was Grome of the styrop to the
Earl of Wilteshyre by the space of six years or more, which was to the time of
his decesse. Also he seith, thet he herd the seid Earl, as well in taking his
journeye towerd Blackhethe feeld as after his returning from thence at
Drayton, Bakenall and in other places, dyvers times report and seye, that
noone of the heirs of Veer should inherit his Manoir of Drayton or any other
his Fee-simple Lands, though he should be drawn in Hell: But that his last
Will was and ever should be, that his Cossyn Earl of Shrewsbury should have the
seid Manoir, and all his Fee simple Lands, to him and to his heirs for ever,
after his Detts paid and his Will performed, which he woold yeve to his seid
Cossyn for a remembrance, trustyng he woold be good Lord to his Servauntes;
which Earl to the knowledge or understandyng of this Deponent never changed his
seid Will or myend in that behalf. Also he seith that about a wyke or more
after the burying of the seid Earl, Thomas Mountegue, one of the Feoffees and
Executors of the seid Earl, came to this Deponent at a place in Drayton called
the Bareheed, demanding of this Deponent how he woold do; whereunto this
Deponent aunswering seid, that he knew not how to do, nether whether to goo
as yeat; which Mountegue then seid, that he thought that William Merbury his
old Master woold have this Deponent; this Deponent seid, that Master Mordaunt
Serjaunt had desired his Servys, and had offered to him good wages, but he had
not agreyed to take them, nor knew not whether he so woold. And which
Mountegue then seid to this Deponent, thou know that I am oon of the
Feoffees in my Lords Lands, and also oon of his Executors, and knew as much
of his myend as sum other did, and yeat I am not called to Council, for
there is now in the tower here in the place at Drayton Master Mordaunt
Serjaunt, Sir Thomas Cheneye, William Merbury and other such as plesyth them,
which will not let me be pryveye what they do there: But what they do or
intend to do I cannot tell, or whether they will change my Lords Will in any
thing; But this I know of troth, that our Lord and Master's myend was at the
time of his death, that his Cossyn Earl of Shrewsbury should have this Manoir
here of Drayton, and all other his Fee simple Lands, after his Detts paid and
his Will performyd. And then this Deponent seid to the seid Mountegue, that he
dyverse times has herd his seid Lord sey and report the same. And more he
knows not.

Deposition of Thomas Cade.
THomas Cade Clarke, Parson of Buckworth in the Diocese of Lincoln, of the age
of forty eight years and more, sworn and examyned the first day of the Month
of March, in the fifth year of the Reign of King Henry the Eight, upon the
testament and last will of Edward late Earl of Wiltes seith and deposes, that
he knew well and perfetly the seid Earl, insomoche this Deponent was his
household Chaplayne by the space of seven years and more. And as concerning the
making of the Testament and last Will of the seid Earl, this Deponent seith,
that he can nothing depose of the contents thereof, but affirms, the twenty
fourth day of March, then being Palm-Sonday, in the year of our Lord God one
thousand four hundred ninety and eight, this Deponent was present at the Manoir
of Drayton the day and year aboveseid in a high Chamber, in which Chamber the
seid Earl lay sick, and there in the presence of this Deponent the seid
Testament and last Will was engrosed in Parchment by one Philip Foster, and
presented and delyvered unto the Hands of the seid Earl, and then and there in
presence of this Deponent the seid Testament and last Will was so sealed with
his accustomed square Signet, graved with a ramping Bear upon a Berewerdes
Staff, then being present at the sealing of the seid Testament and last Will
John Mordaunt Serjeaunt at the Law, Robert Wittelbury, William Marbury, Philip
Foster, James Walbef, Master William Hylde then Master of the College of
Foderinghay, this Deponent, and others more, whose names he perfetly remembers
not. Also this Deponent affirms, that the seid Testament and last Will of the
seid Earl so Sealed was his last Will and Testament, and that he never made
after that time any other Testament, neither solemn in writing, nor
nuncupative by word, and that he renounced all other Wylls, and took him only
to that Will, and would the same to stand for his last Will and Testament and
none other; seying also, that the seid Earl was at the time of the sealing of
the seid Testament and last Will in perfect mind and good remembrance. And at
the same time the seid Earl delivered the seid Testament and last Will so
perfitly engrosed and sealed, unto the hands of William Merbury, one of the
seid Earls Executours, in the name of all other his Executours. This done as
above is written, the seid Earl prayed and required this Deponent, that he would
housell him, and thereunto this Deponent answered and seid these words
following; My Lord, I have made every thing in full redynesse to go to Mass,
if ye be so pleased, and at the same Mass to consecrate an hooste, and when
Mass is done, to housell you. Nay seid the same Earl, I pray you let me not
tarry so long. And thereupon this Deponent went down into the Chapel, and
brought the Sacrament up to the seid Earls lodging Chamber, and set it upon the
cupborde there ready prepared for the same, and came to the same Earl lyeing in
his bed, and seid to him these words following; My Lord, I have brought to you
your Maker and Redeemer, as ye have desired me to do; and forasmoche as every
Priest that shall take upon him to minester the same Sacrament to any Christen
man, ought to examine the faith of soche person as it shall be minstred unto, I
do require of you that I may know what faith is in you, and how ye believe.
Whereunto the seid Earl answered and seid, I believe in Almighty God Creator
and Maker of Hevyn and Earth, and in Jesus Christ his only begoten Son; and
so in effect he answered fourth to all the twelve Articles of the Faith, with
many other good and contryte words; and seid these words following to this
Deponent and to all other then being present there, I pray you witness with me
(and looked on side to th'oder, folks being in the Chamber) and all you. And
after these words the seid Earl with contrite heart made a general knowledge
to God, seying, Confiteor Deo, beatae Mariae, etc. Then this Deponent, by such
authorite as to him was yeven, unto the seid Earl granted and gave absolution;
and that done, the seid Earl received the Sacrament by the hands of this
Deponent with great reverence and meekness of heart. And after that the seid
Earl commanded this Deponent to go to Mass in the seid Earls Chamber, where
at that time the seid Earl lay; and for because the seid Chamber was sumewhat
close, the seid Earl commanded certain panes of the window of the seid Chamber
to be taken down, and to th'entente that more fresh air should coume in,
commanded that the window should be set open, in which window this Deponent
then seid Mass; and for because there came so much wind in at the seid
window, this Deponent spoke to Philip Foster to help him at that time to sing,
that when he should come to the consecration of the host, that then the seid
Philip should shut the said window, and so to remain shut till this Deponent
had used. And when this Deponent had begun his Mass, the seid Earl of his own
mind perceiving that the wind was noyense to this Deponent in seying his
Mass, commanded the seid window to be shut, before he came to the Epistle in
the seid Mass. And after Mass ended, there went a Chaplain of the seid Earls
to high Mass in the Chapel, whose name was Sir John Bukmaster, and at the
passion time of the seid high Mass so seid in the seid Chapel by the seid Sir
John Bukmaster, there came to this Deponent one of the seid Earls Servaunts
called Robert Wilkinson, and seid to this Deponent these words following;
Fader, for the reverence of God come to my Lord, for he is in the pains of
death. And thereupon this Deponent departed out of the seid Chapel into the
seid Earls Chamber, and found there noe creature but himself only. And this
Deponent lighted a fise of wax that was hallowed, and seid these words
following, In manus tuas, Domine, etc. And in that same moment the seid Earl
departed to God out of this present life. And thus this Deponent left the deed
body of the seid Earl, whose soul God absolve. And more he knows not.

Deposition of James Walbef.
JAmes Walbef of Osneye in the County of Oxford Gentleman, of the age of fifty
years, sworn and examined upon the Testament and last Will of Edward late Earl
of Wiltes seith, that he was Auditor to Edward late Earl of Wilts, whose soul
Jesus pardon. And this Deponent seith, that he was present at the Manoir of
Drayton on Palme-Sonday in the morning, the fourteenth year of the Reign of
our late Sovereigne Lord King Henry the seventh, in the Chamber where the seid
Earl lay sick on his dethbed, at which time the seid Earls last Will was
brought forth by one Philip Foster, sometime being Schole-master and Servaunt
to the seid Earl. At which time John Mordaunt then Sarjeaunt at the Law there
being present, after the seid Will was read, demanded and asked of the seid
Earl, whether that his full mind was, that that Will should clearly stand for
his last Will or not, and if he would renounce all manner of other Wylls.
Whereunto the seid Earl answered and seid, that he did renownce all other
Wylls, and that he would hold him to that Testament only, and that it should
stand to be ferme and stable for his last Will and Testament and none other,
with an articule which the seid Earl caused to be put into the end of his
Will, that Robert Wilkinson should have an annuitie of forty shillings for term
of his life, and also the seid Earl recyted certain articules of his Will in
especial as hereafter follows, that is to sey, that the seid Philip Foster
should have an annuitie of four marks for term of his life, as this Deponent
remembers, and also that Edward Bruet then Grome of his Chamber should have an
annuitie of forty shillings for term of his life, and that all Fees which
were granted by Deed or by Patent by his Fader, his Mother or his Graundfader
Green or by himself, should be held ferme and stable for term of their lyyes
to whom they were granted. And after this done the seid Will was sealed with
a Sygnet of Gold, the print whereof was a Bear, as this Deponent remembereth,
the which Sygnet was in his powche under his bedes head at that time. And
after it was sealed, the seid Earl delivered it to the hands of William
Marbury Esquier, one of his Executours, in the presence of diverse of his
household Servaunts. And after the seid Will was so red, sealed and delivered
to the seid William Marbury, the seid Earl desired to be howselled, and then
and there one Sir Thomas Cade, then Chaplain to the seid Earl, went into the
Chapel, and brought forth an host, which was consecrate before that time,
to the seid Earl, and thereupon the seid Sir Thomas Cade had many good words of
exhortation to the seid Earl before he was howselled for his souls health, and
the seid Earl had in likewise many good words to him and to them that stood by,
like a good true Christian man, which this Deponent now persetly remembers
not; And thereupon the seid Earl was howselled by the hands of the seid Sir
Thomas Cade. And after that the seid Earl commanded the seid Sir Thomas Cade
to go to Mass. Whereupon the seid Sir Thomas Cade went to Mass in a window
before the seid Earl; and about the space of an hour after the seid Mass was
done, there went another Priest to high Mass in the Chapel, and at the
passion time of the seid high Mass the seid Earl departed out of this world.
And this Deponent seith, that he was servaunt to the seid Earl many years, and
was privye to the orderinge of diverse and many matters touching the seid Earl.
Also this Deponent seith, That the Will of the seide Earl was written in Paper
and corrected by the seid Earls Council, before it was written into Parchment;
and after that it was so corrected by the seid Council and by the
commandment of the seid Earl, the seid Earl commanded William Marbury to
cause his seid Will to be written and engrossed into Parchement, and thereupon
the seid Will was so written by the hands of the seid Philip Foster as is
above deposed. And this Deponent seith; that he was never privye any time
before the death of the seid Earl at the making of the seid Will, or otherwise,
nether herd, knew nor understoode by the seid Earl at any seasson, that his
Cossyn Earl of Shrewsbury should have the Manoir of Drayton or any other Lands
or Tenements of the seid Earls; but as this Deponent remembers, the seid Earl
made his seid Cossyn Earl of Shrewsbury Overseer of his last Will and
Testament. Also this Deponent seith, that he was daily in the House of the seid
Earl from Crystmasse unto the day of his death in keeping of his audite, and
declared all the declarations upon the Thursday before the day of his decese,
and that he never herd any other Will by mouth or otherwise rehearsed for his
full Will, other then the seid Will. And more this Deponent knows not in this
matter as he seith.

Inquisitio capta post mortem Edwardi Comitis Wilts, etc.
INquisito Indentata capta apud....... in Comitatu praedicto....... die.....
Anno Regni Regis Henrici Octavi post Conquestum quinto, coram Richardo Pulter
Escaetore dicti Domini Regis in Comitatu praedicto, virtute officii sui, tam
post mortem Edwardi nuper Comitis Wilts, quam post mortem Elizabethae nuper
uxoris Thomae Cheney Militis and Constanciae nuper uxoris Johannis Parre,
necnon Annae nuper uxoris Humfridi Brown, per sacramentum, etc. Qui dicunt
super Sacramentum suum, quod Richardus Bollesore Clericus, Willielmus de Ashele
Clericus, Nicolaus Green and Nicolaus Thenford fuerunt seisiti de Manerio de
Drayton cum pertinentiis; Et sic inde seisiti, Licentia Regia inde primitus
obtenta, dederunt Manerium illud cum pertinentiis Henrico Green, filio Henrici
Green, and haeredibus de corpore ipsius Henrici filii exeuntibus; virtute
cujus doni idem Henricus filius fuit inde seisitus in feodo talliato, and obiit
de tali statu inde seisitus. Et dicunt insuper Juratores praedicti, quod
Henricus Green fuit seisitus de Luffwyck cum pertinentiis, ac de advocatione
Ecclesiae de Luffwyck in Dominico suo ut de feodo; Et sic inde seisitus, dedit
Manerium praedictum ac advocationem Ecclesiae praedictae cum eorum pertinentiis
Henrico Green filio suo, and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus; virtute
cujus doni idem Henricus filius fuit inde seisitus in Dominico suo and de feodo
talliato per formam doni praedicti, and obiit de tali statu inde seisitus. Post
cujus mortem Maneria praedicta cum pertinentiis, simul cum advocatione ejusdem
Ecclesiae de Luffwyk, descendebant cuidam Constanciae nuper Comitissae Wilts,
ut Consanguineae and haeredi ipsius Henrici filii, videlicet ut filiae Henrici
Green, filii Johannis, filii ipsius Henrici filii; Virtute cujus eadem
Constancia fuit inde seisita in feodo talliato per formam doni praedicti, and
obiit de tali statu inde seisita. Post cujus mortem Maneria praedicta simul cum
advocatione ejusdem Ecclesiae de Luffwyck descendebant cuidam Edwardo nuper
Comiti Wilts, ut filio and haeredi ipsius Constanciae; Virtute cujus idem
Edwardus Comes fuit inde seisitus in Dominico suo ut de feodo talliato per
formam doni praedicti; Et sic inde seisitus de praedicto Manerio de Drayton cum
pertinentiis, licentia Regia inde primitus obtenta, feoffavit Thomam Mountegu
and Willielmum Pemberton, Habendo eis in feodo ad usum ipsius Comitis and
haeredum suorum ex part praedictae Constanciae, Matris ipsius Comitis, and ad
inde perimplendam ultimam voluntatem ejusdem Comitis; Et de praedicto Manerio
de Luffwyck feoffavit dictum Thomam Mountegue and alios, Habendo eis in feodo
ad usum ipsius Comitis and haeredum suorum ex part praedictae Constanciae
matris ipsius Comitis, Et ad inde perimplendam ultimam voluntatem ejusdem
Comitis. Et idem Comes per ultimam voluntatem suam voluit quod idem Thomas
Mountegue and alii Executores ejusdem nuper Comitis, perciperent exitus and
proficua dictorum Maneriorum de Drayton and Luffwyck cum pertinentiis, ad
perimplendam ultimam voluntatem dicti nuper Comitis. Et postea idem Comes obiit
sine exitu de corpore suo procreato; post cujus mortem usus Maneriorum
praedictorum, simul cum advocatione ejusdem Ecclesiae de Luffwyck, cum eorum
pertinentiis, descendebant praefatae Elizabethae Cheyne nuper uxori Thomae
Cheyne Militis, Elizabethae nunc uxori Johannis Mordaunt, Annae nuper uxori
Humfridi Brown, praedictae Constanciae nuper uxori Johannis Parre, and
Etheldredae Veer, ut Consanguineis and haeredibus ipsius Edwardi nuper Comitis
ex part praedictae Constanciae, matris dicti nuper Comitis, videlicet
praefatae Elizabethae Cheyne ut filiae and haeredi Margeriae, unius sororum and
haeredum praedicti Henrici Green patris praedictae Constanciae nuper
Comitissae, matris praedicti Edwardi nuper Comitis, Et praedictis Elizabethae
Mordaunt, Annae, Constanciae nuper uxori Johannis Parre, and Etheldredae Veer,
ut filiabus and haeredibus Henrici Veer de magna Adyngton in dicto Comitatu
Northamptoniae Armigeri, filii and haeredis Isabellae, alterius sororum and
haeredum praedicti Henrici Green Patris praedictae Constanciae nuper
Comitissae, matris praedicti Edwardi nuper Comitis. Et dicunt insuper Juratores
praedicti quod praedicta Elizabetha, nuper uxor dicti Thomae Cheyne Militis,
obiit tertio die Aprilis, Anno Regni Henrici nuper Regis Angliae septimi decimo
septimo, sine exitu de corpore suo exeunte; post cujus mortem medietas omnium
maneriorum praedictorum, advocationum and caeterorum praemissorum, cum eorum
pertinentiis, descendebant praefatis Elizabethae uxori Johannis Mordaunt,
Annae, Constanciae uxori Johannis Parre, and Etheldredae ut Consanguineis and
haeredibus dictae Elizabethae Cheyne, videlicet ut filiabus and haeredibus
dicti Henrici, filii Isabellae, sororis dictae Margeriae, matris dictae
Elizabethae Cheyne. Et dicunt Juratores praedicti, quod dicta Constancia nuper
uxor dicti Johannis Parre obiit...... die Augusti, Anno Regni dicti Domini
Henrici nuper Regis Angliae Septimi decimo septimo, sine exitu de corpore suo
exeunte; post cujus mortem quarta pars praedictorum Maneriorum, advocationis ac
caeterorum praemissorum cum pertinentiis, descendebant praefatis Elizabethae
Mordaunt, Annae and Etheldredae, ut sororibus and haeredibus ipsius Constanciae
Parre. Et dicunt ulterius Juratores praedicti, quod dicta Anna cepit in vitum
Humphridum Brown, and habuerunt exitum Georgium Brown; Et quod dicta Anna
postea obiit, videlicet decimo quinto die Septembris, Anno Regni dicti Domini
Henrici nuper Regis Angliae Septimi vicesimo secundo; Et quod idem Georgius
Brown est aetatis sex annorum and amplius. Et dicunt Juratores praedicti, quod
praedictum Manerium de Drayton cum pertinentiis tenetur de Domino Rege in
Capite, per quae servitia juratores praedicti penitus ignorant; Et quod
Willielmus Merbury exitus and proficua ejusdem Manerii a tempore mortis dicti
Edwardi nuper Comitis, usque primum diem Octobris, Anno Regni Domini Henrici
dicti nuper Regis Angliae Septimi vicesimo octavo, percepit and habuit; Et quod
Robertus Merbury a dicto primo die Octobris usque ad diem hujus Inquisitionis
percepit and habuit. Et ulterius dicunt quod praedictum Manerium de Luffwyck,
cum advocatione ejusdem Ecclesiae de Luffwyck cum eorum pertinentiis, tenetur
de Abbate de Peterburgh per fidelitatem, and per quae alia servitia Juratores
praedicti penitus ignorant; Et quod dictus Willielmus Merbury exitus and
proficua ejusdem Manerii a tempore mortis dicti Edwardi nuper Comitis usque
dictum primum diem Octobris dicto Anno vicesimo octavo, percepit and habuit; Et
quod Robertus Wittelbury a dicto primo die Octobris usque primum diem Maii,
Anno Regni Domini Regis nunc primo, exitus and proficua ejusdem Manerii
percepit and habuit; Et quod....... Clement and...... uxor ejus exitus and
proficua a dicto primo die Maii usque diem hujus Inquisitionis perceperunt and
habuerunt. Et dicunt Juratores praedicti, quod praedicta Ecclesia de Luffwyck
vacavit circa decimum octavum diem Octobris Anno Regni Domini Henrici nuper
Regis Angliae vicesimo quarto; Et quod Johannes Mordaunt ad eandem Ecclesiam
praesentavit Willielmum Hamswayte Capellanum, qui ad suam praesentationem fuit
admissus, institutus and inductus. In cujus, etc.

Et postea praedictus Johannes Mordaunt and Elizabetha uxor ejus, Georgius
Brown, Johannes Brown and Etheldreda uxor ejus prosecuti fuerunt breve de
forma donationis in distender versus Thomam Mountegue and Willielmum Pemberton
de Manerio de Drayton cum pertinentiis in Comitatu praedicto, and continuatur
processus quousque praedicti Johannes Mordaunt, Elizabetha uxor ejus, Georgius
Brown, and Johannes Brown and Etheldreda uxor ejus recuperaverunt Manerium
praedictum cum pertinentiis versus praedictum Thomam Mountegue and Willielmum
Pemberton, prout pro termino Trinitatis Anno octavo Henrici Octavi apparet.
Virtute cujus recuperationis ipsi Johannes Mordaunt and Johannes Brown
intraverunt in Manerium praedictum cum pertinentiis. Et alias praedicti
Johannes Mordaunt and Elizabetha uxor ejus, Georgius Brown, Johannes Brown
and Etheldreda uxor ejus prosecuti fuerunt breve de forma donationis in
distender versus Thomam Mountegue de Manerio de Luffwyck cum pertinentiis in
Comitatu praedicto, and continuatur processu quousque praedicti Johannes
Mordaunt, Elizabetha uxor ejus, Georgius Brown, and Johannes Brown, and
Etheldreda uxor ejus recuperaverunt Manerium praedictum cum pertinentiis versus
praedictum Thomam Mountegue, prout pro termino Sanctae Trinitatis Anno octavo
Regis octavi apparet. Virtute cujus quidem recuperationis praedicti Johannes
Mordaunt and Johannes Brown intraverunt Manerium praedictum cum pertinentiis.

An Award between the Earl of Shrewsbury, and John Mordaunt concerning the
Manor of Drayton.
TO all Christian people, to whom this present writing Indented shall come,
hear, or see, Robert Brudenell and Richard Elliot, two of the Kings Justices,
send greeting in our Lord.
Whereas there have been diverse variances and debates, moved and had, between
the Right Honorable Lord George Earl of Shrewsbury on the one party, and John
Mordaunt Squire and Elizabeth his Wife, one of the Cossyns and heirs to the
Right Honorable Edward late Earl of Wiltshire on his Mothers side, that is to
say, by Constance Mother of the said Earl and Daughter and heir of Henry Green
of Drayton in the County of Northampton Squire, and Humphrey Brown Squire,
late Husband to Amye, and George Brown his Son and heir apparent, and Son and
heir to the same Amye, another Cossyn, and another of the heirs to the said
Earl of Wilshire after the form aforesaid, and Sir Wistan Brown Knight, and
John Brown his Son and heir apparent, and Audrey his Wife, the third Cossyn
and heir to the same Earl after the manner abovesaid on the other party, of and
upon the right, title, reversion and possession as well to the aforesaid Manor
of Drayton with the appurtenances, as of all other Manors, Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments with their appurtenances, in the said County of Northampton,
or elsewhere, which late were to the said Constance, or to the foresaid Henry
Green, or to any other person or persons, to the use of them or the other of
them; which Manors, Lands, Tenements, the foresaid Earl of Shrewsbury claims
by a Will, supposed to be made by the said Earl of Wiltshire, by which Will the
foresaid Earl of Wiltshire should Will to the said Earl of Shrewsbury, all his
Feesimple Land; Whereupon the foresaid parties have compromitted themselves, to
abide the Award, Ordinance and Judgment, of us the said Robert Brudenell and
Richard Elliot Arbitrators indifferently named and chosen by and between the
aforesaid parties, to award, ordain, and deem, as well of and upon the
premises, as for and upon all manner Evidences, Charters, Escripts, Writings
and Aminiments concerning the premises, or any part of them, and of all manner
of Actions, Suits, Quarrels, and Demands, had or moved between the foresaid
parties, or other Servants, or Friends before the date of these presents,
concerning the premises. And we the aforesaid Arbitrators taking upon us the
authority and power to Award, Ordain and Deem, of and upon the premises,
calling before us the Counsels of the said parties, hearing and seeing their
Tytels, Answers, Replications, Evidences, Proves, and all other their
Allegances, concerning their aforesaid Tytles and Interess, by good
deliberation and by consent of the said parties, Award, Ordain and Deem, of and
upon the premises, in manner and form following, that is to say, forasmuch as
the aforesaid John Mordaunt, Sir Wistan, Humphrey Brown, George and John
Brown, have showed to us the said Arbitrators, a Will supposed to be made by
the same Earl of Wiltshire, and sealed with his Seal; in which Will he revoked
all former Wills, and willed that same Will to stand in his full strength and
virtue, and for his last Will; and in that Will there is no clause whereby the
said Earl of Shrewsbury should have any of his Manors, Lands, or Tenements, as
by the same more plainly appears. And also they have showed unto us fair and
sufficient Deeds, and other Writings, proving the foresaid Manor of Drayton,
and other the said Manors, Lands, Tenements and hereditaments, to be yeven in
tail to the Ancestors of the said Constance, Mother to the said Earl of
Wiltshire, and that the same Earl of Wiltshire had and enjoyed the same by
reason of the same tails, and the foresaid Elizabeth and George Brown, and
Audrey, be Cosens and next heirs to the said Constance, Mother to the said
Earl of Wiltshire, and to the said Earl on his said Mothers side, and heritable
to the foresaid Manors, and other premises, by reason of the same tails:
Wherefore we Award, Ordain and Deem, that the foresaid Elizabeth, George Brown
and Audrey, shall have and enjoy all the foresaid Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and other the premises, to them and to their heirs, according to
the foresaid Titles of Inheritance, and that the foresaid Earl of Shrewsbury
shall by his several Deeds sufficient in the Law, to be enrolled, release to
the said John Mordaunt and Elizabeth, Humphrey Brown, George Brown, and John
Brown and Audrey his Wife, and to such person or persons as they shall name,
to the use of the said Elizabeth, George and Audrey, and their heirs, all such
Right, Title, Claim, Interest and Demands, as the said Earl of Shrewsbury, or
any person or persons to his use, has in the foresaid Manors, Lands and
Tenements, and other the premises, by reason of any Gift or Will in the
premises, or any part of them, made by the foresaid Earl of Wiltshire to the
foresaid Earl of Shrewsbury, at the Costs and Charges of the said John
Mordaunt, John and George Brown in all things; And furthermore the said Earl
of Shrewsbury shall deliver, or cause to be delivered to the said John
Mordaunt, Humphrey Brown, John and George Brown, or to their Deputy or
Deputies in London, all such Charters, Evidences and Writings, as he to his own
use, or any other to his use, to his knowledge, has only concerning the
premises, as soon as it may be conveniently done; for the which Releases and
other things above specified, and for other Costs and Charges which the
aforesaid Earl of Shrewsbury has had by occasion of the premises, We the said
Arbitrators, Award, Ordain, and Deem, that the said Sir Wistan, John Mordaunt,
Humphrey Brown and John Brown shall content and pay to the said Earl of
Shrewsbury, his Executors or Assigns, two hundred Marks of lawful Money, in
form following; that is to say, the said John Mordaunt shall content and pay
to the foresaid Earl of Shrewsbury, his Executors or Assigns, in the day of the
Feast of St. George the Martyr, next coming after the date above written, at
the Rode of the North door in the Cathedral Church of Paul's in the City of
London, between the hours of Nine and Eleven of the Clock of the same day, a
hundred marks; and the foresaid Sir Wistan, Humphrey Brown and John Brown
shall content and pay to the foresaid Earl, his Executors or Assigns, in the
day of the Feast of St. Andrew the Apostle then next ensueing, at the said Rode
in the said Church, between the hours of Nine and Eleven of the same day, a
hundred marks, residue of the foresaid two hundred marks. Also we Award,
Ordain, and Deem, that the said John Mordaunt, Sir Wistan Brown, Humphrey and
John Brown by their Deed and Deeds, as sufficient as the said Earl of
Shrewsbury by his Council shall advise, shall release to the said Earl of
Shrewsbury, and as many persons as the said Earl shall name and appoint, in
writing before the Feast of St. Michaell the Archangel next coming after the
date hereof, which has done, labored or spoken for the said Earl in his
foresaid cause, all actions of Trespasses, Debates and Demands personal, had,
or done before the date of these presents, at the Costs and Charges of the said
Earl of Shrewsbury and the said Earl and all the foresaid persons, which have
done, spoken, or labored any thing for the said Earl of Shrewsbury, in or for
his trial or possession of the premises or any part of them, shall be for ever
discharged against the same Sir Wistan, John Mordaunt and Elizabeth his Wife,
Humphrey Brown, George Brown, John Brown and Audrey his Wife, and every of
them, of all Actions, Trespasses, and Demands personal, which they have, or
might have, against the same Earl or the foresaid other persons, for any cause
had or done touching the premises before the date of these presents.

In witness whereof the foresaid Arbitrators to every part of these Indentures
of their Award, have put to their Seals this twentieth day of March, the sixth
year of the Reign of King Henry the Eight.
A Release from the Earl of Shrewsbury to John Mordaunt of all his Right
concerning the Manor of Drayton.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, nos Georgius
Comes Salopiae
salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Sciatis, nos praefatum Georgium Comitem remisisse, relaxasse, and omnino pro
nobis and haeredibus nostris quietum clamasse, Johanni Mordaunt and Elizabethae
uxori ejus, uni consanguinearum and haeredum Edwardi nuper Comitis Wilts, ex
part matris ejusdem Edwardi, videlicet filii Constanciae, filiae and haeredis
Henrici Green nuper de Drayton in Comitatu Northamptoniae Armigeri, Humfrido
Brown, Georgio Brown, filio and haeredi apparenti dicti Humfridi Brown; and
filio and haeredi Amiae alterius consanguinearum and haeredum dicti Edwardi, ex
part dictae Constanciae, Johanni Brown and Etheldredae uxori ejus tertiae
consanguinearum and haeredum dicti Edwardi, ex part dictae Constanciae, Thomae
Montegue and Willielmo Pemberton, haeredibus and assignatis suis, ad usum
eorundem Johannis Mordaunt and Elizabethae uxoris ejus, Humfridi Brown,
Georgii Brown, and Johannis Brown and Etheldredae uxoris ejus, and haeredum
ipsarum Elizabethae, Georgii and Etheldredae, totum Jus nostrum, statum,
titulum, clameum, interesse and demandum quae habemus, seu unquam habuimus, de
and in Manerio de Drayton, ac de and in omnibus aliis maneriis, terris,
tenementis, reditibus, reversionibus, Boscis, pratis, pascuis, pasturis and
aliis haereditamentis quibuscunque, cum eorum pertinentiis, quae nuper fuerunt
praedictae Constanciae, aut praedicti Henrici, sive alicujus alterius, sive
aliquorum aliorum, ad eorum aut alterius eorum usum, in dicto Comitatu
Northamptoniae, seu in aliquo alio Comitatu infra Regnum Angliae aut in
Marchiis eorundem, quae nos praefatus Georgius Comes vel haeredes nostri aliquo
modo habere poterimus in praedictis Maneriis ac caeteris praemissis, aut in
eorum aliquo, cum eorum pertinentiis, ratione alicujus donationis, legationis,
seu per ultimam voluntatem praefati Edwardi nuper Comitis Wilts nobis factis
sive habitis, salvis omnino and reservatis nobis and haeredibus nostris, omni
clameo, jure, titulo, interesse, and demando, quae habemus seu habere poterimus
in praemissis, seu in eorum aliquo nobis per descensum aut per Jus
haereditarium, per aliquem antecessorum nostrorum, cujus vel quorum haeres, nos
praefatus Georgius Comes existimus, seu ratione alicujus alterius tituli quem
habere poterimus, aliter quam per ultimam voluntatem, legationem sive
donationem praedicti Comitis Wilts, facta sive habita, ita quod nec nos
praefatus, Georgius Comes, nec haeredes nostri, nec aliquis pro alius nobis,
seu nomine nostro, aliquod Jus, statum, titulum, clameum, interesse seu
demandum, de aut in praedictis Maneriis, ac caeteris praemissis cum eorum
pertinentiis, nec in aliqua eorum parcella, ex causis praedictis, de caetero
exigere, clamare seu vendicare poterimus, sed ab omni action juris, tituli,
clamei, interesse, aut demandi, seu aliquid inde petendi simus exclusi in
perpetuum per praesentes. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Scripto meo
Sigillum meum apposui.

Dat' vicesimo quarto die Marcii Anno Regni Regis Henrici Octavi post
Conquestum sexto. G. Shrewsbury.

blazons or coats of arms in the windows of St Peter's church, Lowick,
Northamptonshire In the first South Window of the Chancell in St: Peter's Church
of Luffwick.
In the Second South Window
In the first Window on the North side of the Chancell.
In the second Window on the North side of the Chancell.
In the East Window on the South side of the said Chancell.
In the East Window on the North side of the Chancell
In the East Window of the Chapel at Drayton.
In the first Window on the South side of the Chapel
In the Second Window on the South Side of the Chapel




blazons of coats of arms in the windows of Drayton Hall, Lowick,
Northamptonshire In the lesser Window of Drayton Hall
In the greater Window of Drayton Hall.


A SUCCINCT GENEALOGY Of that HOUSE of VERE, Of which were the LORDS of
Addington and Thrapston; Justified by Public Records, Extant Charters,
Histories, and other Authentic Proofs.
By ROBERT HALSTEAD.
The Arms of the Veres of Addington were of Vere Charged upon the Center with
an Escucheon, bearing Argent a Cross Gules.

blazon or coat of arms of the de Vere family

Of the Original, Descent, Possessions, Alliances, Actions and Arms, of the
House of Vere, which were Lords of Addington and Thrapston.
THE VERES that were Lords of Addington and Thrapston had their Original from
Sir Robert de Vere, who was second Son to Aubrey Earl of Guisnes, Great
Chamberlain to King Henry the First, and Lord Chief Justice of England. Which
granted, it will not after be denied, but their extraction was as great, as any
thing, from whence an English Subject could derive. I shall not enter upon
exaggeration of the Greatness, and advantages of the House of Oxford, they
having been such, as with which, I think, few other can be comparable; but
leave them to some fortunate Author, who by faithfully exposing their truths
unto the world, may do himself honor, and the Nation too: I shall only pursue
what may concern those Veres of which I treat, and with whom I came to be
acquainted, by perusing the Evidences in the House of Drayton; and unto this
Family, I am obliged to tell the Reader, that I think there does belong, an
attribution of as much Honor and Esteem, as any of their Quality could pretend
unto. They have always produced Knights famous for their prowess, for their
fidelities, and for their prudence; They appear in many considerable
expeditions abroad; in France, in Palestine, in Scotland, in Wales, in the most
notable Offices at home, Governing under their Princes the Countries where they
lived. They enter into the most eminent Alliances, with the Houses of Wake,
Bassett, Seagrave, Clifford, and De la Souche; and they have always possessed
many great Manors, and noble Lordships. Besides which, in the whole space of
their durance here, there remains not on their memories the least spot of
reproach or prejudice; but, as all things are ordained to have an end, it was
the fortune of this House to terminate in the Lady Elizabeth Vere, Daughter and
Heir to the last Sir Henry Vere, who being married to John the first Lord
Mordaunt, brought into his Family the Honor, the Blood, the Lands, and the Arms
of this House; which were of Vere, charged on the Center with a Shield, bearing
Argent a Cross Gules, always born by the Lords of this Family, in memory of
their Ancestor Sir Robert de Vere, who was slain, with his General, in a fight
in Palestine, being at that time Standard Bearer to William Longespe, the
famous Earl of Salisbury, that was Grandson to King Henry the Second, and the
fair Lady Rosamond.

AVBREY de VERE, Earl of Guisnes, Chief Justiciar and Great Chamberlain to King
Henry the First.
AUBREY de VERE Earl of Guisnes, was Chief Justiciar of England under King
Henry the First, which in that time was the greatest Office of the Crown;
whoever was invested in it, did exceed all the Noblemen in dignity, and in
power all the Magistrates. And he was also Chamberlain to King Henry the First,
after the death of Robert Mallet. Besides the other great possessions which his
Father Earl Aubrey the elder, and himself had acquired at the Conquest, he held
the Lordships of Drayton, Luffwyck, Islip, Slipton, Addington and Twyvell in
the County of Northampton. This Aubrey was among the great men of his time, in
the highest esteem for wisdom, and experience; and always lived of nearest use,
and Counsel to those Princes, with whom he was Contemporary. He was sent in the
fourth year of King Stephen to that memorable Council of Winchester, unto which
the King himself had been cited by his own Brother, then Bishop of that See,
where with great force and eloquence he pleaded the King's Cause in defense of
his imprisoning certain Bishops, which was there laid to his Charge. But it
fell out, that in the succeeding year he was slain in London in a tumult raised
by the Seditious Citizens. He married Adeliza the Daughter of Gilbert of Clare,
by whom he had Issue Aubrey de Vere the first Earl of Oxford. Sir Robert de
Vere. Roetia Vere, the Wife of Jeffery de Magnavilla Earl of Essex.


MY business being to deduce the Descent of the Veres that were Lords of
Drayton and Addington, and not of the Earls of Oxford, I am obliged to return
to ROBERT de VERE, the second Son of the forementioned Aubrey, to whom his
Father left for his provision and Inheritance, the Lordships of Drayton,
Luffwyck, Slipton, Islip, both the Addingtons, and the Land of Twyvell; which
latter they had held of the Abbey of Thorney. We find this Robert in a Charter
of his under the style of Robert the Son of Aubrey the Kings Chamberlain, did
acknowledge to hold the Land of Twyvell; for so long as he should live, from
Robert the Lord Abbot of Thorney and the Monks of that House, by the same
Covenants under which his Father before him held the same; and that for the
Tenths of the five Carucates, which his Father had given to Saint Mary of
Thorney, to wit, of Drayton, Islip, and Addington, that were of his dominion,
he did grant the same to God, Saint Mary, and the Monks of Thorney. There is
extant of his another Charter, wherein by the name of Robert the Son of Aubrey;
in the first year of the Reign of King Henry the younger, in the presence of
his own Son Henry, he did quit-claim the Manor of Twyvell to the Monastery of
Thorney; which gift was after confirmed by Pope Alexander the third. He was one
of the most faithful and vigorous assertors of the interest and pretenses of
Matilda the Empress, and the Prince her Son, against King Stephen, during the
heats of all the differences appertaining to that contest; and of such esteem
were the effects of his Valor, and generous endeavors, as obliged that
Princess to promise him a Barony valuable with that given to Jeffery de Vere,
and other Lands of equal consideration within a year after she should come to
enjoy the Realm of England. He Married Matilda the Daughter of the Lord Robert
de Furnell, with whom her Father gave in free Marriage diverse Lands in
Cranford; by whom he had Issue Sir Henry de Vere. And William de Vere.


HENRY the Son of Robert de Vere, that was Lord of Drayton, Addington and other
Lordships, was bred up under the care and conduct of his Cousin, the great
William de Magnavilla, Earl of Essex and Albemarle, who was the Son of Roesia
de Vere Countess of Essex, his Fathers Sister. Henry de Vere did give himself
to a dependence upon this Earl, who was a man of great military fame in that
time, and from his example and precept became a Knight of much renown and
valor. For his first essay in Arms, he slew with his own hand, Ralph de Vaux,
in an encounter near the City of Gysors, who was the Son of a great Lord that
would have fortified a strong House of his too near the Borders, and had
besides injured his Cousin the Earl of Albemarle, the King's Chief Governor in
those parts; the words are, verbis dehonestavit amaris. He was made Constable
of the Castle and City of Gysors, where he commanded with much reputation, till
that after the death of his Father he was called home to the care of a
considerable fortune of his own, where we find him afterward to have been one
of those that sided with King John, being then but Earl of Moriton, against the
proud Bishop of Ely, whom King Richard had left behind him to govern the Land
in his absence, being by the same Bishop, amongst diverse others of the great
Lords of that time, excommunicated. He had in Marriage, with one of the
Daughters of a great Lady, whose name was Hildeburga....... the Manor of
Mutford, and thirty pounds Land in Ampton, which she held of the Barony of
Bouden, that did belong to her Father Baldwin of Boxo, a great Lord of that
time.

Their Issue, Sir Walter de Vere Lord of Drayton. Sir Robert de Vere Lord of
Addington.


WE find not any Lands were left by his Father unto ROBERT the second Son of
Sir Henry de Vere; but it is to be esteemed that he inherited no small part of
his Virtue and his Valor, since his own merits acquired him such a fortune, as
was sufficient to maintain his descendants in much splendour and reputation for
many Ages. He was bred up to that renowned calling wherein every well born man
aspired to an excellence, in that heroic Age: Fame in Arms being an Ornament,
without which no great man could appear with any advantage: but it was the
subsistence and only hopes of their younger Brothers. And herein this Robert
did succeed so well, as he became the Favorite to the great Warriers of that
time, from several of which he received great gifts of Lands, whose values were
in that Age very considerable, to engage him in their interests and dependence,
as those in Dalentune from the Lord Jeffery de Lucy, the Lordships of Addington
and Twyvell from his Uncle William de Vere, and the noble Lordship and Market
Town of Thrapston from the Lord Baldwin de Wake in Marriage with his Aunt the
Lady Margaret, to which King Henry the Third did after in his favor, and in
the twenty ninth of his Reign, grant by his Charter diverse liberties and
privileges. After the death of his first Wife he contracted a new Marriage
with a Lady whose name was Elena, that is conjectured to have been of the
highest quality, from her Seals, her style, the complements used toward her in
the applications of Ranulph Earl of Chester, Jeffery of Lucy, and other of the
greatest Lords, by whom in their deeds she was ever treated with the style of
Nobilis Domina Elena de Vere; and it is believed she was that Elena the
Daughter of Roger de Quincy, the last Earl of Winchester, and Widow to Alan de
la Zouch, a great Lord in the Counties of Leicester and Northampton, by the
interest she had in several Lands of those shires belonging to that Family; as
also by other probabilities collected from a Letter that is extant, and a rare
Antiquity, of her Sisters the Lady Margaret, Countess of Lincoln and Pembroke,
to this Sir Robert her Husband being on his Voyage to the Holy Land. The
friendship he had contracted with the Famous William Longespe, Earl of
Salisbury, natural Grandson to King Henry the Second, who had been chosen
Captain of those English that were sent unto that enterprise, could not suffer
so illustrious an undertaking to be unaccompanied with his Sword. He attended
that Prince in quality of his Standard Bearer, and was slain together with his
Captain in that unfortunate Fight, where the Christians did receive so great a
defeat under the Command and Conduct of Robert Earl of Artois, the French Kings
Brother. Particular honors were done to the memory of Sir Robert de Vere by
the greatest Men of that Age, and there was ever after retained for the Arms of
his Successors, Lords of Addington and Thrapston, in a Shield Argent a Cross
Gules, which in order to that War he had assumed, and in memory of the occasion
wherein this their Ancestor had fallen with so much glory.

His Issue, Sir Baldwin de Vere. Sir John de Vere.


THE Lady Ellen, being then the Widow of Sir Robert de Vere, applied her whole
thoughts to the good and advantage of her Children, the dear remainders of so
noble a Husband; to which end she contrived to establish BALDWIN, the eldest of
them, in an Alliance with the Lord Gilbert de Seagrave, at that time the Chief
Subject in England, by reason of his Office, which was great Justiciar, and a
man, besides, in extraordinary favor with the King: Which Gilbert contracted
with her, for the Marriage of the said Baldwin with his Daughter Margaret,
obliging himself to give her a hundred Marks for her consent thereunto, and, as
a Portion to her Son, his Lands in Aleby and Melton in the County of Leicester.
With the years of the young Baldwin de Vere, there grew up in his mind all
those inclinations for Arms and Piety, to which the Knights of his House had
been so accustomed, and the Fields of Palestine were the scenes whereon these
virtues were usually presented. In the company then of other Heroic Pilgrims,
he went thither to pay his first vows, and to win his Spurs; where, after
several generous adventures, the effects of two years spent in that hazardous
warfare, he returned to his own House, to enjoy the esteem and honor he had
acquired. After which he received from the grant of Ralph the great Earl of
Chester, the Lordship of Tywa, and seventeen Virgates of Land in that Town,
with all the men, holding the same and their sequels: Which gift was after
confirmed by particular Charter from King Henry the Third. He had likewise from
the Lord Robert Fitz Walter the Land of Bishopscote, to hold by the service of
half a Knights Fee; Besides other testimonies of the love and value of diverse
great Lords of that time. There is likewise extant an Agreement between him and
the Lord Abbot of Peterborow about the liberties of Thrapston, concerning which
there had been a difference; And as the last testimony of him, there is extant
a Charter from Henry the Lord Abbot of Croyland, granting him liberty to erect
a Chapel in his Court at Addington, upon certain conditions.

His Issue, Robert de Vere. Baldwin Vere.


SIR ROBERT de VERE was a Minor at the death of his Father, thereby becoming a
Ward for his Manor of Addington to his Cousin Sir Baldwin of Drayton, under
whose conduct having passed those years which were to bring him to lawful age,
it appears he was much bound to him for his Education, which produced such
generous qualities, as made him very considerable. He applied himself much to
the War, which we find by the appearance of his name in several Lists of those
Knights that accompanied King Edward the First in his Expeditions into Wales
and Scotland. He exercised the Office of High Sheriff of the County of
Northampton in the thirtieth year of that King; and he dyed seized of the
Lordships of Thrapston, of Addington, of Sudburgh, of Melton, of Tywa, of
Twyvell, of Bishopscote, and other Lands and Lordships. He had Married Anne the
Daughter of Sir Roger of Watervill, by whom he had Issue, Randal de Vere.


RANDAL or RANULPH de VERE, after the death of Sir Robert his Father, became
possessed of all his Lands and Lordships. And in the third year of King Edward
the Third, we find him to have been summoned by the Kings Justices, to answer,
by what Warrant he held and exercised certain Customs and Liberties in his
Lordship of Thrapston; Which upon his appearance, and production of the
Charter, were reserved, and he dismissed. In the ninth year of the same King an
Inquisition passed upon the value of his Lands in Thrapston and Addington; and
in the twelfth, by his Charter dated on the Friday, being the Feast of Saint
Edmund, he granted and gave to the Lord Henry, then Bishop of Lincoln, and to
Agnesse that was the Wife of Sir Richard de Waldgrave, the custody of the Lands
and Tenements which the said Richard had held of him in the Town of Twyvell,
that did belong to him, by reason of the minority of Thomas the Son of the said
Richard and Agnesse; as likewise the Marriage of the said Thomas, for a certain
sum of Money paid to him by the forementioned Lord Henry and Agnesse. The
Wife of Sir Randall de Vere was......

Their Issue, Sir John de Vere. Sir Robert de Vere. Randal de Vere. Idonea de
Vere.


JOHN de VERE in the life time of his Father Sir Ranulph, being as then but
young, was married to a Lady whose name was Alice Clifford, and for his
subsistence settled in possession of the Lordship of Twyvell and other Lands of
his Fathers Inheritance. But the spirit and inclinations of this House being
predominant in his nature and disposition, they would not suffer him to remain
at home, but postposing to the love of Honor and the War, all considerations
of ease, and interest, he followed the noble King Edward into his first Wars
with France, where for his service he acquired the honor of Knighthood; and
after having given extraordinary proofs of his valor, in diverse occasions, it
was his fortune to be slain in the famous Battle of Crecy, among other Heroes
who fought in that place for the honor of their King and Country, and leaving
no Issue behind him, he was succeeded by his Brother Sir Robert de Vere.


BY the death, without Issue, of Sir John de Vere, we find that his Brother
ROBERT came to inherit the Lordships of Addington, Thrapston, Sudburgh, Melton,
Aleby, Kemington, Hokenhanger, with the rest of the Lands and possessions
belonging to that House. There were several transactions that passed between
the Lady Alice de Vere, that was the Widow of his Brother, and him, about
agreements for settling of her Thirds in the Lordships of Thrapston, Addington
and other places, which were performed with much mutual respect and Justice on
either side, and at last ended in a fair accord and composition for the whole.
Several other marks there do remain of the Justice, Economy and Prudence of
this Robert de Vere, whom we find to have married Elizabeth the Daughter of Sir
Robert de Northburgh, and to have deceased in the three and fortieth year of
King Edward the Third, leaving Issue, Robert de Vere. Baldwin de Vere.


ROBERT the Son of Robert de Vere, Lord of Addington and Thrapston, being a
minor at the death of his Father, had his Wardship purchased by his Mother, the
Lady Elizabeth Vere, of Edward the black Prince, for the sum of twenty
pounds, who by his Charter, which is extant, did grant the custody of his
Lands, with his Marriage, to his dear and well beloved Elizabeth, that was the
Wife of Robert de Vere, (those are the words of the Deed) on condition, it
might be without disparagement. There are remaining Covenants hereupon agreed
unto, between the said Robert and his Mother; as also a Petition from the said
Lady to Queen Isabel, for her protection against Sir Henry Green, a man of
great power, by whom the Minor and her self were oppressed in some
circumstances, of the rights that did belong unto them. When this Robert had
attained to man's estate, he confirmed to his Uncle's Wife, the Lady Alice de
Vere, the agreement had been made with her by his Father. He became afterward
much considered from his Virtue and noble qualities; and in the eighteenth year
of Richard the Second he served his Country in the Office of High Sheriff, and
did much adhere to the King in those difficulties which happened in his Reign.
Yet there fell out about this time a quarrel between him and a Knight of great
Authority, called Sir Edmund Noone, on whom having made an assault, wherein the
said Edmund was wounded, it caused him trouble for a time, and an Imprisonment
in the Fleet upon pretense of the Riot; but the matter being composed by
Friends, he afterward recovered the King's grace, and his liberty. He Married
Elizabeth the Daughter of Sir John de Tay, of a noble Family, and descended
from ancient Barons of that Name; by whom having had but one Daughter called
Margaret, he gave her for Wife to Thomas Ashby Lord of Lovesby in the County of
Leicester, with his Lordships of Thrapston and Addington, to them and the heirs
of their bodies; but it falling out that she dyed without Issue: His Lands he
had settled upon them returned to his Brother Baldwin and his heirs, as being
his lawful successors.

SIR BALDWIN de VERE, being for many years a younger Brother, applied himself
to the Wars and a dependence upon great Princes for the support of his fortune.
We find him in the fourth year of King Henry the Fourth, to have been
Lieutenant Governor of the Isles of Guernsey and Jersey, under that noble
Prince Edward Earl of Rutland and of Cork, and who was afterward Duke of
York. He followed this illustrious Hero in all the succeeding Wars of that Age,
and fought by his side at the time he fell with so much glory, in the famous
Battle of Agencourt; after whose death he had confirmed unto him by King Henry
the Fifth an annuity of twenty marks by the year, that had been granted to him
by that Duke for his life, out of his inheritance in the Customs of Linen,
Leather and Skins in the Port of Kingston upon Hull, to be received at the
hands of the Collectors thereof, during the Minority of Richard the Son of
Richard late Earl of Cambridge. After this, his fortune, or rather his settled
affection to the relations and interests of the House of York, carried him into
the Kingdom of Ireland, where in the second year of King Henry the Sixth he was
constituted Treasurer of his Liberties by the Lord Edmund Mortimer Earl of
March and Ulster, and at that time Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, which by his
Letters Patents that are extant, and other testimonies, does appear. After the
death of the Earl of March, and the return of Sir Baldwin Vere into England,
the fortunes of Love as well as those of Arms did contribute to the advantage
and establishment of this worthy and industrious Knight; for he fell into the
favor of a young Lady, the Daughter and heir of Sir John Kingston alias Mohun,
who brought him the Manors of Barkloe, Overhall and Hoakenhanger that were of
her inheritance. And in conclusion, his Brothers Death without Issue male made
him possession of the Lordships of Thrapston, Addington and the other Lands
belonging to that Family: So as having no more to desire at the hands of
fortune, he departed this life full of years and happiness, leaving Issue Sir
Richard Vere Lord of Addington and Thrapston. Elizabeth Vere. Amy Vere.


AFTER the decease of Sir Baldwin de Vere, RICHARD his Son came to inherit the
Estate and interests of that Family. He met with some trouble in the beginning
about this accession which came to his Father for want of Issue male from his
Uncle Sir Robert de Vere, who notwithstanding had made over the Lordships of
Addington and Thrapston to certain Trustees for the security of the Portion
promised to his Daughter Margaret that had been married to a Gentleman of
consideration, one Thomas Ashby of the County of Leicester. And these Trustees
happening to be men of the highest rank, and of most power in the Kingdom (as
the Earls of Hereford and Stafford, the Lord Beaumont, the Lord Cromwell and the
Lord Zouch) and not a little partial to Thomas Ashby and his Wife Margaret, it
was no easy matter to procure a resignation of their interest. But his Cousin
Margaret coming to dye without Issue, and having given testimony of her desire
to have justice done unto her lawful successor, those noble Lords were induced
upon some fair agreement with Thomas Ashby to redemise to Richard de Vere the
Manor of Aldington and the other Lands wherein they had been formerly
enfeoffed. Soon after this Richard de Vere was settled in his fortune, he
contracted an alliance in the Family of Green, the most considerable among the
Gentlemen of that tract, by marrying Isabella one of the Daughters of John
Green, who styled himself Lord of Herdwick in the days of his Brother Ralph
that was Lord of Drayton, and from whose death without Issue male his
descendants came to be possessed of a great and noble Patrimony. The great Lords
of the Church being no easy neighbors in that age, from their exceeding
interest and authority, and this Sir Richard de Vere being a man of a great
spirit, and of a Family unaccustomed to unreasonable submissions, there arose a
contest between him and the Lord Abbot of Croyland, which made much noise,
about certain bordering pretenses: How it was ended does not appear; but soon
after this Sir Richard de Vere departed this life, leaving Issue by his Wife
Isabella Green, Sir Henry de Vere. Baldwin Vere. Constance, Married to John
Butler Lord of Woodhall. Elizabeth Vere, Married to William Dounhalle. Margaret
Vere, Married to John Verners of Essex. Amy Vere, Married to John Ward of
Irtlingborow. Elena Vere, Married to Thomas Isham of Pitchtsley.


HENRY the eldest Son of Sir Richard Vere, with the Estate of his Father
inherited the Suit and Difference with the Lord Abbot of Croyland, and by his
endeavors to defend his interests in that affair, he incurred the displeasure
of King Richard III. which was particularly testified in a Letter to himself,
and in some others from certain Lords of his Council. Several rigours he
suffered from this King, joined to the indignation of Mankind, that had been
drawn upon him by his injustice and cruelty, incited Sir Henry Vere to be
particularly active in the introducing of King Henry the Seventh, to whose
service he brought a resolute Band of his Tenants and Countrymen, at whose
Head he fought himself, in that decisive Day, where at Bosworth the unhappy
Richard lost both his Kingdom and his Life: He thereupon received the Honor of
Knighthood, at the hands of the victorious King; and because of his fidelity
and interest, was made High Sheriff of Northamptonshire in that first year of
his Reign. He married Isabella Tresham, the Daughter of Sir Thomas Tresham, who
was Lord of Rushton, and of a Family at that time very considerable in the
Country where they lived, for their Riches and Authority, by whom he left only
five Daughters, Elizabeth Lady Mordaunt. Amy, married to Robert Mordaunt, and
after to Humphrey Brown, Son of Sir Wistan Brown of Abess Roading. Constance,
to John Parr Lord of Horton. Etheldred Married to John Brown, that was a Judge.
Audrey, who dyed unmarried.


ELIZABETH the first of the Daughters and heirs of Sir Henry de Vere, was about
the eleventh year of King Henry the Seventh Married to John the eldest Son of
that Sir John Mordaunt, who was Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, and
Privy Councellor to that King. There came unto her by composition with some of
the partners, and want of Issue in other, the greatest part of the interest of
these Sisters; and indeed it was a large Inheritance, composed of the Lordships
of Drayton, Luffwyck, Islip, Slipton, Sudburgh, Thrapston, both the Addingtons,
Grafton, Hardwick, Werminster, and sundry other Lands. She also brought into
her Husbands House the Blood and the Arms of the Noble and Ancient Families of
these Veres, of the Greenes of Drayton, and of the Mauduits that were Lords of
Werminster. She was a fortunate Lady, left a numerous Posterity, and from her
is lineally descended and is heir and Successor, the present Earl of Peterborow.

knight on horseback bearing the colors of the family, and a family tree
showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors AUBERY DE VERE Earl of
Guisnes. Chief Iusticiar of England and great Chamberlain to King Henry ye.
first. Adeliza de Clare Aubery de Vere. 1st. E. of Oxford Eufemia de Cantelup.
Sr. Robert de Vere. Matilda de Furnel. Rossia de Vere. Jeffery de Magnaville
Earl of Essex. Sr. Henry de Vere. Hildeburga. Sr. Robert de Vere. Margaret de
Wake. Walter de Vere. Ld. of Drayton. Lucia Basset. Sr. Baldwin de Vere.
Margaret de Seagrave. Sr. John. de Vere. Sr. Robert de Vere. Anne de
Waterville. Sr. Baldwin de Vere. Sr. Randall. de Vere. Sr. Robert. de Vere.
Elizabeth de Northburgh. Randol. de Vere. Idonea. de Vere. Sr. Robert. de Vere.
Elizabeth de Tay. St. Baldwin de Vere. Elena de Mohun, alius Kingston. Margaret
de Vere. Thomas Ashby. S. P. Sr. Richard de Vere. Isabella Green. Elizabeth de
Vere. Amy de Vere. Elena de Vere. Thomas ^sham. Ld of Pichfley. Ann de Vere.
John Ward. Ld of Irtlingborow Margaret de Vere. John Berners. Elizabeth de
Vere. William Dounhall. Sr. Henry de Vere. Isabella Tresham. Baldwin de Vere.
Constance de Vere John Boteler Ld. of Woodhall. Constance de Vere. John Par.
Elizabeth de Vere John Is It. Ld. Mordaunt. Amie de Vere. HumphryBrowne.
Etheldred de Vere. John Brown. John 2d. Ld. Mordaunt.




GENEALOGICAL PROOFS OF THE DESCENT and SUCCESSION Of that HOUSE of VERE,
Whence were the LORDS of Addington and Thrapston; Drawn out of Extant Charters,
Records, Histories, and other Authentic Testimonies.

GENEALOGICAL PROOFS OF THE DESCENT and SUCCESSION Of the HOUSE of VERE.
AUBREY de VERE, Great Chamberlain to King Henry the First, and Chief Justice
of ENGLAND.
Spelmanni Glossarium, Page 337, 338.
ALbericus de Vere, Comes de Guisnes, Camerarius Angliae, and Portgravius, ut
perhibetur, Londini, pater Abrici primi Comitis Oxonii, Angliae ponitur
Justiciarius.

Spelmanni Glossarium de Capitali Angliae Justiciario qualis olim and quantus
fuit.
JUstitia totius Angliae, alias Capitalis Angliae Justiciarius, quantus hic
olim fuit, usquequaque non liquet. Dignitate omnes Regni proceres, potestate
omnes superabat Magistratus.

The Baronage of England, Page 190.
THIS last mentioned Albery, called Albericus Junior, confirmed all those
Grants made by his Father to the Monks of Abingdon; and being in high esteem
with King Henry the First, was by him made Lord Great Chamberlain of all
England, to hold the same Office in Fee to himself and his heirs, with all
Dignities and Liberties thereto belonging, as honorably as Robert Mallet, Lord
of the Honor of Eye in Suffolk, or any other before or after him, held the
same, and with such Liveries and Lodgings of his Court as belonged to that
Office: Being also one of the Kings Justices, Tempore Henrici Primi.

Monasticon Anglicanum, pars prima, Page 248.
Carta Alberici Regis Camerarii.
EGO Albericus, Regis Camerarius, terram de Twyvell, quamdiu vixero, de Domino
Abbate Guntero and Monachis de Thorneya per talem conventionem teneo ad firmam,
ut per unumquemque annum eis sex libras pro ea reddam, ante Nativitatem
quatuordecem solidos, ante Pascham quatuordecem solidos, and ad Vincula Sancti
Petri extremos quatuordecem solidos. Insuper pro remissione peccatorum meorum
illis de una mea decima, scilicet de Islip, unoquoque anno ad Festivitatem
Sancti Michaelis december solidos reddam. Totum vero surplus quod miserim in eadem
Villa ultra quam recepi in extremo die vitae meae, pro salvatione animae meae,
Sanctae Mariae Patribusque meis, simul cum terra eorum, concedo solidum and
quietum ab omni Calumnia. De alia terra quam pro servitio dimidii Militis in
eadem Villa de Willielmo de Blosvilla teneo in feodo; and de dimidio unius
Hidae, quam certe emi pretio, Sanctam Mariam, meosque fratres post me concedo
esse Haeredes, in quantum id eis concedere possum. Hujus Conventionis sunt
testes Hardewin de Escaetere, Radulphus Dapiser, Willielmus de Whitlesege, and
Simonio, fratres illius loci and alii quamplures.

Ex antiquo Pergameni Rotulo penes Comitem de Peterborow.
ALbericus de Twyvell Camerarius Regis dedit Ecclesiae de Thorney duas Garbas
decimae trium Villarum de Islip, Addington, and Drayton, de Dominico suo.

The Baronage of England, Page 190. Writing of Earl Aubrey.
HE in the Fifth of Stephen, with Richard Basset then Justice of England,
executed the Sheriffs Office for the Counties of Surrey, Cambridge, Huntington,
Essex, Hartford, Northampton, Leicester, Norfolk, Suffolk, Buckingham and
Bedford, and gave to the Monks of Thorney in Comitatu Canter. certain Lands in
Islip: But before the end of this year he was killed in London, leaving Issue
by Adeliza his Wife, Daughter of Gilbert of Clare, three Sons, Alberic his Son
and Heir,....... a Cannon of Saint Osiths in Chieche, and Robert, which Robert
in the twelfth of Henry the Second, upon levying the aid for marrying the Kings
Daughter, certified, that he then held half a Knights Fee. He also held the
Lordship of Twyvell in the County of Northampton of the Monks of Thorney in
Fee-Farm, as his Father did.

ROBERT de VERE, Second Son of Alberic de Vere, Great Chamberlain and Chief
Justice of England.
Monasticon Anglicanum, pars prima, Page 417.
ANNO Millesimo Centesimo Tricesimo quinto Rex Henricus Primus obiit apud
Castrum Leonis, and sepultus fuit apud Radingas, ubi Coenobium ducentorum
Monachorum condiderat in honorem Sanctae and individuae Trinitatis. Robertus de
Vere and alii Milites de Anglia, and Statellites and Ministri Regis apud Pontem
Audomari atque bonam Villam Feretrum Regis apud Caddomum adduxerunt.

Baronage of England, Page 190. Second Column. Speaking of Maud the Empress.
SHE likewise gave to Robert de Vere, the other Brother of this Earl Alberic, a
Barony to the value of that so given to Jeffrey, and other Lands of equal
worth, to possess within a year after she should enjoy the Realm of England.

Monasticon Anglicanum, pars prima, Page 248.
Charta Roberti Filii Alberici Camerarii Regis.
EGO Robertus filius Alberici (Camerarii Regis) terram de Twyvell, quamdiu
vixero, de Domino Abbate Roberto and Monachis de Thorneya per eandem
Conventionem in feodi firmam teneo, per quam conventionem pater meus ante me
tenuit, and decimas de quinque Carrucis quas pater meus Deo and Sanctae Mariae
Thorneyae concessit, scilicet Drayton, and Islip, and Edington Deo atque
Sanctae Mariae atque Monachis Thorneyae concedo. Hujus Conventionis sunt testes
Robertus de Jakesly, Ertnoldus, Willielmus de Cesterton, Ogerus Terri de
hominibus ipsius Roberti, Hugo Ware, Adam, imo omnes fratres ipsius loci.

Ex antiquo Pergameni Rotulo penes Comitem de Peterborow.
RObertus filius Albrici Anno primo Imperii Henrici Regis Junioris feria
quinta, in Hebdomada Pentecostes, tempore Galterii Abbatis, qui successit
Gilbertum Abbatem ejusdem loci, Anno Domini Millesimo Centesimo Quinquagesimo
quarto, in praesentia Henrici filii sui quietum clamavit Manerium de Twyvell
Monasterio de Thorney. Alexander tertius Papa donationem confirmavit Abbati de
Twyvell, videdelicet, de duabus garbis decimarum trium Villarum Islip, Drayton,
and Addington.

In libro rubro Feodorum de Scaccario, inter Cartas Dominorum irrotulatas, de
annis septimo, octavo, decimo quarto, decimo octavo Henrici Secundi, a secundo
and octavo Richardi Primi.
DOmino suo Charissimo Henrico Regi Angliae, Robertus filius Alberici
Camerarii, Salutem. Sciatis, Domine, quod Ego teneo de vobis feodum dimidium
Militis.

In Anno octavo, in Northamptonshire, Robertus filius Albrici dimidium Militis.

In Anno decimo quarto, in Northamptonshire, Robertus filius Albrici Camerarii
dimidium Militis.

In Anno decimo octavo, in Northamptonshire, Robertius filius Albrici december
solidos.

In Anno secundo Regis Richardi, fecit Scutagium Walliae, assessum ad december
solidos.

In Northamptonshire, Robertus filius Albrici quinque solidos dimidii Militis.

In Anno octavo Regis Richardi, Scutagium Normanniae ad viginti solidos.

Rotulo duodecimo adhuc communi de Termino Pasch. (Anno tricessuno octavo
Henrici Tertii) Consideratio contra Monachos de Hortune.
HEnricus Avus Domini Regis concessit, and Carta sua confirmavit Deo and
Ecclesiae Sancti Johannis Apostoli and Evangelistae de Hortune, and Monachis
ibidem Deo servientibus, Tintonam and Hortunam cum pertinentiis, habendum and
tenendum cum omnibus libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus, in quibus
Roberus de Vere, and Adelina uxor ejus melius and liberius tenuerunt, and
eisdem Monachis (per Cartam suam) confirmaverunt. Et ideo consideratum est,
quod praedicti Monachi facient Domino Regi pro praedictis Maneriis illud idem
servitium, quod praedictus Robertus and Adelina facere consueverunt.

Carta Roberti Furnell.
RObertus de Furnell omnibus hominibus Francicis and Anglicis, tam praesentibus
quam futuris, Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and hac praesenti Carta mea
confirmasse Roberto filio Albrici de Twyvell cum Matilda filia mea in franco
marriagio quatuor acras terrae in Campis de Craneford, scilicet apud
Wudeforddale tres rodas and dimidiam rodam, and ad Bricluste unam rodam and
dimidiam, ad sort Brokilhill unam rodam, super Langfurlong tres rodas, and
juxta Havedlond Gilberti filii Brikestoni unam rodam, super Hepehill juxta
terram quam Hosse tenuit duas rodas, apud Caldewell in part Orientali unam
rodam, in Sortlundale unam rodam, super Barlifurlong unam rodam, super
Nonishill juxta Gilberti filii Brikestoni unam rodam: Tenendas de me and
haeredibus meis illi and haeredibus suis libere, quiet and honorifice in
plano, in pasturis, in Campis, in pratis, in viis, in semitis, in omnibus
libertatibus, and in omnibus locis; Reddendo inde mihi annuatim and haeredibus
meis ad Festum omnium Sanctorum dimidiam libram piperis pro omnibus serviciis
and consuetudinibus, and pro omnibus rebus, salvo forinseco servicio Domini
Regis spectante ad cantam tenuriam. Et Ego and haeredes mei illas supradictas
quatuor acras terrae illi and haeredibus suis contra omnes homines debemus
warrantizare. Hiis testibus Willielmo de Hanred, Radulfo de Lingevere, Radulfo
de Andeli, Henrico filio ejus, Willielmo filio Radulfi, Galfrido fratre ejus,
Simone filio Remfrei, Rogero fratre ejus, Galfrido Champiun, Waltero Poeir,
Simone de Loholm, Adae Clerico Domini Abbatis de Thorneya, Magistro Rogero de
Glamesford, Mattheo filio Hugonis sacerdotis de Twyvell, Richardo filio
Baldewini, Hugone Halecrist, Willielmo filio ejus, Radulfo Malherbe de
Livdenea, and pluribus aliis.

Carta Johannis Furnell.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Johannes filius Matildae filiae (...)
Furnell dedi and concessi and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Roberto (...)
pro servitio suo and viginti solidis Argenti, quos mihi dedit prae manibus,
quatuor acras terrae in Campis de Craneford, scilicet illas quatuor acras quas
Robertus de Furnell dedit Matri meae in libero marriagio, scilicet apud
Wudefordedale tres rodas and dimidiam, apud Bricluste unam rodam and dimidiam,
apud sort Brockilhill unam rodam, super Langefurlong tres rodas, and unam
rodam juxta capucium Gilberti filii Bricstan, and duas rodas super Hepehill,
and unam rodam apud Kaldewelle in part orientali, and unam rodam in sort
Lundale, and unam rodam super Barlifurlong, and unam rodam super Honishill
juxta terram Gilberti filii Bricstan, tenendas and habendas sibi and haeredibus
suis libere and quiet, been and in pace and honorifice, in bosco, in plano, in
Campis, in pasturis, in pratis, in viis, in semitis, and in omnibus
libertatibus ad terras illas pertinentibus, reddendo inde annuatim mihi and
haeredibus meis dimidiam libram piperis ad Festum omnium Sanctorum pro omnibus
secularibus servitiis, salvo forinseco Domini Regis servitio. Ego vero dictus
Johannes and haeredes mei warrantizabimus dictam terram dicto Roberto and
haeredibus suis contra omnes gentes imperpetuum. Ut autem haec mea donatio and
concessio ratae and stabiles perseverent, praesentem Cartam Sigilli mei
munimine roboravi. Hiis testibus Mauricio Dandeli, Willielmo de Muscha, Henrcio
de Draitone, Willielmo de Paumes, Waltero Deneford, Henrico de Aldwincle,
Radulpho filio Willielmi de Craneford, Luca de Thrapston and aliis.

Carta Thomae Curthun.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Thomas Curthun dedi and concessi and
quietum omnino clamavi pro me and haeredibus meis Domino Roberto de Vere and
haeredibus suis vel assignatis Rogerum filium Willielmi praepositi de
Craneford, cum toto jugo servitutis and cum tota sequela sua; Ita quod nec ego
nec haeredes mei, nec aliquis per me vel per haeredes meos, in praedicto, ut
supra scriptum est, unquam aliquid poterimus exigere. Et Ego praedictus Thomas
and haeredes mei praedicto Roberto de Vere and haeredibus suis vel assignatis
praedictum Rogerum cum tota sequela sua ut dictum est, warrantizabimus
imperpetuum. Et ut haec mea donatio and concessio and quieta clamatio rata and
stabilis imperpetuum perseveret, huic Scripto Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis
testibus Willielmo de Trayli de Wodeforde, Richardo de Gatesdene, Richardo de
Aldwincle, Willielmo de Bruere, Richardo de Cotes, Luca de Thrapston, Roberto
Caper de Twyvell, Galfrido de Walecote, Rogero Clerico and aliis.

Sir HENRY de VERE, the Son of Robert, the second Son^ of Alberic, Great
Chamberlain of England.
Hollinshead's Chronicle, Page 110.
BUT in the mean time it chanced that Sir Richard de Wallis, a Knight of the
Realm of France, went about to Fortify a Castle in a Village that belonged to
him called Walls, situate between Try and Gisors. Whereupon Henry de Vere
Constable of Gisors under William Earl of Albemarle, was nothing content
therewith, and therefore got a Company together and went forth to disturb the
work: Upon this occasion the Servants of the said Sir Richard Walls came
forth, and encountered with him in the Field, insomuch that Ralph the Son of Sir
Richard de Walls was slain, and the residue that were with him fled, many of
them being sore beaten and wounded.

Historiae Anglicanae scriptores december ex imaginibus Historiarum Radulphi
de..... Page 631.
RAdulphus filius Hugonis de Vallibus habitationem habens cum patre suo prope
Gisortium infra Limits Regis Francorum, Willielmum de Magnavilla, Illustrem
Comitem de Albemarle, verbis dehonestavit amaris: in ultionem contumeliae
postmodum Henricus de Vere interfecit Radulphum in Kal. Decembris: Quod Injuria
Regis Francorum esse factum aliqui reputantes, Garnerium quendam Anglorum Regi
familiarissimum and intra muros Gisortii Domicilium a diebus multis habentem,
paratis insidiis crudeliter trucidaverunt, ut sic paria delicta compensatione
mutua delerentur.

Rotulo Secundo adhuc de Communi Termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno vicesmo septimo
Henrici Tertii, Norfolk and Suffolk.
REX Vicecomiti, etc. Constat Nobis per Inquisitionem factam tempore Johannis
Regis Patris nostri, quod Rex Henricus noster proavus dedit Balduco de Boxo
Manerium de Mutford pro triginta libratis terrae in Amptonae Baroniae suae de
Bouden, quod quidem Manerium tenuit postmodum Hildeburga haeres praedicti
Baldewini, qui terram illam dedit Henrico de Vere cum filia sua, and Stephano
de Lulham cum alia filia sua.

Sir ROBERT de VERE, Lord of Addington, Thrapston, Twyvell, and other Lands and
Lordships.
Carta Walteri de Drayton.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Walterus filius Henrici filii Roberti
dedi and concessi, and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Willielmo Patrunculo
meo totam terram de Twyvell, quam Robertus Avus meus tenuit die quo obiit per
servitium dimidii feodi Militis, and totam terram de Addington, quam praedictus
Robertus tenuit die quo obiit per servitium quartae partis feodi unius Militis,
tenendam sibi and haeredibus suis legitime procreatis de me and haeredibus
meis, libere and quiet pro istis praenominatis serviciis: Et si forte
praedictus Willielmus sine haerede quam habuit de Uxore desponsata, obierit,
praedictae terrae ad me and haeredes meos redibunt. Pro hac Intratione,
Recognitione and donatione praedictus Willielmus mihi homagium fecit, and unum
annulum aurem dedit. Hiis testibus Richardo Bassett, Radulpho Dandelyn,
Willielmo de Sidenham, Osmondo de Carleton, Willielmo de Aiston, Gervasio de
Sutborne, Rogero Monacho, Roberto Sancto Marco, Rogero filio Pagani, Richardo
de Aldwincle, Willielmo de Musta, Gilberto Flamens, Eliah de Carleton, Alano de
Hale, Gervasio de Bernak, Roberto de Vere, Henrico de Tichmarch, and aliis.

Carta Willielmi de Vere.
SCiant tam praesentes quam futuri, quod Ego Willielmus filius Roberti dedi and
concessi, and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Deo and Sanctae Mariae and
Sancto Johanni Baptistae, and beatis pauperibus Hospitalis Sancti Johannis de
Northampton, and fratribus ibidem Deo servientibus, sex seliones terrae cum
Cheveciis de meo Dominio in agris Twyvellie, illos scilicet qui jacent juxta
Fullewellemor, in liberam and puram and perpetuam Eleemosynam, pro salute
animae meae and uxoris meae, and pro animabus omnium antecessorum meorum. Hiis
testibus Roberto de Leicestria, Willielmo de Perie, Waltero filio ejus,
Anketill de Passeha, Richardo Pellipario, Richardo filio Radulphi Capellani,
Philippo Clerico vernasio and multis aliis.

Carta Willielmi de Vere.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Willielmus filius Roberti filii Albrici
dedi, concessi and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Roberto de Vere Nepoti
meo, per voluntatem and concessionem Walteri de Drayton, totam terram de Twyvel
quam Robertus pater meus tenuit die quo obiit per servitium dimidii feodi
Militis, and totam terram de Addington quam praedictus Robertus tenuit die quo
obiit per servitium quartae partis feodi unius Militis, quas omnes habui de
donatione graciosa praedicti Domini Walteri de Drayton, tenendas sibi and
haeredibus suis pro istis praenominatis servitiis imperpetuum. Hiis testibus
Domino Richardo de Lucy, Alano de la Zouch, Richardo Basset, Willielmo de
Sidenham, Eustachio de Watford, Simone de Patteshull, Henrico de Pautis, Thoma
de Kirkton, Stephano de Boby, Andrea de Tichmarch, Johanne de Aldwincle,
Stephano Coco and Nicholao Clerico.

Carta Henrici Abbatis Croilandiae.
NOtum sit omnibus ad quos Carta ista pervenerit, Quod Ego Henricus Abbas
Croilandiae and ejusdem loci conventus concessimus, dedimus and hac nostra
praesenti Carta confirmavimus Amiciae and Ymeniae filiabus Matildae de Estun
totum illud tenementum in Addington integre cum omnibus pertinentiis and
asiamentis suis infra villam and extra villam, quod dicta Matilda tenuit de
nobis in Addington, quod scilicet habuimus de dono and eleemosyna Willielmi
filii Albrici, (videlicet illam virgatam terrae quae fuit Willielmi filii
Walteri, cum tofto and omnibus ad eam pertinentibus, and prato quod fuit de
dominico ipsius Willielmi juxta pratum quod fuit Johannis de Bidun trans vadum,
and quatuor seliones terrae juxta croftum quod fuit praedicti Willielmi filii
Walteri, and tres seliones prope Molendinum praedicti Willielmi filii Roberti)
Tenendum and habendum sibi and haeredibus suis vel cui voluerit assignare de
Nepotibus vel Neptibus suis, licere, quiet and haereditarie inter dictas
Amiciam and Ymeniam and haeredes ipsarum aequaliter parciendum, reddendo inde
annuatim nobis ad Natale Domini duodecim denarios pro omni servitio,
consuetudine and exactione, salvo forinseco servicio. Volumus etiam and
concedimus, quod si una praedictarum Amiciae and Ymeniae sine haerede de
corpore suo decesserit, medietas dicti tenementi quae defunctam contingebat,
cedat superstiti, tenenda and habenda sibi and haeredibus suis vel cui voluerit
assignare de Nepotibus vel Neptibus suis, libere, quiet, haereditarie and
integre cum sua quam prius habebat medietate per praedictum annuum servitium
duodecim denariorum. Testibus hiis Reginaldo Parsona de Drayton, Magistro de
Drayton, Magistro Thoma de Kirkton Medico, Nicholao Parsona de Boby, Radulpho
de Rippinghall Clerico, Radulpho Itone, Nicholao Portar, Willielmo de Puriters,
Albano de Cellare, Nicholao filio ejus, Willielmo de Lardar, Andrea filia
Danielis, Alexandro Coquo and multis aliis.

Carta Davidis Abbatis de Thorney.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus praesens Scriptum visuris vel audituris, David Dei
gratia Abbas Thorney and ejusdem loci Conventus, salutem in Domino. Noverit
Universitas vestra ita inter nos and dominum Robertum de Vere convenisse,
scilicet quod concessimus pro nobis and successoribus nostris dicto Roberto and
haeredibus suis in escambium Messuagium illud in Twyvell quod de nobis tenuit
Michael ad Crucem, quod scilicet jacet inter Gardinum ipsius Roberti ex una
part and Messuagium Willielmi filii Godwini ex altera, sine aliquo
retinemento, cum duabus buttis terrae ad Chalpits pro uno Messuagio quod de
praefato Roberto tenuit Richardus Pistor in eadem villa, quod scilicet jacet
inter iter quod vadit versus Craneford and Messuagium Roberti Carpentarii, sine
aliquo retinemento, cum tribus selionibus eidem Messuagio pertinentibus:
Habendum and tenendum sibi and haeredibus suis de nobis and successoribus
nostris libere, quiet, and haereditarie, been and in pace, absque omni
calumpnia and servitio ad nos and successores nostros de praefato Messuagio
pertinente. In cujus rei testimonium duo Chirographa sunt, unum quod resideat
penes dictum Robertum and haeredes suos, signatum communi Sigillo Capituli
nostri, and aliud quod resideat penes nos, signatum Sigillo ipsius Roberti.
Hiis testibus Baldewino de Vere, Willielmo Hay, Willielmo de la Mulche,
Mauritio Dandely, Henrico de Raundes, Henrico de Drayton, Johanne Palmario,
Matthaeo de Twyvell, Reginaldo de Den, Richardo Marescallo, and multis aliis.

Carta Adelinae de Rodlos.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Adelina de Rodlos dedi and concessi
Margaretae juniori filiae meae ad eam consulendam and haeredibus suis, totam
terram quam Baldewinus filius Gisleberti dominus meus moriens reliquit mihi ad
me sustinendum, scilicet Thrapestun and Eschellingo and Hiccham, cum omnibus
istarum villarum pertinentiis, istam and concessionem and donationem feci ei de
praedictis villis and pertinentiis suis in libera potestate mea, and praesentis
cartae testimonio confirmavi, sicut illi quae remansit haeres totius
haereditatis quae fuit Richardi de Rodlos patris mei; and ne haec filia mea,
caeteris consultis, inconsulta remaneret, hanc particulam haereditatis meae
illi reliqui. Hujus donationis testes sunt David Abbas de Brune, Helyas de
Baieus, Reginaldus de Cruce, Robertus Nepos Helyae, Hubertus Sacerdos, Hamo
Sacerdos, Reginaldus de Sancta Cruce, Willielmus Clericus, Spileman, Godricus.

seal of Adelina de Rodlos SIGILLVM AELINA DE RODLOS



Carta Domini Baldewini de Wac.
OMnibus hominibus suis praesentibus and futuris Baldewinus Wac
Salutem.
Notum sit vobis me dedisse and concessisse Roberto de Vere cum Margareta Amita
mea totam villam meam de Thrapston cum pertinentiis suis and libertatibus, illi
and haeredibus suis, ad tenendum de me and haeredibus meis per servitium feodi
dimidii unius Militis. Test Henrico Abbate de Bruna, Widone Clerico de Depyng,
Galfrido filio Galfridi, Waltero filio Radulphi, Hugone de Boby, Rogero filio
Alexandri, Willielmo de Waspria, Helya de Baud, Baldewino de Waspria, Waltero
de Boby, Aluredo Camerario, Willielmo de Mort.

SIGILLVM DNI BALDEWINI DE WAC

seal of Baldwin de Wac

Carta Regis Henrici Tertii pro Mercato de Thrapston.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normaniae, Aquitaniae,
and Comes Andegaviae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ministris, and omnibus Ballivis and
fidelibus suis Salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse and hac carta nostra confirmasse pro nobis and
haeredibus nostris dilecto and fideli nostro Roberto de Vere, quod ipse and
haeredes sui habeant imperpetuum singulis annis unam feriam apud Manerium suum
de Thrapston duraturam per tres Dies, videlicet in Vigilia and in die and in
Crastino Sancti Jacobi Apostoli, nisi feria illa sit ad nocumentum vicinarum
feriarum. Quare volumus and firmiter praecipimus pro nobis and haeredibus
nostris, quod praedictus Robertus and haeredes sui habeant imperpetuum singulis
annis unam feriam apud praedictum Manerium suum de Thrapston, duraturam per
tres dies, scilicet in vigilia and in die and in Crastino Sancti Jacobi
Apostoli, cum omnibus libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus ad hujusmodi
ferias pertinentibus, nisi feria illa sit ad nocumentum vicinarum feriarum,
sicut praedictum est. Hiis testibus Richardo fratre nostro, Comite Cornubiae,
Richardo de Clare Comite Gloucestriae and Herefordiae, Petro de Sebaudia,
Simone de Monteforti Comite Leicestriae, W. de fortibus Comite Albemarliae, R.
Quenci Comite de Wintonia, H. de Vere Comite Oxoniae, Hugone de Vivon, Johanne
de Plessetis, Paulino Peyre, Johanne de Lexynton and aliis.

Datum per manum nostram in Castris apud Gannok quarto die Octobris Anno Regni
nostri vicesimo nono.
Carta Domini Galfridi de Lucy.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Gaufridus de Lucy dedi and concessi and
praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Roberto de Vere, pro homagio and servitio suo,
centum solidos Esterlingorum in Molendino meo de Daylenton, quod scilicet
quondam fuit Roberti de Pruer, percipiendos per annum per manum Molendinarii
ejusuem Molendini ad tres terminos anni, scilicet ad Pascha duas marcas and
dimidiam, and ad Natale Domini duas marcas and dimidiam: Habendos and tenendos
sibi and haeredibus suis de me and haeredibus meis libere, quiet and
haereditarie quousque ei perfecero centum solidatos terrae in loco competenti,
and hoc erit citra Festum Purificationis beatae Mariae Anno Regni Regis Henrici
vicesimo primo; and quam citius ei perfecero praedictos centum solidatos
terrae, ipse Robertus reddet mihi praesentem Cartam, and Molendinum praedictum
mihi quietum remanebit a praedicto Roberto and haeredibus suis, and Ego
Gaufridus and haeredes mei warrantizabimus praefato Roberto and haeredibus suis
praedictos centum solidatos Esterlingorum contra omnes gentes imperpetuum: Et
si eis warrantizare non poterimus, dabimus eis excambium ad valenciam in loco
competenti alibi in terris nostris. Hiis testibus, Williemo de Cantelupo,
Willielmo Barduffe, Gilberto de Breante, Bartholomeo de Thorp, Richero le
Mansell, Gilberto Clerico, and multis aliis.

Carta Margartae Comitissae Lincolniae and Pembrochiae.
MArgarete de Lascy Countess de Nicole and de Pembroc
a son cher amy Sire Roberd de Vere, salut and amistes.
Je vous pry and requer ke vous si vous plest me voillez par le porteur de
cestes lettres envaier le cutel ad la Manche de Jaspe ke mun Seigneur vous
presta al Moes nostre Seigneur nostre Pere kar je la voudrei envaier a mun
Seigneur outre mer ensemblement ad autres chooses ke je luy envaierai en ki
tesmoigne je vous envei mes lettres overtes, saluz.

seal of Margaret de Lacy, Countess of Lincoln and Pembroke

Hollinshead his History of England, Page 241. No. 40.
ABout the same time William de Longespee Earl of Salisbury, and Robert de
Vere, with other Englishmen to the number of two hundred Knights, having taken
on them the Cross, went into the Holy Land, the said Earl being their chief
Captain, and had so prosperous speed in their Journey, that they arrived safe
and sound in the Christian Army, where the French King being chief thereof,
they were received joyfully.

Matthaeus Parisiensis, Page 766.57.
TEmpore quoque sub eodem multi Nobiles de Regno Anglorum, videlicet Willielmus
de Longaspata, Robertus de Vere signifer ejus, and multi alii Nobiles, ita ut
ad ducentorum Equitum numerum congregati recensiti sunt, ut ad iter
Hierosolymitanum pararentur.

Hollinshead his History of England, Page 433. No. 10.
MOreover in the East parts that valiant Earl of Salisbury, William de
Longespee, with Robert de Vere and others, were slain in that unfortunate
Battle, in which the Saracens vanquished the Christians Army, and took Lewis
the French King Prisoner.

Matthaeus Parisiensis, Fol. 791.42.
W. Longaespatae altercatio cum R. Comite Atrebatensi.
TAlia igitur audiens Willielmus Longaspata, schisma in exercitu jam suscitatum
vehementer formidans, impetuosum motum animi Comitis Atrebatensis sedare
cupiens, and Magistri Templi iram mitigare, respondit dicens: Talem scissuram
and divisionem, secundum verbum Dominicum, sequitur desolatio. Credamus igitur
huic viro Sancto and autenico, o Comes serenissime. Incola hujus terrae existit
diuturnus, noritque vires and versutias Saracenorum, experimento edoctus
multiplici; Nos novi Juvenes, and advenae, quid mirum si Orientalium simus
nescii periculorum? Quantum distat Oriens ab Occidente, tantum discrepant
Occidentales ab Orientalibus. Et versa facie ad Magistrum Templi cum serenitate
and verbis blandis ipsum allocutus, conabatur motum animi ejus mitigare, cum
ecce Comes Atrebatensis rapiens verbum ab ore ejus, more Gallico reboans and
indecenter jurans, audientibus multis, os in haec convitia resolvit, dicens: O
timidorum caudatorum formidolositas! quam beatus, quam mundus praesens foret
exercitus si a caudis purgaretur and caudatis! Quod audiens W. verecundatus and
de verbi offendiculo lacessitus, and commotus, respondit: O Comes Roberte,
certe procedam imperterritus ad quaeque imminentia mortis pericula. Erimus,
credo, hodie, ubi non audebis caudam equi mei attingere. Et apponentes galeas,
and explicatis signis progressum contra hosts, qui spaciosam planiciem, montes
and valles undique cooperuerunt, continuabant. Sic igitur volens Comes Robertus
omnia sibi, si Christianos contingeret triumphare, ascribere, dedignabatur
fratri suo Domino Francorum Regi, haec praesumpta pericula nunciare. Soldanus
igitur per expeditissimos exploratores super hujusmodi omnibus certificatus,
omnem suam numerosam, quae sub temporis inopinata brevitate fuerat congregata,
multitudinem ad certamen alacriter animavit, dicens: Eja, eja, hoc est quod diu
praeoptavi. Divisi sunt Christiani, nec frater fratri jam adhaeret. Imo and
isti, qui non nisi vix tertiam partem conficiunt, ad invicem sunt discordes;
Dati sunt nobis in praedam and direptione^ Imo hodie sese corrodentes, turpiter
sunt objurgati. Quid hi faciunt vel facturi sunt Rex Francorum remotus penitus
ignorant. Conterendi sunt primitus isti fame macerati and bello, cum itineris
labor fatigati, and lapidibus quos apud Mansor susceperunt conquassati pauci
admodum and omnino debilitati, ut facilius consequenter alios penitu^
occupemus, quos ab omni victualium genere coarctamus. Hoc igitur consilium cum
ab omnibus Saracenis audiretur, ab universis est approbatum. Irruit igitur
impetuo^^^ nimis ipse Soldanus cum innumerabilibus turmis suis in exercitum
Christianorum, and committitur bellum cruentissimum, and infra parvae morae
spatium Christianorum exercitus multitudine Saracenorum, sicut Insula mari,
coepit circumcingi, and interponunrse Saraceni ipsis Christianis and flumini,
quod transierant, ne unus quidem eorum posse^ evadere. Quod videns Comes
Atrebatensis, poenituit eum consiliis seniorum ac san^ orum non adquievisse.
Sed galeatum sero duelli poenitet. Cum igitur videret Lo^ gamspatam hostibus
undique denso agmine circumvallatum, and pondus totius be^^ sustinentem,
exclamavit Comes Robertus nimis impudenter and imprudenter, dicens: O
Willielme, dimicat contra nos Deus, non possumus amplius resistere, Consule
tib^ per fugam, ut possis vivus elabi, dum te tuus equus portare praevalet, ne
velle incipias, cum non possis. Cui Willielmus breviter, prout tantus tumultus
permisit, respondit: Non placeat Deo, ut filius patris mei fugiat pro aliquo
Saraceno. Malo soeliciter mori quam infoeliciter vivere. Comes igitnr
Atrebatensis Robertus, videns se jam circumquaque hostibus septum, and vix
fugam patere, flexis loris fugam iniit repentinam; and vectus equo rapidissimo
versus flumen, quod vel Nilus fuit, vel Thafnis, quem Nilus absorbet, armatus
intravit, credens flumen transnatare, quia equum noverat validissimum, ast non
potuit, quia ferro and multis aliis impedimentis, fuerat irretitus. Submersus
igitur miser periit, nulli miserabilis, fugitivus and superbus, humiliatus, non
sponte, sed invitus, nullius Lachrymis deplangendus, quia generoso sanguine
Regum procreatus aliis exemplum praebuit perniciosum, and secundum illud
Poeticum:

-- Tanto conspectius in se
Crimen habet, quanto qui peccat major habetur.
Comite igitur sic submerso coeperunt omnes qui in bello fuerant desperare
Francigenae, and agminibus deficere dissipatis. Quod videns Willielmus in quem
omnes Saraceni irruerunt, comperit quod res pro capite agebatur, omnium
insultus viriliter sustinebat, and multorum corpora detruncando, animas ad
tartara destinabat. Tandem equo enervato, and pedibus ejus detruncatis, adhuc
aliquorum supervenientium capita, manus vel pedes mutilando decurtabat. Denuo
post multos ictus, and vulnera quae sustinuit, eliquato sanguine cum jam
coepisset deficere, obrutus lapidibus, Martyr manifestus animam coronandam
exhalavit, and cum ipso signifer ejus Robertus de Vere, miles eximius, and
quamplures Anglici, qui ejus ab initio e vestigio signa fuerant assecuti.

Carta Galfridi de Lucy.
NObili Dominae Helenae de Vere Galfridus de Lucy
Salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Quia nolo quod quicquid vobis depereat de dote vestra occasion mei,
Praesentium Authoritate vobis concedo, quod mittatis vos in possessionem illius
Molendini Deylintune secundum quod inde percipere consueverat bonae memoriae
maritus vester Robertus de Vere. In cujus rei testimonium istas Patentes
Litteras vobis mitto.

Valete. Data anno gratiae millesimo ducentesimo quinquagesimo primo, die
Sancti Sixti Papae apud Battrichelsey.
The Tomb of Sir ROBERT de VERE, as it is extant in the Church of Sudburgh,
commonly called Sudborow, near Drayton in the County of Northampton.
tomb of Sir Robert de Vere
Sir BALDWIN de VERE, first of that Name, Lord of Thrapston, Addington, Melton,
Tywa, and other Lands and Lordships.
Carta Dominae Helenae de Vere.
NOverint universi has Litteras visuri vel audituri, quod Ego Helena de Vere
quondam uxor Domini Roberti de Vere dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti Carta mea
confirmavi Domino Gilberto de Seagrave and haeredibus suis Maritagium Baldewini
and Johannis filiorum meorum, ita scilicet quod si dictus Baldewinus ante suam
legitimam aetatem humaniter decedat, dictus Gilbertus vel haeredes sui
maritabunt dictum Johannem ad unam de filiabus dicti Gilberti, and dictus
Gilbertus vel haeredes sui dabunt eidem Johanni in libero maritagio cum filia
dicti Gilberti centum solidatos terrae. Pro hac vero concessione and Cartae
confirmatione dedit mihi praedictus Gilbertus prae manibus centum marcas. Ego
vero Helena de Vere dictum maritagium dictorum Baldewini and Johannis filiorum
meorum dicto Gilberto and haeredibus suis contra omnes homines warrantizabo. In
hujus autem rei testimonium huic Scripto Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis testibus
Domino Richardo de Mundeville, Domino Radulpho Camerario, Domino Willielmo de
Walteneys, Radulpho de Grontham Vicecomite Rotelandiae, Simone de Pyrers,
Willielmo Beler de Ketilby, Thoma le Benweysner de Standeford, Johanne filio
Gilberti de Melton, Johanne de eadem Clerico, and aliis.

SIGILLVM DNAE HELENAE DE VER

seal of Helena de Vere

Carta Domini Gilberti de Seagrave.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Gilbertus de Seagrave dedi, concessi
and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Baldewino filio Roberti de Vere omnes
terras and tenementa quas habui in Villis de Aleby and Melton in Comitatu
Leycestre, scilicet in Dominicis, homagiis, redditibus, servitiis, releviis,
wardis haeredum, Escaetis, cum omnibus pertinentiis sine aliquo retenemento, in
libero maritagio cum Margareta filia mea, and haeredibus de dictis Baldewino
and margareta exeuntibus: Habendas and tenendas eisdem Baldewino and Margaretae
and haeredibus de eis exeuntibus libere, quiet, and pacifice imperpetuum de me
and haeredibus meis, faciendo pro dictis terris and tenementis omnia servitia
quae pertinent ad dominos feodorum dictorum tenementorum. Ego vero Gilbertus
and haeredes mei praedictas terras and tenementa praedictis Baldewino and
Margaretae, and haeredibus de eis exeuntibus contra omnes homines
warrantizabimus, sicut praedictum est. In cujus rei testimonium huic Scripto
Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis testibus, Domino Richardo de Mundeville, Domino
Radulpho Camerario, Domino Willielmo de Walteneys, Radulpho de Grenam
Vicecomite Rotelandiae, Simone de Pyrers, Willielmo Beler de Ketilby, Thoma de
Benweysner de Standeforde, Johanne filio Gilberti de Melton, Johanne de eadem
Clerico, and aliis.

Carta Ranulphi Comitis Cestriae and Lincolniae.
RAnulphus Comes Cestriae and Lincolniae
omnibus praesentibus and futuris praesentem Cartam inspecturis vel audituris
Salutem.
Sciatis me concessisse, dedisse and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmasse
Baldewino de Vere, pro homagio and servitio suo, totam medietatem tertiae
partis totius Dominici de Tywa, and octo solidatos redditus quos habui in
Molendino Australi de Tywa, and december and septem virgatas terrae and unum
Cottagium and dimidium in eadem Villa, scilicet duas virgatas terrae quas
Ambrosius tenuit, and duas virgatas terrae quas Rogerus filius Wimarci tenuit,
and duas virgatas terrae quas Willielmus de Tackele tenuit, and duas virgatas
terrae quas Quenilda tenuit, and unam virgatam terrae quam Adhelina tenuit, and
unam virgatam terrae quam Hugo Palmarius tenuit, and duas virgatas terrae quas
Richardus Novus-homo tenuit, and unam virgatam terrae quam Willielmus Baro
tenuit, and unam virgatam terrae quam Nicholaus Alverich tenuit, and unam
virgatam terrae quam Willielmus filius Ambrosii tenuit, and unum Cottagium quod
Robertus Molendinarius tenuit, and dimidium Cottagium quod Gilbertus Cornifex
tenuit: Habenda and tenenda de me and haeredibus meis eidem Baldewino and
haeredibus suis libere and quiet, plene, pacifice, and haereditarie in
culturis, in dominicis, pratis, pascuis, boscis, planis, viis, semitis, terris
and aquis, cum omnibus praedictis hominibus and eorum sequelis and
consuetudinibus, and cum omnibus aliis libertatibus and aysiamentis, and
omnibus aliis pertinentiis ad praedictum tenementum pertinentibus infra villam
vel extra; Faciendo inde mihi and haeredibus meis ipse Baldewinus and haeredes
sui servitium septimae partis feodi unius militis pro omnibus servitiis and
demandis universis. Ego vero Ranulphus and haeredes mei dictum tenementum cum
omnibus pertinentiis suis eidem Baldewino and haeredibus suis contra omnes
gentes imperpetuum warrantizabimus. Et ut haec mea donatio and concessio in
posterum perpetuae firmitatis robur obtineant, eas praesenti Carta and Sigilli
mei appositione roboravi. Hiis testibus Domino Waltero de Daynel, Radulpho de
Bray, Gilberto de Seagrave, Waltero de Bisboc, Radulpho de Say, Richardo de
Buron, Gilberto and Rogero de Norfolch, Baldewino de Brucart, Eustacio de
Beckness, Henrico Harang, Elya Pincerna, Willielmo Coquo, Johanne and Willielmo
de Weston Clericis, and aliis.

seal and secret seal of Ralph, earl of Chester and Lincoln SIGILLVM RANULPHI
COMITIS CESTRIAE ET LINCOLNIAE

SECRETVM RANVLPHI COMITIS CESTRIAE ET LINCOLNIAE



Carta Regis Henrici Tertii.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Normaniae, Aquitaniae,
and Comes Andegaviae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Justiciariis, Forestariis, Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ministris and omnibus
ballivis and fidelibus suis Salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse and hac carta nostra confirmasse dilecto and fideli
nostro Baldewino de Vere pro nobis and haeredibus nostris donationem quam
dilectus and fidelis noster Ranulphus Comes Cestriae and Lincolniae ei fecit
pro homagio and servitio suo de tota medietate tertiae partis totius Dominici
de Tywa; Et de octo solidatis redditus, quos idem Comes habuit in Molendino
australi de Tywa; Et de december and septem virgatis terrae and uno Cottagio and
dimidio in eadem Villa: Habendam and tenendam eidem Baldewino and haeredibus
suis imperpetuum been and in pace, libere and quiet, cum omnibus libertatibus
and liberis consuetudinibus ad praedictam terram and praedictum redditum
pertinentibus, sicut Carta praedicti Comitis, in qua praedicta donatio before
continetur, and quam idem Baldewinus inde habet, rationabiliter testatur. Quare
volumus and firmiter praecipimus quod praedictus Baldewinus and haeredes sui
imperpetuum habeant and teneant praedictam terram and praedictum redditum cum
pertinentiis suis been and in pace, libere and quiet, cum omnibus libertatibus
and liberis consuetudinibus ad praedictam terram and praedictum redditum
pertinentibus, sicut praedictum est. Hiis testibus venerabilibus patribus, J.
Bathon. R. Dunhelm. W. Carleoln. Episcopis; H. de Burgo Comite Kanciae
Justiciario nostro, Stephano de Segrave, Johanne Marescallo, Roberto de
Lexynton, Radulpho filio Nicholai, Johanne filio Philippi, Philippo de Perye.

Data per manum venerabilis patris R. Cicestr. Episcopi Cancellarii nostri,
apud Westmonasterium, decimo octavo die Februarii, Anno Regni nostri decimo
quarto.
Carta Roberti filii Walteri.
RObertus filius Walteri
omnibus hominibus and amicis suis Francis and Anglicis Salutem.
Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse and hac presenti Carta mea confirmasse
Baldewino de Vere, pro homagio and servitio suo, totam terram meam in
Bishopscoate cum omnibus pertinentiis, habendam and tenendam de me and
heredibus meis sibi and haeredibus suis in feodo and haereditate per servitium
dimidii militis, and pro duobus cereis de quatuor libris cerae, quos debeo
Domino Abbati de Sancto Albano, reddendis in Festo Sancti Albani, and pro
viginti quatuor solidatis quos debeo Coquinae Sancti Albani pro omni servitio
and exactione. Et si Ego Robertus filius Walteri vel haeredes mei praedicto
Baldewino vel haeredibus suis praedictam terram warrantizare non possumus, Ego
Robertus filius Walteri vel haeredes mei faciemus praedicto Baldewino vel
haeredibus suis centum solidatos terrae alibi de terris meis, faciendo de illis
centum solidatis terrae mihi vel haeredibus meis tertiam partem unius militis
pro omnibus servitiis and exactionibus. Hiis testibus Roberto de Insula,
Waltero de Ely, Gaufrido de Adnes, Richardo de Argentun, Willielmo de Bennier,
Othinello fratre suo, Fulcone Bainard, Willielmo de Ambli, Waltero de Marmy,
Willielmo de Marmy.

seal of Robert de Morley SIGILLVM DNI ROBERTI FILIVS WALTERI



Carta Roberti filii Walteri.
RObertus filius Walteri
omnibus hominibus suis and amicis, Francis and Anglicis Salutem.
Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse and hac presenti Carta mea confirmasse
Baldewino de Vere, pro homagio and servitio suo, totam terram meam in
Bishopscoate, quam teneo de Domino Abbate de sancto Albano, cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis: Habendam and tenendam de me and haeredibus meis sibi and
haeredibus suis in feodo and haereditate per servitium quartae partis unius
militis, and pro duobus cereis de quatuor libris cerae quos debeo, Domino
Abbati de Sancto Albano, reddere ad Festum Sancti Albani, and pro viginti
quatuor solidis quos debeo coquinae Sancti Albani pro omnibus servitiis and
exactionibus. Et si Ego Robertus filius Walteri vel haeredes mei praedicto
Baldewino de Vere vel haeredibus ejus praedictam terram in Bishopscoate
warrantizare non possumus, Ego Robertus filius Walteri vel haeredes mei
faciemus praedicto Baldewino de Vere vel haeredibus suis alibi de terris meis
escambium ad valorem praedictae terrae de Bishopscoate. Quare volo and firmiter
praecipio quod praedictus Baldewinus de Vere and haeredes sui teneant
praedictam terram been and in pace, libere, and quiet, integre and honorifice
per praedictum servitium. Et ut haec mea donatio and concessio rata sit, and
stabilis in posterum perseveret, praesentem Cartam Sigilli mei appositione
cor^^boravi. Hiis testibus Willielmo de Hobrig, Waltero de Crepinges, Galfrido
de Ambly, Folcone Bainghard, Waltero de Valenc. Henrico de Alneto, Thoma de
Blancmuster, Albrico de Wikes, Philippo de Ikeworth, Roberto de Cokesfield,
Radulpho le Blund, Roberto de Cymai, Radulpho Gubiun, Rogero Clerico, Radulpho
Bainghard, Thoma de Clear, Johanne de Wiretel, Willielmo Clerico, and multis
aliis.

Carta Henrici Abbatis Croilandiae.
NOverint universi Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filii ad quos praesens Scriptum
pervenerit, quod Ego Henricus Dei gratia Abbas Croilandiae and ejusdem loci
Conventus, Patroni Ecclesiae de Addington, concessimus and quantum ad nos
pertinet praesenti Carta confirmavimus Domino Baldewino de Vere, and haeredibus
suis, construere and habere imperpetuum Capellam in curia sua apud Addington in
Parochia dictae Ecclesiae, salvo in omnibus jure Matricis Ecclesiae sub forma
subscripta, videlicet ut infra Capellam vel extra nec Baptisterium nec Campanae
nec aliquid aliud habeatur per quod praejudicium fieri possit Matrici
Ecclesiae. Et in ea Capella ipse Baldewinus and haeredes sui and hospites eorum
cum propria familia audiant Missam and divina officia, and ullum aliud
Sacramentum illic fiet, nisi cum panis benedictus and aqua benedicta dominicis
diebus aspergenda tum existentibus in Capella. Et in eadem Capella Parochiani
Matricis Ecclesiae alii a sua familia propria non recipientur ad divina. Et
ipse Baldewinus and haeredes sui jurabunt quod nec per se nec per alium Damnum
ullum vel laesionem aliquam occasion praedictae Capellae Matrici Ecclesiae
inferri patientur. Ad praesentationem vero Baldewini and haeredum ejus
admittantur a Rectoribus Matricis Ecclesiae Capellani in eadem Capella propriis
sumptibus divina officia celebraturi, Sacramento prius ab ipsis praestito quod
de oblationibus and obventionibus omnibus in dicta Capella percipiendis plene
and integre Matricis Ecclesiae Rectoribus respondebunt, and quod nihil in
Parochia facient vel fieri procurabunt per quod fiat praejudicium Matrici
Ecclesiae vel ejusdem Ecclesiae Rectoribus. Qui si infideles inventi fuerint,
and super hoc coram Archidiacono vel Decano loci confessi vel convicti fuerint,
tanquam perjuri ex hac causa amoveantur, Alio idoneo successive substituendo ad
praesentationem dicti Baldewini and haeredum ejus de assensu Rectoris Ecclesiae
ut praedictum est. Et ipse Baldewinus and haeredes sui cum tota familia sua
octies per annum Matricem Ecclesiam visitabunt, divina ibidem audituri,
videlicet die Natalis Domini, die Purificationis beatae Mariae, die Paschae,
die Dedicationis Ecclesiae, die Ascensionis, die Pentecosti, die Assumptionis
beatae Mariae, and die omnium Sanctorum, nisi per infirmitatem vel aeris
intemperiem vel hospitum magnorum reverentiam vel aliam rationabilem vel
manifestam causam fuerint praedictis octo festis impediti, and tunc de
permissione and licentia Rectoris Ecclesiae diebus illis in Capella illa
compleantur divina, sive Rector maluerit per proprium Capellanum sive per illum
qui in Capella illa constituitur. Ita videlicet quod tam diebus illis quam
aliis liceat Rectori Ecclesiae si voluerit per proprium Clericum percipere ea
quae ad Capellam perveniunt per manum ipsius ad Matricem Ecclesiam deferenda,
vel si maluerit per Capellanum in Capella ministrante. Domino vero Capellae
praedictis octo Festis Domi non existente, familia quae tunc ibi erit, Matricem
Ecclesiam visitabunt. Et ut haec nostra concessio rata permaneat imperpetuum
and inconcussa, praesens Scriptum Sigilli nostri munimine corroboravimus. Hiis
testibus Domino Reginaldo de Well, Magistro Willielmo de Stoter, Magistro
Willielmo de Grafton, Magistro Radulpho de Collingham, Waltero Rectore de
Thrapston, Willielmo de Lardar, Osberto de Cellaric, Nicholao filio ejus,
Rogero de Cameraria and multis aliis.

Carta Walteri Rectoris Ecclesiae de Addington.
NOverint universi Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filii ad quos praesens Scriptum
pervenerit, quod Ego Walterus Rector Ecclesiae de Addington, de assensu Domini
Henrici Abbatis and Conventus Croylandiae patronorum ejusdem Ecclesiae,
concessi and quantum ad me pertinet, praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Domino
Baldewino de Vere, and haeredibus suis, construere and habere imperpetuum,
Capellam in Curia sua apud Addington in Parochia dictae Ecclesiae, salvo in
omnibus jure Matricis Ecclesiae sub forma subscripta, videlicet ut infra
Capellam vel extra nec Baptisterium nec Campanae nec aliquid aliud habeatur per
quod praejudicium fieri possit Matrici Ecclesiae: Et in ea Capella ipse
Baldewinus and haeredes sui and hospites eorum cum propria familia audiant
Missas and divina officia, and ullum aliud Sacramentum illic fiet, nisi cum
panis benedictus and aqua benedicta dominicis diebus aspergenda tum
existentibus in Capella. Et in eadem Capella Parochiani Matricis Ecclesiae alii
a sua familia non recipientur ad divina. Et ipse Baldewinus and haeredes sui
jurabunt, quod nec per se nec per alium Damnum vel laesionem aliquam occasion
praedictae Capellae Matricis Ecclesiae inferri patientun. Ad praesentationem
vero Baldewini and haeredum ejus admittantur a Rectoribus Matric is Ecclesiae
Capellani in eadem Capella propriis sumptibus divina officia celebraturi;
Sacramento prius ab ipsis praestito quod de oblationibus and obventionibus in
dicta Capella percipiendis plene and integre Matricis Ecclesiae Rectoribus
respondebunt, and quod nihil in Parochia facient vel fieri procurabunt per quod
fiat praejudicium Matrici Ecclesiae vel ejusdem Ecclesiae Rectoribus, qui si
infideles inventi fuerint, and super hoc coram Archidecano vel Decano loci
confessi vel convicti fuerint, tanquam perjuri ex hac causa amoveantur, Alio
idoneo substituendo successive ad praesentationem d^cti Baldewini and haeredum
ejus de assensu Rectoris Ecclesiae ut praedictum est. Et ipse Baldewinus and
haeredes sui and tota familia sua octies per annum Matricem Ecclesiam
visitabunt divina ibidem audituri, videlicet die Natalis Domini, die
Purificationis beatae Mariae, die Paschae, die Dedicationis Ecclesiae, die
Ascensionis, die Pentecosti, die Assumptionis beatae Mariae, die omnium
Sanctorum, nisiper infirmitatem vel aeris intemperiem vel hospitum magnorum
reverentiam vel aliam rationabilem and manifestam causam fuerint praedictis
octo festis impediti, and tunc de permissione and licentia Rectoris Ecclesiae
diebus illis in Capella illa compleantur divina, sive Rector Ecclesiae maluerit
per proprium Capellanum sive per illum qui in Capella illa constituitur. Ita
videlicet quod tam illis diebus quam aliis liceat Rectori Ecclesiae, si
voluerit, per proprium Clericum percipere ea quae ad Capellam pervenerint per
manum ipsius ad Matricem Ecclesiam deferenda; vel si maluerit, per Capellanum
in Capella ministrante. Domino vero Capellae Domi praedictis octo festis non
existente, familia quae tunc ibi erit, Matricem Ecclesiam visitabunt. Et ut
haec mea concessio rata permaneat imperpetuum and inconcussa, praesens Scriptum
Sigilli mei munimine corroboravi. Hiis testibus Reginaldo de Well, Radulpho
filio Reginaldi, Willielmo de Sidenham, Mauritio de Audeli, Waltero de Denford,
Magistro Willielmo de Stoter, Radulpho de Collingham, Magistro Willielmo de
Grafton, Waltero Rectore Ecclesiae de Thrapston, and multis aliis.

Carta Hugonis Episcopi Lincolniensis.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Hugo Dei
gratia Lincolniensis Episcopus
Salutem in Domino.
Noverit universitas vestra quod cum Baldewinus de Vere Capellam apud Addington
in proprio fundo construxisset assensu dilectorum filiorum Abbatis and
Conventus Croylandiae patronorum Ecclesiae de Addington, and Walteri Rectoris
ejusdem optinuit in hac forma, videlicet, quod infra Capellam vel extra nec
Baptisterium nec Campanae nec aliquid aliud habeatur, per quod praejudicium
fieri possit Matrici Ecclesiae, and in ea Capella ipse Baldewinus and haeredes
sui and hospites eorum and cum propria familia audiant Missas and divina
officia, and nullum aliud Sacramentum ibi fiat, nisi cum panis benedictus and
aqua benedicta diebus Dominicis aspergenda tum existentibus in Capella, and in
eadem Capella Parochiani Matricis Ecclesiae alii a sua familia propria non
recipientur ad divina. Et ipse Baldewinus and haeredes sui jurabunt quod nec
per se nec per alium damnum vel laesionem aliquam occasion praedictae Capellae
Matrici Ecclesiae inferri patientur. Ad praesentationem vero Baldewini and
haeredum ejus admittantur a Rectoribus Matricis Ecclesiae Capellani in eadem
Capella propriis sumptibus divina Officia celebraturi, Sacramento ab eis ipsis
praestito, quod de oblationibus and obventionibus omnibus in dicta Capella
percipiendis plene and integre Matricis Ecclesiae Rectoribus respondebunt, and
quod nihil in Parochia facient vel fieri procurabunt per quod fiat praejudicium
Matrici Ecclesiae vel ejusdem Ecclesiae Rectoribus, qui si infideles inventi
fuerint, and super hoc coram Archidecano vel Decano loci confessi vel convicti
fuerint, tanquam perjuri ex hac causa amoveantur, Alio idoneo successive
substituendo ad praesentationem Domini Baldewini and haeredum suorum de assensu
Rectoris Ecclesiae ut praedictum est. Et ipse Baldewinus and haeredes sui cum
tota familia sua octies per annum Matricem Ecclesiam visitabunt divina ibidem
audituri, videlicet die Natalis Domini, die Purificationis beatae Mariae, die
Paschae, die Dedicationis Ecclesiae, die Ascensionis, die Pentecosti, die
Assumptionis beatae Mariae, die omnium Sanctorum, nisi per infirmitatem vel
aeris intemperiem vel hospitum magnorum reverentiam vel aliam rationabilem and
manifestam causam fuerint praedictis octo festis impediti, and tunc de
permissione and licentia Rectoris Ecclesiae diebus illis in Capella illa
compleantur divina, sive Rector Ecclesiae maluerit per proprium Capellanum sive
per illum qui in Capella illa constituitur; Ita videlicet quod tam diebus illis
quam aliis liceat Rectori Ecclesiae si voluerit per proprium Clericum percipere
ea quae ad Capellam perveniunt per manum ipsius ad Matricem Ecclesiam
deferenda, vel si maluerit per Capellanum in Capella ministrantem. Domino vero
Capellae Domi non existente praedictis octo festis, familia quae tunc ibidem
erunt, Matricem Ecclesiam visitabunt, dictus vero Baldewinus tanti memor
beneficii dedit and concessit and carta sua quam inspeximus confirmavit, pro se
and haeredibus suis, Matrici Ecclesiae de Addington, in puram liberam and
perpetuam eleemosynam, pro salute animae suae, Antecessorum and haeredum
suorum, nec non and Hawise uxoris suae, sex acras terrae cum omnibus
pertinentiis in territorio de Addington, videlicet in Sleng tres rodas, juxta
feodum Mauricii de Andely, sub Wodeforde banlond unam rodam, juxta terram
Ecclesiae, and apud Greenwey duodecim seliones juxta terram Decani, and unam
rodam quae abuttat super Buttes juxta terram Decani, and sub Rigewey dimidiam
acram and quatuor seliones juxta terram Decani, and duodecim seliones qui
abuttant super Tendelade juxta terram Soce, and duodecim seliones super
Lidewellehyll juxta terram Decani, and dimidiam acram quatuor sulcis minus quae
abuttat super Caputium Alexandri juxta terram Henrici filii Seyne, and duodecim
seliones apud Michelwell juxta terram Ade propontici, and in Welfield super
Schithill tres Rodas, and in Bonfurlong unam rodam juxta terram Decani; Item in
Bocfurlong super Rennedewelhill unam acram juxta terram Decani, and apud Holles
tres rodas juxta terram Decani, and subter Rigewey unam rodam juxta terram
Decani. Idem vero Baldewinus and haeredes sui warrantizabunt dictas sex acras
terrae cum pertinentiis dictae Ecclesiae de Addington and eidem Ecclesiae
Rectoribus imperpetuum versus omnes and in omnibus ut liberam and puram
eleemosynam suam. Haec autem omnia praedicta rata quantum in nobis est habentes
and grata, ea speciali confirmavimus authoritate. Salvis in omnibus
especialibus consuetudinibus and Lincolniensis Ecclesiae dignitate. Et ut
imperpetuum obtineat firmitatem, praesenti Scripto Sigillum nostrum duximus
apponendum. Hiis testibus, Warino de Kirkett, Roberto de Boleshoner Capellanis,
Magistris Waltero de Wermengen, and Richardo de Wendover, Willielmo de Winch,
Richardo de Oxon, and Thoma de Askep Canonicis, Magistro Alardo de Arundel, and
Stephano de Castle Clericis, and aliis.

Datum Lincolniae per manum Radulphi de Waravil Canonici Lincolniensis, Quinto
Idus Septembris, anno Pontificatus nostri vicesimo tertio.
Conventio inter Dominum Baldewinum de Vere and Johannem filium Hugonis de
Twyvell.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod haec est Conventio inter Dominum Baudewinum
de Vere and Johannem filium Hugonis de Twyvell, scilicet quod praedictus
Johannes reddidit and concessit praedicto Baudewino plenarie duo prata quae
vocant Wenemedwes de tenemento suo apud Twyvell, and totum jus and clameum quod
praedictus Johannes in praedictis pratis habet vel habere poterit, excepta dote
uxori suae, tenenda and habenda viginti tres annos praedicto Baudewino and
haeredibus suis, vel cui idem Baldewinus illa assignare voluerit de praedicto
Johanne and haeredibus suis, libera scilicet and quieta and soluta ab omnibus
servitiis and exactionibus, pro sexaginta solidis quos praedictus Baudewinus
dedit praedicto Johanni prae manibus. Transactis autem viginti tribus annis
praedictis, duo prata praedicta remanebunt quieta and soluta praedicto Johanni
and haeredibus suis de praedicto Baudewino and suis attornatis and haeredibus.
Et si forte contigerit foenum per inundationem aquae perire, praedictus
Baldewinus and sui Attornati recuperabunt tot quot fuerint amissiones pratorum
praedictorum intra terminum praedictum de praedicto Johanne and haeredibus
suis. Ad hanc Conventionem fideliter inter eos observandam uterque praedictorum
affidavit, and hoc praesens Chirographum Sigillo suo corroboravit. Haec autem
Conventio facta fuit ad Festum Sancti Michaelis, septimo Anno Regni Henrici
Regis nostri, ciclo decenovenali currente per numerum septem, praedicto
Baudewino eodem anno ad Festum Sancti Petri ad Vincula de terra Jerosolyma
revertente. Hiis testibus, Acelino de Sidenham, Willielmo de Musta, Willielmo
filio suo, Henrico de Draytone, Domino Mauricio Dandelin, Willielmo Hatechrist,
Johanne Palmer, Matthaeo filio sacerdotis, Humfrido Capellano Henrico filio
suo, and multis aliis.

Carta Baldewini de Vere.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Baldewinus de Vere dedi, concessi and
hac mea praesenti Carta confirmavi Radulpho filio Simonis pro servitio and
homagio suo unam dimidiam virgatam terrae in Thrapston, quam pater praedicti
Radulphi tenuit, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, tenendam sibi and haeredibus
suis de me and haeredibus meis libere and quiet and haereditarie, reddendo
annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis octo solidos and sex denarios pro omni
servitio, salvo forinseco servitio, scilicet ad quatuor terminos, ad Festum
Sancti Michaelis viginti and quinque denarios and obolum, and ad Festum Sancti
Thomae Apostoli viginti quinque denarios and obolum, and ad Pascha florida
viginti quinque denarios and obolum, and ad Festum Sancti Johannis Baptistae
viginti quinque solidos and obolum. Hiis testibus, Willielmo de Musta,
Bartholomaeo de Subure, Simone Para de Islip, Willielmo filio Walkelini,
Richardo filio Gregorii, Hugone de Ringstede, Roberto filio Hernodi, Willielmo
filio Bawdewini, Galfrido filio Rogeri, and multis aliis.

seal of Baldwin de Vere SIGILLVM BALDEWINI DE VER



Carta Willielmi de Sidenham.
SCiant omnes praesentes and futuri quod Ego Willielmus de Sidenham concessi,
relaxavi and quietos clamavi de me and de haeredibus meis imperpetuum Baldewino
de Vere and haeredibus suis, Thomam de Tichmarch, and Willielmum filium Agnetis
Nativos meos, cum tota sequela sua and cum omnibus Catallis suis, habendos and
tenendos libere, quiet and pacifice in liberam and perpetuam haereditatem. Ita
etiam ut idem Baldewinus and haeredes sui de eis faciant quod voluerint, sicut
de Nativis suis propriis, sine aliquo impedimento aut contradictione mei vel
haeredum meorum. Pro hac autem concessione, relaxatione and quieta clamatione
dedit mihi idem Baldewinus quatuor marcas argenti de denariis suis propriis. Et
ut haec mea concessio, relaxatio and quieta clamatio firmae and stabiles
imperpetuum permaneant, hanc praesentem Cartam Sigillo meo munitam ipsi habere
feci. Hiis testibus, Mauricio de Audely, Willielmo de Musta, Radulpho de
Tichmarch, Willielmo Hay, Roberto Mauf, Henrico de Drayton, Willielmo de
Herton, Willielmo Traily, Willielmo de Polteni, and multis aliis.

Carta Walteri de Ludham.
VIris venerabilibus Dominis and amicis in Christo Charissimis Domino Roberto
de Laxinton and Domino Willielmo de Eboraco, and omnibus Christi fidelibus ad
quos praesentes litterae pevenerint, Walterus de Ludham Salutem in Domino.
Noverit universitas vestra me recepisse a Domino Baldewino de Vere quatuor
viginti and december marcas argenti bonorum and legalium Sterlinghorum, in
solutione quarum praedictus Baldewinus de Vere and Robertus de Vere filius ejus
and haeres mihi tenebantur per Litteras suas patentes, secundum quod
irrotulatum est in Rotulo Justiciarii Domini Regis in Nundinis Sancti Botulfi
die octavarum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae inter horam primam and
vespertinam anno domini millesimo ducentesimo sexagesimo secundo; de qua etiam
summa pecuniae praedictos Baldewinum de Vere and Robertum filium suum and
haeredem quietos clamavi penitus in posterum. In cujus rei testimonium huic
praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis testibus, Domino Hugone de Piro,
Domino Radulpho de Traily, Johanne Clerico de Melton, Willielmo Orghen,
Richardo le Ties, Philippo de Mandeville, Willielmo Clerico, and aliis.

Conventio inter Dominum Abbatem Burgi and ejusdem loci Conventum, and Dominum
Baldewinum de Vere super libertates de Thrapston.
NOtum sit omnibus Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filiis ad quos hoc Scriptum
pervenerit, quod cum contentio esset inter Dominum Alexandrum Abbatem Burgi and
ejusdem loci Conventum, and Baldewinum de Vere super quibusdam exactionibus, ut
de auxilio Vicecomitis and sectis Hundredorum and visu Franciplegii hominum
ipsius Baldewini, and aliis quae ipsi Abbas and Conventus dicebant sibi deberi
de terra praedicti Baldewini de Thrapstona ratione praedictae terrae sitae
infra septem Hundreda sua, sopita est and in hunc modum terminata, videlicet,
quod praedicti Abbas and Conventus concesserunt praedicto Baldewino and
haeredibus suis, quod ipsi and terra sua de Thrapstona and homines sui de
praedicta terra de Thrapstona sint imperpetuum quieti and liberi de praedictis
auxiliis Vicecomitis and sectis Hundredorum and de denariis Franciplegii, and
de omnibus aliis demandis quae ad praedictum Abbatem and Conventum pertinent
ratione praedictorum septem Hundredorum, pro dimidia marca argenti quam
praedictus Baldewinus and haeredes sui solvent singulis annis in Festum Sancti
Michaelis praedicto Abbati and Conventui imperpetuum, pro omnibus exactionibus
ad praedictos Abbatem and Conventum ratione praedictorum septem Hundredorum
pertinentibus, exceptis Attachiamentis and aliis quae ad Coronam Domini Regis
pertinent. Ita etiam quod Ballivus praedicti Abbatis and Conventus de septem
Hundredis suis veniet semel in anno, scilicet post Festum Sancti Michaelis, in
curia praedicti Baldewini, and haeredum suorum, apud Thrapstonam, ad videndum
Francumplegium hominum suorum secundum consuetudinem Regni and sine occasion.
Et si inde aliqua misericordia emerserit, misericordia illa erit dicti
Baldewini and haeredum suorum. Et si aliquis hominum suorum de Thrapstona
capiatur pro latrocinio vel cum latrocinio in terra sua de Thrapstona, vel
alibi infra septem predicta Hundreda, de quo scilicet judicium fieri pertinet
in praedictis septem hundredis per libertatem praedicti Abbatis and Conventus,
judicabitur in Curia praedicti Baldewini and haeredum suorum in Thrapstona
coram Ballivo praedicti Abbatis and Conventus de praedictis septem Hundredis,
qui ibidem venire non differet: Et si ibidem venire non possit vel differat,
serviens Hundredis de Naesford ibidem venient sine dilatione loco praedicti
Ballivi. Et si ex judicio in praedicta Curia de Thrapstona facto, justicia
aliqua emerserit facienda, Justicia illa fiet apud Undell, and Catalla
Indictati erunt Baldewini and haeredum suorum, salvis Abbati and Conventui
omnibus ad praedicta Hundreda pertinentibus, quae scilicet emergere poterunt de
hominibus aliorum in Thrapstona praeterquam de hominibus praedicti Baldewini
and haeredum suorum sicut praedictum est, and salvis praedicto Baldewino and
haeredibus suis omnibus quae ad mercatum suum pertinent. Et ut haec concessio
Abbatis and Conventus rata permaneat imperpetuum, praedicti Abbas and Conventus
praesenti Scripto penes Baldewinum and haeredes suos retinendo Sigilla sua
apposuerunt. Et ne praedictus Baldewinus vel haeredes sui cessare possint a
solutione praedictae dimidiae marcae ad praedictum terminum pro praedicta
concessione, nec ultra praedictam concessionem aliquid exigere, vel contra eam
aliquid facere, vel ad se plus possint attrahere quam eis praeconcessum est,
praedictus Baldewinus praesenti Scripto penes praedictum Abbatem and Conventum
retinendo Sigillum suum apposuit. Et sciendum quod nec praedictus Baldewinus
nec aliquis haeredum suorum poterit unquam aliquo tempore furcas levare apud
Thrapstonam. Hiis testibus.

Sir ROBERT de VERE, third of that Name, Lord of Thrapston, Addington, Twyvell,
Sudburgh, Tywa, Melton, and other Lands and Lordships.
Carta Roberti de Vere.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus de Vere dedi and concessi and
praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Henrico le Permiter de Addington pro homagio and
servitio suo unam dimidiam virgatam terrae, and dimidiam acram terrae quae
jacet super Sciteshill cum pertinentibus; Illam scilicet dimidiam virgatam quam
Richardus pater dicti Henrici tenuit de voluntate and assensu Baldewini de Vere
patris mei: Habendam and tenendam de me and haeredibus meis sibi and haeredibus
suis, de se and legitima uxore sua procreatis, integre, libere, and quiet,
reddendo inde annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis tres solidos, scilicet ad
Festum omnium Sanctorum octodecim denarios, and in septimana Paschae octodecim
denarios, pro omni seculari servitio, salvo forinseco domini Regis servitio. Et
Ego Robertus and haeredes mei praedicto Henrico and haeredibus suis, de se and
legitima uxore sua procreatis, dimidiam praedictam virgatam terrae cum
pertinentiis and dimidiam acram contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus. Ita quod
si dictus Henricus le Permiter sine haerede de se moriatur, dicta dimidia
virgata terrae and dimidia acra cum omnibus pertinentiis mihi and haeredibus
meis revertentur. Hiis testibus, Richardo de Gatesdene, Magistro Simone Parsona
de Addington, Willielmo de Treyly, Luca de Thrapston, Eustachio de
Irtlingburgh, Johanne Clerico de Addington, and multis aliis. Et ad majorem
confirmationem, huic Scripto Sigillum meum apposui per visum testium
supradictorum.

Carta Roberti de Vere.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Robertus Vere Miles, Dominus de
Addington, dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti Carta mea indentata confirmavi
Johanni filio meo and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus legitime, Manerium
meum de Twyvell, cum wardis, releviis, Escaetis, Maritagiis, boscis, hayis,
pratis, semitis, viis, libertatibus, and cum Nativis meis, cum totis sequelis
eorum tam procreatis quam procreandis, dicto Manerio spectantibus in Comitatu
Northamptoniae: Habendum and tenendum praedictum Manerium cum wardis, releviis,
Escaetis, maritagiis, boscis, hayis, pratis, semitis, viis, libertatibus, and
cum Nativis meis, cum totis sequelis eorum tam procreatis quam procreandis,
dicto Manerio spectantibus in Comitatu Northamptoniae praedicto Johanni and
haeredibus de corpore suo legitime exeuntibus, reddendo inde annuatim Baldewino
fratri meo and haeredibus suis unum par calcarium deauratorum ad Festum Natalis
Domini pro omnibus servitiis. Et Ego praedictus Robertus and haeredes mei
praedictum Manerium cum omnibus libertatibus, ut praedictum est, praefato
Johanni and haeredibus suis de corpore suo legitime exeuntibus contra omnes
gentes warrantizabimus and defendemus. Et si contingat quod praedictus Johannes
sine haerede de corpore suo legitime exeunte obierit, tunc volo and concedo
quod praedictum Manerium de Twyvell in Comitatu Northamptoniae cum wardis,
releviis, Escaetis, Maritagiis, boscis, semitis, hayis, pratis, piscariis,
libertatibus, and cum Nativis Villenagii dicto Manerio spectantibus, praefato
Baldewino fratri meo and haeredibus suis remaneat imperpetuum. In cujus rei
testimonium huic praesenti Cartae Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis testibus, Domino
Gilberto Tolthorp de Deneford Milite, Rogero de........ Milite, Willielmo Hotot
de Clopton Milite, Willielmo de Nowers Milite, Henrico de Tychmerche, and aliis.

Carta Domini Roberti de Vere.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus praesens Scriptum visuris vel audituris, Dominus
Robertus de Vere, Dominus de Thrapston,
salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Noverit Universitas vestra me concessisse and dimisisse Henrico filio Galfridi
de Thrapston and Gealae uxori suae unum Messuagium in Villa de Thrapston, and
terram cum suis pertinentiis, quam Robertus de Thrapston pater ejus quondam
tenuit, ad totam vitam dictorum Henrici and Gealae uxoris suae, faciendo inde
annuatim octo solidos argenti ad quatuor terminos anni, videlicet ad Festum
Sancti Petri Apostoli duos solidos, ad Festum Sancti Michaelis duos solidos, ad
Festum Sancti Thomae duos solidos, and ad Pascha florida duos solidos, and
forinseca servitia quae Robertus consueta facere solebat. Ego vero dictus
Robertus and haeredes mei dictum Messuagium cum dicta terra adjacente and eorum
pertinentiis dictis Henrico and Gealae uxori suae dum vixerint warrantizabimus.
Dicti etiam Henricus and Geala uxor ejus, domos, aedificia, muros and alia
dicto Messuagio, firmaria in bono statu sustinebunt.

In cujus rei testimonium huic Scripto Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis testibus,
Willielmo Jordein de Barnwell, Willielmo Perpetuo Vicario de Addington, Johanne
filio Lucae de Thrapston, Thoma de Wolston in Thrapston, Johanne le Franc,
Thoma de Addington, and aliis.

SIGILLVM ROBERTI DE VER

seal of Robert de Vere

Fuller's History of the Worthies of England, Page 295.
SIR Robert de Vere was High Sheriff of the County of Northampton in the
thirtieth year of King Edward the First.

Conventio inter Dominum Robertum de Vere and Thomam de Abburbirie.
ANNO Regni Regis Edwardi filii Regis Henrici tricesimo primo in Festo beati
Petri ad Vincula sic convenit inter Dominum Robertum de Vere Dominum de
Sudburgh Militem ex part una, and Magistrum Thomam de Abburbirie Dominum de
Aula ex part altera, videlicet, Quod praedictus Magister Thomas aut haeredes
sui dicto Domino Roberto seu haeredibus suis absque Calumpnia vel
contradictione dimittent terras and tenementa in magna Tywa in Comitatu
Oxoniae, quae idem Magister Thomas aliquando habuit ex dimissione and dono
dicti Domini Roberti: Ita tamen si praedictus Robertus aut haeredes sui dicto
Thomae aut haeredibus suis seu assignatis suis in quindena Sancti Michaelis in
unum annum proximo futurum prae manibus solverint apud Steple Aston sexies
viginti marcas Sterlinghorum, Et tunc post solutionem praedictam praedicto
Magistro seu certo Attornato praedictis loco and termino integraliter factam,
dictae terrae and tenementa sine mora dicto Roberto aut haeredibus suis
dimittantur and deliberentur, and praedictum Feoffamentum pro nullo habeatur.
Si vero praedictus Robertus aut haeredes sui in praedictam solutionem in toto
vel in part defecerint die and loco praenominatis, extunc dictus Thomas aut
haeredes sui ad reddendum dictas terras aut tenementa praefato Roberto aut
haeredibus suis nullatenus ullo tempore tenebuntur. Et sciendum quod praedjctus
Dominus Robertus tenetur ad liberandum dicto Magistro Thomae plenam and bonam
quietam clamantiam Domini Johannis de Vere patris sui de praedictis tenementis
in Tywa; Ita quod statutum de centum libris in quibus idem Robertus eidem
Thomae tenetur, and quod est in manibus Johannis de Hotot ex consensu dictorum
Thomae and Roberti, nunquam eidem Roberto liberetur, donec praedicta
quieta-clamantia liberata fuerit dicto Thomae aut suo certo Attornato. In cujus
rei testimonium utraque pars huic Scripto indentato Sigillum suum apposuit
alternatim.

Datum apud Steple Aston in praedicto Festo beati Petri Anno Regis praenotato.
Hiis testibus, Dominis Henrico de Williamscote, Waltero de Wychul Militibus,
Johanne de Aula de Nortlega, Henrico de Dichele, Johanne Filio Simonis le
Mestre de Dadington, and aliis.

Carta Roberti Gilkamor.
PAteat universis per praesentes me Robertum de Gilkamor, Collectorem Scutagii
Dominae Isabellae Reginae Angliae, ad opus dictae Dominae meae, recepisse de
Domino Roberto de Vere Milite sexaginta solidos Sterlinghorum pro tribus
Scutagiis dimidii feodi Militis, quod praefatus Dominus Robertus tenet de feodo
Thomae Wake in Thrapston in Comitatu Northamptoniae, scilicet pro Guerra Domini
Regis Edwardi filii Regis Henrici annorum vicesimi octavi, tricesimi primi and
tricesimi quarti, de quibus quidem sexaginta solidis nomine praefatae Dominae
meae fateor me fore satisfactum. In cujus rei testimonium praesentibus Sigillum
meum est appensum.

Datum apud Addington die Lunae proximo ante Festum Sancti Michaelis, Anno
Regni Edwardi filii Regis Edwardi decimo.
Carta Roberti de Vere.
NOtum sit omnibus tam praesentibus quam futuris, quod Ego Robertus de Vere
Dominus de Thrapston dedi, concessi and hoc praesenti Scripto meo confirmavi
pro me and executoribus imperpetuum Ranulfo filio meo and haeredi omnia bona
and Catalla in Manerio meo de Thrapston inventa die confectionis praesentium;
Ita quod nec Ego, Executores mei, nec aliquis nomine meo in dictis bonis and
Catallis de caetero exigere vel clamare poterimus, sed imperpetuum sumus
exclusi. In cujus rei testimonium Sigillum meum apposui.

Datum apud Thrapston die Dominico proximo ante Festum Sancti Marci
Evangelistae, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi filii Regis Edwardi tertio decimo.
In an ancient Manuscript among the Evidences of the Earl of Peterborow is this
Pedigree inserted.
Rogerus de Waterville. Anna nupta Roberto Vere Domino de Thrapston. Elizabeth
nupta Henrico de Tichmarsh. Johanna nupta Thomae de Thorp.

RANVLPH de VERE, first of that Name, Lord of Thrapston, Addington, Twyvell,
Sudburgh, Tywa, Melton, and other Lands and Lordships.
The Privileges and Liberties of the Town of Thrapston.
INTER Recorda in Curia Receptae Scaccarii sub Custodia Thesaurarii and
Camerariorum ibidem residentia, inter alia continetur ut sequitur, videlicet,
in quadam Baga de quo waranto intitulata North. Bed. ss. Placita de quo
waranto, coram Galfrido le Scrop, and sociis suis, Justiciariis Domini Regis
Itinerantibus apud Northampton die Lunae proximo post Festum Omnium Sanctorum,
Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii a Conquestu tertio, Rotulo primo Scrop......ss
Ranulphus de Vere summonitus fuit ad respondendum Domino Regi de placito, quo
waranto clamat habere libertates subscriptas, in Thrapston, videlicet quod
ipse, and Haeredes sui, habeant imperpetuum, singulis annis, unam Feriam apud
Manerium de Thrapston, duraturam per tres dies, videlicet in Vigilia, and in
die, and in Crastino Sancti Jacobi Apostoli, cum omnibus libertatibus and
liberis consuetudinibus ad praedictam Feriam pertinentibus; Et etiam habere
ibidem Mercatum qualibet septimana, per diem Martis, singulis annis, cum
omnibus ad dictum Mercatum spectantibus; Et etiam habere ibidem visum
Franciplegii bis per annum, videlicet semel post Pascham, and iterum post
Festum Sancti Michaelis, cum omnibus ea tangentibus, etc.

Et Ranulphus venit, and quoad praedictam Feriam, dicit, quod Dominus Henricus
Rex, Proavus Domini Regis nunc, per Cartam suam, quam profert, concessit, and
confirmavit cuidam Roberto de Vere, Antecessori praedicti Ranulphi, cujus
haeres ipse est, quod ipse, and haeredes sui habeant imperpetuum, singulis
annis, unam Feriam apud Manerium suum de Thrapston, duraturam per tres dies,
videlicet in Vigilia, and in die, and in Crastino Sancti Jacobi Apostoli, cum
omnibus libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus ad hujusmodi Feriam
pertinentibus, Et eo waranto clamat ipse habere praedictam Feriam, etc.

Et quoad praedictum Mercatum, and Visum dicit, quod illae libertates sunt, and
fuerunt ab antiquo, pertinentes ad praedictum Manerium de Thrapston, de quo
quidem Manerio cum pertinentiis simul cum libertatibus praedictis quidam
Baldewinus de Wake feoffavit quendam Robertum de Vere, Proavum praedicti
Ranulphi; Et de ipso Roberto descendit praedictum Manerium ad quod, etc. cuidam
Baldewino, ut Filio and haeredi; Et de ipso Baldewino, cuidam Roberto, ut filio
and haeredi; Et de ipso Roberto descendit praedictum Manerium ad quod, etc.
isti Ranulpho, ut filio and haeredi, etc. Et dicit quod tam ipse and omnes
Antecessores sui praedicti, a tempore feoffamenti praedicti usque nunc, quam
etiam praedictus Baldewinus de Wake, and Antecessores sui, a tempore quo non
extat memoria, seisiti fuerunt de iisdem Mercato and Visu, tenendis in forma
praedicta, tanquam pertinentibus ad dictum Manerium de Thrapston; Et eo waranto
clamat ipse praedictum Mercatum and Visum, etc. Et idem Ranulphus quaesitus si
habet ibi Pillorium and Tumbrellum, dicit quod sic. Et Richardus de Aldeburgh
qui sequitur pro Domino Rege, dicit quod praedictus Ranulphus sub color
Concessionis praedicti Regis Henrici, de Feria praedicta factae, per tres dies
tantum duratura, aliquando tenuit istam Feriam ultra tertium diem, per duos,
vel tres dies, capiendo ibidem Tolneta, Stallagia, and alia proficua ad
detrimentum populi, and contra formam Concessionis praedictae, etc.

Et quoad Visum praedictum, dicit, quod idem Ranulphus non punivit debite
transgressores cum Pillario and Trumbrello, quotiens puniri debuissent, pro eo
quod multotiens hujusmodi transgressores per fines and amerciamenta punivit,
cum Judicium Pillorii and Tumbrelli subiisse debuerant. Et hoc petit quod
inquiratur pro Domino Rege. Ideo venerunt inde Juratores hic die Mercurii
proximo post quindenam Paschae, etc. Ad quem diem venit praedictus Ranulphus,
and similiter Juratores, qui di cunt supra Sacramentum suum quod Antecessores
praedicti Ranulphi semper a tempore confectionis praedictae Cartae continue usi
sunt tenere praedictam Feriam usque ad Festum Sancti Michaelis proxime
praeteritum, quo tempore praedictus Robertus Pater praedicti Ranulphi obiit. Et
dicunt quod idem Ranulphus huc usque nullam Feriam tenuit, eo quod praedictum
Festum Sancti Jacobi in praedicta Carta contentum adhuc est venturum.

Et quoad praedictum Mercatum and Visum dicunt, quod tam ipse and Antecessores
sui a tempore doni praedicti Baldewini, quam idem Baldewinus and Antecessores
sui a tempore quo non extat memoria, seisiti fuerunt de iisdem tanquam
pertinentiis ad praedictum Manerium de Thrapston; Et dicunt quod idem Ranulphus
unum Visum tantum tempore suo post praedictum Festum Sancti Michaelis, and ante
primum diem Itineris, in quo Visu in aliquo non excessit debitum modum. Et
quoad praedictum Mercatum dicunt, quod idem Ranulphus per finem hic in Curia
tenuit praedictum Mercatum diebus debitis and consuetis, and non aliter. Dicunt
etiam quoad punitiones transgressorum, quod ipse habet Pillorium and
Tumbrellum, per quae tales transgressores puniuntur, cum causae tempore suo
emerserunt. Ideo Concessum est quod praedictus Ranulphus eat inde sine die,
salvo jure Domini Regis, cum inde loqui voluerit, etc.

Examinatur per Scipionem le Squyre Procamerarium ibidem.

Carta Willielmi de Wygth.
A Touz ceaux que ceste letre verrount ou orrount William de Wygth
Salutz en Dieu.
Sachetz moi avoir done and grant a Radulfe de Vere de Thrapston tote ma
Baille de Brigstoke and de Geytington, ou totes les appurtenances auxint
entirement, come ceo lay del donn nostre Seigneur le Roy and de Madame Isabel
sa Mere Royne d'Angleterre, a term de setz ans, le term comencant le jour de
la Confection de ceste Endenture, rendant a moy per an diz marces d'argent a
deux terms de l'an, cesta savoir a les Festes de Saint Michel l'Archangel, and
a la Pask par esgalles portions; Et le dit Randolfe oblige luy and ses heyrs a
dit William de luy salver devers nostre dit Seigneur le Roy, and devers ma dite
Dame Isabel sans dommage que a luy purra avenoir par cause de malegarde de la
dite Baille. En tesmoignance de quelle chose a cestes presens Endentures je,
and le dit Randolfe enterchangeablement eyons mis nous Seals. Par iceux
tesmoignes, Monsieur Simond de Drayton, Monsieur John Dandelyn Chevaliers,
Robert de Tolthorp, Henry Trayly, Bernard de Bruz, and autres. Done a
Addington le samedy le jour de Saint Mark le Evangeliste, l'an du Regne Roy
Edward Tierz paiz la Conqueste syme.

Carta Ranulphi de Vere.
UNiversis pateat per praesentes, quod Ego Ranulphus de Vere concessi and
vendidi venerabili in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino Henrico, Dei gratia
Lincolniae Episcopo, and Agneti quae fuit Uxor Richardi de Waldegrave Militis,
Custodiam terrarum and tenementorum quae dictus Dominus Richardus de me tenuit
in Villa de Twyvel, quorum Custodia ad me pertinet ratione minoris aetatis
Thomae filii and haeredis dicti Domini Richardi. Concessi etiam iisdem Domino
Henrico and Agneti Maritagium dicti Thomae filii and haeredis dicti Domini
Richardi quod ad me pertinet ratione praenominati feoffamenti; Ac etiam
Custodiam terrarum and tenementorum praedictorum ac maritagium haeredis dicti
Thomae de haerede in haeredem in Collaterali gradu, usque aliquis eorundem ad
plenam aetatem pervenerit, pro quadam summa pecuniae mihi prae manibus soluta:
Habenda and tenenda praedictis Domino Henrico and Agneti and eorum Assignatis;
Ita quod nec Ego dictus Ranulphus nec aliquis nomine meo, ratione custodiae
terrarum and tenementorum praedictorum ac maritagiorum haeredum praedictorum,
versus praedictos Henricum and Agnetem vel Assignatos suos de caetero aliquam
actionem exigere vel vendicare poterimus, sed per praesentes versus eosdem ab
omni action, ratione custodiae terrarum and tenementorum and maritagiis
praedictis imperpetuum sumus exclusi. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti
Indenturae Sigilla dicti Domini Henrici, and praedictae Agnetis sunt appensa.
Hiis testibus Magistro Simone de Issip Officiali Lincolniae, Johanne de
Waldgrave, Johanne de Thrapston, Willielmo de Castle, Johanne de Cotesmore,
Roberto de Ryby, Thoma de Fulbek, and aliis.

Data apud Lafford die Veneris in Festo Sancti Edmundi Regis, Anno Regni Regis
Edwardi Tertii a Conquestu duodecimo. seal of Ralph de Vere SIGILLVM RANVLPHI
DE VER



Thrapston and Addington Inquisition.
Northampton.
INquisitio facta apud Thrapston nono die Mensis Octobris, Anno Regni Regis
Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum nono, super verum valorem Manerii Ranulphi de
Vere de Thrapston and Addington, per sacramentum totius Homagii sui de
Thrapston, and dicunt, quod idem Ranulphus tenet Manerium dictum de Thrapston
de Domino Thoma Wake per servitium dimidii feodi unius Militis pro omni
servitio. Dicunt etiam, quod est ibidem unum Capitale Messuagium quod valet per
annum sex solidos and octo denarios, cum duobus Gardinis adjacentibus. Item
dicunt, quod sunt ibidem in Dominico centum acrae terrae arabilis, and valent
per annum triginta and tres solidos and quatuor denarios, per acram quatuor
denarios. Item dicunt, quod sunt ibidem december acrae prati falcabilis, and
valent per annum quindecim solidos, per acram octodecim denarios. Item dicunt,
quod sunt ibidem december libere tenentes, qui reddunt per annum, scilicet ad
terminum Natalis Domini, Paschae, Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, and Sancti
Michaelis, quinquaginta solidos and quatuor denarios aequis portionibus. Item
dicunt, quod sunt ibidem december Nativi, qui reddunt per annum ad terminos
praedictos sexaginta solidos and octo denarios; and non operantur; and sunt
ibidem septem Cottagia, quae reddunt per annum quindecim solidos ad terminos
praedictos. Item dicunt, quod sunt placita and perquisita Curiae, quae valent
per annum (cum duobus visibus Franciplegii) viginti solidos. Et est ibidem unum
Molendinum aquaticum, quod reddit per annum sex libras ad dictos terminos. Et
est ibidem unum Mercatum cum una Feria, quod valet per annum tredcim libras,
sex solidos and octo denarios ad terminos praedictos.

Summa xxixl vis viijd.

Item dicunt, quod idem Ranulphus habet unum Manerium in Addington, quod tenet
de Domino Simone de Draytone per servitium quarterii unius Militis, and valet
Capitale Messuagium per annum december solidos. Et est ibidem unum Columbarium,
quod valet per annum quatuor solidos. Et est ibidem unum Gardinum, cum fructus
acciderit, quod valet per annum quatuor solidos and quatuor denarios. Item
dicunt quod est ibidem unum Molendinum in dicto Gardino, quod valet per annum
tredecim solidos and quatuor denarios. Item dicunt, quod sunt ibidem in
Dominico sexaginta acrae terrae arabilis, quae valent per annum viginti
solidos, per acram quatuor denarios. Item dicunt, quod sunt ibidem sex acrae
prati falcabilis, quae valent per annum novem solidos, per acram octodecim
denarios. Item dicunt, quod sunt ibidem duo libere tenentes qui reddunt per
annum duos solidos ad terminos Sancti Michaelis and Paschae. Et sunt ibidem
septem Nativi, qui reddunt per annum triginta solidos, videlicet ad terminos
Natalis Domini, Paschae, Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, and Sancti Michaelis
aequis portionibus; Et operantur, and valent opera septem solidos. Summa iiijl
xviijs viijd. SS Summa totalis xxxiiijl xvs iiijl.


JOHN de VERE, first of that Name, who died without Issue, and ROBERT de VERE,
fourth of that Name, Lords of Addington, Thrapston, and other Lands and
Lordships.
Carta Roberti de Vere.
HAEC Indentura facta inter Robertum le Vere ex una part, and Aliciam quae
fuit Uxor Johannis le Vere Militis ex altera part, Testatur, Quod praedictus
Robertus concessit and assignavit praedictae Aliciae rationabilem dotem suam
sibi contingentem de Manerio de Thrapston post mortem Johannis le Vere Militis
quondam viri sui, videlicet tertiam partem Capitalis Messuagii dicti Manerii,
tertiam partem totius Dominciae terrae arabilis, tertiam partem totius prati,
tertiam partem totius pasturae dicti Manerii; prout jacent in singulis suis
locis, Et sexaginta sex solidatos and obolatum annui redditus, percipiendos de
liberis tenentibus, Nativis and Cottagiis dicti Manerii, cum omnibus suis
Juribus and pertinentiis, videlicet de tenemento quod Thomas Boszoun tenuit,
duos solidos; de tenemento quod Johannes Croil tenuit, septendecim solidos and
unum denarium; de tenemento quod Richardus le Wright tenuit, quatuor solidos;
de Tenemento quod Willielmus le Masson tenuit, duodecim denarios; de tenemento
quod Thomas de Weston tenuit, sex solidos novem denarios; de tenemento quod
Johannes Wagge tenuit, quinque solidos; de Tenemento quod Johannes Mahen
tenuit, septem solidos quatuor denarios; de Tenemento quod Thomas Fasham
tenuit, septem denarios; de Tenemento quod Willielmus de Foixton tenuit, septem
denarios; de Tenemento quod Johannes le Milner tenuit, sex denarios; de
Tenemento quod Willielmus de Kettering tenuit, duodecim denarios; de Tenementis
quae Alicia le Vinter tenuit in bondagio, quatuor solidos; de Tenemento quod
Henricus Asser tenuit in bondagio, tres solidos; de Tenemento quod Willielmus
Cade tenuit in bondagio, quatuor solidos and octo denarios; de Tenemento quod
Mabile le Cook tenuit in bondagio, quatuor solidos; de Tenemento quod Johannes
le Wright tenuit in bondagio, quatuor solidos; and de Tenemento quod Letilbred
tenuit in bondagio, sex denarios and obolum. Et etiam idem Robertus concessit
and assignavit eidem Aliciae tertiam partem proficuum Molendinorum, Mercatorum,
Nundinarum, Curiarum, Visuum Franciplegii, Et etiam tertiam partem omnium and
singulorum proficuum quovismodo ratione Dominii dicti Manerii accidentium,
percipiendam per manus firmariorum: Habenda and tenenda omnia praedicta
tenementa praedictae Aliciae concessa and assignata cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis ad terminum vitae dictae Aliciae, nomine dotis suae, de praedicto
Manerio sibi contingente. Praeterea idem Robertus concessit and dimisit
praefatae Aliciae ad totam vitam suam quadraginta solidatos annui redditus cum
pertinentiis in Thrapston pro dote sua sibi contingente de Manerio de Kimington
in Comitatu Hertfordiae post mortem praedicti Johannis de Vere Militis, quondam
viri praedictae Aliciae, percipiendos de tenentibus dicti Manerii de Thrapston,
videlicet de Roberto Raunds octo solidos, de Richardo Jekk duos solidos and sex
denarios, de Johanne Vynter octo solidos and novem denarios, de Willielmo de
Kettering quatuor solidos and tres denarios, de Thoma Westburgh tres solidos,
de Henrico Bedeoke tres solidos tres denarios, de Thoma Vynter octo denarios,
de Willielmo Holme octo denarios, and de Johanne Swon octo denarios. Habendos
and tenendos praedictos quadraginta solidatos annui redditus cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis praefatae Aliciae ad totam vitam suam pro dote sua dicti Manerii
de Kymington. Et idem Robertus concessit pro se and haeredibus suis praedictos
quadraginta solidatos annui redditus cum omnibus suis pertinentiis praefatae
Aliciae ad terminum vitae suae contra omnes gentes warrantizare. Pro qua quidem
concessione, dimissione and assignatione dictorum quadraginta solidatorum annui
redditus, praedicta Alicia remisit, relaxavit, and omnino pro se and haeredibus
suis quietum clamavit praedicto Roberto and haeredibus suis imperpetuum, totum
jus suum and clameum quod habuit seu aliquo modo habere potuit in praedicto
Manerio de Kymington. Et etiam praedicta Alicia remisit and quietum clamavit
praedicto Roberto and Executoribus suis omnimodas actiones reales and
personales quas erga dictum Robertum habuit a principio mundi usque diem
confectionis praesentium, occasion aliqua. Et idem Robertus remisit and
quietum clamavit praefatae Aliciae and Executoribus suis omnimodas actiones
reales and personales quas erga praefatam Aliciam habuit ab origin mundi usque
diem confectionis praesentium, occasion aliqua. Salva praedicto Roberto and
haeredibus suis Reversione and Jure suo omnium Tenementorum praefatae Aliciae
ad totam vitam suam forma praedicta assignatorum and dimissorum. In cujus rei
testimonium huic praesenti Indenturae penes praedictum Robertum remanenti
praedicta Alicia Sigillum suum apposuit. Hiis testibus, Symone de Drayton
Milite, Richardo Chamberleyne Milite, Henrico de Green, Henrico Trayly,
Bernardo de Bruce, Michaele de Stamforde and Johanne Campion, and aliis. Data
apud Thrapston die Martis in octabis purificationis beatae Mariae, Anno Regni
Regis Edwardi Tertii, post Conquestum vicesimo quarto. Item praedictus Robertus
concessit praefatae Aliciae ad terminum vitae suae, nomine dotis suae, tertiam
praesentationem ad Ecclesiam de Islip cum acciderit, and tertiam partem
redditus provenientis de tenemento quod Johannes Baudwen tenuit, cum haeres ad
plenam aetatem pervenerit.

Carta Roberti de Vere.
HAEC Indentura testatur, quod Robertus de Vere concessit and dimisit Aliciae,
quae fuit uxor Johannis de Vere Chevalier, quinquaginta and duas acras terrae
cum pasturis eisdem terris adjacentibus, and cum pertinentiis suis in
Thrapston, and unam placeam prati vocatam le Feyre-croft. Quae quidem
quadraginta and duae acrae aratae and laboratae fuerunt tempore Confections
praesentium, and separatae de dote dictae Aliciae, habenda and tenenda
praedicta cum suis pertinentiis ad totam vitam dictae Aliciae, reddendo inde
annuatim pro praedictis quinquaginta and duabus acris terrae triginta quatuor
solidos and octo denarios ad quatuor anni terminos usuales praedicto Roberto
and haeredibus suis in eadem Villa, termino solutinis incipiente ad Festum
Natalis Domini proximum futurum. Concessit etiam, quod una placea vocata le
Nether-Orchard, quae Willielmus Nowers tenet ad terminum sex annorum, and una
Cultura terrae quae Johannes Ormer tenet ad eundem terminum, and quae post
terminum illum praefato Roberto reverti deberent, praefatae Aliciae ad terminum
vitae suae remaneant: Reddendo inde annuatim per totum terminum praedictum
quinque solidos pro praedicto Nether-Orchard ad terminos praedictos. Et
praedicta Alicia vult and concedit, quod si praedictus redditus triginta
quatuor solidorum and octo denariorum de praedictis quinquaginta duabus acris
terrae and de placea praedicta quae vocatur Nether-Orchard recepturus, ad
terminum aliquem praedictum in tota vita ipsius Aliciae in part vel in toto
aretro extiterit, quod extunc been liceat praedicto Roberto and haeredibus suis
in omnibus terris and tenementis praedictae Aliciae nomine dotis assignatis per
praedictum Robertum, seu ad totam vitam suam dimissis, in eadem villa
distringere and districtiones retinere, quousque de praedicto redditu and de
arreragiis ejusdem plenarie fuerit satisfactum. Concessi etiam praefatae
Aliciae salices crescentes circa Molendinum Aquaticum ejusdem Manerii. Et
praedictus Robertus and haeredes sui omnia praedicta tenementa praefatae
Aliciae warrantizabunt, Et de omnibus debitis, recognitionibus, executionibus,
forisfactis, finibus, amerciamentis, redditibus and oneribus quibuscunque erga
Dominum Regem and quoscunque alios praedictam Aliciam acquietabit and defendet.
Et si contingat quod praedicta Alicia aliquod solvat per justam districtionem
in tenementis praedictis factam, quod been liceat praedictae Aliciae retinere
de redditu praedicto reservato tantum quantum sic solutum fuerit per justam
districtionem. Et si contingat, quod haeredes praedicti Roberti praedictam
Aliciam non acquietaverint seu defendent in forma praedicta, quod tunc liceat
praedictae Aliciae praedictas quinquaginta duas acras terrae and placeam quae
vocatur Nether-Orchard, sursumreddere praedictis haeredibus, and de praedicto
redditu omnino exonerari, and praedictam Fair-croft and Culturam praedictam
penes se retinere. Concessit etiam idem Robertus eidem Aliciae ad totam vitam
suam liberos taurum and aprum in Thrapston, quos habuit ratione Dominii sui in
eadem Villa; Et praedicta Alicia redditum septem solidorum and quatuor
denariorum, qui ei assignati fuerint in dote de Johanne Mayhen, post quindenam
Sancti Michaelis proximum futurum sursumreddet praefato Roberto. In cujus rei
testimonium hiis Indenturis parts praedictae Sigilla sua alternatim
apposuerunt.

Dat. septimo decimo die Junii Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum
vicesimo octavo. seal of Robert de Vere SIGILLVM ROBERTI DE VER



Carta Aliciae Vere.
HAEC Indentura facta inter Aliciam quae fuit uxor Johannis de Vere Chevalier
ex part una, and Robertum de Vere fratrem and haeredem praefati Johannis ex
part altera, testatur, quod praedictus Robertus concessit and assignavit eidem
Aliciae tertiam partem Capitalis Messuagii and Manerii de Thrapston, ac etiam
tertiam partem totius Dominicae terrae and prati dicti Manerii prout dimidiatur
per metas, ac etiam tertiam partem pasturae ejusdem Manerii, ac etiam redditus
and servitia Thomae Bosoun, Johannis Pressed, Johannis Croyl, and servitia and
redditus Richardi Write, de tenementis quae fuerunt Willielmi Taverner and de
tenementis quae fuerunt Willielmi Foixton, and redditus and servitia Johannis
Wagge, Willielmi Gray, liberorum tenentium ejusdem Manerii, ac etiam redditus
and servitia Johannis Vineter, Johannis At Parsones, Willielmi At Cross,
Willielmi Berd, and Johannis Swan, and redditus and servitia de tenementis quae
fuerunt Johannis Milner, and redditus and servitia Richardi Holme and Agnetis
uxoris ejus, and redditus and servitia haeredum Galfridi Mahen, de totis
tenemntis cum suis pertinentiis quae tenent in Thrapston ut praedictum est; ac
etiam Johannem Coke, Richardum Holme, Henricum Asser, Willielmum Cade and
Johannem Monk, Nativos ejusdem Manerii, cum sequelis and Catallis eorum, and
cum omnibus tenementis quae tenent in bondagio; ac etiam unum Messuagium quod
Richardus Wright quondam tenuit; ac etiam tertiam partem omnium Cottagiorum,
vel tertiam partem proficuum praedictorum Cottagiorum; ac etiam tertiam partem
proficuum Molendinorum, Mercatorum, Nundinarum, Curiarum, Visuum Franciplegii
and piscariarum ejusdem Manerii and Villae praedictae de Thrapston; ac etiam
tertiam partem omnium proficuorum quovismodo ratione Curiae dicti Manerii
accidentium. Habenda and tenenda omnia praedicta praefatae Aliciae and
assignatis suis ad terminum vitae dictae Aliciae in dotem, in allocationem
totius dotis ei contingentis de praedicto Manerio de Thrapston, and de Manerio
de Hogenhanger in Kymington. Concessit etiam idem Robertus and assignavit
praedictae Aliciae quadraginta tres acras terrae cum pertinentiis in eadem
Villa de Thrapston, de quibus duodecim acrae terrae jacent in una Cultura
vocata Midlewong, and december acrae terrae in alia cultura vocata Milnewong, and
duae acrae vocatae Heyweywong, and december acrae terrae in alia cultura vocata
Thorpweywong, and quatuor acrae in alia cultura vocata Honeywong, and duae
acrae in alia cultura vocata Wylpyt-furlong, and tres acrae super Benlond:
Salvis praedicto Roberto Bladis in eiisdem tenementis crescentibus die
Confectionis praesentium. Assignavit etiam idem Robertus praefatae Aliciae
residuum praedicti Capitalis Messuagii praedicti Manerii de Thrapston, excepta
una placea terrae vocata le Nether-Orchard praedicta, praefatae Aliciae ad
terminum vitae suae in dotem, in allocationem dotis suae ei contingentis de
Capitali Messuagio and de dominicis terris ipsius Roberti in Addington, de
quibus Capitalibus Messuagiis and dominicis terris in Addington praefata Alicia
sursumreddidit dotem suam, cum pasturis eiisdem dominicis terris pertinentibus,
and illa eidem Roberto quietum clamavit; salvis eidem Aliciae redditibus,
servitiis, pratis, pasturis, and aliis tenementis ei in eadem Villa de
Addington in dotem assignatis. Concessit etiam idem Robertus, quod ipse eandem
Aliciam de exitibus per ipsum forisfactis, and de finibus per ipsum factis, and
de servitiis suis propriis, and de omnibus oneribus de tempore suo de omnibus
praedictis tenementis emergentibus, acquietabit and defendet. Assignavit etiam
idem Robertus praefatae Aliciae tertiam partem redditus and servitii de
tenementis quae Johannes Bendwayne tenuit, in dotem tenendam. Concessit etiam
and assignavit eidem Aliciae secundam praesentationem ad Ecclesiam de Islip
post datam istius Indenturae, and post secundam praesentationem praedictam,
tertiam praesentationem ad terminum vitae dictae Aliciae, nomine dotis
tenendam. In cujus rei testimonium parts praedictae alternatim Sigilla sua
apposuerunt.

Data septimo decimo die Junii, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum
vicesimo octavo. seal of Alice de Vere SIGILLVM DNAE ALICIAE DE VER



Carta Roberti de Vere.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus de Vere, Dominus de Thrapston,
dedi, concessi and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Dominis Galfrido Knight
de Thurleby, Rectori Ecclesiae de Thrapston, and Willielmo Cordell, Rectori
Ecclesiae de Addington magna, haeredibus and assignatis eorum, omnia terras and
tenementa mea cum pertinentiis in Thrapston, ut Messuagiis, terris, pratis,
pascuis, pasturis, molendinis, stagnis, vivariis, nundinis, mercatis, Nativis
and eorum sequelis, sectis Curiarum and proficubus earum; Ac etiam redditus and
servitia omnium Tenentium meorum tam liberorum quam Nativorum in Villa
praedicta, cum homagiis, wardis, releviis, Escaetis, and omnibus commoditatibus
and libertatibus mihi quovismodo in Villa praedicta pertinentibus. Concessi
etiam eisdem Galfrido and Willielmo, haeredibus and assignatis eorum,
reversionem omnium terrarum and tenementorum quae Alicia, quae fuit uxor
Johannis de Vere, de me tenet in eadem Villa ad terminum vitae ipsius Aliciae;
Et etiam reversionem omnium terrarum and tenementorum quae de me tenentur in
eadem Villa, ad vitam: Habenda and tenenda omnia praedicta terras and tenementa
cum eorum pertinentiis, and redditus and servitia omnium praedictorum Tenentium
tam liberorum quam Nativorum and eorum sequelas in forma praedicta, and
reversiones praedictas quandocunque acciderint, eiisdem Galfrido and Gilberto,
haeredibus and assignatis eorum, been and in pace de Capitali Domino feodi per
servitia inde de Jure debita. Et Ego vero praedictus Robertus and haeredes mei
omnia and singula tenementa praedicta cum omnibus eorum pertinentiis, redditus
and servitia and reversiones praedictas, ut praemittitur, praefatis Galfrido
and Willielmo, haeredibus and assignatis eorum contra omnes gentes
warrantizabimus and defendemus. In cujus rei testimonium Sigillum meum huic
Scripto apposui. Hiis testibus, Simone de Drayton, Richardo Chamberlayne
Militibus, Thoma Bozun, Edmundo Clerk, Johanne Mayhen de Thrapston, and aliis.

Data apud Thrapston die Dominico proximo post Festum Nativitatis Johannis
Baptistae, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum vicesimo nono.
Carta Aliciae de Vere.
CEste Endenture tesmoign, que Alice, que fu la femme Johan de Vere Chevalier,
ad grant and less a Robert de Vere, ses heirs and a ses assigns a tote la
vie l'avantdit Alice, la tierce party des Molynz and Weretz de Thrapston, and
la tierce party de Molyn de grant Addington, que est appelle le Tippe, oue
les appurtenances, quex mesme ceste Alice tient en dowere a puis la mort
l'avantdit Johan jadis son baron, avoir and tenir les avantditz tierce parties
des Molynz avantditz oue les appurtenance l'avantdit Robert, ses heirs and ses
assigns a tote la vie la dit Alice, rendaunt de an en an a la dite Alice ou a
ses assigns vint soulz pur la tierce party des Molyns de Thrapston, and
quatuor soulz pur la tierce party del Molyn de Addington, a quatre terms de
l'an, au ceo est a scavoir, a la Feste de Saint Michel, Nowel, Pasque, a les
Festes de Saint Piere and Paul par esgales portions. Et le dit Robert pur luy
and ses heirs voet and grant, que si l'avantdit rent en part ou en tout
apres nulle des terms par une quinzaine soit arere, que bien lyse a la dite
Alice ou ses Assigns, en les Molyns avantditz destreyndre, and per tout, and
en touz ses altres terres and tenementz en Thrapston, en qui mayns qu'ils
devignent, and la distress enchaser, and detenir, taunt que gree soit fait a
pleyn, ou que lyse a la dite Alice, ou a ses assigns, en la tierce party des
Molyns avantditz, si la rent avantdit soit arere par une quarter de l'an a pres
nulle term assign, entrer and retenir a sa volunte; ou altrement la ou
l'avantdit Alice tient del dit Robert certain terres and tenementz in
Thrapston, rendaunt per an trent and quatre soulz vint denires, que a quele
hure que le rent des Molyns avantditz soit arere par une quinzeine, come
devaunt est dit, que l'avantdit Alice reteigne de valy a taunt de la rent le
dit Robert, saunz nulle debat ou contredit del dit Robert, ou de ses heirs. Et
l'avantdit Alice grant, que William Sade, and Johan Asselyn entrent en les
bonds le dit Robert, de fair les Fosses des Molynz de Thrapston avantdit,
quel heure qu'ils seient par le Bayliffe le dit Robert reasonablement requis,
and mester soit, ou leurs ancestres souloit fair. Et le dit Robert voet and
grant que de tote manner des blees molues a les ditz Molynz pur le hostiel la
dite Alice, que elle soit frank, and quites de tote manner de tolune durante sa
vie; Et que la dite Alice apres la venue de ses blees, que ses blees soint
molues sin devaunt touz altres, sans les blees quex sunt en molaunt. En
tesmoignance de quele chose a ceste Endenture le parties enterchangeablement
ount mis les Seals, pur queux tesmoignes Edmund le Clerk, John Matthew, John
Croyl and Edward Sone de Thrapston, le jeusdy en la Feste de la Purification de
nostre Dame, en l'an de Regne nostre Seigneur le Roy Edward Tierz apres le
Conquest trent and premere.

Carta Roberti de Vere.
CEste Endenture faite enter Robert de Vere fitz Randolph de Vere de Thrapston
d'une part, and Alice que fuist la femme Johan de Vere Chevalier d'autre part,
Testmoigne, que l'avantdit Robert ad grant and less a l'avantdit Alice a tot
la vie mesmes cestui Alice les profitz des pleez and purchaz de sa Court de
Thrapston, oue les profitz des deus Letes de la mesme Ville annuelment a tener,
Rendance per an a l'avantdit Robert ou ses heirs quaraunt soitez d'argent par
esgales portions a quatre terms de l'an, cest a scavoir as Festes de Pasque,
Saint Johan le Baptiste, Saint Michel and Nowel, and le premier term de
payement comenceaunt a la Feste de Pasque procheyn ensuivant apres la fesaunce
de cestes, sur tiel condition, que la dite Alice terre a nully lesesera in de
mettera duraunt le term avantdit ne Courts, ne Let saunz license l'avantdit
Robert ou ses heirs: Et l'avantdit Alice sustendra a ses custages demeigne le
Pinfold, le Pilloir, and le Tumbrel en auxi bon estat come elle les recoivent,
ou en meliore. Et l'avantdit Robert ad bail au dite Alice le Standard de
Bussell and Potell and de Alne, enseales del seal de la Marchancie, pur estre
rebaile a luy apres le decesse Alice, ou altres per iceles: Et la dite Alice
eyt toutz les comodites and emprovementz des avantditz Courts and Letes come de
plees and purchaz, weyves and strayes, and altres comodites as Courts and Letes
apurtenauntz, duraunt le term avantdit; Fors prise gardes, marriages, fyns and
entres porter, homages, relef, legerwic, and redemption de neifes des tenauntz
le dit Robert. Et la dit Alice voet and grant, que si elle preigne
amerciament ou fyn outraiousement de null des tenauntz l'avantdit Robert, que
sell outrage seit redress par le dit Robert and soun bone counseil solone ley
and reason. Et l'avantdit Alice voet and grante, si la dite rent de quarant
soulz soit arere en party ou en tout par un moys apres nulle des terms
avantditz, en defalte la dite Alice, ou si elle fail en nulle des Covenants
avantditz tener, quadonques bien lise au dite Robert ou a ses heirs, les
avantditz. Courts and Letes reentrer, and verse luy retiner, oue totes les
comodites and approvements au ditz Courts and Letes apurtenants, saunz
contradit de nuluy. Et estre ceo l'avantdit Alice fei obligee and ses heirs
and ses Executours au dit Robert and a ses heirs en dix livres d'argent, si
elle fail en nulle des Covenants l'avantdits a tener in form susdite. Et a
ses Covenants susditz firmament a tener, l'avantdit Robert voet and grant par
cestes, and sei oblige, si l'avantdit Alice en toute sa vie soit disturbee pour
le dit Robert, ou nulle autre pour luy, en null des Covenants avantditz tener
contra la come desus est dit, quadonques ille seit tenuz au dite Alice and a
ses heirs en diz livres d'argent a payer. En testmoignance de quel chose a
ceste party del Endenture verse Alice demuraunt l'avantdit Robert ad miis son
seal. Done a Thrapston le Lundy en le Feste Saint Vincent l'an de Regne le Roy
Edward le Tierce puis le Conquest trent septiesme, pour iceaux tesmoignes,
Robert Groyland, Edmund Clerck, Johan Mayhew, Johan Croyl, Johan Taylour,
William Taverner, and assetz des altres. Et l'avantdit Robert and ses heirs
les Courts and Letes avantdits oue toutz les profitz susditz a l'avantdit Alice
a tote sa vie en la form susdite garranteront and defenderont. Estre ceo le
dit Robert ad grant and less pour ceste Endenture a l'avantdit Alice a term
de la vie Alice les deus parties de tolune de Seel de Thrapston, rendaunt per
an au dit Robert ou a ses heirs cink bussels de seel a deus terms de l'an,
cest a dir, a la Feste de Penticost deus busseaux, and a la Feste Saint Michel
tres busseaux.

Testamentum Roberti de Vere.
IN Dei nomine Amen. Ego Robertus de Vere de Thrapston, compos mentis and sanae
memoriae, condo Testamentum meum in hunc modum. Imprimis lego animam meam Deo,
beatae Mariae and omnibus Sanctis, and corpus meum Christianae Sepulturae in
Ecclesia de Addington, and meum melius animal post mortem meam nomine
Principalis. Item lego summo Altari de Addington tria trigentalia pro anima
mea, and pro animabus Patris mei and Matris meae; Ita quod illae missae
celebrentur in dicta Ecclesia ad formam quae sequitur, videlicet, Quod tres
missae celebrentur de Festo Assumptionis beatae Mariae, tres missae de Festo
Nativitatis ejusdem, tres de Festo Natalis Domini, tres de Festo Epiphaniae
Domini, tres de Festo Purificationis beatae Mariae, tres de Festo
Annuntiationis ejusdem, tres de Festo Paschae, tres de Festo Ascensionis
Domini, tres de Festo Pentecostes, and tres de Festo Trinitatis, proximo
octavis Festorum antedictorum. Item lego quadraginta solidos ad distributionem
pauperum, pro anima mea, secundum bonam dispositionem Executorum meorum
faciendam. Item lego Fabricae alae beatae Mariae Ecclesiae antedictae duo
quarteria Ordei. Et quod residuum bonorum meorum, scilicet non legatorum, lego
Elizabethae uxori meae pro sustentatione liberorum meorum; Ita quod primo
solvantur debita mea in quantum possint, and quod exequiae circa funaria mea
fiant secundum bonam dispositionem Executorum meorum. Hujus autem testamenti
mei ordino, facio and constituo meos Executores, dictam Elizabetham Uxorem
meam, Robertum de Northburgh fratrem suum, and Simonem de Northburgh; and quod
ipsi faciant in omnibus sicut viderint melius Deo placere, and pro anima mea
expedire.

Datum apud Addington tertio decimo die Julii, Anno Domini Millesimo,
trecentesimo, sexagesimo nono. In cujus rei testimonium hoc praesens
Testamentum meum Sigillo meo signavi.
ROBERT de VERE, fifth of that Name, Lord of Addington, Thrapston, and other
Lands and Lordships.
Carta Edwardi Principis Walliae.
EDward aisne filz du Roy d'Angleterre and de France, Prince de Gales, Duc de
Cornwaill, and Count de Cestre,
A touz ceux que cestes verrount ou orrount Saluz.
Sachez, Nous, pour vingt livres a paier a nous, par les mains du Gardein de
nos fees en Countee de Northampton, qui pour le temps sit per manner que
sensuit, c'est a scavoir, a la Pasque prochein venant, dix marcz, a la Saint
Michel prochein ensuant dix marcz, and a la Pasque lors prochein ensuant, dix
marcz, avoir, grauntez and venduz a noftre chere and bien amee Elizabeth, que
fut femme de Robert de Vere, la Guard du Corpse and des terres de Robert filz
and heir du dit Robert, estanz en nostre main a cause de son meyndre age, a
avoir and jouir tantque a plein age du dit heir, ensemble ove son marriage, a
marier sans disparager, reservez a nous fees des Chevaliers, Advousons des
Eglises, Reversions, Forfaitures and Eschetes.

Done par tesmoignance de nostre Privy Seal a Londres le quatuorsieme jour de
Fevrier l'an du Regne de nostre tres redoubte Seigneur and Pere le Roy
d'Angleterre quarante noef, and de France trente six. seal of Edward, prince of
Wales (the Black Prince) S edwardi primogeniti regis angl and fran principis
Wall ducis cornub sl comti cestr



Covenants which were between Elizabeth the Wife of Robert de Vere, and Robert
her Son.
CEaux sont les Covenants tails, and accordes enter Elizabeth, qui fut femme a
Robert le Vere d'une part, and Robert son fitz d'autre part, grauntanz and
assentanz a fermement tener en touz pointz come ensuit. C'est a scavoir, pour
ceo que l'avantdit Elizabeth en a fait gree and fyn pour la guard and le
Marriage de l'avantdit Robert son fitz, a nostre Seigneur le Prince, qui par ses
Lettres Patentes ad grante la dite guard, and le Marriage de a l'avantdit Robert
l'avantdit Elizabeth pour la luy doner, mesmes cestuy Robert grante and
lealment promette qu'il ne voudroit ne voet marier, ne contract, de covenant
Matrimonial a null part fair, ne tretter encontre le gre and la volonte ou
license de l'avantdit Elizabeth expressement and apertement estre grante,
autrement sei tiendra desmarie, and de contract Matrimonial deslie, attandant
la volonte d' Elizabeth, au mesme tams qu' a son plein age lealment and en dew
maniere prove. Et si l'avantdit Elizabeth pregne tallent de marier le dit
Robert, and luy offer convenable Marriage sans disparagement, il ne le doibt
refuser, mais agreablement accepter and assenter, and les Covenants
Matrimonials selon la volonte and le profit Elizabeth accomplir. Et si
auviegne, que Dieu defend, que l'avantdit Elizabeth devir a devant qu' elle a
le dit Robert Mariee, ou le profit de son Marriage come devant and dit en est
receue, mesmes cest Robert donnera and payera vingt livres de leal monoye, en
aid del Marriage d'une de ses soeurs and filles d' Elizabeth a quelle qu'il
sera par la dite Elizabeth en vie, ou par testement a coe fair assign. Et
outre ceo, le dit Robert ne luy mesprendra de travailler ne challenger par plee
ne autrement la dite Elizabeth de terre ou tenement touchant son heritage don't
elle est enfeoffee, ne la feroit estre travaillee don't elle seroit endamage. A
cestes Covenants firmement tenir en tous points and garder, and pour bon accord
les parties avantdits sont entreassies, and l'avantdit Robert, quand temps
viendra qu'il sera pas l'avantdit Elizabeth requis and demand, fera un bon
surete tell quelle mesme cette Elizabeth par le Conseil and ordonance de
Monsieur Thomas de Preston, Monsieur Hugo de Northburgh, Thomas de Pincback and
John de Lenton voudrent ordeigner. Et en tesmoignance de quelle chose les
parties avantdits a ceste Endenture ont mis leurs Seals, and le dit Robert a
plein sa fei.

Done a Londres en Fleetstreet en la Paroche Saint Bride, le disiesme jour de
Feurier, l'an du Regne du Roy Edward le Tierz, puis le Conqueste quarante
neofieme.
A Petition from the Lady Elizabeth Vere, Wife to Sir Robert de Vere, to Queen
Isabel, Mother of King Edward the Third.
A SA tres-honoree and tres-gracieuse Dame Madame la Mere de nostre Seigneur le
Roy supply humblement Elizabeth qui fust la femme de Robert Vere, Que come
elle tient de vous certaines terres and tenements en la Ville de Thrapston
enfeoffes avesque Nadgaires son dit Baron, par quoy Robert le fills and heir le
dit Robert Vere estoit en vostre guard, a tant la dite Elizabeth par une grande
sum d'argent avoit achetes heirs d'ycelle, issint il semble au dite
Elizabeth, que vous deves ayder la dite Elizabeth a avoir droit and raison de
ce que la ou Robert son dit Baron avoit fait une fosse en ses prees de
Thrapston pour leau couryer par icelles fosse, en le grant Rivere, and
salvation de ses dites prees. Illeques ove la fosse, Henry Green Chevalier qui
ores est ad fait estopper, issint que leaure ne puisse en icelles issir, par
quoy le dite Elizabeth perdra le profit de les dites prees cet ses veisins ceux
de leurs prees pour long temps. Et par cause que Robert son fills venoit
illoeques ovesques autres Gents pour debriser and ouster les dittes estroupes,
le dit Monsieur Henry luy vouliet avoir tue, and les autres Gents, se il les
pouvoit avoir pris, and ainxi le dit Monsieur Henry a pris une grant piece del
terre la dite Elizabeth illecques pour fair and enlarger les fosses de son
molins awere, and la dite terre issint tient, contre la volunte la dite
Elizabeth, a ses domages de cinquant livres. Et vous plaise pour l'amour de
Dieu and en oeuvre de Charity eider la dite Elizabeth a avoir droit and raison
de ses torts susdites.

Carta Roberti de Vere.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus Vere de Thrapston dedi,
concessi and praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Thomae de Preston Militi, Johanni
de Preston and Waltero Waldgrave, haeredibus and assignatis eorum, illam
tertiam partem omnium illarum terrarum, tenementorum, reddituum and
servitiorum, cum omnibus libertatibus and pertinentiis suis quam dicta Alicia
le Vere tenuit nomine dotis ad terminum vitae suae in Villis and campis de
Thrapston and Addington magna, in Comitatu Northamptoniae, post decessum Domini
Johannis le Vere Militis nuper viri sui, and quae quaedam tertia pars terrarum,
tenementorum, reddituum and servitiorum praedictorum cum omnibus pertinentiis
suis mihi haereditarie accedebat post decessum praedictae Dominae Aliciae le
Vere, ut consanguineo and haeredi praedicti Domini Johannis le Vere Avunculi
mei: Habendam and tenendam dictam tertiam partem terrarum, tenementorum,
reddituum and servitiorum praedictorum cum libertatibus and pertinentiis suis
praefatis Thomae de Preston, Johanni de Preston, and Waltero Waldgrave,
haeredibus and assignatis eorum imperpetuum, de capitalibus Dominis feodorum
illorum per servitia inde debita and de Jure consueta. Et Ego vero praedictus
Robertus le Vere and haeredes mei praedictam tertiam partem terrarum,
tenementorum, reddituum and servitiorum cum libertatibus and pertinentiis suis,
praefatis Thomae de Preston, Johanni de Preston, and Waltero Waldgrave,
haeredibus and assignatis eorum, ut praedictum est, contra omnes gentes
warrantizabimus imperpetuum.

In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Cartae Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis
testibus, Dominis Johanne Holand Milite, Domino de Thorp Watermil, Henrico
Green, Johanne Raunds, Richardo Chamberlain Militibus, Thoma Green, Johanne
Raunds and aliis.

Data apud Thrapston die Sabbati proximo ante Festum Conversionis Sancti Pauli,
Anno Regni Regis Richardi Secundi post Conquestum Angliae duodecimo. seal of
Robert de Vere SIGILLVM ROBERTI DE VER



Doctor Fuller's History of the Worthies of England, Page 139. in his Catalogue
of Sheriffs for the County of Leicester.
RObert de Vere was High Sheriff of that County in the Eighteenth Year of
Richard the Second.

Carta Regis Richardi.
RIchardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, Dominus Hiberniae,
omnibus Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint
Salutem.
Sciatis Quod cum Robertus Vere de Thrapston, pro eo quod non venit in Curiam
nostram coram Justiciariis nostris de Banco, ad satisfaciendum nobis de
redemptione sua occasion cujusdam transgressionis Edmundo Noon Chevalier, per
praefatum Robertum and alios, vi and armis factae, unde convictus est, in
exigendis positus fuisset in Comitatu Norfolciae ad Utlagandum, and ea
occasion postmodum Utlagatus, sicut per tenorem Recordi and processus
Utlagariae praedictae, quem coram nobis in Cancellariam nostram venire fecimus,
est compertum; Jamque idem Robertus Prisonae nostrae de Fleet se reddiderit
coram praefatis Justiciariis occasion praedicta, and in eadem moretur; Ac
allegaverit, praedictum Edmundum per quoddam Scriptum suum quod idem Robertus
in curia praedicta coram praefatis Justiciariis protulit, remisisse and
relaxasse eidem Roberto omnimodas actiones personales quas erga ipsum habuit,
seu aliquo modo habere potuit ab origin mundi, usque diem confectionis Scripti
praedicti, ratione transgressionis praedictae. Et quia nesciebat an Scriptum
praedictum fuit factum ipsius Edmundi necne, praeceptum fuit Vicecomiti nostro
Comitatus praedicti, quod scire faciat praefato Edmundo quod esset in curia
nostra praedicta coram praefatis Justiciariis ad certum diem jam praeteritum,
ad agnoscendum vel dedicendum Scriptum praedictum, and ad faciendum ulterius
and repiendum quod Curia nostra consideraverit in hac part. Ad quem diem
Vicecomes retornavit, quod scire fecit praefato Edmundo essendi coram praefatis
Justiciariis in forma praedicta; Idemque Edmundus ad diem illum solempniter
vocatus non venit, sicut dilectus and fidelis noster Robertus de Cherleton,
Capitalis Justiciarius noster de Banco praedicto, nos in dicta Cancellaria
nostra ad mandatum nostrum certificavit. Nos pietate moti pardonavimus eidem
Roberto Utlagariam praedictam, and firmam pacem nostram ei inde concedimus; Ita
tamen quod nobis satisfaciat de redemptione sua supradicta. In cujus rei
testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test Edmundo Duce Eborniae Custode Angliae, apud Westmonasterium, octavo die
Februarii, Anno Regni nostri decimo octavo. Irrotulatur termino Paschae Anno
decimo tertio, Rotulo cxxxviij.



Indentura inter Dominam Aliciam de Vere and Robertum filium Roberti de Vere.
HAEC Indentura facta inter Aliciam quae fuit uxor quondam Johannis de Vere
Chevalier ex part una, and Robertum filium Roberti Vere de Addington ex altera
part, Testatur, Quod praefata Alicia concessit, tradidit and ad firmam dimisit
praefato Roberto illam tertiam partem proficuorum quorumcunque Mercatorum and
Feriarum de Thrapston assignatorum eidem Aliciae nomine dotis tenendam post
mortem praefati Johannis Mariti sui. Concessit etiam eidem Roberto tertiam
partem proficuorum provenientium de communi Furno ejusdem Villae cum quodam
Cottagio situato in le Draperie, quam Emma tempore quondam tenuit: Habendum and
tenendum and capiendum omnia praedicta proficua Mercatorum and Feriarum and
Furni cum dicto Cottagio praefato Roberto ad totam vitam praefatae Aliciae;
Reddendo inde eidem Aliciae annuatim duas marcas bonae and legalis monetae ad
quatuor anni terminos per aequales portiones, videlicet, ad Festum
Purificationis beatae Mariae dimidiam marcam, ad Festum Pentecostes dimidiam
marcam, ad Vincula Augusti dimidiam marcam, ad Festum Sancti Martini in hyeme
dimidiam marcam, prima solutione incipiente ad Festum Purificationis beatae
Mariae proxime futurum post datum praesentium. Et praefatus Robertus faciet and
supportabit pro praefata Alicia omnia ea quae pro dicta quantitate dictorum
Mercatorum, Feriarum, Furni and Cottagii sumptibus suis propriis incumbent
legaliter and usualiter facienda. Et si contingat praedictum redditum dimidii
marcae ad aliquem terminum a retro esse vel non solutum per unum mensem proxime
sequentem, tunc been licebit praefatae Aliciae dicta proficua dictorum
Mercatorum and Feriarum and Cottagii cum omnibus quae ad ea pertinent
reclamare, rehabere, and penes se retinere in pace absque impedimento vel
contradictione praefati Roberti aliqualiter facienda. Et praefata Alicia omnia
proficua praedicta in quantitate and forma qua praedictum est, ad totam vitam
suam habenda praefato Roberto warrantizabit. In cujus rei testimonium huic
praesenti Indenturae penes Aliciam remanenti praefatus Robertus Sigillum suum
apposuit.

Datum apud Thrapston die Dominico proximo post Festum Purificationis beatae
Mariae, Anno Regni Regis Richardi Secundi post Conquestum nono.
Indentura inter Elizabetham Vere Dominam de Addington and Johannem Wardale.
HAEC Indentura facta inter Elizabetham le Vere Dominam de Addington magna ex
una part, and Johannem Wardale and Thomam Salpyn ex part altera, testatur,
Quod praedicta Elizabetha tradidit, concessit and ad firmam dimisit praefatis
Johanni and Thomae Molendina aquatica sua de Thrapston cum stagnis, holmis and
piscariis aquae de le Milnepit cum pertinentiis, prout Johannes Milner nuper
tenuit: Habendum and tenendum praedicta Molendina cum praedictis stagnis,
holmis, cum pertinentiis praefatis Johanni and Thomae ad terminum vitae dictae
Elizabethae, termino eorum incipiente ad Festum Natalis Domini proximo post
datum praesentium: Reddendo inde per annum praefatae Elizabethae pro dictis
Molendinis, holmis, stagnis, cum suis pertinentibus, prout Johannes Milner
nuper tenuit, octo marcas, termino primae solutionis incipiente ad Festum
Paschae proximo futurum post datum praesentium, sustentando omnia alia onera
dictis Molendinis and stagnis quovismodo spectantia. Et praeterea praedicti
Johannes and Thomas praedicta Molendina and stagna, ut in domibus, muris,
maerem. Et omnibus aliis necessariis suis manutenebunt, reparabunt been, and
competenter sumptibus suis propriis durante termino praedicto sustentabunt; Et
in fine termini praedicti praedicta Molendina and stagna cum pertinentiis in
adeo bono statu seu meliori quo illa receperunt, dimittentur. Et praedicta
Elizabetha vult and concedit, quod praedicti Johannes and Thomas percipiant and
amputent ramos omnium salicum crescentium super stagnum praedictum de Wodeford
ad plantandos, obstupandos and reparandos omnes defectus dictorum stagnorum,
quotiens necessitas fuerit, and hoc in debito tempore optime fine impedimento
aliquali durante termino praedicto. Et si contingat dictum redditum fore aretro
in part, vel in toto post aliquem terminum supradictum per unum mensem
integrum insolutum, licebit praefatae Elizabethae in praedictis Molendinis cum
pertinentiis distringere, and districtiones ea occasion captas de ibidem
fugare and abducere quo loco sibi placuerunt, and retinere donec de praedicto
redditu cum arreragiis plenarie fuerit eidem Elizabethae satisfactum. Et
praedicta Elizabetha praedicta Molendina cum stagnis, holmis, and aliis suis
pertinentibus, prout Johannes Milner nuper tenuit, praefatis Johanni and Thomae
and assignatis suis durante termino praedicto in forma praedicta contra omnes
gentes warrantizabit. In cujus rei testimonium hiis Indenturis parts
praedictae Sigilla sua alternatim appenderunt. Hiis testibus, Johanne
Chamberlain de Thrapston, Willielmo Carteys, Johanne Mayhyn, Thoma Draughton,
Johanne Clopton, and aliis.

Datum apud Thrapston octavo die mensis Decembris Anno Regni Regis Henrici
Quarti post Conquestum secundo.
Carta Roberti Vere.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus Vere de Thrapston dedi,
concessi and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Johanni de Pilkington de
Brikelesworth Militi, Richardo Green de Drayton, Thomae Mulso and Johanni de
Welton de Would, Maneria mea de Thrapston and de magna Addington, simul cum
omnibus terris and tenementis in parva Addington and Wodeford, cum Homagiis,
Wardis, Maritagiis, Releviis, Redditibus, Reversionibus cum acciderint,
servitiis tam liberorum Tenentium qua Nativorum, Molendinis, Aquis, Piscariis,
sectis Curiarum, visibus Franciplegii, cum omnibus Dominicis and Dominiis
praedictis Maneriis and Tenementis supradictis quoquo modo and qualitercunque
spectantibus, cum Nundinis and Feriis, cum suis pertinentiis in Comitatu
Northamptoniae. Dedi etiam eisdem Johanni, Richardo, Thomae and Johanni
Manerium meum de Hokenhanger in Parochia de Kympton in Comitatu Herefordiae,
cum omnibus Homagiis, Wardis, Maritagiis, Releviis, Redditibus, Reversionibus
cum acciderint, servitiis tam liberorum Tenentium quam Nativorum, Molendinis,
Aquis, Piscariis, sectis Curiarum quoquo modo and qualitercunque spectantibus:
Habenda and tenenda praedicta Maneria and omnia terras and tenementa, redditus
and servitia cum reversionibus, cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis and juribus
ut praedictum est, and reversionibus cum acciderint in Comitatibus and Villis
supradictis, praefatis Johanni, Richardo, Thomae and Johanni, haeredibus and
assignatis suis, de Capitalibus Dominis feodorum illorum per servitia inde
debita and de jure consueta. Et Ego vero praedictus Robertus and haeredes mei
praedicta Maneria cum omnibus terris and tenementis supradictis, atque singulis
pertinentiis and commoditatibus, and Villis supradictis ut praedictum est,
praefatis Johanni, Richardo, Thomae and Johanni, haeredibus and assignatis
eorum contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus and imperpetuum defendemus. In cujus
rei testimonium huic praesenti Cartae Sigillum meum apposui. Dat' apud
Addington magnam die Jovis proximo post Festum omnium Sanctorum, Anno Regni
Regis Henrici Quarti post Conquestum Decimo. Hiis testibus, Johanne Holand de
Thorp Milite, Willielmo Hodleston, Willielmo Raunds, Johanne Ashton, Roberto
Chisell, and aliis.

Endenture fait enter Robert Vere de Addington le Grand d'une part, and Thomas
Asheby de Lovesby d'autre part
CESTE Endenture, fait perentre Robert Vere de Addington le Grand d'une part,
and Thomas Asheby de Lovesby d'autre part, Tesmoigne, que Thomas fits and heir
audit Thomas prendra a femme Margarete la fille l'avantdit Robert sur tiells
conditions, que le dit Thomas Pere enfeoffera le dit Thomas son fitz and
Margarete la fille a dit Robert en terres and tenements a la valeur de dix
livres en la Count de Leycester, en soissante jours apres le jour
d'esponsailles, a eux and a leurs heyrs de leurs deux corpse engendres. Et le
dit Robert donnera audit Thomas le Pere pour le dit marriage deux cents marcs, a
payer au jour d'esponsailles quarante marcs, and le remanent comme appert par
quatre obligations perentre eux fait. Et si issint aveigne que la dite Margaret
devie devant aucun jour du payment, que adonc le payment du obligation ou
obligations nient encurruz cessera ou cesserount. Et le dite Thomas le Pere
voet and grante par icest, que'il ne alienera mye nulles terres ou tenements a
luy descenduz de sa part, and du part le Mere le dit Thomas fitz, entaunt que
en luy est, si non qu'il lessera audit Thomas le fitz terres and tenements a la
value en Fee-simple. Et le dit Robert voet and grant par icest que si
l'avantdit Thomas le Pere perform touz les conditions de sa part en icest
Endenture conteinuz, que adonques un obligation de deux cents livres a icest
Robert faitz par l'avantdit Thomas le Pere soit tenuz pur nulle. Et le dit
Thomas voet and grante par icest, que si l'avantdit Robert perform touz les
conditions de sa part en icest Endenture conteinuz, que adonques un obligation
de deux cents livres a icest Thomas faits par l'avantdit Robert soit tenuz pur
null. En tesmoignance de quelles les dits parties enterchangeablement ount mis
lour Seaulx.

Done le quart jour de Julii, l'an le Roy Henry quint puis le Conquest prime.
Carta Roberti de Vere.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus Vere dedi, concessi, and hac
praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Willielmo Hudleston Militi, Willielmo
Chamberlain, Johanni Ashton and Stephano Ornell, Maneria mea de Thrapston and
Addington magna in Comitatu Northamptoniae, cum omnibus and singulis terris,
tenementis, redditibus, servitiis, pratis, pasturis, Molendinis, Wardis,
Maritagiis, Releviis, Heriettis, Escaetis, Curiarum finibus, amerciamentis,
eorum sectis and sequelis, Nundinis, libertatibus, reversionibus, and omnibus
aliis pertinentiis suis dictis Maneriis spectantibus, and cum omnibus aliis and
singulis terris, redditibus and servitiis meis cum suis pertinentiis quae habeo
in Addington magna, cum Advocatione Ecclesiae de Islip, una cum reversionibus
omnium illarum terrarum cum suis pertinentiis quae Margarita quae fuit Uxor
Albredi Vere tenuit ad totam vitam suam in Thrapston statim quoad decessum
ejusdem Margaritae, cum reversionibus inde cum acciderint. Dedi etiam and
concessi praefatis Willielmo, Willielmo, Johanni and Stephano Manerium meum de
Hokenhanger in Comitatu Herefordiae, cum singulis terris, tenementis,
redditibus, servitiis, pratis, pasturis, boscis, Molendinis, Wardis,
Maritagiis, Releviis, Heriettis Escaetis, Curiarum finibus, amerciamentis,
Nativis cum eorum sectis and sequelis, Nundinis, reversionibus, libertatibus,
and omnibus aliis pertinentiis eidem Manerio pertinentibus: Habenda and tenenda
omnia and singula praedicta Maneria, terras, tenementa, redditus and servitia,
cum reversionibus praedictis, and omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis, adeo plene
and perfect, una cum Advocatione Ecclesiae de Islip praedictae in Comitatu
Northamptoniae, praefatis Willielmo, Willielmo, Johanni and Stephano,
Haeredibus and Assignatis eorum in perpetuum de capitalibus Dominis feodi
illius per servitia inde debita and de jure consueta. Et ego praedictus
Robertus Vere and Haeredes mei omnia praedicta Maneria, terras, tenementa,
redditus and servitia, cum reversionibus praedictis and omnibus aliis
pertinentiis suis adeo plenarie ut praefertur, una cum Advocatione Ecclesiae de
Islip praedictae, praefatis Willielmo, Willielmo, Johanni and Stephano,
Haeredibus and Assignatis eorum contra omnes Gentes Warrantizabo in perpetuum.
In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Cartae Sigillum meum apposui.

Dat' apud Thrapston, vicesimo quarto die Januarii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici
Quinti quinto. Hiis testibus, etc.

Carta Roberti de Vere.
HAEC Indentura facta inter Robertum Vere de Addington ex part una, and Thomam
Asheby Juniorem and Margaretam Uxorem ejus, Testatur, Me dictum Robertum
dedisse, concessisse and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmasse praedictis Thomae
and Margaretae Manerium meum de Addington in Comitatu Northamptoniae cum
omnibus suis pertinentiis; nec non omnia terras and tenementa, prata, pascua,
and pasturas, redditus, reversiones and servitia, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis
quae habeo in Villis and Campis de Wodeford and Islip in Comitatu praedicto,
similiter cum advocatione dictae Ecclesiae de Islip. Dedi etiam dictis Thomae
and Margaretae Manerium meum de Hokenhanger in Parochia de Kympton in Comitatu
Hertfordiae, cum omnibus inclusis, pratis, pascuis and pasturis, aquis,
piscariis, and cum omnibus aliis suis pertinentiis: Habenda and tenenda omnia
praedicta Maneria, terras, tenementa, redditus, reversiones and servitia, cum
omnibus suis pertinentiis, similiter cum Advocatione dictae Ecclesiae de Islip,
praedictis Thomae and Margaretae and Haeredibus de corporibus eorum legitime
procreatis de Capitalibus Dominis feodi illius per servitia inde debita and de
jure consueta: Reddendo insuper annuatim praedicto Roberto and Assignatis suis
octodecim libras bonae and legalis monetae ad Festum Nativitatis Domini and
Pentecostes per aequales portiones ad terminum vitae ipsius Roberti. Et
praedictus Robertus and Haeredes sui omnia praedicta Maneria, terras and
tenementa, redditus, reversiones and servitia, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis,
similiter cum Advocatione dictae Ecclesiae de Islip, ut praedictum est,
praedictis Thomae and Margaretae and Haeredibus de corporibus eorum legitime
procreatis contra omnes Gentes warrantizabunt and defendent inperpetuum. In
cujus rei testimonium hiis Indenturis parts praedictae Sigilla sua alternatim
apposuerunt. Hiis testibus Simone Felbrigge Milite, Johanne Pilkinton Milite,
Richardo Chamberlayne, Baldewino Vere, Willielmo Palmer, Thoma Drayton and
aliis.

Dat' apud Addington vicesimo die Maii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Quinti post
Conquestum octavo.
Carta Thomae Asheby junioris and Margaretae Uxoris ejus.
HAEC Indentura facta inter Thomam Asheby juniorem and Margaretam Uxorem ejus
ex part una, and Robertum Vere de Addington ex part altera, Testatur, Quod
praedicti Thomas and Margareta tradiderunt, concesserunt and ad firmam
demiserunt praefato Roberto omnia terras and tenementa, redditus and servitia
sua, cum suis pertinentiis, quae habent in Villis de Addington, Wodeford and
Islip in Comitatu Northamptoniae, and Kympton in Comitatu Hertfordiae, simul
cum advocatione Ecclesiae dictae Villae de Islip; Habenda and tenenda omnia
praedicta terras, tenementa, redditus and servitia cum suis pertinentiis, simul
cum advocatione Ecclesiae dictae Villae de Islip praedicto Roberto and
Assignatis suis durante vita dicti Roberti, capiendo de praedictis terris and
tenementis, redditibus and servitiis cum suis pertinentiis, ac de advocatione
Ecclesiae dictae Villae de Islip, rationabilia Estoveria durante vita sua
absque Impetitione vasti: Reddendo inde annuatim praedictis Thomae and
Margaretae and Haeredibus suis unam Rosam ad Festum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis
Baptistae pro omnibus aliis servitiis. In cujus rei testimonium parts
praedictae hiis Indenturis Sigilla sua alternatim apposuerunt. Hiis testibus,
Richardo Chamberlayne, Thoma Drayton, Richardo Reyndon, Gervasio Campyon,
Johanne Parker and aliis.

Dat' apud Addington primo die Junii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Quinti post
Conquestum Octavo.
Intitulatur supra Petram jacentem in Capella Sanctae Mariae in Ecclesia de
Addington.
Anno Milleno bis quorum deno

BALDWIN de VERE, second of that Name, Lord of Addington, Thrapston, Barklow,
Overhall, Kempton, Hokenhanger, and other Lands and Lordships.
Carta Roberti de Vere.
OMnibus ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Robertus Vere de Thrapston
salutem in Domino.
Noveritis me dedisse and concessisse Baldewino Vere, Fratri meo unum annuum
redditum Centum Solidorum percipiendum annuatim de Manerio meo ibidem, Habendum
ad terminum virae suae ad Festa Paschae and Sancti Michaelis aequaliter. Et si
praedictus redditus aretro sit in parte^^el in toto per unum mensem ultra
aliquem terminum supradictum, quod tunc ben e liceat praefato Baldewino in
omnibus terris and tenementis meis in Thrapston distringere, and districtiones
fugare and retinere, quousque eidem Baldewino de redditu praedi^cto and ejus
arreragiis plenarie fuerit satisfactum. Et Ego praedictus Robertus and Haeredes
mei praedictum annuum redditum Centum Solidorum cum pertinentiis praedicto
Baldewino ad terminum vitae warrantizabimus. In cujus rei testimonium huic
praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis testibus, Domino Henrico Grene
Milite, Thoma Grene de Sudburgh, Thoma Cottingham, Johanne Phipston de
Thrapston, Thoma Drayton and aliis.

Dat' apud Thrapston vicesimo die Martii, Anno Regni Regis Richardi Secundi
post Conquestum nono.
Carta Edwardi Deverwyk, Comitis de Rutteland and de Cork.
EDward D'Everwyk Count de Rutteland and de Cork,
A nostre chier and bienayme Escuier Baudwin Vere nostre Lieutenant and
Receivor des Isles de Gernsey and Jersey salutz.
Pour ce qu'il nous vient asses a memoire que vous avez pay and delivre pour
nous and a nostre ceps and Commandment les parcelees soubz escriptz des issues
des dites Isles prudement a Thomas Clove venant par devers nous des dites
Isles, and en retornant deux Marcz; Item a Richard Pensaux pour ses despenses
pour la mesme cause quarante Shillings; Item a Jenkyn Freeman pour ses
despenses deux fois en alant and retornant de Message cinq Marcz and quarante
soulz; Item done a une Varlet mon tres redoubte Seigneur le Roy venant pour
avoir deliverance de le Sire Cobham vingt Shillings; Item a la Servante du dit
Varlet quarante soulz; Item en leur despenses illeoques and des vingt quatre
Mariners pour deux jours avec vittaille a eux delivre pour le mer quarante
Shillings; Item delivres a les Mariners alantz pour vous servir en la journee
d'Ireland vingt deux Marcz six Shillings and vingt soulz; Item dix Marcz
deliveres a nos propres mains, si nous voulons, que vous ejez due and entiere
allowance des pracelles avantditz, and que cestes nos Lettres enselles desoubz
nostre Seal, avous and a nos Auditors en soyent garrauntz.

Done a Londres le quinzisme jour de Decembre, l'an du Regne de mon tres
redoubte Seigneur le Roy Henry quart primer,
Request de Baldewin Vere au Roy Henry Cinqueisme.
PLese au Roy nostre Soverein and tres-gracious Seigneur graciousement
considerer, que vostre humble Lige Baldewin Vere avoit de la grant de le noble
Prince and son redoubte Seigneur le Duc de York, qui darrein morust, a qui Dieu
pardoint, vingt Marcz pour term desa vie, de l'annuite de l'enheritance de le
dit Duc en le port de Kingeston sur Hull, sicome en les Lettres Patentes en
faites il est contenuz plus en plein; la quelle annuite est ore d'en avent en
vostre main, a cause del meindre age de Richard filz de Richard Naugerres
Count de Cambrige and Heir au dit Duc, and sur ce de vostre grace speciale and
pour le service que le dit Baldewin vous fera, tres-gracious Seigneur, en temps
a venir, luy granter vingt Marcz a prendre annuellement durant le miendre age
de Richard filz a dit Richard Count, and Heir au dit Duc, de vostre custume
des Leyns, quirs and pealx, entrans en le dit port, par les mains des
Cueilleurs d'ycelle pour le temps esteantz, es terms de pasque and de Seint
Michel par oue les porcions: Considerantz, tres-gracious Seigneur, que le dit
suppliant n'a pour son long service fait a son dit Seigneur le Duc, sinon
soulement les ditz vingt Marcz annuels, pour Dieu and en euure de Charity.

Carta Thomae Asheby.
PAteat Universis per praesentes, me Thomam Asheby de Louesby seniorem
recepisse and habuisse die Confectionis praesentium de Baudwin Vere and Thoma
Asheby juniore Administratoribus Bonorum and Catallorum quae fuerant Roberti
Vere, quatuordecim Marcas legalis Monetae, and alia vice per manus praedicti
Thomae Asheby junioris sexdecim Marcas, de quibus quidem summis fateor me esse
solutum, dictosque Administratores inde fore quietos per praesentes. In cujus
rei testimonium huic scripto acquietantiae Sigillum meum apposui.

Dato apud Louesby in Comitatu Leicestriae die Lunae in Septimana Pentecostes,
Anno Regni Regis Henrici Quinti post Conquestum nono. seal of Thomas Ashby
Sigillum thome assheby



Carta Edmundi de Mortuo Mari, Comitis March and Ulton.
EDmundus de Mortuo Mari Comes Marchae and Ultoniae, Dominus de Wigmore, Clare,
Trym, Connac,
Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint salutem.
Sciatis quod nos de Fidelitate Circumspectione and Industria dilecti Armigeri
nostri Baldewini Vere before confidentes, ordinavimus, constituimus and
assignavimus ipsum Thesaurarium nostrum Libertatis nostrae Midiae, habendum and
occupandum idem officium quamdiu nobis placuerit, percipiendo de nobis in
Officio illo feoda, vadia and regarda praedicto Officio ab antiquo debita and
consueta. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test dilecto Armigero nostro Richardo Nugent Seneschallo nostrae Libertatis
nostrae praedictae apud Trym, vicesimo septimo die Septembris, Anno Regni Regis
Henrici Sexti secundo.
A Letter from the Earl of March, Lieutenant of Ireland, to Baldwin Vere.
To Our Well-beloved Baldewin Vere, Treasurer of our Liberty of March; the
Earl of March and of Ulster, Lieutenant of Ireland.
WEll-beloved, We greet you well; And we woll and charge you, that you don send
out Precepts to all Our Homagers wythinn our Liberte of Inithe, to come and do
their homages unto Us at Trym upon Monday or Tewysday next comeing without any
fail or excusation made the contrary.

Write at Develin the eleventh day of October.
Testamentum Baldewini de Vere.
IN Dei nomine Amen. Die Lunae proximo post Festum Sancti Andreae Apostoli,
Anno Domini millesimo quadringentesimo vicesimo quarto, Ego Baldewinus de Vere
condo Testamentum meum in hunc modum. Imprimis lego animam meam Deo
Omnipotenti, beatae Mariae Matri suo, and omnibus Sanctis eorum, and corpus
meum ad sepeliendum in Capella beatae Mariae in Ecclesia omnium Sanctorum de
Addington magna, and optimum meum animal nomine Principalis, ut consuetudo loci
expostulat. Item lego summo Altari ibidem pro decimis meis oblitis viginti
Denarios. Item lego uni Lampadi in dicta Ecclesia ardenti duodecim denarios.
Item lego Lumini beatae Mariae ibidem duodecim denarios. Item lego in Cera
circa Sepulturam meam duodecim Libras. Item lego Elenae Uxori meae omnia
Mobilia mea in Anglia and extra, ad terminum vitae suae; and volo quod post
decessum ejusdem Elenae eadem sint partita inter Richardum Vere Filium meum,
and Elizabetham and Annam Filias meas, videlicet praefato Richardo, one
Salt-saler of Silver, one douzin Sponys, one gylt Kuppe standing with three
Angels in the fotte, one white pese covered with a gylt Knoppe, with two sengel
peses; Item dicto Richardo two Brochis of Gold; Item Elizabethae Filiae meae
one Saltsaler, one douzin Sponys, a gylt Kuppe enamylled with a seye, one Pot
of Silver standing, with three Brochis of Gold, and three Ringys of Gold. Item
lego Annae Filiae meae one Saltseller of Silver with gylt brinkes, and a deck
spice with one gylt fotte enamylled in the midst for Spice, gylt above with
Levereds Headis one douzin Sponys, one Pot of Silver standing, one gylt Kuppe
standing with a Bird on the Cover, anoder gylt Cupp standing with a knoppe on
the Cover, an Ouche of Gold with an Egyle in the meddis set about with Stone
and Perle, three Rings of Gold and two Brochis of Gold enamylled with white.
Item lego Edwardo Filio meo optimam meam Togam Penulatam. Item lego Garialo
Filio unum Cyphum Argentatum. Item lego ad distribuendum pauperibus pro salute
animae meae tredecim solidos and quatuor denarios. Residuum vero Bonorum meorum
non legatorum, lego Elenae Uxori meae, Willielmo Aldewincle, Willielmo Fellesan
Parsonae Ecclesiae de Islip, and Johanni Barton ad distribuendum pro salute
animae meae and omnium Benefactorum meorum. Item Ordino and constituto meos
Executores praefatos Elenam, Willielmum, Willielmum and Johannem. In cujus rei
testimonium praesentibus Sigillum meum apposui.

Dat' die and Anno supradicto. seal of Baldwin de Vere SIGILLVM BALDEWINI DE VER



Carta Elenae, quae fuit Uxor Baldewini de Vere.
HAEC Indentura testatur, Quod Elena, quae fuit Uxor Baldewini Vere de
Addington, tradidit, concessit, and ad firmam dimisit Rogero Salpyn de Luffwyk,
Molendina sua aquatica de Thrapston, cum les holmes and omnibus proficuis
salicum in eisdem holmes crescentium, and cum omnibus aliis proficuis and
pertinentiis eisdem Molendinis pertinentibus: Ac etiam tradidit, concessit and
ad firmam dimisit eidem Rogero tota separalia Piscaria sua in Ripariis and
Aquis de Thrapston, quae sunt extra Villam praedictam, cum omnibus les Fishing
holmes and proficuis salicum in eisdem holmes crescentium, and cum duabus Acris
Terrae in Campis de Thrapston, and cum omnibus aliis proficuis and pertinentiis
eisdem Piscariis pertinentibus: Habendum and tenendum praedicta Molendina and
Piscaria praedicta, cum omnibus les holmes and proficuiis salicum praedictarum,
cum Terris praedictis and aliis pertinentiis suis praefato Rogero, Haeredibus
and Executoribus suis, a Festo Sancti Michaelis ultimo praeterito, usque in
finem december annorum proxime sequentium and plenarie completorum; Reddendo
annuatim praefatae Elenae, Haeredibus and Assignatis suis quatuor Libras
legalis Monetae ad quatuor anni terminos, videlicet ad Festa Natalis Domini,
Paschae, Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae, and Sancti Michaelis per
aequales portiones; Et etiam satisfaciendo and solvendo Capitalibus Dominis
annuatim liberum redditum pro praedictis Molendinis durante termino praedicto.
Et si praedictus redditus aretro fuerit in part vel in toto ad aliquem
terminum ultra unum mensem non solutus, quod extunc been liceat praefatae
Elenae, Haeredibus and Assignatis suis in praedictis Molendinis and Piscariis
cum les holmes and Terris praedictis cum pertinentiis suis reintrare, and in
pristino statu suo retinere, praesentibus Indenturis non obstantibus. Et
praedictus Rogerus Salpyn and Haeredes sui praedicta Molendina and Piscaria cum
les holmes, and Terras cum pertinentiis suis, sustentabunt and reparabunt in
omnibus Custagiis, sumptibus suis propriis durante termino praedicto, and ea in
adeo bono statu and reparatu in fine termini sui vel meliori dimittet quam illa
recepit a praedicta Elena. Et praedicta Elena and Haeredes sui praedicta
Molendina aquatica and Piscaria, cum les holmes, and Terris cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis, in forma supradicta, durante termino praedicto, contra omnes
Gentes warrantizabunt and defendent. Et ad omnes istas Concessiones and
Conventiones supradictas been and fideliter tenendas and complendas quaelibet
pars supradicta obligat se Articulo in december Libris legalis Monetae. In cujus
rei Testimonium parts praedictae hiis Indenturis Sigilla sua alternatim
apposuerunt.

Dat' apud Addington die Mercurii proximo post Festum Sancti Dionysii, Anno
Regni Regis Henrici Sexti post Conquestum quarto.
Ista continentur in Fenestra Sancti Nicolai in Ecclesia de Addington.
Orate pro Anima Baldewini Vere qui istam Capellam fecit, and obiit primo die
Mensis Augusti, Anno Domini MCCCCLXXXVI.

In eadem Fenestra continentur ista Arma,
Arma Vere two Labels Gold, Arma Barkelow.

Sir RICHARD de VERE, first of that Name, Lord of Thrapston, Addington, and
other Lands and Lordships.
Indentura inter Thomam Asheby and Richardum de Vere.
THis Indenture made betwix Thomas Asheby of Louesby in the County of Leicester
Squyre on the on Party, and Richard Vere of Thrapston in the County of
Northhampton on to other Party, Bears witness, That where debate, strife and
discord weren between the said Parties for the Manor of Mikle Addington, with
the Appurtenance in Addington and Wodeford, togedere with the advowson of the
Church of Islip in the County of Northampton aforesaid, and the Manor of
Hokenhanger in the Parish of Kympton in the County of Hertford; the which
Manor the said Thomas claymeth to hold this of his life be a Feoffement made
be Robert Vere Squire to the said Thomas and Margaret his Wife, and to the
Heirs of their Bodies lawfully begotten; for the which debate, strife, and
discord be mediation of good friends the foresaid Thomas is agreed and
accorded, that he shall release all the Right, Estate and Claim that he has
or claymeth for to have in the Manor of Addington abovesaid with the
appurtenances, togedere with the advowson of the Church of Islip, to the said
Richard and to his Heirs for evermore. And also the foresaid Richard is
accorded shall confirm the Estate of the said Thomas term of his life in the
Manor of Hokenhanger aforesaid without appeachment of Wast. Also the said
Thomas grants, That all those haven any Estate in the said Manors be him,
sholen release to the said Richard and to his Heirs all the Estate and the
Right that they have in the Manor of Addington abovesayd. Also the said Thomas
grants, That he shall deliver to the said Richard and to his Heirs all the
Estate and the Right that they have in the Manor of Addington abovesayd. Also
the said Thomas grants, That he shall deliver to the said Richard a Deed, be
the which Robert Vere granted an Annuitye of five Marcks owte of Thrapston to
the said Thomas and Margaret his Wife, and all other Deeds the which that he
has touching the Inheritance of the said Richard. Also the said Richard shall
pay to the said Thomas twenty Pounds at the same day that the said Thomas and
his Feoffees shall release their Estate and Right that they haven in the Manor
of Addington with the appurtenances, togedere with the advowson of the Church
of Islip abovesayd, to the said Richard and to his Heirs for evermore. Also
the said Richard Vere and Richard Prittes shall be bounden to the said Thomas
in an Obligation of an hundred Pounds to be paid at Martlemas next comeyng; to
the which Covenants on the party of the foresaid Thomas well and truly to be
performed, the foresaid Thomas byndeth him to the foresaid Richard in an
hundred Pounds to be paid in the Feste of Pasche next comeyng. In witnessing of
the which things to this part of the Indenture with the foresaid Richard
remaining the said Thomas has set to his Seal.

Yeven in the Feste of Saint Hilarie the Year of the Reign of King Henry the
Sixth after the Conquest the twentyeth.
Carta Humfridi Comitis Herefordiae and aliorum.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum pervenerit. Humfridus
Comes Herefordiae and Staffordiae, Johannes Vicecomes Dominus de Bellamonte,
Radulphus Dominus de Crombwell, Willielmus Dominus de Zouche Milites, Johannes
Hototte de Knebworthe, Johannes Fray, Johannes Eton, Richardus Neel and
Johannes Boche de Kingessthorp
salutem in Domino.
Noveritis nos remisisse, relaxasse, and omnino pro nobis and Haeredibus
nostris in perpetuum quietum clamasse Richardo Vere totum statum quem habemus
in Manerio de Addington magna cum suis pertinentiis, ac de and in una Roda
Terrae in Islip, simul cum advocatione ejusdem Ecclesiae in Comitatu
Northamptoniae ex dono and concessione Thomae Asheby de Louesby Armigero; Ita
quod nec nos nec Haeredes nostri nec aliquis alius nomine nostro aliquod jus
vel clameum in praedictis Maneriis de Addington magna ac in praedictis Rodis
Terrae in Islip, simul cum praedicta advocatione ejusdem Ecclesiae and omnibus
suis pertinentiis de caetero exigere seu vindicare poterimus in futurum, sed ab
omni action nostris and clameo simus inde exclusi per Praesentes. In cujus rei
testimonium huic praesenti Scripto Sigilla nostra apposuimus.

Dat' vicesimo octavo die Januarii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti post
Conquestum vicesimo.
Carta Thomae Asheby.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Thomas Asheby
de Louesby in Comitatu Leicestriae Armiger
salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Cum Robertus Vere Armiger, Avunculus Richardi Vere, cujus Haeres ipse est,
nuper per Cartam suam, cujus Datum est vicesimo die Maii Anno Regni Regis
Henrici quinti post Conquestum octavo, dederit and concesserit and per dictam
Cartam suam confirmaverit mihi praefato Thomae and Margaretae Uxori meae
Manerium suum de Addington in Comitatu Northamptoniae cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis, nec non omnia Terras and Tenementa, Prata, Pascua and Pasturas,
redditus, reversiones and servitia cum omnibus suis pertinentiis in Villis and
Campis de Wodeford and Islip in Comitatu praedicto, simul cum advocatione
Ecclesiae de Islip praedicta, ac etiam Manerium suum de Hokennhanger in
Parochia de Kympton in Comitatu Hertfordiae, cum omnibus Inclusis, Pratis,
Pascuis and Pasturis, Aquis, Piscariis and omnibus aliis suis pertinentiis,
Habenda and tenenda omnia praedicta Maneria, Terras, Tenementa, redditus and
servitia cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, simul cum advocatione dictae Ecclesiae
praefatis Thomae and Margaretae Uxori suae and Haeredibus de Corporibus eorum
legitime procreatis de Capitalibus Dominis Feodorum illorum per servitia inde
debita and de jure consueta, prout in praedicta Carta before apparet:
Noveritis me praefatum Thomam, pro eo quod praedicta Margareta Uxor mea mortua
est fine Haerede de Corporibus ipsius Margaretae and mei praefati Thomae
legitime procreato, remisisse, relaxasse, and omnino pro me and Haeredibus meis
imperpetuum quietem clamasse dicto Roberto in sua plena possessione Manerii de
Addington praedicti cum suis pertinentiis, ac omnium Terrarum and Tenementorum,
Pratorum, Pascuorum and Pasturarum, reddituum, reversionum and servitiorum cum
omnibus suis pertinentiis in Villis and Campis de Wodeford and Islip
praedictis, simul cum advocatione Ecclesiae de Islip praedicta, existenti,
Haeredibus and Assignatis suis imperpetuum, totum jus and clameum, titulum and
demandam quae habui, habeo, vel quovis modo habere potero in futurum de and in
praedicto Manerio de Addington praedicta cum suis pertinentiis, ac de and in
omnibus Terris and Tenementis, Pratis, Pascuis and Pasturis, redditibus,
reversionibus and servitiis cum omnibus suis pertinentiis in Villis and Campis
de Wodeford and Islip praedictis, simul cum advocatione Ecclesiae de Islip
praedicta; Ita videlicet, quod nec ego praedictus Thomas nec Haeredes mei, nec
aliquis alius pro nobis seu nomine nostro, aliquod jus vel clameum seu demandam
aut proprietatem de and in praedicto Manerio de Addington cum suis
pertinentiis, ac de and in omnibus Terris and Tenementis, Pratis, Pascuis and
Pasturis, Redditibus, Reversionibus and Servitiis cum omnibus suis pertinentiis
in Villis and Campis de Wodeford and Islip praedictis, simul cum advocatione
Ecclesiae de Islip praedicta, nec in aliqua parcella eorundem de caetero
exigere, clamare vel vindicare seu demandare poterimus nec debemus quovis modo
in futurum, sed ab omni action Juris vel clamei, tituli seu demandae simus
penitus exclusi imperpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Scripto
meo Sigillum meum apposui.

Dat' ultimo die Mensis Januarii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti post
Conquestum Angliae vicesimo.
Carta Richardi de Vere.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Richardus Vere Armiger dedi, concessi
and hac praesenti Carta mea confirmavi Johanni Holland Militi, Waltero Dove
Clerico, Roberto Plyngton Clerico, Willielmo Vaus Armigero, Henrico Hodleston
Armigero, and Johanni Dyne, Haeredibus and Assignatis eorum, Manerium meum de
Thrapston cum pertinentiis suis, cum visu Franciplegii, and omnibus aliis
Terris and Tenementis, Redditibus and Servitiis cum suis pertinentiis,
praefatis Johanni, Waltero, Radulpho, Roberto, Willielmo, Henrico and Johanni,
Haeredibus and Assignatis suis, de Capitalibus Dominis Feodorum illius, per
servitia inde debita and de jure consueta. Et ego vero praedictus Robertus and
Haeredes mei praedictum Manerium cum pertinentiis suis, cum visu Franciplegii,
and omnibus aliis Terris and Tenementis, redditibus and servitiis cum suis
pertinentiis praedictis, praefatis Johanni, Waltero, Radulpho, Roberto,
Willielmo, Henrico and Johanni, Haeredibus and Assignatis suis contra omnes
Gentes warrantizabimus and imperpetuum defendemus. In cujus rei testimonium
huic praesenti Cartae Sigillum meum apposui. Hiis Testibus, Richardo Dudley
Armigero, Johanne Lenton, Johanne Duffyn, Willielmo Reyne, Simone Conford and
aliis.

Dat' apud Thrapston tertio die Novembris, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti post
Conquestum vicesimo nono.
Carta Johannis Holland Militis, and aliorum.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod nos Johannes Holland Miles, Walterus Dove
Clericus, Radulphus Martell Clericus, Robertus Plyngton Clericus, Willielmus
Vaus Armiger, Henricus Hodleston Armiger, and Johannes Dyve, tradidimus,
liberavimus, and hac praesenti Carta nostra confirmavimus Richardo Vere
Armigero, and Isabellae Uxori suae, Manerium nostrum de Thrapston cum
pertinentiis suis, cum visu Franciplegii, and omnibus aliis Terris and
Tenementis, Redditibus and Servitiis, cum suis pertinentiis, quae nuper
conjunctim habuimus ex dono and Feoffamento praedicti Richardi in Thrapston
praedicta: Habendum praedictum Manerium cum pertinentiis cum visu Franciplegii
and omnibus aliis Terris and Tenementis, Redditibus and Servitiis cum suis
pertinentiis, praefatis Richardo and Isabellae and Haeredibus praedicti
Richardi de Capitalibus Dominis Feodi illius per servitia inde debita and de
jure consueta imperpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Cartae
Sigilla nostra apposuimus. Hiis Testibus, Richardo Dudley Armigero, Johanne
Lenton, Johanne Duffyn, Willielmo Reyne, Simone Conford, and aliis.

Dat' apud Thrapston vicesimo die Novembris, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti
post Conquestum vicesimo nono.
Carta Richardi Vere.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum Indentatum pervenerit,
Richardus Vere de Thrapston in Comitatu Northamptoniae salutem in Domino. Cum
Robertus Vere de Addington in Comitatu praedicto Avunculus mei praedicti
Richardi, cujus Haeres ego sum, nuper per Cartam suam Indentatam, cujus Data
est apud Addington vicesimo die Maii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici quinti post
Conquestum octavo, dederit and concesserit Thomae Asheby and Margaretae Uxori
ejus Manerium de Addington magna cum pertinentiis in Addington praedicta and
Wodeford, una cum advocatione Ecclesiae de Islip in Comitatu praedicto, ac
Manerium de Hokenhanger in Parochia de Kympton cum pertinentiis in Comitatu
Hertfordiae, Habenda and tenenda Maneria praedicta simul cum advocatione
Ecclesiae praefatis Thomae and Margaretae and Haeredibus de Corporibus ipsorum
Thomae and Margaretae exeuntibus, prout in praedicta Carta eis inde confectis
before apparet: Noveritis me praefatum Richardum Consanguineum and Haeredem
praefati Roberti, cui reversiones Maneriorum praedictorum pertinent, pro eo
quod dicta Margareta mortua est fine Haerede de Corporibus dictorum Thomae and
Margaretae exeunte, ratificasse, approbasse and confirmasse praedicto Thomae
statum quem dictus Thomas habet in Manerio de Hokenhanger praedicta ratione
donationis and concessionis praedictarum ad terminum vitae suae absque
impetitione vasti. In cujus rei testimonium utrique parti hujus Scripti
Indentati praefatus Richardus Sigillum suum apposuit. Dat' ultimo die
Decembris, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti post Conquestum Angliae vicesimo nono.

seal of Richard de Vere SIGILLVM RICARDI DE VER



A Letter from the Abbot of Croyland to Sir Richard Vere.
To the Right Worshipful Sir Richard Vere of Addington Estmer.
RIght Worshipful Sir, Aftyr due recommendation, pleases it you to wir, that
by compleynt of my Fermor Nicholas Hall I have conceived that the Tennants of
the Town of Addington put him out and his Cattle fro pasturing in mine own
several Pastures, letting and withstonding him to pasture with his Horse and
Neat togedyr, saying, that he should not pasture with both togedyr, they in
themself doing the contrary; and upon this they drove his Cattle and pynned
them in your Pownde, where I as chief Lord having a Pownde of mine own should
have had the Prerogative of such pynning, and forfetts done in especial of mine
own Fee, and severell like as this case stondeth in. Wherefore I pray you to
withdraw your hand of lettynge of my Right, and your Tennants also that they
attempt no more any thing in derogation of my Right, certifying you, that if
you do, I shall show the Common Law against them to the uttermost that I can
and may. And as for them that drove my Fermors Cattle fro my severell Ground
and Pasture, and so kept them wrongfully in Pownde, I shall remedy that deed
by sewte of Common Law against them in as hasty space of time as I may. The usage
as I have heard and known of old is this, That in my severell Pasture in the
sown Field I and my Fermor being there shall take the first Croppe of the
Gresse with his Bestes, Horse and Nete togedyr, and I and he will so, and
after that the Tennants of the Town in like wise. This Custom and usage have
I known almost fyfty Wynters goon when I was Styward, and since continued,
which I will have and keep in continuance, or else it shall cost me as mickle
as all the Land is worth. And the holy Trinity have you in his governaunce.

John Abbot of Croyland.

Carta Regis Edwardi Quarti.
EDwardus Dei gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae, Omnibus
Ballivis and fidelibus suis ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, salutem.
Sciatis quod de gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa scientia and mero motu
nostris pardonavimus, remisimus and relaxavimus Richardo Vere Armigero, tenenti
Terrarum and Tenementorum quae fuerunt Willielmi Uldale Clerici Spisariae
Henrici Sexti, nuper de facto and non de jure Regis Angliae, alias dicto
Richardo Vere de Addingtonia in Comitatu Northamptoniae Armigero, alias dicto
Richardo Vere Armigero, alias dicto Richardo Vere Armigero, seu quocunque alio
nomine censeatur, omnimodas transgressiones, misprisiones, contemptus and
impetitiones per ipsum Richardum ante ultimum diem Septembris, Anno Regni
nostri undecimo contra formam Statutorum de signis liberatis pannorum and
capiciorum, ac retentionibus factis sive perpetratis, unde punitio caderet in
demandam debitam seu in finem and redemptionem aut in alias poenas pecuniarias
seu imprisonamenta, Statutis praedictis non obstantibus. Et insuper ex gratia
and scientia and motu nostris praedictis pardonavimus and remisimus and
relaxavimus eidem Richardo sectam pacis nostrae quae ad nos versus ipsum
Richardum pertinet pro omnibus proditionibus, murdris, raptibus Mulierum,
rebellionibus, insurrectonibus, feloniis, conspirationibus, cambipartiis,
manutenentiis, confederationibus, riotis, routis, Conventiculis illicitis,
imbraciariis and aliis transgressionibus, offensis, negligentiis,
extortionibus, misprisonibus, ignorantiis, contemptibus, concelamentis,
forisfacturis and deceptionibus per ipsum Richardum ante dictum ultimum diem
Septembris qualitercunque factis sive perpetratis, ac etiam utlegariis, si quae
in ipsum Richardum hiis actionibus seu earum aliqua fuerint promulgatae, and
firmam pacem nostram ei inde concedimus. Ita tamen quod stet rectus in Curia
nostra si quis versus eum loqui voluerit de praemissis vel aliquo praemissorum.
Et insuper pardonavimus, remisimus and relaxavimus eidem Richardo Catalla
felonum and fugitivorum, Catalla Utlegatorum and Felonum de se, deodanda, vasta
and impetitiones, ac omnimodos articulos, destructiones and transgressiones de
viridi vel venatione, venditiones Boscorum infra Forestas and extra, and
aliarum rerum quarumcunque ante dictum ultimum diem Septembris infra Regnum
nostrum Angliae and Marchias Walliae, unde punitio caderet in demandam debitam
seu in finem and redemptionem aut in alias poenas pecuniarias, seu in
forisfacturam Bonorum and Catallorum, aut imprisonamenta seu amerciamenta
Comitatuum, Villarum vel singularium personarum, vel in onerationem liberi
Tenementi eorum qui nunquam transgressi fuerunt, ut Haeredum, Executorum vel
Terrae tenentium, Escaetorum, Vicecomitum, Coronatorum and aliorum hujusmodi,
and omne id quod ad nos versus ipsum Richardum pertinet seu pertinere possit ex
causis supradictis. Ac etiam pardonavimus, remisimus and relaxavimus eidem
Richardo omimodas donationes, alienationes and perquisitiones per ipsum de
Terris aut Tenementis de nobis vel Progenitoribus nostris quondam Regibus
Angliae aut aliis nuper de facto and non de jure Regibus Angliae seu eorum
aliquo in Capite tentis, ac omnimodas donationes and perquisitiones ad manum
mortuam factas and habitas absque licentia Regia; Nec non omnimodas intrusiones
and ingressus in temporalia Archiepiscopatus, Episcopatus, Abbatiae, Prioratus,
Collegii, Hospitalis seu alterius Domus prae Religiosae seu Ecclesiasticae
cujuscunque, and in haereditatem suam in part vel in toto post mortem
Praedecessorum suorum and Antecessorum suorum absque debita prosecutione,
liberatione seu restitutione eorundem extra manum Regiam ante ultimum diem
Septembris factis, una cum exitibus and proficuis inde medio tempore perceptis.
Et insuper pardonavimus, remisimus and relaxavimus eidem Richardo omnimodas
poenas ante dictum ultimum diem Septembris forisfactas coram nobis aut
Progenitoribus praedictis, aut aliis nuper ut praemittitur Regibus seu eorum
aliquo, seu Concilio nostro, Cancellario, Thesaurario, vel aliquo Judicum
nostrorum vel Progenitorum praedictorum seu aliorum nuper ut praemittitur Regum
vel eorum alicujus pro aliqua causa, and omnes alias poenas per ipsum Richardum
pro aliqua causa ante dictum ultimum diem Septembris nobis vel Progenitoribus
praedictis aut aliis nuper ut praemitt tur Regibus seu eorum alicui
forisfactas, ad opus nostrum levandas; Ac omnimodas securitates praedictas ante
eundem ultimum diem Septembris forisfactas; nec non omnimoda escapia and
evasiones quorumque Felonum and Clericorum Convictorum seu attinctorum ante
eundem ultimum diem Septembris; Ac etiam tertias and tertiarum tertias
omnimodorum Prisonariorum in guerra captorum nobis vel Progenitoribus aut aliis
nuper ut praemittitur Regibus seu eorum alicui dicto ultimo die Septembris
qualitercunque debitas, pertinentes sive spectantes per eundem Richardum; nec
non omnimodas demandas, transgressiones, offensas, contemptus and impetitiones
per ipsum Richardum ante dictum ultimum diem Septembris contra formam tam
quorumcunque Statutorum, Ordinationum and Provisionum Factorum sive Edictorum
de perquisitionibus, acceptationibus, lectionibus, publicationibus,
notificationibus and executionibus quibuscunque quarumcunque literarum and
bullarum Apostolicarum, and omnium aliorum Statutorum, Ordinationum and
Provisionum praetextu quorum aliqua secta versus eundem Richardum per Billam
vel per Breve de praemuniri facias, seu alio modo quocunque, pro aliqua materia
ante eundem ultimum diem Septembris facta, fieri valeat, quam quorumcunque
aliorum Statutorum, factas sive perpetratas ante eundem ultimum diem
Septembris, Statutis, Ordinationibus and Provisionibus illis non obstantibus;
Literis and Bullis de exemptionibus duntaxat exceptis. Ac etiam pardonavimus,
remisimus and relaxavimus eidem Richardo omnimodos fines adjudicatos,
amerciamenta, exitus forisfactos, relevia, scutagia, and omnimoda debita,
compota praestita, arreragia firmarum and compotorum nobis vel Progenitoribus
praedictis aut aliis nuper ut praemittitur Regibus seu eorum alicui ante
vicesimum nonum diem Septembris Anno Regni nostri nono qualitercunque debita
sive pertinentia; nec non omnimodas Actiones, Executiones, Impetitiones,
Querelas and Demandas, quas nos solus vel nos conjunctim cum aliis personis vel
alia persona habemus vel habere poterimus versus ipsum Richardum pro aliquibus
hujusmodi finibus, amerciamentis, exitibus, releviis, scutagiis, debitis,
compotis, praestitis and arreragiis ante dictum vicesimum nonum diem
Septembris, Anno Regni nostri nono, nobis vel Progenitoribus praedictis aut
aliis nuper ut praemittitur Regibus seu eorum alicui debitis; Ac etiam
Utlegariis in ipsum Richardum promulgatis pro aliqua causarum supradictarum:
Proviso semper quod praesens Pardonatio nostra se non extendat ad praedictum
Richardum quoad captionem, asportationem, abductionem seu detentionem aliquorum
Bonorum seu Catallorum nostrorum quorumcunque per ipsum Richardum habit' sive
detent', dummodo Bona and Catalla illa nostra citra quartum diem Martii Anno
Regni nostri undecimo capta asportata seu abducta fuerint; nec ad ipsum
Richardum quoad captionem, asportationem, abductionem seu detentionem aliquorum
Bonorum seu Catallorum aliquorum praedictorum Rebellium and Inimicorum
nostrorum, qui guerram contra nos aliquo modo levaverunt, citra quartum diem
Martii supradictum per ipsum Richardum habit' and detent'; nec ad ipsum
Richardum quoad aliquas transgressiones, negligentias, misprisiones,
contemptus, concelamenta, forisfacturas aut deceptiones in stapula nostra ad
Cales aut in aliquibus Merchandizis ad stapulam illam pertinentibus per ipsum
Richardum facta sive perpetrata in deceptionem seu laesionem nostram aliquo
modo citra dictum vicesimum nonum diem Septembris; nec ad aliquam personam seu
aliquas personas virtute vel authoritate alicujus Parliamenti nostri de alta
proditione attinctam vel attinctas, and post hujusmodi attinctionem ad
beneficium Legis nostrae per nullam authoritatem alicujus Parliamenti nec per
aliquas Literas nostras Patentes habilitatas nec restitutas; Nec ad aliquos
magnos computantes nostros qui nunc sunt aut nuper fuerunt, videlicet ad
Majorem and Societatem stapulae nostrae praedictae, aut Majorem, Constabularem
and Societatem stapulae nostrae praedictae Thesaurarii Cales and Hospitii
nostri vel Progenitorum dictorum aut aliorum nuper ut praemittitur Regum seu
eorum alicujus, Vitellarios Cales, Camerarios nostros Cestriae, Northwalliae
and Southwalliae, Custodes Garderobae Hospitii nostri vel Progenitorum
praedictorum aut aliorum nuper ut praemittitur Regum seu eorum alicujus, aut
Custodes sive Clericos magnae Garderobae nostrae vel Progenitorum praedictorum
aut aliorum nuper ut praemittitur Regum seu eorum alicujus, Clericos sive
Custodes Hanaperii Cancellariae nostrae qui nunc sunt aut nuper fuerunt, vel
Executores aut Administratores Bonorum and Catallorum eorundem Clericorum sive
Custodum vel eorum alicujus, Clericos operationum nostrarum vel Progenitorum
praedictorum aut aliorum nuper ut praemittitur Regum vel eorum alicujus,
Thesaurarios Terrae nostrae Hiberniae and, Receptores Ducatus nostri
Lancastriae and Ducatus nostrae Cornubiae tam generales quam particulares,
quoad aliqua hujusmodi Officia seu hujusmodi Occupationes suos seu alicujus
eorundem tangentia ullo modo se extendat. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas
nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipso apud Westmonasterium quinto die
Maii Anno Regni nostri duodecimo.

Irrotulatur in memorandis Scaccarii de Anno duodecimo Regis Edwardi Quarti,
videlicet inter Recorda de termino Sancti Michaelis Rotulo quinquagesimo tertio
ex part Rememoratoris Thesaurarii.

HENRY de VERE, second of that Name, Lord of Addington, Thrapston, and other
Lands and Lordships.
Carta Regis Henrici Septimi.
HEnricus Deigratia Rex Angliae and Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae, Omnibus ad
quos praesentes Literae pervenerint salutem. Sciatis quod per manucaptionem
Johannis Boteler de Wotton in Comitatu Hertfordiae Gentilman, and Willielmi
Coteler de Billing in Comitatu Northamptoniae Gentilman, confirmavimus Henrico
Vere Armigero Custodiam Manerii sive Dominii de Gedyngton cum pertinentiis in
Comitatu Northamptoniae, Habendum a Festo Sancti Michaelis Archangeli proximo
futuro usque ad finem termini septem Annorum ex tunc proxime sequentium and
plenarie completorum; Reddendo inde nobis per Annum pro custodia praedicta
viginti tres Libras novem Denarios and unum Obolum prout nobis responsum est,
and octo Denarios ultra de incremento per Annum, ad Festa Paschae and Sancti
Michaelis Archangeli per aequales portiones. Proviso semper quod si aliquis
aliis plus dare voluerit de incremento per Annum pro Custodia praedicta fine
fraud vel malo ingenio, quod ex tunc dictus Henricus tantum pro eadem solvere
teneatur, si custodiam voluerit habere supradictam. In cujus rei testimoninm
has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo secundo die Septembris, Anno Regni
nostri primo. Curteis. Per Billam Thesaur' and de dato praedicto authoritate
Parliamenti.
To the Right Honorable and my singular good Lord, my Lord Chancellor of
England.
RIght honorable and my most singular good Lord, I recommend me to your good
Lordship in as humble manner as I can. Please it your good Lordship to
understand, That where one Thomas Watts has compleyned before your Lordship and
other of the Kings Council against Harry Vere Squire, of diverse injuries and
wrongs supposed that he should do to him in the coming of the Kings Grace into
this Land, for the which injuries and wrongs the said Thomas had at that time
a Privy Seal, and of his own offer and desire prayed me to set him and the
said Harry at accord; And the said Harry Vere to appear. And the said Thomas
kept still his Privy Seal. And for so much as he was my Servaunt at the time,
I, at a Sessions in the second Year of our said Sovereign Lord at
Northampton, before Sir Thomas Green, John Throgmorton, Richard Knightly, and
other Gentilmen there present, made a their own agreement and accord of
matters, desires and greves depending betwix the said parties, from the
beginning of the World unto that day of accord, as well of the part of the said
Harry as of the said Thomas. And also whereas the said Thomas should late
surmiis unto your Lordship, that the said Henry should desire me to go to the
house of the said Thomas in Rothewell at my goeing toward the King at his
last Journay Northwarde, to slay or destroy the said Thomas; It was never so
desired by the said Henry, nor noon of his, of me, nor of noon of mine, nor I
never thought no such intent to him, nor to noon other, but according to the
Kings commandment, and his Laws, and thereto I shall be ready to answer as
well for my declaration, as for the declaration of the said Henry in all the
premises, whansoever it pleas the Kings Highness, and your Lordship to comande
me. And Almighty God ever preserve your good Lordship to your most hertes
pleasure.

Written at Haroweden the four and twentyeth Day of October By your own
Servant, Nicholas Vaus.

The Answer of Henry Vere Esquire to the Bill of Complaint of Thomas Watts.
THE said Henry says by protestation, That the said Bill of Complaint is
insufficient, and compriseth matter slanderous. For the declaration of the
troth of the premises, the said Henry says, That the said Thomas Watts,
before the said twentye sixthe day of August specified in the said Bill, that
the said Compleynent in the days of King Richard (late in deed and not in
right) King of England, took from the said Henry riotously with thirty persons
defensibly arrayed certain Timber, Hey-Rekes, Peese-Rekes, with much other
Stuff of Howshold, to the value of eleven Marks, and more; And also the said
Thomas in like riotous wise resevyd of the Rents of the said Henry ten Mark in
Ekton, Barton and Wouleston within the Count of Northampton, for the which
the said Henry compleyned to the Kings Grace imediately after his first feld;
And it pleased the Kings Grace among other of his Highness Comandemen^s, to
command the said Henry to bring the same Thomas to him to answer to the
premises. And the said Henry by reason of the same Commandment, with two
persons harnessed came from his first Feld unto the House of the said Thomas,
to the intent to execute the Kings said Comandements, then and there being John
Tresham Esquier, the Viccar of the said Town of Rothewell, John Dove, and one
Cowper, and many others, and they knowing the premises, and knowing for
troth, that the said Thomas of and in the premises and many other had
offended the said Henry, desired the said Henry to take some reasonable weye,
and end with the said Thomas in eschewing further expenses and troubles. At the
which time the said Viccar and John Dove, by the special desire of the said
Thomas, brought unto the said Henry ten Mark; And the said Thomas by his
Servant sent the same Black Horse specified in his said Bill to the said Henry
in full recompense of such injuries as been before rehearsed. All which matters,
and every each one of them the said Henry is ready to prove, as this Court will
award, and prays to be dismissEd out of this Court with his reasonable Costs
and expense for his wrongful vexation.

Fuller's History of the Worthies of England, Page 296.
HEnry Vere was High Sheriff of the County of Northampton in the first Year of
Henry the Seventh.

To the Right Worshipful Master Vere Shrese of Northamptonshire be this Letter
delivered, etc.
Master Shrefe, After due recommendation with my service in my most herty
manner, I pray you, that for as mikyl as the Ferme of all the assarts within
the Forest of Rokyngham was granted to my Brother Sir William Stoke and Richard
Burton yontly, and to other of them longer lyffing, and my said Brother whom
God has called from this World nothing meddled with the gadryng up of the
deutes of the same, but only Richard Burton, like as he said unto you at
Stamford but lately, that he would charge himself with them, and discharge my
Brother in that behalf; It may please you in that manner-wise, and after that
Form to make return of your Writ. And as for my Brothers Lyvelode within
the Shyre, it is but littyl; he purchased and bought two Cottages in Rokyngham
of lityl value, and a Meese in Kyrtby, also two Closes, one beside Pipwell and
one at Brigstock, and here is all the livelode that he had in the Shyre; for
that livelode that was my Moders in Warmington and elsewhere, she gaf hit to me
twenty Year ago, and my Brother had never ado the with but by mine assignement
and for mine behofe. In this and in other things concerning me and mine, I pray
you show your kindly favor, and I shall so dele with you at our next meetyng in
Northamptonshyre, that ye shall hold you right well content. From Lincoln the
twentyeth Day of March. And as for Newys with us, This day my Lady of
Northumbyrland came to the King to Lincoln, and brought to the Kings Grace with
her, her eldest Son, a goodly young Lord. On Monday cum sevenyght the King is
preposed toward Nottingham, there to tarry six or seven days, and from thence
to take his journay toward York, etc.

Yours to his power, Thomas Stoke.

To his Worshipful Brother Henry Vere be this Bill delivered at Addington.
Right Worshipful Brodyr, I recommend me unto you and to my Sister your Wife,
hertily desiring to here of your welfares, the which Almighty God preserve to
his pleasure and yowr hertes desire. Sure I have spokyn with Master Catesby,
and he has promissed me to be as friendly to you in yowr matter as he can. He
is ryding with my Lord Chamberlyn this Morning toward the King. Watts calls
for the process, and therefore I went to Master Catesby this morning when he
took his Horse, and fete a Tokyn from him to Watts, that he should cale noe more
on the process till he come to Town ayene, and that shall be when the King
come, and that shall be within fourteen days; and if ye come up then, he will
see an end betwix you and the other Gentilman the Jewe; and so I think best you
do, for anoder man cannot labor your mattir so well to yowr intent as yowr
self sure. As for your Suite against Beke, they have yeven you none Answer as
yet. There is an Exigent out against Parson Edward Davy sure. I pray you
remember my Brother Barners, for I sent him word, That ye would send him ten
Pounds within fourteen days after Alhallow-Day. Brother, whereas you wrote
unto me, that ye were not in hertes ese, ye have made me very hevye of that
tidings; but I trust to God, in the next Bill ye shall send me better comfort.
And sure at the reverence of God, whatsoever adverfityes befall you, take them
lytely, and set them not to yowr heart, and then remedy them as ye think best:
for if ye set them to yowr heart, ye shall hurt your self, and that shall
plese syche as be the causes thereof, and all syche as love you not, and shall
discomforte all syche as be yowr friends and Lovers. Wherefore I will avise you
to take that way that may comfort yowr friends and lovers, and displese yowr
foes. No more to you at this time but, I shall be at yowr commandment both here
and elsewhere be God's Grace, who have you in his kepeing.

At London on Symond Jude is Evyn. Be your Brother and Servant, Baldwyn Vere.

To my Right Trusty and Welbeloved Henry Vere Gentilman.
Right Trusty and Welbeloved, I commend me unto you; And whereas I have
perceived by my Right Welbeloved Sir Thomas Thornton Parson of Addington in the
County of Northampton, how that he of late has permuted a Benefice that he had
in Northbeneflete in Essex for the said Benefice in Addington with oon Master
John Ovyn late Parson there, and as he says ye do now pretend, that a Grant
was made unto you by the said Master John Ovyn in his time of the Ferme of the
said Parsonage of Addington for the space of a Year, which pretense I
understand the said Master John Ovyn utterly denies, saying, that he never was
agreeable thereunto, and how that ye have no writing thereof, but only that ye
intend with strong hand to keep the said Ferme against the will of the Parson
there, and contrary to all good reason and conscience: Wherefore I pray you as
hertely as I can, that as well for my sake, as in discharge of your own
conscience, ye woll deal favorably with the said Parson, and to suffer him to
occupy and enjoy his Benefice according to Right without your interruption,
wherein you shall give me cause to be good Lord unto you in any thing ye
reasonably can desire me: And if ye do the contrary, the matter will be
ferther attempted against you to your trouble and charge.

Written the third day of March. Franceys Lovell.

To my Trusty and Welbeloved Henry Vere Squier.
TRusty and Welbeloved, I great you well, and let you wite, that I am credibly
informed how ye grevously and contrary to all right vex and trouble the
Tennants and Inhabitants of the Town of Addyngton in the County of Northampton
belonging unto the Abbot of Crowland, whereof I am Steward, and had not I have
been, the said Abbot had ere this time showed it unto the Kings Grace, my Lady
his Modre, and also unto my Lord of Oxford, in as much as he is Chappellaine
unto them, which as I suppose would have been to you none ease gif he had so
done. Wherefore I advise you from hencesorth no more to vex ne troble the said
Tennants and Inhabitants, but to leave such your wrongful dealing among them,
and suffer them to have their Comunes and Herdes as they have had in times
past, for dread of that may ensue thereof; And that you will surcease of any
more troubling with them, as I may say unto you gramercy at our next metyng.
And if I understand that ye do the contrary, I shall provide a convenient
remedy therefore. And also as for such mattris as been depending betwix you
and my Servant Richard Clerc, I shall, when we next speak togedyre, see a
remedy therein. Moreover that you will give credence unto the Bringer hereof,
which is a Servant of the Kings and mine.

Yeven under my Signet at the Manor of Shene the three and twentyeth day of
May. John Viscount Wells.

A Letter from the King to Henry Vere.
To Our Trusty and Welbeloved Henry Vere Squier.
By the King.
H.R.

TRusty and Welbeloved, we great you well; And wot ye well, grevouse Compleynt
has be made unto us on the behalf our trusty and welbeloved in God th'Abbot of
our Monastery of Crowland, how, where he in the right of the said Monastery
has a Fermor and certain Tennants in the Town of Addington, ye without matter
or cause sufficient, of your pure malice, not only at diverse times heretofore
have by your sinister menes vexed and trobled the said Eermor and Tennants,
that they ne are of sufficient power, defending their life, to pay and content
to him their Fermes due unto the said Monastery for their terms in the same;
but as well put them daily in such fear of new trouble, that he is like to be
destitute of any sufficient Fermor and Tennants to occupy the Manor and
Tenements lying in the said Town at any time hereafter, to the utter
impoverishing of our said Monastery, as we be informed. Wherefore we willing
the said Abbot peasibly to enjoy the profits of our said Monastery as far as he
ought of right to do, by reason of his Dignity there, most specially, in
consideration of that it is of our foundation, whom we are bound to defend in
all the right of the same, woll and straightly charge you, if it be as is
surmised unto us in this part, that ye not only dispose you lawfully to
compound with the said Abbot for such injuryes and offenses as ye have
attempted in this party contrary our Laws and good conscience, but also at
all times hereafter to suffer the said Fermors and Tennants now being and
hereafter for to be, peceably to occupy their tenors in the same without any
vexation, inquieting, or trouble of you or other in your name, or for you into
the contrary, so that the said Abbot have no cause of reason eftsoons to pursue
unto us in the premises, as ye woll answer unto us at your uttermost peril.
Yeven under our Signet at our Town of Stamford the fourteenth day of March.

To his Right Worshipful and Welbeloved Brother Sir Henry Vere be this
delivered.
Right Worshipful Brodyr, in the most herty wise I commend me unto you; and
Brodyr, I have sent unto you your Aporne and Gussets of Mayse, I trust not
appaired, and I thank you right hertely for them; and if it like you not to
have them again, ye shall have for them what ye will think reasonable. And
Brodyr, I have sent you be this the Bringer hereof the Copye of the evidence of
Barton and Sywell, and I will be with you with the Grace of God on Tewesday or
Wednesday next coming, and bring to you all the dedys concerning the Manor of
Sywell with the appurtenances. And Brodyr, I pray you to lend to me be the
Bringer hereof five Marcks, that ye promissed I should have had at the first
payment; for ye promissed me twenty Marcks, and I had but ten Pounds; And I
pray you of all gentilnesse that I may have this five Marcks now, or else that
ye will send me forty Shillings, for it would do me great ease now, and I have
need thereof, and ye shall find me in all behalfes as I have promissed you
with the Grace of Jhesu, who preserve you. Written at little Okely in haste on
Saint Peter's Eve. And I pray you that this Bill may recomend me to my Sister.

Your loveing Brodyr, John Tresham.

To his Right Worshipful Brodyr Sir Henry Vere be this delivered.
Right Worshipful Brodyr, in the most loving wise I recomend me unto you and
unto my Sister your Wife. And Brodyr, whereas I sent you word by your Servaunt
to have been with you as this day, I pray you to take it for noon unkindnesse
that I come not, for I have such a soreness in my Throat that hit grevys me to
speak or to swallow any thing, and the Wether is so farvent cold that I dare
not aventure forth. And also your Servaunt showed me that ye should
understand, that I have sold more Londs in Northampton to Chauncey, and for
certain so have I done. And though I help and ease my self with part of mine
inheritance that is fee-simple, to bring me out of debt and danger, I pray you
think not but that I hope and trust to God to have a Heir or Heirs of my Body
lawfully begotten, though it fortune me not to have any by this Woman: And that
I think not nor intend not if God fortune me to have such Issue, to disinheryte
them nor noon other that shall fortune to be mine next Heir. But if God
fortune me live, I purpose to leve them as much as I found, and more of mine
own purchase with the Grace of Jhesu, who preserve you and yours both Body and
Soul.

Your loveing Brodyr, John Tresham.

To my Right Welbeloved Cosen Sir Harry Vere, Sheriff of the County of
Northampton.
Right Welbeloved, I comend me to you. Forasmuch as I am informed that John
Robyns of Multon is vexed and troubled by certain persons there wrongfully and
against Conscience, I will and desire ye that ye will succor the same John in
his Right, and not suffer him so to be wronged, otherwise than may accord
with Law and Conscience, so that he may have and enjoy that he has Right to,
in quiet, rest, and peace.

Written at London the two and twentyeth day of February. Oxynford.

To my Right Welbeloved Cousyn Sir Henry Vere.
Right Welbeloved Cousyn, I comende me to you, thankyng you for yowr good will
and disposition showed to me by your Servant this Berer, whereby I understand
that ye having knowleche that I sent for my Friends and Lovers, thought that I
should have sent for you in like manner. I have therein showed my mind and
intent to yowr said Servant, to whom ye may yeve credence in that behalf, not
doubtyng but mine intent was, at soche time as I would call such as be toward
and retained to me, to have then sent for you; And so hereafter I entend to
do, as well for you, as for all such other there as be toward me, whereto I
desire you and them to show yowr good wills, and to be ready to do the King
service in my Company when ye shall thereto be desired.

Written at the Abbay of Stretford the four and twentyeth day of February.
Oxynford.

To my right entirely beloved Cosen Henry Vere Squier.
Right entirely beloved Cousyn, I comende me hertely to you. And forasmoche as
I trust that ye think I take you for my Kynnesman, as ye may certeynly be sure
that I so do, and that I here by report that ye be gretely greved and vexed
with sikenes, whereof I am right sorry, howbeit I think by Godis Grace ye shall
do right well. Nevertheless I understand that ye have young Gentilwomen to yowr
Daughters, which be my Kynneswomen, I therefore woll think that howsoevyr God
dispose for you, that ye should be content that I might have the Rule and
Governaunce of them, or some of them, consydering that they be of my blood,
desyring you especially, that ye will so dispofe yowr self, not doubting but
that I shall be as good Lord to them that ye will putt in my Rule, and
cherish them, as I would do mine own, delyverryng the same to my right
trusty Servaunt Thomas Lowthe, by him to be conveyed to me, yevyng him credence
also in that he shall show to you ferther, according to my mind in this
behalf. And Almighty God preserve you.

Written at Colne the last day of April. Yowr Cosen, Oxynford.

Carta Edwardi Comitis Wilts.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Edwardus Comes
Wilts salutem. Noveritis nos praefatum Comitem remisisse, relaxasse and omnino
pro nobis and Haeredibus nostris quietum clamasse Henrico Vere Armigero,
Haeredibus and Assignatis suis totum jus, titulum, clameum, statum, interesse
seu demandum quae unquam habuimus, habemus, seu in futuro habere poterimus de
and in omnibus illis Terris and Tenementis, Pratis, Pascuis, Pasturis,
Redditibus and Servitiis cum suis pertinentiis quibuscunque in Villis and in
Campis de Farnedich and Addington parva in Comitatibus Bedfordiae and
Northamptoniae jacentibus, quae praefatus Henricus nuper habuit ex dono,
concessione, and confirmatione, Johannis Babington Militis, Roberti Witilbury,
Thomae Meris Armigerorum, and Oliveri Sutton Gentilman, prout in quadam Carta
inde facta before testatur; Ita quod nec nos praefatus Edwardus Comes Wilts
nec Haeredes nostri, nec aliquis alius nomine nostro aliquod jus, titulum,
clameum, statum, interesse seu demandum in praedictis Terris and Tenementis,
Pratis, Pascuis, Pasturis, Redditibus and Servitiis cum suis pertinentiis
quibuscunque, nec in aliqua parcella eorundem de caetero exigere vel vendicare
poterimus in futuro; sed inde ab omni action juris, titulo, clameo and demando
sumus exclusi imperpetuum per praesentes. Et nos praefatus Comes Wilts and
Haeredes nostri omnia illa praedicta Terras and Tenementa, Prata, Pascua,
Pasturas, Redditus and Servitia cum suis pertinentiis quibuscunque praefato
Henrico Vere, Haeredibus and Assignatis suis contra omnes Gentes
warrantizabimus and in perpetuum defendemus. In cujus rei testimonium huic
praesenti Cartae meae Sigilla nostra apposuimus. Hiis Testibus, Georgio Dalyson
Armigero, Willielmo Merbury Armigero, Willielmo Dounhale Armigero and Johanne
Walker. Datum duodecimo die Mensis Junii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Septimi post
Conquestum Angliae septimo.

Testamentum and ultima Voluntas Henrici Vere.
TO all true Christen pepul, to whom this present Writing shall come, see or
here, Henry Vere of Addington Knight sends greteing in our Lord evalersting.
Know ye, Me the foreseyd Henry my last Will and Testament is, That the Will of
my Fadyr be performed, if any be behynd. Also I will, that six Pounds yearly
be paid out of my Fee-simple-Land to my Chantre, for a Priest there to sing for
ever, for me and my Ancestors; I will, that my Obsequies be performyd yearly
be the same Priest, and five Pence to be delivered to five poor men in the
Worshepe of the five wounds of Christ, and once in the Year a....... for all my
Ancestors, and to dele five Pence to five poor pepul in the Worchepe of the
five sorrows of our Lady. I will, that my Chantre Priest say daily in the seid
Cherch or Cherchyard Placebo and Dirige, and our Ladys Psalter, except a lawful
scuse let him. Also I will, that my Tomb be made in our Ladys Chapel, with
a Vault in the Wall, of Alybaster, and the Tomb of the same, with a Picter
insolid on them. I will, that iii Trantalls be song for me be my seventh day,
whenever it plese God that I depart the World. Also I will, that if I owe
any man any money, that it be paid; And also if any man can or will say that
I have done him wrong, or withhould any money from him in the way of bargaynyng
or communing, let him be agreed with as ye here the Cause.

Also I will, that my Wife have twenty five Marks of Quit-Rent out of the
Manor of Thrapston, Lands and Tenements, or twenty Pounds in Land during her
life, and that she have twenty Mark in money for her Chamber, so that she ask,
ne take no stofe, out of the Manor of Addington.

Also I will, that as in Sheep, Nete and allodyr Cattle she have her part
according to the Law, and let her choose whedyr she will have twenty Pound in
Land or the said Quit-Rente. Also I will, that she have the two littel Salts
that go daily abroad, with the Silver Spones, and a Pese that Thomas Ash
have. Also I will, that all such Goods as I have in the Manor of Addington
unbequest, remain to the said Manor while the World last, or the said Goods
endure, that is to say, Bedding, Chests, Tables, Brass, Pewter, and a Coffer
of Plate, with Harness, Gold Rings, Owches, and a Chene of Gold, with other
Jewels in the same Coffer. Also I will, that my Dawter Elizabeth have the same
Manor in part of her Chose, and all my purchased Land in the same Town, and
also in Addington parva more than her chose, to meynteyn the said Manor. Also
I will, that my Dawters, Anne, Constance and Audre have an odyr Coffer called a
Gardewyn, with certain Plate, a Chene, Girdyll, and odyr Stoffe, to be partyd
among them, when they come to Age; and if the one dye, the to other to depart
it; than if one dye, the the other to have all; if they all depart, the said
Coffer to remain to the Manor again.

Also I will, that William Marbyry have the Rule and the gyding of my
Children, till they come to Age to gyde themselves. Also I will, that the said
William have the Receipts of my Land till the said Children come to lawful Age,
also the keeping of all other moveable Goods, that I have bequeathed to them;
and when they come to lawful Age, or else happyn to be married, then to deliver
to them syche as I have besett them, as he think most profit to them.

Also if it hap the said William Marbyry decesse ere all this be fulfilled
and performed, then I will that the foresaid William Marbyry to chose or to
assign such a person or persons as he can bethink best, with the avise of Mr.
John Bloxham, if he be then alive, or else of Sir Thomas Thornton now Parson of
Addington.

Also I will, that if it hap my Children all decesse and noe Issue of them,
then I will that my Goods and Stoffe in my Manor of Addington, and odyr not
delivered to them be sold, and done for my soul, and the souls of my Fadyr
and my Modyr and all Christen souls: and if there be any of nere kin, that
have need in their Marriage, I will that they be holpyd, and succuryd before
odyrs.

Also I will, that each of my Sisters have ten Shillings, and each of their
Children six Shillings eight Pence; also William Marbyry during his life three
Pounds six Shillings eight Pence. Also Robert Marbyry to be Steward of all my
Lands, having for his Fee six and twenty Shillings eight Pence for term of
life. Also I will, that my Servaunts that will bide till our Lady Day shall
have their Wages, and each of them three Shillings four Pence over their Wages.

Also I will, that John Daundely have every Year three Shillings four Pence to
pray for me dureing his life.

Also any Priest that comes to the Day of my Beriall, seventh Day, or Months,
every one six Pence a pese: Also every odyr Clarke two Pence.

Also I will, and I charge my Children, that they nor none of them, nor no
odyr shall troble ne vex William Marbyry whom I have made Receyver of my Lands
and of all odyr Goods, for to call him to account or reckynnyng, but to make it
after his own Conscience, and so I put my trust in him.

Also I will, that there be given twenty Shillings to the Abbey of Crowland to
pray for me. Item, to Sir Thomas Whotton six Shillings eight Pence besides his
Wages.

Also I will, that if that Master William Marbyry may not have the Rule ne
the Marriage of my Children to syche as he will with his counseil, so if any of
my Children will not be ruled be him, then my Executors shall have my purchased
Land in their kepeing and possession unto the time that my Will be fulfilled,
and than to gyff hit to them, or one of them, as they think best in all manner
of things, the Stoffe both Plate and all odyr to dispose them for my soul.

Also I will, that William Dounhall have the Land that I should have in
Harawld, for the Wife of William Milner term of her life, as they of Harawld
and I have agree.

Also I will, that mine Executors be suffered to receyve the profitts as well of
all my Londs in Fee-tayl, as of my Londs in Fee-simple,....... my Children to
be kept and married be their assents, then I will all such Goods as I have
assigned to remain in the Manor of Addington aforesaid, be taken and kept be
my said Executors, and the profitts of my Londs in Fee-simple unto the time my
Children be of reasonable Age, and then to dispose the said Goods and profitts
of Londs after their discretion, as they find cause and se my Childrens
disposition.

Provided always, that and my said Executors may not have and receyve the
revenue and profitts of Londs aforesaid to perform this my last Will, then I
will they see it performyd with my moveable Goods, and the revenues and
profitts of my Fee-simpul Lands.

seal of Henry de Vere SIGILLVM HENRICI DE VER



Fuller's History of the Worthies of England, Page 298.
HEnry Vere was the Son of Richard Vere of Addington Esquire, by Isabel his
Wife, Sister and at last sole Heir of Henry Green of Drayton Esquire, of whom
formerly. This Henry was after Knighted, and dying without Issue Male,
Elizabeth his Daughter and Coheir was married to John first Lord Mordaunt, to
whom she brought Drayton in this Country, and other fair Lands, as the Partage
of her Portion.

tomb of Sir Henry de Vere Here lies the Body of Sr Henry Vere Knt. who was
once Lord of this (...) He was Father of Elizabeth, Wife to John the first Lord
Mordaunt unto whom his eldest Daughter and Coheire) did decend the Greatest
part of his Ancient and (...) In heritance. On whose Soul God have Mercy.



ELIZABETH VERE, Lady Mordaunt, Lady of Drayton, Thrapston, Addington, and
Inheritrix of all the Lands that belonged to the Greenes and Veres her
Predecessors.
Specialis Liberatio Terrarum Green and Vere assignata per Regem.
H.R.

REX, etc. omnibus, etc. Sciatis quod Nos de gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa
scientia and mero motu nostris, concessimus, and licentiam dedimus, ac per
praesentes damus, and concedimus, pro nobis and Haeredibus nostris, quantum in
nobis est, dilectis and fidelibus nostris, Thomae Cheyne Militi, and
Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Filiae and Haeredi Margeriae, Sororis and unius
Haeredum Henrici Grene Armigeri, Patris Constanciae, Matris Edwardi nuper
Comitis Wilts defuncti, and Johanni Mordaunt, and Elizabethae Uxori ejus,
Roberto Mordaunt, Fratri suo, and Amiae Uxori ejus, Johanni Parre and
Constanciae Uxori ejus, and Etheldredae Vere Filiabus Henrici Vere Armigeri,
Filii and Haeredis Isabellae alterius Sororum and Haeredum praedicti Henrici
Grene, quod ipsi absque aliqua probatione aetatis ipsarum Elizabethae Cheyne,
Elizabethae Mordaunt and Amiae, Constanciae Parre and Etheldredae, seu earum
alicujus, and absque aliqua liberatione, seu prosecutione, Haereditatis suae
seu alicujus inde parcellae, extra manus nostras vel Haeredum nostrorum, in
Cancellaria nostra vel Haeredum nostrorum secundum cursum ejusdem Cancellariae,
ac Legis Terrae, seu aliquo alio modo prosequed', In omnia and singula Castra,
Dominia, Maneria, Terras, Tenementa, Feoda, Firmas, Annuitates, firmas
redditus, Reversiones, Servitia, Boscos, Asserta, Hundreda, Feoda, visa
Franciplegii, Curias letas, Turnas Vicecomitis, Libertates, Franchesias,
Ferias, Mercata, Jurisdictiones, and Vivaria, Piscarios, Warrennas, Feoda
Militum, Pacronatus Abbatiarum, Prioratuum, Advocationes Ecclesiarum,
Vicaragiarum, Cantariarum, Capellarum, and Hospitalium, and aliorum
Beneficiorum Ecclesiasticorum quorumcunque, ac omnia alia Possessiones and
Haereditamenta quaecunque infra Regnum nostrum Angliae, Walliae, and Marchias
earundem, cum omnibus and singulis suis pertinentiis and dependentiis
quibuscunque, de quibus praedictus Henricus Grene, aut praedicta Constancia,
Filia ejusdem Henrici Grene, seu eorum alter, aut praedictus Edwardus nuper
Comes, aut eorum aliquis, fuit sesitus de dominio suo, ut de feodo, aut de
feodis qualitercunque taliatis, die quo obiit; Et in omnia Dominia, Maneria,
Terras, Tenementa, Redditus, Reversiones, and Servitia, Feoda Militum,
Advocationes Ecclesiarum, Hundreda and caetera praemissa cum pertinentiis, de
quibus aliqua Parsona ad usum praefatorum Edwardi, Henrici, and Constanciae
Filiae ipsius Henrici, and Haeredum suorum, seu ad eorum alicujus usum tempore
mortis suae conjunctim, vel separatim seisitus fuit, Et quae tam per sive post
mortem praedictorum Edwardi, Henrici, and Constanciae Filiae ipsius Henrici,
and eorum alicujus aliquo modo ad manus nostras, seu ad manus aliquorum
Progenitorum sive Predecessorum nostrorum devenerunt, seu devenire debuerunt,
aut in manibus nostris jam existunt, aut existere debent, aut debebunt, aut
praefatis Elizabethae Cheyne, Elizabethae Mordaunt, Amiae, Constanciae Parre
and Etheldredae descendere, revertere, remanere, pertinere, seu spectare
debent, aut deberent, licite aut impune intrare, ingredi, and seisire, Acea
omnia and singula praemissa praefatis Elizabethae Cheyne, Elizabethae Mordaunt,
Amiae, Constanciae Parre, and Etheldredae, and Haeredibus suis, prout ipsae in
eisdem post mortem praedictorum Edwardi, Henrici Grene, and Constanciae, Filiae
ipsius Henrici, aut eorum alicujus, aut post mortem aliquorum Antecessorum
dictarum Elizabethae Cheyne, Elizabethae Mordaunt, Amiae, Constanciae Parre,
and Etheldredae de Dominiis, Maneriis, Terris and Tenementis praedictis, and de
caeteris haereditabiliter existerunt, Habend' persequend', capiend', vel
faciend', aut absque aliqua liberatione, sive prosecutione eorundem extra manus
nostras seu Haeredum nostrorum, quovis modo prosequenda, vel impetranda:
Nolentes quod praedicti Thomas Cheyne, and Elizabetha Uxor ejus, Johannes
Mordaunt, and Elizabetha Uxor ejus, Robertus Mordaunt, and Amia Uxor ejus,
Johannes Parre and Constancia Uxor ejus, and Etheldreda, nec Haeredes ipsarum
Elizabethae Cheyne, Elizabethae Mordaunt, Amiae, Constanciae Parre, and
Etheldredae ratione intrationis, ingressus vel seisinae suorum hujusmodi de
praemissis, seu aliqua praemissorum ante haec tempora fact', vel in posterum
faciend', per nos vel Haeredes nostros, Justiciarios, Escaetores, Vicecomites,
and alios Ballivos, seu Ministros nostros, vel Haeredum nostrorum quoscunque
occasionentur, inquietentur, vexentur, perturbentur, molestentur in aliquo seu
graventur; Nec quod quod iidem Escaetores, Vicecomites, Ballivi, and Ministri
nostri, aut Haeredum nostrorum, nec eorum aliquis, de aut in Dominiis,
Maneriis, Terris, and Tenementis praedictis, ac caeteris praemissis, aut de aut
in aliquibus praemissorum vel de aut in aliqua parcella eorundem, in aliquo se
intromittant, vel intromittat; sed quod iidem Thomas Cheyne and Elizabetha Uxor
ejus, Johannes Mordaunt and Elizabetha Uxor ejus, Robertus Mordaunt and Amia
Uxor ejus, Johannes Parre and Constancia Uxor ejus, and Etheldreda, and
Haeredes ipsarum Elizabethae Cheyne, Elizabethae Mordaunt, Amiae, Constanciae
Parre, and Etheldredae, ac omnes Escaetores, Vicecomites, Ballivi, and alii
Officiarii nostri praedicti quicunque, erga nos and Haeredes nostros quieti and
exonerati ac exonerabiles inde existant, and quilibet eorum exonerabilis inde
existat, and quod ipsi habeant and quilibet eorum habeat tot and talia brevia
and alia Warrantia, quot and qualia eis and eorum cuilibet pro exoneratione sua
in hac part erga nos and dictos Haeredes nostros, habenda necessaria fuerint
and opportuna; Homagio tamen and fidelitate ipsorum Thomae Cheyne, Johannis
Mordaunt, Roberti Mordaunt, and Johannis Parre, in hac part debitis semper
salvis. Et ulterius concedimus pro nobis and Haeredibus nostris, praefatis
Thomae Cheyne, and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Johanni Mordaunt and Elizabethae
Uxori ejus, Roberto Mordaunt and Amiae Uxori ejus, Johanni Parre and
Constanciae Uxori ejus, and Etheldredae, quod hujusmodi seisina, possessio,
perceptio, occupatio, intratio and ingressus, per ipsos Thomam Cheyne and
Elizabetham Uxorem ejus, Johannem Mordaunt and Elizabetham Uxorem ejus,
Robertum Mordaunt and Amiam Uxorem ejus, Johannem Parre and Constanciam Uxorem
ejus, and Etheldredam, in omnia and singula Dominia, Maneria, Terras, and
Tenementa praedicta, and caetera praemissa, vigore and authoritate Concessionis
and licentiae nostrae praedictae, habitae, factae and retentae, ac possessio
and seisina inde, sint and existant ipsis Thomae Cheyne and Elizabethae Uxori
ejus, Johanni Mordaunt and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Roberto Mordaunt and Amiae
Uxori ejus, Johanni Parre and Constanciae Uxori ejus, and Etheldredae, and
Haeredibus ipsarum Elizabethae Cheyne, Elizabethae Mordaunt, Amiae, Constanciae
Parre, and Etheldredae, tantae and talis vigoris in lege and virtutis, ac si
eadem Dominia, Maneria, Terrae and Tenementa praedicta and caetera praemissa in
manus nostras seu in manus aliquorum Praedecessorum seu Progenitorum nostrorum
capta and seisita fuissent, ac inquisitiones inde post mortem praedictorum
Edwardi, Henrici, Constanciae, Filiae Henrici, and eorum cujuslibet, aut
cujuslibet Antecessorum dictarum Elizabethae Cheyne, Elizabethae Mordaunt,
Amiae, Constanciae and Etheldredae rite and debite factae, captae and in
Cancellariam nostram retornatae fuissent, and eaedem Elizabetha Cheyne,
Elizabetha Mordaunt, Amia, Constancia Parre, and Etheldreda aetatem suam
sufficienter probassent, ac si ipsi Thomas Cheyne and Elizabetha Uxor ejus,
Johannes Mordaunt and Elizabetha Uxor ejus, Robertus Mordaunt and Amia Uxor
ejus, Johannes Parre and Constancia Uxor ejus, and Etheldreda liberationem
Dominiorum, Maneriorum, Terrarum and Tenementorum and caeterorum praemissorum
extra manus nostras secundum cursum Cancellariae nostrae, ac Legis nostrae
Angliae in forma debita prosecuti fuissent, and quod sit adeo valida eiisdem
Thomae Cheyne and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Johanni Mordaunt and Elizabethae
Uxori ejus, Roberto Mordaunt and Amiae Uxori ejus, Johanni Parre and
Constanciae Uxori ejus, and Etheldredae and Haeredibus ipsarum Elizabethae
Cheyne, Elizabethae Mordaunt, Amiae, Constanciae Parre, and Etheldredae, and
hujusmodi vigoris, valoris and effectus erga nos and Haeredes nostros, prout
esset una bona and sufficiens and legalis liberatio, per ipsos Thomam Cheyne
and Elizabetham Uxorem ejus, Johannem Mordaunt and Elizabetham Uxorem ejus,
Robertum Mordaunt and Amiam Uxorem ejus, Johannem Parre and Constanciam Uxorem
ejus, and Etheldredam in hac part extra Cancellariam nostram praedictam per
cursum communis Legis nostrae debite prosecuta and habita, and nobis de omni eo
quod ad nos inde pertinet seu pertinere inde debet, satisfactum esset, and
conventum, aliqua in hac part negligentia, omissione, misprisione, errore,
contrarietate, repugnantia, seu aliquo defectu quocunque limitata vel
limitanda, assignata vel assignanda in inquisitionibus supradictis si quae
fuerunt, vel aliqua eorundem seu returnis eorundem vel alicujus eorundem, aut
aliqua alia re necnon omissione aliquarum inquisitionum quae capi debuissent
post mortem dictorum Edwardi, Henrici and Constanciae Filiae Henrici seu eorum
alicujus, de aliquibus Terris, Tenementis, Possessionibus quae ad manus nostras
seu aliquorum Progenitorum nostrorum vel Predecessorum nostrorum devenire
debuissent, descendere, remanere, revertere aut aliquo modo devenire debent,
non obstante; Et quod nos and dicti Haeredes nostri ad seisandum and capiendum
Dominia, Maneria, Hundreda, Terras and Tenementa praedicta and caetera
praemissa and aliquam inde parcellam in manus nostras, ratione alicujus Juris
vel tituli quod vel quae nobis and Haeredibus nostris per sive post mortem
praedictorum Edwardi, Henrici and Constanciae Filiae Henrici, seu eorum
alicujus, aut alicujus alterius personae competit seu competere poterit, sumus
exclusi in perpetuum per praesentes. Concessimus etiam eiisdem Thomae Cheyne
and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Johanni Mordaunt and Elizabethae Uxori ejus,
Roberto Mordaunt and Amiae Uxori ejus, Johanni Parre and Constanciae Uxori
ejus, and Etheldredae, omnia exitus, proficua, reversiones and firmas omnium
Dominiorum, Maneriorum, Hundredorum, Terrarum, and Tenementorum praedictorum,
and caeterorum praemissorum a tempore mortis praedicti Edwardi, nuper Comitis,
huc usque provenientia, sive crescentia, and quamdiu omnia praedicta Dominia,
Maneria, Terrae, and Tenementa, and caetera praemissa seu aliqua inde parcella,
in manibus nostris seu Haeredum nostrorum existere, seu remanere contigerint:
Habenda, levanda, recipienda, retinenda, and percipienda eisdem Thomae Cheyne
and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Johanni Mordaunt and Elizabethae Uxori ejus,
Roberto Mordaunt and Amiae Uxori ejus, Johanni Parre and Constanciae Uxori
ejus, and Etheldredae, tam in manibus suis propriis quam per manus separalium,
and qui nunc sunt, qui nuper fuerunt, vel qui in posterum erunt, in Comitatibus
sive Marchiis in quibus eadem Dominia, Maneria, Terrae and Tenementa, and
caetera praemissa separaliter existunt, per manus Ballivorum, Firmariorum and
Occupatorum Tenementorum, sive aliorum Receptorum eorundem Dominiorum,
Maneriorum, Terrarum and Tenementorum and caeterorum praemissorum qui nunc
sunt, qui nuper fuerunt, vel qui in posterum erunt, absque compoto seu aliquo
alio nobis vel Haeredibus nostris inde solvendo, reddendo sive faciendo. Et
volumus and concedimus praefatis Thomae Cheyne and Elizabethae Uxori ejus,
Johanni Mordaunt and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Roberto Mordaunt and Amiae Uxori
ejus, Johanni Parre and Constanciae Uxori ejus, and Etheldredae per praesentes,
quod iidem Escaetores, Receptores, Ballivi, Firmarii and Occupatores and eorum
quilibet, de and pro hujusmodi exitibus and proficuis erga nos and Haeredes
nostros quieti and exonerati sint imperpetuum per praesentes. Et etiam de
ampliori gratia nostra pardonavimus, remisimus and relaxavimus, ac per
praesentes pardonamus, remittimus and relaxamus eiisdem Thomae Cheyne and
Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Johanni Mordaunt and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Roberto
Mordaunt and Amiae Uxori ejus, Johanni Parre and Constanciae Uxori ejus, and
Etheldredae, omnimodas intrusiones and ingressus in omnia praedicta Maneria,
Dominia, Terras and Tenementa and catera praemissa, ac in haereditatem suam in
part vel in toto post mortem praedictorum Edwardi, Henrici, and Constanciae
Filiae Henrici, and eorum cujuslibet, absque debita prosecutione seu
liberatione inde extra manus nostras seu Progenitorum aut Praedecessorum
nostrorum, and omnimodas transgressiones, offensiones, misprisiones,
contemptus, forisfacta and impetitiones quascunque per ipsos Thomam Cheyne and
Elizabetham Uxorem ejus, Johannem Mordaunt and Elizabetham Uxorem ejus,
Robertum Mordaunt and Amiam Uxorem ejus, Johannem Parre and Constanciam Uxorem
ejus, and Etheldredam, and eorum quemlibet, occasion praemissorum facta sive
perpetrata; Ac etiam omnia and omnimoda receptiones, debita and compota nobis
occasion praemissorum debite pertinentia, Nec non omnes actiones, sectas,
querelas and demandas quas nos versus ipsos Thomam Cheyne and Elizabetham
Uxorem ejus, Johannem Mordaunt and Elizabetham Uxorem ejus, Robertum Mordaunt
and Amiam Uxorem ejus, Johannem Parre and Constanciam Uxorem ejus, and
Etheldredam, occasion praemissorum vel alicujus inde parcellae habemus seu
habere poterimus in futurum; Eo quod expressa mentio de vero valor annuo vel
certitudine praemissorum vel alicujus inde parcellae, aut de aliis donis sive
concessionibus eisdem Thomae Cheyne and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Johanni
Mordaunt and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Roberto Mordaunt and Amiae Uxori ejus,
Johanni Parre and Constanciae Uxori ejus, and Etheldredae, seu eorum alicui,
per nos, Progenitores, sive Praedecessores nostros ante haec tempora factas in
praesentibus minime facta existit, aut aliquo Statuto, Actu, Ordinatione, re,
causa, vel materia inde in contrarium factis, editis sive ordinatis non
obstantibus. In cujus rei testimonium, etc.

Sub Sigillo Magno.

An Indenture septipartite between Edward Duke of Buckingham, and the Coheirs
of Green and Vere.
THis Indenture septipartite made the second Day of September in the fifteenth
Year of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, Between the Right Noble Prince
Edward Duke of Buckingham, Earl of Herford, Stafford, and Northampton, on the
one party; Margaret Countess of Wiltes, late Wife of Edward, late Earl of
Wiltes, on the second party; Thomas Cheyne of Artlingburgh Knight, and
Elizabeth his Wife Daughter and Heir of Margery Hodleston, Daughter and oon of
the Heirs of John Green, and Sister and oon of the Heirs of Herry Green late
Lord of Drayton in the County of Northampton, on the third party; Richard
Gilford Knight, Comptroller of the Kings most honorable Household, Garden of
Audre, youngest Daughter of Henry Vere, late of Great Addington in the County
of Northampton Esquire, Son and Heir of Isabell Daughter and another of the
Heirs of the said John Green, and Sister and another of the Heirs of the said
Herry Green on the fourth part; Alice Lady Fits Hugh, late the Wife of William
Fits Hugh Knight, Lord Fits Hugh, Garden of Constance, the third Daughter of
the said Harry Vere, now married to John Parre, on the fifth Party; John
Mordaunt of Turvey in the County of Bedford, oon of the Kings Sergeants at Law,
Garden of Elizabeth first and eldest Daughter of the said Harry Vere, and
married to John Mordaunt Son and Heir Apparent of the same John Mordaunt, of
the sixth party; And the same John Mordaunt, Garden also of Amye, second
Daughter of the same Henry Vere, now married to Robert Mordaunt, second Son to
the same John Mordaunt the Fader, of the seventh party: Witnesses, That where
upon Communication and Agreement of Marriage had and concluded between Edward
late Earl of Wiltes and the said Margaret Countess of Wiltes, It was fully
covenanted, bargained and agreed, That the said Countess should have in
Jointure for term of her life, Manors, Lands and Tenements of the same late
Earl of such yearly value, as Sir Reynald Gray Knight would name, And also
such other as the said Sir Reynald would name; And after the said Sir Reynald
by the assent and agreement of the said late Earl named, that the said
Countess should have in Jointure, for term of her life, Manors, Lands and
Tenements of the said Edward late Earl of Wiltes to the yearly value of three
hundred Marks above all Charges, and after the same naming, a Youes was made to
the same Edward and Margaret, and to other persons for term of life of the
same Margaret, to the use and behoof of the same Margaret, of the Manors of
Newton, Blosmavile, Clifton, Watershall, Brafeld and Policote, in the County of
Bucks, Sutton, Peggislond, Botellis, Tracies and Stamford-rivers in the County
of Essex; Which Manors, Lands and Tenements were sometimes of the Right Noble
Prince Humphrey Duke of Bucks, Aile to the said Edward late Earl of Wiltes, and
been of the yearly value of one hundred twenty one Pounds thirteen Shillings
and four Pence: And toward the recompense of the residue of the said Jointure
the said Edward late Earl and Margaret, and other, had Estate of the Manors of
Wamiden, Empton and Much Wolston in the County of Bucks, and Chalton in the
County of Bedford; Which Manors, Lands and Tenements were sometimes of the
said Herry Green, and be of the yearly value of forty one Pounds ten Shillings
eleven Pence. All which Manors, Lands and Tenements, as well such as were late
of the said late Duke of Bucks, as of the said Herry, extend to the yearly
value of one hundred sixty three Pounds four Shillings and three Pence. And
so the said Margaret, now Countess, lacked of her Jointure to her belonging,
by reason of the same Covenant, Bargain and Agreement, thirty six Pounds
fifteen Shillings nine Pence. And whereas after that the said Earl in his life,
for the tender favor and love which he had to the said Edward now Duke of
Buckingham, was in very mind and fully agreed, that the said Jointure, Lands
and Tenements, that were of the Inheritance of the said Duke of Bucks, should
be changed, and that the said Margaret, now Countess, should have in
recompense of them other Manors, Lands and Tenements, that were of the same
Herry Green, of like value; And where Estate was made to Robert Wittelbury,
William Merbury, Esquires, Robert Bayston Clerk, Thomas Montague, John Freman,
and one John Feld Clerk now dead, of and in the Manors of Raunds, Ringstede,
Cotes, Stawike, Luffwike, Sudburgh, and Harringworth in the County of
Northampton, Emton and Mochewolston in the County of Bucks, Chalton in the
County of Bedford, Warmester, Westbury, Grately, Dichrich in the Countye of
Wiltes and Southampton, Buckworth in the County of Huntington, and Combton in
the County of Cambridge, and of all other Lands and Tenements which sometime
were of the said Constance late Wife of John late Earl of Wiltes, and Mother to
the said Edward late Earl of Wiltes, in the said Countyes of Northampton,
Wiltes, Southampton, Bedford, Bucks, Huntington, and Cambridge; To have to them
and to their Heirs for ever, to the use of the said Edward late Earl, and of
his Heirs: And where also Estate was before that made of and in the said
Manors of Wamiden, Emton, Mochewolston and Chalton in the Countyes of Bedford
and Bucks, and of diverse other Lands and Tenements in the same Countyes, the
which late were of the said Harry Green to the said Edward and Margaret then
his Wife, Johane Vicountesse Lesle, John Vicount Lesle, Thomas Gray Esquire,
Thomas Kebell, one of the Kings Sergeants at Law, Edward Hungerford Esquire,
Humphrey Connesby, Thomas Frowike, Sergeants at Law, John Tichbourne, John
Smith, John Gardener, Thomas Bayall, and Thomas Haywode; To have to them for
term of life of the said Margaret, the Remainder thereof to the right Heirs of
the said Edward late Earl of Wiltes; And of the residue of the said Manors,
Lands and Tenements, whereof the said Robert Wittelbury and his Cofeffez were
infeossed, they were satisfied thereof at the time of the death of the said
Edward late Earl, and yet thereof be seized: And where also the said Edward
Duke of Bucks has before this time pretended Title to part of the said
Manors, Lands and Tenements, and other Manors, Lands and Tenements, late of
the said Edward late Earl, of the Greenes Lands, as Cosyne and next Heir to
the said Edward late Earl, of the Faders side of the said late Earl: And
where also the same Countess claymeth to have dower of parcel of the same
Manors, Lands and Tenements, over and beside her said Jointure: And where
also the said Richard, Alice Lady Fits Hugh, and John Mordaunt the Fader, as
much as in them is, for their interest, for causes comprised in their
Indentures, have promissed to the said Sir Thomas and Elizabeth his Wife, that
the said Sir Thomas and Elizabeth his Wife over and above the portion of the
same Dame Elizabeth of the same Manors, Lands and Tenements, and of all other
Manors, Lands and Tenements called the Greene's Lands, shall have the Manor
of Drayton in Drayton, the Conyngre and the Park of Drayton, and the Pasture
there called the Ox Pasture, dureing the life of the said Thomas and Elizabeth
his Wife; saveing the reversion thereof to the said Elizabeth Mordaunt, Amy,
Constance Parre, and Audree, and to their Heirs; Provided always that the same
Sir Thomas nor Elizabeth shall do no waste in the same Manor and Park, nor cut
down no Timber in the said Manor, Park or Conyngre: And where also the said
Sir Thomas Cheyne Knight and Dame Elizabeth his Wife never had Issue begotten
between them, nor any belike to have, because of the Age of the same Dame
Elizabeth, so that the said Sir Thomas is not entitled to have any part of the
same Manors, Lands and Tenements, nor other premises, nor entitled to have
any other Manors, Lands or Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services, Woods,
Avowsons, Franchises and Hereditaments, which at any time were of the said
Costance late Countess of Wiltes, nor of the said Herry Green Fader of the
same Constance in England, Wales and Marches of the same, nor any part of them,
but only dureing the life of the same Dame Elizabeth his Wife in her Right:
Yet nevertheless for that the same Sir Thomas and Elizabeth, nor any of theirs
shall not discontinue nor aliene, put away nor depart, fro the said Manors,
Lands and Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Avousons and other premises within the
Realm of England, Wales and the Marches of the same, nor fro any part or
parcel of them, But that all the said Manors, Lands and Tenements and other
the premises, immediately after the decease of the said Margaret Countess,
and after the decease of the said Sir Thomas and Dame Elizabeth his Wife, shall
descend, grow, go and come to the said Elizabeth Mordaunt, Amy, Constance
Parre, and Audree Vere, and their Heirs, in like manner and form, and of like
Estate as the said Herry Green was inheritable unto the same. It is agreed
therefore between all and every of the said parties in manner and form
following; That the said Margaret now Countess shall have and enjoy for term
of her life the said Manors of Stamford-Rivers and Sutton in the County of
Essex, and all other Lands and Tenements that late were of the said Edward,
late Earl of Wiltes, in Stamford-Rivers and Sutton in the same Countye; And as
much of the said Lands and Tenements in the said Countye called Tracies
Peggislonde and Botellis, as with the said Manors of Stamford-Rivers and
Sutton shall be of the clear yearly value of fifty Pounds above all charges, as
well Stewards Fees, Bayliffes Fees, as other yearly charges; which Manors,
Lands and Tenements were of the inheritance of the said Edward late Earl of
Wiltes, descended to him by the said John late Earl of Wiltes his Fader, whose
Heir to the same Manors, Lands and Tenements the said now Duke is. And the
same Duke covenanteth and grants by these Presents, That he shall make or
cause to be made all the said Manors, Lands and Tenements of the yearly value
of fifty Pounds before the sixteenth day of July next comeing, as sure to the
said Margaret or other to her use, dureing her life, as by the Counsel of the
said Margaret shall be devised at her Costs and Charges. And for and in
recompense of the residue of the said Duke of Bucks Lands which the said
Margaret had in Jointure, and also to make up her full Jointure of three
hundred Marks, the same Margaret now Countess shall have the said Manors of
Wamiden, Emton, Wolston and Chalton according to the Estate of her old Jointure
thereof made; And also the Manors, Lands and Tenements following, That is to
say, the Manor of Grately in the Countye of Southampton, and all Lands and
Tenements that were of the said Edward late Earl of Wiltes in Grately in the
said County; The Manor of Westbury in the Countye of Wiltes, and all Lands and
Tenements that were of the same late Earl in Westbury in the same Countye; The
Manors of Ramides, Ringstede, Cotes, Stanwike and Harringworth in the Countye
of Northampton, and all Lands and Tenements that were of the said late Earl in
Ramides, Ringstede, Cotes, Stanwike and Harringworth in the same Countye; The
Manor of Buckworth in the Countye of Huntington, and all Lands and Tenements
that were of the same late Earl in Buckworth in the same Countye; And the
Manor of Combton in the Countye of Cambrigge, and all Lands and Tenements that
were of the said late Earl in Combton in the said Countye: All which Manors,
Lands and Tenements in the said Countyes of Bedford, Northampton, Buckingham,
Huntington, Cambrigge, Southampton and Wiltes were of the Greene's Lands.
Except and always reserveing unto the said Sir Thomas Cheyne and Hizabeth his
Wife, Elizabeth Mordaunt, Amye Mordaunt, Constance Parre and Audree Vere, and
to the Heirs of the said Elizabeth Mordaunt, Amye, Constance, and Audree, All
Wards, Marriages and Avousons belonging to the said Manors, Lands and
Tenements, and to every parcel of them. All which said Manors, Lands and
Tenements with the said Manors of Wamiden, Emton, Wolston and Chalton are
delivered to the said Margaret Countess, for and instede of the yearly value
of one hundred and fifty Pounds, over Charges, as well Stewards Fees, Bayliffes
Fees, as other annual Charges. And the said Sir Thomas Cheyne and Elizabeth his
Wife, Sir Richard Gilford, Alice Lady Fits Hugh, and John Mordaunt the Fader,
Covenantyn and grantyn by these Presents, that the said Sir Thomas and the said
Dame Elizabeth his Wife, and also the said John Mordaunt the younger and
Elizabeth his Wife, Robert Mordaunt and Amye his Wife, John Parre and Constance
his Wife, and the said Audree Vere, and such as shall be her Husband if she be
then married, and also all such persons as were lately infeoffed by the said
Edward late Earl of Wiltes, or now be infeoffed or seized of and in all the
said Manors, Lands and Tenements sometimes of the said Herry Green, before the
said sixteenth day of July next coming shall suffer the said Margaret Stafford
Countess of Wiltes, Johan Lesle Vicountesse Lesle, John Gray Vicount Lesle,
Thomas Gray Esquire, John Bretteyne Clerk, Thomas Frowyke Sergeant at Law,
Edward Hungerford Esquire, Thomas Marrow and John Gardener to recover against
them the same Manors, Lands and Tenements, in such form and order, and all
other things do and suffer to be done concerning the same recovere, as by the
Counsel learned of the said Countess shall be avised, at the Costs and
Charges of the said Countess; The same recovere to be to the use of the said
Countess dureing her life, and after her decease of the one moiety of the same
Manors, Lands and Tenements with the appurtenances, for the considerations in
these Indentures, to the use of the said Sir Thomas Cheyne and Elizabeth his
Wife for term of their life's only, and either of them longer living only,
without impeachment of waste dureing the life of the said Elizabeth his Wife,
and after their decease to the use of the right Heirs of the said Isabel Vere
Daughter of the said John Green, in like manner and form and of like Estate
as the Heirs of the said Herry Green Fader of the said Constance late
Countess was inheritable to the said Manors, Lands and Tenements; and of the
other moiety of the same Manors, Lands and Tenements after the decease of the
same Countess, to the use of the right Heirs of the same Isabel Vere Daughter
of the same John Green, in manner and form and of like tenure and Estates as
is aforesaid of the other moiety of the same Manors, Lands and Tenements. And
the said Sir Thomas Cheyne and Elizabeth his Wife, John Mordaunt the younger
and Elizabeth his Wife, Robert Mordaunt and Amye his Wife, John Parre and
Constance his Wife, and Audre Vere, and every of them, before the said
sixteenth day of July next coming, shall further do, and suffer and cause to be
done, to make the said Manors, Lands and Tenements before appointed to the said
Countess sure to the said Margaret Stafford Countess of Wiltes, Johan
Vicountesse Lesle, John Gray Vicount Lesle, Thomas Gray Esquire, John Bretteyn
Clerk, Thomas Frowyke Sergeant at Law, Edward Hungerford Esquire, Thomas Marrow
and John Gardener, and to their Heirs to the uses aforesaid, as by the Counsel
learned of the said Countess before the said sixteenth day of July next coming
shall be advised, at the Costs and Charges of the said Countess. And over that
is covenanted, bargained and agreed between the said Parties, that the said Sir
Thomas Cheyne and Elizabeth his Wife dureing their lives shall have the Manor
of Drayton in Drayton, the Park of Drayton, the Conyngre and the Oxe-Pasture;
Provided that they shall therein do no waste. And over that, that the said Sir
Thomas Cheyne and Elizabeth his Wife shall have for term of their lives only,
and of every of them longest living, without impeachment of wast dureing the
life of the said Elizabeth his Wife, the Moyte of all other Manors, Lands and
Tenements within the Realm of England, Wales, and the Marches or Libertyes of
the same, the which late were of the same Herry Green, and after their decease
the said Manor of Drayton, the Park, Conyngre and Oxe-Pasture, and all the
same Moiety of all other the said Manors, Lands and Tenements within the
Realm of England, Wales, and the Marches of the same, to goo and grow to the
right Heirs of the said Isabel Vere Mother to the said Herry Vere, and to their
Heirs for ever, in manner and form, and of like Estate as the said Herry
Green had therein or was heretable to the same. And that the said Elizabeth
Mordaunt, Amy Mordaunt, Constance Parre and Audree Vere shall have the other
Moyte of all the said other Manors, Lands and Tenements, in England, Wales,
and the Marches of the same, to them and to their Heirs, in the manner and
form and of like Estate as the said Herry Green had therein or was
inheritable thereunto. And that all such persons as were late inseoffed by the
said late Earl, or be now seized or hereafter shall be seized of and in the
same other Manors, Lands and Tenements in England, Wales or the Marches of the
same, and of the said Manor of Drayton in Drayton, the Park, Conyngre and
Oxe-Pasture, with their appurtenances, shall be and stand feoffed and seized of
the same to the same intents and uses aforesaid. And over that, that before the
sixteenth day of December next comeing shall not let John Fisher, one of the
Kings Sergeants at Law, William Mordaunt, William Gascoyne, Wistan Broun, John
Mulso, and William Lane to recover all the same other Manors, Lands and
Tenements, and the same Manor of Drayton in Drayton, the Park, Conyngre and
Oxe-Pasture, with the appurtenances, against the said Elizabeth Cheyne,
Elizabeth Mordaunt, Amy Mordaunt, Constance Parre, and Audree Vere, and against
all such persons as be or then shall be their Husbands, and against all Feoffez
thereof, to their use, in such manner and form as shall be a vised by the
learned Counsel of the said Sir Thomas, Sir Richard, Alice Lady Fitz Hugh and
John Mordaunt the Father, at the Costs and Charges of the same Sir Thomas, the
said Recoverez to be of the Moyete of all the said other Manors, Lands and
Tenements, with their appurtenances, and of the said Manor of Drayton in
Drayton, the Park, Conyngre and Oxe-Pasture, for the Considerations comprised
in this Indenture, to the use of the said Sir Thomas and Elizabeth for the
term of their lives, and either of them longest living only; And after their
decease to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the said Isabell Vere, of
like Estate as is aforesaid; And of the other Moyete of the residue of the said
other Manors, Lands and Tenements, to the use of the right Heirs of the said
Isabel Vere, of like Estate as is aforesaid for ever. Provided always, that the
said Margaret Countess of Wiltes shall have for term of her life, the said
Manors, Lands and Tenements to her appointed by these Indentures, and also
her Title and Interesse of Dower of the Lands late of Thomas Tresham, any thing
contained in these Indentures notwithstanding, and notwithstanding the said
Recovere. And where the said now Duke has before this time pretended right and
title to such Manors, Lands and Tenements, as late were of the same Henry
Green, as Cosyn and right Heir of the said Edward late Earl of Wiltes, of the
Faders side of the same Earl, The said Duke now covenanteth by these Presents,
that he in consideration of all the premises, ymediately upon the sealing of
these Indentures, by his Fine and several Deeds sufficient in the Law, to be
enrolled on record, at the Costs and Charges of the said Sir Thomas, Sir
Richard, Alice Lady Fits Hugh, and John Mordaunt Sergeant, shall release all
his right and title in all the Manors, Lands and Tenements with the
appurtenances late of the said Herry Green within this Realm of England,
Wales, and the Marches of the same, to such persons, and to their Heirs, and in
such wise and with warranty against the Abbot of Chester and his Successors, as
the same Thomas, Richard, Alice and John shall name, at the Costs and Charges
of the said Thomas, Richard, Alice and John, three, two or one of them. And the
said Countess and all other persons having any thing to the use of the said
Countess of and in the said Manors of Newton, Blosmevile, Clifton, Wathall,
Brafield and Policote, and in all other Manors, Lands and Tenements which late
were of the said Humphrey late Duke of Buckingham, and afterward of the said
Edward late Earl, except such as be appointed to the said Countess by these
Indentures, and except such Lands and Tenements as late were of Sir Thomas
Tresham, shall, after the premises duly and truly performed by their several
Deeds sufficient in the Law, release all their Title of and in the same
(except before excepted) to the said now Duke, and his Heirs, and to such other
as be now seized to his use and to their Heirs; and also do, and suffer to be
done for the Surety of the same now Duke, as shall be devised by the Counsel
learned of the said Duke, and his Heirs, at the Costs and Charges of the said
Duke, and his Heirs. And the same Countess grants by these Presents, that
after the premises truly performed, and in consideration of all other things
herein comprised, that she shall by her five several Deeds sufficient in Law,
and to be enrolled of record, release to the said Elizabeth Cheyne, Elizabeth
Mordaunt, Amy Mordaunt, Constance and Audree, and to all Feoffez to their use
and to their Heirs, all the Right and Title which she has in all the residue
of all Manors, Lands and Tenements, that late were of the said Herry Green,
other than is appointed to her by these Indentures, and except the Lands and
Tenements late of the said Sir Thomas Tresham Knight, as shall be avised by the
Counsel of the same Dame Elizabeth Cheyne, Elizabeth Mordaunt, Amy, Constance
and Audree, one, three or two of them, at the Costs and Charges of the said Sir
Thomas Cheyne, Sir Richard, Alice and John Mordaunt the Fader. And the said
Countess also covenanteth and grants by these Presents, that if the
Grant of Annuity, yearly Rent or Fee of one hundred Shillings, goeing out of
certain Lands and Tenements in the Countye of Northampton, granted to one
William Pemberton, be now void, or fro henceforth dureing the life of the said
Countess, by insufficiency of Patent, Surrender, or otherwise happ to be void
or determined, that then ymediately after such avoydance, or determination, the
said Sir Thomas and Dame Elizabeth his Wife, Elizabeth Mordaunt, Amye Mordaunt,
Constance and Audree, dureing the life of the said Countess, shall have one
hundred Shillings of Rent goeing out of the said Lands and Tenements, and that
the same Countess and her Assigns, by Deed or Deeds sufficient in Law,
shall upon a reasonable request to her made, make sufficient Grant of an
hundred Shillings of Rent to the said Sir Thomas Cheyne and Dame Elizabeth his
Wife, Elizabeth Mordaunt, Amye, Constance and Audree, at their Costs and
Charges, payable at the Feasts of Saint Michael, and Easter, by equal
portions, dureing the life of the said Countess, with a sufficient Clause of
distress in the same Deed for non-payment of the same hundred Shillings Rent;
With Proviso in the same Deed or Deeds, that the same Grant or Graunts shall
not charge the person of the said Countess; Of which Rent of one hundred
Shillings the said Sir Thomas Cheyne and Dame Elizabeth his Wife shall have
fifty Shillings dureing the life of the said Countess. And the said Sir Thomas
and Elizabeth his Wife grauntyn by these Presents, that for consideration of
all the premises they shall not discontinue, aliene or put away the Right,
Title or Possession of the said Elizabeth his Wife, of and in the premises,
nor discontinue, or put away any parcel of the said Manors, Lands and
Tenements that late were of the said Constance, late Countess of Wiltes, nor
of the said Herry Green, nor any of them, nor of any part of the Greene's
Lands within the Realm of England, Wales, and the Marches of the same, Nor do
cause nor suffer to be done any thing to the disinheritance of the said
Elizabeth Mordaunt, Amye, Constance Parre, and Audree, nor of any of them, nor
do cause nor suffer to be done any thing, but that all the said Manors, Lands
and Tenements, and all the Lands and Tenements that were of the said Herry
Green, Constance late Countess, and every part of the said Greene's Lands,
ymediately after the decease of the said Margaret Countess, Sir Thomas Cheyne
and Elizabeth his Wife, shall descend and come, revert and grow to the same
Elizabeth Mordaunt, Amye, Constance and Audree, and to their Heirs for ever, in
use or in possession, in like manner and form, and of like Estates, as the
same Constance late Countess or Herry Green was seized of, or was heritable
unto. In witness whereof to these present Indentures septipartite the Parties
aforesaid interchangeably have put to their Seals, the said second day of
December, and fifteenth year above-sayd.

Carta Edwardi Ducis Buckinghamiae.
EDwardus Dux Buckinghamiae, Comes Staffordiae, Herfordiae and Northamptoniae,
Omnibus ad quos praesens Scriptum nostrum pervenerit salutem. Sciatis nos
praefatum Edwardum Ducem remifisse, relaxasse, and omnino pro nobis and
Haeredibus nostris imperpetuum quietum clamasse Thomae Cheyne Militi and
Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Johanni Mordaunt Juniori and Elizabethae Uxori ejus,
Roberto Mordaunt and Amiae Uxori ejus, Johanni Parre and Constanciae Uxori
ejus, Etheldredae Vere, Roberto Wittelbury, Willielmo Merbury Armigeris,
Roberto Bayston Clerico, Thomae Montague and Johanni Freman, Haeredibus and
Assignatis suis, ad usum ipsorum Thomae Cheyne and Elizabethae Uxoris ejus,
Elizabethae Mordaunt, Amiae Mordaunt, Constanciae Parre and Etheldredae Vere,
and Haeredum ipsarum Elizabethae Mordaunt, Amiae Mordaunt, Constanciae Parre
and Etheldredae Vere, totum jus nostrum, statum, titulum, clameum, demandam and
interesse nostra, quae unquam habuimus, habemus, seu quovis modo in futuro
habere poterimus de and in Maneriis de Chalton in Comitatu Bedfordiae, Drayton,
Slipton, Haughton magna, Grafton, Herdwike, Irtlingburgh, Luffwike, Islip,
Sudburgh, Ramides, Ringstede, Cotes, Stanwike, Malwades, Chilneston, and
Harringworth in Comitatu Northamptoniae, Wamiden, Wolston magna, and Emburton
in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, Buckworth in Comitatu Huntingdoniae, Combton in
Comitatu Kantiae, Rodingalba in Comitatu Essexiae, Grately in Comitatu South',
Wermestre, Westbury, Eyeshed, Verdon and Dichrub in Comitatu Wiltes, and de and
in omnibus aliis Maneriis, Terris, Tenementis, Redditibus, Reversionibus,
Servitiis and Haereditamentis quibuscunque infra Regnum Angliae, Walliae, and
Marchias earundem, quae nuper fuerunt Constanciae Matris Edwardi nuper Comitis
Wiltes, ac Henrici Green Patris ejusdem Constanciae, sive alterius eorundem
Henrici and Constanciae, ratione alicujus Feoffamenti per ipsum Edwardum in
vita sua factum; Ita quod nec nos praefatus Dux nec Haeredes nostri, nec
aliquis alius pro nobis seu nomine nostro, aliquid de and in praedictis
Maneriis, Terris, Tenementis and caeteris praemissis cum suis pertinentiis de
caetero exigere, clamare seu vindicare poterimus, sed ab omni action juris,
clamei, seu aliquid inde petendi penitus simus exclusi, imperpetuum per
praesentes. Et nos vero praefatus Dux and Haeredes nostri omnia praedicta
Maneria, Terras, Tenementa and caetera praemissa cum suis pertinentiis
praefatis Thomae Cheyne and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Johanni Mordaunt and
Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Roberto Mordaunt and Amiae Uxori ejus, Johanni Parre
and Constanciae Uxori ejus, Etheldredae Vere, Roberto Wittelbury, Willielmo
Merbury, Roberto Bayston, Thomae Montague, and Johanni Freman, Haeredibus and
Assignatis suis, contra Abbatem Cestriae and Successores suos, Warrantizabimus,
acquietabimus, and imperpetuum defendemus per praesentes. In cujus rei
testimonium huic praesenti Scripto nostro Sigillum nostrum apposuimus. Dat'
quarto decimo die Junii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici septimi post Conquestum
quintodecimo.

E. Buckingham.

Carta Edwardi Ducis Buckinghamiae.
EDwardus Dux Buckinghamiae, Comes Staffordiae, Herfordiae and Northamptoniae,
Omnibus ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum nostrum pervenerit salutem. Sciatis nos
praefatum Edwardum Ducem remisisse, relaxasse, and omnino pro nobis and
Haeredibus nostris imperpetuum quietum clamasse Margaretae Stafford Comitissae
Wiltes, Johannae Vice comitissae Lesle, Johanni Gray Vicecomiti Lesle, Thomae
Gray Armigero, Johanni Bretteyne Clerico, Thomae Frowike Servienti ad Legem,
Edwardo Hungerford Armigero, Thomae Marwode and Johanni Gardener, Thomae Cheyne
Militi and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Johanni Mordaunt juniori and Elizabethae
Uxori ejus, Roberto Mordaunt and Amiae Uxori ejus, Johanni Parre and
Constanciae Uxori ejus, Etheldredae Vere, Roberto Wittelbury Armigero, Roberto
Bayston Clerico, Thomae Montague and Johanni Freman, Haeredibus and Assignatis
suis, ad usum ipsius Margaretae Comitissae ad terminum vitae suae, and post
ejus mortem ad usum ipsorum Thomae Cheyne and Elizabethae Uxori ejus,
Elizabethae Mordaunt, Amiae Mordaunt, Constanciae Parre and Etheldredae Vere,
and Haeredum ipsarum Elizabethae Mordaunt, Amiae, Constanciae Parre and
Etheldredae, totum jus nostrum, statum, clameum, demandam and interesse nostra,
quae unquam habuimus, habemus seu quovis modo in futuro habere poterimus, de
and in Maneriis de Chalton in Comitatu Bedfordiae, Wolston magna, Embton and
Warmiden in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, Buckworth in Comitatu Huntingtoniae,
Combton in Comitatu Kantiae, Harringworth, Ramides, Cotes, Stanwike, Ringstede,
Malwades, Chilneston in Comitatu Northamptoniae, Westbury in Comitatu Wiltes,
and Grately in Comitatu South', ac de and in omnibus aliis Maneriis, Terris,
Tenementis, Redditibus and Servitiis cum pertinentiis in Chalton, Wolston
magna, Embton, Wamiden, Buckworth, Combton, Harringworth, Ramides, Cotes,
Stanwike, Ringstede, Malwades, Chilneston, Westbury and Grately in Comitatibus
praedictis quae nuper fuerunt Constanciae Matris Edwardi nuper Comitis Wiltes,
ac Henrici Green Patris ejusdem Constanciae, sive alterius eorundem
Constanciae and Henrici, ratione alicujus Feoffamenti per ipsum Edwardum in
vita sua factum; Ita quod nec nos praefatus Dux nec Haeredes nostri, nec
aliquis alius pro nobis seu nomine nostro, de and in praedictis Maneriis,
Terris, Tenementis, and caeteris praemissis cum pertinentiis, de caetero
exigere, clamare seu vindicare poterimus, sed ab omni action juris and clamei
seu aliquid inde petendi, penitus simus exclusi imperpetuum per praesentes. Et
nos praefatus Dux and Haeredes nostri omnia praedicta Maneria, Terras,
Tenementa, and caetera praemissa cum pertinentiis, praefatis Margaretae
Stafford Comitissae, Johannae Lesle Vicecomitissae, Johanni Gray, Thomae Gray,
Johanni Bretteyne, Thomae Frowike, Edwardo Hungerford, Thomae Marwode and
Johanni Gardener, Thomae Cheyne and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Johanni Mordaunt
juniori and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Roberto Mordaunt and Amiae Uxori ejus,
Etheldredae Vere, Roberto Wittelbury, Willielmo Merbury, Roberto Bayston,
Thomae Montague and Johanni Freman, Haeredibus and Assignatis suis, ad usus
praedictos contra Abbatem Cestriae and Successores suos warrantizabimus,
acquietabimus ac imperpetuum defendemus per praesentes. In cujus rei
testimonium huic praesenti Scripto nostro Sigillum nostrum apposuimus. Dat'
sextodecimo die Julii Anno Regni Regis Henrici septimi post Conquestum Angliae
quintodecimo.

E. Buckingham.

A Grant of the Issues and Profits of Greene's and Vere's Lands assigned to
John Mordaunt.
REX, etc. Omnibus, etc. Sciatis quod nos de gratia nostra speciali ac ex certa
scientia and mero motu nostris dedimus and concessimus, ac per praesentes damus
and concedimus pro nobis and Haeredibus nostris quantum in nobis est, dilecto
and fideli nostro Johanni Mordaunt omnia redditus, exitus, proficua and
emolumenta omnium Castellorum, Maneriorum, Terrarum, Tenementorum, Reddituum
and Servitiorum, Advocationum Ecclesiarum, Capellarum, Feoda Militum, and
omnium aliorum Haereditamentorum quorumcunque, ac praesentationes ad Ecclesias
praedictas, in Anglia, Wallia and Marchiis eorundem, quae nuper suerunt Henrici
Vere, Henrici Green Armigeri, Constanciae nuper Comitissae Wiltes, Edwardi
nuper Comitis Wiltes, Thomae Cheyne, Constanciae nuper Uxoris Johannis Parre,
and Margaretae nuper Comitissae Wiltes nuper Uxoris dicti Edwardi nuper
Comitis, and eorum cujuslibet, quae per sive post mortem eorundem Henrici Vere,
Henrici Green, Constanciae nuper Comitissae, Edwardi nuper Comitis,
Elizabethae Cheyne, Constanciae Parre, and Margaretae nuper Comitissae, ac
eorum cujuslibet ratione minoris aetatis Elizabethae Uxoris Johannis Mordaunt,
Amiae Uxoris Humfridi Broun, Constanciae nuper Uxoris Johannis Parre, and
Etheldredae Vere, and earum cujuslibet seu earum alicujus, seu ratione plenae
aetatis earundem Elizabethae, Amiae, Constanciae and Etheldredae, seu earum
alicujus, seu ratione primae seisinae praedictorum Castrorum, Maneriorum,
Terrarum, Tenementorum, and caeterorum praemissorum seu alicujus inde
parcellae, post mortem praedictorum Henrici Vere, Henrici Green, Constanciae
nuper Comitissae Wiltes, Edwardi nuper Comitis Wiltes, Elizabethae nuper Uxoris
Thomae Cheyne Militis, Constanciae nuper Uxoris Johannis Parre, and Margaretae
nuper Comitissae Wiltes nuper Uxoris dicti Edwardi nuper Comitis, and
cujuslibet eorum, seu ratione alicujus alterius materiae vel causae cujuscunque
ad nos pertinent seu pertinere deberent, spectent seu spectare deberent, seu ad
manus nostras devenerunt seu devenire deberent: Habendum, levandum, retinendum,
recipiendum and percipiendum omnia praedicta redditus, exitus, proficua and
emolumenta omnium praedictorum Castrorum, Maneriorum, Terrarum and
Tenementorum, and caeterorum praemissorum and cujuslibet inde parcellae, una
cum praesentationibus ad Ecclesias praedictas per totum illud tempus
accidentibus and contingentibus praefato Johanni Mordaunt, Executoribus and
Assignatis suis a tempore mortis praedictorum Henrici Vere, Henrici Green,
Constanciae nuper Comitissae, Edwardi nuper Comitis, Elizabethae Cheyne,
Constanciae Parre, and Margaretae nuper Comitissae, and eorum cujuslibet,
quamdiu eadem Castella, Maneria, Tenementa and caetera eadem praemissa seu
aliquae inde parcellae in manibus nostris seu Haeredum nostrorum existere seu
remanere contigerint, and quousque legalis liberatio inde extra manus nostras
seu Haeredum nostrorum debite prosecuta fuerit, tam in manibus propriis ipsius
Johannis Mordaunt seu per manus separalium Escaetorum qui nunc sunt, qui nuper
fuerunt, aut in posterum erunt in Comitatibus sive Marchiis in quibus eadem
Maneria, Terrae, Tenementa and caetera praemissa specialiter existunt, quam per
manus Ballivorum, Firmariorum, Occupatorum, Tenentium, sive aliorum Receptorum
eorundem Maneriorum, Terrarum, Tenementorum and caeterorum praemissorum qui
nunc sunt, qui nuper fuerunt, aut qui in posterum erunt, absque compoto seu
aliquo alio nobis vel Haeredibus nostris pro praemissis seu aliquo
praemissorum, reddendo, solvendo, vel faciendo. Et concedimus eidem Johanni
Mordaunt per praesentes, quod iidem Escaetores, Receptores, Ballivi, Firmarii
and Occupatores, and eorum quilibet, de and pro hujusmodi exitibus, proficuis,
reversionibus, firmis and emolumentis erga nos and Haeredes nostros quieti and
exonerati sint imperpetuum per praesentes; Eo quod expressa mentio de vero
valor annuo seu certitudine praemissorum, vel alicujus inde parcellae, aut de
aliis donis sive concessionibus eidem Johanni Mordaunt per Nos, Progenitores
sive Praedecessores nostros ante haec tempora factis in praesentibus minime
facta existit, Aut aliquo Statuto, Actu sive Ordinatione, re, causa vel materia
inde in contrarium factis, editis sive ordinatis in aliquo non obstantibus. In
cujus rei, etc.

Carta Margaretae Stafford Comitissae Wiltes.
MArgareta Stafford Comitissa Wiltes, nuper Uxor Edwardi nuper Comitis Wiltes,
Omnibus ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum meum pervenerit, salutem. Sciatis me
praefatam Comitissam remisisse, relaxasse, and omnino pro me and Haeredibus
meis imperpetuum quietum clamasse, Thomae Cheyne Militi and Elizabethae Uxori
ejus, Johanni Mordaunt juniori and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Roberto Mordaunt and
Amiae Uxori ejus, Johanni Parre and Constanciae Uxori ejus, Etheldredae Vere,
Roberto Wittelbury and Willielmo Merbury Armigeris, Roberto Bayston Clerico,
Thomae Montague and Johanni Freman, Haeredibus and Assignatis suis, totum jus,
statum, titulum, clameum, demandum and interesse mea, quae unquam habui, habeo,
seu quovis modo in futuro habere potero de and in Maneriis de Drayton, Slipton,
Haughton magna, Grafton, Hardwyk, Irtlingburgh, Luffwike, Issip and Sudburgh in
Comitatu Northamptoniae, Rodingalba in Comitatu Essexiae, Wermester,
Fishedverdon and Dichrich in Comitatu Wiltes, Et de and in omnibus aliis
Maneriis, Terris, Tenementis, Redditibus, Reversionibus, Servitiis and
Haereditatibus quibuscunque infra Regnum Angliae, Walliae and Marchias
eorundem, quae nuper fuerunt Constanciae Matris praedicti Edwardi nuper Comitis
Wiltes, ac Henrici Green Patris ejusdem Constanciae, sive alterius eorundem
Constanciae and Henrici: Exceptis semper, and mihi dictae Comitissae reservatis
Maneriis de Grately in Comitatu Southamptoniae, Westbury in Comitatu Wiltes,
Chalton in Comitatu Bedfordiae, Wamiden, Wolston, Emberton in Comitatu
Buckinghamiae, Ramides, Ringstede, Cotes, Stanwik, Harringworth in Comitatu
Northamptoniae, Buckworth in Comitatu Huntingtoniae, Comberton in Comitatu
Kantiae, Stamford-Rivers, Suttons, Tracies, Piggislond and Botlyes in Comitatu
Essexiae, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis; Ac exceptis omnibus Maneriis, Terris
and Tenementis quae ego dicta Comitissa, and Johanna Lesle Vicecomitissa Lesle,
Johannes Gray Vicecomes Lesle, Thomas Gray Armiger, Johannes Bretteyne
Clericus, Thomas Frowik serviens ad Legem, Edwardus Hungerford Armiger, Thomas
Marow and Johannes Gardener, per quinque separalia Brevia Domini Regis de
ingressu super disseisinam in le post in Octabis Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno Regni
Domini Regis nunc quintodecimo, in Curia ejusdem Domini Regis apud
Westmonasterium, coram Thoma Bryan and Sociis suis Justiciariis ipsius Domini
Regis de Banco, versus praedictos Thomam Cheyne Militem and Elizabetham Uxorem
ejus, Johannem Mordaunt juniorem and Elizabetham Uxorem ejus, Robertum Mordaunt
and Amiam Uxorem ejus, Johannem Parre and Constanciam Uxorem ejus, Etheldredam
Vere, Robertum Wittelbury Armigerum, Willielmum Merbury Armigerum, Robertum
Bayston Clericum, Thomam Montague and Johannem Freman recuperavimus, prout in
Curia praedicta before apparet de Recordo; Ac etiam exceptis similiter omnibus
Maneriis, Terris and Tenementis cum suis pertinentiis infra Regnum Angliae,
quae nuper fuerunt Thomae Tresham Militis, aut alicujus alterius seu aliquorum
aliorum ad ejus usum: Ita videlicet, quod nec ego praefata Margareta Comitissa,
nec Haeredes mei, nec aliquis alius pro nobis seu nomine nostro, aliquid de aut
in praedictis Maneriis, Terris, Tenementis and caeteris praemissis (exceptis
praeexceptis) cum pertinentiis de caetero exigere, clamare seu vendicare
poterimus, sed ab omni action Juris and clamei inde simus penitus exclusi
imperpetuum per praesentes. Et ego vero praefata Margareta and Haeredes mei
omnia praedicta Maneria, Terras, Tenementa and caetera praemissa cum
pertinentiis (exceptis praeexceptis) praefatis Thomae Cheyne and Elizabethae
Uxori ejus, Johanni Mordaunt and Elizabethae Uxori ejus, Roberto Mordaunt and
Amiae Uxori ejus, Johanni Parre and Constanciae Uxori ejus, Etheldredae Vere,
Roberto Wittelbury, Willielmo Merbury, Roberto Bayston, Thomae Montague and
Johanni Freman, Haeredibus and Assignatis suis contra Abbatem Cestriae and
Successores suos warrantizabimus, acquietabimus and imperpetuum defendemus per
praesentes.

In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Scripto meo Sigillum meum apposui.
Dat' sexto decimo die Julii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Septimi post Conquestum
Angliae quintodecimo. Mordaunt.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Septimi vicesimo, Rotulo
Dxi.
North. ss.
JOhannes Mordaunt and Elizabetha Uxor ejus, Humfridus Brown and Amia Uxor
ejus, and Etheldreda Vere per Willielmum Gylbert Attornatum suum, petunt versus
Thomam Cheyne Militem, Johannem Bloxham Capellanum, and Johannem Walker,
Manerium de Addington cum pertinentiis, quod Galfridus Knight de Thorley
Clericus, and Henricus Vere Capellanus dederunt Roberto Vere, and Elizabethae
Uxori ejus, and Haeredibus de Corporibus suis exeuntibus; Et quod post mortem
praedictorum Roberti and Elizabethae, and Roberti Filii and Haeredis eorundem
Roberti and Elizabethae, and Margaretae Filiae and Haeredis praedicti Roberti
Filii, and Baldewini Consanguinei and Haeredis praedictae Margaretae, Filiae
praedicti Roberti Filii, Fratris praedicti Baldewini, and Ricardi Filii and
Haeredis ejusdem Baldewini, and Henrici Filii and Haeredis praedicti Richardi,
praefatae Elizabethae Mordaunt, Amiae Brown and Etheldredae Vere, Filiabus
praedicti Henrici descendere debet per formam donationis praedictae, etc. Et
unde dicunt quod praedicti Galfridus and Henricus Vere Capellanus dederunt
Manerium praedictum cum pertinentiis praefato Roberto Vere and Elizabethae
Uxori ejus, and Haeredibus de Corporibus suis exeuntibus in forma praedicta,
per quod donum iidem Robertus Vere and Elizabetha fuerunt inde seisiti, in
Dominico suo ut de feodo and jure, per formam, etc. tempore pacis, tempore
Domini (...) nuper Regis Angliae (...) post Conquestum, capiendo inde ex (...)
ad valentiam, etc. Et de ipsis Roberto Vere and Elizabetha Uxore ejus descendit
jus per formam, etc. cuidam Roberto, ut Filio and Haeredi, etc. Et de ipso
Roberto Filio descendit jus per formam, etc. cuidam Margaretae, ut Filiae and
Haeredi, etc. Et de ipsa Margareta, eo quod obiit sine Haerede de Corpore suo
exeunte, resorciebatur jus per formam, etc. cuidam Baldewino ut consanguineo
and Haeredi, etc. videlicet ut Fratri praedicti Roberti Fratris praedictae
Margaretae, and de ipso Baldewino descendit jus per formam, etc. cuidam
Ricardo, ut Filio and Haeredi, etc. Et de ipso Ricardo descendit jus per
formam, etc. cuidam Henrico, ut Filio and Haeredi, etc. Et de ipso Henrico
descendit jus per formam, etc. istis Elizabethae Mordaunt, Amiae Brown and
Etheldredae Vere, quae nunc petunt simul cum, etc. ut Filiabus and Haeredibus,
etc. Et quod post mortem, etc. Et inde producunt sectam, etc. Et praedicti
Thomas Cheyne, Johannes Bloxham and Johannes Walker, per Thomam Spriotte
Attornatum suum ven' and defend' jus suum quando, etc. Et nichil dicunt in
barram sive praeclusionem praedictae Actionis praedictorum Johannis Mordaunt,
Elizabethae Uxoris ejus, Humfridi Brown, Amiae and Etheldredae, per quod iidem
Thomas Cheyne, Johannes Bloxham and Johannes Walker remanent versus praefatos
Johannem Mordaunt, Elizabetham Uxorem ejus, Humfridum Brown, Amiam and
Etheldredam inde indefensi. Ideo cons' est quod praedicti Johannes Mordaunt,
Elizabetha Uxor ejus, Humfridus Brown, Amia and Etheldreda recuperent seisinam
suam versus praefatos Thomam Cheyne, Johannem Bloxham, and Johannem Walker, de
Manerio praedicto cum pertinentiis, Et nichil de misericordia eorundem Thomae
Cheyne, Johannis, and Johannis, quia venerunt primo die per suum, etc.

Mordaunt.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Septimi vicesimo, Rotulo
Dviii.
North. ss.
JOhannes Mordaunt and Elizabetha Uxor ejus, Humfridus Brown and Amia Uxor
ejus, and Etheldreda Vere per Willielmum Gylbert Attornatum suum petunt versus
Thomam Cheyne Militem, Johannem Bloxham Capellanum, and Johannem Walker,
duodecim Messuagia, quadraginta Acras Terrae, sex Acras Prati, and viginti
solidatos redditus cum pertinentiis in parva Addington, de quibus Ricardus Vere
Avus praedictarum Eiizabethae, Amiae, and Etheldredae, cujus Haeredes ipsae
sunt, fuit seisitus, in Dominico suo ut de Feodo, die quo obiit, etc. Et unde
dicunt quod praedictus Ricardus Avus, etc. fuit seisitus de Tenementis and
redditu praedictis cum pertinentiis in Dominico suo ut de feodo and jure,
tempore pacis, tempore Domini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae Quarti post
Conquestum, Capiendo inde exp' (...) ad valentiam, etc. Et de ipso Ricardo
descendit feodum, etc. cuidam Henrico, ut Filio and Haeredi, etc. Et de ipso
Henrico descendit feodum, etc. istis Elizabethae, Amiae and Etheldredae quae
nunc petunt similiter, etc. ut Filiabus, and Haeredibus, etc. Et de quibus,
etc. Et inde producunt sectam, etc.

Et praedicti Thomas, Johannes Bloxham and Johannes Walker per Thomam Spriotte
Attornatum suum ven' and defend' jus suum quando, etc. Et nichil dicunt in
barram sive praeclusionem praedictae Actionis praedictorum Johannis Mordaunt,
Elizabethae, Humfridi, Amiae and Etheldredae, per quod iidem Thomas, Johannes
Bloxham, and Johannes Walker remanent versus praefatos Johannem Mordaunt,
Elizabetham, Humfridum, Amiam, and Etheldredam inde indefensi. Ideo cons'. --
est quod praedicti Johannes Mordaunt, Elizabetha, Humfridus, Amia and
Etheldreda recuperent sectam suam versus praefatos Thomam Cheyne, Johannem
Bloxham, and Johannem Walker de Tenementis and redditu praedictis, cum
pertinentiis, Et nichil de misericordia eorundem Thomae Johannis and Johannis,
quia venerunt primo die per suum, etc.

Mordaunt.

Termino Sanctae Trinitatis, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Septimi vicesimo, Rotulo
Dviii.
North. ss.
JOhannes Mordaunt and Elizabetha Uxor ejus, Humfridus Brown and Amia Uxor
ejus, and Etheldreda Vere per Willielmum Gylbert Attornatum suum, petunt versus
Thomam Cheyne Militem, Johannem Bloxham Capellanum, and Johannem Walker
quatuordecim Messuagia, quadraginta Acras Terrae, octo Acras Prati, and december
and octo solidatos redditus, cum pertinentiis in Wolleston, Craneford, Herdwyk
and Farnedishe, de quibus Ricardus Vere Avus praedictarum Elizabethae, Amiae,
and Etheldredae, cujus Haeredes ipsae sunt, fuit seisitus in Dominico suo ut de
feodo die quo obiit, etc. Et unde dicunt quod praedictus Ricardus Avus, etc.
fuit seisitus de Tenementis and redditu praedictis, cum pertinentiis in
Dominico suo ut de feodo and jure, tempore pacis, tempore Domini Edwardi nuper
Regis Angliae quarti post Conquestum, Capiendo inde exp' (...) ad valentiam,
etc. Et de ipso Ricardo descendit feodum, etc. cuidam Henrico, ut Filio and
Haeredi, etc. Et de ipso Henrico descendit feodum, etc. istis Elizabethae,
Amiae and Etheldredae, quae nunc petunt similiter, etc. ut Filiabus and
Haeredibus, etc. Et de quibus, etc. Et inde producunt sectam, etc.

Et praedicti Thomas, Johannes Bloxham, and Johannes Walker per Thomam Spriotte
Attornatum suum veniunt and defendunt jus suum quando, etc. Et nichil dicunt in
barram sive praeclusionem praedictae actionis praedictorum Johannis Mordaunt,
Elizabethae, Humfridi, Amiae, and Etheldredae, per quod iidem Thomas, Johannes
Bloxham, and Johannes Walker remanent versus praefatos Johannem Mordaunt,
Elizabetham, Humfridum, Amiam, and Etheldredam inde indefensi. Ideo cons' --
est quod praedicti Johannes Mordaunt, Elizabetha, Humfridus, Amia, and
Etheldreda recuperent sectam suam versus praefatos Thomam Cheyne, Johannem
Bloxham, and Johannem Walker de Tenementis and redditu praedictis cum
pertinentiis, Et nichil de misericordia eorundem Thomae, Johannis and Johannis,
quia venerunt primo die per suum, etc.

An Award between the Earl of Shrewsbury and John Mordaunt concerning the
Manor of Drayton.
TO all Christian people to whom this present Writing indented shall come, hear
or see, Robert Brudenell and Richard Elliot, two of the Kings Justices, send
gretyng in our Lord. Whereas there has been diverse variances and debates moved
and had betwyne the Right Honorable Lord, George Earl of Shrewsbury, on the
one party, and John Mordaunt Esquyer, and Elizabeth his Wife, oon of the
Cosynes and Heirs of the Right Honorable Edward late Earl of Wiltshire, oon
his Moders side, that is to say, by Constance, Mother of the said Earl, and
Daughter and Heir of Henry Green of Drayton in the Countye of Northampton
Esquier, and Humfrey Brown Esquier, late Husband to Amye, and George Brown his
Son and Heir apparent, and Son and Heir to the same Amye, another Cosyne,
and another of the Heirs of the said Earl of Wiltshire, after the form
aforesaid, and Sir Wistan Brown Knight, and John Brown his Son and Heir
apparent, and Audree his Wife, the third Cosyne and Heir to the fame Earl,
after the manner abovesayd on the other party, of and upon the Right, Title,
Reversion, Inheritance and Possession, as well of the foresaid Manor of
Drayton with the appurtenances, as of all other Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments with their appurtenances in the said Countye of Northampton or
elsewhere, which late were to the said Constance, or to the said Henry Green,
or to any other person or persons to the use of them or the other of them;
which Manors, Lands and Tenements the aforesaid Earl of Shrewsbury claymeth,
by a Will supposed to be made by the said Earl of Wiltshire, by which Will the
foresaid Earl of Wiltshire should will to the said Earl of Shrewsbury all his
Fee-simple Land: Whereupon the foresaid Parties have compromitted themself to
abide the Award, Ordinance and Judgment of us the said Robert Brudenell and
Richard Elliott, Arbitrators indifferently named and chosen by and betwyne the
foresaid Parties, To award, ordein and deem, as well of and upon the premises,
as for and upon all manner Evidences, Charter Escripts, Writeings and
Aminiments, concerning the premises or any part of them, and of all manner of
Actions, Suites, Quarrels and Demands, had or moved betwyne the foresaid
Parties, or other Servaunts or Frynds, before the Date of these Presents
concerning the premises. And we the said Arbitrators taking upon us the
auctority and power to award, ordein and deem of and upon the premises,
calling before us the Counsels of the foresaid Parties, hereing and seeing
their Tytyls, Answers, Replications, Evidences, Proffes, and all other their
Alleadgeances concerning their foresaid Tytyls and Interesse, by good
deliberation and by consent of the said Parties, award, ordein and deem of and
upon the premises in manner and form following, that is to say: Forasmuch as
the foresaid John Mordaunt, Sir Wistan, Humfrey Brown, George and John Brown
have showed to us the Arbitrators, a Will supposed to be made by the same Earl
of Wiltshire, and sealed with his Seal, in which Will he revoked all former
Wills, and willed that same Will to stand in his full strength and virtue, and
for his last Will; And in that Will there is no Clause whereby the same Earl
of Shrewsbury should have any of his Manors, Lands or Tenements, as by the
same more plainly appears: And also they have showed unto us fair and
sufficient Deeds, and other Writings proveing the aforesaid Manor of Drayton,
and other the said Manors, Lands and Tenements and Hereditaments to be yeven
in tail to the Ancestors of the said Constance Mother of the said Earl of
Wiltshire; And the said Earl of Wiltshire had and enjoyed the same, by reason
of the same Tails; And that the said Elizabeth and George Brown and Audree be
Cousyns and next Heirs to the same Constance, Mother to the said Earl of
Wiltshire, and to the same Earl on his Moders side, and heritable to the
foresaid Manors and other the premises, by reason of the same Tails;
Wherefore we award, ordein and deem, that the aforesaid Elizabeth, George Brown
and Audree shall have and enjoy all the foresaid Manors, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments and other the premises to them and to their Heirs, according to
their foresaid Tytylls of Inheritance; And that the foresaid Earl of
Shrewsbury shall by his several Deeds sufficient in the Law to be enrolled,
release unto the said John Mordaunt, and Elizabeth, Humfrey Brown, George Brown
and John Brown, Audree his Wife, and to such persons or person as they shall
name, to the use of the said Elizabeth, George and Audree and their Heirs, and
all such Right, Tytyl, Claim, Interest and Demand, as the said Earl of
Shrewsbury or any person or persons to his use has in the foresaid Manors,
Lands and Tenements, or other the premises, by reason of any gift, or Will in
the premises, or any part of them, made by the aforesaid Earl of Wiltshire,
to the foresaid Earl of Shrewsbury, at the Costs and Charges of the said John
Mordaunt, John and George Brown in all things: And furthermore the said Earl
of Shrewsbury shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the said John Mordaunt,
Humfrey Brown, John and George Brown, or to their Deputy or Deputies in London,
all such Charters, Evidences and Writeings, as he to his own use, or any other
to his use, to his knowledge has, only concerning the premises, as soon as it
may be conveniently done. For the which Releases, and other things
above-specified, and for other Costs and Charges which the foresaid Earl of
Shrewsbury has had by occasion of the premises, We the said Arbitrators
award, ordein and deem, That the said Sir Wistan, John Mordaunt, Humfrey Brown
and John Brown shall content and pay to the said Earl of Shrewsbury, his
Executors or Assigns, two hundred Marks of lawful money in form following;
that is to say, The said John Mordaunt shall content and pay to the foresaid
Earl of Shrewsbury, his Executors or Assigns, in the Day of the Feast of
Saint George the Martyr, next comeing after the Date above-written, at the
Rode of the North-Door in the Cathedrall-Church of Paul's in the City of
London, betwyne the howrs of nine and eleven of the Clock of the same Day, a
hundred Marks; And the foresaid Wistan, Humfrey Brown and John Brown shall
content and pay to the foresaid Earl, his Executors or Assigns, in the Day of
the Feast of Saint Andrew the Apostle, then next ensueing, at the said Rode in
the same Church, betwyne the howrs of nine and eleven of the same day, a
hundred Marks, residue of the foresaid two hundred Marks. Also we award,
ordein and deem, that the said John Mordaunt, Sir Wistan Brown, Humfrey and
John Brown by their Deed and Deeds, as sufficient as the said Earl of
Shrewsbury or his Counsel shall advise, shall release to the said Earl of
Shrewsbury and to as many persons as the said Earl shall name and appoint, in
Writeing, before the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel next comeing after
the Date hereof, which has done, labored or spoken for the said Earl in his
foresaid Cause, All Actions of Trespass, Debates and Demands personal, had or
done before the Date of these Presents, at the Costs and Charges of the Earl
of Shrewsbury: And the said Earl and all the foresaid persons, which has
done, spoken or labored any for the said Earl of Shrewsbury, in or for his
Tytyl or possession of the premises, or any part of them, shall be for ever
discharged against the said Sir Wistan, John Mordaunt and Elizabeth his Wife,
Humfrey Brown, George Brown, John Brown and Audree his Wife, and every of them,
of all Actions, Trespasses and Demands personal, which they have or might have
against the said Earl or the foresaid other persons, for any cause had or done
touching the premises before the Date of these Presents. In witness whereof
the foresaid Arbitrators to every part of these Indentures of their Award have
put their Seals this twentieth Day of March in the sixth year of the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth.

A Release from the Earl of Shrewsbury to John Mordaunt of all his Right
concerning the Manor of Drayton.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Nos Georgius
Comes Salopiae salutem in Domino sempiternam. Sciatis nos praefatum Georgium
Comitem remisisse, relaxasse, and omnino pro nobis and Haeredibus nostris
quietum clamasse Johanni Mordaunt and Elizabethae Uxori ejus uni
Consanguinearum and Haeredum Edwardi nuper Comitis Wiltes ex part Matris
ejusdem Edwardi, videlicet Filii Constanciae Filiae and Haeredis Henrici Green
nuper de Drayton in Comitatu Northamptoniae Armigeri, Humfrido Brown and
Georgio Brown Filio and Haeredi apparenti dicti Humfridi, and Filio and Haeredi
Amiae alterius Consanguinearum and Haeredum dicti Edwardi ex part dictae
Constanciae, Johanni Brown, and Etheldredae Uxori ejus, tertiae Consanguinearum
and Haeredum dicti Edwardi ex part dictae Constanciae, Thomae Montague and
Willielmo Pemberton, Haeredibus and Assignatis suis, ad usum eorundem Johannis
Mordaunt and Elizabethae Uxoris ejus, Humfridi Brown, Georgii Brown and
Etheldredae Uxoris ejus, and Haeredum ipsorum Elizabethae, Georgii and
Etheldredae, totum jus nostrum, statum, titulum, clameum, interesse and
demandum quae habemus seu unquam habuimus de and in Manerio de Drayton, Ac de
and in omnibus aliis Maneriis, Terris, Tenementis, Redditibus, Servitiis,
Reversionibus, Boscis, Pratis, Pascuis, Pasturis and aliis Haereditamentis
quibuscunque, cum eorum pertinentiis, quae nuper fuerunt praedictae Constanciae
aut praedicti Henrici sive alicujus alterius sive aliquorum aliorum, ad eorum
vel alterius eorum usum, in dicto Comitatu Northamptoniae, seu in aliquo alio
Comitatu infra Regnum Angliae seu in Marchiis eorundem, quae nos praefatus
Georgius Comes vel Haeredes nostri aliquo modo habere poterimus in praedictis
Maneriis ac caeteris praemissis aut in eorum aliquo cum eorum pertinentiis,
ratione alicujus donationis, legationis seu per ultimam voluntatem praefati
Edwardi nuper Comitis Wiltes nobis factis sive habitis. Salvis omnino and
reservatis nobis and Haeredibus nostris omni clameo, jure, titulo, interesse
and demando quae habuimus seu habere poterimus in praemissis seu in eorum
aliquo, nobis per descensum aut per jus haereditarium per aliquem Antecessorum
nostrorum, cujus vel quorum Haeres nos praefatus Georgius Comes existimus, seu
ratione alicujus alterius tituli quem habere poterimus, aliter quam per ultimam
voluntatem, legationem sive donationem praedicti Comitis Wiltes, nobis facta
sive habita: Ita quod nec nos praefatus Georgius Comes, nec Haeredes nostri,
nec aliquis alius pro nobis seu nomine nostro, aliquod jus, statum, titulum,
clameum, interesse seu demandum de aut in praedictis Maneriis ac caeteris
praemissis cum pertinentiis, nec in aliqua eorum parcella ex causis praedictis
de caetero exigere, clamare seu vendicare poterimus, sed ab omni action Juris,
tituli, clamei, interesse aut demandi, seu aliquid inde petendi simus exclusi
imperpetuum per praesentes. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Scripto meo
Sigillum meum apposui.

Dat' vicesimo quarto die Martii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici octavi post
Conquestum sexto. G. Shrewsbury.

A SUCCINCT GENEALOGY Of the HOUSE of FITZ-LEWIS THAT WERE Lords of
Westhornedon, Justified by Ancient and Authentic Testimonies.
By ROBERT HALSTEAD.
blazon or coat of arms of the house of FitzLewis The Arms of the House of
Fitz-Lewis, were Argent a Cheveron Sable between three Trefoils of the same.



Of the Original, Descent, Noble Alliances, Possessions and Arms of the House
of Fitz-Lewis.
ALthough the House of Fitz-Lewis has been possessed of Advantages in its
Original, Alliances, noble Possessions and continuance, that might do honor to
the pretenses of any Successor whatsoever: Yet I was doubtful whether I should
insert it among the other Genealogies, they being all so strong in extant and
apparent Proofs, and to this there remaining only Fragments in my power, by
reason that with Westhornedon and the other of the Fitz-Lewis's Lands there
were delivered to the Lord Peter's, a prudent and wary Purchaser, all the
Records, Deeds and Papers which did belong to that Family, there having, and by
chance only, continued among the Evidences of the Lord Lewis Mordaunt, who did
sell that Estate, an ancient, though very authentic Pedigree. Yet with the
help thereof and some other Pieces that have been gathered by accident, there
being so great a conviction of the value of this splendid Family, I have
thought it a due to its Memory and Descendants, to establish the remembrance of
it.

The Family of Fitz-Lewis, through the power of Nature, if not under the Laws
of Marriage, does derive from Royal Blood, being descended of Charles the VIII.
King of France, who was a great King in his time, through the person of a Lady
that was of high Nobility in this Nation, though her Name shall be unmentioned,
out of respect to other great Families which by her after-marriages to a noble
Husband are descended from her. It was endowed with many fair Possessions,
Lands and Lordships. It was allied by Marriages to the greatest of all the
English Lords, and deserved to be honored by the famous Camden in his
Provincial Description thereof, with the Epithet of Clara Familia Fitz-Lewis:
so as I doubt not but my endeavors herein will be acceptable to such as are
curious in things of this nature, and particularly to the noble Persons
concerned in the Blood and Succession of the Family.

LEWIS Prince of France, who came afterward to be King LEWIS VIII.
LEwis, Prince of France, commonly at that time called Monsieur Lovis de
France, and in Latin Instruments Dominus Ludovicus de Francia, having in the
Year 1251. been called into England by several of the greatest Lords of the
Kingdom, in opposition to their natural Prince King John, the disorderly
rigours of whose Government was become unsufferable to the greatest part of the
Nation; He was at first received with all the applause which sometimes follows
Novelties of this nature, He was crowned at London, He had Homage done him, and
Allegiance sworn as to a lawful King, He proceeded with their assistance in
diverse warlike Undertakings, wherein he had admirable success, and acted in all
the other Parts of the Government as one who expected to be soon established.

During this time, among the great Lords of his Party there happened to be one
who to all his Concerns was most useful, and to his Person most officious. This
Lord, whose Name is omitted out of respect to the Descendants of his Family,
had no Issue of his own, and only for his Heirs three beautiful Sisters: The
youngest whereof, whose Name was Philippe, by her admirable Qualities had so
engaged the Prince's love, as it made the Conquest of her heart, to share his
cares with that of the Kingdom. But against a King that was young, and seemed
happy, it was not strange that a Lady did not long resist. She yielded at last,
and the Prince enjoyed; the effects and her misfortune began to appear
together. She found her self with Child, and by the fatal loss of the Battle of
Lincoln, that her Lover was like to be abandoned by his Friends, and by his
fortune. He was obliged to retire to London, whence from the Tower, where he
had refug'd himself, he made Conditions to depart home in safety, by
relinquishing to the young King Henry his farther pretenses.

The poor Lady, left in this condition, owned her disaster to her Brother, who
pitying her state, from the greatness and merit of the Author, gave her a
comfortable assurance of his kindness and protection. She was after secretly
delivered, and the Child named Lewis. Which Fruit of her Loves being nourished
under this Great Lords Care and Education, he having no Children of his own,
before his death bestowed upon the Youth the noble Lordship of Westhornedon with
diverse other Lands in the County of Essex, obliging him to bear himself and
transmit to his Descendants the Name of Fitz-Lewis for ever after. Among his
three Sisters, this Lord coming to dye, did leave his vast Inheritance, with
whom the Lady Philippe has her share; and her misfortune, either concealed, or
else gilded over with the advantages of her Riches, did not hinder her from
being afterward married to an Husband of great Quality, in whom she was happy
for her time, and brought him a Posterity, whence are descended some of the
greatest Lords that flourish in this Age.

Sir LEWIS FITZ-LEWIS, Lord of Westhornedon, and other Lands and Lordships.
LEwis Fitz-Lewis, having been bred under his Uncle in the Notion of a more
distant relation than in the truth of the matter he did indeed stand toward
him, at the time of that Lord's death found himself possessed by his favor and
affection with such an Estate as was capable to support the generous
inclinations of his heart, which did altogether incline him to the love and
practice of Arms, the only application of Gentlemen in that Age: and therefore
he made himself very considerable, especially toward the end of that Kings
Reign, where he attained the Honor of Knighthood; and having allied himself to
a very notable Family by his Marriage with Margaret of Essex, he left Issue Sir
John Fitz-Lewis.


Sir JOHN FITZ-LEWIS, Lord of Westhornedon, and other Lands and Lordships.
JOhn Fitz-Lewis flourished in the days of King Edward the First, and followed
him in several of his Expeditions. He won his Spurs in the first Scotch War,
and became after very considerable in his Country, when he married Elizabeth de
Harpden, an Inheritrix, whose Lands did plentifully add to his former
Patrimony: but after the death of this great King we find he was unfortunately
drawn into the adherence of Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and that he did unhappily
perish in the War caused by that Rebellion, leaving to succeed him his Son
Richard Fitz-Lewis.


Sir RICHARD FITZ-LEWIS, Lord of Westhornedon, and other Lands and Lordships.
RIchard Fitz-Lewis being with diverse others, through the Grace and favor of
King Edward the Third, restored to his Rights and Lands that had been seized
upon pretense of his Father's trespass in the former Reign, he became much
considered from his own merit, and the opulency of his fortune notably
increased by the accession of his Mothers Inheritance. He was very useful to
the Government of his Country during the King's absence in his long Wars, and
always contributed his best cares toward the service and supplies of the
King's occasions from the Parts where he had interest, being always zealous for
the honor of his Prince and Country. He married Elizabeth de Baude, a Lady of
a Family very ancient, and considerable both from their Riches and good same,
whose true Name was de Baden, but corruptly otherwise called, and by her he
left his Son Sir John Fitz-Lewis.


Sir JOHN FITZ-LEWIS, Lord of Westhornedon, and other Lands and Lordships.
THE great consideration wherein this Family was in these days held, may be
judged by the alliance contracted by Sir John Fitz-Lewis, who to his first Wife
took Alice the Daughter of Aubery the tenth Earl of Oxford, and to his second,
Anne Mountague Daughter of John the third Earl of Salisbury of that House, and
that was after his death Duchess of Exeter.

Issue by his first Wife,
Sir Henry Fitz-Lewis. Sir Lewis Fitz-Lewis.


Issue by his second Wife,
Elizabeth Fitz-Lewis married to Sir John Wingfield of Suffolk.


Sir HENRY FITZ-LEWIS, Lord of Westhornedon, and other Lands and Lordships.
SIR Henry Fitz-Lewis, that had signalized himself in an adherence to the House
of Lancaster, was so esteemed by the chief Supporters of that Faction, as he
had given him in Marriage by Edmund the noble Duke of Somerset, the Lady
Eleanor his youngest Daughter, by whom he had Issue Mary, the second Wife of
Anthony Woodville Earl of Rivers.


But for want of Issue Male his intailed Lands descended to his Brother Sir
Lewis Fitz-Lewis, with the other Interests of that Family.

Sir LEWIS FITZ-LEWIS, Lord of Westhornedon, and other Lands and Lordships.
LEwis Fitz-Lewis, lived in his Brother's time in Marriage with a Lady called
Margaret Stonore, of whose life and actions we are ignorant, but it is recorded
He left Issue his Son and Heir Sir Richard Fitz-Lewis.


Sir RICHARD FITZ-LEWIS, Lord of Westhornedon, and other Lands and Lordships.
THis Richard Fitz-Lewis appears to have had some Controversy with his Cosen
Mary Countess of Rivers about his Inheritance, by a Judgment recorded in his
behalf, whereby he was declared Heir of all the entailed Lands of that Family,
she to inherit only such as had been her Father's by Gift, or acquired by
proper Purchase. Richard Fitz-Lewis was a busy man in his time, much employed
in the interest of King Henry the Seventh against the Usurper, with whom he was
in immediate action at the Battle of Bosworth, and upon the success of that
Field knighted for his service. He bare afterward much rule in his Country
during that King's Reign, being High Sheriff of Essex in the ninth Year
thereof, not long after which he departed this life, leaving Issue by Mary the
Daughter of Sir John Hurleston, John Fitz-Lewis. Ely Fitz-Lewis.


JOHN FITZ-LEWIS, Lord of Westhornedon, and other Lands and Lordships.
JOhn Fitz-Lewis, being a Youth of singular expectation, and coming by a course
of Years to a fitness for such a Marriage as might continue his Family in a
probability both of a fair succession and a plentiful Fortune, a Match was to
those ends contrived by the advice of his Friends, wherein all useful purposes
did concur in the person of Anne Lovell, a beautiful Virgin, the Daughter and
Heir of Sir Robert Lovell Knight: but in the accomplishment thereof, even on
the fatal Wedding-Night, by what miserable accident it is not said, the house
wherein the celebration was performed, was set on fire; the suddenness and fury
whereof was such, with the time of the Night and the effects of the preceding
jollities, as rendered it impossible to be extinguished, till it had destroyed
the Lovers, the Guests, and the Edifice wherein they did repose, so as John
perishing so unhappily without an Heir, his Estate descended to his Sister Ely
Fitz-Lewis.


ELY FITZ-LEWIS, Lady of Westhornedon, and other Lands and Lordships.
ELY Fitz-Lewis, being left the fortunate Heir of an unhappy Brother, who
perished on his Wedding-Night, became entitled thereby to a free and fair
Estate in the County of Essex, upon whom were suddenly cast the eyes of many
Pretenders, but Sir John Mordaunt, afterward Lord Mordaunt, having at that
time much interest in Court for diverse services rendered by his Father and
himself, obtained her Wardship of King Henry the Seventh, and gave her
afterward in Marriage to Sir John Mordaunt his eldest Son, from whom the
present Earl of Peterborow is descended.

knight on horseback bearing the colors of the family, and a family tree
showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors JEWS Prince of France
After King Lewis ye Eight By a Noble English Virgin Sr. Lewis Fitzlewes
Margaret of Essex. Sr. John Fitzlewes Eliz: de Harpden. Aubury de Vere the
tenth Earl of Oxford. Alice Filzwater. Sr. Richard Fitzlewes. Eliz: de Baude
John Mountacute the 3d. Earl of Salisbury Maud Francoys. Alice de Vereo. Sr.
John Fitzlewes. Anne de Mountacute. Sr. Henry Fitzlewes Eleonor de Beaufort.
Sr. Jews Fitzlewes Margaret Stoner. Eliz: Fitzlewes. Sr. John Wingfeild. Mary
Fitzlewes Second Wife to Anthony Woddvill Earl of Rivers. Sir Richard
Fitzlewes. Mary Hurlestone. John Fitzlewes. Anne Lovell. Elly Fitzlewes. John
2d. Lord. Mordaunt.




GENEALOGICAL PROOFS Of the HOUSE of FITZ-LEWIS THAT WERE Lords of
Westhornedon, Drawn out of Extant Charters, Records, Histories and other
Authentic Proofs.

GENEALOGICAL PROOFS Of the HOUSE of FITZ-LEWIS OF WESTHORNEDON.
Lewis Prince of France. Sir Lewis Fitz-Lewis. Sir John Fitz-Lewis, and Sir
Richard Fitz-Lewis.
An ancient Latin Pedigree found among the Evidences of Fitz-Lewis.
DOminus Ludovicus de Francia dum in Anglia moram fecit and coronatus fuit,
habuit ex Philippa Filia cujusdam nobilis pulcherrima, de qua erat
perditissimus, Dominum Ludovicum Fitz-Lewis, cui Pater Matris qui praeter tres
Sorores nullos habuit Heredes, post recessum dicti Principis Francorum, and
quod spem Juvenis de virtute sua dederat, reliquit ad sustentationem, Manerium
de Westhornedon in Comitatu Essexiae. Iste Ludovicus floruit in tempore Henrici
tertii, and ex Uxore sua Margareta de Essexia reliquit Haeredem

Johannem Fitz-Lewis, qui cum Baronibus militavit contra Edvardum secundum and
Bello peribat in Comitiva Comitis Lancastriae; Filium tamen genuit ex Maria de
Harpden

Richardum Fitz-Lewis, qui clementia Successoris ad Haereditatem and
praetentiones restitutus, evasit ditissimus Maternis opibus, and colendissimus
vixit, linquendo Haeredem ex Uxore Agnete de Baude

Dominum Johannem Fitz-Lewis, qui virtute and opibus ita erat spectabilis, ut
ab Alberico decimo Comite Oxoniae in Uxorem accepisse meruit Aliciam Filiam
suam, and post obitum dictae Aliciae in alteram Uxorem Annam Filiam Johannis de
Montacuto tertio istius nominis Comite Sarum, quae fuit postea Ducissa de Exon,
ex quarum prima genuit Henricum Fitz-Lewis, and Johannem, ex altera Elizabetham
nuptam Johanni Wingfield de Comitatu Suffolciae Militi.

Dominus Henricus Fitz-Lewis Miles erat strenuissimus, and ita addictus
Principibus Domus Lancastriae ut Ducibus istius partialitatis charissimus
semper existit, cum eiisdem militavit and eorum Fortunae fuit particeps; tandem
pro virtute and been meritis sibi data erat in Uxorem Eleanora Filia Edmundi de
Beaufort Ducis de Somerset, ex qua genuit Mariam Uxorem Anthonii de Woodville,
primi Comitis de Ripariis, sed obiit sine Haerede Masculo, unde sibi successit

Dominus Ludovicus Fitz-Lewis Frater ejus, qui fuit Haeres omnium Terrarum quas
tenebat in feudo, de qua non extant altera sed quod duxit in Uxorem Margaretam
Stonore, ex qua genuit

Dominum Richardum Fitz-Lewis, qui Manerium de Westhornedon ac alias Terras
nobiles tenuit Jure Haereditario post mortem Patris; ad consanguineam ejus
Mariam Comitissam de Ripariis, tantummodo descenderunt Terrae illae quae
Henrico Patris sui datae essent, aut industria ejus, vel propriis pecuniis
partae. Miles insignis fuit iste Richardus in suo tempore, multosque labores
and pericula pro Rege suo and Patria subivit, tandem annorum satur quievit in
Domino, linquendo exitum ex Maria de Hurleston Johannem Fitz-Lewis and Ely
Fitz-Lewis.

Johannes Fitz-Lewis, cui Natura formam dedit egregiam, and educatio indolem,
cum perventus fuit ad aetatem quam idoneam Amici aestimarunt ad subeundum
Matrimonii Jugum, ut iis spes non deesset propagandi Familiam tam claram and in
Provincia tanti nominis, oculos affines conjecerunt super Virginem omnimodo
spectabilem, forma, stirpe, and virtutibus, quam elegerunt sicut materiam hujus
Familiae futurae felicitatis. Tractaverunt cum Patre Domino Roberto de Lovell
Milite, and conclusis pactibus in Domo Patris, infelicissimum celebrarunt
Matrimonium, quia post mediam Noctem omnibus somno immersis, miserrimum erupit
Incendium, quod tam vorax fuit, subitum and violentum, ut parvo tempore Domum,
Hospites, cum Sponso and miserrima Conjuge consumpsit, sic ut Domina Ely
Fitz-Lewis, Soror unica hujus Johannis, alibi tunc infirmitate detenta, hujus
causa infortunii, Haeres ditissima devenit, nominis, Armorum, and Haereditatis
Fitz-Lewis.

Ely Fitz-Lewis ratione minoris aetatis, Warda ob obitum Patris devenit Domini
Regis, qui ejus Custodia Johannem Dominum Mordaunt gratificavit, qui in illo
tempore spectabilem in Aula fuit, ob egregia merita Patris and sui, versus
Regem and Coronam, qui quidem Johannes eam in Matrimonio copulavit cum Domino
Johanne Mordaunt Milite Filio suo Primogenito, cui illius jure, devenit tota
Haereditas hujus clarae and antiquae Familiae.

Sir JOHN FITZ-LEWIS, Lord of Westhornedon.
In a Book called Vincent's Discovery of the Errors of Ralph Brook, page 405.
AUbrey de Vere, after the banishment and death of Robert Duke of Ireland his
Nephew, was the tenth Earl of Oxford, Lord Bulbec and Samford 1393. But the
Chamberlainship of England (says Mills) which his Ancestors held in fee, he
surrendered to King Richard the Second, who bestowed the same upon John Holland
Duke of Exeter, his half Brother by the Mother. He married Alice Daughter of
John Lord Fitzwater of Woodham-water in Essex, and had Issue Richard Earl of
Oxford, and John that dyed without Issue, and Alice a Daughter that was married
to Sir John Fitz-Lewis Knight. This Aubery dyed in the first Year of Edward the
Fourth, and was buried in the Priory of Earls Colne in Essex in the Year 1400.

In the same Book of Augustine Vincent, page 450.
JOhn Mountacute Knight, Son and Heir of Sir John Mountacute Knight, and Nephew
and Heir of William Earl of Salisbury, his Uncle, was the third Earl of
Salisbury of that Name, and was one of the Noble men that conspired the death
of King Henry the Fourth at a Justs held at Oxford; but being disclosed, diverse
of them were put to death, and this John, and Thomas Holland Earl of Kent
flying to Circester were by the rude Townsmen there brought into the
Marketplace, and had their heads smitten off. The first Year of Henry the
Fourth He married Maud, Daughter and Heir of Sir Adam Francis, and Widow of Sir
Allan Boxhull Knight, Lieutenant of the Tower, and had Issue Thomas Mountacute
Earl of Salisbury, Richard that dyed young, and three Daughters; Anne the
eldest was first married to Sir Richard Hanckford, and after to Sir John
Fitz-Lewis Knight, and thirdly to John Holland Earl of Huntington and Duke of
Exeter; Margaret the second was married to William Lord Ferrers of Groby, and
Elizabeth the third was married to Robert Lord Willoughby of Earsby.

Carta Johannis Montgomeri Militis, and Dominae Annae Ducissae Exon.
HAEC Indentura tripartita facta quintodecimo die mensis Februarii, Anno Regni
Regis Henrici Sexti post Conquestum vicesimo septimo, Testatur, Quod Johannes
Montgomeri Miles nomine Cofeoffat' ac Domina Anna Ducissa Exon, nomine
Elizabethae Fitz-Lewis Filiae ejusdem Ducissae, ac nomine dict. feoffat.
dimiserunt and ad firmam tradiderunt Thomae Green and Johanni Mongeham Cun'
and Tellur' London omnia illa Terras, and Tenementa cum omnibus eorum
pertinent' in Enfield in Com' Middlesex and in Villa de Hatfield Episc' and
Esenden in Com' Hertford vocat' Hornbeingate and Blountiis nuper recuperat' in
Curia Domini Regis per dictum Johannem Mountgomeri Militem and Lodovicum John
Militem jam defunct' ac alios, Habend' and tenend' omnia praedicta Terras and
Tenementa cum omnibus eorum pertinent' praefat' Thomae and Johanni Mongeham,
Executor' and Assignat' eorum a Festo Sancti Michaelis Archangeli ultimo
praeterito ante dat' praesent' usque ad finem december Annorum extunc proxime
sequent' and plenar' complend' reddend' inde annuatim in Ecclesia Cathedrali
Sancti Pauli Londin' praefato Johanni Montgomeri Haeredibus and Assignatis suis
pro part sua sex Libras Sterling, and praefatae Ducissae pro part dictae
Elizabethae and Haeredum suarum sex Libras Sterling, ad Festa Paschae and
Sancti Michaelis Archangeli per aequales portiones durante termino praedicto;
Nec non solvendo and supportando Domino nostro Regi, and omnibus aliis omnia
and singula dicta Terras and Tenementa incumbr'. Et si contingat dictos annuos
redditus aut eorum alterum post aliquem terminum quo ut praefert' solvi
debeant, per unum mensem aretro fore non solut' in part vel in toto contra
formam praedictam, durante anno praedicto, extunc been licebit praefato Johanni
Montgomery and dictae Ducissae ac eorum utrique seu Attornat' eorum in omnibus
praedictis Terris and Tenementis cum omnibus eorum pertinentiis and in qualibet
parcella eorundem intrare and distringere, and districtiones sic captas licet
asportare, abducere, fugare, and penes se retinere quousque eis de praedictis
annuis redditibus cum omnibus arrearagiis eorundem plenarie fuerit satisfact'
and persolut'. Et si sufficiens districtio pro praedictis annuis redditibus,
cum omnibus inde arrearagiis ibidem adtunc non numeratur, extunc been licebit
praefato Johanni Mountgomery ac dictae Ducissae, nec non praedict' Feoffat' in
omnia praedicta Terras and Tenementa cum omnibus eorum pertinentiis reintrar'
illaque rehabere and possidere, ut in eorum statu pristino, dictosque Thomam
and Johannem Mongeham Executores and Assignatos suos inde totaliter expellere
and amovere, hac Indentura in aliquo non obstante. Et praedictus Johannes
Montgomery omnia praedicta Terras and Tenementa cum omnibus eorum pertinentiis
praefatae Thomae and Johanni Mongeham, Executoribus and Assignatis eorum pro
praedictis annuis reddit' modo and forma praedict' contra omnes Gentes
warrantizabimus per totum dictum terminum.

In cujus rei testimonium unae parti hujus Indenturae tripartitae penes dictos
Thomam Green and Johannem Mongeham remanent', dict' Johannes Montgomery and
Ducissa Sigilla sua apposuerunt;
alteris vero partibus ejusdem Indenturae tripartitae penes dict' Johannem
Montgomery and Ducissam alternatim reman' dict' Thom' Green and Johannes
Mongeham Sigilla sua apposurunt.
Dat' die and anno supradictis.
JOHN FITZ-LEWIS, HENRY FITZ-LEWIS, MARY Conutess of Rivers, and Sir RICHARD
FITZ-LEWIS, Lords of Westhornedon.
Vincent's Discovery of the Errors of Ralph Brook, page 432.
THomas Bledlow, Alderman of London, and others, gave certain Lands called
Okefield and Shortcroft in Nevengden in Essex to Henry Fitz-Lewis, son of Sir
Lewis John Knight, and Eleanor his Wife, and to the Heirs of their two Bodies
coming; and for want of such Issue, to the right Heirs of Henry: By virtue
whereof he was thereof seized, and so dyed the ninth of May 1480, in the
twentieth of Edward the Fourth. Upon whose death for Lands intailed to the
Heirs Males, the Jury find Richard Fitz-Lewis, Son of Lewis Fitz-Lewis, Son of
Sir Lewis John Knight, to be Cosen and next Heir; but for the other that was
given sibi and Haeredibus, to the Heirs general, they deliver upon their Oaths,
Quod Domina Maria Comitissa Rivers, Uxor Anthonii Widevyle Domini Rivers, est
Filia and propinquior Haeres praedicti Henrici Fitz-Lewis and aetatis 15
annorum; which plainly shows he had a second Wife called Mary, Daughter and
Heir of Henry Fitz-Lewis, although here omitted.

JOHN FITZ-LEWIS, Lord of Westhornedon.
Camden's Britannia, page 205, treating of the County of Essex,
THorndon quondam Habitatio Clarae Familiae Fitz-Lewis, quorum ultimus, si qua
fides vulgo, incensis fortuito Aedibus Nuptiali Festivitate, misero incendio
periit.

ELY FITZ-LEWIS, and JOHN Lord MORDAVNT, Lord and Lady of Westhornedon.
A Will or Testament of John Lord Mordaunt.
THIS is the last Will of John Mordaunt Knight, Son and Heir apparent of Sir
John Mordaunt Knight, Lord Mordaunt, confirming the order, disposition and
demise as well of my Goods and Chattels, as of my Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments with their appurtenances that I have and am seized of Estate of
Fee-simple in the Counties of Essex, Northampton and Somerset, or elsewhere
within the Realm of England. First, I will and demise, that all my parts,
portion and demand, Right, Title, Possession and Interest that I have of and in
the Manors of Granham, otherwise called Bishop Wokenton, in Nevedon Haes and
Nokenhal to Warson alias Walton in Bristed within the County of Essex, with all
and singular Rights, Members and Appurtenances, and all Lands, Tenements,
Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Woods, Underwoods and other Hereditaments, that be
or has been in times past reputed or taken part or parcel of the said Manors
of Grangeham, otherwise called Bishop Wokengton, Greice Brumford in Nevedon
Haes and Nokenhall unto Warson, alias Walton in Bristed in the County of Essex,
together with the Advowsons of the said Manors to Dame Joan my Wife, To have
and to hold and enjoy the Premises with their Appurtenances to the said Dame
Joan and her Assigns for term of her natural life. Also, I will and demise,
That all my Right, Title, Possession, Interest that I have of and in the Manor
of Westhornedon, and Gingeraps, and also Cranham, in the said County of Essex,
the reversion of the said Manor of Cranham after the decease of Dame Joan my
Wife, with all and singular Rights, Members and Appurtenances, and all Lands,
Tenements, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Woods and Underwoods, and other
Hereditaments, that be or hay been in times past reputed or taken part or
parcel of the said Manors of Westhornedon and Gingeraps, with the Advowsons
belonging to the said Manors, To have, hold and enjoy the Premises with all
Rights, Revenues, Profits, Uses, Commodities, Emoluments and Arrearages of all
and singular the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, Ways, Meadows, Pastures and
other Hereditaments, and all other the Premises with their Appurtenances, to
John Mordaunt Knight Lord Mordaunt my Father, and to Edmond Mordaunt my
Executors, and to the Surviver of them, and to the Executors of the Surviver
for term of thirty Years next ensuing after my death, without impeachment of
Waste, to the intent that they with the Issues and Profits of the Premises and
every part thereof coming and growing from time to time during the said Term,
shall find and provide to my Daughters Elizabeth Mordaunt, Margaret Mordaunt,
Anne Mordaunt, Ursula Mordaunt, and every of them, sufficient Meat, Drink and
Lodging, Apparel, Learning and other Necessaries for them, until they be
married, and also give and deliver to every of them toward their several
Marriages the Sum of four hundred Marks of good and lawful Money of England,
to be paid to every of them at the day of their several Marriages; If that my
said Executors have loned, or at any time or times hereafter the said
Marriages, as it may be loned of the Issues and Profits of the said Manors of
Westhornedon and Gingeraps. And if it shall so chance, that one or two of my
said Daughters to dye and depart out of this transitory life unmarried, I will
that her or their Parts, Portions and Sums of Money, that to her or to them by
this my last Will and Testament did belong, shall remain, grow, come and be
deemed amongst the other of my Daughters, which shall so fortune to overlive.
And if it shall so chance that more of my said Daughters than two to dye, and
depart out of this transitory life, I will that their Parts and Portions shall
remain still in the hands of my Executors, to be delivered to my Son and Heir
when he comes to two and twenty Years of Age. And if I chance to depart to God
without Issue Male, then I will that the moiety of the said money equally to be
divided amongst my said Daughters which at that time shall chance to be alive,
and the residue to be distributed in deeds of Charity according to the
discretion of my Executors, my said Lord and Father, and my Brother Edmond
Mordaunt. Furthermore, I will that if any of my said Daughters happen to marry
her self against the will and appointment of my Executors, the said Lord and
Edmond Mordaunt, or the Survivors or the Survivor of them, within the Age of
twenty one Years, or if any of the said Daughters do refuse any lawful
marriage tendered or offered by my Executors, the said Lord and Edmond Mordaunt
my Brother, or by the Survivors or Survivor of them within the said Age of one
and twenty Years, to the intent to marry themselves at their own pleasure, That
then I will, That she or they shall tarry for her or their part until the time
that all my Daughters be set forth and married, and then to be delivered to my
said Daughter or Daughters so marrying themselves, or to the Children of her or
them, according to the discretion of my Executors the said Lord and Edmond, or
the Survivors or Survivor of them. And further, I will and demise, that my said
Executors with the Issues and Profits of the Premises during the said term,
shall find a Priest to sing Mass in the Parish Church of Westhornedon
aforesaid, to pray for my Soul, and Dame Ely my late Wife deceased, and all
Christian Souls; And also shall distribute every Year during the said term, to
the help and sustentation of the poor and needy people in Westhornedon,
Gingeraps, Cranham and Nevendon, according to the discretion of my Executors;
And also give and distribute unto the maintaining of Highways and Bridges
wheresoever my Executors shall think most meet and convenient any where within
the County of Essex. Also I do demise unto the said Edmond Mordaunt my Brother,
the reversion of certain Lands and Tenements, Pasture, Woods, Underwoods and
other Hereditaments in Coume and Sturmest in the County of Somerset, with the
appurtenances, which I the said Sir John did purchase of one Richard Matthew,
one of the Sons of Robert Matthew deceased, which Joan Matthew Widow does now
claim for to hold for term of her life, as parcel of her Jointure, To have and
to hold to the said Edmond and his Heirs, in as large and ample manner as ever
Robert Matthew did hold or occupy the premises, upon this Condition following,
that is to say, that the said Edmond or his Heirs shall make or cause to be
made within two years after the death of the said Joan Matthew in the Church of
Westhornedon of the North side of the Altar, a Tomb of Marble meet and
convenient to serve for the Sepulcher, at the Feast of Easter, and also that
the said Edmond shall pay or cause to be paid during the space of twelve years
next and immediately after the decease and death of the said Joan Matthew
Widow, every year six Pounds eight Shillings four Pence, to my Executors toward
the performance of this my last Will. Also I will, That the said Lord Mordaunt
and Edmond shall receive my Aunt Petre's Pension, and during the said term
shall find her Meat, Drink and Clothing, and other Necessaries meet for her
Degree during her life, as long as she shall be content to be at my Executors
appointment: And if it chance that she will refuse to be ruled after the said
Lord Mordaunt and Edmond, or the Survivor of them, then I will that my
Executors shall suffer her to receive her own Pension, and to deliver her
thirty three Shillings four Pence yearly, and to go whither she will. And if it
chance that she happen to overlive the said term, that I do demise unto her
yearly four Pounds Rent, to be perceived and taken out of my Manor of
Westhornedon aforesaid at the Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady, and Saint
Michael the Archangel, by even Portions. And if it chance the said Rent of
three Pound to be behind unpaid by the space of a Month after any of the said
days of Payment, that then I will and grant that the said Petres or her Assigns
shall enter into the said Manor of Westhornedon, and there to distrain; and
the distress so taken to carry away and to retain, until she be fully satisfied
and paid of the Rent and the Arrearages of the said Rent, if any shall appear
to be behind. Furthermore, I will that the said Lord and the said Edmond shall
suffer my Heir when he comes to the Age of two and twenty years, to have,
occupy and enjoy all the premises, so that the said Heir will be bound by such
ways and means as shall be demised or thought most convenient by the said Lord
and Edmond, or the Survivors or Survivor of them, or the Executors of the
Survivor, to perform the execution of this my last Will, the residue of this my
last Will which shall chance to be at that time unperformed, allowing unto my
Executors all their Costs and Charges had or sustained in executing of this my
last Will, and that has not been taken and lowed of the Issues and Profits of
the foresaid Lands and Tenements, any thing in this my last Will and Testament
to the contrary notwithstanding.

Occasions of Disagreement between the Lord Mordaunt, and his Son Lewis
Mordaunt.
THE late Lord Mordaunt bought the Wardship of Ely Fitz-Lewis, Daughter and
sole Heir unto Sir Richard Fitz-Lewis Knight, for which he paid thirteen
hundred Marks. Her Lands which she had by Descent were five hundred Marks a
year.

The late Lord Mordaunt afterward did couple her in Marriage unto the now Lord
Mordaunt, then being his Son and Heir apparent, for the Marriage of which now
Lord Mordaunt the last Lord Mordaunt might then have had diverse great Sums of
money.

Afterward the late Lord Mordaunt, for the better advancing of his own House,
procured the said now Lord Mordaunt, and the said Dame Ely then his Wife, to
levy a Fine of the Fitz-Lewis's Lands to one William Hemmyng Clerk, who rendered
the same unto the now Lord Mordaunt, and to the said Dame Ely then his Wife,
and to the Heirs Males of their two Bodies lawfully begotten; and for default
of such Heirs, to the Heirs Males of the Body of the now Lord Mordaunt, with
diverse remainders over.

Afterward the said now Lord Mordaunt and Dame Ely then his Wife, had Issue
between them Lewis Mordaunt; and after the said Dame Ely Mordaunt dyed; after
whose Death the said now Lord Mordaunt took to Wife the Lady Johan Mordaunt now
his Wife: after which Marriage the said now Lord Mordaunt, for that his said
Son Lewis would not marry his Wife's Daughter, suffered a recovery of the
Fitz-Lewis's Lands to trust of himself, for the term of his life, without
impeachment of waste; and after his decease, to trust of such as at pleasure
himself to appoint for the term of ninety two Years, without any Penny of Rent
paying therefore; to the intent that not only he, but also my Lady his Wife may
declare their wills thereof during the same ninety two Years, whereof the late
Lord Mordaunt had certain intelligence, not knowing how nor to whom the Fee
simple and the Inheritance thereof is bestowed or appointed.

Whereupon the late Lord Mordaunt, as well for Conscience sake, for that he was
the cause why the now Lord Mordaunt had such Estate of the Fitz-Lewis's Lands,
as he might by the Law suffer such recovery thereof to the disherison of the
said Lewis Mordaunt, being right Heir of the Fitz-Lewis's Lands, as also for
the stay of his own Inheritance and the bringing of the Fitz-Lewis's Lands to
the right course of Inheritance again, did suffer recoveries of his own Lands
to the uses and upon condition following.

To the use of the late Lord Mordaunt and of his Heirs, until the said Lewis
Mordaunt was married, and after to the use of the said Lewis Mordaunt for the
term of his life without impeachment of waste, and after to the use of such
Wife as the said Lewis Mordaunt shall be married unto at the time of his death.

To the use of the late Lord Mordaunt for the term of his life without
impeachment of waste, and after to the use of Lewis Mordaunt for the term of
his life without impeachment of waste, and after to the use of such Wife as the
said Lewis Mordaunt shall be married unto at the time of his death.

To the use of the late Lord Mordaunt for the term of his life without
impeachment of waste, and after to the use of Lewis Mordaunt for the term of
his life without impeachment of waste.

To the use of the late Lord Mordaunt for the term of his life without
impeachment of waste, and after to the use of his Executors until the Feast of
Saint Michael the Archangel next ensuing the death of the said late Lord
Mordaunt, and further to the same Executors for twelve Years toward the
performance of his Will, And after to the use of the now Lord Mordaunt for the
term of his life, if he will assure the Fitz-Lewis's Lands, as hereafter
appears.

To the use of the late Lord Mordaunt for the term of his life without
impeachment of waste, and after to the use of the now Lord Mordaunt for the
term of his life, to the intent that he of the Issues and Profits thereof might
fully answer to the Queens Majesty as much money as shall amount to one Years
value of the full third part of all the late Lord Mordaunt's Lands for the
primier season thereof and twenty Pounds over.

Memorandum, That it was provided by the same Book, that if the now Lord
Mordaunt did not assure the Fitz-Lewis's Lands, which are of the value of five
hundred Marks per annum, within six Months after the Feast of Saint Andrew next
ensuing the Date of the same Book, to Sir Robert Throckmorton and other the
Recoverers and their Heirs of the late Lord Mordaunt's Lands, that is to say,
parcel thereof to the value of three hundred Marks, or under, to the use of the
now Lord Mordaunt and my Lady now his Wife for the term of their lives,
disponishable of waste, during the life of the now Lord Mordaunt, and after
their deceases to the use of Lewis Mordaunt and of the Heirs of his Body
lawfully begotten; And for default of such Heirs, to the use of the right Heirs
of the Fitz-Lewis; And the remanent part thereof to the use of the now Lord
Mordaunt for the term of his life, without impeachment of waste; And after his
decease to the use of his Will for the term of ten years, and after to the use
of Lewis Mordaunt and of the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten, and for
default of such Heirs to the use of the right Heirs of the Fitz-Lewis for ever:
That then the use of all such and so much of the late Lord Mordaunt's Lands as
was appointed to the now Lord Mordaunt by that Book, should be unto the late
Lord Mordaunt for the term of his life without impeachment of waste, and after
to the use of Lewis Mordaunt for the term of his life without impeachment of
waste.

And after the said several uses of the late Lord Mordaunt's shall be ended and
determined, as is abovesaid, and as the same shall severally end and determine,
the uses thereof be further appointed as follows, that is to say, Unto the
first Son of the said Lewis Mordaunt in lawful marriage begotten, and to the
Heirs Male of his Body lawfully begotten, And after, to the second Son of the
said Lewis Mordaunt on lawful marriage begotten, and to the Heirs Male of his
Body lawfully begotten, with diverse remainders over, the last remainder thereof
being appointed to the right Heirs of the said Lewis Mordaunt for ever.

And to the intent that my Lady Mordaunt, now Wife to the now Lord Mordaunt,
should have goodwill, that the Fitz-Lewis's Lands should be assured as
aforesaid, the late Lord Mordaunt did grant unto her, for the augmentation of
her Jointure, to make it up four hundred Marks a year an yearly Rent of an
hundred Marks by the year during her life, with a Clause of distress in his own
Land for the not payment thereof upon Condition that the Fitz-Lewis's Lands
should be assured as is aforesaid.

Shortly after this Book thus agreed upon and sealed, one part thereof was sent
to the now Lord Mordaunt, that he might thereby perfectly understand what his
Father had done, and the premises notwithstanding he would not assure the
Fitz-Lewis's Lands as he ought to have done within the said six Months, by
reason whereof the uses of the late Lord Mordaunt's Lands, appointed to the now
Lord Mordaunt, did cease through the wilful default of the now Lord Mordaunt,
and the same came to the said Lewis Mordaunt.

Memorandum, That the Conveyances of the late Lord Mordaunt's Lands as is
aforesaid, was of the mere motion, circumspection and providence of the late
Lord Mordaunt for the causes aforesaid without any seeking of the said Lewis
Mordaunt, who neither would nor durst move the said late Lord Mordaunt his
Grandfather, being a wise man, in such a matter.

Now the premises considered, it may appear that the said Lewis has not done
any thing whereby to offend his Father, except it be in refusing to marry his
Mother-in-Laws Daughter which his Father offered him in marriage, which he
liked not, or else in receiving the benevolence of his Grandfather unprocured
of his part.

The Causes of the late Lord Mordaunt's doings, and the doings of the now Lord
Mordaunt toward the late Lord Mordaunt his Father, and toward the
Fitz-Lewis's Lands, may plainly appear in the Articles abovesaid.

The Book was delivered to the now Lord Mordaunt within twelve days after the
beginning of the six Months, so as he had all the six Months saving twelve days
to consider thereupon, and to have made assurance of the Fitz-Lewis's Lands
accordingly.

Another Will of Sir John Mordaunt of Westhornedon.
IN the Name of God, Amen. The twentieth Day of September, in the Year of our
Lord God a thousand five hundred forty and nine, and in the third Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord Edward the Sixth, by the Grace of God of England,
France and Ireland King, Defender of the Faith, and in Earth of the Church of
England and Ireland the supreme Head; I Sir John Mordaunt of Westhornedon in
the County of Essex Knight, being of whole mind and perfect remembrance, thanks
be to God, do make my Testament and last Will in manner and form following.
First, I bequeath my Soul to Almighty God, and my Body to be buried in the
Parish Church of Westhornedon aforesaid by Dame Ely Mordaunt my late Wife,
trusting through the merits of Christ's Passion to be saved. And the doings and
ordering of my Funeral-expences I commit to the order and disposition of Dame
Joan now my Wife, whom I make and ordain by this my present Testament my sole
Executrix. And first, as concerning the devise and bequest of my Lands and
Tenements, I give and bequeath to John Mordaunt Knight, Lord Mordaunt, my
Father, the said Joan my Wife, and to Edmond Mordaunt my Brother, all that my
Manor of Westhornedon, and all my Right, Title and Possession that I have in
the said Manor with the appurtenances, with all those my Lands and Tenements
called Fieldhouse and Maundes, now in the manurance, occupation and tenure of
John Wright of Keldon in the said County of Essex; The reversion of the Manor
of Wantons in Bumpsted ad Turr', with Purbysher and Whytley, set, lying and
being in the Town of Bumpsted ad Turr' and Burdbroke, which Dame Joan my Wife
does hold for the time of her life, as Parcel of her Jointure, with all and
singular Rights, Members, Appurtenances, and all Lands, Tenements and
Advowsons, Meadows, Feedings, Pastures, Woods, Underwoods and other
Hereditaments, that be or have been in times past reputed, taken or known as
Part or Parcel of the said Manor of Westhornedon and Wantons in the said
County of Essex; And all other my Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in the
said Town of Westhornedon, Easthornedon, Tholderdyche, Warley magna, Bumpsted,
Sturmer and Burdbroke in the said County of Essex: To have, hold and enjoy all
the Premises with their Members and Appurtenances, and every Part and Parcel
thereof, to the said Lord Mordaunt, Dame Joan and Edmond Mordaunt, and to their
Heirs and Assigns upon the Conditions following; that is to wit, That they with
the Issues and Profits of the Premises shall find and provide, or cause to be
found and provided for my Daughters Margaret, Anne, Winefryd and Ursula
Mordaunt, Meat, Drink, Apparel, Learning and other Necessaries meet for their
desire for them and every of them, until they be married or otherwise provided
for, if they shall determine their minds not to marry; And also shall give unto
every one of them four hundred Marks at the day or days of their several
Marriages, or any other time or times after, as yeu may be levied of the Issues
and Profits of the Premises, so that they and every of them be ruled and
ordered as well for their Education and bringing up until they be married, as
for the order and disposition for their Marriages, by the said Lord Mordaunt,
Dame Joan and Edmond, or the Survivor of them: And if any of my Daughters shall
determine their mind or minds not to marry, but to live without a Husband, then
I will, that the Part or Portion of her or them determined not to marry, be
bestowed to her or their most profit, to purchase to her or them a Living
during their life or lives; And also shall find and provide for my Son Edmond
Mordaunt Meat, Drink, Apparel and Learning, until he come to the Age of one and
twenty Years; And also shall give and deliver unto the said Edmond two hundred
Marks, after that the said Money be levied for the Preferment of my Daughters
in manner and form above-written, and after that the said Edmond has
accomplished the Age of one and twenty Years, so that the said Edmond will be
ruled by the said Lord Mordaunt, Dame Joan and Edmond Mordaunt and the Survivor
of them until the said Age of one and twenty Years. And also I will that Dame
Joan my Wife shall occupy and enjoy my Mansion House of Westhornedon, with all
Houses, Orchards and Garden-Plats thereunto belonging, for the space of nine
Years next and immediately following my decease: Provided always, that if the
said Dame Joan my Wife do depart out of this transitory World before the said
Years be expired, or that my Son Lewis do come to his full Age before the said
time, then the said term to be void, any thing before to the contrary
notwithstanding. Also I will that if my said Daughters or any of them do marry
themselves against the Will and appointment of the said Lord Mordaunt, Dame
Joan, and the said Edmond, or the Survivor of them, or if any of my said
Daughters does refuse any lawful and convenient Marriage tendered and offered
by the said Lord Mordaunt, Dame Joan and Edmond Mordaunt or any of them, to the
intent to marry themself or selves at their own pleasure or pleasures, that
then her or their Part or Portion shall not be delivered to her or them, until
all and every of my said Daughters so lawfully provided for be preferred to
Marriage, and the Portion or Sums of Money before bequeathed to every of them
be delivered and paid. And if she or they dye before the said delivery, then I
will the said Parts or Portions to be equally divided and delivered to their
Daughter or Daughters which shall so live until they be married; And for lack
of Daughters, to the Son or Sons of my said Daughter or Daughters marrying
themselves against the Will of the said Lord Mordaunt, Dame Joan and Edmond, as
is abovementioned. And also for Beatrice Lewis, Aunt to my late Wife, Dame Ely
Mordaunt, I will that she shall have Meat, Drink, Clothing, and all other
Necessaries meet for her during her life; so that she suffer the Lord Mordaunt,
Dame Joan and Edmond Mordaunt to perceive and take one yearly Pension of three
Pounds six Shillings and eight Pence, granted to the said Beatrice by our late
Sovereign Lord of famous Memory King Henry the Eighth. And if it happen any of
my said Daughters intending to marry to depart out of this life unmarried, I
will that her Part, Portion or Sum of Money, that to her shall belong by
reason of any former bequest, be divided and bestowed in manner and form
following, after that the said Sums of Money before bequeathed to my said
Daughters and to my said Son Edmond be levied in manner and form abovesaid;
that is to say, if one of my said Daughters happen to dye before Marriage, then
I will one hundred Marks to be delivered unto Lewis Mordaunt after that he
comes to the Age of one and twenty Years, and one hundred Marks to be
delivered to my said Son Edmond Mordaunt after that he has accomplished the
Age of one and twenty Years; And if any of my said Sons dye before delivery
made, Then I will the Survivor of them shall have the part of his Brother
deceased to be delivered to him after his said Age of one and twenty Years; And
the residue, that is to say, Two hundred Marks, to be distributed amongst the
poorest and neediest of mine and Dame Ely's, my late Wife's Kinsfolk for their
Preferment in Learning, Marriages and other things according to the discretion
of the said Lord Mordaunt, Dame Joan and Edmond Mordaunt, or their Assigns. And
if any other of my said Daughters happen to depart from this transitory life, I
will that two hundred Marks of her Portion deceased be delivered and equally
divided amongst the residue of my said Daughters then living, until they be
married, and other two hundred Marks to be distributed in repairing of
Highways, and to the Marriages of poor Maids, or in other Deeds of Charity in
such places as I have any Lands and Tenements in the County of Essex, Norfolk,
Bedford or Northampton: And if that all my said Daughters shall live until they
be married, or otherwise preferred, if they intend not to marry in manner and
form abovesaid, Then I will that two hundred Marks be levied of the Premises,
and distributed to the preferment of the poorest and neediest of my Kinsfolks,
or of the Kinsfolks of Dame Ely my late Wife; And other two hundred Marks to be
distributed in other such Deeds of Charity as is abovesaid, according as by the
discretion of the said Lord Mordaunt, Dame Joan and Edmond Mordaunt or their
Assigns shall be thought meet and convenient. Also I will that if my said Son
Lewis does depart from this transitory life before all and every of my said
Daughters be married or otherwise preferred in manner and form abovesaid, and
more than two of my said Daughters departed out of this life unmarried, or
afterward happen to dye before Marriage, or otherwise preferred, if they intend
not to marry, That then the Parts, Portions or Sums of Money of her or them so
dying before Marriage, and also the said Sums of Money before bequeathed to my
said Sons Lewis and Edmond by the reason of the Death of any of my said
Daughters, if they happen to dye before the said Sums of Money be delivered to
them, likewise to be bestowed in such Deeds of Charity as is abovesaid. Also I
will and devise the Manors of Amys and Cranham, otherwise called Wokingdon
Episcopi, with all and singular their Appurtenances, set, lying and being in
the Parishes of Kinton, Bulvan, Easthornedon, Westhornedon and Cranham,
otherwise called Bishops Wokingdon in the County of Essex aforesaid, which the
said Dame Joan does hold for term of her life as Parcel of her Jointure, and
all and all manner of Lands, Tenements, Meadows, Pastures, Feedings, Commons,
Woods, Underwoods, and all other Hereditaments to the said Manors appertaining
or belonging to my Son Edmond Mordaunt and to the Heirs of his Body lawfully
begotten, upon Condition, that if my said Son Edmond, his Heirs or Assigns, do
aliene, grant with Warranty, discontinuance, suffer any recovery, or suffer to
be done any Act or Acts, thing or things, to the intent to bar his or their
Heir or Heirs, or him or them in the reversion of the said Manors of Amys,
Cranham, otherwise called Wokingdon Episcopi, with their appurtenances, or of
any Part or Parcel thereof, or of any other Lands, Tenements or other
Hereditaments devised to the said Edmond by this my last Will and Testament,
That then it shall be lawful to my Heirs to enter into the said Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and all other Hereditaments, alienated, discontinued or recovered in
manner and form abovesaid, and into every part and parcel thereof, and the same
to retain and keep in manner and form, as though no such devise had been made,
And the said Edmond and his Heirs thereof to expel and put out for ever.
Provided always, that if any alienation, discontinuance or recovery be had and
made in manner and form abovesaid, without fraud, covyn or deceit to make his
Wife or Wives Jointure for term of her and their life or lives, to the
preferment of his or their younger Son or Sons, for the marrying of his or
their Daughter or Daughters, and for the Payment of his or their Debts, so that
the said Edmond and his Heirs of his Body make or cause the Fee-simple of such
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, recovered and discontinued to such use, to
be made sure to my Heirs, to remain, come and grow to them immediately after
the death of my said Son Edmond, or of the Heirs of his Body, or immediately
after the death of his said Wife or Wives the Money levied for the marrying of
his or their said Daughter or Daughters, for the Payment of his or their Debt
or Debts, or the Preferment of his or their younger Son or Sons, Then I will
that mine Heirs shall take no benefit or advantage of any such discontinuance,
recovery, act or acts, thing or things, assurance or assurances, had or made
for the aforesaid intents or purposes without fraud or covyn by way of Entry or
otherwise, any thing in this my last Will and Testament to the contrary
notwithstanding. Furthermore, if my said Son Lewis or his Heirs of his Body
being of the Age of one and twenty years or more, shall lawfully offer and
tender to give, grant and assure within two years after the death of the said
Dame Joan, or after the said Edmond or the Heirs of his Body shall accomplish
the Age of one and twenty years, the Manor of Typtosts and Pinkneys in the
County of Essex, and the Manor of Belhalf in the County of Norfolk, with all
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments in Wymbyshe, Walden, Thaxsted and Radwynter
in the County of Essex, and Belhalf, Billinford, or elsewhere in the County of
Norfolk, which has or shall descend, remain or come to my said Son Lewis from
my late Wife Dame Ely Mordaunt to my said Son Edmond, or if he chance to dye,
to the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten, To have and to hold the said Manor
of Typtosts and Pinkneys, Belhalf, Billingford and the Premises, to my Son
Edmond and to the Heirs of his Body, in like Estate, Degree, and with like
Condition, as I have devised unto the said Edmond the Manors of Cranham,
otherwise Wokingdon Episcopi, Amys, and other the Premises above mentioned,
That then, if the said Edmond or the Heirs of his Body shall refuse to receive
and take the said Manors of Typtosts, Pinkneys, Belhalf, Billingford and other
the Premises being lawfully tendered and offered to him or them by the said
Lewis or the Heirs of his Body, in manner and form abovesaid, Then I will that
immediately after the said assurance made, or the said denial, that the devise
of my Manors of Cranham, otherwise called Wokingdon Episcopi, and Amys
aforesaid, and all other my devises made to my said Son Edmond by this my last
Will, to be void and of none effect, any thing in this my last Will or
Testament to the contrary notwithstanding. And further I will, that if my said
Son Lewis Mordaunt or the Heirs of his Body do not tender and be contented to
make unto my said Son Edmond Mordaunt or to the Heirs of his Body within the
time abovementioned a good, sure and sufficient Estate in manner and form
abovementioned, at the Costs and Charges of the said Lewis or his Heirs, of or
in the Manors of Typtosts and Pinkneys, and other the Premises, Then I give
and devise to my said Son Edmond Mordaunt the said Manors of Cranham and Amys,
and all other the Premises before devised to him, To have and to hold to the
said Edmond and his Heirs for ever. Also I will that after this my last Will
and Testament performed concerning the Premises, all manner of Costs and
Charges had and sustained by the said Lord Mordaunt, Dame Joan and the said
Edmond, or the Survivor of them or their Assigns, about the defense and
execution of the same Will and Testament paid and discharged, That then the
said Lord Mordaunt, Dame Joan and the said Edmond or the Survivor of them or
their Assigns, shall infeosse or otherwise assure the Premises abovementioned
and every part and parcel thereof to the only use of his Heirs and their Heirs
for ever, the said assurance to be had and made at the only Costs and Charges
in the Law of my said Heirs.

A SUCCINCT GENEALOGY Of the HOUSE of HOWARD of Effingham, Justified by Public
Records, Charters, Deeds, Histories and other Authentic Proofs.
By ROBERT HALSTEAD.
The Arms of the House of Howard were Quarterly, Howard, Brotherton, Warren and
Mowbray.

blazon or coat of arms of the house of Howard

Of the Original, Greatness, Actions, Honors, Alliances, Possessions and Arms
of the House of Howard of Effingham.
I Would have the Reader know, That I presume not here to declare the Honors,
and Advantages, which belong to the Illustrious House of Howard; it would be
too great a task for one much abler, that could have access unto those lights
which might direct him in such an undertaking; but much more for a stranger,
who does only pretend to trace out those Genealogies, among the proofs of
which, he has been conversant, and that particularly appertain to the House of
Mordaunt.

It is therefore of the Howards of Effingham of which I am to Treat, from
whence the Earl of Peterborow is not only Descended, but of which he is,
indeed, the very Heir; and of this Family it was, which is so very admirable,
where Fortune and Virtue (that are so often at odds, about the Creatures they
intend to raise) did both concur, to make the Lords thereof so very Great, with
so little Envy.

Great they were, as all the greatest Dignities could make them; they had been
Generals in the Field, Admirals at the Sea, Counselors at the Board,
Ambassadors abroad, Commissioners in the most important Treaties, and borne the
greatest Offices in the Houses of their Kings; but greater far, in that their
Noble Qualities, and Virtuous Actions did deserve them; so as they seemed made
to adorn those Honors, which might well at first have been designed to
illustrate other Men.

For their Descent, it was several ways derived from the Beds of Kings; they
took Marriages from the Crown, and gave Wives into the Arms of Princes.

Their Estates were suitable to their other Greatness, and the Rewards of their
Services such as became the acknowledgment of generous Princes.

After all which, I know not what could obstruct the Luster of this House,
unless it were the Malignity of Oblivion, or want of Friends within the House
of Fame: to obviate which, these short Memorials are thought fit to be
Recorded, by a Servant, and honourer of their Descendants.

THOMAS HOWARD, Second Duke of Norfolk, and Earl of Surrey, Lord High Treasurer
and Earl Marshal of England, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter.
CHAPTER I.
THOMAS HOWARD, who was afterward the Second Duke of Norfolk, from whom more
immediately the Howards of Effingham do Descend, being the greatest, and most
happy Subject of his time; it were not amiss, for example sake, to show by what
Education and Practices he became fit for such a Fortune; for he was certainly
the Son of Virtue; and Chance, or Favor had little share in his Prosperity. He
was, by a prudent Father, as soon as he was fit for Study, committed to the
severity of the Schools, to the end a great Spirit under discipline might be
acquainted with the moderations that are to be used in the course of Humane
Life; as that he should apply himself to obtain the Favor of the Muses, whose
Graces if he could acquire, they would certainly be to him of use, or comfort
in every Fortune.

After he had such a tincture of Letters as was necessary for a Man, that was
neither designed for the Pulpit, nor the Bar, the Lord Howard his Father sent
him out of the Country, where there was little improvement to be made, besides
enabling himself, in the conduct of mean Sports, or meaner Inclinations.

He addressed him to the Court, where he was soon received in the quality of
Page, or Henchman to King Edward the Fourth, continuing there till he came to
Man's estate, in perpetual practice of those Exercises that are necessary to fit
a Man for the Knowledge and use of Arms; of all which, when he was become a
Master, he was ambitious to show his Learning upon a proper Stage: And hearing
that the Duke of Burgundy, one of the nearest and most considerable Allies of
the Crown of England, was undertaking a War against Lewis the Eleventh, at that
time King of France; He begged leave of the King his Master to go into that
Service, in Company of other considerable Gentlemen of his own Country, who
desired to gain Knowledge and Experience in that great Art; to be the better
able afterward, when there should be occasion, to serve their own Prince and
Country.

They were received with all the courtesy they could expect from that Warlike
Prince, and had every Encouragement young Adventurers could pretend to, in such
an undertaking. The young Howard did particularly advance into the Favor of
the Duke, by his extraordinary application to what he came for; being the first
in every occasion, that could possibly gain him either Honor, or Experience.
And thus he continued in this Service, till the end of that War; at which time
he returned home to his own King, laden with the Rewards, and Praises of the
Duke of Burgundy.

King Edward, as well for the desert of the Young Gentleman, as to give Example
and Encouragement to other of his Subjects, for enabling themselves by such
generous untertakings, upon his Arrival did distinguish him by several Graces,
and took him into an Office, at that time very considerable, to be the Esquire
of his Body; whose duty it was to attend the King at his making ready, both
Morning and Evening, and afterward he made him Knight. He continued from
thenceforth to follow King Edward in all his Fortunes; he Fought by his side at
the Field in Lincolnshire, at Banbury Field, and was with him at Warwick, when
he was taken Prisoner by the Earl of that place: And after the Kings escape
into Flanders, and that all the ways were so be-set, as it was over hard for
any of his Servants to get after him, Sir Thomas Howard was fain to take
sanctuary at Saint John's in Colchester, for the true love that he bore King
Edward; where he remained till the Kings Return; upon which, he immediately
resorted to him, and went with him to Barnet Field, at which he was sore hurt.

The King, after this, being settled in the Throne, and designing to go over
into France with an Army Royal, he sent thither, before, diverse Gentlemen: and
having great opinion of the Conduct, and Experience of Sir Thomas Howard, from
the Service he had seen under the Duke of Burgundy, as because he had been with
himself in so many Fields, and Businesses; he commanded him to go over with
them, that nothing might be done without his Advice, till the Kings own
Arrival. And when King Edward, and King Lewis met at the Barriers upon the
River of Sum, the said Sir Thomas Howard was with King Edward, by the King's
Commandment, in that Occasion, and no Man else save only the Chancellor of
England, the Chancellor of France, and Sir Thomas Cheyny.

Sir John Howard, the Father of Sir Thomas, had before this been made Lord
Howard, and lived always exercised in the greatest Employments, having just
pretentions to the Honors, and Lands, of the Great and Ancient House of
Mowbray, as Son and Heir to Margaret the Eldest Daughter to Thomas Mowbray, the
last Duke of Norfolk.

But Sir Thomas Howard his Son, of whom we Treat, having acquired noble
Possessions of his own, by his Services, and his Wife's Inheritance, who was
Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Sir Frederick Tilney; did about this time desire
the King's leave to retire from Court; which having obtained, he came into
Norfolk, and dwelt during the rest of King Edward's days, at a House of his
Wife's, called Ashwoldsthorpe; where he kept an honorable House, in favor of
the whole Shire: The Lord Howard his Father being yet alive, and so continuing
many Years after.

What was the inducement to this retreat is still uncertain; but it is
constant, that the last Years of King Edward were so full of Faction between
the power of the Queen and her Kindred, and the Ambition of his Brothers, as it
was not strange that Wise Men should desire to withdraw from the difficulties
of keeping well with both, or the danger of disobliging either. In this
condition remained the House of Howard at the death of Edward the Fourth, and
for some time after, till the Ambition of King Richard, with the Arts and
Practices subservient thereunto, had through Blood and Violence, made way unto
the Crown; and that the Young King was destroyed with his Brother, and as many
of the great Lords as were like to have taken part with the unhappy Prince.

The new King (after this) being one of the most Politic, as well as the most
daring Princes in the World, was not ignorant of the ill Actions he had
committed, nor of the consequences they were like to have; he knew all the
Friends he could make would be little enough to sustain him, against the potent
Enemies he had created. And therefore he made it now his business to gain,
among the Nobles, and among the People, every Man that had Parts, or Interests
suitable to his occasions. To this end, knowing the Lord Howard, and his Son,
had from the latter Years of King Edward, been retired from the Court, not
oversatisfied; and in no good Correspondence with the Queens Kindred, which he
had been forced to suppress: He thought from the great interest they had, and
their exceeding reputation for Wisdom and Valor, they were the sit persons
to be gained, and the likeliest to adhere to him of any other. He therefore
invited them to Court; and as an earnest of his Favor, and dependence, he
created the Father Duke of Norfolk, with the restitution of the Lands of his
Mother's Inheritance; and makes the Son, at the same time, Earl of Surrey: They
were also from thenceforth the chief in all his Councils; and with this
proceeding he captivates their grateful Hearts, and makes them resolve to stand
by him in every Fortune.

After King Richard had Reigned two years, in all the endeavors that could be
practiced by a Wise Ruler, to get his faults to be forgotten, and to oblige his
People by doing Justice, and making good Laws, and favoring particulars as far
as was in his power; he found, notwithstanding, from every part, Clouds
agathering in order to a Storm Abroad; the Earl of Richmond sought for Aid; at
Home, the Duke of Buckingham, and other great Lords, prepared to assist him: In
fine, toward the end of the Second Year of his Reign, that Earl Landed in
England: and at last, the King was forced to see his Crown set at Com-promise,
in the Fortune of a Bloody Battle; at Bosworth was the Fatal Field, whereat
this Criminal King, was as prodigal of his own Blood, as he had been of other
Men's; All that could be performed by the conduct of a Captain, or the Valor of
a Soldier, he put in practice, to save that Crown, which had cost so many
Crimes. And when by the overthrow of some Troops, and desertion of others, he
found it could not be, as one that scorned to outlive his Power, and his
Fortune, he threw himself into the Arms of Death, as the only refuge against
humane miseries.

John Duke of Norfolk, his faithful Friend and Subject, with his Son the Earl
of Surrey, Fought both, this day, in behalf of their Benefactor: and the Duke,
who led on the Archers, and had his post at the head of the Foot, was there
slain upon the place, in performing that duty to which he was called by his
Honor, and his Gratitude. The Earl toward the end of the day, overcome by his
own Valor, which had spent his strength and spirits in continual exercise of
Heroic Actions, but that disdained to save his Life, by flying from the
Fortune of his Friends, was taken by his Enemies, and brought a Prisoner to the
Victorious King.

The Earl of Surrey was at this time in the vigor of his youth, Tall, Strong,
and Graceful, of a flourishing Health and Constitution, and esteemed one of the
best Men of Arms of that Age: He was of a high Spirit, but had a sober Aspect,
and was nothing dejected by his ill Fortune. King Henry was surprised, though
not undelighted, with the sight of a Man so extraordinary; and after having
said some thing to the other Prisoners of Quality, he called for the Earl, and
asked him, How he durst engage in the Service of so Unjust, and Cruel a Tyrant?
To whom the Earl Replied, That King Richard was in the Throne before he came
into his Interest; and if he had found the Crown of England upon a Bush, he
would have Fought for it. The King did not seem exasperated with so bold an
Answer, and with the rest, he did dismiss him, to the charge of those in whose
custody he was, to be conveyed to the Tower.

Within these fatal Walls, which seemed built for the restraint of Hero's, the
Earl of Surrey was detained Three Years: During which Imprisonment, he often
with gratitude, acknowledged the Goodness and Care of the Duke his Father, who
had given him such a share of Learning, as did enable him (during that
solitude) to divert himself with the Records, and Notions of Philosophy, and
other useful and esteemable Studies. He had acquiesced in the determination of
Heaven, and the destruction of his Master; who leaving no Heir to pretend a
right to his farther Services, this Earl did believe he might well submit to
his Authority, whom God had made a Conqueror, who was now Crowned, and whose
Royal Virtues did deserve that he should Reign. He therefore refused all the
invitations were made him by the King's Enemies, and the Malcontents of that
time (of which there were many, and those very potent) to enter into the
intriegues of their Faction: He would not hear of the Duchess of Burgundy, nor
of the Earl of Lincoln: And when a great Consternation arose, upon that
Prince's Invasion, and the Armies approach toward Stoake in Lincolnshire, in
order to Fight with the King and his Forces; the Lieutenant of the Tower,
offered the Earl his Liberty, to have gone where he pleased; but he generously
refused it, and said, He would never leave to be a Prisoner, but by his consent
that had thought him worthy of such a punishment.

And so he continued till the King's return from the Battle of Stoake, who
having been informed of his submissive and modest behavior, during so long an
Imprisonment; and of the other great Capacities of the Earl, which would render
him very useful to any Prince that should employ him; he took him out of the
Tower, and made him one of his Privy Council; being, as Polidore the Historian
says, Vir Prudentia, Gravitate, and Constantia summa.

In the Fourth Year of this King he was restored, by Act of Parliament, to the
Title of Earl of Surrey, and to all those Lands that were of his Wife's
Inheritance. But after this, he began to be set at the head of every important
business; this Wise King believing he might trust a Man who had proved so
faithful to another Master.

There having then happned a great Commotion in the North, occasioned by the
raising of a Subsidy, and of that importance, that the Earl of Northumberland
was slain therein; (who was the greatest Lord of all those parts:) The King
raising a great Army for suppressing of the same, he gave the whole Command
thereof to the Earl of Surrey; and sent under his Obedience the greatest Lords,
and the best Captains of his Court; as the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Lord
Hastings, Sir William Stanly his Chamberlain, Sir Rice ap Thomas, Sir John
Bourchier, Sir John Savage, Sir John Risely, and diverse others. And he was
after, in the Eighth of the same King, employed again, for suppressing the
Incursions of the Scots. His Deserts, and great Abilities appearing every day
more and more to this Sagacious King; in the Sixteenth Year of his Reign, he
conferred upon him the great Office of Lord High-Treasurer of England; and in
the Two and twentieth of his Reign, finding the Earl worthy of all the
acknowledgments he could make, King Henry granted him a special Livery of all
the Lands whereof his Father died Seized, Mowbrays, Howards, and what ever he
had acquired. This put him in a condition to support his great Merit, his great
Blood, and his great-Condition: And after the death of this King, (which soon
succeeded) his Young Successor, King Henry the Eighth, found the Earl of Surrey
in a condition of Fortune and Reputation, as much to do, as to receive Honor
from the Court, or any Employment whereunto he could be called. He therefore
chose him into the number of his first Counselors, renewed his Patent for Lord
High-Treasurer, and constituted him Earl Marshal of England for his Life.

In the Fourth Year of this King, there happned a great Crisis of State. The
King was Engaged with an Army, consisting of the flower of England, to go for
France; where he Besieged, and took several Towns. At the same time he had
cause to believe the King of Scots would enter England, with his utermost
Power; the Defense whereof, would be enough for the greatest Captain he could
appoint. He thereupon chose the Earl of Surrey; under whose Protection he left
all that could be dear to him, his Country, and his Wife: and it falling out as
he did apprehend, and the Scottish King entering the Kingdom with a mighty Army,
the Earl, with all power he could make, Marched to meet him. He found the King
had taken Norham Castle; and being resolved now, to do something should render
him worthy of the Trust he had received, or to die in the endeavor, he
brought, by several industries (of which the Historians are very particular)
the Scottish Army to a necessity of Fighting: Which they did, under the
Example, and Sight of their Valiant King, with all the Valor and Resolution
that was possible. But such was the Conduct, the Valor, and the Ascendant of
this Earl, as their Resistance did prove fruitless; the whole Scottish Army was
overthrown, and their King (who for his Valor deserved a better Fortune) was
slain Fighting upon the Field.

If ever the Action of any Subject was opportunely Fortunate to a King, or his
Affairs, this Victory proved so to King Henry, at that time Engaged in the War
with so Potent an Enemy as the King of France; and the consequence would have
proved of the last misfortune, if the Earl had otherwise succeeded. The
applauses of the Court, of the King, and Kingdom, were of mighty satisfaction
to the great and public Spirit of this Earl; but the Generous King forbore not
to add Rewards suitable to the Great Merits of his Service. He did him several
Honors, but as the greatest, was his restitution to the Illustrious Dignity of
his Ancestors, the Dukedom of Norfolk, of which his Father was possessed, and
that by his Grandmother had Descended to him from the Mowbrays, in former times
Dukes of that Country. He gave him, for the support of this Dignity, many
Manors, and great Lordships; and continued him, during the rest of his Life,
in the greatest Honors of the Kingdom. But at last, laden with Years as well
as with Felicities, he yielded to Death, in the Castle of Framingham; the
Twenty first of May, in the Year 1524. in the Sixteenth Year of King Henry the
Eighth: Having Married Two Wives.

The First, Elizabeth Daughter and Heir of Sir Frederick Tilney, Knight, Widow
of Humphrey Burcher Lord Barners. The Second, Agnes Daughter of Sir Philip
Tilney, Knight.
Issue by his First Wife, Thomas, afterward Duke of Norfolk. The Lord Edward
Howard, Knight of the Garter. Edmund Howard. And Five that died young.
Elizabeth, Married to Thomas Viscount Rochford. Muriell, Married to John
Viscount Lisle. Mary, Married to Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of Richmond and
Sommerset.

Issue by his Second Wife. William Lord Howard of Effingham, Knight of the
Garter, Lord Privy Seal, and Lord High-Admiral of England. Thomas, who Married
Margaret Douglas, Daughter to the Queen of Scots; which Thomas died in the
Tower. Richard, who died young. Anne, Married to John Earl of Oxford. Dorothy,
Married to Edward Earl of Darby. Elizabeth, Married to Henry Earl of Sussex.
And, Katharine, first Marrid to Sir Rice ap Thomas; and afterward to Henry
Daubeny, Earl of Bridgwater.

WILLIAM Lord Howard, Lord Baron of Effingham, Lord-High-Admiral of England,
Lord Chamberlain, Lord Privy Seal, and Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter; and Privy-Counsellor to Henry the Eighth, to Queen Mary, and Queen
Elizabeth; and eldest Son (by his Second Wife) to Thomas the Second Duke of
Norfolk. CHAPTER II.
WILLIAM Lord Howard, though he had the advantage of so great, and so fortunate
a Father, yet it was not to that he owed the least part of his Fame, or of his
Fortune. The Duke, his Father, loved Virtue and Industry, and to a Son that
would have been Great without Care, or Labor, he would have afforded little
assistance. The Earl of Surrey, the Lord Howard, and the Lord Edmund, were the
Sons of his Prudence; by his Duchess Elizabeth Daughter to Sir Philip Tilney,
who brought her Husband a great Inheritance: But the Lord William was the Son
of his Love; and Born of Agnes Tilney, his Second Wife, that was a young
Virgin, Cousin to the former Duchess; and who brought in partage, but her
Beauty, her Virtue, and her Fruitfulness. To this young Lord the Duke had
indeed a secret partiality, but his great Lands were already all to be
inherited by the Children of his First Wife; and it was the principle in those
days, for Great Men to do little in detriment of them, that were to sustain
their Names and Dignities. He resolved then so to cultivate the Virtue, and
noble Inclinations of the young William, as should make him deserve any
Fortune, what ever his own were like to be. He gave him therefore admirable
Education, and thrust him betimes into the World. He made use of his
Inclination, being Martial, to introduce him into the Favor of the greatest
Captains of his time, particulary those that were applied unto the Sea; whom
with his Company, in every occasion, he did so well humor, as he became the
future Hopes of that calling. In intervals of Martial occasions he followed the
King, and Ministers, who found him of so solid and useful a Temper, as they
thought him fit serve the Crown in any important capacity. He followed the King
to Boloigne; at the magnificent enterview with King Francis: And in the Twenty
sixth of Henry the Eighth, was sent into Scotland, to present King James with
the Order of the Garter, and his Master's desire that he would come through
England, to accompany him, and be present at the enterview.

The Duke, his Father, had been instrumental in the greatest disasters of
Scotland. But in those Heroic times, Generous Princes had a value for Noble
Enemies. King James was taken with the Nature and Manners of the Lord William
Howard, and perceiving in his Merit, much hopes of future greatness, he did so
cultivate his friendship, as when there was business to be transacted between
the Crowns, that King did show an inclination more ready to hear this Lord,
than any other; wherefore King Henry, having, at that time, a great desire to
draw the King of Scotland to an enterview, he sent him to Edinburgh in the.....
Year of his Reign, together with the Bishop of St. Asaph, to persuade him
thereunto; as also to make him propositions of very great advantage.

In the Three and thirtieth Year of the same King, he was sent Extraordinary
Ambassador into France; in his discharge of which Employment, having much
satisfied the King, and his Ministers, he expected a cheerful welcome at his
return; but from the Faults, or the Misfortune of another, he found such a
disappointment as lodged him in the Tower, instead of the Palace; and gave him
the Frowns due to the ill behavior of the Queen, instead of the Applauses his
own endeavors had deserved. For Katharine Howard, the Fifth Wife of Henry the
Eighth, was his Niece, and had in a short space after her Marriage, so
conducted her self, as she fell into his Majesty's disgrace, and lost her Head.
Thereupon, the old Duchess of Norfolk, with this Lord William, and his Lady,
were Indicted for Misprision of Treason, in concealing (as was alleged) what
they knew of that Queen's former behavior, and Condemned to perpetual
Imprisonment.

But after that for reason of State, and to justify the King, something had
been done under an appearance of Anger, and Severity; the King, that knew the
Lord William was never Author of that Match; and that it could not be expected
he should have taken great pains, to hinder the Honor, and Advantage, of his
Niece; who he could not foresee, would have made so ill a use of so great a
good Fortune: his Majesty set at liberty this Noble Lord, and his Relations,
who had suffered this restraint. Although they did remain under some sort of
discouragement, during the short remainder of this King's Reign; who for other
reasons had Beheaded the Noble Earl of Surrey, that was Brother to this Lord,
and Imprisoned the Duke his Father; a Servant, and Subject, that had deserved
more than any other of his time.

But after the Death of King Henry, when the State began to grow jealous of the
French, for designing to recover the Key of their Kingdom; the considerable
Town of Calis, King Edward's Council cast into the Arms of the Lord William
Howard; and to make it safe, made him Lord Deputy thereof, in the Sixth Year of
his Reign.

After the Death of King Edward, the Queen his Sister, being notable for the
Council she chose, and the Ministers and Servants she employed in every
purpose, took this noble Lord into the nearest of her Trust, and Confidence;
she knew his Valor, his Experience, and the opinion the World had of it; and
therefore thought none so fit, for the great Office of High Admiral of England;
which she conferred upon him in the First Year of her Reign; creating him, at
the same time, Lord Baron of Effingham, whereof in the succeeding Parliament,
he took his place; she also made him Lord Chamberlain of her Household; and he
was afterward Lord Privy Seal.

When this Queen was dead, her Sister remembering the behavior of this Lord,
to have been tender toward her, and obliging, during the times of her
troubles, and Persecution; she conferred the same Office of Chamberlain upon
him, in the First Year of her Reign.

He was also sent by Queen Elizabeth, with the Lord Cobham, Ambassador to the
Spaniard, into the Netherlands, on an important Negotiation; and in the Twelfth
of that Queen, joined with the Earl of Sussex, in Command of those Forces, that
were sent to suppress the Rebellion of the Earls of Northumberland and
Westmorland: He was also one of the Peers, who sat upon the Trial of his
unfortunate Nephew, the Duke of Norfolk. Thus, after having been employed (as
has been expressed) in the Service of so many Kings, in management of the
Highest Offices, and Employments of the State, he dyed, full of Honor, Esteem,
and Reputation, the Fifteenth Year of Queen Elizabeth; at her Palace of
Hampton Court. By his Will, bequeathing his Collar of Gold, and his Robes of
the Order, to Charles, his Son; (for he was also, a Knight of the Garter) and
was honorably Interred in the Parish Church of Rygate.

He Married Two Wives.
The First, Katharine Daughter to Sir John Braughton of Tuddington, in the
County of Bedford. The Second, Margaret Daughter of Sir John Gammage.
Issue by his First Wife:
Mary, Married to William Paulet, the Third Marquess of Winchester.
Issue by his Second Wife:
Charles Howard, Earl of Nottingham. William Howard of Lingfield. Edward
Howard. Henry, who died Young. Douglas, Married to John Lord Sheffield; after
to the Earl of Leicester. Mary, Married to Edward Lord Dudly; after to Richard
Mountpesson. Frances, Married to Edward Earl of Hartford. Martha, Married to
Sir George Burcher, Knight.


CHARLES Lord Howard, Earl of Nottingham, Lord High-Admiral of England, Lord
Chamberlain, Justice and Heir of all the Forests on this side Trent; Knight of
the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of the Lords of the Privy Council
to Queen Elizabeth, and King James the First. CHAPTER III.
CHARLES HOWARD, the eldest Son of the Lord William, Baron of Effingham (of
whom we have last Treated) was bred under a Father who knew that great Birth
and Dignities, were things that weighed much upon those that wore them; and
could never be honorably supported, without equal Merit, and Capacities, in
those that would pretend to be advantaged by them. He had therefore, in his
Youth, been bred to the Theories of all the Noble Arts, that could render a Man
useful to his King, and Country; and as soon as he was of a fit strength, he
was thrust by his Father into the practice of them, upon every necessary
occasion. He was with him in all his Expeditions at Sea; becoming thereby very
expert in Navigation. He was in all the Land Services of his time, and followed
his Father in every Embassy where he was employed. These practices made him fit
for great Employments; as indeed, such Employments were fit for him; because,
the truth was, that his Father's perpetual custom, of keeping his hands clean
in all the great Trusts had been committed to him; being ever fonder of Fame
and Faithfulness, than of Money or Estate; he had not left his Son so
superfluous a Fortune, as it might have been easy for him to have suitably
subsisted, to his desert, and great Spirit, without the Favor and Assistance
of his Princes: But the times wherein he lived were very Active, and in them
usefulness made Men considered more than fancy. And the discerning Queen
Elizabeth thought she had a jewel in this Youth, whose hopefulness and merit
shone in the Eyes of every Man. The first Employment we find he had, was to be
one of those noble persons, chose by the Queen, to conduct the Lady Anne of
Austria, Daughter to Maximilian the Emperor, from Zeland into Spain. Afterward
we find him a Commander of some Forces, under his Father, that were sent for
the suppression of the Earls Rebellion: And in the Registers of that Order it
appears, That he was chosen a Knight of the Garter in the Fifteenth Year of
Queen Elizabeth.

In the Twenty eighth of that Queen, upon the Death of the Earl of Lincoln, he
was made Lord High Admiral of England; being at that time Lord Chamberlain, as
his Father had formerly been. And in the Year 1588. when the King of Spain sent
his greatest Fleet under the Conduct of his greatest Subject, the Duke of
Medina Sidonia, with a design to take the Kingdom with the very sight of so
formidable a power; the Queen then, and her admirable Council, pitched upon
this Lord Howard to be the Buckler of England; making him, with an
extraordinary Power, Lieutenant General of all the Queen's Forces on the Sea,
from the estimation they had of his excellent Virtues; as being a Man of great
Moderation, much knowledge in Maritine Affairs; Discreetly Wary, thoroughly
Valiant, Industrious in Action, and a Person whom the Mariners entirely loved.

The success gave the approbation to this choice; the Spaniards appeared, the
Admiral gave them Battle, and they were overthrown; England was delivered, and
the Noble Lord received the Applauses his Valor, and his Conduct did deserve.

But after this, there remaining still great jealousies of future dangers from
the Enmity of Spain, who did design much by the Assistance of the Irish, who
were at that time Rebelliously disposed, he was made joint General of the
English Army, with Robert Earl of Essex, for defense of this Kingdom, both by
Sea, and Land. He was also in this Year, on the Fifteenth of June, constituted
Justice Itenerant of all the Forests South of Trent for Life. And in the Two
and twentieth of October following, in consideration of his Eminent Services in
Anno. 1588. in defending this Realm against the Spanish Armado, as afterward
of the Sacking of Cadiz in Spain, and for destroying the Spanish Fleet then in
the Port there, he was advanced to the Title and Dignity of Earl of Nottingham,
as descended from the Mowbrays; whereof some had before been Earls of that
Country.

In the One and Fortieth Year of the same Queen, this Admiral continuing still
in great Reputation, and there remaining some supition of the Spaniard's ill
intentions, he was made Lieutenant General of all the Queen's Field Forces, and
one of the Commissioners for exercising the Office of Earl Marshal of England.
And in these great Trusts, he employed his time during the Reign of this Happy,
and Victorious Queen. And the wife Successor, upon his Arrival, thought it a
material testimony of his kindness to the Kingdom he did Inherit, to give all
marks of his Esteem and Favor, to those who had contributed so many Cares and
Labors, to the Glory, and Safety thereof. Therefore, at his Royal Coronation
he made this Earl Lord Great Steward of England for that occasion. And in the
Second Year of his Reign, at the renewing the Commissions unto several Great
Lords, for exercising the Office of Earl Marshal of England, he was likewise
constituted one of that number. But by this time the Noble Earl was grown very
Ancient, and his Body being less able than before to support the Labors, and
Cares of War, or of the Court; he by the advice of his Friends, resolved of a
retreat; he resigned the great Office of Admiral into the King's Hands, for
which he was notwithstanding allowed great Pensions for his Life, and other
very considerable advantages. After which he was engaged in going Extraordinary
Ambassador on a most splendid occasion, into Spain, to Make and Sign that
Peace, which was so agreeable to King James the First, as he thence did design
such an Alliance, as by Marriage of his Son, should make lasting Friendship
between the two Crowns. This was the last great occasion, wherein the Earl of
Nottingham did appear; the rest of his Life was Peace, and Prayer. His Lordship
departing this World, at Hayling in Kent, at the Age of Eighty eight Years;
having been Knight of the Garter Fifty two. This Noble Earl had Married Two
Wives:

His First was Katharine Carry, Daughter to the Lord Hundsdon.

His Second was Margaret Stuart, Daughter to James Earl of Murray in Scotland.

Issue by his First Wife:
William Lord Howard of Effingham, who Married Katharine Daughter, and Sole
Heir to John Lord Saint John of Blefso. Charles Howard, who by reason of his
Brothers Decease without Male Issue, did succeed him in his Honors; and Married
Mary Cockain. Elizabeth, Married to Sir Robert Southwell. Frances, Countess of
Kildar. Margaret, Married to Sir Richard Leusson. Issue by his Second Wife:
James Howard, who died young. Charles Howard, afterward Earl of Nottingham;
but dyed without Issue.


WILLIAM Lord Howard, Eldest Son to Charles Earl of Nottingham, Lord Baron of
Effingham. CHAPTER IV.
WILLIAM Lord Howard, was a Youth of extraordinary expectation, and had given
early proof of many rare Virtues; he was Active, he was Ingenious, he was
applicable to every thing that was for the Honor of the Court, or the Use of
the Kingdom. In the days of Queen Elizabeth, the Pastimes, and Triumphs of the
State, were very Martial; Courses at the Tilt were much in fashion, and Fights
at the Barriers; no Man had greater applause at these Exercises, than this
Young Lord: And when Monsieur was here, with his great Followers, who are held
Masters at these Exercises, he got the esteem of all the Frenchmen. He was
with his Father at the Encounter with the Spanish Fleet; (though but Young at
that time) he was with him at the Sacking of Calis; and also, in most of his
Embassies. He was Grave of his Nature, and entering into the favor of the
Ministers, as Man likely to be fit for Business; when unhappily he fell into a
consuming Sickness, that after some time, brought him to his end, (in the
Lifetime of his Father; to the great mortification of that Noble Lord, and of
all the rest of his Relations; leaving by his Wife, the Lady Anne Saint John,
Daughter and sole Heir of the Lord John Saint John of Blefso, for his sole
Heir; Elizabeth Howard.


ELIZABETH HOWARD, Countess of Peterborow. CHAPTER V.
ELIZABETH HOWARD, was the only Daughter, and Sole Heir, of William Lord
Howard, eldest Son to the Admiral; and she was Inheritable to all the Lands
that at his Marriage had been settled upon her Father, and to what ever else
had not by Will, or otherwise, been disposed of by her Grandfather, to any of
his other Sons. And if Margaret Stuart, Countess of Nottingham (the Admiral's
Second Wife) had not, by being present with the old Lord at the time of his
Death, been possessed of his personal Estate, which was vast in Jewels, Plate,
and all kind of Precious Movables, she had proved the greatest Fortune of her
time. However, she was possessed at her Marriage with the Castle of Dunnington,
with the Park, and a large Lordship of fair Revenues, that had Royalties of
great Extent and Consideration: She had the Noble Lordship of Blechingleigh in
expectance after her Mother, and the Priory of Rygate after the death of the
Countess of Nottingham; all which she lived to enjoy.

She was a Lady of extraordinary Beauty in her time; and before she was
Married, the hopes and expectation of every one that was Great and Considerable
in England. But her Mother being of a Family that was of Kindred as well as
Neigbourhood to the Mordaunts of Turvey, proved favorable to the Merits, the
Person, and Noble Qualities of the Lord Mordaunt, afterward Earl of Peterborow;
to whom she gave in Marriage her Daughter, and all her pretenses.

This Lady had much Wit, and a great Spirit, which inclined her to be Generous
and Bountiful, to a degree of a little too much valuing the uncertain applause
of needy persons. She lived in Unhappy Times, the Rebellion beginning and
ending in her days; dying after the King's Restoration, in the Year....
leaving Issue by her Husband, John Earl of Peterborow: Henry Earl of
Peterborow. John Lord Viscount Mordaunt. Elizabeth Mordaunt, Married to Thomas
Lord Howard of Escrick.


knight on horseback bearing the colors of the family, and a family tree
showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors Elizabeth Tilney. Thomas
Howard the second Duke of Norfolk. Agnes Tilney. Anne Daughter to K. Edward ye
4th. Thomas Howard. third Duke of Norfolk. Elizabeth Stafford. Catherine
Broughton. William Lord Howard. Baron of Effingham Margaret Gammage. Agnes
Howard William Pawlet Marquess of Winchester. Catherme Carry. Charles Howard
Earl of Nottingham. Margaret Stuart. Sr. Willm. Howard of Hingfeild Frances
bouldwell. Doaglas Howard. John Lord Sheffield. Mary Howard. Edward Lord
Dudley. Frances Howard. Edw: Seymour Earl of Hertford. Martha Howard. Sr.
George Bourcher. Margaret Howard. Sr Rich. Leueson. Frances Howard. Henry
Fitzgerald Earl of Kildare. Eliz: Howard Sr. Robt. Southwell. Charles Howard
E. of Nottingham Mary Cockaine. Willm: Ld. Howard. Baron of Effingham Catherine
St. John. Charles Howard. 3d Earl of Nottingham. -- Smith. Eliz: Howard John
Mordaunt Earl of Peterborow Henry Mordaunt Earl of Peterborow. Penelope
Obrian.




GENEALOGICAL PROOFS OF THE DESCENT and SUCCESSION Of the HOUSE of HOWARD of
Effingham; Drawn out of Extant Charters, Records, Histories, and other
Authentic Testimonies.

GENEALOGICAL PROOFS OF THE DESCENT and SUCCESSION Of the HOUSE of HOWARD of
Effingham.
THOMAS HOWARD, Second Duke of Norfolk, Lord High Treasurer, and Earl Marshal
of England. CHAPTER I.
The Baronage of England, Part II. page 267.
Mentioning the Will of Margaret Duchess of Norfolk.
ORdaining her Son-in-Law, Thomas Earl of Surrey, surviver of this her
Testament, to whom she gave a Cup of Gold, and a Cross with the Pots of Silver
Gilt. The probate of which Will bears Date the Thirtieth of December, 1494.

Which Thomas being Squire of the Body to King Edward the Fourth (his Father
then living) was retained to serve in his Wars, in the Fifteenth of Edward the
Fourth, with six Men at Arms, and Two hundred Archers. And the next ensuing
Year constituted Sheriff of the Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk; he was also
created Earl of Surrey, at such time as John his Father was made Duke of
Norfolk, by King Richard the Third. And though he took part with that King, and
Fought valiantly on his behalf at Bosworth Field, where he was taken Prisoner,
yet did King Henry the Seventh afterward receive him into Favor, and made
choice of him for one of his Privy Council, being a person of great Prudence,
Gravity and Constancy; whom he served faithfully, during the whole time of his
Reign.

In the Fourth Year of Henry the Seventh he was in Parliament restored to his
Title of Earl of Surrey, and to all those Lands which were of his Wifes
Inheritance. And the same Year, upon the Insurrection in the North, occasioned
by the assessing of a Subsidy (wherein the Earl of Northumberland was Murdered,
through the fury of the Multitude) he was sent with a strong power for the
suppressing thereof: And in the Eighth of Henry the Seventh was again employed
into the North, to restrain the incursions of the Scots.

In the Thirteenth of Henry the Seventh, upon the Siege of Norham Castle by
those bold Invaders, (being then in Yorkshire) he Marched toward them; but
before he could reach to Norham, they quited their ground, and retired into
their own Country; whereupon he followed them with his Army and made great
spoil within their borders.

About this time he made partition with Maurice, Brother of William Marquess of
Berkley, of the Lands which came to them by Inheritance, by reason of their
Descent from the Coheirs to Mowbray Duke of Norfolk. And in the Fifteenth of
Henry the Seventh attended the King and Queen to Calis.

In the Sixteenth of Henry the Seventh (25 Junii) he had that great Office of
Lord Treasurer of England conferred on him. And in the Two and twentieth of
Henry the Seventh obtained a Special Livery of all the Lands, whereof his
Father died seized. In the First of Henry the Eighth, being likewise made one
of the Privy Council to that King, he had his Patent for Lord Treasurer
renewed: And in the Second of Henry the Eighth was constituted Earl Marshal of
England for Life.

In the Fourth of Henry the Eighth, upon that Expedition then made by that King
into France (at which time Therouane, and Tourney were taken) he was sent
Northwards to prevent the Scots Incursions, during the Kings absence: But
before he got far enough to make resistance, King James the Fourth of Scotland,
having entered the borders, with a powerful Army, took Norham Castle. Of which
this Valiant Earl being advertised, he made the more speed thitherwards (his
Army consisting of Twenty six thousand) appointing Thomas his Son, then Lord
Admiral, to come by Sea, and meet him at or near Alnwick in Northumberland:
Which he accordingly did, bringing with him a Thousand stout Men (some say Five
thousand.) Hereupon, having intelligence, That the Scots had Entrenched
themselves on a Hill called Floden, on the edge of the Mountain Cheviot; and
finding the Country so Forraged that he could not long continue there, he sent
Rouge-Cross Herald, on Sunday the Fourth of September, conducted by a Trumpet,
with instructions to tell that King, That having violated his Faith and League,
and Hostily entered England, he resolved on the Friday next following, to bid
him Battle, if he would accept it.

Whereupon King James accepting the Challenge, he Marched within Three Miles of
Floden; and discerning that the Scots still kept the Hill, he sent Rouge-Cross
again, with a Letter subscribed by himself, and his Son, the Lord Admiral, with
diverse others, moving them to come down into the Plain: Unto which no
satisfactory Answer being given, he Marched on with his Army, to cut off their
Victuals, in case they would not draw down. The Scots therefore being aware of
that danger, fired their Huts and dislodged, covertly by the advantage of the
Smoke; but kept still on the higher Ground. This Earl therefore traversing some
Bogs and Marshes, till he came to the bottom of the ascent, and finding it not
very steep encouraged his Men to Fight, marching speedily on; his Two Sons,
Thomas and Edmond leading the Van of the Battle, himself and Sir Edward Stanly
the Rear: The Lord Dacres, with the Horse, being appointed as a reserve.
Whereupon the Fight began, which was stoutly maintained on both sides for Three
hours; till at length, the Scots, for the better avoiding the storm of Arrows,
opening their Ranks, the Lord Dacres came in with his Horse, and put them so to
it, that they were constrained to cast themselves into a ring, doing all that
Valiant Men could do, and no Man more than the King himself; yet he lost the
day, himself being slain upon the place by a mortal Wound with an Arrow, and
another with a Bill. For which memorable Service this Earl had thereupon a
special Grant from King Henry, to himself, and the Heirs Male of his Body, of
an honorable augmentation to his Arms, to bear on the Bend thereof, the upper
half of a Red Lion (Depicted as the Arms of Scotland are) pierced through the
Mouth with an Arrow: And by Letters Patent, bearing date the First of February
next ensuing, was advanced to the Dignity of Duke of Norfolk; which Title, John
his Father, deriving his Descent (through the Heirs Female of Mowbray and
Seagrave) from Thomas of Brotherton, Son to King Edward the First, did enjoy;
the Ceremony of his Creation being performed at Lambeth the Day following,
which was the Festival of Our Ladies Purification. And by other Letters Patent
bearing date the same First of February, obtained a Grant in Special Tail, of
the Manors of Acton-Burnel, Holgat, Abeton, Millenchop, Langdon, Chatwall,
Smithecote, Wolstanton, Vppington, and Rushbury, in Comitatu Salopiae,
Solihull, in Com. War. Wolverhampton, in Com. Staff. Birehust, and Vptonlovel,
in Com. Wilts; Erdescote, in Com. Berks; Honnesdon, Estwike, Barley and Hide,
in Com. Hertf. Kentcote and Kerdwike, in Com. Oxon. Eastwickham, in Com. Kanc.
of the Castles of Balesover and Horeston, and Manor of Horsley, in Com. Derb.
and of the Manors of Clipston, Limby, Mauncefield, Wood-house, and Sutton in
Ashfield, in Com. Not. to be held by the Service of one Knight's Fee.

Upon the Second of March next following, he had a new Patent (by the Title of
Duke of Norfolk) for the Office of Lord Treasurer of England: And in the Sixth
Year of Henry the Eighth, upon the Contract of Marriage betwixt Lewis de
Longueville, on the behalf of Lewis the Twelfth of France, and the Lady Mary,
Sister to King Henry the Eighth, the King himself conducting her to the Sea
side, recommended her to the care of this Duke, who Landing with her at
Boloigne, brought her to Abbeville; where (upon the Ninth of October) King
Lewis himself solemnly Consummated the Marriage. But in the Seventh of Henry
the Eighth, observing that the Kings Coffers were much exhausted by his Wars
and Triumphs, and not finding it easy to supply these vast Expenses, which (in
Pageants, and other devices) increased daily, he wisely withdrew himself.

In the Thirteenth of Henry the Eighth (13 Maii) he performed the Office of
Lord High Steward, upon the Trial of Edward Duke of Buckingham, and gave
Sentence of Death upon him, but not without Tears. And in the Fourteenth of
Henry the Eighth, obtained a Grant in Special Tail, and to his Son Thomas Earl
of Surrey, of the Manors of Wells, Shyringham Stafford, Barningham, Warham,
and Waveton, in Com. Suff. with the Advousons of the Churches, part of the
Possessions of the before specified Edward Duke of Buckingham attainted.

By his Testament, bearing date ult. Maii, Anno. 1520. (12. H. VIII.) he
bequeathed his Body to be Buried in the Church of the Priory of Thetford, in
Com. Norf. before the High-Altar; appointing that his Executors should cause a
Tomb to be made, and set up there, with the Images of himself, and Agnes his
Wife thereon; allowing for the charge thereof CXXXIIIl VIs VIIId He also
bequeathed to his Son, and Heir Apparent, who should be living at his Decease,
his great hanged Bed, paled with Cloth of Gold, white Damask, and black Velvet,
broidered with these Two Letters T and A, as also one suit of Hangings of the
story of Hercules, made for the great Chamber at Framingham in Norfolk. And
departing this Life at his said Castle of Framingham, 21 Maii, Anno 1524. (16.
H. VIII.) had Burial in the Priory of Thetford accordingly.

He Married two Wives, first Elizabeth, Daughter and sole Heir to Sir Frederick
Tilney, Knight, Widow of Humphrey Bourchier Lord Berners: Which Elizabeth, by
her Testament, bearing Date Nov. 6. Anno 1506. (22. H. VII.) bequeathed her
Body to be Interred in the Nuns Quire of the Minoresses without Aldgate in
London, nigh unto the place where Anne Montgomery lay Buried: appointing that
no more than Twenty Torches should be used at her Burial, and Months-mind;
also, that no Dole, or Money, should be given at either of these Solemnities;
but instead thereof, a Hundred Marks to be distributed to the poor folks, viz.
to every poor Man and Woman, in the Parishes of White-Chappel and Hackney, vij
d.

By this Elizabeth he had Issue Eight Sons, 1. Thomas, created Earl of Surrey
in his life time. 2. Sir Edward Howard, Knight of the Garter. 3. Edmond. The
other Five, viz. Henry, John, Charles, Henry, and Richard all dying young: And
Three Daughters, 1. Elizabeth, Married to Thomas Viscount Rochford, (afterward
Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond) 2. Muriell, first Married to John Gray Viscount
Lisle, afterward to Sir Thomas Knevet of Buckingham, in Com. Norf. Knight: And
3. Mary, Married to Henry Fitz-Roy, Duke of Richmond and Sommerset, Natural Son
to King Henry the Eighth.

To his Second Wife he Wedded Agnes, Daughter to Sir Philip Tilney, Knight; by
whom he had Issue, William, afterward created Baron Howard of Effingham, (of
whom, and his Descendants, I shall say more anon.) 2. Thomas, who taking to
Wife the Lady Margaret Douglas, (Daughter to Margaret Queen of Scots, by her
Husband the Earl of Angus) Niece to King Henry; was attainted of Treason, upon
some suspicion of his intents for aspiring to the Crown; and departing this
life in the Tower of London, 1. Nov. Anno 1537. (29. Eliz.) was Buried at
Thetford. 3. Richard, who died Anno 1517. (9. H. 8.) and was Buried at Lambeth.
And Four Daughters, Anne, Married to John Earl of Oxford; Dorothy to Edward
Earl of Derby, Elizabeth to Henry Earl of Sussex; and Katharine, first Married
to Sir Rice ap Thomas, Knight, but afterward to Henry Daubeny Earl of
Bridgwater.

Polydore Virgil, page 567.
Reckoning up those the King chose for his Council.
ET Thomas Howardus, Comes Surriae, vir Prudentia, Gravitate, and Constantia
summa.

Polydore Virgil, page 621.
JAM dies Concilii ad Westmonasterium habendi advenerat, ubi Henricus, cum
Katharina Uxore, a Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo corona redimitur, sacraturque,
Octavo Kal. Julii, Anno qui fuit salutis humanae MDIX, quo ejus pater e vita
excesserat, qui dictus est Henricus, eo nomine octavus, dum publicum gaudium
celebratur, Laetitiam moeror velut saepe Comes sequitur: Margareta enim Henrici
avia, moritur, ob cujus obitum non nihil respublica damni fecit; quippe mulier
erat prudentissima atque sanctissima, quae cum videret Henrico per aetatem non
licere suum officium praestare, ita a principio providere, consulere,
prospicere coepit, ut summa imperii penes optimos quosque principes esset, quo
ne quid ipsa respublica detrimenti acciperet, quae aliquot menses communi
multorum Concilio gubernata, postremo ad duos, Ricardum Wintoniensem Episcopum,
and Thomam Comitem Surreium, administratio pervenit, qui inter se secretas
habebant simultates, quas authoritatis aemulatio in dies singulos magis
magisque augebat. In iis diversa erant studia: Wintoniensis, suis amplis rebus
contentus, Regis tantum and republicae utilitatem quaerebat: Comes vero, qui
olim paternae haereditatis majori ex part, propter Civilia Bella and Factionum
Seditiones, Naufragium fecerat, suo interim privato commodo inservire
cogebatur, qui idcirco ad latus Regis quotidie adhaerens, been magna identidem
ab eo beneficia habebat, quae ille tam suis quam aliis postea ad arbitrium suum
daret, tribueret, deferret. Ista Wintoniensi visa sunt eo brevi tempore
evasura, ut Comes primas apud principem teneret omnino, nisi mature obviam ejus
conatibus praeiretur, id quod sibi modis omnibus faciendum deliberavit.
Accessit in eandem palaestram and tertius, Guilielmus Conton, in Regio cubiculo
primus Minister; sed is cum magis rei familiari quam potentiae studeret, nihil
dabat suspicionis. Interea Christopherus Benbricus, Eboracensis Archiepiscopus,
Romam Legatus ad Julium Romanum Pontificem Mittitur, and Thomas Ruthal
designatur Dunelmensis Episcopus.

WILLIAM HOWARD, Peer of England, Lord Baron of Effingham, Lord High Admiral of
England, Lord Chamberlain, Lord Privy Seal, and Privy Councellor to the Queens,
Mary and Elizabeth. CHAPTER II.
Baronage of England, Page 278.
Howard of Effingham.
HAving thus Finished with the Principal Stemm of this most Noble Family, I
come to those Collateral Branches as are not yet spoke of: And first, to
William, Son to Thomas, the Second Duke of Norfolk of this House, by Agnes his
Second Wife, Daughter of Hugh Tilney, and Sister and Heir to Sir Philip Tilney
of Boston, in Com. Linc. Knight.

This William in 24. H. VIII. was one of the Attendants of that King to Calis,
and so to Boloigne, at such time as he was there Magnificently received by
Francis the First, King of France: And in 26. H. VIII. sent into Scotland, to
present King James the Fifth, with the Order of the Garter: Also, to acquaint
him with the intended Interview betwixt King Henry, and King Francis of France:
And entreating his Presence thereat, to desire his Coming through England, to
accompany King Henry to Calis.

In 27. H. VIII. he was sent with Dr. William Barlow, Bishop of St. Asaph, to
the same King of Scots, to persuade him to enterview with King Henry; as also,
to make certain advantageous Propositions to him. And in 35. H. VIII. upon that
unhappy Deportment of Katharine Howard, his Niece, Fifth Wife of King Henry,
for which she lost her Head, (being newly returned from an Embassy into France)
he was Indicted (as was also his Wife, and the old Duthess of Norfolk) for
Misprision of Treason, (in concealing what they knew of that Queen's Behavior
therein) and condemned to perpetual Imprisonment: But at length, through the
King's Favor, enlarged; and in 6. Edw. VI. made Deputy of Calis; being a very
valiant Person, and perfectly Loyal to both those Kings. He had such Esteem
from Queen Mary, as that by Letters Patents, bearing Date 11. Martii, in the
First Year of her Reign, he was advanced to the Degree and Dignity of a Baron
of this Realm, by the Title of Lord Howard of Effingham; as also, the Twentieth
of the same Month, made Lord Admiral of England, Ireland, and Wales: And upon
the Second of April next ensuing, took his Place in Parliament amongst the rest
of the Peers: Also, upon the Eighth of that Month, constituted Lord Admiral,
and Lieutenant General of all her Forces at Sea: He was likewise Lord
Chamberlain of her Household. And in the 1. Eliz. had the same Honorable
Office conferred on him by that Queen.

After this he was sent Ambassador, with the Lord Cobham, to the Spaniard into
the Netherlands; and in 12. Eliz. accompanied the Earl of Sussex, General of
those Forces then sent against the Earls of Northumberland and VVestmoreland,
at that Time in Rebellion. In 15. Eliz. he was one of the Peers which sat at
the Trial of the Duke of Norfolk. And by his Testament, bearing Date 6. Maii,
(11. Eliz.) being then Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, bequeathed
his Body to be buried in the Chancel of the Parish Church of Rygate, in Com.
Sur. appointing a Tomb to be there made for him. And to Charles, his Son and
Heir, bequeathed his Collar of Gold, and all his Robes belonging to the Order
of the Garter.

He Married Two Wives; first, Katharine Daughter and Coheir to Sir John
Broughton, of Tuddington, in Com. Bedf. Knight; by whom he had Issue, only one
Daughter, called Agnes, Married to William Pawlet, the Third Marquis of
Winchester: Secondly, Margaret, Daughter of Sir Thomas Ganiage, Knight; which
Margaret departed this Life..... Maii, Anno 1581. (23. Eliz.) by whom he had
Issue four Sons, viz. Charles, who succeeded him in his Honor; William Howard
of Lingfield, in Com. Sur. Edward and Henry, who died Young: Also Five
Daughters; First, Douglas, Married first to John Lord Sheffield; afterward to
Robert Earl of Leicester, as has been pretended; and thirdly, to Sir Edward
Stafford of Grafton, Knight: Secondly, Mary; first, to Edward Lord Dudley;
afterward to Richard Montpession, Esquire. Thirdly, Frances, to Edward Earl of
Hertford. Fourthly, Martha, to Sir George Bourchier, Knight, (Third Son to John
Earl of Bath.) And, Fifthly, Katharine, who died young. And departing this Life
at Hampton Court, 11. Jan. 15. Eliz. was honorably Buried at Rygate in Surrey,
upon the 29th. of the same Month.

A Patent whereby Queen Mary does create William Lord Howard Baron of Effingham.
MARIA Dei Gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regina, Fidei Defensor,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Ducibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Justiciarils,
Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ministris, and omnibus Ballivis, and Fidelibus
suis, salutem. Cum enim praeteritorum Magnifica gesta Principum saltem, qui sua
Industria atque Virtute, famam nobis reliquere Immortalem, ad mentem revocemus,
nil Prudentius, nil laud Dignius pro prospero atque Felici ipsorum Statu,
Salute, securoque Successu, eos fecisse arbitramur, qui quando Fideles,
Diligentes, strenuosque suos servientes Facultatibus, Regimine, and Honor,
condign remunerari, caeterisque praeferre decreverint, sicque sua iis
Beneficia juxta eorum Virtutes, atque Merita, benign confer curarunt. Nos
eorum mores imitantes, non solum Nobilitatem atque Constantiam, imo probitatem,
ac in Armis strenuitatem, caeterasque virtutes Domini Willielmi Howard, militis
nostri intime dilecti, non modica cum deliberatione mature considerantes ipsum
Willielmum Howard in Baronum Parliamenti, and Regni nostri Angliae, ex mero
motu, gratiaque, nostris ordinavimus, deputavimus, creavimus, and constituimus,
prout per praesentes ordinamus, deputamus, creamus, and constituimus, atque
titulum, nomen, and stilum Baronis Howard de Effingham, locumque in singulis
Parliamentis infra idem Regnum nostrum Angliae posthac celebrandis, caeteraque
jura, Privilegiaque nostra ipsius Regni Baronibus ejusdem ex Lege,
consuetudine, aliove quovis pacto pertinentia, eidem Willielmo, damus, and
concedimus, eisque ipsum adeo libere, and ample uti, and gaudere, sicut unquam
aliquis Baro hujus Regni nostri usus fuit, aut debuit, volumus habendum
hujusmodi statum, titulum, nomen, and stilum Baronis Howard de Effingham
praedicta, atque locum in Parliamentis praedictis, ac caetera praemissa
praefato Willielmo, and haeredibus suis masculis, de corpore suo excuntibus, in
perpetuum, eo quod expressa mentio de vero valor animi, aut de certitudine
praemissorum, sive eorum alicujus, aut de aliis donis, sive concessionibus, per
nos, seu per aliquem progenitorum nostrorum praefato Willielmo ante haec
tempora factis, in praesentibus minime factum existit. Aliquo statuto, actu,
ordinatione, provisione, sive restrictione inde in contrarium ante haec editis,
factis, seu ordinatis, seu provisis, aut aliqua alia re, causa, vel materia
quaqunque in aliquo non obstante, his testibus Reverend' in Christo Patre, ac
praedilecto and fideli Conciliario nostro, Stephano Wintoniensi Episcopo, summo
nostro Angliae Cancellario, charissimis consanguineis, and Conciliariis
nostris, Willielmo Marchione Winton, praenobilis ordinis Garterii Milite, ac
Thesaurario nostro Angliae, Henrico, Comite Arundel, praenobilis ordinis
Garterii Milite, ac Domino senescallo Hospitii nostri, Johanne Comite Bedford,
praenobilis ordinis Garterii Milite, ac Custode privati sigilli nostri,
Henrico, Comite Sussex, Willielmo, Comite Pembroke, praenobilis ordinis
Garterii Milite, praedilectis and fidelibus Conciliariis nostris, Willielmo
Domino Paget de Bewdesert, praenobilis ordinis Garterii Milite, Reverendo in
Christo Patre Cutberto Dunelmens. Episcopo, Johanne Gage, praenobilis ordinis
Garterii Milite, Domino Camerario nostro, Roberto Rotchester, Milite,
contrarotulatore Hospitii nostri, Henrico Jernynham, Milite, Vicecamerario
nostro, Willielmo Petre, Milite, uno Primariorum Secretariorum nostorum, and
Johanne Bourne, Milite, altero Primariorum Secretariorum nostrorum. Data per
manum nostram apud Westmonasterium undecimo die Martii, Anno Regni nostri
primo, per ipsam Reginam.

Sigillum Eden.

Herbert's History of Henry the Eighth, page 535.
BUT it rested not here; for the Lord William Howard, the Queen's Uncle, newly
returned from an Embassage in France, and his Wife, and the old Duchess of
Norfolk, and diverse of the Queen's, and the said Dutchess's Kindred and
Servants, and a Butter-Wife, were Indicted of Misprision of Treason, as
concealing this Fact, and condemned to perpetual Prison; though yet, by the
King's Favor, some of them were at length Released.

Commission of Queen Mary, To be High Admiral of England.
MARIA Dei Gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regina, omnibus, ad quos,
etc. Salutem. Sciatis quod nos ob certas causas, and considerationes nos
specialiter moventes, ac in consideratione boni, very, and fidelis Servitii per
dilectum Conciliarium nostrum, Willielmum Howard, Militem, Dominum Howard de
Effingham, ante haec tempora facti, and impensi, de gratia nostra speciali, ac
ex certa Scientia, and mero motu nostris dedimus, and concessimus, ac per
praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris, damus, and
concedimus, eidem Domino Howard, officium magni Admiralli nostri Angliae,
Hiberniae, Walliae, ac Dominiorum and Insularum eorundem, Villae nostrae in
Cales, ac Marchiarum nostrarum ejusdem, Normanum Gastonum, and Aquitanum, ac
ipsum Dominum Howard, magnum Admirallum nostrum Angliae, Hiberniae, and
Walliae, ac Dominiorum and Insularum nostrarum eorundem, Villae nostrae Cales,
and Marchiarum nostrarum ejusdem, Normanum Gastonum, and Aquitanum, necnon
praefectum generalem Classis, and Marium, dictorum Regnorum nostrorum Angliae,
and Hiberniae, ac Dominiorum and Insularum eorundem, fecimus, constituimus, and
ordinavimus, ac per praesentes facimus, constituimus, and ordinamus: Et
ulterius sciatis, quod nos de Gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and
mero motu nostris dedimus, and concessimus, ac per praesentes pro nobis,
haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, damus, and concedimus eidem Domino
Howard, magno Admirallo nostro Angliae, and praefecto Classis, and Marium
nostrorum praedictorum, omnia and omnimodas jurisdictiones, autoritates,
libertates, officia, feoda, proficua, vadia, emolumenta wrecum maris, and maris
ejectum, regardia, advantagia, commoditates, and praeminentia quaecunque eidem
officio magni Admiralli nostri Angliae, and Hiberniae, ac aliorum locorum, and
Dominiorum praedictorum qualitercunque spectantia, and pertinentia, sive
incumbentia, vel aliquo modo ab antiquo, and perantea debita, sive consueta;
necnon tam bona, and catalla quorumcunque praedictorum piratorum, homicidarum,
and felonum, qualitercunque infra nostram jurisdictionem Admiralitatis nostrae
Angliae, inferius limitatam, delinquentium; quam bona, debita, and catalla
omnium and singulorum eorum manutenentium accessariorum, consulentium,
auxiliantium, vel assistentium quorumcunque, and eorum ministrorum; atque etiam
bona, debita, and catalla quarumcunque personarum felonum de se, and cujuslibet
personae felonis de se, infra praedictam nostram jurisdictionem Admiralitatis
nostrae Angliae praedictae, quovis modo, seu qualitercunque ad mortem
devenientium, ubicunque bona, debita, vel catalla hujusmodi, aut aliqua
parcella eorundem, per mare, aquam, vel terram, infra Regna nostra praedicta,
seu Dominia nostra eorundem, tam infra libertates, quam extra fuerint inventa,
seu invenienda, forisfacta, seu forisfacienda, vel existentia quaecunque: Et
etiam bona, debita, and catalla, quarumcunque aliarum personarum felonum de se,
and cujuslibet aliae personae felonis de se infra jurisdictionem nostram
praedictam reperta, seu reperienda, aut contingentia quaecunque; and praeterea
tam bona, dedita, and catalla quorumcunque aliorum praedictorum felonum and
homicidarum ubique locorum delinquentium; ac bona, debita, and catalla eorum
manutenentium, accessariorum, consulentium, auxiliantium, seu assistentium;
quam etiam bona, debita, and catalla quorumcunque fugitivorum, convictorum,
attaintorum, damnatorum, utlatorum, vel in exigendo vel productione felonia,
homicidia vel murdra, seu aliquo alio quocunque offenso, aut delicto,
qualitercunque posito, sive ponendo; necnon and bona naviata Flotsfonde,
Jetsond, Lagon, and Shares, ac thesaurum inventum, seu inveniendum, deodanda,
ac bona inimicorum pro derelicta habita, vel habenda, seu casu fortuito
reperta, aut reperienda, vel qualitercunque debita, seu debenda; necnon omnia
bona mercimonia, and catalla deperdita in mare inventa, sive extra mare
projecta, atque etiam omnia and singula alia casualia, tam in, super, seu per
mare, litorave, crecas, aut costeras maris, vel parts Maritimas, quam in,
super, vel per aquas dulces, portus, flumina publica, rivos, seu crecas
quascunque, aut loca superundata quaecunque, infra fluxum vel refluxum maris,
seu aquae ad plenitudinem, aut super litora, vel ripas alicujus eorundem, a
quibuscunque primis pontibus versus Mare per Regnum Nostrum Angliae, aut
Hiberniae, seu Dominia nostra praedicta, qualitercunque, quandocunque, vel
quomodocunque emergentium, contingentium, seu provenientium quaecunque; vel
ubicunque bona, debita, vel catalla hujusmodi aut caetera praemissa, seu aliqua
parcella eorundem infra jurisdictionem nostram Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae
praedictae reperiantur, aut invenire seu reperiri contingunt, vel quae ad nos
nunc pertinent, aut unquam a die obitus Domini Edwardi Sexti, nuper Regis
Angliae defuncti, quovis modo pertinuerunt, seu pertinere debuerunt, aut debent
ullo modo, Areriam, Anchoragia, Beothonagia, seu signa per mare, vel portus,
seu publica flumina, sive litora and promontoria alicujus eorundem pro
directione navium erecta, and lastagia seu arenosam navium onerationem, atque
Pisces Regales, videlicet Sturgiones, Balaenas, Cetas, Porpesias, Delphinos,
Riggs, and Graspes, ac generaliter caeteros Pisces quoscunque, magnam sive
ingentem crassitudinem, sive pinguedinem, in se habentes, eidem officio magni
Admiralli nostri Angliae, ab antiquo, de jure vel consuetudine, pertinentes seu
spectantes, aut aliquo modo consueta. Et insuper omnes, and omnimodas fines,
mulctas, exitus, forisfacta, amerciamenta, redemptiones, ac recognitiones
quascunque, forisfacta, and poenas pecuniarum, pro transgressionibus, delictis,
injuriis, extortionibus, contemptibus, ac aliis malefactis quibuscunque, vel
pro aliqua alia re, materia, seu causa quacunque impositas, vel inflictas, aut
imponendas, vel infligendas tam coram dicto magno Admirallo nostro Angliae, seu
aliquo ejus locum tenente Officiali Commissario, Vice-admirallo, vel deputato
vigore harum literarum nostrarum Patentium, per eum assignando, vel deputando,
in aliqua curia Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae, tenta, sive tenenda,
praesentatas, sive praesentandas assidendas, afferendas, forisfaciendas, vel
adjudicandas; quam etiam amerciamenta, exitus, fines, perquisita, mulctas, and
poenas pecuniarum quascunque, ac forisfactionem quarumcunque recognitionum,
coram dicto magno Admirallo nostro Angliae, ejusque locum Tenente,
Vice-admirallo, vel Deputatis, ac aliis Justiciariis, seu haeredibus, vel
successoribus nostrum Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae, vel quatuor
corundem, ad omnia Productiones, Felonias, Roberias, ac Murdras, Homicidia,
Confederationes, ac alia Offensa, Transgressiones, Comtemptus, Misprisiones,
Spoliationes and Maleficia, infra jurisdictionem nostram maritimam, commissa
sive committenda, audienda, and terminanda per literas nostras commissionales
patentes, haeredum vel successorum nostrorum juxto statuta inde edita, and
consuetudinem Curiae principalis Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae fub
Magno Sigillo Angliae, factas, and fiendas, assignatas, sive assignandas,
contingentia, sive imposita, aut imponenda, vel affligenda, sive aliquo modo
affligenda, afferenda, forisfacienda, seu adjudicanda, aut aliquo modo,
occasion praemissorum, nobis vel haeredibus seu successoribus nostris, in ea
part qualitercunque debita, seu debenda quaecunque, eademque omnia and singula
petenda, exigenda, levanda, capienda, recipienda, and obtinenda, ac libere
disponenda, habenda, gaudenda, occupanda, and exercenda, dictum officium magni
Admiralli nostri Angliae, Hiberniae, Walliae, Cales, and Marchiarum eorundum,
Normanum Gasconum and Aquitanum, ac Praefecti generalis Classis and Marium
nostrorum praedictorum eidem Domino Howard pro termino vitae suae, per se, vel
per sufficientem deputatum suum, sive deputatos suos sufficientes, una cum
omnibus and singulis praemissis, ac aliis rebus quibuscunque, eidem officio
magni Admiralli nostri Angliae quovis modo pertinentibus, devenientibus,
incumbentibus, sive spectantibus, seu perantea ab antiquo debitis, vel
consuetis, absque compoto, seu aliquo alio, nobis, haeredibus, vel
successoribus nostris, proinde reddenda, solvenda, seu facienda, aliquibus
Statutis, actibus, ordinationibus, prohibitionibus, restrictionibus in
contrarium factis, editis, ordinatis vel positis, aut aliqua alia re, materia,
seu causa quacunque in aliquo non obstante. Et insuper ex uberiori gratia
nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu, nostris concessimus, ac
per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, damus,
concedimus eidem Domino Howard, magno Admirallo nostro Angliae, ac Praefecto
Classis, and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, pro occupatione and exercitio dicti
officii magni Admiralli nostri Angliae praedictae, quandam annuitatem, sive
annualem redditum ducentarum marcarum legalis monetae Angliae, una cum omnibus
and singulis caeteris praemissis, habendum, gaudendum, and annuatim
percipiendum praedictam annuitatem, sive annualem redditum ducentarum marcarum,
praefato Domino Howard, a Festo Nativitatis Domini ultimo praeterito de
thesauro nostro ad receptam scaccarii nostri, per manus thesaurariorum and
Camerariorum nostrorum dicti Scaccarii pro tempore existentis, ad quatuor anni
terminos, videlicet, ad Festa Annunciationis beatae Mariae Virginis,
Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae, Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, and
Nativitatis Domini, per aequales portiones solvendum. Et praeterea de uberiori
Gratia nostra, ac ex certa Scientia, and mero motu, nostris dedimus, and
concessimus, ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris,
damus, and concedimus praefato Domino Howard, magno Admirallo nostro Angliae,
and Praefecto Generali Classis, and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, plenam
jurisdictionem, potestatem, and authoritatem, audiendi, examinandi, and
terminandi quascunque Causas Civiles and Maritimas, atque querelas, contractus,
delicta, seu quasi delicta, crimina, debita, exchambia, compotas, literas
petitas, conventiones, lites, transgressiones, injurias, extorsiones, and
demanda, ac negotia Civilia, and Maritima quaecunque inter mercatores, aut
inter Dominos, and proprietarios Navium, and aliorum vasorum, and mercatores
seu alios quoscunque cum eisdem Dominiis, and proprietariis Naviis, and
caeterorum vasorum quorumcunque infra jurisdictionem nostram Maritimam
Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae, occupatorum vel usitatorum, seu inter
quascunque alias personas qualitercunque habitas, factas, initas, seu
contractas, pro aliqua re, materia, seu causa, vel negotio, seu injuria
quacunque, tam in, super, vel per mare, aut flumina publica, seu aquas dulces,
portus, rivos, seu crecas, and loca fuperundata quaecunque, infra fluxum, and
refluxum maris, and aquae ad plenitudinem, vel super litora, seu ripas
quascunque, eisdem vel eorum alicui adjacentes a quibuscunque primis pontibus
versus mare, per dicta Regna nostra Angliae, and Hiberniae, seu Dominia nostra
eorundem supradicta, vel alibi ultra mare, aut in partibus ultramarinis
quibuscunque expedita, seu expedienda, una cum omnibus and singulis suis
infidentibus, emergentibus, dependentibus, annexis, and connexis causis
quibuscunque, ubicunque, seu qualitercunque hujusmodi causas, querelas,
contractus, and alia praemissa supradicta, vel eorum aliquod oriri, celebrari,
contrahi, vel fieri contingat. Atque insuper causas appellationum and
nullitatis querelarum ex causis praedictis, seu earum aliqua, a quibuscunque
Judicibus, Justiciariis, Vice-admirallis, Majoribus, Vice-comitibus,
Senescallis, Ballivis, seu ab Officiaris vel ministris quibuscunque ad curiam
nostram principalis Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae interpositarum,
seu interponendarum, cum omnibus and singulis suis emergentibus, dependentibus,
connexis, and annexis causis and negotiis quibuscunque, juxta leges nostras
Civiles and Maritimas, ac consuetudinem Curiae nostrae principalis
Admiralitatis nostrae praedictae, in eadem Curia nostra audiendis, and
terminandis, cum plena potestate, and authoritate nostris inhibendum,
prohibendum, and supersedere faciendum, and mandandum omnibus, and singulis,
quibus in ea part fuerit inhibendum, supersedendum, vel prohibendum, quod
ipsi, and eorum aliquis, pendentes in dicta Curia nostra, hujusmodi
appellationes, sive nullitatis querelae, negotiis indiscussis, ulterius in ea
part procedere minime attemptent, nec attemptet, sub poenis, arbitrio dicti
magni Admiralli nostri, in ea part limitandis, seu interponendis, necnon
querelas omnium and singulorum contractuum, conventionum, ac causarum, and
negotiorum civilium, and maritimorum ultra mare proficiendorum, vel ultra mare
contractorum, ac in hoc Regno nostro Angliae, vel dicto Regno nostro Hiberniae,
vel in aliquo alio Dominio nostro eorundem perimplendorum, seu perficiendorum,
qualitercunque emergentium, seu contingentium, areriam, cognitionem caeterorum
omnium and singulorum, quae ad officium magni Admiralli nostri Angliae, and
Praefectum generalem Classis, and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, vel
jurisdictionem nostram Maritimam nostrae Admiralitatis Angliae praedictae
quovis modo tangunt, vel aliquo modo concernunt, aut ab antiquo pertinere
debuerunt, aut debent. Et generaliter ad cognoscendum, and procedendum in
omnibus, and singulis aliis causis, litibus, criminibus, delictis, excessibus,
querelis, injuriis, maleficiis, seu quasi malesiciis, transgressionibus,
regretariis, forstallariis, and negotiis Maritimis quibuscunque per Regna
nostra, and loca praedicta infra jurisdictionem nostram Maritimam Admiralitatis
nostrae Angliae praedictae, per mare, vel aquam, aut ripas, seu litora eorundem
qualitercunque facta, commissa, perpetrata, aut emergentia; una cum potestate
and authoritate recognitiones quascunque pro conventionibus seu debitis
quibuscunque capiendas, easque executionum ponendas, and exequi faciendas and
mandandas; necnon naves, personas, res, bona, merces, and mercimonia quaecunque
pro praemissis, and eorum quolibet, ac aliis causis quibuscunque eadem
concernentia ubique locorum fuerint reperta, seu inventa per Regna, seu Dominia
nostra praedicta infra libertates, seu extra Areriam, pro aliis conventionibus,
causis, seu debitis quibuscunque, qualitercunque contractis, sive emergentibus,
dummodo bona, seu personae debitorum reperiantur infra jurisdictionem
Admiralitatis nostrae praedictae ab antiquo usitatas, realiter arrestandas, and
arrestari faciendas, and mandandas, ipsasque and ipsa cum suis emergentibus,
dependentibus, insidentibus, annexis, and connexis causis, and negotiis
quibuscunque, juxta leges, and consuetudines praedictas, aliisque viis, modis,
and mediis omnibus and singulis, quibus idem magnus Admirallus noster and
Praefectus generalis Classis, and Marium nostrorum praedictorum melius
sciverit, and poterit, ad audiendum, examinandum, discutiendum, and sine debito
terminandum. Ac personas quascunque in ea part, prout casus exiget in dicta
Curia Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae, coram dicto Admirallo nostro
Angliae, seu ejus deputato quocunque, seu deputatis comparere, and respondere,
cum cujuslibet coercionis potestate, ac cum suis alternis poenae and mulctae,
juxta leges, and consuetudines praedictas compellendum, ac justitiam faciendum
and ministrandum, etiam juris ordine servato seu velo servato, sine strepitu
and sigura justitii sola facta, and rei veritate inspecta procedendum. Necnon
ad inquirendum per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum, tam infra
libertates quam extra, de omnibus and singulis, quae de jure, statutis,
ordinationibus, vel consuetudinibus Curiae nostrae principalis nostrae
Admiralitatis Angliae praedictae ab antiquo inquiri solent vel deberent.
Reofque, contemptores ac juris and jurisdictionis nostrorum praedictorum
violatores, and usurpatores, delinquentes, and contumaciter absentes,
naucleros, marinarios, remiges, piscatores, naupegos, and alios operarios and
expertos quoscunque, res nauticas quascunque exercentes, tam juxta and secundum
leges nostras Civiles and Maritimas, ac ordinationem and consuetudinem
praedictam, and eorum demerita, quam juxta and secundum Statuta Regni nostri
Angliae in ea part edita, and posita, mulctandum, corrigendum, puniendum,
castigandum, and reformandum, ac in quibuscunque carceribus nostris, ubique
locorum, infra Regna and Dominia nostra praedicta, incarcerandum, and
incarcerari faciendum and mandandum, incarceratosque quoscunque, qui
deliberandi fuerint, deliberandum, and penitus exonerandum, and exonerari
faciendum and mandandum, fluminaque nostra publica, portus, rivos, and aquas
dulces, and crecas quascunque infra jurisdictionem nostram maritimam, ubicunque
locorum, infra Regna and Dominia nostra praedicta existentia, pro conservatione
tam Classis nostrae ac Classium and Navigiorum regnorum and dominiorum
nostrorum praedictorum, quam piscium in eisdem fluminibus and locis praedictis
crescentium quorumcunque, necnon and ordinationes and statuta quaecunque in ea
part edita and posita, debite conservandum, and exequi ac conservari
faciendum, subconservatoresque deputandum, and assignandum, omniaque alia and
singula faciendum, exercendum, expediendum, ac exequendum in praemissis, and
eorum quolibet, prout de jure, and secundum leges, and consuetudines praedictas
fuerint facienda. Necnon and reta minus stricta, ac alia ingenia, sive
instrumenta illicita quaecunque, ubicunque locorum, per flumina publica,
portus, rivos, aquas dulces, seu crecas quascunque infra jurisdictonem nostram
maritimam Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae per aquam occupata, sive
exercita, ac exercitatores, and occupatores eorundem, juxta dicta Statuta, and
ordinationes Regni nostri Angliae praedictae, in contrarium editas, and
positas, puniendum, corrigendum, and reformandum, ac insuper tam naves, and
naviculas, seu vasa quaecunque, pro quibuscunque voyagiis, and negotiis
nostris, vel expeditione eorundem; necnon nautas, sive Pilotas Navium,
Magistros, Naucleros, and Vibrillatores, sive Bombardarios and Marinarios, ac
alias personas quascunque, pro Navibus and Naviculis, seu vasibus hujusmodi
aptas, and idoneas de tempore in tempus quoties necesse fuerit, ubique locorum,
infra Regna and Dominia nostra praedicta, infra libertates and extra
congregandum, delegandum, retinendum, capiendum, arrestandum, deputandum, and
assignandum, absque interruptione seu impedimento per quemcunque alium in
contrarium fiendum, cum plena jurisdictione, and potestate ad exequendum omnia
alia and singula, quae in ea part per magnum Admirallum generalem nostrum, and
Praefectum Classis and Marium nostrorum fieri possint, debent, vel solent
expediri, vel necesse fuerint expedienda vel exequenda aoprout eidem magno
Admirallo nostro Angliae, and Praefecto Classis, and Marium nostrorum
praedictorum, de tempore in tempus magis expediens visum fuerit; concessimus
praeterea, and de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu,
nostris dedimus, ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus
nostris, damus, and concedimus eidem Domino Howard, magno Admirallo nostro
Angliae and Praefecto generali Classis, and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, ac
omnia, and singula alia eidem officio pertinentia, and spectantia, per Regna
and Dominia nostra praedicta, and quodlibet eorundem, melius and commodius
exequi, and perimpleri valeat, vel possit, plenam potestatem, and autoritatem,
quoties opus and necesse fuerit, ad nominandum, proficiendum, ordinandum,
assignandum, faciendum, and constituendum, locum tenentem, sive locum tenentes,
Judicem, sive Judices, Vice-admirallum, sive Vice-admirallos, Commissarium,
sive Commissarios, Praesidentem, sive Praesidentes, Registrarium, sive
Registrarios, ac omnes, and omnimodos alios Officiarios, and Ministros sub se
necessarios, idoneos, and opportunos pro praedicto Officio and exercitio
ejusdem in locis praedictis exercendo, pro termino vitae cujuslibet
officiariorum, and ministrorum hujusmodi duratorum, deputandorum, and
praeferendorum, vel ad been placitum dicti magni Admiralli nostri Angliae
praeferendorum, deputandorum and assignandorum, ad omnia and singula praemissa,
vice and loco suis faciendum and expediendum, Statutaque, and ordinationes
quascunque in officio nostro Admiralitatis Angliae praedictae statuendum, and
concedendum, quoties opus fuerit, ac ea quae fuerint repellenda, repellendum.
Necnon hujusmodi officiarium, and ministrum, and eorum quemlibet, ab hujusmodi
officio and exercitio eorundem, juxta juris and aequitatis exigentiam, ac
dictae curiae principalis Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae
consuetudinem, amovere, and expellere, ac alium, sive alios, loco, sive locis,
modo praemisso ad ejus beneplacitum, vel pro termino vitae, substituere,
ordinare, facere, and deputare possit, and valeat, quoties magis expediens
videbitur. Et insuper de uberiori gratia nostra volumus, ac per praesentes
concedimus quod hujusmodi officiarii, and ministri habeant and percipiant omnia
and singula vada, and feoda, proficua, advantagia, and commoditates quaecunque
eisdem officiariis and eorum cujuslibet, juxta consuetudinem Curiae principalis
Admiralli nostri Angliae praedictae, ab antiquo debita and consueta absque
compoto, seu aliquo alio, nobis, haeredibus, vel successoribus nostris proinde
reddendum, solvendum vel faciendum.

Et ulterius de uberiori Gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero
motu, nostris dedimus, and concessimus, ac per praesentes pro nobis,
haeredibus, and successoribus, damus, and concedimus praefato Domino Howard,
magno Admirallo nostro Angliae, and Praefecto generali Classis, and Marium
nostrorum praedictorum, and ejus locum tenenti, and locum tenentibus, Judici,
sive Judicibus, Vice, admirallo, sive Vice-admirallis, Deputato, sive
Deputatis, Comissario, sive Comissariis, Praesidenti, sive Praesidentibus,
plenam potestatem, jurisdictionem, autoritatem in causis supradictis, negotiis,
litibus, and querelis, delictis, criminibus, extorsionibus, malefactis,
contractis Civilibus and Maritimis, ac caeteris praemissis, omnibus and
singulis, una cum omnibus and fingulis suis emergentibus, incidentibus,
connexis, dependentibus, and annexis causis, and negotiis quibuscunque
cognoscendum, procedendum, easque and ea audiendum, examinandum, terminandum,
and siniendum, ac sententias, and decreta quaecunque in ea part fulminandum,
promulgandum, and interponendum, eaque executioni demandandum, cum cognitione,
and plena jurisdictione quarumcunque aliarum causarum civilium and maritimarum,
quae mare, vel maris pertransum, sive passagium, aut iter navale, sive voyagium
maritimum, vel jurisdictionem nostram Maritimam supradictam, quovis modo
concernunt, seu recipient, aut super mare, fluminibus publicis, seu portubus,
rivis, aquis dulcibus, crecis, vel locis praedictis, qualitercunque expeditis,
vel expediendis; etiam cum potestate ad procedendum in eisdem juxta leges
nostras civiles and maritimas, ac consuetudinem Curiae principalis nostrae
Admiralitatis Angliae praedictae, ab antiquo usitatas, tam ex officio mere
mixto vel promoto, seu ad alicujus partis instantiam, prout casus exiget and
expediens visum fuerit. Volumus etiam and per praesentes concedimus, quod
praefatus Dominus Howard, magnus Admirallus noster Angliae, and Praefectus
Classis and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, ac ejus locum tenentes, ac caeteri
ejus officiarii, and ministri praedicti habeant cognitionem, and decisionem de
wreco maris magno, seu parvo, ac de morte, supervisione, and visu corporum
mortuorum, quarumcunque personarum in mare vel fluminibus publicis, portubus,
aquis dulcibus, seu crecis quibuscunque infra fluxum maris, vel aquae
praedictae ad plenitudinem, per dicta regna nostra, and dominia praedicta, ac
jurisdictionem Admiralitatis nostrae praedictae custodiendum, and conservandum,
statutis nostris de wreco maris, and de officio Coronatoris, annis, tertio and
quarto Edwardi Primi, atque Statutis de bonis spoliatis super mare venientibus
in hoc Regnum nostris Angliae, anno vicesimo septimo Edwardi Tertii,
progenitorum nostrorum quondam Regni Angliae respective editis and provifis,
atque cognitionem de mahemio in locis praedictis, infra fluxum maris, and aquae
ad plenitudinem contingent, cum potestate etiam puniendi delinquentes in ea
part quoscunque, juxta juris exigentiam, ac Curae Admiralitatis nostrae
praedictae consuetudinem, eo quod expressa mentio de vero valor annuo vel
certitudine praemissorum, sive eorum alicujus, aut de aliis donis sive
concessionibus, per nos seu aliquem progenitorum nostrorum praefato Domino
Howard, magno Admirallo nostro, and Praefecto generali Classis, and Marium
nostrorum praedictorum, ante haec tempora factis, in praesentibus minime facta
existit, aut aliquo Statuto, actu, ordinatione, provisione, prohibitione, sive
restrictione, praesentibus literis nostris patentibus, sive alicui parti, seu
clausulae in eisdem expressis vel insertis, repugnantibus, derogatoriis, aut
contrariis quibuscunque, in contrarium factis, editis, ordinatis, sive
provisis, seu aliqua alia re, causa, vel materia quacunque in aliquo non
obstante, mandantes and firmiter and stricte tenore praesentium percipientes,
atque per dictum magnum Admirallum, and Praefectum nostrum generalem ex part
nostra percipi and mandari volentes universis and singulis Proceribus, Dominis
Justiciariis, Majoribus, Vicecomitibus, Capitaneis, Senescallis, Ballivis,
Custodibus Gaolorum, and carcerum nostrorum quorumcunque, Constabulariisque ac
caeteris Ministris, and fidelibus Subditis, and Ligeis nostris quibuscunque,
and eorum cujuslibet infra libertates and extra, quod praefato Dimino Howard,
magno Admirallo nostro Angliae and Praefecto generali Classis and Marium
nostrorum praedictorum, ac officiariorum, deputatis and ministris suis
quibuscunque, and eorum cuilibet in dicto officio Admiralitatis nostrae,
assignatis seu assignandis, circa executionem praemissorum intendentes,
auxiliantes, faventes, pariter and obedientes sint, ac quod mandatis and
praeceptis quibuscunque eis, vel eorum alicui ex part nostra, per dictum
Dominum Howard, magnum Admirallum nostrum Angliae, ac Praefectum generalem
Classis, and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, vel ejus nomine direct pareant,
sub poena contemptus istarum literarum nostrarum patentium, ac sub periculo
incumbentium. In cujus rei, etc.

Test Regina apud Westmonasterium vicesimo die Martii, Anno Regni Reginae
Mariae primo. Per ipsam Reginam. Concordatum cum Recordo and examinatum per me
S. Killingworth.

Cambdeni Elizabetha, Page 28.
JAM illa annos nata XXV, usu, and adversitate efficacissimis magistris,
edocta, prudentiam supra aetatem comparuerat, cujus primum specimen in
Conciliariis deligendis dedit. In sanctius enim Concilium sibi adscivit
Nicolaum Heathum, Archiepiscopum Eboracensem, quem dixi, magna prudentia, and
modesto ingenio, virum, Guilielmum Pawletum, Wintoniae Marchionem, summum
Angliae Thesaurarium, Henricum Fitz-Alanum Arundeliae, Franciscum Talbottum
Salopiae, Edwardum Stanleium Derbiae, Guilielmum Herbertum Penbrochiae,
Comites, Edwardum Baronem Clintonum, maris Praefectum, and Guilielmum Baronem
Howardum Effinghamium, Cubicularium.

Cambdeni Elizabetha, Page 19.
AD Hispanum in Belgio mittitur Baro Cobhamus cum documentis in eandem
sententiam; necnon cum diplomate, quo Comes Arundeliae, Thurlbeius, Episcopus
Eliensis, and D. Wottonus a Maria ad pacem Cameraci tractandam nuper delegati,
Reginae nomine denuo delegantur, illisque Guilielmus Baro Howardus Effinghamius
adjungitur.

Cambdeni Elizabetha, Page 31.
HINC visum ut ad castellum Cameracense de componendis controversiis, and pace
concilianda, agerent utrique delegati. Pro Regina Angliae, Thurlbeius,
Episcopus Eliensis, Guilielmus Baro Howardus Effinghamius, Reginae cubicularius
supremus, and Nicolaus Wottonus, Ecclesiarum metropolitanarum Cantuariae and
Eboraci Decanus. Pro rege Galliae, Carolus Cardinalis a Lotharyngia,
Archiepiscopus and Dux Rihemensis, Par primus Franciae, Annas, Dux
Montmorentius, Par Conestabilus, and magnus Magister Franciae, Jacobus Albonus,
Dominus a St. Andraea, Marchio Fronsac, and Franciae Marescallus, Johannes
Morvillerius, Episcopus Aurelianensis, and Claudius Albospinaeus, in Privato
Concilio Secretarius.

Ex eodem iterum, Page 209.
INter pares appellatur ad judicium nepotis Ducis Norfolciae.

Ex eodem iterum, Page 243.
PRincipio hujus anni spiritum edidit Guilielmus Baro Howard Effinghamius,
privati Sigilli Custos, Thomae Howardi, Bellicosi illius Norfolciae Ducis, de
secunda Uxore Agnete Tilneia, filius, vir fidei spectatissimae and animi
invicti, qui primum Caleti Praefectus, in Baronum numerum a Regina Maria
adstitus, and magnus Angliae Admirallus constitutus. Cui postea Cubicularius
erat, ut etiam Elizabethae, donec aetate fractus, Sussexio, paucis ante obitum
mensibus, cesserit, privati Sigilli Custos factus, qui in Anglia quartus est,
ut dixi, honoris gradus. Successit in Baroniae honor, Carolus filius, qui
postea Reginae Cubicularius, and magnus itidem Angliae Admirallus.

CHARLES HOWARD, Earl of Nottingham, Peer, and Lord High Admiral of England,
Lord Baron of Effingham, Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, Lord Justice and Heir
of all her Majesty's Forests, Parks, and Chaces on this side Trent, Knight of
the most Noble Order of the Garter, and one of Her Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council. CHAPTER III.
Hollinshed in the Life of Queen Elizabeth, Page 1212.
About the Rebellion of the Earls of Westmoreland and Northumberland.
AND the twentieth of December they came to Hexam, from whence the Rebels were
gone the Night before to Neworth, where they counseled with Edward Dacres
concerning their own weariness; and also, how they were not only pursued by the
Earl of Sussex, and others with him, having a power with them of seven thousand
Men, being almost at their heels, but also, by the Earl of Warwick, and the
Lord Clinton, with a far greater Army of Twelve thousand Men, raised by the
Queen's Majesty's Commissioners, out of the South, and middle part of the
Realm; in which Army, besides the Earl of Warwick, and Lord Admiral, chief
Governor of the same, there were also Walter Devereux, Viscount Hertford, High
Marshal of the Field, with the Lord Willoughby of Parham, Mr. Charles Howard,
now Lord Howard of Effingham, General of the Horsemen under the Earl of
Warwick, young Henry Knowles, Son to Sir Francis Knowles, his Lieutenant,
Edward Horsey, Captain of the Isle of Wight, with five hundred Harquebusiers
out of the same Isle, and Captain Leighton, with other five hundred
Harquebusiers, Londoners, and many other worthy Gentlemen and valiant Captains.

The Baronage of England, Page 279.
WHich Charles so succeeding him, in 13. Eliz. (his Father then living) was one
of those noble persons, who, by the command of Queen Elizabeth, conducted the
Lady Anne of Austria, Daughter to Maximilian the Emperor, from Zeland into
Spain: And in 16. Eliz. (24. April) was Installed Knight of the most Noble
Order of the Garter.

In 28. Eliz. upon the death of Edward Earl of Lincoln, Lord High Admiral of
England (being then also Chamberlain to the Queen, as his Father had formerly
been) he was constituted his Successor in that great Office. Whereupon in Ann.
1588. (30. Eliz.) when that formidable Armado from Spain so much threatened an
Invasion here, he was constituted Lieutenant General of the Queen's whole Fleet
at Sea, of whose prosperous success she had no small opinion, well knowing him
by his Moderation and Noble Extraction, to be a person of great knowledge in
Maritine Affairs, Discreetly Wary, througly Valiant, Industrious in Action, and
a person whom the Mariners entirely loved.

And in 39. Eliz. further dangers being threatened from the Spaniard, through
the help of those Irish, who were Rebelliously disposed, he was made joint
General of the English Army with Robert Earl of Essex, for the Defense of this
Realm, both by Sea and Land, ( vix. Essex for the Land, and this Lord Admiral
for the Sea) the first squadron being led by him, the second by Essex, the
third by Thomas Howard, and the fourth by Sir Walter Rawliegh. In this Year
also (15. Junii) he was constituted Justice Itenerant of all the Forests South
of Trent for Life. And upon the 22th of October following, in consideration of
his eminent Services in in Ann. 1588. by defending this Realm against the
Spanish Armado, and afterward in Sacking of Cadiz in Spain; as also in
destroying the Spainsh Fleet (then in the Port there) was advanced to the Title
and Dignity of Earl of Nottingham, as descended from the Family of Mowbray,
whereof some had been Earls of that County.

In 41. Eliz. still continuing in high reputation at Court, some danger from
the Spaniard being again threatened, he was constituted Lieutenant General of
the Queen's Field Forces: And in 44. Eliz. made one of the Commissioners for
exercising the Office of Earl Marshal of England.

In 1. Jac. I. in order to the Solemnity of that King's Coronation, he was made
Lord Great Steward of England, for that occasion: And in 2. Jac. I. upon
renewing the Commission unto seven of the great Lords, for exercising that
great Office of Earl Marshal, was likewise constituted one of that number. But
in Ann. 1619. (17. Jac. I.) he surrendered his Patent for the Office of Lord
Admiral, into the King's hands; whereupon it was conferred on the Marquis of
Buckingham.

This Noble Earl Married to his first Wife Katharine Daughter to Henry Lord
Hunsdon, by whom he had Issue Two Sons, William, who Wedded Anne, Daughter and
sole Heir to John Lord Saint John of Bletso, but died in his lifetime, leaving
Issue Elizabeth his sole Daughter and Heir, Married to John Lord Mordaunt of
Turvey, in Com. Bedf. afterward Earl of Peterborow. 2. Charles, his Successor
in his honors. As also three Daughters, Elizabeth, Married to Sir Robert
Southwell of Wood-Rising, in Com Norf. Knight; Frances, first Married to Henry
Fitzgerald, Earl of Kildare, in Ireland; afterward to Henry Lord Cobham; and
Margaret to Sir Richard Leveson of Trentham, in Com. Staff. Knight, and
Vice Admiral of England.

To his second Wife he Married Margaret, Daughter to James Steward, Earl of
Murrey in Scotland, which Margaret was naturalized in the Parliament of 1. Jac.
I. by whom he had Issue Two Sons, James, who died young; and Sir Charles
Howard, Knight. And died at Hayling, near Croydon in Kent, 13. Dec. Ann. 1624.
(22. Jac. I.) being at that time Eighty eight Years of Age, having been Knight
of the Garter Fifty two Years: his Wife surviving him, who afterward Married
to Sir William Munson, Knight, afterward Viscount Castelmayn, in Ireland.

To whom succeeded Charles his second Son (the elder dying before him without
Issue Male) which Charles first took to Wife Charity, Daughter of..... White
(Widow of..... Leche, a Londoner); afterward Mary, Daughter to Sir William
Cockaine, Knight, Alderman of London; and thirdly, Margaret, Daughter to James,
Earl of Marrey, in Scotland; by whom he had Issue, James, who died unmarried;
and Charles.

Which Charles succeeding him in his Honors, Married Arabella, Daughter
of...... Smith of....... but, as yet, has not any Issue; so that Francis
Howard of Great-Buckham, in Com. Surr. Esquire (Son and Heir to Sir Charles Howard,
Knight; Son and Heir to Sir Francis Howard, Knight; Brother and Heir to Sir
Edward Howard, Knight, Cup Bearer to King James the First; Son and Heir to
William Howard of Lingfield, in Com. Surr. second Son to William Lord Howard of
Effingham) is his next expectant Heir Male.

Cambdeni Elizabetha, Page 42.
ILLA tamen (ut mortuo constaret Regius honos) exequias ut regi amico in Templo
Paulino Londini magna pompa persolvit. Simulque per Carolum, Baronis Howardi
Effinghamii filium, Francisco successori de patris obitu condolet, and de
successoris gratia, ut amicitiam nuper initam Sancte coleret, admonet.

Cambdeni Elizabetha, Page 186.
ILLI enim aliis curis erant occupatissimi, and Hispanus totus in nuptiis
apparandis cum Anna Austriaca, Imperatoris Maximiliani filia, sua ipsius e
sorore nepte, quae hoc tempore e Zelandia Hispaniam versus solvit. Ad quam per
mare Britannicum in Hispaniam deducendam, Elizabetha Carolum Howardum cum
Bellicosa Class, and selectis nobilibus misit. Summa cum honoris, and amoris
in Austriacam familiam festificatione.

Cambdeni Elizabetha, Page 389.
INeunte hoc anno diem obiit Edwardus Clintonus, maris Praefectus, sive
Admirallus, qui Comes Lincolniae anno MDLXXII. ab Elizabetha creatus,
Windesorae sepultus, and fines sepulchrali inscriptione falso cognominatus,
quod adnoto, non ut arguam, sed ne ipse arguar. Successit in dignitate
Henricus, filius, in maris Praefectura, Carolus Effinghamius Reginae
Camerarius. Illi autem eo in munere successit Baro Hunsdonius, Bervici
Praefectus.

A Commission to Charles Howard of Effingham, for being High Admiral of England.
ELizabetha Dei Gratia Regina Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, etc.
Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Sciatis quod nos ob certas causas and considerationes nos specialiter
moventes, ac in consideratione boni, very, and fidelis servitii, per dilectum
Conciliarium nostrum Carolum Dominum Howard, praeclari ordinis Garterii
Militem, Baronem de Effingham, ante haec tempora facti, and impensi, de gratia
nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu, nostris dedimus, and
concessimus, ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus
nostris, damus, and concedimus eidem Carolo, Officium magni Admiralli nostri
Angliae, Hiberniae, Walliae, ac Dominiorum, and Insularum eorundem, Villae
nostrae Calesiae, and Marchiarum nostrarum ejusdem, Normanum Gasoonum, and
Aquitanum, ac ipsum Dominum Carolum, magnum Admirallum nostrum Angliae,
Hiberniz, and Walliae, ac Dominiorum, and Insularum nostrarum eorundem, Villae
nostrae Calesiae, and Marchiarum nostrarum ejusdem, Normanum Gasconum, and
Aquitanum, necnon Praefectum Generalem Classis, and Marium dictorum regnorum
nostrorum Angliae and Hiberniae, ac Dominorium, and Insularum nostrarum
eorundem, fecimus, constituimus, and ordinavimus, ac per praesentes facimus,
constituimus, and ordinamus. Et ulterius sciatis quod nos de Gratia nostra
speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu, nostris dedimus, and
concessimus, ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus
nostris, damus, and concedimus eidem Domino Carolo, magno Admirallo nostro
Angliae, ac Praefecto Classis, and Marium nostrorum praedicta omnia, and
omnimodas jurisdictiones, autoritates, libertates, officia, feoda, profitus,
vada, emolumenta, wreca maris, and maris ejectum, regarda, advantagia,
commoditates, praeminentia, and privilegia quaecunque, eidem officio magni
Admiralli nostri Angliae, and Hiberniae, and locorum, and Dominiorum
praedictorum qualitercunque spectantium, and pertinentium, sive incumbentium,
vel aliquo modo ab antiquo and perantea debitorum, sive consuetorum. Necnon tam
bona and catalla quorumcunque praedictorum Piratorum, homicidarum, and felonum
qualitercunque, infra jurisdictionem Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae inferius
limitatam, delinquentium; quam bona, debita, and catalla omnium and singulorum
eorum manutenentium, accessariorum, consulentium, auxiliantium, vel
assistentium quorumcunque, and eorum cujuslibet; atque etiam bona debita, and
catalla quarumcunque personarum, felonum de se, and cujuslibet personae,
felonis de se, infra praedictam nostram jurisdictionem Admiralitatis nostrae
Angliae praedictae, quovis modo seu qualitercunque, ad mortem devenientium,
ubicunque bona, debita, vel catalla hujusmodi, aut aliqua parcella eorundem per
mare, aquam, vel terram, infra Regna nostra praedicta, seu dominia nostra
eorundem, tam infra libertates, quam extra, fuerint inventa, seu invenienda,
forisfacta, seu forisfacienda, vel existentia quaecunque: Et etiam bona,
debita, and catalla quarumcunque aliarum personarum, felonum de se, and
cujuslibet aliae personae felonis de se, infra jurisdictionem, nostram
praedictam reperta, seu reperienda, aut contingentia quaecunque. Et praeterea
tam bona, debita, and catalla, quorumcunque aliorum praedictorum felonum, and
homicidarum, ubique locorum delinquentium: ac bona, debita, and catalla eorum
manutenentium, accessariorum, consulentium, auxiliantium, seu assistentium;
quam etiam bona, debita, and catalla, quorumcunque fugitivorum, convictorum,
attinctorum, damnatorum, utlegatorum, vel exigendorum, pro productione felonum,
homicidarum, vel murdra, seu aliquo quocunque offenso, aut delicto,
qualitercunque positorum sive ponendorum. Necnon and bona naviata, flotzon,
jetzon, lagon, and shares, ac thesaurum inventum, seu inveniendum deodanda; ac
bona inimicorum per derelicta, habita, vel habenda, seu casu fortuito reperta,
seu reperienda, vel qualitercunque debita, seu debenda. Necnon omnia bona,
mercimonia, and catalla deperdita in mare inventa, seu extra mare projecta.
Atque etiam omnia and singula alia casualia, tam in, super, vel per mare,
litora, crecas, aut costera maris vel parts maritimas, quam in, super, vel per
aquas dulces, portus, flumina publica, rivos; seu crecas quascunque, aut loca
superundata quaecunque infra fluxum, vel refluxum maris, seu aquae ad
plenitudinem, aut super litora, vel ripas alicujus eorundem, a quibuscunque
primis pontibus versus mare per Regnum nostrum Angliae, aut Hiberniae, seu
Dominia nostra praedicta qualitercunque, quandocunque, vel quomodocunque
emergentium, contingentium, seu provenientium quaecunque vel ubicunque, bona,
debita, vel catalla hujusmodi aut caetera praemissa, seu aliqua parcella
eorundem infra jurisdictionem nostram Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae,
reperiantur, aut inveniri, seu reperiri contingunt, vel quae ad vos nunc
pertinent, aut unquam a Festo Nativitatis Domini, quod fuit in anno regni
nostri decimo septimo, quovis modo pertinuerunt seu pertinere debuerunt aut
debent ullo modo, and ad manus vel notitiam nostram, and ministrorum nostrorum,
nondum pervenerint, nec in scaccarium nostrum relata fuerint, Areriam,
Anchoragiam, Beochonagiam, seu signa per mare, vel portus, seu publica flumina
sive litora, and promontoria alicujus eorundem, pro directione navium erecta,
and lastagia, seu arenosam navium onerationem, atque Pisces regales, videlicet
Sturgiones, Balenas, Cetas, Porpesias, Delphinos, Rigges, and Graspes, ac
generaliter caeteros Pisces quoscunque magnam sive ingentem crassitudinem, sive
pinguedinem in se habentes, eidem officio magni Admiralli nostri Angliae, ab
antiquo de jure, vel consuetudine pertinentia, seu spectantia, aut aliquo modo
consueta. Et insuper omnes and omnimodas fines, mulctas, exitus, forisfacta,
amerciamenta, redemptiones, ac Recognitiones quascunque, forisfacta, and poenas
pecuniarum pro transgressionibus, delictis, injuriis, extorfionibus,
contemptibus, and aliis maleficiis quibuscunque, vel pro aliqua alia re,
materia, seu causa quacunque imposita vel inflicta, aut imponenda, vel
infligenda, tam coram dicto magno Admirallo nostro Angliae seu aliquo ejus
locum tenente, Officiario, Commissario, Vice-admirallo, sive Deputato, vigore
harum literarum nostrarum patentium per eum assignandis, vel deputandis in
aliqua Curia Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae, tentae, seu tenendae,
praesentatae sive praesentandae, assidendae, afferendae, forisfaciendae, vel
adjudicandae, quam etiam amerciamenta, exitus, fines, perquisita, mulcta, and
poenas pecuniarum quaecunque, ac forisfactarum quarumcunque Recognitionum coram
dicto magno Admirallo nostro Angliae, ejusve locum tenente, Vice-admirallo,
Deputato, vel Deputatis, ac aliis Justiciariis nostris, seu haeredum vel
successorum nostrorum, Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae, vel quatuor
eorundem, ad omnes productiones felonum, roberias, murdras, homicidia,
confederationes, ac alia offensa, transgressiones, contemptus, misprisionum
spoliationes, and malesicia infra jurisdictionem nostram maritimam commissa,
sive committenda, audienda, and terminanda, per literas nostras commissionales
patentes, haeredum, vel successorum nostrorum, juxta statuta inde edita, and
consuetudinem Curiae principalis Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae sub
magno Sigillo Angliae factas and fiendas, assignatas, sive assignandas,
contingentes sive impositas, aut imponendas, vel infligendas, sive aliquo modo
assidendas, afferendas, forisfaciendas, seu adjudicandas, aut aliquo modo
occasion praemissorum nobis, vel haeredibus, seu successoribus nostris, in ea
part qualitercunque debitas, seu debendas, and quaecunque eadem omnia, and
singula petendas, exigendas, levandas, capiendas, recipiendas, and obtinendas,
ac libere disponendas, habendas, gaudendas, occupandas, exercendas, dictum
officium magni Admiralli nostri Angliae, Hiberniae, Walliae, Calesiae, and
Marchiarum eorundem, Normanum, Gasconum, and Aquitanum, ac Praefectum generalem
Classis and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, eidem Carolo, pro termino vitae suae
per se vel per sufficientem Deputatum sive Deputatos suos sufficientes, una cum
omnibus and singulis praemissis, ac rebus aliis quibuscunque eidem officio
magni Admiralli nostri Angliae quovis modo pertinentibus, devenientibus,
incumbentibus, sive spectantibus, seu perantea, ab antiquo debitis, vel
consuetis, absque compoto, seu aliquo alio, nobis, haeredibus, vel
successoribus nostris proinde reddendis, solvendis, seu faciendis, aliquibus
statutis, actibus, ordinationibus, prohibitionibus, aut restrictionibus, in
contrarium factis, editis, ordinatis, vel provisis, aut aliqua alia re,
materia, seu causa quacunque, in aliquo non obstante. Et insuper ex uberiori
gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu, nostris
concessimus, ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus
nostris, damus and concedimus praedicto Carolo, magno Admirallo nostro Angliae
praedictae, quandam annuitatem, sive annualem redditum ducentarum marcarum
legalis monetae Angliae, una cum omnibus and singulis caeteris praemissis;
habendum, gaudendum, and annuatim percipiendum, praedictam annuitatem sive
annualem redditum ducentarum marcarum praefato Carolo, magno Admirallo nostro
Angliae, ac Praefecto Classis and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, and assignatis
suis pro termino vitae ejusdem Caroli, a Festo Annunciationis beatae Mariae
Virginis ultimo praeterito, de thesauro nostro, haeredum and successorum
nostrorum, ad Receptum Scaccarii nostri, haeredum, and successorum nostrorum,
per manus thesaurariorum and Camerariorum nostrorum dicti Seaccarii pro tempore
existentium, ad quatuor anni terminos, videlicet, ad Festa Nativitatis Sancti
Johannis Baptistae, Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, Natalis Domini, and
Annunciationis beatae Mariae Virginis, per aequales portiones solvendum; and
praeterea de uberiori gratia nostra, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu,
nostris dedimus, and concessimus, ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, and
successoribus nostris damus, and concedimus praefato Carolo, magno Admirallo
nostro Angliae, and Praefecto generali Classis, and Marium nostrorum
praedictorum, plenam jurisdictionem, potestatem, and autoritatem, audiendi,
examinandi, and terminandi causas quascunque civiles, and maritimas, atque
querelas, contractus, delicta, seu quasi delicta, crimina, placita, debita,
excambia, assecurationes, compotos, literas partitas, conventiones,
chirographia, oneratus navium, omniaque negotia and contractus, quae nauta pro
navibus conductis, and locatis debitis pecuniam trajectis, seu nautis fevdus
quovis modo tangunt, seu aliquo modo concernunt, lites, transgressiones,
injurias, extorsiones, and demanda, ac negotia civilia and maritima quaecunque,
inter mercatores, aut inter Dominos and proprietarios navium, and aliorum
vasorum, and mercatores, seu alios quoscunque, cum eisdem Dominis and
proprietariis navium, and caeterorum vasorum quorumcunque, infra jurisdictionem
nostram maritimam Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae occupatorum, vel
usitatorum, seu inter quascunque alias personas qualitercunque habitas, factas,
initas, sive contractas, pro aliqua re, materia, seu causa, vel negotio, seu
injuria quacunque, tam in, super, vel per mare, aut flumina publica, seu aquas
dulces, portus, rivos, seu crecas, and loca superundata quaecunque infra
fluxum, and refluxum maris, and aquae ad plenitudinem, vel super litora, seu
ripas quascunque eisdem vel eorum alicui adjacentes a quibuscunque primis
pontibus versus mare, per dicta Regna nostra Angliae, and Hiberniae, seu
Dominia nostra eorundem supradicta, vel alibi ultra mare, aut in partibus
ultramarinis quibuscunque expeditas, seu expediendas, una cum omnibus and
singulis suis incidentibus, emergentibus, dependentibus, annexis, and connexis
causis quibuscunque, ubicunque, seu qualitercunque hujusmodi causas, querelas,
contractus, and alia praemissa supradicta, vel eorum aliquod oriri, celebrari,
contrahi, vel fieri contingat; atque insuper causas, appellationes, and
nullitates querelarum, ex causis praedictis, seu earum aliqua a quibuscunque
Judicibus, Justiciariis, Vice-admirallis, Majoribus, Vice-comitibus,
Senescallis, Ballivis, seu aliis officiariis, vel ministris nostris
quibuscunque ad Curiam nostram principalem Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae
praedictae interpositis, seu interponendis, cum omnibus and singulis suis
emergentibus, dependentibus, connexis, and annexis, causis and negotiis
quibuscunque, juxta leges nostras civiles, and maritimas, ac consuetudinem
Curiae nostrae principalis Admiralitatis nostrae praedictae, in eadem Curia
nostra audendis, and terminandis, cum plena potestate, and autoritate nostris
inhibendum, prohibendum and supersedere faciendum, and wavedandum, omnibus and
singulis, quibus in ea part fuerit inhibendum supersedendum, vel prohibendum,
quod ipsi, aut eorum aliquis ponendus, in dicta Curia nostra hujusmodi
appellationibus sive nullitatibus, querelis, negotiis indiscussis, ulterius in
ea part procedere minime attemptent, neque attemptet, sub poenas arbitrio
dicti magni Admiralli nostri in ea part limitandas, seu interponendas. Necnon
querelas omnium and singulorum contractuum, conventuum, ac causarum, and
negotiorum civilium, and maritimorum, ultra mare perferendorum, seu ultra mare
contractorum, aut in hoc regno nostro Angliae, vel dicto Regno nostro
Hiberniae, vel aliquo alio Dominio nostro eorundem perimplendorum, seu
perficiendorum qualitercunque emergentium seu contingentium, atque etiam
cognitionem caeterorum omnium and singulorum, quae ad officium magni Admiralli
nostri Angliae, and Praefecti generalis Classis, and Marium nostrorum
praedictorum, vel jurisdictionem nostram maritimam, nostrae Admiralitatis
Angliae praedictae quovis modo tangunt, seu aliquo modo concernunt, aut ab
antiquo debuerunt, aut debent, and generaliter ad cognoscendum, and
procedendum, in omnibus and singulis aliis causis, litibus, delictis,
excessibus, querelis, injuriis, maleficiis, seu quasi maleficiis,
transgressionibus, regretis, forstallis, and negotiis maritimis quibuscunque
per regna nostra, and loca praedicta infra jurisdictionem nostram maritimam
Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae per mare, vel aquam, aut ripas, seu
litora eorundem qualitercunque factis, commissis, perpetratis, aut
emergentibus, una cum potestate, and autoritate recognitionum quarumcunque, pro
conventis, seu dibitis quibuscunque capiendis, eisque executioni ponendis, and
exequi faciendis and mandandis. Necnon naves, personas, res, bona, merces, and
mercimonia quaecunque pro praemissis, and eorum quolibet, ac aliis causis
quibuscunque eadem concernentibus, ubicunque locorum fuerint reperta, seu
inventa, per Regna, seu Dominia nostra praedicta infra libertares, seu extra.
Areriam pro aliis conventis, causis seu debitis civilibus quibuscunque,
qualitercunque contractis, sive emergentibus, dummodo bona, seu personae
debitorum reperiuntur infra jurisdictionem Admiralitatis nostrae praedictae,
juxta leges nostras civiles and maritimas, ac Consuetudinem Curiae nostrae
principalis Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae ab antiquo usitatam,
realiter arrestandum, and arrestari faciendum and mandandum, ipsasque, and ipsa
cum suis emergentibus, dependentibus, incidentibus, annexis, and connexis
causis and negotiis quibuscunque, juxta leges and consuetudines praedictas,
aliisque viis, modis, and mediis omnibus and singulis, quibus idem magnus
Admirallus noster, and Praefectus generalis Classis and Marium nostrorum
praedictorum melius sciverit, aut potuerit, audiendum, examinandum,
discutiendum, and fine debito terminandum, ac personas quascunque in ea part,
prout casus exiget in dicta Curia Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae,
coram dicto Admirallo nostro Angliae, seu ejus Deputato quocunque, seu
Deputatis, comparere, and respondere cum qualibet cohibitione temporali, ac cum
suis alternis poenis, mulcta, potestate, juxta leges and consuetudines
praedictas compellandum, ac justiciam faciendum, and ministrandum, etiam juris
ordine servato, seu velo levato, sive strepitu and figura judicii sola facta,
and rei veritate inspecta procedendum. Necnon ad inquirendum per sacramenta
proborum and legalium hominum, tam infra libertates quam extra, de omnibus and
singulis quae de jure, statutis, ordinatis, vel consuetudinibus Curiae nostrae
principalis Admiralitatis nostrae Angliae praedictae, ab antiquo inquiri
solent, vel deberent, eosque contemptores, ac juris and jurisdictonis nostrorum
praedictorum violatores, and usurpatores, delinquentes, and contumaciter
absentes, naucleros, marinarios, remiges, piscatores, and alios operarios, and
expertes quoscunque, res nauticas quascunque exercentes, tam juxta and secundum
leges nostras civiles, and maritimas, ac ordinationes, and consuetudines
praedictas, and eorum demerita, quam juxta, and secundum statuta regni nostri
Angliae in ea part edita, and provisa, mulctandum, corrigendum, puniendum,
castigandum, and reformandum, ac in quibuscunque carceribus nostris, ubique
locorum, infra Regna and Dominia nostra praedicta, incarcerari faciendum, and
mandandum, incarceratosque quoscunque, qui deliberandi fuerint deliberandum,
and penitus exonerandum, and exonerari faciendum, and mandandum, fluminaque
nostra publica, portus, rivos, and aquas dulces, ac crecas quascunque, infra
jurisdictionem nostram maritimam, ubicunque locorum, infra regna and Dominia
nostra praedicta existentia, pro conservatione tam Classis nostrae, ac Classis
and Navigiorum Regnorum and Dominiorum nostrorum praedictorum, quam piscium in
iisdem fluminibus and locis praedictis crescentium quorumcunque. Necnon and
ordinationes, and statuta quaecunque in ea part edita and provisa, debite
conservandum, and conservari faciendum, subservatoresque deputandum, and
assignandum. Omniaque alia and singula faciendum, exercendum, expediendum, and
exequendum in praemissis, and eorum quolibet, prout de jure and secundum leges,
statuta, and consuetudines praedictas fuerit faciendum. Necnon and retia minus
stricta, ac alia ingenia, sive instrumenta illicita quaecunque, ubique locorum,
per flumina publica, portus, rivos, aquas dulces, seu crecas quascunque, infra
jurisdictionem nostram Admiralitatis nostrae praedictae, per aquam occupata,
sive exercita, ac exercitatores, and occupatores eorundem, juxta dicta statuta,
and ordinationes regni nostri Angliae praedictae, in contrarium edita and
provisa, puniendum, corrigendum, and reformandum. Atque insuper tam naves and
naviculas guerrinas, quam quascunque alias naves and naviculas, seu vasa
quaecunque, pro quibuscunque voyagiis, and negotiis nostris, vel expeditione
eorundem. Necnon navigeros, nautas, seu pilotas, navium magistros, naucleros,
vibrillatores, sive bombardarios, ac marinarios, ac alias personas quascunque
pro navibus, and naviculis, seu vasibus hujusmodi aptas, and idoneas, de
tempore in tempus, quoties necesse fuerit, ubicunque locorum, infra regna, and
Dominia nostra praedicta, infra libertates and extra, congregandum, delegandum,
retinendum, capiendum, arrestandum, deputandum, and assignandum absque
interruptione sive impedimento per quemcunque alium in contrarium fiendum, cum
plena jurisdictione, and potestate ad exequendum omnia and singula alia quae in
ea part per magnum Admirallum nostrum, and Praefectum generalem Classis and
Marium nostrorum praedictorum fieri possint, debent, vel solent expediri, vel
necesse fuerint expedienda, seu exequenda, aut prout eideni magno Admirallo
nostro Angliae, and Praefecto Classis, and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, de
tempore in tempus magis expediens visum fuerit. Concessimus praeterea, ac de
gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu; nostris dedimus,
ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, damus, and
concedimus, eidem Carolo magno Admirallo nostro Angliae, and Praefecto generali
Classis, and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, ac hujusmodi officio magni
Admiralli nostri Angliae, and Praefecto generali Classis, and Marium nostrorum
praedictorum, ac omnia and singula eidem officio pertinentia, and spectantia,
per regna, and Dominia nostra, and quodlibet eorundem, melius, and commodius
exequi, and perimplere valeat vel possit, plenam autoritatem, ac potestatem,
quoties opus, and necesse fuerit ad incidendum, perficiendum, ordinandum,
assignandum, faciendum, and constituendum Locum tenentem, sive Locum tenentes,
Judicem, sive Judices, Vice-admirallum, sive Vice-admirallos, Commissarium,
sive Commissarios, Praesidentem, sive Praesidentes, Registrarium, sive
Registrarios, and omnes, ac omnimodos alios Officiarios and Ministros sub se
necessarios, idoneos, and opportunos, pro dicto officio, and exercitio ejusdem
in locis praedictis exercendum, pro termino vitae cujuslibet officiariorum and
ministrorum hujusmodi duraturorum, deputandorum, and perficiendorum, vel ad
been placitum dicti magni Admiralli nostri Angliae praedictae, deputandorum,
and assignandorum, ad omnia and singula praemissa, vice, and locis suis
faciendum, and expediendum, statutaque, and ordinationes quascunque, in officio
nostrae Admiralitatis Angliae praedictae statuendum, and condendum, quoties
opus fuerit, ac ea quae fuerint repellenda, repellendum. Necnon hujusmodi
officiarium and ministrum, ac eorum quemlibet, ab hujusmodi officiis, and
exercitio eorundem juxta juris and aequitatis exigentiam, ac dictae Curiae
principalis Admiralitatis nostriae Angliae praedictae consuetudines, amovere,
and expellere, ac alium, sive alios, eorum loco, sive locis, modo praemisso, ad
ejue beneplacitum, vel pro termino vitae substituere, ordinare, facere, and
deputare possit, and valeat, quoties magis expediens videbitur. Et insuper de
uberiori gratia nostra volumus, ac per praesentes concedimus, quod hujusmodi
officiarii, and ministri habeant, and percipiant omnia and singula vada,
proficua, feoda, advantagia, and commoditates quaecunque eisdem officiis, and
eorum cuilibet, juxta consuetudinem Curiae principalis Admiralitatis nostrae
Angliae praedictae, ab antiquo debita, and consueta, absque Compoto, seu aliquo
alio, nobis, haeredibus, vel successoribus nostris proinde reddendum,
solvendum, and faciendum. Et ulterius de uberiori gratia nostra speciali, ac ex
certa scientia, and mero motu, nostris dedimus, and concessimus, ac per
praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, damus, and
concedimus praefato Carolo, magno Admirallo nostro Angliae, and Praefecto
generali Classis, and Marium, nostrorum praedictorum, and ejus Locum tenenti,
sive Locum tenentibus, Judici, sive Judicibus, Vice-admirallo, sive
Vice-admirallis, Deputato, sive Deputatis, Commissario, sive Commissariis,
Praesidenti, sive Praesidentibus plenam potestatem, jurisdictionem and
autoritatem in supradictis causis, negotiis, litibus, and querelis, delictis,
criminibus, extorsionibus, maleficiis, and contractibus civilibus and
maritimis, ac caeteris praemissis; una cum omnibus and singulis suis
emergentibus, incidentibus, connexis, dependentibus, and annexis causis, and
negotiis quibuscunque cognoscendum, and procedendum, easque, and ea audiendum,
examinandum, terminandum, and finiendum, ac fententias, and decreta quaecunque
in ea part fulminandum, promulgandum, and interponendum, eaque executioni
demandandum, cum cognitione and plena jurisdictione, quarumcunque aliarum
causarum Civilium and Maritimarum, quae sunt maris, seu quae mare pertranseunt,
sive passagiunt, aut iter navale, sive voyagium maritimum, vel jurisdictionem
nostram maritimam supradictam quovis modo concernunt seu recipient, aut super
mare fluminibus publicis, seu portubus, rivis, aquis dulcibus, crecis, vel
locis praedictis qualitercunque expeditis vel expediendis, etiam cum potestate
ad procedendum in eisdem, juxta leges civiles nostras and maritimas, ac
consuetudinem Curiae principalis nostrae Admiralitatis Angliae praedictae ab
antiquo usitatis, tam ex officio mero mixto, vel promoto, seu ad alicujus
partis instantiam prout casus exiget, and expediens visum fuerit. Volumus etiam
ac per praesentes concedimus, quod praefatus Carolus, magnus Admirallus
Angliae, and Praefectus Classis, and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, and ejus
locum tenens, sive locum tenentes, ac caeteri ejus officiarii, and ministri
praedicti habeant cognitionem de wreco maris magni, ac de morte, submersione,
and visu corporum mortuorum quarumcunque personarum, in mare, vel fluminibus
publicis, portubus, aquis dulcibus, sen crecis quibuscunque, infra fluxum
maris, vel aquae praedictae ad plentitudinem per dicta Regna nostra, and
Dominia praedicta, ac jurisdictionem Admiralitatis nostrae praedictae
qualitercunque interfectarum, sive subversarum, aut interficiendarum, sive
subversendarum, vel murderatarum, sive murderandarum, aut aliquo alio modo
ibidem ad mortem deveniendarum. Necnon per jurisdictionem Admiralitatis nostrae
praedictae, custodiam, and conservationem, statutorum nostrorum de wreco maris,
and de officio Coronatoris, annis, tertio and quarto Edwardi Primi, atque
statutum de bonis spoliatis super mare venientibus in hoc Regnum nostrum
Angliae, Anno vicesimo septimo Edwardi Tertii progenitorum nostrorum, quondam
Regnum Angliae respective editum, and provisum, atque cognitionem de Mahemio in
locis praedictis infra fluxum maris, and aquae ad plenitudinem contingentibus
cum potestate etiam puniendi delinquentes in ea part quoscunque, juxta juris
exigentiam, ac Curiae nostrae Admiralitatis praedictae consuetudinem. Eo quod
expressa mentio de vero valor annuo, vel certitudine praemissorum, sive eorum
alicujus, aut de aliis donis, sive concessionibus per nos, seu aliquem
progenitorum nostrorum praedictorum ante haec tempora factis, in praesentibus
minime facta existunt, aut aliquo statuto, actu, ordinatione, provisione,
prohibitione, sive restrictione praesentibus literis nostris patentibus, sive
alicui parti seu clausulae in eisdem expressis, vel insertis, repugnantibus,
derogatoriis aut contrariis quibuscunque in contrarium factis, editis,
ordinatis, seu provisis, seu aliqua alia re, causa, vel materia quacunque in
aliquo non obstante, mandantes, ac firmiter and stricte tenore praesentium,
percipiendum, atque per dictum magnum Admirallum, ac Praefectum nostrum
generalem ex part nostra percipi and mandari volentes universis, and singulis
Proceribus, Dominis Justiciariis, Majoribus, Vice-comitibus, Capitaneis,
Senescallis, Ballivis, Custodibus Gaolorum, and carcerum nostrorum
quorumcunque, Constabulariisque, ac caeteris Ministris, and fidelibus Subditis,
and Ligeis nostris quibuscunque and eorum cuilibet infra libertates and extra,
quod praefato Domino Carolo, magno Admirallo nostro Angliae and Praefecto
generali Classis, and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, ac officiaris, deputatis,
and ministris suis quibuscunque, and eorum cuilibet, in praedicto officio
Admiralitatis nostrae assignatis sive assignandis, circa executionem
praemissorum, intendentes, auxiliantes, faventes, pariter and obedientes sint,
ac quod mandatis and praeceptis quibuscunque, eis, vel eorum alicui, ex part
nostra per dictum Carolum, magnum Admirallum nostrum Angliae, ac Praefectum
generalem Classis, and Marium nostrorum praedictorum, vel ejus nomine direct
pareant sub poena contemptus istarum literarum nostrarum patentium, and sub
periculo incumbentium. In cujus rei, etc.

Test regina apud Westmonasterium octavo die Julii, Anno Regni Reginae
Elizabethae. Per ipsam Reginam. Concordatum cum Recordo and Extractum per me S.
Killingworth.

Cambdeni Elizabetha, Page 479.
ELizabetha contra, ne incauta opprimeretur, Classem quantum posset maximam,
and omnia ad bellum necessaria singulari studio apparat. Et ipsa quae in
ingeniis dignoscendis, judicio acerrimo, and cum soluta sibi fuerit eligendi
optio, non de aliorum commendatione, semper felicissinia, ad singula munia
optimos nominatim dessignavit. Universae vero Classis Praefectum, Carolum
Howardum Effinghamium, Angliae thalassiarcham sive Admirallum. De cujus
felicitate optime sibi persuaserat, quem rei maritimae gnarum, providentia
cautum, animo fortem, in agendo industrium, and magna inter Classiarios
authoritate, tum ex moderatione, tum ex nobilitate noverat. Eum ad occiduas
Angliae parts tempestive mittit, ubi Dracum, quem subthalassiarcham
constituit, ibi adjunxit. Henricum Seimorum, filium secundo genitum Ducis
Somersetti, ad oram Belgicam cum quadraginta navibus Anglicis, and Belgicis, ne
qua Parmensis tum suis copiis egrederetur, excubare jubet, etsi non deerant,
qui hostem expectandum, and terrestri praelio excipiendum summopere suaserunt,
juxta quod deliberatum fuerat, regnante Henrico Octavo cum Galli numerosa
Class Angliae imminerent.

Iterum ex eodem, Page 485.
CLassis illa Hispanica, viris, machinis, and omni apparatu, omnium quas
oceanus unquam vidit, long instructissima, and arroganti nomine invincibilis
dicta, constabat e centum and triginta navibus, in quibus milites XIXMCCXC
nautae, VIIIMCCCL. remiges, catenati IIMLXXX, tormenta majora IIMDCXXX.
Praeerat cum summo imperio Alphonsus Pererius Gusmanus, Dux Medinae Sidoniae,
(Antonius enim Columna Dux Paliani, and Marchio Sanctae Crucis, quibus hoc
imperium destinatum, dum apparabatur, diem obierant) and sub eo Johannes
Martinus Recaldus, in re nautica versatissimus. Tertio Calendarum Junii e Tago
solvit, dumque cursum ad Corunnam Galliciae intendit, horrida tempestate tota
erat disjecta; tribus triremibus Davidis Gwini, mancipii Anglici opera, and
remigum Turcicorum perfidia, in Galliam abductis, and aegre post aliquot dies
ad Corunnam, and stationes vicinas convenit. Adeo afflictam fama perhibuit, ut
Reginae persuasissimum fuerit, classem illam hoc anno non expectandam, and
Walsinghamius a secretis ad Admirallum scripserit, ut quatuor e maximis navibus
remitteret, quasi bello jam confecto. Ille haud facile credidit, mollique
responso, ne quid temere in re tanta crederetur, utque eas vel propriis
impensis retineret, rogavit. Et vento favente usus, Hispaniam versus vela
pandit, ut afflictas hostium naves in stationibus opprimeret. Cum non long ab
Hispaniae ora abesset, ventus in notum mutavit, and ille, qui jussus ut Angliae
oram tueretur, veritus ne eodum vento illi inconspecti in Angliam
appellerentur, Plimoutham rediit.

Iterum ex eodem, Page 489.
NEC visum Angliae Admirallo conserte per harpagines aleam belli subire, and
quod nonnulli inconsiderati suaserunt. Hosts enim justum exercitum in class
habuerunt, ille nullum. Eorum naves erant numero long plures, mole majores,
robore firmiores, structura altiores, ut a desuper propugnantibus e tabulatis,
nihil nisi certum exitium inferius oppugnantibus immineret. Perviditque cladem
multo magis sibi obfuturam, quam victoriam profuturam. Victus enim regnum
Angliae in ultimum discrimen adduxisset, victor, tantum gloriolam de class
superata, and host caeso retulisset.

Iterum ex eodem, Page 490.
POstridie Admirallus, Thomam Howardum, Baronem Sheffeildum, Rogerum
Townsendum, Johannem Hawkinsum, and Martinum Forbesherum ob fortitudinem
equestri dignitate ornavit. Deliberatumque jam inde hostem non adoriri,
priusquam ad fretum Britannicum pervenirint, ubi Henricus Seimorus, and
Guilielmus Winterus, eorum adventum praestolabantur. Ita secundo Etesiarum
flatu (qui nostro coelo a Libanoto sereni plerumque spirant) Hispanica classis,
Anglia subsequente, provehitur. Tantum autem abfuit ut invincibili nomine, aut
terribili spectaculo oram maritimam terruerit, ut juventus Anglica incredibili
quadam alacritate (parentibus, uxoribus, liberis, cognatis, and amicis, ex
intima in patriam charitate, derelictis) navigiis undique privatis impensis
conductis, se Classi magno numero adjunxerit, and inter alios, Comites Oxoniae,
Northumberlandiae, Cumberlandiae, Thomas and Robertus Cecilii, H. Brookus,
Carolus Bluntus, Walterus Raleighus, Guilielmus Hattonus, Robertus Carius,
Ambrosius Willoughbeius, Thomas Gerardus, Arthurus Georgaeus, and alii
clarioris notae.

Iterum ex eodem, Page 491.
AT diligentiam ejus and spem credulam Hispanorum praevertit Elizabethae
providentia, cujus jussu, postridie quam Hispani anchoras fixerunt, Admirallus
naves octo ex vilioribus, igne Graeco, pice, resina illitas, sulphur, varioque
ignis fomite repletas, ductu Youngi and Prowsi, vento ferente in Hispanicam
classem nocte intempesta immisit. Quas, ut propius adventantes Hispani
conspexerunt, toto mari flammis collucente, rati naves illas incendiarias,
praeter ignis periculum, exitialibus etiam machinis instructas fuisse,
ululabili quodam clamore sublato, anchoras tollunt, rudentes dissecant, vela
expandunt, remos incitant, and terribili pannico horrore perculsi, repentino
impetu, in fugam confusissime proruunt. Inter quas, Galeassa praetoria
gubernaculo fracto fluitans, dum die sequente trepide Caletum petit, arenae
illisa, ab Amia Prestono, Thoma Gerardo, and Harveio ancipiti pugna occupatur,
Hugone Moncada Praefecto occiso, militibus, and remigibus, vel aqua haustis,
vel gladio peremtis, magna vi auri in praedam abrepta. Navigium and tormenta
Caleti praefecto cesserunt.

Iterum ex eodem, Page 495.
ELizabetha similiter supplicationem and gratiarum actionem per omnes Angliae
Ecclesias decrevit, ipsaque, quasi triumphum agens, cum spectatissimo nobilium
agmine per plateas Londini, coeruleo panno vestitos, and civium societates cum
suis Banneriis pulcherrimo spectaculo utrinque adstantes, pilento bijugi, (nec
quadrijuga adhuc principibus in usu, ut hodie privatis) Templum Paulinum adiit
(ubi vexilla hosti rapta, proposita) gratias divino numini demisissime egit,
and concioni, qua Deo soli gloria relata, interfuit. Admirallo quosdam reditus
ob operam tam feliciter navatam, assignavit, eum and navium Praefectos, ut
patriae conservandae natos, subinde laudavit. Caeteros nominatim, quoties
vidit, ut praeclare meritos gratanter salutavit, (quod instar praemii illi
habuerunt) saucios atque egentiores pensionibus honestis remuneravit. Eruditi
vero domi forisque, animis Laetitia praegestientibus, victoriae congratulantes,
triumphalia omnibus linguis cecinerunt.

Cambden's History of Queen Elizabeth in English, Page 516.
NOT many days passed before a far greater and more choice Army was raised in
England, into which many Noblemen and Gentlemen voluntarily listed themselves.
For a constant rumor grew every day stronger and stronger, That the Spaniard,
with all his might and main, prepared for War against England and Ireland;
encouraged the rather, because he was now in possession of Calice (from whence
it was but a short cut over into England). Hawkin's and Drake's voyage had had
ill success; and the Irish Rebels earnestly urged the succors out of Spain.
The queen to scatter this Storm that was gathering, supposed it the best course
to set upon the Enemy in his own Ports; and to that end rigged a Fleet of 150
Ships, whereof 17 were of her Navy-Royal, 22 Low Country Ships, which the
Confederate Estates joined with hers, the rest Pinnaces and Victualers. In
these were 6360 Soldiers under pay, Volunteer Gentlemen 1000, Seamen 6772,
besides Low-Country-men. Robert Earl of Essex, and Charles Howard, Lord Admiral
of England, who were at great Charges toward this expidition out of their own
Estates, were made Commanders in chief, with equal Authority, under the title
of Generals; yet so, as the Lord Admiral should have the principal Authority
and Dignity at Sea, the Earl of Essex at Land. To these were joined for a
Council of War, the Lord Thomas Howard, Sir Walter Raleigh, Sir Francis Vere,
Sir George Carew, and Sir Coniers Clifford. The whole Fleet was divided into
four Squadrons; the first the Lord Admiral commanded, the Earl of Essex the
second, the Lord Thomas Howard the third, and Sir Walter Raleigh the fourth.
The Officers of the Army were, Sir Francis Vere, Lieutenant General, or
Marshal; Sir John Wingfield, Quarter-master-general; Sir George Carew, Master
of the Ordnance; Sir Coniers Clifford, Serjant-major. The Colonels were,
Robert, Earl of Sussex, Sir Christopher Blunt, Sir Thomas Gerrard, Sir Richard
Wingfield, Sir Edward Wingfield, Captain of the Volunteers, and Anthony Astley,
Secretary of the Council of War, who was to register the Councels with every
Man's Reasons, and to record all their Actions, and Enterprises.

Again out of the same, Page 518.
UPON Sunday, the 20th of June, betimes in the Morning, they cast Anchor, near
Saint Sebastian's Chapel, on the West side of the Island. Essex, full of
courage and youthful heat, was of opinion, That the Forces were presently to be
Landed. Raleigh, and especially the Lord Admiral were of a contrary mind; which
Lord never approved of rash and heady Councels; yet upon much entreaty, he
consented that some should make trial, Whether they could conveniently Land
there, but all in vain, the Sea beating violently with vast Waves upon the
Shore.

Again out of the same, Page 519.
THE English Ships, which, by reason of the shallowness of the Chanal, could
not hitherto come near them, now, when it was flood, came in with great
alacrity. Essex also with his Ship, thrust himself into the midst of the Eight;
as likewise did the Admiral himself, with his Son. In the Miranora they Fought
smartly, from break of day till noon; when the Spaniards (their Galleons being
shot through and through, and miserably torn, and many Men slain in them)
resolved to fire their Ships, or run them a ground. Many of the Seamen, for
fear, cast themselves overboard; some whereof got to the shore, some were
taken, some drowned, others as they swam, cried for Quarter, and the Admiral
pitying them, many of them were saved.

Again out of the same, Page 520.
AT the same instant almost the Lord Admiral, with the Lord Thomas Howard, Sir
William Paget, Raleigh, Sir Robert Southwell, Richard Levison, Philip
Woodhouse, Robert Mansfield, and the Seamen; Sir Edward Hobby bearing the Flag
before them, following hastily, entered the Town. Now did the Spaniards give
over Fighting, and retired into the Castle and Townhouse. The Townhouse was
presently yielded, the other the next day after, upon these conditions; That
the Citizens should depart in safety with the Garments they wore, and the rest
should go to the Soldiers for pillage. That 520000 Ducats should be paid for
their ransom, and for the payment thereof Forty of the principal Citizens
should be sent as hostages into England. Shortly after Proclamation was made,
That no Man should offer violence to the Spaniards. The Women, Churchmen, and
Citizens, were conveyed to Porta Santa Maria.

Again out of the same, Page 521.
ABout Sixty Military Men were Knighted for their Valor: viz. Robert, Earl
Sussex, Count Lodowick of Nassan, Don Christophero, a Portuguese, King
Antonio's Son, Sir William Herbert, Sommerset Bourk, an Irishman, William
Howard, the Admiral's Son, Robert Dudley, George Devereux, Henry Nevill, Edwin
Rich, Richard Levison, Anthony Astley, Henry Lennard, Horace Vere, Arthur
Throgmorton, Miles Corbet, Edward Conway, Oliver Lambert, Anthony Cook, John
Townsend, Christopher Heydon, Francis Popham, Philip Woodhouse, Alexander
Clifford, Morris Barkley, Charles Blunt, George Gifford, Robert Cross, James
Scudamore, Vrian Leigh, John Lea, Richard Weston, Richard Wainman, James
Wotton, Richard Rudal, Robert Mansell, William Mounson, John Bowls, Edward
Bows, Humphrey Druell, Amias Preston, Robert Remington, Alexander Ratcliffe,
John Buck, John Morgan, John Aldrige, William Ashinden, Matthew Brown, Thomas
Acton, Thomas Gates, John Stafford, Gillie Merrick, Thomas Smith, William
Pooly, Thomas Palmer, John Lovell, John Gilbert, William Harvey, John Gray,
John Vanduvenvord, Melchior Lebben, Peter Regemort, Nicholas Medkirk.

A Patent constituting Charles Lord Howard of Effingham, Earl of Nottingham.
ELizabetha Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regina, etc.
Universis, and singulis Archiepiscopis, Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comitibus,
Vice-comitibus, Episcopis, Baronibus, ac omnibus aliis ad quos praesentes
literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Cum hi quos divina providentia in Monarchia and Regali solio constituit, and
collocavit, ut in terris quasi Vicarii, coelestis illius Majestatis, been,
just, and pie decent, and salutariter praesint regno, atque quaecunque suae
custodiae, gubernationi, and regimini, divinitus mandatae, and commissae sunt.
Ipsique monarchae in monarchia sua idem repraesentant, quod oculi in corpore,
quorum officium est dirigere omnia corporis membra, ita summi monarchae and
principes, tanquam oculi reipublicae intentive circumspicere and perlustare
debeant, omnes status, and ordines imperii sui, sine quibus haud dubie nullam
civilem administrationem, nullam politiae gubernationem institui, aut fieri
posse fatendum est. Atque usque necessaria est ordinum in magnis imperiis
conservatio, and postquam viderint statum, and ordinem nobilitatis temporis
diuturnitate, antiquitate, vel aliter convulsum, immunitum, conquassatum, aut,
ut multa humaniter accidunt, morte afflictum and debilitatum, mature resarcire,
instaurare, augere, and amplificare, ita quod aliis quos cum virtutis suae, tum
generis, and majorum suorum gloria nobilitavit, ad nobilitatem and honorem
accitis, ordinem, and statum, in nitore, and splendore suo perpetuatim
conservent. Jam idcirco videntes illustrem ordinem Comitum hujus Regni, ex
reliquis honorificum, and gloriosum, ex paucitate laborare, and compertum
habentes charissimum Consanguineum nostrum, Carolum Howard, Baronem Howard de
Effingham, praenobilis ordinis Garterii Militem, se strenue, and fortiter nobis
gessisse, ante aliquot annos, ut supremus Admirallus Angliae, atque valde
egregia servicia, nobis, ac Regno nostro praestitisse, cum navibus, and Class
nostra Regia, and armata nostra, in Anno Domini millesimo quingentesimo
octagisimo octavo, ac Regni nostri tricesimo, auspiciis nostris, ac favente
Deo, aperto praelio navali expugnasse Classem Hispanicam paratam, ad invadendum
Regnum nostrum, quanquam numero multo fuerint plures naves Hispanorum, Duce
Medina Sidonia exercitus Hispanici supremo, Duce, and Capitaneo generali in
fugam coactis, majorique part suae Classis distructae aut submersae, and ea
victoria parta Regnum nostrum tutum reddidit ab omni vel invasione Hispanica,
vel suspicione periculi. Cumque etiam, eo facto, non desistebat a vindicta
ulteriori sumenda contra Regem Hispaniae, hostem Regni nostri, sed ut
Archithalassiarcha conjunxit cum charissimo consanguineo nostro Roberto, Comite
Essex, fortiter, and magnifice coepit, vi aperta, insulam, and urbem de Cadiz,
fortiter munitam, in ulteriori Hispania, integramque aliam Classem Regis
Hispaniae in dicto portu de Cadiz paratam, contra Regnum nostrum totaliter
expugnavit, and destruxit. Volentes igitur ipsum Carolum, pro his rebus tam
strenue gestis, merito, ad statum, honorem, and dignitatem Comitis Nottingham
erigere, ac pro eo quod praedictus Carolus Howard, Baro Howard de Effingham
nuper, ac nepos ortus, and prognatus, sit a nobili stripe, and familia dictorum
Howardorum diu possidentium jure haereditario titulos Ducum Norfolciae, Comitum
Warrennae, Surriae, and Nottinghamiae, quorum etiam multi ejusdem nominis, ac
familiae, officia Admiralitatis Angliae, anteactis temporibus, and nominatim
temporibus patris nostri Regis Henrici Octavi, fratrisque nostri Edwardi Sexti,
ac sororis nostrae Reginae Mariae, magna cum laud, and victoriis executi sunt.
Sciatis quod nos de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu
nostris, praefatum Carolum in Comitem Nottinghamiae, nec non ad statum, gradum,
dignitatem, and honorem Comitis Nottinghamiae ereximus, creavimus, and
praefecimus, ipsumque Comitem Nottinghamium erigimus, creamus, and praefacimus,
tenore praesentium; eidemque Carolo nomen, stilum, and titulum Comitis
Nottingham imposuimus, dedimus, praebuimus, and imponimus, damus, praebemus, ac
ipsum Carolum hujusmodi statu, titulo, honor, and dignitate Comitis
Nottingham, per gladii cincturam, cape honoris, and circuli aurei impositionem
imponimus, insignimus, investimus, and realiter nobilitamus, per praesentes
habendum and tenendum, statum, gradum, dignitatem, stilum, titulum; necnon and
honorem Comitis praedicti, cum omnibus and singulis praeeminentiis, honoribus,
caeterisque hujusmodi statutis Comiti Nottinghamiae pertinentibus, sive
spectantibus, praefato Carolo, and haeredibus masculis de corpore suo
exeuntibus in perpetuum. Volentes, and per praesentes concedentes pro nobis,
haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, quod praefatus Carolus, and haeredes sui
praedicti, nomen, stilum, gradum, dignitatem, statum, titulum, and honorem
praedictum, successive gerant, and habeant, per nomen Comitis Nottinghamiae
successive vocitentur and nuncupentur, and quilibet eorum vocitetur and
nuncupetur. Et quod idem Carolus, and haeredes sui praedicti successive, ut
Comites Nottinghamiae teneantur, tractentur, and reputentur, and eorum quilibet
teneatur, tractetur, and nuncupetur, habeantque, teneant, and possedeant,
dictus Carolus, and haeredes sui praedicti, and eorum quilibet habeat, teneat,
and possedeat sedem and locum in Parliamentis nostris, haeredum, and
successorum nostrorum, infra Regnum nostrum Angliae, inter alios Comites, ut
Comes Nottinghamiae. Necnon dictus Carolus, and haeredes sui praedicti
gaudeant, and utantur, and eorum quilibet gaudeat, and utatur, per nomen
Comitis Nottinghamiae, omnibus and singulis, juribus, and privilegiis,
praeeminentiis, immunitatibus, statu Comitis, in omnibus rite, and de jure
pertinentibus, quibus caeteri Comites dicti Regni nostri Angliae, ante haec
tempora melius honorificemus and quiemus, usi and gauvisi fint, seu in
praesenti gaudeant and utantur. Et quia crescent status celsitudine necessario
crescent sumptus, and onera grandiora. Et ut idem Carolus, and haeredes sui
praedicti, melius, dicentius, and honorificentius statum praedictum Comitis
Nottinghamiae, ac onera ipsi Carolo, and haeredibus suis incumbentia
manutenere, and supportare valiant, and quilibet eorum valeat. Ideo de
ulteriori gratia nostra, dedimus, and concessimus, ac per praesentes, pro
nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris damus, and concedimus praefato
Carolo, and haeredibus suis praedictis in perpetuum, vigenti libras feodi, sive
annualis redditus, singulis annis percipiendum, de exitibus, proficuis, and
reventionibus magnae, and parvae custumae, and subsidii nostri, nobis concessi,
seu in posterum nobis, haeredibus, vel successoribus nostris concedendi,
provenientis, crescentis, sive emergentis, infra portum civitatis nostrae
Londini, per manus Custumariorum, sive Collectorum nostrorum, haeredum, and
successorum nostrorum, ibidem pro tempore existentium, ad terminos Sancti
Michaelis Archangeli, and Paschae, per aequales portiones, singulis annis,
solvendas. His Testibus, Reverendissimo in Christo patre and conciliario
nostro, Johanne Archiepiscopo Cantuariae, totius Angliae Primate, ac
Metropolitano, ac praedilectis, and perquam fidelibus Conciliariis nostris,
Thoma Egerton, Milite, Custode magni Sigilli nostri Angliae, Willielmo Domino
Burghley, praeclari ordinis Garterii Milite, magno Thesaurario nostro Angliae,
ac etiam charissimis Consanguineis nostris, Henrico Comite Northumbriae,
praenobilis ordinis Garterii Milite, Gilberto Comite Salopiae, ejusdem ordinis
Garterii Milite, Edwardo Comite Wigorniae, ejusdem ordinis Garterii Milite,
Roberto Comite Sussexiae, Edwardo Comite Hertfordiae; necnon Reverendis in
Christo patribus, Ricardo, Episcopo Londini, Thoma, Episcopo Wintoniae,
Antonio, Episcopo Cicestrensi, Herberto, Episcopo Herefordiae, ac praedilecto
and fideli Conciliario nostro, Georgio Domino de Hunsdon, praenobilis ordinis
Garterii Milite, Camerario hospitii nostri, ac etiam praedilectis, and
fidelibus nostris, Edwardo Domino Zouche, Thoma Domino Berkley, Henrico Domino
Cobham, Edwardo Domino Stafford, Thoma Domino Scroope de Bolton, Willielmo
Domino Sands, Henrico Domino Windsorae, Edmundo Domino Sheffield, and
praenobilis ordinis Garterii Milite; necnon praedilectis, and fidelibus
Conciliariis nostris, Rogero Domino North, Thesaurario hospitii nostri, Thoma
Domino Buckhurst, praenobilis ordinis Garterii Milite, ac Angliae princerna, ac
praedilecto, and fideli nostro, Willielmo Domino Compton, ac etiam dilictis,
and fidelibus Conciliariis nostris Willielmo Knolles, Milite, Contrarotulatore
hospitii nostri, Roberto Cecilio, Milite, principali Secretario nostro, and
aliis. In cujus rei, etc.

Test Regina apud Westmonasterium vicesimo secundo die Octobris, Anno Regni
Reginae Elizabethae tricesimo. Per ipsam Reginam. Concordatum cum Recordo and
Examinatum per me S. Killingworth.

The History of Queen Elizabeth by Cambden, Page 610.
HE was very much offended that the Council were let loose: several Papers he
cast into the Fire, lest (as he said) they should tell tales, and prepared
himself for defense. And being now reduced to his last hope, of expecting Aid
from the Londoners, he Fortified his House on all sides. The Lord Admiral
presently Besieged the House to Land-ward. He assigned the Earls of Cumberland,
and Lincoln, the Lord Thomas Howard, the Lord Gray, the Lord Burghly, the Lord
Compton, and others, with Forces of Horse and Foot, every Man his Post. He
himself, with the Lord Effingham, his Son, the Lord Cobham, Sir John Stanhop,
Sir Robert Sidney, Sir Fulk Grevill, seized upon the Garden by the Thames side.
Being now ready to assault the House, he summoned him by Sidney, to yield.
Southampton asked him, to whom they should yield; To their Adversaries? That
were to run themselves headlong to ruin; Or to the Queen? That were to confess
themselves guilty. But yet, said he, if the Lord Admiral will give us Hostages
for our security, we will appear before the Queen: If not we are every one of
us fully resolved to lose our lives fighting. The Lord Admiral returning word
by Sidney, That neither were Conditions to be propounded by Rebels, nor
Hostages to be delivered to them; signified to Essex, That, for the sparing the
weaker sex, he would permit the Countess, his Wife, the Lady Rich, his Sister,
and their Waiting-Gentlewomen (who filled all places with their womanish
Shrieks, and Lamentations) to come forth. Which Essex took as a favor; only he
desired that an hour or two's time might be granted him to fortify the place,
by which they should go forth: which was also granted.

Before the hour was expired, Essex, holding all things now for desparate, and
lost, resolved to make his way out. And the Lord Sands, who was more aged than
the rest, earnestly urged him so to do; often repeating that saying, That the
resolutest Councels are the safest; That it is more honorable for Noble
Persons to die fighting, than by the hand of the Executioner. But Essex,
wavering in his resolution, began presently to think of yielding, and gave
notice that upon certain Conditions he would yield. But when the Lord Admiral
would admit of no conditions; he said, he would not give conditions, but rather
take them. Yet Three things he requested: First, That they might be civilly
dealt withal. This the Lord Admiral promised. Secondly, That their cause might
be justly, and duly heard. He answered, That there was no reason to doubt
thereof. And, Lastly, That Ashton, a Minister of God's Word, might be with him
in Prison, for his Soul's comfort. The Lord Admiral answered, That for these
things he would make intercession to the Queen. When presently all the
Noblemen, falling upon their Knees, and delivering their Swords up to the Lord
Admiral, yielded themselves at Ten of the Clock at Night. There were no more
slain but Owen Salisbury, and one, or two, who were killed in the House by
shot, and as many of the Besiegers.

And again out of the same, Page 659.
UPON which day (whether thinking on her Death, or presaging what would ensue)
she happned to say to the Lord Admiral, whom she always dearly affected, My
Throne has been the Throne of Kings, neither ought any other, than he that is
my next Heir, to succeed me. And the Courtiers observed, That she never before
more frequented Prayers, and the Service of God, than now.

WILLIAM Lord Howard, Lord Baron of Effingham, Eldest Son to Charles Earl of
Nottingham, that was Lord High Admiral of England. CHAPTER IV.
HE is recorded in several Writers of the Heralds Books, to have bore a part in
most of the Tilts, Fights at Barriers, and other Marshal Games, and Triumphs of
the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Cambden's History of Queen Elizabeth, Page 519.
THE English Ships, which, by reason of the shallowness of the Channel, could
not hitherto come near them, now, when it was flood, came in with great
alacrity. Essex also with his Ship, thrust himself into the midst of the Fight;
as likewise did the Admiral himself, with his Son.

Ibidem, Page 521.
ABout Sixty Military Men were Knighted for their Valor: viz. Robert, Earl of
Essex, Count Lodowick of Nassau, Don Christophero, a Portuguese, Sir William
Herbert, Sommerset Bourk, an Irishman, William Howard, the Lord Admiral's Son,
Robert Dudley, George Devereux, Henry Nevill, etc.

Milles's Catalogue of Honor, Page 894, 895.
CHARLES Howard (Son of William, Lord Howard of Effingham, Lord Admiral of
England, Lord Chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth, one of her Privy Council, and by
her made Knight of the Garter, who was younger Son of Thomas Howard, second
Duke of Norfolk) one of the Lords of the Honorable Privy Council to Queen
Elizabeth, and King James, Lord Howard of Effingham, Knight of the Garter, Lord
Admiral of England, was, for his most right honorable Service at the Sacking
of Cales, with Robert Devereux, Earl of Essex, by Queen Elizabeth, created Earl
of Nottingham, in right of his descent from the Mowbrays, Dukes of Norfolk, and
Earls of Nottingham.

The First Wife.
Katharine, Daughter of Henry Carry, Lord Hundsdon (who being Lord Chamberlain
of the Household to Queen Elizabeth, one of her Honorable Privy Council, and
Knight of the Garter, was Son of William Carry, by his Wife, Mary Bollen, Sister
to Queen Anne Bollen, Mother of Queen Elizabeth) was first Wife unto Charles
Howard, Earl of Nottingham.
The Second Wife.
Margaret, the Daughter of James Stuart, Earl of Murray, was the second Wife to
Charles Howard, Earl of Nottingham, now living, 1610.
Children by his First Wife.
William Howard, (was by King James, created Lord Howard of Effingham) a Baron
of the Parliament House, who Married Anne, Daughter and Heir of John Lord Saint
John of Bletsoe, by his Wife, Katharine, Daughter of Sir Robert Dormer of
Eythorp in Buckingham-shire. Charles Howard, Knight, Keeper of the Castle at
Windsor. Elizabeth, Wife of Sir Robert Southwell, of Riseing in Norfolk,
Knight. Frances, Wife of..... Fitzgerald, Earl of Kildare. Margaret, Wife of
Sir Richard Leuson.
Children by his Second Wife.
James, died lately, young, 1610.
ELIZABETH HOWARD, Countess of Peterborow. CHAPTER V.
The Second Part of the Baronage of England, by Dugdale, Page 279.
THIS Noble Earl took to Wife, Katharine, Daughter to Henry, Lord Hundsdon, by
whom he had Issue, Two Sons, William, who wedded Anne, Daughter, and Sole Heir
to John Lord Saint John of Bletsoe, who died in his Father's Lifetime; leaving
Issue, Elizabeth, his Sole Daughter and Heir, Married to John Lord Mordaunt of
Turvey, afterward Earl of Peterborow, and Charles his Successor in his Honors:
as also three Daughters; Elizabeth, Married to Sir Robert Southwell of
Wood-Riseing; Frances, first to Henry Fitzgerald, Earl of Kildare; and
Margaret, to Sir Richard Levison of Trentham, and Vice Admiral of England.

An Indenture by which Elizabeth, Countess of Peterborow, does settle the
Manor of Blechingleigh, upon her Son, Henry, Earl of Peterborow.
THis Indenture made the Four and twentieth day of April, Anno Domini 1648. and
in the Four and twentieth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles, by
the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of
the Faith, etc. between the Right Honorable, Elizabeth, Countess Dowager of
Peterborow, of the one part, and the Right Honorable, Henry, Earl of Arundel,
Sir Becham Saint John, Knight of the Honorable Order of the Bath, Sir Oliver
Luke of Hawnes, in the County of BEdford, Knight, and Sir Samuel Luke of
Woodend, in the said County of Bedford, Knight, of the other part, Witnesses,
That the said Countess Dowager, for the settling of the Manor and Lands
hereafter mentioned, in the Name, and Blood of her, the said Countess; And in
consideration of the sum of Five shillings of lawful Money of England, to her
in hand paid, by the said Henry, Earl of Arundel, Sir Becham Saint John, Sir
Oliver Luke, and Sir Samuel Luke, whereof she acknowledges the receipt; and
for diverse other good causes and considerations, her, the said Countess,
hereunto especially moving, has Granted, Bargained, Aliened, Sold, Enfeoffed,
and Confirmed, and by these Presents, does Grant, Bargain, Alien, Sell,
Enfeoffe, and Confirm unto the said Henry, Earl of Arundel, Sir Becham Saint
John, Sir Oliver Luke, and Sir Samuel Luke, all that the Manor of Blechingly,
alias Bletchingley, alias Blechingleigh, in the County of Surrey, with the
Rights, Members, and Appurtenances thereunto belonging; and all Houses, Lands,
Tenements, Hereditaments, Commons, Wastes, Warrens, Courts, Court Leet, view of
Frankpledge, Privileges, Goods of Felons, Deodands, Franchises, Profits,
Emoluments, and Appurtenances whatsoever, to the said Manor belonging, or
appertaining, or as part, parcel, or member thereof, commonly accepted,
reputed, taken, or known; and also all Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, of
her, the said Countess Dowager, situate, lying, and being, in the Parishes of
Blechingly, alias Bletchingley, alias Blechingleigh, aforesaid, Godstone,
Cateram, and Horn, or any of them, in the said County of Surrey, To Have and
to Hold the said Manor, Lands, and Premises, with their, and every of their
rights, members, and appurtenances, to the said Henry, Earl of Arundel, Sir
Becham Saint John, Sir Oliver Luke, and Sir Samuel Luke, their Heirs and
Assigns for ever, to the use, behoof, intents, and purposes, and with, upon,
and under such limitations as are hereafter, in, and by these presents limited,
expressed, and declared; and to, and for no other use, intent, meaning, or
purpose whatsoever: (That is to say) To the Use of the said Elizabeth, Countess
Dowager of Peterborow, for and during the Term of her Natural Life, without
Impeachment of, or for any manner of Wast: And after her Decease, then to the
Use and Behoof of Henry, Earl of Peterborow, Son and Heir Apparent of the said
Countess, for, and during the Term of Fourscore and nineteen Years, if the said
Earl of Peterborow shall so long live, without Impeachment of Wast: And
afterward to the Use of the said Henry Earl of Arundel, Sir Becham Saint John,
Sir Oliver Luke, and Sir Samuel Luke, for the Life of the said Earl of
Peterborow, upon Trust, and to the intent that the Contingent Remainders,
herein after limited, may not be prevented, defeated, or destroyed, without the
Consent of the said Countess: And nevertheless, That the said Earl of
Peterborow, may have and receive the Rents and Profits of the said Manor and
Premises, for the term of his Life: And after the Decease of the said Earl of
Peterborow, to the Use of the Daughter, or Daughters, and Younger Son or Sons,
of the Body of the said Earl of Peterborow, lawfully to be begotten: And of,
and for such Estate; and Estates, either in Fee Simple, Fee Tail, for Life, or
Lives, or Years, or otherwise, of the said Manor and Premises, and every or
any Part or Parcel thereof. And to the intent that such Son, or Sons, Daughter,
or Daughters, may have and receive such Rent, or Rents, Sum, or Sums of
Money, out of the Premises, or any Part thereof, as the said Earl of
Peterborow, at any time, during his Life, by any Writing or Writings, under his
Hand and Seal; testified by Two or more Witnesses, shall limit and appoint: And
for Default of such Limitation and Appointment; or as the Estates so limited
shall respectively end and determine; and charged or chargeable with such Rent
or Rents, Sum or Sums of Money, as shall be so limited: Then to the Use and
Behoof of the First Son of the said Earl of Peterborow, lawfully begotten, or
to be begotten, and of the Heirs of the Body of such First Son, lawfully
begotten. And for default of such Heirs, then to the Use and Behoof of the
Second Son of the said Henry, Earl of Peterborow, lawfully begotten, or to be
begotten; and of the Heirs of the Body of such Second Son, lawfully to be
begotten. And for default of such Heirs, then to the Use and Behoof of the
Third Son of the said Henry, Earl of Peterborow, lawfully begotten, or to be
begotten; and of the Heirs of the Body of such Third Son, lawfully to be
begotten. And for default of such Issue, then to the Use and Behoof of the
Fourth Son of the said Henry, Earl of Peterborow; and of the Heirs of the Body
of such Fourth Son, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such Heirs,
then to the Use and Behoof of the Fifth Son of the said Henry, Earl of
Peterborow, lawfully begotten, or to be begotten; and of the Heirs of the Body
of such Fifth Son, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such Issue, then
to the Use and Behoof of all, and every such other Son or Sons of the said
Henry, Earl of Peterborow, lawfully to be begotten, as they shall be in
Priority of Birth; and of the several and respective Heirs of their several and
respective Bodies, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such Heirs, then
to the use and behoof of the Daughter, or Daughters of the said Henry, Earl of
Peterborow, lawfully begotten, or to be begotten; and of the Heirs of the Body,
or Bodies of such Daughter, or Daughters, lawfully to be begotten. And for
default of such Heirs, then to the use and behoof of John Mordaunt, Esquire, Second
Son of the said Countess, for, and during the term of his Natural Life, without
Impeachment of, or for any manner of Wast. And after his Decease, then to the
use and behoof of the First Son of the said John Mordaunt, lawfully to be
begotten; and of the Heirs of the Body of such First Son, lawfully to be
begotten. And for default of such Heirs, then to the use and behoof of the
Second Son of the said John Mordaunt, lawfully to be begotten; and of the Heirs
of the Body of such Second Son, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of
such Heirs, then to the use and behoof of the Third Son of the said John
Mordaunt, lawfully to be begotten; and of the Heirs of the Body of such Third
Son, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such Heirs, then to the use
and behoof of the Fourth Son of the said John Mordaunt, lawfully to be
begotten; and of the Heirs of the Body of such Fourth Son, lawfully to be
begotten. And for default of such Heirs, then to the use and behoof of the
Fifth Son of the said John Mordaunt, lawfully to be begotten; and to the Heirs
of the Body of such Fifth Son, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such
Heirs, then to the use and behoof of all and every the Sons of the said John
Mordaunt, lawfully begotten, as they shall be in Priority of Birth; and of
their several and respective Heirs, of their several and respective Bodies,
lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such Heirs; then to the use and
behoof of the Daughter; or Daughters of the said John Mordaunt, lawfully to be
begotten; and of the Heirs of the Body, or Bodies of such Daughter, or
Daughters, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such Heirs, then to the
use and behoof of the Heirs of the Body of the said Countess Dowager, lawfully
begotten, or to be begotten. And for default of such Heirs, then to the use and
behoof of Sir Francis Howard of Great Bookham, in the County of Surrey, Knight,
for, and during his Natural Life, without Impeachment of, or for any manner of
Wast. And after his Decease, then to the use and behoof of the First Son of the
said Sir Francis Howard, lawfully begotten or to be begotten; and of the Heirs
Males of the Body of such First Son, lawfully begotten or to be begotten. And
for default of such Heirs, then to the use and behoof of the Second Son of the
said Sir Francis Howard, lawfully begotten, or to be begotten; and of the Heirs
Males of the Body of such Second Son, lawfully to be begotten. And for default
of such Heirs, then to the use and behoof of the Third Son of the said Sir
Francis Howard, lawfully begotten, or to be begotten; and to the Heirs Males of
the Body of such Third Son, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such
Heirs, then to the use and behoof of the Fourth Son of the said Sir Francis
Howard, lawfully begotten, or to be begotten; and of the Heirs Males of the
Body of such Fourth Son, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such
Heirs, then to the use and behoof of the Fifth Son of the said Sir Francis
Howard, lawfully begotten, or to be begotten; and of the Heirs Males of the
Body of such Fifth Son, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such Heirs,
then to the use and behoof of all, and every the Sons of the said Sir Francis
Howard, lawfully to be begotten, as they shall be in Priority of Birth; and of
their several and respective Heirs Males, of their several and respective
Bodies, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such Heirs, then to the use
and behoof of Sir Charles Howard of..... in the County of Surrey, Knight, for,
and during the term of his Natural, Life without Impeachment of, or for any
manner of Wast. And after his Decease, then to the use and behoof of the First
Son of the said Sir Charles Howard, lawfully begotten or to be begotten; and of
the Heirs Males of the Body of such First Son, lawfully to be begotten. And for
default of such Heirs, then to the use and behoof of the Second Son of the said
Sir Charles Howard, lawfully begotten or to be begotten; and of the Heirs Males
of the Body of such Second Son, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of
such Heirs, then to the use and behoof of the Third Son of the said Sir Charles
Howard, lawfully begotten or to be begotten; and of the Heirs Males of the Body
of such Third Son, lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such Heirs, then
to the use and behoof of the Fourth Son of the said Sir Charles Howard lawfully
begotten or to be begotten; and of the Heirs Males of the Body of such Fourth
Son lawfully to be begotten. And for default of such Heirs, then to the use and
behoof of the Fifth Son of the said Sir Charles Howard, lawfully begotten or to
be begotten; and of the Heirs Males of the Body of such Fifth Son, lawfully to
be begotten. And for default of such Heirs, then to the use and behoof of all,
and every the Sons of the said Sir Charles Howard, lawfully to be begotten, as
they shall be in Priority of Birth; and of the several and respective Heirs
Males, of their several and respective Bodies, lawfully to be begotten. And for
default of such Issue, then to the use and behoof of the right Heirs of the
said Elizabeth, Countess Dowager of Peterborow for ever. And the said Countess
Dowager does Covenant, Grant, and Agree to, and with the said Henry, Earl of
Arundel, Sir Becham Saint John, Sir Oliver Luke, and Sir Samuel Luke, their
Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, That she the said Countess Dowager, shall
and will, before the First Day of July, next ensuing the Date hereof,
acknowledge and Levy one Fine with Proclamations, according to the Statute in
that Case made and provided, before His Majesty's Justices of His Courts of
Common Pleas at Westminster, of all and singular the Premises, with their, and
every of their Rights, Members, and Appurtenances, by such Name or Names,
Quantity and Number of Acres; and in such Manner and Form, as by the said
Henry, Earl of Arundel, Sir Becham Saint John, Sir Oliver Luke, and Sir Samuel
Luke, their Heirs and Assigns, or by their Council Learned in the Law, shall be
thought fit and convenient: Which said Fine, so, or in any other manner to be
Levied, of the said Manor, Lands, and Premises; and all, and every other Fine
and Fines, by, and between the said Parties, or any of them, of the said Manor
and Premises, or any Part thereof, heretofore Levied, or hereafter to be
Levied, shall be, and shall be Adjudged, Deemed, and Construed, and taken to
be, and Inure, to, and for the Uses, Limitations, Intents, and Purposes, herein
before mentioned, limited, and declared. Provided, and it is hereby further
declared, That this present Assurance, and the Fine to be Levied, as aforesaid,
shall be Deemed, Construed, and Taken to be, and Inure for the Strengthening
and Confirming of one Annual or Yearly Rentcharge of Three hundred Pounds per
Annum, heretofore Granted or Limited to the said John Mordaunt, and his Heirs,
to be Issuing out of the said Manor of Blechingly, alias Bletchingley, alias
Blechingleigh, and other the Premises: And also one Estate for One and twenty
Years, of the said Manor and Premises, granted to Francis, late Earl of
Bedford, Oliver, late Earl of Bullingbrooke, Sir Henry Compton, and Sir Rowland
Saint John, to Commence immediately from, and after the Decease of the said
Countess Dowager, for the raising of Four thousand Pounds, for the Portion of
the Lady Elizabeth Howard, Daughter of the said Countess, according to the
Purport and true Meaning of One Indenture, bearing Date the First Day of
November, in the Fourteenth Year of His now Majesty's Reign, as by the said
Indenture may appear: And that the Uses, Estates and Limitations herein before
mentioned, shall be Subject to, and Charged with the said Rentcharge of Three
hundred Pounds per Annum, and term of One and twenty years, any thing in these
Presents, contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

In witness whereof, the parties above named have to these present Indentures
Interchangably set their Hands and Seals, the Day and Year first above written.
E. PETERBOROW.
Sealed and Delivered in the Presence of Tho. Farrer, Will. Preston, Sam.
Holland.


A SUCCINCT GENEALOGY Of the HOUSE of MORDAUNT, Justified by Ancient and Extant
Charters, Public Records, Histories and other Authentic Proofs.
By ROBERT HALSTEAD.
The Arms of the House of Mordaunt were Argent, a Cheveron Sable, between Three
Stars Waved of the same.

blazon or coat of arms of the house of Mordaunt

Of the Name, Antiquity, Descent, Alliance, Possessions, Greatness, Actions,
and Arms of the House of Mordaunt.
IN the Preface to these Genealogies, there has been exposed to the Reader the
Nature and Antiquity of Sur-names, and the grounds, causes, and occasions upon
which they were assumed in general. To ascribe why the Lords of this House took
to themselves the Name of Mordaunt, is not in my power; but that they did so,
near Six hundred Years ago, and have continued it to their descendants unto
this very day, will be as easy, as to read the unquestioned Proofs shall be
exposed upon that matter.

The obvious and natural conjecture, will be the quality of the occasion, where
they first appeared, an occasion of War, Chivalry, and Conquest; a Soldier, a
younger Brother, and a brave fellow, set out to make a Fortune by adventures of
Arms; it was proper to such a one, dare mortem, to Wound, Kill, and Destroy his
Enemy; whence le Mordaunt, which was the first Epithet assumed by Osbert, the
beginner of that House, might appear no unproper sobriquit for him that did
deserve it.

The descent of this Osbert is not affirmed to be certain, neither, by one of
who detestes to advantage his undertaking by any thing he cannot prove; but it
is evident his Father, Robert, was a great deserver in the Conquest; and that,
by the assistance he brought Duke William, and the share he acquired as the
reward of his labor. He bore the illustrious appellation of de Sancto Aegidio,
or of Saint Giles; which at that time was the Name of the Sovereign Earls, and
Princes of Toulouse, of which House he was in all probability a Son, a Brother,
or a near Relation; and from his Brother Eustace, the eldest Son of this
Robert, our Osbert did receive several noble provisions; as the Lordship of
Radwell, that of Brayfield, with Lands in Wahull, in Lavendon, and in other
parts; and for the Blood of the Gentlemen, who were his descendants, it has
been so fortunately pure, as never to have been mis-allyed, since the first
knowledge of the Family; but the chiefs thereof have always Married into Names
of great Authority, and Nobleness; as that of Fortis, Alno, Olney, who were of
the first Conquerors; those of Wake, L'Estrange, Latimer, Vere, Darcy, and
Howard; all of the prime Nobility.

And as they have taken Wives out of the greatest Families, so they have given
them to the chiefest Gentlemen, and prime Houses of England; to Strangeways, to
Fettyplace, to Browns, to Henningham, to Mansell, to Danvers, to Radney, to
Nevill, and to Howard. To these circumstances has been added their felicity,
that by the Prudent Conduct of their Affairs, and successful undertakings, they
have ever flourished in an eminent degree of Riches and opulency.

They had been, before the time of the first Sir John Mordaunt, Lords of great
Manors, Lands and Lordships; but from his time, to which was designed the
exaltation of this Family, and his Alliance with the House of Latimer, his
Sons, with the Heir of Vere, and his Grandsons, with the Inheritrix of
Fitz-Lewis: The Riches and Patrimony of this House was such, as there was
scarce a Gentleman in England, whose Estate was comparable to it.

After this, as the occasion of their coming into this Kingdom, was the
Military Service of a victorious Prince; so the Lords of this House have
continued to serve diverse of their Kings in their Wars: they have served them
likewise in their Councils; they have deserved to be called into the supreme
Dignity of the Peerage, and thereby made hereditary Grandees, Judges, and
Counselors, in which they have remained for diverse Ages. There have been of
them Privy Counselors to several of the greatest Kings, Ministers of State,
Captains, Ambassadors, and Governors of Provinces: And in all these qualities
they have served without reproach. So as if Antiquity of Original, Illustrious
Derivance, Descent from noblest Blood, great Alliances, high Dignities and
Employments, worthy Actions and large Possessions, be of Virtue to make a
Family considerable, there will be little cause for Envy to bark at my
endeavoring to establish the Honor, and Memory thereof, according to what is
due to the merit of a Name so Illustrious.

For the Arms of this House, from the time they have been in use, and born
hereditarily in Families, were Argent a Cheveron Sable, between Three Stars
Waved of the same.

OSBERT le MORDAVNT, Lord of Radwell, and other Lands and Lordships. CHAPTER I.
IN the Year 1066. against which Providence had prepared so great a change for
the People and Government of England, as did ensue by their subjection to the
total Conquest of a Victorious Prince. At that time, among the other Hero's,
who joined their hopes and assistance to the Fortunes of the famous William,
Duke of Normandy, there was a Noble Knight, called Robert of Saint Giles, in
the Latin Tongue, Robertus de Sancto Aegidio, who brought to his Service
Fourscore Knights, (Milites) out of the South parts of France, and joined
himself to the Duke's other Troops, at the Imbarcation for this great
undertaking. Of this Robert of Saint Giles, no more is extant of what he was,
than the assurance that the Sovereign Earls and Princes of Toulouse, did all at
that time, use the Name and Appellation of Saint Giles, or De Sancto Aegidio:
That the Attendance of Fourscore Kinghts was an Equipage suitable to a Prince
Adventurer; and that after his labors in this War, he was rewarded by the
generous Conqueror, with great Lands and noble Possessions. How long this
Robert of Saint Giles lived, or remained in this Kingdom, we cannot tell; but
we find his Son, Eustace of Saint Giles, did survive his Father, and possessed
his Acquisitions, by a Charter, wherein he gave to his Brother Osbert (who from
some occasion was called Le Mordaunt, and was the beginner of this House and
Name) the Lordship of Radwell, in the County of Bedford, and other Lands that
were of his Father's Partition. And from this Osbert all the Mordaunts do
derive, as will appear by a continued Series of Extant Proofs. He lived after
to a great Age; and being engaged in assistance with the first Conquerors of
Ireland, we find him to have received from the Gift of Harvey de Montmorency,
who is styled Marescallus Domini Regis totius Hiberniae, the Lordship of
Balinaeeros, Tobenere, and many great Possessions. When, or where he died does
not appear; but He left Issue,
Osmund Mordaunt. And, Baldwin Mordaunt. Which latter was a Witness to many
Ancient Charters that are Extant.


OSMVND le MORDAVNT, Lord of Radwell, Felmarsham, and Chellington. CHAPTER II.
OSMVND le MORDAVNT flourished in the time of Henry the Second, and became
possessed of the Lordship of Radwell, of the Town of Felmarsham, of Lands in
Wahull and other places, which were of those his Father, Osbert did possess in
this Kingdom; and it is possible, may have been a younger Brother, and that an
elder Son of Osbert Mordaunt, did remain settled upon his Lands in Ireland,
under some other Name. However, he was a Knight of much Renown, as may appear
by the Alliance he contracted with one of the most famous Knights of his time,
Sampson Fortis, of whom was held many Fees by Knight Service. This Sampson was
so called from his great Strength and Valor; being a great Champion, and
Associate in War with Simon de Saint Lis, and David of Scotland, and the Earls
of Huntington, and Northampton, and was Lord of several Towns and Villages, of
Chellington among the rest, which he gave in Marriage to Osmund Mordaunt, with
his Daughter Ellen: of whom the said Osmund had Issue, Eustace Mordaunt. Robert
Mordaunt.


EVSTACE le MORDAVNT, Lord of Radwell, Felmarsham, Chellington, of the Moiety
of the Noble Lordship of Turvey, as of Lands in Wahull, and in Brayfield.
CHAPTER III.
EVSTACE le MORDAVNT was a Valiant and a Fortunate Knight; he did Accompany
King Richard the First, among the Troops that followed him into the Holy Land,
and served in all the Enterprises of that Expedition. At his return he found
his Father Deceased, and a Devolution to him of his Inheritance. He began with
an Action of Piety, in acknowledging the mercy of his Return, and
Establishment; and gave (under the Name of Eustachius le Mordaunt) certain
Lands in Turvey, in free, pure, and perpetual Alms, to the Church of St. John
Baptist, and St. John Evangelist of Caldwell, and the Canons of that place, for
the good of his Soul, for that of Alice his Wife, and for that of all his
Ancestors and Successors. He had indeed, by his merit and worthiness, acquired
a Wife out of the House of Alno, or de Alneto; who from the Conquest had been
Lords of Turvey, and other fair Possessions, which by the death of Hugh of
Alno, without Issue, were devolved to Two beautiful Sisters, Alice, and Sarah,
whereof he Married the first, (the second being the Wife of Sir Richard of
Ardres) and with this Lady he became possessed of the Moiety of that Noble
Lordship, from thenceforth called Mordaunts Manor, having a large Extent, and
very particular privileges. He had a Suit with Gilbert Fitz-Williams, in the
Ninth Year of Richard the First, about some Lands in Radwell, which was
Adjudged on his behalf; and granted several Lands in Turvey for their Homages
and Service, and other considerations to William Cook, to Simon of Turvey, to
Raignold le Bray, and to others. Toward his latter end, about the Sixteenth
Year of King Henry the Third, he had a Contest with Sir John de Traylly, and
the Cause was decided against him: and we find he died near that time,

Leaving Issue, William Mordaunt. Agnes Mordaunt.


WILLIAM MORDAVNT, Lord of Turvey, Felmarsham, Esthull, Radwell, of Lands in
Wahull, and in Yerdley. CHAPTER IV.
WILLIAM de MORDAVNT, (for from this time in the old Deeds the le is changed
into the de) after the death of Eustace, became Lord of the Lordships of
Radwell, Turvey, and several other Lands. In the Twenty ninth of Henry the
Third, he paid a Releif to the Lord William de la Church, and the Lady Matilda
de Traylly his Wife, for certain Lands he held: I suppose they were those about
which Eustace, his Father, was cast in the behalf of John de Traylly, in the
Sixteenth of the said King's Reign. About the same time, Henry, the Son of Fulk
Huriel, Roger le Soc of Wybaudston, and Albreda, the Daughter of Robert of
Saint George, do by several Deeds, Release, and Quit Claim to this William,
under the style of William de Mordaunt, their Lord, diverse Rights, and Lands.
And Richard of Ardres, unto the said William (for such proprieties the Lords of
this Manor of Turvey had in these, and aftertimes) Gives, Grants, and
Confirms, for Six Marks of Silver, which he gave to him in Gersumam, one of his
Villanes, called Adam Pite, with all his sequel and procreation, gotten, and to
be gotten for ever. There passes afterward, between William Mordaunt, and Hugh
Poor, Prior of the Monastery of St. Neads, an exchange of diverse Lands, with
an advantage given by the said William, in free, pure, and perpetual Alms. And
as the last testimony of him, there is Extant an Account given unto him under
the Seal of one William de Wikely, who terms himself therein, Serviens
Willielmi de Mordaunt in Manerio suo de Turvey: Dated the Ninth of Edward the
First. Not long after which, he is supposed to have deceased. Amice of Olney,
the Daughter of Sir William of Olney, was the Wife of William Mordaunt; and by
her he had the Lordship of Esthull, and a Manor with diverse Lands in Yerdley:
which last had been given her Father by John Scot, Earl of Huntington, a Prince
of the House of Scotland. Her Husband is styled in a Deed (wherein Matilda, the
Daughter of Lettice of Esthull, does remit unto him, and Amice, his Wife, her
Right and Claim to certain Lands) Lord of that place. The Charter runs,
Willielmo de Mordaunt Domino de Esthull, and Amiciae Vxori suae. Sir William of
Olney, the Father of this Amice, was one of the Sons of that Sir Richard
Sutton, that flourished in the time of Henry the Third, from whence the Lords
of Dudley did descend. He assumed the Name of Olney, from certain Lands he held
therein, that his Father had received from the Grant of Ralph, Earl of Chester.
After the death of William Mordaunt, this Amice took into her Second Bed,
Aegidio de Albeny, Lord of Demster: and under the Name of Amicia de Albeny, she
Granted afterward, in the Ninth Year of Edward the Second, unto William
Mordaunt her Son, and to Robert the Son of the said William, five Virgates, and
five Acres of Land in Yerdly, with the five Villanes that then occupied the
same.

Their Issue, William de Mordaunt. And Richard de Mordaunt.


WILLIAM de MORDAVNT, Lord of Turvey, Chicheley, Clifton, Yerdley, Esthull, and
other Lands and Lordships. CHAPTER V.
WILLIAM de MORDAVNT, the Son of William, Lord of Turvey, and of Esthull, in
the Fourteenth year of Edward the First, purchased the Manor of Chicheley, and
diverse Messuages therein, of William, the Son of Samson le Mansell, and of
Gualfridus de Stachesden. In the Twenty second of the said King's Reign, he had
a dispute with the Lord Reignald de Gray, then a great person, and from whom
the Earls of Kent are descended, who continue to this day large possessions in
those parts. It was about a Fishing of a certain part in the River Ouse,
joining to the Lord Gray his Lands, which by reciprocal Indenture was accorded,
that it should be thenceforth free unto them both. And in the Twenty fifth of
the same Henry, he obtained a Patent to Empark certain Lands in his Lordship of
Turvey. The last Act of his, we find to be in the Eleventh Year of Edward the
Second; at which time he made a Grant, Release and Quit-claim for ever, unto
God, the Church of St. Need's, and the Monks of that House, of all his Right
and Claim, which he had, or could have, unto three Messuages, Eighty eight
Acres of Land, and One Acre of Meadow in Turvey, with their Appurtenances, for
the which he, together with his partner, Hugh of Ardres, had Sued the Prior of
that place, in the King's Court; as also fo other Lands and Tenements, which
the said Monks held of his Fee, and in his Fee; all which Lands their
Predecessors had received from the Gift of his Ancestors, in the said Village,
saving always to him, and to his Heirs, and unto Hugh of Ardres, his partner,
the Services due unto them.

Roesia, or Rose de Wake, was the Wife of this William Mordaunt. She was the
Daughter of Sir Ralph de Wake, who was Lord of Clifton; which was a Family in
those, and elder times, when there were no Dukes, and but few Earls in England,
and the Degree of the Baronage (wherein several of that Name sat) was so
illustrious, did yield to few, in splendour of dignity, greatness of power, and
opulency of fortune: It had brought forth a number of Hero's, famous for Valor
and Wisdom: It had become worthy the Alliance of the Royal House. And had
Fortune persevered in her own work, and not always delighted in the change and
subversion of great Families, there had not any (in probaility) arrived at
greater eminency. With this Roesia there was at that time given, in part of
Portion, the Land and Manor in Clifton, which to this day remain unto the
Mordaunts, under the Name of Wake's Manor, unto which a very Noble Royalty and
Privilege do belong.

Their Issue, Robert Mordaunt. William Mordaunt.


ROBERT MORDAVNT, Lord of Turvey, Clifton, Yerdley, Knotting, Chicheley, and
other Lands and Lordships. CHAPTER VI.
IN the Sixteenth Year of Edward the Second, while William Mordaunt, his
Father, was yet alive, Hugo Bossard, that was Lord of Knotting, did Enfeoffe
ROBERT, the Son of William Mordaunt, of all his Homages, Services, Natives, and
other Royalties of his Manor of Knotting, to him and to his Heirs. Several
Records, and Rolls of his Court are extant, that express, upon the decease of
his Father, the Homages he received, and the Noble Royalties, which in Right of
his Manors, he was invested in. He was Lord of the Lordships of Turvey, of
Chicheley, of Esthull, of Yerdley, of Clifton, and of Knotting. We find that he
made over, in the Seventeenth of Edward the Third, in trust, unto one William
Campion of Stachesden, all his Lands and Tenements, which he had and held, of
the Fee of Gloucester in Turvey, in Lands, in Houses, in Woods, in Gardens, in
Meadows, in Pastures, in Paths, in Ways, and in Reversions, in Homages, in
Wards, and in Releiffs, in Escheats, in Rents of the Freemen, and of the
Villanes, of their sequels, and of all other things (these are the words of the
Deed.) And the same William Campion does, by another Deed, return to Robert
Mordaunt, and to Johane, his Wife, all the said Manors, Lands, Tenements, and
Services for the Term of his life, with the Reversion over to Edmond Mordaunt,
Son and Heir to the said Robert and Johane. Dated of the same Year.

The first Wife of Robert Mordaunt, was one Mary of Rutland; unto whom he was
Married in his Father's time, as we find by a Deed, Dated of the Thirteenth of
Edward the First, wherein one Robert de Hulier of Turvey, does sell unto them,
and the Heirs of their Bodies, a certain piece of Land; but she dyed early,
without leaving him any Issue.

His Second Wife was Johane de Bray, the Daughter of Roger de Bray, that was
Lord of Silesho; which Brayes were a Family of a long continuance in that Tract.

Their Issue, Edmond de Mordaunt, their only Son.


EDMOND de MORDAVNT, Lord of Turvey, Clifton, Chillington, Staggesden,
Shephaell, and other Lands and Lordships. CHAPTER VII.
EDMOND de MORDAVNT flourished in the Twenty seventh of Edward the Third, at
which time we find several transactions that past between him, Sir Henry of
Brussels, and others, about the Lands that came unto him in Right of his Wife.
But in the Twenty ninth of this King, there happened a memorable dispute
between this Edmond, and one Roger Cook of Newton Blosmavile, that is at this
day upon Record in the Court of Exchequer, which I have seen there and taken a
Copy thereof under the Hand of the Keeper of those Records; Edmond de Mordaunt
was Attached to Answer, in the Term of St. Michael, unto this Roger Cook, upon
a Plea of Trespass, by Bill, and thereupon the said Roger came in his own
person, and complained, That our Edmond, upon a certain day, in the Twenty
Ninth of the said King's Reign, had come into his House, and had taken away by
force (the words are, vi and Armis, scilicet gladiis, etc.) a large proportion
of Wool, Carpets, and Linen Cloth, and Forty Shillings in Money. Whence he
expresses himself to have been damnified in the Sum of One Hundred Shillings;
and thereupon produces his Suit. In order whereunto, Edmond Mordaunt comes
likewise in his own person, and defends the Force and the Injury. Alleging,
That the aforesaid Roger, unto his Bill, ought not to be Answered; Because (he
said) he was a Native of him the said Edmond, of his Manor of Turvey in the
County of Bedford: And that his Ancestors from time without mind, were, and had
been seized of the Ancestors of the said Roger, as of their Natives of the
Manor aforesaid: And likewise, the said Edmond had been seized of Roger
himself, as of one of the Natives of his said Manor. And he desired Judgment,
Whether the said Roger were for these causes to be answered unto his Bill; And
Roger could not deny, but that he was a Native of the said Edmond's. Therefore
it was concluded, That Roger should receive no advantage by his Bill, but
remain at the mercy of Edmond Mordaunt, Pro falso clamore suo.

Helena de Broc was the Wife of Edmond Mordaunt, unto whom she was Married the
Twenty seventh of Edward the Third. She was the Daughter, and one of the Heirs
of Sir Ralph de Broc, who was a Knight of a most Ancient Descent, and Lord of
very fair and large Possessions. All his Lands were, upon his Decease, divided
between Helena Mordaunt, and Agnes, another of his Daughters, the wife of Sir
Henry de Brussels. There did accrue to Edmond Mordaunt, for the part of Helena,
his Wife, in Cambridgeshire, half the Manor of Mallots, with several Lands in
Cambridge, Treversham, and Fulborne; in Buckinghamshire, diverse Lands in
Elsburgh, Bridsthorne, Hardwick, and Wedon, Chesham and Aumundsham, with sundry
other in Hertfordshire, and the entire Manor of Shephaell. She was a Noble
Inheritrix; and besides her Lands, brought into the House of Mordaunt both the
Blood and Arms of the Pirots and the Argentines, two successions, which fell
unto her Family by the Heirs of those Names; the first being Elizabeth, the
Daughter of Sir Ralph Pirot, who was Wife to Laurence de Broc, her Grandfather;
the other the Mother of the same Elizabeth, named Cassandra, the sole Heir of
Sir Giles of Argentine.

Their Issue, Robert Mordaunt, their only Son.


ROBERT MORDAVNT, Lord of Turvey, Clifton, Chicheley, Shephaell, and other
Lands and Lordships. CHAPTER VIII.
ROBERT MORDAVNT, after the Death of his Father, had not only the Fortune of
possessing a large and plentiful Inheritance, but of enjoying it betimes, he
being hardly of full age when he came in succession thereunto. He inherited in
Bedfordshire, the Lordship of Turvey, that of Clifton, and Chicheley with Lands
in Elsburgh, Wedon, Hardwick, Chesham, Welpool, and Aumundsham in the County of
Bucks: In Cambridgeshire, half the Manor of Mallots, besides Lands in
Treversham and Julborne: And in Northamptonshire, the Lordship of Yerdley,
besides the entire Manor of Shephaell, and other Lands in Hertfordshire.

It was the Fortune of this Robert Mordaunt to unite the Ancient Lordship of
Turvey, which for the space of One Hundred and ninety five Years had (till
then) been divided into Two Manors and Jurisdictions, by the Names of
Mordaunt's Manor, and Ardres's Manor, ever since the Reign of King Richard
the First, when it was parted, with the rest of the Alno's Lands, between Alice
and Sarah de Alno, the Two Heirs of that House. For in the Forty ninth of
Edward the Third, an exchange was made by Deed of Indenture, between Thomas de
Ardres and Robert Mordaunt, in which the said Thomas gave and granted all his
Lands, Tenements, and their appurtenances in Turvey, to the said Robert, in Fee
and Exchange for all the Lands, which Robert had in Shephaell, which were of
the inheritance of her Mother, Helena de Broc.

This Robert Mordaunt had Married Agnes L'Estrange, the Daughter, and one of
the Heirs of John L' Estrange, that was Lord of Ampton, Timworth and Brokeley,
and of Elizabeth, who was Sister and Heir of William Botteler of Walden. The
other Daughter of John L' Estrange, was Elizabeth, that Married John Warren,
and by whose death, without Issue, the Lordships of Ampton, Timworth, Brokeley,
with that of Walden, which was of those Bottelers Lands, devolved entirely to
Agnes Mordaunt, and to the Heirs of her body.

Agnes Mordaunt, after the Death of Robert, her Husband, Married again to
Thomas de Fodringay, as appears by a Deed, bearing Date the Monday next after
the Feast of St. Andrew, the Apostle, in the twentieth Year of Richard the
Second, wherein Thomas of Ardres granted to Thomas de Fodringay, and Agnes, his
Wife, a certain Annuity for term of the Life of the said Agnes, in Exchange for
her Dower in Shephaell.

The Issue of Robert Mordaunt, and Agnes his Wife. Robert Mordaunt. Cassandra
Mordaunt, a Nun in the Monastery of Elueston.


ROBERT MORDAVNT, Lord of Turvey, Clifton, Chellington, Brayfield, Ampton,
Timworth, Brokeley, and other Lands and Lordships. CHAPTER IX.
ROBERT MORDAVNT, the Third of his Name, giving way to that Spirit, which led
him to the generous, but uncertain applications of this life, and being
inclined to the War, which flourished in that Martial Age, he became a
Favorite dependant upon that Famous Prince Edward, Duke of York, who was after
slain at the Battle of Agincourt, as appears by an Extant Deed, where by
Covenant, he was with one William Mirefield, retained to serve him in the Wars
of France, with a certain number of Archers and Lances.

He outlived those Services, and continued, during the Civil Broils of his own
Country, an asserter of the Claim and Interest of the House of York.

Whether it were by the Expenses incident to such undertakings, or otherwise,
he proved a great Alienator of many noble Lordships and Possessions, that
descended to him by his Ancestors. In the Sixth Year of King Henry the Sixth,
Agnes de Fodringay, and Robert Mordaunt, her Son, released with Warranty, all
their right to the Manor of Timworth, in the County of Suffolk: Dated the
Tenth of February. In the Eleventh of the said King, he made away all his Lands
in Elsburgh, to Thomas Chaucer, Esquire, Peter Fettyplace, and Thomas Ramsey. And
in the seventeenth, by a Deed bearing Date the Fourth of June, he Alienated to
one John Austin, the Moiety of the Manor of Mallots in Hinton in the County of
Cambridge, with its appurtenances, and all the rest of those Lands, which the
said Robert held in the Towns, and in the Fields of Hinton, Cambridge,
Treversham, and Julborne, in the said County: And lastly, he sold, in the same
Year, to Thomas Cheyney, Esquire all his Lands and Tenements in Chesham, and
Aumundsham. Yet this King's Reign abounding in occasions of Expense and
Troubles, since it was never free from exhausting Wars abroad, till it became
the scene of more destructive Civil ones at home, excuses may be rendered for
what was unavoidable. Notwithstanding, he left a competent Estate to his
Successor. And Deceased in in the Twenty seventh Year of this King. He had
Married Elizabeth of Holdenby, the Daughter of Robert Holdenby of Holdenby;
which Family was of an Ancient standing in the County of Northampton, and
flourished at this time in very Noble Possessions; for we find that Robert
Holdenby, the Brother of Elizabeth Mordaunt, held the Manors of Burton,
Brimmington, and Ramston, with Lands in Would, and in Clipston, in Guilden,
Morton, Kilmersh, and West-Haddon, in Northampton, Oxhampton, Wepsmade, in
Dunstable, and in Holdenby. And this Elizabeth surviving Robert Mordaunt, took
to her Second Husband, Robert Tanfield of Gayton in the County of Northampton,
Esquire.

The Issue of Robert Mordaunt. William Mordaunt, Lord of Turvey. Maud Mordaunt.
Elizabeth Mordaunt.


WILLIAM MORDAVNT, Lord of Turvey, Chellington, Clifton, Brayfield, Bottellers,
and other Lands and Lordships. CHAPTER X.
WILLIAM MORDAVNT, after those wastes the Accidents of the precedent Age had
made in the Estate of his Ancestors, was not induced by the discontent thereof,
to neglect what Providence had left him. There remained to his support his
Ancient Lordships of Turvey, that of Brayfield, the Lordships of Clifton and
Chellington, with the Lands appertaining to the Manor of Bottellers in Walden,
in the County of Suffolk. He had Married Margaret the Daughter of John Peck,
Lord of Copull, a Person of great Economy and Virtue; and they strove
together, by a provident and frugal proceeding to repair those breaches, the
over liberal ways of his Father had made in the Fortune of his Family. Their
endeavors did succeed; and as an approbation thereof, and a blessing
thereupon, Providence sent them to enjoy the fruits of their worthy Cares,
Three Children; whose merits from their Natures, and good Education, made them
all have (as well as deserve) excellent Fortunes: They were, Sir John Mordaunt,
Lord of Turvey. William Mordaunt, Lord of Hempstead, Married to the Heir of
Huntington. Elizabeth Mordaunt, Married to Sir Wiston Brown of Abessroading.


Sir JOHN MORDAVNT, Knight, Lord of Turvey, Staggesden, Chellington, Clifton,
Brayfield, and many other Lands and Lordships; Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, and Privy Councellor to King Henry the Seventh. CHAPTER XI.
JOHN MORDAVNT, Son and Heir of William Mordaunt, that was Lord of Turvey,
being a Youth of a particular Ingenuity, such as did promise both Spirit and
Capacity, the appearances thereof were taken hold of by his judicious Father;
who, after his Son had received what the Method and Discipline of a Free School
could give, sent him to learn the Knowledge of the Laws, and to be instructed
in those ways that might enable him for the most useful and public Callings.

These applications were so successful, as he became, betimes, very
considerable in that way. But happening to live in those days of War and
Tumult, and his flourishing Youth subsisting in the Reign of King Edward the
Fourth, he gave great proof of his Valor in matters of that nature also; His
Temper and Inclinations being in truth, Tam Mart quam Mercurio: And indeed he
was an Officer in Arms (as well as a Councellor in Civil Matters) to Richard
Nevill, the great Earl of Warwick, into whose Affairs he was introduced by the
Lady Anne Beauchamp, Countess of Warwick, his Wife, a Princess most Eminent in
that Age, for great Birth and Qualities, and that in his Last Will he reckons a
great Benefactress. He was with this Earl at the Battle of Barnet, where his
Patron was Slain, himself much Wounded, and the Fortune of King Henry for ever
overthrown. After this he retired to his Studies, and particularly to those of
the Law, whereunto he had at first designed his applications, and therein he
became very Eminent.

His Father dying afterward, about the Fourteenth Year of King Edward the
Fourth, and he becoming Master of his House and his Inheritance; his Prudence,
thenceforth, and his Worthiness, made him so considerable in the County of
Bedford (where was his usual Residence, and chief Establishment) as by his
Interest and Reputation he governed that Country very much. This is evident, by
Letters directed to him from diverse Princes, who required his aid to several of
their Wars, by his Attendance, with his following of Tenants and Friends, which
he did successfully afford to King Henry the Seventh, both at Bosworth, before
he was King, and at Stoake Field afterward, against the Earl of Lincoln, where
he resorted to him in person, accompanied with a numerous Assembly of his
Relations and Dependants.

His Services to this King, with the knowledge of his Abilities, were the
grounds of a singular esteem his Majesty had for him; which he testified in the
Fifteenth Year of his Reign, by taking him to live in his own Palace, for the
use of a private and particular Councellor; and after that, having received the
honor of Knighthood, he was made Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, with a
considerable Pension; a place, at that time, when the Lands belonging to that
Duchy were more than what does now appertain unto the Crown, of great Honor
and Emolument. And he was made at the same time, one of that King's Privy
Council.

Sir John Mordaunt was very notorious for his advice, in matching the King's
Eldest Daughter to the King of Scotland; and had a great part in the direction
of drawing up the Articles of that Treaty, between the Two Kings; a Copy
whereof is yet Extant, under his own Hand. In fine, there were few Men, upon
whose Counsel that Wise King depended more, nor that had done him more useful
and agreeable Services; from whence proceeded the improvement of his Fortune, in
this Reign: For though the King was a sparing Giver, unless upon great deserts,
yet Sir John Mordaunt had very many advantagous benefits at his Hands, as may
appear in the Proofs, by the several Royal Gifts, and Offices he bestowed upon
him. So as having disengaged several Lordships that had been Morgaged, or
Encumbred by his Grandfather, made new Acquisitions of many others by his own
industry, and become Master of a large Patrimony, in behalf of his Wife, who
was the Daughter and Heir of Sir Nicholas Latimer, Lord of Duntish, in the
County of Dorset, and diverse other Noble Possessions in the West of England, as
the head of a very Ancient Family, He was in the way to all the Greatness could
be coveted by the Ambition of a reasonable Man. But near the One and twentieth
Year of King Henry the Seventh, he was grown old and much wasted, through the
Cares and Labors incident to a Man busied in three Active Reigns. So as
falling Sick at London, after having received particular testimonies of the
care, and concern of his Royal Master, he departed this Life, and was carried
to rest with his Fathers; and lies Buried in his own Church of Turvey, under a
fair Tomb of white Marble. He had Issue by his Wife, the Lady Edith Latimer,
Sir John Mordaunt, first Lord Mordaunt. Robert Mordaunt. William Mordaunt.
Joane Mordaunt, Married Giles Strangeways, of Melbury in the County of Dorset.


Sir JOHN MORDAVNT, Knight, Peer of England, Lord Mordaunt, Lord Baron of
Turvey, and Privy Councellor to King Henry the Eighth. CHAPTER XII.
JOHN the Eldest Son of Sir John Mordaunt, that from his good Qualities was the
joy of his Father's Heart, as well as the hopes of his House, was not like to
want good Education under the Conduct of so knowing a Parent; he was bred to
every thing of which an ingenious Nature could be capable; to Learning, to
Arms, to Courtship, attending much upon Prince Arthur, till he died. The first
fruit of his Father's great Care toward him, was, the procuring of his
Establishment in Marriage with Elizabeth, the Eldest of the Coheirs of Sir
Henry Vere, that was Lord of Addington; which were the noblest and most
considerable Inheritrixes of that Age; (the Wardship of which, Sir John
Mordaunt, his Father, had obtained of the King) and from which Elizabeth
descended to the Mordaunts, the Noble Lordships of Drayton, Thrapston,
Addington, Sudburgh, Islip, Luffwick, Slipton, and many other great
Possessions: Many disputes, notwithstanding, arose about the pretenses of these
Heirs, even with the greatest Lords in England; as the Duke of Buckingham, and
the Earl of Shrewsbury; but the Credit of Sir John Mordaunt, and his interest
with the King, joined to his Wisdom, and great Knowledge in the Laws, had ever
influence upon them: But after his decease, they set up great pretenses to
Drayton, and the Green's Lands; and the Young Mordaunt soon found how much his
Fathers Life had conduced to the settlement of that Estate. In the Agitations
of the Establishment whereof, and the Agreements made with those great Lords,
he spent the remainder of King Henry the Seventh's Reign, and was by that time
become a person greatly accomplished. After this King's Death, he applied
himself wholly to the farther designs of the Honor and Advantage of his House;
and made his Court to the Young Successor, followed him in his First Wars, and
got so successfully into his Favor and Opinion, as upon his return he received
the gratification of a Patent, containing the grant of several Noble
Privileges, and Immunities. Among the rest, to be Pilo Copertus in the presence
of the King, or of any of his Judges, Ministers, or Magistrates. The
Consideration he was at this time in, appears by several Letters directed to
him, when he was yet but a private Gentleman: He was Knighted by him after
this, and made a Privy Councellor, wherein his Wisdom, Fidelity, and Zeal to
his Majesty's Service were very Exemplary: He was, at one time, Surveyor
General of the King's Woods, and Wood-sails, and the Chief in another
Commission, for providing Necessaries for the Fortifications of Calice, and the
other Ports and Castles within the English Pale in the Country of Picardy; and
in many other matters he was Employed of great Importance, wherein he so
behaved and discharged himself, as his generous Master thought fit, for a
reward of his many Services, to take him into the Illustrious Dignity of the
Peerage; calling him, by Writ, a Baron into the Parliament, in the Twenty
fourth Year of his Reign. After this upon the Revolutions which happned by the
change of the Church Government, whereunto he was not able to show that
compliance which others of more supple tempers did condescend to do; his Favor
did decline, and his Master's Kindness to him: So as being retired to his own
House and Country, he did not remain without several mortifications, which his
Enemies of the prevailing Faction, that Governed in the Court, did endeavor to
put upon him; several hard Letters he received from the King, about matters
which they imputed to him, concerning his backwardness in suppressing the
Interest of the Old Religion; and as the last endeavor of their Revenge, they
strove to make the King oblige him to an Exchange of the Noble Lordship of
Drayton, and the other Towns lying about it, of his Wives Ancient Inheritance,
and that he had in his Old Age, settled against all Competitors, at great
Labor and Charges, with certain of the Abbey Lands, newly acquired unto the
Crown, with which his Conscience, as well as his Interest, were altogether
incompatible. From this oppression he had not been able to have defended
himself, notwithstanding all his great Friends, and Ancient Services, if the
King's Death had not succeeded, which in this point set him at liberty. The
Reign of King Edward he spent in peace; But at the beginning of Queen Mary, he
labored a little under an imputation of his Enemies, who would allege, he
favored the Dudleys, and the claim of the Lady Jane; but it was blown off,
with the improbability of an Inclination so contrary to his Principles and
Profession; and he lived out her time too, and to the Second Year of her
Successor, Queen Elizabeth; when he, being very Old, departed this Life, in
great Honor and Happiness. Leaving Issue by his Wife, the Lady Elizabeth Vere,
Sir John Mordaunt, his Son and Heir. Edmund Mordaunt. William Mordaunt, from
whom are the Mordaunts of Oakely, and that Married Agnes Booth. George
Mordaunt, from whom are the Mordaunts of the Hill, Married to Cecilia Harding.
Edith Mordaunt, Married to John Elms. Anne Mordaunt, Married to John Fisher.
Margaret Mordaunt, Married to Edmond Fettyplace. Dorothy Mordaunt, Married to
Thomas Moore. Elizabeth Mordaunt, Married to Silvester Danvers. Winifreid
Mordaunt, Married to John Cheyney of Chesham Boys.


Sir JOHN MORDAVNT, Knight, Peer of England, Lord Mordaunt, Lord Baron of
Turvey, and Privy Councellor to Queen Mary. CHAPTER XIII.
JOHN MORDAVNT was the early fruits of his Father's Marriage with the Lady
Elizabeth Vere; and the Lord Mordaunt being but young himself, when his Son was
born, this John grew up to early Manhood while his Father was yet in the vigor
of his own years, and so they had the happiness to live long together in the
same Generation.

The Lord Mordaunt, in the time of his favor, had the opportunity to purchase
of the King, at an easy rate, the Marriage of Elly Fitz-Lewis, who had become
Heir of that Ancient Family, by the untimely Death of her Brother (as has been
expressed in the relation appertaining thereunto.) She was a very rich and
considerable Fortune, bringing with her the noble Lordship of Westhorndon, and
many other fair possessions: And unto this Lady he Married John Mordaunt, his
Eldest Son; who, with his Wife, lived long in his Father's life time upon her
Estate in great Plenty and Reputation. He had for several Years participated
with the Lord Mordaunt, much of King Henry's Favor; and in the Twenty fourth
Year of his Reign, and in the same wherein his Father was made a Baron, he was
summoned to come and receive at his Majesty's hands, the Honorable Order of
the Bath, at the Coronation of Queen Anne of Bollen, which he did at that time
in fellowship of the Marquess of Dorset, the Earl of Darby, the Lord Clifford,
the Lord Fitz-Waters, the Lord Hastings, and the Lord Mounteagle: But with his
Father being entirely addicted to the old Religion, the change that succeeded
in the one, produced the same in both their Fortunes, which was to retire to
their Houses from all further applications in that Reign; and at home Sir John
Mordaunt continued likewise, during that of the young Successor. But at the
Death of King Edward, and the early difficulties of Queen Mary, he was of the
first that put themselves into the Field, at the head of the Essex Men, where
his interest and reputation was very great; offering unto her his, and their
Services, in defense of her Person and Government, at the Castle of Framingham
in Suffolk, where she was then retired, in expectation of being assaulted, by
the Troops raised in behalf of the Faction of the Lady Jane and her Husband,
upon whom the Dukes of Suffolk and Northumberland intended to settle the Crown
of England. The considerableness of which Service, and the example of it, the
Queen did so esteem, as upon her coming into the Government, she took him into
the Dignity of a Privy Councellor, wherein he served during her short Reign.
And so much favor she had for him, and the Lady Joane, his Second Wife, that
had God afforded her a longer life, there was no advancement he might not have
expected under her Countenance and Government.

But about this time it pleased God to punish this Family with a Division in it
self. Sir John Mordaunt, after the death of his, first Wife the Lady Elly
Fitz-Lewis, who left him only one Son for the stay of her House, called Lewis,
after the Surname of her Family, Married the Lady Johanne: his Second Wife, who
was the Daughter of Sir John Farmer of Eston Neston in the County of
Northampton, and at that time, the Widow of.......... and that likewise when
she was a Maid attended upon Queen Mary, then but Princess. This Lady Johanne
had Children of her own, and of them a beautiful Daughter, to whom the young
Lewis Mordaunt, as is should seem, had made Love, and as it was pretended, to
the passing of some engagement: His Mother, therefore, greedy of such an
establishment for her Child, pressed hard for a proceeding unto Marriage; but
the young Man, who had his chief dependence upon the old Lord Mordaunt, his
Grandfather, who was entire Master of the great inheritance, comprehended in
the Shires of Northampton and Bedford, whereupon he lived at a distance from
his Son, durst not, for all his Father's Commands, engage in a matter of that
Nature without his leave and Council, that Lord ever loving to be a Master of
all the interests of his Family; so as when he became acquainted with his Sons
intentions, finding the subject far short of what he designed for his Grandson,
both in Relations and Advantage; it was rejected by him, with the circumstances
of severe commands and menaces, both to his Son and Grandson, which latter he
recalled unto his own House and Custody.

Hereupon the Lady whom the disparagement of her Daughter did much concern,
engaged into those passions might be expected from an offended Woman, she
exasperated her Husband both against his Father and his Son Lewis, and the
testimonies of very great differences are extant in several instruments: so
that the Father would, out of displeasure, have alienated from his Son the
Fitz-Lewis's Lands, which were of his own Mother's Inheritance: And the
Grandfather intended to have disinherited Sir John Mordaunt of all the
Mordaunt's Lands, infinitely of greater consequence: At last, mutual fears of
General ruin by disagreement made the peace, and they both concurred in
Marrying the young Lewis Mordaunt to Elizabeth, the Daughter of Sir Arthur
Darcy. After which, his Grandfather, the old Lord Mordaunt dying, in the Second
of Elizabeth, this second Lord John, his successor, survived to the 13th. of
the same Queen: Leaving Issue by his First Wife; Lewis Lord Mordaunt.
Elizabeth, Married to George Monox.
By his Second Wife:
Margaret Mordaunt, Married to William Aclam. Anne Mordaunt, Married to Clement
Tanfield. Vrsula Mordaunt, Married to Thomas Welbore of Clavering in Essex.


Sir LEWIS MORDAVNT, Knight, Peer of England, Lord Mordaunt, and Lord Baron of
Turvey. CHAPTER XIV.
LEWIS Lord MORDAVNT, after his Father's Decease, succeeded unto a Noble and
Free Fortune, to the Mordaunts, to the Latimers, to the Veres, to the Greenes,
and to the Fitz-Lewis's Lands, comprehending an interest in the Counties of
Bedford, Buckingham, Hartford, Northampton, Essex, Dorset, and Sommerset; in
every of which he had fair Seats, and Lordships. He had a large Soul, and a
Disposition incompatible with either Craft or Servitude, and would by no means
subject the happiness of his mind to an uncertain Ambition, nor give up his
freedom by applying himself to the arts and ways of the Court, but rather chose
to enjoy the Fortune he had received from his Ancestors in the peace and
opulency of his House and Country. He was a person of great Nobleness, Justice,
and Affability; very well parted, and ingenuous. He was the Idol of the
Province where he lived, and by his proceeding drew unto him more respect than
all the Great Men of those parts. He lived indeed in much magnificence, and in
a port that was a pattern for the Great Men of that time, so as his Hospitality
is to this day famous; although he was not immediately of the Court; yet as a
Peer and a great Councellor, he had his part in most of the great actions of
that Reign; and as an instance of the great Prerogative of the Baronage of
England, he was called by the Queen's Summons to sit one of the Judges of the
Life and Fortunes of that great and unfortunate Princess, Mary Queen of
Scotland: unto whose Sentence he did most unwillingly concur. And upon the like
occasion he was again a Judge in the Arraignment of that great Subject, Thomas
Duke of Norfolk. He sat in many Parliaments, and Commanded the Troops of those
parts, assembled at the general Rendezvous, that were prepared against the
Spanish Invasion. He was, besides this, a Lover of Art, and an Encourager of
Learning; as also a Builder, and added much to the Noble old Castle of Drayton,
the beloved Seat of his Grandmother: and although I cannot say, but he did
Alienate from his Family several great Possessions, as the Fitz-Lewis's, which
were His Mother's, and the Latimer's Lands, which were the Possessions of his
Great Grandmother; yet it cannot be denied, but what he spent was employed with
honor. Though he was no Courtier, yet he was much honored by them all; and he
had a near Friendship with the Earl of Leicester, and the Lord Chancellor
Hatton.

He Married Elizabeth, the Daughter of Sir Arthur Darcy, Knight, who was
Brother to the Lord Darcy of the North, and that passed with much honor
several great Employments in that Reign. He lived a long and prosperous life,
and departed out of this World soon after the entry of King James the First,
and lies Buried in his Church of Turvey, under a Tomb of Black Marble.

His Issue. Henry Lord Mordaunt. Mary Mordaunt, Married to Sir Thomas Mancell
of Morgan. Katherine Mordaunt, Married to John Henningham. Elizabeth Mordaunt.


HENRY Lord MORDAVNT, Peer of England, and Lord Baron of Turvey. CHAPTER XV.
HENRY Lord Mordaunt, the only Son of his Father, after whose decease he
Inherited his Honor and his Lands, was of a Family wherein it was hard to
extinguish their Inclination to the old Religion; and besides, he had married
the Lady Margaret Compton, Daughter to Henry Lord Compton, and the Lady Frances
Hastings, that had been bred to much Strictness and Zeal therein. The
Incompatibility of his Religion, with the Favor of the Court, and the
Employments thereof, made him satisfied with the enjoyment of his great Estate
and large Possessions; whereupon he lived in the exercise of great Nobleness
and Hospitality, and in continual Expressions and Testimonies of Duty and
Service to the Crown; but their happening a conjuncture which rendered those of
his profession under much suspicion and jealousy from the Proceedings of that
Conspiracy, called The Gunpowder Treason, which if it had succeeded would have
been of so cruel a consequence. This worthy Lord was envolv'd in the unhappy
troubles it produced to most of his persuasion: For upon surmise of his holding
correspondence with the Traitors, the innocent Lord, in the Seventh Year of
King James the First, was seized in his House, and committed Prisoner to the
Tower, for which there could be never produced other grounds than his professed
Religion, his being absent from that Parliament, (which was upon leave) and
some neighbourly correspondences he had held with Sir Everard Digby, and
certain others of the conspirators; which were but slender Reasons for so large
Sufferings. His Lordship thereupon was severely Fined, and so long kept a
Prisoner, that by the destruction of his Health it brought him finally to his
Grave; after which his Innocence sufficiently appeared, to convince his
persecutors of the Injustice of their severe dealings.

His Issue. John Lord Mordaunt, first Earl of Peterborow. James Mordaunt, first
married to Mary Tirringham, after to....... Gostwick; from whom is descended
John Mordaunt of...... in the County of Leicester. Lewis Mordaunt, that dyed
without Issue by his Wife...... Smith, the Widow of Sir Robert Throgmorton.
Frances Mordaunt, married to Sir Thomas Nevill, Eldest Son of the Lord
Abarganey. Elizabeth, that dyed unmarried. Margaret, that dyed unmarried. Anne,
that dyed unmarried.


JOHN Earl of PETERBOROW, Peer of England, Lord Mordaunt, Lord Baron of Turvey,
and Lord Lieutenant of the County of Northampton. CHAPTER XVI.
JOHN Lord Mordaunt being young, and under years, at the Death of his Father,
and remaining in the care, and government of his Mother, the Lady Margaret
Mordaunt, who was a Zealous, as well as a Public Professor, of the obnoxious
and suspected Religion, after he came of an age capable of taking important
impressions, was by the command of King James the First, as an act of State,
taken out of that Lady's custody, and committed to be brought up in the House,
and under the direction of his Grace George Abbot, at that time Archbishop of
Canterbury: Where he lived for a while, till he was thought fit to be sent to
improve his Studies at Oxford. In this University this young Lord flourished in
the liking and esteem of every body. He enjoyed many perfections of Body and
Mind. He was very Beautiful, Ingenious, Affable, and Applicable to all was good
and useful; and there he remained the Star of the University, till King James
the First, coming to Oxford in a Progress, took him from that place to follow
the Court, designing him to such kind of farther improvement, as might render
him, in time, more useful to his Service, and the Government. The first
testimony he gave him of his Favor, was to quit him of the Fine had been
imposed upon his Father, of Ten Thousand Pounds, for his being suspiciously
absent from the dangerous Parliament, and to set him at liberty from any
burdens of Obligations might come upon him by reason of his Wardship; of which
by the King's Command, he was discharged. He commanded his attendance in his
first Journey he made back to Scotland; during which, that Gracious King gave
him so many particular marks of his Favor and Kindness: As to standers by,
Fortune and occasion never seemed to present themselves to any with more
fairness to be taken hold upon, than to this young Lord. But in fine, he was
not born to the advancement of his House, and a humor he had, which was averse
to Constraint, and indulgent to all his own Passions, gave way afterward to
another entrance into Favor, who was designed for all the Greatness England
could give. Notwithstanding, the Great and Unfortunate Charles, Son and
Successor to this King, conferred upon him the Dignity of an Earl, under the
Title of Peterborow, gave him the Lieutenancy and Government of the Province
where he lived; besides many invitations to his nearest Affairs and Councils.
But the destiny of this Lord carried him to other purposes; for having Married
Elizabeth Howard, the Daughter of William Lord Howard of Effingham, and sole
Heir to that Family, which had bred so many Admirals, and Great Officers of
State; he was invited by her, that had received some disgust at Court, and was
a Lady of a very haughty Spirit, to take part with those unhappy Reformers, who
at last destroyed all they pretended to amend; and this Lord, with much regret
for having been engaged among those unfortunate Politicians, at last ended his
life of a Consumption, in the Second Year of the Civil War; leaving Issue:
Henry Earl of Peterborow. John Lord Viscount Mordaunt, Married to Elizabeth
Carry. Elizabeth Mordaunt, Married to Thomas Lord Howard of Escrick.


HENRY Earl of PETERBOROW, Peer of England, Lord Mordaunt, Lord Baron of
Turvey, Groom of the Stole, and First Gentleman of the Bedchamber to King
JAMES the Second, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Northampton, and One of the
Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. CHAPTER XVII.
HENRY Lord Mordaunt, although at his coming into the World he found the
greatest part of Men inclined to Rebellion, and defire of change, both in the
Government of Church and State: Yet having been bred under well principled
Masters, in the Royal College of Eaton, in the Company of several young Lords
of great Quality, whose Education was inspected by the Learned and Memorable
Sir Henry Wotton, at that time retired from sundry Embassies and Employments,
to the Provostship of that place. He received such a tincture of Duty to his
Prince, and Love to the Monarchy, as neither Hazards, Disappointments, Hard
Usage, nor any difficult Circumstances, could ever afterward extinguish.

I leave the particulars of his Childhood and early Youth, and come to meet him
at his first appearance in the City of York, where he accompanied his Father,
who came to attend the King at his Great Council which he had called, in order
to take Resolutions about the Scotch War, and the ensuing Parliament.

The English Army, that had been Raised for the Defense of the Kingdom, lay
Encamped about the Town: among the Soldiers this young Lord continually
appeared, at the Musters, at the Reviews, and at the Exercises, whereat he was
always present; and being not then in his Seventeenth Year, he intended, if the
War had proceeded, to have personally engaged in all the Actions and Successes
of it.

In the Assemblies of the Council he did ever constantly attend, to hear the
Debates of the most important matters, were agitated there, being admitted
thereunto in Quality of a Peer's Son, who had all place behind the King, as in
Parliament.

But at last, the Cessation being made, and a Parliament resolved upon, the
King returned to London, and the Young Lord with his Father to his House, in
order to ^^ake preparation for their attendance in that occasion.

The time come for the meeting of the Parliament, the Earl with his Son came to
Town; here the Young Lord began to be acquainted with Great Men, and gave such
early testimonies of his Prudence, Generosity, and Zeal for the concerns of
(...) Crown, as acquired him the particular notice and esteem of the King, with
the Favor of the first Men of the Court, who, from the pregnant appearances of
his merit, began severally to wish and design him into their Alliance.

The Parliament growing now, every day, into greater heats than other, and the
Earl, apprehending the consequences of the Factious Proceedings of that time,
thought it not amiss to have his Son free from the beginnings of the Troubles,
that he might the better discern to what they were like to tend. He sent him,
therefore, into France, to learn his Exercises, and acquire those Improvements
were necessary for the qualification of a young Man whose Birth and Fortune was
so considerable. The young Lord out-did the expectation of his Parents, and
became Master of every quality was necessary for him to possess.

But after too years spent in that Kingdom, England, his own Country, was now
in a flame, the Rebellion broke out, and a Battle had been fought; yet it was
far from a decision, and the War like to draw out in length. And the Earl, his
Father, not knowing by what accidents his Fortune might be so intercepted, or
encomber'd, as it would be out of his power to maintain his Son abroad, as he
did desire, thought it best to recall him home. But at the time he had the
unwelcome orders for his return, he received worse News, which was, That of his
Father's being engaged in the Parliament party. It had like to have made the
Lord Mordaunt desperate: it was a stroke he looked upon as sent from Heaven, to
punish him and his Family for all their Sins. But he was then resolved to
expiate that Crime by the hazard of all could be dear to any Man, and to wash
out his Father's Faults with his own Blood, that with his Life he was resolved
to expose in support of the good King and his Authority.

But to enable him thereunto, it was necessary he should at present obey and
dissemble too; so he returned, and was received into the Embraces of his
Friends, as one they hoped to make useful to their designs, and the party,
wherewith they were engaged.

And to the end they might charm the Inclinations of the Young Lord, whom they
found to be Active, Generous, and fond of Business, and Command, the Earl his
Father, who was then Field Marshal of the Army, and had, besides, a Regiment of
Foot, and a Troop of Horse, did consign the command of the Troop to the charge
of his Son, that he might busy himself therewith, and practice the Trade of a
Soldier, under the Command of Robert Earl of Essex, at that time Captain
General of all the Parliament Forces.

The Lord Mordaunt received a Commission to that purpose, and, in appearance,
busied himself a whole Winter in the Care of the Troop; but in the mean time,
by the intermise of a Noble Gentleman, called Sir John Manwood, (whom he had
known abroad) he cultivated a correspondence at the Court, made the King
understand, That the color of his engagement in that Army, was but to enable
him the better, and more usefully to make his escape from the Party, and so
settled the understanding of his proceeding and intentions there, as he was
sure to be received with open Arms at Oxford, when ever it would be fit for him
to quit the Rebels.

In order hereunto the Lord Mordaunt retired to Henly, which was at that time
his Quarters; and intending to leave the Parliament Army, prepared his
Servants, his Equipage, and all other necessaries which could be useful in the
future Service, he intended to his King and Country: And so upon the Twenty
first day of April, in the Year 1643, in company only of a French Gentleman,
that had been his Lieutenant, and Fifteen Servants, with about Twenty good
Horses, he rode into the King's Quarters, and came into the Town of Reading,
which was at that time well Fortified, and whereof Sir Arthur Aston, an
experienced Soldier, was t^^ Governor. After he had made and received the
Complements usual upon such an occasion, he intended to have left that place,
and pursued his Journey to the Court; but there happ'ning to be at that time in
the Garrison, and in a Post very considerable, an old Friend and Acquaintance
of the Earl his Father's, called Colonel Richard Fielding, the Treatment, the
Respect, and the Attendance he paid to the Lord Mordaunt, would not permit him
decently to leave that place without affording to a particular Friend of his
Family his company for a day longer: He stayed therefore the next day, which
was employed in seeing the Works, in being enform'd of the condition of the
place, and understanding the designs of the Enemy. But in the Evening,
Intelligence was brought them, That the Earl of Essex was upon his March with
his Army, and Train of Artillery, in order to Besiege the Town. Hereupon, the
Lord Mordaunt's business not being in that place, he resolved to have departed
in the Morning. But his Friend, the Colonel, who had business himself at
Oxford, did much desire to accompany his Lordship to the Court; and no way
believing the Intelligence of the Enemies approach, for many reasons which he
did allege, he assured him, That if he would but stay another day, he would
take leave of the Governor, and not fail to attend his Lordship to Oxford,
which, he thought, would be very much for his Lordships Service and convenience.

The young Lord let himself be persuaded, and passed the night in expectation
of the morrow's Journey. But by the break of day he heard the Alarm, and now
the whole Garrison was employed in preparation to receive the Enemy, whose
Scouts appeared, and that were upon their March ready to invest the Town.

This rendered it now too late to leave that place, where was like to be
occasion of serving the King, by Fighting in defense of it, and encouraging the
Soldiers, who love to see Great Men participate of their toils and hazards.
This young Lord prepared then to do the part of a Volunteer, wherein he had
soon occasion to signalize himself by the sudden advance of the Enemy, the Earl
of Essex, with his whole Army sitting down before this Town, upon the 25th. day
of April, just Three days after the arrival of the Lord Mordaunt. The next day
there was a Sally resolved upon, wherein the Young Lord went out with a Musket
on his Shoulder, and so distinguished himself in this first adventure as made
him admired and loved by all the Garrison.

The day after, by an accident, the Governor was hurt, and so, as it made him
incapable of farther Function, and in his default the whole command of the
place devolved upon Colonel Richard Fielding; who, whether it were, that he did
really want the Provisions necessary to the maintenance of the Town, or that
his Head turned round under the diverse difficulties of so great a charge,
having never before commanded alone such a Garrison, nor so considerable a
place, did show so much confusion, and such unsteadiness in his Orders, as
after brought his Life and Honor into question, and lost him in the Opinion of
the King and the Chief Officers of the Army. Succors had been promised to the
relief of this Town, and at last a considerable body of Horse and Foot was
sent, in hopes to raise the Siege, an attempt whereof was made at Causam
Bridge; but so unsuccessfully, as after the loss of many Soldiers, and diverse
Gentlemen, and brave Officers, the King's Troops were forced to Retreat,
leaving the Town in a much worse condition than it was before, the Garrison and
Inhabitants being much disheartened by such a disappointment. There were great
disputes afterward, whether it proceeded from the want of number and strength,
in the Party that was sent, or the neglect, if not a worse reflection, upon the
Commander, for not Sallying out upon the Enemy, with what might have been
spared of the Garrison, at the same time they were so vigorously assailed by
his Majesty's Troops on the other side. And this some did affirm to have been
concerted at the time of the undertaking.

But the Colonel now beginning to despond of any farther endeavors, were
intended to relieve the Town, and finding his Men dissatisfied, his Ammunition
wasted, and his provision grown very short, he demanded a Treaty, which the
Enemy easily condescended to, well knowing an attempt to take a Town by force
wherein were so many and so good Men, if it did succeed, was like to be at a
rate would prove ^^^y dear: And Commissioners being appointed on either side,
it was agreed, The ^^^arrison should march out with Arms, Bag, and Baggage,
Flying Colors and Balle en Bouche. The only thing was found weak and mean in
the Commander among the conditions, was, That such as had, from a certain time,
left the Parliament Service, were to be abandoned to their reprisal and
resentment; an Article calculated on purpose for delivery of this Young Lord.
To which the Commander, so ancitient and so great a pretended Friend, had
condescended with very small resistance; the dishonor of which was afterward at
his Trial before the Court Martial at Oxford, with very much exaggeration laid
to his charge.

The night before the surrender, it may be imagined, the Lord Mordaunt was in
no small concern how to escape the danger of being seized by the Enemy,
according to the right they had so to do, by reason of the Articles. Diverse
ways were proposed for his escape, whereof some seemed too mean, others too
precipitate: At last he resolved to take the Habit, Arms, Horse, and Apparel of
an ordinary Trooper, and at adventure to march in the Rank of such a one, even
under inspection of the Earl of Essex himself, before whom all the Troops were
to march away. This the next morning he put in practice, and was so successful,
as to pass clear, without any discovery or obstruction, although the General
had employed diverse to search for him among the Troops, and that his Father had
sent of his own domestics to assist in his seizure, as well to vindicate
himself from any suspicion of connivance with his Son, as to divert the young
Lord from his intended Engagement among the Cavaliers, from which the Countess,
his Mother, was at that time very averse.

He marched in company of the Troops till he came to Wallingford, where he saw
Prince Rupert the first time, whom he found much enflamed against Colonel
Fielding. He complemented the Young Lord, with a particular sense he expressed
to have of the hazards, whereunto by these mean Articles he was exposed. The
Lord Mordaunt came the next day to Oxford, where he presented himself to the
King, and was received with that goodness which was natural to one of the best
Kings that ever Reigned. After which he applied himself in his respects to the
Ministers, became acquainted with the Great Officers of the Army; and though he
had lost some of his Servants, his Baggage, his Money, and, which was worst,
all his Horses, whereof there were some very excellent, these necessaries
having been known at their march out of the Town, and were all seized by the
General's Order, as the Goods of a Dissertor, whom himself they could not find;
yet the Lord Mordaunt esteemed himself a gainer upon the whole, having, by this
generous testimony of his Loyalty, gained an opportunity of justifying himself,
with the good Opinion and esteem of all the Worthy and Ingenuous persons of the
Court.

His next care was, to repair the losses of those necessaries, which were
useful to the method of Service he did intend, Horses, Arms, and Money; toward
which the kind care of the Noble Lady Mordaunt, his Grandmother, that had
always been a zealous Catholic, did much enable him, and he was soon after in
a condition to follow the King in all his Marches and Expeditions; whereof the
first was, when he advanced from Oxford to Bristol, to take possession of that
important City that had been delivered up by Colonel Fines, and there to settle
a strong Garrison and his Authority. After which, and his return to Oxford, he
followed the King to the Siege of Gloucester, wherein he endeavored to
advantage his Experience, with the observation of every Action and Proceeding
was practiced in that occasion, and so signalized his application toward
enabling him for the future Service of his Prince, as gained him much honor
from all that did observe him.

But after the disappointments and ill success of this enterprise, and that by
the approach of the Parliament Army, the Siege was forced to be raised, to the
shame of those had engaged the King upon the undertaking, upon the assurance of
a present delivery, the Lord Mordaunt followed his Majesty to Newbery, where
the King engaged in Battle with the Parliament Forces. The Two Armies lay the
first Night in fight one of another, and by break of day they began to
skirmish: The Fight soon became very fierce; the young Lord showed his Valor
and Bravery in several parts; but particularly, when, among other generous
Volunteers, he put himself in the first Rank of the Prince's Troop, then
Commanded by Sir Richard Crane, when it went to Charge the Great body of the
Parliament's Foot, which had Cannon planted before it, all laden with Case
Shot, for the better reception of their Enemies: It was an occasion never to be
forgotten, for at the first charge of the Horse, they were saluted with such a
Fire, as killed and dismounted above Fourscore at one Volley: There it was the
Earl of Sunderland was slain, and so many considerable persons hurt and
disabled. The Lord Mordaunt was shot in the Arm, wounded with a Pike in the
Thigh, had several honorable marks made in the Coat that covered his Arms, and
his Horse was shot in the shoulder. The end and consequences of this Fight is
known in Story. The King returned to Oxford, the Earl of Essex to London, and
the Lord Mordaunt remained at Court the ensuing Winter.

The young Lord had not attained the full age that might capacitate him to sit
in Parliament, but the Earl, his Father being deceased, and he succeeding to
his dignity of Earl of Peterborow, it pleased his Majesty to dispense with a
year of that time, and by Writ to call him to fit in the Oxford Parliament. It
was in this Assembly the Earl of Peterborow showed the fruits of a Generous
Education; his Manners were grave and decent, his Judgment sound, his Learning
above his Years and his Quality, and he spoke so as satisfied much, and
affected those that heard him. In fine, the Great and Unfortunate Charles took
such an impression from his proceedings, as had the King outlived the
disorders of that Age, the Earl of Peterborow had been certainly both employed
and cherished by him.

After this Session, he followed the King in the Expeditions of the succeeding
Summer. He was engaged in the Fight at Cropradey; he was with him in the West,
at Exeter, and in Cornwall, where the Parliaments Army was Besieged, their
Generals shifted for themselves by Sea, and their Troops passed by the King's
Army on conditions.

The Winter following was employed by this Earl in an Action very considerable
to him, which was his Marriage with a beautiful young Lady of great birth,
called Penelope Obrien, only Daughter to Barnaby Earl of Thomond, part of whose
Portion was at that time very useful to him, his Mother being then alive, and
in possession of most of his Estate, and the rest sequestered, and in the
Parliament Quarters.

The next Spring he carried his Lady to Bristol, a place, in appearance, of
most safety, and farther from the Scene of the War, which was likely, as it did
fall out, to be more Northward.

Here he happn'd to be about the time of the Fight at Leicester, where the good
King was worsted, and from whence his greater misfortune began to flow.

Upon the King's retreat Westward the Earl of Peterborow, to be more free to
follow him in all his Fortunes, got a Pass for his Lady to go to London to
agitate among his Relations some supplies, toward enabling him for his
subsistence, and to furnish him toward certain designs he had for his
Majesty's Service.

He went with the King after this for Wales, but losses and defections coming
now more and more upon his Majesty every day, he retired again to Oxford; and
Winter drawing nigh, the Earl took that Season to pass into Ireland, where was
a considerable remainder of his Wife's Portion, with which he intended to pass
into France unto the Queen, being then at Paris, to Negotiate the interests he
had at Court, and after to return. Unto all this he had not only the King's
leave, but such Passes, and Letters of Recommendation from his Majesty, and the
Principal Secretary (the Earl of Bristol) as will for ever bear honorable
testimony of this Earl's behavior.

He did then prosecute his journey, which was in all things very fortunate,
though full of particular adventures, too long for this relation. He passed
into Ireland, came into Thomond, in the Province of Munster, where his
Father-in-law lived, and carried thence the Moneys he did demand. Embarked at
Galloway in Cannaught for France, after extraordinary sufferance and hazards at
Sea, landed at Saint Mallows, and came afterward to Paris, where he was
received by the Queen, with that kindness and concern, as was due to a Man, who
had adhered so faithfully, and so long, to the King her Husband, and all his
Interests.

By this time every Post brought news of the King's misfortunes, who having
been at last forced to quit Oxford, and the few Troops he had left, had cast
himself upon the Protection of the Scotch Army.

Here, to well judging people, seemed to be an end of all the hopes of the
Royal Party, who had reason to fear what was the present Interest, and was like
to be the resolution of that People.

After some time then, every one, as in a Shipwreck, seeking for a Plank,
whereon they might save themselves, the Earl of Peterborow, upon discourse with
the Queen, and the King's Secretary, that was then in France, had not only
their leave, but their advice to make it his business to get admission to come
home into England and compound for his Estate, as the rest of the Cavaliers in
England did. The Earl's Mother, that always lived in the Parliament Quarters,
and had many Friends among them, procured his desire: So that with the young
Countess, his Wife, at that time with him in France, he repaired home; and at
last, by a very severe composition in Money, for which he was fain to sell and
mortgage many of his Lands, he made such a kind of Peace, as that wherewith the
Lords and Gentlemen of the King's Party were, at that time, forced to be
contented.

In the care then of his Fortune, composing of domestic differences, and
providing, as well as he could, against future accidents, the Earl of
Peterborow spent his time, till the King came to be abandoned by those false
Scots, and delivered into the hands of the Parliament.

He happn'd to be residing upon his Noble Lordship of Turvey, at the time the
King was taken from Holmby, and brought on his way toward London. His Majesty
happn'd one Night, in his journey, to be lodged at Ampthill, where it was
designed he should rest a day or two; at hearing hereof (the Earl's House not
being above seven Miles from thence) he thought it his duty to endeavor to see
his Sacred Master, and try if he could have occasion to be useful to him in any
kind. He rose then, and by Eleven of the Clock, came to the House where the
King lay. Not without some difficulty he got to be admited where he was, and he
found his Majesty going to the Prayers usual before his Dinner. After they were
performed, he kneeled down for the honor of his Majesty's Hand, but had only
opportunity for the ordinary Complements, being overlooked by the Officers
appointed to observe the addresses and behavior of all that did approach him.
Cheerfulness there was not much in the King's looks, but no disorder; grave
they were, but distinguishing to any he took for Friends; and injured goodness
appeared in every motion. The Dinner was soon brought up, during which the Earl
waited by him, and near the end of it the Officers withdrew, and all, except
the Guards of the Door. The Earl quickly took the opportunity of asking his
Majesty, If there were any thing wherein he might be served with the hazard of
his Life and Fortune: The King Answered, He was not in a place to take any
measures, but would have him advise with those that were his Friends. The Earl
said no more, by reason of the Villainous Jaylers returning, so he took his
leave, and departed home, full of indignation against the Times, the Nation,
and Fortune; resolving, though he were at ease, and had made his peace, to
expose Wife, Estate, Quiet, and his Life, upon any undertaking, wherein there
should be a reasonable appearance of relieving the best of Kings.

What ensued after this is the King's Story, and that of other Men. I shall
only relate, that after his being at Hampton Court, his escape thence, and
unfortunate detention in the Isle of Wight, the Transactions with the Army, and
many other Contrivances, there came at last to be designed a Rising in his
favor, to be begun in Surrey, of which Henry Earl of Holland was to be
General. To this there was much contributed in Money and Counsels, by the
Presbyterian Party; and herein, under assurances of great partakers, the Earl
of Peterborow was again engaged, who on his part failed not to be at the
Rendezvous, according to appointment, in the head of a Hundred Horse, well
Armed and provided, that came to follow him out of his own Country. But of such
numbers as others had undertaken, there were so many failed, as at the Muster
and Survey of that Rendezvous, it gave a great discouragement to those that did
appear, which caused diverse that came in to the first Meeting, even of the
Surrey Gentlemen, after the recess of one Night, never to return again.

The Earl of Holland, notwithstanding, still in hopes from the great promises
wherewith he had been deluded, marched on into the Country, and the first Night
Quartered at Darking, expecting for the next day great supplies and accession
of of Men out of that Country and the City; but the succeeding Morning produced
no more armed Men, nor any change to his desperate condition. And being now
past any retreat from his Engagement, he marched back toward Kingston, in
order, by passing the River at that Bridge, to proceed Northward into such
Countries wherein he hoped he should find more zealous and trusty Friends. But
in the Afternoon as he made a small halt upon the way, he had Intelligence,
That Sir Michael Lucy's Regiment of Horse, and some other Forces were on their
march to overtake and Charge him, and by that time he reached Kingston Heath,
their Scouts appeared, as he was ready to march into the Town. The Enemies
Troops arriving, thereupon, he had not time to draw up his few Forces as he
should have done, but they were Charged and routed in a short time; the Lord
Francis Villiers, Brother to the Duke of Buckingham, was killed in the Lane,
and most of the rest dispersed to shift for themselves, the best they could be
able.

The Earl of Peterborow, with Five or Six Gentlemen Volunteers of his Troop,
had Charged quite through the Enemies Men, and were so far engaged, That the
Enemy being got between them and the Town, it was unpossible for them to reach
back unto the Bridge, or their own flying Party; and Night being come on, they
sheltered themselves in a Gentleman's House near by, and by means of good
Guides got the next Night to London, where they lay concealed in expectation of
hearing how and where they might meet with their Friends again.

The Fortune of the Earl of Holland, and the rest of the Party, which got from
Kingston, every body knows, and how he was taken at St. Needs, and afterward
lost his Head.

The hopes of this Design being thus unfortunately disappointed, and Messengers
and Spies employed every where to seek, and seize all the considerable Persons
engaged, or suspected to have contributed to this attempt; the Earl of
Peterborow, whom they did intend to make an example, was forced to abscond, as
well as he was able. He did it in a Chirurgeon's House, called Mr. Low, by
whom he was very faithfully served; till by the frequentation of the Earl's
Mother, the House began to be suspected, and there was then procured for him a
lodging at the Printers in Black-Friars, where he lay till a safe passage was
provided for him to get below Gravesend, where he was received into a small
Fisher's Boat, which conveyed him to Flushing in Zealand.

There escaped with the Earl, John Mordaunt, his Brother, afterward Viscount
Mordaunt, and Mr. William Stafford of Blatherwick, a young Gentleman of
Fortune, who both followed him in this occasion; and having presented
themselves to the Prince of Wales, who was then at the Hague, they were all
received by his Highness, the Princes of Orange, his Sister, and his Aunt the
Queen of Bohemia, and all the Princes, their Children, with that consideration
that appertained to persons, who were Martyrs for their Service, having lost
their Estates, ventured their lives, and exposed all their Friends to vindicate
the Honor and Authority of their House, and relieve the King out of Prison.

Winter now did approach, and it was in that dead time, when the King's Affairs
were in their last and worst condition. The Duke of Hamilton had been routed
and taken, the Scotch Army dissipated, Colchester was surrendered, Lord Capell a
Prisoner, and Lisle and Lucas Executed. In fine, to this succeeded the Trial of
the Lords, Hamilton, Holland, and Capell, their Murder, and after, that never
to be execrated enough, of the King himself, and in consequence a seeming
settlement of that horrid power of the succeeding Commonwealth.

At this time the Earl of Peterborow was retired to the City of Antwerp,
because his Estate, being all for the second time sequestered, he could withdraw
no such subsistence as might enable him to follow the young King, as he did
desire; and the Prince was not Master of so much Treasure and Revenues as he
might spare wherewith to maintain such Men, without Employment, in his Service,
and the expectation of his remaining hopes lying then in Scotland, he was
forced to employ the Moneys he had, to entertain and encourage the Men of
interest in that Nation.

The Earl of Peterborow then, being from the young King, whom he was not able
to follow, and in a condition very necessitous, useless to his Prince, and
unprofitable to himself, he was advised by all his Friends to try if at any
expense he could make way with some of power in England, to be admitted to a
second Composition. His Wife, the Countess, being an Ingenuous and Industrious
Lady, found means to obtain it; upon notice whereof, the Earl acquainting the
King and his Ministers therewith, had his Majesty's leave and approbation to
provide for himself the best he could, and to submit to the general Fortune and
Condition of his Party.

He returned then, and after many extreme and perverse difficulties, paid
another great Composition, and was once again settled in the possession of his
Fortune. In the retirement then to his own House, the payment of great Debts,
acquired upon Public accounts, and settlement of his Fortune, this Earl spent
those years which remained between the King's Murder, and the Restoration of
his Son.

But upon the return of King Charles the Second, the Lord Viscount Mordaunt,
the Earl's Brother, and the Lady his Wife (called before her Marriage Mrs
Elizabeth Carry) had by much officiousness, and many endeavors, during the
King's Exile acquired a great share in his favor, but most of all with the
King's Chief Minister, the Lord Chancellor Hide, afterward Earl of Clarendon;
and having great and incomposable differences with the Earl of Peterborow,
about the settlement of his Estate, whereunto, against his will, they pretended
to Inherit, they had, to incline them to their partiality, in case the decision
of any of the differences should come to depend on them, done sundry ill
offices to the Earl; so as at the King's first Arrival, he received marks
enough of the King's coldness, and the ill impressions they had taken. But the
Earl of Peterborow, who could speak well, having means by some Friends of the
contrary Faction, to have access to the King, soon dispersed those Clouds, and
convinced his Majesty of the Art and Malice of his Enemies, and of the untruth
of those suggestions, which were partly the cause that inclined the King and
his Minister to suffer the remainders of Rygate to be taken out of the Crown,
by which the Earl lost one of the Noblest Houses in the South of England, and
such Lands and Revenues belonging to that Priory as were worth a Thousand Pound
of yearly Revenues.

The King after this promised proportionable Recompense to the Earl, and by the
interposition of the Lord Chancellor, had given him a Commission for Captain
General of the King's Forces to be sent into Africa, and to be Governor of the
City of Tangier.

To this undertaking then the Earl of Peterborow wholly applied himself; and
although from the Division of the Council, which did at that time consist of
two very powerful Factions, neither of them much favoring what ever the other
did propose, great obstructions and difficulties did arise unto the Earl, both
in the preparations that were necessary, and in the after performance of
several things that were undertaken: yet with his industry and diligence he
overcame the envy and secret opposition of that affair; Embarking the......
of...... with Three Thousand Three Hundred Men under his conduct, and
proportionable Provisions for them of every sort; and landing at Tangier
the...... of...... took possession of it for the King of England, and
established himself Governor thereof.

The History of his Government there, being too long for this place, I shall
only say, That, for the time he stayed, there was never place kept in better
order, better paid, better provided for, nor where all sorts of Men had better
Justice, or Protection. It is true, Two reasons made him desire to be recalled;
the first, That his spirit, and his endeavors were so limited, as that little
Honor was to be obtained by his residence in that place, having not Troops
enough to march, or attempt any thing, into the Country; nor Money enough to
design such Fortifications, or so proceed with the business of the Mole as
might render the Town safe against an undertaking Army, or the Sea advantageous
to a Trading Fleet. But the chief Thorn in his Foot was the Envy and Malice of
some considerable Enemies at home, who endeavored to support an under Officer
of his own, in his pretension of competition to some powers, that were
incompatible with his Honor and Authority. And they engaged the best, and
otherwise, the justest Prince in the World, so to favor what that Officer did
aim at, as the Earl must have submitted to his Adversaries, or encurr'd the
last enmity from that person, for whom he had the greatest service and
veneration that could be.

Seeing it was like to come to that extremity, the Earl of Peterborow desired
leave to lay down his Government, and return. It was so agitated by his
Friends, as that he had it granted, with all the circumstances of honor and
kindness that could be; as appears by a Letter of Thanks, under the King's
Hand, for his faithful and good Services; and in consideration thereof, he had,
under the Great Seal of England, a Pension granted him, for his life, of a
Thousand Pound by the Year.

Upon his return, he found the King engaged in a War that was like to prove
very fierce between himself and the States of the United Provinces. And
resolving to acknowledge the King's Bounties on every occasion that should
present it self, by the constant offer of his Service, he desired the Command
of a Ship, to serve in that conjuncture, and it was granted, with
acknowledgments for the Example: But upon notice thereof among the Men of
Quality, it was so much, and so suddenly followed, as it put a necessity upon
the King to refuse it to others of as great merit and zeal as could be, or to
have his Fleet commanded, for the most part, by Men of greater Quality than
Experience.

This put a stop even to the Earl's pretension; But since he could not serve in
that capacity, he was resolved to go a Volunteer; which he hid, in the Ship,
and company of the Noble Earl of Sandwich, they first setting to Sea from
Portsmouth: But the Fleet soon returning, by reason of the lateness of the
Season, his Lordship did so too, remaining that Winter making his court to the
Princes.

The next Expedition, which the succeeding Summer did produce, he went again to
Sea in good earnest; and because it was a Second-rate Ship, of good force and
accommodation, he was ordered aboard the Unicorn, Commanded by one
Captain...... Tidiman, wherein he remained during that great Fight of the Third
of June, in the Year.... where, to his immortal glory, the present Great King
James the Second, showed more personal Valor and Conduct, than any other Prince
of the House of England since the Conquest, who had killed by his side, the
Earl of Faymouth, his Brother's Favorite and his own, his first Gentleman of
his Bedchamber, the Lord Muskery, the generous Mr. Boil, with many other
Gentlemen and Soldiers.

The behavior of the Earl, in the Ship where he Sailed, was not unsuitable to
his Quality and the other actions of his life. He encouraged the Soldiers with
his Actions and his Words too; and the Captain in truth, of not too forward a
Nature, did perhaps more than otherwise he would, to hide from his Men the
great difference there was between the intrepidity of the Earl, and his own
circumspection. In fine, there was nothing scandalous, but his Lordship did not
look upon it as good Fortune to have accompanied a Man no more sollicitous to
get Glory in so great an occasion for that purpose.

The Earl of Peterborow, after his Engagement by Sea, had it intimated to him,
by a private Friend about the Duke, That if he thought he could apply himself
to a Court-life, wherein attendance would be necessary, and a particular
devotion to all the interests of his Master, he believed his Highness would not
be unwilling to engage his Lordship in his Service, even in the first, and most
honorable place in his Court, at that time vacant by the so late death of the
Lord of Muskery, who was Groom of the Stool, and first Gentleman of his
Bedchamber: And this person did offer himself, if the Earl did esteem the
occasion, to be an instrument of proposing the matter, and bringing it about.
His Lordship, that was surprised, did not at first embrace it with that warmth
the Gentleman did expect; who thought to have thereby put such an obligation
upon the Earl, as might deserve some extaordinary acknowledgment; for he was
not altogether uninterest'd, and had several considerations of his own, which
excited the appearance of his friendship in this matter. But the Earl told his
Friend, he desired a few days to consider of the business, and to inform
himself of the nature and commodities of the place, that he might see how such
an Employment, would quadrate with the condition of his Affairs and Fortune;
having at that time a Mother a live, who kept away the most confiderable part
of his Estate: so as if he had not with the place some such emolument, as might
equal the increase of Expense would grow upon him, by the change of his
condition, and application, he should insensibly draw himself into such
circumstances as would afterward become uneasy.

The Earl of Peterborow, in the mean time, by the advice of his Friends, did
not haste away from the Fleet as soon as the Fight was done, as weary of the
Fatigue, or impatient of the strait living aboard; but staid to attend the Duke
to the Court, and his reception, as he had come out, only to wait upon his
Highness, and to show a particular devotion to so great a Prince. He came then
with him to Whitehall, and was a witness of the kind reception he had from so
dear a Brother. And his Highness presented the Earl to the King, as a
particular partaker of the Honor, as well as the hazards of that great
occasion; who thereupon received from His Majesty very signal Thanks and
Commendations.

Some days were now past, during the consideration the Earl had employed about
the proposition was made him by his Friend at Sea, concerning the Duke's
Service; and indeed, according to the information he received, he did not judge
the allowances, were like to be made him, would support the extraordinary
charges would arise from that condition: So as unwilling to bring a burdensome
Service to a Master, he did rather desire to make more easy, a declension of
that affair became more sutiable to his inclination. When one Morning, about a
week after, happ'ning to visit another Friend, upon whose judgment, candor, and
experience, he had a much greater dependence, and acquainting him with the
answer he did intend to make; he was by many important reasons overruled, as
to a change of his resolution, and persuaded to embrace the occasion of entering
into the Interests and Service of his Royal Highness. This Gentleman was a
Servant to the Duke himself, and much nearer than the first, to every part of
his Favor and Inclination: And having occasions that were like, for diverse
times, to keep him distant from the Court, he thought, by introducing the Earl
of Peterborow, to establish a Friend, who would maintain his interests and
pretenses there in his absence, very usefully. And it is true, that he had
those, that did prove then, and after, very confiderable to himself and many
others.

He did then undertake the management of this accord, and acquainted the Duke
with the Earl's desire to be his Servant; with which he did suggest so many
reasons as made his Highness resolve, notwithstanding some little dislike of
the Earl's demur, to receive him with that kindness and encouragement, as was
suitable to his Birth and Quality.

There was some little dissatisfaction in the minds of the first proposer, and
others of his Faction, to find the Earl introduced, and not by them, thinking
his actions, and dependence would prove accordingly. But by whom it was, they
could not guess, and it was for some time a secret.

From thenceforth the Earl applied himself close to the Duke's Service and
Interests. He attended him in the Plague Year to York, and afterward to
Oxford. He participated of the Frowns and Smiles were applied to every
variation of his Fortune. In the Parliaments, which did succeed, he did not
only adhere, but appear in all his interests; he avoided not the hard looks
were given to those that durst endeavor the protection of his Father-in-Law,
the Earl of Clarendon, and stood by his defense when he was abandoned by such
as were fed and clothed by the Fortunes and Favors he had procured them. He
opposed the Bill for Divorce of the Lord Ross, solicited by the Court, not in
favor of that Lord, (now Earl of Rutland) but as an introduction to a greater
that was intended, whereby the Duke's Right to the Succession would have been
cut off, by an act unusual in this Kingdom, and esteemed unlawful in every
other.

These proceedings got the Earl of Peterborow the opinion of being more
particularly tied to the Duke's Service by affection, than every one would have
had him. Such as envied the virtue of this Prince, desiring he should have the
forms of Greatness in his Service, but not the zeal, the duty, nor the true
sincerity that should sustain it. The Earl of Peterborow was not a Man to act
for him in one occasion, for his Service, and to betray him in another, for his
own advantage. He was ever concerned for the Duke in the first place, but for
his own Reputation in the second. And though, it is true, he would have dyed
for the Duke in a great occasion, yet it is certain his own honor would have
had some share in the sacrifice. With these principles, and in actions suitable
unto them, he continued in his Royal Highnesses Service several Years; and
although he was esteemed by all the Ministers, he had not many marks of their
favor, who think the dependants upon the Brother and Presumptive Heir of a
King, rejoice not overmuch to see that power in them, which naturally, as his
due, the others would have devolved upon their Master. However, he lived well
with all, and they with him. Though the World saw well, by the little
acquisitions he made of Honors or Advantage, that he did serve his Master with
the least design of interest, of any person that ever did approach him.

About the Year..... it fell out, that Anne Duchess of York, departed this
life; and by those that were friends to the Duke, and the Government, it was
thought fit, that another should be sought to supply, by her fruitfulness, the
want of Issue Male, which Providence to that time, had denied to the felicity
of the Royal House. All concurred in the profession that this was necessary;
but not every one in their endeavors to accomplish it. The accession of Sons
like to live, would have made the Duke more considerable than his enemies
wished that he should be; and objections were not wanting, from many of them
that were in place to speak, and in right to be heard, in Occasions, and
Councels of that nature, against any seemed proper to his Friends for his
Alliance. Some of them, 'twas said, wanted Fortune; others, were not of Quality
enough; and there were those that were not bred in the Religion of the Country,
which in certain Men was not easy to digest. At last, the good King (who, it
were to have been wished, had in more things followed his own good nature and
judgment) accepted the proposition made from Spain, by Sir Mark Ogniaty, at
that time Agent here out of Flanders, of a Marriage, and Treaty to that
purpose, with the Young Archduchess of Inspruk, which was believed would have
answered all the objections of Honor, Fortune, and Fruitfulness, more than any
Princess that had been proposed. This could not apparently be refused by the
Ministers, who found the King did himself desire his Brother's Marriage, and
that the Duke was resolved to have a Wife at any rate. Therefore, the expedient
for its hindrance was, to propose a Creature of their own, one that followed
the Court, and the favor of it, by birth a Stranger, not concerned what became
of the Succession of England; to be sent over in quality of Negotiator of this
business. This Man was engaged in the affair, whom they did manage as they
pleased; they made him advance it one day, and retard it another: and at last
he did contribute, by his skill, to so long delays, as it became apparent by
diverse signs of the Empress's ill health, that she was not like long to live.

From that time the Emperor, who thought it just he should provide for his own
happiness in the first place, began to cast his thoughts upon this Princess;
and his Council, for his satisfaction as well as the interest of his House, by
reuniting the concerns of Inspruk, that had been the Appennage of those
Archdukes, did wholly give their approbation of that conditional intention, in
case of the Empress's death: So that when the Court of England was in
expectation of a final conclusion of this Treaty, the cunning Negotiator did
procure the appearance of it, to stop the Mouths of dissatisfied Men, and the
clamors would have been upon a rupture, after a years suspense, and chargeable
Treaty; so as the Duke being then upon the Sea, immediately after his
Engagement of Sole Bay, in the last Dutch War; the Envoy at Vienna sent word,
The Treaty was now ended, and there wanted only an Extraordinary Ambassador
from the King, to come to demand and Marry the Archduchess, according to the
forms, toward bringing her into England, contenting the King in that affair,
and making the Duke happy.

Hereupon, his Royal Highness, who had long in his mind pitched upon the Earl
of Peterborow to undertake and manage this great trust, not only as the first
person about him, for his Birth and Quality, but as a Man whom he knew could
never be corrupted, to act, or omit any thing might prove contrary to his
intention or his service, did now declare he should (with the King's leave) be
alone employed and trusted, as Extraordinary Ambassador, in perfecting this
matter, which so nearly did concern him.

The Earl did at that time attend the Duke in his own Ship. He had been with
him the whole Expedition, and was particularly participant of all the Honors
and Hazards of that bloody Battle, wherein the Noble Earl of Sandwich lost his
life, and so many brave Gentlemen in either Party: And from off this Fleet it
was, he commanded the Earl to repair to the King, and entreat his orders to the
Ministers, for preparing Moneys, Instructions, and Instruments that might
enable him to proceed upon his journey, in order to bring home the Princess had
been so much desired.

At his arrival, and first Audience of the King upon this affair, he found His
Majesty not so warm as he did expect; he would not trust the Earl entirely with
his indifference, but let fall some doubtful words, as it were to sound,
Whether he would comply with more delays: But when he found by the steddiness
of his Lordship's Answers, That he did expect an ingenuous proceeding, for his
Master's satisfaction, His Majesty, a little abruptly, broke off the Discourse,
and bid him repair to the Ministers, who should have orders to dispatch him
with as much speed as the preparations would admit.

He addressed himself, in the first place, to the Lord Treasurer, who, for all
his concurrence with the Duke to other ends and enterests, by which he had
gained a most particular share in his Credit and Favor; yet he was certainly
no friend to this, nor wished success to any other Foreign proceeding, and did
comply with, if not foment the King's inclination, to a farther delay in the
affair. Whether it was, that he would not appear to the approaching Parliament,
author of a Match, of which, he thought, they were not like to approve; or that
he hoped the overlong delays would weary the Duke, and make him at last content
to take up with some Lady for whom this Lord had a favor in the Court at home.

Certain it is, That he received the Earl's pressing desires for a dispatch,
with a colder kind of moroseness than he could have imagined, and in a way as
did seem to expect from the Earl an understanding of some thing he was not
willing plainly to express.

The Duke seemed to believe the obstructions did proceed from the insinuations
of another Minister, with whom he had long been out upon many other accounts;
but he being in most things competitor with the Lord Treasurer, was glad to
have occasion to justify himself in a thing so tender to the Duke, at the
reasonable cost of the other, and to set the Saddle on the right Horse.

The account the Earl of Peterborow gave to his Highness of these Affairs,
brought him, with as much have, as matters would admit, from the Fleet to the
Town. And when he arrived, the business was so pressed on his side, as the
Ministers were driven to break, or comply with his desires. But it is most
true, That in all the matters expected from the Treasurer, he was more dry,
more stiff, and more scarce, than was agreeable to the good opinion it was
necessary for him to preserve in the Duke's Mind; and the Earl of Peterborow
was fain to make use of his competitor, who had a desire, at that time, to
justify himself to the Duke, and had also much interest with the King, to
procure from his Majesty, upon reasons of public honor, more large allowances
than the Treasurer would otherwise have made, who thought to have pinched the
Earl, and made his business uneasy on that part, for not complying with him,
in an indirect sufferance of those delays to take place, which might have
obstructed the Duke's Marriage in any Foreign part whatsoever.

However, those difficulties were overcome, allowances were made for the Earl's
Equipage, and provision of Money designed for the maintenance of the Embassy.
Orders were given for Commissions and Instructions: And after the Earl had
served His Majesty in Raising for him a Regiment of Foot, whereof he was to be
Colonel, designed for carrying on the Dutch War, his affairs being all in a
readiness for proceeding on his Embassy, he did on the (...) of March, in the
Year (...) under the Character of Ambassador Extraordinary to the Emperor,
depart from London on that employment, having in his custody, Jewels of his
Royal Highness's particular Cabinet, to the value of Twenty Thousand Pound,
intended for a present to the young Archduchess of Inspruk.

The Earl arrived at Dover the next day, and under a very fair passage, came
the day following to Calls, where having stayed too Nights in providing for
his farther proceeding to Paris; on the Third day, in the Morning, an Express
came to him from the Court, bringing Letters of assurance from thence, and from
Germany too, That the Empress was dead, and the long Treaty of Inspruk broken
off, by reason the Emperor was now resolved to have that Princess for himself.

The Earl had, notwithstanding, Letters from his Royal Highness, and from the
Earl of Arlington, by the King's Command, That notwithstanding this, he should
proceed to Paris, remaining quiet there, under his own particular character,
attending their farther Commands, whereby he was like to be employed to procure
a Princess that might be a fit Wife for the Duke out of some other Family.

His Lordship obeyed, and after being settled at Paris, he had advice from his
Royal Highness, That there had been proposed to him Four Wives; with whom,
since it was impossible for him to be acquainted, he did command his Lordship
to endeavor by all the diligence he could use, to get sight and knowledge of
them, or at least, their Pictures, with the most impartial relations of their
Manners and Dispositions.

The First of these was the Duchess of Guise, whom France most particularly
wished to favor into this Alliance; the next the young Princess of Modena, only
Sister to the present Duke of that City and Country; the Third a Lady called
Madmoiselle de Raise; and the Fourth, Mary Anne, Princess of Wirtenbergue.

This was a great trust, to the performance whereof, was requisite both Honesty
and Discretion; the first, To render unconsider'd all the advantages might be
proposed, to make partial the person trusted, against the interest and
satisfaction of his Master; and the latter, To find out, and judge, what might
be most expedient and agreeable to his true humor and circumstances.

The first, and the latter of these did recide at Paris, the Duchess of Guise
at her own House, and the Princess of Wirtenbergue, as a Pensioner in the
Monastery of....... but the Princess of Modena was with her Mother in Italy,
and Madmoiselle de Raise at her Relations, some Hundred Miles distant from
Paris. The Duchess of Guise he saw at Court; she was the youngest Daughter of
Gaston of Bourbon, Duke of Orleans, the King of France his Uncle, but a
Princess for whom he knew the Duke had no inclination; she not being only low,
and ill shaped, but under the appearance of a feeble Complexion, so, as though
she had much reputation for Innocence and Virtue, her Constitution did not
promise a likelihood of either many or strong Children; and that end appearing
to the Earl, the chief business of the Duke, and of England too, all the favor
of France (a share whereof he might have tasted from the merit of a
recommendator to this Alliance) could not induce him to promote a matter
contrary to the ends of his Trust, and the Duke's Service.

The Princess of Modena, Mary of Este, his Lordship could not see; but by the
means of a Scotch Gentleman, that had been conversant in the House of Conty,
one Mr. Conn, he was introduced into the Palace of that Prince, whose Wife had
been one of the young Princess of Modena's nearest Relations, and there he saw
her Picture, that had been lately sent thither from that Court. It bore the
appearance of a young Creature about Fourteen years of Age; but such a light of
Beauty, such Characters of Ingenuity and Goodness, as it surprised the Earl,
and fixed upon his Fancy, That he had found his Mistress, and the Fortune of
England.

An ill Picture he saw of Madmoiselle de Raise; but being at such distance as he
could not know her self, or have any perfect relation of her circumstances, he
sought no farther encouragement in that matter.

His whole thoughts were turned upon the young Princess of Modena, with whose
Character that he might be the better acquainted, by the means of the
forementioned Mr. Conn, he got a meeting, such as might seem accidental, with a
Gentleman called the Abbot Richini, a Man that was employed at Paris in
Negotiating the interests of the House of Este; and it was in a private, but
commodious place for such an interview, in the Cloisters of the Great
Charter House in Paris. After usual Complements, they fell upon diverse
indifferent Discourses, and by degrees, that made it casual, coming to matters
of England, and the Duke's being a Widower, with the necessity of another
Marriage, we talked of Diverse Princesses that the World named as proper for a
Match so Illustrious. The Earl had occasion hereupon, to enquire of him, What
Children there were in the House of Este? he told him, only too; A Son, that
was the present Duke, as yet a Minor, and a Daughter, of about Fourteen Years
of Age; to whom, although he attributed many excellences, yet he endeavored to
make them useless to us, by saying, The Duchess her Mother, but more strongly
her own Enclinations, did design her to a Religious life, and that she did seem
resolved not to Marry.

This affirmation was an extreme blow to the hopes and desires of the Earl of
Peterborow, and of which he was forced to give an account, together with the
esteem and great value he had for the Character, that from all hands he had
received of this young Princess.

But after this, he was induced by the Duke's particular direction, to make his
access to the Princess Mary Anne of Wirtenbergue, that had likewise, as has
been said, been recommended to his consideration. This Lady, whose Father had
been slain in the War, and her Mother retired at that time into Flanders, of
which Country she was, did remain in a Monastery of Ladies, in company of
several others of great Quality: And the Earl was introduced to a fight of her,
by Father Gilbert Talbot, at that time newly entered into Orders of Priesthood,
and an acquaintance of her Confessor. She was persuaded to receive his Lordship
by way of a Visit, in the manner as is usual, at the Grate of a Parlor,
designed to give the Ladies opportunities of speech, at seasonable times, with
their Friends and Relations. This Princess, who was Daughter of a Brother to
the Duke of Wirtenbergue, was under the protection and care of the Crown of
France, by reason of the great merits of her Father's Services; and it was
believed would have stood fairer than any for its assistance to the preferment
of this Match, if that of the Duchess of Guise, and Princess of Modena did not
take place. She was of middle Stature, Fair Complexion, with brown Hair; the
Figure of her Face turned very agreeably, her Eyes Gray, her Looks Grave, but
Sweet; and in her person, she had the motions of a Woman of Quality, and well
bred: But above all, she had the appearance of a Maid in the ripeness of her
Youth, of a Sanguine and Healthful Constitution, fit to bring strong Children,
and such as might be like to live and prosper. Although there was much modesty
in all her behavior, yet she was not scarce of her discourse, and spoke well,
and pertinently to every thing.

His Lordship not being now unsatisfied with this interview, and believing that
except the Princess of Modena, he had neither seen, nor heard of any thing more
proper, for what might capacitate the person of a Wife; he began to enquire of
the Fortune might be expected with her: But of that, although some concerned
for her, did give out, That by several ways, there might be expected from her
Friends, Fifty or Threescore Thousand Pounds, yet he confessed, he could never
find any reasonable bottom, upon which to build such an assurance. Yet a
Marriage being his chief business, and a probability of Children, he gave,
according to his Trust, and the Duke's Command, the truest Character he was
able, of her, and her circumstances.

His Highness hereupon having a concurring account of this Princess, from
others he had charged with the Enquiry, as well as his Lordship, seemed so
satisfied with it, as he gave order to the Earl of Peterborow, to proceed in
his application to the Princess, and to give hopes, to her, and her Friends,
That he would send sudden orders to demand her in the usual Forms. And from the
earnestness of the Duke's Expressions, he himself did believe, he should in two
or three Posts, have been capacitated thereunto. He obeyed, and found every day
new contentments in the conversation of the Princess, so as he doubted not,
there would have risen from this commerce, a satisfaction, both to his Master's
Interests and Enclination.

But on a sudden, unexpected orders gave a change to this affair; an Express
brought directions to the Earl, That leaving Paris privately, with as little
company as was possible, he should repair incognito to Dusseldorpe, the
Residence of the Duke of Newburgh; and that there, he should try to get a fight
of the Princess his Daughter, who had been earnestly recommended to his
Highness, as a Princess fittest of any for his Alliance. This was believed did
proceed, from the Service France did at that time expect from the Duke her
Father, whose Country and Troops were at that time adjacent to those parts of
Flanders and Holland, where the King made a very sharp War. And it was
earnestly supported by diverse persons of much interest in our Court, who had
been formerly obliged, or at present gained to promote the satisfaction of that
Duke. But the Earl had orders from His Royal Highness, to give him a perfect
Character of that Princess, her Person, as to what he could see, of her Parts,
Manners, and Enclinations, as he could any ways learn, with the reposition of
so great a Trust, as he did assure him, if he found her not answering the
Character had been given her, he should have immediate Orders to return, and to
bring home the Princess of Wirtenbergue, of whom we have spoke before.

The Earl, who was nothing but Duty and Faithfulness to the Duke, obeyed his
new Orders with all the diligence imaginable; he took Post accompanied only
with an Italian Gentleman, one Signior Varasani, his Gentleman of the Horse,
and one that served him in his Chamber. He arrived in two days at Metts, whence
by Water he came to Cullen. At the time Sir Lionel Jenkins, and Sir Joseph
Williamson were Ambassadors Plenipotentiary at that City. He did not intend to
have seen these Ministers, having no Orders to communicate, nor Advice to take
of them. But walking alone in the Street, after his arrival, he met Sir Joseph
in his Coach, who, without considering he was not in a condition to be
publicly taken notice of, light, and complemented the Earl in the Street; of
which unseasonable respect, his Lordship delivered himself, by his desire that
he would forbear it any farther. But after this, he did privately visit those
Ambassadors, but without communicating his Business, or Intentions.

He prepared then for his Voyage to Dusseldorpe, pretending, at the House where
he lay, a curiosity to see the Court, and Habitation of a Sovereign Prince, not
above.......... from that City, who had the Reputation of being Wise, and
Generous, and to live in all the State and Order suitable to his condition, and
the greatness of his House. The Master of the House provided him a convenient
Guide, acquainted with the Town he was to see, and the ways and passages to it.
So one Morning the Earl, his Companion the Seiur Varasani, and too Servants
Embarked upon the Rhine, and in an ordinary Boat, were carried down the River
to the Walls of Dusseldorpe.

They were examined at the Gate, and giving account, that they were Strangers,
brought by curiosity to see the place, were admitted, and by a Soldier,
conducted to an Inn, where they stayed to repose themselves, and take their
measures for a farther proceeding.

They thereupon sent their Guide to enquire the method of approaching the
Palace, and the Prince; who brought word, There would be, that day, a greater
difficulty than usual, by reason the Prince and Court were to be employed in
seeing an Anniversary Contest among the Citizens and other persons of that
place, which should soonest Shoot down the Papegay, or Parrot, a thing made in
similitude of such a Bird, from a very high Pole, which was to be performed
with much Method and Ceremony, and the Victor to have the usual reward of his
address. But that before the beginning of the undertaking, the Prince was to be
entertained, at Evening Service, in the Jesuits Church, with very rare Music,
to which the Duchess and Princess did likewise resort, so as the Earl might
have a fair view of them there, and what else was considerable in the Court,
and that he would conduct them to a Station proper for that end.

This was readily accepted by his Lordship and his Companion, who were by their
Guide placed in a fair passage, part of a Cloister whereby they were to pass.
After some expectation the Duke arrived, preceded with the State and Ceremony
was suitable to a Sovereign Quality, he had his Wife by the Hand, the Princess
followed, and a considerable Train of Ladies and Cavaliers, well dressed, and
in good order. The Princess was not well to be discerned, by reason of the
Hoods were over her Face: But passing after into the body of the Church, the
Earl had a farther view into a Gallery above, where the Duke sat to hear the
Service.

The Office and Music at an end, the Court retired in the order it had come,
and all went out to be spectators of the Shooting, but his Lordship retired to
his Inn, not being in a condition, or desiring to be seen publicly abroad.

Near six of the Clock, that divertisement had an end, and our Guide having
acquainted some under Officer of the Court, that Two Gentlemen of the English
Ambassadors Train, that were at Cullen, and had come to see that Town, were
desirous to have a sight of the Court, and do Reverence to the Prince: he was
told, That he might bring them. They came then to the Palace, under his
conduct, and being met by a Gentleman in the Inner-Court, he took them out of
the Hands of the Townsman, and carried them up into a large Room, where after
some attendance they were led into another, whereinto the Prince came unto them.

The Duke of Newburgh seemed to be at that time near Forty Years of Age, of
competent Stature, well shaped, well dressed, and of a most obliging behavior.
He had a Suit, after the French fashion, of a Gray Stuff, with Diamond Buttons,
a Diamond Hatband, and a Diamond Sword; and about his Neck, in a Black Ribbon,
hung the Order of the Golden Fleece. He did receive their Complements with much
Courtesy, which they paid with all Respect; and of himself began to entertain
them with diverse Questions about their Journey, the Ambassadors, and proceeding
of the Treaty at Cullen; and afterward, insensibly fell upon England, the
Court thereof, the Princes, and its other concerns. He inquired concerning the
Duke of York and his Marriage; where was Monsieur de Peterborow, and if he
continued at Paris after the disappointment of the Treaty of Inspruk; to all
which questions having been answered, he said afterward, He heard the Duke was
like to be Married to an English Lady; they assured him, they heard of no such
thing. At last he took his leave of them with much civility, and when he was
departed they asked the Gentleman if they might have the farther favor of
seeing the Duchess and the young Princess; who having told them, he would
enquire, he left them; and after some stay, returned to let them know, they
should be admitted. Toward which they were carried, and introduced into an
upper Room, where seemed to expect them the Duchess of Newburgh, accompanied
with the young Princess her eldest Daughter.

The Earl made her his complements, with the greatest respect of which he was
capable; whereunto her Highness, as he was told, in her own Tongue, made all
suitable returns; but said, That being not versed in the French Tongue, she
defired her Daughter, the Princess, might interpret between them; at which the
Princess did approach, and helped to carry on the conversation, and with
intention, as he thought, to show her capacity in that Language. They all by
that time, as he had reason afterward to believe, suspecting the Earl of being
some other person, and having more design, in his little Voyage, than was
pretended.

The Duchess of Newburgh was a Princess, in his Opinion, of about five or six
and thirty years, of a middle stature, light brown Hair, enclining to be Fat;
great characters of goodness in her countenance, and was such a one, as might
be proper for a good Wife; without qualities over subtle, or Courtly, as might
be found in the spirits of Ladies bred in France or Italy.

The Princess, her Daughter, was supposed to be about Eighteen years of Age, of
middle stature, she had likewise very light Hair, and was of an exceeding Fair
Complexion; her Eyes were of a light blueish gray, the turn of her Face more
round than oval; that part of her Neck he saw was white as Snow, but upon the
whole, at those Years, she was enclining to be Fat. In discourse she rendered
to his Lordship readily her Mother's sense, and spoke her own aptly enough. She
had the appearance of one that might be proper enough for a good Wife, and that
possibly was fit for Generation. But the great genius did not appear, of
Business or Conversation, for which she has been praised since she came to sit
upon the greatest Throne of Europe.

After a due time the Earl of Peterborow did from hence too take his leave,
with all the circumstances of respect were due to persons of that Quality: But
at his departure he found himself much more attended by Gentlemen, and with
greater respect, than at his arrival: And he was pressed to stay Supper, by the
Chief Officers of the House, even to a degree of being like to have it imposed
upon him. But his Resolution of not receiving any farther Engagement, made him
in the civillest manner he could, break through all that, and got him liberty to
retire to his Inn; where after he had made a very ill Supper, there came to
enquire for him, under pretense of a Visit from a Countryman, a young
Gentleman, one Hamilton, that wore a Gold Key by his side, and was said to be
much in the Duke's favor, and of his Bedchamber. This Mr. Hamilton seemed
every way to try what he could get out of the Earl, and by his discourse his
Lordship perceived his proceedings had puzzled the Court: But withal, That they
were suspicious of his satisfactions, by reason his Lordship declined to
receive greater favors from them than was just necessary; however he departed
civilly, and his Lordship to his rest.

The Earl was impatient to be gone in the Morning, and having a Wagon ready,
(the ordinary way of Traveling in that Country) he came by Land to Cullen,
whence his Lordship immediately dispatched an Express for England, with the
success, and account of his Journey. In answer whereunto, his Lordship had
immediate Orders to return with all speed to Paris, with an assurance, That at
his arrival there, he should meet directions to demand, to marry, and to bring
home the Princess Mary Anne of Wirtenbergue.

As has been said, there were a great party in the Court of England engaged to
promote the Marriage of Newburgh; but there was another that moved strongly to
promote Madmoiselle D' Alboeuf, Daughter to the Duke of that Name, who was a
Cadet Prince of the House of Lorain; which was the Duchess of Portsmouth, who
was then, and continued to his end, the favorite Mistress of King Charles II.
and she who wanted neither cunning nor Counsel, considering the transitoriness
of humane condition, and particularly of humane affections, and not knowing how
soon her retreat might be necessary into her own Country, did wisely endeavor
to oblige therein, and make all the Friends she could: So, to engage the House
of Lorain and Boullion, she had wrought with the King, not only to consent to
the Marriage, but to order the Earl of Peterborow to see the Lady, and to send
him his opinion thereof. And to this, if it had been any way advisable, His
Royal Highness himself would not have been averse, from the partiality he ever
had to the House of Boullion, and principally to Monsieur de Turene, whose
Niece the Lady was. But in truth she was so very young, not having fully
attained Thirteen Years, and so little a Woman of that Age too, as when it was
really represented, it was found wholly unproper for the Duke's circumstances,
and the business of England. But to favor it, she and her creatures had, in the
mean time, done what they could to detract from the Princess Mary Anne of
Wirtenbergue, to whom, notwithstanding, from the first impressions he had
received, he stood so well inclined, as by the return of the next Express after
the account of the Princess of Newburgh, he commanded the Earl to go back in
diligence to Paris, where he assured him he should meet all the orders
necessary to bring away that Lady.

The Earl obeyed with much satisfaction, esteeming this, next to the Italian
Alliance, the most suitable of any that had ever been proposed. So with all the
haste he could he came to his first station, and not doubting of the
performance of what had been so earnestly assured him, he lighted at the
Monastery where the Princess Mary Anne lived, as soon as he came to Paris, and
acquainted her with the orders, he had reason to believe, did attend him at his
House, after the receipt of which, he should have but to call her (as he said)
his Mistress, and pay her the respects due to the Quality that did attend it.
He could not but confess the moderation, which in other things did appear in
her temper, was not great enough to conceal her joy in this occasion; and she
was not to be blamed, considering the provision it would have been for an
Orphan Maid to Marry a Prince so great, both in the circumstances of Fortune
and Merit; but after he had taken his leave, and was returned home, with what a
reverse of Fortune did he meet!

The Agent that did at that time Negotiate, in absence of the Ambassador, had
order to watch the Earls approach to Paris, that he might deliver his Letters,
with new orders, to him before he arrived; thereby to obviate his communication
to the Peincess of the last he received at Cullen, before he could be
forewarned of it, or forbiden; but by neglect, or taking a wrong way to meet
him, the Earl had seen her, and made her complements upon the orders he had so
great reason to expect, before he could receive his new directions. So as
coming home, and being there saluted by this unwary Minister, he received from
his Hands such Letters, as quite changed all his methods, by the total
forbidding to proceed any farther in Treaty, or Demand of the Princess of
Wirtenbergue; and directing him to expect instruments and instructions by the
following Post, to proceed with all haste to Italy, to demand, according to the
forms, the young Princess of Modena.

This last order Reducing the Earl to his first Opinion and Enclination, did
comfort him against the dissatisfaction of so uncertain and changeable a
proceeding. He found a way to acquaint the Princess Mary Anne with the
unexpected change in the Fortune was designed her, and turned the event upon
the resolutions of State Ministers, from the Duke's changeableness, or any
dissatisfaction taken from her character. Much a do there was to appease a mind
disappointed to that degree, and there were of those to whom she had seemed a
rival that forbore not to recoyce, if not to insult upon this reverse of
Fortune. But at last she was forced to appease her discontents; and though the
Earl durst see her no more, yet he wished her much happiness, as she did
deserve, in any other proceeding.

His Lordship was, after this, employed in preparation for his Voyage to
Modena, expecting in a Post or two the necessaries should enable him to proceed
in that Negotiation. In ten days they arrived to his Hands, with particular
recommendation from the Duke his Master, to use that Expedition and diligence
which was done capable to establish his Marriage, beyond the contradiction, or
dissolution of a Parliament; which, it being now the Month of July, was like to
fit in November; and if it were not, before that, past obstruction, would leave
no Stone unturned, that might contradict or hinder any Catholic Alliance.

He dispatched then away his Train and his Equipage, under the conduct of his
Officers, and himself took Post, with intention of giving a sudden end to this
affair. It had been hinted to him, That he would find no difficulty in his
undertaking, all things having been prepared by the power and offices of the
King of France, in whose interests the Princess of this House had of a long
time been; and that Monarch finding the Match with his Cousin not like to take,
nor the other of the Princess of Newburgh, did not think it advisable to let
His Royal Highness escape into the Alliance of any Family unfavourable to
France, and therefore he used all the force of his Councels and persuasions, to
make this Marriage succeed.

The Earl then received wings from the Interest and Commands of his Master, and
came to Lions in three days. but he was no sooner entered into his Inn, and
began to repose himself, believing from the care he had taken to be concealed,
and his little Equipage, that he was there wholly unknown; when a Servant of
the Inn brought him word, There were Two Gentlemen below that desired
admittance to speak with him, on the part of the Duchess of Modena. He could
not refuse to see them, not knowing upon what account they came, and upon their
approach they delivered his Lordship a Letter, Signed by one Nardi, that styled
himself a Secretary; wherein he wrote to acquaint his Excellency, That they had
heard of his intentions to come into those parts, in order to treat of a
Marriage with the young Princess of Modena: But the Duchess knowing her
Daughters intentions to be entirely against any obligation of that kind, and
that she was perfectly settled in the resolution of taking upon her a Religious
life, she thought it reasonable to give him timely advertisement thereof; that
the King, his Master, not being unacquainted therewith, might desist from
exposing himself, or his Lordship, by pursuing a design, which though it was
very honorable, and advantageous to her, her Daughter, and the House of Este,
yet was unpracticable, and by no ways to be brought about.

The Earl's surprise was infinite in this occasion; but he thought it most
prudent to seem amazed at the cause of such a Letter, and to disown to these
persons any concern of that nature, or orders to proceed in the business they
did surmise; he told them, he was a private Traveller, that came upon his own
account, only to satisfy his curiosity, and the desire of seeing Italy, so as
there was no occasion for her Highness or any others concerning themselves in
his motions.

The Gentlemen departed, and the Earl immediately gave an account to the King,
and the Duke his Master, of what had happened, and the discouragement he had
met; and though he directed his Servants and Equipage to remain at Lions till
farther orders, yet he resolved himself to proceed as far as Turnin, where
resided an Ambassador of France, who had the reputation of presiding over the
French affairs in Italy, to whom he might communicate what had happened, and to
take some measures with him about his farther proceeding.

He repaired immediately to the Embassador's House, after his arrival at that
City; and enquired of him, Whether he had any orders to assist him in the
affair in question, wherein the World esteemed the King, his Master, the chief
mover? The Ambassador assured his Lordship he had never been made acquainted
with that business; and that if his Master were concerned in it, it was likely
he designed to send some Man of Quality on purpose, who would be particularly
instructed in the management thereof. But, he said, that, to his particular
surprise, he had two days before received a Letter from the Duchess of Modena,
wherein she prayed him, That if his Lordship came to Turin, and did confer, or
advise with him upon that matter, he would signify to his Lordship, an
impossibility in the accomplishing of it, for the reasons had been before
expressed, in the Letter his Lordship had at Lions received from Nardi.

This second appearance of an averse proceeding, began very much to discourage
the Earl of Peterborow; and after he had given an account thereof to the Court,
he was in doubt what to do, or how to make any farther advances. But the French
Ambassador, who, though unimploy'd in this affair, did now believe his Master
much concerned in bringing it about, advised the Earl to a little patience, and
that continuing the pretense of a casual Traveller, he would advance his
Journey down the Po to an agreeable City, called Plaisance, where he might find
occasion to remain, and entertain himself till he had farther orders.

The Earl followed his Counsel, arrived at the place agreed on, and lodged
himself as conveniently as he could, to the appearance of a private Traveller;
but for all his caution, the Second or Third day after he came to Plaisance,
one of the Servants brought him word, one Morning, how there was a Gentleman
desired the favor of being admitted to him, who came from the Duchess of
Modena: The Earl sent immediately to have him introduced; and it proved the
same Nardi himself who had written the first Letter to his Brother at Lions. He
had the appearance of an ingenious Man, who spoke well, and was practiced in
all Italian civilities. He presented now to his Lordship, a Letter, from the
Duchess her self, wherein she wrote, That having heard of his Journey into
those parts, with the end and causes thereof, she thought it her part, before a
great King and his Minister should expose themselves, in the demand of a thing
which could not be accomplished, out of respect to them, to manifest the
reasons of it, that she might be excused from seeming any ways the cause of
their dissatisfaction: There was likewise in her Letter repeated what was
contained in hers to the Ambassador with something more; but to all she added,
That indeed there were other Princesses besides her Daughter, to one of which,
if the King his Master did think fit, it was possible he might be admitted to
address himself. And however, in the mean time, if his Lordship would come and
divert himself in that Court, she should esteem her self favored by his
reception, and he should be very welcome.

The Earl after having excused himself to the Duchess, from the trouble his
coming into those parts seemed to cause unto her Highness, and thanked her for
the Honor she did in the rest, with a fair excuse, he told her again, There was
no cause for the first, because he was but a private Traveller, without design,
or orders to disquiet any body with pretenses were not agreeable to them: nor
indeed with any of that nature, which might answer the latter also. So Nardi
returned with a seeming satisfaction at that time. But the next day his
Lordship received a Letter from the French Ambassador at Turnin, whereby he
acquainted him, That there was now, by the King of France's Order, upon the
way, the Marquess of Angeao, designed by his Majesty to come with most pressing
desires to the Duchess for a consent and conclusion to this Match, and to
assist his Lordship with all the offices and endeavors imaginable.

This did much satisfy the Earl of Peterborow, if on the neck thereof there
had not come an Express out of England to assure him of the same, as to the
part of Monsieur d' Angeao, but with direction, That when he came, instead of
the young Princess, from whom they took it, all the difficulties did arise,
they should demand an Aunt of hers, which in all manner of circumstances was
inferior to her, and from diverse considerations improper for the Duke's
occasions. This sudden change in the Affair did infinitely mortify the Earl,
whose Head turned round under this variety of uncertainties: But he had but to
obey and be patient. And now some days after came Nardi again with new
Complements from the Duchess, and Expressions how glad that Court should be,
if the Honor was supposed to be intended to the Daughter, might be transferred
on any other Princess of that Family (for it seems, they had been enform'd,
that something of that kind had been listened to in France.) The Earl, that was
in expectation of his French assistant, who was not yet near, continued still
upon his first guard, owning no Orders at all; but alleged the cause of his
stay to be a little Indisposition, which he expected should soon pass, and
returned the Duchess his Duty and humble Thanks for the honor of her
Civilities.

About a week after this, another new Express came out of England,
countermanding again the last directions, and assuring the sudden arrival of
Monsieur d' Angeao, who was to use the uttermost power of the King of France's
mediation, in demand of the Princess's Daughter and no other. Whereof, if at
last they should come to fail, the Earl was then commanded to return to Paris,
without any farther delay.

Accordingly, about a week after the Marquess of Angeao came, and the Morning
of his arrival hastened to Visit and Complement the Earl at his Lodging;
acquainting him, That his Commission was to assist him in his Negotiation, with
all the offices of France, which he would improve with his best industry. This
Marquess was a Man of good appearance, very cunning, and bred to all the Arts
and Confidence of Courts. It was soon concerted between them, That this Envoy
should go first to Modena, having had formerly some acquaintance with that
Duchess, when, as one of the Cardinal's Neices, she remained in France, and
there try the power of his Reasons and Persuasions; to which, if the Duchess
proved inflexible, the Earl, from the knowledge thereof, might return without
exposing either himself or his Character: And if he did succeed, it would make
way for his Lordship to declare his pretenses to assume his Character, and be
received into that Court with the Honor and Respect due to his Dignity and
Business.

The Marquess departed the next Morning, and with such dexterity did
demonstrate to the Princes of that House their true interest, both in
constantly deserving the Protection of the King his Master, and the Alliance of
England, that all the Court and Council became desirous of it, except a cunning
Jesuit, that was Confessor to the Duchess, and indeed her chief Minister, one
Father Garimbert, that was a Subject born of the Duke of Parma's, and always
much influenced by that Family. This Garimbert, whether it were that he desired
to make the Match with the other Princess, who was Daughter to a Lady of the
House of Parma, or else that he was engaged (as some did suspect) to cross this
Match at the secret desire of that Family, who thought so Royal an Alliance
would advance a Neighbor Prince in Honor and Power, above that balance
whereunto they wished it should be kept unto their own: Italian Princes being
not only very jealous, and emulous of their Neighbors, but subtle too; He did
all he could to make averse unto it both the Duchess, and the Princess her
self.

But the reason of the thing was so strong in it self, as at last, it did
overruled, the Duchess, and all that were concerned in her Service and
Councels.

The Marquess of Angeao wrote then to the Earl of Peterborow, how all
difficulties being overcome, he might now take off the mask, and advance to
Modena, where his addresses would be received; and the Duchess wrote to him
also to the same effect, with all the respectful Invitation that was suitable.
They declared, there remained now only one difficulty, which was, in obtaining
a Dispensation from the Pope for Celebration of a Marriage with a Catholic
Princess, to a Prince not declared of the same Religion; of which,
notwithstanding, they did not seem to doubt. But the Earl, not knowing the
delays, or even the repture might proceed from this pretense, refused to appear
publicly in that Court till that difficulty were overcome, but consented to
come privately thither, where he might, incognito, see and converse with the
Princes and their Ministers. The Abbot of Angeao, Brother to the Marquess,
being gone to Rome, to negotiate the Dispensation with his Holiness, and the
Cardinal Nephew, in the mean time.

His Lordship advanced then privately to Modena, and about a Mile out of the
Town was met by Nardi, the under Secretary, with a Coach and Six Horses, into
which the Earl being received he was carried into the City, and set down at the
Palace of............ who was Brother to the Bishop of Modena, of which he was
put in possession in the name of the Duchess; there to remain till his
Lordship should think fit to appear in public and assume his Character.

The Earl did expect to have had a House where he might have lived at his own
Expense, and under the care and government of his proper Officers: But he found
there several appartments, all nobly furnished, for himself and the rest of his
followers, according to the quality of every Man, and each Office full of the
Dutchess's Servants, with Provisions suitable for keeping a noble House; and at
the time of Supper, there was a Table for himself, another for his Steward and
superior Attendants, with a third for Livery-Men and others, all nobly
provided, with that plenty and magnificence, as at first did not please his
Lordship; seeming contrary to his intentions of being private, and giving cause
of discourse to Men of a proceeding that was not ordinary.

The Earl told Nardi, That this was contrary to what he had desired; but he
replied, That though the Duchess, in public at his Lordship's instance,
omitted to pay him the respects that were due to him, yet she was not tied from
serving him her own way, in all the accomodations were necessary to his living
and subsistence, wherein he would have found difficulty, his Servants being
strangers, and wanting the advantage of the Language.

In the mean time the Abbot was at work in his Negotiation at Rome, to procure
a Dispensation, the Earl of Peterborow was received incognito, to the sight and
conversation of the Duchess: He was led thither the first time by Nardi alone,
who fetched him up to the Palace in a private Coach, and by a back way led him
up into an appartment, where he found the Duchess standing with her Back to a
Table; whom he approached with the Respect was due to a Sovereign Princess in
her own House; she received him likewise with much courtesy; and Chairs being
set, the Earl began to expose the true cause of his coming, and how he was
furprized to find a difficulty in a thing the World judged to be so
advantageous to all the Parties. The Duchess did seem to excuse her self much
upon the aversion her Daughter had to a Married life, and the great desire she
had to be Religious; she said likewise, That the Princess was young, and of a
Constitution not very strong, and that besides the Italian Princes, depending
much upon the reputation of Zeal for the Catholic Religion, there would be
difficulties in obtaining a Dispensation for an Alliance, with a Prince, though
never so great, that was not declared of the same Church, let the Opinion of
his true Faith be what it would. To every particular of these, his Excellency
answered what he thought proper; and so, as her Highness confessed to have
appeased the greatest difficulties of her own thoughts, and so much, as if the
Abbot's Negotiation in obtaining the Dispense did prove successful, she knew
not but that they might proceed to a happy conclusion. This first Conversation
ended with the Earl's desire of being favored with a sight of the young
Princess, whose possession he had so long thought necessary for his Master's
happiness, and the Dutchess's having promised it for the succeeding Evening: So
he retired home in the same manner and way as he arrived.

But now from Rome there was advice, by the Abbot of Angeao, of great
difficulties that arose in the consultations of this Affair. The French
Ambassador, the Duke d' Estree, favored the Marriage with all the Power of the
French Faction; so did the Cardinal Barbarin, and the other Friends and Allies
of the House of Este: But his Holiness himself was very averse, and Cardinal
Altieri, who was the governing Nephew, a professed and violent opposer.

Various pretenses were alleged for excuse of this obstinacy, but the true
cause was the jealousy of the Sea of Rome, concerning any increase of
Greatness to the House of Este, so considerable a part of its State and Riches
resting upon the violent usurpation of the Duchy of Ferara, and other Lands
belonging to those Princes; so as the interest of Religion apart, the Popes and
their Nephews do consider this Family as the least their Friend of any other in
Italy. And do believe, If their Alliance to any Royal, or Potent House, should,
by their support, offer them a fair occasion to recover their Dominions, they
might be induced to use other means than Preces and Lacrimae, to recover their
own, even from the Successor of St. Peter.

It seemed time then to press on this Affair to a conclusion; wherefore the
Earl, against that Night, did desire again that he might see the Princess; to
which purpose he was at the time appointed conducted up to the Palace, as he
was before, and found the Princess with her Mother. He did approach her with
the respects he thought due to his future Mistress; and having made her the
Complements were proper, he asked her pardon, if he was made an Instrument to
discompose her quiet, and in some sort to cross her Enclinations; but he
thought before, from the sight of her Picture, and was now much more confirmed
in the Opinion, by the view of her self, That it was the only way to make happy
a Prince, whose Love and Application, when she came to know him, would be well
able to make amends for what she might now in some measure esteem a sufferance.

She answered, with a little fierceness, That she was obliged to the King of
England, and the Duke for their good opinion; but she could not but wonder, why
from so many Princes of more merit, who would esteem that Honor and be ready to
embrace it, they should persist in endeavoring to force the Enclinations of
another, for whom it was impossible to agree to a proposition of that nature;
and that had vowed her self, as much as was in her power, to another sort of
life, out of which she could never think she should be happy. She desired his
Excellency, and even as he thought, with Tears in her Eyes, That if he had
interest in his Masters, he would oblige her, by endeavoring yet to divert any
farther persecution of a Maid, who had an invincible aversion for Marriage.
There were Princesses enough, she said, in Italy, and even in that House, that
would not be unworthy so great an Honor, and that from the esteem they might
have thereof would deserve it much better than she could do.

The Earl began to be a little peek'd, at expressions he thought something too
earnest in opposition of what he did desire. He told her then, he begged her
pardon, if he could not obey her; he might have been induced to it before he
saw her, but it was now impossible. He could not believe, from what he did
perceive of her, That she was made for other end than to give Princes to the
World, which should honor it with Characters of high Virtue and Merit: That his
Country had need of such, and he would now hazard the offending her, by
persisting in his demand; since if he did incur her indignation, he was sure at
last she would not own it, because it would prove to be, for making her one of
the most happy Princesses in Europe.

The Princess Mary of Este appeared to be at this time about Fourteen Years of
Age, she was tall, and admirably shaped, her Complexion was of the last
fairness, her Hair black as Jet, so were her Eyebrows, and her Eyes; but the
latter so full of light and sweetness, as they did dazzle and charm too. There
seemed given unto them, from Nature, Sovereign Power; power to kill and power
to save; and in the whole turn of her Face, which was of the most graceful oval
could be framed, there was all the Features, all the Beauty, and all that could
be great and charming in any humane Creature.

This Princess seemed unsatisfied, for all he could say, of the Earls
persistance, but said no more, and retired with the Duchess after the end of
the Conversation. The next day his Excellency complained to Nardi of her
Highnesses proceeding, expressing dissatisfaction, that having been kept in
hand on pretense of the Abbot of Angeao's Negotiation for the Dispense, he
found now a greater difficulty would arise when that was done, which was,
obtaining a consent from the Princess, to which so lately she did express so
much aversion. He told him, He should not find that strange, nor be concerned,
since the Ladies of Italy, when it came to be in earnest, were to have no will,
but that of their Friends and her Mother satisfied, she would soon to have no
will, but that of their Friends and her Mother satisfied, she would soon be
brought to a more difficult matter, if she thought fit. The Earl then began to
declare, That time drew on, and the meeting of the Parliament came near, to
which he was much circumscribed in his Affairs, and he was obliged to come to a
sudden conclusion or to depart.

Upon Notice whereof, the Duchess sent him notice next day, of greater hopes
of the young princess's concurrance, whom, she said, had been pressed by the
Duke her Brother, and all her Friends, so as upon the arrival of the Dispense
she hoped he should be satisfied. In the mean time the Treaty did proceed about
the Portion, which was to be Fourscore Thousand Pounds, to be paid at several
times according to agreements: With conditions for Jointure, Maintenance, and
other matters; and upon these things there was not any disagreement.

But now at last came from Rome the Abbot of Angeao without the Dispensation,
which he could not by any means obtain, by reason the Cardinal Altieri was
inflexible; and threats of Excommunication were issued out to any should
undertake to perform, or celebrate that Marriage. Hereupon we were all, upon
the Fears and Expectation of a total Rupture. The Duchess her self, a Zealous,
if not a Bigot Woman, was in great pain about the part that might seem
offensive to his Holiness, or neglective of his Authority; and the Princess
took occasion from hence to support her unwillingness. But in truth the
Cardinal Barbarin, of whom the Duchess had great dependence, and all the other
Adherents and Relations of the House of Este, being every day more and more
possessed of the Honor and Interest they were like to find in this Alliance,
were scandalized at the unreasonable obstinacy of the Pope and his Nephew, and
did franckly advise the Duchess of Modena suddenly to make up and perfect the
Marriage; the peace, and excuse of the thing being eafier to be had after it
was done, than any present License to be obtained for doing it.

The Bishop of Modena was then applied to for the performance, but he refusing,
a poor English Jacobine was found, Brother to Jerome White, that after served
the Duchess, who having nothing to lose, and on whom the terror of
Excommunication did not so much prevail, did undertake it.

The Princess then at last gave her self up to the will of her Friends; a day
was set for the Solemnity, and his Excellency had liberty to visit her Highness
in he own appartment.

The Earl of Peterborow, instead of making a public Entry, which the little
preparation he had made, by reason of his being incognito, would not well
admit, was notwithstanding in the noblest manner that place was capable of,
brought to his audience of the Duchess Regent, and the Duke her Son, who was
but Twelve years old, by the Prince Renaldo of Este, the young Duke's Uncle,
and all that were great or considerable in that Court; and indeed the Ceremony,
Attendance, State, Guards and other Appurtenances, were in that Order and
Magnificence, as might have become a Prince of far greater Revenue and
Territories; and herein all the marks of Sovereignty did appear, which are
usual with Princes who are independent but of God. He delivered the King his
Master's Letter to their Highnesses in the usual form; and after having made a
Speech suitable to the occasion, retired as he came, only instead of being
conducted to his Coach, he was led into a very noble apartment, which was
designed now to entertain his Excellency, in quality of Extraordinary
Ambassador, all the time he would have occasion to stay in Modena; and therein,
indeed, with great Plenty and Magnificence he was served in all necessary
kinds, at the Expense of that Generous Princess.

But now other things being concluded, and the Earl pressing his departure, the
Day for the Marriage was assigned, being the (...) of September. Against which
the Earl had betimes prepared himself in habit and Equipage suitable to the
occasion; and about Eleven of the Clock he was fetched at his Lodging by the
Duke, accompanied by his Uncle the Prince Renaldo, and all the considerable
Cavaliers of the Court, and conducted to a Chamber near the Chapel, where he
reposed himself till so much of the Service was done as seemed obnoxious to the
Religion he did profess; after which he was led to the Chapel, where the
Princes expected him, and there between them was performed the Ceremony
designed for a perpetual Marriage between this admirable Princess and the Duke
of York his Master.

After which he led her by the Hand to her Apartment, and there taking his
leave he went to repose himself, till he was fetched to accompany these Princes
at the Dinner.

That did succeed about One of the Clock: and as to the Ceremony of it, it was
performed at a long Table, over the upper end whereof, was a rich Cloth of
State, under which (in representation of a Bridegroom) the Earl of Peterborow
sat with the Princess, the Duke, Duchess, and other Princes of that House
sitting on either side according to their degrees.

This Dinner was served with all the care and curiosity that was possible for
any thing of that nature to be contrived: What the Sea could afford (though it
was not near) and what the Rivers, and the Lakes, was there; what the Land
could produce, or the Air of Italy, was not wanting; and all this was made more
excellent by the Courtesy and good Humor of the Princes. But it ended at last,
and all arose in order to a greater liberty for Conversation. That had also a
conclusion for that time too, and the company (for their repose) retired every
one to their Apartment, and to his Excellency's he was conducted after the same
ceremony as he was brought to Dinner.

To the honor of the Night, was dedicated Dancing, and a Ball, whereunto all
the Beauties of that Court did resort. It was performed with the Order and
Ornaments suitable to the other parts of the Entertainment; being much to the
satisfaction and esteem of all the Strangers that did see it.

The next Day, in a very formal Cavelcade, the Duke and his Excellency rode to
the Cathedral, where a solemn Service and Te Deum was sung, in honor of the
accomplishing of this Marriage. And two or three other days more were spent in
triumphal Shows, and other testimonies of Public Rejoicing.

After all which, the time of undertaking the departure being come, the
Duchess Mother would by all means accompany her Daughter into England, and it
could not be diverted by any means, although it proved chargeable to her, and
of ill Consequence to her concerns in that Government. Passes were obtained
from the Kings of France and Spain, and the Italian Princes, through whose
Territories her Royal Highness was to pass, to travel incognito; but with
orders to provide any accomodations should be necessary for her service.

She began then this happy voyage the (...) of September, in the Year 1673.
accompanied by the Duchess Regent, the Duke her Brother, his Excellency, and
the Prince Renaldo of Este, with whatever was Noble and considerable among
their own Subjects, as many other Men of Quality who made their Court to those
Princes upon different obligations; and a very Princely Corteggio it was that
went with them out of Modena. Monsieur d' Angeao and his Brother had gone some
days before to Milan, and did not rejoyn the Princess till they came into
Piedmont.

After two days the young Duke was persuaded to take his leave of his Sister,
and return; but he did it with all that repugnancy of which an excellent nature
could be capable, having been ever bred together with that reciprocal kindness
which nearness and merit could beget. But the Princess was near being dissolved
in tears; she left her loving and hopeful Brother, her happy and delicious
Country, with the kind companions of her youth, among whom she had been bred,
and all these perhaps for ever: her Youth and Innocence permitted her not to
know whither it was she was to go, to what kind of part, nor among whom. So
compassion was to be allowed to her Fears, as well as her Enclinations, and it
was enough we could procure her to proceed and to be comforted.

Having passed then through her own Country, through the Parmesan, and part of
the Milanese, she came at last into Piedmont, where the Princes were almost, as
it had been by Spirits, for several days invisibly lodged and provided for,
after a most magnificent manner, but ever at the expense of that Generous Duke,
till they came out of his Territories, where they were met by Officers of the
King of France, who did accompany, and defray them unto the City of Paris,
bringing them to lodge at the Arsenall; where his Excellency was likewise
provided for, and had a noble Table kept for his own particular, at the same
Kings expense all the time of his residence there.

The necessity of our repair into England now drew near; but her Royal Highness
here fell sick, and her Disease, for all the power and diligence of Medicines,
hung so upon her, as for some weeks they were not able to think of their
remove. And when her strength was again returned, the King of France, for all
her desire of being incognito, would not be persuaded from personally paying
her his Complements, and those respects which a General Reputation did declare
were due to her Royal Qualities.

He made her then a visit in the Forms, under all the state to himself, and
with all the consideration to her that could be possible. This drew on a
necessity of a Visit from her Highness to the Queen; and indeed she was
received at Versailles, by their Majesty's, with all imaginable circumstances
of Honor and Consideration; and there entertained, with that Royal profusion
and magnificence, accustomed from that great Monarch, toward such Guests, and
on such occasions. The Queen of France returned the visit of her Royal
Highness: And this afterward drew on the consideration of receiving and giving
visits to the other great Princesses of the Royal. House; wherein was much
circumspection to be had, about Punctilio's, and Formalities. But being in the
King of France's House, the Marriage made upon his account, and his Favors
continually employed upon all concerned in this Affair, it was thought but a
just and necessary return, to give unto those of his Royal Blood, what respects
could be paid without lessening the Duchess of York, or practicing any undue
condescentions: Mediums were then found, and expedients for all pretenses;
visits were made by Madmoiselle, Madmoiselle de Montpensier and Madame de
Guise, and repaid to them again; after which, and the receipt of very Royal
Presents from the King, her Royal Highness began her Journey from Paris, on the
(...) of October; was defrayed by the King's Officers, till she came on board
the King of England's Yachts, which attended her at Calice; and in all the
Provinces and Towns she passed, she was met and received by the Governors and
Magistrates, as if she had been the Queen of France.

To Calice she came at last, and there in company of her Mother, her Uncle, and
all that came with her out of Italy, Embarked in the Katherine Yacht, whence in
few hours they arrived at Dover; upon the Sands whereof the Duke her Husband
did attend her; and upon her landing she took possession of his Heart as well
as of his Arms; and was thence conducted by him to her lodging. After she had
reposed her self, his Royal Highness, (that had provided so to confirm this
matter, as the malice of any Age to come should have no pretense to call it
into Question) led out his Duchess into the great Room before his Bedchamber,
and there in presence of all the Lords, who had attended him from London, of
all the Country Gentlemen, who were come to see him, and what it could contain
of the Citizens of Dover, he Married again his Wife, after the forms of the
Church of England, by the hands of Dr. Nathanael Crew, at this time Bishop of
Durham. After which, and that they had Supped together, they were lawfully put
to Bed, for the final consummation of this undertaking. And here the Earl of
Peterborow ended this great service, which through so many difficulties,
brought to the Duke the fairest Lady in the World, and to England a Princess of
the greatest Example and Virtue.

This little Court, the second day after the Marriage, began their journey to
London, where by the King, the Queen, and the Loyal party of the Court, they
were received, with the countenance and satisfaction honest Men could expect.
But clouds hung upon the brows of many others, who had a mind to punish what
they could not hinder; and great device there was, how to mortify the Earl of
Peterborow, that had proved the instrument of bringing a Popish Princess into
England. Great wait was set upon it by some Eminent persons: But his Lordship
having had the King's Commission for all he did, they found there was nothing
to be wrought upon it without attacking the King's Prerogative in that part;
and so, though the Parliament began to sit within two days, the greatest effect
of all the noise came to end but in a Libel.

What passed in this Parliament is the business of another story, and how it
came to be dissolved; but when it was so, here did soon appear that great
conjuncture, where, on a sudden, his Royal Highness took a resolution to leave
the practice and profession of the Church of England. Upon what grounds this
was resolved, and with whose concurrence is yet a secret and a mystery. But
from hence his open enemies took occasion to act against him with greater
assurance, and his private ones, to declare themselves more freely than they
had done before. He did not at first proclaim he was a Roman Catholic, but by
little and little, not denying he was such, and having left the exercise of all
his charges to avoid the Oaths, it became an uncontested conclusion, he was of
that persuasion.

The succeeding Spring and Summer proved full of domestic contrivances, great
effects of Faction did appear. The Envy of the Duke of Monmouth played, by many
little resorts of clandestine Creatures, to all the secret prejudice it could
against the Duke, who on the contrary, misled by his desire to please the King,
or insinuation of ambodexters about himself, gave all the testimonies of love
and value for that young Viper, and besides the public countenance he gave to
him, contributed in all he could to his greatness and advantage.

The Earl of Peterborow constantly declared his Opinion of this proceeding, how
prejudicial any increase of Power or Reputation in this young Man would in time
prove to his Royal Highness, and always foretold, he would some time or other
become his rival, even to the Crown it self. From hence, and his faithful
adherence to his Master's interests, he became the most particular object of
that Duke's hatred, which upon all occasions he showed to him and his near
Relations; and indeed he so managed his advantages in this dislike, as during
the last Reign kept his Lordship from all the rewards and acknowledgments, his
long and faithful services to the King and the Crown might justly have
pretended to.

Several Parliaments were assembled after this, in each of which the Faction
improved, that especially which designed the ruin of the Crown, and
establishment of a Commonwealth; against the prevalency whereof there was but
the Duke's fidelity to the King his Brother, his valor and vigilance that did
oppose. It was he that stood up in every Parliament for the King's just Power
and Prerogative, against popular invasion; it was he encouraged the King's
faithful Friends and his fainting Ministers; and it was in him alone the
Enemies of the Crown found resistance. He made them desperate at last, and to
accomplish their designs they saw it was impossible without his ruin. This did
seem a great undertaking, to destroy a Prince such as he, such in his Birth,
such in his Merit and Virtues, and such in the esteem of all just and
reasonable Men. But the zeal of these Common-wealth-Men made them find nothing
impossible, their resolution was great in this particular, their malice greater
than that, and their cunning greater than either.

They knew the admirable Qualities of this Prince; they knew his Valor, his
Justice, his Temperance, his love of business, his indefatigableness in all
honorable undertakings; they knew also, that against a Man so qualified, no
Truth could prevail; they were then resolved to have recourse to falsehood, and
to the Devil the Father of Liars, one of whose chief Favorites was become, Sir
Anthony Ashley Cooper, the late Earl of Shaftsbury.

This person was a Man of little stature, in his youth well enough shaped, of
countenance agreeable; grace he had in all his manners of application, which
were to every body soft and plausible. He was very well Learned, and
particularly understood the Laws; he was exceeding Eloquent, a great Master he
was of words, and the Language, and knew powerfully to apply them to every
purpose. His voice was harmonious, and of the sweetness thereof he did likewise
make use, in his intent to charm the Auditors, when he intended to cast false
colors upon any thing. But with this he was Proud as Lucifer, and Ambitious
beyond what ever entered into the designs of any Man; impatient of every Power
but his own, of any Man's reputation; false to that degree, as he did not
esteem any Promise, any Engagement, any Oath, of other use than to serve a
purpose, and none of these of consequence to bind a Man farther than it was his
interest: and for Religion, of which, for a tool, he made most use, he had
never any, as appeared by the private practices of his whole life. For he was
ever vicious to his power. And for his Cruelty, it was never less to those he
hated, than intentions of total ruin, and extirpation, in which he was
inexorable; and it was never known he forgave, or was reconciled to any Man.

This Man from a condition obnoxious enough to the King, and his party, had
prepared the way of his Peace, before the Restoration of King Charles the
Second, by an Alliance with a great Man, esteemed of much merit in the Royal
Interest, the Earl of Southampton, by whose influence it was not only made, but
his Uncle, which that Lord was, becoming Treasurer, he procured for him the
next considerable place in that omnipotent post, which was to be Chancellor of
the Exchequer, and it was so much the more considerable, as the Earl being very
infirm, in effect he did exercise both places.

His Parts and his Activity, which, to give him his due, were both very
extraordinary, appeared in all occasions of Council and Parliament, so as the
King took opinion of his great Abilities, which as soon as he did perceive, his
first design became to undermine the Chancellor, whose compliance and
friendship to the Earl of Southampton had occasioned his being let into
Business, and the Government, and his first malice to his Royal Highness,
excepting that, which those that knew him did believe he always bore to the
whole Royal House, was grounded upon the obstruction his interest gave to such
clandestine prejudices as might have been wrought against his Father-in-law,
which then the Chancellor was. But after this he became, as far as he durst,
opposed to the Duke; on every occasion joined himself to and party that seemed
contrary, and took all Men by the Hands that he thought bore him secret
unkindness; and if there were prejudicial whispers, and insinuations, to be
applied unto the King, no Man knew to do it with more dexterity than this Lord,
for he could kill with courtesy, and so ruin a Man's Reputation with Praises.

The Earl of Shaftsbury, under these capacities, having tried various successes
in his Fortune, and finding the Duke's Genious in opposition to his
Establishment, began to enter upon the undertaking of that famous contrivance
of the pretended Popish Plot; wherein he had for assistant another Great Earl,
whose Name I shall omit for the sake of some that went before him, and of
others that may come after: His chief Instruments were Doctor Tongue, and the
memorable Titus Oats.

It was about the end of Summer, in the Year (...) when the late King Charles
the Second was at his Castle of Windsor, in possession of that peace and
quietness he did so much affect; where there was conveyed to him, by the
officiousness of his then Chief Minister, the Earl of Danby, notice of certain
Papers and other Instruments, containing the substance of a Conspiracy, wherein
his Life and Government were said to be concerned: Herein many of the Duke's
Creatures and Servants did undergo Reflection and the Aspertion, the Calumny,
and the Slander reached even unto all the Catholics of England; there are
Reasons pro and con, to make Men think the King sometimes did, and other times
did not give credit to any thing of this nature. But soon hereupon he removed
to London, it being near the time he usually went to divert himself with the
Races at New Market; and stayed longer than he did intend, upon pretense of
searching into this matter to satisfy the World, what there was of Reality or
Fiction in it. But that which did appear to make Men doubt of his Opinion of
the thing, was, the treating the Examinations with two much seriousness and
application, and his not stifling and putting an end to it before his going to
New Market: This made many doubt of his intentions toward the Duke; and of his
resolution to suffer his Ministers and his Brother's Enemies to make advantage
of it to his prejudice: For all the endeavors could be used, would not prevail
toward stopping a Journey of Recreation, for a matter so important, as the
discovery of this imposture would have proved, when otherwise, there had been
time enough to have performed it, between that and the sitting of the
Parliament, if to that purpose it had been well employed. But the King would
go, and in the Interim Godfrey was killed, by himself or by some other, which
made a noise so great, as at his Majesty's return, there was no way to hinder
the acceptance of this Ball, which was played into the hands of the Parliament
and the Duke's Enemies, to the end they might maintain a Game, intended, and
undertaken, for the ruin of the Government, the person of the Duke, and indeed
of the King himself, and all the Royal House.

But now the cry began to rise, Oats put in his Accusations and his Narrative,
and notwithstanding all the Contradictions, and even Impossibilities they did
contain, they had countenance and encouragement. Coleman was seized, his
Letters and his Papers, they were exposed, the Duke's Enemies would have them
Read, and Printed, that they might reflect upon his Designs, and the Influence
he had upon the King. The Queen was accused, and all the Catholics. Bedloe
came in upon the false inventions of the death of Godfrey; many other became
Evidences, suborned and maintained by the Costs and Arts of Shaftsbury,
Monmouth and their Party. The Test was framed to exclude the Duke and the
Catholic Lords out of Parliament. The Duke had much to do to get an exemption
for himself, as a respect to the advantage of his High Birth. The Lords, Powis,
Stafford, Arundell, and Petres were after accused of High Treason, and many
others. In fine, Hell was broke loose; Malice, Revenge, and Ambition were
supported by all that Falsehood and Perjury could contrive: And, lastly, it was
the most deplorable time that ever was seen in England.

But during all these Troubles, the Earl of Peterborow continued firm,
industrious and diligent to all that could be of use, and service to the Duke
his Master; he exposed himself in Parliament, by perpetual opposition of that
party; he got the ill will of the City, and he made himself obnoxious to the
Enemies of the Duke and his Religion in all the Provinces of England; he stood
up for the Innocent, he to his power supported the oppressed, and he declared
for public justice against public malice and public partiality.

After this, things came to that height, as the King was induced to send his
Brother out of England; whether it were he thought he was not able to protect
him against the aversion of the People and Parliament, or that he was weary of
being urged to those generous ways of defending his Interest and Prerogative,
which the Duke was always ready to suggest unto him: And to this he was urged
by his Ministers, his Minions, and his Mistress.

The Duke then was forced to retire into Holland, and after into Flanders, the
Earl of Peterborow remaining behind to serve his Master in what might occur in
Parliament; but at the instance of the prevailing party, he was immediately,
with the rest of his Royal Highness's Friends, excluded out of the Privy
Council, whereof before he had of some years been a Member; he fell then to
working by himself and all his Friends, to strengthen the interest his Master
had left behind; he endeavored to make him Creatures, he disabused several
that had taken prejudices upon false suggestions: And in fine, braved his
Enemies by all the important oppositions he could make against them; and when
the Parliament was up, and that there was no more opportunity to serve him
here, his Lordship followed him into his Exile, with his Wife and Family,
resolved to run his Fortune and support as well, as he could, the consequences
of their displeasure who were like to be offended at such an adherence.

And indeed, he was no sooner gone, than he began to feel the weight of their
resentment; for there was a Pension he had given him from the King, under the
Great Seal of England, of a Thousand pound by the Year, for valuable
consideration, and which he had constantly received for diverse Years from the
date thereof, that was immediately stopped, and forbid farther to be paid, by
the influencing malice of the Earls of Essex and Shaftsbury.

He constantly then attended his Royal Highness during his stay in those
Countries, and at an expense, as did no dishonor to his Master, his Country,
nor the Quality of which he was; and upon his Highness's notice of the King his
Brother's being sick, and the resolution he took thereupon to repair into
England, he, with the Lord Churchil alone, came over with him unto Windsor,
leaving the Duchess and the Court at that time behind them.

I mention this as an introduction to an accident, which after happened,
wherein his Lordship and his Royal Master had like to have been much concerned;
which was effectually, as shall be here set down.

Upon the Earl of Peterborow's arrival at London, after a day or two he went to
visit a noble Lady of his acquaintace, the Countess of Powis, who with her
Family were in affliction, by reason of the unjust Imprisonment and Oppression
of the Earl, her Husband, at that time in the Tower. After some discourses of
the times, and of the straits wherein it was believed the King, the Duke, and
the Royal Family were all, by reason of the seditious proceedings in
Parliament, and the disaffection had been raised toward them, by the wicked
Arts of their Enemies, her Ladyship asked, Whether his Lordship did not believe
it might be a service to His Majesty and his Highness, if some of the
considerable leaders in those proceedings and designs could be taken off from
their Malice, and introduced into the King's Service, and the endeavors of
honestly astssiing the Crown. The Earl gave his approbation of the proposition,
and said, He did believe it would be so, and that encouragement ought to be
given to those that were capable to effect any such matter. Her Ladyship told
him then she knew an ingenious Woman, who from the Calling of a Midwife had
opportunity of frequenting domestically many considerable Families, and that
was intimately acquainted, even with the Earl of Shaftsbury, from whom she had
been sometimes trusted with messages, if not propositions, to his Royal
Highness himself, although nothing had succeeded thereupon. This Woman, she
said, was passionately concerned for the King and the Duke, and had every where
made it her business to soften their Enemies and make them Creatures. She
acquainted her Ladyship, That she found diverse of them susceptible of reason,
and to be taken off, but they all feared an imaginary implacability in the
Duke's Nature, and that advancing his power they should but promote their own
prejudices, by giving him thereby opportunities of revenging the injuries they
might formerly have done him. So as if by receiving one or two of them into
grace, from the submissions they should make, the rest might be disabused of
the error they were in, from the conceit of his revengeful Nature, she did much
believe it would prove of very good effect.

The Earl of Peterborow told the Countess of Powis, he would willingly see this
Woman, and if the Men she named were considerable enough, he would undertake,
upon due submissions, beginning with one, to make the rest see the Duke was the
most gracious Prince in the World, the most ready to forgive, and the gladest
to reclaim any Gentleman out of an ill proceeding, wherein he might have been
engaged through mistakes, evil Counsel, or Company, or other Accidents, that
sometimes have influence over humane nature. This Woman, whose name was
Cellier, met the Earl at the same place the next day, and affirming all the
Countess had said, told his Lordship, That the fittest Man to begin withal was
one Sir Robert Payton. The Earl knew this Gentleman had been a Factious, a
Turbulent, and a Discontented Man; he had been turned out of some Employments
by the endeavors and power of certain Ministers, which he did after resent and
endeavor to revenge upon the Government. He had grown very popular, presided
at dangerous Clubs, and carried the being Knight of the Shire for Middlesex,
against all the endeavors of the Court, and the Loyal Party. He was
dangerously bold, and industrious in the Parliament, and his Lordship thought
it not an ill service to take him off.

A time was appointed for their meeting; the Earl complied: It was desired by
Sir Robert that he might see the Duke, make his submission and be forgiven by
him, and through his means by the King. His Lordship brought him to an
audience; his Highness assured him he was above private injuries; That he was a
Friend or an Enemy to none but as they were so to the King, and the Government;
That he could forgive any body that would be dutiful to his Brother and love
Him and His service. If he would return to do so, he would never think of what
was past, and he would undertake to make his peace with the King, if he
intended to deserve it by his future actions. Upon which assurance Sir Robert
took his leave, in all appearance, a good Subject.

After this, being upon intentions to go to work with more considerable Men, in
the next meeting at the Countesses House, those endeavors were diverted by an
intervening Information. Mrs. Cellier had told her Ladyship how she was come
acquainted with an ingenuous young Man, who by several accidents had attained
the knowledge of such important things, as if he could be brought to the King
or Duke, might become occasions of discovering one of the most dangerous
Conspiracies against them both, and the Government of England, that had been at
any time undertaken; and she desired to know, if his Lordship would be a means
to introduce him. The Earl said he would not engage to bring in any Man upon
such an account, unless he saw the person, and heard some probable reasons to
incline him to believe what he said, but appointed an hour for her to bring him
to his Chamber in the Court: they did not fail, and at the time, a young Man
appeared under a decent figure, a serious behavior, and with words that did not
seem to proceed from a common understanding. He owned his Name to be Thomas
Willoughby, and he introduced his business with a probable discourse of his
Life. He told, That the Wars being ended in Flanders, where in several
capacities he got his living, he returned to England, and being here idle, to
pass his time and look out for opportunities, he frequented the Coffee-Houses:
There, by the general discourses, wherein at that time most were very free, he
discovered the temper of Men to be infinitely inclined to Sedition, to a
dissatisfaction of the Government, and a great desire of change. Malice
appeared in most of what was spoken or proposed in those places, against the
Ministers, the Princes themselves, and all their Friends; and the compliance
and sufferance of the good King had brought the esteem of his Power and
Authority to so low a rate, as Treason was spoke with that liberty, as if their
had been no Laws made against it.

In these places, he said, appeared to be most busy a certain Man, who was
called a Major, and reported to have been an Officer of the old Rebellion. He
spoke well, with Art, and Authority; knew the Arguments that touched Men's
Opinions, and was not unprovided with those that concerned their interests; and
this Man was not only willingly heard but always much applauded.

Coming thus to a knowledge of what was the humor of the times, and the
intentions of the principal persons he saw there, he said, he thought, he could
no way serve the King better, nor the Government, than by seeming to give into
the Opinions and Inclinations of those Men, that thereby he might become
knowing of their intentions, and Master of some secrets, the discovery whereof
might after, perhaps, be of more service than he could foresee.

He applied himself then to consider their Arguments, and make himself able to
improve them to their advantage, he affected to show a zeal for Liberty, and a
cunning aversion to the constraint of a single Government. He learned to make
use of the word Popery when there was occasion, and to talk high of Slavery and
Power Arbitrary.

This proceeding, he said, won the heart of the Major, and induced him to
believe he had found an Instrument fit for the Cause, and all the Party. He
could no more live without him; he gave him a domestic freedom in his House
and Family; and at last opened his heart to him, and left him no longer a
stranger to any of his secrets.

He told him then that the time now approached wherein was designed the
overthrow of the present Government, against which had conspired the greatest
Men in the Court, in the Parliament, and in the Conutries. It was, he said,
made easy by the weakness of the present King, by his remissness, and want of
vigor to assert his own right, and by the ill posture whereunto he had suffered
his Brother to be brought, that was the only hopes of sustaining the declining
interest. All Irons, he said, were now in the fire to this effect, Assosiations
were framing in every Country, Contributions were making, and Money raising
from all the Party, Men were Listing and Officers named to assert and carry on
the Rebellion; and he did assure him for his own part, he should soon have
himself, a Commission to be Captain of a Foot Company. He told him there was
once a Week a Committee of the chief managers did meet, to receive accounts
from their Friends proceedings in the Countries, and to disperse (by Expresses
they did send) their Orders upon any emergencies that did arise. He named most
of the great ones that favored the Party, and said, the Duke of Monmouth was
maintained by the Contribution of their Churches. And Mr. Willoughby concluded
this Information with saying, he no way questioned, That being privy, by this
Man's means, to the times when their Expresses were sent away, that if he could
be furnished with a good Horse and Arms, he should be easily able to intercept
such a one of them as would well discover the dangerous practices upon which
they were engaged.

After having heard all this, his Lordship thought it not safe, even for
himself, to conceal or stifle what had been said, if it were not of use to the
Princes, it might be (perhaps) a Trap for him, to see how he would be concerned
for them, in things of that nature and consequence. He acquainted then the Duke
upon the first occasion with what had passed, with intent he should make it
known to the King; but he told the Earl he would first see the Man himself, and
hear if what he said was of importance enough to trouble the King with it, but
ordered, That what he had to say should be put in writing for the King to see.
His Lordship had direction then, to bring him in the Evening into his
Highness's Closet, but to be by, and so close, as he might be a witness to
every thing he said. Willoughby, afterward called Dangerfield, came
accordingly, and to his Highness justified all he had said to the Earl, with
more besides, and left it written in a Paper under his own hand: He after
complained of want of Money, and the Duke, for his Relief, gave him out of his
Pocket Ten Guinneys, and so he was for that time dismissed.

Immediately his Highness acquainted the King with the whole particulars and
circumstances, and delivered the Paper into his Majesty's Hands, but desired he
would not admit a Man of that Character, for whom no body could answer, into
his presence, but rather send him to be examined by his Secretary, and farther
directed as he should see occasion.

But the King found something extraordinary enough in this adventure, to give
him a curiosity to see and speak with Willoughby himself, and after, unknown to
the Duke, commanded Mr. Halsey to bring him to him. How he behaved himself to
the King, or what he said is not well known, but his Majesty was then so
satisfied, as he ordered him to the care of the Secretary of State, from whom
he had several Sums of Money for his encouragement, and had him after, by the
admission of Mr. Cheffin, into more private and secret discourses with him.

The Earl of Peterborow thought now, having performed what was incumbent upon
him in this occasion, that he was wholly out of the affair, having left it in
the natural channel of such matters, the Secretary's Office, and expected no
more trouble upon that account, when one Morning Dangerfield came to his
Lodging, and under pretense of a great dissatisfaction, complained, That there
was no care taken at the Secretary's for enabling him to perform the great
service of discovery he had undertaken, since he was denied a General Warrant
to search where he should think fit, or indeed, any House or Lodging, unless he
would positively swear, he knew to be therein such Papers or Instruments as
would import to the purpose he did allege: His Lordship told him then, that he
had done what appertained to him, he had brought him into the hands of the
Ministers, who had their own methods, and whom he could not direct, so as now
he could interpose no more in that affair, but left him to his Applications and
Good Fortune.

He seemed unsatisfied, and went muttering away, and after this his Lordship
heard no more of him till one Evening the poor Cellier, whose meaning and
intentions were certainly very good, came to the Earl's Lodging, in great
disorder, to acquaint him, that this Willoughby, or Dangerfield was come in the
Messenger's hands before the Council, accused for having conveyed Papers into
the Lodging of one Mansell, and pretended to have found them there; and indeed
not having been able to procure the Warrant he would have had, he made a
pretense of coming to search for forbidden Goods; and it is to be doubted,
would have played some such trick for his justification, if the whole was not
rather a design of the Earl of Shaftsbury, to give him means by the access he
had to the Duke and the Earl, of applying the Scandalous Accusation he did
afterward contrive. The Earl told Mrs. Cellier, That if he had done any
indirect thing, or used any means he could not justify, he would not endeavor
to support him, nor countenance any proceeding that was not according to
Justice and to Truth, and he must expect to stand or fall by his own merits.
The poor Woman that was still in hopes he was honest, and zealous in what he
did pretend, caused her Husband and her Son, to give Bail for his appearance
the next Council. In the mean time he came again that Night, after the Earl was
in bed, asserted his intentions for the King's Service, and desired care might
be taken to prevent his suffering for a desire to serve his Majesty. The Earl
told him, He had taken unjustifiable ways, that gave Men occasion to suspect
the Truth of his Information, and had waved all the methods whereby he had at
first undertaken to proceed, so as he was obliged to desert him, and he had now
only to provide for his safety as he should think fit. He retired with
utterance of some passionate words, and if he did not understand with them
before, without doubt went then immediately into the interests and directions
of Shaftsbury, Oats, Waller, Mansell, and the rest of the Authors of that
pretended Popish Plot, upon whose instigation he undertook the placing that
sham contrivance in the Meal-Tubb of Mrs. Cellier, that it might be found by
them, where the Earl was accused of intending the Assassination of the Earl of
Shaftsbury, and the Scandals and Accusations were to be cast upon diverse other
persons of Quality. This he undertook at the next meeting of Council, and with
great pretensions of Repentance owned himself, for the obtaining of more
credit, to have been a Popish Instrument.

His Royal Highness, unto whom it was a mortification to have been induced to
speak, or give any appearance of belief to such a wretch, was by this time upon
his first Journey into Scotland, but the Earl remained behind, that he might
not seem to fly from any of their Aspersions, and to be ready to serve the Duke
in the approaching Parliament, in every of those occasions wherein his interest
might be concerned.

But as soon as he was gone, the Earl of Shaftsbury complained of the Earl of
Peterborow to the King in Council, for having been Abettor, if not Author of a
Contrivance, wherein several great Men were intended to have been involved, and
a Murder that was particularly designed for himself. His Lordship was summoned
to come and answer the Accusation, which he did at the day appointed, in the
Council Chamger, and had the fortune so to overthrow the Impudence of his
accuser by his ingenuous and candid Narration, as he was dismissed by his
Majesty and the major part of the Council, to the shame of those would have had
him sent to the Tower, and the particular honor of his Lordship.

After this, came on the Parliament, the hardships against the Lords in the
Tower did increase, Dangerfield exhibited a new Accusation and a Narrative, the
first to the Parliament, the other to the People. The Earl of Peterborow
contested for the protection of Innocence, and after defended himself and his
Master. Among other things, the Villain accused the Duke to have given him
Twenty pounds to kill the King, and the Earl to have been privy and conscious
of the offer. The knowledge the World had of the Duke's Virtue and Loyalty,
made the credit of it to be detested by most of his very Enemies: And the Earl
so satisfied the House of Lords, and the King, by his plain and generous
Defense, as it obliged them to dismiss the Accusation to the shame and
confusion of Dangerfield, and all those that did abet and set him on. And his
Majesty standing by him, at the time of this Contest, told his Lordship openly,
That for all that had been said, he would always trust his life sooner in his
hands than in any of theirs, who had been so ready to abet and countenance his
Enemies.

In the same day was brought in afterward by the Lord Russel, that impudent
Bill of Exclusion from the Succession to the Crown, against his Royal Highness:
It endured a strong and long debate: Of powerful Eloquence and great parts were
the Duke's Enemies, who did assert the Bill; but a Noble Lord appeared against
it, who, that day, in all the force of Speech, in Reason, in Arguments, of what
could concern the public, or the private interests of Men, in Honor, in
Conscience, in Estate, did outdo himself, and every other Man; and in fine,
his conduct and his parts were both victorious, and by him all the wit and
malice of that party was overthrown.

After this, Henry Lord Viscount Stafford, was brought to his Trial, as the
chief of those Lords, that had been accused of so many Treasons; in the
particulars of whose Impeachment, there appeared so many improbabilities, in
the Witnesses such reasons to render them of no belief, and in the Prosecutors
so much Malice, Interest, and Partiality, as it was impossible to the Earl of
Peterborow, for Conscience sake, not to endeavor his justification, though to
the uttermost offense of so powerful and prevailing a party.

He came to the House the last day of his Trial, and would go down into the
Hall to exercise his right of Judicature, though he were sick of a Fever, from
the pain of his Arm, that was out of joint, though he was persuaded and
threatened from it, and in scorn of that iniquity did not remove, till he had
voted for public Justice, against popular Tyranny and Oppression.

This Parliament, after this Lords Condemnation, came to be Dissolved; and the
Earl being then no more either of Council or Court, retired to Drayton in
Northamptonshire, where his Master had commanded him to stay, till the
approaching Parliament was to meet, that had been appointed for to sit at
Oxford. It was about this time the Faction began to prepare for Action: They
began to find the King more sensible of his danger, and their intentions, than
ever he had been: They began to lose the hold they had upon his Mistresses and
his Ministers, and that the false Minions of his Court, began many of them to
lose their esteem, and be suspected by him, whilst he began to harken to
honester Men, and that were better instructed in the True principles of his
Interest and Government. They believed the Assembling of the Parliament of
Oxford was calculated for to evade their power in London, and that at last they
were like to find the King not so complying to his own Ruin, as they might
desire, and possibly were made to expect some Months before: They thought
themselves then ready, and ripe for violence; they intended to put the end of
their Assosiations into practice, and a Man of their party came not to Oxford
without more Friends and Arms, than had been needful for them at any other
time. Upon noise whereof the Lords and Friends of the Crown did in some measure
do so on the other side, being willing to secure themselves from insults of
their Adversaries, if they should be attempted, and it looked in a degree like
one of those Parliaments called in the Barons days. The Earl of Peterborow came
to this Assembly, from his House, more provided than ordinary, in proportion to
the care and intentions of the other honest Lords: And I have heard him say,
That meeting the King by chance, at his first arrival to the Town, he thought
him better attended, and under an appearance of more Resolution and Majesty,
than ever he had seen in him before. The King entered then upon the Parliament,
and indeed such was his love to quiet, and the public peace, as he was ready
to have granted more than had ever been fit for them to ask: But they were now,
as it pleased God, so exalted in their opinion of their power and interest, as
they would have all, and were resolved to leave him but the empty name of King,
and without power, to maintain that longer than it should seem convenient. He
was forced then and on a sudden to dissolve this Parliament also, and to betake
himself to their Councels, who undertook to make him live without it. And so he
came to spend at London and Windsor the ensuing Summer.

Enraged the Party became at this, and looked upon him to have escaped their
hands by the Art and Contrivance of his new Cabinet, and so as by the methods
they took for his subsistence, he was not like to come suddenly into their
power again.

And now the Faction found, that both the Brothers were to be destroyed, before
they could attain the power was thought necessary for them, so they then fell
to the fatal consultations of plain Rebellion, open Murder, and such other
pious Expedients as did suit with their refined Consciences, which the Year
after broke out by the discovery of the Enterprise of Rye, and public
appearance of the Rebellions of Monmouth and Argile.

But upon the dissolution of this Parliament, the Earl of Peterborow went back
to his House, and employed the rest of that Summer in disabusing many Gentlemen
of the opinion they had received of the candor and innocence of that Parties
intentions, and in procuring Addresses, to encourage the King, and
discountenance the disloyal Faction.

In October his Royal Highness sent for his Lordship to come and attend him in
Scotland, which he did, with all his Family, and with that affection, as made
it doubtful whether his Journey might not have proved a means to have excluded
him from ever returning home again. Indeed, in this fluctuation of affairs,
where not only the Court and Council were divided, but even the King's own
Thoughts, and Inclinations, it was dangerous to be so far distant from the
Court; and many of the Earl's Enemies, whereof he had some were very potent,
did afford him such ill offices to his Majesty, as when his Royal Highness did
write to the King about any of the Earl's interests, he could never procure any
answer during all the time of his absence.

But the Winter wore out at last, and the Duke was invited home. Those that had
least interest in the Council were for his return, those that had most were
against it, under specious pretenses. But the true reason, was, They had a mind
to keep their Power, which they thought his Quality, his Parts, and Inclination
to business, would (if not at first, yet in some time) very much diminish or
eclipse.

He Embarked the (...) of March, at Leith, in his own Yatcht, and attended by
the Earl of Peterborow, and diverse other Noble Lords of both the Kingdoms, and
setting Sail from thence, under the sufferance of very tempestuous weather,
landed at Yarmouth, where with the applause and duties of that Town, and all
the adjacent Countries he was received, and thence passed to New Market,
meeting there the King, and with that joy which was natural to him, because he
truly loved his Brother above all other things. It was from hence he
accompanied his Majesty to London; but having left the Duchess at Edinburgh,
he was forced to depart once more from thence, to conduct her home, according
as he had engaged himself to do.

In order to this he Embarked upon the Friggat, the accomodations as well as
the safety whereof was esteemed more proper for both the Voyage, and the
Company, difficulties having been experienced in the last passage aboard the
Yatchts, which were esteemed would not have been so dangerous in this other
sort of Embarkation. His Highness proceeded then, but Providence showed, that
all pre-cautions are vain, and let the wise take what care they can, the event,
and success of all things, are ever in her power: For the Duke had not sailed
far, being over or near the Coast of Yarmouth, when from many circumstances of
negligence, or ill conduct in those who had the leading of that sailing affair,
the Duke's Ship struck upon a Sand, and in a short time sunk down to rights,
all perishing in this occasion, except such as could swim, or had the
extraordinary fortune to be saved by Boats, which may be thought to have had
enough to do in so distracted and divided a conjuncture: But the Duke himself
was preserved, with a few, in his own Pinnace, by the care and Loyalty of the
Seamen, who would neither intrude themselves, nor suffer others for their
safeties, to expose that of a Prince so considerable.

His Highness came after safely to Land at Leith, and once again into the Arms
of his incomparable Duchess, who was half dead, though she saw him live, at
the fears of that, which though it was now past, she had heard had been once so
near.

After some days stay, they together left Scotland for the last time, and came
together to London, where they were received with all the joy honest Men could
express. The Summer they spent with the King, at which time was discovered the
first part of the desperate Phanatick Plot, diverse Accusations there were, and
the Lord Russel was Tried, Condemned, and Executed. Many were Imprisoned, and a
great consternation appeared upon all that Party. The Earl of Peterborow was in
the mean time restored to his place in Council; and his part in the Summers
actions consisted in causing Presentiments to be made, and Indictments in his
own Country, for examples sake, of such as had been of Shaftsbury's Party, and
appeared disaffected to the Crown; with settling the Magistracy, and Offices of
the Militia in faithful hands, so as by the end of the Year, of one of the most
perverse, and worst inclined Countries of all England, he did, with the pains,
care and diligence that he applied, render it the most exemplary, and readiest
to serve the King of any other. In October ensuing, he attended the Duke his
Master to New Market, and was with his Highness at the time when that fortunate
Fire broke out, which burnt that Town, and preserved the King and his Brother,
by hastening their return to London, sooner than was intended: By which the
assault of Rye was prevented, and those measures disconcerted, which in
consequence were designed to the ruin of the Kingdom, and all those that loved
the Royal House and the Government.

He continued to serve his Master with the same zeal and concern the rest of
the days of King Charles, at whose Sickness and sudden Death he was present,
and a witness of that tenderness wherewith the dying King resigned his
Dominions, and all his Interest, to his loving Brother, as the right of his
inheritance, by all the Laws both of God and Man.

After the King's decease great endeavors were used to prevent the Earl of
Peterborow from succeeding to the place under the new King, wherein he had
served his Majesty while he was Duke, the space of twenty years together; but
his Master was too just and generous not to stick to his old Servant, that had
run so many fortunes and hazards with him: He did then give his Lordship the
Gold Key, and thereby established him Groom of the Stole, and First Gentleman
and Governor of his Bedchamber: The Earl served his Majesty afterward at his
Royal Coronation, in bearing before him St. Edward's Scepter; and after the
ensuing Parliament, and the passing the Bill of Attainder against the Duke of
Monmouth, one Evening, when his Lordship expected nothing less, his Majesty,
with a bounty and graciousness never to be forgotten, took him aside, and
asked, If he did not remember a promise that had once been made him; to which
the Earl replied, He had a memory only for what pleased his Majesty; who
answered, He had not forgotten the Garter he should have had after his
attendance on him at the Sole-Bay Fight, and he should find he was as mindful
of old Promises as ancient Service. Some days being past, the King commanded
the Earl's attendance at a Chapter in Whitehall, and there caused him to be
Invested with the George and Garter; after which his Lordship was sent into the
Country to raise Troops against the Rebellion, wherein he did very exemplary
Service to his Majesty; and upon his return, he, with the Duke of Norfolk, and
the Lord Treasurer, was Installed in the Royal Castle of Windsor, to all the
purposes and privileges which do appertain to the Noble Order of the Garter.

Henry Earl of Peterborow had Issue by his Wife, the Lady Penelope Obrien, two
Daughters; Elizabeth Mordaunt, that dyed in the Twelfth year of her Age. Mary
Mordaunt, Married to Henry Howard, Duke of Norfolk.


knight on horseback bearing the colors of the family, and a family tree
showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors OSBERT le MORDAUNT a
Norman Knight. Osmond le Mordawnt Elena Fortis. Baldwin Mordaunt. Eustace le
Mordaunt Alice of Alne. Robert Mordaunt. William de Mordaunt. Amicia de Olney.
Agnes Mordaunt. William de Merdaunt. Rese de Wake. Richard Merdaunt. William
Merdaunt. Rebert de Mordaunt. Ieane de Bray Nichalas Mordaunt. Richard
Mordaunt. Edmund de Mordaunt. Elena de Broc. Rebert de Mordaunt. Agnes le
Ejlrange (...) Mordaunt (...) Cheney (...) of (...) Boys Edmund Fettyplace.
Margaret Mordaunt. John Denton. John Radney of Radney Stoak. Anne Mordaunt.
John Fisher. Robert de Mordaunt. Elizabeth de Holdenby. Cassandria Mordaunt a
Nun in the Monestery of Elnestow. Elizabeth Mordaunt. William Mordaunt.
Margaret Pec. Maud Mordaunt. Willm. Mordaunt Ld. of Hempsted Anne Huntington
Sr. John Mordaunt. Edith Latimen Eliz: Mordaunt Sr. Willm. Brown Ld. of Abess
Reading in Essex. William Mordaunt. John 1st. Lord Mordaunt. Elizabeth Vere.
Robert Mordaunt. Amye de Vere Johanna Mordaunt Giles Strangway. Ld. of Melborne
in Com: Dorsell. Edith Mordaunt John Elmes Ld. of Lilford. George Mordaunt of
the Hill Cicely Harding. John 2d. Lord Mordaunt. Elly Fitzlewes. Edmund
Mordaunt. Willm. Mordaunt Ld. of Oakley Agness Booth. (...) Mordaunt (...)
Strangway (...) Melborne (...) Dorsell. (...) Mordaunt (...) of Oakley (...)
Booth. Dowthy Mordaunt Thomas Moore. Ld. of Bampton Eliz: Mordaunt. Silvester
Danvers. Anne Mordaunt Clement Tanfield Eliz: Mordaunt George Monox. Jews Lord
Mordaunt. Elizabeth Darcy Margaret Mordaunt. Willm. Acclam Ursula Mordaunt:
Tho: Welbore of Clavering in Essex. Mary Mordaunt Thomas Mancell Lord of Morgan
Henry Lord Mordaunt. Margaret Compton Catherine Mordaunt. John Honingham James
Mordaunt Gostwick John Mordaunt Earl of Peterborow. Eliz: Howard. Lewis
Mordaunt Smith. Frances Mordaunt Sr. Thomas Nevill Eldest Son to Henry Lord
Abergeveny John Lord Viscount Mord: ^aunt Elizabeth Carry Henry Mordaunt Earl
of Peterborow Penclope Obrian Eliz: Mordaunt Tho: Lord Heward of Escrick. Mary
Mordaunt Duchess of Norfolk Henry Howard Duke of Norfolk.




GENEALOGICAL PROOFS OF THE DESCENT and SUCCESSION Of the HOUSE of MORDAUNT:
Drawn out of Extant Charters, Records, Histories, and other Authentic
Testimonies.

GENEALOGICAL PROOFS OF THE DESCENT and SUCCESSION Of the HOUSE of MORDAUNT.
OSBERT le MORDAVNT, First of that Name, Lord of Radwell. CHAPTER I.
Charta Eustachii de Sancto Aegidio.
EUstachius de Sancto Aegidio omnibus hominibus and Amicis suis, tam
Francigenis quam Anglicis, Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and hac praesenti Charta
confirmasse, Osberto dicto le Mordaunt, fratri meo, pro homagio and servitio
suo, terram meam de Radwell, cum omnibus pertinentiis and libertatibus suis,
sibi and Haeredibus ejus, Tenendum de me and Haeredibus meis libere and quiet,
honorifice and haereditarie, sicut illam Ego inter alia recepi ac tenui de
donatione and munificentia Willielmi Illustrissimi Regis Angliae pro servitiis
quae Pater meus in Conquestu and Ego sibi fecimus, per servitium dimidiae
partis feodi unius militis pro omni servitio seculari. Ego vero praedictus
Eustachius de Sancto Aegidio and haeredes mei praedictam terram praedicto
Osberto and Haeredibus ejus contra omnes homines and foeminas warrantizabimus.
His Testibus, Ranulpho filio Thomae, Herveio filio Richardi, Willielmo Breto,
Johanne Calvo, Rogero le Puer, Johanne Pippard, Richardo le Mole, and multis
aliis.

Charta Osberti le Mordaunt.
OSbertus le Mordaunt omnibus ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, tam Francis
quam Anglicis, Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and concessisse, and hac praesenti
Charta confirmasse Baldewino le Mordaunt filio meo juniori, ad terminum vitae
suae, medietatem Terrae meae de Radwell, cum redditibus, servitiis and
libertatibus ad eandem pertinentibus; Ita ut illam occupet, dimittat, obliget
vel aliquo modo proficua extrahat. Quando illi tamen obire contigerit, volo ut
mihi terra illa revertat vel haeredibus meis, libere, quiet and sine
impedimento. In cujus rei Testimonium praesenti Chartae Sigillum meum apposui.
His Testibus, Joscelino Malherbe Thoma Marescallus, Galfrido de Castello,
Roberto Forestarius, Willielmo Piscatore, Nicolao de Sancto Laud, Johanne
Presbiter, Richardo Pincerno, and aliis.

Ex Antiquo MS. e manu propria Johannis Mordaunt Militis, Cancellarii Ducatus
Lancastriae sub titulo, Le Titre de tous le terres and tenements qui fuerent
allienez par mes Ancestres. Charta tamen Extat.
De Terris in Hibernia. Charta Hervei de Montemorenci Marescalli Domini Regis
totius Hiberniae.
HErveius de Montemorenci Marescallus Domini Regis totius Hiberniae omnibus
Amicis atque Hominibus suis tam Francigenis quam Anglicis, tam Wallensibus quam
Hibernensibus, Salutem. Sciatis me dedisse and hac praesenti Charta mea
confirmasse Osberto Roberti filio quandam villam in Hubarchi quae vocatur
Balmacros, atque dimidiam villam quae vocatur Chilmor; and totam aliam terram
quae fuit Radulphi de Tobenere die qua defunctus fuit, cum omnibus pertinentiis
suis sine ulla retentione dedi praedicto Osberto propter homagium suum and
servitium quod mihi fecit, sibi and haeredibus suis, tenendum de me and
Haeredibus meis............... atque de alia terra quae est inter
Insulam....... feudum quindecim Militum, per servitium trium Militum quod mihi
faciet, and quandam domum ei firmabo intra illa ubi melius fuerit Concilio meo
ac aliorum amicorum suorum, and hoc insumonsa: quare volo quod praedictus
Osbertus and post eum Haeredes sui praedictum feudum quindecim Militum per
praedictum servitium trium Militum sine ulla occasion teneat been and
honorifice, libere and in pace, quiet and integre, scilicet in bosco and in
plano, in viis, in semitis, in pratis, in pascuis, in aquis, in molendinis, in
stagnis, in Ripis, in piscariis, in piscinis, and in omnibus libertatibus and
liberis consuetudinibus feudo illo pertinentibus, velut unquam Radulphus
praedictus liberius tenuit, velut ille in Hibernia qui melius and liberius de
feudo Comitis Richardi Nepotis mei in Hibernia tenet. Test Roberto le Puer,
Rogero le Puer, Willielmo le Puer, Roberto de Estova, Henrico Clement, Alario
Mallemains, Hugone Strangio, Alexandro de Berlin, Rogero le Butler, Richardo
Hay, Willielmo le Bruce, Nicolao filio ejus, Hugone de Hargrave, Richardo
Wallense, Rogero....

OSMOND le MORDAVNT, First of that Name, Lord of the Lordship of Radwell.
CHAPTER II.
Charta Osmundi le Mordaunt.
OSmundus le Mordaunt omnibus ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Salutem.
Sciat Universitas vestra me concessisse and confirmasse Baldewino le Mordaunt
fratri meo ad terminum vitae suae medietatem terrae de Radwell quam Osbertus le
Mordaunt pater noster ei concessit cum redditibus, servitiis and libertatibus,
sicut in Charta sua continetur, quae idem Baldewinus tenet de praedicto Osberto
patre nostro. Et ut haec concessio and confirmatio rata and inconcussa
permaneat, eam praesenti Scripto and Sigilli mei appositione roboravi. His
Testibus, Roberto de Camfrey, Thoma de Novo Porto, Adam de Camuille, Elias de
Hacley, Roberto Sertor, Willielmo Mancell, Guido Sertor, Richardo de Wahull,
and multis aliis.

Charta Sampsonis Fortis.
SAmpson Fortis omnibus hominibus and Amicis suis, tam futuris quam
praesentibus, Salutem. Notum fit vobis me dedisse and concessisse Osmundo le
Mordaunt and haeredibus suis, legitime procreatis ex corpore Helenae filiae
meae, totam terram de Chillington, quam Robertus pater meus tenuit die quo
obiit, per servitium dimidii feodi Militis, Tenendum de me and haeredibus meis,
sibi and haeredibus suis libere and honorifice ab omni exactione, salvo
servitio Domini Regis, quantum ad tantam terram pertinet. Hi sunt Testes,
Walterus de Timainill, Huardus de Levendena, Robertus de Blosvilla, Walterus
Dizell, Baldewinus Mordaunt, Robertus filius Stephani, Allanus Bellet, Rogerus
de Longo prato, Almericus de Hallem, Bonifacius Scriptor.

seal of Sampson Fortis SIGILLVM SAMSONIS FORTIS



EVSTACE le MORDAVNT, First of that Name, Lord of Turvey, and other Lands and
Lordships. CHAPTER III.
Charta Willielmi de Alno.
OMnibus hominibus and Amicis suis, praesentibus and futuris, Willielmus de
Alno, Salutem. Notum sit vobis, quod Ego dedi and concessi Eustachio le
Mordaunt, cum Alicia filia mea primogenita, medietatem omnium terrarum mearum
Villae meae de Turveia cum eorum pertinentiis and libertatibus, illi and
haeredibus suis tenendam de me, and haeredibus meis, per servitium feodi
dimidii unius Militis. Isti sunt Testes, Dominus Simon de Borard, Dominus Hugo
de Lega, Petrus Mauncell, Robertus Mordaunt, Nicolas de Biden, Robertus de
Patshull, Gilbertus de Blosvilla, Alexander de Alno, Stephanus Moly, Hugo de
Aviron, Robertus de Pixtull, cum multis aliis.

Charta Eustachii le Mordaunt.
NOtum sit omnibus filiis Matris Ecclesiae, and omnibus hominibus meis and
Amicis, tam praesentibus quam futuris, quod Ego Eustachius le Mordaunt dedi and
concessi, concensu fratris mei Roberti, Aliciae sponsae meae in duarium totam
terram illam quam Osmundus pater meus tenuit in Wahull, and servitia Nicolai
Basset, Rogeri de Croc, Thomae filii Stephani, and Roberti Pecham, and insuper
terram meam de Radwell, and servitia Gerardi Fabri, Johannis Sporke, Richardi
Grisell, and Edmundi Beech, salvo hoc, quod haeredi meo pertinet, and haec sibi
dedi in Creis postquam lectum meum ascendit. Hujus rei sunt Testes, Dominus
Hugo de Alno, Dominus Willielmus de Blosvilla, Dominus Simon de Borheard,
Robertus de Patshull, Gerardus de Coudrey, Hugo de Delton, isti praedicti ad
sponsalia fuerunt: isti sunt testes de Creis, Osmundus filius Philippae
Dominae, Gervasius de Albeni, Gislebertus de Blosvilla, Stephanus Moly,
Galfridus filius Ewani, Robertus de Hacley, Hugo de Philgrave, Willielmus
Venator.

Charta Eustachii le Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri quod Ego Eustachius le Mordaunt de Turveia dedi
and concessi and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Willielmo filio Richardi
Coci del Wike-end, pro homagio and servitio suo, and pro dimidia marca argenti
quam mihi dedit in gersumam, unum messuagium cum suis pertinentiis in Turveia,
videlicet illud messuagium quod Richardus Cocus tenuit, Habendum and Tenendum
de me and haeredibus meis sibi and haeredibus suis vel suis assignatis libere,
quiet, integre, and haereditarie, reddendo inde annuatim mihi and haeredibus
meis duos solidos argenti ad duos anni terminos, scilicet in die beatae Mariae,
in Martio duodecim denarios, and ad Festum Sancti Michaelis duodecim denarios,
pro omnibus servitiis, consuetudinibus and demandis mihi and haeredibus meis
pertinentibus. Et Ego praedictus Eustachius and haeredes mei warrantizabimus
praedictum messuagium cum suis pertinentiis praenominato Willielmo and
haeredibus suis vel suis Assignatis contra omnes homines and foeminas. His
Testibus, Domino Roberto de Ardres, Richardo filio ejus, Roberto de Pixill le
Champian, Roberto le Mordaunt, Galfrido de Bosco, Stephano de Gatesden, Waltero
de Miccleput, and aliis multis.

Charta Eustachii le Mordaunt.
SCient praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Eustachius le Mordaunt, and Alicia Uxor
mea, dedimus, concessimus. and hac praesenti Charta nostra confirmavimus,
Reginaldo, filio Simonis le Brayeur de Turveia, quadraginta acras terrae
nostrae, cum duobus Thoftis and uno messuagio, quae Simon, pater praedicti
Reginaldi, tenuit de Domino Willielmo de Alneto, patre nostro, in Turveia,
habendas and tenendas de nobis and haeredibus nostris, sibi and haeredibus
suis, qui exibunt de Sibilla, Uxore praedicti Reginaldi, reddendo inde annuatim
nobis and haeredibus nostris, ipse and haeredes sui, qui de praedicta Sibilla
exibunt, duodecim solidos, pro omni servitio nobis and haeredibus nostris
pertinente: (scilicet) ad Pascham sex solidos, and ad Festum Sancti Michaelis
sex solidos, salvo forinseco servitio Domini Regis, quantum pertinet ad tantam
terram ejusdem feodi in eadem Villa: Ita tamen quod si praedictus Reginaldus
and Sibilla haeredes a se non habeant, praedictae terrae cum pertinentiis
praedicto Eustachio and Aliciae vel haeredibus eorum, sine molestia vel
contradictione, redeant. Ut autem haec nostra donatio rata and stabilis
permaneat praesenti Scripto Sigilla nostra apposuimus. His Testibus, Roberto de
Ardres, Simone de Blosvilla, Stephano de Lega, Johanne de Lega, Willielmo de
Sancto Georgio, Willielmo Mancell, Galfrido de Bosco, Petro Malherbe, Andreo de
Aversham, Thoma filio Stephani, Petro Camerario, Roberto Harlac.

Charta Philippi filii Nicolai de Turveia.
NOverint universi, praesens Scriptum inspecturi vel audituri, quod Ego
Philippus, filius Nicolai de Turveia, dedi and concessi, and hac praesenti
Charta mea confirmavi, pro salute animae meae and antecessorum meorum, Deo and
Ecclesiae Omnium Sanctorum de Turveia, totum messuagium meum cum aedificiis and
cum Gardinis, and totas terras meas arabiles cum pasturis, pascuis and omnibus
aliis pertinentiis, quae habui de dono Willielmi fratris mei in villa de
Turveia, in liberam, puram and perpetuam eleemosynam, ad sustentationem uni
capellani divinorum officiorum in capella, in honor beatae Mariae, infra
clausuram Rectoris dictae Ecclesiae, constructa, perpetuo celebraturi. Quare
volo quod dicta Ecclesia and Rectores ejusdem, qui pro tempore fuerint, omnia
praedicta habeant and teneant adeo libere, pacifice, plene and integre, sicut
aliquid melius and liberius in eleemosynam conferri potest. Et Ego praedictus
Philippus and haeredes mei praedictae Ecclesiae and Rectoribus ejusdem, omnia
praefata cum pertinentiis suis contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus. Ut autem
ista donatio and concessio, confirmatio and warrantizatio firmitatis perpetuae
robur obtineat, praesens Scriptum Sigilli mei munimine corroborabo. His
Testibus, Roberto de Ardres, Eustachio Mordaunt, Richardo Mauduit, Willielmo
filio Roberti, Galfrido de Bosco, Waltero de Northbroc Magistro, Almaricho
Archidiacono Bedford Magistro, Radulpho de Hogtuch officiali ejusdem, and toto
Capitulo Bedford, and multis aliis.

Charta Eustachii le Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Eustachius Mordaunt de Wahull, dedi and
concessi and hac praesenti Charta mea in liberam and puram and perpetuam
eleemosynam confirmavi Ecclesiae Batonenci Johannis Baptistae, and Johannis
Evangelistae de Caudewell, and Canonicis ibidem deo servientibus and
imperpetuum servituris, pro salute animae meae and Aliciae Uxoris meae, and pro
animabus antecessorum and successorum meorum, in subsidium fabricae Ecclesiae
ejusdem, december acras terrae cum earum pertinentiis, in villa de Turveia: Illas
videlicet quae jacent juxta terram Richardi Mauduit versus West, and abuttant
super viam quae ducit ad Ecclesiam de Turveia uper Manselleshull. Quare volo
and concedo, pro me and haeredibus meis, quod praedicti Canonici habeant and
teneant praedictam terram cum libero introitu and exitu, and cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis plenarie and integre imperpetuum, and ita libere and quiet
sicut aliqua eleemosyna poterit liberius and quietius possideri: Et ego
Eustachius and haeredes mei warrantizabimus praedictam terram cum pertinentiis
suis praedictis Canonicis contra omnes homines and foeminas imperpetuum, and de
omnibus and in omnibus defendemus. His Testibus, Nicolao Vicario de Stuvent,
Johanne Rectore de Chelwent, Waltero Capellano de Harwold, Eudone Capellano,
Roberto Parsona de Wahull, Richardo fratre ejus, Hugone de Aviron, Johanne de
Buel, Simone de Blosvilla, Galfrido Clerico, Rogero Clerico, Radulpho serviente
Prioris, and multis aliis.

Inter Recorda in Curia Receptae Scaccarii, sub Custodia Thesaurarii and
Camerariorum ibidem residentia, sub pede Finium de Communi Banco in Comitatu
Bedford, tempore Regis Richardi Primi, inter alia continetur ut sequitur:
HAEC est finalis concordia facta in Curia Domini Regis apud Westmonasterium,
die Jovis proxima post Conversionem Sancti Pauli, Anno Regni Regis Richardi
nono, coram Domino H. Cantuariensi Episcopo, Magistro Thoma de Husselburne,
Willielmo de Wareno, Richardo de Herierd, Richardo Elienfi Archidiacono, and
Johanne de Gestlings Justiciariis, and aliis fidelibus Domini Regis ibidem tunc
praesentibus, inter Eustachium Mordaunt petentem, and Gilbertum filium
Willielmi tenentem, de una virgata terrae cum pertinentiis in Radwell, scilicet
de illa quam Osmundus, pater ipsius Eustachii, tenuit; unde placitum fuit inter
eos, in praefata Curia scilicet, quod praedictus Gilbertus recognovit
praedictam terram cum pertinentiis esse jus and haereditatem ipsius Eustachii,
and remisit, and quietum clamavit ei and haeredibus suis totum jus and clameum
suum quod habuit in praedicta terra, de se and haeredibus suis imperpetuum: Et
pro hac fine and concordia and quieto clameo and recognitione praedictus
Eustachius dedit praenominato Gilberto, duas marcas argenti and dimidiam.

Examinatur per Scipionem le Squire Procamerarium in Curia Receptae Scaccarii.

Inter Recorda in Curia Receptae Scaccarii, sub Custodia Thesaurarii and
Camerariorum ibidem residentia, videlicet in quadam Baga de finibus, tempore
Regis Henrici Intitulata, Bed. Buck. Northamp. inter alia continetur ut
sequitur:

Indorsat. ss. Bed. Fines de Annis iijo xijo xiijo xvio xixo xxo xxvo Henrici
Tertii.
HAEC est finalis Concordia facta in Curia Domini Regis apud Bedford, die Lunae
proxima post Festum Sancti Michaelis, Anno Regni Regis Henrici, filii Regis
Johannis, sextodecimo, coram Willielmo de Raleigh, Roberto de Lexinton,
Radulpho de Norwico, Adam filio Willielmi, Richardo Dukett and Radulpho filio
Reginaldi, Justiciariis Itenerantibus, and aliis Domini Regis fidelibus tunc
ibidem praesentibus, inter Johannem de Traylly petentem, and Eustachium le
Mordaunt tenentem, de una carucata terrae and dimidia cum pertinentiis in
Turveia, unde Alissa Mortantecessoris summonita fuit inter eos in eadem Curia,
scilicet quod praedictus Eustachius recognovit totam praedictam terram cum
pertinentiis esse jus ipsius Johannis, and pro hac recognitione, fine and
concordia idem Johannes concessit praedicto Eustachio totam praedictam terram
cum pertinentiis, habendum and tenendum ipso Eustachio and haeredibus suis de
praedicto Johanne and haeredibus suis imperpetuum, reddendo inde annuatim
vigenti and tres solidos and quatuor denarios ad duos terminos anni; scilicet
medietatem ad Pascha, and aliam medietatem ad Festum Sancti Michaelis, and
faciendo servitium feodi dimidii Militis pro omni servitio and exactione.

Examinatur per Scipionem le Squire Procamerarium in Curia Receptae Scaccarii.

Bed.

WILLIAM de MORDAVNT, First of that Name, Lord of Turvey, Asthull, and other
Lands. CHAPTER IV.
Charta Galieni Seneschalli Domini Willielmi de la Chuche.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Galienus Seneschallus Domini Willielmi
de la Chuche, and Dominae Matildae de Traylly, Uxoris suae, recepi de Willielmo
le Mordaunt, filio and haerede Eustachii le Mordaunt, post mortem ejusdem
Eustachii, relevium suum, videlicet, quinquaginta solidos, Anno Regni Regis
Henrici, filii Regis Johannis, vicesimo septimo, pro terra quam tenet a
praedicto Willielmo Domino meo and Matilda Uxore sua in Turveia: Ego vero
Galienus and haeredes mei warrantizabimus and acquietabimus praedictum
Willielmum le Mordaunt and haeredes suos contra omnes gentes de praedictis
quinquaginta solidis, quos de eo nomine Relevii accepi. Si quis vero praedictum
Willielmum vel haeredes suos de praedictis quinquaginta solidis vexare
praesumpserit, and praedictus Willielmus and haeredes sui circa defensionem
hujus Negotii expensas exposuerint, ego Galienus and haeredes mei, ipsas ei
simplici assertione declarandas, refundemus, renunciando in hoc omni
Cavillatione, contradictione and utriusque fori privilegio, nec non and regia
prohibitione. In cujus rei testimonium, praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum
apposui. His Testibus, Hugone de Lega, Henrico de Lega, Galfrido de Burdeleyes,
Richardo de Ardres, Willielmo cum Barba, Simone de Holewell, Roberto le
Mordaunt, Galfrido de Bosco, Henrico de Gatesden, Radulpho de Norrho, Philippo
serviente Domini Regis de Turveia, and aliis.

Charta Ranulphi Comitis Cestriae.
RAnulphus, Comes Cestriae, omnibus, tam futuris quam praesentibus, Salutem.
Notum sit vobis omnibus, me dedisse Willielmo Mareschallo de Sutton, pro
homagio and servitio suo, quadraginta acras terrae inter Coventreyam and terram
suam de Esthull, cum pannagio and cum omnibus aliis libertatibus, Tenendas ei
and haeredibus suis in feudo and haereditate, de me and de meis haeredibus
libere and quiet and honorifice, reddendo ab illo and haeredibus suis mihi and
meis haeredibus annuatim, in Nativitate Sancti Johannis Baptistae, quaedam
calcaria deaurata pro omni servitio. Et quod ipse Willielmus vel haeredes sui
terram illam ellarcent si voluerint, vel eam teneant cum nemore quod est in
terra illa: Et ut haec donatio mea perpetuae firmitatis robur obtineat,
praesenti Scripto and Sigilli mei munimine eam confirmavi. Testibus his, Hugone
de Colone, Petro Roaud, Juhello Benegero, Gaufrido Farly, Juhello de Lovigneio,
Philippo de Oreby, Bartholomaeo Abbate, Richardo Pilse, Willielmo de Serlant,
Willielmo de Verdun, Petro Clerico, and multis aliis.

seal of Ralph, earl of Chester SIGILLVM RANVLPHI COMITIS CESTRIE



Charta Ranulphi Comitis Cestriae.
RAnulphus, Comes Cestriae, omnibus, ad quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit,
Salutem and amorem. Sciatis me concessisse, and hac praesenti Charta
confirmasse, Willielmo Mareschallo de Suttonia and haeredibus suis, ut donent
omnes decimationes de Dominio suo de Esthull, and de omnibus terris and
assarcis quas eis dedi apud praedictum Esthull, uno Capellano, qui Serviat in
Capella sua de Esthull imperpetuum, pro anima patris mei and Antecessorum
suorum, reddendo annuatim unam libram Thuris Ecclesiae Sancti Michaelis de
Coventrey ad Pascha, nomine impenfionis. His Testibus, Philippo de Orchi, Petro
Roaud, Petro de Sancto Hillario, Juhello de Lovigneio, Juhello Berenger, and
multis aliis apud Rigidum Pontem.

Charta Ranulphi Comitis Cestriae.
RAnulphus, Comes Cestriae, omnibus hominibus and Amicis suis, and omnibus ad
quos praesens Scriptum pervenerit, Salutem. Notum sit vobis me concessisse and
dedisse and ac Charta mea confirmasse Richardo de Sutton, filio Roberti, pro
homagio suo and servitio, unam virgatam terrae in Olneya, quam Gaufridus,
filius Osberti, tenuit, cum messuagio and prato ad eandem virgatam
pertinentibus, and dimidiam virgatam terrae quae ad molendinum meum pertinuit
cum messuagio and prato and pertinentiis suis, and sex acras de assarco in
bosco de Hyda, scilicet propinquiores Domui, quam Richardus Arneburgerus tenuit
in bosco quod vocabatur Hydehai, and pratum quod nominatur Hydemor. Tenenda ei
and haeredibus suis de me and haeredibus meis in feudo and haereditate libere
and quiet, cum husbote and haibote, and cum quietantia de passuagio, and cum
omnibus libertatibus and liberis confuetudinibus praedictae terrae
pertinentibus, reddendo annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis quaedam calcaria
deaurata, ad Festum Sancti Petri, ad Vinclam pro omni servitio. His Testibus,
Philippo de Oreby, Johanne de Pracell, Waltero de Coventry, Henrico Despenser,
Normando Panci, Henrico Mordaunt, Avernedo de Soligneio, Willielmo de Verdi,
Willielmo filio Drogoni, Petro Clerico, and multis aliis apud Oxoniam.

Charta Johannis de Scotia, Comitis Huntingdoniae.
EGO Johannes de Scotia, Comes Huntingdoniae, dedi Willielmo de Olneya, filio
Richardi de Sutton, septem virgatas terrae in villa de Yerdley, alias,
scilicet, quarum Richardus filius Alexandri tenet, unam virgatam terrae and
Willielmus filius Reginaldi tenet, unam virgatam and Elias Forestarius tenet,
unam virgatam and Petrus filius Richardi tenuit, unam virgatam and Simon filius
Willielmi Lewin tenet, unam virgatam terrae and Willielmus Biun tenet, unam
virgatam and Hugo filius Lunne tenet, unam virgatam terrae cum praedictis
Richardo, Willielmo, Elia, Petro, Simone, Willielmo, Hugone, and cum tota
sequela eorum habendas and tenendas de me and haeredibus meis sibi and
haeredibus suis, reddendo inde annuatim duodecim Capones ad Pascha pro omni
servitio cum clausula warrantiae. His Testibus, Domino Baldewino de Pantona,
etc. sine data.

Charta Willielmi Mareschalli de Sutton.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Willielmus, Mareschallus de Sutton,
dedi and concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Matildae filiae
Letticiae, unum messuagium in Asthull cum cultura praedicto messuagio
pertinente, quod Johannes de Kenillwich de me tenuit, Tenendum and habendum de
me and haeredibus meis illi and haeredibus ejus vel cuicunque assignare
voluerit vendere vel legare, reddendo inde annuatim ipsa and haeredes sui vel
assignati sui mihi and haeredibus meis, sex denarios ad Natal. Domini pro omni
servitio, consuetudine and demanda: Et Ego Willielmus and haeredes mei
praedictum messuagium cum praedicta cultura praedictae Matildae and haeredibus
suis vel assignatis, contra omnes homines and foeminas warrantizabimus: Et si
warrantizare non poterimus, illi quinque marcas dabimus sine ulla
contradictione.

His Testibus, Roberto de Kanele, Johanne Flechero, Roberto Gupill, Alexandro
de Kanele, Johanne de Warburleye, Thoma de Horwell, Johanne fratre suo, and
multis aliis.
Sigillo fracto.
Charta Matildae filiae Letticiae de Asthull.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Matilda filia Letticiae de Asthull, in
libera potestate mea remisi, and penitus quietum clamavi Willielmo de Mordaunt,
Domino de Asthull, and Amiciae Uxori suae, totum jus meum and clameum quod
habui, vel aliquo modo habere potui, in tota terra illa cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis intra Croftum de Asthull, quae jacet inter terram quam Gilbertus
Carpenter quondam tenuit, ex una part, and viam quae ducit apud le Horwell, ex
altera part, and extendit se a via Regia usque ad sursum aquae in longitudine
and latitudine, secundum metas and devisas ibidem factas, habendum and tenendum
dictis Willielmo and Amiciae, and eorum haeredibus vel assignatis quibuscunque,
libere, quiet and in pace, absque aliqua calumpnia seu retentione mei vel
haeredum meorum imperpetuum: Et pro hac remissione and penitus quietum
clamatione dederunt mihi, dicti Willielmus and Amicia, tres marcas argenti prae
manibus. In cujus rei Testimonium praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum apposui. His
Testibus, Roberto de Kanele, Vicale de Folkyshull, Hugone de Stok, Ranulpho de
Smethall, Philippo de Winchecumbe, Johanne le Fletcher, Thoma de Horewelle,
Johanne fratre ejus, Ranulpho de Franketon, and aliis.

Charta Richardi de Ardres.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Richardus de Ardres dedi, concessi, and
hac mea praesenti confirmavi Charta Willielmo de Mordaunt, Consanguineo meo,
pro quinquaginta marcis sterlingorum, quas mihi dedit prae manibus in magno
negotio meo, totam partem meam quam habui in molendinis de Turveia, cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis, scilicet cum stagno, and aqua, and libera piscaria a salice,
quae stat in Insula de super Domum Personae de Turveia, videlicet a superiore
capite illius Insulae descendendo, cum aqua usque Marewell subtus Snelleston,
and totam partem meam hulmorum and insularum quam habui vel habere potui in
praedictis, stagno and aqua, and tam in veteri rivario quam in alio, and totam
sequelam molturae illorum molendinorum in viis and semitis, tam liberorum quam
villanorum meorum, salvo mihi and haeredibus meis in iisdem molendinis liberam
molturam ad liberam mensam and proximam molturationem, postquam bladum dictas
molendinas intraverit, postquam viros qui tunc molturant totum
permolturaverint; Et si hominem vel foeminam de mea familia ad liberationem
posuero, ipsi toluetam ad dictas molendinas dabunt, sicut alii de patria; Et
quod dictus Willielmus and haeredes vel assignati sui libere and licite sine
contradictione mei vel haeredum meorum possint capere terram in loco consueto,
and debito ad reparationem and emendationem praedictorum molendinorum and
stagni, habendum and tenendum praedictam partem meam praedictorum molendinorum
cum suis pertinentiis omnimodis, de me and haeredibus meis dicto Willielmo and
haeredibus suis, vel cuicunque ille dare, vendere, legare, vel assignare
voluerit, libere, quiet, been and in bona pace and haereditarie imperpetuum,
cum omnibus libertatibus and liberis consuetudinibus, in omnibus rebus and
locis, and adeo libere, ac si ea in manu mea tenerem, reddendo inde annuatim
mihi and haeredibus meis, ipse and haeredes sui sive sui assignati, unam marcam
argenti ad duos anni terminos, scilicet ad Festum Sancti Michaelis dimidiam
marcam, and ad Festum beatae Mariae, in Martio, dimidiam marcam, pro omnibus
servitiis, consuetudinibus and exactionibus, secta curiarum, and omnibus aliis
secularibus demandis. Et si ita contingat quod dictus Willielmus and haeredes
sui sive assignati sui praenominatam marcam nomine redditus, ad praedictos
terminos mihi vel haeredibus meis non persolverint, ego dictus Richardus and
haeredes mei, tam in dictis molendinis quam in praedicta piscaria, quousque
nobis fuerit persolutum, distringemus. Et ego praedictus Richardus and haeredes
mei omnia praedicta praedicto Willielmo and haeredibus vel affignatis suis
contra omnes gentes Christianos and Judaeos warrantizabimus. Et ut haec omnia
praedicta rata and inconcussa permaneant, ut praedictum est, ea praesenti
Scripto and Sigilli mei impressione roboravi. His Testibus, Domino Simone
Druel, Henrico de Lega, Vnfrido Vis de Lu Militibus, Galfrido Burdeleyes
Magistro, Roberto de Abinton, Willielmo cum Barba, Galfrido filio Roberti,
Roberto de Guniles, Roberto Amori, Helya de Piro, Hugone de Piro, Hugone de
Montibus, Henrico de Montibus, and multis aliis.

Charta Richardi de Ardres.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Richardus de Ardres dedi, concessi and
hac mea praesenti Charta confirmavi Willielmo de Mordaunt pro sex marcis
argenti, quas mihi prae manibus dedit in gersumam Adam Pite de Turveia, cum
tota sequela sua and procreatione sua procreata and procreanda in posterum, and
totam terram quam dictus Adam de me tenuit in Villa de Turveia, cum
pertinentiis, Tenendum and habendum de me and haeredibus meis, sibi and
haeredibus suis vel cuicunque, and quando dare, assignare, vendere, vel legare
voluerit libere and quiet, integre and honorifice, haereditarie, been and in
pace, reddendo inde annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis, de se and haeredibus
suis vel suis assignatis, unum clavum garyophilli ad Pascha Domini, pro omnibus
secularibus servitiis, exactionibus, consuetudinibus, sectis curiarum, and
demandis: Et Ego Richardus and haeredes mei dictum Adam cum tota sequela sua,
and cum tota procreatione sua procreata and procreanda, and totam terram quam
de me tenuit in Villa de Turveia, dicto Willielmo and haeredibus suis and
assignatis, contra omnes homines and foeminas warrantizabimus, acquietabimus
and defendemus imperpetuum per praedictum servitium. In cujus rei testimonium
hoc praesens Scriptum Sigilli mei impressione roboravi.

His Testibus, Domino Henrico de Lega Milite, Philippo Serviente, Willielmo cum
Barba, Galfrido de Bosco, Roberto de Mordaunt, Richardo le Theyn, Radulpho de
Norrho, Richardo Cuggell, Waltero Davies, Gilberto Bayvel, Henrico fratre
Sacerdotis, Huberto de Manduth, Roberto Gerin, and aliis.
Sigillo fracto.
Charta Henrici filii Fulconis Hurel.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Henricus filius Fulconis Hurel,
resignavi and quietum clamavi Willielmo le Mordaunt Domino meo, pro quinque
marcis and dimidia argenti, quas mihi dedit prae manibus, totum illud
tenementum cum messuagio adjacente, cum prato and cum omnibus pertinentiis
infra villam and extra, quod de eo tenui in Turveia: Ita videlicet quod nec
ego, nec haeredes mei, nec aliquis ex part nostra de caetero jus vel clameum
habere possimus vel debeamus. Hanc autem resignationem and quietam clamationem
ego Henricus and haeredes mei cum praedicto tenemento praedicto Willielmo and
haeredibus suis imperpetuum warrantizabimus. In cujus rei testimonium and
securitatem praesenti Scripto Sigillum apposui pro me and haeredibus meis. His
Testibus, Galfrido de Burdeleyes, Willielmo cum Barba, Richardo de Lega,
Galfrido de Bosco, Richardo de Theyn, Willielmo Martell, Roberto de Mordaunt,
Philippo Serviente, Henrico de Gatesden, Roberto Gerin, Radulpho de Norrho,
Henrico fratre Sacerdotis, Willielmo Clerico de Newenton.

Charta Albredae, filiae Roberti de Sancto Georgio.
SCiant universi, hoc praesens Scriptum visuri, quod Ego Albreda, filia Roberti
de Sancto Georgio, in libera viduitate remisi, and pro me and haeredibus meis
quietum clamavi Willielmo le Mordaunt de Turveia Domino meo, totum redditum
meum quem habui in eadem villa de quarta part unius dimidiae virgatae terrae
quam tenui de dicto Willielmo in Turveia, cum homagiis, releviis, wardis and
Eschaetis, and cum omnibus aliis rebus, quae mihi vel haeredibus meis de dicto
redditu and de praedicto tenemento possint accedere, Habendum and tenendum
dictum redditum, scilicet sexdecim denariorum and oboli de haeredibus Roberti
le Soc annuatim recipiendorum cum homagiis, releviis, wardis and eschaetis, and
cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis, sicut praedictum est, libere, quiet, been
and in pace, plenarie and integre and haereditarie dicto Willielmo le Mordaunt
and haeredibus suis, vel cuicunque dare, vendere, assignare, vel in lecto
mortali legare voluerit imperpetuum. Ita vero, quod ego dicta Albreda, nec
haeredes mei, nec aliquis per me, nec per haeredes meos in praedicto redditu,
neque in wardis, homagiis, releviis and eschaetis aliquod jus vel clameum de
caetero habere poterimus; pro hac autem remissione and quieta clamatione dedit
mihi dictus Willielmus december solidos sterlingorum prae manibus. In cujus rei
Testimonium praesens Scriptum Sigilli mei impressione roboravi. His Testibus,
Willielmo cum Barba, Roberto le Mordaunt, Radulpho de Norrho, Willielmo
Martell, Henrico fratre Capellano, Roberto Gerin, Willielmo Savarico and aliis.

Charta Rogeri le Soc.
SCiant universi, hoc praesens Scriptum visuri vel audituri, quod Ego Rogerus
le Soc de Wibandston remisi, and pro me and haeredibus meis quietum clamavi
Willielmo le Mordaunt de Turveia Domino meo, totum redditum meum quem habui in
eadem villa de quarta part unius dimidiae virgatae terrae, quam tenui de dicto
Willielmo in Turveia, cum homagiis, releviis, wardis and eschaetis, and cum
omnibus aliis rebus, quae mihi vel haeredibus meis, de dicto redditu and de
tenemento praedicto, possint accedere, Habendum and tenendum dictum redditum,
scilicet sexdecim denariorum and oboli de haeredibus Roberti le Soc
recipiendorum annuatim, cum homagiis, releviis, wardis and eschaetis, and cum
omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis, sicut praedictum est libere, quiet, been and
in pace, and haereditarie dicto Willielmo le Mordaunt, and haeredibus suis, vel
cuicunque dare, vendere, assignare, vel in lecto mortali legare voluerit
imperpetuum. Ita vero, quod ego dictus Rogerus le Soc, nec haeredes mei, nec
aliquis per me, nec per haeredes meos in praedicto redditu, neque in wardis,
homagiis, releviis and eschaetis, aliquod jus vel clameum de caetero habere
poterimus; pro hac autem remissione and quieta clamatione dedit dictus
Willielmus dicto Rogero unam marcam argenti prae manibus. In cujus rei
testimonium dictus Rogerus huic praesenti Scripto Sigillum suum apposuit. His
Testibus, Willielmo cum Barba, Roberto le Mordaunt, Radulpho de Norrho, Huberto
de Manduth, Henrico fratre Capellano, Roberto Gerin, Willielmo Savarico, and
aliis.

Quieta Clamatio Willielmi de Mordaunt Thomae de Wikeley Ballivo suo de Manerio
suo de Turveia.
MEmorandum quod Thomas de Wikeley, serviens Willielmi le Mordaunt in Manerio
suo de Turveia, reddidit compotum suum finalem de omnibus receptis and expensis
suis factis in praedicto Manerio, a die Sancti Michaelis, Anno Regni Regis
Edwardi nono intrante decimo, usque ad Festum beatae Margaretae undecimo,
scilicet die Mercurii proxima post Festum Annunciationis beatae Mariae, Anno
Regni Regis ejusdem Edwardi decimo secundo, in praesentia Domini sui apud
Turveiam, and Domini Galfridi Roland, Richardi Roland, Domini Willielmi Roland,
Canonici, Nicolai Roland, and aliorum ibidem praesentium hoc audientium; Ita
quod omnibus computatis and allocatis remanfit in debito Domino suo pro
omnimodis demandis and rebus aliis idem Thomas in viginti solidis sterlingorum,
de toto tempore quo fuit Ballivus suus. Et praeterea idem Thomas acquiecabat
Dominum de omnimodis debitis and demandis versus omnes gentes, de toto tempore
suo praedicto. In cujus rei testimonium huic Scripto de praedicto compoto
soluto, Chirographato inter praedictas parts, Sigilla sua mutuo apposuerunt,
and praedictus Willielmus Dominus suus de omnimodis demandis quietum clamavit
eidem Thomae de toto praedicto compoto.

WILLIAM de MORDAVNT, Second of that Name, Lord of Turvey, Asthull, Chicheley,
and other Lands. CHAPTER V.
Charta Willielmi filii Sampsonis le Mansell de Turveia.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Willielmus, filius Sampsonis le Mansell
de Turveia, dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Willielmo,
filio Willielmi le Mordaunt, de eadem, and Rosyae Uxori suae pro triginta
marcis sterlingorum, quas mihi dederunt prae manibus, omnes terras and
tenementa, cum redditibus, homagiis, fidelitatibus, wardis, releviis,
eschaetis, dominiis, sectis Curiarum, and cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis
and juribus, quae habui, vel aliquo modo habere potui, in villa and in Campis
de Chechle, sine aliquo retinemento, habendum and tenendum de Capitalibus
dominis feodi praedictis Willielmo filio Willielmi le Mordaunt, and Rosyae
Uxori suae, and haeredibus ejusdem Willielmi filii Willielmi, vel assignatis
libere, quiet, been, in pace and haereditarie imperpetuum, faciendo inde
annuatim capitalibus Dominis dictorum feodorum servitia debita and consueta,
pro omnibus secularibus servitiis, consuetudinibus, exactionibus, Curiarum
sectis, querelis, aufiliis, wardis, releviis, eschaetis and demandis omnimodis,
quae mihi and haeredibus meis accedere poterunt. Et ego vero praedictus
Willielmus, filius Sampsonis le Mansell, and haeredes mei, vel mei assignati,
omnes praedictas terras and tenementa cum redditibus, homagiis, fidelitatibus,
wardis, releviis, eschaetis, dominiis, sectis Curiarum, and cum omnibus
pertinentiis, sicut praedictum est praedictis, Willielmo, filio Willielmi le
Mordaunt, and Rosyae Uxori suae, and haeredibus ejusdem Willielmi vel
assignatis, contra omnes homines and foeminas warrantizabimus. In cujus rei
testimonium huic praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum apposui. His Testibus, Domino
Johanne de Pateshull, Domino Johanne Druell Militibus, Roberto de Ekencho,
Martino de Carmi, Michaele Haddele, Johanne Mansell, Thoma le Suetesone, and
aliis. Richardo Tile datum die Annunciationis beatae Virginis, Anno Regni Regis
Edwardi, filii Regis Henrici, quinto decimo.

Charta Domini Reginaldi de Gray.
CUM Dominus Reginaldus de Gray, and Willielmus le Mordaunt in Riparia de Ouse,
inter molendinum praedicti Willielmi in Turveia and Hulmum Walteri de Proud
comuniam piscariae conjunctim and divisim habere debeant, and ne caetero
praefatus Willielmus, nec haeredes sui praedictum Dominum Reginaldum, nec
haeredes suos, nec idem Dominus Reginaldus, nec haeredes sui praefatum
Willielmum, nec haeredes suos de praedicta Comunia priscariae, inter metas
praedictas, impedire possunt, praefatus Willielmus concessit pro se and
haeredibus suis praedicto Domino Reginaldo, quod ipse Dominus Reginaldus and
haeredes sui, in praedicta riparia, inter metas praedictas, pro voluntate sua
piscari possint, sine contradictione vel impedimento ipsius Willielmi vel
haeredum suorum imperpetuum. Et praedictus Dominus Reginaldus concessit pro se
and haeredibus suis praedicto Willielmo, quod ipse Willielmus and haeredes sui
in praedicta riparia, inter metas praedictas, pro voluntate sua piscari
possint, sine contradictione vel impedimento ipsius Reginaldi vel haeredum
suorum imperpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium praesentibus Scriptis
chirographatis Sigilla praedictorum, Domini Reginaldi and Willielmi, alternatim
sunt apposita. His Testibus, Dominis Johanne de Wahull, Willielmo de
Botevegleyne, Johanne Pavenham, Johanne Druell, Johanne Rydel, Alexandro Bozun
Militibus, Hugone le Blount, Johanne Ernyz de Midleton, Henrico de Norwize, and
aliis. Data die Mercurii Proxima post Festum Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, Anno
Regni Regis Edwardi, vicesimo secundo.

seal of Reginald de Gray SIGILLVM REGINALDI DE GRAY



Charta Edwardi Primi pro Parco de Turveia.
EDwardus, Dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae, omnes
ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Salutem. Sciatis, quod de gratia nostra
speciali concessimus, and licentiam dedimus, pro nobis and haeredibus nostris,
quantum in nobis est, dilecto and fideli nostro, Willielmo le Mordaunt, quod
ipse boscum suum de Wolesey, and campum suum vocatum Turvey lees, cum bosco suo
de Mancelsgrove, and alias terras suas liberas in Parochia de Turveia, quas in
Parcum reducere desiderat, includere, and Parcum inde facere. Et terras illas
sic inclusas, and Parcum inde factum, tenere possit, sibi and haeredibus suis
imperpetuum, sine contradictione vel impedimento nostro, vel haeredum nostrorum
quorumcunque: Dum tamen bosci illi, and terra illa intra metas foresti nostri
non existent. In cujus rei testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus
patentes. Test meipso apud Salisburiam, Anno Regni nostri vicesimo quinto.

Finis facta inter Willielmum Mordaunt and Thomam filium Warini de Bosco.
HAEC est finalis concordia facta in curia Domini Regis apud Westmonasterium, a
die Paschae, in tres septimanas, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi, filii Edwardi,
septimo, coram Willielmo de Bereford, Lamberto de Frikingham, Johanne de
Benstede, Henrico le Scroope, Willielmo Inge, and Johanne Bacun Justiciariis,
and aliis Domini Regis fidelibus, tunc and ibidem praesentibus, inter
Willielmum de Mordaunt de Turveia querentem, and Thomam filium Warini de Bosco
deforciantem. De tribus messuagiis, centum and viginti acris terrae, quatuor
acris prati, and duabus acris pasturae, cum pertinentiis in Turveia, unde
placitum conventionis summonitus fuit, inter eos in eadem Curia, scilicet quod
praedictus Thomas recognovit praedictam terram cum pertinentiis, esse jus
ipsius Willielmi, and illa ei reddidit in eadem Curia; habendum and tenendum
eidem Willielmo and haeredibus fuis, de capitalibus Dominis feodi illius quae
ad illa tenementa pertinent imperpetuum. Et praeterea idem Thomas concessit pro
se, and haeredibus suis, quod ipsi warrantizabunt eidem Willielmo, and
haeredibus suis, praedicta tenementa, cum pertinentiis, contra omnes homines
imperpetuum. Et pro hac recognitione, redditione, warantia, fine, and
concordia, idem Willielmus dedit praedicto Thomae unum Espervarium sorum.

Charta Amiciae de Aubeny.
EGO Amicia de Aubeny, dedi Willielmo de Mordaunt, filio meo, and Roberto filio
ejusdem Willielmi, quinque messuagia, and quinque virgatas terrae, cum quinque
nativis, qui praedicta messuagia tenuerunt, habenda in feodo. Data apud
Coventreyam die Veneris proxima post Festum Sancti Thomae Martyris, Anno Regni
Regis Edwardi Secundi, nono.

Charta Willielmi de Mordaunt.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus, praesens Scriptum visuris vel audituris, Salutem in
Domino sempiternam. Noverit universitas vestra me remisisse, relaxasse, and
omnimodo pro me and haeredibus meis, quietum clamasse imperpetuum, Deo and
Ecclesiae Sancti Neoti, and monachis ibidem Deo servientibus, totum jus and
clameum quod habui, vel aliquo modo habere potui, in tribus messuagiis,
quadraginta and octo acris terrae, and una acra prati, cum pertinentiis in
Turveia, de quibus Priorem loci praedicti, coram Justiciariis Domini Regis de
Banco, per breve Proavi, una cum Hugone de Ardres perticipe meo, implacitavi;
praeterea remisi, and quietum clamavi, eisdem monachis, and eorum
successoribus, totum jus and clameum, quod habui, vel habere potui, in omnibus
aliis terris and tenementis, quae iidem monachi habent in feodo meo, and de
feodo meo, and in omnibus terris and tenementis, quae homines eorum tenent, de
ipsis de feodo meo, quae quidem terrae and tenementa iidem monachi, and eorum
praedecessores aliquo tempore habuerint, de donis antecessorum meorum in villa
praedicta. Ita quod nec ego Willielmus, nec haeredes mei, nec aliquis nomine
meo, seu nomine haeredum meorum, aliquid juris, dampnum, seu calumpniam, in
praedictis tribus messuagiis, quadraginta and octo acris terrae, and una acra
prati cum pertinentiis, nec in aliquibus aliis terris, seu tenementis, quae
iidem monachi habent in feodo meo, and de feodo meo, nec quae homines ipsorum
tenent de ipsis, de donis praedictis de caetero clamare, vendicare, habere, nec
exigere poterimus imperpetuum; salvis tamen mihi and haeredibus meis, and
Hugone de Ardres perticipe meo, servitiis, si quae inde debentur nobis. In
cujus rei testimonium praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum apposui. His Testibus,
Domino Johanne de Pabenham, Domino Waltero de Ba Militibus, Johanne de
Chetindon, Henrico de Lega, Willielmo Paslew, Richardo de Stratteford,
Willielmo Thorold, Johanne Sylvester, Stephano Wichard, and aliis. Datum apud
Sanctum Neotum, die Dominica proxima post Festum Apostolorum Simonis and Judae,
Anno Domini millesimo trecentesimo septimo decimo, and Anno Regni Regis
Edwardi, filii Regis Ewardi, undecimo.

ROBERT de MORDAVNT, First of that Name, Lord of Turvey, Clifton, Chicheley,
and other Lands. CHAPTER VI.
Charta Hugonis Bossard Domini de Knotting.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Hugo Bossard Dominus de Knotting, dedi,
concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Roberto filio Willielmi de
Mordaunt, homagia and servitia mea in Knotting, scilicet homagium and servitium
Willielmi Begree and servitium septemdecim denariorum, and sexdecim denariorum
a Reginaldo Caponis, and novem denariorum de Johanne de Bentele, de Simone
Hardles duodecim denariorum, de Waltero filio Margeriae sex solidorum, and
undecim denariorum de Henrico Bossard duodecim denariorum, de Willielmo Paxtone
seniore, sex Capones, de Uxore Willielmi Bercarii duodecim denarios, de Johanne
Huggron sex denarios, de Hugone Michael duos solidos, septem denarios and
obulum, de Gilberto Cowper unum denarium and quadrantem, de Willielmo Paxtone
juniore duos solidos, and quatuor dies in ductura, de Richardo Bercario, de
Willielmo Wariner december solidos, de Waltero Abraham duodecim denarios, de
Johanne Maranuts duodecim denarios, and quatuor dies in ductura, de Johanne
Anore octodecim denarios, de Johanne Mayris duodecim denarios and quatuor dies
in ductura, de Rolando Michaelis duodecim denarios, de Johanne Fabro duodecim
denarios, and dimidiam virgatam terrae quam Richardus de Roll tenet, cum dicto
Richardo and omnibus catallis suis and sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam terrae
quam Richardus Barker tenet, cum dicto Richardo and omnibus catallis suis and
sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam terrae quam Johannes filius Willielmi tenet,
cum dicto Johanne and omnibus catallis suis and sequelis eorum. Dimidiam
virgatam terrae quam Henricus filius Hugonis tenet, cum dicto Henrico and
omnibus catallis suis and sequelis eorum. Unum messuagium and duos acras terrae
quae Juliana le Blount tenet, cum dicta Juliana, and omnibus catallis suis and
sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam terrae quam Gilbertus le Cowper tenet, cum
dicto Gilberto, and omnibus catallis suis and sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam
terrae de Richardo Noreys, cum dicto Richardo and omnibus catallis eorum.
Dimidiam virgatam terrae de Hugone Michael, cum dicto Hugone and omnibus
catallis and sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam terrae de Johanne filio Hugonis
Michael, cum dicto Johanne and omnibus catallis and sequelis eorum. Dimidiam
virgatam terrae de Waltero de Roll, cum dicto Waltero and omnibus catallis and
sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam terrae quam Galfridus de Roll tenet, cum
dicto Galfrido and omnibus catallis and sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam
terrae quam Hugo filius Richardi tenet, cum dicto Hugone and omnibus bonis
catallis suis and eorum sequelis. Dimidiam virgatam terrae quam Johannes
Michaelis filius tenet, cum dicto Johanne and omnibus catallis suis and eorum
sequelis. Unum messuagium and duas acras terrae, quae Abraham Anore tenet, cum
dicto Abrahamo and omnibus catallis suis and sequelis eorum. Unum messuagium
and duas acras terrae quae Richardus filius Thomae tenet, cum dicto Richardo
and omnibus catallis suis and sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam terrae quam
Richardus Abraham tenet, cum dicto Richardo and omnibus catallis suis and
sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam terrae quam Richardus Molendinarius tenet,
cum dicto Richardo and omnibus catallis suis and sequelis eorum. Dimidiam
virgatam terrae quam Johannes filius Hugonis tenet, cum dicto Johanne and
omnibus catallis and sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam terrae quam Juliana en
le Hoo tenet, cum dicta Juliana and omnibus catallis suis and sequelis eorum.
Dimidiam virgatam terrae quam Johannes Heyne tenet, cum dicto Johanne and
omnibus catallis suis and sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam terrae quam
Richardus Waregat tenet, cum dicto Richardo and omnibus catallis suis and
sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam terrae quam Gilbertus Rose tenet, cum dicto
Gilberto and omnibus catallis suis and sequelis eorum. Unam quartam terrae quam
Willielmus Page tenet, cum dicto Willielmo and omnibus catallis suis and
sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam terrae quam Nicolaus Watigod tenet, cum dicto
Nicolao and omnibus catallis suis and sequelis eorum. Dimidiam virgatam terrae
quam Willielmus Wategot tenet, cum dicto Willielmo and omnibus catallis suis
and sequelis eorum. Unam quartam terrae quam Henricus Watigod tenet, cum dicto
Henrico and omnibus catallis suis and sequelis eorum, and cum Curia mea de
Knotting de tribus septimanis in tres septimanas, habendum and tenendum omnia
praedicta tenementa, homagia, and servitia, sicut praedictum est, de
capitalibus Dominis feodi per servitia inde debita, and de jure consueta,
praedicto Roberto and haeredibus suis, vel suis assignatis. Et ego praedictus
Hugo and haeredes mei praedicto Roberto and haeredibus suis, vel suis
assignatis, contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus imperpetuum. In cujus rei
testimonium huic praesenti Chartae Sigillum meum apposui. His Testibus, Hugone
de Ardres, Willielmo Begree, Willielmo de Asey, Willielmo de Paxtone, Rogero
Begree, and aliis. Datum apud Knotting, die Sancti Matthaei Apostoli, Anno
Regni Regis Edwardi, filii Regis Edwardi, decimo sexto.

Rotulus Curiae Roberti de Mordaunt, tentae apud Chicheley, die Jovis proxima
post Festum Sancti Andraeae Apostoli, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post
Conquestum, septimo.
SImon Tile ponit se in misericordiam pro defalta facta ad ultimam Curiam, per
plegiatum Johannis Hering, and Rogeri de Mullesho.

Thomas Alleyne pro eadem per plegiatum Simonis Altenell and Rogeri de Mullesho.

Simon Harlewyne distringitur pro pluribus defaltis.

Johannes de Soham pro defaltis in misericordiam.

Simon Nore pro eadem in misericordiam Roberti Fabri and Rogeri de Mullesho.

Hugo Maunsell fecit fidelitatem Domino, and cognovit, quod tenet de Domino,
quae ignorant, habet diem ad proximam Curiam. Postea cognovit, quod tenet de
Domino unum messuagium redditus per annum trium solidorum, ad terminum Sanctae
Mariae in Martio, and Sancti Michaelis, pro omnibus servitiis. Item ipse habet
diem usque proximam Curiam, ad testificandum de aliis servitiis. Item idem Hugo
tenet duodecim acras terrae in quodam Crofto, quod vocatur Impheye, per
servitium unius denarii, and unius clavi gariophilli, ad Festum Sancti Thomae
in septimanas Nativitatis Domini, pro omnibus servitiis. Item idem Hugo tenet,
unum Croftum, quod vocatur Longcroft, per servitium december denariorum per annum,
ad praedictos terminos, and homagium, sentagium, wardam, and relevium. Item
idem Hugo tenet unum Croftum, quod vocatur Longcroft, per servitium duorum
denariorum, per annum, ad eosdem terminos, homagium, sentagium, wardam, and
relevium. Item tenet partem suam Crofti a le short Croft, redditus per annum
pro una part unius denarii, and pro altera part unius denarii and homagium,
sentagium, wardam and relevium.

Johanues Hering tenet unum messuagium, duas acras terrae and dimidiam, and
rodam, per servitium duodecim denariorum and quadrantis, per annum, ad eosdem
terminos, homagium, wardam, relevium, sentagium, sectam Curiae, and fecit
fidelitatem.

Simon Tile fecit fidelitatem, and cognovit de Domino tenere unum messuagium,
and tres acras terrae and dimidiam, and dimidiam rodae, per servitium,
homagium, relevium, wardam, and sentagium, and sectam Curiae, and quatuordecim
denarios redditus, per annum, ad eosdem terminos.

Willielmus Maunsell fecit fidelitatem Domino, and cognovit tenere de Domino
unum toftum, and sex acras and dimidiam, and unam acram prati, per servitium
quatuordecim denariorum and quadrantis, ad Festum Annunciationis, and
quatuordecim denariorum, ad Festum Sancti Michaelis, and trium Caponum, ad
Pascha, and homagium, wardam, sentagium, and relevium. Praeceptum est
distringere Isabel Frankelyn veniendi ad proximam Curiam ad faciendum, etc.

Johannes de Soham ingressus est feodum Domini, videlicet, in uno messuagio,
and dimidiam acram terrae, and fecit fidelitatem, and dat Domino pro
ingressione, duodecim denarios, per parts Hugonis Maunsell and Simonis Fere.
Thomas Harlewyne, summonitus fuit veniendi ad istam Curiam, and non venit, ita
distringendus veviendi ad proximam. Emma Brute tenet unum messuagium, and unam
rodam and dimidiam, per servitium quatuor denariorum, obuli, quadrantis, and
faciendo omnia alia servitia, videlicet sectam Curiae, and omnia alia servitia,
fecit fidelitatem.

Thomas Maunsell and Sibill Brute tenent dimidiam rodam terrae, redditus per
annum unius denarii and obuli, and faciendo omnia alia servitia, and Sibill
fecit fidelitatem, and praeceptum est distringere praedictum Thomam.

Thomas Attewell ingressus est feodum Domini, in unam acram terrae, secundum
formam statuti, and fecit fidelitatem, and reddidit per annum obolum, ad Festum
Sancti Michaelis per homagium.

Johannes Adam tenet de Domino quatuor acras terrae, reddit per annum obolum
pro omnibus, etc. and fecit fidelitatem. Praeceptum est summonere Willielmum
Gold, veniendi ad proximam Curiam ad faciendum, etc.

Rogerus Mullesho fecit fidelitatem, and cognovit tenere de Domino unum
messuagium and quinque acras terrae, per servitium sex solidorum per annum, ad
praedictos terminos, and duos denarios ad Festum Sancti Thomae Apostoli,
homagium, sentagium, and sectam Curiae; item tenet alterum messuagium, and tres
acras terrae, and reddit per annum sex denarios and obolum, ad eosdem terminos,
pro omnibus servitiis.

Thomas Alleyn ingressus est in uno messuagio, and duas acras terrae, reddit
per annum obolum, and faciendo servitia fecit fidelitatem.

Praeceptum est summonere Jacobum de Riddington, veniendi ad proximam Curiam ad
faciendum, etc.

Charta Roberti Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus Mordaunt de Turveia, dedi,
concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi, Willielmo Campion de
Stacheden, capellano, totum manerium meum de Turveia, cum molendinis aquaticis,
cum tota secta ad dicta molendina, simul cum tota piscaria, tam in separali,
quam in communi, cum omnibus nativis meis, and cum tota sequela eorum, una cum
omnibus liberis tenentibus ad dictum manerium spectantibus, cum boscis, viis,
semitis, pratis, pascuis, pasturis, redditibus, wardis, releviis, homagiis,
eschaetis, and omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis, habendum and tenendum totum
praedictum manerium cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, de capitalibus Dominis
feodi, per servitia inde debita, and de jure consueta. Et ego vero praedictus
Robertus and haeredes mei totum praedictum manerium cum omnibus pertinentiis
praedictis, praedicto Willielmo and haeredibus suis, sive suis assignatis,
contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti
Chartae Sigillum meum apposui. His Testibus, Johanne Dardres, Alexandro Bozonn,
Johanne Garnys, Willielmo Maunsell, Nicolao Mordaunt, and aliis. Data apud
Turveiam, die Lunae proxima post Festum Purificationis beatae Mariae, Anno
Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post Conquestum, septimo decimo.

seal of Robert Mordaunt SIGILLVM ROBERTI MORDAVNT



Charta Roberti Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus Mordaunt de Turveia, dedi,
concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi, Willielmo Campion, omnia
illa terras and tenementa, quae habui, and tenui de feodo de Gloucestria, in
Turveia, ut in terris, domibus, boscis, gardinis, pratis, pascuis, semitis,
viis, and pasturis, and reversionibus, homagiis, wardis, releviis, eschaetis,
redditibus liberorum villanorum, and eorum sequelis, and omnibus aliis
pertinentiis quovismodo spectantibus, habendum and tenendum, omnia praedicta
terras and tenementa, ut praedictum est, de capitalibus dominis feodorum, per
servitia inde debita and de jure consueta. Et ego vero praedictus Robertus, and
haeredes mei omnia praedicta terras and tenementa, ut praedictum est, praedicto
Willielmo, haeredibus and assignatis suis, contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus
in perpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Chartae Sigillum meum
apposui. His Testibus, Johanne Dardres, Willielmo Mordaunt, Willielmo Maunsell,
Nicolao Mordaunt, Willielmo Kneu, and aliis. Data apud Turveiam, die Mercurii,
in Festo Sancti Gregorii, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi tertii post Conquestum,
decimo septimo.

Charta Alexandri Bozonn.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Alexander Bozonn de Rokesden, dedi,
concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Roberto de Chelnestone,
capellano, totum manerium de Rokesden, cum omnibus quae ad dictum manerium
spectant, habendum and tenendum praedictum manerium cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis, praedicto Roberto haeredibus and assignatis suis de capitalibus
dominis feodi illius libere, been and in pace, per servitia inde debita and de
jure consueta. Et ego praedictus Alexander and haeredes mei concedimus
praedictum manerium cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, praedicto Roberto,
haeredibus and assignatis suis, and contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in
perpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Chartae Sigillum meum
apposui. His Testibus, Henrico de Bareford, Thoma Gold, Roberto Blanchfront,
Willielmo Maynard, Willielmo Bruce, and aliis. Data apud Rokesden die Sabbati
proxima post Festum Sancti Gregorii, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi tertii post
Conquestum, decimo septimo.

seal of Alexander Bozonn Sigillum Alexandri Bozonn



Charta Johannis Oliver.
PAteat universis per praesentes, quod Ego Johannes Oliver, capillanus de
Chelnestone, dedi, concessi Alexandro Bozonn de Shacheden, totum manerium meum
de Rokesden, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis ad totam vitam suam, habendum and
tenendum praedictum manerium ad totam vitam suam, ut praedictum est, de me and
haeredibus meis, reddendo inde annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis unum solidum
ad terminum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae pro omnibus servitiis and
demandis, and faciendum pro me and haeredibus meis capitalibus dominis feodorum
omnia servitia inde debita and de jure consueta. Et concedo pro me, haeredibus
and assignatis meis, quod praedictus Alexander de vasto vel destructione pro
me, haeredibus vel assignatis meis, vel per quem alium non occasionetur, vel
implacitetur, vel in aliquo gravetur, and been liceat praedicto Alexandro
vastum and destructionem, pro voluntate sua in manerio praedicto cum omnibus
pertinentiis praedictis, facere. Etiam volo and concedo, quod post decessum
praedicti Alexandri Bozonn praedictum manerium cum omnibus suis pertinentiis
Johanni filio dicti Alexandri and Elizabethae filiae Roberti Mordaunt uxori
suae, and haeredibus de corporibus eorum exeuntibus, remaneat; and si
contingat, quod absit, quod praedictus Johannes and Elizabetha obierint, sine
haeredibus de corporibus eorum exeuntibus, quod praedictum manerium cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis rectis haeredibus dicti Alexandri Bozonn in perpetuum
remaneat. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Chartae dupliciter Indentatae
Sigillum meum apposui. His Testibus, Henrico de Bereford, Johanne Debne, Thoma
Soler, Robrto Blanchfront, Willielmo Bray, Johanne Deny, Johanne Sawyare, and
aliis. Data apud Rokesden die proxima post Festum Sancti Ambrosii, Anno Regni
Regis Edwardi tertii post Conquestum, decimo septimo.

Charta Willielmi Campion.
PAteat universis per praesentes, quod Ego Willielmus Campion de Stacheden,
capellanus, dedi, and concessi Roberto Mordaunt de Turveia, and Johannae Uxori
suae, totum manerium meum de Turveia, cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, ad totam
vitam praedictorum Roberti and Johannae, habendum and tenendum praedictum
manerium, ad totam vitam praedictorum Roberti and Johannae, ut praedictum est,
de me and haeredibus meis, reddendo inde annuatim mihi and haeredibus meis,
unam rosam ad Festum Nativitatis Johannis Baptistae, pro omnibus servitiis and
demandis. Et faciendo pro me and haeredibus meis, capitalibus Dominis feodi,
omnia servitia inde debita and de jure consueta. Et concedo pro me, haeredibus
and assignatis meis, quod praedictus Robertus, de vasto vel destructione, per
me, haeredes vel assignatos meos, vel per quem alium, non occasionetur,
implacitetur vel in aliquo gravetur, sed been liceat praedicto Roberto, vastum
and destructionem pro voluntate, in manerio praedicto, and in omnibus
pertinentiis praedictis, facere. Etiam volo and concedo, quod post decessum
dictorum, Roberti and Johannae, praedictum manerium cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis, Edmundo filio and haeredi dictorum, Roberti and Johannae,
haeredibus de corpore dicti Edmundi legitime procreatis, integre remaneat. Et
si ita contingat, quod absit, quod praedictus Edmundus obierit sine haeredibus
de corpore suo legitime procreatis, quod extunc praedictum manerium cum omnibus
suis pertinentiis, rectis haeredibus dicti Roberti Mordaunt imperpetuum
remaneat, sine contradictione alicujus. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti
Chartae Indentatae Sigillum meum apposui. His Testibus, Johanne Dardres
seniore, Johanne Dardres juniore, Willielmo Maunsell, Willielmo Mordaunt, and
aliis. Data apud Turveiam die Martis proxima post Festum Sancti Ambrosii, Anno
Regni Regis Edwardi tertii post Conquestum, decimo septimo.

Charta Roberti Mordaunt.
HAeC Indentura testatur, quod Robertus Mordaunt de Stacheden, and Johanna le
Bray, uxor ejus, concesserunt, tradiderunt, and demiserunt Hammoni de Ibbestok
de Pullokshull, sex acras terrae arabilis, jacentes in campo de Keching, quarum
duae acrae and una roda similiter jacent in una placea, quae vocatur Wodecroft,
inter bosculum Aliciae Shortfrend, ex una part, and quandam hayam del
Braycroft ex altera part; and dimidium acrae jacet in uno furlongo, vocato
Hubberimade furlong, inter terram Johannis de Foldhe, ex una part, and terram
Emmae, quondam uxoris Hugonis Blundel, ex altera part; and una acra and una
roda, jacentes in eodem furlongo, inter terram Willielmi de Walkington, ex una
part, and terram Richardi Humfrey de Pullokshull, ex altera part; and una
acra in eodem furlongo, inter terram Roberti Weystard, and terram Johannis
filii Hugonis Blundel; and una acra jacet in eodem furlongo, inter terram dicti
Roberti Weystard, ex una part, and terram Johannis de Faldo, ex altera part,
habendum and tenendum praedictas sex acras terrae, cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis, praedicto Hammoni, haeredibus and assignatis suis, ad totum
terminum vitae praedictae Johannae, reddendo annuatim praedictis, Roberto
Mordaunt and Johannae uxori suae, duodecim solidos argenti ad duos anni
terminos, videlicet, ad Festum Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, and Annunciationis
beatae Mariae virginis, per aequales portiones, pro omnibus aliis secularibus
servitiis and demandis. Et si contingat praedictum redditum a retro esse, in
part vel in toto, per quindena post aliquem terminum supradictum, quod extunc
been liceat, praedictis, Roberto and Johannae, seu eorum assignatis,
distringere, in omnibus liberis terris dicti Hammonis in campis de Pullokshull,
and similiter in communibus de Pullok, and districtiones detinere, quousque, de
praedicto redditu, iis plenarie fuerit satisfactum. Et praedictus Hammo and
haeredes sui, facient annuatim, durante termino supradicto, pro praedictis,
Roberto and Johanna, sectam Curiae Dominae Margaretae, quondam uxori Domini
Radulphi filii Richardi Militis, quoties Curiam tenere voluerit. Et praedictus
Robertus Mordaunt and Johanna uxor ejus, praedictas sex acras terrae cum
omnibus suis pertinentiis, praedicto Hammoni, haeredibus and assignatis suis,
ad totum terminum vitae praedictae Johannae, contra omnes gentes
warrantizabunt, and pro redditu praedicto aquietabunt, and defendent. In cujus
rei testimonium his Scriptis indentatis, alterna part Sigillum suum apposuit.
His testibus, Willielmo Weystard, Johanne le Clarke de Pullokshull, Thoma le
Smith, Rogero Humfrey, Nicolao Weystard, and aliis.

Data apud Stacheden, die Mercurii in Festo Sancti Laurentii Apostoli, Anno
Regni Regis Edwardi tertii post Conquestum, decimo nono. Sigillo fracto.
Charta Hugonis Wake.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Hugo Wake de Clifton, Miles, dedi,
concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Roberto Mordaunt de Turveia,
nepoti meo, and Johannae Uxori suae, and haeredibus de corpore eorum legitime
procreatis, omnia tenementa mea in Parocha de Clifton, in uno assarto, quod
vocatur Knightistokking, jacentia, cum separalibus, fossatis, divisis,
francborcis, and lanceant ad unum caput super parcum de Newington, and ad aliud
caput versus Thecheyngstokking, cum hayis usque ad Wychordich, inter praedictam
assartam, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, de capitali Domino feodi, per servitia
inde debita and de jure consueta, praedictis, Roberto and Johannae, and
haeredibus de corporibus eorum legitime procreatis. Et ego praedictus Hugo and
haeredes mei, omnia praedicta tenementa, praedictis, Roberto and Johannae, and
haeredibus de corporibus eorum legitime procreatis, warrantizabimus
imperpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Chartae Sigillum meum
apposui. His Testibus, Thoma de Reins Domino de Clifton, Johanne Dardres de
Turveia, Thoma Borard, Richardo de Hekney, Johanne filio Richardi de Eleneye,
Johanne Coke de Clifton, Johanne Toft de Astwode, and aliis. Data apud Clifton
die Mercurii in Festo Sanctae Mariae Magdalenae, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi
tertii post Conquestum, vicesimo nono.

EDMUND de MORDAVNT, First of that Name, Lord of Turvey, Clifton, Shephaell,
and other Lands. CHAPTER VII.
Charta Edmundi de Mordaunt.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus, ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Edmundus
Mordaunt Salutem in Domino. Noveritis me remisiss, relaxasse, and omnimodo
imperpetuum quietum clamasse, pro me, haeredibus, and executoribus meis,
Willielmo Mordaunt seniori, totum jus, and clameum, quae habui, habeo, vel in
futurum habere potero, in tertia part unius messuagii, sexaginta acrarum
terrae, unius acrae prati, and dimidii acrae pasturae, cum suis pertinentiis,
quae quondam fuere Magistri Warini in villa de Turveia, habendum and tenendum
eodem Willielmo, haeredibus and assignatis suis imperpetuum. Ita videlicet,
quod nec ego praedictus Edmundus, nec haeredes mei, nec aliquis alius pro
nobis, vel nomine nostro, aliquid juris vel clamei, in tertia part praedicta,
praedictorum, messuagii, terrae, prati, and pasturae praedictae, nec in aliqua
part eorundem, exigere vel vendicare poterimus in futuro; sed ab omni action,
jure, vel clameo, aliquid inde habendi, vel petendi, sumus exclusi imperpetuum.
In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum apposui. His
Testibus, Roberto Hotot Milite, Edmundo Sergeaunt, Johanne Ardres, Thoma
Fishere, Willielmo Proud, and aliis. Data apud Turveiam praedictam, vicesimo
die Octobris, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi tertii post Conquestum, vicesimo septimo.

seal of Edmund Mordaunt SIGILLVM EDMVNDI MORDAVNT



Charta Petri Carbonell.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus, ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Petrus
Carbonell Salutem in domino. Sciatis quod cum ego, praedictus Petrus, teneo
centum acras terrae, in Cantabrigia, jacentes in quodam campo, vocato
Swinesfield, quae mihi descendebant haereditarie, post mortem Guilielmi patris
mei, in eadem villa, qui quidem Guilielmus, praedictam terram habuit, ex dono,
and feoffamento Domini Radulphi de Broc, qui eandem tenuit, in feodo talliato,
ex concessione Domini Laurentii de Broc, patris praedicti Radulphi, per finem
in Curia Domini Regis, inter eos inde levatum. Et ea de causa noveritis, me
praedictum Petrum, praedictam terram cum pertinentiis concessisse, and pro me
and haeredibus meis, sursum reddidisse, Henrico de Brussells, and Agneti Uxori
ejus, and Edmundo Mordaunt, and Helenae Uxori ejus; praedictis Agneti, and
Helenae, ut filiabus and haeredibus praedicti Radulphi, habendum and tenendum
praedictam terram, cum pertinentiis, praedictis Henrico de Brussells, and
Agneti, Uxori ejus, and Edmundo Mordaunt, and Helenae, Uxori ejus, and
haeredibus eorum, imperpetuum, de capitalibus Dominis feodi per servitia inde
debita. In cujus rei testimonium Sigillum meum apposui. Data apud Cantabrigiam,
die Dominico in crastino Festi Exaltationis Sanctae Crucis, Anno Regni Regis
Edwardi tertii a Conquestu, vicesimo septimo.

Charta Edmundi de Mordaunt and Henrici Brusselle.
A Tous yceux qui cettes lettres verront, ou orront Edmond Mordaunt, and Ellene
sa femme, and Henry de Brusselle, and Agnes sa femme, Salutz en dieu, Saches
nous avoir ordoigne nostre cher, and bien aim, Jean Baynard, nostre attorne, a
recevoir la sesine qu'elle Peiris Carbonell a nous liurera, and surrendra, de
cent acres de terre, ove les appertenances, en Cantabriga: queux sont de
l'heritage de l'avantdit Ellene, and Agnes per finem, le Court nostre Seigneur
le Roy, de ceo leve, en form de taill, seant firm, and stable, quicunque le
dit Jean Baynard, de ce fera, en nostre nom. En tesmognance de qu'elle chose, a
cestes nos presents lettres, avons mis nos Sealls, escrit a la Maudelyn, Mardy
prochain apres la Feste nostre Dame, l'an le Roy Edward Tiers, puis la
Conqueste vint and septiesme.

The Partition of Lands.
CEtte Indenture, feites en trois parties, enter Thomas de Rokesle, and Johane
sa Femme, d'une party, Agnes soeur mesme d'ycelle Johane, d'autre party, and
Edmund Mordaunt, and Ellene sa Femme, soeur mesme d'ycelle Johane, and Agnes de
tiers party, filles and heretieres de Rauff de Broke: de l'heritage mesme cel
Rauff Southecrit, tesmoigne la purpartie, enter les parties avantdits, en la
manniere qui S'ensuit: cest ascavoir.

Pars Thomae de Rokesle and Johane sa Femme.
QUE les ditz Thomas and Johane sa Femme, auront, en purpartie de l'heritage ne
le dit Johane, le Columbar de Chesham, and viij l. viij s. iv d. de rent, ove
les appertenances, jadis appartenant, a la manniere de la Maudeleyn. Et en
manniere de la Maudeleyn iij. maisons, cest ascavoir, une grange, une novelle
etable, and una novelle chamber de mariesme, a sa volunte: cest ascavoir,

l. s. d. ob. q. De Alice Edrich. 0 0 vi 0 0 De Johanne Child. 0 i iv 0 0 De
Johanna Prestmere. 0 ii 0 0 0 De Richardo Witringden. 0 i iv 0 0 De Thoma Prat.
0 viij iv 0 0 De Johanna at Thorn. i vij ix 0 0 De dame Johanne de Badden. Et
una libra de Cumyn. 0 v vi 0 0 De Edmundo Colt. 0 vi xi 0 0 De Johanna Colle. 0
vi xi 0 0 De Johanna Assbiry. 0 vi 0 0 0 De Richardo Carter. 0 x 0 0 0 De
Johanna Cole. 0 i vij 0 0 De Johanna at Dene. 0 vi 0 0 0 De Luce le Well. 0 i
vi 0 0 De Willielmo Hikelond. 0 i 0 0 0 De Johanna Mareschall. 0 iij 0 0 0 De
Hugone Wine. 0 0 x 0 0 De Edellyne de Welpele. 0 ij 0 0 0 De Johan Guess. 0 i 0
0 0 De Elene Reivie. 0 0 ix 0 0 De Alene Alot. 0 i iv 0 0 De Willielmo Draper.
0 ij 0 0 0 De Johanne Welpele. 0 0 viij 0 0 De Johanne Prat. 0 i viij 0 0 De
Henrico Blake, 0 vi vi 0 0 De Johanne Rokmarsey. 0 vi ij 0 0 De Johanne Fitz
Nichol Ashele. 0 0 vi 0 0 De Johanne Somerton. 0 i iv 0 0 De Rogero Toryny
Chevalier. 0 viij iv 0 0 De Johanne Child. 0 0 i 0 0 De Willielmo Coke. 0 iij
ix 0 0 De Johanne Blakwell Shephire. 0 ij 0 0 0 De Johanne le Long. 0 xi v 0 0
De Simone Stonherd. 0 x iij 0 0 De Johanne Gardener. 0 xiv vi 0 0 De Johanne
Gardener. 0 0 vi 0 0 De Johanne Baker. 0 iij 0 0 0 De Agnete Pennyfader. 0 ij 0
0 0

Ove lour homages and services. Et le Manner de Stevenach forpris la terre in
Rygemerefeld, and le Blakelond que est assign a le Manner de Shephale.

Pars Agnetis Brussells.
ET l'avant dit Agneyse, autre des parteners susditz, averoit le site de Manner
de Maudeleyns, ove toute les terres, boys and pastures iiij l. viij s. iij d.
de rent; mesme le manner de Maudeleyn: cest ascavoir, l. s. d. ob. q. De
Johanne Cokeregge. 0 vij iv 0 0 De Stevenne Chaumpeneys. 0 xiij iv 0 0 De les
tenants de Barkhamstede. 0 xxxvi 0 0 0 De la dame Porter. 0 viij 0 0 0 De
Johanne Pedifat. 0 0 xij 0 0 De Willielmo Cohesdele. 0 ij vij 0 0 De Johanne
Redbourn. 0 ij 0 0 0 De Johanne Cokevyle. 0 0 xij 0 0 De Willielmo de Asheld. 0
xiv 0 0 0 De Roberto at Shore. 0 xvi x 0 0

Ove lour homages, services and custumez forpris Grenelands, and iii. measons,
devant nomes.

Pars Edmundi le Mordaunt, and Elene sa Femme.
ET les avanditz Edmunde, and Elyn averont de l'heritage Elen, le Manner de
Shephale, ove les appertenantz, and les terres, de Rigmerfeld and Blakelond,
avaunt nomes, jades parcel de Stevenach; and de la rent du Manner de Maudeleyn,
vii l. xiv s. 1 d. ob. quadrans, Cest ascavoir.

l. s. d. ob. q. De Waltero Powell. 0 0 x 0 0 De Johanne Sokereseyn. 0 iij x 0
0 De -- John 0 ij 0 0 0 De Nicolao Oysell. 0 vi i 0 0 De Johanne Mollyns
Chevalier. 0 viij viij 0 0 De Roberto Gravely. 0 ii 0 0 0 De Johanne Carrier. 0
0 iij 0 0 De Johanne -- 0 0 xviij 0 0 De Johanne Godele. 0 iv iv 0 0 De Waltero
Garnhon. 0 0 xviij 0 0 De Stevenne Marten. 0 0 iij 0 0 De Johanne Gardener. 0 0
xvij 0 0 De Johanne Drake. 0 ii viij 0 0 Del molen lable de Mussenden. 0 xv 0 0
0 De Waltero Blakwell. 0 vi vi i 0 De Thoma Shepherd. 0 0 xvij 0 0 De Johanne
Blakwell. 0 xi i 0 0 De Juliana Blakwell. 0 0 xv 0 0 De Rauff Clarnik. 0 0 xxij
0 0 De Elizabetha Blakwell. 0 0 xx 0 0 De Rauff Coke. 0 viij v i 0 De Johanne
White. 0 0 xij 0 0 De Willielmo May. 0 0 ix 0 0 De Johanne Cole. 0 0 ix 0 0 Et
de les tenante de Esylbirghe iij ix viij 0 0 Ove lour homages, services and
lour Customez.

ET aussy, si les advantdits, Thomas, Johan, Edmunde and Elyne, ou aucun d'eux,
sont distourbes, par les Fermiers de Stevenach, and de Shephale, de mesme les
Manors; a la fine de v. ans, apres la fesance de cestes, en deinz le term de
leur ferme, de xviii. Marcz, par an; donque voet, la dite Agneyse, que soit a
volunte les avantdits Thomas, Johan, Edmunde and Elyne, de reentre les
Tenements advantdit and aller a novell departisment, nient contredisants: Et
touts les reversions de qu'elle party que eux sont, sont purparties enter les
parties avantdits, quant eus escherront, ou null d' eux escherra, and quant
iiii s. de rent, issant de la terre de William le Shepherd, and xx s. rent
issant de la terre que Thomas Trayerr tient, demeureront en commun, entres les
parteners avantdits, a departir, quant il leur plaira: En Tesmoignage de
qu'elle chose, les parteners susdits, entrechangeablement ont mis leur seaulx.
Data a Maudeleyn, le Lundy prochain devant la feste de la Conversion de St.
Paul, L'an du Reign Edward troifieme apres la Conqueste vintisme.

Out of an Ancient Pedigree among the Evidences of the Earl of Peterborow.
IN tempore Regis Henrici Secundi, Vir erat praepotens, and maximae
Authoritatis, Nomine Ranulphus de Broc, qui Castellanus erat Castri de Agenet,
and Constabularius Castri and Honoris de Saltwood. Iste Ranulphus habuit
exitum, Robertum de Broc, qui suo tempore Mareschallus fuit Angliae, and
floruit regnantibus Richardo primo, and Johanne Regibus. Robertus habuit
exitum, Laurentium de Broc, qui fuit tempore Henrici tertii, qui habuit exitum,
Hugonem, qui fuit plenae aetatis, anno tertio Edwardi primi: postea Hugo habuit
exitum, Laurentium, qui fuit decimo quinto Edwardi Secundi and ante, qui quidem
Laurentius habuit exitum Ranulphum, qui duxit in uxorem, Elizabetham Hussy;
qui peperit Elenam, quae fuit uxor Edmundi Mordaunt; Agnetem uxorem Domini
Henrici de Brussells, and Johannam, and praedicta Johanna obiit sine prole.

Inter Recorda in Curia receptae Scaccarii, sub custodia Thesaurarii and
Camerariorum ibidem residentium, videlicet inter placita, coram Domino rege,
apud Westmonasterium de termino Sancti Michaelis, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi
tertii post conquestum Angliae, vicesimo nono, inter alia continetur ut
Sequitur rotulo vij.
Shareshull. Adhuc de termino Sancti Michaelis.
EDmundus Mordaunt attachiatus fuit ad respondendum Rogero Cook de Neuton
Blosseville, de placito trangressionis per billam, etc. Et unde idem Rogerus in
propria persona sua queritur, quod praedictus Edmundus, die lunae proxima post
Festum Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, Anno Regni Regis nunc Angliae vicesimo
nono, vi and armis, scilicet gladiis, etc. Viginti petras lanae, duo tapeta,
and tria lintheamina ipsius Rogeri, pretii quadraginta solidorum, apud
Westmonasterium inventa, cepit, and asportavit, contra pacem Domini Regis, unde
dicit, quod deterioratus est, and dampnum habet ad valentiam centum solidorum,
and inde producit sectam, etc. Et praedictus Edmundus, in propria persona sua
venit, and defendit vim and injuriam, quando, etc. and dicit, quod praedictus
Rogerus, ad billam suam praedictam responderi non debet, quia dicit, quod
praedictus Rogerus, est nativus ipsius Edmundi, de Manerio suo de Turveia, in
Comitatu Bedford, and quod antecessores ipsius Edmundi, a tempore quo non extat
memoria, fuerunt seisiti de antecessoribus ipsius Rogeri, ut de nativis suis
manerii praedicti, and similiter idem Edmundus fuit seisitus de ipso Rogero ut
de nativo suo manerii praedicti. Et petit judicium, si praedictus ad billam
suam praedictam, in hac part respondere debeat, etc. and praedictus Rogerus
dicit, quod ipse non potest dediscere, quin ipse est nativus ipsius Edmundi,
ideo consideratum est, quod praedictus Rogerus nihil capiat per billam suam, in
hac part, sed sit in misericordia pro falso clamore suo, and praedictus
Edmundus inde sine die, etc.

Examinatur per Scipionem le Squire Procamerarium in Curia Receptae Scaccarii.

ROBERT de MORDAVNT, Second of that Name, Lord of Turvey, Clifton, Chicheley,
Shephaell, and other Lands and Lordships. CHAPTER VIII.
Charta Roberti Mordaunt, filii and haeredis Edmundi Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus Mordaunt, filius and haeres
Edmundi Mordaunt de Turveia, in Comitatu Bedfordiae, dedi, concessi, and hac
praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Johanni Curteys de Wimington, Willielmo
Mordaunt de Wybolston, Johanni Buk capellano, and Edmundo Wright capellano,
totum manerium meum de Turveia praedicta, cum boscis, molendinis, terris,
pratis, pascuis, pasturis, redditibus, servitiis, tam liberorum tenentium quam
nativorum, reversionibus, vivariis, stagnis, piscariis, ac cum omnibus aliis
pertinentiis, ad praedictum manerium quoquo modo spectantibus, tam prius
nominatis quam non nominatis. Et etiam cum omnibus aliis terris and tenementis
cum pertinentiis quae quondum fuerunt praedicti Edmundi Mordaunt in Turveia
praedicta, habendum and tenendum totum praedictum manerium cum boscis,
molendinis, terris, pratis, pascuis, pasturis, redditibus, servitiis, tam
liberorum tenentium, quam nativorum, reversionibus, vivariis, aquis, stagnis,
piscariis, and omnibus aliis pertinentiis, ad praedictum manerium spectantibus,
tam nominatis quam innominatis, and etiam cum omnibus aliis terris and
tenementis meis, cum pertinentiis quae quondam fuerant praedicti Edmundi
Mordaunt, patris mei, in Turveia, praedictis, Johanni Curteys, Willielmo
Mordaunt, Johanni Buk capellano, and Edwardo Wright capellano, and eorum
haeredibus vel assignatis, de capitalibus dominis feodi, per servitia inde
debita and consueta. Et Ego praedictus Robertus Mordaunt, filius and haeres
praedicti Edmundi Mordaunt, and haeredes mei, totum manerium praedictum, cum
boscis, terris, molendinis, pratis, pascuis, and pasturis, redditibus,
servitiis, tam liberorum tenentium quam nativorum, reversionibus, vivariis,
aquis, stagnis, piscariis, ac cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis, tam nominatis
quam innominatis, ad praedictum manerium spectantibus, and etiam cum omnibus
aliis terris and tenementis, cum pertinentiis quae quondam fuerant praedicti
Edmundi Mordaunt patris mei, in Turveia praedicta, praefatis, Johanni Curteys,
Willielmo Mordaunt, Johanni Buk capellano, and Edwardo Wright capellano, and
eorum haeredibus, vel assignatis, contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus, and
defendemus, in perpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Chartae
sigillum meum apposui. Data apud Turveiam praedictam sexto die mensis
Septembris, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi tertii a conquestu, quadragesimo nono. His
testibus, Gerrardo Braybrok milite, Johanne Wydeville, Radulpho Walton, Alano
Riscebi, Willielmo Proud, Rogero Long, Thoma Mordaunt, Roberto Geffray, and
multis aliis.

seal of Robert Mordaunt SIGILLVM ROBERTI MORDAVNT



Charta Thomae Dardres.
HAEC Indentura testatur, quod Ego Thomas Dardres, dedi, concessi, and hac
praesenti Charta mea indentata confirmavi, Roberto Mordaunt de Turveia, omnia,
terras and tenementa, redditus, reversiones and servitia, prata, pascua and
pasturas, boscos, stagna, molendina, aquas piscarias, and corpora nativorum, si
quae sint, cum omnibus sectis and sequelis suis, cum omnibus pasturis,
communibus and separalibus, and omnibus aliis proficuis and pertinentiis
eorundem, cum Wardis, Releviis, and Maritagiis, quae habeo, vel habui in villa
de Turveia, in excambium pro omnibus terris, and tenementis, redditibus,
reversionibus, and servitiis, pratis, pascuis, pasturis, boscis, stagnis and
molendinis, aquis piscariis, and corporibus nativorum, si quae sint, cum
omnibus sectis and sequelis suis, cum omnibus pasturis, communibus and
separalibus, and omnibus aliis proficuis, and pertinentiis eorundem, cum
Wardis, Releviis, and Maritagiis, quae praedictus Robertus Mordaunt habet in
villa de Shephale, habendum and tenendum omnia praedicta, terras and tenementa,
redditus, reversiones, and servitia, prata, pascua, pasturas, boscos, stagna,
molendina, aquas piscarias, and corpora nativorum, cum omnibus sectis and
sequelis suis, cum omnibus pasturis, communibus and separalibus, and omnibus
aliis proficuis and pertinentiis eorundem, cum Wardis, Releviis and Maritagiis
praedictis in Turveia, in excambium praedictum, praedicto Roberto, haeredibus
and assignatis suis, de capitalibus dominis feodi illius, per servitia inde
debita and de jure consueta in perpetuum. Et Ego praedictus Thomas Dardres, and
haeredes mei, omnia praedicta, terras and tenementa, redditus, reversiones and
servitia, prata, pascua, pasturas, boscos, stagna, molendina, aquas piscarias,
corpora nativorum, cum omnibus sectis and sequelis suis, cum omnibus pasturis,
communibus and separalibus, and omnibus aliis proficuis and pertinentiis
eorundem, cum Wardis, Releviis and Maritagiis in Turveia, in excambium datis,
praedicto Roberto, haeredibus and assignatis suis, contra omnes gentes
warrantizabimus in perpetuum. Ac etiam praesens Indentura testatur, quod Ego
Robertus Mordaunt dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti Charta indentata
confirmavi, praedicto Thomae Dardres, in excambium pro omnibus terris and
tenementiis, redditibus, reversionibus and servitiis, pratis, pascuis,
pasturis, boscis, stagnis, molendinis, aquis piscariis, and corporibus
nativorum, si quae sint, cum omnibus sectis and sequelis eorum, cum omnibus
pasturis, communibus and separalibus, and omnibus aliis proficuis and
pertinentiis eorundem, cum Wardis, Releviis, and Maritagiis in Turveia superius
mihi datis in excambium supradictum, omnia, terras, and tenementa, redditus,
reversiones and servitia, prata, pascua, pasturas, boscos, stagna, molendina,
aquas piscarias, and corpora nativorum, si quae sint, cum omnibus sectis and
sequelis suis cum omnibus pasturis, communibus and separalibus, and omnibus
aliis proficuis and pertinentiis eorundem, cum Wardis, Releviis, and
Maritagiis, quae habeo vel habui in villa de Shephale, habendum and tenendum
omnia praedicta, terras and tenementa, reversiones, and servitia, prata,
pascua, pasturas, boscos, stagna, molendina, aquas piscarias, and corpora
nativorum, si quae sint, cum omnibus sectis and sequelis suis, cum omnibus
pasturis, communibus and separalibus, and omnibus aliis proficuis and
pertinentiis eorundem, cum Wardis, Releviis, and Maritagiis in villa de
Shephale, praedicto Thomae, haeredibus and assignatis suis, in excambium
praedictum in perpetuum, de capitalibus dominis feodi illius, per servitia inde
debita and de jure consueta. Et Ego vero praedictus Robertus, and haeredes mei
omnia praedicta, terras and tenementa, redditus, reversiones and servitia,
prata, pascua, pasturas, boscos, stagna, molendina, aquas piscarias, and
corpora nativorum, si quae sint, cum omnibus sectis and sequelis suis, cum
omnibus pasturis, communibus and separalibus, and omnibus aliis proficuis and
pertinentiis eorundem, cum Wardis, Releviis and Maritagiis, in villa de
Shephale, praedicto Thomae, haeredibus and assignatis suis, in excambium
praedictum datis, contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in perpetuum. In cujus
rei testimonium parts praedictae alternatim praesentibus Sigilla sua
apposuerint. His Testibus, Thoma de Reins, Roberto Hotot, Willielmo Mordaunt,
militibus, Alano Rushby, Johanne Reysele, Willielmo Proud, Johanne Duyneld,
Johanne Chartesey, and aliis. Data apud Turveiam, die Mercurii proxima ante
Festum Sancti Martini Episcopi, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post
conquestum, quadragesimo nono.

seal of Thomas d'Ardres Sigillum Thomae Dardres



Charta Richardi Dagenhale.
PAteat universis per praesentes me Richardum Dagenhale, ballivum Buckinghamiae
and Bedfordiae Domini Hugonis Comitis de Stafford, recepisse de Roberto
Mordaunt, filio and haerede quondam Edmundi Mordaunt, Domino de Turveia,
viginti marcas bonae and legalis monetae, de duobus finibus, pro ingressu. De
qua quidem solutione fideliter soluta, fateor me plenarie esse solutum, and
praedictum Robertum Mordaunt and quoscunque suos per praesentes in perpetuum
fore quietos. In cujus rei testimonium, praesentibus Sigillum meum apposui.
Datum apud Turveiam die Sabbati proxima ante Festum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis
Baptistae, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Tertii post conquestum, quinquagesimo primo.

Pedigree of the Botelers of Walden, out of the same Manuscript.
GEffrey Boteler, John and Richard fueront freres, Galfridus avoit issue,
William and Elizabet, Geffery devi William enfeoffe de toutes ces terres in
Walden and Ashden les dits John and Richard, ces uncles John Bernard, and John
Heyne, puis William morust sans issue, puis John Boteler relesse a Richard and
John Heignys [B pixide] puis Richard Boteler, and John Heignys, donna toutes
les dites terres a une John Strange, and a la dite Elizabet, and haeredibus de
corporibus eorum legitime procreatis, remanere pro defectu exitus, rectis
haeredibus dictae Elizabethae, per factum, cujus data est apud Walden, die
Martis proxima ante Festum Annunciationis beatae Mariae, Anno Regni Regis
Edwardi Tertii, quadragesimo quarto. Et puis le dit John L'Estrange de Brokle,
donna toutes les dites terres a un John Waryn, and a Elizabet sa Femme, en
taille and remanere pur defaut d'issue a un Agnes Mordaunt, soeur a dite
Elizabet la mere, les dits Elizabet and Agnes and a ces droit heirs, die
Sabbati in vigilia Sancti Michaelis, Anno Regni Regis Richardi Secundi,
undecimo. Elizabet Waryn morust sans issue de sa corpse, Agnes avoit issue
Robert Mordaunt, Robert avoit issue William, William avoit issue John Mordaunt,
in bosco.

Touching the Pedigree of L'Estrange, out of the old Manuscript, is as
follows;
RObert de Tymworth, qui fuit en fait Robert L'Estrange de Tymworth, and
Mabelle sa Femme avoyent issue un John L'Estrange, qui prist a Femme une
Elizabet, la soeur Willielmi Boteler de Walden, qui eux avoyent issue John
L'Estrange, Elizabet and Agnes, Elizabet la fille, Elizabet prist a baron un
John Waryn, puis Elizabet la fille devi sans issue, Agnes prist a baron un
Robert Mordaunt, qui avoit issue Robert, Robert prist a Femme Elizabet, and
avoit issue William, William prist a Femme Marget, qui avoit issue John qui ore
est demandant.

John L'Estrange qui prist a Femme Elizabet fuit appelle John L'Estrange,
Dominus de Brokle, and fuit John L'Estrange de Ampton qui avoit fills un John
L'Estrange, Anno septimo Richardi Secundi.

Charta Johannis L'Estrange de Kimpton.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Johannes L'Estrange de Kimpton, dedi,
concessi and hac praesenti Charta mea indentata confirmavi Johanni L'Estrange,
filio meo, totum tenementum meum in Walden in Comitatu Essexiae, cum
messuagiis, aedificiis, redditibus, and servitiis, terris, pratis, pascuis,
pasturis, sepibus, hayis, fossatis, and cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis in
Walden praedicta, Habendum and Tenendum praedictum tenementum cum messuagiis,
aedificiis, redditibus, servitiis, terris, pratis, pascuis, pasturis, sepibus,
hayis, fossatis, and cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis, praedicto Johanni
L'Estrange, filio meo, haeredi and assignatis suis de capitalibus Dominis
illius feodi, per servitia inde debita and de jure consueta in perpetuum,
Reddendo inde mihi praedicto Johanni L'Estrange, patri, ad terminum vitae meae,
octo libras argenti, and unam libram piperis per annum, viz. Quatuor libras and
unam libram piperis ad festum nativitatis Domini, and quatuor libras argenti ad
festum nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae. At si praedictus redditus a retro
fuit in part vel in toto ad aliquem terminum non solutus, eodem durante
termino vitae meae, extunc tum liceat mihi praedicto Johanni L'Estrange, patri,
haeredibus and assignatis meis, in totum praedictum tenementum cum messuagiis,
aedificiis, redditibus, servitiis, terris, pratis, pascuis, pasturis, cum
omnibus suis pertinentiis, reingredi, and ea in primo statu meo, quoad Terminum
ante diem confectionis praesentis, retinere in perpetuum. Et Ego praedictus
Johannes L'Estrange, pater, and haeredes mei, totum praedictum tenementum cum
messuagiis, aedificiis, redditibus, servitiis, terris, pratis, pascuis,
pasturis, sepibus, hayis, and fossatis, and cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis
suis, praedicto Johanni L'Estrange, filio meo, haeredi and assignatis suis,
forma and condition praescriptis, contra omnes gentes Warrantizabimus in
perpetuum. In cujus rei Testimonium uni parti hujus Chartae Indentatae, penes
Dominum Johannem filium meum remanenti, Sigillum meum apposui, alteri parti,
penes me remanenti, Dominus Johannes filius meus Sigillum suum apposuit. His
Testibus, Richardo Boteler, Johanne Boteler Johanne Crouche, Willielmo Michel,
Johanne Sutton, and aliis. Data apud Walden die Mercurii proxima post festum
Omnium Sanctorum, Anno Regni Regis Richardi Secundi post conquestum, Sexto.

Charta Dominae Johannae Escutamore.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus, ad quos praesens Scriptum Indentatum visurum vel
auditurum, pervenerit, Domina Johanna Escutamore, Salutem in Domino. Noveritis
me dedisse, concessisse, and hoc praesenti indentato, in pura viduitate mea,
confirmasse, Abissae Monasterii de Elnestowe, Domino Nigillo Loring, Domino de
Schalgrave, Roberto Mordaunt Domino de Turveia and Thomae Pevere, unum annuum
redditum december marcarum ad terminum vitae naturalis, Dominarum Lorae Loring,
Elenae Aubin, and Cassandrae Mordaunt, Monalium Monasterii praedicti
percipiendum annuatim de manerris meis de Maudeleyn and Stevenach, in comitatu
Herfordiae, ad duos anni terminos, videlicet ad Festa Annunciationis beatae
Mariae, and Michaelis, per equales portiones. Et si contingat praedictum annuum
redditum december marcarum, ad aliquem terminum praedictum, in part vel in toto,
per unum mensem a retro fore, and non solutum, tunc been liceat praefatis
Abissae, quae pro tempore fuerit, Domino Nigillo, Roberto and Thomae,
haeredibus and assignatis praedictorum, Nigilli, Roberti and Thomae, in
praedictis maneriis intrare, and distringere, and districtiones captas
retinere, and eas abducere, and de iisdem disponere, quousque de praedicto
annuo redditu december marcarum, una cum expensis and dampnis, in hac part
habitis, plenarie fuerit satisfactum. Et ego vero praedicta Johanna and
haeredes mei, praedictum annuum redditum december marcarum praefatae Abissae, quae
pro tempore fuerit, Domino Nigillo, Roberto and Thomae, usque ad totam vitam
praedictarum dominarum, Lorae, Elenae, and Cassandrae, monalium, contra omnes
gentes warrantizabimus, and defendemus. In cujus rei testimonium praesentibus
Sigilla nostra alternatim sunt apposita. Data apud Elnestowe die Dominica in
Festo Sancti Andreae Apostoli, Anno Regni Regis Richardi Secundi a Conquestu,
sexto.

Charta praedictae Dominae Johannae Escutamore endorsata est ut sequitur;
videlicet,
HAEC est intentio dictae Johannae infra scriptae, quod Lora infra scripta,
habeat pro sua part, de annuo redditu infra Scripto, quolibet anno, ad totam
vitam suam, quatuor Marcas, Elena Aubin tres marcas, and Cassandra Mordaunt
tres marcas.

Charta Johannis Curteys and Willielmi Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod nos Johannes Curtes de Wymington, and
Willielmus Mordaunt, dedimus, concessimus and hac praesenti Charta nostra
confirmavimus Roberto Mordaunt de Turveia, and Agneti uxori ejus, omnia illa,
terras and tenementa, prata, pascua, and pasturas, boscos, stagna, and
molendina, redditus, reversiones, servitia and consuetudines, curias, sectas
curiarum, liberorum and nativorum tenentium, cum sequelis eorundem, and omnibus
aliis suis pertinentiis, quae quondam fuerant Edmundi Mordaunt, patris
praedicti Roberti, in Turveia praedicta, ac quae prius habuimus de dono and
feoffamento praedicti Roberti in villa praedicta sine aliquo retinemento.
Habendum and tenendum omnia praedicta, terras and tenementa, prata, pascua and
pasturas, boscos, stagna and molendina, redditus, reversiones, servitia and
consuetudines, curias, sectas curiarum, liberorum and nativorum tenentium, cum
sequelis eorundem, and omnibus aliis suis pertinentiis, praefatis, Roberto and
Agneti, and haeredibus de corporibus eorum legitime inter eos procreatis, de
captialibus dominis feodorum illorum, per servitia inde debita, and de jure
consueta in perpetuum. Et si contingat, quod absit, quod praedicti Robertus and
Agnes obierint sine haeredibus de corporibus eorum legitime procreatis inter
eos, extunc omnia praedicta, terrae and tenementa, pascua and pasturae, bosci,
stagna, and molendina, redditus, reversiones, servitia and consuetudines,
Curiae, sectae Curiarum, liberorum and nativorum tenentium, cum sequelis
eorundem, and omnibus aliis suis pertinentiis, rectis and propinquioribus
haeredibus ipsius Roberti remaneant in perpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic
praesenti Chartae nostrae Sigilla nostra apposuimus. His testibus, Johanne
Reygnes milite, Thoma de Ardres, Johanne Walkim, Thoma at Brugh, Willielmo
Fyshere, and aliis. Data apud Turveiam praedictam, die dominica in festo
Sanctae Mariae Magdalenae, Anno Regni Regis Richardi Secundi post conquestum,
decimo.

Charta Johannis Curteys de Wymington.
NOverint universi per praesentes me Johannem Curteys de Wymington, ordinasse,
constituisse, and loco meo posuisse, dictum in Christo mihi, Alanum Rusbye,
certum Attornatum meum, ad liberandum Roberto Mordaunt de Turveia, and Agneti
uxori ejus, plenam and pacificam seisinam de omnibus terris and tenementis,
pratis, pascuis and pasturis, boscis, stagnis and molendinis, redditibus,
servitiis and consuetudinibus, curiis, sectis curiarum, liberorum and nativorum
tenentium, cum omnibus sequelis eorundem, and omnibus aliis suis pertinentiis
quae quondam fuerant Edmundi Mordaunt, patris praedicti, in Turveia praedicta,
juxta formam and tenorem cujusdam Chartae inde per nos confectae, ratum and
gratum habiturus quicquid idem Alanus nomine meo fecerit in praemissis per
praesentes. In cujus rei testimonium praesentibus sigillum meum apposui. Data
apud Wymington praedictam, die dominica in Festo Sanctae Mariae Magdalenae,
Anno Regni Regis Richardi Secundi post conquestum, decimo.

Charta Domini Johannis L'Estrange Domini de Brokeley.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Johannes L'Estrange, Dominus de
Brokley, dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea Indentata confirmavi
Johanni Waryn juniori and Elizabethae, uxori suae, totum tenementum meum in
Walden, cum redditibus and servitiis, terris, boscis, pratis, pascuis and
pasturis, sepibus, hayis and foslatis, wardis, maritagis and releviis, and cum
omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis in Walden praedicta, habendum and tenendum
totum praedictum tenementum cum redditibus and servitiis, boscis, pratis,
pascuis and pasturis, sepibus, hayis and fossatis, wardis, maritagiis and
releviis, and cum omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis, praedicto Johanni Waryn and
Elizabethae, uxori suae, and haeredibus praedictae Elizabethae de corpore suo
exeuntibus, de capitablibus Dominis feodi illius per servitia inde debita and
de jure consueta, reddendo inde annuatim mihi praefato Johanni L'Estrange,
durante termino vitte meae, sex libras bonae monetae, videlicet, ad Festum
Purificationis beatae Mariae sexaginta solidos, and ad Festum Sancti Petri ad
vincula sexaginta solidos per aequales portiones; Et si praedictus redditus a
retro fuerit non solutus in part vel in toto ad aliquem terminum supradictum,
vel per octo dies, ultra terminum aliquem praedictum, durante termino vitae
meae, quod tunc been liceat mihi praefato Johanni L'Estrange in praedictum
tenementum cum omnibus suis pertinentiis praedictis reingredi in pristino
statu, and mihi and haeredibus meis in perpetuum retinere; Et si contingat quod
praedictus Johannes Waryn and Elizabetha obierint sine haerede de corpore
ipsius Elizabethae exeunte, quod tunc praedictum tenementum cum omnibus
pertinentiis suis supradictis, Agneti Mordaunt, filiis meis and sorori ipsius
Elizabethae, and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus, integre remaneat in
perpetuum, habendum and tenendum totum praedictum tenementum cum omnibus
supradictis, praefatis, Agneti and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus, de
capitalibus dominis feodi illius, per servitia inde debita and de jure
consueta. Et si praedicta Agnes obierit, sine haerede de corpore suo exeunte,
tunc praedictum tenementum, cum omnibus supradictis, rectis haeredibus matris
praedictarum Agnetis and Elizabethae, integre remanere debent, tenendum de
capitalibus dominis feodi illius, per servitia inde debita and de jure consueta
in perpetuum. Et Ego vero praefatus Johannes L'Estrange, and haeredes mei,
totum praedictum tenementum cum redditibus and servitiis, boscis, pratis,
pascuis and pasturis, sepibus, hayis and fossatis, wardis, maritagiis and
releviis, and cum omnibus pertinentiis suis, praefatis, Johanni Waryn and
Elizabethae, and haeredibus de corpore ipsius Elizabethae excuntibus, forma and
condition praescriptis, contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in perpetuum. In
cujus rei testimonium uni parti hujus Chartae Indentatae figillum meum apposui.
His testibus, Johanne Crouche, Johanne Buk, Johanne Sutton, Simone Adam,
Johanne Elyot, Roberto Boucher, and aliis. Data apud Walden, praedicta die
sabbati in vigilia Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, Anno Regni Regis Richardi
Secundi post conquestum, undecimo.

seal of John le Strange SIGILLVM IOHANNIS LE STRANGE



Charta Roberti Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus Mordaunt de Turveia, dedi,
concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi Thomae Pevere de Thoddington,
Johanni Curteys de Wymington, Johanni Boteler de Stacheden, Rogero Keston,
Roberto Brown de Turveia, and Johanni At Well clerico, omnia, terras and
tenementa, redditus and servitia, curias, sectas curiae, tam liberorum quam
rativorum tenentium, cum omnibus aliis suis pertinentiis in Hynton, Cambrugh,
and Treversham, in Comitatu Cantabrigiae. Habendum and tenendum omnia
praedicta, terras and tenementa mea, redditus and servitia, curias, sectas
curiarum, tam liberorum quam nativorum tenentium, cum omnibus aliis suis
pertinentiis, praefatis, Thomae, Johanni, Rogero, Roberto Brown and Johanni,
haeredibus and assignatis suis, de capitalibus dominis feodorum illorum, per
servitia inde debita and de jure consueta in perpetuum. Et Ego vero praedctus
Robertus Mordaunt, and haeredes mei, omnia praedicta, terras and tenementa,
redditus, servitia, curias, fectas curiarum, tam liberorum quam nativorum
tenentium, cum omnibus pertenentiis suis, praefatis, Thomae, Johanni, Johanni,
Rogero, Roberto Brown and Johanni, haeredibus and assignatis suis, contra omnes
gentes warrantizabimus in perpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium, huic praesenti
Chartae meae sigillum meum apposui. Data apud Turveiam praedictam, tertio die
Martii, Anno Regni Regis Richardi Secundi post Conquestum, quarto decimo. His
testibus, Roberto Else de Hynton praedicta, Richardo Chamburlyn de eadem,
Willielmo Tripplow, and aliis multis.

Charta Roberti Mordaunt.
NOverint universi per praesentes, me Robertum Mordaunt de Turveia, Attornasse
and loco meo posuisse dilectum mihi in Christo Robertum Else de Hynton,
attornatum meum, ad deliberandum Thomae Pevere de Thoddington, Johanni Curteys
de Wymington, Johanni Boteler de Stacheden, Rogero Keston, Roberto Brown de
Turveia, and Johanni At Well clerico, haeredibus and assignatis suis, plenam
and pacificam feisinam de omnibus terris and tenementis, redditibus, and
servitiis, curiis, sectis curiarum, tam liberorum quam nativorum tenentium, cum
omnibus aliis suis pertinentiis in Hynton, Camburgh, and Treversham in Comitatu
Cantabrigiae, secundum tenorem ejusdem Chartae meae, eisdem confectae, ratum
and gratum habiturus quioquid idem Robertus nomine meo faciet in praemissis per
praesentes. In cujus rei testimonium praesentibus Sigillum meum apposui. Data
apud Turveiam praedictam, tertio die Martii, Anno Regni Regis Richardi Secundi
post Conquestum, quarto decimo.

Charta Roberti Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus Mordaunt de Turveia, dedi,
concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi, Thomae Pevere de
Thoddington, Johanni Curteys de Wymington, Johanni Boteler de Stacheden, Rogero
Keston, Roberto Brown de Turveia, and Johanni At Well clerico, omnia, terras
and tenementa mea, redditus, consuetudines and servitia, curias, visus and
sectas curiarum, tam liberorum quam nativorum tenentium, cum wardis,
maritagiis, releviis, heriotis, eschaetis, and omnibus aliis suis pertinentiis,
in Chesham, Welpoole, and Aumondsham. Dedi etiam eisdem Thomae, Johanni,
Johanni, Rogero, Roberto Brown and Johanni, reversionem omnium terrarum and
tenementorum, reddituum, consuetudinum, and servitiorum, and curiarum, visuum
franciplegiorum, sectarum Curiarum, tam liberorum quam nativorum tenentium, cum
wardis, maritagiis, releviis, heriotis, eschaetis, and omnibus aliis suis
pertinentiis, quae and quas Thomas de Ardres de Turveia, and Elizabetha uxor
ejus tenent de me praedicto Roberto Mordaunt ad terminum vitae eorum in
Eselburgh and Bridsthorne, Wedon and Herdwick in Comitatu Buckinghamiae.
Habendum and tenendum omnia praedicta, terras and tenementa, redditus,
consuetudines and servitia, curias, vilus franciplegiorum, and sectas curiarum,
tam liberorum tenentium quam nativorum, cum wardis, maritagiis, releviis,
heriotis, eschaetis, and omnibus aliis suis pertinentiis; Et etiam reversionem
omnium terrarum and tenementorum, reddituum, consuetudinum and servitiorum
Curiarum, visuum franciplegiorrum, sectarum Curiarum, tam liberorum quam
nativorum tenentium, cum wardis, maritagiis, releviis, heriotis, eschaetis, and
omnibus aliis pertinentiis suis, praefatis, Thomae, Johanni, Johanni, Rogero,
Roberto Brown and Johanni, haeredibus and assignatis suis, de capitablibus
Dominis feodorum illorum, per servitia inde debita and de jure inde consueta in
perpetuum. Et ego vero praedictus Robertus Mordaunt and haeredes mei, omnia
praedicta, terras and tenementa, redditus, consuetudines and servitia, curias,
visus franciplegiorum, and sectas Curiarum, tam liberorum quam nativorum
tenentium, cum wardis, maritagiis, releviis, heriotis, eschaetis, and omnibus
aliis suis pertinentiis; Et reversionem praedictam omnium terrarum and
tenementorum, reddituum and servitiorum, cum omnibus aliis suis pertinentiis,
post decessum praedictorum Thomae de Ardres and Elizabethae, praefatis Thomae
Pevere, Johanni, Johanni, Rogero, Roberto Brown and Johanni, haeredibus and
assignatis suis, contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in perpetuum. In cujus rei
testimonium, huic praesenti Chartae meae Sigillum meum apposui. Data apud
Turveiam praedictam, tertio die Martii, Anno Regni Regis Richardi Secundi post
Conquestum, quarto decimo. His testibus, Johanne Chesham, Johanne At Brook
seniore, Roberto Morring, and aliis.

Out of the old Manuscript.
ET Thomas de Ardres per fait Indentre, portant date apud Turvey, le lundie
prochain avaunt le Fest de Seint Andrew l'Apostel, Anno Regni Regis Richardi
Secundi post Conquestum, vicesimo, granta viginti duo solidos and quatuor
denarios, a Thoma Foddringey, and aliis, pour term de vie Agnes la Femme
Robert Mordaunt qui fit exchange avec Thomas de Ardres pour le Manner de
Shephale pour le dower le dit Agnes in Shephale avantdit.

Endentures faicts per enter le tres haut and puissant Prince Edward Duc de
York, and Robert Mordaunt, and Thomas Mirefield.
CEtte Endentre faicte per enter tres haut and puissant Prince Edward Duc de
York d'une part, and Robert Mordaunt and Thomas Mirefield Esquiers, d'autre
part, tesmoigne, Que les dits Robert and Thomas sont retenus avecque le dit Duc
pour demi an commencant le siziesme jour de Juliet venant prochain, avesque
xxiv archers prenant pour luy mesme xviij d. le jour, and pour l'autre lance
xviij d. le jour, and pour chacun des xxiv archers noef d. le jour, and seront
le dit Robert and Thomas avecque leurs dits gents, prests, montez, armez and
arrayez au dit jour en le port de Southampton comme a leur dites gentes
apertinet, and seront le dit Robert and Thomas payez pour deux mois avaunt leur
depart d'Angleterre, c'est ascavoir pour un mois en main, and pour un autre a
leur montre a la mer. Et aussi de mois en mois au commencement de chaque mois
ou dedans dix jours apres le dit commencement; and feront le dit Robert and
Thomas gait and guard avesque tous leurs dits gents, quant and si souvent comme
ce seront raisonablement requis ou assigns par le dit Duc, ou aucun autre en
son nom, and aussi entendans audit Duc avesque eux mesmes, and leurs dits
gents, ou a celuy qu'il voudra en son nom assigner and ordeigner durant le dit
voyage, a pie a cheval, selon que le cas requerra, and aura le dit Duc le tiers
de tous les gains d'eux mesmes, and le tierce du tierce de toutes leurs dits
gents: Et si lesdits Robert and Thomas pregnent ou pregneront aucun Chevetain,
Chastel ou Forteresse, adoncque mon dit Seigneur les aura verse luy sur un
raisonable regard a fair au dit Robert and Thomas. En tesmoignance de qu'elle
chose les parties avandits a ces presents enterchangeablement ont mis leurs
Seals. A Londres le xvi jour de Juin, l'an du Reign nostre Seigneur le Roy
Henry quarta puis le Couqueste tressisme.

ROBERT de MORDAVNT, Third of that Name, Lord of Turvey, Clifton, Yerdley, and
other Lands and Lordships. CHAPTER IX.
Charta Roberti de Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus de Mordaunt de Turveia, dedi,
concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi, Thomaev Peered Thoddington,
Thomae Foddringey de Turveia, Willielmo Bozonn de Wotton, and Willielmo Campion
vicario Ecclesiae de Amphthill, omnia terras and tenementa mea, redditus,
reversiones, servitia, consuetudines, wardas, maritagia, relevia, heriota and
eschaeta, cum Curiis, sectis Curiarum, tam liberorum quam nativorum tenentium,
and cum omnibus singulis aliis pertinentiis suis, in parochia de
Yerdley-Hastings, quae mihi accedebant jure, and haereditarie post decessum
Roberti Mordaunt patris mei; habendum and tenendum omnia praedicta terras and
tenementa, redditus, reversiones, servitia, consuetudines, wardas, maritagia,
relevia, heriota and eschaeta, cum Curiis, sectis Curiarum, tam liberorum quam
nativorum tenentium, cum omnibus and singulis aliis pertinentiis suis,
praefatis Thomae Pevere, Thomae Foddringey, Willielmo Bozonn and Willielmo
Campion, haeredibus and assignatis suis, de capitalibus Dominis feodorum
illorum, per servitia inde debita and de jure consueta in perpetuum. Et ego
vero praedictus Robertus and haeredes mei, omnia praedicta terras and
tenementa, redditus, reversiones, servitia, consuetudines, wardas, maritagia,
relevia, heriota and eschaeta, cum Curiis, sectis Curiarum, tam liberorum quam
nativorum tenentium, ac cum omnibus and singulis aliis pertinentiis suis,
praefatis Thomae Pevere, Thomae Foddringey, Willielmo Bozonn and Willielmo
Campion, haeredibus and assignatis suis, contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in
perpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Chartae meae Sigillum
apposui. His Testibus, Johanne Reins de Clifton milite, Nicolao Bradshaw,
Thoma Ardres, Hugone Ardres, Johanne Boteler de Stacheden, and aliis. Data apud
Turveiam in vigilia Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, Anno Regni Regis Henrici
Quarti post Conquestum, tertio decimo.

seal of Robert Mordaunt SIGILLVM ROBERTI MORDAVNT



Charta Roberti de Mordaunt.
NOverint universi per praesentes me Robertum Mordaunt de Turveia in Comitatu
Bedfordiae, ordinasse, constituisse, and in loco meo posuisse dilectum mihi in
Christo, Johannem Boteler, in Comitatu Buckinghamiae Attornatum meum, ad
deliberandum nomine meo Thomae Pevere Domino de Thoddington, Thomae Foddringey
de Turveia, Willielmo Bozonn de Wotton, and Willielmo Campion vicario Ecclesiae
de Amphthill, plenam and pacisicam seisnam, in omnibus terris and tenementis
meis, redditibus, servitiis and consuetudinibus, wardis, maritagiis, releviis,
heriotis and eschaetis, ac etiam de Curiis, sectis Curiarum, tam liberorum quam
nativorum tenentium, ac omnibus ac singulis eorum aliis pertinentiis in
Yerdley-Hastings, in Comitatu Northamptoniae, secundum tenorem cujusdam Chartae
meae, inter nos confectae, ubi before continetur. Et ad distringendum omnes
tenentes meos ibidem, ad attornandum dictis feoffatis meis, and Arreragia
reddituum, ibidem existentia, nomine meo recipiendum. Ratum and gratum
habiturus, quicquid idem Johannes nomine meo fecerit in praemissis per
praesentes. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti Scripto Sigillum meum
apposui. Data apud Turveiam praedictam, in Festo Apostolorum Petri and Pauli,
Anno Regni Regis Henrici Quarti post Conquestum, tertio decimo.

Charta Roberti de Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Robertus de Mordaunt de Turveia, in
Comitatu Bedfordiae, dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi,
Thomae Pevere Domino de Thoddington, Thomae Foddringey de Turveia praedicta,
Willielmo Bozonn Domino de Wotton, and Willielmo Campion vicario Ecclesiae de
Amphthill, omnia, terras and tenementa mea, redditus, servitia, consuetudines,
wardas, maritagia, relevia, heriota and eschaeta, cum Curiis, sectis Curiarum,
tam liberorum quam nativorum tenentium, ac omnibus ac singulis aliis suis
pertinentiis in Herdwick and Wedon, juxta Alisbury in Comitatu Buckinghamiae,
and quae mihi accedebant jure and haereditarie post decessum Roberti Mordaunt
patris mei; habendum and tenendum omnia praedicta terras and tenementa,
redditus, servitia, consuetudines, wardas, maritagia, relevia, heriota and
eschaeta, cum Curiis, sectis Curiarum, tam liberorum quam nativorum tenentium,
ac omnibus ac singulis aliis suis pertinentiis, praefatis Thomae Pevere, Thomae
Foddringey, Willielmo Bozonn and Willielmo Campion, haeredibus and assignatis
suis, de capitalibus Dominis feodorum illorum, per servitia inde debita and de
jure consueta in perpetuum. Et ego vero praedictus Robertus and haeredes mei,
omnia praedicta, terras and tenementa, redditus and servitia, consuetudines,
wardas, maritagia, relevia, heriota and eschaeta, cum Curiis, sectis Curiarum,
tam liberorum quam nativorum tenentium, ac omnibus ac singulis aliis
pertinentiis suis praefatis Thomae, Thomae, Willielmo and Willielmo haeredibus
and assignatis suis contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus. In cujus rei
testimonium huic praesenti Chartae meae Sigillum meum apposui. His Testibus,
Johanne Reins de Clifton milite, Nicolao Bradshaw, Thoma Ardres, Hugone
Ardres, Johanne Boteler de Stacheden, and multis aliis. Data apud Turveiam
praedictam, quinto die mensis Junii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Quarti post
Conquestum, tertio decimo.

Charta Roberti de Mordaunt.
NOverint universi per praesentes me Robertum Mordaunt de Turveia, in Comitatu
Bedfordiae, ordinaisse, constitusse and loco meo posuisse, dilectum mihi in
Christo, Johannem Boteler de Checheley, in Comitatu Bukinghamiae Attornatum
meum, ad deliberandum nomine meo, Thomae Pevere Domino de Thoddington, Thomae
Foddringey de Turveia praedicta, Willielmo Bozonn Domino de Wotton, and
Willielmo Campion vicario Ecclesiae de Amphthill, plenam and pacificam
seisinam, de omnibus terris and tenementis meis, redditibus, servitiis and
consuetudinibus, wardis, maritagiis, releviis, heriotis and eschaetis, ac etiam
de Curiis, sectis Curiarum, tam liberorum quam nativorum tenentium, ac omnibus
ac singulis eorum aliis pertinentiis, in Herdwick and Wedon, juxta Alisbury, in
Comitatu Buckinghamiae, secundum tenorem cujusdam Chartae meae, inter nos
confectae, before continetur. Et ad distringendum omnes tenentes meos ibidem,
ad attornandum dictis feoffatis meis, and arreragia reddituum, ibidem
existentia, nomine meo recipiendum. Ratum and gratum habiturus, quicquid idem
Johannes nomine meo fecerit in praemissis per praesentes. In cujus rei
testimonium, huic praesenti Scripto meo Sigillum meum authenticum apposui. Data
apud Turveiam praedictam, quinto die mensis Junii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici
quarti post Conquestum, tertio decimo.

Charta Roberti de Mordaunt.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit, Robertus
Mordaunt de Turveia Armiger, Salutem in Domino sempiternam. Noveritis me
remississe, relaxasse, and omnimodo pro me and haeredibus meis, in perpetuum
clamasse, Johanni Brigge juniori de eadem, and Matildae uxori ejus, haeredibus,
and eorum assignatis, totum jus meum, clameum and statum, quae habeo, habui vel
quovis modo in futurum habere potero, in omnibus illis terris and tenementis,
pratis, pascuis and pasturis, redditibus and servitiis, cum omnibus suis
pertinentiis, sicut jacent in villa and campis de Turveia praedicta, quae nuper
fuerant Alienorae Mordaunt de eadem, ita quod nec ego praefatus Robertus, nec
haeredes mei, nec aliquis alius nomine nostro, aliquid juris, status seu
clamei, in praedictis terris and tenementis cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, nec
in aliqua parcella eorundem, de caetero exigere vel vendicare poterimus in
futurum, sed ab omni action juris, status, and clamei, ab inde sumus exclusi
in perpetuum penitus per praesentes. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti
scripto relaxationis Sigillum meum apposui. His Testibus, Thoma Dardres,
Johanne Turvey, Willielmo Raunston, Johanne Cotton, Johanne Repinghale, and
multis aliis. Data apud Turveiam praedictam, decimo quarto die mensis Martii,
Anno Regni Regis Henrici quinti post Conquestum Angliae, quarto.

Charta Johannis Brigge Senioris, Johannis Brigge Junioris, and Matildae uxoris
ejus.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Johannes
Brigge de Turveia senior, Johannes Brigge de Turveia junior and Matilda uxor
ejus, salutem. Cum Robertus Mordaunt de Turveia Armiger, ut filius and haeres
Roberti Mordaunt filii and haeredis Edmundi Mordaunt, nuper clamavit versus nos
praefatos, Johannem Brigge seniorem, Johannem Brigge juniorem, and Matildam,
unum toftum, vocatum Waryns, continens dimidiam acram in se, and sexaginta
acras terrae arabilis cum pertinentiis in Turveia praedicta, quae praedictus
Robertus pater Edmundi quondam concessit Willielmo Mordaunt fratri suo, ad
terminum vitae suae, reversione inde post mortem ipsius Willielmi, eidem
Roberto patri Edmundi, and haeredibus suis spectante, and in quae quidem
Willielmus Mordaunt junior filius ipsius Willielmi fratris Roberti, post mortem
ejusdem Willielmi patris sui, in praedicta, toftum, and sexaginta acras terrae
cum pertinentiis, intravit, and minus just occupavit, and inde cum pluribus
aliis terris and tenementis, in eadem villa, feoffat quosdam Johannem Conquest,
tunc rectorem medietatis Ecclesiae de Haughton Conquest, and Johannem Olivere,
Capellanum, qui ipsum Willielmum filium Willielmi, and Alienoram uxorem ejus,
and Johannem filium ipsorum, Willielmi filii Willielmi, and Alienorae,
postmodum de eisdem tofto, and sexaginta acris terrae cum pertinentiis, cum
praedictis pluribus aliis terris and tenementis, in dicta villa de Turveia,
refeoffarunt, habendum and tenendum sibi and eorum haeredibus and assignatis in
perpetuum, quae quidem Alienora tam praedictum Willielmum virum suum quam
praedictum Johannem filium suum superinuens de eisdem tofto, and sexaginta
acris terrae, tum praedcitis pluribus aliis terris and tenementis, cum
pertinentiis, in eadem villa, feoffavit quendam Willielmum Shakill de Turveia,
and alios, quorum statum nos praefati Johannes Brigge junior, and Matilda,
habemus in eisdem tofto, and sexaginta acris terrae, ac in praedictis pluribus
aliis terris and tenementis, videlicet, nobis and haeredibus nostris, de
nostris corporibus procreatis, ita quod si nos sine haerede, de nostris
corporibus procreato, obire contigit, Reversio inde post mortem nostram,
praefato Johanni Brigge seniori, Johanni Brigge juniori, and Matildae
incognitum existit, quae praedictae sexaginta acrae terrae, quas praedictus
Robertus, filius Roberti, versus nos sic clamat, existant, and ubi and in
quibus locis camporum jacent, eo quod nos praefati Johannes Brigge senior,
Johannes Brigge junior, and Matilda, cum terris illis, plures alias terras in
eadem villa teneamus, and occupamus, sciatis nos eosdem Johannem Brigge
seniorem, Johannem Brigge juniorem, and Matildam, liberasse ac sursum
reddidisse, praefato Roberto, filio Roberti, toftum praedictum, and nomine
praedictarum sexaginta acrarum terrae, and pro eisdem sexaginta acris terrae,
terras subscriptas; videlicet, tres selliones terrae jacentes in Campo vocato
Inlond, pro una acra, videlicet, juxta Berodebalke ex part australi, and
abuttantes contra pratum vocatum Alfetcroft; and sex selliones terrae jacentes
in eadem quarentena, pro duabus acris, inter terram quondam Johannis Traylly
militis, ex part australi, and terram Johannis Chamberleyn, ex part altera,
and abuttantes contra Alfetcroft; and septem selliones simul jacentes super
Medefurlong, inter terram quam Agnes, matter ipsius Roberti filii Roberti, tenet
ad terminum vitae, reversione inde post mortem ipsius Agnetis, eidem Roberto
filio Roberti spectante ex part boreali, and terram Roberti Barker ex part
altera, and abuttantes contra pratum vocatum Knapperisdole; and duas selliones
longas jacentes in superiori quarentena ibidem, lanceantes a le Churchapath,
usque Northbrookeweye, and ad earum finem juxta Northbrookeweye, jacentes inter
terram Johannis Turvey, ex utraque part, pro una acra, and dimidiam acram
terrae, abuttantem contra Coppedmoor, jacentem inter terram quam praefata Agnes
tenet, in forma praedicta, ex part boreali, and terram Johannis Chamberleyn,
ex part altera; and aliam dimidiam acram terrae abuttantem contra Coppedmoor,
jacentem inter terram quam eadem Agnes tenet, in forma praedicta, ex part
australi, and terram quondam Johannis Smyth, ex part altera; and unam rodam
terrae super Northbrookfurlong, jacentem juxta terram quondam Willielmi
Fyshere, ex part orientali, and ad caput boreale abuttantem contra
Northbrooke; and dimidiam acram terrae in eadem quarentena, jacentem inter
terram Roberti At Brigge de Beydon, ex part orientali, and terram Johannis
Chamberleyn, ex part altera, and ad caput boreale abuttantem contra
Northbrooke; and unam rodam terrae jacentem in eadem quarentena, juxta terram
Willielmi Shakill, ex part orientali, and similiter abuttantem contra
Northbrooke; and tres rodas terrae jacentes super Denlond, inter terram quam
praedicta Agnes tenet, in forma praedicta, ex utraque part, and unum caput
abuttans contra Northbrooke, and aliud contra Prestmede; and duas acras and
dimidiam terrae simul jacentes in quarentena intra Northbrooke and Prestmede,
inter terram Willielmi Chapman, ex part orientali, and terram Willielmi
Shakill, ex part altera, and ad caput australe abuttantes contra Northbrooke;
and unam acram terrae jacentem in eadem quarentena, inter terram Willielmi
Shakill ex part occidentali, and viam ducentem usque ad Prestmede ex part
altera, and ad caput australe abuttantem contra Northbrooke; and unam acram
terrae jacentem in quarentena vocata Holmes, jacentem inter terram Johannis
Chamberleyn, ex part orientali, and terram Johannis Shepherd de Carleton ex
part altera, and ad caput boreale abuttantem contra foreram Johannis
Stephenson; and unam rodam terrae jacentem in eadem quarentena, inter terram
quam praedicta Agnes tenet in forma praedicta, ex utraque part, and ad caput
boreale abuttantem contra foreram praedicti Roberti filii Roberti; and sex
selliones terrae, jacentes, pro quinque rodis, in quarentena, subter
quarentenam vocatam Holmes, unde una est forera, contra quam praedicta roda
terrae super Holmes, ut praedictum est, abuttat ex part boreali, jacentes
juxta terram Johannis Sancherum; and sex selliones terrae jacentes in
quarentena super Prestmede, pro una acra, inter terram Roberti Focour, ex part
occidentali, and terram Willielmi Focour, ex part altera, and ad caput
australe abuttantes contra Prestmede; and in quarentena subter Carleton
Hallewell duas selliones pro una acra, jacentem juxta terram praedicti Johannis
Brigge senioris, and sellio borealis earum est forera, and ad caput orientale
abuttant contra Fildingwey; and dimidiam acram terrae jacentem super Lobynden,
inter terram Johannis Stephenson, ex orientali, and terram Prioris de Sancto
Neoto, ex part altera, and ad caput australe abuttantem contra foreram
Willielmi Shakill; and tres selliones jacentes super Cherlesho, pro una acra
intra terram quam praedicta Agnes tenet in forma praedicta, ex part Australi,
and terram Willielmi Focour ex part altera; and unam rodam terrae quae est
forera, contra quam praedictae tres selliones terrae abuttant ad caput
orientale; and dimidiam acram terrae similiter jacentem super Cherlesho inter
terram quam praedicta Agnes tenet, in forma praedicta, ex utraque part, unde
finis orientalis est forera; and dimidiam acram terrae jacentem apud
Peterespitts, juxta terram Nicolai At Brigge, ex part Australi, and
similiter unam rodam terrae ibidem jacentem, juxta terram ejusdem Nicolai, ex
part boreali, unde capita orientalia abuttant contra foreram praedicti
Johannis Brigge junioris; and etiam duas rodas ibidem jacentes inter terram
Thomae Toft, ex part boreali, and terram Rectoris de Carleton ex part altera,
and similiter abuttant contra eandem foreram; and duas selliones pro una acra
jacentes apud Estenbrooke, juxta terram Johannis Tryce, ex part australi, and
sellio borealis earum est forera, and ad caput orientale abuttant contra
Gastenbrooke; and duas selliones terrae ibidem jacentes, inter terram quondam
Roberti Hotot militis, ex part orientali, and terram Johannis Tryce ex part
altera, and ad caput orientale abuttant contra foreram Willielmi Shakill; and
duas selliones pro una roda jacentes in Bendlondfield, videlicet, apud
Northbrooke-Cross, inter terram quondam praedicti Johannis Traylly, ex part
australi, and terram quam praedicta Agnes tenet in forera praedicta, ex part
altera, and ad caput orientale abuttantes contra foreram Johannis Turvey, and
ad aliud caput contra viam ducentem a Northbrooke-Crooss usque ad
Stanwey-Cross; and dimidiam acram terrae ibidem jacentem juxta terram Roberti
Barker, abuttantem contra crucem vocatam Northwood-Cross, ad caput occidentale;
and unam acram terrae cum pastura adjacente, apud Caldwenstade, juxta terram
Margeriae At Brigge, ex part orientali, abuttantem contra Caldwenstade ad
caput boreale; and quatuor selliones terrae cum Pastura, in eadem quarentena
jacentes, inter terram praedictae Margeriae, ex part occidentali, and terram
Willielmi Shakill, ex part altera, similiter abuttantes contra Caldwenstade;
and dimidiam acram terrae jacentem super Vicifurlong, juxta terram Richardi
Cut, ex part australi, and ad unum caput abuttantem contra Ovenlmeshanden,
and aliud contra Northbrookeweye; and octo selliones terrae pro duabus acris,
jacentes super Normanstocking, inter terram Willielmi Focour, ex part
occidentali, and terram Willielmi Shepherd, ex part altera, and ad caput
boreale abuttantes contra foreram Johannis Southern; and unam rodam terrae
jacentem super Hangingslond, inter terram praedicti Prioris, ex part
orientiali, and terram Johannis Chamberleyn, ex part altera; and aliam rodam
terrae ibidem jacentem, inter terram ejusdam Johannis ex part orientali, and
terram Margeriae At Brigge, ex altera part, and ambae rodae abuttantes
contra foreram ejusdam Margeriae ad capita borealia; and duas selliones terrae
jacentes super Heyebenlond, juxta terram Johannis Turvey, ex part orientali,
and sellio orientalis est in media forera, and jacent pro una acra, and ad
caput occidentale abuttant contra foreram Willielmi Shakill, and ad aliud caput
contra le Rigewey, ducentem in Caldwenstade; and unam rodam terrae ibidem
jacentem, and eodem modo abuttantem, inter terram quam praedicta Agnes tenet,
in forma praedicta, ex part orientali, and terram Johannis Chamberleyn, ex
part altera; and duas selliones terrae pro una acra, jacentes in quarentena
subter Benlond, ex part australi, inter terram quam praedicta Agnes tenet, in
forma praedicta, ex part australi, and terram Willielmi Shakill, ex part
altera; and duas selliones terrae pro una acra, jacentes super Wolfho, inter
terram Johannis Capon, ex part orientali, and terram Roberti At Brigge de
Beydon, ex altera part, and ad caput australe abuttantes contra foreram
Willielmi Chapman; and quinque rodas terrae jacentes ex utraque part viae
vocatae Stanwey, ducente a Stanwey-Cross usque Pixhill, inter terram praedicti
Prioris, ex part occidentali, and terram Johannes Tryce, ex part altera; and
dimidiam acram terrae in alia quarentena, ibidem jacente, inter terram quam
praedicta Agnes tenet, in forma praedicta, ex part orientali, and terram
praedicti Prioris ex part altera; and aliam dimidiam acram terrae, in eadem
quarentena jacentem inter terram ejusdam Prioris ex part orientali, and terram
Willielmi Shakill ex part altera, and ambae dimidiae acrae illae abuttantes
contra foreram Johannis Brigge juioris antedicti, ad capita borealia, and ad
capita australia contra praedictam viam vocatam Stanwey; and duas selliones pro
una acra, jacentes apud Stanwey-Cross utraque part viae quae ducit usque ad
Wolfho Brook, in quarentena subter Asplond, inter terram Johannis Turvey ex
part orientali, and terram praedicti Johannis Brigge ex part altera; and duas
rodas terrae jacentes in alio campo ejusdam culturae, in quarentena juxta
Mauncelleswey, inter terram quam praedicta Agnes tenet, in forma praedicta, ex
part occidentali, and terram praedicti Johannis Brigge senioris, ex part
altera, and ad caput boreale abuttantes contra viam ducentem ad Hyecross usque
Rathshey; and unam rodam terrae jacentem in eadem quarentena, ad caput boreale
abuttantem contra eandem viam and ad aliud caput contra Depstade; and duas
selliones terrae ibidem jacentes, and eodem modo abuttantes juxta terram
Roberti Barker ex part occidentali; and tres selliones terrae jacentes in
campo alio, videlicet in quarentena super Priestswelle, pro tribus rodis, inter
terram Willielmi Raunston ex part orientali, and terram Thomae Chopper, ex
altera part, ad caput boreale abuttantes contra Priestswelle Brook; and duas
selliones jacentes super Lynches, pro una acra, intra terram praedicti Johannis
Brigge junioris ex part orientali, and terram praedicti Prioris ex part
altera, quarum sellio se extendit a Lynches usque ad Milnewey, unde finis
australis est forera; and unam rodam terrae jacentem in quarentena ejusdam
forerae, inter terram Willielmi Chapman ex utraque part, ad finem australem
abuttantem contra Milnewey; and duas rodas terrae jacentes in eadem quarentena,
inter terram quam praedicta Agnes tenet, in forma praedicta, ex part
orientali, and terram Johannis Long, ex part altera, ad caput australe
abuttantes contra Milnewey; and unam rodam terrae jacentem apud Clovenbalke
juxta terram quondam Willielmi Fisher, abuttantem ad caput boreale contra
foreram Johannis Chamberleyn; and unam rodam terrae jacentem in quarentena
juxta Milnewey, intra terram Johannis Chamberleyn ex part boreali, and terram
Willielmi Shepherd ex part altera, ad caput orientale abuttantem contra
foreram Johannis Turvey; and duas selliones, unde australis est forera, in
eadem quarentena jacentes; and etiam december selliones in superiori quarentena
ibidem jacentes, and contra foreram illam abuttantes, pro tribus acris and una
roda terrae, and dictae december selliones jacent inter terram quam praedicta
Agnes tenet in forma praedicta, ex part occidentali, and terram Willielmi
Shepherd ex part altera; and unam acram terrae jacentem, inter terram Johannis
Turvey, ex part orientali, and terram Willielmi Shakill, ex part altera, and
ad caput australe abuttantem contra terram Johannis Brigge senioris; and
sexdecim selliones, pro quinque acris terrae, jacentes inter Portwey, and viam
quae ducit ab Oddebrigge usque ad Hillys, inter terram de Stenington, ex part
occidentali, and terram praedicti Johannis Brigge junioris, ex part altera;
and etiam alias duas rodas ibidem jacentes, inter terram quondam ejusdam
Johannis, ex part occidentali, and terram quam praedicta Agnes tenet, in forma
praedicta, ex part altera; and duas rodas jacentes in quarentena vocata
Westlond, intra terram quam eadem Agnes tenet, in forma praedicta, and terram
Roberti Capon; and december selliones terrae jacentes in pecia, pro duabus acris
and dimidia, vocata Maudeleyn Piece, jacentes juxta terram quam eadem Agnes
tenet, in forma praedicta, ex part occidentali; and sex selliones terrae in
alia quarentena ibidem, ad caput occidentale, contra eandem peciam, vocatam
Maudeleyn Piece, abuttantem, jacentes pro una acra, intra terram praedicti
Johannis Brigge senioris ex part boreali, and terram Johannis Chamberleyn ex
part altera, and quatuor sellionis terrae jacentes in superiori quarentena de
Dedknave, pro dimidia acra, juxta terram quam praedicta Agnes tenet, in forma
praedicta, ex part occidentali, quarum una est forera; and octo selliones
vocatas Gores, jacentes apud Dedknave, pro una acra, intra terram praedicti
Prioris, ex part occidentali, and terram Willielmi Shakill ex part altera;
and sex selliones terrae pro una acra, jacentes apud Dedknave, juxta terram
quondam praedicti Roberti Hotot ex part australi, abuttantes ad caput
orientale contra Alyngcroftstade; and unam peciam terrae pro duabus acris and
dimidia, jacentes super Salmanshill, intra terram Willielmi Shakill ex utraque
part, and ad utrumque caput abuttantes contra foreram ejusdam Willielmi; and
unam rodam terrae ad caput occidentale abuttantem contra Alyngcroftstade,
jacentem intra terram quam praedicta Agnes tenet in forma praedicta, ex utraque
part; and unam peciam terrae continentem duas acras, ad caput occidentale
abuttantes contra Rothshegwey, jacentes intra terram praedicti Johannis Brigge
senioris, ex part boreali, and terram quam praedicta Agnes tenet, in forma
praedicta, ex part altera. Volentes quod licet terrae illae vel aliqua earum
parcella existat, vel existant, de perquisitione praedicti Willielmi Mordaunt,
filii Roberti, vel praedicti Willielmi, filii sui, ut forte per chartas in
posterum probari poterit, quod praedictus Robertus, filius Roberti, tamen
habeat and in pace teneat, sibi and haeredibus suis in perpetuum, omnes terras
praedictas cum pertinentiis sibi liberatis, Chartis illis non obstantibus: Et
quod Chartae illae, si inventae fuerint, nisi alias terras meas comprehendant,
per nos Johannem Brigge seniorem, Johannem Brigge juniorem, and Matildam,
remisisse, relaxasse, and omnimodo de nobis and haeredibus nostrum in perpetuum
quietum clamasse, praefato Roberto, filio Roberti, jam in possessione extincti,
de praedictis tofto and sexaginta acris terrae, sibi liberatis, haeredibus, and
assignatis suis, totum jus nostrum and clameum, quae vel quod habemus habuimus,
vel quovis modo in futurum habere poterimus, in praedictis, tofto and terris,
eidem Roberto, filio Roberti, superius liberatis, cum pertinentiis, ita quod
nec nos praefati Johannes Brigge senior, Johannes Brigge junior, and Matilda,
nec haeredes nostri, aliquid juris vel clamei, in eisdem tofto and terris, cum
pertinentiis, nec in aliqua parcella earundem, de caetero exigere, vel quovis
modo vendicare poterimus in futuro. Sed ab omni action juris and clamei abinde
sumus exclusi in perpetuum per praesentes. Et ego verod Johannes Brigge junior,
and haeredes mei, toftum illud, and omnes terras illas, cum pertinentiis
praefato Roberto, filio Roberti, haeredibus and assignatis suis, contra omnes
gentes warrantizabimus in perpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium parti hujus
Scripti indentati, penes praedictum Robertum, filium Roberti, remanenti, nos
praefati Johannes Brigge senior, Johannes Brigge junior, and Matilda Sigilla
nostra apposuimus. Et vero inde penes nos remanenti, idem Robertus filius
Roberti Sigillum suum apposuit. His testibus, Johanne Turvey, Thoma Dardres,
Willielmo Raunston, and aliis. Data apud Turveiam praedictam duodecimo die
Martii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Quinti post Conquestum, quarto.

Yerdley. Visus ad modum Curiae Roberti Mordaunt ibidem tentae die Jovis
proxima post Festum Sancti Edwardi Regis and Martyris, Anno Regni Regis Henrici
Quinti post Conquestum, nono.
AD istam Curiam venit Richardus Leefe, and cognovit tenere de Domino ad
voluntatem, unum messuagium and unam virgatam terrae and prati, reddendo inde
annuatim december solidos, ac reparabit and sustinebit praedictum messuagium
sumptibus suis propriis, sicut ea habuit ex dono Thomae Foddringey. Ideo
praeceptum est seisire ea in manus Domini.

Ad istam Curiam venit Johannes Burbache, and cognovit tenere de Domino ad
voluntatem, unum messuagium and unam virgatam terrae, continentem per
estimationem sexdecim acras terrae and prati, quae prius tenuit Willielmus
Lane, pro termino centum annorum, quae quidem messuagium and terras idem
Johannes habuit ex dimissione praedicti Willielmi, reddendo inde annuatim octo
solidos and duos Capones, and de reparatione concessit concordare cum Domino.

Ad istam Curiam venit Alicia Bosegate, and clamavit tenere de Domino ad
voluntatem, unum messuagium cum curtelagio, and unam virgatam terrae cum
pratis, pascuis, and pasturis, quae quondam Simon Bate tenuit, quae clamavit
habere ex dimissione Johannis Norman, qui quidem Johannes, Alicia uxor ejus,
and Johannes filius eorum, jam defuncti, tenuerunt, and Edmundus Mordaunt, ad
terminum vitae ipsorum, reddendo inde annuatim Domino, december solidos and duos
Capones. Et repararent and sustentarent tenementum praedictum, durante termino
praedicto, sumptibus suis propriis. Et quia dicti Johannes Norman, Alicia uxor
ejus, and Johannes, filius eorum, jam defuncti, status dictae Aliciae
determinatus existit, ideo praeceptum est seisire tenementa illa in manus
Domini, etc.

Ad istam Curiam venit Johannes Bosegate, and cognovit tenere de Domino ad
voluntatem, sibi, haeredibus and assignatis suis, unum messuagium and unam
virgatam terrae, quae prius tenuit Thomas Forth, reddendo inde annuatim
Domino, quatuordecim solidos and quatuor denarios, and faciente capitali Domino
de Yerdley, redditus, and servitia, de praedicto tenemento exeuntia, and eidem
Domino pertinentia, quae quidem tenementa idem Johannes habuit, ex dimissione
Johannis Shelton, and praedictus Thomas Forth illa tenementa dimisit eidem
Johanni Shelton. Et non solvit de redditu praedicto, a morte praedicti Thomae,
usque nunc, nisi december solidos per duos annos elapsos. Ideo praeceptum est
ipsum distringere pro redditu, and summa de arrearagiis ad tunc quadraginta
solidos, etc.

Ad hanc Curiam venit Johannes Helyer, filius Matthaei Yeselham, and cognovit
tenere de Domino ad voluntatem, unum messuagium and unam virgatam terrae and
prati contientem, per estimationem sexdecim acrarum terrae, and prati, quae
Robertus Mordaunt quondam dimisit eisdem Matthaeo and Johanni, and cuidam
Margaretae uxori ejusdem Matthaei, matri ejusdem Johannis, ad terminum vitae
ipsorum, reddendo inde annuatim december solidos, and reparando and sustentando
praedicta tenementa sumptibus suis propriis, durante termino praedicto.

Johannes Smyth tenet unum messuagium and unam virgatam terrae, quae prius
tenuit Johanna uxor Johannis de Histow ad terminum vitae ipsius Johannae,
reddendo inde annuatim sexdecim solidos, and dicta Johanna jam defuncta est,
ideo praeceptum est seisire praedicta tenementa in manus Domini.

Item praeceptum est seisire tenementa quae Alicia Bosegate clamavit tenere,
and catalla pro reparatione. Ad Curiam Roberti Mordaunt apud Yerdley tentam,
die Jovis ante Festum Nativitatis Domini, Anno Regni Regis Henrici quinti post
Conquestum, nono, Willielmus Henkyn venit, and cognovit tenere de Domino
libere, ex dono and feoffamento Rogeri Henkyn patris sui, unum messuagium and
quatuor selliones, adjacentes in crofto, per homagium, fidelitatem, and sectam
Curiae, ac reddendo inde annuatim, ad Festum Nativitatis Sancti Johannis
Baptistae, unam rosam rubram deponendam super liminari domus Domini. Et fecit
fidelitatem.

Charta Johannis Dardres.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod Ego Johannes Dardres nuper de Turveia in
Comitatu Bedfordiae Armiger, dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea
indentata confirmavi, Roberto Mordaunt de eadem, Armigero, and Elizabethae
uxori ejus, manerium meum de Turveia praedicta, vocatum Ardresmaner; nec non
omnia alia terras and tenementa, prata, pascua, and pasturas, boscos, redditus
and servitia, quae habeo in eadem villa, cum omnibus eorum pertinentiis,
excepto quodam messuagio, in le Tonnedo de Turveia praedicta, situata inter
messuagium, nuper Edmundi Geffery, ex part occidentali, and regiam viam, and
messuagium Willielmi Shakill ex partibus aliis, cum pertinentiis suis. Habendum
and tenendum manerium praedictum, nec non omnia alia praedicta terras and
tenementa, prata, pascua, pasturas, boscos, redditus and servitia, cum omnibus
eorum pertinentiis, praefatis, Roberto, Elizabethae and haeredibus de corpore
eorum legitime procreatis, in perpetuum, de capitalibus dominis feodorum
illorum, per servitia inde debita and de jure consueta, sub conditionibus
subsequentibus; videlicet, reddendo inde mihi praefato Johanni Dardres and
Johannae uxori meae, durante vita utriusque nostrum, diutius viventis, annuatim
december marcas legalis monetae Angliae, ad quatuor anni terminos, videlicet, ad
Festum Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, Nativitatis Domini, Paschae, and
Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae, per aequales portiones. Ita quod si
redditus ille a retro fuerit in part vel in toto ad aliquem terminum
praedictum, per unum mensem non solutus, tunc been liceat mihi dicto Johanni
and dictae Johannae, and utrique nostrum diutius viventi, in praedictis,
manerio, terris and tenementis, pratis, pascuis, pasturis and boscis
distringere, per omnia bona and catalla, in eis inventa, and districtiones
captas abducere and retinere, quousque de praedicto redditu, and arrearagiis
inde si quae fuerint, plenarie fuerit satisfactum; and si praedictus redditus a
retro fuerit, in part vel in toto aliquo tempore in posterum, ultra spatium
medietatis unius anni, in defectu praedictorum Roberti and Elizabethae, aut
alicujus haeredum suorum, quod tunc been liceat mihi dicto Johanni Dardres,
haeredibus and assignatis meis, in praedictum manerium, and in omnia alia
praedicta, terras and tenementa, prata, pascua, pasturas, boscos, redditus and
servitia cum pertinentiis reintrare, and illa in pristino statu meo possidere,
and in perpetuum retinere, praesenti Charta and seisina, inde liberata, non
obstantibus. Et si praedicti Robertus and Elizabetha obierint sine haerede, de
corporibus suis legitime procreato, tunc post decessum ipsorum Roberti and
Elizabethae, volo and concedo per praesentes, quod praedictum manerium, and
omnia alia praedicta terrae and tenementa, cum praedictis pratis, pascuis,
pasturis, redditibus and servitiis, cum omnibus eorum pertinentiis (excepto
messuagio praeexcepto) cum pertinentiis sub conditionibus praescriptis, rectis
haeredibus and assignatis ipsius Roberti remaneat in perpetuum, tenendum de
capitalibus Dominis feodorum illorum, per servitia inde debita, and de jure
consueta. Et ego vero praedictus Johannes Dardres, and haeredes mei praedictum
manerium, and omnia alia praedicta, terras and tenementa, prata, pascua,
pasturas, boscos, redditus and fervitia, cum pertinentiis (excepto messuagio
praeexcepto cum pertinentiis) praefatis, Roberto and Elizabethae, and
haeredibus de corporibus eorum legitime procreatis, and pro defectu exitus,
rectis haeredibus and assignatis ipfius Roberti, modo and forma praedicta,
contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in perpetuum. In cujus rei testimonium uni
parti istius Chartae indentatae penes praedictos Robertum and Elizabetham
remanenti, ego praefatus Johannes Dardres Sigillum meum apposui, alteri vero
parti inde penes me remanenti ipsi Robertus and Elizabetha Sigilla sua
apposuerunt. His testibus, Johanne Bromham Priore de Newingham, Rogero Hunt de
Chalsterne, Johanne Brigge, Johanne Cotton, Johanne Vaux, Henrico Franklin,
Willielmo Shakill, and aliis. Data apud Turveiam praedictam duodecimo die
Septembris, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Quinti post Conquestum Angliae, nono.

Out of the Old Manuscript.
AGnes Foddringey and Robertus Mordaunt, relesse ove garrante tout lour droit,
en le Manner de Tymworth cum pertinentiis in Suffolk. Data decimo die Februarii,
Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti, penser pour garrante collateral de Elizabeth
Waryn.

Concerning Elizabeth, the Wife of Robert Mordaunt, out of the Old Manuscript,
is as follows.
RObertus Oldenby de Oldenby in Comitatu Northamptoniae avoit issue un John and
William Oldenby de Isham, and devi, John prist a Femme une Margery, qui fust la
fille un Ravenz and per la did Margery les tenementz en Weppesmade, and
Dunstable nova, and avoient issue John, Herry, Robert, Elizabet, and Cicile,
and devierunt, Herry, morust sans issue, car il n'avoit unque Femme, Robert
prist a Femme une.............. qui fuist la fille d'un Tawe de Stareton, prope
Daventryam, and avoint issue une fille qui fuist espousee a un Gold, qui manet
a Leycestre, and avoit issue ore en plein vie, John qui fuist l'eisne fills, and
heir, prist a Femme une Johane qui fuist la fille d'un John Mortimer de
Grendon, and avoient issue, enter eux William and Maude, and devierunt, William
prist a Femme, la fille bastard de Lucy, avoit issue, William qui ore est, and
Elizabet, cestui William le fills, William prist a Femme Marget fille de Robert
Lakis de Walisborow, in le Count de Leycestre, and encore n'ont issue Elizabet
soeur William prist a baron Herry Hatton de en le Count de Warwick and ont
issue diverse fills and filles.

William Oldenby de Isham prist a Femme Elienor Mortimer fille de dit John
Mortimer, and avoit issue William Oldenby de Isham, Thomas qui a espousee une
Femme d'age de L anz, and n'ont issue, John Oldenby de Northanptona qui prist
Femme de L anz and plus, and n'ont issue, and une fille Marget qui prist a
baron John Mountgomery de Gayton, and ont issue William, qui ore est, and
Isabel qui prist a baron Thomas Croft de Barnwel, en le Count de Northampton,
and avoient issue deux filles, Johane and Anne, and Richard Alen de Bugden
juxta Hareborow prist la dite Anne a Femme, qui sont ore en vie, Maude prist a
baron un Robert Canon, d'Oxford, queux encore n'ont issue, la dite Elizabet
fille John fills and heir de Robert Oldenby prist a baron un Robert Mordaunt,
queux avoient issue, un Maude, Elizabet, and William, and devierount. Maude
fuit espousee a un....... Downham de Londrez, Elizabet a un John Stevenson de
Turvey, William prist a Femme une Marget, fille d'un John Perke de Copull, and
avoient issue, John Mordaunt qui ore est.

Deinz le Count Northampton John le fills Robert avoit Barton viij mark,
Brummington x mark, Raunston x mark, and Would c s. apud Clipston xxxiij s.
iiij d. War. Galdonmoreton xxvij s. viij d. Kilmersh in Westhaddon vi s. viij
d. Northampton xx s. Oxhampton in Weppesmade x l. Dunstable xvi s. Holdenby x l.

Memorandum quod iste discensus factus fuit die Sancti Marci Evangelistae, Anno
Regni Regis Edwardi Quarti vicesimo primo, per dictum Johannem Mordaunt, ex
informatione Johannis Law, quondam servientis Johannis Oldenby, filii and
haeredis dicti Roberti.

Charta Roberti de Mordaunt.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens scriptum indentatum pervenerit,
Robertus Mordaunt de Turveia in Comitatu Bedfordiae Armiger, Salutem, Sciatis
me praefatum Robertum concessisse, and hoc praesenti scripto meo indentato
confirmasse, Willielmo Mordaunt filio meo, and Margaretae uxori ejus, filiae
Johannis Pekke de Copull, unum annualem redditum december librarum, exeuntem de
manerio meo in Turveia, vocato Mordaunts manner, and de omnibus aliis terris and
tenementis meis, pratis, pascuis and pasturis, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis,
quae habeo in eadem villa, and in Brafeld in Comitatu Buckinghamiae
spectantibus, sive pertinentibus dicto manerio. Habendum and percipiendum
dictum annualem redditum december librarum, praefatis Willielmo and Margaretae,
and assignatis suls de dictis, manerio, terris, tenementis, pratis, pascuis,
pasturis cum suis pertinentiis, ad terminum vitae meae dicti Roberti and
Margaretae uxoris meae, ad duos anni terminos annuatim, videlicet, ad festa
sancti Michaelis Archangeli, and Annunciationis beatae Mariae, per aequales
portiones, primo termino solutionis incipiente ad festum Sancti Michaelis
Archangeli proximum futurum post datum praesentium. Et si praedictus annualis
redditus a retro fuerit in part vel in toto ad aliquod festum praedictorum
festuum, ultra spacium unius mensis non solutus, tunc been liceat praefatis
Willielmo and Margaretae and eorum assignatis, in dictis, manerio, terris and
tenementis, pratis, pascuis and pasturis, cum pertinentiis distringere, per
omnia bona and catalla in eis inventa, pro redditu illo sic a retro existente,
and districtiones illas sic captas, abducere, asportare, effugare, quo
voluerint, and retinere quousque de praedicto annuali redditu, cum arrearagiis
inde, si quae fuerint, plenarie fuerit satisfactum. Et pro majore securitate
dicti annualis redditus, ipsos Willielmum and Margaretam posui in seisina inde
per solutionem unius denarii. Proviso tamen, quod si praefati Willielmus and
Margareta obierunt ante obitum mei praedicti Roberti and dictae Elizabethae,
quod tunc praedictus annualis redditus omnino cesset and nemini persolvatur. In
cujus rei Testimonium parti hujus scripti indentati, penes praefatos Willielmum
and Margaretam remanenti, ego praefatus Robertus sigillum meum apposui, alteri
vero parti penes me residenti ipsi Willielmus and Margareta sigilla sua
apposuerunt. Data apud Turveiam quinto decimo die Aprilis, Anno Regni Regis
Henrici sexti post Conquestum Angliae, vicesimo septimo.

Charta Roberti de Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Robertus Mordaunt de Turveia, in
Comitatu Bedfordiae Armiger, dedi, concessi, and hac praesenti Charta mea
confirmavi Willielmo Holdenby de Isham, Johanni Holdenby de Holdenby, Johanni
Turvey de Turveia, and Johanni Bainton de eadem, manerium meum de Turveia
praedicta, vocata Mordauntsmaner, and omnia alia terras and tenementa, prata,
pascua, pasturas, boscos, molendina, aquas piscarias, insulas, reversiones,
custumas, redditus and servitia, cum nativis and eorum sectis and sequelis, and
omnibus aliis eorum pertinentiis, quae habeo in dicta villa de Turveia, and in
Brayford in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, die confectionis praesentium dicto manerio
pertinentibus seu spectantibus. Habendum and tenendum praedictum manerium, and
omnia alia praedicta, terras and tenementa, prata, pascua, pasturas, boscos,
aquas piscarias, insulas, reversiones, redditus and servitia, cum nativis and
eorum sectis and sequelis, and omnibus aliis pertinentiis, praefatis,
Willielmo, Johanni, Johanni, and Johanni, and eorum haeredibus, and assignatis
in perpetuum, de capitalibus dominis feodorum illorum per servitia inde debita
and de jure consueta. Et ego vero praedictus Robertus and haeredes mei,
praedictum manerium, and omnia alia praedicta, terras and tenementa, prata,
pascua, pasturas, bofcos, aquas piscarias, insulas, reversiones, custumas,
redditus and servitia, cum nativis and eorum sectis and sequelis, and omnibus
aliis pertinentiis praefatis, Willielmo, Johanni, Johanni and Johanni, and
eorum haeredibus and assignatis, contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in
perpetuum. In cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti Chartae sigillum meum
apposui. His Testibus, Johanne Brigge, Johanne Eoton, Richardo Shakill, Thoma
Walcote, Petro Martine, Richardo Geffery, Thoma Bartolet, and aliis. Data apud
Turveiam decimo octavo die Aprilis, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti post
Conquestum Angliae, vicesimo Septimo.

Charta Roberti de Mordaunt.
NOverint universi per praesentes me Robertum Mordaunt de Turveia in Comitatu
Bedfordiae Armigerum attornasse and in loco meo posuisse, dilectum mihi
Willielmum Eynsbury de Turveia meum verum and legitimum attornatum, ad
liberandum vice and nomine meo, Willielmo Holdenby de Isham, Johanni Holdenby
de Holdenby, Johanni Turvey de Turveia, and Johanni Bainton de eadem, plenam
and pacificam seisinam, de and in manerium meum in Turveia praedicta, vocata
Mordauntsmaner and de and in omnibus aliis terris and tenementis, pratis,
pascuis, pasturis, boscis, molendinis, aquis piscariis, insulis, reversionibus,
custumis, redditibus and servitiis, cum nativis and eorum sectis and sequelis,
and omnibus aliis eorum pertinentiis, quae habeo in Turveia praedicta, and in
Brafeld, in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, dicto manerio, die confectionis
praesentium, spectantibus, seu pertinentibus, secundum vim, formam, and
effectum, cujusdam Chartae feoffamenti, eisdem Willielmo Holdenby, Johanni,
Johanni and Johanni, per me dictum Robertum inde confecti, prout in eadem
Charta before continetur. Ratum and gratum habente and habituro, quicquid
dictus Attornatus meus nomine meo fecerit in praemissis. In cujus rei
Testimonium prasentibus sigillum apposui. Data apud Turveiam, decimo octavo die
Aprilis, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexti post Conquestum Angliae, vicesimo
septimo.

WILLIAM MORDAVNT, Third of that Name, Lord of Turvey, Clifton, Brafield, and
other Lands and Lordships. CHAPTER X.
Indentura inter Willielmum Holdenby and Willielmum Mordaunt.
HAEC Indentura facta inter Willielmum Holdenby de Isham, Johannem Holdenby de
Holdenby, Johannem Turvey de Turveia, Johannem Bainton de eadem, and
Elizabetham Mordaunt de eadem, viduam, ex part una; Et Willielmum Mordaunt de
Turveia filium dictae Elizabethae, and Margaretam uxorem ejus, and Johannem
Pekke de Copull patrem dictae Margaretae, ex part altera, testatur, quod iidem
Willielmus Holdenby, Johannes Holdenby, Johannes Turvey, Johannes Bainton, and
Elizabetha, concesserunt, tradiderunt, and ad firmam dimiserunt, praefatis
Willielmo Mordaunt, Margaretae and Johanni Pekke, situm manerii ipsorum
Willielmi Holdenby, Johannis Holdenby, Johannis Turvey, Johannis Bainton, and
Elizabethae, in Turveia, vocati Mordaunts-maner, and situm manerii praefatae
Elizabethae, in eadem villa vocati Ardres-maner, una cum terris, pratis,
pascuis, pasturis, subscriptis, dictis maneriis pertinentibus, videlicet totum
campum vocatum Westfeld, Ardresstrokkyng, Knightesstokkyng, totum campum
vocatum Hodewyke, Mauncelysfeld, Blathwikes, Longcroft, Broadmedefeld,
videlicet, Wodestokkyng, and totum le Brodedole, totum le Peryfurlong totum le
Netherhanger, Middelhyll, Cronlehill, and lez viginti acras terrae in eodem
campo, and totum campum suum vocatum Wolsey, cum omnibus pratis, pascuis,
pasturis, and sladis, in dictis campis existentibus, and eis pertinentibus, and
cum una pecia terrae vocatae Colynspeece and Radesbushspeece, Wikill,
Durantescroft, cum Depstade, exceptis omnibus boscis and subboscis suis, in
eisdem campis, and villa existentibus, and Columbario in dicto manerio vocato
Mordaunts-maner, and omnibus stagnis in dictis sitis dictorum maneriorum, and
boscis existentibus, quae dicti Willielmus Holdenby, Johannes Holdenby,
Johannes Turvey, Johannes Bainton, and Elizabetha reservant, una cum liberis
introitu and exitu ad eadem, pro se and servientibus suis, and aliis eorum
nomine illuc venientibus, cum equis and carectis, toties quoties voluerint, tam
par vias ex antiquo visitatas, quam per campos praedictos, cum non seminantur,
ac per pasturas praedictas prout antiquitus fieri consuevit, excepto le
Blakepond, quod dicti firmarii habebunt, quamdiu praedictam firmam tenent.
Habendum and tenendum praedictos situs maneriorum praedictorum and omnia alia
praedicta, terras, prata, pascua, pasturas, and dictum stagnum vocatum
Blakepond, cum les sladis praenominatis, exceptis praeexceptis, praefatis
Willielmo Mordaunt, Margaretae and Johanni Pekke, and eorum assignatis, a Festo
Sancti Michaelis Archangeli proximo futuro post datum praesentium, usque ad
finem and terminum sexaginta annorum, extunc proximo sequentium, and plenarie
completorum, edde ndo inde annuatim praefatis Willielmo Holdenby, Johanni
Holdenby, Johanni Turvey, Johanni Bainton, and Elizabethae, december libras
legalis monetae Angliae ad duos anni terminos, videlicet ad Festa
Annunciationis beatae Mariae, and Sancti Michaelis Archangeli per aequales
portiones, aut exonerando praefatos Willielmum Holdenby, Johannem Holdenby,
Johannem Turvey, Johannem Bainton, and Elizabetham, annuatim, de quodam annuali
redditu december librarum, quem Robertus Mordaunt nuper de Turveia Armiger
defunctus concessit praefatis, Willielmo Mordaunt and Margaretae, durante vita
dictae Elizabethae, exeunte de dicto manerio vocato Mordaunts-maner, and aliis
terris and tenementis eidem manerio pertinentibus, videlicet ad quodlibet
festum dictorum festorum, quamdiu ipsi firmam praedictam occupaverint, aut
aliquis eorum occupaverit, virtute dimissionis praedictae, de centum solidis
per sufficientem aquietationem, de festo in festum dictorum festorum inde
factam, ad electionem dictorum Willielmi Holdenby, Johannis Holdenby, Johannis
Turvey, Johannis Bainton, and Elizabethae, proviso semper quod si praefata
Elizabetha obierit, aut praefati Willielmus Mordaunt and Margareta obierint,
infra dictum terminum sexaginta annorum, quod extunc praedicta dimissio omnnino
cesset, ita quod tunc been licebit dictis Willielmo Holdenby, Johanni Holdenby,
Johanni Turvey, Johanni Bainton and Elizabethae, Haeredibus and assignatis, in
dictum situm dicti manerii vocati Mordaunts-maner, cum dictis terris, pratis,
pascuis, pasturis, stagno vocato Blakepond, and les sladis, eidem manerio
pertinentibus, reintrare, and ea in pristino statu suo possidere, and retinere,
ad faciendum inde voluntatem dicti Roberti. Et si praedictus annualis redditus
december librarum, quem praefati Willielmus Mordaunt, Margareta, and Johannes
Pekke, pro firma praedicta solvere tenentur, a retro fuerit in part vel in
toto ad aliquod festorum praedictorum non solutus ultra quindecim dies, and
Willielmus Mordaunt, and Margareta aquietantiam de centum solidis pro quolibet
festo dictorum festorum, pro part solutionis dicti annualis redditus december
librarum, quem praefatus Robertus, ut praedictum est, eis concessit, facere
recusaverint, aut eorum alter recusaverit, tunc been licebit dictis Willielmo
Holdenby, Johanni Holdenby, Johanni Turvey, Johanni Bainton, and Elizabethae
pro redditu firmae praedictae a retro existente, in dictis sitis ac omnibus
terris, pratis, pascuis, pasturis, and sladis dictae firmae distringere, per
omnia bona and catalla in eis inventa, and districtiones captas abducere,
asportare, effugare, quo voluerint, and retinere quosque de redditu illo, and
arreargiis inde plenarie suerit satisfactum. Et si nulla sufficiens districtio
in iis inveniatur per mensem post aliquem terminum, quo redditus ille solvi
debeat, tunc been licebit praefatis, Willielmo Holdenby, Johanni Holdenby,
Johanni Turvey, Johanni Bainton and Elizabethae, and eorum haeredibus and
assignatis, in praedictos sitos maneriorum praedictorum, and in omnia praedicta
terras, prata, pascua, pasturas, and sladas, cum pertinentiis, reintrare, and
ea in pristino statu suo possidere, and retinere in forma praedicta, his
Indenturis non obstantibus. Et praefati Willielmus Mordaunt, Margareta and
Johannes Pekke, omne onus reparationis domorum, and sepium praedictae firmae,
durante termino praedicto, portabunt, and omnia onera reddituum and
servitiorum, quintorum decenniorum, and subsidiorum ejusdem firmae, contra
quoscunque praefati Willielmus Holdenby, Johannes Holdenby, Johannes Turvey,
Johannes Bainton and Elizabetha, portabunt, quamdiu ipsi firmarii, firmam
praedictam virtute dimissionis praedictae, tenuerint, aut eorum unus tenuerit.
Et tam diu iidem firmarii habebunt de boscis, subboscis, and spinis dicti
manerii vocati Mordaunts-maner, housebote, haybote, ploughbote, cartebote,
harrewbote, barrewbote, faldebote and ferebote, quantum iis rationaliter
indigebit, manerio illo expendenda absque venditione per liberationem dictae
Elizabethae aut sui deputati. In cujus rei testimonium parts praedictae his
Indenturis Sigilla sua alternatim apposuerunt. Data apud Turveiam vicesimo die
Julii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Sexi post Conquestum Angliae, vicesimo septimo.
Haec Indentura duplificatur.

Charta Roberti Tanfield and Elizabethae uxoris ejus.
HAEC Indentura facta octavo die Aprilis, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi Quarti post
Conquestum Angliae, nono, inter Robertum Tanfield de Gayton in Comitatu
Northamptoniae Armigerum, and Elizabetham uxorem ejus, ex una part, and
Willielmum Mordaunt de Turveia in Comitatu Bedfordiae Armigerum, filium ejusdem
Elizabethae, and Margaretam uxorem ejus, ex altera part, testatur, quod
praefati Robertus and Elizabetha, tradiderunt, and ad firmum dimiserunt
praefatis, Willielmo and Margaretae, omnia terras and tenementa sua, prata,
pascua, pasturas, boscos, redditus, and servitia, cum omnibus and singulis suis
pertinentiis in Turveia praedicta. Habendum and tenendum praefatis Willielmo
and Margaretae, a Festo Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, ultimo jam praeterito,
usque ad finem and terminum quadraginta annorum, extunc proximo sequentium, and
plenarie complendorum, reddendo inde annuatim praefatis Roberto and
Elizabethae, durante termino praedicto, in Ecclesia de Gayton praedicta,
viginti quatuor libras, and quatuor denarios, legalis monetae Angliae, ad Festa
Paschae, and Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, per aequales portiones, si ipsa
Elizabetha tamdiu vixerit. Quam quidem annuam summam viginti quatuor librarum,
and quatuor denariorum, iidem Willielmus and Margareta concedunt, pro se and
haeredibus suis, praefatis, Roberto and Elizabethae, per praesentes, quod ipsi
and haeredes sui, eidem Roberto and Elizabethae, annuatim, ad festa praedicta,
in eadem Ecclesia solvent, aut eorum aliquis solvet. Et si contingat dictum
annualem redditum viginti quatuor librarum, and quatuor denariorum, aut aliquem
parcellam inde a retro fore non solutam in Ecclesia praedicta post aliquod
festum festorum praedictorum, per quarterium unius anni, aut contingat quod
aliquod vastum in aliquo praemissorum, durante termino praedicto, fieri, quod
tunc been liceat praefatis, Roberto and Elizabethae, in omnia eadem terras, and
tenementa, prata, pascua and pasturas, molendinas, stagna, piscaria, boscos,
redditus and servitia, cum omnibus suis pertinentiis, intrare, and ea in
pristino statu suo tenere, and possidere, his indenturis in aliquo non
obstantibus. Et iidem Willielmus Mordaunt and Margareta; etiam concedunt pro se
and haeredibus suis, praefatis, Roberto and Elizabethae, per praesentes, quod
ipsi and haeredes sui, omnia terras and tenementa and caetera praemissa
sufficienter reparabunt, and sustentabunt, sumptibus suis propriis, and
expensis. Ac omnia alia onera, redditus and servitia, tam Domino rege, quam
capitalibus dominis feodi illius, annuatim solvent and supportabunt, durante
termino praedicto. Etiam iidem Willielmus and Margareta concedunt pro se and
haeredibus suis, per praesentes, praefatis, Roberto and Elizabethae, quod ipsi
non allegabunt, nec aliquis eorum allegabit, aliquam aquietantiam, sive aliquod
scriptum exonerationis, aut aliquam solutionem redditus praedicti, sive
alicujus inde parcellae, allegatum sit, alibi fore triable, quam per visum
praedictum, quod tunc illa aquietantia, scriptum solutionis, and exonerationis,
nullius sint vigoris, nec effectus in lege, sed omni suo robore careant and
virtute. Proviso semper quod si, and quandocunque contigerit, ipsam Elizabetham
infra terminum praedictum obire, extunc praedicta traditio, and dimissio vacuae
sint and nullius valoris nec effectus, and quod solutio redditus praedicti,
extunc solubilis non existat, his indenturis non obstantibus. In cujus rei
Testimonium parts praedictae his indenturis sigilla sua alternatim
apposuerunt. Data die and anno praedicto.

Charta Johannis Bainton.
NOverint universi per praesentes me Johannem Bainton de Turveia, remisisse,
relaxasse, and omnimodo pro me and haeredibus meis in perpetuum quietum
clamasse, Willielmo Mordaunt de eadem, Gentilman, Johanni Mordaunt, Johanni
Tawe clerico, Johanni Faux clerico and Willielmo Geliott clerico, haeredibus
and assignatis suis, totum jus meum and clameum quae habeo, habui, vel quovis
modo in futurum habere potero, de and in omnibus illis maneriis, cum omnibus
juribus, commoditatibus, and pertinentiis suis quibuscunque, ac aliis omnibus
illis terris and tenementis, pratis, pascuis, pasturis, boscis, redditibus and
servitiis, cum suis pertinentiis omnibus, quae nuper habui conjunctim, cum
Johanne Holdenby de Holdenby Armigero, Willielmo Holdenby de Isham, and Johanne
Fisher, alias dicto Johanne Turvey de Turveia, jam defunctis, ex dono and
feoffamento Roberti Mordaunt nuper de Turveia praedicta Armigeri, in villa and
campis de Turveia praedicta, and alibi in Comitatibus Bedfordiae, and
Buckinghamiae, ut in quadam Charta ipsius Roberti Mordaunt nobis inde confecta
plenarie liquet. Ita quod nec ego praedictus Johannes Bainton nec haeredes mei,
nec aliquis alius nomine nostro, aliquod juris vel clamei in dictis maneriis
cum pertinentiis suis, neque in aliis dictis terris and tenementis, pratis,
pascuis, pasturis, boscis, redditibus and servitiis praedictis cum suis
pertinentiis, nec in aliqua parcella inde de caetero exigere vel vendicare
poterimus. Sed ab omni action juris vel clamei inde sumus exclusi in perpetuum
per praesentes, sigillo meo sigillatas. His testibus, Johanne Richardson de
Hardmeade, Richardo Schabury de Newinton, Humfrido Sherley de Harwold, Rogero
Bonham de Carleton, Thoma Walcote de Turveia, and multis aliis. Datas apud
Turveiam praedictam vicesimo sexto die mensis Januarii, Anno Regni Regis
Edwardi quarti, undecimo.

Charta Johannis Bainton.
HAEC indentura facta vicesimo die Januarii, Anno Regni Regis Edwardi quarti
undecimo, testatur, quod Johannes Bainton de Turveia, tradidit, concessit, and
ad firmum dimisit Willielmo Mordaunt de eadem, Johanni Mordaunt, Johanni Tawe
clerico, Johanni Faux clerico, and Willielmo Geliott clerico, omnia illa
maneria sua, cum omnibus and singulis suis pertinentiis, juribus and
commoditatibus quibuscunque, and omnia alia illa terras and tenementa, prata,
pascua, pasturas, boscos, redditus and servitia, cum suis pertinentiis
universis, quae nuper habuit, conjunctim cum Johanne Holdenby Armigero,
Willielmo Holdenby, and Johanne Fisher, alias dicto Johanne Turvey, jam
defunctis, ex dono and feoffamento Roberti Mordaunt, nuper de Turveia praedicta
Armigeri, situata, and jacentia in vila and campis de Turveia praedicta, and
alibi in Comitatibus Bedfordiae and Buckinghamiae. Habendum and tenendum omnia
illa praedicta maneria, cum omnibus and singulis suis pertinentibus
quibuscunque, absque aliquo retinemento, ac omnia alia praedicta terras and
tenementa, prata, pascua, pasturas, boscos, redditus and servitia cum omnibus
suis pertinentiis praefatis Willielmo Mordaunt, Johanni Mordaunt, Johanni Tawe,
Johanni Faux, and Willielmo Geliott, clericis, and assignatis suis, a festo
Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, ultimo praeterito, usque ad finem and terminum
december annorum, tunc proximum sequentium, and plenarie completorum, reddendo
inde annuatim praefato Johanni Bainton, and assignatis suis, durante termino
praedicto, ad festum natalis Domini, duos capones, and solvendo omnia servitia
de dictis maneriis, cum pertinentiis, terris, tenementis, pratis, pascuis,
pasturis, boscis, redditibus and servitiis, exeuntia, durante termino
praedicto. In cujus rei testimonium huic parti istius indenturae, penes
praefatum Johannem Bainton remanenti, praedicti, Willielmus Mordaunt, Johannes
Mordaunt, Johannes Tawe, Johannes Faux, and Willielmus Geliott, clerici,
sigilla sua apposuerint; alterae parti penes eos remanenti, praedictus Johannes
Bainton sigillum suum apposuit.

Data apud Turveiam praedictam die and anno supradictis. Sigillo fracto.
Sir JOHN MORDAVNT, Knight, First of that Name, Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, and Counselor of State to King Henry the Seventh. CHAPTER XI.
Charta Johannis Mordaunt.
TO all Christian People, to whom this present Writing shall come, John
Mordaunt of Turvey of the County of Bedford, Gentilman, sends greeting in our
Lord God. Whereas Margaret Mordaunt, my Mother, holds the Manners called
Mordaunts-maner, and Dardres-maner, and diverse Lands and Tenements, called
Maunsellis, Blatherwykes, and diverse other Lands and Tenements, with the
appurteneces, in the Parish of Turvey aforesaid, from the Feast of Saint
Michael the Archangel, in the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, after the
Conquest the nineteenth, unto the end and term of forty Years, then next
following. the reversion thereof to me the said John belonging. Know ye me the
said John, to have given, and by this my present Deed confirmed, to Thomas
King, Parson of the Moyite of the Church of Turvey, John Vynter of Kerdington,
John Poley of Bydenham, and to Richard Stevynson of Turvey aforesaid, the
reversion of the said Manners, Lands and Tenements with the appurtenances, the
Rent unto the said Lessee reserved. To have and perceive to them and to their
Heirs for evermore. And Whereas the said Margaret holds the Mills of Turvey,
with diverse Holmes and Waters, from Year to Year yielding to me therefore
yearly ten Pounds of Lawful Money; and... Son William Ball holds diverse Lands
and Tenements with the appurtenances, called Wellynz for the Term of six Years.
Know ye me the said John Mordaunt to have given, and granted to the said Thomas
Vynter, John Vynter, John Poley, and Richard, the reversion of the said Mills,
Holmes, Waters, Lands and Tenements with the appurtenances, to have to them and
to their Heirs for evermore. And I the said John Mordaunt and my Heirs, all the
said Manners, Mills, Waters, Holmes, Lands and Tenements with the appurtenances,
unto the said Thomas, and John Vynter, John Poley, and Richard, and to their
Heirs, shall warrant for ever. In witness whereof I put my Seal. Witness, John
Richardson, William Bargeman, William Everard. Given at Turvey the six and
twentieth day of September, in the Year of the Reign of King Edward the Fourth
the one and twentieth.

seal of John Mordaunt SIGILLVM IOHANNIS MORDAVNT



Charta Johannis Mordaunt.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing shall come, John Mordaunt
greeting in God. Whereas one Hugh Jacob holds the Manner of Botelers, in the
Parish of Walden, within the County of Essex, with the appurtenances, except
three Acres and a half of arable Land, half an Acre of Meede, a Close called
Horsecroft, and eight Shillings four Pence, and one Pound of Pepper, of free
Rent from the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, in the Year of the Reign of
King Edward the Fourth, the eleventh, unto the end and Term of sixteen Years,
then next following, of the demise of William Mordaunt, Fader to me the said
John, which after the Death of the said William, to me the said John, as Son
and Heir to the said William, ought to descend. Know ye me the said John to
have given and granted, and by this present Deed confirmed to Thomas King,
Parson of the Moyite of the Church of Turvey, John Vynter of Kerdington, John
Poley of Bydenham and to Richard Stevynson of Turvey, the reversion of the said
Manner with the appurtenances, except before excepted, to have to them and to
their Heirs for evermore. And also I give and grant, and by this present Deed
confirm unto the said Thomas King, John Vynter, John Poley, and to Richard
Stevynson the said three Acres and a half of Land, half an Acre of Meede, the
Close called Horsecroft, eight Shillings four Pence, and one Pound of Pepper,
of free Rent with the appurtenances. To have and perceive to them and to their
Heirs for evermore, of the chief Lords of the Fee, by the services due and
accustomed. And I the said John and my Heirs the said Manner with the
appurtenances to the said Thomas, John, John and Richard, and to their Heirs
shall warrant for evermore. In witness whereof I put my Seal. Witness, John
Richardson, William Bargeman, William Everard. Given at Turvey the twenty sixth
day of September, in the Year of the Reign of King Edward the Fourth, the one
and twentieth.

A Letter from King Richard the Third to John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved John Mordaunt, Gentilman. signature of Richard
III By the King.

TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well. And for so much as We, with God's
Grace, intend to bring into our obeisance, our Castles, kept by our Traitors
and Rebels in the North Parts of our Land, and therefore will in our Person
remove to Morrow toward these said Parties, to stablish the means that may
best serve thereunto, We pray you heartily that you, being accompanied with as
many Persons, defensibly arrayed, as may goodly accord with your ease, meet
with us at Leicestre the tenth day of May next coming, furnished with good for
yours and their expenses, to attend upon us from thence for the space of two
Months for the said cause. And that natheless ye be ready with the said Persons
in the said array upon the warning of a day, next after the fourth day of May,
to attend upon us as the case shall require for the said intent. Not failing
hereof as our trust is in you and as ye tender the assured rest of our said
Land. Given under our Signet at our Tower of London the Twenty fifth of April.

A Letter from King Richard the Third to John Mordaunt and William Salisbury.
To our Trusty and Welbeloved John Mordaunt and William Salisbury, and to every
of them. signature of Richard III By the King.

TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well. And forasmuch as by the advice of
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal of this our Land, late assembled at our Palace
of Westminster, we be fully determined by God's Grace, to address us in Person
with Host Royal, toward the parties of our Enemies, and Rebels of Scotland at
the beginning of this next Summer, to subdue and do them the annoyance possible
both by Sea and Land, in saving as well this our Land from such
inconveniences, as else were like to ensue, as the Honor of Us and of our
Blood, and true Liegemen, inhabited and inherited within this our Land. We
having perfect and certain Trust of your Good Will, Aid, and Assistance to this
our great Voyage, and knowing how useful and necessary your presence shall be
to us in the same, will and desire you right effectually, and natheless charge
you in the straitest wise, that incontinent, upon the sight of this our
Writing, ye dispose you to serve Us personally in Our said Voyage, accompanied,
and apparelled for the War according to your degree, so and in such wise, that
by the first day of May next coming, ye be ready, and readily pass forward with
Us in the said Journey, so accompanied as aforesaid; and that in giving
credence to the Bearers hereof ye send Us by them your Intent and Mind, and
what assistance we shall be sure to have of you in this behalf, as Our very
trust is in you. Given under Our Signet at Our Tower of London the eighteenth
day of February. And howbeit we purpose by God's help to set forward upon our
Journey the said first day of May next coming, yet natheless We be content that
ye be with Us at Our Town of Newcastle the last day of the said Month of May.

A Letter from King Henry the Seventh to John Mordaunt, Gentleman.
To our Trusty and Welbeloved John Mordaunt, Gentleman, of our County of
Bedford. signature of Henry VII By the King.

TRusty and welbeloved, We greet you well. And whereas we have directed Our
Commission, and certain Instructions in Writting to Our trusty and welbeloved
Master Walter Field, Clerk, Thomas Fouler, Squier, and others, to do and
exercise in Our Name, and the usual well of this Our Realm, such things as be
comprised in the said Commissions and Instructions. We for the great trust we
have in you, desire and heartily pray you, that at such season as Our said
Commissioners shall repair unto these parties to execute the said Commandment,
Ye, upon the sight of the said Commission and Instructions, which our said
Commissioners, shall show unto you, be unto them in all things concerning the
same, Counseling, Aiding, and Assisting, Exhorting, and by your discretion and
wisdom moving, and inducting all such Persons, as Our said Commissioners shall
name unto you, to the good accomplishment of Our other Letters at this same
time sent unto them, and to Our said Commissioners by Us delivered, not failing
hereof in any wise as Our special trust is in you. Given under Our Signet at
Our Castle of Windsor the three and twentieth day of January.

The Indenture of Marriage between William Mordaunt and Anne Huntington.
THis Indenture tripartited, made the fourteenth day of February, the tenth
Year of the Reign of King Henry the seventh, between Thomas Huntington of
Hempsteed next beside Radwinter, in the County of Essex, Esquire, oon that oon,
John Mordaunt of Turvey, in the County of Bedford, Esquire, and William
Mordaunt his Younger Brother, oon that second Party, and Robert Paris of Little
Lynton, in the County of Cantebrig, Esquire, and John Paris, Son and Heir
apparent of the said Robert, oon that third Party, Witnesses, That the said
William, by the Grace of God, shall take to his Wife Anne, one of the Daughters
and Heirs apparent of the said Thomas Huntington, and Margaret his Wife; and
likewise the same Anne, by the Grace of God, shall take to her Husband the said
William: The Solemnization of the said Matrimony to be had, and done, by the
fifth day of June next coming, at the Cost and Charges of the said William, as
well in Apparel as in Meat, and Drink and other Charges. It is also assented,
covenanted, and bargained, between the said Parties, That the said Thomas
Huntington, shall have to him for Term of his Life, without Impeachment of
wast, all the Manners of Crochemans in the County of Cantebrig, and all other
Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, and Services, with their Appurtenances, in
Mochesampford, little Sampford, Mocheradwinter, little Radwinter, Fynchingfeld,
Ashdon, Barklowe, Stevyngton, Bimsted, Helionbimsted, next beside
Mocheradwinter in the County of Essex, and Trumpyngton, Cambridge, Newnham,
next besides Cambridge, Saweston, Baburgham, Wittelff, Trippolo, and Cleyhithe
in the said County of Cantebrig, and elsewhere in the said Counties of Essex,
and Cantebrig, whereof the said Thomas Huntington, or any other Person or
Persons to his use, at this time stand or be seized. And after his Decease all
the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, and Appurtenances, shall be, go, and
remain to the said John Paris and Margaret his Wife, the Elder Daughter, and
oon of the Heirs apparent of the said Thomas Huntington, and of Margaret his
Wife, and to the said William and Anne, and to the Heirs of the Body of the
said Margaret, now Wife to the said John Paris, and Anne, lawfully and
generally begotten. And for default of Issue of the Body of the said Margaret,
lawfully begotten, all her part of the premises, shall be, go, and remain to
the said Anne, and to the Heirs of her Body lawfully begotten: And likewise in
default of Issue of the Body of the said Anne, lawfully begotten, all her part
of the premises, shall be, go, and remain to the said Margaret, now Wife of the
said John Paris, and to the Heirs of her Body, lawfully begotten: And for
default of Issue of the Bodies of the said Margaret, and of the said Anne,
lawfully begotten, all the said Manners, Tenements, and other Premises with the
Apputenances, shall be, go, and remain to the said Thomas Huntington, and to
the Heirs of his Body, lawfully begotten: And for default of Issue, all the
said Manners, Lands, and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, shall be, go, and
remain to the right Heirs of the Body of Robert Huntington, Son of Walter
Huntington, lawfully begotten, and to the Heirs of the Bodies of those Heirs,
lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue to remain to Catherine, now
Wife of John Wetham, and Sister to the said Walter Huntington, and to the Heirs
of her Body, lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue, to remain to the
right Heirs of the said Thomas Huntington for ever. And for the further
accomplishment of the same, the said Thomas Huntington, before the Feast of the
Assension of our Lord God, next coming, shall make, or cause to be made, to
George Nicolls, John Jenour, and Thomas Thorpe, and to their Heirs, a
sufficient and lawful Estate of all the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, and
other the Premises with their appurtenances, to the said use and intent, as by
the Council of the said John Mordaunt, and Robert Paris shall be devised: And
the same Thomas Huntington before the Feast of Saint Martin, in Winter next
coming, shall suffer all such Recoveries to be had by William Fyndern, Knight,
William Thine, Esquire, John Mordaunt, Esquire, Thomas Frowyke, Esquire, Robert
Tyrall, Esquire, Richard Higham, Esquire, Robert Bradbury, Gentilman, John
Vynter, Gentilman, and William Gascoigne, Gentilman, or by and against such of
them as then shall be in Life, to make sure all the said Lands and Tenements,
and other the Premises with their Appurtenances, to the uses and intents
abovesaid: And the said Thomas shall do, and suffer to be done, in the same,
Recoveries, at such time as reasonably shall be devised by the said William
Mordaunt, and John Paris, their Heirs and Assigns, at the Cost and Charges of
the said William and John. It is also assented and agreed between the said
Parties, that the said William Fyndern, and the other Demandents before
rehearsed, shall at the assignment desire, or according to the last Will of the
said Thomas Huntington, make a Grant or Grants, of forty Shillings by Year,
yearly going out of the said Manners of Crochemans with the Appurtenances in the
County of Essex, and of other forty Shillings by Year, yearly going out of the
said Manner of Trumpyngton, with the Appurtenances in the County of Cantebrig,
to oon, two, three or four Persons severally, or jointly, at the Pleasure of
the said Thomas Huntington, to be named during the Lives of them, to whom it
shall be so granted. It is also agreed, that the said Thomas Huntington, by the
assent and agreement of the said Robert Paris and John Paris, his Son, and John
Mordaunt, and William Mordaunt, his Brother, that at the pleasure of the said
Thomas Huntington, they shallcause all the said Manners, Lands, and Tenements,
and other the Premises to be divided into two equal Parts, and that Division of
equally done, and made, the said John Paris and William Mordaunt, shall thereof
make choice, as by the said Thomas Huntington, John Mordaunt and Robert Paris,
and other Friends shall be devised and agreed, and after that Division and
choice so made and had, the said William Fyndern, William Cheyne, John
Mordaunt, Thomas Frowyke, Robert Tyrall, Richard Higham, Robert Bradbury, John
Vynter, and William Gascoigne, to stand and be seized of Part of the said
Manners, Lands and Tenements, with their Appurtenances alted to the said William
and Anne, and by them so chosen, to the use of the said Thomas Huntington
during his Life, without impeachment of Wast: And after his Thomas Huntington
during his Life, without impeachment of Wast: And after his Decease to the use
and behoof there, I the said William Mordaunt and Anne, and of the Heirs of the
Body of the said Anne, lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the
use and behoof of the said John Paris and Margaret his Wife, and of the Heirs
of the Body of the said Margaret, lawfully begotten: And for default of such
Issue, to the use and behoof of the said Thomas Huntington, and of the Heirs of
his Body, lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the use and
behoof there, of the right Heirs of the Body of the said Robert Huntington,
lawfully begotten, and of the Heirs of the Bodies of those Heirs, lawfully
begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof there, of the
said Catharine, and of the Heirs of her Body, lawfully begotten: And for
default of such Issue, to the useand behoof there, of the said Thomas
Huntington, and of his Heirs for ever. And in like wise, after division in form
aforesaid made and had, the said William Fyndern, William Thine, John Mordaunt,
Thomas Frowyke, John Vynter, and William Gascoigne, to stand and be seized of
the said Part of the said Manners, Lands and Tenements with their Appurtenances,
so allotted to the said John Paris and Margaret his Wife, and by them so chosen
to the use and behoof of the said Thomas Huntington, for term of Life, without
any Impeachment of Waste: And after his Decease, to the use and behoof there,
of the said John Paris and Margaret his Wife, and of the Heirs of the Body of
the said Margaret, lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the use
and behoof there, of the said William Mordaunt, and Anne, and to the Heirs of
the Body of the said Anne, lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue, to
the use and behoof there, of the said Thomas Huntington, and of the Heirs of
his Body lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the use and
behoof there, of the right Heirs of the Body of the said Robert Huntington,
lawfully begotten, and of the Heirs of the Bodies of those Heirs, lawfully
begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the use and behoof there, of the
said Catharine, and of the Heirs of her Body, lawfully begotten: And for
default of such Issue, to the use and behoof there, of the said Thomas
Huntington and of his Heirs for ever. And if no Partition be made and agreed
to, of the said Manners, Lands and Tenements in the Life of the said Thomas
Huntington, that then it is agreed between the said Parties that after his
Decease, the said William Mordaunt and Anne, or oon of them, or the Heirs of
the Body of the said Anne, lawfully begotten, shall make equal Partition of all
the said Manners Lands and Tenements, with their Appurtenances, and after that
Partition so made, the said John Paris and Margaret his Wife, or the said
Margaret, or the Heirs of the same Margaret, lawfully begotten, shall choose at
their pleasure oon of the Part so divided, to hold it in severalty; and the
said William Mordaunt and Anne, or the Heirs of the Body of the said Anne,
lawfully begotten, to have the other Part thereof so divided, and to hold it in
severalty according, and in like Form and Estates, with the remainder of every
of the said Parties over, as is limited above, and as they should have holden
it, if they had had choice of the same, after Partition made by the said Thomas
Huntington. Also it is agreed and covenanted, That the said Thomas Huntington,
at the Costs and Charges of the said William Mordaunt and John Paris, shall
cause all the Charters, Escripts, Muniments, and Writings concerning the
Premises. These Indentures only excepted, to be indifferently seen and divided,
and the Evidences belonging to every of the said parties, after division and
choice thereof, in Form aforesaid made, to be laid in the Abbey of Walden by
themselves, if the Abbot and Covent of the same place, will thereto agree, to
the use of the said Thomas Huntington, during his Life, and after his Decease
to be delivered to the said John Paris, and Margaret his Wife, and William
Mordaunt, and Anne, and the Heirs of the said Mordaunt and Anne, according to
the choice of such Estates as is aforesaid. And if the Abbot and Covent of
Walden aforesaid will not thereto agree, then the same Evidences to be laid in
some other place, in safeguard, as shall be divised by the said Thomas
Huntington, John Paris, and William Mordaunt, to the said use and intent. For
the which premises well and truly to be performed, the said William Mordaunt
shall pay to the said Thomas Huntington, three hundred Marks of lawful Money of
England, in form following; that is to say, at the Sealing of these Indentures
one hundred Marks of lawful Money of England, and over that for payment of the
residue of the said Money, the said William Mordaunt, before the said day of
Marriage, shall cause the said John Mordaunt, his Brother, and John Vynter,
Thomas Laventhorp and William Gascoigne, Gentilmen, to be bound jointly and
severally in three several Obligations, every of them containing the sum of
forty Pounds, whereof the day of payment of the first Obligation, shall be the
First day of February, in the Year of our Lord God, one thousand four hundred
ninety five; and the day of payment of the second Obligation, shall be the
First day of February, in the Year of our Lord God, one thousand four hundred
ninety six; and the day of payment of the third Obligation, shall be the First
day of February, in the Year of our Lord God, one thousand four hundred and
ninety seven. And over that the said William Mordaunt, shall cause the said
John Mordaunt, John Vynter, Thomas Laventhorp and William Gascoigne, before the
said day of Marriage, for payment of thirteen Pound six shillings eight pence,
residue of the said three hundred Marks, to be bound jointly and severally to
the said Thomas Huntington, in a fourth Obligation payable the first day of
February, in the Year of our Lord God, one thousand four hundred ninety eight.
It is also covenanted and agreed between the said Parties, and the said Thomas
Huntington grants by these Presents, That, if the said William Mordaunt, die
before any of the said days of payment, specified in any of the said
Obligations, then having none Issue begotten of the Body of the said Anne, That
thence all the said Obligations, whereof the days of payment shall come after
his Death, shall be void, and the payments of them to cease; except always,
That if the said Anne be with child at the time of the decease of the said
William Mordaunt, that then as long as that Child lives, the payment to hold,
and the Obligations to be good, and in strength; and if that Child happen to
die, then all the Obligations, whereof the days of payment shall be to come at
the time of the death of the said Child, shall be void, and the payment of them
shall cease. And the said John Mordaunt and William grant, by these presents,
That they shall make, or cause to be made, before the said day of Marriage, to
the said William Mordaunt and Anne, and to the Heirs of the body of the said
William, lawfully begotten, and to the use and behoof of the said William and
Anne, and of their Heirs aforesaid, as sure, sufficient and lawful estate of
the Manner of Wodend, otherwise called Rokesden Wodend, with the Appurtenances
in the County of Bedford; and all the Lands and Tenements, Rents, Reversions
and Services with their Appurtenances, in Rokesden, Bereford, Chalnestre,
Colmorth, and Collesden, in the same County of Bedford; and all the Lands and
Tenements in Chichmersh and Clopton, in the County of Northampton, whereof the
said John Mordaunt, or any other to the use of the said John, or of his Heirs,
at the making of these Presents, being sealed, as shall be devised by the
Learned Council of the said Thomas Huntington, at the costs and charges of the
said William Mordaunt; And moreover the said William shall cause the said John
Mordaunt, John Vynter, Thomas Laventhorp and William Gascoigne, to be bound to
the said Thomas Huntington in an Obligation of a hundred pounds, to make, or
cause to be made before the First day of April, that shall be in the Year of
our Lord, one thousand four hundred and ninety eight, an Enfeoffment and lawful
Estate, of Lands and Tenements, to the Yearly value of an hundred and six
Shillings and eight pence, over all Charges to the said William Mordaunt and
Anne, and to the Heirs of the Body of the said William Mordaunt lawfully
begotten; and wherefore, before this time certain Covenants were made and had
between the said Thomas Huntington and Robert Paris, upon Marriage had between
the said John Paris and Margaret his Wife, and thereupon the said Robert Paris
paid to the said Thomas Huntington, an hundred and forty Pounds of lawful
Money of England, and also promised a Jointure of Lands and Tenements, to the
Yearly value of twenty Marks, then immediately to be paid to the said Margaret,
and after his Decease, to have a further Jointure of Ten Marks for Term of her
Life, which Jointure in all should be of the Yearly Value of twenty Pounds,
which is well and truly executed and performed, and for that the said Thomas
Huntington should leave to his Heirs, Lands and Tenements, to the Yearly Value
of an Hundred Marks, as in an Old pair of Indentures, made between the said
Robert Paris on the one Party, and the said Thomas Huntington on the other
Party, among other more plainly appears; which Covenants the said Robert
Paris has renounced, and released, and by these Presents now renounceth, and
releaseth unto the said Thomas Huntington. It is now assented and agreed
between the said Thomas Huntington, Robert Paris, and William Mordaunt for the
Premises, to be performed to the said John Paris and Margaret his Wife, as is
abovesaid, That all the Covenants comprised in the Old Indentures of the part
of the said Robert Paris to be performed; and the Indenture of the same for the
part of the said Robert, shall be, and stand in their force: And moreover that
William Fyndern, Knight, and others that be now enfeoffed in the Manner of
Hildersham, and of other Lands, and Tenements in Hildersham in the said County
of Cantebrig, shall be, and stand seoffed thereof, to the use of the said
Margaret for a Jointure for Term of her Life, of Lands and Rents in Hildersham
aforesaid, and to the Yearly Value of ten Marks, over and beside the Jointure
of twenty Pounds, to be had after the Death of the said Robert Paris; and the
said Robert Paris shall pay to the said Thomas Huntington, ten Pounds of lawful
Money of England, in Form following; That is to say, Yearly five Marks at the
Feast of Hallowmesse, till the said ten Pounds be paid. In Witness whereof to
the part of these Indentures, remaining with the said Thomas Huntington, the
said John Mordaunt, and William Mordaunt, and Robert Paris, and John Paris,
have set to their Seals. To the second part of these Indentures, remaining with
the said John Mordaunt, and William Mordaunt, the said Thomas Huntington,
Robert Paris, and John Paris, have set to their Seals: And to the third part of
these Indentures, remaining with the said Robert Paris, and John Paris, the
said Thomas Huntington, John Mordaunt and William Mordaunt, have set to their
Seals, the said Fourteenth day of February, the tenth Year of the Reign of King
Henry the Seventh. John Mordaunt, William Mordaunt, John Paris.

Junctura Annae uxoris Willielmi Mordaunt.
SCiant praesentes and futuri, quod ego Johannes Mordaunt de Turveia, Armiger,
dedi, concessi and hac praesenti Charta mea confirmavi, Willielmo Mordaunt,
fratri meo juniori, and Annae Huntington, filiae Thomae Huntington de Hempsted,
Armigeri, Manerium meum de Wodend cum pertinentiis, nec non omnia terras and
tenementa, redditus, reversiones and servitia mea, cum suis pertinentiis in
Rokesden, Bereford, Chalnestre, Colmorth and Collesden, in Comitatu Bedfordiae,
quae nuper fuerunt Johannis Carlisle. Dedi etiam and concessi and hac praesenti
Charta mea confirmavi praefatis, Willielmo Mordaunt, and Annae, omnia, terras
and tenementa mea, cum suis pertinentiis in Tychmerch and Clopton, in Comitatu
Northamptoniae, quae nuper fuerunt Thomae Hunt. Habendum and tenendum omnia and
singula, manerium, terras and tenementa, redditus, reversiones, and servitia
cum suis pertinentiis, praefatis, Willielmo Mordaunt and Annae, and haeredibus
de corpore ejusdem Willielmi legitime procreatis. Et ego praedictus Johannes
Mordaunt and haeredes mei, omnia and singula, manerium, terras and tenementa,
redditus, reversiones, and servitia, cum suis pertinentiis praefatis, Willielmo
Mordaunt and Annae, and haeredibus de corpore ejusdem Willielmi legitime
procreatis, contra omnes homines warrantizabimus, acquietabimus, and defendemus
in perpetuum per praesentes. Noveritis insuper me praefatum Johannem Mordaunt,
attornasse, constituisse, and in loco meo posuisse, dilectos mihi in Christo,
Henricum Handson and Richardum Stevynson conjunctim and divisim, meos veros and
legitimos attornatos, ad intrandum in omnia and singula, manerium, terras and
tenementa praedicta, cum suis pertinentiis, and seisinam nomine meo in iisdem
capiendum, and post hujusmodi seisinam sic inde captam, and habitam, seisinam
de iisdem nomine meo praefatis, Willielmo Mordaunt and Annae and haeredibus de
corpore ejusdem Willielmi legitime procreatis, deliberandum secundum vim,
formam, and effectum, hujus praesentis Chartae meae, ratum and gratum habendum
totum and quicquid iidem Attornati mei fecerint, seu eorum alter fecerit nomine
meo in praemissis. In cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti Chartae meae
sigillum meum apposui. Data ultimo die Januarii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici
septimi post Conquestum, decimo.

Per me Johannem Mordaunt.

Charta Regis Henrici Septimi, Ad constituendum Johannem Mordaunt unum
servientium ad legem.
HEnricus Dei Gratia, Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, Omnibus
ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem. Sciatis quod nos ex mero motu
and scientia nostra constituimus Johannem Mordaunt unum servientium nostrorum
ad legem, nec non cessimus eidem Johanni, officium unius servientium nostrorum
ad legem, habendum, occupandum, and exercendum dictum officium; nec non ad
essendum unum servientium nostrorum ad legem, quamdiu nobis placuerit
capiendum, and accipiendum, annuatim pro officio illo exercendo, ab eodem
Johanne, vadia, feoda, vesturam and regarda, dicto officio debita seu
pertinentia, prout alii servientes ad legem pro hujusmodi officio exercendo
percipient, seu habere, vel percipere debent. In cujus rei Testimonium has
literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Test meipso apud Westmonasterium
vicesimo quinto die Novembris, Anno Regni Regis nostri undecimo.

Charta Edwardi Ducis Buckinghamiae.
EDwardus Dux Buckinghamiae, Comes Herfordiae, and Northamptoniae. Omnibus ad
quos praesens Scriptum nostrum pervenerit, Salutem. Sciatis nos praefatum
ducem, remisisse, relaxasse, and omnimodo pro nobis and haeredibus nostris in
perpetuum quietum clamasse, Johanni Mordaunt de Turveia, in Comitatu
Bedfordiae, uni servientium Domini regis ad legem, haeredibus and assignatis
suis, totum jus nostrum, statum, titulum seu clameum, quae unquam habuimus,
habemus, vel in futurum habere poterimus, de and in quinquaginta acris terrae,
duabus acris terrae aqua coopertis, and separali piscaria in aqua de Ose, cum
pertinentiis in Turveia praedicta, and de and in duabus acris terrae aqua
coopertis, and de separali piscaria in aqua de Ose in Brafeld, juxta Lauenden
alias vocata Coldbrafeld, in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, quae omnia and singula
idem Johannes Mordaunt habuit ex dono and feoffamento Edwardi Comitis Wilts,
consanguinei nostri; and quibus omnibus and fingulis praemissis, idem Johannes
Mordaunt seisitus existit. Ita quod nec nos praefatus Dux, nec haeredes nostri,
nec aliquis alius pro nobis seu nomine nostro, aliquod, jus, titulum seu
clameum, de and in praedictis terris, tenementis, aquis, separalibus piscariis,
and caeteris praemissis, de caetero exigere vel vendicare poterimus; sed ab
omni action juris, status, tituli vel clamei, seu aliquid inde petendi, sumus
in perpetuum exclusi per praesentes. Et nos vero praefatus Dux and haeredes
nostri, omnia praedicta, terras and tenementa, aquam, separales piscarias cum
pertinentiis, and caetera praemissa praefato Johanni Mordaunt, haeredibus and
assignatis suis contra Abbatem Sancti Petri Monasterii and successores suos
warrantizabimus, acquietabimus, and in perpetuum defendemus per praesentes. In
cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti Scripto nostro duplicato sigillum nostrum
apponi fecimus. Data undecimo die Februarii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici septimi
quarto decimo.

An Indenture between John Mordaunt of Turvey and John Tresham of Rushton.
THIS Indenture made the Twenty first day of March, in the Fourteenth Year of
the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, between John Mordaunt of Turvey, one of
the King's Sergeants at the Law, on the oon party, and John Tresham of Rushton
in the County of Northampton, Esquire, on the other party, Witnesses, That it
is agreed, covenanted, and bargained, between the said Parties, That the said
John Mordaunt shall endeavor him to get the Marriage of Elizabeth Vere to
Marry with John Mordaunt the younger, Son, and Heir apparent of the said John
Mordaunt the Sergeant, and Amey Vere to Marry with Robert Mordaunt, the Second
Son of the said John Mordaunt the Sergeant, which Elizabeth and Amey, being
Daughters to my Sister Isabel: and to give Lands and Tenements in Jointure to
the said Elizabeth Vere, for term of her Life, to the yearly Value of Twenty
Pound; and to give to the said Amey, Lands and Tenements, in Jointure to the
yearly Value of Ten Pounds, for term of her Life; for the which Marriage and
Jointure and other Considerations the said John Tresham grants, That in case
he be disposed to sell any of his Manners, Lands, and Tenements, within the
County of Northampton or elsewhere, within the Realm of England, That then the
same John Mordaunt shall have it, and all Manners, Lands and Tenements, Woods,
Rents, and Services, that he shall be disposed for to sell, after the rate of
Fifteen Years purchase, of the clear yearly Value of the same Lands and
Tenements to be sold. It is also agreed, and bargained between the said
Parties, That the said John Tresham at his pleasure shall give to Isabel,
Daughter of Sir James Haryngton, now his Wife, all his Lands, Tenements,
Pastures, and Hereditaments in Lyneden, Churchfeld, Owndell, Warmyngton, Stoke,
Doyle, Aldwyncle, Ryngsted, Stanwig and Church-Brampton, or part of them, for
the term of her Life; and to give unto Isabel Tresham and Clemens Tresham,
Daughters begotten between the said John Tresham and Isabel, Daughter of the
said Sir James, all the said Manners, Lands, and Tenements, in Lyneden,
Churchfeld, Owndell, Warmyngton, Stoke, Doyle, Aldwyncle, Ryngsted, Stanwig and
Church-Brampton, or part of them, to have to them and to the Heirs of their
Bodies begotten; And for default of Issue of both their Bodies begotten, the
same Manners, Lands, and Tenements to remain to the said Isabel, Sister of the
said John Tresham, for term of her Life, the remainder thereof for default of
such Issue, or if there be no such Gift made of the same, to remain to the said
Elizabeth Vere, Amey Vere, and Constance Vere, their Sisters, and to their
Heirs for ever. And in case the said John Tresham make no sale of his Manners,
Lands, and Tenements, as is aforesaid, That then immediately after his decease,
and the decease of Isabel his Sister, all his Manners, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, within the Realm of England, not sold to the said John Mordaunt
the Sergeant, as is abovesaid, shall remain, go, and grow to the said Elizabeth
Vere, Amey Vere, and Constance Vere, and to their Heirs for ever. And the said
John Mordaunt shall pay for reversion of the Premises sold, or to be sold by
the said John Tresham, to the same John Mordaunt Sergeant, after the rate of
half Fifteen Years Purchase, as is abovesaid. In witness whereof to these
present Indentures, the said Parties interchangeably have set their Seals, the
same Twenty fifth Day and Year abovesaid. And in case the said John Tresham
hereafter have any Issue Male of the Body of the said Isabel by him begotten,
That then the said Issue Male shall have all the same Manners, Lands, and
Tenements in Lyneden, Churchfeld, Owndell, Warmyngton, Stoke, Doyle, Aldwyncle,
Ryngsted, Stanwig, Church-Brampton, or part of them, if it shall please the
same John Tresham to make any such Gift Entail.

Extracta per me Nicolaum Hardyng verbatim, xxv die Januarii, decimo nono
Henrici Septimi.

A Letter from the Prince to John Mordaunt his Attorney.
By the Prince.
TRusty and right well beloved we greet you well. And understand by your late
Letters directed unto our Council, that ye have endeavored you diligently, to
perform such matters and businesses, concerning our profit, according to our
desires in our Letters directed to you; for the which we give unto you our
great thanks, praying you to persevere and continue: And whereas in your said
Letters among other matters is contained, That Richard Empson, has found that
Ingleton held certain Hamlets, and Parcels of Lands of my most dread Lord and
Fader the King, by Knights Service, whereby he intends to defeat us, as it
seems, of the Ward of the said Ingleton, to our Prejudice, with whom we
charge you severely in our Name to travers, for diverse considerations, and
specially for that our Council have had of late more perfect knowledge, That the
said Ward rightfully appertains unto us, than they knew, or had
understanding; for the which and other great matters, whereof we shall be
ascertained, we intend within brief time to send some of our Council unto my
most dread Lord and Fader instructed, to the intent we may know his pleasure
concerning the same. We will also, That in our Name ye take Actions against
Ward, Waste, and Sefnian, for such Wards as they detaining have by craft
concealedly hid and kept from us, wherewith we be nothing pleased nor content.
And as for the hundred and three score Pounds, resting in the hands of Nicholas
Nynes, due unto us, we pray you on our behalf to charge the said Nicholas to
send the same surely to us in all convenient have, and to give credence to our
trusty servant Thomas Canceller, chief Clerk of our Kitchen, in such things as
he on our behalf shall show unto you, whereby ye shall greatly please us.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Beaudley the Twenty third day of May.
Articles of Marriage between Sir Wistan Brown, and Elizabeth Mordaunt.
THIS Indenture made the Twentieth day of September, in the Fourteenth Year of
the Reign of King Henry the Seventh, between John Mordaunt of Turvey, oon of
the Kings Sergeants at the Law, on the oon Party, and William Brown of
Abbesroding in the County of Essex, Esquire, on the other Party, Witnesses,
That whereas it was promised, concluded and agreed, between the Friends of the
said William, and the said John Mordaunt, and other Friends of Elizabeth,
Sister of the said John Mordaunt, That the said William, should take to Wife
the said Elizabeth; and upon the same Marriage concluded, and was promised, as
well by the Friends of the said William, as by the said William, he then being
of the Age of sixteen Years, or thereabout, and of good and sad discretion,
That the said Elizabeth should have a Jointure of Manners, Lands, and Tenements,
late Robert Brown's, Father to the said William, to the yearly Value of Ten
Pound Four Shillings; and that of the same Manners, Lands, and Tenements, so of
the yearly Value of Ten Pound Four Shillings; and also of other Lands and
Tenements in the Saint Martins, which before that time were laid to Mortgage by
the said Robert to William Capell, Knight, for a Debt and Forfeit to the said
Sir William, and afterward redeemed by the said John, at his labor and
Instance, for the sum of Eight Pounds Six Shillings and Eight Pence, the which
Eight Pounds Six Shillings and Eight Pence, the said John Mordaunt paid to the
said Sir William, and the said John Mordaunt should have and take the Profits
into his own hand, from the time of the said agreement and concluding of
Marriage, unto the time the said William come to his full Age of One and Twenty
Years, which Lands in the whole were promised to be of the yearly Value of
Eight Pounds, over all Charges to the said John. And also it was farther
agreed, That the said Elizabeth, over, and besides Manners, Lands, and
Tenements, to the said yearly Value of Ten Pounds Four Shillings, should have a
Jointure in the said Lands and Tenements, in the Saint Martins, if the said
William, when he came to his full Age of One and Twenty Years, would agree,
That she should have the said Lands and Tenements in the Saint Martins, term of
her Life; and after that the said William came to his full Age of One and
Twenty Years, he oftentimes assented and agreed, That the same Elizabeth should
have the said Lands in the Saint Martins in Jointure, and by these Presents
confesses and grants, That he agreed and granted, and at the time of
concluding the said Marriage, the Manners of Rokewodhall and Stokhall, and all
Lands and Tenements in Abbesroding, Bauchamproding, High-Laffare,
Little-Laffare, and Maehing, in the County of Essex, except Hobberlerkey, which
were the said Robert Brown's, were promised to be of the yearly Value of Ten
Pound Four Shillings, over all Charges, were assigned to be the said Jointure
of the said Elizabeth; and after were given in Jointure by Sir Thomas
Boughchier, Knight, John Bardefeld, and other Enfeoffes, to the said William
and Elizabeth his Wife, for term of Life of the said Elizabeth: And the said
William took Seizing and Possession for him and the said Elizabeth, at
Abbesroding aforesaid. The same Elizabeth, her Friends verily believing the
same Manners, Lands and Tenements, had then been of the yearly Value of Ten
Pounds Four Shillings, according to the said Promise, and also as it was agreed
upon between the same Parties, upon the said Marriage, concluded, That the
reversion of the said Manners of Rokewodhall, Stokhall, and all Lands and
Tenements aforenamed, and the said Lands called Hobberlerkeys, after the death
of Edmund Brown, Uncle to the said William, and also the Manners of Langenthorp,
Whiteroding, and all other Lands and Tenements, which were the said Robert
Brown's, or any other to his Use, at the time of his decease, after certain
Debts of the same Robert paid, and after the decease of the said William and
Elizabeth, should go to the Heirs begotten of the Body of the said William. And
thereupon the said Elizabeth took to Husband the same William: For which
Marriage and other Premises and Promises, well and truly to have been
performed, the said John Mordaunt should have paid Three hundred Mark, and
Four Shillings, whereof he, the said William, has paid Eight Pounds Six
Shillings and Eight Pence, to Sir William Capell; for redeeming the said Lands
in the Saint Martins has paid to diverse persons, for the contentation of
diverse of the Debts of the said Robert Brown Six Pounds; and because the said
Lands, that the said John Mordaunt should have had, during the Nonage of the
said William were not of the yearly Value of Eight Pounds, according to the
said Agreement and Promise by much Money; therefore it was agreed by the said
William and his Friends, That the said John Mordaunt should rebate and keep
still in his own hands, and in full recompense of the said yearly Value
of...... the other...... the residue of the said Three hundred Marks, whereunto
the said William, before the Date of these Presents, and also now, agrees by
these Presents, and confesses fully to be satisfied of all such Money, as
should be due to him by reason of the said Marriage; and by reason of the Money
paid by the said John Mordaunt, the Debts of the said Robert were the sooner
paid, and the said William sooner attained and had the Possession of the said
Lands. Moreover the said William, contrary to his said Agreement, has sold the
said Lands and Tenements in the Saint Martins to the said John Bardefeld for
Twenty Pounds, whereof the said William has received Four Pounds, and the same
William has........... the said Bardefeld the Ten Pounds, and also
upon........ has........ and given to John Wro, and Sybill his Wife, by Fine,
the said Manner of Stokhall with the appurtenances, to have to them and their
Heirs, of the Body of the said Sybill begotten, for all the said considerations
and many other causes, in recompense of the Premises, and in recompense of the
full Jointure and Dowre of the said Elizabeth, upon agreement had between the
said John Mordaunt and William, the said William by his Deed bearing Date the
Tenth day of June, the Fourteenth Year of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh,
Enfeoffed the said John Mordaunt, William Gascoigne, John Mestot, and Thomas
Heron, of the said Manners of Langenhoo, Rokewodhall, Whiteroding, Brown's
Manner, and of all his Lands and Tenements in the County of Essex, of the
Avowson of the Church of Langenhoo, to have to them and to their Heirs; and the
same John Mordaunt, William Gascoigne, John Mestot, and Thomas Heron, according
to the same Agreement, at the desire and request of the said William, have by
Deed, bearing Date the Eleventh day of June, the Fourteenth Year of the Reign
of King Henry the Seventh, made estate of all the said Manners of Langenhoo,
Rokewodhall, Whiteroding, and Brown's Manners, and all other Lands, Tenements
and Avowsons in the said County of Essex, to Robert Whiteing, William Mordaunt,
George Whiteing, Humphrey Brown, John Jenour, William Sewster, and Thomas
Kirkeby, to have to them and their Heirs for ever, to the use of the said
William and Elizabeth, for Term of their Life, and of the longer liver of them,
yiedling to the said John Mordaunt, William Gascoigne, John Mestot and Thomas
Heron, and to their Heirs, Ten Pounds Four Shillings, out of the said Manners of
Langenhoo, to the uses and intents specified in the said Indenture; and after
the Decease of the said William and Elizabeth, the said Robert Whiteing,
William Mordaunt, George Whiteing, Humphrey Brown, John Jenour, William Sewster
and Thomas Kirkeby, to be and stand feoffed of and in all the said Manners,
Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises, to the use of the Heirs of the Body
of the said William, lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue, then to
be and stand Feoffes of the Premises to the uses and intents specified in the
same Indenture, as by the same it more plainly appears. It is now Covenanted,
Assented, and Agreed, between the said John Mordaunt and William, at the
departing of the said William from Turvey, by these Presents in form following;
That is to say, That where the said William, has received of Glasyer, late
Farmer of Stokhall, One and Twenty Pound Four Shillings and Eight Pence, which
was due to the said John Mordaunt, by reason of the same Farm; and also whereas
Bogdich, late Farmer to the said John Mordaunt of Rokewodhall, had all the
Manners, Lands, and Tenements in Abbesroding, to Farm, with diverse Goods and
Cattels of the said John Mordaunt: That is to say, Two and Thirty Kyne, a Bull,
Eight Horses, a Cart and Cartgeer, and Plough and Ploughgeer, for term of
years; and departed from the said Farm being then in debt to the said John, for
the said Farm, in Ten Pounds, over and besides the said Cattle; and of which
arrearages of Ten Pounds, and of the said Goods and Cattels, the said William
has received a good substance; and also whereas the said John Mordaunt, has
found the said William and Elizabeth, their Children, their Servants, as well
Men as Women, and Horses, meat and drink continually, from the time of the said
Marriage, unto the time of making of these Preserts, (one Year and a half only
excepted) and at diverse times in the mean season has found the said William to
School, and to Account at London, to the great cost and charge of the said John
Mordaunt; the said John Mordaunt gives to the said William the keeping and
finding of him, his Wife, his Children and Servants as is aforesaid, freely
unto the date of the making of these Presents; and also releaseth to the said
William all Actions for the said Goods, Debts, Money, and Cattels, received by
and of the said Glasyer and Bogdich, Farmers of Stokhall and Abbesroding; and
also whereas the said William has borrowed of the said John Mordaunt Fourteen
Pound ready Money, and is bound for the same, by his Obligation to the said
John; and also whereas the said William has certain and diverse Stuffs of
Household, which were late William Mordaunt's, Father of the said John Mordaunt,
and Elizabeth, to make the said William clearly discharged at his departing
against the said John Mordaunt, his Heirs and Executors, the same John
releaseth by these Presents to the said William, all Actions and Demands, as
well in Conscience as otherwise. For the which Premises and all other benefices
that the said John has done to the said William, the said William Covenanteth,
Agrees, and Assenteth by these Presents, That the said Robert Whiteing,
William Mordaunt, George Whiteing, Humphrey Brown, John Jenour, William
Sewster, and Thomas Kirkeby, and all other Persons, That be Enfeoffed in any of
the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, and other the Premises to the use of the
said William; if any such be, shall be and stand Feoffes, of all the said
Manners of Langenhoo, Rokewodhall, Whiteroding, and the said Lands and Tenements
and other the premises in the County of Essex to the use of the said William
and Elizabeth for term of their lives, and of the longer liver, reserving the
said Ten Pounds to such use and intent, as is specified in the said Indentures,
made the said Eleventh day of June, and after their decease to be and stand
Feoffed of all the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, and other Premises to the
use of John Brown, Eldest Son of the said William and Elizabeth, and of the
Heirs of his Body begotten; And for default of such Issue, to be and stand
Feoffed of all the same Manners, Lands and Tenements, and other the Premises to
the use of William Brown, second Son of the said William and Elizabeth, and of
the Heirs of his Body begotten; And for default of such Issue, to be and stand
Feoffes thereof, to the use of the right Heirs of the Body of the said William
lawfully begotten; And for default of such Issue, to be and stand Feoffes
thereof, to such use and intent as is specified in the said Indentures, bearing
Date the said Eleventh day of June. In Witness whereof, to these Presents, the
said Parties interchangeably have set their Seals, the said Twentieth day of
September, the said Fourteenth Year of the Reign of King Henry the Seventh.

Per me Johannem Mordaunt.

Charta Thomae Prioris prioratus de Caldwell.
OMnibus Christi sidelibus, ad quos hoc praesens Scriptum nostrum pervenerit,
Thomas Prior prioratus sanctorum Johannis Baptistae and Johannis Evangelistae
de Caldwell, and ejusdem loci Conventus, salutem in Domino sempiternam.
Noveritis nos praefatos Priorem and Conventum unanimi consensu and assensu
nostris dedisse and concessisse, ac per praesentes damus and concedimus
Reginaldo Gray, militi, and Johanni Mordaunt de Turveia, uni servientium Domini
Regis ad legem, Advocationem Ecclesiae de Sondey unica vice, tantum cum primo
ex aliqua causa vacaverit, per proximam nominationem Capellani ad eandem
Ecclesiam, cum Ecclesia illa primo vacare contigerit. In cujus rei Testimonium
huic praesenti Scripto Sigillum nostrum commune apposuimus. Data in domo nostra
capitularii decimo septimo die Augusti, Anno Regni Regis Henrici Septimi quinto
decimo.

An Indenture between John Mordaunt, Wistan Brown, and Humphrey Brown his
Brother.
THIS Indenture made the Third day of February, in the Seventeenth Year of the
Reign of King Henry the Seventh, between John Mordaunt on the oon Party, and
Wistan Brown, and Humphrey Brown, his Brother, on the other party, Witnesses,
That where the said John late bought the Ward, and Custody of the Body, Lands,
and Tenements of Amey Vere, late the Wife of Robert Mordaunt, Son to the said
John Mordaunt, late deceased, whereof as yet the same John has no Patent, but
only a Bill assigned by the King. It is Covenanted, and Bargained between the
said Parties, by these Presents, That the said Wistan and Humphrey shall have
to their own use, all such Right, Title, and Interest, of, and in all the
Manners, Lands, and Tenements of the said Amey's, as the said John now has, or
hereafter, by reason of the said Bill assigned, shall have; And also, That the
said Wistan and Humphrey, shall have free liberty to resort to the said Amey,
to attain her good will, for a Marriage to be had, between the said Humphrey
and the said Amey, without Let, Interruption, or Impediment of the said John
Mordaunt, or his Assigns; for which Premises the said Humphrey shall suffer the
said John Mordaunt, William Mordaunt, and William Gascoigne, to recover against
the said Humphrey, the Manner of Melbourne in the County of Cambridge, called
Browns-Maner, and all the Lands and Tenements in Melbourne, Melreth, and
Shepons, in the same County, which late were Robert Brown's, and the which the
said Humphrey, or any other to his use may have, in the same County of
Cambridge, by a Writ of Entry in the Post, wherein the said Humphrey shall do
and suffer to be done, for making sure the said Manners, Lands, and Tenements,
to the said John Mordaunt, William Mordaunt, and William Gascoigne, and to
their Heirs, to the use of the said John Mordaunt and his Heirs; And also the
said Wistan and Humphrey, and either of them, shall cause to be made, and make
such other Surety, by Fine, Warranty, or otherwise, to the said John Mordaunt,
William Mordaunt, and William Gascoigne, and to their Heirs, and to the Use of
the said John Mordaunt and his Heirs, of the same Manners, Lands and Tenements,
with the Appurtenances, as shall be advised by the Learned Council of the said
John Mordaunt or his Heirs, at all times when the said John Mordaunt or his
Heirs shall require; And the said Wistan and Humphrey, shall deliver, or cause
to be delivered, to the said John Mordaunt or his Heirs, when they be thereto
required, all the Evidences that they or any of them, or any other person to
the use of any of them, have concerning the said Manners, Lands, and Tenements
in the said County of Cambridge; And if the said Amey dye before she come to
the age of Three and Twenty Years, having no Issue of her Body begotten, alive,
or dead, then the said Humphrey shall have, for term of his Life, out of the
said Manners, Lands, and Tenements in the County of Cambridge, Ten Marks by the
Year yearly during his Life, as sure as the said Humphrey shall advise: And the
said Wistan and Humphrey, Covenant and Grant, by these Presents, That the said
Humphrey and Amey, or any of them, shall not do, or suffer to be done, any
thing hereafter, whereby the Inheritance of any Lands or Tenements of the said
Amey be put from the right Heirs of the said Amey, but only Lands, or Tenements
to the yearly value of Forty Pounds, which the said John does agree, That the
said Humphrey shall have during his life only, if he can get it of the said
Amey, and that the Reversion of these Lands and Tenements, to the value of
Forty Pounds by the Year, and the Reversion of any other Lands and Tenements of
the said Amey's, if it happen the said Humphrey thereof to be Tenant by the
Court-Fee, and all other Lands and Tenements of the said Amey's, immediately
after the death of the said Amey, shall go to the right Heirs of the said Amey;
And the said Humphrey shall discharge the said John Mordaunt against William
Merbury in all things that in the same Humphrey is, or shall be becoming the
said Marriage and the Lands and Tenements, of the said Amey, or any of them;
And that the said John Mordaunt shall have the whole Interesse of the said
Humphrey that he shall have of all Advowsons belonging to the said Amey, till
she come to the Age of Three and twenty Years full; and the said Humphrey
gives, and binds himself by these Presents, That he shall be of Council to
his power, and cunning with the said John Mordaunt, and John Mordaunt the Son,
during the Life of the said Humphrey, without any Money, Fee, or other Reward
taking for his labor.

In Witness whereof the Parties abovesaid to these Indentures interchangeably
have set their Seals, the Day and Year abovesaid: and that the said Humphrey
shall continue at his Book. Per me Humphredum Brown.
Per me Wistanum Brown.
Extracta decimo quarto Maii Henrici octavi vicesimo quarto, coram Doctore
Olyver.
An Indenture between Henry Strangeways and John Mordaunt for a Marriage
between Gyles Strangeways his Son, and Jane the Daughter of the said John.
THIS Indenture made the Eighth Day of February, in the Seventeenth Year of the
Reign of King Henry the Seventh, between Henry Strangeways, Esquire, on the oon
Party, and John Mordaunt of Turvey, Gentleman, on the other Party;
Witnesses, That it is Bargained, Accorded and Agreed, between the said
Parties, in form following; that is to say, The said Henry Grants, and
Covenanteth by these Presents, That Gyles, Son and Heir apparent, of the said
Henry, and of Dorothy late his Wife, Daughter of john Arundell of Chideok,
Knight, shall by the Grace of God, Marry, and take to Wife, Jane, Daughter to
the said John and Edith his Wife, Daughter, and one of the Heirs of Nicholas
Latimer of Duntish, Knight, if the same Jane thereto will agree. And in like
wise the said John Covenanteth, and Grants by these Presents, that the said
Jane, by the Grace of God, shall Marry, and take to her Husband the said Gyles,
if the same Gyles thereto shall agree. The Solemnization of the said Matrimony
to be done at such time as the said Henry and John Mordaunt shall agree, at the
Costs, and Charges of the same Henry and John indifferently, except the said
John Moudaunt shall find Meat and Drink, and the said Henry and his Heirs shall
cause, as sure and lawful Estate to be made to the said John Mordaunt and Jane,
William Carant, of Tomer, Esquire, William Mordaunt, Brother to the said John
Mordaunt, William Gascoigne, Wistan Brown and Reynold Holdy, for term of Life
of the same Jane, within two Months next after the decease of Elianor......
Mother of the said Henry, or at any time after; when the said John Mordaunt, or
his Heirs shall require, of Manners, Lands, and Tenements, in the Counties of
Somerset and Dorset, or the one of them, to the yearly Value of an hundred
Marks, over all Charges, to have to them for Term of Life of the same Jane, as
shall be advised by the learned Council of the said John Mordaunt, or his
Heirs. And it is Covenanted between the said Parties, during the Life of the
said Elianor, That the said Henry shall find the said Gyles, to School, Court,
and in all other Places, in all manner of things convenient for his Degree. And
the said John shall find the said Jane according to her Degree. Furthermore it
is Covenanted and Granted, between the said Parties, that immediately after the
said Estate made of the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, to the yearly Value
of a hundred Mark, to the said John Mordaunt, Jane, William Carant, William
Mordaunt, William Gascoigne, Wistan, and Reynold, in form aforesaid, That the
said Henry shall take the Issues and Profits of Fifty Mark Land, parcel of the
said hundred Mark Land, to their own uses, six Years after the said Estate made
to the said John Mordaunt, Jane, William Carant, William Mordaunt, William
Gascoigne, Wistan, and Reynold, the said Henry finding the said Gyles, and the
said John Mordaunt finding the said Jane, as is aforesaid. And the said Henry
Grants further, That he shall cause to be made within three months next after
the Death of the said Elianor, or at any time after, when the same John
Mordaunt, or his Heirs shall require, to the said John Mordaunt, Jane, William
Carant, William Mordaunt, William Gascoigne, Wistan and Reynold, a sufficient
and lawful Estate of Manners, Lands, and Tenements to the yearly Value of a
hundred Mark, over and beside the said other Manners, Lands, and Tenements
before specified, to the yearly Value of a hundred Mark, to have to them and to
their Heirs, to the use of the said Henry, during his Life, without Impeachment
of wast. And after his Decease to the use of the said Jane, for Term of Life,
in full recompense of all her Dower, of all the Manners, Lands, and Tenements,
to which the said Jane should be entitled by the Law of the Inheritance of the
said Gyles. And the said Henry shall cause and suffer, as well the reversion of
the said Manners, Lands and Tenements to the Value of the said two hundred Marks
severally demised to the said John Mordaunt, Jane, William Carant, William
Mordaunt, William Gascoigne, Wistan and Reynold, in Deed or in Use: As all
other Manners, Lands and Tenements, whereof the said Elianor, or any other
person to her use is now seized of Estate of Inheritance; and also the Manner of
Todrington, which is of the yearly Value of Twenty eight Pounds, immediately
after the Decease of the said Elianor and Henry in Deed or in Use, to come,
grow or descend, immediately after the Decease of the said Elianor and Henry,
to the said Gyles, and to the Heirs of his Body begotten: And for default of
such Issue to John, Brother of the said Gyles, and to the Heirs of his Body
begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the right Heirs of the said Henry
for ever. Which Lands and Tenements the said Henry promises, in the whole to be
of the yearly Value of Eight hundred Marks over all Charges. And so the said
John Mordaunt accepts them to be of the same yearly Value. It is also
Covenanted, Bargained and Agreed between the said Parties, That whereas the
said Henry late purchased the Manners of Melbury Samford, and Melbury Osmond,
and all the Lands, Tenements and Advowsons in Melbury Samford, and Melbury
Osmond in the County of Dorset, late Browning's, to him and to his Heirs for
ever, if Catharine now Wife of the said Henry, Decease without Issue Male, of
her Body by the said Henry begotten: that then all the said Manners, Lands,
Tenements, and Advowsons, late Browning's, with the appurtenances, after the
decease of the said Henry and Catharine now his Wife, and of William Browning;
and after the Issue Male of the said Catharine, by the said Henry begotten, if
any such shall be spent and determined, shall go, and grow to the said Gyles,
and to the Heirs of his Body begotten, and for default of such Issue, to the
said John, his Brother, and to the Heirs of his Body begotten: And for default
of such Issue, to the right Heirs of the said Henry for ever. And that all such
Persons as be now feoffes, seized or possessed by Recovery, Feoffment or
otherwise, of the said Manners, Lands and Tenements before named, shall from
henceforth, be, and stand Feoffes, to the uses and intents abovesaid. Provided
always that it shall be lawful to the said Henry, of the Manners, Lands and
Tenements, to the yearly Value of Two hundred Pounds, parcel of the Premises,
other than the said Two hundred Mark Lands before named, to make Lease, for
term of Twenty Years, or under, to perform his Will, or to make Jointure to the
said Catharine, or to his Wife, or Wives, if any he shall hap to have, after
the decease of the said Catharine, now his Wife, for term of their Life, or
Lives, so as always the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, of the yearly Value of
Two hundred Pounds, after the term of Twenty Years expired, or the said Will
performed, or after the decease of the said Wife, or Wives, shall grow, and
remain to the said Gyles, and to the Heirs of his Body begotten: And for
default of such Issue, to go and remain to the said John, his Brother, and to
the Heirs of his Body begotten: And for default of such Issue to go and remain
to the right Heirs of the said Henry for ever. And if it fortune, as God
forbid, that the said Gyles decease before the said Marriage had and
solemnized, that then the said John, Brother to the said Gyles, shall
inter-marry if they can so agree, and like Jointure and Dower to be to the said
Jane, and all the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, and Advowsons, to be left
to the said John, and all other Covenants then to be kept, of every of the said
Parties respectively, as be now comprised in these Indentures. For which
Premises well and truly to be performed, on the part of the said Henry, the
said John Mordaunt shall pay unto the said Henry, or to his Assigns, Five
hundred Mark of lawful Money in form following, that is to say at the day of
the Solemnization of the Matrimony, one hundred Mark of lawful Money, and
yearly, after the said Jointure made, one hundred Mark of lawful Money, till
the said Sum of Five hundred Marks be fully contented and paid. And if the
said Jane dye before she come to the Age of Seventeen Years, having no Issue
then the said Henry shall repay to the said John Mordaunt, all such Sums of
Money as he has received of the same John before the Death of the said Jane,
at such days yearly and in such Sums as he received it. In Witness whereof the
Parties abovesaid, to these Presents interchangeably have set their Seals, the
Day and Year abovesaid.

Charta Johannis Mordaunt.
HAEC Indentura facta inter praenobilem principem Edwardum, Ducem
Buckinghamiae, ex una part, and Johannem Mordaunt de Turveia in Comitatu
Bedfordiae, Gentilman, and Willielmum Mordaunt fratrem ejus, ex alia part,
Testatur, Quod praefatus Dux dedit, concessit, and hac praesenti Indentura
confirmavit, praefatis Johanni and Willielmo, visum suum franciplegii cum
pertinentiis in Turveia in Comitatu Bedfordiae, qui quidem visus est parcella
de Gloucester fee, alias vocatus Gloucester fee, and assisiam panis and
cerevisiae, bona and catalla straiata and waiviata, bona and catalla felonum,
fugitivorum, utlagatorum, deodandorum, thesaurum inventum, cum omnibus aliis
rebus, libertatibus, franchesiis, juribus and pertinentiis eidem visui
pertinentibus, sive parcellis, ac visum franciplegii, and letum omnium
tenentium, sive residentium, qui nunc sunt, sive in posterum erunt in feodo suo
in Turveia praedicta, ac quemlibet visum quem habemus in Turveia praedicta,
salvis nobis and haeredibus nostris feodis militum, wardis, maritagiis,
releviis and eschaetis cum acciderint in Turveia praedicta. Habendum and
tenendum omnia praedicta, visum franciplegii, and letum, assisiam panis and
cerevisiae, and caetera praemissa cum pertinentiis, exceptis praeexceptis,
praefatis, Johanni Mordaunt, and Willielmo Mordaunt, haeredibus and assignatis
suis in perpetuum, ad usum ipsius Johannis Mordaunt and haeredum suorum in
perpetuum, reddendo inde annuatim, praefato Duci, haeredibus and assignatis
suis, quendam annualem redditum trium solidorum in perpetuum, ad Festa Sancti
Michaelis Archangeli, and Paschae, aequis portionibus solvendum. Et praedicti
Johannes Mordaunt and Willielmus Mordaunt concedunt pro se and haeredibus suis,
quod si contingat dictum annualem redditum trium solidorum a retro fore in
part vel in toto, ad aliquod dictorum Festorum, quo solvi debeat, non solutum,
quod tunc been licebit praefato Duci, haeredibus and assignatis suis, in omnia
terras and tenementa ipsorum, Johannis Mordaunt and Willielmi Mordaunt, seu
eorum alterius in Turveia praedicta intrare, and distringere, and districtiones
sic captas abducere, asportare, effugare, and penes se retinere quousque de
praedicto redditu, and arrearagiis ejusdem plenarie fuerit satisfactum and sibi
persolutum. Et praedictus Dux and haeredes sui omnia praedicta, visum
franciplegii, letum, and caetera praemissa cum pertinentiis, praefatis, Johanni
and Willielmo, haeredibus and assignatis suis, ad usum praedictum, contra omnes
gentes warrantizabunt, acquietabunt ac defendent in perpetuum per praesentes.
In cujus rei testimonium uni parti istius Indenturae penes praefatum ducem
remanenti, praefatus Johannes and Willielmus Sigilla sua apposuerunt. Alteri
vero parti ejusdem Indenturae penes praefatos Johannem and Willielmum remanenti
praefatus Dux Sigillum suum apposuit. His testibus, Roberto Broughton, milite,
Johanne Fisher, uno justiciariorum Domini Regis de Communi Banco, Johanne Saint
John, milite, and Thoma Rotheram, and aliis. Data vicesimo die Maii, Anno Regni
Regis Henrici Septimi decimo septimo.

Finis facta inter Edwardum Ducem Buckinghamiae and Johannem Mordaunt de visu
franciplegii and aliis libertatibus in Turveia.
HAEC est finalis concordia facta in Curia Domini Regis, apud Westmonasterium,
in crastino Sancti Johannis Baptistae, Anno regnorum Henrici Regis Angliae and
Franciae, septimi, a Conquestu decimo septimo, coram Thoma Wode, Willielmo
Danvers, Johanne Vavasour, and Johanne Fisher justiciariis. Et postea in
octavis Sancti Hillarii, Anno regnorum ejusdem Regis Henrici decimo nono,
ibidem concessa and recordata coram Thoma Frowyke, ac praefatis, Willielmo,
Johanne and Johanne justiciariis, and aliis Domini Regis fidelibus tunc ibidem
praesentibus, inter Johannem Mordaunt, and Willielmum Mordaunt querentes, and
Edwardum Ducem Buckinghamiae, and Alienoram uxorem ejus deforcientes, de visu
Franciplegii, assisia panis and cerevisiae, catallis waiviatis, straiatis,
felonum, fugitivorum, utlagatorum, deodandorum, and thesauro invento cum
pertinentiis in Turveia, unde placitum conventionis summonitum fuit, inter eos
in eadem Curia, scilicet, quod praedicti Johannes and Willielmus recognoverunt
praedictum visum, franciplegium, assisiam panis and cerevisiae, catalla
waiviata, straiata, felonum, fugitivorum, utlagatorum, deodandorum, cum
pertinentiis, esse jus ipsius Ducis, and illa remiserunt and quietum
clamaverunt de ipsis Johanne and Willielmo and haeredibus ipsius Willielmi,
praedictis Duci and Alienorae, and haeredibus ipsius Ducis in perpetuum; and
pro hac recognitione, remissione, quieta clamatione, fine, and concordia, iidem
Dux and Alienora, concesserunt praedictis Johanni and Willielmo praedictum
visum franciplegii, assisiam panis and cerevisiae, catalla waiviata, straiata,
felonum, fugitivorum, utlagatorum, deodandorum, and thesaurum inventum cum
pertinentiis, and illa iis reddiderint in eadem curia habendum and tenendum
eisdem Johanni and Willielmo and haeredibus ipsius Willielmi in perpetuum,
reddendo inde annuatim praefatis Duci and Alienorae, and haeredibus and
assignatis ipsius Ducis annuatim tres solidos, ad duos anni terminos; videlicet
ad Festa Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, and Paschae, aequis portionibus
solvendum, and praedictus Johannes and Willielmus concedunt pro se and
haeredibus suis, quod si contingat praedictum redditum, trium solidorum, a
retro fore ad aliquod dictorum Festorum, quo solvi debeat, non solutus, tunc
been licebit, praedicto Duci and Alienorae, and haeredibus and assignatis
ipsius Ducis, in omnia terras and tenementa ipsorum Johannis and Willielmi, vel
eorum alterius in Turveia praedicta, intrare and distringere, and districtiones
sic captas abducere, asportare, effugare, and penes se retinere, quousque de
praedicto redditu, and arrearagiis ejusdem sibi fuerit plenarie satisfactum and
persolutum; and praeterea iisdem Dux and Alienora concesserunt pro se and
haeredibus ipsius Alienorae, quod ipsi warrantizabunt, acquietabunt and
defendent, praedictum visum franciplegii, assisiam panis and cerevisiae,
catalla waiviata, straiata, felonum, fugitivorum, utlagatorum, deodandorum, and
thesaurum inventum, cum pertinentiis in Turveia praedicta, praefatis Johanni
and Willielmo, and haeredibus ipsius Willielmi contra omnes homines in
perpetuum.

Indentura facta inter Henricum Strangeways and Johannem Mordaunt.
THis Indenture made the Sixteenth Day of November, the eighteenth Year of the
Reign of King Henry the Seventh, between Herrey Strangeways, Esquire, on the
one Part, and John Mordaunt, of Turvey, Gentilman, on the other Part,
Witnesses, That whereas the said John, and other Persons, have recovered this
present Michaelmas Term against the said Herrey, certain Manners, Lands and
Tenements, in the Counties of Stafford, Gloucester and Dorset, which the said
Henry promises by these Presents, to be of the yearly Value of Two hundred
Marks, in executing and performing of certain Covenants made between the said
Parties bearing date the Eight day of February last, for a certain Marriage
between Gyles, Son of the said Henry, and Jane, Daughter of the said John
Mordaunt, which Marriage, God be thanked, is now solemnized, between the said
Gyles and Jane. It is Assented and Covenanted between the said Parties, That
the Manners, Lands and Tenements comprised in the said Recoveries in the
Counties of Stafford and Gloucester, be and shall be in the stead of one
hundred Marks, which the said Jane should have for Term of her Life, and take
the Profits thereof forthwith, according to the effect of the said first
Indentures. And the said manners, Lands and Tenements comprised in the said
Recovery in the County of Dorset, be and shall be in stead of the other
hundred Marks, which the said Jane shall have immediately after the decease of
the said Henry, according to the effect of the said first Indentures. And in
Case the said Manners, Lands and Tenements in the said Counties of Stafford, and
Gloucester, be of more yearly Value than one hundred Marks, then the said John
Mordaunt, and other the Recoverers, shall grant, when they shall be required, a
yearly Rent out of the said Manners, Lands and Tenements to the said Henry and
his Heirs, of so much as the said Manners, Lands, and Tenements, be of more
yearly Value than One hundred Marks. And in Case the said Manners, Lands and
Tenements, in the said Counties of Stafford and Gloucester, be under the yearly
Value of One hundred Marks, then the said Henry, or his Heirs, before Easter
next coming, shall make it up of other Lands and Tenements, to the yearly Value
of One hundred Marks for Term of Life, of the said Jane. And likewise if the
said Manners, Lands, and Tenements, in the County of Dorset be of more yearly
than an hundred marks, then the said John Mordaunt, and the said other
Recoverers, shall grant, when they be required, to the said Henry, a yearly
Rent of so much as the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, be of more yearly
Value than one hundred Marks; and in Case the said Manners, Lands and Tenements,
in the same County of Dorset be under the yearly Value of One hundred Marks,
then the said Henry or his Heirs, before Easter next coming, shall make it up
of other Lands and Tenements, to the yearly Value of One hundred Marks, for
Term of Life of the said Jane. In Witness whereof the said Parties to these
Indentures have interchangeably set to their Seals, the Day and Year abovesaid.

Concessio wardae, and custodiae Thomae Leventhorp.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex, etc. Sciatis quod nos de gratia nostra speciali, ac
ex certa scientia, and mero motu, dedimus, concessimus ac per praesentes damus
and concedimus, Johanni Mordaunt, uni servientium nostrorum ad legem, Custodiam
terrae, and haeredis Thomae Leventhorp, videlicet, Johannis Leventhorp filii
and haeredis ejusdem Thomae Leventhorp, ac omnium Manerium terrarum,
tenementorum, reddituum, reversionum, advocationum, Ecclesiarum, feodorum
militum ac haereditamentorum quorumcunque, quae prae sive post mortem ejusdem
Thomae Leventhorp, ac ratione minoris aetatis ejusdem Johannis Levenhorp ad
manus nostras devenerunt, sive devenire debuerunt, sive debebunt. Concessimus
etiam praefato Johanni Mordaunt, maritagium ejusdem Johannis Leventhorp, absque
disparagatione, habendum and tenendum custodiam terrae and haeredis praedicti
and caetera praemissa cum pertinentiis, praefato Johanni Mordaunt, durante
minore aetate praedicti Johannis Leventhorp. Concessimus etiam praefato Johanni
Mordaunt, omnia arrearagia, redditus, exitus, and proficua omnium praedictorum
maneriorum, terrarum and tenementorum, and caeterorum praemissorum, a tempore
mortis praedicti Thomae Leventhorp hucusque pervenientium sive crescentium.
Concedimus etiam eidem Johanni Mordaunt, quod si contingat ipsum Johannem
Leventhorp, antequam ad legitimam aetatem suam, viginti unius annorum
pervenerit, obire, haerede suo infra aetatem existente, quod idem Johannes
Mordaunt habeat custodiam terrarum and haeredum hujusmodi haeredis, ac omnium
praedictorum maneriorum, terrarum and tenementorum, and caeterorum
praemissorum, cum pertinentiis, una cum maritagio hujusmodi haeredis absque
disparagatione, and sic de haerede in haeredem, quousque aliquis hujusmodi
haeredum ad plenam and legitimam aetatem suam pervenerit, absque compoto seu
aliquo alio pro Praemssis, seu aliquo praemissorum, nobis vel haeredibus
nostris, reddendo seu solvendo; and eo quod expressa mentio de vero valor
annuo, aut certitudine praemissorum, aut de aliis donis seu concessionibus, per
nos praefato Johanni Mordaunt, ante haec tempora factis, in praesenti minime
factum existit, aut aliquo statuto, actu, ordinatione, restrictione, re,
materia, vel causa quacunque in contrarium edita seu prius, in aliquo non
obstante. In cujus rei, etc.

A Letter from the Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond the Kings Mother.
To our full trusty Councellor Sir John Mordaunt, Knight.
SIR John Mordaunt, we be credibly informed, the Meadows, Pastures and Marshes,
lying upon either side the Sewer called Witham, having course from the City of
Lincoln, unto the Town of Boston, be greatly surflowed with Waters, to the
great Damage and importune Loss of the Inhabitants of the County thereto
adjoining, by reason of the multitude of Fishgarths, and Weresteddes, made in
the said Sewer, and straitness of the same. In consideration whereof humble
suit has been made to us, by many and diverse Persons, for to obtain a special
commission of the Kings grace, to be addressed to certain persons for the
reformation thereof. We having tender respect to the weal of the said Country,
desire, and heartily pray you to help to obtain a Commision of Sewers, in the
parties of Lyndesey, Kesteven, and Holland, to be directed to Sir Henry
Willoughby, Sir William Tiriohitt, Sir John Hussy and Sir Robert Dimmok,
Knights, Mr. Henry Hornby, Warden of the College in Tateshall, Sir John Cutler,
Treasurer of the Cathedral Church of Lincoln, Mr. Simon Stalworth, Subdean of
the same, Robert Brudenell, William Cutlerd, Sergeants at Law, Robert Nevell,
Learned man, John Tempest Esquire, and William Beale of Lincoln, Gentilman: And
to such others as it shall please you. That five or four of them may appoint
Sessions for redress of the said Sewer, or any other within in the County
aforesaid. Over this we pray you to be good and favorable master, and the
rather for our sakes, to our Tenants in our Town of Conyngesby, for the
obtaining the Kings Writ of Ad quod dampnum, for mortesing by the Kings
License, of certain Lands to a guild of our Lady in the said Town of
Conyngesby. And that you will give further credence in all the premises, to our
full trusty Counselor Richard Line, our Vice-chamberlain this bearer. Written
at our Manner, of Colliweston the Nine and twentieth day of June.

Charta Willielmi Episcopi Dunelmensis Cancellarii Cantabrigiae.
GUillielmus Episcopus Dunelmensis, Universitatis Cantabrigiae Cancellarius,
inclito viro equitique aurato Johanni Mordaunt, Salutem plurimam dicit. Quoniam
seneschallatus Universitatis nostrae officium (cujus ad nos collatio pertinet)
per mortem nuper Aurati equitis Rogeri Ormston vacare certo cognovimus, ad
illustrissimi nostri Regis, regiaeque matris intuitum, insuper and de tua
ipsius erga nos nostramque Universitatem supradictam, fide, diligentia,
industria confidentes, tibi munus idem conferimus, cum suis juribus,
libertatibus, Emolumentis, and honoribus universis. In cujus rei Testimonium
nostri Sigillum officii apposuimus. Data apud Cantabrigiam, sexto die Aprilis,
Anno Regni Regis Henrici septimi decimo nono.

Literae patentes Domini Regis Henrici septimi, factae Johanni Mordaunt militi
de officio Cancellariatus Ducatus Lancastriae.
HEnricus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae and Dominus Hiberniae, Omnibus ad quos
praesentes literae nostrae pervenerint, salutem. Sciatis quod nos considerantes
bona and laudabilia servitia, quae dilectus serviens, and fidelis noster,
Johannes Mordaunt miles, nobis ante haec tempora impendit, and in posterum
durante vita sua impendere intendit, and pro sua continua attendentia super
personam nostram, ordinavimus and constituimus, ac per praesentes ordinamus,
and constituimus ipsum Johannem Mordaunt Cancellarium Comitatus nostri Palatini
Lancastriae, nec non Custodem sigilli nostri, pro eodem officio, provisum and
ordinatum, aut in posterum providendum and ordinandum. Et officium
Cancellariatus Comitatus Palatini Lancastriae ac custodiam sigilli praedicti,
pro officio illo ut praemittitur, provisum ceu ordinatum, aut in posterum
providendum ceu ordinandum praefato Johanni per praesentes, damus and
concedimus; and ulterius ordinavimus and constituimus, ac per praesentes
ordinamus and constituimus, ipsum Johannem Cancellarium Ducatus nostri
Lancastriae, ac custodem sigilli nostri pro eodem officio, provisum and
ordinatum, ceu in posterum providendum ceu ordinandum. Et officium
Cancellariatus Ducatus nostri Lancastriae, ac custodiam sigilli praedicti, pro
officio illo ut praemittitur, provisum seu ordinatum, seu in posterum
providendum and ordinandum, praefato Johanni per praesentes damus and
concedimus, habendum, occupandum and exercendum officium and custodiam illius
praefati Johannis Mordaunt pro termino vitae suae, percipiendum and recipiendum
annuatim, de, in and pro officio, and custodia praedictis, annuatim Ducentas
marcas Sterlingorum and non ultra, absque aliquibus aliis vadiis, feodis,
dietis, and regardis, pro dietis, and absque aliquibus aliis proficuis,
commoditatibus and emolumentis, dicto officio and custodiae Sigilli, ceu eorum
alteri pertinentibus, spectantibus, sive consuetis, ad festa Sancti Michaelis,
Natalis Domini, Paschae, and Nativitatis Sancti Johannis Baptistae, per
aequales portiones, solvendum de exitibus and proficuis, and reventionibus
Comitatus Palatini praedicti, and Ducatus nostri Lancastriae praedicti, and
cujuslibet parcella eorundem, per manus generalis receptoris eorundem, ac
aliorum receptorum Ballivorum, and propositorum tenentium, firmariorum aut
aliorum quorumcunque officiariorum, sive occupatorum eorundem, and eorum
cujuslibet pro tempore existentis, sive existentium. Dantes and concedentes
eidem Johanni, plenam potestatem and autoritatem ad faciendum, exequendum and
exercendum, omnia and singula quae ad officia Cancellariatus, Comitatus
Palatini praedicti, ac Ducatus nostri Lancastriae praedicti, rite pertinent,
facienda, exequenda, and exercenda. Quare volumus and mandamus omnibus and
singulis justiciariis, vice-comitibus, eschaetis, seneschallis, majoribus,
ballivis, ac omnibus and singulis officiariis, and ministris meis, quod
praefato Johanni in exercitione, and executione officiorum illorum suorum, sint
obedientes, attendentes, consultantes, auxiliantes in omnibus prout decet. Eo
quod expressa mentio de vero valor annuo praemissorum aut de aliis donis, sive
concessionibus per nos praefato consiliario nostro ante haec tempora factis, in
praesentibus minime factis existit. Aut aliquo actu, statuto, ordinatione,
promissione, sive restrictione, in contrarium inde factum, ordinatum ceu
provisum in aliquo non obstante. In cujus rei Testimonium has literas nostras
fieri fecimus patentes. Datas apud Manerium nostrum de Richmount, tam sub
sigillo Comitatus nostri Palatini Lancastriae, quam sub sigillo nostri Ducatus
Lancastriae, vicesimo quarto die Junii Anno Regni nostri decimo nono.

Per billam manu Regis signatam.

Liberties and Privileges granted from the Pope to Sir John Mordaunt.
EDwardus Vaughan legum Doctor, Archidiaconus Lewen, Universis and singulis
praesentes literas, sive praesens publicum transumpti instrumentum,
inspecturis, visuris, lecturis, pariter and audituris, Salutem in Domino, and
praesentibus fidem indubitam adhibere. Noveritis quod nuper nos quandam
supplicationem pergameni, cedulum confessionale nuncupatum, per reverendissimum
in Christo patrem Dominum, Dominum Clementem duodecim Apostolorum Presbyterum
Cardinalem, Mimaten. signatam, nobis, pro part nobilis viri Johannis Mordaunt
militis, una cum aliis in iisdem supplicationibus, principalis nominati, coram
notario publico and testibus infra scriptis praesentatam. Nos cum ea qua decuit
reverentia, recepimus hujusmodi sub tenore; Beatissime pater, ut animarum
saluti devotorum, oratorum, virorum nobilium laicorum, Johannis Mordaunt
militis, and principalis supradicti, Edithae uxoris ejus, Johannis Mordaunt and
Elizabethae uxoris ejus, Willielmi Mordaunt and Johannis Strangeways, ipsius
Johannis Mordaunt militis, and principalis praedicti, liberorum, Lincolniae,
Diocesiae and eorum cujuslibet, supplicant humiliter sanctitati vestrae,
oratores praefati, quatenus eis and eorum cuilibet, specialem gratiam
faciendam, ut confessor idoneus secularis, vel cujusvis ordinis regularis
Presbyter, quem quilibet ipsorum duxerit eligendum, ipsos and eorum quemlibet,
a quibuscunque Excommunicationis, suspensionis and interdicti, aliisque
Ecclesiasticis sententiis, censuris, and poenis, a jure, vel ab homine, quavis
occasion vel causa latis, and promulgatis ac votorum quorumcunque, and
Ecclesiae mandatorum trangressionibus, perjuriorum, and homicidii, mentalis vel
casualis, necnon adulterii, incestus, sacrilegii, manuum violentarum in quasvis
personas Ecclesiasticas injectionibus, jejunorum, penitentiarum injunctarum
omissionibus, nec non ab omnibus and singulis eorum peccatis, criminibus,
excessibus, and delictis quantumcunque gravibus, and enormibus, de quibus cord
contriti, and ore confessi fuerunt. Etiam si talia forent, propter quae seeds
Apostolica merito foret consulenda. De reservatis sedi Apostolicae casibus,
semel in vita, and in mortis articulo, exceptis contentis in bulla coenae
Domini. De aliis vero eidem sedi non reservatis casibus, totiens quotiens opus
fuerit, absolvere, and pro commissis penetentiam salutarem injungere. Vota vero
quaecunque per eos vel alterum ipsorum forsan amissa, ultramarini visitationis,
summorum apostolorum Petri and Pauli de urbe, atque Jacobi in Compestella
(Religionis and castitatis votis, duntaxat exceptis) in alia pietatis opera
commutare. Et juramenta quaecunque relaxare, nec non semel in vita and in
mortis articulo, plenariam omnium peccatorum suorum remissionem, and
absolutionem, autoritate Apostolica, impendere possit and valeat. Quodque
liceat eis and eorum cuilibet, habere altar portatile, cum debitis, reverentia
and honor, super quo in locis ad hoc congruentibus and honestis, etiam
Ecclesiastico interdicto, ordinaria auctoritate suppositis: Dummodo causam non
dederunt hujusmodi interdicto, and etiam antequam elucescat dies, circa tamen
diuturnam lucem, missas and alia divina officia, per se qui Presbyteri fuerint,
aut proprium vel alium sacerdotem idoneum, in sua and cujuslibet ipsorum, ac
familiariorum suorum, utriusque sexus Domesticorum praesentia, ipsi omnes
celebrari facere, and tempore interdicti, hujusmodi divinis interesse,
Ecclesiastica Sacramenta, praeterquam in Paschate, recipere, and decedentium
eorundem corpora Ecclesiasticae inibi tradi possunt sepulturae sine pompa
funerali. Et insuper unam vel duas Ecclesias ceu Capellanias, aut duo vel tria
altaria in partibus ubi singulos oratores pro tempore residere contigerit,
quam, quas vel quae, quilibet ipsorum duxerit eligendum. Singulis diebus
quadragesimalibus, cujussibet anni visitando, tot and similes indulgentias, and
peccatorum remissiones consequantur, quas consequerentur, si singulis diebus
and temporibus eisdem, singulas urbis Ecclesias, quae a Christi fidelibus,
proper stationes hujusmodi, visitare solent, personaliter visitarent. Et
nihilominus oratores praefati, tam quadragesimalibus quam aliis diebus, and
temporibus ab Ecclesia prohibitis, praeterquam in majori hebdomada, ovis,
caseo, butyro, and aliis lacticiniis, nec non carnibus necessitatis causa,
absque conscientiae scrupulo, vesci, frui, ac uti, libere and licite, possint
and valiant. Praeterea praefatis oratricibus, sive mulieribus una cum tribus
aut quatuor honestis mulieribus per eas and earum quamlibet eligendis,
quaecunque monasteria monalium, and sororum, cujuscunque ordinis, etiam Sanctae
Clarae, causa devotionis ingredi, ac ipsas monales cum omni caritate visitare,
ac cum illis refectionem corporalem assumere, and illis conversari, and alloqui
ter vel quater in anno, dummodo ibidem non pernoctent, licentiam and facultatem
de omnibus praedictis, auctoritate Apostolica concedere, and indulgeri
dignemini, de gratia speciali, non obstantibus constitutionibus and
ordinationibus Apostolicis, ac monasteriorum praedictorum statutis, and
consuetudinibus, juramento, etc. roboratis, nec non Cancellariae Apostolicae in
contrarium editis, ac suspensionibus similium facultatum in coena Domini
factis, quibus (illarum tenores and pro expressis habentes) specialiter, and
pro hac vice placeat derogare, caeterisque in contrarium faciendum non
obstantibus quibuscunque cum clericis opportunis, and consuetis, and sine
alicujus praejudicio, de consilio utriusque medici de consensu inibi
praesentium. Concessus ut petitur in praesentia Domini Papae C. Car. Mimaten.
Et de reservatis sedi Apostolicae casibus, exceptis praemissis, semel in vita,
and in mortis articulo. Et de aliis sedi praedictae non reservatis casibus,
totiens quotiens opus fuerit. Et de commutatione votorum, praedictis exceptis,
and relaxatione juramentorum. Et de plenaria remissione and absolutione, semel
in vita and in mortis articulo. Et de altari portatili cum cla. ante diem, and
locis interdictis ut supra. Et tempore interdicti hujusmodi divinis interesse,
Ecclesiastica Sacramenta recipere, and decedentium eorum corpora inibi
Ecclesiasticae tradi possunt sepulturae sine pompa. Et de indulgentiis
stationum Ecclesiarum almae urbis visitando ut supra. Et de esu butyri, ovorum,
and aliorum lacticiniorum, temporibus prohibitis ut supra. Et de licentia
ingredi Monasteria monalium, pro mulieribus ut profertur. Et cum derogatione
Cancellariae Apostolicae, ularum ac suspensionum praedictarum. Et quod
praesentium transumpto, manu notarii publici subscripto, and sigillo alicujus
Praelati, aut personae auctenticae in dignitate Ecclesiastica constitutae,
plena fides abhibeatur sicut originali. Et quod praesentis supplicationis sola
signatura, absque aliarum literarum desuper expeditionem. Et quod praesens
indultum non intelligatur unquam revocari vita omnium durante. Hae autem
clausulae de manu etiam praefati Reverendissimi Domini Cardinalis Mimaten.
claudebantur signatura, videlicet, Concessus C. Cardinalis Mimaten. Qua quidem
supplicatione sic ut praemittitur nobis ostensa and praesentata pro part
praefati nobilis viri Domini Johannis Mordaunt militis in praeinserta
supplicatione nominati principalis, fuimus debita cum instantia requisiti,
quatenus dictam supplicationem transumi, and exemplari facere dignaremur. Nos
igitur Edwardus Archidiaconus attendentes requisitionem hujusmodi fore justam
and consonam rationi, quodque justo petentibus non est denegandus assensus.
Idcirco dictam supplicationem coram Notario publico and testibus infra scriptis
diligenter inspeximus, vidimus, tenuimus and palpavimus. Et quia illam sanam
and integram, and in nulla sua sui part suspectam, sed omni prorsus vitio and
sinistra suspicione carentem reperimus, eandem per notarium publicum infra
scriptum transumi and exemplari, and in publicam transcripti formam redegi, and
transumptum hujusmodi cum originali debite collationari mandavimus, and
fecimus. Volentes and auctoritate Apostolica decernentes, quod huic publico
transumpto, ubique stetur, and tanta fides adhibeatur, quanta ut originali si
praesentialiter adhiberetur, adhiberi posset and deberet. In quorum omnium and
singulorum fidem, and Testimonium praemissorum, praesentes literas, sive
praesens publicum exinde fieri, and per notarium publicum infra scriptum,
subscribi and publicari mandavimus sigillique nostri, jussimus, and fecimus
appensione communiri. Data and acta Londini in domo residentiae nostrae ibidem,
sub anno a nativitate Domini milesimo quingentesimo quarto. Indictione septima.
Die vero vicesimo octavo mensis Augusti. Pontificatus Sanctissimi in Christo
patris and Domini nostri Domini Julii, Divina providentia Papae secundi anno
primo. Praesentibus tunc ibidem providis viris Magistro Alexandro Lawson
notario publico, and Richardo Johnson literato Eboraci and Lincolniae Dioces.
testibus ad praemissa vocatis specialiter and rogatis.

Et quia ego Nicolaus Collyns, Clericus Lincolniae Dioces. publicus autoritate
Apostolica notarius, nec non Curiae Cantuariensis procurator generalis,
praedictas literas in forma supplicationis, ceu confessionalis praesentationi,
receptioni, exhibitioni, transumptioni, collationi, auscultationi, omnibusque
aliis and singulis praemissis, dum sic ut permittitur agerentur and fierent,
una cum praenominatis Testibus, praesens interfui, eaque sic fieri vidi, and
audivi, atque in notam sumpsi. Ideo praesentes literas sive praesens publicum
transumpti instrumentum, manu alterius fideliter scriptum, una cum originali
auscultavi, and collationavi atque in hanc publicam formam redegi, signoque and
nomine meo consutis, una cum praenominati egregii viri Domini Archidiaconi
Sigilli appensione signavi, and hic me Subscripsi. In fidem and Testimonium
omnium and singulorum praemissorum rogatus and requisitus.

Concessio custodiae Johannae Sayntmaur a Rege Henrico Septimo.
REX, etc. omnibus ad quos, etc. salutem. Sciatis quod nos de gratia nostra
speciali, ac ex certa scientia and mero motu dedimus, and concessimus, ac per
praesentes damus, and concedimus, Johanni Mordaunt militi, custodiam and
maritagium Johannae Sayntmaur filiae and haeredis Willielmi Sayntmaur militis
defuncti, absque disparagatione. Habendum and tenendum custodiam and maritagium
praedicta eidem Johanni, Executoribus, and assignatis suis, usque ad plenam and
legitimam aetatem ejusdem Johannae. Et si contingat eundem Johannem obire,
antequam ad plenam and legitimam suam aetatem pervenerit, haerede suo infra
aetatem existente, tunc volumus and per praesentes concedimus, eidem Johanni
quod idem Johannes executores, and assignati sui, habeant custodiam, and
maritagium hujusmodi haeredis sic infra aetatem existentis, absque
disparagatione usque ad plenam and legitimam aetatem ejusdem haeredis. Et sic
de haerede in haeredem, quousque aliquis haeres hujusmodi haeredum, ad plenam
and legitimam aetatem suam pervenerit: Dedimus and concessimus insuper praefato
Johanni, custodiam omnium and singulorum domorum, maneriorum, terrarum, and
tenementorum, reddituum, servitiorum, reversionum, feodorum militum,
advocationum Ecclesiarum, Capellarum, and cantariarum, and aliorum
haereditamentorum quorumcunque quae nuper fuerunt praedicti Willielmi Sayntmaur
militis, aut aliquorum Antecessorum suorum, seu alicujus alterius, sive
aliquorum aliorum, ad usum ipsius Willielmi, in Comitatibus Wilts, Dors.
Summers. and Devoniae, and alibi infra regnum nostrum Angliae and Walliae, seu
Marchiis ejusdem, quae per sive post mortem ejusdem Willielmi, ac ratione
minoris aetatis praedictae Johannae filiae and haeredis ejusdem Willielmi, ad
manus nostras pervenerunt seu devenire debuerunt, deberent aut debebunt, una
cum Curiis, letibus, visibus franciplegii, libertatibus, proficuis, feodis
militum, advocationibus Ecclesiarum, and aliis commoditatibus quibuscunque,
iisdem maneriis, terris and tenementis, and caeteris praemissis, seu eorum
alicui pertinentibus, sive spectantibus, quae per sive post mortem ejusdem
Willielmi, ac ratione minoris aetatis praedictae Johannae filiae and haeredis
ejusdem Willielmi ad manus nostras pervenerint, seu devenire debuerunt,
deberent aut debebunt. Concessimus etiam per praesentes praefato Johanni
reversionem and custodiam reversionum omnium and singulorum domorum,
maneriorum, terrarum, and tenementorum, and haereditamentorum quorumcunque, cum
pertinentiis quae nuper fuerunt Willielmi Sayntmaur, seu alicujus, seu
aliquorum antecessorum suorum, aut alicujus alterius, seu aliquorum aliorum, ad
ejusdem Willielmi seu aliquorum antecessorum suorum usum, seu alicujus usum,
quae Margareta, nuper uxor dicti Willielmi, and Katharina nuper uxor Richardi
Wynsore, tenent, habent, seu occupant, seu earum aliqua tenet, habet seu
occupat, ad terminum vitae earum, vel earum alicujus, aut in dotem, aut ad
terminum vitae alicujus alterius personae, aut aliquarum aliarum personarum,
seu de quibus aliquis seu aliqui alii seisiti existunt, seu seisitus existat,
ad usum earundum Margaretae and Katharinae, seu earum alicujus, ad terminum
vitae earum, seu earum alicujus, reversione inde, in re, nomine, facto, vel in
usu praefatae Johannae Sayntmaur, and haeredibus suis spectante, habendum and
tenendum dicta dominia, maneria, terras, tenementa, advocationes, and caetera
praemissa, cum suis pertinentiis, ad custodiam eorundem, ac reversionem omnium
ac singulorum praemissorum, cum acciderint, vel acciderit, praefato Johanni
Mordaunt, executoribus and assignatis suis, a tempore mortis praedicti
Willielmi Sayntmaur, quousque dicta Johanna ad plenam and legitimam aetatem
pervenerit. Ac omnes and singulas reversiones praedictas, omnium praedictorum
dominiorum, maneriorum, terrarum, tenementorum, advocationum and caeterorum
praemissorum, cum pertinentiis, immediate post mortem dictarum Margaretae and
Katharinae, and earum cujuslibet cum acciderit, quousque praedicta Johanna ad
plenam and legitimam aetatem suam pervenerit. Et si dicta Johanna obierit
antequam ad plenam and legitimam aetatem suam pervenerit, haerede suo infra
aetatem existente, tunc volumus and concedimus per praesentes eidem Johanni
Mordaunt, quod idem Johannes Mordaunt, executores, and assignati sui habeant
custodiam and maritagium hujusmodi haeredis, and custodiam tam omnium and
singulorum dictorum dominiorum, maneriorum, terrarum and tenementorum, and
caeterorum praemissorum cum pertinentiis, cum acciderint, ut praedictum est,
and custodiam reversionum praedictarum, cum pertinentiis suis, usque ad plenam
and legitimam aetatem hujusmodi haeredis sic infra aetatem existentis, and sic
de haerede in haeredem, quousque aliquis haeres hujusmodi haeredum, ad plenam
and legitimam aetatem pervenerit. Concedimus etiam dicto Johanni Mordaunt omnia
exitus and proficua, omnium and singulorum dominiorum, maneriorum, terrarum,
tenementorum and caeterorum praemissorum cum suis pertinentiis, a tempore
mortis praedicti Willielmi huc usque provenientia sive crescentia, absque
aliquo compoto, sive aliquo alio nobis aut haeredibus nostris pro praemissis,
seu aliquo praemissorum, reddendo, faciendo, seu solvendo. Eo quod expressa
mentio de vero valor annuo, aut aliquo alio valor ceu certitudine
praemissorum vel alicujus eorum parcellae, aut de vero valor dictorum
maritagiorum, and eorum cujuslibet, aut de aliis donis sive concessionibus
praefato Johanni, ante haec tempora factis, in praesentibus minime facta
existit, aut aliquo alio statuto, actu sive ordinatione ceu restrictione in
contrarium factis, editis, sive provisis, aut aliqua alia re, causa, vel
materia quacunque non obstante. In cujus rei Testimonium, etc.

An Indenture between Sir John Mordaunt, and Wistan Brown, about the Wardship
of Thomas Leventhorp.
THIS Indenture made the Twelfth day of September, the Nineteenth Year of the
Reign of King Henry the Seventh, between John Mordaunt of Turvey on the one
Party, and Wistan Brown and Humphrey Brown his Brother, on the other Party,
Witnesses, That whereas Thomas Leventhorp late of Whethamsted, in the County
of Hertford, held certain Lands and Tenements in the said County, of our
Sovereign Lord the King by grant Serjeanty, and had Issue John Leventhorp and
diverse other Children, and dyed, the said John being his Son and Heir within
Age; by the death of the which Thomas, the King our Sovereign Lord, ought to
have the custody of the said John, and of all the Lands and Tenements of the
said Thomas, whereof he dyed seized, and of all the other Lands of the same
Thomas of which he made no Will, nor otherwise disposed. And howbeit that at
the making of these Presents, there is no Office found in any Shire, after the
death of the said Thomas, whereby the Kings Highness may be lawfully entitled
to the said John Leventhorp: Yet that notwithstanding our said Sovereign Lord,
by his Bill Assigned, has Given, and Granted to the said John Mordaunt, the
Custody of the said John Leventhorp, and of all his Lands and Tenements, with
the Issues and Profits of the same Lands and Tenements, from the Death of the
said Thomas, to the said John Mordaunt. To have to him and to his Assigns, till
the said John Leventhorp come to his full Age; and further as long as the said
Lands and Tenements, shall happen to be in the Kings Hands; And so from Heir to
Heir, till one of the Heirs of the said Thomas shall come to his full Age. The
said John Mordaunt has Bargained and Sold, and by these Presents Bargaineth,
Gives and Sells, to the said Wistan, all such Right, Title, Possessions and
Interest, as he has or hereafter shall have in the Wardship of the Heirs of
the said Thomas Leventhorp, and the Marriage of the same, be it Son or
Daughter, or Daughters, To have to the said Wistan from the Date of these
Presents, as long as the Interest of the said John Mordaunt should endure, by
reason of the Kings Grant. Provided, That the same Heirs shall not be Married
by the said Wistan, to any other Person, but to be Married with one of the
Children begotten between the same Wistan and Elizabeth his Wife, Sister to the
said John Mordaunt. And for lack of such Issue, or such Marriage, the same John
Mordaunt to have again the Marriage of the same Heirs of the said Thomas, to
his own Use: if it be Male immediately after he be fully of the Age of Twenty
Years; and if it be Female or Females, after they be of the Age of Fourteen
Years, without any thing paying therefore, this Indenture notwithstanding, for
as much as the said Wistan shall take the Issues, and Profits of the said
Lands, all the mean time without any thing paying for the same. And the said
John Grants by these Presents, That he shall assent what in him is, at the
Costs and Charges of the same Wistan, to cause the Offices to be found, after
the Death of the said Thomas, according to the truth of the Testaments. And
after these Offices so found, to get Grant by the Kings Letters Patents to the
same John Mordaunt of the Ward and Custody abovesaid, according to his said
Bill Assigned. And after that Patent made, then the same John shall Grant the
said Ward and Marriage of the Heirs of the said Thomas Leventhorp, with the
Custody of his Lands, to the said Wistan and his Assigns, to be Married as is
above limited. For the which Premises well and truly to be performed, the said
Wistan shall pay to the said John Mordaunt and his Assigns, a Hundred Pound of
lawful Money, to be paid, and delivered in form following, That is to say,
whereas the said Humphrey, is indebted to the said Wistan in One Hundred Pound
for diverse Considerations and Covenants made between the said Wistan and
Humphrey, upon the advancement of the same Humphrey to the Marriage of Amey
Mordaunt, one of the Daughters and Heirs of Henry Vere, Esquire, and one of the
Cousins and Heirs to Edward, late Earl of Wiltshire of the Grenslonds, which
Marriage the said Humphrey attained of the said John Mordaunt, by the special
Favor and Means of the said Wistan. The said Wistan and Humphrey Grant for
them and either of them by these Presents, That the said John Mordaunt, shall
retain and take up all the Revenues, Rents and Profits due to the said Humphrey
and Amey, of all the Manners, Lands and Tenements, belonging to the said
Humphrey and Amey, from the making of these Presents, unto the time that the
said John Mordaunt be fully therewith, and with the Profits, that he has
before this time received, of the Lands of the said Humphrey and Amey at the
Feasts of Easter and Michaelmas last past, Ten Pounds Four Shillings Assigned
to the same Humphrey, for the same Feasts, till his Exhibition be fully
satisfied of the said Hundred Pounds. Provided always that the said Humphrey
shall have from henceforth, at the Feasts of Easter and Michaelmas next ensuing
the date of these Presents, toward his finding of the Profits of the same
Manners, Lands and Tenements, that he has by the said Amey, and the yearly
Hundred Pounds till the said John Mordaunt, be fully contented of the said
Hundred Pound: And after that Hundred Pound so fully contented, then the said
Humphrey to be discharged of that Hundred Pound he owed to the said Wistan, and
also the said Wistan to be quit and discharged against the said John Mordaunt,
of the said Hundred Pound due to the said John, by reason of these Presents.
And if the said Humphrey dye before the said Hundred Pound, to the said John
Mordaunt in form before rehearsed, is satisfied, Then the said Wistan Grants
by these Presents to pay yearly to the said John Mordaunt, Twenty Pound four
Shillings at the Feasts of Easter and Saint Michael, by true Portions, till the
same John Mordaunt, therewith and with the Money that the same John has and
shall retain of the Profits of the Manners, Lands and Tenements of the said
Humphrey and Amey, be fully satisfied of the said Hundred Pound. And the said
Wistan binds him by these Presents in two Hundred Marks, That he shall not
Marry the Heir of the said Thomas, to any other Person than to one of his
Children begotten of the said Elizabeth. In Witness whereof the Persons
abovesaid, to these Presents interchangeably have set to their Seals, the Day
and Year abovesaid.

John Mordaunt.

Vltima Voluntas Johannis Mordaunt Militis probata.
IN Dei Nomine Amen, ego Johannes Mordaunt miles, compos mentis sanaeque
memoriae, die Jovis, quinto die Septembris, Anno Domini milesimo quigentesimo
quarto, and Anno Regni Regis Henrici Septimi vicesimo, condo Testamentum and
ultimam voluntatem meam in hunc modum:

Imprimis lego animam omnipotenti Deo, corpusque meum Ecclesiasticae
sepulturae, in Capella beatissimae Virginis Mariae in Ecclesia parochiali de
Turveia, ubicunque contingat me obire.

Item lego Ecclesiae de Turveia optimum meum animal, nomine mortuarii.

Item lego fabriciae Ecclesiae de Turveia, viginti solidos.

Item lego fratribus minoribus Bedfordiae, viginti solidos.

Item lego Ecclesiae de Mulso, december solidos.

Ecclesiae de Stacheden, december solidos.

Priori and Canonibus de Newnham, viginti solidos.

Abbati de Wardon, and Conventui ibidem, viginti solidos.

Item volo quod feossati and executores mei, erigere and stabiliri faciant,
quandam Cantariam, in dicta capella in Ecclesia de Turveia de duobus capellanis
secularibus perpetuis divina ibidem celebrantibus, juxta ordinationem meam, vel
executorum meorum, pro bono statu illustrissimi principis, and Domini mei
Henrici septimi, Dei gratia, Regis Angliae and Franciae, and Domini Hiberniae,
dum in humanis existat, ac pro anima ejus, cum ab hac luce migraverit, and
anima Elizabethae nuper consortis suae, and animabus omnium progenitorum and
antecessorum ejusdem Domini Regis. Nec non pro animabus mei Domini Johannis
Mordaunt, Willielmi Mordaunt patris mei, and Margaretae uxoris ejus, matris
meae, and omnium antecessorum meorum.

Et pro anima Edithae uxoris meae, filiae and unius haeredum Nicolai Latimer,
Militis, de Duntish, in Comitatu Dorsetiae.

Et animabus Annae nuper Comitissae Warwichiae, and omnium benefactorum, meorum.

Et quod dicti Capellani and eorum successores, cum sint sic erecti, stabiliti,
and fundati, licentia Regia inde primitus obtenta, habeant sibi and
successoribus suis, manerium meum de Melburne, ac omnia boscos, terras and
tenementa mea cum pertinentiis, in Melburne, Melreth, and Royston, in Comitatu
Cantabrigiae.

Et volo quod dicti duo Capellani and eorum successores, in perpetuum sint
residentes in Turveia super Cantaria illa.

Et quod unus illorum Capellanorum sit sciens in scientia Grammaticae, and
docens Grammaticam in Turveia in perpetuum libere, omnibus pueris, and aliis
illuc venientibus, scientiae illae studentibus, absque aliquo stipendio, vel
aliquid de iis, vel eorum amicis ceu parentibus capiendo.

Et ipse Capellanus docens Grammaticam, habebit sibi and successoribus suis, de
praedictis maneriis, terris and tenementis, december libras annuatim. Et quod
alter Capellanus habeat sibi and successoribus suis, octo marcas de eisdem
manerio, terris and tenementis.

Et quod residuum dicti manerii, terrarum and tenementorum, cum pertinentiis
sit ad sustentationem dictae Cantariae, and mansionis suae; and pro reparatione
vestimentorum, and aliarum rerum pro eadem Cantaria necessariarum.

Item volo, quod iidem Cantarii, and successores sui habeant sibi and
successoribus suis, messuagium suum in Turveia vocatum Fyshers, cum columbari,
domibus, gardinis, and curtelagiis eidem adjacentibus, pro eorum mansione, and
schola pro pueris docendis in scientia praedicta.

Et quod magister ille and successores sui, cum pueris quolibet die, cum primo
venerit ad scholas, dicant pro bono statu meo, and haeredum meorum, Dominorum
manerii mei de Turveia, hunc psalmum; Deus in nomine tuo salvum me fac, etc.
and cum suffragiis solitis.

Et in eorum recessu a scholis, quolibet die pro animabus praedictis, psalmum,
De profundis, etc. cum suffragiis solitis de defunctis dicendis.

Et quod dicti Capellani and eorum successores, sint diebus festivis in choro
de Turveia divina, videlicet primas Vesperas, matutinas Missas, and secundas
Vesperas, ibidem cum nota psallentibus.

Et quod executores mei omnia necessaria ordinent, pro divinis celebrandis in
dicta Cantaria, una vice tantum.

Et quod extunc de caetero, eadem and talia necessaria, reparentur, and manu
teneantur, de and cum residuo dictorum exituum, and proficuorum per supervisum
haeredum meorum.

Et quod executores mei, and assignati sui, capiant exitus and proficua inde,
ad erigendum dictam Cantariam quousque Cantaria illa sit fundata and erecta, ut
praedictum est.

Item volo quod dicta Cantaria sit fundata and erecta, licentia Regia, mediante
infra december annos proximo post obitum meum. Et si non sit fundata infra december
annos, quod extunc volo quod haeredes mei, illa manerium and tenementa habeant,
sibi and haeredibus de corporibus suis exeuntibus remanere inde rectis
haeredibus meis in perpetuum.

Item volo quod Editha uxor mea habeat ad terminum vitae suae terras and
tenementa ad valentiam centum librarum per annum in Turveia and Statfold, ceu
alibi, in recompensationem totius dotis and juncturae suae, ac tertiam partem
omnium bonorum meorum mobilium, exceptis wardis meis, and maritagiis eorundem,
ac omnibus denariis de eisdem wardis and maritagiis provenientibus, and etiam
illis denariis quos promptos habeo in manibus, debitis meis, and omnibus
denariis reservatis, sive crescentibus de Etheldreda Vere, quae omnia
praeexcepta, volo quod executores mei habeant, cum reliquis duabus partibus
bonorum meorum, ad debita mea persolvenda, and hanc voluntatem meam
perimplendam.

Item volo quod executores mei habeant ad terminum december annorum, exitus and
proficua omnium terrarum, and tenementorum meorum residuorum, tam quae habeo
jure haereditario, quam ex perquisitione, in Turveia praedicta, Stacheden,
Felmarsham, Radwell, Roxton, Charlestern, Collesden, Berford, Bedford,
Carleton, Elstowe, Chalton, Colmoth, Cramfeld, Eyeworth, Wotton, Peling,
Bromham and Thomasine, Lamburne, in Comitatu Bedfordiae, ac manerium de Mulso
and Willien, ac omnium terrarum ac tenementorum meorum cum pertinentiis, in
Tychemerch, Clopton, Luffwyk, in Comitatu Northamptoniae, manerii de Halshyde,
ac omnium terrarum, and tenementorum cum pertinentiis, in Halshyde, Stenage,
ceu alibi in Comitatu Herfordiae, manerii de Botelers, ac omnium terrarum and
tenementorum meorum cum pertinentiis in Walden, and Ashden in Comitatu
Essexiae. Et maneriorum de Newton per mare, and Burnton cum pertinentiis. Nec
non omnium terrarum and tenementorum meorum quae nuper fuerunt Johannis
Middleton militis, in Comitatu Northumbriae, manerii de Lyford, cum acciderit,
in Comitatu Berks; nec non manerii de Mykleham, cum acciderit, and advocationem
Ecclesiae de Mykleham, ac omnium terrarum and tenementorum meorum cum
pertinentiis, in Comitatu Surriae; nec non omnium aliorum maneriorum, terrarum
and tenementorum meorum cum pertinentiis, infra regnum Angliae.

Et quod iidem executores mei vendant, omnes boscos, and subboscos, meos in
omnibus dictis Comitatibus.

Et quod habeant totum interesse meum, quod habeo, and haberem, debeo, sive
deberem, in omnibus exitibus and proficuis, omnium maneriorum, terrarum, and
tenementorum, cum pertinentiis, Etheldredae Vere, tam in terris de
Greene's-lands, quam in terris de Vere's-lands, ac totum interesse meum in
Goldston and Raundis, and in terris, and tenementis suis, ea intention, quod
iidem Executores solvent omnia debita mea, and deinde legata mea, and expensas
necessarias, pro fundatione and creatione contrariae meae praedictae, and
perimpleant istam meam voluntatem.

Item volo and lego post dictos december annos elapsos, Willielmo Mordaunt filio
meo, and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus, reservationem manerii mei de
Lyford; ac omnium terrarum and tenementorum meorum cum pertinentiis, in Lyford,
and alibi, in Comitatu Berks, remanere inde Johanni Mordaunt filio meo and
haeredi apparenti, and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus; remanere inde
Willielmo Mordaunt fratri meo, and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus;
remanere inde Elizabethae uxori Wistani Brown, sorori meae, and haeredibus de
corpore suo exeuntibus; remanere inde rectis haeredibus mei dicti Johannis
Mordaunt patris, in perpetuum.

Item lego dicto Willielmo filio meo, quendam annualem redditum viginti
marcarum, exeuntem de terris and tenementis meis in Comitatu Buckinghamiae,
quousque dicta reversio dicti manerii, de Lyford cum pertinentiis acciderit.

Et quod idem Willielmus filius meus habeat totum proficuum proveniens de
Etheldreda Vere, and de terris and tenementis ipsius Etheldredae, durante
interesse meo in eisdem; and totum proficuum quod provenire poterit de eisdem,
cum idem Willielmus ad plenam aetatem suam pervenerit, vel ad ipsam vendendam,
vel ad ipsam maritandam, prout deo placuerit, nisi de eisdem prosicuis sibi
provideatur maritagium, per discretionem executorum meorum, and tunc totum
residuum eorundem proficuorum, remanentium ultra idem maritagium, erit eidem
Willielmo cum ad plenam aetatem suam pervenerit.

Item volo quod Johannes filius meus primogenitus, habeat, durantibus dictis
december annis, quadraginta marcas, annuatim exeuntes de manerio meo de Mulso, and
volo quod feoffati mei, in eodem manerio, ac omnibus terris, ac tenementis
meis, cum pertinentiis in Mulso, Newportpagnel, Hermede, Clifton, Broughton,
Harwyke, Wedon, and Breddesthorn, in Comitatu Buckinghamiae, ac de and in
omnibus maneriis, terris and tenementis meis de Turveia, Bosoms, Bordlen, ac
omnibus terris and tenementis, ac reversionibus meis in Stacheden, Turvey,
Felmarsham, Radwell and Eyeworth, in Comitatu Bedfordiae; ac de and in omnibus
terris ac tenementis meis cum pertinentiis in Luffwyk, Tychemerch, and Clopton,
in Comitatu Northamptoniae, ac in manerio meo de Halshydes; and omnibus terris
and tenementis meis, cum pertinentiis in Shephale, Stevenage, ceu alibi, in
Comitatu Hertf. ac de manerio de Botelers in Walden, and omnibus terris and
tenementis meis cum pertinentiis in Walden and Ashton, in Comitatu Essexiae,
stent and sint feoffati, post dictos december annos elapsos, ad usum dicti
Johannis Mordaunt filii mei, and haeredum de corpore suo exeuntium; remanere
inde praedicto Willielmo filio meo, and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus;
remanere inde praefatae Johannae Strangeways filiae meae, and haeredibus de
corpore suo exeuntibus; remanere inde praefato Willielmo fratri meo, and
haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus; remanere inde praefatae Elizabethae
Brown, and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus; remanere inde rectis
haeredibus dicti Johannis Mordaunt filii in perpetuum.

Item volo quod Katharina Ardres vidua, filia Johannis Hamwell, de Tansore, and
Rosae uxoris ejus, habeat omnia, terras, boscos and tenementa mea, cum
pertinentiis, in Northcrawley, excepto quodam clauso in Northcrawley, vocato
Greatcalverly, quod assignavi Roberto Broughton militi, in excambium, pro
quodam clauso in Turveia nuper Broughtons, quae sunt omnia tenementa quae
Broughton habuit in Turveia praedicta. Habendum omnia praedicta terras, boscos,
and tenementa cum pertinentiis in Northcrawley praedicta, excepto praeexcepto,
praefatae Katharinae, and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus; remanere inde
mihi dicto Johanni Mordaunt and haeredibus de corpore meo exeuntibus; remanere
inde Willielmo Mordaunt fratri meo, and haeredibus de corpore suo exeuntibus;
remanere inde praefatae Elizabethae Brown, and haeredibus de corpore suo
exeuntibus; remanere inde rectis haeredibus Dominae Agnetis Pekke, nuper uxoris
Johannis Pekke, de Coupull, filiae Johannis Vynter de Creke, in Comitatu
Northamptoniae, in recompensationem medietatis manerii de Creke, and
tenementorum in Northamptonia, in eodem Comitatu Northamptoniae, per me dictum
Johannem Mordaunt venditae.

Item volo quod nullus dictorum Johannis Mordaunt, and Willielmi filiorum
meorum, habeat statum in praedictis maneriis, terris, and tenementis,
durantibus vitis suis, nec eorum alicujus diutius viventis, nisi tantum pro
junctura uxorum suarum, sed quod iidem Johannes and Willielmus tantum inde
capiant exitus, and proficua, post dictos december annos elapsos, durantibus vitis
suis.

Item volo quod executores faciant juncturas uxoribus, eorundem Johannis and
Willielmi, de and in praedictis terris and tenementis, sibi separaliter in ista
mea ultima voluntate assignatis, aut in parcellis eorundem, si and quando, and
de tanta portione inde prout per meos executores avisabitur, and prout teneor
Elizabethae uxori, praedicti Johannis Mordaunt junioris.

Item volo quod dictus Willielmus Mordaunt frater meus habeat regimen dictorum
filiorum meorum durante, vita sua, quousque filii mei pervenerint ad aetatem
viginti quatuor annorum, and post ejus decessum alii executores mei habeant
regimen eorum usque ad eandem aetatem.

Et volo, quod si aliquid in fine dictorum december annorum, ista ultima voluntate
mea perimpleta remaneat, de bonis meis mobilibus, aut de exitibus terrarum and
tenementorum meorum praedictorum, aut de venditione boscorum meorum, quod tum
volo quod illud residuum remaneat ad usum dicti Johannis Mordaunt filii, si
tunc sit superstes, aut dicto Willielmo filio meo tunc superstite, ut ipsi
exorent pro me, and animabus antecessorum meorum.

Item lego Johannae filiae meae, uxori Aegidii Strangeways viginti libras
argenti, non in pecuniis, sed in una pelve and Ewre de argento, and in uno
cipho cum coopertario deaurato ad valentiam viginti librarum.

Item volo quod septem animae disponantur pro anima Agnetis Pekke, cujus
executor ego sum; and tenementum and quinque acras terrae in Elnestowe, quae
valent ad majus, sex libras duodecim solidos and quatuor denarios, assignavi
Katharinae Ardres and haeredibus suis in perpetuum.

Item lego Richardo Stevynson quatuor libras annuatim, durante vita sua; and
Thomae Kirkeby quatuor libras annuatim, durante vita sua, and Thomae Heron,
quamdiu haeredi mei manerii de Turveia deservire valet, annuatim quatuor
libras; Johanni Deyster, and Johannae uxori ejus, victum and vestitum apud
Turveiam, vel viginti sex solidos and octo denarios, per annum, durante vita
sua, and Jacobo Harris victum and vestitum, durante vita sua.

Item lego cuilibet alio servienti meo non sumenti annuali stipendio,
quadraginta solidos; and cuilibet alio servienti meo annuali sumenti stipendio,
integrum stipendium unius anni.

Et hujus praesentis Testamenti, and ultimae voluntatis meae, executores facio,
ordino, and constituo, Willielmum Mordaunt fratrem meum, Johannem Vynter, and
Willielmum Gascoign; and cuilibet eorum do, and lego, viginti libras, ultra
expensas necessarias, circa implementum istius meae ultimae voluntatis, quas
similiter volo quod habeant, and expendent de bonis meis. His Testibus
praedictis, Willielmo Mordaunt, Willielmo Gascoign, Johanne Vynter, Johanne
Mordaunt filio meo, Wistano Brown, and aliis. Data dicto die Jovis, anno
vicesimo supradicto.

Tenore praesentium nos Willielmus permissione divina Cantuariensis Episcopus,
totius Angliae primas, and apostolicae sedis legatus, Notum facimus universis,
quod sexto die mensis Decembris, Anno Domini milesimo quingentesimo quarto apud
Lambeth probatum fuit, coram nobis, ac per nos approbatum, and insinuatum,
Testamentum Johannis Mordaunt Militis defuncti, praesentibus annexum, habentis
dum vixit, and mortis suae tempore, bona in diversis Diocesibus nostrae
Cantuariensis provinciae, cujus praetextu, ipsius Testamenti approbatio, and
insinuatio, ad administrationis bonorum and debitorum suorum commissio, nec non
compoti, calculi, sive ratiocinii, administrationis hujusmodi, auditio
finalisque liberatio, sive demissio ab eadem, ad nos solum and insolidum, and
non ad alium nobis inferiorem judicem, de jure praerogativa and consuetudine
nostris, ac Ecclesiae nostrae Christi Cantuariae, quiet, pacifice, and
inconcusse, in hac part usitatis and observatis, legitimeque praescriptis,
dignoscuntur notorie pertinere. Commissaque fuit administratio omnium and
singulorum bonorum, and debitorum dicti defuncti, Willielmo Mordaunt and
Willielmo Gascoign, executoribus in hujusmodi Testamento nominatis, de been and
fideliter administrando eadem, ac de pleno, and fideli inventorio omnium and
singulorum bonorum, and debitorum hujusmodi conficiendo. Et nobis citra festum
Natalis Domini proximo futuro exhibendo. Nec non de pleno and vero compoto,
calculo, sive ratiocinio nobis aut successoribus nostris, in ea part
reddendis, ad sancta Dei Evangelia juratis. Reservata potestate similem
Commissionem faciendi, Johanni Vynter etiam executori in hujusmodi Testamento
nominato, cum eam venerit in debita juris forma Admissurus. Data die mensis,
Anno Domini, and loco praedicto, and nostrae translationis anno primo.

Sub Sigillo Officii.

tomb of Sir John Edith (nee Latimer) Mordaunt Hic jacet Dominus Johannes
Mordaunt, Miles, Dominus hujus villae, cum Domina Editha uxore ejus, filia and
haerede Domini Nicolai Latimer, Militis; qui quidem Johannes Cancellarius fuit
Ducatus Lancastriae, regnante Rege Henrico Septimo, and a Secretioribus suis
Conciliis. Multa meruit, and habuit plurima, pro longa and fideli servitute.
Obiit tandem satur dierum, clarus virtute, posteritate faelix, in expectatione
beatissimae Aeternitatis (...) die (...) Anno Domini (...)



JOHN Lord MORDAVNT, Second of that Name, Peer of England, Lord Baron of
Turvey, and Privy Counselor to King Henry the Eighth. CHAPTER XII.
Charta Regis Henrici Septimi facta Willielmo Mordaunt and Willielmo Gascoign,
Executoribus Johannis Mordaunt, Militis, pro Custodia Johannis Leventhorp.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, and Franciae, Dominus Hiberniae, Omnibus ad
quos praesentes literae pervenerint, salutem. Sciatis quod nos de gratia nostra
speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris dedimus, and concessimus,
and per praesentes damus, and concedimus, Willielmo Mordaunt and Willielmo
Gascoign, Executoribus Testamenti Johannis Mordaunt militis, defuncti,
custodiam terrae and haeredis Thomae Leventhorp, videlicet, Johannis
Leventhorp, filii and haeredis ejusdem Thomae Leventhorp, ac omnium maneriorum,
terrarum, tenementorum, reddituum, reversionum, advocationum Ecclesiarum,
feodorum militum, ac haereditamentorum quorumcunque, quae per, sive post mortem
ejusdem Thomae Leventhorp, ac ratione minoris aetatis ejusdem Johannis
Leventhorp, ad manus nostras devenerunt, ceu devenire debuerunt, sive debebunt.
Concessimus etiam praefatis Willielmo Mordaunt and Willielmo Gascoign,
maritagium ejusdem Johannis Leventhorp absque disparagatione. Habendum and
tenendum custodiam terrae, and haeredis praedictorum, and caetera praemissa,
cum suis pertinentiis, praefatis Willielmo Mordaunt and Willielmo Gascoign,
durante minore aetate ejusdem Johannis Leventhorp. Concessimus etiam praefatis
Willielmo Mordaunt and Willielmo Gascoign, omnia arrearagia, redditus, exitus,
and proficua, omnium praedictorum maneriorum, terrarum and tenementorum, and
caeterorum praemissorum, a tempore mortis praedicti Thomae Leventhorp hucusque
pervenientia, sive crescentia. Concessimus etiam eisdem Willielmo Mordaunt and
Willielmo Gascoign, quod si contingat ipsum Johannem Leventhorp antequam ad
legitimam aetatem viginti unius annorum per^^^erit obire, haerede suo infra
aetatem existente, quod iidem Willielmus Mordaunt (...) Willielmus Gascoign,
habeant custodiam terrae and haeredis, hujusmodi haeredis, (...) praedictorum
maneriorum, terrarum and tenementorum, and caeterorum praemissorum cum
pertinentiis, una cum maritagio hujusmodi haeredis, absque dis^ragatione. Et
sic de haerede ad haeredem, quousque aliquis hujusmodi haeredum, (...) and
legitimam aetatem suam pervenerit, absque compoto, ceu aliquo alio (...)
praemissis, ceu aliquo praemissorum, nobis vel haeredibus nostris reddendo,
(...) solvendo. Eo quod expressa mentio de vero valor annuo aut certitudine
praemissorum, aut de aliis donis, ceu concessionibus per nos praefatis,
Willielmo Mordaunt and Willielmo Gascoign, ante haec tempora factis existit,
aut aliquo statuto, actu, ordinatione, restrictione, re, materia, vel causa
quacunque, in contrarium editis ceu provisis, in aliquo non obstantibus. In
cujus rei Testimonium, (...) literas nostras sieri fecimus patentes, Test
meipso apud Westmonasterium duodecimo die Maii, Anno Regni nostri vicesimo
primo.

Baynbrig.
Per ipsum Regem and de data praedicta autoritate Parliamenti
A Patent to John Mordaunt to be Sheriff.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, and Franciae, Dominus Hiberniae,
Archiepiscopis Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Ducibus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Militibus, Liberis hominibus, and omnibus aliis de Comitatibus Bedfordiae, and
Buckinghamiae, salutem. Cum commiserimus dilecto nobis Johanni Mordaunt,
officium Vicecomitis, Comitatuum nostrorum praedictorum cum pertinentiis,
habendum quam diu nobis placuerit, prout in aliis nostris patentibus, sibi inde
confectis, before continetur. Vobis mandavimus quod eidem Johanni tanquam
Vicecomiti nostro, Comitatuum praedictorum, in omnibus quae ad officium illud
pertinent intendentes sitis, and respondentes. In cujus rei Testimonium, has
literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes. Test meipso apud Westmonasterium,
decimo die Novembris, Anno Regni nostri primo.

Young. Sub Sigillo magno.

Concession de Cognoisance a Jean Mordaunt.
A Tous presens, and advenir qui ces presents lettres verront, ou orront.
Thomas Wryothesley, aulterment dit Jerretiere Roy d'armes, des Anglois: Et
Thomas Benolt, aulterment dit Clarencieux Roy d'armes, de parties du South, en
cestuy Royaulme d'Angleterre salut, avec humble recommendation. Equite veult,
and Raison ordonne que les hommes vertueux, and de noble courage soient par
leurs merits, and bonne renommee remunere, and non pas seulment leurs
persons, en ceste vie mortelle, tant briefue and transitoire, mais apres eulx,
ceux qui du leurs corpse issiront and seront procree, soient en toutes places,
perpetuellment avec autres renommees, par certaines enseignes and demonstrances
d'honneur and de noblesse. Comme ainsi soit, que Jean Mordaunt de Turvey, en la
Count de Bedford Escuyer: soit descendu de noble lignee, and aussi longuement
ait continue en noblesse, portant arms; neantmoins iceluy uncertain, en
quelles manieres ces predecesseurs, portoient leur cognoisance, non volant
prejudicer a aucune person, a nous les dits Roys d'armes a requis de luy
ordonner, deviser, and assigner, un cognoisance convenable. Et pource nous
considerantz, sa request estre just and raisonable, par virtue de l'autorite,
and pouvoir annex, and attribue a nostre office de Roys des arms, avons
ordonne, devise and assignee, au dit Jean Mordaunt, and sa posterite, aveques
du difference la cognoissance en la maniere qui s'ensuit. C'est ascavoir un
test d'aigle, rasee d'argent dedans un courronnal de gueules, enter trois
estoiles, de sis points, de sable, becquee de pourpre, tenant en son beque en
branche d'aulbe espine, de vert, la fleur a la test si comme la picture en la
marge si devant le demonstre. A avoir and tenir, au dit Jean Mordaunt, and sa
dit posterite, and eux en user a tousiour mas. En testimoigne de ce nous
Jarretiere Roy des Arms des Anglois, and Clarencieux Roy d'armes des parties
du South, dessusdits avons signees de nos mains, and seeles des seaulx de nos
arms, ces presents. Fait and done a Londres, le derniere jour de Fevrier,
l'an de nostre Seigneur Jesu Christ, Mil cinque cens, and douze, and l'an du
reign du Roy Henry l'huictiesme nostre tres redoubte and Sovereign Seignieur
quatriesme.

A Letter from King Henry the Eight to John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved John Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and welbeloved we greet you well: And forasmuch as for the defense of
this our Realm and resistance against outward Enemies, it is necessarily
requisite that all manner our Subjects, able for the Wars, should be put in
sufficient readiness for the same, to do unto us service when the case shall
require; we therefore will and desire you, and nevertheless command, That with
all diligence possible, after the receipt of this our Letter, ye not only
prepare such and as many able Men for the Wars sufficient harnished, as ye may
and can prepare of your own Tenants, and other Servants within your Offices,
and Rooms, and none other, but also make Certificate in writing of their number
to our self, or the Bishop of Duresme our Secretary before the Feast of Saint
John Baptist next coming at the farthest, like as we have semblably written to
all Lords, Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of every Shire within this our
Realm, and therefore fail ye not to accomplish the premises, as ye tender our
honor, and the surety of us and of our Realm and Subjects; so and in such wise
that by our preparation of a good number of able Men, we may understand your
towardly mind to do unto us service, which shall be remembered according to your
deserts; and these our Letters shall be your sufficient warrant and discharge
in that behalf.

A Letter from King Henry the Eight to John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved John Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and welbeloved we greet ye well. So it is, upon the even of Philip and
Jacob last passed, a great number of insolent Apprentices, and malicious
Journey-men of their sensual Appetites, and rancorous Dispositions, against
Aliens and Strangers, Artificers and others, Inhabited within our City of
London, suddenly assembled themselves within our said City in the night time,
under color of Maying, breaking up, entering, and robbing the houses of sundry
French and Dutch men, making also great Comminations to other Strangers, to the
mavelous Inquietation and Commotion of our said City, and Disturbances of our
Peace within the same. And albeit the same Commotion and Rebellious Assembly,
by the Mayor, Sheriffs, and other substantial, and well disposed Citizens, with
and by the Policies, Powers, and Assistance of the Noble Men, and others of our
Council, was not only forthwith repressed, and pacified, but also a great
Number of the Malefactors and Offenders taken, and according to our Laws and
their Demerits, openly convicted and put to execution, so that it is now
thoroughly pacified, and put in Quietness, our Lord be thanked. Yet we thought
right expedient to advertise you thereof, as well for the Declaration of the
Truth, in putting all Sinister and Seditious Bruits to silence, if any such
shall be made by indisposed Persons, as also that ye by your Wisdom, should not
only foresee and have good espial in the place and Countries near adjoining to
you, to know the disposition of our Subjects, if upon untrue reports, they
should be stirred to any semblable Commotions, by perverse Council against
Merchants, Strangers, or upon any other ground or cause. But also by your
wisdom and power with the assistance of other faithful Servants, and Subjects
in these parts, forthwith to repress the same, by taking as well the principal
mover and stirrers thereof, as also the offenders accompanying them, for such
unlawful intent and purpose, committing them to Ward. And also, advertising us
thereof, with all speedy diligence, as our special Trust is in you, and as ye
intend to do unto us acceptable service and pleasure, to be remembered hereafter
accordingly.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Richmond, the Third day of May.
An Award between the Earl of Shrewsbury and John Mordaunt concerning the Manner
of Drayton.
TO all Christian People to whom this present Writing Indented shall come, hear
or see, Robert Brudenell and Richard Elliot, Two of the Kings Justices, send
greeting in our Lord. Whereas there has been diverse Variances and Debates,
moved and had between the Right Honorable Lord, George Earl of Shrewsbury, on
the one Party, and John Mordaunt, Esquire, and Elizabeth his Wife, one of the
Cousins and Heirs to the Right Honorable Edward late Earl of Wiltshire, on his
Mothers side, that is to say by Constance Mother of the said Earl, and Daughter
and Heir of Henry Green of Drayton, in the County of Northampton, Esquire, and
Humphrey Brown, Esquire, late Husband to Amey, and George Brown his Son and
Heir apparent, and Son and Heir to the same Amey, another Cousin, and another
of the Heirs of the said Earl of Wiltshire, after the form aforesaid, and Sir
Wistan Brown, Knight, and John Brown his Son and Heir apparent, and Audrey his
Wife, the third Cousin, and Heir to the same Earl, after the manner abovesaid,
on the other Party, of and upon the Right, Title, Reversion and Possession as
well of the foresaid Manner of Drayton, with the Appurtenances, as of all other
Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their Appurtenances in the
said County of Northampton, or elsewhere, which late were the said Constance's,
or to the foresaid Henry Green, or to any other person or persons, to the use
of them, or the other of them. Which Manners, Lands and Tenements the foresaid
Earl of Shrewsbury claimed by a Will, supposed to be made by the said Earl of
Wiltshire, by which Will the foresaid Earl of Wiltshire should will to the said
Earl of Shrewsbury, all his Fee simple Land. Whereupon the foresaid Parties
have compromitted themselves, to abide the Award, Ordinance and Judgment of us
the said Robert Brudenell, and Richard Elliot, Arbitrators indifferently named
by and between the foresaid Parties to Award, Ordain and Deem, as well of and
upon the Premises, as for and upon all manner of Evidences, Charters, Escripts,
Writings and Amuniments, concerning the Premises, or any part of them, and of
all manner of Actions, Suits, Quarrels and Demands, had or moved between the
foresaid Parties, or their Servants or Friends, before the date of these
presents concerning the Premises. And we the foresaid Arbitrators taking upon
us the authority, and power to Award, Ordain and Deem of and upon the Premises,
calling before us the Counsels of the foresaid Parties, hearing and seeing
their Titles, Answers, Replications, Evidences, Proves, and all other their
Allegiances, concerning their foresaid Titles, and Interess by good
deliberation, and by consent of the said Parties Award, Ordain and Deem of and
upon the Premises, in manner and form following, that is to say, Forasmuch as
the foresaid John Mordaunt, Sir Wistan, Humphrey Brown, George and John Brown,
have showed to us the said Arbitrators, a Will supposed to be made by the same
Earl of Wiltshire, and Sealed with his Seal, in which Will he revoked all
former Wills, and willed that same Will to stand in his full strength and
virtue, and for his last Will. And in that Will there is no clause whereby the
same Earl of Shrewsbury, should have any of his Manners, Lands or Tenements, as
by the same more plainly appears. And also they have showed unto us fair and
sufficient Deeds, and other Writings proving the aforesaid Manner of Drayton,
and other the said Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, to be given in
Tail to the Ancestors of the said Constance, Mother to the said Earl of
Wiltshire, who had and enjoyed the same by reason of the said Tails, and the
foresaid Elizabeth, and George Brown and Audrey, be Cousins and next Heir to
the same Constance, Mother to the said Earl of Wiltshire, and to the same Earl
on his Mothers side, and heritable to the foresaid Manners, and other the
Premises by reason of the said Tails. Wherefore we Award, Ordain and Deem,
That the foresaid Elizabeth, George Brown and Audrey, shall have and enjoy all
the foresaid Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and other the
Premises, to them and to their Heirs, according to their foresaid Titles of
Inheritance. And that the foresaid Earl of Shrewsbury, shall by his several
Deeds sufficient in the Law, to be enrolled, release to the said John Mordaunt,
and Elizabeth, Humphrey Brown, George Brown and John Brown and Audrey his Wife,
and to such Person or Persons, as they shall name to the use of the said
Elizabeth, George and Audrey, and their Heirs, all such Right, Title, Claim,
Interest and Demand, as the said Earl of Shrewsbury, or any Person or Persons
to his use, has in the foresaid Manners, Lands and Tenements, and other the
Premises, by reason of any Gift or Will, in the Premises, or any part of them,
made by the foresaid Earl of Wiltshire, to the foresaid Earl of Shrewsbury, at
the Cost and Charges of the said John Mordaunt, John and George Brown in all
things. And furthermore the said Earl of Shrewsbury shall deliver, or cause to
be delivered to the said John Mordaunt, Humphrey Brown, John and George Brown,
or to their Deputy or Deputies, in London, all such Charters, Evidences and
Writings, as he to his own use, or any other to his use, to his knowledge has
only concerning the Premises, as soon as it may be conveniently done: For the
which Releases, and other things above specified; and for other Costs and
Charges, which the foresaid Earl of Shrewsbury has had by occasion of the
Premises, we the said Arbitrators, Award, Ordain and Deem, That the said Sir
Wistan, John Mordaunt, Humphrey Brown, and John Brown, shall content and pay to
the said Earl of Shrewsbury, his Executors or Assigns, Two hundred Marks of
Lawful Money in form following, that is to say, The said John Mordaunt shall
content, and pay to the foresaid Earl of Shrewsbury, his Executors or Assigns,
on the Day of the Feast of Saint George the Martyr, next coming after the Date
above-written, at the Rode of the North-door, in the Cathedral Church of
Paul's, in the City of London, between the hours of Nine and Eleven of the
Clock of the same day, a Hundred Marks; and the foresaid Sir Wistan, Humphrey
Brown and John Brown, shall content, and pay to the foresaid Earl, his
Executors or Assigns, on the day of the Feast of Saint Andrew the Apostle, then
next ensuing, at the said Rode, in the same Church, between the hours of Nine
and Eleven of the same Day, a Hundred Marks, residue of the foresaid Two
hundred Marks. Also we Award, Ordain and Deem, That the said John Mordaunt, Sir
Wistan Brown, Humphrey, and John Brown, by their Deed and Deeds, as sufficient
as the said Earl of Shrewsbury or his Counsel shall advise, shall release to
the said Earl of Shrewsbury, and to as many persons as the said Earl shall
name, and appoint in Writing, before the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel,
next coming after the date hereof, which has done, labored, or spoken for the
foresaid Earl, in his foresaid cause, all actions of Trespasses, Debates and
Demands personal, had, or done before the date of these Presents, at the Costs
and Charges of the said Earl of Shrewsbury. And the said Earl, and all the
foresaid Persons, which has done, spoken or labored any thing for the
foresaid Earl of Shrewsbury, in or for his Title or Possession of the Premises,
or any part of them, shall be for ever discharged, against the same Sir Wistan,
John Mordaunt, and Elizabeth his Wife, Humphrey Brown, George Brown, John Brown
and Audrey his Wife, and every of them, of all Actions, Trespasses and Demands
personal, which they have or might have, against the same Earl, or the foresaid
other persons, for any cause had or done, touching the Premises, before the
date of these Presents.

In Witness whereof the foresaid Arbitrators, to every part of these Indentures
of their Award, have put to their Seals this Twentieth day of March, the Sixth
Year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth.
A Release from the Earl of Shrewsbury to John Mordaunt, of all his Right
concerning the Manner of Drayton.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos praesens scriptum pervenerit, nos Georgius
Comes Salopiae, Salutem in Domino sempiternam. Sciatis nos praefatum Georgium
Comitem, remississe, relaxasse, and omnino pro nobis and haeredibus nostris
quietum clamasse Johanni Mordaunt and Elizabethae uxori ejus, uni
consanguinearum and haeredum Edwardi nuper Comitis Wilts, ex part matris
ejusdem Edwardi videlicet filii Constanciae, filiae and haeredis Henrici
Green, nuper de Drayton in Comitatu Northamptoniae Armigeri, Humphredo Brown,
Georgio Brown, filio and haeredi apparenti dicti Humphredi Brown, filio and
haeredi Amiciae, alterius consanguinearum and haeredum dicti Edwardi, ex part
dictae Constanciae, Johanni Brown, and Etheldredae uxori ejus, tertiae
consanguinearum and haeredum dicti Edwardi, ex part dictae Constanciae, Thomae
Montegue, and Willielmo Pemberton haeredibus and assignatis suis, ad usum
eorundem Johannis Mordaunt and Elizabethae uxoris ejus, Humfredi Brown, Georgii
Brown and Johannis Brown, and Etheldredae uxoris ejus, and haeredum ipsarum
Elizabethae, Georgii, and Etheldredae: Totum jus nostrum, statum, titulum,
clameum, interesse, and demandum, quae habemus ceu unquam habuimus, de and in
manerio de Drayton, ac de and in omnibus aliis maneriis, terris, tenementis,
redditibus, reversionibus, boscis, pratis, pascuis, pasturis, and aliis
haereditamentis quibuscunque, cum eorum pertinentiis, quae nuper fuerunt
praedictae Constanciae, aut praedicti Henrici, sive alicujus alterius sive
aliquorum aliorum, ad eorum vel alterius eorum usum, in dicto Comitatu
Northamptoniae, ceu in aliquo alio Comitatu infra Regnum Angliae, aut in
Marchiis eorundem, quae nos praefatus Georgius Comes, vel haeredes nostri,
aliquo modo habere poterimus, in praedictis maneriis, ac caeteris praemissis,
aut in eorum aliquo, cum eorum pertinentiis, ratione alicujus donationis,
legationis, ceu per ultimam voluntatem praefati Edwardi, nuper Comitis Wilts,
nobis factis sive habitis: Salvis omnino and reservatis nobis, and haeredibus
nostris, omni clameo, jure, titulo, interesse, and demando, quae habemus, ceu
habere poterimus, in praemissis ceu in eorum aliquo, nobis per descensum, aut
per jus haereditarium, per aliquem antecessorum nostrorum, cujus, vel quorum
haeres, nos praefatus Georgius Comes existimus, ceu ratione alicujus alterius
tituli, quae habere poterimus, aliter quam per ultimam voluntatem, legationem,
sive donationem, praedicti Comitis Wilts, nobis facta, sive habita. Ita quod
nec nos praefatus Georgius Comes, nec haeredes nostri, nec aliquis alius pro
nobis, ceu nomine nostro, aliquod jus, statum, titulum, clameum, interesse, ceu
demandum, de aut in praedictis maneriis ac caeteris praemissis, cum eorum
pertinentiis, nec in aliqua eorum parcella, ex causis praedictis, de caetero,
exigere, clamare ceu vendicare poterimus, sed ab omni action juris, tituli,
clamei, interesse, aut demandi, seu aliquid inde petendi, simus in perpetuum
exclusi per praesentes.

In cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti Scripto meo, sigillum meum apposui.
Data vicesimo quarto die Martii, Anno Regni Regis Henrici octavi post
Conquestum sexto. E. Shrewsbury.

A Patent to John Mordaunt, Esquire, granting several Liberties, and among
others, to be Pilo Coopertus, that is Covered in the presence of the King.
HEnricus Dei gratia Rex Angliae, and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae. Omnibus
ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint salutem. Sciatis quod nos de gratia
nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris, concessimus, and
per praesentes concedimus, pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, quantum in nobis
est, dilecto nobis Johanni Mordaunt Armigero, ceu quocunque alio nomine,
cognomine, sive additione nominis idem Johannes censeatur, ceu nuncupetur: Quod
ipse ad totam vitam suam hanc habeat, and plenarie gaudeat libertatem,
videlicet, quod deinceps non ponatur, impanelletur, nec juretur, in assisis,
juratis, inquisitionibus, attinctis, ceu aliis recognitionibus, aut juratis
quibuscunque, licet ipsi, ceu eorum aliquis tangat nos vel haeredes nostros,
aut placita coronae nostrae, vel haeredum nostrorum, ac licet nos vel heredes
nostri, soli, aut conjunctim cum aliis personis, fimus una pars. Concessimus
etiam and per praesentes concedimus eidem Johanni, quo ipse de caetero non fiat
Vicecomes, Eschaetor, Coronator, Balivus, Receptor, Constabularius nostri vel
haeredum nostrorum, in aliquo Comitatu, sive Civitate, Villa, vel Burgo Regni
nostri Angliae, nec Collector assessorum, ceu Taxator aliquarum decimarum
quintarum decimarum, aut aliorum tallagiorum, quotarum, vel subsidiorum
quorumcunque, nobis aut haeredibus nostris, autoritate Parliamenti, vel aliter
concessorum, vel aliqualiter in posterum concedendorum, aut per nos, aut
haeredes nostros, ligeis nostris in Regno nostro, aliqualiter imponendorum. Nec
Collector alicujus rationabilis auxilii, ad primogenitum aut quemcunque alium
filium nostrum, vel haeredum nostrorum, militem faciendum. Ceu ad primogenitam
filiam, aut aliquam aliam filiam nostram, vel haeredum nostrorum maritandam. Et
quod idem Johannes in posterum non fiat nec eligatur, Miles alicujus Comitatus,
nec Burgensis alicujus Burgi, infra Regnum nostrum praedictum, ad veniendum ad
aliqua Parliamenta nostra, vel haeredum nostrorum in posterum summonenda ceu
tenenda. Nec aliqualiter assignetur, ordinetur aut fiat, Custos pacis aut
aliquis Justiciarius, sive Commissionarius, aut assignatus, ad pacem nostram,
vel haeredum nostrorum conservandam: aut ad inquirendum, audiendum,
determinandum, de laboratoribus, servientibus, artificibus, aut de aliquibus
transgressionibus, riotis, aut aliis offensis, contemptis, forisfacturis, ceu
malefactis, aut sewris aut aliis quibuscunque, nec Justiciarius laboratorum,
vel artificum, nec aliquis alius Justiciarius, capitalis Constabularius,
Traiator, Arragator sive Ductor aliquorum hominum ad arma, aut in aliquibus
negotiis nostris, vel haeredum nostrorum aut aliorum aliquorum. Et quod idem
Johannes de caetero non eligatur, ordinetur aut aliqualiter fiat, Major,
Vicecomes, Ballivus, Coronator, Escaetor, Camerarius aut alius officiarius
quicunque in aliquo Comitatu, Civitate, Villa, sive Burgo. Nec aliquis
Ballivus, officiarius, ceu minister nostri vel haeredum nostrorum, infra regnum
nostrum praedictum. Et quod ipse ad ordinem militarem suscipiendum, vel aliquod
officium, vel onus superius recitatum, aut aliquod aliud officium, sive onus,
aut honorem sive honores habendum, exercendum, faciendum, recipiendum aut
occupandum, ullo modo, per nos vel haeredes nostros, assignetur, votetur,
ordinetur, ceu compellatur aut aliqualiter arctetur ullo modo. Nec ad essendum
Jurator, super aliqua triatione, arraiatione, alicujus assisae, coram
quibuscunque justitiariis nostris, vel haeredum nostrorum ad assisas capiendas
assignatis, aut aliis justiciariis quibuscunque. Et quod non ponatur nec
impanelletur, in aliqua magna assisa, infra regnum nostrum Angliae, inter
parts quascunque, contra voluntatem suam, licet nos, aut haeredes nostri, sit
una pars. Et ulterius de abundantiori gratia nostra concessimus praefato
Johanni, quod si ipse ad aliqua officia sive onera, ceu honores supradicta, ceu
aliquod praemissorum, ceu aliquod aliud officium, ceu onus, aut honorem
quemcunque eligatur, ipseque officia, vel onera, ac honorem and honores illa
facere aut recipere recusaverit, extunc idem Johannes, aliquem contemptum de
praedictis poenam, aut forisfacturam, aut aliquos exitus, fines, redemptiones
ceu amerciamenta, quacunque occasion refutationis, omissionis, non
susceptionis, sive non omissionis, aut receptionis eorundem, aut alicujus
eorundem nullatenus incurrat, forisfaciat, aut perdat: Sed quod presens charta
nostra de exemptione, coram quibuscunque Justiciariis nostris, and
Thesaurariis, and Baronibus Scaccarii nostri, and heredum nostrorum, ac in
quocunque alio loco, aut curia de Recordo, per totum regnum nostrum, super sola
demonstratione ejusdem chartae nostrae, absque aliquo brevi, praecepto, ceu
mandato, aut aliquo alio superinde habendo, ceu prosequendo, vel aliqua
proclamatione facienda praefato Johanni allocetur. Concessimus etiam and per
praesentes concedimus eidem Johanni, quod ipse de caetero, durante vita sua, in
praesentia nostri, and haeredum nostrorum, aut in praesentia alicujus sive
aliquorum aliorum, regni nostri quorumcunque, quibuscunque temporibus futuris,
pilio sit coopertus capite, and non exuat, aut deponat pilium suum, a capite
suo, occasion vel causa quacunque, contra voluntatem and beneplacitum suum. Et
ideo vobis omnibus and singulis ac quibuscunque Justiciariis, Judicibus,
Baronibus Scaccarii nostri, Vicecomitibus, Escaetoribus, Coronatoribus,
Praepofitis, Majoribus, Balivis, and aliis officiariis and ministris nostris,
and haeredum nostrorum, ac omnibus ligeis and fidelibus nostris, firmiter
jungendo mandavimus, quod ipsum Johannem contra hanc concessionem nostram, ac
contra tenorem, exigentiam, aut effectum praesentium, non vexetis, perturbetis,
molestetis in aliquo, ceu gravetis; aliquo statuto, actu, ordinatione, sive
provisione, inde in contrarium editis, factis, sive provisis, aut aliqua alia
re, causa vel materia quacunque, in aliquo non obstantibus. In cujus rei
Testimonium has literas nostras fieri fecimus patentes.

Test meipso apud Oxford, secundo die Septembris Anno Regni nostri sexto. Per
ipsum Regem and de data praedicta autoritate Parliamenti Tongue.
Irrotulatur in Memorandis Scaccarii de Anno nono Regis Henrici octavi;
videlicet, inter Recorda de termino Sanctae Trinitatis rotulo..... Ex part
Remem. Thesaurum.



A Letter from King Henry the Eight to John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved John Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And forasmuch as we intend that our
dearest Sister, the Queen of Scots, shall now shortly repair unto our City of
London, at whose coming our mind is, That she be honorably accompanied, and
conveyed from Shire to Shire, by such Noblemen and other Gentlemen, as be
Inhabitants of those paris; amongst whom, we have appointed you to accompany,
and attend upon our said Sister, from the Town of Stony-stratford to Saint
Albans. We therefore will and desire you, to put your self in a readiness, so
that against the Fourteenth day of April, ye be at our said Town of
Stonystratford, there to meet with our said dearest Sister, and from thence to
attend upon her till her coming to the said Town of Saint Albans. Not failing
hereof as ye intend to do unto us honor and pleasure.

Given under our Signet, at our Manner of Greenwich the Two and twentieth day of
March.
A Letter from King Henry the Eight to John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved John Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And forasmuch as we understand, that
at the time of the late repair hither of our dearest Sister, the Queen of
Scots, ye according to our Letters to you then Addressed, right thankfully
acquitted your self, in giving your Attendance for Her conducting and
honorable conveyance. We therefore give unto you our special thanks: And where
it is appointed that our said dearest Sister, shall now return unto the Realm
of Scotland, we will and desire you to put your self in a readiness likewise to
accompany, and conduct her at this her said return from our Castle of Windsor,
where she intends to be the Sixteenth day of this Month, so to attend upon
her to Stony-stratford, whereby ye shall deserve a further thanks to be
remembered accordingly.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Richmond the Eight day of May.
A Letter from King Henry the Eight to John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved John Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: Forasmuch as a right-great and
Honorable Ambassaor, shall within short time repair unto our Presence out of
France, at which season it is requisite, and right expedient, that our Court be
Honorably furnished with Lords, and other Nobles, for the receiving, and
entertaining of the said Ambassador: We therefore have appointed you among
others, to give your Attendance in our said Court at their coming. Wherefore we
will that forthwith upon the sight of these our Letters, ye put your self in
such a readiness in your best array, that ye may be here with us, by the
Twentieth day of this instant Month at the farthest, without failing thus to do
as ye tender our Honor and Pleasure.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Greenwich, the Tenth day of August:
Alliance of Mordaunt and Elmes.
THese be the Articles and Agreements, had, made and concluded, the Twelfth day
of February, the Eleventh Year of the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, between
John Elmes, Son and Heir of William Elmes, Esquire, and Son and Heir apparent
of Elizabeth, now Wife to Thomas Pygott, Esquire, one of the Kings Sergeants at
Law, and late the Wife of the said William, and one of the Daughters and Heirs
of John Iwardely, Esquire, Deceased, on the one Party, and John Mordaunt of
Turvey in the County of Bedford, Esquire, on the other Party, for a Marriage,
by the Grace of God, to be had and solemnized, between the said John Elmes and
Edith Mordaunt, one of the Daughters of the said John Mordaunt: First it is
agreed, That the said John Elmes, shall by the same Grace of God, Marry, and
take to Wife the said Edith, if the said Edith thereunto shall agree, and
assent. And in the like manner the said Edith, shall by the same Grace of God,
Marry, and take to Husband the said John Elmes, if the said John Elmes will
agree and assent thereto. The said Marriage to be had and solemnized before the
Feast of All Saints, next coming after the date of these present Agreements.

Item, It is agreed by these Presents between the said Parties, That the Costs
and Charges of the same Marriage, as in Meat and Drink and other such things
convenient and necessary for the same, shall be at the Costs of the same John
Mordaunt.

Item, It is also agreed by these Presents, That the said John Elmes shall
Apparel himself at his pleasure, and at his own Costs and Charges. And in like
manner the said John Mordaunt, shall Apparel the said Edith, at the same day of
Marriage, at the proper Costs and Charges of the said John Mordaunt.

Item, The said John Elmes Covenanteth and Grants by these Presents, That he,
before the Feast Day of All Saints, shall at the Costs and Charges in the Law
of the said John Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, make, cause or do
to be made to the said John Mordaunt, Robert Brudenell, Knight, one of the
Justices of our Sovereign Lord the King, at the Pleas before him to be holden,
Thomas Pygott one of the Kings Sergeants at the Law, and to William Gascoign,
Esquire, Walter Luke, Nicholas Gardener, John Spencer, Robert Latimer,
Gentlemen, and to their Heirs, and at all time and times, after the said Feast
of All Saints, within the space of Eight Years, when the said John Elmes
thereto shall be required, by the said John Mordaunt, or by by his Heirs, or by
his Executors, or by his Assigns, a sufficient, sure and lawful Estate in the
Law, in Fee-simple, by Feoffment, Fine, Recovery, Release with Warranty,
Confirmation or otherwise, of Manners, Lands and Tenements, with the
Appurtenances, to the clear yearly Value of Threescore Pounds, over all yearly
Charges, and of such Manners, Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, of
the Inheritance of the said John Elmes, as by the said John Mordaunt shall be
named and appointed; the said Persons to be and stand seized of Fifty Pounds,
parcel of the said Sum of Threescore Pounds, to the use of the said John
Elmes, and of the said Edith Mordaunt, after their said Marriage had, of the
Heirs of the Body of the said John Elmes, lawfully begotten; And for default of
such Issue, to the use of the Heirs of the Body of the said William Elmes; And
for default of such Issue, to the right Heirs of the said William, according to
the Old Interest thereof. And of Ten Pounds residue of the said Threescore
Pounds; that the said Feoffees shall stand, and be seized thereof to the use of
the said John Elmes, and his Heirs during the Life of the said Elizabeth, and
after the Death of the said Elizabeth, and Marriage had between the said John
Elmes and Edith, to the use of the said John Elmes, and of the said Edith of
the Heirs of the Body of the said John Elmes, lawfully begotten, with the
remainder over, like in every thing as is above expressed of the said Fifty
Pounds.

Item, The said John Elmes Covenanteth and Grants by these Presents, That he,
before the said Feast of All Saints, and all time and times, within the said
Eight Years after the said Feast, when the said John Elmes thereunto shall be
required, by the said John Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, shall at
the proper Costs and Charges of the said John Elmes, his Heirs, Executors or
Assigns, make, cause or do to be made to the Persons above named, and their
Heirs, a sufficient and lawful Estate, in the Law, by Feoffment, Fine,
Recovery, Releases with Warranty, Confirmations or otherwise, as by the said
John Mordaunt, his Heirs, or Assigns shall be avised, of all his other Manners,
Lands, Tenements, Woods, Rents, Reversions and Services, the Appurtenances
within the Realm of England, which the said John Elmes, or any other Person or
Persons, to the use of the said John Elmes, has within the Realm of England;
the said Persons to stand and be seized of the same, to the use of the said
John Elmes, and of the Heirs of the Body of the said John Elmes lawfully
begotten; And for default of such Issue, to remain in like manner and form as
is aforesaid written of the foresaid Fifty Pounds. Provided always, That it
shall be lawful to the said John Elmes, to Appoint and Assign Lands, and
Tenements, to the yearly Value of Twenty Pounds parcel of Manners, Lands,
Tenements, and other the Premises, except always, Manners, Lands and Tenements,
with the Appurtenances before expressed and named to the said yearly Value of
Threescore Pounds, to be Appointed and Assigned, for the Jointure of the said
Edith; the said Twenty Pounds to be and go to, and for the Exhibition,
Marriage, Advancement of his Children, and to pay his Debts, and to the
performance of the last Will of the said John Elmes, so it extend no further,
but for term of Life or Lives, or for the term of Twenty Years next ensuing the
Death of the said John Elmes. And also provided, That if it fortune the said
Edith to decease, and the said John Elmes to Marry, and take another Wife or
Wives, that then it shall be lawful for the same John Elmes, to make a Jointure
or Jointures to his said Wife or Wives, that it shall fortune him so to Marry
for the term of her Life, of Manners, Lands and Tenements, parcel of the
Premises, under the yearly Value of Forty Pounds, at the pleasure of the said
John Elmes.

Item, The said John Elmes Covenanteth and Grants by these Presents, That he
shall not Alien, Sell, Give nor lay to Mortgage, no do, nor suffer, nor cause
to be done, nor suffer to be done, any manner of Act or Acts, whereby any
manuer of Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions and Services, with the
Appurtenances, which did come, grow or descend to the said John Elmes, by the
Death of the said William his Father, should be Alienate, or put away from the
Heirs of the said John Elmes, before expressed; but that he shall suffer all
such Manners, Lands, Tenements, and other the Premises, to come, grow or descend
in Possession, Reversion or Use, to the Heirs of the Body of the said John
Elmes, lawfully begotten; And for default of such Issue, the remainder thereof,
as is before expressed of the said Fifty Pounds. And also the said John Elmes
Covenanteth and Grants by these Presents, That he shall not Alien, Sell, Give
nor lay to Mortgage, nor do, nor suffer, nor cause to be done, nor suffered any
Act or Acts, whereby any Manners, Lands, or any other Hereditaments, which do
come, or may come, or shall come, grow or descend, to the said John Elmes, by,
and after the decease of the said Elizabeth, his Mother, should be Alienate, or
put away from the Heirs of the said Elizabeth; but that the said John Elmes
shall suffer the said Manners, and all other the Premises, which shall so
descend, or in any other manner of wise come, or grow to him by the said
Elizabeth, his Mother, to come, grow or descend in Possession, Reversion or in
Use, to the Heirs of the Body of the said Elizabeth, lawfully begotten; And for
default of such Issue-Male, the remainder thereof to the Heirs of the said
Elizabeth, according to the Old Inheritation thereof. For the which Premises on
the party of the said John Elmes to be truly performed and kept, the said John
Mordaunt, Covenanteth and Grants by these Presents, To pay, cause, or do to
be paid to the said John Elmes, his Executors or Assigns, Five hundred Marks of
lawful Money, that is to say, At the Feast of the Purification of our Lady,
next coming after the date hereof, One hundred Marks; And at the Feast of Saint
Peter the Advincula, commonly called Lammas day, Fifty Marks, and so yearly at
every of the said Feasts Fifty Marks, until the said Sum of Five hundred Marks
be counted and paid. And the said John Elmes Covenanteth and Grants by these
Presents, That he, his Executors or Assigns shall purchase with the same Five
hundred Marks, which the said John Elmes has of the said John Mordaunt, for
the same Marriage, and with the Sum of Two hundred Marks, which the said John
Elmes shall have delivered to him by the said Thomas Pygott, the day of the
said Marriage solemnized, Lands and Tenements to the clear yearly Value of
Forty Marks: And that the said John Elmes, his Executors or Assigns, after the
said Lands so purchased, shall Enfeoffee the said Persons of the same, to have
to them and to their Heirs in Fee, the same persons to stand and be seized of
the same, to the use of the said John Elmes, and of his Heirs for ever. And the
said John Elmes Covenanteth and Grants by these Presents, That if the said
Elibeth, his Mother, do Alien, Sell, Discontinue, Release or put away, by any
manner of means, any Manners, Lands, Tenements, or any other Hereditaments of
the Inheritance of the said Elizabeth from the said John Elmes, or from the
Heirs of the said John Elmes, lawfully begotten, except certain Lands and
Tenements, with the appurtenances lying in Littlecote, in the County of
Buckingham, to the yearly Value of Four Pounds, or thereabouts, That then the
said John Mordaunt or his Heirs shall have Ten Marks, parcel of the said Forty
Marks, so to be purchased to the said John Mordaunt and his Heirs for ever. And
the said persons so being seized of the said Forty Marks, incontinent after the
said Alienation, and Sale or Discontinuance, or any other matter of Act, by the
said Elizabeth so made or done, shall be seized of the same Ten Marks, to the
use of the said John Mordaunt, and of his Heirs for ever.

Item, The said John Elmes Covenanteth and Grants by these Presents, That if
the said Edith, within the time and space of Six Years after the Marriage
solemnized, do dye, having no Issue by the said John Elmes alive: That then the
said John Elmes, his Executors or Assigns shall repay, or cause to be repaid to
the said John Mordaunt, his Executors or Assigns, Two hundred Marks, parcel of
the said Five hundred Marks, within the space of Two Years next, and
immediately after the Decease of the said Edith. To all which Covenants,
Bargains, Promises and Grants, on the part of the said John Elmes, to be
performed and kept, the said John Elmes binds him, his Heirs, Executors and
Assigns, to the said John Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, in a
Thousand Marks. And to all the payments well and truly to be performed and
kept, on the Party of the said John, the said John Mordaunt binds him, his
Heirs, Executors or Assigns, to the said John Elmes, his Heirs, Executors and
Assigns, in Six hundred Marks.

In Witness whereof, etc.
A Letter from King Henry the Eight to John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved Servant John Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And whereas this Year last passed,
after the conclusion taken between us, and our dear Brother, Cousin,
Confederate, and Allie, the French King, as well for firm Peace, Love and
Amity, as of Alliance, by way of Marriage, God willing, to be had, and made
between our dearest Daughter the Princess, and the Dolphin of France, a
personal meeting and Interview was also to them concluded to be had betwixt us,
and the said French King, which upon urgent considerations, and great respects,
was by mutual consent, for that year put over, and deferred. So it is now that
the said French King being much desirous to see and personally to speak with
us, has sundry times by his Ambassadors and writings, instantly desired us to
condescend to this said interview, offering to meet with us within our
Dominion, Pale and Marches of Caleys, whereas heretofore semblable honor of
preeminence has not been given, by any of the French Kings, to any of our
Progenitors, or Ancestors; we therefore remembering the manifold good effects
that be in appearance like to ensue of this personal meeting, as well for
Corroboration and assured Establishment of Peace and Alliance concluded between
us, as for the universal well, tranquillity, and restfulness of all Christendom;
taking also to consideration the great honor offered to us by the French King,
for the said meeting within our Dominion, have condescended thereunto
accordingly, the same to be, God willing, in the Month of May next coming. And
in as much as to our Honor and Dignity Royal it appertains to be furnished
with honorable Personages, as well Spiritual as Temporal, to give their
Attendance upon us, at so solemn an Act as this shall be, for the Honor of us
and our Realm; we therefore have appointed you among others, to attend upon our
dearest Wife the Queen in this Voyage; willing therefore and desiring you not
only to put your self in a readiness, with the number of Ten tall Personages,
well and conveniently apparelled for this purpose to pass with you over the
Sea: But also in such wise to appoint your self in Apparel, as to your degree,
the Honor of us and this our Realm appertains. So that ye repairing to our
said dearest Wife the Queen, by the First day of May next coming, may there
give your Attendance in her transporting over the Sea accordingly; ascertaining
you, that albeit ye be appointed to the number of Ten Servants, to pass with
you as is abovesaid, yet nevertheless in as much as that at her arrival at
Caleys, you shall have no great Journey requisite to occupy many Horses, ye
shall therefore convey with you over the Sea, for your own Riding, and
otherwise, not above the number of Four Horses. Howbeit our mind is not to
Coact, or Restrain you to the said Precise number of Four Horses, for your
coming up to our said dearest Wife, and accompanying you to the Sea side, which
thing we remit to your Arbitrament; but only to ascertain you what number of
Servants, and Horses be appointed unto you to pass over the Sea, like as we
have ordered all other Lords and Nobles as shall attend upon our said dearest
Wife the Queen, according to their Degrees. Fail ye not therefore to accomplish
the premises, as ye tender our Honor and Pleasure. Given under our Signet at
our Manner of Eltham the Six and twentieth day of March.

An Indenture between John Elmes and John Mordaunto.
THIS Indenture made the Ninth day of May, the Twelfth Year of the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth, between John Elmes, Son and Heir of William Elmes,
Esquire, and Son and Heir Apparent of Elizabeth Pygott, Widow, one of the
Danghters and Heirs of John Iwardeby, Esquire, deceased, and late Wife to the
said William Elmes, on the one Party, and John Mordaunt of Turvey in the County
of Bedford, Esquire, on the other Party; Witnesses, That it is Promised,
Covenanted and Agreed between the said Parties in the manner and form
following, that is to say, The said John Elmes grants and promises, by the
Grace of God, to espouse and take to his Wife, Edith Mordaunt, one of the
Daughters of the said John Mordaunt, before the Feast of All Saints next
coming, after the date of these Presents, if the said Edith thereunto shall
agree and assent. And in like manner the said John Mordaunt grants and
promises, That the said Edith shall, by the same Grace of God, Marry, and take
to Husband, the said John Elmes, before the foresaid Feast, if the said John
Elmes thereunto shall agree and assent. And it is agreed by these Presents,
between the said Parties, That the Costs and Charges of the same Marriage, as
in Meat and Drink, and other such things convenient and necessary for the same,
shall be at the costs of the said John Mordaunt: And that the said John Elmes
shall apparel himself at his Pleasure, at his own cost and charges; and in like
manner the said John Mordaunt shall apparel the said Edith, at the same day of
Marriage, at his proper cost and charges. And the said John Elmes Covenanteth
and Agrees by these Presents, That he before the Feast of All Saints next
coming, at the cost and charges in the Law of the said John Mordaunt, his
Heirs, Executors or Assigns, shall make, cause, or do to be made, to Robert
Brudenell, Knight, the Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, and to the said John
Mordaunt, John Thyney of Drayton in the County of Buckingham, Esquire, Robert
Thyney, Thomas Tyrynghin the Elder, Thomas Brudenell the Elder, William
Gascoign, Esquire, Walter Luke, Nicholas Hardyng, John Spencer and Robert
Latimer, Gentlemen, and to their Heirs, a sure and lawful Estate in the Law in
Feesimple, and in Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, to the clear
yearly value of Ten Pounds by the Year, over all charges, whereof the Manners,
Lands, Tenements and other Hereditaments, which the said John Elmes or any
other to his use, has in Lilford, Wiggesthorp, in the County of Northampton,
shall be parcel to the use and behoof hereafter ensuing: And also shall further
do, suffer, and cause to be done, at the costs and charges of the said John
Mordaunt, as well before the foresaid Feast, as at all times after, within the
space of Four Years, next after the said Feast, when the said John Elmes
thereto shall be required, by the said John Mordaunt, by his Heirs, Executors
or Assigns, at their costs and charges, a sufficient, sure and lawful Estate in
the law, in Fee-simple, to the foresaid Robert Brudenell, and the said
Co-feoffees their Heirs and Assigns, or to the one of them, and to their Heirs,
to the use ensuing, by Feoffment, Fine, Recovery, Release, with Warranty,
Confirmation or otherwise, of, and in the foresaid Manners, Lands, Tenements,
and Hereditaments. And that the said Persons, their Heirs and Assigns, beside,
of, and in Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the yearly Value of
Fifty parcel of the said Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of the
yearly Value of Sixty, shall stand and be seized, to the use of the said John
Elmes and of the said Edith, immediately after the said Marriage had, and of
the Heirs of the Body of the said John Elmes, lawfully begotten; And for
default of such Issue, to the use of the Heirs of the Body of the said William
Elmes; And for default of such Issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the said
William, according to the old Inheritance thereof, Ten Pound, residue of the
said Hundred Pound, that the said Feoffees their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand
and be seized thereof, to the use of the said John Elmes and his Heirs, during
the life of the said Elizabeth, his Mother, and after the death of the said
Elizabeth, and Marriage had between the same John Elmes and Edith, to the use
of the said John Elmes, and of the said Edith, for term of her life, and of the
Heirs of the Body of the said John Elmes lawfully begotten, with like remainder
in any thing as is above expressed of the said Hundred Pounds. And the said
John Elmes Covenanteth and Grants by these Presents, That he before the said
Feast of All Saints, and at all time and times within the space of Four Years
next after the Feast of All Saints, when the said John Elmes thereunto shall be
required by the said John Mordaunt, his Heirs Executors or Assigns, shall at
the proper Costs and Charges of the said John Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors or
Assigns, make, cause or do to be made to the Persons abovenamed and to their
Heirs, or to the survivors of them and their Heirs, a sufficient and lawful
Estate, by Feoffment or otherwise, as by the said John Mordaunt, his Heirs or
Assigns, shall be advised, of all his other Manners, Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions and Services, with their Appurtenances, and all other his
Hereditaments with the Appurtenances, within the Realm of England, which the
said John Elmes or any other Person or Persons, to the use of the said John
Elmes now has. And the said Persons to be and stand seized of the same other
Manners to the use of the said John Elmes, and of the Heirs of the Body of the
said John Elmes, lawfully begotten; And for default of such Issue to remain in
like manner and form as is aforesaid written, of the said Hundred Pounds.
Provided always, That if it fortune the said Edith to decease, and the said John
Elmes to Marry and take another Wife or Wives, that then it shall be lawful for
the same John Elmes, to make a Jointure or Jointures to his said Wife or Wives,
that it shall fortune him to Marry, for the time of his Life, of Manners, Lands,
Tenements, parcel of the Premises, to the yearly Value of Fifty Pounds or
under, at the pleasure of the said John Elmes. And the said John Elmes
Covenanteth and Grants by these presents, That he shall not Alien, Sell, Give
nor lay to Mortgate, nor do, nor suffer, nor cause to be done, nor suffer any
manner of Act or Acts, whereby any Manners, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions
and Services, with the Appurtenances, which be, come, grow or descend, to the
said John Elmes by the Death of the said William, his Father, should be
Alienate, or put away, from the Heirs of the said John Elmes, before expressed;
but that he shall suffer all such Manners, Lands, Tenements, and other the
Premises, (except before excepted) to come, grow and descend, in Possession,
Reversion or in Use, to the Heirs of the said John Elmes, according to the Old
Inheritance thereof. And also the said John Elmes, Covenanteth and Grants by
these presents, That he shall not Alien, Sell, Give or lay to Mortgage, nor do,
nor suffer, nor cause to be done, nor suffer any Act or Acts whereby any
Manners, Lands or any other Hereditaments, which do come, or may come, or shall
come, grow or descend, in power or in use, to the said John Elmes, as Son and
Heir of the same Elizabeth, by and after the Decease of the said Elizabeth, his
Mother, should be Alienate, or put away from the Heirs of the said Elizabeth;
but that the said John Elmes shall suffer the said Manners and all other the
Premises, which shall so descend, or in any other manner of wise, come or grow
to him by the said Elizabeth, his Mother, to come, grow or descend in
Possession, Reversion or in Use to the Heirs of the Body of the said Elizabeth,
lawfully begotten; And for default of such Issue, the remainder thereof to the
Heirs of the said Elizabeth, according to the old Inheritance thereof. For the
which Premises on the Party of the said John Elmes to be truly performed and
kept, the said John Mordaunt Covenanteth and Grants by these presents, To
pay, cause or do to be paid, to the said John Elmes, his Executors or Assigns,
Six hundred Marks of lawful Money; for the which sum of a Hundred Marks, the
said John Mordaunt, has made to the said John Elmes Ten several Obligations.
for the sure payment of the same Six hundred Marks by the same Obligations,
Sealed with the Seal of the said John Mordaunt, and remaining with the said
John Elmes, more plainly it does appear. And the said John Elmes Covenanteth
and Grants by these presents, That if the said Edith within the time and
space of Four Years, next after the said Marriage solemnized, do dye, having no
Issue by the said John Elmes, that then the said John Elmes, his Executors or
Assigns, shall repay, or cause to be repaid to the said John Mordaunt, his
Executors or Assigns, Two hundred Marks parcel of the said Six hundred Marks,
within the space of Four Years, next and immediately after the decease of the
said Edith, and thereupon immediately after the payment of the said Two hundred
Marks, all and singular the Promises, Covenants and Agreements on the Party of
the said John Elmes, to be performed, to be utterly void and of none effect.

In Witness whereof, etc. John Mordaunt.
John Elmes.

A Letter from Cardinal Wolsey to Sir John Mordaunt.
To my welbeloved Friends Sir John Mordaunt and Sir William Paulet, the King's
Counselors.
AFter my hearty commendations, these shall be to advertise you, That the King
has appointed this present bearer, Roger Ratclif, to be Keeper of the Manner
and Park of Birdsnest, and Overseer of the Forest of Leicester, with such
Wages, Pasturage, and Commodity, as is appointed and contained in your
Memorial; over and besides this the King's pleasure is, That he shall be
Steward of the Five Hundreds, and other Lordships belonging to the Honor of
Leicester, within the same County, with the Fee of Three Pound Six Shillings
and Eight Pence by the Year. The King's pleasure also is, That he shall be
Keeper and Porter of the Castle of Leicester, with such Fee as shall be
accorded; now ye be ascertained of the premises, the King's mind is, That ye
shall see this said trusty Servant, Roger Ratclif, to be put in possession of
the foresaid Rooms accordingly, giving unto him credence in such things as on
the King's, and my behalf he shall declare unto you. And thus heartily fare ye
well.

At the King's Manner of Richmond the Twenty Fourth of May. Your Loving Friend
THOMAS, Cardinalis Eboracensis.

A Letter from Cardinal Wolsey to Sir John Mordaunt.
To my trusty and welbeloved Friends Sir John Mordaunt and Sir William Paulet,
the King's Counselors.
RIght welbeloved, I commend me unto you in my hearty manner, and have received
your Letters dated at Leicester the Twelfth day of this Instant Month, the
continue whereof I have showed unto the King's Highness; who for your good
endeavor, discreetly and substantially used in the affairs to you committed
there, gives unto you great thanks, praying you so to persevere, and continue
to the final perfection of the same.

And whereas amongst other things, ye writ, That by reason that the Lady
Hungersord, compelled by sickness, is yet removed no further out of the Castle
of Leicester, than into the College of Newark; the Lord John Gray remains
still in Birdsnest, affirming that he will in no wise depart from thence till
such time as the Lady Hungerford does also remove from Leicester; the King's
Highness does much marvel hereof, for considering that the said Lady and her
Husband, be departed out of the Castle, and that without danger of her Life,
she cannot so soon pass out of the Town as she would do, the said Lord John and
the Lady his Wife, ought not to make such refusal, ye shall therefore show unto
him that the King's pleasure is, he and the Lady his Wife without further
contradiction, do depart from Birdsnest, as he tendereth the King's pleasure;
and as soon as the Lady Hungerford shall move without danger of Life, ye shall
also cause her, and her Husband to do the semblable out of Leicester, wherein
the King's trust is, he will use no colorable excuse, or fained delay, and
therewith the said Lord John must be contented, as reason is; I refer you
therefore to see this accomplished accordingly, proceeding also to the residue
of your business with diligence and effect as appertains; And fare ye
heartily well.

At my place of the More the Sixteenth day of June. Your Loving Friend THOMAS,
Cardinalis Eboracensis.

Charta Johannis Cottisford Rectoris Collegii de Lincoln in Vniversitate
Oxoniensi.
OMnibus Christi fidelibus ad quos presens scriptum pervenerit, Johannis
Cottisford Custos sive Rector Collegii beatae Mariae and omnium Sanctorum
Lincolniae in Universitate Oxoniensi and Scolares ejusdem Collegii, salutem in
Domino sempiternam. Sciatis nos praefatum Custodem, sive Rectorem and Scolares
unanimi assensu, and consensu nostris deputasse, ordinasse, and per praesentes
constituisse, Johannem Mordaunt de Turvey in Comitatu Bedfordiae militem,
capitalem Senefcallum nostrum, maneriorum nostrorum de Skeney and Petesthoo in
Comitatu Buckinghamiae, ac omnium aliorum maneriorum terrarum and tenementorum
nostrorum cum eorum pertinentiis, in eodem Comitatu Buckinghamiae, ac eidem
Johanni officium Senescalliae omnium maneriorum praedictorum, damus and
concedimus per praesentes. Habendum, exercendum, and occupandum officium illud
per praefatum Johannem Mordaunt, aut per suum sufficientem Deputatum, durante
vita ipsius Johannis. Percipiendum annuatim, praefato Johanni Mordaunt pro
termino vitae suae, pro officio praedicto exercendo, viginti solidos nomine
feodi sui de exitibus and proficuis praedictorum maneriorum cum pertinentiis,
per manus Receptorum, Ballivorum, Firmariorum sive Occupatorum maneriorum
praedictorum vel eorum alicujus pro tempore existentis, de festo Annunciationis
beatae Mariae Virginis, and Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, aequis portionibus
solvendum; primo termino solutionis inde incipiente, de festo Annunciationis
beatae Mariae praefixi futuri post datum praesentium. Volumus and concedimus
per praesentes, quod si ac quotiens contingat praedictum annualem redditum,
viginti solidorum, a retro fore, in part vel in toto post aliquod festum
Solutionis, quo ut proefertur solvi debeat, per unum mensem insolutum, quod
tunc been liceat, and licebit, praefato Johanni Mordaunt and Assignatis suis,
in omnibus praedictis maneriis terris and tenementis, cum eorum pertinentiis,
intrare and distringere, districtionesque sic captas licite asportare,
abducere, effugare, and penes se retinere, quousque eundem Johannem and
assignati sui, de annuali redditu sive feodo praedicto, sic a retro existente
insoluto, and de omnibus inde arreragiis, plenarie fuerit satisfactum and
persolutum. Deinsuper omnibus and singulis Ballivis, Firmariis, and Tenentibus
nostris mandamus, quod praefato Johanni Mordaunt, aut suo in hac part
Deputato, in executione praedicti officii sint intendentes, obedientes,
assistentes, and auxiliantes in omnibus prout decet, in and ad utilitatem dicti
Rectoris and successoris aut successorum suorum. Ratum and gratum habentes and
habituri, totum and quicquid idem Johannes Mordaunt, aut in hac part suus
Deputatus, in debito officio Senescalliae debite fecerit, aut duxerit
faciendum; dummodo nihil fecerit contra voluntatem ejusdem Rectoris and
successoris vel successorum suorum. In cujus rei Testimonium huic praesenti
Scripto nostro Sigillum nostrum commune apponi fecimus. Data Oxoniae in
Collegio nostro ante-dicto Tricesimo die mensis Decembris, Henrici octavi post
Conquestum duodecimo.

Memorandum, That Sir John Mordaunt Promises and Grants, That he himself, or
his Deputy, shall keep yearly Courts upon the said Manners, Lands and Tenements,
if the said Sir John or his Deputy thereto be required by the said Rector and
Scholars, or by their Successors, according as it has been there used in times
past, in all the foresaid Manners, in the said County of Buckingham, requiring
for him or his Deputies only the Fee rehearsed.

This Patent by William Shyrby and Henry Brown, which William and Henry had it
at the Hands of Sir Richard Lyster, Gentleman.

William Shyrby. Per me Henricum Brown.

Alliance between Mordaunt and Fettyplace.
THIS Indenture made the First day of July, in the Year of the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth by the Grace of God, of England and France, King, Defender of
the Faith, and Lord of Ireland, the Sixteenth: Between John Fettyplace of
Shefford in the County of Berks, Esquire, on the one Party, and John Mordaunt
of Turvey in the County of Bedford, Knight, on the other Party; Witnesses,
That the said John Fettyplace has Bargained and Sold, and by these Presents
does Bargain and Sell to the said Sir John, the Marriage of Edmond Fettyplace.
And the said John Fettyplace Covenanteth and Grants by these presents, That
the said Edmond, before the Feast of the Assumption of our Lady next coming,
after the date of these presents, shall Marry and take to Wife Margaret
Mordaunt, one of the Daughters of the said Sir John, if the said Margaret
thereto will agree and assent. And in like manner the said Sir John Covenanteth
and Grants by these presents, that the said Margaret shall Marry and take to
Husband, before the foresaid Feast of the Assumption of our Lady, the said
Edmond, if the said Edmond thereto will agree and assent. The said Marriage to
be had and solemnized, between the said Parties before the said Feast, at the
Costs and Charges of the said Sir John, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns. And
the said John Fettyplace Covenaneth and Grants by these presents, That his
Executors or Assigns, at their Costs and Charges, shall apparel the said
Edmond, for the said day of Marriage, in all things necessary and convenient
for the degree of the said Edmond. And in like manner the said Sir John
Covenanteth and Grants by these presents, That he his Heirs Executors or
Assigns, at their Costs and Charges shall apparel the said Margaret, for the
day of the said Marriage, in all things necessary and convenient, for the
degree of the said Margaret. And the said John Fettyplace Covenanteth and
Grants by these presents, That he before the Feast of Easter next coming
after the date hereof, shall make, cause or do to be made, to Sir Gyles
Strangeways, Sir William Gascoign, Knights, Thomas Englefield, one of the Kings
Sergeants at the Law, Edward Eynes, John Elmes, Edward Purfray, Philip
Fettyplace and William Fettyplace of Maydencote, Esquires, Nicholas Hardyng,
Robert Latimer Gentlemen, Thomas Nethercote and John Duke, and to them, their
Heirs and Assigns, and to the over-livers of them, their Heirs and Assigns,
such a sufficient sure and lawful Estate, of, and in Manners, Lands and
Tenements, with the Appurtenances in the County of Kent, to the clear yearly
Value of Fifty Pounds, discharged of all former Bargais, Sales, Jointures,
Dowers, Uses, Judgments, Executions, Recognisances, Statutes-Merchants,
Statutes of the Staple, and of all other Encumbrances whatsoever they be, the
Rents hereafter to be due to the Chief Lords of the Fee only except, as shall
be advised by the said Sir John, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, or by their
Learned Counsel, at the costs and charges in the Law of the said Sir John, his
Executors or Assigns, be it by Feoffment, Fine, Recovery, Release, with
Warranty, Confirmation or otherwise. The same Feoffees or Recoverers, their
Heirs and Assigns and the over-livers of them, their Heirs and Assigns, to
stand and be seized of, and in the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, with the
Appurtenances, to such Uses and Intents as hereafter follow: That is to say, Of
Manners, Lands and Tenements, to the clear yearly value of Twenty Pounds parcel
of the said Fifty Pounds; the said Feoffees or Recoverers, their Heirs and
Assigns, and the over-livers of them, their Heirs and Assigns, to stand and be
seized thereof, immediately upon the Marriage had and solemnized, to the use of
the said Edmond and Margaret, and of the Heirs of the Body of the said Edmond
lawfully begotten; And for default of such Issue, to the use of the right Heirs
of the said John Fettyplace, the Father, for ever: And of Manners, Lands and
Tenements, to the clear yearly value of Ten Pounds, parcel of the said Fifty
Pounds; the said Feoffees, or Recoverers, their Heirs and Assigns, and the
over-livers of them, their Heirs or Assigns, to stand and be seized thereof,
from the date of these present Indentures, to the use of the said John
Fettyplace, the Father, unto the time that the said Edmond his Son and Heir
apparent, come to the full Age of One and twenty Years. And after that the said
Edmond has accomplished the said Age of One and twenty Years; and after the
Death of Dame Alice Besellys, Widow; that then the said Feoffees or Recoverers,
their Heirs and Assigns, and the over-livers of them, their Heirs and Assigns,
to stand and be seized thereof, to the use of the said Edmond and Margaret, and
of the Heirs of the Body of the said Edmond lawfully begotten; And for default
of such Issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the said John Fettyplace, the
Father, for ever. And of Manners, Lands and Tenements, to the yearly value of
Twenty Pounds residue of the said Fifty Pounds; the said Feoffees or
Recoverers, their Heirs and Assigns, and the over-livers of them, their Heirs
or Assigns to stand and be seized thereof, to the use of the said John
Fettyplace, the Father, for term of Life of the same John Fettyplace, the
Father, without Impeachment of Wast during the Life of the said John
Fettyplace, the Father. And immediately after the Death of the said John
Fettyplace, the Father, and after the said Edmond shall come and be of the Age
of One and twenty Years; that then the said Feoffees or Recoverers their Heirs
and Assigns, and the over-livers of them, their Heirs and Assigns, to stand and
be seized thereof, to the use of the said Edmond and Margaret, and of the Heirs
of the Body of the said Edmond lawfully begotten; And for default of such
Issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the said John Fettyplace, the Father,
for ever. And the said John Fettyplace, the Father, Covenanteth and Grants by
these presents, That he shall leave Manners, Lands and Tenements with the
Appurtenances, to the clear yearly value of Three hundred and twenty five
Marks, over and beside the said fifty Pounds before appointed for the Jointure,
in the County of Berks, Oxfordshire, or elsewhere within the Realm of England,
immediately after the decease of the said John Fettyplace and of Dorothy his
Wife, and after the decease of Dame Alice Besellys, Widow, and after the said
Edmond shall be of the Age of One and twenty Years, to come, grow, descend in
possession, Reversion or in Use, to the said Edmond, and to his Heirs for ever.
Provided always, That it shall be lawful to the said John Fettyplace, at his
liberty to make a Jointure, to any other Woman that he shall fortune hereafter
to Marry, if the said Dorothy now his Wife fortune to decease, of and in
Manners, Lands and Tenements, parcel of the said Three hundred and five and
twenty Marks, to the yearly value of Forty Pounds, for term of Life of the same
Woman only. Provided also, That it shall be lawful to the said John Fettyplace,
for to declare his Will of the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, of the value
of Three hundred twenty five Marks, during the Nonage of the said Edmond, and
during the Nonage of the next Heir of the said Edmond, if the said Edmond
fortune to decease before he shall accomplish the Age of twenty one Years: And
also for to declare his last Will of Manners, Lands and Tenements, to the yearly
value of Forty Marks, parcel of the said Three hundred and five and twenty
Marks, for the term of Ten Years, after the decease of the said John
Fettyplace: And after the said Edmond shall be of the Age of One and twenty
Years, for the preferment of the Younger Sons and Daughters of the said John
Fettyplace, and for the contentation and payment of his Debts. Provided also,
That it shall be lawful for the said John Fettyplace, for to give to every of
his Younger Sons, which shall fortune to be in Life at the time of the Death of
the said John Fettyplace, severally by himself, Ten Marks, parcel of the said
Three hundred twenty five Marks, during their lives only. And if any of them
happen to decease, that then after the Death of every of them, that Ten Marks
of him that is so Dead, to come, go and return to the said Edmond and his Heirs
for ever. For the which Premises, and also for other Covenants, Grants and
Agreements, on the Party of the said John Fettyplace, his Executors and
Assigns, for to be performed and kept, the said Sir John Covenanteth and
Grants by these presents, That he, his Executors and Assigns, shall pay,
cause or do to be paid to the said John Fettyplace, his Executors or Assigns,
Six hundred Marks of lawful Money of England in manner and form following, that
is to say, One hundred pounds of lawful Money of England, at the sealing of
these present Indentures; of the which Hundred Pounds the said John Fettyplace
acknowledges himself by these Presents to be truly contented and paid: And
the said Sir John Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, thereof to be
quit, and discharged by these presents; And at the Feast of Saint Andrew the
Apostle next coming after the date of these presents, Fifty Marks of lawful
Money of England, at the Feast of Pentecost, which shall be in the Year of our
Lord God, a Thousand five hundred and twenty five, or within twelve days next
following the same Feast, One hundred Marks of lawful money of England; and so
yearly at the Feast of Pentecost, or within Twelve days next following after
the same Feast, One hundred Marks, until the time that the said Six hundred
Marks be truly contented and paid. And the said John Fettyplace Covenanteth and
Grants by these presents, That if the said Edmond during the Life of the said
John Fettyplace, do dye before the said Marriage had between them, and before
carnal copulation, that then Thomas second Son of the said John Fettyplace, or
he which at that time shall be Heir apparent to the said John Fettyplace, shall
Marry and take to Wife the said Margaret, if the said Margaret will thereto
agree, and the Law of the Church will so suffer, and permit the same; and to
have like Covenants, Grants and Agreements, for to be made between the said
John Fettyplace and Sir John Mordaunt, as well for the payments to be made, as
for the Marriage of the said second Son, or the next Heir apparent of the said
John Fettyplace at that time being, as the said Sir John should have had, if
the said Edmond had lived: And the said John Fettyplace Covenanteth and
Grants by these presents, That if the said Margaret during the Life of the
said John Fettyplace, do dye after Marriage had between the said Edmond and the
said Margaret, and before carnal copulation, that then the said Edmond shall
marry and take to his Wife, Dorothy Mordaunt, another of the Daughters of the
said Sir John Mordaunt, if the said Dorothy will thereto agree, and the Laws of
the Church the same will suffer; with like Covenants, Grants and Agreements,
and also payments of the same sum of Six hundred Marks, as then is and shall
be paid, for the Marriage of the said Dorothy, as should have been if the said
Margaret had lived. And the said John Fettyplace Covenanteth and Grants, That
the said Sir John Mordaunt, his Executors or Assigns, shall have the keeping
and custody of the said Edmond, until the time that the said Edmond come to his
age of One and twenty Years; and that the said Sir John, his Executors or
Assigns, shall have the said Twenty pounds to the use of the said Sir John, his
Executors and Assigns, any Covenant or Grant in these present Indentures, to
the contrary made notwithstanding, to and for, the finding of the said Edmond
and Margaret: And the said Sir John Covenanteth and Grants by these presents,
That he, his Executors or Assigns, shall at their Costs and Charges, find the
said Edmond, Apparel, Meat and Drink, and all other things necessary and
convenient, for the degree of the said Edmond, unto the time that the said
Edmond come to the age of One and twenty Years: And the said Sir John
Covenanteth and Grants by these presents, That the said John Fettyplace shall
have the keeping, custody and rule of the said Margaret, as long as it shall
please the said John Fettyplace to have her; for which the said Sir John, shall
content and pay to the said John Fettyplace, for the finding of the said
Margaret, as long as the said Margaret shall be in the House, or at the finding
of the said John Fettyplace, Ten Marks of lawful Money of England: And if the
said John Fettyplace be not disposed to have the said Margaret, and to find her
himself; that then the said Sir John, his Executors or Assigns, shall at their
Costs and Charges, find the said Margaret Apparel, Meat, and Drink, and all
other things necessary and convenient for the said Margaret, unto the time that
the said Edmond come to the full age of One and twenty Years. And it is further
agreed between the said Parties, That after that the said Edmond has
accomplished the full age of One and twenty Years, that then the said Edmond
shall receive and take the Profits of the said Twenty Pounds. And also all
other parcels as be appointed by these Indentures, for the Jointure of the said
Margaret, to the only use of the said Edmond, according to the Covenants
comprised and specified in these Indentures.

In Witness whereof the Parties abovesaid to these present Indentures
interchangably have put to their Seals and Sign Manuals, the Day and Year
abovewritten. John Fettyplace.

Alliance between Mordaunt and Fisher.
THIS Indenture made the Twentieth Day of October, in the Year of the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth, by the Grace of God of England and of France King,
Defender of the Faith, and Lord of Ireland, the Sixteenth, between Michael
Fisher of Clyfton in the County of Bedford, Esquire, on the one Party, and
John Mordaunt of Turvey of the said County of Bedford, Knight, on the other
Party, Witnesses; That the said Michael has Covenanted and Granted, and by
these Presents Covenanteth and Grants to the said Sir John, That John Fisher,
Son and Heir apparent of the said Michael, and of Margaret his Wife, shall, by
the Grace of God, before the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, which shall
be in the Year of our Lord God, One Thousand Five Hundred and Twenty Six,
Marry, and take to Wife Anne Mordaunt, one of the Daughters of the said Sir
John, if the said Anne thereunto will agree and assent. And in like manner, the
said Sir John Covenanteth and Grants by these Presents, That the said Anne
shall, by the same Grace of God, Marry, and take to Husband the said John
Fisher, if the said John Fisher thereunto will agree and assent. The said
Marriage to be had and solemnized between the said Parties, before the said
Feast of Saint Michael, at the costs and charges of both the said Parties truly
to be borne. And the said Michael Covenanteth and Grants by these Presents,
to the said Sir John, That he, his Executors, or Assigns, shall Apparel the
said John Fisher, his Son, at the said day of Marriage, in all things that
shall be necessary and convenient for the degree of the said John Fisher. And
in like manner the said Sir John Covenanteth and Grants by these presents to
the said Michael, That he, his Executors or Assigns, shall Apparel the said
Anne, at the said day of Marriage, in all things necessary and convenient for
the degree of the said Anne. And the said Michael Covenanteth and Grants to
and with the said Sir John by these presents, That the said Michael, his Heirs
or Assigns shall before the Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next
coming after the date hereof, make, cause or do to be made to John Spelman,
Sergeant at the Law, John Elmes, Esquires, Nicholas Hardyng, Robert Latimer,
Thomas Fitzhugh, Gentlemen, and Sir William Rymer, Clerk, to them, their Heirs
and Assigns, or to the one of them, their Heirs and Assigns, a good,
sufficient, sure, and lawful Estate in the Law, at the costs and charges of the
said Michael, and of the said Sir John, by Feoffment, Fine, Recovery, Release
with Warranty, Confirmation or otherwise, as shall be advised by the said Sir
John, his Heirs, or Assigns, or by their learned Counsel, of, and in these his
Manners of Westlyngworth, Clifton and Felinshin, with the Appurtenances in the
County of Bedford, and of, and in all Lands and Tenements, Woods, Rents and
Services, with the Appurtenances in Westlyngworth and Felinshin, in the said
County of Bedford. And also the said Michael Covenanteth and Grants to and
with the said Sir John by these presents, That the said Michael, his Heirs or
Assigns, shall before the said Feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist,
next coming after the date hereof, make, cause or do to be made, to the said
John Spelman, John Elmes, Nicholas Hardyng, Robert Latimer, Thomas Fitzhugh and
Sir William Rymer, to leave them, their Heirs and Assigns, a good, sufficient,
sure and lawful Estate in the Law, at the whole costs and charges of the said
Michael, and of the said Sir John, by Feoffment, Fine, Recovery, Release with
Warranty, Confirmation or otherwise, as shall be advised by the said Sir John,
his Heirs or Assigns, or by their learned Counsel, of, and in certain Pastures,
Lands and Tenements, being in Clopton in the County of Kent, to the clear
yearly value of Ten Pounds, over all charges, discharged of all former
Bargains, Sales, Statutes, and of all other Encumbrances, and Charges made by
the said Michael only: To have and to hold to the said John Spelman, John
Elmes, Nicholas Hardyng, Robert Latimer, Thomas Fitzhugh and Sir William Rymer,
Clerk, their Heirs and Assigns, to such uses and intents, as hereafter ensues:
That is to say, Immediately after the solemnization of the said Marriage had,
to stand and be seized of the said Manner of Westlyngworth, and of, and in all
Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, in Westlyngworth aforesaid, to the
use of the said John Fisher and of the said Anne, and of the Heirs of the Body
of the said John Fisher lawfully begotten. And immediately after the said John
Fisher has accomplished the age of Twenty Years, then the said Feoffees, their
Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of, and in the said Manners of
Clifton, and of, and in all Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances in
Clifton, to the use of the said John Fisher, and of the said Anne, and of the
Heirs of the Body of the said John Fisher lawfully begotten. And immediately
after that the said John Fisher has accomplished the age of Twenty and three
Years, then the said Feoffees, their Heirs and Assigns to stand and be seized
of, and in Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances in Felinshin aforesaid,
to the clear yearly value of Four Pound six Shillings and eight Pence, parcel
of the said Lands and Tenements in Felinshin, of the value of Eleven Pounds, to
the use of the said John Fisher, and of the said Anne, and of the Heirs of the
Body of the said John Fisher lawfully begotten. And immediately after the said
John Fisher shall come to his age of One and Twenty Years, then the said
Feoffees their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of, and in other
Lands and Tenements in Felinshin aforesaid, to the yearly value of Four Pound
six Shillings and eight Pence, to the use of the said John Fisher, and of the
said Anne, and of the Heirs of the Body of the said John Fisher lawfully
begotten. And immediately after the death of the said Michael, the said
Feoffees, their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of, and in all
other Lands and Tenements in Felinshin aforesaid, residue of the said Lands and
Tenements in Felinshin, of the value of Ten Pounds and above; of, and in all
the said Closes, Lands and Tenements in Clopton aforesaid, parcel of the Manner
of Clopton, to the use of the said John Fisher and Anne, and of the Heirs of
the Body of the said John Fisher lawfully begotten. And the said Michael
Covenanteth and Grants by these presents, That if it happen the said John
Fisher, after the said Marriage had and solemnized, to decease, as God forbid,
before the said John has accomplished the said age, as before specified; that
then the said Feoffees, their Heirs and Assigns, to be and stand seized of all
the said parcels of Lands and Tenements above limited, to the said John Fisher
and Anne, from the Death of the said John Fisher, to the use of the said Anne,
for term of Life of the said Anne, in such manner and form as they should be,
if the said John Fisher should have lived, to his said lawful age: That is to
say, Immediately after the Death of the said John Fisher, the said Feoffees,
their Heirs and Assigns, or the one living of them, their Heirs and Assigns, to
stand and be seized, of, and in the said Manners of Westlyngworth, and also of,
and in the said Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances in Westlyngworth,
to the use of the said Anne, for term of Life of the said Anne. And immediately
after the said John Fisher should have accomplished his age of Twenty Years;
then the said Feoffees, their Heirs and Assigns, to stand and be seized of the
said Lands and Tenements in Clifton aforesaid, to the use of the said Anne, for
term of her Life. And immediately after that the said John Fisher should have
been of the age of Twenty three Years, the said Feoffees, their Heirs and
Assigns, to stand and be seized, of the said Lands and Tenements, of the yearly
value of Four Pounds six Shillings and eight Pence, to the use of the said
Anne, for term of her Life. And after that the said John Fisher should have
accomplished the age of Six and twenty Years, then all the said other Lands and
Tenements, to the yearly value of Four Pounds six Shillings and eight Pence, in
Felinshin, shall be to the use of the said Anne, for term of her Life. And
immediately after the Death of the said Michael Fisher, the said Feoffees,
their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized of the said other Lands and
Tenements in Felinshin aforesaid, and also of all the other Lands and
Tenements, and Pastures in Clopton, to the use of the said Anne, for term of
her Life. And the said Michael Covenanteth and Grants by these Presents, That
he shall suffer Manners, Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances in the
Counties of Bedford, Oxenford, Northampton, Sussex and Middlesex, to the clear
yearly value of a Hundred and forty Pound, over and beside the said Manners,
Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances above expressed, for the Jointure
of the same Anne, to come, grow, and descend, immediately after the death of
the said Michael, (the Jointures of Juliana, Clopton, and of Margaret, now his
Wife, and the Rents hereafter to be due to the Chief Lords of the Fee, only
except) to the said John Fisher, and to the Heirs of the Body of the said John
Fisher lawfully begotten; And for default of such Issue, to the right Heirs of
the said Michael Fisher for ever. Provided always, That it shall be lawful to
the said Michael to make a Jointure to the said Margaret, now his Wife, of
Manners, Lands and Tenements, parcel of the said Hundred and forty Pounds, to
the yearly value of Sixty Pounds, for term of life of the said Margaret.
Provided also, That if the said Margaret do die before the said Michael, and
that the said Michael do fortune to Marry any other Wife, or Wives, That then
it shall be lawful to the said Michael for to make a Jointure to the said such
Wife, of, and in Manners, Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, parcel of
the said Hundred and forty Pounds, to the yearly value of Threescore, for term
of the life of the said second Wife or Wives. Provided also, That it shall be
lawful to the said Michael to declare his last Will during the space of Six
Years, of all the residue of the said Hundred and forty Pounds, over and
besides such Jointures as any of his said Wife or Wives shall have after the
death of the said Michael; And after the said Six Years expired and determined,
then the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, to be to the
use of the said John Fisher, and of the Heirs of the Body of the said John
Fisher lawfully begotten; And for default of such Issue, to the right Heirs of
the said Michael for ever. Provided always, as it is agreed between the said
parties, That if the said John Fisher shall happen to die, his Heir, or Heirs
of his Body lawfully begotten, then being within Age; that then it shall be at
the liberty and pleasure of the said Michael Fisher, for to make and declare
his last Will, of all the said Lands and Tenements, of the value of a Hundred
and forty Pounds, during the Nonage of the said Issue, and no longer. For the
which Premises, on the part of the said Michael to be performed and kept, the
said Sir John Mordaunt shall pay, cause, or do to be paid to the said Michael,
his Heirs, or Assigns, Six Hundred Marks of lawful Money of England, in manner
and form following; That is to say, at the sealing and delivering of these
Presents, One Hundred Pounds, of the which Hundred Pounds, the said Michael
acknowledges himself by these Presents, to be truly contented, and paid, and
the said Sir John, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, thereof to be quit and
discharged; And for the Three hundred Pounds, residue of the said Six hundred
Marks, the said Sir John Mordaunt, John Elmes, Esquire, Nicholas Hardyng, stand
and be bound jointly and severally, to the said Michael, his Executors or
Assigns, by several obligations, bearing date, the day of the date of these
present Indentures, to be paid at certain days contained and specified in the
said Obligations, as by the same Obligations it more plainly does appear. In
Witness whereof, to the either part of these present Indentures, the Parties
abovesaid interchangably have put to their Seals the Day and Year above-written.

A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to Sir John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved Sir John Mordaunt and Sir William Paulet,
Knights, our Counselors. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And albeit that we by our other
Letters, to our Right trusty and right entirely beloved Cousin and Counselor,
the Marquess of Dorset, directed, willed him to take Five Hundred quick Deer,
within our Chase of Leicester, and within Leicester Fryth, and within the Honor
of Leicester, for the enstoring of his Park; yet nevertheless, we will that in
no wise our said Cousin shall take the said Deer himself, but that ye shall
deliver the said Five Hundred Deer unto him your self, like as we will and
command you so to do accordingly: To be taken to him of our Gift, our said
other Letters in any wise notwithstanding. And these our Letters shall be your
sufficient Warrant and Discharge in this behalf.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Greenwich the Seventh Day of April, the
Sevententh Year of our Reign.
A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to Sir John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved Sir John Mordaunt and Sir William Paulet,
Knights, our Counselors. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And will and command you, That for
the enstoring the Park of our Right trusty and welbeloved the Lord Hastings, ye
deliver, or cause to be delivered, unto him, or his Assigns in that behalf,
Three hundred of quick Deer, to be taken of our Gift, in our Chase of
Leicester, and within our Park there, called Leicester Fryth; And these our
Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant, and discharge in that behalf or at
all times hereafter; any restraint or commandment heretofore made, or had, the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Greenwich the Seventh Day of April, the
Seventeenth Year of our Reign.
A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to Sir John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and right welbeloved Counselor, Sir John Mordaunt, Knight,
Master and Surveyor of our Woods and Wood-sales. Henry R.

By the King.
HEnry the Eighth, by the Grace of God, King of England, and of France,
Defender of the Faith, and Lord of Ireland. To our trusty and Right welbeloved
Counselor Sir John Mordaunt, Knight, Master and Surveyor of our Woods and
Wood-sales within our County of Hertford, and in his absence to his Deputy or
Deputies there, Greeting. Forasmuch as we have not only commanded our
welbeloved Servant Hector Asheley, Master and Controuler of our Works, at our
Manner of Hunesdone, in our said County of Hertford, to fell and cut down, or to
cause to be felled and cut down, with all diligence in either of our said Parks
there, such, and as many Oaks as he from time to time shall think needful and
expedient, as well for Pale, for the enclosing of a Paddok within our old Park
of Hunesdone for a Winter pasture there, as also for the empaling of the
Parsons ground within our new Park at Hunesdone; but also we by these presents
for certain causes and considerations, us specially moving, have freely given
and granted unto our said Servant, all the Lops and Tops of the said Oaks, and
of every of them, without any thing therefore paying, or account yiedling unto
us or our use at any time hereafter. We will therefore and command you, and
every of you, to permit and suffer the said Hector Asheley, to have, use and
enjoy, the whole effect of this our commandment and gift, without any your
challenge, let, or interruption to the contrary, as ye tender our pleasure.
And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge in that
behalf.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Beaulieu, the Twelfth day of August,
the Nineteenth Year of our Reign.
Charta Regis Henrici Octavi.
HEnricus Octavus Dei gratia Angliae and Franciae Rex, Fidei Defensor and
Dominus Hiberniae. Omnibus dilectis and fidelibus suis Majori Civitatis suae
Londini, Johanni Mordaunt, militi, Conciliario nostro, Christophero Hales,
Solicitori nostro, and Rogero Wygston Armigeris, Salutem. Quia accepimus quod
Johannes Gysours filius Johannis Gysours, Armigeri, Fatuus and Idiota in vita
sua fuit, and quod regimen sui ipsius terrarum and tenementorum suorum non
sufficit, and quod ipse in fatuitate sua magnam partem terrarum and
tenementorum suorum alienavit in exheredationem suam and nostri prejudicium
manifestum, nos indemnitati nostrae perspicere volentes vobis mandamus, quod ad
loca ubi terrae and tenementa illa infra civitatem Londinum existunt, in
propriis personis vestris accedatis, and de statu suo qualis ille erat, dum in
humanis agebat, viis and modis quibus poteritis informari, omnes affines,
cognatos and vicinos suos, circumspecte examinetis. Et nihilominus per
Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum de civitate praedicta, per quos rei
veritas melius sciri poterit, diligenter inquiratis, utrum idem Johannes
Gysours, junior, fatuus and idiota in vita sua fuisset, nec ne; and si sic,
utrum a nativitate sua, seu ab alio tempore, and si ab alio tempore, a quo
tempore, and qualiter and quomodo, and si lucidis gaudebat intellectualibus;
and si idem Johannes in eodem statu existens terras and tenementa aliqua
vendiderit seu alienaverit, nec ne; and quid pro eisdem recepit, and si sic
vendiderit, tunc quae terrae and tenementa, and ubi vel in, vel quibus, and in
quorum, vel cujus manibus, terrae and tenementa sic alienata existunt, and
qualiter, and quo modo, and quae terrae, and quae tenementa haeredibus suis
adhuc remanent, and de quo vel de quibus tam terrae and tenementa sic alienata
quam terrae and tenementa sibi retenta teneant, and per quod servicium, and
qualiter, and quomodo, and quantum valiant per annum, in omnibus exitibus; and
quis propinquior haeres ejus sit, and cujus aetatis; and inquisitionem inde
distinct and aperte factam nobis in Cancelaria nostra sub sigillis vestris and
sigillis eorum per quos fuerit sine dilatione mittatis, and hoc breve, etc.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium quarto die Maii, Anno Regni vicesimo. Newman.

Charta Regis Henrici Octavi.
HEnry the Eighth, by the Grace of God, King of England and of France, Defender
of the Faith, and Lord of Ireland. To our Right welbeloved Counselors Sir John
Mordaunt, Knight, and Roger Wigston, Esquire, and to our welbeloved Robert
Harward, Thomas Borett and John Duke, greeting. Know ye that we having Trust
and Confidence in your Wisdoms, Fidelities and Circumspections, have appointed,
deputed and authorized you, and by these presents give unto you, and two of
you, and to such Persons bringers hereof, as ye shall substitute, name and
assign, in your place and absence, full Power and Authority, to take and
provide to and for the use of our Fortifications, Munitions, Buildings and
Reparations of our Ordnances, and other things, concerning as well the
Safeguard, Defense and Tuition of our Town and Marches of Caleys, the Castles
of Guysnes, Hammes and Newnambrigge, as also other necessaries, and requisites
of and for the same purpose, to be taken and had, not only within our
Lordships, Manners, Woods and Parks, and other Grounds within our Counties of
Kent, Sussex and Essex; but also to be taken and had, within any Lordships,
Manners, Lands and Tenements, of any other Person or Persons, within the said
Counties of Kent, Sussex and Essex, at convenient and reasonable prices; and by
this we give unto you, and two of you, full Power and Authority in manner and
form abovespecified, to take Carpenters, Workmen, Artificers and Laborers, apt
and convenient for Felling and Squaring of the said Timber and Trees to the use
aforesaid; and also all manner of Carriages, as well by Sea and Salt-Waters, as
also by Fresh-Waters and by Land for reasonable Wages, and Payments to be taken
and had in that behalf, not only within Franchises, and places privileged, but
also without, and in other places. Wherefore we will and command you and every
of you, to do your diligence in the executing of this our pleasure and
commandment. And also we will and command all and singular Mayors, Sheriffs,
Bailiffs, Constables and all other our Officers, Ministers and Subjects to be
Aiding, Helping, Counseling and Assisting you in the executing hereof, as they
will answer to us at their utmost peril.

In Witness whereof we have caused these Presents to be Sealed with our great
Seal at Westminster, the Three and twentieth Day of December, the twentieth
Year of our Reign. Pexfatt.

A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to Sir John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved Sir John Mordaunt, Knight, Surveyor and Master of
our Wood-sales, within our Forests, Parks, and Chaces, as well on this side
Trent as beyond. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and welboved, we greet you well: And whereas our great Lodge, in our
New Park, within our New Forest, is decayed and ruinous, which Lodge we intend
to have repaired conveniently against our resort to the same; and because we be
credibly informed, that it should be very necessary for the preservation of our
Game in Southbally within our said Forest, to make a Trench in our Wood there
next adjoining, to the Abbot of Bewleys Park: We will that ye upon the sight
hereof, do cause a Trench to be felled in our Woods befide the said Park, and
that ye make sale of all the said Woods, in the said Trench to our most profit,
and with the Money thereof growing, to cause to be bestowed upon the reparation
of our said great Lodge, in as convenient have as ye can; and that ye cause
such Brick, as stands in a Kyln ready made within our Ballywyke of Burley,
within our said Forest, to be kept to our use, and to bestow part thereof upon
the said reparations of our said Lodge, and these our Letters, shall be your
Warrant and discharge in that behalf.

Given under our Signet, at our Castle of Windsor the Thirteenth day of April,
the One and twentieth Year of our Reign.
A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to Sir John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved Counselor Sir John Mordaunt, Knight, Surveyor
General of our Woods. Henry R.

By the King.
WE will and command you forthwith, upon the sight of these our Letters, to
direct your writing unto our Officers of our Forest of Sawsey, and of our Park
of Moulton, commanding them by the same, to deliver, or do to be delivered unto
our Trusty and welbeloved Servant John Hartwell, Esquire, and to Richard Wale,
Gentleman, such, and as many Oaks convenable for Posts and Rayls, with the
Lops, Tops, and Bark of the same, as shall be sufficient for the enlarging of
our Park of Hartwell, and making of a new Lodge there; they employing the said
Lops, Tops and Bark, toward the payment of the Workmanship of the said
enlargement of our said Park. The said Oak to be taken within our said Forest
and Park, and these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and discharge
in this behalf.

Given under our Signet, at our Manner of Ampthill the Thirteenth day of
September, the Three and twentieth Year of our Reign.
A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to Sir John Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved Counselor Sir John Mordaunt, Knight. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and Right welbeloved, we greet you well: And whereas we singularly
tendering as well the defense of this our Realm, against the malignity of our
Ancient Enemies, the Frenchmen and Scots, and to suppress their Temerities,
which contrary to their Oaths and Promises, have commenced the Wars against us
and our said Realm; as also specially minding to be in such a readiness, as we
may be not only able to resist the malice of our said Ememies; but also aid and
assist our faithful Friends, Confederates and Allies, with our Power, according
to such Treaties as be passed, and concluded betwixt us, and them, have now of
late of special trust addressed our Commission with Instructions to you and
others of that our Shire of Bedford, as well for the Viewing, Mustering and
putting our said Subjects in a readiness with Heaumes and other Abiliments fit
for the Wars, according to the Port and Continue of our said Commission, and
Instructions thereunto annexed; as also to make due Certificate to us in
Writing, of, and upon all and singular the Points and Articles, contained in
our said Instructions. We therefore truly regarding, providing and considering
the great Costs and Charges, that we of likelihood shall be enforced to sustain
and bear for maintenance, and continuance of our Armies and Navy, both by Land
and Sea, and over that by the advice of our Council, devising the ways and
means, how the said Charges might the more easily be born and supported, by the
loving Aid of our faithful and benevolent Subjects; have thought right
expedient, to have certain knowledge as well of the Extents, and yearly
Revenues of such Lands, as be within the precinct and Circuit of that Shire,
and to whom the said Lands particularly appertain, as also in the value and
estimation of the Goods and Substances of all and singular our Subjects, as
well spiritual as Temporal, resident, and inhabiting within the same. And for
that cause remembering you to be our true and Faithful Servant, thought right
expedient to authorize you for that purpose, willing and commanding you, not
only to give firm credence, to our Trusty and right welbeloved Servants, Sir
John Saint-John, Sir William Gascoign, and Sir John Mordaunt, Knights, whom we
have right amply instructed, of our mind and pleasure to you by them to be
declared, but also toward your self, after such form and manner, for the more
assured knowledge of the premises, as they shall instruct you. Fail ye not thus
to do, as we fingularly trust you, and as ye tender the advancement of our
Honor and surety; to be remembered hereafter according to our laudable acquital,
and good deserts.

Given under our Signet at our Castle of Windsor the Twenty sixth Day of July.
A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
RIght trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And forasmuch as we be
determined, in the Feast of Pentecost next coming, to keep and celebrate, with
all due circumstances of Honor, the Coronation of our most dear and welbeloved
Wife, the Lady Anne, our Queen, as to her Estate and Dignity does appertain: We
therefore desire, and pray you to put your self in such order and readiness
against the said Feast, as ye may here attend, and be present at the said
Coronation, in such wise furnished, as to your degree, and that solemnity,
shall be convenient and agreeable; wherein ye shall do unto us very acceptable
pleasure.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Greenwich, the Five and Twentieth Day
of April.
Alliance between Mordaunt and More.
THIS Indenture made the Two and twentieth day of January, in the Five and
twentieth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord Henry the Eighth, by the
Grace of God, of England and of France, King, Defender of the Faith, Lord of
Ireland: Between John More of Haddon, in the Parish of Bampton in the County of
Oxford, Esquire, on the one Party, and John Mordaunt, Knight, Lord Mordaunt on
the other Party, Witnesses; That the said Parties being agreed in manner and
form as hereafter follows, That is to say, The said John More does Covenant
and Grant by these Presents, to and with the said Lord Mordaunt, That Thomas
More, his Son and Heir apparent, shall, by the Grace of God, Marry and take to
his Wife Dorothy Mordaunt, one of the Daughters of the said Lord Mordaunt, if
the said Dorothy thereto will agree and consent. And in like manner the said
Lord Mordaunt does Covenant and Grant, to and with the said John More by these
presents, That the said Dorothy, by the like Grace, shall Marry and take to her
Husband, the said Thomas More, if the said Thomas More thereto will consent and
agree. The said Marriage to be had and solemnized between the said Thomas More
and Dorothy Mordaunt, before the Feast of Pentecost next coming, after the date
hereof, at the indifferent Costs and Charges of the said John More and Lord
Mordaunt. And the said John More does Covenant and Grant, to and with the said
Lord Mordaunt by these presents, That he, at his proper costs and charges,
shall apparel the said Thomas More, in all things as shall be meet and
convenient for the Degree of the said Thomas More, the day of the said Marriage
to be had and solemnized between the said Thomas More and Dorothy. And in like
manner the said Lord Mordaunt does Covenant and Grant, to and with the said
John More by these presents, That he, at his proper costs and charges, shall
apparel the said Dorothy, in all things that shall be necessary and convenient
for the degree of the said Dorothy, the said day of Marriage so to be
solemnized and had. And the said John More does Covenant and Grant for him, his
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, to and with the said Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs,
Executors and Assigns by these presents, That the same John More, his Heirs or
Assigns, before the Feast of Easter next coming after the date of these
Presents, or within Fifteen days next ensuing the said Feast of Easter, shall
make, cause or do to be made to Sir Thomas Audely, Knight, Lord Chancellor of
England, Sir Henry Parker, Gyles Strangesways, John Mordaunt the Younger,
William Gascoign, Thomas Bernardyston, Knights, Edmond Fettyplace, Roger More,
John Elmes, Esquires, William More, Clerk, John Gostwyke, Robert More, second
Son of the said John More, Thomas Spilman, Robert Latimer, Nicholas Hardyng and
Richard Downhall, Gentlemen, Thomas Jews and George Caldwell, their Heirs and
Assigns, a good, sufficient, sure, and lawful Estate in the Law, in Fee-simple,
of, and in the Manner of Whaddon, otherwise called Charles's Manner in Whaddon in
the County of Cantebrigge, and of, and in the Manner of Ladybury, in Whaddon
aforesaid, and of, and in all other his Manners, Lands and Tenements,
Hereditaments, Woods, Rents, Reversions and Services, with the Appurtenances,
in Whaddon aforesaid, Knesworth, Melreth, Melburn, Basingburn, Moredon,
Abyngdon, Crawdon, Wympole and Crewell, in the said County of Cantebrigge. All
which Manners, Lands and Tenements, and all other the Premises, with the
Appurtenances, the said John More does Covenant and Grant, for him, his Heirs,
Executors and Assigns, to and with the said Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors
and Assigns by these presents, To be of the clear yearly value of Forty eight
Pounds, over and above all yearly Charges, and Reprizes going out of the said
Manners, Lands and Tenements, and other the Premises, with their Appurtenances
before expressed. The said Feoffees, their Heirs and Assigns, to be and stand
Feoffees, and seized, of, and in the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, and all
other the said Premises, with their Appurtenances, to the uses and intents
hereafter following: That is to say, To the use of the said John More, and his
Heirs, until such time as Marriage be had and solemnized between the said
Thomas More and Dorothy. And after such Marriage had and solemnized between the
said Thomas More and Dorothy, then immediately the said Feoffees, their Heirs
and Assigns, to stand, and to be seized of, and in the Site of the Manner, and
Manner place, of the said Manner of Whaddon, called Charles's Manner, with all
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, to the same Manner belonging, or
appertaining, with the Appurtenances, now in the Tenure of Anthony Bennes, to
the clear yearly value of Fourteen Pounds; And of, and in certain Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, now in the Tenure of one William Fox, to the clear
yearly value of Four Pounds thirteen Shillings and four Pence; And of, and in
certain Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, called Lady-place, to the
clear yearly value of Fifty three Shillings four Pence; And of, and in certain
Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, now in the Tenure of John Pain,
to the clear yearly value of Three hundred Pounds and ten Shillings; And of,
and in certain Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, now in the Tenure
of Richard Crepyn, to the clear yearly value of Ten Shillings. And of, and in
certain Lands, now in the Tenure of Anthony Bennes, to the clear yearly value
of Twenty six Shillings eight Pence. All which Manners, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances, parcel of the Premises, amount to the
clear yearly value of Forty Marks, to the use of the said Thomas More and
Dorothy, and of the Heirs of their two Bodies lawfully begotten; And for
default of such Issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the said John More, for
ever; And of, and in certain Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances, now
in the Tenure of William Newman, to the clear yearly value of Twenty four
Shillings; And of, and in certain Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenances,
now in the Tenure of William Borolman, to the clear yearly value of Forty
Shillings; And of, and in certain Lands and Tenements, with the Appurtenences,
now in the Tenure of John Astemore, to the clear yearly value of Four Pounds
three Shillings and four Pence; And of, and in certain Lands and Tenements,
with the Appurtenances, now in the Tenure of John Dickons, to the clear yearly
value of Three Pounds six Shillings eight Pence; And of, and in diverse Lands
and Tenements, now in the Tenure of John Alleyn, to the clear value of Thirteen
Shillings four pence, also parcel of the Premises, amounting in the whole, to
the Sum of Twenty Marks, to the use of the said John More, during his Life
without Impeachment of wast: And after the Death of the said John More, to the
use of the said Thomas More and Dorothy, and of the Heirs of their two Bodies
lawfully begotten; And for default of such Issue, to the use of the said John
More, and of his Heirs for ever. And of all other the said Lands and Tenements,
residue of the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, before expressed, to the use
of the said John More, for the term of his Life without Impeachment of wast:
The Remainder after his decease to the said Thomas More, and his Heirs for
ever, discharged of all former Rights, Titles, Claims, Uses, Dowers, Demands
and of all other Charges and Encumbrances whatsoever they be. And the said John
More for him, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, does Covenant and Grant, to and
with the said Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, by these
Presents, That he the said John More, his Heirs and Assigns, shall from time to
time during the space of Three Years, make, do, suffer, and levy, or cause to
be made, done, suffered and levied, such further Assurances, and Surety, to the
said Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs or Assigns, or to any other Person or Persons, by
the said Lord, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns to be limited and named, of,
and in the Manners, Lands, Tenements and other the said Premises, with the
Appurtenances, to the uses and intents before expressed and declared, as shall
be devised by the said Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns, or by
his or their learned Council in the law, at the costs and charges in the law,
of the said Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns. And the said John
More for him, his Heirs Executors and Assigns, does Covenant to and with the
said Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, by these presents, That
he the said John More before the said Feast of Pentecost, shall make, do,
suffer and levy, or cause to be made, done, suffered and levied to the said Sir
Thomas Audely, Sir Gyles Strangeways, and other his said Co-feoffees before
named, their Heirs and Assigns, a good, sure, sufficient and lawful Estate in
the law, in Fee-simple, of, and in all his said Manners, Lands, Tenements,
Rents, Reversions and Services, and all other his Hereditaments, with their
Appurtenances in the said County of Oxford: That is to say, Of the Manner of
More, with the Appurtenances in More and Moreton; of the Manner of Haddon with
their Appurtenances in Bampton, of the Manner of Esthall, otherwise called
Asthall and Astally; and of all other his Manners, Lands, Tenements, Woods,
Waters, Rents, Reversions, Services and Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances
in More and Moreton, Staunton, Harecourt, Bampton, Clanfield, Norton, Asthall,
Esthall and Astally in the said County of Oxford, or elsewhere within the said
County of Oxford; except certain Lands and Tenements in Handborough, to such
uses and intents as hereafter follows: That is to say, Of, and in the said
Manner of More in More and Moreton, to the use of the said John More, and of
Jane, now Wife to the said John More, for term of their lives, and of the
longest liver of them, without Impeachment of wast, during the Life of the said
John More: And after the Death of the said John More and of Jane his Wife, then
the said Feoffees, their Heirs or Assigns, or the over-liver of them, his Heirs
and Assigns, to stand and be seized thereof, to the use of the said Thomas More
and his Heirs, according to such Estates of Inheritance thereof, as at the date
of these present Indentures made. And of, and in the Manner of Haddon in
Bampton, the Manner of Esthall, Asthall and Astally, and of all the said Lands,
Tenements, Woods, Waters, Rents, Reversions and Services, and Hereditaments,
and other the Premises before rehearsed in Bampton, Esthall, Asthall and
Astally, the said Feoffees, their Heirs, and Assigns, or the longest liver of
them, and his Heirs, to be, continue and stand Feoffees thereof, to the use of
the said John More, for term of his Life, without Impeachment of wast; the
Remainder after his Death, to the said Thomas More, and his Heirs, according to
such Estates of Inheritance thereof, at the date of these present Indentures
made. And the said John More for him, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, does
Covenant and Grant, to and with the said Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs and Assigns
by these presents, That he shall suffer all other his Manners, Lands, Tenements,
and all other his Hereditaments, with all and singular their Appurtenances,
whatsoever they be, whereof he or any other be seized of, in Right, Title,
Possession or in Use, other then before expressed and declared: except one
yearly Rent of Nine Pounds sixteen Shillings, which the said John More has out
of the Manner of Newbolt, in the County of Northampton, now in the Tenure of Sir
William Newenham, Knight; which Nine Pounds sixteen Shillings, is parcel of the
Jointure of the said Jane, Wife of the said John More, to come, grow and
descend in Demeasn, Possession, Reversion, Remainder or in Use, immediately
after the Death of the said John More, and of the said Jane his Wife, to the
said Thomas More, and to his Heirs, according to such Estates of Inheritance
thereof, at the date of these present Indentures made, discharged of all former
Rights, Titles, Uses and demands, and of all other Charges and Encumbrances
whatsoever they be, (the Rents, Customs and Services, to the Chief Lords of
that Fee or Fees, hereafter to be due, only except.) Provided always, That if
the said Jane, now Wife to the said John More, fortune to decease, that then it
shall be lawful to the said John More to make a Jointure, of, and in the Manner
of More and Moreton, to any Wife or Wives, that hereafter the said John More
shall fortune to Marry, during the Life or Lives of the said Wife or Wives; any
Covenant, Grant, Use or Article before expressed, to the contrary
notwithstanding. For all which Covenants, Grants and Agreements on the part of
the said John More, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, for to be truly observed,
performed, fulfilled and kept; the said John Lord Mordaunt does Covenant and
Grant by these Presents, To pay or cause to be paid to the said John More, his
Executors or Assigns, Four hundred and fifty Marks of lawful Money of England:
That is to say, at the day of Marriage had and solemnized, one hundred Pounds
of lawful Money of England: And at the Feast of the Purification of our Lady
then next coming, One hundred Marks of lawful Money of England. And so yearly
at the said Feast of the Purification of our Lady, One hundred Marks of lawful
Money of England, unto the time the said Sum of Four hundred and fifty Marks,
be to the said John More, his Executors or Assigns, truly contented and paid.

In Witness whereof the Parties aforesaid interchangeably have put to their
Seals and Sign Manual to these present Indentures, the Day and Year
above-written.
A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
RIght Trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: Signifying unto you that for
certain weighty causes and considerations touching us; our mind and pleasure
is, That all excuses laid apart, ye be, and personally appear at our City of
London, on Tuesday the Seventh day of July next coming, there to tarry and
demeur, until ye shall know farther of our pleasure, which shall be declared
unto you on our behalf, by the Mouth of our Chancellor: Fail ye not hereof as
we specially trust in you.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Hampton Court the last day of June.
A Letter from the Queen to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved Counselor, the Lord Mordaunt.
By the Queen.
RIght welbeloved, we greet you well: And whereas it has pleased the Goodness
of Almighty God, of his Infinite Mercy and Grace, to send unto us at this time,
good speed in the deliverance and bringing forth of a Princess, to the great
Joy, Rejoice, and inward Comfort of my Lord, Us, and of all his good and loving
Subjects of this his Realm, for the which his inestimable Benevolence so showed
unto us, we have no little cause to give high Thanks, Laud and Praising unto
our said Maker, like as we do most lowly, humbly and with all the inward desire
of our Heart: And inasmuch as we undoubtedly trust, that this our good speed is
to your great Pleasure, Comfort and Consolation, we therefore by these our
Letters advertise you thereof; desiring and heartily praying you to give, with
us, unto Almighty God, high Thanks, Glory, Laud and Praising, and to Pray for
the good Health, Prosperity and continual preservation of the said Princess
accordingly.

Given under our Signet, at my Lord's Manner of Greenwich, the Seventh day of
September in the Five and twentieth Year of my Lord's Reign.
Alliance between Mordaunt and Danvers.
ARticles of Agreement made, devised, and concluded between the Right
Worshipful Dame Anne Danvers of Dauntesey, and the Right Honorable Lord
Mordaunt, for a Marriage to be had, between Silvester Danvers, and Mistress
Elizabeth, Daughter to the said Lord Mordaunt, the Twelfth day of April, in the
Twenty eighth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King Henry the Eighth.

First, It is agreed between the said Parties, That the said Silvester Danvers,
shall Marry and take to his Wife the said Elizabeth, if she will thereto agree;
and the said Elizabeth shall take to her Husband the said Silvester, if he
thereto will agree; and the said Marriage to be solemnized between them before
the Feast of Pentecost next coming after the date hereof, where it shall please
the said Lord Mordaunt; and the Costs of Meat and Drink at the Marriage, and
even of their Apparel after they are Married to be provided at the Charges of
the said Lord Mordaunt.

Item, Where the said Dame Anne is seized of Lands, Tenements, Rents,
Reversions and Services, with the Appurtenances in the County of Cornwall, all
of the yearly value of Fifty Pounds, she is contented to make a sufficient and
sure Estate in Fee-simple of the foresaid Lands and Tenements, Rents,
Reversions and Services, with their Appurtenances, to the said value, to Sir
Anthony Hungerford, Knight, and to............. discharged of all manner of
Charges and Encumbrances made or done by the said Dame Anne, on condition as
hereafter follows: That is to say, That the said Feoffees, within Ten Days
after they have their Estate, shall make a sure and sufficient Estate, to the
said Dame Anne of the foresaid Lands and Tenements, Rents, Reversions and
Services, with their Appurtenances, for term of her Life, without Impeachment
of Wast; the Remainder thereof to the said Silvester and Elizabeth, and to the
Heirs of the Body of the said Silvester lawfully begotten; And for lack of such
Issue, to remain to the right Heirs of the said Dame Anne.

Item, Further the said Dame Anne, after she has received her Estate, for term
of her Life, of the Premises, grants to make a grant of an Annuity of Forty
Pounds by the Year, for the term of her said own Life, to the said Silvester
and Elizabeth, to be had, and received out of the said Lands and Tenements,
Rents, Reversions and Services, with the Appurtenances, as the said Lord will
devise; with a Clause of Distress, to distrein in the said Lands and Tenements
for lack of payment, or at Three Months after any of the said Feasts limited,
or appointed for payment thereof, as hereafter follows: And the said Forty
Pounds to be paid yearly, at the Feasts of Saint Michael the Archangel, and the
Annunciation of our Lady by even Portions; and the first payment of the said
Annuity to begin, at the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, next after the
said Silvester shall come to his full Age of One and twenty Years; and the
Writings to be made for the assurance of the Premises, and all further Devises,
as shall be devised by the said Lord, and the same to be done at the Costs and
Charges of the same Lord Mordaunt.

Item, All such Leases as shall be made by the said Dame Anne, of any parcel of
the Premises, for term of her Life or Lives, or Years, or by Copy of
Court-Roll, not minishing the Rents, such Services nor Customs, to stand in
effect according to the Grant, and the same not to be altered, nor devised by
the said Silvester nor Elizabeth; but the same to be confirmed by them, when
the Remainder shall be Executed; if the Tenants, or any of them for their own
part, will so require it.

Item, The said Dame Anne shall suffer all her Manners, Lands and Tenements,
Rents, Reversions and Services, of her own Inheritance, with their
Appurtenances, that she is in possession of, or any other to her use,
immediately after her decease, to descend and remain to the said Silvester, and
to the Heirs of the Body of the said Silvester lawfully begotten; And for lack
of such Issue, to remain to the right Heirs of the said Dame Anne Danvers,
discharged of all Encumbrances by her done, (her Manners of Marden and Wyfford
in the County of Wiltshire, with their Appurtenances, only except,) whereof one
John Danvers, Son of the said Dame Anne, to have the value of Twenty Pounds
yearly thereof, for term of his Life, and Thirty Years over, without
Impeachment of wast; yiedling to her Heirs yearly, One Red Rose, at the Feast
of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist, if it be asked, and the Profits of the
residue of the said Manners of Marden and Wyfford, with their Appurtenances, to
be at the liberty of the same Dame Anne for Twelve Years after her decease, to
go to the performance of the last Will, of the said Dame Anne Danvers, for the
space of the said Twelve Years, next after her decease; and likewise except
Forty Shillings yearly for an Annuity, for the term of Life of one James Vause,
to be paid forth of a Close, or a Pasture, called the Oxe-less, parcel of the
Manner of Dauntesey.

For the which Marriage to be executed, and for the Feoffment to be made, and
sufferances of her Possessions, to descend and remain, (except before excepted)
the said John Mordaunt, Knight, Lord Mordaunt, promises to pay to the same
Dame Anne Danvers, and her Executors, Six hundred Marks, at such days as
hereafter follows: That is to say, At the day of the Sealing of these
Indentures and before any Contract, or the Marriage solemnized, Four hundred
Marks; and at the Feast of Saint Thomas the Apostle, then next coming, or
within one Month next following the same Feast, One hundred Marks, to be paid
at Dauntesey aforesaid, to the said Dame Anne, her Executors or Assigns; and at
the Feast of Saint Thomas the Apostle then next ensuing, or within One Month
next following the same Feast after that, One hundred Marks, to be paid to the
said Dame Anne, her Executors or Assigns, at Dauntesey aforesaid, till the said
Sum of Six hundred Marks be, to the said Dame Anne and her Executors, fully
satisfied, contented and paid: And for the sure payment of the Two hundred
Marks, parcel of the Six hundred Marks, the said Lord Mordaunt, and Sir John,
his Son, to be bound in several Obligations of a hundred Pound a piece, to the
said Dame Anne, to be paid at the place, and days before limited, or within one
Month next following.

Item, The said Lord Mordaunt shall find, at his Costs and Charges, the said
Silvester and Elizabeth, from the day of their Marriage till the Feast of Saint
Michael the Archangel, next after the said Silvester shall come to his full Age
of One and twenty Years, and have the bringing up of them, as it is between
them agreed, if the said Silvester so long will be ruled by the said Lord, his
Executors or Assigns; or else the said Lord, his Executors or Assigns, to pay
yearly to the said Silvester Twenty Pounds for his finding, at the pleasure of
the said Lord, his Executors or Assigns.

Item, It is agreed between the said Lady Danvers and Lord Mordaunt, That the
Articles before expressed, and such of them, and the Surety thereof, and such
things thereunto appertaining, and belonging, shall, by the advice of the
Learned Council of the said Lady, and Lord Mordaunt, be engrossed, and made
upon Parchment, according to the true meaning and intent, both of the said Lady
and Lord Mordaunt, at the indifferent Costs and Charges of the said Lady and
Lord Mordaunt.

Anne Danvers.

A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And forasmuch as diverse Lewd and
Traitorous Persons, have lately, contrary to their Duties of Allegiance,
assembled together in great numbers, to the great peril and danger of our
Loving, Faithful and Obedient Subjects inhabiting those Parts. Albeit we have
taken order for their repression in such sort, as we think their Example shall
be a learning to all others hereafter: Yet because the Successes and Chances of
such things be so doubtful, that no certainty can be prescribed therein in all
events: For the more surety we have thought convenient, not only to command you
immediately upon the sight hereof, to have a vigilant Eye to the preservation
of the quiet of the Country about you; but also, with all diligence to you
possible, to put all your Friends, Servants, Tenants, and such others as be
under your rule, in such a readiness as in case need shall require, ye may
within a days warning both advance you, with all your Force, to such place as
shall be limited unto you, and yet leave the Country behind you in such assured
governance as thereupon hap no inconvenience, for want of good foresight, and
circumspection touching the same. And in case ye shall perceive any Persons
like to be of such Conspiracy, our pleasure is, ye shall from time to time
apprehend them, and commit them to Ward. Fail ye not hereof, as we specially
trust you, and as ye will answer for the contrary at your peril.

Given under our Signet at our Castle of Windsor, the Sixth day of October, the
Eight and twentieth Year of our Reign.
A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
RIght Trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And whereas we be not only
most certainly informed, but know the same by our own Experience, that by the
Negligence, Corruption, and want of Circumspection, of those whom we put in
trust with the order of Justice under us, within this our Realm, many light,
lewd and ill-disposed Persons, be permitted and suffered, and sometime animated
by the self-same Persons, whom we do so put in trust, and ought to be indeed,
the Men of most honesty within our said Realm, to use their wilful and corrupt
Appetites, in attempting all kinds of Evil at their liberties, without fear of
punishment, to the great Annoyance of our good Subjects, and to the great
Encouragement of Malefactors, which is, has been, and shall be the occasion of
innumerable Inconveniences, Dangers, Perils and Displeasures to the State of
our whole Realm; whereof having the Supreme care and charge under God, it shall
be our part and duty to endeavor our self to put just Remedy to the same:
Albeit we have at this present time sent forth our Proclamations, whereby we in
general command all our Officers, Ministers, Subjects and true Leige-Men to
have regard to their duties, according to their Degrees and Callings, as they
will answer for the contrary, at their extreme perils, which we purpose in case
of defaults so to look upon, as we have not yet done the like, since it pleased
God, to commit the Governance of this our Realm unto us; yet forasmuch as we
know, that ye be not only of great Authority in those parts, but also that your
Wisdom, Knowledge and Experience, is such as may facielly correct things there
that be out of good order; and can also see, if you will open your Eyes
thereunto, when things digress from the right Train, and will be corrected and
amended by lawful Punishment, which puts a stay to others that might percase
fall into the like Folly. We have thought meet to desire and pray you
specially, as a Man, whom we specially trust, and one whose fault by
Negligence, want of Vigilance, or due Circumspection, we shall specially note,
weigh and consider; that putting apart all affections with other corruptions,
as commonly now adays do occupy the Stomachs of them, which in name and
Authority be directed to honesty, you will lay before your Eyes, first your
Duty to God, then your Obedience to us by his Commandment, and after the great
Good which to all Men, and most of all to them that be of Honor, and should be
inclined to good Civility, does ensue by good Order, and due Execution of
Justice, which brings forth a perfect quiet; and upon those grounds, with a
respect to the avoiding of all dangers that by the contrary part may ensue, you
will apply your self to be so vigilant, as the points contained in the said
Proclamation, and all others meet to be remembered, for the Maintenance, and
Conservation of Justice may be put in use, and duly observed according to your
Allegiance, and to the Commandment of the same. By the doing hereof ye shall
satisfy a good duty toward God, you shall preserve your Estimation toward
us, you shall honestly serve your Country, and you shall save your own to your
self and to your posterity: By the other part you shall offend God, you shall
displease us, put out your Estimation with all the rest in danger. Wherefore
eftsoons we require you to remember your self touching these things, in such
wise as we may have cause, both to remember you again with Favor, and to think
you a Man worthy the same, and to have Authority with others in our
Commonwealth accordingly: Willing you for your better instruction to get a
Copy of our said Proclamation, and in such wise to note the special points of
the same, as you may the better put it in due Execution without failing, as we
trust in you.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster the Ninth Day of March,
the Twentieth and nine Year of our Reign.
A Letter from the Queen to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt.
By the Queen.
RIght trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And forasmuch as by the
inestimable Goodness, and Grace of Almighty God, we be delivered and brought in
Childbed of a Prince, conceived in most lawful Matrimony, between my Lord the
King's Majesty and Us: Doubting not but for the Love and Affection which ye
bear unto us, and to the Commonwealth of this Realm, the knowledge thereof
should be Joyous and glad Tidings unto you: We have thought good to certify
you of the same, to the intent ye might not only render unto God, condign
Thanks and Praise for so great a Benefit; but also continually Pray for the
long Continuance, and Preservation of the same, here in this Life, to the
Honor of God, Joy, and Pleasure of my Lord the King and Us, and the Universal
Well, Quiet, and Tranquillity of this whole Realm.

Given under our Signet, at my Lord's Manner of Hampton Court, the Twelfth Day
of October.
Alliance between Mordaunt and Danvers.
THIS Indenture made the Twentieth Day of October, in the Nine and Twentieth
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, Henry the Eighth, by the Grace of God,
of England, and of France, King, Defender of the Faith, and Lord of Ireland,
and in Truth, Supreme Head of the Church of England. Between the Right
Worshipful Dame Anne Danvers of Dauntesey, in the County of Wiltshire, on the
one Party, and the Right Honorable Sir John Mordaunt, Knight, Lord Mordaunt of
Turvey, in the County of Bedford, on the other Party; Witnesses, That it is
fully Covenanted, Condescended, Bargained, Concluded and Agreed, between the
said Parties, and either of them, Covenanteth, Bargaineth, Grants and Agrees
for them, their Heirs, and Executors, to and with the others in manner and form
following: That is to say, Where the said Dame Anne, for a Marriage already
had, done and solemnized, between one Silvester Danvers, Son and Heir of Thomas
Danvers, Esquire, Deceased, Son and Heir of the said Dame Anne, has received
of the said Lord Mordaunt, Four hundred Marks Sterling, whereof the said Dame
Anne knowledgeth her self to be fully satisfied, contented and paid, and the
said Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs and Executors, thereof to be acquitted, and
discharged; and also the said Dame Anne by these presents knowledgeth her self,
to have received of the said Lord Mordaunt several Obligations for the payment
of Two hundred Marks: For the which Sum, and payments already paid, and to be
paid, The said Dame Anne Covenanteth and Grants by these Presents, to and
with the said Lord Mordaunt, That where she the said Dame Anne is seized of,
and in certain Manners, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions, Services and
Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances, in the County of Cornwall, of the clear
yearly value of Fifty Pounds, over and above all yearly Charges and Expenses,
that the said Dame Anne, shall before the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord,
next coming after the date hereof, make, or cause to be made, to Sir Anthony
Hungerford, Knight, and Edmond Fettyplace, Esquire, and to their Heirs for
ever, a good, sufficient, sure and Lawful Estate in the Law, in Fee-simple, of
and in all and singular the said Manners, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Reversions
and Services, and Hereditaments, with their Appurtenances; To have and to hold
the said Manners, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and all and singular other
the Premises, with the Appurtenances, to the said Sir Anthony Hungerford, and
Edmond Pettyplace, and to their Heirs for ever; discharged of all former
Bargains, Uses, Sales, Jointures, Dowers, Titles, Statutes, Statutes of the
Staple, Uses, Wills, Arrearages of Rents, Judgments, Alienations without
License, Intrusions, not suing of Livery out of the King's Hands, Entries,
Fines, Forfeits; and that the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, and other
Hereditaments be, at the making thereof, to the clear yearly value of Forty
Pounds, over and above all charges, going out of the same Rents, (Customs and
Services to the Chief Lords of the Fee, from thence forth to be due only
excepted) to the intent, and upon condition, That the said Sir Anthony and
Edmond Fettyplace, or the Survivors of them, their Heirs and Assigns, shall
immediately, and incontinently, after such Estate made to them, by the said
Dame Anne, within Ten days next after the same Feast, make or cause to be made
to the same Dame Anne, a good, sufficient, sure and lawful Estate, of all the
said Manners, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the Premises, with the
Appurtenances; To have and to hold, the said Manners, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances, to the said Dame Anne, and her Assigns
for term of Life of the said Dame Anne, without Impeachment of Wast; the
Remainder thereof after the said Dame Anne, to the said Silvester and
Elizabeth, and to the Heirs of the Body of the said Silvester lawfully
begotten; And for default of such Heirs, the Remainder thereof, to the right
Heirs of the said Silvester for ever, discharged in manner and form before
rehearsed. And the said Dame Anne Covenanteth and Grants, to and with the
said Lord Mordaunt, by these Presents, That the said Dame Anne, within Fifteen
Days after she has the Estate of the Premises made to her, by the said Sir
Anthony and Edmond Fettyplace, and by the survivors of them, their Heirs and
Assigns, with the remainder, as before is expressed, that the said Dame Anne by
her sufficient Deed or Deeds in the Law, shall Grant an Annuity, or Annual
Rent, of Forty Pounds by the Year, going out of the said Manners, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances, yearly to be paid, at the
Feast of the Annunciation of our Lady, and Saint Michael the Archangel, by even
Portions and Sums, to the said Silvester and Elizabeth, and to their Assigns,
for term of Life of the said Dame Anne; with a clause of distress for the
Non-payment of the said Annuity, or Annual Rent, to be contained in the said
Deed or Deeds, as shall be devised, and advised by the said Lord Mordaunt, or
by his Heirs or Executors, or by his or their Learned Counsel, at the Costs and
Charges in the Law of the said Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs or Executors: The said
Annuity to begin first to be paid the said Silvester and Elizabeth, or to the
over-liver of them, at the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, which shall be
in the Year of our Lord God, One thousand five hundred and forty one, which
shall be the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, next after that the said
Silvester does or might have attained, or come to his full Age of One and
twenty Years. And it is also further Agreed between the said Parties, That all
such Leases, and Grants, before the date of these Presents, by the said Dame
Anne, or any of her Ancestors made, or hereafter to be made by the said Dame
Anne, of the said Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with the
Appurtenances, or of any part or parcel of the same, to any person or persons,
for term of Life, or Lives, or for Years, or by Copy of Court-Roll, not
minishing the Rents, such Customs or Services, before this time used to be
paid, shall be, stand, remain and continue in their force, and effect,
according to the said Leases, and Grants, without denying or altering of the
same, to be made by the said Silvester and Elizabeth, or their Heirs, or any of
them; but that the said Leases, and Grants, when the Remainder shall be
Executed in them, or in any of them, shall not only be ratified and confirmed
by them, and either of them, to the said Lessees and Grantees, if the Lessees
and Grantees of the same, will the same of the said Silvester and Elizabeth and
their Heirs require and demand; but also, the said Lessees and Grantees, and
every of them, shall peaceably occupy, hold, and continue, according to their
said Leases and Grants, without interruption of the said Silvester and
Elizabeth, or of any of them, or of their Heirs. And the said Dame Anne
Covenanteth and Grants, for her, her Heirs and Assigns, to and with the said
Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs and Executors, by these Presents, That then the said
Dame Anne shall suffer all and singular her Manners, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, with the Appurtenances, which be of her own Inheritance, now
being in her Possession or Occupation, or in Tenure, Possession or Occupation,
of any other Person or Persons, to her Use, in Possession, Remainder, Reversion
or in Use, immediately after the death of the said Dame Anne, to descend,
return, remain, or come to the said Silvester, and to the Heirs of his Body
lawfully begotten; And for default of such Heirs, the remainder thereof to the
right Heirs of the said Dame Anne for ever; discharged of all Encumbrances,
Titles and Demands, done and made by the said Dame Anne, or by any other person
or persons, for her, in her name, or by her commandment; all Leases and Grants
already made, or hereafter to be made, by the said Dame Anne, of any of the
Premises, being of her own Inheritance, reserving the Rents accustomed only
excepted; and reserving the Manner of Willeford, with the Appurtenances, in the
foresaid County of Wiltshire, and the Tenements now called Butler's Farm, now
being in the Tenure of Richard Amor; another Tenement called Conyes, now being
in the Tenure of Henry Moxham; and the third Tenement called Watrobins, now
being in the Tenure of Robert Whitebread; and one Close or Pasture called
Hickperse, now being in the Tenure of John Hampshire; with all other Lands,
Meadows and Pastures, with all other the Appurtenances, to the said three
Tenements belonging or appertaining, and the Rents of the same, parcel of the
Manners of Marden, in the foresaid County of Wiltshire, during the Life of one
John Danvers, Son of the said Dame Anne, and Thirty Years next and immediately
ensuing after the death of the said John Danvers only excepted and reserved;
and also excepted and reserved the whole residue of the said Manner of Marden,
with the Appurtenances, and the Chief Rents of the said Manner, to the said Dame
Anne, her Executors and Assigns, for term of Life of the said Dame Anne; and
the remainder thereof, for term of Twelve years, next and immediately ensuing
after the death of the said Dame Anne, to the Executors and Assigns of the said
Dame Anne; and after, to remain, revert, descend, and come to the said
Silvester and his Heirs for ever, discharged in the manner and form before
expressed; and also, an Annuity or yearly Rent, of Forty Pounds, going out of a
Close or Pasture called the Oxe-less, parcel of the said Manner of Dauntesey, in
the County aforesaid, for term of life of one James Vause, excepted and
reserved; and also, the Manner of Smythcote in the Parish of Dauntesey, in the
aforesaid County of Wiltshire, and seven Messuages with the Appurtenances lying
in Smythcote aforesaid, in the Parish of Dauntesey aforesaid; and a Close or
Pasture called Great Hideow, and a Close or Pasture called The new Lease,
parcels of the Manner of Dauntesey aforesaid, excepted and reserved to William
Danvers, Son of the said Dame Anne, and to the Heirs Male of his Body lawfully
begotten: If the said William or his Heirs Male, be vexed, troubled, or
otherwise interrupted of the Possession of the Manners of Culmoth, Moundfield,
Culmouth-Pinkney, and Soulgrove-Pinkney, in the County of Northampton, with
their Appurtenances, or any parcel thereof, or in taking the profits of the
same, by the said Silvester, his Heirs or Assigns, or the Heirs or Assigns of
any of them; and one Annuity or yearly Rent of Twenty Pounds, to Mistress
Margaret Danvers, Mother of the said Silvester, for term of her Life, also
excepted and reserved. For the which Marriage so held and executed, and for the
assurance of all the said Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, to be
made and had to the said Silvester and Elizabeth, and to the Heirs of the said
Silvester, as before is expressed, the said Lord Mordaunt Covenanteth and
Grants by these Presents, That he, his Executors or Assigns, at their Costs
and Charges, shall continually find and keep the said Silvester and Elizabeth,
and their Children, from the Date of these Presents, until the Feast of Saint
Michael the Archangel, next after the said Silvester shall attain and come to
his full Age of One and twenty years; and to have the bringing up and ordering
of the said Silvester, until the said Feast, if the said Silvester will be so
long ruled or ordered by the said Lord Mordaunt, his Executors or Assigns; or
else the said Lord Mordaunt, his Executors or Assigns, to pay yearly to the
said Silvester Twenty Pounds for his finding, at the pleasure and liberty of
the said Lord Mordaunt, his Executors or Assigns. And it is further Agreed
between the said Parties, that where the said Dame Anne allows to the said
Lord Mordaunt in the price of the Marriage of the said Silvester, One Hundred
Marks, for and toward the finding of the said Silvester, his Wife and
Children, during the Nonage of the said Silvester, over and beside the said
Six hundred Marks, which the said Lord Mordaunt has paid, and is bound to pay
to the said Dame Anne, as before appears: For the said Marriage, the said
Lord Mordaunt Covenanteth and Grants, by these Presents, That if it fortune
the said Dame Anne to die and decease within the space of Three Years next
after the date hereof, whereby the said Silvester and Elizabeth his Wife shall
have Lands and Tenements, in the County of Cornwall, to the yearly Value of
Fifty Pounds, as by this Indenture it does appear, That then the said Lord
Mordaunt, his Executors or Assigns, shall content and pay, or cause to be
contented and paid, to the Executors or Assigns of the said Dame Anne yearly,
Ten Pounds, during as many of the said Three Years, as shall remain after the
decease of the said Dame Anne, as is aforesaid. In witness, etc.

A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
RIght Trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And forasmuch as we be
informed, that the Pestilent Idol, Enemy of all Truth, and Usurpator of
Princes, the Bishop of Rome, perceiving his most detestable doings, to begin
now to appear, to all our good Subjects; which fully minded in his Rage, do
seek all the ways to him possible to Rob, and Spoil this our Realm, as
heretofore he has accustomed, and to Invert the good Religion of the same,
with the Torment and Disherison of all our good Subjects: We let you wit, That
intending to put the same our Realm, both by Sea and Land, in such a readiness,
as shall be necessary toward his Malicious and Devilish purpose, which by all
means he labors to Cloak and Color, pretending only in Words, the
advancement of true Religion, without any the disturbance of our People; to the
intent he may blind their honest and simple Eyes, and so the more easily
compass his most Cruel and Devilish Enterprise: We have among other our loving
Subjects appointed you, to furnish unto us, to do us service on the Sea, the
number of Forty able Persons. And therefore we will and desire you, that
immediately upon the sight hereof, ye will furnish unto us the said number,
whereof as many of them to be Archers and Gunners, as you can make well
Harnished to do us service as before; and the same to be in a readiness with
Habiliments meet for them, upon one hours warning, whenever our Right trusty
and Right welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, the Earl of Southampton, our
Admiral of England, shall by his Letters give you admonition, or call for the
same; and in the mean time with all diligence to make unto him your Certificate
of the same your number; whereby you shall deserve our hearty thanks.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Greenwich, the Seventh day of April.
A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
RIght trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And cannot a little marvel to
hear, that notwithstanding our sundry Advertisements, lately made unto you for
the doing of your Duty, and such Office, and Administration, as in our
Commonwealth is committed to you, and others the said Justices of the Peace
within this our said Realm; many things be nevertheless rather directed, at
will and pleasure, than either upon any just Contemplation of Justice, or with
any regard to the good Admonitions, which heretofore we have set forth, for the
Advancement of the same: Minding yet once again, before we shall correct the
Leudness of the Offenders in this behalf, with any Extremities of the Law, to
give a new general Admonition, to the intent no Man shall have color of Excuse
by Ignorance; we have thought meet to write these our Letters unto you, and
every of you, of all Sorts and Degrees; and by the same to desire and pray you,
yet nevertheless to Charge and Command you, upon your duties of Allegiance:
That for the repairing of all things negligently passed, and then avoiding of
all such danger as may, for lack thereof, happen unto you; you shall have
special care, and study to the due and just Observation of the Points
following. First, We have with our great Study, Travel and Labor expelled the
Usurped Power of Rome, with all the Branches, and Dependents upon the same: Our
pleasure is, That you shall have principal regard, that the privy Maintainers
of that Papistical Faction, may be tried out, and brought to Justice; for by
sundry Arguments it is evident to us, That there wants not a number, that in
that matter, and dependances of the same, retain their old feigned Fantasies
and Superstitions, muttering in Corners as they dare, to the maintenance and
upholding of it, what Countenance so ever they show outward for the avoiding of
danger of Law; those kind of Men we would have tried out, as the most Cankered
and Venomous Worms that be in our Commonwealth, both for that they be apparent
Enemies to God, and manifest Traitors unto us, and to our whole Realm, Workers
of Mischief and Sedition within the same. Secondly, You shall have vigilant
Eye, That all Raisers of Bruits and Rumors, that may in any wise touch Us, our
Honor, or Surety, or touch the State of our Realm, or the Mutation of any Law,
or Custom thereof, may be apprehended and punished to the Example of others,
disposed to the like Evil. Thirdly, You shall have special regard, That all
Sturdy, Vagabond and Valiant Beggars, may be punished according to the Statute
lately made for that purpose; your default in the Execution whereof, proceeding
upon an inconsiderate Piety to one evil person, without respect of the great
Multitude that live in honest and lawful sort, has bred no small Inconvenience
in our Commonwealth: And to the intent you may more exactly put this Statute
in Execution, where by the Statute it is appointed, that Common-watches shall
be kept from the Ascension-tide till Michaelmas, Our pleasure is, That you
shall not only see the said Watches duly and substantially kept, according to
the limitation of the said Statute; but also that you shall continue the said
Watches, for this Year till Allhallowtide: Having also special regard, That if
any Remissions or Resistance shall chance to be made upon any Watches, or other
Officers, the Offenders therein may be produced to Justice, for their condign
Punishment. Fourthly, Our Pleasure and most dread Commandment is, That all
respects set apart, you shall bend your self to the advancement of Common
Justice, between party and party; both that our good Subjects may have the
benefit of our Laws sincerely ministered to them, and that all evil doers may be
punished, as the same Act does prescribe and limit: To which Points if you
shall upon this monition, and advertisement give such diligent Regard, as you
may satisfy your duty in the same, leaving and exchanging from henceforth all
disguised Corruptions; we shall be content the more easily to put in oblivion
all your former Remissions and Negligences: But on the other part, if we shall
perceive, That this kind of gentle Proceeding, can work no good effect in you,
nor any of you, whom we put in Trust under us; assure your self that the next
Advice shall be of so sharp a sort, as shall bring with it a just Punishment of
those, that shall be found Offenders in this behalf: Requiring you therefore,
not only for your own part, to wax a new man, if you shall in your own
Conscience perceive, that ye have not done your duty as appertained; but also
to exhort others of your sort and condition, in this Administration, whom you
shall perceive to digress from the true Execution of their Offices, rather to
reconcile and conform themselves to satisfy with gentle Monition, then upon
any Affection, Respect or Displeasure, to do any such thing, as shall hereafter
minister unto them such Repentance, as will not percase, when it should light
in their Neck, be redoubled. Finally, Our pleasure is, That you shall have
special regard, that no Man use any unlawful Games, but that every Man apply
himself to use the Long-Bow, as the Law in that behalf requires; wherein you
shall show your self a Man of good Inclination, and deserve our right hearty
Thanks accordingly.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Oaking, the One and Twentieth of July,
the Thirtieth Year of our Reign.
Alliance between Mordaunt and Denton.
A Letter from the Lord Mordaunt to his Daughter Fettyplace.
DAughter Fettyplace: After all hearty Commendations, these shall be to
advertise you, That this present Second Day of November, Mr. Denton delivered
me a Bill of Articles, and a Paper ready drawn, concerning the Declaration of
the said Articles, setting forth more at large whereby it appears, That ye
and he be very forward toward Marriage, and has desired my good Will for the
same; and has showed me, that he has caused the King's Graces Letters to be
directed to you in his Favor, of the same. The Articles be made between Thomas
Denton on the one part, the Lord Mordaunt, Sir Anthony Hungerford, Knight,
Edward Fettyplace and Alexander Fettyplace, Esquires: In the which Articles,
nor in the Indenture of Paper, any mention is made of any Jointure, that ye
shall have by Mr. Denton, nor yet what Goods he shall leave you, if God call
him to his Mercy before you. Also there is no mention made, that he shall leave
you in Goods of your own, as good as he finds you; so that upon Marriage had
and determined, all your Goods and Chattels shall be his, and at his
distribution and pleasure. Many other things are to be remembered by the advice
of Wiser Men than I am, which can give you better Counsel, and better
Advertisement than I can do, or write to you: Albeit I would ye should do well,
and so I pray God send you Grace to do. I pray you with all speed send me your
mind in the premises; And that I may have Mr. Hungerford's advice, by his
Letter for the same, that yet I may know something of your mind, at the latter
end of the Feast, although that I be not made privy to the first beginning, and
to the first Communication; but ye do like a wise Woman, Conclude, and Agree,
and then ask Counsel of your Friends. Mr. Hungerford knows all, and I think
verily he would ye should do well; albeit I do not know whether be be privy to
it, by you or by Mr. Denton, or by both: Thus fare ye and all yours, as well as
I would do my self, to God's pleasure, who grant you of his goodness, his
Blessing, and his Grace to do well; And I do give you my Blessing with all my
heart.

Written the Third Day of November.
A Letter from Margaret Fettyplace to her Father the Lord Mordaunt.
To the Right Honorable, and my singular good Lord and Father, my Lord
Mordaunt, at Turvey.
RIght Honorable and my singular good Lord and Father: Very glad to hear of
your good Amendment and Welfare, which I pray God daily increase: It may please
your Lordship to be advertised, that I have received your Lordships Letters;
whereby I perceive that Mr. Denton has delivered to your Lordship, both a Book
of certain Articles, and a Paper ready drawn concerning the Declaration
thereof, which Book I have received from your Lordship, wherein is wholly
contained such Requests as I made unto him: For my Lord, this is the very
Truth, That about Saint Bartholomew-day last past, it was his chance to be at
Ratcote, at which time he first made motion to me herein. And for his
furtherance therein, not only delivered unto me the King's Majesty's Letter,
most favorably made in his behalf; but also other like Letters from my Lord
Saint-Johns, whom as your Lordship knows, I have found of late my very great
and earnest Friend: Whereupon I, as I thought my duty, was not minding to make
to the King's said Letters an unadvised and sudden Answer, desired a time to
make a further answer thereunto, intending at that time to repair unto your
Lordship, for your Advice therein; but being immediately after taken with
Sickness, I was thereby constrained to tarry at home, and for that time to take
advice of other of my Friends in these parts; who both considering the King's
said Letters, and also his Honesty, and Towardness, counseled me not to refuse
his suit; but upon certain Requests which they advised me to make unto him, to
enter further into Communication. Whereupon I made these Articles, and about
Michaelmas last past, at his repair unto me, I delivered him the same; showing
him at that time, that if he would be thereunto bound, as by my Friends should
be thought meet, and further repair unto your Lordship, and therein obtain your
Favor, without whom, as I then showed him, I would be loath to bestow my self,
I could be content to accept his suit; which he promised to do. This, my Lord,
is all that I have done, and as I trust he will claim no further promise of me;
so that I shall desire your Lordship, not to esteem me of such lightness, that
I will unadvisedly bestow my self, and then ask Counsel. I hope your Lordship
has at all times found me conformable to your pleasure, which I have been
glad, and will be glad at all times to follow; defiring your Lordship to
conceive none other opinion of me. And if in this matter your Lordship
perceives, or knows any just or good Cause of Breach herein, I have not gone
so far, but as yet I may return by your Lordships better Advice. I have sent
you again the Book of Articles, and somewhat added by Cousin John Yate unto
them; if your Lordship thinks not these sufficient, I shall desire your
Lordship to add more unto them; which being but reasonable, I trust Mr. Denton
will assent thereto. And what your further pleasure is herein, I shall defire
your Lordship to certify by your Letters, by this bearer my Servant. And
further to disclose your whole mind herein, to Mr. Denton at his next repair
unto your Lordship, whereby ye shall bind me to pray for you. I would have seen
your Lordship before this, if I had not been let by Sickness: But I intend
by God's Grace shortly to wait upon you. In the mean time I shall desire your
Lordship, and my good Lady my Mother, of your Blessings. Thus our Lord send you
both long Life.

From Besellesly the Tenth day of November, by your Obedient and Loving
Daughter Margaret Fettyplace.

A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved Counselor, the Lord Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
RIght trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: Letting you wit, That where
upon the special Zeal, and Affection which we bear to the Commonwealth of this
our Realm, and Furniture of the same, with some more Store, if it shall please
God, of our lawful Posterity; we did lately at the Suit and Contemplation of
some of our Nobles and Counsel, resolve eftsoons to Marry; and have thereupon
concluded by God's Grace, a Marriage between Us and the most Excellent
Princess, the Lady Anne of Cleves-Juliers: Forasmuch as we suppose that the
same Dame Anne, shall shortly arrive at our Town of Calice, to be Transported
unto this our Realm, for the consummation of the said Marriage: Considering
that it shall be requisite and necessary, both for our Honor, and for the
Honor of our said Realm, That she shall be Honorably received, and met at
sundry places at the said arrival: We have named and appointed you to be one of
these Noble Personages, whom we have thought meet in this affair, to attend
upon Us, or to accompany such others of our Nobles and Counsel, as shall meet
her before she shall come to our Presence. Wherefore we shall desire and pray
you, to put your self in such order as you may be at our City of London the
Eighth Day of December, there to know our further pleasure concerning the place
of your Attendance; bringing with you honestly furnished Twenty Servants;
wherein you shall do unto us acceptable service.

Given under our Signet at Westminster, the Four and twentieth day of November.
A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
RIght trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: Letting you wit, That minding
earnestly to have a Marriage concluded between our Trusty and welbeloved
Servant, Sir Humphrey Ratclif, Knight, Son to our Right trusty, and Right
welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, the Earl of Sussex, Great Chamberlain of
England, and Mistress Rich, Neice, and Heir to our trusty and welbeloved
Servant, Sir Michael Fisher, Knight: Albeit we doubt not of the conformity of
the said Sir Michael, having written our mind and pleasure to him in that
behalf, yet knowing that the same, taking you for his assured Friend, will be
much advised by you in this, and other his private affairs: We have thought
meet not only to signify this our purpose, and pleasure unto you; but also to
desire and pray you, at this our especial Contemplation, to extend your Favor,
and good Advice to the same, in such sort, as we may perceive, that you tender
our Pleasure, according to the good Expectation we have of you accordingly.

Given under our Signet at our House of Hampton Court, the Second day of March,
the Two and thirtieth Year of our Reign.
Alliance between Mordaunt and Cheyne.
ARticles of Agreement made the Twenty third day of October, the Three and
thirtieth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, King Henry the Eighth,
between John Mordaunt, Knight, Lord Mordaunt, of the one Party, and Robert
Cheyne, Esquire, on the other Party; of and for a Marriage, by the Grace of God
to be had, between Winefred Mordaunt, Daughter of the said Lord, and John
Cheyne, Son and Heir apparent to the said Robert.

First, The said Lord to apparel his said Daughter, the day of the Marriage at
his costs and charges.

Item, The said Robert to apparel his said Son, the day of the Marriage at his
costs and charges.

Item, The costs and charges of the said Marriage, and for two days after, to
be be at the costs and charges of the said Lord, the said Robert to find Dishes
of Fowl at his pleasure.

Item, The said Robert shall make Estate of certain Closes, parcel of a
Pasture, called Hellesthorp, in the Parish of Drayton and Wyning in the County
of Buckingham, to the value of Twenty Pounds by the Year, to the said John and
Winefred, to have to them during the Life of Margaret Cheyne, Widow, Mother to
the said Robert.

Item, That the said Robert shall make Estate to the said John and Winefred of
certain Lands and Tenements to the yearly value of Six Pounds fourteen
Shillings, parcel of the Manner of Grove in the County of Buckingham, to have to
them during the life of the said Margaret.

Item, That the said Robert shall make Estate to the said John and Winefred, of
his Manners of Drayton, Beauchamp, and all his Lands and Tenements in Drayton,
Beauchamp in the County of Buckingham; which Manner of Drayton with the
Appurtenances, the said Robert promises to be of the clear yearly value of
Forty Pound, over all yearly Reprises and Charges; and of the Manner of Cuggenho
in the County of Northampton: Which Manners, Lands and Tenements together, shall
be to the yearly value of Sixty Pounds, to have to them, and to their Heirs of
their two Bodies, lawfully begotten by the said John; And for lack of such
Issue, to remain to the Heirs Males of the said Robert: That is to say, The
said Manner of Drayton, with the Appurtenances, of the yearly value of Sixty
Pounds, immediately after the Death of the said Margaret, Mother to the said
Robert, and Twenty Pounds in Cuggenho, after the Death of the said Robert.

Also it is agreed, That the said John shall pay yearly to the said Robert his
Father as much Money of the Issues of the Fruits of the said Manner of Drayton,
as the said Manner shall amount, above the clear yearly value of Fifty Marks,
during the life of the said Robert.

Item, The said Robert, shall leave to the said John in Possession, Reversion
and Use, after the decease of the said Margaret, his Mother, Mary his Neice,
and John Cheyne, Esquire, his Brother, and Robert, Manners, Lands and Tenements
in the Counties of Buckingham and Northampton, to the clear yearly value of Two
hundred and twenty Pounds.

Item, That the said Robert shall be bound by Recognisance to the said Lord, in
the Sum of a Thousand Pounds, that his Manners, Lands and Tenements, and
Hereditaments, which he has within the Realm of England, after the decease of
the same Robert, shall Descend, Remain and come to the said John, his Son, and
to his Heirs, clearly discharged of all former Bargains, Sales, Jointures,
Dowers, Judgments, Recognisances, Statutes, and of all other Charges and
Encumbrances, had, made, done, or suffered to be had, made or done by the said
Robert or by any other, by his Assent or Agreement.

Provided always, That it shall be lawful to the said Robert, to make a
Jointure of Lands and Tenements, parcel of his Inheritance, of the yearly value
of Forty Pounds in Chessham, Boys and Amersham in the County of Buckingham, to
any his Wife or Wives, only for term of Life: And also the said Robert at his
pleasure, to give Lands and Tenements in Chessham, Boys, to the value of Twenty
Pounds to his Youngest Son or Sons, for term of Life of the said Margaret. And
after the decease of the said Margaret, the said Robert to be at liberty to
give to his Younger Son or Sons, Lands and Tenements in Cuggenho, in the County
of Northampton, to the like yearly value of Twenty Pounds.

Provided also, That it shall be lawful to the said Robert, for to Entail the
Manner of Grove, to the Heirs Males of the said Robert's Body lawfully begotten.

The said Lord to find the said John Cheyne and Winefred Meat and Drink, for
themselves, their Servants and Children, during Three Years, next after the
Marriage solemnized. And the said Robert to find them other Three Years, next
ensuing at his costs and charges.

Provided also, That it shall be lawful to the said Robert, to declare his Will
of a Field, called Trinity-Field, parcel of a Pasture called Hellythorp, of the
Issues and Profits going out of the same Ground; saving the sure Inheritance to
the said John Cheyne, his Son and Heir apparent.

For the which Premises, the said Lord does Covenant and Grant to pay to the
said Robert Four hundred and fifty Marks yearly: That is to say, At the day of
the Marriage a hundred Pound, and every Year after a Hundred Marks, at the
Feast of the Purification of our Lady, until the said Sum of Four hundred and
fifty Marks be fully contented and paid to the said Robert, his Executors or
Assigns.

Provided, That the Fifty Marks before rehearsed, shall be paid to the said
John Cheyne the Younger and Winefred, at such time as they shall begin to keep
House, toward their charges and taking up of Household.

Item, That the said Lord shall be bound by Recognisance to the said Robert in
the Sum of Four hundred Pounds, for the payment of Four hundred and Fifty
Marks at such Days as is before limited.

A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
RIght trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: Letting you wit, That
forasmuch as by the manifold Injuries wrought, and Displeasures done unto us,
our Realm, and Subjects, by the Scots, we have been enforced lately to enter
into open War and hostility with the same, which we intend and purpose, God
willing, unless the Nobles of Scotland shall conform themselves to Reason, to
prosecute in such sort as shall redound to our Honor, and to the Common Wealth
of our Realm and Subjects: To the intent we may the better know the Forces of
our said Realm, and thereby put the same in such order and readiness, as they
may serve us in this Enterprise, as the case shall require; We have thought
meet and necessary, to have special Musters taken of all our people, and
thereupon also to have such plain and perfect Certificate made, as shall
declare what may be trusted to in that behalf. Wherefore our Pleasure and
Commandment is, That you, by virtue and authority hereof, shall with all
convenient diligence take the Musters, of all the able Men, as well Horsemen as
Footmen, which you can make and furnish, both of our Tenants inhabiting upon
Farms, Holds, and Tenemenrs, within any Office, whereof you have the
Stewardship under Us, (if you have any such,) and also of your own Servants and
Tenants, dwelling upon your own Tenements; and the same so taken to certify in
writing, to our Counsel, attendant upon our Person, with all possible
diligence; with a special Note, and Declaration, to be expressed in the said
Certificate, how many of the said Persons be furnished with Horses, to occupy a
Spear or a Javelin, how many be Archers, and how many be Billmen, and how many
Principal Men may be picked out of every sort out of the whole number: All
which persons, our pleasure is, you shall put in such a readiness, as they may
set forth upon one hours warning, whenever you shall receive commandment from
us in that behalf; foreseeing that in these Musters, and Certificate, you
meddle not in any wise with any Mariners, forasmuch as we purpose to reserve
the same for our Furniture by Sea. And these our Letters shall be your
sufficient Warrant, and Discharge in that behalf.

Given under our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the last day of March,
the Four and thirtieth Year of our Reign.
A grant of Deodands and other Liberties in Turvey.
HEnricus Octavus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
Defensor, and in Terra Ecclesiae Anglicanae and Hibernicae Supremum Caput.
Omnibus ad quos praesentes Litterae nostrae pervenerint salutem. Sciatis quod
inter Recorda and pedes Finium cum proclamatione secundum formam Statuti, inde
editi and provisi, de termino sancti Hilarii, Anno Regni Henrici Regis Septimi
decimo septimo continetur sic: Bedfordiae scilicet; Haec est finalis Concordia
facta in Curia Domini regis apud Westmonasterium in crastino Sancti Johannis
Baptistae, Anno Regni Henrici regis Angliae and Franciae Septimi, a Conquestu
decimo septimo, coram Thoma Wood, Willielmo Danvers, Johanne Vavasour and
Johanne Fisher Justiciariis, and postea in Octavis Sancti Hilarii, anno regni
ejusdem Henrici regis decimo nono, ibidem concessa, and Recordata coram Thoma
Frowyk, and praefatis Willielmo and Johanne, and Johanne, Justiciariis, and
aliis Domini Regis fidelibus tunc ibi praesentibus, inter Johannem Mordaunt and
Willielmum Mordaunt, Querentes, and Edwardum Ducem Buckinghamiae, and Elianoram
uxorem ejus Deforciantes: De Visu Franciplegii, Assisa panis and cervisiae,
Catallis, Waiviatis, Straiatis, Felonum, Fugitivorum, Utlagatorum, Deodandorum,
and Thesauro invento cum pertinentiis in Turveia: Unde placitum Conventionis
summonitum fuit inter eos, in eadem Curia, scilicet. Quod praedicti Johannes
and Willielmus, recognoverint praedicta Visum Franciplegii, Assisam panis and
cervisiae, Catalla, Waiviata, Straiata, Felonum, Fugitivorum, Utlagatorum,
Deodandorum and Thesaurum inventum, cum pertinentiis, esse jus ipsius Ducis. Et
illa remiserunt and quietum clamaverunt de ipsis Johanne and Willielmo and
haeredibus ipsius Willielmi, praedictis Duci and Elianorae and haeredibus
ipsius Ducis in perpetuum. Et pro hac Recognitione, Remissione, quieta
Clamatione, Fine, and Concordia, iidem Dux and Elianora concesserunt,
praedictis Johanni and Willielmo, praedicta Visum franciplegii, Assisam panis
and cervisiae, Catalla, Waiviata, Straiata, Felonum, Fugitivorum, Utlagatorum,
Deodandorum, and Thesaurum inventum cum pertinentiis: Et illa iis reddiderunt
in eadem Curia. Habendum and tenendum eisdem Johanni and Willielmo, and
haeredibus ipsius Willielmi in perpetuum. Reddendo inde praedictis Duci, and
Elianorae, and haeredibus ipsius Ducis, annuatim, tres solidos, ad duos anni
terminos, videlicet ad festa Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, and Paschae, equis
portionibus solvendos. Et praedicti Johannes and Willielmus concedunt pro se,
and haeredibus suis, quod si contingat praedictum redditum trium solidorum a
retro fore, ad aliquod dictorum festorum quo solvi debeat, non solutum; tunc
been licebit, praedictis Duci and Elianorae, and haeredibus, and assignatis
ipsius Ducis in omnia terras and tenementa ipsorum Johannis and Willielmi, and
eorum alterius in Turveia praedicta intrare and distringere, and districtiones
sic captas abducere, asportare, and effugare, and penes se retinere, quousque
de redditu praedicto, and arreragiis ejusdem sibi fuerit plenarie satisfactum
and persolutum. Et praeterea iidem Dux and Elianora concesserunt, pro se, and
haeredibus ipsius Elianorae, quod ipsi warrantizabunt, acquietabunt, and
defendent praedicta Visum franciplegii, Assisam panis and cervisiae, Catalla,
Waiviata, Straiata, Felonum, Fugitivorum, Utlagatorum, Deodandorum, and
Thesaurum inventum, cum pertinentiis, in Turveia praedicta, praefatis Johanni
and Willielmo, and haeredibus ipsius Willielmi, contra omnes homines in
perpetuum. Quae omnia ad requisitionem Johannis Mordaunt militis Domini
Mordaunt tenore praesentium duximus exemplificanda. In cujus rei Testimonium
sigillum nostrum ad Brevia in Banco praedicto sigillandum deputatum
praesentibus apponi fecimus.

Test E. Montague,
apud Westmonasterium duodecimo die Februarii Anno Regni nostri tricesimo
septimo. Wellisborn.

An Acquittance or Bill from Robert Cheyne to the Lord Mordaunt, for Four
hundred and fifty Marks.
THIS Bill made the Twelfth day of April, the Thirty seventh Year of the Reign
of our most dread Sovereign Lord, Henry the Eighth, by the Grace of God, King
of England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and in Earth of the
Church of England, and also of Ireland, Supreme Head: Witnesses, That I Robert
Cheyne, Esquire, have received the day and Year above-written, of John
Mordaunt, Knight, Lord Mordaunt of Turvey, in the County of Bedford, One
hundred Marks of good and lawful Money of England, in full Satisfaction,
Contentation, and Payment of Four hundred pounds, to be due to me the said
Robert, at the Feast of Easter next coming after the date hereof: And also in
full Contentation, Satisfaction and payment of Four hundred and fifty Marks,
due to me the said Robert, for Marriage had and solemnized, between John Cheyne
my Son and Heir apparent, and Winefred, one of the Daughters of the said Lord;
as by certain Indentures of Covenants of Marriage, bearing date the Seventeenth
Day of November, the Six and thirtieth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord,
made between the said John Mordaunt, Knight, Lord Mordaunt, on the one party,
and me the said Robert Cheyne on the other Party, amongst other things more
plainly may appear. Of the which Sum of One hundred Marks, in full
Contentation, Satisfaction and Payment of the said Hundred pounds, and of all
the said Four hundred and fifty Marks; I the said Robert do knowledge and
confess my self by these presents to be well and truly Satisfied, Contented and
Paid by the said Lord; And thereof and of every part thereof, do Acquit,
Discharge and Release the said John Mordaunt, Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs and
Executors, and every of them by these presents.

In Witness whereof to this present Bill, I the said Robert have put my Seal,
and Subscribed my Name the said Twelfth Day of April above-specified. Robert
Cheyne.

A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And whereas it is come unto our
knowledge, That sundry Persons, as well Religious as Secular Priests, and
Curates in their Parishes, and other places of this our Realm; do daily, as much
as in them is, set forth and extol, the Jurisdiction and Authority of the
Bishop of Rome, otherwise called the Pope, sowing their Seditious, Pestilent
and false Doctrine, praying for him in the Pulpit, and making of him a God; to
the great Deceit, Illuding, and Seducing of our People and Subjects, bringing
them thereby into Error, Sedition and evil Opinions; more preferring the said
Laws, Jurisdiction and Authority of the said Bishop of Rome, than the most Holy
Laws and precepts of Almighty God: We therefore minding, not only to provide an
Unity and Quietness, to be had and continued amongst our People and Subjects;
but also greatly coveting and desiring them to be brought to a Perfection, and
knowledge of the mere Verity and Truth, and no longer to be seduced, nor
blinded with any such superstitious and fall Doctrine, of an Earthly Usurper
of God's Law. We will therefore and command you, That where and whenever ye
shall find, apperceive, know, or hear tell of any such Seditious Persons, that
in such wise do Spread, Teach, Preach and set forth, any such pernicious
Doctrine, to the Exaltation of the power of the said Bishop of Rome, bringing
thereby our People and Subjects, into Error, Grudge and Murmuration; that ye
without delay, do Apprehend and take them, or cause them to be Apprehended and
taken, and so committed to Ward; there to remain without Bail or Mainprise,
until, upon your Advertisement thereof to us or our Council, ye shall receive
answer of our further Pleasure in that behalf.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of reenwich, the Tenth Day of April.
An Act of John Lord Mordaunt, by which he does constitute his Proxies to the
Parliament, the Duke of Somerset, the Lord Paulet, and the Lord Russel.
PAteat universis per praesentes, quod quidem Ego Johannes Mordaunt miles,
Dominus Mordaunt, virtute Brevis cujusdam a regia Majestate mihi directi, ad
apparendum and personaliter interessendum, in Parlamento suo inchoato apud
Westmonasterium, quarto die Mensis Novembris, Anno Regni ejusdem Domini Regis
primo, summonitus fuerim, justis and legitimis causis in praesentiarum
impeditus, Regiae etiam Majestati ex part mea declaratis, and a sua Regia
Majestate vicissim approbatis, quo minus in dicto Parlamento apparere and
personaliter interesse valeam: Nobilem principem Edwardum Ducem Somerset,
totius Angliae Protectorem, simulque personae Regiae Majistatis Gubernatorem,
and nobiles viros, Willielmum Paulet militem. Dominum Southamptoniae, Magnum
Magistrum Hospitii Domini Regis, and Dominum Russell privati Sigilli Domini
Regis Custodem, meos veros, and legitimos Actores, Factores, and Procuratores
nomino, facio, and constituo. Dans, and concedens eisdem, conjunctim, and
divisim, plenam authoritatem and potestatem, tractandi, assentiendi, seu
dissentiendi, ac omnia alia generaliter faciendi Rempublicam concernentia,
prout eisdem, vel alteri eorum videbitur melius expediri, nomine meo, and vice
mea, prout ego ipse facere possum aut deberem, si personaliter interessem.
Promittoque me gratum and ratum habiturum, totum and quicquid dicti
Procuratores mei statuerint seu fecerint, vel alter eorum statuerit seu fecerit
in hac part.

In cujus rei testimonium sigillum meum praesentibus apposui. Datum apud.
Articles of Agreement between the Lord Mordaunt, and his Son William Mordaunt.
THIS Indenture made the Ninteenth day of May, the Second Year of the Reign of
our most dread Sovereign Lord, Edward the Sixth, by the Grace of God, King of
England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, and in Earth, of the
Churches of England, and also of Ireland, Supreme Head: Between the Right
Honorable John Mordaunt, Knight, Lord Mordaunt, on the one party, and William
Mordaunt, the third Son of the said John Lord Mordaunt, of the other party:
Witnesses, That where the said John Lord Mordaunt, for the great, entire and
natural Love, that he has, and bears to the said William, is contented to do
what in him is, to buy, get and obtain the Custody, Ward, and Marriage of the
Body, and Lands of one Agnes Booth, Cousin, and next Heir of John Booth, Clerk;
That is to say, Daughter and Heir of Charles Booth, Brother of the said John
Booth, Clerk, that in consideration of the Premises, and for such costs and
charges, that the said John Lord Mordaunt shall sustain and bear, and be at,
for obtaining and getting of the said premises; The said William Mordaunt does
Covenant and Grant, by these Presents, to and with the said John Lord Mordaunt,
his Executors and Assigns, That he the said William, after the same William
shall, by the Grace of Almighty God, Marry and take to Wife the said Agnes
Booth, the same William shall suffer the said John Lord Mordaunt, to take and
perceive all the Issues and profits, which shall yearly come, grow and arise,
of the Manners, Lands and Tenements, and other Hereditaments, which the said
William, as in the right of the said Agnes may have, or hereafter shall have,
within the Realm of England; during the Espousals between the same William and
Agnes, without Let, Impeachment, Suit, Vexation, Interruption, or in any other
manner of wise, to be Expulsed, Sued, Vexed, Inquieted or Disturbed by the same
William, to the time that the said John Lord Mordaunt, his Executors or
Assigns, has and shall plenarily and fully, wholly and entirely, have
received, perceived, and taken of the Issues and profits of the said Manners,
Lands and Tenements, and other Hereditaments of the said Agnes, all such Sums
of Money which the same John Lord Mordaunt, his Executors or Assigns has, ar
hereafter shall pay, for the obtaining and getting of the Ward and Marriage of
the said Agnes, and all manner of Costs, Charges and Expenses concerning the
same, or any part or parcel thereof. Provided always, (and the said John Lord
Mordaunt is so pleased) That the said William shall have yearly Forty Marks, of
the Issues and Profits of the said Manners, Lands and Tenements, and other
Hereditaments of the said Agnes, toward the living and finding of the said
William and Agnes, to be paid to the said William and Agnes at the Feast of
Saint Michael the Archangel, and the Annunciation of our Lady, by even
Portions. And also, where the said William stands bound to the said John Lord
Mordaunt, his Executors and Assigns, in the Sum of One thousand Pound
Sterling, by his Obligation, bearing date the day of these Presents: The said
John Lord Mordaunt Grants unto the said William, That if the said William,
does well and truly observe, perform, fulfill and keep, all and singular
Covenants, Grants and Agreements, specified and comprised in these present
Indentures, which of the part and behalf of the said William, are to be
performed, fulfilled, kept and done: And also if the said William from time to
time, do make, cause or do to be made, such other further good sufficient
Surety, to the said John Lord Mordaunt, his Executors or Assigns, for the
sooner Payment, Contentation and Satisfaction, of the said Sums of Money, so
said, further expended, and paid by the said John Lord Mordaunt, his Executors
or Assigns, without Trouble, Suit, Vexation of the said William, or of any
other by his procurement, assent or agreement: And also if the said William
Mordaunt, during the natural Life of the same John Lord Mordaunt, be Governed,
Ruled, Ordered and Demained, in all Causes by the same John Lord Mordaunt: That
then the said Obligation of the said Sum of One thousand Pounds, to be utterly
void, and of none effect, or else to stand in its full Strength and Virtue.

In Witness whereof the Parties abovesaid, have enterchangably set their Seals,
and Signs-Manual, the Day and Year above-written. John Mordaunt.

A Division of Lands and Tenements between the Lord Mordaunt, Sir Humphrey
Brown, and others.
THIS is the Agreement for a Partition to be had, between Sir John Mordaunt,
Knight, and Elizabeth, his Wife, on the one party, and Sir Humphrey Brown,
Sergeant at the Law, and George Brown, his Son, on the other party, of all the
Manners, Lands and Tenements, hereafter following. The said Sir John Mordaunt is
agreed to take in allowance of his part, a third part of the Manners hereafter
mentioned, and allowed to the said Humphrey and George, the third part of the
Manners hereafter next following, and the third part of all the Lands and
Tenements occupied with the same.

Inprimis, The third part of the Manners of Drayton, and Luffwick.

Islip and Slipton, with all the Members and Appurtenances, with the Advowsons
of the Churches of Luffwick and Islip.

The third part of the Manner of Sudburgh, in Reversion.

The third part of the Manner of Thrapston, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Emberton, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Woolston, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Wavendon, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Thalton, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manners of Rawnes, Ringsted, and Cotton, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Buckworth, cum pertinentiis.

The Advowsons of the Churches of Buckworth and Woolston.

The third part of the Woods following, and the Inheritance of the same, that
is to say, Langhill, Farthinshalve, Otteland, Bullay, Shyningegappe.

The said Humphrey and George are agreed to take in Allowance, of their parts,
and third part of the Manners before mentioned, and allotted to the said Sir
John, the third of the Manners next ensuing, and the third part of all the Lands
and Tenements occupied with the same in the Compartnery.

Inprimis, The third part of the Manner of Warmister, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Westbury, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Gratley, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Fyfees Verden, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Dichericho, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Hardwick, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Comberton, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Rympton, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Lands of Woodford, cum pertinentiis.

The Advowsons of the Churches of Grafton, Grately and Dichericho.

And the said Humphrey and George, be contented to take in Allowance and
Recompense, for their third part of the Manners, Places, Buildings and Houses of
Drayton, these Parcels following.

The third part of the Manner of Houghton, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Lands in Irclinburgh, cum pertinentiis.

The third part of the Manner of Adyngston, cum pertinentiis.

It is further agreed between the said Parties, to abide the Ordinance of
Nicholas Hardyng and Richard Highman, for the Woods and wast Ground of Sudburgh
and Warmister, and the Inheritance of the same Woods.

It is also agreed between the said Parties, That all Annuities and Rents,
Charges and the Profits, and Rents of such Manners, Lands and Tenements, as be
in Reversion, shall be paid, born, and sustained indifferently by the said
Parties, in like manner as it has been in times past; and that all Evidences
concerning only the premises, to be delivered to the said Parties, to whom the
said Manners and other the premises be allotted.

Signata manu propria Domini Mordaunt. John Mordaunt.

The Claim and Surmise that the Lord Parre makes for to have the Freeborde of
Drayton-Park, to the King's use, from the Lord Mordaunt.
FIrst the Lord Parre says, That one Sir John Karr, Knight, was Keeper of the
Little Park of Brykestock diverse Years, and after the death of the said Sir
John, then the Lord Parre entered: So that the Lord Parre says, That these
Sixty Years there was no claim made to the Freeborde, by any of the Lords of
Drayton; and if any of the Lords of Drayton had pretended any such Right, they
would have f^lled the Wood in their times.

For answer thereunto the Lord Mordaunt says, That he does much marvel, that
the Lord Parre, would claim the premises upon so small a ground; for he cannot
prove, That ever the said Sir John Karr, or any of his Keepers, or the said
Lord Parre, or any his Keepers, did fall, sell, or give any of the Wood,
growing of the said Freeborde, these Sixty Years: For this is true, that John
Stafford, and Edward Stafford, Earls of Wilts, and the Executors of the said
Edward Stafford, and the Lord Mordaunt, and other his Copartners, as in the
right of their Deyffs, did at all times take the Lops and Shreds of the Trees
of the said Wood, growing of the said Freeborde, for mending and repairing of
the Hedges and Ditches of Drayton-Park, and never no business made to the
contrary; but the time that the Lord Parre conceived diverse displeasures
against the said Lord Murdaunt, for that intent, that the Lord Mordaunt should
grant unto him a Fee, for term of his life; and also for to have diverse other
manner of Liberties and Pleasures, at the hands of the Lord Mordaunt in
Grafton-Park-Chase, and in other Woods of the said Lord, and of his said
Drayton.

And after that the said Lord Parre perceived, that the Lord Mordaunt would not
be agreeable to the same, then the Lord Parre began to pick quarrels against
the Lord Mordaunt, and his Servants; and among other things for the said Wood,
growing of the Freebord of Drayton Park, caused one John Allen, Keeper at that
time of the Park of Brykestock, to fell certain Bushes and Woods, whereof some
of them did grow within the bottom of the Ditch, and some did grow otherwise
upon the bare Bank of Drayton Park. And also caused the said Allen for to pluck
down the Pale of Drayton Park, to make a common way, through Drayton Park, for
my Lord Parre and his Servants: And yet the Lord Mordaunt's Servants carried
the said Wood so fellen unto Drayton-Maner.

And the Lord Parre not pleased therewith, found default at the Pale of
Drayton-Park, which was there made by Sir Thomas Cheyne, Knight, and would
never rest by complaining to the Council, and by setting of pains in the King's
Court of Swanymote, unto the time that the Lord Mordaunt, and his Copartners,
were fain to pull down the old Pale, and to make a new Pale there, of a Man's
length, which was done.

And also the Lord Mordaunt says, That the Lord Parre many times, and often
discharged the said Lord, for to give him all the Woods growing upon the said
brink of the Ditch, Freeborde, and in the bottom of the Ditch; and also all the
Wood growing upon the Bank it self, to the intent that the Lord Parre would
have sold that Wood to his own profit. And forasmuch as the Lord Mordaunt,
denied the Lord Parre, for to have it of his Gift, The Lord Parre said, he
would be about with the Lord Mordaunt: And upon that refusal and denial, the
Lord Parre began to seek and invent, how he might do the Lord Mordaunt all the
Displeasure that might be devised; and for accomplishment of part of his
purpose, the said Lord Parre spoke to his Cousin, Sir Wistan Brown, Knight, who
was one of the Wardens, and had the Custody of the Heirs of the Manners of
Drayton, and Drayton-Park, and to Sir Humphrey Brown, Knight, who was Tenant by
Courtesy, of the third part of the said Manner and Park; and did get a Grant of
their parts of Drayton-Park, and had liberty for to Hunt, and Hawk in all the
Manners and Vere's Lands for their two part: And thus having such rule, took
upon him for to fell certain Woods of the brink of Drayton-Park, the bottom of
the Ditch, and of the Bank-self, and commanded one Rowland Slade, otherwise
called Rowland Smith, Servant to the said Lord Parre, and Keeper of the
Nether-park, for to fell a Tree growing within the Ditch of Drayton-park; which
Rowland caused one Richard Slade, otherwise called Richard Smith, Brother to
the said Rowland, for to fell the said Tree: Whereupon the Lord Mordaunt spoke
to the Lord Parre for the said Tree, and showed him, That Rowland had done
naught in so doing: Whereupon the Lord Parre said to the Lord Mordaunt, What
have you to do therein, I have as good authority and power for Two parts, as
you have for the Third part. And after that, the Lord Mordaunt's Servants
carried away to the Lodge of Drayton-park, most part of the said Tree, and the
said Rowland had certain Arms, and the Body of the said Tree.

Also the said Richard Slade, by the Lord Parre's Commandment, accounted for to
fell more Wood upon the said brink, Freeborde, bottom of the Ditch, and of the
Bank; which was about the Commotion time in Lincolnshire: Whereupon James
Wavenson, Servant to the Lord Mordaunt, was sent to the Lord Parre for to have
his pleasure in the same: Which Lord Parre made answer to the said James,
saying, What have you to do therewith? And then the said James said, I come for
to know, if it be your pleasure, that your Servants shall so do upon my
Master's Ground? Then the Lord Parre answered and said, I shall make your
Master and you also answer, when I do see my time: And so the said James
departed from the said Lord Parre.

Also the Lords of Drayton, were at all times from time to time, by pains laid
in the King's Courts of Swanymote dryven for to make sufficient Fence, either
with Hedge and Ditches, or else with pale, for to keep the King's Deer out of
Drayton-park: So that it is to be thought clearly, that if the Lords of
Drayton, had encroached any part of the King's Ground or Wood, that the said
Encroachment should have been, from time to time, presented in the said Court
of Swanymote, as well as the pains there laid and presented, for default of
making of Pale, Hedges or Ditches.

And where it is said, That the Lord Mordaunt and his Servants, of Right ought
not for to have any Interest or Title to the said Wood, growing of the brink of
the Ditch of Drayton-park, then they would have fellen the same before this
time, and not have suffered the same so long to grow to old Wood.

So that the Lord Mordaunt makes this Answer, That he and his Copartners have
suffered as old Wood to grow upon the brink of the Ditch, within the Park of
Drayton, as is without, and that will well appear by old Trees, and Stumps of
Trees now growing on the brink of the said Ditch, within the said Park, whosoever
please to view and search the same.

Where also it is Invented, That forasmuch as the Keeper of the little Park of
Brikestock do make a little piece of pale, between Plumbwel-gate and
Drayton-park-Pale, and so do go on the Ditch with the said Pale, and within the
same Pale, next unto the said Pale of Drayton-park, that by the rest they would
have the Ditch and Freeborde.

To this the Lord Mordaunt makes answer, That many times his Keeper of
Drayton-park, has made the said Pale from Drayton-park-pale, over the said
Ditch and Freeborde; which from time to time, for diverse Years, has been
plucked up again, by the Lord Parre and his Servants, for to make a common
Riding and a Foot-path, as well of that part, as of more, for the Lord Parre
and his Servants to ride and go through Drayton-park at their pleasures. And
also at such time, as the said Lord Mordaunt, and his said Copartners, had
Deer within the same Park of Drayton; that the said Lord Parre and Keepers did
come into Drayton-park, and break down the Pales in every corner of their
Grounds, and Hunt out the Deer, and killed also Deer; and all was done to put
the Lord Mordaunt to all displeasures that might be invented and compassed. And
all such Displeasures, as the Lord Parre did to the Lord Mordaunt, he did the
same in the Names of Wistan Brown and Sir Humphrey Brown, and not in the King's
Right.

Also it is well to be perceived, if Men would the same well consider, and
weigh the same indifferently, according to the Truth, That the said brink of
the Ditch, was by the Owners of Drayton-park set with Thorn, as well as with
other Wood; but especially with Thorn, of that side that is adjoining to
Brikestock-park, as also round about all the Park of Drayton, as well of the
insides as of the outsides; which was done to good purpose, for a safeguard to
the Wood, growing between both Hedges, or else the Cattle or Deer, that from
time time did, or should go within Brikestock-park, would have destroyed the
Spring of the Ditches; and all the said brinks be called in this Shire of
Northampton, Ward-Hedges, made for safeguard of the Spring.

Also it is further to be noted, The Antiquity and long continuance of
Drayton-park, the space of Three hundred Years Enparked, and the little Park of
Brikestock, before it was enclosed, was a common Ground called Bootesley;
whereupon the Tenants of Brikestock, Grafton, Slipton, Twywell, and other
Towns, had Common for their Beasts. And if at that time the Owners of
Drayton-park, having a Park there had not well considered the preservation of
their Ditching and Setting, and for the continuance of the Wood to grow, the
said Inhabitants would have clearly destroyed the same with their Cattle; and
so it cannot be thought otherwise of Right, but that the said Ditches and
Freeborde does belong to Drayton-park.

And many other displeasures, the Lord Mordaunt can declare, that he has
sustained and born, and had at the Hands of the Lord Parre and his Servants;
and all such displeasures began for the Denial of the said Wood, and for denial
of granting a Fee to the said Lord, and for that the Lord Parre could not get
rule of the third part of all Greenslands about Drayton, Grafton, Luffwick, and
other Towns, at the pleasure of the said Lord Parre, which displeasure the Lord
Mordaunt will not express.

Matters laid and objected by the Lord Parre, the Regarders, Verders and
others, against the Lord Mordaunt, for what cause the Lords of Drayton suffered
the Wood, growing of the Freeborde of the Park of Drayton to grow so long,
whereupon the Lord Parre now claims the same for the King's Graces Majesty,
Decimo tertio die Aprilis anno primo regis Edwardi Sexti: And the Lord Parre's
Regarders, Verders and others do say, That if the Lords of Drayton should have
had any right to the Hedges, Ditches, Freeborde and Wood, between Drayton-park
and Brikestock-park, that they would not have suffered, Rowland Slade, Richard
Slade, otherwise called Richard Smith, and other Keepers of Brikestock-Park,
for to have fellen the Wood of the said Ditch to the King's use.

For Answer whereunto the Lord Mordaunt says, as hereafter follows.

First, Edward Stafford, late Earl of Wilts, deceased in Anno decimo quarto
Regis Henrici septimi: After whose Death the Rule, Order and Profits of the
said Park went to the performance of the said Earl's Will; and the Executors of
the said Earl, took the Profits of the Park, and did maintain the Hedges
belonging to the said Park, and did fell, cut and prostrate, arms of Trees and
other Thonrs, for making of the said Hedges, between Drayton-Park and
Brikestock Park.

After that Sir Thomas Cheyne, Knight, which at that time had Interest in the
Moiety of the Premises, as in the right of his Wife, agreed with the Executors
of the said Earl for the Premises. And so after that the same Sir Thomas, had
the said Drayton-Park, in which Sir Thomas's days, none of the said Keepers did
fell, or take any such Wood, at that time growing of and upon the said Ditches:
And also the Keepers of the said Sir Thomas walked their Ring-walk, within the
said Little Park of Brikestock, all the said Sir Thomas Cheyne's time: And
after that Sir Thomas Cheyne deceased, then came the premises into the Hands of
the Lord Mordaunt, and his Copartners, who entered into the premises, and also
into the Manner of Drayton, then being in the Tenure of Robert Marburn,
Gentleman; and the said Lord would have occupied the said Manner of Drayton, and
put out the said Robert Marburn; wherewith the said Robert took displeasure
with the said Lord Mordaunt: And the said Robert Marburn, to the intent he
would occupy the said Manners, still in his Hands, Entitled George late Earl of
Salop, to the premises, by a false Will nuncupative, which the same Robert
Surmised, that the said Edward Earl of Wilts should make: Whereupon the said
Manner of Drayton-Park and other Premises, were in contention diverse Years. And
after that the said Lord Mordaunt, and his Copartners, agreed with the said
Earl of Salop, and so had the said Manner, Park, and other the Premises quietly,
without any Interruption, Claim, Challenge or Demand to the Premises, or any
part or parcel thereof, made thereunto by any of the King's Keepers or
Officers, of the said Little Park of Brikestock; and walked the Ring-Walk
within the said Park of Brikestock; and made the Hedges, Pale, Ring, unto the
time that one John Allen, Keeper of the King's Park of Brikestock, by the
commandment of the Lord Parre, that now is, caused certain Wood to be felled;
whereof some of the said Wood did grow, within the bottom of the Ditch, and
some otherwise; which Wood was carried by the Lord Mordaunt's Servants to
Drayton-Maner. And after that one Richard Slade, otherwise called Richard
Smith, Brother to one Rowland Slade, did fell a Tree in the bottom of
Drayton-Park-Ditch, by the commandment of the said Rowland, at that time being
Keeper of the said Nether-Park of Brikestock: Whereupon the said Lord Mordaunt
showed the said Lord Parre, and the said Lord Parre said, That Rowland did it
by his commandment, and that he the said Lord Parre, might lawfully command the
said Rowland so to do, for two parts which he assured belonged to the Browns
parts, as well as the Lord Mordaunt did command his Servants to meddle for his
Two parts; and so the Lord Parre from time to time did permit and suffer the
said Keepers, for to do all the displeasures to the said Lord Mordaunt, and his
Servants, that might be devised, or imagined, for that intent and purpose, that
the said Lord Parre would have had the rule of Drayton-Park himself. And James
Stevenson says, That at another time, which was about the time of the
Insurrection in Lincolnshire, that the said Rowland did fell certain Wood,
growing in the bottom of Drayton-Park-Ditch: Whereupon the said James went to
the Lord Parre, for to know his pleasure, who made answer to the said James as
follows, videlicet, What have you to do therewith? Then said James, Sir, I
come to know your pleasure, and whether it be your pleasure, that your Servants
shall so enterprise upon my Master's Ground or not? No, said the Lord Parre, I
shall make your Master and you answer also. So the said James departed from the
Lord Parre at that time.

And where the said Drayton-kark, since the first making of the said Park, has
been always Ditched, and Hedged, and so did continue all the days and time of
Sir Simon de Drayton, and Sir Henry Green, Knight, Henry Green, Son of the
said Sir Henry Green, Sir Ralph Green, Knight, John Green and Henry Green,
Esquires, and also in the days of John Stafford and Edward Stafford, late Earls
of Wilts, and in the days of Robert Wittlebury, William Marbury and Thomas
Mountague, Esquires, Executors of the Testament and Last Will of the said
Edward Stafford, and always used to be Hedged, and the Ditches scowred by the
Owners of the said Drayton-Park, and in all their days and time, no default
found in the said Freebord, Hedges and Ditches, by any of the Keepers of the
said little Park of Brikestock; but that the owners of Drayton-Park did scowre
the Ditches and Hedges of the same, used their Freebord, took profits of all
manner of Wood and Thorn growing in and upon the said Ditches and Freeborde,
unto the time that the said Drayton-Park came to the Possession of one Sir
Thomas Cheyne, Knight, who had the said Drayton-Park as in the right of his
Wife: And in the days and time of the said Sir Thomas Cheyne, the Keeper of the
said little Park, found default in the said Sir Thomas Cheyne, for not scowring
of the said Ditches, and for not well repairing of the Hedges of the same
Drayton-Park, forasmuch as the Hedges of Drayton-Park, at that time, were
thinly made, and very low: And also the said Keeper of the little Park,
surmised, That the said Sir Thomas Cheyne, and his Keeper of Drayton-Park, did
stand between both the Hedges of Drayton-Park, and Killed the King's Deer,
which were accustomably used for to Feed in the said little Park; and did train
the King's Deer out of the said little Park into Drayton-Park; and surmised,
and laid to the said Sir Thomas Cheyne, and his Servants charge, diverse
Misdemeanors, as, Breaking into the said little Park of Brikestock, with their
Bows, Arrows, Hounds, and Greyhounds: over and beside that the said Keepers of
the said little Park of Brikestock, complained in the King's Court of
Swanymote, upon the said Sir Thomas Cheyne, and upon his Servants, as well for
Killing of Deer, as also for to mend the said Ditches and Hedges, by a day
prefixed; and said to the said Sir Thomas Cheyne, that, If the said Ditches and
Hedges, were not amended, that then they would inform the King's Grace, King
Henry the Seventh, of their misdemeanors. Whereupon the said Sir Thomas Cheyne
considered to himself, and among his Friends, That he would not have the King's
displeasure in that behalf, by the advice of his Friends, caused a Pale to be
set upon the top of Drayton-Park Ditch, which was the first Pale that ever was
set there, after the making of the said Park; for before that pale so set
there, the said Drayton-park was ever Ditched, Quickset, and Hedged; which Pale
so set by the said Sir Thomas Cheyne, continued all the life of the said Sir
Thomas, and long time after, without any default found thereat, or at any of
the Freeborde, Ditches and Hedges of the said Drayton-Park, unto the Tenth Year
of the Reign of our late Sovereign Lord, of Famous Memory, King Henry the
Eighth; at which time the said Drayton-Park, came into the Hands and Possession
of the Lord Mordaunt, and his Copartners.

And the said Drayton-Park being in their hands, the said Lord Parre, and the
King's Officers and Keepers of Brikestock-Park complained and said, That the
said Pale, made by the said Sir Thomas Cheyne, was no sufficient Pale; for the
Pale was so low, that the Keepers of Drayton-Park might stand, and did stand,
upon the top of the Dike of Drayton-Park, and Shoot over the said Pale, unto
the said little Park, and Killed the King's Deer, being feeding within the said
little Park: And diverse times the Lord Parre laid to the charges of the Keepers
of Drayton-Park, for Killing of diverse and many such Deer; and the Lord Parre
not contented with the said Pale, complained to Sir Thomas Lovel, Knight, at
that time being Justice of the Forests, for not maintaining and making a
sufficient Pale, or Hedge between both the said Parks. And that complaint
notwithstanding, diverse Pains were laid in the King's Grace's Court of
Swanymote, upon the said Lord and his Copartners, for to amend the said Pale
and Hedge sufficiently: Whereupon the Lord Mordaunt caused certain number of
Oaks to be felled in Grafton, and Grafton-Park, and in other places within the
bounds of Grafton, for the new amending of the same Pale, and Hedges, and
thereupon took down the old Pale, and made a new Pale of a greater length, and
did certain costs of the Ditches of the said Park, and did fell certain Thorns,
and other Wood for Ports, Rails and Stumps, for the good amending of the same
new Pale; which Pale so newly made continued diverse Years, and no default found
at the same, by the said Lord Parre, or any of his Officers or Keepers.

And after this the Lord Parre's Keepers of Brikestock, would in the Winter
time, being Frost and Snow, break up the said Pale, to the intent that the
King's Deer of the little Park, might come into Drayton, for to have their
feeding there, or else the said Deer would have Perished and Starved for
hunger: And yet the said Favor notwithstanding, a new Complaint was made, a
new pain of Twenty Pounds was laid in the said Court of Swanymote, That the
Lord Mordaunt should amend his Pale and Hedge, and scower his Ditches by a day,
upon pain of Forfeiture of the said pain of Twenty Pounds. And after that,
within certain Years, another like pain of Twenty Pounds, was laid in the said
Court of Swanymote, for to make the said Hedges and Ditches, between
Drayton-Park and Brikestock-Park sufficient. And the said Lord Parre, at this
time being Friendly with the Lord Mordaunt, showed Robert Catbyn, Gentleman,
thereof, to the intent that the Lord Mordaunt might have knowledge thereof, for
to make the Hedges and Ditches sufficient, whereby the Lord Mordaunt might
avoid the Forfeiture of the said pain of Twenty Pounds.

And forasmuch as such pains were so laid in the King's Graces Courts of
Swanymote, as well in King Henry the Seventh's days, as also in the days of our
late Sovereign Lord, of Famous Memory, King Henry the Eighth; for that the said
Sir Thomas Cheyne, as also the Lord Mordaunt, and his Copartners, should
amend, and repair the said Pale, Hedges and Ditches of Drayton-park, of that
side, that is between the said Drayton-park, and the said Little Park of
Brikestock, by certain several days to them prefixed, as by the Books of the
said Courts of Swanymote, it will more at large appear: That if the Lords of
Drayton-park, had made any Encrochment upon the Little Park of Brikestock, or
of, and upon any of the King's Ground, that then their Encrochments should have
been as well found, and presented, as for the amending and repairing of
Drayton-park-pale, and of the Hedges and Ditches of the said Wood, in the said
Courts of Swanymote remembered and presented.

A Letter to the Lord Mordaunt, from the Lord William North.
MY LORD,
After my hearty Commendations, where by virtue of a Commission, ye procure a
Freeborde to be had within the King's Majesty's Little Park of Brikestock,
there is upon the same past a Quest, and Verdit by them given; which Quest, and
Verdit, as it is taken, rather serves for your purpose, than for the
Conservation of the King's Majesty's Right: The said Commission being never
Executed, in my Uncle the Lord Parre's life, whose Office in the said Park I
now have: And that neither the King's Solicitor being then in those parts, nor
any other his Learned Council, for the Soliciting and defending of his Grace's
Right, was called, or Privy thereunto: I thought hereby, notwithstanding your
Proceedings in the premises, to require your Lordship to forbear to meddle, or
intromit with any thing within the said Park, until it may appear unto my Lords
of the King's most Honorable Privy Council, or otherwise by the Law, what you
have to show for your Claim.

Thus I bid your Lordship heartily well to fare, from Hampton Court the
Seventeenth day of October. Your Lordships Loving Friend, W. North.

A Letter to the Lord Mordaunt, from the Lord William North.
MY LORD,
AFter my hearty Commendations, perceiving by your Letter, that according to
such Commission as you have already proceeded in, ye be desirous to enjoy the
Freeborde within the Park of Brikestock; to the which Commission
notwithstanding my Uncle was Privy, thereby to know your Claim and Title of the
said Freeborde; yet if God had continued his life, till it had been sitten on,
he would have found, and caused matter to be alleged for the King, as would
have been for the conservation of his Majesty's Inheritance: By the death of
whom, and for lack of the King's Learned Council, to speak in his cause; it is
thought the thing has not past in his Highness's behalf, in such ways as it
might have done. And as I have heard say, The King's Solicitor has before time
advised you, that ye should not take upon you to Encroach, upon any part of the
King's old Inheritance, this being parcel of the oldest his Grace has in those
parts: To the proceeding of which Commission the said Solicitor being in that
Country, me seemed that he should have had warning, and been privy to the
Execution thereof, to have spoken for the King's Right. Nevertheless, because
it may appear, that as little as I can shall be (by my time) done in the said
Parks, to the derogation of the King's Inheritance; Therefore I will procure
another Commission either to the foresaid Commissioners, or to other Gentlemen
of good Estimation; at the Execution whereof, some of the King's Learned
Council shall be there, for the defense of his Cause; and I doubt not, but you
against the same time will provide as shall be best for your Claim: And if upon
the Trial thereof, you shall have Right to the said Board, I shall be well
content ye enjoy it accordingly. And in the mean time, I require you not to
intermeddle with any thing within the said Park, by virtue of your First
Commission; but to forbear the same, until the new Commission be had, and put
in Execution as shall appertain.

Thus I bid your Lordship well to fare, from Westminster the Tenth of December.
Your Lordships Loving Friend, W. North.

An Exemplification of Depositions concerning the Freeborde of Drayton-Park.
EDwardus Sextus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex, Fidei
Defensor, and in terra Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and Hibernicae Supremum Caput.
Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Salutem. Inspeximus quandam
Petitionem, coram nobis, in Cancellaria nostra, per Johannem Mordaunt, militem,
ad Testes perpetuam rei memoriam examinandum nuper exhibitam, and in filaciis
Cancellariae nostrae praedictae residentem, in haec verba. To the Right
Honorable Sir William Paulet, Knight of the most honorable Order of the
Garter, Lord Saint-John, Lord Grand-master of the King's most honorable
Household, Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and High-Justice of all
the King's Forests, Chaces and Parks, on this side the Trent: In right humble
wise shows unto your good Lordship, your daily suppliant, John Mordaunt,
Knight, Lord Mordaunt, That whereas it pleased King Edward the First, sometime
King of the Noble Realm of England, upon the humble Suit of Simon Drayton,
Knight, Ancestor unto your said Suppliant, to grant unto the said Simon License
for to Empark certain parcels of Ground, then parcel of the Manner of Drayton,
within the County of Northampton; whereof some of the said parcels, were then
before that time, within the bounds of the Forest of Rokingham, and some of
them were without the Forest; and that according unto the said License, the
said Simon made a Park, now called Drayton-park, for the safeguard of the Game;
wherein the said Simon made a Ditch, double Ditch'd, and Quick-set on both
sides, round about the said Park, as well on that side which boundeth, and
adjoineth now on the said Forest side, as on the other parts and quarters
thereof; as upon the sight thereof more plainly it may appear: And the said
Simon did leave also within the said Forest, one Freeborde without the
outer-side of the Ditch of the said Park, to the intent to lay upon the said
Freeborde, all such Wood, and Bushes, as should be at any time thereafter
requisite, for the amendment of the said Hedge. After the which Park of Drayton
so made, a Park now called the Little-Park of Brikestock, was made of that
parcel of the said Forest of Rokingham, which bounded along against the
West Side of the said Park of your said Suppliant, called Drayton-park. After
the which said Park called Brikestock Little Park, so made, the Keepers of your
said Suppliant's Park, called Drayton-park, continually and daily at their
pleasure, without interruption or disturbance, accustomed for to go out of
Drayton-park into Brikestock-park, at a Style called Snapes-Stile, and so keep
their walk within Brikestock-park, upon the said Freeborde of Drayton-park,
unto a Gate within Brikestock-park, called Plumwell-gate, for to view and
oversee the decay of the Mounds and Hedges, between the said Two Parks. And
since the said Park of Brikestock thus made, the Ancestors of your said
Suppliant, for the better mending of the said Park of Drayton, and for the
avoiding of such Contention, as might arise by the occasion of a slender Fence,
between the said Two Parks, have caused a Pale to be set upon the top of the
Ditch of the said Park of Drayton, in such place, where before time one of the
Quick-hedges did grow; and by the occasion of a Pale so made, the Ancestors of
your said Suppliant have not so much esteemed, but have suffered, the
Quick-hedges which were set on the outer-side of the said Ditch, toward the
said Park of Brikestock, for lack of a pashing and cutting thereof, at times
convenient, to grow to great Wood and Thorn. And for because that Timber,
requisite for the making of Pale, is in a manner decayed, and waxes very
scant, and chargeable in these parts: And because your said Suppliant would
also renew the double Quick-set, and the double Dikes, as well which do border
between the said Two Parks, as betwixt such other Grounds and Woods, as your
said Suppliant has adjoining and bordering upon the other quarters of the said
Park of Brikestock, with new Ditches and Hedges, Quick-set, for the more sure
and better fencing of the same: And because also, that your said Suppliant,
would be very sorry to be noted, or reputed to contend with his Prince, or to
encroach or offend upon any parcel of the King's Majesty his Inheritance, or to
minister any occasion of Unkindness to such as be, or should be Keepers unto
the King's Majesty, of the said Little Park of Brikestock, for taking away any
of their lawful Commodities or Profits: Your said Suppliant, does therefore
most humbly desire your good Lordship, for the quiet Determination of the
matter, that it may please your good Lordship, to award the King's Gracious
Commission, unto such persons as your Lordship shall think meet and convenient,
for that purpose; Authorizing and Commanding them thereby, to enquire the truth
by all such ways, means and manner, as to their good discretion shall be
thought most convenient: How far the Freeborde, and Ground of your said
Suppliant, extends and lies, without the said Park of Drayton, toward, or
within the said Little-Park of Brikestock: And whether such Wood, and Thorn, as
now grows upon the side or brink of the Ditch of Drayton-park, which lies
and bordereth next unto the said Little Park of Brikestock, does grow upon the
Ground and Freeborde of your said Suppliant, or upon the King's Majesty's
Ground: And whether the King's Majesty, and his Predecessors, have used, or
ought to have, any Wood that grows on the outside the Pale of the said Park
of Brikestock, toward and against, the Woods and Grounds of your said
Suppliant, by any Prerogative, or any other lawful Custom: And in what place
the Keepers of your said Suppliant's Park of Drayton, have in times past used,
and may lawfully enter, and pass over out of Drayton-park into the said
Little-Park of Brikestock: And where to depart and go, to go out of the said
Brikestock-park. And here far from the said Pale or Hedge of Drayton-park, the
said Keepers of Drayton-park, have used in times past, and may lawfully walk,
for their Walk, within the said Little-Park of Brikestock; and to testisie
under their Seals, the same Inquisition or Depositions into the King's
honorable Court of Chancery, there to remain of Record, for a perpetual
memory, or Remembrance, and for a quiet, and full Determination of the said
matter. And your said Suppliant shall daily pray to God for the Preservation of
your Lordship, in Honor long to continue. Inspeximus etiam quandam
Commissionem, una cum Returna ejusdem, dilectis, and Fidelibus suis Edwardo
Mountague militi, Capitali Justiciario de Communi Banco, Johanni Saint-John,
Thomae Tresham, militibus: Ac dilecto sibi Richardo Humphrey de Drayton
directam, ad Testes praedictos examinandum, and in filaciis ejusdem
Cancellariae nostrae residentem, in haec verba. Edwardus Sextus, Dei gratia,
Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex, Fidei Defensor, and in terra Ecclesiae
Anglicanae and Hibernicae supremum Caput: Dilectis and fidelibus suis Edwardo
Montague, Militi, Capitali Justiciario de Communi Banco, Johanni Saint-John,
Thomae Tresham, militibus, and dilecto sibi Richardo Humphrey de Drayton,
falutem. Sciatis quod nos de Fidelitatibus, and providis Circumspectionibus
vestris before confidentes, Assignavimus vos, and tenore praesentium, damus
vobis, vel tribus vestrum, potestatem, and autoritatem, ad inquirendum per
Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum, de Comitatu Northamptoniae, tam
infra libertates quam extra, per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit; nec non
ad audiendum, and examinandum quandam materiam, in quadam Petitione, his
praesentibus annexa, inter Nos and Johannem Mordaunt, Militem, Dominum
Mordaunt, contentam, and specificatam. Et ideo vobis, vel tribus vestrum
mandamus, quod ad certos dies, and loca, quos ad hoc provideritis, Testes
quoscunque, quos maxim pro testificatione ejusdem materiae fore videritis
evocandum, coram vobis, aut tribus vestrum, evocandum; ac ipsos Testes, and
eorum quemlibet, de and super eisdem materiis, and circumstantiis ejusdem,
super eorum Sacramentis, coram vobis, corporaliter praesentandis, diligenter
examinetis; Depositionesque suas recipiatis, and in scriptis redigatis. Et
super hoc auditis inde Rationibus, ac aliis viis and modis, quibus melius
sciveritis, aut poteritis eandem materiam, juxta sanas discretiones vestras, in
forma praedicta diligenter examinandum. Ac insuper vobis, vel tribus vestrum
mandamus, quod diligenter super praemissis facitis Inquisitionem: Et eam sic
factam distinct, and aperte, Nobis in Cancellariam nostram, in Octavis Sancti
Michaelis proxime futuris, ubicunque tunc fuerit, sub Sigillis vestris, vel
trium vestrum Sigillis, eorum, per quos factum fuit, mittatis, and has Literas
nostras Patentes, una cum Petitione praedicta. Mandamus etiam tenore
praesentium, Vicecomiti nostro Comitatus praedicti, quod ad certos Dies and
Loca, quos vos vel tres vestrum ei scire facitis, venire faciat coram vobis,
vel tribus vestrum, tot and tales probos homines, and legales, de Balliva sua,
tam infra Libertates, quam extra, per quos rei veritas in praemissis melius
sciri poterit, and inquiri. In cujus rei Testimonium, has Literas nostras fieri
fecimus Patentes. Test meipfo apud Westmonasterium, vicesimo septimo die
Junii, Anno Regni nostri primo. Southwell. Inspeximus ulterius Certificationem
praefatorum Commissariorum, una cum Depositionibus quorundam Testium, virtute
Commissionis praedictae, coram praefatis Commissariis captis, examinatis, and
in eadem Cancellaria nostra returnatis, ac in Filaciis ejusdem Cancellariae
nostrae, residentibus, in haec verba. Depositions taken the Two and twentieth
day of September in the First Year of our Sovereign Lord Edward the Sixth, by
the Grace of God, of England, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith,
and of the Church of England, and also of Ireland, in Earth the Supreme Head:
Before Sir Edward Mountague, Knight, Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir
Thomas Tresham, Knight, and Richard Humphrey, Esquire, by virtue of the King's
Commission to them directed, and to these Presents annexed, exhibited on the
part of Sir John Mordaunt, Knight, Lord Mordaunt, Robert Latimer of
North-Crawley, in the County of Buckingham, Gentleman, examined, deposes, and
says upon his Oath, That he this Examinant, about thirty Years past, was
Keeper of a Park, called Drayton-park, under Sir John Mordaunt, Knight, Lord
Mordaunt, then and yet Owner of this said Park, and then Master to this
Examinant; and at his entry into the same Office, one William Boyse, then of
Luffwick, who had been Keeper of the said Park of Drayton, came to this
Examinant, and showed him the Walk of the said Park of Drayton, wherein he
declared, That he being Keeper of the said Park of Drayton; walked without the
Pale of Drayton-park, and within the Park of Brikestock, called the
Little-Park, from a certain place in the said Park of Brikestock, called
Plumwell-Gate, unto a place called Snapes, where he entered always again into
the said Park of Drayton, including always, as parcel of Drayton-park, and as a
Freeborde to the same, a certain parcel of Ground or Wood, without the Pale or
Hedge of Drayton-park, toward the said Little-park of Brikestock: And
according to the same, this Examinant and his Deputies, Keepers there, did
always walk the same way, during all such time as he was Keeper, without any
Contradiction of any Person or Persons. And he says further, That the said
Boyse then also declared to this Examinant, That the same Boyse, has seen,
diverse and many times, the Keepers of Drayton-park, fell Wood for the mending
of the Pale of the same Drayton-park, and for other causes, upon the same
Freeborde, or Ground, without the said park of Drayton, toward and within the
Little-park of Brikestock; and never denied nor Impeached for the same by the
Keeper of Brikestock-park, nor by any other Person or Persons: And more he
knows not. Thomas Jefforne of Luffwick, in the County of Northampton, Clerk,
Sworn and Examined, deposes and says upon his Oath, That he has diverse times
heard one William Boyse, late of Luffwick, say, That he the same Boyse, was
Keeper of a certain Park, called Drayton-park, in the County of Northampton,
under one Edward Earl of Wiltshire, then Owner of the said Park: And that by
such time as he was Keeper there, he always walked, as parcel of his Walk of
Drayton-park, within the Park of Brikestock, called the Little-park, there from
a certain place called Plumwell-Gate, unto a place there called Snapes, where
always he entered again into Drayton-park, including within his Walk a parcel of
Wood-Ground, within the Little-park of Brikestock, and adjoining to the Pale or
Hedge of Drayton-park, as parcel of the said Park of Drayton, and then called
the Freeborde of Drayton-park. And the said Boyse told also the said Examinant,
That he was after the death of the said Earl, Keeper of the said Little-Park of
Brikestock, under one Sir John Carr, Knight, at which time one John Allen was
Keeper of Drayton-park, and walked the same way within the Little-park of
Brikestock, from the said Plumwell-Gate to Snapes, and including the said
parcel of Wood-Ground, as parcel of Drayton-park, in like manner as the said
Boyse, and others had done before. And says further, That he never knew any
thing said or done, to any of the said Keepers of Drayton-park, for the walking
of the same: And more he knows not. James Stevenson of Sudborough, in the
County of Northampton, Sworn and Examined, deposes and says upon his Oath,
That he has been Keeper of Drayton-park, in the County of Northampton, by the
space of Eighteen Years or there-abouts, under John Lord Mordaunt, Owner of the
said Park; and at his entry into the same Park, one William Boyse, sometime
Keeper of Drayton-park, came to this Examinant, and showed to him the Walk of
the same; in which he declared, That this Examinant, should in walking of the
said Park, go over at a Style in Drayton-park, near to the Gate, called
Plumwell-Gate, within the Little-park of Brikestock; and so walking within the
said Little-park of Brikestock, unto a Style called Snapes, and including a
certain parcel of Wood, adjoining to the Pale of Drayton-park, as parcel of
Drayton-park, and as a Freeborde to the said Drayton-park. At which place
called Snapes, the said Keepers of Drayton-park, always entered again into
Drayton-park; and ever after this Examinant walked the same Ground, as parcel
of Drayton park; and diverse and many times caused Wood to be felled, within the
said parcel of Wood-Ground, called Freeborde, without the Pale of Drayton-park,
and within the Little-park of Brikestock, for the repairing and mending of the
Pale of Drayton-park, when need required; which he did, without any
contradiction of any Person. And he says further, That he knew a certain
parcel of Ground, called the Pingle, adjoining to the Little-Park of
Brikestock, sold by Master Marbury, then owner of the same, was all sold to the
use of the said Master Marbury: And at that time the Keepers of
Brikestock-park, nor any other person, claimed or had any part, or parcel of
the same Wood, so sold: And more he knows not. Thomas Watts, of Sudborough,
in the County of Northampton, Husbandman, Sworn and Examined, deposes and
says upon his Oath, That this Examinant, about Twelve Years past, sold a
parcel of Wood, called the Snapes, adjoining to the Little Park of Brikestock,
to the use of one Master Marbury, then Owner of the same Wood, which was felled
into Brikestock-park-pale; at which time the Keeper of Brikestock-park, nor any
other person, claimed, or had any part of the same Wood, so sold: Which said
Wood, called Snapes, is now the Inheritance of the Lord Mordaunt: And more he
knows not. William Stretton, of Twywell, in the County of Northampton,
Husbandman, Sworn and Examined, deposes and says upon his Oath, That he,
about Twelve or Fourteen Years since, bought of one Richard Bailey, of Luffwick,
a certain parcel of Wood-Ground, called the Pingle, in the Parish of
Sudborough, in the Wood called Snapes, adjoining to Brikestock-park; which said
Pingle this Examinant felled, hard to the Pale of the Little-Park of
Brikestock, and carried away the same, without let or interruption of the
Keepers of Brikestock-Park, and without any demand made by the said Keepers, of
any part or parcel of the same Wood, called Pingle: And more he cannot depose.
John Wright, of Godington, in the County of Northampton, Husbandman, Sworn and
Examined, deposes and says upon his Oath, That he, about Twenty Years now
past, was Salesman to one Master Marbury, of Luffwick; at which time, he sold
for his said Master, a certain parcel of Wood, called the the Snapes, adjoining
to the Little Park of Brikestock: At which time this Examinant felled the same
Wood, hard to the Pale of Brikestock-park, without any interruption of the
Keepers of Brikestock-park, or any other person or persons; for to the
knowledge of this Examinant, the same Keepers, nor any other, claimed any part
of the same Wood: Which Wood, called Snapes, is now the Lord Mordaunt's: And
more he knows not.

Inspeximus praeterea quandam Inquisitionem indentatam, super praemissis
captam, and Filaciis Cancellariae nostrae praedictae similiter residentem, in
haec verba. Northampton. Inquisitio indentata, capta apud Drayton, in Comitatu
Northamptoniae, vicesimo secundo die Septembris, Anno Regni Edwardi Sexti, Dei
Gratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei Defensoris, and in terra,
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and Hibernicae supremi Capitis, primo, coram Edwardo
Mountague, milite, Capitali Justiciario dicti Domini Regis de Communi Banco,
Thoma Thresham, Milite, and Richardo Humphrey de Drayton, Armigero,
Commissionariis dicti Domini Regis, virtute Commissionis ipsius Domini Regis
iis directae, ad inquirendum, per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum, de
Comitatu Northamptoniae, tam infra libertates, quam extra, per quos rei veritas
melius sciri poterit. Nec non ad audiendum and examinandum quandam materiam, in
quadam Petitione praedictae Commissioni dicti Domini Regis annexa, and huic
Inquifitioni affilata, inter dictum Dominum Regem, and Johannem Mordaunt,
Militem, Dominum Mordaunt, contentam, and specificatam, per Sacramentum
Willielmi Dudley, Armigeri, Thomae Mulsho, Armigeri, Willielmi Marbury,
Armigeri, Roberti Kinsman, Armigeri, Egidii Isham, Armigeri, Johannis Lenton,
Armigeri, Georgii Thresham, Armigeri, Thomae Brooks de Oakely, Armigeri,
Roberti Catlyn, Generosi, Grifini Salisbury, Generosi, Reginaldi Grenehold de
Ashton, Generosi, Thomae Tawexer de Raundes, Generosi, Johannis Durrant,
Generosi, Willielmi Burton de Woodford, Generosi, Gilberti Pickering, Generosi,
Johannis Palmer de Warketon, Ricardi Moreton de Oundell, Matthaei Law de
Brikestock, Johannis Wright de Beddington, Roberti Chapman de Cottingham,
Thomae Good de Islip, and Willielmi Bull de Pichley, proborum and legalium
hominum de Comitatu praedicto: Qui dicunt super Sacramentum suum, Quod dictus
Dominus Mordaunt, in dicta Petitione nominatus, seisitus existit in Dominio
suo, ut de feodo, de and in Manerio de Drayton, and de and in Parco de Drayton,
in Petitione praedicta specificatis, cum Sepibus, Viis, Palis and Fossatis,
undique suffultis. Nec non de quadam Terra, vocata a Freeborde, ultra and juxta
praedictum Fossatum, extendente usque ad parcum Domini Regis, vocatum le
Little-Park de Brikestock, in dicta Petitione similiter recitatum. Quae quidem
Terra, vocata le Freeborde, circumjacet praedictum Fossatum, Sepes, and Palas
praedicti Parci de Drayton, and continet in latitudine, de altitudine Fossati,
de parco de Drayton praedicto, versus and infra dictum Parcum, vocatum, le
Little-Park de Brikestock, tres pedes; and extendit se in longitudine, ex
occidentali part, dicti Parci de Drayton, tam long quam praedictus Parcus de
Drayton se extendit, and abuttat versus dictum Parcum, vocatum le Little-park
de Brikestock. Et ulterius iidem Juratores dicunt, super Sacramentum suum, Quod
dictus Dominus de Mordaunt, and omnes Antecessores sui, and omnes illi, quorum
statum Johannes Dominus Mordaunt, in manerio and parco praedicto, modo habet,
ac a tempore, de quo non existit memoria hominis ad contrarium, habuerunt, usi
fuerunt, and consueverunt habere, ac de jure habere debuerunt, totam illam
Terram praedictam, vocatam le Freeborde, cum tota Vestura, and Proficuo ejusdem
Terrae, circumquaque jacentis dictum Fossatum dicti Parci de Drayton, tanquam
pertinentem ad cundem Parcum de Drayton, ac parcellam ejusdem Parci de Drayton
existentem. Et ulterius iidem Juratores dicunt, super Sacramentum suum, Quod
dictus Johannes Dominus Mordaunt, ac omnes Antecessores sui, ac omnes illi,
quorum statum idem Johannes Dominus Mordaunt, in Manerio and Parco de Drayton
praedicto, modo habet, and a tempore, cujus contrarium memoria hominis non
existit, ad eorum placitum, and Voluntatem, usi fuerunt, and consueverunt,
succidere, and ad usus suos convertere, totum Boscum, and Subboscum, crescentem
and existentem super dictam Terram, vocatam le Freeborde, and super and infra
dicta Sepes, and Fossatum, inter praedictum Parcum dicti Domini Regis de
Brikestock, and praedictum Parcum de Drayton. Dicunt etiam ulterius Juratores
praedicti, super Sacramentum suum, quod Custodes dicti Parci de Drayton, pro
tempore existientes, de tempore, ad cujus contrarium memoria hominis non
existit, ad eorum libitum, and placitum, de tempore in tempus, exire utebantur,
and de jure exire poterunt, de dicto Parco de Drayton, in dictum Parcum de
Brikestock, apud quendam locum, vocatum, Snapes-Stile; and sic longanimiter
perambulare, super praedictam Terram dicti Domini Mordaunt, vocatam le
Freeborde, jacentem ex occidentali part dicti Parci de Drayton, usque ad
quendam locum, in Parco de Drayton praedicto, vocatum le Plumwell-Stile; and
sic ibidem reingredi in dictum Parcum, ad supervidendum, utrum dictae Sepes,
inter dictum Parcum de Drayton, and dictum Parcum de Brikestock, de tempore in
tempus, been and sufficienter reparatae existebant, prout congruum fuerat,
necne. Dicunt insuper Juratores praedicti, super Sacramentum suum, Quod non
noscunt, quod dictus Dominus Rex, nunc, aut aliquis Praedecessorum suorum,
ratione alterius Praerogativae, sive alterius legitimae Consuetudinis, perantea
habuit, aut habere usus fuit, seu de jure habere debuit, aliquem Boscum, sive
Subboscum, Spinas, sive Arbores, crescentes ex exteriore part Paleorum, sive
Sepium, dicti Parci de Brikestock, abuttantis, sive adjacentis, versus aliquos
Boscos, sive Terras, dicti Johannis Domini Mordaunt, In cujus rei Testimonium,
tam praedicti Commissionarii, quam praefati Juratores, his praesentibus Sigilla
sua apposuerunt, die, anno, and loco supradictis. Nos autem tenores Petitionis,
Commissionis, Certificationis, Testium Depositionum, and Inquifitionis
praedictorum, ad Requisitionem praedicti Johannis Mordaunt militis, Domini
Mordaunt, duximus exemplificandum per praesentes. In cujus rei Testimonium has
Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium primo die Novembris, anno Regni nostri
quarto. S. Southwell.

A Letter from the Lords of the Council to the Lord Mordaunt, and to Sir John
Mordaunt.
To our very good Lord, the Lord Mordaunt, and to our Loving Friend Sir John
Mordaunt, and to either of them.
AFter our right hearty Commendations, for the Safeguard and Preservation of
the King's Majesty's Person, which is in no small danger, by the Falsehood and
Treason of the Duke of Somerset; who nevertheless, to cover the same, now
bruiteth abroad, That we of his Majesty's Council, (which seek only his
Highness's Preservation) should intend Evil unto his Highness, which God
forbid; trusting by that means, to abuse the People, and so by their helps, the
rather to proceed in his purpose: We have thought good to require you, not only
as much as in you is, to let the People know the Truth; but also, forasmuch as
de does already gather Forces, to put your self in order, with all the Power
you may make; presently to repair unto us, for the Service and Surety of the
King's Majesty, in this great and weighty matter, as to the office of good and
loving Subjects appertains.

From London the Sixth of October. Your Lordships assured Friends, Ri. Rich,
Cant. Will. Saint-John. W. Northampton. J. Warwick. Arundell. F. Shrewsbury.
Henry Sussex. Thomas Southampton. T. Theyn. Will. Petres. R. Sadlier. Edward
North. John Gage. Nic. Southwell.


Another Letter from the Lords of the Council to the Lord Mordaunt, and to Sir
John Mordaunt.
To our very good Lord, the Lord Mordaunt, and to our very Loving Friend, Sir
John Mordaunt, Knight, and to either of them.
AFter our most hearty Commendations: Where by our former Letters, we have
signified unto you the state of our doings; and upon occasion of such
Assemblies of Men, as were made by the Duke of Somerset, desired you to repair
toward us, for the surety of his Majesty's Person; you shall understand, That
now, by the goodness of God, both the King's Majesty's Person is in Health and
Surety; and that without any Tumult or great business, the Duke also is in sure
Custody: Which thing as we have thought good to signify unto you, so do we
pray you to stay your Numbers at home, without taking any further Travel for
this matter: Giving you our most hearty Thanks, for your good Readiness at this
time; and so do bid you most heartily farewell:

From London the Eleventh of October. 1549. Your Loving Friends, Will.
Saint-John. Will. Northampton. John Warwick. F. Shrewsbury. Thomas Southampton.
Thomas Wentworth. John Gage. Edward North. Nicholas Wotton. John Baker. Edw.
Montague.


Another Letter from the Lords of the Council to the Lord Mordaunt, and to Sir
John Mordaunt.
To the Sheriff of Bedford and Buckingham, to the Justices of Peace of the said
Counties, and to all other the King's Majesty's Constables, Headboroughs, and
other his Highness's Ministers and Subjects of the said Counties.
FOrasmuch as the Duke of Somerset, abusing the King's Majesty's Hand, Stamp
and Signet; and howbeit that without diverse of us, of his Majesty's Council,
has sent forth diverse and sundry Writings, to Levy the King's Majesty's
Subjects, and disturb the Common Peace of the Realm, for the maintaining of his
own Ill and Outrageous doings, to no small Peril of the King's Majesty's
Person, and the disturbance of all his Majesty's good and Loyal Subjects: These
be to will and require you, nevertheless on his Majesty's behalf, straightly to
Command and Charge you, That you, nor none of you, Levy, nor cause to Levied,
any number of Men, by force of any such Writing or Commandment, or any other
Writing whatsoever; except the Hands of us of his Majesty's Privy Council, or
the more part of us, shall be Subscribed to the same. And further we require
you, on his Highness's behalf, to apply your Labors and Business, every of you
in your several Vocations, quietly and peaceably, as becomes good Subjects;
without giving Credit to any such Rumors and Bruits, as by the said Duke be
untruly and falsely spread abroad, to the Dishonor and Scandal of us, his
Majesty's True and Faithful Counselors, who be and ever shall be, during our
Lives, ready to spend our Bloods, for the Surety of his most Royal Person, and
the maintenance of the Common Wealth, of his Majesty's most Loyal and obedient
Subjects.

Given at London, the Eighth of October, the Third Year of his Highness's most
Noble Reign. Ri. Rich, Cant. Will. Saint-John. W. Northampton. J. Warwick.
Arundell. F. Shrewsbury. Thomas Southampton. Will. Petres. Nicholas Wotton.
John Baker.


A Letter from the Lord Mordaunt to Queen Mary.
To the most High, Mighty, and Excellent the Queen's Majesty.
IT may please your most Excellent Majesty, of your most abundant and
accustomed Goodness, to be a good and most gracious Sovereign Lady to me, your
Faithful, Obedient and True Subject, and to pardon me of my rude Writing, unto
your most Excellent Highness, coacted and constrained so for to do, for
Declaration unto your said most Princely and gracious Goodness, of such things,
as your most Excellent Highness has been informed of against me. First, That
your Highness should be much offended with me; for that I was so prompt, and
ready for to set forth Proclamation, of the Title of the late Usurper Lady
Jane, and to reject your most gracious Highness's Letters and Proclamation: And
also, That I should stay the Country, that they should not repair to your most
Excellent Highness, as their Hearts were bent; which Surmises are in every
part, and in the whole, not true. Most humbly submitting my self to your most
merciful gracious Goodness, and to such Order as shall be taken by your
Highness, and your most Honorable Council, for Declaration of my truth, to
your most Excellent Highness in this behalf; and according to my abounden Duty,
as an Old Man, by your most gracious Sufferance, dwelling here in your County
of Bedford, shall pray to God daily, for the prosperous Preservation, of your
most Imperial Reign, long to continue.

This Third of August. 1553. Your Most Humble and Obedient Servant and Subject,
John Mordaunt.

A Letter from Queen Mary to the Lord Mordaunt, dispencing him to come to the
Parliament, in the First Year of her Reign.
To our Right trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Mary the Queen.

RIght Trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And where we lately addressed
our Writ unto you, for your Attendance at our next Parliament, to be holden at
Westminster, the First day of October next: We let you wit, that in
consideration of your Age, and Impotency, we have thought good, to License you,
and by these presents do give you License, to be absent from our said
Parliament; our said Writ, or any thing contained therein notwithstanding. And
these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and Discharge in that behalf.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of St. James's, the Fourteenth Day of
September, in the First Year of our Reign.
A Letter from the Queen to the Lord Mordaunt, Sir John Mordaunt, and others.
To our Trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt, to our Trusty and welbeloved
Counselor Sir John Mordaunt, Knight, and to our Trusty and welbeloved Sir
Edward Saunders, and Sir John Saint-John, Knights, and to every of them. Mary
the Queen.

By the Queen.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And where it has pleased Almighty
God, so to direct our Heart, that a Treaty is of late concluded for a Marriage
to be solemnized, within this our Realm, between our dearest Cousin the Prince
of Spain and Us, with such Covenants, Parts and Agree ments, for the
preservation of the Laws, Liberty, Surety and Honor of our Realm, as may
appear by the Articles herewith sent unto you: We understand that certain
ill-disposed Persons, meaning, under the pretense of Mislike of this Marriage,
to Rebel against the Catholic Religion, and Divine Service restored within
this our Realm, and to take from us their Sovereign Lady and Queen, that
Liberty which is not denied to the meanest Woman, in the choice of their
Husbands; cease not to spread many false, vile and untrue Reports, of our said
Cousin, and others of that Nation; moving and stirring our good and Loving
Subjects, by these and sundry other devilish ways, to Rebel, and enter a new
Commotion, to the great peril of our Person, and utter Subversion of our whole
Realm, if speedy Remedy be not provided. For remedy thereof, and to the intent
our Loving Subjects, may the better understand this unnatural Conspiracy, and
the falsehood thereof: Our pleasure is, You shall not only cause the said
Articles herewith sent to be Published, in all parts of that our County,
sending abroad Copies, and by such other good means, as you may think best; but
also that you, and every of you, taking diligent heed to the Preservation of
the Peace, and Charge committed unto you, do cause the Authors and Spreaders of
these, or any other false Bruits and Rumors, to be apprehended, and committed
to Ward, otherwise punished, as the Quality of their Offenses shall merit. For
the better doing whereof, our Pleasure is, You shall assemble together,
immediately upon the sight of these our Letters, taking such order for Division
of your selves, into sundry Hundreds and parts; and for the Publication of the
said Articles, Admonition of any good Subjects, and Stay of the rest, as may
best stand to the Quiet of that our Country; whereby you shall show your
selves, our good and obedient Subjects, which we will always be glad to
consider toward you, as occasion may serve.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of St. James's, the Twenty fourth day of
Jamary, the First Year of our Reign.
A Letter from Queen Mary to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our Right trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Mary the Queen.

By the Queen.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And where we be sundry ways
informed, That Thomas Wyat, and some others, have of late by spreading abroad,
most false and vain Rumors, procured to stir our subjects of our County of
Kent, to rise against our Crown and Dignity Royal. Albeit we have already taken
such Order, as we doubt not, shall be sufficient to repress, and overthrow this
unnatural Conspiracy: Yet nevertheless have we thought convenient to require
you, to put your self in convenient Order and Readiness, with as many of your
Servants and Tenants, as ye can make, both on Horseback and on Foot, to be in
readiness, to march and set forwards, upon one hours Warning, either against
the the said Rebels, or such other ways, as shall be signified unto you by Us.
And in the mean time to have good regard, to the good Order and Quiet of the
parts where ye dwell; causing all such Idle and Lewd Persons, as shall, either
by spreading of false Rumors, or by any other means, attempt to stir or
disquiet our Loving Subjects, to be Apprehended and Punished, as the Quality of
their Offenses shall deserve.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of St. James's, the Six and twentieth day
of January, the First Year of our Reign.
A Letter from the King and Queen to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our Trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Philip, and Mary the Queen.

By the King and Queen.
RIght Trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And where for certain great
and weighty Causes, we have Summoned our High-Court of Parliament, to be holden
at Westminster the Twelfth day of November next. Albeit we have for that
purpose, caused our Writ of Summons, to be addressed lately unto you, amongst
others: Yet notwithstanding that your Age, and Impotency, will not well suffer
you to Travel, without some danger of your Health: We let you wit, That in
consideration thereof, we are pleased to give you License, and by these
Presents, do License you (our said Writ or any thing therein contained
notwithstanding) to stay your coming up to our said Parliament; so as
nevertheless you cause your Proxy, to be sent in convenient time, unto some
such Personage, as may for you, and in your Name, give his Voice and Consent,
unto such matters, as shall be treated and concluded in our said Parliament:
And these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and Discharge in that
behalf.

Given under our Signet, at our Palace of Westminster, the Twenty second Day of
October, the First and Second Years of our Reigns.
A Letter from the Queen to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our Trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Mary the Queen.

By the Queen.
RIght Trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And albeit we have of late by
such our Instructions, as we have addressed forth unto the Justices of Peace of
every Shire, prescribed such Order, as the same being well Executed, shall by
the Grace of God, be sufficient to keep all Parts of our Realm, in good Order
and Quietness: Yet considering the Seditious Behavior, and Testy Disposition
of some sorts of Men, that seek nothing else but Stirs and Commotions: We have
thought good, for the preventing the worst, to prepare to have some Power in
readiness, to meet with any sudden Attempt, that may be offered. Wherefore
knowing your Fidelity, and good Will to serve us, and the Zeal you bear the
Common Tranquillity and Quietness of your Country; we have specially appointed,
and by these Presents appoint, and authorize you to Muster, Levy, and Prepare
forthwith, all your own Servants and Tenants, and others under your Rule and
Offices, with such your Friends, as shall be willing to go with you. And of the
same so Mustered, to choose and appoint, and put in full Readiness, as many able
Men, both on Horseback and on Foot, as you may well cause to be furnished, with
Armor, Weapons, and other Necessaries; giving such order, that upon One hours
warning, they may be ready to be employed, for Repression of any sudden Tumult,
Stir or Rebellion within our Realm; or for resisting any Foreign Invasion, or
otherwise for our Service, as by us, or our Privy Council, attending about us,
you shall be required from time to time. For the doing whereof, like as these
our Letters shall be sufficient Discharge, as well unto you, as to such as
shall serve under you; So do we require you to use your accustomed Diligence,
both in preparing your said Men, and also in advertising our Council, what
Numbers, and of what Sorts, you have ready, to the intent upon Knowledge
thereof, we may dispose of their further Service, as occasion shall require:
Whereof we pray you not to fail, as we specially trust you.

Given under our Signet, at our Manner of Greenwich, the Eighth of March, the
Second and Third Years of our Reign.
Vltima Voluntas Johannis primi Domini Mordaunt probata.
IN Dei nomine, Amen. The First day of August in the Year of our Lord God, One
thousand Five hundred and threescore, and the Second Year of the Reign of our
most dread Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the Grace of God, Queen of England,
France and Ireland, etc. I John Mordaunt, Knight, Lord Mordaunt of Turvey, in
the County of Bedford, being of good and perfect Memory, thanks be given to
God; do make and ordain this my Last Will and Testament, in manner and form
following: That is to say, First, I bequeath my Soul to Almighty God, and my
Body to be buried in the Parish Church of Turvey, in the Wall next above my
Father's Tomb. And I will that the Body of my Lady Elizabeth Mordaunt, my late
Wife deceased, be removed and taken up, and laid and buried again on my right
side, with all speed, after my Departure out of this World: And I will, That my
Executors and Administrators, within one Year after my decease, shall prepare
for me, and the said Lady Elizabeth, a meet and convenient Tomb of Marble, and
Two Pictures of Alabaster, the one for my self, and the other for the said Lady
Elizabeth, both the said Pictures representing the State, that God of his
infinite Goodness, has called me hereunto in this present World; which said
Premises will cost, as I suppose, about Threescore Pounds.

Item, I give and bequeath, to be dealt in Alms the day of my Burial, unto the
poor Folks of the Towns of Turvey, Stagesden, Carleton, Chillington, Harold,
Stephinton, Felmersham, Radwell, Lavenden, Brafeld, Newton-Blosmaville,
Hardmede, Astwood, Wotton and Cranfeld, One hundred Marks of good and lawful
Money of England, at the discretion of my Executors and Administrators: Town of
Bedford Five Pounds; Olney Three Pounds. And the rest of my Burial and Funeral
expenses, I remit to the discretion of my Executors and Administrators, for to
do, use, and bestow, and dispose at their Liberties and pleasures, for the
Wealth of my Soul, Lady Elizabeth my Wife, my Father, Mother, and all other my
Friends.

Item, I will and bequeath, for my Mortuary in ready Money, and for Tyths
forgotten, and not truly paid, Five Pounds to be bestowed among poor People,
for to pray for the Souls of them, that of right the Premises ought to be paid
unto.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the Churchwardens, and to the Inhabitants of
the Town of Turvey, and for, and toward the Reparation of the Church, and
Steeple of Turvey, and for the Rough-casting of the Walls of the said Church,
as well within the said Church, as without the said Church, and Steeple, One
hundred Marks.

Item, I give and bequeath to the said Churchwardens and Inhabitants to the
use of the same Town, all my Apparel of Cloth of Gold, and all manner of Silks,
to be made, at the Costs and Charges of my Executors or Administrators, to
serve God in the same Church, and to no other use or purpose: Over and besides
Ten Pounds, which I Will, shall be delivered unto the same Churchwardens, and
others as above, for and toward the said Reparations, to make the said
Premises, meet to serve God, on high and principal Feasts.

I Will and bequeath to the Inhabitants of the Town of Turvey, for and toward
the new repairing of Turvey-Bridge, as much as is within the County of Bedford,
Forty Pounds. And of, and for the repairing of the Long-Bridge, within the
County of Buckingham, to the Reparation and keeping whereof, the Towns of
Hardmede, Astwood, Lavenden, Newton-Blosmaville and Brafeld, are Contributors,
Twenty six Pounds thirteen Shillings and four Pence.

I Will, That according to my Father's Will, the Seven Pounds be disposed in
good Deeds, in the Church and Town of Turvey, for the Soul of Dame Agnes Peck,
Widow, deceased, and toward the Reparation and Amendment of the said Church of
Turvey; or else to buy a new Bell, to Ring Day-Bell in the Morning, and Curfre
at Night, to the Churchwardens and Inhabitants of the Town of Turvey, to pray
for the Souls of William Rogers, late of Hills in Turvey, deceased, otherwise
called Roger Stevenson, otherwise called William Stevenson of Turvey-Hills,
Thirty Shillings to the said Churchwardens and Inhabitants, as is aforesaid:
Thirty Shillings, for to pray for the Soul of Master John Cross, Clerk,
sometime Parson of Turvey, for, and in full recompenee of certain Tyths, and
Rents due to him, for certain Lands late belonging to Parnel Biddlyn and John
Biddlyn, her Son and Heir. To the Heirs of William Bird, late of Hills in
Turvey aforelaid, for and in full recompense of Lands purchased of William
Bird, his Grandfather, living in Hills aforesaid, Forty Shillings. To the said
Churchwardens of Turvey, and other Inhabitants, Ten Shillings: Stagden, Ten
Shillings, and Mulsho Church, Ten Shillings, according to the Last Will of my
Father.

And I Will, That Six Pound thirteen Shillings four Pence, be delivered to the
Churchwardens and other Inhabitants of Mulsho, to the Use and Profit of the
Church, and of the Town, and for and toward the Reparations of the said Church.

I give and bequeath unto the Heirs of Bateman of Turvey, deceased, for diverse
Respects; which Bateman of old time, was Owner of the House next the Mill in
Turvey, and after that it was one Whites, Five Marks.

I give and bequeath to the next Kinsfolks of Thomas Kerby, late of
Heviningham-Castle, in the County of Essex, and of old time Clerk and Servant
to my Father, Twenty Shillings.

I give and bequeath unto John Page of Arlesey, my Cousin, One Ring of Gold,
price Ten Shillings, which I owed to his Mother Cicely Page.

Item, I give and bequeath among the Daughters of Thomas More, Esquire, my Son
in Law, begotten between the said Thomas More and Dorothy his Wife, late my
Daughter, Forty Pounds of good and lawful Money of England. Albeit the said
Thomas does Claim Fifty Marks thereof, by promise of Mouth, besides Writing;
which promise I do not remember. And yet notwithstanding I will the said Forty
Pounds to be paid, as before, without delay, and to be bestowed by the said
Thomas, and by the advice of my Executors.

Item, I Will, That my Servant John Ashecomb, for his long good and faithful
Service done unto me, shall have the Farm of the Manner of Lyford, where he now
dwells, and does inhabit, during the space and term of One and twenty Years,
next after my Decease; in as ample and large a manner, as the said John does
now occupy the same; paying yearly the accustomed Rent, as he does now pay, for
the same, and generally keeping all Reparations, of all manner of Houses,
belonging and occupied in the said Manner.

Item, I Will, That all such Leases as I have made, promised to be made, or
agreed with any manner of Person or Persons whatsoever, for Years, and yet the
said Leases not put in Writing, shall be Good, Stable and Effectual, and stand
in strength against me and my Heirs. And that my Heir shall, with as much Speed
convenient as may be, assure unto them their Leases in Writing, according to my
former Promise, Grants and Agreements, made unto them, or any of them; the said
Leases paying such Fines as be agreed between the said Leasees and me: That is
to say, A Lease made to Simon de Brown for term of Years, of the Manner of
Halfhyde, for the Fine of Twenty Pounds; and as yet received Ten Pounds. A
Lease made to John Perse of Newport-Pannel, for One and twenty Years, for the
Fine of Six Pounds thirteen Shillings four Pence; and received no part thereof.
A Lease of One and twenty Years made unto Robert Edwards of Turvey, of the
Priory Farm, for the Fine of Ten Pounds; the said Robert Edwards to pay yearly
for his Rent, Six Pound thirteen Shillings four Pence.

Also I will and bequeath to every of my Servants, One whole Years Wages, and
also sufficient Meat and Drink for one whole Year, to be allowed to all and
every of my Servants, to be spent at and within my Mansion House of Turvey.

Also I will and bequeath, That of all the Manners, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, with their Appurtenances, which late were of the Inheritance of
Sir Richard Fitz-Lewis, late of Westhornedon in the County of Essex, Knight,
otherwise, Sir Richard Fitz-Lewis, Knight, deceased, which from him, or any of
his Ancestors, descended, remained, or came to Dame Elizabeth Mordaunt,
deceased, late Wife of the said Sir John Mordaunt, my Son, and Cousin and Heir
to the said Sir Richard Fitz-Lewis, Knight, deceased; wherein the said Sir John
Mordaunt, my Son, and Dame Joan now his Wife, or any of them, had any Estate of
any manner of Inheritance, or for term of Life or Lives, or severally in Use,
Possession, Reversion, Remainder or otherwise, at any time since the last day
of August, in the Year of our Lord God, One thousand five hundred fifty and
eight, shall be within One half Year next after my decease, lawfully,
sufficiently and assuredly, conveyed and Assured unto Sir Robert Throgmorton,
Knight, John Cheyne, Esquire, and Thomas Nichols, Gentleman, or to the Survivor
or Survivors of them, and to his and their Heirs, discharged of all former
Rights, Tyths, Uses, Interests, Charges, Encumbrances, and Demands, had or
made, since the Death of the said Dame Elizabeth, (Leases for term of Years,
whereupon the old Rents and Services, or more, are reserved, and the chief
Rents and Services from thenceforth to be due, to the chief Lords only
excepted,) to the only Use hereafter following: That is to say, So many or so
much of the said Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, with their
Appurtenances, which late were of the Inheritance of the said Sir Richard
Fitz-Lewis, as shall amount to the clear yearly value of Three hundred Marks,
or under and not above; and shall be named, appointed and declared, by the said
Sir John Mordaunt, my Son, by a Bill Tripartite, Indented, Sealed and
Subscribed by the said Sir John Mordaunt, my Son, and Enrolled in any of the
Queen's Majesty's Courts of Records at Westminster: Whereof One of the parts so
Sealed and Subscribed, to be delivered to the said Lewis Mordaunt, and the
other of the said Parts so Sealed, and Subscribed, to be delivered to the said
Sir Robert Throgmorton, John Cheyne, and Thomas Nichols, or to the Survivor or
Survivors of them, to the use of the said Sir John Mordaunt, my Son, and of the
same Dame Joan, now his Wife, for the term of their Lives; and for the term of
the Life of the longest Liver of them, without Impeachment of Wast, during the
Life of the said Sir John Mordaunt, my Son: And after their deceases, to the
use of the said Lewis Mordaunt, and of the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten;
And for default of such Issue, to the use of the right Heirs of Dame Elizabeth
Mordaunt for ever. And of all the residue of the said Manners, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, with their Appurtenances, which lately were the Inheritance
of the said Sir Richard Fitz-Lewis; wherein the said Sir John Mordaunt, my Son,
or any of them, had any Estate of any manner of Inheritance, or Freehold,
jointly or severally, or otherwise, in Use, Possession, Reversion, Remainder or
otherwise, at any time since the last Day of August, in the said Year of our
Lord God, One thousand five hundred fifty and eight, to the use of the said Sir
John Mordaunt, my Son, for term of his Life, without Impeachment of Wast: And
after his decease, to such Person and Persons, and to such use, and uses, as by
the last Will and Testament, of the said Sir John Mordaunt, my Son, shall be
declared in Writing; for and during the space of Ten Years, or under, and not
above; so that the same to be declared first, for and to the Payment of his
Debts: And after his Debts paid, then to and for the Advancement of his
Children Unmarried; and after his Debts paid, and his Children Unmarried
advanced, then for the Performance of the Legacies of the same Sir John
Mordaunt, my Son: And after the same Ten Years ended and expired, then to the
proper use and behoof of the said Lewis Mordaunt, and of the Heirs Males, of
his Body lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the use of the
said Lewis Mordaunt, and the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten: And for
default of such Issue, to the use of the right Heirs of the same Dame Eilzabeth
Mordaunt for ever. And also, That if the said Sir John Mordaunt, my Son, does
convey and assure unto the said Lewis Mordaunt, to the use of the said Lewis
Mordaunt, all the Estate, Right, Title, Interest, which the said Sir John
Mordaunt, my Son, has in and to the Manner of Snelson, in the County of
Buckingham, and in and to all other Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, in
Snelson aforesaid, and in Turvey, Harold, Lavenden and Brafeld, or elsewhere,
to the said Manner of Snelson belonging, which were sometime George the Earl of
Kents, in the County of Buckingham and Bedford: And also do permit, and suffer
the said Lewis Mordaunt, quietly to have, hold, occupy and enjoy, all and
singular the Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, which be conveyed or
assured unto the said Lewis, according to the true intent and meaning, as well
of certain Indentures Quadripartite, made between me, the said John Lord
Mordaunt, on the one Party, and the said Sir Robert Throgmorton, John Cheyne
and Thomas Nichols, on the other Party, bearing date the last Day of August, in
the Second Year of the Reign of the Queen's Majesty that now is; as also of
other Conveyances, and Assurances, made by me unto the said Lewis Mordaunt: And
also do permit, and suffer my Executors to execute, and perform my Will,
without any Impeachment or Disturbance, That then my Executors, shall well and
truly content and pay, or cause to be contented and paid, unto the said Sir
John Mordaunt, my Son, within One whole Year next after, such lawful and
sufficient Conveyance, and Assurance of the said Manners, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, which were of the Inheritance of the said Sir Richard
Fitz-Lewis, the Sum of Three thousand Marks, of Lawful Money of England,
toward the payment of his Debts and Advancement of his Children Unmarried. And
further, That then the said Lewis Mordaunt shall assure, or cause to be
assured, unto the said Dame Joan, now Wife to my Son Sir John Mordaunt, one
yearly Rent of One hundred Marks, during her Life, with a sufficient clause of
Distress, in Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, to the yearly value of One
hundred Pounds, for the not payment thereof, at Two Feasts in the Year, that is
to say, At the Feast of Saint Michael the Archangel, and the Annunciation of
our Lady, by even Portions. And also my Will is, That all my Funeral, Debts,
Legacies and Charges, of this my Last Will and Testament paid and discharged;
that the said Lewis Mordaunt, shall have all the residue of my Goods, Plate and
Chattels, whatsoever they be.

Executores Testamenti, and ultimae voluntatis Johannis Mordaunt, Militis,
Domini Mordaunt, tertio decimo die Augusti, anno Domini millesimo,
quingentesimo sexagesimo secundo, and anno regni Reginae Elizabethae quarto.
Robertus Tirewhite miles, Henricus Darcy Armiger, Thomas Nichols Generosus,
Ludovicus Mordaunt Armiger, Georgius Mordaunt Armiger, Johannes Ashecomb
Generosus, and Thomas Darcy, Armiger; Quilibet Executorum praedictorum,
assumens super se, onus Testamenti mei, habebit viginti libras. Also I make Sir
Robert Catlin, Knight, and my loving Cousin Justice Anthony Brown, Supervisors
of this my Last Will and Testament, and I give to either of them, Ten Pounds
for their pains taken herein; these being Witness, John Hatcher, Thomas Larkin,
Robert Pemberton, John Moreton, Edward Knight, Robert Bennet and John
Richardson.

seal of John Mordaunt SIGILLVM IOHANNIS DOMINI MORDAVNT



tomb of John and Elizabeth (nee de Vere) Mordaunt In the Parish Church of
Turvey


Sir JOHN MORDAVNT, Knight, Third of that Name, Second Lord MORDAVNT, Peer of
England, Lord Baron of Turvey, and Privy Counselor, to Queen Mary. CHAPTER
XIII.
A Letter from King Henry the Eighth to Sir John Mordaunt.
To our Trusty and welbeloved Sir John Mordaunt the Younger. Henry R.

By the King.
TRusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: And forasmuch as we are determined,
upon the Feast of Pentecost next coming, to keep and do to be Celebrated at
Westminster, with all due Circumstances of Honor, the Coronation of our most
dear and welbeloved Wife, the Lady Anne our Queen, as to her Estate and Dignity
does appertain; at which time it has been accustomed to advance to the Honor
of Knighthood, to be made and ordered, with the Ceremonies of the Bath, such of
the Nobility as was at that time, by the Sovereign thought convenient for the
same: And therefore minding to pretermit nothing, that might set forth the
Honor of the said Coronation; and thinking you right able, and worthy to
receive that Degree, have appointed you to be one of those, whom we intend to
advance to such Honor. And therefore our Pleasure is, That ye being advertised
hereof, do make such Preparation against the time aforesaid, and put your self
in such a Readiness, as shall be requisite for you, in the acceptance of the
said Order, and as for the Honor thereof, has been used and accustomed.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Greenwich, the Five and twentieth Day
of April.
Hollinshead 's Chronicle, page 931. No. 50.
ON Friday at Dinner served the King, all such as were appointed by his
Highness, to be Knights of the Bath, which after Dinner were brought to their
Chambers, and that Night were Bathed and Shriven, according to the Old Usage of
England, and the next Day in the Morning the King Dubbed them, according to the
Ceremonies thereto belonging: Whose Names ensue;

The Marquess of Dorset, the Earl of Darby, the Lord Clifford, the Lord
Fitz-Water, the Lord Hastings, the Lord Mounteagle, Sir John Mordaunt, the Lord
Vaux, Sir Henry Parker, Sir William Windsor, Sir Francis Weston, Sir Thomas
Arundell, Sir John Hulston, Sir Thomas Poynings, Sir Henry Savill, Sir George
Fitz-Williams, Sir John Tindal, Sir Thomas Jermine.

Stow 's Chronicle, page 610. 40.
THE same Twelfth of July, word was brought to the Council, being then in the
Tower with the Lady Jane; That the Lady Mary, Eldest Daughter to King Henry the
Eighth, was at Kenhinghall-Castle in Norfolk, and with her the Earl of Bath,
Sir Thomas Wharton, Son to the Lord Wharton, Sir John Mordaunt, Son to the Lord
Mordaunt, Sir William Drury, Sir John Shelton, Sir Henry Beddingfield, Mr.
Henry Jermingham, Mr. John Sutierd, Mr. Richard Treston, Mr. Sergeant Morgan
and Mr. Glement Higham.

A Letter from Queen Mary to Sir John Mordaunt, and to the Lady his Wife.
To our Trusty and Right welbeloved Counselor Sir John Mordaunt, Knight, and
to the Lady his Wife. Mary the Queen.

By the Queen.
TRusty and right welbeloved, we greet you well: And whereas we have received
certain Advertisements, That our dearest Cousin the Prince of Spain, was
Embarked at the Groyne Six Days past: Forasmuch as we considering, that the
Wind serving as it does, it cannot be, but that he is near the Coast of this
our Realm: We have therefore thought good, both to signify unto you the
Premises; and also to require you, to put your self in Order, withal Diligence,
to repair hither toward our Court, to the intent ye may give your Attendance
upon us, at the Solemnity of this our Marriage, as shall appertain; whereof we
require you not to fail.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Bishopswaltham, the Fifteenth Day of
July, the Second Year of our Reign.
Vltima voluntas Johannis Secundi Domini Mordaunt probata.
IN the Name of God, Amen. The Sixteenth Day of April, in the Thirteenth Year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the Grace of God, Queen of
England, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith: I Sir John Mordaunt,
Knight, Lord Mordaunt, calling to Remembrance the uncertain State of these our
Transitory Lives, and minding to reduce and set in order such Goods, Chattels
and other things, as God has endued me withal, being somewhat weak in Body,
yet thanks be to God of perfect Remembrance; do make my Last Will and
Testament, in manner and form following.

First, I do bequeath my Soul to Almighty God, my only Maker and Redeemer; my
Body to be Buried within the Church of Turvey, within the County of Bedford, in
such decent Order and Sort, and with such Funeral Charges and Expenses, as by
mine Executors shall be thought meet, and convenient for my Estate and Degree.

Item, I will chiefly and above all things, That mine Executors shall pay, or
cause to be paid, unto all and every Person and Persons, unto whom I shall at
the Day of my Decease be indebted, and all and every such Sum, and Sums of
Money, as I shall owe unto them, or any of them.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Vrsula, my Daughter, Four hundred Pounds, of
good and lawful Money of England, to be paid her by my Executors, at such time
as they conveniently may: And in the mean time I Will, That mine Executors
shall find unto the said Vrsula, sufficient and convenient Meat, Drink, Apparel
and Clothing, necessary for her Degree.

Item, I give unto George Monox, and to Humphrey his Son, Forty Marks, of good
and lawful Money of England, to be bestowed upon a Basin and Ewre of Silver
Guilt, parcel Guilt.

Item, I give and bequeath unto Anne Actem, one of the Daughters of Margaret
Actem, my Daughter, Two hundred Marks, of good and lawful Money of England, at
the Day of her Marriage, or at her Age of Eighteen years, which of them shall
happen; and if it happen the said Anne Actem, to dye before her Marriage, or
before she shall accomplish the Age of Eighteen years, then the Gift to her to
be void. And then my Will is, That the said Two hundred Marks, bequeathed unto
the said Anne Actem, shall be employed, and bestowed among the rest of the Sons
and Daughters, of my said Daughter Margaret Actent, as shall be then living.

Item, I give and bequeath unto the rest of the Sons and Daughters, of the
foresaid Margaret Actem, my Daughter, Six Pounds thirteen Shillings and four
Pence a piece, to every of them, at their several Ages of Eighteen years.

Item, I will and bequeath to every one of my Servants, being no Officers, One
years Wages, over and besides the Wages, as shall be unto them due, at the time
of my Decease.

Item, I will to Anne Witney, my Wife's Daughter, Forty Pounds.

Item, I will to Mary Price, Fifty Marks, toward her Marriage.

Item, I will to the Three Children of Henry Witney, Five Marks a piece.

Item, I will, That my Executors shall bestow, Two hundred and fifty Pounds, of
good and lawful Money of England, upon an I Will to be builded, and made upon the
South Side of the Church of Turvey, within the County of Bedford aforesaid; and
for a Tomb for me to be erected, and set up within the said I Will.

Item, Whereas I the said Sir John Mordaunt, Knight, Lord Mordaunt, and Lady
Joan, my Wife, and Sir Lewis Mordaunt, Knight, by the name of Lewis Mordaunt,
Esquire, by one Indenture Tripartite, bearing date the Third Day of November,
the Fifth year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lady, the Queen's Majesty
that now is, did amongst other things Infeoff Sir William Peter, and Sir Henry
Tervel, Knights, John Talbot, Thomas Lucas, Edward Tirrel, George White, Thomas
Brownly and Thomas Nichols, Esquires, and their Heirs, of all and singular the
Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, of me the said John Lord Mordaunt,
within the County of Essex, late the Inheritance of Sir Richard Fitz-Lewis,
Knight, Deceased, to certain Uses, as by the same Indenture Tripartite, bearing
date as is aforesaid, more at large it does and may appear. Amongst which the
Manners of Cranham, Gingeraff, Tiptofts and Amies, in the County of Essex, and
all Lands and Tenements, known by the name or names of Amies and Nokehall, and
the Farms called Pinkneys and Wareleys, with their Appurtenances; and all those
Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, in Brownfordmagna, in the County of Essex,
then late in the occupation of one Rowland Walhead, or of his Assigns, or
appointed after the decease of me John Lord Mordaunt, and Lady Joan, my Wife,
unto the use and behoof of the Executors of the Last Will and Testament, of me
the said John Lord Mordaunt, for the term of Ten years, next ensuing the
decease of me the said John Lord Mordaunt, and the Lady Joan, my Wife, and the
longer Liver of us. And after the same Ten years being ended, and determined,
then to the Use and Behoof of the said Sir Lewis Mordaunt, and of his Heirs for
ever; as by the same Indenture and Conveyance aforesaid, more at large
appears. And whereas after the same Conveyance so made, the same Sir Lewis
Mordaunt, by another Indenture, dated the First Day of May, in the Eleventh
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady, the Queen's Majesty that now is, and
other Conveyances, did grant, convey and assure, unto the said Lord Mordaunt,
and to his Heirs for ever, all his Reversion, Remainder, Estate and Interest,
of and in the said Manner of Tiptofts, in the County of Essex, and of the said
Farms, Lands and Tenements, and other the Premises called Pinkneys, and
Wareleys, in the said County of Essex; as by the same Indenture, and other
Assurances last mentioned, more at large also it appears.

I Will, and my full Intent and meaning is, That my Executors hereafter named
(the said Conveyance or Assurance of the said Reversion, or Remainder
notwithstanding) shall have, hold and enjoy, for and toward the Performance of
this my Last Will and Testament, all the said Manner of Tiptofts, and all the
said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, called Pinkneys, and Wareleys, in the
said County of Essex: And all other Lands, Tenements, Remainders, Reversions
and Hereditaments, contained in the said Indenture, dated the First Day of May,
and assured and conveyed unto me and mine Heirs: And all Lands and Tenements,
contained in an Indenture, dated the Tenth Day of February last, made by me to
the Lord Windsor, and others, together with the said Manners of Cranham,
Gingeraff and Amies, and all the said Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
called and known by the name, or names of Amies or Nokehall: And all the said
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments in Bromford-magna, in the said County of
Essex, sometime being in the Occupation of one Rowland Walehead, or his
Assigns, from the time of my Decease, and the Decease of the said Lady Joan, my
Wife, unto the full end, and term of Ten Years, the next following, fully to be
complete and ended: And after the said term of Ten Years being fully ended, and
determined:

I then Will, That the said Manners, Lands, Farms, Tenements and Hereditaments,
called Tiptofts, Pinkneys and Wareleys, with their Appurtenances, in such sort,
manners and forms, and to such uses, intents and purposes, as heretofore I have
limited and appointed, the same shall be conveyed, and assured by the right
Honorable Edward Lord Winsor, before recited, and other his Co-bargainers, or
Co-feoffees, unto whom I have assured the same; in hope they will duly perform
and accomplish, my full Intent and Meaning therein; to the Principal of the
King's Hall, and College of Brasen-nose in Oxford, and to the Scholars of the
same, and to their Successors for ever. And for the better having and enjoying
of the said Manners, Farms, Lands, Tenements and other the Premises, according
to this my present Testament, My Will, Intent and Meaning is, That the said
Edward Lord Windsor, and other, to whom I have assured the said Manners, Lands,
Tenements, and other the Premises, called Tiptofts, Pinkneys and Wareleys, and
every of them, as much as in them is, or conveniently may be, at the Costs and
Charges of my Executors hereafter named, shall do, cause and procure to be
done, such reasonable Acts and things, for the assurance hereof, according to
the true Intent, and Meaning of this my present Will and Testament, as by my
said Executors hereafter named, and by the said Principal and Scholars, or
their Successors, or any of them, or by their, or any of their Council, Learned
in the Laws, shall be reasonably devised and required. And with part of the
Issues of the same, I will, Scholars to be named from time to time by mine
Executors, or by the Survivors of them, during their Lives, and after by mine
Heirs, shall be continually found, and other Deeds of Charity shall be done, as
I have limited to mine Executors.

Item, I will and bequeath to the Lady Joan, my Wife, all that my
Mansion House, and all other my Houses, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
situate, lying and being, in or near the Hospital of Little Saint
Bartholomews, in Smithfield, within the Suburbs of the City of London: To have
the same to the said Lady Joan, for and during the full term of Fifty Years, if
the said Lady Joan, my Wife, shall happen so long to live. And the residue of
all the Estates, Interests and Terms of Years, that shall be to come, of and in
my said Mansion House, and other the Premises, in or near the Hospital of
Little Saint Bartholomews, for all the Years that then shall be to come in the
same, shall be sold by my Executors hereafter named, or the Survivor of them;
and all Sums of Money as shall be had, and received for the same, to employ
toward the Payment of my Debts, and toward the Performance of this my Last
Will.

Item, I make and ordain the Lady Joan, my welbeloved Wife, my Brother-in-Law
Thomas Farmer, Edward Plowden, Esquires, and William Goodfellow, my Servant,
mine Executors of this my Last Will and Testament.

And moreover I do refer to the discretion of mine Executors, this my Last Will
and Testament.

And thus revoking all former Wills, by me at any time heretofore made or
declared; I ordain and establish this to be my very true Last Will and
Testament.

And moreover I do refer to the discretion of my Executors, which of my
Legacies shall be first paid, and which after; and likewise the Time of the
payment thereof, I refer to their Choice and Discretions.

And I will, mine Executors shall bestow Sixteen Pounds, of lawful Money of
England, as I have declared to my Wife.

Item, I Will, That my Executors shall have, toward the payment of my Debts,
the Two hundred Pounds, decreed to be paid to me in the Chancery, by Clement
Tanfield, and all other Debts due to me.

Item, I Will, That my House shall be kept at the Charges of mine Executors,
for Two Months, next after my Decease.

The residue of all my Goods and Chartels, Real and Personal, and of the Debts
due to me, and all the Residue, Profit and Commodity of the Premises, appointed
to mine Executors, for the said Ten Years, remaining after my Funeral, Debts
and Legacies paid, I give and bequeath to my said Wife: Saving Twenty Pounds,
of lawful Money of England, which I will and bequeath to the foresaid Edward
Plowden, Esquire; and saving Ten Pounds, which I will unto the aforesaid Thomas
Farmer, Esquire; and also saving Ten Pounds, which I will unto the aforesaid
William Goodfellow.

In Witness whereof, to this my Last Will and Testament, I have put my Hand and
Seal, the Day and Year first above-written. These being Witnesses, whose Names
be hereafter subcribed, John Mordaunt, Anne Ratcliff, John Farmer, John Cams,
per William Colshill, Henry Witney, Robert Nicholsmark, John Bickerton, Emanuel
Maunsell, Scr.

Probatum fuit Testamentum suprascripti coram Magistro Willielmo Drewry, Curiae
praerogativae Cantuariensis Commissiario, apud London, decimo nono die
Octobris, anno Domini Milesimo quingentesimo septuagesimo primo, juramento
Justiniani Kidd, Notarii Publici, Procuratoris dictae Joannae relictae, and
Executricis in hujusmodi Testamento nominatae, cui commissa fuit Administratio,
omnium and singulorum Bonorum, etc. ad sancta dei Evangelia Jurata reservata
potestate, etc. Thomae Farmer, Edmundo Plowden and Willielmo Goodfellow, etc.
and cum venerint, etc. admissuri.

seal of John Mordaunt SIGILLVM IOHANNIS DOMINI MORDAVNT DNI BARONIS DE TVRVEY

Examinatur per me Radulphum Jennings, cum Registro praerogativae,
vigesimo primo Februarii, anno Milesimo sexcentesimo quinquagesimo primo
tomb of John and Eleanor (nee FitzLewis) Mordaunt The TOMB of JOHN the Second
Lord Mordaunt, as it is Extant in the Church of Turvey, in the County of
Bedford.


Sir LEWIS MORDAVNT, Knight, First of that Name, Third Lord MORD AVNT, Peer of
England, and Lord Baron of Turvey. CHAPTER XIV.
Causes of Disagreements between John the Second Lord Mordaunt and his Son
Lewis.
THE late Lord Mordaunt, bought the Wardship of Elizabeth Fitz-Lewis, Daughter
and Sole Heir to Sir Richard Fitz-Lewis, Knight, for which he paid Thirteen
hundred Marks; her Land which she had by Descent, was Five hundred Marks a year.

The late Lord Mordaunt, afterward did couple her in Marriage, unto the now
Lord Mordaunt, then being his Son and Heir Apparent: For the Marriage of which
now Lord Mordaunt, the late Lord Mordaunt, might have had diverse great Sums of
Money.

Afterward the late Lord Mordaunt, for the better advancing of his own House,
procured the said now Lord Mordaunt, and the said Dame Elizabeth, then his
Wife, to Levy a Fine of the said Fitz-Lewis's Lands, to one William Hemmyng,
Clerk, who rendered the same unto the now Lord Mordaunt, and to the said Dame
Elizabeth, then his Wife, and to the Heirs Males of their two Bodies, lawfully
begotten: And for want of such Heirs, to the Heirs Males of the Body of the now
Lord Mordaunt; with diverse Remainders over.

Afterward the said now Lord Mordaunt, and Dame Elizabeth, then his Wife, had
Issue between them, Lewis Mordaunt; and after the said Dame Elizabeth Mordaunt
dyed: After whose Death, the said now Lord Mordaunt, took to Wife the Lady Joan
Mordaunt, now his Wife.

After which Marriage, the said now Lord Mordaunt, for that his said Son Lewis
would not Marry his Wife's Daughter, suffered a Recovery of the said
Fitz-Lewis's Lands, to the Use of himself, for the term of his Life, without
Impeachment of Wast; and after his decease, to the Use of such as it pleased
him to appoint, for the term of Ninety two years, without any Penny of Rent
paying therefore: To the intent, that not only he, but my Lady his Wife, may
declare their Wills thereof, during the said Ninety two years; whereof the said
late Lord Mordaunt had certain Intelligence, not knowing how, nor to whom the
Fee-simple, and the Inheritance thereof, is bestowed and appointed.

Whereupon the said late Lord Mordaunt, as well for Conscience sake, for that
he was the cause, why the now Lord Mordaunt had such Estates of the said
Fitz-Lewis's Lands, as he might by the Law suffer such a Recovery thereof, to
the Disherison of the said Lewis Mordaunt, being the right Heir of the said
Fitz-Lewis's Lands; as also for the stay of his own Inheritance, and bringing
in again of the Fitz-Lewis's Lands, into the right course of Inheritance again;
did suffer Recoveries of his own Lands, to the Uses, and upon Condition
following:

To the Use of the said late Lord Mordaunt and his Heirs, until the said Lewis
Mordaunt was Married; and after to the Use of the said Lewis Mordaunt, for the
term of his life, without Impeachment of Wast; and after to the Use of such
Wife, as the said Lewis Mordaunt shall be Married unto, at the time of his
Death.

To the Use of the late Lord Mordaunt, for term of his life, without
Impeachment of Wast; and after to the Use of Lewis Mordaunt, for the term of
his life, without Impeachment of Wast; and after to the Use of such Wife, as
the said Lewis Mordaunt shall be Married to, at the time of his Death.

To the Use of the late Lord Mordaunt, for the term of his life, without
Impeachment of Wast; and after to the Use of Lewis Mordaunt, for the term of
his life, without Impeachment of Wast.

To the Use of the late Lord Mordaunt, for the term of his life, without
Impeachment of Wast; and after to the Use of his Executors, until the Feast of
St. Michael the Archangel, next ensuing the Death of the late Lord Mordaunt;
and after to the same Executors, for the term of Twelve years, toward the
performance of his Will; and after to the Use of the now Lord Mordaunt, for the
term of his life, if he will assure the said Fitz-Lewis's Lands, as hereafter
appears.

To the Use of the late Lord Mordaunt, for the term of his life, without
Impeachment of Wast; and after to the Use of the now Lord Mordaunt, for the
term of his life: To the intent that he, of the Issues and Profits thereof,
might fully answer to the Queen's Majesty, as much Money as shall amount to One
Years Rent, of the full Third part, of all the late Lord Mordaunt's Lands, for
the primier Seisin thereof, and Twenty Pounds over.

Memorandum, That it was provided in the same Book, That if the now Lord
Mordaunt, did not assure the said Fitz-Lewis's Lands, which are of the value of
Five hundred Marks per annum, within Six Months next ensuing the Feast of Saint
Andrew, next after the date of the said Book, to Sir Robert Throgmorton, and
other the Recoverers of the late Lord Mordaunt's Lands: That is to say, Parcel
thereof, to the value of Three hundred Marks, or under, to the Use of the now
Lord Mordaunt, and the Lady his Wife, for term of their lives, Dispunishable of
Wast, during the life of the now Lord Mordaunt: And after their Deceases, to
the Use of Lewis Mordaunt, and of the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully
begotten: And for default of such Heirs, to the Use of the said Lewis Mordaunt,
and to the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten: And for default of such Heirs,
to the right Heirs of the said Fitz-Lewis; and the Remainder thereof, to the
now Lord Mordaunt, for the term of his life, without Impeachment of Wast: And
after his decease, to the Use of his Will for the term of Ten years; and after
to the Use of Lewis Mordaunt, and of the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully
begotten: And for default of such Heirs, to the Use of Lewis Mordaunt, and of
the Heirs of his Body lawfully begotten: And for default of such Heirs, to the
Use of the right Heirs of the said Fitz-Lewis for ever: That then the use of
such, and so much, of the Lord Mordaunt's Lands, as was appointed to the now
Lord Mordaunt by that Book, should be unto the late Lord Mordaunt, for term of
his Life, without Impeachment of Wast; and after to the Use of Lewis Mordaunt,
for the term of his life, without Impeachment of Wast.

And after the several Uses of the late Lord Mordaunt's Lands, shall be ended
and determined, as is abovesaid, and as the same shall severally end and
determine; the Uses thereof be further appointed as follows: That is to say,
Unto the First Son of the said Lewis Mordaunt, in lawful Marriage begotten, and
of the Heirs Males of his Body, lawfully begotten; And after to the Second Son
of the said Lewis Mordaunt, in lawful Marriage begotten, and the Heirs Males of
his Body lawfully begotten, with diverse Remainders over; the last Remainder
thereof, being appointed to the right Heirs of Mordaunt for ever. And to the
intent that my Lady Mordaunt, now Wife to the now Lord Mordaunt, should have
good will, that the said Fitz-Lewis's Lands should be assured, as is aforesaid,
The late Lord Mordaunt did grant unto her, for the Augmentation of her
Jointure, to make it up Four hundred Marks a Year, a yearly Rent of One hundred
Marks by the Year, during her life; with a clause of Distress in his own Land,
for not payment thereof; upon Condition that the said Fitz-Lewis's Lands,
should be assured as aforesaid. Shortly after this Book was thus Agreed upon
and Sealed, one part thereof was sent to the now Lord Mordaunt, that he might
thereby perfectly understand, what his Father had done: And the Premises
notwithstanding, he would not assure the said Fitz-Lewis's Lands, as he ought
to have done, within the said Six Months, by reason whereof, the Uses of the
late Lord Mordaunt's Lands, appointed to the now Lord Mordaunt, did cease,
through the wilful Default of the now Lord Mordaunt, and the same came to the
said Lewis Mordaunt.

Memorandum, That the Conveyance of the late Lord Mordaunt's Lands, as is
aforesaid, was of the mere Motion, Circumspection and Providence, of the late
Lord Mordaunt, for the Causes aforesaid, without any seeking of the said Lewis
Mordaunt, who neither would, nor durst, move the said late Lord Mordaunt, his
Grandfather, being a Wise Man, in such a matter.

Now the Premises considered, it may appear, That the said Lewis has not done
any thing, whereby to offend his Father, except it be in refusing to Marry his
Mother-in-law's Daughter, which his Father offered him, which Marriage he liked
not; or else in not refusing the Benevolence of his Grandfather, unprocured on
his part.

The causes of the late Lord Mordaunt's Doings, and the Doings of the now Lord
Mordaunt, toward the late Lord Mordaunt his Father, and toward the said
Fitz-Lewis's Lands, may plainly appear in the Articles abovesaid.

The Book was delivered to the now Lord Mordaunt, within Twelve days, after the
beginning of the Six Months; so as he had all the Six Months, saving Twelve
Days, to consider thereupon, and to have made Assurance of the said
Fitz-Lewis's Lands accordingly.

Articles which Mr. Henry Darcy requires to be performed for Mr. Lewis
Mordaunt, concerning the Marriage of his Sister.
FIrst, That the Lord Mordaunt, shall make his Sister a Jointure of One Hundred
Marks, Lands in Possession; and One hundred Marks more, after the decease of
the said Lord Mordaunt

Item, That the said Lord Mordaunt, do leave unto the said Lewis Mordaunt,
Eight hundred Marks a year, to descend unto the said Lewis, immediately after
the decease of the said Lord Mordaunt, and One thousand Pounds a Year more,
after the decease of Sir John Mordaunt, Father to the said Lewis.

Item, For the Marriage Apparel, the Lord Mordaunt to find Mr. Lewis Mordaunt,
and Mr. Henry Darcy his Sister.

Item, For the Charges of the Dinner at the Marriage, the Lord Mordaunt to bear
the one half thereof, and Mr. Henry Darcy the other.

Item, Mr. Henry Darcy is contented, in consideration of the Premises, to pay
unto my Lord Mordaunt, One thousand Marks; the one half to be paid at the Day
of Marriage, the other half before the last Day of August next ensuing, if they
be Married before the said Day; or else to be paid at one entire Payment, at
the Day of the said Marriage.

Item, Mr. Henry Darcy will give unto the said Lewis Mordaunt, and his Sister,
in Jewels, or other like, to the value of Two hundred Marks.

A Commission for Musters within the County of Northampton, to the Lord
Mordaunt and others directed.
ELizabeth Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Regina, Fidei Defensor,
etc.
Praedilecto and fideli Conciliario suo Willielmo Domino Burghley, Domino
Thesaurario Angliae, charissimoque Consanguineo and Consiliario suo Roberto
Comiti Licestriae, Magistro equorum suorum; ac praedilecto, and fideli suo
Ludovico Domino Mordaunt, and etiam dilecto and fideli Conciliario suo Walter
Mildmay militi, Cancellario Scacarii sui; necnon dilectis and fidelibus suis
Thomae Cecil militi, Willielmo Fitz-Williams militi, Edmundo Brudewell militi,
Richardo Knightly militi, Edwardo Mountague militi, and Edwardo Onsey armigero,
ac Vicecomiti Comitatus Northamptoniae pro tempore existente, Salutem.
Sciatis quod nos de approbatis fidelitatibus, and prudentibus
circumspectionibus vestris plurimum confidentes, assignavimus and constituimus,
vos Commissionarios, and Deputatos nostros; Dantes, and concedentes vobis,
december, novem, octo, septem, sex, quinque, quatuor, tribus, and duobus vestrum,
tenore praesentium, plenam and absolutam Potentiam, Facultatem, and
Autoritatem, omnes and fingulos homines ad arma, ac homines habiles ad arma
ferendum, tam Equites quam Pedites, and Sagittarios, and Sclopetarios, supra
aetatem sexdecem annorum, ac infra aetatem sexaginta, in dicto Comitatu nostro
Northamptoniae, tam infra libertates quam extra, arraiandum, inspiciendum, ac
traiandum, ae armari and muniri faciendum; nec non assignandum, equos, arma,
and caetera bellica instrumenta, congruentia habilitati and personae
uniuscuiusque, secundum formam and effectum statutorum, and ordinationum
ante-haec tempora inde editorum, and provisorum. Ac omnibus illis tironibus,
hominibusque imbellibus, and rei militaris ignaris, erudiendum, instruendum,
and excercendum, ad usum praedictorum Equorum, Armorum, and Bellicorum
apparatuum, secundum artem militarem, ac omnia and singula alia diligenter
faciendum, gerendum, and expediendum and fieri causandum, quae ad delectum,
monstrationem, and inspectationem, ac etiam ad eruditionem, instructionem, and
exercitionem subjectorum nostrorum in re militari, pro meliori servitio nostro,
and defensione hujus Regni nostri, maxim consentanea, and opportuna fore
putaveritis; Ita quod iidem homines ad arma, and homines habiles ad arma
ferendum, Equites, Pedites, Sagitarii, and Sclopetarii, ac alii praedicti
homines defensibiles, sic arraiati, inspecti, and muniti, prompti sint and
parati ad serviendum nobis, quotiens and quando necesse fuerit. Assignavimus
insuper quoscunque tres, aut duos vestrum, ad omnes and singulos vestrum non
existentes Dominos, vel Pares Regni nostri, aut Conciliarios in privato
Concilio nostro, similiter mutuo and se invicem inspiciendum, traiaudum and
arraiandum, ac in Armis, and Equis, bellico apparatui idoneis, ordinandum, and
videndum. Ita quod omnes and singuli vestrum, in forma praedicta, ut
praedicitur, inspecti, arraiati, and parati, prompti sint and sitis, and
continuo parati, ad nobis similiter ut praedictum est serviendum. Et ideo vobis
mandamus, quod circa praemissa diligenter intendatis, ac ea omnia and singula,
ad certos dies, and locos, de tempore in tempus, per vestras discretiones
exequamini in forma praedicta. Damus praeterea universis, and singulis
Officiariis, Ministris, and Subjectis nostris quibuscunque, tam infra
Libertates quam extra, tenore praesentium firmiter in mandatis, quod vobis, and
cuilibet vestrum, in executione praemissorum intendetis, auxiliantes and
obedientes sint, in omnibus diligenter: Et quod feceritis in praemissis, una
cum Nominibus and Cognominibus, ac numero tam Equitum, Peditum, Sagittariorum,
and Sclopetariorum, ac omnium armorum and bellicorum instrumentorum,
caeterorumque bello idoneorum per vos in forma praedicta inspectorum, and
armatorum, quam Civitatum, Villarum, Burgorum, Socarum, Hundredorum, Raparum,
Hamletorum, and Parochiarum in quibus habitant, and de Diversitate armaturae,
and instrumentorum bellicorum, quibus unusquisque eorum armatus and paratus
est, Nos, and Concilium nostrum, circa Personam nostram attendens, quam
citissime poteritis, post datum praesentium in scriptis, sub sigillis vestris,
vel trium, aut duorum vestrum manibusque vestris iisdem subscriptis debite
certificetis. Damus ulterius firmiter in mandatis, quod pro meliore
expeditione, and executione praesentium, per omnia, and singula facta, tam
secundum tenorem superiorum articulorum, and instructionum ad homines
arraiandum, and bellica instrumenta apparandum, Anno Regni nostri quintodecimo,
sub magno Sigillo nostro Angliae in quadam amplissima forma ad vos missorum,
quam aliorum quorumcunque Articulorum and Instructionum, quae per privatum
Concilium nostrum, cum opus fuerit, vel per eorum sex in scriptis, manibus suis
fignatis, aliquo tempore posthaec vobis dirigentur. In cujus rei testimonium
has litteras nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipsa apud Gorambury
tricesimo primo die Maii, Anno Regni nostri decimo nono.

Per ipsam Reginam Powle.

Cambdeni Elizabetha, Page 208.
NOvi anni principium novum triste spectaculum Londinensibus in Praetorio
Westmonasteriensi exhibuit. Pegma enim ligneum per medium Praetorii a porta ad
partem superiorem erectum, and ibi Tribunal sedibus utrinque circumpositis,
cujusmodi totis octodecim annis viderant nullum. Ad hoc, die Januarii decimo
sexto Thomas Howardus Dux Norfolciae, inter Owenum Hoptonum Arcis Londinii
Praefectum, and Petrum Carew Equites Auratos, funesta securi, acie aversa,
praegestata, ducitur. In Tribunali sedit Georgius Talbotus Comes Salopiae,
summus Angliae Seneschallus ad illum diem constitutus, utrinque Proceres qui
cognitores dati, quos Pares dicimus, Reginaldus Greyus Comes Cantiae, Thomas
Ratcliffius Comes Sussexiae, Henricus Hastingus Comes Huntingdoniae, Franciscus
Russellus Comes Bedfordiae, Henricus Herbertus Comes Pembrochiae, Edwardus
Seimorus sive a Sancto Mauro Comes Hertfordiae, Ambrosius Dudleius Comes
Warwici, Robertus Dudleius Comes Leicestriae, Walterus D'evereux Vicecomes
Herefordiae, Edwardus Baro Clintonus Admirallus, Guilliemus Baro Howardus
Effinghamius Camerarius, Guillielmus Celilius Baro Burghleius Secretarius,
Arthurus Baro Greyus de Wilton, Jacobus Blountus Baro Montjoius, Guil. Baro
Sands, Thomas Baro Wentworthus, Guil. Baro Bourroughus, Ludovicus Baro
Mordauntus, Joannes Pawlettus Baro a Sancto Johanne de Basing, Robertus Baro
Richus, Rogerus Baro Northus, Edmundus Bruge Baro Chandois, Oliverus Baro a
Sancto Johanne de Bletnesho, Thomas Sackvillus Baro Buckhurstius, and Guil.
Westus Baro De-la-Warus.

Cambdeni Elizabetha, Page 413.
QUid de Scotorum Regina fieret, Consiliarii non unum idemque censerunt: Alii
nihil asperius in eam statuendum censerunt, sed arctissime custodiendum, tum
quod non criminis author, sed tantum conscia, tum quod valetudinaria, nec diu
superfutura. Alii ut Religionis consuleretur, protinus e medio tollendam, and
ex lege Leicestrius veneno maluit, and Theologum submisit qui Walsinghamum hoc
licere doceret. Protestabatur autem Walsinghamus tantum abesse ut vim afferri
probaret, ut Mortonii consilium jam pridem fregerit, qui suaserit ut in Scotiam
remitteretur, and in ipso regnorum collimitio occideretur. Variatum iterum e
qua lege in illam ageretur, an ex illa anni vicessimi quinti Edwardi Tertii
(qua Majestatis laesae tenetur, qui Regi aut Reginae perniciem struxerit,
bellum in ejus regno moverit, aut hostibus adhaeserit) an ex illa anni
vicessimi septimi Elizabethae, quam dixi. Vicit tandem eorum sententia, qui ex
hac postrema maluerunt, utique ad hanc rem nata, ideoque accomodanda. Ex lege
igitur illa superiori anno lata, ut inquireretur, and sententia pronuntiaretur
in illos, qui Rebellionem concitaverint, regnum invaserint, aut Reginae vim
infer tentaverint, plures e Sanctiori Consilio and Angliae Proceribus
Diplomate delegati sunt. Quorum nomina (cum seriem and attributa Procerum
Angliae, posterorum intersit cognoscere) ex ipso Autographo subjicere visum.
Quod formula forensi ita se habet.

Elizabetha Dei gratia Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Regina, Fidei Defensor,
etc. Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Johanni Cantuariensi Archiepiscopo, totius
Angliae Primati and Metropolitano, and uni de Privato Consilio nostro; ac etiam
praedilecto and fideli nostro Thomae Bromley Militi, Cancellario Angliae,
alteri de Privato Consilio nostro; ac etiam praedilecto and fideli nostro
Willielmo Domino Burghley Domino Thesaurario Angliae, alteri de Privato
Consilio nostro; ac etiam charissimo consanguineo nostro Willielmo Marchioni
Wintoniae, uni Dominorum Parlamenti; charissimo consanguineo nostro Edwardi
Comiti Oxoniae, magno Camerario Angliae, alteri Dominorum Parlamenti; necnon
charissimo consanguineo nostro, Georgio Comitis Salopiae, Comiti Marescallo
Angliae, alteri de Privato Consilio nostro; charissimoque consanguineo nostro
Henrico Comiti Cantiae, alteri Dominorum Parlamenti; ac etiam charissimo
consanguineo nostro Henrico Comiti Derbiae, alteri de Privato Consilio nostro;
charissimoque consanguineo nostro Willielmo Comiti Wigorniae, alteri Dominorum
Parlamenti; necnon charissimo consanguineo nostro Edw. Comiti Rutlandiae,
alteri Dominorum Parlamenti; ac charissimo consanguineo nostro Ambrosio Comiti
Warwick, Magistro Ordinationum nostrarum, alteri de Privato Consilio nostro;
charissimoque consanguineo nostro Henrico Comiti Pembrochiae, alteri Dominorum
Parlamenti; necnon charissimo consanguineo nostro Roberto Comiti Leicestriae,
Magistro Equorum nostrorum, alteri de Privato Consilio nostro; ac charissimo
consanguineo nostro Henrico Comiti Lincolniae, alteri Dominorum Parlamenti; ac
etiam charissimo consanguineo nostro Antonio Vicecomiti Montague, alteri
Dominorum Parlamenti; praedilectoque and fideli nostro Carolo Domino Howard,
Magno Admirallo nostro Angliae, alteri de Privato Consilio nostro; ac
praedilecto and fideli nostro Henrico Domino de Hunsdon, Domino Camerario
nostro, alteri de Privato Consilio nostro; necnon praedilecto and fideli nostro
Henrico Abergavenniae, alteri Dominorum Parlamenti; ac praedilecto and fideli
nostro Edw. Domino Zouche, alteri Dominorum Parlamenti; ac etiam praedilecto
and fideli nostro Edw. Domino Morley, alteri Dominorum Parlamenti;
praedilectoque and fideli nostro Willielmo Cobham, Domino Guardiano quinque
Portuum nostrorum, alteri de Privato Consilio nostro; necnon praedilecto and
fideli nostro Edw. Domino Stafford, alteri Dominorum Parlamenti; ac etiam
praedilecto and fideli nostro Arthuro Domino Gray de Wilton, alteri Dominorum
Parlamenti; ac etiam praedilecto and fideli nostro Johanni Domino Lumley,
alteri Dominorum Parlamenti; ac etiam praedilecto and fideli nostro Johanni
Domino Sturton, alteri Dominorum Parlamenti; ac praedilecto and fideli nostro
Willielmo Domino Sands, alteri Dominorum Parlamenti; necnon praedilecto and
fideli nostro Henrico Domino Wentworth, alteri Dominorum Parlamenti;
praedilecto and fideli Ludovico nostro Mordaunt, alteri Dominorum Parliamenti;
praedilectoque and fideli nostro Johanni Domino Saint-John de Bletso, alteri
Dominorum Parlamenti; necnon praedilecto and fideli nestro Thomae Domino
Buckhurst, alteri de Privato Consilio nostro; ac praedilecto and fideli nostro
Hen. Domino Compton, alteri Dominorum Parlamenti; ac etiam praedilecto and
fideli nostro Francisco Knolles Militi, Thesaurario Hospitii nostri, alteri de
Privato Consilio nostro; necnon dilecto and fideli nostro Jacobo Crosts Militi,
Contrarotulatori dicti Hospitii nostri, alteri de Privato Consilio nostro; ac
dilecto and fideli nostro Christophero Hatton Militi, Vicecamerario nostro,
alteri de Privato Consilio nostro; ac etiam dilecto and fideli nostro Francisco
Walsingham Militi, uni primariorum Secretariorum nostrorum, alteri de Privato
Consilio nostro; ac etiam dilecto and fideli nostro Willielmo Davison Armigero,
alteri Primariorum Secretariorum nostrorum, de Privato Consilio nostro; ac
dilecto and fideli nostro Radulpho Sadleir Militi, Cancellario Ducatus nostri
Lancastriae, alteri de Privato Consilio nostro; necnon dilecto and fideli
nostro Waltero Myldmay Militi, Cancellario Scaccarii nostri, alteri de Privato
Consilio nostro; ac dilecto and fideli nostro Amicio Pawlett Militi, Capitaneo
Insulae nostrae de Jersey, alteri de Privato Consilio nostro; dilectoque and
fideli nostro Johanni Wolley Armigero, Secretario nostro pro lingua Latina,
alteri de Privato Consilio nostro; ac etiam dilecto and fideli nostro
Christophero Wraie Militi, Capitali Justitiario ad Placita coram nobis tenenda
assignato; dilectisque and fidelibus nostris Edmundo Anderson Militi, Capitali
Justitiario nostro de Banco; Rogero Manwood Militi, Capitali Baroni Scaccarii
nostri; Thomae Gaudy Militi, uni Justitiariorum nostrorum ad placita eorum
nobis tenenda assignato, and Willielmo Periam, uni Justitiariorum nostrorum de
Banco, Salutem, etc. A Letter from the Lords of the Council to Lewis Lord
Mordaunt. To our very good Lord, the Lord Mordaunt.
AFter our hearty Commendations to your Lordship: We are given to understand,
that by occasion of an unlawful Hunting, attempted by some of your Servants,
within Her Majesty's Park of Brikestock, being under the Charge and keeping of
Mr. Adrian Stokes; it has so happened, That two of your said Servants, have
been Slain, or in very great danger of Death: Forasmuch as it is thought, that
unless some speedy Order be taken therein, it may so fall out, that other
Inconveniences will ensue, which we would be sorry to understand: We have
thought good to require your Lordship, for preservation of Her Majesty's Peace,
to take order, That neither your self, nor any of your Friends, or Servants,
offer any further occasion of Quarrel unto the said Mr. Stokes, or any of his
Friends, or Servants, either serving in the said Park, or elsewhere. And
further, because we could be glad to understand, what your Lordship is able to
say, in excuse of the said Fact, pretended to be done by your Servants: We pray
you, forthwith upon Receipt hereof, as soon as you conveniently may, all
unnecessary Excuses and Delays set apart, to make your Repair hither, where you
shall understand our further Pleasure; and so desiring your Lordship hereof not
to fail, bid you right heartily farewell.

From Greenwich the Eleventh Day of July, One thousand five hundred seventy and
seven. Your loving Friends. W. Burghley. E. Lincoln. T. Sussex. A. Warwick. F.
Knollys. James Swtt. Fra. Walsingham.


Alliance of Mordaunt and Maunsell.
THIS Indenture made the Eleventh Day of July, in the Four and twentieth Year
of the Reign of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the Grace of God, Queen of
England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith; Between Edward Maunsell of
Morgan, in the County of Glamorgan, Knight, of the one part; and the Right
honorable Lewis Mordaunt, Knight, Lord Mordaunt, of the other part,
Witnesses; That in consideration of a Marriage to be (by God's Grace) had, and
solemnized between Thomas Maunsell, Esquire, Son, and Heir Apparent, of the
said Edward, on the one part; and Mary one of the Daughters of the said Lewis
Mordaunt on the other part; and for certain other good Considerations,
hereafter by these Presents expressed; it is Covenanted, Granted, Condefcended,
and Agreed, between the said Edward Maunsell, and Lewis Lord Mordaunt, in
Manner and Form following: That is to say, First, the said Edward Maunsell,
Knight, for him, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, and for every of
them, Covenanteth, and Grants, to and with the said Lewis Lord Mordaunt, his
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns, by these Presents, That the said thomas
Maunsell, shall before the Feast Day of Saint Michael the Archangel, next
ensuing the Date hereof, Espouse, Marry, and take to Wife the said Mary
Mordaunt, if the said Mary and Thomas will thereunto condescend, and agree, and
the Laws of Holy Church the same permit and suffer: And the said Lewis Lord
Mordaunt, for him, his Heirs, Exeutors, and Administrators, and for every of
them, Covenanteth and Grants, to, and with the said Edward Maunsell, Knight,
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, That the said Mary, Daughter of the
said Lord Mordaunt, shall before the said Feast Day of Saint Michael the
Archangel, next coming, Espouse, Marry, and take to Husband, the said Thomas
Maunsell, if the said Thomas and Mary will thereunto condescend and agree, and
the Laws of the Holy Church the same permit and suffer. In consideration of
which Marriage, so to be had and solemnized, the said Lewis Lord Mordaunt, for
him, his Heirs, Executors, and Administrators, does by these Presents,
Covenant, Promise, and Agree, to give with his said Daughter Mary, for her
advancement in Marriage with the said Thomas Maunsell, the Sum of Two thousand
Pounds, of current Money of England, to be paid to the said Edward, his
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, in manner and form following: That is to
say, At, or before the Twentieth and Five and twentieth Day of July, next
ensuing the Date of these Presents, at the usual place of payments, in the
Royal Exchange, within the City of London, between the hours of Ten of the
Clock in the Forenoon, and Three of the Clock in the Afternoon of the same Day,
the Sum of Five hundred Pounds, parcel of the said Two thousand Pounds; and
at, or upon the Four and twentieth Day of February, then next following, at the
said place, and between the said hours, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds, parcel
of the said Sum of Two thousand Pounds; and at, or upon the Twenty and Four
and twentieth Day of August, then next ensuing, at the said place, and between
the said hours, the Sum of Five hundred Pounds, parcel of the said Two
thousand Pounds; and also at or upon the Twentieth and Four and twentieth Day
of February, which shall be in the Year of our Lord God, One thousand five
hundred fourscore and three, at the said place, and between the said hours, the
Sum of Five hundred Pounds, the residue of the said Two thousand Pounds, in
full discharge and payment thereof. In consideration whereof, and of the said
Marriage, so to be had and solemnized, and for the better Maintenance of the
House, and Name, and of the Establishment of the Manners, Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, of the said Edward, in his Blood: And to the end his Lands and
Possessions may continue in his Blood, and to set down, and express what part
and parcel of his Inheritance shall remain after his death, to Dame Jane, Wife
of the said Edward, for her Jointure, for term of her Life; and likewise what
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments shall be limited, and appointed for the
Jointure of the said Mary, Daughter of the said Lord Mordaunt, in possession
presently, and in Reversion after the death of the said Edward, and after his
Wife's death; and what Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments shall remain to the
performance of his Will, for the Education and Preferment, of his younger
Children, and payment, and discharge of his Legacies, and Debts; and what Lands
shall descend after his death, and after the decease of the said Dame Jane his
Wife, to his said Son, for the better Maintenance of his House and Blood: It is
meant and intended by the said Edward Maunsell, hereby to be expressed and
declared, and now these Indentures do witness, That whereas in, and by one
Indenture bearing Date the Eighteenth Day of September, in the Three and
Twentieth Year of the Reign of our said Sovereign Lady, made between the said
Edward Maunsell, Knight, and Dame Jane his Wife, of the one party; and Leyson
Price, of Briton-Ferry, in the said County of Glamorgan, Esquire, and Thomas
Powell, of Longonoyd, in the said County, Gentleman, of the other party, it is
Covenanted, Granted, Condescended, and finally Agreed, between the said
Parties, to the said former Indentures; And the said Edward, for him, his
Heirs, Executors, and Assigns, and for the said Dame Jane his Wife, in and by
the same, has Covenanted, Granted, and Agreed, to and with the said Leyson
Price, and Thomas Powell, their Heirs and Assigns, That he the said Edward, and
Dame Jane his Wife, should, and would, before the First Day of September, then
next ensuing the Date of the former Indentures, Acknowledge, and Levy one Fine,
or Fines, with Proclamation according to the Course of the Common-Laws of this
Realm, before the Queen's Majesty's Justices of he County of Glamorgan, or some
such like other person, as should be sufficiently authorized, of all and
singular his Manners, Lordships, Messuages, Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments,
whatsoever, with all and singular their Rights, Members and Appurtenances, etc.

And so (being a very long Indenture) it proceeds in mentioning all the Manners,
of which this Estate was composed, and ends in form accustomed.

Another Letter from the Lords of the Council to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our very good Lord, the Lord Mordaunt.
AFter our hearty Commendations: The Queen's Majesty having very great and
urgent Cause, to communicate unto the Principals of her Nobility, for the
Advice of them and her Council, concerning the present State of the Realm; has
commanded us, to signify unto your Lordship, that of the said number she has
made choice of your Lordship to be one. And therefore her pleasure is, That
your Lordship do not fail, but to come to London, or to Westminster, to be
there the Six and twentieth of this Month; at which Day your Lordship shall
understand by me the Lord Chancellor, where your Lordship and the rest shall
Assemble, about the Service of her Majesty and the Realm. So we bid your
Lordship right heartily farewell.

From Windsor-Castle the Fifteenth Day of September, One thousand five hundred
eighty six. Your assured loving Friends. T. Brumley, Canc. W. Brughley. W.
Howard. J. Hunsdon. F. Cobham. Chr. Hutton.


Anether Letter from the Lords of the Council to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our very good Lord, the Lord Mordaunt.
AFter our hearty Commendations to your Lordship: Whereas her Majesty has made
special choice of your Lordship, to assist at the Funeral of the late Scottish
Queen, in company of diverse other Noblemen, which is to be performed the First
of August next ensuing, at the City of Peterburgh: These are therefore to
signify unto your Lordship, that her Majesty's Pleasure is, You fail not to be
there the last of this Month. We are also, to let you further understand, That
there is Order given to the Master of her Majesty's Wardrobe, Mr. John
Fortescue, to deliver unto you, or to such as you shall appoint to receive the
same, a certain proportion of Black, as well for your self, as also for certain
Gentlemen and Yeomen, to attend upon you; and so we bid your Lordship heartily
farewell.

From the Court the Tenth Day of July, One thousand five hundred eighty and
seven. Your very loving Friends, Chr. Hutton, Canc. W. Burghley. J. Hunsdon.
Fr. Cobham. Fr. Knollys. Fr. Walsyngham.


A Letter from the Lord Chancellor Hutton to the Lord Lewis Mordaunt.
My good Lord,
WHereas diverse Informations, and sundry grievous Complaints have come unto her
Majesty of outrageous Huntings, within her Highness's Park of Brikestock, since
the Decease of the Lady Anne Throgmorton; and now very lately, new Reports
pursued with Cries, and heavy Suggestions of strange Riots, Routs, Bloodsheds,
Felonies, Disorders, and other like Misdemeanors, done against the same her
Highness's Park, and her Game; with strange Batteries, and great Violences,
executed upon the Keeper of the same: Her Highness herewith being justly
offended, has in her Princely Wisdom addressed her Commission to you, and
other her Loving Subjects, for the due Examination of all the Trespasses and
Transpassors, against her said Game, and the Keepers thereof. Wherein I nothing
doubt, but your Lordship will use all good Care, and Endeavor, for the finding
out of those Malefactors; even so have I thought good for the furtherance of
Justice, as also for the discharge of my duty (having some particular Charge in
these Grounds my self) in Friendship, to wish your Lordship, and the rest
appointed in that Commission, to have all good regard for the due Execution
thereof, without any respect whatsoever, toward such as may any way be touched
with those Misdemeanors, according to the meaning of the said Commission:
Whereof her Highness expects a diligent, and very particular Return, which I
hope your Lordship will see carefully performed, for her better satisfaction in
the said Service.

From the Court, the Eleventh Day of December, One thousand five hundred eighty
seven. Your Lordships very Loving and assured Friend, Chapter Hutton, Canc.

A Letter from the Queen to the Lord Mordaunt.
To our Right trusty and welbeloved the Lord Mordaunt. Elizabeth R.

By the Queen.
RIght Trusty and welbeloved, we greet you well: Being credibly given to
understand, the great Preparations of Foreign Forces, whereof heretofore we
have had sundry Advertisements, are certainly intended to be employed against
this our Realm, not only for Invading the same, but also with full Resolution,
and a Tirannous Intent to make a Conquest thereof; and all under a color and
pretense of Advancing the Romish and Papistical Religion: We have therefore
thought it necessary, to put out Realm in some speedy Order of Defense,
Generally; not doubting, but through the Goodness of Almighty God, who from the
first Entrance into our Kingdom, has as it were Miraculously preserved both us
and our Dominions, against all the malicious Attempts, and Designs of our
Adversaries, which have been many; we shall be able with the Fidelity, Valor
and Constancy of our natural good Subjects, to withstand any thing that shall
be attempted against us and our Realm, to his High Glory and their Confusion.
And for that we have always assured our selves, amongst the rest of our
Nobility, of your Faithfulness toward us, and our Service: And knowing how
greatly it imports those of your degree and calling, having that Interest you
have in the Honor Liberty and Surety of the State, of this our Realm, to
employ both your Life and Goods in Defending and Preserving the same, from the
intended Conquest; considering the infinite and unspeakable Miseries, that do
always fall out upon such Accidents and Change, if the same should not be in
time withstood; which Miseries do well appear by the Cruel and Tyrannous
Government in other Countries not far distant; what pretense soever is made
otherwise fot the cause of Religion: We doubt not but you will make it
apparent, and manifest unto the World, how greatly you are devoted to the
Service of us, and of our Realm, your natural Country, and how ready you are
upon such an urgent Occasion to employ your self and your Forces, in so
necessary and doubtful an Action. For which purpose we do look, that you shall
put your self personally in a readiness to attend upon our person, with such a
number of Lances and light Horses, as may stand with your Ability, to be ready
to repair hither, at such time as you shall receive notice of our pleasure, by
our Privy Council. And so nothing doubting of your Forwardness herein, we
require you as soon as you may, to signify to our Privy Gouncil, what number
of Horsemen you shall have in a readiness furnished, as well of your own
Household as of others pertaining to you.

Given under our Signet at our Manner of Greenwich, the Eighteenth Day of June,
in the Thirtieth Year of our Reign.
An Exemplification at the Request of the Right Honorable Lewis Lord Mordaunt,
of several Patents of Liberties, granted to the Manners of Drayton, Luffwick, etc
ELizabeth dei gratia Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Regina, Fidei Defensor,
etc.
Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint salutem.
Inspeximus rotulamentnm quarundam litterarum patentium praecharissimi
Progenitoris nostri Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae Tertii, anno regni sui primo,
dilecto, and fideli suo Roberto de Arderne, factarum, and concessarum, in
Cancellaria ipsius nuper Regis irrotulatarum, ac infra Turrim nostrum London,
de Recordo manentium, in haec verba.

Edwardus dei gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae and
Dux Aquitaniae, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus,
Baronibus, Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Prepositis, Ministris and omnibus
Ballivis, and fidelibus suis, Salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse, and hac Carta nostra confirmasse, dilecto and fideli
nostro Roberto de Arderne, quod ipse, and haeredes sui, in perpetuum habeant
liberam Warrenam, in omnibus dominicis Terris suis de Drayton, Hanwell, Hornle,
Horyntone, Dunstowe and Walwycline in Comitatu Oxoniae, Warranham, and
Sudburgh, in Comitatu Northamptoniae, Perching, Adburton, Fulking, Lawyck,
Hangleton, and Noteknoll, in Comitatu Sussexiae; dum tamen terrae illae, non
sunt infra metas Forestae nostrae. Ita quod nullus intret Terras illas, ad
fugandum in iis, aut aliquid capiendum, quod ad Warrenam pertineat, sine
Voluntate, and Licentia ipsius Roberti, vel haeredum suorum, sub Forisfactura
nostra december librarum: Quare volumus, and firmitur praecipimus, pro nobis and
haeredibus nostris, quod praedictus Robertus, vel haeredes sui, in perpetuum
habeant liberam Warrenam in omnibus Dominicis Terris suis praedictis; dum tamen
Terrae illae non sint infra metas Forestae nostrae: Ita quod nullus intret
Terras illas, ad fugandum in iis, vel ad aliquid capiendum, quod ad Warrenam
pertineat, sine licentia, and voluntate ipsius Roberti, vel haeredum suorum,
sub Forisfactura nostra, december librarum, sicut praedictum est: His Testibus
venerabilibus Patribus, Willielmo Archiepiscopo Eboraci Angliae Primate,
Johanne Eliensi, Episcopo Cancellario nostro, Thoma de Brotherton Comite
Norssulciae and Marescallo Angliae, Avunculo nostro Charissimo, Johanne de
Warrena, Comite Surriae, Rogero de Mortuomari de Vigmo, Johanne de Cromwell,
and Johanne de Rosse, Senescallo Hospitii nostri, and aliis.

Data per manum nostram apud Eboracum, sexto decimo die Junii, Anno Regni
nostri primo, per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Inspeximus etiam Irrotulamentum quarundam Literarum Patentium, praedicti
percharissimi Progenitoris nostri, Edwardi, nuper Angliae regis Tertii, anno
Regni sui primo, dilecto and fideli suo Simoni de Drayton factarum, and
concessarum, in ^ancellaria ipsius nuper Regis irrotulatarum, ac infra Turrim
nostram London de Recordo etiam remanentium, in haec verba.

Edwardus, Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ministris omnibus, Ballivis and
fidelibus suis, Salutem.
Sciatis nos de gratia nostra speciali, concessisse, and hac Carta nostra
confirmasse, dilecto and fideli nostro Simoni de Drayton, quod ipse, and
haeredes sui, in perpetuum habeant liberam Warrennam, in omnibus dominicis
Terris suis de Drayton, Islippe, Luffwick, and Irthingburgh in Comitatu
Northamptoniae, de Bottlebrigge in Comitatu Huntingdon, and de Sokegoldington
in Comitatu Buckinghamiae; dum tamen Terrae illae non sint infra metas Forestae
nostrae: Ita quod nullus intret Terras illas, ad fugandum in iis, vel ad
aliquid capiendum, quod ad Warrenam pertineat, sine Licentia, and Voluntate
ipsius Simonis, vel haeredum suorum, per Forisfacturam nostram december librarum.
Quare volumus, and firmiter praecipimus, pro nobis, and haeredibus nostris,
quod praedictus Simon, and haeredes sui, in perpetuum habeant liberam Warrenam,
in omnibus dominicis Terris suis praedictis; dum tamen Terrae illa non sint
infra metas Forestae nostrae. Ita quod nullus intret Terras illas, ad fugandum
in iis, vel aliquid capiendum, quod ad Warrenam pertineat, sine Licentia vel
Voluntate ipsius Simonis, vel haeredum suorum, super Forisfacturam nostram
december librarum, ut praedictum est: His Testibus, venerabilibus Patribus,
Willielmo Archiepiscopo Eboraci Angliae Primate, Roberto Coventriae and
Leichfeldiae Episcopo, Edmundo Comite Kantiae, Henrico Comite Lancastriae,
Johanne de Warrenna Comite Surriae, Rogero de Mortuo-mari de Wiggmore, Thoma
Woke, Willielmo de Rosse, Johanne de Rosse Senescallo Hospitii nostri and aliis.

Data per manum nostram, apud Eboracum, primo die Junii, Anno Regni nostri
primo.
Inspeximus insuper Irrotulamentum quarundam Literarum Patentium praedicti
percharissimi Progenitoris nostri, Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae tertii, Anno
Regni sui Secundo, dilecto, and fideli suo Roberto de Arderne praedicto,
factarum, and concessarum, in Cancellaria ipsius nuper Regis Irrotulatarum, ac
infra praedictam Turrim nostram London, de Recordo similiter remanentium, in
haec verba.

Edwardus, Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, Dux Aquitaniae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ministris, and omnibus Ballivis, and
fidelibus suis, Salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse, and hac Carta nostra confirmasse, dilecto, and fideli
nostro Roberto de Arderne, quod ipse, and haeredes sui in perpetuum, habeant
liberam Warrennam, in omnibus dominicis Terris suis in Drayton, Hanwel, Harnle,
Horinton, Dunstawe, Yoloughbury, Wickham, and Waleweclyne in Comitatu Oxoniae,
Wappenham and Sudburgh in Comitatu Northamptoniae, Perching, Adburton, Fulking
la Wike, Hangleton and Noteknoll in Comitatu Sussexiae; dum tamen Terrae illae
non sint infra metas Forestae nostrae. Ita quod nullus intret Terras illas, ad
fugandum in iis, vel ad aliquid capiendum, quod ad Warrennam pertineat, sine
Voluntate and Licentia ipsius Roberti, vel haeredum suorum, sub Forisfactura
nostra december librarum. Quare volumus, and firmiter praecipimus pro nobis, and
haeredibus nostris, quod praedictus Robertus, and haeredes sui, in perpetuum
habeant liberam Warrennam, in omnibus dominicis Terris suis praedictis; dum
tamen Terrae illae non sint intra metas Forestae nostrae. Ita quod nullus
intret in Terras illas, ad fugandum in iis, vel ad aliquid capiendum, quod ad
Warrennam pertineat, sine Licentia and Voluntate ipsius Roberti, vel haeredum
suorum, sub Forisfactura nostra december librarum, sicut praedictum est: His
Testibus, venerabili Patre, Henrico Lincolniae Episcopo, Cancellario nostro,
Johanne de Warrenna Comite Surriae, Rogero de Mortuo-mari de Wiggmore, Johanne
Darcy, Johanne de Wisham, Senescallo Hospitii nostri, and aliis.

Data per manum nostram apud Gloucester, quarto die Octobris, Regni nostri
secundo. Per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Inspeximus praeterea Irrotulamentum quarundam Literarum Patentium,
percharissimi Progenitoris nostri, Richardi nuper Regis Angliae secundi, Anno
Regni sui nono, dilecto, and fideli suo, Henrico Green factarum, and
concessarum, in Cancellaria ipsius nuper Regis, irrotulatarum, ac infra Turrim
nostram London praedictam de Recordo residentium, in haec verba.

Richardus Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Franciae and Dominus Hiberniae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Ducibus, Comitibus,
Baronibus, Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ministris, ac omnibus
Ballivis, and fidelibus suis, Salutem.
Sciatis nos, de gratia nostra speciali, concessisse, and hac Carta nostra
confirmasse, dilecto, and fideli nostro, Henrico Green Chivaler, quod ipse and
haeredes sui, in perpetuum habeant, Mercatum, singulis septimanis, per diem
Jovis, in villa sua de Luffwik, and unam Feriam ibidem, singulis annis, per
tres dies duraturam; videlicet, in vigilia, and in die, and crastino
Pentecostes, cum omnibus Libertatibus, and liberis Consuetudinibus, ad
hujusmodi Mercatum and Feriam pertinentibus. Nisi Mercatum illud, and Feria
illa, sint ad nocumentum vicinorum Mercatorum, and vicinarum Feriarum. Et quod
habeant liberam Warrennam, in omnibus dominicis Terris suis, in villis de
Luffwik and Issipp; dum tamen Terrae illae non sint infra metas Forestae
nostrae. Ita quod nullus intret Terras illas, ad fugandum in iis, vel ad
aliquid capiendum, quod ad Warrennam pertineat, sine Licentia, and Voluntate
ipsius Henrici, vel haeredum suorum, super Forisfacturam nostram, december
librarum. Quare volumus, and firmiter praecipimus, pro nobis and haeredibus
nostris, quod praedictus Henricus, and haeredes sui, in perpetuum habeant
praedicta Mercatum, and Feriam, apud praedictam villam de Luffwik, cum omnibus
Libertatibus, and liberis Consuetudinibus, ad hujusmodi Mercatum, and Feriam
pertinentibus; nisi Mercatum illud, and Feria illa, sint ad nocumentum
vicinorum Mercatorum, and vicinarum Feriarum. Et quod habeant liberam
Warrennam, in omnibus dominicis Terris suis praedictis; dum tameant Terrae
illae non sint infra metas Forestae nostrae. Ita quod nullus intret in Terras
illas, ad fugandum in iis, vel ad aliquid capiendum, quod ad Warrennam
pertineat, fine Licentia and Voluntate ipsius Henrici, vel haeredum suorum,
super Forisfacturam nostram december librarum; sicut praedictum est. His Testibus,
venerabilibus Patribus, Willielmo Archiepiscopo Cantuariae, totius Angliae
Primate, Richardo London, Willielmo Winton, Episcopis, Johanne Rege, Castellae
and Legionis duce Lancastriae, Edmundo Eboraci, Thoma Gloucestriae, Ducibus,
Avunculis nostris charissimis, Roberto Marchione Dublini, Richardo Arundel,
Thoma Warwici, Hugone Straffordiae, Comitibus, Michaele de la Poole, Comite
Suffolciae, Cancellario, Hugone de Segrave, Thesaurario nostro, Waltero Skirlaw
Clerico Coventriae and Leichfeldiae, Custode privati sigilli nostri, Johanne de
Monteacuto, Senescallo Hospitii nostri, and aliis.

Data per manum nostram apud Westmonasterium, Sexto die Decembris, Anno Regni
nostri nono. Per Breve de privato Sigillo.

Inspeximus ulterius Irrotulamentum quarundam Literarum Patentium,
percharissimi Progenitoris nostri, Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae Secundi, Anno
Regni sui undecimo, dilecto, and fideli suo Roberto de Arderne, factarum and
concessarum, in Cancellaria ejusdem nuper Regis, irrotulatarum, ac infra
praedictam Turrim nostram London de Recordo similiter residentium, in haec
verba.

Edwardus, Dei gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae,
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus, Praepositis, Ministris and omnibus Ballivis, and
fidelibus nostris, Salutem.
Sciatis nos concessisse, and hac Carta nostra confirmasse, dilecto, ac fideli
nostro Roberto de Arderne, quod ipse, and haeredes sui in perpetuum, habeant
liberam Warrennam, in omnibus do mnicis Terris suis de Drayton, juxta Banbury,
in Comitatu Oxoniae, and Sudburgh, in Comitatu Northamptoniae; dum tamen Terrae
illae non sint infra metas Forestae nostrae. Ita quod nullus intret Terras
illas, ad fugandum in iis, vel ad aliquid capiendum, quod ad Warrennam
pertineat, sine Licentia and Voluntate ipsius Roberti, vel haeredum suorum,
super Forisfacturam nostram december librarum. Quare volumus, and firmiter
praecipimus, pro nobis and haeredibus nostris, quod praedictus Robertus, and
haeredes sui in perpetuum, habeant liberam Warrennam, in omnibus dominicis
Terris suis praedictis; dum tamen Terrae illae, non sint infra metas Forestae
nostrae. Ita quod nullus intret Terras illas, ad fugandum in iis, vel ad
aliquid capiendum, quod ad Warrennam pertineat, sine Licentia, and Voluntate
ipsius Roberti, vel haeredum suorum, super Forisfacturam nostram december
librarum, sicut praedictum est. His Testibus, venerabili Patre Johanne Winton
Episcopo, Cancellario nostro, Thoma de Brothertone Comite Norfolciae, and
Marescallo Angliae, fratre nostro Charissimo, Adomaro de Valencia Comite
Pembrokiae, Humphrido de Bohune Comite Herefordiae and Essexiae, Hugone de
Despenser seniore, Johanne de Maubray, Willielmo de Monte-cuto senescallo
Hospitii nostri, and aliis.

Data apud Eboracum, vicesimo septimo die Septembris, Anno Regni nostri
undecimo. Per ipsum Regem, manu Magistri Thomae de Charleton.

Inspeximus denique Irrotulamentum quarundam Literarum Patentium percharissimi
Progenitoris nostri, Henrici nuper Regis Angliae Sexti, Anno Regni sui vicesimo
septimo, dilecto sibi Henrico Green Armigero, factarum and concessarum, in
Cancellaria ipsius nuper Regis, irrotulatarum, ac infra Turrim nostram London
praedictam, de Recordo pariter residentium, in haec verba.

Henricus, Dei gratia, Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae,
universis and singulis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus,
Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Justiciariis, Vicecomitibus,
Praepositis, Ministris, and omnibus Ballivis, and fidelibus suis, Salutem.
Sciatis quod cum dilectus nobis Henricus Green Armiger, seisitus existat de
Manerio de Grafton, juxta Warton, in Comitatu Northamptoniae, in dominico suo,
ut de Feodo simplici, unde Bosci vocati Grafton-Woods, and Grafton-Park, ac
Campi vocati Grafton-Feilds, parcella dicti Manerii, sive eidem Manerio
pertinentes, ac infra Forestam nostram de Rockingham in Comitatu praedicto
existunt, ut dicitur: Nos de gratia nostra speciali, Boscos praedictos and
Campos deafforestamus, and deafforestatos esse volumus per praesentes, and
concessimus, pro nobis, and haeredibus nostris, quantum in nobis est, praefato
Henrico, quod ipse and haeredes sui, habeant and possideant liberam Chaceam, in
Boscis, and Campis praedictis, ac Boscos and campos illos, sic deafforestatos,
ut liberam Chaceam suam tenere possint, sibi, and haeredibus suis, in
perpetuum, absque impedimento nostri, haeredum ceu successorum nostrorum,
Justiciariorum, Eschaetorum, Vicecomitum, Coronatorum, aut aliorum Ballivorum
nostri, haeredum, seu successorum nostrorum, aut aliorum quorumcunque. Ita quod
nullus Senescallus, Justiciarius Forestae, Forestarius, Viridarius, Regardator,
seu aliquis alius Minister nostri, haeredum, seu successorum nostrorum, intret
Chaceam praedictam, ad fugandum in ea, vel ad aliquid capiendum, quod ad
Forestam vel Chaceam pertinet, absque Licentia ipsius Henrici, and haeredum
suorum; Eo quod Campi and Bosci praedicti, insra metas, seu perambulationem,
Forestae nostrae praedictae existunt, non obstante. Et ulterius de uberiori
gratia nostra, concessimus and Licentiam dedimus, pro nobis haeredibus, and
successoribus nostris, quantum in nobis est, praefato Henrico, and haeredibus
suis, quod ipse, seu dicti Haeredes sui, ad ipsorum, seu alicujus eorum
beneplacitum, and voluntatem, Boscos and Campos praedictos, and quamlibet
parcellam eorundem, includere and imparcare, ac Parcum inde facere possunt, seu
possit, licite, and impune; and quod idem Henricus, and haeredes sui praedicti,
eundem Parcum per ipsos, seu eorum aliquem, in forma praedicta, factum and
inclusum, habeant and teneant, sibi, and haeredibus suis in perpetuum. Ita quod
nullus intret Chaceam, vel Parcum praedictum, ad fugandum in iis, seu eorum
altero, vel ad aliquid capiendum in iis, contra voluntatem praedicti Henrici,
and haeredum suorum praedictorum, sub Forisfactura nostra viginti librarum.
Quare volumus, and firmiter praecipimus, pro nobis, haeredibus, and
successoribus nostris praedictis, quod praedictus Henricus, and haeredes sui,
habeant and teneant, liberam Chaceam, in Boscis and Campis praedictis, ac
Parcum praedictum, in forma praedicta, absque impedimento, vel impetitione
nostri, haeredum, vel successorum nostrorum, Justiciariorum, Eschaetorum,
Vicecomitum, Coronatorum, vel aliorum Ballivorum nostri, haeredum, seu
successorum nostrorum, aut aliorum quorumcunque. Et quod nullus Senescallus,
Justiciarius Forestae, Forestarius, Viridarius, Regardator Forestae, aut
aliquis alius Minister nostri, haeredum, seu successorum nostrorum, aut aliquis
alius intret Chaceam, seu Parcum praedictum, ad fugandum in iis, seu eorum
altero, vel ad aliquid capiendum, quod ad Chaceam, Parcum, vel Forestam
pertinet, contra voluntatem ipsius Henrici, and haeredum suorum praedictorum:
Eo quod Bosci, and Campi praedicti, infra metas, seu perambulationem praedictae
Forestae nostrae de Rockingham, sicut praedictum est, existunt; aut aliquo
statuto Actu, Ordinatione, Provisione, aut aliqua alia causa, re, vel materia
quacunque non obstante. His testibus, venerabilibus Patribus, Johanne
Archiepiscopo Cantuariensi, totius Angliae Primate, Cancellario nostro,
Magistro Karlial, Thesaurario nostro Angliae, and A. Cicestrense, Custode
privati Sigilli nostri, Episcopis, charissimis Consanguineis nostris, Humphrido
Buckingham and Willielmo Suffolk, Camerario nostro Angliae, Ducibus, Richardo
Sarum and Thoma Devon Comitibus, dilectis, and fidelibus nostris, Richardo
Boteler Domino de Sudley, Senescallo Hospitii nostri, and Jacobi Fenys, Domino
Say, Camerario Hospitii nostri, Militibus, and aliis.

Data per manum nostram apud Westmonasterium primo die Aprilis, Anno Regni
nostri vicesimo septimo. Per ipsum Regem and de data praedicta autoritate
Parlamenti.

Nos autem tenores irrotulamentorum, separalium Literarum Patentium
praedictarum, ad requisitionem praedicti and fidelis nostri Ludovici Mordaunt
militis, Domini Mordaunt, duximus exemplificandum per praesentes. In cujus rei
Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipsa apud Westmonasterium, vicesimo nono die Novembris, Anno Regni
nostri tricesimo quarto. Examinatur per nos Law. Huse and Tho. Leg. Clericis.

Vltima Voluntas Ludovici tertii Domini Mordaunt.
IN the Name of God, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen. I Lewis
Mordaunt, Knight, Lord Mordaunt of Drayton, in the County of Northampton, being
the First Day of October, in the Year of our Lord God, One thousand five
hundred ninety and three, and in the Five and thirtieth Year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the Grace of God, of England, France and
Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc. Whole of Body, of good Mind and
perfect Remembrance, thanks be unto God, certain to dye, and uncertain when,
and where I shall depart this mortal and transitory Life; willing in the
disposition of my worldly Goods, Lands and Possessions, to prevent the sudden
hour of Death, so that at the time it shall please my Maker, Redeemer and
Savior Jesus Christ, to call me from this transitory Life, when my Mind, I
hope, shall be wholly in and toward him, and the Joys of Heaven; I shall not
need then to be busied with any thing of this unstable World: Do therefore now
make, ordain, constitute and declare, this my Last Will and Testament, in
manner and form following, renouncing and forsaking all former Wills, by me
heretofore made.

First and chiefly, I bequeath my Soul to Almighty God, and to Jesus Christ his
Son, my only Savior and Redeemer, trusting, and steadfastly believing, to
receive forgiveness of all my Sins and Offenses, according to his endless
Mercy, and Property; and that he will be merciful to me, a most wretched
sinner, and Creature of his handiwork, and not impute my Sins and Offenses to
me, neither burden me with them according to my merits, and deserts; but
according to the multitude of his great Mercies, he will Pardon and Forgive me,
through the special Faith, and Trust I have in him, and in Jesus Christ, his
only Son, my Savior and Redeemer; by the Merits of whose Passion I believe
faithfully, through this my Faith, pure Submission, and sorrowful Repentance,
to be delivered from the bondage of Sin and Hell, and to receive full
Remission, and Forgiveness of all my Sins, and to be made partaker of the
Fruition of his Deity, in his heavenly Kingdom, amongst his Chosen and Elect;
of whom I humbly ask Forgiveness, even from the beginning of my Life to the end
of the same.

My Body I wish, wheresoever I depart, within this Realm of England, may be
Buried at the Parish Church of Luffwick, where the Body of Dame Elizabeth
Mordaunt, my late Wife does lie, if it may conveniently so be; otherwise where
it shall please God to appoint, in such seemly sort, as may stand with my
Vocation, according to the Discretion of mine Executors.

And I Will, That within One Year after my Departure, my Executors shall cause
to be made for me, and Dame Elizabeth my late Wife, a meet and convenient Tomb,
or Monument of Alabafter, with Two Pictures, the one for my self, the other for
Dame Elizabeth my late Wife, representing the State which God of his infinite
Goodness has called me unto; the charges thereof will be I suppose about
fourscore Pounds; and so much I will shall be bestowed, at the least.

Item, I Will, give and bequeath, to be dealt in Alms, the Day of my Burial,
Threescore and ten Pounds, viz. to the Poor People in Luffwick, Ten Pounds; to
the Poor People of Thrapton Ten Pounds; to the Poor People of Sudburgh Six
Pounds; to the Poor People in Slipton Three Pounds; to the Poor People in
Turvey Ten Pounds; to the Poor People of Stacheden, Charleton and Lawenden
Twenty Pounds; to the Poor People of Grafton Eight Pounds.

I Will that every one of my Household Servants, at the Day of my Funeral, or
at the least within Six Months after, shall have truly paid unto them, one
whole Years Wages, and shall be found, and allowed by some in my House at
Drayton, Meat, Drink and Lodging for Two Months, after my decease, if they will
come for the same, in which time they may provide for themselves.

Now touching and concerning my worldly Goods, I will and bequeath them in
manner and form following. First, I give and bequeath to my Son Henry Mordaunt,
my Funeral discharged, my Debts paid, and Legacies performed, all my Furniture
and Household-Stuff, in my House at Drayton; requiring him in special trust,
not willing to spoil or wast them, but that he will, by his Last Will and
Testament, leave and bequeath them after his Death, to his Son and Heir of his
Body lawfully begotten: And if it fortune him to depart this world, without
Heir Male of his Body, (which God forbid:) Then I likewise require him to give
and bequeath, the One Moiety or half thereof, (the Seilings, and Iron-looms
excepted) to my loving Daughter Mrs. Margaret Mordaunt, his now Wife; and the
other half to the next Heir Male, to whom my House of Drayton ought to descend:
And to that intent and purpose my Will is, My Son Henry shall within Forty Days
after my decease, enter into Bond and become bound by Obligation unto my loving
Friends John Wake and Edward Watson, Esouires, in the Sum of Three hundred
Pounds; with Condition, That he shall well, and truly perform this my Last Will
and Testament, to all intents, constructions and purposes, in manner and form
aforesaid; which if he do not, or refuse to do, then I Will my former Bequests
to him, shall be merely void and of none effect. And now having a special care
of my Two Daughters, Katherine Mordaunt, and Elizabeth Mordaunt, yet
un-married, and willing that they, and each of them, shall be yearly provided
for, and allowed their reasonable Maintenances, until their several Marriages;
and that they, and each of them, may have sufficient Portions, for their, and
each of their Advancements in Marriage; I Will, Give, and Bequeath unto them,
and each of them, such several Parts and Portions, and in such manner as
hereafter follows, viz.

I Will, Give, and Bequeath unto my Daughter, Katherine Mordaunt, the Sum of
Two thousand Pounds, of lawful Money of England, to be paid unto her by my said
Son Henry Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors and Assigns, in manner and form
following, viz. Five hundred Pounds at the Day of her Marriage, Five hundred
Pounds within Six Months after the First Payment; and Five hundred Pounds
within Six Months after the Second Payment; and the other Five hundred Pounds,
being the rest, and residue of Two thousand Pounds, in the Eighteenth Month
after her Marriage.

Item, I will, give, and bequeath, unto my Daughter Elizabeth Mordaunt, the
like Sum of Two thousand Pounds, of good and lawful Money of England, to be
paid unto her by my said Son Henry Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns,
in manner and form following, videlicet, The Sum of Five hundred Pounds at the
Day of her Marriage, Five hundred Pounds more within six Months after, Five
hundred Pounds more within Six Months after the second payment, and the other
Five hundred Pounds, being the rest and residue, of the said Sum of Two
thousand Pounds, in the Eighteenth Month after her Marriage. So that my meaning
is, They shall not have any part of the Sum of Two thousand Pounds to each of
them, before their several Marriages; but as they shall be Married, they shall
be paid in form aforesaid. And hereby I Advise and Charge them, and each of
them, to make deliberate Choice, of each their Husbands, not rashly to match
themselves, without the Assent of their Brother, my Son Henry Mordaunt, and
other their good Friends; who I hope will have good care of them: And if it
happen my said Daughter Katherine Mordaunt, to depart this Life before
Marriage, which God forbid; then my Will and Intent is, That her part and
Portion to her before bequeathed, shall be divided in manner and form
following, videlicet, Five hundred Pounds to her said Sister Elizabeth
Mordaunt, then surviving, in Augmentation of her part, Two hundred Pounds to
Arthur Maunsell, second Son of my Daughter Mary, and the residue of the
foresaid Two thousand Pounds, to my Son Henry Mordaunt. And if it fortune my
Daughter Elizabeth Mordaunt, to depart this Life before Marriage, which God
forbid; then my Will and Intent is, That her part and Portion to her before
bequeathed, shall be divided in manner and form following, To her Sister
Katherine Mordaunt, then surviving, in Augmentation of her part, the Sum of
Five hundred Pounds, and to Arthur Maunsell, the second Son of my Daughter
Mary, the Sum of Two hundred Pounds, and the rest and residue to my Son Henry
Mordaunt.

Further my Will is, That my said Son Henry Mordaunt, and his Heirs, shall
yearly pay unto my Daughter Katherine Mordaunt, for, and toward her
maintenance unto the day of her Marriage, and that the same be solemnized, the
Sum of Fifty Pounds of lawful English Money, at two Feasts in the Year, that
is to say, At the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel, and the Annunciation of
our Blessed Lady Mary the Virgin, by even Portions.

Further my Will and earnest Desire is, That my said Daughter Katherine, shall
and may be in House, and remain with my said Son Henry, and be found and
allowed by him, sufficient Meat, Drink, Fire and Lodging, according to her
vocation, for her self, a Man, and a Maid, at the only Charges of my Son and
his Heirs, until the day of her Marriage, and that the same be solemnized. But
if he and she shall not like so to do, as I hope they will: Then I will, my Son
Henry after such disliking, shall yearly allow her for her Board, and in lieu
thereof, Sixteen Pounds thirteen Shillings and four Pence, over and besides the
said yearly Sum of Fifty Pounds; so that she may have a hundred Marks a year,
for yearly maintenance, and finding until she be Married.

Likewise my Will is, That my said Son Henry Mordaunt, and his Heirs, shall
yearly pay unto my Daughter Elizabeth Mordaunt, for, and toward her
maintenance, until the day of Marriage, the Sum of Fifty Pounds of lawful
English Money, at two Feasts in the Year, that is to say, At the Feast of Saint
Michael the Archangel, and the Feast of the Annunciation of our Blessed Lady
Mary the Virgin, by even Portions. And further my Will is, That my said
Daughter Elizabeth, shall, and may be, and remain in House, with my Son Henry
Mordaunt, and at his Charges, be found, and allowed sufficient Meat, Drink,
Fire and Lodging, according to her vocation, for her self, a Man, and a Maid,
until the day of her Marriage, and that the same be solemnized; which I will
shall be performed, at the Costs and Charges of my Son and his Heirs. But if he
and she shall not like to agree, or continue together, as I hope they will;
then I Will, my Son Henry Mordaunt and his Heirs, after such disliking, shall
yearly allow my said Daughter Elizabeth, for and in lieu of her Board, the Sum
of Sixteen Pounds thirteen Shillings and four Pence, over and besides the Sum
of Fifty Pounds before bequeathed unto her; so that she may yearly have, and
receive One hundred Marks, for her yearly maintenance, and finding, until she
be Married.

Also I give and bequeath all my other Goods, Chattels, Jewels and Plate,
unbequeathed, my Funeral discharged, Debts paid, and Legacies performed, unto
my loving Son Henry Mordaunt, whom I Will shall be mine Executor, for this
purpose: Upon condition, that he take the Executorship upon him, and enter into
Obligation of the Sum of Three hundred Pounds, unto my loving Friends, Edward
Watson and John Wake, Esquires, for the true performance of this my Will, as
aforesaid; which if he shall not do within Forty Days after my decease: Then I
will, That Edward Watson and John Wake, Esquires, shall be mine Executors, and
of my Goods to see my Funeral discharged, Debts and Legacies paid; and the rest
of my Goods to leave unto my Son Henry Mordaunt, according to my true meaning.
Now for the yearly maintenance of my Two Daughters Katherine and Elizabeth, and
each of them, until their several Marriages, as aforesaid, and for the better
Assurance, and sure making of their several Portions, to them before
bequeathed: And in respect I have disbursed the Money, which I kept for my
Daughters Portions, in purchasing of Land, building of my House, lying fit and
necessary for my Son; and lest that my Son, his Heirs, Executors or Assigns,
should not, or would not, perform this my Last Will and Testament, as I verily
think he will, and so by that means my Daughters be lest unprovided, as well of
their several Portions, as of Allowance, for their several maintenances, until
their several Marriages:

I do Will, Give, Bequeath, and Devise, by this my Last Will and Testament,
unto my loving Friends Edward Watson and John Wake, Esquires, and to their
Heirs for ever, Two parts of my Manners of Carleton and Chillington, in the
County of Bedford, in Three parts to be divided, which I lately purchased of
the Lord Vaux, (the Land, Meadow and Common thereto belonging, lying in the
Fields of Turvey, only excepted.)

Also I will, give and bequeath, unto the said Edward Watson and John Wake, and
to their Heirs for ever, Two parts of my Manner of Stacheden, otherwise called
Delwike, in the County of Bedford, in three parts to be divided, lately by me
purchased of Master William Cornwallis, Esquire, and Lucy his Wife, one of the
Daughters and Heirs of Sir John Nevill, Knight, Lord Latimer deceased; and also
two parts of my Manner, and Closes of Snelson, in the Parish of Lawenden, in the
County of Buckingham, commonly called Snelson-Pastures, in three parts to be
divided; or as much of my said Manners of Carleton and Chillington, Stacheden
called Delwike, and Snelson-Pastures, as shall amount unto two full parts, of
all the said Manners, Closes and Pastures, in three parts to be divided: To the
intent and purpose, and upon special Trust, and Confidence, That if my Son
Henry Mordaunt, and his Heirs, do not yearly pay to each of my Daughters, for
their several maintenances, until their several Marriages, the foresaid Sums
of Fifty Pounds a piece, with their several Meat, Drink and Lodging, or One
hundred Marks a Year a piece, without Meat and Drink; so that each of them may
quietly have, and receive Fifty Pounds a Year, and Meat and Drink, or a Hundred
Marks a piece, without Meat and Drink, according to my true meaning as
aforesaid: Then I will, That the said Edward Watson and John Wake, my said
Executors for this purpose, and their Heirs, shall yearly after my death, levy
and receive the Rents, Issues, Profits of the Premises, and pay unto my said
two Daughters yearly, as aforesaid, to each of them the Sum of One hundred
Marks, for their several maintenance, until the several days of their several
Marriages, and the rest remaining, to deliver unto my Son Henry Mordaunt, and
his Heirs: And to the intent and purpose, and upon special Trust and
Confidence, That if my said Son Henry Mordaunt, his Heirs, Exccutors or
Assigns, shall not pay the said several Sums, and every part and parcel of
them before by me, in this my Will, to my Daughters and others bequeathed, at
such days and times, as in this my Last Will, is devised, mentioned, declared
or intended, according to my true meaning, as I trust and assuredly hope he
will: Or shall resuse, make denial, or use detraction or delays: Then I will,
That the said Edward Watson and John Wake, or the Survivor of them, and their
Heirs, shall bargain and sell, to any person or persons, their Heirs or Assigns
for ever, the said two parts, of my said Manners, Closes and Pastures, with all
and singular their Appurtenances in Carleton, Chillington, Stacheden called
Delwike, and Snelson, alias Snelson-Pastures, in three parts to be divided, or
as much thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, as shall amount, or
fully extend, unto the just value of two parts, in three parts to be divided,
(the Land in the Field of Turvey, belonging to Carleton and Chillington, only
excepted) for and toward the payment of their said several Portions before
bequeathed. And my intent is, That if any Sum of Money, shall be remaining
over, and besides the Legacies aforesaid, which I will first to be satisfied;
then within convenient time, after my Executors shall have received the same,
my said Executors and their Heirs, shall, deducting their reasonable Charges,
pay the same over unto my Son, or to such other, as shall be at that time my
Heir Male of my House of Drayton: And for that purpose only, I mean for the
maintenance of my Daughters, and for the sale of my said Land, as aforesaid, if
need so require:

I will that Edward Watson and John Wake, Esquires, and I will that (...) shall
be my Supervisors for whose care in that behalf I give (...)

And if my Son Henry depart this World, without Heir Male, my Daughters or any
of them then surviving; then my will is, That my Daughter Katherine shall have
in Augmentation of her Portion, Five hundred Pounds more, over and above her
former Legacies: And my Daughter Elizabeth also, shall have Five hundred Pounds
more, beside her former Legacies. And Arthur Maunsell, if he be then alive,
shall have the like Sum of Five hundred Pounds; otherwise I will the same to
be divided between my Daughter Mary's two Sons, Arthur and Henry Maunsell; and
that Edward Watson and John Wake, and their Heirs, my Executors, also for this
purpose, shall stand seized of two parts of my Fee-simple Lands, until such
time as my Daughters be paid their Legacies, by the next Heirs, to whom my Son
shall leave the same; if my Son die without a Son: But if my Son Henry have a
Son, that shall survive him, then these three last Legacies, bequeathed unto my
Daughters Katherine, and Elizabeth, and the Children of my Daughter Mary,
touching their last bequests, of Five hundred Pounds a piece, shall be merely
void. Nevertheless my Will is, That though he have a Son, my Daughters shall
have their former Legacies and Portions, according to my true meaning as
aforesaid. And my full Meaning and Will is, That the Charges, of my several
Daughters Marriages, in Meat, Drink and Apparel, according to their degrees,
shall be defrayed, and born at the Costs and Charges of my Son Henry Mordaunt,
and his Heirs; or such other to whom my Lands by virtue hereof shall descend:
Which if he, or they shall refuse, or not do, Then I Will, That Edward Watson
and John Wake, my Executors, or the Survivor of them, or their Heirs, shall see
performed out of such Lands as before, and hereafter I have willed, and devised
to them, and their Heirs, as occasion shall serve. And thus having disposed of
my worldly Goods, and taken order for my Daughters Portions, and Debts, which I
wish to be first paid, having a special care that all, and every Person or
Persons, to whom I have sold any manner of Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments,
shall quietly and peaceably enjoy the same, according to my true intent and
meaning: Although my trust and hope is, my Son and Heir, and his, and their
Heirs, and all those that are, or shall be Heir or Heirs Males, to John Lord
Mordaunt, my late Grandfather, to John Lord Mordaunt, my Father deceased, to my
self, or to my Son Henry Mordaunt, shall, and will quietly and peaceably,
permit and suffer, all those Person and Persons, and their Heirs, to whom I
have sold any Manners, Lands or Tenements, as aforesaid, to have, hold and enjoy
the same, and every part, and parcel of them, to them and their Heirs for ever.
In respect that I have left, and by the Grace of God means to leave, to descend
and come successively, from Heir Male to Heir Male, diverse other Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, lying more necessary, sit and convenient, for my
self and them, of as good or better value; (my Daughters Portions, and other
Legacies, deducted, as aforesaid notwithstanding;) yet for the better
corroboration, and strengthening, assurance, and sure making of all such Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, as I have Bargained and Sold, or hereafter shall
Bargain or Sell, to any Person or Persons whatsoever:

I will, and devise by these Presents, That from, and after my decease, Edward
Watson and John Wake, my Executors, as aforesaid, and their Heirs, shall stand,
and be seized of two parts of my Manners, Lands and Tenements, or whereof I am
seized in Fee, dividable, in three parts to be divided, my Daughters Portions
paid, or Lands sold by my Executors, for the payment thereof, as aforesaid, to
the use of Henry my Son and Heir, and of the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully
begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the use of the Heirs Males of John
Lord Mordaunt, my late Grandfather; and so from Heir Male to Heir Male, so long
as they, and every one of their Heirs Males, and their Assign or Assigns, shall
quietly permit, and suffer all and every such Person and Persons, to whom I
have Bargained or Sold, any Manners, Lands or Tenements, as aforesaid, quietly
and peaceably to have, hold, and enjoy the same, according to my true intent
and meaning; without any Entry, Claim, Suit in Law, Eviction or Interruption:
And lawful Request made to my Heir or Heirs, or any of them by the party
grieved, and by Edward Watson and John Wake, my said Executors, or some of
them, the Heir or Heirs of them, or any of them, in the presence of Ten
sufficient Witnesses; whereof Five to be Hundreders, inhabiting within the
County, where mine Heir, as aforesaid, shall be then resident: If my said Heir
and Heirs, does not surcease, his and their Suit and Suits, Claim and Demand,
against any such parties grieved, and make such further Assurance to the party
or parties grieved, as shall be reasonably required and devised, at the Costs
and Charges of such party grieved: Then my Will, full intent and meaning is,
That Edward Watson and John Wake, my said Executors, and their Heirs, and the
Survivor and Survivors of them, and his and their Heirs, shall from time to
time absolutely stand, and be seized of two parts of my said Manners, Lands and
Tenements, divisible, in three parts to be divided, of a good and perfect
Estate of Inheritance, in Fee-simple, to the use of them, their Heirs and
Assigns for ever; and shall have full Power and lawful Authority, by virtue of
these Presents, to Bargain and Sell, all, or so much of all, or any of my said
Manners, Lands or Tenements, as my said Executors or their Heirs, or the
Survivors of them, shall think convenient, to any Person, and his and their
Heirs for ever; and with the Money received for the same, (my Daughters
Legacies and Portions deducted) make such reasonable Satisfaction, to all and
every party grieved, as aforesaid, as by the Judgment of the Lord Chancellor of
England, or the Master of the Rolls, for the time being, shall be thought meet
and convenient; apportioning the Money paid, with the profits they have
received; allowing to themselves, their Costs and Charges to be expended, in,
and about the same; any thing in these Presents contained, to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Lewis Mordaunt.

And my Will is, That my Daughters and others in this my Will mentioned, being
paid their Portions, as aforesaid, by my Executors, by the sale of so much of
two parts, of my Fee-simple Lands, as will suffice, as aforesaid; that then the
rest of my Fee-simple Lands remaining, shall rest and be, in my Executors and
their Heirs, as aforesaid, for the Assurance and sure making of the Lands I
have sold, which I persuade my self will suffice. And my Will, full Intent and
Meaning is, That if my Son Henry pay his Sisters parts, or any part thereof,
and die without Heirs Males of his Body; then I will, my Executors, and their
Heirs, shall stand seized of all my Fee-simple Lands, until such time as the
Issue Female, of the said Henry, or the Executors, Administrators, or Assigns
of the said Henry, be satisfied and paid, all and so much of the said Sum and
Sums of Money unto my Daughters, and others devised, as my said Son Henry, his
Heirs, Executors or Assigns, shall have paid; any thing in these Presents to
the contrary of this always notwithstanding: And so I make an end.

In Witness whereof I have Subcribed my Hand, and set my Seal, the Day and Year
aforesaid. Lewis Mordaunt.

seal of Lewis Mordaunt SIGILLVM LODOVICI MORDAVNT MILITIS DNI BARONIS DE TVRVEY

Sealed and delivered, as the Will of the aforenamed Lord Mordaunt, in the
presence of, and allowed with the Interlinings as they be;

Edward Watson, John Wake, John Gyll, Thomas Arthur, Sig. Thomas Goodman.

^ion on the North (...) ^he Tomb
PIISSIMAE, MEMORIAE LUDOVICI DN^I MORDAVNT SACRUM. DEPOSITIUM LUDOVICI DN^I
MORDAVNT, SUB AVITA FIDE ET CERTA FILICES RESURRECTIONIS SPE GLORIOSAM JESUS
CHRISTI EPIPHANIA^ HIC EXPECTAT.

VXORE^ HABUIT ELIZABETHA ARTHURIS DARCEL AEQUITIS AURATI. FILIAM EX QUA
SUSCEPIT HENRICUM FILIUM VNICUM ET HAERED^ MARIAM ET ELIZABETHAM ET POST VITA^
FAELICITER ET SINE QUERELA PERACTAM. SUIS CHARUS. ET ALIENIS ANNORUM SATUR ET
HONORUM AETATIS SUAE ANNO 66o. 13o. IUNII ANNO DNI^ 1601. PIE OBDORIVIT IN DN^O

tomb of Lewis and Elizabeth (nee Darcy) Mordaunt

HENRY Lord MORDAVNT, First of that Name, Fourth Lord MORDAVNT, Peer of
England, and Lord Baron of Turvey. CHAPTER XV.
A special Livery granted unto the Honorable Henry Lord Mordaunt.
ELizabeth, Dei gratia, Angliae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina, Fidei Defensor,
etc. Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae prevenerint, Salutem. Sciatis quod nos
de gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris,
concessimus and Licentiam dedimus, ac per praesentes, concedimus and Licentiam
damus, pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, quantum in nobis est,
praedilecto and sideli Subdito nostro, Henrico Mordaunt, modo Domino Mordaunt,
filio and proximo Heredi Ludovici Mordaunt Militis, nuper Domini Mordaunt
defuncti; qui quidem Ludovicus, nuper Dominus Mordaunt, de nobis tenuit in
Capite, die quo obiit, per Servitium militare, quocunque nomine, cognomine,
sive additione nominis, idem Henricus, modo Dominus Mordaunt, nominatus sit,
sive nuncupatus; quod idem Henricus, modo Dominus Mordaunt, incontinenter,
absque aliqua Probatione aetatis suae, and absque aliqua Liberatione, seu
Prosecutione, haereditatis suae, vel alicujus inde parcellae, extra manus
nostras, haeredum, vel successorum nostrorum, secundum cursum Cancellariae
nostrae, vel secundum Legem, and cursum Curiae nostrae Wardorum, and
Liberationum, vel legem terrae nostrae Angliae, seu aliquo alio modo
prosequendum, in ominia and singula, honores, castra, dominia, mancria,
messuagia, terras, tenementa, reversiones, feoda, firmaria, villas, villatas,
hamletta, amnitates, redditus, servicia, hundreda, officia, prata, pascua,
pasturas, moras, matiscos, tolnetta costumaria, visum franciplegii, curias,
escaeta, ballivata, libertates, franchesia, warrenna, vivaria, stagna,
molendina, feoda militum, advocationes, and patronatus Ecclesiarum, vicararum,
capellarum, and nominationes ad easdem, ac in omnia and singula alia
possessiones, reversiones and haereditamenta quaecunque, cum eorum juribus,
membris, and pertinentiis universis, infra Regnum nostrum Angliae, Walliae, aut
Marchias eorundem, quae fuerant praedicti Ludovici Domini Mordaunt, and de
quibus idem Ludovicus Dominus Mordaunt, aut aliquis, vel aliqui Antecessorum
praedicti Henrici, modo Domini Mordaunt, cujus haeres ipse est, fuit, aut
suerunt possessionati, vel seisiti, in dominico suo, ut de feodo, aut in feodo,
qualitercunque talliato, in dominico vel aliter, diebus quibus separatim
obierunt, aut die quo eorum aliquis obiit, vel de quibus aliqua persona seisita
fuit, aut aliquae personae seisitae fuerunt, conjunctim, vel separatim, ad usum
praedicti Ludovici, nuper Domini Mordaunt, seu aliquorum Antecessorum praedicti
Henrici, modo Domini Mordaunt, cujus, vel quorum haeres ipse est, in Dominico
suo, ut de Feodo, aut in feodo qualitercunque talliato, in Dominico, vel aliter
ad usum dicti Ludovici, nuper Domini Mordaunt, aut aliquorum haeredum suorum,
vel ad usum aliquorum talium Antecessorum, aut talis Antecessoris, and haeredum
talium Antecessorum, aut talis Antecessoris, diebus quibus illi separatim
obierunt, aut die quo eorum aliquis obiit, and quae per sive post mortem ipsius
Ludovici, nuper Domini Mordaunt, aut alicujus Antecessoris, aut aliquorum
Antecessorum, praedicti Henrici, modo Domini Mordaunt, cujus haeres ipse est,
aut aliquo alio modo ad manus devenerunt, seu devenire debuerunt, aut deberent,
aut in manibus nostris jam existent, aut existunt, aut existere debent, vel
deberent, quae praefato Henrico, modo Domino Mordaunt, in possessione,
reversione, vel in usu, descendere, revertere, remanere, pertinere, seu
spectare debent, vel deberent, licite, and impunc intrare, and seisire possit;
ac ea omnia, ac singula, praefato Henrico, modo Domino Mordaunt, and haeredibus
suis, prout ipse in iisdem, post mortem praedicti Ludovici, nuper Domini
Mordaunt, aut aliquorum Antecessorum praedicti Henrici, modo Domini Mordaunt,
cujus vel quorum haeres ipse est, haereditabiliter existit, in possessione,
reversione, aut in usu, seisire, habere, tenere, possidere and gaudere possit
and valeat, erga nos, haeredes, and successores nostros, absque aliqua alia
Liberatione, seu Prosecutione eorundem, seu alicujus inde parcellae, extra
manus nostras, secundum Cursum Cancellariae nostrae praedictae, aut legem
terrae nostrae Angliae, seu aliquo alio modo, per praedictas personas, scu per
eorum aliquem, prosequendum, vel impetrandum. Nolentes quod praefatus Henricus,
modo Dominus Mordaunt, nec haeredes sui, nec praedicta quaecunque persona, sive
quaecunque personae, de aliquibus Honoribus, Castris, Dominiis, Maneriis,
Terris, Tenementis and caeteris Praemissis, ad usum, ut praemittitur, seisitus,
vel seisiti existit, vel existent, ratione ingressus, sive occupationis, and
retentionis praedictae, per ipsos, seu per eorum aliquem, facti, vel habiti,
faciendi, vel habendi, per nos, haeredes vel Successores, Justiciarios,
Escaetores, Vicecomites, Receptores, Ballivos and Ministros nostros, haeredum,
vel successorum nostrorum quoscunque molestentur, inquietentur, vexentur,
perturbentur, distringantur, in aliquo seu graventur. Nec quod iidem
Justiciarii, Escaetores, Vicecomites, Receptores, Ballivi, Ministri nostri,
haeredum, vel successorum nostrorum, nec eorum aliquis, in praedicta Honores,
Castra, Dominia, Maneria, Terras, Tenementa, and caetera Praemissa, cum
pertinentiis, sive aliquam inde parcellam, pro nobis, seu nomine nostro, se
intromittant, vel eorum aliquis intromittat. Sed quod nos, haeredes, and
successores nostri, quoad seisendum, and capiendum in manus nostras, praedicta
Honores, Castra, Dominia, Maneria, Terras, Tenementa, and caetera praemissa,
cum pertinentiis, sive aliquam inde parcellam, ratione alicujus Juris, Tituli,
Clamei, vel Interesse, quod, vel qui, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris
praedictis, per, sive post mortem, dicti Ludovici, nuper Domini Mordaunt, vel
alicujus alterius Antecessoris, sive aliquorum aliorum Antecessorum, praedicti
Henrici, modo Domini Mordaunt, cujus vel quorum haeres ipse est, aut alicujus
alterius personae, sive aliquarum aliarum personarum, de aliquibus Honoribus,
Castris, Dominiis, Maneriis, Terris, sive Tenementis, ad usum supradictum,
existens vel existentes accidit, seu evenit, aut accidere, competere, seu
evenire poterit, sumus exclusi in perpetuum per praesentes. Et quod idem
Henricus, modo Dominus Mordaunt, and haeredes sui, erga nos, haeredes, and
successores nostros, pro praemissis, and qualibet inde parcella, quieti, and
exonerati existant, and eorum quilibet quietus, and exoneratus existet in
perpetuum per praesentes. Et praeterea pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus
nostris, concedimus per praesentes praefato Henrico, modo Domino Mordaunt, nec
non praedictis quibuscunque aliis personis, de aliquibus Honoribus, Castris,
Dominiis, Maneriis, Terris, Tenementis, and caeteris praemissis, cum
pertinentiis, ad usum superius recitatum, seisitus, vel seisiti, nuper
existens, vel existentes, quod ipsi habeant, and quilibet eorum habeat, de
tempore in tempus, tot and talia Brevia, Mandata, and Warrantia sufficientia,
Justiciariis nostris, Baronibus nostris de Scaccario nostro, Escaetoribus,
Vicccomitibus, Receptoribus, Ballivis and Ministris quibuscunque, and eorum
cuilibet, dirigendum, quot, and qualia, eis, and eorum cuilibet, pro
exoneratione sua, versus nos, haeredes, and successores nostros, in ea part
necessaria erunt, and opportuna. Et ulterius, de uberiori gratia nostra,
concedimus praefato Henrico, modo Domino Mordaunt, nec non praedictis
quibuscunque aliis personis, aut cuicunque aliae personae, de Honoribus,
Castris, Dominiis, Maneriis, Terris, Tenementis, and caeteris praemissis, cum
pertinentiis, and qualibet inde parcella, praedictum Henricum, modo Dominum
Mordaunt, aut per praedictam quamcunque aliam personam, aut quascunque alias
personas, de Honoribus, Castris, Dominiis, Maneriis, Terris, Tenementis, and
caeteris praemissis, cum pertinentiis, sive aliqua inde parcella, authoritate
harum Concessionis and Licentiae nostrarum, factarum, and habitarum,
faciendarum and habendarum, sint eis, and eorum cuilibet, and haeredibus suis,
and haeredibus eorum cujuslibet, prout ipse in iisdem haereditabiliter, ut
praefatur, extiterit, adeo bonae, validae, and efficaces, ac tanti vigoris, and
effectus in lege, ac si eadem Honores, Castra, Dominia, Maneria, Terrae,
Tenementa, and caetera praemissa, cum suis pertinentiis, and qualibet inde
parcella, in manus nostras, debito modo capta, and seisita fuissent, ac idem
Henricus, modo Dominus Mordaunt, and quaecunque aliae personae, de aliquibus
Honoribus, Castris, Dominiis, Maneriis, Terris and Tenementis, ad usum ut
praedicitur seisitus, vel seifiti existens vel existentes, debitam liberationem
eorundem Honorum, Castrorum, Dominiorum, Maneriorum, Terrarum, Tenementorum,
and caeterorum praemissorum, cum pertinentiis, extra manus nostras, secundum
cursum Cancellariae nostrae, and secundum Legem vere, rite and debite prosecuti
fuissent, and nobis de omni eo quod ad nos, in ea part pertinet, seu pertinere
possit, debet, aut deberet, satisfactum fuisset and contentum, aliqua
Negligentia, Omissione, Misprisione, Errore, Ignorantia, Contrarietate, aut
aliquo alio Defectu, limitatis, vel limitandis, assignatis, vel assignandis,
non obstante; Homagio tamen Fidelitate, and Releviis praedicti Henrici, modo
Domini Mordaunt, nobis in hac part debitis, seu debendis, semper nobis salvis
and reservatis. Et ulterius, de uberiori gratia nostra dedimus, and
concessimus, and per praesentes damus, and concedimus, praefato Henrico, Domino
Mordaunt, omnia, and singula, Exitus, Redditus, Proficua, Reversiones, and
Emolumenta quaecunque, omnium and singulorum praedictorum Honorum, Castrorum,
Dominiorum, Maneriorum, Terrarum, Tenementorum, and caeterorum praemissorum,
and cujuslibet inde parcellae, cum omnibus and singulis suis pertinentiis, a
tempore mortis praedicti Ludovici, nuper Domini Mordaunt, huc usque, and ex
tunc, provenientia, exeuntia, emergentia, sive crescentia, and nobis
qualitercunque debita, pertinentia, seu spectantia: Habendum, levandum,
recipiendum, percipiendum, gaudendum and retinendum, omnia and singula eadem
Exitus, Redditus, Proficua, Reversiones and Emolumenta, eidem Henrico, modo
Domino Mordaunt, executoribus, vel assignatis suis, de dono nostro, tam per
manus suas proprias, quam per manus seperalium, nuper nunc and in posterum,
Escaetorum, Feodariorum, Supervisorum, Vicecomitum, Receptorum, Ballivorum, and
aliorum Occupatorum quorumcunque, eorundem, seu alicujus inde parcellae, pro
tempore existente; nec non aliorum Officiariorum nostrorum quorumcunque, in
seperalibus Comitatibus, in quibus dicta Honores, Castra, Dominia, Maneria,
Terrae, Tenementa, and caetera praemissa cum pertinentiis existunt, sive aliqua
inde parcella existit, absque compoto, responso, seu aliquo alio, nobis,
haeredibus, and sucessoribus nostris, pro praemissis, seu aliquo praemissorum,
reddendum, solvendum, seu faciendum. Et ulterius volumus, and concedimus per
praesentes, quod tum praefatus Henricus, modo Dominus Mordaunt, quam omnes
nuper, nunc, and in posterum Escaetores, Vicecomites, Receptores, Ballivi,
Firmarii and Occupatores, de hujusmodi Reventionibus, Exitibus, Redditibus and
Proficuis, seu aliquo praemissorum, a praedicto tempore mortis praedicti
Ludovici, nuper Domini Mordaunt, huc usque, and ex tunc provenientibus,
exeuntibus, emergentibus, sive crescentibus, absque compoto, seu aliquo alio,
nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, inde reddendum, solvendum seu
faciendum, erga nos haeredes, successores and executores nostros, quieti and
exonerati existent, in perpetuum per praesentes. Et ulterius, de uberiori
gratia nostra, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris, pro nobis,
haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, pardonavimns, remissimus and
relaxavimus, ac per praesentes pardonamus, remittimus and relaxamus, praefato
Henrico, modo Domino Mordaunt, omnes, and omnimodas Intrusiones, and Ingressus,
per dictum Ludovicum, nuper Dominum Mordaunt, aut per praedictum Henricum, modo
Dominum Mordaunt, cujus haeres ipse est, aut per aliquam aliam personam, sive
aliquas alias personas, ad ejus usum, seisitam, vel seisitas, de, and in
praedictis Honoribus, Castris, Dominiis, Maneriis, Terris, Tenementis, and
caeteris praemissis, seu aliqua inde parcella, quae de nobis, vel de aliquo
alio tenentur qualitercunque, ante praesentem diem, habitas, factas, and
perpetratas. Nec non omnes, and omnimodas Perquisitiones, Alienationes,
Donationes, Fines, Compota, and Forisfacturas, de praedictis Honoribus,
Castris, Dominiis, Maneriis, Terris, Tenementis, and caeteris praemissis, cum
omnibus and singulis suis pertinentiis, vel aliqua inde parcella, per dictum
Ludovicum, nuper Dominum Mordaunt, aut per praedictum Henricum, modo Dominum
Mordaunt, aut per aliquem alium Antecessorum ejusdem Henrici, modo Domini
Mordaunt, sive aliquas alias personas, ante mortem dicti Ludovici, modo Domini
Mordaunt, fine licentia nostra, habitas, factas, and perpetratas: Nec non
omnes, and omnimodas actiones, sectas, quaerelas, impetitiones, executiones,
and demanda quaecunque, quas, vel quae versus praefatum Henricum, modo Dominum
Mordaunt, vel aliquem Antecessorum ejusdem Henrici, modo Domini Mordaunt, sive
aliquas alias personas, de and in praemissis, vel eorum aliquo, habuimus,
habemus, seu in futurum habere poterimus ullo modo. Proviso semper quod hae
Literae nostrae patentes, nec aliquid in iisdem contentum, aliqualiter se
extendat, ad exonerandum praedictum Henricum, modo Dominum Mordaunt, aut
aliquam aliam personam, aut aliquas alias personas, aut praedicta Honores,
Castra, Dominia, Maneria, Terras, Tenementa, and caetera praemissa, seu aliquam
inde parcellam, de, and pro aliquo debito, compoto, aut alio demando quocunque,
ratione alicujus officii, aut receptionis alicujus Thesauri, aut monetae
nostri, aut Commissionis ejusdem, aut pro aliquo debito, ratione alicujus
Recognitionis, sive Obligationis, nobis, sive alicui Progenitorum nostrorum,
sive alicui aliae personae, ad usum nostrum, cognitae seu deliberatae. Eo qu`od
expressa mentio de vero valor annuo, aut de aliquo alio valor, vel
certitudine praemissorum, five eorum alicujus, aut de aliis donis, sive
concessionibus, per nos, sive per aliquem progenitorum nostrorum, praefato
Henrico, modo Domino Mordaunt, ante haec tempora facta, in praesentibus minime
facta existit; aut aliquo Statuto, Actu, Ordinatione, Provisione,
Proclamatione, sive Restrictione in contrarium inde ante haec habitis, factis,
editis, ordinatis, sive provisis, aut aliqua alia re, causa, vel materia
quacunque, in aliquo non obstante. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras
fieri fecimus Patentes. Test meipsa apud Westmonasterium vicesimo tertio die
Novembris, Anno Regni nostri quadragesimo quinto.

Per billam Curiae Wardorum, and Liberationum, and de data praedicta
authoritate Parlamenti. Egerton Norrd
Coram Auditoribus Curiae Wardorum and Liberationum dominae Reginae, termino
Michaelis, Anno Regni ejusdem dominae Reginae quadragesimo quinto. 1602.
Examinatur per Walterium Took Auditores.
Examinatur per Will. Curles Auditores.
In Memorandis Scaccarii de anno quadragesimo quarto Reginae nunc Elizabethae
videlicet inter Recorda de termino Sancti Michaelis, rotulo ex part
Remembratorum Thesaurarii.
Charta Caroli Comitis de Nottingham Magni Admiralli Angliae, Capitalis
Justiciarii, ac Justiciarii itinerans, omnium Forestarum, Chacearum, Parcorum,
and Warrenarum, Domini Regis citra Trentham.
CArolus Comes Nottingham, Baro Howard de Effingham, magnus Admirallus Angliae,
etc.
Capitalis Justiciarius, ac Justiciarius itinerans, omnium Forestarum,
Chacearum, Parcorum, and Warrenarum, Domini Regis citra Trentham: Omnibus ad
quos praesentes pervenerint, Salutem.
Sciatis me praefatum Carolum Comitem Nottinghamiae, pro diversis causis, and
rationibus me specialiter moventibus, constituisse, ordinasse, and per
praesentes in loco meo posuisse, ac deputasse dilectum mihi perhonorabilem
Henricum Dominum Mordaunt de Drayton, in Comitatu Northamptoniae, meum verum,
and legitimum Deputatum, ad exercendum, exequendum, and occupandum officium
Justiciarii itinerantis, in and per totum illam Forestam Domini Regis, nunc
vocatam per nomen de Rockingham Forest, in dicto Comitatu Northamptoniae, ac
metas, and limits ejusdem. Et ad faciendum, and peragendum quicquid ad
officium praedictum pertinet (durante solummodo beneplacito meo:) Dans, and
concedens, dicto meo Deputato, plenam autoritatem meam ad agendum, exequendum,
perficiendum, and perimplendum, omnia, and fingula concernentia Forestam
praedictam, ac omnia alia spectantia ad officium praedictum, loco and vice mea,
ad omnes intentiones and proposita, ac in tam amplis modo and forma, prout ego
legitime facere, seu exequi possim, per leges hujus Regni, si personaliter
ibidem interessem. In cujus rei Testimonium sigillum officii mei praedicti
praesentibus apposui. Data decimo nono die Junii 1603 Anno Regni serenissimi
Domini nostri Jacobi, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae
Regis primo.

F. Rich. Bellingham. CAROLVS COM: NOTING BARO: HOWARD DE EFFINGHA^ CALIS
IVSTICIVS OMNIVM FORESVM ET MARCAVM TRENTAM

seal of Charles Howard

An Indenture Tripartite for the Settlement of the Estate of Henry Lord
Mordaunt.
THIS Indenture Tripartite made the Fourth Day of January, in the Year of our
Sovereign Lord, James by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France
and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith; that is to say, Of England, France and
Ireland the Sixth, and of Scotland the Two and fortieth; between the Right
honorable Henry, Lord Mordaunt, on the the First Part, and Thomas Lock of
Gray's Inn, in the County of Middlesex, Gentleman, and John Row of London,
Gentleman, on the Second Part; and the Right honorable Edward Earl of
Worcester, of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Knight, Master of the King's
Majesty's Horse, and one of his Majesty's most honorable Privy Council, Roger
Earl of Rutland, Sir Francis Fane, Knight, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Knight, Sir
Thomas Compton, Knight, and George Sherley, Esquire, on the Third Part,
Witnesses: That the said Lord Mordaunt, as well for, and in consideration of
the natural Love and Fatherly Affection, which he bears to his Children,
hereafter in these Presents named, and for the continuance of all and singular
the Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, of him the said Lord Mordaunt,
hereafter in these Presents mentioned, in the name and blood of him the said
Lord Mordaunt, so long as it shall please God: And for the better supportation
of the Honor and Dignity, of him the said Lord Mordaunt, in the Heirs of his
Body; as also for the better Maintenance and Provision in living, and Portions
to be had, made and raised, for the Younger Children of the said Lord Mordaunt,
both Sons and Daughters, and for the payment of the Debts, which the said Lord
Mordaunt shall owe; or any others shall stand chargeable for the said Lord
Mordaunt, at the time of his Death, and for other causes and considerations,
him thereunto specially moving: Does for him, his Heirs, Executors and
Administrators, and every of them, Covenant and Grant, to and with the said
Earls, Sir Francis Fane, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Sir Thomas Compton and George
Sherley, in manner and form following, that is to say, That he the said Lord
Mordaunt, shall and will leave, and suffer to descend unto such person and
persons, as shall happen to be Heir or Heirs of the said Lord Mordaunt, at the
time of the Death of the said Lord Mordaunt, all these his Lordships and Manners
of Netherbery, Collesden, Carlills and Throgmorton in Roxton, and the Manner of
Woodend, and the Manner or Farm of Kempstonborn, and his other Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments in Roxton, Cranfield and Bereford, in the County of Bedford,
with their and every their Appurtenances, Rights and Members, to the said
Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and to either of them belonging,
and to the Advowson of the Church of Meppersall, in the said County of Bedford,
and the Manners of Thrapston, Gale, Ringsted and Raundes, and of Much-Addington,
Luffwick, Islip and Slipton in the County of Northampton, with their, and
every, and either of their Appurtenances, Royalties and Commodities, to the
same Manners, and to every of them, belonging and appertaining; and the
Chauntries of Much-Addington aforesaid, and Luffwick-Mills, and the Manner of
Drayton, and all the demeasne Lands, to the said Manner belonging or
appertaining, in the said County of Northampton: (The Capital or Mansion House
of the said Lord Mordaunt in Drayton aforesaid, and the Parks called Drayton
and Sudburgh-Parks, and one Close called, the Great Pasture, and another Close
called the Mile-close, one Close called the Lymekill-Close, another called
Clay-Close, another called the Warren-Close; and another called the
Horse-Close, leading from Drayton-house to Luffwick, only excepted:) And one
Free Rent of Thirty three Shillings two Pence half penny, or thereabouts,
issuing out of certain Lands in Barton; and another Free Rent of Thirty eight
Shillings and eight Pence, issuing out of certain Lands in Stanwick, in the
aforesaid County of Northampton; and also the Manner of Clifton, Reins, with
the Appurtenances in the County of Buckingham to the end, That the King's
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors of the same Manners, Lands, Tenements, Rents
and Hereditaments before mentioned, shall and may have, and receive the full
benefit of Wardship, primer Seizure and Livery, as the case shall require,
happening or to happen, by or upon the decease of the said Lord Mordaunt: Which
said Manners, Lands, Tenements, (amounting to the full third part, of the
aforesaid Lord Mordaunt's, Manners, Lands, Tenements and Revenues) the said Lord
Mordaunt does for that purpose limit, assign and set forth by these Presents.
And the said Lord Mordaunt, does further by these Presents for him, his Heirs,
Executors and Administrators, and for every of them, Covenant and Grant to and
with the said Earls, Sir Francis Fane, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Sir Thomas Compton
and George Sherley, in manner following, that is to say, That he the said Lord
Mordaunt, shall and will on this side, and before the Feast day of Saint Andrew
the Apostle, now next ensuing the day of the date hereof, at the costs and
charges of the said Lord Mordaunt, by Fine or Fines, in due form of law to be
levied, before the King's Majesty's Justices of the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster; whereupon Proclamations shall, and may be had, according to the
Statutes in that case made and provided, recognized and acknowledged, all those
other Manners, Lordships, Messuages, Mills, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Fee-Farms,
Royalties, Courtleets, Franchizes, Fairs, Liberties, Advowsons and
Hereditaments whatsoever, of him the said Lord Mordaunt, hereafter in these
Presents mentioned, expressed and declared; that is to say, The Manners of
Turvey, Carleton, Chillington, Delwike, Staggesden, Duckford, Jempses, Bosoms,
Stasmore, Wilchamsted and Westcotton, with all their and every of their Rights,
Members and Appurtenances; and the Parks of Turvey and Delwike, and the Free
Warren in Turvey and Staggesden, and all other the Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments of the said Lord Mordaunt, in the several Towns, Parishes,
Villages and Hamlets of Turvey, Wilchamsted, alias Wilshamsteed, Carleton,
Chillington, Delwike, Duckford, Staggesden, Stanford, alias Jempses, Bosoms,
Steventon and Westcotton in the foresaid County of Bedford, with all the
Rights, Members and Appurtenances to the same Manners, Lands or Tenements, or
any of them, appertaining or belonging. And the Manner of Snelston with the
Appurtenances, in the Counties of Bedford and Buckingham, or in both, or in one
of them, and all those Pastures and Meadow Grounds and Closes, called Snelston,
in the said Counties; or in one of them; and all other the Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments of him the said Lord Mordaunt, in the several Parishes of
Lavenden, Brayfield, alias Coldbrayfield and Harrold, in the Counties of
Bedford and Buckingham; and all those the Manners and Farms of Walterhall,
Oldlayton, Brayfield, Coldbrayfield, Willen Wolston, Parva Woughton upon the
Green, alias Woughkington upon the Green, Lavenden, and the Castle Manner in
Lavenden, with their, and every of their Appurtenances, in the County of
Buckingham: And all that the Free Warren, with the Appurtenances, in Lavenden
and Brayfield, otherwise called Brafeld next Lavenden, Olney and Warrington, in
the said County of Buckingham: And all other Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, of him the said Lord Mordaunt, (the Manner of Clifton, Raynes,
alias Week's Fee, with the Appurtenances excepted,) in the foresaid County of
Buckingham: And all those the Manners of Hardwike, Grafton and Sudburgh, with
all their, and every of their Rights, Members and Appurtenances, in the County
of Northampton, and the Parks called Drayton-Park, and Sudborow-Park aforesaid,
and the Capital Message or Mansion House of Drayton aforesaid, and the Closes
aforesaid to the said Mansion House adjoining, or lying near unto the same: And
the Parsonages of Denford and Ringsteed: And all those Lands called the
Assart-Lands, in the County of Northampton: And all other the Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, Rents and Services of him the said Lord Mordaunt, in the
several Parishes of Hard-wike, Grafton, Alwinkle, Sudburgh, Tychmarch and
Denford, in the foresaid County of Northampton, to be the Right of the said
Thomas Lock and John Row, as those which the said Thomas Lock and John Row
shall have, of the gift of the said Lord Mordaunt; with general Warranties for
the said Lord Mordaunt, and his Heirs against all Men: Which Fine so, or in any
other sort, to be levied, and all other Fine or Fines, which shall be levied of
the Premises, or of any part thereof, by the said Lord Mordaunt, to the said
Thomas Lock and John Row, abovenamed, or to either of them, on this side the
Feast of St. Andrew the Apostle aforesaid, shall be and enure, and shall be
taken to be and enure, and the Parties Cognizees therein, their Heirs and
Assigns, shall stand and be seized for ever, of all the said Manners, Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, in the said Fine or Fines, to be comprised, to the
use of them the said Thomas Lock and John Row, and of their Heirs for ever, and
to no other use. Yet withal upon this Trust and Confidence, That they the said
Thomas and John, shall and will permit, and suffer them the said Earls, Sir
Francis Fane, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Sir Thomas Compton and George Sherley, upon
one or more Writ, or Writs of Entry, Sur dessein in le post, to be brought or
prosecuted, out of his Majesty's Court of Chancery, by, and in the names of the
said Earls, Sir Francis Fane, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Sir Thomas Compton and
George Sherley, against the said Thomas and John, retornable before the King's
Majesty's Justices of his Highness's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, to
recover from and against them, the said Thomas and John, according to the usual
course of common Recoveries, used for Assurance of Lands, all and singular, or
any part or parcel of the said Manners, Lands, Tenements, Rents and
Hereditaments, with their Appurtenances, in the same Fine or Fines to be
comprised, or contained, by such name or names, and quantities, as in the said
Writ or Writs of Entry shall be contained. In which Recoveries the said Thomas
and John shall appear as Tenants, and vouch over to Warranty the said Lord
Mordaunt; and the said Lord Mordaunt shall appear, and vouch over the common
Vouchee, who shall appear gratis; and after inparlance, depart in despite of
the Court, according to the form and course of common Recoveries, in such cases
used. And all the said Parties are agreed by these Presents to demean
themselves, either in the course aforesaid, or in some other course, that a
perfect common Recovery, with such Vouchees as is aforesaid, may and shall be
had, and suffered of the said Manners, Lands, Tenements, Rents and Hereditaments
in the same Fine or Fines to be comprised, in all points, and to all intents
and purposes, according to the usual order, and form of common Recoveries for
assurance of Land: Which said Recovery or Recoveries, so or in any other manner
to be Sued, Prosecuted or Executed, of the Manners, Lands, Rents, Tenements and
Hereditaments, or of any part thereof, and the Execution of them, or every of
them, and all and every other Recovery or Recoveries to be had, sued and
prosecuted, of the Premises, or of any part thereof, against the said Thomas
and John as Tenants, and the said Lord Mordaunt as Vouchee, on this side the
Feast of St. Andrew, and the full force and Execution of them, and either of
them, shall be judged, esteemed, deemed and taken to be and ever remain to the
use hereafter expressed and declared, and to no other intents or purposes, that
is to say, As for and concerning all and singular the said Manners, Lordships,
Lands, Tenements, Rectories, Advowsons, Rents and Hereditaments whatsoever in
the said Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, or in any of them, to be
mentioned and expressed, to the use of the said Henry Lord Mordaunt, for and
during the term of his natural Life, without impeachment of, or for any manner
of Wast. And from, and after the decease of the said Lord Mordaunt, as
concerning the Manners of Turvey, Staggesden, Carleton, Chillington, Snelston,
Lavenden, alias the Castle-Maner of Lavenden, Delwike, Bosoms and Westcotton,
with their, and every of their Appurtenances aforesaid, after the decease of
the said Lord Mordaunt, the said Recovery and Recoveries, shall be and enure,
and the Recoverers and their Heirs, and the Survivors of them, shall stand
seized thereof, and of every part and parcel thereof, to the use of the said
Earls, Sir Francis Fane, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Sir Thomas Compton and George
Sherley, and their Assigns, for, and during the Life of the Lady Margaret, now
Wife to the said Lord Mordaunt; and from, and after the decease of the said
Lord Mordaunt and Lady Margaret; then to the use of the said Earls, Sir Francis
Fane, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Sir Thomas Compton and George Sherley, and of their
Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for, and during the term of One and
twenty Years, from the Day of the decease of the Survivor of them, the said
Lord Mordaunt and Lady Mordaunt, if no Heir of the Body of the said Lord
Mordaunt, shall before the end of the said One and twenty Years, accomplish
such Age, as that the same Heir by the laws of this Realm, may have and sue
Livery out of the Hands of our Sovereign Lord the King's Majesty, that now is,
his Heirs and Successors, of and for, such of the said Manners, Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments, as is before in these Presents limited, and appointed to
descend. And from and after the exspiration of the said term of One and twenty
Years, or in the time wherein such Heir shall come to such Age, which of them
soever shall first happen; then to the use and behoof of John Mordaunt, Son and
Heir apparent, of the now Lord Mordaunt, and of the Heirs Males of his Body
lawfully begotten, and to be begotten: And for default of such Issue, to the
use of the Heirs Males of the Body of the said Lord Mordaunt: And for default
of such Issue, to the use of the Heirs of the Body of the said Lord Mordaunt:
And for default of such Issue, to the right Heirs of the said John Mordaunt for
ever. And as for and concerning the Manner of Hardwike, with the Appurtenances,
in the said County of Northampton, and the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
of the said Lord Mordaunt, in Hardwike aforesaid, from and after the decease of
the said Lord Mordaunt; then the said Recovery and Recoveries, and the said
Earls, Sir Francis Fane, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Sir Thomas Compton and George
Sherley, their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized, of the said Manner
of Hardwike, and of every part thereof, and of all the said Lands, Tenements
and Hereditaments of the said Lord Mordaunt, in Hardwike aforesaid, to the use
of themselves, the said Recoverers, and of their Executors and Administrators;
until such time as James Mordaunt, Esquire, second Son of the said Lord
Mordaunt, shall or should accomplish his full Age of One and twenty Years; and
afterward to the use of the said James Mordaunt, for and during the natural
life of the said James Mordaunt, and then to the use of that and such Wife of
the said James Mordaunt, as the said James Mordaunt shall happen to leave
behind him, at the time of the death of the said James Mordaunt, for, and
during the natural life of that, and such Wife of the said James Mordaunt: And
afterward to the use of the said John Mordaunt, and of the Heirs Males of his
Body lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue, then to the use of the
Heirs Males of the Body of the said Lord Mordaunt: And for default of such
Issue, then to the use of the Heirs of the Body of the said Lord Mordaunt: And
for default of Issue, then to the use of the right Heirs of the said John
Mordaunt for ever. And as for, and concerning the Manner of Furnells in Ramides
and Ringsted, with the Appurtenances, and the Parsonages of Denford and
Ringsted, in the County of Northampton, from and after the decease of the said
Lord Mordaunt, the said Recovery shall be, and the said Recoverers, their Heirs
and Assigns, shall stand and be seized thereof, and of every part thereof, to
the use of themselves, the said Recoverers, and of their Executors and
Administrators, for during, and until such time as Henry Mordaunt, Esquire,
third Son of the said Lord Mordaunt, shall or should attain to his Age of One
and twenty Years, and then to the use of him the said Henry Mordaunt; and after
the decease of the said Henry Mordaunt, to the use of that, and such Wife of
the said Henry Mordaunt, as the said Henry Mordaunt shall happen to leave
behind him, at the time of the decease of the said Henry Mordaunt, for and
during the natural Life of that, and such Wife: And afterward to the use of
the said John Mordaunt, and of the Heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten:
And for default of such Issue, then to the use of the Heirs Males of the Body
of the said Lord Mordaunt lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue,
then to the use of the Heirs of the Body of the said Lord Mordaunt lawfully
begotten: And for default of such Issue, then to the use of the right Heirs of
the said Lord Mordaunt for ever. And as for, and concerning the foresaid Manner
of Woughton upon the Green, alias Woughington upon the Green, and Willen, and
the Advowson of the Rectory or Parsonage of Woughton, with the Appurtenances,
in the said County of Buckingham, from, and after the decease of the said Lord
Mordaunt: Then the said Recovery, shall be and enure, and the said Recoverers,
their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized thereof, and of every part
thereof, to the use of themselves, the said Recoverers, and of their Executors
and Administrators, for and during, and until such time as Lewis Mordaunt,
Esquire, Fourth Son of the said Lord Mordaunt, shall, or should attain to his
full Age of One and twenty Years; and then to the use of the said Lewis
Mordaunt, for term of the natural Life of the said Lewis Mordaunt; and after
the decease of the said Lewis Mordaunt, then to the use of that, and such Wife
of the said Lewis, as the said Lewis Mordaunt shall happen to leave behind him,
at the time of the death of the said Lewis, for, and during the natural Life of
that, and such Wife; and after to the use of the said John Mordaunt, and of the
Heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue, then
to the use of the Heirs Males of the Body of the said Lord Mordaunt lawfully
begotten: And for default of such Issue, then to the use of the right Heirs of
the said Lord Mordaunt. And as for and concerning all other the Manners,
Lordships, Rents, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments whatsoever, of him the
said Lord Mordaunt, in the foresaid Counties of Bedford, Buckingham and
Northampton, and in every of them, whereof no use after the death of the said
Lord Mordaunt, is before in and by these Presents limited and appointed: The
Recovery and Recoveries aforesaid, shall be and enure, and the Recoverers
therein, their Heirs and Assigns, shall stand and be seized thereof, and of
every part and parcel thereof, after the death and decease of the said Lord
Mordaunt, to the use of them the said Recoverers, their Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, to the end, and until that they shall, and may have
gathered, levied, and received of the Rents, Issues, and Profits of the same,
and of the other Manners, Lands and Tenements, of the said Lord Mordaunt, before
in these Presents, to the said Recoverers limited and appointed, so much Money
as shall and will satisfy to pay, such Debts, Portions and Sums of Money, as
are hereafter in these Presents mentioned and expressed. And as concerning what
Debts, and Sums of Money and Portions, are meant by the said Lord Mordaunt to
be raised, and paid, as well with the Rents, Issues and Profits of the Premises
before mentioned; as also with the Rents, Issues and Profits of the Premises
before limited, for the life of the said Lady Mordaunt, after her decease; and
of the Rents, Issues and Profits of the Premises, limited to the said James,
Henry and Lewis, until they shall or should, respectively, come to their Age of
One and twenty Years: The said Lord Mordaunt does by these Presents, express
the same to be such as follows, that is to say, All such Debts as the said
Lord Mordaunt shall justly owe, at the time of his decease, together with all
the necessary Costs, Charges and Expenses, which they the said Earls, Sir
Francis Fane, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Sir Thomas Compton and George Sherley, shall
necessarily expend, disburse, pay or lay out, in about, or concerning the same;
and such other Sum, and Sums of Money, as the said Lord Mordaunt by a note in
Writing, under the Hand and Seal of the said Lord Mordaunt, shall limit, and
appoint to be paid and disbursed: And also the several Sums and Portions
hereafter following, ( videlicet;) The Sum or Portion of Two thousand Pounds
of lawful English Money, for, and unto the use of Elizabeth Mordaunt, Eldest
Daughter of the said Lord Mordaunt, to be paid unto her at her Age of One and
twenty Years, or at the Day of her Marriage, which of them shall first happen:
And the Sum of Two thousand Pounds lawful English Money, for, and to the use
of Frances Mordaunt, another of the Daughters of the said Lord Mordaunt, to be
paid unto her at her Age of One and twenty Years, or at the Day of her
Marriage, which shall first happen: And also the Sum and Portion of Two
thousand Pounds, of like lawful Money of England, for, and unto the use of
Margaret Mordaunt, one of the Daughters of the said Lord Mordaunt, to be paid
unto her at her Age of One and twenty Years, or at the Day of her Marriage,
which of them shall first happen: And moreover the like Sum or Portion, of Two
thousand Pounds, of like lawful English Money, for, and unto the use of Anne
Mordaunt, another of the Daughters of the said Lord Mordaunt, to be paid unto
her at her Age of One and twenty Years, or at the Day of her Marriage, which of
them shall first happen: And also the several Sum and Sums, of Two thousand
Pounds a piece, to each and every of the Children of the said Lord Mordaunt,
both Sons and Daughters, which hereafter shall happen to be Born to the said
Lord Mordaunt, to be paid at his, her or their several Ages, of One and twenty
Years, or Days of their Marriages, which of them shall first happen. But it is
nevertheless meant and intended, That if any of the said Children so appointed,
to have, take and receive Portions as aforesaid, shall happen to dye, before
the several time and times limited, and appointed for the payment thereof, That
then his, her or their Portions so deceasing, shall not be paid at all to the
Executors, Administrators or Assigns, of such of the Children so dying; but the
same shall go to the benefit of the right Heirs of the said Lord Mordaunt. And
also the said Earls, Sir Francis Fane, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Sir Thomas Compton
and George Sherley, their Executors and Administrators, shall after the death
of the said Lord Mordaunt, yearly allow and pay unto the said James Mordaunt,
Henry Mordaunt, and Lewis Mordaunt, Sons of the said Lord Mordaunt, for, and
toward their maintenance, from the time of the decease of the said Lord
Mordaunt, until every of them severally shall attain, and come to their several
Ages of One and twenty Years aforesaid, or Days of Marriages aforesaid, the
several yearly Sums following, (videlicet) Fifty Pounds yearly, at the Feasts
of All Saints, called Hallowmas-Day, to the said James Mordaunt, during his
said minority; and Fifty Pounds yearly at the Feast aforesaid, to the said
Henry Mordaunt, during his said minority; and Fifty Pounds yearly at the
aforesaid Feast, to Lewis Mordaunt, during his minority; and also Fifty Pounds
a piece yearly, and at the Feast aforesaid, to every Son and Sons hereafter to
be Born, unto the said Lord Mordaunt, during the minority of such Son and Sons,
respectively: And if it shall happen, the said Lady Margaret do dye, before the
foresaid Daughters of the foresaid Lord Mordaunt, or any of them shall attain
to her, or their several Ages, or Times aforesaid, on, or at which her or their
several Portions aforesaid, be or ought to be paid: Then the said Recoverers,
their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, shall yearly pay at the Feast of
All Saints aforesaid, unto such of the Daughter and Daughters of the said Lord
Mordaunt, then not attained to the Age and Time of her having, or wherein she
ought to have, and to be paid, her foresaid Portion, according to the
appointment of these Presents, the yearly Sum of One hundred Pounds a piece,
for, and toward her and their Maintenance respectively, to, and unto the time,
when by the appointment and limitation of these Presents, her or their said
Portions ought to be paid as aforesaid: And also the like Sum of One hundred
Pounds a piece, at the Feast aforesaid, and in manner and sort aforesaid, unto
all and every the Daughters, and Issue Females of the said Lord Mordaunt,
hereafter happening to be born unto the said Lord Mordaunt, either in the life
time of the said Lord Mordaunt, or after his death. And it is further the
absolute Meaning and Intent, of all the Parties to these Presents, That all the
Issues, Rents and Profits whatsoever, that they the said Recoverers, their
Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or any of them, shall or may have,
take or receive by the limitations in these Presents, of any of the Lordships,
Manners, Lands, Tenements, Rents or Hereditaments of him the said Lord Mordaunt
aforesaid, after the death of him the said Lord Mordaunt, shall be employed to,
and toward the payment, and paying of the Debts, Portions, and Sums of Money
before in this Presents, limited and appointed to be paid. And also that if it
happen by, upon, or through any means, chance or occasion whatever, that there
be, or shall happen to be, any Surplusage of Money, coming or arising, of or
out of the Manners, Lands and Premises aforesaid, of the said Lord Mordaunt, to
be or remain in the hands of the Recoverers, their Executors or Administrators,
the Debts, Payments and Sums of Money, in these Presents, before limited and
expressed, paid and discharged: That then the said Recoverers, their Executors
and Administrators, shall give, bestow and pay the said Surplusage thereof, and
of every part thereof, to, and unto the, and such Heir and Heirs of the said
Lord Mordaunt, as shall be Heir or Heirs unto him the said Lord Mordaunt, at
the time of the death of the said Lord Mordaunt, when such Heir shall and may
have sued Livery out of the Hands of our Sovereign Lord the King's Majesty, his
Heirs or Successors: And from and after, and as soon as the Debts, Portions and
Charges in these Presents limited and appointed, to be levied, raised and paid,
are and shall be paid and performed; then the said Recovery and Recoveries
shall be and enure, and the said Recoverers, their Heirs and Assigns shall
stand and be seized of, and in all those Manners, Lands, Tenements, Rents and
Hereditaments, so to the said Recoverers, their Executors, Administrators and
Assigns, lastly, for the performance of the said Debts, Portions and Sums of
Money, limited and appointed, to the use of the said John Mordaunt, and of the
Heirs Males of his Body lawfully begotten: And for default of such Issue, to
the use of the Heirs of the Body of the said Lord Moruaunt, and of the Heirs
Males of his Body lawfully begotten, and to be begotten: And for default of
such Issue, to the use of the Heirs of the Body of the said Lord Mordaunt: And
for default of such Issue to the use of the right Heirs of the said Lord
Mordaunt for ever. Provided always, and it is fully granted concluded and
agreed upon, by and between all the Parties to these Presents, That it shall
and may be lawful, to, and for the said Lord Mordaunt at any time, during his
natural Life, and for any of the Heirs Males of the Body of the said Lord
Mordaunt, after the death of the said Lord Mordaunt, at his or their free will,
and pleasure to make any Lease or Leases, or limit any Use or Uses, for One and
twenty Years or under, beginning at or before the making of the said Lease, or
limiting of the same use, or for any number of Years so beginning, and
determinable upon any two or three Lives, of all or any the said Manners, Lands,
Tenements, or other Hereditaments, before in these Presents mentioned and
expressed; so as upon every such Lease, or limitation of use for Years, there
be reserved or appointed, payable yearly during the said term, to such as shall
from time to time, have the immediate Reversion or Remainder expectant upon the
said term, so much Rent or Sums of Money, or more as now is reserved, paid or
satisfied for the same; and so as no such Lease be made, or limited for Years,
dispunishable of Wast: And also so as every such Lease or use, be appointed to
cease and determine, upon default of payment of the said Rent or Sum, so to be
reserved or appointed, payable yearly by the space of Twenty Days, next after
every such Feast or Day of payment, whereat the said Rent or Sum, shall be
reserved or appointed to be paid. Provided always, and it is agreed by and
between all the Parties to these Presents, That it shall and may be lawful, to
and for the said Lord Mordaunt, at all times, and from time to time during his
natural Life, at his free will and pleasure, by any Writing or Writings,
Indented under his Hand and Seal, to be published by him before three credible
Witnesses, at the least, to alter, change, determine, revoke or make void, all
or any of the Use or Uses, Limitation or Limitations, before in these Presents
mentioned, of all or any part or parcel of the Premises, (except the said
Manners of Turvey, Carleton, Chillington, Snelston, Lavenden, Castle-Park,
Staggesden, Delwike, Bosome-field and Westcotton, with the Appurtenances in the
Counties of Bedford and Buckingham, before by these Presents limited, to the
said Recoverers, during the Life of the said Lady Mordaunt, for the same use
and estate only,) and at his pleasure to limit new Uses thereof, or of any part
thereof, or utterly to extinguish the foresaid former Uses thereof, or any of
them: And that then and so often from time to time, after such Alteration,
Determination, diminishing, limiting, or appointing, of any such new Use or
Uses of the Premises, or of any part thereof (except before excepted) by
Writing indented to be Sealed, Published and Subscribed as aforesaid, the said
Recoveries, shall be and enure, and the Recoverers and their Heirs shall stand
and be seized, as of and concerning such part and parts, parcel and parcels of
the Premises, whereof such alteration, determination, diminishing, enlarging,
or other limitation of new Use or Uses, shall be so had or made to the use of
the said Lord Mordaunt, and his Heirs, if he so please, or to such new Use or
Uses, and in such manner and form, under such Conditions and Limitations, and
of such Estate and Estates, to all intents and purposes, as shall be so newly
appointed, limited and declared, in such Writing Indented, so from time to
time, or at any time to be had or made by the said Lord Mordaunt as is
aforesaid, and to none other use, intent or purpose, during only the Limitation
or Continuance, of the said new Use or Uses, so to be limited and appointed.
And lastly it is agreed, That if the Recoveries, in these Presents meant and
expressed to be had, levied and suffered, or any of them, shall happen not to
be had, suffered, perfected and executed, in the Life of the said Lord
Mordaunt, so as an effectual use or uses shall not thereupon be raised,
according to the true meaning hereof: Then all the Parties to these Presents
and, every of them, be contented and agreed, and the said Lord Mordaunt, and
the Cognizees aforesaid, do by these Presents limit and appoint, express and
declare, That the foresaid Fine and Fines, in these Presents mentioned and
intended to be had, acknowledged and levied; and the Cognizees in the said Fine
and Fines, and their Heirs and Assigns, shall be, and stand seized of all the
Manners, Lands, Tenements, Royalties and Hereditaments whatsoever, in the said
Fine or Fines mentioned and expressed, to be comprised in the same, and to
those uses, intents and purposes, and upon the same Limitations and Payments,
as the said Recovery and Recoveries are in, and by these Presents meant,
mentioned and expressed, and as the true intent, meaning and purpose of these
Presents be, and are intended, mentioned or meant, to be limited and appointed,
and that to all intents and purposes whatsoever. In Witness whereof to the
first part of these Presents, with the said Thomas Lock, John Row, Edward Earl
of Worcester, Roger Earl of Rutland, Sir Francis Fane, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Sir
Thomas Compton and George Sherley remaining, the said Henry Lord Mordaunt, has
put to his Hand and Seal: And to the second part of these Presents, with the
said Henry Lord Mordaunt, Edward Earl of Worcester, Roger Earl of Rutland, Sir
Francis Fane, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Sir Thomas Compton and George Sherley
remaining, the said Thomas Lock and John Row, have put their Hands and Seals:
And to the third part, with them the said Henry Lord Mordaunt, Thomas Lock and
John Row, remaining the said Edward Earl of Worcester, Roger Earl of Rutland,
Sir Francis Fane, Sir Edward Ratcliff, Sir Thomas Compton and George Sherley,
have put their Hands and Seals, the Day and Year above-written, Annoque Domini.
1608.

Vltima Voluntas Henrici quarti Domini Mordaunt.
IN the Name of God. Amen. The Sixth Day of February, in the Sixth Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord King James, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. videlicet, of
England, France and Ireland the Sixth, and of Scotland the Two and fortieth,
Annoque Domini, 1608. I Henry Lord Mordaunt, knowing the Days of Man's Life to
be few, and my self to be now Summoned by languishing Sickness, (the messenger
of Death) and God knows how soon, I shall yield up my Soul unto the Hands of my
God and Savior, do therefore, while I am (praised be God) in perfect Memory,
make, publish and divulge, this my last Will and Testament: Wherein and whereby
I commit, and commend my Soul into the Hands of Almighty God, my Body to be
Buried at Turvey amongst my Ancestors there lying Buried; and for the clearing
of my Conscience before God and Man, and to give a public satisfaction to the
World, concerning such and those Imputations, which lately have been laid upon
me, and for which I have in a high degree been censured, I mean the late
Gunpowder Treason; which fact for the Heinousness thereof, (in the Offenders
therein) I do loath to remember and now sorrow to repeat; therefore at this
time, when all hope, or desire of long Life has forsaken, and now Almighty God
(into whose Hands I am instantly yiedling up my Soul) is my immediate Judge, to
witness with me that I lie not; I do solemnly Protest before God and his
Angels, and that without all Equivocation or Duplicity whatsoever, that I am
innocent of that Fact, and guiltless of all Foreknowledge thereof; and although
I know that this Protestation of mine cannot (without the gracious Mercy of my
Prince, and Sovereign the King's Majesty) extenuate or mitigate the greatness
of my past Censure: Yet, herein I comfort my self, that I live (and that in the
time of my dying Innocence,) to publish and express the truth (and grief) of my
trouble, which I hope will suffice to cleanse the stain thereof from my Name
and House, and so to leave the Reputation of my Name and House, as I found it
spotless from being defamed or disreputed, with the Knowledge, Acting or
Assenting unto any dishonorable, disloyal or dishonest Action whatsoever. And
whereas I have lately by Fine or other Conveyance in Law, settled my Estate and
Living amongst my Children and Family, according to my own mind and good
liking, as by an Indenture Tripartite, dated the Fourth day of January last,
made between me on the first part, Thomas Lock and John Row on the second part,
and the Right Honorable the Earls of Worcester and Rutland, and some others on
the third part: I do heartily entreat my said Honorable Friends, and all
others in the said Indentures mentioned, and to be trusted, that they would
carefully, according to my Trust in them severally reposed, (and as the case
shall fall out,) execute and see performed my said Plot and Project, for the
benefit of my said Children and Family, and for the performance of my other
Intentions therein expressed. And I do right heartily entreat my Righ
Honorable and welbeloved Brother-in-law, the Lord Compton, (whom for that
purpose I have left out of the said Indenture) that he would be pleased to have
a care, and regard unto the executing and performing of my said Project, that
the Issues and Profits of my Manners, Lands and Revenues, in the said Indentures
mentioned, may be truly disposed, according as the same by me in my said
Indenture be appointed. And I do give to the said Lord Compton, for his pains

Item, I do Will and bequeath unto my Son John Mordaunt, all my necessary
Household and Implements of Household, which, and wherewith my several Houses
of Turvey, in the County of Bedford, and of Drayton in the County of
Northampton, be now furnished withal; which said necessary Household and
Implements of Household, I Will, shall go and remain, with my said Houses from
Heir to Heir.

Item, I do further Will and Bequeath, all other the Legacies and Portions, in
a Schedule to this my present Will filed, mentioned, devised and bequeathed;
and I do make Sole Executor of this my Will, the Right Honorable the Lord
Compton. In Witness whereof, I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal, the Day and
Year first above-written.

SIGILLVM HENRICI DOMINI MORDAVNT DNI BARONIS DE TVRVEY

seal of Henry Mordaunt

JOHN Lord MORDAVNT, Fourth of that Name, Fifth Lord MORDAVNT, Earl of
PETERBOROW, Peer of England, Lord Baron of Turvey, and Lord Lieutenant of the
County of Northampton. CHAPTER XVI.
A Pardon and Release Granted to John Lord Mordaunt, of a Fine in the
Star Chamber, set upon Henry Lord Mordaunt his Father.
JAMES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To the Commissioners of the Treasury of us, our Heirs and Successors, for the
time being, and to the Treasurer, Chancellor, Under-Treasurer, Chamberlains,
and Barons of the Exchequer of us, our Heirs and Successors, for the time
being, and to all other the Officers, Ministers, and Subjects of us, our Heirs
and Successors, to whom it shall, or may appertain, Greeting.
Whereas in our Court of Star Chamber, before our Counsel there the Third Day
of June, in the Fourth Year of our Reign of England, France, and Ireland; there
were brought to the Bar, as Prisoners, from our Tower of London, Henry Lord
Mordaunt, (late deceased) and Edward Lord Sturton; against whom, Sir Edward
Coke, Knight, then our Attorney General, did inform, for diverse great Contempts
and Misprisions, by them committed, and done against us; whereupon our said
Court, weighing and considering the quality of their said Offenses, did order,
and adjudge, The said Henry Lord Mordaunt, for his Offense therein, should pay
to our use, for a Fine, the Sum of Ten thousand Marks, as by the Records of
the said Court of Star Chamber it does and may appear. And whereas the said
Fine of Ten thousand Marks, has not been to us yet answered and paid, so as
the Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, and Chattels of our Right Trusty
and Welbeloved John Lord Mordaunt, Son and Heir of the said Henry Lord
Mordaunt, deceased, are chargeable, subject, and liable, to and with the
payment of the same: Know ye nevertheless, That we being graciously pleased, to
free and acquit, the said John Lord Mordaunt, and his Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels, of and from the said Fine, and every part
thereof, of our special Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, have
Pardoned, Remised and Released, and by these Presents for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, do Pardon, Remit and Release unto the said John Lord Mordaunt, by
whatsoever Name or Names, Surname or Sirnames, or addition of Names or
Sirnames, Dignity, Place or Places, the said John Lord Mordaunt is, or lately
was called or known, the foresaid Fine or Sum of Ten thousand Marks, and every
part and parcel of the said Ten thousand Marks. And further, for the more full
and absolute freeing and discharging of the said John Lord Mordaunt, of and
from the said Fine, or Sum of Ten thousand Marks, and of every part and parcel
thereof, We of our special Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, do by these Presents, Pardon, Remit and Release unto
the said John Lord Mordaunt, all and all manner of Actions, Suits,
Informations, Seisures, Extents, Writs, Processes, Judgments, Executions,
Impetitions, Claims and Demands, which we now have, or which We, our Heirs or
Successors, at any time hereafter can, may or might have, against the said John
Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators or Assigns, or his, or
their, or any of their Lordships, Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
Goods, Chattels, Rights, Debts or Credits whatsoever, for or in respect of the
said Fine, or Sum of Ten thousand Marks, against or upon the said Henry Lord
Mordaunt, his said Father adjudged, given, set and imposed as aforesaid; and
him the said John Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators,
Terrtenants and Assigns, and his and their Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
Goods, Chattels, Rights, Debts and Credits of, for, from, and concerning the
said Fine, or Sum of Ten thousand Marks, and every part and parcel thereof, We
do for Us, our Heirs and Successors, clearly and absolutely Acquit, Exonerat,
Free and Discharge for ever by these Presents. Willing, and by these Presents
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, straightly charging and requiring our said
Commissioners for our Treasury, and the Treasurer, Chancellor, and
Under-Treasurer, Chamberlains, Barons and Remembrancers of the Exchequer, of
Us, our Heirs and Successors, for the time being, and all other the Officers
and Ministers of the said Court, for the time being, whom it may concern, and
all other the Officers and Ministers of Us, our Heirs and Successors
whomsoever; That he the said John Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators, Terrtenants or Assigns, or any his or their Lordships, Manners,
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, Leases, Debts, Rights or
Credits, or any of them, or any part or parcel thereof, for or by reason of the
said Fine, or Sum of Ten thousand Marks, or any part thereof, be not hereafter
by any of the Sheriff, Undersheriff, Bailiff, or other Officers or Ministers
of Us, our Heirs and Successors, in any wise Sued, Vexed, Extended, Seized,
Troubled, Molested, Impeached, Questioned or Inquieted; but shall thereof be
fully, freely, clearly and absolutely from henceforth by virtue, and upon
showing forth of these Presents, or the Inrolment, Constat or Exemplification
thereof, acquitted, exonerated and discharged against Us, our Heirs and
Successors; the said Order, Decree, Sentence, Fine and Judgment of our said
Court of Star Chamber, herein before mentioned, or any matter or thing therein
contained, or any Estreat, Process, Seizure or Extent heretofore awarded, had
or made, touching the Premises; or any Act, Statute, Ordinance, Provision,
Proclamation or Restraint whatsoever, to the contrary thereof, in any wise
notwithstanding. And further, We do for Us, our Heirs and Successors, of our
especial Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, Will and Grant to the said
John Lord Mordaunt by these Presents, That these our Letters Patents of Pardon,
or the Inrolment thereof, and every Clause, Grant, Article, Matter or Thing
therein contained, shall be good, sufficient and effectual in the Law, and
shall be taken, construed and adjudged most strongly against Us, our Heirs and
Successors, and most favorably, benignly and beneficially, to and for the said
John Lord Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, for the
full, clear and absolute Pardoning, Releasing, Freeing and Discharging him,
them and every of them, and his and their Manners, Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods, Chattels, Rights, Debts and Credits of, for, from and
concerning the said Fine, or Sum of Ten thousand Marks, so ordered, decreed
and adjudged as aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof: And of and from
all, and every Writ, Process, Extents, Seisures, Executions, Claims, Benefits
and Demands whatsoever, which we now have, or which we, our Heirs or
Successors, at any time hereafter, shall, might, or may have, for, touching or
concerning the Premises. Notwithstanding, the not true, or not certain, or not
reciting, naming or mentioning the said Information, wherein or upon which the
said Fine was set, or assessed upon the said Henry Lord Mordaunt, or of the
Offenses, or Misdemeanors or other Cause, for which the same was set or
assessed, or of the natures or qualities of any of them. And notwithstanding
the not mentioning, not reciting, or not true and certain meaning or reciting
of the just Day, or time of the said Sentence, or Judgment therein given as
aforesaid; or any Act, Statute, Ordinance, Provision, Commandment, Order or
Restraint, or any other Incertainty, Defect or Imperfection, Cause, Matter or
Thing whatsoever to the contrary hereof, in any wise notwithstanding. Although
express mention of the Certainty of the Premises, or of any of them, or of any
other Gift or Grant by us, or any of our Progenitors, or Predecessors, to the
said John Lord Mordaunt, before this time made, in these Presents is not made:
Any Statute, Act, Ordinance, Provision or Restraint, heretofore had, meaned,
ordained or provided; or any other matter, cause or thing whatsoever, to the
contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

In Witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents.
Witness our self at Westminster the Eleventh Day of March, in the seventeenth
Year of Our Reign of England, France and Ireland, and of Scotland the Three and
fiftieth. Young and Pie. Per breve de privato Sigillo.
In Memorandis Scaccarii de anno xviij Regis nunc Jacobi, videli^et, inter
Recorda de termino Paschae rotulo ex part Remem. Thesauri reman. intratum.
A Deed of Jointure made for the Countess of Peterburgh before Marriage.
THis Indenture Tripartite made the One and thirtieth Day of March, in the
Years of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord King James, by the Grace of God, of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, (that is to
say) of England, France and Ireland the Nineteenth, and of Scotland the Four
and fiftieth, Between the Right Honorable Sir John Mordaunt, Knight, Lord
Baron of Turvey on the first part; the Right Honorable Lady Anne Howard of
Effingham, and Sir Francis Fane of Apethorp, in the County of Northampton,
Knight, and Sir Oliver Luke of Woodend, in the County of Bedford, Knight, on
the second part; and Henry Lovell of Blechmichleigh, in the County of Surrey,
Esquire, and Henry Stanley of the Inner Temple London, Esquire, of the third
part, Witnesses: That whereas there is a Marriage intended and agreed (by the
Grace of God,) to be had and solemnized between the said John Lord Mordaunt,
and Elizabeth Howard Sole Daughter and Heir of William Lord Howard of
Effingham, deceased, and Heir apparent of the said Lady Anne Howard; in
consideration whereof, and for the love and affection, which he the said Lord
Mordaunt does bear unto the said Elizabeth Howard, in case she survive and
over-live the said Lord Mordaunt; and for the making and providing a competent
Jointure, and Livelihood to the said Elizabeth Howard, in case she survive and
over-live the said Lord Mordaunt, fit for her Honor and Degree; and for
settling and continuing of the Manners, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
hereafter in these Presents expressed, to continue in the Issues, Name and
Blood of him the said Lord Mordaunt, (so long as it please God) as hereafter in
these Presents is mentioned: He the said John Lord Mordaunt, for himself, his
Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, does Covenant, Grant, Promise and
Agree to and with the said Lady Anne Howard, her Heirs, Executors,
Administrators or Assigns, and every of them by these Presents, That he the
said Lord Mordaunt, and his Heirs, at their or some of their own proper Costs
and Charges in the Law, in this side or before the Feast of Pentecost, commonly
called Whitsontide, next ensuing the date hereof, shall and will acknowledge,
and levy one or more Fine or Fines with Proclamations, according to the Statute
in that Case provided, before the King's Majesty's Justices of the Court of
Common Pleas at Westminster, in due form of Law, according to the common course
of Fines in such Cases used, unto the said Henry Lovell and Henry Stanley, and
the Heirs of the said Henry Lovell, and Henry Stanley, of all those his Manners
of Drayton, Islip, Ringsted, Furnels in Raundes, Addington, Slipton and
Luffwick in the County of Northampton, with all their and every of their
Rights, Members and Appurtenances; and of the Capital Message or Mansion House
of Drayton aforesaid, with the Appurtenances; and of the Rectories or
Parsonages of Slipton, Denford and Ringsted; and of the Rectory of Luffwick, in
the said County of Northampton, with their and every of their Appurtenances;
and of all other Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments of him the said Lord
Mordaunt, lying and being in the several Towns, Parishes and Hamlets of
Drayton, Ringsted, Islip, Raundes, Addington, Slipton, Luffwick and Denford in
the County of Northampton; and of all the Rights, Members, Royalties and
Appurtenances to the said Manners, Parsonages, Lands or Tenements, or any of
them, in any wise appertaining or belonging; and of all that his Manner or Farm
of Kemston-burn in the County of Bedford, with all the Rights, Members and
Appurtenances thereto appertaining; and of all those his Lands, Tenements and
Hereditaments, being Freehold in Cranfield, in the said County of Bedford: By
which Fine or Fines with Proclamations, he the said Lord Mordaunt shall
acknowledge the said Manners, Parsonages, Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments,
and all other the Premises, with the Appurtenances, by such name or names, and
by such quantity and number of Acres, as shall be meet and convenient, to be
the Right of the said Henry Lovell and Henry Stanley, as those which the said
Henry Lovell and Henry Stanley have of the gift of the said Lord Mordaunt, and
shall remise and quit claim to the same from him and his Heirs, to the said
Henry Lovell and Henry Stanley, and the Heirs of them the said Henry Lovell and
Henry Stanley, with Warranty against him the said Lord Mordaunt and his Heirs,
and all claiming from, by, or under them, or any of them: Which Fine or Fines,
in form aforesaid, or in any other manner to be levied, and all other Fine or
Fines, which shall be of the Premises, or any part thereof, levied by the said
Lord Mordaunt, to the said Henry Lovell and Henry Stanley, or either of them,
on this side the said Feast of Pentecost, shall be and enure, and shall be
deemed and taken to be and enure, and the said Cognizees therein, their Heirs
and Assigns shall, from, and immediately after the levying and engrossing of
the said Fine or Fines, stand and be seized of all the said Manners, Parsonages
and Premises, and of every part and parcel thereof, to the use of the said
Henry Lovell and Henry Stanley, and of their Heirs for ever: To the only intent
and purpose, That the said Henry Lovell and Henry Stanley, shall stand and be
adjudged perfect Tenants of the Freehold of the said Manners, and other the
Premises, and of every part thereof, until a perfect Recovery may be lawfully
had and executed, of the Manners and Premises, against the said Henry Lovell and
Henry Stanley. And the said Lord Mordaunt for himself, his Heirs, Executors and
Assigns, does Covenant and Agree, to and with the said Lady Anne Howard, her
Heirs, Executors and Assigns, That the abovenamed Sir Francis Fane and Sir
Oliver Luke, shall and may before the said Feast of Pentecost, at the proper
Costs and Charges in the Law of him the said Lord Mordaunt, Commence and
Prosecute one or more Writs of Entry, Sur disseisin in le post, against the
said Henry Lovell and Henry Stanley, retornable before the King's Majesty's
Justices of his Highness's Court of Common Pleas at Westminster, according to
the usual course of common Recoveries; whereby they shall demand against the
said Henry Lovell and Henry Stanley, the said Manners, Parsonages, Lands and
other the Premises, by such name and names, number and quantity of Acres, as
shall be thought meet and requisite. Unto which Writ or Writs the said Henry
Lovel and Henry Stanley shall appear in proper person, or by their Attorney or
Attorneys lawfully authorized, and shall Vouch to Warranty the said Lord
Mordaunt: And the said Lord Mordaunt agrees, That he shall appear in proper
person upon the same Voucher, or by his Attorney sufficiently authorized, and
shall Vouch over to Warranty the common Voucher, who shall appear gratis and
imparle, and then make default and depart in despite of the Court, according to
the form and course of common Recoveries in such cases used. And all the said
parties are agreed by these Presents, so to demean themselves either in the
course aforesaid, or in some other course, that a perfect common Recovery, with
such Vouchers as aforesaid, may and shall be had and suffered, of the said
Manners, Parsonages, and other the Premises, with the Appurtenances, in the same
Fine or Fines to be comprised, in all points and to all intents and purposes,
according to the usual form of Recoveries for the Assurances of Land, and that
Seisin shall be thereof had. And it is fully concluded, condescended and
agreed, by and between all and every the parties, to these Presents, for them
and their several Heirs; and every of the said parties does severally Covenant
and Conclude, to and with the others, and their several Heirs, That the said
Recoverers, and their Heirs, shall, from and immediately after the suffering
and perfecting of the said Recovery or Recoveries, stand and be seized of the
said Manners, Rectories and Premises, with the Appurtenances, and of every part
and parcel thereof; and that the said Recovery or Recoveries, and all and every
other Recovery and Recoveries to be Sued, Prosecuted or Executed of the
Premises, or of any part thereof, against the said Henry Lovell and Henry
Stanley, as Tenants, and the said Lord Mordaunt as Voucher, on this side the
Feast of St. John Baptist, next ensuing the date hereof, shall be and enure,
and shall be adjudged, deemed and taken to be and enure, to the uses hereafter
expressed, limited and declared, and to no other use, intent or purpose, (that
is to say,) To the use of John Lord Mordaunt, for and during the term of his
natural Life, without Impeachment of Wast: And from, and after the decease of
the said Lord Mordaunt, then to the use of the said Elizabeth Howard, for and
during the term of her natural Life, for her Provision, Maintenance and
Jointure: And after the decease of the said Elizabeth Howard, then to the use
of the Heirs Males of the said Lord Mordaunt, on the Body of the said Elizabeth
Howard lawfully begotten: And for default and want of such Heirs, then to the
use of the Heirs Males of the Body of the said Lord Mordaunt lawfully begotten:
And for default of such Heirs, to the use of the right Heirs of the said Lord
Mordaunt for ever. And the said Lord Mordaunt for him, his Heirs, Executors,
Administrators and Assigns, does further Covenant, Grant, Promise and Agree, to
and with the said Lady Anne Howard, her Heirs, Executors and Assigns, that the
said Manners, Rectories, Lands and Hereditaments, and other the Premises, with
the Appurtenances, are now, and from time to time, after the decease of the
said Lord Mordaunt, shall remain, continue and be, to the said Elizabeth,
during the term of her natural Life, of the clear yearly value of One thousand
Pounds, over and above all Charges and Reprises. And that he the said Lord
Mordaunt, will cause and procure a Surrender, Release, or some other Act or
Acts, to be had and done, whereby all or any Estate or Estates, now in being,
which may let or hinder any ways the knowledging, levying and suffering of the
said Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries, or any of them, or the Execution or
Operation thereof, according to the true meaning of these Presents, may be
extinguished and purchased, before the time and times, that the said Fines and
Recoveries, or any of them shall be acknowledged or suffered; and also that he
the said Lord Mordaunt, has not heretofore acknowledged, suffered or done, nor
hereafter shall acknowledge, suffer or do any Act or Thing, whereby the said
Manners, Rectories, Lands, Tenements and Premises, shall not, nor may not, after
the death of the said Lord Mordaunt, and solemnization of the said Marriage,
remain and continue to the said Elizabeth Howard, during her Estate hereby
limited, and to such Uses, Intents and Purposes, as in this Indenture are
mentioned and expressed, according to the true meaning thereof: And also that
she the said Elizabeth Howard, during her Estate aforesaid, shall peaceably and
quietly have, hold and enjoy, all and singular the Premises, and every part
thereof discharged, or otherwise from time to time, well and sufficiently,
saved and kept harmless, of, and from all manner of former Bargains, Estates,
Titles Conditions, Charges, and other Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made,
suffered or done by the said Lord Mordaunt, or Henry late Lord Mordaunt his
Father, or any other Person or Persons, by his or their means, assent or
procurement. And also that the said Lord Mordaunt, and his Heirs, shall and
will, at all and every time and times hereafter, after the solemnization of the
said Marriage, during the Life of the said Elizabeth Howard, upon reasonable
request, to be made by the said Lady Anne Howard, her Heirs, Executors or
Administrators, do, make, suffer, acknowledge, finish and execute, all and
every such further reasonable Act and Acts, Thing and Things, Conveyance and
Conveyances in the Law, for the better and more perfect Asiurance, Surety and
sure making, of all and singular the said Manners, Rectories, Lands, Tenements
and Premises, to the uses in these Presents limited and expressed, as by the
Council learned in the Law of the said Lady Anne Howard, her Executors and
Administrators, shall be devised, advised and required: So that the said
several Assurances or Conveyances, or any of them, extend not to hinder the
said Lord Mordaunt, or his Heirs, to any further or other Warranty, then only
against them, their Heirs and Assigns, and so that the said Lord Mordaunt be
not forced, to travel from the place, where he then shall abide, for the doing
and perfecting thereof. Provided always, and it is fully Concluded, Granted and
Agreed, by and between all the parties to these Presents, That it shall and may
be lawful, to and for the said Lord Mordaunt, at any time, during his natural
Life, at his free will and pleasure, to make any Lease or Leases, or limit any
Use or Uses, for three Lives, or One and twenty Years, or under, beginning at
or before the making of the said Lease or Leases, orlim iting the same Use or
Uses, for any number of Years, so beginning and determinable upon one, two, or
three Lives, of all and singular the said Manners, Rectories, or Parsonages,
Lands, Tenements, and other the premises before mentioned, and of every, or any
of them, or any part or parcel thereof (other than the said Capital
Mansion House in Drayton aforesaid, and the Demeasns, Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments thereunto belonging and appertaining;) so as upon every such
Lease, or Limitation of Use, there be reserved, and appointed to be payable, to
those to whom the right thereof, for the time being, shall belong and
appertain, yearly, during the said term and terms, so much Rent, or more, as
now is reserved, paid, or satisfied for the same, and so as no such Lease be
made, or Use limited, dispunishable of Wast; and also so as every such Lease,
or Use, be appointed to cease and determine, upon default of non-payment of the
said Rent, so to be reserved for the space of Eight and twenty days, next after
every such Lease, or day of payment, whereat the same Rent shall be reserved,
or appointed to be paid: And the said Fine or Fines, Recovery or Recoveries,
shall be, and enure, and the said Sir Francis Fane, and Sir Oliver Luke, and
their Heirs and Assigns, and every of them, and all and every other Person and
Persons then standing, and being seized of, or in the premises, so to be
demised, let, limited, or any part or parcel thereof, shall stand and be
seized thereof, and of every part thereof, as for and concerning only all and
every the same Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, and other the Premises, for to
be demised, letten, or limited, as is aforesaid, to the use of all and every
such Person and Persons, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, to whom
any such Lease or Leases, or limitation of Uses, shall be so thereof made or
limited; and during such time and term only, as the said Lease or Leases, or
other limitation of Uses, according to the purport thereof, and the meaning of
these Presents are to endure and continue, and according to the true intent and
meaning of all and every the said Lease and Leases, or limitation of Uses, and
of these Presents: And after the Expiration of the said Lease or Leases, or
limitation of Uses, and of every of them, as they shall severally end and
determine, and as the same shall severally end and determine, and of the
Reversions thereupon, (except of the said Fine or Fines, Recovery and
Recoveries) shall be and enure, and the said Sir Francis Fane, and Sir Oliver
Luke, and their Heirs, and all and every other Person or Persons, then standing
or being seized of, or in the Premises so to be demised, letten, or limited, or
any parcel thereof shall at all times from thenceforth, stand and be seized of,
and in the same and every part thereof, to such uses, purposes and intents, as
be before in these Presents expressed and declared, and as by the true intent
and meaning of these Presents they should, or ought to have done, if no such
Lease or Leases, or limitations had been at any time hereof made or had. And it
is likewise agreed, That if the Recovery, or Recoveries in these Presents
mentioned, and expressed to be had and suffered, shall not happen to be had,
suffered, perfected and executed in the Life of the said Lord Mordaunt, so as
the Use and Uses, shall not thereupon be effectually raised, according to the
true meaning hereof: Then all the parties to these Presents, and every of them
be contented and agreed, and the said Lord Mordaunt, and the Cognizees
aforesaid, do by these Presents limit, appoint and declare, That the foresaid
Fine and Fines in these Presents mentioned, and intended to be acknowledged and
levied; and the Cognizees in the said Fine and Fines, and their Heirs and
Assigns, shall be and stand seized, of all the Manners, Rectories, Tenements and
Hereditaments, and other the Premises, in the said Fine or Fines mentioned, to
be expressed and comprised, to the same, and to those uses, intents and
purposes, as the said Recovery and Recoveries, are in and by these Presents
meant, mentioned and expressed to be; and as the true intent and purpose of
these Presents, are intended or meant to be limited and appointed, and that to
all intents and purposes whatsoever. And further, whereas there is a certain
Lease of the Priory of Rygate in the County of Surrey, made by the Right
Honorable Charles Earl of Nottingham, to the Right Noble Lodowick, Duke of
Lenox, and others, and is intended for the Provision and Jointure of the Right
Honorable the now Countess of Nottingham, Wife unto the foresaid Earl, and the
said Lady Anne Howard, with certain Sureties are bound in the Sum of Four
thousand Pounds, that the said Countess shall enjoy the same Priory, with the
Appurtenances, during the term in the said Lease limited; as by the Indenture
of the said Lease, and the said Bond may appear: Now the said Lord Mordaunt,
for him, his Executors and Assigns, does Covenant, Promise and Agree, to and
with the said Lady Anne Howard, her Executors and Assigns by these Presents,
That the said Countess of Nottingham, shall peaceably and quietly, during her
Life, have, hold and enjoy the said Priory, and every part thereof, according
to the purport, and meaning of the said Lease so thereof made, without the
Interruption or Disturbance of him the said Lord Mordaunt: And notwithstanding
any Act or Thing to be made, done or suffered by him, or any claiming by, from
or under him. And that the said Lord Mordaunt, will upon reasonable request to
him made, seal and deliver to the said Lady Anne Howard, or other whom she
shall appoint, a Bond of the penal Sum of Four thousand Pounds, condescended
to that or the like end and purpose. And the said Lady Anne Howard for her
self, her Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and for every of them,
does Covenant, Promise, Grant and Agree, to and with the said John Lord
Mordaunt, his Heirs, Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and every of them
by these Presents, That she the said Lady Anne Howard is seized of the Manner of
Donnington, in the County of Berks, in her own Demeasne, as of Freehold of a
good and sufficient Estate, for the term of her own life, the remainder to the
said Elizabeth Howard, and the Heirs of her Body lawfully begotten, or some
other Estate of Inheritance to the said Elizabeth, immediately after the
decease of the said Lady Anne expectant; and that she the said Lady Anne
Howard, before, or immediately upon the Solemnization of the said Marriage, and
upon reasonable request made, will Surrender, Grant, or Convey, all her Estate,
Right, and Title, in the said Manner of Donnington, and every part thereof to
the said Elizabeth Howard, or the said Lord Mordaunt, or both of them, at the
election, or appointment of the said Lord Mordaunt, and in such manner and
form, and by such assurance, as by the said Lord Mordaunt, or his Council
learned in the Law, shall be reasonably demised, advised and required, at the
Costs and Charges in the Law of the said Lord Mordaunt: And that he the said
Lord Mordaunt and Elizabeth Howard, or either of them, to whom the said
Conveyance shall be so made as aforesaid, their Heirs and Assigns, shall and
may peaceably and quiety hold, possess and enjoy the said Manner of Donnington,
and every part and parcel thereof, during the natural Life of the said Lady
Anne Howard, without the Disturbance and Interruption of the said Lady Anne
Howard, or any claiming by, from or under her; and freed or discharged, or
otherwise saved and kept harmless from time to time, of and from all Titles,
Estates, Troubles, Charges and other Encumbrances whatsoever, had, made,
suffered or done by the said Lady Anne Howard, or any claiming by, from or
under her, or by her means, assent, or procurement, (the Leases now in being,
which she, according to the liberty and power annexed to her Estate, has made,
only foreprized and excepted.) In witness whereof to the first part of these
Presents, with the said Lady Anne Howard, Sir Francis Fane and Sir Oliver Luke,
Henry Lovell and Henry Stanley remaining, the said John Lord Mordaunt, has put
his Hand and Seal; and to the second part of these Presents, with the said Lord
Mordaunt, Henry Lovel and Henry Stanley remaining, the said Lady Anne Howard,
Sir Francis Fane and Sir Oliver Luke, have put their Hands and Seals; and to
the third part remaining with the said Lord Mordaunt, Lady Anne Howard, Sir
Francis Fane, Sir Oliver Luke, the said Henry Lovell and Henry Stanley, have
put to their Hands and Seals, the Day and Year above-written.

J. Mordaunt.

Charta Caroli primi Regis constituendo Johannem Dominum Mordaunt Comitem de
Peterborow.
CArolus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
Defensor, etc.
Archiepiscopis, Ducibus, Marchionibus, Comitibus, Vicecomitibus, Episcopis,
Baronibns, Militibus, Praepositis, liberis Hominibus, ac omnibus Officiariis,
Ministris, ac Subditis nostris quibuscunque, ad quos praesentes literae
pervenerint, salutem.
Nihil magis Regium esse censemus, quam qui se inter Proceres Regni, tum
Virtutum cumulo, tum Generis splendore eminentiores, and ad praeclara Regi
officia fideliter praestandi, assiduos and promptiores se exhibent, eos ad
altiores honorum gradus libentius evehere, tum ut illi, qui se sic honoratos
sentiant, and majori conatu and animo alacriori indies ad res optime gerendas,
se pronius accingant, tum ut alii eorum exemplo freti, acrius contendant se
dignores reddere, and favorem Principis sui intensiorem, and augusta virtutum
praemia, tam revera mereri, quam feliciter exequi: Inde est quod nos intuitu
Regio personam pernobilis Johannis Mordaunt, Baronis Mordaunt de Turveia,
pensiculatius contemplantes, eumque tam suipsius, quam majorum nobilitate,
eaque non minus vera quam vetusta conspicientes: Ita etiam eximiis animi
Dotibus, quae virum praestantissimum constituunt insigniter praeditum
agnoscimus, egregia scilicet morum Suavitate, Prudentia and just temperata cum
Gravitate, Judicii acumine, quibus inprimis accedit, ut demum ea quae
singularem in eum nostri Favorem, and Gratiam peperere apertius profiteamur
obsequiosi, sed ejusmodi qui virum optimum and Principis sui amantissimum
decuit animi, and constans, and fidelissimum officium, tum erga praecharissimum
gloriosae memoriae Patrem nostrum, tum ergo nos ipsos, qui tanti nunquam sane
intermissi, amoris fideique meritum, non magis non remunerare possumus, quam
ejusdem esse plane immemores. Quocirca ne Viro undequaque nobilissmo, and tam
multipliciter merenti, and virtutis praemium and honoris incrementum condignum
(ut par est) adiiceremus, eundem Johannem Mordaunt, Baronem Mordaunt de
Turveia, ad celsiorem Dignitatis gradum, scilicet ad Comitis titulum, statum,
honorem and gradum evehendum duximus and censuimus. Sciatis igitur quod nos de
gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, ac mero motu nostris, praefatum
Johannem Baronem Mordaunt de Turveia praedicta, ad statum, dignitatem, stilum,
titulum and honorem Comitis de Peterborow in Comitatu nostro de Northampton,
ereximus, praefecimus and creavimus, ipsumque Johannem Comitem de Peterborow
praedicta facimus, constituimus, praeficimus and creamus, per praesentes;
eidemque Johanni, nomen, statum, gradum, stilum, dignitatem, titulum and
honorem Comitis de Peterborow praedicta, imposuimus, dedimus and praebuimus, ac
per praesentes, imponimus, damus, ac praebemus, ac ipsum Johannem hujusmodi
nomine, statu, gradu, stilo, dignitate, titulo and honor Comitis de
Peterborow, per gladii Cincturam, cape honoris, ac Circuli aureii impositionem
insignimus, investimus, and realiter nobilitamus per praesentes. Habendum and
tenendum, eadem nomen, statum, gradum, stilum, dignitatem, titulum and honorem
Comitis de Peterborow praedicta, cum omnibus and singulis Praeheminentiis,
Honoribus, caeterisque hujusmodi, nomini, statui, gradui, stilo, dignitati,
titulo and honori, Comitis pertinentibus, sive spectantibus, praefato Johanni,
and Haeredibus masculis de corpore suo exeuntibus in perpetuum. Volentes and
per praesentes concedentes, pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris,
quod praedictus Johannes, and haeredes sui masculi praedicti, nomen, statum,
gradum, stilum, dignitatem, titulum and honorem praedicta successive gerant,
and h^beant, and eorum quilibet habeat, and gerat, and per nomen Comites de
Peterborow successive, vocentur and nuncupentur, and eorum quilibet vocetur and
nuncupetur. Et quod idem Johannes, and haeredes sui masculi praedicti,
successive, Comitis de Peterborow, in omnibus teneantur, and ut Comites
tractentur, and reputentur, and eorum quilibet teneatur, tractetur and
reputatur. Habeantque, teneant, and possideant, dictus Johannes, and haeredes
sui masculi praedicti, and eorum quilibet habeat, teneat, and possideat Sedem,
Locum and Vocem, in Parlamentis and publicis Comitiis, atque Conciliis nostris,
haeredum and successorum nostrorum, infra Regnum nostrum Angliae, inter alios
Comites, ut Comes de Peterborow: Necnon dictus Johannes, and haeredes sui
masculi praedicti, gaudeant, and utantur, and eorum quilibet gaudeat and
utatur, per nomen Comitis de Peterborow, omnibus and singulis talibus Juribus,
Privilegiis, Preheminentiis and Immunitatibus, statui Comitis, in omnibus rite,
and de jure pertinentibus, quibus caeteri Comites, dicti Regni nostri Angliae
ante haec tempora melius, honorificentius and quietius usi sunt, and gavisi,
seu in praesenti gaudent, and utuntur. Et quia crescente status, and dignitatis
celsitudine, necessario crescunt sumptus, and onera grandiora, and ut idem
Johannes, and haeredes sui masculi praedicti, melius, decentius, and
honorificentius, statum praedicti Comitis de Peterborow, and onera ipsi
Johanni, and haeredibus suis masculis, incumbentia, manutenere and supportare
valiant, and eroum quilibet valeat: Ideo de uberiori gratia nostra dedimus, and
concessimus, ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris
damus, and concedimus, praefato Johanni, and haeredibus suis masculis
praedictis in perpetuum, Feodum seu annualem Redditum, Viginti librarum,
praefato Johanni, and haeredibus suis masculis praedictis, de Exitibus,
Proficuis, and Reventionibus, magnae and parvae Custumae, and Subsidii nostri,
nobis concessis, seu debitis, seu in posterum nobis, haeredibus, and
successoribus nostris, concedendis, seu debendis provenientibus, crescentibus,
seu emergentibus, infra portum Civitatis nostrae Londini, per manus
Custumariorum, sive Collectorum nostri, haeredum, and successorum nostrorum,
ibidem pro tempore existentium, ad festa Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, and
Paschae, per equales portiones. Volumus etiam and per praesentes concedimus
praefato Johanni, quod habeat, and habebit, has Literas nostras Patentes, sub
magno Sigillo nostro Angliae, debito modo factas, and sigillatas, absque Fine,
seu Feodo magno vel parvo, in Hanaperio nostro, aut alibi ad usum nostrum,
quoquomodo reddendo, faciendo, vel solvendo. Eo quod expressa Mentio de vero
valor annuo vel certitudine praemissorum, vel eorum alicujus, aut de aliis
Donis sive Concessionibus, per nos, sive per aliquem Antecessorum, sive
Progenitorum nostrorum, praefato Johanni ante haec tempora factis, in
praesentibus minime facta existit; aut aliquo Statuto, Actu, Ordinatione,
Provisione, Proclamatione, sive Restrictione, inde in contrarium ante haec
habita, facta, edita, ordinata, sive ^rovisa, aut aliqua alia re, causa, vel
materia quacunque in aliquo non obstante. In cujus rei Testimonium, has Literas
nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium, nono die Martii, anno Regni nostri tertio.
Edmondes. Per Breve de privato Sigillo.
Vicesimo die Novembris 1633 Irrot. per R. Sutton Audit.

The Disafforestation of the Earl of Peterborow's Lands in Northamptonshire,
and Grant of other Liberties thereunto.
CArolus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
Defensor, etc.
Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, salutem.
Sciatis quod nos tam pro and in consideratione summa octingintarum librarum,
legalis monetae Angliae, nobis ad Receptum Scaccarii nostri, apud
Westmonasterium, been and fideliter per praedilectum Consanguineum nostrum
Johannem Comitem de Peterborow, solutae, atque solvendae, ducentae Librae,
existentes parcella praedictae Summae octingentarum Librarum, in termino
sanctae Trinitatis, in hoc instanti anno, milesimo sexcentesimo tricesimo nono,
in Receptu Scaccarii nostri praedicti fuerunt solutae, residuum inde existens
sexcenta librarum, in termino Sancti Michaelis, in hoc etiam anno milesimo
sexcentesimo tricesimo nono, in praedicto Scaccario nostro, per quandam
Recognitionem, captam coram Humphrido Davenport Militi, Capitali Baroni Curiae
Scaccarii nostri, super Festum Sancti Martini Episcopi in hieme assurantur fore
solvenda, in plena solutione, praedictae summae octingentarum librarum pro
Deafforestatione Maneriorum, Villarum, Messuagiorum, Terrarum, Tenementorum and
Haereditamentorum infra Forestam nostram de Rockingham, in Comitatu nostro
Northamptoniae, inferius in praesentibus expressa; de qua quidem summa
ducentarum librarum fatemur nos plenarie fore satisfactos, eundemque Johannem
Comitem de Peterborow, Haeredes, Executores and Administratores suos,
acquietatos and exoneratos esse volumus per praesentes, quam pro diversis aliis
bonis causis, and considerationibus, nos ad praesens especialiter moventibus;
De gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris
concessimus, and per hanc Cartam nostram confirmavimus, ac per praesentes pro
nobis, Haeredibus, and Successoribus nostris concedimus, and confirmamus
praefato Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, Haeredibus and Assignatis suis, quod
totum illud manerium de Sudburgh, cum pertinentiis, in Comitatu Northamptoniae;
nec non tota illa villa de Sudburgh, in Comitatu Northamptoniae praedicto, ac
etiam omnia illa Messuagia, Terrae, Prata, Bosci, Subbosci, and Terrae
boscales, Pasturae and Haereditamenta quaecunque, scituata, jacentia and
existentia, sive jacere, and existere reputata infra praedictum manerium, and
villam de Sudburgh praedicta, in Comitatu Northamptoniae praedicto: Nec non
omnia illa Messuagia, Terrae, Prata, Pasturae, Bosci, Subbosci, and Terrae
boscales, and caetera Hereditamenta vocata, and cognita per nomen de
Sudburgh-park, cum pertinentiis, in Sudburgh praedicta, in Comitatu
Northamptoniae praedicto: Quod quidem manerium, and caetera omnia and singula
praemissa praedicta, continent in toto, mill quingenta sexaginta and duas
acras terrae, vel eo circiter: Nec non totum illud Manerium de Luffwick, cum
pertinentiis, in Comitatu Northamptoniae; ac etiam tota illa villa de Luffwick,
in Comitatu Northamptoniae praedicto; nec non totum illud Capitale Messuagium,
sive Domus Mansionalis, praedicti Comitis de Peterborow, cum pertinentiis, in
Luffwick praedicta, vocatum Drayton: Nec non omnia alia Messuagia, Terrae,
Tenementa, Prata, Pasturae, Bosci, Subbosci, Terrae boscales, and
Haereditamenta quaecunque, cum pertinentiis universis in Luffwick praedicta:
Nec non omnia illa Terrae, Prata, Pasturae, Bosci, Subbosci, and Terrae
boscales, and alia Haereditamenta quaecunque, cum eorum pertinentiis, vocata,
seu cognita, per nomen de Drayton-park, scituata, jacentia and existentia, sive
jacere, and existere reputata, in Drayton, Luffwick, Sudburgh and Slipton, vel
in eorum aliquo, vel aliquibus, in Comitatu Northamptoniae praedicto: Quod
quidem Manerium, and caetera omnia and singula praemissa praedicta, modo ultime
mentionata, continent in toto, mill ducenta viginti and unam acras terrae, vel
eo circiter: Nec non totum illud Manerium de Islip, cum pertinentiis, in
Comitatu Northamptoniae praedicto: Et tota illa villa de Islip, in Comitatu
Northamptoniae praedicto, ac omnia Messuagia, Terrae, Prata, Bosci, Subbosci,
Terrae boscales, Pasturae and alia Hereditamenta quaecunque, in Islip
praedicta, continentia in toto octingenta acras, vel eo circiter: Nec non totum
illud Manerium de Slipton, cum pertinentiis, in Comitatu Northamptoniae; ac
etiam tota illa villa de Slipton, in Comitatu Northamptoniae praedicto, and
omnia Messuagia, Terrae, Prata, Bosci, Subbosci, Terrae boscales, Pasturae and
Hereditamenta in Slipton praedicta, continent quingenta sexaginta and duodecem
acras, vel eo circiter: Nec non omnes illae Parcellae, Prata, Pasturae, Bosci,
Subbosci, cum pertinentiis, in Cranford, Woodford and Twiwell, sive in eorum
aliquo vel aliquibus, in Comitatu Northamptoniae praedicto, modo vel nuper in
separalibus tenuris, sive occupationibus Johannis Patrick, Roberti Lion, Thomae
Beale, Johannis Goodfellow, and Thomae Nicolls, vel Assignatorum suorum, and
separalibus Messuagiis, sive Firmis in Slipton praedicta, in seperalibus
tenuris praedictorum separalium Tenentium sive Firmariorum modo ultime
mentionatorum, respective spectantes, sive cum eisdem Messuagiis, sive Firmis
respective locatae, usitatae, sive gavisae, continentes in toto octodecem
acras, vel eo circiter: Nec non totum illud Manerium de Grafton, Underwood, cum
pertinentiis, in Comitatu Northamptoniae praedicto: Ac etiam tota illa villa de
Grafton Underwood, in Comitatu Northamptoniae praedicto: Ac etiam omnia
Messuagia, Terrae, Prata, Bosci, Subbosci, and Terrae boscales, Pasturae and
Haereditamenta quaecunque in Grafton praedicta, continentia mill acras, vel eo
circiter: Nec non omnia illa Terrae, Prata, Pasturae, Tenementa, Bosci,
Subbosci, Terrae boscales, and Haereditamenta praedicti Comitis de Peterborow,
cum eorum pertinentiis universis, jacentia, and existentia, sive jacere and
existere reputata, in Alwinkle, in praedicto Comitatu Northamptoniae,
continentia ducentas quinquaginta and quinque acras, vel eo circiter. Nec non
totum illud manerium de Addington-magna, cum pertinentiis, in Comitatu
Northamptoniae praedicto; ac etiam omnia Messuagia, Terrae, Prata, Bosci,
Subbosci, Terrae boscales, Pasturae and Haereditamenta quaecunque, praedicti
Comitis de Peterborow in Addington-magna praedicta, cum eorum pertinentiis
universis, continentia quingentas acras, vel eo circiter. Ac etiam omnia and
singula Domi, Edificia, Logia, Structurae, Curtelagia, Pomaria, Gardinia,
Terrae, Prata, Pascua, Pasturae, Morae, Marisci, Aquae, Aquarum Cursus, Stagna,
Vivaria, Piscaria, Piscationes, Bosci, Subbosci and Arbores quaecunque, de and
super praemissis praedictis, vel eorum aliquibus, aut aliqua part eorundem
crescentia, sive existentia, and totum fundum, and solum eorundem Boscorum,
Subboscorum and Arborum, Vasti, Terrae, Vacui, Fundi, Proficua, Commoditates,
Emolumenta and Haereditamenta quaecunque, praemissis vel eorum alicui vel
aliquibus, vel alicui inde parti, sive parcellae, partibus, sive parcellis
spectantia, sive pertinentia, sive spectare and pertinere reputata, dehinc in
perpetuum sint and erunt omnino deafforestata; eaque omnia and singula pro
nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris deafforestamus, and exta forestam
nostram de Rockingham, in praedicto Comitatu nostro Northamptoniae, and
quamlibet aliam, and quaslibet alias Forestam, vel Forestas nostras quascunque;
and extra Assisas, Leges, Jura, Jurisdictiones, Libertates, and Consuetudines,
Forestae seu Forestarum nostrarum de Rockingham praedicta, and aliarum
Forestae, sive Forestarum nostrarum quarumcunque ponimus per praesentes. Ita
quod praedictus Johannes Comes de Peterborow, Haeredes and Assignati sui, and
omnes alii Tenentes, Occupatores, and Proprietores, and eorum Firmarii
praemissorum, seu alicujus inde partis, sive parcellae, partium, sive
parcellarum, pro and concernente praedictis separalibus Maneriis, Villis,
Terris, Pratis, Boscis, Pasturis, and omnibus aliis praemissis praedictis, cum
pertinentiis, superius per praesentes deafforestatis, vel mentionatis fore
deafforestati, and quilibet inde part sive parcella, partibus sive parcellis,
tam de viridi, and venatione, quam de omnibus aliis Libertatibus,
Jurisdictionibus, and rebus quibuscunque, quae ad Forestam pertinent and
spectant dehinc, liberi and immunes sint and erunt in perpetuum. Ac quod
Forestarii, Justiciarii, Viridarii, aut alii Officiarii, sive Ministri Forestae
nostrae, haeredum, and successorum nostrorum, de praedictis separalibus
Maneriis, Villis, Terris, Pratis, Boscis, Pasturis, and caeteris praemissis
praedictis, cum suis pertinentiis universis, vel de viridi, aut venatione infra
praemissa praementionata, vel aliqua praemissorum, vel aliquam inde parcellam
per praesentes deafforestatam, vel mentionatam fore deafforestatam, se non
intromittant, aut intromittat, in aliquo, quod ad Forestam, Chaceam, sive
Warrennam pertinet. Nec ipsum Johannem Comitem de Peterborow, haeredes vel
assignatos suos, vel eorum aliquem, aut aliquos alios Tenentes, Occupatores vel
Proprietores, sive eorum Firmarii praemissorum, vel alicujus inde partis sive
parcellae, pro and concernente, vel ratione praedictorum separalium Maneriorum,
vel eorum aliquorum, Villarum, Messuagiorum, Terrarum, Pratorum, Boscorum,
Pasturarum, and caeterorum praemissorum praedictorum, per praesentes
deafforestatorum, vel mentionatorum fore deafforestatos, vel alicujus parcellae
eorundem, per aliquam Summonitionem, vel Districtionem, coram aliquibus
Justiciariis, Viridariis, Forestariis and aliis ministris nostris, haeredum and
successorum nostrorum, de Foresta praedicta, vel de aliqua alia Foresta, sive
aliquibus aliis Forestis nostris quibuscunque, venire faciant, vel eorum
aliquis venire faciat. Et quod tam praedictus Johannes Comes de Peterborow,
haeredes and assignati sui, ac omnes alii Tenentes, Occupatores, and
Proprietores, sive eorum Firmarii praemissorum, vel alicujus inde parcellae,
pro and concernente separalibus Maneriis praedictis, vel eorum aliquo, Villis,
Messuagiis, Terris, Pratis, Boscis, Pasturis, and caeteris praemissis
praedictis, and quaelibet inde parcella, quam praedicta praemissa, and
quaelibet inde parcella, liberi sint, and immunes, and liberi, immunes, and
quieti, in perpetuum remaneant, a visu Justiciariorum, Viridariorum,
Forrestariorum, and aliorum Ministrorum, Forrestae nostrae, haeredum and
successorum nostrorum, Exploratorum, Assertorum, Regardatorum, and de omnibus
Exactionibus, Demandis, Attachiamentis, and omnibus aliis Assisis, Legibus,
Ordinationibus, Juribus, Consuetudinibus, Libertatibus, Jurisdictionibus, and
aliis rebus ad Forestam pertinentibus. Et ulterius, de ampliori gratia nostra
speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris volumus, ac per
praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris concedimus praefato
Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis, quod ipse
praefatus Johannes Comes de Peterborow, haeredes and assignati sui, and omnes
and singuli alii Tenentes, Occupatores and Proprietores, and eorum Firmarii
praemissorum, and cujuslibet inde parcellae, habeant, teneant and gaudeant,
habeat, teneat and gaudeat praedicta seperalia Maneria, Villas, Messuagia,
Terras, Prata, Boscos, Pasturas, and caetera omnia, and singula praemissa
praedicta, and quamlibet inde partem, sive parcellam, cum eorum juribus,
membris, and pertinentiis universis, per praesentes deafforestata, vel
deafforestari mentionata and antehaec infra Forestam nostram de Rockingham
praedicta, vel aliquam aliam Forestam nostram, vel aliquorum praedecessorum
nostrorum, existentia seu existere reputata, libere, licite, and quiet, de and
ab omnibus Libertatibus, and Jurisdictionibus Forestae, and de and ab omni
Custodia, and Depasturatione Damarum, Ferarum, and animalium quorumcunque per
nos, haeredes and successores nostros, aut per aliquam personam, sive aliquas
alias personas clamantes, aliquem statum, titulum, interesse, sive demandum,
per nos haeredes and successores nostros, de in vel ad eorum aliquod, vel
aliqua, aut de vel ad eorundem aliquam partem, sive parcellam. Volumus etiam,
and de uberiori gratia nostra speciali, pro nobis haeredibus and successoribus
nostris, praefato Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis,
concedimus, quod praedictus Johannes Comes de Peterborow, haeredes and
assignati sui, nec non omnes and singuli alii Tenentes, Proprietores, Firmarii,
and Occupatores praemissorum, and alicujus inde partis sive parcellae,
praedicta separalia, Maneria, Villas, Messuagia, Terras, Prata, Boscos,
Pasturas, and caetera, omnia and singula praemissa praedicta, and quamlibet
inde partem, sive parcellam, per praesentes deafforrestata, vel mentionata fore
deafforestata, habeant, teneant and gaudeant, habeat, teneat and gaudeat, ac
habere, tenere and gaudere, valiant and possint, valeat and possit, dehinc in
perpetuum, deafforestata and extra libertates, and jurisdictiones Forestae,
penitus posita, ac libere, licite and quiet, and penitus liberata, and
acquietata, de and ab omnibus, and omnimodis Clameis, cujuscunque sint, vel
fuerint generis, coram Capitali Justiciario, and Judiciario, itinerante nostri,
haeredum vel successorum nostrorum, citra Trentam, vel aliquo alio Justiciario,
sive Justiciario itinerante Forestae, sive Justiciario Forestae nostri,
haeredum, vel successorum nostrorum, de Rockingham praedicta, in praedicto
Comitatu nostro Northamptoniae, el alicujus aliae Forestae nostrae, vel
aliquorum praedecessorum nostrorum, Regum, vel Reginarum Angliae, apud aliquam
Curiam itinerantem, vel aliquam aliam Curiam Forestae, sive Forestarum
praedictarum habendam, vel tenendam, pro praemissis praedictis, vel aliquo
praemissorum inposterum faciendis, prosequendis, vel abhibendis quovismodo. Ac
de and ab omnibus aliis Sectis, Serviciis, Comparentiis and Apparentiis
quibuscunque, per praedictum Johannem Comitem de Peterborow, haeredes vel
assignatos suos, vel aliquos alios Tenentes, Proprietarios, vel Occupatores
praemissorum, sive eorum alicujus, vel aliquarum, vel alicujus partis, sive
parcellae, partium, sive parcellarum, sive residentes quoscunque infra
praemissa praedicta, vel aliquam parcellam eorundem praemissorum inhabitants,
vel aliquo tempore in futuro inhabitare contingentes, ad aliquam Curiam
itinerantem Forestae, vel Forestarum praedictarum, vel ad aliquam aliam Curiam
nostram, haeredum, vel successorum nostrorum Forestae, sive Forestarum
praedictarum, quocunque modo concernentes, ratione, vel occasion praemissorum,
vel eorum alicujus, aliquo tempore in futuro, habendis, faciendis, vel
performandis. Non obstante quod praedicta separalia, Maneria, vel eorum
aliquod, Villae, Messuagia, Terrae, Prata, Bosci, Pasturae, and caetera
praemissa praedicta, vel eorum aliqua, seu aliqua inde pars, sive parcella
parts, sive parcellae, scitata sint, and existunt, vel antehaec scituata
fuere, vel reputata fore infra Forestam praedictam, vel aliquam aliam Forestam
nostram, sive aliquas alias Forestas nostras quascunque, vel infra metas,
bundas, limits, sive perambulationes Forestae, sive Forestarum praedictarum,
vel alicujus aliae Forestae nostrae, vel praedecessorum nostrorum quorumcunque;
aliqua lege, vel aliquibus legibus, ordinatione, assisa, vel assisis Forestae,
usu, vel consuetudine, antehaec editis, ordinatis, habitis vel stabilitis, vel
inposterum edendis, ordinandis, habendis, vel stabiliendis, vel aliqua alia re,
causa, vel materia quacunque, in contrarium non obstante. Et ulterius, de
ampliori gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris
dedimus, and concessimus, ac per praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus and
successoribus nostris, damus and concedimus praefato Johanni Comiti de
Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis, and omnibus and singulis aliis
Tenentibus, and Proprietariis praemissorum, vel eorum alicujus, plenam
potestatem, and authoritatem, ad beneplacitum eorum, and cujuslibet eorum, de
tempore in tempus, and omnibus temporibus anni opportunis, posthac in
perpetuum, succidendum, and prosternandum, omnia and omnimoda, aut aliqua
Boscos, Subboscos, Copiceas and Arbores, tam quercorum, quam aliorum arborum,
ac tam malorum, quam non malorum, cujuscunque generis sint, vel fuerint, infra
aut supra praedicta separalia Maneria, vel eorum aliqua Villas, Terras, Prata,
Boscos, Pasturas, and caetera praemissa praedicta, per praesentes
deafforestata, vel mentionata fore deafforestata, aut super aliquam inde
parcellam crescentia, sive existentia, aut inposterum crescere contingentia. Et
quod been liceat, and licebit eidem Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus
and assignatis suis, and omnibus and fingulis aliis Proprietariis, and
Tenentibus praemissorum, vel eorum alicujus, omnia and singula praemissa per
praesentes deafforestata, aut mefltionata fore deafforestata, and aliquam inde
parcellam, in pasturam, sive culturam convertere, and redigere, and ad libitum
suum, and ad libitos suos assertare omnes and quascunque Copiceas, Boscos, sive
Subboscos, super eadem praemissa, vel aliquam inde parcellam, infra Forestam
praedictam, aut aliquam inde parcellam, aut infra aliquam aliam Forestam
nostram, sive aliquas alias Forestas nostras quascunque, crescentes, sive
existentes, aut in posterum ibidem crescere contingentes: Nec non eadem
praemissa, aut aliquam inde parcellam, in culturam vel pasturam conversa,
redacta, sive assertata, vel convertenda, redigenda, sive assertanda, in
separalitate retinere, and iis uti and gaudere, sibi, and haeredibus suis in
perpetuum, libere and quiet, and penitus liberatis, acquietatis, and
exoneratis, de and ab omnibus Juribus, Statutis, Legibus, Assisis and
Ordinationibus Forestae quibuscunque, and absque Impetitione, Praesentatione,
Damno, Paena, sive Penalitate, proinde ratione legum Forestarum quarumcunque
incurrendis. Licet praemissa, vel eorum aliquod, vel aliqua, sit vel sint, vel
antehaec fuit, vel fuerunt, infra Forestam praedictam, aut infra aliquam aliam
Forestam nostram, vel praedecessorum nostrorum, and ea omnia and singula, extra
Forestam praedictam, and omnes alias Forestas nostras, haeredum, vel
successorum nostrorum, quascunque in omnibus ponimus, and emancipamus per
praesentes. Et ulterius, de ampliori gratia nostra speciali, ac ex certa
scientia, and mero motu nostris, pro confiderationibus praedictis, concessimus,
and per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris concedimus,
praefato Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis, quod de
caetero in perpetuum liceat and licebit, praefato Johanni Comiti de Peterborow,
haeredibus and assignatis suis, and haeredibus and assignatis eorum cujussibet,
and omnibus and singulis Tenentibus, Proprietariis, Occupatoribus and Firmariis
eorum, and cujuslibet eorum, and omnibus and singulis aliis Tenentibus,
Proprietariis, Occupatoribus and Firmariis, praemisorum, vel eorum aliquorum,
sive alicujus, infra omnia and singula praemissa praedicta, superius per
praesentes deafforestata, vel mentionata fore deafforestata, and quamlibet inde
parcellam, facere and exercere, in venatione, viridatione, and in omnibus aliis
rebus quibuscunque, sicut and tanquam in locis deafforestatis, and extra metas
Forestae nostrae existentibus, sine occasion vel impedimento nostri, haeredum,
vel successorum nostrorum, vel Justiciariorum de Foresta, Viridariorum,
Regardatorum, and aliorum Officiariorum nostrorum, haeredum, vel successorum
nostrorum quorumcunque. Quare volumus and per prsentes firmiter injungendo
praecipimus, pro nobis haeredibus and successoribus nostris, quod omnes
Justiciarii, Viridarii, Regardatores, Custodes, Forestarii, and omnes alii
Ministri, and Officiarii nostri, haeredum vel successorum nostrorum, praedictae
Forestae de Rockingham, and aliarum Forestarum and Chacearum, nostri, haeredum,
and successorum nostrorum quorumcunque, and eorum quilibet pro tempore
existentes, de officiis, and serviciis suis, infra omnia and singula praemissa
praedicta, superius in praemissis mentionata fore deafforestata, aut infra
aliquam inde parcellam, praestandis versus nos, haeredes and successores
nostros, exonerantur, and eos inde exoneramus per praesentes. Nolentes quod
ipsi, aut eorum aliquis, in officiis, vel serviciis illis, infra praemissa,
praenominata fore deafforestata, seu in aliqua inde parcella, aliqualiter se
intromittant, vel aliquis eorum intromittat; and ipsos, and quemlibet eorum, de
officiis, and serviciis praedictis, ab iis ibidem praestandis, erga nos,
haeredes and successores nostros, exoneramus, and exonerari volumus in
perpetuum per praesentes. Et ulterius, de uberiori gratia nostra speciali, ac
ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris, pro considerationibus prdictis
pardonavimus, remisimus, and relaxavimus, ac per paersentes, pro nobis,
haeredibus and successoribus nostris, pardonamus, remittimus and relaxamus
praefato Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis,
Servientibus, Tenentibus, Ministris and Officiariis quibuscunque, qui nunc
sunt, vel qui aliquo tempore antehaec fuerunt, Servientes, Tenentes, Ministri,
sive Officiarii praefati Johannis Comitis de Peterborow, ac omnibus aliis modo
vel antehaec Dominis, Possessoribus, Tenentibus, Proprietariis, Firmariis, sive
Occupatoribus, praedictorum seperalium Maneriorum, vel aliquarum earum
Viliarum, Messuagiorum, Terrarum, Pratorum, Boscorum, Pasturarum, and
caeterorum praemissorum praedictorum, vel alicujus inde parcellae, omnes and
omnimodas, and quascunque Malificentias, Transgressiones, Forisfacturas,
Usurpationes, Intrusiones, Arborum, Boscorum, Subboscorum and Copicearum, vel
alicujus eorum, Succisiones, Spoliationes, Prosternationes and Eradicationes;
Et omnia Edificiorum Purpresturas, Incrochiamenta, Assertationes and Nocumenta
quaecunque: Nec non Cervorum, Damarum, vel aliquarum aliarum Ferarum, Volucrum
and Piscium, cujuscunque generis, occisionem and perturbationem: Et omnia, and
omnimoda alia, Forisfacturas, Offensa and Malefacta quaecunque, per ipsum
praefatum Johannem Comitem de Peterborow, vel per aliquem Tenentium,
Proprietariorum, Firmariorum, vel Occupatorum, praedictorum separalium
Maneriorum, Villarum, Messuagiorum, Terrarum, Pratorum, Boscorum, Pasturarum
and caeterorum praemissorum per praesentes deafforestatorum, vel mentionatorum
fore deafforestata, vel alicujus, vel aliquarum inde partis, vel parcellae,
partium, vel parcellarum antehaec in vel infra, vel concernentia eadem
praemissa, vel aliquam inde parcellam, facta, commissa, sive perpetrata, contra
Assisas, Leges, sive Ordinationes, vel per Leges, Ordinationes, seu Assisas
Forestae, prohibita, vel punienda; ac omnia and singula Fines, Amerciamenta,
Paenas, Penalitates, Punitiones and Forisacturas quaecunque incursa, assessa,
imposita, afferata, adjudicata, leviabilia, debita, vsie solubilia, aut
assidenda, imponenda, afferanda, adjudicanda, levianda, debenda, seu solvenda,
per super aut versus ipsum Johannem Comitem de Peterborow, haeredes vel
assignatos suos, vel per super versus aliquem Dominum, Proprietarium,
Possessorem, Tenentem, Firmarium, vel Occupatorem praedictorum praemissorum,
vel alicujus inde parcellae, per praesentes deafforestatorum, vel mentionatorum
fore deafforestata, ratione alicujus Praesentamenti, Jndictamenti,
Convictionis, sive Judicii habiti, sive habendi pro ratione, sive occasion
aliquarum Transgressionum, Boscorum Succisionis, Edificiorum Purpresturae,
Incrochiamentorum, Assertationum, Nocumentorum, Contemptuum, vel Offensorum
quorumcunque, contra Leges, Assisas, Consuetudines, sive Ordinationes Forestae,
infra praedicta separalia Maneria, vel aliqua earum Villarum, Messuagiorum,
Terrarum, Pratorum, Boscorum, Pasturarum, and caeterorum praemissorum
praedictorum, per praesentes deafforestatorum, aut aliquam inde parcellam, ante
confectionem praesentium, per praefatum Johannem Comitem de Peterborow, aut per
aliquem alium Dominum, Proprietarium, sive Possessorem inde; vel per aliquem,
vel aliquos, Firmarium, sive Firmarios, Tenentem vel Tenentes suos, aut eorum
alicujus eorundem praemissorum, aut alicujus inde parcellae, vel parcellarum,
antehaec facta, commissa, sive perpetrata. Et ulterius, de uberiori gratia
nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris, dedimus and
concessimus, ac per praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris,
damus and concedimus, praefato Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and
assignatis suis, plenam and integram Licentiam, Potestatem and Authoritatem,
omnia and singula praedicta praemissa, vocata sive cognita, per nomen de
Drayton-park, scituata, jacentia and existentia, sive jacere and existere
reputata, in Drayton, Luffwick, Sudburgh and Slipton praedictis, vel in eorum
aliquo, vel aliquibus; nec non aliquam aliam partem, vel parts, parcellam, vel
parcellas praemissorum, non excedentes in toto, simul cum praedictis
praemissis, vocatis Drayton-park, mill acras, vel aliquam, sive aliquas, inde
partem, sive parts, parcellam vel parcellas, de tempore in tempus, prout
praefato Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus vel assignatis suis
placuerit, in Separalitatem reducere, and Parcum vel Parcos inde facere, ac cum
Fossis, Sepibus, Muris, Palis, aut aliquo alio modo, separare and includere,
and inclusa custodire and tenere, pro Parco, vel Parcis; and in eodem Parco,
vel eisdem Parcis, factis and inclusis, vel in posterum faciendis and
includendis, libertatem, proprietatem, and beneficium, liberi Parci, and
quicquid ad liberum Parcum, sive libertatem, vel beneficium Parci, pertinet vel
spectat, habere, tenere and gaudere. Et ulterius, pro nobis, haeredibus and
successoribus nostris, damus and concedimus praefato Johanni Comiti de
Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis, plenam and integram licentiam,
potestatem, and authoritatem, praedicta Parcum, vel Parcos, sic inclusa vel
includenda, de tempore in tempus in perpetuum, Damis and Feris estaurare, and
implere ad libitum suum, haeredum, vel assignatorum suorum, ac etiam in eodem
Parco, vel eisdem Parcis, and qualibet inde parcella, libertatem, proprietatem,
and beneficium Parci, and quicquid ad Parcum, sive libertatem, vel beneficium
Parci pertinet, vel spectat, habere and gaudere. Volumus etiam ac per
praesentes pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris praecipimus and
mandamus, quod praefatus Johannes Comes de Peterborow, haeredes and assignati
sui, Parcum, sive Parcos praedicta, sic facta sive inclusa, facienda vel
includenda, and quamlibet, sive aliquam inde parcellam, libere, licite, been
and quiet, habeant and teneant, and de caetero in perpetuum habere, tenere,
uti and gaudere valiant and possunt in perpetuum, una cum omnibus, and singulis
Libertatibus, Privilegiis, and Commoditatibus, quae ad hujusmodi Parcum, vel
Parcos, pertinent, sive pertinere possint quovismodo. Non obstante quod
praedicta praemissa, vocata Drayton-park, and caetera praemissa sic inclusa,
sive facta, includenda, sive facienda, pro Parco, sive Parcis, vel aliqua inde
parcella sint, vel sit, infra Forestam de Rockingham praedictam, sive aliquam
aliam, vel aliquas alias Forestas nostras quascunque, vel inter metas, bundas,
sive perambulationes alicujus Forestae, sive aliquarum Forestarum nostrarum,
haeredum vel successorum nostrorum quorumcunque. Insuper, de ampliori gratia
nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris, volumus, and per
praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris, concedimus
praefato Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis, quod
ipse praefatus Johannes Comes de Peterborow, haeredes and assignati sui,
habeant, teneant, utantur and gaudeant, habeat, teneat, utatur and gaudeat
liberam Warrennam, and omnia quae ad liberam Warrennam pertinent, infra
praedicta separalia Maneria, vel eorum aliqua, Villas, Messuagia, Terras,
Prata, Boscos, Pasturas, ac caetera praemissa superius per praesentes
deafforestata, vel deafforestari mentionata, ac quamlibet inde parcellam; licet
eadem separalia Maneria, vel eorum aliqua, Villae, Messuagia, Terrae, Prata,
Bosci, Pasturae, aut aliqua inde parcella sint, vel sit, aut antehaec fuerint,
vel fuerit, infra aliquam Forestam nostram, sive aliquas Forestas nostras, vel
aliquorum praedecessorum nostrorum, vel metas, sive bundas ejusdem Forestae,
vel earundem Forestarum, vel earum alicujus; aliqua Lege, Consuetudine, vel
Ordinatione Forestae, vel aliquo alio Statuto, Actu, Ordinatione, vel
Provisione, in contrarium inde non obstante. Quare volumus, ac per praesentes,
pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris, concedimus praefato Johanni
Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis, quod ipse, haeredes and
assignati sui, liberam Warrennam, and omnia quae ad liberam Warrennam
pertinent, infra praemissa praedicta, per praesentes deafforestata, aut
mentionata fore deafforestata, and quamlibet inde parcellam, libere, licite and
quiet, habeant and teneant, and habere, tenere and gaudere, possint and
valiant, possit and valeat, in perpetuum; una cum omnibus, and singulis
Libertatibus, Privilegiis and Commoditatibus, quae ad liberam Warrennam
pertinent, seu pertinere poterunt quovismodo. Volumus etiam, ac per praesentes,
pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris, praecipimus and mandamus, quod
nullus introeat, aut introire presumat, liberam Warrennam praedictam, ad
fugandum, occupandum vel Damas, aut Feras, ibidem capiendum, chaceandum, vel
perturbandum, vel aliquid ibidem faciendum, quod ad liberam Warrennam pertinet,
seu pertinere debet aut possit; nec aliquid in vel infra Warrennam praedictam,
faciendum, vel perpetrandum, quod sit, vel fore poterit, ad damnum, nocumentum,
sive praejudicium liberae Warrennae praedictae, sine voluntate, and licentia
praefati Johannis Comitis de Peterborow, haeredum, vel assignatorum suorum, sub
paena, in statutis and ordinationibus, pro Parcis, and liberis Warrennis
conservandis, editis and provisis; nec non sub pena Forisfacturae, nobis,
haeredibus and successoribus nostris, december librarum, legalis monetae Angliae,
ad opus praedicti Johannis Comitis de Peterborow, haeredum vel assignatorum
suorum, nomine nostro, haeredum and successorum nostrorum, per manus
Vicecomitis Comitatus Northamptoniae praedicti, pro tempore existentis,
levandum, and recipiendum, and praedicto Johanni Comiti de Peterborow,
haeredibus and assignatis suis, per eundem Vicecomitem Comitatus praedicti pro
tempore existentem, solvendum and deliberandum. Quare volumus and per
praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris, praecipimus and
mandamus, Vicecomiti Comitatus Northamptoniae praedicti, pro tempore existenti,
quod quando, and quotiescunque, aliqua talis Paena, sive Forisfactura december
librarum, posthac per aliquam personam, sive aliquas personas, sit aut erit,
sint aut erint, perdita sive forisfacta, idem Vicecomes Comitatus praedicti,
pro tempore existens, immediate post Collectionem, sive Levationem ejusdem
Forisfacturae, solvet, seu solvent, seu solvi facient, easdem december libras, de
tempore in tempus, praefato Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and
assignatis suis. Et hae literae nostrae Patentes, vel irrotulamentum eorundem,
erunt de tempore in tempus, sufficiens Warrantum, and Exoneratio, praefato
Vicecomiti Comitatus praedicti pro tempore existenti, in hac part, versus nos,
haeredes and successores nostros, in omnibus Curiis nostris, haeredum and
successorum nostrorum quibuscunque, super solam demonstrationem, harum
Literarum nostrarum Patentium, vel irrotulamenti earundem, absque aliquo alio
Brevi, seu Warranto, a nobis haeredibus and successoribus nostris, in hac part
obtinendis, impetrandis seu prosequendis. Ac ulterius, de ampliori gratia
nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris, pro
Considerationibus praedictis, convenimus and concedimus, pro nobis, haeredibus
and successoribus nostris, ad and cum praefato Johanne Comite de Peterborow,
haeredibus and assignatis suis, quod ad proximum Parlamentum, sive sessionem
Parlamenti, vel ad aliquod aliud Parlamentum nostri, haeredum vel successorum
nostrorum, infra hoc Regnu mnostrum Angliae tenendum; Nos, haeredes and
successores nostri, super humilem Requisitionem praedicti Comitis de
Peterborow, haeredum vel assignatorum suorum, nobis, haeredibus and
successoribus nostris, faciendum, dabimus and concedimus, aut dare and
concedere volumus and dignabimur, Regale, liberumque Assensum and Consensum
nostrum, alicui Actui Parlamenti, Petitioni, sive Billae, in eodem Parlamento,
sive sessione Parlamenti, exhibendis, sive praeferendis pro deafforestatione
praedictorum separalium Maneriorum, and caeterorum omnium and singulorum
praemissorum, per praesentes deafforestatorum, vel deafforestari mentionatorum,
aut alicujus inde parcellae, aut pro meliori Confirmatione, Assurantia,
Securitate, and secura Concessione, omnium and singulorum, Libertatum,
Franchesiorum, Exemptionum and Immunitatum, superius per praesentes
praeconcessorum, aut mentionata fore praeconcessa, and cujuslibet inde partis
sive parcellae, secundum veram intentionem nostram, and juxta effectum and
propositum, harum Literarum nostrarum Patentium. Et ulterius volumus, ac per
praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris concedimus praefato
Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis, quod si and
quotiescunque aliquae Dubitationes, sive Questiones, orire contigerint, de
validitate harum nostrarum Literarum Patentium, in aliquo, vel aliqua clausula,
materia, sive re quacunque, de vel concernente praedictis separalibus Maneriis,
Villis, vel eorum aliquo, Terris, Pratis, Boscis, Pasturis, and caeteris
praemissis praedictis, aut aliqua inde parcella; quod tunc and toties super
humilem Petitionem praefati Johannis Comitis de Peterborow, haeredum vel
assignatorum suorum, nobis, haeredibus vel successoribus nostris, exhibendum,
ac super Notitiam and Certificationem, nobis, haeredibus vel successoribus
nostris, per Attornatum, aut Solicitatorem nostrum Generalem, haeredum vel
successorum nostrorum, pro tempore existentem, de hujusmodi defectu emendari
requiritur, nos, haeredes vel successores nostri, gratiose concedere
dignabimur, alias Literas Patentes eidem Johanni Comiti de Peterborow,
haeredibus and assignatis suis, cum talibus, and hujusmodi Emendationibus,
Explanationibus, Amplificationibus and Additionibus, quales and quae per dictum
Attornatum, vel Solicitatorem nostrum Generalem, pro tempore existentem, in ea
part advisabuntur, and convenientia fore videbuntur. Et ulterius volumus, and
per praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris, praedicto
Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis, concedimus, ac ad
and cum praefato Johanne Comite de Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis,
per praesentes convenimus, and agreamus, quod si ad aliquod tempus, vel ad
aliqua tempora in posterum, contigerit, quod aliquis, vel aliqui Tenentes,
Firmarii, Occupatores, Residentes, aut Inhabitants, infra praedicta separalia
Maneria, Villas and caetera praemissa, per praesentes mentionata, fore
deafforestata, vel in eorum, sive earum aliquo, sive aliqua part, vel
parcella, qui nunc sunt, antehaec fuerunt, vel qui aliquo tempore in futuro
fore contigerint, liberi Tenentes, Firmarii, Occupatores, Inhabitants,
Commorantes, Residentes aut Remanentes, infra praedicta separalia Maneria,
Villas and caetera praemissa, per praesentes mentionata fore deafforestata, vel
aliquam inde partem, sive parcellam, parts, sive parcellas, vel aliqua alia
persona, sive personae, aliter quam praedictus Johannes Comes de Peterborow,
haeredes and assignati sui, ad and cum praedicto Johanne Comite de Peterborow,
haeredibus and assignatis suis, convenire recusabit, vel recusabunt, and
satisfactionem praedicto Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and
assignatis suis, pro deafforestatione talium partium praemissorum, superius per
praesentes deafforestatorum, vel mentionatorum fore deafforestata, quorum ipse
vel ipsi sit, vel sint, vel in futuro fore contigerit, vel contigerint,
Tenentes, Occupatores, vel Inhabitants, reddere negabit, vel negabunt; and
quod praedictus Johannes Comes de Peterborow, haeredes and assignati sui, talem
recusationem and negationem, recusationes, vel negationes, per aliquod
scriptum, vel aliqua scripta, sub manu and sigillo praefati Johannis Comitis de
Peterborow, haeredum vel assignatorum suorum, and in Curia nostra Cancellariae
irrotulata significabit, vel declarabit, significabunt, vel declarabunt; quod
tunc, and in tali casu, nulli tales Tenentes, Occupatores, Firmarii, sive
Inhabitants, quorum negationem, vel negationes, recusationem, vel
recusationes, praefatus Johannes Comes de Peterborow, haeredes vel assignati
sui, sic ut praefertur, significabit, vel declarabit, significabunt, vel
declarabunt, Pardonationem, Libertatem, Beneficium, Privilegium, vel
Exemptionem praedicta virtute praesentium, vel alicujus Clausulae,
Concessionis, vel Sententiae, in his Literis nostris Patentibus contentae, ullo
modo habebunt, clamabunt, tenebunt, vel gaudebunt, vel habere, clamare, tenere,
vel gaudere, quocunque modo in futuro exspectabunt; nisi per specialem
Warrantum, Concessionem and Declarationem, Concessiones, Warrantia and
Declarationes, sub manu and sigillo ipsius Johannis Comitis de Peterborow,
haeredum vel assignatorum suorum, habendum, obtinendum, vel acquirendum,
testificandum, demonstrandum and declarandum, Consensum, Approbationem,
liberumque Assensum praedicti Johannis Comitis de Peterborow, haeredum and
assignatorum suorum, in eisdem praemissis praedictis, Tenentibus, Firmariis,
and caeteris personis praedictis, per praedictum Johannem Comitem de
Peterborow, haeredes vel assignatos suos, respective fore concessa, sed
praedicti Tenentes, liberi Tenentes, Firmarii, Occupatores, Residentes and
Inhabitants, ac omnes aliae personae and persona, infra praedicta Maneria,
Villas and caetera praemissa per praesentes mentionata, fore deafforestata,
residentes and inhabitants, vel in futuro residere, vel inhabitare
contingentes, aliter quam praedictus Johannes Comes de Peterborow, haeredes and
assignati sui, and alii tales, quorum negationem, vel negationes, recusationem
vel recusationes, praedictus Johannes Comes de Peterborow, haeredes and
assignati sui, non significabit, vel significabunt, declarabit, vel
declarabunt, and alii tales Concessiones, Warrantia, sive Declarationes, sub
manu, and sigillo ipsius Johannis Comitis de Peterborow, haeredum vel
assignatorum suorum, ut praefertur habens and habentes, sint and erint, and
eorum quilibet de tempore in tempus, sit and erit, subjectus, obediens and
obstrictus, Legibus, Statutis and Ordinationibus Forestae, in omnibus
Forisfacturis, Penalitatibus, Punitionibus, Sectis and Serviciis, and caeteris
rebus quibuscunque, Forestae praedictae, quocunque modo pertinentibus and
spectantibus, tam pro tempore praeterito, quam futuro, ac si hae literae
nostrae Patentes, minime factae fuissent, his Literis nostris Patentibus, vel
aliquo in eisdem contento, in contrarium inde in aliquo non obstantibus. Et
tunc and in tali casu, volumus, and per praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus and
successoribus nostris, praedicto Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and
assignatis suis, concedimus omnes Forisfacturas, Penalitates and Pecuniarum
Summas, nobis, haeredibus vel successoribus nostris, vel aliquibus
progenitorum, vel praedecessorum nostrorum forisfactas vel forisfaciendas, per
aliquam personam, vel aliquas personas, sic ut praefertur subjectas Legibus
Forestae, existentibus, ratione, vel occasion aliquorum, vel alicujus Delicti,
Contemptus, vel Transgressionis in praemissis praedictis, vel aliquo
praemissorum, antehaec contra leges Forestae, in aliquo perpetrati, commissi,
sive omissi, vel in posterum perpetrandi, committendi, vel omittendi, in tam
amplis modo, and forma, ac si eadem omnia and singula, in his praesentibus
particulariter expressa, and mentionata fuissent. Et ulterius volumus and
concedimus, ac per praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris,
praedicto Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis, damus
potestatem, facultatem and authoritatem, omnia and singula Forisfacturas,
Penalitates and pecuniarum Summas praedicta, in aliquibus Curiis nostris,
haeredum vel successorum nostrorum, recuperare, and praecipimus, and mandamus,
Thesaurariis, Justiciariis Itinerantibus ac Justiciariis, and Capitali
Justiciario Forestae praedictae, Cancellario, Thesaurario and Baronibus, Curiae
Scaccarii, and omnibus aliis Judicibus, Justiciariis, Officiariis and Ministris
nostris, qui nunc sunt, vel in posterum erunt, Vicecomitibus, Ballivis and
omnibus aliis Officiariis, Ministris and Subditis nostris, haeredum and
successorum nostrorum, ad quos pertinere poterit, nunc aut pro tempore
existentibus, processus, de tempore in tempus ad requisitionem praedicti
Johannis Comitis de Peterborow, haeredum vel assignatorum suorum, facere and
emittere, contra aliquam personam, vel personas, pro praemissis praedictis, and
eosdem processus, executioni debitae demandare, pro levatione and recuperatione
earum Forisfacturarum, Penalitatum and Pecuniarum Summarum, vel alicujus inde
parcellae. Et hae Literae nostrae Patentes, vel Irrotulamentum eorundem, erunt
tampraedicto Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus and assignatis suis, quam
praedicto Thesaurario, and caeteris Officiariis, and personis praedictis,
sufficiens Warrantum and Authoritas, in hac part. Et ulterius volumus, and per
praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris, convenimus, and
concedimus, ad and cum praefato Johanne Comite de Peterborow, haeredibus, and
assignatis suis, quod nec, nos, haeredes, vel successores nostri, ad aliquam
personam, sive personas quascunque, de vel concernente Privilegiis,
Exemptionibus, Forisfacturis, Penalitatibus, vel pecuniarum summis, vel eorum
aliquo, in his praesentibus expressis, and mentionatis, and praedicto Johanni
Comiti de Peterborow, haeredibus, and assignatis suis, per praesentes
concessis, and confirmatis, aliquam Concessionem, Pardonationem, Compositionem,
Relaxationem, Exonerationem, vel Licentiam, in futuro faciemus, vel fieri
causabimus, sed omnia, and singula praemissa praedicta praedicto Johanni Comiti
de Peterborow, haeredibus, and assignatis suis, per praesentes concessa, and
concedi mentionata, sint and erunt, de tempore in tempus, ad solum and proprium
opus, and usum ipsius Johannis Comitis de Peterborow, haeredum and assignatorum
suorum. Et ulterius volumus, and per praesentes, pro nobis, haeredibus, and
successoribus nostris, concedimus praefato Johannis Comiti de Peterborow,
haeredibus, and assignatis suis, quod hae Literae Patentes nostrae, vel
Irrotulamentum earundem, erunt in omnibus, and per omnia, firmae, validae,
bonae, and sufficientes in lege, erga and contra nos, haeredes, and successores
nostros, tam in omnibus Curiis nostris, quam alibi, infra hoc regnum nostrum
Angliae, absque aliquibus Confirmationibus, Licentiis, vel Tolerationibus, de
nobis, haeredibus, vel successoribus nostris, procurandis, vel obtinendis. Non
obstante male nominando, vel non nominando, male recitando, vel non recte
recitando praedictorum separalium Maneriorum, vel eorum aliquorum, Villarum,
Messuagiorum, Terrarum, Pratorum, Boscorum, Pasturarum and caeterorum
praemissorum praedictornm, aut aliquam inde partem vel parcellam. Et non
obstante quod aliquod Breve, vel aliqua Brevia, de ad quod damnum, non
emanaverit, vel emanaverunt, aut quod nulla Inquisitio, sive Inquisitiones
superinde captae, sive habitae, fuit vel fuerunt, ante confectionem harum
Literarum nostrarum Patentium. Et non obstante, quod metae, limits, and
bundae, praemissorum praedictorum, vere and certe, non describuntur, vel aliqua
incertitudine in eisdem, vel in eorum aliquo. Et non obstante quod
Maleficentia, Transgressiones, Forisfacturae, Usurpationes, Intrusiones,
Arborum, Boscorum vel Subboscorum succisiones, spoliationes, prosternationes,
vel eradicationes, contemptus, negligentiae and aliae offensae, and omissiones
praedictae, nec parts eadem perpetrantes, nec fines Amerciamenti, Penae,
Penalitates, Punitiones, pecuniarum summae, and aliae Forisfacturae, pro eisdem
incursae, impositae, adjudicatae, leviabiles, debitae, sive solubiles; nec
Praesentamenta, Indictamenta, Convictiones, Judicia and aliae res eadem
concernentes, particulariter in praesentibus non mentionantur. Et non obstante
aliquo defectu, vel aliquibus defectibus, in male nominando, vel non nominando,
Tenentium, Firmariorum vel Occupatorum praemissorum, vel alicujus inde
parcellae. Et non obstante male nominando vel non nominando, aliquarum
Villarum, Parochiarum, Hamlettorum, Locorum, vel Comitatuum, in quo, vel in
quibus praedicta separalia Maneria, Villae, Messuagia, Terrae, Prata, Bosci,
Pasturae and caetera praemissa praedicta, aut aliqua inde pars, vel parcella,
existunt, vel existit. Et non obstante statuto in Parlamento, Domini Henrici
nuper regis Angliae Sexti, anno Regni sui decimo octavo, facto and edito. Et
non obstante Statuto in Parlamento Henrici nuper Regis Angliae quarti,
Antecessoris nostri, Anno Regni sui primo, facto and edito. Et non obstante
aliquibus aliis Defectis, in non nominando, aut non recte nominando, naturae,
speciei, quantitatis, numeri acrarum, anni valoris, aut qualitatis
praemissorum, aut alicujus inde parcellae; aut quod praemissa praedicta, vel
eorum aliquod, sive aliquae continent, sive continet, majorem numerum acrarum,
vel sint, vel sit majoris annui valoris, quam in his praesentibus, vel alio
scripto, sive particulari, inde mentionatur; aut aliquo alio statuto,
ordinatione, provisione, aut restrictione in contrarium inde in aliquo non
obstante. Eo quod expressa mentio de vero valor annuo, aut de certitudine
praemissorum, vel eorum alicujus, aut de aliis donis, sive concessionibus, per
nos, sive aliquem progenitorum, sive praedecessorum nostrorum, praefato Johanni
Comiti de Peterborow ante haec tempora facta, in praesentibus minime factis
existit, aut in aliquo Statuto, Actu, Ordinatione, Provisione, Proclamatione,
sive Restrictione in contrarium, inde antehac habitis, factis, ordinatis, sive
provisis, aut aliqua alia re, causa, vel materia quacunque, in aliquo non
obstante. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium, quinto decimo die Octobris, Anno Regni
nostri quintodecimo. Per Breve de privato sigillo. Wolesley.

The Patent of Lord Lieutenant of Northamptonshire, to John Earl of Peterborow.
CHARLES, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith;
To our Right Trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin, John Earl of Peterborow,
greeting.
Know ye, that we for the great and singular Trust and Confidence, we have in
your approved Wisdom, Fidelity and Circumspection, have assigned, made,
constituted and ordained, and by these Presents do constitute, assign, make and
ordain you to be our Lieutenant, within our County of Northampton, and in all
Corporate and Privileged places, within the Precinct and Limits of the same
County; (as well within the Liberties as without:) And do by these Presents
give full Power and Authority unto you, that you from time to time, may levy,
gather and call together, all and singular our Subjects, of whatsoever State
and Degree, or Dignity, they or any of them be, dwelling, or inhabiting within
our said County of Northampton, and all corporate and privileged places,
within the limits or precincts of the same County, or any of them, (as well
within Liberties as without) meet and apt for the Wars; and them, and every of
them, to try, array and put in Readiness, and them also, and every of them,
after their Abilities, Degrees and Faculties, well and sufficiently to cause to
be armed and weaponed, and to take the Musters of them, in places most meet for
that purpose, after your good discretion. And also the same our Subjects so
arrayed, tried and armed, as well Men of Arms, as other Horsemen, Archers and
Footmen, of all kinds and degrees, meet and apt for the Wars, to conduct and
lead as well against all and singular our Enemies, as also against all and
singular Rebels, Traitors, and other like Offenders, and every of them, their,
and every of their Adherents, against us, our Crown and Dignity, within our
said County, and all corporated and privileged places within the Limits or
Precincts of the said County, and every of them, (as well within Liberties as
without) from time to time, as often as need shall require, by your discretion.
And with the said Enemies, Traitors, and Rebels, to fight, and them to invade,
resist, repress, subdue, slay, kill, and put to execution of death, by all ways
and means, by your said good discretion: And to do, fulfill, and execute, all
and singular other things, which shall be requisite for the Levying and
Government, of our said Subjects, for the Conservation of our Person and Peace,
so by you, in form aforesaid, levied, and to be levied; and to do, execute, and
use against the said Enemies and Rebels, Traitors, and such other like
Offenders, and their Adherents, as necessity shall require, by your discretion
the Law called the Martial Law, according to the Law Martial; and of such
Offenders, apprehended, or being brought into subjection, to save whom you
shall think good to be saved, and to slay, destroy, and to put to Execution of
Death, such, and so many of them, as you shall think meet by your good
discretion to be put to Death. And further our will and pleasure is, and by
these Presents, we do give unto you full power and lawful authority, that in
case any Invasion of Enemies, Insurrection, Rebellion, Riots, Routs, unlawful
Assemblies, or any like offenses shall happen to be moved, in any place of this
our Realm, out of the limits of this our Commission; that then as often as need
shall require, by your good Discretion, or as you shall be directed from us by
any special Commandment, you with such power to be levied, within the limits of
your Lieutenancy, as you shall think requisite, or as shall be directed from
us, as is aforesaid, shall with all diligence repair to the place where any
such Invasion, unlawful Assembly or Insurrection shall happen to be made, to
subdue, repress and reform the same, as well by Battle, and other kind of
force, as otherwise, by the Laws of our Realm, and the Law Martial, according
to your discretion. And further we give unto you full power and authority, for
the Execution of this our Commission, to appoint and assign in this our said
County of Northampton, and all corporate and privileged places aforesaid, (as
well within Liberties as without) Muster-masters, and one Provost Martial;
which Provost Martial shall execute, and use the Martial Law, in case of any
Invasion, Insurrection or Rebellion, in conducting any number of Men of War,
against the said Invaders, Traitors or Rebels, during the continuance of such
Invasion, Insurrection or Rebellion: Wherefore we will and command you our said
Lieutenant, That with all diligence you do execute the Premises with effect.
And for a smuch as it may be, there shall be just cause for you to be attendant
on our Person, or to be otherwise employed in our Service, whereby this our
Service of Lieutenancy committed to your Fidelity, cannot be by you in person
executed in such sort, as we have appointed the same: Therefore we give unto
you, for your better aid and assistance, and for the better performance and
execution of this same our Service, full power and authority, from time to
time, to appoint, assign and constitute by writing under your Hand and Seal,
such sufficient and meet Persons, as you in your discretion shall from time to
time, think fit to be your Deputies in this our said Service, in our said
County of Northampton, and in all corporate and privileged places, within the
Limits and Precincts of the said County, (as well within Liberties as without.)
And by this our present Commission, We give unto such Deputies, so to be by you
assigned and appointed, as aforesaid, or to any two or more of them, full power
and authority, in your absence, to do and execute in our said County of
Northampton, and in all corporate and privileged places, within the Limits and
Precincts of the said County (as well within Liberties as without,) all and
every thing and things before in this our Commission, assigned and appointed by
you to be done and executed: And our will, pleasure and commandment is, That
your said Deputies, so by you from time to time to be appointed, shall
immediately after your Letters of Deputation to them made, as is aforesaid,
take care and charge, to see every point of this our Commission, as fully and
perfectly executed, in your absence, as you your self ought to have done, if
you had been personally present. And the better to enable them so to do, our
will and pleasure is, That immediately after such Deputation to them made, as
aforesaid, you shall deliver to them a Duplicate, or true Transcript of this
our Commission, subscribed with your Hand: And whatsoever you being present, or
in your absence, your said Deputies, or any two or more of them, shall do by
virtue of this our Commisson, and according to the Tenor and Effect of the
same, touching the execution of the Premises, or any part thereof, the same
shall be by these Presents discharged in that behalf against us, our Heirs and
Successors. And further we will and command, all and singular our Justices of
the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and all other
our Officers, Ministers and Subjects, meet and apt for the Wars, within our
said County of Northampton, and all corporate and privileged places, within
the limits and precincts of the said County (as well within Liberties as
without) to whom it shall appertain, that they and every of them, with their
Power and Servants, from time time shall be attending, and assisting,
counselling, helping, and at the commandment as well of you our said
Lieutenant, as of your said Deputies, or any two, or more of them, as
abovesaid, in the execution hereof, as they and every of them tender our
pleasure, and will answer the contrary, at their utmost Perils.

In witness whereof we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents.
Witness our self at Westminster, the Sixteenth Day of July, in the Sixteenth
Year of our Reign. Willis.

A Commission for Constituting Deputy Lieutenants for the County of Northampton.
JOHN Earl of Peterborow, Baron of Turvey, and Lord Lieutenant of the County of
Northampton,
to all to whom these presents shall come, sends Greeting in our Lord God
everlasting.
Whereas the King's most Excellent Majesty, by his Highness's Letters Patents
under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster, the Sixteenth Day
of July, in the Sixteenth Year of his said Majesty's Reign, has made,
constituted and ordained me the said Earl of Peterborow, to be his Majesty's
Lieutenant of his Highness's County of Northampton, and all corporate and
privileged places, within the limits and precincts of the same County, (as
well within Liberties as without:) And because there may be just cause for me
to be attendant upon his Majesty's Person, or to be otherwise employed in his
Service, whereby the said Service of Lieutenancy to me committed, cannot be by
me in Person executed, in such sort as his Majesty has appointed: Therefore
his Majesty has given unto me, for my better Aid and Assistance, and for the
better performance, and execution of this Service, full power and authority to
appoint, assign and constitute by my Writing, under my Hand and Seal, such
sufficient and meet Persons, as I in my discretion shall from time to time,
think fit to be my Deputies in the said Service, in the said County of
Northampton, and all corporate and privileged places, within the limits and
precincts of the same County, (as well within Liberties as without,) giving
unto my said Deputy Lieutenants, or to any two or more of them, full power and
authority in my absence, to do, and execute in his Majesty's said County of
Northampton, and the places privileged as aforesaid, all and every thing and
things, mentioned in his Majesty's said Commission, by me to be done and
executed: Know ye therefore, That I the said John Earl of Peterborow, Lord
Lieutenant of the said County of Northampton, according to the tenor and
purport of the said Commission, have assigned, constituted and appointed, and
by these Presents do assign, constitute and appoint Sir Rowland Saint-John,
Knight of the Bath, Sir Rowland Egerton, Knight and Baronet, Sir Lewis Watson,
Knight and Baronet, Sir Hatton Farmer, Knight, Sir Thomas Cave, Knight, Sir
Robert Hatton, Knight, William Elmes, Esquire, and Charles Cokeyne, Esquire, to
be my Deputies in the said Service, within the said County of Northampton, and
in all corporate and privileged places, within the Limits and Precincts of the
said County, (as well within Liberties as without:) And whatsoever the said Sir
Rowland Saint-John, Sir Rowland Egerton, Sir Lewis Watson, Sir Hatton Farmer,
Sir Thomas Cave, Sir Robert Hatton, William Elmes, and Charles Cokeyne,
together, or any two or more of them, shall execute, or do by force of the said
Commission, within the said County of Northampton, and the places privileged
as aforesaid: I the said Earl of Peterborow, do by authority of his Majesty's
said Commission, allow and approve the same, in all points and every thing, as
if I my self were there present in Person. And the better to enable my said
Deputies, according to his Majesty's will and pleasure in that behalf, I do by
commandment of his Majesty, deliver unto them and every of them, a true
Transcript of the said Commission, subscribed with my Hand.

In Witness whereof I have hereunto set my Hand and Seal at Arms, the One and
twentieth day of July, in the said Sixteenth Year of his said Majesty's Reign
that now is, Annoque Domini. 1640. J. Peterborow. SIGILLVM IOHANNIS COMITIS DE
PETRIBVRGO DN^I BARONIS DE TVRVEY

seal of John Mordaunt, earl of Peterborough

A Commission of Array to the Right Honorable John Earl of Peterborow.
CArolus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex, Fidei
Defensor, etc.
Charissimo consanguineo nostro Johanni Comiti de Peterborow, Salutem.
Sciatis quod cum quidam Rebels regni nostri Scotiae, regnum nostrum Angliae
cum posse non modico hostiliter ingressi fuerunt: Nos malitiae hujusmodi
Rebellionis (gratia nobis favente divina,) resistere, ac pro salvatione, and
defensione nostri, and regni praedicti, and ligeorum nostrorum ejusdem,
disponere and ordinare volentes, ut tenemur: Assignavimus vos ad arraiandum and
triandum, omnes and singulos homines ad arma, ac homines armatos and
sagittarios, in Comitatu nostro Northamptoniae commorantes, infra libertates,
and extra. Et ad armari faciendum omnes illos, qui de suo corpore sunt
potentes, and habiles ad armandum, qui de suo proprio habent unde seipsos
armare possint, videlicet, quilibet eorum juxta status and facultates suas. Et
ad assidendum and apportionandum, juxta avisamentum, and discretiones vestras;
ac etiam ad distringendum omnes illos, qui in terris, and bonis, sunt potentes,
and pro debilitate corporum ad laborandum impotentes ad inveniendum, juxta
quantitatem terrarum, and bonorum suorum, and prout rationabiliter portare
poterint (salvo statu suo) armaturas hominibus ad arma, ac hominibus armatis,
ac arcus and sagittas. Ita quod illi qui morabuntur, seu morari poterunt, ad
domum suam propriam in patria sua, super defensionem ejusdem regni contra
rebels praedictos, si periculum eveniat, non capiant vadia nec expensas, pro
mora sua apud domus suas praedictas. Et ad hoc dictos homines ad arma, and
homines armatos, and sagittarios fic arraiatos, and injunctos continue in
arraiatione, ut in millenis, centenis, and vintenis, and alias prout conveniens
fuerit, and necesse teneri and poni faciendum. Et eos tam ad costeram maris
quam alia loca, ubi, and quotiens necesse fuerit, ad dictos rebels
expellendum, debellandum and destruendum de tempore in tempus, cum aliquod
periculum immineat mandandum, and injungendum, and ad monstrum sive
monstrationem, eorundem hominum ad arma, ac hominum armatorum and sagittariorum
de tempore in tempus, quotiens indiguerit, diligenter faciendum, and
supervidendum: Ac etiam ad proclamandum, ordinandum and diligenter examinandum,
quod omnes, and finguli hujusmodi homines ad arma, ac homines armati, and
sagittarii, in monstris, hujusmodi armaturis propriis and non alienis armentur,
sub pena amissionis eorundem, exceptis duntaxat illis qui ad expensas aliorum
armari debent, ut praedictum est, and ad omnes and singulos quos in hac part
inveneritis, contrarios sea rebels, arrestandum and capiendum, ac eos in
prisonis nostris committendum, in iisdem moraturos quousque de eorum punitione
aliter duxerimus ordinandum. Et ideo vobis districtius quo possumus, super fide
and ligeantia, quibus nobis tenemim, injungimus and mandamus, quod statim visis
praesentibus, vos ipsos, melius and securius quo poteritis, arraiari and
parari, and coram nobis ad ipsos dies and loca, quo videritis magis
competentes, and expedientes, and pro populo nostro minus damnosas. Et omnes
homines in patria commorantes, per quos arraiatio hujusmodi, melius fieri and
compleri poterit, venire and vocari facias, and arraiari, armari, and muniri,
and eos sic armatos and munitos, in arraiatione hujusmodi teneri facias. Et
insuper figna, vocata Bekins, poni facias in locis consuetis, per quae gentes
patriae de adventu rebellium praedictorum poterunt congruis temporibus
praemuniri. Ac eosdem homines sic arraiatos and munitos, cum periculum
imminuerit, in defensione regni, and patriae praedictae, de tempore in tempus,
tam ad costeram maris, quam alia loca, ubi magis necesse fuerit, duci facies.
Ita quod pro defectu defensionis, arraiationis sive ductionis dictorum hominum,
vel per negligentiam vestram, damna patriae praedictae, per rebels praedictos
a modo non eveniat ullo modo pro posse vestro. Damus autem universis, and
singulis Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, Justiciariis Pacis, Majoribus,
Ballivis, Constabulariis, Ministris and aliis Fidelibus, and ligeis nostris
Comitatus praedicti (tam infra libertates quam extra) tenore praesentium
firmiter in mandatum, quod nobis in omnibus, and singulis praemissis, faciendum
and explendum intendentes sint, consulentes and auxiliantes. Et Vicecomiti
Comitatus praedicti, quod ad aptos dies, and loca quos ad hoc ordinaveritis,
venire faciat coram vobis, omnes illos in Comitatu praedicto, per quos
arraiatio, assessio, and ordinatio melius poterint fieri and compleri. Si illos
quos pro rebellione sua capi, and arrestari contigerit, in prisona nostra
custodiat, sicut praedictum est. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras
fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium tertio die Septembris, Anno Regni nostri
sextodecimo. Per Dominum Custodem magni Sigilli Angliae, virtute Warrantii
regii. Willis.

A Letter from King Charles the First, to the Right Honorable John Earl of
Peterborow.
To our Right trusty and welbeloved Cousin John Earl of Peterborow. Charles R.

RIght Trusty and welbeloved Cousin, we greet you well: Whereas we are desirous
to speak with you concerning some affairs, much importing the Peace, and good
of this our Kingdom, which being of more than ordinary consequence, will admit
of no delay; we therefore will and command you, upon your Allegiance, (that
setting aside all other occasions whatsoever,) you fail not forthwith to repair
hither to us; when we shall acquaint you with the particular cause of our
sending for you, which is of that importance, as is neither fit to be imparted
to you by Letter, nor will bear any delay or excuse: And for the ready
observance of this our command, these our Letters shall be your sufficient
Warrant.

Given at our Court at York, the Twentieth of May. 1642. My Lord, I pray you
fail not to make haste.

C. R.



HENRY Earl of PETERBOROW, Peer of England, Lord MORDAVNT, Lord Baron of
Turvey, Grome of the Stole and First Gentleman of the Bedchamber to King JAMES
the Second, Lord High-Steward to the Queen, Lord Lieutenant of the County of
Northampton, One of the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
and Knight of the Most Noble Order of the GARTER. CHAPTER XVII.
A Declaration of King Charles the First, against the Alienating of the
Lordship and Priory of Rygate, from Henry Earl of Peterborow.
Charles R.

WHereas our Right Trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin, Henry Earl of Peterborow
by his Humble Petition has represented to us, That his Mother the Countess of
Peterborow is seized of certain Lands, whereto he is Inheritable, by virtue of
an Entail of the gift of the Crown, and that the Reversion expectant thereof is
in us: And that his said Mother, upon displeasure conceived against him,
prevailed with his Father, the late Earl of Peterborow, about the time of his
Death, to leave much of his Estate to her, who now endeavors to have power to
cut off the Entail of the Crown's gift, tending to his the said now Earl of
Peterborow's Disinherison therein; which without our consent she cannot
accomplish: And therefore the said Henry now Earl of Peterborow, humbly prays
the withholding of our Consent therein. Forasmuch as we have special cause to
tender the good, and advantage of the said now Earl of Peterborow, and that by
act of Parliament provision is made, That such Entails shall not be cut off to
bar the Posterity, whose Advancement was thereby intended: We therefore hereby
declare to all, and every whom it may concern, our Unwillingness, That the said
Earl should be prejudiced in the benefit of the said Entail, contrary to the
intent of the Giver, and of the said Parliament. And we will and require our
Council at Law, the Clerks of our Signet, and other Seals, and all others whom
it may concern, to take knowledge of the Premises; and if by any means or ways,
endeavors shall be used by the said Countess, or others, for a Reversion of
the said Entail Lands, that they or any of them fail not to mind us of the
same, whereby no Grant thereof may pass, without the said Earl's notice, and
our more full consideration, and express orders upon the same, first had and
obtained.

Given at Hampton Court, the One and twentieth Day of September. 1647.
A Writ Summoning the Earl of Peterborow to the Parliament, in the Twelfth Year
of King Charles the Second.
CArolus secundus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Charissimo consanguineo suo Henrico Comiti Peterborow, salutem.
Quia de advisamento and assensu Concilii nostri, pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum, and defensionem regni nostri Angliae, and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, quoddam Parlamentum nostrum apud civitatem
nostram Westmonasteriensem, octavo die Maii proxime futurum, teneri
ordinavimus, ac ibidem vobiscum, ac cum magnatibus, and proceribus, dicti Regni
nostri colloquium habere, and tractatum, vobis, sub fide and ligeantia, quibus
nobis tenemini, firmiter injungendum mandavimus, quod consideratis dictorum
negotiorum arduitate, and periculis imminentibus, cessante excusatione
quacunque, dictis die and loco personaliter intersitis nobiscum, ac cum
magnatibus, and proceribus praedictis, super dictis negotiis tractatum utrinque
concilium impensurum. Et hoc, sicut nos and honorem nostrum, ac salvationem and
defensionem, Regni and Ecclesiae praedictae, expeditionemque dictorum
negociorum diligitis, nullatemus omittatis.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium decimo octavo die Februarii, Anno Regni
nostri decimo tertio.
A Letter from the Duke of Albemarle.
To the Right Honorable the Earl of Peterborow, or to the Officer in chief
with his Regiment. My LORD,
UNderstanding there are some dissatisfied Officers lately disbanded, who are
endeavoring to bring the Soldiers into mischief, if special care be not taken
to prevent the same, and so the Soldiers will loose their Arrears, besides the
dishonor that will fall upon the Officers, in whose Regiment it happens: I
desire you will be careful to keep the Officers of your Regiment with their
Commands: And if they hear any Officers, or Soldiers speak discontented words,
to take away their Arms, and secure them; and you are to acquaint the Officers
and Soldiers, that (though they be shortly to be reduced, yet) they will
receive Arrears before disbanding: And there is an Act of Parliament, that they
may set up their Trades, in any City or Town corporate. I desire you to
acquaint the Captains of each Company under your command herewith; and that
they may be careful to observe the same. I remain,

Cockpit 11 September. 1660. Your Lordship's very humble Servant, ALBEMARLE.
If your Lordships occasions will not give you leave, you need not repair to
your Regiment.



A Commission constituting Henry Earl of Peterborow Captain General, and
Governor of Tangier.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To our Right Trusty and Right welbeloved
Cousin Henry Earl of Peterborow, greeting. Whereas we intend forthwith to
settle and secure our City of Tangier, and the Territories, and Dominions
adjacent, in or near the Coasts of Barbary, or the Kingdoms of Sus, Fez, and
Morocco, some or one of them, in the continent of Africa, and for that purpose
have resolved, by and with the advice of our Privy Council, forthwith to raise,
draw forth, and transport thither such Forces of Horses and Foot, as we shall
judge necessary for our service, in defense of the said City of Tangier, and
our Dominions and Territories, in or near the said Kingdoms of Sus, Fez and
Morocco: Know ye therefore, That we reposing an especial trust and confidence,
in your Honor's Courage, Wisdom and Fidelity, have constituted and ordained,
and by these our Letters Patents, do make, constitute, ordain, and appoint you
the said Henry Earl of Peterborow, Captain General of all Forces, both Horse
and Foot, raised or to be raised, and now sent, or which hereafter shall be
sent, by our Royal Authority, or Commissions, and of all other Forces
whatsoever, which are, or shall remain, or be drawn into our City of Tangier,
or any other of our Dominions or Territories, in or near the said Kingdoms of
Sus, Fez and Morocco, and of all Forts, Castles, Cities or other parts or
places whatsoever, which by your good conduct, and success, shall be reduced to
our obedience and subjection. And we do hereby give and grant, unto you the
said Henry Earl of Peterborow, our Captain General, full power and authority by
beat of Drum, Proclamation or otherwise, in our Name, to raise, lift, arm,
array, and put under Command, such or so many Volunteers both of Horse and
Foot, within this our Kingdom of England, or any other our Kingdoms or
Dominions, as shall make up and complete the number defigned by us, in the
establishment for that Service; and to give Commission to Officers and
Commanders, to be set over them, and conduct, lead and imbark the said Officers
and Soldiers, to be transported to our said City of Tangier, and to remove and
cashier any such Officers or Soldiers, as to you shall seem convenient. And we
do further by these Presents, give full Power and Authority, to you our said
Captain General, from time to time, to muster, exercise, and train, our said
Forces, and all other our Armies and Forces, which you shall there raise, or
entertain into our service, or which shall be sent to you, from hence or any
other place, and to drive, train, conduct and lead out, or otherwise employ the
Natives, or other Inhabitants, if need shall require, and with them to defend
our said City of Tangier, and any other our Dominions, which already are, or
hereafter shall be in our Power or Possession; and to lead them forth against
any Enemies, Rebels and Traitors, and them to fight, kill and slay, and subdue
to our Obedience; and to invade, surprise, and reduce such Towns, Forts,
Castles or Countries, as shall declare or maintain any Hostility against us, or
that may endanger the Peace, or Security of our City, or Territories aforesaid,
and to possess and strenghten them, with Forts or Garrisons, or otherwise raze,
dismantle, or disable them, as to you shall seem expedient; and to arm,
discipline and entertain into your Service, all such as you shall think fit, to
receive under your Command, out of any the Kingdoms, Dominions or Territories
aforesaid. And we do further, by these Presents, ordain and appoint you, one of
our Vice-Admirals, with power to give, ordain and command, to all our Naval
Forces and Commanders at Sea, that shall be appointed by us, or our Authority,
to attend the service of our said City of Tangier, and upon the Coast of
Africa; and likewise to require them by your Orders, or Instructions, to
prosecute any design, which you shall judge to be for our service; and also
when, and where ye shall think meet to appoint, constitute, and keep a Court of
Admiralty, and appoint Judges and Officers for the same, for the hearing and
determining all Maritime Causes, belonging to the Jurisdiction of a
Court-Admiral, as it is exercised in England. And for the better discipline of
the Forces under your Command, both by Land and Sea, We do hereby give you full
Power and Authority, to ordain, publish and execute Laws, and
Ordinances-Martial, according to the Constitutions, and Practices of a
Court Martial, and to punish by death, or otherwise, or to pardon Offenses, as
in your discretion you shall judge meet. And we do hereby give unto you all
such further Powers, Preheminences, and Authorities, as to a Captain General,
or to one of our Vice-Admirals, do any ways appertain, or belong. And we do by
these our Letters Patents, make, ordain, and constitute you our chief Governor
of our said City of Tangier, and Subburbs thereof, and of all other Cities,
Towns, Villages, Forts, Castles, Islands, Lands, and Countries, which now are,
or which hereafter, during this our Commission, shall be delivered, or reduced
to our obedience, within any of the Kingdoms aforesaid. And we do hereby give
you Authority to make, approve, and execute, such Laws and Ordinances, making
the same as near as may be conformable to the Laws of England, for the better
carrying on of the Civil Government, of our said City of Tangier, or any other
Cities, or Places which are, or shall happen to be, under your command, and may
best stand with the peace, and good government of the People, and Places
commanded by you, and to punish, pardon, or remit Offenses, against any of the
Laws or Ordinances aforesaid. And we do hereby further authorize you, to
entertain Trade, and to give license to others to Trade, and to proceed by such
ways, and means, for the advance, and encouragement of Trade, as you in your
discretion shall think fit; until you shall receive further or other Directions
from us: And to appoint, and establish Officers proper for the administration
of public Justice, as may best suit with your Interest, and with such
Instructions as you shall receive from us, from time to time; and to impose and
raise such reasonable Taxes, Contributions, Customs or other Payments, as you
shall judge necessary to our affairs. And our will and pleasure is, That all
Confiscations, Prizes, Goods, Merchandises condemned by a Court of Admiralty,
and all other Forfeitures, Customs, or other Payments, or Profits which shall
be taken by you, be put into account, which account shall be transmitted hither
unto us, or to such as we shall appoint, once every Year; and that ye employ
the proceeds thereof to our Service, for the supply of the Magazines, or Forces
under your Command, until we shall order you to dispose otherwise of the same.
And we do further empower you, under your Hand and Seal, to appoint your Deputy
or Deputies, by what Name or Qualities you shall think fit, to execute all, or
any of those Powers and Authorities, by these Presents granted unto you; and we
do give to such person and persons, so appointed by you, full Power, and
Authority, to do and execute, whatsoever he or they respectively, shall be by
you appointed to do or execute: To have, hold, exercise, and enjoy the said
Offices of Captain General, Chief Governor, and Vice Admiral, and all and every
the Powers, and Authorities aforesaid, by you, and by your Deputy and Deputies
as aforesaid, during our will, and pleasure. And further we do hereby give, and
grant, for us, our Heirs, and Successors, that for whatsoever you, or any by
your Commission, Warrant, or Command, shall lawfully do by virtue of this our
Commission, or the Instructions, which you at any time shall receive from us,
the showing forth of these our Letters Patents, or the Inro^^ent thereof, shall
be in all and every of our Courts, and elsewhere in our Dominions, a
sufficient Discharge, and Acquittal in that behalf to you, or such as shall act
under you, against us, our Heirs, and Successors, and free you and them from
all impeachment, and other molestations for the same. In witness whereof we
have caused these our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness our Self at Westminster the Sixth Day of September, in the Thirteenth
Year of our Reign. Per ipsum Regem. Barker.

Instructions for the Earl of Peterborow, General of our Army designed for
Tangier in Africa.
I. YOU are by virtue of your Commission under our Great Seal, and such
Warrants, and Directions as you have had from us, or our Council, to receive
under your Command the Forces of Horse, and Foot raised in England, and two
Regiments appointed for this service at Dunkirke, and from the Rendezvous at
Portsmouth, wind and weather serving, to sail directly to our City of Tangier.

II. Being there arrived, you are, as our General and Governor of that City,
and Country, within the extent of your Commission, to demand, and receive the
same, with the Artillery, Ammunition, etc. into your possession, from the
Governor of our Brother the King of Portugal.

III. You are to signify to the Earl of Sandwich the delivery of Tangier, as
soon as you receive it, and send some trusty Person with your Bills of Exchange
for etc. to Lisbon, where the same is to be paid, and sent by his Lordship in a
good Ship to Tangier, as we have directed.

IV. You are to endeavor to entertain into our Service such of the Portugal
Horse, as are willing to continue there, upon the pay appointed by the
establishment for Horse delivered to you: And upon your Certificate to the Earl
of Sandwich, what sum of money is requisite to provide for them, in equality
with the Horse sent from England: And order shall be taken to return the same
to you immediately from Lisbon.

V. You are not to apply any of the Provisions, or Pay of our Army, for the
support of any of the Inhabitants, not in Pay, but in all cases of their want,
or straits, you are to dispose of them so (any thing to the contrary
notwithstanding) that our City of Tangier may not be endangered thereby.

VI. Having given you by Commission full Power and Authority, to treat, and
conclude upon what Conditions, and Terms of Peace, or Neutrality, with any
Prince, or People, of those Parts, you shall judge most for our Honor and
Service: We are not willing to limit you further therein, then that (except it
be in extreme Accidents) we expect that you refer all your agreements to our
Ratification, and that they be no longer binding, if we refuse to give the
same, after notification of such our Refusal.

VII. Our main design in putting our self to this great charge, for making this
addition to our Dominions, being to gain to our Subjects the trade of Barbary,
and to enlarge our Dominions in that Sea, and advance thereby the Honor of our
Crown, and the general Commerce, and Welfare of our Subjects, you are to
declare, That we are graciously pleased, that no Duties, Customs, or other
Taxes whatsoever, shall be laid by us, or any under us, upon any Goods
imported, or exported to, or from our City of Tangier, but that it shall be and
remain, a free Port for (...) years; and you are with all convenient speed to
consider, and advise of the best ways and means, for Encouragement and
Invitation of our Subjects, and Strangers to Reside, and Trade. And as that
which we judge absolutely necessary to those ends, you are speedily to consider
of the making of a Mould, for a sure station of Shipping, and to transmit to
us, the Design and Estimate thereof; beginning in the mean while, with such
preparations, as the Soldiers can be persuaded to, till upon consideration of
your advice therein, treasure shall be transmitted for that end.

VIII. And whereas after you have received into your Power and Obedience, our
aforesaid City of Tangier, and settled and established there, in the best manner
you shall be able, our Garrison, and Interests, you may find it necessary to
resort in person to our Royal Presence, either to inform us of the Grounds, and
Probabilities, of further Designs, to the good, and advancement of our
Dominions there, and to take our Commands, and Directions thereupon; or to
solicit, and procure, such other supplies, and necessaries, as the occasion,
and subsistence of our said City, and Garrison, shall require: We do enable you
by our license, which by these presents we do grant unto you, to repair unto
us, when you shall see convenient, leaving behind you, to govern in your
absence, a Deputy fit for that place, or such a one, as before your departure
from hence, or hereafter, we shall signify, and direct unto you.

IX. If (which we cannot expect) any accident should intervene, whereby he City
of Tangier should fail to be delivered to you, you are then to return home,
with the Forces under your command, if by joint advice, after meeting with the
Earl of Sandwich, you shall not agree upon some further design for our service.

Charta Regis Caroli Secundi.
Potestatem Concedendi Bellum faciendi vel Pacem cum Regibus vel Principibus
Africae.
CArolus Secundus, Dei gratia, magnae Britanniae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Omnibus and singulis ad quos hae litterae pervenerint, salutem.
Cum indole naturae, atque instituto regiminis, omnes homines, and prae
caeteris Principes, ad pacem and concordiam, inter dissitas nationes,
conciliandam ac fovendam, animos studiaque sua applicare debeant, non solum
quia talis humani generis consensus, ad univerlam incolumitatem Commercii
incrementum, and navigandi securitatem quam maxim facit, sed etiam quia Dei
Optimi Maximi gloria, ex hujusmodi mediis, mirifice crescit and dilatatur: Nos
satis conscii regiam Celsitudinem ad tales curas praecipue destinatam, ac
constitutam esse, nec minus pro nostra statione commode ut putamus, ad
illiusmodi fines promovendos, id unice operam dare, atque eo contendere
decrevimus, ut longinquae terrae, atque adeo universus orbis (si fieri possit)
cum nostra Britannia, manus, animos and sinceros amplexus conjungat: Sciatis
igitur quod nos probitate, ac fide nobilissimi Viri, perquam fidelis and
praedilecti consanguinei nostri Henrici Comitis de Peterborow, Civitatis
nostrae Tingitanae in Africa, omniumque circumcirca regionum, portuum, littorum
and pagorum, Capitanei-Generalis, and Praefecti, nec non in iisdem oris, ac
littoribus Vice-admirali nostri confidentes, eundem Henricum Comitem de
Peterborow, nostrum verum and indubitatum Plenipotentiarium constituimus and
ordinavimus, ac per praesentes constituimus and ordinamus. Dantes eidem virtute
praesentium facultatem, authoritatem and mandatum generale, ac speciale, per
se, and per Commissarios aut Procuratores suos, cum quolibet Rege, Principe,
Dynasta, Civitate, vel Statu, in Regnis de Sus, Fez and Morocco, vel qualibet
alia per Africam ditione, supremam aut sufficientem potestatem habente, pacem
vel inducias, prout, quandocunque, and quotiescunque ipse dictus Comes, e re
nostra esse judicaverit faciendi, amicitiamque vel antiquam renovandi, vel
novam ineundi, pro nostrorum Regnorum, Subditorum, and Mercatorum bono
commercio and commodo, atque de and super quibuscunque articulis, capitulis,
causis and conditionibus, pacis, amicitiae, faederis and commerciorum
restauratione, aut stabilimento cum dictis Regibus, Principibus, Dynastis,
Civitatibus, aut Statibus, vel quibuslibet eorum respective, sub modis, formis,
provisionibus, cautionibus and securitatibus, quas ad formam, and stabilem
Conventorum observationem, necessarias, aut idoneas putaverit; atque de aliis
ad veram, and sinceram pacificationem, amicitiam, mercutaraeque exercitationem
spectantibus, hinc inde conciliandi, tractandi, concordandi, paciscendi,
conveniendi and finaliter concludendi. Denique omnia alia, nostro nomine,
gerendi, exercendi and firmandi, quae ad servitium nostrum spectant, and
opportuna and salubria videbuntur. Promittentes bona fide, and in Verbo Regio,
quicquid per dictum nostrum Capitaneum Generalem and Plenipotentiarium,
Henricum Comitem de Peterborow, vel per Commissarios aut Procuratores suos,
legittime constitutos, actum, gestum, conventum, and conclusum fuerit, nos
ratum, gratum, ac acceptum habituros, neque contra ipsorum aliquae, vel aliquid
contraventuros, imo ipsa defensuros, inviolabiliter observaturos, atque
observari curaturos and facturos. In quorum Testimonium literas hasce scribi,
and manu nostra propria signatas, regni nostri Angliae sigilli majoris
additione communiri volumus.

Quae dabantur in Palatio nostro Westmonasteriensi vicesimo primo die
Novembris, Anno Domini milesimo sexcentesimo sexagesimo primo. Signat. CAROLUS
R.

His Majesty's Warrant for Two thousand Pounds, as a free Gift to the Earl of
Peterborow.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To the Treasurer, and Under-Treasurer of our Exchequer, now and for the time
being, greeting.
Whereas by our Letters of Privy Seal, bearing date the Thirteenth of September
last past, we gave order for payment of Three thousand eight hundred Pounds
Sterling, unto our Right Trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin, the Earl of
Peterborow, our Governor of Tangier, by way of Inprest as his own pay, and for
raising of One hundred Horses, and Fifteen hundred Foot for our Service, in
Tangier aforesaid: Our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby require and
authorize you, to allow Two thousand Pounds, of the said Three thousand eight
hundred Pounds, as a free Gift from us, unto the said Earl of Peterborow, in
consideration of the great expense he was at, in Preparatives and personal
Provisions, for our Service in that expedition, to be passed to him without
account, and his own pay to continue, and go on; notwithstanding our said Privy
Seal of the Thirteenth of September last, and to be accounted, and allowed unto
him from the term, and according to the tenor of the Establishment, for our
said Garrison of Tangier; and these our Letters shall be your sufficient
Warrant, and Discharge in that behalf.

Given under our Privy Seal, at our Palace at Westminster, the Fifteenth Day of
February, in the Thirteenth Year of our Reign.
A Letter from JAMES Duke of York. For the Earl of Peterborow.
My Lord of Peterborow,
THE Wind coming contrary, you will have prevented that Perplexity, which
otherwise I judge ye would have been in, by the mistake of Secretary Maurice
his Letter; the King's Direction to him was, To send to you to Sail to Tangier,
when you had a Thousand Men, which he by mistake wrote Lisbon. The King has
ordered Secretary Nicholas to write to you, and to certify that mistake, to
which I refer you: Order was given on Saturday last, to quicken down the rest
of the Merchant-Ships, which I suppose is done. If the Wind continue contrary,
there will be an inevitable necessity for you, to lend some of your Provisions
to victual them for their Return, which I desire you to do, and oblige my self
to take care for the restoring it to you again.

I am Your very Affectionate Friend, JAMES.
Whitehall, December 9. 1661.
A Letter from JAMES Duke of York. For the Earl of Peterborow.
My Lord of Peterborow,
I Have forborne to write to you all this while, in answer to several of your
Letters, expecting still the dispatch of this Bearer, Major Fines, who has
stayed here soliciting some concerns of his Regiment, which he has now
dispatched: And to what you desire to know, concerning such Offices in the
respective Regiments, as shall become vacant, the King has commanded me to
tell you, That when that shall happen, you shall fill them up, out of such of
the same Regiment, as by right, and merit may pretend to be advanced; which I
hope will be a great encouragement to the whole Troops under your Command, when
they see no fear of others to come over their Heads: And because some of the
Regiments are not complete of Soldiers, according to the establishment, the
King would have you to keep all such Moneys, of the vacant places of
Common-Souldiers, in your Hands, to be laid out in recruiting, or other uses,
for every respective Regiment; and from time to time to give an account of it
here, that you may receive further direction. This is all I have to say to you,
at present, but to wish you a good Voyage, and to assure you, that you shall
ever find me to be,

Your very Affectionate Friend, JAMES.
Whitehall, December 20. 1661.
A Letter from King Charles the Second, written with his own Hand to the Earl
of Peterborow.
For the Earl of Peterborow.
My Lord of Peterborow,
I am very well satisfied of your Care and Diligence, in the employment you are
in, for which I thank you very heartily; and assure your self I have so just a
Sense of this, and all your other services, as you shall find upon all
occasions, how much I esteem and value those who serve me faithfully. I have no
more to add at present, only to desire you to let those honest Men know, who go
along with you, That they shall always be in my particular Care and Protection,
as Persons that venture themselves in my Service; and so wishing you a good
Voyage, I remain,

Your very Affectionate Friend, CHARLES R.
Whitehall, the 21 of Dec. 1681.
JAMES Duke of York and Albany; Earl of Ulster; Lord High-Admiral of England,
Ireland, and Wales, and the Dominions and Isles of the same, of the Town of
Calis, and the Marches thereof, of Normandy, Gascoigne, and Aquitaine; and
Captain General of the Navies and Seas of his Majesty's Dominions; and also
Lord High-Admiral of his Majesty's Town of Dunkirke, and of his Dominions of
New England, Jamaica, Virginia, Barbados, St. Christophers, Bermudos and Antego
in America, and of Guinny, Binny, Angola in Africa, and of Tangier in the
Kingdom of Fez, as also of all and singular his Majesty's other Dominions
whatsoever, in Parts Transmarine; Constable of Dover-Castle; Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, and Governor of Portsmouth, etc.
To Henry Earl of Peterborow.
BY virtue of the Power and Authority unto me granted, by the King my Sovereign
Lord and Brother, by his Majesty's Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of
England, bearing date the Twenty seventh of February, in the Fourteenth Year of
his Majesty's Reign, I do hereby empower and authorize you, the said Henry Earl
of Peterborow (whom I have nominated, constituted and appointed, to be my
Vice Admiral, of the City and Port of Tangier in Africa, and of the maritime
Places thereunto adjacent, and appertaining,) to appoint a Judge-Advocate,
Register, Proctor, and Marshal of the High Court of Admiralty of Tangier
aforesaid, for the due, and orderly management of all Proceedings, in the
Vice-Admiralty of the said City, Port and Places, adjacent and belonging to
Tangier aforesaid, during the vacancies of the said places, and until I shall
think fit to give further order therein; and for so doing this shall be your
Warrant.

Given under my Hand and Seal at Hampton Court, August the Tenth. 1662. By
Command of his Highness, W. Covenny. JAMES.

The Earl of Teviot's Receipt of the Garrison of Tangier, from the Earl of
Peterborow.
WE Andrew Earl of Teviot, Lord Rutherford, Captain General of his Majesty of
Great Britain's Forces in Africa, and Governor of Tangier, by virtue of his
Majesty's Commission to us, and his dimission to his Excellency, Henry Earl of
Peterborow, late Governor for his Majesty in Tangier, directed, do hereby
acknowledge to have received of his said Excellency, the Earl of Peterborow,
his Majesty's City and Garrison of Tangier, with the Provisions, Guns, Arms,
Ammunition, and other Utensils of War, as by our Receipts, and Commissaries
Certificate, more particularly appears; together with the Soldiers, Horse and
Foot, belonging to the said Garrison.

In witness whereof we have hereunto set our Hand and Seal, the Ninth Day of
June, in the Fifteenth Year of his Majesty's Reign, Annoque Domini. 1663.
TEVIOT.

A Grant of a Pension to the Earl of Peterborow, from King Charles the Second,
of a Thousand Pounds by the Year for his Life.
CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Treasurer, Chancellor,
Under-Treasurer, Chamberlains, and Barons of the Exchequer of us, our Heirs and
Successors, and to all other the Officers and Ministers of the said Court, and
of the Receipt there now being, or which at any time hereafter shall be, and to
all others to whom these Presents shall appertain, Greeting. Know ye, That we,
as well in consideration of the great Merit and good Service, of our Right
Trusty, and Right welbeloved Cousin, Henry Earl of Peterborow, already done and
performed, in possessing and settling our City, Fort and Garrison of Tangier in
Africa, as for diverse other good causes, and considerations us hereunto moving,
of our special grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, have given and
granted, and by these Presents for us, our Heirs and Successors, We give and
grant unto the said Henry Earl of Peterborow, one Annuity or Pension, of One
thousand Pounds, of lawful Money of England, by the Year: To have and yearly to
perceive, and receive the said Annuity or Pension, of One thousand Pounds by
the Year, unto the said Henry Earl of Peterborow, and his Assigns, from the
Feast of the Nativity of our Lord God, which was in the Fourteenth Year of our
Reign, for and during the natural Life of him the said Henry Earl of
Peterborow, out of the Treasury of us, our Heirs and Successors, at the receipt
of the Exchequer, of us, our Heirs and Successors, by the Hands of the
Treasurer, Under-Treasurer, Chamberlains, and other Officers and Ministers of
the said Exchequer, for the time being, at the Four usual Feasts or Terms in
the Year, that is to say, At the Feast of the Annuntiation of the blessed
Virgin Mary, St. John the Baptist, and St. Michael the Archangel, and the Birth
of our Lord God, by even and equal Portions; the First payment thereof to
commence, and begin from the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord God, One
thousand six hundred sixty and two. Wherefore we do hereby require, authorize
and command the Treasurer, Chancellor, Under-Treasurer, Chamberlains, and
Barons of our said Exchequer, and all other the Officers and Ministers there,
for the time being, to make due payment of the said Annuity, or yearly Pension,
of one thousand Pounds, on the Feast-days abovementioned: And these Presents,
or the Inrolment thereof, shall be unto them, and every of them, a sufficient
Warrant, and Discharge, for the payment of the said Annuity, or Pension of One
thousand Pounds, from time to time accordingly; any Act, Statute, Provision,
Proclamation, Restraint, or other matter or thing, heretofore had, made,
enacted, or provided, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. In witness
whereof, we have caused these our Letters to be made Patents.

Witness our self at Westminster, the One and thirtieth Day of March, in the
Fifteenth Year of our Reign. By Writ of Privy Seal. HOWARD.
Irrotulatur in Thesaurarii receptis Scaccarii Domini Regis Caroli Secundi,
quarto die Junii, Anno Regni sui decimo quinto. Rob. Long.
Irrotulatur inter Recorda Domini Regis Caroli Secundi, infra recepta Scaccarii
sui remanentia in Officio Clerici Thesaurarii Clerici Willielmi decimo quinto
die Junii 1663. Annoque Domini Regis decimo quinto. W. Wardour.

A Commission of King Charles the Second, Constituting John Earl of Exeter, and
Henry Earl of Peterborow, Lord Lieutenants of the County of Northampton.
CArolus Secundus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Praedilectis and per quidem fidelibus Consanguineis nostris Johanni Comiti de
Exeter, and Henrico Comiti de Peterborow, Salutem.
Cum per quendam Actum in Parlamento nostro, inchoato apud Westmonasterium,
octavo die Maii, Anno Regni nostri decimo octavo, and ibidem tento usque ad
decimum octavum diem Februarii, Anno Regni nostri decimo quarto, and abinde per
separales prorogationes continuato, intitulatum, [An Act for the ordering the
Forces in the several Counties of this Kingdom,] factum and editum, ac
authoritate ejusdem declaratum and enactitatum existit, inter acta ordinaria,
nos, haeredes and successores nostri, de tempore in tempus, ut occasio
requirerit, emanabimus, and emanare potuimus, separales Commissiones
Locumtenentium, talibus personis quales nos, haeredes and successores nostri,
idoneas putabimus fore Locumtenentes nostros, pro separalibus, and respectivis
Comitatibus, Civitatibus and locis Angliae, and Dominii Walliae, and villae
Barvici super Twedam. Qui Locumtenentes plenam habebunt potestatem and
authoritatem, ad convocandum omnes tales personas, ad talia tempora, ac eas
armare, and arraiare in tali modo, qualiter postea in eodem actu expressum, and
declaratum existit, ac ipsas in Cohortes, Turmas and Regimenta formare, and in
casu Insurrectionis, Rebellionis, aut Invasionis, ipsas ducere, conducere and
disponere, vel duci, conduci and disponi causare, tam infra praedictos
separales Comitatus, and Civitates, and loca pro quibus respective
commissionati fuerint, quam etiam in aliquibus aliis Comitatibus, and locis
praedictis, ad supprimendum omnes tales Insurrectiones and Rebelliones, and
repellendum Invasiones, quales fore contigerunt, secundum directiones, quales
ipsi de tempore in tempus, a nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris,
recipient, prout per Actum illum, inter separales alias potestates, and
authoritates in eodem actu contentas, and specificatas, before liquet and
apparet. Sciatis igitur quod, nos virtute and secundum tenorem, formam and
effectum actus Parlamenti praedicti, ac pro meliori executione ejusdem, ac
potestate and authoritate in eodem actu contentis and specificatis,
Nominavimus, fecimus, and assignavimus, ac per praesentes nominamus, facimus
and assignamus, vos praefatum Johannem Comitem de Exeter, and Henricum Comitem
de Peterborow, Locumtenentes nostros per and in Comitatu nostro Northamptoniae,
and per and in omnibus Comitatibus, Burgis, Libertatibus, Locis, Incorporatis
and Privilegiatis, ac aliis locis quibuscunque, infra Comitatum illum, limits,
vel proficua ejusdem: Et tenore praesentium, ac virtute actus praedicti, plenam
potestatem, and authoritatem, vobis damus and concedimus, ad faciendum,
exequendum, peragendum and performandum, omnia and singula, in aut per actum
Parlamenti praedicti enactitatum, declaratum sive contentum, quae ad hujusmodi
Locumtenentes, per nos, vigore illius actus, nominandum, seu constituendum,
aliqualiter spectant, virtute ejusdem actus, faciendum, exequendum, peragendum,
seu performandum. Et ideo vobis mandamus, quod secundum tenorem, formam, and
effectum actus Parliamenti illius in hac part, procedatis, and ea omnia
faciatis, and exequemini cum effectu, periculo incumbente. In cujus rei
Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium, Vicesimo primo die Maii, Anno Regni nostri
decimo. Per ipsum Regem. Barker.

Testimony of Council for the Earl of Peterborow's having been sworn in order
to the Lieutenancy.
At the Court at Whitehall the 13th. of June, 1666.
PRESENT,
The King's Most Excellent MAJESTY. His Royal Highness the DUKE of TORK. Earl of
Craven. Earl of Lawlerdale. Earl of Middeton. Lord Viscoum Fitzharding. Lord
Arlington. Lord Berkeley. Mr. Vice-Chamberlain. Mr. Secretary Maurice.
THis Day the Right honorable Henry Earl of Peterborow, took the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Oath appointed by the Act, (for ordering of
the Forces in the several Counties of this Kingdom,) to be taken by the Lords
Lieutenants of the respective Counties, and his Lordship is joined with the
Right Honorable John Earl of Ezeter, in the place of Lord Lieutenant of the
County of Northampton, and it is ordered that the same be entered, in the
Register of Council causes.

Richard Brown.

A Letter from the Earl of Arlington, Principal Secretary of State, to Henry
Earl of Peterborow.
Whitehall, June 30. 1666. My LORD,
HIS Majesty, being pressed by the likelihood of a speedy Invasion from abroad,
by the united Force of France and Holland; and being assured by all his
Intelligence, That the Dutch have Inbarked in their Fleet, now upon our Coast,
Sevea or Eight thousand Land-men, with all Necessaries accordingly, besides
what they expect from the Preparations of France; has resolved, among other
Expedients occurring to him, to raise distinct Troops of Horse, to be
afterward incorporated in Regiments, as he shall see cause; and commanded me
to transmit to your Grace this enclosed Commission, recommending to you the
raising of them with all possible expedition: And your Lordship being pleased
to certify me, what place you will appoint for their Rendezvous, his Majesty
will forthwith send a Commission to Muster them, when they shall amount to the
number of Thirty; and accordingly receive them into pay, with their Officers:
of which I beseech your Lordship to let me be informed with all speed. I am,
with all truth,

Your Lordship's, Most Humble Servant, ARLINGTON.
Your Lordship signifying to me the Names of such Persons as you shall choose
for Officers, care shall be taken for Commissions to be forthwith dispatched
for them.



A Commission from King Charles the Second, to raise a Company consisting of
Fourscore Horse, to be an independent Troop.
Charles R.

CHARLES the Second, by the grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To our Right Trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin, Henry Earl of Peterborow,
Greeting.
We reposing a special trust, and confidence in your Loyalty, Courage and good
Conduct do by these Presents, constitute and appoint you to be a Captain of a
Troop of Horse, consisting of Eighty Common Troopers, besides Officers, which
you are hereby authorized to raise, arm, and diligently exercise, keeping your
Soldiers in good Order and Discipline: Commanding them hereby, to obey you as
their Captain, and your self to observe such Order and Directions, as you shall
receive, from time to time, from us, or our General, according to the
discipline of War, in pursuance of the Trust we repose in you.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the Thirtieth Day of June, in the Eighteenth
Year of our Reign. 1666. By his Majesty's Command. ARLINGTON.

A Letter from the Lords of the Council, to Henry Earl of Peterborow.
AFter our very hearty Commendations to your Lordship: Whereas the present
State of affairs, may require the speedy Calling together of the Forces of the
several Counties, in order to the securing the Kingdom from Foreign Invasion,
the Enemy already appearing with a Fleet of Ships upon the Coast; we have
thought fit to give you notice thereof, to the end, speedy Warning may be
given, for all the Horse and Foot of that County, to be in a readiness, to
march at a short notice, to such place as your Lordship shall find most
convenient, or shall be ordered from hence, for opposing the Enemy, if he shall
make any attempt to Land, and for defense of the County: And for their
Encouragement, and such as shall supply them, for their March, his Majesty has
declared his Royal pleasure, and required us, to signify to your Lordship,
that during the said Forces continuing in Service, after their Rendezvousing,
and marching upon the occasion aforesaid, they shall be in his Majesty's pay,
as the rest of his Forces. We are, by his Majesty's directions, farther to
acquaint you, That upon serious consideration had of the Act Entitled, [An Act
for ordering the Forces in the several Counties in this Kingdom] it does
appear, That any of the said Forces have been formerly in actual service for a
month or more, and were provided with a Months pay; yet nevertheless, they in
their Persons are to appear and serve, whenever they shall be thereto
Summoned, as by the said Act does appear, under penalty therein mentioned. And
for the easing of his Majesty's Charge, we pray and require your punctual Care
and Diligence, in the constant Raising the Moneys, designed for furnishing
Ammunition, and other Necessaries, and the Fines due from Defaulters upon the
said Act, and to have the same in readiness, to answer Emergences; and not
doubting of your Lordships Compliance, with these his Majesty's Commands, we
bid your Lordship heartily farewell.

From the Court at Whitehall, the Eleventh Day of June. 1667. Your Lordship's
very loving Friends, Bath. Craven. Dorchester. Fitz-Harding. Ashley. J.
Bridgwater. Anglesey. Lawderdale. T. Clifford. Arlington. Will. Maurice. W.
Coventry. R. Brown.


Since the writing hereof, finding that your Lordship, amongst some others the
Lords Lieutenants of this Kingdom, have failed to return to this Board, a List
of the several Troops, and Companies of Militia, in the County under your care,
with the numbers of them severally, as you were required: We do pray and
require your Lordship, the next Post after the receipt hereof, as you tender
the Safety of his Majesty's Kingdoms, to send the same unto us, and therein
also express, as many of the Commissioned Officers Names, as your Lordship can
by that time ascertain.

Richard Brown.

A Letter from the Earl of Arlington, Principal Secretary of State, to Henry
Earl of Peterborow.
Whitehall, 1667. My LORD,
HIS Majesty commands me, to signify his Pleasure to you, that forthwith your
Lordship repair to your Lieutenancy, there with all diligence to put your
Militia and other Troops into such a posture, as may best secure the Quiet and
Peace of the Country, and render them capable to comply with such Orders and
Directions, as your Lordship shall, from time to time, receive from his
Majesty, of which, as of all things else, that may relate to his Majesty's
Service, his Majesty desires to receive frequent and particular Advice, on all
occasions, from your Lordship: I am, with much Truth and Affection,

My LORD, Your Lordship's, Most Humble Servant, ARLINGTON.

The Earl of Peterborow's Commission for being Colonel of a Regiment of Foot.
Charles R.

CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To our Right Trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin, Henry Earl of Peterborow,
greeting.
We reposing especial Trust and Confidence in your Courage and good Conduct,
have thought fit to constitute and appoint, as by these Presents we do
constitute and appoint, you to be a Colonel of a Regiment of Foot, to be
raised for our Service, the same to consist of Ten Companies, and each Company
of Sixty Men, besides Officers: You are carefully to discharge the Duty of a
Colonel, by exercising the said Regiment in Arms, both Officers and Soldiers,
and keeping them in good Order and Discipline; and we do hereby command them to
obey you as their Colonel: And we do further constitute and appoint you, to be
Captain of one of the Companies of the said Regiment, and you are from time to
time to observe, and follow such Orders and Directions, as you shall receive
from us, according to the Rule and Discipline of War, pursuant to the Trust we
repose in you.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, this Twenty third Day of January, in the
Twenty fourth Year of our Reign. 1672/3. By his Majesty's Command. ARLINGTON.

A Commission for the Earl of Peterborow, to be Extraordinary Ambassador to the
Emperor, for the Marriage of the Archdutchess, with the Duke of York.
CArolus Secundus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Omnibus ad quos praesentes literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Quandoquidem nobis visum fuerit, pro singulari illo animi affectu, quo
prosequimur, semperque sumus prosecuti, Augustam domum Austriacam, and ut votis
charissimi Fratris nostri unici, Ducis Eboracensis, gratum faceremus,
serenissimam principem Claudiam Feliciam Archiducissam de Inspruck, ab
invictissimo and potentissimo Principe, ac Domino, Domino Leopoldo, divina
favente Clementia, Romanorum Imperatore semper Augusto, per Ablegatum nostrum
Extraordinarium Bernardum Gasconi Equitem auratum, in matrimonium dicto Fratri
nostro charissimo deposcere: Cumque Majestas sua Caesarea rem ipsam amplexus,
in tantum desideriis nostris obsecutus sit, ut projectum Tractatus de
matrimonio praedicto olim ineundo, per Commissarios Caesareae suae Majestatis
and Ablegatum nostrum Extraordinarium antedictum, jam conclusum, and
subsignatum sit: Sciatis quod nos, eidem proposito rei hujusce ad optatum finem
sine mora perducendae firmiter insistentes, nec non ut externis omnibus
Ceremoniis, and solennitatibus ad hujusmodi opus requisitis, plene
satisfaciamus, simul ut quo modo, tam in ipsam Principis antedictae personam,
quam in novos hosce Affinitatis nexus, inter nos and augustam illam domum jam
contrahendas, affecti sumus, palam omnibus faciamus, Fide, Virtute, Prudentia
and Meritis praedilecti, and perquam fidelis Consanguinei nostri, Henrici
Comitis de Peterborow, Paris Angliae, Domini Baronis Mordaunt de Turveia, and
Locumtenentis pro nobis, in provincia and Civitate Northamptoniae, plurimum
confisi, eundem Comitem de Peterborow nominavimus, constituimus, and
deputavimus, uti per praesentes constituimus, and deputamus nostrum verum,
certum, and indubitatum Legatum, sive Ambassiatorem Extraordinarium, Deputatum,
Commissarium and Procuratorem: Dantes ei and concedentes, omnem and omnimodam
potestatem, authoritatem, pariter ac mandatum generale, simul and speciale, ita
tamen ut generale and speciale non deroget neque e contra, pro nobis, and
nostro nomine, tam serenissimam principem Claudiam Feliciam Archiducissam de
Inspruck antedictam, solenniori modo, in uxorem Fratri nostro charissimo Duci
Eboracensi praedicto postulandi, adeoque in eum finem Articulos quosvis
ulteriores, sive contractum matrimonialem, prout videbitur necessarium, cum iis
qui a Caesarea sua Majestate, nec non ex part serenissimae Archiducissae
Claudiae Feliciae antedictae, vel etiam ex part serenissmae Archiducissae
viduae, matris suae, ad id erunt sufficienti authoritate instructi,
conveniendi, tractandi, concludendi and subsignandi, quam nomine, and vice
dicti Fratris nostri charissimi, proque ipso, Archiducissam antedictam, vi
Literarum procuratoriarum, ipsi a praedicto Fratre nostro charissimo, in eum
finem concessarum, iisque quibus convenerit, modo and forma desponsandi,
eandemque Principem ita (ut praefertur) desponsatam, in hoc Regnum nostrum
Angliae, eo modo quo illustribus suis natalibus, and dignitati par erit,
deducendi; omnia denique ac singula faciendi, praestandique, quae ad optatum
hoc opus Nuptiarum, ad finem and effectum quantocius perducendi, dictamque
Principem (ita ut praefertur) domum deducendi, videbuntur necessaria, tam
amplis, omnimoda modo ac forma, ut ipsi, si praesentes illic essemus, prorsus
facere possemus; etiamsi istiusmodi illae fuerint, quae particularem magis
potestatem, and mandatum a nobis specialius requirerent: Spondentes, and in
Verbo Regio promittentes, nos quaecunque a dicto nostro Legato Extraordinario,
vi praesentium concludi contigerint, ea omnia rata, grara and accepta, ea qua
convenerit forma, and solennitate, habituros. In quorum fidem, and testimonium,
has Literas nostras, Manu nostra Regia signatas, magno Angliae sigillo
communiri fecimus.

Dabantur in Palatio nostro Westmonasteriensi, Vigesimo quarto Die mensis
Februarii, Anno Domini, 1672/3, Regni nostri Vigesimo quinto. CAROLUS R.

Instructions for our Right Trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin, Henry Earl of
Peterborow, going in quality of our Ambassador Extraordinary to his Imperial
Majesty. Given at our Court at Whitehall, the Twenty seventh Day of February.
1672/3.
Charles R.

I. HAving for many Months past, treated privately, and in a preliminary
manner, a Marriage betwixt our most dear Brother, James Duke of York and
Albany, our High Admiral of all our Dominions, etc. and the most serene
Archdutchess Claudia Felicia of Inspruck, by the means of our Trusty, and
welbeloved Sir Bernard Gascoign, Knight, our Envoy Extraordinary to his
Imperial Majesty; and finding now at last, that the matter is brought to a
great probability of Succeeding, by what our said Envoy has notified to us,
and the Powers we have given to him for the same, bearing date the Twenty
seventh Day of January last past, and being desirous to finish and complete the
same; we have resolved of sending you, in quality of our Extraordinary
Ambassador to his Imperial Majesty, with full Powers and Instructions, openly
and avowedly, to demand of him the said Princess, in a Marriage with our said
most dear Brother, and to treat and conclude the same, according to the Powers
given herewith under our Great Seal, and those others you shall receive from
our said most dear Brother: Promising anew, as we have expressed in our
aforesaid Plenipotentiary Power, sent to Sir Bernard Gascoign, to ratify the
same, as soon as he shall send hither the Project, signed by the Commissioners,
appointed to treat with him, and to transmit it to his Imperial Majesty; the
Ratifications whereof you shall see exchanged on both sides, before you proceed
to a final Conclusion of the said Marriage, in such a form as shall be agreed
on.

II. To this effect you shall Transport your self, with all convenient speed
you can, from hence to Strasburgh, by the way of France, and there expect (if
the knowledge thereof cannot be sooner imparted to you,) the hearing from Sir
Bernard Gascoign, that all the Points are completely adjusted, as is aforesaid;
till when you shall detain your self there, giving an account of your arrival
to Sir Bernard Gascoign, and the occasion of your stay there. If on the one
side you shall, understand from the said Sir Bernard, that the Treaty and
Project of Marriage, is signed according to our direction, (a Copy of whose
Plenipotentiary Power to effect the same, is herewith delivered you,) then you
shall without delay, proceed on in your Journey toward the Court of his
Imperial Majesty; and there taking upon you the quality of our Extraordinary
Ambassador, demand your public Audience in the accustomed forms; accompanying
your discourse therein with those Complements, that are most suitable to the
occasion, and the present conjuncture of our Affairs, the condition whereof,
with relation to them, shall be herewith exposed to you: But if on the other
hand, you understand from the said Sir Bernard, that new delays are interposed
in this Affair, viz. That the Ministers have not signed the Project, in the
terms we have directed Sir Bernard Gascoign to do it, then you shall advertise
the said Sir Bernard, of the precise Orders we have given you, not to detain
your self longer there; and according to his answer, either pursue your Journey
on to the Court of the Emperor, or return back into France, dismissing your
Equipage, so as to lessen your expense, as far as you can; and in your return
home again, you are to follow such further Instructions and Directions, as you
shall receive from our said most dear Brother.

III. When you shall have received an assurance, of his Imperial Majesty's
entire Concurrence, and Approbation of the Marriage, you shall take your leave
there of him, and proceed on to the Court of the Archdutchess of Inspruck,
taking along with you Sir Bernard Gascoign for your Assistance, in this and
your further Transactions; and being arrived there, concert with the
Archdutchess Dowager, the Marrying the Princess her Daughter, in the Name of
our said most dear Brother, according to the Proxy, he shall give you to that
effect; and in a word, performing all other Ceremonies, that shall be conducing
to that Affair, with all regard to such an occasion, and the value we put upon
it.

IV. Being arrived at the Court of Inspruck, you shall make all fitting
Complements to both the Archdutchesses in our Name, suitable to the occasion,
delivering to them our Letters, and afterward adjust and concert with such
Minister or Ministers, as shall be appointed to Treat with you, according to
the Powers herewith given you, all the Circumstances and Ceremonies, requisite
toward the completing of the Marriage, and the bringing the Young Princess
hither into England, with as much speed and convenience, as an Affair of that
nature will permit: Advertising us from time to time, by express Couriers, or
otherwise, of your Agreements and Progress therein, that nothing may be found
wanting on our part, to satisfy the World of the value we have of his and her
Marriage, with our most dear Brother, resorting further to those particular
Instructions and Directions, you shall receive from him therein.

V. In the performance of this our Embassy, you shall take a special care of
our Dignity, not yiedling the Hand to any Ambassador of any Crowned King
whatsoever; but on the other side avoiding prudently, all unnecessary occasions
of Competition, not to discompose your Negotiation thereby, unless you are
unavoidably provoked thereunto: And if in your way going or coming, it shall
befall you to see any Princes of the Empire, even the Electors themselves, you
shall take care to stipulate before hand, the manner of your Reception, so as
it may not be inferior, to what they have given to the Ambassadors of any
Crowned Head; demanding especially the Hand of them in their own Palaces, when
you shall be visited in any of the Courts, by the Envoys, Ordinary or
Extraordinary, Residents, etc. of any Princes, you shall deny the Hand to them
in your own House, it being a Rule now Established.

By his Majesty's Command. ARLINGTON.
C. R.

A Commission constituting Henry Earl of Peterborow Lord Lieutenant of the
County of Northampton.
CArolus Secundus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Praedilecto and perquam fideli Consanguineo nostro Henrico Comiti de
Peterborow, Salutem.
Cum per quendam Actum in Parliamento nostro inchoato and tento, apud
Westmonasterium, octavo die Maii, Anno Regni nostri Decimo tertio, and ibidem
continuato usque ad decimum nonum diem Maii, Anno Regni nostri Decimo quarto,
and abinde tunc prorogato, usque ad decimum Octavum diem Februarii, tunc
proxime sequentem, intitulatum, [An Act for ordering the Forces in the several
Counties of this Kingdom,] factum and editum, ac authoritate ejusdem and
declaratum, and inactitatum existit, inter alia, quod nos, haeredes and
successores nostri, de tempore in tempus, ut occasio requirerit, emanabimus,
and emanare potuimus, separales Commissiones Locumtenentium, talibus personis,
quales nos, haeredes and successores nostri idoneas putabimus, fore
Locumtenentes nostros, pro separalibus and respectivis Comitatibus,
Civitatibus, and Locis Angliae, and Dominii Walliae, and villae Bervici super
Twedam: Qui Locumtenentes plenam habebunt potestatem, and authoritatem, ad
convocandum omnes tales personas, ad talia tempora, and eas armare, and
arraiare, in tali modo, qualiter postea in eodem Actu expressum, and declaratum
existit, ac ipsas in Cohortes, Turmas and Regimenta formare; ac in casu
Insurrectionis, Rebellionis, aut Invasionis, ipsas ducere, conducere, and
disponere, vel duci, conduci, and disponi causare, tam infra praedictos
separales Comitatus, Civitates and Loca, pro quibus respective commissionati
fuerint, quam etiam in aliquo alio Comitatu, and locis praedictis, ad
supprimendum omnes tales Insurrectiones and Rebelliones, and repellendum
Invasiones, quales fore contigerunt, secundum Directiones, quales ipsi, de
tempore in tempus, a nobis, haeredibus and successoribus nostris recipient,
prout per Actum illum, inter separales alias potestates, and authoritates, in
eodem contentas and specificatas, before liquet and apparet. Cumque nos per
Commissionem, sive Literas Patentes nostras, sub magno Sigillo nostri Angliae
confectas, gerentes data, Vicesimo primo die Maii, Anno Regni nostri Decimo
octavo, virtute, and secundum formam, tenorem and effectum, Actus Parlamenti
praedicti, ac pro meliori executione ejusdem, potestate and authoritate, in
eodem actu contentis, and specificatis, nominaverimus, fecerimus and
assignaverimus, praedilectum ac perquam fidelem Consanguineum nostrum Johannem
Comitem Exoniae, and te praefatum Henricum Comitem de Peterborow, Locumtenentes
nostros, per and in Comitatu nostro Northamptoniae, and per and in omnibus
Civitatibus, Burgis, Libertatibus, Locis incorporatis and privilegiatis, ac in
aliis locis quibuscunque, infra Comitatum illum, limits, and praecincta
ejusdem. Et tenore Commissionis, sive Literarum nostrarum Patentium
praedictarum, ac virtute Actus praedicti, plenam potestatem, and authoritatem
dederimus, and concesserimus, ad faciendum, exequendum, peragendum and
performandum, omnia and singula, in aut per Acta Parlamenti praedicti,
inactitatum, declaratum, sive contentum, quae ad hujusmodi Locumtenentes per
nos, vigore actus illius, nominandum and constituendum aliqualiter spectant,
virtute ejusdem Actus faciendum, exequendum, peragendum, seu performandum,
prout pet eandem Commissionem, sive Literas nostras Patentes praedictas,
before liquet and apparet. Cumque ratione longitudinis Comitatus nostri
Northamptoniae praedictae, magnaeque distantiae, separatim fuere, and partem
ejusdem Comitatus Locumtenentibus nostri praedicti, non tam commode insunt, and
conjunctim, quam separatim, and divisim possint, quod etiam in aliis nonnullis
Comitatibus hujus Regni nostri Angliae, experti sumus: Cumque dictus Comitatus
noster Northamptoniae, in duas parts, sive divisiones, divisus existit, aut
reputatur fore divisum, ex antiquo captum, and cognitum fuit, quarum una pars
vocatur, sive cognoscitur per nomen de le East division, and altera per nomen
de le West division, eundemque Comitatum sic partitum, and divisum per duos
separales Locumtenentes, duabus separalibus Commissionibus nostris munitos,
armare, arraiare, ordinare, disponere, regere and gubernare, secundum formam
Statuti praedicti equum esse duximus: Sciatis igitur quod nos ad requisitionem,
tam praefati Johannis Comitis Exoniae, quam praefati Henrici Comitis de
Peterborow, pro praeventione omnium, and omnimodarum Controversiarum,
Discordiarum, Misprisionum, Difficultatum, and in conjuncta Executione officii
praedicti Locumtenentis Comitatus praedicti: Ac etiam virtute, and secundum
tenorem, formam and effectum, Actus Parlamenti in praesentibus praesentatum, ac
pro meliori executione ejusdem, and potestate, and authoritate, in eodem Actu
contentis and specificatis, nominavimus, fecimus and assignavimus, ac per
praesentes nominamus, fecimus and assignamus, te praefatum Henricum Comitem de
Peterborow, per te ipsum solum, and non conjunctim, cum praefato Johanne Comite
Exoniae, Locumtenentem nostrum, per and in dicta part, sive divisione,
nuncupata sive cognita, per nomen de le West division Comitatus nostri
Northamptoniae praedictae, and per and in omnibus Civitatibus, Burgis,
Libertatibus, Locis incorporatis and privilegiatis, ac in aliis locis
quibuscunque, infra Divisionem illam, vocatam le West division, vel infra
limits, vel praecincta ejusdem, and tenore praesentium, ac virtute Actus
praedicti before separatim, and distinctim, potestatem and authoritatem, tibi
damus and concedimus, infra le West division praedictam, ad faciendum,
exequendum, peragendum and performandum, omnia and singula, in aut per Actum
Parlamenti praedicti inactitatum, declaratum, sive contentum, quae ad hujusmodi
Locumtenentem, per nos, vigore Actus illius, nominandum, seu constituendum,
aliqualiter spectant, virtute ejusdem Actus faciendum, exequendum, performandum
seu peragendum. Et ideo tibi mandamus, quod secundum tenorem, formam and
effectum, Actus Parlamenti illius, in hac part procedas, and ea omnia, and
singula facere, and exequi, cum effectu, infra le West division praedictam,
periculo incumbente. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras fieri fecimus
Patentes. Test meipso apud Westmonasterium, Vicesimo sexto die Maii, Anno
Regni nostri Vicesimo sexto.

Per breve de privato Sigillo.

Instructions for our Right Trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin, Henry Earl of
Peterborow, our Ambassador Extraordinary to the Court of Modena. Given at our
Court at Whitehall, the Thirty first Day of July. 1673.
Charles R.

THE occasion failing upon which we lately Instructed you, in the quality of
our Extraordinary Ambassador to the Court of Vienna, viz. The effecting a
Marriage betwixt our most dear Brother JAMES Duke of York, etc. and the Young
Archdutchess of Inspruck; and our said dear Brother, desiring us now to consent
to his Marriage, with the Young Princess of Modena, Mary d' Este, Sister to the
present Duke of Modena; we have thought fit hereby to enjoin, and direct you to
make what convenient speed you possibly can, to the Court of the said Prince;
and introducing your self there by your Letters of Credence, which we herewith
send you, to an Audience with the Duchess Regent, (after the performance of
such Complements to her on our part, as will best occur to you upon the
Subject) open unto her our Brother's earnest desire, to Espouse the Young
Princess her Daughter, declaring withal, the sufficient Authority you have to
effect the same, by virtue of those Powers, you will herewith receive from us,
and our said most dear Brother: And desiring of her to appoint you some
Ministers, with whom you may adjust all circumstances, as well relating to the
Marriage, as the briging the Princess hither: Accordingly you shall stipulate
and agree, such Conditions and Articles with them, for the payment of the Young
Princess's Portion on their part, and for the establishing of a Jointure on
ours, as you shall be more particularly Instructed therein, by our said dearest
Brother, who seems to be willing to settle a Jointure of Fifteen thousand
Pounds per annum Sterling, Money of England, and even to enlarge himself
further therein, if the value of her Portion (hitherto not certainly known to
us,) shall require a better; and further secure this clause by referring it,
and the time for the payment of her Portion, to the Arbitration of the most
Christian King, as a neutral person betwixt the parties; in case you do not
find it easy for you, finally to conclude these Points your self. These
Capitulations being thus finished, you shall proceed to Espouse the Princess in
our Brother's name, according to the Deputation, and Proxy he will send you to
that effect; and when that Ceremony is over, adjust with the Duchess Regent,
or her Ministers, the manner of bringing the Young Princess hither, which we
suspect (for the avoiding of many troublesome and chargeable Ceremonies) she
will choose to do, Incognita; consequent to which, you shall leave to them the
defraying the expense thereof, as far as Paris or Calice, whither our said
Brother will resolve to send a part of his Household, to receive and entertain
her at his charge, until she arrives in our Court; assuring the Duchess
Regent, and the Young Princess too, of all possible evidences on our part, of
our tender care and affection to her, agreeable to the quality of her Person,
and the Love we shall ever bear her, as our Brother's Wife. Now although it be
unusual to send Extraordinary Ambassadors to a single Prince in Italy of that
Sphere, yet we have condescended unto it, to honor our most dear Brother's
choice of this Princess for his Wife: But that on the other side, our own
Dignity may not suffer thereby, you must be careful at your appearance in that
Court, to stipulate and adjust, the manner of your Reception there, to the full
extent of such Ceremonies, as have been given to the Ambassadors of France and
Spain, that have ever appeared there, and particularly those given to the Duke
de Navailles, when he conducted thither a Wife to the late Duke. You shall not
fail to give us timely notice, of all your Progress and Proceedings herein, by
the Hands of one of our principal Secretaries of State, that if need be, we may
transmit to you, our further Instructions and Directions, for the better
performance of this important Service. Given at our Court at Whitehall, the
Thirty first Day of July, One thousand six hundred seventy three, in the five
and twentieth Year of our Reign.

By his Majesty's Command. ARLINGTON.
C. R.

JAMES Duke of York and Albany, Earl of Ulster, etc.
Instructions for the Earl of Peterborow, in his Extraordinary Embassy,
touching my Marriage with the Princess of Modena.
I. YOU are in pursuance of his Majesty's Command and Powers to that effect, to
make what speed you can to Modena, (or where-else that Court shall be) and
there having obtained Audience of the Duchess Regent, Duke, and Princess his
Sister, and presented your credential Letters from his Majesty, and my self,
(which shall be sent you herewith:) You are to profess to them, the earnest
desires I have, of Marrying that Young Princess, and the great Affection I have
conceived of her Person and Virtues, with such other expressions, as you judge
proper for the occasion.

II. Your are to apply your self to that Court, and the Ministers there in such
sort, as to expedit all you can, the Conclusion of this Treaty and my Marriage;
to which end in Stipulating the conditions, for payment of the
Marriage-Portion, whether as to the same it self, or as to the times and
methods of payment: In case you find any difficulties therein, you are to refer
to the determination of the most Christian King, who being a Neutral Person
between the parties, and a Friend to each, will adjust this point to the mutual
Satisfaction of both.

III. You are, as a particular mark of my esteem of the Young Princess, to
offer for her Jointure, (in case she survive me,) the annual Rent of Fifteen
thousand Pounds Sterling, payable quarterly, and to be given out of my whole
Revenue, and to be secured according to the best, and most effectual Forms,
used in the Common Laws of England; at the same time, assuring the Duchess
Regent, and her Ministers, of my willingness to augment this Pension, according
to the proportion, of what her Portion shall be judged to exceed it in value,
by the determination of the most Christian King.

IV. When you shall have contracted the Princess in my name, you are to present
to her, as a token of my esteem, such part of my Jewels in your custody, as you
shall judge convenient; and on the Morning of the Day of performing the
solemnity of the Marriage, you shall present her with the remainder of my said
Jewels, as a farther pledge of my Affection, and Satisfaction of what you have
done for me.

V. When the Marriage Ceremonies are performed, you shall with all convenient
speed, conduct the Princess at the charge of the Court of Modena, to Paris or
Calice rather, (if it may be) and for avoiding many troublesome, and expensive
Formalities, it will be advisable that she come incognita. But for the better
adjusting this point likewise, you are to consult with the French Minister upon
the place, who will be fully instructed therein.

VI. At the same time the Princess shall arrive at Paris or Calice, which you
are to signify to me before hand, as soon as you can compute it exactly, I
shall order out of the Officers, and others of my Household, a suitable Retinue
for her, to be assisting to her there, and wait upon her hither; always
supposing you will do your utmost, to inculcate to the Princess her self, and
the Ministers there, the great inconveniences would follow, her being attended
with too numerous a train of Foreigners, who are seldom so useful here as
Natives, and are obnoxious to censure upon any miscarriages; but because this
point is such a one, as may be better handled by the French Minister, you shall
herein use his help.

VII. In all things touching this matter, whether expressed here or omitted,
you are to consult likewise the Instructions, you shall have received from his
Majesty, on this occasion, that by comparing both, you may be the better
guided, in what you are to transact.

VIII. You are to lose no opportunity, of giving me (or my Secretary) constant
advice of your Proceedings and Progress, as well for my own Information, as for
your further Direction, if any new matter occur, not at present foreseen.

Finally, His Majesty having left it to me, more particularly to direct you the
best I can, in the performance of this Service, so as it may speedily take
effect to my satisfaction, I cannot think it will be well brought to pass, if
you carry with you a Train or Equipage, answerable to your Character of
Extraordinary Ambassador, viz, Coaches, Horses, Footmen, and many other
Officers proportionably: My Opinion therefore and Direction is, That you go
Post to Modena, by the way of Lions and Turin, incognito, with such a Train as
is suitable to that way of Traveling; and yet with as much regard to the
dignity of your Embassy, as may be, viz. A competent number of Gentlemen,
Pages, and other ordinary Servants, as are convenient for you, dividing which
by several companies, they will never be far behind you, especially at your
arrival in the Court of Modena, where it is only necessary they should be seen
with you. And arriving there you must without delay, enter into a Conference
with him that is the Minister of the most Christian King, under what Character
soever he be there, and imparting to him freely the scope of your Errand,
advise with him, and use his assistance, in obtaining and adjusting for you
such things, as may facilitate all the ends thereof, as well for your own
dignity and convenience, as the speedy accomplishment of the Marriage, and all
the Circumstances depending thereupon.

When the Marriage shall be over, and that you have adjusted also the manner of
the Princess's coming into France, (which Journey I think will most
conveniently be performed by Sea to Marseilles, whither the Galleys of the most
Christian King, will be ordered to bring her, and whither you must attend her,)
it will be fit that then, or before you dismiss most of your Retinue, least
their Attendance may not consist with the figure, the Princess may probably
desire, to take of Traveling, incognita, or embarras you in the Conveniences
of your Journey, retaining only as many as will fill one Coach, and thus follow
her all the way, until she arrive at Paris, or Calice, at one of which places,
my Servants shall be appointed to attend upon her, and then you shall be sure
of receiving new orders from me.

Given under my Hand and Seal, at Saint James's the First Day of August. 1673.
JAMES.
By command of his Royal Highness. Jo. Werden.

The Earl of Peterborow's Pass from the King, to go Extraordinary Ambassador to
Modena.
CArolus Secundus, Dei gratia, Magnae Britaniae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Universis and singulis ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, salutem.
Cum praedilectus, ac perquam fidelis Consanguineus noster, Henricus Comes de
Peterborow, Legatus a nobis Extraordinarius, ad Curiam serenissimi Principis
Ducis de Modena proficiscatur, quo tutius iter illud suscipiat conficiatque,
rogandos duximus, omnes and singulos Reges, Principes, tam Ecclesiasticos, quam
Seculares, Status, Respublicas, liberasque Civitates, Amicos nostros, and
faederatos, eorumque subditos (quod and subditis nostris ubique locorum
firmiter injungimus) velint dicto Legato nostro Extraordinario, liberam eundi,
transeundi, redeundi, commorandique (prout occasio postulaverit) copiam facere,
una cum Comitatu, Famulitio, Equis, Sarcinis, Rebusque omnibus, eidemque simul
omnibus humanitatis officiis adesse, and favere; and id quod nos pari, vel alio
Officiorum genere, occasion quacunque universis, and fingulis grati referemus.

Dabantur e Palatio nostro de Whitehall, Secundi die Augusti, Anno Domini 1673.
Regnique nostri Vigesimo quinto. CAROLUS R.
Ad mandatum serenissimi Domini Regis. ARLINGTON.

An Order for the Earl of Peterborow's being Sworn a Privy Councellor.
At the Court at Hampton Court, the Tenth Day of July, 1674.
PRESENT,
The KING's Most Excellent MAJESTY. His Highness Prince RVPERT. Lord Keeper.
Lord Treasurer. Lord Privy Seal. Duke of Monmouth. Duke of Lauderdale. Marquess
of Dorchester. Earl of Ogle. Earl of Ossory. Lord Chamberlain. Earl of Bath.
Earl of Craven. Earl of Arlington. Lord Maynard. Lord Berkeley. Mr. Secretary
Coventry. Mr. Mountague. Mr. Chancellor of the Duchy. Mr. of the Ordnance. Mr.
Speaker.
THIS Day the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Peterborow was, by His Majesty's
special Command, Sworn one of the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable
Privy Council, and took his place at the Board accordingly.

Robert Southwell.

The Earl of Peterborow's Commission for being Colonel of a Regimet of Horse.
Charles R.

CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To our Right trusty, and Right welbeloved
Cousin and Councellor, Henry Earl of Peterborow, Greeting: We reposing trust
and confidence in your Loyalty, Courage, and good Conduct, do by these
Presents, constitute and appoint you, to be a Colonel of a Regiment of Horse,
raised, and to be raised for our Service, and to be called the Regiment of our
dear Brother, JAMES Duke of York; consisting of Eight Troops, and each Troop of
Threescore Men, besides Officers: And we do also constitute and appoint you to
be a Captain of a Troop in the said Regiment. You are therefore to take the
said Regiment as Colonel, and the said Troop as Captain, into your Care, and
Charge, and duly to Exercise, as well Officers, as Soldiers in Arms, and to
use your best endeavor to keep them in good Order and Discipline. And we do
hereby Command them to obey you, as their Colonel and Captain respectively.
And you are from time to time to observe such Orders and Directions, as you
shall receive from our General of our Forces, or other Superior Officer,
according to the Discipline of War, in pursuance of the Trust we repose in you.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the Sixteenth Day of February, 1677/8. in the
Thirtieth Year of our Reign. By his Majesty's Command. H. Coventry.
Entered with the Comissioner-General of Musters.



A Writ Summoning the Earl of Peterborow to the Parliament, 30. Caroli Secundi.
CArolus Secundus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Charissimo consanguineo nostro Henrico Comiti de Peterborow, Salutem.
Quia ex advisamento and assensu Concilii nostri, pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum, and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, quoddam Parlamentum nostrum, apud
Civitatem nostram Westmonasteriensem, sexto die Martii proxime futuro, teneri
ordinavimus, and ibidem vobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus
dicti regni nostri colloquium habere and tractatum, vobis, sub fide and
ligeantia, quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod
confideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate, and periculis imminentibus,
cessante excusatione quacunque, dictis die and loco, personaliter intersitis
nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus super dictis negociis
tractaturi, veriusque Consilium impensuri: Et hoc sicut nos, and honorem
nostrum, and salvationem, and defensionem Regni and Ecclesiae praedictae,
expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis, nullatenus omittatis.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium, Vicesimo quinto die Januarii, Anno Regni
nostri Tricesimo. Grimston.
Pengry.

A Commission constituting Henry Earl of Peterborow Lord Lieutenant of the
County of Northampton.
CArolus Secundus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae, Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Praedilecto and perquam fideli Consanguineo, and Consiliario nostro, Henrico
Comiti de Peterborow, Salutem.
Cum per quendam actum in Parliamento nostro inchoato and tento, apud
Westmonasterium Octavo die Maii, Anno Regni nostri Decimo tertio, and ibidem
continuato, usque ad decimum nonum diem Maii, proxime sequentem, and abinde
tunc prorogato, usque ad decimum Octavum diem Februarii proxime sequentem,
Intitulatum, [An Act for Ordering the Forces in the several Counties of this
Kingdom,] factum and editum, ac authoritate ejusdem declaratum, and inactitatum
existit (inter alia) quod nos, haeredes and successores nostri, de tempore in
tempus, (ut occasio requirerit) emanabimus, and emanare potuimus, separales
Commissiones Locumtenentium, talibus personis, quales nos, haeredes and
successores nostri idoneas putabimus (fore Locumtenentes nostros) pro
separalibus and respectivis Comitatibus, Civitatibus, and Locis Angliae, and
Dominii Walliae, and villae Bervici super Twedam: Qui Locumtenentes habebunt
plenam authoritatem, and potestatem, ad convocandum omnes tales personas, ad
talia tempora, and eas armare, and arraiare, in tali modo, qualiter postea in
eodem Actu expressum, and declaratum existit; ac ipsas, in Cohortes, Turmas,
and Regimenta formare; and in casu Insurrectionis, Rebellionis, aut Invasionis,
ipsas ducere, conducere, and disponere, vel duci, conduci, and disponi causare,
tam infra praedictos separales Comitatus, Civitates and Loca, pro quibus
respective commissionati fuerint, quam etiam infra aliquem alium Comitatum, and
Locos praedictos, ad supprimendum omnes tales Insurrectiones and Rebelliones,
and repellendum Invasiones, quales fore contigerint, secundum Directiones, de
tempore in tempus, a nobis, haeredibus, and successoribus nostris recipient,
prout per Actum illum, inter separales alias potestates and authoritates, in
eodem contentis and specificatis, before liquet and apparet. Sciatis igitur,
quod nos, virtute and secundum tenorem, formam, and effectum, Actus Parliamenti
praedicti, ac pro meliori executione ejusdem, and potestate ac authoritate in
eodem Actu contentis and specificatis, nominavimus, fecimus and assignavimus,
ac per praesentes nominamus, facimus, and assignamus, te praefatum Henricum
Comitem de Peterborow Locumtenentem nostrum, pro Comitatu nostro
Northamptoniae, and in omnibus locis corporatis, and privilegiatis, and aliis
locis quibuscunque, infra dictum Comitatum nostrum Northamptoniae. Et tenore
praesentium, ac virtute ejusdem Actus, plenam potestatem, and authoritatem,
tibi damus and concedimus, ad faciendum, exequendum, peragendum and
performandum, omnia and singula, in aut per Actum Parlamenti praedicti,
inactitatum, declaratum, sive contentum, quae ad hujusmodi Locumtenentem, per
nos, vigore Actus illius, nominandum, seu constituendum, aliqualiter spectant,
virtute ejusdem Actus faciendum, exequendum, peragendum, seu performandum. Et
ideo tibi mandamus, quod secundum tenorem, formam and effectum, Actus
Parlamenti illius, in hac part procedas, and ea omnia, facias and exequaris,
cum effectu, periculo incumbente. In cujus rei Testimonium has Literas nostras
fieri fecimus Patentes.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium, Vicesimo die Februarii, Anno Regni nostri
Tricesimo. Per breve de privato Sigillo. Barker.

A Writ Summoning the Earl of Peterborow to the Parliament, 31. Caroli Secundi.
CArolus Secundus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Charissimo consanguineo nostro Henrico Comiti de Peterborow.
Quia de advisamento and assensu Concilii nostri, pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum, and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, quoddam Parlamentum nostrum, apud
Civitatem nostram Westmonasteriensem, decimo septimo die Octobris proxime
futuro, teneri ordinavimus, and ibidem vobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus
and Proceribus, dicti Regni nostri, colloquium habere and tractatum, vobis, sub
fide and ligeantia, quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod
consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate, and periculis imminentibus,
cessante excusatione quacunque, dictis die and loco, personaliter intersitis
nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus praedictis, super dictis
negotiis tractaturi, veriusque Consilium impensuri: Et hoc sicut nos, and
honorem nostrum, and salvationem, and defensionem Regni, and Ecclesiae
praedictae, expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis, nullatemus omittatis.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium, Vigesimo quarto die Julii, Anno Regni
nostri Tricesimo primo. Grimston.
Pengry.

A Writ Summoning the Earl of Peterborow to the Parliament, 32. Caroli Secundi.
CArolus Secundus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Charissimo Consanguineo nostro Henrico Comiti de Peterborow, Salutem.
Quia de advisamento and assensu Concilii nostri, pro quibusdam arduis, and
urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum, and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, quoddam Parlamentum nostrum, apud Oxoniam,
vicesimo primo die Martii, proxime futuro, teneri ordinavimus, ac ibidem
vobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, and Proceribus dicti Regni nostri,
colloquium habere and tractatum, vobis, sub fide and ligeantia, quibus nobis
tenemini, firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod consideratis dictorum negotiorum
arduitate, and periculis imminentibus, cessante excusatione quacunque, dictis
die and loco, personaliter intersitis nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus
and Proceribus praedictis, super dictis negotiis tractaturi, veriusque
Consilium impensuri: Et hoc sicut nos, and honorem nostrum, ac salvationem and
defensionem Regni, and Ecclesiae praedictae, expeditionemque dictorum
negotiorum diligitis, nullatenus omittatis.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium, Vigesimo die Januarii, Anno Regni nostri
Tricesimo secundo. Grimston,
Pengry.

The Jointure of the Countess of Peterborow in Turvey.
THIS Indenture made the Sixth Day of August in the (...) Year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. and in the Year
of our Lord God One thousand six hundred (...) Between the Right Honorable
Henry Earl of Peterborow, of the one part; and the Right Honorable Arthur Earl
of Anglesey, the Honorable William Mountague, Esquire, Brother to the Lord
Mountague of Boughton, Sir William Farmer, of Easton, in the County of
Northampton, Baronet, and Sir John Nicholas, Knight of the Honorable Order of
the Bath, of the other part: Whereas the Manner of Turvey, and certain Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments in Turvey, in the County of Bedford (except a
certain Farm, and the Lands thereunto belonging, in the possession of John
Dobbs) were settled, or intended to be settled, upon Penelope Countess of
Peterborow, for her natural Life, for her Jointure, and in lieu of her Dower
and Thirds of the Estate of the said Henry Earl of Peterborow, and a certain
Decree has been made in the High Court of Chancery, for the Establishing the
same for her Jointure accordingly; and it is the intent and purpose of the said
Henry Earl of Peterborow, that the same shall be enjoyed accordingly: Now
witness these Presents, That the said Henry Earl of Peterborow, for, and in
consideration of the Sum of Five Shillings, of Lawful Money of England, by the
said Arthur Earl of Anglesey, William Mountague, Sir William Farmer, and Sir
John Nicholas, at and before the Ensealing and Delivery of these Presents, well
and truly unto the said Henry Earl of Peterborow in hand paid, the receipt
whereof he does hereby acknowledge; and thereof, and of every part and parcel
thereof, does clearly and absolutely acquit and discharge the said Arthur Earl
of Anglesey, William Mountague, Sir William Farmer, and Sir John Nicholas,
their Executors and Administrators for ever, by these Presents, and for diverse
other good Causes and Considerations him thereunto moving; has Granted,
Bargained, and Sold, and by these Presents does grant, bargain and sell, unto
the said Arthur Earl of Anglesey, William Mountague, Sir William Farmer, and
Sir John Nicholas, their Executors, Admininistrators and Assigns, all the
Manner, or reputed Manner of Turvey, in the County of Bedford; and all Messuages,
Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments whatsoever, of him the said Henry Earl of
Peterborow, situate, lying, and being in Turvey aforesaid, or accepted,
reputed, taken, demised or known as part or parcel of the said Manner of Turvey
aforesaid, (except a certain Farm, and the Lands thereunto belonging, in the
possession of John Dobbs;) To have and to hold the said Manner of Turvey, and
all the Premises in Turvey aforesaid, (except as before is excepted) unto the
said Arthur Earl of Anglesey, William Mountague, Sir William Farmer, and Sir
John Nicholas, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, from and after the
death of the said Henry Earl of Peterborow, for and during, and unto the full
end and term of Ninety nine Years, from thence ensuing, and fully to be
complete and ended; if she the said Penelope, Countess of Peterborow, shall so
long live: Nevertheless, upon this special Trust and Confidence, That the said
Arthur Earl of Anglesey, William Mountague, Sir William Farmer, and Sir John
Nicholas, their Executors, Administrators and Assigns, shall permit, and suffer
the Rents, Issues and Profits thereof, to be received and taken, in pursuance
of, and according to the said Decree, and according as was intended by the said
Settlement for a Jointure.

In Witness whereof the Parties abovenamed have to these Present Indentures,
Interchangeably set their Hands and Seals, the Day and Year first
above-written.
An Order for the Earl of Peterborow's being Sworn a Privy-Counsellor.
At the Court at Whitehall, the Twenty eighth Day of February, 1682.
PRESENT,
The KING's Most Excellent MAJESTY. Lord Archbishop of Canterbury. Lord Keeper.
Lord Privy Seal. Duke of Albemarle. Duke of Beaufort. Lord Chamberlain. Earl of
Oxford. Earl of Chesterfield. Earl of Sunderland. Earl of Clarenden. Earl of
Bath. Earl of Craven. Earl of Ailesbury. Earl of Conway. Earl of Nottingham.
Earl of Rochester. Lord Dartmouth. Mr. Secretary Jenkins. Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer. Mr. Godolphin.
THIS Day the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Peterborow was, by His Majesty's
special Command, Sworn one of the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable
Privy Council, and took his place at the Board, and signed accordingly.

John Nicholas.

A Copy of the Oath taken by the Earl of Peterborow, as Groom of the Stole.
YOU shall Swear by the Holy Evangelists, and by the Contents of this Book, and
by the Faith that you bear unto Almighty God, To be a true Servant unto Our
Sovereign Lord JAMES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

You shall know nothing that shall be any ways hurtful, or prejudicial to the
King's Majesty's Royal Person, State, Crown, or Dignity, but you shall hinder
it what in you lies; or else reveal the same (with all convenient speed) to
the King's Majesty, or some of his Most Honorable Privy Council.

You shall serve the King, truly and faithfully, in the place whereunto you are
called, as Groom of the Stole to His Majesty, and First Gentleman of the
Bedchamber. So help you God, and the Contents of this Book.

A Writ Summoning the Earl of Peterborow to the Parliament, 1mo. Jacobi Secundi.
JAcobus Secundus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Rex,
Fidei Defensor, etc.
Charissimo Consanguineo and Consiliario nostro, Henrico Comiti de Peterborow,
Salutem.
Quia de advisamento and assensu Concilii nostri, pro quibusdam arduis and
urgentibus negotiis, nos, statum, and defensionem Regni nostri Angliae, and
Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, quoddam Parlamentum nostrum, apud
Civitatem nostram Westmonasteriensem, decimo nono die Maii, proxime futuro,
teneri ordinavimus, and ibidem vobiscum; ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus, and
Proceribus dicti regni nostri colloquium habere and tractatum; Vobis, sub fide
and ligeantia, quibus nobis tenemini, firmiter injungendo mandamus, quod
consideratis dictorum negotiorum arduitate, and periculis imminentibus,
cessante excusatione quacunque, dictis die and loco, personaliter intersitis
nobiscum, ac cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and Proceribus praedictis super dictis
negotiis tractaturi, vestrumque Consilium impensuri: Et hoc ficut nos, and
honorem nostrum, and salvationem, and defensionem Regni and Ecclesiae
praedictae, expeditionemque dictorum negotiorum diligitis, nullatenus omittatis.

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium, decimo quarto die Februarii, Anno Regni
nostri primo. Churchill,
Pengry.

A Letter from King James the Second to the Earl of Peterborow, Commanding his
Attendance at the Coronation.
To Our Right trusty Cousin and Counselor Henry Earl of Peterborow. James R.

RIght Trusty and Welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, We greet you well. Whereas
We have appointed the 23d. day of April next for the Solemnity of Our
Coronation; These are therefore to Will and Command you (all Excuses set apart)
That you make your Personal Attendance on Us, at the time abovementioned;
(furnished and appointed, as to your Rank and Quality appertains) there to do
and perform such Services, as shall be required, and belong to you. And
whereas. We have also resolved, That the Coronation of Our Royal Consort the
Queen, shall be Solemnized on the same Day; We do further hereby require the
Countess your Wife, to make her Personal Attendance on Our said Royal Consort,
at the time, and in the manner aforesaid: Whereof you and she are not to fail:
And so We bid you heartily farewell.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 23d. Day of March 1684/5. in First Year
of Our Reign.
A Letter from the Duke of Norfolk to the Earl of Peterborow, intimating the
King's Pleasure that he should bear St. Edward's Scepter at the Coronation.
For the Right Honorable the Earl of Peterborow.
MY LORD,
HIS Majesty having appointed your Lordship to bear St. Edward's Scepter in the
Proceeding at his Majesty's Coronation: This is to desire your Lordship, to
meet in the House of Lords, at His Majesty's Palace of Westminster, on Thursday
the Three and twentieth of April Instant, by Eight of the Clock in the Morning,
in your Robes, and with your Coronet, in order to the performance of His
Majesty's Pleasure. I am,

MY LORD, Your Lordships, Most Obedient Servant, NORFOLK and MARSHAL.

An Order from King JAMES the Second, to the Earl of Peterborow, for Raising
the Militia of the County of Northampton.
To Our Right Trusty and welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, Henry Earl of
Peterborow, our Lieutenant of our County of Northampton. James R.

RIght Trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, We Greet you well.
Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby require you, to give order and take
care, That the Militia Troops of Horse in your Lieutenancy be forthwith raised:
And as to the Foot, We think it requisite, they should be in such a readiness,
that they may be immediately called together, to March, or obey such other
Orders, as they shall receive for Our Service:

And so We bid you heartily farewell.
Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the Sixteenth Day of June 1685. in the First
Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command. SVNDERLAND.

An Order from King JAMES the Second, to the Earl of Peterborow, for the
seizing of suspected Persons.
To Our Right Trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, Henry Earl of
Peterborow, Our Lieutenant for Our County of Northampton. James R.

RIght Trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, We Greet you well.
Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby Authorize and Direct you, to give
Order forthwith for the seizing and apprehending all disaffected and suspicious
Persons; and particularly all Nonconformist Ministers, and such Persons as
have served against Our Royal Father, and late Royal Brother of Blessed Memory;
and for sending them, in safe Custody, to the Prison at Oxford, to be secured
there till further Order: And for so doing this shall be your Warrant.

And so We bid you heartily farewell. Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the
Twentieth Day of June, in the First Year of Our Reign. 1685. By His Majesty's
Command. SVNDERLAND.
Our Will and Pleasure also is, That you give order for securing all the
Horses, belonging to any Persons, which shall be so seized.



The Earl of Peterborow's Commission for being Colonel of a Regiment of Horse.
James R.

JAMES the Second, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
To our Right trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, Henry Earl of
Peterborow, Greeting:
We reposing especial Trust and Confidence in your Loyalty, Courage, and good
Conduct, do by these Presents, constitute and appoint you, to be a Colonel of
a Regiment of Horse, raised, and to be raised for our Service, and likewise to
be Captain of a Troop in the said Regiment. You are therefore to take the said
Regiment and Troop into your Care and Charge, and duly to Exercise, as well the
Officers as Soldiers in Arms, and to use your best endeavor to keep them in
good Order and Discipline. And we do hereby Command them to obey you, as their
Colonel and Captain respectively; and you to observe and follow such Orders
and Directions, from time to time, as you shall receive from Us, or any your
Superior Officer, according to the Rules and Discipline of War, in pursuance of
the Trust we repose in you.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the Twentieth Day of June, 1685. in the First
Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command. SVNDERLAND.

A Letter from the Earl of Sunderland, to the Earl of Peterborow, about
Marching his Three Troops to Colebrook.
Whitehall, 30th. June, 1685. MY LORD,
HIS Majesty Commands me to acquaint your Lordship, That He thinks it
convenient you should be near His Person; and therefore would have you repair
hither, so soon as you can conveniently: As to the Three Troops of Horse, which
your Lordship so well approves of, He would have them forthwith ordered to
march to Colebrook, to be in Quarters there; and doubts not, but you will leave
such directions, with the rest of the Militia, as may be most requisite for His
Majesty's Service. I wish your Lordship a good Journey, and am,

MY LORD, Your Lordships, Most Faithful humble Servant, SVNDERLAND.

The King's Warrant to Discharge the Prisoners at Oxford.
To Our Right Trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, Henry Earl of
Peterborow, Our Lieutenant for Our County of Northampton. James R.

RIght Trusty and Right welbeloved Cousin and Counselor, We greet you well:
Whereas We did, by our former Letters, authorize and require you to give
Order, for seizing and apprehending all disaffected and suspicious Persons, and
particularly all Nonconformist Ministers, and such Persons as have served
against Our Royal Father, and late Royal Brother, of blessed Memory, and for
securing them and their Horses: And it having pleased God, to Bless Our Arms
with Success against the Rebels, so that they are entirely defeated, and the
Chiefs taken: Our Will and Pleasure is, That you forthwith give Order, for
discharging all such Persons so secured, who where taken up upon Suspicion
only, and for restoring their Horses to them: But as to those, who stand
particularly accused, of having any way corresponded with, or otherwise abetted
the Rebels; You are to direct, that they be continued Prisoners, that they may
be Tried at the Assizes, or elsewhere, as shall be thought fit; and for so
doing this shall be your Warrant:

And so We bid you heartily Farewell.
Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 16th. Day of July, 1685. in the First
Year of Our Reign. By His Majesty's Command. SVNDERLAND.

A Letter from the Bishop of Sarum, to the Earl of Peterborow, intimating the
King's Pleasure that he attend at a Chapter of the Order of the Garter.
May it please your Lordship,
HIS Majesty, Sovereign of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, having Commanded
me to signify to your Lordship, That a Chapter shall be held at Whitehall, on
Friday next, being the One and thirtieth Day of July, at Three of the Clock in
the Afternoon: These are humbly to give Notice thereof to your Lordship, to
appear there in your Mantle only.

Your Lordships, In all Obedience, Seth Sarum, Praenob. Ord. Gart. Canc.
July 29. 1685.
A Patent of High Steward and Chief Bailiff to the Queen's Majesty, Granted to
the Right Honorable Henry Earl of Peterborow.
Mary R.

MAria, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regina,
Omnibus ad quos praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem.
Sciatis quod nos magnam Fidelitatem and Integritatem praedilecti and perquam
fidelis Cognati and Consiliarii nostri Henrici Comitis de Peterborow, Custodis
Stolae charissimi Domini and Mariti nostri considerantes; Nec non pro diversis
Causis and Considerationibus, nos ad hoc specialiter moventibus: De gratia
nostra speciali, ac ex certa scientia, and mero motu nostris, dedimus and
concessimus, ac per praesentes damus and concedimus, eidem Henrico Comiti de
Peterborow, Officium Capitalis Seneschalli, vel Seneschalliae, omnium and
singulorum (quae nunc sunt vel imposterum fuerint) Honorum, Maneriorum and
Dominiorum nostrorum infra hoc Regnum Angliae, ac Custodiam sive Officium
tenendi Curias Leetiae and Visifranciplegii and Leetiae Honorum, Maneriorum and
Dominiorum praedictorum, and eorum cujuslibet. Ac ipsum Henricum Comitem de
Peterborow, Capitalem and Generalem Seneschallum nostrum, in Curiis nostris
Visifranciplegii and Leetiae infra Honores, Dominia, Maneria, and Hereditamenta
nostra praedicta facimus, constituimus, and ordinamus per praesentes. Et
ulterius de liberiori gratia nostra dedimus and concessimus, ac per praesentes
damus and concedimus, praefato Henrico Comiti de Peterborow, Officium Generalis
and Capitalis Ballivi, omnium and singulorum praemissorum, and cujuslibet
eorum: Habendum, tenendum, gaudendum and exercendum, Officia praedicta, and
quodlibet eorum, per se, vel per sufficientem Deputatum suum, five sufficientes
Deputatos suos, quamdiu Nobis placuerit. Percipiendum annuatim, in and pro
exercitio Officii praedicti, Generalis and Capitalis Seneschalli, Viginti
Libras, bonae and legalis Monetae Angliae: Solvendum per manus Thesaurarii sive
Receptoris nostri Generalis, ad Festum Sancti Michaelis Archangeli, and
Annunciationis Beatae Mariae Virginis, per aequales portiones: Nec non
percipiendum annuatim, pro exercitio Officiorum praedictorum, Generalis and
Capitalis Seneschalli, and Generalis and Capitalis Ballivi, omnia Vada, Feoda,
Proficua, Advantagia and Emolumenta quaecunque, eisdem Officiis, vel alicui
eorum, aliquo modo spectantia aut pertinentia, adeo libere, and tam amplis modo
and forma, prout Henricus Comes de Arlington, nuper Capitalis and Generalis
Seneschallus and Ballivus Excellentissimae Principis Catharinae Reginae, vel
aliquis alius, seu aliqui alii, antehaec locum tenens, vel locum tenentes,
Generalis and Capitalis Seneschalli, and Generalis and Capitalis Ballivi,
alicujus Reginae Consortis Regis Angliae, pro tempore existentis, Officia
praedicta habens, seu habentes, habuit, percepit, vel gavisus fuit, habuerunt,
perceperunt, vel gavisi fuerunt, aut de jure habere, percipere, vel gaudere
debuit vel debuerunt. In cujus rei Testimonium, has Literas nostras fieri
fecimus Patentes. Datum sub Magno Sigillo nostro apud Whitehall, Decimo nono
die Januarii, Anno Regni praecharissimi Domini and Mariti nostri Jacobi
Secundi, Dei Gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae Regis, Fidei
Defensoris, etc. primo, Annoque Domini, 168

May it please Your Majesty,

This contains a Grant from Your Majesty, to the Right Honorable Henry Earl
of Peterborow, of the Offices of High Steward and Keeper of Your Courts Leet,
etc. and of General and Chief Bailiff of all Your Majesty's Honors, Manners and
Lands, now, or hereafter, within the Kingdom of England: To hold during Your
Majesty's Pleasure; with the Annual Fee of Twenty Pounds, for the said Office
of High Steward, and all other profits to the said several Offices belonging.
And is done by virtue of your Majesty's Warrant to me directed, bearing Date
the First Day of January 1685/6.

To. North.

OF THE Collateral BRANCHES That have issued out of the HOUSE OF MORDAUNT.

OF THE Collateral BRANCHES That have issued out of the HOUSE OF MORDAUNT.
HAVING deduced the Succict Genealogies of all the Houses whence were
descended, and whereunto were Heirs, the Mordaunts that were Lords of Turvey in
the County of Bedford; as likewise particularly, that of the same Noble Family,
and justified them by the Extant and Unquestionable Proofs inserted all along
in the foregoing Works. I have thought it indispensably necessary to declare
the descents of those Branches also that at several times proceeded from the
Chief House, and that in other Countries, upon Lordships of their own, have
since made separated Families, and continued in Worthy Estimation to this day:
That in case of accidents, though very improbable, which might conduce to the
extinction of the Eldest Family, there might remain Lights to the right of
Succession, for preventing future Controversies, and wrongful or mistaken
Pretenses, though it cannot be expected instruments of Proof should be inserted
here as in the former, they remaining in the hands of the Owners who willingly
part not with the Evidences of their Estates out of their power, or live at
such distance as would make it too uneasy or troublesome. Here shall therefore
hereunto be annexed the Pedegrees of these Collaterals, with all the Truth and
Justness imaginable, to the end those Gentlemen concerned in them may know what
is their Rank in point of Time, and the Grounds of any Pretenses they can
justly make upon any Accidents may happen for the future.

The Decent of the Mordaunts that were Lords of Wybaldstone. Willm Mordaunt.
Ld. of Turven. Rossia de Wake. Robert Mordaunt. Ld. of Turvey. Eldest Son.
Iolianna de Bray. Sr. Will Mordaunt Ld. of Wybaldston Mary de Bosco. Willm.
Mordaunt Ld. of Wubaldstone Eleanar Conquest. Gohn. Mordaunt. Ld. of Wubaldston
Eliz Raunstou. Matilda Mordaunt. Filia and Here Is.


Mordaunt family tree showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors The
Decent of the Mordaunts who were Lds. of Hempstead and Massingham. Willm.
Mordaunt Ld. of Turvey. Agness Peck. Sr. John Mordaunt. Ld. of Turroen Eldest
Sonue Edith Latimer. Willm Mordaunt. Ld. of hempsted. Anne Huntington Robert.
Nordaunt Ld. of Hempsted. Margaret Pooly. Sr l'Estrange Mordaunt Knt. and
Baronett. Margarett Charles. Sr Robert Mordaut Knt. and Baronett. Amie
Southerton. Henry Mordaunt. Barbara Catthrop. Willm Mordaunt. Robert Mordaunt.
Eliz: Rowse. Sr. Charles Mordaunt. K and Bar. Catherine Talmach. l'Estrange
Mordaunt. -- Catlin. Edmund Mordaunt Lewis Alordaut Sr. John Mordaunt. Anne
Risely. Henry Mordaunt.


Mordaunt family tree showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors The
Decent of the Mordaunts which were Lords of Oakley John the first Ld. Mordaunt.
Elizabeth vere. John the 2d. Ld. Mordaunt. Elly Fitzlewes. Willm. Mordaunt. Ld.
of Oakely. Agnes Booth. George Mordaunt Ld. of the Hill and Caldcaut. Cicely
Harding. Edm: Mordaunt Ld. of Oakely. Eliz Sturley. Sr. Charles. Mordaunt Ld.
of Oakly Eliz Snagg. S. P. John. Mordaut Ld. of Oakely. Eliz: Pudsey. Charles
Mordaut Ld. of Oakely. Eliz: Strozzy. Sr. John Mordaunt. Eliz: Adams. John
Mordaunt. Henry Mordaunt. John Mordaunt.


Mordaunt family tree showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors The
Decent of the Mordaunts who were L. of (...) John Lord Mordaunt. Elizabeth
Vere. John ye 2 Lord Mordaunt. Elly Fitzlewes Edm: Mordaut. Second Son Sine
Prole George Mordaut Fourth Son Cicely Harding. Willm. Mordaunt Third Son.
Agnes Booth. Jews Mordaunt Jane Ncedam. Eliz. Mordaunt Edw: Maynard Jews
Mordaunt. George Mordaut Anne Smith. Charles Mordaunt. George Mordaunt Eliz:
Everard. John Mordaunt Son and heir.


Mordaunt family tree showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors The
Decent of the Mordaunts that were Lords of Hardwick. Henry Lord Mordaunt.
Margaret Compton. John Eark of Peterborow Eliz: Howard. James Mordaut. --
Gostwick. John Mordaunt. Barbara Ludlous Henry Mordaunt. Son and Heir.


Mordaunt family tree showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors The
Decent of the Mordaunts that were Lds. of Rygate. John Ld Mordaunt. Earl of
Peterborow Eliz: Howard. Henry Earl of Peterborow. Penelope Obrian John Ld.
Viscount Mordaunt. Elizabeth Carry. George Mordaunt. Osmond Mordaunt. Charles
Ld. Viscout. Mordaunt Carry Fraiser. Henry Mordaunt. Jews Mordaunt. -- Martin.
Henry Mordaunt. John Mordaunt Son and Heir.


Mordaunt family tree showing the blazons or coats of arms of the ancestors


