THE PETITION OF THE Six Counties of South- Wales, and the County of Monmouth,
Presented to the PARLIAMENT Of the Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

For a supply of Ministers, in lieu of those that have been Ejected.

Printed in the Year, 1652.

To the Supreme Authority, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, The
Humble Petition of the Inhabitants of South Wales and County of Monmouth.
Shows
1 THat your Petitioners cannot but with all humblenes acknowledge your Honors
constant care in providing for the supply of their spiritual necessities, and
the advancement of the Gospel of Christ, and particularly in passing the Act of
the 22th. of Feb. 1649. entitled an: Act for the propagation of the Gospel in
Wales, so much really intended by your Honors, which filled the hearts of your
Petitioners, and all the Inhabitants of Wales with joy and gladness, in hopes to
find the fruits thereof accordingly: Nevertheless your Petitioners humbly
show, that since the passing of the said Act, all or most of the Ministers of
South Wales, together with the County of Munmouth, have been (and stand)
ejected from their Benefices: and but few or none of the said respective
Counties have been supplied with any competent number of Godly able Teachers to
officiate in the rooms of the outed Ministers: Neither has there been
provided any convenient number of godly Schools for the education of Children,
and advancement of learning, as was intended by your Honors, and the true
purport of the said Act, as they humbly conceive, there being not above four or
five Itine rary Teachers in some of the said Counties appointed, and approved
of to teach the Gospel; whereas some of the said Counties do consist of above
six score Parishes, and the least of fifty or threescore, many whereof have at
least two thousand Souls.

2 That some persons deriving Authority from the said Act, have for these two
years last past, received and disposed of all the profits of the Tithes of
Church Livings, and all other Benefices and Impropriations sequestered within
the said six Counties of South Wales, and County of Monmouth, which are
annually worth twenty thousand pound or thereabouts; Out of which, little has
been converted toward the propagation of the Gospel, or accounted for to the
State.

3 That for want of the due execution of the said Act, your Petitioners,
together with the said Inhabitants, endure a Famine of the Word of God;
Children are not bred up in the instruction and information of the Lord; The
vast Revenue of the outed Ministers are set out at extraordinary undervalues;
the Churches are in most places shut up, and the Fabric thereof ready to fall
to the ground for want of repair: Neither can the Inhabitants take notice of
your Honors Acts, Edicts, and Proclamations, (wherein the public welfare, the
liberty and safety of their Persons and Estates are concerned) for want of a
fitting number of Teachers in each County to publish the same.

Your Petitioners therefore, out of their duty to God, the preservation of the
Souls of the Inhabitants of their Country, the Commonwealths Interest, and
the earnest desire they have that your Honors most pious intentions expressed
in the said Act may be accordingly observed, do hold themselves bound in
conscience, out of Christian and Soul-saving necessity to present the Premises
to your Honors consideration; earnestly beseeching your Honors in pursuance of
your wonted Zeal and unfeigned affection to Gods Glory, and the increase of
true Religion, Learning, and Piety, to take such a course for the future supply
of their respective Counties with such convenient number of Godly able
Teachers, and for provisions of Schools and Nurseries of Learning and Religion
there; As also to call to account such persons as have received the profits of
the said Tithes, Church Livings and Prebends, and the sequestered
Impropriations, as to your Honors grave wisdom shall seem meet.

And your Petitioners shall (as in duty bound) most humbly and heartily pray
etc.

A Letter of Mr. Valvasor Powell against the said Petition: with a sober Reply
thereunto.
Dear and Honored Sir,
HAving intelligence by your Letter, and more particularly by a printed
Petition from South Wales, that the condition of our Country, and the
faithfullest Instruments therein, are misrepresented with you, insomuch that I
hear from good hands, that credit some of our best friends begin to give to
false Reports, and thereby, countenance profane and faithless men, to raise
Reports, and print abominable Lies, falsities and scandalls against Godly
persons and their honest proceedings, I have for the satisfaction of my self
and many friends that question the same, endeavored to know the Truth in the
manifest particulars objected, especially in that South Wales Petition, and
that I might be certain of the Truth, got Coppies of all the Commissioners
proceedings upon the Act for Propagation of the Gospel, I also conversed with
several both of North Wales and South Wales, and I know most of the
Commissioners, and have objected against some of their proceedings my self, and
upon the whole I must say this as in the presence of God, before whom I do
not, and dare not lie, That,

1 I do believe that since the granting of the aforesaid Act for Propagation
of the Gospel, God has been much glorified, many hundreds (if not thousands)
have been converted in Wales, much of the power and practice of Godliness set
up, and much impiety and wickedness suppressed.

2 For the Commissioners they are most of them really Godly, and all of them
faithful to the Parliament from the beginning.

3 That they have acted judiciously and conscientiously according to the Act as
far as they discerned, and that they have not taken into their own hands any of
the Revenue, as I believe they will be able not only to show, but sufficiently
to swear, for I cannot hear that ever any part of the money came to their hands.

4 Of all the men which they put out, I know not any in these six Counties of
North Wales that have the power of Godliness, and very few the form thereof,
or that have been firm and faithful to the Parliament, but most of them
un-preaching Curates, or scandalous in their lives, or having given that cursed
Oath called Capells Oath, and I believe this will be made appear, as Mr. White
did, to the satisfaction of all.

5 Concerning Ministers and Schoolmasters, not to mention or meddle with
South Wales, who are now returning an exact account which will satisfy all
honest men and shame their Adversaries, this is a true account for Northwales,
that there 51 or thereabouts, old Ministers ejected, there are of approved
Ministers now sent out and settled about thirty two, whereof twenty four at
least are University men (and some of the rest good scholars) for
Schoolmasters there are twenty nine under present pay; nay whereas some report
that all the Ministers are cast out, take this for a truth, for I heard it from
a godly able Minister of Flint-shire this day, that there are not two Ministers
cast out by virtue of this Act in all Flint-shire.

Lastly, For the Tithes, they were and are tendered unto the Parishioners, but
some are either so Malignant or fearful of their priest, that they would not,
nor dare not to take them in several parishes, they are set to the owners at a
reasonable rate, but the value of them, because things are so cheap and the
people much disaffected thereto, much fallen; these things will be affirmed to
be true, and I will engage my self upon the word of a Christian and a Gospel
Minister to maintain the same.

Yours in the Lord Valuesor Powel

The Answer to the preceding Letter.
Sir,
IN the front of one of the Diurnals lately come to my hands, I found a
frontlesse Letter or invective of yours against that much-talked of Petition of
South Wales, that had been long since presented to the Parliament, wherein you
charge the said Petition and Petitioners with abominable lies, falsities and
scandals against godly men and their proceedings.

1 This is boisterous and bold language, and these words are not like those of
St. Paul, the words of Truth and Soberness. Act. 26.15.
If the Petitioners had been so pusillanimous and so poor-spirited as to have
deserted their Petition, as you did (by your menaces) endeavor to make them;
or if they had failed to justify and make good the Charge therein contained, you
might have had some cause to be thus violent, and to spend your usual
Artillery, even bitter words: but since (maugre all opposition and
discouragements) they stand to what they have don, and like worthy
conscientious Gentlemen do prosecute their pious desires and intentions
declared in the said Petition, I hope all sober heads will suspend their
judgments touching that Pet: while you spend yours so freely, and rather
incline to believe, that a Pet: proceeding from 7 whole Counties, and
subscribed by above 15000 hands of persons engaged and well affected to the
present State and government, was not framed and prosecuted without very good
grounds and reasons.

But for the honest proceedings, you speak of, we have but your word, and
single testimony for their honesty as yet; the general exclamations, and
great thoughts of heart, among the Inhabitants of those respective Counties,
seem to me, to argue the Contrary. And some of your own Commissioners that went
along with you a good while in the simplicity of their hearts, and who were
not so sharp sighted as to see into the bottom of your designs at first, have
now deserted you, and joined with the Petitioners, in presenting the said
Petition, to the Parliament: and others of their Colleagues, that did not go
along with it to the House, went along with it in their hearts, and wished it
good luck in the name of the Lord.

2 But to justify these proceedings further, you tell us of the great pains
you have taken to converse with the Commissioners both of North Wales, and
South Wales, and to examine their proceedings: we can bear you witness that
you took no small pains in traveling those Countries like a Spiritual post,
or a Knight errant, to encounter this terrible Petition, persuading some by
fair words, to call back their hands from that lying Petition (that was your
style) and like another Saul, breathing out threatenings against others,
menacing them with sequestration and ruin. This petition tossed you much in the
saddle, and made you sit very uneasy, ever since it came to light; which
shows that all is not well and sound in your proceedings, nor so honest as you
seem to make them: all is not gold that glisters, nor are all Saints that
arrogate that name and Title.

3 In the next period, you present your friends with the fruits of your labors
and Apostolical excursions in to those Countries: some hundreds and thousands
of people have been Converted in Wales, since that new Engine for the
propagation of the gospel was brought in thither. Converted? these were your
suggestions of old to the Parliament that your Country men were no better then
Pagans and Infidells, and stood in need of being converted to the Faith: But
let me tell you Sir, that the Inhabitants of those parts, were neither Jews,
Turks, nor Pagans, before your Holiness came thither, but were as good
Christians (every whit) as they are now, and I may say better: For they had
Sermons far more frequently, and used to observe the Lord's Day with more piety
and reverence than now they do: Sabbatum aurei vituli.
for now they make it but a Brutish Sabbath, and distinguish it from other
days but by mere abstaining from their daily labors, which is not a Holy and
sanctified rest, but a Sabbath of Beasts and not of men: There be strangers
enough that have travailed those Countries, that can bear witness to this sad
Truth and seriously lament it: But perhaps you mean another sort of
conversion, to wit, to Popery, and herein we can bear you witness that many
hundreds have been converted since you came to Reign and since the Ministers
have been cast out, who did carefully guard their Flocks from Romish Wolves,
and Foxes: For these have made as great a Harvest in those parts (of late) as
you have; and do seduce as fast as you: we hear of whole Parishes fallen off
that way: For the people of Wales (in the general) have so much aversnes to
your loose and fanatic ways, that they choose rather to go to Rome then to
Bedlam; And for this reason I know none that are greater Enemies to the said
Petition and restitution of the able Ministers, than the Papists and your self.

4 For your Character of the Commissioners that most of them are really Godly,
we will not gainsay you, but wish they may approove themselves so, when their
Actions shall be scanned; yet that many of them had their judgments captivated
by fair pretenses, and been seduced to go along with you, appears by their
serious remorse and retractations, which we have touched before: Praestat
recurrere quam male currere; and I wish the rest would be so godly as to follow
so good a president.

But that none of them have taken any of the Church Revenue into their hands, I
think you will not be a Compurgator for any of them, we can tell you of one
Commissioner that resolved not to Act or concur with you in the extirpation
of the Ministry, if he might not have some Tithes into his hands: he would not
be evil for naught, or sell his conscience for nothing; and accordingly he
has been a parson of two good Benefices ever since: we can name others, that
have bought lands and built houses, since they had the handling of these
Revenues, who (before times) were so low, that they never had such immodest
hopes as to amend themselves so well, and so fast as they have done.

5 Having used your Target, to defend your Commissioners, you now draw your
sword, against your formidable Enemies, (those Things in black, the Ministers)
whom you have routed and rooted out. They were (say you) most of them either
Un-preaching Curats, or scandalous men in their lives, or had administered some
accursed oath to the people.

But in sober sadness Sir, did you eject none else? we could name you
hundreds, that you have deprived the Church of God of the benefit and comfort
of their labors, that had neither administered any oaths, neither were Un
preaching Curats, nor were any way scandalous in their lives. But their lives
and labors did express as much power of godliness (quietly in their proper
spheres) as any of your tinkling cymballs or wandering and foolish fires. If
the Parliament were pleased to go down (that is in their power and authority,
to those Countries) and see whether you have done altogether according to the
cry of it which is come up unto them; Genesis 19.21.
If they were pleased to grant Commissions to examine who and what persons you
have cast out of gods vineyard, and upon what score; your actions would appear
as odious to all the world, as now they do to them that know you. It seems
you had not room, and scope enough to rule, except like the great Ottoman, you
killed all your Brothers, that you might rule and reign alone.

6 But for to satisfy all honest men, and to shame your Adversaries, you
promise an exact account from South Wales. If you desire to satisfy the one,
or to shame the other, let me advise you as a friend not to smoother your
Accounts, but let men see them, and see how you have disposed of near 20000 l.
per annum for two years and a half. For if your Accounts must be received only
in gross, without the particulars, received by an implicit faith without
farther examination, (as we hear they must) you and your friends may pass for
Godly men still.

Howsoever, the Petitioners do humbly conceive that they have performed the
office of honest and faithful men to the State, in presenting to their notice
and cognizance, what a vast Revenue they have been defrauded of, and are like
to be still defeated, and they seem to all indifferent, and dis-interessed
persons, to deserve thanks from the State, and countenance and encouragement,
against all affronts: For if they miscarrie in this petition, and their hopes
be blasted therein, they resolve to make no such attempts any more; but will
study to serve the Parliament, in some more acceptable way.

7 But in the next Paragraph you tell us of the Ministers, and Schoolmasters
of North Wales, with their number and quality, as though you had been at a
late muster of them; indeed the Scean of your discourse lies most in that
country; this is lapwing-like to cry far from the nest: you give an account
of North Wales, to confute a Petition from South Wales. Here you are out of the
reach of my pen, because the places are out of the road of my acquaintance. But
for your School masters in North Wales if they be like those you have placed in
South Wales, they are fitter to go to School, then to keep any, as the
countries are most deeply sensible thereof.

8 But here is some good news from Flintshire, Here are but two Ministers
ejected in all; truly they had better luck then their fellows, we can tell
you of some other Counties (in lieu of this) where you have not left above two
to stand in all; and of others, where you have not allowed of above, 3 or 4
Itinerants to instruct near three score and ten parishes, some whereof are very
large and populous and were supplied (lately) with very able godly Ministers,
that had been trained up in the Schools of the Prophets, and were skillful in
dividing the word of god aright, and were instruments of conveying goodness
and grace to many a poor soul in their respective charges: for by my vicinitie
to those countries and my often sallies upon occasion to those parts, I have
reason to know them well.

But the Itinerants that are come in their room, are such men, that though
they presume to be Teachers, yet have need to be taught themselves, which are
the first principles of the oracles of God: and if men had a design to bring
preaching into contempt and derision, they could not have thought of a more
effectual course, then by setting up such men to preach: for they have set up
such mock-teachers that will be glad of 10 l. per annum, though their Masters
may set upon their score large reckonings to be accounted to the State, as they
will do for their Schoolmasters likewise.

But how well contented men are with your Propagation in North Wales may appear
by this ensuing presentment made by the Grand Jury of Montgomery-shire at the
last great Sessions held for that County.

The presentment of Montgomery-shire was as following. April, 1. 1652.
WE the Grand Jury of the County of Montgomery being upon our oaths, do
discover and represent to your Lordships, the complaints and aggrevances
thereof. In the first place out of our duty to Almighty God, and in obedience
to the present Government, we make bold to signify to your Lordships, that the
most General and almost universal complaint amongst us is the want of able
Ministers to supply our parish Churches being 47, which are left vacant upon
the Lords day, without any known preacher to officiat in them; But in lieu of
the said 47 (and most of the rest lately questioned) there are a few illiterate
poor Tradesmen, set up and countenanced, (without any just pretense, or fitting
qualifications) to instruct the Congregations, so that by means hereof the
gospel (as we conceive) is so far from being Visibly propagated among us,
according to the meaning of the late Act, that it is much feared, (if a remedy
be not timely applied) it is rather in a way of declining; which we crave your
Lordships assistance, seasonably to prevent.

Two foremen of the Grand Jury
Ga. Win, Will. Kyffin, etc.
We could produce the like (if need were) from Denbighshire, put up at the
Great Sessions held for that County at the same time.

You conclude with Tithes (that delicate morsel which is fit for the mouths of
your creatures only) which you tell us were and still are tendered to the
Parishioners; But they have a kind of an odd squeamish conscience, that few of
them will meddle with them as you complain: You made an Order of late (as I am
told) since this Petition was set on foot, to make offer of the Tithes to the
Parishioners to avoid envy and exclamations; Before that, none but your
Favorits must eat of the holy things and live of the altar. The poor ejected
Parsons must have no share nor portion in them, though they offered more rent
than any others paid for them, and offered good security for the payment. But
we need not marvel that they could not have their Tithes, when they could not
have their Glebes upon rent, nay their very fifts denied them, though allowed
by the Act for Propagation, which being accounted according to the
undervaluations made by the Sequestrators and their Agents, will appear to be
so small an allowance, to maintain a family, that it will not find them bread
and water; and yet this pitiful pittance cannot be received or obtained,
without many a tedious wearisome journey, and much expense, and hazard of men's
lives: As some have perished in the waters, by going to Petition and seek
relief for their perishing families; And others being wearied out with
fruitless journeys, and dilatory answers, have given over all Adresses to
these Un-mercifull Sequestrators and other Officers, to power out their
Complaints before the All-seeing God; who graciously heard the groans of his
people in Egypt, Exodus 2.13. and the voice of the poor ladd, weeping under the
tree, Genesis 21.17.

To gain belief to what you have affirmed in your Epistle, you close it up, and
seal it with a deep Asseveration and engagement. Truly Protests and
Asseverations weigh but little with me, since you have applied them to untruths
heretofore, and that in the pulpit; you may remember where and when you
protested to the congregation, that you never received any recompense for your
pains in preaching. But there was one present, that helped your memory to
remember what a round sum you received at Brecon, for one worm wood-Lecture
which you made against all the Ministers of that county. There are some also that
can remember you, how much of the Fee-farm Rents of the late king you have
purchased in Radnor-shire and elsewhere, and they are sure that it was not your
fathers inheritance, but some other ways (of gainefull goodliness) that have
enabled you to make these purchases. Therefore Sir, be more cautious hereafter,
how you make the like protestations, but let them be according to the rule, in
justice, judgment and truth, Jer. 4.2.

God give you grace to see, and a heart to feel and grieve for the ruin that
you have brought upon the Church of God in those parts, and the contempt that
you have brought upon his Ministers and Ordinances: For though we stand in an
indifferent good posture as yet, in this County, yet the fire being in our
neighbors house we may justly fear our own, and suspect the like Propagation
of the Gospel here, as we have seen there; For though you have begun with the
out-skirts and Suburbs (as it were) of this Nation, yet we find now that the
Design is general, as appears by a Letter from Herefordshire inserted, some
weeks since, in the weekly Diurnall, and subscribed M. H. the Penman whereof
was not a Mile from a Hill; And also by the Proposalls sent in by some of your
Party to the Committee for the propagation of the Gospel, and printed in one
of the late Diurnalls; whereby any man that has but half an eye may see, that
this Mystery that goes under the specious name and title of the Propagation of
the Gospel, begins to work strongly in other parts of this Nation, and to
creep from the Circumference to the Center of the Commonwealth; but let men
look well about them, and learn to be wise at other men's cost: Let the present
deplorable condition of Wales, move men both to resent their neighbors
miseries, and to prevent their own.

Dated from my house near Hereford, the 26 of May: in the Third year of the
Abrogation of the Gospel in Wales.
For Mr. Valvasor Powel one of the Itineraries of Wales.
Sir,
YOU were soon induced upon other men's Relations, to misinform your self, of
some Challenge tendered by me against you and your preachers; But as your
informers were Cretians in their suggestion, so it is dangerous Cretizare cum
Cretensibus; you should rather have bin Cautelous in your Credulity, Observing
Paul's Command, Tit. 1.13.
(...), to Rebuke them sharply, for they deserved it, accusing me unjustlie,
of what I was not then Guilty. If you would deign to be remembered in the
Character of Christianity, and the true Cognizance of Christ's soldier, The
Apostle tells you, 2. Tim. 2.24.
The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be Gentle to all men, apt to
Teach, patient. Being a servant he should imitate his Master, and the Master is
not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace. Qui litigat verbis, pugnat, a
barking tongue is a striking hand. How Cruelly the Ministers of Wales are and
have bin used, their good names murdered, their very Calling accounted a
Crime, and Mission their Ruin, exposed like those disguised Primitive
Christians in Bears and Lions skins, for the baiting and tearing of Dogs; I am
sure your unsavory Invectives against us (being rather Satyrs than Sermons)
are sufficient Testimonies thereof. And now I find that Aspis a vipera sumit
venenum, The minor Preachers (if they may be called preachers) borrow their
language and virulency from you, As the minor greek Poets are said to lick up
the vomit of blind Homer. In respect of my self, I shall pass by such
Reproaches, remembering therein the Result of the Schoolmen, That Abuses are to
be Remitted, that are injurious toward men's Persons not only quoad Rancorem,
in respect of the Malice, but also quod Satisfactionem, in respect of the
Redress. But Abuses which Concern our Offices, touch both the Author
entrusting, and the trust Committed to our Charge: And we have our Saviors
direction, in the eighth of John, to maintain, (as there he did) the Truth of
our Profession. Neglecting then, That you fell upon my Person in my absence,
both at Glasebury and the Hay, which was neither Candidelie nor Christianlie
performed; I shall (as I promised you, (upon your own Challenge and wonted
manner of Vanity and bragging) together with one or two of my brethren, be
Ready (with Gods assistance) to meet you and the like number of yours any
time, after the end of Trinity term next, either in the University of Oxford,
or in any place within ten Miles of my abode: Sooner I cannot, because of many
journeyes, and Occasions which I am necessitated to perform. And will then
endeavor to Maintain these ensuing Positions.

1. The Necessity of Baptism, Necessitate praecepti, and the lawfulness of
Paedobaptism. 2. That the Ministry of England is according to Divine
institution. 3. That our Doctrine is Orthodoxe; being willing to Hear, what
Errors we have broached, Or what Truths have bin Revealed by you, or unto you,
which we have not formerly taught and known. 4. That your Separation was
Causless, and unwarrantable.
Which as far as I can remember were the sum of those Questions proposed,
that I would maintain. And though your defiance was (as I partly heard, and
more fully understood by others) very high against all the Ministers of this
Nation, the Fathers of Jsrael, judging them as Zuinglius did Carolstadius, (Non
satis humerorum habere) too weak to undertake the defense of Truth; yet I doubt
not but having gathered our stones from the brook of Gods word, we shall be
Able with the sling of his Spirit to encounter the fiercenes of your
haughtiness, And resist all your shafts, draw them forth from what Quiver you
please, though you accounted your self a Triform'd Geryon in the Languages.
Commend not in your self, what you use to condemn in others, to wit learning.

-- Proprio Laus sordet in Ore. Thus having for a long time patiently born
your several reproaches, and revilings, still expecting the Lords good will
and pleasure; We are at last persuaded in our souls by his blessed spirit,
That his name must be glorified by us in earnestly Contending with you for the
Faith once delivered to the saints: And so resolved with Gods help and
blessing, to vindicate our innocence and Calling, with the spirit of Meekness,
and of Mildness, as it becomes true Christians, and the temper of Christ's
Gospel, for we cannot put up your affronts, and slanders any longer. Nihil
veritas crubescit, nisi solummodo abscondi, Truth never blusheth, but when it
is silenced; We have in Modesty spared you too long, Couching like Issachars
Ass under our burdens; Now expect us like the Iawrell, bearing up the more,
the more weight you lay upon us. And assure your self, we shall (God willing)
display you in livelyer Colors, than ever you have mishaped others. Therefore
trample no longer on those whom you have ruined, as Diogenes did upon Plato's
Clothes, with greater Pride, than ever Plato wore them.

Truly the Zeal of Gods Cause, the Cause of Christ's Gospel, does even Ravish
and inflame me.

-- Nam quis iniquae,
Tam patiens turbae, tam ferreus ut teneat se?
Who can be silent, to see a whole Nation (a Nation Converted to Christianity,
as soon almost as our Savior suffered) so notoriously branded by their own
Natives? for Ignorance, Heathenism, and Profaness, as you have done for your
own ambition and self ends, which the World has now sufficiently discovered:
As though Wales were still a land of Darkness, the poor inhabitants as yet
Continuing in the Region and shadow of Death.

-- Pudet patriae te, patriamque tui You have had a prime hand in this
Aspersion, being not only injurious to the Nation, to the Apostolical
Martyrs, and first Planters of Religion here among us, but to diverse most
painful and Reverend Ministers therein, of later times; And now do Arrogate to
your self the Propagation of the Gospel therein, with the utter Ruin and
Abrogation thereof: witness what Superstition and Popery is all ready Crept in
among us, since our Ejectment, as is sensibly discovered by three parishes in
Brecknock-shire; Such are the effects of this your Apostolical Propagation.
And How can it be otherwise? My heart bleeds to see so many hundred souls
within this Parish (I pass by greater parishes) whereof I was late Vicar
fainting and scattred abroad like sheep without a shepherd; Math. 9.36.
having neither the comfort of Preaching, nor Praying, nor Sacraments, nor
visiting of the sick, nor of any Decency of Burial; your Preachers being so
divided in their Opinions, that the good people are at a stand, being wholly
dejected, and as much as in you lies, Anathematized from the Communion of
Saints, and all Church-fellowships, as men unchurched, and unchristend, and (in
your Repute) mere Pagans and Heathens; For you Account all fixed parochial
Congregations to be such, uncalled, and without the Pale of Christ's Church: but
I must tell you they have learnt Christ far better, being Constantly taught to
my knowledge these twelve years twice every Lords day: for many of us have
labored more abundantly than you all, yet not we. 1 Cor. 15.16.
And now you superstruct Hay and stubble upon our labors: we praise not our
selves, but these precious souls are our Epistles written in our hearts, for
whose spiritual Condition (at this present) we most heartily greive and
lament.

What does not your Conscience accuse you? Is it seared up with a hot iron? do
not you hear the groans of many thousand Souls testifying against you?

Does not the truth of that most Christian, Charitable, and Pious Petition of
South Wales, startle you in your sleep, and affrighten you in the Pulpit? which
in all your meetings you so much rayl against, because it discovers your
Hypocrisy, Covetousnes, and Self Ends to the World.

With what impudency dare you Revile the same, being so Graciously received by
the Honorable House of Parliament? And there, upon solemn Debate, Ordered and
Committed to further examination?

Is this your Obedience? to discountenance their Actions, and to deter so many
thousands from Petitioning those Wise and Grave Patriots of this Nation who are
assembled for the hearing and redressing of the several Abuses and Greivances
of this Common wealth?

Nay with what Divinity or Moral honesty durst you, with your Fanatic
Raptures in your Sermon before the Judges the last Assizes for this County of
Radnor, revile and Curse that most valiant and worthy Commander Colonel
Freeman in his person and in his place, for preferring the said Petition? Does
this become the Minister of Christ, the Propagator of the Gospel in Wales? You
forget our Saviors Rule, Bless them that persecute you, bless I say and
curse not. Surely this your storming, and Indignation, and great Industry, in
travayling from County to County, and from Parish to Parish, to threaten the
Petitioners and Subscribers (in your Sermons) with Sequestration and Ruin, and
Stigmatizing them as profane persons, Malignants, a Cavalliering party, and
mere Incendiaries of the State, Is like Sanballat's the Horonite's dealings
with good Nehemiah to terrify him from Re-edifying Jerusalem, and of the
Inhabitants of Samaria in discouraging Zorobabel from Re-edifying the Temple:
Read Ezra 4.11. and Nehemiah the sixth, where you have your Parallells. This
plainly argues that you are not Parliament proof, and that your Actions will
not abide the Test, and Examination of Public light. For if the Petition be
false, the blame and shame will recoyl upon the Contrivers and Presenters of
the same: But if it be true, they have done the Parliament good service in
giving them intelligence of your practices and proceedings in these Remoter
parts of the Commonwealth, far from their sight and cognizance, and in giving
them warning how far to trust such men as you again; who under color of
Religion and Sanctity do drive on Politic and Worldly Interests: For such
Light Heads as you are (unles timely discovered and prevented) will become not
only the Brand of the Church, but also the Bane of this Commonwealth. But I
leave you to your circuits, wishing you to search your heart, which is not
right in the sight of God, for you are in the very Gall of bitterness, of which
Repent, and Pray God if perhaps the Thoughts of your Heart, and Words of your
Mouth m y be forgiven you; And I beseech God that he would be pleased in his
mercy to unite all Differences, and compose all Divisions within this Nation,
That we may all with one Heart, and one Mind, endeavor to preserve the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace. Expecting your Answer for the place of
meeting, I must in Charity commend you to Gods Grace, who (in mine own opinion)
being the unworthyest Ejected Minister of Christ Jesus, in South Wales,

Am in all humility most ready not only to be bound, but to die for the name of
Christ, the lawfullness, and Necessity of Baptism, the Right of our calling,
and the Truth of our Doctrine. ALEX: GRIFFITH.
Glasbury 9th. May 1652.
The Petition (before mentioned) was presented to the Honorable House of
Parliament the 16th. day of March 1651. by the hands of Colonel Ed. Freeman,
the States Atorney-Generall for South Wales, being accompanied by some select
Gentlemen out of the several Counties.
The House being informed that diverse Petitioners of South Wales were at the
door, they were called in, and Coll. Freeman being come to the Bar, delivered
a short Speech to this effect.
Mr. Speaker,
IT was the desire of many of the well-affected Gentry, and other Inhabitants
of South Wales, that I should present to your grave Consideration, this
Petition, and withal humbly to beg, you will be pleased to believe they desire
not to bring in any Scandalous ejected Ministers, (as some out of prejudice to
the Petition do suggest) But such as this honorable House shall approve of, and
only such, shall be most gratefully entertained by them.

A Soul-saving necessity has constrained them to this humble Address, who for
above two years last past have lived in darkness, the Light of the Gospel
being almost exstinguished, shining only in some few corners of the Country,
and engrossed into particular distinct Congregations, which are not above four
or five in most Counties in South Wales, and how four or five Itineraries can
supply a whole County, most of the Counties consisting of eighty or a hundred
Parishes, is humbly left to your Honors grave consideration. The Inhabitants
of South Wales are not only destitute of a convenient number of Ministers, but
also of able Schoolmasters, to the decay of Religion and Learning. And
nevertheles, the vast Revenue of the outed Clergy, and all sequestered Tithes,
Impropriations, Glebes, and other Ecclesiastical Livings (amounting to a great
value is) received by particular persons deriving Authority from the Act of the
two and twentieth of February 1649. which was really intended by this Honorable
House for the true Propagation of the Gospel, who do Let and Set out the
same, to Friends, Creatures and Alliance of their own, at extraordinary
undervalues to the prejudice of the State, and the gain of private persons.

Mr. Speaker,

This innocent Petition has no design in it against the Commonwealth, or any
particular persons; All that the Petitioners crave from this Honorable House,
is a convenient number of able Godly Teachers and Schoolmasters, such as you
shall approve of: And an Account for the Profits and Revenues of the Churches
received for these two last years.

As we aim herein at the Glory of God and the Public good, so let God bless us
and give a Gracious issue to our humble Desires.

The Petitioners being withdrawn, the Petition was read, and Entitled The
humble Petition of several of the Inhabitants of the six Counties of
South Wales and County of Munmouth, well-affected to the Parliament and present
Government, on the behalf of themselves and the rest of the Inhabitants there,
Subscribed by many thousands.

Whereupon the house ordered it should be referred to a Committee.
Resolved by the Parliament, That it be referred to the Committee of plunderd
Ministers, to examine this business, and to State the matter of fact, and
report their opinions therein to the House, with power to the same Committee to
send for persons, papers, and witness.

Resolved by the Parliament, That the same Committee have power to examine upon
oath, and to authorize such Commissioners in the Country, as they shall think
fit, to Examine witnesses upon oath touching any the matters contained in the
Petition, and to return these examinations to the said Committee.

FINIS.

