THE VISIONS OF THOROUGH REFORMATION
The Royal Arms does Presbyter def^^^
To Paint the Common Wealth's upon the p^^^
Thus to Reform from Popery, he draw's
A Cross; the Common Seal toth good old C^^^^
Thus when the Kingdom turns a Common we^^
The Imperial Crown will be the Popes by Ste^^


THE VISIONS OF THE Reformation: OR, A DISCOVERY OF The Follies and Villainies
that have been Practiced in Popish and Fanatical Thorough Reformations, since
the Reformation of the Church of England.

WITH A DIALOGUE betwixt the Author of Melius Inquirendum, and a Priest of the
Church of England.

By Edward Pettit, M. A. the Author of The Visions of Purgatory.

Quod unquam vidit saeculum tot subditorum in Principes Bella sub Religionis
titulo, and horum Concitores nunc reperiuntur Ministri Evangelii uti se vocant?
Grot. de Antich.

LONDON, Printed for Joanna Brom. 1683.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
IT IS whispered that Morpheus never walks in his sleep, but when the Brains of
Mercury's winged Head drop into his leaden Heels. When you shall have perused
these ensuing Papers, you will conclude, that although I have taken a long nap,
I have had but little rest: However, my Memory is not so defeated, but I may be
able to make a discovery of such Passages, as may be profitable for your
Instruction, and pleasant for your Diversion.

The Scenes indeed are laid in Visionary-Lands, but the Actours of the ensuing
Tragi-comedies were not Fairies, or Hobgoblins, but men of Renown, and famous
in their generation; and though they be but Dreams, they lively represent the
Substantial Miseries which Ruffled the last Age, and Threaten this.

The subject matter you will find in the Title Page; more of it in the
Contents; and most of all in the whole Book.

If the Manner and Style of my Writings should make thee sneeze like
Guinea-Pepper, I hope 'twill clear thy head, and then thou will clear me. If
any shall take snuff that I pick such holes in the Purple of the Trent-Fathers,
I have done no more than what Matthew Paris said long ago of the 4th Lateran
Council: Concilium illud Generale, quod more Papali, Grandia prima front prae
se tulit, in risum, and scomma desiit, quo Archiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates,
Decanos, Archidiaconos, omnesque ad id Concilium accedentes Ludificatus est. If
their own Writers thus boldly speak the truth, why should we be silent, who
have been provoked by such injuries, and instructed by such sad and long
experience?

I have therefore endeavored to drag into the Light, from the very Land of
Darkness, the whole Scheme and Mystery of the Ridiculous Impieties of an
Hypocritical, Superstitious and Rebellious Age, and to expose them to the just
scorn and contempt of the Understanding World. Why should not the foolish
wickednesses of men be scourged in a strain that may make them most sensible of
them? Who ever met with an Academy of Complements for a Generation of Vipers?
or a Help to Discourse with a Drove of Asses? It Is true, that the Follies of
Mankind do rather require our grief, than our mirth; but Tears will flow as
well from excessive laughter, as sorrow: Let men pretend what they will, our
affections will be suitable to the Genuine Nature of their Actions; and
therefore what mortal man could forbear Hummering to see Friar Juniperus, an
old, mossy, overgrown Coxcomb, playing at Titter-totter with the little Boys,
to testify, forsooth, his Humility; or to read of the Flemish Capuchin's
inviting half a dozen Devils to come and lodge in his Corpusculum, for fear of
catching cold, when he had driven them out of another man: this, I suppose, was
a Cast of his Charity. Have not these men Reformed Religion into superfine
Notions?

But come hither, (good Reader,) Suppose younder Cobbler should in an ecstasie
skip out of his Bulk, and pretend to Reform an Apothecarie's Shop, would it not
be enough to split the sides of half the Country to see what a delicate Dose
his Worship would soon give himself by a lick from every Individual Gally-pot?
Could you, on the other hand, forbear smiling to see how a pack of grave and
solemn Knaves do Skulk and Leer when they see those eyes that pierce through
the varnish of their pretenses, into the villainy of their designs? to see what
ugly faces they make when a witty and just Satyr tickles their Guilty
Consciences? So true is the Saying of the Poet,

-- Ridiculum acri. Fortius and melius magnas plerumque secat res.

But we have greater than Poetical License, even the Examples of the Holy
Fathers, and of the Holy Scriptures too: What severe Ironies do we meet with in
Irenaeus adversus Haereses, lib. 1. cap. 5? But in the Holy Scriptures we meet
with many to show, that their folly shall be manifest unto all men, 2 Timothy 3.
9. And that they might proceed no farther, the Prophet Elijah surrendered up the
Priests of Baal to the fatal consequences of their strong delusion, by
Sarcasms, that Bit as deep as their Knives wounded, 1 King. 18. 27. But we do
not desire that the superstitious of our Age should sacrifice, but amend
themselves. Dr. Brown in his Hydriotaphia calls the 14 Chapter of Isaiah a
Poetical Taunt; and the Prophet Habakkuk threatens a Taunting Proverb, 2. 6.
the Philippians are bid to beware of Dogs, cap. 3. v. 2. and the Psalmist says,
He that sits in the Heavens shall have them in derision, Psalm. 2. 4. and the
righteous shall laugh at him, Psalm. 52. 6. Our Savior himself whipped the buyers
and sellers out of the Temple, which they had made a den of Thieves.

But this way of writing is at present most necessary: We have the Reprobate
Ghosts of Celsus, Porphery and Lucian, stalking in the shapes of the profane
Scriblers of this disobedient Age. And therefore it is time that the Counterfeit
enchantments of such Magicians, who encourage a Rebellion, which is as the sin
of witchcraft, should be destroyed, and themselves scourged with the same Rod.

Now as these men offend in the subject Matter of their Writings, so ought we
to take care that we offend not in the Manner of ours; we ought to keep within
the bounds of Religious Modesty; for though the Scriptures are as sharp as a
two-edged Sword, and may wound to the healing, they do not venom to the
destroying. I could never conceive that that is true wit, which is either
profane or immodest, any more than that the Devil is in the true shape of a
Man, when he has a Cloven foot; I thank God I always detested the one, as I
have renounced the other: Besides, as the Truth needs no lies, so neither does
Virtue any thing that is impure for its defense: the case of the immodest
woman, Deuteronomy. 25. 11, 12. has a Moral signification; which is, that how great
obligations soever we have to defend Goodness, yet we ought not to do it by
the discovery of those wicked actions; of which the Apostle says, It is a
shame to speak; therefore I never valued the doctrine of Stage Players: but I
may say with Lactantius, Quid de mimis loquor Corruptelarum praeferentibus
disciplinam, qui docent adulteria dum fingunt and simulatis erudiunt ad vera?

Perhaps (if you be my acquaintance) you will wonder that these Papers have
been so long in the Press; why truly, I have been in Purgatory; it was the
glory of the Famous Monsieur Scarron, that he could write so very well,
although the Gout had got him both by his hands and feet: I will not pretend
ever to equal him; but I say 'twas well for him that his pain was neither in
his head, nor at his heart: To be short, I met with some private misfortunes,
which hindered me some time from writing; but I hope you will heartily read
what I have honestly endeavored for the Public good.

THE First VISION OF THE REFORMATION.
The INTRODUCTION.
A Discourse about Reformation in General by the Ghost of Sir E. B. G. How all
the Troubles of Christendom have for 148 years last past arose from Pretenses
of thorough Reformations, beginning with the Reformation of Rome, in the days
of Pope Paul the Third, What it came to. Parallel the strict Presbyterian
Reformation.

IT was a brave Calm, and bright Moonlight night which invited me to take a
solitary walk in the Ruins of the once flourishing and magnificent Monastery,
dedicated to the Honor of St. Edmund, the first King and Martyr (from whom the
Town of St. Edmunds-Bury takes its name). I was used to be pleased with the
grateful horror of that melancholy Retirement, wherein I might Contemplate
the various Fates of all the Glories under the Moon; and my Walk was advantaged
with the ragged shaddows which, to speak in the Romantic phrase, fell from the
tops of broken Turrets and decayed Walls: How high Madam Cynthia had clambred
toward the Zenith, to peep over them, is not my business to tell, nor had I
much time to observe, for on a sudden all the Sky was darkened, and a strong
Wind blew such a Volly of Rain on my face, that it forced me to take shelter
under the remains of a roof, which half covered a decayed Chapel: I sat down
upon the Pedestal of a Pillar, and leaning my head against it, there was such a
dreadful noise all about me, as if not the Monastery only, but the whole World
also were dissolving; all my faculties were presently hushed, and my thoughts
jumbled into a confusion of fears, and my spirits slow'd too fast with the
Idea's of things to take any particular notice of them; how long I remained in
that state of insensibility, I cannot well tell; but the first thing I took
notice of, was, that the Scene was strangely altered, and from a heap of Ruins
changed to a stately and magnificent Cathedral; at the East End of which was a
large Antic Tomb, which by the many Lamps, that in a moment enlightened all the
Church, seemed to have been lately plundered, for the Ornaments were thrown
about, and they had dropped some of the They had several falsified Relicts, vid.
His Reformation.
bones for haste; among which, one was of a Horse of a large size: Lord,
thought I to my self, was St. Bucephalus buried here? Indeed I was so amazed,
that I could not tell whether I was asleep or awake, in the land of the living,
or among the dead; so that I began to feel for my self, to know whether I was
Fish or Flesh, or good Red-herring, when as my thoughts were diverted with a
long Entrada of Benedictine Monks, who went in Procession up to the Shrine, and
standing around it with Tapers in their hands (which I observed did not grow
shorter or consume): they all sung as follows.

Look down Bright Saint, look down from high,
See how thy scattered Ashes lie:
The Heretics more cruel than the Dane,
With Pagan hands thy Relicts do Profane. St. Edmund shot with Arrows.

Thou art now in thy Tomb a Martyr more,
Than in thy Body, when 'twas stuck all over
With Darts; which piercing through thy Royal Breast,
Let out thy Soul more swift than Arrows fly to rest:
Those joys above, which do for ever flow, May make thee Blessed, But not
forgetful of thy Fame below.
If Plots and Prayers, and lifted eyes and hands,
Shall e're re-conquer these thy holy Lands?
Then shall new Vows to thee be made,
Then to thy Shrine shall Pilgrims trade:
The Gifts which to thy Altar they shall bring,
Will make thee a Rich Saint, and Glorious King.
After this a Chorus of an innumerable Company, which Sung all together.

We Will slay all the Heretics, that none shall remain,
And the Pope shall enjoy his own again.
Lord, thought I to my self, I shall certainly be siz'led for an Heretic until
my Crackle comes off, if ever Popery return any more; and therefore was ready
to vanish for fear, but that my curiosity stayed me; for a Gentleman in modern
habit, with a Crevat about his neck, which had been tied so strait, that his
face was black and swollen: And what was more strange with a Sword run through
his body? Went boldly up to them, and with a ghastly Visage: Ye devout Villains
and solemn Rascals, (quoth he) think not that ye shall be ever able to play the
old game over again, or impose upon the World any more at the same rate ye did
for 500 years: This Age is too learned to be cheated with your lying Legends,
and too wise to be deluded with your profitable superstitions: This Nation is
sufficiently taught what a grievance ye were to our Forefathers: and the Kings
of England have better Maxims of Ecclesiastical Policy, than to suffer
Lord-Abbots in Parliaments, who with their Tribes are the Pope's sworn
Subjects, to execute his Lusts against their Sovereigns by a Vassalage, which
Cancels all other Oaths and Obligations whatever. Oh happy Princes, (cried he)
lifting up his eyes, who have thrown off the Roman Yoke; not forced to pay
Pensions to Cardinals, or to maintain a chargeable Correspondence with Rome as
Cromwell did; not troubled with an Army of Seculars in their own Bowels: Think
not therefore that these Popish Garrisons will ever be Manned again, or that
these Colonies of Ecclesiastics will ever flourish for the future; ye in vain
seek to shelter your selves in these Seraglio's of Iniquity, and pompous
Kennels of Darkness, which tottered for a long time before they fell; but so
fell at last, as never to rise any more: Ye grew odious to the world, even in
the times of darkest Ignorance; nor were the Rival Oracles among the Heathens
more infamous for their Falsehoods and Equivotions before they were silenced of
old; and that the Writings of all Pious, Learned and Witty men, ever since the
Conquest, can testify by undeniable Evidence; who might as well have gone
about to puff out the Moon, as Reform you by their Writings, for nothing but
dissolution, or annihilation could do it: Therefore begone (cried he) ye lewd
spirits, wrapped up in debauched Exhalations; ye impiously adorn the Shrine,
whilst ye traitorously invade the Throne, and in vain do ye invoke the Name of
the Saint, whilst ye rebel against the Majesty of the King; but Sir Edmundbury
Godfrey.
mine shall remain a lasting Monument of such infamous principles, when these
Massy ruins are sunk into the Earth, or quite swept away from the face of it.

At these words the Monks vanished, and all the Vision fled away, but the Ghost
of Sir E. B. G. who turning to me, said, Could I as easily defeat all those
Legions of new Rebels, who distinguish between the Person and Authority of the
Prince, as I have conjured down those old ones, who did it between the Martyr
and the King; my fate which has been made use of by precipitated fears and
tumults to destroy the Government, might by orderly Counsels have established
the safety of the Kingdom; and that Reformation which brought such benefit to
the Nation by the dissolution of Abbeys, should not have been an occasion of
ruining Church and State by erecting Conventicles.

Oh, Reformation! Reformation (cried he) and then he was pleased to bestow a
little Latin upon his mouth, Corruption optimi est pessima: O thou
latitudinarian word; Oh thou word of endless comprehension; it has wheadled it
self into all the variety of actions under the Sun; it signifies Repenting,
Repairing, Renewing, Rebuilding, Reducing, Redressing, and eke Rebelling; as
also Killing, Plundering, Sequestring, Libelling, Canting, Purging and Fluxing;
and sometimes is graciously pleased to signify nothing. Read in all
Histories, sacred and profane, and you shall find that all mankind, both
Black, White and Mulattoes lay claim to this great and glorious title of
Reformation: this is the pretense of violent Thieves and Murderers, as well as
of good Princes and just Lawyers; of Absalon and Jeroboam, as well as of David
and Josiah; of Nero, that Burnt Rome, as well as of Constantine, who became
more glorious by the Church, than by the Name he gave his City which he built:
This is the pretense of Enthusiasts, as well as of Pious and Learned Divines:
this was the gay excuse of Cataline and Messer Anello, of Jack Straw, Wat Tyler
and Colonel Who defaced Canterbury.
Sandys: this came by the Honorable Title of Inspiration to Mahomet and
Sergius, to Simon Magus, Ignatius Loyola and Hugh Peter's, to St. Francis, St.
Benedict, St. Smectymnus, St. Sol in Cancro, etc. This is the pretended
Property of all Mortality from Hercules, that slew the Lion, and the Bear, and
the Hydra, and the Lord knows what, to the good old Puritanical Gentlewoman,
who killed her Cock for treading the Hens on the Sabbath Day: this has
occasioned the great Revolutions in Empires, Kingdoms and Commonwealths; has
been the Prologue to the great Tragedies of the World, whose Scenes never
change without a deluge of Blood: This, with Rebellion, seems the very Original
guilt of Bodies politic, makes them subject to fatal changes, and turns them
from a flourishing Paradise into a ruined Wilderness: this accompanies all
Plots, Conspiracies, Confederacies, Associations, Massacres, holy Leagues,
solemn Covenants; but when it appears in the World in its genuine purity and
excellency, free from hypocrisy, secular interests and designs (which it
seldom does), by how few is it regarded or known? or how long does it remain
before it is invaded by disorders, or involved in the confusions of a giddy and
unsettled world, Men still pretending the very same thing they are destroying?
When Noah by the Building of the Ark, which was a Type of the Church, preached
to the World a Reformation, how few of the hunting Nimrods left the pursuit of
their pleasures to hear him? Nay, when 'twas thus reformed after a manner which
Boccalin bespeaks in the person of Cato; the Earth no sooner appeared, but Cham
uncovered his Father's nakedness; began to break his seven Precepts, for which
he received a Brand of black Infamy, which shall remain as a testimony to all
posterities, that there are a sort of men in the World that can never be
Reformed, or made white; no sooner was the Law of the Two Tables delivered with
all the astonishing Magnificency that might make a lasting impression, but the
Sovereign multitude made Aaron their Protector, and worshiped the Golden Calf,
which flowed from the melted Rings taken off their itching Ears; the whole body
of the Law was not delivered before Corah, Dathan and Abiram, with their
Levellers, took men, made a tumult, invaded the Priesthood under pretense that
the whole Rabble was holy; for which unparalled Rebellion they led the way to
those who resist the higher Powers, which were now testified to be ordained of
God, because they were punished by a death not common to men. No sooner was the
Gospel, that great and glorious Reformation of the World, delivered, but we
find it opposed by Scribes and Pharisees, by Herod and Pontius Pilate, by Jews
and Gentiles, who though differing in Interests and Opinions engaged in the
same Association to make Coesar a glorious King, by killing him who gave him
his Authority: And although the Gospel planted in the world by our Savior and
his Apostles continued three Centuries in its Purity, struggling with
Persecutions and Tribulations; yet the damages it received by Heresies (which
are the tares among the wheat) were of more fatal consequence, being reckoned
80 by Epiphanius, which afterward multiplied into such infinite Innovations and
Superadditions, taken either from Jewish or Heathen Customs, and found
beneficial to the ambitious projects of sinful men; that then Chiristian Piety
began to decay, and give way to gaudy superstition; and a policy worse than
devilish, because pretended to be heavenly, was set on foot, which has made a
great part of the world slaves, and not a few Atheists. Thus truth was clothed
with golden Fetters and Chains, Obedience inverted, and Religion in fardingals
so dilated, that it looked like a fair well proportioned face in a
Magnifying-glass, distorted into vast deformities: and thus Popery became
exceedingly Popish. Now although the Truth of Religion appeared in every
Century, in some little Mr. Bircber Protest. Evidence. Mr. Shaw Origo Protest.
glances, as several Authors testify (if it be lawful for a Ghost to quote
Authors), yet it never broke out to any purpose, until the Resolute Luther
made way for it, through thick and thin, provoked to it by the Impious
Indulgences of Pope Leo the 10th, and the loud Immoralities of the Spiritual
Court, who soon found some Princes of Germany of the same mind, or easily
persuaded them to it; but none more considerable than King Henry the Eighth of
England; who though he writ against Luther, found greater Irregularities and
Abuses in the Consistory, which moved him, being of a fierce disposition, and
fit for so great a work, to deny and abolish the Pope's Supremacy, to reassume
his own; to vindicate the Authority of National Synods, and so made way for his
Pious Son King Edward the Sixth, to remove all those devices by which the
Popish Clergy had enslaved the Nation, and that it might be parallel with the
Primitive Doctrine of the Church; it suffered a short, but violent Persecution
under Q. Mary, until her Death set Q. Elizabeth upon the Throne, and restored
the Reformation to its fullest perfection.

Never were Church and State more happy, whose united Interests seemed founded
upon a Rock, never to be separated or removed: The first years of her Reign
promised a Succession of Halcyon Ages, and the Kingdom looked like the World
new born from the darksome Womb of the Chaos, calm Glories o'respread the happy
Isles, whose Lands resembled the Virgin Spring after the deluge, and successes
Crowned the Seas: The Excellency of Paradise were given to the Valleys, and the
Beauty of Lebanon to the Mountains; the Wildernesses blossomed like a Rose, and
Gleams of Joy warmed the Northern World. But oh (cried he) at this he seemed
melted into tears, the frailty of all immoderate Excellency: This Mother Church
soon found a generation of Vipers in her own Bowels: This Reformation which was
advanced by such wise Methods, was at once utterly confounded by as strange
ones as ever astonished the World; we find in the Chronology of Helvicus,
Fanatics of Renown Contemporary with Luther; the Devil thought it was time to
bestir him when he saw the Intrigues of his Kingdom of Darkness in such
manifest danger of discovery, and therefore sent his Enthusiastical Agents,
whose rebellious projects and loud blasphemies were more serviceable to him
than the Pope's Nuncio's. King Henry the 8th himself in his Preface to the Book
of Articles observes, That as Superstition and Profaneness were purged away,
so a spirit of presumption, dissension and carnal liberty were breaking in. The
German heats and violences bred a Pestilential Sect of Anabaptists in the very
Infancy of the Reformation; and what in respect of us was more unhappy than the
Marian Persecution, those who fled to Foreign Plantations of the Gospel,
brought home with them a Political Discipline, utterly inconsistent with the
methods of our wise and pious Reformers, or with the fundamental Laws of the
Kingdom, for which they had no Evangelical or Apostolical Precept; and although
they little foresaw what dismal Schisms such different Schemes of
Church Government would necessarily produce, yet they certainly were the first
occasions of our Civil Wars and homebred Factions, which has made the
Reformation a hissing and scandal to Foreigners, who judge of our affairs by
the event, not knowing the Causes, and condemn us in general for the
extravagant Villainies which the ambitious Frensies of some particular men have
publicly acted.

Sir, I wish it were possible (said I) that you could appear openly, for then
those many people who are deluded would be convinced of these things you say.
Hold you there Sir (said he), that is the way to be called a Malignant, Popish
Tory Apparition, a vagrant Hobgoblin of the Church of England; they would swear
that I killed my self Popishly, and crossed my self with my Sword, and all true
Protestant Conjurers would be binding me to my good behavior in the bottom of
the Red Sea; but you cannot think, Sir, how I am troubled that my head should
appear for a Sign to a Haberdasher of Sedition upon Ludgatehill: but pray tell
the Gentleman who lives there, when he is at home, that he will never leave
till he is laid by the heels, in order to the having his own exalted upon a
Pole, until the Coxcomb looks like a true Protestant Indian Cabbage. But as
for those people who have such a great fancy for nonsense, what sort of Logic
will convince them? a man must dispute with them with his heels upward; but as
for a Ghost, he will find it a difficult thing to put his face into shapes
enough to please them; and besides, they have forged so many lies about Spirits
and Apparitions, that they will not believe truths. And since they will not
believe Moses and the Prophets, the Apostles and Evangelists, the Fathers and
Councils, but are utterly against every thing that is Orthodox; neither will
they be convinced, though Steven Marshal himself arose from the dead, whose
last words ought to be more heeded than all his Preaching through the whole
course of his life, when he so often cried out, King Charles, King Charles, and
testified so much horror and regret for the bloody confusions he had promoted;
nor was he the only man that had those stings of Conscience upon him: but I
could tell you the name of one of the 104 Godly, a great Sequestrator, who
seemed a mighty Zealot all along, until he came to dye; but then he was not
fit to be seen by Malignants, because to the astonishment of that party, who
Reprobate every body else without a Fever or Frenzy, his Conscience, which
could digest the bread of so many Orphans and Widows, that allowed him to
protect the Estates of Papists, whilst he plundered the Church under the notion
of Popery; nay, that could dispense with him to rob the good Old Cause it self,
and keep her Money for her several years, now pulled off her Mask, and frighted
him, as if so many Devils had been about his bed; it full sorely convinced him:
but I do not hear that they cared much for his Conscience when it had done
getting of money, or prove any thing the honester for it. Therefore since such
serious occasions cannot move them, I think it the best way for you to laugh
them out of those stubborn and foolish humors which subject the Nation to such
real Miseries, and deplorable Calamities as it lately felt by a through
Reformation; if you run into such disorders again, it will be questioned
whether ye be Chronicled for the greater Fools, or they for the greater Knaves;
to prevent which, there is variety of means, and all lawful and necessary;
frowning and laughing are performed by the same sinews, and may have both the
same ends; and I do not read any one Canon of Scripture against bitter
Ingredients in the cure of a desperate disease: Go therefore to the Zealous of
the Land, and tell them who surfeit with Preaching, and are sick of the Prayers
of the Church, who are lightheaded with Reformations, and want of sleep; who
would have all the World of their opinions, and yet are not of the same mind
one hour; who pretend to love nothing but God and their Wives; that they are
desired either to leave off hatching of Disciplines and Governments, or
multiplying and increasing; for they will certainly do one of these things;
either they will people the Nation with Idiots, for it is remarkable that the
very genius of this people is much altered since Tobacco and Revelations grew
so cheap; and there is scarce a Fanatical family of note which has not some one
or others of it, who have the Cramp very signally upon their Intellectuals), or
else they will beget a Generation that will breed teeth only to bite and devour
one another: Or lastly, a Generation that will either curse them or laugh at
them, who will fill all their Stages with one another Grandsires; and to
convince them of this, show them only what has been done by ours that were
before us, both by true Papists and true Protestants (as they call themselves)
either under the pretense or notion of a through Reformation; you will find,
that though they have two faces that look different ways, yet they have both
the same Lineaments, the same Principles, the same Practices, and both
impudently deny them, like the two men that stole the piece of Flesh from the
Butcher, in the Fable: He that took it, swore he had it not; he that had it,
swore he did not take it; who took it, or who has it, I do not know (quoth the
Butcher), but by Jove ye are a couple of Knaves: this was one of the first
Associations, but now the Mystery of Iniquity is complete, because they both
make it a Mystery; and until the time to come discover fully the truth of
things present, pray give the World an Impartial Account of what has been done
by the Papists first, and then by the Presbyterians; and then ye may guess for
the future why they are so like one another; who they are that Reform Murder
it self, that can stab men without spilling a drop of Blood, or secretly
rejoice at it when it is done without being guilty; that can Rebel without
Plotting, and Plot without Rebelling; by observing what has past in the last
Age, you will know what a great and glorious Reformation they are endeavoring
now. With that he put his hand to my head, and I expected that he would have
clapped a face to the nape of my neck, and have made a Janus of me; but he only
stroak'd me over the forehead, and then vanished Right Worshipfully.

His hand was so very cold, and put my head into such a dizziness, that I could
not tell where I was; for the first thing I stumbled at was the Threshold of
St. Peter's Church in Rome, and I fell backward into the year 1534; it was on
St. Peter's day, Pope Clement was seated in his Throne in his Pontificalibus,
and all the Cardinals; with Generals of Orders, Bishops, Abbots, etc. which
made a very splendid show; the Anthems then sung were excellent Composures, and
the Music extraordinary to carry on the Solemnity of the day, when on a sudden
a great Groan was heard, as if some Infernal spirit had howled in Disdiapason;
and as well as I could distinguish it, cried Reform. At this the Eunuchs could
not sing one Note more, but made noises like hoarse Cuckows; the Cardinals Hats
began to flag, and the Gems in the Triple Crown were in an Eclipse; and there
was so great an Earthquake, that the Church had like to have fallen on their
heads, had not a lame fellow (whom no body then knew, but afterward proved to
be Ignatius Loyola) stepped out, and like another St. Dominick, Who slew 120000
of the Albigenses, and therefore the Pope fancied he saw him uphold the Lateran
Church.
upheld it. At this they hasted in great amazement to the Consistory in Monte
Cavallo; as soon as I got in, there entered several Nuncio's from England and
Germany, that looked as if they had been affrighted, and sent home with Bottles
tied to their tails; for one brought the sad Message, that there was no more
Peterpence to be Coined in Histor. Con. Trid.
England; that that King denied the payment of Annals; that a Comedy had been
acted before him to the disgrace of the Pope and his Court, who had used too
great precipitation in the Case of the Divorce; not out of Conscience (for
those Dispensations were very usual, and found advantageous to the Old Vicar),
but to keep on the profitable debate. Another brought the News of the Liberty
of the Augustan Confession: And a third of the Victory of Wittenberg: A fourth
related how solicitous Charles the Fifth was for a General Council. These
things so troubled Clement the Seventh, that calling him a great He Emperor,
he fell sick and dyed, and was succeeded by Cardinal Farnese, named Paul the
Third: The first business he took in hand, was to stop those spreading
alterations which threatened Rome it self (for in Faenza, a Town belonging to
the Pope, there was Preaching against the Church of Rome, Anno 1528); and
therefore as soon as the Consistory met, a Cardinal, who seemed much dejected,
stood up and said, The holy City of Rome, which has been famous for Prodigies
ever since the days of Livie the Recorder, was never more threatened with them
than now, for it is certain that the Statua of the Blessed Virgin in Sancta
Maria Magior wept Icicles for the Revolt of the frigid Zone; and not knowing
what those German Heretics, who threatened to eat the Pope might do, she had
got the holy Wafer in her Arms to protect the Corporal Presence: Her Ladyship
of Loretto was packing up for Damascus; and if she had once gone, your Holiness
might have whistled long enough in St. Peter's Keys for her; several Images
have had a Quartan Ague; and what is more than all, several souls come
chattering their Teeth out of Purgatory, and complain that they have had a very
deep Snow lately; therefore we ought to take a speedy course to prevent our
ruin; and I know no better way than Friar James Hogostrate's, a Dominican
Inquisitor, who advised Leo the Tenth to prosecute Luther with Chains and
Gibbets: For since Piety and Miracles ceased, all great Actions are to be done
with Fire and Sword; by these we consumed the Hussits, Lollards and Waldenses,
and all other Modern Goths and Vandals have been so far kept from sacking Rome,
that they have been buried from time to time in their own Country; for rather
than they should damn their souls, and we lose our money, I think your Holiness
should thunder out Excommunications, overturn all, set the World on fire,
kindle the North Pole with Piles of flaming Heretics, make the frozen Seas
boil over with heat, until sodden Whales make them greasy with their fat, and
swim for coolness under the Equator. He strained so fiercely, that Leeches
crept out at his Eyes and Nose, which was taken for a Miracle to confirm the
truth of what he said; but Pope Paul the Third (whose chief virtue was
dissimulation) being a subtle Fox, and not willing to bark loud until he
could bite, having composed his Whiskers, that his mouth became a solemn
Parenthesis, was pleased most Infallibly to say, We in vain cut off the member
that is Gangreen'd, if we neglect to take care of the head which is fatally
ill: The splendor of our Church cannot hide the extravagancy of our lives; and
not only bold Heretics will be peeping into our Transgressions, but even the
Sons of the Church will be seeing what their Fathers do with so much money as
they drein from the veins of the living, and the graves of the dead; our
Examples have too great an influence: And if a Cloud hang about St. Peter's
Cupola, it will be seen afar of. My just Commands therefore are, that ye first
Reform your selves, before ye go about to mar or mend others; and let it not be
said that my Vatican, which was the ancient abode of the Cornel. Tacit. in fine
Vitel. Imper.
Whores, is now become the Sanctuary of Thieves and Robbers; when ye shall have
shown some truly Cardinal Virtues at home in our Consistory, then your
assistance abroad in a General Council will put an end to all the present
disturbances in the Church.

Had a whole Regiment of Oracles spoken, it could not have been more
Authentic: Nothing now was noised about the World but a General Reformation,
and a General Council; every man began to frame to himself a new Model of
things, as himself most affected; and indeed the variety of men's inclinations
in this case was so apparent, that nothing seemed more a Contradiction, than a
General Reformation: For since the Laws of Charity (which alone can make men of
one mind) were abolished in Rome, the Orders his Holiness gave the three
Cardinals took no effect at Histor. Council. Trident. lib. 1. page 68.
all; and yet for all that a Reformation we must have, and that a General one
too; and that by the Authority of Pope Paul the Third, who was the worst man
living; for not only the Penetentiary and Datary-Courts, and the manners of the
Courtiers of Rome were to be reformed; but whatever was amiss in the whole
world, was threatened with a strict Visitation; so that wandering non-resident
Stars were to keep at home, the spots were to be wiped out of the Moon, and
dame Nature, which had been extravagant with Earthquakes, Storms and Tempests
was to put an end to her frolicks, and to grow staid and moderate; and indeed
so great a splutter there was in the lower World about Reformation for about
half an Age, that not many years after a Star, that was a great stranger peeped
down out of Cassiopeia to see what was the matter.

The Pope carried it on with such seeming Resolutions, that there was a pious
uproar all over Rome, all men marvelling where this wonderful Reformation
should first take place; indeed the first effects of it appeared in the
Cardinals, who began to leave off talking Politics at Mass, at the Jews
traffic, at their devotions; and that there might be a race of Innocent
Cardinals for the future, that had not run through all Orders of Vice. His
Holiness created two of his Grandchildren, one of 14, the other of Hist.
Council. Trent. lib. 1. page 73.
16 years of age. All Inferior Orders were threatened as severely; and although
the Heretic Pasquin had waggishly reported that the City was holy enough, most
of the Inhabitants being either Clergymen or Clergy-women of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction; yet Pope Paul the Third was resolved to cut out all his
Predecessors a bar and a half in point of Piety, for strict Orders were given
that all men should restore to the Brutes those Irregular Passions which they
had purloyn'd from them; all old Images were to be new varnisht (a kind of
extreme Unction to them), and several of them threatened with Excommunication,
because they bred Worms, and could never prove their Conversion from Idolatry,
since they had formerly been the Images of Heathen Gods; so that the talk was,
That the second Commandment should be taken into favor again, and restored to
all its ancient Honors and Dignities, and that all of them should take the
upper hand of Indulgences, a thing which mightily startled the Courtiers; for
since they had been in fashion, the Spiritual Court flourished beyond measure,
and therefore they resolved to defend them to the last man; and indeed they so
brought it about, that this great noise of Reformation dwindled to nothing but
the mending a Gutter, which drained the filth of the Town into Tyber; for
indeed they were as much afraid of the Reformation of their pockets, as of
their manners; and therefore peremptorily said, That if Sins and Iniquities
were totally abolisht, the Prerogative of Holiness would not belong to the
Pope, but become a Property to all his Vassals; and his Supremacy would so
dwindle away, that his Successor might e'n call himself Pope Job: They said
moreover, that Perjury and Simony were two flowers of the Triple-Crown; that
Adultery, Incest and Sodomy were Sins of Quality, that brought in vast Revenues
and Customs, that they were considerable Passes to the Kingdom of Darkness,
which they ought not to surrender but upon honorable terms; that if Vice was
Banished the World, Purgatory would be utterly uninhabited, and his Holiness
would never be able to lay an Embargo upon Charon's Boat again. To this Friar
Nicolas Scomberg, the Cardinal of Histor. Con. Trid.
St. Sistus added, that the Lutherans would laugh that they had frighted his
Holiness into better manners than Marforio's Libels, or his own Conscience
could; that 'twould be very dishonorable to his Infallibility to confess his
Errors to the World, and to his Holiness to publish the Vices of his Court by
a Reformation of them: This was all this while a mere piece of politic
Hypocrisy carried on to stop the Clamours of the World, but far from being
then designed, or ever effected: Nay when Adrian the Sixth did afterward
really attempt it, he was not only Contemned by his Courtiers, but Cardinal
Palavicini a long time after spoke very Lib 2. cap. 6.
meanly of him, and calls his zealous design of Reformation an Abstracted Idea,
Ma non form proportionate all Condizioni della materia, But the form was not
proportionate to the disposition of the matter (said he). Now that hypocritical
strict Reformation, the Presbyterians afterward proclaimed, differed from this
only, in that to attain that Tyrannical Power over men's Consciences and
Estates the Pope then had, and was in danger of losing; they were forced to
longer and deeper hypocrisy to color their Principles, which are most
Jesuitically Popish, observing the politic Rule of this Jesuit, The form was
not proportionate to the matter: they were then poor, had not the power in
their hands; but when by their Doctrines they had gained their designs, how did
they agree with him in his new lights? and what difference was there between
their Establishing Christ's Throne (which they had made wide enough for all of
them to sit in like one great accumulative Pope) or St. Peter's Chair, which he
makes the Imperial seat of all Power and Dominion? But further, in the course
of History (which is the second Method of this Book) we shall find when we come
to their days of domineering, that they fell into the most extravagant
excesses, even in those very things, times and actions they pretended to
Reform; and so likewise those very abuses the Court of Rome then for a while
pretended to take away, are now established by Canons, and defended by their
Writers; for

Rome 's seven Hills Popes may have faith to move,
As soon as hopes that they will Zions prove.
The Mountains swelled were big with expectation,
But Vermin Bore instead of Reformation.
THE Second VISION OF THE REFORMATION.
The Reasons of Calling the Council of Trent; The Unchristian Stratagems of the
Court of Rome in that Council; The Decrees of Reformation in that Council; with
the sad Calamities they occasioned in the Kingdom of France which opposed them.
Parallel the Assembly of Divines in England.

THE noise of the Reformation of Rome was no sooner silenced, but the Town was
as much concerned about a General Council; for the Consistory concluded it a
better expedient, and that it looked more honorable to carry the Controversy
further from their own doors: Therefore his Holiness himself, silence being
made, was pleased to say, That since it was the Maxim of this holy and politic
City, that Heretics ought to be destroyed rather than Infidels: He knew no
better means to effect it, than by calling a General Council of the whole
Church-Militant, wherein he should engage the Catholic Princes to join their
Temporal Arms to his Spiritual; that therefore by the Authority of St. Peter
and St. Paul, which he exercises on Earth, he intimates an holy General
Ecumenical Council; and because the Venetians refused to have it held in
Vicenza, and the Duke of Mantua will not suffer him to administer Justice in
his City (which is a derogation from his Universal Supremacy in all cases); he
was resolved it should be held in Trent, a City not only free and opportune for
all Nations, but also whose very Name imported good success to the Church.
Tridentum being derived from Tridens, God Neptune's Prong, which was an ancient
Type of the Triple-Crown: That therefore for the greater splendor of his
Apostolic Monarchy, he Commanded all Patriarchs, Archbishops, etc. to be
there, himself resolving to go thither in Person.

At this three or four Cardinals stood up and took an occasion to dissuade him
from ventring himself into such eminent dangers, as that place so near the
Germans would expose him to; which thing did not only please him, because no
man living is so timorous as the Pope, (insomuch that he will not eat the
Consecrated Wafer without a taster, one infallible symptom of Usurpation); but
they also used such Arguments as kept his successors from going thither too;
for they said that his Holiness was too glorious a sight for the eyes of
polluted Heretics; that to be absent better suited with his spiritual and
invisible Authority; that to imitate the Eastern Monarchs in such cases, was a
policy becoming the Western Church, who are seldom seen, lest they should grow
cheap in the eyes of their Subjects; that the Grand Seignior was always shut up
in his Seraglio, whilst his Bassa's, Beglerbegs and Agliamoglams executed his
Commands in the Divan; that they with his most Obedient Generals of Orders,
Abbots, Priors and Posteriors were no less ready to testify their devotion to
enlarge the spiritual Interests, by all Pious frauds, Holy cheats, and
Consecrated stratagems, which they should think convenient, that therefore he
might sit still and enjoy the pleasures of the Belvedere; and they did not
question but that by following his directions (according to their Oaths and
Allegiance) they should bring the Council to so happy an Issue, as to make it
famous to all posterities.

The Pope contented to stay at home, hastened the Council with all possible
speed; and because the people of Rome talked of things either as they first
heard them, or as they were prejudiced. I was resolved, seeing I could convey
my self without great Charges (being in a Vision) to go to Trent, I do not
remember what kind of Journey I had; but as soon as I came into the Town, there
was a noise in Council, as if they had been hallowing who should roar loudest;
the Cardinal of Lorain took upon him Histor. Con. Trid.
to be Chief in those acclamations, which ended that famous Council with
wishing long life for the Pope; Eternal felicity were prayed for Paul and
Julius; Eternal memory for Charles the Fifth; Long life for the Emperor
Ferdinand, and for Kings, Princes and Republics, to the Legates, Cardinals and
Bishops, and the Faith of that Synod commended as the Faith of St. Peter.
Goodly, goodly (thought I) how loving are we now! all good friends, and a rare
show: When as Father Paul the Venetian espied me, and twitching me by the Ears,
Is not this (said he) a very splendid sight? Four Legates, Two Cardinals, Three
Patriarchs, Twenty-five Archbishops, Two hundred sixty eighty Bishops, Seven
Abbots, Thirty-nine Proctors of Men absent, Seven Generals of Regular Orders do
sign, and subscribed to the Decrees of the Council (which the Heretics
reject), for which you hear they are in General Anathematized, therefore ought
you not to fear falling into Heresy? Indeed Sir (said I) the Cardinal does it
with such vehemence, that I fancy his very foam will poison me: Yet, Sir,
(Thanks to your Impartial History) although Campian is pleased to rant in
Commendation of this Synod; and in his Ecstasie of Jesuitism to cry out, Qui
delectus Episcoporum? quae Medulla Theologorum Augustum illud Sacrarium
implevem^nt? Yet I neither value their Number, nor their Judgment, nor their
Excommunications any more than of so many Dogs and Sorcerers; and if you have
not a care of me, I shall hit upon the Number of the Beast presently; the
Number of those which subscribed, amounts in all to just 355. Now you know that
the Pope is above a General Council, thus: His Holy Assent, as I may call it,
makes the Decrees infallible, and obliging all People, Nations and Languages;
And he being put to all of them, doubles their Number, which makes 710 (which
doubling their Number, is his Authority above them): Now deduct 44 from 710,
and there remains 666: Of the 44, I deduct 5 for the Person of Pope Pius
Quartus, (1 for Pius, and 4 for Quartus); and the 39 for the Proctors of them
that were absent, Vid. Hist. of the Council of Trent, 2 Book, P. 111.
because Pope Paul the Third, upon the account that the Viceroy of Naples sent
but 4 Bishops to the Council, made a severe Bull, that none, without exception,
should appear by Proctor. This the Legates concealed as being too severe,
because it contained all the Prelates of Christendom, even the most remote; and
because (says your History) it was too rigid, Constituting, that they incurred
ipso facto, the punishment of Suspension from their Ministry. Now because Pope
Paul the Third published this Bull, and Pius the Fourth confirmed the Decrees
by them subscribed; therefore to salve the Infallibility of both, I have
reckoned them in one place, and deducted them in another; thus, Let him that
has understanding count Apoc. 13. v. 18.
the number of the Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is Six
hundred threescore and six. Now, Sir, though I do not pretend to Calculate the
Nativity of the Beast, yet I think I have as much authority for it, as some
(well read in telling Noses) have to reckon the Pope 7000 and odd times bigger
than the Emperor: As for this Council, Sir, replied Father Paul, you need not
tell me any thing about it; for I do assure you, he that reads my History,
which I would advise all Roman Catholics, will be convinced of the Juggling
tricks of the Court of Rome; and what a foundation the Jesuits then laid by
James Laynes, their General, for their present Greatness. Indeed, Sir, (said I)
that Council have produced a wonderful Reformation; I believe we shall find it
the source and fountain of all the Villainies that have been acted in
Christendom ever since; and if you will be pleased to give us a short account
of the Stratagems and Juggling tricks of that Council, I will show you what
followed their Decrees of Reformation: With all my heart (replied Father Paul)
by a little that I shall tell you, 'twill not be very difficult to guess the
rest. Just as he was going to speak, a French Gentleman, belonging to the
Ambassador 'Lansac (who so severely reprimanded the Fathers of the Council)
came up to us, laughing as if he would have split his sides, which made Father
Paul, a very inquisitive man, ask him what was the matter? the matter (quoth
he) after he had taken breath; if ever the Devil danced, it is now; yonder has
been the greatest mistake that ever was since the Salique Law was broke by Pope
Joan: Why what is the business (said I)? Why (said he) the last Cloak-bag his
Holiness sent from Rome, which was to be filled with Instructions concerning
the Decrees of Reformation, and ending the Council, did not prove the right
one; for when it was opened before the Legates and their Accomplices, instead
of the Holy Ghost, the Devil flew out of it, and left nothing but a Pack of
Cards behind him. Pray what course did they then take (replied Father Paul)?
Why, Sir, (said he) James Laynes, the General of the Jesuits, who was so
vigorous for the Pope's Interests, being resolved to make the best of it;
looking very gravely, said, I wonder, Reverend Fathers, that ye as men, not
used to Miracles, should stand amazed at this thing: Is it not to your immortal
honor, that the Devil justly fearing a Reformation, flies from you as if he
were affrighted out of his wits? And as for his Books, since ye have made
Traditions of equal Authority with the Scriptures, I know none more venerable
than those which are contained in them; they are of that antiquity, that no
mortal Cronologer can find out the first invention of them; So that Whisk is
not insignificantly by the learned styled Old Adam: And now I think of it,
there is a profound mystery in the words Proponentibus Legatis, pointing to a
game in those Cards; and whilst they so eagerly labored for them, might be
said to be at spiritual Putt; indeed these last Sessions we have been engaged
in a pious kind of Lanterloo; we have lurch'd the Bishops; we have made the
Pope Pam; and he is both Spiritual and Temporal Trump by our Decrees; which
cannot alter all; being Con. Trent, p. 761.
forbid upon pain of damnation to make any Glosses or Interpretations upon them.

The Fathers were so pleased, that he helped them at a dead lift (for he took
great advantages from their negligence), that they ordered that his Order
should have the honor to carry the Cloak-bag for the future; of which office
the Cardinal Palavicini, the Jesuit, was afterward so proud, that he makes
that biting Jest a serious Truth in his Book, which he wrote a long time after
to confute your Relation of the Transactions of the Council: Mine, (quoth
Father Paul) I was just now going to give this person a short account of them;
but I owe him so much kindness, that I will oblige him to read it at length;
but to stay his stomach for the present, I will tell him some of the last part
of the politic Game, the Papalins then played. The Council (said he) turning
to me, had been suspended by the Pope; who having overcome those difficulties
which threatened him from the Emperor's Greatness, was not pleased with the
freedom of the Prelates, who were earnest for a Reformation: but Pope Pius the
Fourth was forced to call it again, because the French King, Francis the
Second, resolved to have a National Synod, Scotland revolted, and the King of
Bohemia was suspected of Lutheranism: these were Counc. Trent, 407.
his words: We must reform our Court first, for the Condition of the times,
when all cry out for Reformation, requires it, and it must not be refused, in
regard of the glorious Name thereof; but by reason of those Plots which the
Ultramontan's have laid to abate that absolute Sovereignty which God has
given us, we must speedily call the Council. The first thing mentioned was,
that none but the Legates should propose any thing in Council; and because L.
6. 439.
they found difficulty about the Article of non-residency, the Pope hastened
away all the remaining Bishops to Trent; what Postings were there 472.
night and day from the Council to the Consistory, until they had gained this
point? Now nothing is proposed but what pleased the Legates; and when a
Proposition is made, wherein 70 agree, they in vain complain they dare not
speak; What stratagems every 475.
day to prevent a Reformation? and with what a world of Hypocrisy did they
proclaim it? Nay, though all the Ambassadors of Princes made Lansac their
Speaker (who severely told the Legates of those shameful delays), how
diabolically did they put it off with reckoning up the abuses of Princes
Courts, and threatening them with such a Reformation, as the meanest Subjects
would refuse, because it put their lives into the hands of every desperate
Villain. When the French and Spanish Prelates combined to assert the ancient
Authority of Episcopacy, this was diverted with a Union of Catholics against
the Protestants, or with 508.
long Jangling disputations to no purpose; how cunningly did the Pope find
Bishops enough in Italy to out Vote all others (whose Lands lay in the Moon,
and had neither learning in their heads, nor shoes to their feet, nor money in
their pockets but what he gave them); and when by gaining the Cardinal of
Lorain, with some other Bishops, his Party was much the stronger; then out
comes the Decrees of Reformation, and the Council must end. Pray, Sir, (said I)
what were those Decrees? Such (said he) as made all the Ambassadors complain;
such as were distastefull to all the World, but Italians; and yet every Mothers
Son and Daughter, Town and Country, must be Spitch't-cock't in soecula
soeculorum, that will not be obedient to them; you must think they were not
good which were procured by such ill means; and, if you will not believe me,
hear what Andrew Dudithius, Bishop of five Churches, as learned as any in that
Council, says to Maximilian the Second Emperor, That In Epist. ad Imp.
needy and hungry Bishops came to Trent; youths for the most part without
Beards, given to Riot and Luxury, hired only to give their voices as the Pope
pleased, that the Council did not seem to consist of Bishops, but of disguised
Maskers; not of Men, but of Images, such as Daedalus made, that moved by
Nerves, which were none of their own, Hireling Bishops, who, as Country
Bag-pipes, could not speak, but as breath was put into them. This is the
Council the Papalins do so magnify, who flourish with Fathers and Councils,
and like Puddle-water reflect all the glories of the firmament, when they may
be fathomed with a finger: But, Sir, (said I) the designs of this are as deep
as Hell, and come from the very bottomless pit. They do so (replied the French
man, almost drowned in tears) Oh my poor Country, which these transubstantiated
Devils incarnate have almost ruined! the Alps are not whiter with Snow, than
the Valleys are red with Blood: What Bloodshed, Massacres, and irreconcilable
Enmities did this Holy Synod procure us, by the Holy League, which these Holy
Fathers contrived? What alterations in Council did the Death of the Duke of
Guise occasion, when the Scheme of their Villainies was broken? how easy is it
from your History to trace the Causes of all the Civil Wars of France? the
liberty of the Gallican Church, and the Supremacy of the French King were
things that troubled the Court of Rome more than the Protestants; the
Persecution of which, was only a Stale, and to facilitate their grand design,
which was to destroy the Royal Family, to consume the Nobility, to divide the
Commonalty, so that the Pope might take what remained into his Fatherly
Protection. Do not you think, Sir, (said he) very earnestly, that the Speech of
de Ferrieres stuck in their Gizards? and that particular clause, That the
Authority of the French King was not founded upon the Pragmatique or
Concordates, and Privileges given by Popes, but upon the Law of Nature, Hist.
Con. Trid. 723.
Holy Scriptures, Ancient Councils, and the Law of Christian Emperors. And how
was his Holiness moved with the French Protestation for Abrogation of
Proponentibus Legatis? Did not the Fathers find great fault with the Government
of France? and how do they mention several things included in the very words of
the Holy League? what a mystic saying was that of the Pope's to Cardinal
Lorain (the great Agent in that Rebellion) about Reforming France? and how often
would he say, That the Greatness of that Cardinal was profitable to the ends he
had in aiming at some matters of great moment; that he must shut up the
Council, provide Money, and afterward (said he) that shall happen which shall
please God. We have heard since, Sir, (said I) by Dr. Durel, your Countryman,
that all the methods of that Villainy were laid at Rome, which several Papers
have discovered. Hold you there, Sir, (said he) think you that the Jesuits are
such fools as to confess upon such pitiful dumb Evidences as Papers and
Writings? they that would swear the World out of their senses; that can swallow
Oaths without fear of splitting, and fancy them only a composition of words got
together by chance: Think you that they fear kissing the outside of that Book,
when they have denied the Truths contained in it, or value the testimony of any
Writings, that debase the Authority of Scriptures? Alas! they are Scepticks as
to every thing that shall hinder their designs; and that Rule which our Savior
gives in the doing Charity, they mis-apply to Actions of Sedition and Treason;
Let not their left hand know what their right hand does. Do you think they
believe that there was a Letter ever delivered to Monteagle? No, they deny all
the Powder Treason, and are ready to swear that the Gunpowder was conveyed
into the Cellar by those who went to search it; I wonder they have not found
out that Faux only walked in his sleep, and so 'twas all a dream: As for the
people of France, they have reason enough to have their eyes opened, and to see
and know what a glorious Reformation the Moulinists, who are lineally descended
from the Trent Fathers, may in time produce; both Princes and People have
reason enough to take warning; the same Principles are always qualified for the
same Practices; and although every Rebellion differs from others, because of
the change of Persons and Circumstances, yet they commonly run Parallel in many
material things and occurrences: Alas, the growing greatness of the King of
France is so little an argument of his Posterities security, that 'twill ruin
them; he is but the Jesuits Cormorant, to catch the Fish which they will eat;
and when ever they get the Popedom, they will soon discover what an
insignificant thing it is to be an universal footstool, and how easily they
will trample upon Monarchy; for to the singular advantages they have above any
Pope that ever lived, they will have this extraordinary one of perpetuating the
Popedom in their order; therefore it is that they magnify, and extol the
Council of Trent, whose Canons of Doctrine and Discipline, whose Decrees of
Reformation do so directly tend to this great end; and well they may boast of
it, for I think there never was the like in the world. Yes verily, by your
discourse, Sir, (said I) you have rubbed up my memory, that I have found out a
renowned Gang of Theologues, that look as if they were spit out of their
mouths; and who should these Gentlemen be but the Assembly of Divines sitting
at Westminster in the late Rebellion: Now although in their Preface to the
Annotations upon the Scriptures they call it the Pseudo-Synod of Trent, yet I
will prove that there were better Protestants in Trent at that time, and some
more against the essential Points of Popery than this very Assembly of Divines;
and certainly such they were, who declared against the impious and unchristian
Stratagems of the Court of Rome, from whom this Assembly seems to Copy all
their Transactions: Let the Devil take it ill if he pleases, that I show to the
world how pitifully he is put to his Politics to keep up the custom and credit
of Rebellion, by vamping up old projects, and playing an old game over again
with new shapes of Hypocrisy; I cannot help it, the truth must out, and there
is nothing certainer than that, as the Council of Trent was composed of men
either very ignorant, or prevailed upon by threats Vid. His Con. Trid.
and fears, or bigots to the Interests of the Court of Rome: So the Assembly of
Divines, whom the two Houses applied, in (...), p. 183.
an unwonted way, to advise of Church affairs, were not legally convened or
chosen; nor did they act in the name of all the Clergy of England, nor with
freedom and impartiality could they do any thing, being limited and confined,
if not overawed, to do and declare what they did. How did the Cabals of
Presbyterians and the Consistory jump in the methods of their Consultations?
And as the Pope either made or found Bishops enough in Italy to prevail in that
Council, so likewise did they by the same ways gain enough to compose their
Decrees of Faith and Discipline, and to silence all opposition. With what a
glorious Reformation did they a long time amuse the world? as the Pope did in
his Council; and what did it come to? Why, as the Jesuits, a small party at
first, which pretended to live by begging, have got the start of them, and do
now threaten to overthrow the whole Hierarchy of the Romish Church; so the
Independents broke in upon them and routed their Discipline. Did they not
compose a solemn Covenant, which is sufficiently shown to be exactly parallel
with the Holy League? And as the pretense of that in France was to destroy the
Hugonots (when as indeed it more immediately tended to the pulling down the
Kingly Authority, and the Liberty of the Gallican Church), so this in England
was pretended against the Papists, under which notion they ruined Monarchy and
Episcopacy. Did not the Council of Trent tax Charles the Ninth as Hist. Con.
Trid. page 726.
a favourer of Hugonots? and did not our Assembly accuse the King as a Defender
of Papists? how did they Libel all honest Divines The Author Mr. White, Nov.
17. 1643.
which opposed their wickedness, as the Courtiers of Rome did the honest
Fathers in the Council of Trent? The Assembly ordered public Thanksgivings
when their Forces were beaten by the Kings: So the Fathers assembled in Trent,
made Processions, sung Mass, and the Archbishop of Metz made an Oration for the
Victory, as they called it, which the Duke of Guise had over the Hugonots, when
as there was 5000 Catholics, and but 3000 Protestants Hist. Coun. Trent, p.
606.
slain. The Assembly, to make the good Old Cause look big, vaunted that all
foreign Churches of Protestants View of the late Troubles, p. 564.
sided with them; but when they sent to know their opinions, and expected that
they would assent to, and encourage them in their Proceedings, Verdict upon
Mel. Inquirendum.
they all condemned them: So Cardinal Amulius brought Letters concerning the
Oriental Christians, that they did own the Pope and his Religion, but the
Portugal Ambassador confuted Hist. Counc. Trent, 535.
them as forgeries.

If they thus agree in their Plots, certainly the issue will be almost alike
(replied the French man). Just as I was going to answer him, I was interrupted
with such a noise of sighing, groaning and sobbing, that I thought the wild
Irish had got under a Tub at their Funeral Lamentations, whenas a Scene opened
and discovered a great number of men, who looked so devout, and so Saint-like,
that I fancied the very Flies about their heads ready to turn into Seraphims;
their hands were lifted up to catch their eyes, that were ready to fly out of
their heads; and their faces with white Caps turned up, made them look as if
they were sick of the world: But that which amazed me most of all, was to see
Salmasius and Grotius come stumbling in at a back door; and as soon as
Salmasius saw them, Was there ever such a pack of hypocritical fools, said he,
since the invention of Nonsense, as this Assembly of Divines? Good Lord! how
was Grotius amazed when he understood that they came from Trent, for he always
fancied that they came from Geneva. Whence soever they come, cried Salmasius,
they are plotting some Villainy; for now they are busy about a Fast, that they
may the more greedily devour the flesh of Kings and mighty men, as they strain
it; these are the sober, godly party, that occasioned the Civil Wars of
England. Is the Author of Melius Inquirendum among them (replied Grotius)? No,
Mine Here, (said I) he is busy in procuring another to succeed this; Who is
that (said Salmasius)? Another Milton, Sir, (said I) I hope the King of England
will thank him according to Law one of these days for the great and timely
pains he took in his Book: in which he says, that yours which you wrote de Jure
Belli and Pacis, has occasioned all the Civil Wars that have been in Europe
ever since: He may as well say (replied Grotius) that Mare Liberum is Latin for
Liberty of Conscience; for why should my Book which was written in Latin move
the Rabble (the chief instruments of that Rebellion) to those unparalleled
Exorbitancies, who understood not a word of it? therefore it is their fault,
(For there Aug. de Util. Cred. Tom. 6. cap. 1.
will ever be a difference between an Heretic and a plain well, meaning man
that believes an Heretic), (says St. Austin), who taught them as many
Treasonable Doctrines in English, as ever Lucifer could invent in Hell; And
although he seems very tender of Hurting Loyal Ears upon the account of my
Writings, yet he prosesses the same Loyalty his Predecessors did in the late
Rebellion, which he lays at my door, that he may with the more impudence
proceed in those very practices, which directly tend to the same end: But since
he is for sprinkling in a sentence or two of my Writings to justify his own,
pray let him take this along with him too, wherein I clearly show my opinion
concerning the Causes of Rebellion: Circumferamus oculos per omnem Historiam,
quod unquam vidit soeculum tot subditorum in principes Grot. de Antich.
bella sub Religionis titulo? Et horum Concitores nunc reperiuntur Ministri
Evangelii, uti se vocant. Let us look through all History; what Age ever saw so
many Rebellions against Princes; and those that raise them, are now found to be
Ministers of the Gospel, as they style themselves. Such as himself now is, such
as were this Blessed Assembly of Divines, and that holy Council of Trent, which
first show them the way to suppress Episcopacy and Monarchy, who first taught
them the sanctified methods of Reforming Princes and Prelates, wherein they
have infinitely outdone their Masters; for the Fathers in Trent were forced to
disguise themselves under many Stratagems, before they could get those Decrees
pass; which was the end and scope of that most Popish Council: but our
Assembly-men fell upon them first with the greatest impudence and violence
imaginable, deluding the Nation with a fair pretense of thorough Reformation,
and the Suppression of Popery: The Devil always provides a Vizard for his
Agents, and Murderers can cry A Race, a Race, when they are running quite
away. Murderers! (quoth Salmasius) I think this Assembly will not own that
they were guilty of the Murder of the King, no more were the Jesuits of the
Death of the King of France, that fell by the hands of Raviliac; they in the
Council of Trent procured the King-killing Decrees, they fomented the fatal
divisions of that Kingdom, to establish the Throne of Christ's Vicar upon the
Ruins of the Monarchy; they instructed and encouraged the Assassins, and yet
they did not kill him; it is easy to apply it, but it is hard to make them
believe it.

I believe so too, (Sir, said I) for with the same confidence that the Jesuits
could splendidly embalm the heart of that Henry 4.
Prince whom they had traitorously Murdered, do our Presbyterians seem to
lament for the Death of King Charles the First; and who but they restored King
Charles the Second? who now such Defenders of the Regalia of France as the
Jesuits? and Father Maimbourg writes against the Usurpations of the Pope; who
but Presbyterians are Loyal Subjects? who but they the Preservers of their
Country, and of the true Protestant Religion? Hiccius Doxius of Colchester
writes his Black Nonconformist, and Dedicates it to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, just as Answered by Dr. Durel.
Philanax Anglicus, a Jesuit, did before him: these are the men that are so
irreconcilable to Popery, that every honest Orthodox Churchman is a Jesuitical
Tory, and is marked out in Libels and Pamphlets to the Rabble, who have a fair
occasion to complement him when they Cart the Whore of Babylon through the
streets of London: These are your true Protestant Processions wherein they burn
the Pope in Effigy, that they may establish his Authority, for the multitude
are as ready to change Crucify him into Hosanna's, as Hosanna's into Crucify
him; they are but as Dogs to Perk that fair game; the Jesuits never want a
consecrated Gun to shoot at: this is the old game of 41; but they will neither
acknowledge their former guilt, nor fear that punishment which attended it,
which King Charles says, was like that of Corah (...). p. 261.
and his Accomplices (at once mutining both against Prince and Priest) in such a
method of divine Justice as is not ordinary; the earth of the lowest and
meanest people opening upon them, and swallowing them up in just disdain of
their ill-gotten and worse-used Authority, upon whose support and strength they
chiefly depended for their building and establishing their designs against me,
the Church and State.

As soon as I had spoken these words, the roof was in a moment uncovered, and
there descended the most glorious object that ever I beheld; it was in the
shape of a Virgin, Beautiful as the Sun, and which had all the Charms of
Heaven and Earth; her garments were not very rich, but decent and comely; her
eyes piercing as lightning, and on her face was enthroned all the glories of
modesty and innocence; her feet, which were bare, seemed torn and bloody with
Thorns and Briars; on her right hand sat Kings and Princes, and immediately
next her King Charles the First with a Crown of light upon his head; her left
was guarded with a long row of Reverend Prelates, in garments white as Snow;
she no sooner descended with a quickening light all about her, but both the
Trent Fathers and Assembly of Divines were so strangely Metamorphosed, that I
could not distinguish them from Devils, or from one another, for the Fucus and
Paint of Hypocrisy upon their faces (with which they had deluded and bewitched
such multitudes of people) melted off with the warmth of her Rays; and she no
sooner espied them, but with an angry grief she threatened to make them in a
short time as contemptible and odious to future Ages, as the worst Heretics in
the world ever were.

I have, said she, (turning and looking around her) traveled through the
Wilderness of this World now more than Sixteen hundred years, and never yet
could find any long-continued abode or resting place: But when the Defenders of
the Faith, like true Christian Champions, had set me free from my long and dark
imprisonment, and had restored me to my Primitive purity and just Authority;
the Honor, the Peace, the Plenty I brought to these Kingdoms, made me reflect
not only upon their gratitude, but their interest too, for my security: But woe
is me! I still, like the Sun, must pass through Clouds of various shapes, which
are every where drawn from the combined humors of a feculent world; yet never
was I so much darkened with sorrow and lamentations, as in these Islands for the
unparalleled Indignities inflicted upon my head, and my members by the most
ungrateful men, upon the most unjust accusation that ever was laid to my
charge by Heathens or Infidels: I, who freed them from the Tyranny of the
Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable enormities, was condemned and torn in
pieces as guilty of Popish Superstitions: So my great Bridegroom was accused as
instrumental to the bringing the old Romans to take away the Place and Nation
of the Jews, but their destruction followed his Crucifixion; and the Rebellious
divisions of those very Jews provoked the Roman Emperors, and laid them open
to that final vengeance, that they left that Land deluged with blood which they
found overflown with Milk and Honey. Oh my people of England, whom I love and
pity with the tenderest compassion, and with an unlimited charity! Oh that ye
(weeping) said she, would know in this your day the things that belong unto
your peace; that ye would open your eyes, and see and consider who they are
that will by undiscreet zeal, preposterous fears, or an ambitious policy
subject you to a more intolerable bondage than ever this Nation yet felt: Are
they not those Pharisaical Hypocrites which strain at a Gnat, but swallow a
Camel; who Pray against Popery in the Church, but Preach Jesuitism in the
Conventicle; who fight against me under a form of Godliness; who for a pretense
make long Prayers, and thorough Reformations, that they may destroy Widows
houses and God's too? Certainly ye have been sufficiently taught from the
Calamities ye have lately felt, without comparing them to others (of a farther
distance of time and place), not to trust to any change of that Government
which was restored with so Universal satisfaction, and has still preserved you
in peace; but by an union of Loyal and truly Christian Resolutions, to maintain
it against all opposition upon what pretense soever; which thing if ye do,
then shall ye be delivered from the Presbyterianism of the Council of Trent,
and from the Jesuitism of the Assembly of Divines; from Popish Leagues and
Protestant Covenants; from the Good Old Cause, with a new name to it; from
establishing Christ's Throne upon the Blood

Of Pious Prelates, and of Christian Kings;
From Killing God's Anointed to his Glory;
From Prayers in unknown words, for unknown things,
And from the Mass, and from the Directory.
THE Third VISION OF THE REFORMATION.
A short Vindication of the Reformation of the Church of England; The Methods
the Presbyterians used to ruin it; A full Description of their thorough
Reformation, Parallel desideratur.

IT is a great and lawful convenience that a well-meaning man has in Visions,
above those who design mischief when they are awake, and dream of nothing that
is good when they are asleep, above Popish Priests up to the Ears in Legends,
Fanatics in Pulpits, or Witches upon Bromstaves; for his fancies are for the
real good of others, as well as for to please himself: Parables are lively
Pictures of significant truths, and Morality was excellently described in
Fables by a Heathen; but it does not a little trouble me that the Beasts in
Aesop should shame some men now a days, who will not be convinced of the Errors
and Mischiefs they are engaged in, when they have the opportunity of being
better taught by the truly ancient and Catholic Doctrine of the Church of
England: but her Adversaries the Jesuits and Fanatics who deny the King to be
Head of the Church, do likewise reject the Reformation by his Authority; the
Papists Sham it, and would make it a ridiculous Schism; the Presbyterians
(though they renounce the Pope, yet retain to themselves that Usurpation which
was above 500 years a gaining by the Popes), finding that such a Discipline was
not consistent with the Doctrine of the Church of England, Preached up a
Reformation more pure and primitive, as they pretended; the reasons we shall
know afterward: Therefore the Emblem of the Church we saw in the last Vision,
having vanquished and discovered the unjust Stratagems both of the Council of
Trent, and of the Assembly of Divines, ordered her own Convocation of Orthodox
and Learned Churchmen to defend her for the future against both Papists and
Presbyterians: They were no sooner fat, but in came Harding, and boldly told
them, That they were a small obscure meeting of Calvinists that reformed the
Church: As soon as Bishop Jewel espied him, That is very false, said he, I will
tell you the truth, and tell you otherwise in the Epistle I wrote concerning
the Council of Trent to a Venetian Noble man; my words relating to our
Reformation, are these: For our selves we have done nothing but with very good
reason; nothing but what we saw to be lawful, and to have been practiced by
the Ancient Fathers, without any reprehension at all; wherefore we called a
full Synod of Bishops, and by common consent of all estates, purged our Church,
as it were Augeas 's Stable, of all superfluities, which either the negligence
or malice of men had brought in: this was justly in our power to do; and
because we could do it, we did it faithfully.

At this I was so encouraged as to ask Harding whether or no they were
Calvinists, or a small obscure meeting that signed the Judgment of the
Convocation, that the Pope cannot call them without the King's consent, in the
year 1536, there being present the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of
London, 13 Bishops, 49 Abbots, etc. Now the fatal blow was given to the Papal
Authority in England; and yet these could not be Calvinists, nor were they few
or contemptible; indeed you Popish Writers are great adversaries to National
Councils, because they will look after the Civil Rights, that the Court of Rome
do not encroach upon them, which a General Council, wherein the Pope is what he
pleases, cannot; therefore Cardinal Palavicini profoundly tells Lib. 14. cap.
12.
us, that Concilio Nazionale sempre abhorrito da Pontifici, That the Pope did
always abhor a National Council; and good reason, because it sometimes stops
that Torrent of Money which he says is so necessary to maintain the carnal
felicity of the Church; therefore we know why you stickle so much against the
Methods of our Reformation which Mr. Shaw has well justified; and Origo Protest.
which Dr. Burnet says was advanced with such deliberation in King Henry the
Eight, and King Edward the Sixth's time, as is as great an evidence of the
ripeness Part 1. Page 289.
of their proceedings, as can be showed in any Church in any Age: So that we
were Reformed without that violence the German Divines were, as the Letters
between Osiander and Cranmer testify; or without Rebellion, which is always
the consequence of Popish Reformations.

At this he marched off, and made room for Raynolds, a Rhemish Renegado, who
came Busling up, And although (said he) ye have fob'd off Mr. Harding, yet I
suppose I shall prove your Reformation to be a wicked Separation from the Roman
Communion, which the irreconcilable divisions among you testify: for hear what
I say to Whitaker, Page 481. Have you not at this present among you a great
murmuring, even amongst the Protestants, against the Communion-Book and State
of Religion, which in the beginning of her Majesty's Reign was Queen Elizabeth.
brought in? If the Catholics said nothing, have you not the Puritans
detesting your Faith; and, were it not for the Prince's Sword, ready to
dispossess you of Chairs and Churches? I was mightily amazed to hear this, for
it is 99 years ago since these words were Printed; which a Gentleman observing,
See you not (said he) what a scandal these rascally Schismatics are to our
Reformation? indeed the man foretold what too certainly came to pass; but he
must know that we do not acknowledge that any of their Principles had any share
or part in it, any more than they had in bringing in the King; for in the days
of Queen Mary, Knox, that peevish Puritan, was as malicious toward the
Orthodox in Francfurt, as the Papists were to them in England: And moreover,
it is no wonder that they agree not with us, for they disagree among themselves,
and are not the same they were. Those in King Edward's time scrupled only some
Ceremonies, as Bucer, Rogers and Hooper; those in Queen Elizabeth's time
excepted against some Prayers, Canons and Articles; but now they are for
Abolishing Supremacy and Episcopacy; they have laid the Ax to the root, and
are gone so far from the Church of England, that they are come round about to
the Church of Rome, and are worse Papists than any before the Reformation.

We perceive by Raynolds, that the Jesuits very well knew this; and therefore
whilst the Presbyterians were busy to advance their Discipline, they thought
them fit tools to carry on their Fifth Monarchy; their Principles being both
alike destructive, both of Church and State; in order to which, they quarrel
with our Reformation; and as the Pope and the Devil would have it, Cry up a
thorough one of their own: Of which I will give you such a full sight, if you
will go along with me, that you shall never forget it until you are in heaven.
Pray, Sir, (said I) before you do that, let me know by what methods they
brought their Discipline to that perfection in 48. I will not trouble you,
(said he) with a long relation of their several Cabals they had all King James
his Reign; he himself was sufficiently sensible of their restless humor, and
said, What his Son King Charles found by experience, that there were not
greater thieves and cutthroats among the Highlanders and Borderers; for as
soon as they (by the same computation the Devil tells his Legions) found that
they were grown so numerous and strong as to make a prevalent Party in every
County, then they set up their Patriots, whom they raise, and then admire, as
Boys do Paper-Kites: These were the men that should Trounce Antichrist, that
should toss the Pope and all his Cardinals in Blankets; that should purge out
all superfluities of Popish Idolatry, and make the Nation as clean as a penny;
indeed new Brooms sweep clean, but they turned into rods to scourge it at last
by their Ordinances, as Resolutions, viz. Resolved, That the Kingdom be put
into a posture of defense, March 2. 1641. Now I would fain know against whom:
Against one another (said I); you know, Sir, the Spaniards sometimes at an
Execution, as soon as the person is hanged do draw all their Swords; we cannot
suppose that it is to kill the man that is dead; and it had been well for this
Nation, if as the Spaniards put up their Swords again quietly, they had put
themselves into a posture of Peace: No, no, Sir, replied he, Jack Presbyter
must have a holy War too; and since he fought for the Throne of Christ, he may
as lawfully kill Malignants, as the Pope slew Infidels to regain his Sepulcher.

Item, Resolved that a Committee be appointed to examine St. Paul, whether or
no it be lawful to grant the King Tonnage and Poundage. Pray, Sir, said I,
what do you mean by this? I never heard thus much before: Why, said he, Sir Jo.
Eliot and Pym would not grant them, until they had first settled Religion
touching Arminianism. Sir, said I, do you think that St. Paul will be summoned
before a Rebellious Committee? No, Sir, I will assure you he will appeal unto
Caesar; and besides, do you think that he will satisfy the curiosity of those
men about the difficult Points of Predestination and Free Will, who care not
for damnation upon such plain terms? besides, he does not know why, nor does he
believe that the Fundamental Laws of this State are contrary to the Fundamental
Government of the Church, so as to alter it; and therefore he will be tried by
the Bishops; for which there is more Greek in his Epistles, than for a Burgess
in all the Old and New Testament. When the Church of England (said he) was
Reformed from the Corruptions of Rome, it was done with the advice and consent
of all the Estates of the Nation; and for the establishing a public and
lasting Settlement: but these Ambitious men endeavoring to alter the
Government in the State, found it a requisite piece of Policy to make a Schism
and Division in the Church, in order thereunto; which was the Reason they were
so zealous about those Controversial Points: So the Court Prelates in Trent
gained their Decrees of Reformation, whilst they diverted the well-meaning
Friars in sharp disputes about Doctrines; so the Jesuits over-reacht the
Franciscans and Dominicans, by setting them together by the Ears: And therefore
I am persuaded, that as St. Paul would have Condemned those Interlopers, who
troubled themselves about things they neither understood nor had to do
withal; so likewise he would have blamed those men who called themselves
either Calvinists, or that styled themselves Arminians; as he did those, who
said, I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, or I am of Cephas; for among the many
methods those Rebels used to obtain their glorious Reformation, there was none
of greater consequence: First of all it made a great division among the Clergy,
and that numerous part of them, which contrary to their Oaths, separated from
the Church either ignorantly or wilfully upon the account of Arminianism,
became the greatest Incendiaries of all, and the chief Promoters of that
unnatural Rebellion: And secondly, the People who by them were taught the
Discipline of Calvin, were taught likewise that Arminianism was downright
Popery, which the visible Ceremonies of the Church branded with the same
Character confirmed to them, who could know no better; therefore they must help
too to promote the Reformation aforesaid, they must carry on the work of the
Lord in the land of the living; which they did by Tumults, and Petitions
against Bishops, as Popish Nusances, and against the Rites and Ceremonies of
the Church as Rags of Superstition: That the Jesuits had a hand in encouraging
that Controversy to enrage the People against the Church, is a plain case, and
nothing is certainer than that they brought up the distinction of Long Cloaks
worn in London and elsewhere; and now they are playing the same game again with
Socinus and his fratres Poloni. But to return to those Learned Patriots I
before mentioned, after they had got the Power into their hands, they no more
depended upon the Judgment of Calvin or Arminius for what they did, than upon
the Hypothesis of Tycho Brahoe, or of Copernicus, for the Sequestring
Delinquents Lands; only in the mean time it testified their zeal to all the
godly of the Land (as they were deliciously pleased to style themselves) who
are wise Disputants in defense of their several Enthusiasms, when they are
ignorant of the Catechism; and, like Ravilliac, learned in all the Doctrines of
King-killing, when he scarce knew his Creed: And who did all of them
unanimously agree in one Billingsgate Argument against the Bishops and Clergy,
Railing, reviling, and calling them by names, enough to fright old Nicolas
until he plucks in his horns like a Snail: And although Michael the Archangel,
Epist. Jude v. 9.
when contending with the Devil, durst not bring against him a railing
Accusation; yet these meek-hearted were taught by their Preachers in the
Language of Sion, to say, that they were Wilson to the Commons 1642.
Croaking Frogs, Spirits of Devils -- Vicar's Jehov. Jir. p. 88.
a stinking heap of Atheistical and Roman Rubbish -- a Rotten Rabble of
Scandalous Priests, Bastard Sons of Belial -- White's first Century Epist. to
the Reader.
persons illiterate and insufficient, dumb Dogs, Whoremongers and Adulterers,
who as fed Horses, Neigh after their Neighbors Wives -- Priests of Baal,
Bacchus and Priapus: And therefore says Coleman to the Parliament Aug. 30.
1643, the Hierarchy is become a fretting Gangreen, and spreading Leprosy, an
insupportable Tyranny; Up with it, up with it to the bottom, Root and branch,
Hip and thigh; destroy these Amelekites, and let their place be no more found.

Thus that Order of men, who have been instrumental to all the Public good
this Nation ever enjoyed, was exposed to the public scorn and contempt of the
insolent Rabble, and made as the filth of the world, and the offscowring of all
things. But 1 Cor. 4. 13.
what was their glorious Reformation in the end? Truly more infamous than
Jeroboam's Rebellious Idolatry, he made the lowest of the people Priests to his
high Places; but here the lowest of the people (viz. Triers, etc.) made Priests
and Kings too to the most high God, as they pretended: Truly (replied I) had
St. Paul himself been here then, he had as certainly been sequestered and
plundered, as Archbishop Laud was beheaded: For our Puritans, who deprived him
of his Saintship, would have found many Malignant places in his Epistles,
enough to have brought him before a High Court of Justice; for in August 1642,
one was committed to the Prison, which they made of the Lord Peter's House, for
reading Malignant Chapters, as said his Mittimus, and some of them without
doubt were St. Paul's. Certainly the Jesuits (who were very busy in all the
late Rebellion) and who were for expunging the 7 first Verses of the 13th
Chapter to the Romans, would have employed their Agents, to have proved him a
Prelatical Papist, in England, and a great Enemy to the Presbyterian
Reformation, which could not be done decently and in order, as he would have
all things in the Church. Besides he put the Assembly of Divines to a great
Postscript to their Annotat.
expense of Learning, about his Epistles to Timothy and Titus, to defend their
Form of Church Government; and the House of Commons were forced to the Lord
knows how many Ordinances, to raise Horse, Foot and Dragoons to prove
themselves the Higher Powers; and that shutting the King out of Hull, fighting
him in open Field, and imprisoning him, was not resisting him; therefore he
would have come within the reach of this thorough Reformation, as sure as a
Gun, for the only Cathedral in Christendom, dedicated to his Honor, was
Reformed to a Stable for their Horses. Well, Sir, said he, before we talk of
that, come along with me, I will show you some more of their tricks to bring
about their Reformation. With that he carried me to St. Antolin's Church, in
which at the beginning of the Rebellion, the Brethren had set up a Lecture to
pull down Popery; as soon as I came to the Door, there was such crowding and
thronging that I was unwilling to go in, besides the Steam of the Saints, which
were half stewed with Zeal, was almost as troublesome as a Damp in a Coal-mine.
The Gentleman observing me to be somewhat backward, took me by the Arm; And,
pray Sir, (said he) give your self a little trouble, it will be much to your
satisfaction I will assure you: You must expect to be a little warm, for
Presbytery and the Sweating Sickness came into England much about the same
time. Warm, Sir, (said I) is that all the danger? Truly I do not like their
Looks, what do they come hither for? For what, (said he) to take warning
against Popery? Why, Sir, (said I) is any body to be hanged for it? No, replied
he; but yonder is a Gentleman that will do execution upon it presently: Pray,
Sir, (said I) what reason have these People to be afraid of Popery? They do not
look as if Mahomet would bestow the Alcoran upon them; for I do not believe
that they ever had any Religion, but they disgraced it: they look more like
Jews than any other people living, or indeed like an Assembly of Egyptian
Mummies. And truly until they stirred, I imagined that several of them next
the Wall, had been Antic Wainscot, or Grotesque Carvings; but one Fellow amazed
me mightily, for he was of such a course grained Complexion, that I thought an
Effigies belonging to some Tomb had been walking away from its Pedestal. Whilst
I was looking around me, there stepped a living Creature up into the Pulpit, that
took up all my Thoughts; he was in the most mortified Dress that you can
imagine, for the white Border upon his black Cap, made him look like a Black
Jack tipped with Silver; he wrinckled his Face up and down that it resembled a
Crab-lanthorn possessed with a Devil, who had crumpled all the upper Crust with
his Horns and Hoofs; after he had been a considerable time putting himself into
a posture of Ugliness, and had wiped the Pearl from his Snout; at last his
Mouth opened, his Lips trembled, his Eyes twinkled, but nothing was yet heard
but a little grumbling in his Guts, as if his Fervency lay in his Chitterlings:
the Audience in the mean time stretched their Ears until they looked like
Elephants Luggs, and then to gratify them a word or two slipped out of his
Trunk; but at last he roared so loud that I could not imagine but that there
was an hollow place in his Head to make an Echo, and the method and matter of
his Prayer confirmed my fancy; for excepting the malicious part of it (which
respected the King and his Loyal Subjects, in which his Prayers for them
contained a scandalous Invective against them,) those which were for
deliverance from their Enemies (as he called them) were saucy and blasphemously
foolish; their usual strain of ex tempore praying; concluding, That it would
please the Lord to take his and their Foes a knock on the Costard, and then
they would join their hands to smite them Hip and Thigh: This way of Praying
was the Reformation of the Liturgy, and according to the Rules of the
Directory, a superfine way of propagating Sedition, leaving them scope to
insert whatever might move the Passions of the ignorant Rabble, and might
compose a Form for devout Necromancers to raise the Devil. But now for a touch
of his preaching, which was the modish Eloquence of Church-Conventicles in
those days: The Subject he treated upon was the Union of Protestant Dissenters
against the common Dangers of Popery; and his Text in order to it was this. And
in the Genesis 14. verse. 5.
fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the Kings that were with him, and smote
the Rephaims in Ashteroth-Karnaim, and the Zusims in Ham, and the Emims in
Shaueh Keriathaim. He was forced to spit five or six times before he entered
upon his Discourse, the speaking the Text had made his Mouth water so mightily,
but after he had done fluxing he began.

Beloved! And shall we, and our Brethren in the Country, and our Brethren of
Scotland, be smitten by the Kings of the Earth, as the poor Emims and Zusims
were? And will it not be better that we join in a Covenant together, that we
may join with them in Battle altogether?

Beloved! If these People I here mention be Strangers unto you, take it upon my
word they were the ancient French Protestants, and this Chedorlaomer was a huge
great Popish King, a mighty tall Man, with a dimple upon his Chin, above
seventeen hand high; a great sign of being a Persecutour. Pray observe, he came
in the fourteenth year, there he cheated the Protestants, because he came in
the Popish Stilo veteri. But who do you think came with him? Why all the Kings
he could rap and rend; Antichristian French Kings, Sons of Belial. And what do
ye think his Majesty Chedorlaomer, and the Kings that were with him, did? Why,
first they came, and secondly they overcame, and smote the Rephaims, yea they
smote them, even the Rephaims of Ashteroth-Karnaim. I suppose this was a good
Town of trading, Beloved, there was a World of these honest People formerly of
the Ims, there was the Rephaims, the Zusims, the Emims, the Cherubims, and
Seraphims, the Vrims, and Thummims, and they all come from the Hebrew word le
Vmmim; but now there is not one of them to be had for love or Money. And what
should be the reason that so many godly people should be smitten? why truly
they were separated, and were united far asunder. Do ye think that if these
Protestants had made a Bargain to stand by one another, that the Pope and his
Kings could ever have smitten them? Do ye think that if they had entered into
Covenant before the Lord, that he would not have left all Business to defend
them? Yes verily, the Lord loves to see his secret ones go hand in hand like a
Yoke of Oxen. But now, Beloved! Let us consider the reasons why we are not
united, for the Zusims and the Emims Case is ours at this day; I say, what is
the reason? why truly, the reason is because there is no reason at all; for are
we not all Protestants, though we go by several Names? If we had all the same
Name, how should we know one from another? Then if I called my Wife, my Maid
would come, and there would be such coming and going, and going and coming,
that we should be like Satan walking to and fro. What! one is called a
Presbyterian, another an Independent, a third an Anabaptist, what signifies
these Names? Are we not all Protestants? Shall a few Letters, we learnt when we
were Boys, make us quarrel now we are Men? Nay, now we are come of Age to be
Martyred? And have we not reason to fear it? For it is certain that the Whore of
Babylon is coming with a great many Kings after her Tail; and then what do ye
think will become of us? She will eat of the best, and drink of the best; She
will eat up all your White Bread, and leave you nothing but Brown-Bread. And do
you think that is all? No! She will send you Slaves to the Sugar Mines, or
drown you by the way in the Pyrenaean Sea. One would think this enough, but
hold ye there; She will kill you over and over again; She will fetch the
Heart's Blood and Gutts of your Souls out, and pick your Pockets. Ah! my
Beloved, Ah Lord! I wish ye had been so united, that I might have divided my
Text but into one part; nevertheless I will conclude with this (pray carry it
home with you): We have been a long time, as Hemp, I say, as Hemp beaten by the
Ungodly; let us be twisted with one ac-cord into an holy Rope, to bind their
Kings in Chains, and their Nobles with Links of Iron.

As soon as he had ended, the Gentleman pulled me by the Sleeve; and what, Sir,
(said he) do you think of Demosthenes or Cicero? What, Sir, (said I) I think
they have been dead this half year. Why? (said he) When they were living they
were not half so good Orators as this very Fellow that now Canted (as you call
it); is not that the truest Eloquence that moves the Audience to what the
Preacher designs? Pray come along with me, I will show you how servently they
practice his Doctrine.

I went along with him in the Crowd, until we came into a spacious open Field,
in the midst of which was a great Ring of People hand in hand, in the middle of
them a Scotch Bag-piper, and a Fellow blind-folded, dancing to the Tune of 41.
Bless me, thought I, what is here to do? what have we a dance of Satyrs in a
Fairy Circle? As soon as we were come close up to them, I never saw such
different shapes of Men in all my Life, there was not one of them like to
another. Pray, Sir, (said I) what are these? Here are (quoth he) Presbyterians,
Independents, Anabaptists, Brownists, Ranters, Antinomians, Familists,
Libertines, Scepticks, Jesuits, Adamites, Quakers.

Hold, Sir, (said I) have you ever a Rhinocerot among them? What do you mean,
Sir, (said he)? Why truly, Sir, (replied I) I thought you had been reckoning
the Beasts of America. Oh no, Sir, (said he) these are the several Sectaries,
who united in the late infamous League against the Government in Church and
State: And is not that Man very Eloquent, that can persuade Men who are
Antipodes in Religion, to venture Life and Estate, Soul and Body, to fight
against any particular one, which they do not understand, so well as the
differences between themselves? Oh! Sir, (said I) as these several Sects have
derived their blasphemous Opinions from the Ancient Heretics, so likewise do
they agree with them in their rebellious Combinations against the Sovereign
Truth, as Tertullian has delivered to us a Character of those in his Days, let
us compare them with these: Omnes tument, omnes scientiam pollicentur, ipsae
mulieres Haereticae quam procaces, quae audent docere contendere, etc. Now is
not this like our Separatists? But to the present Case. Nihil interest illis
licet diversa De Praescrip. cap. 41.
tractantibus dum ad unius veritatis Expugnationem conspirent* But, Pray Sir,
(continued I) which of these are true Protestants? Why (said he) the Fellow
that is blinded in the midst of them is a Seeker; and if I had time, he who has
been of all Religions, should give us an account of their several Opinions, and
when you have heard them, if you can from them all patch up such a considerable
Rarity as a true Protestant, I will be bound to give you a Venison Pasty made
of Act aeon, for your Supper; but I will be at leisure to give you a relationn
of them at another time.

Pray, Sir, (said I) let me have a short account of some of these Rarities of
Fanaticism now, I will not trouble you to speak of them all, for I think to D.
Aug. de Haeres.
St. Austin's Catalogue of Heretics here are ninety more of a later Invention
added; surely Ross in his View of Religions, never saw half so many strange
Garbs of Opinion, as are here before us; it is no wonder the Morocco Ambassador
was startled to find such Protestant Monsters amongst us, as Africa never bred,
and which can digest the good Cause, better than his Ostriches can old Iron.
But what is yonder Fellow with a watering-Pot in his Hand? That is (replied he)
an Ana-Baptist; and that Fellow who Trembles (as if he had swallowed an
Earthquake,) has a cold Fit of the Hat, just now creeping upon him, his
Principles have of late been sufficiently proved to be Jesuitical, and his
Practices much more; for when the warm Fit of Zeal and Fighting is upon him, he
is as brisk a Reformer as the rest of the Pack; or as that Antinomian, who is
for breaking the two Tables, that he might prevent Popery, whereas his Holiness
thinks that taking away but one of the Commandments is a sufficient means to
encourage it. But is not that Yeoman in his Naturalibus, a very hardy Fellow
think you, and a Saint of Expedition? At this, I espied a lusty Clown as naked
as any in Bedlam; a very devout Cannabal, Sir, (said I); No, no, (replied he)
he is a true Protestant Adamite, and to show you what an Enemy he is to Popery,
and to St. Peter's Successors, he is a Disciple of the first Adam in his
Innocence: What his Opinions are, I cannot tell (said I); I shall not pin my
Faith upon his Sleeve (I perceive); but this I am sure of, that the Jesuits in
their Morals defend this very Brutality, if it be upon the Account of
Curiosity: And in the Book of Fol. 6^.
Conformity, we have a famous Story of Friar Leonard, how he put off his
Breeches, and putting them on his Head, went stark naked about the Streets, and
although his Fraternity cried Shame of him, yet he was so Holy he cared not
what they said; Very true (replied he) and now we see that these Savages in
Worship, the very Dregs of Popish Enthusiasts, did the Presbyterians combine
with in order to their Glorious Reformation; and although many of these
Sectaries were then insignificant, for their number, to do any thing against
the State, yet when joined with others they had a pestilential Influence upon
the Government, therefore they were enrolled in the common League and Covenant,
and they had their Protestant Joyners to, Unite them and their different
Maggots,
As long and short Sticks are in Faggots. Hud. 3d Part.

Indeed, when ever they were in jeopardy, they were Brethren to some purpose,
and mighty sweet upon one another; and therefore Calamy tells the Commons, This
is a time wherein we should all unite December. 26. 1644.
against the Common Enemy, that seeks to devour us all. By their Common Enemy
they meant the Government, to ruin which they used all means imaginable.

He could not speak one word more, for there flew such a Volley of Pamphlets
that we could scarce hear or see any thing else for them; I gathered up a good
number of them, and found them to be most Scandalous, and Seditious Libells,
defaming the King, and his Prime Ministers of State; done with all the Artifice
in the World to inflame the Rabble: and they, whose private Affairs were either
inconsiderable, or desperate, seemed most concerned for the Public. For the
first Troop of those Blessed Reformers, were a great number of Apprentices,
who, by a Paper, were advised to sack Lambeth-House. I followed them May 9.
1640.
as near as I could, but they being forced to retire without effecting their
Enterprise returned back into the City: At my entrance I heard such a dismal
noise, as if the Inhabitants had been throwing the Houses about one another
Ears; before I was aware of any Danger, I was up to mine in the Mobile, and
carried along with such a torrent of greasy Operators, that I could not
disengage my self; all the way they went yelling, and howling as if they would
split their Mouths up to their Ears; the very Earth trembled, the Teeth of half
Middlesex were set on edge, and the Clouds were sour'd, and curdled with the
din: I thought they would have squeezed my Gutts out at my Mouth with crowding,
and feared every moment when they should give me a gentle Dab with one of their
Weapons, for they were all armed with Clubs, and Glaves, and old rusty
Halberts, in the midst of them, one carried an Ensign of Scotch-Cloth, with
Justice on one side, and Reformation on the other in great Red Letters: they
were led on by a Chimney-Sweeper, who carried his Cromes in Imitation of the
Roman Fasces, he went gnawing a Bone, and crying out Justice! Justice! I
wondered against whom they were so exasperated, but found it immediately to be
the Earl of Strafford, who was to their great satisfaction guarded to
Tower Hill, and there standing upon a Scaffold to be sacrificed to the
Accumulative Rabble, told them, He thought it a strange way to write in Blood
the beginning of a Reformation.

In Blood! cried a Gentleman standing by, can it begin or end with any thing
else, that is managed by such execrable Miscreants as those are? I wondered whom
he meant, until I saw him point to about 23 Presbyterian Preachers, whom I saw
lifting up their Eyes, laying their hands to their Breasts, and talking so
seriously to the People, as if they had been preparing them all for Death;
whenas Marshal stepped out and bawling as if he had been Frantic, I pray (said
he) Look on me, as one that come among 1641.
you this day to beat a Drum in your Ears, to see who will come out and The
Word in the North Rebellion, 1644.
Follow the Lamb.

I perceived that this Magical Jargon had conjured up a Rabble as formidable as
the other, who in Legions ran violently down to White Hall, and so to
Westminster, crying out, NO Bishops, no Bishops! when the Throng was past, I
followed Calamy, Baxter, Newcomen and Owen, and some others, until they were
got into a private Place, where they soon changed their Countenances, and began
to Laugh as heartily as ever the Wicked did in their Lives; they being thus
upon the merry pin, Calamy invited them all to his House, telling them, Calamy
's Apol. 1646.
That they knew that his House was the receptacle for godly Ministers in the
worst of Times, that 'twas there the Remonstrance was framed against Prelates,
that there they had their Meetings.

They went with him, and I followed them, without the least suspicion, for
indeed their Actions began now to publish to the World their private Designs,
although they colored them with a world of Hypocrisy to the People. As soon
as they were entered, they threw off their Cloaks, and taking their Girdles
which were stuck round with Daggers, Ponyards and Stilletto's, cast them away
with Contempt: Saying, What need have we any longer of these sneaking Tools?
have we not found out a more compendious way of destroying the malignant
Moabites, and Canaanites that are among us? Where is that Amalekite that can
stand any longer against a Bill of Attainder? have not we the Power of the
Sword, and of the Keys too, to bind and to loose, to bind up several puny
Articles into one Accumulative Treason, and to loosen the Authority of the King
from his Person? Do not the strong cries of the Babes of Grace, plainly show
that Vox Populi is on our side too? With what glorious Hosanna's do they
conveigh the five Members through our Jerusalem; Showing that Christ must
triumph, and now be established on his Throne? and now down go Popery and
Prelacy; and High Boys up go we. At this there was profound Silence for a short
space, until Bond stood up, and said; The work of Reformation still goes on,
there *Bond to the Commons, March 27, 1644.
do we get ground, as to perfect a Protestation into a Covenant; to ripen an
Impeachment into a Root and Branch: and in a word to settle an Assembly of
Divines, as a general Refiner's Fire, to try all Metals of the Church. As soon
as he had done speaking, Palmer told them, The Prentices Palmer to the Earl of
Essex. 1644.
and Porters, were stirred up by God's Providence, thousands of them, to
petition the Parliament for speedy Relief.

I was abundantly satisfied that they were the Instruments to encourage the
baser sort of People to those seditious Tumults, which began those unhappy
Confusions, which they called their thorough Reformation. And therefore I
stayed no longer, but slipped out of doors as fast as I could. I had not gone a
quarter of a Mile, before I fell into such a Drove of City Dames, that I
thought the Amazons had landed at Billinsgate, with a Resolution to establish a
Parliament of Women, because the Men ordered things no better: They had long
Samples in their Hands, on which with their Thimbles, Bodkins and Needles, they
had wrought, and drawn up a very curious Petition against Bishops, and Popish
Lords; which a grave old Gentleman observing, fell a Laughing heartily, and by
all the Goddesses (quoth he) this is a very beautiful World, is it come to
this? Must the Ladle inform the Mace? Must our Joan's reform us from Popery?
'twas before my time, but I remember that Epiphanius tells us of a
superstitious Custom, of offering a Cake to the Virgin Mary, which he is
Greekishly pleased to call (...), and we in English, the Heresy of Women;
every Body knows that the improvement of that Superstition is a main point of
Popery at this day; and are they now for making Cakes for the Funeral of the
Mass, and for reducing Pudding-Pyes to their Primitive Institution? I cannot
tell (said I) whether or no they have a true Protestant Receipt, but I fancy
the Reason why they are so incensed against Popery is; because it is a great
Hinderer of Matrimony.

Did they know what a great many, like to prove good Husbands, the Wars (said
he) will destroy, they would not be so eager to promote them. Had they come
with a Petition of Right, or of due Benevolence, or had they been surprised, as
the young Senator did the Roman Dames, with the fearful Decree for Polygamy,
I had not at all wondered at them; but if they must direct and govern the Church
as Arbitrarily as they rule their Houses, they will in a short time wear the
Doublet, and the Gown, as they have for a long time worn the Breeches: Then
turning to them, Gentlewomen (quoth he) we shall never be able to lie quiet in
our Beds for you one of these days, how is it possible to please you? Ye will
neither go to Church, nor stay at home: I profess if ye do not behave your
selves better for the Future, we will have a Salique Law against Petitioning.

This so enraged them that they uncas'd him in a Moment, calling him Cuckold,
Malignant, etc. at which I was so affrighted that I do not remember how I got
from among them, but running hastily, I tumbled over a Fellow who lay grovelling
in a Gutter, and crying, Good Wife! for God's sake! I helped him up, and when
he had recovered himself; Pray Sir (said I) what did you mean? Mean! Sir (said
he) to save my Life, for I cannot save my Estate; my Wife, whom I espied among
the Petitioners, has been so liberal in her Contributions to those sniveling
canting Whelps, that I am almost ruined, and what can I expect from her who
would make me a Beggar to propagate their lewd Cause? I pity you, replied a
Gentleman (that overheard him) with all my Heart, but you do but take part in
the common Calamities, which those formal Hypocrites have brought upon this
whole Kingdom, under pretense of a General Reformation; in order to which they
have cancelled all the Fundamental Laws, and Obligations betwixt Prince and
People, Father and Son, Husband and Wife, that they might make way for a new
Model of Obedience, Reverence and Love, by filling the Nation with Violence,
and staining every Corner of it with Blood.

Whilst I was musing upon what he had said, I observed that the Countenances of
many People were changed, and some seemed to tremble with Amazement, and others
were stupifyed with a solitary Silence, wondering at the sudden alteration; (for
there had been several Thanksgivings for the impious Victories the Rebels in
the Course of the Wars had gained.) At last a Rumor ran, that His Majesty was
in the Hands of his Enemies, and not only so, but one confidently affirmed
that his Life was threatened by a High Court of Justice.

At this a Reverend Clergyman that had been plundered, and sequestered, and had
nothing left to bestow upon his unfortunate Sovereign but Prayers, and Tears,
shed them plentifully, and turning toward us: Is this (said he) the way to
make the Prince Glorious, and the People happy? Is this the Reformation of
Antichristian Rome, and can it not be done without Blood more Royal, than that
with which the Walls of Heathen Rome were first cemented? Is it not enough that
by their Canting and Railing, they have stirred up all Orders of People into an
unnatural Rebellion, but they must now crown all their Villainies with cutting
off the Head of the King?

Pray Sir, (said I) to him, who are those you speak of? Come along with me
(said he) and I will show you whom I mean presently.

I followed him as far as Westminster, and he carried me into a large place
which was somewhat dark, and hung around with Mourning; I observed a
considerable number of the Assembly of Divines, there sitting with Arms
folded, and Eyes lift up, looking so pale and ghastly, as if from a Body of
Divinity, they had dwindled into the very shapes of Men; I wondered to find them
in such a Posture of Mortification. And (looking on my Friend who conducted me
thither;) surely Sir (said I) these Godly Men are here met to lament the Death
of the King, near the Monuments of his Predecessors: A gang of Whited
Sepulchers themselves, (replied he) the reason of their keeping this Fast, is
not because the Government is ruined by the Death of the King, but because
their Discipline is in danger by their Brethren the Independents. He had no
sooner spoke, but Bastwick stood up, and looking as if his Nose had been lately
put out of Joint; Bastwick 's Postscript to Burton.
The Independents (cried he) have now the Sword in their Hands, and think
themselves strong enough to encounter any adverse Party; and they profess, they
care not how soon they come to cutting of Throats, and speak of nothing but the
slaughtering and butchering of the Presbyterians.

Alack! and Alas! poor Saints, cried one (who by his Countenance seemed a
Foreigner;) are they now afraid of their Wind-Pipes, which they have so often
stretched with their Magical Cant, that they have raised a sort of evil Spirits
they cannot conjure down again? Where will they now seek redress from these
intolerable Grievances of their own hatching? Did they imagine any thing else
should be the Consequence of destroying so just and wise a Government, both in
Church and State; which was a sufficient Bar to keep out those wild Heresies
they have now let in upon themselves? Surely no Body at home will pity them,
and all the Reformed Churches abroad do utterly condemn them. Beza himself,
whose Choleric Disposition was of fatal Consequence to the Reformed Churches,
will tell their Public Faith it self, that it lies, when they said, An
Ordinance for putting the Directory, etc. 1644.
They resolved to Reform according to the Example of the best Reformed
Churches. For let but any Man read over that To the Prince of Conde.
Epistle Dedicatory of his before his Translation of the New Testament, and he
will find how positively he condemns the Methods of their Reformation long
before: he will find that the same Beza, acknowledges the King's Edict to be
Jure Divino, of Supreme Authority in Ecclesiastical Cases, relating to that
very Reformation, though the King himself was of another Opinion; or else what
means those words (speaking of the Prince of Conde, and some others) Quos
dominus Ecclesiae suae nutritios ex Regiae majestatis edicto constituit?

He would have continued his Discourse somewhat longer, had not a Gentleman
interrupted him, who was so full that he could not hold, but turning himself
toward the Smectymnuans. Ye meagre Hypocrites (quoth he) because ye have
devoured the Fat of the Land, and the Plenty of a whole Age; Do ye now look
like Pharaoh's Lean Kine? Do ye, who have long been the Trumpeters of Sedition,
now look like Drums unbrac'd, until your Chaps, like loose Parchment, flap
inwards? What Fast so soon after the Exceedings of the Flesh of Kings and
mighty Men? Ye in vain pinch those Bowels that deserve to be burnt for
Traitors; for ye have made the Members fight against the Head so long, that for
want of a Head, they now quarrel with the Belly. Ye have made so many spare a
Meal to cram the Good Cause, that at last it is grown too Fat, and Wanton; so
that ye may pine your Gutts to Pack-thread, until ye have enough to hang your
selves, before ye shall make those People obedient to your Discipline, who were
at first taught to be Rebellious by your Doctrine; and besides, all the
Tith-Geese and Pigs, are grown so wild with so much shooting, that they will
not stay long with any of you, but they are for Liberty of Gizard and
Pettytoes, and the first turn Ana-Baptists, and the latter have thrown off the
Yoke, and are become Independents; so that ye are like to starve for all them.
Alas poor Bards! the Druids from every Tree preach down your Kirk; and now hope
ye have enough of thorough Reformation, to chew the Cud upon for one while.

It was in vain for them to open their Mouths, for they had nothing either to
Answer or Eat; so there being a continued Silence for some time, I at last
turned to the honest Clergyman (I before mentioned) and desired him if he
could do me that Favor, to give me a short view of the several Pranks the
Saints A-la-mode had played up and down the Kingdom. Nothing (said he) can
pleasure me more than to satisfy you with a Description of their thorough
Reformation, which I shall soon do if you follow me: As we were walking
together, you must consider (said he) that all the Villainies that are acted
under that Notion are the Effects of Presbyterian Zeal, and however they
complain mightily in the Gangraena, 'twas they first putrified the Nation;
'twas they first taught the Rabble to Reform, and then they learnt of
themselves to Blaspheme. Boccalin says, It Is the duty of Reformers, to provide
themselves of a sure Remedy, before they take notice of the Wound; and that the
Surgeon deserves to be punished, who first opened the Sick Man's Vein, and
then runs for things to close it. But they, to strain it in their own Phrase,
bled the Kingdom in the Basilick Vein, and then pretended to stop it; set the
Nation in a Flame, and then for fear of being burnt themselves endeavored to
quench it. And the same Author says, Sir, (replied I) That every Man ought to
mind his own Trade, that a Tailor cannot reform an Apothecary, much less a
Cobbler the Church.

No, (said he) do you think he cannot? What and if he should fancy himself to
be shod with the Preparation of the Gospel, or imagine himself a Gibeonite with
his old Shoes, may not he be in League with Israel, to reform the old
Inhabitants of the Land? Yes, by St. Crispin, he hates Popery, and since he is
a Translatour, he is no mean Reformer; why should not those Thumbs which have
long been in Mourning for the Sins of the Nation, join with all true Protestant
Fingers in pulling down high Places? But Sir (said I) to him again, is it
possible that the Presbyterians should encourage such lewd Fellows of the baser
sort, (who naturally delight in mischief) to reform as they should think fit?
Yes, (replied he) that they did, and though Boccalin should say the same thing
an hundred times, and although they have experienced the ill Effects of their
rash Reformation, yet they would make use of the same means again; and rather
than fail would call in the Pope, and the Devil too, to help them.

As soon as he had spoke, we saw a great Dust arising like a Cloud, and heard a
confused noise, but could not distinguish any Person of a long time, until
Greenhill (a famous Stickler for the new Pilgrimage of Grace) appeared at the
Head of a vast multitude of Mechanics, intermixed with Troopers and other
Soldiers; my Friend and I fell in among them, and marched along until we came
in view of a great and stately Cathedral Church, which seemed to rock like a
Cradle; as soon as we were come pretty near it, the Multitude stood still; and
Greenhill turning to them cried, If Greenhill to the Commons, 1643. p. 37.
Justice be at a stand, and cannot take hold of living Delinquents to keep the
Axe from rust, let Justice be executed upon liveless Delinquents; Are there no
Altars? no High Places? no Crucifixes? At this the whole Multitude rusht into
the Church with such Violence, as if they would have thrown it out at the
Windows, and to make way for it, they broke all the Painted Glass, which in
lively Colors, and large Figures, represented many remarkable Histories of the
Old and New Testament, calling them Popish Pictures, Painted Jezabels looking
out at Windows; which an ingenious Gentleman observing with Indignation, these
(Wall-eyed dapple Saints, quoth he,) will be for reforming the Rainbow one of
these days, and fancy it to be set in Holy Water, and then down it goes if
possible.

I could not hear what he said more, for the Echoes of chopping, hacking and
defacing whatever came in their way, which was either decent or magnificent;
but observing a Fellow at the Poor-mans-Box, with a Back-Sword, lifted up over
the Effigies of a Cripple standing upon it, I was resolved, if possible, to
hear what he had to say to it; when I was got close to him, Thou lame Idol,
(quoth he) that haltest betwixt two Opinions, that have Feet and walk not, I
will hew thee in pieces, as Samuel did Agag before the Lord in Gilgal! At a few
Strokes he cut it down, and had so split the Box that out flew several pieces
of Brass and Silver, which he greedily catching; thou art (said he) like the
Image in Aesop's Fables, which did the Man no good whilst he worshipped it, but
now being broken thou sheddest thy Mammon like Blood: I left him, to observe a
Tribe of Quakers who were got to the Steeple, and seemed so mighty Zealous
against it, that they would have pulled it down about their Ears, had they not
feared it might have beaten off their Hats, but nothing more offended them than
the Bells, and their great Fault was that they called others to Church although
they never came in themselves; so that whatever was said to prove them true
Protestant Bells, that they had never been baptized as Popish As the great Bell
in St. John Lateran.
Bells used to be, though they had neither Godfathers nor Godmothers, yet
down they must, because (said they) The Babylonians had an Idol called Bell.

Thus the Reformation was carried on according to the various Frensies, and
ridiculous Humors of the jangling Rabble, who agreed in nothing but Mischief
and Desolation, not sparing the very Monuments of those first Reformers (whom
in the Page 6.
Preface to the Directory, the Presbyterians acknowledged, as excellent
Instruments raised by God to begin the purging, and building of his House, and
desired they might be had in everlasting Remembrance with Thankfulness and
Honor:) for they pulled the Brass off their Tombs, and defaced every thing
that was curious for Workmanship, or Venerable for Antiquity, under the
pretense of Popery, when as indeed their Covetousness, which was worse than
Idolatry, was the chiefest Motive, that they scratched up the Names of worthy
Benefactours for the Brass they were engraven upon, that they raked up the very
Dust of their Ancestors, and would have sold the Bones of their Grandsires if
any would have bought them; but this was not all; their brutish Zeal carried
them to greater Extravagances, as to thrust their Swords through, and mangle
the Corpses of the deceased, a piece of Romish Fury, now turned into Protestant
Piety.

Whilst I observed these things with Grief and Wonder, the Clergyman pulled me
by the Sleeve, and look you, yonder (quoth he) is fine work; at this, I espied
a mixed Multitude of the wildest Machines that ever I beheld, some tooting with
the broken Pipes of Organs, others dancing in Hoods, Copes, and Surplices, some
Smoking, others Swaggering with lewd and bloody Oaths, and all of them pulling
down the King's Arms, calling them the Colors of the Dragon, and the Ensigns
of Antichrist, and saying, that the Unicorn was the very White Horse in the
Revelations, with a blazing Star upon his Forehead. Then a great number of
Levellers, great Enemies to Angels and Archangels, cutting in pieces the
Images of the Apostles. After them a Troop of Antinomians fell foul upon the
Ten Commandments, and carried out the Pictures of Moses and Aaron (vowing to
make his Incense blaze as well as smoke) and so burnt them with the Rails
before the Altar. Whilst the Rout were thus revelling in their lewd and
diabolical Triumphs, I wondered to hear on a sudden some howling and mourning
very lamentably, but was much more astonished to see Greenhill weeping, as if
he had been sorry for what the People by his Instigation had done, and
therefore going up to Edwards (who wrote the Gangraena) Pray good Sir, (said I)
What ails Mr. Greenhill, what is the Matter? What! (said he) Edwards Catalogue
of Errors, page 25.
an Anabaptist, and a great Sectary came to him, and said, he might as safely
Baptize a Dog as a Believer's Child. At this I looked toward the Font and
espied a Company of Villains In Lichfield Cath. Sir William Dugdale 's Hist.
baptizing a Calf wrapped in Linen. Edwards seeing them at the same time, cried
out, From all these Errors, Heresies and Practices of the Sectaries, you may
see what a great Edward 's Further Discourse. p. 195.
Evil and Sin Separation is, from the Communion. of the Reformed Churches; and
how highly displeasing to God for Men to make a Schism, and Rent in the Church
of God, in time of Reformation, God punishing the Schism, and Separation of our
Times with so many Heresies, Blasphemies, and wicked Practices. Very true,
(replied the Orthodox Clergyman;) Knox and some of your Predecessors made a
Schism in the Church of God in the very time of the Reformation, and because
your Separation from the truly Reformed Church was unreasonable, the Pretenses
frivolous, and the Methods of your Super reformation Impious, and Ridiculous,
therefore does God justly punish your Schism and Separation.

Impious! and Ridiculous! cried 40 or 50 of them at once; was the visible
growth of Popery, and Arbitrary Government a frivolous Pretense?

Yes marry was it, (replied he) 'twas what the Papists themselves suggested,
and was rather therefore the Invisible Growth of Popery, under the Visible
Growth of Knavery. And since you talk of God's Punishment for Schism, surely
the World may now trace the Guilt of your pretended Reformation in the
Consequences of it. 'Twas ye set the People above the King, and now every
Individual usurps a Supreme Equality; a nonsensical Confusion not to be found
among Cannabals; 'twas ye abolished Episcopacy, and now every one makes himself
a Priest, with as much Authority as one Presbyter makes another; 'twas ye
taught the People to sit irreverently at the Sacrament, and now ye may see some
of them laying their Tails at the Communion Table; ye took away the decent
Ceremonies in Baptism, and now they profane that Sacrament with Diabolical
ones; ye brought the Catechumeni to the Desk, and it is not long e're they are
chirping in the Pulpit: Thus like so many Judas's have ye betrayed both
Christ's Vicegerent, and his Church too with glorious Pretenses, and then left
them to the mockery of Men worse than Jews, who have now made the Temple of God
a Den of Thieves; which ye denied to be the House of Prayer.

Prayer! cried one of them! Was not the whole Book of Common Prayer Popish, and
Superstitious? Are not Bishops Antichristian? And did not that Arch-Prelate
Laud design to bring us into right down Popery?

That you shall know by and by, (replied he) but in the mean time it is
remarkable, that the Archbishop was condemned upon an Indictment of the Scots,
for obtruding the Book of Common Prayer, and you imposed the Title Page of the
Directory.
Directory upon them, and the Irish too, a little after. That Bishops are not
Antichristian, neither Name, or Office, one Instance for a thousand, and that
from the Reformed Churches; Oecolampadius who Reformed the Church of Basil is
styled Bishop upon his Tomb, which your Reformation had certainly demolished.

That Archbishop Laud had no such Design as you speak of, your Brother Fisher
that Trent Presbyter can testify, although he smiles to think that after you
had confuted him with the Axe, you should reform Lambeth-House into a Prison,
and a Dancing-School, at once representing a Popish Inquisition, and a Carnival
too. But since your main Argument, that moved the People to assist you in your
blessed Reformation, was, that the Liturgy of the Chuch was Popish, I will tell
you, if you will keep it to your self, that you either knew not what Popery was,
or else had a mind to bring it in; the Fool and the Knave are both in the Case,
choose which you will; it is certain that by the great number of Papists that
were in the Parliament Army, by the long delay of Assistance to be sent to the
distressed Protestants in Ireland; you were more intent upon the ruin of the
Church of England than of Rome. But pray what is Popish in the Liturgy? All of
it, replied they; and therefore ought to be reformed: Preface to the Directory.
All the several burdensome Ceremonies, 'twas made a mere Idol, Lip-labor,
and a great Hinderer of the preaching the Word.

Pray Gentlemen, (said he again) since you quote the Public Faith, let me ask
you one question: Are the Responses in the Liturgy Popish? and may not the
Church of England enjoin them? No, no, replied they, they are not of
Apostolical Institution. How then (cried he) came it to pass that the Assembly
should order Of Singing of Psalms, Directory, page 83.
the reading the Singing Psalms Line by Line to the People? Is that of
Apostolical Institution? Or are Sternhold and Hopkins of greater Authority than
all the Fathers of the Church? There is enough written by learned Pens, to
prove the Significancy, Usefulness, Innocence and Antiquity of the Ceremonies
of the Church, to satisfy every Objection, and Scruple of yours beforehand;
but if that cannot do, you might a little reflect upon what followed your
Reformation of them: You abolished all those excellent Prayers for the King and
the Church; but how did yours you put in the room of them prevail, to procure
either his Honor, or its good Estate? You pretended to reform the Sabbath to a
Pharisaical Strictness, but the first general Battle was fought on the 23 d of
October, at Edghill, on the Sunday, wherein with five shot made at the King's
Army, you bid him Battle; and then having abolished Holy Days, even Christmas
day it self, which you made a Fast, you sanctified your own first
Thanksgivingday with a lewd Lie. You took away the Order of Christian Burial,
and indeed there was little occasion for it, when you preached so many at a
time to the Sword, that it could be no more used than in a Pestilence; and
moreover, you being to set Christ upon his Throne on Earth, could not comply
with that Prayer, that He would hasten the Kingdom of Glory. Item. You took
away the Cross in Baptism, and afterward sold your Fellow Christians to Turks
and Barbarians, among whom they must receive either the Badg of Slavery or
Infidelity. You altered the Form of Marriage, and afterward 'twas solemnized
by a sort of Bassa's in the very Livery of the Scarlet Whore. In short, you
debauched the People with Superstitious Fears, which made them fly into a
wicked Rebellion, and they were afterward as unjustly hanged up in Bundles for
the Sin of Witchcraft: Thus did ye involve the Nation in infinite Guilt, and
they were punished with Judgments shadowing or reflecting their Sins; nor did
ye your selves escape a retaliating Justice, being severely chastised by that
very Cromwell, whom ye first set up in the House of Commons, to be such a
Stickler against Dr. Neal, for a Defender of Arminianism and Popery.

At this they all fell a crying, Ah Lard! Lard! 'twas Covenant Breaking that
brought all these Evils upon us, and upon this Nation.

'Twas so indeed, (replied he) ye broke the first Covenant with your Prince, in
the oath of Allegiance, by introducing the Solemn League, which brought in the
Engagement, which brought in the Devil and all his Works.

He had no sooner spoken, but there was a Fellow in a Red-Coat got into the
Pulpit, and playing as many Tricks as a Turkish Dervice upon a Moschite, railed
against the Presbyterian Reformation, calling it Goodwin 's twelve Cautions,
page 5.
Rough, Froward, Peremptory, Imperious, etc. which Discovery of Sectaries, page
26.
Edwards observing; All sorts of Mechanics (said he) take upon them to preach,
as Smiths, Tailors, Shoemakers, Pedlars, Weavers.

A peculiar People, truly, (replied he) you complained, that the Liturgy of the
Church of England was a great Hinderer of the preaching the Word; I hope you
have now enough of it: But why should you find fault with a Red-Coat, when as
your warlike Doctrine could not endure a White one: and besides these are but
your Journey-men in Divinity, your Scribes and Amanuenses, whom you have taught
all the Tricks of Sanctified Legerdemain, and if they have outdone you in your
own Trade, you know that all Arts improve. What and if they have not so much
Learning as you, yet they are arrived to such a pitch of Mystical Gibberish,
and Edifying Nonsense, that they are more powerful with the People than your
selves, although you first taught them to justle out the Prayers in the known
Language, by your unintelligible Cant and cramp Exorcisms; and this was driving
away Popery. But, Gentlemen, let me ask you a question: Is it not a main
Artifice of the Popish Priests to keep the People zealously ignorant? Is it not
as easy to compose a thing in English, of which the common People shall
understand every single word, and yet not know the meaning, or Connection of any
whole Sentence; as it is to make some Lines in Spanish words, which put together
shall be true Latin, the very Language of the Beast? It Is certainly as easy,
since ye have mixed and balderdash'd the sacred Style with barbarous
Expressions, and made every thing ye do not like, to be either Antichrist, or
the Whore of Babylon. But moreover, it is very remarkable that ye had a fine way
of amusing the Rabble with ends of Hebrew; let me tell you that Mr. Herbert
Thorndike, as learned a Rabbi as any of you, observes in his Book of Religious
Assemblies, from the Commentaries under St. Ambrose's Name, that those who
would needs speak in strange Languages Page 351.
in the Church, were of the Hebrews; and Irenaeus Lib. 1. c. 8.
tells, that the Marcosians at the Ministration of Baptism, used some Hebrew
words to astonish the Minds of the Ignorant. I cannot say, that you directly
designed to bring in flat down right Popery, as you call it, but you were
reforming us to those Fantastical Customs, from whence at first it is probable
that the Romish Corruptions had their beginning; but what and if you thought to
banish the Mass by taking away the Common Prayer Book, it is certain, that you
at the same time made room for the Targum; and surely your Friends the Jews
could not but smile at their return into England again, to meet such plenty of
Adonirams, Obadiahs, and Ichabods, such blessed Reformers from Popery, as would
have sold them St. Paul's Church for a Synagogue, who preached Christ to the
Gentiles; this was establishing his Throne, Nineteenthly, My Beloved.

We cannot help it cried Vines, if the Turk should come in; For that Horse of
Superstition, and Idolatry, upon the Back of Vines to the Commons. 1646.
which the Devil has in former times made war against the Church, is slain
under him; and now he is mounted upon a fresh Horse of another Color, called
Liberty of Opinion (falsely called) Liberty of Conscience.

Well done old Beelzebub, (cried a Cavalier, laughing heartily;) a very good
Jockey truly, and very well mounted upon an Horse that will carry double and
treble, I hope he will be so grateful to your Worships for helping him to him,
that he will take some of you up behind him one of these Days: But for the
Horse of Superstition and Idolatry, did those Horses rout him which Cromwell
brought into the Church, watered at the Font, and fed at the Communion Table?
assure your selves that those very Gentlemen, who raised that abominable Lie
concerning the Nag's-head, are the Men that would make you believe that there
is a Horse of Superstition grasing within the Pale of the Church of England,
although it is hard to prove him to be lineally descended from those Horses upon
which the Popes ride, whilst Princes hold their Stirrup: But since the Devil is
mounted, as you say, we find he will not ride alone, for your Brother the
Quaker is got upon his Mare, that may in time breed as many false Opinions, as
the Trojan Horse carried treacherous Grecians. But how came we (cried he) from
Hebrew to Horseback?

How! (replied a Gentleman) over Hedge and Ditch, by leaping a Similitude of
Vines's, who compares the Service of the Church to an Horse of Idolatry, whenas
his Brethren who style themselves the Horsemen, and Chariots of Israel, are
Heyryck to the Commons, May 27* 1646.
nearer related to the old Centaures; and his Horse of Opinions, might as well
have been a Hydra, or the Beast with seven (score) Heads: But my Friends (cried
he) turning to the Presbyterians, were not you forewarned of those very things
of which ye now complain? Did not the Author of the Loyal Convert, whoever he
was, thus argue with you in the Year 1643? Think you such swarms of Sectaries
sweat Page 17.
for nothing? Are their Purses so apt to bleed to no end? Will not their costs
and pains expect, at least, a congratulatory connivance in the freedom of their
Consciences? Or will their Swords, now in the strong possession of so great a
multitude, know the way into their quiet Scabbards, without the expected
Liberty of their Religions? and can that Liberty produce any thing but an
established Disorder? And is not Disorder the Mother of Anarchy, and that of
Ruin?

At this, they being all silent for a considerable time, he said again, pray
what do you your selves think to be the reason, that your intended Reformation
should so dismally miscarry? What! replied Faircloth, why Faircloth on John 7.
25. Page 25.
Israel could not be cured without a full and total extirpation of all the
accursed Things and Persons also.

That is, (replied the Cavalier) every Throat that could not swallow the
Covenant was to be cut, which amounted to some hundreds of thousands; and by
all the accursed things, you meant whatever you called Popish: But I protest,
(Saints!) according to your Definition of Popery, many things more Popish than
any thing you objected against the Church, escaped your sagacious Reformation:
Why did you not utterly abrogate all Legs of Mutton, Town and Country, because
they have the Popes Eye in every one of them? Why was not the Man in the
Almanac, that great Malignant, laid by the Heels, whose Heart is influenced by
Leo, the name of a great many Popes? Why did you not demolish all the Signs of
the Cross-Keys, of the Mitre, and of the Cardinals Cap? Why did ye suffer the
Babylonish Game of Cross and Pile? the Antichristian Game of Chess, with Kings,
and Queens, and Bishops in it? Why was there a Toleration of Dice, (the very
Bones of the Whore of Babylon, with black Patches on them;) these were all
dismal Tokens of the Beast, and more the just Objects of your refining Zeal,
than many things you did abolish. But to be serious with you, after all the
Remonstrances you made, did the King ever deny to concur with you in a Legal
Reformation of any abuse? But instead of closing with him in calm and moderate
Counsels, you brought all things into Confusion, with violent Invectives, and
distant Scandals, the Peoples easy Fancies being the best grounds of your
clamorous Arguments to prove the Ceremonies of the Church Popish, and
particular Irregularities of some few Clergymen were made use of, as a general
Argument against its Discipline and Government; whenas indeed, the Faults of
its Members are not its Constitutions, nor did so good and just a King any more
countenance them, than your Rebellion: and therefore they did not authorize you
to revile the whole body of the Church, much less to treat the best of its
Members with such barbarous Insolences, without distinction, as you have done:
and De Moribus Eccl. Cath. Tom. 1. cap. 34.
St. Austin (if you will allow of any Saints but your selves) has taught you a
better Lesson, when he says, Nunc illud vos admoneo ut aliquando Ecclesiae
Catholicae maledicere desinatis Vituperando mores hominum quos and ipsa
condemnat, and quos quotidie tanquam malos filios corrigere studet. Now this I
advise you that you cease at length to revile the Catholic Church, by
disparaging the manners of Men which it self condemns; and whom as evil Sons it
daily endeavors to correct. The words immediately before are, Novi multos esse
Sepulchrorum, and picturarum adoratores. I know that there are many Worshippers
of Tombs and Pictures. So much Superstition could never be found among the Sons
of the Church of England, who might have found more Charity among Turks, and
less Inhumanity from Infidels than from you: But you who could not endure one
established Religion, let in at least 40 to drive it out, as Foreigners
themselves computed. This was, First, (my Beloved) a plentiful Reformation.

You, that could not allow the King any considerable Supplies toward the
maintaining a Foreign War, in which you engaged him, could raise and consume 17
Millions Sterling, in less than three Years in a Domestic War against him; and
this was a Loyal and Rich Reformation. Secondly,

You turned the most eminent Men for Letters and Honesty, out of both
Universities, then filled up their Places with grave Dunces, and formal
Block-heads, and afterward their whole Revenues had like to have been sold to
maintain the Army; so that instead of Professors of the several Sciences, we
should have had a sort of Turkish Timariots, who should have held these Lands
in Capite of the Rump; this was a Learned Reformation. Thirdly,

You were mighty zealous for the Liberty and Property of the Subject, insomuch
that ye set the People above the King, and afterward an High Court of Justice
is mounted above them all, taking away the Lives of King, Lords and Commons,
without Law, or Reason: (And if the People may deal thus with their King, where
he is Supreme, why not with all other Supremes whatsoever? and consequently by
Succession, and with success, (for ought we know) why not rise against their
Magistrates, till the last Resurrection? and put them to Death, till Death it
self shall be swallowed up.) This was a righteous and peaceable Reformation.
Fourthly, My Friends,

You declaimed against Popery mightily, and yet did whatever the Papists
desired or prompted you to do, time will show that you and your Proselytes,
were Factours for the Pope and the Devil in every particular of that whole
Rebellion; all the Aspersions cast upon the King and the Church were of Romish
Invention, which your Malice knew how to improve; the Rebel-Parliament
Parliament's Declaration to the King, March 9, 1641.
entertained Advertisements from Rome, Venice, and Paris, of the Pope's Nuncio
soliciting France and Spain for 4000 Men a-piece, but when came they over? And
was it not Popish Intelligence which ye greedily caught to inflame the People?
The Irish Rebels bragged that the King would come among them and assist them,
that they did but maintain his Cause against the Puritans, that they had his
Commission; and those very Scandals you made use of; laid that Rebellion to
his Charge, wherein they set up the Pope's Standard in Opposition only to his
Supremacy. Cardinal Richlieu fomented all those unhappy Divisions by your
means; your Solemn League and Covenant proves most Jesuitically Popish. The
Jesuits had their Spies and Agents in all your Committees; and how far they
helped you in your Blessed Reformation, Dr. Vindication of the Protestants, p.
57.
Du Moulin will tell you: and although the Person is not known that gave the
Fatal Blow; yet you brought the King to the Block; and he was a Popish Priest
and Confessor who then brandished his Sword, saying, Now our greatest Enemy we
have in the World is gone. And this was your true sober Protestant thorough
Reformation. Lastly,

At this they all sneaked away, and the Gentleman taking me by the Hand led me
up to the top of an high Hill, from whence I might view the Miseries of three
Kingdoms raging in an unconquerable War, and looking wistly upon the various
and innumberable Evils, which almost twenty Years Rebellion had brought upon
us, and wondering with my self when and how these troubles should end; I was
startled by a Jesuit, who flourishing a bloody Sword in his Hand, spoke as
follows:

So! the Work's done, those Men are now cut down,
Which standing did oppose the Triple Crown:
The silly Heretics themselves defeat,
And with their Blood the Scarlet Whore looks great.
In Holy Wars the Pope Triumphs alone,
And as he lost, so now regains a Throne,
Re-conquers now by Reformation.
THE Fourth VISION OF THE REFORMATION.
The King's Return: The Factions endeavor to bring about their thorough
Reformation again: The Methods they have used ever since in order to it. A
Parallel betwixt the Jesuitical Papists and Fanatical Protestants in several
new Remarks: They Ridiculously inveigh against one another: The Church of
England vigorously opposes them both. A Conference wherein the four main
Arguments of the Papists, viz. Universality, Antiquity, Unity and the Pope's
Supremacy are exploded. A Convocation of Orthodox Divines before whom the
Authors of Melius Inquirendum, of Julian the Apostate are summoned, etc. A
Prophecy by the famous Ghost of A. A. C.

THE Horror of past Villainies, and the endless prospect of future Calamities,
had so benumbed my Spirits with drowsy Grief, that I fell into a profound
Trance for a considerable time, until at length I was awakened with the loud
and joyful Acclamations of vast Multitudes, crying, God save King Charles the
Second: At this I looked and saw a mighty Train of People, so splendid and
brave, as that the very confused Light of infinite Jewels made them resemble a
new Milkie-Way, in which Charles his Triumphant Wain was then moving. Surely,
(said I) although I have not taken so long a Nap as the seven Sleepers, yet I
have snored out more strange Revolutions; what gloomy Days were those I first
began to nod in? What Confusions in Church and State? what cruel Animosities?
what fatal Divisions? and what was worst of all, Popery big with a whole Ages
Revenge, like a Polyphemus ready to devour all; but now my waking Senses are
saluted with the harmonious Triumphs of universal Joy and Concord. Very strange
indeed, replied my old Guide, (who carefully attended me) and you might still
think your self in a Dream, were not our present Happiness as real as were our
former Miseries. I hope, Sir, (said I) they will be as lasting. I wish so too,
(said he) but do not you see what sour Faces yonder grim Fellows make? those
cloudy Looks still threaten many a Storm to this Nation: At this I saw a great
number who seemed somewhat discontented, and were earnestly whispering and
talking to one another, and as soon as I came up to them, I found among them
several Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers and some Papists, who
let fall some mystical words which discovered a great deal of secret
dissatisfaction, but for what I could not tell; for the briskest Cavaliers in
the Kingdom did not seem more active, in solemnizing his Majesty's happy
Restoration, than most of them did. So that turning to my Friend, certainly
Sir, (said I) those People are not Breeding of Commonwealths again, so soon
after their Delivery; I hope they have no democratical Qualms in their
Stomachs, and have done longing for thorough Reformations for one while. I
confess, (said he) one would think what you say; and besides at the Solemnities
of the King's Coronation, they hung out as conspicuous Evidences of their
Loyalty, as any the most Obdurate Malignant, for their Garlands were richly
laden with the glittering Confessions of their former Plunder and Sacrilege,
but their Loyalty was exactly like the Weather at that time, very fair for a
little Season, and very foul both before and after; they know how to temporize
with present Difficulties in hopes of future Advantages, and can be as
impudently Loyal, as they were boldly Rebellious, think they may talk what
Treason they please if they do but wipe their Mouths after it; and act what
Villainy they will if they do but wash their Hands when they have done; a
ceremonious sort of Varnish, left for a Legacy by Pontius Pilate to the
Jesuits, and which came by the way of France, in company with the Holy League,
to the Covenanters of Great Britain; for when Henry the 4th was prevailed upon
by the Solicitations of others, and his own natural Clemency, to give them
leave to enjoy their former Privileges in that Kingdom, from which they were
banished with Infamy, for the treacherous Murder of his Predecessor, they had
such a strong fit of Obedience, that they at last became absolute Masters of
his Heart.

Sir, (said I) if I may not interrupt you too long, I will wedge in a small
Caveat, which shall be A-la-mode, and not at all unseasonable at this Juncture
of time; Boccalin in his third Advertisement concerning the Civil Wars of
France, and the Murder of Henry the Fourth, brings in Apollo, commanding that
60000 Pack-horses should be sent from Arcadia into France, and when it was
answered that there was no danger since they had so noble and numerous a
Cavalry, He replied, That since the peace and quiet of that Kingdom depended
upon their Unity, they could not come to it by any better means than by the
Remembrance of their former Miseries; as those Pack-Horses, which by Instinct
of Nature did detest passing a second time by the same way, wherein formerly
they had run the Hazard of breaking their Necks.

I wish (said he) that the English would take Example of the French, who being
not half so wise as the Pack-Horses, are become a Pack of Asses, so that their
King is not improperly styled Rex As^norum, for he has laid Burdens upon their
Shoulders almost as bad as breaking their Necks: But our dull stupid Asses, who
fancy themselves fit Cronies to bray with Jupiter, are so far from taking
warning by the Harms of others, that they have forgot their own; and whilst the
Jesuits privately prick them forward, their Teachers have these twenty Years
been leading them by the Ears into another Rebellion: therefore, if you will go
along with me, I will give you as pleasing an account of all their Actions ever
since the King came in, to this day, as your Heart can wish; I will lay before
your Eyes, at one view, all the Stratagems and Designs both of Jesuited Papists
and Protestants; by which we may guess what a Superlative Reformation we might
expect for the Future, if they had their Wills for the Present.

With all my Heart, Sir, (said I) as soon as you please, nothing can oblige me
more: so away we went; as we passed along, You must know (said he) that the
King was scarce settled on his Throne, and the Brethren hardly recovered of that
dreadful Astonishment that sudden Change had put them into, (justly fearing to
be made Examples for all the bloody Villainies they had perpetrated in that
Rebellion;) but in contempt of his unparalled Mercy, and of his Justice too,
they began to play the old Game over again, and to run on Tick upon a new
Score. The Murderers of the King, his Father of Blessed Memory, were
represented to the People as the Righteous Sufferers in a glorious Cause, and
their last Speeches recommended as the groaning Oracles of dying Martyrs, but
if those be their Saints, what are their Devils? Surely never such Villains
were canonized before, since the World began.

Yes, Sir, (replied I) their Fellow Laborer, James Clement, is as much
extolled by Mariana the Jesuit, for killing Henry the 3 d of France, when
mentioning the manner of that treacherous and diabolical Fact: He cried out,
Marian. Lib. 1. De Rege and Regis Justit.
Insignem Animi confidentiam! facinus memorabile caeso Rege ingens sibi nomen
fecit. Oh admirable confidence of Mind! O memorable Action, by killing the King
he got himself a great Name. But, Sir, never trouble your self about them, they
may be Martyrs of the Army, but we shall never find them in the Army of
Martyrs: and so fare'em well in saecula saeculorum. Just as I had spoken these
Words, we were come to a place that looked like The Devil's -- of Peak. Hold,
Sir, (said I) I think we are come to the very fag end of the World; surely this
is the Den wherein the Ghosts of the Rump-Parliament do revell Nemine
Contradicente.

Come on, (said he) you shall receive a great deal of satisfaction, but no
harm. I know no reason why I should not be as valourous as a Glister-Pipe,
although I thought it an odd kind of Portico to the Sthadt-House of Darkness,
and so in we went: he carried me through a great many narrow windings and
turnings, that I fancied my self wilder'd in small Gutts, until at last I came
to a pair of Gates all crusted and embroidered with Saltpeter; as soon as they
opened we entered a spacious and large Hall, at the upper end of which stood
that Greekish Gentleman old Mr (...), alias Time, with a Scythe in his Hand,
and a true Protestant Hourglass of a large size on his Head: This is (said my
Friend) the Chronicle Room, wherein are laid up all the Archiva of Fanaticism,
this is the Register Office of the Democraticks, a Place which they are
unwilling that any but those of their own Faction should see. I think, Sir,
(said I) that we were forced to creep in at the wrong end of the Body Politic,
before we could come at it: it is no matter for that (replied he) now you are
here, pray observe those 22 large Tables all along the Walls, which are
engraven with red Letters, what are they? (said I) Why! they are the 22 Years
last past, with the Contents of all their Designs and Villainies upon them, and
over them you see the Historical part of them painted in large Figures to the
Life, we will not examine them all, because some of them contain the same
things over again, but what you think the most remarkable, I will expound to
you: Sir, (said I) I think they did little in 1661, only I observe some of
them grumbling over a good thick Quarto-Book. That is (said he) their Liturgy
of 76 Quarto Pages, for the Excellency of which they appeal to the People,
because the King and Bishops would not admit of it. But here is to do, and to
do, in the Year 62: yonder is some of them going to Execution upon Hurdles;
those are Tongue, Gibbs, Phillips and Stubbs, who then suffered for High Treason,
(replied he) and perhaps they were engaged in the bloudiest and most barbarous
Conspiracy that ever was hatched, in which several Presbyterians joined with
them, as is evident from the Particulars of their Trial; the End of it was to
destroy the King, and Duke of York, the chief Ministers of State, all the
Bishops, most of the Nobility, of the Gentry, and Commonalty, all that should
any way oppose them, or had formerly disgusted them; and all to reform the
Kingdom to a Commonwealth again: This was so far from being a Sham-Plot, that
in order to it they had their Council of Six, their Committees of Secrecy,
their General Officers, Agents, Treasurers and Magazines, held Correspondence
in most Counties; designed to secure the Castle of Windsor, the Tower of
London; had appointed the very time to begin their Villainy in, which was to
have been on All-Hallows Eve, a proper time for our modern Saints to commence
Devilism in; and all under the Notion of a Popish Massacre. Now let us observe
what were the more public humors of those Days. Why! the several Factions
began their separate Congregations, made a formal Schism, united their broken
Interests; and by all Arts imaginable, endeavored to lay the Foundations of
another War; they preached nothing but Persecution! Persecution! and set the
doleful Coxcombs of their silenced Ministers before their Farewell Sermons.
Libels flew about in Swarms, and Address to the Freeholders, page 19.
one which recommended to the People the Example of Ehud, who stabbed the King
of Moab, was just upon the Wing, but was stopped in the Press; many other
Circumstances, if I had time, I might relate, but these are enough to show you
that the Saints were no Sluggards.

They began (said I) to play their Pranks so early, that I believe they will
never make an end; never (said he) until there is an end made of them: for in
the Name of them all, old Arthur Jackson, in a Letter of his, dated Feb. 26.
1662, and at a time, when he said he was come to Jacob's, must die, tells his
Friend that the 2 d Reason why he too did not conform, was; Charge of Schism
renewed against Separation. page 11.
The doing of any thing contrary to the covenanted Reformation, which they had
so earnestly prayed for, or that might be scandalous to those that rejoiced in
the first Fruits of it, and do still desire and endeavor to promote it.

Well, Sir, (said I) enough of old Arthur, and the Year 62: But I wonder to see
them so busy in the Years 65, and 66. which were dreadful enough, with the
immediate Judgment of God upon the Nation, and the City of London particularly;
but instead of appeasing the Wrath of God, they seem active to stir up the Fury
and Indignation of Men against one another, by increasing the astonishment of
the People with fabulous Prophecies, and terrible and romantic Stories, by
hinting that their Governors were the Causes of their Calamities; thus making
the Pestilence a Motive to Wars, with a Zeal more raging than the Flames that
consumed the City, and more contageous than the Plague that destroyed the
Inhabitants; so that when we reflect upon the virulency of their Principles,
and the destructive Practices they have produced, we conclude Mr. Cowley was
more than a Poet, when he said,

Come Pestilence and reap us down,
Come God's Sword rather than our own.
But Sir, (said he) look upon the Year 1673, is not that a pleasant Change? It
looks, Sir, (said I) like a Year of Jubilee. I never saw so many People of
different Humors so well pleased, what is that that makes them so devoutly
Brisk and Jolly? They had then gained a Toleration, (replied he) by the means
of my Lord Clifford, whom you see leading a Phalanx of Romanists on one side,
and the Earl of Shaftsbury at the Head of a Fanatical Herd on the other.
Toleration (said I) is a thing of very ill Consequence, ever since the Horses
of the Sun broke loose, and ran away with Esquire Phaeton; and so made the
first Leap-year, from which time we date all the unhappy Divisions among
Judicial Astrologers. But did the Papists help to procure a Toleration? No
wonder then we so often hear of Jesuits in the Conventicles of Fanatics, and
that they both of them have ever since more industriously conspired the
destruction of the Government.

Now you speak (said he) of the Destruction of the Government, look upon these
two Tables that contain the Discovery of the Popish Plot.

I cannot well read them, (said I) I think it is wrote in Sir Thomas More's
Characters, and so sullied that although there is a certain account of a Plot,
yet I cannot understand many particulars; surely they who first contrived it,
found out this way in case of discovery to sham it. But what do you think (said
he) of him that discovered it? I cannot tell (said I); well then, (replied he)
I will tell you a Story: There was a certain good natured Man who lived within
a Mile of an Oak, and he was one Day sitting in his House, when there came a
little wandering Fellow to him, and told him that in such a place there lay a
hideous and dreadful Wolf, with a design to devour both him, and his whole
Flock of Sheep; he being careful to preserve his Flock as well as himself,
prudently contrives to apprehend and secure the Wolf; as he was going he had
like to have fallen into an Ambuscado of Bears, which were the Relations and
Friends of him that discovered the Wolf, and altogether as ravenous; upon this
he carefully retires to consult what was best to be done: Certain it was, there
was a terrible Wolf, of the very race of the Wolf that was wet Nurse to Romulus
and Remus; but the Bears lay in the way, who were as dangerous, for they would
beat down all the Bee-Hives (the Emblems of Monarchy) for the sake of the
Honey; and besides, they alarmed the Wolf, so that he sculk'd away for the
present: at last one advised him thus. Sir, you have a Lion and a Unicorn in
your House, the best in the World, and without more ado, set them briskly on
both the Wolf and the Bears, and if they come any more I will be bound for
their good Behavior.

I understand the Moral of it, Sir, (said I;) but that Picture for the Year
1680, does quite pose me, the Painter deserves to be rewarded as the Poet
Choerilus was, for the few good Lines in it: Whilst (said he) you stand right
against the Central Line you can make nothing of it, but come this way, what do
you see now? The Pope (said I.) Go that way, what do you see now? Jack
Presbyter. Just so, (said he) according to this Rule of Painting have they
intermixed the Popish and Fanatical Plots, that if a Man be not rightly fixed
they confound one another, if he be he sees them both in their proper Colors.
But as they have had traitorous designs upon the Government for above 100 Years
last past, so since the Toleration they have been more than ordinarily active
in their Conspiracies, which their more open and public humors do
sufficiently prove, and if you will not believe me, pray observe them.

At this a pair of great Gates opened, and discovered a spacious Court full of
all sorts of People, like the Exchange-Walks; at our first entrance, a Fellow
with a whole Basket of Pamphlets had like to run over me, crying, Mirma,
Maromah, Maroum, or a Prophecy of the downfall of Babylon. Do not you wonder,
(said my Friend) to hear these People threatening the Pope with a whole Volley
of Rumbling Gibberish, who were but lately ready to run out of their Wits for
fear of him, when the Pamphlet entitled the Growth of Popery was printed. Oh!
Sir, (said I) I suppose this is only to whet the Irascible Appetite of the
Saints, and to encourage them to knock at Rome Gates, as they threatened in the
Days of Oliver. This is (replied he) fitted for an Association, to destroy the
Government under the Notion of Popery, and would be as serviceable to the
Jesuits ends in France. But on the other hand, yonder are a sort of Fellows
playing upon the Hypocondria's of the Rabble, and telling them sad Stories of a
Prophecy found in a Kettle, of a strange Monk-Fish, taken in the Pyrenaean Sea,
upon the Coasts of Northamptonshire: yonder are others selling your true
Protestant Almanacks, wherein all the twelve Houses are made Conventicles, and
many other ridiculous, nonsensical and seditious Papers are thrown about, with
which the fickle Rout first kindle their Zeal, and then light their Pipes, but
these are their Tricks of old. And therefore, let us try if we can hear what
yonder Person (whom I know to be a Jesuit in Disguise,) is saying to the
Presbyterians; as soon as we came to him. Brethren, (said he) since the Church
of England hates to be Reformed, still maintaining several Popish Ceremonies, I
think our Separation from it so far from being a Schism, that we are bound in
Conscience not only to separate our selves, but to carry along with us as many
as we can, by which means we shall rescue many poor Souls from the Paws of the
Beast, and from the Clutches of Antichrist; and still stick fast to that Solemn
League and Covenant, which we made with Hands lifted up to the most High God:
and since it was the Breach of that Covenant which made the good Cause
miscarry, by the falling away of our Brethren the Independents, therefore ought
we, laying aside the memory of all former Injuries, to be reconciled to them
who are our Fellow Sufferers in the present Persecution. We ought so, (replied
one of them) even the Common Papist, who lives innocently in his way, he is to
us as other Separatists. Well then (continued he) since you are of my Judgment,
I hope you will take my advice. You see your Congregations daily increase,
insomuch that we are able to vie numbers with the Episcopal-men, that a great
many Wealthy and rich Persons are our Friends; I therefore advise, that upon
the Death of any of the House of Commons, we do all our utmost endeavor, that
godly Men, and Friends to our Reformation, may be chosen into their Places, in
order to this we must recommend those we design, as most worthy Patriots, and
stigmatize with a brand of Reprobation and Popery, those who stand in
competition with them: Thus shall we again slide insensibly into all the
Advantages we have lost.

He talked at the same rate to the Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, and all
other Sectaries, who had their several Walks, and they all took his advice:
for, a little time after I heard a most horrid noise, as if the Tartars had
been sacking the Town, but coming nearer, they proved a vast number of common
People carrying the Image of a Gentleman in triumph, and in the mean time
reviling and abusing several worthy Persons of good Note, who stood looking on
them. I observed but two or three Clergymen among them, and one of them so
crooked that his very Corpse was uncanonical, the other so fat, that he had more
need of Hoops than of a Girdle; whilst he was dancing in his Chair, he smiled a
1000 Vtopian Liberties and Privileges; and many red-fac'd Politico's nabbled
the Heads of their Canes, in pious hopes of a happy Reformation: at last a
General Petition was delivered to him in a large Scroll, upon the back of which
was a Sentence in Capital Letters, which was,

Multa Petentibus desunt multa. I smiled to think what a biting Jest some merry
Tory had put upon them; but more surprised was I to find my self accosted by
the very same Jesuit that had been talking with the Presbyterians; for, (laying
his Hands upon my Shoulders with a great deal of Familiarity;) now you see
(said he) who are the Plotters; who those are that would ruin the Government,
are they not those very Fanatics that destroyed King Charles the First! that
are the Pests of all Humane Societies, and are mortal Enemies to the Church and
State? Hark you Sir, (said I) I have some News to tell you that is 1500 years
old and more; what is that (said he?) what (said I,)

Clodius accusat Moechos Catilina Cethegum. At this he sneaked away, but I
pursued him at a convenient distance, until I saw him fall in with a company
of People who seemed very moody and discontented; as soon as he came to them:
Gentlemen, (said he) your condition is very hard, it is strange that Men of your
Parts should be thus neglected and thrown aside; indeed I really pity you, you
can expect nothing from the Government upon the account of your Merits; all
Preferments are bought and sold in a scandalous manner, that must be said for
the Church of Rome they will let nothing of worth starve; and the simplest sort
of Fanatics are very liberal to those who will justify them at any rate; but
whilst in the Church of England ingenious Men want the Conveniences of Life,
the dullest Blockheads of the Age are, by the help of a Sum of Money, crowded
into the fattest Benefices of the Nation, after the great pain and peril of
Ordination.

At this one of them grew so outrageous, that I thought he would have run mad,
so that staring about him; I am resolved (said he) to be revenged upon an
ungrateful World! I Will rend the Rocks asunder! I Will plunge in the Deep! and
wake all asleep! I Will settle the Nation as I please! Here my Muses and Graces
where are you? Now for my Mathematics. Well! because the World is round, it is
perfect Demonstration that the Succession ought not to go in the Right Line.

At this a brisk Gentleman hit him such a blow on the Mouth, that he made his
Teeth break their Ranks, calling him ambitious and proud Coxcomb; and turning
to me, surely, (said he) had his Mothers Milk been curdled his Brains had been
a Sillabub before now. Then turning to him, Friend, (said he) rest your self
contented; such Insects as you, ought to take example from the Hedg-hog, which
travels through the shady Groves, and being contented with vulgar Crabs, envies
not those who enjoy the Golden Apples, and after Supper is graciously pleased
to wrap himself up within the Limits of his own proper Person, and so securely
rests, and is more at ease, than if he should put his Nose out all Night, and
pretend to have it grow to an Elephant's Trunk before the next Morning: but I
perceive, that some of those who are padling in all the ill Humors of the
Nation, have been tampering with you. That Fellow, Sir, (said I) that spoke to
him is a Jesuit, and he has been as busy with all manner of Fanatical
Malcontents. Perhaps, (said he) with as much Success, for it is easy for him
to draw those People to what Practices he please, who are of the same
Principles with himself.

As for that little Gentleman (said I) that frets like Gum-Taffety, If he will
change his Religion, because he is not successful, he never had any. And as
for the Fanatics they have been told that theirs is purely Popish, until
their Ears are stretched with hearing it, and they will by no means believe it.

But I will believe my Eyes, (said he.) And if you had ever been in France,
Spain, Italy, or Germany, and had seen or heard the Jesuits, or preaching
Friars in their Pulpits, you might at the same time have seen all our
Conventiclers Mimick Voltings, their frisking Ecstasies, their apish Laughings,
their sudden Howlings, their awry Faces: all their Postures are according to
the Ceremonies of a Roman Missal, their fumbling their Buttons, their knocking
their Breasts, their Hands hanging loose, and then again stretched as if they
were bewitched; with an hundred other juggling Tricks, and all to set off, and
varnish their Doctrines which are the most modish Popery in the World; viz.
That the People is the Supreme Power: That Kings and Princes may be Deposed and
Murdered: That Success is a certain Evidence of God's approving whatever comes
to pass.

I have heard, Sir, (said I) Instances enough of the two first Positions; pray
let me have one of this last.

Jenkins (said he) in his Conscientious Queries, printed 1651. Asks! Whether,
The stupendous Page 2 d.
Providence of God manifested among us, in the destruction of the late King,
whether by these Providence God has not removed the Government of Charles
Stuart, and whether a refusal to yield Obedience to the present Government, be
not a refusal to acquiesce in the Wise and Righteous pleasure of God; and a
stat Breach of the Fifth Commandment? So Bellarmine uses it for an Argument for
Image Worship; Iconomachis Bell. lib. de Imag* c* 12. Argumen^um decimum.
omnia (non sine divino quodam Miraculo) male successisse: and then instances
that Leo Isaurus, for his demolishing Images lost the Empire of Italy, whereas
it was taken from him by the perfidious Rebellion and Perjury of the Roman
Bishops.

Now you talk, Sir, (said I) of Image Worship, they object as a reason of their
Separation, that the Church of England is inclinable to Popish Superstition and
Idolatry: No, but they are, (replied he;) You must know that some kind of
Image Worship sprang from the obsolete Fancies of the Anthropomorphitae; and
therefore Pope Adrian argues thus; God made Man in his own Image, therefore
Images ought to be worshipped: Now one would think that Pope Adrian's Idea had
whipped into that Zealot's Noddle, by the way of Pythagoras, who cried; Oh Lord,
take a Chair and come and sit among thine Honorable House of Commons. But
farther, another Popish Doctrine they hold is, that God sees no Sin in his
Children; that they cannot fall from Grace: So the Jesuits hold, that they
cannot commit a Mortal Sin. Nemo sociorum in Lethale peccatum incidere queat;
None of our Society can fall into deadly sin; thus they vaunted to Cardinal
Borromaeus, says Alphonsus de Vargas, in his Book Cap. 14. page 39. Edit. 1636.
De Stratag. Jesuit. Their Funeral Sermons are as so many Popish Canonizations,
and the Lives of their Saints, wherein they boast of such extraordinary
Revelations, and Gifts of the Spirit, of strange Voices, great Lights, and
heavenly Apparitions, seem to out-doe the Enthusiastic Legends of St. Francis,
St. Dominick, Father Xaviere, or Ignatius Loyola: they both of them interpret
many places of Scripture to the very same sense; (though both very false) and
the 21st of Ezekiel the 25th Verse, has been frequently quoted by Popish and
Presbyterian Expositours, to the same ends and purposes, and so has the 8th
Verse of the 149th Psalm. I have often thought, that John Owen learnt from the
Psalter of Bonaventure, to abuse and misapply the Psalms of David. He says,
Eben Ezer, page 13.
God came from Naseby, and the Holy One from the West, Selah. And that says,
Let our Lady arise, and let her Enemies be scattered, etc. The preaching of
Women in the Conventicles of Quakers is rank Popery; Bell. lib. 1. de Bapt.
cap. 7.
Bellarmine says, It Is not only permitted but lawful for Women to teach; and
* Paludanus says, In 4. Sent. did.
Papa potest clavem Jurisdictionis and Laico, and Foeminae committere. And
again, Papa potest sicut Laico sic and Mulieri committere quod excommunicet;
The Pope can grant as to a Lay Person, so to a Woman the power of
Excommunication. And the Canonists teach, that they may exercise Spiritual
Jurisdiction. Thus you see that the Spirit of Popery in one shape or other,
appears among all the several Sectaries of Great Britain; and some more of
their Practices will plainly show how injuriously they cast the Charge of their
own Guilt upon the truly Reformed Church of England: They condemn all but those
of their own Persuasion, and their Motto in Zion's Plea, is; aut hoc aut nihil:
So Campian in his Challenge to Oxford says, aut nostrum est aut nullius Regnum
Coelorum: The Jesuits did never more industriously corrupt the Writings of the
Fathers, than the Presbyterians did the last Books of Mr. Hooker's
Ecclesiastical Policy. The Papists endeavor to impose upon us the Rhemish
Testament; and the Presbyterians in King James's time were as busy to have the
Geneva Notes put upon the Margent of the Bible. The Jesuits have their Index
Expurgatorius; but they never cancelled any thing with more boldness, than the
Presbyterians did, when they procured that the 20th Article, viz. That the
Church has power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, etc. was by their Malice left
out in the printed Articles. And lastly, whoever shall read their unsanctified
Ribaldry, with which they treat the Reverend Prelates of the Church of England,
will fancy them the very Cronies and Disciples of the famous Cardinal
Palavicini, who to maintain the new Frame of Papal Government modeled by the
Council of Trent, does so ridiculously, and maliciously inveigh against the
Sacred and Primitive Order of Bishops; calling them In Hist Conc. Tr.
Piccioli Vescovi, Fanciulli, impertinenti, insolenti, Buffoneschi; little
Bishops, Babies impertinent, insolent, Buffoons.

He had no sooner done speaking, but we heard a mighty shouting as if some
Triumph had been coming along, and hastening to see what was the matter, I
perceived a great Bonfire blazing in the amidst of the Court, and a world of
People with many Torches, bringing the Pope with his Cardinals and Jesuits, to
burn them in Effigy, in remembrance of the execrable Design of the Jesuits on
the 5th of November; it was very pleasant to hear the Porters out-rail the
Factious Preachers, and to see the Rabble warming themselves in the flaming
Relicts of the Beast, fancying the Whore of Babylon a kind of old Witch, that
was put to pain with the burning her Imps; but I was most of all surprised to
see a great many Papists in disguise, as active and cheerful as any of the
Company, until I perceived that although the Pope was burnt in Effigy, yet
several Protestants of the Church of England, were the Persons that were aimed
at to be sacrificed in Propriis Personis: So that I withdrew as fast as I
could; but by the way I had a Copy of Verses put into my Hands, which because
they came from the warm Fancy of some Zealous Mongrel, designed for a Post of a
Conventicle, I have here set down as a Specimen of his Future Hopes.

Upon the Gunpowder Treason.

Tell me the Man that can divulge the Traitor,
That underground did build this damned Theater;
Had but this Plot stayed until to Morrow,
We had been like to Sodom and Gomorrah.
Iron Bars, Gunpowder, Faggots and Deal Board
They heapt up for to destroy thy People, O good Lord.
Whilst I was laughing with my Companion, and descanting upon these Lines, I
wondered to see such a sudden and strange Change in the vast Multitude there met
together; the common People, as if weary of idle Tumults began quietly to
retire to their Business, the Romish Priests sculk'd about, and betrayed a
world of Despair in their Looks, the Fanatics had put on their Suffering
Complexions, and looked as heavy as smoked Beef; so the People being
dispersed, some of the Company had unfortunately dropped a strange new-fashion'd
Idol, which had a Belt on, upon which was embroidered in Letters of Blood the
Association: Good Lord! what striving their was to keep it from being at first
seen, as if it had been the Cub of some hopeful Basilisk? There was a small
Company of the new-instituted Order of St. Ignoramus, great Reformers of the
third Commandment, who proferr'd to wash their Hands in scalding Lead, to
swallow Fire and Brimstone, and to do harder things than the trial of the
Ordeal to testify its Innocence, nay its very non Entity. But when that would
not do, a couple of Foreigners endeavored to take Possession of two
considerable Forts, that they might protect it, and in order to that, they
would have accepted of the Votes of their very Country Puppets in Rare-Showes;
but all in vain, for a numerous Company of Loyal and true hearted Englishmen
broke in upon them; and being made sensible of the several un-christian
Artifices, both of the Papists and Fanatics, to alter and destroy the
established Government, laid their several Addresses at his Sacred Majesty's
Feet, wherein they Religiously vow and promise to defend it.

At this time there came a Gentleman to me, and pulling me by the Sleeve. That
our Fears and Jealousies (said he) might for ever vanish, and our future Peace,
and Prosperity be real, and lasting; not only the Loyal and true-hearted
Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of the Realm; but the Learned Clergy too are
now doing their utmost endeavors to confute the Principles, as well as prevent
the Practices, both of Papists and Fanatics, and if you will go along with me,
you shall see them as pleasantly baffled, and exposed, as your Heart can
imagine, or desire.

We went until we came to a stately Theater, like that at Oxford, wherein I
was infinitely pleased to see such a number of Learned Writers of the Church of
England: on one hand of them sat those who had written in defense of the
Romish Doctrines; on the other sat Smectymnuus, with many more late Writers of
the Presbyterians: The Solemnity began with Consorts of Music, and an Anthem
sung by those of the Church of England, the Subject of it was, the Gunpowder
Treason, the Martyrdom of King Charles the First, and the Birth and Return of
King Charles the Second: which because it was in a strein something differing
from that of our late Poet, I have here set down.

November. the 5th.
I.
The Law came down and spoke
Of Old, in Fire and Smoke,
The terrible Thunder from around it broke;
Sure those Wretches vowed
To send up one as loud
With the Lawgiver in a smoakie Cloud:
Had our meek Moses gone
To God, and left us here alone,
Streightway some Calves as God's had sat,
Calves, which Rome's Bulls would have begat.
How soon should we
Have lost our new got Liberty,
And strangely have slidden back to the old Idolatry.
Januar. the 30th.
II.
Oh wondrous strange! it was decreed
That the Great Charles should bleed,
Not burn; that Trial he Alas!
Did'scape, because he was a worse to pass,
(The Quintessence of Inhumanity:)
Charles! Ah! Charles! that Sacred Name,
Our Pride, and yet Eternal Shame;
Had thou an Infant Martyr been,
None had the Glory of thy setting seen:
Immortal Honor was designed to Thee,
A Free Will Offering to be.
So the Child Jesus was preserved
From Herod's Cruelty,
Sad Bethlehem Massacre,
And for Mount Calvary reserved.
Chorus.
Long may we sing
God save the King,
The Royal Martyr's Son,
By Wonders placed upon his Father's Throne:
Traitors in vain their Plots do lay,
Traitors do but themselves betray.
In vain their Treacherous Foes their Malice show,
His Crown of Light shall never wax old,
His ever will flourish that is of Gold,
Charles now triumphs above, Charles now triumphs below.
As soon as the Anthem was ended, one in long Scarlet Robes stood up, and
turning to the Papists (said) Since so many Grave and Reverend Divines of the
Church of England, have so frequently confuted the Doctrines and Positions of
your Church of Rome, and yet you still perservere in your perfidious and
rebellious Practices: We therefore demand, that the Fundamental Principles of
such fatal Bigottry may be here openly exposed, that the World may know what
ridiculous Consequences, and foolish Absurdities those Opinions are subject to,
for which you so zealously disturb the Peace of Christendom, and give such
occasion of Scandal to Turks and Infidels.

The Papists were so provoked that they soon accepted the Challenge; for
immediately a Lane was made among them to give way for a Monster, much like a
Chinese Hieroglyphick in Kirker, with a great many Hands, Feet, and Eyes, and a
Head representing the Terrestrial Globe, on the top of which stood a Cupola. As
soon as one of our Church saw it, he cried out, it is not lawful to bring
Briareus into a Christian Assembly. Briareus! said one of the Papists, know you
not that by this Emblem we represent the Universality of the Church of Rome? do
not you know that the Bishop of Rome is the Universal Bishop of the whole
Catholic Church? No, replied he, I know it no more than the Pope of Rome;
Gregory the Great did not Greg. Epist. lib. 6. cap. 3.
know it, he detested it as a Symptom of Antichrist: and Phocas who bestowed
it upon Pope Boniface, did not do it until he had an occasion to bestow his
Master the Emperor Mauritius in the other World. But now (said he) you may
plainly see it with your Eyes, look you there, there is the Globe of the whole
Earth, of which the Pope is the Lord and Governor; it is true, you Heretics
wander in some little bye Places, as in England, and in some petty Hans-Towns
of Germany, but his Authority is extended over all the World, all the Indies
acknowledge him, all Italy, France, Spain, Poland, Hungaria, Transylvania,
Gallicia, Valentia, Granada, Andalusia.

Hold, Hold Sir, (cried he) if you should stumble over the Straits Mouth you
will beat out your Brains against Hercules's Pillars. Pray, let us examine this
Monster's Noddle, what a grievous bruise has Martin Luther given him with his
High Dutch Knuckles? he has broken I do not know how many Degrees of Longitude
and Latitude; all Great Britain is quite beat out, and the Low Countries are so
sunck in, that I believe he must be trepan'd before he can recover; in short,
the Protestants are almost as numerous as the Papists. But suppose we grant him
that thumping Appellation, why did Pope Paul the 5th in his Bull wherein he
excommunicated Queen Elizabeth, use that sneaking Title of Servant of Servants,
your Triple Servant? He should have sent a good deep-mouthed Nuncio that should
have stretched his Muzzle to the uttermost, and have roared like a crack of
Thunder among the Alps, and have cried Paolo quinto Papa Monarcha, di Regno,
di Vaticano, Segnor del mondo, supremo, santissimo, Vmano magistrato, etc. This
would have conjured down all the Protestants, and have put them into such a
trembling Fit, that they would have shak'd all their Heresy out of the Knees
of their Breeches; this would have better suited him who is the most serene and
invincible Sultan of Contradictions, the Grand-Seignior of all Mental
Reservations and Equivocations, the Sophi of Legends and Romances, the Great
Mogul of Indulgences, the Czar of Holy Impostures and Pious Cheats, the Great
Cham of the Inquisition, etc.

Hold Sir, (cried one of the Papists) this is Railery and Abuse: it is as true
(replied he) as that the Pope is Universal Bishop; let him but keep within his
own Diocese, and not meddle any more with the Rights of Sovereign Kings and
Princes, and there is no body (that I know of) will be so ready to complement
him from the Artick to the Antartick Pole for the Future.

But we hope (cried several of them) you will allow our Church to be the
Catholic Church: For this word Catholic, there has been much scrambling these
many Years, (replied he) and you have taken much pains to monopolize it to your
See of Rome, in order to which for the great number of humane Heretics whom
you excommunicate, you take all manner of Beasts, Fowls, and Fishes into the
Pale of your Church; St. Francis first converted the Birds, and then afterward
he fully convinced and satisfied a Wolf that had a very tender Conscience; nor
was he the only Apostle to the Brutes; but the Bishop Book of Conf. p. 114.
of Canaglion managed as difficult a Diocese in the Year 1593, for he
Catholickly accused the Fishes, so that afterward they without all doubt
believed the Doctrine of Holy Water. St. Bernard in a Fit of Popery is reported
by Pet. de Not. in vit. Bern.
Petrus de Natalibus, to have excommunicated the Flies: and therefore several
Species of Creatures, observing that all Regular Orders had put themseves under
the Protection of some considerable Saints, have likewise listed themselves,
the Dogs under St. Hubert, a Huntsman; the Horses under St. Loys, their
Ostler-General; and because the Geese once preserved the Capitol, there was an
Order from the Vatican that St. Feriol should take care of them. And so (said
he) I hope we are all satisfied as to the Universality of the Romish Church:
pray set forth the Antiquity of it.

Upon this all the Papists desired that they might save that Argument until
the last; fancying that it gathered strength every Moment, and desired the
Assembly to take into their consideration the Unity of their Church, and the
Supremacy of the Pope: as for the Protestants (cried one of them) they are
divided into as many Factions as there are days in the Year, and make an
Anarchy of the Kingdom of Grace; but the Roman Catholics are all united under
one Head, the Pope, so making the true Hierarchy of the Holy Catholic Church.

Upon this one of the Church of England stood up, (and said;) as for our
Church, it has no more to do or answer for the Factions among Protestants,
than yours, nor so much neither; when did ever any Minister of the Church of
England preach the Doctrines of Fanatics to promote its Interest? when did any
of them ever preach, that which in their Consciences they knew to be a Lie, for
the sake of the Truth? and if you look into your own, you will find those
Divisions which never were in our Church, as the differences betwixt the
Dominicans and Franciscans, betwixt the Jansinists and Mollinists, which have
been continued with the greatest heats imaginable; it is true the Pope has
sometimes interposed his Authority, but to no great purpose: but where was the
Papal Authority in the days of the Anti-Popes? or what will become of it, if
the Jesuits gain their designs? will all other Orders acknowledge the Papal
Authority, if the Jesuits confine it to their own? the Church of England can
never be subject to such a Fatal Division, so long as the King of England is
acknowledged to be in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical, as Civil, Supreme
Governor. As for the Pope's Supremacy, that has been so sufficiently pelted
with good Greek and Latin, by many of these Learned Authors, that I will only
humbly drop a few Queries concerning it at this time.

First then, We desire to know, Whether our Savior ever granted it to St.
Peter? Secondly, Whether the present Pope be his Successor? Thirdly, Suppose
it was granted to St. Peter, Whether there was any need of forging the Donation
of Constantine afterward? Fourthly, If it was granted to St. Peter, because he
first confessed him to be Christ the Son of the living God, Whether Pope Leo
the 10th had any right to it, for saying to Cardinal Bembo, Crispinus.
Quantum nobis nostrique ea de Christo fabula prosuerit satis est omnibus secu^
notum. Fifthly, we desire to know whether any Bishopric in Christendom
remaining, can show a Succession so disordered, and corrupted, as that of Rome?
Not to mention their strange Schisms, let any Person but consider the
Stratagems and impious Intrigues of the Conclave, the Factions of the Nepotism,
contrary to that Solemn Oath they take, enough to make Angels tremble, and he
will conclude, that there is more of the Old City than of the Ancient Church in
Rome. Lastly, If the Papal Supremacy be so absolutely necessary to Christ's
Kingdom here on Earth, Whether the Cardinals be not strange Men, that they by
their long Janglings, and Disputes upon a Vacancy, and at an Election, should
so long debar him from the Administration of that Power by his Vicar; And
whether it be not more suitable to a Monarchy that suffers no Interregnum: And
consequently since, Rex Angliae non moritur, The King of England is said not to
dye according to our Law; whether the King be not according to the 37th Article
the Supreme Governor, in all Causes Ecclesiastical and Civil, in all his
Dominions; and whether the Bishop of Rome has, or ought to have any
Jurisdiction in any of them?

At this a Jesuit stood up, and looking earnestly upon some newly proselyted
Papists; Regard not (said he) what any prating Heretic of them all says: Have
we not made you sufficiently sensible that all the Protestant Religion is an
Innovation? that King Henry the 8th, a mere Julian, was the first that
apostatized from the Holy Catholic Faith, the first that arrogated to himself
the Pope's incommunicable Dignity of being Head of the Church?

It Is false (replied one of the Church of England) King Henry the 8th only
reassumed what some of his Predecessors owned, what none of them ever could,
or any of his Successors ever can give away from the Crown of England: But the
Papal Supremacy is an Usurpation and an Innovation too; 'twas never heard of in
the World until above 600 Years after Christ; nay Pope Boniface the 3 d, was
the first that ever pretended to be the Universal Bishop. The Christians in
Tertull. ad Scap. cap. 2.
Tertullians's time acknowledged the Emperor to be, Hominem a Deo secundum,
solo Deo minorem. And Opt. Lib. 3.
Optatus has the same Strain, Super Imperatorem non est nisi solus Deus qui
fecit Imperatorem. What need I mention what Cyril, and Chrysostom, and Gregory
the Great, and Pope Agatho have clearly and plainly said, and written upon this
Point, you have been told often enough; nay in that Council which you call the
Eighth General Council, the Emperor Basilius publicly professes, (none of
the Bishops contradicting him) Epag. Basilii in Conc. quod vocat. Act. 8. 1.
Gubernacula Ecclesiasticae navis sibi a Deo commissa, That the Government of
the Church was committed to him by God.

There was no reply made of a long time, for a great bustle that was among the
Papists; at last three or four lusty Fellows came dragging in a mighty tall
Statua, almost resembling the old Image of St. Christopher in Nostre Dame in
Paris, he held in his Hand a long Scroll, which was a Catalogue of all the
Popes, and was hung from Head to Foot with all manner of old fashioned
Trumpery: Before it marched an aged Hermit with a Scyth in his Hand, and
looking upon the Protestants as if he would have mowed them down at once; Ye
base Innovatours (cried he) that have troubled the World with new Doctrines,
where was your Religion before Luther? See here the ancient and undeniable
Records of ours; see here the infallible Traditions of many Ages, by which we
clearly know that we profess the same Fundamental Truths the first Martyrs
asserted, (who were so very old that their Beards helped to burn them,) and
which none but a Company of new fangled Heretics in the last Century ever
denied.

Good Father grey-Beard (replied Bishop Montague) don't think to afright us out
of our Senses with an old Wormeaten Idol, overrun with Cobwebs, you might as
well have brought a Tom of Bedlam with the Luggage of the Gibeonites, to prove
the Antiquity of your Doctrines, as this old withered Hercules; for assure your
self we cannot only prove them the spurious Inventions of your Cabalistical
Innovatours, but we can tell you the very Time, and Occasions of the
introducing every one of them into the Christian Church; we have not only the
Scriptures, Fathers and Councils maintaining all the grounds of the Protestant
Religion, according to the Reformation of our Church of England, but before it,
even in the darkest days of Popery we meet with many the learned Men that
those Ages afforded, inveighing against the Corruptions both in Doctrine and
Discipline of the Church of Rome, as Robert Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln,
William Occham, John Gerson, Picus Mirandula, Hierom Saveranola, Hus and
Hierom, the Followers of Waldo; and in the Year 1260, Nicholas Gallique, wrote
a Book upon that Subject, entitled the Fiery Dart: But since we cannot
convince you of the Antiquity of Protestantism, we will be so complemental for
this once as to allow Popery to be older than Christianity it self, it is no
difficult thing to prove several of your Legends out of Livie and Valerius
Maximus; what a dull Theologue was Lipsius not to remember that several of the
fine Stories he tells concerning our Just. ^ips. de Virg. Hallu. cap 6.
Lady at Hall, were long before recorded of the Val. Max. lib. 1. cap 8.
Statua of Claudia, placed in the Temple of the Mother of the Gods? the
speaking and Miracles of Images are all Ethnic Illusions, and the friskings of
Monkish Puppets, the Artificial Contrivances of Heathenish Oracle-mongers; many
of your Saints are slipped into places of Trust held by the old Deities; but I
wonder that since Diana had so noble an Office as to hunt the Stag, and the
Wild-Bore, that St. Gertrude should get no better Preferment in your Legends,
than that of a paltry Rat-catcher: But we will talk no more of the Antiquity of
your Religion. As for that Jesuit who boasts so much of it, although he is the
greatest Innovatour amongst you, yet rather than fail, upon occasion, he can
learnedly prove his own Order to be the eldest, as well as the richest in the
World, nay contemporary with the very Hivites and Perizzites, for Numb. 26. 44.
we read; Of Jesui, the Family of the Jesuits.

He had a great deal more to say to them, but that he was interrupted with a
great Crowd and Noise of Clergymen coming in from all parts of the Kingdom,
who made great Complaints against the Presbyterians and other Dissenters, for
that they (in a time when the Government both in Church and State was in such
danger, by reason of the Papists) were then more ungovernable, restless and
insolent than at any other time: and indeed so it plainly appeared, for those
there present began to be troublesome and mutinous, pretending great Fears of
Popery, but levelling all their Invectives against Persons the most remarkable
for Loyalty and Conformity; and clamouring for a speedy Reformation of I do not
know what, holding a great many Seditious Pamphlets in their Hands,
complaining, railing, petitioning, threatening; which when the Papists observed
they very cunningly slipped away, well knowing that they had too much alarmed the
Government to carry on their Designs at present, and infinitely pleased to
think that they had left their Deputies in an uproar to make them more easy and
successful for the Future: But because they perceived that their rude Clamours
grew distatefull to the Generality of People, they began to be more calm, upon
which a Reverend Divine stood up, and turning to them: Can ye, Brethren, (that
dissent from us) imagine (said he) that we can either redress your Grievances,
or answer your Writings, whilst they thus fly in Swarms about us? No certainly,
unless we had as many Ears as Argus had Eyes: Let one or two of your select
Champions now stand forth, and we will give you all possible Satisfaction by
answering all their Objections.

To this they all willingly agreed, and after a short Debate pitched upon the
Authors of Melius Inquirendum, and of Julian the Apostate; so Proclamation was
made, and the first of them cited to appear in their Defense. As he was coming,
the same Person stood up again and said; this Person has wrote a Book entitled,

MELIVS INQVIRENDVM, OR A SOBER INQUIRY INTO THE REASONINGS OF THE SERIOUS
INQUIRY. WHEREIN The Inquirer's Cavils against the Principles, his Calumnies
against the Preachings and Practices of the Non-conformists are examined and
refelled, etc.
In which Book he shows himself the most dangerous and implacable Adversary of
the Church of England, abusing our Reformation and established Government, with
all the unsanctified Buffoonry his Wit and Malice can invent; and pretends to
superinduce a Thorough Reformation of his own, which for all his confident
Varnish, and pious Pretenses, would subject us to all the Calamities and
Villainies we have already seen and felt: Now although the sober part of this
pretended Sober Inquirer is already sufficiently answered and refell'd by the
Reverend and Learned Dr. Laurence Womock in his Verdict upon the Dissenters
Plea, etc. Yet since he is maliciously pleased to swell into a third Edition
with Additions, we will even let loose a small Country Curate at him to trifle
with him in his own way, and to give him some gentle Corrections: he cannot
find fault with his Antagonist, or despise him, it is but to fulfill his own
Quibble, Page 110.
Parvae Loquuntur curae, ingentes stupent.

I paid for my peeping, for immediately I was commanded to come into the
Theater, where I stood trembling, as if I had been to kick and cuff with
Colbron the Giant, or to fight and scratch with some Wild Beast; whenas a good
brisk Fellow, with a loose Coat hanging upon his Shoulders, came in, and
turning to a Gentleman. You, Sir, (said he) The ever and much honored Epist.
Ded.
S. K. Esquire: Do you think that these Dissenters Court their Miseries, with
the same Passionate Caresses that other Inamorato's do their Mistresses? that
they should run over one another Heads for the first grasp of Destruction, as
if they rode Post all upon the Switch and the Spur, for a Presentation to a
warm Parsonage?

Hold Friend, (said I) curb in your Pegasus, or he will run over some of the
Company by and by; Inamorato's are as very Fanatics as ever doted upon Chains
and Fetters, and have as wrong a Notion of Persecution; and I do not know why
the Circumcelliones might not pretend as many Charms for courting the Gallows,
as some of them have for whining after an Insolent and Squabbling Dowdy: but
your Miseries are so well qualified with the Liberality of the Holy Sisters,
that you can merrily bear them; you never meet with so many Golden Mines, as in
the Torrid Zone of your Sufferings; and can pleasantly endure to be smoked a
little in Terra del Fogo, so long as it is by the way of Potosi; this makes you
so flippant under Tribulations, and crackle like Bays in the Flames of
Martyrdom: it is certain, that as Jack-Pudden gets most Money when he is briskly
kicked about the Stage, so does Jack-Presbyter when the Penal Laws are pretty
nimble upon him. Well Sir, since You and I must have a Trial of Skill for the
Diversion and Good of the Company, pray tell me your Name; Melius Inquirendum
by Ignoramus! what is the meaning of this R. W. your Name begins with a W. and
therefore it shall be Whiggus, mine with a P. (any one will do) mine for once
and away shall be Pamphilus. But what are your Miseries you were speaking of?
What is the Matter with you?

Whig. Why there is a certain Compassionate Enquirer, lately come to Town, with
a great deal of Passion, that would set us together by the Ears with
Uniformity; but why cannot we love a Christian as he is such, though differing
from us in Innocent Accidents; as well as a Man because he is a Man, though his
Hair be of another Color, his Face of another Symmetry and Complexion than our
own?


Pamph. If you cut off the Man's Head, or lop off his Arm, you cannot say you
love him, if you do it wilfully it is no Innocent Accident; you think the
Supreme Magistrate (who is a Man and a Christian too) a great deal too tall for
you, you wilfully take his Authority down lower by the Head it is no Accident,
and when he was made the Head shorter in his Person, I wish you were Innocent.


Whig. But you Churchmen make the Breach so wide, by endeavoring to reduce
the World into a strict and precise Uniformity in every minute Punctilio.


Pamp. How come these Punctilio's to grow so fat and burly on a sudden, that
you durst not swallow them for fear the Devil and all his Works should crowd in
after them, for before the next full of the Moon you will be complaining that
they are bigger than Camels and will not go down? How can you love or agree with
another Man, that do not agree with your self; but in this Book you have not
shown your self either a Man or a Christian, but rather a profane Satyr of
another symmetry, being a Composition of Man, Beast and Devil, that can blow
hot and cold and Contradictions with the same Breath. And now you have the
Heels of a Goat, can clamber over the most craggy Consequences: I shall not
trouble my self to trace you in all the bye-paths wherein you are wanton and
rampant upon the Compassionate Enquirer, but since you are broke loose upon the
Reformation of the Church of England, if I can come handsomely at you I will
put a Curb in your Mouth, that you shall be more sensible of, than of the Axes
and Halters you talk of.


Whig. I see I cannot avoid the lash of virulent Tongues; but I tell you, I
design nothing but a Reformation to the Primitive Institutions of Christ and
his Apostles: I would have no Inventions of Men, but perfect Evangelical Purity
and Simplicity, and that is the Design of my Book.


Pamp. But the strain of your Book shows little of the Evangelical Gravity or
Modesty; I doubt you will find a great many Idle words in it, and besides what
is worse, you will be found in your Plea for the Dissenters to defend the
Actions of the Scribes with the Language of the Pharisees; though by the way
you may chance to meet with the Whip for them that profane the Temple, and as
smarting Correction for those that are Hypocrites in the Corners of the
Streets. But, Sir, did you ever read any Punns or Quibbles in the Evangelists?
Did the Apostles Ridicule and Burlesque the Ceremonial Law though abolished?
Did they Droll upon, or make sport with Kings, or those that are in Authority
under them? Hermias a Christian Philosopher, was the first that wrote Gentilium
Philosophorum Irrisio (a Book so called) but is there no difference betwixt the
Diabolical Magic of Heathenish Institutions, and the decent Ceremonies of a
Christian and Reformed Church? No, so it seems by you, whilst those that
constitute them are made no better than Numa Pompilius (the first Roman
Ritualist, as you call him) and the Orders appointed by them, (with whom Christ
by the Blessed Spirit is promised to be (...), to the end of the World) than
the Palladium of Troy, or the Image of Diana: Thus you show your Malice more
than Wit in your disproportionable Similitudes and Examples, whenas to expose a
Child for its indifferent Innocence, you might as well dress him in the Armor
of one of the Titans, and then frighten all Nations with him; Your Instances,
Rejoynders, Quotations, are all the way of the same Nature, which though at
first glance they may seem (to some) to look upon the Church, yet like the
Parthians shoot another way; yet you draw them in by the Head and Shoulders,
dress them up with Daisies and Primroses, to amuse and cheat the easy Reader;
whenas a Judicious Eye that pierces through the Buffoonry of such a Scribler,
will no more mistake him for a good Casuist, than a Morrice-Dancer for a good
Statesman: had you like Janus looked (...), you might in the profane abuse of
all things Sacred, in the late Blessed Reformation of the Dissenters, have met
with ridiculous Impieties, that rather require the severe Lashes of a flaming
Wit, if Blasphemy, Sacrilege and Treason do rather deserve them than Peace and
Order. But now to the purpose, what do you in particular object against our
Reformation?


Whig. I tell you, I clear the Articles of the Church of England from the
Rubbish of Popery and Arminianism; and since the Compassionate Enquirer has
made a Syncope of the Name and Fame of St. Augustine, alias Austin, for
confuting the Pelagian Heresy; and since he pretends to rout him, and the
whole Synod of Dort, that was of St. Austin's Mind, with a whole long row of
Fathers, Greek and Latin, then and there quoted; I think I was no less bound
after the Examples of our own Kings and Parliaments, and many Writers of the
Church (knowing this Arminianism to be an inlet into Popery) to oppose and
expose it.


Pamp. Here is indeed the whole matter in short from Page 45 to 65: Only, Sir,
by the way there was no need of half that noise about it, with all that
ruffling of flanting Metaphors and learned Outcry; the design is to lay a new
Indictment for the pretended Crime of Arminianism against the Church, to help
to run it down as in the late Rebellion, but you want an Oliver Cromwell to
make Evidence: It had been as witty, since you are got to Dort, to say that St.
Augustine's Name is begun in the Middle like an Holland Cheese, as that a
Syncope was made of it, and much more to the Capacity of the Phlegmatic Tribe;
but Sir, though he did not very well agree with Pelagius, yet he would never
have set up his Horses at Hippo with Aerius, much less at Dort with any of his
Successors; therefore I do not know why the Church of England, which is as
considerable as the Church of Africa was, should receive Ecclesiastical
Government from Dort, or Civil from Amsterdam. We are neither Calvinists, nor
Arminians, nor Pelagians, nor Novatians, but of the truly Ancient Catholic
and Apostolical Church of England; we have our own National Convocation. And as
for our Articles, pray let them alone, you have already filch'd away one of
them, viz. the 20th, as the Papists have done the second Commandment: But what
was you going to say about Ceremonies and Reformation?


Whig. For your Ceremonies, I say, they were left as a Key to Let in Papists,
and now they are a Lock to shut out Protestants: Thus Indulgences and Remission
of Sins were granted to all that would engage in the Holy Wars, but in process
of time were dispensed to them that would Massacre the Waldenses and
Albigenses: Thus the Inquisition was first set up to discover the Hypocritical
Moors of Spain, but the edge of it since turned against the Protestants.


Pamph. Here are two more Instances that have been upon the Tenter-hooks these
hundred years: but when will you prove the Ceremonies of the Church comparable
to Romish Indulgences, or the Penal Laws to the Inquisition? when the Moon has
Calv'd, and left you her horns for a Legacy. But that is not the End why they
are retained; and if they were Abolished, you would discover your selves to be
worse than Hypocritical Moors by a Rebellion, of which neither the Waldenses,
Albigenses or Protestants in Spain were ever guilty.


Whig. I say they are Popish, and therefore your Reformation wants a
Reformation; for as one said, The English have driven the Pope out so hastily,
that he has left his Garments behind him. And therefore we desire a Reformation
of what is necessary, and as often as is necessary.


Pamph. I will make bold with an Answer from Bishop Sanderson; It were good
(says he) for your own selves, that you may not Rove in infinitum, and in
compassion to us, that you would give us a perfect Boundary of what is Popery
now, with some Prognostication or Ephemerides annexed (if you please) whereby
to conclude what will be Popery seven years hence: Therefore propose what you
would have Reformed.


Whig. Before I come to particulars, I must say what honest Gerson said of old:
There can be (says he) no General Reformation without the Abolitions of sundry
Canons and Statutes, which neither are, nor reasonably can be observed in these
times, which do nothing but ensnare the Consciences of men to their endless
perdition; no Tongue is able to express what evil, what danger and confusion
the neglect and contempt of the Holy Scriptures (which doubtless is sufficient
for the Government of the Church, else Christ had been an imperfect Lawgiver)
and the following of Humane Inventions has brought into the Church. Sermon. in
die circ.


Pamph. Truly, friend, this is too long-wasted, and looks (as you say) like a
Shrimp in a Lobster's Symar. What does this signify to us? you might as well
have scrape'd an Objection out of the Minor-Poets, for he neither talks of our
Canons, nor of these times; nor have you, who live in them, any reason to
complain of the neglect and contempt of the Holy Scriptures, which are ordered
to be read in the Church, by the Rubric, in better order, and more frequently
than ever they were in any Conventicle. But as you show your self an excellent
Artist at the Hocus-Pocus of Systole and Diastole, so by sleight of hand you
have scrub'd up a new-fashion'd Hypotyposis, a figure of Rhetoric, in which
you Conjure up together Things, Places, Persons, Times, that little thought of
meeting one another in this world. Now if a true Syllogism in Logic should but
flush in the Pan, they would disperse like wildfowl, to their several quarters:
You talk earnestly for a Reformation, but make a great many Cramp Quibbles
about the Remedies for healing our divisions, as if you had plundered a
Druggist, or culled the hardest names from the Gally-pots of an Apothecary's
Shop. But, Sir, to be short, I demand of you, that you plainly tell us in order
(though your grievances lie scattered up and down your Book, like the Sporades
or darkest specks in the Chaos) what you would have Reformed in the Church of
England, and to what Model you would have them Reformed.


Whig. I Will, Sir: And, first, for your sake I would have the Gouty Benefices
reduced to the Modicum of Meagre Vicarages, or that Lean Curats should have
more of the Fat Parsonages; if we be for Moderation in Reformation, why are we
immoderate for Revenues? but instead of that, nothing but laying Steeple upon
Steeple, like Pelion on Ossa, and such Riding to Constantine over hedge and
ditch for a thumping presentation!


Pamph. Ho! Pegasus! ho! what, is he broke loose again? Pray stop a little, and
let me tell you, Sir, That if all the Gentlemen of England would follow the
example of our good Constantine, (who refused the Impious request of your
Brethren, to make them a Lease of Bishops Lands for 99 years,) the consequence
would be this; That few men of Worth and Parts would be almost starved with
want, or ruined with discontent, whilst heavy Block-heads waddle with plenty.
But there are a sort of Mongrel Heteroclites of your Faction, that Gallop over
the head and shoulders of Simon Magus, into the Church doors, that they may
throw it out at the Windows; these make the inequality, by jumping over the
Barrecadoes of Oaths and Sacraments; who have found out a Salvo, with which if
they do but anoint their Mouths, they can take an Episcopal Oath, though hot as
melted Lead, without scalding their Chaps. But hark you, Sir! One of your
Friends at Sudbury was so deadly trepan'd the last Assizes at St. Edmunds-Bury,
that that Trade (since you are such an Advocate for Trading) is in danger to be
lost. But pray what makes you laugh?


Whig. Why, to think that you Churchmen should hazard such Substantial
Preferments, for such Circumstantial Fopperies, as Ceremonies are, as the Sign
of the Cross, the Surplice and Organs, etc.


Pamph. What say you to the Sign of the Cross in Baptism?


Whig. I say they may as well put a finger in the Child's Ear, in token that it
shall hereafter hearken diligently to the Word of God; or lay a little Salt
upon the Child's Tongue, in token that its Speech shall be seasoned with Salt;
as make an Airy Cross over its Forehead, in token that it shall confess a
Christ crucified.


Pamph. Good morrow, Mr. Udal, I thought you had been hanged fourscore years
ago, in token that you should not hereafter have talked so profanely; if I be
not mistaken, you may find a great many of your squirting Jests in his or
Penn's Writings: But how comes it to pass that you who at other times make the
Sign of the Cross such a stout overgrown humane Sacrament, such a huge
symbolical, mystical Ceremony, as to be more dreadful to the Saint, than
raw-head and bloody-bones should now make it only an airy vanishing Phantasm?
But I Will tell you a piece of news, Sir: I have been told, that when Sir William
Waller, that great Apostate-Gold-finder, burned the Picture of the Cross, that
His Majesty should say, That although he would not Worship it, yet he would not
Burn it: And all his good Subjects will tell you, that you should not contemn
and scoff at it: Why should it not be a token, that I should manfully fight
against sin, the world and the devil, under Christ's Banners; as when in the
late Wars pulling out the lappet of a Shirt, or some such device was a token
that your Dissenters should perfidiously fight under the Banners of a Rebel
against their Lawful Sovereign? You have had Reasons enough for the Ancient
use of the Sign of the Cross; but I will be bold to add, That because the
Church has retained it as a pious custom, in opposition to the scurrilous
Malice of Heathens, Jews and Mahometans, who would seem to affront the
Christians with that Sign; so ought the Church still to continue it, so long as
among your Dissenters, as you call them, there have been lately found
Dissenters Sayings.
that have denied to put their trust in a Crucified Savior. One word more of
this, and I have done: If symbolical signs and tokens will move your Anger, why
not (if they be Analogous) my Devotion? I do not think running for Fritters on
Shrove-Tuesday a symbol of the Christian Race, nor drawing Valentines in the
Ash-heap of Mortality: Yet I say again, that tokens or symbols that bear a true
Analogy, will stir, I hope, my Devotion, and, I fear, your Anger; for should I
point at your forehead with two fingers (and make Horns, as they call it,) you
would go near to hit a man a substantial Cuff for such a symbolical affront;
and although it did not make you a Cuckold, (any more than the Sign of the
Cross makes a man a Christian,) yet 'twould be a token that you shall hereafter
be ashamed to confess it. But go on to the next thing that must be Reformed, I
think you spoke of the Surplice.


Whig. Ay, I say it is strange that you Churchmen must have your
Summer-Ceremonies, and your Winter-Ceremonies; sometimes you are in White, and
then again in Black.


Pamph. Are not you in both, when you have a black and white Cap on? but I
thought you had been for variety, by the flourishing Harangues you make upon it
in your Preface; and besides you say, Let the Worshippers of Mahomet quarrel
about their Green and Red Turbants, may not a man agree with another, though
his suit be not of the same color? How is it that you so disagree with your
self? But I can tell you, Sir, that for all the Clamours against Symbolical
Colors, when the Green Ribond was made a note of distinction, to know those of
your Faction by; none of you ever spoke against it, although it was the color
worn by the Leaguers in France, and although such an Historian as you are,
cannot be ignorant of the great deflagration, and those bloody Murders that
happened in Constantinople for the Colors of Green and Blew under Justinian.
But now let us hear you Play upon the Organs.


Whig. Not for the World, they are both Jewish and Popish, and the proof for
them in Durantus's Rationale will not hold good from that Text of Scripture,
Let every thing that has Breath praise the Lord; for Pope Vitalian was the man
that glories first, to have taught mankind the art of worshipping God with a
Box of Whistles.


Pamph. They sound better than the prayers of a Sauce-box, that trumpets his
impertinences to Heaven through his Snout, of which we had good store when the
Trumpeters in Zion made a Drum of the Pulpit, to call the people out to fight
the Lord's Battles against his Anointed, in the days of the Sweetsingers of
Israel;

Whose frensies then were reconciled Hud.

With Drums and Rattles like a child.
I know the Chinese sing all in one Note, and the Turkese Amusical dispositions
show the Barbarity of their tempers in some cases; but that true Protestants
should serve God only with those tunes they whistle to their Horses, is the
strangest thing in the world; that they should think nothing so sprightly in
devotion, as that which Lulls their Brats asleep; Well, the beating a Hog's
Trough is as good for a Sow, as a pair of Organs for her Pigs; for extempore
singing or snivelling sounds better with them than orderly composures, that
will not be confined to any Rule in any thing else: But if Instrumental Music
be, as you fancy, so offensive to God on Earth, how come we to read of
Citharists and Harpers in Heaven, (...), having the Revel. 15. 2.
Harps of God? The whole Book of Psalms, so often used by Christ, is Sepher
Tehillim, a Book of Praises: And why may they not, now the Prophetic Part is
fulfilled, be sung with as joyful a noise as they were in the Temple before,
to which Christ himself in his flesh often resorted? I know no reason why
Organs should blow Popery into any man's head, we have had experience to the
contrary at home; for Histor. if the Reform. Part 1. page 326.
Rob. Festwood and John Marbeck, two Singing-men at Windsor, proved as Early
Protestants as any of their neighbors, for Festwood was Burned for it, and
Marbeck was the first that showed the way to compose an English Concordance:
The Reformed Churches abroad use them; and I dare lay you a wager you will find
a pair in the very Maiden Town of Dort, (which was never yet forced with your
Music of the Canon:) And now we are got again to Dort, let St. Austin, for old
acquaintance sake, give you a small sentence to teach you better manners for
the future: In his rebus (says he) quibus August. in Ep. Casulano.
nihil certi statuit divina Scriptura mos Populi Dei vel Instituta Majorum pro
Lege tenenda sunt, utique cavendum est, ne tempestate contentionis serenitas
charitatis obnubiletur. In those things concerning which divine Scripture
determines nothing certain, the custom of God's People, or the determinations
of our Ancestors are to be held for a Law.


Whig. I take you at your word, I stand to the customs of God's People, and I
cry with the Council of Nice, (...).


Pamph. And I Will take the words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 16. If any man among
you seems to be contentious ((...)) we have no such custom, nor the Churches
of God: And this he says after he had given the Corinthians a Rationale of the
Service and Ordinances he had delivered them; and for such Projectours as you
are, since you so often appeal to the Reformed Churches abroad; Hear what
Epist. Ded in N. T.
Beza says, Intolerabiles sunt omnino qui Novitatis studio vetustatem damnant,
sed ii quoque magnam reprehensionem merentur quibus nihil nisi vetustum sapit:
They are altogether intolerable that condemn all Antiquity out of a study of
Novelty; but they too deserve mightily to be blamed, who will admit of nothing
but what is very ancient. But, Sir, for my part, I Will scramble with you no
longer, but leave it to the Learned, who are longer winded than I am; and
besides, you have so many ridiculous scruples about the Circumstantials of Time
and Place, etc. That you seem rather to urge some of them for the sake of a
Jest, than for any Reason in them, lest any one Quibble in your Common Place
book should be lost, and not do the work of its Generation.


Whig. Ay, but, Sir, I Will be serious; My Conscience will not give me leave to
comply with these humane Inventions, though backed with the Authority of the
Supreme Magistrate, God Commands me to obey Authority; the same God Commands me
not to sin against my light; in some cases I am not bound to obey Authority,
but in no case am I allowed to act against my light: It Is very clear, that the
Magistrate has a Power to command; but not so clear, that he has a power to
determine things Indifferent, and make these determinations the conditions of
my enjoying the means of salvation. But it is very certain, that Conscientia
erronea ligat, licet non obligat, An erroneous Conscience, though it oblige me
not to act against what God has made a duty, yet it binds me up from ever
acting against its Convictions: And therefore it is safer to adhere to the
clearer side, and not to act against the decision of Conscience, in compliance
with a Command, which its uncertain whether it oblige or no.


Pamph. Here is the scope of all your Arguments, in your 6, 7, and 8 Chapters,
crowded up into this kind of Prosyllogism; should I trip up one of the
Propositions, down they would all tumble, like an House built of Cards, Trumps
and all; but we will take 'em off gently, one after another. We grant you that
you are in no case allowed to act against your Light: No, by no means so to
act, as to make that light darkness, which you do, if you be wilfully ignorant,
and blind; however, you say it is clear that the Magistrate has a Power to
Command: Many thanks to you for that, it is a Property of his that may be felt;
and that is more: But how is it not so clear, that he has a Power to determine
things Indifferent? why, the following Clause makes it obscure: And make these
determinations the conditions of my enjoying the means of salvation. Pray how,
or in what sense do you mean his making them the Conditions, etc. Suppose you
had a Trial for a Title to an Estate, because the Supreme Magistrate appoints
the time, place and persons for the Assizes, would those determinations be the
conditions of your enjoying the means, etc. not the immediate conditions
certainly, but the Evidence you can make, and the Letter of the Law. Now if you
will rather choose to be nonsuited, than comply with such determinations which
may be to your advantage, much good may it do you. Moreover, it is generally
believed, by all natural Philosophers, that a man may walk into a Church,
though it stands East and West, if all the doors be open; though some
Hypocondrical people would fancy they could not, and that the door is either
too little for their Noses, or their Noses too big for the Door. Now, Sir, you
will say, that Conscience, though erroneous, is not melancholy, and that the
cases we talk of are not Civil, but Ecclesiastical; therefore say you it is
certain, that Conscience, though false, obliges; but that it is uncertain
whether such Commands do, or no. But that your Conscience may not be erroneous,
we will prove they certainly do oblige.


Whig. If the Commands of a Father, or Master of a Family, do not in such
Circumstantials, for many reasons I have given; how then can such Commands of a
Supreme Magistrate, whose Dominions may be so large, that they cannot
punctually be observed? Suppose a strict Law were made at Paris, that every
particular Church in the Nation should commence their public Service on the
Lord's day, precisely at nine a clock, it is Mathematically certain, that some
would have done, and got half through their dinners, before others would be
half way in their devotions; they in the farthest Eastern Parts would have come
to their Amen, before those on the Calabrian Ocean would be at their Oremus.


Pamph. They would be pretty well out of the hearing and interrupting one
another, that is the comfort of it: If the Man in the Almanac, though pelted
with all the Signs of the Zodiac, had not brought a better Argument, I would
sentence him to be stuck in the Pillory, that his Noddle might be influenced
with rotten Eggs; and therefore keep your Mathematical Certainty for your
Sunday Pudding. But, Sir, though the Clock of a Family may sometimes go wrong,
it cannot go far; and therefore, I suppose, the Master of a Family may determine
a time by that clock for family-duty; ay, and many other Circumstantials too:
Nay, I fancy that he may enjoin his Family to abstain from Wine all Lent.


Whig. That would be a Breach of Christian Liberty.


Pamph. Was not that more a Breach of the Jewish Privileges, when the
Rechabites were commanded to drink no Wine, they, nor their sons for ever, by
their Father Jonadab? there lay no such obligation from the Law of Moses; yet
what says the Text, Jerem. 35. 18, 19. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of
Israel, Because ye have obeyed the Commandment of Jonadab your Father, and kept
all his Precepts, and done according to all that he has commanded you:
Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Jonadab the son of
Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.


Whig. But the consequence from the power of a Master of a Family, to the Civil
Magistrate's Power, is not very clear, and that by reason of the incapacity and
unfitness of the Matter, the bulkiness of the Aggregate; for as, etc.


Pamph. Away with these rumbling Similitudes, you draw but foisty Arguments
from such swelling words of vanity: I say the Supreme Magistrate, particularly
the King of England is better qualified to govern in all cases Civil and
Ecclesiastical in his Dominions, than any Master can be for domestic in his
Family; God has furnished him with means suitable to the greatness and variety
of his charge for Ecclesiastical affairs, Rex Angliae est persona mixta cum
Sacerdote, in the same sense that Constantine the Great vouched himself to be a
Bishop, and the Church of Christ acknowledged him: He is custos utriusque
Tabulae; And as he can command you to hold up your hand at the Bar of God's
Justice (whose Vicegerent he is) in case you break any one Commandment; so can
he command you to kneel before the Throne of Grace, in token of your Obedience:
So that indeed I grant you, that the power of a Master of a Family may not be
compared with that of the Supreme Magistrate; indeed if you look into the late
Rebellion, the Supreme Magistrate was made low enough: but if you look into the
Present State of England, you will find by Common, Civil, Canonical,
Apostolical, by all manner of Law, that our Sovereign Lord King Charles the
Second, is by the grace of God, in all Causes, and over all Persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil, Supreme Governor: Look into the late Rebellion, and
you will find that they were such scrupulous Buffoons as your self, that broke
the Boundaries of Order and Obedience, under the pretense of Reformation and
Conscience, and turned the Nation Topsy-turvy in Blood and Gore. I have
formerly shown what was their Reformation: As for their Consciences, they were
not very tender when they made none: you are mightily offended that such a
Tender Conscience should be thought a melancholy delusion, or a superstitious
qualm: But with what confidence are you so brisk upon that instance of David's
heart smiting him when he cut off Readiness skirt, when you are Page 375.
pleading for the Consciences of those Dissenters that cut off King Charles his
Head? You are merrily profane, when you say page 381. that you wonder that
among all the Apocryphal Epistles of our Savior to Agbarus, or Paul to Seneca,
that we meet with none of the Apostles to Nero: That whereas their Lord and
Master, either through the hurry of business had forgotten, or the littleness
of the things had neglected to settle his Churches, etc. That therefore they
humbly beseech his Imperial Majesty, that he would review and revise their
Religion, and such other mystical Ceremonies significant of Gospel Grace,
wherewith his well-known Piety could not but be intimately acquainted, etc.

And his Petitioners shall humbly pray, etc.

Sir, Had you drawn a Petition according to the strain and humor of those
Dissenters you plead for, it should have run thus:

That whereas their Lord and Master, whose Kingdom was not of this world, had
not left them Ammunition enough to settle his Churches, etc. That therefore they
humbly beseech his Protectorship to grant them the Militia of the Empire, the
Pretorian Bands, and to add such other things significant of Gospel-power,
wherewith, etc.

And his Petitioners shall heartily fight, etc.


Whig. Hark you, Sir! have you nothing to say to the Author of Julian the
Apostate?


Pamph. Yes, I suppose he is one of your disciples, and has learned both his
Loyalty and his Modesty from you; one would think that you had spit into his
mouth that very Complement, you, by the way of Similitude, pass upon the
Supreme Magistrate, Page 361. It was, say you, a Malicious Artifice of Julian
the Apostate, to erect the Images of the Heathen gods in the Forum, near his
own Statue, reducing hereby the Christians to this Dilemma, either to seem to
worship the Images, whilst they reverenced his Statue, or contemn their
Sovereign, by refusing to bow before the Images; into the same Straits would
the Masters of Ceremonies bring us; that either our Loyalty must argue us into
a Conformity to their Intentions, or Nonconformity shall be an interpretative
contempt of Authority. The Masters of Ceremonies bring you into these straits,
(as you call them.) Pray, by whose Authority? by the King's certainly; they
cannot do it without it: But why (though our Ceremonies can find no better
quarter than to be laid up with Heathenish Lumber) must such reflections pass
upon our Gracious Sovereign, as to bring him within the verge of a comparison
with Julian the Apostate? No wonder that his Royal Brother meets with no better
entertainment from such Insolent Scriblers; if they be not Confuted by that
wooden Syllogism, that stands upon three Propositions, at the end of the Town,
I may chance to have a Brush with them one of these days; in the mean time,
Sir, for your dainty Similitude: As Julian the Apostate, just so the Masters of
Ceremonies; As Judas betrayed his Master with a Kiss, so do you; As he brought
the Conscientious Multitude along with him, so do you; And as after the Sop
Satan entered into him, what then? why just so he became All-sop.

At this there fell a terrible Thunderclap, and dark and misty it grew on a
sudden, so that there was a great Consternation among the Fanatics, until at
last, in the midst of a great Circle that was environed around with a Greenish
Lambent-flame, arose the Ghost of A. A. C. and holding in his hand the Holy
League, the Covenant and the Association, all torn and shattered, he spoke to
them as follows:

Be calm! be still! your Pens and Swords throw by,
In vain you struggle with your destiny.
In vain you Plot, Contrive, Conspire, Combine;
Had you all Hearts, had you all Heads like mine,
You Will fail, you will fail, you will fail of your design.
From the Black Courts of Darkness now I come;
I heard the Good Old Cause receive her doom:
The Aching Ghosts of Rebels stood around,
And sharp despair did their sad shadows wound:
They pale with Envy grew, that they no more
Should skim over luscious Fogs of Civil Gore:
Then flamed with Wrath to hear their cursed Fame,
And in Red Letters read each blasted Name,
That their Ambitious deeds should ever be,
From Age to Age Branded with Infamy.
Go, Living Saints, to Carolina go,
To a Land that does with Liberty overflow.
Can England 's David have a Rebel Son?
That The Oak.
Tree saved him that punished Absalon.
But Awful peace, guarded with Laws, shall be
Great Britains strength to late posterity: And,
As when bright Beams pierced the dark Chaos through,
The unshap'd Mass did into order flow;
So mystic Plots discovered, do create
A lasting glory both to Church and State.
The glittering Temple swells above the Town,
That will go up, and Conventicles down.
St. Paul withstood St. Peter to the face,
He will confine him to his Ancient place;
And of his Prelates show a better Race.
Successive Heirs will fill the British Throne
Until the General Reformation;
Until again the dreadful Shiloh come,
And on the Rebel-world shall pass the Final Doom.
After this he Bounc'd like a Granado, and flew into a Thousand sparks, with
such a dreadful noise, that it immediately dissolved all the Visionary-frame,
and I awaked; and not finding my self in a proper place for sleep, went home to
bed; and so, my dear friend, a good night.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 9. lin. 7. for Lawyers, read Lawgivers. p. 23. 19. for Annals, r.
Annats. p. 38. l. 18. for six^^ eighty, r. sixty eight. p. 43. l. 16. for
Lurch't, r. Lood. ^ 43. l. 19. for alter all; r. alter; all -- p. 49. l. 24.
for Durel, r. Du-Moulin. p. 51. l. 3. for Moulinist, r. Mollinist. p. 60. in
the Margin, for Durel, r. Du-Moulin. p. 61. l. 1^ for Perk, r. Perch. p. 174.
l. 5. for one, r. our. p. 175. l. pe nult. for Bethlehem, r. Bethlehem 's. p.
209. l. 22. for Penns, r. Penri 's.


