Mr. PETER'S Last Report of the ENGLISH WARS, Occasioned by the importunity of
a Friend Pressing an Answer to Seven Quaeres.

Viz.
I. Why he was silent at the Surrender of Oxford. II. What he observed at
Worcester it being the last Town in the Kings hand. III. What were best to do
with the Army. IV. If he had any expedient for the present difference. V. What
his Thoughts were in relation to Foreign States. VI. How these late Mercies
and Conquests might be preserved and improved. VII. Why his name appears in so
many Books not without blots, and he never wipe them off.
Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Pope's Head Alley. 1646.

Mr. PETER'S Last Report of the English WARS.
SIR,
YOur importunity has prevailed, and I could wish my Answers to your Quaeres
might gain this with you that they are rather sent to please you then my
self, whose knowledge lies rather in the Hyssop on the wall then the Cedars of
Lebanon: I assure you I would now go home and know my self, and study it
thoroughly, Nam miser ille qui notus nimis omnibus ignotus moritur sibi.

First, In that you heard not from me upon the surrender of Oxford, I hear so
much of it on both ears, and the distance was so little from London, that I
forbore to report that to you, which you might have been an eyewitness of at
so little charge and trouble: only let me be your true informer, that you had
nothing committed then by ours, that had not its rise from integrity and
faithfulness to the State, accompanied with such skill, as the Lord was
pleased to dispense; and let me tell you, men upon the place (in such case) can
better judge, then lookers on afar off, I hope you will not lose by that
bargain in the end, though it seem for present an ill penniworth.

Secondly, For Worcester, I am sorry so little is spoken of it, where so much
worth and gallantry appeared, and indeed I cannot remember where I have seen
so much done in so short a time; where, when that valiant Commander of Horse
Colonel Whaley had done his duty, and with the help of Country forces had
blockt up part of the Town; four Regiments of foot under the command of
Colonel Rainborow came, and raised works within Pistol shot of their royal
Sconce and the City, the Enemy playing upon them with Case-shot out of Sakers
all the time, wherein Lieutenant Colonel Pride, and Lieut. Colonel Ewers had
a chief share; whereupon the Enemy accepts of those Propositions you have
seen: Master Richard Salwey a Member of the House who was of our Council in
this Work deserves well of his Country and the Kingdom for his wisdom and
faithfulness many ways: and truly I wish Colonel Rainborow a suitable
employment by Sea or Land, for both which God has especially fitted him,
foraine States would be proud of such a Servant: I Preached at Worcester at our
coming in, and afterward, and did observe a door open to the Gospel.

I am now fully satisfied with the Answer of my many many Petitions that I
might live to see this day, this blessed day, and the last town of the Enemies
taken: I am thinking whether to go a few days more in this Vale to admire
what I have seen upon Earth, and then dye, that I may praise him as he would
be praised, who has founded mercies for his servants, and brought forth
deliverance to miracle through Jesus Christ. I find our Soldiers generally in
the old form, rather wondering then boasting, admired by the Enemy for their
gallantry and Conduct.

Thirdly, Your demand about the disposing the Army, is not so proper for a
private Pen to engage in; yet this I may say, that other Nations in our
condition would think, if they looked round about them and within them, the
disbanding an Army (if trusty) ought not to be a work of have: when the seas
are down in England, I think the passage unto Ireland will be easier, and if
we can maintain a defensive war this Winter, I trust the Spring will invite
many over thither: only I wish the English a good Magazine of all things, and
that they would attend two things in the Irish war besides, viz. not to spend
time about Castles and Forts, but to become Master of the Field: and secondly,
to burn up the Enemies provisions every where. The wild Irish and the Indian
do not much differ, and therefore would be handled alike: yet I could tell you
a more excellent way; In the mean, if these faithful Commanders were in
Garrisons (without any design be it spoken) you have always an Army ready,
the private soldier will still run to his honest and well-known Commander;
yea, so firm they are, that if their Officer should be changed, I believe
those soldiers must be pressed to stay with others.

Briefly, this I say to your Question, that this Army was hardly gotten, and I
wish it may be as hardly disbanded; if you have no present employment, were I
persuaded that foreign threatenings were in earnest; I wish this Army might be
sent to encounter them, and teach Peasants to understand liberty, and I would
not doubt but to see good fruit of it soon, I would rather our men should live
upon their wine, then they upon our Beer: It is one of the great interests of
this State to keep war at distance: Fear not that Army whose Commanders
(like Samuel) can ask any County or Town where they have been whose, Ox or
Ass they have taken? never fewer complaints, not many men of such quality,
whose design is only to obey their Masters: viz. The Parliament, the
slighting the Army is their money, triumphant chariots would have broke our
necks.

Fourthly, Whereas you desire some expedient to the difference: I assure you
the question in hand: and the Lord walking in the clouds toward us, it is no
wonder we walk in the dark among our selves. And truly it wounds my soul,
when I think Ireland would perish, and England continue her misery through the
disagreement of ten or 20. learned men: but if you will pardon and pity my
folly, I will state the disease, and then we have half, won the cure. To omit
the three common enemies that befoole learned and unlearned, noble and ignoble,
Gentleman and Peasant, I mean the flesh, the world, and the devil. You shall
find our; First and maine mischief lies in our spirits, which are now made so
keen and thorny, that they cannot be touched but by a pair of iron gloves,
could we but conquer each others spirit, we should soon befoole the devil,
and his Instruments: to which end I could wish we that are Ministers might pray
together, if that cannot be, let us speak together, eat and drink together,
because if I mistake not, estrangement has boiled us up to jealousy and
hatred.

2. Let us much study, hold forth, and rejoice in what we agree, as please our
selves, and grieve others in what we differ, our animosities may content our
selves, but wrong the Gospel.

3. Let us remember England, as it was never conquered but by faction, so it
can never be ruled but by love; the same Last will not fit an English and a
Scottish foot, they come not suddenly to what they enjoy, and therefore should
give England a little breathing over what is propounded, It will be their mercy
to keep what they have, and our to be growing up to what we desire.

4. An evil lies in this, that we unwillingly drive on our enemies designs:
Barnevelsh laid his project upon an Arminian bottom, and so made Religion a
stalking horse to his Politic ends.

5. Let the present Church Government go on, and walk softly and tenderly,
let those that longed for it improve it, and valeat quantum valere potest: Let
others that are godly know it may help, at least to hew stone, and square
timber for a more glorious building, to bring from one extreamitie to another,
God uses his own media only, violence becomes not Saints: In Popish times
the Clergy had not the coercive power, but subjected the civil magistrate to
do their work; I wish the State keep a good bolt upon that door: I am
confident the chief means to greater an error will be by violence and
opposition, when slighted it dies. Coals blown get heat and strength,
neglected grow cold. I wish every one might be severely punished that spoke
against either Presbytery or Independencie till they could define that aright,
and distinguished about them and their ways, them I believe we stole hvee altum
silentium.

Lastly, men are not in their proper work, which excentrick motions produce
many things uncoucht: I need not particularize, but when I see the languishing
perishing conditions of many Counties, thorough want of preaching I must be
bold to say to wrangling is none of our proper work; I think we might do God
more service in Study and Pulpits, then in waiting at great men's doors, and
working them up to their selvish interests. I could add that we take causam
pro non causa, we put our troubles upon schismatics, and opinionists, and
never attend the true cause: There may shortly be a great change in the
Nether-Lands, but you shall find the cause not in the harmless Anabaptists,
whereof there are swarms, but in some Hispaniolized Statesmen.

Fifthly, Your demand of my thoughts of England in order to foreign States, I
answer with a wish, viz. That forthwith we might have some choice agents sent
out as two to Sweden, two to the Cantons our good friends, two to the
Netherlands, and so to other parts as we see cause, and these accompanied with
a Manifest of Gods gracious dealings with this State, letting them to know we
omitted this work in our misery lest our friends might fear us for beggars,
but now being upon an even foot with them, we let them know our condition, and
how ready we are to own them against a common enemy: every man in this Nation
pretending to soldiery upon good experience. This being done, and our Navey in
its true English beauty, I would not doubt but others may be as glad to know an
English man, as we desire acquaintance with them. And if our back-doore were
well shut at home, how might Euphrates be dried up; I mean the West Indies and
the East too offer themselves to our devotion. Let us still remember the
support of Trade is the strength of this Island, discountenance the Merchant,
and take beggary by the hand. This is the misery of England whilst others are
beat into slavery, they are apt to be complemented into it.

Other Kingdoms and Countries are therefore terrible to us, because we are so
little terrible to them: Were we not more effeminate then our Predecessors in
Queen Elizabeth's time, I know not why three Kingdoms should do less then
one; you see we can fight if we must, I dare undertake if you can find work
abroad, it will not be hard to find men: nay it were easy to find both, if
we were agreed at home: What you hear of a conjunction between the Prince of
Wales and his Lieutenant General the Duke of Lorrayne with some promises from
his Uncle Bavaria need not trouble you, the Danes and Saxons never mastered
this Island by power, but by our homebred distempers. To prevent those fears
let English men keep to their proper Interests, and Scots to theirs, and I
know not why we might not march into Bavaria and Lorrayne before they come unto
us, and make them pay all old Arreares. I must confess I am divided between
Ireland and the Palatinate, only I quiet my self in this that we may do both.

Sixthly, Touching the preserving and improving the Conquests and mercies: I
only commend unto you these few rules.

1. By the same means the mercy is gained it may be preserved, if men, yea
good men were isntrumental in the one, they must be in the other; confide when
you see reason to confide: thy friend and thy fathers friend put price upon, he
that loves you and your Country may be trusted to conserve what is won: to
which add praying, and believing, for in all these God has appeared: I would
as soon credit a garrison to a known honest godly English man, differing from
me in his opinion, as all France being most Catholic trust it self to their
Protestant Leaders.

2. Walk plainly in your Counsels, God needs no man's lies to carry on his
work. Commonly these Arcana Imperii and ruina populi, let your yea be yea, and
your nay nay. God preserves the simple: Do but observe the History of
Europe, and you shall find those admired deep set counsels of men mingled
with so much flesh, have proved but grass.

3. If England be now a conquered Kingdom, we cannot have much to beg of a
conquered enemy, and therefore I could wish all marks of slavery might be
taken off, and since God has invested us with our almost lost liberty, let it
be our care that after ages may not say we conquered our selves into a new
slavery.

4. Because not only our selves, but also the wisest of our late enemies
confess the influence of the City is such, that we could not have wanted it,
and therefore their highest design now is to make it royal, you may remember
how willing I was once to have made a match, my weakness was such that I did
not study whether both parties were well agreed, and my simplicity kept me from
thinking of a Corrivall, yet now I pray improve your Interests, and let London
know that if they think a Parliament sits the quieter by being so near them,
so (...) think when the Parliament doors are shut up (...) Westminster, their
shops will hardly stand open at London: If the clashing of swords cannot be
heard, yet death clinching up their windows by the increase of the plague
calls for something.

5. Justice will exalt and maintain a Nation, I wish they might be first
sharers in it, that first adventured their estates and lives; had the Citizens
remonstrated more about their debts due, and less about their wills, they
might had more thanks, and (it may be) by this time some might have kept
Orphans from their doors, that cry for the money lent to supply the States
use, he that will ride a free horse to death, may in time be spurring a dull
Jade to no purpose. And for distributive Justice, let it be impartial. Two
things may break the Axle-tree of any State, viz. First, Opposition to known
truths, or slighting that Religion in the purity of it, which we own in
mixtures, and innocent blood not wiped off by the hand of Justice. A State may
stand upon any frame of Government, if fastened together with Justice, Charity,
and Industry, the only upholders of that flourishing Neighbour-Nation the
Netherlands.

Lastly, Because England is devout, and Religion of one kind or another carries
most prevalency, and that this Nation acts generally upon religious
apprehensions, above any I know, therefore that which has been our wound must
be our cure (preaching and Preachers I mean) the Gentry must be base, and so
the Parliament unsupplyed of good members; the common people will worship any
dunghill-god, the City is full of black iniquity, if preaching be neglected:
how long therefore shall I entreat some three or four Itinerary Ministers in a
County? Evangelists went out before Churches were settled, how easily might the
Land be (in some measure) reduced to God, and their own civil Interests, if
provision was laid in of this kind? but you will object we have above nine
thousand parishes, and not a thousand able men: I answer, you see the need of
Itinerants, and secondly, Why may we not follow the practice of other Reformed
Churches? and gather up godly youths out of shops, and send them for
improvement somewhere, why not a College of Oxford set apart to that use? and
if men cannot answer the narrow examen of an Assembly, why might there not be a
Committee to judge of some competency in some men for the present to send out,
though they should fall short of Arts and Tongues? John Alasco was a Baron, yet
in Edward the sixts time, you may see what Church work he did: why not learned
godly Gentry, Lawyers, that might be spared some of them, physicians, etc.
employed this way? teaching their tenants were a better Trade, then racking of
Rents by some of our Gentry. How ripe have I found Herefordshire and
Worcestershire for the Gospel, and many other Counties? Help Lord!

To the Question concerning my self; I answer, I am at present upon a good
Study, ever how to want what the Lord is not willing to give: I am turning my
cheek to the smiter: I have been thinking to answer six or seven Pamphlets
that name me either enviously or disgracefully, but yet remain doubting. The
Lord rebuke Satan. I see (with Jeremy) though I neither borrow nor lend, etc.
yet this may be my portion. This I must say, if either in Doctrine or Practice
I have failed, the time is not yet wherein any Brother in a way of God has
dealt with me: and if my different judgment offend any, my Answer is, that
with much expense of money and time, with diligent inquiry into reformed
Churches, I have taken pains to satisfy my self, and remain now where I was
for substance fifteen years since, resolving by that experience to keep a
window open to more light and truth, though scoft and slighted; my care has
been to acquaint my self with the most learned and godly in the Country
where I travel, first I lived about six years near that famous Scotchman
Mr. John Forbes, with whom I traveled into Germany, and enjoyed him in much
love and sweetness constantly, from whom I never had but encouragement though we
differed in the way of our Churches. Learned Amesius breathed his last breath
into my bosom, who left his professorship in Friezland to live with me because
of my Churches Independency at Rotterdam, and charged me often, even to his
death, so to look to it, and if there were a way of publik worship in the
world, that God would own it was that: he was my Colleague and chosen Brother
to the Church where I was an unworthy Pastor: and I thank the Lord such a
Church it continues to this day; that truly I sli^^tly took up nothing in
that kind, nor did I los^^^^ my seven years being in New England, amongst those
faithful, learned, godly brethren, whose way of worship if we profess, it
will not be groundless when their Writings are examined. But to those Printed
Scribles against me I may provide shortly a more satisfactory Answer, where I
may plainly charge home untrue and unworthy passages upon the Authors; though I
know, Et facere and pati fortia Christianorum est. Now the good Lord who has
led Captivity captive for us, suodue us to himself, and grant that in these
tossing, tumbling, foaming Seas we depart not from our Principles of Reason,
Honor, Liberty, much less Religion; which is the Prayer of

SIR, Your Friend sine fuco, HVGH PETER'S.

FINIS.

