PET ITION OF THE INHABITANTS OF CY RENCESTER whose names are (...) subscribed.

Presented to His M aiestie at Oxford.

WITH HIS MAJESTY ES Answer thereunto.

Printed, by His MAJESTY'S Command, AT OXFORD, February 28. By LEONARD
LICHFIELD Printer to the University. 1642.

TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
The humble Petition of the Inhabitants of CYRENCESTER.
DREAD SOVEREIGN,
WE Your poor Subjects the Inhabitants of the miserable distressed
Cyrencester, having undergone all the heavy effects of Your Majesty's justly
incensed Army, do prostrate our selves at Your Majesty's feet, not to excuse,
or in the least measure to extenuate our ill-deservings. We acknowledge us
unexcusably faulty, but to appeal unto Your mercy, and to beg Your pardon,
That as we have been through all Your Kingdoms the first example of Your
justly deserved Rigor, and the terror thereof working its due effect upon all
others, to deter them from provoking Your like displeasure, we may remain
Your most remarkable object of Your mercy, the most glorious and resplendant
gemme of Your Crown. Oh, Sir, the God of Heaven has given You unto us our God
upon the earth. We have grievously sinned against him by our undutifull
carriage against You his Vicegerent. Behold us now lying before You,
acknowledging, and from our hearts detesting the foulenes of our offense, and
our selves for committing it. And most humbly beseeching Your Majesty in
imitation of that Divine virtue, the most lively Character of his Image in You,
to Pardon us, and to receive us into Your protection. In the assurance whereof,
we may securely return to, and abide at our several homes, begin to go on
in our former Trades and Occupations, and, by Gods good blessing upon us, in
them many hundreds of People of our Town and adjoining parts of the County,
who have no other livelihood, may again be set on work and releived, and we
may have the hope in time, upon our after care, to endeavor to express the
sincerity of our true return to the Duties of our Allegiance, to joye in the
recovery of Your wonted Favor, and all of us, all our lives long, and our
posterity after us, bound to acknowledge the height of Your mercy, to pray to
Almighty God to bless Your Majesty with all the happiness which he has
promised in his sacred word, to all that shall show mercy.

ANdrew Sollace. Row. Freeman. Robert Isles. Thomas Dutton. William Willis.
Edmund Freeman. William Tailor. George Stone. Amos Dansey. Virgill Crippes.
Thomas Gibbes. More Gwilliam. Edward Causton. William Chance. John Beaton.
Edmund Feribee. Michaell Sharp. William Groves. Thomas Man. John Portlocke.
John Batt. Richard Aucutt. Edward Prat. John Kerby. Thomas Tipping. John Petty.
James Armand. Thomas Maysey. Richard Matthew. John Flacher. Richard Sollace.
Thomas Man. Thomas Cartor. Edward Scovell. Richard Masters. John Francklin.
Walter Portlocks. Richard Evans. James Burge. Thomas Allen. Samuel Spencer.
Henry Webb. Richard Man. William Burge. Michaell Hartred. George Lawrence.


HIS MAJESTY'S GRACIOUS ANSWER TO the foregoing PETITION.
At the Court at Oxford the 25. day of February 1642.
HIS MAJESTY graciously accepts the submission of the Petitioners, and is
Himself sorry that the Rebellion and disloyalty of that place has brought so
great a measure of sufferings upon any of His Subjects; which was not in His
Majesty's power to prevent. He is well pleased that all the Inhabitants of that
Town of Cyrencester return safely to their Houses, and live securely in them,
from all violence by any of His Majesty's Soldiers, that the Trade and Wealth
of that place may (by Gods blessing) be again renewed. And His Majesty's Will
is, and does hereby give precise Order, that no violence or Injury be
henceforward offered by any of His Majesty's Garrison or Soldiers to the
Petitioners, or any the Inhabitants of Cyrencester, they demeaning themselves
with that duty and obedience to His Majesty's just and necessary Commands, as
the condition of the present time, and His Majesty's necessityes require. And
His Majesty's express Command is, That the Governor of Cyrencester for the
time being, and all other, His Majesty's Officers and Soldiers of that His
Garrison, take Order and conform themselves accordingly.

EDW. NICHOLAS.

FINIS.

