THE PETITION OF THE Roman Catholics TO THE RUMP-PARLIAMENT.

Published by the Care of M. M.

For general Satisfaction.

LONDON, Printed by T. N. for James Collins, at the Kings-Arms in
Ludgate Street. 1673.

To the Supreme Authority of this Nation, the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England.
The Humble Petition of the Roman Catholics.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners have long waited some happy leisure, when there might be
a Hearing allowed them of their many sad Pressures, the Weight whereof has
sunk them so ruinously low, That they are utterly disabled to discharge their
many Debts, make the least Provision for their Children, or Relieve themselves,
reduced to extreme necessities.

That even such of your Petitioners, as are Sequestered for Delinquency, Have
still comforted their Sorrows with this Hope, That at last they should
certainly be received to Mercy, since the General Votes for Composition of the
17th of March, 1648. seem clearly to imply them capable thereof, when the Rules
concerning them should be agreed upon.

That now the Wisdom of the Parliament, applying it self to establish the
People of this Commonwealth in a quiet and settled Condition, Your Petitioners
take up an humble confidence that they alone shall not be excluded from so
Universal a Benefit.

And therefore humbly pray, That the Laws and Proceedings concerning them may
be taken into Consideration, and such Clemency and Compassion used toward them
by Composition, or otherwise, as in the Judgment of this Honorable House may
consist with the Public Peace, and your Petitioners comfortable living in
their Native Country.

And they further humbly pray, That it would please the Parliament to vouchsafe
them the Permission of Clearing their Religion, from whatsoever may be
inconsistent with Government, Which will assuredly be done to full
satisfaction, If there may be a Committee appointed by this Honorable House, on
whom they may have the Privilege to attend.

And your Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

