THE PETITION Of the Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and others the
Inhabitants of the County and City of York, presented to the Honorable House of
Commons now assembled in Parliament.

Wherein ( inter alia)

Subscribed by the Lord Major and Aldermen of York, By the high Sheriff and
very many Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of good quality.

With the manner of their taking the Protestation, before they subscribed the
Petition.

LONDON, Printed for John Frank, and are to be sold at his Shop next door to
the Kings Head in Fleetstreet, 1642.

To the Honorable the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses assembled in
Parliament, The humble Petition of the Knights, Gentlemen, Freeholders, and
other the Inhabitants in the County and City of York,
Shows,
THat your Petitioners do with all than fullness acknowledge and resent the
benefit of those good Laws which you have already provided for us, as most
seasonable and precious fruits of your pious and prudent consultations, As also
of that most happy and reunited Peace betwixt us and Scotland, our Neighbor
Nation, and the blessed care you have lately taken both to relieve our
distressed Brethren in Ireland, and to put the Town of Hull (the chief strength
of our County) into such an hand, as for his integrity we have good cause to
conside in; As also to purge the House of Peers of the Prelates votes (a main
obstruction to your happy undertakings) And having received so much refreshment
from you in our so important Concernments, do take boldness to represent our
humble requests.

That your pious care for the further relief of our distressed Brethren in
Ireland, may be continued, and your wise resolutions thereupon put into speedy
execution.

That this whole Kingdom may speedily be put into a Military posture of
Defense both by Sea and Land.

That the Composition of Recusants (with which his Majesty rests satisfied)
being paid, the residue of their lands and goods forfeited by the Statute may
be disposed of, as well for the safety of defensible Ports and places in this
Kingdom, as also for settling and mayntaining necessary Guards over the houses
of papists and popishly affected persons.

That the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremaci^ may be impartially and speedily
tendered to all papists and popishly affected persons whatsoever, according to
the Statute in that case provided.

That the Laws against Priests and Jesuits may be fully executed, and that some
present course may be directed for the disarming and confining of papists to
their own houses, or else that some of the princiall and most dangerous
spirits of them in every County may be as caution for the peaceable deportment
of the ^est confined to the custody of trusty persons in some places of safety,
if to your wisdoms it shall seem meet. And the (...) may be deputed for these
services as a^e not to be s^^pected to use any forbearance therein. As also
that such as are convicted Recusants, some speedy course may be taken against
them, either by the present Laws in force, or otherwise as shall seem best to
your wisdoms, that they may not be left so full handed, and so readily prepared
upon all occasions to manage either their own, or the Designs of others, to
our so eminent and continual danger.

That the Votes of popish Peers and others coming in by proxy, being so
apparent a Grievance may be redressed, which are found not only prejudicial to
the wisest results of your consultations, but also affords them liberty and
opportunity to act and encourage the promoting the popish Cause in the Kingdom.

And because that to the making of a more succesfull passage to the
accomplishment of all these our so important concernments, it will be
especially available, that matters in Religion be chiefly regarded: We
therefore humbly desire that all such impediments as may hinder the progress
thereof may be removed.

Amongst which we rank in the first place scandalous Ministers, as also
places unprovided of such maintenance as is competent for persons of better
endowments. Humbly beseeching that for the remedy of both these, you will be
pleased to pursue your former pious intentions, as also that Ceremonial
burdens may be removed, and religion settled in such a way, that such as make
all conscience obediently to submit to Magistracy and civil authority in
every degree and latitude of it, both supreme and subordinate may not suffer
under any penalty merely and only for conscience sake.

And forasmuch as these our Counties have undergone very great damage by the
billeted soldiers which now they are less able to sustain then before, by
reason of the Manufactury trades of our Country daily decaying, which we
visibly discern not only tending much to the present impoverishing of a great
number of Families, whose maintenance and livelihood has been hitherto wholly
supported upon that Foundation, which being not prevented may prove to be of
dangerous Consequence, but also to the weakening of the estates of Farmers and
others, because the benefit of Woolls and other Commodities of our Country do
much depend upon the prospering of these foresaid Trades of Manufacture: We
therefore humbly desire that you would be pleased to direct such Course,
whereby considerable satisfaction may be made (for what rests unpaid) to such
of our Countries as have been by the said billeted souldies thus en^ammaged.

That this Honorable House would be pleased to move the well affected Lords,
and they and you both join in supplication to his Majesty, that his Majesty
would discover, and nominate who those evil Councillors were that advised to
those unparalall'd breaches of the prviledges of Parliament in charching those
worthy members in so illegal a way, and that were any occasion so long to
remorate the relief of our distressed brethren in Ireland, to the end they may
be brought to condign punishment: And in case his Majesty shall not declare
who they be, that then you your selves would be pleased to endeavor to find out
and declare who in your judgment have been the Contrivers and Fomentors of
those evil counsels.

And being confidently assured of your re^dinesse to answer our desires, as in
other things, so especially to further the Military posture of the Kingdom, we
humbly tender it to your consideration, that for the speedy safety of our own
Country, both against any homebred Commotion or foreign invasion, we are
ready and willing at our own charge for three Months next ensuing to
maintain and billet three hundred of our bond of Horse, and three thousand of
our private Train-bond of foot, in some most convenient places of the several
Ridings of our said County (concerning which we have more particularly
expressed our intendments in a schedule hereunto annexed) to be in readiness
upon all occasions, if in your wisdoms it shall be approved of: And if so our
most humble desire is, the way may receive Countenance and confirmation by some
Order from your honorable House.

And lastly, that such things may be archieved as are worthy of the excellent
wisdoms and painful labors of such noble instruments, whom unto our great
rejoicing of heart we evidently discern to be for faithfully and
indefatigably studious for the public weal of this Nation: We therefore for
the better accomplishment of your Honorable endeavors, and for our more
complete enjoyment of the precious fruits thereof, Most humbly desire that the
high Court of Parliament of the infringement of the liberties whereof we are
very sensible, and which in all your just and honorable ways we shall be
ready to our utmost abilities to assist against the enemies of God, the King
and State) may in all the power and prviledges of it be inviolably maintained.

And your Petitioners shall daily pray, etc.
Subscribed by Sir Tho. Gower Sheriff. Sir Math. Boynton. Sir Tho. Farrefaxe.
Sir Io. Bourchier. Sir William Fairefaxe. Sir Jo. Ramsden. Sir Arthur Robinson.
Sir Tho. Gower senior. Sir Hugh Bethell. Sir Jo. Savile. Sir Marmaduke
Langdale. Sir Edward Rodes. Sir Richard Darlye. Sir Jo. Goodricke, and ali. Mil.


And by 50. Esquires, and diverse Gentlemen, and others of quality, and by
Edmund Cooper, Lord Major of the City of York, and by the Aldermen of that
City.

Before the subscription to which Petition the High Sheriff first took the
Protestation, and all the Knights and Gentlemen in order after him, and
afterward agreed, (if the dangers increased, and the Parliament so approved
thereof) to Muster 3000. Foot, and 300. Horse, to be kept for six weeks in
such parts of that County as might most conduce for the safety thereof, and
sent the proposition thereof unto the Parliament by Hen. Bethell Esquire, who
was employed by that County to present this Petition to the house of Commons,
and two more, one to his Majesty, and another to the House of Peers.

FINIS.

