Infant Baptism VINDICATED FROM THE EXCEPTIONS OF Mr. Thomas Grantham.

By SAM. PETTO, Minister of the Gospel in SUDBURY.

Acts 2. 39. For the Promise is unto you, and to your Children.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Ed. Giles, Bookseller in Norwich, and T.
Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns in Cheapside, 1691.

TO THE Christian Reader.
THere is such Scripture-Evidence for Infant Baptism, that intelligent,
unprejudiced Men may find what Mr. Grantham says against my Defense of it, a
Reply, and no Answer; Presumption, and no Proof.

The Practice of that Person which withdrew from our Communion, was such as (if
admitted) is destructive to all Gospel of Church Order, and so is no slight
Occasion to write upon: But I had other weighty Matters ensuing, which
necessitated my Writing; and Mr. Grantham (not being meddled with) can show none
such for his Replying.

As to what he says to me, I shall very briefly answer, being still of the
same Mind that I was of* Let all be measured by the Rule of the Word: And that
thou may have Understanding therein, shall be the Prayer of him, who is

Thine to serve thee In the Gospel, Sam. Petto.
October. 12. 1687.
Infant Baptism VINDICATED.
INfants were diversified by the Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. and so
still may be by the Will of Christ, all not being the Seed of Abraham.

My Argument, page 3. was Ad Hominem, as appears there, and by my Postscript;
and says only, [That Infant Baptism is not expressly forbidden, therefore
either it is lawful, or else Scripture-Consequences must be admitted,] which is
undeniable. It was occasioned by my being told in a Conference, that there
should be express Scripture in such a Case; therefore it was not my Mistake.
Neither is my Argument answered by saying, as he does, p. 2. [There is no
express Scripture for Infant Baptism, therefore Infant Baptism may be omitted.]
This is false; for there is no express Scripture for Women's Receiving the
Lord's Supper, and diverse other things, yet they may not be omitted, because by
Scripture-Consequences, rightly deduced, they are required. And hence I can
subscribe to every Word which he mentions of that Author of our own, p. 2. and
to Tertullian's Rule; I am of the same Mind; there is nothing therein against
my Argument, and I can easily withstand any Innovation which is not expressly
forbidden in Scripture; for I think things may be commanded or forbidden by
good Scripture-Consequence: And it was and is my Judgment, that all in the
Worship of God must be commanded there, either expressly, or by necessary
Consequence.

Thus Mr. Grantham, at his first beginning with me, and frequently after, by a
multitude of impertinent Words, would make his incautelous Reader believe, that
I bring Scriptures for one purpose, which are brought for another. As, p. 4. I
bring Act. 8. 3. and 9. 1. to prove that to be a Churchmember is, in
Scripture, to be a Disciple; whereas he would have it believed, that I thereby
would immediately prove Infants Disciples, p. 4. So the Scriptures by which I
prove, p. 5. that the Name [Holy] is given to Father, Son and Spirit, as, 1
Pet. 1. 15. Lev. 19. 2. and 20. 7. Heb. 7. 26, etc. he, p. 5, 6, 7. would make
the Reader believe, that I bring them immediately to prove Infants discipled.
And the like use he makes, p. 6, 7. of the Scriptures whereby I prove, p. 5.
that the Name [Holy] is given to the Church and its Members. So that, either
from great Ignorance or Inadvertency, he may blush that he beats the Air, and
abuses me.

As to my first Argument, That some Infants are discipled so as to have the
Name of Trinity upon them.

At last, he denies my Antecedent; saying, That no Infants are discipled at
all, much less so as to have the Name of Father, Son and Spirit upon them.

In Answer, I evidenced it various ways: They are said to be [holy,] and so are
discipled: God has put his Name upon them before their Baptism, though it is
solemnly signalized and declared after, when they are baptized.

His first Reason, p. 3. from Act. 10. 28. is answered in my Book, p. 49, 50,
51. I grant there is no distinction between Jew and Gentile, but those of both
who are visibly in Covenant (whether Adult, or Infants) are more clean than
others who are out of Covenant; and are a holy People, differenced from others,
if not by Qualitative, yet by Relative Holiness in Church State, Romans 11. 16. 1
Pet. 2. 9. as of old, and nothing here against it.

As to his second Reason, I say, Men, by the Word of God, are to be
instrumental to bring Men within the Covenant, which extends to their Seed;
therefore also to make Infants Disciples. Some may be made Disciples without
actual teaching, or learning; as we put Children to School, who at first learn
nothing. Learned Spanhemius well observes, (...), non significat solum docere,
sed Discipulos facere, and aequipollet, (...), Joh. 4. 2. Dub. Evang. Par. 3.
p. 93. giving Reasons for it.

I do not say, that all who are under Means for Instruction (though
Persecutors) are Disciples, but all who are in the School of Christ's Church;
of which, some are Infants. The Infant Seed of Believing Jews were in it (by
Covenant, Genesis 17. and so, when that was spoken, Matthew. 28. 19. (not being
broken off till afterward;) and so also the Seed of Believing Gentiles.

I proved some Infants to be Disciples, from Act. 15. 10. He denies that every
one were Disciples whom they would have circumcised, yet proves it not. But all
which the Apostle blames them for imposing Circumcision practically upon, are
called by him Disciples, and these were principally Infants, Genesis 17. 10, 11,
12. Will he say, they were not blamed for laying Circumcision upon Infants? His
Instance of Infant-Sprinkling is not parallel, because Infant is not a Genus
for all that we would have baptized.

I proved, some Infants had the Name of the Trinity upon them, 1 Cor. 7. 14.
they are [holy.] This Holiness he takes for being Legitimate, but answers not
what I said against it; nor does he prove all to be holy that are legitimate.

[Else,] i. e. Say some, If one be not a Believer; or [else,] if the Unbeliever
were not sanctified to or by the Believer, then the Children were unclean, not
illegitimate: For where there is no Sanctification of one, to or by the other,
but both are Infidels or Unbelievers, yet the Children are legitimate, Heb. 13.
4. are no Bastards. The being [holy] then must be by a Separation unto God.

There is no Good in Sin, but it becomes of humbling and abasing use to the
Soul, and so accidentally is turned by God to Good to it; which I suppose Mr.
C. intends, by its being sanctified to. And this is no new Doctrine, but as
old as the Days of Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25, 26. and Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 13.

And if all Infants be in a visible State of Salvation by the Covenant of
Grace, as Mr. Grantham says they are, p. 19. then they have the Name of the
Trinity upon them, for the Covenant is a part of his Name, and so they are
discipled; and what hinders their being baptized? Does not Matthew. 28. 19
command it?

He thinks then they ought to partake of the Lord's Table. But are they as
capable of Self-Examination, and of that Eating and Drinking, and Spiritual
Growth, as they are of being washed?

As to my second Argument, from some Infants being visibly or externally in the
Covenant made with Abraham:

Obj. He premiseth, that the Covenant of Grace with Abraham was Twenty four
Years before Circumcision: Others under it, as Salah, -- not so circumcised:
And others were, to whom the Covenant of Grace seems to have the least extent,
as Ishmael, Esau, Bondmen, -- p. 9.

Then if by Covenant, Mr. P. means the Covenant of Circumcision and Infants of
Christians, or the Covenant of Grace, Genesis 12. he denies the Minor: But if
Infants be in a visible State of Salvation, yet he denies the Consequence of
the Major, that they are to be baptized, p. 10.

Ans 1. The Covenant of Grace was made and published before Abraham, Genesis 3.
15. and those might have Salvation by it through Christ; as Salah, Arphaxad. --
Then the Church was Domestical, but no such clear Declaration of the Subjects,
and their Church State and Privilege, in a Community of many Families for
public Worship and Ordinances; no such Sign or Token of the Covenant for
Infants, till Circumcision was granted, Genesis 17. And after that Grant to
Abraham, all good Men that could were obliged to join with him, or his Seed, as
the only Church in such Order then in the World, as they would enjoy such
Church-Privileges: Witness his Servants which were Professors, v. 13. Genesis 18.
19. and the Proselytes, Exodus 12. 48, 49. Isa. 56. 3, 6.

2. I mean that Covenant which Circumcision was a Token of, Genesis 17. v. 7, to
15.

Indeed, This is the same Covenant, for substance, with that, Genesis 12. but in a
new Edition; with a Declaration of the ancient Subjects, and an Enlargement of
Privileges, as aforesaid, which expressly extended to the Infant Seed, Genesis 17.
7, 9, 12 In the same Covenant and Breath, Abraham himself, and also his Seed,
are commanded to be circumcised; and that as a Token of the Covenant between
God and him, v. 9, 10, 11. He and his Seed then were in the same Covenant, and
Circumcision was of the same use to him and others: And that Covenant was not
only for Circumcision and the Land of Canaan, but that (at least visibly) God
would be a God to them; and there is a double Assurance thereof, v. 7, 8. and
that clearly was a Covenant of Grace, and is still continuing; for it was to
him a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11.

It is then his gross Mistake, to think that the Covenant, Genesis 12. is one, and
that, Genesis 17. another distinctione. Indeed, the Sign Circumcision is ceased,
but the Covenant is not repealed, as to the Subject of it, Infants: This cannot
be proved. It Is true, some did forfeit their visible, external Interest in the
Covenant, as Ishmael and Esau; and so may Professors of the Gospel also, after
duly baptized: But they were so in Covenant before, as it had been broken if
the Token had been neglected, or not applied, Genesis 17. 14.

3. At last, he denies the Consequence of the Major; which is to say, That
though some Infants be visibly or externally in the Covenant which God made
with Abraham, yet by the Will of Christ they are not to be baptized.

I am glad to hear Men of this Persuasion confess Infants within that Covenant;
which indeed they must do, or else show a Repeal of that Covenant, as to the
Subjects of it, which I think they can never prove. But I am sorry this Man
grants Infants being in that Covenant upon such a corrupt, unscriptural
Principle, viz. That all Infants are in a visible State of Salvation by the
Covenant of Grace; he must say by the Covenant with Abraham, if he deny my
Major, which is grounded upon that; and it will be impossible for him to prove
all Infants in the World to be the Seed of Abraham, that in the very mentioning
of it importing a Limitation.

The ground of his Denial is, p. 10. upon a great Mistake, viz. that the
Covenant of Grace must be abstracted from the Covenant of Circumcision; whereas
that which Circumcision is annexed to (as I have proved) is the Covenant of
Grace, only in a new Edition. Also he says, [That never required the
Application of any Ceremony to Infants, as a Pledge of it, either before the
Law, or as it is now established -- in the Gospel.]

All which is false; for Circumcision was such a Pledge and Token of the
Covenant, to be applied to Infants, above Four hundred Years before the Law,
Gal. 3. 17. and so Baptism under the Gospel, Act. 2. 38, 39. for that is
commanded upon that Ground and Encouragement, that the Promise is to them; and
that is there to a double Subject [You Repenters, and your Seed,] and so to
Infants, and so they are commanded to be baptized. All that are under the
Ground and Encouragement unto the Duty of being baptized, are obliged to the
Duty; and some Infants are under that, for the Promise is to them.

Genesis 17. speaks not expressly of Baptism, but it commands the Keeping the
Covenant by applying the Token of it, which now is not Circumcision, but
Baptism; and so commands that even to Infants, seeing they are in the
Covenant, as aforesaid; and there is no Scripture-Warrant to delay the applying
that first Token of it after Opportunity is offered. If it were limited (as
Circumcision was) to the Eighth Day, it might be delayed till then, but now may
be applied before. The Females were incapable, wanting the part, and yet were
deemed circumcised in the Males, for all Israel are called the Circumcision:
Which answers his p. 9, 10, 11, 12.

It still runs there in his Head, that all I say is brought forthwith to prove
Infant Baptism; whereas I prove other Mediums in order to it. Thus, p. 8. I
mention Heb. 10. 16, 17. only to prove Remission of Sins to be a great Blessing
of the Covenant: He, p. 11. dreams that I must mean it of Infants.

So I mention the Second Commandment, as requiring the observing
Gospel-Institutions, as Baptism after the alteration of the Sign, as of old it
required Circumcision: He fancieth, that I produce it presently to prove
Infant Baptism.

So I, p. 41. mention Matthew. 16. 18. Romans 16. 16, 1 Cor. 12. 27. etc. to prove
that the Church is Christ's: He, p. 13. conceiteth, that I would hereby prove
Infants visibly Christ's; which I do by other Mediums. And here he talks that
Infants may be saved who were never baptized, which was not there my Business.

I am weary of his Impertinencies, but hope that by serious reading my Book,
any judicious Person will have enough there to answer him.

Abraham had an Ecclesiastical Seed, even of Infants, Genesis 17. The Infant Seed
of Jews were broken off with their Parents, from external Interest in, and
Privilege by the Covenant, Romans 11. unless he can prove the Infants remained in
Covenant still.

The Seed of Believers are visibly under the Promise, the Word of Faith, as the
Seed of others are not, and so are of the Faith.] I see nothing to invalidate
what I said thereof.

I said, Infants Interest in the Covenant, Genesis 17. is not cut off.

Instead of proving a Repeal, and the Cutting them off, without which, all that
he or others say is nothing, he replieth,

Obj. 1. Infants had as good Right to the Covenant of Grace before
Circumcision, and have the same Right now, v. 17, 18.

Ans. And what if they had, and have it? That is for me, not against me. But,
under favor, Circumcision was a new Privilege, which Infants had not before,
Genesis 17.

However, this does not prove them cut off from any, but the contrary.

Obj. 2. No Person's Right to Circumcision did arise out of the Covenant of
Grace, but it did only issue from the Command of God, p. 17.

Ans. 1. Here is no Syllable to prove that Infant-Interest in the Covenant,
Genesis 17. is cut off: Some Infants certainly had it, and so must still, unless
there be a Repeal.

2. The Command is express to all the Seed of Abraham, to keep the Covenant by
applying the Token: And Infants are expressly concerned in that Command, Genesis
17. 9, 10, 11, 12. and so all Infants within that Covenant are under that
Command still, unless cut off. It Is true, the Sign of Circumcision is changed,
but the Covenant is the same, and the Subject of it the same: So that whether
the Right arises from the Covenant, or from the Command, or both, it matters
not; all his Seed, Infants and all in it, by the Command, are to pass under the
Sign: And Circumcision then being a Token of the Covenant, the Right to it must
arise from the Covenant, although a Command was the Direction for applying the
Sign.

Obj. 3. As Circumcision did not give Abraham' s Seed an Interest in the
Covenant of Grace, so the Abrogation did not take that Interest from them: He
instanceth in the delay of it to Moses his Child, the Omission Forty Years in
the Wilderness: -- Infants now have no part in the Covenant of Circumcision,
yet they lost nothing by it. And then he speaks of the Typical Covenant of
Circumcision being made void, p. 17, 18.

Ans. 1. Who says that Circumcision did give them Interest in the Covenant of
Grace? Rather a being in that Covenant gave Interest in Circumcision, which was
a Token of it. Moses his delaylaying of Circumcision was his Sin, Exodus 4. 24,
25, 26. and had like to have cost him his Life; and Israel's Omission of it was
their Sin. And is it no Loss, in Mr. Grantham's Account, to be cut off from
External Privileges, unless Men be wholly cut off from the Covenant of Grace,
and the Salvation thereof? Is it nothing for God to say, Loami? The Taking away
Circumcision was a Mercy, the Lord giving Baptism in lieu of it; but if he had
taken away that, and all Church-Privilege, and External Covenant Interest also,
from Infants, which once they had, it must needs be a great Loss, an
unspeakable Disadvantage, a sore Judgment.

2. Now he declares that Covenant which Circumcision did belong to, void, and
distinguished from the Covenant of Grace, and calls it a Typical Covenant:
But not one Syllable of Scripture-Evidence for any such thing: We must believe
it, if he will, because ipse dixit. Here he should have proved a Repeal of that
Covenant with Abraham; and not having done this, he has done nothing. I
believe that the Covenant, Genesis 17. wherein twice God declares himself a God
to the Seed of Abraham, v. 7, 8. the Sign whereof, Circumcision, Abraham
received, as a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. must needs be a
Covenant of Grace, no Typical Covenant, nor void; for that Righteousness was
not of a Covenant only for Canaan, but of Grace, for Eternal Life. And that
Abraham received it as a Sign of one Covenant, and his Seed of another, can
never be proved: The contrary is plain, viz. that both had it by the same
Command and Covenant, Genesis 17. 9, 10, 11.

But now Mr. Grantham, p. 19, 20, etc. finds a Medium by a new Position, viz.

Posit. That all Infants (as such) are in a Visible State of Salvation by the
Covenant of Grace, and so are of the Universal Church of God, and cannot be put
out of that blessed State, till by their voluntary departure from God, by
choosing sinful Ways, they destroy themselves.

Ans. If this were true, one would think that all Infants, without exception,
might be baptized, being so in the Covenant of Grace, and of the Church; for
then they are made Disciples, and so are expressly commanded to be baptized,
Matthew. 28. 19.

I hope Mr. Barret or some other will examine this Position, I shall not now
insist long upon it. If never so many Infants be in a State of Salvation, or be
saved, this is not against my Principle of Infant Baptism: I would not diminish
the number of saved Ones; however, I think this to be a false, unscriptural
Position.

Obj. He tells us of five Demonstrations, p. 20, to 24. but all of them come
to one poor Argument from the Covenant of Grace, Genesis 3. 15. which he thinks
was made with all Mankind, with the whole World.

Ans. 1. That all Mankind, or the whole World, is this Seed of the Woman with
whom the Covenant of Grace was made, is altogether without Proof; and so all
his Demonstrations are wholly groundless. Let him but form an Argument from
Genesis 3. 15. that is universal, and any may see it will have a Non sequitur.

The utmost here said is, that a Seed of the Woman, or some of her Seed, should
be saved; but it is not said, All the Woman's Seed, as such, should be saved.
His Position should be his Conclusion of all his Demonstrations* viz. That all
Infants (as such) are in a visible State of Salvation by the Covenant of Grace.
But such a Conclusion has no Footing in, no Countenance from this Text, not so
much as by Consequence. I think I have better than this for Infant Baptism; and
I might say as well, that all their Seed have the Spirit poured out upon them,
and the Word in their Mouth, Isa. 44. 3. and 59. 21.

The truth is, Genesis 3. 15. comes in as a Threatening of Punishment or Severity
against the Serpent, (as any observing Eye may see,) yet implying a Promise of
Mercy, attainable by some sinning Men, through Christ, a Seed of the Woman.
Until Adam did take hold of that Promise by Faith in that Seed, Christ, he
remained out of Covenant, as others, Ephesians. 2. 8, 12. When Adam was actually
and personally admitted into the Covenant of Grace, yet it was not as a common,
public Person, and Head of that Covenant, representing all his Seed, as he was
before his Fall a Head of the Covenant of Nature; for then Adam's After-Sins
against the Covenant would have been imputed to all his Seed, as his former
were, against the Covenant of Works, Romans 5. 12, etc. v. 20. --

Now every individual Man was personally to be in Covenant; and if he derived
external Privilege, it was only to his next or immediate Seed.

Hence, if Adam's Infant Seed might have outward Privilege by being his
Posterity, (or any before Abraham,) yet if any of them after rejected the
Covenant, (as Cain did,) they cast themselves out of that external Privilege,
and their Infant Seed with them. So in after Generations, Hagar, and Ishmael
her Seed were cast out, and Esau and his, the Israelites and theirs, Romans 11.
and those were Strangers to the Covenants, Ephesians. 2. 12. See also Psalm. 37. 28.

I know not that Adam and Eve (two Persons) made a Church: Let Mr. Grantham
prove it. But that Promise laid a Foundation for the Erecting a Visible Church
afterward.

If Adam's Family was the Church, (as you say,) and the whole World, or all
Mankind that then was (and so his Infant Seed) were Members of it, yet Cain and
his Seed were soon rejected; notwithstanding which, many Persons believing in
that Seed, Christ, were so saved in after Generations, through that Promise.
But that all Infants of rejected Cain, Ishmael, or Esau were in a visible State
of Salvation, and of the Visible Church, or that all dying in Infancy are
certainly saved, appears not, Genesis 3. 15. Mr. Grantham asserting, it is
Presumption without Proof.

2. That Genesis 3. 15. mentions a Seed of the Serpent, which is part of the
World, as well as the Seed of the Woman, which the Covenant of Grace extends
to; and hence this Text which he alleges is exclusive of some, and so
confuteth his Demonstration. For if there be in it another opposite Seed, then
all Mankind, or the whole World, cannot be comprised in the Seed of the Woman,
who are under this Promise. Will he say, the Seed of the Serpent are visibly in
a State of Salvation, by the Covenant of Grace: Or that they are no part of the
World?

3. Only those are this Seed of the Woman, under this Covenant or Promise, who
have Enmity against the Serpent, and such Power over him, as to bruise his
Head: And this is exclusive of others.

For that is expressly the Qualification of the Seed of the Woman here intended:
Yea, the whole of the Promise which here extends unto any of Mankind is, Genesis
3. 15. I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and
her Seed; it shall bruise thy Head; the following Words concern the Serpent,
viz. his bruising his Heel. So then, none else are this Seed of the Woman, or
visibly in a State of Salvation, by this Covenant, but such in whom is found
that Enmity against the Serpent, so as to conflict with, and prevail against
him. Therefore this [Seed of the Woman] can be only Christ, 1 John 3. 8. Heb.
2. 14, 15. and such as believe in him; for, 1 John 5. 4. This is the Victory,
-- even our Faith. Hence the whole World cannot be here intended.

If whole Mankind, yea, all Infants were that Seed of the Woman, then all
Infants have Enmity against the Serpent, and then they are capable of, yea have
Love to God, and Faith in him, and so may be baptized.

It is the Covenant which I called the great Charter of Heaven, viz. of the God
of Heaven: And as others, by denying Infants Interest therein, do take from it,
so let him take heed of adding to it.

A POSTSCRIPT.
THE foregoing Answer to Mr. Grantham should have been published soon after its
Date, 1687. with Mr. Firmin's, if his had not been out before he expected; and
it is at the desire of some Friends, that now it comes forth.

He intimates, p. 9. that Salah, Heber, etc. lived after Genesis 17. and were not
circumcised, nor had Obligation to Circumcision.

But this is more than he knows, seeing so little is revealed to us of the way
of their Worship in that Day. And it seems to be false, because Abraham then
was declared the Father of many Nations, v. 5. And so Believers of other
Nations were then his Seed, and obliged, if some lawful Impediment hindered not.

However, this is certain, that believing Gentiles in Gospel Times are graffed
into, or interested in the same Covenant that was made with Abraham, Genesis 17.
and his Seed; the same Olive which the Jews were broken off from, Romans 11. 11,
to 27. And as of old they were circumcised, not merely by virtue of a Command,
but as a Token of the Covenant, Genesis 17. 14. hence all under that Covenant that
could, were to submit to it, and that as a Mark of Distinction; for they were
distinguished from others by Circumcision: Even so it is now as to Baptism.

And whereas Mr. Grantham denies that the Covenant, Genesis 17. is a
Gospel Covenant, or a Covenant of Grace,

This is his gross Error; for the Apostle proves Justification in
Gospel Times to be by Grace from this Covenant with Abraham, Romans 4. 1, 2, 3,
4, 16, 17.

This is the very Ground which his Argument is built upon, viz. That we under
the Gospel are justified in the same way that Abraham was, and therefore by
Grace: By the Promise, and not by the Law. If this could be denied, all his
Arguing were vain and false.

Now that Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. which Circumcision did belong to, is
that which his Argument is bottomed upon, as is evident, Romans 4. 16. Therefore
it is of Faith, that it might be by Grace. -- How does he prove that? V. 17. As
it is written, I have made thee a Father of many Nations -- Now it is very
observable, that this is quoted cut of Genesis 17. 4, 5. and it is no where else
in foregoing Editions of the Covenant: It is not found in Genesis 12. nor in Genesis
15. therefore that, Genesis 17. was a Gospel Covenant, and not ceased.

Does Mr. Grantham think that the Apostle would seek to prove our Justification
by an abrogated Covenant, and a legal one too, as he would have this be?

I might prove it a Gospel Covenant from his calling Circumcision a Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, Romans 4. 11. and there is no Syllable in the
Institution, declaring it to be of one Use to Abraham, and of another to other
Persons.

Also, From his setting this Promise to Abraham, in opposition to the Law, Romans
4. 13, 14. it is contradistinguished from that, as elsewhere, Gal. 3. 17. This
evidenceth it to be a Covenant of Grace, and still in force; and if for
Justification, then also for External Privileges to the Subjects of it.

And once more from Genesis 17. 7, 8. where twice he promises to be [their God]
which is the great Blessing of the new Covenant, Heb 8. 10.

What is objected to make it a legal Covenant, as that Circumcision made Men
Debtors to the whole Law, etc. is vain.

For either it speaks of it in the Sense of the False Prophets, who urge
Circumcision -- for Justification and Salvation: And thus if Men should urge
any Duty, even Baptism, upon such a legal Ground, it would make them Debtors to
the whole Law. Or it imports, that neither Circumcision, nor any Works of the
Law, do profit, unless all be performed; for the Law promised nothing but upon
perfect Obedience, Gal. 3. 10. Romans 10. 5.

As to Genesis 3. 15. It makes no mention of Infants, much less of all of them.
What Share they have in a Promise, must be deduced from other Texts, not from
this. Will he say, that [Seed] and [Infants,] or [all Infants,] are synonymous?
Here no more is said of all Infants being the Seed of the Woman, than of some
of them being the Seed of the Serpent.

I shall only add, that if Mr. Grantham should reply so as I be convinced that
the substance of what I have here written be not Truth, then I intend a
Retractation: But if I be silent, it may be concluded that I do not account him
worth the Answering.

A Catalogue of Books, Printed for, and are to be Sold by Edward Giles,
Bookseller in Norwich, near the Marketplace.
SEveral Discourses concerning Actual Providence.

A Word in Season.

Defensive Armor against four of Satan's most fiery Darts.

Sermons upon the whole 1st and 2d Chapter of Canticles.

Thirteen Sermons upon several useful Subjects. All published by John Collings.
D. D. of Norwich.

The Way of the Spirit in bringing Souls to Christ.

The Glory of Christ set forth, with the Necessity of Faith: In several
Sermons. Both by Mr. Thomas Allen, late Pastor of a Church at Norwich.

Enoch's Walk with God and Christ, a Christian's Gain. By Mr. Timothy Armitage,
late Minister at Norwich.

A Discourse of the Preciousness of Christ, and of the Preciousness of Faith.

Precious Promises the Portion of Overcomers.

Sermons on five several useful Subjects. All by Mr. John Longher, Minister in
Norfolk.

The Saint's Ebenezer. By Mr. Francis English, late Minister in Norwich.

Directions to spell English right.

The History of the Protestant Reformation, as it was begun by Luther.

The dead Saints speaking: Being a Sermon preached upon the Death of Mr.
Newcomb, of Deadham in Essex.

The English Presbyterian.

The Miracles of Christ.

The ordinary Matter of Prayer, drawn into Questions and Answers.

Two Treatises: The first, Of Rejoicing in the Lord Jesus in all Cases and
Conditions. The second, Of a Christian's Hope in Heaven, and Freedom from
Condemnation by Christ. Both by Mr. Robert Asty late Minister of Jesus Christ
in Norwich.

Obedience to Magistrates: Recommended in a Sermon preached September the 9th,
1683. being the Thanksgiving-Day for His Majesty's Deliverance. By Jonathan
Clapham, Rector of Wramplingham in Norfolk.

A Present for Youth, and an Example for the Aged: Two Discourses; one, Of
Spiritual Blessings; the other, That God has an high Account of the least
Grace in the Saints. By Mr. John Cromwell, late Pastor of a Church of Christ in
Norwich.

Infant Baptism of Christ's Appointment. By Mr. Samuel Petto, Minister of the
Gospel in Sudbury in Suffolk.

Of the Conversion of Sinners to God, in Christ; the Necessity, Nature, Means
and Signs of it: With a Concluding Speech to the Unconverted.

An Answer to Mr. Thomas Grantham's Book, called A Dialogue between the Baptist
and Presbyterian. Both by Martin Finch, Pastor of a Church of Christ in Norwich.

Sincerity: Or, The Upright Man's Walk to Heaven: Delivered in several Sermons
in the Parish Church of St. Michael, in Long-stratten, in Norfolk. By James
Oldfield, late Minister there.

Alexipharmacon Spirituale: Being a Defensative against the Poison and Sting of
Death: Or, The Great Expedient how to make the Bed of the Grave so easy, that
we may lie down in Peace, and take our Rest. By Samuel Snowden, Minister of the
Gospel at Newton in Norfolk.

Christ set forth: In several Sermons upon the 17th Chapter to the Hebrews. By
Mr. Robert Ottee, late Pastor to a Congregation in Beckles in Suffolk.

Sacramental Discourses on several select Subjects. To which is added, A
Discourse of the Life of Faith. By Christopher Amarett, Minister of the Gospel
in Norfolk.

A Discovery of Audacious Insolence against the Doctrine of the Church of
England, vented in a malicious Pamphlet, published against the Presbyterians,
by Thomas Grantham: Together with a Poem thereon. And a Postscript, wherein
some of the Citizens of Norwich are more particularly concerned and cautioned.

FINIS.

