THE Revelation Unvailed: OR, An Essay toward the Discovering

I. When many Scripture Prophesies had their Accomplishment, and turned into
History. II. What are now Fulfilling. III. What rest still to be Fulfilled,
with a guess at the time of them.
WITH An APPENDIX, PROVING, That Pagan Rome was not Babylon, Rev. 17. and that
the Jews shall be Converted.

Dan. 12. 4. Many shall run to and fro, and Knowledge shall be increased. By
SAMVEL PETTO, Minister of the Gospel at Sudbury in Suffolk.

London, Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow in the Poultry, MDCXCIII.

THE PREFACE.
IT is a Duty of high Concernment unto Christians to be searching the
Scriptures, Joh. 5. 39. one part as well as another, all being given by Divine
Inspiration, and profitable to high and glorious Ends. The last Prophetical
Book would never have obtained the Name and Title of Revelation, if an
understanding of the Mind and Will of God therein had been unattainable. Nor
would there ever have been such a precious Promise in the Front of it, Rev. 1.
3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this Prophecy,
if it had been un-intelligible. Who should share in this Blessedness, if none
could arrive at the Knowledge of what they Read?

Neither should any take Discouragement for this search, because some have been
mistaken in their Computations of time; for they may as well reject the Study
of other Scriptures on that account, seeing many Wise and Learned Men have been
grossly mistaken about great Matters of Eaith, or Doctrines of the Gospel.

Indeed the Enquiry is the more necessary, that at last the Truth may be found
out. I am not peremptory in fixing the time, but offer different Epocha's with
the Grounds, and let these or the Event determine which is the Truth: And
besides the Mystical Numbers, there are other Signs of the times; as, the
sleepiness of Virgins may speak that the coming of the Bridegroom is not far
off, Mat. 25. 1, etc. and some Events may discover what are next to follow, as
some former Seals opened, tell us what were yet to come, and some Trumpets
sounding, tell us which are next to sound.

Also know that there are other Matters besides the times yet to come to be
enquired after, even what is already past; that we may discern what an
answerableness there have been in Events in the several Ages to what is
contained in the Prophesies; which is indeed the great Scope and Design of this
Discourse to give a discovery of.

Here we may see how Prophesies have been turned into History. And there is
enough in this to recompense all the labor of any serious Observer and
Enquirer, and to fill him abundantly with Admiration.

Here is Matter not only knowable, but of great importance to be known, for
receivers of the Mark of the Beast in the forehead or hand, openly or secretly,
are severely threatened, Rev. 14. 9, 10. They shall drink of the Wine of the
Wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture, and shall be tormented with
fire and brimstone for ever.

A Discovery of the Enemies of the Church I accounted necessary, else what
followed would not have been Established.

I confidently conclude the Pope to be the second Two-horned Beast, Rev. 13.
11. who is the Giver of this Mark, and so the least Compliance with him as such
is very perilous and desperately dangerous. That Mark may not only be what I
have particularly mentioned, but may extend to some other Act or Badge,
Tessera, Sign of Token which he gives of their belonging to him.

As to the First Beast, Rev. 13. 1. I think him not to be the Pope or Seventh
Head, but another persecuting Beast as I have evinced. Herein I confess I
differ from other Interpreters, yet I account it the Truth, and this may be a
salvo for their supposed mistakes about the Mystical Numbers; some of them
might be righter in their Computations as to the End, than themselves were
aware of, two things (which I have proved) being considered.

1. That the Epoch of the 42 Months and 1260 Days, is to be fetched from a [
Persecution] of the first Ten-horned Crowned Beast, Rev. 13. 1, 5. Not from the
Pope, nor from any [ Apostacy] of his, or other Romish Corruptions; some of
which were too early to begin those Days with, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7. and others too
late, if they were to Commence from the very first Moment of time when Rome
lost the Essentials of a true Church, and turned into the Whore of Babylon.

2. That the 42 Months and 1260 Days are not expressive of the whole time,
either of the Beasts continuance or Dominion: It is a great mistake to think
that immediately after the expiration of those Days, the Beast must be
destroyed, or the Churches Trouble come to its End. It Is true, the Sackcloth or
Wilderness-state then ended; but after that, the Witnesses having finished
their Testimony, there a is Witness-killing War, and the Death-state of the
Witnesses, and their Resurrection ensues, before the reign of the Beast comes
to an end, Rev. 11. v. 7. to 15.

As to the 2300 Days, Dan. 8. 14. I think they are not Prophetical Days, i. e.
Years, but Natural Days; not only because expressed by Evenings and Mornings,
v. 26. but because they are limited and confined to the little Horn which
grows on the Hee-goat, v. 8. which is declared to be the King of Grecia, v.
21. And so that Littlehorn was Antiochus Epiphanes, who did grow out thence,
as, v. 9. in the latter time (not of the World, but) of the Four Kingdoms which
sprang from the Grecians, or which that was split into, as, v. 23. And this
Antiochus did take away the daily Sacrifice, and cast down the Sanctuary, v.
11, 12. And it being asked, How long it should be till that was cleansed, v.
13. The aforesaid days are given as the Answer, v. 14. And sutably was the
Event, according to Josephus and the Maccabees, which may be esteemed as other
humane Histories, though not as Scripture. For from Antiochus first Persecution
in his own person in the 143 Year of the Greeks to his Death in the 149 Tear,
is about that time, 1 Maccab. 1. 20, 21. and 1 Macc. 6. 16.

Or from Menelaus, who intended to Revolt to the Religion of the Greeks, and
had a License from Antiochus, to Erect a place in Jerusalem in the 142 Year, to
the time of cleansing the Sanctuary in the 148 Year, is about 2300 Days,
Joseph. lib. 12. c. 6. 1 Maccab. 4. 41, 43, 52.

In vain therefore do many perplex themselves, seeking the expiration of these
2300 Days in the times of the New Testament.

And if they were so many Years, yet they could not begin before the Vision it
self, which has its first Date at the Ram, Dan. 8. 3. noting the Kings of
Media and Persia, v. 20. and the first Year of Cyrus was about 528 Years before
Christ; nor indeed could they Commence before that little Horn Antiochus did
take away the daily Sacrifice, and tread down the Sanctuary, v. 13, 14. about
Ann. 167. before the Nativity of Christ, and the residue must come after, and
thus would not expire till about Ann. 2133. But I conclude, that those 2300
Days did begin and end with Antiochus.

I would not absolutely determine that the Conversion of the Jews will be
before the Fall of Rome; but offer some Reasons for it.

This seems plain, that the Jews will not return to their own Land, or be
called till the Resurrection of the Witnesses: For as the time, times and half,
and 1260 Days, so the three Days and half of the Witnesses lying dead, are all
of them times of the Gentiles, Rev. 11. 2, 3, 9. and it is expressly said, Luke
21. 24. They shall fall by the edge of the Sword, and shall be led away Captive
into all Nations, and Jerusalem shall be trodden down; How long? [ until the
times of the Gentiles be fulfilled]. And they are not fulfilled till the Death
of the Witnesses is over, seeing the Gentiles hold them under their death.

If the Tenth part that falls at the Witnesses rising or ascending, should
not be Rome, but another of the Ten Horns (as some would have it) then seeing
there is but one blow more after that Triumph, Rev. 19. 1, 2, etc. Why may not
Rome be the Babylon that comes into Remembrance at the Seventh Vial? let the
Event determine.

I do not pretend to immediate Revelation, or such a Spirit of Prediction for
the foretelling things to come; but only compare Scripture with Scripture. I
did compose this Ann. 1665. and see no Cause yet for Variation in the
Substance; only now I have much abbreviated it, with a few Alterations, and a
little Addition especially as to the Number of the Beast; and this Review ^ath
added much to my Confirmation and Satisfaction in these things. The Day of the
Lord is near, let us exercise Faith in Prayer, that if Jesus Christ should come
at Midnight, yet we may be always found watching.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. OF the general Scope of the Revelation and Enemies of the Church,
Page 1 Chap. II. Of the Ten-horned Crowned Beast, Rev. 13. 1. Not the Pope, p.
8 Chap. III. Of the Two-horned Beast, the Pope, Rev. 13. 11, p. 21 Chap. IV. Of
the Little Horn, p. 37 Chap. V. Of the first rising of the Ten-horned Beast, p.
39 Chap. VI. Of the Epoch of the Mystical Numbers, 42 Months and 1260 Days, p.
50 Chap. VII. Of what ensues the End of the 1260 Days; Of the Witnesses Death
and Resurrection, p. 68 Chap. VIII. Of the Seven Vials, that they are not all
under the Seventh Trumpet, p. 91 Chap. IX. Of the Vials, and how many are
already poured out, p. 98 A Conclusion of what was unaccomplished, Anno 1680.
p. 127
An Appendix, Showing,
I. That Pagan Rome was not the First Beast, nor Mystical Babylon, Rev. 17. p.
145 II. That the 1000 Years did not begin at Constantine the Great. p. 155 III.
That the Restoration and Conversion of the Jews and Ten Tribes, is still to be
Expected. p. 156
THE Revelation unvailed, etc.
CHAP. I. Of the general scope of the Revelation, and the Enemies of the
Church, especially the Dragon.
IT is a singular demonstration of the Love of Christ to his Church, that he
has vouchsafed the Book of the Revelation, which affords not only useful
Moral Observations, but ^rophetic^^ Conclusions of the great Events from (...)
days of John until the end of all things; Rev. 1. v 1, 3. It is called [ a
Prophecy] of what was shortly to come to pass, and that until the general
Resurrection; Rev. 20. v. 10, 11, 12. when jesus shall sit on his great white
Throne, and the dead, small and great, shall be judged according to their works.

Here is a Prediction of the state and condition, of actions and passions,
doings and sufferings both of the Church and People of God, and also of their
Enemies during that whole time.

And note there are,

1. Seven Seals, Rev. 6. six of which lasted during the time of Pagan
Emperors, till after Anno 300. See Mr. Mede. And the seventh delivered it self
into 2. Seven Trumpets, Rev. 8. and 9. Some of which began to sound Judgment
against the Roman Empire before Ann. 400. 3. Seven Vials or l^^t Plagues* Rev.
15. and 16. and all other dispensations are for time reducible to some of
these.
That the Roman State or Empire is the chief boundary of all these matters, is
evident, seeing the description undeniably agrees to that, and ^o no ^o other
Place or State in the World; for Rome was that great City, Rev. 17. v. 18*
which was built upon seven Hills or Mountains, v. 9. and had seven heads, seven
several supreme Governments, v. 10 [five of which were fallen] in the days of
John, viz. 1. Kings; 2. Consul^; 3. Tribunes; 4. Decem-vi^i; 5. Dictators, and
it is said [one is] viz. 6. Caesar's or Emperors. And another was yet to come,
viz. 7. Popes: And in that Territory were the ten Horns or Kings, viz. that
after received power as Kings, which in the days of John they had not.

The principal Enemies here described are four; 1. A Dragon, Rev. 12. 3. 2. A
tenhorned Beast, Rev. 13. 1. 3. A two-horned Beast, Rev. 13. 11. ^. A Whore,
Rev. 17.

Seven Heads and ten Horns the Dragon had, and so the Beast crowned, and upon
the Beast the Who^e rides, Rev. 17. 7. and therefore all of them belong to the
Roman Empire.

The Church till after Ann. 300. is deciphered by a Woman clothed with the Sun,
Rev. 12. 1. and then the red Dragon was her grand Enemy, v. 3.

Afterward she is described under the notion of two Witnesses, Rev. 11. and of
144000 sealed ones, Rev. 7. and 14. 1. and then her great Enemies were the
first and second Beast and the Whore, Rev. 13 and 17.

The grand Opposite to the true Church, is [ the Whore of Mystical Babylon]*
which therefore must be the corrupt Church of Rome, Rev. c. 17. v. 1, to 6. For
who else can these Characters agree to? Who else did sit upon many Waters, with
whom the Kings of the Earth committed Spiritual Fornication? Is the Mother of
Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, and drunk with the Blood of the Saints?
Who else has sat upon the Scarlet-colored Beast with seven Heads and ten
Horns?

Yea it is expressly said, v. 18. The Woman (...) the great City which reigns
over the Kings of the Earth; which could not in the days of John be asserted of
any other in the World but only the City of Rome, and so the Romish Church is
here intended.

For the right understanding or clearing of these Prophetical Mysteries, I
shall lay down diverse Rules* with the proof of the (...).

Rule 1. That [the Dragon] notifieth Pagan Rome persecuting, or such as are not
professedly Christian.

As a Key to a considerable part of the Prophecy, I take [ Dragon] throughout
the Revelation, for Satan (...) i^ and by Paganish Power, or not Christian. It
cannot be the Devil himself for the description here of his seven Heads and ten
Horns, Rev. 12. 3. We have otherwise expounded of Instruments of Satan Rev. 17.
9, 10. (as Ezekiel. 29 3. Jer. 51. v. 34.) and it aptly agrees to Heathen Rome,
when there were [ seven Crowns] (Emblems of Majesty, Supreme Power and
Sovereignty) and these upon the heads. Satan acted like a Dragon by fierce and
cruel Persecutions against the Church under Ethnic Emperors before Ann. 300.
and not long after the Man-child Christ (not personally considered, but
mystically in his Church and Gospel-administrations) was brought forth (by his
Captain General Constatine the Great) notwithstanding all Pagan attempts to
destroy him, or hinder turning from Paganism to Christianity. And several acts
or works of the Dragon or Paganish Powers are mentioned. As

1. A Dragon War with Michael, i. e. with Jesus Christ, whilst the Empire was
Pagan, Rev. 12. v. 7. And there was War in Heaven, Michael and his Angels, and
the Dragon and his Angels.

This War is before the rising of the Beast, and before the 1260 days begin, as
appears in that he had but seven Crowns, and these upon the Heads, v. 3.
whereas upon the Beast are ten Crowns, and these upon the Horns, Rev. 13. 1.
and in that in this War the Dragon is overcome, and cast out, or down, so as
his place is no more found in Heaven, Rev. 12. 7, 8. whereas, had he been then
turned Beast, he would have been a Conqueror, Rev. 13. 7* It was given to him
to make War with the Saints, and to overcome them, and should after have had
the same place in Heaven as before. It is therefore a War that casts the
Dragon down from his Imperial Throne and Headship, not from his acting in Horns
of the Beast that is intended. It ushereth in a great Triumph for the erecting
or seting up at present another Kingdom, Rev. 12. 10. Now is come Salvation and
Strength, and the Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ, for the
accuser of our Brethren is cast down -- Whereas such a Triumph is inconsistent
with the Sackcloth Wilderness-state of the 1260 days, and cannot be during the
Reign of the Beast, or till those days are ended, and the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11. 15.

This War and Triumph is before the Woe to the Inhabiters of the Earth and Sea,
Rev. 12. v. 12. i. e. probably before the first and second Trumpets which fall
upon the Earth and Sea, Rev. 8. v. 7, 8. and so before the 7th Seal, v. 1, 2.
and before the safe sealing, Rev. 7. v. 2, 3.

Therefore this Dragon-War was that between Constantine the Great, and the
Pagans, wherein he had a glorious Victory over Maxentius, Maximinianus and
Lict^ius, and this admirably agrees with, or answers to the sixth Seal, Rev.
6 12. to the end: And the rather, because the Dragon was enraged at his being
cast down, Rev. 12. 12. knowing that he had but a short time; for but one Pagan
more, viz. Julian, was ever advanced to the enjoyment of the Imperial Throne,
and he ruled but two or three years (some say less) a very short time*

Neither does the mentioning a flying into the Wilderness 1260 days before this
War, v. 6, 7. argue that the War is after; For, often things are inserted by
way of anticipation, and that mentioned in a former place, which was done
after; as diverse matters, Rev. 11. are not in time before those, Rev. 12. and
here is a special reason for it in the Case in hand: For having asserted that
the Dragon watched to destroy the Man-child, and yet he was brought forth, and
was caught up to God, and to his Throne, i. e. had safety, power, eminent
exaltation, and yet the Woman flies into the Wilderness for so long a time, v.
4, 5, 6. A Question arises,

How all this comes to pass? and how after such advanceme^^ she comes into
the Wilderness?

He answers, by declaring, that there is a War wherein Michael overcomes the
Dragon, and so the Woman the Church has advancement; but the Dragon being
enraged raises a Persecution, and drives the Woman into the Wilderness, v.
13, 14. (and so she was not there before) and it is [into her place] i. e. into
the place which God had prepared for her, no necessity of its implying that she
had been in that place before. And let it be observed what the provocation was,
to that Persecution; (...). 13. And when the Dragon saw that he was cast unto
the Earth, he persecuted the Woman that brought sorth the Man-child. Which
argues, that this casting down the Dragon from his Imperial Seat, and the
bringing forth the Manchild by Constantine, were fresh in memory, and not many
hundred years before, as they must be, if this War were toward the end of the
1260 days, as some would have it.

And seeing this War was before the rising of the Beast, and seeing the going
into the Wilderness, which next ensued Michael's Victory over the Dragon, is
that going into the Wilderness for a time, times and half, v. 7, 1^, 14. Hence
that going into the Wilderness for 1260 days, is the going into the Wilderness
for a time, times, and half a time; or these are the same measure of time.

2. A Dragon, or Pagan Persecution (after the Empire became a Beast) driving
the Church into the Wilderness, Rev. 12. v. 13. When the Dragon saw that he was
cast to the Earth, he persecured the Woman.

The Dragon now persecuted the Church, not by a Headship which he was already
cast down from, but in the form of Crowned Horns of the Beast, diverse of which
at first were Paganish, as the Goths, Vandals, etc. And let it be observed,
that they then did not give their Power to the second Beast the Pope (who was
not then up) by way of professed subjection either to him, or to the Christian
Religion.

3. A Dragon flood cast out after the Woman the Church, Rev. 12. 15. A
multitude of Pagans, as well as Errors, which were dried up, that She was not
drowned thereby.

4. A New Dragon War raised upon this, against a Remnant of the purest
Worshippers, Rev. 12. 17. I shall it to Consideration, whether this was at the
next Persecution by the Horns, after the Woman was in the Wilderness, and the
Flood was over; or by the Sarracens and Turks, who overrun the Eastern
Churches and raised Persecutions there, and although they own God, yet it is in
so carnal a way, as they deny him by their Religion, and not so much as
professing Christianity may be deemed Paganish, though not professedly Pagans.

Thus we see the work of the Dragon against the Church, both before the 1260
days, and in that time.

5. A Dragon Combination, as one Partner at the Battle of Armageddon, Rev. 16.
13. Where Dragon, I think* is especially Turkish Power and Infidels, and so is
distinguished from the Beast and false Prophet; and the issue as to the Dragon,
is, Rev. 20. That he is bound 1000 Years, i* e. restrained from former
Persecutions, and at last is utterly destroyed, v. 10.

CHAP. II. Of the Ten Horned Crowned Beast, Rev. 13. 1.
IT is impossible to regulate our Knowledge in these Prophetical Matters, or
our ensuing Practice without rectified Apprehensions, in what state the Roman
Empire must be considered, when it became a Beast.

I cannot concur with an eminent Writer, in thinking the first ^east, Rev. 13.
1. to be [ the Roman Catholic Visible Church*]

For I cannot find that the claim of Universal Churchship, was first before the
claim of Universal Supremacy or Headship, to make a second Beast. Nor do the
other Characters, v. 3. 5, 7. agree to that.

If that were the first Beast, then who is the Whore that rides upon the
Beast, Rev. 17. 3, 7. Surely that is the pretended Roman Catholic Church, and
so that cannot be the Beast that is ridden upon. Nor is the Church one of the
eight Kings or seven Heads, v. 11. and so cannot be the first Beast.

Nor is this first Beast Rome, as under Pagan Emperors. For then it had but
seven Crowns, and these upon the Heads, Rev. 12. 3. Whereas this first Beast
has Ten Crowns, and these upon the Horns, Rev. 13. ^ Because the Ten Horns
assumed a Supremacy and Sovereignty (which Crowns are Emblems of) to
themselves. And this Beast is the Dragons Successor, v. 2. and received a
deadly wound in one of his Heads, v. 3. Whereas although ^aganism was wounded
by Const^^^^ne the Great, yet the sixth Head of Emperors was not wounded, much
less unto Death during the Dragon or Pagan State; it was (...) this Beast, nor
wounded until the (...) were upon the Horns; nor did Pagan Emperors continue
forty two Months, as this Beast does, Rev. 13. 5.

Nor is the Pope the first Beast. I am persuaded that the accounting him so
has caused diverse mistakes in the matters of the Revelation, as seeking the
E^ocha of the Prophetical days in him, which should be found in another, as
this first Beast. I grant that the Pope is the second two Horned Beast, Rev.
13. 11, 12. and Antichristian; but I humbly conceive, that there was a first
Antichristian persecuting Beast, up above two hundred years before the second
Beast arose, and so before the Pope became the two horned Beast, and seventh
Head.

Take my Notion under this Rule.

Rule 2. That the first ten horned Crowned Beast is a Civil State of the Roman
Empire, as broken or divided into ten persecuting Kingdoms.

For 1. The first Beast is distinct from the two horned Beast; or these are two
distinct Beasts, and not barely a double Power Temporal and Ecclesiastical of
the same Beast: Here are many Notes of Distinction. They have a different
manner of rising. One [ out of the Sea,] Rev. 13. 1. the Other [ out of the
Earth,] v. 11. the former is wounded in one of his Heads, v. 3. the latter is
another Beast, v. 1. 11, 14. they are differing in Shape, the first has ten
Horns Crowned, v. 1. the second has two Horns, v. 11. Nay, the second Beast
exercises all the Power of the first Beast, and that before him, i. e. before
the first Beast, and therefore they are distinct, yet some part of the time
exist together, i. e. the second Beast is up before the first is down, else it
could not be [before him:] And hence it cannot be the same Beast, considered as
wounded as the first Beast, and as healed as the second Beast: For, how could
the second Beast, as healed, exercise the Power of the first Beast before him
as wounded? Seeing the wounded State, as well as that before the wound is past,
when the healing time comes, and so it could not be [before him] if after the
second Beast were up, the first were not up also. How can one act before
another, if both be not up together, as distinct each from other, even still in
some respects? And hence it is evident, that it cannot be limited only to a
double Power of the same Beast; seeing whatsoever Power the first Beast has,
the same the second has also; (and so the first is in some degree subjected to
the second) if the first Beast did exercise Temporal Power, then so did the
second also; for, the second exercises not only some, but all the Power of the
first Beast, v. 12. From all which it is evident, that they are two distinct
Beasts, and that therefore the first Beast cannot be the Pope or seventh Head.
For, there are but seven Heads in all, Rev. 13. 1. Chap* 17. 3, 9. And if the
Pope be the first Beast and seventh Head, how can another distinct Beast come
after and exercise all the Power of the first without making eight Heads? And
who should that second Beast be after Popes or seventh Head, if the Pope be the
first Beast?

2. He to whom the Dragon resigned or gave his Power, Throne and great
Authority about the time of Crowning the Horns, he is the first Beast, Rev. 13.
1. Upon his Horns ten Crowns. And v. 2. The Dragon gave him his Power, and his
Seat and great Authority.

Now the Pope had not from the Dragon ( i. e. from Pagan Rome) his Throne,
Power or Military Forces, nor great Authority, he had the same Seat before, and
at Crowning the Horns, and therefore the Pope is not the first Beast, but the
Crowned Horns, who had these, as Alaricus.

3. That which was Head of the Roman Empire, after the rising of the first
Beast, received a deadly wound, which afterward was healed, Rev. 13. 1, 2, 3. I
saw one of [his] i. e. of the Beasts Heads -- wounded as it were unto Death. It
was then one of the first Beasts Heads that was wounded, and so in his time,
after he was up.

And therefore the Pope cannot be the first Beast, or the seventh Head then,
for the Head of ^opes (as it was not up so early, as the Crowning of the Horns,
so) did not receive a deadly wound, he was rather in a rising than a falling
posture thence forward.

But there was a manifest wound, in the sixth Head of Emperors by Alaricus
about Ann. 410. and others afterward, till about Ann. 475. in Augustulus; that
wound was so great, that there were no Emperors in the West, or at Rome, till
Charles the Great, about Ann. 800. when the wound was after a sort healed
again, yet it had not the extent of the former Empire. The manner and occasion
take thus.

Alaricus took Rome, and set up a Mock Emperor, that he might bring the
Majesty of the Imperial Scepter into Contempt and Derision, he proclaimed
Emperor One, whose Name was Attalus, and the same day they carried him up and
down the Streets in the habit of an Emperor, and the next day they made him
serve as a Slave. It Is said to be occasioned thus; Alaricus having overrun
many places, sent Messengers to Honorius, declaring, that if Lands were granted
to him and his to dwell in, he would cease spoiling of the Country: Honorius
not knowing how to recover France and Spain from the Suevians, Vandals, etc.
gives Alaricus Power to go into France, confirmed this Grant with an Oath.
Alaricus steering his Course toward France, Sti^ico against the Covenant
follows him, and made a great slaughter, Alaricus not the least suspecting it
before: Hereupon the Goths snatching up their Arms, and Alaricus exasperated by
this injury and violation of Covenant, turned back into Italy was^ing with Fire
and Sword, and at last Rome it self was taken by him. Socrat. 1. 7. c. 10.
Cent. 5. c. 16. Funcc^^^ --

And whereas some grant that the sixth Head of Emperors was wounded, and would
have the Popes obtaining Headship to be the healing.

I confess I understand not, how a wound in one Head should be healed by the
rising up of another. I think the wound is never healed, unless the same Head
that was wounded, recovereth again. But this is a granting the thing, for it is
not a Head of the Dragon, but a Head of the Beast that is wounded, Rev. 13. 3.
One of [his] Heads -- and therefore if it be the sixth Head of Emperors that
is wounded, then that first Beast is not the Roman State under the seventh
Head, but under the sixth Head of Emperors.

4. The first Beast is the Whore-ridden Beast, Rev. 17. 3. I saw a Woman sit
upon a Scarlet-colored Beast, v. 4. 5. Rev. 13. 1. Now the Pope is rather
carried by the Whore, than the Beast that carries her, and therefore this
Beast is not the Pope.

Nor is the Turk this first Beast, for this Whore does not ride upon the Turk,
nor is Constantinople the City, which in the days of John reigned over the
Kings of the Earth; nor did the Turk arise the same hour with the Crowning of
the Horns, as Rev. 17. 12. but hundreds of years after; yet I deny not that the
Turk may belong to the Beast, after he obtained some Territories belonging to
the Horns of the Beast. It is therefore a Civil State of the Roman Empire.

5. The Beast is both an eighth King and of the seven Heads, Rev. 13. 1. And
Rev. 17. 3, 11. The Beast that was and is not, even he is the eighth and (...)
the seven -- There were but six, when the (...) did arise, and the wound was of
the sixth (...), as I have proved, and so must the ei^^th be some distinct new
kind of Government, and if the (...) Beast, Rev. 13. 1. were Popes, and the
sev^^th Head at his first rising, then the Beast could not be the eighth and of
the seven; For, I ask what distinct kind of Government or State of the Empire
came after Popes to make an eighth King?

If it be said, the Christian Emperors, before the rising of the Beast. I add,
that it was the same State of Government under Pagan and Christian Emperors,
though the qualifications and Actions of Governors were different, both were
Emperors. And seeing after the sixth Head of Emperors, two Beasts so
different each from other are mentioned, Rev. 13. 1, 11. It is to me a wonder,
that men should not seek a way how the other six might by these two Beasts be
made up eight Kings. Thus the first Beast ( Rev. 13. 1.) has Ten Crowns upon
the Horns; or Kingly Government there, which made a different sort of
Government from the other six, and so may be deemed a seventh King or sort of
Government or an eighth, if we will count it after Popes, who makes another,
as 2 Pet. 2. 5. God saved Noah [the eighth] Person; the meaning is, that there
were seven saved besides Noah, he was not the last of them in order, but did
make up that number. So Rev. 17. 11. The Beast is the eighth, that is, there
are seven besides, seven others, and so with him there are eight. The Beast is
the eighth in number, not necessarily that he is eighth or last in order: Hence
he a^deth [and of the seven] he does not say he is the [seventh] so warily does
the Apostle speak here.

It is said of this Beast, it [was, is not, and yet is] Rev. 17. 8, 11. [was]
in its Ten Horns crowned before the deadly Wound, [is not] in respect of
perfect Headship when wounded, for the Head is said to be wounded as it were
unto death, Rev. 13. 3. [and yet is] when the Wound was healed, Rev. 13. 3.

6. The Pope obtained not any Civil Supremacy over the Empire, till hundreds of
years after the Horns were crowned, and so after the first Beast was ^^;
therefore the first Beast (Rev. 13. 1.) is not the Pope or seventh Head: For
the crowning of the Horns, or their receiving Power as Kings, is the same hour,
or the first hour with the Beast, Rev. 17. 12. All the former Heads were Civil
Heads, as Kings, Consuls, etc. and therefore so must the seventh be also.

And indeed how is it possible that Popes should be reckoned a Head of the
Roman State or Civil Monarchy, or succeed and come in the place and stead of
the sixth Head of Emperors, (which was a Civil Head) until they obtain a Civil
Supremacy, as Emperors and others had? ^hocas his constituting Boniface the
third Universal Bishop Anno 606. is evidence enough that the Bishop of Rome had
not then obtained a Civil Supremacy, but was under the Head of Emperors still,
seeing he was beholden to them even for his Ecclesiastical Supremacy; and yet
the first Ten Horned Crowned Beast was up long before this.

Indeed there is evidence that a long time after the crowning of the Horns, yet
Emperors were the Supreme Head, and the Popes of Rome subordinate or subject to
them. Bonifacius writing to Honorius, says [God has given you the Regiment of
worldly things, and the Priesthood to me -- ]

Even the Councils for spiritual matters were called by the command of Emperors
many years after, as Phil. Morney Knight, in his Mystery of Iniquity, has
largely proved. And claiming Supremacy, or aspiring after Civil Headship, is no
obtaining it, any more than John Bishop of Constantinople his claiming and
assuming the Title of Universal Bishop about Anno 590. did make him
Ecclesiastical Head over the Bishop of Rome in that day. The Temporal Supremacy
of the Pope cannot be proved until a long time after, and so he could not be
the first Beast. And to say that his Ecclesiastical Power made him the first
Beast, and his Temporal the second, is to invert the Order of Rev. 13. 17.
which ascribes that to him as a second Beast.

7. All the other Characters of the first Beast agree to the Civil State of the
Empire with ten Horns crowned persecuting, and so the complex body of them, or
as headed by Emperors, make that Beast, Rev. 13. v. 3, 4. When the Wound was
healed, then all the World wondered after the Beast. Charles was called the
Great, because then he was so much admired. And they worshipped the Beast. To [
worship] him is eidem subjici, i. e. by civil subjection to him noted by
worship, Genesis 27. 7. and 37. 7. and 49. 8. Isa. 45. 14. Saying, [ Who is like
unto the Beast? who is able to make War with him?] So early they admired the
Horns of the Beast, as the Goths and Vandals, and their great Power, and
others, as Attila King of the Hunns, who after the death of Ecius grew so
mighty, that he overthrew the Imperial General and Army, took many Cities, and
was held for the most powerful Prince in the World, and was so much feared,
that Martianus the Emperor sent to sue for Peace, and sent him Presents. See
Imper. Histor. and v. 5, 6, 7. made War with the Saints.

Obj. 1. It Is a mark of Perdition to worship the first Beast, Rev. 13. 8. but
it is not so to yield civil subjection to Civil Power.

A. 1. It is not made a mark of Perdition. The Text does not show the danger of
worshipping the Beast, but describes him by the multitude of Reprobates that
are admirers of him. See Brightman. Civil subjection may lawfully be yielded to
the Civil Power of those who are overmuch honored by many who shall perish.

2. If a corrupt Religious Worship must be intended (which is not proved) yet
this agrees to the first as a Civil Persecuting Beast: For it is a
Scarlet-colored Beast, i. e. a cruel Persecutor, Rev. 17. 3. warreth with the
Saints, Rev. 13. 7. a blasphemer of God, v. 6. And diverse of the Ten Horns in
their first rising were such, being either Pagans, or in Pagan Worship, or
Arrians, blaspheming his Name and Tabernacle, i. e. Jesus Christ; and
latter-ward it was a Whoreridden Beast, Rev. 17. 7. And to magnify him in
these corruptions, or in that wherein he is a Beast, is pernicious; yea
compliance with him in Persecution is an evident token of Perdition, Phil. 1.
v. 28, 29. And thus it may be a mark of Perdition, though the Pope be not the
first Beast.

Obj. 2. There is but one Beast mentioned, Rev. 17. 8. which is the
interpretation of Rev. 13.

A. [Beast] is a name common both to the first and second, and so Rev. 17. may
notify the whole Beast-state in distinction from Dragon-state, Rev. 12. they
are sufficiently diversified, Rev. 13. and need not be so again in Rev. 17.
When compared each with other, they are two Beasts differenced from each other
by many notes of distinction, but when differenced from Dragon, both agree in
the common name of Beast. As the Roman Monarchy from first to last is called a
fourth Beast, Dan. 7. v. 3, 19, 23. yet that will not deny Dragon and Beast to
be distinct each from other part of its time. But their being two is implied,
Rev. 17. v. 10, 11. There is another, and an eighth, which agrees with the word
King in gender, and there cannot be an eighth King ( i. e. different
Government) if there were not two Beasts.

In short [ Beast] without distinction may be taken promiscuously either for
the first or second Beast, as the matter enforces, but it notes most commonly
the first Beast, or whole Roman State after it ceased to be under Dragon, i. e.
after Pagan Headship ended, and may be understood either of its after Headship,
or the complex body of the crowned Horns comprizing the Roman Territory, or
Provinces in East and West, the same that the Dragon had before.

But [ Beast] when with distinction is usually taken for the first Beast: Thus
when [Beast and false Prophet] are distinguished, the false Prophet is he that
works Miracles, Rev. 19. v. 20. which is the second Beast, Rev. 13. v. 14.
and therefore the Beast distinguished from him must be the first Ten-horned
Beast.

So when [Beast and Image] are distinguished, Rev. 14 9, 11. and 15. 2. and 16.
2. and 19. 20. and 20. 4. The first with Ten Horns crowned is intended by
Beast, for it is an Image of him that received a Wound by a Sword, and did
live, Rev. 13. 14. which was the first Beast, v. 1, 3. not the second. It is
the second Beast which had power to give life to the Image of the Beast, and
work Miracles, and that in his sight, v. 15* and so he cannot be the Beast it
self whose Image is animated, and has life given to it, and in whose sight
those Miracles are wrought, but the first.

Also when [ Beast and Woman] are distinguished, as Rev. 17. there [Beast]
signifies the first Beast, at least till the rising of the seventh Head, and
this in so many of the Horns as were ridden by the Whore of Babylon after she
arose, v. 3.

So when [ Beast and Dragon] are distinguished, Rev. 13. 1. and 16. 13. there
[Beast] notes the first Beast, or so many of the Horns as were professedly
Christian, and were ridden by the Whore, and [Dragon] notes such as were not
professedly Christian; for we must note, that all the Horns of the Beast were
not of the same Spirit or Religion. About the time of their first crowning,
some were Dragonish Pagans, Rev. 12. v. 13, 14. Others professedly Christian
and corrupt; some Arrians, as Goths, Vandals, etc. and toward the latter end
of the Beasts Dominion some Horns or Provinces are Dragonish, not professedly
Christian, Rev. 16. 13.

The Turk has part of the Territory of the first Beast, Rev. 13. 1. others are
Popishly affected. By all which it appears, that there is no necessity that
the Pope should be the first Beast.

And although herein I differ from other Interpreters, yet I am more for them
than against them, the matter being rightly stated, especially seeing hereby I
extricate them out of many difficulties where they are at a loss for a ground
in their fixing the Epoch of the Prophetical days on the Pope, which I hereby
prove should be taken from another Beast, viz. The first Civil Ten-horned,
crowned, persecuting Beast.

CHAP. III. Of the Two-Horned Beast the Pope, Rev. 13. 11*
Rule 3. THAT the Two-Horned Beast is the Horn of Ecclesiastical Power is a
false Prophet, by his second Horn of Temporal Supremacy became the seventh Head
of the Roman Empire.

This appears, for all the Characters of this second Beast agree to the Pope,
and to none else: As,

1. He arose out of the Earth, Rev. 13. 11. not from Heaven, but from below,
from Satan and carnal earthly men and means. Not out of the Sea, or Confluence
of People and Nations, as the other, v. 1. but had a mean Original, from a poor
Bishop at last ascended to this dignity.

2. He has Two Horns like a Lamb. Horns denote Power, Rev. 17. 12. Dan. 8. 5.

So the Pope usurpeth a twofold Power, Temporal and Spiritual.

The first Horn of [ Ecclesiastical Power] arose in the time of Phocas Anno
606. who made Boniface the Third Universal Bishop. This was a new Institution,
and not only a Declaration, for Statuit he ordained. Hic (i. e. Phocas) sedem
Romanae and Apostolicae Ecclesiae caput esse omnium Ecclesiarum, quia Ecclesia
Constantinopolitana, primam se omnium Ecclesiarum scribebat. P. W. Diacon. P.
de Gest. Longobard. l. 4. c. 37.

If Justinian a little before decreed that the Pope of Rome should be the first
of Priests to keep footing at Rome, or because of Old Rome was the Imperial
Seat, yet not as Peter's Successor, for the same Justinian pronounced by Law
the Church of Constantinople the Head of all the holy Churches.

And John Bishop of Constantinople assuming the name of Universal Bishop about
Ann. 590. Gregory Bishop of Rome so disclaimed this Title, as he concluded the
time of Antichrist to be at hand, because John usurped it. L. Dupless. Histor.
of Pap. Cent. 6. Magd. c. 7. It being the Controversy of that day, he obtained
not that first Horn till the time of Phocas.

As to the second Horn of [Temporal Supremacy] he obtained not that so early.
Indeed Celestinus Bishop of Rome about Ann. 424. began to aspire after it
[passing the bounds of his Priestly Order, presumed to challenge unto himself
Secular Power and Authority] Says Socrat. Hist. l. 7. c. 11. He says the same
of the Bishop of Alexandria, ib. and l. 7. c. 7.

But after Anno 500. Anastasius sent this Answer to Pope Horsmida [Imperatoris
proprium esse Imperare, non imperata Pontificis accipere] Cent. 6. Magd. c. 7.

And after the Popes of Rome had Confirmation from the Emperors, Cent. 7. Magd.
c. 7. Et suit ipsa Vrbs Roma non in Pontificum, sed Imperatorum potestate and
dominio, ib. Under Justinian by Narses turning out the Goths, both Italy and
Rome were annexed to the Eastern Empire.

His Temporal Power and Headship must have its first date either from the
Donation of Rome to him (which of old was the Imperial Seat) or from his
obtaining Superiority either over the Head of Emperors, or over some of the Ten
Horns.

Now, about Ann. 725. the City of Rome came under the Power of the Pope. Leo
the Emperor forbidding the use of Images in Churches, Pope Gregory forbad the
Tribute of Italy and Rome: Removit Roman, and Italiam, necnon and omnia reip.
quam Ecclesiastica jura in Hesperiis ab obedientia Leonis and Imperii sub ipso
constituti -- Romam cum tota Italia ab illius Imperio recedere faciens -- Paul.
Diacon. Anast. l. 21. Says Platina, Leonem tertium Imperatorem
Constantinopolitanum Imperio simul and communione fidelium private, quiae
Sanctas Imagines e Sacris adibus abrasisset. Which sufficiently evidenceth that
the pretended Donation of Constantine the Great, was but a fiction, they
belonging to the Eastern Empire till now they were usurped by the Pope, who
made himself Prince of Rome: And afterward Pope Zechary deposing Childerick,
set up Pipinus the French King, who in requital compelled Aistulphus King of
the Lumbards to restore all the Towns and Lands which he had taken, and by his
Donation bestowed on him the Exarchate or Princedom of Ravenna and Pentapolis,
and a very large Dominion and Possession which afterward were confirmed by
others, with Additions, as by Charles the Great Anno 800.

All which argue that now the Pope was become not only a Temporal Prince by the
Dukedom of Rome -- but by getting power over some of the Crowned Horns, and
opposing and overtopping Emperors so as without their consent, by degrees,
they had their elections, and swelled in their power, till at last they
disannulled the Inauguration, placing and displacing Emperors at their
pleasure. This appeared most manifestly in Hildebrand or Gregory the Seventh,
Ann. 1073. who not only Excommunicated Henry the Emperor, but deposed him, and
gave away his Kingdom to Rodolphus Duke of Suevia. And now Emperors had their
confirmation from Popes whereas of old the Popes had confirmation from the
Emperors. Whether this were the first of his being Regnant (as some assert) or
the time of his being Triumphant in the Temporal Power I leave it to others to
judge.

3. He spoke as a Dragon, so did Hildebrand and other Popes, not only in their
Excommunications and Depositions, but also in those they call Hildebrands
Dictates or Canons and Decrees, as [That no Book may be accounted Canonical
without his Authority.] [That he ought to be judged of none.] Vid. Onuphr. in
vita Greg. 7.

4. He exercises all the Power of the first Beast before him, and causes the
Earth to worship the first Beast, Rev. 13. 12. This the Pope does by letting
none be Emperors without his confirmation, deposing Emperors, and sending the
Imperial Crown to others; as Rodolphus, setting up persecuting Emperors at his
pleasure, and causing the Earth to obey their decrees, by influencing the Horns
to persecute: As Pope Martin perceiving the Gospel prevailed in Bohemia,
stirred up the Emperor and German Princes to making War against the Bohemians,
and thus exercised the power of the first persecuting Beast, and caused Earthly
men to worship him.

5. He does Wonders, so that he makes fire come down from Heaven, and
deceives the Earth with his Miracles, Rev. 13. v. 13. 14. So the Pope as a
false Prophet pretends to Miracles. One says that the garments of Hildebrand
or Gregory after his death wrought Miracles.

Cardinal Benno (who lived at the same time) says of Hildebrand, that when he
list he would shake his Skirts and fire would come out like sparks, and by such
Miracles he abused the eyes of simple People; and therefore when the Devil
could not persecute publicly Jesus Christ by Painims, he disposed himself
fraudulently to destroy his name by this false Monk, under the show and color
of Religion. Estate of the Church. p. 298. Benno in vit. Hildebrandi. Usher
Graviss. Quaest. Hist. Explic.

Also to encourage Rodolph in War against the true Emperor Henry, which he had
deposed, Hildebrand, foretold that the false King, (whom he interpreted to be
Henry) should die the same year before the Feast of St. Peter. But Rodolph lost
his life before the day, and Henry lived after; and so Hildebrand not only by
false Miracles but by foretelling what did not come to pass was proved to be a
false prophet, Deuteronomy. 18. 20, 21, 22. Rev. 19. 20. Matthew. Paris. Onuphr. B.
Usher Graviss. Quaest. Histor. Explic,

6. He says to them that dwell on the Earth, that he would or they should make
an Image to the Beast. Rev. 13. v. 8. 14*

What this [Image] is, it is a great question?

It must be an [Image] not of the second, but of the first Beast that was
Wounded, v. 14. and so it is not the first Beast it self (and the rather
because the Beast and Image are made distinct, Rev. 14. 9.) but a
representation or resemblance of him, yet such as the false Miracles were to
win Credit and Honor to this Image, v. 14. saying that they should make an
Image -- (which in making is [to] when once made [of] the Beast, v. 15.) or
that he had made it, and he urges worshipping of it upon pain of death, v. 15.

This is not Image worship, for Images are dead things, but this is living, it
can speak and do, v. 15.

Therefore this [Image] must be either the Pope himself, or some new
Constitution of his, or else the German Empire.

It seems not to be this second Beast or Pope himself, for he makes it, and
so is before and is not it that is made, unless it notes his exciting or
causing others to give Imperial Honor and Dignity to him.

Or this [ Image] may be especially the Cardinals, who are said to succeed in
the place of Consuls, and to be Principes mundi and very mundi Cardines,
resembling Emperors in their Habit and power; and who obtained a new
Principality of Election of Popes about Ann. 1059 or 1061. When Nicolaus Papa
sancit Pontificem Eligendum a Cardinalibus; and bear such Authority as
threatens those with death who will not submit. B. Usher ib. and others.

Or else the German Empire is this [Image] as wanting diverse Kingdoms that did
belong to it, yet is an Image of the old Roman Empire by a Constitution of Otho
the third, and Pope Gregory the fifth, seven Electors were Erected, and and as
says Hondy, ten, Provinces or Circuits, resembling the old Seven Heads and
TenHorns. And the Pope has instigated Emperors as Sigismond against the
Bohemians to persecute, and so he gives life to the Image and makes it speak
terribly against his opposers.

7. He causes as many as would not worship the Image of the Beast to he
killed, Rev. 13. 15. So the Pope not only excited others, but himself, raised
Wars, killing many as in the time of Leo the ninth: And Pope Urban had a great
hand in that which is called the Holy War, Ann* 1099. for gaining Jerusalem.
Also by his Thunderbolts, Anathema's, Excommunications, Canons and Decrees,
seeks to exterminate those which yield not subjection to him. Potestates
seculares perpetui vel temporales jurare tenentur universos haereticos ab
ecclesia damnatos pro viribus exterminare. Decret. Gregor. lib. 5. Ti. 7.
Lateran Council Ann. 1215.

And accordingingly the Council of Constans Ann. 1414. condemned and burnt John
Huss and Jerome of Prague as Heretics, notwithstanding the Emperors safe
Conduct. Thus they that yield not obedience to him are killed.

8. He causes all, both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond to
receive a Mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads, Rev. 13. v. 16. So
as none must hold Communion, buy or sell without it.

So the Pope has his (...) or universal Character in various notes of
distinction of his followers from others, some in [ the forehead] by an Open
Profession that they are Roman Catholics, it was one of Hildebrands Decrees or
Dictates, Catholicus non habeatur qui non concordat Romanae Ecclesiae; Others
in [the hand] more privately, or by [the number of his name] so resembling him,
his ways and customs as they are to be deemed of that number, though they do
not own the name. Such Marks are his Confirmation, Transubstantia^ion* the Sign
of the Cross, etc. Their Council of Trent says, Si quis dixerit in tribus
Sacramentis Baptismo scil. Confirmatione and Ordine non imprimi Characterem in
anima, hoc est, signum quoddam Spirituale and indelebile unde ea iterari non
possunt Anathema sit. Sess. 7. Can. 9. They then make Confirmation to be one
Character or Mark.

The first imposing this Mark was not at the first rising of the Beast, but at
the first eminent restoration of the Church. The Beast marketh his for
distinctions sake from the opposite numerous party of the Lamb, compare Rev.
13. 16. with Rev. 14. 1.

As to the Popish Chrisme or Confirmation which they call a Sacrament
consecrated by a Bishop compounded of Oil Olive and of Balm to be applied to
the person baptized upon the forehead with the sign of the Cross -- This is
witnessed and declared against by the Barbes or Pastors of the Valleys, as
having no ground in Scripture. See Mr. Morlands Extract of Treatises and
Antiquities; where many other Romish corruptions are discovered about Ann. 1120.

Also of that confirmation see Decret. Gregorli. 1. Ti. 15. Referring to the
times of Innocent 3.

As to Transubstantiation, that they have made that another Mark or Test is
undeniable. The Martyrdom of Hundreds in Queen Mary's time, by Fire* and Faggot
for denying it, as well as their ^ateran Council, asserting it as a special
business under Innocent the third Ann. 1215. is a sufficient proof of it.

And it was a Mark long before; For, it is said Berengarius arose Ann. 1039.
and Ann. 1049. and 1050. And after there were Councils called by Pope Leo the
Ninth, Benedict and Nicholas, for the condemning that Heresy (as they call it)
of Berengarius who denied Transubstantiation.

Some say that Pope Nicholas the Second assembled a Council called the Council
of Lateran, Ann. 1059. and in the same Council was hatched and invented the new
found device and term of Transubstantiation. Acts and Mon. Vol. 1. p. 217.

It is said then Berengarius was driven to a Recantation: Others say he never
Recan^ed.

If Eleutherius Archbishop of Sens did begin it, as Binius affirms, yet that
might be more privately, how long before the time aforesaid it became visible
and public I leave to others to judge.

Now by Berengarius and others the opposite party appeared openly with the Lamb
on Mount Sion, as Rev. 14. 1. and that with the full number 144000 (which were
all that were long before safely sealed, Rev. 7. 4.) and that [having his
Fathers name on their foreheads] in opposition to their foregoing more latent
State: For before, though the Church did not utterly fail, (as Romans 11. 4.) yet
it was [ more private.] It was a horrid time of darkness as to Religion in the
World, some Hundreds of years till after Ann. 1000. But then about Thirty or
Forty Years after there began the first open restoration of the Church when
they had the name of God upon their [foreheads] i. e. publicly, openly, and as
in Nickname they were called Berengarians; so the Beast by Councils -- By
Marks differenced his from these.

Also it is said that in Alexander the third his time an Oath of fidelity was
imposed on Bishops, by which they did swear Obedience to the Papacy, to
maintain the Church of Rome in all Councils, in all Times and Places; was not
this a mark in opposition to the Waldenses?

And that Lateran Council further says, the Catholics that taking the Badge
of the Cross, shall give themselves to the exterminating of Heretics, shall
enjoy indulgence -- And they Decree to Subject to Excommunication the Believers
and Receivers, Defenders and Favorers of Heretics -- Not to be admitted to
any public Offices or Councils, nor to choose any to such, or to be a witness,
and let him not have power to make a will -- And if any after such [a mark] by
the Church shall contemn to avoid them be smitten with the Sentence of
Excommunication. --

What is the meaning of all this? but that none shall have Commerce, buy or
sell without being marked by the Beast?

9. He has the number of the Beast 666. Rev. 13. v. 18. Various
interpretations hereof differing each from other, yet agree to the Pope*

Ireneus would find the meaning in the numeral Letters in the name Latinos, but
some answer, this is too Cabalistical and agrees to Heathen Rome as well as
Antichristian, and to many other names as Mahometes, Gensericus, Titan --
Neither is there any warrant to take other Numeral Letters making up the same
with (...) and then conclude them Synonymous.

I cannot assent to the way of learned and ingenious Mr. Potter, making the
square root of 25 the Beasts number; for few Christians are such Arithmeticians
as to find out the mystery by the extraction of Roots, nor are they obliged to
be such; whereas all Christians are bound to count and apply this number, so as
to avoid compliance with the Beast or being of his number, [ Here is Wisdom let
him that has understanding Count. -- ]

And that we may find out the true meaning of this difficult Text, observe; it
is [ the number of the Beast] not only [ the number of his name] (which some
confound with it) but of the Beast himself, which is distinct from the name,
Rev. 15. 1. Victory over the Beast is one thing, and over the number of his
name is another. And it is known by computation [ let him -- count] it must
then be found out by reckoning or counting, and so is a real number. And it is
[ The number of a Man] i. e. commonly in use among men as, Rev. 21. 17. [The
measure of a man] is that which man is wont to use, and so it must not be a
mystical, prophetical number, a day being put for a year as elsewhere in this
prophesy, but the very number, 666.

It remains then that it must (according to Scripture denote either the
number of persons the followers of the Beast, or else a number of his years a
time.

If it be a description of the Beast by the number of his followers, it is
applied to him not as if they were precisely so many, for it is known they are
many, many more in Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People; but as an opposite
number to that of the Lamb, Rev. 14 1. and there 144000 is fixed on, not for
its own sake, but for the sake of 12 as the Basis of it, for it is not
imaginable that every Tribe parcelled out ( Rev. 7.) had exactly 12000. But 12
is befitted to all the concernments of the Lamb both great and small, all
matters of Faith and Worship are measured by 12 the doctrine of the 12
Apostles, hence so many things run upon 12. as Rev. 21. v. 12, 14, 17, 19, 20,
21. there 12 Angels, 12 Gates, etc.

Answerably the number of the Beast 666 is chosen for the sake of six, which is
diametrically opposite to 12 the number of the Lamb, and can neither by
Multiplication or Division be reduced to 12 the Apostolical number; the Beast
(some observe) had six books of Decretals, and his matters great and small in
Faith and Worship are not squared by the Rule of the Scriptures or the 12
Apostles, and so run upon six an opposite number.

Or say some, Numerus homi^is is an Hebraism, homines numeri a great multitude,
as Genesis 34. 30. Deuteronomy. 4. 27. and 33. 6. Isa. 10. 19.

But 666 may be a number of years of this second Beast, yet cannot denote the
whole time of his duration, for I have evidenced that he has already been up
longer than so in both his Horns of Spiritual and temporal power.

Some refer it to the time of his beginning others to the time of his end.

Of the former sort, Mr. Stephens finding that the Pope had his Title of
Universal Bishop, Ann. 606. looks back 60 years before Christ, when the
Romans subdued the Church of the Jews, to make up the number.

But I cannot assent to it, for as I cannot find any Scripture where numbering
applied to any person refers to the beginning, but to the end, as Dan. 5.
26. God has [numbred] thy Kingdom and finished it; so I see no warrant for
Faith to count from that Epoch of the Romans or Pompey. 666. is none of
Daniels numbers, nor is there a syllable in the Revelation putting upon
counting thence; rather the contrary, Rev. 1. 1. The things were to come,
therefore it is wholly groundless. If it must note the time when the Beast
began, I should much rather take the Epoch from the time of John's writing the
Revelation in Patmos, about Ann. 89 and add 666. it brings us to Ann. 755.
about which time some think the Pope obtained from Pepin King of France his
second horn of Temporal Power and began to be an Earthly Prince, and so became
a two-horned Beast.

Some referring it to the time of his Fall had raised expectations on the year
1666. supposing that John left out the Millenary number, but time has confuted
this, that year being past and he not fallen; unless you will begin either at
the Passion of Jesus Christ, or the time of writing the Revelation, which yet
is ungrounded.

I rather think it refers to the time of his End, for the reason aforesaid
from Dan. 5. 26. and that the Epoch of the 666 when it begins is not from
the first rising of the Beast, but from his first marking time: from the Beasts
making War with the first reformed Churches, or first causing his followers to
receive a Mark in their forehead or hand, a note of distinction of the Bestians
from the opposite party appearing against him openly with the Lamb in Mount
Sion.

None that I know of have observed this notion, yet methinks the Text it self
gives great countenance to it; for immediately after he had mentioned causing
those that would not Worship the Image of the Beast [ to be killed] Rev. 13.
15. (which is by his Warring against them) and his [ causing all his to receive
a mark in their Foreheads or Right-hand] v. 16, 17. immediately it follows [
Here is Wisdom -- count the number of the Beast -- ] i. e. count from this time
of his open marking his followers to difference them from others, and thence to
the time of his fall or of receiving some deadly blow will be 666 years.

And further to confirm this, as the next thing after mentioning the mark and
number of the Beast, he subjoineth or adds by way of opposition as of the
same time that an oppo site party were visibly, openly marked for Christ, Rev.
14. 1. And I looked, and lo a lamb stood on Mount ion and with him 144000.
having his Fathers name written on their foreheads. So that this refers not
to the time when a few, but a vast number appeared for Christ, even 144000 and
not privately, but publicly in Sion, in the Church, with the Fathers name upon
their foreheads, and not when they were first sealed, but when they made the
first open separation from the Beast, and appeared for the restoration of the
Church. It is when they rejoice with singing for redemption from, and victory
over Antichristian Pollutions, v 2, 3, 4. which plainly must be at the
beginning time of pouring out the Vials, for then a like Song of Moses and the
Lamb is sung upon the same account, Rev. 15. 1, 2, 3. for victory over the
Beast, his Image and Mark and the number of his Name -- it was then after some
getting out of Spiritual Egypt. So that the imposing the Mark of the Beast and
the Churches first restoration by the Fathers name on their foreheads in an
open profession are of the same date, beginning at the first Vial and thence
the number of the Beast is 666 years to the time of his Fall.

And the first Vial I think began about the time of Berengarius whose opinion
was condemned by Popish Councils at Vercellis and Rome about Ann. 1049 or 1050
etc. therefore his (...) ^rofession was before; how many years (...) judge.

CHAP. IV. Of the Little Horn.
Rule 4. THAT the Two-Horned Beast the Pope is the Little Horn, Dan. 7.

Note that there is a little Horn, Dan. 8. 5, 9. growing on the Hee-Goat, which
is expressly there said to be the King of Graecia, v. 21. that Horn is
Antiochus Epiphanes.

But the Little Horn, Dan. 7. grows on another Beast, the fourth Monarchy, v.
7, 8, 19, 20, 24. and all the Characters of him agree to the Pope; therefore he
is that Little Horn.

As the Pope in his Original or Rise was [a little Horn] v. 8. a poor Bishop,
yet grew in his looks more stout than his fellows, v. 20, 25. he did grow up
among the ten Horns, and was diverse from them, v. 8, 24. Another had Eyes like
a Man, i. e. full of Policy and Wisdom, has a mouth speaking great things
against the Most High. v. 8. 11, 25. making himself supreme Judge in matters of
faith* a Vice God. He Warreth with the Saints by Persecutions, and prevails,
v. 21. wears out the Saints, as a Garment, by long rubbing, fretting and ill
using of them. And he thinks to change Times and Laws, i. e. change Gods Laws
for his own, as in Doctrine, Worship and Discipline, particularly in Marriages,
Meats, Festivals -- all which obviously agree to the Pope; and also,

1. The little Horn prevails against three of the other, Dan. 7. 8. before
him three of the first Horns were plucked up by the Roots, and v. 20. fell. V.
24. he shall subdue three Kingdoms.

This agrees to the Pope; for, he was a means of rooting out the Grecian
Exarchs, the Lombards and also the Goths, who ruled in Italy and had
Sovereignty over Rome; Silverius the Bishop brought this to pass says Evagr.
l. 4. c. 18. and these were precisely three; and this does not lessen the
number of Horns, or reduce them to seven, but gives him more Power at Rome. Or
Mr. Parker thinks they were three Mahumetan Kings, viz. Solomon in Asia,
Cassianus in Syria, the Egyptian Caliph in Judea, which were subdued by the
Pope who raised the War, and this was one of the greatest acts that ever he
did, and these are precisely three, and properly subdued by him, and these were
of the Ten Horns or their Territory belonging to Daniels fourth Beast.

2. The Little Horn continues until a time, times and the dividing of time,
wearing out the Saints, Dan. 7. 25. yea after till he overcomes them, v. 21,
22, 27.

Neither does the word (...) [until] deny its being longer, as one observes
donec signifies Consecutionem, non exceptionem vel exclusionem futuri
temporis, Genebr. in Psalm. 109. So [until] is not exclusive, Psalm. 110. 1. and
57. 1. Cant. 2. 16, 17. Mat. 12. 20.

And besides, the Little Horn is up, Dan. 7. 22. Until the Ancient of Days
came, and judgment was given to the Saints of the Most High, and the time came
that the Saints possessed the Kingdom, which is not till after the Death and
Resurrection of the Witnesses and sounding of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11. 14,
15.

Daniels Beast is comprehensive of the whole fourth Monarchy from first to
last, and so may clearly enough be distinguished from the little Horn, as Dan.
7. 11. though the Pope be it, he has but a part thereof, not all the Ten Horns.

CHAP. V. Of the first rising of the Ten-Horned Beast.
Rule 5. THat the first rising of the Ten Horned Beast in all probability was
in the time of Valens, however before Ann. 400.

It is a great mistake, that a knowledge of the day of his Birth will give a
certain knowledge of the day of his death; for he may not so early be in that
work which gives the first date to the Prophetical numbers, and he surviveth
some of these, viz. the 42 months which many would have to be the whole of his
time; yet seeing he must be up before he can act, it is of great importance to
enquire after the time of his first rising, and take it thus.

1. When the Roman State or Empire became like a troubled Sea after the Dragons
downfall, then did the Beast arise, and this was before Ann. 400*

I saw [ A Beast] rise out of the Sea, Rev. 13. 1. [Sea] is the gathering
together of Waters, Genesis 1. 10. and Rev. 17. 15. [Waters] are people, and
multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues --

Ammianus Marc^llinus, who lived at the very time of Valens and Valentinian,
and was a Soldier then, uses these words.

[At this time as if the Trumpets had sounded the Battle throughout all the
Roman World, most Fell and Savage Nations rose up in Arms and Invaded the next
limits to them; the Alemanes wasted at once both Gaul and Rhae^ia; the
Sarma^ians and Quadi made spoil in Pannonia both the one and the other. The
Ticts, Saxons, Scots and Allacots, infested the Britains with continual
troubles The Anstorians and other Manrite Nations made Rodes more fiercely than
they had wont into Africa certain Bands of Gothic Brigands and Rovers rifled
and ransacked Thracia, the King of Persia laid violent hands upon the
Armenians, etc. thus far he lib. 26. cap. 5.]

And now judge whether the Roman Empire was not at this time like a troubled
Sea, and so whether the Beast did not rise out of it, especially, seeing some
of the Horns were Crowned in this time of Valens, about Ann. 376, and 378. as
is proved. Antichristi excidium.

But further the Alemanes brake through the limits of Germany, provoked thereto
with a more mischievous mind than usually, etc. about that time or not long
after Procopius in the East rose up in arms, and plotted to usurp the Empire,
etc. There were most woeful Tempests and Storms up in both parts of the Empire
at one and the self same time -- in the same Months both in the West, and also
in the East part of the World, etc. Ib. lib. 26. c 6. See much more lib. 27. c.
8. The State of Rome. most corrupt in those days. ^b. lib. 28. c. 8.

Yea they overran those parts even to the Suburbs of Constantinople and
besieged that, but at last were repulsed Sccrat. lib. 4. c. 31. and others.

2. When the Body of the Roman Empire was changed from its Ancient form of
Provinces, into the form and shape of Crowned Horns; then the Beast was up: For
it is said in the days of John, Rev. 17. 17. They have received no Kingdom as
yet, but receive power as Kings one hour, or the first hour with the Beast.

The rising then of the Beast and the crowning of the Horns, are about the same
time. This Beast is differenced thus from the Dragon, that he, the Beast, has
his Crowns (Emblems of Sovereignty) upon his Horns, Rev. 13. 1. and from the
two Horned Beast, that he has more than two, even Ten, [and upon his Horns Ten
Crowns.]

Not that they must all be up first, so as the rising of the tenth Horn should
give the first date to the Beast: For they are all Horns of the Beast; and
therefore speak a Beast up for them to grow upon, and they receive Power as
Kings: [ One hour with the Beast,] Rev. 17. v. 12. Not the Beast one hour with
them, intimating the Beast to be first in order rather than otherwise. But as
the Dragon is said to have seven Heads, Rev. 12. 3. When as the seventh Head of
Popes was not up till Dragon (Pagan Power) was down; so as well may this be
called a Ten Horned Crowned Beast, Rev. 13. 1. Before all the ten were Crowned,
because there were to be so many principal ones; and ten may not be taken
precisely, neither more nor fewer, but indefinitely for many, as Numb. 14. 22.
Job. 19. 3. Genesis 31. 7.

Now before Ann. 400. diverse Horns were Crowned, see an Elaborate book
Entitled Antichrists Excidium, which proves the riseing of the Kingdom of the
Alemanes Ann. 356. the Ostrogoths Ann. 377. the Visogoths Ann. 378. the Hunns
Ann. 378. and others even ten about Ann. 410.

Therefore then the Beast was up.

3. When the Dragon gave unto Crowned Horns in the Roman Empire, his Power,
Throne and great Authority, then the Beast was up: For it is the Beast he gave
these to, Rev. 13. 2. the Dragon gave him ( i. e. the Beast) his [power, (...)]
strength or force, distinguished from authority, and so it is outward strength
or military power, [his Throne] i. e. the City of Rome, or a Government there.
[and great Authority] so as to become a lawful ruler within the Roman Empire.

Now all this was given before, or soon after, Ann. 400. For Crowned Horns had
[power] such military power as they did wage War with the Emperors, as the
Goths and others, and after the death of Valens they overrun Thracia and
spread themselves even to the Suburbs of Constantinople, and besieged that. Am.
Marcell. l. 31. c. 14. 15, 16, 17. Alaricus King of the Goths occupyeth
Thracia, Graecia, Athens, Corinth and other Cities, etc. Returns to Italy.
Calvis. Ann 395.

The Hunns destroyed Armenia and other Countries of the East, Socrat. l. 6. c.
1. By Armenia brake into Asia, and besieged Antioch, Calvis. Ann. 395. Gainas
with an Army of Goths overran the Eastern Empire and Constantinople was in
great danger. Socrat. l. ^. c. 6. Gildo usurped Africa. Magd. Cent. 5. C. 16.

And his [Throne] the City of Rome was given to crowned Horns, for Alaricus
King of the Goths took it about Ann. 410. It is true this was a little after
Ann. 400. But it proves the Beast to be up before, having such great power as
aforesaid. It is true Alaricus then did not keep Rome long, but then he took
possession of the Throne: And it is not said the Beast [kept] the Throne, but
that the Dragon [gave] it to him, and afterward also Gensericus King of the
Vandals, sacked Rome. And after the Goths reigned over Italy about 70 years.

Yea Crowned Horns obtained in the Roman Empire [ great Authority] for before
Ann. 400. Valentinian the Emperor made a league with Macrianus King of the
Alemanes, and ratified it by ^ath about Ann. 374. Am. Marcell. lib. 30. c. 4.
Afterward Valens granted some Countries in Thracia to the King of the Goths
about Ann. 376. and so he became a crowned Horn. ib. lib. 31. c. 4. Socrat.
Diacon. and consider whether this was not the birthday of the Beast, this
being the first crowned Horn that received not only Power, but Authority in the
Roman Empire. I might mention other Leagues, as between the Emperor Honorius
and the Goths, and so with Theodosius, and others. All this argues that the
Beast was up before Ann. 400.

4. When the deadly wound was given to one of the Heads, then the Beast was up;
For it was a Head of the Ten-Horned Beast that was wounded as it were unto
death, Rev. 13. v. 1, 2. And so the Beast must then exist and be up to receive
the wound.

Now this deadly wound was made when Alaricus sacked Rome, and perfected at
Augustulus. Indeed this act was after Ann. 400. but it presupposes the Beast
to be up, and so we may reckon that he did rise before Ann. 400. And here note

1. It is not the Pope, but this ten Horned Beast, who in respect of his first
State is said to continue [a short space,] Rev. 17. 10. For it is not said the
seventh Head, but [(...) another] i. e. another of the eight Kings (with whom
the word agrees) not another Head. There were eight Kings, and but seven
Heads, this was another King, or State of Government when the Empire was so
broken and changed from its ancient form and shape of Provinces, into crowned
Horns, and this was but [a short time] before it was wounded even unto death;
Whereas the seventh Head, the Pope, has continued a longer time, than any of
the other Heads if compared with them. And further to confirm this, he
immediately adds the different States of the first Beast, v. 11. [ was, and
is not, and yet is] as before, v. 9. and so [ was] is before wounding this
short space, [ is not] is when wounded, [ yet is] is after healed.

2. If the first Beast be [the man of sin,] 2 These. 2. 6, 7. Then the [lett]
which hindered, not merely his rising, but his revelation, must be imperial
power, which was removed by the aforementioned breakings and woundings of it.

But if it be the second Beast, then the (...) is their Imperial Authority, and
it was removed when Popes over-topped and assumed power over Emperors, as
Hildebrand and others.

Rule 6. That the Eastern parts belong to the first Ten-Horned Beast as well as
the Western.

This is denied by some, but seeing it conduces to the clearing up of truths,
and some material points, I shall give these grounds of it.

1. The same Dominion which the Dragon (i. e. Pagan Emperors) had, the same
the Beast has: Compare Rev. 12. 2. and 13. v. 2. He is Successor to the
Dragon; with the same number of Seven Heads, and Ten Horns, all the
Constitutive parts.

And seeing undenyably the Dragon had the Eastern Empire as well as the West,
so must the Beast have, the whole territory also.

2. There were Crowned Horns in the Eastern parts, as is undeniable; and this
differenceth the Beast from the Dragon; compare Rev. 12. 3. and 13. 1. and 17.
v. 3, 12. That Crowned Horns overran the Eastern Empire, and endangered
Constantinople, is before proved; and these acted in persecution, the work of
the Beast.

3. The East and West made but one undivided Empire, till after Horns of the
Beast were up in Valens time: though Valentinian was associated with him, yet
the Empire was one till divided between Arcadius and Honorius, and diverse
Horns up.

Yea when the Woman flees into the Wilderness* Rev. 12. it is upon the two
Wings of the Eagle, the East and West Roman Empire. It will be hard to assert
that there might have been a Roman Empire distinct from the Beast at the same
time.

4. The irruption of the Turks into the Eastern parts, or sixth Trumpet, Rev.
9. 14, 15. should not have had the Beast as the proper subject thereof, if the
Eastern parts had not belonged to the Beast, where this Tragedy was principally
acted. Whereas the Lord expected the Beasts Repentance of his Idolatry and
Persecution; as the issue thereof, v. 20, 21.

5. How could the act of an Eastern Emperor Phocas, make Boniface 3 Universal
Bishop; if the Eastern Empire did not belong to the first or second Beast, or
both? for both have the same Power Rev. 13. 12. as to extent.

6. The seventh head of Popes did extend their Power into the Eastern parts;
witness not only Victor the Bishop of Rome his Excommunicating all Asia about
the observation of Easter. Socrat. lib. 5. c. 21. Greek 27. but also from that
which is called the Holy War, chiefly raised by the Pope; and from his
Excommunicating the Grecians, upon the account of the differences between them
and the Latin Church about Anselms time: and the Greek Church and the Latin
Church, were in some mean agreement under subjection to the Sea of Rome, until
the time of Pope Gregory IX. Ann. 1230. says Fox Acts and Monuments, Vol. 1.
p. 244, 365. and then were dissevered from them.

But it is objected against the Grecian Empire belonging to the Beast, as
follows.

Obj. 1. The Greek Empire was up long before the deadly wound, out of which the
seventh head with ten horns arose, and so that cannot be of the Ten.

Answ. This labors with or is built upon a double mistake, viz. that this
Beast cannot be up before the deadly wound; whereas it was the Beast that was
wounded, Rev. 13. 3. and so must be up before to receive the Wound. Another
mistake is, that the seventh Head did arise at the same time with the ten
Horns, which I deny, see Rule 3.

Obj. 2. The Ten Kings receive power the same hour with the Beast: but the
Greek Empire arose near 100 years before, and so is none of the Ten.

Ans. When the Roman Empire in its other parts changed its ancient form, and
was divided into Crowned Horns, then the same hour the Grecian Empire was
changed from what it was before: now it had a new distinct Sovereignty of its
own, without dependence on the rest of the Empire as formerly, and so thence
might be deemed one of the ten Horns; especially seeing some of those Horns
made such Incursions into the Eastern parts, as is before discovered. If the
Alemanes arose Ann. 356. why might not another be up a little sooner? Some of
them received power as Kings, the same hour with the Beast, and that is enough*
Rev. 17. 16.

Obj. 3. The Greek Empire often withstood the Pope of Rome, and so did not give
his power to the Beast, Rev. 17. 12.

Answ. This first Beast I proved is not the Pope, but a Civil persecuting
Beast; and the Eastern Empire had its share in the Work of Persecution as
Anastasius and others. Yea the Greek Churches we heard did for some time give
their power to the Pope of Rome.

And further, in the time of the Lutheran Reformation, many Churches were
planted in Germany, England, Scotland, France, Flanders, Denmark, Switzerland,
Poland, Hungary, so that diverse of the Western Princes and Kingdoms, withstood
the Pope of Rome, yet that will not prove that they never were of the ten
Horns, the like may be said of the Grecian Empire.

And further, as the ten Horns are said to hate the Whore, and Burn her with
Fire, Rev. 17. 12. when only some of them do it; not all, for there are others
who committed Fornication with her, that lament her burning, Rev. 18 9. which
seems to intimate, that those who destroy her had not lately committed
Fornication with her. However it argues there is no necessity that every Horn
should give power always to the Beast, and the Greek Empire may be of that
number; which also answers the next objection.

Obj. 4. If the Greek Empire were among the Ten Horns, then it must last 1260
years; Whereas it came into the hands of the Turks before it had been up such a
time.

Answ. No necessity that there should be precisely Ten Horns, neither more nor
fewer, and that every one of these should last 1260 years, either in the same
place, Rule or Religion, as at first.

It is sufficient that the Body of them, or some continue so long in the work
of the Beast, persecution. The Goths ruled a long time in Italy, and then were
expelled thence, yet that is one of the Ten Horns still; at first some of the
Horns were Pagans, others Arians, others since Popish, others became
Protestants, fell off from Rome, did not continue 1260. Some of the Horns at
last must be of another Spirit, so opposite as to hate and destroy the Whore,
Rev. 17. 12. In short, the whole Roman Dominion, as of old, in East and West,
make the boundary of the Ten Horns, and so the Grecians make one Horn; though
the Greek Empire be at an end, yet those that are or rule there make the Horn.

The conclusion then is, that the quondam Eastern Empire, or Eastern parts,
belong to the Ten Horns, some of them may be found there; and so those three
Horns, Dan. 7. 8. might be there, and persecutions there may make the Epoch of
the 1260 days, and some Eastern Powers (though not under the notion of a
Grecian Empire, as before) may hate the Whore, and Burn her with fire, Rev. 17.
16. or have a hand in her destruction.

CHAP. VI. Of the Epoch of the Mystical Numbers.
Rule 7. THat the 42 months, the time, times, and half, and 1260 days did in
all probability begin before Ann. 400.

Here I must premise, or take three things for granted.

1. That those various numbers are the same measure of time diversely computed,
they begin and end together: for as the Witnesses Prophesying in sackcloth is
1260 days, Rev. 11. 3. So the cause or means of it was the Gentiles treading
the Holy City under foot 42 months, v. 2* which being resolved into days (30
days to every month) is the same time. And as the Woman's being in the
Wilderness is said to be 1260 days, Rev. 12. 6. So the same Wilderness state is
expressed, v. 14. by the time, times, and half, and one being resolved into the
other explaineth Dan. 7. v. 25. and 12. 7. which otherwise would have remained
very dark; now plainly [time] is a Prophetical year; [times] two years, and
[half] half a year, (as Dan. 4. 16* 23, 25, 32.) which is the same with 1260
years. And the Beast also having 42 months assigned to him for like work, Rev.
13. 5. it strongly proves that all these are equal numbers, and of the same
date.

2. That they are not taken indefinitely for an uncertain or long time, but
definitely, for a certain determined time: For though round numbers, as 10,
100. etc. may be indeterminately used, yet such broken numbers cannot be so
taken for an uncertain time, without special reason enforcing it. And seeing
three several expressions are used five times ( Rev. 11. 2, 3. and 12. 6, 14.
and 13. 5.) to set forth the same space of time, and all of them broken
numbers, it must be a certain definite time; else why is it 1260, and not 2000
days, or 42 months, rather than 40 or 60. or time, times, and half, rather than
four times? and what difference were there between the 1290 and the 1335 days,
Dan. 12. 11, 12. or how could a head of account be laid down, v. 11. and that
purposely in answer to that question* v. 6. how long shall it be to the end of
these Wonders, if they were an uncertain number which no account could be made
up from?

3. That they are not Natural or Common Days or Months, but Prophetical, every
day noting a Year; as Numb. 14. 33, 34. Ezekiel. 4. 5, 6. Dan. 4. 16, 23, 25, 32.
and Dan. 9. 24* 25, 26, 27. which last are 70 Weeks of Years reaching to the
Messiah; when natural days are intended there is a note of distinction, as of
Evenings and Mornings, Dan. 8. 4, 14, 26. which concern the Hee-Goat, v. 8. the
King of Graecia, v. 21. but those in the Revelation cannot be natural days, or
only three years and half, for the Beast is of long continuance, and has been
hundreds of years in the work of the 42 Months, treading down the Church, Rev.
11. 2. and his Wounding and Healing, Rev. 13. and the Earths wondering after the
Beast, and his being ridden by Mystical Babylon, so as to have all Nations
Drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, Rev. 17. 2, 3, 4, 5. has been hundreds
of years, and the Churches Sackcloth State very long; these things cannot be
confined to 1260 natural days, but must be so many years.

Many have been mistaken in their Computations, and therefore I would not be
too positive therein, but in probability those Days and Months began before
Ann. 400. this appears diverse ways.

1. The 42 Months and 1260 days must begin after the utter dethroning of the
Dragon, or casting down Pagans from their Imperial Seat and Worship: for upon
that provocation and the triumph, the Beast as his Successor drives the Church
into the Wilderness for such a time, Rev. 12. 6, 13, 14. They cannot begin upon
his firsT overthrow by Constantine the Great, but so as his ^l^ce was no more
found in Heaven, v. 8. and therefore not till after Julian, who was the last
professedly Pagan Emperor, and reigned Ann. 360 or not long after, and these
Days must begin after this, and not before, for the Horns were not Crowned, and
in the Work of the Beast till then, yet before Ann. 400.

2. The 1260 Days had their beginning soon after the first rising of the
Ten-Horned Crowned Beast: For, the 42 Months are assigned or allotted to him,
Rev. 13. 1, 5. power was given him to do 42 Months; he being of such a Savage
Nature, v. 2. like a Leopard, a Bear, a Lion, would take the first opportunity
offered for being in his Work; there is no evidence that he delayed till the
deadly Wound was made, much less to the time of Healing, which was hundreds of
years after. His receiving his Power, and Throne, and great Authority, v. 2.
(whence ensued the Worshipping him, v. 4.) is mentioned before the deadly Wound;
but that Wound being given soon after his first rising, that is the reason why
so little of his Work is mentioned till after that; yet doubtless he was found
in it soon after his first rising or before Ann 400.

3. Some say that the 1260 Days probably must so begin, as Daniels 1290 days
may expire or end with them, and so begin in likeliness before Ann. 400.

Daniel hearing of a time of unparallelled trouble, and that then his People
(the Jews) should be delivered, Dan. 12. 1. enquireth v. 6. How long shall it
be to the end of these Wonders? the answer was, in two branches, the one by a
Gentile number [of time, times, and half,] v. 7. which is the same with 1260
days. Daniel not understanding enquireth again after the end, v. 8. and has an
answer again, v. 11, 12. in two branches; the former is by 1290 days, which
discovers when the time, times, and half were to end, else it were no
explication thereof, seeing they are different times, cannot begin and end
together. And whether they end with the 1260 days or not, yet he gives a
direction when those 1290 days are to begin v. 11. from the time that the daily
Sacrifice shall be taken away and the abomination that makes desolate set up,
shall be 1290 days*

Now this must be either the Epiphanean or a Roman abomination; there is no
third imaginable to make the Epoch.

I cannot think that the Epiphanean, i. e. When Antiochus Epiphanes profaned
the Jewish Temple, 167. years before Christ, is intended: For the abomination
of desolation in Daniel is mentioned as to come, Mat. 24. 15. in words agreeing
not only to Dan. 9. 27. but as aptly to Dan. 12. 11. where the time, times, and
half, to be explained, clearly refer to the fourth Monarchy. And it is as
rational that he should look back to another Vision, given to himself as to
another third Monarchy from the fourth. And if we begin the 1290 days at
Antiochus Epiphanes, they must end about Ann. 1123. where was no suitable event
for their expiration; some would have it to be, the first Revelation of
Antichrist. But it is an answer to Daniels question which twice was not
concerning the beginning or revelation of him, but the end of those Wonders, v.
6, 7. And besides, the Revelation of Antichrist was long before Ann. 1123. if
not Ann. 606. yet to be sure when Eerengarius and others openly witnessed
against him, An. 1049. Neither should the 1335 Days then usher in Blessedness,
(as v. 12.) but great Persecution.

It must then refer to a Roman Abomination; not at Titus and Vespasian about
An. 70. Mat. 24. 15, 16. compared with Luk 21. 20, 21. for then not only the
1290. but also the 1335, were expired long ago, and yet the Blessedness
entailed is not come.

It remains then, that it must either be from the Antichristian Abomination,
viz. from the taking away of the true Gospel-Sacrifice, and setting up the
Abomination of Mystical- Babylon, making desolate, Rev. 17. 19. and 19. v. 19.
and this seems not to be intended; for Daniel using that Phrase two or three
times, never applies it that way, nor does he, or John, assign any such Number
as 1290 days to her, or to the Beast that carries her; yet if other accounts
fail, this must stand; because God is true.

Or it must be the Julian Abomination; those days cannot begin since upon any
Jewish account, for there has never been any Jewish Temple since to sacrifice
in or at and to be taken away. Also that Stupendous Dispensation in the time
of Julian, seems to many suitable for the 1290 days (a Jewish, not a Gentile
Number) to begin with: For, he armed the Jews against the Christians, demanded
why they did not use Sacrificing, seeing the Law commanded it? When they
answered, it was permitted to them only to Sacrifice in one place, the Temple.
Then suddenly he commanded the Temple to be Rebuilt, and by terrible
Earthquake, Thunder, Lightning and Fire, the Foundation Stones of the Temple
(till that day unstirred) were thrown out of their places, and their Tools and
Instruments burnt up, so as Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem then remembered the
Prophecy, that there should not be one Stone of the Temple le^t upon another,
Matthew. 24. See Socrat. lib. 3. c. 17. or 20. Ammianus Marcellinus, who lived in
the very time of Julian, lib 23* c. 1. says, That certain flaming Balls of
Fire issuing near unto the Foundations, and making many terrible Assaults,
consumed sundry times the Workmen, and made the place unaccessible. Now, to
attempt to re-edify a Jewish Temple purposely for Jewish Worship, and
Sacrificing in Gospel Times, and that in direct Opposition to Christ and
Christianity, thereby to take away the true Gospel-Sacrifice and Worship, was a
height of Abomination, and such as in a miraculous way brought Desolation: and
although there be no account of any Sacrifice then offered, yet it was
designed, and the Temple then being made utterly desolate, hence the daily
Sacrifice (which depended upon the Temple, Dan. 12. 5, 6, 7.) must needs be
taken away also. And though Julian was not personally or with an Army in the
holy Place or City; yet then he perfected the Desolation begun in the time of
Titus and Vespasian by his Edict about the Third Year of his Reign. Am.
Marcell. lib. 23. c. 1. 6.

And this is still the more considerable in that the Abomination of Pagan
Worship being set up about the Second Year of his Reign, the Lord made it
desolate also by a miraculous Earthquake or Fire; the Ethnic Temple in Delphos
was overwhelmed and burnt down when Julian had sent a Legate to offer Sacrifice
therein, and to consult with the Oracle of Apollo there, of the Event of the
Persian War. Chron Carrion. l. 3. Am. Marcell. lib. 22 c 4. 12. [On the 11th.
day before the Kalends of November (i. e. 21. of October) the most stately
Temple of Apollo Daphnaeus which Antiochus Epiphanes, (that ireful and cruel
King built) together with the Image therein of Jupiter Clympicus, equal in
bigness to the Patron it resembled, by sudden Violence of Fire was burnt]. And
the Abomination of Heathen and Jewish Worship being attempted to be set up by
Julian (as another Antiochus Epiphanes) were made a Desolation near the same
time, viz. between An. 360. and 366.

And indeed there was a suitable Event about the time of their Expiration, For
Ann. 1650. there was a Preludium of Israel's Salvation, (whose Deliverance was
the thing enquired after, v. 1.) if Julian's act was a little after An. 360.
often God does cut short his work, and omit small Numbers (as Genesis 15. 13.) in
a great Number. And according to Mr. Brett's Narrative by the leave of the Turk
and the King of Hungaria, there was October. 12. 1650. a Council of the Jews
consisting of about 300, and Spectators near 3000, to enquire after the
Messiah, whether he were come or not? whether Christ were he or not?

After Seven or Eight days Conference, some of the Roman Clergy mentioning the
use of Images and Praying to the Virgin Mary -- they brake up in disorder; yet
it is said, the Jews agreed upon another Meeting which was to be Three Years
after, and in Syria.

But if the 1290 days ended there, then whether 45 more will make up the 1335
days, and usher in the Blessedness of their Deliverance, let the Event
determine.

4. The 1260 days must begin about the time when there were two Wings of the
Roman Eagle, for the Woman the Church to flee by into the Wilderness, Rev. 12.
v. 14. i. e. when the Empire (the Ensign whereof was the Eagle) was divided
into East -- West: So it was between Arcadius and Honorius, about An. 395.
Helvic.

5. The 1260 days must begin before the Dragon poured out his Flood to drown
the Woman, Rev. 12. v. 14. for this Flood was cast out, v. 15. (...) -- [after
her, or upon her Back] and therefore the was upon her Journey going into the
Wilderness, or gone, gotten thither, when this Flood was poured out, but the
Earth swallowed up the Flood, v. 16. and the Dragon was disappointed.

Now many think it was a Flood of corrupt Doctrines, called Heresies, and about
An. 395. and after, these did swarm, the Eastern Churches were even overrun
with Arianism yea* in the West the Barbarian persecuting Vandals turned Arians!
so there were Nestorians, Pelagians, Eutychians, etc. which Earthly Men, i. e.
Civil Emperors by calling Councils did in some measure dry up.

I cannot say that this was the Flood, considering that the chiefest of these
corrupt Doctrines, viz. Arianism, did prevail in the time of Constantine and
Constantius, before the Beast was up, before the Woman's going into the
Wilderness, and Emperors themselves did Countenance Arianism, as Constantius,
and after him Valens, who were Arians and Persecutors.

I think it was a Dragonish, Paganish Flood; for it is [out of the Mouth of the
Serpent]. v. 15. and [Waters] in this Book are expounded to be Rev. 17. 15.
[People, and Multitudes, and Nations, and Tongues]. Let it then be a Flood or
Multitudes of barbarous People, and that not every Inundation of them wherein
they prevailed against the Empire; but some particular overflow of them (after
the Beast was up) wherein their design was chiefly against the Woman, or
Christian Church, and wherein they were unsuccessful, the Earth helping the
Woman, they are swallowed up, as v. 16.

And where we find this, we may conclude that the Woman was now going, or gone
into the Wilderness; and so the 1260 days did begin a little before.

Now this Flood of Barbarians was either at the Attempt of Eugenius and
Arbogastes, or else at Rhadagaisus, or both; which Actions I shall here add,
and judge whether they do not aptly answer to all that is said of this Flood.

It must be remembered that about this time the Contest was afresh about Pagan
Worship, which Constantine had thrown down; and says Calvis. An. 384. Gentiles
petunt restitui Romae cultum Ethnicum; Ambrosius resistit and obtinet. And An.
394. he says, Eugenius cum suis claustra Alpinm contra Theodosium munit,
minitaturque Christianae religioni exitium si victor rediret; the like say
others. It is apparent then that the very design of Eugenius was against
Christianity, and to restore Paganism in the Roman Empire, and having Usurped
the Supremacy in the West Parts of the World, Theodosius the Civil Emperor,
after spending the Night in Prayer to God, waged War with him, and though the
Enemy were so many that it seemed impossible to encounter them, yet there arose
so violent a Wind and Tempest, as the like never had been seen by any Man then
living, which without annoyance to the Emperor's People, did turn the Darts
of. Eugenius Soldiers to light in their own side, that Theodosius obtained a
complete Victory. See Socrat. Oros. Funccius. --

And thus this Dragon Flood cast out purposely to drown the Woman, the Church,
was swallowed up, not by Ecclesiastical Councils, but (through Divine
Concurrence) by the Earthly, Civil or Military Power of Theodosius.

Also Rhadagaisus with Two hundred Thousand ^oths, for the Restoration of
Ethnic worship, came into Italy, overran Thracia, Illyricum, Noricum, etc.
with Fire and Sword made great Devastations; the Romans affrighted hereat,
called in the help of Vldinus and Sarus (Earthly Pagan Men) with an Army of
Hunns and Goths, and partly by Hunger, partly otherwise, that so great a
Multitude was destroyed, few escaped, Cent. 5. c. 3 16. Diacon. Funcc. Calvis.
An. 406. And if this be the Dragons Flood, then the Woman must be in the
Wilderness, An. 406. and so the 1260 days began before.

6. The 1260 days must begin upon a Persecution raised by the revengeful
overthrown Dragon in the form of a Beast, by which the Woman (the Church) was
driven into a Wilderness Condition: This [ Persecution] thus limited I take to
be the clearest, firmest and most Signal Character of all, for the discovering
when the 1260 days and 42 Months must begin, and yet not insisted on by
Writers, I suppose from their Mistake thinking the first Beast to be the Pope,
and so making an Apostasy of his to be the Epoch; whereas he is the second
Beast, and there is another first Beast which those 42 Months and Prophetical
Days are to begin with; and that at a Persecution, as all the Three Chapters
where those Days and Months are mentioned, do clearly evidence; as, Rev. 11. v.
2, 3. the holy City shall they ( i. e the Gentiles) tread under foot 42 Months.
That [treading down] imports Subjection, great Sufferings by Enemies
insulting over them with contempt; and also the Witnesses being in Sackcloth
speaks the like.

So Rev. 12. 6. The Woman flees into the Wilderness -- 1260 days. It is an
allusion to the flight of the Israelites from an enraged Enemy, persecuting
Pharaoh; with such a flight (which imports Tribulation, Mat. 24. 20, 21.) do
the 1260 days begin, and therefore with Persecution; and expressly, v. 13, 14.
[he persecuted the Woman -- ] and this is mentioned as the very Cause of her
fleeing into the Wilderness, v. 14. for a time, times and half a time, i. e.
for 1260 days* What can be more plain, than that these days do begin with or by
a Persecution.

The third place is, Rev. 13. 5. Power was given him (...), to do, another
Version has it (...), to make War 42 Months; and the warring with the Saints
is expressly mentioned with the same word, v. 7.

And note, it is not every Persecution that does make the Epoch: it is not any
till Dragon, i. e. Pagan headship was cast down, and so not any of the Ten
Persecutions, not any till after Julian; but after the first Beast with crowned
Horns was up, v. 1, 2. which was many Years before the sixth Head of Emperors
went down. Yea, it is [a Persecution] raised in way of revenge for the Dragon,
i. e. Pagan overthrow, Rev. 12. 13. [he] i. e. the Dragon [when he saw he was
cast unto the earth, he persecuted the Woman -- ]. It was then a fresh
Persecution, upon that Provocation, his casting down. And note, it is not every
Warlike Irruption (as that of Alaricus) which makes the Epoch, but [a
Persecution] and such as drives the Woman into a Wilderness-condition, v. 6,
13, 14. which notes not a change of Place, so much as of State* answerable to
that of the Israelites in the Wilderness. It mporteth a solitary, afflicted,
yet safe condition; full of Wants, Dangers, Trials, Temptations, and yet having
Divine Protections, Provisions and Preservations.

And hence, none need be stumbled at the seeming or real Godliness, either of
some Emperors, (or Popes) after the Beast was up; For, if the Head of
Emperors did not persecute, yet if some of the Crowned Horns did, though
others did not; yet, it may be deemed a Persecution of the Beast. Often an
action of a part is reckoned to the whole, as Achan's to Israel, Josh. 7. 1,
11. So 1 King. 14. 22. Am. 2. 5. Rev. 17. 16. compared with Rev. 18. 9. So
whether Head or Horns, some of them persecute the Church into the Wilderness,
and this gives the first Date to the 1260 days. The great Question then here,
is,

When did that Persecution begin by the Dragon in form of a Beast, with Crowned
Horns, out of revenge for his Overthrow, whereby the Church was driven into a
Wilderness-Condition? For, at such a Persecution, or at the Churches being
fully in the Wilderness thereby, we must begin the 42 Months and 1260 Days.

And upon a diligent Search into History, it is to admiration that the Event
should so aptly agree to fix the Epoch before Ann. 400.

For such Persecutions there were about that time, by the Head of Emperors,
and by Crowned Horns; as Goths, Vandals, Hunns -- they destroyed the Churches,
and were feared every where.

It must be remembered, that Theodosius the First, caused the Pagan Temples to
be destroyed, which Constantine shut up, Tripart. Hist. lib. 9. c. 33. Calvis.
An. 395. and Dragon-worship being decreed to be plucked up by the Roots; this
occasioned the fleeing of many into the Wilderness by their Persecutions both
in East and West. See Magdeburg. Cent. 5. c. 3. take their and others words.

1. The Church in the West was grievously smitten, because of Public Tumults,
-- as says Sozomen; for very many barbarous Nations rushing chiefly into the
Roman Regions, have vehemently afflicted the Churches, as Jerome makes a great
Complaint of the thing. How many Matrons, how many Godly Virgins, and comely
and noble Bodies were Mocking-stocks to those Beasts? (he speaks of barbarous
Nations:) The Bishops taken, and diverse Orders of the Clergy slain, etc. Ubique
lucuts, ubique gemitus and plurima mortis imago. In these People, the chief
were the Goths and Vandals; whereof, seeing part were Strangers to
Christianity, and given to the Superstition of the Gentiles, taking some
occasion, they did not only extremely persecute Christians, but also
endeavored utterly to abolish them; but part, although in Profession they were
numbered among Christians, yet because they were Infected with the Poison of
Arius, they also did no less sharply oftentimes afflict the Church. There is
every where a meeting of Pagans, there are heard Roarings and Blasphemies
against the Christian Faith, Complaints of the Neglect of the Religion of their
Forefathers; therefore so great Evils hung over them; because omitting the
Ancient Rites of sacrificing, and rejecting their Father's Gods, many embraced
Christ. -- Immediately therefore leaving all things, they consult of
reiterating their Sacrifices, of repairing of Altars, and restoring wholly all
the Idolatry of the Ancients, and devise to abolish Christianity every where.
Paul. Diacon. Oros. --

About the same time, the Churches also of France sustained great Persecutions;
for the Vandals overrunning, destroying France, overturned many both Cities
and Churches, and made many famous godly Men Martyrs, etc. See also Jerome
Epist. ad Geront.

Also the Churches in Spain experienced their Calamities and Afflictions; for
the Vandals about 16. Honor. occupied Spain, and when some of them were Arians,
and others Gentiles Catholicos more suo afflixerunt, etc. See more, Cent. 5. c.
3.

And now Judge whether the Woman was not in Sackcloth and the holy City trodden
and persecuted by a revengeful Dragon turned into a Beast with Crowned Horns,
at that Day, and so whether the 42 Months and 1260 Days were not begun?

2. The Church also in the East Empire under Arcadius, sustained like
Persecution about the very same time, Cent. 5. c. 3. Gainus a Barbarous, Cruel
and Military Man, of the Nation of the Scythians, troubled the Church before
An. 400. being by Profession an Arian, desired one Temple of the Emperor
within the Walls; Chrysostom told the Emperor, it must not be to Blasphemers;
Gainus did get an Army, he going by Thracia, destroyed all as he went;
Constantinople was in eminent danger. A little after, Chrysostom saw the most
corrupt state and dissolute Discipline of the Churches, and began the
Correction of these things; he was deposed and twice banished, and at last died
in Banishment; presently after he was gone out of the City, there was a great
Fire, which they laid to the Charge of Chrysostom's Followers, they take and
Imprison many; some were carried to Chalcedon Prison, and neighboring places,
and others carried beyond Sea to diverse Islands, being first vexed with diverse
Torments, others fled -- The Governor, because a Pagan, and out of Hatred of
that Religion, took great Pleasure in the Misery of Christians; many had great
Tortures, and were tormented unto Death, and not only in the City, but in other
places, was Trouble. The Friends of Chrysostom could not communicate with his
Enemies, and therefore a great Persecution was raised against the Churches of
God, by the instinct of Atticus, and there was a Law made for their Banishment
-- lb. Cent. 5. c. 3. out of Sozom. Nicephor.

And since there has been a Continuation of the Persecution of the Beast by
its Heads or Crowned Horns. As,

The cruel Vandals passing out of Spain into Africa, under [ Genserick] their
Captain, an Arian, about An. 427. as Calvis. or 430 as others, being one of the
Crowned Horns, raised a sore Persecution against the Christians; they wasted
and destroyed all before them with Fire and Sword, but especially raged against
the Churches; the Bishops and Ministers they destroyed with many kinds of
Torments. -- When he had taken Carthage, all the Ministers were thrust into
weather-broken Ships, and so banished; all in the Province were despoiled of
all their Substance, and turned out of their Churches. -- After Genserick, his
Son Hunnerick succeeded, who also used Tortures, and became a great Persecuter;
he banished into [the Wilderness] of Bishops, Ministers, Deacons, and other
Members of Christ 4976. -- By an Edict, in one day he caused all Christian
Churches throughout Africa to be shut up, giving to the Arians all the Goods
and Churches of the Orthodox -- and some of them were told, that they should be
banished into the Wilderness. He also sent abroad through all Africa his cruel
Tormentors; so that no Place, no House remained free from Lamentation,
Screeching, and Outcries.

These things, and many more are written by Victor Bishop of Utica, who lived
at the same time, and was himself a Sufferer, under this Persecution. And it is
remarkable, that the Suffering is once and again expressed by being in the
Wilderness, which is the very Notion it is under, Rev. 12. 6. 14. as if it were
literally to be fulfilled.

Attila King of the Hunns, when he wasted both Empires, did also not a little
trouble the Church, 9000 Virgins were made Martyrs and many others, Cent. 5. c.
3.

So Anastasius Emperor about Ann. 492. raised great Persecutions. See Cent. 6.
c. 3.

It were almost endless to mention the After-Persecutions under Emperors and
Crowned Horns. But whether any Acts of either aforementioned, or some other
Acts, did give the first Date to the 1260 days, I must leave to others to
judge. I am comfortably persuaded that these days of their Sackcloth state are
come to their Period, and end some Years since. As a small Act, Ishmael's
Mocking might be the Epoch of the 400 Years ( Genesis 15. 13.) so some less
obvious Act possibly might begin these Prophetical Days.

CHAP. VII. Of what Ensues after the 1260 Days are at an End.
IT is confidently concluded by many Writers, that exactly and immediately
after the Perioding of the 42 Months and 1260 Days, there is an end of the
Dominion of the Beast, and of the Sufferings of the Saints; whereas I am
confident they are mistaken in both; another Event was to be expected. It Is
true, then the Witnesses come out of their Sackcloth-state, but soon after they
pass into a worse state; as will appear under the next Rule.

Rule 8. That after the Expiration of the 1260 Days, and finishing of the
Testimony, there is a Witness-killing War, the Death and Resurrection of the
Witnesses, and a great Commotion before the sounding of the Seventh Trumpet.

This appears: For,

It Is clear that Daniel's little Horn continues after the time, times and
half, Dan. 7. 25, 26. the Judgment shall sit, and they shall take away his
Dominion, to consume and destroy it to the End.

Therefore his losing his Dominion and his Destruction, will be by a
Consumption after those times (which are the same with 1260 Days) are ended.
Yea, he is prevalent, thinks to change Times and Laws; How long? v. 21, 22.
until the ancient of days came, -- and the Saints possessed the Kingdom, i. e.
until the Seventh Trumpet.

And further to confirm this, after the time, times and half, it is added, Dan.
12. 7. [and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the Power of the holy
People, all these things shall be finished] viz. Daniel's People, the Jews,
shall be delivered, v. 1.

So then, the accomplishing to scatter the Power of the holy People, is after
the time, times and half are expired. And seeing we read not of any new
scattering of the Jews, and this belongs to the Fourth Monarchy, and is a
Gentile Number, it may possibly refer to Gentile Christians, and be in part
expressive of the way of slaying the Witnesses by a scattering them and their
Church Assemblies, after these times or 1260 days are expired.

Also John in the Revelation clearly places what concerns the Death of the
Witnesses after the 1260 days are ended, Revel. 11. 7. (...), when they have
finished their Testimony, -- then, and not before, does the Witness-killing War
begin. I had rather render it so in the time past, being in the Aorist than
[when they are about to finish]. And their Testimony was not finished till the
1260 days of their Prophesying expired; seeing the Testimony of Jesus is the
Spirit of Prophecy, ( Rev. 19. 10.) so long as they Prophecy, (though in
Sackcloth) it is not finished either for time or work. And not only the import
of the word (...), but the Nature of the thing makes that War and Death
subsequent. For during the 1260 days of their prophesying the Witnesses are
Overcomers, and their Enemies are killed. Rev. 11. 5, 6. [if any Man will hurt
them, fire proceeds out of their Mouth, and devoureth their Enemies] -- and
[he must in this manner be killed] -- and this [in the days of their Prophesie]
--

Whereas the issue of this War is, the Witnesses are overcome and killed, v. 7.
the Beast -- shall overcome and kill them, Rev. 13. 7.

Yea, the Prophesying state, in the very mentioning of it, is inconsistent with
the Deathstate, and the Death far worse than the Prophesying, though in
Sackcloth; so long as they Prophecy they are alive, not dead. Neither do the
Witnesses in the time of their lying dead, torment the Earth-dwellers, as they
do in the time of their Prophesying, v. 5, 6, 10.

The Conclusion then is, that the finishing of the Testimony, however the
Witness-killing War, and the Death of the Witnesses are after the 42 Months and
1260 days are expired and at an end.

For the further discovering who are the Witnesses, and what their Death; how,
where, and when they are to be Slain, taken Seven Propositions.

Prop. I. That the [Two Witnesses] are faithful Ministers, and pure Professors
or Beast-opposing Churches.

For they are [two Candlesticks] Rev. 11. 4. (which are interpreted Churches,
Rev. 1. 20* the seven Candlesticks are seven Churches), and they are [two Olive
Trees] which is but an Allusion to Zech. 4. 3, 11, 14. and cannot be confined
to Magistrates and Ministers, seeing they are never called a Candlestick, and
pure Professors and Churches are anointed ones, Romans 11. 17, 18, 19, 20. 1 John
2. 20. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Yea, these are such as Prophecy (1 Cor. 14. 24, 31. Rev.
19. 10.) and that 1260 Rev. 11. 3. not only making a Profession at large, but
bearing and finishing a Testimony for Christ and his Kingdom against the Beast,
as v. 7. so as he becomes their Enemy, and makes War with them. The Two
Testaments are their Testimony, and so cannot be the Witnesses; however it
comes to the same in Effect; for if these, or Magistrates and Ministers lie
dead, then so will such pure Professors and Churches also, and so are to be
deemed Witnesses.

Prop. II. That [the Death of the Witnesses] is an Extremity of Suffering: Or,
it consists in an unparalleled Cessation of Testimony and Deprivation of
Means and Comforts of Life.

The various Phrases of overcoming and killing them, may intimate its being
attended with much Bloodshed: but it is not chiefly a corporal Death, for then
such must be the resurrection or recovery out of it, and that under the sixth
Trumpet, Rev. 11 11. 14. whereas the corporal resurrection is not until the
seventh Trumpet, v. 18. And their Enemies behold them with pleasure three
Prophetical days or years and half, which they could not do if it were a
corporal Death. It must then be a metaphorical Death, by the Churches being in
a state and condition full of Extremity, of Affliction and Suffering, which
often is called a Death, 2 Cor. 1. 10. and 11. v. 23. Psalm. 71. 20. and 80. 18.
Isai. 26. 19. Ezekiel. 37. 10. -- 35. Romans 11. 15. It will not only be a civil
death, by deprivation of Public Ministration and Employment, as to the
exercise of office; but also a spiritual Death, by an unparallelled Cessation
of Testimony, for they dye not merely as Men, but as Witnesses they lose much
of their witnessing Spirit, Rev 11. 7. Their state is far worse than in their
prophesying time, possibly by military Men having Power over, ( v. 9, 10.) and
forcibly disabling of them for former actual witnessing work; and thus it will
be not only their Sin, but their Suffering, that there is a failing of their
Testimony. And although Spiritual Life it self will not utterly fail, yet they
will in an extraordinary unpresidented way, be cut short of external means for
the support of it, so as they are deemed as dead Corpse, v. 8, 9. and their
restoration or recovery, is by the Spirit of Life from God entering into them,
which imports a precedent want of it. As the dead-state of the Jews or
Israelites, Ezekiel. 37. imports not only the ruin of their City, destruction of
their Temple, despoiling of them of outward Comforts, Houses, Lands, Relations.
Accommodations; -- but the Profaning of the solemn Worship of God, the
trampling under foot his Ordinances, the casting down from Church State or
work, and subjecting them to the wills of merciless Men, and their own drawing
up despairing Conclusions, v. 11. our hope is lost, we are cut off for our
parts: and the restoring of them, is a recovery out of this condition, v. 8. to
15.

So the Death of the Witnesses imports the like; an unparallelled, unwonted
loss of a witnessing Spirit, deprivation of the external Worship and Ordinances
of Christ and Church State, by scattering, loss of Communion, and all
aggravated with the triumphant Blasphemies of Enemies, and Insultations over
them, Rev. 11. 10. and their own despairing Conclusions, from their seeing no
visible possibility of coming into a better condition afterward; all which,
will be attended with a variety of other Afflictions and Sufferings, rendering
their conditions so deplorable, as is hardly to be pre-conceived of before
experienced.

Prop. III. That it is by a latter Victorious War of the First Beast that the
Witnesses are slain.

Rev. 11. 7. -- The Beast that ascends out of the bottomless Pit, shall make
War against them, and shall overcome and kill them.

Where note, It was not by [the Dragon] i. e. not by any of the Ten
Persecutions in the First three hundred Years after Christ, under Pagan
Emperors, but by [the Beast] who was the Dragon's Successor; he is the slayer
of the Witnesses: and not the second Beast, the Pope (though it may be by his
Instigation) but by the first Civil, Persecuting, Ten-horned, Crowned,
Whore-ridden Beast: for, it is by him which ascends out of the bottomless
Pit; Compare Rev. 17. v. 3, 7, 8. with Rev. 13. 1, 2. and 11. 7.

And it is by [a War] not a mere worldly literal War, but a Spiritual, Mystical
War, by a difference stated between the Witnesses and the Bestians; and so, not
where the power of the Beast has wholly prevailed, but where Christ has a
potent party to make opposition. And, not any War soon after the rising of the
Ten-Horned Beast, or during the 1260 days, but when the Witnesses have finished
their testimony as to time and work, and are overcome and the War ended; and
hence this [Death of the Witnesses] was not by any National distresses and
calamities, which equally betide Bestians and the true Witnesses; nor could the
Death of the Witnesses be before or at the Smalcaldian War, nor at the Council
of Trent, Ann. 1546. nor at the Massacre at Paris, Ann. 1572. for from the
rising of the Horns to those times, the 1260 days could not be ended, or
testimony finished, and so the Witness-killing War was not then so much as
begun.

Prop. IV. That it is in an open place of Mystical Babylon that the Witnesses
lie dead: How long this Witness-killing War lasts, the Scripture does not
determine, but the event must, but it leaves Spiritless, Lifeless, Rev. 11. 8.
their dead bodies shall lie in the Street of the great City, which Spiritually
is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was Crucified.

This [great City] is Mystical Babylon, see Rev. 14. 8. and 16. v. 19. and 17.
v. 18. and 18. v. 10, 16, 18, 19, 21. and the description agrees to that, for
it is [Spiritually] i. e. not literally, but mystically called [ Sodom] for
spiritual Whoredom and Idolatry, ( Rev. 17. 5.) and [ Egypt] for tyranny and
cruelty ( Rev 17. 6.) [where our Lord was Crucified] which was under Pontius
Pilate a Roman Deputy, and in that Jurisdiction.

It cannot be literally [ Jerusalem] for that was not a great City in the days
of John, nor ever after till the New Jerusalem, (Rev. 21. 10.) after which
there will be no more sorrow or death (v. 4.) Z^ph. 3. 15. Z^ch. 9. 8. Amos 9.
14, 15. Ezekiel's measuring is after restoration, not before, Ezekiel. 40. 17,
19, 20. and 48. 15, 16. and therefore that is under the Seventh Trumpet, after
which they will not lie dead, and therefore that is not the same, nor at the
same time with John's measuring, for that and the death of the Witnesses, is
before the end of the Sixth Trumpet, Rev. 11. 1, 7, 14. They lie dead in the
great City, the Roman dominion, not in the whole compass of it, but in [a
Street] thereof, where some eminent testimony was held for Christ and his
Kingdom, against the Beast, not in Streets. Yet (...), though distinguished
from City, as being only a part thereof ( Luke 10. 10. and 14. 21.) notes a
public, broad and open place, in opposition to what is private, as Mat. 6. 5.
and 7. 13. [wide] is the Gate -- Rev. 21. 21. and 22. 3.

So that the Witnesses shall lie dead in [the Street] i. e. in a most open
place of Mystical Babylon, exposed to the view of all, even of Enemies. The
openness of it is such, as v. 9. [they of the People, Kindreds, Tongues and
Nations, shall see their dead bodies, and not suffer them to be put in the
Grave.] Denying Burial to the Dead, generally sounds disfavour, and being
barbarous ( Am. 8. 3. Psalm. 79. 2, 3. Jer. 16. 4, 6. and 22. 19. and 25. 33.)
but if it be an act of favor here, securing them from utter destruction, yet
it is a very public business, the sadness of their condition is notoriously
known to those of various Nations and Kingdoms* by the dead Witnesses being
personally present there. And so, either they are slain in diverse Nations and
Kingdoms, or else after dead, they are transported, exiled, banished, and by
flight dispersed and driven for refuge thither, and finding welcome there, by
their kindness are sheltred, and secured from burial, from utter ruin and
destruction. Or else (as some think) military men of all gatherings of several
Nations, Kindreds and Tongues, will have power over them, and hold them under
their death; and the Bestians are expressed under the same notions, Rev. 13. 7,
8. and the Earthdwellers rejoice over them, Rev. 11. 10 and to be sure these
are Enemies.

Prop. 5. That when the Witnesses have lain dead three years and half, they
shall be eminently revived and advanced, Rev. 11. 11, 12. After three days and
half, the Spirit of life from God entered into them -- and they heard a voice
from Heaven, saying unto them, Come up hither -- It is a determinate time, else
it might have been said as well after three or four days, if only a short
uncertain time had been intended; whereas it is three days and half, and so
twice mentioned. Nor can they be Natural days, for the Earth-dwellers could not
so congratulate one another at a distance, in three natural days and half. Nor
are they the same with the 1260 days; For, who can imagine that so many days
should signify no more than three days and half in the same breath? And
besides, they are different states, the one of Sackcloth the other of Death.
Neither are they dead when they begin their testimony (as that would have it)
nor till they finish it. It remains then that the time of the Witnesses lying
dead is [three years and half] not to be counted from the first beginning of
trouble, that is longer, for the witness-killing War brings trouble, but from
the end of the War, when it can be said, Now the Witnesses are overcome and
killed, are able to make no more considerable opposition against the Bestians,
but are Spiritless, their power is gone; thence begin those days.

And hence, where the Witnesses remain in the same deplorable and sad
condition, or go into a worse, a longer space, as four or six years, that is
not the time of the Witnesses lying dead* For it is said [After three days and
half, the Spirit of life from God entered into them] Rev. 11. 11. Some
extraordinary if not immediate hand of God beyond all expectation before the
fourth year is come gives some reviving, removes that wherein the Death of
the Witnesses did consist.

[And they stood upon their feet] they were fallen down, but now are recovered
into a better posture, to the affrightment, and astonishment of Spectators;
[Great fear fell upon them which saw them.] This second step follows not long
after their reviving, a resurrection.

Afterward they have an invitation or call into a more honorable condition,
v. 12. [and they heard a great voice from Heaven, saying, Come up hither.] It
is not the highest Heaven, for the call thither is not till the end of the
Seventh Trumpet; but [the Church] is [the Heaven] they are called up to, which
they were greatly cast down from, during the time of their Death, now they are
called to public exercises again, in a Church State of exaltation and
advancement, [and they ascended] their Resurrection is immediately after the
half day, but their Ascension may be some time after, more gradual, and [in a
Cloud] i. e. with a great multitude, as Heb. 12. 1. a Cloud of Witnesses; a
vast number, who at their death seemed fewer: what if this Cloud should be that
fullness of the Gentiles coming in, as an immediate forerunner of the Jews
return, and Isreal's being saved? Romans 11. v. 25, 26. [and their Enemies beheld
them] Rev. 11. v. 11. 12. this expression at the second view differeing so much
from the first, v. 11. makes me question, whether the great fear after the
resurrection of the Witnesses when they stand upon their feet be not of friends
as Enemies, answerable to that great fear at the Resurrection of Jesus Christ,
(all alluding to him) which fell upon those that kept the Watch to hinder his
rising, as well as upon those Disciples that sought him after risen, Matthew. 28.
v. 2, 3, 4, 8. Mark 16. v. 5, 6, 7.

So after the Resurrection of the Witnesses at first hand, not only those that
have kept the Watch, and by Edicts and Acts, in the time of their Death sought
to hinder their rising, are struck into a pannick fear, but as well many
Friends and Witnesses may be filled with great trembling, fear and amazement,
at the first hand, by the Earthquake and terrible dispensations. The rising of
the Witnesses at first, may not be obvious to eminent Christians, so as to
deliver them from fear, or great workings of unbelief: but at their Ascension,
their exaltation by that call is so eminent and public, that then [the
Enemies] of the Witnesses only fall under astonishing fears.

And observe, that whilst the Witnesses lie dead, there is a remnant that is
secured from that death; all the Witnesses in all places do not die, it is not
so general; God has a reserve in that day, of a number that shall bear some
testimony, and not suffer at the rate that others do, where the stage of this
Tragedy is, in the time of lying dead; For those that lay dead (all of them for
ought I know) are called up into Heaven, into a state of exaltation, Rev. 11.
12. and therefore there are others who give the call, and not those that lay
dead; these do not call themselves but are called, therefore there are others
who did not fall under that Death: but these Witnesses or Friends who are
reserved, shall not appear so eminently till about the time of their Ascension,
then the Witnesses had that call, [and they Ascended up to Heaven in a Cloud.]

Prop. 6. That there is an Earthquake or stupendous alterations, to the
desolating a famous tenth part of the City, about the time of the Witnesses
restoration: Rev. 11. 13. [and the same hour (or day, as in some copies) there
was a great Earthquake -- ] i. e. at the same time with the Witnesses
Resurrection; possibly as a means of their rising, it alludeth to Mat. 28. 1,
2. or at their Ascension.

There was [an Earth quake] i. e. commotions or wonderful alterations in the
face of things, (as Rev. 6. 12.) and would hardly be called [a great
Earth-quake] if it did not extend to many Nations and Kingdoms. This seems to
be a Turkish Earthquake, for it is closed thus, Rev. 11. 14. The second Woe is
past -- i. e. the Sixth Trumpet is over, which sounded by the Turk, as is
generally granted and proved, in that all matters of it aptly agree to him. So
that this is a sure direction, to tell us where we are at the Witnesses
Ascension, viz. at the conclusion of the Sixth Trumpet.

And it is very observable, that the fifth Trumpet is closed thus, Rev. 9. 12.
One Woe is past; but when he had mentioned much work of the sixth Trumpet, v.
13, etc. he does not end the chapter in the same manner, but suspendeth and
deferreth that, till he had mentioned some other eminent occurences, chap* 10,
and 11. and then adds, v. 14. The second Woe is past, i. e. the Witnesses
being Risen, Ascended, and the Earthquake over, now the Turks have done their
work of the sixth Trumpet, the punishing the Romanists for their Idolatry,
Worshipping Images of Gold and Silver, ( Rev. 9. 20, 21.) now the Turks will
cease to be a Woe as formerly to them; no more famous exploits of theirs
against Papists are to be expected. The Turks then may lose their dominion, or
much of it, though their utter ruin and destruction may not be till
afterward, and that upon the Mountains of Israel, (Ezekiel. 39. 4.) but they will
be much concerned in this Earthquake, as the last part of their work against
the Romanists.

Now this Earthquake is signalized, by the destruction of a vast number of
Dignitaries, either of the Turks or Romanists, Rev. 11. 14. and in the
Earthquake were slain of men 7000. names of men, i. e. men of Name and Office
(many more than of Enemies of the common sort) possibly parallel to Rev. 18. 6,
8, 15, 16. and by the Repentance of some, Rev. 11. 14. [And the remnant were
affrighted, and gave Glory to the God of Heaven;] and especially by the
Destruction of a famous tenth part, [And the tenth part of the City fell.] To
[fall] is to be ruined, overthrown, destroyed, made desolate, as Rev. 18. 10,
17, 19, 21. This [Tenth part] which falls, some think to be one Kingdom where
the Witnesses did lie Dead, which is not proved, and is unlikely, seeing their
Death and the effect of their Ascension reaches other Kingdoms, v. 15. it is
then, either Constantinople or some other famous Kingdom belonging to the Turks
(as Hungary, or Greece. --) Seeing the Turkish Woe now soon passes and loses
ground before the seventh Trumpet; Or else seeing it is a tenth part of the
City; I think it rather is Rome it self; not upon Mr. M. too curious notion of
that being but a tenth part now, of what it was of old; but as being
emphatically the (...), and because its fall is an immediate forerunner of the
seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 19, 20. There is a Triumphant
Song, that [the Kingdoms of the World, are become the Kingdoms of the Lord a^^
of his Christ:] which is the same that is (...) the destruction of the Whore of
Babylon, and by the same persons; compare it with Rev. 19. 7, 9, 11, 15, 19, 20.

And hence, Rev. 18. is an explication, not of the fifth Vial, but the sixth,
and the rather because after the Witnesses Restoration, a remnant repented,
Rev. 11. 13. and so their rising cannot be under the fourth, or fifth, or
seventh Vials, for then they repented not, but blasphemed God, Rev. 16. 9, 11,
21. Their Resurrection and Ascension then must be under the sixth Vial.

It must be before the seventh Vial at Armageddon; For, at the seventh Vial,
the whole fourth Kingdom of the Beast falls, whereas at the rising of the
Witnesses, it is but a tenth part that falls, and that upon an Earthquake
under the sixth Trumpet, Rev. 11. 13. after which there is another, and the
greatest Earthquake under the seventh Trumpet, v. 19. Whereas the seventh Vial
is the last of the last Plagues, and brings the greatest Earthquake, Rev.
16. 18. and so cannot be that at the rising of the Witnesses, for that is not
the last nor greatest. And further after the destruction of the Whore, there is
an interval for the lamentation of some of her friends which survive, Rev. 18.
9, 10. and for the rejoicing of others, her Enemies, and making themselves
ready, Rev. 19. 8, 9. when the great supper at Armageddon by the seventh Vial
is to come, ver. 19, 20.

Only we must distinguish between the destruction [of Babylon at Rome] (which
is at the Earthquake, near the rising of the Witnesses, under the sixth Vial,
Rev. 11. 13.) and the Perdition [of Babylon, as extending into the Nations] or
the whole compass of the Roman Dominion, which is not till the Earthquake at
the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11. 9. and at the seventh Vial, when the Cities of
the Nations fall, Rev. 16. 19. and then great Babylon comes into remembrance,
to give her the fiercest wrath; but Babylon at Rome was destroyed before, Rev.
18.

Some not observing this distinction, run upon mistakes, either to think that
Rev. 18. belongs to the seventh Vial, which is the last wrath, whereas, that
Rev. 19. 19, 20* comes after; Or else say, that the Turks and Constantinople,
are the Babylon mentioned under the seventh Vial; which I dare not think; they
being no where called Babylon in the Apocalypse, but rather belong to the Beast
or Dragon; And it is untrue, for the Ten-Horned Beast carries the Whore of
Babylon, Rev. 17. 3, 5, 7. whereas the Ten-Horned Beast never carried the
Turks, nor did the corrupt Church of Rome Ride upon the Turks; neither was
Constantinople the great City, which in the days of John did Reign over the
Kings of the Earth, v. 18. but Rome was that City, and stretching into the
Nations; so it is the Babylon mentioned in the seventh Vial.

And here observe, that this slaying or lying dead of the Witnesses three days
and half, cannot be successively in one Kingdom after another: For, at their
Resurrection or Ascension, the tenth part of the City falls, Rev. 11. 13. the
sixth Trumpet passes, v. 14. and soon the seventh Trumpet sounds, v. 15.
that notion would make diverse slaughters, resurrections and falls: whereas the
Scripture makes but one slaughter, one resurrection, one Earthquake, one fall
of the Tenth part; neither can the sixth Trumpet pass, or the seventh sound in
one Kingdom after another, for when that sounds, not only one Kingdom, but
the Kingdoms of the World, become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ,
v. 15.

Prop. VII. That the Death of the Witnesses, Ann. 1680. was not past, but to
come.

There are various thoughts among learned Men, whether this black and dismal
day of the Witnesses Death be past or yet to come? I think it is near
approaching, not only because the days of their Sackcloth in all probability
are finished, and the Warring time seems near at an end; but because the
sixth Trumpet has sounded a long time, above 200 years, if it began when the
Turk obtained Constantinople, Ann 1453. therefore the conclusion of it cannot
be far off.

I do not think the Church to be the proper subject, which the Trumpets sound
judgment against, but the Civil State of the Roman Empire; and clearly the
seventh blows good to the Church, Rev. 11. 15. I shall refer the Reader to
Mr. Mede and others, to see how and when the several Trumpets sounded. All
things concerning the sixth agree to the Turk; and if [the hour, day, month and
year] Rev. 9. 15. notify the time allotted to the Turkish Tyranny, then the
end of his work is hastening; for the time must be counted, not from the time
of their being [prepared,] but of their being [loosed] to do the work of
slaying the third part of Men, v. 14, 15. This loosing of four Angels, or
Sultans, seems to be before Ann. 1300. for then they fell into one Ottoman
Family; however, (taking a day for a year as elfewhere) the time for that Woe
will expire within a few years, which is after the Witnesses Resurrection and
Ascension.

But my opinion is, that the Death of the Witnesses is yet to come 1680 I
should be glad herein to be mistaken; my grounds are these.

I. Until the 1260 days, and the Warring State be at an end, their death-state
is not come: for it is after finishing their Testimony, that the Beast makes
War with them and kills them, Rev. 11. 7. So long as their Testimony is not
finished, and the War not ended, so long they are not Dead, nor the three days
and half begun; And therefore Ann. 1680. their Death was yet to come.

It Is true, in the time of their Death there may be Edicts or Acts (as after
the Death of Christ, Sealing the Tomb --) to hinder the Witnesses Resurrection,
but till there be a suppression of their Testimony, they are not dead.

II. The Condition of the Witnesses since finishing of their testimony, has
not been for three years and half, far worse than it was before, by a greater
suppression of Testimony, and other unparallelled sufferings; therefore Ann.
1680. their Death was not past, but to come.

The consequence is clear, because the Deathstate is far worse than the
Sack-cloth-state, as death is far worse than life, though in a mournful
condition; this has been proved before. Prop. 2.

III. Whatever the Death of the Witnesses consists in, some recovery out of
that is the immediate issue of the three days and half; For, else they must be
longer dead, whereas Rev. 11. 11. [after three days and half, the Spirit of
life from God entered into them, and c.] This [life] stands in opposition to
the [Death] and no medium between them; no moment wherein they are not either
dead or alive; at the expiration of these days, before the fourth day, they
live. If their Death consists in an unparalleled cessation of Testimony,
then there is some recovering into witnessing work again, before four years be
expired, and so whatever else their Death may be placed in.

But no such recovery out of that which is their Death, or no removal of that
wherein it does consist, has been the immediate issue of three years and half,
of any supposed time for their death already past, and so that is yet to come.

I see no Scripture evidence for a gradual reviving or resurrection, yet there
may be a gradual Ascension.

IV. There has not been such a triumphant state of Earth-dwellers, for freedom
from former Torments, which they felt by the Witnesses Prophesying, as
answers Rev. 11. 10. They that dwell upon the Earth shall rejoice over them,
and make merry, and shall send gifts one to another, because these two Prophets
tormented them -- It was by their Prophesying and Praying as Elias did, that
they tormented the Bestians, Carnal, Earthly minded Men; and whilst the
Witnesses lie dead, the Earth-dwellers are in a very prosperous flourishing
condition, keep a Jubilee, with more than ordinary signs of joy, (as the
variety of Expressions intimates) and this for freedom from their former
Torments.

But no such triumphant State of Earthdwellers has been experienced in the
time past, since finishing their Testimony. Therefore their Death is yet to
come.

The like might be said of the Nations, Kindreds and Tongues not seeing their
dead Bodies, so as to hinder their Burial, v. 9.

5. Immediately after the reviving of the Witnesses from their Death-state,
there is such a restitution to their former Posture, as is to the great
affrightment of Spectators, Rev. 11. 11, 12. -- Great fear fell upon them which
saw them.

But this is not yet experienced by Friends or Enemies, and so their
Death-state is not past, but yet to come.

6. There has not been Ann. 1680. such a great Earthquake or Commotion as
ushers in the Consequents of the Witnesses resurrection. And so it is not past,
but yet to come.

Rev. 11. 13. The same Hour there was a great Earthquake --

There is not yet a fall of that famous Tenth part of the City, nor the
Slaughter of 7000. a vast number of Men of Name; nor the Repentance of a
Remnant, so as to give Glory to God; nor is the Turkish Woe yet past, as v. 14.

Therefore the Death, Resurrection, and Ascension of the Witnesses cannot be
yet past, but to come.

7. The seventh Trumpet has not yet sounded; Therefore the Witnesses are not
yet ascended.

For then that comes quickly, Rev. 11. 14, 15. though not the same moment with
their Resurrection, yet very speedily after their Ascension, and so their Death
could not be at the time many fix upon; as at the Council of Trent -- which are
past above 100 years past.

It Is true, the great Reformation about the time of Luther, has its place in
the words of this Book, so as one of the seven Vials (I think the fourth Vial)
was then eminently poured out; but that was not the sounding of the seventh
Trumpet.

There are invincible Arguments to prove, that the seventh Trumpet has not yet
sounded.

For, when that does begin to sound, the Mystery of God is finished, Rev. 10 7.
as he has declared to his Servants the Prophets. And what can this be, or is
called so in Scripture, that it can be applied to, but the Conversion of the
Jews? Romans 11. 25, 26 And it is evident, the Jews are not yet converted and
saved.

And further, the second Turkish Woe is not yet past; they do not yet cease to
be a Woe to the Roman Idolaters, which must be before the sounding of the
seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11. 14, 15.

And there is a Resurrection and Ascension of the Witnesses before the sounding
of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11. 11, 12, 15. after which, it can never be
proved that they shall pass under a Death any more, or such an extremity of
Suffering as they are under at this day, in France and elsewhere.

And once more, immediately after the sounding of the seventh Trumpet, not only
a Jewish Nation, but the Kingdoms of this World become the Kingdoms of the Lord
and of his Christ, Rev. 11. 15. and that so, as he reigns for ever and ever.
And therefore after the sounding of the seventh Trumpet Antichrist shall never
recover, to regain any of the Kingdoms to submit to him again, as he has done
since the Reformation. Therefore the seventh Trumpet has not yet sounded; and
consequently the Witnesses are not yet ascended.

I have wondered that this seventh Trumpet begins thus, and not with terrible
Dispensations; but possibly the aforementioned great Earthquake, Rev. 11. 13.
did much of the first destructive work, so as to usher in this triumph, v. 15,
16, 17. and so the first sounding of it is with Praises, and much of the Woe of
the Trumpet is reserved to the latter part of it, v. 18, 19.

CHAP. VIII. Of the seven Vials, and that they are not all under the seventh
Trumpet.
AS the seven Seals were several degrees of Judgment upon Rome Dragon or Pagan;
and the seven Trumpets sounded an Alarm of Judgment upon the Civil State of the
Empire; so the seven Vials are several degrees of Judgment coming upon it after
its Papal State; and also upon other Enemies of Jesus Christ at last.

Rev. 14 relates to the time of the Vials; For there is the Song of the Lamb,
v. 1. which answers Rev. 15. 1.

It refers to a time of visible Separation from Antichristian Pollutions and
Victory over the Beast and his mark, Rev. 14. 1, 4, 9. So the Vials, Rev. 15.
1, 2, 6.

It relates to the time of witnessing against, and crying down Babylon, Rev.
14. 8, 9, 10. Babylon is fallen, if any Man worship the Beast -- he shall drink
of the wine of the wrath of God: and it is under the Vials that there is this
Victory over the Beast, Rev. 15. 1, 2.

It concerns a time wherein an Angel has Power over fire, Rev. 14. 8. and
this is the Angel of the fourth Vial, Rev. 16. 8.

And it mentions a Harvest and Vintage, Rev. 14. v. 15. to the end; which
must relate to the latter Vials, Rev. 16. 19. and 19. v. 15.

And so, Rev. 14. declares the work of the Angels, or how they pour out the
Vials, as well as the Condition of the Church under them.

As to Rev. 15. I take it to be no Prophecy of what shall be accomplished
before the Vials begin to be poured out; but it gives a Compendium or general
view of Matters relating to the Vials, from the beginning to the end; like the
Contents of a Chapter set before it; and it discovers the State and Condition
of the Church and People of God during the time of the Vials in a general way.
It contains a Description of the Virgin Saints, v. 2, 3, 4, 5. by their
Conquest over the Beast, and triumphant Song for that Victory, and a subsequent
Privilege; [The Temple of the Tabernacle of the Testimony in Heaven was opened]
v. 5. i. e. not before, but after Vial Judgments, v. 4.

And the Vial Angels more particularly are described, v. 5. 6, 7, 8. by their
place from which they come; not out of the World, but the Church, [out of the
Temple] v. 6. by their Qualifications, [clothed in pure and white Linnen] by
the Instruments given them, v. 7. [golden Vials] by the Persons from whom they
receive these Vials, v. 7. by a token of a Divine Presence during the Vials, v.
8.

Some think that none of the Vials are yet poured out, others are otherwise
minded; for clearing this Matter, take a Rule or two.

Rule 9. That the seventh Trumpet does not contain all the seven Vials.

Some say, that none of the Vials are poured out, till the Resurrection of the
Witnesses is past, and that all the Vials are under the seventh Trumpet.

On the other hand, I am persuaded that most of the Vials are poured out before
the Witnesses Resurrection, and that only the latter part of the sixth and the
seventh Vial do fall under the seventh Trumpet; and that upon these Grounds.

1. The Consummation of the Mystery of God (the Jews Conversion) is at the
beginning of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 10. 7. Romans 11. 25, 26. Rev. 11. 15.
Therefore before the beginning of the seventh Trumpet most of the Vials must be
poured out; for the Conversion of the Jews is not till latter Vials, as the
sixth. And indeed by Vials the Kingdoms of the World must be brought off from
the Beast, else they cannot become the Lords and his Christ's.

2. There have been Storms of Wrath upon, and remarkable decays of the Papal
Kingdom, answerable to the Vials (as will be proved in the next Rule) Therefore
some Vials are poured out; whereas the Witnesses are not yet ascended, and the
seventh Trumpet has not yet sounded, Rev. 11. 15.

3. All the wrath of the seventh Trumpet is contained in the sixth or seventh
Vial, Rev. 11. 18, 19. The anger of the Nations, Lightnings, Voices,
Thundrings, Earthquake, great Hail -- All are found under the sixth or seventh
Vials, Rev. 16. 12, 14, 16, to the end.

4. There is no Scripture-Evidence that all the Vials must come under the
seventh Trumpet; without which, the Supposition is groundless,

The contrary seems to be asserted; for, before the Witnesses Death or
seventh Trumpet, they have Power to turn Waters into Blood, Rev. 11. 6. which
is the work of the second and third Vials, and to smite the Earth with all
Plagues, which reaches other Vialwork.

It Is true, The seventh Seal delivers itself into seven Trumpets, as its
work, Rev. 8. 1, 2, 6. But so does not the seventh Trumpet deliver it self into
seven Vials, that has much other work of its own; and Men must not coin such a
Method there, without a Divine Warrant.

The Vial-Angels fine and white Linen, speaks their Purity and Freedom from
Antichristian pollution, and their having the Righteousness of the Saints, Rev.
19. 8. but this is no way unsuitable to the Witnesses in their Sackcloth-state,
Rev. 14. 4. Their having Harps in their hands, and rejoicing under the Vials,
Rev. 15. 2, 3, 4. is not inconsistent with the Witnesses Sackcloth-state, for
they may have sometimes and cause of rejoicing there, Philip. 4. 4. Hab. 3. 17,
18. Rev. 16. 4, 5, 6. although the highest rejoicing is reserved to the latter
Vials. Rev. 19. 1. to 8. and 11. 15, 16, 17.

That the seven Vials are the seven last Plagues, is no Proof that all of them
must come under the seventh Trumpet; that differenceth them from the seven
Seals and seven Trumpets, there were no more Seven distinct Dispensations to
succeed or come after; and indeed the seventh Seal was opened, and diverse
Trumpets had sounded before the first Vial was poured out, and so they may well
be called, the seven last Plagues, though only the wrath of the seventh Vial
should come under the seventh Trumpet.

Obj. 1. Then there are Two Wo's in the second Woe; one by the Vials, the other
by Euphrates Angels; and the Subject of the second Woe, and of the Vials differ.

A. 1. No absurdity, if there be two different Dispensations of Wrath in the
time of one Woe; viz. Vial-wrath, and Trumpet-wrath: as it is undeniable, under
the sixth Trumpet there is great Wrath, Rev. 9. 15. to the end; and yet also
another great Earthquake, Rev. 11. 13. Yea, it must be so, if all the Vials
came under the seventh Trumpet; for then there would be there, the Woe of that
Trumpet, and also of all those Vials.

2. They may contemporate, and yet the Subjects of the second Woe and of the
Vials differ; what should hinder this? a Trumpet may blow Wrath to the Roman
Civil Empire, and yet at the same time, Vials may pour out Wrath upon the Roman
Papal State.

But the grand Objection is,

Obj. 2. The seven Vial Angels come not out of the Temple till it be opened,
Rev. 15. 5, 6. but the Temple is not opened till the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11.
19. and so on Vials poured out till then.

A. As to Rev. 15. It is an Epitome or general View of Vial-Matters; as, of all
the seven Angels coming out, v. 6. which they never did together, but at
several seasons; and Mr. M. observes, That the Complutens Edition reads not,
come out of the Temple, but out of Heaven. Some think, Rev. 15. speaks only
of an opening of the Temple [of the Tabernacle] v. 5. noting an unsettled
condition, or mixture of Tabernacle and Temple, suitable to the former Vials,
before the Sackcloth-state was ended, answerable to which, the Song is mixed of
Moses, (whilst yet in the Wilderness, Exodus 15. 1, 2.) and of the Lamb, v. 3.
and that it does not refer to the opening under the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11.
19. [of the Temple] which concerns a New Jerusalem state of Settlement; and
so it is far from proving that all the Vials come under the seventh Trumpet. My
Answer is,

1. The seven Angels come out of the Temple, before that opening of it under
the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11. 19. that opening is not to let Vial Angels out,
but to let a vast number in, and to give the highest and most glorious
Discoveries of Jesus Christ and his Matters, and not till the seventh Vial,
[The Temple of God was opened in Heaven] and what was the Effect of it? [There
was seen in this Temple the Ark of his Testament] which was a most eminent
Symbol of his Presence. This opening was to give the choicest Manifestations of
his Presence; it notes the unloosing or opening the most hidden and Glorious
Mysteries of all, even Christ himself. It cannot be proved that this opening is
before any Angels going forth to pour out Vials; but rather after the seventh
Vial was pouring out.

Then there comes a great Voice out of the Temple of Heaven, [from the Throne]
saying, [It is done], Rev. 16. 17. And this is, when the New Jerusalem comes
down from Heaven, for there the like Phrase is used, Rev. 21. 5, 6. [It is
done] and, v. 25. the Gates of it shall not be shut at all. -- Here is an
opening at the seventh Vial; the New Jerusalem stands open, in opposition to
some shutting in the time of former Vials. Then the Lord makes highest
discoveries of his Glory, v. 11, 23. and 22. 4, 5. they shall see his Face.

2. I say therefore, there is a double opening of the Temple: One before the
Vial Angels go forth to let them out, Rev. 15. 6. Another, after the Vials are
poured out, Rev. 11. 19. joined with judging the Dead and rewarding the Saints,
v. 18. Or often things are spoken absolutely, which are to be understood
comparatively; and so he does not deny absolutely that there is any opening of
the Temple till the seventh Trumpet, but comparatively. At the former opening
before the Vials, few in Comparison enter, Rev. 15. 8. no Man could enter, till
the seven Plagues of the seven Vials were fulfilled, i. e. till the latter
Vials, few entered; but at the latter opening, many enter, Rev. 11. 15, 19. the
Kingdoms of the World are the Lord's and his Christ's; and this is not before
the seventh Vial.

CHAP. IX. Of the Vials, and how many are already poured out.
THe [Seven Vials] are so many Dispensations or Tempests of Divine Wrath; not
upon the Saints, but upon the Papal and Antichristian World; upon the
Worshippers of the Beast, and those that receive his mark, Rev. 16. 2. upon
such as shed the Blood of the Saints, v. 6. upon such as Blaspheme the Lord, v.
9, 11, 21.

Hence [Earth, Sea, Rivers, Sun, and c.] cannot here be taken literally; for
that would bring as much hurt to the true Church, as to the Antichristian
Party; but mystically: for that which in the Papal or Antichristian World
bears a resemblance unto Earth, Sea, Rivers, Sun -- in the Natural World; and
so the Beast's Earth is the Subject of the first Vial, his Sea the Subject of
the second Vial, and c.

And observe that none of the Vials are poured out, until after the second
Two-horned Beast, the Pope was up, Rev. 13. 11. for till then, the Image of the
Beast was not made, nor worshipped, v. 14. it was he that caused all to receive
a mark, v. 16. 17. and the very first Vial falls upon those that had the mark
of the Beast, and did worship his Image, Rev. 16. 2. and he was not up in his
First Horn till Phocas, Ann. 606. and had not his Mark till after Ann. 1000. as
I have proved; and seeing Seals were opened, and diverse Trumpets sounded before
this time, hence they are much mistaken who think that the first Seal, and the
first Trumpet, and the first Vial do contemporate, and so of the rest.

Also note, that the former Vials do alter, but do not utterly destroy the
Subjects of them: and therefore it is not to be wondered at, if after these have
been poured out, yet the Beast has recovered again, and seemed to regain what
he lost; for even the fifth Vial is not said to destroy the Seat of the Beast,
but to fill his Kingdom with Darkness, and only the sixth and seventh Vials do
destroy the Subjects of them.

Rule 10 That we are under the latter end of the fifth, or the beginning of the
sixth Vial.

I have before manifested that we are in the latter end of the sixth Trumpet;
and how many Vials are already poured out, comes now to be considered. I shall
briefly declare when the Vials (as I conceive) began to be poured out, and
thereby it will appear, that now, Ann. 1680. we are either under the latter end
of the fifth, or the beginning of the sixth Vial.

1. The [first Vial] was poured out upon [the Earth] i. e. the Popish Earth,
Rev. 16. 2. [Earth] is the most gross, inferior part, Air of a more subtle
Nature, and so must either be the grosser Doctrines of Popery, or the common
Popish people, those Earthly Churchmen out of which the Two-horned Beast
arises, Rev. 13. 11. Hence, the effect of this Vial is, v. 2. a noisome Sore
upon those that have the mark of the Beast, and worship his Image, i. e. they
are filled with inward torments and vexation, and also rendered noisome and very
loathsome unto others, as those that are full of grievous and filthy Sores.

This Vial began to be poured out by Berengarius, Peter Bruis and others, who
witnessed, some say, Ann. 1039. others, about Ann. 1049. and after, against the
grosser Corruptions of Rome; as, Transubstantiation, Adoration of the Host,
bowing the Knees before it, and c. and called the Church of Rome, Ecclesiam
ma^^gnantium, Concilium vanitatis and sedem Satanae and Leonem nonum -- non
Pontificem, sed Pompisicem atque Pulpificem dictitabat.

Yea, an Anonymous Author mentions their Conventicles in Tours, who denied
the Substance of the Bread and Wine, to have Transmutation into the Body and
Blood of Christ; so that here was the first visible or open Separation from
Rome: And a very great Multitude in diverse Nations embraced their Doctrine, and
were drawn off from Romish Errors by their means, whereupon the Gospellers
were called Berengarians and Petro-Brusians; they opposed Antichrist not in one
place only, but filled most noble Countries, Matthew. Westminster. Roffens. Hist.
says, Eodem tempore Berengarius Turonensis in haereticam prolapsus pravitatem,
omnes Gallos, Italos and Anglos suis jam pene corruperat pravitatibus. See much
more of this, B. Usher, Graviss. Quaest. Histor. Explic. c. 7.

And this alone may argue, that the Beastmarked ones, and his
Image-worshippers, were now smitten as with a noisome Sore; For the Pope and
his Party were so tormented, that it is said, they condemned the Opinion and the
Fautors of it as Heretics, seeking their Extirpation, warning Princes to take
heed of them and banish them out of their Territories; they called Councils
against Berengarius: One at Rome, by Leo IX. about An. 1050. where upon his
Letters to Lanfrancus, they condemned him (though absent) as an Heretic.
Another the same Year at Vercellis. Another by Victor II. at Tours, about An.
1055. Another Council assembled by Pope Nicolaus II. at Rome, about An. 1059.
where Berengarius was present, and some say, they forced him to a Recantation;
Others write, that he never recanted, or that he died in his Opinion about An.
1083. ib. and Bertold. Constable.

The Recantation of Berengarius (if he made any) cannot hinder his being
instrumental in pouring out this Vial, seeing he disowned his Recantation; and
there were many others besides him, that firmly taught the same true Doctrine,
and many Thousands in several Nations steadfastly owned it, and courageously
opposed those Corruptions of the Romish Church, to their great vexation.

As Aaron and Peter had their Falls, their Blemishes; so may Pourers out of
Vials, for the hardening of their Enemies, and humbling of themselves; which
here I intimate once for all.

And I conclude, that the first Vial was poured out by these Berengarians and
Petro-Brusians, because this was the first eminent Storm of Wrath upon the
Worshippers and Marked ones of the Beast, or the first rising out of the Dregs
of Popery; the first remarkable open Separation from Rome, and is answerable to
all that is said of that Vial.

2. The second Vial was poured out upon the Sea, Rev. 16. 3. i. e. upon the
Popish Sea; and the Effect is, [it became as the Blood of a dead Man] i. e.
without spirit, corrupt, filthy and deadly; for [every living soul in the Sea
died] i. e. many in, or that were maintained by the Popish Sea, could no longer
live and breath there.

This [Sea] must either be the whole Papal Religion and Corrupt Doctrine
wherein they Trade and Traffic about the Souls of Men, Rev. 18. 13. with all
their corrupt Ecclesiastical Constitutions, Forms, Ordinances and Worship taken
together. Or else [Sea] is the whole compass of the Papal Society, the Nations,
People, Kingdoms and Provinces of the Papal Dominion or Jurisdiction; thus
Waters are taken, Rev. 17. 15. and Sea is a confluence or the gathering
together of Waters. The Explication of this second Vial, and the manner of its
pouring out is found, Rev. 14. 6, 7. and it reaches to many Nations, Kindreds,
Tongues and People.

This second Vial was poured out by the Albingenses and Waldenses; for, (after
the Berengarians) they were the next which were famous for making Opposition
against, and Separation from the Pope and corrupt Church of Rome, and in them,
all that is spoken of this Vial, was exactly fulfilled: For Waldus being
converted about Ann. 1160. he Preached sound Doctrine, as, Rev. 14. 7. Fear
God, and worship him, i. e. do not worship Images, he and others called off
from the Idolatry of Rome; Some called it the New Gospel the Holy Ghost, in
opposition thereunto called it, the Everlasting Gospel, or possibly in
opposition to what was falsely so called; for, Matthew. Paris. about An. 1256.
mentions a wicked Book made by the Jacobin Preaching-Friars, entitled. [ The
Everlasting Gospel] the design of which was to suppress the Gospel of Christ,
teaching that the state of Grace did not proceed from the Law of the Gospel,
but from the Law of the Spirit; for so they called their Dreams and
Revelations. Indeed this Book was so pestiferous, that Platina says, Alexander
IV. caused it to be burnt; but it is said* this Burning it was secretly, and by
constraint; for he banished Will* de S. Amore who complained of it.

Whether [Sea] be the whole Papal Doctrine, or the Papal Society, made up of
many Nations, either way these Waldenses poured out a Vial upon it; showing the
corruptness and deadliness of their Religion and Worship in the complex Body of
it, and this in many Nations of the Papal Kingdom, whereby many Thousands were
converted, and durst drink no more of those corrupt Doctrines, than of the
Blood of a dead Man, and many that Traded in the Papal Sea, and had dependence
upon it, lost their Livelihoods, and so died civilly; as may be seen in the
Histories of them. Yea, even literally it was in part fulfilled; for when they
raised Wars against these Waldenses, multitudes of the Papal Party perished;
it is said, that in the Siege of Avignion were destroyed by Famine, Pestilence
and Drowning, more than Two and twenty Thousand of the French Soldiers, Acts
and Mon. Part 1. p. 352. and many more died elsewhere; though afterward, by
various ways, they did sorely persecute those faithful Creatures.

Reinerius a Writer about their time, and an extreme Enemy against them, yet is
driven to confess this of them; That the Sect of the Leonists has a great show
of Holiness, in that they both live justly before men, and believe all things
contained in the Creed, only they do Blaspheme the Romish Church, and hate it,
etc. ib. p. 301, 302. And he and others do conclude these Leonists to be of all
other Sects (as they call them) most pernicious to Rome, and that for three
causes. 1. Because of longer continuance. 2. Because more general almost in all
Lands. 3. Because of a show of Piety, etc. So that this was upon the Papal Sea,
even the Papal party themselves being Judges. So Popliner. Histor. Franc. l. 1.
It was never more sharply oppugned than by the Waldenses, their Doctrine (says
he) differs but little from the now Protestants; Non per Galliam solum totam,
sed etiam per omnes pene Europae or as disseminarunt, nam Galli, Hispani,
Angli, Scoti, Itali, Germani, Bohemi, Saxones, Poloni, Lithuani and gentes
aliae eam ad hunc diem pertinaciter defenderunt. So that Nations, Kindreds,
Tongues and People, received the pure Gospel, and forsook the deadly Roman See
by their means. They spread into Picaray, whence they were called Picards; by
Persecution they did fly into Germany and Alsatia, where they spread their
Doctrine: they had goodly Churches in Bulgary, Croatia, Dalmatia and Hungary.
Clarks Martyr. Where also see what their Doctrines and Opinions were, as that
the Mass was an Abomination, the Host an Idol, and Purgatory a Fable, they
declaimed against Popish Holy Oil with Baptism, Canonical hours, Auricular
Confession, Adoration of Images* Indulgences. Praying for the Dead, and many
others, even the Sea of the Romish corrupt Doctrines, and made it as a Dead
Sea, and so was the second Vial.

3. The Third Vial was poured out upon the Rivers and Fountains of Waters, Rev.
16. 4. which come from the Sea, and return thither again. And if Sea in the
former Vial be the confluence of corrupt Doctrine (as Waters* signify Doctrine
Ezekiel. 47. 4, 5. Isa. 11. 9. and 55. 1.) then the Rivers are some particular
corrupt Doctrines, or some Doctors or Emissaries of the Romish Church. Or if
Sea there was the confluence of Nations and Kingdoms, making up the Papal
jurisdiction, as Waters signify Rev. 17. 15. Then Rivers and Fountains denote
some particular Nations or Kingdoms within the Papal Dominion.

And the effect of this Vial is, that these Rivers, Rev. 16. 4. become blood,
i. e. they become bloody much of the Blood of the Papal party is shed there, as
v. 6. thou have given them blood to drink, for they are worthy. And there is a
double attestation of the righteousness and equity of it: the Lord is declared
True and Righteous in his ^udgments twice over, v. 5, 6, 7. Thou art righteous,
O Lord -- because thou have judged thus -- righteous, are thy judgments. Which
being the same cry that will be in giving glory to God, at the great
destruction of Babylon, Rev. 19. 2. Hence I take this Vial to be as a Sessions
or a Preludium, as it were a Type, and that Fall of Babylon (Rev. 18.) like a
great Assize. And therefore this third Vial is notified, Rev. 14 8. Babylon is
fallen, is fallen -- this cannot be the great fall of it, for after this
several other Angels have Vial work, v. 9* to end, whereas after the great Fall
of Babylon, Rev. 18. there is only one Vial to follow at Armageddon, Rev. 19.

This Third Vial was poured out by the Wickliffites and Hussites, and Jerome of
Prague, and others about Ann. 1370 and after: for, then there was a distinct
gust of wrath upon the Papal Party and Doctrine, as the next remarkable blow
after that of the Albingenses and Waldenses; and this was answerable to all
that is said of this Vial, which falls only upon the Rivers and Fountains,
not upon the Popish Sea. In that dark time they did famously Witness for Christ
against the Pomp, Avarice, and c. of the Pope, to the bringing multitudes off
from his corruptions. They held such doctrines as these, That the substance of
Bread remained in the Sacrament, after the words of Consecration, that the
People should have it in both kinds; they declared against Popish Pardons,
Indulgences and Corporal Unction, as a Sacrament, and c.

A Council at Constance was assembled by the Emperor Sigismund and Pope John
23. Ann. 1414. where a Sentence of Condemnation was given out against the
Doctrine of John Wickliffe, and his Bones ordained to be raised out of his
Sepulcher, and to be Burnt. Also notwithstanding the Emperor Sigismund sent
for John Huss to the Council, and promised him safe conduct, yet they condemned
John Huss, and though the Nobles and Lords of Bohemia, did challenge the safe
Conduct, yet they Condemned and Burnt him, and Jerome of Prague was Burnt also.

And I cannot without admiration observe, how answerable the event was to the
effect of this Vial, as Rev. 16. 4, 5, 6. 7. which may further confirm it, and
render it undoubted, that now this Vial was poured out;

For a Nobleman named Zisca, being sore grieved for the Death of John Huss and
Jerome of Prague, minding to revenge the injuries which the Council had done
greatly to the dishonor of Bohemia, he gathered together a number of Men of
War, and subverted the Monasteries, and Idolatrous Tem^^es, pulling down and
breaking in pieces the Images and Idols, driving away the Priests and Monks,
having gathered together about 40000 Men, took Towns, obtained the City of
Prague, where the number of the Reformers was increased: Sigismund the Emperor
besieged that City, but lost many men* and was forced to raise his Siege, and
after had a great overthrow by Zisca; in that Conflict were slain fourteen
Noblemen of the Moravians and Hungarians, and others a great number* Zisca took
many Places, destroyed Monasteries in the Territory of Pelzina, put the
Emperor to Flight. He with his power enters again into Bohemia with a great
Army, but the Emperor afraid of Zisca, fled again, and many of his Nobles were
slain. Zisca pursuing the Emperor a days journey, and having obtained this
Victory, would not suffer any Image or Idol to be in the Churches, nor Priests
to Minister with Copes or Vestments. The Reformed obtained another great
victory, many Nobles of their Enemies slain, and 9000 common Soldiers. In the
Epitaph of Zisca, it is said that he was a severe punisher of the Pride and
Avarice of the Clergy, that eleven times in joining Battle he went Victor out
of Field. See Acts and Mon. vol. 1. p. 848, etc. out of Aeneas Silvius.

After the Death of Zisca, Sigismund the Emperor which Burned Huss and Jerome,
is fain to entreat for his Kingdom. Pope Martin then perceiving the Gospel to
increase daily more and more, sent into Germany to move them unto War against
the Bohemians, whereunto also the Emperor did assist. There were three Armies
provided, which joined together, but when the news came that the Reformed had
gathered an Army and came with all speed toward them, they fled before they
saw their Enemies, leaving great Prey. The Cardinal meeting them in their
flight, marvelled at their Cowardliness, and entreated them to turn again to
their Enemies, but all in vain: The Bohehemians coming upon the rereward, and
then their flight was more disordered and fearful than before, neither did they
leave flying* before the Bohemians left following; the Host of the Bohemians
was greatly enriched. Sigismund the Emperor having news of these things
gathered new help; also Pope Martin sent into Germany, and a new Expedition is
decreed against the Bohemians, and several Bishops, as of Mentz, Trevers and
Cologne -- sent their aids. The Bohemians made ready, but there fell such a
sudden fear amongst all the Papists throughout the whole Camp, that they began
most shamefully to run away before any Enemy appeared in sight, and by all the
entreaties of Cardinal Julianus would not return. Thus the Reformed by the fear
of their Enemies made the more bold, and courageous, pursued them, and had
great prey and spoil, and the Bohemians prospered so long, as they could agree
among themselves.

And now judge whether these acts of Zisca, and other Bohemians upon a reformed
account, so wonderfully prevailing against the Popish party, were not the
pouring out of the Third Vial upon the Rivers and Fountains, and the effect
thereof, whereby they became blood, Rev. 16. 4. and the Angel of the Waters
gives glory to God for judging thus, rendering this reason, v. 6. for they
have shed the Blood of thy Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them blood
to drink, for they are worthy. So v. 7. It was for shedding the Blood of the
Saints, John Huss, and Jerome of Prague, and others, that these Wars were
raised by Zisca and the Bohemians, and here the Lord gave the Popish party,
(who are the proper subjects of this Vial) of their own blood to drink, and
therefore doubtless here was the third Vial poured out.

I have the more insisted upon it, because it is given by the Holy Spirit, as
an emblem or lively resemblance of the great destruction of Babylon at Rome,
Rev. 18.

These exploits of Zisca and the Bohemians, I am apt to think were a lively
picture or representation thereof, even in the very manner of it, viz. by some
purely professing Commander like Zisca, upon a religious account for injuries
offered to the Saints, and so as the mighty Romish Armies shall be struck with
consternation or a pannick fear, and flee before the sight of their Enemies.

4. The fourth Vial was poured out upon the [Sun,] Rev. 16. 8, 9. the effect
is, [Power was given him to scorch men with fire.] That which in the
Antichristian World, resembles the Sun in the Natural World, must be the
subject of this Vial: and therefore the Pope is this [Sun] upon which the wrath
of this Vial falls: For, he is the greatest, most illustrious, and glorious
light there, which they say, so derives light to the very Scriptures, that they
are counted authentical, and their sense, received Doctrine, Worship, Councils,
Decrees, only as they borrow light from him for their ratification, and
therefore he is this Sun. Yea as if it were purposely to intimate so much, the
Emperor writes to the Pope and says, We are both appointed of God as two
great lights, etc. Sleidan. Comment. l. 6. and after Innocent. III. makes the
Bishop or Priest much more excellent than the other. Look what difference is
betwixt the Sun and the Moon, so great a diversity is there betwixt the office
of a High-Bishop, and a Kings Office, ib li. 6.

Upon this [Sun] the Pope, did Luther and other Worthies about Ann. 1517. and
after pour out such a Vial of Wrath, as never any did the like before, Papists
themselves being Judges. He writ a Book wherein he says, that the Sea of Rome
is nothing else but the Kingdom of Babylon, and the power of the strong hunter
Nimroth; when they Burnt Luthers works, he burnt the Bishop of Romes Law, and
the Decree then lately published openly. Ib. l. 2.

So Calvin, Melancthon, Zwinglius, and many others, as well as Luther, scorched
men with Fire, as Rev. 16. 8. and this is a sure Direction when this Vial was
poured out, viz. when men by their Preachings, Writings, Disputations, and c.
denounced Fire and Brimstone, and the greatest Torments against such
Worshippers, and so it is explained, Rev. 14. v. 9, 10, 11. If any worship the
Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, i. e. openly, or in
his hand, i. e. secretly, v. 10. The same shall drink the Wine of the Wrath of
God poured out without mixture -- and shall be [tormented with Fire and
Brimstone] which was clearly fulfilled in Luther and Calvin's time.

How many Countries and Kingdoms by such Preaching fell off from Rome, and took
up Reformation, as desiring to preserve themselves from that Fire, which
therefore scorched the Papal party?

After a Disputation, Religion was Reformed, not only at Bernes, but also
proclaimed by Magistrates in sundry places thereabouts, Masses, Altars, Images,
abolished in all places. They wrote the day and year wherein they forsook the
Popish Religion upon a Pillar, in Golden Letters, that it might be an
everlasting memorial to their Posterity.

Likewise they of Geneva did imitate them of Bernes, wherefore the Bishop and
Clergy forsook the City in anger. Then the Reformers began to be called
Protestants, of whom there were seven Princes. The Protestants made a League,
that if any did stand in danger for Religion one might help another, Ib. li. 6.

Another symptom of its being then poured out is, the great following
persecutions, raised by the Bestians being incensed by the torment of this
fire, as Rev. 14. 12. Here is the Patience of the Saints, i. e. here at this
time is the trial of their patience, that even death it self shall be
desirable, v. 14. Blessed are the dead -- answerable to which, in the fourth
Vial, it is said, Rev. 16. 9. men were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed
the name of God -- and repented not --

All which was manifestly accomplished, for after Luther and Calvin and others
had proclaimed fire against the worshippers of the Beast, they repented not,
witness the Council of Trent, wherein they sought to establish their
Abominations, and then followed the great and sore Persecutions in most
Kingdoms of the Beast, in the West, as France, Spain, Germany, Bohemia,
England, all which give evidence that then the fourth Vial was poured out.

5. The fifth Vial is poured out upon the Throne of the Beast, Rev. 16. 10. and
the effect is, [his Kingdom is full of Darkness,] and they have anguish and
indignation, [gnawed their Tongues -- ]

[Throne] either is, the Government of the Beast, his Sovereignty and
Authority, (as Psalm. 89. 36, 37. Psalm. 122. 5.) and if it be taken thus, then
this Vial might be poured when the Popes Supremacy was cast off by Protestant
Princes, as Hen. VIII. Edw. VI. Q. Eliz. Duke of Saxony, Brandenburgh -- and
when Popish Orders, and Branches of that Government were rejected. The German
Princes told the Popes Ambassadors they acknowledged not his authority in such
matters, and Q. Elizabeth would not suffer them to come into the Land. Sympson
of the Church, p. 408.

Or the [ Throne] of the Beast, most properly is, the chief place of his
residence, wherein he appears in his highest Majesty and Glory.

And this Vial was poured out upon Germany or the German Empire, since Ann.
1600. especially by Gustavus Adolphus.

I know many think the City of Rome to be the Throne of the Beast which this
Vial falls upon; but the City of Rome is the Woman, Rev. 17. 18. or whore of
Babylon, which sits upon the Beast, v. 3. and so cannot be the Throne which
the Beast sits upon. And the more improbable is it, that Rome should be this
Throne, for when a Vial comes upon that, it is with an utter destruction, Rev.
18. and so it is by the sixth Vial, whereas the fifth Vial does not destroy,
but darken the Kingdom of the Beast. It will be hard, or impossible to prove,
that the Throne of the Two-horned Beast, the Pope, is intended here; and if it
be of the Ten-Horned Beast, then, although the Throne of the Dragon was given
into his possession, yet he made it not as his Throne; For, when the Beast was
very young, the Emperor did not take up his residence at Rome, but at Ravenna,
Sigon. de Reg. Ital. 1. speaking of Ravenna says, Postremo Honorius eam sibi
atque Occidentis Imperio sedem urbe Romans relicta constituit, quod institutum
Successores quoque illius tam Imperatores Rom; quam Reges Gotthorum
custodierunt.

That as Honorius was enthroned (not at Rome, but) at Ravenna, so other
Emperors till Augustulus, Ann. 475. and then there were no Emperors in the
West or at Rome till Carol. Magn. Ann. 800. Neither have the Emperors ever
since to this day, made the City of Rome their Seat or Throne, but Germany, and
there are seven Electoral Heads, and Ten Horns or Provinces in the West, as the
Beast.

Let the Throne then, upon which this fifth Vial falls, be Germany,
especially, seeing the event does admirably answer there, to all that is said
of this fifth Vial.

For the Case was thus, as it is said. Some Seeds of Division being sown by the
proscribing and forcing Donawerdt (on the occasion of a Tumult at a Procession
there,) and mastering Gulick: the German Protestants received the Alarm, and
assembled at Hall, and the Catholics at Wirtsburgh. This quickly did fly like
Wildfire, filled all Germany, and involved all Europe in a prodigious War;
some compare it with that of Zisca and the Bohemians.

I shall give some short account of it, out of J. Parival. History of the Iron
Age, and shall refer to the Book it self, for a larger and fuller discovery of
it.

He speaks much in favor of the Papists, but declares himself in this
manner.

I abhor to begin the Discourse of the longest and most cruel War, that ever
was in Christendom, and which drew more Blood, more altered the Christian
Faith, and caused more ruin and desolation, than all that ever were in Europe,
ib li. 3. c. 1.

And Ann. 1630. Gustavus Adolphus King of Sweden, invited by the Germans,
incited by France, England, Venice, the United Provinces, as also by his own
peculiar interests, entered Germany with an Army, was sure of his Allies, and
of the inclination of all the Protestants, whose Cause and Religion he came to
defend.

King Gustave takes Francfort, beats the Imperialists, cleansed Pomerania.
Ambassadors of the Princes, Imperial Towns, and Protestants States, treated an
Alliance with King Gustave. These sparkles encompassed all Germany with a Fire,
which lasted till the year 1649. ib. cap. 17, 18, 19, 20.

Gustave worsted Tilly, before the Fort of Werbern, being joined to the forces
of the Electors; had a great Battle with Tilly, the Emperors General at
Leipsick. This Battle wherein were hazarded the Caps of two Electours, the
Liberty of the Princes of Germany, the conquests of so many years, and the
whole hope of the Roman Catholics, was very bloody, and the old Bands which
had never been seen fly, gave gound here, ib. c. 21. King Gustave has the
Victory, and Tilly with the Imperialists were put to flight; An Army of Four
and Twenty Thousand Captains, (that is old Soldiers) were broken in the Plain
and open Field -- This Bloody Battle was Sept. 7. 1631. which was called a day
of Blood -- and changed the Countenance of the Affairs of Germany. And the news
of this victory -- unspeakably rejoiced not only all the Protestants, but also
all such as to whom those glorious Eagles, seemed too proud, and too much
undertaking, Ib. c. 21.

The first Post which arrived at Vienna, brought news of the defeat of the
Saxons, the second that of Tilly, which disturbed the joy, and the Third filled
the whole Court with sadness, and made it think of a way how to repair this
great loss. If the Africans -- were much amazed to see them, i. e. the Romans
before Carthage, so to say the truth, the Bishops and the Roman Catholics were
not a whit less, by the destruction of this Army, which had always been
victorious and by means whereof after the gaining of one Battle they hoped to
see the Mass, and the Imperial Authority restored, throughout all Germany. A
flock of Sheep is is not more scattered when it sees itself environed by
Wolves, and without a Shepherd, than were the Ecclesiastics by this accident,
for terror having thrust it self in amongst them, they betook themselves all
to flight, some to the other side of the Danube, and others by the Rheyn to
Cologne, etc. ib. c. 21.

Italy was Alarmed by the report of so great prosperity --

The Swede still goes on (though not without some checks) and even after the
death of Gustave, yet often had great successes, and prevailed much against the
German Emperor, and at last forced him to stoop to such terms, as he could
make with him.

And now judge whether the fifth Vial was not here poured out upon Germany, as
the Throne, or Chief Kingdom of the Ten-horned Beast? For this War was stated
between the [Beasts party] of the one part, to the striking great terror into
the Hearts, and overthrowing so many thousands of them, and the [Protestants]
as the other party. And seeing this is a distinct storm upon that party, after
four Vials had been poured out, what can this be but the fifth Vial? and the
rather because all things answer to it, even as to effects. As,

The whole Kingdom of the Beast was darkened, as Rev. 16. 10. even by that one
blow given by Gustavus Adolphus; did it not suffer a greater Eclipse of its
esteem and glory at that day, than ever before? even at Jankow Battle, March 6.
1645. there was a most sensible Defeat to the Imperial Party; for* it left
Bohemia as a Prey, and opened the Passage into Moravia, and the Emperors
Hereditary Lands, as far as the Danube. Every one thought that the Emperor was
lost, if the Swedes chanced to pass the Danube. They were in great amazement to
see the Swedes at one and the same time at the Gates of Vienna, Copenhaghen and
Bremen, every where treading down their Enemies, ^b. Part 2. c. 16. This
therefore was the fifth Vial, which seemed to have spent its greatest Strength,
and to be drawing toward a Conclusion, when the Pacification was made in
Germany, or Peace, Ann. 1649. but some Effects may have continued since.

Neither will this deny it to be that Vial, that the Effect of the German War
fell as heavy upon God's People there, as his Enemies.

For, at the first hand, here was a great distinction between the People of God
and others. And however, in some of the first Plagues in Egypt (to which the
Vials allude) the Lord made no distinction between the Israelites and the
Egyptians, till Exodus 8. 22.

And further, the Effect of this Vial is, Rev. 16. 10, 11. they gnawed their
Tongues for pain, and blasphemed God -- and repented not. Which argue the
indignation, vexation, rancour and extremity of Rage, which the Beasts Party
shall be filled with, by the pouring out of this Vial upon them, and so they
not only persist in their Evil way without repentance, blaspheming God, but
like distracted Madmen* they seek to revenge their own quarrel by falling upon
and raising bitter Persecutions against the Protestant Party; and therefore,
this is but an expected issue of the Kingdom-filling darkness and
Tongue-gnawing Pain, an event of this Vial, and so rather a Confirmation of its
being then poured out.

Neither will this deny that German War to be a Vial, because the Empire is yet
standing.

For, I see no Scripture-Evidence, that any Vial (except the 6th or 7th) do
bring a Total Destruction upon the Subjects on which they fall: for if the
Beasts Earth, Sea, Rivers and Fountains, had been utterly destroyed by the
three former Vials, there could have remained nothing for several other Vials
to be poured out upon* these comprising the whole Antichristian World. And this
fifth Vial does but darken, not utterly destroy the Kingdom of the Beast, Rev.
16. 10. and so the German Empire may be yet standing after that Vial is poured
out upon it, as Egypt was darkened before Pharaoh and the Egyptians were
destroyed. And immediately before that Vial which destroys the Whore, she
fitteth as a Queen, saying, she shall see no sorrow, Rev. 18. 7. and how could
she sit in such Pomp, if former Vials had caused an utter Destruction of what
they fell upon?

In short, either Rome cannot be the Throne which this fifth Vial is poured out
upon, (seeing then they repented not, Rev. 16. 10, 11.) or else it cannot be
the Tenth part, Rev. 11. 13. for then they repent. And if the fifth Vial was
poured out in Germany, then we are under the latter part of that, or the
beginning of the sixth Vial.

That which follows is mostly hereafter to be fulfilled, or in a great part
to come.

6. The sixth Vial is poured out upon the great River Euphrates, Rev. 16. 12.
The Effects of it are, the drying up the Waters thereof, and warlike
Preparations, v. 12. to 17.

The Subjects of the other Vials are not Literal, but Mystical or Metaphorical;
and therefore Euphrates is not to be understood literally here, of that very
River, especially seeing all the seven are Plag^es or Vials of the Wrath of
God, Rev. 15. 1, 6, 8. and the drying up that River is no such Plague, neither
is the Wrath of God kindled against it, more than against any other River.

Therefore the River [ Euphrates] here must notify, either, that which is the
strength of Mystical Babylon, as Euphrates was of Literal Babylon:

Or else the People inhabiting about Euphrates, which are the Turks. The Event
will be the best Interpreter of the Prophecy.

If [ Euphrates] be the strength of Mystical Babylon; then as the drying up
literal Euphrates by Cyrus, was the means of taking Literal Babylon; so the
drying up here imports the great means of the desolation or downfall of
Mystical Babylon. And [Waters] being Multitudes, People, Nations and Tongues,
Rev. 17. 15. hence the drying up of these, is by the Conversion of many, and
their coming into the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, Rev. 11. 15. or by some great
destruction or desolation and wasting of People about Vienna and Austria, the
strength of Mystical Babylon, and this may be a Provocation to the Nations,
that they are angry, v. 18. and make preparation against Christ. And the
Triumph for the Ruin of Babylon being Vial-work, and being the immediate
forerunner of Armageddon, Rev. 19* 1, 2, 3. the Preparation to which is in the
close of the sixth Vial, Rev. 16. 12. to the end. hence it seems that the
desolation of Babylon at Rome, is by that sixth Vial, and before the seventh;
else there must be two Earthquakes under that one seventh Vial, viz. one at
that, and the Exaltation of the Witnesses under the sixth Trumpet, Rev. 11. 13.
and another the greatest under the seventh, v. 19. Rev. 16. 18.

Or else [ Euphrates] must be the Turks the People that inhabit about
Euphrates, which is but once more mentioned in this Book, ( Rev. 9. 14.) and
there refers to the Turks.

The [Waters] are, as Rev. 17. 15. People, Multitudes, Nations and Tongues --

By this Vial these Waters are dried up, i. e. wasted, consumed, vast Numbers,
great Multitudes of the Turkish People are destroyed, or many Nations fall off
from the Turks, so as they lose much of their Power and Dominion, and cease to
be a Woe to the Romanists; when this comes to pass, the sixth Vial is pouring
out. By what ways and means this will be; whether by Intestine Discords, or
some exterraneous Enemy, the Event must determine. The Angel that pours out
this Vial comes out of the Temple, as well as others, and is clothed in pure
and white Linen, Rev. 15. 6. and so it seems not to be primarily or only by
Intestine Discord, nor by the Antichristian Romanists, as Vial Angels; but
Jesus Christ may employ these in the destructive work, dashing Enemies as
Potsheards one against another, as a fruit of the Prayers of Saints.

As the former Vials were much poured out by Preaching; so the two last by
Prayer. A Vial Angel out of the Temple solliciteth Jesus Christ (the Angel on
the white Cloud) to thrust in his Sickle and reap a Harvest, by cutting down
his Enemies, and he does it as a return of Prayer, Rev. 14. 14, 15, 16. and
this, I think, does contemporate with, and is an Explication of this sixth
Vial. And thus the Angel is in white Linen under a pure Profession, who
pours out the Vial in a way of Prayer, but it is referred to Jesus Christ to
do the work, and he may and often does make Enemies Executioners of his Wrath
upon one an^^^er.

The drying up this Euphrates, is [(...) the way of the Kings of the East may
be Prepared].

By [Kings of the East] many understand the Jews, and near this time they shall
return and be converted, else how should they escape the Wrath of the seventh
Vial? and they shall come not only from the East, but from all Quarters, Isai.
43. 6. and 49. 12. Jer. 31. 8. Zech. 8. 7. and then the import of it is, that
the drying up of Euphrates, either of Mystical Babylon, Rome, or the consuming
of Turkish People and Power, it is to this intent, it is designed for this end,
to make way for that ancient People of God the Jews, to return to their own
Land, and unto God. [That] the Kings of the East, that the Jews may be reduced,
God, in ruining Rome, or wasting the Turks, prepares a way for the Jews. And
as God dried up the Red Sea of old, to make a Passage over for his People; so,
what if the Lord should dry up the very River Euphrates, to make a Passage for
the Jews to come to their own Land? Isai. 11. 15, 16. and thus indeed it might
be a Judgment or Wrath upon the Turk, letting in an Enemy upon them for their
Destruction.

But let it be considered, whether these Kings of the East, or, as it may be
rendered, from the rising of the Sun; may not be meant of those Enemies, Dragon,
Beast, and False Prophet? Seeing the very next thing mentioned is a Preparation
of them unto Armageddon, Rev. 16. 13* (...) 15, 16. and that out of all Parts
of the (...) World, from the rising of the Sun* which notes the greatest
distance; as, Isai 45. 6. and 59. 19. Mal. 1. 11. And then it imports, that
the ruin of Rome, or wasting the Euphratean People, the Turks, will provoke
all the Enemies of Christ to make a Combination against him. The return and
Conversion of the Jews, the first setting up the Kingdom of Jesus Christ, will
be such a grievance to Enemies, that they which were at variance before, shall
reckon themselves so concerned, that all shall join their Forces against Christ
to their ruin, Rev. 19.

Whether these three, Dragon, Beast, and False Prophet, shall be gathered
together in three Parts or Places, or only in one Place, viz. about Jerusalem,
time will manifest.

7. The seventh Vial is poured into the Air, Rev. 16. 17.

[ Air] Is Universal, and so notes that this Vial brings general Wrath upon
the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, all taste of the Wrath of this Vial.

One Adjunct is, [A great Voice out of the Temple of Heaven from the Throne]
saying, [It is done] i. e. the Mystery of God is finished, Rev. 10. 7. the Jews
are converted, or the New Jerusalem Throne is now set, as, Rev. 21. 5, 6. where
we have the same Throne, and the same Voice from it [It is done] now is the New
Heaven and New Earth, v. 1. not yet Consummate, and in the fullness of its
Latitude and Glory, but inchoate, in the beginning ^^ it, v. 2. prepared as a
Bride, adorned for her ^^sband, now is the Preparation, as Rev. 19. 7. (...)

The Effects are, v. 16. Voices and Thunders, and a great Earthquake, such as
was not since Men were upon the face of the Earth, i. e. great Commotions and
Alterations in the Nations. And v. 19. [the great City was divided into three
Parts].

The [City] is the whole Jurisdiction of the ancient Roman Empire, [is divided]
and so overthrown; I think, the [three Parts] are those before mentioned, v.
13. possibly rendevouzed in three several places. Some shall belong to the
Dragon, i. e. be Pagans, or not professedly Christian; Others to the Beast, i.
e. Civil-Crowned Horns; Others to the False-Prophet, i. e. Ecclesiastical Men,
or belonging to the Pope.

And the Calamities of diverse are pointed out, v. 19. [the Cities of the
Nations fell] i. e. they of the Nations who Engage and lend Assistance here
against Christ are overthrown, or experience great Desolations.

[And great Babylon came into remembrance before God] --

Some think that the Destruction of Rome is not till this seventh Vial, because
of this Expression.

But there is Babylon at Rome, and Babylon in the Nations. The former falls
by the sixth Vial, as I proved the latter by the seventh Vial, after the
gathering together to Armageddon, v. 16. with the greatest Earthquake, v. 18.
by which the Cities of the Nations fall, v. 19. which cannot be till the
Armageddon Battle; yet (...) that, there is a rejoicing for the desolation of
the Whore of Babylon, Rev. 19. which this Opinion would leave no room for.

I therefore say, there is a double remembrance of Babylon, one under the
sixth, the other under the seventh Vial. The former brings wrath upon Rome,
and causes the Nations to lament her burning, and stand afar off for fear of
her torment, Rev. 18. 9, 10. the latter cause the Nations to feel what before
they had feared, they fall, which before they did not. The former is a
particular desolation at Rome; this more general, Rev. 16. 19. The former is a
partial, this a total or an utter destruction. The former brought [Wrath] but
this, under the seventh Vial, brings [fierceness of Wrath] v. 19* as at
Armageddon, Rev. 19. 15.

And thus the Holy Ghost distinguishes, Rev. 14. 15. to the end. The Fall of
Babylon at Rome is the Harvest; the utter Extirpation of Babylon at the seventh
Vial is the Vintage, which will quickly follow the other, as the Vintage does
the Harvest.

The [Hail] out of Heaven, Rev. 16. 21. denotes the more immediate Judgments of
God on the Enemies at that Day.

The Conclusion of all then is, that we are to wait by Faith and Patience, for
those great things which are yet unfulfilled; for the great Day of the Lord is
near. And the things that are still unaccomplished, and yet to come, An. 1680,
and so to be expected, are such as these that follow:

1. The Death-state of the Witnesses, their Resurrection and Ascension, Rev.
11. 7. to v. 13.

Their Death is signalized by various Characters aforementioned; especially by
the darkness, blackness and gloominess of the Day, with the loss of a
Witnessing-Spirit after finishing their Testimony. This is the Comfort, that it
will be short, and the issue glorious. Their recovery is notified by a great
Earthquake or Commotion, v. 13. we may know they are risen, if after that there
be a Fall of a famous Tenth part of the Old Roman Jurisdiction, and the Ruin
of a vast Number of Dignitaries, Officers, Men of Eminency and Renown by the
Earthquake, and the repenting of a Remnant, so as to give Glory to God.

2. The wasting and diminishing of Turkish Power, so as it cease to be a Woe
to the Idolatrous Romanists, Rev. 11. 14. the second Woe is past -- This is an
immediate issue of the Witnesses Ascension, not only in Vision, but in
Execution; for the fifth, or former Wo-Trumpet was concluded in the same
manner, with respect to the Event; and also it is added expressly, the Third Woe
comes quickly.

Not that the utter Destruction of the Turks, or of his whole Dominion every
where, will be at the Ascension of the Witnesses; no, that is not till
afterward at the seventh Vial, as I shall evidence: but they shall abundantly
lose Ground and suffer a Consumption of a vast Number of People, (by revolt, or
otherwise) not only in Europe, in Hungaria, but in Africa or in Asia, near the
River Euphrates, where they were first loose, and did overrun the Nations to
the killing a third part of Men, Rev. 9. 14, 15. and this wasting or destroying
their Power and Dominion about Euphrates, this drying up that deluge of
Inhabitants there, is* Rev. 16. 12. [that the way of the Kings of the East may
be prepared] i. e. either as an occasion for Enemies combining against Christ;
or that a passage may be open for the Jews return to their own Land, ( Isai.
49. 22.) which they stood in the way of, Isai. 11. 14. They shall fly upon the
Shoulders of the Philistines toward the West, they shall spoil them of the
East together, i. e. those that have been Enemies to the People of God, as the
Philistines were, shall march toward the West, and spoil the Turks of the
East, so as to make way for the Jews repossessing of their own Land. Whether
these Philistines shall do it intentionally or accidentally, God so overruling
by his Providence, as their spoiling of the Turk shall give advantage to the
Jews return; wonderfully removing all impediments and hindrances that were in
the way of it; this I shall not here determine.

All the Twelve Tribes shall return from all Quarters, v. 11, 14, 15. from
Assyria, from Egypt -- Edom, Moab, and the Children of Ammon shall be subject
to them. And when the Turkish Power shall be thus wasted, either in Pathros and
Egypt, or about Euphrates, or both, then I shall expect the speedy rising or
restitution of the Jews.

3. The downfall of Mystical Babylon at Rome, Rev. 11. 13. Rev. 18. 2. Babylon
the Great, is fallen, is fallen; so throughout the Chapter. Not only her
Superstition and Idolatry, her corrupt Offices, Orders, Ways, Worship,
Merchandise there, will be destroyed as a Mercy, but the City it self of Rome
for her Sins will irrecoverably fall under sudden and unavoidable Divine Wrath
as a Sore Judgment, utter Desolation, shall be burnt with Fire; so as the
People of God are to avoid her Plagues, v. 4. and even her Friends shall be
afraid of her Torments, v. 5, 8, 9, 10. -- She is threatened with the ceasing of
the Voice of Mirth of the Bridegroom, and of the sounding of the Millstone, and
of the shining of Light, v. 22, 23. which Phrases generally note an utter
Desolation, as Jer. 7. 34. and 16. 9. and 25. 10, 11. Isai. 24. 8, 9. and it is
expressly declared, Rev. 17. 16. where we have the way and means of her Ruin
and Destruction. [The Ten Horns shall hate the Whore, and shall make her
desolate, and shall eat her Flesh, and shall burn her with Fire] i. e. Some of
the Ten Horns who abominate her Idolatry shall make her desolate, whether some
in the Eastern Parts, or in the West, or both, time must discover; others
adhere still in their Spirits to, and make Lamentation for her, Rev. 18. 9.
even those that committed Fornication with her, and are thus distinguished from
those who make her desolate.

Now the Symptoms and Signs of Romes approaching Ruin, are such as these: The
aggravated, measure-filling Sins of Babylon, her Plagues come, Rev. 18. 5. [for
her Sins have reached unto Heaven] her heinous Evils as new invented Cruelties
-- hasten her ruin, especially the hand she has in slaying the Witnesses,
Rev. 11. 8, 11. their death presage her ruin, v. 13. as well as her own
triumph, Rev. 18 8. Behold, I sit a Queen -- her singing a Requiem to her self.
Also the Lord's raising up suddenly some famous Instrument in the World to
appear for his Interest, Rev. 18. 1. so as the Earth will be filled with his
Glory. Also Christ's appearing in his Regal Dignity in greater Splendour,
Purity, Brightness and Glory than heretofore, on a white Cloud, Rev. 14. 14,
15, 16. with a golden Crown, and in his hand a sharp Sickle; and here is
speedily a Vial-Angel out of the Temple, out of his pure Church, applying it
self to Christ, having not only an expectation of, but an extraordinary Spirit
of Prayer, crying to him, for the reaping the Harvest of Babylon, and it was
done accordingly, v. 16. so that this is an immediate forerunner of her Ruin.

4. A Triumphant Song among the Saints, for the Ruin of Rome or Babylon there,
Rev. 19. 1, 2, 3, 4. This seems to be about the latter end of the sixth, or
beginning of the seve^th Vial, near, or in the time of preparation to
Armageddon, Rev. 16. 13, 14.

And it must ever be observed, that the Effects of one Vial do oftentimes run
into another Vial, or last and continue after another Vial is begun to be
poured out, like the Scales of Fishes, one partly covers another.

5. The Restoration and Return of the Jews and Israelites, together with their
Conversion as well as others:

Ezekiel. 37. under the Emblem of dry Bones living, is signified the restitution
of the Jews; and by two Sticks, one for Ephraim the Head of (and often put for)
the Ten Tribes; and another for Judah, or the Two Tribes, v. 16, etc. is
represented the recovery of all the Twelve Tribes of Israel, and bringing them
to their own Land, v. 21. and this was never yet accomplished; For when it is,
says the Lord, v. 22. I will make them one Nation upon the Mountains of
Israel, and one King shall be to them all, and they shall be no more two
Nations, neither shall they be divided into two Kingdoms any more at all. So
that when this is made good, all the Twelve Tribes, the Body of them, are
reunited, so as they shall never be separated any more, and one King shall be
over them, David, v. 24. and that is Jesus Christ, for David was dead long
before this Prophecy. Few here yet know where the Ten Tribes are, and the two
are still scattered; so that this never was accomplished to this day, and
therefore it must hereafter be fulfilled, because God is true. This then is
certain, That all the Twelve Tribes of Israel shall have a Possession of their
own Land again, and be under Conversion there; some think they shall not be
converted till after they are there, Isai. 61. 7. Jer. 31. 17. and 32. 41.
Ezekiel. 37. 21, 22, 25. Am. 9. 14, 15. Zech. 2. 12.

So Romans 11. 25, 26. he says, the fullness of the Gentiles shall come in, [and
so all Israel shall be saved]. So that in Gospel Times, after breaking off the
Jews for Unbelief, yet there is a time when all Israel shall be saved. And this
will be completed at the beginning of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 10. 7.

The Way and Means of Isreal's return and Conversion, will be partly
Extraordinary by Impressions from the Lord, like wind breathing upon them,
which will be to them as life from the dead, Ezekiel. 37. 9, 11, 12. it will be a
sudden, unexpected thing, a Nation to be born in one day, Isai. 66. 8.

Their Call will be partly by Ordinary means, the Preaching of the Gospel, Jer.
31. 6, 8, 9, 10, etc. by Watchmen on Mount Ephraim, Isai. 52. 7, 8. and 59. 20.
Isai. 60. 16. Thou shall also Suck the Milk of the Gentiles, Romans 11. 25, 26.
The deliverer shall come out of Sion, i. e. by Ministers out of Gentile
Churches, so he will turn away Ungodliness from Jacob. And the Faith of the
Gentiles shall provoke the Jews to Jealousy and Emulation, v. 11, 12. possibly
at the rising of the Witnesses, Rev. 11. 11, 12.

Their first Conversion will not be by the personal appearance of Jesus Christ;
for that is not till the seventh Vial, Rev. 16. 15, 16. Behold I come as a
Thief -- Mat. 24. 29, 30. when they shall welcome him, Mat. 23. 39. whereas they
are converted before under the sixth Vial, v. 12. and prepared as a Bride
before the seventh, Rev. 19. 7. to end.

As to the time; some say, before the Salvation of Israel, the Pope and Turk
shall be overthrown and destroyed.

And indeed, a partial Fall of the Turk will be by the sixth Vial, but their
total Destruction is not till the seventh.

And the Mistake that the Fall of Rome will be by the fifth Vial, I have
disproved.

As to that great Question,

Whether Rome shall first be destroyed, before the Calling or Conversion of the
Jews?

I would not absolutely determine, but consider, the first Triumphant Song for
Judgment upon Babylon, is with various Hallelujahs, Rev. 18. and Rev. 19. 1, 3,
4, 6. which is an Hebrew word never before used in the Apocalypse, and so
imports, that the Hebrews are concerned and engaged in the first Praises for
the Fall of Rome; and therefore the Hebrews seem to be Converted before,
without which, they could not rightly show forth these Praises, ( Isai. 43.
21*) and this is in order of time after those things concerning its
Destruction. And the next thing is the Lamb's Wife (which especially must be
the Jews) makes her self ready, Rev. 19. 7.

Yea, the Angel which fills the Earth with his Glory near the downfall of
Babylon, Rev. 18. 1, 2. seems to be the very same with that at the first
restoration of Israel, Ezekiel. 43. 2. And so why may not the Jews have some hand
also (with others) in the Ruin of Rome, Dan. 2. 34, 35. 44, 45. Zech. 12. 2,
3, 4, 6.

I know the Idolatry and Abomination of Rome, have been agreat Stumbling Block
in the way of the Conversion of the Jews.

But, the special Gospel Manifestation and Divine drawings, rending the Veil
upon the Heart, will be enough to remove all these Stumbling Blocks, 2 Cor. 3.
15, 16. Joh. 6. 44, 45. Act. 2. 37, 38.

And that Rev. 15. 8. is not to be understood absolutely; as if none entered
into the Temple or pure Church*state, till all the Vials be poured out; for all
the seven Vial-Angels come out of the Temple, and with pure and white Linen,
v. 6. and so there was then a pure Temple, that some, yea many, entered into;
but it must be understood Comparatively, few enter in comparison of what shall
enter at the latter Vials.

6. A general Combination of Enemies against Jesus Christ and his Interest, to
their own Destruction: After the Fall of Babylon, some will survive to lament
her burning, Rev. 18. 9. and being of the same Spirit they were, hence the
Witnesses after their rising ( Rev. 11. 11.) in such places may have Trouble
and Sufferings from their hands, and the watchword and warning to keep their
Garments, intimate danger then of spiritual Drowsiness, ( Mat. 25. 1, etc.) and
of Self-pollution; however Enemies will be exasperated, so as all will conspire
against Jesus Christ and his Members, Rev. 16. 13, 14 15, 16. Dragon, Beast,
and False Prophet, but the issue is their Destruction.

The^e was a partial Destruction before, but the total Destruction is reserved
to this seventh Vial at Armageddon. The Tenth part fell before, but the Beast
the Fourth Monarchy, continued, and the little Horn till now. At the seventh
Vial (and not before) the Beast is slain, and his Body destroyed, and given to
the burning flame, Dan. 7. 11. and then is seen one like the Son of Man in the
Clouds -- v. 13, 14.

So John tells us of the End of [the Beast and False Prophet] (the first and
second Beast) they are then cast into the Wine Press of the fierceness of the
Wrath of God, Rev. 19. 15. cast alive into a Lake of Fire burning with
Brimstone, v. 20.

As to the [Dragon] the Turk and all Pagan Powers, those that are not
professedly Christian, what become of them? They are wasted by the sixth Vial,
and their Power destroyed by the seventh, to an utter Subjection, Rev. 20. 2,
3. the Dragon is cast into the bottomless Pit, and he bound a Thousand Years. A
wonderful restraint is laid upon him, that he may not hurt the Church as
heretofore. And, v* 3. after that he must be loosed for a little season, and go
to deceive the Nations in the Four Quarters of the Earth, [ Gog and Magog] v.
8. And these being the Dragon loosed at the End of the Thousand Years; it
plainly tells us what is [the Gog and Magog] at the beginning of the Thousand
Years, Ezekiel. 38. and 38. even the same; they are principally the Turks and
their Associates at Armageddon, or the remains of the Enemies of Christ from
all Parts; for the description agrees to the Turk and his Confederates, Ezekiel.
38. 2, 3. he is the Chief Prince of Meshech and Tubal -- If Tubal be the
Spaniards and Italians, yet Meshech may be the Moschici or Cappadocians. And
the Turk has a vast Number of Horsemen, as* v. 4. is a bitter Enemy to Israel,
v. 9, 16, 18. and has a Situation Northward, or in the North Country; as v.
15. and Ezekiel. 39. 2. yea, he has Syria under him, which denominated the
Seleucians Kings of the North, Dan. 11. 6, 13, 15.

The attempt of this Gog and Magog, the Turk and his Adherents, will be
speedily after the restoration or return of Israel, and dwelling safely in
their own Land, Ezekiel. 38. 8, 9, 11, 15. Ezekiel. 39. 25, 26, 28, 29. when all the
Twelve Tribes shall be newly gathered out of the Nations after their long
scattering.

And it will be a very dreadful and terrible destruction, by the fierceness of
the wrath of God, Ezekiel. 38. 18. by a general Earthquake or Commotion; by
setting every Man's Sword among the Men of Gog against his Brother, by
Pestilence, Blood, and immediate Judgments, Hailstones, Fire and Brimstone, v.
19, 20, 21, 22, 23. So as they shall be a long time in burying the Dead, and
burning the Instruments of War, Ezekiel. 39. 17, 19, 20. and therefore it will be
before the thousand years, for it is not like there will be such a space after
the end of them, to the end of time, Rev. 20. 11, 12.

And this great destruction of Gog or the Turk, will not be in Hungaria (though
he may before have great losses there) but especially in the Land of Canaan;
his great and last utter ruin and destruction shall be there, Ezekiel. 39. 4.
thou shall fall upon the Mountains of Israel.

This is further confirmed from, Dan. 11. where the Kings of Egypt are called
Kings of the South, and those of Syria, Kings of the North, till both were
translated to the Romans, and then even in order of story it is said, v. 36.
And a King shall do according to his Will -- there being but one King, because
both Egypt and Syria, were under the Romans, till they divided and split again,
that the Saracens obtained Egypt, and became King of the South, and the Turks
obtained Assyria, v. 40. and so became King of the North. All the description
of the King of the North there agree to the Turk; as, he in the latter days
has Egypt under him, and the precious things thereof, v. 43. and so he is the
King of the North.

Therefore the Turks shall hear tidings out of the East, and the North* and
shall go forth with fury to destroy, and then he shall come to his end, v. 44,
45.

The last signal thing of it is, v. 45. and he shall plant his Aphadno, the
Tabernacle of his Palace or Tent for this War [between the Seas in the glorious
Holy Mountain; yet he shall come to his End, and none shall help him]. None
has obtained (especially from Daniel) that title of Renown [glorious Holy
Mountain] but J^rusalem, or, the Land of Promise, Dan. 9. 16, 20. Zcch. 8. 3.
And that is [between the Seas]. Jerusalem is situate between the Egyptian Sea
on the West, and the Dead-Sea, or the Asphali^is on the East. Also Samaria has
the Egyptian-Sea Westward, and the Dead-Sea Eastward* Also the Territory of
Assure and Zabulon* are between the Sea of Galilee on the East* and the
Phoenician, Syrian or Mediterranean-Sea on the West.

When Gog or the Turk shall plant the Tabernacle of his Palace or his Tent for
War in Judea or about Jerusalem, and shall go forth furiously to destroy, upon
the Mountains of Israel, then he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.

7. A time of general and stupendous Alterations in the World: When all those
Enemies shall conspire against Christ, as, Rev. 16. 14, 16. Ezekiel. 38 4, 5, 6,
7, 14, 15. it cannot but be a time of Trouble every where, especially seeing it
will be attended with such astonishing Mutations, Mat 24. 29. the Sun shall be
darkened and the Moon shall not give her Light, and the Stars shall fall from
Heaven, and the Powers of Heaven shall be shaken. And this refers to the
same time, for as the next thing, v. 30. then shall appear the sign of the Son
of Man in Heaven. -- And Jesus Christ himself explaineth this, Luke 21. 25, 26,
27. There shall be signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars, and
upon the Earth distress of Nations, with perplexity, Men's hearts failing for
fear -- and then they shall see the Son of Man coming in the Clouds, -- i. e.
for their relief and succor.

These Universal Commotions will occasion a very great consternation and
affrightment, yet Jesus Christ gives them as a Comforting Cordial to the Faith
of the Saints, like the budding of the Fig Tree; which evidenceth that the
Summer is near, v. 28. 29, 30, 31.

So these terrible things argue that the Redemption of Believers draws nigh,
v. 32. Verily, -- this Generation shall not pass away till all be fulfilled.

[This Generation] cannot be meant of that wherein this was* spoken by Christ
on Earth; for that, and many Generations are passed since, and yet the things
are unfulfilled: But in other Evangelists, especially Luke, it is applied to
the Parable of the Fig Tree, [that Generation] v. 28. when the Fig Tree shall
begin to put forth by these Distresses of Nations and Men's hearts failing for
fear of those things, which are coming on the Earth, [this Generation] wherein
these things begin, shall not pass until all be fulfilled, i. e. till the
Kingdom of God shall come, v. 31. till they shall see the Son of Man coming in
a Cloud, v. 27. All shall be accomplished in the very same Age or Generation
wherein they have their beginning. Those things will have a terrible Aspect
even to the Saints; yet they will issue in their Redemption, v. 28. and the
blow will fall upon Enemies in their great destruction, Ezekiel. 38. 20, 21, 22.
and 39. 4, 5. Rev. 19. 18, 19, 20. so that this will be the greatest trouble to
the Enemies of Christ and his Church.

It seems that the greatest trouble to the Jewish Nation will be over before
this; For it is said, Mat. 24. 29, 30. Immediately after the Tribulation of
those days, shall the Sun be darkened -- and then shall appear the signs of the
Son of Man. --

This foregoing trouble is applied to the Jews, v. 16, 17. and is expressly
declared to be their greatest Tribulation, v. 21. for then shall be great
Tribulation: such as was not since the beginning of the World to this time, nor
ever shall be. So then, the Eclipsing of all Earthly Glory by distress of
Nations (about the time of Armageddon) is not before, but immediately after
that greatest Tribulation to the Jewish Nation is over and at an end. It began
at Vespatian about Ann. 70. that was their greatest in respect of the severity
and sharpness of it; the History is very Tragical, many Hundred thousands of
the Jews perished, and were made miserable, by Famine, Sword and Captivity;
their Houses and Streets were filled with dead Men, Women and Children, so that
those alive could not Bury the Dead, that it was unparallelled, it passed any
Plague formerly sent by God, Joseph. lib. 6. c. 14, 16. and lib. 7. c. 17. Then
might be fulfilled, Zech. 14. v. 1, 2, 3. And that is their greatest
Tribulation in respect of Duration, it has lasted above 1600 Years, and the
Jews are not yet delivered.

It is hard to conceive that any future trouble of theirs should exceed that
which is past, and especially seeing there are so many Promises, that after
their return, they should have no more such Sorrow and Captivity as before,
Jer. 31. 10, 11, 12. Ezekiel. 34. 12. 22. Zeph. 3. 15. Zech. 9. 8. Am. 9. 14, 15.
they shall no more be pulled out of their Land; and so they shall not again
have their Houses rifled and Women ravished, nor go again into Captivity; as,
Zech. 14. 2. And if so, then their greatest trouble mentioned, Dan. 12. 1. must
be begun at Vespatian, and is almost expired, the worst of it is over; for
there cannot be two greatest troubles to them, and Christ says, there shall
never be like to them, ( Mat. 24. 21.) It is usual for the Prophets in a few
Lines, to express that which is fulfilling many Hundred Years; and so here in a
Verse or two, may decipher the great and long Tribulations of the Jews, and
also their deliverance, and reach even to the last Resurrection, v. 2.

In short, those words [And there shall be a time of Trouble, such as never was
since there was a Nation] may come in by a Parenthesis, discovering what shall
intervene between Israel's rejection, and Michael's standing up for their
deliverance, even a long and sore Tribulation.

Or else they must refer to this general Commotion, which will be unparallelled
in respect of astonishment and affrightment, but they will be more afraid than
hurt, for then at that time they shall be delivered.

8. The setting up of the glorious Kingdom of Jesus Christ, the New Jerusalem,
or the Glory of the Church here a Thousand Years, Rev. 20* and 21. and 22.

The Rise or first State of this Kingdom, will be speedily after the
Resurrection of the Witnesses, and the first Conversion of the Jews, Rev. 11.
12, 15. and before the Thousand Years begin. This is the Kingdom of the Stone,
Dan. 2. 34, 45. whose beginning will be small, and its way unpeaceable and
troublesome, conflicting with Enemies, yet prevailing against and breaking of
them* v. 45. So that this is not begun, so long as the Enemies of Christ are
the prevailing Party, every where.

The second State of this Kingdom, will begin next after the Battle at
Armageddon, this will be more Peaceable and Glorious, Isai. 2. 4. Mic. 4. 3, 4,
6, 7. The Church will enjoy great Liberty; for, her grand Enemy, the Dragon,
will be under a wonderful Restraint, will be Bound a Thousand Years, Rev. 20 2.

It cannot note the State of the Saints to come in Heaven upon the Judgment of
the Great Day; for, after that Satan will be loosed no more; whereas, after
this, v. 3 8. he shall be loosed for a little season to deceive the Nations,
after which, will speedily follow that last Day of Judgment, v. 7, 9, 11, 12.
but of that day and hour knows no man, Mat. 24. 36.

And it cannot be past; for the Dragon has never been bound a Thousand Years
hitherto. The first Three hundred Years of Christ, he he was loose, ruling by
Pagan Emperors, Rev. 12. 3. 4. And since has been loose, sending forth not
only Papism, but Mahumetism, out of the bottomless Pit after An. 600. Rev. 9.
1, 2, etc. which continue to this day; therefore he is not yet shut up in the
bottomless Pit, and bound there, as Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3. and consequently the
Thousand Years are not yet begun. And besides, when the Thousand Years are
expired, Satan is loosed again, and his Party is destroyed in an immediate way,
by fire from God out of Heaven, v. 9. and he is cast into the lake of fire and
brimstone [where the Beast and the false Prophet are]. Therefore the Beast and
false Prophet must be destroyed before the Thousand Years begin; else how could
the Dragon be cast into the Lake where they were, if they had not been there
before? and they are not there as yet, and so that time is not yet begun. They
cannot be cast in during the Thousand Years, for Satan is bound all that time;
whereas he is loose till they be in the Lake, and immediately before the Beast
and false Prophet were cast in, the Dragon was not bound there, but assisted
them at the Battle at Armageddon, Rev. 16. 13. 16. and so that time of a
Thousand Years is not yet begun.

And this Thousand Years will be a glorious time; not Absolutely, as if
Sinless; but Comparatively, or compared with any former state of the Church
since the Fall of Adam; so it will be a state of Blessedness, Dan. 12. 11, 12.
Possibly it may be ushered in by a personal appearance of Christ in the Clouds;
but I cannot say, that it will be by the personal presence and continuance or
reigning of Christ on Earth. Now will Ezekiel's City and Temple be erected,
Ezekiel. 40. to the End of that Book, the glory of which will be, that the Name of
it from that day shall be Jehovah Shammah, the Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48. 35.
This is the time of finishing the Mystery of God in the seventh Trumpet, Rev.
10. 7. and 11. 15, etc.

Here will begin the State of the New Jerusalem, which comes down out of
Heaven, Rev. 21, 1, 2. and is not by our going up to Heaven.

Here, will be such a new face of things, as if there were a New Heaven, and a
New Earth. Rev. 21. 1. and great Changes for the better in the Civil, and
Ecclesiastical State, great Purity of Administrations and Ordinances, and a
glorious Divine Presence, v. 3. Zeph. 3. 9. Zech. 14. 20, 21.

Then there shall be given to Christ as, Dan* 7. 14. 22, 27. Dominion and Glory
and a Kingdom that all People, Nations and Languages should serve him; and his
Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom
that shall not be destroyed.

An Appendix.
ALL aforegoing (except in two lines) I had written long since; but some of
late have affirmed Pagan Rome to be the first and second Beast, and the Subject
of the Seals, Trumpets and Vials, yea, to be the Whore of Babylon, which
falling* they say) the 1000 Years began: Also they deny the Conversion of the
Jews. If these things be true, then much aforesaid were false; so as this
necessitateth a considering those Matters.

Q. 1. Whether Pagan Rome was the first and second Beast, and the Whore or
Mystical Babylon, Rev. 13. and Rev. 18?

A. Negatively, it was not: For,

1. There is a Dragon-state of the Roman Empire, which falls at the rising of
the first Beast; for the Dragon gives the first Beast, his Power, Throne and
great Authority, Rev. 13. 2. and so the Beast is the Dragon's Successor, and
does not get up, until the Dragon be cast down from his Imperial Throne and
Dignity, Rev. 12. 9, 13. Hence it is impossible that Pagan Rome should be both
Beast and Dragon: Neither was there any State before Pagan Rome to make the
Dragon-state, seeing it was Pagan from the first.

2. Rome whilst Dragon, had a vastly different form and shape from what it had
under the first Beast: In its Dragon-state it had only seven Crowns, and these
not upon the Horns, but upon the Heads, Rev. 12. 3. but at the rising of the
first Beast, there were Ten Crowns, and these upon the Horns, Rev. 13. 1. for
the Goths, Vandals, etc. obtained a Sovereignty, setting up in the Empire for
themselves; whereas in the days of John, they had not received Power as Kings,
Rev. 17. 12. all then (though some were named Kings, Mat. 2. 1, 3. Luke 1. 5.
Act. 26. 2, 7, 27.) being under the headship of, and in subjection to
Emperors; but were to be Crowned about the same time when the Roman Empire
turned Beast; were not so crowned under Pagan Rome; therefore that was not the
first Beast.

3. After crowning the Horns, one of the Heads of the first Beast was wounded
as unto death, and healed again, Rev. 13. 3. This cannot be proved of Pagan
Rome, and so that is not the first Beast.

4. The first Beast had Power to continue or make War 42 Months, Rev. 13. 5. if
they were literal Months, Pagan Rome was Idolatrous and persecuting the Church
much longer, even Hundreds of Years. If they be taken for Months of Years, then
Pagan Rome did not continue half so long, and so cannot be that first Beast.

5. It does not appear that the ten horns after Crowning did hate Pagan Rome,
and burn it with fire, Rev. 17. 12, 16. and so that was not the first Beast:
Nor was it the Whore of Babylon, for, Rev. 18. speaks not merely of the
destruction of some Corruptions (as of Paganism) but of an utter desolation of
a City it self; Compare it with Jer. 25. 9, 10, 11, 12. so that if it had been
Rome Pagan, it would not have left that as a City after Paganism, for the
Papacy to reign in.

6 The Reasons urged for Pagan Rome, being the first Beast and the Whore of
Babylon, are not cogent, but easily answered; for they are mostly built upon
that common Mistake, viz. That else Rome Papal must be the first Beast: whereas
I have proved that first Beast to be a civil persecuting state of Rome,
distinct from, and up long (even Hundreds of Years) before the second Beast
(which is Papal) did arise in his first Horn of Ecclesiastical Power, about
Ann. 606. and so most of the Reasons are enervated, or evaded at once. Hence
the Pope is not the 7th and 8th Head or King. It is usual for [King] to
signify, not a particular Person, but a Species of Government, or a Race of
many Successively, Dan. 7. 17. and 8. 21. and 11. 5, 9, 11, 13, 15, etc. And so
Rev. 17. 10. cannot intend particular persons; for, Five Pagan persecuting
Emperors were not fallen in the days of John, and there were more to come than
would make up the 7 or 8, for there were Ten Persecutions; therefore it must be
Five Species of Government that then were fallen. If the [ short space] v. 10.
be not meant of the state of the first Beast before the 7th Head of Popes did
arise, but of it; then it may intend the Pope from the time of his becoming the
7th Head by obtaining Civil Supremacy over-topping Emperors, and then his
continuance may be but a [ short space] comparatively with the whole time of
Emperors.

Obj 1. It is Idolatrous persecuting Power that the Text describes, and none
persecuted but Emperors.

A. Not only the Emperors, but the Beast by Crowned horns also persecuted:
However it is not said that all the seven* Heads did persecute, but that state
did it which has these. And often that is ascribed to many, which is acted not
by all, but by some or a few of them; as Rev. 17. 16. compared with, Rev. 18. 9.

Obj. 2. Evince that the six Pagan Governments were Heads of Papal Rome.

A. In describing one Roman Monarchy which has various Dynasties, no Necessity
that all which is affirmed of it should be verified under one of them: Daniel's
4th Beast comprehends all its various states mentioned in the Revelation
under both Dragon and Beast state. So the six Pagan Governments were Heads of
the Empire which now is Papal; but all the six not in being when Papal.

Obj* 3. As to the seven sorts of Government, Kings, Con^^ls, Decemvirs, etc.
Evince that six were Suprean. Powers at Rome before Popes.

A. Trecentesimo al^ero quam Condita Roma er at iterum mutat^ forma Civitatis
ab Consulibus ad Decemviros, quemadmodum ab Regibus ante ad Consules vener at
translato imperio, T. Livii, lib. 3. Dec. 1. See Tacitus Annal. l. 1. and
others, who speak of Dictators and Tribunes.

1. Kings, cannot be denied to be Supreme as Romulus, etc.

2. Consuls were created in the room of Kings; Regibus urbe propulsis Romani --
Consules creaverunt, pro uno rege duo hac causa Creati -- Paul Diacon. lib. 1.
p. 13.

3. Dictators: The Romans smitten with fear* Dictatorem creant, cujus
auctoritas and potentia Consulem praeiret. Oros. lib. 2. c. 5. The like says
Dempster.

4. Decemviri; Pro duobus Consulibus December facti sunt qui summam potestatem
haberent constituendarum legum Atticarum gratia, qui a numero Decemviri sunt
Nominati. Paul. Diacon. lib. 1. See Paul. Oros. lib. 2. c. 13.

5. Tribunes, were of two sorts, Tribuni Militum were of Consular Authority.
Paul. Diacon. lib. 2.

6. Emperors are known to have had Supreme Authority.

7. Popes have over-top't Emperors, as Hildebrand, or Pope Gregory VII. and
others.

Obj. 4. But the Supreme Power was in the Senate, and that is made none of the
Six.

A. It Is said, That Romulus the King first constituted the Senate at Rome, yet
he was Supreme still; Centum Senatores creavit quos Patres auctoritate
nuncupavit. Messalae Corvini lib. Eutropii Historia cum Diacono, p. 6. the
number was increased afterward.

It Is true, there were Contests after between the Senate and Emperors, and the
Senate had a hand in making Decrees; but Emperors had the Supreme Power in the
Administration of the Government of Rome, or in the Executive part of the Law;
for, who will say that there were two Supreme Powers at the same time there?
And those who make the Objection by their asserting particular Emperors, to be
the seven Heads, Rev. 13. 1. and Rev. 17. 9, 10. they must unavoidably grant
not the Senate, but Emperors to be Supreme.

Obj. 5. The Pontifex Maximus might as well be named, as one of them.

A. 1. Its denied; For Pontifex Maximus was first instituted by Numa Pompilius,
a King who had Supreme Power over him. See Messal. Corvin. Libel.

2. Afterward it was sinfully annexed to him who had the Supreme Power, viz. to
the Emperor, as one of his Titles. After, C. Julius Caesar, all Emperors
assumed that wicked Title Pontifex Maximus, even Constantius -- until the
Emperor Gratian, and he did forbid to be called by it. See Dempster, and Rosin
and Zosimus.

3. It Is against Rev. 17. 10. for if Pontifex Maximus was one of the Seven,
which were the Five fallen in the days of John; how can the number Seven be
made up?

Obj. 6. Show that [The Beast] that [was and is not] is meant, that it [is not
now, nor ever was, but shall be] and when the Pope falls [shall not be]. And
v. 15. [where the Whore sitteth] where she shall sit hereafter.

A. 1. It may be as difficult to Answer if the Pagan Empire were the Beast; for
that [was] in the days of John, yet it is said [and is not].

2. It is usual in a Prophetical strain, to mention things as past or present,
which are to come hundreds of Years after, because they shall certainly be
future; as Rev. 18. 2. Babylon -- [is fallen], whereas it was not fallen in the
days of John, no, although the Pagan Empire were the Babylon intended, which it
is not. Thus, Dan. 2. 29. his Dream was, of what should come to pass afterward;
yet in Vision, it was as if present or past, v. 32. to 46. so Dan. 7. 3, 4. to
v. 15. and v. 17. to the End; and Dan. 8. Such reasoning then, does but darken
truth with many words. And as to Rev. 17. 8, 11. the Apostle interprets it,
the Beast [ was] before wounding [ is not] what he was when wounded unto death,
[ yet is] when healed.

Also [ The Gowned and literate Tribe] of Pagan Rome could not be [ the second
Beast] Rev. 13. 11. for various Characters thereof do not agree to them; as v.
12. they did not exercise all the Imperial Power and Authority of the first
Beast; nor did they so much as pretend to work Miracles, v. 13. they do not
make fire come down from Heaven on the Earth in the sight of men, and so they
are not the second Beast.

Take this Rule.

A Correspondency or agreeableness of some Matters or Events unto a Prophecy
will not prove its accomplishment, if there he disagreeableness in other
things.

Thus, some observing great Sufferings of Churches at diverse Seasons about
Three Years and half, have concluded these for the times of the Witnesses
Death, Rev. 11. 7, 9. and yet have been mistaken, as I before evidenced. So
others finding [ Pagan Rome] to answer some Characters in Rev. 17. 4, 5, 6. as
being great, and a Mother of Harlots and Abominations, etc. have groundlesly
concluded that to be [ the Woman or Whore of Babylon]. Whereas Pagan Rome was
down (as I have proved) before the Scarlet-colored Beast was up, which
carries her, v. 3, 7. and before the Ten Horns were crowned, v. 12. and so
that cannot be the Babylon here intended.

But as to [ the Whore of Babylon, Rev. 17.] all the Characters of her agree to
Rome Papal, and so we may conclude that to be it. Rome undeniably is that great
City which in the days of John reigned over the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 17.
18. though now it is not of the same Magnitude as then, yet it is the same City
that now is the Seat of the Papacy. And her bad Qualifications of Spiritual
Fornication or Idolatry and Cruel Persecution, v. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. do now
notoriously and undoubtedly agree to Rome Papal; And therefore Rome Papal is [
the Whore of Babylon]; and I think Antichristian. If the name Antichrist be not
in this Book, yet the thing is. It is not against it, if her riding upon the
Beast was not until Pope Gregory VII. or Innocent III. or the Lat^ran Council:
For there is no Scripture Evidence that the rising of the Whore of Babylon was
as early as the first Beast, much less her riding upon him; that might not be
until the rising of [the second Beast] Hundreds of Years after; especially
seeing Babylon is first mentioned in this Book, Rev. 14. 8, 9. with the Image
and Mark of the second Beast, Rev. 13. 14* 15, 16.

But how unimaginable is it, that almost the whole Book of the Revelation
should be spent about Pagan Rome in the first Three Hundred Years after
Christ's Nativity, and that all the great Events should be passed over in a
deep silence, which have been for many Hundreds of Years since; and this when
they were so remarkable to the Church, and do so clearly and exactly answer the
Prophecy which yet certainly extends to the End of time, even to the Day of
judgment, Rev. 20. 11, 12?

I might add, that as this Prophecy of the casting down the Dragon, Rev. 12.
tended greatly to the Consolation of Christian Jews and Gentiles in the
^rimitive times and here is a triumph on that account, v. 10 12, So Jesus
Christ has tenderly provided for the consolation of Christians in the latter
Days, for here is another, a new Triumph for Victory over the Beast, and the
Destruction of Babylon, Rev. 19 5, 6, 20. this after two Beast had been up and
persecuted, Rev. 13. and after some Trumpets had sounded, and Vials were poured
out upon Enemies, Rev. 15. and 16. the first of which Vials, v. 2. spoke the
Beast up before. So that here is a double rejoicing, one a long time after
another, and the latter upon the downfall of Babylon.

Here I must add, that it is unscriptural to say (as some do) that the three
Days and half, R^v. 11. should amount to as much as 1260 Days, or be the same
with the 42 Months; as if the three Days and half were first to be turned into
Prophetical Days, i. e. Years, and then every day in those Years to be turned
into Years again; such doubling is wholly unwarrantable. We are not to teach
the Spirit to speak, there is a Mystery in the broken Numbers so often
repeated, else the three Integrums might have been more, and so the 1260 Days
might have been 1300 or 2000. And surely there is curiosity in adding half a
Day or Year, to three Years of the Witnesses lying dead, Rev. 11. 9, 11. it
intimates that there will be some reviving in that half Year, or before a 4th
Prophetical day is come about. If a long time would be required for the strange
Feats of the Antichrist talked of by the Romanists, yet they who have so long
persecuted, why may they not at last slay the Witnesses in such a short time,
the way being prepared before? and why may they not in some Street of the great
City by a Spirit of Life from God suddenly be revived again?

To conclude this; in all the 1260 Days of their Sa^kcloath-state, the
Witnesses Prophecy, Rev. 11. 3. and so are alive; whereas during the three
Days and half, they are in a deathstate, v. 7, 9, 11. and therefore the three
Days and half are no part (much less the whole) of the 1260 Days.

I have proved diverse Vials to be poured out, long before the rising of the
Witnesses; and to the Vision of the Vials we must refer that vast change of
Affairs in the Papacy, by the late Reformation. Quickly after passing of the
second Woe, the Kingdoms of the World become the Lords. Rev. 11. 14, 15. or then
comes the 1000 Years, Rev. 20. in which I do not assert a l'ersonal reign of
Christ upon Earth, during that time, but a more glorious State of the Church
than before, and then comes the Day of Judgment, v. 11, 12, etc.

Quest. 2. Whether the 1000 Years, Rev. 20. must commence or begin from the
Fall of Pagan Rome at Constance, and expire at the Ottoman Empire. Ann. 1300.

A. Negatively, the 1000 Years cannot take date from the Fall of Pagan Rome:

For,

1. The Beast and false Prophet are cast into the burning Lake at the beginning
of the 1000 Years, Rev. 20. 10. Seeing the Dragon at their Expiration is cast
into it [ where the Beast and false Prophet are] therefore they were in before.

2. The Dragon is bound during the 1000 Years, that he does not deceive the
Nations, Rev. 20. 3. whereas during the 1000 Years from the Fall of Pagan Rome,
about Ann. 300. the Dragon was not bound but loose, and did deceive the Nations
into the Corruptions and Abominations both of the Papism even in the height of
it, witness Hildebrand's Dictates, and others; and also of Mahumetanism, which
overspread and deceived the Nations in the times after, An. 600. and before An.
1300. Yea, not only so, but a Scarlet-colored Whore in that time persecuted
the Church; witness the Sufferings of the Albingenses, and Waldenses, and
Bohemians. --

Q. 3. Whether the Restoration and Conversion of the fews and Ten Tribes is
still to be expected?

A. Affirmatively, I assert that the restoration and conversion of the Jews,
and the Body, or great Numbers of the Ten Tribes is still to be expected.

If the Prophesies and promises hereof had the beginning of their
a^^omplishment in the Primitive Times; if then, there were the first fruits of
them; yet the principal, the chiefest part, the complete fulfilling of them is
yet to come For,

1. All the Tribes, the dry bones must live: The two Sticks shall be one Stick,
one Nation, and that in their own Land under David their King, Jesus Christ,
when they shall be no more two Nations, neither shall be divided into two
Kingdoms any more at all, Ezekiel. 37. 5, 10, 14, 16, 19, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. and
they shall be converted, v. 14. I will put my spirit in you. --

This speaks not of a Union of believing Jews and Gentiles under Jesus
Christ; but plainly of the Twelve Tribes of Israel; for one stick is for Judah
and the Children of Israel, his Companions, v. 16. and the other for Joseph,
the stick of Ephraim, and for not only [some] but [all] the house of Israel his
Companions; this must comprise the Ten Tribes; and these must all be united,
become one Nation, v, 19, 22. in the Land, in the Mountains of Israel, and one
King shall be to them all, v. 22. and this is Jesus Christ, v. 24. David, my
servant, shall be King over them, and they all shall have one Shepherd -- i. e.
Jesus Christ, for David was dead long before, and [ David] often is put for
Christ, Ezekiel. 34. 23, 24 with Joh. 10. 11. Isai. 55. 3. with Act. 13. 34. Hos.
3. 5. --

Whereas they never yet were thus united under Christ in their own Land, but
are a divided scattered People to this day.

Therefore there is a time yet to come, when they shall be thus united under
Jesus Christ; for God is true* and no tittle of his Promise shall fail. The
like is declared in many other Prophecies.

2. All Israel shall be saved, Romans 11. 26. and not only the Elect, the
spiritual Israel, but plainly the Jews, that Israel, in distinction from the
Gentiles, v. 25. and after blindness or hardness happened to the Jews, so as
they were cast away and broken off for their unbelief, v. 15, 17* 20.

Therefore the Conversion of the Jews, of multitudinous number of that Israel
is to be expected.

It will be such as will be greater riches to the World; to the Gentiles than
their fall was, v. 12. how much more their fullness? There is then a time
coming, when there will be such [a fullness of the Jews] as will usher in the
Conversion of a far vaster Numbers than in the first Ages of the Gospel, as the
[ how much more] does evidence.

Obj. But there is no probability that all or most of the Common People of the
Ten Tribes were transplanted; but only the Rulers, and Rich and Military Men.

A. I think every individual Person or Family was not carried away: yet it is
apparently untrue, that only such a small number of them were transplanted. See
2 King. 17. 6, 18, 24, 26. 41. and 18. 9, 10, 11. there were such vast numbers
removed to various distant places, v. 6. as it is said, v. 18. there was none
left but the Tribe of Judah only; see v. 23. they bear the name of Israel. And
such multitudes were brought from far to people the Country, and be placed in
the room of them as are called [Nations] v. 24, 26, 41.

Let it be granted that there must be a return answerable, and the conversion
of such a multitude as were transported, and we need not desire more.

Obj. 2. All the Ten Tribes were in the Dominion of Cyrus, and had liberty to
return.

Ans. 1. Dr. Lightfoot says, [when Cyrus gave leave to the Jews after the 70
years captivity, to return to their own country, multitudes of them found
themselves so pleasingly seated, and by continuance of time rooted in
Babylonia, that they would not remove their habitation, but fixed there. There
in time they grew to so great a Nation, and distinct a people, that they had a
Prince of the captivity of their own blood, over them, and three famous
Universities, Nehardea, Pombeditha and Soria, -- Peter's lot fell here --
directs his Epistle to the dispersed Jews in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia
and Bithinia -- See Harmon. p. 335.

2. They did not so return as to answer the Prophecy, Ezekiel. 37. for then they
must now be in their own land, v. 22, 23, 25. which they are not, Some of the
Ten Tribes joined with Judah. 2 Chronicles. 11. 17, 18. When yet they were
undoubtedly two Kingdoms. And they are as really two Kingdoms still as they
were of old, against v. 22, 23, 25, 26, 28. yea in Gospel times we read Joh. 7.
35. of the dispersed among the Gentiles. Therefore there is yet a time coming
wherein they shall return to their own land and be converted.

Obj. 3. But the two Nations or Sticks became one under Zorobabel as a type,
and mystically under Christ, and so Ezekiel. 37. was fulfilled.

Ans. 1. That Ezekiel. 37. had any part or beginning of its accomplishment under
Zorobabel, is an assertion wholly groundless: and so a bare denial of it is
sufficient till there be proof of it. By [ David] often is meant Christ, and
not a type of him, so as the first accomplishment of it was in the days of the
Messiah long after Zorobabel was dead. The Twelve Tribes, or two Nations were
never united under Zorobabel that I can find, there might be some of them as
there was, 2 Chronicles. 11. 17, 18. when yet they were two Kingdoms, but the body
of them returned not, Zorobabel was not their Prince for ever, as Ezekiel. 37. 25,
28. there will be a time when they shall be in their Land, and their Children,
and their Childrens Children for ever, v. 25.

2. Ezekiel. 37. was not fulfilled in the first ages of the Gospel, or at the
first coming of Christ: for, as Mr. Greenhill well observes, then the Scepter
should not have departed, when Shiloh came, Genesis 49. 10, If the Messiah were
King in Israel, King over both Houses united into one, the Scepter did not
depart, but was advanced.

This will appear further by their being still scattered as here follows.

Obj. 4. The Epistle to the Hebrews, and that of Peter and James, are directed
not to the two Tribes only, but to the Twelve Tribes that are scattered abroad.

Ans. 1. This very objection evidenceth that even multitudes of the Twelves
Tribes were still scattered in those Gospel times, when the greatest number of
Jews and Israelites were converted, that hitherto have become Christians: and
they have had further scatterings since, which sufficiently proves that the
Prophecies aforesaid and many others of like nature, were not then
accomplished; they were not then united in their own land: therefore there is a
time yet coming wherein he that scattered Israel will gather him, Jer. 31. 10.
Ezekiel. 37. 21.

2. Those Epistles concerned not the Twelve Tribes in those primitive times
only, or chiefly in that age, and the time now past; but those Epistles to the
Hebrews, and of Peter and James, are directed to all the Tribes, and will be of
use to them in the times yet to come, when they shall be converted.

Obj. 5. Many of the Jews were converted in the Primitive times, Act. 21. 20.
and in Constantine's time, and so Romans 11. 26. was fulfilled.

Ans. The conversion of Jews in those first ages of the Gospel, do not answer
Romans 11. 26 for that was the time of their fall and blindness; not of their
fullness; Those myriades then are but few in comparison of the time when all
Israel shall be saved. Also as then there were great destructions of the Jews
by Titus and Adrian, etc. so Christ tells us Luke 21 23, 24. That wrath
should be upon them, and they should be trodden down of the Gentiles; how long?
Until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled; and they are trodden down by the
Turks until this day; all which evidence that their conversion and glory could
not be in those Primitive times; but the time is coming when they shall say as
Mat. 23. 37. Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord. But their
Conversion is such a mystery as it will be as life from the dead, Romans 11. 15,
25. hardly any first fruits or appearances of it before hand, yet dry bones
shall live, and Jerusalem appear in her glory.

And now we see Scripture grounds still to pray for the downfall of Babylon,
and the coming of the glorious Kingdom of Christ and the restoration and
conversion of the Jews, yea of all the Tribes of Israel, and we do not take the
Name of God in vain, nor deprave the Christian Faith, but discharge an
important duty therein.

A Postscript.
THE Title of my Book is [ The Revelation Vnvailed] because it tends to free
it from the aforesaid misinterpretations which Eclipse and darken this sacred
Prophecy.

I know many are discouraged for searching into these mysteries by observing
the mistake of Writers in the computation of times. Whereas I account that one
of the smallest matters in it self, only it may prove great by its ill
influence, upon a Man's own Spirit, in the disappointment of his confidence, and
ones Enemies, who seeing others error-as to time, may promise themselves
immunity, from threatened Judgments, and so may be hardened to their ruin and
destruction, I know the expectations of some eminent men, are raised high of a
destruction of the Beast or Rome, about four or five years hence, supposing
that then will be the expiration of the 1260 days: whereas I think those days
expired some years since, but that this was not the event to be expected upon
their expiration. If those worthy Men should suffer a frustration of
expectation, yet there is no cause for a prostration of their Spirits, or for
Enemies triumphing: I do modestly, not confidently hope for some glorious
events within in this Age, if not within few years, but it is upon other
grounds, as

1. From the number of Vials already poured out: indeed the accomplishments of
foregoing Prophesies, are indications of what events are next to follow, and a
sure guiding thread for our direction, to discover where we are.

2. The state and condition of the Turks: when the Turks cease to be a woe to
the Roman Idolaters: to scourge whom they were raised up, Rev. 9. 13. to the
end, then the second Woe passes, Rev. 11. 14. and then the next revolution
will be the Jews, will appear, and v. 15. the Kingdoms of the World will become
the Kingdoms of the Lord and of his Christ, this must be either by a Peace with
the Turk (which may delay the work) or else by losing much of his Dominion* and
if Rev. 9. 15. denote his time of prevailing: a month in the Revelation being
30 days, then if we begin their Empire with Oguzians, Ann. 1294. then his time
allotted to slay the third part of men expired, Ann. 1685. since which time he
has been losing ground, and it is hopeful his further fall may be approaching,
Leonicus Chalcoconditos.

3. Especially the death of the Witnesses, by the darkness and dreadfulness of
it* together with their Resurrection, and the consequences thereof are the most
sure prognostics and most signal marks of the approaching glorious state, Rev.
11. 7. to 16.

And if any should inquire whether the death of the Witnesses be yet past? I
answer, if remarkable occurrences since Ann. 1680. by Persecutions in Germany,
Hungary, England, Scotland, and Ireland, and especially in Savoy and in France,
in the unparalleled sufferings of the Protestants there, did not amount to the
Death of the Witnesses, then that fatal, black and gloomy day is yet to come.
No preceding time which men have fixed upon can answer the character of it, but
when I consider the marvelous and almost miraculous return of the Vandois to
their places together, with the wonderful liberty, here established in England
by Law, and else where with some other matters, I have some hopes that it is
past, and that the Resurrection of the Witnesses is begun, until I see to the
contrary. Neither does the darkness of some present dispensations altogether
dash my hopes, for Luke 18. when the Son of Man comes, there will be distress
of Nations, so as it will be hard to find Faith (without fainting) on the
Earth; I have now answered the desire of friends in publishing these sheets,
and if any will be contentious I think not to reply without great necessity: if
this may put others upon enquiring further into these prophesies to the
increasing a knowledge of the times, and the encouraging the faith of
Christians, I have my design, and they may lift up their heads, for the
redemption draws near.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
*THE Life and Death of that Old Disciple of Jesus Christ, and Eminent Minister
of the Gospel, Mr. HANSERD KNOLLYS, Who Died in the Ninety Third year of his
Age. Written with his own Hand to the Year 1672. and continued in General, in
an Epistle by Mr. William Kiffin. To which is added, his last Legacy to the
Church. Price Stitcht 6 d. or Bound 8* d.

Errata Corrigenda.
IN the Preface. Page 15. Marg. Lin. 7, 8. read, P. 103, 104. P. 24. l. 7. r.
been. P. 53. l. 11. r. his. P. 60. l. 26. r. Roast. P. 62. l. 8. r. Man.

In the Contents. Page 5. Lin. 8, 9. read. Schecinah.

In the Book. Page 3. Marg. Lin. 18. dele sine. P. 17. l. 4. r. as are not. P.
35. Marg. l. 22. r. cavi^. P. 50. l. 25. r. (...). P. 58. l. 3. del. of. P. 70.
l. 20. r. prevails. P. 75. Marg. l. 25. r. Baptizari in. P. 80. l. 14. r.
Harmoniously. P. 91. l. 3. del. fore. and in the same line, r. offered for. P.
92. ^. 27. r. were. P. 93. Marg. l. 4, 5. r. 48. 53. P. 94. Marg. l. 3. r. 46,
47. P. 100. Marg. ^* 4. r. 94. P. 120. Marg. l. 16. r. instituto. P. ^27. l.
ult. r. Antipaedobaptistic. P. 133 l. 3, 4. r. Obstacle. P. 136. l. 21. del.
they* P. 138. l. 15. del. the*


