Hugh Peter's Figaries OR, His merry Tales, and witty Jests, both in City, Town
and Countries. In a pleasant and Historical Discourse; showing,

1. His merry Pranks and Conjunctions, betwixt the Miller and his Wife, and the
Parson of the Town in a Kneading Trough; with their several Speeches.

2. How Mr. Peter's was (...) by the Butchers Wife; And how he lighted the Blind
Harper. With (...) rare Conceits upon the Citizens Wives.

3. How he pretended to cloth Christ in a Buff-Coat; His opening of Heaven
Gates to a Committee-man; And how he looked for that Monster Oliver Cromwell,
but could not find him. With many other delightful Stories.

Licensed according to Order.



Printed for George Horton, living in Fig(...) 1660

Hugh Peter's Figaries, etc.
How Mr. Peter's being belated on a Journey, lodged at a Millers house, and what
passed between him and the Miller.
MR. Peter's being on a Journey inquired of a Miller whom he saw standing on his
Mill, where he might have a lodging for himself, and conveniencie for his
Horse; the Miller answered, He knew no place thereabout: Whereupon Peter's
traveled on his way, till he came to a little house, which appeared to be the
Millers; there he knocks, the good woman coming to the door, Mr. Peter's desired
lodging; she told him she had but one bed in the house, and therein lay her
Husband and her self, but if he would be content with clean straw in the Barn,
he might. Mr. Peter's accepted the proffer, and betakes himself to the Barn,
where he had not lain long, but through a small cranny, he spies a man with a
bottle of Wine and a Capon; which was no sooner brought, but immediately a good
fire was made, and down thereto it went; anon knocks the Miller, all the while
the Dame was sore affrighted, and presently conveys away the Capon on the spit,
puts out the fire, hides her friend in a kneading Trough, and then opened the
door for her husband. The good man being weary, betakes himself to rest; which
Mr. Peter's seeing, bethought how he might be master of that Capon; and to
effect it, leaving the Barn, he comes to the house door, knocks, and straight
there appears the Miller: Honest Friend, quoth Mr. Peter's, I enquired of you
for a lodging, but you knew of none, therefore I am content with this Barn; but
being exceeding hungry, I desire you to refresh me with what you have, I shall
content you to your own desire. Indeed, quoth the Miller, I have nothing but a
brown Loaf, and a piece of Suffolk Cheese, you are welcome to that, and so
opens the door. Mr. Peter's being in, said, Now my friend, what if I should try
a conclusion for some victuals, thould'st not be angry, would thou? I angry,
no in truth, Sir, not I, quoth the Miller. With that, quoth Hugh, When I was a
Youth I could conjure, and I think I have not forgot: So uttering some
barbarous words, and making strange figures with his fingers, says he, Look in
such a place, and see what there is. Oh Sir, quoth the Miller, I pray do not
conjure, I dare not do as you command me: Prithee, says Mr. Peter's, do so as I
say, and fear not, we shall have good cheer anon. By these persuasions the
Miller was wrought upon, He looks, and finds a goodly Capon piping hot, which
he brings forth: To this they both fall to; but Hugh complaining of the
smallness of the Millers drink, would needs conjure again: so doing as before,
He bid the Miller look in such a place, which he did, and there found a bottle
of Wine: This they drank, the Miller admiring, and believing wicked Hugh to be
a Conjurer; who said, What if I should show thee the Devil that brought these
good things? Oh (quoth the Miller) for Gods sake, Sir, forbear, I never saw the
Devil yet, and I would not see him now. Nay, says Mr. Peter's, Do you do, as I
I shall instruct you, and you need not fear; stand in the next Room, and when I
stamp, then come forth. With much persuasions he went in; being gone, Peter's
steps to the Trough, wherein the kind Devil had hid himself; and uncovering it,
says he, Go your ways, and be glad you escape so. Out goes the man, and Mr.
Peter's then stamps with his foot: whereupon presently appears the Miller. Look,
says Mr. Peter's, see you where the Devil goes? Good God, replied the Miller,
if you had not said it was the Devil, I durst have sworn it had been the Parson
of our Parish. As indeed it was.

How Mr. Peter's lighted the blind Harper.
Mr. Peter's being in company with a Parliament Man one evening, it so happened,
that a blind Harper coming by, and hearing their Discourse, began to play; upon
which they willed him to come into the house; And having done, Mr. Peter's
called to his friends servant to light the blind Harper out. To whom the
servant said, Sir, The Harper is blind. Why then (quoth Mr. Peter's) he has the
more need of Light.

How Mr. Peter's cheapned a close Stool.
Mr. Peter's once cheapned a close Stool; but the shopkeeper asked (as he
thought) too much for it, but still commended his commodity, willing him to
note the goodness of the Lock and Key: At which he replied, I have small use
for either Lock or Key, for I purpose to put nothing in it, but what I care not
who steals.

How Mr. Peter's clothed Christ in a Buff-Coat.
Mr. Peter's preaching in the Country, told his Auditory he had brought them
Christ in a Buff-Coat; saying, Here, take him while you may have him, for if
you refuse him this time, I Will carry him with me to New England.

How Mr. Peter's went to Heaven and Hell.
Mr. Peter's in the midst of one of his Sermons, dives down, and rising up
again, Faith, My Beloved, Where think you I have been now? I Will tell you, I
have been in Heaven, and there is my Lord Bradshaw; but to say the truth, I did
not see Cromwell; the Lord knows whither the Great Wind blew him. Then diving
again, Now, says he, I have been in Hell, and there were a number of factious
Parliament men, Old Usurers, and young Sequestrators, and that they might
believe it to be true as that Gospel, showing a Paper-book with Notes, bound up
like a Testament.

How Mr. Peter's was served by the Butchers Wife.
Mr. Peter's ingratiating himself with a Butchers Wife, who was somewhat
handsome, did with much entreaty gain her consent to be her Visiter at
midnight, and she ordered him to come at such a time, and put his hand under
the door, where he should find the Key which should open a passage to her
Chamber: He comes at the appointed time, but this crafty Woman, in stead of the
Key, had there laid a Trap, and Mr. Peter's looking for the Key, did unluckily
thrust his hand into the Trap, and could not get it out, till by his calling
for help, he was heard, and disgracefully used.

How Mr. Peter's discoursed against Organs.
Mr. Peter's discoursing of Church Ceremonies, brake into this expression, Ye
must have Music too; but indeed when as ye say, Lord have mercy upon us
miserable Sinners, ye may well vary the words a little, and let your Petition
be, Lord have mercy upon us miserable Singers.

How Mr. Peter's asked Grapes of Alderman Titchbourn.
Alderman Titchbourn, so formerly called, wrote a Book, and entitled it, A
Cluster of Canaans Grapes, and Mr. Peter's meeting him, asked him if his Worship
would be pleased to bestow a Cluster of his Grapes on him; at which the
Alderman answered, If he would come to his Vine (meaning his house) he should
have his choice of all his store.

How Mr. Peter's opened Heaven Gates to a Committee-man.
Preaching once in Ireland, and discoursing on the Times, it came into his
head, with his Knuckle to hit against the Pulpit, imitating to his Auditory, he
had been in Heaven, and answering the sound, quoth he, who is there, a
Cavalier, Oh a Calier! you must not come here, you must to Hell, for you fight
against the Parliament. Then he knocks again, and cries, Who is there, a
Roundhead; Oh a Roundhead! you must not come hither, you are factions and
disorderly in Opinions; so he knocks the third time, and cries, Who is there, a
Committee-man; Oh a Committee-man, he must come, and shall, laying his hands on
the Pulpit door, as if he would let him in.

How Mr. Peter's wisked his Auditory to beware of three Ws.
Mr. Peter's preaching in a Country Village, exhorted his Congregation in this
manner; Beware, Beloved, of three mischeivous Ws, Wine, Women, and Tobacco; but
you will object, Tobacco is no W, to which I answer, Tobacco must be understood
under the notion of a Weed, and then it holds right.

How Mr. Peter's said he knew where His Majesty was.
Mr. Peter's was once heard to say, That he where knew his Majesty was, and
being desired to tell, said, in Bedlam sure enough, for unless he be mad he
will not be in England.

How Mr. Peter's enveighed against Citizens Wives.
Preaching in London, he exclaimed greatly against the Citizens Wives; Your
City Mistresses (says he) must have their Lap-dogs to play with all day long,
for want of Children; and if by chance he lets fly an uncivil blast; then, Out
ye Foisting Cur, O how he stinks. Immediately after he leaps into their Lap
again, and to Bed perhaps they both march together, and the happy Cur is laid
so snug, where many an Honest man would be with all his Heart.

How Mr. Peter's jeered a Rich Man and his Fat Wife.
Mr. Peter's being invited to Dinner to a friends house, knowing him to be very
wealthy, and his Wife as Fat as he was Rich, brake this Jest at Table before
them; Truly Sir, said he, you have the World and the Flesh, but pray God that
you get not the Devil in the end.

How Mr. Peter's said he had been in Heaven.
Another time he told his Auditory he had been in Heaven, and there were store
of Roundheads, but going into Hell, he found that so full of Cavaliers, that
if a Roundhead should chance to stumble thither, there would be no room for
him.

How Mr. Peter's took an affront on the Exchange.
Mr. Peter's walking at full Change time on the Royal Exchange, a certain person
comes to him, whispering him in the ear, says to him, Mr. Peter's you are a
Knave, or else you had never gained so much Wealth as you have. Say you so
(said he) Marry if you were not a Fool, you would be a Knave too.

How Mr. Peter's answered Oliver Cromwell.
Being desired by Oliver Cromwell to repair to an appointed place, there to
preach, it suddenly fell a Raining, whereupon Cromwell offered him his Coat; to
whom he replied, I will not have it for my part, I would not be in your Coat
for a thousand pounds.

How Mr. Peter's defaced a shoulder of Mutton.
Being in^ited to Dinner, his Stomach invited him into the Kitchen to take a
slice before Dinner, where espying a Shoulder of Mutton, began to cut a piece
of that, and to deface it; at which, says the Maid, O Sir, cut not of that,
because it is old. Say you so, quoth he, then I will have a piece of it to
choose, for Age you know is honorable.

How Mr. Peter's brake a Jest upon a Lady.
Mr. Peter's by chance meeting a Lady of his acquaintance, asked her how she
did, and how her good Husband fared; at which words weeping, she answered, Her
Husband had been in Heaven long since. In Heaven, quoth he, it is the first
time that I have heard of it, and I am sorry for it with all my heart.

How Mr. Peter's reproved the Monster Oliver Cromwell for sleeping in the Church
while he was Preaching.
It being his turn to preach before the said Tyrant at the Chapel in
White Hall, much about the time that his present Majesty was marching toward
Worcester, He espied that the Devil had shut the Casements of his Highness
Eyes, and lulled him asleep; whereupon varying from his discourse in hand,
quoth he, We have now an enemy in this our Land, a potent one, and it is not
unknown I suppose to any here that he daily approaches nearer us; but it is no
matter, I preach but in vain while my Auditory sleeps, I hope he will come and
take you napping.

How Mr. Peter's mistook in reaching to the top of his Pulpit.
Mr. Peter's preaching immediately after the death of Oliver Cromwell, in his
Sermon brought in this expression, That he knew Olive-Cromwel was in Heaven as
sure as he could then touch the head of his Pulpit, and reaching up his Hand to
have done the same, came short thereof by half a yard.

How Mr. Peter's examined a Country Lad, and the Jests that happened at that
(...).
All (...)appy Boy that kept his Fathers sheep in the Country, (...) to ^y a
pair of Cards in his Pocket, and at the same meeting with Companions, played at
the Game called One and Thirty, at which sport he would some days loose a
Sheep or two, for which his Father corrected him; in Revenge whereof, the Boy
would drive the Sheep home at Night over a narrow Bridge, where some of them
falling into the Water, were drowned.

The old man wearied with his Sons (...) tricks, had him before Mr. Peter's. (He
being a man busy, and having some Authority in those parts where he lived) Mr.
Peter's begins to reprove the Boy in these words: Sirrah, you are a notable
Villain, you play at Cards and lose your Fathers sheep at One and Thirty. The
Boy using (...)rence, and less manners, replied it was a lie. A lie (q(...)
Peter's) you saucy knave, do you give me the lie? No, quoth the Boy, but you
told a lie; for I never lost Sheep at One and Thirty, for when my Game was One
and Thirty I always won: Indeed said Mr. Peter's thou say true. But I have
another accusation against thee; which is, That you drive your Fathers Sheep
over a narrow Bridge, where some of them are oftentimes drowned. That Is a lie
too, quoth the Boy, for those that go over the Bridge are well enough, it is
only such that fall beside which are drowned; which Mr. Peter's acknowledged
for a truth, and being well pleased with his Clownish answers, gave him a short
advice, and then dismissed him.

How Mr. Peter's and several Justices of the Peace, sat two days about
(...)ing small Beer.
(...) Justices of the Peace (with whom Mr. Peter's was then accompan(...) being
informed with the frequent sin of Drunkenness within their Jurisdictions, met
at a Market Town, and sat 2 days to refo^ it, whereupon they commanded, that
from thenceforth ^aller drink should be Brewed, at which order a mad Tos-pot
(...) made himself half drunk, without fear or wit, (...) and asked them, if
they had sat two days a(...)ll Beer: One of them answered, yes, why then,
(...)ay sit three more, to know who shall drink it, for I (...) none of it.


