THE PETITION OF THE COMMITTEES for IRELAND to His MAjESTY. WITH HIS MAJESTY'S
ANSWER OF THE 1. December. 1642.

Printed by His MAJESTY'S Command at OXFORD December. 15. By LEONARD LICHFIELD
Printer to the University. 1642.

TO THE KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, The humble Petition of Sir JAMES
MONTGOMERY, Sir HARDS WALLER Knights and Colonells, and of Colonel ARTHUR
HILL, and Colonel AUDLEY MERVIN, in the behalf of themselves and others
Commanders in Your Majesty's Army in Ireland.
May it please Your sacred MAjESTY,
WE Your Majesty's most humble Subjects being entrusted from considerable
Parts of Your Majesty's forces in the Kingdom of Ireland, to petition Your
Majesty and Your Parliament for supplies, And finding that Your Majesty had
committed the care and mannaging of that War to Your Parliament here, we
addressed Our selves unto the same, whose sense of Our miseries, and
Inclination to redress appeared very tender unto us, but the present
distempers of this Your Majesty's Kingdom of England (to our unspeakable
grief) are grown so great, that all future Passages by which comfort and life
should be conveyed unto that gasping Kingdom, seem totally to be obstructed so
that unless Your gracious Majesty, out of Your singular wisdom and fatherly
care, apply some speedy remedy, we Your distressed and Loyal Subjects of that
Kingdom must inevitably perish. Our condition represents unto Your Majesty the
estate of all Your Majesty's faithful Protestant Subjects in Ireland, the
influence of Your Princely favor and goodness so actively distilled upon Your
Kingdom of Ireland, before the birth of this monstrous Rebellion there, and
since the same so abundantly expressed in Characters of a deep sense, and
lively resentment of the bleeding Condition thereof, gives us hope in this
their deplorable extremity to address our selves unto Your sacred Throne,
humbly beseeching, that it may please Your gracious Majesty, amongst Your other
weighty cares so to reflect upon the bleeding condition of that perishing
Kingdom, that timely relief may be afforded, otherwise Your Loyal Subjects
there must yield their fortunes a Prey, their Lives a sacrifice, and their
Religion a scorn, to the merciless Rebels powerfully assisted from abroad.
Whilst we live we rest in your Majesty's Protection, if our deaths are signed
in that Cause, we will dye in Your obedience, and living and dying ever pray
for Your Majesty's long and prosperous Reign over us.

Montgomerie. Hards Waller. Arthus Hill. Au. Mervine.


At the Court at OXFORD, this first of DECEMBER. 1642. HIS Majesty Has
expressly commanded me to give this Answer to this Petition.
THat His Majesty, since the beginning of that monstrous Rebellion, has had no
greater sorrow then for the bleeding Condition of that His Kingdom; And as He
has by all means labored that timely Relief might be afforded to the same,
and consented to all Propositions (how disadvantagious soever to Himself) that
have been offered Him for that purpose, and not only at first recommended their
Condition to both His Houses of Parliament, and immediately of His own mere
Motion sent over several Commissions, and caused some Proportion of Arms and
Ammunition (which the Petitioners well know to have been a great support to the
Northern Parts of that Kingdom) to be conveyed to them out of Scotland, and
offered to find Ten thousand Volunteers to undertake that War, but has often
since pressed by many several Messages, that sufficient Succors might be
hastened thither, and other matters of smaller Importance laid by, which did
divert it, and offered, and most really intended in His own Royal Person to
have undergone the danger of that War, for the defense of His good Subjects,
and the Chastisement of those perfidious and barbarous Rebels; and in his
several Expressions of His desires of Treaty and Peace, has declared the
miserable present Condition, and certain future loss of Ireland, to be one of
His principal Motives, most earnestly to desire that the present Distractions
of this Kingdom might be composed, and that others would concur with Him to
the same End; So His MAjESTY is well pleased that His Offers, Concurrence,
Actions and Expressions are so rightly understood by the Petitioners, and those
who have employed them (notwithstanding the groundless and horrid Aspersions
which have been cast upon Him:) But wishes that instead of a mere general
Complaint (to which His MAjESTY can make no Return but of Compassion) they
could have disgested, and offered to Him any such Desires, by consenting to
which He might convey (at least in some Degree) comfort and life to that
gasping Kingdom, preserve His distressed and loyal Subjects of the same from
inevitably perishing, and the true Protestant Religion from being scorned and
trampled on by these merciless and Idolatrous Rebels. And if the Petitioners
can yet think on any such, and propose them to His MAjESTY, He assures them
that by His readiness to consent, and His Thanks to them for the Proposal,
He will make it appear to them, that their most pressing personal Suffering
cannot make them more desirous of Relief, then his Care of the true Religion,
and of His faithful Subjects, and of that Duty which obliges Him to his Power
to protect both, renders Him desirous to afford it to them.

FINIS.

