A WAY PROPOUNDED TO Make the poor in these and other Nations happy.

By bringing together a fit suitable and well qualified people unto one
Houshold-government, or little-Common-wealth, Wherein every one may keep his
propriety, and be employed in some work or other, as he shall be fit, without
being oppressed.

Being the way not only to rid those and other Nations from idle, evil and
disorderly persons, but also from all such that have sought and found out many
inventions to live upon the labor of others.

Whereunto is also annexed an invitation to this Society, or little
Commonwealth.

Psalm, 42. 1. Blessed is he that considers the poor, the Lord will deliver
him in time of trouble; the Lord shall preserve him, and keep him alive, and he
shall be blessed upon the Earth, BY PETER CORNELIUS, VAN-ZURIK-ZEE.

LONDON, Printed for G. C. at the sign of the Black spread-eagle at the Westend
of Paul's Churchyard.

A way propounded to make the poor in these and other Nations happy, etc.
HAving seen the great inequality and disorder among men in the World, that not
only evil Governors or Rulers, covetous Merchants and Tradesmen, lazy, idle
and negligent Teachers, and others, have brought all under slaverie and
thraldom: But also a great number of the common handy-craft men, or laborers
(by endeavoring to decline, escape or cast off the heavy burden) do fill all
things with lies and deceit, to the oppressing of the honest and good people,
whose consciences cannot bear such practices, therefore have I (together with
others born for the common welfare) designed to endeavor to bring four sorts
of people, whereof the World chiefly consists out of several sects into one
Family or Houshold-government, viz. Husbandmen, Handy-crafts people,
Mariners, and Masters of Arts and Sciences, to the end that we may the better
eschew the yoke of the Temporal and Spi^^tuall Pharaohs, who have long enough
domineered over our bodies and souls, and set up again (as in former times)
Righteousness, love and B otherly Sociab' enesse, which are scarce any where
to be found, for the convincing of those that place all greatness only in
domineering, and not in well-doing, contrary to the pattern and doctrine of the
Lord Jesus, who came not to be served but to serve, and gave his life a ransom
for many; appointing his Kingdom unto his Apostles, as it was appointed to him
from his father, answering them when they murmured, who after his departure
should be the greatest amongst them, said; If any among you would be greatest,
let him be the servant of all. In direct opposition and contradiction to the
World where they are accounted the greatest who have most servants, and not
they that do most service to others, and therefore the Worlds greatness, and
the greatness of Christians differ as light and darkness, whereas true
Christians being merciful do endeavor to ease men's burdens, instead
thereof, others (as if there were not trouble enough in the World) are still
making the burden heavier with new devises setting themselves forth daily, in
their sight as if their design were to vex and grieve poor people (and stir
them up to Impatience) with their excess and riot.

Just as if a Physician that were able to cure the sick should come bragging
and make a boast of his skill, to make them the sicker.

To this may be added those that are called spiritual persons or Clergymen
who persuade people (that they may the more willingly drudge for them) to
believe that they take care of their souls (as if they could love the soul
which they cannot see, and have no compassion on the body which they see, This
therefore being deceit and lies, Let us return again to mercifulness which is
as well touched with the miseries of the body as with the miseries of the soul
se^ling such order or society of mutual love whereby the opressed (scarce able
to breath) may be brought to rest and enlargment.

Taking upon them every day (except the Sabbath) so many as are fit to work
the labor of 6. hours beginning ordinarily, from 9. of the clock in the
morning to 12. at noon, and from 3 till 6. at night, if any desires to have an
afternoones liberty he may work from 4. o^ 6. of the clock in the morning till
10. or 12. at noon or labor another day so much the more, they that have hard
work to do may begin in Summer Morninges while it is co^l, and take their
rest, in the heat of the day, bestowing the rest of their time, for the
refreshing of their bodies, and profitable excercises of the mind.

They that are set on work by us (being not fit to be of our Society) receiving
wages shall work 12. hours in a day, from 6. in the morning to 12. at noon,
and from 2 till 8. at night till any of them be fit and willing to come into us.

The Children of rich people (who are not of our society) coming to School
(after we have found out the ablest masters) to be instructed in Arts Sciences
and Languages are every day (except the Sabbath, learning some useful Trade)
to work 3. hours to the end they may allwaies in case of loss and want
afterward get their living without being necessitated to fall upon such
courses (as we see happen often in the world) as may prove hurtful to their
souls and bodies.

The rich people (being not of our Society) having a desire to dwell amongst us
shall not be bound to work, if they will sometimes of themselves do any thing,
they will hold forth a good Example to all rich time-loosers in the world, and
paying for their diet, Clothing, Lodging and other necessaries they shall be
free.

For the beginning and undertaking of this great work it will be good that some
able men (as Fathers) to lay the foundation, for the common welfare do put in
a sum of money to raise a Stock, employing the same to buy a piece of land
whereupon the Husbandman, handy Craftsmen, Tradesmen, Mariners, and others
[comming in with their movables as Cattle, Money, or any other Commodityes]
may be secured.

Those that come into our Society shall not be bound to make their goods
Common for (according to the tenth Commandment) none ought to covet another
man's goods.

If any will out of a free real and bountiful heart bring in any thing to
increase the Stock it shall be used for the common benefit, without being
appropriated for any man's own in particular.

They that will bring in their own lands for the Common service may have
security upon the same, and for their movables upon the lands freely given,
only it shall be employed for the common welfare without giving Interest, if
they die, their Children or friends (that none may suffer wrong) shall possess
the same except they gave it to the Society or otherwise.

If any be minded to leave the Society, they shall not only receive that which
they brought, but also a share of the profit which has been made since they
came to the Society if no profit has been made in their time, they shall
receive none, that so they that come into us may not seek their own private
gain.

A young man or maid leaving the society, by marrying, or otherwise, shall have
a share of the profit, that has been made since he or she were of the Society
(from their birth or otherwise) no profit being made, it shall be at the
pleasure of the Society to give them what they please, for the profit made
before belongs not to them.

If any one having brought into the Society money or other commodities,
afterward desires to go out again, they shall acquaint the Society thereof,
that so there may be care taken to restore it, the sum being not above 100.
l. shall be paid as the owner desires, if more, then 100. l. they shall have
freedom to pay it within a years time, paying them a quarter of the sum
presently (if they desire it) that so none may be hindered to leave the society
when they please.

In case the Society hereafter be disturbed or separated by Tyranny or
otherwise, then shall the lands and moneys which was freely given to raise and
increase the stock (all Creditors being paid) come to the benefit of those poor
only who have brought nothing to the Society, except there be poor kindred of
those that (out of love) have given to the stock, such shall have an equal
proportion with the others.

For the well ordering of our business we shall have need of two great houses
one in [or about the] City viz. a Warehouse for Merchants or Tradesmen,
another in the Country near a River for the Husbandman, Handy Crafts people,
Schoolmasters and Mariners.

The house in the City so big that 20, or 30. families may dwell in it, having
shopps of several wares, as Cloth, says, linen, men and women's apparel,
Stockings, shoes, Hatts, and other useful and necessary things, being the
foundation of the whole work, not only by reason of the proffit that comes by
Trading, but also because all Handy-Grafts, belonging thereunto depend thereon.

Our trade will for three sufficient reasons undoubtedly increase, the first is
that there will not be overasking in price, but all will be sold at the lowest
rate in a word, contrary to the Common custom of the world.

The second is, that we dwelling at a cheaper Rent and living less costly, can
make all things better at the price.

The third is, that the profit is made use of for the common-good, as well for
the honest people of one, as of another sect.

At the first we may bring into our Scociety, (besides a beginning of several
Merchandises) for the most part unmarried persons, that with laying out little
money may presently be on the getting hand, as Cloth, Linen and Saye-Weavers,
Tailors, Shoo-makers and the like. Secondly, Barber-Chyrurgeans, Physicians,
and Masters of several Arts and Sciences; one that can write extraordinary
well, another that understands Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Navigation,
Italian book-keeping, or Merchants Accounts. Thirdly, some for Latin, Greek,
Hebrew and other Languages, as also Physic, Music, and other useful things,
referring all to a good and spiritual end.

Our Chyrurgeans or Physicians shall serve the Rich (without the Scociety) for
money, and the poor gratis; some going abroad to visit Patients, and others
staying at home (at certain times,) to speak with people, that come to them, to
show that they do highly esteem of the life and health of others, as of their
own; this will give an increase to our Trading for the common good, the fame
thereof being noised round about, and the more when people are sensible that we
sell all things at a reasonable rate without deceiving any.

They that are Rich (without the Society) seeing that their children are not
only well brought up in handy-crafts, but also in Languages and other Sciences,
and in good manners, will incline very much to buy wares of us for their
particular Families, and Merchandises, and Trade increasing, we shall have need
of much Cloth, Says, Linen Stockings, Shoes, Hats and other things, these
will require Cloth, Linen and Saye-weavers, Whi^sters for blanching, Dyers and
other Handy-crafts, here now will be use for shoep and k(...)e, not only for
their milk and flesh, but also for their wool and skins, etc. Here then is
work for our Husband man, for the breeding up of Cattle, Poultry, etc. and
especially for tilling the ground for Corn, Flax, Hemp, etc. also Gardiners
having skill in gardening, for roots, plants and orchards, for fruit, flours
and herbs, as well medicinal (for our Physicians) as others.

For the building of the Country house (for the Husbandmen, Handy-crafts
people, Mariners and Masters of Arts and Sciences) we have need of
Brick-makers, Brick-layers, Carpenters, Smiths, as also Ship-carpenters, not
only to make Boats, wherein to fetch and carry goods to and from the City, but
also to catch fish for the Society, and afterward to build ships to send to
Flanders, Holland, France and other places sailing with our own people that
shall have all things common among them abroad, as well as in the Scociety at
home, being as welcome, (having done their duties,) when they come home from a
bad voyage, as from a good; Their ships or goods being lost by storm or
otherwise, the loss is to come upon the Society in common, which venters no
more than what the Society can well spare, and may be set forth again as they
are able, their wifes and children being always provided with necessaries, as
well as others.

This house is to be built so far from the water, that there be left a
convenient key to deliver goods out of the Ships, and if it be possible to
bring the water out of the River round about the house, with a drawbridge, to
be secured by night from thieves and robbers, devising two Instruments whereby
the fish may come out of the River into our water, and not go out again, having
our Garden for pleasure and necessity behind our house.

Which house is to be built after a convenient manner, with public and private
places, for freedom and convenience a chamber and a closset for every man and
his wife with a great Hall, to lay all things ready made in order, a place to
dress victuals, another to eat together a third for the children, also Cellars
to keep meat and drink ^n, a place for the sick, one for the Physicians and
Chyrurgeans furniture and medicines, one other for all kind of useful, (as
well natural as spiritual Books, Maps, and other Instruments belonging to
liberal Arts and Sciences, several places for Scholars, a place for strangers,
etc. who intending to stay any long time, shall do some work, or pay for their
lodging and diet.

Our workfolks and School masters, with their Scholars, being brought out
abroad into the Country the City house will be instead of a warehouse, leaving
therein besides the Physicians, Barber Chyrurgeans and Apothecaries (who with
some Tradesmen must be in the City, so many Merchants (who shall change by
turns,) as shall suffice to attend the Merchandise with ease. Our youth being
capable of being taught, shall be instructed in Ciphering, and keeping Books of
accounts, that the Merchants also may sometimes work, putting every one to that
which is fittest for him, as they that have wrought in wool, to the selling of
wool and cloth, they that have been used to flax-threed and weaving, to the
selling of flax and linen, Tanners and Shoe makers, to sell leather, and so in
all things else.

Also it will be necessary, that in the Warehouse in the City, there be some
men women and Children; not only to make apparel, and to have other things
ready made; but especially to serve every one, as there shall be occasion,
making all things for sale without unnecessary trimminges, unless that any
buying of us would have any trimming upon them, those we shall endeavor to
g^ve content, if they bring to us those unnecessary Timmings, which we our
selves have not, doing our endeavor to keep their custom, that so in time they
may be convinced of their folly, being better with us, who give them reasons
for alterations, than with others who bolster them up in pride and excess.

If the making and selling of things unnecessary were sin, then it should be
quite forborne, then must all unnecessary things (though a shop were worth
1000. l.) be burnt or destroyed, and all the Children be presently taken from
those trades, that depend upon pride and vanity. It is to be considered that
the eating of the tree of knowledge was evil, but not the making many things
are for trial, what is in the hearts of men, if we will not serve those
worldly people that come to us, then our youth that sometimes desire to travel
into other Countries will be necessitated always to be at home, because they
cannot serve any masters that work for vainglorious men.

Every 6. or 12. Months an account shall be given, and what is overpluss above
necessity, a part shall be distributed to men and women, also young men and
maids, that so every one may have wherewithal to give to the poor, or to
pleasure his friend, in some special manner.

One man alone (though he were chief of the whole Society) shall not be master
of the cash, or treasury, but three of the uppermost in the Government, shall
always have the Keys; so that one, or two, unless the third were with them
should not be able to open the Chest, a threefold cord does not easily break,
says Solomon.

None is to rule longer than one year, least he domineer in his office, and
others seeking his favor, play the Hippocrites.

A man about 40. years of age, shall be chosen chief Governor of the whole
Society, every one giving his voice for him, that he judges to be fit.

This man having governed one year, a new choice shall be made, with liberty to
choose him again that last Governed, as well as any body else, by this m^anes
he that has a mind to continue in the Government will have an Inducement to
rule well, that he having the favor of the people, may be chosen again, not
that any Governor is to rule according to his own pleasure, but according to
such orders, as the whole people shall make except in small matters, wherein
they cannot convenien ly make any certain order, but who would not rather (if
no benefit come of ruling) work quietly 6. hours in a day, then to be in a
perpetual disturbance of his thoughts, being employed in multiplicity of
businesses.

Here none is to be chosen for his riches or wealth, as we see come to pass in
the world, (to the ruin almost of all commonwealths,) but for his w^sdome.

Men and women having the oversight of meat, drink and other things, shall
govern by turns, and in case some would rather keep to their ordinary work,
they shall be passed by, and others put in their stead, 10. or 12. men and
women. having governed half a year, 5. or 6. of them shall go off, and 5. or 6
others come in their stead, the other continuing half a year longer to instruct
them that do newly come in, with what they are not acquainted, having so many
young people to do the hardest work, as shall be requ^site who being come to
years, and having gotten experience, shall also rule ^ver others, for it does
suit the aged to give orders, and the young to obey.

The maids shall not only be fitted to do the housewifery, and order children,
but also in case hereafter they be minded to leave the Society, they shall
learn a good Handy-craft Trade, that so whether they leave the Society, or come
to be married, they may be able to get a livelihood, sometimes taking their
turns one with another, that so they may continue fit for working and
housewifery.

In this house every one shall be able quietly to do his work, because none
shall have more than one single work to mind: 5. women in our Society, when all
things are done orderly, shall have no more business to trouble their heads
with, than one woman in her own private Family.

Besides the quiet and ease that we shall have by the helping one another; it
will also be very profitable to dwell together, for whereas in 100. Families
dwelling apart, we should stand in need of at least 100. women to do the
housewifery; now b^inging 100. Families together, the same may be done with 25.
women, the rest (when they shall be fit,) being employed about some work;
together with men for the common good, which many women will rather do, than to
be a whole day troubled with diversities of cares.

Whereas in 100. Families there will be need of 100. fires every day to be
made, bringing so many Families together, we shall be able to make shift with
4. or 5. great sires and furnaces, out to boil and reast meat, another where
the children are, a third where men, women, young men and maids meet together
at meals, sitting at the table in order, (as Joseph's brethren) the women over
against the men, young men next their Fathers, and maids next their Mothers,
the young people waiting by turns at the Table, that so one may not be
respected above the other, neither will it be needful (being assured of one
another love) to use the ceremonies of putting off the Hat, or common drinking
to one another, yet not to hinder any man from showing his hearty love to a
stranger, or otherwise.

Meat, drink, and all other things will cost us the less, because we buy a
great quantity at once, also we shall our own selves breed up kine, sheep,
hens, ducks, and other things, having garden and orchard, fruits from our
Gardeners and Husbandmen, Fish from our Fishermen, making drink for
necessity, and refreshment for our selves.

Our Rules and Laws being few, are to be only for necessity, not to take away
any ones liberty, leaving them always open to the trial of all rational men,
that so self seeking (to be more or above others, in natural or spiritual
matters,) may be discovered and excluded.

If any desires to marry, he shall not be tied to marry one of our Society, if
he will have a virtuous person abroad, out of the Society, and dwell with her,
or have her come into the Society, every one is left to his liberty.

All things wherein the Kingdom of God does not consist, (not contradicting
Scripture or reason) are to be left free, as the outward form of Baptism, the
Lords supper and the like, because in the omitting of such things there seems
to be more danger than in performing of them.

The apparel should be fitted for the body, and convenient for the work
without being tied to fashion, color, or stuff, only the unnecessary trimmings
to be forborne, that Gods creatures, which he has made, be not misused.

If any that have an Estate, desire to have stuff, cloth, or other things finer
than others, they may add to it so much of their own money, as it will cost
more, for it will be a demonstration to the poor (without the Society,) that he
has an ability above others to relieve them.

In all Handy crafts we shall appoint the best workmen for Masters, who as
well as others are to work 6. hours.

Whereas now men in the World do conceal their skill from one another, for
their own private advantage, here in our Society they are to bring it in, and
impart it to the common welfare, being the only way to find out the height,
depth length and breadth of all things.

The children of the poor are to be brought up (to the comfort of their
Parents) as well as the children of the rich, they learning instead of one,
sometimes 2. or 3. Handy-crafts, being always cheerful by not being oppressed
with bondage and slavery, as commonly is seen amongst children of the World,
especially in England, who must endure (many times) to pass through 7 years, as
slaves under the Turk, on the contrary the children of our Society shall be
always in our eyes, working no longer every day than 6. hours; the remainder
of the time, being to be spent in other useful employments, that they may be
fitted for somewhat else besides working.

They are to be taught only necessary and always useful trades, that they
may continually, howsoever the world changes, get their li(...)ing, for some
having learned only useless handy-crafts, oftentimes through the change of the
world, (which falls into some other way and custom) come to poverty and want.

Whereas the Traders in the world do oppress their workmen, with heavy labor,
and small wages, instead thereof with us the gain of the tradesmen will redound
to the benefit and refreshment of the workmen.

And whereas the traders of the world, seeking after their own particular
profit and advantage, are continually betwixt hope and fear, now here in our
Society, every one is quietly to mind his business, at the set time, for the
loss that is suffied lies upon none in particular.

In the selling of our commodities, seeing there is no overasking, it will give
occasion to others (that are not willing to lose their Customers,) to imitate
us, it being the true way to rid the world of that deceitful practice, and we
being in no sumptuous expensive way, can afford our commodities at a better
rate or better wa^e for money, whereby we reach the world (because they can get
little) to keep within compass, instead whereof, they now daily provoke and
grieve poor people with their excess and riot.

In observance of the words of Christ to give to Caesar the things that are
Cesars, we are to pay Taxes and tribute to the Magistrates, being in subjection
under all humane Ordinances, which are not contrary to the will of god.

Such Tradesmen or Merchants that are honest, and cannot well provide for
themselves, may timely (before they be necessitated to wrong any one) turn in
to us.

Any honest persons, through sickness, want of trading, work or otherwise,
being in poverty and debt, may be brought to rest, by making an agreement with
their Creditors, if merciful, or if unmercifull, to give them all they have,
in full satisfaction.

A Family being united and conjoined with us, and being come to be se^^ed ^n
quiet, will make known their welfare to others, and men perceiving that the
profit and benefit is extended to the refreshing of the oppressed, among all
Sects, will readily come to us, to buy commodities, and provision being made
aforehand, all things will follow in order.

Any handycrafts men, or Tradesmen, may be in fear, (the business being not
settled) to make a beginning, doubting that he removing from his particular
employment to this common soc^ety (by loosing some Customers) shall want a
subsistence, but considering the opportunity to have the custom of all those
that dwell with him, is freed from that fear; neither does any one stand singly
by himself alone. Any by sickness or otherwise bec^me indisposed, the rest
(being united as members of one body) shall work for him; and we being assured
of one another faithfullness, shall exceed in love, all other Societies.

It is far otherwise with us than in Hospitalls of old men, and women, where
they come in out of necessity (not being able otherwise to provide for
themselves) for their own benefit only, with their contentions, opposition and
deeply rooted Infirmi^ies, having oftentimes their bodies by hard labor
spoiled and made decrepite, and their minds corrupted by evil manners, being
many times besides a deep stupid ignorance, so ill natured, that no reason can
sink into them.

Some handy Craftsmen as Smithes, Carpenters, and others, do undergo often upon
hope to attain ease from labor, 20. or 30. years almost intolerable labor,
letting out their money to Interest, that it may increase; and sometimes loose
principal and all, that they have so surely labored for, or else come to die,
before they have given themselves to rest often leaving their estates to the
destruction of their Children in the world, who in pleasure and voluptuousness
do consume what the parents have gotten and gained with so great labor, and
sometimes it comes to such hands, which in their life time they grutched
should have it, who after their death laugh at them for their labor, sometimes
the^r Children and relations long for their death; and when they do live long
enough to use their estates themselves, then oftentimes their bodies which they
have spoiled with working, will suffer them to take no rest.

On the contrary, there will be no need in our Society, to take any care or to
make provision for the aged time, or day of sickness, nor for children; for the
aged will be better looked after then the young, the sick than the healthful,
and the children after the death of their parents, than before.

Any leaving their children in such a Society, does better than if they left
them much money, because they are under the eyes and inspection of many good
people, and are sure of necessaries; whereas otherwise being brought up by
others, are many times spoiled by their Parents Estates, being the fruits of
their labors.

If any fall sick in our Society, he has not only that which he stands in need
of, but besides, he is freed from all worldly incumbra(...), for all things
being in order, all things are taken care of without him, on the contrary men
commonly in the World are busied with their affairs, as long as they have
understanding.

Some being healthful, and able with their Trade or Merchandise to get more
than others, are commonly not inclined to come into us, because they love their
private gain more than the common good; but considering how soon their health
may be lost, it will be reasonable for them, (without delay,) to desire such a
wished estate and condition for themselves and families.

Covetousness, excess, lying and deceit, together with all the evils that
spring up out of riches, or poverty, will be excluded from us, who maintain
equality, if any be minded to live disorderly in drunkeness, adultery,
whoredom, etc. he can have no entertainment in our Society, neither will he be
willing to come in to the company of the virtuous, for he that does evil,
hates the light, and comes not to the light, that his works may not be
reproved, but who so does the truth, comes to the light, that it may be
manifest, that his works are done in God.

Many finding no rest in their present estate and condition, and being wearied
with all the differences in spiritual, as in worldly matters, will be ready to
come in to us.

Some teachers being convinced of their perverting and erroneous teaching,
would sincerely gainsay all falsehood and errors, if they did but discern that
there were an opportunity to get their living otherwise, whereas now, being not
strong enough to bear poverty and reproach, they remain in their old condition
to the destruction of their souls.

Many young men and maids being wearied under the slavery and service of
others, would for the ease of their bodies, and advantage or profit of their
souls come in to us, whereas otherwise they are often times stired up, and
provoked (by reason of hard, strict, severe Masters and Mistrisses) to wicked
and desperate resolutions, either by marrying an unfit person, and so casting
away themselves, or giving themselves up to some evil course, as we often see
come to pass in the World.

The women in our Society having lost their Husbands, they and their children
are cared for, whereas else dwelling by themselves, they are oftentimes forced
(together with their little ones) to pass their lives in poverty and grief,
sometimes receiving relief of the rich with reproachful languages, to the
increase of their grief, some being in the prime of their years are
disregarded, but in our Society children (whether few or many) are no
hinderance.

Those among us that desire to marry, will not so easily (having seen one
another conversation) be deceived, as they are now in the World.

Young men and maids are forced oftentimes for want of opportunity to pass
their years in solitariness, contrary to their natures: This trouble will be
taken away in our Society when they need not look after house or household
stuff; but without care they may marry, if they can affect one another, doing
their usual work as before.

Parents when their children come to marry, are not disquieted to provide what
is required for an household or trade, the fear, they should have no custom or
work, cannot seize upon the children, so that they may the better live together
in love, whereas else for want of custom or work they wish they had never been
married yea sometimes that they had never been born, they cannot mind
themselves and children as is fit, partly for want of time and partly for d^st
action of thoughts, so that the Parents with their children instead of joy and
comfort, oftentimes do live in nothing but sadness and calamity.

Some husbands and wifes, instead of growing in love, and being loving, gentle
and meek to their servants and children, do through too much care and vexation,
fall into disorderly manner, they become murmuring one against another, whence
commonly evil and wicked resolutions are begotten, the women living by
themselves, are so tied to their families, that they can go no whither with
quietness, on the contrary in our Society we shall have opportunity for every
thing.

The children are not to be taught any humane forms of Religion, but the
writings of the Saints, and natural Arts, Sciences and Languages, that their
understandings (before they have the use of reason) be not spoiled, as for the
most part is done amongst all people and Nations in the World; on the contrary
it is to be imprinted in them, that they ought not in spiritual matters to
believe any but those that have the spirit of God, doing miracles as the
Prophets, and Apostles, for our faith ought not to depend upon men's words, but
upon the power (or wonderful works) of God: So doing there will be no
foundation for sects, factions, and schisms laid in their hearts.

There shall be built a great meeting place, not only for our family or
Society, but also for all rational men, round about with seats, rising one
higher than another, that every one may be seen; having before them convenient
leaning places, to read, and write upon; Also one desk on one side, or end, to
read the holy Scripture, at a set time, giving liberty (after that reading) to
every one to propound somewhat for mutual edification, none being tied (unless
himself think fit) to another matter to follow, or gainsay it.

For in spiritual things, we acknowledge none but Christ for head and Master;
Who of old has appointed in his Church Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists,
Pastors and Teachers, these having through the spirit of God, (which led them
into all truth) brought forth (and left behind them) the writings of the new
Testament, we own for Ambassadors, and their words (without any
interpretations of men) for our rule and Plummet, keeping in remembrance when
we meet together, that we must allow that liberty of speaking, to others, which
we desire our selves, without tying any one to our opinion, maintaining a firm
friendship with such, who have renounced all unreasonable things contrary to
Scripture: without stumbling at any differences, which do not hinder love and
piety: For our Children without doubt, will be of differing opinions, and yet
no reason, when they do not hinder the common welfare; to exclude them from our
Society. It ought also to be considered that the most differences (dwelling
together) by time, and liberty of speaking, will cease to be. The more,
because with us, noe loss will be suffered, by the changing of our opinion; for
the most part of the differences (in spiritual and worldly matters) arise from
a consideration of a wordly advantage, which if in the world abroad as in our
Society were taken away, evil and false opinions would soon fall to the
ground, but the Teachers being Spiritual Captains, would rather (as to the
generallity) for there own profit have Wairs than peace in Christendom, and
therefore they having made an incurable rent, do set people one against
another; which makes it appear that by nature the people are not at so great a
distance, as they now appear to be, contrary to this we intend, that we may
bring the good people out of all (...)cts to (...)ty, setting our meeting place
open to all rational men, strictly watching that Antichrist (who exalts himself
above others) may be continually shut out by exactly observing that no
preheminency ^or sole privilege be granted to any, of offering any thing, or
of speaking first, that so every one being at liberty, and unhindered may bring
forth that which is most conducing to the common welfare, according to the
words of Paul, 1. Cor. 14. 26. all of them sitting still so long after the
reading of the Scripture (as being swift to hear and slow to speak) till any
think it fit (in his juditious and humble mind) to propose any thing for
edification, endeavoring withal to make his discourse short, that another may
have his turn likewise, contrary to the custom of the common Teachers, who only
(or solely) speaking, do lengthen their discourse, to the wearying of their
Auditory, for which end the Moderators (who ought to be meek and understanding
men) are to observe, that there be due order kept.

THe Reader may be pleased to remember, that such only shall be received into
our Society, or little commonwealth, as are honest, rational, impartial
persons, and for others who are not so, they shall receive wages, for their
work, and go to their own houses, or lodging places, till they are fitted and
prepared to be members of our Society, which consist only of four sorts of
people. viz.

1. Husbandmen. 2. Mariners. 3. Masters of Arts and Sciences. 4. Useful Handy
Craft-people Smiths of all sorts. Carpenters. Ship-Carpenters. Brick-makers.
Brick-layere. Masons. Stone-Cutters. Brasiers. Pewterers. Plummers. Tin-men.
Founders. Wheelwrightes. Millwrightes. Millars. Bakers. Brewers. Butchers.
Stillars of strong waters. Tallow-Chandlers. Basket-makers. Brush-makers.
Turners of all sorts. Instrument-makers. Ioyners. Weavers of all sorts.
Fullers. Diers. Tanners. Curriers. Shoo-makers. Skinners. Glovers. Hat-makers.
Woll-combers. Knitters. Rope-makers. Sayl-makers. Net-makers. Compass-makers.
Paper-makers. Printers. Book-binders. Painters. Potters. Plate-workers.
Ingravers. Wier-drawers. Pin-makers. Nodle-makers. Hooks and eyes makers.
Looking-glass makers. Twisters. Tailors. Button-makers. Combe-makers. Coopers.
Cutlers. Glass-makers. Glasiers. Glue-boylers. Sope-boylers. Sak-boylers.
Sadlers. Sieve-makers. Spectacles-makers. Sheeremen. VVhitstars. VVatch-makers.
Barbers. Ch^rurgeons. Physicians. etc.

One Society being settled in order (as a nursery) about London, to employ the
poor, we may have a second about Bristoll, and another in Ireland, where we can
have a great deal of Land for little money; and plenty of wood for building of
Houses, Ships, and many other things.

AN INVITATION TO THE aforementioned SOCIETY or little COMMONWEALTH: Showing
the excellency of the true Christian love, and the folly of all those who
consider not to what end the Lord of Heaven and Earth has created them.

MATT. 12. 50. Whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in Heaven, the
same is my Brother, and Sister, and Mother. LONDON, Printed for G. C. at the
sign of the Black-spread-eagle at the Westend of Paul's Churchyard.

An invitation to the aforementioned Society or little Commonwealth, etc.
THough men are bound one to another, upon several accounts, and knit together
with very straight bonds, and that the likeness either of manners, or of life
and conversation; or of parentage and education, begets a mutual friendship
between them, yet this is the most perfect, and of all others the most blessed;
when God by the dispensation of his secret Counsel, joined some such together,
as do agree with his divine will, and with the rules of nature, and they will
not exchange their union or fellowship for all the riches in the World.

But the more divine this state of friendship is, the seldomer it is seen
amongst us, and the more is Satan that enemy of mankind against it; who knows
full well, that he has not so much right or power to meddle with this holy
fire, and the matter which maintains it, as he has, where either recreation
or advantage is only looked after, which kind of friendship he uses with very
little trouble to dissolve; but in this way of amity God only is the bond,
wherewith they are tied together without being liable to be unloosed, and upon
which foundation being fixed, they resolve to withstand all aslault^ whatsoever.

If then there be any felicity in the life of man, or any efficacious remedy to
prevent his future misery: I conceive nothing was ever more solacing or
reviving and coming nearer to the divine nature than love, viz. true love,
which does so communicate it self in and to that wherewith it reciprocates,
that it seems to have exchanged therewith, and made over thereto, whatsoever it
did possess before, so that amongst true friends there is such an agreement,
that no secret, no joy, no profit, nor any cross or affliction is undivided,
but whatsoever betides either of them, is no otherwise than if it were the
change of one alone, so that death it self can scarce separate souls, so
totally united, certainly the Heathens, who in all things pursued that which
they esteemed best, found nothing more excellent, and delightful then perfect
freindship.

But how far does Christ excel all others in love, who by his Doctrine and
example, has instituted a partnership or Society of mutual love; by the
denomination of Brethren; Abollishing amongst his disciples, all preheminency,
or domineering, of one, over another, requiring that the gifts, and means of
subsistence in the world, (for necessity and delight) should be Common; having
called his people to a moderation, and to a life suitable to pure nature, so
that all Christendom ought to be merely, a certain great fraternity consisting
of such as (having denied the world and their own lusts) conspire together in
Christ, the sole head and spring of love; doing well to one another, and for
his sake distribute their goods to those that stand in need.

Oh that we had this perfection? and were answerable to the end of our
Creation; certainly there would not be such going to law; such intrenching and
incroaching of the bounds of lands, such hiding, and close locking up of
money, nor would there be such scraping together of superfluous estates.

Oh total sum and highest pitch of all good? if any may be admitted and that
in due time to this divine favor for even many decrepit aged persons do
seldom attain to this; to be desirous to live after such a manner: Emperors,
Kings, Princes, etc. having spent all their years, all their strenght of body
and soul, have little or no time left them, to serve a better master, than the
world, and therefore if God do join some such together as endeavor after a
life more regular then their former, each of them being at a loss for a
Companion to better and promote his resolution, one to whom he may communicate
his secrets, a freindly reprover of his Errors, a reclaimer of him from the
worlds alurements, a comforter in adversity, a moderator of Joy in prosperity,
and in all respects a sharer in that which God has liberally given; and last
of all one ready for all cases and conditions that may happen I say and judge,
that these are the happiest of all persons that ever were upon the Earth. For
as no painfuller or miserabler thing can be thought on, than that life which a
man lives according to the course of this world, so nothing is more acceptable
and lovely in the universe, then that harmony and concord, which has its
Original from God, and influence upon the man, that is joined with his fellow
man, so agreeable to his mind; which certainly can be found, no where but there
only where a firm love, agreement and concerning will in well doing, as also a
liberal distribution and imparting, of all created things is entertained.

It is evident, that the most wise God, would honor the sacred society of
Matrimony, with the utmost perfection of this so great love; since they that
are so joined together and built upon the right foundation, have not only
their Goods, but also their joys and griefs, common; And cannot be severed,
by any kind of reproaches, or malicious endeavors of the envious.

The world has her delights in different degrees of Dignities, States, Titles,
and offices; exalting themselves one above another; But Christ on the contrary
will that every one shall perform his office as a member of one and the same
body, In which no one exalts it self, nor accounts it self worthier than
other, the eye is not puffed up because it sees; the foot is not grieved that
it sees not: If any member in the body be blemished it is carefully covered by
the other, if any be weak it is dilligently provided for by the rest, whereas
on the contrary Every one in the world, which by his office or Title is
differenced, from others Conceives he is quite another thing and in himself
better than others and must be reputed, for one that is set together and
composed, of some finer substance, and designed to a sweeter life, yea to an
higher place in heaven then others.

Now if you do but divest and strip the world of her Riches, Honors, and
State; how naked, and refully forlorn will she remain, and how far different
will she be found from that she seems to be; and then it will be easy to
beleave, that she is shored up by nothing else but wormeten propps, which if
they were once pulled away they would be fitted and made free for the imitation
of Christ.

Do but see oh man! what kind of things they are, which do shut the door
against true love; and hinder communion or fellowship with Christ viz.
Nugatory, frivelous things and trifles which only consists in avain esteem
and opinion, which some of the very Heathens who saw a little further than
others, did oftentimes laugh at.

1. First Riches and Estates, which as soon as our Natures are satisfied, are
altogether superfluous, and very troublesome; the vanity whereof who does not
see it they are a burden to the rich, causing them to fill their houses with
variety of costly furniture, which in many years (or never) happens not to be
useful to them; they are a trouble to get them, a perplexity to keep them, and
a grief to part with them; their houses are spacious and great, so that there
is either much void and empty room within, or else they put themselves to a
great deal of trouble and molestation in furnishing and filling them; Their
cloths are so dainty and curious, that they cannot sit down any where with
freedom, nor stand with ease, nor scarce walk any where without fear of
spoiling their apparel, and unless they have some to behold their splendour,
all is little to them, but if they have spectators, they fear some will lurch,
and others fi^ch away from them, their sleep is almost none, Oh how great a
misery and burden is it to be laden with riches!

Secondly, honor and dignities, which if we measure according to the design of
nature, and the rule of Christ, may not otherwise be distinguished than by
several names or denominations of diverse members of one and the same body, the
name of the tongue is that any more worthy name than the name of the finger,
the name of the eye, is that more excellent than the name of the breast, no
certainly, that whereby the members are differenced, does not lift them up, as
with us the name of Lord and Gentlemen puffs up, and what else is it but a
mere name, the vanity whereof who sees it not? the very foundation of it is
nothing else but the noise of the tongue, and the report of others, or the
knee, or the hat, all fleeting and variable things that are to be bought for a
very small matter, and yet we are often times so foolish, that though such
things commonly come not from the heart, neither are fruits of an upright and
sincere mind; nay when on the contrary our own mind do suggest to us, that
there is I know not what kind of tacit derision in it, and does often times
signify nothing else but hatred and ill will, yet we do delight in such
trifles, and give way to them so far, that we will rather hear a lie from a
notorious parasite or slatterer, if it be but on our side, then to hear the
truth from an honest man if it cross our interest.

Do but now cast up thy account; Oh man! how dearly thou have ventured to buy
the friendship of the World, which yet thou never foundest to be thy friend,
but feignedly and that for a spirt, on the contrary consider how little or
almost nothing thou have bestowed to answer the love of God, who nevertheless
would have been the most assured, and most faithful, and unchangeable friend.

Thou have trimmed and decked thy body, and in apparel thou have been passing
sumptuous, that some silly creature might gaze on thee with admiration: In
feasts thou have been prodigal that thy companions and associates might
commend thee; thou have distributed thy gifts and presents, that thou may
seem liberal; thou have put forth thy art and skill, that thou may be called
and accounted learned; thou have dawbed thy house with many colors, to cause
them to stand still that pass by. In the mean time thy reward has been nothing
else but a great toil, and the sudden uncomposed disagreeing and unreasonable.
judgment and censure of other men; consider in the mean while, whether thou
have provoked God thereby, or honored him, it is most certain that thou
might have served God, and have performed the office of love to thy
Neighbor, at a far cheaper rate, for by how much profuse and lavish thou have
been in the service of the World, by so much the more have thou been
partimonious and sparing in the service of God, for it is evident the World
requires costly attendance, as to all her matters, being never solicitous of
the heart, how it stands with that, if you be but careful that nothing be
wanting in outward appearance, in dissembling and complemental deportments; or
if there be but ceremony and external semblance, and fine show enough, so that
by the very aspect, it is plain that the slaves of the World may be discerned
from the true servants of God; in as much as the first are movable, flexible,
fickle and variable; but the latter have their eyes always fixed upon the
mark, which is set before them. If we but once bring our selves to the touch,
and travel through the World with a free and pure mind; we shall be able to
obtain so much from our selves, as in Christian simplicity, silence and
unincumbredness to exclude the wisdom, eloquence and prudence of the World,
concluding, (as in truth it is) that nothing is to be compared with our Master
Christ, and that none other knows any thing or can give any counsel that is
savingly profitable but he, nor shall we repute them happy who have no other
character or superscription than the Worlds endowments, knowing that worldly
knowledge is not so great a thing as it is commonly esteemed; forasmuch as
under the title and disguise of learned, the very shame of being found ignorant
does with many inventions and cheating subterfuges, endeavor the hiding of it
self from being discovered to the eyes of the common people.

Shall we never be able to attain to that equal judgment in putting a true
value upon real virtue where so ever it be found, as well in a prince; and to
leave of more to admire the ornaments of a Magistrate, than the office he
sustaines, and esteeming less of poverty, than of superfluity, of the honor,
then of the state, of a good conscience less then of a popular or vain
applause, of a piece of bread, then of dilicious dainties, of water then wine;
of a green bink of Turf, then of a costly Couch, shall we not be able to arive
to this, to esteem one only sentence of the holy Scriptures more, than the
highest accuteness, of all the worlds Philosophy, we shall be able to do it, if
we did well weigh, that the worlds turn, is but a short Comedy, and that we
are but Actors, who appear no more than once upon the Stage: and if we did
seriously consider, that all things are described, and represented to us in
the world, far otherwise, than they are in themselves, but especially when we
have well pondered, that honest and godly people, after a very little while are
to expect, a participation and enjoyment, of another kind of honor and
dignity, than any the world promises.

Shall we never be able to attain to this, to choose rather to lay up our
estates in the hungry bellies of the poor, than in a few bags, to lay the
foundation of our praise upon the prayers of the poor to make the cross of
Christ our glory, and not to eschew the disfavour of man, as the reward of our
weldoing; in a word, to put of all desire of fame and renown, as also to refer
all desire of Revenge to the Judgment of Christ, we shall be able to do all
this if we forgetnot, that our God is the most faithful of all Debtors, and
the most sure of all securities if also we never forget, that his praise which
shall be given to us, in the presence of men and Angels is the most glorious
praise, and that his renumerations and recompenses are the most noble, and
everlasting.

To how happy an hour are we born, if we do enter upon this communion or
fellowship, and from how many vexations will it releaseus whereof the Heathens,
having attained but a shadow, how magnanimously did they in their minds, sore
alost above all Kings and worldly glory; how did they despise all terrene
affairs (as they that from above look down upon that which is below) and had
pity on them, and so did indeed a void the greatest miseries of man's life.

But since Christian Religion is come into the world it is a wonderful thing
to consider, what a light brake in together with it, viz. Such a light that all
they whose hearts were touched therewith; throwing all from them, betook
themselves to it for refuge, as to a true and sledfast liberty after a long and
horrible captivity, easily forgetting their Riches, State, Rule and possession,
forsaking Parents, Wife, Children, Relations and whatsoever before was most
near and dear unto them, not being by any Temptations of Tyrants, to be drawn
from the sweetness of the Christian life.

The same have appeared in the memory of our forefathers, when the bonds of
Antichrist (it is strange to think how firm they were) were broken when they
who a little before were forced to creep upon the ground, began to rise up,
with what readiness, that Tyrannical worship of Invocating so many deceased
Saints, was rejected, and the unconfined worship of God reentertained, and with
what readiness that vain (though gainful) fancy of Invocating Christ by so
many Intercessions came to naught; So that it appears in all respects, how
much God has Chalked out in nature it self, the pure and true worship, as also
the amicable and freindly conversation of man, and likewise how easily those
things which are contrary thereto perish, and come to nothing, and how far our
Religion with draws us from all theatricall or stageplay, gestures, and
countenances, and all those troublesome Ceremonies, wherewith we torture our
selves, in speaking, eating, saluting, walking, clothing, yea and in all the
actions of our life: But on the contrary how conformable it makes us, to the
celestial Hierarchy and natural policy, and yet in these petty and
altogether childish things, men are so hard to be convinced, and drawn of from
them, as if all their well being depended thereon; and the beatitude or
happiness of all mankind, had all its foundation therein and never give so much
scope to reason and well guided understanding, as either to acknowledge their
vani^y, or if it be known to them rather to throw it of, then to retayn and
daily augment it, with new and exottick bawbles.

Intruth as often as we do strictly ponder, to what end God the Creator and
ruler of all things, has brought every one of us into this great Fabric of
the world, and yet for us to observe. that the life of almost all men is
either unprofitable, idle, wicked, or hurtful to mankind we have reason to be
affrayd, and jelous of our selves, least peradven ure either by the Corruption
of the times, or our education, we have applied our selves to some manner of
life, which is not suiteable to the will of God, and the end of our Creation
being not able to give a just account, wherein we have lived to the glory of
God, and the advantage of mankind.

Certainly to have eaten, to have drank, to have slept, yea, to have read much,
writ much, seen, heard and traveled much, and let this also be added, to have
managed an Estate, to have kept hounds, horses and servants, to have had arts
and learning in great esteem, to have trimmed up houses, to have often made
banquets, to have born Titles of Honor, to have collected many books together;
in a word, to have been employed, and very busy, to the uttermost, in things
that do not relate or belong to Christ, let them be what they will: Certainly
all that will ne(...), satisfy God, nor endure the touth or trial of the fire
but being consumed as stubble, will leave man bare and naked, a male, factor,
and guilty in the presence of God, for his lost time, and hisneglect of
friendship and union with God, together with the neglect of the endowments, as
well of body, as of spirit, so that there will be an horrible distance between
them, and those whose faith in God, and love to man, have been sted fast and
firm.

Let us take heed brethren, least those among us who either in understanding,
learning, riches, beauty or arts, excel others, do conceit that God is
therefore more gracious and favorable to them than others, and that they have
attained to the best life, for such men do grossly deceive themselves, because
the manner of Gods judgeing is quite different from that of the World, his eyes
are quite other kind of eyes, and his policy differs from the Worlds policy,
as much as Heaven from Earth, as one who choseth the unworthy; and despised,
rejects and abhors that which the World do highly esteem.

If any think this our Society or fellowship to be a new thing, so that he
cannot (as it was in old time,) so much as point out five pair of such friends,
he has reason with me to lament, that while men do curiously, and with anxitie
of mind, search into the other course of the Stars and Planets; the virtues of
plants and vegetables, yea, into the very bowels of the Earth; yet they are so
neglective of their Salvation, that they do not in the least so much as seek
and look after that life, for which they would not need so much silver and
gold, so many Titles of Honor, so many buildings, such clothes, so much
furniture for their houses, so many messes and dishes at their meals, so many
arms and ammunition, or warlike provisions, so many judgments or decrees of
Law, so many medicines, nor so many books, all which are causes of vast
trouble; so that the men of the World themselves (if they were but wise) would
avoid these occasions, or (as they themselves do confess) necessitys of sinning.

This Society or fellowship has not always been so rare, and so thin sown,
but was very rise in the primitive times, till the enemies of the first
innocence did insinuate themselves thereunto, whereby the life which men were
bound to live, as in obedience to the Laws of Christ, began to be accounted
such as a man may chose whether he would embrace or no, and take up a
meritorious and superoragatory life, comprising such a sanctimony or holiness
as was more than necessary to Salvation, and was only to be used by such as
desired a greater reward in Heaven than others; which opinion gave a beginning
to many orders of lazy and wanton beasts, (I mean Monks and the l^ke) and of
many thousand fables and cheats, which things when men came to themselves, they
did justly reject, and when they are grown wiser, they will again totally cast
off. even those poor ones, who now scrape and take together the riches of the
World; as also those (seeming) humble and lowly persons that now take up the
high seats of the World, and such pretended simple ones, who now fill and
disturb the whole World with their cunning and deceit.

But for us let us hold fast that which is in this life, the best thing, viz.
the universal love to Gods creation, and if we be insufferable to the World,
and they be incorrigible, or unbette able, as to us, then let us reduce our
friendship and society to a few in number, and maintain it in such places as
are separate from other men, where we may with less impediment or hinderance,
love one another, and mind the wonders of God, eating the bread we shall earn
with our own hands, leaving nothing to the body, but what its nakedness,
hunger, thirst, and wearyness calls for to help our necessity and health, then
it will appear how many things we may well be without, what things we may
refrain, and what kind of matters we ought not to know how many things we may
avoid, in what things we may best quiet our selves, and how far easier we may
satisfy Christ in his little ones with a penny, than the World with a pound.

For Princes are not born on purpose to rear up stately Palaces, the Learned
are not born for the writing of many unprofitable, and for the most part
frivolous Books; the rich are not born to boast of their gold, silver, and
crystal vessels; the rest of the people are not born for so many various
unprofitable Handy-crafts; In a word, mankind is not born, for so many kinds of
education, of being rich, and running into excess, but all these racks of the
mind, it has invented of it self, and now made a custom and habittual, so that
it has made the life more grievous, to it self every day, under so many
painful and laboursome inventions.

Now I would that they that stand and admire, at the fine wits of our age, and
the sublime learning of our times; did but consider with me, whether those
things which daily please our eyes, with their novelty; be indeed such, for
which we may justly rejoice or whether on the contrary, it were not much
better, since they are the cause of so many griefs, and troubles in man's life,
that we were wished and advised, by our learned men, to put them away far from
us.

For what greater fruit of wisdom, or what greater glory of the new revived
learning, could their possibly be, then by that to bring humane matters to such
aposture, that we may attribute our well being, and felicity, in this life, to
them under God, that by the whole some instruction thereof, that which is
superfluous, useless and unnecessary, might be thrown away, and that which is
Nugatory, trifling and unprofitable might be cut of, and that we might truly
be distinguished, from the life of the Barbarous and savage people, not by
books, nor by Titles of honor, nor by universitys but by such mor^ality as
Christian Philosophy does prescribe.

Let there come forth from the Studdies, and libraries, of our wisemen, into
the light, not a continuation, or prosecution of old Errors; or an heaping up
of new to the old but on the contrary, a rule or direction, for a new and
reformed life in Christ, which may demonstrate, that as we are professors of
the best Religion, we are also imitators of the best life; then shall we return
to their Society or fellowship, and be subject to their good laws, and Orders;
and observe their rational customs.

In the mean time, let them not take it ill, that we do not make any great
account, of these Sciences that are void of Christ; that we do not desire to
know them, and if we have drunk in any such, yet we desire to unlearn them, and
with singleness of heart, to become as Children, who are altogether
unacquainted, with voluptuousness, ceremonies, Riches, and foolish labor,
hence forward we desire to live toward God in unincumbredness, void of carking
for the multiplicity of supernecessary things, exercising a delight, in real
equallity, and for the rest acknowledge Christ only, for our Lord and Master,
and in this School of his, we hope that neither divine mysteries, nor secrets
of nature, nor the contemplation of rare matters, shall be wanting to us, since
he so merly has made it evident by the example of his Apostles and (...)ly
men, how powerful he is in teaching, and then especially he displayeth his
riches, and opens his unexhaustible treasures, when humane wisdom ceased, and
the skill of the World melts a way.

But that we now are so weak, and that the strength of our Religion is grown so
faint with us, that the Majesty of the divine presence, with the miraculous
working is removed from us, whom shall we accuse for this, but our selves, who
in the midst of the divine light, have scarce retained any more than the bare
name, being content if we may but be called Christians, as to the rest being
altogether like to the World; so that it is no mervail that we who do not
excel others in the pursuit of honest actions, as Justice, Mercy, and the
propagation of the name of Christ, nor in the education of children; do not
also in the least go beyond them in those gifts which were peculiar, to upright
and zealous Christians, and yet we ought in so clear a light of the Gospel, as
we have to be so far distinguished, as to excel other men, so that if others
do not commit Adulrery, we should not so much as desire another man's wife, if
they do not commit Murder, we should not at all be angry with our brother; if
they love them that are like to them, we should love our enemies, if they do
lend to those that have to give again, we should lend to those from whom we
cannot hope to receive any thing again: For it becomes us who hope for the
inheritance of an eternal fe, in all things to go beyond those that know only
this present life. But if nevertheless we be found beneath these, or if we are
found but like to them, and no more, how much will their accusation press us
down, and condemn us to the like, yea, to a more grievous punishment.

Let us look back to the former ages, and it will appear that the divine power
was then most of all vigorous and eminent, when there was not such ostentation
of fine wits, but the supreme knowledge and happiness then was placed in the
Cross of Christ; but now while matters go quite otherwise, and the creatures
of our brain do obumbrate, or over shadow and obscure the works of God, we do
things according to the will and pleasure of Satan, who being the most subtle
of all Philosophers, Logitians and Artists, is not afraid of us, if we go his
way, and by that occasion he insinuates himself more and more into us, and
gl^deth in by means of such things which we most admire.

Do not you see Brethren, that by the goodness and long suffering of God, It is
in our hand and power, now we have tasted, of the bitterness (...) worlds
pleasure to rid our selves, of very(...) ^y troubles(...) going on by a way
that is not ^^ooked, and rugged, but straight and smooth, tending to the true
^est, and highest pith of (...) (...)ctions by applying our selves to this
Communion or Society, (...) (...) we have made mention, which suffers no
pride, Riot, excos(...) (...)ness, in(...)e, or any evils, which have been
pourtrayed in their (...) (...)ve colloures, from which Society no man that
professes the name (...) Christ, and practices his doctrine, is exclut^ed of
what fect party of by what name so^ver he is called or known.

We desire therefore, that all who love their own peace and welfare, will
consider of our Order or instition, which is propounded for a general rule
(...) For we Judge it to be, not only a true opposition to all evil, but also
a means to rid the world, of all unprofitable, and hurtful handy Crafts,
being the cause of sin and slavery. To which we hope that God who is the
Husband of W^ddows, and a Father of the Fatherless, will vouchsafe his
blessing, through Jesus Christ, that so the pure and uncorrupted, worship
(which consistes more in well doing, then in much speaking) may break forth to
the glory of his holy name and the good of all mankind.

If any have a desire to speak with him who is isntrumental in the promoting
of so good a work; may have knowledge of his residence by in quiring of the Book
seller noted in the title page.

FINIS.
A Letter written in order to the now mentioned Society or little
Commonwealth; By some well affected persons, whose hearts and hands have
already joined therein: to stir up all such who are truly sensible of the poor
and needy, to carry on this so necessary and charitable a work.
HAving not only considered the poverty, afflictions and streights of many well
minded people; Together with the evil consequences that arise from the corrupt
customs and ways of most employments, and the general disorder proceeding from
riches and poverty: But also the way propounded by the endeavors of our friend
Peter Cornelius; to rectify all such and many other inconveniences, by
bringing together a fit, suitable and well qualified people into one Household
government or little Commonwealth, wherein every one may keep his propriety,
and be employed in some work or other as he shall be fit, without being
oppressed, as is more at large expressed in a Platform to that purpose.

Whereupon we are resolved, judgeing it to be necessary, and our duty to
promote so good and pious a work, with the assistance of other merciful and
rational men, to lay such a foundation, as may tend to the relief of the
oppressed, the preserving of such as are in danger of falling into snares, and
the increase of understanding and mutual love, as also the exemplary ordering
of such acts as may be accomplished by prudential charity.

And hereunto we do earnestly invite all Persons that have a willing mind to do
good according to their abilities; some by their Wisdom and Council, others by
money and credit, or by both, as they shall be able and free, that so a stock
may be raised for the carrying on of this good and beneficial work.

To which end we have subscribed our names, and the sums of money which we are
willing to give. Hoping that all such as are for so general a work, will upon
due consideration likewise subscribe for such a sum of money as they are
willing to give toward the accomplishment of the Premises, and meet together
to confer and order the said sums of moneys into the hands of some trusty
Persons for the use and benefit of the Society only, and what else shall be
found conducing to the perfecting of this work, till the Society can subsist of
it self in order, which we believe may soon be from the credible information of
diverse persons, relating that many hundreds in Transylvania, Hungaria, and the
Paltsgraves Country, from a small beginning have attained, not only to a very
comfortable life among themselves, but also ability of doing much good to
others, not of their Society.

Subscribed toward the raising of a Stock. I. S............... 100 l. W.
R............... 100 l.



