A RELIGIOUS SCRUTINY CONCERNING Unequal Marriage, To be represented To the
General Assembly of the Kirk of SCOTLAND: Together with a POSTSCRIPT to the
Commissioners of the KIRK.

Whereunto is subjoyned AN APPENDIX, Humbly tendered to the Parliament of
ENGLAND, In reference to the late Transactions of State.

And now lastly is added A Faithful and Conscientious Account FOR Subscribing
the Engagement.

By Thomas Paget, Minister of the Word in SHREWSBURY.

Jer. 6. 16. Thus says the Lord, Stand ye in the ways and see, and ask for
the old paths, which is the good way, and walk therein, and ye shall find rest
for your souls.

John 8. 31, 32. Then said jesus to those Disciples which believed on him, If
ye continue in my word then are ye my disciples indeed, and ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free.

London: Printed by John Macock, and are to be sold in Pope's Head Alley. 1650.

To the Reader.
THis last addition mentioned in the title of these following discourses,
should have come forth eight months since; but many occasions intervening, and
among them the Author observing that many learned discourses were about that
time published by others on the same argument, he thought the world would have
less need of his, but finding since that time (besides the persuasion of such
as had viewed it, to whose judgment he owed much) many notable things come to
pass in the event of affairs, in a manner then foretold to those of that
faction (pretended to be the old Presbyterian) to whom the advertisement
agreeing with the scope of the book, was particularly directed, and many
dangerous conjunctions since discovered (which were then foreseen, when they
seemed to be most concealed) repented him not that it was deferred till now,
having more hope that after so many means of conviction, they might be now
found the willinger to open their ears to that evidence of truth which is laid
before them, inducing them with the same solidity and clearness of Reason to
submit to the Engagement, as he had done before, in exhorting them to a
peaceable compliance with the present Government; though then for some private
Reasons, under the assumed name of THEOPHILUS PHILOPATRIUS. And thus much was
thought good to be prefixed to the former advertisement, which now follows,

By the same friend to pure Religion and his Native Country.

An Advertisement by way of Preface to the Neophyte Presbyterian Ministers of
England and Ireland.
THe reverend Author of these several Discourses following, though a stranger
to me, appears throughout the whole Treatise, to be of that judgment in
Church Discipline, which is called Presbyterian, but far different from some
opinions which so many of those, who in these days assume that name, have under
that pretext lately broached among us, with such disturbance of the Peace, and
Civil Magistracy of the Land. His years likewise intimated in a passage of his
Book, with other Arguments, give us to believe him more then ordinarily versed,
both in the writings of the good old Non-Conformists of this Nation, and the
acquaintance and familiarity of many grave and worthy Ministers, whose faith
and constancy, endured the trials of long persecutions and exiles, under the
reign of the two last Kings.

Whereby the world may know (besides what has been lately shown in several
other Treatises, and chiefly from Histories of the Scottish Reformation, penned
by the most eminent of the Presbyterians, and principal managers of those
Affairs) that these subscribers in London of the Representation, Vindication,
etc. against the trial of the late King, etc. and their copartners in
subscriptions on the same account in Lancashire, Essex, or any other County of
England, with the Presbytery of Belfast in Ireland (as many of them, at least,
whose countenance, of names, have not been made use of without their knowledge)
are not as they profess to be, the followers of those sincere, and pious men of
this, or other Reformed Protestant Countries, whose doctrine, and holy life, in
the midst of all kind of sufferings (unto which they were then exposed) has
yet left a Religious memory of a sweet smelling savor behind them.

Which Contratenor of these men's, appears not only in those assumed
Vindications, with their other slightings of the present Authority, and
defaming the higher powers placed over them in the manage of their trust; and
these Representations attended in odium tertii by an unnatural coition in so
palpable steps with the tumultuous spirits of their old, and (by themselves
declared) inveterate enemies; of that part of their old and once owned friends,
which is now become unto them a principal abomination, by reason of those their
late avowed and pursued principles, most inconsistent with their interest; and
of the rude multitude, of whose crying one day Hosannah, and by and by
Crucify, they need not more experience: They all this while not foreseeing how
naturally these courses do tend to settle on their own heads, by their own
hands, those very evils, whereof they are most afraid.

But also that they may be sure to keep distance from their most faithful and
inwardly approved friends, their countermining is yet more evident (a new
opportunity to show themselves arising) in their tenacious adhering to set days
of Humiliation, in opposition to occasional; wherein the opinion, and practice
of the Reformed Churches, and especially of the Church of Scotland (with whom
they most plead to have uniformity) is clearly no less against them, of the
which, such of them as have either been conversant in their Writings, about
their Discipline, against the Prelatical, or have had the opportunity of any
free discourse with their Commissioners in the Assembly at Westminster, or
elsewhere, cannot possibly have any color to plead ignorance.

Into both of which so opposite aspects, that they did not upon their own
principles choose to fall, but were indeed by emergence of occurrences
surprising them, driven; is very apparent by that ready Testimony, which the
most forward of them at first were observed to give (besides former expressions
that way looking) to the very Remonstrance of the Army, in what concerned even
the calling of the King to account, and afterward so perfectly falling out
with it, by reason of the manner of doing, viz. The suspension of some Members
of Parliament, etc. The which manner notwithstanding made void, does sweep along
with it (whereof they cannot be ignorant) the Alpha and Omega of their friends
transactions, for the re-establishent and preservation of Presbytery, etc. in
Scotland, against the Prelatical inundations, they having in the beginning of
these conflicts, no Parliament, till their sword fencing their other addresses,
begot both it, and their assembly; and that Parliament in a few successions
degenerating; these again with their own sword assisted with the followers of
their copy in this Land, having altogether overturned that line, and cut out a
new Parliament in affect of another Constitution of Members, and (...) passed
sentence of Non-Communion in an Admonition upon the acquiescers in the
settlement of this Nation, upon the Concessions at Newport, as being
destructive to the specially professed Interest of themselves, and their
Presbyterian friends in England. The which acquiescers seeing they were those
very heterogeneous Members, who could not but let any building, save on that
foundation, till they were taken out of the way, what a chain of security,
their continuance at the stern, might have framed, the consideration of the
links of their adherents, Inchiquin, Belfast, Ormond, etc. Yet going on, who
knows how far further? will help themselves to give judgment.

It is heartily therefore wished by me (and with me, I doubt not, but by all
those who duly ponder the present carriage of the most of them.) That if their
judgments be indeed inclined to the Presbyterian way, they would be more
cautelous in the offering to engage a whole Party, in what is too too evidently
the mere driving on of the self-interest of some discontented persons; and
indeed apply themselves without partiality to the Law and Testimony, as they
have this aged, and reverend Author, in these his grave and judicious
Discussions (upon special Reason, we see directed to those our nearest
neighbors of Scotland) for an example, together with such other worthy
ancients, whether in years or understanding, which do yet remain exemplary, who
(being of a fuller age in controversies of this nature, then by such as
satisfy themselves to swim in a stream, is attained) by reason of use have
their senses exercised to discern, and are become more skilful in the word of
righteousness, and shine with greater brightness, in the rendering of what is
due unto all, as ordained of God. And that they would timely cease their
causing of many to stumble (an evil of old complained of by the Prophet, as
reigning in the Ministry of that generation, see and consider Mal. 2. 7, 8,
9.) and that they would not go on to render themselves contemptible before the
people, by their corrupting the Covenant, which is the main scope of this
premised Advertisement to these Leaders of the over-credulous, into the snare
wherein they have led themselves captive.

By a Friend to pure Religion, and his Native Country.

A Religious Scrutiny, Or an important, expedient QVESTION To be represented to
the GENERAL ASSEMBLY Of the Kirk of SCOTLAND;
Touching the unlawfulness and nullity of some kind of unequal Marriage, As a
Consectary to the late Necessary and Seasonable Testimony, against Toleration,
in reference to Religion: From the Commissioners of the Kirk.
The Preamble to the Question.
IT is most humbly and sincerely desired, That the Reverend, and godly-wise
Pastors, and Elders of Scotland, conveening in the General Assembly of the
Kirk, may be pleased to take into their grave and mature deliberations, the
ensuing Question of grand importance and expediency. They are earnestly and
religiously solicited hereunto the rather, since a satisfying Resolution of the
case in hand, may argue; not only their unfeigned and impartial zeal against
Toleration, in reference to Religion, (which the necessary and seasonable
Testimony from their Commissioners of the Kirk, with their Admonition and
Exhortation unto their Brethren in England; together also with the Concurrence
of the Estates in Parliament, allowing, and attesting the same; and a Letter
likewise from the said Commissioners, to the Ministers of London Province,
dated at Edinburg, Ian. 18. 1649. do fairly and learnedly pretend unto, and in
the judgment of Christian charity, do piously contend for, according to the
Scriptures,) but also may tend to instruct and establish pure minds, studious
of truth and p(...), in this conjuncture of cloudy and scrupulous emergencies,
occasioned by the extraordinary overtures and mysterious transactions of the
Parliaments, and Souldieries in England and Scotland; even in the one Nation,
as well as in the other, both in the State and Church affairs. But let the
Answer be ingenuous, punctual, solid, plain, and clear, grounded on the holy
and good Word of the eternal God; and let it be truly weighed in the balances
of the Sanctnary, which deceive not, nor can be deceived. For so it becomes
the truth which is after godliness.

This is brotherly and modestly requested by an English Minister of the Gospel,
in his measure zealously affected to the honor of the true God, and sincerely
loving to his most endeared native Country, and a hearty wel-wisher of the best
good unto theirs; who has now about the space of forty years served God with
his Spirit in the Gospel, preaching the Word in season, and out of season;
reproving, rebuking, and exhorting, with all long-suffering and doctrine (save
in some intervals, when a first, second, and third time hindered, and
restrained by Prelatical suspension, and Tycannical persecution for the
Testimony of Jesus Christ, and thereby necessitated to keep silence, till the
indignation was overpast;) and who still aged, endevoreth diligently and
industriously, according to his capacity, ability, and opportunity; the
propagating of the Gospel, and Kingdom of Christ, the utter extirpation and
subversion of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness,
and the establishment of the Ministry and Discipline of Christ in Presbyteries
and Synods in all Churches, joying greatly, in beholding such order, and
contributing prayers, That notorious Delinquents may in a due way, be censured
and proceeded against, according as the nature and degree of their offense may
require, in doing justice and judgment upon them; that so the Lords people may
not be left to oppressors, whose designs and machinations do portend to make
void God his holy, just, and good Laws, and Ordinances.

The Question.
WHether the marriages of men, professing the true Religion of God, according
to the Faith of Gods elect, and acknowledging the Truth, which is after
godliness; contracted and made with the idolatrous daughters of a strange god,
and through strong delusion, believing a lie, after the working of Satan, in
all deceiveableness of unrighteousness; ought not in a due way to be separated,
and made void, as being a nullity (de jure) from the first? And whether the
children born of them in their pretended conjugal Society, ought not to be
separated, and cast out from patrimonial Inheriting? And consequently, whether
the marriages of Protestants of the true Christian Religion, made with Papists
of the Antichristian, false Religion; ought not to be separated? And whether
the children born of them, ought not to be cast out from inheriting in
Christian Nations of the Reformed true Religion?

The state of the Question discussed and ventilated, in the consideration of
certain Observations, Cases, and Restrictions; for anticipating misprision, and
futile prevarication.
I. THe subject of the Question is taken for granted, viz. There is a
lawfulness and requisitness, of separating and making void, the marriages of
some persons unlawfully contracted at the first; and there is a lawfulness of
the casting out the children, born of them. The Word of God gives very evident
testimony hereunto, holding forth a most direct and undeniable president,
beyond all exception, as being practicable according to Law, in the case of
diverse of the people of Israel, returned from the Babylonish captivity, who had
transgressed abominably in making mixed marriages; and who therefore as the case
required, did institute Reformation, and accordingly did reform. This appears
Ezra 9. and 10. throughout, and more particularly Chap. 10. 3, 16. Hereunto
also the Apostolical allusion, in the business in hand, does notably serve for
illustration. See Gal. 4. 30. Cast out the bondwoman and her son, etc. Such was
the known famous case (in some sort infamous) of King Henry the eighth of
England, who in an Oration to his Subjects, gave them to understand, That the
Lady Mary his daughter, was not reputed his lawful daughter, nor his Queen
Katherine, her mother, his lawful wife, but their pretended conjugal society
had been most detestable adultery, as he had been informed by diverse learned
Clerks: Whereupon afterward, the marriage was declared, and made void. See 2.
Vol. of the Book of Martyrs, page 327. Edit. 1641. Thus it is manifest, that
some pretended conjugal society, and fruit of it, may be separated and cast out.

II. It is to be observed, that the God of Heaven, and Earth, does really
distinguish, and put difference, betwixt person and person; and requires
likewise, that his people should do so too in their walking and conversing with
humane society, according to occasion, in such Scriptural notions and
expressions, as following are specified and instanced for better discerning
herein, viz.

1. The seed of the woman, and the seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. 2. The sons
of God, and the daughters of men, Genesis 6. 2, 4. 3. Noah his family, and the old
world of the ungodly, 2 Pet. 2. 5. 4. The tents of Shem, Canaan his servant,
Genesis 9. 27. 5. Circumcised persons, and uncircumcised ones, Genesis 17. 13, 14. 6.
Children of the freewoman, and of the bondwoman, Gal. 4. 31. 7. Israelites,
and Gentiles, Exodus 19. 5, 6. 8. Precious ones, and vile persons, Jere. 15. 19.
9. Jews, and adversaries of Judah, Ezra 4. 1, 2, 3. 10. Righteous, and the
wicked, Mal. 3. 18. 11. Children of God, and children of the devil, 1 John 3
10. 12. Regenerate, and unregenerate, John 3. 3, etc. 13. Spiritual man, and
natural man, 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15. 14. Believers, and unbeleevers, 2 Cor. 6. 14.
15. Christians, and Antichrists, Acts 11. 26. 1 John 2. 18. 16. Within the
Church, and without, 1 Cor. 5. 12. Acts 2. 47. 17. One inwardly in the heart,
and one outwardly, Romans 2. 28, 29. 18. Quickened, and dead, Ephesians. 2. 5. 19.
Children of the light or day, and of darkness, or the night, 1 These. 5. 5. 20.
Baptized, and unbaptized, Luke 3. 7. and 7. 30, etc.
Hence it may be discerned, how marriages may be made in the Lord.

III. The Question is not propounded, touching a separating of the marriages of
such persons who were married, when both of them were idolatrous, but after the
marriage, one of them through the dispensation of the Gospel, becomes a
convert to the true Religion: Neither is it touching the casting out of their
children, since such their condition, and such state of their children likewise,
is clearly and punctually spoken unto, and determined by the Apostle Paul, in
the case of desertion, or non-desertion, according as occasion may offer. See 1
Cor. 7. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. The case of Galeacius Caracciolus, Marquess
of Vico, declared in his life, translated into English, by W. Cr. cap. 25. is a
singular instance in the specified occasion.

IV. Neither is the Question about the abrogating of the marriage of such a
professor of the true Religion, who in a due way, does espouse himself unto
such a woman, whose parents and progenitors are grossly idolatrous, and she her
self was lately such, but she is now converted, and embraces the true
Religion, before the marriage be made: For there are approved presidents in the
Word of God, of the lawfulness of such their matrimony. See Ruth 4. 13. compare
chap. 1. 16. 1 Kings 1. 3. compare Psalm. 45. 13.

V. Nor yet the Question is not instituted with a partial respect and exception
of some sorts of persons, but it equally and indifferently concerns any sort
and degree of persons whomsoever, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, Supreme or
Inferior, Rich or Poor, etc. Since by occasion there is a possibility, that any
sorts and degrees of persons may be tempted, and fall into one miscarriage, as
well as another as is employed, Gal. 6. 1. Yea, and the Scripture instanceth the
transgressions in such kind, even of Kings, Princes, Rulers, Priests, Levites,
and People. See Nehe. 13. 26. Ezra 9. 1, 2. The Scripture gives instance
likewise, of course held for redress, see Ezra 10. Nehe. 13.

VI. Moreover, the Question is not, whether the professors of the true
Religion, having transgressed by making mixed marriages, may, or ought, at their
own pleasure, put away their wives, by their own and sole authority; and so
likewise, cast out their children: Since such procedure, it may seem, if admited
of, ought to be by the decision and order of such, as have calling and
authority thereunto. As it may appear, Ezra 10. 2, 3, 4. Nehe. 13. 23, 24, 25.

VII. Likewise, the Question is not touching a making void the marriages of the
professors of the true Religion, who are married to professors of the said true
Religion for the substance of it, but some difference is in some circumstantial
matters, and superstructive opinions, which do not destroy the foundation and
principles of the true Religion. Since such condition of difference in judgment,
about lesser matters in Religion, may be incident unto some members of the true
Churches of Christ. See 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4, 12. Phil. 3. 13.

VIII. Neither is the Question concerning professors of the true Religion, who
are charitably and probably reputed to be truly religious, having the Spirit
of power, and of love, and of a sound mind; but their yoke-fellows professing
outwardly only, and having a form of godliness, but deny the power of it;
professing indeed, that they know God, but in their works deny him; whether
these should be separated, and their children cast out? Since profession
denominateth the Religion. Howbeit, Note.
in the seventh and eighth Cases, special and uttermost faithful endevor, ought
to be used by persons of good knowledge, to free their yokefellows from the
entanglement of erroneous opinions, and unchristian conversation, and to
establish them in the truth; if so, they may yet be brought to approve
themselves, as becomes the Gospel of Christ; and if God through their due way
of instructing them with meekness, may peradventure grant them repentance unto
life, and unto the acknowledging of the truth, see 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. Whereas on
the other hand in this case, God hates putting away, (as being a treacherous
dealing against ones companion, and wife of his Covenant, see Mal. 2. 14 15,
16.) save in the case of whoredom alone; for in such case it is lawful to
procure a Bill of divorcement for the putting away of the wife, notwithstanding
the marriage was lawfully made and continued, until such occasion, see Matthew.
19. 9.

IX. And lastly, the Question is not whether in all ages and times recorded in
the Scriptures, the Rulers commissioned to execute justice and judgment on
notorious offenders; have fully approved their integrity and faithfulness, in
acting in the specified case as had been meet. 1. Forasmuch as the sacred
Records in matters of fact, are many times silent, lest they should be too
voluminous, and because also that which is recorded is enough for the guiding
of believers in steering of their course, see John 21. 25. and Chap. 20. 30,
31. 2. And forasmuch as sometimes the Rulers, who ought to have been vigorously
active against miscarriage of any herein, have been themselves delinquent, and
so the edg of Justice has been thereby blunted; see Solomon, Nehe 13. 26.
Iehoram, 2 Chronicles. 21. 6. 3. Yea, and forasmuch as pious and reforming Princes,
have yet some of them been too remiss in zealous executing according to Law, as
they ought to have done, even as the Scripture shows in the example of
gracious and worthy Iehoshaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 33. and of the zealous and
constantly upright-hearted King Asa, 2 Chronicles. 15. 17. In their not taking away
of the high places. It is the Annotation in the Margent (of the Bible, Printed
at Edinburg, by Andrew Heart, 1610. much approved in Note.
Scotland) on 2 Chro. 15. 16. touching King Asa his deposing his mother Maachah
from her regency, because she had made an Idol in a Grove. That therein he
showed he lacked zeal, for she ought to have died, both by the Covenant, as
verse. 13. and by the Law of God; but he gave place to foolish pity, and would
seem also after a sort to satisfy the Law. Concerning the which Annotation,
the propounder of this Question, heard it reported about forty years agone
from authentic witnesses, that King James was so offended thereat, that he for
that Note sake, would not permit thenceforth any Bibles in English to be
Reprinted with any Annotations whatsoever, neither of the new Translation, nor
of the former old Translations. Which by the way, may advertise the learned and
forward attesting Brethren of the Ministry, both in Scotland, and in London,
and some other Provinces of the English Nation, that it need not seem strange,
if there be a paucity of presidents in the Scriptures, or modern Protestant
writings, about penal executions on superlative persons, especially as matters
have stood under Monarchy: When yet notwithstanding, there is sure and
sufficient rule and example in the Word of God, either directly expressed, or
by just consequence to be deduced from the latitude of Commandments, and
Scripture Historical, which may satisfy Conscience, and also oblige and
encourage unto the due execution of Justice: so that the Question is as it is
stated, Whether commissioned Rulers, supreme or subordinate, ought not
formerly, and consequently, Whether they ought not still, even in these
Gospel-days, according to occasion, see to legal execution in the matter in
hand, or any other?

Motives inducing unto the representing of the Question, arguing the importance
and expediency of it.
I. TExts of Scripture expressly.

1. Requiring and commanding professors of the true Religion, that when they
shall make use of their liberty or necessity to marry, to be sure that they do
marry only in the Lord, see 1 Cor. 7. 39.

2. Prohibiting and forbidding people in Covenant with God, to make any
marriages with daughters who are strangers to the Covenant of God, see Deuteronomy. 7.
3. 2 Cor. 6. 14.

3. Complaining of, convincing, and reprehending such mixture in marriages, see
Ezra 9. 2. Nehe. 13. 23, 24, 25, 28, Mal. 2. 11.

4. Threatening, and denouncing punishment to be executed in such case of
unlawful marriages, whoever the offenders are, see Mal. 2. 12.

5. Informing of the approved course of faithful and religious Rulers, in the
separating and putting away such idolatrous wives, and such as were born of
them, to be done according to the Law, see Ezra 10. 2, 3, etc.

6. Declaring and showing Gods proceedings in judgment against the old world,
by the deluge for sin in this kind, see Genesis 6. 2, 3, etc.

II. Divine forceable Reasons made use of in the holy Scriptures, against such
mixed profane marriages, taken from the

1. Inequality of their being yoked together in conjugal society, see 2 Cor. 6.
14, 15, 16. compared with Deuteronomy. 22. 10.

2. Extreme danger of the not attaining of an holy seed in mixed marriage, which
yet ought to be seriously looked after, as that which God seeks and minds,
see Mal. 2. 15. But in all appearance, is likely to be frustrated hereby, see
Ezra 9. 2. Nehe. 13. 23, 24. Inasmuch as children are most apt to be swayed
according to their mothers principles, see 2 Chronicles. 22. 3, 4.

3. Dangerous ensnaring the husbands, in the sin of the Wives, foreseen and
warned against, by the Lord himself, see Deuteronomy. 7. 4. and envinced by woeful
event, see 1 King. 11. 1, 2 4. Nehem. 13. 26. whence also ensues, an
hinderance or disturbance of religious family duties of prayer, 1 Pet. 3. 7.
and consequently a drawing down the wrath of God on them, Jerem. 10. 25.

III. Evident testimonies of ancient and modern Theologues, in their approved
Orthodox writings, occasionally treating hereabouts. viz.

1. Old Tertullian, one of the most learned Latin Fathers, (in whose writings,
Cyprian the Father, and Martyr delighted to exercise himself every day) Lib. 2.
ad uxor. cap. 3. He asserteth, That believers marrying with Gentiles or Pagans,
are guilty of whoredom, and that they ought not to be communicated withal. This
Book of his is approved by Abr. Scultetus, who was an eminent professor at
Heydelburg, in his Medul. Patr.

2. Peter Martyr, a most pious, learned, and much renowned professor,
heretofore at Oxford, and elsewhere, in the reign of King Edward the sixth, and
very much endeared to most Orthodox Protestants of the Reformed Religion, in
his Commentar. on 1 King. 3. 1. disputing De dispari conjugio, propounds
sundry Arguments against mixed marriages, quoteth some of the Fathers, as being
of his mind, even Jerome, Augustine, etc. and answers sundry Objections;
yea, and albeit he has somewhat in the close of his discourse to allay extreme
severity, yet it may appear, (the Question being rightly stated) that none of
his allayes do infringe the Arguments.

3. That famous and worthy Minister of Christ in the University of Cambridg,
Master William Perkins, in his Warning against the Idolatry of the last times,
asserteth, That the marriages of the Israelites, with Idolaters, mentioned Ezra
10. 3. were indeed void, and no marriages. He alleges two Reasons thereof,
the latter whereof is, In that they were not only idolaters, but also inticers
to idolatry. God by express Commandment, did simply forbid the Jews to marry
with them, unless they did repent and change their Religion. And in regard of
this Commandment, the foresaid marriages were nullities, as incestuous
marriages are no marriages, by reason of the absolute, prohibition of God. Thus
Master Perkins in his Warning against the Idolatry of these last times, meaning
the idolatry of Popery, as the scope of his Treatise imports, vide Vol. 1.
page 677, 678.

4. The judgment of some sound and much honored English Ministers of the
Gospel, (most of which, are now asleep in the Lord, yet a few still alive) who
conferring and humbling themselves frequently in private, at such times as
overtures were with Spain, and shortly after with France, about King Charles his
mixed marriage. The Questionist demanded the same he now represents to
Disquisition, and the most and best approved for their learning and piety,
inclined to the affirmative.

5. The Solemn League and Covenant, 1643. engaging unto an extirpation of
Popery, in the second Article: For the course insisted on, in the Qnestion,
seems to have an effectual tendency, to the keeping of the said Covenant in
that Article of it.

6. The Commissioners of the General Assembly of the Kirk in Scotland, in the
Necessary and Seasonable Testimony against Toleration, approved by the Estates
of present Parliament; who amongst other Texts of Scripture, alleged by them,
against Toleration have these words, Page 5. The children of Israel after their
return from Babylon, made a Covenant, and entered into a Curse, and into an
Oath, to walk in Gods Law, and to observe, and do all the Commandments of the
Lord their God, Nehem. 10. 28, 29, 30. Let this Text alleged, be compared with
Ezra 10. 2, 3, 5. And the Reader is desired to take the Bible, and to turn to,
and observe the Texts cited, which undoubtedly must needs affect greatly; and
the rather, since cited by such interested persons, and to such purpose.

IV. The same Texts of Scripture, and Scriptural Reasons, which do make against
the marriages of the people of God, with the daughters of a strange god, and
all that are born of them, do seem also by necessary consequence, to conclude
against the marriages of Protestants with Papists, and all that are born of
them. viz. Because

1. Popery is the Religion of the Roman Antichrist; who is the man of sin, the
son of perdition; who opposes and exalts himself, above all that is called
God, or that is worshipped: So that (...) as God, sits in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God, see 2 These. 2. 3, 4. And who is the king of the
Locusts, as singularly described, Apocal. 9. 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Yea, who is
the whore of Babylon, on whose forehead was a name written, Mystery, Babylon,
The Great, The Mother of Harlots, And Abominations of the Earth, see Apocal.
17. 5.

2. The Antichristian Religion was inspired and promoted by Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders; and with all deceiveableness of
unrighteousness, in them that perish, through divine effectual permission, see
2 These. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. Even as the Heathenish idolatry is devilish, and is
therefore in no wise to be communicated with, see Deuteronomy. 32. 17. 2 Chro. 11. 15.
compared with 1 Cor. 10. 20, 21.

3. There are the same, or the like sacred precepts, requiring to come out, and
separate from the Antichristian Religion, and to have no communion therewith,
lest uttermost peril do overtake, see Apocal. 18. 4. as are for the
relinquishing of Pagan Idolatry, see 2 Cor. 6. 17. Isaiah 52. 11.

4. The idolatries of the Papists, being compared with the idolatries of the
Heathen; they are every jot as gross and vile, if not more, as are the
Heathenish; yea, they are indeed so odious, as is not meet to be once named
amongst Saints, further then just cause requires. See by way of allusion, the
Psalmists expression. Psalm. 16. 4.

V. Magistrates in new Testament times, ought to hold course against sinful
evil, in any kind committed, as well as they did in old Testament times, see
Romans 13. 3, 4. To this end, let it be well weighed (and application be made
accordingly) what is asserted by the Commissioners of the General Assembly, in
the Testimony against Toleration, page 6, 7. in these words, For it cannot be
shown, that any part of that power, which Magistrates had under the old
Testament, is repealed under the new: Neither can any convincing Reason be
brought, why it should be of narrower extent now, nor then. May it not seem
hence, That the Estates, and Ministers, and Elders of Scotland are of one
mind, That Popish wives ought to be separated, and their children ought to be
removed from patrimonial inheriting in a Christian reformed Nation?

VI. And who knows, but that as the Question agitated, and resolved in King
Henry the eighth his case, touching the unlawfulness of his incestuous marriage
with Queen Katherine, portending extreme prejudice to the Kingdom, in such
spurious succession, as might be by the Lady Mary; as appears in the History
above cited, Acts and Mon. Tom. 2. p. 326, 327, etc. (and as indeed most
woefully ensued afterward in the Marian days) yet tended through divine
providence, unto a making way for true Reformed Religion, in some degree, by
his marrying with Anne Bullen, mother to Queen Elizabeth. So it may please God,
that the Question represented, touching the marriages of Protestants with
Papists, and touching their children, if it shall be duly discussed, it may
become remarkably occasional unto a safe and wel-grounded establishment of
Peace, with Holiness, even throughout England, Ireland, and Scotland too. The
premises being rightly observed, according to the Question, as it has been
stated and grounded, seeming to be for the affirmative.

Epilogue.
NOw then, forasmuch as the Question has been fairly, plainly, submisly, and
Christianly represented to the General Assembly, conveening to discuss and
determine arising Questions that are of notable and high concernment: Their
grave wisdoms are once again beseeched to confider of it, To speak their minds
to take advice, and give counsel. They shall have joy by the Answer of their
mouths, soundly and impartially uttered; And a word spoken in its season how
good is it! And let the Lord (whose the preparations of the heart, and answer
of the tongue are, Prove. 16. 1.) be graciously present, and propitious in
giving understanding in all things.

Amen, Amen.
A Postscript.
To the most able and Religiously affectionate Commissioners of the General
Assembly of the Kirk of Scotland, Tending to Pacification betwixt the two
Nations, concerning the present State proceedings. Mercy unto you, and Peace,
and Love, and Truth be multiplied from the King of Saints, and Prince of
Salvation; who works all things after the counsel of his own Will, and does
all things well, expecting that Wisdom be justified of her children.
REverend Sirs, behold now, the proposer of this Question has taken upon him
to interrogate your General Assembly a word in the cause of God, and his
people, even as cause has seemed to require; knowing well how much it
behooves, and becomes all those that make mention of the Lord, not to keep
silence in the day of Jacobs trouble; if a necessary word seasonably spoken,
may become any way instrumental, unto the breaking forth of light in these days
of darkness and gloominess; days of clouds, and thick darkness: And seeing God
does not altogether hide from seeing eyes, and hearing ears, and understanding
hearts, what he is about to do: The wonderful and unwonted daily occurrences,
do seemingly declare, That the Lord of hosts is doing his work, his strange
work; and bringing to pass his act, his strange act of removing the Diadem, and
taking off the Crown, overturning, overturning, overturning it, that it may be
no more, in as much as the horrid and grievous sin of Tyranny has found out
the guilty, capital Delinquents; to allude to that which is prophetically
denounced, see Ezekiel. 21. 25, 26, 27. God thus thundering and speaking as it
were from Heaven; who can but tremblingly speak? If children should hold their
peace, the stones would immediately cry out?

Hence the said proposer has taken upon him also, to propound a few words unto
your learned and solid wisdoms, who are the choice and eminent Commissioners of
your General Assembly, and to pray you of your gentleness, to hear with
patience, some advertisement, for the stirring you up to contribute your best
assistance in this perplexed, conjuncture of Affairs in our three Nations, in
helping the Lord against his opposites.

Right worthy Sirs, It manifestly appears by the return of the hearty thanks
of the Estates of your Parliament, for your Testimony against Toleration; and
likewise their concurrence with it; that ye have singular interest in the
Estates of Parliament. May it please you therefore, to improve your interest,
by suggesting and persuading them (that whereas this your Parliament was
extraordinarily summoned, and the form and frame, or materials in great part,
regulated by such of the Estates and Souldieries, who sought the real welfare
of your Church and Nation, in the extreme exigencies thereof, without the
command or direction of any legal Monarch, to give order thereabouts, and as
indeed your case seemed absolutely to require) they would now deeply ponder,
and bethink themselves of the best expedient for the settlement of Truth and
Peace, as may tend to the lengthening of your tranquillity, in the liberty of
true Religion, and also Ecclesiastical and Civil Government, for the
suppressing of Popery, Prelacy,. Heresy, Schism, and Profaneness; which
otherwise will infest your Nation, as well as others, whether neighbors, or
more remote. If ye) as Mordecai sent Queen Esther word) do altogether hold your
peace at this time, Deliverance and Enlargement may come some otherway, but ye
may not expect the comfort thereof. And who knows, whether your favor in the
eyes of the Estates, be not for such a time as this? Now howbeit, the
generality of the Reformed Christian World, studious of Zions peace, are not
ignorant of your abundant and excellent sufficiencies, in the managing of the
weighty concernments of your own Country: Yet your humble advertiser,
inquisitive, and solicitous of your entire, faithful deportment, presumes it
will not be vexatious unto you, to be put in remembrance of such truth, as ye
well know, and are established in: Which remembered, and made use of, may become
serviceable in this time of need. Be pleased therefore, to take notice and
observe these few hints.

Government being a goodly and honorable Ordinance of God, instituted for the
Weal of all Nations, and humane Societies, in the latitude of the fifth
Commandment, and first of the second Table of the Decalogue; yet the
constituting, and exercising of it for its kind, whether supreme or
subordinate, seems in the Scripture language to be an humane Ordinance or
Creature, even as right reason may dictate, and sway any society, to choose and
comply withal, according as divine providence, and effectual ordering, and
permission, may be discerned; when the state and condition of occurrences
requires a new moulding and fashioning, as sometimes it does, see 1 Pet. 2.
13, 14. compared with 2 Samuel 5. 1, 2, 3. 1 Kings 12. 1, 15, 20, 24. Hushai his
speech (who was a great Counselor of State) seems to be a reasonable and
just political Maxim; viz. Whom the Lord, and his people, and all the men of
Israel choose (to be supreme) his will I be, and with him will I abide, see 2 Samuel 16. 18. And to say nothing what humane writings tell us, touching
political Government in its kinds or species; as likewise, touching their
rules given in the main of them practicable in any kind of lawful policy;
whether it be Monarchical, Aristocratical, Democratical, or mixed of these. Nor
yet to say nothing of Church Government, by Presbyteries and Synods, in any
Commonwealth, as being directed unto, in the Word of God; and is therefore
unchangeable (de jure) in the substantials of it, in all ages and times of the
Church. That which is to be remembered and taken notice of, is touching
Political Government of Commonwealths; which according to the divine story in
Scripture, written for our learning, Romans 15. 4. has been variously
changeable, in various ages and periods of times. viz. From Adam to Moses, it
was in one kind, even by Patriarks; from Moses to Samuel, it was in other
kinds, even by Moses, Joshua, Elders, Heads of Tribes, and Judges; from
Samuel, until the Captivities of Israel and Judah, it was again in other
kinds, even by Kings, variously promoted unto the Government by Gods design,
viz. Either elected by the people, or by descent approved amongst the people,
or by conquests; from the return of the Jewish captivity, until new Testament
times, it was yet in other kinds, even by Princes, Governors, Captains, or
Roman Deputies; and the same judicial, penal Laws, of divine institution and
enacting, did equally and respectively serve in one kind of Government, as
well as another; for the preservation of life, livelihood, and liberty, in a
due way of administration. So that such passages of Scripture, well observed
and remembered, it may seem, That our Lord Christ is no more a friend to
Monarchical Government, then to Aristocratical, or Democratical, or mixed of any
of these. Moreover, let it also be remembered, That after the return from the
captivity, when preceding Monarchy had ceased (and yet Jacobs Prophetical
prediction failed not, Genesis 49. 10.) and the Government was changed through
divine dispensation of times and seasons which the Father has put in his own
power; yet such after- Government, did flourish and prosper greatly: And
although the external pomp and splendour of the Commonwealth was not in all
things so illustrious, as formerly at some times; by how much a deficiency was
of some special means and accommodations, as had been for the structure of
Solomon's Temple, and magnificent Kingly Palaces, etc. Yet the latter condition,
both of the Temple re-edified, and Commonwealths posture, wanted not
altogether their glory and encouragements; yea, and in that which was most
considerable, even spiritual dignity, and welfare; it had the preference and
preeminence, see Hag. 2. 7, 8, 9. True it is, when strange and sudden changes
do happen in the state of Nations; it is no great marvel, if men's spirits be
much moved, and greatly troubled. If the good and grave Prophet Samuel, did
mourn for King Saul in such sort, as he did (and yet God himself did therefore
reprove him, see 1 Samuel 16. 1.) yea, when he was rejected from being King, for
his disobeying God, and governing the people unworthily: It is the less to be
wondered at, if the Scots, after a succession of 107 Kings, a total eclipse
ensuing, or like to ensue, should be exceedingly moved in their minds. But
however it may be, may not the same reproof and complaint be applied to them,
as was to Samuel for his mourning for Saul? when now a door of hope, as it were
in the valley of Achor, is opened for the taking away of the offender and
troubler of Israel, for the better fruition of just freedom. Sirs, ye are not
ignorant what pressures and oppressions have been on your Nation, from sundry
tyrannical persons, from generation to generation, whatever garnishing is now
adays of pretended, glorious, Kingly remembrances among you. But for brevity
sake, as the concernments have been latest, and therefore more sensibly
affecting, mention shall be only made of King James, and King Charles his son,
principled by his Father, treading in his steps, and in some things, doing
worse then all that were before him, as was said of King Ahab, see 1 Kings 16.
30, etc. It seems therefore, it is now high time for you to call to
remembrance those former days, in which ye endured a great fight of
afflictions. First through King James his tyrannical oppressions, who was the
notorious Covenant breaker, as your frequent sighing and groaning complaints,
both in publiks and private, have spoken in the ears of the Lord, and of his
people; and he who did rend in sunder the Kirk of Scotland, as in his nonage,
in a sullen and peevish fume, he rent of his Hanks head; even as his Tutor G.
Buckanan on that occasion, and thoroughly acquainted with his untoward
disposition, sagaciously presaged. So will thou rend the Kirk of Scotland. The
precious names of Master Andrew Melvin, Master David Chalderwood, Mr. John
Sharp, and many, many other glorious Confessors; together with the infamous
Articles enacted at the pretended Assembly at Perth, 1618. do give full and
pregnant evidence hereunto: Besides, the havoc made of the Ministry of many,
many hundred Worthies of the Lord in England. Secondly, through King Charles his
oppressing and vexing tyranny, who fiercely assayed at the time of his
Coronation in Edinburg, 1633. the introducing of spiritually poisonous means,
for prevailing of Hierarchy, and superstitious Conformity, not so fully taking
place there, as in England; howbeit, he was at that time repulsed therein; the
Parliament at that time suffering aborsion. But his expectation being
disappointed, and many Common Prayer Books, and other English superstitious
utensils drowned, and himself in greater danger of drowning also; he returned
into England full of rage and fury, posting with great have, even in four hours
space from Berwick to Newcastle, which is fifty long miles; where as soon as he
came, his breathing himself was, in breathing out in a cursing way, threatening,
and persecution, to the true religious Ministry; not only not conforming to
Hierarchy, but conforming also, if any whit zealous Preachers, both in England
and Scotland; as some of Newcastle being present, did with grief of heart,
report unto their friends. Ever after which time, he either by open hostility,
or by subtle undermining imposture pursued that his malicious design (as many
woeful instances might be mentioned, if need required) until when, there was no
remedy, the sword of justice drawn out in England for his blood-gueltiness,
gave a stop to the swift and violent torrent of blood, issuing from many many
thousands of English, Irish, and Scots, which had cried in the ears of the Lord
of hosts for vengeance. And O that your remembering hereof, may be more and more
effectual unto you, for your hearing the rod, and who has appointed it for
giving instruction; if probably, ye may escape the danger of a giantly
generation; and if after such threatening storms, ye may safely arrive in the
Harbor of wel-grounded Peace. To this end, observing the Lords proceedings,
alluded unto Ezekiel 21. 25, 26. above mentioned, compared with Mal. 2. 12. Ye may
do well to serve Gods providence in the use of means, in becoming followers of
our English Parliament, and in walking so, as ye have them for an ensample, who
have also had the united Netherlands, in casting of the Spanish tyrannical
yoke, for their example in obtaining freedom: A course approved and justified
throughout all the Reformed Churches in Europe, contributed unto from the
first, all along by the English, to this day in a special manner. And as
touching the sound minds of the Orthodox Theologues, expressing their sense of
Scripture, according to Scripture: It is presumed, that ye do certainly like
well what venerable Master Knox, and others heretofore, and of late of your own
Country, have suggested and published, touching the lawful warrantableness of
present necessary undertakings; besides, what foreign Professors of Divlnity
have written, and commended to the Christian world. Let the judgment of
judicious and faithful D. Paraeus, in stead of many, suffice for instance, who
was a man of God, highly reverenced and accepted in the Reformed Churches of
Christ, and was evidenced, as otherwise by his learned and pious Commentaries;
so by his Letters, and advice, inserted in the Acts of the Synod of Dort, 1618.
touching the five controverted Articles, debated and determined there; however,
his most approved and learned Exposition on the Epist. to Romans suffered
Martyrdom in England, being burnt at London, and elsewhere, by the tyrannical
persecution of King James, for its opposing tyranny. This worthy man in his way
of resolving doubts on Romans 13. touching civil Anthority, in a second
Proposition there, has five Reasons; the last whereof in special, from sacred
examples and others, speaks fully in vindication of our matter in hand, whether
the Reader is referred to see further.

Object. Buy whereas it is vehemently objected by your Nations Commissioners,
in their Papers, and otherwise represented to our Parliament; and likewise it
is suggested by your Correspondents of London Province, in a little Pamphlet
styled, A Vindication of the Ministers of the Gospel, in, and about London,
subscribed with diverse names, as if they had promoted the bringing of the King
to justice, (do they not blush in so speaking?) The purport whereof is, As if
an unlawful and unjust course was used for the doing of justice, and judgment
on the King (notwithstanding all the blood guiltiness, which by you and them,
was charged on him, and most substantially by witnesses evidenced, for the more
complete satisfaction of his Judges; which proof also, had been publicly
managed, had he pleased to answer to the Charge.) And as if thereby likewise
there were a notorious breach of the Solemn League and Covenant. Will ye be
pleased to weigh and consider, what is offered to your view in the short
ensuing Answer, tending to satisfaction and resolution.

Answ. 1. Be it known unto the Objecters, whether Scots, or English, that at
least some of the prime promoters, endevorers, and contributers unto the doing
of justice and judgment on the capital Delinquent, and Delinquents; are persons
truly fearing God, exercising themselves, to have always consciences void of
offense, toward God and men; partaking in their measure, of all the properties
and marks of true Church members, asserted in Psalm. 15. And who have not
forgotten God, nor dealt falsely in his Covenant; so that whatever comes on
them, they will not, they may not suffer their integrity to be taken from them.

2. Let all men know whoever they are, That Ministers of the Gospel, and people
professing the Gospel, fearing God, have not been wont to esteem it, nor yet do
think it any disparagement at all, to be zealous with a perfect zeal, against
the crying sin of blood-guiltiness. Does not the Moral Law expressly prohibit
murder? And does not the Judicial Law expressly direct unto the satisfactory
expiation thereof, by putting to death the blood-guilty? And is not Gods
controversy with a Land, defiled with blood, (...) judgment be executed?
Blood-guilty King Saul left unto himself, and doing execution on himself, 1 Samuel 31. 4. Had he been alive when inquisition was made for blood, by occasion
of a three years famine; he ought to have been put to death, as well as those
of his bloody house were, because of his sinister zeal in slaying his servile
subjects the Gibconites, see 2 Samuel 21. 1, 2, 6. David for his
blood-guiltiness, in the exposing Uriah to the sword of the Ammonites, deserved
death; his own mouth conscientiously passing sentence: however, the One
absolute Lawgiver, who might do what he pleased, according to the full
Sovereignty of his own Will, exchanged his death for his childs at that time,
see 2 Samuel 12. 5, 12, 13. All this the Objectors do know well enough, howbeit,
they are someway transported to elude herein. Non tutum est ludere sacris.
Cavete.

3. It is taken for granted, That the contrivers, urgers, and takers of the
Solemn League and Covenant, did mean, endevor, and act, according to the sacred
conditions of an Oath, prescribed in Jerem. 4 2. Thou shall swear, The Lord
lives in Truth, in Judgment, and in Righteousness. If otherwise, it is a
taking of Gods Name in vain. An Oath may not be [vinculum iniquitatis] an
obligation to sin. This plea the defendants have against the plaintiffs.

4. In the preamble unto the taking of it, it is expressed, That the end of the
Covenant (as a last refuge) was the preservation of the takers of it, and their
Religion from utter ruin and destruction. So that the six particular Articles
of it, were intended and pretended to have a tendency to such an end, and not
otherwise. Now such has been the end, and hereunto have served the means of
the defendants in this case. Let the adversaries judge, if otherwise apparent.

5. In the Parliaments Order of September. 25. 1643. about the taking of it. It
is required, That the Ministers who were appointed to tender it, should read
it, and then explain it, and then persuade to the taking of it. This Order
seems to imply, not only a necessity of the explaining of it, but also a
requisitness in so taking of it, as explained in its just sense, and latitude,
and end, and not otherwise And this also is the plea of the Covenanters,
honestly and uprightly disposed; as all must needs acknowledge.

6. Whereas the title prefixed unto the Covenant, is, A Solemn League and
Covenant, for Reformation and defense of Religion, the honor and happiness of
the King, and the Peace, and Safety of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
and Ireland. The explanation must needs be, That such Reformation and defense,
ought to be prosecuted, in lawful and just ways, and means, for the
accomplishment thereof, and not otherwise. And in this sense, no doubt the
faithful Covenanters have taken it.

7. It must needs be understood rationally, That the course for the due
accomplishing of what is in the title, or more full expression of the six
Articles of it, ought to have their mutual consistency, without any prejudice
to any of the particulars; whether they be absolute, or conditional only;
whether they be primary, or subservient only. Our Lord Christ's vindicating of
his Disciples, touching the keeping of the Sabbath, against the calumnies and
exceptions of the Pharisees, see Matthew. 12. 1, 2, 9. may vindicate the objected
against, in the case in hand.

8. Touching the endevor Covenanted in the first and second Articles, it is
charitably hoped, That all the takers of it, have complied therein, more or
less, according to their calling, capacity, and opportunity thereunto. Every
one stands or falls to his own master; howbeit, it is most probably
conjectured, That such Parliamenteers, and their adherents, who voted against
the Concessions of the King, in the treaty at Newport, in reference to Religion
and Covenant, as no just ground and foundation for a good Peace; argued thereby
much faithfulness to the Covenant. Ye your selves acknowledge, Testim. against
Tol. page 12, That those Concessions, if acquiesced in, were dangerous, and
destructive, both to Religion and Covenant.

9. The third Article of the Covenant, in the first branch of it, touching,
Endevor mutually to preserve the Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments, and
Liberties of the Kingdoms, must be understood of known and just Rights, and
Privileges, and Liberties; otherwise, there must needs be a transgression of
the Rules prescribed above mentioned, see Iere. 4. 2. Answ. 3.

10. Touching the second branch of the third Article, viz. To defend and
preserve the Kings person, and authority, in the preservation, and defense of
the true Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms; it is to be taken notice of,
That this branch is propounded and taken conditionally, and with limitation,
viz. With respects unto the ends specified. Supreme or subordinate Authority is
(custos utriusque tabutae) the Keeper of both Tables. Now as the Governors do
act answerably to the just nature of their Offices, they ought to be honorably
assisted and defended; but if they shall act contrarily, even tyrannically,
then it may, and ought, be said, and done, unto them (as just means, and
opportunity do serve thereunto) as Iehu said to Ioram, see 2 Kings 9. 22. 24.
What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel, and her witchcrafts
are so many? And Jehu drew a bow, with his full strength, and smote Jchoram
between his arms and the arrow went out at his heart, and he sunk down in his
chair.

11. Whether the fourth Article of the Covenant, has not been endeavored by our
Covenanting Parliament, and their adherents, for discovering Incendiaries,
Malignants, and evil Instruments, whoever they have been, for the hindering
Reformation of Religion, etc. contrary to the League and Covenant, and for the
bringing them to public trial, and to receive condign punishment, as the
degree of the offense deserves. Let the lookers on, yea, and your own
consciences judge.

12. Whether the fifth and sixth Articles of the Covenant, are not likest to be
fulfilled, if ye shall do and approve, as our Parliament has done, and does:
Let the Reader understand.

13. Lastly, Let the Apostolical retorsion be reverently observed, and made use
of, viz. see Romans 2. 13. Thou that make thy boast of the Law, through
breaking of the Law, dishonorest thou God? And likewise, the expostulation and
conviction, used by Samuel against King Saul; who boasted of his performing
Gods Commandment, in bringing the Delinquent Amalekites to condign punishment,
when yet he had spared King Agag alive; so as he himself was necessitated to
put him to death. O that that the mouths of unworthy complainants against
miscensured Covenant breakers, who yet have not deit falsely in the Covenant,
however calumniated, might hereby be stopped; and whereas in truth, such bitter
complainants themselves, taking the Covenant in their mouths, are deep in the
breach of it, etc.

The premises duly weighed and considered, your faithful Remembrancer
(observing your worthy and effectual Admonition, in your Seasonable Testimony
against Toleration, to the secluded Members of Parliament, page 12 13. And he
taking noticae, how gracious ye are, not only in the eyes of your Estates, and
Ministers; but also in the eyes of very many in our Land) takes encouragement
and confidence, to stir you up, to exhort all those, in whose hearts ye are
ingratiated, both in Scotland and England, to repent of miscarriage in any
kind, and degree, hitherto, and to set and prepare their hearts, fully to seek
God, if yet every thing that does offend, may be taken away; and that so the
grand work of Reformation, both in Doctrine and Discipline, may be no longer
obstructed, but that a great door and effectual may be opened, there being so
many adversaries.

This is moved the rather, because friends do at least a little suspect; but
enemies do strongly charge, the sometimes subscribing and conforming
Hierarchical Ministers, in both Nations, in too great a generality of them,
that whatsoever pretense may seem to be of their being Covenanters; as if they
hankered still after Egypts garlic and flesh pots, under the deceiving and
deluding notion of moderate Episcopacy: Since there is such a tumultuous stir,
because the Kings destructive Concessions were not accepted, nor he spared;
whose expressions sounded to the last breath, Episcopacy, Episcopacy.

But to draw to a conclusion, Give your zealous Remembrancor leave, to
represent in a word unto your affectionate, compassionate bowels of love to the
brotherhood. What if your selves and brethren in Scotland, and by your advice,
the Ministers of London Province (together with others in some Counties of this
Nation, ambitious to tread in your and their steps) shall set all your hearts
and hands, more and more, to understand and pursue, an holy and just way of
brotherly peace, to be walked in, with those godly brethren that are otherwise
minded, then your selves, in some lesser points of the Discipline, till God
shall further reveal to them, whilst you that are perfect, do mind the same
thing, and do endevor to walk by the same rule of Church Government, held forth
in Scotland, and other Reformed Churches, and in our own Church now also?
Behold how good, and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell together in
unity, see Psalm. 133. 1.

Beloved Brethren, ye cannot be ignorant, That the Canaanite, and the
Perizzite, even the Antichristian Papists, Prelatical Royalists, Malignant
Hyppocrites, Blasphemous Heretics, Pernicious Sectaries, and Profane
Atheists, are in these Lands, observing and making advantage of the strife
betwixt holy Brethren; to harden themselves in sinful folly against Gods ways,
and to consult and take crafty counsel against his people, his hidden ones in
the Land, and to cut them off from being a people, that their name may be no
more in remembrance. O that in this case, the children of faithful Abraham,
would say as he did to his nephew Lot! We are Brethren; Let there be no strife
between us nor between our Pastors. Our Lord Jesus Christ, the head of his
Church, and their pattern; when he was in the days of his flesh, did suffer
long and much those his Disciples that followed him in the regeneration;
albeit, he did not indulge them in their infirmities, but reproved them sharply
on occasion, for their dullness in understanding, and for their perverseness,
folly, and slowness of heart in believing; yet notwithstanding, he did not
therefore reject them, but exercised wonderful patience toward them,
instructing them with meekness, and all long-suffering, and doctrine: Yea, and
he tells them, he gave them example, that they should do as he did.

My good Brethren of England and Scotland, do not count it grievous to be
called on to remember your guides, who have spoken to you the Word of God, even
those good old Non-Conformists to Hierarchy and Superstition, who ruled with
God, and were faithful with the Saints, when Prelacy and the generality of the
reputed Clergy compassed God with deceit, if ye may follow their faith; and
being compassed about with so great a cloud of witnesses, ye may follow peace
with holiness; without which, no man shall see the Lord. I shall produce for
instance, two witnesses only, whom for their honors sake, I do make mention
of, viz. Mr. Arthur Hildersam of England, and Mr. Alexander Henderson of
Scotland, both of them of blessed memory. The one, namely Mr. Alexander
Henderson of your own Nation, whose praise in the Gospel, has been so great in
the Churches abroad, and whose love so abounded at home, in all knowledge, and
in all judgment, in the worst of times with you; and in special, his most
prudent and unwearied acting in the Assembly of Divines at Westminster, in
England, in a time of need, till preproperous death put a period to his days: I
refer the reflecting of thoughts on him, to your selves, who abundantly knew
the proof of him, with what natural love he served you in the Gospel. He was a
burning and a shining light to walk by. Be ye followers of him, as he followed
Christ, in walking in love. The other, namely Mr. Arthur Hildersam, of our
English Nation; of him I choose to speak in Mr. John Cotton of Boston his
expression, in giving testimony, of him; for his singular worth, see Epist.
prefixed to Lect. on John 4. He was like one of the chief of David's Worthies;
not amongst the thirty, but amongst the first three. This blessed man of God,
as otherwise, and otherwhere, so in special in his Lect. 98. on John 4. August
27. 1611. handles at large, and very effectually, (not with enticing words of
man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit, and of power) the useful
lesson for Gods people, viz. Not to reject or despise any child of God,
because of weaknesses, whether the infirmities be error of judgment,
frowardness, pride, unthankfulness, slips in conversation, etc. Where he
directs likewise, unto the duties that are owing to them; and that there
ought not to be a judging for difference in judgment in Church Controversies,
nor an estranging in affection, nor a neglecting means of reclaiming, etc. and
there prescribing also requisite remedies in this case, Vid. ibid. O therefore,
that such stirring, useful inferences, from heavenly doctrine (by an
Interpreter, one of a thousand) might cause our hearts to burn within us, and
sway us to vow unto the mighty God of Jacob, not to enter into the Tabernacle
of our house, nor go up unto our beds, nor give sleep unto our eyes, nor
slumber to our eyelids, until such time as some blessed expedient may be
found, and observed, for establishing truth and peace amongst Brethren.

Now the Lord of peace himself, give England and Scotland peace always, by all
means. Grace be with you all,

Amen.
Matthew. 5. 9. Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the
children of God.
AN APPENDIX Humbly offered and submitted to the most faithful, prudent, and
godly-zealous Patriots of the Honorable House of COMMONS, And of the English
Nation, Tending to vindicate Some late actings and proceedings of the High
Court of PARLIAMENT, and their puissant Army, for the promoting of blessed
Justice and lawful Liberty.

As also the alteration of set days of Humiliation, and appointing of
occasional.

In certain short exemplary Observations, and present parallel applicatory
Inferences grounded on some select Texts of Scripture.

1 Samuel 14. 36, 38, 39, 40, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.

1 Samuel 15. 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 20, 21, 24, 32, 33.

2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14.

Zech. 7. 3, 5. and 8. 19.

Romans 25. 4. For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have
hope. Psalm. 119. 133. Order my steps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have
dominion over me.
1 Samuel 14. 36, 38, 39, 40, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48.
Observation, I. 1. Parallel inference. KIng Saul had a due Sovereign Power, and
Supreme Authority over the Israelites, yea, over the chief of them that were of
the Army or Soldiery, and accordingly did exercise the same, even as cause and
occasion required, see Verse. 36, 38. THe Parliament of England has a due
Sovereign Power, and Supreme Authority over the Nation, yea, over the chief
Officers of their army, and accordingly does exercise the same, in giving the
Army their Commission, and Direction, etc. This is taken for granted, as being
many ways sufficiently cleared, see Master Prynnes Soverain Power of
Parliaments. II. The people of Israel, yea, the chief of the Soldiery
acknowledged King Saul's due soveveraignty over them, and loyally submitted
thereunto, as indeed it became them so to do, see Verse. 36, 40. They said (once
and again) unto Saul, Do whatsoever seems good unto thee. 2. The People of
the English Nation, yea, even the chief of the Army, and Counsel of War, do
acknowledge the due Sovereignty of the Parliament; and also do submit thereunto,
as does become them, and as indeed they ought to do. Thus much may appear to
any ingenuous lookers on, both by the Armies Declarations, and also by their
answerable conformity, in the variety of incident occasions. III. It is to be
understood, that the dueness of Saul's Sovereign power, and the dueness of the
submission of the people and 3. The due Sovereign power of the Parliament, and
the due submission of the people, or chief of the Army, have their Consistency
in the Rules and Directions contained chief of the Army was only In the Lord
and according to the Oath of God, and his direction, In giving to Caesar, the
things that are Caesar's; and to God, the things that are Gods, see V. 45.
Eccles. 8. 2. Matthew. 22. 21. in the sacred Scriptures, under this limitation,
According to the Oath of God, and In the Lord. Note. Lex inferioris non
praejudicat, nec derogat legi superioris: that is, The Law of the inferior is
not prejudicial to, neither diminishes any thing from the Law of the Superior.
Note. Reforming, and Reformed Christians do not, they dare not pretend or claim
otherwise. Since they have learned to search the Scriptures, and to prove all
things, and to observe and hold fast only that which is good, see John 5. 39.
1 These. 5. 21. Saul's guard did justly refuse to obey his unlawful command, see
1 Samuel 22. 17. IV. King Saul transgressed very hainously and odiously, in his
devoting and sentencing his son Jonathan, most unwarrantably and unjustly to
capital punishment, even to be put to death. Since such sentence tended not
only to the extreme damage, and prejudice of his son Jonathan, and subjects,
but also the main violation of Gods Law, see Verse. 39. 43, 44, 45. 4. The
majority of the Sovereign Parliament in those their Votes, asserting the Kings
last Concessions, to be a ground and foundation of a good safe peace; swerved
both highly and hainously. Since such his Concessions, if rested in, were
evidently dangerous and destructive, as being contrary to the Scripture, and to
the Solemn Covenant; yea, and thus deemed, not only by the Scots, as has been
formerly declared, but also by a great part of prudent, and pious Members of
the Parliament, and the generality of the truly Religious in the whole Nation.
V. The people or chief 5. Some of the people of chief of Saul's Army, having
means and opportunity thereunto (other meet means being at that time and on
that occasion wanting) did worthily hinder, and restrain Saul on very just
grounds (though not altogether regularly) from such procedure against Jonathan,
in his resolved way of acting unwarrantably, what ever might have been alleged
by him against the people speciously, or pretended in case of Sovereign
Perogative or Privilege, see Verse 45. This course held by Azariah the Priest,
and eighty Priests, (being valiant men) in their forceable withstanding of King
Uzziah, in a case of emergent exigency, was approved, see 2 Chronicles. 26. 16, 17,
18. of the Parliament Army, having probable power and opportunity thereunto
(other punctual regular means, being then wanting on that occasion) did
prudently and worthily hinder and restrain some Parliament Members from entering
into the House in that juncture, when destructive overtures in agitation, were
in extreme danger of too great concurrence thereunto by the plurality of Votes,
had not such seasonable anticipation given a stop. Does not extreme necessity
disregard and pass by lesser Privileges, and subservient Rules, which
otherwise might deservedly claim a sacred inviolableness? Let the instance in
the Text, Ver. 45. be well weighed, besides what is cleared by, Christ himself,
Matthew. 12. 3, 4, 5, etc. Like as the Soldiers did well to cut off the Ropes of
the Boat, and let her fall off, when the Ship men (who were the supreme
Governors of the Ship) were about to flee out of the Ship, to the utter
endangering of the lives of all the Passengers, as the Apostle Paul did
confidently advertise, see Acts ^7. 30, 31, 32. So it may seem the chief of the
Parliament Soldiers did well to hinder, and restrain at present from entering
into the House, some of the Members (who had they been in the House were of
equal Authority Note. Events do usually make very clear and sure discoveries
and manifestations of the prudential and faithful manage of important expedient
undertakings; which in their present enterprisings, have seemed very dark to
some. As it may easily be discerned, by diligent observers of Heroical Actions,
and of the generally received principle, Salus populi suprema Lex. in Voting
with the rest) whereas, if they had not been so restrained, or secluded, it was
with most likely probability apprehended, that the majority might have swayed
by Votes, to the extreme prejudice, both of the Civil State, and Church
Affairs. VI. K. Saul having been justly hindered, and restrained in his
unworthy and pernicious design against Jonathan, even by the chief of the
Soldiers; He does notwithstanding, afterward apply himself to act as became
him according to his office, in the behalf of the Kingdom, and against the
enemies of the peace of it, see verse. 47, 48. And such his approved course,
tended very much to the vexing of the common enemies, and the delivery of
Israel out of the hands of spoilers, see verse. 47, 48. 6. May it not be
inferred hence, That such Members of the Parliament, as were restrained in that
nick of time, from the opportunity of acting unworthily then only; ought
notwithstanding to have applied themselves to have returned seasonably, and
gone on as formerly in the discharge of Parliamentary Authoritative power, and
weighty employment committed unto them by the Countries, and Corporations, for
which they were the Representatives? Verily had they so approved themselves (or
shall any yet do so in a due way) it might much have conduced to the public
good; to the peace of their own consciences, and obtaining the Spirit of Glory
to rest upon them.

1 Samuel 15. 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15, 20, 21, 24, 32, 33.
Observation. I. 1. Parallel inference. SAul in his reign over Israel (the
Israelites having earnestly desired a Kingly Government, see 1 Samuel 8. 19. And
having approved Saul's designment unto it, see 1 Samuel 10 ^4.) He in process of
time had a special Commission, and employment put upon him, even to execute
Justice on certain enemies, whose Ancestors had raised an unjust and unnatural
war against the Israelites about four hundred years before, see Verse. 2, 3.
compared with Exodus 17. 8. THe English Parliament (long, long desired, and
longed for; and now by the good hand of God providentially overruling, and it
happily continuing to sit unto this day) did in due time effectually and
seasonably engage it self unto a faithful endevor (as the cause of God, and his
people required) to restore the Nation to their Just Liberties, and to reform
Religion, which had been withheld and depraved by Tyranny and Antichristian
Hierarchy (as is to be seen in the English Histories of Civil and
Ecclesiastical Occurrences,) yea, and bring notorious Delinquents to Justice,
as the Parliament Remonstrances do testify. And blessed be the God of England,
who with such unspeakable, merciful goodness, has visited the languishing
Nation. II. Saul and the people, did in good part very vigorously pursue their
Commission, in engaging and fighting those Amalekitish enemies, who had been
such grand Delinquents against the Israelites: 2. The majority of the English
Parliament, for some time after their first convening, did act strenuously unto
the reforming of sundry grieoppressions, both in Commonwealth, and Church
Affairs, engaging themselves many ways thereunto; yet nevertheless, afterward
But yet notwithstanding they failed greatly in their not executing impartially,
according to the commission and trust assigned unto them; in that they spared
King Agag, and the best things, see Verse. 7, 8, 9. they failed greatly in
unvoting their votings against future addresses, when clear and evident
discoveries were of unsufferable, desperate tyranny; yea, and at last in voting
unworthy Concessions to be a just Foundation of safe Peace, which were indeed
most dangerous and destructive, tending to spare the capital Delinquents, and
such seeming best things, of a flourishing, vain condition, as in greatest
likelihood would in short time, have involved into the former deep gulf of
misery and ruin, and worse then before. III. Saul notwithstanding such his
rebellious miscarriage against God, yet he professes, and protests the
contrary; either justifying, or denying, or disguising, or exousing, or
extenuating his sinister prevarication; howbeit, he was again and again,
effectually convinced thereof by the Prophet Samuel, see Verse. 13, 14, 15, 20,
21, 24. 3. It is very much to be lamented and deplored, that many of the
Parliament Members after their votings for the Concessions as a Foundation of
good Peace; and after the remarkable Occurrences which have ensued thereupon,
even hitherto: they do yet notwithstanding justify, disguise, excuse, or
extenuate such their votings, whatever conviction is, or has been since that
time; yea, and do hitherto seem to be well pleased in their pretended whole
seclusion, which was only pro tempore. IV. When Saul the supreme Magistrate,
had bewrayed a very great degree of unfaithfulness in his sparing King Agag
from death; yet the uprightness, justice, and 4. When the Majority of the
Parliament failed in great degree, as has been hinted already; then the
faithfulness, justice, and zeal of the lesser number, remaining, and sitting in
Parliament (who yet were a full number of constituting zeal of Samuel the
Prophet, and Judge, (though of inferior Authority then Saul) is singularly
approved in his bringing King Agag to justice, see Verse. 32, 33. Members of an
undeniable Parliamentary power) is highly praiseworthy in their appointing an
high Court of Justice, for the due bringing of capital Delinquents to just
Trial and Sentence, for the executing of condign punishment upon them. V.
Notwithstanding that Agag was a King yet his Kingship did not privilege him to
be above Law, neither did his prerogative exempt him from legal proceeding
against him, see Verse. 32, 33. Joshua, Gideon, and Jehu, were approved in their
due executing of Delinquent Kings, see Rogers 53. Sermon. on Judges. 5. It is a
weak and unwarrantable plea for Kings (if their Might do not overcome Right)
that their Kingship takes them off from being subject to Law. Note. There is
one only, absolute, and independent Lawgiver, who is the King of Kings and
Lord of Lords, see Isai. 33. 22. Jam. 4. 12. 1 Timothy 6. 15. Note. All grant that
subjects may have the benefit of the Law against the King in case of Goods, and
Lands, by virtue of the legality of the eighth Commandment of the Decalogue.
And trials in such case have been very usual in England. Why not much more
therefore in the case of notorious bloodguiltiness, by virtue of the sixth
Commandment of the Decalogue? VI. Samuel did justice on King Agag being Judge of
Israel, to execute the sentence of God pronounced 6. The High Court of Justice
erected by the Parliament, have justly sentenced the great and heinous
Delinquents unto just punishment, against Amalek, which was neglected by Saul:
That it might be also a terror to other Kings, that they persecute not the
people of God, see Doctor Willet on 1 Samuel 15. 33. however such proceeding has
not been ordinarily (means having been wanting) used. That this course also may
be a terror to the greatest personages, that they may not oppress, nor raise
unjust and unatural war in the Nation.

2 Samuel 12. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14.
Observation. I. 1. Parallel Inference. DAvid the King of Israel having highly
and hainously transgressed in the matter of Uriah, the Hittite, see 1 Kings 15.
5. compared with 2 Samuel 11. 2. He was therefore, according to Gods direction,
to be convinced and reproved of such his capital sin by Nathan the Prophet, see
Verse. 1. 2, 7, 8, 9. KIngs in all ages and times (as well as others) falling by
occasion into scandalous and capital offenses; a faithful and impartial course
of conviction and reproof, ought to be held with them by meet persons, as just
opportunity may serve thereunto. The Law is given to Kings as well as to
others; and therefore they ought to know it, and be convinced by it, that their
hearts may not be lifted up, see Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19, 20. Hos. 5. 1. II. For the
better and more effectual convincing David, the King, of his odious sin of
oppression, adultery, and murder, God directed Nathan to take up a parable in
his mouth. Since in such way of expression, there was a special 2. It is Gods
will that such persons, whom it may more specially concern, do hold the most
effectual course, for the detecting and convincing gross offenders of the vile
and odious sins, they are tainted with; whether oppression, tyranny, adultery,
murder, etc. And in case of effectual course held, (and efficacious virtue, see
Ver. 1, 2, 3, 4. see also Jothams Parable in such case, Judge. 9. 7. Yea and our
Saviors most authoritative course therein, Mat. 21. 45. not prevailing;
whether by similitudes or otherwise) the Delinquents shall remain untractable,
and obstinate, they may certainly be left without excuse, see Hosea 12. 10.
III. King David who had more understanding then all his Teachers, see Psalm.
119. 99. And who was also a man singularly zealous, see Psalm. 119. 139. He
having now heard and observed a clear eviction in the case represented in the
parable of the implied Delinquent; he even as right reason guided, gave this
just sentence, That he was worthy to die, see Verse. 5. 3. Heinous capital
Transgressors, whoever they are, whether high or low; ought without any respect
of persons, to be adjudged by the Magistrate (sitting on the seat of Justice,
and bearing the Sword) to such corporal punishment, as the nature of the
offense calls for in its desert, whether death, or any other, see Romans 13. 4.
Note. There ought to be an unresistable force in Right Reason, to sway Judges
to act according to it, see Acts 4. 20. IV. The general and indefinite
expression in the parable uttered by Nathan, Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4. Moving David on
just ground, unto such his sentence, Verse. 5. is particularly applied by Nathan
to David himself, verse. 7. So as David saw it did belong unto himself, although
a King as well as to any other faulty in such kind, see verse. 13. 4. The Law
and Mind of God, touching the capital punishment of the polluting, and crying
sin of wilful murder, whosoever is the committer of it, yea, though he be a
blood-guilty King, may not be by the Magistrate looked upon as one to be
dispensed withal, see Genesis 9. 6. Numb. 35. 30, 33. Matthew. 26. 52. V. Gods
sparing David 5. The unsearchable ways of the from death, and yet appointing
the child to death, see verse. 13, 14. as it argued Gods absolute sovereignty,
and indepency in doing what he will, yea, touching his Laws; so it shows his
just severity against murder, see Ibid. 13, 14. one only absolute Lawgiver,
even the infinite, most wise, holy, and just God, ought to be admired and
adored, see Romans 11. 33, 34. But the people of God ought to walk, and act,
according to his revealed Will in his Word, see Deuter. 29. 29.

Zechar. 7. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and 8. 19.
Observation I. Parallel Inference. 1. IT was well understood by the people of
God, the Jews (unto whom one ly in the Old Testament times were committed the
Oracles and Ordinances of God, as their singular advantage, and preferment, see
Psalm. 147. 19, 20. Romans 3. 1, 2.) yea, even by those Jews, who lived in the
time of the Babylonish captivity, and newly after the return thence, that the
divine Ordinance of Religious and Solemn Humiliation in Fasting and Prayer, on
just cause and occasion thereunto, was very requisite; and IT has been well
understood by the Reformed Churches in Europe, and particularly by the people
of God in England, who heretofore lived under the spiritual Babylonish
captivity; that the sacred Ordinance of Religious Humiliation on just cause and
occasion, is very requisite in New Testament times, as well as it was of old,
even according to the New Testament doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles; and
accordingly they do exercise themselves therein. This may evidently appear to
any that observes the doctrine and practice of the Reformed Churches, and
particularly, and in a special, and effectual manner in the English Nation, even
unto this day; as the accordingly did exercise themselves therein, see Verse. 3.
5. Dan. 9. 3. Ezr. 8. 21. Nehe. 1. 4. Acts of Parliament, for Fasting, and
Prayer, in April 19. and May 17. do bear witness, 1649. II. The Jews of those
times also knew well what were the kinds and ways of such religious
Humiliation, in Fasting and Prayer, and answerably as the emergency of the
cause, and opportunity served thereunto, they exercised themselves. 2. The
people of God in England, do likewise by the patterns in Scripture, know well
the approved kinds and ways of religious Humiliation in Fasting and Prayer,
and answerably as any just occasion and opportunity requires, and serves,
they are wont to set themselves thereunto, viz. 1. Publicly, as public
Authorized Persons ordered, Ezra 8. 21. 1. Publicly, as Parliament and Rulers
do appoint and require. 2. Privately, as the Governors of Families saw it meet,
Esth. 4. 16. 2. Privately, as Families approve themselves in England, above
other Nations. 3. Secretly and alone, as any singular person saw fit, Dan. 9.
3. Nehe. 1. 4. 3. Secretly, as conscientious persons having ability and
opportunity, approve themselves to him that sees in secret. III. The Jews had
likewise the prudence to discern what were special causes and occasions, that
gave calling to such religious Humiliation. viz. Greater and more notorious
sins, and evils to be deprecated, and more choice, and affecting blessings to
be obtained, see Verse. 3. and the other Texes already quoted in Daniel, Ezra,
and Esther. 3. The Reformed Churches in their doctrine and practice of Fasting,
are wont also to insist prudentially on the occasions and causes noted in
Scripture, to be observed in these New Testament-times, as way is thereunto;
and particularly it is thus in England. Many yet alive may remember, how since
the time of Reformation in Queen Elizabeth's days, Religious Humiliations have
been observed on occasion of War, Famine, and Pestilence, invading more or
less. Since Note. The current stream of Orthodox Interpreters, comparing Verse.
3. 5. chap 8. 19. with Jere. 5. 2. and 41. do conceive, that the special
occasions of these four Fasts were. 1. The siege laid before Jerusalem, in the
tenth month. 2. The taking of Jerusalem in the fourth month. 3. The burning
of the Temple in the fifth month. 4. The murder of Gedaliah in the seventh
month. Now touching these conceits of the godly learned, The Observator
acknowledges that those occurrences were very sad, and might well cause deep
Humiliation to the Jews; yet observes, that there is not the least hint in any
Texts of Zechariah or Jeremiah, or elsewhere in Bible, to fasten such assertion
of the mentioned occasions, as the cause of such their anniversary monthly
Fasting. The slaughter of King Josias, and captivity, in the third year of
Jehoiakim, not long before, were most sad occurrences, and might justly also
(as they did) occasion great mourning, as well as these four in hand: So that
it is wished, that Interpreters would be cautious in their Expressions, and not
be too bold in their Breachings and Printings, in asserting and publishing for
current, that which the Scripture is wholly silent in. Who knows not, what
mischief has ensued by an easy receiving of Traditions? the sitting of the
present Parliament there has been very much occasional Fasting required, even
as floods of evils have invaded, viz. In the behalf of Ireland frequently; in
regard of unseasonable weather; in regard of pernicious Errors, and Heresies,
March 10. 1646 etc. Yea, the Parliament in their late Act for the Fast that was
on April 19. 1649. do acknowledge, They have learned from the Word of God; and
the example of his people in all ages; and likewise their own experience, the
singular advantage of due occasional Fasting. And albeit, for just cause they
have annulled the monthly Fast, yet at the same time they enacted a Fast in
the behalf of Irish Affairs, to be observed on May 17. 1649. next ensuing. And
blessed be God, that has hither, so ordered their hearts, and ways, for the
promoting of the true welfare not only of England, but Ireland also. As for
the Mourning and Fasting of the Jews, frequently in the time of seventy years
captivity, which was so grievous, every one that observes, may see there was
cause enough, see Lamentations, Psalm. 137. 1. IV. Howbeit, God might approve
and accept the Jews in their occasional Humiliation and Fasting, so far as the
exigencies of the seventy years captivity did call thereunto, and as sincerity
swayed in the manage thereof, unto just ends; yet nevertheless, he seems to
dislike and reprove the anniversariness, or monethliness of their four Fasts,
as not being commanded nor directed unto by him, see verse. 5. Since God required
one only anniversary Fasting and Humiliation, on the tenth day of the seventh
month, Levit. 23. 27. and it only peculiar to old Testament times: So that
these such their set, monthly, anniversary Fasts, seemed in point of set-time
to be a Will Worship, and humane Invention reproved in Scripture, see Isai. 29.
13. Col. 2. 22, 23. And even thus Interpreters do gloss, on 4. Howbeit, God may
have been pleased to accept a course of Fasting and Humiliation in the Reformed
Churches, and more specially in England, in some set times of months together,
and of late, for diverse years together, monthly in the behalf of Ireland; in
as much as much sincerity might be in the ends and manage thereof in great
part, whatever formality and undue carriage might creep in, etc. Yet
nevertheless, the set-time of months and years, may seem to have wanted good
ground. Orthodox Divines do condemn, as otherwise; so in a special manner in
point of set-time, The Lent Fast, albeit of great Antiquity, and of long use;
the Ember week Fasts pretended in imitation of these four monthly Fasts of
Jews, Friday Fasts, and Eves of Festivities, etc. which Reformed Churches have
therefore abrogated; and in these our Reforming times, are totally abrogated in
England, by Parliamentary Authority. The Scots to their high praise (above
other Churches) in the year 1560. the first year of their Universal
Reformation, abrogated all anniversary set-times for divine on Zech. 7. 5. The
Geneva Note on Text there, is, That as the Jews were diversely reproved, so that
such their Fasts (for the set-time of them) were invented by themselves.
Learned Junius and Tremellius Annot. Summa redargutionis est; Jejunia haec
(anniversaria) vobis non imperavit Deus. 1. The sum of the Reproof is, God did
not com mand you to observe such your (yearly month) Fasts. W. Pemble in his
Exposit. on Zechary, sets out at large such their Reproof for their set-time of
those Fasts, Chap. 7. 5. Unto me, even to me. Such interrogation has a
vehement denial, That (as otherwise failing was, so) the time was not com
manded by God. That which is pretended from these words of Calvin on Zech. 8.
19. -- Non dicemus haec jejunia temere aut perperam fuisse ab illis suscepta,
etc. We shall not say, That those their Fasts were rashly or vainly undertaken,
etc. If the scope and sense be heartily and ingenuously weighed, he pleads
not in approbation of the set anniversariness of four month Fasts, in point of
set, fixed, and unmovable times: but of their being duly affected in a mournful
deportment, expressed by Fasting, at the beginning of the captivity. It is well
known, that Calvin was no friend to superstitious set-times for will worship.
worship, save the Lords day, which is of divine Institution. See Re-examination
of Articles enacted at Perth. 1618. sundry strong Reasons against observing
set-times, etc. True it is, The pretense of the observing a monthly Fast in
England, only whilst the Irish troubles should remain, is more specious then
the superstitious course of Papists and Hierarchical Conformists (whose old
Leven is not hitherto wholly purged out) who set no such bounds; but yet the
pretense at best can be no other then what the Jews pretended for their set
Fasts, during the seventy years captivity, see Zech. 7. 3, 5. The Parliament
therefore approving, and requiring occasional Humiliation in Fasting and
Prayer, has done well to enact the annuling of that monthly Fast, and in a
prudential way to enact occasional Fasting, both in the behalf of Ireland, and
otherwise, as in their Religious and Conscientious Wisdoms do judge the meetest.
V. The Jews sometime after the first return of some of them from the captivity,
enquire what was meetest to be done in point of their set Humiliation, verse. 1,
2, 3. And a satisfying answer is given to them, verse. 4, 5. 5. Many godly
zealots returned from spiritual Babylonish captivity, having had scruples, and
made inquiries, touching late monthly Fasts (who yet have been conscientious
in observing occasional Fasts) have now good satisfaction by the late Act of
Parliament, annulling the monthly fasting, and yet enacting occasional
fasting, even as occasion requires. VI. The words of the Text in Zech. 8. 19.
prophesying or promising joy and gladness, etc. instead of monthly fasting, do
not infer an approbation of the four set monthly fast ing years after years;
Since such just reproof was thereunto, chap. 7. 5. But they seem to infer that
there should be a change of the state of future times, and that such as had
mourned unfeignedly in a godly manner, that they should be comforted, see Psalm.
126. 5, 6. 6. The people of God of the English Nation, having sown in tears
diverse months and years, walking mournfully before the Lord, and exercising
Humiliation in their measure, as cause and occasion has required, and are
still in such wise affected, shall find to their comfort, That their course
shall not be in vain in the Lord. The valley of Achor is given for a door of
hope.

FINIS.

