GODS DOINGS, AND MAN'S DUTY, Opened in a SERMON Preached before both Houses of
PARLIAMENT, the Lord Major and Aldermen of the City of LONDON, and the Assembly
of DIVINES; at the last Thanksgiving Day, April 2.

For the recovering of the West, and disbanding 5000 of the Kings Horse, etc.
1645.

Quadragesimus hic quintus mirabilis Annus
Ang. Hyb. Sco. requiem det Deus ut pariat. This fourty-fifth great year, of
wondrous worth,
Lord grant it may Great Brittain's peace bring forth.


By HUGH PETER'S Preacher of the Gospel.

Judge. 3. 31. So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord; but let them that love
him, be as the Sun when he goes forth in his might. And the Land had rest
forty years.

The second Edition, corrected by the Author.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for G. Calvert, at the sign of the black Spred-Eagle,
at the West end of Paul. 1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE Lords and Commons Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
I Profess that I never thought my self master of my own Trade, and therefore
never forward either to cast such a mite as this into your Public Treasury,
or to be in Print with the rest of my brethren: But since it was your pleasure
to make choice of me to bring in a Narrative of Gods bounty, as being an
eyewitness to many of his glorious works; I have obeyed, in this, and that. I
knew not what better to pitch upon then Gods doing, and your duty. He that
will not confess God has done much, (I fear) means to wave the duty; and who
so shall slight this duty, must look for that sad Curse of Anathema Maranatha:
And therefore I again commend it to you. They that have much given, and much
forgiven, will love much. The woman spent all that she had upon Physicians,
for the cure of her Bloody Issue, and nothing would heal, till she touched the
hem of his garment, who was the way contrived in Heaven, to bring over
Salvation to man: I do believe it has been thus far your Cure to this Bloody
Disease; and to enjoy a through Cure, I beseech you stoop again, and touch the
hem again: you cannot honor the Lord more then in loving his Son and
believing in him.

Bear with my rudeness; if I say you must be very hard put to it in your
Counsels, should you not live comfortably upon your experiences, and cheerfully
look all changes in the face for time to come? You have a greater stock by
you, then the greatest and richest Nation in the world could get and lay up for
themselves. The same God give you skill to improve it to his advantage, and the
good of this poor Kingdom, that begins to breathe again (through his blessing
upon your unexampled care and travel.) Methinks I see the Ages to come marking
your doors and dwellings as the habitations of their Deliverers. I wish that
never a soul of you may die at Nebo, but come to their enjoyments of Canaans
milk and honey. You seem to have before you two or three great mountains to go
over: and though I can contribute little to your encouragement, yet I will beg
your wonted patience for a few words.

First, since you are still buzzed in the ear with a desperate increase of
Error, give me leave to offer this Expedient by way of Quaere. The wound seems
to be in the Understanding, and the Cure must lie there: (Under favor) what if
some convenient place or places in the City were set apart two or three times
weekly, where godly learned men appointed by your selves, and the Leaders or
Heads of those Errors (as they are termed) might have leave to come, and there
in a brotherly way take and give satisfction? for as Conclaves have always
been dangerous, so these poor erring men cannot have the benefit to appear with
boldness; and reasonable souls may sooner certainly be taught with Reason and
Scripture, then with cudgels and blows. Tyrannus had a School; and Christ
disputed with the Doctors in their Synagogue.

Religio docenda est, non coercenda. Wollchius.


Religion is to be taught, not forced. This I am sure, Conviction should go
before Punishment. The Lord will not burn Sodom, till be see whether the
report be true. I pray consider Genesis 18. ^1.
it.

Secondly, for the present Government, in order to any man or men, if you keep
to the premises, the Lord himself will make a blessed conclusion.

Thirdly, for further Hostility; the Lord has owned you and your Army, and
made you formidable beyond what we conceive at home; my only fear has been
diseases in our bowels; which gave me that boldness to urge a near union
betwixt your selves and the City, which has since a double knot upon it by
your late full and satisfying Declaration, and your ordering the dissenters
about Churchmatters to bring in their several thoughts backed by the Word, that
so you may keep to that Clause in the Covenant which concerns England. Only be
courageous, and your work will be issued so, as your selves and we shall cry,
Grace, Josh. 1.
grace, etc.

For any other request unto you, I have but one: I most humbly beseech you,
spread that Gospel you own; and to that end do profess my grief not only
for the miserable, dark, and ignorant parts of the Kingdom; but that diverse
Orthodox, learned, faithful Ministers of the Gospel, with their precious
Flocks, cannot enjoy public places in the City, but their ^^ry gifts and
almost their persons, are stifled by being thrust into corners, which keep them
under the name of Schismatiques, whose souls have panted under your service in
these calamitous times; and their purses constantly opened, themselves hazarded
beyond many: a word from you, may enlarge them.

And for my self, I acknowledge here before God, Angels and men, the Characters
of your favor; protesting that your work has been so good and so sweet, that
I have found my wages wrapped up in my work, and a great addition by your
acceptance. I could even say as he did:

Si in vita prodesse possim, quid vis imperate; si in morte, vel occidite;
quicquid de me statuetis; hoc semper confitebor and profitebor semper, hanc
vestra humanitas mihi fecit, injuriam, quod vivam and moriar ingratus.

If my life may be profitable, command what you please: if my death, even kill
me; whatever you shall determine of me, this will I always confess and
profess, this injury your humanity has done me, that I shall live and dye
ungrateful.

I bless God heartily for a Parliament, yea, for this Parliament: and the
blessing of him that was in the bush, and kept it in the fire, be upon you and
yours for ever: And let all that love the God of Heaven, who is the God of
England, say

AMEN.
My Lords and Gentlemen, I am Yours most humbly devoted, Hugh Peter's.

To the Honorable, the Lord Major, the Aldermen, and the Common-Counsell of
this famous City of LONDON.
YOu were invited to what ensues by the Honorable Houses, and you invited them
to a portion suitable to that day; and I take leave to return you thanks for
their and your patience toward my self, in hearing what I now present, for
which I humbly crave favor of them and you for some inlargements, being then
pent into much narrowness in regard of the time, and the rather, because I
strove to suit your expressions of respect and love to them, who deserve so
much from your selves, and the Christian World. How I have been represented
unto you, and others, by printings or otherwise, shall not fill up this paper;
I must reserve to some other way, which shortly I shall do (God willing;) but
in the mean time and ever do profess my constant respect to and esteem of
this City, from your first compliance to the great Counsel of this Kingdom,
that I have left remembrances of you in foreign parts, and (without flattery) do
think this City one of the best pieces of ground in the World. I am sorry I
caused any unexpected smiles in my zeal for your further conjunction with the
Head and Heart of this Nation; If I commended you as a good portion, he did not
An Epist. to a Sermon.
well that thought, it ridiculous; nor do I think you too good a portion for
those I wooed you unto. You know me, and your wisdoms know how to make
allowance to my zeal: They have a strong appetite to quarrel, that are offended
at expedients presented against future quarrelling, My sighs to God for you are
these, That you may still move with faithfulness in your own Orb, That you
remember you and yours live in a Parliament, That you are made wealthy for
others, not your selves alone, That you would not make Opinions your Interest
which are changeable, but Godliness and Faithfulness, That you would rather
punish known sins, show mercy to the poor, a known duty, maintain Civil peace,
look to your City-priviledges rather then lose your selves in doubtful
questions, I must remember you that I have heard many of you wish for such a
Parliament and such an Army: Own your own desires, and be assured your constant
concurrence with our great Counsel, will not only be your present safety, but
strength to posterity. Believe it, a now suspected party in the Kingdom, have
no further design then your and the Liberty of the Nation from Bondage; who
deserve your love, not your displeasure. The God of all grace be with your
spirits, and help you to love him, who has kept you in the midst of your
relations and comforts, whilst so many thousands have fallen on the one hand
and the other of you: May your souls prosper under the abundance of rich means
you enjoy: May your examples for wisdom, piety, faithfulness, love to the Lord
Jesus and his Saints, provoke the next Generation to glorious things. These are
the desires and hearty breathings of,

My Lord and Gentlemen, Yours in any service for Christ, Hu. PETER.

To my truly Honorable and Faithful General Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX.
SIR;
ONe of the greatest comforts I have bad in this world next to the grace of God
in Christ to my poor soul, has been to be a Member of your Army, and a
Spectator of his presence with you and it. What others do, I know not; but it
is my duty to return to my work, and to meet you again; which I am bold to do
with this simple present. I know your mind, who must not, will not be
flattered; nor am I skilful in that mystery: I have seen you upon Earth, and
doubt not but to meet you triumphing in Heaven. I only must crave leave to
speak your own words, That your great experiences of Gods power and mercy, have
made strong obligation upon you to love him and the Saints, which I have seen
you do impartially: you have made it your interest, and now find you are not
deceived. The God of all your unparalled mercy dwell in that thriving soul of
yours, strengthen you throughout to the completing of this great Work, yea
Serus in coelum redeas, diuque
Laetus intersis populo Britanno. After t(...) England has long, long enjoyed
you;
At length return to him, who here employed you.




For my self (if it be worth your acceptance) I am resolved to live and die in
your and the Kingdoms service; and as you have obliged three Kingdoms to you
and many thousands of Saints, so none of them more to honor you then

SIR, Your ever faithful servant in Christ, HUGH PETER'S.

A Sermon preached before the Honorable Houses of PARLIAMENT, the LORD MAYOR
and ALDERMEN of the City of London, and the Assembly, for the glorious Success
it pleased God to give our Army, in dissolving 5000 of the Kings Horse, and
reducing Cornwall, and near all the West.
PSALM. 31. 23. Love the Lord all ye his Saints: for the Lord preserves the
faithful, and plenteously rewards the proud doer.
THe little time left for this Work, must be improved to the best advantage;
and therefore though we must be beholden to the Neighborhood of the words
before and after the Text, yet we shall forbear to speak any thing at all of
the whole Book of Psalms, and no more then neds of this. It is easily agreed
that this Psalm is

1. (...), 2. (...), 3. (...).

1. His Prayer you have to the twentieth Verse; and therein,

1. His desires for his own safety, to the 18. 2. His request tending to the
ruin of his enemies, in the two following Verses.
2. His Praises, in the 21 and 22 Verses, which are

1. Either (...), for all. 2. Or (...), for himself in special.
3. A hortatory Conclusion, in the two last Versea. O love the Lord all ye his
Saints, etc.

In the Text briefly th^se two things fall under consideration.

1. The Duty, Love the Lord; and that set out diverse ways: By intensivenesse
in the Exclamation, By the Object, and by the universality of those engaged,
etc. But time checks me: these, with others, I can hardly name. 2. The
Arguments carrying on the Duty. 1. Because be preserves the faithful. 2.
Because be plenteously rewards the proud doer.

Thus much only of the Logic of the Text; something of the Grammar of it, and
then shortly to the Divinity, and those profitable and seasonable Truths it
will afford. Some few words are to be attended in the clearing the sense.

Saints here in the text is or may be read, Ye that feel mercies.

Faithful, the word is sometimes taken for persons, sometimes things; and so
the Lord is said to preserve True men, and Truths; Faithful men, and
Faithfulnesses.

He plenteously rewards the proud doer; or the Lord rewards plenteously:
The Lord, who does wonderful things. Plenteously is either in cumulum, abunde,
or in nepotes, as some would have it; But I would rather commend, then go
about to amend Translations; though I could wish some of my learned Brethrens
quarrelling hours were rather spent upon clearing the Originals, and so
conveying (...) pure Scripture to posterity, then in scratching others with
their sharpened Pens, and making Cockpits of Pulpits.

I make all haste to the work of the day; and the Verse before the Text will be
like a going down into a deep Well, where we may discover Stars at noon.
Mercies are best observed from depths of Misery: and set them off like Foyles
the Diamonds.

I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes: or I said in my
hastening, 1 Samuel 23. David was in a running posture.

The Greek translates it in a trance, or ecstasy; and truly this is worth our
thoughts this very day: we have had our hasty times and trances, when we
thought we had been all cut off, who are now left living monuments of rich
mercy. Many of us here, were even upon the wing, imbanking our Money, and
hastening after it. And if you shall enquire after the rise of this temper or
distemper of Spirit, how David and other Saints prove so succumbent and
s^attered: I answer, It has three springs.

1. From the Lord afflicting, who puts more weight into the Scale then we
mind, and often makes a small affliction heavy: yea, they that could go over
a mountain, at other times stick at a molehill: as Jacob will not be comforted
about a son; as if he had neither Genesis 37. 35.
a child left, nor a God.

2. From the party afflicted, and that in three cases.

First, from a natural sense of pain, more then of comfort: Haman Esth. 3.
is more pinched with one cross in Mordecay, then pleased with all the
contents in Court, though (you know) few favorites fared better for a time:
and it is but a short time the best of that generation have; poor Sun-dyals
that are never minded in foggie and cloudy days.

Secondly, from the overweening some contents, which causes faintings to us
in the losing them. My son Absalon, O my son, my son, cries David, as if heaven
and earth head been wrapped up in his weighty 2 Samuel 19. 4.
locks.

Thirdly, through inconsiderateness, and not searching the end Lam. 3. 9.
of things: for the Church came down wonderfully.

3. From the pressures and afflictions themselves, and that,

First, from the multitude of them: what one will not, cannot do, Psalm. 38.
many may. This Prophet at one time was the scorn of drunkards, suspected by
the godly, abused by his own son, betrayed by his friend.

Secondly, from the greatness of them, and that especially when they either
fall upon an unsound part, when Job was remembered of the sin of his youth not
quite healed; or upon a noble part, the soul and conscience: we know the brain,
heart, and liver being touched, will soon complain.

Thirdly, from the continuance of them. The Church complains, I was afflicted
from my youth up. To lie so long at Bethesda, and to be bowed down eighteen
years, as the poor woman in the Gospel was, will put the soul upon hastening,
as David's: but all these gusts are over-blown, and the Lord shines in upon him,
as you see in the close of the Verse before the Text; upon which smiles of Gods
face, he cries out as you here see, O love the Lord all ye his Saints, etc.

In which words there are many divine Conclusions: but in these narrow limits
of time, I shall confine my self to One main Truth, which I conceive will be
the principal Work of this day: and that will take up both Arguments used here
by the Prophet to enforce the duty: and in the end I shall make bold to take up
the duty to enforce my design.

And therefore to lay much in a little room, this is that the Spirit of God
commends unto you.

The faithful have God for their preserver, whilst the proud doer by the same
hand receives wages proportionable to his work. Doct.


A witness or two will cast the cause. Salvation belongs to the Psalm. 3. 8.
Lord, and thy blessing is upon thy people, Selab.

O thou hope of Israel, the Savior thereof in the time of trouble. Jer. 14. 8.
Psalm. 98. 1.


O sing unto the Lora a new song; for he has done mavelous things: his right
hand and his holy arm has gotten him the victory.

To which Isaiah adds, Lord, thou will ordain peace for us; for thou Isa 26.
12.
also have wrought all our works in us.

From Genesis to the Apocalypse, the Scripture gives in a general testimony to
this Truth: to which we may let in some more light, by opening these three
Casements.

1. Quere, When the Lord does thus appear preserving the faithful. 2. How he
does it. 3. Why he does it.
To the first I answer, His preservation looks cut and discovers it self
specially in five cases.

1. When he intends to advance his own wisdom, he then befools all the
counsels of the sons of men; and his Saints shall only be engaged to him for
counsel: and thus the poor man shall save the City, and thus Paphnutius shall
save the Council at Ephesus by the counsel of God, whose singer writ folly upon
that learned Age.

2. When he intends to exalt his own power, he comes in more immediately for
the Saints preserving, and proclaims to the world its own feebleness and
weakness: and then J^el shall do more against Sisera then an Army of men.

3. When he glorifies his mercy; he leaves the Saints to extremities, to reach
an opportunity, to lift up that attribute: and thus he leads them from Bacha to
Sion, throw a Country of Giants and harrennesse, where their souls even melt
through thirst, and brought them to a mountain of sweet.

4. When the Lord does purpose to awaken those gifts and graces in their
cryings, in their bel^evings, in their patient wakings upon Jesus Christ, he
will com^ delivering: he will be sought unto by the house of Israel, and loves
to hear the lispings of his little ones. Psalm. 107. 6. 19.
You have known some Fathers in the Country that leave their Children the other
side the Style, and help them over when they cry; and seeming to leave them
sometimes in a throng, and then reach them the hand again upon their
complaints. The Lord loves to see Faith in its adhering and assuring acts.

5. The Lord appears when deliverance may be sweetest and dearest, and that in
an exigent when one glance of his eye may be worth a whole world. Who remembered
us in our low estate, for his mercy Psalm. 136. 23.
endures for ever: And thus sickness commends health, poverty wealth, the
storm a haven, and a sinful wretched world commends heaven: Oh how sweet will
it be when all tears shall be wilped away, all Temptations out-wrestled,
Devils, and Sin, and World, and Self, all conquered, and we shall be with the
Lord for ever!

To the Second, which is, How the Lord preserves: I answer, Many ways; but
shall only fix upon two.

1. In Order to means, 2. To Men.

For the former, his greatest and most eminent preservations are by his own
spirit, and therefore the two Olive Trees shall supply the Pipes and the Lamps
growing on each side the Golden bowl Naturally, Zach. 4. 6.
without any Artifice of man's: and that appears thus;

1. Means can do nothing without him; the Streams are dry, unless the spring
be full: Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and Isa. 40. 30, 31.
the young men shall utterly fall: But they that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength, they shall mount up with wings at Eagles: they shall run,
and not beweary; and they shall walk and not be faint.

1. Though means gain strength, yet they can act no further then he quickens
them: It was he that withered Jerobo(...) hand, and knocked off Pharaoh's
wheels, and laid six hundred Iron Chariots Psalm. 136. 15.
under the Cataracts of his displeasure: He overthrew Pharaoh and his host in
the Red sea, son his mercy endures for ever.

2. Means though quickened, yet they succeed not, nor reach their purposed ends
without him: The Madianits shall sheath their Isa. 95. 6.
swords in their own bowels; their Webbs shall not become Garments; neither
shall they cover themselves with their works.

3. The Spirit of the Lord can do what it will without means; he creates a
shadow; for thou have been a strength to the poor, a Isa. 25. 4.
strength to the needy in his distress, a r^fuge from the storm, a shadow
from the heat when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the
wall; and that appears thus;

1. Sometimes against all means; the waters shall be a wall to Israel, and
they shall pass through the great deep with dry feet, and Jonah 1. 17.
Jonab shall be kept from drowning in the sea by being thrown into the Sea.

2. Sometimes beyond all Means: else how should one chase a thousand, and a
fancy put many thousands to flight? else how should the shaking of a few leaves
and the blowing of Rams-horns do such terrible executions?

3. It is the Lord that does all that is done by means: walk about Psalm. 48.
12, 13, 14.
Sion, and go round about Her: tell the Towers thereof: mark ye well her
Bulwarks: consider her Palaces, that ye may tell it to the generation
following: for this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even
unto death. If you say that money answers all things, yet you must hear the
Lord say, the gold is mine, your silver is mine: It is not the drug, nor the
bread that does the work, but the spirit of them both.

And for the second, which is his manner of preserving in order to men, yea,
destroying men, his working shows it self usually in these four particulars:

1. God oftentimes over-awes and overbears them, that Laban shall have little
to say to Jacob when he overtakes him: Balaam had an opportunity and spleen
enough against Israel, but durst not vent Numb. 25. 23.
it, entreats Balacks Messengers to stay all night, would feign be taking
money; but there was no Incantation against Jacob, nor divination against
Israel: for the Lord was with them, and the shout of a King was amongst them.
Esau shall rather kiss then kill: for Jacob was a Prince, and had prevailed
with God and with man; sc. had wrestled through all his fears that his brother
must be his Servant, the Lord putting a bit into his mouth.

2. The Lord often takes away the occasion, that the Sons of Belial cannot
attempt what they intend: If they in the Acts, which swore Paul's death, had
kept their oaths, they had never kept their Acts 25. 12.
lives: but he never came within their reach. Ahab sends to all places under
Heaven to take Elias; but the Lord sends him away Kings 1. 19.
before they came. He that dwells in the secret place of the most High, shall
abide under the shadow of the Almighty. Psalm. 91. 1.


3. Oftentimes the Lord stops them in their practices. Jeroboam will needs be
striking the Prophet, The Lord strikes him, who is very sensible of the least
touch of his anointed ones, or any harm that befalls his Prophets.

4. Lastly, The Lord works by diversion. When Saul thought he 1 Samuel 23. 27.
had made sure of David, the Philistims brake in upon his Country, and
probably had spoiled him in the rear. And that I take to be the meaning of the
cloud, Isaiah 25. 5. Thou shall bring down the noise of strangers, as the heat
in a dry place, even the heat with the shadow of a cloud; the branch of the
terrible ones shall be brought low. The shadow of a cloud intervening betwixt
the scorching Sun and the weary Traveller in a hot Country, how does it
refresh! God finds his enemies work abroad, that his Saints may not be
destroyed at home: and since the whole world and all the Princes of it are but
the servants of a few Saints, he can put all into several postures for his
preserving ends.

To the third Quere, Why God thus preserves the Saints, I answer in these three
particulars:

1. Because of his righteousness and holiness in the very dispensations of
his judgments, which occasioned this large offer to the Genesis 18. 32.
men of Sodom, and caused him to descend so low as ten righteous persons, yea,
though they were but as righteous as Lot, who was not without strong
corruptions: Who can say his hands are clean? Yet such are called righteous and
faithful: They are called in my Text, even such as have candor upon their
spirits; such as take up and own right principles; such as are contented in the
main and in the Cause they have in hand, to have glasse-windows made to their
hearts; even such as Heathens named Homines simplices and apertos: To such he
sends his Angels to show his tender affection, which is better then his
protection. To be faithful does entitle us to preservation in the deluge of
the greatest judgments, that our work will be only to look to duty which is
ours, and leave events to God which are his.

2. God does it for the glory of his mercy, and therefore sends Genesis 19. 6.
his Angels to draw forth Lingerers; and such is his tenderness, that the
righteousness of one Lot binds his hands that he can do nothing till the
faithful be preserved. Come my people enter, thou Isa. 26. 20.
into thy chambers, and shut thy door about thee: hide thy self as it were for
a little moment, ^ntill the i^dignation be o^^rpast. When the birds of prey are
abroad, the Hen calls her Chickens under her wings. When tumults are in the
streets, the tender Mother gets her Children into the upper chambers.

3. Through his wise faithfulness, or faithful wisdom, the Lord does thus by
his Saints, and therefore he saves every crum. Nothing John 6* 1^.
must be lost; the Lord knows what to do with crumbs and fragments, and the
saving of what was left, must make the miracle: If there be but a cluster, the
branch must not be cut down. The Prophet is elegant; Thus ^aith the Lord, As
the new wine is found in the chester, and one says, destroy it not, for a
blessing is in it; so will I do for my Isai. 65.
servants sake, that I may not destroy them all. I believe a few clusters in
the world have preserved such new wine in them, that this day we taste the
blessing. Do not destroy the poor cluster therefore, much less destroy it
because there is new wine in it, ^ill you see whether a blessing be with it.

Not a child of Abraham's but shall be blessed: It is an old Charter of Genesis 12.
2, 3.
a promise. And hence it came to pass, that he preserved the very
off-scourings of the world, to carry forth his Name to the world, and maintain
that which men call foolishness, to bring wisdom to them that knew it not.

And thus far I have made progress in the clearing up the former part of
that Truth I am to prosecute, and hope by this time we are all agreed, when,
and how, and why the Lord preserved the faithful; and that he plenteously
rewards the proud doers, remains to be made good: Therefore, not to make
forfeiture of your patience, I shall only apply my self to these two passages:

1. W(...) the Lord rewards them. 2. How he does it.
The former of these two Questions has taken up the heads, hearts, and pens of
the Christian world for diverse years: many crying with those in the Revelation,
How long, O Lord holy and true, do Rev, 6, 10.
thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth? Some
enquiring after the downfall of Antichrist: some looking to the prophesies that
concern Gog and Magog, some casting their eve upon the drying up of Euphrates,
and the way to be made for the Kings of the East: some looking after the taking
away him that lette^^, and most men disputing the ^^ying of the two Witnesses;
as much condueing to Gods design in bringing about what is piomised in the
second and seventh of Daniel, where the Kingdom is promised to the Saints of
the most High; supposing that to be the fifth Monarchy: In all which I shall
be silent for the present, and only put you in mind of their usual seasons,
wherein we may expect to see proud doers receiving their wages.

1. When the Lord goes his progress through the world, and rides his circuit
amongst the sons of men, and puts a crown upon his glory, great offenders are
then brought forth; and that was Pharaohs case, who withstood all the miracles,
that God might be more glorious in his downfall. And thus he contracts many
times the eyes of neighboring Nations to see his vengeance upon some: And Isai
26. 21
he is said to come out of his place, to punish the inhabitants of the earth
for their iniquity.

2. When ever you see his Sanctuary trodden upon, and Holiness slighted, then
he rends the Heavens and comes down to make his Name known to his adversaries;
that the Nations may tremble at Isa. 63. 18. and 64. 2. Zach. 1^. 8.
his presence: and that it was that brought the Lord forth to the ruin of the
Jewish Church: Your soul abhorred me, and my soul loathed you. Hence he
destroyed three Shepherds in one day, the Sadducees, Scribes, and Pharisees:
upon this he breaks his two staves of beauty and bonds: Oh this undervaluing
godliness in the power of it!

They were wont to say of Caius Seius, he was an honest man, but he was a
Christian. Poor Jews, when Christ ask^ his price, they valued him at thirty
pieces of silver, which in our account amounts to eighteen shillings and four
pence: and this was that which bought a field of blood: To slight that mercy
that must save, and shut the door of that only City of Refuge that must
protect Acts 4. 12.
from the pursuers of blood: to put indignities upon that Christ, and injuries
upon that Jesus by whose Name only salvation is brought into the world. The
Lord has set his Son upon his holy Hill, Psalm. 2.
and will crush those that have scorned him.

3. When sinful men shall have filled up their iniquities, the Lord empties
his full vials upon their heads, that even the Saints must Genesis 15. 16.
wait upon the sins of the Amo^^tes for the fullness of them, till they can be
delivered: Let us observe the Scripture, setting forth this fullness; and it
will give us a (...)ling of God^ (...)ing with the proud doers in order to
time; and that in these particulars:

1. There is a fullness of magnitude when provocations grow very Joel 3. 13.
great. Clamitat ad Coelum vox sanguinis, and Sodomorum.


2. There is a fullness of number and multitude: Blood touches Ezekiel. 7. 23
blood, and sins are fruitful in their generations.

3. A fullness of measure: that Children may fill up the measures Mat. 23. 23
of their Fathers iniquity.

4. There is a fullness of strength: when the sinner grows strong, Ier. 3.
Ezekiel. 22. 6.
and has Cart-rop^^ to draw on vanity: Behold the Princes of Israel, every one
was in you to their power to shed blood; when head, and heart, and hand are
engaged in mischief; when all interests are improved to that end.

5. There is a fullness of growth: and now they sin more and more: Hosea 13. 2,
3. 2 Timothy 3. 13.
therefore they shall be as the morning cloud, and as the early dew that
passes away: as the chafe that is driven with the whirlewind out of the
floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney.

6. A fullness of age, when men grow old in sin: Behold every one that uses
proverbs, shall use this proverb against thee, saying, As is the Mother, so is
her Daughter: and thus sinners grow gray in Ezekiel. 16. 43.
their transgressions: yea, sin must leave them before they leave it.

7. There is a fullness of Dexterity: there be some that be their Ier. 42.
crafts-masters in sinning, who can spin threads of all sorts: you have your
Court sins; City, Country, University sins: men take their degrees in this
sin-craft; they have their several dimensions, depths, and bredths.

8. A fullness also there is of impudence, when men cannot blush; Ier. 3. 3.
commit folly, and yet wipe their mouths with Solomon's harlot: thus, often sin
meets you with a brazen forehead: it takes the wall of Christ, and Religion,
and thrusts holiness into the kennell: This is that bold-fac't harlot, that
does kiss and kill at once: and Zeph. 3. 5.
these are the men that call great sins little, and little ones none at all.

9. When sin comes to a full period; and then the proud doer has Psalm. 7. 9.
done his work, and receives his wages: O let the wickedness of the wicked
come to an end, but stablish the just: for the righteous God tries the hearts
and reine.

The second Qu^re is, How God rewards the proud doer: in which though the
Lords proceedings be diverse, and many times his paths in the clouds, and his
judgments in the deep, and the uttermost farthing shall be paid the proud doer
at the great day; yet so much of his mind he has left unto us, that even in
this life he gives out something to the proud, which he calls, The day of
Recompense, which he commonly manifests in these particulars.

1. By way of Retaliation; for Adoni-bezek that would be cutting Judge. (...), 7.
off thumbs, had his thumbs cut off, Satia te sanguine quem sitisti. So the
poor Jews that cried so loud, Crucify him, crucify him, were so many of them
crucified, that if you believe Josephus, there was not wood enough to make
crosses, nor in the usual place room enough to set up the crosses when they
were made. Snares are made, and pits are dug by the proud for themselves
commonly; to which the Scripture throughout gives abundant testimony. Psalm. 57.
6


2. By shameful disappointments, seldom rea(...) (...)hat they sow, (...)
eating what they catch in hunting: which is ^ost clear in the Jewish State when
Christ was amongst them: Jud^s betrays him to get money, and hardly lived long
enough to spend it. Pilat to please Caesar, withstands all counfels against it,
and gives way to that murder; by which he ruined both himself and Caesar. The
Jewish Priests, to maintain their domination and honor (which they thought the
son of Joseph and Mary stole from them) cried loud for his death; which proved
a Sepulcher to them and their glory: And the poor people that crucified him
(through fear of the Roman^ taking their City) by his death had their gates
opened to the Roman^: yea, Caesar himself fearing a great change in his
Government, by Christ living near him (which to this day set^ all the
King-craft in the world to work) met such a change, that shortly he had neither
Crown nor Scepter to boast of, if you read the story of Titus and V^spasian.
All which dealings of God with the proud, is most elegantly set forth unto us
by the Psalmist: Behold, Psalm. 7. 14. 15.
he travelleth with i^^quity, and has (...)ived mischief, and brought ^orth
fals^^^^. He has made a pit and dug it, and it fallen into the ditch which
^e made.

Where the Prophet by the dark and hidden work^ of Nature, sets forth the
Con^^^vements and Machinations of the proud doers most exquisitly, and that in
these three passages:

First, in the Co^ception. Secondly, in the Travel. Thirdly, in the Birth and
Issue.
And the first will appear in these four particulars:

1. Invention receives and entertains the plot, as the earth does the seed.
Pharaoh says, Let us deal wisely. They cannot sleep till they have devised
mischief. The head is the seat and womb of their destructive conceptions.

2. It is approved of and affected: he is chronicled for a Worthy, and
canonized for a Saint, that proves the Engineer. Rare designs, pick and choose,
not knowing which to attempt first.

3. Consultations ripen their inventions, and lick the whelp into shape, and
fashion it into its several parts: and thus did Haman and Jezabel; and all
your under-ground-workers have thus managed their designs.

4. It (...) (...)me to strength which is wrought by resolution: so they in
th(...) (...) took an oath to kill Paul. So that by invention evil purposes are
received; by approbation, cherished; by consultation, fashioned; Acts 25.
and by resolution go to their full time and are ripened for travel. This
travel may be discovered in these four particulars:

1. When their months are up, travel cannot be prevented by tears nor prayers,
petitions nor requests; nay, nor by the power of an Army can be prevented: if
all the Lords of England and Commons, should again ride down to York, or
elsewere, and remain upon their bended bare knees a whole day, they should not
be able to put by some design^^. Pilate's wife did her duty, but could not
prevent the mischiefs Gamaliel's counsel was good, and yet the Apostles were
brought to the Whipping-post. Needs must they go, whom the Devil drives.

2. Extreme throws and pangs must be undergone. Amnon is sick of Incest, Ahab
of Covetousness; he must have a poor man's vineyard. Little does a poor
shrub in a hedge know what shakings these proud Cedars are subject to: the
silent rivulet feels not what the high-swoln Ocean meets with from many
churlish blasts. Oh the sad nights and hours these Nero's draw forth!

3. The best succor and supply must be got: send to As^ur and Egypt, Amalek
and Ammon, with all that dwell at Tire, to midwife the matter: yea, if all fail,
Acheronta movebunt.

Yea, even to an Irish Rebel rather then miscarry. Herod and Pilate shall
shake hands, and help on the foulest murder that ever the Sun shone upon, or
the earth bore.

If no delivery, nothing but death must be expected; which is a true character
of the violence and virulence of cruel men, who break themselves, yea, the very
Axle-tree of a whole Kingdom, yea, three Kingdoms, that so others may perish in
the fall. Achitophel dies in Childbed, when he could not be delivered of that
David and State-ruining design. How many Crowns and Kingdoms have been thus
hazarded, to foment the will of a distempered Prince? And truly there be no
sharper stones in the world for men to fall upon, then the Saints, from whom
all the States under heaven have had their deaths wounds (as you lately heard
well in the Interest of England.) And thus far the Conception and Travel; and
now briefly to the third thing, which is the Birth and Issue: all is Falsehood
and a Lie. Parturiunt montes, nascetur etc.


The whole work is but a Tympany or a swollen Bladder, which being pincht, and
the wind vented, is a very mean contemptible thing, and only fit for a
dunghill. And such are these Cobweb Lawncounsels and Tiffany-designes, that
every child may see through; yet called Arcana Imperii; the utmost of which is
but killing a few Saints, and tyrannizing and perishing. Nay, let us say, All
they can do, it is but wittingly sending the faithful to their graves, and
unwittingly to their glory. What pitiful misshapen brats have the proudest of
men's brains brought forth in Scripture? What fearful horrid lies? Haman says,
Not a Jew shall live: the issue is, Not a Jew must die. Pharaoh says, Not an
Israelite shall depart: the issue is, Not an Israelite must stay: Daniel in the
Den, and the three Nobles in the Fire, gave the lie to cruelty it self: and she
that sat in glory, and should never be a widow, was made the scorn of
Nations: Babylon is fallen, is fallen.

And now (men, brethren, and fathers) it will be time to apply our ^^^ves to
this days work. (Anglia) de te narrantur haec.


You Saints, you faithful ones, you that have and do feel mercies, that wear
mercies clothes, lie in mercies bed, eat mercies bread, live in mercies air,
enjoy mercies Ordinances: of whom and to whom I may say as they did of Dorcas
when they thought her dead, Acts 9.
These are the Garments Dorc^^ made. Th^se are the fruits of mercy; these be
the paths mercy has strewed with flowers and sweets; mercies, deliverances,
protections, preservations: it is all mercy, mercy, free-mercy. More
particularly let us now look back upon what has been spoken as our own, God
having made it so; and call these days by their due and just names: these
certainly are the best times we ever saw, we commonly miscall them: Those
former days we doa^ed on were none of the best; they were a sad seed-time of
our misery: for most true it is, that the seeds of the ruins of estates and
commonwealths are sown in the days of their greatest prosperity; and of
these Halcy^n-times, we might say, -- Longae pacis patimur mala, saevior army
Luxuria incubuit, victumque ulciscitur orbem.


We could never have suffered so much by a foreign enemy, as by our homebred
luxury and wantonness: Oh call these ill times, when a base messenger from a
proud Prelate could shut up these doors, stop the mouths of the most godly
Ministers, that the best nobleman here could not enjoy the worship of God
freely; and hardly his Bible without reproach: I am bold to say you have heard
more of Christ within these last four years, then you have for forty before;
call such days good: And more especially to improve what I have spoken in the
doctrinall part; truly the Lord has rightly timed his favors, even when he
might most advance his own wisdom, power and mercy; when he might stir up his
gifts and graces in you: if the enemy ask after our Prayers, Fasts, Tears, yea,
our God (as they were wont to do) we have all these this day from Edgehill,
and before, even to this very hoare; yea, all these preservations have been so
seasonable, that what time we our selves would have chosen, has been Gods
time; that we may say as David in this Psalm, Our times have been in thy hands,
O Lord.

And I humbly beseech you, give the Spirit of the Lord its praise, who has
done the work. The Lord is willing you should have the mercy, so he may have
the praise. Potiphar lets Joseph h^^e the use of all he has, only keep^ his
wife to himself: Pharaoh lets him have the Kingdom, but he will keep the
Throne. Gods Spirit has so appeared, as we conclude means can do nothing
without him, but he can do all without means; and what means does, is all
(...) (...) be it is that has quickened and succeeded your counsels and
executions; he has even gone against (...), and beyond means for you; he it is
who has spirited all your endeavors, in Counsels and Armies, raised help for
you out of the very dust, External motive he has none from us, who are not
the loveliest people in the world; he has from himself over a w^d men, powered
contempt upon Princes, taking away the occasions of many evils; met the proud
in their full career, and withered their arm; often kept them from us by
strange diversions, filled the world with tumults, that you might not be a prey
to strangers. On the riches of his grace. His own righteousness and holiness
have thus persuaded him to do; the glory of his mercy has been his argument;
his wisdom and faithfulness have been glorious in preserving crumbs and
clusters. The very Truths now professed, have been raked up in contemptible
ashes, and now revealed to the world; Psalm. 107. ult.
and they that are wise, shall see the loving kindness of the Lord in all.

For the proud doer (so called, because a contemner of the faithful) you see
how the Lord has resisted him, and has taken him (in his month) as the wild
Ass in Job; you may remember how the Egyptian King outlived many miracles,
but must perish in the Red Sea; whether Red from the sand thereof, or the blood
of many he spilt, I will not dispute. You know how the Lord has been provoked
by the low price set upon his holiness, and his image in his Saints, the
peculiar sin of this Nation; for travel where you will, even from hence to the
Garamants you shall never find but the Z^lots in other parts of the world are
honored, only in England, Ludibrium vulgo; It has long been a crime to be
godly, and he has been a lost man that trades that way, whilst a company of
obsolete and beggarly rudiments and ceremonies have been billeted upon Gods
ordinances, and eat out the very heart of them; double Service, and no
Preaching. Nay you have lived to see Iniquity in the fullness of it, Oaths and
blasphemies unparalled; yea, when one of our Troopers reproved one of theirs
in Cornwall for swearing, he was answered by that profane mouth, He would
swear as long as he was on horseback, he should have time enough to repent on
foot; nay, they would serve the Devil now, that he might use them kindly when
they came to hell: the very Sun might even blush, looking upon such
mise^^ants. Of this fullness you have seen the magnitude, multitude, measure,
strength, age, growth, d(...)ity, imp^dence; and the good God grant we may see
the period. How the Lord has paid them in their own coin, you have many
witnesses: They would have war, they have it the sword must decide the
controve^sie; let God, Angels and men give the verdict, and let it be carried
down to after-ages, that God plenteously rewards the proud doer, or that a
Parliament and faithful Council to a State may live in the midst of the fury
of an implacable Prince and his ^a^e wigs. Add this, that you have been ear
and eye witnesses of the pr^ud men's disappointments after all their labor and
travels; their inventions have been many for mischief, which have been
cherified by affection, formed by consultations and Juncto^, and made ready for
birth by many resolutions which have held as high as Brainford; what inland and
foreign conceptions of this kind have we met with? Plot upon Plot, design
upon design. Speak London, has it not been so?

Let us now remember, the time of traveling could not be prevented; Petition
sent after Petition, Declaration after Declaration; nothing must prevail, but
the acceptance of such a remedy as would prove worse then the disease: And then
before the birth, what throws and pai(...)? Send to Denmark, run to Holland,
fly to France, Curse Digby, imprison Hamilton, etc. and then all help is called
in for midwisery, entreat friends here and there, pawn jewels, break and close
with Irish even in a breath; any thing for help; hazard posterity, ingagein
marriage, and as she did, roar out, Give me a child or I^dle and that
miscarriage we are this day to praise God for, and wonder at. The sum total
of all these endeavors of the proud comes to nothing but vanity and
emptiness, all these conclusions vanish into a li^: the Parliament is not
destroyed, the City stands, the Gospel is preached; we do not yet hear the
scretches of defloured damsels, nor the cries of abused matrons, we hear not
the rattling of their arms, nor the neighing of their horses in our streets. Oh,
my Lords, you are not at Oxford, led up and down as Samps^n, to be looked at by
children, nor are you crying as poor Belifalius, Date obolum Belisario, date
obolum! Nor you Gentlemen of the other House, crying at a prison grate to some
merciful man for a penny; Nor you, my Lord Major and your Brethren, under a
great ransom for your freedom; Nor You, that your Teachers are forced from
you, but you can yet look upon them: And you (my reverend Brethren) who have
been part of the divided spoil, you feel that mercy that gives them a loud
lie.

But to raise the groundwork of our praises, (Right honorable and beloved,)
let us a little go back, and suppose that some Messenger were come from Bristol
when we lost it, or suppose you had Jobs messengers one after another, and
every one crying -- Luxuriat Britano sanguine pinguis humus.
Suppose you were again hearing the story of that sad March out of that City,
with the breach of all Articles (which they are not used unto from us) and
think your selves sitting (as old Eli) in expectation of tidings from the Army,
and what befell us in Cornwall in 1644 were now brought unto you: Or if not so
far back, say that now you were reading the Letters from poor Leicester, taken,
plundered, abused beyond president: what do you now think of this days mercy?
Do you believe what you enjoy to be real, or are you in a dream? Remember, I
beseech you, it is not above a year since, when we had thought to have hung
our harps upon willow trees in some strange countries under some strange
Printes, and there might have been called unto for our-English song^; Alas, how
would they have been mingled with tears, sighs, and groans. They say, he that
in a dark night came over a high bridge only upon a slight board lying cross,
coming the next day to look upon his deliverance, could not bear the weight
of the mercy, but Rochester. Bridge.
died away in the contemplation. The good God give us skill to manage what we
do enjoy, left our preservation be but a reservation of us to greater calamity.

But because Generals may either deceive, or at least not reach Individuals: I
shall take leave to present unto you a List of some special prints of
providence, which like floodgates opened, may turn every wheel about to the
duty of the day: I shall but name some, your own collection may swell these to
a mountain of praises.

A List of special Providence since the breaking out of these Distempers:
which may provoke others to make up the Catalogue.
1 THat this Nation proved so faithful to our Brethren of Scotland, in the
time of their first trouble from the Prelates; (...), th^^ the profanest (...)
souldi(...) had no heart to that service; And to th(...) I might ^dd^ their
dis(...)t and honorable coming in and going out: the same good Spirit of God
direct them still.

2 That a Parliament was procured: which makes me remember the faithfulness^
of^ and the haz^rds run by our noble Lords, Comment, Citizens, and Ministers.

3 That, even to wonder, Justice was done upon that great man, and carried
through so many difficulties.

4 That the Bishops thrust themselves out by their own Protestation or
Remonstrance.

5 That the six Members of Parliament were preserved.

6 That this City stood in that firmness, with so much freeness, that the
Apprentices and their gallantry will be renowned to after ages.

7 That the Sea(...), who have long been tertible to foreign natio(...) should
close a^ they did; And that the ships Royal were (...) in that nick of time,
for which the State owes much to that Noble m^n which did it: to which I add,
the Sea-mens cordial appearing above ^he Bridge.

8 A That (...) Nobles (...) (...)ook the leading of your Armies, and Earl of
Essex, etc.
to look the first danger^ in the face; The good Lord requite it to them fully.

9 Money and Plat^, the sin^wa of your work, offered to admiration, as if every
one had been persuaded of the time when to part with (...).

10 The standing out of Hull, which compared with some other passages, might
make some think we are delivered against ou^ wills.

11 The discovery of men, and their spirits, together with the departure of
some from us.

12 That in all (...) (...) (...) to this (...) all sorts amongst u^ have and
must confess, they never saw more of God and less of man, as if he resolved
to own your cause.

13 The maintaining and relieving. Gloucester, and when there was little show of
an army, yet marched in six days time, when the other party could hardly
expect them in six months; and then it was when our hearts even melted away.

14 C(...) cannot, may not be forgotten, it was a most seasonable mercy, if you
remember all circumstances about it.

15 The enemy bewildred and divided in their counsels, falling short of their
hopes, especially when they might have come to London, they went to Gloucester,
when they might have gone into the associated Counties, they will fight at
Marston, Naseby, and others the like.

16 The business of that great Northern battle, full of providence, and rich
ones.

17 Their disappointments by Intelligence, or rather the want of it, many.

18 The new Modelling of the Army, and the filling up vacant places in the
house of Commons, two desperate designs, drawing eyes round about us upon this
Nation even to amazement; by which work I would wish no chief Commander should
think himself slighted or asperst, but eye that change as the Product of
unhappy mixtures of some inferior Officers; they that know the Low Country
war, may know how tender they are in mixing Nations, and how Brigades are
distinguished: Civil war is never soon ended by Soldiers of Fortune, and I
must here profess without flattery, I know none of your Commanders in chief,
but have had their proper Excellencies.

19 Lime and Plymouth deserve a story by themselves, who so looks upon their
works, and remembers the power besieging them, must say, Digitus Dei and hic,
and hic, it were pity the instruments preserving them should be forgotten.

20 The many things that rendered your last Army so contemptible: the evil
spirits about this town scorned them, as poor, skillesse, helpless, beardlesse
youths, their friends trembled and feared to think what God would do by them,
hardly three strangers in place in the whole army, homebred, new-bred
soldiers; like the choice of David from his sheep, in comparison of Eliah,
A^inedab and Shammah.

21 Poor, burnt, aflicted Taunion, twice or thrice relieved, and that the first
work of the year.

22 The Kings Letters from Goring taken by the great care of our honest and
vigilant Scout Watson, the night before Naseby battle, whereby the King was
wholly dissuaded from sighting with us then.

23 Lieu. Genesis Cromwell, and Col. Roffiter coming in so seasonably to that
battle: I say seasonably.

24 Providence gave us the Kings Cabinet, and thereby opened many eyes that
before were covered.

25 Since which this Army was never foiled, hardly a Guard beat up all this
year: no enchantment against Jacob, etc.

26 The counsel of God leading the Army to Bristoll, when it was expected by
most we should have gone to the West, and the western line so well kept in that
juncture, it was glorious mercy.

27 That all the last summer, when Bristol had near 200 a week died when we
entered, all the country about infected with the plague, our principal
Officers, even the Lieu. Genesis himself and other^ lying within the hearing of
their gronts, yet upon best inquisition, we can hear but of two of the whole
Army infected all the year.

28 And mercy it is, that in the Army there has been no breath, that (through
Grace) Religion grows there, and grows apacet yea, this is your safety, that
what is desired in the Parliament by the most faithful, is there consulted and
acted, as God gives opportunity.

29 The Lord has made this Army often more then Conquerours: the Roman
conquerours rode boasting in their triumphant chariots; here no boasters.

30 God has often extorted confessions from the Enemy, that some have been
forced with Juliun to cry out, Vicisti Galil^^.

31 Providence carried out Army the other side Exeter even by the sickness in
it, and barrenness of our quarters, and the Enemies advance toward us: where
how the Lord helped at Dartmouth, stormed without loss, and in other places, is
fresh in memory.

32 Their debau(...)ery in all places made way for our welcome, that if the
cause should be judged by their instruments, a very stranger must pass a sad
verdict upon it.

33 Such horror possessed them every where in pursuit of them at great distances,
that the Lord seemed to send a hornet before us, and, Magor^issabi^, they were
a terror to themselves; and this is remarkable, that after they had fel^ our
Horse or Foot, they had no list to close with u^ again, though they took much
time to recruit their spirits.

34 The work of a Summer has been done this Winter: where I learned this
lesson, That faithful honest English Christians, assisted from Heaven, can do,
and suffer more then the most gallant heathen Roman: What mountains of Snow and
Ice have been marched over this winter; what Rains and Winds have been gone
through, even to silence the Posting Hannibals, or Cunctating Fabii?

35 All the Enemies actions and counsels have turned to our advantage, and we
have been gainers by our losses generally: As in the loss of Bristol, we found
the way to it by the loss, at first view we saw it was not tenable with so
little force, which easily acquits that wise and valiant Gentleman that
surrendered it. Yea, their idol Princes God has made useful to us many ways,
by sleeping when they should fight, and fighting when it had been better they
had slept.

36 That in all the harrased and plundered Countries God has fed your Army,
and at Dartmouth fish brought in to us from the sea to miracle, the Country
acknowledging that generally we have been welcome where we came, many with
tears have parted with us at their doors.

37 The influence the Justice of the Army has had upon all forts, most
observable: For instance, when the Lieut. General had taken Langford house,
and promised safe convoy to the Enemy to Oxford, six of our troopers brake the
articles, and in the convoy took four or five pound from some of them, for
which one was presently to be shot, and the lot fell upon the first attempter,
who was put to death, and I hope is in heaven, being godly, as far as could
be discerned; the other five were sent to the Governor of Oxford, to put to
what death he pleased, who entertained them nobly, sent them back, and desired
their lives, and professed in his letter (which I read) it was the highest piece
of gallantry he had met with, etc. This very act with the many civilities of
the Army, has been very conquering. Justice exalts a Nation, Et Caesar in
host probat. Call to any County, and ask what wrong your Army has done them?
have you any scrols of complaints come up against them?

38 And (which is much to be remembered this day) all Cornwall, upon the matter,
is yours without blood, and 5000 horse with their riders disbanded: and as if
this were not enough, Ashley rai(...)ng a new force is crushed in the egg.

39 And this is worth noting; that the inhumanity our former Army met with in
Cornwall, was requited by the Turk fetching away many from Foy, near two
hundred, and diverse taken away by sickness at Lestithiel, that had abused our
poor Soldiers.

40 Nor is it a little, that all the Nations round about us should be engaged
in war; and whilst they hoped this Civil combustion might so weaken us, that it
would not have been hard for them to fall upon the stronger party, the Lord
has made us warlike, awaked us thoroughly out of our effeminacie, and we are
become formidable to our neighbors: Especially remember Denmark.

41 Hereunto I add, what was not thought on in the appointment of this Day,
being the second of April: The second of April last year, this Army advanced,
and was the first day of entertainment. They say, it is April, ^b aperiendo,
from opening the Earth: the Lord then opened a way to your deliverance: the
same hand open your hearts now to praises and thankfulness.

42 Hereunto I might add the Cities sweet compliance with the Parliament; yea,
what oil the footsteps of God have dropped within the walls of the Parliament
houses; what providence and blessed hints in your Militia, and Common Counsel,
what in your Assembly, is better known to your selves then me: and what in the
North and other parts, I might even tire you with the repetitions of what you
have felt and tasted from the hands of mercy. You have done like your selves,
to constitute Chronologers; and you need have good testimonies, for Ages to
come will look upon many passages a^ incredible, and I believe the year 45
will stand parallel with 88.

In a word, You have the Army you wished for, and the Successes you desired: Oh
the blessed change we see, that can travel now from Edinburgh, to the lands
end in Cornwall, who not long since were blockt up at our doors! To see the
highways occupied again; to hear the Carter whistling to his toiling team;
to see the weekly Carrier attend his constant mart; to see the hills rejoicing,
the valleys laughing! Nay, me thinks I see Germany lifting up her lumpish
shoulder, and the thin-cheekt Palatinate looking out a prisoner of hope;
Ireland breathing again, that not only lay bedrid, but the pulse beating
deathward: the overawed French Peasant studying his long lost liberty, the
Netherlanders looking back upon their neighboring England, who cemented their
walls with their blood, and bought their freedom with many, many thousands of
good old Elizabeth shillings: Indeed, me thinks, all Protestant Europe seems to
get new color in her cheeks. Dumb Rhetoric is best; I could even stand
silent, and give you time to wonder. And this God is your God, and I trust will
be your guide for ever. I could name men, but cannot read one word that way in
my Commission from the Army, who like the covered stals in your chief street of
this city, are willing to bear the rich Plate, but themselves must be veiled:
else I could tell you of Men, yea such, as if you had a Blank sent from Heaven,
and leave given to have written what names you would have had of men for your
work, you could not have amended your choice, (rebus sic stantibus) Heraldry
did not miscarrie, that has this word for your Chief, in his Coat of Honor:
Fare, Fac. Sir Tho. Fairfax his Motto.

Say, Do.
I might add your Cromwell, with many others, and know not how to forget our
dear Pickering, who had as much worth in him, as such a parcel of clay could
well contain, and never left his work till he was called to his account: But I
forbear Men; The LORD has preserved the faithful, and plenteously rewarded
the proud doer.

And now it will be seasonable to improve what we have said: These things are
your Honor, let not your Duty seem a burden: O love the Lord, ye his Saints,
and ye that feel mercy.

And so I pass in the last place to the first words of my text, which will be
the reverse, or the other side of our present business: As if the Lord should
say, Thus and thus I have done for you, You have seen the glance of my eye, you
have seen the smiles of my face, what could you desire more that I have not
done for you? You did but knock and it was opened; you sought, and found, asked,
and had: Go every stage of your latter pilgrimage, and tell me if you may not
set up a pillar and write upon it, Thus far God has helped us? Are not the
faithful preserved, and the proud doer rewarded? have any of you lost your
labor, in trusting me and my providence? have you not the fulfilling of many
prophecies, and might you not draw forth more, had you more faith? Is there any
Nobleman here, but has been honorable by me, or can he repent of his owning my
truth (...)ath his faithfulness proved a burden to him? Speak Parliament,
City, Ministry, have I not done well by You?

And me thinks I hear you ecchoing again; Lord, what would thou have from
thy servants? And I hope you stand as Samuel, Lord speak, thy servant bears!
or as Saul, after Paul, Lord, what would thou I should do? Yea, as he said,
Da quod jubes, and jube quid vis. David lets you know Gods mind, -- O love the
Lord ye his Saints!


And truly it is one of the hardest skils in the world, to use mercy well: I
remember the old spirit of the Jews, I wish we had never felt it; In sad
hours they would ever be making great promises, and in prosperity they would
soon make new gods. Beloved, I beseech you consider this short duty, Love the
Lord. I will but use a few arguments, and then open your duty in the duty, and
end all.

1. I pray consider (good Christians) how the Lord has loved you; you could
never hate him so much, as he has loved you; Ioh. 3. 16.
He loved you enemies, traitors, He loved you unkind to him, and cruel to
your own souls; nay so, as he is willing to take the Devils leaving^, when sin
and satan had taken the use of your best strength and time, yet he loves, wooes
and waits: yea when you have been proud and scornful, when he had besieged and
beleaguered you with love, and were loath to hang out the white flag, he offers
propositions still: O love the Lord.


2. See if any God be like unto him of all the gods, and can do such wonders
at he has done: You remember what Saul said to Psalm. 48. ult.
David's men in his case; If the son of Jesse can give you orchards and
vineyards, as I can do, then follow him. If all the Gods of the world can do
for you what he has done, can pardon sin by giving his Son, can heal your
souls, and save them after all, Follow them. Joshua struck home in that last
speech of his, I have delivered the Ammonites, Hit^ites, etc. into your hand; I
have sent a horns before Josh. 25. 12, 13, 14, 15.
you, which drove them out before you, even the two Kings of the Ammoni(...)s,
etc. I have given you a hand for which you did not lab(...), (...). Now
therefore fear the Lord and serve him in sincerity and truth, and put away the
Gods your fathers served on the other side the flood, and serve ye the Lord.
And if it seem evil to serve the Lord, then choose whether you will serve the
gods on the other side the flood, or the Gods of the Ammonites: but as for me
and my house I will serve the Lord. Apply it to your selves and give me leave
again to say, therefore O love the Lord, ye that feel mercy.


3. You may be assured, without love, neither what you are, nor what you do
shall please him, nay this whole days work will prove but a mockage, Love will
carry all home to heaven and gain acceptance. Hear what Christ says: Thou
have ravished me (my Cant. 4. 9.
sister, my spouse) with one of thy eyes, and that was the eye of love. I have
many times thought of that of the Apostle, giving so much to love, even putting
all upon love: Yea, though I gave my body to be 1 Cor. 13.
burnt, and had not love, etc. yea preferring it (in some cases) to faith;
truly it is worth your noting: the sum of all, is, Nothing will pass without
Love, it is your ticket to pass into Heaven by. They cry, Wepreacht in thy
name: But where is your Pass, did you do it in love to me? We cast out Devils:
but was it in love, etc. Ah, (my beloved and honored in the Lord) we have
prayed, wept, fasted, feasted, fought, counseled, etc. but were all these in
love to the Lord Jesus? I am bold to say to my learned brethren, that they
shall find it the distinguishing character in their soule-trade. I have seen
this year some of the Enemy before a Council of war, and some of our own
Officers, upon some offense: I have known both pardoned, but here lies the
difference; the enemy pardoned is gone, his pardon was all he looked for; but
the other mourning, what will this pardon do me good, if I should leave this
Army, from which I know not how to live cheerfully? It matters not for my lands
(says poor Mephibosheth) but I shall live in David's presence and see his face.
Love makes way to the bosom of Christ incontinently, and lays the soul in a
bed of roses. It is in all the world like Benjamin to Joseph, if you bring
Benjamin, come and welcome, I else look upon you but as Spies. If this day all
your graces were met to make a glorious flame that might reach heaven; you
shall find Love must do two things, it must put beauty upon all, and perfume
all. Therefore, O love the Lord, ye his Saints.


4. Let this prevail; that mountains of gold and silver are not desired, nor
fat bullocks and rams, but only an affection, Love the Lord. If he had desired
some greater thing of you, (as Naamans servants said) would you not have done
it? Indeed you cannot bestow it better, nor is there any object you call good
can so justly claim it, bestow this where you will else, you shall find the
object mortal, short-breathed, and short-lived; alas, what waking dreams are
honor, beauty, friends, etc? Nay, you shall find it non-satisfactory, all the
excellencies under the sun leave the soul to complaints of vanity and vexing;
and lastly, you shall find it but partially, not universally good. Why will you
lay out your money Isa. 55. 2.
for that which is not bread? all these things will but prove gravel under your
teeth. When David had reckoned mercies not Psalm. 18. 1.
a few, he says upon the total, I will love thee dearly, O Lord my strength.
I beseech you, bethink your selves this day, what less can you do, then kiss
the hand that has preserved you? Love climbes after more union with the
object: would you not be nearer to him, who has made such approaches and
addresses to you, that who so beholds not with wonder and joy, is either
stupid, or envious? Therefore, O love the Lord, ye his Saints.


5. Love is an obliging affection, and draws forth much of God continually to
the creature: when the Lord by his servant Moses charged that people to love
the Lord their God with all their heart, and all their might, he will fill up
all the rest with heaps of promises of what he would do for them, enemies of
all sorts should be subdued, mercies of all kinds should be brought in,
deliverances, preservations, protections, illuminations, and what not? Hosea
seems to delight to particularize the joyncture Gods people shall have in this
case. And it shall come to pass that I will hear, says the Hos. 2. 21, 22,
23.
Lord; I will hear the heavens, and they shall bear the earth, and the earth
shall hear the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall bear Jezreel,
and I will sow her unto me on the earth, and I will have mercy on them that had
not obtained mercy, and I will say unto them which were not my people, Thou art
my people; and they shall say, Thou art my God. And if that be too little, I
will be as the dew unto Israel, he shall grow as the Lilly, and cast forth his
root as Lebanon, his branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the
olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon, they that dwell under his shadow, shall
return, etc.

Nothing can greaten a Nation as this, nothing can maintain what you have
gotten but this, and you will find, Non minor est virtus quam querere, parta
tueri. Therefore, O love the Lord, ye that feel mercy.


6. You shall find that this is a strong and powerful (I was about to say
omnipotent) affection. Much water cannot quench love, it is strong as the
grave. If Paul would give an account of some undertakings, he will tell you
love carries constraint with it, it lessens difficulties, answers hard
questions, removes impediments, over-powers fears, cares, doubts, dangers,
makes wash-way of all. Upon this the Apostle throws the gantlet of famine,
want, persecution, principalities, powers above, beneath; nay, it will wait and
serve in heats and colds, as Jacob for Rachel. I must profess (Excellent
Senators) I know not how you will continue your wearying, toyling, incessant
travels, but by this cordial; it is this only can oil your wheels, and
cheer your hearts, pay you your wages after all expenses of time, estates,
spirits. If a stranger should look upon your travels, the bread of carfulness
you eat, your early risings, long sittings, late goings to bed; can you give
account of any thing, but, That you love? Truly, I know nothing so heavy but
love can lift, nothing so high but it can reach, nothing so deep but it can
fathom. Love to this Cause, I would rather say to this God, has quieted your
Army often, drawn out the deepest blood of many, emptied the purses of the
rich, drawn forth the tears of the poor, and their sighs to heaven, when they
could do no more. Union with God, the end of this love, is the issue of all
our labors. Therefore, O love the Lord, ye that feel mercy.


But you may ask wherein it consists, or how would I desire this affection
should be manifested? I answer,

1. There is a love in imitation; and indeed, those we love most, we make our
copies to write after. Then he pleased to mind the Text again, He preserves
the faithful, and plenteously rewards the proud doer: there is your pattern,
imitation calls upon you to preserve the faithful, and to reward the proud
doer. And these two look like the main interests of this State: the former, a
revere^d brother, under that name, Mr. Tho. Goodwin, in a Sermon so called.
has commended unto you worthily, I am bold to add the latter to it. For if
you hear Politicians abroad what they say, even Roan to Richlien, they tell us
of this double interest, (which some think expired with Queen (...)) viz. that
We should have continued the patrons of the Protestant cause, as the King of
Spain of the Catholic, and so have preserved the faithful, which Germany and
Rochel would have thanked us for. And secondly, We should have rewarded the
proud, i. e. kept our war at a distance even where she left us engaged, and by
this time (it may be) we might have dried up E^^phra^es, I mean, possessed the
whole West Indies, which with little time and help from these parts, may b^
accomplished: The words that follow in that Treatise, are, That England is a
great Animal, and cannot be destroyed but by it self; which injury we are
still as likely to put upon our selves as any people in the world. One Chapter
in Amos has bred me some sad thoughts of heart, where he (...) you of Amos 1.
2, 3.
two Visions, the one of G(...)ppers, that devoured every green thing, which
made the Prophet cry out; By whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small? and those
Caterpillars were swept away. The other Vision was a contention by fire, for
which he uses the same prayer, By whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small? It
seems contentions, yea, fiery contentions may lay a State as low as
Caterpillars; the Lord sprinkle the blood of his Son upon this fire, and quench
it (...).

Doubtless much love of imitation will be showed to God, in recovering these
two Interests abroad, and (if I might not be thought a designer) I wish it at
home: Why should not the faithful be preserved? For the love of God do it. I
speak not for my self, for with Simeon, I could even desire to depart in
peace, now mine eyes have seen so much of the Salvation of God.

Nor do I bring any Petition from your Army, they never have, nor ever will be
burden some to you by Petitions but since you have trusted them with your own
lives and estates, they are contented willingly to trust you again with their
liberti^^. It brings to mind that issue of a Combat, whereof Livie is the
reporter, when the three H(...)i, and the three (...) had by the sword decided
the quarrel betwixt the (...) and their enemies, and only one H^^arius
survived, (...) (...)ning, met his sister, the wise of one of the ^^ra^ii, and
she forgetting her self to her brother in language, fell also by his hand: The
Sena^e would con^^emn to death this Hora(...), whose father by the Author
speaks to this purpose.

^ victoria (...) vidistis (Quiri(...)s) nunc sub furea inter verbera and
cruciatus videre potestis, I lictor, obnu^e caput liberatoris hujus urbis,
colliga manus quae paul^ (...) ^rinatae imperium populo Romano peporerunt, etc.
Can any man bind those hands, which lately armed, procured the liberty and
safety of the Kingdom? This I must take boldness to say, that if this or the
next Age shall bury those faithful ones, it must be either here among the
Trophies, taken from their enemies, or abroad in the Country among the
sepulchers of Cavaliers, and so they will live when ever they die. But I have
held you here too long, and I refer this head to that interest of England: That
which concerns the rewarding proud doers, as the Lord has gone before you,
follow after in his name, for truly I fear not all the contentions among us,
but pride I fear, the Mother, Midwife, Nurse of all contention. I hear much of
difference, opinions, sects, heresies, and truly I think they would be less,
if we did not think them so many: One error, and but one, our Savior gives
caution about, and lately I have thought much upon: He says, Beware of the
leaven of the Pharisees, and if we knew what that leaven were, it would help
us in these fear^. This I suggest therefore, Leaven has three properties. 1.
It sowres. 2. It tuffen^, or hardens. 3. It swells the lump. Therefore that
opinion which sowres (...) sp^^its against their brethren, and it may be
against Authority, that swells them, and prides them, that hardens them, and
makes tough, and not easily entreated, beware of that opinion, as of the leaven
of the Pharisees. Errors in us, are like corn, in the sowing of it; if it lie
above ground, it may be gathered up again, but if plowed in and harrowed, lie
under the clod, there is little hope. Whilst Errors lie in the understanding,
Scripture, reason, argument, time, sweetness and tenderness may do much to
the curet the danger is, when they lie under the will, when we shall say, we
will have what we will, or all shall crack; with Sampson, pull down the two
great posts, that others may perish, though we perish with them. Beware of this
leaven of the Pharisees: You shall ever find pride the fomenter of
differences, I beseech you therefore reward the proud do^^, and spar^ not. But
those opinions that find a soul in a lowly frame, and after (...)ved, keep the
soul so, and carry it to Christ, they need not trouble State nor Church. I
long since learn^d, if we could (...) imagination, we might soon cu^e
tribulation. But I proceed.

2. It will be love to the Lord, if we love him in his dispensations when they
have their vicissitudes; to love him smiling, and love him frowning too; to
love him, sitting upon his knee, and love him under his lash too: to maintain
that, Compositi jus, fasque animi sanctosque recessus
Men^is --
To be mediis tranquillus in undis; to say, the Lord does well what ever he
does: I will love thee, though thou kill me, and trust in the (cries Joh.) This
look like love, otherwise your mistakes will be many, about the creature, and
the Creator. You are now come upon a new trial, the Lord outwrastles the
temptation for you: You may think now the danger little, I pray remember
Sisera, he took a nap after his lordly dish, and a woman's hand nailed his head
to the ground. David thought it no danger to take a nap in an afternoon, but
there he split his soul, and hardly made up again. You may think it looks now
like the afternoon of the day to you, and as if your work were toward an end:
mistake not, I believe you have seen most of the miracles, but are not yet over
the red sea; or if you were over, yet love the Lord in this dispensation, lest
you be brought to tack about two and forty times in the wilderness.

It argues much feebleness of spirit, to change our affections upon changes of
Providence, he never loved well, nay hardly at all, that can love no better:
yea, this you shall find most true, that all backslidings from God, spring
from the change of our opinions concerning God, and these we do often from the
varieties of his dealings with us, as if he were a better God one year than the
other, and this is often our folly, who can easilier look upon the barks and
outsides of things, than their insides: Because he was a Carpenters son,
therefore a stumbling block to the Jews, they could see no further. The glitter
and glory of a painted world has made blind the eyes of many: Nor is it a
small mistake among men, when they keep their thoughts upon present things,
with neglect of future, hence the Psalmist concludes the 107. Psalm, Who so is
wise, and will observe Psalm. 107. ult.
these things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord: Now
the infide of all was loving kindness, and the issue of all will be loving
kindness to the Saints. It concerns you therefore to look to your love in
storm, and calm, in war, in peace; to love the Lord then, is to love him in all
changes.

3. It appears you love him, when you are promoting his ends, and ayms: thus
wives love, thus faithful servants love, who stand not in shops to sell
Apprentices, but their Masters wares, not advance themselves, but him they
serve. That humble loving John Baptist, I must decrease, but he must increase,
and willing he was Christ should have all; and that love discovers it self much
when you are ready to live in his will, not your own, that he may have not
only meat dressed, but as he pleases; such Worship as he likes, such
Governments as he takes pleasure in; yea, when you will be reaching your duty
through the fire, even to become fools, that you may be wise in his account:
If the Lord be gainer, what if all the world be losers? These are my daily
sighs to heaven for you all, that he may be lifted up, who has held up your
heads above the water; that you may hear that Euge at your great account, Come
you blessed and faithful servants, enter into your Masters joy. And if you ask
me what I conceive the Lords great design is in these days, that you may
attend it? I answer. Doubtless it is to pull down all the glory of the world,
that his Son may be advanced. He is now preaching. All flesh is grass; you are
certainly upon the edge of the fulfilling very great and glorious Prophecies:
You see the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing: The Kings of
the Earth are in Council, Be wise therefore O ye Judges, kiss the Son lest
be be angry, and you perish in the midway. The Lords desi(...)is the downfall
of Antichrist, love him in promoting this end; and especially let me call for
help hereunto from my Reverend and learned Brethren here present, Ah Brethren,
show your love in this work: Be not offended if I leave this caution with you,
and let this charity begin at home amongst us, for ever beware of a spirit of
domination, truly it is a spirit of Antichrist, and it was the first great
quarrel the first 300. years after Christ. When Constantine had been
bountiful to the Church at Rome, and after was as noble to that of Bizantium
(now Constantinople) a quarrel grew among the two Pastors of these Churches,
who should be called Papa, which introduced the Proverb, Religion begot wealth,
and the mother devoured the daughter. Remember our old complaints against
Prelates, and how we have filled Parliament ears with our outcries. Let this
be often with you (my dear Brethren) that in all the cracks, flaws, and ruins
of States, some priestly thing or other has had the principal hand; mind it
in a passage or two, good Jeremy past through all guards, till he came to
Pushur Jer. 20. 1.
the Priest: the Nobility, Gentry, and others were easily entreated: Christ
breaks upon the (...)bes and Pharisees mainly: It is considerable that H^sed
says, Hear Oye Priests, hearken Oye People, give ear O Hos. 5. 1.
house of the King, for ye have been a snare, etc. the poor people are betwixt
the Priest, and the house of the King, but it is to be noted that the Priests
are in the first place: It lies much upon you to show your love to the Lord in
promoting his great ends.

4. This love would (...) let out to his Saints, of which you have lately heard
so much, that I shall say but little, less then this I cannot say, No man can
love the Father, and destroy his children, truly I cannot say ^oo much for
them, because they have done so much for you. I pray grieve them not, it may be
you may grieve the Spirit of God in them, do not make them sad, whom the Lord
would not have made sad, be not angry with your deliverance because of the good
hand the Lord has made use of: Why should Ezra be angry with Zer^^babel for
beginning the work? O^ Zer^^babel with Nehemiah for ending it? You know how
well it will be taken in heaven, that you use the heirs of that country well
upon earth, yea, you shall do well to love them impartially; It is the trial
many of the world are put to (which they mind not) how they will demean
themselves toward poor Saints; And let it not be forgotten, that it will be
the word of (...) the great day, In that you did it not (says Christ) to one
of these little ones, you did it not to me. The Saints may do you much good,
they can do you no harm: I am confident, their interest in heaven which they
have made use of for this nation, has been a strong ingredient to your
preservation^ and this is your glory, and may be your establishment, That this
Land is sown with such feed, which I believe Popery, Prelacy, and what else is
not of God, does come too late to root up. You remember that great Emperor,
who professed he would rather be a Member of a Church of Saints, then the Head of
the Empire. It is taken notice of, that you have laid this to heart, and the
Saints bless you, and carry you, and your counsels to heaven with them daily.
In all the loud cries now about differences, this touches my heart, that some
men can trample a poor Saint to the dust, and into the grave (if they might)
for a Peccadillo, a little distance in an opinion; and an open, prop(...),
beastly, (...) drunkard, a blackmouthed swearer, an enemy to any thing that is
good, can live quietly and unmolested.

5. And above all, this love is clothed with all its glory, when we shall love
him in his Son, and greater honor you cannot do him, then to love him in
Christ, in whom he has laid up all fullness, Col. 1. 19.
the character and image of all his grace and glory. But what he is, and how
lovely, what want you have of him, what worth is in him, and which is the way
to please him, is constantly suggested unto you almost from every Pulpit, the
mystery of Christ now discovering it self. He is the chiefest of ten thousand,
his mouth is most sweet, yea, he is all loveliness. He is your peace, the
Prince of Peace, the Psalm. 2.
great Peacemaker, if you desire peace, war must continue, he has an Iron
Mace: and the Nations will be delivered up unto him, a Dan. 2.
stone cut out of the Mountains shall fall upon the greatest Governors in the
world, O love the Lord in his Son,


6. It concerns us this day that our love appear in our praises, and though we
have had so many Victories and Mercies, that we have even wanted time for our
solemn acknowledgements, and kindnesses have come tumbling in like war, one
following the other, that Finis unius boni gradus est futuri;
Yet we have wanted ^kill to manifest our love to God in his praises, of which
you hear much by David, who sometimes seems to forget himself in this point, he
will like a bird, having got a note, record it over and over. Psalm. ^36. For
his mercy endures for ever, His mercy endures for ever. I shall take leave to
commend to you that he has in another place. Pr^^ise waits for thee silently
in Sien, Psalm. 65. 1.
though your Translation want the Adverb that gives the Emphasis: There is a
threefold silence in this waiting upon Gods praises: As, 1. There is a silence
of expectation, when the soul waits when to express his praises, and
therefore keeps a private Catalogue of his faithfulness, and truth. 2. A
silence of admiration, when the heart is even ravished to wonder, and sits down
silently, wondering over every mercy, and all his lo^e^. 3. A silence of
approbation, when others shall set forth his praises, we approve, and allow,
and can say A(...), and this is the work at Sion, about his praises: in the
last Psalm there are but six Verses, yet (...) (...). O love him in his
prai^^^, (...) him for (...), (...), (...) him for all your lashes, for you
could not want a ^^ig of the rod, praise him for his power, goodness, love,
tenderness, pity, praise him that you are on this side the grave and hell,
yea above all, for his own bosom, for his dearest Son, who has hung about our
necks often, and wept many a compassionate tear upon our cheeks, not yet wiped
off. Let us all take up that of the Prophet, My heart is inditing some good
matter, the word there is the same with the bubling of the oil in the frying
Pan at the Sacrifice: Every heart should now be bubling up something, every one
should be thinking of setting up some monument, Jacob promises the building of
a Bethel, a house of God, if he might speed well in his journey: What if you
Noble Lords should write upon your door, The Lord will honor them that honor
him.


If you Worthies of the other house, upon your door, Salus populi suprema lex.


And you, the Governors of this City,

Jerusalem is a City compact, etc. Your union amongst your selves will turn
much to Gods praise.

And I wish this were written upon the doors of the Assembly,

If any man list to be contentions, we have no such custom among us, nor the
Churches of Christ.

I leave these but as intimations, or suggestions to your wisdoms, lest the
day and work we are about do evaporate, and come to nothing. I wish your
children, and so ages to come may be taught his praises, since you so abound in
matter, I pray convey it to after ages, that they may love the God of their
Fathers: Tell your little ones this night the story of 45. the towns taken, the
fields fought, tell them of near 30000 prisoners taken this last year, 500
pieces of Ordnance, tell them of the little loss on our side, be sure to let
them know it was for the liberty of the English subjects you fought, charge
them to preserve the liberties that cost you so dear, but especially the
liberties purchased by the blood of Christ, and above all, let them know that
the God of heaven is the God of England, and has done all, but his name, and
his Sons name, who can tell us? I wish Job 30.
we knew God better, that we might love him more. Oh love the Lord in his
praises, and praise him for his love. In amore divino hic solus inest modu^, ut
si^ si^e modo.

I dare not add more, time is so exceedingly exceeded.

You are (I understand) by the City invited to a feast, which I confess is one
piece of this solemnity: But what feast shall we call it? Shall it be a feast
of Tabernacles? truly we might have lived in Tents and Booths, or by some
hedges sides all our days, had Tyranny and Popery gained the travel of their
souls, and desire of their hearts, you might have been sitting by some rocks
sides in the Wilderness, looking sadly back upon poor England, or by the river
Ahava, in the Captivity with Ezra. If you like not to call it a feast of
Tabernacles, will you let it go under the name of a Marriage Feast? it seems
to look like that: I remember the Espousals of the Parliament and this City,
when ye wore your Protestations upon your Pikes, resolving to live and die
with the Parliament: I hope you will be as good as your words; you are upon the
close of your work, and now you have many causes of further union, who have
mourned together, and now are rejoicing together upon unparalled grounds:
Call it then a feast of love, my Text calls for nothing but love, and I wish
that may be the issue, and product of the work, and truly for that end, I would
willingly come from the place where I stand to beg it upon the bare knee; and
when I speak of love betwixt Parliament and City, I do not exclude my Reverend
Brethren, only I am afraid of a third State, because we have paid already very
dear for Clergicall interests.

And now I think of this further union betwixt you, I remember when the Lord
closes with his people in Hosea, He will take away the names of Loammi, and
Lorumah; There are two names in this Hos. 2.
Kingdom, I wish they were taken away also, or whatever might hinder your
nearness.

You worthies of the City, look well upon the Parliament, and tell me if they
be not lovely; how could you have been preserved from Anarchy without them,
where would you have centered had this Basis of the Kingdom been destroyed? If
the foundations be plucked up, what shall the righteous do? The best now in
England could not have lived without a Parliament, and the worst but a little
time: I must profess an Anti-Parliamentary spirit (especially in this
conjuncture) to be the designer of his own ruin and posterity, to be the
introducer of certain misery to the present age. I look upon it as the fruits
of much malice, or much ignorance, and the brat of those men's brains that never
lived beyond the view of the smoke of their own Chimnies, that measure States
and Kingdoms with their interests, by their private shop-wands; and if they be
pressed, or priested into it by any of my coat (which is Satan's old method) it
will argue the more feebleness, and prove more dangerous. Remember (friends)
to beat Religion with Religion, is a subtlety as old as Jesuitisme, and older.
Remember the dead and the living; You have had their Hambdens, Pims, Stroudes,
who if now living, would have called this day the Suburbs of their happiness,
and you had the blood of some Nobles too, that Zealous Brook and others; and
these are here this day to joy with you, that have mourned with you, who have
been your watch day and night: You know how vain it will be to war abroad; nisi
sit consilium domi, you are now reaping the most glorious fruits of their
labors and pains; if you have any thing justly to object against them, all
you can say is, they are men, yet such men as may not be called to a slight
account for their actions, but in many cases the ways of State may run so
deep, that we can help only with this, Levius fit patientia,
Quicquid corrigere est nefas.
To be weary of a Parliament now, were to conquer our selves into a new
slavery, it were to proclaim to the world we are mercy-sick, victory-sick, and
liberty-fick, the Lord prevent that portentous mischief. Yet Goa is good to
Israel, Let me hope he will not be worse then he has been.

Nobles and Gentlemen, look upon the City, these are they that strengthened
you with the finews of your war, you have not come unto them for any thing, and
returned empty, You may remember the 100000. li. the 50000. li. the greater,
the lesser fu(...)nes for England, Scotland, and Ireland; and I may not forget
that 80000. li. that oyled the wheels of this last Army in their first going
out. The Lord of Hosts requite it to them that offered so willingly. I add,
you have not only had these helps, but their servants, yea their children out
of their bosoms, who now are found the Officers generally in this Army But I
might call in much of this again, and say the Parliament have had their labor
for th^mselves, and the City for themselves, and one for the other, and all
for the Lord, and this, and other Nations. Only I call for love this day, I
would desire strength in your union. The Spirit says, two are better then one,
and gives reasons from cold, or falls: but adds, a threefold cord is not easily
broken, of which I conceive thus: If two be well agreed, Jesus Christ will make
a third, and then tell me who shall break that cord? it will be stronger then
all the Covenants the sons of men can make, either national, or otherwise. I
am herein the bolder, because the cursed world nearer hand, and further off are
projecting a breach here, and some men within this City walls are ridden up and
down by Jesuits to perfect this work, and feel not their burden. Would you go
again to Egypt? shall we give away our Bibles to Papists, and our libertles to
Locusts and Caterpillars? Shall we deliver up the towns we have taken to them
that are subtle to destroy? Have we not heard of murders and rapines enough?
Mind what Abner said to Joab, Has not the sword devoured enough? will not the
end be bitterness? Let us have but love at Westminster and London, and we
shall crown the day, and derive something from this day to the child unborne,
to give it matter of rejoicing.

If you shall object, the work is not done, we are now upon a Crisis. I answer,
Your temptation is new, this was the time of the year when Princes were wont to
go forth to war, but now it proves a time wherein they sue for peace: Blessed
change! and the truth is, the Sun may sooner get off your Cloak now, then the
Storm could before; the fawning world may do that, the frowning never could. I
shall commend unto you two or three Scriptures: The first, the words after my
Text, Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope
in the Lord.

The second shall be, Eccles. 10. 4. If the spirit of the Ruler rise up against
thee, keep thy place. Learn for ever to make good your experiences, and let it
blow high or low, keep your places. I humbly beseech you (noble Speakers of
both Houses) keep your places, as hitherto you have done: Be not ashamed of
that seasonable and wise Answer once made at that exigent, You have neither
eyes to see, nor tongues to speak, but by order from the house in such cases. I
desire my Lord Major and his brethren to keep their places, and not to be dubbed
out of them, nor courted from your comforts and safety, remember what we all
fought for, prayed for, adventured all for, let not all be lost in the kiss of
a Royal hand, nor suffer your eyes to be put out with Court-glitter and glory:
And I humbly beseech your Lordships, not to lead us the way to that mischief,
for us Ministers, truly we may be apt to catch at the old bait, the Lord help
us to keep our places also: It would grieve your souls to be Court-scoffed
after all. Let me leave with you what Tacitus says of Caesar.

Quotis scunque e curia egrederetur, in haec verba prorupisse fer^ur, O homines
ad servitutem paratos! Etiam illum qui publicam libertatem nollet tam foede
servientium patientiam taedebat.

Therefore every man keep his place, and in so doing another objection is
answered: But our old laws and privileges may again be struck at; read the 8.
v. of Eccles. 10. Who so breaks a hedge, a Serpent shall bite him, an old
hedge, are old good laws, and those that will break them, shall find a
Serpent, you can apply, He that removes stones, shall be hurt therewith. And
though it should be that Shimei might escape for a time with his confinement,
yet in the next generation he will break his Covenant, his neck, and all, and
thus I think of many that have railed against heaven and earth, who will be
found out by divine Justice, when your hand cannot reach them. To close up my
thoughts in this, you have hitherto lived upon daily providence, as you do upon
your daily bread, and by providence I believe you are brought beyond your own
first imaginations, and I know the wisest man here cannot tell what will be
next, though in order of causes he may say this or that should be, for who can
tell what is in the womb of a day, or what it will bring forth unto us? This is
certain, when there is darkness in Counsels, in promises, the Lord is pleased
to dissipate clouds, and disperse mists by providence; you shall not need to
fear relying upon that Provident hand which has left you with so many
glorious experiences. Only these cautions I must commend to your wisdoms. 1.
That providence be not slighted and bestow that upon Fortune and Chance, which
is handed to you by Providence. -- Sed nos
Te facimus (Fortuna) Deam coeloque locamus.
2. That you withstand not providence, but accept and improve the offers of
mercy. 3. That you outrun not providence, but be contented to want what the
Lord is not willing to give, not to overhasten your deliverance, for it can
never come seasonably, being wrought by friend or foe, unless the God of your
mercies have a hand in it, and truly he that cannot freely trust God in his way
upon what you have received already, is not fit to receive more: How good it is
to live in his bosom, and upon his hand, who knows how to take measure of your
wants, and supply your needs, and that out of an inexhaust fullness? Lastly,
since feasts are seldom without beggars, give me leave to be the first: and if
we had not been over-bold in detaining you already, I should have been large,
even from my soul to beg help from this most Honorable Assembly in four
particulars.

1. I beg for Souls. 2. For Bodies. 3. Estates. 4. Names.
1. And for the first, I present you here the tears and cries of many
thousands, in the countries we have conquered, who poor souls cry like
prisoners at the Grate, Bread, bread, for the Lords sake bread; all you that
pass by take Pity, pity of us, we have lived upon husks time out of mind.
Men, brethren, and fathers, whilst we are disputing here, they are perishing
there, and going to hell by droves. If I know any thing, what you have gotten
by the sword, must be maintained by the Word, I say the Word by which English
Christians are made; In other countries discipline makes them so, drive them
into a Church together, and then dub them Christians; you will find too much of
this abroad, and hence it comes to pass, that most of their Religion lies in
Polemicks, which is the trade we are likely to drive, if God prevent not. I
need not tell this Assembly, that every where the greater party is the
Orthodoxall, and the lesser the Heretics; so once the A^rians afflicted the
sound Christians, and they increasing, requited it again to the Arrians. It was
once my lot to be a Member of that famous, ancient, glorious work of buying in
Impropriations, by which work 40 or 50 preachers were maintained in the dark
parts of this Kingdom: Diverse Knights and Gentlemen in the Country contributed
to this work, and I hope they have not lost that spirit: I wish exceeding well
to preaching above many things in this world, and wish my brethren were not
under these Tithing-temptations, but that the State had it^neran^ preachers in
all parts of the Kingdom, by which you may reach most of the good ends for this
State designed by you: Let poor People first know there is a God, and then
teach them the way of Worship. The Prophet says, When the husbandman has
plowed, harrowed, and broken the clods, then sow your timely seed, when the
face of the earth is made plain. Indeed I think Isa. 2^.
our work lies much among clods, I wish the face of the earth were cavened. I
fear, whilst we are striving for an Eldership clothed with authority, we shall
want five thousand Ministers to preach; that if you get an Eldership in London,
and think you have done much, you have neither Minister nor Elder to be had in
half the Kingdom, and so you do nothing, a true Eldership is easier wished for
than gotten. I know not why the Parliament may not try and examine men, and
send them out to preach, and take cognizance of the success; I wish that
Committee for plundered Ministers to cast in their help. I once read a story of
a Chairman, setting forth a Century of base Priests. I wonder what is become of
the second, third, and fourth Century: I wish (under the abuse of the Covenant)
they be not crept into their old dens for mischief. If you shall preserve the
Gospel, the Gospel will preserve you. It would not be amiss even in this City
and other places, to turn two or three Meetings to one, and so there might be
room in public for those that are forced into corners, and so suffer under the
name of Schismatics. If this great work were attended abroad, we should not
need to be quarrelling at home. I am not so fully acquainted with the use this
great Council has for my Brethrens advice: but surely I know, the people are
desperately ignorant and profane abroad: and from profane Priests and
ignorant people, you know the other party have fomented this war, and may begin
it again, if the Word prevent not the Sword.

Secondly, I have something to beg for the bodies of men: you have had strong
cries from widows and fatherless children, whose husbands and fathers have
spent their heart-bloud in this service; you have many mai^ed men, which puts
me in mind of an expedient for them, if improved: I mean that famous royal
Foundation of the Charter House, or Suttons Hospital, they say worth 5
or 6000 l. per annum. I humbly beseech your Lordships not to be offended, if I
put you in mind of the intentions of the Donor. It is pity that so gallant a
work should prove a nest of unclean Birds; methinks it was built for this time,
and God may be much honored, by turning the givers intentions into the right
channel, many faithful souls will bless your care and tenderness.

The streets also are swarming with poor, which I refer to the Senators of this
City, that is glorious many ways, why should it be so beggarly in the matter
of beggars? I leave to your wisdom de m^do. Yet let not my request dye. I have
lived in a Country, where in seven years I never saw beggar, nor heard an
oath, nor looked upon a drunkard: why should there be beggars in your Israel
where there is so much work to do? and if this design were well minded and
managed in the City, there would be little place left for such Excentrick
motions.

The third boon I beg is for men's estates, Justice exalts a Nation, but sin
is a shame to any people. I would beseech all sorts whom it concerns to speed
justice; it were better for a man to dye once then often: You reverend Fathers
of the Law put in some help here; can there not yet be found a shorter way to
further justice? must that badge of conquest still lie upon us, the Laws I
mean, in French? Can there not an expedient be found out in plain English,
whereby every one may soon come to his own? Must such members of the most
Heroic spirits be spending their brave heats and heights in Westminster Hall?
was it not a project to in-gown our gentile English, for fear they might be
looking abroad to see how their interests lie? may there not be two or three
friend-makers set up in every Parish, without whose labor and leave none
should implead another? I crave pardon. There is one evil I have seen under
the Sun, a poor man kept in prison for debt, whereby his spirit is debaucht,
and he utterly disabled to pay: It is not so abroad. Let those that lent you
freely in this war, and suffer now, be first thought on. I know many have
adventured more then all for you, your promise made good for the sale of
Delinquents lands will do it.

Fourthly and lastly, I beg something for men's names; and though I know no
public person but ought to carry a spare Handkerchief to wipe off dirt, yet
certainly blasting men's names in print, is not the way to clear a cause in
dispute. Yet I have learnt this of my noble General. Let us look to our duty,
and the Lord will care for our reproaches; but I leave it to your wisdoms. I
need not to tell you, you have Heralds of Arms to keep up men's names that have
done worthily, though that spirit breath not in this Army. But I shall shut up
all with these Scriptures.

Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3. If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any compassion and mercy,

Fulfill my joy that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, and one judgment.

That nothing be done by contention or vainglory, etc.


Phil. 4. 8. Furthermore (brethren) whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are worthy
love, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any virtue, or if there
be any praise, think of these things.
These things do, and the God of peace shall be with you,
Amen.
FINIS.

