HERESIOGRAPHY: OR, A description of the Heretics and Sectaries of these
latter times.

By E. Pagitt.

The second Edition, with some Additions: as in the Folio following.

MATH. 15. 17. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps (...), but
inwardly are ravening Wolve^. 1 TIMOTHY 4. 1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly,
that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to
seducing Spirits, and doctrines of Divils: Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having
their conciences seared with a hot Ir^n. Imprimatur. J* A. CRANFORD.

LONDON, Printed by VV. Wilson, for John Marshall and Robert Trot, and are to
be sold at their shops in Cornhill, over against the Exchange, and under the
Church of Edmond the King in Lombard street* 1645.

The names of the Sects; viz.
Anabaptists, page 1. Brownists, 48. Semi-separatists, 75. Independents, 76.
Familists, 81. Adamites, 91. Antinomians, 94. Arminians, 10. 8 Socinians, 122.
Antitrinitarians. 124. Millenaries, 126. Hethringtonians, 127.
Anti-sabbatarias, 128. Traskites, 130. Jesuits, 132. Muncerians, 32.
Apostolikes, 33. Separatists. 33. Catharists. Enthusiasts. Liberi. Hutites.
Augustinians. 34 Bewkeldians. Melchiorites. Georgians. Menonists. Pueris
Similes. Servetians. 35 Libertines. Denkians. Semper orantes. Deo-relicti.
Monasterienses. Plunged Anabapt. 36. Barrowists, 69. Wilkinsonians,
Johnsonians. 70 Ainsworthians. Robinsonians. Lemarists. 71. Castalian
familists, 89 Grindletonians. Familists of the mourtains. 90. Of the valleys.
Scattered flock. Caps Order, etc.
The Addition.
The sum ^f a Treatise of M^ Johnsons* aagainst Anabaptists. 44 Of the
Pelagins. 138 Soule-sleepers. 139 Denyers of the Scriptures. 141 Expecters or
Seekers. Divorsers. 142 Of the Papists. 143 The Papists compared with other
Heretics. 147 A Postscript. 154 An Extract of the Acts of the National Synod
of the reformed Churches of France 195
To the Right Honorable Thomas Atkin, Lord Major of the City of London, and
to the Right Worshipful, Sir Nicholas Raynton. Isaac Penington, Lieutenant of
the Tower, Sir lo: Woollaston, John Glyn Recorder, Sir John Cordell, Sir Thomas
Soame, Sir John Gayr, Sir Jacob Garrat, Thomas Adams, Io: warner, John Tous^,
Abraham Reynardson, Sir George Garra^, Sir George Clerk, John Langham, Th^mas
Andrews, John Foulke, James Bunce, William Gibbs, and Richard Chambers
Sheriffs: Samuel Warner, W^lliam Barkely, Thomas Foot, John Kendricke, Thomas
Culh^m, Simon Edmonds, Aldermen of the said City.
RIght Honorable, and Right Worshipful, whereas I have lately published a
Christianography, or a description of many great Churches of Christians in the
world: some of which are for extent, larger then the Church of Rome in Europe,
for time more ancient, for succession as continual, for faith more sound: who
believe with us the church of God to be Catholic, as it is in the Apostles
Creed, and not as it is set down in the new Trent Creed confined to Rome, who
renounce the Popes Supremacy, some of them excommunicating him for a
Schismatic and Heretic.

Who receive the holy Communion in both kinds, they all drink of Christ's cup,
and abhor the Romish decree, made contrary to Christ's Institution.

Who make no Images to be worshipped.

Who do not acknowledge the figment of Purgatory, nor use any Prayers to be
delivered from the fained pains thereof.

Who have their Prayers in their own tongue, and mutter them not in latin as
the Romists do.

Who forbid not Marriage (the prohibiting of which is called by St. Paul, the
Doctrine of Devils.) Their Priests may and do marry.

Who hold not popish Transubstantiation.

Who prohibit not Laymen the reading of the holy Scriptures commanded by
Christ himself.

Who do not join with Christ's Intercession the suffrages of Saints: nor with
his Justification the merit of works: nor with the Satisfaction Papal
Indulgences.

These points with some others, which the ambition and avarice of the Romists
has lately hatched, they renounce with us.

This work I purposing to perfect and consummate to the glory of God, the
great profit of the Church, and establishing of men's consciences, they seeing
the unity and agreement of the holy Churches in the world with us: Behold
suddenly a numerous company of other Heretics stole in upon us like the
locusts, Rev. 9.

As the unpure Familists who blasphemously pretend to be Godified like God,
whereas indeed they are divellified like their Father the Devil.

The illuminated Anabaptists who blasphemously affirm the baptism of children
to be the mark of the Beast, and to come from Antichrist.

The Donatisticall Brownists, who in times past hid themselves in holes; now
lift up their heads, and vent openly their errors, infecting our people.

The Antinomians, who teach as I find, such a fair and easy way to heaven,
viz. That a man need not be troubled by the law before faith, and that faith is
not a going out of himself to take hold of Christ, but only a discerning that
Christ is his, and that after this, such a man must see nothing in himself,
have nothing, do nothing, need no sorrow nor repentance, nor be pressed to
duties, need never pray unless moved by the Spirit: If he fall into sin,
never the more disliked of God, nor his condition the worse: and that he must
abide in the height of comfort, though he fall into gross sin. The novelty of
this doctrine takes so well, or rather ill that multitudes of simple men and
women dance after their Pipes, they run after these men as if they were mad,
crowding the Churches, filling their doors and windows.

The Independents trouble also our poor Church, who pretend that they have a
perfect model of Church^ government, which Almighty God has revealed to them,
which many like better then the government of the Reformed Churches, being
persuaded that in Independency they may have liberty to do what they list,
having no government, hoging to be as free as their Teachers, who will have
none at all.

The Arminians also an after-brood of the Pellagiant, broach their erroneous
opinions.

The Sabbatarians affirm the old Jewish Sabbath to be kept, and not the Lords
day.

The Anti-sabbatarians would have no particular Sabbath at all, but every day
to be a sabbath to a Christian man.

The Traskites, who would have us observe many Jewish ceremonies.

We have also Millenaries who affirm that before the day of judgment Christ
shall come down from heaven, and reign with the Saints upon earth 1000. years,
in which time they shall destroy all the wicked, binding their Kings in
chains, and Nobles in linkes of iron.

We have Hetheringtonians, who hold a hodg-podg of many heresies, troubling
our peoples brains.

We have also Socinians, who teach that Christ dyed not to satisfy for our
sins: and also his Incasnation to be repugnant to reason, and not to be
sufficiently proved by Scrip^ture, with many other abominable errors.

We have Arians, who deny the Deity of Christ.

We have an Atheistical Sect, who affirm that men's souls sleep with their
bodies until the day of Judgment.

We have Atheists too many, as among others, one was committed by a Justice of
Peace, who mocked and jear'd at Christ's Incarnation. His Father was burnt at
Thoelouze in France; he scapeth unpunished among us: too many others we have.

They preach, print, and practice their heretical opinions openly: for books,
vide the bloody Tenet, witness a tractate of divorce in which the bonds are
let loose to inordinate lust: a pamphlet also, in which the soul is laid
asleep from the hour of death unto the hour of judgment, with many others.

Yea, since the suspention of our Church Government, every one that lists
turns Preacher, as Shoo-makers, Cobblers, Button-makers, Hostlers and such
like, take upon them to expound the holy Scriptures, intrude into our Pulpits,
and vent strange doctrine, tending to faction, sedition, and blasphemy.

What mischief these Sectaries have already done, we that have cure of souls
in London find and see with great grief of heart: viz. Our Congregations
forsaking their Pastors; our people becoming of the Tribe of Gad, running
after seducers as if they were mad; Infants not to be brought to the Sacrament
of Baptism; men refusing to receive the holy Communion, and the Lords Prayer
accounted abominable, etc. A Volume will hardly contain the hurt that these
Sectaries have in a very short time done to this poor Church; and does not the
Commonwealth suffer with the Church? Whence are all these distractions? Who
are the Incendiaries that have kindled and blown this fire among us but these?

Considering with my self the former happiness of this Kingdom, and the
sudden change that is betide it, it being fallen from the height of prosperity
to the lowest ebb of misery, and this not by the incursion of a Foreign
Nation, but by its own children, who imbrue their hands in the blood one of
another with no less inhumanity then Cannibals or Men-eaters, without any
reluctation at all; the Son against the Father, and the Father against the
Son, being involved in a most cruel War without any hopes of Peace.

And moreover (which is worst of all) when I consider that some of our
Clergymen (who should like Moses stand in the gap to appease Gods anger) do
increase the same, not only by blowing the fire, but by their Errors and
Schisms which they broach and foment among us; by which they do as much as in
them lies to put men's souls in as great danger as their bodies.

And considering again how we are involved in a most cruel War without any
hopes of peace, may not I cry out with the Prophet; O that my head were full of
water, and my eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep for the slain of
my people!

But all this being Gods permitting, let us with patience possess our souls;
let us trust in him, depend upon him, and in his good time he will deliver his
Church, and turn all to the best; and in the mean season every man do his
best to quench this fire. For my own part, these sad considerations made me
leave my Christianography, and write an He^^siography to describe the Heretics
and Schismatics of this time, in which I set down their beginning among us;
their heretical opinions and errors, confuting them; and also relate how other
Princes and Common^ wealths have suppressed them, and how severely some of them
have been punished among us.

I know my reverend Brethren have not been wanting to oppose these Heretics
in writing and preaching, in season and out of season, using all means to
suppress these Heresies, having to that end chosen special men to preach
several Lectures in several places; But without your help and the assistance
of our Religious Patriots assembled in Parliament, they do, and will increase
upon us do what we can.

This Treatise I present to your Lordship, and to this Honorable Senate. What
can be more suitable or fitter for you, Servants of the most high God, then
that which tends to the glory of God, Edification of his Church, and
vindication of the truth against the illusion of Sectaries and Heretics?

What is more correspondent with the duty of Christian Magistrates then to
assist Gods cause with your political Authority? A question may be asked
whether it be lawful for the Magistrates to use the sword against Heretics?
To this I answer; such whose Heresies are blasphemous in doctrine, or dangerous
to the State, deserve death, the reason is, because they corrupt the faith. If
such as poison waters and fountains at which men and beasts drink, deserve
Capital punishment, how much more they that as much as in them lies go about
to poison men's souls?

Yea, St. Augustine says in his fifth Tractat upon John; Quantum in ipsis est
Christum in homine occidunt.

The forenamed St. Augustine indeed wavered concerning this point for a time,
as he confesses in one of his Epistles: but when he saw the City wherein he
dwelt was reclaimed from Donatisme by the Magistrates sword, he retracted his
opinion.

And expecting the like success in this honorable City, I do implore your
helps, and that for Jesus Christ's sake: and I pray you give me leave to put you
in mind of the Covenant we made in the presence of Almighty God the searcher of
all hearts, with a true intent to perform the same, as we should answer at
that great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, viz. That
we should in like manner without respect of persons endeavor the extirpation
of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Propha^enesse, and
whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of
godliness, lest we partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to
receive of their plagues; and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the
three Kingdoms.

And this I beseech you in the name of God to take in hand, laying aside all
humane reasons.

Let not Gods cause go to rack, nor by worldly policies and humane reason be
protracted or retarded.

The Turk will not suffer Mahomet to be blasphemed: as we are Christians let
us stand for Christ.

How dangerous the fostering of Heretics has been, histories declare, viz.
Almighty God sent down fire from Heaven and consumed Antioch, Paulus Diacon.
Lib. 15.
being a Nursery of Heretics: And also how the earth opened and swallowed
Nicomedia, the meeting place of the blasphemous Arrians: also in the
Commentaries of Sleidan, Theodo^. lib. ^. cap. ^6.
how the Anabaptists meeting first in Conventicles, surprised Munster: and how
hardly Amsterdam escaped them, Lambertus Hortensius writes.

The plague is of all diseases most infectious: I have lived among you almost a
Iubile, and seen your great care and provision to keep the City from
infection, in the shutting up the sick, and in carrying them to your
Pest-houses, in setting Warders to keep the whole from the sick, in making of
fires and perfuming the streets, in resorting to your Churches, in pouring out
your prayers to Almighty God with fasting and alms to be propitious to you.
The plague of heresy is greater, and you are now in more danger then when you
buried five thousand a week: You have power to keep these Heretics and
Sectaries from Conventickling and sholing together to infect one another. Fire
is dangerous, many great Cities in Europe have been almost ruinated by it: I
have seen your diligence and dexterety in quenching it in the beginning: your
breaking open your Pipes for water making floods in your streets: your Engines
to cast the water upon the houses: your industry and pains is admirable.

Heresy is as dangerous as fire, use your best endeavors to quench it before
it consume us.

Thus not doubting Right Honorable, and Right Worshipful, of your best
endeavors to suppress these Heretics and Sectaries, by whom not only many
poor souls are infected, but also the holy name of God is blasphemed. I
cease, most humbly entreating Almighty God to bless this City, and to give
unto you the fruition of all temporal felicities in this life, and the
neverfailing fullness of blessedness in the life to come

To the Reader.
THou which have atender Conscience, and desire nothing so much as to know
the right way to Heaven, having many doubts which cause thee to leave thy own
Pastor, and run not only to other public Congregations, but also to the
private meetings of the Separatists and others for resolution.

For thy sake and safety I have published this Treatise, in which thou may
discern Truth from Error, having their Errors set before thee, with the
confutation of them out of the holy Scripture.

OU^ Lord and Savior in his holy Sermon in the Mount, telling his Disciples of
the narrow way that leads unto life, he specially forewarneth them of false
Prophets: Beware of fals^ Prophets which come to you in sheeps clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening Wolves. As if he should say, my dear Disciples, you
hearing of the way to heaven, will be inquiring after it, and especially of
Prophets; But let me forewarn you of false Prophets, for in stead of directing
you, they will put you out of the way. Come.
False prophets will come, they are not sent: St. Paul asks how they can
preach except they be sent? and this stands with good reason: every true
Minister stands in Gods room being the Lords Ambassador to deliver his will,
who dare to this unsent? No man takes this honor unto himself, but he that
is called of God says my Author to the Hebrews.

But whence come they now, from the Schools of the Prophets? no, many of them
from mechannicke Trades: as one from a stable from currying his horses: another
from his stal from cobling his shoes, and these sit down in Moses chair to
mend all, as Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, as Heralds of the most high God:
these take upon them to reveal the secrets of Almighty God, to open and shut
heaven, to save men's souls.

But to hear these fellows to discourse of the holy Trinity, of Gods eternal
decree and other deep points of Divinity: you may hear the mad men in Bedlam
prate as wisely as they: and are not their hearers that run after them as mad
as they? Are they not bewitched? as St. Paul tells the Gallatians.

To you that are my Disciples: daily experience shows us whom the
Anabaptists, To you.
Brownists and other Sectaries go about to seduce, viz. not drunkards.
Adultere^s, Swearers, and profane persons whom the Devil has ensnared
already, but such as are desirous of heaven. They lead captive (says St.
Paul,) silly women who are always learning. They come unto you in sheeps
clothing. In sheep clo^thing.
That is, like Zealous and holy Christians, For example, the Devil turns
himself into an Angel of Light: Baals Priests used long prayers: the
blasphemous Arrians (as St. Bazill writes) were easily believed because of
their counterfeit holiness.

The Romish seducers pretend great Sanctimony* the begging Friars befooled the
Christian world with their pretended holiness, with which they (...) their
lewd lives. Generally they come to you with outward sanctimony, with a seeming
contempt of the world; with long prayers, fasting tears, ^lmes deeds,
seeming-zeale, seeming-humi^^^y, seeming harmlesnesse, etc.

They come to you in sheep clothing, insinuating themselves into you under
color of giving you good counsel: as the Devil their chief, counselling our
first Parents to break Gods Commandment, promised to make them like God: and
tempring Christ in the ^^^dernesse, promised to give him all the Kingdoms of
the world and the glory of them.

And that you may the better avoid their enchantments, I will show you the
method they use in deceiving. As first they endeavor to separate the sheep
from their Shepherds, bringing them into contempt with their people, ^ff^^ming
them to be unprofitable, unpowerfull, taxing their conversations as profane,
and doctrine as erroneous. Thus smiting your Shepherds with their tongues,
they draw you to their Conventicles.

2. To palliate their Errors, they parvert the holy Scriptures, as that Monster
Arrius pretended to have 42 places of Scripture against the Deity of Christ,
and this he learnt of his father the Devil, who perverted part of the 91.
Psalm, to tempt our Lord to cast himself down from the pinnacle of the Temple.

And for this cause these Heretics are enemies to the ten Commandments, being
some of the Law: to the Creed being a brief of the Gospel, and to the Lords
Prayer, being a perfect form of Prayer, containing all that can be asked or
prayed against, by which only a simple man may discern any Heretic,
contradicting any Commandment of the Decalogue, Article of the Faith, and
Petition of the Lords Prayer. And for this cause the Church of Rome teaches
the Laity them in Latin, and also they leave out part of the decalogue in
their Catechismes: and for other He^etikes, some do null the whole Law, some
the Creed, and others the Lords Prayer, affirming it to be abominable.

Again, whatsoever outward show they make of holiness, they are indeed
ravening Wolves; therefore our Lord bids us beware of them. The word beware
precedeth danger: As sheep are in danger among Wolves, so are your souls in
danger among false Prophets.

The j^urney of the Israelites to the earthly Canaan, was a type of our journey
to the heavenly. And did not one false prophet, Balaam, do them more mischief
in their journey then Og the King of Bashan, Sehon King of the Amorites, and
all their enemies besides? yea, would the Devil himself in his own likeness
have been more noxious to the Church of God then some Heretics have been? As
one Heretic, Arrius, denying the Deity of Christ, in a manner infected the
whole world.

The like did one other Heretic Eutyches, erring concerning his humanity,
affirming the immensity of Christ's divine nature to have swallowed up his
humane. Now if Christ had not been man, how could he have dyed for us sinners?
and if not God, how could he have wrought the salvation of mankind?

Alas, what danger are we in now, being environed with such a multitude of
Here^ickes? Our Lord tells us again, by their fruits ye shall know them:
they pretend that they are led by the Spirit. The works of the Spirit S^. Paul
s^t^eth forth to be love, joy, peace, (...)
long-suffering gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, and temperance. If
they were led by the holy Spirit, these would be their Characters. But St. Paul
tells us that in the latter days there shall come men, (...). 3.
lovers of their own selves, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to
Parents, unthankefull, unholy:

Master Calvin that admirable man of God, whose name is yet terrible in the
Kingdom of Pope^y, sets down certain Characters of these Impostors, taken
out of St. Augustine.

1. Great Boasters, making ostentation of their own worth, like Simon Magus,
who bewitched the people, sayng that he himself was some great man: Like the
Gnostikes who had a high conceit of their own knowledge, as if they were the
only knowing men of the whole world: their common talk is of their own worth
and actions.

2. Superbia tumidi, blown up with pride, and among us many proud spirits
having not these preferments which they thought themselves worthy of, have
forsaken our Church, and gone to Rome and Amsterdam.

3. Calum^ijs insidiosi, deceitful slanderers: and in this faculty of all
other Sects the Brownists excel: The ^esuites are not so bitter against our
Church as the Separatists compare their writings. Michael the Arch-Angell durst
not give the Devil such cursed speaking, nor rail upon him as they do upon
us and Gods Church.

4. Treacherously seditious, not preaching peace as Christ commanded his
Disciples to do, but division: yea, the Brownists arrogate to themselves, the
name of Separatists, which well they may, being separated from their Mother
Church, from (...) the Reformed Churches, and maliciously divided amongst
themselves.

5. Lest they should seem to be destitute of the light of truth, they arrogate
to themselves the shadow of austerity and show of holiness.

6. Sacri^egious, what the appetite of all Schismatics has been in this way
is notorious, caring no^ for the ruin of the whole Church, upon condition that
they might get somewhat. They have so taught, that some think there is no such
sin as Sacrilege at all.

Our Lord fore-warning us of false Prophets, and so lively describing them, and
we having such Characters and marks to know them: Thou understanding the
Decalogue, Creed, and Lords Prayer, if thou be misled, thy sin will light upon
thine own head. For is there any man so simple but can ^ell when their
Doctrines they teach cross any of these?

And one thing more will aggravate your defection before Almighty God, viz.
Your Covenant and Oath wherewith you bound your selves in the presence of God,
to suppress all Errors, Heresies, and Schism; God forbid but that you should
keep your Covenant which we ministered, and you received with great alacrity.

To draw to an end, Epiphanius writes of the heresies of this time, calls
his Book Pae^arium, that is, a medicinable box, containing saving medicaments
against lying doctrine.

The end of my writing is not to hurt any man, but to give warning to well
minded souls, and espesially to them that are entangled with Errors, to pray
to God to give them grace to see and ^enounce their errors, and to acknowledge
the truth, that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil.

And if my pains shall do any good in the confirmation of any against
seducers, in forewarning them to beware of private Conventicles, and to keep
them close to the public Ministry of the Word, and communion of Saints in
Gods Church, I shall think my labor well bestowed.

The God of peace grant that all they that confess his holy Name, may agree in
the truth of his holy Word, and live in unity and godly love, Amen.

So prays thine in the Lord, Old Ephraim Pagitt.

HERESIOGRAPHY: OR A Description of the Heretics and Sectaries sprung up in
this latter Age, etc.
Chap. I.
Of the Anabaptists.
For the discovery of this Sect I purpose to set down, 1. Their Original and
first Proceedings. 2. Their Errors and Blasphemies. 3. A Confutation of their
Errors. 4. The Orthodox Doctrine of the Church of England opposite to their
Errors. 5. The several Sects of Anabaptists. 6. Of their manner of
Rebaptizing, and other fashions. 7. How Christian Princes and Magistrates have
suppressed them: and especially how they have been punished among us. 8. Of
their audacious boldness at this day to publish Books in defense of their
Errors, and to challenge our Protestant Divines to public disputations: and to
intrude into our Pulpits to vent their Blasphemies. 9. Their modern Tenants
which they own.


1. Of their Original and first proceedings.
ABout the year of our Lord God 1521. (...)
Doctor Luther preaching the Gospel in Saxony, Almighty God blessing his
labor, a new Sect (among many others through the instigation of the Devil)
began to spring up in the said Coun^^y of certain fanaticall people, who
boasted that they talked with God, and God with them, who commanded them to
kill all the wicked, that is, all that were not of their Sect, and make a ^ew
world, in which the innocent and godly should live and reign alone. The Author
of this Sect Melancton affirms to be one Nic^las Storke, who would tell his
followers that God spoke to him by an Angel, and revealed his will to him in
dreams, promising him the place of the Angel Gabrie^, and the Empire of the
whole world. He affirmed the Saints must reign in this world alone, and that
he must be their Leader, to kill all the Kings and Princes of the wo^ld, and to
repurge the Church. He took upon him also to have the gift of discerning
spirits, and to know the Elect.

In this man's School was one Thomas Muncer brought up, Anno 1525 Horten. de
Anab. page 11.
who amplyfied much his Masters Doctrine. He b^gan to preach at Alsted in
Turingia, where he made first an a^^ociation, administering an oath to all that
promised to assist him in killing the ungodly Princes and Magistrates: So long
as he preached but his dreams and Fancies the Elector of Saxony bore with
him; but after he b^gan to preach killing of Princes and Rebellion, he banished
him from Saxony, who (...) to Nurenberg, and being driven from thence to Mulhus
in Tu^ingia, to which place diverse of his old Disciples resorted: whatsoever he
determined was received as an Oracle, especially when he preached that all
goods must be (...), and (...) men to be free and of equal dignity an
acceptable Doctrine in those parts, where the Nobility used their Tenants like
slaves; upon this his preaching about 40000. Bores and Tradesmen rose up in
Suevia and Franconia, (...)
who took some of the Nobles, r^nsacked, plundered and burnt houses* carrying
all before them. Muncer also having prepared Munition, and raised a numerous
multitude (the meaner sort of people leaving their ploughes and loomes) armed
themselves to become adventurers in this holy war: one Phifer a chief
Associate of Muncers, rusheth into the Countries adjoining, and destroyed many
Towns, burnt many houses, and brought away some of the Nobles bound, with a
great Booty; which good success elevated the minds of these Sectaries and
caused a defection in the County of Mausfelt: Muncer hoping this defection to
be universal, takes his journey to Frankhus, where the Frankhusians joined
with him. But before this snowball grew greater by rolling, Count Mansfield
raises Forces, sets upon Muncer, and slew 200. of his men; Muncer renueth his
Army, pitcheth upon a hill by Frankhus entrenched with Carts. Count Mansfield
with the Princes his Assistants pitying the rude company, sent to offer them
impunity and general pardon if they would but yield up the Author of that
sedition and return home. Muncer falls to preaching, te^ling them that he was
sent from God to command and lead them in this action, and that they should
certainly overthrow these and all other enemies of God, it being Gods promise
(who cannot lie) That the righteous should wash their feet in the blood of the
wicked; and that he had promised him Victory, Sl^id^. ^^4.
indowing him with such strength that he was able to turn all their bullets
back with his Coat, so the Botes refused peace; upon this the Princes began to
play upon them with their Ordnance, the Bores neither advanced nor fled, but
fell a singing, Come holy Ghost, confiding and expecting that God would fight
for them from heaven according to Muncers promise; But when the intrenchments
of their Carts were broken, and the Princes Army came to handy-blowes, 5000. of
them being slain, away fled the Bo^es, some one way, some another, but most of
them ^o Frankhus, which City the Princes took with Muncer who lay hid therein,
who with Phifer and 300 more were executed and put to death. Muncer was so
dejected at his death that he could not make confession of his faith; but with
much ado he could speak after the Duke of Brunswicke, who taught him what he
should say. Thus the Suevian Rebellion was extinguished, the root and branch
seeming to be cut off; But the seeds remaining, Germany swarmed with
Anabaptists, ane^ name, but in effect the old Sect with some additions.
Melchior Hopman who called himself Elia, one of greater learning and parts
then Muncer, began to vent the same Errors at Stransgburg, Chapter Nelles. page ^^.
for which he was imprisoned, and all his followers severely i^prest. This Sect
was dispersed in the higher and lower Germany, especially among the meaner sort
of people; says Hertensius one of my Authors, Ho tens. page 12. in tanta ho^um
homi^um colluvie nc unus quidem i^ventus o^edilite as dedice. it. Sleid. 152.
among that numerous rabble scarce one was found that was a Scoller, or could
write or read.

The whole world was little enough for there ambition which they attempted to
obtain, beginning their Empire at Munster. In the year 1532 Munster received
the Gospel, and in the year 1533 there comes to Town John Becold a Tailor of
Leyden, and with him, or after him a great multitude of his fraternity, most of
them Hollanders: These keeping Conven^icles, got in few months a great party in
Munster, and incensed one another with desperat^ resolutions. The Magistrates
not yet infected with their errors, commanded the Sectaries to depart the City;
they going out^t one gate, came in at another, saying, they must not desert
Gods cause. The Landgrave of Hesse pitying the distressed case of this City,
sent Divines to set a bound to the unlimited extravagancy of the Anabaptists,
offering disputation to them, which they refused, and took a more compendious
way to work their own ends: One of them feigning himself to be seazd with a
prophetical spirit, ran about the City crying, Repent, and be baptized again,
left the wrath of God fall upon you; many cried with him, this crying ended in
ransacking rich men's houses, and laying hands upon the owners; others rushed
into the market^place crying out, that all that were not rebaptized must be
killed presently. The Evangelicks or Protestants gathered themselves in a place
called Over water, and there fortified themselves: after 3 days there was a
Composition made, that either Party should enjoy the freedom of their
Religion. This composition gave the Anabaptists time to strengthen their party,
for they sent their letters to Wezell, Lumber. Horten. page 16.
and other places, the tenor whereof was, that God had sent an holy Prophet to
Munster, who spoke wonders, and showed the right way to salvation; and if they
would leave their houses, and come to Munster, they should have ten times more
than they left at home, and with spiritual wealth attain all worldly riches.
These fair promises drew the scumme of the Towns adjoining to Munster, (the
poor and idle sort liking that Religion best, that makes all men alike, all
goods common, that pays no Rent, Tribute, nor Tithes, that puts down those
Laws and Magistrates that restrain their licentiousness) so that in a short
time the City was full of strangers, who looked upon it us upon the land of
Promise. The Anabaptists knowing their strength ran to St. Maurice Church*
burnt it, seized upon the Armory, pillaged and defaced other Churches,
depopulated the Colleges, burnt a fair Library, and finally drove the
Protestants out of the City, crying out get ye hence all ye wicked, else ye
shall all be slain.

The Anabaptists being Masters of the City, began to erect a government,
(although they were enemies to all Superiority, necessity and nature forcing
them to choose some governors, but the Prophets overruled all: one of the
first orders that they made was, that every man should bring his gold, silver,
and goods into the common stock upon pain of death: and there were two maiden
Prophetesses that discovered the Concealers; also they ordered that all books
should be burnt but the Bible, which was performed. John of Leiden being in a
Prophetical Trance after he had slept three days, pretending to be dumb,
called for writing Tables, Hortens. p. 26.
in which he writ down that it was the will of the heavenly Father, that
twelve men by him named should govern the City, which was also put in
execution, the ancient Magistrate being discharged. Also that it was the good
will of the Father that a man should not be tied to one Wife, Page 28.
but to marry as many as he pleased: when some would not approve of this
Doctrine, he cyted them before the twelve Governors, swearing upon the new
Testament that this Doctrine was revealed to him from heaven, and to testify
the evidence of the spirit, he commanded some of the opposers to be beheaded:
forthwith many Preachers confirmed this Doctrine, but the greatest confirmation
was the Prophets practice, who presently married 3. wives, and left not till he
had fifteen: many followed his example, and it was accounted a matter of praise
to have many wives: After the promulgation of this Ordinance, the Brethren ran
to the hansomest women, striving who should be first served, and lay with them
without any contract.

After this, Hortc^s p 31.
one John Tuscocurer a new Prophet, called the Congregation together, and
declared that it was the will of the heavenly Father, that John of Leyden
should be King of the Universe; That he should sit upon the Throne of his
Father David; That he should kill all the Kings and Princes, destroy the
ungodly, and save the people that loved righteousness. This Prophecy the
multitude entertained, and proclaimed John of Leyden King of Zion with great
acclamations.

The new King being a Tailor, made use of his skill, and translated the Copes
and Carpets of the Churches into Robes, and set forth his Majesty in gold and
silver, his horses were also sutably harnessed, with saddles and foot-cloathes
embroydered with gold: he rode abroad in very great state, having his chief
Officers before him; next before him were two young men, the one carrying a
Bible, the other a sword: He himself wore a great chain like the Collar of
some Order; his Motto was Rex justitiae hujus mundi, the King of righteousness
of this world. After him followed fifty Pensioners well clad: three times a
week he kept Court, sitting upon a high Throne in great Magnificence, under him
sat Knipper dolling Governor of the City, and lower, his four great
Counselors of State: In that Court he judged all Controversies, most of which
was about Divorces, for by their new orders any man that was weary of his wife,
might put her away and take another. Among other memorable acts of this new
King, I read, that one of his wives offending him, he took her into the
Marketplace and cut off her head, causing the rest of his wives to dance about
her, and give thanks to their heavenly Father, and then the King began to dance
himself, commanding the people to dance with him. Again Thuscocurer the
Prophet came to the King sitting in his Throne in more than ordinary Majesty,
saying to him, King John, the Gospel must be renewed by thee. Thus says the
Lord God, go and say to the King of Zion, that he prepare my Supper in the
Churchyard of the great Church: and that he send forth Preachers of my word
into the four quarters of the world to teach all Nations the way of
righteousness, and to bring them by the spirit of their mouths into my
Sheepfold.

So a public Communion was celebrated, Sleidan 154. Ho ten p. 34.
which they made a full meal: a great Feast it was, both for persons, as also
for meat, for there were about four thousand Communicants, and three courses
of meat; but between them (says my Author) there was an intercourse, for the
King accused a man of Treason, and cut off his head and returned again, and
with bloody hands he took upon him to administer the body and blood of Christ,
assisted with the Queen, who did the office of a Deacon, the like did the
principal Officers of State. After Supper the King asked the people, whether
they were all heartily disposed to do Gods will, and to suffer and dye for the
faith: To whom the people answered with one voice, that they would.

Then rose the Prophet and said; Thus says the Lord, Page 35.
choose men among my people to send to the four quarters of the world, to do
wonders among the Nations, and to publish my wondrous things among strange
people. Then he read the names of 28. of whom himself was one; these Apostles
went to the Cities to which they were sent, crying in the streets that they
should repent, or else shortly be destroyed: these men were apprehended in the
Cities and put to death, and so there was an end of their Apostleship.

All this while the City was besieged by Count Waldeck the Owner thereof, and
so fore oppressed with Famine, that they were feign to ea^e Dogs, Cats, Rats,
sodden Leather, yea some their own children. The Princes of the Empire
assembled at Coblents, pitying the seduced people, sent letters to the people
of Munster, representing to them their fault and danger they were in, and that
if they did not submit to their natural Prince, they should draw the whole
force of the Empire upon them: this was about December, 1534, Hilversum also
one of their Prophets being taken by the besiegers, writ out of the Camp a most
sensible Letter to the people of Munster, wherein he acknowledges that his
former Prophesies were impostures, and entreated them to open their ^yes to see
how they were deluded by a company of Rascals, what a beastly life they lead,
having violated all Laws of pudicity and honesty. These Letters moved the
hearts of many, who were weary of their lives that they lived in, and were also
pinched with hunger, and they began to murmour against the King, who calling
them together made a fine speech to them, saying that he would never have
thought that they being born again by a new baptism, would show themselves so
impatient for Gods cause whereas they should have followed St. Paul's example,
bearing nakedness, hunger, and cold to attain the heaven of salvation: That
God was powerful enough to send them Manna and Quails from heaven? That he
had great Troops in Holland and Freezeland, that would certainly come with
great provision of victuals and bear the enemy back? That God had revealed to
him that at Eafter they should be delivered for certain. Finally, the Town
was taken, June 1535. having endured a siege of eighteen months: after the
taking of the Town, it was ordered that the innocent people should be spared,
and that all the good Citizens that were come out or kept in by force, should
have restitution of their goods. The Citizens that yielded were spared, but the
fierce Anabaptists who could never be tamed, and lay hid in several holes,
were sought out and killed. The King resisted to the last, and being taken with
Knipperdoling and others, was sent prisoner to a Castle, drawn thither, tied
to a horse tail; he was condemned and executed as a Traitor, being tied to a
stake, and pulled in diverse parts of his body with hot pincers for an hour and
more, and then stricken to the heart with a dagger: with him suffered
Knipperdoling. The King abjured his Errors; but Knipperdoling dyed like a mad
beast: After their deaths they were put into Iron Cages, and hanged upon the
high steeple of St. Lambert. Thus dyed this imaginary King, and Anabaptistrie
was suppressed in Munster.

As the Anabaptists had surprised Munster, so they had the like projects in
many other places, but with ill success: As one John of Geles was sent to
Amsterdam, and finding the people fit objects for his delusions, he told them
wonders of the new Kingdom of righteousness at Munster, their liberty of
living, their pillaging of Churches, and the enriching themselves with the
goods of the ungodly, and of the great designs of their King, of the
prophesies of the propagation of his Kingdom, with such discourses. In their
private Conventicles they filled the minds of the people with a frantic
zeal, and made them long to be fing^ing Church-Plate, and the goods of the
ungodly, pretending that it was an easy matter to surprise Amsterdam, which
Town (with others) God had given to the King of Zion, as the first fruits of
his Reign over the world: Hereupon they enterprised the taking of the Town,
and to kill the Magistrates as they were feasting in their Town house; but by
the providence of God they were deceived of their purpose. They wanting their
Signal, which was the ringing of the Towne-Bell, which was not done, (a
drunken man having taken away the rope) the Company assembled not: many of the
Anabaptists were slain, and others received condign punishment.

The Anabaptists after the death of John of Leyden chose another King, who with
his high Treasurer was taken at Virecht and kept in prison: among the exployts
of that elected King, he brought his wife into a wood and there killed her,
Hort. page 74.
that without interruption he might lie with her daughter; and he also cut a
young wenches throat, lost she should detect him: good store of Plate was found
in his house, most of it Church Plate: the King and his Treasurer was burnt.

I read of another King of the Anabaptists called Ian Wilhems, whose execrable
deeds and actions are written in Dutch and translated into French by Chapter de
Niclles. Chapter Niclles. page. 3.
This Ian Wilhems was Son to one Theodore Wilhems, a Vicar in Ruremond in
Gelderland: this King kept his Residence in diverse places, as at Ar^hem first;
and afterward at Lovain, Wesel, Alden, Ch Niclles, page 52.
Calcar, Harsem, and last of all at a Village called Avendrop, not far from
Wesel, to which place diverse resorted who had been in the siege of Munster:
This man succeeded Cornelius Appleman: who was executed for his wicked Acts in
the City of Virecht.

Which Appleman succeeded Ian Cordwainer, who going about to restore the broken
fantastic Kingdom of the Anabaptists, was discovered by some of his followers
to be Captain of the Thieves and Church robbers, and executed at Brussels.

This King Wilhems affirmed the Doctrine of the Anabaptists taught in Munster
to be the true Doctrine to bring men to salvation, and that God for his austere
life had given him grace to make known his law more clearly and purely than
it had been ever before,

He wrote a book entitled, Ibid. page 55
Du marriage impure des faux Evangeliques, in which he defended Poligami.

He robbed and spoiled the Country about him, affirming that to rob the ungodly
was no sin at all for the people of the new Jerusalem, because the good of
the land belonged only to lesus Christ and his Disciples. This wicked Rout
called themselves le people de Ian Wilhelmes.

He used a sword, Page 61.
which he called the sword of God and Gede^.

This holy King had 21. wives to increase his holy seed, among whom he had
Elsken Thewes, Four conscione multipher le nomo e deu peuple di dieu.
and Elizabeth her daugh^er: also Clare and Elizabeth, sisters daughters of Ian
Marsens. Of his facinorous Acts, and names of his Queens you may read more at
large in the History of his life, written by Chapter Nells. Chapter Nicll p. 56
This fanetick King was burnt according to his deserts the 12. of March, Anno
1580. and diverse of his Accomplices were executed at Wesell, Cleve, and other
places.

In this History before releated, The (...) of the (...).
we may see the great Hypocrisy of these Sectaries, who when they crept first
into Munster made a show of great holiness* great humility, great innocence:
they would not swear, not use any obscene speech, their ordinary communication
was of mortification; But when they became Masters of the Town, they broke the
laws of all pudicity and honesty.

More especially an Anabapeist might not bear on office in a Country village,
but afterward John of Leyden their Prophet would be King of the Universe, they
would not suffer a man to wear a Ring, or a woman a silken Gown: But after
the surprise of Munster, no Prince was so gloriously arryed as King John and
his Officers an this other Attendants.

They pretended that it was not lawful for a Christian man to bear Arms or
to punish offenders, whereas in Munster they exercised all manner of cruelty:
King John cut of his wives head in the Marketplace, another Prophet his
brothers head before his Father, affirming it to be the will of the heavenly
Father. And whereas some good Citizens were grieved at their disorders, and
groaned under their Tyranny, and went about to shake off the yoke of King John's
oppression, about 50. of them were taken and put to death with all manner of
cruelty. John of Leyden encouraging them, saying that in that their doing they
should do God good service.

The History of the Anabaptists you shall find in the fifth and tenth book of
Sleidens Commentaries: Master Bull^^ger has written the same, and confuted
their Errors: Lambe^tus Hortensius has written of the Anabaptist's of the Low
Countries, and John Gastius Minister of Zuricke of their doings in Zuitzerland.

II. The Errors of the Anabaptists, set down by Pontanus, Set down by
^ontanus and Bullinger.
Osiander, Bullinger, and others.
Errors not to be tolerated in the Church.
1. THat Christ did not assume his flesh and blood from the Virgin Mary. 2.
That Christ is not true God, but only endued with more gifts than other men.
3. Our righteousness not to depend upon faith in Christ, but upon the works
of Charity and Afflection. 4. They reject the Doctrine of Original sin and
those Doctrines that depend upon it. 5. They deny Baptism to Infan^s, because
they cannot make confession of their faith, affirming that the Baptism of
children came from the Pope and the Devil: they call Baptism of Infants the
mark of the beast. 6. They re-baptize them that have been already Baptized.
7. They dream that before the day of judgment their Church shall destroy all
the wicked, and obtain a Monarchy, in which the godly shall reign alone. 8.
They allow men free will in spiritual things. 9. They separate themselves from
all other Churches, accounting themselves only pure and holy without sin. 10.
That the Office of the Ministry is of no great effisicacie, Gastius p. 10.
Anabap. Sumunt sibi omnes praedicandi (...)
and that Lay men may preach and administer the Sacraments.
Errors not to be suffered in a Commonwealth, without the Ruin of it.
1. That it is unlawful for a Christian man to be a Magistrate, and that the
people may depose them. Sleid. com. lib. 10. licere plebeis in magistratibus
(...) sumere.
2. That it is not lawful for a Magistrate to punish any malefactor whatsoever
with death. 3. That a Christian man cannot with a safe conscience take (...)
Oath. 4. Nor by oath promise fidelity to any Prince or Magistrate whatsoever.
Non licere Chri^tani^ justurandum ^^cere, Sleid. lib. 10.

Errors not to be tolerated in Families.
1. That a Christian man may not with a safe conscience possess any thing
proper to himself, but whatsoever he has he must make common. 2. That wives
of a contrary Religion may be put away, and that it is lawful for them to take
others. 3. That a Christian man may have many wives.
III. The Confutation of these Blasphemous and detestable Errors before named.
THat Christ took not flesh from the Virgin Mary. Error 1.
This Error is flar against the first promise of Christ, Answer.
G^n. 3. The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head. Against the
promise made to Ab^aham, Genesis 22. In thy seed, etc. To David, Psalm. 132. 11. Of
the fruit of thy body, etc. Luke 1. That which is borne of thee, says the
Angel to Mary, Romans 1. 3. Who was made of the seed of David, according to the
flesh, whence in the New Testament he is called the Son of man. As also Isay
the son of a Virgin, which could not be if he had not taken flesh upon him from
the Virgin Mary: neither should our flesh have any hope of eternal life if he
were not made flesh, neither should his passion or resurrection profit us at
all. In this point the Anabaptists are worse than the Papists, yea then the
Turks themselves, who confess that Christ was borne of a Virgin. The
Melchiorists, a kind of Anabaptists, do not only hold the opinion above
named, but also are so diabolical and blasphemous as to curse the flesh of the
blessed Virgin, Maledicta sit c^ro Mariae, Bull in advers. Anabab fol. ^ 6^.
by maintaining this error: The Anabaptists manifest themselves to be of the
number of them whom the Apostle St. John speaks, 2. Ephesians. vese 7. For many
deceivers are come into the world, who confess not that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh.

That Christ was not true God. Error 2.

This blasphemous Error is contrary to the holy Scripture, Answer,
as Ioh. 1. The word was God, Ioh. 10. I and the Father am one, Ioh. 4. He that
sees the Father, sees me: I am in the Father, and the Father in me, Col. 2.
9, For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead corporally. Again, 1
John 5. We are in him that is true, even in his son Jesus Christ, that is, the
true God. And again, if he were not God, no created power had been sufficient
for the work of our redemption and satisfaction of Gods wrath. This
blasphemous opinion reigns among the Anabaptists in Moravia: I do not find
this to be maintained by our English Anabaptists, but to be the opinion of
Servetus, who was burnt at Geneva and his followers.

Not to be saved by faith in Christ.
What can be more contrary to the holy Scriptures than this detestable Error:
Error 3.
read John 3. 16. Answer.
So God loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that who so
believes in him shall not perish, but have life everlasting. Romans 3. 24. We
are justified freely by grace through the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ,
Romans 3. 28. We conclude that a man is justified by faith, without the works of
the Law.

By the work of Charity and Affliction, the passion of Christ is a sufficient
ransom for all our sin, 1 John 1. The blood of Christ purges us from all out
unrighteousness, Isa. 43. 25. I am he that blotteth out all thy
transgressions, for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins, Heb. 9. He
has obtained for us eternal redemption, nothing here perfect, 1. Cor. 13.
Neither in his sight can any man living be justified. Psalm. 143. 2. Neither any
troubled conscience can be pacified, Romans 5. 1. Being justified by faith, we
have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. And for afflictions they
are either just punishments for our sins, or fatherly corrections to stir us up
to a holy life.

They reject the Doctrine of original sin, because (say they) Christ has
taken away all evil, Error 4.
whether it be the inclination or concupiscence, according to that, Behold the
Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world. Also that children whereas
they do neither good nor evil, are under grace and without sin, but so the
Infants of all nations and Infidels may be saved, being without sin: but the
contrary appears by the effect of sin. The reward of sin is death, Romans 6.
And David confesses expressly. Psalm. 51. Behold I was borne in iniquity, and in
sin my mother conceived me. And St. Paul calls our inbred concupiscence sin
dwelling in us. And Ephesians. 2. We were by nature the children of wrath.

They deny the Sacrament of Baptism to Infants. Error 5.

The ground of this Error is Ignorance, they not knowing what Baptism is,
pretending Faith and Repentance to be the estence of Baptism, which Infants
are not capable of, and therefore not to be baptized.

To this I answer; As faith and repentance was not the essence of Circumcision,
but the outward circumcising of the flesh, and the inward circumcising of the
heart.

So the essence of Baptism, is not faith and repentance, but the outward
washing of the water, the word annexed, and the inward washing of the Spirit.

Our Lord affirms, Joh. the 3. Except a man be born again by water and the
holy Ghost, etc. St. Augustine affirms, Although sound faith be not present:
yet the Sacrament of Biptisme may be sound. ^^emiae paid Respen. 1.
The Greek Patriarch, writing to the German Divines, affirms in Baptism the
matter to be water, the form the words, viz. This servant of God is baptized
in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: the isntrumental cause to be
the Minister.

The Anabaptists attribute too much in this Sacrament to their repentance,
faith, mortification, and merit, and little or nothing to Gods mercy, which is
most contrary to the nature of this holy Sacrament, which seals up unto us
out receiving into Gods favor and grace for his own mercies sake without any
merit of ours.

To palliate this their abominable error, they pervert diverse places of holy
Scripture, as Matthew. 28. Mar. 10. Out of the order of words, Go and teach all
Nations, baptizing them: Because that teaching is set before baptizing, they
would have children taught before they are baptized.

To this I answer, 1. Whereas teaching is set before baptizing, Matthew. 28.
Baptizing is set before teaching, Mar. 1. 4. John did baptize in the
wilderness, and teach the baptism of repentance: And again, where it is
said, repent and believe: whether is faith or repentance first required?

But where find you (say they) a literal command in all the new Testament for
the Baptism of Infants?

To this I answer: The new Testament does not literally command, Remember to
keep holy the Lords day, nor to say grace before and after meals, or to pray
with our Families evening, or morning or for women to receive the Communion,
and many other such like things, which are moral duties, and may be
sufficiently proved by consequence out of the holy Scriptures. As for example
in this very Text which they allege against the baptism of children: the
baptism of children is there commanded: Go and teach all Nations, baptizing,
etc. The meaning is, go and teach all them that are capable of teaching and
baptize them that are capable of baptizing: to make this more plain.

Is a man should bid his servant, go sheare all my sheep and mark them: if
that servant should sheare all his sheep, and mark them only that he had shorn,
and not mark his Lambs, because he could not shear them: does that servant
fulfill his Masters command? No more had the Apostles done, if they had not
marked his lambs as well as his sheep; although they were not capable of
teaching, yet they were capable of marking or baptizing. In laws and precepts
that be general, the numeration of singulars are not necessary; because laws
do command the whole kind: and therefore the holy Apostles baptized whole
Families, in which we find none excep^ed, as St. Peter baptized Cornelius and
his Family, Acts 10. 48. St. Paul baptized the Jailer, and all that belonged
unto him, Acts 16. 33. Lydda and her household, Acts 16. 15. The household of
Stephanus, 1 Cor. 1. 16, etc.

Again, whereas our Lord commands, Mark 10. Suffer little children to come
unto me, and forbid them not. How properly can an Infant come unto Christ but
by Baptism? Repent they cannot, believe they cannot, as the Anabaptists
affirm: But by baptism they may come, where the Minister in Christ's stend
receives them and blesses them; and why all this? Of such is the Kingdom of
God, and therefore says our Lord, Forbid them not.

St. Peter says, Acts 2. 39. The promise is mad: to you and your children; and
therefore be baptized. To whom the promise is made, and covenant, let no man
forbid baptism, which is the seal of the Covenant.

Again, the faith of the Parents may warrant their Infants baptism: yea,
though they have but an hystoricall faith, and not a justifying, if they can
credere ad baptismum, though not adsalutem: this faith makes their children
capable of baptism: many in the Apostles time were baptized, having only an
historical faith, as S^mon Magus, and others.

Moreover, these phrases, Teach and baptize, Repent and believe, Believe and be
baptized, are meant of such as were of riper years, and made profession of the
Christian faith, or else the estate of Christian infants in the Gospel, were
much worse then the condition of the Israelitish Infants under the Law: which
to affirm, is an horrible indignity offered unto Christ. Last of all,
Blasphemy.
most blasphemously they call baptism of Christian men's children, the mark of
the Beast, and to come from Antichrist, and especially from Pope Innocent the
third, who lived about the year, 1213.

Learned Mr. Calvin Instit. 4. cap. 16. ss. 6.
affirms the baptism of children to be a holy institution always observed
in Christ Church.

All the reformed Churches use it, Vid. The harmony o^ their conf sio^s Orati
40. upon Levit.
and it has been the practice of the universal Church.

The Greek Church (who yearly excommunicate the Pope) to whom St. Paul preched,
baptize their Infants, as Gregory Nazianzen affirms.

And Origin, who lived about the year 226, about 1000, years before Pope
Innocent, whom the Anabaptists would make the author of pedobaptisme.

The Russians, who received the faith from St. Andrew the Apostle, Hoc si qu^s
neglex^rit and deriserlt, mortis poena affilgetur, Re^ig. Moscov^t. (...) 17*
and account the Pope of Rome an Heretic, hold a necessity of baptism, and
put to death them that neglect and deride baptism: what would they do with
these men who blaspheme it?

The Abyssi^s, or Ethiopians, who received Christianity from St. Matthew the
Apostle, do baptize their Infants: viz. their male children at forty days of
age, and their females at eighty.

The Armenian Christians, to whom St. Barthoiomew preached the faith, Gu^do de
^^res.
baptize their Infants. Baronius writes, that these Christians had a thousand
Bishops.

The Iacobites, The a Jesus de conv^r omnium gent. 1. lib. 7. p 506:
who are a numerous sort of Christians, do the same: yea, they mark their
children with a hot Iron with the sign of the cross, alluding to the words of
St. John: He shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire.

The Cophtie, Th, a ^esu ividem.
or native Christians of Egypt, to whom Saint Mark preached, baptize their
Infants: these Christians have no communion with the Pope of Rome.

The Indians to whom St. Thomas brought the faith, Navig. ^oseph. indi, cap 134.
do the like.

The Matacasion Christians in Africa, The it. cos. lb 4. 2.
affirm children dying without baptism, to be deprived of eternal beatitude.

The Melchites, Boler, relat. lib. 2. page 3.
one of the greatest fort of Christians in the Orient, as Boterus affirms, do
the same.

The Nestorians under the Patriarch of Muzal, who as Cardinal Vitriacus
affirms, are more numerons with the Iacobites, then the Christians of the
Latin and Greek Church, do the same: These account the Pope of Rome a
reprobate Bishop.

The Circassians, Mengrellians, Georgians, Maronites, Cephalians; with all the
orthodox Christians in the Universe baptize their Infants.

Erasmus wondreth what evil Devil entered them, who forbid the baptism of
children used by the holy catholic Church for above 1400. years.

Also the Britains, to whom Simon Zelotes preached have always baptized their
children, and have honorably esteemed of that Sacrament administered to their
children, until some of these heretics fled hither out of Germany, where they
burnt, hanged, and drowned men of that Sect, till they had suppressed them.
They came into England about the year 1535. and, as they could be found, we did
the like to them, burning some, and banishing others: but since the year of
our Lord 1640. they have crept out of their holes, lift up their heads,
challenge our Divines to public disputations, preach in our Churches, publish
their blasphemies, print their books, seducing multitudes of people.

And moreover, to speak of the curelty of these Sectaries, The barbarous
cruelty of these Sectaries.
who depriving Infants of baptism, put them all out of the estate of grace. We
read of Herod the Tyrant, who destroyed all the children in Bethlehem, and the
coasts thereof; is not this a far more cruel sentence, to set all infants in
no better state then Pagans and Infidels, without Christ, Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, as strangers from the convenant of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world? Can any sober Christian but think this to
be a barbarous cruelty? It is not lawful to take childrens bread, and give it
to dogs: but these conclude children to be no better then dogs. The Propher
Elisha wept when he look^ upon Hazael, foreseeing that ^e should dash the
Infants of Israel against the wall: Hazael thought himself worthy to be so
esteemed, if ever he should ^^e any such things. And certainly thus to deprive
Infants of baptism, is a more cruel act then to dash their bodies against
stones.

Let these men also consider how much they provoke Christ's displeasure against
themselves: he was greatly displeased with his Disciples for forbidding little
children to come to him: and one day they shall find him much more displeased
with them* who with great violence oppose the bringing of children to Christ in
this holy Sacrament, and with wrong, injury and slander: prosecute the
Ministers of Christ, who administer this Sacrament to Infants, condemning
the^^or Ministers of Antichrist: yea, condemning all Churches ^or
Antichristian, who will not cast their children out of ^be covenant of grace.
The Lord open their eyes that they may see their error, and repent of it.

To conclude, the baptism^ of children is commanded in holy Scripture: the holy
Apostle, baptized whole families, the ancient ^athers testify the same; the
holy Catholic Church of God always used it. Let not the Devil enter into the
heart of any man to bel^^ve a f^^acick, unlearned, mechanic man, not an Angel
from h^aven that teaches a contrary doctrine: What greater mischief can the
Devil and his Imps do, then to make a schism in the Church, and rob Almighty
God of all his Lambs^ and cut off so many millions of souls from the communion
of the Church?

And also whereas our pious parents brought us to Christ, and dedicated us to
God the Father, Son, and holy Ghost: let us take heed that we do not renounce
that holy Covenant, as Witches do when they compact with the Devil: remember
our Lords words; How can ye escape the damnation of hell?

They baptize them that have already been baptized. Error 6.


They do that which the Scripture never commands, Answer.
Ep^. 4. St. Paul calls it, One Baptism, neither was ^ebaptization ever
received in the true Church of God; yea the Church taught that they that were
baptized by such Heretics as erred not in the Doctrine concerning the Trinity
were not to be rebaptized. Also the Imperial Law punished them with Capital
punishment who submitted themselves to a second Baptism.

They dream of Monarchy, Error 7.
in which the godly shall reign alone, and destroy the ungodly, which is
false; for Christ's Kingdom in this world is spiritual, in which troubled
consciences shall be victors, and receive solid consolation against sin, the
devil, and all manner of temptations. Our Lord himself says, My Kingdom is
not of this World, John 18. Likewise says St. Paul; The weapons of our war are
not carnal, but mighty in operation, 2 Cor. 10. Our Lord tells us that the
separation between the godly and ungodly shall not be until the last day,
Luke 18 Again, That the Son of man coming, shall hardly find faith upon
earth, Luke 17. In that night there shall be two in a bed, the one received,
the other refused. And Mat. 15. That the Angles shall separate the godly from
the ungodly, and the tares to remain with the what until the Harvest. This
Monarchy St. Peter confuteth in his second Epistle 2. 9. Saying, the Lord
knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the unjust
against the day of judgment to be punished: Therefore they are not to reign
alone here, the ungodly being killed. And although the Prophets seem sometimes
to speak of a corporal Kingdom, yet they expound themselves, showing that
they speak of his spiritual Kingdom. To reign with Christ 1000. years before
the ending of the world was the old Error of the Chiliasts, condemned above
1000 years agone by the Church of God,

They allow men free will. Error 8.
So that we may do those things which God commanded, and omit those things
which God has forbidden; otherwise (say they) God gave his Law in vain:
neither would he punish delinquents if he had not given them the power of free
will.

It is answered, Answer.
it is impossible that in our corrupt nature we should keep the Law, because it
does require a whole and absolute obedience in all things inward and outward;
of all the heart, all our soul, and all our might: And the sense of the flesh
(as St. Paul testifies) is enmity to God. Also, the natural man does not
understand the things that are of the Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. Also John 3. Man cannot
take to himself any thing except it be given him from above. So Ephesians. 2. The
unregenerate man is said to be dead.

They separate themselves from all other Churches, Error 9.
accounting themselves only pure and holy; and for this cause some of them
will not say this Petition of the Lords Prayer (Forgive us our trespasses)
saying, they are pure and without sin:

To this I answer with St. John, 1 Epist. 1. 8. If we say we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; if we confess our sins, he is
faithful to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all our
unrighteousness: If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his
word is not in us. To conclude, the Anabaptists that say they have no sin, are
of the Devil the father of lies, going about to make God a liar who is truth
it self.

The Office of the Ministry to be of no great efficacy with them.] Error 10.
They do not only contemn the Office of the Ministry, but also the holy
Scripture. As Muncer would speak scoffingly of it, Bible, Bible, Babble, Babble:
they depend too much upon peculiar Revelations.

The sincere preaching the word of God in the public Congregations by the
Ministers of the Word lawfully called, Answer.
profits much. Mal. 2. The lips of the Priest shall preserve wisdom, they
shall require the Law from his mouth. Ezech. 44. The Priest shall teach my
people the differences between the holy and the profane, and cause them to
discern between the unclean and clean. Romans 1. 16. The preaching of the
Word is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes. Romans ^0. 1
Co^ 1.
For this cause Christ taught in the Synagogues. Every one among them takes
upon him to preach as a Minister, John Becold a Tailor of Leyden. The Apostle
teaches us Heb. 5. That no man take this calling upon him except he be
called of God. Romans 10. How shall they preach except they be sent? And this
stands with good reason, for every true Minister stands in Gods room,
being the Lords Ambassador to deliver his will. Who dares take upon him to be
the Lords Ambassador except he be sent? I have not sent them (says the Lord)
and yet they run and prophecy lies in my name. Piety and Justice are the two
Bases or Pillars that bear up humane Society: and whereas the Devil goes
about in these his Impes to overthrow the dignity of the Ministry and of the
Magistrate, what does he else but endeavor to bring the whole world to Ruin
and Confusion?

The Confutation of their Errors not tolerable in a Comman-wealth.
THat it is unlawful for a Christian man to be a Magistrate or to be subject
to a Magistrate. Error 1.
And why? They object that subjection came in with sin; but Christ has taken
away sin, and therefore no subjection. Resp.
To this I answer; subjection is two fold, servile or civil: servile is the
vassalage of a slave, which was not before the fall: civil for the common good
was before: the former a curse, the latter a blessing: Eve was subject to Adam
before either of them sinned. 2. Object.
They object that every believer is now in the Kingdom of Heaven, Christ alone
must reign. Ans. Resp.
There is a spiritual Kingdom standing in grace, peace and joy, in which there
is no distinction of persons. There is also a civil Government, which cannot
subsist without distinctions and order: there must be Masters and servants;
subjects and Governors; and necessity requires it, it is the bond of the
Commonwealth. There is a Regiment in the Host of Heaven; there is a Regiment
in the Body, the members move by the direction of the Head; there is a Regiment
in every Family, the servants acknowledge the Master* and the children their
Parents. Among the irrational cr^atures the Bees have their King. the Cranes
their Leader, and the (...) principal Beast. St. Paul calls Magist^a^y a
divine Cr^^^ance all Gods O^dinances a^^ good and lawful: (...) 8^ Psalm^ (...)
called Gods because they are in Gods ^lace. The Anabap^^sts themselves who
despised Government finding the necessity of it in Munst^r, so that they could
not subsist without Go^ernment, chose themselves a King with inferior Officers
under him.

That it is not lawful for a Magistrate to punish, Error 2.
because reveng^ is forb^dden Christian m^n.

In this they err, not distinguishing between revenge and punishment, which
is from the Magistrate by reason of the execution of the Law grounded upon Gods
Law, a lawful punishment appointed by God. The Magistrate (says St. Paul) is
the Minister of God appointed for thy go^d: either for our natural good,
preserving our lives which bloody men would soon ruinate, who fear not so
much hell as the halter: For our civil good, preserving our goods and
Possessions: For our moral good, in rewarding virtue, and punishing vice, he
bears not the sword in vain: For our spiritual good, by coactive power
enforcing men to the duties of Godliness. In that notorious Apostasy of
Israel, when so many execrable enormities were committed; When Micah had a
house of Gods, the Levite wanted maintenance; when his Concubine was ravished
to death, Judge. 17. 18. 19. chapters.
the Spirit still prefixeth, at that time there was no King in Israel. We are
beholding to Government for Order, Peace, and Religion: for Order, where no
King is, every man will be his own King: for Peace, he that will be his own
King, will be another man's Tyrant: for Religion, every Micah will have a House
of Gods without Government.

To conclude, Adulterers, Murderers, Traitors, Witches, Burners of Houses may
be put to death by the Magistrate to whom the sword is given, and they are not
killed, but such in suffering, do receive a just guerdon for their offenses.

That a Christian man may not take an oath, Error 3.
because Christ says. Thou shall not swear at all, which is repeated, James
5. And that it is enough to say, Yea, yea, and nay, nay.

Answ. Christ does not forbid an oath before a Magistrate, as it is a testimony
of truth: he reproves the Pharisees, who taught men that they should swear,
not only by the name of God, as God had commanded, but also by heaven by the
earth, by their heads, etc. This vicious kind of swearing he forbids, only
because these things cannot be witnesses of the things averred, nor punish
lying. Neither do the words following, Let your communication be yea, yea, and
nay, nay, take away a lawful oath; but admonish the godly of the goodness of
truth, and hatred of lies. That a godly man may lawfully take an oath,
appears by these reasons, following: 1. From the authority of holy Scripture,
By the name of God thou shall swear, Deuteronomy. 6. 4. The reason is set down, Heb.
6. Because the Lord is greater, and that an oath is the end of all
controversies: so Psalm. 15. He that swears to his neighbor, and deceives
him not. 2. From the example of Christ and holy men in the old and new
Testament, Genes. 24. 26. 3. From the worship of God: for an oath is part of
Gods worship, being a calling upon God to be a witness of the truth, and an
avenger of the lie.

Nor by oath promise any fidelity, or bind himself to any Prince or Magistrate
whatsoever.
This opinion opens a gap to all Treasons, Rebellions, and Truce-breakings
whatsoever. If it be not lawful for a Christian man to bind himself by an
oath, then i^ is unlawful for a Christian man to keep such an oath. Isaac made
a covenant with Abimelech King of Gerar, to do one another no hurt: which
being sealed up with an oath, could not be violated without sinning. The
Prophet Ezekiel calls the oath of obedience (which Zedechiah King of ^srael
made to the King of Babel) the oath of God: although the said King was a tyrant
and an usurper, without any lawful succession from David; yet he confirms it
by the mouth of his Prophet, Ezekiel. 17. 19. As I live, I will surely bring upon
Zedechia mine oath that he has despised, and my covenant which he has broken,
upon his own head.

Again, you may see how great a tie an oath is, and how severely Almighty God
does punish the violation thereof in the story of ths Gibeonites, Josh. 9.
Joshuah and the Princes having made a league with them (being beguiled by them,
pretending that they came from a far Country) the congregation murmuring
against the Princes, were answered by them after this manner, We have sworn to
them by the Lord God of Israel, now therefore we may not touch them, lest wrath
be upon us, because of the oath which we swore unto them. About 4000 years
after, Saul in his zeal to the children of Israel, show the Gibeonites; for
which cause, 2 Samuel 21. the Lord plagued the whole Land, sending a famine upon
them for three years, declaring himself, that it was sent because Saul had
slain the Gibeonites, who hanged up seven of Saul's sons given them by David,
and then God was entreated for the Land.

3. Confutation of Errors not tolerable in Families.
THat a Christian cannot with a good conscience have any thing proper, Error 1.
but all things common.

This community they ground upon the example of the Apostles in the Acts.
Answer. Answer.
An Example makes no Law, neither was this universal. Peter says to Ananias,
Acts 5. 4. Whilst it remained was it not thine own? Again, 2 Cor. 9. Every man
as he purposes in his heart, so let him give. The property of goods is
confirmed in the seventh Commandment. Again, 1 Timothy 6. The Apostle charge
rich men not to be proud, but bountiful; not to forsake their goods, but to
use them well, by giving alms. Again, Prove. 5. 16. Let thy fountains be
dispersed abroad, and rivers of wa^ers in the streets: let them only be thine
own, and not strangers with thee; out of which we may gather, that every man
has a property in his own

That if their wives be not of their Religion, Error 2.
they may put them away.
Answer. Answer.
This is against the definition of marriage, which is a lawful copulation of a
man and woman not prohibited by the degrees of consanguinity or affinity.
Qu^dam impuri nebulones persuaserunt juxta ^auli vaticinium, 2. ^. m. 3.
stultis mulierculis ut relictis propriis maritis ipsus sequeretur, Bulling,
adver. An^b^pt. l^b, 1. fol. 8.
The marriage of an Infidel before God, is in it self no sin.

The Apostle persuades the believer not to put away his unbeleeving wife, 1
Cor. 7.

Joseph in Egypt married the daughter of an Heathen Priest, And Moses took the
daughter of Jethro, who was not of the Circumcision. Marriage is a lawful
copulation of a man and a woman, not to be dissolved during life, but for
adultery.

That it is Error 3.
lawful to have many wives.
To this I may oppose the words of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 7. 2. To avoid
fornication, let every man have his own wife, and every woman her own Husband,
Heb. 13. Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge. Exodus 20. 14. Thou shall
not commit adultery. Malachi 2. 15. Did he not make one?

4. The Orthodox Doctrine of the Church of England, contrary to these
detestable errors, taken out of the 39. Articles.
HAving handled much poison, I think it fit to give the Reader to preserve him
from infection, some Methridate out of the Paunarium, or Medicinable box of our
Mother the Church, viz. Out of the Articles of Doctrine agreed upon for
avoiding of diversity of opinions, and establishing of consent touching true
Religion: To which Articles every Minister refusing to subscribe, should ipso
fasto be deprived, and all his promotions to be void, Anno 13. Reg. Eliz.
as if he were naturally dead. Read the Statute.

1. Article 2.

That Christ took flesh from the virgin Mary.
The Son which is the Word of the Father, begotten from the everlasting
Father, the very eternal God of one substance with the Father took man's nature
in the womb of the blessed virgin of her substance; So that two wh^le and
perfect Natures, (that is to say) the Godhead and the Manhood, were joined
together in one Person never to be divided, whereof is one Christ very God and
very Man, who truly suffered, was crucified, dead and buried, to reconcile us
to his Father, and to be a sacrifice not only for original guilt, but also
for the actual sins of men.

2. (...).

That Christ was God.
There is but one living and true God everlasting, without body parts, or
passion of infinite power, wisdom and goodness, the maker and preserver of
all things both visible and invisible; and in the Unity of this Godhead are
three Pers^ns (...) one substance, power, and eternity, the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost.

3. Article 11.

Of our justification by Faith.
We are accounted ^ighteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior JESUS CHRIST, by faith and not for our own works or deservings:
wherefore that we are justified by says only, is a most wholesome Doctrine, and
very full of comfort.

4. Article 12.

For good Works.
Which are the fruits of Faith, and follow after justification, alb^it they
cannot put away our sins and endure the severity of Gods judgments, yet they
are pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and so spring out necessarily of
a true and lively faith, insomuch as by them a lively faith may be evidently
known, as a tree is discerned by the fruit.

5. Article 9.

Of Original sin.
Original sin stands not in the following of Adam, but it it the fault and
corruption of the nature of every man that naturally is engendered of the
offspring of Adam, whereby man is very far gone from Original righteousness,
and is of own nature inclined to evil, so that the flesh lusts always
against the Spirit, and therefore in every person borne into this world, it
deserves Gods wrath and damnation; and this infection in nature does remain,
yea in them that are regenerated, whereby the lust of the flesh called in Greek
(...), which some do expound the wisdom, some sensuality, some the
affection, some the desire of the flesh, is not subject to the Law of God.

And although there is no condemnation to them that believe and are baptized:
yet the Apostle does confess that concupiscence and lust has of it self the
nature of sin.

6. Article 27.

Of the Baptism of Infants.
Baptism is not only a sign of profession and mark of difference, wherehy
Christian men are discerned from other that be not Christened: but it is also a
sign of regeneration or new birth, whereby (as by an instrument) they that
receive Baptism rightly are grafted into the Church: the promises of the
forgiveness of sin, and of our adoption to be the sons of God, by the holy
Ghost are visibly signed and sealed.

Faith is confirmed, and grace increased by virtue of prayer unto God. The
Baptism of young children is in any wise to be retained in the Church, as most
agreeable with the institution of Christ.

7. Article 10.

Of Free Will.
The condition of man after the fall of Adam, is such, that he cannot turn and
prepare himself by his own natural strength and good works to faith and
calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to do good works pleasing and
acceptable to God, without the grace of God by Christ preventing us, that we
may have a good will, and working with us when we have that good will.

2. Article 15.

Of being without sin.
Christ is alone without sin; If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us.

9. Article 37.

Of the Civil Magistrate.
We give unto the Kings most Excellent Majesty that Prerogative which we see to
be given to all godly Princes in holy Scriptures by God himself, that is, that
they should rule all estates and degrees committed to their charge by God,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Temporal, and restrain with the Sword the
stubborn and evil doers.

The Laws of the Realm may punish Christian men with death for heinous and
grievous offenses.

It is lawful for Christian men at the commandment of the Magistrate to wear
weapons and serve in the wars.

10. Article 38.

Christian men's goods are not common.
The riches and goods of Christian men are not common, as touching the right,
title, and possession of the same, as the Anabaptists do falsely boast.

11. Article 39.

A Christian man's Oath.
As we confess that vain and rash swearing is forbidden Christian men by our
Lord Jesus Christ and James his Apostle: so we judge that Christian Religion
does not prohibit, but that a man may swear when the Magistrate requires, in
a cause of Faith and Charity, so it be done according to the Prophets teaching,
in judgment, justice, and truth.

5. Of the several sorts of Anabaptists.
IT betell the Anabaptists as other Heriticks, to wit, having once forsaken the
truth, there is no end of their Errors. As the Spirit increased, so many things
were altered, and new things received by the brethren as Oracles from heaven.

First, they break asunder into four Sects, and David George took upon him to
reconcile them, Histor. David Georg 1. fol. 17.
who being possessed with the Devil, preferred himself most blasphemously
before Christ himself; daily they were divided more and more.

There are foureteen several sorts of Anabaptists according to their several
sorts of Errors or Authors set down by Alst edius in his Indice Theologia
Polemina, Page 565. viz.

Muncerians. Apostolikes. Separatists. Catharists. Silentes. Enthusiasts.
Liberi. Adamites. Hutites. Augustinians. Beucheldians. Melchiorites. Georgians.
Menonists.
Whose several Errors I purpose to touch.
Muncerians, 1. Muncerians.
so called of Muncer before named, who raising a sedition of Boores in Germany,
was defeated, taken and beheaded about the year of our Lord God, 1525. He
preached that all goods must be common, and all men free, and of equal
dignity. That God had commanded him to destroy all the ungodly, Sleid. Com.
lib. 5.
and to repurge the Church.

Apostolikes, 2. Apostolikes.
a kind of Anabaptists, because they would be like the Apostles, they wandered
up and down the Countries without staves, shoes, money, or bags, preaching
up and down their celestial vocation to the Ministry of the Word, they
washed one another feet; and leaving houses, wives, and trades; they were so
burdensome to the brethren, that at last they were excommunicated as idle
drones. They dissolved the bands of marriage when they lifted, putting their
wives away as often as they pleased.

Separatists, 3. Separatists.
a kind of Anabapt^sts, so called, because they pretended to be separated from
the world: They condemned fine clothes: To them that laughed they would cry;
Woe be to you that laugh, for hereafter ye shall mourn. They did look sadly,
and fetched deep sighs; they avoided marriage meetings, fealts, music, and
condemned bearing of Arms, and Covenants.

Catharists, 4. Catherists.
who deny children Baptism, affirming that they have no Original sin, and
pretending themselves to be pure and without sin. These will not say this
Petition in the Lords Prayer, forgive us our Trespasses.

Silentes, 5. Silentes.
who despise all humane constitutions, and dispatch their business with great
silence, they answer all questions of Religion with much silence

Enthusiasts, 6. Enthusiasts.
who pretend that they have the gift of Prophecy by dreams, to which they
give much credit. They would lie in Trances like men having the falling
sickness, and then would declare st^ange things which God had revealed to
them, viz. That Anabaptisme was holy: that Pedobaptisme came from the devil,
and that Zwinglius was in hell, etc.

Liberi, 7. Liberi.
a sort of Anabaptists, who understand the liberty we have in Christ carnally:
and, being freed from Christ, they think themselves freed from paying any
rent, tribute, or tithes, and take unto themselves liberty to commit all
uncleanesse whatsoever.

Adamites, 8. Adamites.
a kind of Anabaptists, who think clothes to be cursed, and given to man for
a punishment of sin, whereas they think themselves to be innocent and without
sin.

Hutites, 9. Hutites.
who boast themselves to be the only children of God, and hei^es of heaven, so
called of John Huta; this John Huta dyed in prison. These Anabaptists deny the
deity of Christ.

Augustinians, 10. Augustinians.
who affirm the entrance into Paridice to have been shut up until Augustine
the Bohemian opened it for himself and those that were of his Sect.

Beuckeldians, 11. Beuckeldians.
a kind of Anabaptists so called of Ioh. Beuchelzo^^^us; these affirm
Polygamie to be permitted in the Gospel, and that it is a holy thing to have
many wives.

Melchiorists 12. Melchiorists.
are Anabaptists, so called of Melchior Hofman, who was their Prophet at
Strausborough, whom they do expect to come at the day of Judgment with Elias.
They also affirm the blessed Virgin Mary not to be the Mother of our Lord, but
to be as a Conduit through which Christ passed, so that he took nothing from
her, neither was borne of her. This Hofman was so wicked as to say, Malidista
sit caro Mariae.

Georgians, 13. Georgians.
certain Anabaptists, followers of David George, who was father of the
Familists, boasted that he was a great Prophet, the Son of God, greater than
Christ: and he should rise three years after his death, and restore the
Kingdom of Israel.

Menonists, 14. Menonists.
called of Menon a Frisian, by whose name the Anabaptists were generally
called, as if all their other denominations had been lost and buried.

These foureteen are named by Astedius: Mr. Bullinger in his first book against
Anabaptists, Hist. Anabap. page 53.
names others, as some of them under pretense of childish innocence, played
many odd pranks: one having kept his excrements in store many days, powered
them out in the street, and turned himself naked into them, saying, unless we
be made like little Children, we cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. 15.
Pueris similes.
Others for the same reason would ride upon sticks and Hobby-horses like
children in great companies, and women would run naked with them, and then in
pure innocence they lay together, and so in the end it proved childrens play
indeed.

Servetians, 16. Sevetians.
a blasphemous kind of Anabaptists, so called of Servetus, a Spaniard, whose
Heresies are set down by Prateolus, Bullinger, and others; he called the
baptism of children an horrible abomination: he would not have them baptized
before they were thirty years old. This Servetus denied the Deity of Christ,
and was burnt for his blasphemous opinions, October, 27. in the year of our
Lord, 1553. at Geneva.

Libertines, 17. Libertines.
who make God the author of sin, and deny the resurrection of the body:
against these Mr. Calvin has written a Treatise; Bullinger tells us of
diverse sotts of Anabaptists called Liberi, vid. sup.

Denkians, 18. Denkians.
a sort of Anabaptists, of which Denkius was chief, who taught that the Devil
and wicked men should be saved. This Denkius was converted by Oecolampadius
Minister of Basil.

Semper Orantes, 19. Orantes.
who would always pray, and neglect all other duties.

Deo relicti, 20. Deo relicti.
Anabaptists that relying only upon God, refuse all means that God has
appointed.

Monasterienses, 21. Monasterienses.
or magnificent Anabaptists, so called because of their bravery under their
King John, who added many things unto the hodgepodge of their errors: as the
having many wives, which he pretended to receive from the heavenly Father; and
it was no burden for a man to have never so many in Munster, they being
provided for out of the common stock. They put away barren women, and women
past children as good for nothing, and committed them to Curators to keep:
whereas they had many wives, yet it was accounted a great offense for one wife
to look ( distorto virtue) but awry upon her sister wife, yea, accounted a
capital crime.

Yea, at this day they have a new crotchet come into their heads, 22. Plunged
Anabaptists.
that all that have not been plunged nor dipped under waters, are not truly
baptized, and these also they re-baptize; And this error arises from ignorance
of the Greek word, Baptize, which signifies no more then washing or ablution,
as Hezychius, Stephanus, Scapula, Budaeus, great Masters of the Greek-tongue
make good by many instances and allegations out of many authors.

In holy Scripture it is used generally to wash, Luke 11. 38. The Pharisees
wondered that he had not first washed, (...) So Heb. 9. 10. (...). Mark. 7. 3.
Except they wash often they care not.

And both are allowed by our Church; and sprinkling has been rather used among
us, by reason of the coldness, of our climate, and the tenderness of our
Infants.

They will tell us that Christ was baptized in the River, and the Eunuch in the
River.

True it is, The Abyssins baptize not in Fonts as we do, but in the
Church Porch, but with a potful of water ^ Alvares of the ^^hiop^ans. c. 5 Cyp.
Epist. 76. ad Mag^.
for then they had no Church, nor Fonts, which now are to be used; but in what
river was Cornelins and his family, or the Jailer and his family plunged in?

Again, if the spiritual grace be sufficiently expressed by a little water
sprinkled, as by ducking in a river: then dipping is not necessary; as a little
bread in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, is of as much efficacy as a whole
loaf. The Apostle tells us, Heb. 9. 13. ofsprinkling them that were unclean.

St. Cyprian tells us true baptism to be as well by sprinkling as by dipping.

It is impossible (says Mr. Bullinger) to set down all the differences and
contrary opinions of the Anabaptists, with all their pernicious Sects and
Factions; and true it is that almost every one of them has some peculiar toy
or figment in their heads, upon which they are divided, and often excommunicate
one another.

6. Of their manner of Re-baptizing, and other Rites.
THey flock in great multitudes to their Jordans, Manner of Rebaptizing.
and both Sexes enter into the River, and are dipped after their manner with a
kind of spell, containing the heads of their erroneous tene^s, and their
engaging themselves in their schismatic covenants, and combination of
separation.

In the Thames and Rivers, Manner of receiving the Communion. Of their
marriages.
the Baptizer, and the party baptized go both into the Rivers, and the parties
to be baptized are dipped or plunged under water. They receive the holy
Communion most unreverently, sitting with their hats upon their heads.

For their Marriages, Gast 363* de Catabap. erroribus.
they mary not in their Congregations, but in private, after this manner:
Barbara (says the Bridegroom) will thou have me the brother of the Lord, a
man newly regenerate of water and of the holy Ghost? are you of that Church
whereof I am a member? She answers, I am rebaptized (God be praised) and
w^ll co-habite with no man but with a brother of the same faith; to whom the
Bridegroom replieth, give me thy hand, and give me a kiss, and I take thee to
wife, both for ou^ faith approved in Baptism, and because my spirit is
exceeding enamoured of thee* the Bride saying the same words, the marriage is
consummated.

For their spiritual marriage, Spiritual marriages.
which is their promiscuous uncleaninesse.

They affirm, those women sin grievously that ly^ with their husbands that are
not rebaptized, Bulling adver. Anabapt. lib. 2. fol 42.
because they are Gentiles; but it to be no sin at all for them to lie with any
man that has bin rebaptized because the heavenly Father has so commanded.

Gastius reports, P^ge 36 de Catabap. error.
that a certain Maid of modest behavior, who had dwelt with her Master
honestly many years, being seduced by the Anabaptists, lived among them, and
after a month returned to see her old master, who saluted her merrily after
this manner: why do thou suffer thy self to be seduced by those impure
knaves? a woman having once lost her honesty, what has she left her? The wench
answered, they told me that the heavenly Father commanded it, and therefore I
was most obed^en^ in all things to all m^n, and denied no man the duty of
spiritual marriage that did require it: Her Master answered, fie upon thee
bol^ whore, that do not only glory in thy great sin, but also accountest
thy abominable wickedness to be pleasing unto God! Thus they deceive the poor
people, Bulling. adver Anabap pa 4 Community of women.
they persuade simple women under pretense of Gods commandment, that they
cannot be saved except they prostiture their bodies to their brethren, Bu^ling
adver Anabaptist l 2. fol. 37.
and play the ha^lots.

For this Community of women they had diverse reasons worthy of Registring.

That Christians must renounce for Christ's sake those things that they love
best, Qudam imp^ri nebulones pers adebant I vibus mol erculls on osse ip^as
salvari ^isi pud citi^m suam p^ostitue^ rent, abu^ebantu^ autem non absque
blasphemia verbo Domini. etc.
and are most dear unto them, and therefore women must renounce their beloved
honesty.

That so Christ's sake we must undergo all manner of infamy.

That Publicans and Harlots shall enter Heaven before the Pharis^es, and
therefore common women before honest Matrons.

Again, as we are all one spirit; so we must be all one body; again, one faith,
one charity.

For their manner of Ordnation.
Ordination of their Ministers.

The Anabaptists are all Preachers, every man at his pleasure takes upon him
to be the Lords Ambassador: as John Becold the Tailor of Leyden; I ohn
Matthias the Baker of Hartem; and hence have our Cobblers, Shoomakers, Ostlers,
etc, learnt to take upon them this divine calling, of which the holy Ghost
speaks, No man takes this calling upon him except he be sent of God.

For their learning: Learning.
they have none at all, all Books they burnt in Munster but the Bible; many of
them can scarcely read; yea Gastius affirms that many of their Preachers
never saw a Bible.

For their places of assembling, Places of mee^ing.
they do not meet in Churches; their going thither (say they) is like the
going of the Heathen to their Idol Temples; but rather in woods and secret
places, and this rather in the night then in the day, darkness being fittest
for their devotions. In Munster they burnt the Church of St. Maurice, and made
Storehouses of others.

For their manner of preaching, they please the common people well in preaching
community of goods, every man to be alike, exemption from paying of Rent,
Tribute, and Tithes; putting down of Magistrates; and commonly they rail as if
they were mad against the Reformed Preachers that go about to detect their
Errors, and teach them obedience.

They affirm Luther to be worse then the Pope, and hate the Protestant
Preachers more then the Popish Priests.

For miracles they can do none, except it be a miracle (says Gastius) to make
halfe-witted men stark mad, or to make full Ambries soon empty. One of their
Prophets pretended to do a great miracle, viz. in the night time he caused to
be put a great number of fishes into a soul puddle where the people used to
wash horses, and in the morning he called the people together, and prophesied:
Thus says the Lord, cast nets into this puddle, and you shall get good ^ish (a
thing incredible) for never fish was seen there; but at his command, his
Disciples cast a net and enclosed multitudes of fi^hes, so that the net brake.
Thus the profane Rascal (says my Author) would imitate the miracle of
Christ, and God in his anger gave efficacy of error to that false miracle, by
which he deceived many.

7. How Christian Princes have suppressed these Sectaries, and especially how
they have been punished in England.
AS you have heard of their detestable and blasphemous Errors; so I purpose to
speak a word or two of the severe punishments inflicted upon those wicked
Sectaries.

Anabaptisme continued in Germany in its vigor not much above ten years, Gast.
250.
they were destro^ed and suppressed by the Christian Princes and Magistrates;
at Frankhus there were slain about 5000 of them and 300 executed with Munter;
at Norinberg also a great number were slain; G^stius* de Anabapt. exord. lib.
1. Decre^lt senatus Tigu^nus merge^eeum qui merserit baptismo eum qui ^rius
emerse at. Gast p 178. lib (...) no die mul^i ob at a^^baptismums ^bmer si
sunt. Howes Chr^p 576
at Zuricke they drowned the^ that were rebaptized; at Vienna they did the
like; at Passom many were burnt and drowned; in the Low Countries at Amsterd^m,
Leyden, Hartsem, and in all other places else, they were everly punished.
Pontanus writes of the destruction of ^50000 persons.

The Christian P^^ces and Magistrates never left burning, drowning, and
destroying them till their remainder was contemptible: a remnant of them came
into England in two ships* where they have lain lurking. They came hither about
the year 1535. In the year 1538. ^e read of them in our Chronicles, viz. upon
the second day of November* in the said year four Dutch Anabaptists ^are
fagots at Paul's Cross; Howes Chr. p. 4. 6.
and again, of the burning of two Dutch Anabaptists in Smithfield the 27th day
of November.

Again, How 579.
of two Dutch Anabaptists burnt in the high way beyond Southwarke, How 679.
leading to Newington, Auno 1539. Again, upon Easter day 1575, of a
Congregation of Dutch Anabaptists discovered in a house without the Bars at
Algate, of whom 27 were taken of them, four recanted at Paul's Cross the 25th
day of May, in form following.

Whereas l. T. R. H. being seduced by the Devil the spirit of Error, and by
false teachers have fallen into most damnable and detestable errors, namely.

1 That Christ took not flesh of the substance of the Virgin Mary. 2 That the
Infants of the faithful ought not to be Baptized. 3 That a Christian man may
not be a Magistrate, or bear the sword or office of Authority. 4 That it is
not lawful for a Christian man to take an oath.
Now by the grace of God, and through conference with good and learned
Ministers of Christ's Church, I understand the same to be most damnable and
detestable Heresies, and do ask God before his Church mercy for my said
former errors; and do forsake, recant, and renounce them, and abjure them from
the bot^ome of my heart, protesting that I certainly believe.

1. That Christ took flesh of the substance of the Virgin Mary.

2. That the Infants of the faithful ought to be baptized.

3. That a Christian man may be a Magistrate, bear the sword and office of
Authority.

4. That it is lawful for a Christian man to take an oath.

And further I confess, that the whole Doctrine established and published in
the Church of England, and also that is received in the Dutch Church in London,
is found true, and according to Gods Word, whereunto in all things I submit my
self, and will be most gladly a member of the said Dutch Church, from
henceforth utterly a bandoning and forsaking all and every Anabaptisticall
errors. Anno 1575, in the 17th year of Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, one
man and ten women, Dutch Anabaptists, were in the Consistory of Paul's condemned
to be burnt in Smithfield: but after great pains taken with them, only one
woman was converted, and the other were banished the Land.

The 22th of July in the same year, two Dutch men, Anabaptists, were burnt in
Smithfield, who dyed in great horror, c^ying and roa^ing: this was the
entertainment that these Sectaries had in times past.

In the year 1561* a Proclamation was set forth by Queen Elizabeth, Cambden in
the life of Qu, Eliz. p. 35.
whereby she commanded the Anabaptists and such like Heretics which had
flocked to the Coast-Towns of England from the parts beyond the Seas, under
color of shunning of per^ecution, and had spread the poison of their Sects in
England* to depart the Realm within 20 days* whether they were (...) borne
people of the Land, or Foreigners, upon pain of imprisonment and los^e of
goods.

8. Of the audacious boldness of these Sectaries at this time.
BEfore you have heard of the condition of these Heretics in times past: but
with grief of heart I speak it. Now they lift up their heads, they write
books and publish them in defense of their detestable opinions, of which I have
seen some: the one by one Edw: Barber, and two other by A. R. Anno 1642. A
fourth by one Lamb, with others, and this without any control that I can hear
of. Yea, they challenge our Divines openly to defend their Tenets by
disputation, and to satisfy the people. Doctor Featly gave them a meeting in
Southwarke, where four of their Disputants appeared on their side, besides a
great number of the vulgar: of which meeting the Doctor has given the world an
account. Would to God our Rel^gious Patriots assembled in Parliament would at
length take care (as they have done of the Romish Emissaries) to suppress
these, that the name of God be not blasphemed: that they may not infect the
simple people with their abominable Errorus. Was not all Israel plagued for
the execrable things taken by Achan? who can tell whether the plagues of God
that are upon us, are for not punishing these detestable Sectaries and others?
Alas our poor Church is oppressed, and who lays hand to help. The plague of
Heresy is among us, and we have no power to keep the ^ick from the whole.

The Wolves that were wont to lie in the woods, are come into our Sheepfold,
and roar in the holy Congregations. Oh thou Shepherd of Israel, why have thou
broken down the hedge of this thy Vineyard which thy right hand has planted?
The Bore out of the wood, and the wild beas^ out of the Field do devour. Oh
remember not against us our former iniquities, let thy tender mercies prevent
us, for we are brought very low.

The Confession of Faith of those Churches which are commonly called
Anabaptists, Printed at London in the year of our Lord God, 1644. Subscribed in
the names of 7. Churches in London.
William K^ffen, Thomas Patience, John Spilsbery, George Tipp^ng, Sam.
Richardson, Thomas Skippard, Thomas Monday, Thomas Gunne, John M^bbat, John
Web, Thomas Killcop, Paul H^bson, Thomas Gore, Joseph ^helps, Edward Heath.
Set down in 52. Articles. In which Articles you shall find some Rats bane
covered with a great deal of honey.
1. IN the 38. Article, That the due maintenance of the Officers ( viz. the
Ministers) should be free, etc. their meaning being, that their maintenance
should depend upon the voluntary contribution of their people: this their
opinion is most impious and sacrilegious, and directly repugnant to Gods Law.

2. In the 39. they affirm Baptism to be an Ordinance of the new Testament,
given by Christ to be dispensed only upon persons professing faith, or that
are Disciples, or taught, who upon a profession of faith ought to be baptized.

By this Article most cruelly they exclude all Infants baptism from the
Sacrament of entrance into the Church, being the only outward means of their
salvation.

3. In the 40. they making dipping necessary, which Christ never commanded.

4. In the 41. the persons designed by Christ, say they, to dispense this
Ordinance: a preaching Disciple, it being tied to no particular Church*
officer, nor person.

5. In the 42. Article, that such to whom God has given gifts may preach. When
Muncer a seditious Anabaptist began first to preach, Luther advised the Senate
of Mul^us to demand of him what calling he had: and if he should avouch God to
be his Author, then they should require him to prove his extraordinary calling
by some evident sign. For whenever it pleases God to change the ordinary
course, and to call any man to any office extraordinarily, he declares that
his good will and pleasure by some evident sign: If the Anabaptisticall
calling be ordinary, let them prove it by Scripture: if extraordinary, let them
prove it by Miracles.

HEre I might add the sum of a Treatise of Mr. Johnons (who styles himself
Pastor of the ex^led English Church at Amsterdam:) written against two errors
of the Anabaptists maintained by them at this day. The one concerning the
Bap^isme of Children, the other concerning the Anabaptismes of elder people,
what specious shows so ever they make, says he, (...) his Epistle.
perverting the Scriptures, filling their mouths with falsehood and blasphemy,
abusing the people of God, reproaching and challenging all such as stand
against their Errors and Heresies, Goliath like, defying Israel: yet says my
Author, their opinions are such as pervert the Gospel of Jesus Christ, 1.
Baptism to be adm^n^st to the Infants of the faithful^.
bereave the Church of the grace and favors of God, to young and old, etc.

First for his grounds and reasons for the Baptism of Children* he alleged
seven.

1. Because it is the Commandment of God to give the 1. Reason, Gods command.
sign and seal of his Covenant of grace to his people and their seed, Gen 17
7. 12, 13. 14.
in their infancy, throughout their generations. Which Ordinance of the Lords
has never been repealed, but abides stablished upon a certain and perpetual
ground, Exodus 12. 48, 49. Acts 2. 38, 39. and 3. 25. and 16. 31. 15. 8, 9, 10,
Gal. 3. 8. 29. Isa 54. 10. Luke 20. 37, 38. Heb. ^1. 13 -- 16. and 13. Lu^e ^.
54, 55. 72, etc. Romans 4. 11 16. 17. and 8. 20. Rev. 14. 16.
which is, his Promise and Covenant of grace made with the faithful and their
seed for ever.

2. Because Christ has confirmed the same, 2. Confirmed by Christ.
when he sent forth his Apostles, and appointed them to make all the Natitions
Disciples, Mat. 28, 18. 19
and to baptize them into the Name of the Father, the Son, Mark 16. 15, 16
and the Holy Ghost. For to make Gentiles Disciples, is by the Gospel, to bring
them unto the Covenant of God, Gal* 3. 8 -- 29
made with Abraham the Father of many nations, Genesis 12. 3. and 17. 4, 5, 7.
for salvatition, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Which being a
Covenant everlasting, Romans 4. 9 -- 1^ and 11. 13 -- 16. and 15. 8 -- 16.
and including the faithful and their seed, (Baptism which did now succed and
seal it, in stead of Circumcision) was therefore by this appointment of
Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
to be administered unto all that should be brought and comprehended under that
Covenant of Grace: Esa. 42. 6, 7. and 49. 6.
and consequently, both to such as were of years, Acts 13* 46, 47
coming to the faith of Christ, and to their children, being yet Infants. Ioh
10. 16.
Otherwise the Gentiles should not with the Jews be made co-heriters, and of
the same body, 1 Cor. 19. 13. and 12, 13.
and joynt-partakers of the Promise of God in Christ, Ephesians. 2. 1^. -- 22 and 3.
9.
as the Scripture teaches.

3. Because is was the Apostles practice, 3. The Apostles practice
at the publishing of the Gospel through the world, to baptize both the
house-holders themselves that believed, Acts 16. 15. 33 (...). 16 Genesis 15, ^
and 17^ 26 27* and ^1. 4.
and their households also: Like as Abraham himself first believed, and then
was circumcis^d; and all his family with him: and as the strangers of the
Gentiles, which received the faith of the Jews, Ex. 12. 48, 49. House implies
children therein. Genesis 30. 30 and 45, 18, 19 -- 46. 5, 6, 7. Number. 3^^5, etc.
Psalm. 115. ^^, 13, 14. 1 Timothy 5. 8.
was circumcised likewise, with all the males that were his.

4. Because Children of believers are holy, 4. The Children o^ Believers ore
holy.
and are Abraham's seed and heirs by promise of the Kingdom of heaven. And who
can then withold the Baptism of water from them, to whom God vouchsafes the
baptism of his Spirit, 1^ or 7^ 4 Romans 11. 16 A^^s 3. 25 Gal 3. 29 Esa 46. 3,
4. Psalm 21. 10. 30. and 71* 6. and 115. 12, 13, 14, 15. Luk 1. 41. 4* Acts
10. 47.
and the blessing of Abraham to an inheri^ance everlasting.

5. Because Baptism is the Lords sign of his washing away 5. Sign of wash^ng
away of sin.
of our sins, receiving of us into the Church, and incorporating of us into
Christ, Ro^ 6. 3^ and 5. 14, 15* Z^ch 13, 1. 1 Cor 1. 13 -- 16 and 2, 13 Acts 4
12 16. 0, 31, 32, 33, 34.
for salvation by his death and resurrection. Whereof the children of Believers
are partakers, as well as they which be of years; and therefore can no more be
deprived of Baptism* then of remission of sins, entrance into the Church,
ingraffing into Christ, and salvation by his means.

6. Because there is one Ba^tisme, 6. One Baptism Ephesians. 4. 4, 5 6.
as there is one Body, and one Mediator, and confirmer of our covenant of Grace
to the faithful, 1 Cor. 12. 13. and 0. 1, 2.
and their seed in all ages, so as therefore one and the same Baptism
pertains to the children of the faithful, together with the Parents
themselves, as they ere also one and the same body with them, Exodus 12. 37.
having one and the same Mediator and ra^ifier of Gods Covenant of grace unto
them, 1 Pet. 3. 20 21
even Jesus Christ the head and Savior of his Church, Gen 7. 1 Gal^ 1. 8. ^7,
28, 29.
which is his body, the fullness of him that fills all in all things. 1 T^m.
25. ^oh. ^6 16* A^ts ^, 38, 39


7. Because else the grace of God to his people is now ^sal* 1^0. 3. 5.
since Christ's coming in the flesh lessened and straightened more then before: 7.
Go^s grace not lessened since Christ's coming
which to affirm, is highly to derogate from the grace of God, the fullness of
Christ and his Gospel, the comfort of Christians, and contrary to that which is
written, 1 Cor. ^. 17 and 8 -- 12. Rom, 4. 11. 25. and 11. 11 -- 36. and 15. 4.
Genesis 10. 1. -- 4. Luke 7. 1. 1 Pet. 3. 18. -- 22. 19. 9. Esa 49. 6 Acts 15. 1.
-- 31 and 16. 15. 33. and 26. 6, 7. 22. 2^. Gal. 1. 6. 9.
Col. 2*

2. That Baptism received in the Apostaticall Churches of Christians, as in
Rome, and the like, is not to be renounced; and a new to be repeated again.

1. Because there is no precept nor example for, Mar. (...). 25. and 28. 18,
19, 20.
and therefore not from heaven.

2. Because there is one Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5.
as, one Circumcision: Genesis 17. 12, 11, 12, 13.
as in the apostasy of Israel Circumcision was not repeated again, they
returning. In like manner Baptism being once received in the Apostaticall
Churches of Christians is not to be repeated.

3. Because the Covenant of Gods grace in Christ is an everlasting Gen 17. 7.
Covenant. Gal. 3. 8. 29.


4. Because Christ dyed for sin once and being raised from the dead dies no
more; Romans 6. 8, 9, 10, 11.
and we are buried with him by Baptism into his death, to be graf^ed with him
in the similitude of his resurrection: Acts 13. 34*
wherefore all that are once Baptized into his name* ought still to retain it,
and not repeat it any more.

5. Because the Church of Rome was espoused to Christ in the Covenant of Grace
by the Gospel of salvation, Romans ^, 7. and 6. 3. 4
having Baptism and the rest of Christ's Ordinances in the Apostles days, and
have ever since retained it, Rev. 17*
with other grounds of Christian Religion, notwithstanding all her adulteries
and apostasies whereinto she is fallen.

6. Because God has his people in the Romish Babylon: and when he calls them
out from thence, Rev 18 4
does not enjoyne them to leave whatsoever is there had, but requires of them
to have no communion with their sins. Now Baptism is not of her adulteries
Hos. 2. 2 and 4. 15.
but of Christ's O^dinance.

7. Because else men might by the same reason also not retain the Articles of
faith: the learning of Scripture, Deuteronomy. ^. 32
or the translations thereof; and also be persuaded to d^ssolve such marriages
which have been had by their Ministry, Luke 16 29.
with other as strange consequences; which to admit were unlawful.

Now howsoever the Brownists comply with the Anabaptists in many things, as you
shall ^ee afterward; yet in these points Mr. Johnson, and some other of them
disagree from them, counting these their opinions abominable.

In describing of the Brownists I purpose to set down: 1. Their Original, and
why called Brownists. 2. Called also Separatists, and why. 3. Their agreement
with the Donatists. 4. Their agreement with the Anabaptists. 5. Great
In^ovators. 6. Some of their errors set down by Mr. White. 7. They are bitter
Railers. 8. Magnify their own Sect. 9. Criminate the Dutch and French
Churches. 10. They pretend Scripture. 11. Blame our Congregation for
profaneness. 12. The profaneness, impietyl, dissentions, and lewdness of
their own Sect. 13. Their equivocating and palliating their own wickedness.
14. Blame the Conversations of our Ministers. 15. Except against our Ministers
Ordination. 16. Noveltie of their Ordinations. 17. Their singing of Psalms.
18. Their Prophesying. 19. Their blaming set Prayers. 20. Their blaspheming the
Lords Prayer. 21. The tyranny of the Separation. 22. Diverse sorts of Brownists.
23. How great a sin Schism is. 24. How they have been suppressed and punished
in times past. 25. Mr. Scots description of a Brownist. 26. Of the
Semi-separatists.

1. Their Original.
THese Sectaries are called Brownists from on^ Master Robert Brown, a
Northamptonshire man, who was Schoolmaster of the Free-Schole of St. Olaves in
Southwark, This Brown seducing certain people, preached to them in a
gravelpit near Islington; (and by their Tenets was not the holy Catholic
Church of God included at that time in the for^said gravell-pit?) Also when the
whimseyes came first into his head? he was advised by some of his friends to
confer with Master Fox; and having been with him, he reported that he had
been with a madman, who thrust him out of his doors, telling him that he
would prove a firebrand in Gods Church.

Before his departure out of the Kingdom he acquainted also one Mr. Greenham,
a pious Divine with his intentions, who dissuaded him from his Separation,
using many reasons to stay him; among others, that what grace he had received,
he had it from the Church of England; but finding him obstinate, he told him
that for himself he doubted not (although he went away in his hot zeal) but
that being better informed, he might return again unto his Mother Church; but
bad him bethink himself what should become of those poor souls whom he had
seduced, and was carrying away. Master Greenham's words preved true: for Master
Brown returned, God giving him grace to renounce his errors) and dyed lately a
Member of the Church of England, being Parson of a Church in Northampton shire;
But his Sect remains to the great disturbance of our Church: For those errors
that Brown recanted and vomited up, many male-contented simple men supped up
and swallowed down, poisoning their selves and others.

2. Called also Separatists. 2. Called also Separatists.

THese Sectaries are also called Separatists, and this name they arrogate to
themselves, like the Pharisees of old; and well may they be called Separatists,
because they separate themselves not only from their Mother Church in which
they were baptized; and brought up, and fed with the pure milk of Gods Word;
but also from all the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas, for they carry their
simple seduced people not to any of those holy Churches to be members of their
Congregations; but to Conventicles, for which they are termed by a learned man
separata factio defectorum.

2. They may also be called Separaticts, not only by reason of the separation
they make from the Church of England, and all other the Reformed Churches; but
also by reason of the grievous separations and divisions they make among
themselves: for example sake; what an evil spirit of hateful and fiery
contention was raised between the Brothers, the Iohnsons, which burnt up both
spiritual and natural love; as the one of them, being the younger, forgetting
his profession and brotherly love became a Libeller, loading his brother and
others with reproaches, shame and Infamy, and that iin Print to abide for ever,
as Master Thomas White in his discovery of Brown^sme does relate? The other
separated himself, and broke fellowship with his brother and father, and
cursed them with all the curses in Gods Book: This separation was confimed by
the heavy sentence of Excommunication, by which he ^id give his father and
brother to the devil. The Dutch and French Ministers in Amsterdam went about
to reconcile Francis Johnson and his Father, as appears by their Letter:
Proph schism. p. 60.
Narravit-nobis Io^nnes I^^sonius Anglus se hominem septuagena^^um ex Anglia in
hanc Vrbem difficili itinere venisse, ut duos filios suos, Franciscum, and
Georgium dissidentes in gratiam reduceret. etc. But their labor was in vain;
His son Francis pe^sisting obstinately until the death of his Father,
sending him down to the grave with a curse, as if it were engraving the
sentence of Excommunication upon his Fathers Tomb, etc.

3. Agree with the Donatists. 3. Their agreement with the Donatists.

THe Separatists or Brownists agree in many things with the Donatists, who
confined the holy Catholic Church to a corner of Africa, as the Brownists do
confine the Church of God to their Conventibles, excluding all other Christians
pale of the Church that are not o^ their Sect.

May not I say, to these Brow^^sts, as Constantine the E^perour to Acefius:
Capa scalas and ascend coelum solus take ladders and mount heaven alone; who
dream that they have ladders or something else to en^er heaven alone? They
believe not (with the Donatists) the Article of faith, viz. That ^he Church of
God is Catholic, but uncharitably put all the Christians of the world into the
estate of damnation th^^ are not of their Sect. Of their agreement with the
Donac^sts, Master Gifford late Minister of the Word of God at Malden, has set
forth a Treatise at large, which you may puruse if you please.

4. They comply with the Anabaptists. 4. Their agreement with the Anabptists.

THE Separatists do comply in many things with the Anabaptists, and these
Maxims following they have from them.

As they separate themselves from the Papists; so also from all Protestant
Churches.

They affirm, that theirs is the true Church only, and the Gospel to be no
where truly preached but by them.

To receive the Communion with profane persons is to par^ake of (...)
prop^anenesse.

That all (...) preach; having gifts.

That in the Church there should be a par^ty.

They dislike marriages in Churches, and to serve God in Churches that have
been polluted by the Papists.

Whereas the Anabaptists forbear one Petition of the Lords Prayer, viz.
Forgive us our trespassas, the Brownists refuse the whole Lords Prayer.

Although they bear with temporal Magistrates; yet they abhor spiritual
government.

Lastly, they like not payment of Tithes* reserved by God himself for the for
the maintenance of his Ministers, paid before the Law, commanded in the Law,
and allowed by Christ himself, Matthew. 23. But disallowed by the Anabaptists.
The Brownists (...) re^ibap.


5. They are Innovators. 5. (...) ^nnovators.

MAy not these Separatists be also called Novat^res, by reason of the great
Innovations made by them? they can not abide no old things heretofore used in
Gods Church. They cannot abide our Fonts, nor our Churches, (steeple houses
some call them) nor our Bells, (I hear of a Sect that are called together by a
Sow-gelders horn) nor our marriage, nor our administration of the Sacraments
in our Churches, nor our burials, nor our Prayers taken out of holy Scriptures,
and commanded by Christ himself, as the Lords Prayer.

6. Some of their Errors set down by Mr. White. 6. Some of their ^rrors.

1. THey hold it lawful for a man to live with her that is not his wise,
^ather then to reveal himself.

2. That there are qualities in God no^ essential, and that love in God is not
of his being, but that the self same love that is in God is (...) in us.

3. That i^ is not lawful for the innocent parties to retain the offender as
the wife the husband, or the husband the wife of either party that has
committed adultery; though the innocent party upon the others repentance
forg^ving the other sin, be desirous still to live with the other party in
marriage Covenant, as before, but have excommunicated the parties innocent for
so doing.

7. Bitter Railers. 7. Bitter ^ail^rs. Profane schism, cap. 12.

THese new Sectaries are bitter Railers, and especially upon their Mother the
Church o^ England, calling her Apostate Israel, Sodom, Bobylon, murdering
Step-mothers, Idolatrous Antich^istian etc. They judge and condemn them that
are better then themselves, far excelling in the gifts and graces of God; yea
they condemn and sl^nder our whole nation, as a false Church, false
Christians, a Synogogue of Satan, a people in a damnable estate, exempting
none: neither the learned, nor the holiest, but condemn all.

They boast much of the Spirit but by their virulent and venomous tongues you
may see what spirit is in them, viz. That Spirit that rules in the children of
disobedience.

Michael the Archangel durst not give the Devil such cursed language as the
Brownists give their mother, The poison of Aspes are under their lips.

Barrow and Greenwood were possessed with a spirit of railing and scoffing, Mr.
Ba^^. Separ. schism.
terming set Prayers the smoke of the bottomless pit; preaching preachment and
sermocination; the Preachers deliverie of the word, the distilling and dropping
down of old Parables from his mouth; the time of preaching, disputing with the
houre-glasse, the Pulpit a prescript place like a Tub, solemn Fasts
hyporiticall Fasts, and a stageplay wherein one plays sin, another judgment,
another the Gospel, the singing of Psalms harmonizing of pleasant ballads;
our Churches styes, and our Baptism adulterate baptism; the receiving the
holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper a two-penny Feast; the worship of God
Idolatry, and us Idolaters, yea Sodomites, Canaanites, Beliamites, Chamites^
Cainites.

8. Magnify their Sect. 8. Magnifit their own Sect;

AS these Sectaries villefie others, so they magnify themselves, like those
men of whom the Prophet speaks, Isa. 65. Stand further off* I am holier then
thou. And with the Pharisee* they thank God that they are not lik^ other men.
Or with S^mon Magus gave out that they are the great power of God. These cry up
their own Sect to the Skies. John Robinsons a swer to R. B^ page 213.
On Mr. Bernard (says Mr. Robinson) if ever you saw the beauty of Sion, and
^he glory of God filling his Taber^acle, it has been in the manifesta^ion of
d^vers graces of God in our Church in that heavenly harmony and comely order,
wherein by the grace of God we are set and walk. Likewise hear Mr. Smith: Oh
Mr. Bernard, John Smiths p^^allei. p 17.
if you knew but the power and comfort of Gods Ordinance as we do, etc.
Touching both these boasters of their popular Government, Pro^ha^e schism. ^.
47.
hear the censure of Mr, Johnson, who shows them to be Korites, a bellious
rout, pleaders for confusion, etc. Also Mr. Daniel Studl^y, Ibidem p. 76.
Mr. Iohnsons second, describes Mr Samuel Fuller a Deacon of Mr. Robinsons
company with his friends to be ignorant Idiots, noddy Nabalites, dogged Doegs,
fainfaced Pharisces, shameless Shimeites, malicious Machavilians.

9. Criminate the Dutch and French Church. 9. They criminate the Dutch and
French Churches.

IN their separations they carry not their seduced people from us to the Dutch
or French, nor to any Reformed Churches to have Communion, They are as
malevolent to Dutch and French Churches as to us: many crimes they do lay upon
them, as for example.

1. That their Assemblies are so contrived, Fran^^^ Iohnsons Ar^i^les against
the Dutch and French Churches.
that the whole Church continue^h not together, so that the Ministers cannot
together with their flock sanctify the Lords day. The presence of the members
cannot be known, and finally no public action, whether excommunication or any
other cannot be rightly done: Vid. Dr. Halls Apology against the Browniste.
page 797*
can they say worse of us? the Lords day cannot be rightly observed, nor
presence nor absence known, nor any holy action rightly performed: what can
there be in their Churches but mere confusion? See what dirt these Separatists
cast upon the Church that harbors them.

2. They baptize the seed of them that are no members of the visible Church, of
whom they have no care as of members, neither admit their Parents to the Lords
Supper. Is not this mee^ Babylonisme? how is the Church of Amsterdam separated
from the World?

3. That rule and commandment of Christ, Matthew. 18. 15. If thy brother offend
thee, go and tell his fault, etc. They neither observe, nor suffer to be
observed: behold, what they complain of us, they find the same in the Church of
Amsterdam.

4. They worship God in the Idol Temples of Antichrist, so that the wine is
marred with the vessels, is not this an abomination? yea, the Antichristian
stones have some of them the ornaments of the Roman harlot upon them remaining.

5. Their Ministers have set maintenance.

6. Ty^hes, or a maintenance as ill: Tithes were commanded by God, and never
repealed; but this they have lea^n^ of their Tutors the Anabaptists.

7. Their Elders change yearly, which is not according to the Doctrine of the
Apost^es; what? can our Church have wor^e then false Governors?

8. They celebrate marriage in the Church, is not this a foul fault? Is it not
better to be married in the Congr^gation with prayers and Gods blessing
pronounced upon them by the Minister, then to be contracted privately, and
(...) into a book as men do horses in Smithfield?

9. They use a new censure of suspension which Christ has not appointed: a
great presumption, s^y they.

10. They receive unrepentant Excommunicants to be members of their Church, by
which means they become the body with them that are delivered over to Satan.

Thus these Seperatists besmeare the Church at Amsterdam: yea, they count it a
great Apostasy for one of them so much as once to hear a Sermon in any of the
Dutch or French Churches.

10. Pretend Scripture. 10. Pretend Sc^ip^ure.

AND whereas they do pretend Scripture for their novelties while the world
stands (says a learned man) it connot be showed out of Gods sacred book,
that he has commanded any of these following:

1. Let all decisions, excommunications, yea, and ordinations be performed by
the multitude.

2. Let evey Assembly have a Doctor and a Pastor distinct in charge and office.

3. Let private Christians agree among themselves to set over themselves a
Postor chosen by themselves.

4. To this I may add; where or when did our Lord take the keys from the
Church and give them to the multitude? how dare any Layman presume to ordain
Ministers to bind and loose? etc.

11. Thy avoid our Congregations as profane. 11. Blame our congregations for
p^ophanenesse.

ONe special cause of their Separation they pretend to be the mixed
Congregations of men, holy and profane, with whom they will nor communicate,
lest they should be defiled. You have heard of the resemblances that have been
made of Gods Church: as namely, it is compared to a field, in which are some
Tares as well as whea^: to a net, wherein are contained bad fish as well as
good; to a fold, having in it Goats as well as sheep: yet is not the field to
be spo^led because of Tares; nor the net to be broken because of the bad fish;
nor the fold to be broken because of the Goats: no, we are not to depart from
any Church of Christ for any scandal given to us by the members and professors
therein, except for extreme errors of doctrine, or ungodly practices professed
in it.

12. The proph^nenesse of their Sect. 12. The profaneness of t^eir Sect.

THis fault they find with the Protestants of our Congregations; but how they
have avoided this in their own Conventicles, Mr. White, Mr. Johnson, and Mr.
Smith, and many others will tell you, whose plentiful reports of their known
uncleanenesse, smothered mischiefs, malicious proceedings, corrupt preachings,
communicating with known offenders, bolstering of sins, and willing
co^nivences, as they are shameful to relate; so they might well have stopped
their mouths from excepting against our communion with the profane.

To use some of Mr. Whites words, Mr. White.
These that pretend such sincerity of Religion, do abound above others with
all kind of debate, malice, adulteries, cozenage, uncleanness, so that (says
he) that W. C. complained that he had thought that they had been ^ll Saints;
but, I see, they are all devils. These are the Assemblies to which they carry
the poor souls whom they do seduce.

Extracted out of a Letter of Master Whites the 20th of July. Vid. P^^phane
Schism of the Brownists p, 27.


I desire God to keep all people from such a Congregation, where Adulteries,
Cozenages, and Thefts are in such abundance as in the English Congregation of
Amsterdam: that I speak not of Brokerage of whores, and other filthiness, too
too bad.

This is true, Ibid page ^7.
there is no Sect in Amcterdam (though many in such contempt for filthy life as
the English are, viz. the Brownists, etc.

The author of this Letter, Master White, was sued for slander by Francis
Johnson, Henry Aainsworth, Francis Blakewell, Daniel Studley, Christopher
Bowman, Jane Nicolas, Judith Holder, William Barbons, and Thomas Bishop. But
after Master White had brought in witnesses before the Burgomasters, who did
testify, and upon their Oaths and depositions confirm what Master White had
written, Ac^um. 25. ^eb* 1606.
he was discharged, and had charges given him by the Magistrates.

A brief discovery under the hand of the Secretary and seal of the City of
Amsterdam.

1. Of some of the abominations daily practiced and increased amongst the
English company of the separation, remaining for the present at Amsterdam in
Holland.

2. That they abou^d above all others, with all kind of debate, malice,
adulteries, cozenages, and such other like enormities, etc.

The testimony of the Dutch Church concerning the Brownists, The testimony of
the ^utch Church co^ce^ning the Browni^^s.
when as they sent their Messengers with some questions to their Eldership,
they received this answer from them; That they did not acknowledge theirs to be
an Ecclesiastical Assembly, or a la^full Church.

The testimony of the Magistrates of Amsterdam concernin^ the Brownists, Of the
Magistrates of Amsterdam Vid. proph. schi^m. page 21.
both of old, in their suit against Master White, and now in their late suit
for their meeting house, when they sought to lay their Action in the name of a
Church; they were repelled by the Magistrates that are members of the Dutch
Church; they would not receive complaint from them in the name of a Church, or
in the name of an Elder, or a Deacon; but from private men; The Magistrates
told them, that they held them not as a Church, but as a Sect.

13. Their Equivoca^ing. 13 Their equivoca^ing and palliating their
wicked^esse. Vid. proph. schis page 20.

I Might here set down their^ ^quivoca^ing and palliating their wickedness, as
one Geoffry Wh^^acres of Master Iohnsons Congregation, being found in bed with
one Judith Holder, another man's wife; for which matter he affirme^ that he did
it not to satisfy his lust; but to comfort Judith, being ^ickly, and to keep
her warm: as though he had sought to perform a Christian duty of love, and
not an action of uncleanness.

Again, when Mr. Studley, a chie^e Prophet of Mr. Iohnsons Profane schis. page
p. ^*
Congregation, was found hidden behind a Baske^ in Iudiths house, he had this
holy pretense; that he hid himself to see the behavio^^ of G. P. who ca^
thither after him: he being an Elder, would be a watchful Over-seer.

Again, M. ^ being in a whore-^^use* and creeping out at a window, Ib them.
the Elder D. S. excused ^im alleging in his def^nce the example of St. Paul,
A^ts 9. 25. Who was by the Disciples let down over the wall; ^n a Basket.

Mr. Johnson sought to clear the uncleanness of a man found a bed with
another man's wife; Ibid. p. 30.
to dimini^h the sin distinguished between lying with a woman, and in a woman.

And old Father Brown being reproved for beating his old wife distinguished,
that he did not beat her as his wife, but as a cursed old woman.

Also Da^iel Studley, He did like Solomon, who would know all secrets. Proph.
schsm p. 39
went about to palliate his filtinesse with his Wives Daughter, ungodlily
alleging the Holy Scripture.

Let it not be offensive to the good Reader to see a child to vindicate the
foul aspersions cast upon his Mother, from whom he had his souls spiritual
birth and breeding, by setting forth by what manner of men his Mother Church is
scandalized.

14. Blame the Conversation of our Ministers. 14. Blame the conve^ sat^ o^ of
our Ministers.

Again, although in the Visible Church the evil ever mingled with the good,
and sometime the evil have chief Authority in administration of the Word and
Sacraments; yet forasmuch as they do not the same in their own name, but in
Christ's, and do administer by his Commission and outhority, we may use their
Ministry both in hearing the Word of God* and receiving the Sacraments;
neither is the effect of Christ's Ordinance taken away by their wickedness, nor
the grace of Gods gifts diminished from such as by faith rightly do receive
the Sacraments administered unto them: The Scribes and Pharisees (says our
Lord) sit in Moses chair; all therefore what they bid you observe, do you,
but not after their works, for they say and do not.

15. Except against our Ordination. 15. Ordination of our M^nisters.

THey except against our Ministers, because they receive their Ordination from
Bishops.

To which I answer, we have our Ordination from Christ by Bishops and
Clergymen; and for this kind of Ordination by Bishops and Presby^ers we have
the universal cons^nt the Primitive Church; by St. Paul, Timothy, and Titus
were ordained.

And this has been the practice of all the Christian Church* of the Universe
until the time that Anabaptists crept into the world.

But they will allege, that we have been ordained by Antichristian Bishops,
and therefore they conclude every action done by our Ministers to be
Antichristian.

1. To which I answer; why is not the Ordination that our Forefathers had from
Antichristian Bishops as effectual as the Bap^isme that was administered by
them to our Forefathers? D^d ever any Reformed Church re-baptize them that
were baptized by them? And why should our Ministers be re-ordained mo^e then
rebaptized.

2. Indeed our Ministers being ordained by Bishops and that by Protestant
Bishops, such as Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley, who were holy Martyrs, who
renounced all Superstition; what exceptions can be taken against them?

Neither can they find any shelter under that ^oted Te^t, neglect not the gift
that is in thee by the imposition of the hands of the Presbyter; (...)
which learned Mr. Calvin expounds not of the men, but of the Office following:
Herein Hierome, Anselm^, Ha^mo, Lyra, referring it to the gift given him, and
to the Bishops and Pre^byters, which has been the practice of the Church of
England, and all Christian Churches in the world until the Anabaptists.

To conclude, let the Brownists confess our Bishops to be but Christians,
which they cannot deny, and the Ordination of our Ministers will be lawful by
their own rules: for if the Ordination of their Ministers by Pl^beian
Artificers be lawful how much more is the Ordination of our Ministers by
Bishops and learned Ministers, qualified with learning and wisdom, and set
apart to do the same.

16. Brownists Ordination. 16 Brownists Ord^nat^on*

BUT let them show who devised their Ordination of Ministers; I dare say, not
Christ, nor his Apostles, nor their Successors.

What Church in the whole world can be produced unless in case of necessity,
whose conspiring multitudes made them Ministers at pleasure? What rule of the
Church prescribes it? What Reformed Church ever did it, or does practice it?
What example warrants it? where have the in^eriours presumed to lay their hands
upon their Superiors? It is an old policy of the faulty to complain first;
certainly, there was never Popish Legend a more errand device of man then some
parts of this Ministry of theirs, so much gloried in for sincere
correspondency with the first Institution.

17. For their Singing. 17. Their singing of Psalms.

FOR their singing of Psalms it is almost left among them, for in Master
Iohnsons Assembly they had new r^ymes, but in so harsh and hard a phrase, that
the people knew not what they meant; so that they could not sing with
understanding.

2. These being in use, Propha^e schl^sme. p. 10.
and the coppies being kept from the people; by that means singing of Psalms
was kept from the people, and sh^t out of private houses.

3. Again, by reason of the uncouth and strange translation and Meetre used in
them, the Congregation was made a laughing stock unto strangers.

Master Daniel Studley pleaded for the continuance of those rhimes, the
Congregation complaining of them: For (says my Author) he had a good vein in
making thimes, especially filthy and obscene ones, which he taught unto little
children his Scholars, and to Mistress May, who used in her house to sing such
songs, being more fit for a common Bawd, then for a person professing the pure
separation. They object against all the Churches in Amsterdam, that they have
Organs to modulate their voices in singing: Sure I am, the Separatists also had
need of somewhat, as a Bag-pipe, or somewhat never used by Antichrist to tune
them, singing in their Conventicles like hogs against rain.

Here I might ask some questions, viz. why singing set Psalms does not
confine the spirit, (we being commanded to sing with the spirit) as much as
saying set Prayers; and why the brethren inspired with the spirit, do not
every day sing a new song, as make a new Prayer, which are set prayers to the
People? and why the people may not pray together with the Minister (as it was
the custom of al Christian Churches) as sing together: And lastly, why Laymen
do not pray in the Church as well as preach or prophecy in the Church: Do they
not in forbidding the people to pray with the Minister, as the Papists do in
depriving the people of the Cup in the Sacrament, and that for the honor of
the Priesthood?

18. Of their prophesying. 18. Of their Pr^phe^^ing.

AS the illuminated Anabaptists are called Preachers, so the fanatic Brownists
take upon them to be Prophets, and to preach the word of God with all authority
publicly in their Congregations: St, Panlasketh, how they can preach, except
they be sent? And this stands to good reason, every true Preacher stands in
Gods room, being the Lords Ambassador to do his will: who dares do this
unsent? These come not from the Schools of the Prophers; but from Mechanic
trades, and set them down in Moses Chair, as Ambassadors of Jesus Christ, as
Heralds of the most high God: These take upon them to reveal the secrets of
the Almighty, to open and shut heaven, to save souls, But to hear these
fellows discourse of the holy Trinity, of Gods eternal Decree, and other deep
points of Divinity, you may hear the Madmen in Bedlam prare as wisely as they:
May not Almighty God say to these mad Prophets, what have thou to do to take
my Word in thy might? etc. Of their confused preaching, or rather prating,
hear Mr. Simpson complain, and especially of the Prophets in Master
Ainsworths Church: For our manner, (says he) of meeting upon the Lords day, it
is with such a confusion and contradiction with one another, that our
profession of Separation may be overthrown by it: For example, Thomas Cochi in
his prophecy witnessing against England, their Ministry is Antichristian,
and being so, cannot beget true faith; and where there is no true faith, there
is no true salvation, a fearful sentence in my judgemnt! Again, our beloved,
Mr. de Cluse in his prophecy labored to prove separation from a true Church
for any corruption, obstinately stood in this Doctrine, was by another in
prophesying there showed to be absolutely contrary to the place, Rev. 2. 24.
which how unsoundly it was concluded by our Teacher* was ^^en observed by many:
Also it was since by another delivered in the way a^ prophecy, that even among
our selves did reign in my (...) as namely, fullness of bread pride and
idleness; (...), in that they were not satisfied with neither temporal nor
^pirituall food; pride* in that many did strive to go beyond their calling;
idleness, in that many were negligent in their callings, If these things be
so, and be not redressed by the (...) of this pro^hesie* we must, (according to
Mr. de^Cluse his Doctrine) make a new s^paration, How often do the Br^thre^
except one against another prophesying, by which, much heart-burning and
strife is ^indl^d between them? Th^se things being well considered, I pray you
well to mind whether this new way of prophesying on the Lords day can be ^or
the edification of the Church or not. For this new prop^^ying of the Lay
people, read a Treatise newly set forth by (...) Apol^nij.

19. They will use no set Forms of Prayer. 19. (...).

THey find fault with set Forms of Prayers, and this also they learn of the
Anabaptists, who having burnt all the Books in Munster, and in the Dominions of
King John of Z^^on (except the Bible) were compelled either to pray without
book, which they call Praying with the spirit, or not at all: moreover, the
Anabaptists were so ignorant, as Lambertus Hortensi^^ reports, that among the
numerous multitude of them (...) was not one found (as it was credibly
reported) that could read. So they being not able to pray within book, but all
without book: They have with the Brownists invented diverse arguments against
set Prayers.

They pretend set Prayers to be a device of man, a muzling of the spirit, a
nurse of idleness, and a means to neglect the gra^es of God that are in them*
whereas they pretend extemporary prayers to be the work of the spirit: whereas
rather thereby they ^^zzell the spirit of the people, being tied to the ex
tempo^e and (...) prayers of the Ministers.

Yea, the Brownists g^e fa^ bey^nd the Anabap^^sts; aff^^ming set Prayers to be
abominable in the eyes of Almighty God.

To this ^^^answer; whatsoever God has ordained is neither abominable nor
loathsome to him; but God has ordained set Prayers* therefore they are not
abominable no^ loathsome.

That God has ordained set prayers* see Number. 6. 23* 24. Ye shall bless the
child^en of Israel, saying unto them, the Lord bless thee and keep thee, the
Lord make his face to shine upon t^ee and be gracious to thee, the Lord lift up
his countenance upon thee and give thee peace, Again, Deuteronomy. 26. 5. And thou
shall speak, and say before the Lord thy God, a Sy^ian ready to perish was my
Father.

The 90. Psalm is a Prayer, even the prayer of Moses, and and used in the
Jewish Church, as we use the Lords Prayer.

All the Psalms of David* except some that are doctrinall) are prayers, and
have been, and shall be read in the Church of God, ma^gre all the Heriticks
and Schismatics In the World.

In the Gospel are many set prayers daily read in the Church; What? are all
these abominable? All the ancient Churches in the world, planted by the
Apostles* have set Prayers; as the Greek Church, to whom St. Paul preached; the
Indians, to whom St. Thomas brought the ^ight of the Gospel; the Ethiopians; to
whom St. Mark brought the knowledge of Christ; the Muscovites, who affirm,
that they received the truth from S^. Andrew: These, with all ancient Churches
have set prayers: their Liturgies are to be seen.

Yea all the Reformed Churches; the Du^ch, the French, the Dan^sh, the Swedish,
the Scot^ish etc have set Prayers; only these Sectaries will speak to God ex
tempore.

In my Christianography you may see d^vers Liturgies: as a Liturgy attributed
to St. James ^he first Bishop of ^erusalem, set forth by Victorius Sc^at^^us
the Maronite, The Apd^^le James was commonly called Iacobus Liturgus, that is,
James the Service-maker, which begins, O Lord do not despise me defiled
with the multitude of my sins, etc.

Again, the service the Muscovites use, taken out of the Commentaries of
Sigismund Liberus.

The Ethiopian Liturgy or Service, written by Francis Alvares.

The Cop^s Liturgy set forth by Kircherus.

The Armenian Service, set down by Odoardus Bar^osa.

The Armenian Service, set down by Peter Bellonius, lib. 3. cap. 12.

The Liturgy of Severus, sometime Patriarch of Alexandria, written in Syriak,
and translated into Latin by Guido Subritius.

But to show you a pattern of some of their new Prayers; one of them cries
out in his prayer; O Lord, thou knowe^^, good Lord, that we never had the truth
preached among us until now. etc. Whereas the Doctrine of the Church of
England is Gods truth, as the learned Assembly of Divines do restifie,
howsoever in our Discipline there may need Reformation.

Another cries out in his prayer; Good Lord, good Lord, deliver this
Congregation from this man, who is unlearned, unpowerfull, unprofitable, etc.
This spiritual Prayer was made for my self, in my own Church, in my own
Pulpit, in my own hearing.

To conclude this with the counsel of the holy Ghost; Be not rash with thy
mouth, nor let thine heart be hasty to utter a thing before G^d, Eccles. (...)
for God is in the heavens, and thou art (...) the earth: Therefore let thy
words be few: for as a dream comes by the multitude of business; so the
voice of a fool is known by many words.

20. They quarrel at the Lords Prayer.
BUT what need I complain of their blaspheming of set Prayers? whereas our
Lord taught his Disciples a set Form of Prayer, the perfectest and exactest of
all that can be made, it being compiled by the Son of God, who is the
wisdom of the Father. For perfection, it contains all that can be asked, or
prayed against. For acceptance, it contains the words of Christ the Son of
God, in whom the Father is well pleased.

These Sectaries quarrel at this prayer, and will nor say it; as Barrow and
Greenwood affirm it to be abominable, and as lo^thsome unto God as
swines-flesh to a Jew.

Apollina^ius the Heritick equalled his songs with holy Scripture: but I never
heard of any Heretic that^prefer'd his own works before holy Scripture: Do
not these Heriticks prefer their own Prayers before our Lords? If our Lords
Pr^yer be better then theirs, why do they not say it according to our Lords
Commandment, Luke 11? Or if they will pray after the same manner as is
commanded, Matthew. 6. Why do they use so many vain repetitions there by him
forbidden?

I have read that St. Peter used no other prayer at the Communion, but this
Prayer which his Master taught him; and the Greeks in Calabria used the same:
But now it is not used by some at the ministration of the Sacrament. I am sure
this prayer is perfect, and all other devised by them not so perfect. Let us
not neglect that perfect form which our Lord has left us, or pray at
leastwise after that manner, not using vain repititions by him forbidden, as
before.

21. Of the Tyranny and ill-usage of some of them to their Wives and Servants.
MAny there be that are taken in the B^iars of this propane Schism, (...).
that wish they had never met with the separation of that Schismatic body,
and would fly, so that they might escape without excommunication, with which
they ter^ifie them so, that they dare not so much as whisper, or as much as
^uffe against it. You may read in the Boook called ( The profane Schism of
the Brownists) how cruelly also they used their servants for not doing their
taskes; as some they hang up by the hands, and whip them stark naked, being
women grown; yea they spare not the^r wives, but correct them, Read the story
of Seudley, and Mansfield. It may be they learn^ this of their Patriarch,
Father Brown, who would cu^stly correct his old wife, as before.

22. There are diverse sorts of Separatists.
THere are diverse sorts of these Sectaries; Bpownists.
for every day begets a new fancy or opinion, it ^a^ing with them usually as
with all other Heretics, who having once forsaken the Truth, wander from one
error to another: as Mr. Smith, one of their Grandees, from a Protestant he
turned Brownist; and from a Brownist he turned Anabaptist; yea, a Sebaptist,
and rebaptized himself.

The first sort of Separatists affirm the abominations of the Church of
England to be so great, that they will ^ot come within their Church doors to
hear any of their Ministers, but ^y themselves wholly to their own
Conventicles. The root of this Sect was one Mr. Robert Brown, before named:
from whom are risen many Sects, for every day begets a new fancy and conceit.
These say that England was once the Lords wi^e, but that he has given her a
Bill of divorce and put her away. These deny all communion with her; but
private communion they hold lawful with her members.

As for the ancient company of Brownists that were under the feeding of Master
Brown himself, they were swept away as dung by the Testimony of Master George
Johnson, and not one of them left alive that continued faithful, but became
Apostates.

The second sort of Brownists may be called Barrawists Barrowists.
from their Protomartyr Barrow, whose censures are more desperate then the
former, who say that the Church of England is Sodom, Babylon, and Egypt, and
that she was never the Lords wife, nor he her husband; but that she is at the
best a murdering Stepmother; Therefore they say, what communion has light
with darkness? christ with Belial? Believers with Infidels? And therefore they
proclaim the former Sect, (for not judging the Church of England so
desperately as they judge her) to be partakers of her adulteries, and that they
must receive of her plagues.

Of this Sect Barrow was the Father; afterward Greenwood, Brewer, Bois, Rutter.

A third sort of Brownists did arise from one Mr. Wilkinson, Wilkinsonia^s.
whose Disciples in a short time grew so strong in the Spirit that they stoutly
affirmed that they were Apostles, as Peter, and Paul, and the rest; and
therefore deny communion with all others that will not give them that Title.

A fourth sort of Brownists, who say that there is not any one true Church in
the world but themselves, because they say, that they are married to Christ by
that one true Baptism which consiste^h of persons confessing of faith and
their sins; and all other Churches that baptize Infants are but Synagogues of
Satan, and have never made covenant with Christ, and therefore they call the
Brownists for retaining the Baptism of children as very a Harlot as Rome or
the Church of England. So name they the Brownists, Romes fairest daughter, and
proclaim, that all that will be saved must come to them to be rebaptized; and
condemn all other worship to be Antichristian, divellish, and ob^oxious to the
wrath everlasting. Of these, there are many Sects and Heresies you shall find
in the description of the Anabaptists. Many other Sects of Bronists there are,
as the Iohnsonians and their Teners, who commenced a ^uit in Amsterdam against
the Ainsworthians, for their Meeting House or Synagogne granted to the
Brownists after the rending of that Conventicle asunder. Iohnsonians.
The Iohnsonians pleaded the Synagogue belonged unto them, they being the
ancient Brownists: The Ainsworthians answered, Ainsworthians.
that the House belonged to them, they being the true Brownists, because they
held the ancient faith upon which their Church was grounded, from which Master
Johnson and his company had fallen into Apostasy, and therefore could not be
the true Church; and they set forth a writing of the Articles forsaken by
Master Johnson.

I might speak also of Robinson Robinsoni^^^.
and his company; which Robinson protests against both the former, affi^ming
Mr. Iohnso^s company to be bastardly runnaga^es, miserable guides, engrossers
of the keys, arrogant Zidkias laying the cornerstone of Babylon; Lucian or
scoffing Atheists; Schismatics, making the Church of God a cipher; a Hangby
wanting an honest heart, like Chancellours and Officials captivating of the
Church; either marked servants of the Pope, or such as care not what they say
for some present advantage, using a power more execrable and accursed.

Master Smith and his Disciples do at once as it were swallow up all the
Separation besides, protesting against their false constitutions, false
worship, false Ministers, and false Governors.

I might here also set down the Heresies of Mr. Thomas Lemar described by Mr.
Padget, with this Title.

The Monster of Lemarisme.
THis Monster is set down with seven heads.
1. Mahometanisme, in that Lemar denied the holy Trinity and eternal Godhead
of Christ. 2. Iudaisme, in affirmiag that Christ should come shortly in his
own person to reign here upon earth. 3. Papisme, affirming that a mere
creature may be worshipped. 4. Lutheranisme, in maintaining the Doctrine of
Consubstantiation. 5. Anabaptisme, in affirming that Christ took not flesh of
the Virgin Mary. 6. Libertanisme, in holding that there is no visible Church
upon earth. 7. Brownisme, in holding the Doctrine of Separation; who can recko^
up their opinions, they shifting daly? Mr. Hancor will have a separation alone.
To confirm their several Sects and divisions among themselves, Their cursing
one another.
I might set down their uncharitable cursing one of another; not to speek of
the manifold curses that flew abroad in Mr. Barro^s time, nor yet of the
manifold curses which the company of Brownists remaining in London have often
laid upon one another: consider but those that remain in the low Countries.

Mr. Johnson and his company are now accursed and avoided by Mr. Ainsworth and
his company; Pro^hare schism. p. 63.
Mr. Ainsworth and his company excommunicated by Mr. Johnson, and his company.

Mr. Smith and his company are rejected both of Mr. Johnson and Mr. Ainsworth,

Mr. Robinson and his company holding Mr. Johnson and his to be in apostasy.

And Mr. Johnson him again for taking part in his Schism against him, Propha^e
schism. page 64.
and by this reckoning, where is almost one of them free from the curse? As for
those straggling Brownists that walk alone; as they avoid all, so they are
avoided and rejected by all the (...): is not this (says my Author) a cursing
and a cursed Sect.

23. Schism a great sin. 23. Schism a great sin.

I Ccould by way of counsel advise the^e Separatists who forsake the Church to
consider how great a sin Schism is, viz. greater than murder; a murder
kills one man or two, but a Schismatic goes about, as much as in him lies,
to destroy the Church of God.

To depart from the Church of England, is a departing from the Church of God:
let them consider, the Church of Corinth had many faults in it, as many as the
Church of England has, and as great ones too; and yet was Gods Church for
their faults. St. Paul b^ames some there for their civil jars impetuously,
they traffering them and their suits to the Courts of Infidels, 1 Cor. 6. 7.
Others for their wicked connivence and indulgence toward the incestuous, 1
Cor. 5. Others for their vile profaneness in their sacred Assemblies, 1 Cor.
11. 32. Yea, others for heresy, 1 Cor. 15. Would any Brownist think this to be
the Church of God, but a Synagogue of Satan? If our Apostle were alive now, (in
which more light has appeared) he should be taught by Father Brown and his
Disciples, to give the Church of Corinth a new Title, and not Paulan Apostle of
Jesus Christ to the Church of God in Corinth. But the example of Christ
himself writing to the seven Churches of Asia may be our best direction,
charging five of them with several faults, and with crimes of a large size,
yet he does call them Churches.

Moreover, is not the forsaking the Church of God, a forsaking of God himself.

And lastly* is not excommunication one of the greatest punishments of the
world, by which a man is cast out of the Church? St. Paul calls it a giving to
the devil: and do not they in their separation cast themselves out of the
Church, and give themselves to the devil?

24. How these Sectaries have been punished.
FIrst, Brown their Patriarch was taken and laid in the Gaol, and his disciples
were made to f^ve; Bolton, whom some would make their Author, dyed as Judas
did; Howes Chro^. p. ^65*
He^r. Barrow, Gent. John Greenwood Clerk, two of the Authors of this opinion,
that set Prayers are abominable; Daniel Studley Girdler, Saxio Billet, Gent.
Robert Bowlie Fish-monger, were indicted of Felony at the Sessions Hall without
Newgate, London, before the Lord Major, and the two Lord chief Justices of
both Benches, and sundry of the Judges and other Commissioners of Oyer and
Term^ner. The said Barrow and Greenwood, for writing sundry seditious seditious
Books, tending to the slander of the Queens Majesty and State: Studley, Billet*
and Bowly for publishing the said Books, on the 23. day of March they were all
arrigned at Newgate, and found guilty, and had judgment: Henry Barrow and
John Greenwood on the last of March were brought to Tiburne in a Cart and
carried back again, and were afterward hanged on the sixth day of April.

And about the same time one Penrie, How. Ch^on. p. 766.
a Welch-man, a principal penner and publisher of a Book called Martine
Marprelate, was apprehended at St^bben-hea^h, and committed to (...): in the
month of May he was a^raigned at the King^ Bench at Westminister, condemned of
Felony, and af^erwards conveyed from the Jail of the Kings Bench in Southwarke
to St. Thomas Waterings, and there hanged: Elias Thack^r was hanged at St.
Edmonds-bury in Suffolk on the fourth of (...): and John Copping on the first
of the same mo^eth, for spreading of certain seditious books penned by one
Robert Brown against the Book of Common Prayer established by the Laws of the
Realm, their books as many as could be found, were burnt before them; Examples
how this Sect was suppressed in Queen Elizabeth (...) many. They that would know
more of these Sectaries, let them read these books following.

First, a book called a discovery of Brownisme, or a brief Declaration of the
errors and (...) daily practiced and increased among the English company of the
separation, remaining at this present at Amsterdam in Holland, by Mr. White.

A Book called the raising of the foundation of Brownisme, by S. B. Printed by
Henr. Windet. 1588.

A plain Decla^ati^n that our Brownists be full Donatists, by comparing them
together from po^nt to point, out of the writings of St. Augustine, by George
Gifford Minister of Gods Word at Malden.

An Apology of the Church of England against the Brownists, written by Doctor
Hall now Lord Bishop of Norwich.

Master Bernards Separatists Schism.

The profane Schism of the Brownists or Separatists, with the impyety,
dissentions^ lewd and abominable vices of that impure Sect, discovered by
Christopher Lawne, John Fowler, Clement Sanders, and Robert Bulward.

Item, A book called the shield of defense: written against Master de le Cluse,
in defense of Mr. Brightman. Printed 1612.

25. Mr. Tho. Scots description of a Brownist. 25. Sco^s description of a
Brownist.

THe Cameleon is in England a F^milist, at Amsterdam a Brownist.

He lives by the ay^e, and there he builds Castles and Churches; none on the
earth will please him: he would be of the triumphant and glorious Church, but
not of the ^errene militant Church, which is subject to storms, deformities,
and many violences and alterations of time: he must find out Sir Tho. Moors
Utopia, or rather Plato's Community, and be an Elder there. In this point, and
in that of resisting Civil Governors, he seems the same with the Romish
Catholic. But they are tied only by the tiles, like Sampso^s ^oxes, their
heads like ^anus, look diverse ways: they are Boute^ews, and carry betwixt them
a firebrand to inflame all Christendom: they have in their imaginations an
Idea of such a Church, and such keys as the Romanists madly boast they
possess, but they will not have them the same, not to resemble their foolish
Alchymists: they are both seeking a Philosophers stone, and neglecting the true
Elixa^ the cornerstone; they boast to build gold on the foundation, when what
they dawbe on is adulterate stuff besides the foundation: they beggar
themselves in seeking for wealth abroad, whilst at home they neglect that
pearl of inestimable price, for which the wise Merchant gives all that he is
worth. If ever I could hear Papist clear the Pope from being Antichrist, and
prove he must be one singular person, I would then believe that he should not
spring from a Jew of the Tribe of Dan, as they Fable, but from a promiscuous
conjuction betwixt two Fugitives to Amsterdam and Rome.

26. Of the Semi-separatists. 26 Of the Semiseparat^sts.

THese halt between two opinions, they are neither wholly for the Separation,
nor wholly against it. Master Jacob is said to have been of this Sect called
Iacobites; and therefore in his writings we find that he mis-liked our
Church Government: but in his Declaration he affirms; Although (says he) I
know they of the Separation be very far from being so evil, as commonly they
are held to be: yet I deny not but in some matters they are straiter then I
wish they were. Howsoever in the point of Separation, I for my part never was,
nor am separated from all public communion with the Congregations of England.
I acknowledge therefore that in England are true visible Churches and Ministers
accidentally, yea such as I refuse not to communicate with: for his coming to
our Church, I heard once a Minister complain to me of Doctor Bancroft Bishop
of London, for not doing that Justice that he would have had him to do upon
Mr. Jacob, of whom he had complained, (as far as I remember) for not kneeling
at the Communi^n* This (...) having prosecuted his complaint, and finding
nothing done against Mr. Jacob, went to the Bishop, telling him wh^t a great
deal of pains he had taken in vain, and asking of the Bishop what he would
counsel him to do, who bid him go home and trouble not himself, but leave
such things to his Churchwardens.

There is a sort of Semi-separatists, that will hear our Serm^ns, but not our
Common Prayers; and of these you may see every Sunday in our streets, sitting
and standing about our doors; who when the Prayers are done rush into our
Churches to hear our Sermons.

Of the Independents.
1. Why called Independents. 2. Their Original. 3. Some of them write and
speak against Churches. 4. Some against Tithes. 5. Would have no set Prayers.
6. Nor use the Lords Prayer.
1. Why called Independents.
BEcause they teach that every particular Congregation ought to be governed by
its own particular Laws, without any depending of any in Ecclesiastical
matters, without obligation, acknowledge Classes or Synods for its government
and conduct. They call themselves the Congregational government* as I read.
These appella^ons I heard not of when I began to write the Treatise. The Author
of the Antidote against Independency affirms, that by establishing this
government in stead of suppressing Prelacy, we should erect in our Kingdom
9324. Prelates, viz. in every Parish one.

2. Their Original.
THe first man of note that held their opinions, (as Master Edwards writes)
was one Mr. Robinson, who leaving Norwich malcontent, became a rigid
Brownist; but afterward by conference with learned men, he was brought to some
moderation, and writ a book retaining some of his opinions. This man dying,
many of his congregation went from Leyden unto New England, and planted at new
Plymouth, whither they carried Mr. Robinsons opinions, which spread far there,
and by letters also and other means were conveyed into old England: and to
this purpose he cites a Letter of Mr. Cottons.

As the Brownists (says Mr. Edwards) growing up, and out of the Anabaptists,
Answer to the Apologeticall Na^ration, p. 204, 25.
did refine Anabaptisme in many things, so the Independents have refined
Brownisme from the grossness and rigidnesse of it.

Yet in separating from Gods Ordinance because of our mixed Congr^gations: in
settti^g up a Church against a Church: and in (...) they not with the Brownists
make a rent in Ch^ist^ mystical body.

3. Enemies to our Churches.
THese Independents with the Brownists, are enemies to our Churches, The (...).
the glory of our nation, the monuments of the piety of our Forefathers,
builded to the honor of Almighty God, and for his service. They call them
steeple houses, as you may read Mr. Cotton in one of his Sermons upon the
opening of the the seven Vialls affirms.

Ichosaphat (says he) took away the high places and groves out of Judah, 2
Chr. 17. 6. So when the zeal of God lifts up the hearts of the people, then
will they not endure a consecrated place in all the world where they come; and
when the seventh Vial is poured out, the earth shall be full of the knowledge
of God: then all the Chapels of Ease, Churches of States, and Temples of
glory, where the world has been deiuded, they will not leave a stone upon a
stone that shall not be thrown dow^e: though now in some places you may not
pass through with a burden, nor look upon the Wall thereof. The zeal of the
Lord of Hosts will blow them up, these places will be laid open to the rest of
the streets, and become but common soil, they will not then be regarded, but
trempled upon, etc. I am informed that some preach this Doctrine among us.

4. Ruin Learning.
Again to overthrow Learning, they would overthrow the maintenance, viz.
Tithes appointed by Almighty God for the maintenance of his service: as he
appointed a certain time for his service, so a certain part for the
maintenance of his service: viz. A tenth part which was paid before the Law,
commanded in the Law, and confirmed by our Lord and Savior.

The persecution of the Julian Apostate is affirmed to be greatest of all
other: For whereas in other persecutions they killed the Priests, Julian taking
away the maintenance from Gods service, did occidere Presbiterium, the whole
Order.

When I first heard of the name of Independency, I confess I could not well
mislike it, knowing the poverty of many Livings within the walls of London, and
the dependency of the Ministers, being not able to subsist without the
charities of the people.

And for example, among others the Tithe of a Parsonage of a learned Doctor,
(who is accounted one of them) not to be worth above 20. l. per annum toward
all charges, and diverse others to be of small value: I could not well blame
them, if renouncing their Tithes, they have devised some other way to subsist.

In time of Superstition the said Living is reported to have been worth about
two hundred pound per annum; by reason of a gang of silly women with child to
the Image of our Lady of Steining (in that Church) to which they did ^ot with
many rich offerings, being persuaded that she could give them easy labor:
Other Churches had their working Saints that relieved their Parsons, as one
could make barren women fruitful, etc. And for this cause the poor livings in
London were so highly rated in the Subsidy. And whereas one man had hererofore
many Livings* which now is prohibited: As my Predecessor had three, Alhollowes
the great, the Temple, and Edmonds within the line of Communication: And also
our vailes for Burialls and Christings is in a manner ceast, which were a great
help too. Should I blame the poora Ministers to devise some means to have a
being: but whereas they gather Congregations among us who are as poor as
themselves, getting our fattest sheep from us, and for other causes, I like it
not.

5. Allow no set Prayers,
THey allow no set Prayers. The Jews used set Prayers, John's Disciples used
set Prayers, and Christ gave his Dissciples a set form of Prayer, which all
Christian Churches in the world generally use. Master Calvin all^dgeth three
reasons for the maintaining of set Prayers. First, to provide for the weakness
of some Minister. Secondly, that there might be a general consent and
agreement in all Churches. Thirdly, to cross the liberty of some Ministers,
who affect noveities: and therefore it bohoveth to have a set Catechism, a set
form of administering the Sacrament, a set form of public prayers.

For taking too much liberty in their praying, I have had too much sense, being
deprecated or execrated by some of them, yea even in my own Church, in my own
Pulpit, and in my own hearing.

6. Use not the Lords Prayer.
Again, some of them will not use the Lords Prayer, preferring their own
before it. If the Lords Prayer be more perfect than theirs, why do they not
use it, but abuse the people, using their own imperfect Prayers, and omitting
our Lords perfect Prayer commanded by him to be used.

I have read that Apollinaris the Heriti^k equalled his Writings with the holy
Scriptures, I marvel why they will say Paul's Prayer. The grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the love of God the father, and not say the Lords Prayer.
but preferred them not as these seem to do, in om^tting Christ's Prayer
commanded to be used, and using their own, as before.

To conclude, my Prayer to God is, that God would give them grace to use their
gifts that he has given them to edification, and not to make a rent in his
Church.

Doctor Steward has written a Book, in which is set down the opinion of some
of the Reformed Churches concerning Independency.

Of the Familists.
THis Sect of the Family of Love is one of the most erron^ous and dangerous
Sect that ever was.

The Family of Love are so called, because they will admit none common among
them; their love is so great that they may join with any Congregation, and
live under obedience to any Magistrate, be he never so ungodly, and therefore
to ^urry favor with all, they have some opinions agreeable with all in some
things. They agree with the Turks in some things, with the Jews in some
things, with the Don^^^sts, Palagians, Libertines, Arians, and Anabaptists, in
many things with the Papists, in few with the Protestants.

In describing of this Sect I purpose to set down:
1. Their Original or Authors. 2. Their horrible Blasphemies. 3. Their
confession of Faith, or Creed. 4. Their Conversations. 5. Their several sorts.
6. How to discover one of this Sect. 7. The abjuration of certain Familis^s at
Paul's Cross.
THe first author was one David George of Delfe, The History of David George is
written by his son in (...), Nich-Bles^ (...) and published by Jacob Beeb,
Pri^ted ^t Daventry, 1633. His doctrine is set down in 31 Articles.
who fled out of Holl^nd^^ Basil giving it our that he was banished out of the
low Countries; he changed his name, called himself John of Bridges he
affirmed that he was that right David that was sent from God, and should
restore again the Kingdom of Israel. He wrote diverse Books as one called the
Wonder-booke. he broached his damnable Heresiee, as:

^. All the Doctrines taught by Moses, the Prophe^s, and Christ himself were
not sufficient to salvation, but only to keep the people in good order till the
coming of David George, but his doctrine was able to save all those that put
their trust in him.

2. That he was the right Messiah, the beloved Son of the Father, not born of
the flesh, but of the Holy Ghost; and that when Christ was dead according to
the flesh, the Spirit of Christ was left by the Fathers appointment until the
coming of this David George, and given him.

3. That he would set up the true house of David, and the children of Levi must
raise the Tabernacle of God through the Spirit of Christ, not by the cross and
suffering, but through meekness and love.

4. That whosoever speaks against this Doctrine shall never be forgiven in
this world, nor in the world to come; he dyed the 16. of August, 1556. at which
his Disciples were much dismayed, for he promised them that he should not dye:
or if he did, that he should rise again, and fulfill all his former Promises,
whereupon some forsook his heresies. The Magistrates being informed of his
doctrine and manners, caused his house and the houses of such as were suspected
to hold such errors to be searched, his books to be burnt, forseiting his
goods and lands ^o the use of the Town, causing his followers to recant.

After him rose one Henry Nicholas borne in Amsterdam, a Town in Holland, of
many called Henry of Amsterdam who took upon him to maintain the same
Doctrine, yet not in the name of David but in his own name, as a Prophet sent
to rebuke the world of sin and iniquity, naming himself rest^^r^to^ mund^, the
restorer of the world.

Mr. Iessop describes H. N. after this manner, page 89. They call him the new
man, or the holy nature, or holiness which they D^s^^^^^y of the errors of the
(...) p^ge 89.
make to be Christ, and sin to be Antichrist, because it is opp^^i^e to Christ.
They say that when Adam sinned then Christ was killed, and Antichrist came to
live.

They teach the same perfection of holiness which Adam had before he fell, is
to be obtained here in this life, and affirm, that all their Family of Love
are as perfect and innocent as he, and that the Resurrection of the dead
spoken of by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 15. and this Prophecy, then shall be fulfilled
the saying which is written; O death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy
victory? is fulfilled in them; and they deny all other resurrection of the body
to be after this life. They will have this blasphemer H. N. to be the Son of
God, Christ, which was to come in the end of the world to judge the world, and
say that the day of judgment is already come, and that H. N. judges the world
now by his Doctrine; so that whosoever does not obey his Gospel (in time)
shall be rooted out of the world, and that this Family of Love shall inherit
and inhabit the earth for ever, world without end: only they say they shall
dye in the body, as now men do, and their souls go to heaven, but their
Posterities shall continue for ever. This deceiver describes eight
through-breakings of the light (as he terms them) to have been in eight
several times, from Adam to the time that now is, which (as he says) have
each exceeded other. The seventh he allows Jesus Christ to be the publisher
of, and his light to be the greatest of all that ever were before him; and he
makes his own to be the eight and last and greatest, and the perfection of
all, in and by which Christ is perfected, meaning holiness; he makes every
one of his Family of Love to be Christ; yea, and God, and himself God, and
Christ in a more excellent manner, saying that he is godded with God, and
co-deified with him, and that God is hominified with him. These horrible blas
hemies with diverse others, does this H. N. and his Family teach to be the
everlasting Gospel: which the Angel is said to preach in the Rev. 11. 15. They
profess greater love to the Church of Rom^, and to all her Idolatries and
superstitions, then they do to any Church else whatsoever, except themselves.

They wickedly abuse these words of Christ; I must walk to day, to morrow, and
the third day I shall be perfected: and say, that by to day is meant the time of
Jesus Christ his Apostles: and by to morrow, all the time of the Religion of
the Church of Rome: and by the third day, this their day of H. N. and his
Family wherein they will have Christ to be perfected. And they do compare all
the whole religion of the Church of Rome to the Law of Moses, affirming that as
God did teach his prople by these shadows and types, till Jesus Christ came;
so he has taught the world ever since by the Images, sacrifices, and heathen
Rites of the Church of Rome, till this wretch H. N. came, and now he must be
the only chief Teacher, Gods obedient man, yea his Son (as they blasphemously
call him.) he by his Gospel must make all things perfect.

One Christopher Viret, Christopher Viret.
a Joyner dwelling in Southwarke, who had been in Queen Mary's days an Arian,
being infected with Hen, Nocolas his doctrine, poyso^ed first the English with
this heresy: he translated out of Dutch into English diverse of the books of
Henr. Nicholas, as Evangelium regni, out of which and others these errors are
collected.

2. Their blasphemous Errors.
1. COncerning God] That there is none other Deity belonging unto God, but
such as men are partakers of in this life.

2. Concerning Christ] 1. That Christ is not God. 2. Christ is not one man; but
an esta^e and con^^tion in men, common to so many as have received H. N. his
doctrine, etc.

3. Of Adam] That Adam was all that God was; Knewst. p. 24.
and God all that Adam was, etc.

4. Concerning Baptisme] That no man should be baptized until he was 30 years
old.

5. Concerning the Word] That there was never truth preached since the Apostles
time before H. N.

6. Concerning the Resurrection] 1. The resurrection of the body is a ^ising
from sin and wickedness. 2. That the dead shall rise and live in H. N. and in
the iluminated Elders everlastingly and reign upon earth.

7. Concerning the day of Judgement] 1. That the day of Judgment is in this
life. 2. That the joys of heaven are here upon earth.

8. Concerning marriage.] The marriage of such as are not enlightened with true
faith is ^^lthy and polluted, and to be reputed for whoredom.

9. Concerning Henry Nicolas.] 1. He is raised by the highest God from the
dead. 2. He can no more ^rre then Moses or Christ, etc. 3. He is the true
Prophet of God, sent to blow the last Trumper of Doctrine which shall be
published upon earth. 4. That he only knows the true sense of Scripture. 5.
That his Books are of equal authority with the holy Scripture.

Through the service of H. N. his holy and gracious Word, Knewst. p. 27.
and our obedience thereunto; we are led of the Father to the love of Jesus
Christ. 6. That the Scriptures are fulfilled in H. N. and his Family. 7. H. N.
knows the secrets of our hearts. 8. That all men must submit themselves to
the godly wisdom of H. N. etc.

10. Concerning their illuminated Elders and family.] 1. All illuminated Elders
are Godded with God, Knewst. fol. 15
or deified; and God in them hominified, or become man. 2. The young Disciples
are Adams, and the illuminated Elders Christ's. 3. The eldest Father of the
Family is Christ himself. 4. That the estate of all such as are not of this
Sect is a false being, the Antichrist, the wicked spirit, the kingdom of hell,
and the devil himself. 5. The Family of Love is perfect in this life, and
therefore that they must not pray for forgiveness of sins. 6. That their
illuminated Elders do not sin. 7. They may join with any Congregation and
Church, and live under the obedience of any Magistrate though never so ungodly.
8. Whatsoever is taught by any other then by their illuminated Elders is false:
Such as despise their Family shall be consumed with everlasting fire.

Moreover they hold:

1. That he who is one of their Congregation is either as perfect as Christ, or
else a very devil.

2. That it is lawful to do whatsoever the higher Powers command to be done,
though it be done against the commandment of God.

3. That it is ridiculous to say, God the Father, God the Son, God the holy
Ghost; as though by saying these words, they should affirm to be three Gods.

4. That every man ought first to be in an error before he can come to the
knowledge of the truth.

5. That heaven and hell are present in this world among us, and that there is
none other.

6. That they are bound to give alms to none other persons but to those of
their Sect, and if they otherwise do, they give their Alms to the devil.

7. That they ought not to bury their dead: because it is said, let the dead
bury the dead.

8. That none ought to receive their Sacraments before he receives their whole
Ordinances, as 1. He must be admitted with a kiss, then his feet must be
washed, then hands laid on him, and so received.

9. That the Angels Raphael, and Gabriel and others were borne of a woman.

10. That they ought not to say David's Psalms as Prayers, being righteous and
without sin.

11. That there ought to be no Sabbath day, but that all should be alike.

12. That Christ is come forth of the flesh as he came forth of the Virgin Mary.

13. That there was a world before Adams time as is now.

14. That the Law of God is possible to be kept of every man that will
endeavor himself thereto.

15. That it is ^^pedient that they should make manifest their whole heart,
with all their counsels, minds, wills, and thoughts, together with all their
doings, dealings, and exercises naked and bare before the children of the
Family of Love, and not to cover or hide any thing (be it was it is) before
him, and what their inclination and nature draws them unto.

In a word, their doctrine is perverse, blasphemous and erro^eous: it opens a
door to all wickednese, turning Religion up-side-downe, building heaven here
upon earth, making God man and man God, heaven hell, and hell heaven, not
accounting of the Law of God, and making but a jest of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, leaving no manner of sin uncommitted, and yet affirming they sin not at
all: for venom and poison which will bring present death to the soul, he has
dispersed over every member and Article of the Belief; so universal is the
poison of his opinion, as you may see in their confession set down by Mr.
Knewstub.

3. The Confession of Familists.
I Do believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth. They say
the same is a true living God, a mighty Spirit, a perfect clear light; a true
being, and that the same being is God, the Fathers name, and his love it self.
And they persuade their good willing ones, that by the belief of this Article,
which they call the Baptism in the Fathers name, that here and now they do
attain to the perfect obedience of the Law of God and of the belief of Jesus
Christ, and love of the holy Ghost, which they make to be all one with the
perfect righteousness of the Law.

2. And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord. Some of these words they alter,
for instead of his only Son, they say the only Son of God etc. Whereby Jesus
the only Son, I mean, Righteousness: for there is their general Tenet and
conclusion, that Righteousness is Christ, and Sin is Antichrist. The seed of
the woman is righteousness and holiness, and the seed of the Serpen^ is sin
turning the person of Christ into equality.

3. Which was conceived of the holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin Mary. As we
confess the thing done, so we speak of the present time as of the thing
doing, saying, which is conceived of the holy Ghost, meaning, every one that
comes to take in their Belief (as they term it) is then conceived of the holy
Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, calling the conception of their fancy the
first or Virgins estate of Infancy, so making the Article intend all and every
one of them in general, and hot one in particular, as we believe.

4. Sufferedunder Pontius Pilate, was crucified dead and buried, and descended
into hell. In the former Article they confess the conception and birth of the
blessed seed of Abraham according to the Promises, and here they believe their
sufferings according to the Scriptures. And Jesus Christ is borne and conceived
in themselves under Pontius Pilate, and so is incorporated into the death of
his Cross, and this they call the Baptism under the obedience of the Belief
in the name of the Son; and they f^y, they bury through his Belief, the old
Man, which state they call the youth or young Man; the renewing of the Spirit
in an upright life, wherein this Article both of suffering, crucifying death
and burial, and discention into hell, are fulfilled in them: the rest you may
see in Mr. Knewstub.

4. Their lewd Conversations.
OF this holy Family we read, that most shameful corruption of life has
always followed corruption of Doctrine, as Romans 1. 24. God gave them up to
their own hearts lusts, to uncleanness, to defile their own bodies between
themselves, which turned the truth of God into a lie.

They are like Priscillianus the Heretic, of whom H. N. borrowed not only
that villainous wresting of the Word by allegories, as also the monstrous
opinion that perj^ry and lying was lawful, and to be done with a good
conscience to conceal Religion.

Priscilianus (says Daneus) was put to death at Treversa a City of Germany,
En^ch Clapham
confessing at his death what shameful villainies he had committed with the
women of his Sect.

The Familists talk of love, and being in love, and nothing but love; but
their love turns into lust, as one writes of them.

Hen, Nicolas, as I find written, had in his house three women apparelled
alike: the one he affirmed to be his wife, the other his sister, the other his
Cousin: which Cousin of his falling sick, and doubtful of her life, confessed
to her neighbors who resorted to her in her sickness, that H. N. had often
abused her body, and made her believe that she should never dye. Complaint
thereof being made to the Governor, he came to the house to have apprehended
him; but he fled. It was thought he was gone with Granvella unto Naples, his
goods were seized upon and carried to the Castle in Embden, in the year of our
Lord 1556. and in the 57. year of his age.

5. Of diverse sorts of Familists.
OF the Castalian Order, Do De^isons White W^lfe, page. ^8. 1. Castalian Order.
which dissent from the doctrine of the Church of England, opposing in every
syllable, and yet being notorious Hypocrites, if they be never so little
questioned, will make show by outward seeming of conformity, as if they did
highly approve the doctrine of our Church. Who hold that the Law of God may be
perfectly fulfilled by men in this world.

Who term themselves Eagles, Angels, and Archangels, Lambs, and Doves, etc.
who hope in a short time to be inspired with light and illumination, as ever
Paul or any Prophets were, which allegorize the places of Scripture concerning
Christ denying indeed that there was ever any such man as Christ, dreaming
only of a sanctisying Christ, and abhorring a justifying Savior, expecting
salvation by their own works, although they be known to be co^rupt workers
both in their Calling and Families, holding that Turks and Pag^ns may be saved
if they live well, although they never heard of Christ.

Of the Grindletonian Familists, 2. Grindletenian,
who hold:
1. That the Scriptures are but for novices. 2. The Sabbath to be observed but
as a Lecture-day. 3. To pray for the pardon of sin after he is assured of Gods
love, is to offer Christ again. 4. That their Spirit is not to be tried by the
Scripture, but the Scripture by their Spirit. 5. That we must not go by
Motives, but by Motions. 6. That when God comes to dwell in a man, he so
fills the soul, that there is no more sinful lusting. 7. That they see no
reason why Ministers should speak against the sins of the wicked, seeing the
wicked men can do nothing but sin. 8. Which boast and thank God that they have
cast off praying in their Families, repeating of Sermons, and such like things
long ago. 9. Which scoff at such as make conscience of words, with many other
pernicious points.
3. Of a third sort, 3. Of the Mountains.
Familiests of the Mountains, who say that they have clean vanquished the
devil, and are pure from all sin, and never so much as once tempted to doubt
of their spiritual estate.

4. Of a fourth sort, 4. Of the Valleys.
Familistes of the Valleys, who bring in their damnable doctrine, with fair
pretenses of weeping, sighing, and lifting up their eyes to heaven, of
patience, of a smooth carriage, and the like.

5. Familists of the scattered flock, 5. Of the scattered flock.
who seduce by pretending themselves to be of them which fear the Lord when
they are nothing less.

6. Familists of Caps Order, 6. Caps Order.
and of other ranks.

6. How to discover Familists.
THey are (says my Author) at this present so close and cunning, that they can
carry themselves, being directed thereunto by their Master H. N. that ye shall
hardly ever find them out. They wll profess to agree in all things with the
Church of England, and also with the Church of Rome, If they should be examined
by them only, they will not lightly deny their Mr. Henr. Nicolas, nor speak
evil of him, nor of his writings, if they should be put to it, and there is no
way but this to discover them. I say, to put them to the denial and abjuring
of him and his writings, and to pronounce him a Blasphemer, and his doctrines
blasphemous: this they will hardly do, unless they be not yet fully his
Disciples.

4. The abjuring of certain Familists.
THe 12. of June 1575. stood at Paul's Croste five persons, How. Chron.
Englishmen, of the Sect termed the Family of Love, who there confessed
themselves utterly to detest as well the Author of that Sect H. N. as all his
damnable errors and heresies, Master John Knewstub has written a confutation
of the monstrous and horrible heresies of the Family of Love, Printed by Thomas
Dawson. 1575.

Of ADAMITES.
AN old Heresy, of which St. Augustine makes mention, but renewed by the
Anabaptists, in the assembly of the Adamites men and women pray naked,
celebrated the holy Communion naked hear Sermons naked. These Heretics had
their Conventicles in subterranean places, called Hypocausta, because that
under the place of their meetings a Furnace of fire was kindled to warm the
place of their Conventions; for they uncloathed themselves when they entered
into it, and stood naked born men and women, according to the similitude of
Adam, and Eve before their fall. They call the place of their meeting Paradise.

I read in the History of the Anabaptists, Lamb. Hortens. p. 53.
page 42. That in Amsterdam, in a house seven men and five women had a meeting:
one of them called Theadoret a Tailor, who bore himself a Prophet, fell flat
on the ground, prayed with such vehemenacy, that he scared all the assistants,
and rising as if it were out of an ecstasy, I have seen (said he) God in his
Majesty, and have spoken with him: I was taken up into heaven, then I descended
into hell, and there scarched every corner: the great day of the last judgment
is coming. At night they met again in the same place, and after four hours
spent in praying and teaching the prophet being armed, disarmeth himself, and
puts off his garments to his shirt, and throws them in the fire: then he
commands the company in authority of a Prophet to do the like, and so they
did, women, and all, leaving not so much as a hai^elace to tie up their
scattered hair, no covering to the body, no shelter, (for so was the Prophets
pleasure, that they should cast away all that came out of the earth and burn it
as a Sacrifice of sweet favou unto God: yet you may think (says my Author)
that the burning of so many clo^hes yielded no very sweet favor, for it was
such as awaked the ^istris of the house that knew nothing of the meeting, and
made her arise to seek where this burning was, for that smell made, her afraid
that the fire was in her shop which was of woollen Drapery. Being come to the
place, she saw eleven naked bodies, and the Propher commanded her to put off
her clothes and put them in the fire, which she did: then the Prophet
commanded them all to follow him, and do as he should do, and so rushed into
the street stark naked, and all his Disciples after him, running and crying
horribly throughout the Town, woe, woe, woe, the divine vengeance, the divine
vengeance, whereby they put the whole Town into an uproare; The people thinking
that the Town was surprised by some enemy, they were all taken but one woman
that slipped out of the way, and brought before the Magistrate: and as they stood
all naked in a full Court, they could never be persuaded neither by command nor
threatening to put on garments which they offered them, saying, that they must
have no covering, for they were the naked truth: they were kept a while in
prison until the great conspiracy in Amsterdam by the Anapaptists, when they
went about to surprise the Town, and then they were executed. The Mistress of
the house where the Conventic^e was kept was hanged before her own door.

Of the Adamites in Bohemia.
WHereas Bohemia is like Africa, always bringing forth some new thing: ^onfi^.
decad. 3. lib 2. page 390. Gas^io^ page (...).
an heresy (says he) far greater then the for^er, arose there, viz. of the
Adamites. A certain Piccard passing over the Rhene, came out of the low
Countries into Bohemia, who, with craft and with delusion deceiving many,
gathered a multitude of followers, and taking an Island in the Lusmisicus Lake,
he lived there, prosessing himself to be the Son of God; he taught his Sect to
go naked, and to call him Adam and to use promiscuous marriages, and for their
lust every one to take a woman and to bring her before the Prelate, saying, My
flesh does wax hot upon this woman: unto whom Adam answered, increase and
multiply. This man called all other men slaves, and himself and they that were
of his Sect, freemen: Forty of this Sect with their Swords drawn set upon the
Village adjoining to them, and killed about 200. husbandmen, whom they called
the children of the devil: when these things were come to the ears of Zisca,
the Adamites were all slain, but two men who were left to declare and make
known to the world their superstitions, with the women who declared that all
that wore clothes, and especially breeches, were by no means Freemen. These
women were committed to prison, and afterward for their obstinacy in their
Errors they were burnt. They did undergo their punishment with great ^aerity,
singing and laughing in the fire.

Of Antinomians.
In describing of these Sectaries I purpose to set down:
1. The Original of the Antinomians. 2. Their Errors. 3. The first Antinomian
in England. 4. The opinions of our modern Antinomians. 5. The stirs raised by
the Antinomians in New England, and their banishing from thence.
1. The Original of the Antinomians.
THe Antinomians are so called, because they would have the Law abolished in
the light of the Gospel.

The Author of this Sect Pontanus affirms to be one John Agricela of Isleby
who broached his errors about the year of our Lord, 1535.

2. The errors of the Antinomians.
POntanus in his Catalogue of Heretics sets down these following.
1. They precend the Law not to be given to Christian men 2. The Law to
pertain to the Court, and not to the Gospel. 3. The ten Commandments not to
be ta^ght in the Church because they that are regenerate need not the Law,
becaule they do that duty willingly, being led by the Spirit. 4. There to be
no need of the Law to any part of our Conversion. 5. It is sufficient for a
wieked man to believe, and not to doubt of his salvation. 6. Our faith and
Religion to have been unknewn to Moses. 7. Neither good works profit to
salvation, neither ill works can do any hurt. 8. That a Ghristian man cannot
be known by his works. 9. The third use of the Law, that it is a rule of life,
is blasphemous in Divinity, and a monster in nature.
2. The first Antinomian in England.
THe first Antinomian among us, (that I can hear of) was one Master John Eaton
who had been a Scholar of m^ne, and afterward was Cu^ate to Mr. Wright (...)
near Algate; he was (...) his errors impriso^^, in the Ga^^ heule a
Westminster. There is a (...) set (...) in his name, called the Honey-combe of
fre^ ^ust ^^ation by Christ alone, collected (as he pre^ende^^) out of the
(...) of Scup^ures, and common and ^animous consent of the faithful (...) of
Gods mysteries upon the same: the main subject of which bock is to prove that
God does not, will not, nor cannot see any sin in any of his justified children.

To prove the point above named, he makes a distibution of justified persons,
in regard of their estate, according to (...) distinct times: the time of the
law, the time of John Baptist and the time of the Gospel: the first glorious,
the second more glorious, the third most glorious.

The first time of the Law was glorious (says he) because Honey (...).
Jesus Christ was in it, and glorious things are spoken of the City of God that
then was, yet Christ and those glorious things were then veiled and greatly
obscured with the bondage terrors, and legal government, not only of the
Ceremonial Law, (as the Papists hold) but also of the Moral Low, whereby sin
was severely taken hold of, and punished sharply in Gods children.

The second time between the Law and the Gospel, to wit, the time of John
Baptist, Page 102.
continuing to the death of Christ, was more glorious than the former: because
in it the former legal severitie that then lay upon the children of God, Page
103.
began then to s^ick and cease; for although John laid open their sins and
the danger of them, yet we read not of any punishment inflicted on Gods
children.

The third time the most glorious, Page 106.
is since Christ graned out his blood and life upon the Cross, by which sin it
self, and guilt, and punishment are so utterly and infinitely abolished, that
there is no sin in the Church of God, and that God now sees no sin in us: Page
108.
and whosoever beleeyeth not this point, is undoubtedly damned.

To the strengthening of this his fiction he abuses diverse places of Luther,
Calvin, and others, who (in all likelihood) never once dreamed of this fancy.
And them that are contrary to this his opinion, he loadeth with approbrious
imputation, and vile aspersions, besmearing them with his Honey-combe: for his
Errors Mr. Eaton was imprisoned in the Gate House, Page 44, 45. 54.
as before.

3. Of the Errors of our modern Antinomians.
THe Antinomians will say that Eaton is dead, and that his errors dyed with
him: whatsoever they say, you may read a learned book set forth by Mr. Gataker:
in the Preface whereof you may see the Opinion: of the modern Antinomians, viz.

1. That the Moral Law is of no use at all to a Believer, no^ a rule for him
to walk in, nor to examine his life by, and tha^ Christians are free from the
mandatory power of it: when^^ one of them cried out in the Pulpit, Away with
the La^^ which cuts off a man's legs* and then bids him walk.

2. That it is as possible for Christ himself to sin, as for a child of God to
sin.

3. That the child of God need not, nor ought not to ask pardon for sin, and
that it is no less then blasphemy for him so to do.

4. That God does not chasten any of his children for sin, nor is it for the
sins of Gods people that the Land is punished.

5. That if a man know himself to be in the state of grace, though he be
drunk or commit Murder, God sees no sin in in him.

6. That when Abraham denied his Wife, and in outward appearance seemed to lie
in his distrust, lying, dissembling* and equivocating that his wife was his
sister, yea, then all his thoughts, words, and deeds, were perfectly holy, and
righteous from all spot of sin in the eyes of God freely.

To this I may add that wholesome exhortation of one of their Teachers in his
Pulpit; Let believers sin as fast they will, they have a Fountain open to
wash them: may not a man expect more honest dealing from a Heaten man, or from
a conscientious Papist, that is persuaded that God sees his sin, then from the
hand of an Antinomian thus principled? For your better information, read Mr.
Gatakers learned book before named, now set forth, which is to be sold by Fulke
Clifton dwelling upon new Fish-street hill.

Of the stirs raised by the Antinomians and Familists in New England, and of
their banishing of them set down by Mr. Wells in a Book Printed for Ralph
Smith at the sign of the Bible in Cornhill; in which you way read a learned
Confutation of their errors.
^Ome persons among those (says my author) that went hence (...) New England,
being fraighted with many loose and unsound (...), which ^^ey dust not here,
they there began to (...) them* the (...) whereof ope^ed such an easy and wide
(...) to (...); that by the (...) slights, friendly and hum^^ (...) their own
doctrine, as a (...) (...) those that they were acquainted (...) Revelation,
not sanctificat^on, working first upon women ^^^^ducing godly Ministers to be,
and preach (...), a Covena^^ of works, dropping their ba^s by little and
little, and angling yet further where they saw them take, and fathering their
opinions on (...) of the best quality in the Country; and by the mea^s of
Mistress Hutchinsons double weekly ^ecture a^ Rost^n, under pre^ence of
repeating Mr. Cottons Sermons, these opini^ns were quickly dispersed, before
authority was aware, into all the Country round about.

Which because they had already ca^ght some eminent persons in the Country,
grew at last to that pride and ins^lency, that it had almost ru^nated the poor
Church of God and ^hey did threaten the same very much both in their words and
actions,

Their Opinions were such as these
FIrst, That the Law, and the preaching of it, is of no use at all, to drive a
man to Christ. 2 That a man is (...) to Christ, and justified without faith;
yea from etarnity. 3. That faith is (...) ^^ceiving of Christ, but a m^ans
discerning (...) he has receive him already. 4. Th^^ (...) to Christ only by
the work of the (...) upon him without any act of his. 5. That a man is never
effectually Christ's, (...) he has assurance. 6. This assurance is only from
the witness of the Spirit. 7. This (...) of the Spirit is merely (...),
without any respect to the Word, or any co^currence with (...). 8. When a man
has once this witness^ he never doubt^ (...) 9. To ques^ion my assurance,
though I fall into Murder, (...) Adult^ry, prov^s (...) never had true
assurance. 10. Sanctification (...) be no evidence of a man^ good estate. 11.
No comfort (...) be had from^ any conditional promise. 12. Poverty (...)
Spirit, (to which Christ (...) ble^se^^esse, Ma^h^ 5. 3.) is only this, to
see, I have no grace at all. 13. To see I have no grace in me will g^ve me
comfort; but to t^ke comfort from sight of grace is leg (...). 14. ^^ hypocr^te
may have Adams graces that he (...) Innocence. 15. The g^aces of Sa^^ts and
Hypocrites differ not. 16. Al^ graces are in Christ as in the Subject, and none
in ^s, so that Christ belie^^s Christ loves, etc. 17. Christ is the new
creature. 18. God loves a man never the better for any holiness in him, and
never the less, be he never so unholy. 19. Sin in a c^ild of G^d must never
trouble him. 20. Trouble in conscience for sins of co^mis^ion, or for neglect
of ^uty, shows a man to be under a covenant of Works. 21. All Covenants to
God expr^ssed in work^ are l^gall Workess 22. A Ch^istian is not bound to the
Law as a rule of his conversatio^ 23. A Christian is not bound to pra^, except
the Spirit moves him. 24^ A Minister that has not this (new) light is not able
to edify others that have it. 25. The whole Letter of the Scripture is a
Covenant of Works. 26. No Christian must be pressed to duties of holiness. 27.
No Christian must be ex^orted to faith, (...) ^^* etc. except we know he hat^ a
Spirit. 28. A man may have all grace^, and yet ^ant Christ. 29. All a Believers
acti^^y is only to act sin,
Now the^e most of them being so gross, one would wonder how they should
spread so fast and sudd^nly amongst a people so religious and well taught.

For declaring of this be pleased to attend two things.
First, the nature of the Opinions themselves, which open such a fair and
easy way to haaven, that men may p^sse without difficulty. For, if a man need
not be troubled by the Law, before faith, but may step to Christ so easily; and
then if his faith be no going out of himself to take Christ, but only a
discerning that Christ is his own already, and is only an act of the Spirit
upon him, no act of his own done by him; and if he for his part must see
nothing in himself, have nothing, do nothing^ only he is to stand still, and
wait for Christ to do all for him. And th^n if after faith, the Law no rule to
walk by, no sorrow or repentance for sin; he must not be pressed to duties,
and need never pray, unless moved by the Spirit: And if he falls into sin, he
is never the more disliked of God, nor his condition never the worse. And for
his assurance, it being given him by the Spirit, he must never let it go but^
abide in the highest of comfort, though he falls into the grossest sins that
he can. The^ their way to life was made easy; if so, no marva^l^ so many like
of it.

And this is the very reason, besides the novelty of it, that this kind of
Doctrine takes so well here in London, and other parts of the Kingdom; and
that you see so many dance after this pipe, running after such, and such,
crowding the Churches, and filling the doors and windows, even such carnal
and vile persons (many of them) as care not to hear any other godly Ministers,
but only their Leaders. Oh, it pleases Nature well to have Heaven and their
lusts too. How many of these opinions were, I will not stand to number, but how
desparately eroneous they were, I shall show you in naming some of them.

First, that the whole Letter of the Scripture holds forth ^ Covenant of
works, contrary to 3 John 16. 1 Timothy 1. 15. 11. Matthew. 28. 8. Heb. 10, 11, 12.

Secondly, that in the ^aving Conversion of a sinner, the faculties of the
soul, and working thereof are de^^^oyed, and made to cease: and the holy Ghost
agitates in stead of them, contrary to Luke 24* 45. John 21* 12. 1 These. 5. 23.
Heb. 9. 14. John 14. 26.

Thirdly, That God the Father, Son, and holy Gh^st, may give themselves to
the soul^ (...) that the sou^e may have true ^mon with Christ, true re^^^ssion
of (...), true marriage and fellowship^ * true san^^i^^cation (...) the blood
of Christ, and yet ^e an Hypocrite, contrary to Ephesians. 4. 24.

Fourthly, That there is no (...) righteousness in the Saints* nor any in
them, but only in Christ, contrary to 2 Timothy 1. 5. ^ Pet. 1. 4. 2 Timothy 1.
6. 1 Ioh. 16.

Fifthly, that the (...) does work in Hypocrites by gifts, and graees, but in
God^ children immediately, contrary to Heb. 5. 15. 11. Heb. 17.

Sixty, That a man must take no notice of sin, or repentance for it, contrary
to Psalm. 51.

Sevent^ly, That it is a ^oule damning error to make Sanctification an evidence
o^ Justification, contrary to Roman^ 8. 1. John 3. 10.

Eghtly, That the devil and nature may be the cause of good works. An unsavory
(...) to (...) command, Luke 4. 22.

You may see a confutation of 82. of these Errors in Master Wells his Book.

Unsavory Speeches Confuted.
These that follow were adjudged by the Assembly aforesaid, as unsafe Speeches.
1. TO say we are justified by Faith is an unsafe speech; we must say, we are
justified by Christ.

Answer 1. False, for the co^^ant language of the Scripture is not unsafe; but
we are justified by faith, is the constant language of the Scripture, Romans 1.
5. being justified by faith; the righteousness of faith, Romans 10, 31, 32.
Righteousness by Faith, Phil. 3 9, 10.

2. The distinct phrase of the Scripture used in distinguishing Legal and
Evangelica^l righteousness is no unsafe Speech, but such is this, Romans 9. 31,
32. Israel found not righteousness, because they sought it of the Law, and not
of, or by faith. So Romans 10. 5, 6. The righteousness of faith says thus, etc.
The Apostle makes these two so directly opposite, as membra dividentia, or
contrary species, that there is no danger one should be taken for another; but
that it is so safe, as that he that affirms the one, denies the other: yea, in
the most exact expression that ever Paul made, to exclude whatsoever might be
unsafe toward a man's justification, you have this phrase, yea twice in the
same verse, Phil. 3. 5. not having mine own righteousness, which is of the
Law, but that which (...) through the faith of Christ: And again, The
righteousness which is of God by faith ((...)) Ergo, it is no unsafe speech;
yea, it must be said on the contrary from those grounds, that to say a man is
justified before faith, or without faith, is unsafe, as contrary to the
language of the Scriptures.

And for the second part, that we must say, we are justified by Christ, it is
true so far as that it cannot be denied, nor is unsound or unsafe at all to
speak; but if it mean a must of necessity always, or only so to speak it as
it is here set in opposition to the phrase of being justified by faith, then it
is utterly false, for as much as the Scripture leads us along in the way of
other expressions ordinarily, and the Apostle gives us the truth of Doctrine
and soundness of phrase together, Romans 10. 3. Christ is the end ^o the Law for
righteousness to every one that believes.

2. To evidence justification by sanctification, or graces, favors of Rome.

Answ, Not so, 1. Rome acknowledges no justification in our common sense,
Scil* by righteousness imputed. 2. Rome denies evidencing of our justification
and peace with God, and teaches Doctrine of doubting, and professes that a
man cannot know what God will do with him for life or death, unless by
special Revelation, which is not ordinary: but if they mean old Rome, or Paul's
Rome, to which he wrote, it is true, that it ravours of the Doctrine that they
received, as appears Romans 8. 28. All things co^ work for good, (the evil,
of every evil being taken away, which is a point of justification, and this is
propounded under the evidence of the love of God) to them that love him,
because Romans 8. 2. 9. 13, 14. the evidencing of our being in Christ, freedom
from condemnation, and adoption is prosecuted by arguments from sanctification,
as by having the Spirit, being led by the Spirit, walking after the Spirit,
mortifying the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit: and if hereto were added the
Doctrine of St. John, so abundant this way in his first Epistle (whereof I have
already made mention) I doubt not, but it was the faith of the Church of Rome
that then was, so that the speech is unsavory, and casting a foul aspersion on
a good thing expressed in the Scripture; but as for the point it self, that is
included, we refer it to its place, to be discussed when it is ^ightly sta^ed.

3. If I be holy, I am never the better acc^pted of God: if I be unholy^ I am
never the worse, this I am sure of, he that has elected me must save me.

Answ. These words ravour very ill, and relish of a careless and ungracious
spirit; for howsoever we grant that our acceptance (...) justification is
always in and through Christ the same in Gods account, yet this expression
imports, that though a man's conversation be never so holy and gracious, yet be
can expect never the more manifestation of Gods kindness and love to him,
contrary to Psalm. 50. ult. To him that orders his conversation aright, I will
show the salvation of God; and John 14. 21. It implies secondly, that though a
man's conversation be never so vile and sensual, yet he need not fear or expect
any further expression of Gods displeasure and anger to break forth against
him, or with-drawings of his favor from him^ contrary to Psalm. 51. 8 11, 12.
where God breaks David's bones for his ^in, and Jonah 2. 4. Jonah was as one
cast out of Gods presence, and 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. If you forsake him he will
forsake you. And in a word, it imp^rts as if God neither loved righteousness,
nor hated wickedness, contrary to Psalm 45. 6, 7. and (...) take no delight in
the obedience of his people, contrary to Psalm. 147. 11. The Lord delights in
those that fear him, etc, As concerning the last clause, he that has elected
me must save me: It is true the foundation of Gods election remains sure, yet
it is as true, that whom he chooses, he purpos^th to bring to sal^at^on through
sanctification of the Spirit. 2 These. 1. 13.

4. If Christ will let me sin, let him look to it upon his honor be it.

Answ. This retorts the Lords words upon himself, Pro 4. 22. 24. Keep thine
heart, etc. Ponder thy paths, etc. and therefore no less blasphemous and is
contrary to the professed practice of David, Psalm 18. 23. I was upright
before him and kept my self from min^ iniquity: The la^ter clause puts the
cause of Gods dishonor upon hims^l^e, no less blasphe^ous then the former,
and contrary to Romans 2. 23. where the dishonouring of God is laid upon
themselves.

5. Here is a great stir about graces and looking to hearts: but give me
Christ, I seek not for graces, but for Christ, I seek not for promises, but
for Christ, I seek not for sanctification, but for Christ, tell not me of
mediation and duties, but tell me of Christ.

Answ. 1. This speech seems to make a flat opposition between Christ and his
graces, contrary to that in Ioh. 1. 16. Of his fullness we all received; and
grace for grace; and between Christ and his promises, contrary to Gal^ 3. 13,
14. Christ was made ^ curse that we might receive the promise of the Spirit,
and Luke 1. 70. with 74. And betwix Christ and all holy (...), contrary to Tit.
2. 14. and therefore hold f^rth expressions not agreeing to wholesome Doctrine.

6. A living faith, that has living fruits, may grow from the living Law.

Answ. This whole speech is utterly (...) the (...) of words required, 2 Timothy
1. 13, Hold fast the form of (...) words. 1. That a Hypocrite may have a
living La^* is contrary to James 2. ^7. where the Hypocrites faith is called a
dead faith. 2. That a Hypocrite may bring forth living fruit is contrary to
that, Heb. 9. 14. 3. That all this grow^s from a living Law, contrary to a Cor.
3. 6. where the Law is called a killing Letter. And to Gal. 3. 21. If there had
been a Law which could have given life, etc.

7. I may know I am Christ's, not because I do crucify the lusts of the flesh*
but because I do not crucify them, but believe in Christ that crucifieth my
lusts for me.

Answ. 1. The phrase is contrary to the Scripture language* Gal. 5. 24. They
that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts. 2.
(...) the flesh, for these three things may seem to be expres^^^ in it. 1. If
Scripture make not opposite, but subordinate, Romans 8. 13. (...) through the
Spirit crucify the flesh. 2. That if I do (...) crucify my lusts, th^n,
there is an open and free way of looking to Christ, contrary to the Scripture,
Mat. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see G^d, both in
boldness of faith here, and fruition hereafter 2 Timothy 2. 19 Let every one that
names the Lord Jesus depart from iniquity. 3. That believing in Christ may ease
me from endeavoring to ciucifie my lusts in my own person; which is so
gross* that it needs no more confutation then to name it. 4. The safe sense
that may be possibly intended in such a speech is this. If I crucify the flesh
in my own strength, it is no safe evidence of my being in Christ; but if
renouncing my self, I crucify the flesh in the strength of Christ, applying
his death by faith, it is a safe evidence of my being in Christ: but this sense
conveyed in these words, is to conveigh wholesome Doctrine (...) an ^^^olsome
some Channel, and a darkning and losing the truth in an (...) expression.

8. Peter more le^ned to a Covenant of works then Paul, Paul's doctrine was more
for free grace then Perers.

Answ. To oppose these persons and the doctrine of these two Apostles of
Christ, who were guided by one and the same spirit in preaching and penning
thereof, (2 Pet 1. 21. Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, 2 Timothy 3. 16 All Scripturs is given by inspiration of God) in such a
point as the Covenant of works and grace, is little less then blasphemy.

9. If Christ be my sanctification what need I look to any thing in my self to
condence my justification?

Answ. This position is therefore unfound, because it holds forth Christ to be
my sanct^fication, so as that I need not look to any inh erent holiness in my
self; whereas Christ is there^^re said to be our sanctification, because he
works sanctifica^^^^ (...) us, and we daily ought to grow up in him, by
receiving new supply and increase of grace from his fullness, according to 2
Pet. 3. 18. Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

^ These with many other had so infected the Church, that if God had not
wrought wonderfully for his truth, they had overwhelmed us that would or
nec^^sent into bloody and ^uell martyrdom as their own Sermons did (...) them
up, and their threats gave us occasion to fear.

But God in this did not sit still, as asleep, (says my Author) while these
Ta^es choakt the Wheat, though he suffered the enemy to sow them, but he
manifested his dislike in notorious judgments upon the prime fomenters of them.

As first, Mistress Hutchinson, the Generalissimo (...) high Priestesse of the
new religion, was delivered at one (...) of 30. monstrous Births, or
thereabouts, much about the n^mber of her monstrous opinions; some were bigger,
some less, none of them having humane shape, but shaped like her opinions:
Mistress Dier another of the same crew, was delivered of a large woman-child
which was stil-born: it had no head, but a face upon the breast, and the ears
(which were like an Apes) stood in the shoulders, the eyes and mouth stood
far out, the nose was looking upwards, the breast and back full of sharp
p^i^^les, the navell, belly, and privy parts were where the back and hips
should be, and the back parts were on that side that the face was: the arms
and legs, thighs and hands were as other children, but in stead of toe^, it
had upon each foot three claws* with Talons like a young Foul: upon the back
above the belly it had two great holes like mouths, and in each of them stuck
a piece of flesh: It had no forehead, but in the place thereof above the eyes,
four horns, whereof two were above an inch long* hard and sharp, the other two
somewhat shorter. Thus God punished those monstrous wretches with a monstrous
fruit, sprung from their womb, as had before sprung from their brains.

But as the Jews in the sad por^ent^ appearing before the last destruction of
Jerusalem, construed all things to the best, though never so apparent, so did
they: and whatsoever might seem prodigious in any of these births, the burden
they laid upon the Church, which they thought their enemies.

Then God stirred up his people to call an assembly of Ministers, who confuted
these opinions publicly, and made the authors and upholders of them unable to
answer, although they could not make them yield.

But lastly, God put it into the hearts of the civil Magistrates to convent
the chief Leaders of them: and after many fruitless admonitions given, they
proceeded to sentence: some they disfranchised; others they excommunicated, and
some they ba^isht.

A seditious Minister, one Mr. Wheele^wright was one, and Mistress Hutchinson
another, who going to plant her self in an Island, called Read^^sland under
the Dutch, where they could not agree, but were miserably divided into sundry
Sects, ^emo^ed from thence to an Island called Hell-gate, where the Indians set
upon her and ^^ew her and her daughter and daughters husband, children and
family: some report that the Indians burnt them.

And thus much of the Anti^omians: read Mr. W^lls his book, where you shall
read their opinions at large with a learned Confutation.

Of ARMINIANS.
THE Armi^^^^s are so called of James Armin^^^s, who was (...) Divinity at
Leiden in the Low Countries, in the (...) of our Lord God 1605. They are also
called Remonstra^^s.

Their Errors follow.

1. Concerning Gods Predestination.
THat the will of God to ^^ve such as shall believe and persevere in faith and
obedience of ^aith* is the whole and entire d^cree of the election to
salvation, and that nothing else concerning that decree is revealed in the word
of God.

These Teachers deceive the sim^^er sort, and plainly gainsay the holy
Scripture, which witnesses that God not only will save such as shall believe,
but also from eternity hat^ chosen some certain men, upon whom rather then
upon others, he would bestow faith in Christ, and persev^^a^ce, as it is
written Ioh. 17. 6, I have declared thy name to the (...) which thou gave
(...) Like manner Acts 13. 48. As many as were ordained to eternal life
believed And Ephesians. 1. 4. He has chosen us before the foundat^on of the World.

2. They teach ^thit the election of God to salvation is manifold, one general
and indetinite, and this again (...) incomplete, revocable, nor peremp^orie or
conditional; or ^lse complete, ^^^^ocable, peremptory, or abs^lute: likewise
that there is one election unto faith, another to salvation, so that election
unto just^ying aith may be without peremptory election to salvation* This is a
f^gment of man's brain, devised without any ground in the Scripture, corrupting
the doctrine of election and breaking that golden chain of salvation, Romans 8.
30. Whom he has predestined, them also has he called: and whom (...) has
called, them a^ so he has ^ustified: and whom he has justified also he has
glorified.

3. They teach that the good pleasure and purpose of God, whereof the Scripture
makes mention in the doctrine of election, does not consist herein, that God
did elect some certain men rather then others: but in this, viz. That God from
among all possible conditions (amongst which are the works of the Law also) or
out of the rank of all things did choose as condition to salvation, the act of
faith (in it self ignoble) and imperfect obedience, and was graciously pleased
to repute it for perfect obedience, and account it worthy of the reward of
everlasting life. By this pernicious error, the good pleasure of God and merit
of Christ is weakened, besides that by such unprofitable questions men are
called from the truth to free justification, and from the single plain of the
Scriptures, and that of the Apostle is out^^ced as untrue, 2 Timothy 1. 9. God
has called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according
to his purpose and grace which was given to us through Christ ^esu^ before the
world began.

4. They teach that in election unto faith, this condition is formerly
required, viz. That a man may use the ^ight of reason aright, that he be
honest, lowly, and humble, and ^^^posed unto eternal life, as though in some
sort election d^pended on these things, for these Teachers have a strong (...),
and broadly enough tell the Apostle that he is (...) when he says Ephesians. 2. 3.
We had all our conversations in ti^^s past in the lust of the flesh, fulfilling
the will of the flesh, (...) of the mind, and were by nature the children of
wrath as well as others.

But God which is rich in mercy through his great love wherewith he loved us,
even when we were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ, (by
grace ye are saved) and (...) raised us up together, and made us sit together
in heave^^y pl^ces in Jesus Christ, that he might show in the ages to come the
exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness tow^rds us in Jesus Christ: for
by grace ye are saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the
gift of God, not of works, lest any should ^^ast.

5. They teach that incomplete and not peremptory election of singular person
is made by reason of foreseen faith, repentance, sanctity, godliness, and
that this is the gracious and Evangelicall worthiness, by which he that is
chosen becomes worthier then he that is not chosen: and therefore that faith,
the ^bedience of faith sanctity, godliness and perseveran ce are not the
fruits or effects of the unchangeable electi^n unto glory, but conditions and
causes sine quibus non, (that is to say, without which a thing is not brought
to pass) before required and foreseen as already performed by those who are
completely to be chosen, a thing rep^gnant to the whole Scripture, which every
wherebeats into our ears and hearts these and such like sayings, Rom 9. 11.
Election is not of works, but of him that calls, Acts 13, 48. As many as were
ordained to everlasting life, believed, Joh. 15. 16. Ye have not chosen me, but
I have chosen you, Romans 11. 6. If of grace not of works, 1 John 4. 10. Herein
is love^ not that we loved God but that he first loved us and sent his Son, etc.

6. That not all election to salvation is unchangeable, but that some which are
elected, withstanding Gods decree, may perish, and for ever do perish. By
which gros^e error they hoth make God mutable, and overthrow the comfort of the
godly concerning the certainty of their salvation, and contradict the holy
Scriptures, teaching, Mat. 24. 24. That the Elect cannot he seduced, John 6.
39. That Christ does not lose those are given to him by his father, Romans 8. 30.
That God whom he has predestined, called, justified, them he does also
glorify.

7. They teach that in this life there is no fruit, no sense, no certainty of
immutable election unto glory, but upon condition, contingent and mutable: for
besides that, it is absurd to make an uncertain certainty. These things
contrary to the experience of the godly, who with the Apostle, triumph upon the
sense of their election, and extol this benefit of God, who rejoice with the
Disciples according to the admonition of Christ, Luke 10. 20. That their nam^^
are written in heaven. And lastly, who oppose the sense of their election
against the fiery darts of divillish temptations, demanding, Romans 8. 33. Why
shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect.

8. They teach that God out of his mere just will has not decreed to leave
any man in the fall of Adam and common state of sin and damnation, or to pass
over any in the communication of grace necessary to faith and conversion, for
that stands firm, Romans 9. 18. He has compassion upon whom he will and whom he
will he hardn^th. And that Mat. 13. 11. To you is given to know the mysteries
of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. In like manner, Mat.
11. 25, 26. I glorify thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou have
hidden these things from the wise and understanding men, and have revealed them
unto Babes: even so, O Father, because thy good pleasure was such.

9. They teach that the cause why God sends the Gospel rather to this nation
than to another, is not the mere and only good pleasure of God, but because
this nation is better and more worthy of it then that to which he has not
communicated the Gospel: ^or Moses gain-sayes this speaking thus unto the
people Israel, Deuteronomy. 10. 14, 15. Behold heaven and the heaven of heavens is the
Lord thy Gods, and the earth with all that therein is: Notwithstanding the Lord
set his delight in thy Fathers to love them, and did choose their seed after
them even you above all people* as appears this day. And Christ, Mat. 11. 21^
W^e be to thee Corazin, woe be to thee Bethsaida, for if the great works which
had been done in you, had been done (...) Ti^^s and Sydon, they had repented
long ago in sack (...) and ashes*

2. Their Errors concerning Christ's death, and the redemption of men by it.
1. THey teach that God the Father ordained his Son unto the death of the
Cross without any certain and determinate counsel of saving any particular
man expressly, so that its necessary, profit and dignity might have remained
whole, sound, and perfect in every respect, complete and entire in the
impetration of Christ's death, although they obtained redemption, had never
actually been applied to any particular person, for that assertion is
reproachful to the wisdom of God the Father, and the me^^t of Jesus Christ,
and contrary to the Scripture, where our Savior Christ says, Ioh. 10. 15. I
lay down my life for my sheep, verse 27. And I know them The prophet speaks
thus of our Savior, Isa. 53. 10. When he shall make his sons a sacrifice for
sin he shall see his seed and prolong his days, and the will of the Lord shall
prosper in his hands. Lastly, it overthrows any Article of our faith, wherein
we do believe that there is a Church,

2. They reach that this was not the will of God, that he might establish a
new Covenant of Grace by his blood, but that he might only procure unto his
Father the bare right of making again with men any Covenant whatsoever,
whether of grace or of works: for this thwarteth the Scripture, which teaches
that Christ is made the surety and mediator of a better, that is, a new
Covenant, Heb. 7. 22. and Heb. 9. 17. The Testament is confirmed when men are
dead.

3. They teach that Christ by his satisfaction did not certainly merit for any
man's salvation it self, and faith by which this satisfaction of Christ may be
effectually applied unto salvation, bu^ only that he purchased his Fathers
power or resolution to enter into a new match with mankind, and to prescribe
them what new Covenant soever he pleased. The performance of which condition
should depend upon man's free will, and that therefore it might fall ^ut that
either no man or every man might fulfill them: for these esteem too (...)
basely of Christ^ death, in no wise acknowledging the chiefest (...) excellent
fruit and benefit procured thereby, and will call up (...) Pelagian herisie
from hell.

4. They teach that the new Covenant of grace with God the Father, by the
mediation of Christ's death made with men, does not consist herein* viz. That we
are justified before God, and saved by faith, insomuch as it apprehends the
merit of Christ, but herein, viz. That God, the exaction of perfect legal
obedience being abrogated, reputes faith it self and the imperfect obedience
of faith for the perfect obedience of the Law, and graciously thinks it worthy
of the reward of eternal life. Th^^ concludes the Scripture. Romans 5. 24, 25.
All are justified freely by grace, through the redemption that is in Christ
Jesus, whom God has set forth to be a reconciliation through says in his
blood. And with wicked Socinus they bring in (...) and strange justification of
man before God, (...) consent of the whole Church.

5. They teach that all men are received into the sta^e of reconciliation and
grace of the Covenant, so that no (...) shall be condemned for Original sin,
nor in respect of it be (...) unto death or damnation: but are all acquitted
and f^e^d from the guilt of that sin.

This opinion is contrary to the Scripture, which affi^es that by nature we are
the Children of wrath. This the Arminiams learnt from the Anabaptists.

6. They imply the distinction of impetration and application, to the end that
they may infuse this opinion unto unsk^^full and unwary wits; namely, that God
as much as concerne^ (...), would confer upon all men eq^^lly those benefits
which are promised by Christ's death. And whereas some rather then others are
made partakers of forgiveness of sins (...) life etern^ll^ and this diversity
depends upon their own free will, applying it self unto grace indifferently
offered, but not upon the ^^^gular gift of mercy effectually working in them
(...) then others, that they may apply this grace unto themselves: (...) they
while they bear the world in hand, that they pr^pound this destruction with a
sound meaning, they go about to make the people drink of the poisonous cup of
Pelagianisme.

7. They teach that Christ neither could nor ought to dye, neither did dye for
those whom God dearly loved, and chose unto eternal life, seeing such stood
in no need of Christ's death.

In this they contradict the Apostle, who says, Gal. 2. 20. Christ loved me,
and gave himself for me. In like manner, Romans 8. 33. Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of Christ's chosen? It is God that justifies, who shall condemn?
it is Christ which it dead, to wit for them. And our Savior averring John 10.
15. I lay down my life for my sheep. And John 15. 12. This is my Commandment
that ye love one another as I have loved you, greater love then this no man
has, that a man lay down his life for his friends.

Thirdly, and Fourthly, Their Errors concerning man's corruption and conversion
unto God.
1. THey teach, that it cannot be well objected, that Original sin of it self
is sufficient ^or the con^en^ning of a^l mankind, or for the deserving of any
temporal and eternal punishment.

In this they go against the Apostle, who says Romans 5. By one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men for that all
have sinned, and vea^. 16. The judgment was by one to condemnation, Romans 6.
23. The ^ages of sin is death.

2. They teach that spiritual gifts or good qualities or virtues, such as our
goodness, holinesses, or righteousness, could not be s^a^ed in the will of
man in his first (...) and therefore in his fall the will could not be bereft
of them.

This is contrary to the Image of God laid down by the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 24.
Where he describes it by righteousness and holiness, which doubtless are
placed in the will.

3. They teach that in spiritual death n^ spiritual gifts were separated from
the will of man, to (...) will it self (...) corrupted b^t only encombred by
(...) darkness of the understanding and unrulin^ sse of the affections: which
impe^iments being removed the will may be put into her own inbred faculty of
freedom, that is, of her self, will or ^ill choose or refuse any kind of good
set before her.

Verily, this is a new feigned and erroneous piece of doctrine* bent on purpose
for the enhansing of the forces of free will, contrary to that of the P^ophet,
Jer. 17. 5. The heart is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked.
And that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 23. Among whom (namely the children of
disobedience) All we had our conversation in times past in the lusts of our
flesh fulfilling the wills of the flesh and of the mind.

4. They teach that an unregenerate man is not properly nor totally dead in
sins, nor destitute of all strength tending to spiritual good, but that he is
able to hunger and thirst after righteousness or everlasting life, and to offer
the Sacrifice of an humble and contrite heart, even such as is acceptable to
God.

These assertions march against the direct testimonies of Scriptures, Ephesians. 2.
1. 5. Ye were dead in trespasses and sins. Genesis 6. 7. 8. 21. Every
imagination of the thoughts of man's heart is only evil continually. Moreover,
the hungring and th^rsting for deliverance out of misery, and for life
eternal, as also offering to God the sacrifice of a broken heart is proper to
the Regenerate, and such as are called blessed, Psalm 519. Matthew. 5. 6.

5. They teach, that a corrupt and natural man can so rightly use common grace
(by which they mean the light of nature, or, those gifts which are left him
after the fall) that by the good use thereof he may obtain to a greater;
namely, Evangelicall, or saving grace, and by degrees at length salvation it
self. And that God for his part shows himself ready in this manner to
reveal Christ to all men, seeing he does sufficiently and efficaciously afford
to every man necessary means for the making Christ known, and for faith and
repentance.

This is (...) to be false, as by the experiance of all ages in the world, so
also by Scriptures, Psalm. 147. 19, 20. He shows his word unto Jacob; his
statutes and his judgments unto Israel: He has not dealt so with any nation,
and as for his judgments, they have not known them, Acts 14. 16. God in times
past suffered all Nations to walk in their own ways, Acts 16. 6, 7. Paul and
his company were forbidden to preach the Word in Asia; and after they were come
to Mysia, they offered to go into Byth^^i^; but the spinit suffered them not.

6. They teach, that in true conversion of a man there cannot be in^used by God
any new qualities, habits, or gifts into his will; and so by faith, by which we
are first converted, and from which we are styled faithful, is not any gift or
quality infused by God; but only an act of man that this faith cannot be
called a gift otherwise then in regard of the power or means given us of
attaining it.

These strange positions are contrary to holy Scriptures, which testify unto
us, that God does infuse or shed down into our hearts new qualities of faith,
obedience, and some of his love toward us, Ier. 31. 33. I pu^ my Law into
their inner parts, and write it in their hearts, Isa. 44. 3. I will pour water
upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry grounds; I will pour my
spireit upon thy seed, Romans 5. 5. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts,
by the holy Ghost which is given unto us. They contradict also the continual
practice of the Church, which uses to pray after the manner prescribed by the
Prophet, Convert me O Lord, and I shall be converted Jer, 31. 18.

7. They teach, that the grace wherewith we are converted unto God is nothing
else but a gentle inducement, or (as others explain it) that the most noble
kind of working a man's conversion, and most ^utable to our nature is performed
by swaso^y motives or advice; and that no cause can be alleged ^hy even such
moral grace alone should not of natural men make spiritual. Nay moreover,
that God does not produce the consent of our will otherwise then by way of
moral counselling, and that the efficacy of Gods working, wherein he exceeds
the working of the devil, cons^steth in this, that the devil promises
temporary things, but Gods things eternal.

This is downright Pelagianisme, and warreth against the whole course of
Scriptures, which besides this swasory course of moving acknowledges in the
conversion of man another manner of working of Gods spirit, and that more
divine and of far greater efficacy, Ezekiel. 36. 26. I will give you a new heart
and a new spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the stony heart
out of yur flesh, and will give you an heart of flesh.

8. That God in regenerating a man does not imply that omnipotent strength
whereby he may powerfully and infallibly bow and bend his will unto faith and
conversion; but that all the gracious operations which God uses for our
conversion being accomplished, nevertheless man may withstand God, and his
holy Spirit intending that man's conversion; yea, and oftentimes does make
actual resistance; so it lies in man's power to be, or not to be regenarate.

This amounts to no less then the denying of all efficacy to Gods grace in
our conversion, and to the subjecting of the work of Almighty God unto the
will of man, which is flat contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles, Ephesians. 1.
19. That we believe according to the working of his mighty power. And 2 These.
1. 11. That God fulfilleth all the pleasure of his goodness, and the work of
faith with power. And 2 Pet. 1. 3. That Gods power has given to us all things
that pertain to life and godliness.

9. They teach, that grace and free will are co-partening causes jointly
concurring to the beginning of conversion, and that grace does not in the order
of casuality go before the action of the will. That is, that God does
effectually help man's will to conversion before the will of man moves and
determines or setleth it self thereunto.

This doctrine was long since condemned by the ancient Church among the
Pelagian Errors out of the Apostles Authority, Romans 9. 16. It is not of him
that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. And 1
Cor. 4. 7. Who makes thee to differ from another? and what have thou that thou
did not receive? Item. Phil. 2. 13. It is God which works in you both ^o
will and to do of his good pleasure.

5. Error concerning the perseverance of the Saints.
1. THey teach, that the perseverance of the faithful is not an effect of
election, nor any gift of God purchased by the death of Christ; but that it is
a condition of the new Covenant which is to be performed by man's part by his
own free will before his (as they themselves speak) peremptorily election and
justification: whereas the holy Scriptures testify, that it follows
election, and is given to the Elect by virtue of Christ death resurrection, and
intercession, Romans 8. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him
up for us, how shall not he with him give us freely all things? Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It is God that justifies, who is he
that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea, or rather that is risen again,
who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us: who
shall separate us from the love of Christ?

2. They teach, that God indeed furnishes the faithful man with sufficient
strength to persevere, and is ready to maint^i^e that strength in him if he
himself be not wanting to his du^y: yet not withstanding, when as all
abilities necessary unto perseverance, and all things which God is pleased to
use for the preservation of Faith once granted, and set in readiness, that it
still remains in the choice and pleasure of man's will to perform or not.

This opinion is easily discovered to be an impe of Pelagi^nisme; which whilst
it strives to make man free, makes him sacrilegious, contrary to the uniforme
and pe^petuall consent of Evangelicall doctrine, which quite strippeth a man of
matter of boasting and ascribes the glory of his benefit to Gods grace, only
and contrary to the Apostle, witnessing that it is God that shall confirm us
unto the end, that we may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.

3. They teach that the regenerate and true believers, not only may totally and
finally fall from justifying says, as also from grace and salvation, but that
frequently also they indeed do fall from all these, and perish everlastingly.

This opinion makes the grace of justification and regeneration, and Christ's
continual custody void and of none effect, contrary to the express words of
St. Paul, Romans 5. 8. While we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us, much more
then being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.
And contrary to the Apostle St. John, 1 John 3. 9. Whosoever is borne of God
sins not, for his seed remains in him, neither can be sin because he is
borne of God. And also contrary to the word of our Savior, John 10. 28, 29. I
give eternal life to my sheep, and they shall never perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of my hand: my Father which gave them me is greater then all,
and none is able to pluck them out of my Fathers hand.

4. They teach that the regenera^e and truly faithful may sin the sin unto
death, or against the holy Ghost.

St. John in his first Epistle, Chapter 5. Verse 16. Having made mention of
such as sinned unto death, and forbidden to pray for them presently, verse 16.
adds; We know that whosoever is borne of God sins not, to wit, that kind
of sin; but he that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that wicked one
coucheth him not.

5. They teach that no certainty of future perseverance ca^ he had in this life
without special revelation.

By this Doctrine the solid comfort of true believers in this life is quite
taken away, and the doctrine of doub^fulnesse (^^ ^ouched, by the Papists) is
brought again into the Church, whereas the holy Scripture every where draws
this assurance, not from special and extraordinary revelation, but from the
proper marks and signs of Gods children, and from the infallible promises
made by God himself, especially the Apostle, Romans 8. 39. No creature is able
to separate us from the love of God, which is in Jesus Christ. 1 John, 3. 24. He
that keeps his Commadement dwells in him and he in him, and hereby we know
that he abides in us, even by the spirit which he has given us.

6. They teach that the doctrine maintai^ing assurance and pers^verance, and of
salvation, is of its own nature and gift, a soft pillow for the flesh, and
hurtful to good manners, godliness, praying and other holy exercises; and
contrariwise that it is a true commendable thing to be doubtful of such
perseverance. The opposers of this assurance do evide^tly show that they know
not the powerfulness of Gods grace, nor the operation of the holy Ghost
dwelling in the heart, and spare not to outface the Apostle. John affi^ming the
contrary in express terms, 1 Ioh, 3. 2, 3. Beloved now are we the sons of
God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be; but we know that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And every man,
that this hope in him purifieth himself even as he is pure. They are also
refuted by the examples of holy men both in the old and new Testament: who
though well assured of their own perseverance and salvation, yet gave not over
prayers and other exercises of godliness.

7. They teach that the faith of those that believe but for a season differs
no: from justifying and saving faith, but only in respect of continuance:
Christ himself manifestly puts, Mat. 13. 20. Luke 8. 13. a threefold
disparison between temporisors and true believers, saying that those receive
the seed in a stony ground, these in a good ground, that is, an honest and good
heart: these want root, these have a fast root, these are fruitless, these
bring forth their fruit with diversity of yield, and that with patience, that
is, with constancy and perseverance.

8. They teach that it is absurd that a man should lose his first regeneration,
and be again newborn spiritually.

They that reach this, do thereby deny the uncorruptiblenesse of that divine
seed whereof we are borne anew, contrary to the testimony of the Apostle St.
Peter, 1 Pet. 1. 23. Being born anew not of corruptible seed, but of
incorruptible.

9. They teach that Christ never prayed for the faithfulls infallible
perseverance in faith, in which they contradict Christ his saying to Peter,
Luke 22 32. I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not* And also
witnessing, John 17. 20. That himself prayed not only for his Apostles, but
also for all that should believe by their word, when he said, verse 11. Holy
Father keep thine own, (namely) those whom thou have given me, and ver. 15. I
pray that thou should not take them out of the world, but that thou should
keep them from the evil.

For your better satisfaction read the Synod held at Dort in the years of our
Lord, 1618, 1619. where the Orthodoxe opinions of the Reformed Churches are set
down, and the errors before named condemned. King James of blessed memory was a
special means for the suppressing of these Sectaries* as appears by his
writings against them.

Predestination to life is the everlasting purpose of God, whereby before the
foundations of the world were lai^, he has constantly decreed by his counsels
secret to us, to deliver from curse and damnation those whom he has chosen in
Christ ou^ of mankind and to bring them to Christ, to everlasting salvation,
as Vessels made to honor: therefore they which be endued with so excellent a
benefit of God, be called according to Gods purpose by his Spirit, working in
due season; they through grace obey the calling, they be justified freely, they
be made Sons of God by adoption, they be made like the Image of his only Son
Jesus Christ, they walk religio^sly in good works, and at length by Gods mercy
they attain to everlasting Felicity.

As the godly consideration of Predestination, and our election in Christ is
full of sweet, pleasant, and unspeakable comfort to godly persons, and such as
fe^le in themselves the working of the Spirit of Christ, mortifying the works
of the flesh and their earthly members* and drawing up their mind to high and
heavenly things, as well because it does greatly establish and confirm their
faith of eternal salvation to be enjoyed through Christ, as because it does
fervently kindle their love toward God* so for curious and carnal persons,
lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have continually before their eyes the
sentence of Gods Predestination, is a most dangerous downfall, whereby the
devil does thrust them either into desperation, or into wretchlesnesse of most
unclean living, no less perilous then desparation. Furthermore, we must
rece^ve Gods promises in such wise as they be generally set forth in holy
Scripture, and in our doings that will of God is to be followed, which we have
expressly declared unto us in the word of God. To conclude, since we cannot
our selves think one good thought: let us not in the work of salvation
attribute any thing to our selves, but to God let us give all the glory.

Of the Socinians.
In treating of these Sectaries, I will propose:
1. Their Original. 2. Some of their chief Errors, with the refutation of
them.
1. SOcinisme (...) Socinanisme has its name from Lelius Socinus, and his
Nephew Faustus Socinus, both Italians of Siena in the State of Florence.

2. L^lius Socinus in the time of Mr. C^lvi^, broached his opinions by private
Letters, written to Ca^vin: Faustus his Son, by public writings, and by books
fo^lowed the steps of his Father in corrupting and traducing the sincere and
Orthodoxe faith.

3. For Socinianisme is a compound of many per^icious and antiquitated
heresies, in which are revived the errors especially of these five Sects, viz.
Ebio^^tes, Arrians, Phot^^ians, Servetians, Antitrinitarians, with which are
joined the Samofatonians and Sab^^ans, of whom also they participate. Their
erroneous and dangerous opinions may be read especially in the works of
Socinus, Ostorodius, Catechesis Racoviensis, Crellius, Volkelius, and others.

The principal of them may be reduced to the heads following being six in
number.

1. Concerning God.
1. That there is no natural knowledge of God, by which we may be instructed
to any kind of acknowledgement or belief of a Dei^y, or any thing concerning
the being of God.

Refuted, Rom, ^. 20. Romans 2. 14.

2. Christ his Incarnation.
2. That the Incarnation of Christ is repug^ant to reason, and cannot be
sufficiently proved out of Scripture.

Refuted John 1. 14.

Deity.

That Christ is not truly God, and that the believe of his divine nature is
not agreeable to Scripture.

Refuted 1 John 5. 7, 8. Phil. 2. 6. John 5. 18.

Satisfaction.

That Christ did not by his death satisfy for our sins.

Refuted, John 11. 5. 2 Cor. 5. 15. Tit. 2. 14. Mat. 20* 18 1 Timothy 2. 6.

3. The Holy Ghost.
That the holy Ghost is not God.

Refuted, 1 Ioh. 5. 7.

4. The Trinity.
That it is repugnant to the word of God, to believe three Persons and one God.

Refuted 1. John 5. 7. Mat. 28. 19.

5. Man*
That Man in the state of Innocence was not created in original righteousness.

Refuted, Eccles. 7. 29.

6. The Scripture or word of God.
That the old Testament is not necessary for a Christian man, though it may be
profitably read.

Refuted John 5. 46. Acts 17. 11.

Antitrinitarians, or new Arrians.
CAlled Arrians of the old Heretic Arrius, who was a Deacon of the Church of
Alexandria, (...)
Achillas the Bishop being dead, and Arri^^ having not the Bishopric given
him, which he desired, Alexander being chosen, he infected the world with this
heresy: he was condemned in the Council of Nice by 318. Bishops under the
Emperor Constantine the great* and banished: he died as Judas the Traitor did,
his Bowels falling out of his belly.

The Antitrinitarians have renewed Arrius his old heresy, (...)
and they are called Antitrinitarians because they blaspheme and violate the
holy Trinity. These Antitrinitarians sprung up in Polonia and neighbor
Countries in the year of our Lord, 1593. Against this Sect Doctor Pelargus
Wigandus, and others have written learned Treatises.

The horrible blasphemies and divillish opinions of these Here^^cks I am loath
to name* but that my desire is that Christians should take notice of them to
beware of them.

1. They deny the Trinity of Persons, which blasphemy Saint John refuteth, 1
John 5. 7. There are three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the Word,
and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one. Read Genesis 1. 26. And God said, let
us make man in our own Image, and God created man in his own ^mage. Mat. 3.
ver. 17.

2. They deny the Son to be God, which blasphemy is refuted Esa. 9. 6. For unto
us a child is borne, unto us a Son is given: his name shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, etc. John 1. ver. 1. 2. In the
beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.

3. The eternal generation of the Son to be against reason, against truth,
refuted Mic. 5. 2. Thou Bethlehem Ephrata, out of thee shall come to be a Ruler
in Israel, whose goings have been from of old, from everlasting, John 1. 14.
Psalm. 7. Col. 1. 15.

4. Christ not to be called God in respect of his Essence, but by reason of his
dominion, which is refuted John 10. 30. I and the Father am one. 1 John 5. Heb.
1. 3. Psalm. 2. verse 7.

5. The Holy Ghost to be God, refuted Acts 5. 3. Why has Satan filled thy
hear^ to lie to the holy Ghost? 4. Thou have not lien to men, but to God. Isa.
4. 8. 16. Job 33. 14. Psalm. 33. 6.

From these false Doctrines and Heresies good Lord deliver us.

These Heretics have been heretofore burnt among us, as Anno 1611. March 18.
Bartholomew Legate, an (...) Arrian, was burnt in Smithfi^ld; he refused all
favor, contemned Ecclesiastical Government. And in the mon^^ of April
following, one Edward Wightman was burnt at Liechfield for the same Heresy.
Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory he^^ing of them, said, she was very
sorrowful to hear that she (...) such Monsters in her Kingdom; and truly,
it grieveth me very much to relate their blasphemous and devilish opinions.

Of Millenaries.
AN Heresy frequent at this time. This Sect look for a temporary kingdom of
Christ, that must begin presently, and last a thousand years. Of this Opinion
are many of our Apocalypticall men, that study more future events then their
present duty, and more rules by Prophesies then Precepts.

This Fancy is most dangerous for all estates.

1. For to promote that Kindome of Christ, they (...) that all the ungodly must
be killed.

2. That the wicked have no property in their estates.

3. That the promise might be fulfilled, that the meek must inherit the earth.

This Doctrine fills the people with a furious and unnatural zeal, which
breathes nothing but fire and sword, and makes them to look upon their
Contrymen with such an eye as the Anabaptists cast upon Munster when they
came first to it, viz. a malignant and covetous eye, discerning their prey, and
marking the rich men to ruin and destruction, God deliver us from such a
Reformation brought by a multitude, missed with a frantic zeal and giddy
Revelations.

This was the ancient Error of Cerinthus who was a Jew, and lived in the time
of Domitian the Emperor, about the year of our Lord, 96. Among other Errors
he taught eternal life to be here in earth, where we should enjoy all
pleasures of the flesh.

That after the resurrection Christ's kingdom should be upon earth, and
corp^rall; and that men should live in carnal concupiscence and lust for one
thousand years.

He dyed oppressed by the fall of a Bath: when St. John the Evangelist, with
some of his Disciples were bathing at Ephesus, and saw this Heretic Cerinthus
in the Bath, he leaped out, saying, let us depart lest the Bath fall upon us:
Cerinthus being here the enemy of truth; which came to pass as soon as Saint
John was gone out of it, as is set down in these Verses of Stigelius.

Impia Cerinthus sansto convitia Christ^
Dum facit, and stulta garrulitate furit;
Concidit, and rando blasphemum contudit ictu
Collapsae subito facta ruina domus.
This ancient Heresy condemned by the Church, and long ago buried, is now
revived in these latter times.

You shall find this heresy confuted in the Chapter of the Anabaptists.

Hetheringtonians.
THE Author of this Sect was one John Hetherington, a Box-maker.

1. This Hetherington being a Tradesman, cast off his Trade and betook
himself to be an Interpreter of the Scriptures to many persons, keeping
private Conventicles. Vid Do. De^iso^s White-W^^te.


2. He maintained and published the Church of England to be no true Church of
Christ.

3. He was a man disaffected to the Government and Discipline of the Church of
England, and agrees with the Familists, holding with them the perfect purity
of the soul.

4. He maintained and published the Sabbath since the Apostles (...) to be of
no force; and that every day is a Sabbath, as much as that which we call the
Lords day, or Sunday.

5. He maintained the Books of Esdras was part of the Canonical Scripture, and
that they ought so to be esteemed.

For which erro^^ous opinions, tending to the disturbance of the peace of the
Church, and to the seducing of many silly souls, he was adjudged for a
dangerous Sectary; and among other (...) upon him, this was one, that he should
recant his Errors at Paul's Cross.

His Errors before named, are conf^ted by Doctor Denison in a Sermon of his,
which he preached at Paul's Cross at the recantation of the foresaid
Hethrington. He recanted them at Paul's Cross, and has lately written against
the Familists.

The Anti-Sabbatarians.
THese Anti-Sabbatarians hold the Sabbath day, or that which we call the Lords
day, to be no more a Sabbath, in which they go about to violate all Religion;
for take away the Sabbath and farewell Religion.

The Morality of the Sabbath does consist in a mystical resting from sin, but
in celebrating an appointed day in seven to the worship and service of Almighty
God.

1. The Sabbath was instituted in the time of man's Innocence.

2. The manner of promulgation of it in the Decalogue is worrhy to be observed.
God says, Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath day.

3. This Law is not placed among the Ceremonial or Judicial Laws but in the
Decalogue it self.

4. The reasons for keeping it are expressed in the Commandment, viz. Six
days shall thou labor, and do all that th^^ have to do; but the seventh day
is the Lord, etc.

Reasons why the Lords Day is to be observed.
1. BY Morality of the fourth Commandment, because the Moral Law is not
abrogated by the Gospel, but established, Romans 3. 3.

2. Because this day on which our Lord rose has been observed by all
Christians. It was kept at Ierusal^m, A^^s 2. 1. It was kept at Troas, Acts 20.
7. At Patm^s Rev. 1. 10. And in all Christian Churches in the whole world.

3. The ancient Fathers have pressed the observation of this day. Ignatius
says; Let every one that loves (...) celebrate the Lords day. St. Basil
says* when as (...) days prescribed by the Law are abolished yet ther^ (...)
one great day of the Lord which never shall be abolished. Their Testimonies are
infinite.

4. God has from time to time showed his fe^refull judgments upon prophaners
of his day, as you read in the Practice of Piety. A certain Husbandman
gri^ding corn ^n the Lords day had all his meal burned to ashes: another
carrying corn upon the same day, had his Barn and all his Corn the next night
burnt.

A certain Nobleman usually profaning the Lords day by hunting, had a child
by his Lady (...) had a head like a hound. Many examples of Gods judgments are
there set down, all which may be fair warnings to forwarne not only prophaners
of the Sabbath, but also all such as by their per^icious Doctrine teach men to
profane it.

Traskites.
SO called of one Mr. John Traske, whom the Author knew well. His opinions
were, that it was not lawful to do any thing ^orbi^den in the old Law, nor to
keep the Christian Sabbath. One Theophilus Braborne endeavored with him to
bring back again the Jewish Sabbath, and to that purpose writ a Book in the
year 1632.

The Positions concerning the Sabbath by them maintained, were these.
1. THat the fourth Commandment of the Decalogue, Remember the Sabbath day,
too keep it holy, etc. Exodus 20. is a divine precept, simply and entirely
Moral, containing nothing legally Ceremonial in whole or in part, and
therefore the weekly observation thereof ^^ght to be perpetual, and to
continue in full force and virtue to the worlds end.

2. That the Saturday, or the seventh day of every week ought to be an
everlasting holy day in the Christian Church, and the religious observation of
this day obliges Christians under the Gospel as it did the Jews before the
coming of Christ.

3. That the Sunday, or Lords day is an ordinary working day* an it is
superstition and will worship to make the same the Sabbath of the fourth
Commandment. Of this opinion was Theophilus Braborne. As the Anabaptists will
have no children baptized, because there is no expres^e command for it in
Scripture; Lo^d day.
so these Sabbatarians will have no Sunday because they can find no express
Text for the alteration of it. John Traske for his Judaicall opinions was
censured in the Star Chamber to be set upon the Pillory at Westminster, and
from thence to be whipped to the Fleet, there to remain Prisoner; three years
after he writ a recantation of all his Schismatic errors.

Also Theophilus Braborne had his doom in the Star Chamber, and afterward
renounced his Errors by conference had with Doctor Vhite, Lord Bishop of Ely,
which caused him to write a book of the Sabbath.

For the observation of the Lords day, we read there is among others a Treatis^
of Doctor Bonners, Bishop of Land.
called ( A profitable and necessary Doctrine) wherein on the fourth
Commandment Sunday is often called by the name of Sabbath, and thereon (says
he) we must have our minds quiet and free from all worldly cares, and give
them entirly and wholly unto God both privately and publicly; and that we
must occupy our selves in thought, word, and deed, as may be to the glory of
God, with spiritual edifying both of our selves and also of our neighbors;
and that every one must instruct his children, servants and family in virtue
and goodness: and as Saint Augustine says, Sermon. 251. Let us mark and see
that our rest be not vain or fruitless, but that we being sequestered from
all rural works, and from all business, do from the evening on the Saturday
until the evening on the Sunday, give your selves to divine service. Only and
after such sort we do duly or well sanctify the Sabbath of our Lord: And to
prove the Sabbath day to be kept, he cit^th, Genesis 2. 5. Exodus 16. 25. Exodus 23.
12. Exodus 31. 14. Exodus 35. 2. Numb. 15. 35. Some Some Christians there be that
keep both Saturday and Sunday, as the Ethiopians.

Of the Jesuits.
This sor^ or Order is of a latter Edition then the Anabaptists, and therefore
not to be om^tted.

In descrebing of them I purpose to set down: 1. Their Original. 2. Their
Government. 3 Their Errors, in which they do not agree with other Papists. 4.
That they are of all Sects most pernicious and dangerous.
1. FOR their Orignall, the first Foundation was one Loyola, a Spanish
Soldier, who was maimed by the French at the siege of Pampelona, his right leg
being broken by a shot, and his left leg with a stone cast from the wall.

This Order boasts much of heavenly visions, and divine revelations (not
unlike the Coetanij the Anabaptists) is that the blessed Virgin Mary appeared
to Ignatius, with her Son Jesus in her arms: persuading him to erect this
Order, to which she promised to be propitious. They will tell you that Ignatius
was rapped up into heaven and that Almighty God showed him the (...) or frame
by which he created the world, with many such like fancies. Moreover, whereas
other orders bear the name of their founders; as the Dominicans of Dominicke;
the Franciscans of Francis, they bear the name of Jesus: whereas (says my
Author) they came from the devil, the father of lies, they being the last
Engine and device of Satan to supplant the truth. This Order was confirmed Anno
1540. by Paul the third Bishop of Rome. Gregory the 13. Bishop of Rome, gave to
the Jesuits a place in Rome called the Island, in which they demolished many
houses, turned many widows out of their dwellings and built themselves a most
magnificent and sumptuous College. It is reported, that it cost in building
25. Tun of gold, in which the Pope placed 500. Jesuits of several nations.

2. For their government, the Jesuits have a chife, whom they call their
General, who attends upon the Pope in Rome, their late General was Claudius
Aquaviva, his Office is to govern the whole Order, and to make new orders: and
their Generals commands the Jesuits receive as divine oracles. They believe
and obey their General as Christ himself.

Next their General they have four Assistants, who, as their General
attends the Pope, so do they attend their General. The office of these four
are to promote the Popes authority into the four quarters of the world. The
Jesuits their Emissaries abroad, signify unto them in writing how Princes
stand affected to the Church of Rome.

Moreover, theie office is with the General to send Governors, Visiters,
Recters, and preachers to the whole Order, and to send forth the inferior
Jesuits into all places of the world, who take upon them all manner of
fashions: to do mischief among soldiers they are arrayed like soldiers: in
Princes Courts like Noblemen, attending foreign E^bassadors: in Ci^ies like
Merchants; yea, sometimes they beg of Protestant Ministers, as men banished for
religion: And all this to dive into the secrets of State, and to disclose the
Counsels of Princes.

3. For their Errors, Chemnitius sets down 26. some sew of which I purpose
to relate, and especially those in which they differ from other Papists.

First, they presumptuously arrogate to themselves the name of Jesus, which is
a name above all names.

2. They place their General in equal authority with Christ, saying, the
voice of our General is the voice of Christ.

3. The Jesuits generally maintain the Popes temporal power, as well as
spiritual, that he may depose Kings, and dispose of their kingdoms, which the
French Papists do not allow of, viz. Their decree set forth, Anno 1611. and
among us, Heart, Bartley, Preston, and others disclaim this power given by the
Jesuits to the Pope.

4. They deny the lawfulnes of the Oath of Allegiance, which the secular
Priests do all generally allow and take: See Blackwell, Howard, Widrington,
and the Author of the Safe guard from Ship wrack.

5. The Jesuits also teach it to be not only lawful* but also meritorious to
lay hands upon the Lords Anointed, and to murder Heretic Kings after the Pope
has declared them to be such: see Mariana, Anti-Cotton; but the secular
Priests disclaim and abhor this doctrine.

6. The Jesuits hold that the Pope is only Iure Divino, a Bishop, and that
all other Bishops hold from him: but the Cardinal of Lorraine, and the French
Bishops, with many other, hold Bishops to be Iure Divino: see the History of
the Council of Trent.

7. The Jesuits with the Franciscans believe the immaculate conception of the
Virgin Mary, which the Dominicans and other Papists do deny.

8. The Jesuits with the Pelagians and Arminians, hold that God works in our
conversion only moraliter, by way of swasion; but Jacobites and other Papists,
especially the Spaniards, (as we may see in Alvares and others) maintain with
all Orthodox Divines, that God works Physically, and per modum physici
agentis by powerful inclining the faculty of the will.

For confutation of these errors, so many books are written against them in
English, and some of them are confuted before, so that I may save my labor.

These are the most pernicious and dangerous sort of all others. These are not
ignorant Sots, like the Anabaptists, and others, but educated and brought up in
all manner of humane learning, and so more able to do mischief.

These take upon them to justify all the Errors and abominations of
Antichrist; yea, their Idolatries, and Sodomiticall uncleanness they will
defend and maintain.

And have they not for this cause, (a thing most abominable to be spoken of)
corrupted the writings of the ancient Fathers, and new printing of them, make
them speak as they would have them, and also written many books in their names
to bear witness with them of their novelties? A volume will not contain
their cumbustions that they have raised in kingdoms and States. Their plotting
of Treasons, and especially the Powder Treason, a divillish design, not to be
believed in ages to come. Their murdering of Princes, and all these under
pretense of holiness. O God, that art in heaven, dissipate their Counsels; O
Christ, the Redeemer of thy Church by the grace of thy holy Spirit, deliver
England from these wicked Ass^ssians, and remove them far from our dwellings.

One thing I will add, to show what impostors they are. I will set down, how
by a pretended delusion of theirs, a few of them had almost perverted a whole
kingdom of Christians, in which there is a Patriarch and eighteen Bishops. In
the year of our Lord, 1614. Tenurazes being King of the Georgians, the Persian
Army entered his Country, spoiled diverse Towns, carried away many prisoners,
and among others Ceteba the Kings mother out of the City Cremon. The old Queen
refusing to become a Mahom^tan, and speaking ill of Mahomet, was put to death,
and her body cast out into the fields, left unburied to be eaten of wild
beasts. There being at that time certain Jesuits in Persia, they sought for
her body but found it not, (for Moacla, a late servant of liers, who was slave
to a Persian, got leave of her Master to bring home the body and embalme it)
the Jesuits found a dead man's head, and embalming it, traveled toward
Georgia with it: and drawing near, they sent a messenger to the King, to let
him understand that certain Roman Christians were come out of Persia who
brought with them the head of the holy Martyr Cetaba his Mother, which had
delivered them out of many dangers. The Prince hearing this went a days
journey with a great troop of his Nobility and Clergy, and brought the holy
Relic to Chachete* and with great honor and celebrity placed it in the Church
of the holy Martyr St. George of Aberdall, and used them with all respect, and
sent them great gifts, which they refused, saying that they had vowed poverty:
Infinite miracles were wrought daily, great offerings they had, the sick
resorted to them. Those that were past cure, they told them that their sins
were great, and they needed a long time of Penance which they prescribed them,
and after to return, before which time they usually dyed: others of whom they
had hope of recovery, they used means, being Physicians, and attributed their
health to the holy Relic, and to the Bishop of Rome, whom loving Jesus had
left his Vicar here upon ^^rth: by this means they enticed many to the R^mish
Religion of the Nobility, and had great hopes of the King himself; but in the
midst of all this came Leue^s from Moacla his Mothers Maid, that the King
might ransom his mothers body which she had with the other prisoners. The King
agreeing with the Persian King* had home his mothers body and many captives,
which manifestly knew it to be his Mothers body with her head on. At the same
time came also certain Muleters cut of Persia, who affirmed that they were in
the Jesuits company, when they cut off the head of a Malefactor, as they
supposed, and embalmed it: whereupon the King commanded the Jesuits to prison,
who were delivered at the (...) of some of the Nobility. This History is
written in Greek by Gregorius Hieromonachus, the Patriarchall Exa^ch from
Tr^pazunt, An. 1626. By this ^eanes the Jesuits had almost perverted the whole
Country of Georgia. From this Sect the Lord deliver us.

There are many other Sects among us, as they ^ultiply daily. There is but one
truth, but errors are infinite. I will conclude with the Prayer that (...)
Mother Church has taught us: That it would please Almighty God to bring into
the way of truth all such as have erred and are deceived: Which God grant for
his blessed Son Jesus Chris^s sake.

Sir Thomas Overburies Character of a Jesuit.
A Jesuit (says he) is a larger spoone for a Traitor to seed with the Devil
than any other Order. Unclasp him, and he is a gray Wolf with a golden star in
his forehead. So superstitious, he follw^eth the Pope that he forsakes Christ
in not giving Caesar his due. His vows seem heavenly, but with meddling with
state business he seems to mix heaven and earth together. His best Elements
are Confession and Pe^ance; by the first he finds out men's inclinations, and
by the latter heaps wealth to his Seminary. He sprang from Ignatius Loyola, a
Spanish Soldier, and though he had long since found out the invention of the
Canon, he thought he had not done mischief enough. He is a false key to open
Princes Cabinets, and pry into their Counsels; and where the Popes
Excommunication thunders, he holds the de-crowning of Kings to be no more sin,
then our Puritans do the suppressing of Bishops. The Order it is full of
irregularity and disobedience, and ambitious above all measure; for of late
days in Portugal and the Indies he rejected the name of Jesuit, and would be
called Apostles Disciple. In Rome, and other Countries that give him freedom,
he wears a mask upon his heart: In England he shuffles in, and puts it upon
his face. No place in our Climate hides him so secretly as a Ladies Chamber.
The modesty of the Pursevant has only forborne the bed, and so mist him.

There is no disease in Christendom that may so properly be called the Kings
evil. To conclude, will you know him beyond the Sea? In his Seminary he is a
Fox; but in the Inquisition a Lion Rampant.

Since the printing of this Book, I hear of an assembly wherein one preaches
against the Deity of Christ: and of another great Congregation of Familists,
and of atheistical books published.

I most humbly entreat Almighty God for Jesus Christ's sake in mercy to look
upon us, and to keep our poor Church from these Doctrines of the Devil, Amen.

Of the Pelagians.
WRicing of the Heretics and Secta^ies of these times, ^ think it not amiss,
to write somewhat of the Pelagians; their ancient Errors reviving among us.
Pelagius was a Welch-man: and he is usually styled Pelagius the Briton, to
distinguish him from Pelagius the samosatensian Bishop; a man learned and
Orthodox: Luther says, he was called Pelagius of Pelagus the sea; his errors
like the Sea overflowing in a manner the whole world. His name in Welsh was
Morgan, which signifies the sea. He lived in the time of the Emperor
Theodosius the younger, about the year of our Lord, 416. His Errors were
condemned in the Synod of Carthage, An. 425. in which there assembled 217.
Bishop^; and among other Saint Argustine: And also in the Melivitan Council
held in Africa: His Errors are set down by Augustine, Hierome, Ambrose,
Bontanus Catal. Haeret^.
Isidore, Prosper, and Fulgentius. Pontanus sets them down to be twelve.

1. He taught that Adam had dyed, although he had not sinned by the Law of
nature, and so sin not to be the cause of death. 2 Adam^ sin to b^ noxious
to himself only, and not to his posterity; and th^re to be no original sin.
3 Lust and concupiscence being natural not to be evil, but rather good; and
sin not to be propagated by generation. 4. The former being granted, children
to have no original sin from their Parents. 5. The children of the faithful,
though not batized, to be saved, and to enjoy everlasting life, but not in
heaven. 6. Men to have now free will, even after sin, which is sufficient and
fit to do well without Gods grace. 7. Gods grace to be obtained by the merit
of our works. 8. The word grace in holy Scripture, not to be meant the
gracious remission of sin and the donation of the Holy Ghost, but the
p^omulgation of doctrine. 9. Faith to be the knowledge of the Law and History
as they call it, not a special work and our perseverance in faith. 10. The
Law of God to be satisfied by external obedience, neither it to be impossible
for a man to keep. 11. The prayers of the Church for sinners, that they may be
converted; and for the faithful to persevere to be made in vai^e: because it
is in the power of our own free will. And we need not ask that of God that
we have power to d^e our selves. 12. They do mock and scoff at the doctrine
of Predestination^ explo^ing it out of the Church.
These Errors need no confu^ation, being so opposite to the holy Scripture.

Soule-Sleepers.
THat the soul dies with the body is an old and despicable Heresy, raised in
Arabia, about the time of Origin, and extinguished by his dispute immediately
after the birth thereof: Such as were infected with this opinion were termed by
Saint Augustine Arabici, by reason of the Province in which this Error first
arose. This Heresy is risen up again among us, and an abscure Author
labors to maintain in a Treatise late published among us, entitled Man's
mortality, in which he brings an argument out of Genesis 3. 19. where Adam is
told that for his disobedience he must turn unto dust from whence he was made,
and not only his body, but also his soul, which came not out of the dust.

In the description of man's Creation by Moses, you may manifestly see the
immortality of the soul.

When God created the Beasts, Genesis 1. 24.
etc. he said, Let the earth bring forth every living thing: But when he made
man, Let us make man in our own Image. Genesis 126.
And again, The Lord God made man of the Dust of the earth; that is his body:
and for his soul, Genesis 2, 7.
he breathed in his face the breath of life. God created the Angels spirits
without bodies. The creatures bodies without souls: he took a body and soul
and made a man in his own Image; in respect of his body he has affinity with
beasts; in respect of his soul with heavenly spi^its.

The Beasts came out of the earth, and to the earth they return; so man's body.

But his soul came from heaven, and returns to God that gave it.

Beside some foolish arguments alleged in the Treatise before named, he cites
the words of Solomon, Ecclsiastes 3. 10. For that which befalls the sons of
men befalls beasts, even one thing befalls them: as the one dies, so ^yeth
the other, yea, they have all one breath, so that a man has no preeminence
above a beast, for all is vanity. All go to one place, all are of the dust,
and all turns to dust again. Who knows the spirit of man that goes upward,
and the spirit of the beast that goes downward to the earth?

Which words were to determination of Solomon's, but a History of what came in
his thoughts, and what troubled him, and stirred him up to a solicitous
enquiry, concerning the souls condition, but the state of the soul he
determines, Chap. 12. saying, Dust returns unto the earth from whence it
came, and the Spirit to God that gave it. To this resolution of Solomon's, I may
add our Lords answer to the Saduces, Matthew. 22. 32. I am the God of Abraham,
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. God is not a God of the dead, but of
the living. This Error of theirs is contrary to the holy Scriptures, 2 Cor. 5,
6. 8. Psalm 31. 5. Luke 23. 46. Acts 7. 59. Apocal. 6. 40. 4. To conclude with
Sap. 3. Though not received in^o the Canon, yet it is confessed to be very
ancient, and therefore may claim precedence of authority before any heathen
Philosopher. The souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and there
shall no torment touch them. 2. In the sight of the unwise they seem to dye,
and their departure is taken for misery, and their going from us to utter
destruction, but they are in peace.

Deny the Scriptures.
AMong others, one wicked Sect denies the Scriptures both of the old and new
Testament, and account them as things of naught: whereby by Gods command they
that despised Moses Law by the mouth of two or three witnesses, were to be put
to death, these wicked ungodly creatures despise both the Law and the Gospel,
and in the presence of a cloud of witnesses: Yea, as I am credibly informed in
public Congregations they vent these their damnable opinions Almighty God
deliver our poor Church from them.

Of the Seekers, or Expecters.
MAny have wrangled so long about the Church, that at last they have quite lost
it, and go under the name of Expecters and Seekers, and do deny that there is
any true Church, or any true Minister, or any Ordinances: some of them affirm
the Church to be in the wilderness, and they are seeking for it there: others
say that it is in the smoke of the Temple, and that they are groping for it
there, where I leave them praying to God to open their eyes and give them
repentance, that they may consider from whence they are fallen, and return
again to the bosom of that Church, from which they have, to the great
dishonor of God, and the scondalizing of the Gospel made so fearful a
defection.

Divorsers.
THese I term Divorsers, that would be quit of their wives for slight
occasions; and to maintain this opinion, one has publ^shed a Tractate of
divorce, in which the bonds of marriage are let loose to inordinate lust,
putting away wives for many other causes, besides that which our Savior only
approves; namely in case of adultery, who groundeth his Error upon the words
of God, Genesis 2. 18. I will make him a help meet for him. And therefore if she
be not an helper, nor meet for him, he may put her away, says this Author.
Which opinion is flat contrary to the words of our Savior, Matthew. 5. 31. It
has been said also, whosoever shall put away his wife, let him give her a
testimonial of Divorsement: But I say to you, whosoever shall put away his
wife, except it be for fornication, causes her to cowmit adultery: and
whosoever shall marry her that is divorsed, commits adultery. Again, he
confirms the same, Matthew, 19. 9. I say therefore unto you, that whosoever
shall put away his wife, except it be for whoredom, and marry another,
commits adultery: and whosoever does marry her that is divorced,
commits adultery, Vid. Mar. 10. 11. Luke 16. 18. 1 Cor. 7. 11.

Of the Papists.
A Question may be asked, why I rank the Papists among the late Heretics. To
which I answer, that there is a great difference between the ancient Papists,
and the modern, since their Trent Conventicle; and therefore I rank them with
the former Sectaries; their doctrines being many of them new. In describing of
then Errors, I purpose to show their differences from the Protestants, which
are set down at large in Master Perkins Reformed Catholic.

1. Concerning Free Will; 1. Concerning Free Will.
the dissent is in the cause of the freedom of man's will in spiritual things,
and especially in the first conversion of a sinner. The Papists say, that man's
will works with Gods grace in the first Conversion of a sinner by it self:
we say that man's will works with Gods grace in the first Conversion, yet not
of it self, but by grace, 1 Cor. 2. 14.

2. Concerning Original sin; 2. Original sin.
the difference between them and us stands not in the abolishment of it, but
in the manner and measure of the abolishment of it. They affirm Original
sin to be so far taken away after Baptism, that it cease to be sin
properly, and is nothing else but a defect, and want, making the heart ready to
conceive sin: we teach, although it be taken away in the Regenerace in sundry
respect: yet it does remain in them, not as a want or defect, but as sin, and
that properly, as St. Paul affirms, Romans 7. 17.

3. Of the certainty of salvation, 3. Certainty of salvation.
we hold that a man may be certain of his salvation in this life. They also
hold the same. The difference is, they hold the certainty to be by hope, and we
by faith, John 1. 12.

The fourth point is of the justification of a sinner.
1. Concerning the matter of our justification. 4. Of ^ustification.
They grant that i^ justification sin is pardoned by the merits of Christ, and
that none can be j^stified without remission of sin.

2. That the righteousness whereby man is justified comes from Christ, and
from him alone.

3. The most learned of them say, that the merit of Christ's death is imputed to
every sinner that does believe for his satisfaction before God.

We say that the satisfaction made by Christ's death and obedience is imputed to
us, and becomes our righteousness. They say it is our satisfaction, and not
our righteousness.

The second difference is about the manner of our justification; we both agree
that a sinner is justified by Faith: The difference is, the Papists understand
a general faith; whereby a man believes the Articles of Religion to be true.
We hold the faith which justifies to be a particular faith; whereby we apply
to our selves the promises of righteousness and life everlasting by Christ.

2. The Papists say, that a man is justified by faith, yet not by faith alone,
but also by other virtues, as hope, love, etc.

3. They say that we are justified by works; as causes we say we are justified
by works, as by signs and fruits of our justification before God.

Fifthly, touching merit we agree, 5. Merit.
that merits are so far necessary, that no man can be saved without them.

2. That Christ is the root and fountain of all merit.

The Papists place merits within a man, making two sorts of them, viz. The
merits of persons, which is to be found in Infants dying after Baptism: and
the merit of works, which they teach to be meritorious two ways: First, by
Covenant, because God has made a promise to reward them. Secondly, because
Christ has meritted that our works should merit: we renounce all merit, and
rest only upon the merits of Christ.

The sixth point of Satisfaction.
1. We hold a civil satisfaction, 6. Satisfaction.
and a recompense for injuries.

2. We hold also a Canonical, whereby having given offense to the Church, or
any part thereof, a man does make an open testimony of repentance.

3. We hold that Christ has made satisfaction for our sins, and the punishment
of them both eternal and temporal. They hold* that Christ by his death has
made satisfaction for all the sins of men, and for the eternal punishment of
them all, yet so as they themselves must satisfy for the temporal punishment
of them either on earth or in Purgatory, which we deny.

The seventh point of Traditions.
The Papists teach, that besides the written word, there be certain unwritten
Traditions, 7. Traditions.
which must be believed as profitable and necessary to salvation. We hold the
Scriptures to be most perfect, containing in them all things necessary to
salvation.

The eighth part concerning Vows.
We say lawful Vows may be props and stays of Gods worship, 8. Of Vows.
but not the worship it self. They hold Vows of things not commanded to be
part of the worship of God: as Continency, Poverty, Regular obedience, which
are against Christian liberty.

The ninth point for Images. 9. Images.
We acknowledge the Civil use of Images, but we deny any religious worship of
them.

The tenth is the Real presence. 10. Real presence.
We deny not the presence it self; and although we hold a real presence of
Christ's body and blood in the Sacrament: yet we do not take it to be local,
bodily or substantial but spiritual and mystical to the signs by
Sacramental rela^ion, and to the Communicants by faith alone.

The eleventh is the Sacrifice of the Lords Supper, which they call the Mass.
11. The Mass.
We acknowledge the Lords Supper to be a Sacrifice.

1. Because it is a memorial of Christ's Sacrifice upon the Cross.

2. Because every Communicant does offer up himself body and soul a living
and acceptable sacrifice unto God.

3. Because of the Alms given to the poor.

They ma^e the Eucharist to be a real, external, or bodily sacfice offered
unto God.

(...) twelfth point of Fasting. 12. Fasting.

We maintain three sorts thereof, to wit, a Moral, Civil, and Religious.

The first being Moral, is a practice of Sobriety and Temperance to be used in
the whole course of our life.

The second Civil, when upon some particular and politic Considerations we
abstain (...) flesh at certain seasons of the year, to preserve the breed of
Cattle, and to maintain the calling of Fishermen.

The third, a religious Fast, when the duties of Religion, as the exercise of
prayer, and humiliation be used in our Fasts.

We join with them in the allowance of the principal ends of Fasting. The
first, that thereby the mind may become attentive in the service of God. The
second that the rebellion of the ^lesh may be subdued. The third is to profess
our guiltiness, and to testify our humil^ation before God.

Thirdly, we yield to them that Fasting is an help and furtherance to the
worship of God, yea and a good work also, if it be used in a good manner.

Our distent is in three things. First, they prescribe certain times of
Fastirng, as necessary to be kept. Secondly, they prescribe a difference of
mea^^, as Whi^me^^ts and Fish, etc. only to be used on their fas^ing days,
and that for conscience sake. Thirdly, we differ touching the ends of Fasting;
for they make abstinence it self in a person fitly prepared, to be a part of
Gods worship. To conclude, we do not condemn Fasting, but the abuse of it.

The thirteenth point of the state of perfection. 13. The state of Perfection.

Our consent is, that all true Believers have a state of perfection in this
life: and this perfection has two parts: First is the imputation of Christ's
perfect obedience: The second part, of a Christian man's obedience is sincerity
or righteousness.

The difference is, they teach that they cannot only keep all the
Commandments of the Law, and thereby deserve his own salvation, but go
beyond the Law, and do works of Super-erogation.

The fourteenth point is of the worshipping of Saints and especially of
Invocation. 14. Worshipping of Saints.

Our consent; The true Saints of God, as the Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs
are to be worshipped and honored three ways.

First, by keeping a memorial of them in a godly manner.

Secondly, in giving thanks to God for them, and the benefits that God
vouchsafed by them.

Thirdly, they are to be honored by an imitation of their Faith, Humility,
Meekness, Repentance, and good virtues, in which they excelled. The difference
stands in the manner of worshipping of Saints. The Papists make two degrees of
Religious worship; the highest they call Latreia, whereby God is worshipped,
and that alone Douleia, whereby the Saints and Angels are worshipped: We also
distinguish adoration or worship for it is either Religious, or Civil;
Religious worship we give to God alone, Civil worship we give to men. To come
to the point, we deny that any Civil worship is to be given to the Saints,
being absent from us; much less any religious worship at all, call they it
what they will.

The fifteenth point of the Intercession of Saints. 15. Intercession of Saints.

We hold that the Saints departed, pray to God by giving thanks to him for
their own redemption, and for the redemption of the whole Church.

Secondly, that they pray generally for the state of the whole Church.

They hold that the Saints in heaven do make intercession to God for particular
men, according to their several wants, and receiving particular men's Prayers,
they present them unto God: which doctrine we flatly renounce.

The sixteenth point of implicit faith, 16. Implicit faith.

We hold that there is a kind of implicit faith, as in the time of a man's
first conversion, and in the time of some grievous Temptation. A second kind
of implicit faith is in regard of Apprehension, when as a man cannot say
distinctly and certainly. I believe the pardon of my sins, but I do
unfainedly desire the pardon of them all, and do desire to repent. The
difference is; The Pillars of the Roman Church, lay down this ground, that
faith in his own nature is not a knowledge of things to be believed, but a
reverent assent unto them, whether they be known or unknown: hereupon they
build, that if a man know some necessary points of Religion, as the doctrine of
the Godhead, of the Trinity, of Christ's Incarnation, and of our Redemption,
etc. it is needless to know the rest, and it is sufficient to give his consent
to the Church, and to believe as the Pastors believe. This implicit faith we
reject: for ^aith contains a knowledge of things to be believed; and nothing
is believed that is not known.

The seventeenth point of Purgatory. 17. Purgatory.

They hold it to be a part of Hell, into which an entrance is made onley after
this life: which we deny having no warrant for it in Gods word.

2. We differ from them touching the means of Purgatory, They say that men are
purged by suffering the pains of Purgatory, whereby they satisfy for their
v^niall sins, and for the temporal punishment of their mortal sins. We
teach the contrary, holding that nothing can free us from the least punishment
of the smallest sin, but the sufferings of Christ, and purge us from the
least taint of corruption, saving the blood of Christ. For Prayer for the dead,
which the Author joyneth to this point.

We hold Christian Charity is to ex^^^d it self to the Dead and it may show it
self in their honest burial, in preservation of their good names, and in
relievi^g their poste^^^y.

We pray further in general for the faithful departed, that God would hasten
their joyful Resurrection, and the full accomplishment of their happiness,
both for the body and the soul.

But to pray for particular men departed, and to pray for deliverance out of
Purgatory, we dare not; we think it unlawful, because we have neither Promise
nor Commandment so to do.

The eighteenth point of the Supremacy. 18. Supremacy*

In causes Ecclesiastical, our consent: First, for the founding of the
Primitive Church, the Ministry of the Word was distinguished by degrees, not
only of order, but also of power, as Peter was called to the highest degree,
Ephesians* 4. 11. Christ ascended up an high, and gave gifts unto men, as some to be
Apostles* some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Doctors. Now
howsoever one Apostle be not above another; yet one Apostle is above another,
as an Apostle is above an Evangelist; and an Evangelist above Pastors and
Teachers. And Peter being an Apostle, was above all Evangelists and Pas^ors,
having the highest room in the Ministry of the New Testament.

Secondly, among the twelve Apostles, Peter had a threefold privilege. First;
of authority, Cephas, with James an^ John were called Pillars, Gal. 2. 6. 9.
Secondly, of Primacy, being first named; The names of the twelve Apostles are
these; the first is Simon called Peter.

Thirdly, of Principality; in regard of the measure of grace in which he
excelled, Math. 16. 16.

The difference is, the Papists give to Peter and to the Bishops of Rome his
successors, a supremacy under Christ, above all causes and persons: which we
deny; affirming Kings and Princes to be supreme within their own Dominions.

The nineteenth of the efficacy of the Sacraments. 19. Efficacy of the
Sacraments.

Our consents. We teach Sacraments to be signs, to represent Christ with his
benefits unto us.

2. Instruments, whereby God offers and gives the said benefits unto us.

The difference. First, that Sacraments are Physical Instrements, having force
in them to give grace.

Secondly, that the very action of the Minister dispensing the Sacrament, as it
is a work done, gives grace, if the party be prepared. We hold the contrary.

The twentieth point of saving Faith. 20. Saving faith.

Our consent. 1. They teach the property of faith to believe the whole Word of
God, and especially the redemption of mankind by Christ.

2. They a vouch, that they believe and look to be saved by Christ, and by him
alone, and by the mere mercy of God in Christ.

3. The most learned of them hold and confess that the obedien^e of Christ is
imputed to them for the satisfaction of the Law, and their reconciliation with
God.

4. They avouch that they put their whole trust and confidence in Christ, and
in the mere mercy of God for their salvation.

5. They hold that every man must apply the promise of life everlasting by
Christ unto himself.

Though in colored terms they seem to agree with us, yet indeed they abolish
and deny the substance thereof: namely, the particular, and certain
application of Christ Crucified, and his benefits to our selves.

The 21. point of Repentance. 21. Of Repentance.

Our consent. 1. Conclusion; that Repentance is the conversion of a ^inner, and
that it is passive or active; passive is an action of God, whereby he
converteth a man being yet unconver^ed; Active, is an action of man, whereby
man being once turned of God, turns himself.

2. Conclusion: That repentance stands: In
Confessing of the mouth. Contition of the heart. Satisfaction in deed.


3. Conclusion: that in repentance we are to bring forth outward fruits, worthy
amendment of life.

We dissent not from the Church of Rome in the Doctrine of Repentance, but in
their abusing of it.

1. They place, the beginning of repentance, partly in themselves, and partly
in the holy Ghost.

2. They take Repentance or Penance for that public Discipline that was used
against offenders in the open Congregation.

3. They make it a Sacrament.

4. They make it a meritorious cause of Remission of sin, and everlasting
life: and in these points (says my Author) we dissent from the Church of Rome.

In the 22. place he sets down some sins of the Romish Church, 22. The
sins of the Romish Church*
viz. Atheism, Idolatry, and Adultery, in permitting Stews, and
Brothell-houses. I pray God keep us in these distracted times from Atheism,
and Sacrilege, which ensu^th thereupon.

In Master Perkins Reformed Catholic, you may see the confutation of the
Popish errors before named at large.

A Review of the Sectaries* comparing them with the PAPISTS.
FOr the Sacrament of Baptism the Papists exclude those Infants heaven that
are not Baptized; 1. Baptism.
and the Anabap^ists affirm the Baptism of Children to be the mark of the
Beast, and Antichristian.

The Papists attribute too much to the Element of Bread in the holy Communion,
2. Lords supper
accounting him no good Christian that will not call it his Lord God. Some of
these Sectaries, as the Brownists, mock and scoff at the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, calling it a two-penny Banquet.

For the number of Sacraments, 3. Number of Sacraments.
the Papists will have too mamany: and some of these Sectaries too few.

The Papists give too much reverence to the Blessed Virgin* holy Apostles, 4.
Reverence to the blessed Virgin.
and Saints departed: and some of these Heretics blaspheme the holy Virgin,
whom all Nations should call blessed; as the Melchiorists saying, Maledicta sit
caro Mariae.

The Papists are blamed for saying too often the Lords Prayer: 5. Lords prayer
the Brownists, and some of other Sectaries will not say the Lords Prayer at
all; some of them affirming it to be an abominable Idol, though it be
commanded to be said by our Lord himself.

The Papists will not only keep the Lords day, 6. Lords Day.
but also many Holy Days: some of these Sectaries will neither keep
Holy Days, nor the Lords day; as the Famalists and An^i-Sabbatarians.

The Papists confess their sins, 7. Confession of sins.
and suppose they cannot enter heaven without a particular confession of them:
some of these Heretics will not confess their sins at all; affirming God
can see no sin in them: as the Antinomia^s.

In equivocating they are alike: 8. Equivocation
Equivocation is a cunning coloring of a Lie, which is against Scripture,
against the rule of equity, an hindering of Justice, the way to perjury, the
divills creature, who is the Father of Lying a princi^pll proppe and pillar of
Antichrists Kingdom.

For lying: 9. Lying.
I know not whether Papists or Sectaries shall carry away the Bell: they tell
lies, they print lies, they preach lies, they paint lies, and both without
control.

Bullinger tells us that the Anabaptists brought Cart-loads of lies to
maintain their detestable opinions.

Piae frauds; 10. Piae frauds*
as the Papists have Piae frauds, to draw men to godliness, as purgatory, and
such like; so have the Sectaries, and especially the Anabaptists have tricks
and devises, as Visions, Revelations, Dreams; yea, false miracles to maintain
their cause.

For Hypocrisy they are both alike* 11. Hopocrisie
they come in sheep clothing; but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. The
Anabaptists entered Munster like Lambs, but became Wolves, having gotten the
upper hand.

For their uncleanness; 12. Vnclea^n^s.
the Papists permit Stews ^but the uncleanness of the Familists and
Anabaptists in their spirit^all marriages, and other abominations, are not
with a modest tongue to be spoken*

For Churches; 13. Churches.
the Papists spare no cost in erecting and trimming them, they would make them
if they could like heaven it self: whereas some of these Sectaries would
destroy and dem^lish them.

Last of all, the Papists worship God in Trinity, 14. Blaspheme the Trinity.
and Trinity in Unity: and whereas some of these Sectaries blaspheme the holy
Trinity; their opinions being so Diabolical and prodigiously impious, that it
is not for a Christian to name their opinions.

It hope that our Governors will drive these also from our Folds, as they do
the Popish Emissaries.

It is fit for all that are Christians to avoid all those who speak against
Christ, and to account them as the enemies of God, and corrupters of souls

Postscript.
SInce the publishing of this Heresiography, I have been abused above measure,
not only with reviling language in the streets, as I go; but also in my
estate: some Sectaries of my Parish, denying now to pay me any thing at all;
affirming, that they are to maintain the Minister of their own Congregation.
And that which troubles them, is my defense of Tithes, and the Ordinance of
Parliament for the true payment of them. The non-payment whereof, is one of the
chief inducements, that the Brownists and some other Sectaries have to entise
the silly people, and to poison them with their other errors: which they learnt
from the Anabaptists, who taught also, that Christian men were to pay no rent,
nor submit to any government: for which the German Princes rooted them out of
their Dominions.

Now these latter Heretics daring not to forbid payment of rent, nor
Magistracy, rail altogether upon the payment of Tithes, and the Ordinance for
Tithes, lately set out by Parliament. And some of them in a scandalous Libell,
among other things affirm, Doctor Featlies Devil to be transmigrated into old
Ephraim Pagitt, (would to God I had his learning) who is altogether for fat
Tithes, etc. I pray God keep the devil out of them. A learned man writes,
Lower de paupertate Ecclesie.
That if a man should bind himself to the Devil, to do his uttermost in
supplanting the kingdom of Christ, he could not attempt it any way more
directly, then in driving the Ministers to such straits and difficulties, that
having not convenient and necessary maintenance, they must either give over
their callings, or devoyd of courage and comfort, in sorrow exercise the same:
by occasion whereof, others shall be discouraged from the study of Divinity,
nothing desirous to buy poverty so dear. Such, (as I have said before) do not
only occidere Presbyteros, kill Christ's Ministers; But also with Julian
Presbyterium, the very Ministry of Christ. Yea, they strike at the root of
Gods Service, at Christ's Priesthood, going about to destroy the Ministry and
Seminary of Gods Church. But for the payment of Tithes which they so blaspheme,
the Ministers have to them a double right.

First, by special reservation of Almighty God.

Secondly, by humane donation.

For the first, men have souls as well as bodies, and God has provided for
them both: There was a sphecial^ pr^yer appoy^t^d for men p^ying their (...),
with a (...) of the true p^iment of them; (...) Gods (...) D^ut. ^6. 13.
as in the week he allowed six days for the body, and sanctified the seventh
for the soul: so of men's goods, he allows nine parts for the Body, and
reserveth a tenth for the soul, to maintain his Ministers, to beget them unto
God, and teach them his knowledge: a tenth part he precisely enjoined, that
man's covetousness should not rob his Ministers, which some would do; if the
quota pars were lest to their discretions. The reservation of Tithe is set
down in express words, Levit. 27. 30. All the Tithe of the land, whether of
the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, it is the Lords, it is holy
to the Lord. [All] none excepted [ is] no^ hereafter shall be, but now is and
has been: As the Sabbath was observed, before the fourth Commandment was
promulga^^d, Exodus 20. So Tithes were paid long before this reservation to the
Levites. You may read of Abraham paying Tithe to Melchisedech and of lacob
promising to pay them. And now God reserving them to himself, and establishing
them upon the Levites, so we have a succession of them unto Christ.

Now has not Christ a Priesthood, and that more excellent then Melchisedechs,
or the Levites: Melchisedech blessed Abraham; But in our High Priest, all the
Nations of the earth are blessed. H^mi^^. 5. Advers* (...).
The Apostle tells us (as Chrysostom affirms) that Christ received Tithe
from Levi by Abraham, father of the faithful, who paying Tithe to
Melchisedech* shadowed out the faithful paying Tithe to Christ. For Abraham
paid Tithe not to the Priest that offered Leviticall Sacrifices of Bullocks
and Goats, but of Bread and Wine: setting ^orth to what Priests we must pay
Tithes to.

Has not Christ our High Priest a Priesthood? yes, and why should not Tithes
be due to his Priesthood? are his Priests to serve for nothing? he tells us
himself, that the Labou^er is worthy of his wages.

How dare any man deny Tithes to Christ's Priesthood? tell me, is Christ's
Priesthood les^e deserving than Aarons or Melchisedechs, or has he lost his
right, or has Christ less care of the Ministers of of the Gospel, then was
taken for the Priests of the Law? Saint Paul says, they are worthy of double
honor. Or has Christ renounced his right in Tithes? no, you may read of his
express allowance of them, Matthew. 23. 23. It is his Ordinance. 1 Cor. 9. 3.
Doe^ce not know, that they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the
Altar? So has God ordained, that they which preach the Gospel should live of
the Gospel: God has ordained, says the Apos^le, where can we find a^y other
ordinance?

The Apostles s^^teth down the difference between the Levi^^call Priests and
Christ, Heb. 7. 8. They under the Tabernacle, take Tithes of them who dyed; but
here he takes them that lives for ever. In which Text he shows, that Tithes
are not Leviticall and a mutable maintenance, but the eternal maintenance of
Gods service, used before the Law, when the Priesthood was in the Father of
the Family, stated on, (not first invented sor) Levi, during the Levites
service: and when the body came which was Christ's, and Levi with all his
Typical service was to be abolished; then ceased not Tithes in right, although
in practice they were not paid by Pagans, but were transferred to Christ, and
to his Ministers for their maintenance; yea to the Priesthood of Christ who
lives for ever.

Let these Sectaries show any one Syllable in all the holy Scriptures in which
Tithes are Ceremonial, as the Sacrifices were, which were types and figures of
Christ's Sacrifice, which he offered once for all, and in him determined.

Or where Christ or his Apostles may but seem to have abrogated, abolished, or
changed them, or why the Law for Tithes should be more abolished then the Law
for the Sabbath: The service of God continuing, why should not the maintenance
thereof continue.

To conclude, as the Christians, so also the Mahometans, who are much more
numerous than the Christians, pay their Tithes with great conscience, the
detention of them* is one of the grand sins, which the two inquisitor Angels
of their Law do examine souls after death, viz. Whether they have paid their
Tithes without fraud, as witnesses Ioannes Baptist a Alfaqui, who had been a
Mohammedan Priest. The wisdom of Almighty God, the practice of all ages, the
example of Patriarks, Abraham and Jacob; yea the Commandment of God has
taught us to render God a tenth.

If this will not suffice, we have another right, a Title as good, and as
ancient, as any man can show for his lands; that is, the donation of Tithes to
the Church, confirmed by the Kings and Parliaments of this Kingdom from time
to time, ever since Christianity flourished amongst us. For this vid. my
Christianography, page 211. and Sir Henr. Spelman de non Temerandis Ecclesi^s.

Last of all consider the equity of this maintenance, whether it be better for
men to pay a tenth, 2 Timothy 3. 6.
then have these Seducers to creep into their ho^ses, and get from their wives,
(being silly women) children and servants, Vdals N^li me tange e. p ^ Acts 5.
3. The devil that was in Ananias seems to be a conscionable d^vell in respect
of the Sacr^legious devils of our t^me.
not a tenth, or two and nine pence for an Ob^ation, but great sums of money,
whatsoever they can pro^e from them (like the Pharisees) devou^ing Widows
houses under the color of long Prayers.

But whereas some of them write the devil to be in me, Sir Thomas Mo^e writes
of a Devi^l called Negotium, Business, which carries more to Hell then all
the devils beside, who was in them that would not come to the feast: one being
so basie in marrying a wife, that he could not come, another having b^ught
O^en, another having bo^ght a Farm, etc. I read also of another divill called
Sacrilege, Most of the Ministers of London may pray for ^ompetencies, being
not ab^ to subsi^^ without the charity of their parishioners, their Be^ifices
being many of them worth but 20. 30. 40. 50. per annum; and paying great Taxes
out of them, as first Fruits, Tenths, etc. Although they are freed from the
Bishof Romes superstitions enormities, they are not freed from the payments
that the Bishops of Rome laid upov them.
which St. Peter te^leth us to be in Ananias. Why has the devil filled thy
heart. If the divill were in him who gave half that he had, and kept back but
part; what divill is in them, that give nothing themselves, but sense upon
those lands and goods, which not they, but other men had consecrated to the
service of Almighty God, with many curses to the violaters of their Donations?
This Devil Sacrilege at this time, seems to be a very devou^ Divill, very
careful of Gods service that it might be better performed, he would have the
Ministers lands taken from them; that they might follow their studies and not
be encombred with them; yea, a careful devil also of the Ministers
maintenance he would have them to have competencies, and the King and State to
have the overplus of their means, all which godly pretenses are hypocritical,
and the Maskes of vile in^quity, and holy these; for it is not the Ministers
profit they look at, neither the commod^ty of the King or State, but their
own covetousness, by which some seek to satisfy their own pride, riot,
wanton and greedy ^usts. Like Judas, who will not stick to ^el Christ himself
for money: Such a Reformation as was in King* Henry the eights time do some
gape after, in which almost every m^n got somewhat^ some one Gentleman got ten
Parsonages, some other twenty. Read Doctor Turners Book entitled Spiritual
Physic; almost in every house and Alehouse, you might see Carpets, and
Cushions made of Church-Ornaments. After that men had devoured the wealth of
the Monasteries, they began to long after the lands of Bishops, and Cathedral
Churches, (as Mr. Fox relates) and for this purpose they set Sir Thomas S^ymor
a work, to promote it to the King. To whom the King answered, There are a sort
of you to whom I have liberally given of the possession of Menasteries, which
like as you have lightly gotten, so you have unthriftily spent, some at Dice,
others on gay ^loathes, and others worse; and now you would make a ^^eavance of
Church lands to accomplish your greedy appetites, etc.

Surely it is a disgrace to Religion, that in Reformations men's thoughts do
run, even in the greater labors and learning in the Church, to pill and pole
the Ministry, and bring it to beggary; being the curse pronounced against the
Priests the posterity of Eli: from which curse the Lord keep this poor Church.

An Extract of the Acts of the National Synod of the Reformed Churches of
France, assembled by the Kings permission at Charantoun, Anno 1644. 26. December.
and days following.
UPon what has been reported by the Commissioners of the Maritime Provinces,
that diverse coming from Forreigh Coun^ries, and who go under the name of
Inde^endents, because they ^each that every particular Congregation ought to be
governed by its own particular Laws, without a^ depending of any in
Ecclesiastical matters, and without any obligation to acknowledge the Authority
of Coll^ques, 2 Timothy ^ 6.
or Classes and Synods for its government and conduct, setlling their abode in
this Kingdom, and hereafter they might cause here amongst us many great
inconveniences if in due time there were not order taken, the Assembly fearing
lest the contagion of this poison gaining ground insensibly should throw
trouble and disorder among us; and judging the said Sect of Independents to b^
not only prejudicial to the Church of God, in so far, that it endeavors to
bring in Confusion, opening a Gate to all kind of Singularities and
Extravagancies, and taking away all means of any remedy to the evil, but also
most dangerous to the State, where (if it had place) there might as many
Religions set up, as there be parishes or particular Congregations, does
enjoyne to all the Provinces, and particularly to the Maritimes, to take heed
that the evil take no foot in this Kingdom* to the end that Peace and
Uniformity as well in Religion as in Discipline, may be inviolably preserved;
and that nothing be brought in amongst us which may alter in any kind the
service due unto their Majesty's.

Garrissole Moderator. Basnage Adjoynt. Blo^del Secretary. Le Coq. Secretary.


Errata.
PAge 10. l. 8. read Harlem. p. 26. l. 15. r. 400. p 32 l. 1. r. Polem^cae. p.
54. l. 5. r. Balamites. 22. rebellious. ^ 61. l. 6. r. Presbytery. p. 63. l.
5. r. all. p. 75. l. r. into their society, but such as are content to have
their goods.

FINIS.

