VOLATILES FROM THE HISTORY OF Adam and Eve: Containing, Many unquestioned
Truths, and allowable Notions of several Natures.

By Sir John Pettus, Knight.

LONDON, Printed for T. Bassett at the George in Fleet Street, 1674.

To the Right Honorable LEISTER DEVEREVX, Lord Viscount Hereford.
My Lord,
HAving the Honor of being your Neighbor in Suffolk, it London, and in our
Public Employments; and your Lordship knowing the occasion of my Writing, upon
this subject, affords me some reasons of Dedicating this to your Lordship, to
show you how I spent my time (when I had any little leisure from business,
which I seldom neglected) persuant to Antoninus advice, that if one should ask
me at any time what I was thinking, I might be able to give an account of some
worthy matter, and therefore I made Choice of this Story, which has furnished
me with above an 100 several Subjects, which always fed my Thoughts with such
safe Varieties, that they fenced out the Consideration of other troubles which
might have perplexed them: My Method of Writing, I borrowed from Malvezzi his
Davido persecutato my Extravagant way, from Mountain, who in his Essays,
undertakes in one Chapter to write of Thumbs, and yet not one word of them in
all that Discourse, for have observed in the Country, that when I forsook the
path, which would have guided me to the place I designed, and crossed the
Pastures sometimes I started Hares, sometimes sprang Partridges, or observed some
curious Plants; which pleasures I had never enjoyed if I had confined my self
to the path, yet I kept my Eye on it, (least I should stray too far) and
returned home by it, and inliven'd or inrich't my thoughts with the
Contemplations of what happened by my digressions.

Possibly, these Excursions might have been more excusable to me in my Youth,
than in my Age; but it is a solace to me, that I can be yet youthful in my
notions, and if your Lordship please to peruse these as a Recreation, your
Lordship will very much Honor,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant Jo. Pettus.

The Stationer to the Courteous Reader.
THere are some Errata's occasioned by the Indisposition of the Printer, for
want of Orthography, Comma's, Conjunctions, Parenthesis, expunging of needless
Adverbs, mistakes of Singulars for Plurals; which may be amended by the
Ingenuity of the Reader upon the intended sense of the Sentence; but the most
material are, viz.

PAGE 14. l. 5. read sixteen, and l. 18. r. grains. p. 18. l. 1. r. Life, p.
30. l. 10. r. Undermines, and l. 25. r. humid part, and l. 28. r.
prae-efficient, p. 40. l. 21. r. adjectively, p. 79. l. 25. r. feminine, p. 96.
l. 4. r. tunes, p. 110. l. 1. r. of, p. 125. l. 30. r. are none, p. 163. l. 13.
r. Jonathan.

THE HISTORY OF ADAM and EVE.
Introduction.
IN the beginning. Whilst all we can apprehend was God, in the beginning of his
manifestation of himself by Parts: In the beginning of those Parts, from whence
we account the beginning of Time: In the beginning, when that Time was an
Emanation of Eternity: In the beginning, when God afforded us Visibility out of
his Invisibility, God Created Heaven and Earth. And from that Mass of Creation
diverse other parts were (as we may say in respect of their Comparative
Excellency) also created, as it appears Verse the 3. And God said, Let there be
Light. Secondly, And God said, Let there be a Firmament. Thirdly, And God said,
Let the Earth appear. Fourthly, And God said, Let the Earth bring forth grass.
Fifthly, And God said, Let there be Lights. Sixthly, And God said, Let the
waters bring forth Fowl. Seventhly, And God said, Let the Earth bring forth
Cattle. So that there was a Septenary or seven Fiats, and no more (seven being
a perfect number.) And those being done, God begins with Man in another
Dialect; for instead of Let there be God said, Let us make: Cap. 1. ver. 26.
Now whether these words Let us are to be understood as more Majestically
spoken, or an Invocation of the Trinity, employed in the word Elohim, Et dixit
Dominus angelis mini strantibuscoram eo, qui creati sunt die secundo creationis
mundi. Targ. Hier.
or a summoning of Angels or other spiritual Instruments: Or Let us, that is,
let the Creatures which I have Created on the five former days, together with
such a Soul as I shall infuse into Man, Let us make Man; that is, let man be
constituted of Light, Air, Water, and Earth, and of the Qualities and Virtues
of those and other Creatures, and of a Soul peculiar to himself, yet derivative
in some manner from us (his Creator, and my other Creatures) I shall not here
dispute; but leave it to other voluminous Writers: For not only the Dialect
(as I said concerning Man's creation) is different, but it is clear that Moses
gives only a Concise Narrative of the things created before Man, not imparting
to us any circumstances used in their Creation. But as to Man he gives a full
and ample discourse, from the seventh Verse of the second Chapter, to the end
of the same Chapter, being wholly spent in it; and indeed is but a Parenthesis
proper to be read between the 26 and 27 Verses of the first Chapter: the words,
Let us make Man, in the 26 verse, being either the Consultative part of Man's
Creation, or as Gods declarative Resolution so to do; and the words in the
27th. verse (So God created man) shows the completing that deliberation or
resolution. And therefore I shall begin with those words of the seventh verse
Chapter second, And the Lord God (made) as being the beginning of the active
part of his Creation, and so descant upon that whole second Chapter; and that
being finished, return to the 27th. verse of the first Chapter, (So God created
man) and then to the 28 and 29 verses, with which I shall conclude the first
part of these discourses.

The second part shall begin with the 30th. of the first Chapter, because it is
an Induction to the offenses of the Serpent, and thence pass to the whole third
Chapter: to which shall be added so much of the 4th. and 5th. Chapters as shall
make the History and variety of discourses concerning Adam and Eve entire and
pleasurable to the Reader, and I hope without the least offense to the sacred
Method, or dissatisfaction to any.

The Notions which I have used herein are chiefly from my Notes out of Dr.
Waltons Laborious and Learned Polyglotta, some parts of St. Augustine,
Pererius, Sir Walter Rawleigh, Dr. Done, Paulus Lovatius, Crook, and some
others cited on the Margin; and if I have hit upon any others veins which I
have not cited, it is the error of my Memory not of my Gratitude, so that till
I know them I may be excused: and if the Style and Method be somewhat above, or
out of the usual road, it may be ascribed to my Education, which has been not
like a Pedant, but a Gentleman.

The Text of the first Part.
Cap. 2.
Verse 7. THe Lord God made Man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into
his Nostrils the breath of Life, and the Man became a Living Soul.

8. And the Lord God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden, and there he put the
man whom he had formed.

9. And out of the ground made the Lord to grow every tree that is pleasant to
the sight, and good for food, the tree of Life also in the midst of the Garden,
and the tree of Knowledge of good and evil

10. And a River went out of Eden to water the Garden, and from thence it was
parted into four Heads.

11. The name of the first is Pison, that is it which incompasseth the whole
Land of Havilah, where is Gold.

12. And the Gold of that Land is good: there is Bdellium, and the Onyx Stone.

13. And the name of the second River is Gihon: the same is it which
incompasseth the whole Land of Aethiopia.

14. And the name of the third River is Hidekell, which is it which goes
toward the East of Assyria: and the fourth River is Euphrates.

15. And the Lord God took the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden to
dress it, and to keep it.

16. And the Lord God commanded the man, saying, of every tree of the Garden
thou may freely eat:

17. But of the tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil thou shall not cat of it,
for in the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die.

18. And the Lord God said, It is not good that man should be alone, I will
make an help meet for him.

19. And out of the ground the Lord God formed every Beast of the field, and
every Fowl of the air, and brought them to Adam to see what he would call them,
and whatever he called every living Creature, that was the name thereof.

20. And Adam gave names to all Cattle, and to the Fowls of the Air, and to
every Beast of the field, but for Adam there was not found an help meet for him.

21. And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept, and
he took one of his Ribs and closed up the flesh instead thereof.

22. And of the Rib which the Lord God had taken from man made he a Woman, and
brought her unto the man.

23. And Adam said this is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, she
shall be called Woman because she was taken out of man.

24. Therefore shall a man leave his Father and Mother, and shall cleave unto
his Wife, and they shall be one flesh.

25. And they were both naked, and were not ashamed.

Cap. 1.
27. So God created man in his own Image, in the Image of God created he him,
male and female created he them.

28. And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be fruitful and multiply,
and replenish the Earth, and subdue it, and have Dominion over the fish of the
Sea, and over the fowl of the Air, and over every living thing that moves upon
the face of the Earth.

29. And God said, behold I have given you every herb bearing seed, which is
upon the face of the Earth, and every tree in the which is the fruit of a tree
yielding seed, to you it shall be for meat.

Cap. 2. Ver. 7.
The Lord God. 1.
This is the first time that any Additional Attribute is added to the word God;
for though Lord God is twice used in the two preceding verses of this second
Chapter, yet the matter of those verses is subsecuent to the Creation of Man:
For man was made before the Sabbath, and before the Creation was finished; so
that this addition of Lord shows what deliberation and power was used in
Creating and making Man, expressed in the words, Let us make: and here being
made, it is said, the Lord God made Man; for as God he created Man, as Lord he
governs and rules him being made: to which I shall add this Observation, that
Jehovah (expressing God) has seven Letters, and so has Dominus (expressing
Lord;) and Lord God joined consists also of seven Letters: so sacred is that
number of Seven to the different Languages. And the word God (consisting of a
Ternary of Letters) as used only in the general Creation; but in the Creation
of Man, viz. from the seventh verse to the end of the Chapter, Lord God is
mentioned nine times and no more; which two numbers seven and nine are most
applicable to the business of Creation.

For the Creation consisted of seven days (as some Fathers write) seven
Planets, seven properties of the two great Lights, nine Orbs or Spears (and
three times seven generations, of which I have writ a particular Treatise) and
though our Common Translations do not mention the numbers of the parts of Man,
yet the Targum of Jerusalem says, the Lord created Adam with 248 Membranes, and
365 Nerves, (so many it seems as there are days in the year) and covered all
with a Skin which he filled with Flesh and Blood; so that there are but five
similar parts here mentioned, but these that are more exact (collected also
from the Text) do make the Body of Man to consist of twice seven similar parts,
viz. Bones, Cartilages, Ligaments, Membranes, Nerves, Arteries, Veins, Fibras,
Tunicles, Spermaticks, Fat, Blood, Flesh, Skin; but to satisfy the Reader with
some variety before I proceed in my intended method, I take leave to insert
here my sense of Spencer's Stanza, concerning those two numbers of seven and
nine, and if I differ in the interpretation thereof from the Learned Sir Kenelm
Digby, I may be excused because I leave it to the Reader to please himself in
the allowance or disallowance of it.

Spencer in his Fairy Queen (Chapter 22th. Of Temperance) describes the Castle
of Alma (or Man's Body thus:

The frame thereof seemed partly Circular,
And part Triangular O Work Divine!
These two the first and last Proportions are,
The one Immortal, Perfect, Masculine;
The other Mortal, imperfect, Feminine.
And 'twixt them both a Quadrate is the Base.
Proportioned equally by Seven and Nine:
Nine was the Circle set in Heavens place,
All which compacted make a goodly Diapase.
Which is thus to be understood as I conceive,

The Frame thereof seemed partly Circular. The Body of a Man or Woman being
exactly extended makes a true Circle, by fixing the Center at the Navel, and
the Circumference to touch the extreme points of the fingers and toes. Then
draw a Diametrical Line over the Navel point, so that the passing over the head
touch no further downwards than the Navel Line, and it will be partly Circular,
or Semi-circular.

And Part Triangular. Then the inferior part from the Navel (both legs being
divided and extended to the Circumferating Line) makes a Triangle, there being
as much distance from foot to foot, as from the Extreme point of each to the
Navel; so it is part Circular and part Triangular.

O Work Divine! And this is the Divine Work to give all things their Numberand
Measure, Geometrical Proportion, as shall be further showed.

These two the first and last Proportions are. This fully explains, that the
Circular proportion has reference to the Superior part of the body, the
Triangular to the inferior, calling them the first and last proportion.

The one Immortal, Perfect, Masculine. Now in the first Superior or half
Circular proportion, which is from the head to the Navel, is properly seated
the Soul, (although virtually it opperates in all other parts of the Body) and
therefore is called the Immortal, Perfect, Masculine part.

The other Mortal, Imperfect, Feminine: In the last inferior or Triangular
part, which is from the Nave to the feet (alluding to the flesh) is nothing but
Corruption, Imperfection, and the excrementitious parts of Nature, and may
justly be called the Mortal, Imperfect, Feminine.

And 'twixt them both a Quadrate is the Base,
Composed equally by Seven and Nine.
The Exterior extensive parts of Man being thus composed and described by a
Circular and Triangular sorm, here he shows the proportion both of Man and
Woman: for for as Hercules his whole body was delineated by making use only of
his Thumb, so may every man's (the exact length of his Face being once known:)
for every body is eight, nine, or ten times as long as his face, according as
he is nearer or further from a true proportion. But the most famous Arcists
agree, that the exact length of a man ought to be but nine faces, of a woman
but seven: that is, the body of man from the Chin ought to be eight times as
long as the face, and of a woman six times. And lest the Error of the face
should give an Error to the body, the face ought to be so composed, that from
the top of the forehead to the dint of the Nose, and from the dint of the Nose,
the length of the Nose, and from the bottom of the Nose to the turn of the
Chin, should be of an equal measure and distance. And so likewise from the dint
of the Nose to the exterior parts of each Eye, and from that part of the Eye to
the setting on of each Ear of the same distance; the rule for the proportion
and measure of which distance ought to be from the top of the thumb to the
second joint of the thumb. Then his breadth stom side to side, and thickness
from back to stomach is answerable. And this symmetry is not only in the
outward Lineaments, but in the inward; for the Guts of Man do also confirm this
proportion of seven and nine, being nine or seven times the length of the body.
Had not this exactness been observed, the sixteen Italian Artists had never
agreed; who resolving each man to make a sixth part of a Man, without seeing
each other, or any model given, but what was apprehended by them to be the just
proportion of Man, when each of them brought their part to be joined together,
it seemed as the Act of one entire Artist and Workman, and not of many. And
it is not only thus in number and measure, but in weight; for the Heart as I
have showed elsewhere (by the Conjectures of some, for it cannot otherwise be
demonstrated) weighs two strains at the Birth, and increases to fifty grains,
and then decreaseth by two grains as he declines in years to his Infant Age, if
the Almighty thinks fit to give him such a Continuation. And not only man, but
woman is made by this Geometrical proportion of seven and nine, which numbers
being conjoined make sixteen, that is, a Quadrat, a Quadrat number being that
which is formed of its own parts: and there is a proper and improper Quadrat,
because it consists of odd parts; as three times three is nine, which is an
improper Quadrat; but four times four is sixteen, which is a proper Quadrat,
because it consists of equal parts, which is the Quadrat here meant; and this
Quadrat is called Base, which if it be meant according to the English word
Base, ( id est, vile or beastly) this Conjunction of Man and Woman so
improperly used, or with such immoderacy, that thereby we weaken or abuse our
Castle of Alma, or Temperance, it is most base, sordid, and beastly: Or if from
the Geometrical or Musical word Base or Basis, which is most significant; then
if this groundwork or Foundation, or Musical Key be compacted by a divine,
chaste, and solemn compact, we make a proper Quadrat and perfect Diapase.

Nine is the number set in Heavens place,
All which compacted make a goodly Diapase.
And this compact is made when nine stands in Heavens place; for Man being
understood by nine, consisting (as I said) of nine parts, is often called God;
and as God being himself a Trinity governs Man; so Man (an Inferior God, having
in himself a Triple Trinity nine, or three times three) should govern the
Woman, by keeping the proper distance above seven, (of which proportion Woman
consists) which God has allowed him, that is two, (seven being so many short
of nine;) rather allowing her one to make her even with him, then either by too
much subtracting from himself, and giving her a number above him, or robbing
her of less then she should have. But this fair compact by allowing her one out
of his number, God himself allowed when he made her of one of his Ribs; by the
addition of which one, the seven becomes eight, so there is two eights, which
makes the goodly Diapase. The sweetest, the most Harmonious and Mystical
concord in Music, as we see by two Lutes or silver Bowls, the one being
struck, the other answers an eight without striking. Thus numbers from oddness
become even; when Circles, Triangles, Genders, Perfection and Imperfection,
Mortality and Immortality concurred and were combined in so Divine a Work.

But to return to the word of our Translation. The Lord God

Made. Translators do promiscuonsly render these words, viz. 3.
Made, Formed, Framed, and Created: But where the word Created is used after
the general Mass of Creation (as in the zith. verse, God created the Whale; and
in the 27th. verse, God created Man) it is to be understood, that God created
some singular and more eminent Piece, besides the original Mass; and so says
the Targum of Jerusalem, Creavit eum duabus creationibus, i. e. He created Man
by two singular and universal Creations. Now the word Made signifies a
Temperament of that singular Creation with the universal; Framed relates to the
proportions; and Formed to the Life or Soul of the thing created: so that Man
was created with other Creatures out of the main Mass; then he was created with
some peculiar additions; after which he was made into Quantities and Qualities
in gross; then Framed into certain regular dimensions and proportions; and
lastly Formed, or (as the Schools call it) informed with a Soul. Now whether
God did all this in order of Time I shall not dispute; for in tespect of Gods
Works they have no distinction of Time, but in respect of Man we may so
apprehend them (without offense;) because otherwise Gods Omnipotency cannot
clearly be conceived by man's capacity.

But as to these words made, framed, and formed, (as they are notionally did
inct from Created) they may be thus considerable, viz. made into a Vegetative
(intimated by the dust of the Earth) framed into a Sensitive life (intimated by
the breath of Lile) and formed into a rational life (intimated by a Living
Soul:) so that in this notion we may apprehend also our similitude to God by a
Trinity in Unity. And that these words ought to be distinctly understood,
appears from the words in the second Chapter, verse 2. And God rested from all
his works which he had creaded and made; and likewise in the fourth verse,
These are the Generations of the heavens and the earth, when they were created,
in the day that God made the earth and the heavens. And the words framed and
formed are used in other places in different senses; but I conceive the word
made is most proper to be used here, because it is only applied to Creatures
of the greatest Eminency, and that nine times. 1. To the firmament. 2. To the
two great lights. 3. To the stars; and four times in the second and third
verses of this Chapter, where the word is expressed by way of Enumeration, of
what was created and made: and then it is twice more named by change of the
number, as in the 27th. verse, Let us make; and in the 18th. verse of the
second Chapter, I will make: Let us make denoting either the Trinity or Angels,
or the composition of his Qualities assimilating God; And I will make denoting
his peculiar care. But however here it is said, The Lord God made man; which are
plural appellations, though the verb be singular; so that Let us make, and the
Lord God made, do answer each other as to the Trinity, or what concerns the
eminency of man's being made.

Man. If David asked the question, 4.
Lord, what is man? so many hundred years after he was made, and answered
himself, that man is altogether vanity, or is nothing, and his days as a
shadow; what can we imagine man to be before he was made? he was nothing as the
word Creation implys; and being made, he was made of little more then nothing;
for he was made of the dust of the earth, and yet still continuing in this
Compact of dust, he is still but vanity or nothing. And so we may Collect from
his four names, for he is called Adam, Enoch, Ishe, Chebor; the first name Adam
signifies earth, or red earth, that seems to have some color of a substance;
and yet when we see how changeable it is into other Elements, the earth it self
is but a momentary something. Secondly Enoch, which signifies sickness or
calamity, we feel something of that, and yet that vanishes; for pain or
calamity may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. The third is
Ishe, which signifies crying or laughing, both of which are so often expressed in
one wind (as the Proverb says) they are scarce distinguishable. And for the
last Chebor, signifying Excellency, it is said that man being in honor has no
understanding, but is compared to the beasts that perish. So that we may well
conceive these four words signify the four Elements of which he is Compacted;
Adam, Earth, the grosser part of his body: Enoch, Water, the redundancy of
which causes sickness and deluges of Rhumes: Ishe, Air, from whence also unds
are procreated: and Cheber, Fire, which is the most excellent of all the
Elements, and so is either common and culinary, or supercelestial, consisting
of Love, or au intellect, or such properties as belong to an Angelical Nature.

Of the dust of the ground. Man is said to be made of the dust of the ground;
and in the ninth verse it is said, Out of the ground the Lord God made to grow
every tree; and verse 19th. Out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast,
etc. Out; here it is merely out of the dust of the ground, to show that there
was a difference between Man and other Creatures in their making; so that by
the dust of the ground is to be understood the superficial part of the earth,
of which man only was made; for all Creatures are said to be made out of the
ground, but not of the dust of the ground; but Man of the dust of the ground or
earth. Now whither this dust was made by a peculiar omnipotent Calcination, or
other Rarification is not demonstrated; but we may conceive it of the most
attenuated part of the earth, and therein the more Noble part, because capable
of the most activity; for if we consider our commondust, it flies like Atoms
over the Surface of the earth, ofttimes being raised into as many dry Clouds as
there are moist, and by the cooperation of these two, dry and wet, those
varieties of Naturals and Preternaturals (which are so often showred down upon
us, and seen among us, as Moths and other flies, Mice and other Vermin) are
produced. And mostly they are Agile creatures, whether we respect their
volatile or reptile, or aquatick natures; which I mention to show, that if the
ordinary dust produces such agile Creatures, we may collect that our Creator
has adapted to our more agaile body (in relation to our Souls) far more agile
dust the to other Creatures. For the Targum of Jerusalem adds to our honor,
that we are made ex palvere Sanctuarii, i. e. of holy dust, differing from all
other dusts: which should raise this Contemplation in us, that as we are not
like beasts or other Creatures in our Temperaments, they made of the ground,
that is, of the faeces or dregs of the Earth, we of the Superficies (or of some
peculiar sanctified dust;) so ought the habits of our bodies to be sublime, and
always ascending to an higher sphere, and not to be alloyed and turned into
various Corruptions.

And breathed the breath of life. 6.
God at first breathed upon the face of the waters: this was the first
universal Vegetative and Sensitive life and motion which he infused into the
Mass of Creation, of which Man was also partaker. But this breath which God
breathed into man, was of a higher nature, not only giving life and motion
(for Man had that by universal breath, but by this man became a living Soul.)
And as our blood within us (for all things have a blood or spirit of the nature
of blood) is said to be the Vehicle or Conveyor of the Vegetative or Sensitive
life; so the Air without us, in which is the universal breath, may be said to
be the Vehicle of that life into us; and the spirit or life is the vehicle of
our rational life, or of that divine Soul which flows into us; for God works
all things by fit Instruments: so that our Soul is conveyed to us by this
spirit or breath of life; the spirit of life passes by air, the air, by blood
(and other parts adapted for such receprions;) so traversing the whole body by
Circulation, returns again to the place from whence it came; for we see when
the blood and air (which are more evident to us) meet with any obstructions
either by nature or accident, the Soul thereby is deprived of all its faculties.

Into his Nostrils. 7.
The Egptians were wont to signify a wise and prudent mind by the figure of a
Nose, and of strength to his wisdom by the extension of the Nostrils; for here
it is that the breath of life first enters, and consequently wisdom and
strength. The Anatomists call them Nares, because the Spirits of the air do
Nare or Swim continually in them; nor is the mouth or pores fitted for such
receptions. The three properties of Inspiration, Expiration, and Respiration,
being peculiar only to the Nostrils; for if the Nostrils be not clear, the
mouth will be foul, the breath stinking, and the pores unapt for sudation: for
the Nostrils having through its little hairs sucked in the air free from
commixtures, it passes from thence to certain spungy bones, and from thence
into Mammillary processes, or things like the teats of Udders, and so
immediately to the Brain, where the commonsense sits as Judge, and resolves to
pleasure the body with what is fit for the senses, or by certain perforations
does again distill into the mouth, or throws them out by efflations as
obnoxious. Now it is certain (as Anatomists find) that there are two Nervous
inductions, which go from the nostrils to the very middle of the brain, whereby
the Life and Soul first enters by the help of the air into the Nostrils, and
thence to the brain, and from thence by the breath of life is virtually
transfused into all parts of the body; but the Nostrils must have the honor of
the first ingress of life, and of the first infused Creation, or Created
infusion of the Soul.

And Man became a Living Soul. 8.
The Arabic renders it a Rational Soul, which properly distinguishes it from
the Soul of other Creatures. But the word Living is sufficient: for all
Creatures have a share in the breath of life, but Man only is said to be a
Living Soul, or a Soul which is always Living: It lives here under a notion of
Mortality in respect of the body, but lives here in respect of it self under a
certain notion of Immortality, dying as to the body, but always living to its
self. The blood returns it through the brain and nostrils to the spirit of
life, that universal spirit of life to the peculiar spirit of humanity, to be
disposed into individual Glorifications.

Cap. 2. Ver. 8.
And the Lord God planted a Garden Eastward in Eden. 9.
The garden here is not merely to be understood in our usual phrase, a place of
Flowers, or Orchard for Plants, but a place which contains all sorts of plants
and Flowers from the Hysop to the Cedar, from the least to the greatest, as the
Seminary and Nursery for all future Plantations: and this place was Eastward,
which the Sun saluted in the morning; to set us an example of our duty to all
orderly motions. A place where no Edifices were to hide our lazy or surfeited
bodies; a place where was no bed to repose on, but the lap of our Mother Earth;
no Valences or Curtains but the shade of trees; no covering to innocent
nakedness, but their leaves; no mixtures to heighten our tastes; all pure
simples; no Pensils to deceive or flatter our eyes; all true natural, and a
perfect representation of what a Country life should be. And this is as the
word signifies the true Garden of Eden, in which happy solitude or safe
pleasure, see what Adam enjoyed; He had every tree that was pleasant to the
sight, or good for the taste, but principally a tree for Life, a tree for
knowledge. There was also flowing and enriching Rivers: Besides there was gold
and precious stones enough to satisfy a contented mind, not Avarice: And above
all he had opportunity there to express a harmless industry (it seems one of
the pleasures of Paradise)

And there he put the Man whom he had formed. 10.
Not the man whom he had Created out of nothing, and by mere Creation could do
nothing; but being formed, or a Soul infused into that lump of Creation, he was
thereby empowered to act; and that he might have some materials to work upon,
he was there put or placed. And certainly not only Adam, but every man has
his native Paradise, every part of the World has its varieties, and may afford
us satisfaction for the body and the mind. And it is either the original Itch
in us, or want of true Education or Instruction, or curious ambition, or an
uncontented mind, or a continued punishment upon us mortals, that no place, no
station where we are, can hold us, nor no Paradise or pleasure retain us from
further inquiries. It is not said he put the Man there whom he had created, or
made, or framed; but the Man that he had formed, to show that the Mind or Soul
of Man wheresoever placed with the body might make any place contenting, if it
transgressed not its Rules and Boundaries.

Cap. 2. Ver. 9.
And out of the ground. 11.
Man (as I showed in the seventh verse) is said to be made not only of the
ground, but of the dust of the ground; and here every tree is said to be made
out of the ground, but not of the dust; so that Man has a Constitution by
himself, and yet as made of the ground, he partakes of all plants; for homo est
Arbor inversa, i. e. man is a tree invers'd: and is called homo, because he is
ex humo, or ex humida part terrae, i. e. out of the humid part of the earth.
He has his dust and moisture, i. e. he is agile and apt for motion, yet fixed
in his materials; whereas plants are not so they are fixed in the ground, and
have no motion but of Vegetation, except what is said of the Mandrake and the
feeding Lamb; Perkinson, p. 118.
yet they also die if the fibras that oblige them to the earth be cut asunder.
And Man has very little advantage, when we consider that in all his postures,
sitting, lying, or standing, still he is fixed to the earth or to some
materials made of the earth, (swimiming in the water, leaping in the air, being
but forced motions, and of no continuance.) And this is called our Vegetative
life; although in a plant there is also a sensitive life, (...)
as is seen in the sensible and other known plants of that nature. Now as man
is made of the dust of the ground, plants are more proper out of the ground,
and they have two advantages over Man, first in their height above ground, 300
foot and more high; and next by perforation in the ground, some conceiving that
the sap root of an Oak will run 9 foot perpendicular downward, which is as I
conjectured is in solid earth the uttermost Orb of the Liquid Element: But Man
by his ingenuity mounts the heighest and mines the deepest rooted plants.

Now the other part of the earth further from the superficies is more compact
and solid, affording Quarries, Mines, and Precious Stones; but yet all
varieties of colors, tastes, odours, Instruments of Harmony, and indeed all
things which please the senses, are produced out of this superficies of the
humid part of the earth, being in the middle between air and Minerals, which
have their colors and virtues only by attraction, then consolidation.

The Lord made to grow. 12.
That is, they had their energy of growth from his humid part; for we must
distinguish between Creation and Generation, the one being an existency out of
no p^^ efficient matter, the other the motion or operation of that existency,
according to the several natures of several kinds, adapted for various
Operations, always moving in the universal Soul, being the spring of the World,
which makes the wheels to move in order, if we consider the whole; but if we
consider the parts, it is more difficult to apprehend the Connection of all
things as it were in one: but we can look on it no otherwise then as a Watch,
the spring giving motion to every wheel, where the nimbler motion of the
balance is as considerable as the Majestic gradation of the great wheel, both
serving to one end. Thus the little Mite of the Cheese has its proportioned
use, as the great Crocodile produced out of the slime of Nile; the little Wren,
as the Ostridgae or the great bird Ibis; the harmless Lamb, as the Elephant, or
the great beast that devours Countries; the Pigmy, as the Giant; the Hysop as
the Cedar; the pleasant Southern air, as the the great Diapason of Saturn,
(accounting the motion of this lower air to move harmoniously with the other
seven Orbs.) So that in the whole Creation this growing is no other then the
motion of the universal spirit diversifyed by various Organs for several uses
to one common end.

Every Tree. 13.
We must apprehend this garden called Paradise to be greater then Geographers
do allow it; or else we must (as Sir Walter Rawleigh does with the beasts that
went into the Ark) confine them to their original kinds, and then less ground
may be affigned; or otherwise the whole Earth is but sufficient to contain the
several Species: for if we admit of such exuberant Plants as some Authors
mention, few trees might fill such a Garden: for the Jewish Targuns tells us,
that the tree of life therein was 500 years journey high (the breadth they
mention not, Cujus altitudo erat Iteneris quingentorum annorum. Targ. Hier.
but proportions therein must be also admitted.) And others Sir W. Rawleigh.
speak of an Indian Figtree, which extends it self in some Countries twenty or
thirty miles: nor need we much doubt of the latter, in respect it is possible
by art of several inlayings to make a Vine, or any other exuberant Plant to
extend as far. But we may suppose here was the Seminary of all beneficial
plants; from whence the rest of the world had their Seeds, Cions, or
Transplantations by winds or birds, or exhalations to convey their seeds into
other Regions; and after by nature, art and industry, diversifyed into Plants
preternatural to their originals.

That is pleasant to the sight, 14.
or good for food. The Eye is the noblest part of man, being the Index of the
Soul; and food is not only a subject or sustentation of our whole, but
especially our Ocular part. The Eye is the first discoverer of want or
supersluity of sustenance; the eye is the first Judge of what is offensive or
inoffensive to our appetite; for if the eye dislike, we refuse, if approves, we
eat, though it proves our poison; for the stomach often surfets by the pleasure
of the eye, when the appetite takes its dimension from what the eye fees, and
not what the little bag of the stomach contains; for nature is content with a
little, if that little be good. And since nature has confined her self to
certain receptacles for food, it were against its rules to fill those with the
unlimited appetites of the eye, unless we make our stomach to imitate our eyes,
which are merely satisfied with outward objects; yet something must be to
support their spirits. And therefore the eye may be pleased with what it sees,
the stomach satisfied not with what the eye sees or pleasant to the sight, but
with that which is good for food or sustentation.

The Tree of of Life in the midst of the Garden. 15.
I do not apprehend this tree to be planted in the midst of the garden, as the
Center to a Circumference, but rather as virtue is said to be in the midst, or
to consist in the mean or mediocrity, or temperance. To show that if Adam could
have been so temperate as not to aspire to life till it were revealed to him
what kind of life he should enjoy, or what Knowledge he should know, he had
been happy; for we shall find by the subsequent, that God imparted life and
knowledge to him by degrees. Or possibly in the midst may be taken for the
chief, namely that among all the trees of the garden the tree of life was the
chief; the garden being an Emblem of our bodies, our Heart being as is thought
the seat of life in the midst of our body. But it may well be said also in the
midst, because a tree of that stupendous height, as to be 500 years journey to
the top as before mentioned, must needs be seen in all parts of the garden, the
proper and true distance undiscernable to the eye.

And the tree of knowledge of good and evil. 16.
This was not placed in the midst as the tree of life, but as it were concealed
till God thought fit to impart the knowledge of its virtues, or forbid the use
of it as he did: And though Adam did eat of it, yet it produced no such Science
as was satisfactory; for by eating he knew good and evil so confusedly, that he
and we know not how to distinguish them, many things being good or bad
according to doubting Inteations or Commands. But I conceive as the virtue of
one tree was to enliven, a Man to a sound Constitution, the other was a fruit
of a mavelous, luxurious nature, and provoked Adam to the evil of
Concupiscence and Carnal desires and actions; and so by eating knew both good
and evil, that is, good whilst they knew not Carnality; evil in the knowing
Carnalty: and Man has the reward of his Libidinous disobedience, his body
being so full of Diseases and Infirmities, that the means of propagation seems
to beget more Diseases then Children.

Cap. 2. Ver. 10.
And a River went out of Eden to water the garden, 17.
and from thence divided into four Channels or Heads. Adam had seen the pleasure
of the Heavens in their glorious ornaments, and the pleasures of the Earth in
its various tapistry, whose odoriferous influence offorded also a most pleasing
breath; he was now showed the pleasures of the waters in Eden, where was a
pregnant River, or rather Fountain, which issued forth such abundance of
delightful waters, that they divided into four Channels, Heads or Rivers; the
Earth gave way to their gentle motions, and as it were left the rich valleys
for them to dance upon whilst it self still rose higher and higher into Hills
and Mountains merely to overlook their pleasures. And it is to be observed here
that four is the next number repeated after 1.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, as being the
first Quadrat number of great use in Physical proportions; and possibly these
three, Gold, Bdellium, and the Onyx, were only mentioned, and no more to make
the four streams in the same Narrative seven, to show the perfection of this
Fountain. But some allude the four Channels to the four parts of the Earth,
Europe, Asia, Africa and America: But doubtless they were neither known nor so
divided in Moses time, certainly not in Adams. Others allude them to the four
Cardinal Virtues, but virtue was then so entire, that there needed no
distinction; for pure virtue is not divisible; for he that is truly just, must
be Stout, Temperate and Prudent; and he that is stout must be temperate, and
prudent must have the other virtues. True virtue can admit of no separation
from it self. The streams of virtue come out of the Spring Head in Eden; and
though it may seem to divide, yet every stream is contiguous to the Fountain,
and so is virtue. Now where this Eden may properly be placed, and from whence
these waters flow and return, I shall afford a larger Discourse something
different from former notions both in History and Philosophy, and yet I hope
rational.

Cap. 2. Ver. 11.
The name of the first is Pison: 18.
that is it which compasses Havilah, where there Gold. See my Introduction in
my Book called Fodinae Regales.

Cap. 2. Ver. 12.
And the gold of that land is good: 19.
there is Bdellium and the Onyx Stone. I remember not my Author who says that
there are three eminent stones in the nature of Minerals, which were known to
Adam; the one is a stone that has a virtue of transmutation of Metals, and
possibly this may be meant by gold; the other has a virtue to discover the
quality of all Sensibles and Vegetables, and this may be meant by Bdellium; and
the third of a more transcending nature, by imparting to us all Angelical
operations, and this may be meant by the Onyx: But whether or no there were or
are such stones by nature or art, the fruitless labors of others shall cease
my further inquiry. I confess there are such admirable qualities in such as are
of common use, that I can run very high in my Credit, that in respect of their
solid temper they are more fit to retain such Excellent virtues: As in the
Loadstone for Navigation and Intelligence, the Sapphire against Poisons, the
Vitriol against Corruptions; and above all the Bolonian stone which upon
Calcining receives and the beams of the Sun, and constantly after affords a
soft light like the Gloworm. But whatever this Bdellium was, which Sir Walter
Rawleigh says was a tree bearing Gum and Pearl, or what the Onyx or Beril
were, the Text says, the gold was good, and if ever since there has been in
Man such a Sacra fames auri, a sacred hunger of gold, I hope it is only to get
that gold which Pison embraced, which gold only is said to be good; it is good
whilst it is here, but whether it be good to be got or carried from thence is
the question: but admit we have it, it is still good so as it be not adulterated
by the bad use of it. In short, it is the Cordial to all humane Commerce, and
therefore said to be near a River, as more fitted for transportation; for as
Adam was to labor at home, so upon the increase of his Posterity he was to
traffic abroad. And it may be observable upon the number 3, that as Gold,
Bdellium, and Onyx, were the first Jewels that nature offered to Adam before
his fall; so Gold, Myrrh, and Frankincense were the first offers which were
made to the second Adam; the first by a wise God, the other by Wise men.

Cap. 2. Ver. 13, 14.
And the name of the second River is Gihon: 20.
the same is it which compasses the Land of Aethiopia. The name of the third
River is Hiddekel: that is in which goes toward the East of Assyria: And the
fourth River is Euphrates. Though the Scriptures differ in the names of the
Countries where these four Rivers are, as the Land of Havilah, called also
Evilat, and Indies, so Aethiopia called Chush, and what those Countries
contains; viz. Gold, which some adjutively call Bonum and Electum, and others
Electrum (which is the richest composition of Gold:) and for Bdellium, which
some esteem a tree yielding sweet Gum, others render it Carbuncules, and
Oniones, Pearls: and for the Onyx, others render Beril, Lapides Chrystali, or
Crystal, and Diamonds. And though they differ as much in the Rivers Hiddekel
(which some call Tygris and Diglath) and Euphrates (Perath;) yet these seeming
differences are but noble invitations to the Study of Geography, Hydrography,
and other Sciences, thereby to learn the Wonders of the Land and Deeps;
insinuating also to us the richest Minerals, Plants, and Precious Stones; and
that the natural progress of Creation may easily conduct us to them, for the
Fountains direct us to their Streams or Rivers, those Rivers to the Seas, the
Sea carries us into and from other Creeks by Fluxes and Refluxes; and so the
Art of Navigation is known and improved, and Merchandising thereby
enencouraged: and it may not be amiss to think that those Names and Places of
Territories, Rivers, Minerals, Plants, and Precious Jemms, and Stones, were
purposely rendered ambiguous, that we may not be lazy in our Inquiries after
them; for mistakes are many times clews to guide us into certainties; and
therefore it may be inquired whither the four great Rivers (as Ortelius tells
us) which come from the Artic Pole, and are the origin and source of all Seas
and Waters, were not those four Rivers here intended; and whether the circle of
those impassable Mountains about that Pole was not the defending Angel to the
place of Paradise, the Sun keeping always an equal distance and heat from that
Pole or Point; and though it be called the Frigid Zone, and the Antartick the
Torrid, yet those are but as imaginary as the Circles.

This Text also teaches us the East Point of the Compass; which though certain
to every Country, yet every Country has a different East from another
according to its position, from the first appearance of the Sun upon their
several Horizons: The next Point is West, Genesis 12.8. which is opposite to every
East or Rising of the Sun to that Horizon where it appears. And Verse the 9th.
the South is mentioned, which is the middle Point when the Sun is at its
height between its appearance or Ascension, and disappearance or Descension,
upon any Horizon. Then in the 13th. Chapter verse 14. the North, which is the
opposite Point to the South, is mentioned, and placed before the other three as
the most principal and certain Point, viz. Northward, Southward, Eastward,
Westward; that is, toward the North, South, East, West. For I question whether
Moses then knew the exact Points (as now we do by the use of the Loadstone)
which now are also taught us from the natural inclination of all things to that
North point by Plants, other Stones, Birds, Fishes, Waters, etc. though
possibly they might know the Load Star or North Star, yet I do not find that
the Use of the Compass was known till about Christ's Time, as I collect from the
27th. of the Acts verse 12. where the Southwest and Northwest are mentioned; by
which time they had got two Points more of the thirty two, which Compass now is
the Seamans Alphabet. However we have sufficient hints from this Text to
traverse the world for the better manifestation of our Creators glory, by the
insight and benefit of his various and wonderful Operations and Products in the
Elements.

Cap. 2. Verse 15.
And the Lord God took the man, 21.
and put him into the garden to dress it, and to keep it. God knew that
Idleness corrupts the best natures, and therefore Man was employed in that
humble vocation; Vt coleret legem and observaret mandata ejus. Targ. Hier.
for though God did at first create the kinds of all Plants, yet doubtless man
had and yet has an honest Allowance to procreate a Diversity of Species by
Transplantations, Ingrastings, Inoculatings, and other various Cultivations,
which were Incestuous in other Creatures; but as I conceive allowed from the
words here to dress and keep it.

Nature is of her self rude in Exuberancies, so that if Art do not polite it,
even the Winds, Frosts, Birds, and Beasts do supply their Prunings. And it is
not only thus in Plants but other Creatures: the Eagle with her art breaks off
her overgrown Beak, and renews her age; and Man himself would scarce be
discerned from Beast, if Art and Care did not preserve his Excrescencies from
defacing him. Nature is dull and idle; Art is the Soul of Nature; and Sedulity
the Spirit or Mind that unites them. It is Motion that keeps all things
Celestial and Sublunary in order; should that cease, it is thought the upper
World would be in a flame, and our lower World a rude Chaos. That which we call
Quiet is only the result of a Lazy Mind, true Quiet is only our Contentment
in all orderly and allowable motions, to the improving and preserving Nature in
her best form, whither considered as to Individuals or Generals.

Cap. 2. Verse 16, 17.
And the Lord God commanded the man saying, Of every tree, etc. thou may
eat, 22.
but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil thou shall not eat. Besides
the Law of Nature, whereby God had fixed to every Creature its order, as the
Sun to rule the Day, and the Moon the Night, and Man next under God to have the
Dominion of all Terrestrial Creatures, God did think fit to exhibit to Man a
Law of Trial, or rather a Command of Reason; for what needed God to command
whenas there was nothing could have power but from him to disobey? yet that Man
might not think all things so tied to the order of Nature without variation, as
that his Posterity, which were not to have such immediate conversation with
God, might easily judge by the rule of Trial or Reason what was expedient for
such a Creature to perform to a Creator. And therefore did God command this Law
of Trial or Reason, for it was but reason that God should be obeyed (even in
seeming Trivials) seeing Nature it self, which he has constituted, invites us
to the same. It Is true, sin came not till the Law: Now the Law is but the
Memorials of Nature, which are that every thing should be kept in order,
Servants obey Masters, Wives Husbands, Children Parents, Subjects their
Superior Magistrates; (accoeding to several orders:) and for want of which,
Rebellions in States, Commotions in Families, do arise. God did know Man would
disobey, and God permitted him to disobey, that by Adams example all his
Posterity might see the effect of Disobedience to the Law of Reason; for it was
most rational and just, that Man should obey whatever God imposed, especially
seeing God had given him such a latitude, and so small a limitation.

And though we may think this Law of Reason too strictly imposed upon us, yet
upon due inquiry we had no other way left us in our Creation to express our
gratitude, but by this Law of Trial or Reason: for though we know not exactly
what God has empowered us to do or not do, what to act, or what to forbear;
yet now by the rules of Reason we may judge what things are not fit to be done,
and as much as in us lies retire our Wills, Desires, or Acts from them. As for
example, Adam might thus have discoursed: I may eat of all Fruits except one or
two; I have sufficient by this freedom to please my taste and sight; why should
I be so ambitious by eating of the Tree of Life to live another life, whereas
that wherein I live enjoys so many varieties? Why should I be so curious to
know more by eating of the Tree of Knowledge, whenas already I know so much as
God thinks fit to impart, and I find that he is still instructing me? And thus
may every man judge by the Law of Reason whether he disobeys God or no. The
first examination is from the rules of Nature in the point of Obedience, and
therefore it is said, that Obedieuce is better then sacrifice: for those Rules
which we have of Morality or Christianity are but the Product of the Rules of
Nature formed into rational Doctrines. I do not here include the Rules of
Faith, and yet these are Rules of Trial and Reason; for what can be a safer
Trial then to believe because he commands? and then in reason how safe is it to
believe that which may be hazardous to our Souls if we do not believe? And even
here do we follow the Dictates of Nature, rather in obeying what is said to be
his command, then in disobeying in those things wherein we have not his
command; but especially in such things wherein both in Nature and Reason we
find Natural, Rational, and Christian Injunctions. So that Gods command (how
mean soever the command may seem) was but to show, that besides the Law of
Nature he did exhibit unto us a Law of Reason; and unless we return to his
commands as well a rational subjection as a natural, we submit as Irrational
Creatures, but not as Men: and though possibly we cannot do otherwise then what
is decreed, yet to will, to desire, to endeavor the doing what we are
commanded to do, or prohibited from doing, cannot but prove an acceptable
sacrifice.

Cap. 2. Verse 17.
For in the day thou catest thereof. 23.
I cannot but admire that the God of Union should ordain Disunions, seeming
Sympathies and Antipathies, Evening and Morning, Day and Night, Light and
Darkness, Life and Death, Good and Evil: But when I consider, that the Morning
could not be known but by the terminating it with the Even, or the Day but by
terminating it with Night, or the Light but by terminating it with Darkness, or
Life but by terminating it by Death, or Good but by terminating it with Evil; I
find that these terminations were agreeable to our knowledge: for the several
appellations of Light had been infinite, and thereby not fitted for a
manifestation to us; and we must in their knowledge have been made coequal with
God in glory and eternity, if they had not been thus manifested. But these
appellations of Darkness were the Foils to set off the splendour of the
Creation, and Evil was no other then as the evening to the morn, or as night to
the day, or as darkness to the light; nor was death any other then the smooth
transition to immortality, without fear, pain, or trouble, or only a sudden
rapture or exstacy in the ineffable change from terrestrial contentments to
supercelestial beatitudes. But from the breach of this command arises the evil
of evils, death of death, evening, night, and darkness. It is wonderful that
Adam should so much err in the first trial which God made upon his obedience,
and it is as wonderful that God did command Adam to forbear that which was the
best piece of Mankind, the Knowledge of good, and the termination of it; which
was all the evil which then could be called evil: But Man was forbidden it
doubtless that he might not conceit within himself that he had attained
Knowledge from the virtue or nature of that Plant, but from the immediate gift
and instruction of God; for certainly God did inform him of the whole system of
the Creation, (by what we may collect by the foregoing and following verses)
which was a sufficient Knowledge; so that the Knowledge he had by this Tree was
only a Knowledge of Intoxication, and Knowledge of the termination of Life,
and a confused Knowledge of Distinction between good and evil, (which
Knowledges were forbidden;) his Knowledge before being a complete Knowledge
consisting of a perpetual blessedness: for his Knowledge thereof was only
this, that goodness did now terminate by his disobedience, and that life should
have a period or termination, which was a death; for by this Knowledge he got a
Critical Knowledge, as we find by Eves Dispute, that Disobedience was the
extreme of Obedience, Death the extreme of Life; whereas whilst he was under
Gods teaching and instruction, he knew nothing but a quiet obedience, and an
innocent life, free from thoughts of disorder, or fear of what should happen;
but now he knew the termination of that life, and that sentence, In the day
thou catest thereof thou shall surely die.

Thou shall surely die. 24.
If it be true what some Divines affirm, that Adam continued but six hours in
Paradise, three before the eating the Fruit, and three after; I should wonder
how Adam should be made sensible of death, seeing before his eating he was in a
perfect and immortal condition; for a Blind man cannot understand a Color, nor
he that had never seen the separation of Soul and Body know the effects of it;
but certainly God did either show him the Horary Plant, (or other Creatures of
the like nature) that has its birth, flourish, and close, in an hour, and is
never seen after; or else taught him the way of Sacrificing Beasts, and by
their expiration to know his own, in case he disobeyed this command; or else
the nature of the Death was represented unto him, not as an immediate
separation of the Soul and Body, (for we find he lived many hundred years
after) but his death, feretold here was a certainty of a future dying.

Cap. 2. Verse 18.
And the Lord God. 25.
God is seven times repeated in the first Chapter, and the eighth time in the
26th. verse; but in the second Chapter verse 7. where the Narrative of Man's
Creation is more fully described, it is expressed that not God alone, but the
Lord God said. And so here concerning Woman, the words Lord God are also used
to testify, that in the Creation and Making of both of them God did assume
another Title to himself then the single word God; God seeming to be a name
relating to all his Creatures, but Lord more peculiarly to Man and Woman, as
before is hinted concerning Man only.

Said. 26.
This word said is repeated seven times in the first Chapter, viz. verse 3, 6,
9, 11, 14, 20, and 24. Now where it is thus expressed that God said, Let there
be, we must apprehend rather as an act, then a discourse or deliberation; for
though we discuss before we act, proceeding from the imperfection of our
Knowledge, and want of power to act (things being known to us only in the
abstract) and when we do know them, we are uncertain of our Abilities to put
them in action; yet God knows all things in the concrete, and his perfect
Wisdom and Power requires no discourse or deliberation: so that it must be
understood in the seven other places, that God said and did at one and the same
instant; but in the eighth and ninth places the word said is not to be
understood as a fiat only, but as a word of deliberation rather then action,
which is inferred from the words Lord God, and Let us, and I will: for in all
the entrances of the other parts of Creation it is said only Let there be; but
in the 7th. and 18th. verses (being the eighth and ninth time) the Lord God
said, Let us make, and I will make.

It is not good for man to be alone. 27.
Man is a noble and sociable creature; a secluse and monastic temper neither
becomes him, nor was safe in the primitive and most eminent time of Adam, much
less in ours: for it often produces such prodigious Copulations, or
contranatural Restrictions, as Nature is as much injured in the one as in the
other; therefore to be avoided as being not good for Adam nor his Posterity.
And of all Societies surely that is most complacent that consists of suitable
Tempers.

Yet some of the Fathers hold, that Man is never alone when he is alone; Angels
or Spirits that attend his most private meditations are such contenting
Companions, that though he converseth with no other body, yet his Mind has the
fruition of an ineffable Society: so that in respect of the Mind it is good to
be alone, but in respect of the Body it is not good to be alone. And therefore
to prevent that solitariness or other beastial society, God did make the Woman
to be the Wife or Consort to Man. And it is not good for either to be separate,
as to leave the other to be alone; he or she that does it is guilty of the
breach of that originally instituted good thus provided for them by a
Conjunction: for when it is said, They shall be as one, that is, of one
society; he is not to be alone, nor she alone, but both to make an unseparable
society, so as to leave all other Relations or Interests to be two, all one, or
two alone, and yet not alone so long as they two concenter in an happy and
affectionate Unity.

I will make an help meet for him. 28.
That is, I will make him into such a posture or condition, that a meet help
shall be extracted from him, and so to be to him as his Companion.

Here I must observe, that in all the Works of Creation the words Let there be,
and Let us, seem to be results of plurality, and may relate to the Trinity or
Angels, or some subordinate Instruments; but in making Woman God speaks it in
the Singular Number, I will make; to show, that God did more appropriate to
himself the making of Woman then any Creature of the whole Creation; for she
cannot but be apprehended the most singular and unexpressible piece: for when
Adam had seen the Light, Firmament, Waters, Earth, with all their Ornaments,
and all the varieties of Fowl and Beasts, and could discourse with them in
their own Dialects, (and doubtless some of them might have afforded a
satisfactory contentment in a Conversation;) yet (I say) none of those glorious
Creatures (either Celestial or Terrestrial) were thought fit Helps for him: and
therefore the Lord God said, (it must be so implied) I will make a more
excellent piece then all my former pieces, a Woman; which shall be a more meet
Help for Man then all those glorious things which I have created: and God seems
to appropriate the Woman's making more peculiarly to himself; for fecit (he
made) is applied to the universality of all Creatures; faciamus (let us make)
applied to Man; but faciam (I will make) applied only to Woman. I shall add
this, that the productive Mass of all Creatures was made out of nothing, and
Man in his Elementary Parts was made out of that Mass which was made out of
nothing, and Woman was made out of him, who was made out of them, that were
made out of nothing: so that Ex nihilo nil fit; she, and we, and all Creatures
in their most beauteous appearances, are still but appearances, mere nothings;
and yet nothing is, nothing ought to be, more helpful to Man then Woman; for
whilst that nothing is something, she is to be a meet Help, Faciamus ei
mulierem, ut sit sustentaculum in adversa ejus. Targ. Hier.
a Help meet, for him for whom she is made, and to whom she is conjoined, and
that is her duty; and to this end woman was made, to be a Help meet for him,
(adjutorium) an helper, a delight and ease to Man, and that in the most meet,
apt, fit, and agreeable manner. The Arabic add to adjutorium (e regione ejus)
that is, an Help, but still such an Help as should keep within the bounds,
limits, or region of Man's government: and that certainly was the intent of Gods
making of her. And if she proves otherwise, methinks I hear God say, I will
make her to be a meet Help for Man; if she will not, she shall know more sorrow
then Eve. And certainly the Man is to take care that he lays no servile (or
such other) Impositions upon her, then she is able to bear: she is to be a meet
Help, to go hand in hand in helping and supporting their mutual Interests. This
is all the difference I can observe; an help does imply that one is to be
assisted, so that it is his part to give the first motion to all affairs, and
she is to help without dispute, and not to run away or separate from the
burden.

Cap. 2. Verse 19, 20.
And out of the ground the Lord God formed every beast of the field, 29.
and every fowl of the air, and brought them unto Adam, to see what he would
call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that was the name
thereof. And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to
every beast of the field. Man being made of a clear intellect and insight into
all Creatures under his subjection, God as a perfect Workman having made so
exquisite an engine to put in motion those various parts of Creation, tried how
those excellencies with which he had endowed him would operate; for the model
or framing of any piece to such an end as it was designed, shows only its
outside and not its virtue, till it does operate to that end. And certainly as
Adam was so qualified in his Intellects, so are we in some proportion; for
could we but follow old Bias his Rule of Nosce teipsum, Know thy self, we
should find by Anatomy the perfect composure of all mechanic engines: For
instance, by the circulation of the blood (more clearly discovered to us by Dr.
Harvey then in former ancient Authors) which circulation must not be understood
as moving by the rule and just proportion of a circle, but rather by
retrogressions; for very few are circular, but rather perpendicular oblique,
etc. and those who will busy their brains about a perpetual motion, may sooner
obtain it for sixty or eighty years from perpendicular and oblique motions of
our blood for so many years, then by any circular motion to perpetuity. And if
I have time to digest my notions into practical rules, I doubt not but to make
as evident a System of Philosophy as Aristotle, (who makes the Sun go round,
and the Earth stand still;) or Copernicus (who makes the Sun stand still, and
the Earth turn round;) and therein show that the cause of Fluxes and Refluxes
of the Sea, and the Circular motions of the Planets, are mostly deceptions, and
those caused from perpendicular and oblique impressions forcing their
vertiginations. Also by this inquiry into our selves we may learn the use of
the Almbecks, and all sorts of distillations, and indeed all the Seven Liberal
Sciences, and Seven Mechanic Arts. And those who are so large in their
Constitutions, as to drive at a more universal knowledge of Creatures, may by a
due inspection into them gain the whole Body of Philosophy; which doubtless
were sooner obtained if we could be informed of the true primitive Names of all
Creatures, and the mystical Interpretations of theose Names; which some say
Selomon attained to as far as concerned Plants, and thereby understood the
nature of them even from the Cedar to the Hysop; which Book of his is mentioned
in the Holy Writ, but is either utterly lost or concealed, (which is equal to
us) and is the great error of Mankind in not communicating what we know; for by
wanting these impartments we make most things diabolical which are only
Secrets of Nature unrevealed: and thus we wilfully banish our selves out of the
Paradise of Knowledge, either by not seeing, trying, or inquiring into the
nature of our selves or other Creatures, or not freely imparting what we do
know, or foolishly condemning or censuring the kind and laborious impartments
of others. And hereupon even some of the pious Fathers of our Church were
condemned as Heretics for asserting the Antipodes, which no Geographers now
dispute: and hence the Loadstone, and other marvelous effects of the natures of
other pieces of Creation, were at first esteemed Witchery, which now are safely
allowed: and hence came the loss of those Impartments, of which Pancirollus
has writ a Book called De rebus perditis.

Some are of opinion, that if the Original names of those Creatures were known,
we also should know their primitive and intrinsic natures; which Adam did know
when he first fixed their distinct and different names. And herein did God as
it were entertain Adam, and enrich his Knowledge by all the ways and progresses
of the Creation, teaching him the nature and constitution of all things: so
that there was no need of any addition but what God himsest imparted; the other
(as I said) was but Intoxicated Knowledge, or a Fruit that would rather blind
his Knowledge then improve it. And yet for all these impartments and society,
God did not think Beasts fitting Companions for Man, for he was to have the
dominion over them, and therefore not fit to be equal or meet Helpers to him:
so that (as it were upon further consderation) God says again, But as for Adam
there was not found an Help meet for him. So then in order to such an Helper:

Cap. 2. Verse 21.
And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, 30.
and he slept. Here seems to be a supernatural and a natural sleep; the
supernatural (which Adam fell into being caused by God for the end which was
designed, the producing of Eve;) the natural sleep, and he slept; sleep being
as adequate to nature as night to day, or darkness to light. In our natural we
have Dreams, in our supernatural Revelations; and every such Revelation (when
true) is an Eve, or an Helper either in our Devotions or Actions. But all the
difficulty is to judge them; and certainly they ought to be as evident and
manifest to us, as Eve was to Adam after he awaked: for Fancy does so deceive
men, that we take those representations which we have in our sleep to be real,
which are but imaginary, and the recreations which Nature affords us during the
recess of our Spirits to be Divine Revelations, which in truth are nothing but
Chymera's. I cannot say but God may impart such truths to us; but then they
will be always attended with some real and warrantable subsequences: But here
we find tht is lessened Adams Perfection, after a nap he lost a Rib, to show
that sleep in our best Constitution takes something from us in the abbreviation
of our Lives.

And he took out one of his ribs, and clesed up the flesh instead thereof. The
curiosity of Anatomists concerning our Ribs is not to be a rule to our belief
in the Text; or whether we should dispute of the truth from the number of those
which remain, for it is impossible to know what the Original of the number of
Ribs were. Deus accepit unam ex costis ejus, illa est costa decima tertia
lateris dextri. Targ. Hier.
Gallen affirms, that Man has now but eleven, but according to the Jewish
Targum Adam had thirteen; and then the odd Rib being taken out, twelve remain:
now Eve being made like to him, she had then twelve Ribs also, equal in number
to those were left to him; but accounting her whole self one Rib, she had
thirteen. But to pass this; the more general Anatomists hold that Man has
twelve Ribs, whereof five are called true or perfect Ribs, because they are
Circular; seven bastard or imperfect Ribs, because they want that proportion.
Now there may be made a question, Whether Eve were made of one of those which
were perfect and circular, or those which were imperfect; for had he not parted
with some of his perfection, he could not so easily have fallen into error. On
the other fide, had she been partaker of his perfection, she would not so
easily have been tempted; or rather by dividing their perfection, both of them
became subject to imperfection.

Cap. 2. verse 22.
And of the Rib, 32.
which the Lord God had taken from Man, made he a Woman. The Latins use the
word aedificavit, or built, to show that she was to be an house, or mansion
place; but the English translators use the word made. And it is here
observable, that she was not said to be created as Man, in the Image of God, or
after his likeness, nor formed, nor framed; but Made, a word of a lesser
signification, relating to the temperament of her body only. Nor was she made
of the dust or purer part of the Earth, but of a Bone, which is the hardest,
dryest, coldest, and most terrestrial part of Man, according to Physics. Nor
had she the Breath of Life breathed into her Nostrills, but that Life Eve had
went with the Bone. Nor is it said she became a Living soul, her soul being as
it were the same, or a Ray of his: the truth is, she was abstracted either out
of a soporiferous temper, which is all Fancy, or from some suparnatural
effluvium; or that she was like him in his Creation, unlike after the
separation. But this may be observed, that when God made Eve he took a Rib from
Adam, and of it made Woman; so that he could not but fall, being lessened in
the perfection of his Creation. Now when Jesus was born of a Virgin, God took
that part from her which the woman had before from Adam, so he became perfect;
as by this, God did in a manner bring forth such a substantial revelation from
Adam's sleep, that it seemed to be a continued divine Apparition. But (as I
said) that there are two sorts of sleep, so there are two sorts of Women, the
one Snpernatural and most civinely qualified, the other mere Natural,
Fantastical, and Quelque chose: the first a revealed blessing from God, the
other only disturbers of the mind, and distraction to man's quiet sleep and
reposement.

But she was made of a Rib; from whence it happens that man's, heart which was
surrounded all with Bones, now lies open; so that all its Loves and desires had
no fence against her; for we see even Adam, when God brought her to him, so
soon as he saw her was immediately transported: and Adam said with a divine
implicit asseveration, Hac tempore non rarsus creabitur mulier ex viro. Targ.
Hier
This glorious piece which thou have brought to me is Bone of my bone, and
Flesh of my flesh. As if he should have added, this is she that (like my Bones)
is to be my helper, and supporter to all my regular motions; she that (like my
bones) ought to give stability, rectitude, and form to all my actions; This is
she that (like my flesh) is to be the Pillow of my Body; this is she which is
to be as a Wall or Safeguard to all my Vital functions; this is she that
according to the property of Flesh, is to allay the rage of all my natural
heates. Now it is here to be observed, that God brought all Beasts to Adam, who
only gave Names to them, but no Instructions, they being incapable of reason;
but when God brought the Woman to Adam, Adam began first with instruction, and
taught her her duty toward him, which was in short, that Look of what ever use
the bone is within us, or the Flesh without us, she is to act these parts for
man's preservation.

And brought her unto the man. 33.
From hence probably came the Jewish and Roman Customs, to lead the Spouse
between two to the Nuptials: and the Latins still continue the phrase of
ducere uxorem, which we call Marrying, and is a kind of tacit compulsion on her
part, more to represent her modesty toward that ceremony, then any
disinclination of Nature in operating to a mutual contact, there being a
certain Sympathy lodgd in the progresses of propagation, which tends to
coition, which future, times have made more ceremonial, restrictive, or
coercive.

Cap. 2. Ver 23.
And Adam said, 34.
this is now Bone of my Bone, and Flesh of my flesh. Anatomists reckon 302
Bones in Man's body; so that this Rib it seems was the bone of all these bones,
or the spring of all the rest; and they are the most inflexible of all the
parts of the body; and therefore to assist that temper he adds, that she was
also flesh of his flesh (though there is no mention of any flesh taken from
him.) Now the Flesh is the most soft and tender part, consisting of a pleasing
ruddy color, to show that she should not only be steady in her affections, but
tender, compassionate, gentle, and amiable in all her proceedings toward him.

And when he had thus declard her Constitution, he gave her a name, and said,

She shall be called Woman because she came out of Man. 35.
She was not named like to the beasts, Hanc deus vult vocare viraginem quia ex
viro desumpta est^. Targ. Hier
who had names given them without any reason given for imposing their names
upon them; but here is a reason given, i. e. she shall be called Woman, says
he, Because she came out of man: And this was to teach her her original, and
also how she should demean her self toward him. It shows Man's superiority to
the Woman; because that which is derived cannot be equal to that from which it
was derived: it shows also her usefulness by obedience; and this is not an
humane, (as some Woman would have it) but a mere Natural, or rather a divine
imposition upon the sex; for the Bone cannot but move when it is incited, nor
the Flesh cannot but expose it self to outward accidents; so those pieces of
natural Kindnesses which we call Obedience, (and it is pity any Woman should
stumble at the word) are but the Instruments of Nature, and would prove easy
and natural if it were not for a wilful resistance which destroys the Fabric,
Harmony, and Cooperation of the Union between Man and Woman, as is between the
whole Man and his Flesh and Bones. From which disunion the English Proverb
comes, that Woman is a Woe to Man; but the Latin conceit is more kind, and
makes Mulier quasi Mollior, a more soft, tender, and delicate Creature then
Man; and the Hebrew Eva, fignifying Viva or Vivens, being as it were the life
or living part of Man, that is, when they execute the Duty which belongs to the
preservation of Man, and when they do thus perform their function.

Cap. 2. Ver 24.
Therefore (or for that cause) a Man shall leave his Father and Mother, 36.
and cleave to his Wife, and they two shall be one Flesh. This seems to be
spoken in an exstacy upon Adams beholding of her Excellencies; S^perabitur ex
domo ipsius cubilis patris sui and matris suae. Targ Hier
for Adam had no other Father but God, nor no other Mother but Earth, both of
which he forsook when he was tempted by her to Eat the Fruit which God his
Father had forbidden to eat, and neglected his Mother Earth, which he should
have been dressing and keeping, when he spent his time in desputing the
question with her and the Serpent. But this was intended rather for a Law to
them that were to succeed him, for neither he nor we are to make our Kindness
to a Wife superintendent to the Commands of God: we owe a Native duty to one,
Conjunctive duty to the other. For though it is said the man and his Wife shall
be one Flesh, yet the Father, Mother, and Child are one flesh also. The mystery
that is to be enquired is, which has the greater Unity of Flesh, the Parent
and Child, or the Man and Wife; the Child is but the effect of the Woman, the
subject of propagation, and when the effect is effected, the cause, Ligament,
and virtue of producing the effect, is as it were lost and Consummated in the
substantialls of the effect; but the Husband and Wife, so long as the Union
Continues, have constant desires to produce the effects of their desires; and
desires, so long as they are in any ability to effect, are far more strong and
fervent, then those are which have received the end or satisfaction to their
desire. So that upon the continuance of this Love or desire they may justly be
said to have a more proper conjunction and unity, of Flesh then Parents and
Children, and God and Nature ties them to a more secret affection then can be
had to Father and Mother. And that which may fitly be added is, that man is not
to forsake his Wise with his affections, nor his Parents which his obedience;
and this Command to Man belongs to the Wowan also; for we may see a sad example
not only in Adam but Eve, in forsaking God and his precepts; for although the
man was only forbidden to eat of the Fruit, yet they two being one, the Command
to one was the Law to both; nor did the Serpent so much as tempt her with this
Argument. And this may be added, that the Latin calls Flesh Carv, and Chara
(Deer) in the Adjective; and Charitas, which is a relative word to them both,
shows that this deareness or fleshly affection between Man and Wife ought to
consist of perfect Love and Charity toward each other.

Cap. 2. verse 25.
And they were both Naked, 37.
and were not ashamed. Shame (as I conceive) proceeds either from Pride or
sense of outward or inward imperfections: Now they had not the Armor of the
Rhenoceros, nor the Furrs of the Ermine, or Wool of the tender Lamb, or the
variety of Plumes which adorn the Fowls of the Air: But they had a perfect
reason to continue naked or covered according to the nature of situation, from
which the other could not depart were they never so burdensome, when ere they
changed their Climates.

Adam well knowing that those outward coverings were but the Excrements of
their tempers, so that Adam and Eve could not be ashamed in the want of these
superfluities, nor could they be guilty of imperfections being perfectly
formed; their mind could represent nothing to them but harmless thoughts,
their shape nothing but exact proportions, the motion of their Blood was
according to the Course of nature, no obstructions from the spleen, or
diffidence of their mutual goodness, to raise or alter the Current of nature
(to a blush, or dejection of their eyes, filled only with the Beams of
Innocence and constancy to God and themselves.) A Condition of life apt to meet
with envious and subtle disturbers of so happy a Calm and quiet: they were
united in perfect Innocence, and being made Male and Female, Moses renders them
to us in the most eminent expression, Et erunt ambo ipst Japienties. Targ. Hier
as in the first Chapter, to which I return for the Reasons in the Proem.

Cap. 1. Vese 27.
So God created Man. 38.
That is, after he was made, sed non morari fuerunt in gloria. Targ Hier
framed, and formed out of nothing, he was said to be Created, the matter or
form, or both, of which he was made, being peculiar to Man, or more eminent in
him then in any other Creature: for the word Created is mentioned but to 3
operations; 1st. to the Heavens and the Earth, next to the Whale, and 3ly. to
Man; and they that would advance the invocation of the Trintiy in the
Consultative part of Man's Creation from the words Let us in the 7. Verse, may
be assisted from this consummative Verse (where the word Created is three times
repeated, viz. so God Created Man in his own Image, (referring to the first
person;) 2ly. In the Image of God Created he him, (referring to the second
Person;) 3ly. Male and Female Created he them, (referring to the Holy Ghost.)

In his own Image. 39.
After his likeness, as in the 26. verse, being here left out; which shows that
it intended one and the same thing. Now what this Image or Likeness is I may
borrow from Plato, who says, that there was a certain Idea, platform, or
inward representation of all things in God before they were; according to which
the matter being created, the forms by which things were distinguished were
also made: so that this Image and Likeness signifies no otherwise, then that
Man should be made like to that Idea or imagination which God designed to that
Creature; or as I conceive that this World (as Spagnetus, in his Enchiridion
Physicae) is nothing but God manifested, and so saw himself as in a Glass; and
Man the little World is his Image or Likness in the Epitome of that great Image
or manifestation of God, Tanquam in minori speculo; but to conceit any
Figuratine or Lineamentive Image of God St. Agustine says, Let him be cursed
that refers the Deity of God to the Lineaments of man's Body; and Philo
says, That God is not partaker of humane forms, nor can humane bodies be
partakers of the form divine: but as Sir Walter Rawliegh says from some other,
that if any thing comes near the similitude of God, it is more the virtue that
is in Man then the figure. Right Reason is the Image of God, and Man has in
his mind a certain similitude of God; and this is safe to believe, safe to
continue in by a vertuons and good life. But according to the Context of the
words, So God created Man in his Image, may be considered that he was Created
according to his Geometrical Image in all things consisting of number, weight,
and measure. In his Image, even of the dust, being within the Image of the
representative World: In his Image, participating of the universal breath and
peculiar soul: In his Image, by participating of his general manifestation and
enjoyment of all Creatures: In his Image, by a social and Communicative nature:
In his Image, by a peculiar Love to his Elect: And in his Image, by
multiplication and dominion: So that God is Man in great, and Man is God in
Little.

Male and Female Created he them. 40.
Some do from hence conceit: that they were Created Hermaphrodites; but whoever
consults rightly with Physics will find almost an impossibility in that
Conceit, for the intent of Male and Female was propagation, which would rather
be hindered then advanced by such improbable Copulation, where the Agent and
Patient must at one time naturally have a mutal operation or desire with each
other; and by this preternatural form which are in some, they would make a
perfection of the imperfection, or rather exuburancy, which happens to others
of Humane race. So that by Male and Female is to be understood, that Man was
made the Male, or Masculine, or Agent; Woman, or the Wife, the Feminine, or the
Patient: And though it is said that God created them Male and Femane, yet
Grammarians know, that where an Adjective has relation to two Substantives
(apt for life) of the singular number, and different genders, the Adjective
shall be of the plural, and of the gender of the most principal word; so it is
said, Creavit eos, not eas; they were not both Created Males and Females, but
man was Created male, and Woman the femal, and so created he then. And here is
to be observed, that the word Created is applied to the Woman, though in the
whole order of her production it is only said that she was made; which shows,
that when she was united, and made one with man as man and wife, she was
adopted into that title of Creation, and that not single but united; for
Creating is a Masculine word, making or Production femine: And God did think
fit to Crown the Conjugal union of Man and Wife with the Title of Creation,
when as she being not joined must be content without that Title; yet this may
be said for her, that Man by Creation was made out of nothing, or at most out
of the dust, but she was made out of something, or Dust enlivened.

The Jews in one of their Targums are most exact, who say, that God made Man in
his Image, according to the similitude of God Created he him, with 248.
members, and 365 Nerves, and covered him over with a Skin, and filled it with
Flesh and Blood, Male and Female created he them; in noble form, and distinct
sexes, of whose excellency and geometrical proportions I have writ in the
preceding Chapters; but being created, made, framed, formed, whether in that
manner which I have mentioned, I shall not dispute.

Cap. 1. Verse 28.
And God blessed them and said, 41.
Be fruitful and multiply. I have observed that the word Created is used only
in the universal Creation in the works of the 5. days, and in the 6th. day in
the Creation of Man; so here I observe, that this Benediction is only used in
this place, and in the 5th. days work, and in no other parts of the seven
days, but only in the seventh day, where it is said, God blessed and
sanctified it. The reason of this is, that all the works of the other days
either produced no suitable species, as the Sun, Stars, etc. or if they did, yet
it was by a natural production, without any Local action or copulation, as
Trees, Herbs, etc. but Fish, Foul, and Man have Local and active motions of
production, one only natural, the other natural and voluntary. Now to the
seventh day or Sabbath there is a benediction or sanctification, but not the
addition of fructification or multiplication for rest; or the Sabbath does only
quiet and preserve the Creation, but Action continues it with multitudes of
species.

However this was the first Joint Commission which was given to man and wife,
and if we may believe the Jews, Adam and Eve had in their chaste Wedlock 30.
Sons and 30. Daughters; whereas extravagant tempers seldom enjoy such a
multiplying Condition: and we see that in those countries, where Laws of
Wedlock are sacredly observed, the people are more numerous then in other
Countries where there is a greater Liberty; for the Womb is quickly vitiated,
by Commixtures, and either destroyed by heat, or over cooled by diversities.

And replenish the Earth, 42.
and subdue it. In the Syriack it is, Fill the Earth instead of replenish; and
in the Arabic, Possess it instead of Subdue it; which are better then the
other, for replenish signifies a filling of that which was once full and now
empty, and subduing that which was once conquered and rebeld again, which here
could not be, if we believe that there was no Man till Adam, or Cultivations
till he practiced them; or else it must be thus understood, that besides the
productions of nature (I mean as to terrestrial things) there are productions
of Art; the productions of nature are those properly which were at first
created, the productions of Art are those with which man's Industery (under the
title of tilling the Earth) Adam did, and man since does, replenish the Earth;
as by Sowing Seed and Planting Trees he caused Herbs and Trees to grow, which
is a replenishment to the first Creation; and by plowing, digging, dressing,
etc. of grounds, he may be said to subdue the Earth, or conquer those
extravangancies of nature, which otherwise without man's assistance would
destroy those Vegetables which are most profitable for man's use; and thus he
replenishes and subdues it, or thus fills and possesses the earth. And this
was the second joint Commission to Adam and Eve, wherein both were enjoined
from Idleness; the Man was not to work alone, nor the Woman alone, but he to
set on the work, and she to help and assist him in prosecution of it.

The third clause of their Commission was, to

Have dominion over the Fish of the Sea, 43.
and over the Fowls of the Air, and over every Living thing that creeps or
moves upon the face of the Earth. The word Dominion signifies the chief
authority or power of ruling or taming, all which man has over all other
creatures; God did not give them a natural power to resist, but man either by
his superior reason, ingenuity, or strength persuades or sorceth them to a
subjection. When they endeavor to violate this original supremacy given to
Man, they may for a time fly, run, swim, or creep from his Commands; but he
has a Stand for the Eagle, a Toil for the Lion, a Hook for the Fish, and a
Spade for the Mole: or when he desires to make his Sovereignty a pleasure, he
sends the Hawk to fetch the Hern and the Partridge, the Hound to bring the
Woolf, the Heart, and the Hare; the Cormorant and the Otter to fetch the Fish,
and the Ferret the Coney; so that they are not only submissive to his will, but
obey all his subordinate commands. I conceive at this time the domination did
not extend, that they should be food for man: This, extravagant appetites
brought into use; and when they begun to make Gods of men, they offered these
creatures to their bellies God, which were designed for sacrifices to the only
true God and Creator.

And it is observable, that the Earth, and all that moves in the Sea, Air, and
Earth, were given to man's dominion; but not the Sea, nor the Air, nor so much
as mention of Fire. One Element is sufficient for us, the other three have a
dominion over us, yet subordinate to Gods dispose; and therefore why should we
too much wade in their Curiosities, or be troubled like Aristotle at our
ignorance of them, seeing they are not within our Commission.

The fourth Joint Commiffion was for their sustenance, and for that,

Cap. 1. Ver. 29.
God said, 44.
Behold I have given you every Herb bearing Seed, and every Tree bearing Fruit;
to you it shall be for meat. Herbs and its seed, trees and their fruit, in
which are Comprehended all Roots, afford so great varieties to please the
Pallat and fill the Appetite, that we need not seek for any other natriment;
especially under those Climats where their virtues are more excellent. And when
at first that food was assigned to our Forefathers, it was sufficient, and I
conceive there was no edible use made of living Creatures, but only for
sacrifices, till after Noah came out of the Ark; and I am apt to think that God
was angry with Cain (not as Josephus says; for offering things extracted from
the ground) but for offering the fruit of the ground to God, which God himself
had clearly disposed off to man, having appropriated beasts to be sacrifices to
himself, as may be collected by Abels offering of the Firstlings; which was
therefore so acceptable, because God reserved them for himself; but Cains was
not accepted, because they were given to man: so it was a mere breach of Gods
disposure. We are not to cross Gods order; those things which he seperates to
himself ought to be devoted to him; those things which he allows us, are not so
fit for him: we are neither to rob Peter that we may be enabled to pay Paul,
nor to satisfy God with the fruits of our worldly employments, and omit the
offering of those oblations which are more peculiar to himself.

But whether this was Cains offense or not I shall not dispute with Josephus: I
do not find that man's dominion did, extend to the eating of Flesh till after
Noah went out of the Ark, and then it was permitted: but certainly if we could
return to our Primitive diet, that life we should live by that food would be
more full of health and vigor. But I will say no more to this Point, lest I
offend the Chemical Doctors; only that man and beast did participate of one
food, Man's with a pleasurabe industry (for so it was doubtless before the fall)
where it is said, God put man into the garden to dress it and to keep it; but
beasts with ease only, without industry. And therein man had the advantage; for
what food man produced by his industry, satisfied his knowledge equal to his
appetite; and certainly the knowledge of the nature of productions, and then
the use of them to please all the senfes with their nutriture and medicine, was
a gift as magnificent as reason is beyond insenfibility.

PARS SECUNDA.
The Text of the second Part.
Cap. 1.
ANd to every beast of the earth, Verse 30.
and to every fowl of the air, and to every thing that creeps upon the earth
wherein there is life, I have given every green herb for meat, and it was so.

Cap. 3. Verse 1.
Now the serpent was more subtle then any beast of the field which the Lord
God had made, and he said unto the woman, Yea, has God said ye shall not eat
of every tree of the garden?

2 And the woman said to the Serpent, We may eat of the fruit of the trees of
the garden:

3 But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden God has
said, Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye touch it, lest ye dye.

4 And the Serpent said unto the woman, Yea shall not surely dye;

5 For God does know that in the day you eat thereof then your eyes shall be
opened, and ye shall be as God knowing good and evil.

6 And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was
pleasant to the eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one wise, she took of
the fruit thereof, and did eat, and gave also to her husband with her, and he
did eat.

7 And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked,
and they sowed fig leaves together: and made themselves aprons.

8 And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden in the cool
(or wind) of the day, and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of
the Lord God among the trees of the garden.

9 And the Lord God called to Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou?

10 And he said I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid because I was
naked, and I hid myself.

11 And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? have thou eaten of the
tree whereof I commanded thee, that thou should not eat?

12 And the Man said, The woman thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the
tree, and I did eat.

13 And the Lord said unto the Woman, What is this that thou have done? and the
Woman said, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.

14 And the Lord said unto Serpent, Because thou have done this, thou art
cursed above all the cattle, and above every beast of the field; upon thy belly
shall thou go, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy life.

15 And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and
her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.

16 And to the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy sorrows and thy
conception; in sorrow shall thou bring forth Children, and thy desire shall be
to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.

16 And unto Adam he said, Because thou have harkned to the voice of thy wife,
and have eaten of the tree of the which I commanded thee, saying thou shall not
eat of it: Cursed is the ground for thy sake, in sorrow shall thou eat of it
all the day: of thy life.

18 Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to thee, and thou shall eat
the herbs of the field.

19 In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, till thou return unto the
ground; for out of it wast thou taken, for dust thou art and unto dust thou
shall return.

20 And Adam called his wifes name Eve, because she was the mother of all
living.

21 Unto Adam also and his wife aid the Lord God make coats of skins, and
clothed them.

22 And the Lord God said, Behold the man is become like one of us to know good
and evil; and now lest he put forth his hand and take also of the tree of life,
and live for ever.

23 Therefore the Lord God sent him forth from the garden of Eden to till the
ground from whence he was taken.

24 So he drove out the man, and he placed at the East end of the garden of
Eden Cherubims and a flaming sword, which turned every way to keep the way of
the tree of life.

Cap. 4. Ver. 1.
And Adam knew his wife, and she conceived and bare Cain; and she said, I have
gotten a man from the Lord. And she again bore his brother Abel, and Abel was a
keeper of Sheep, and Cain a tiller of the ground.

Cap. 5. Ver. 3, 4, 5.
3. And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years, and knew his wife again, and
begat a son in his likeness, after his Image, and called his name Seth, for she
said, God has appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew.

4. And the days of Adam after he begat Seth were eight hundred years, and he
begat sons and daughters.

5 And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years, and he
dyed.

Cap. 1. Ver. 30.
And to every Beast of the Earth, 1.
and to every Fowl of the air, and to every thing that creeps upon the Earth,
wherein there is life, I have given every Green Herb for meat. Beasts and Man
being created as is supposed much about one time, their food also was appointed
the same; there is only this differance, that we find not any food assigned to
them, until Man was first served; and then to show the difference of their
Appetites, it is said to Man, Behold, I have given you every herb, etc. But to
Beasts, Fowls, and creepers, every green herb; to show that Beasts were led to
their Food by Sense, but Man by his Intellect. If the virtue of the Plant do
not satisfy his knowledge of it, the Color is not to entice, the Eye is not to
be judge of his Appetite, though allowed to Beasts.

This Green is the first Color that is mentioned in Scripture, and this
properly the first place; and indeed no color is so pleasing to nature, and so
stupifies the understanding, it being impossible to find out why nature should
mantle her self more universally with this color then any other; unless it be
admitted that the beams of the Sun on the sudden reflecting upon Earth, do
usually produce a Yellow color, which being mixed with the Azure color of the
Air, and contemperd with the Liquid part of the Earth, sends forth a Green: For
the mixture of Yellows and Blues produces Greens. And where it is denied to
the superficies of the earth by shades or otherwise, it unites its force, and
runs into the bodies of trees, and after asecret ascension mounts to the
highest branches with a more sublime verdure. And these green Vegetables were
to invite the appetite of Beasts without inquiry; it was Man's part properly to
know their Natures and virtues.

Cap. 3. Verse 1.
Now the serpent was more subtle then any Beast of the field which the Lord God
had made. 2.
It is conceived that beasts were made the Evening before man, being the very
fore-recited piece to Man, so as they had the very assimilation of man by way
of approximation to his creation; and doubtless they did understand each others
Dialects, and God had them in so great regard above other Terrestrial
Creatures, that when he gave Dominion to Man, Cap. 1. Verse 28. It was over
Fish, and Fowl, and creeping things, but not over beasts, so that that Now,
whilst there was this Amity, this conjugation of Tempers and Disposition
between Man and Beast, even Now, That is, Then The serpent was more subtle,
etc.

Whether this mas really a Serpent, 3.
or the Devil in the Serpents shape, I dispute not; but conceive the Temptation
might be by either: for those who writ of Serpents, make some of them (even
known to our age, as the Basilisk and Scytala) so beautiful and cunning, that
by their beauty, splendour, and subtilty, entice many into destrustion: and
there is an other sort, as the Lyzard, that are so affectionate to Man, that is
preserves him from all dangers. As for the first sort, it was not likely that
Eve in the state of Innocence should meet with such Nocent creatures; and as to
the other sort, their nature disposes not them to nocency. But possibly the
fruit being pleasant, and the serpent discoursive, the one might allurethe
other, persuade her to eat out of no evil intention, but as incredulous that
God would deny Eve the eating of so delicate a fruit. But if it were the Devil
in the Serpents shape, then indeed he was Serpens Versatilis, as the Vulgar
read it; that is, Viro subtilior, and consequently the subtilest Beast of the
field.

And he said to the woman, 4.
Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden? What
Language the Devil or Serpent spoke is not material, but that which was natural
to either was understood by both: For it seems by the Text, that that which was
said by the Serpent was but as a reply to the Woman: For says the Serpent,
Yea, has God said (as you tell me) that you are not to eat of every tree of
the garden? So we see here were discourses tending to a temptation, and she
must be more Innocent then Eve in her Innocence who admits of such. For
methinks I hear the serpent say, Has that God who has made you so beautiful,
endued you with all perfections, given you all pleasures for your senses,
placed you in so sweet a garden where nothing is wanting to content your Mind,
or recreate your Body; and can that God be so unkind after all his kindness to
forbid you the Eating of a fruit so inconsiderable? Yea, has God said so?
surely I will not believe it. And so she takes the Devils Argument as granted,
without consulting her husband, (to whom the Command was given, though
inclusively to both:) By which means the Temptation went gently on. Now though
this discourse of the serpent may seem strange to remoter Ages; yet I apprehend
that in that time of Perfection Man could not be a stranger to the Dialect of
all Creatures, I mean in the highest considerations of comparing the Chaps, and
the Lips, or other Tendons, with inward intentions or desires; and this is done
by the judgment of the Eye. But for that which we use by the judgment of the
Ear, we read that some in every age have attained to such diversities of times,
calls, cries, expressing the mirth, assistance, acclamations, joys, or sorrows
of several Birds and Beasts; that Men, Birds and Beasts have enjoyed a mutual
intercourse of affections: And the meanest Capacity finds, that every kind of
Creature which affords a sound, is known not only in its distinct kind by its
tone, but every individual species of each kind is also known by their
Guttural, Labial, Dental, or Rostral sounds. Nor is it prodigious to me, that
the Serpent should afford such persuasive discourses, finding by Common
observations that all Beasts, Birds, etc. have a certain Raticination, and a
Language to express it; the Horse speaks for his Provender, the Dog for his
meat, and the Bird in the Cage for its seeds.

But I wonder more that Eve having doubtless a more perfect reason as yet in
her unspotted Innocence, could be persuaded by a beast (or the Devil himself)
from neglecting her husband. But they that will suffer their senses to master
their Reason, Love, and Obepience, will quickly prove wholly rebellious: And
therefore without her husband she replies,

Cap. 3. Verse 2. and 3.
2. And the Woman said to the Serpent, We may eat of the trees of the garden:
3. But of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the Garden, God has
said, Ye shall not eat thereof. 5. See Part 1. Sect 15.
I Observe that the Command was given to Adam before Eve was made of his Rib,
but it seems Adam had imparted that Command to Eve, and that Command and in
unction was sufficient for her to say, that We may eat, or we may not eat. The
wifes obedience (implicitly) depending upon the husbands: He is to obey God,
and she him; and in that she has a double reward from God and him: But when
she strays from her husbands dictates (for she had none from God) we see what a
curse she brought upon her self, and on her tender and complying husband, yea
and upon the serpent which (if not the Devil.) It may be meant only a piece of
Courtship to her. And therefore it is dangerous to admit of Temptations against
positive Commands.

Neither shall ye touch it lest ye dye. 6.
Here she gave the Serpent (or Devil) the first advantage by a false reply: For
first, God had Commanded Adam that he should not eat of the tree, cap. 2.17.
and no mention in that Text of the fruit. Secondly, Nor did God ever command
that he should not touch it Thirdly, the tree of life was said to be in the
miost of the garden, which was not forbidden; but the place of the tree of
Knowledge is not mentioned; and he had Liberty to eat of the tree of life, but
not of the tree of Knowledge: So that the Serpent had sufficient Advantage by
the Mistake of the command. Whereupon,

Cap. 2. Verse 4.
The Serpent said, 7.
Ye shall not surely dye. You shall not dye, either for eating the Fruit (which
was not mentioned) or for touching the tree (which is not Commanded) or for
eating of the Tree in the midst of the garden (which was the Tree of life) and
not forbidden. And when the Serpent had thus possessed her, that she should not
dye for eating or touching of that which was not forbidden, he returns to the
truth of punishment, yet depending upon the former asseveration, and says, ye
shall not surely dye. For the Serpent had got so much advantage by the
discourse with Eve, and understanding the Nature of her death, not to be a
separation of the Soul and Body, but a deprivatian of Gods Love, did tell her
to this effect; so good a God would not inflict so rigorous a punishment upon
her; for she should not dye, but Live, and live now with far more
satisfaction: For her eyes which were only as Senses, shall then represent all
thing in their perfect Knowledge of them, For ye shall be like Gods knowing
good and evil. But in this discourse hitherto both the Devil and Eve left out
one expression in that command, namely, In the day thou eatest; they were both
willing it seems to omit the point of time. And well may Procrastination
continue as a punishment upon our humane Nature; she thought God would not be
so punctual to a day, or it may be she did not understand what a day was, or it
may be she had too various opinions of it, and not Considered as intended in
Puncto temporis, either 12. or 24. hours, or a year, according to the Natural
motion of the Sut: But it may be she conceivd the day to be a Thousand years,
which are but as a day with God. So that the day she should die should be a
thousand years after the Eating, or a time undeterminable. Some of these
Conceptions might make them omit the day; for it is certain, he neither sinned
the last day of his life, nor dyed the first day of his death. So that we may
understand it to be a death Contracted, but not instantly inflicted; and in
stead of Morte Morieris, we may read Mortalis eris; Thou shall dye the death,
that is, thou shall be Mortal, or have a daily disposition in thee to death.

Cap. 3. Verse 5.
For God does know, 8.
that in the day you eat thereof then your eyes shall be opened, and you shall
be like God's knowing good and Evil. Now the Devil boldly mentions the day,
when by his subtle intangling discourses he had gotten the day of the Woman:
But (poor soul!) it proved her night; Their Eyes which till now were open to
see all sorts of Felicity, are now dimmed with the shades of ensuing Mortality;
so that though they have Eyes, yet they can see nothing, but the effects of
their Ambition. For that knowledge of goodness which they had in perfection, by
continuing in obedience to Gods Commands, is now turned by their disobedience
to an imperfect knowledge, which is the greatest Evil attending human Nature:
For by this imperfection we scarce know what good is to be followed, or what
evil to be shunned. Regions, Climes, Tempers, Accidents, and even Laws of
Nations, giving Latitudes or Circumscriptions enough to puzzle the devoutest
souls; and doubtless this is no similitude of a Divine knowledge, or to know as
God, who I presume knows Evil no otherwise, then by suffering our Knowledge to
be puzzled in attaining the unspeakable Mystery of goodness. And therefore the
Targum of Jerusalem being tender, I suppose, in ascribing the knowledge of Evil
to God, instead of you shall be like Gods, knowing Good and Evil; say, you
shall be like the great Angels, who are endued with Wisdom to determine good
and evil. And if the Planets and Spheres have their operations from the Angels,
then the astrologians have the advantage of knowing good and evil by
Collection: however, it is an equal infelicity not to know the distinction of
good and evil, as not to be able to improve the one, or prevent the other. And
the Chaldee Paraphrase says, Ye shall be like Princes; as if Princes were to be
the Judges of Good and Evil: For good or bad things (which some call
indifferent) are made good or bad according to the Nature and obligation of
their Command.

Cap. 3. Ver. 6.
And when the Woman saw that the Tree was good for food, 9.
and that it was Pleasant to the Eyes, and a tree to be desired to make one
wise Here we see the foundation of disobedience: We first argue from necessity,
It is good for Food; and without Food we cannot sustain Nature: and who has
more reason to be Careful of that then our selves? And why did God exhibit us
the view of Food, yea and good food, if we may not be our own Carvers? Then we
argue from Pleasure; does God (say we) Create in us organs of sight, and those
attended with such Agents, that we are pleased and displeased according to our
objects; and seeing content gives life to every fruition why should we not
enjoy what is most pleasurable? and at once please our taste and sight? And
then steps in Ambition, and says, We shall not only please our senses, but our
Intellectuals: We shall be wise as God, Angels, or Princes; that is, as any of
our superiors. And thus by these insinuations we give our selves Latitude to
our own destructions; and this is the ground of ruin to Families as well as to
States: The Servant would evade the Masters Commands, the Wife the Husbands,
the Subject the Princes; Judging the Commands to be of small consequence, and
so the breach easily forgiven, or advantageous to our selves, and therefore
naturally dispensibe. But doubtless the less the command be the more we are
obliged to perform, because the performance seems more in our Power; and the
more advantageous it is to our private Capacities the greater affront we give
to the public by our disobedience, and engrossing that which should be either
common or restrained, by so being persuaded and resolved to disobey.

She took of the Fruit thereof, 10.
and did eat. This Fruit which Eve did eat is commonly taken for an Apple, but
I cannot tell for what reason, unless that Malum is Latin for an Apple, as
also for Evil. And then the next doubt is ( for none knew the original of
Latin) whether Eve did speak Latin in Paradise. But the small reason that I
have heard for the Apple is, because if one Cut an Apple cross the Core, that
is, beteen the stalk and the top, the Beds of the Seeds are just ten in number,
representing the ten Commandments; all which Eve did at once break by eating
the Apple, and that Fruit continues still which those ten marks. But whether it
were an Apple eaten, or any other Fruit, as Ficu^ Indicus, etc. is not
meterial; the breach of a command is that which is denoted to us, and our
Ambitious Curiosity in meddling or inspecting such things, though seeming
trivial, yet are the Arcana Imperii, and not to be touched but by God, or
Angels, or Princes themselves. Let the tree of Knowledge alone; it is meat only
for our superiors: you who are Subjects be content to plant your Gardens, and
sow your Fields, and converse with the innocent Beasts thereof, The Woman must
not prattle her self into temptations, nor be courted by the subtilty of those
who would beguile her into forbidden Actions. We see the Consequence; her
disobedience breaks the Conjugal Bond of obedience, and proves to be both the
ruin of her self and her Superior. And as it is in private Families, so in
States, Schisms beget Faction, Faction Sedition, Sedition Rebellion, Rebellion
Wars, Wars Murders, Depopulations, and even ruin to themselves and the whole
Fabric of which they are Composed. So that certainly the great sin against God
and Nature is disobedience, and the greatest Ignorance is not to know the true
Nature and dependences of obedience, from a Child to his Parent, from a Servant
to his Master, from a Soldier to his Captain, from a Wife to her Husband, from
a Subject to his Prince; and not to be enticed, or go out of the Limits of
either, till the guidance of Superiors directs us; wherein God is to be served
in the first place, Princes in the next, and the other degrees according to
subordinations. Yet the great deceit in these gradations is, that we are apt to
say, That God would not have done what our Superiors Command, or would have
done what they forbid. Wherein the safest and justest Rule is, Not to think our
selves wiser then our Superiors, for they and we have our very orders and
stations from God; and Angels, Princes, and Superiors are nearer to him in
their several degrees, then those who are subordinate to them. And he is a
dangerous Casuist, who undertakes to cleave a Hair between a Superiors
positive Command and his own private Judgment, of what is fit or not fit to be
done therein. For the Orders of all Men, yea even of all Creatures, are so
Known and ascertained, that it is only a Criticisme tending to Rebellion, when
by subtle persuasions of others, which is meant by the Serpent, or our own
inclinations, we are diverted from that harmonious Method which God has
constituted in the Government of the World, and more especially of Men: And it
is much better to err in the Obedience, then in the Repugnancie. If any one in
his own time makes but a due Collection of what Rewards he has seen to the
one, and what inflictions to the other, he shall need no other argument for the
one, or disswasions from the other.

6. 11.
And gave also to her Husband with her, who did eat. What Moral man can say,
but Eve was a kind Wife to let her Husband partake of the pleasures of her Eye,
taste, and great expectation of Knowledge? For with these three arguments did
Eve present to him the fruit: And it was from a Wife, whose very Beauties (she
being then in perfection) were temptation sufficient to receive a meaner
Present from so fair a hand, whose kindness was so full of duty and goodness,
that he could not doubt of incurring the least prejudice from the tenders of
her Love. And how could he, who had the command to forsake Father and Mother
and cleave to his Wife, be so unkind, as to make the least expostulation or
denial of the Testimonies of her affection? And possibly, (if the story be not
altogether Allegorical) as some Fathers would have it, or Chemical, (according
to Paracelsus) the Serpent might whisper in the Ear of Eve to this effect:
Well, you think Adam Loves you, when possibly he only pretends this Commnnd
from God merely to deprive you of so great advantage as you may have by eating
that fruit, and thereby be equal in Knowledge with him. Or it may be he is
Jealous of you, because I have been so long discoursing with you; and therefore
it may be he will deny you, because I have persuaded you to it. Upon the whole
matter, it is an evident Testimony of his want of Love to you if he deny you so
Kind an offer, or the grant of that wherein there is no trouble, but seeming
advantages to you both by your Condescension.

Who at her persuasion did eat. 12.
It is a riddle to my thoughts, when I consider that the fulfilling of the Law,
and the breach of the Law, have both of them their foundation from Love. And in
those the Jews were so Critical, that they accounted the number of the Mosaical
Precepts to be seven hundred ninety and three, whereof four hundred twenty and
eight affirmatives, which were what we should do; and three hundred sixty and
five Negatives, which were what we should not do. And the Moralists call those
Virtues, and these Vices. And the truth is, in these there are no distinctions
Real or formal; for even Lust and drunkenness, etc. are but the Excesses of
Love: so that the same God, who bids us Love, and gives us Variety of amiable
enjoyments, Bids us also forbear Love. Now, how can the Temper of one Man give
Law or proportion to the temper of another, and make that Lust which is but a
discharge of a different Temper; or that Drunkenness, which is but the natural
satisfaction of thirst? And therefore are to forbear too severe a Censure, for
every Man has a proportioned Love, some but sparks, some Coals, and some
Flames; and it is (or ought to be) the wisdom of every Man to know the Temper
of his own Love, and not thereby to bound or limit another; and his own (once
known) not to suffer his Love either to injure others by a breach of
Commutative Justice, or prejudice himself in not giving a true balance to his
affections, by making that necessary to his Constitution, which is but
adventitious either by habit, or admitting temptations, or willful
provocations. But herein we show our true Love, when our Love is fixed in
obedience to the Laws superiors, and by restraining our Appetites to
subordinate Loves, and bringing our Tempers to observe superior Commands: for
God commanded Adam that he should not eat; so the delights of the Eyes, the
pleasures of the taste, the Inticements of the Woman ought to have been
subservient Loves to the love of his command; and though there are certain
natural and inherent Loves, as to see, and taste, even things desirable in
themselves; yet he is most happy that can make his Negative Loves subservient
to the affirmatives of higher Powers, and such Law as are made intentionally
equal.

Cap. 3. Ver. 7.
And the eyes of them both were opened, 13.
and they knew that they were naked. We must not think that Adam and Eves eyes
were shut in their Perfection, and opened by their transgression; for before
they saw each other in their full Accomplishments of Nature, and had no cause
to blush or be ashamed: But being now sensible of their Disobedience, and not
knowing how to blame one another, her for tempting, and he for yielding, they
now not only blush, and are ashamed of their Disobedience, but like the Beast,
that by hiding his head thinks his body undiscerned; so they by making
themselves Garments thought that their fault should not be discovered. And it
still continues in the Nature of Man to find out shifts, clokes, and umbrages
for his offenses.

And they sowed fig leaves together, 14.
and made themselves aprons. It is probable Adam made choice of these
fig leaves rather then any other, both for the breadth, substance, and
excellent qualities of repelling all Tumors; but whether of them they made
Aprons, Coats, or Girdles, or Breeches, Tranflators differ: But the Targum of
Jerusalem says, Nudati erant a vest Onychina, in qua creati erant; that is,
They were disrobed of their Garment, which in the time of their Perfection was
made of the Onyx stone. For there are stones in Italy of which they make most
curious threads, and those spun into Cloth resembling our finest flexen Linen:
and the like might be made of this. Now this Onyx stone has a peculiar quality
(as Authors write) to strengthen the Spirits, and heighten Venery: And whether
their offense was Venereous, adumbraged under the name of forbidden Fruit, may
be Considered on. And great Reason had God to be Angry, if they enjoyed that
forbidden Fruit, till God (as it were) had fully considered whether it had been
more advantageous to Man to arise from the ground like the Mandrake, or the
Sensitive Lamb, or like Barnacles from trees or shells) or that there should
have been Incubents and Succubents to dispose of their Nocturnal ejaculations
or decostations, without pain to Male or Female: like that of Adam and Eve, he
only in the loss of a rib, she in being one.

Cap. 3. Verse 8.
And they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the Garden. 15.
This voice and walking is not to be Considered in an humane sense, but every
inclination to good, or declination of what is evil, is a voice from God to
incite or prohibit; And every Motion which tends to an act of goodness, or
deviation from evil, is within the Compass of Gods perambulation. He walks in
this world as his Garden, where we enjoy all pleasing objects to the Eyes, and
other senses, and by our senses we improve our Knowledge, both in Moral and
Divine Concerns; his Voice still attends, and his Motion gently persuades us.
And yet miserable Men as we are, we see and approve of the best things, but
pursue the Worst. And it seems a strange Condemnation to be punished for our
inquisition and trial of all things, whenas by sacred Writ we are advised so to
do; and that those things which are good for us to enjoy, yet are made
destruction to us, by (as it were) a secret Inhibition. So that our Trial of
all Things consists even of Nothing but Circumspections, lest in the most
seeming Innocent Actions we should offend: For our Eating, Drinking, Sleeping,
and inquiries into Lawful Knowledge, have in them almost undeservedly both a
Necessity and Offense: And therefore the Apostle might justly tell us, that we
are to work out out Salvation with Fear and Trembling. And it is remarkable,
that as God is said to be walking in a Garden, where Adam Committed his
offense: So Christ himself (as Religion teaches us) was walking in a Garden,
and as Man he was Crucified for that sin in a Garden. And he that will observe
the Divine Motion of punishment shall find (both in Sacred and Profane
Histories) Examples enough to teach, that God is (as it were) punctual in his
punishments, both as to Time, Place, and Circumstance, even to the third and
fourth Generation of them who hate him; which Third and Fourth I take to be a
septenary time. And as Adam and Eve consists of seven Letters, so their
ensuing punishment was upon the seven Ages of mankind, whether Considered
Individually to Man, or Generally to the seven Ages of the World.

Walking in the cool of the day. 16.
God is said to be the Lord of hosts, to show his courage; and a God of anger;
and yet a God of patience, though provoked every day. And even now when Adam
had offended, and his offense known, yet he showed not his anger, but walked
without any seeming passion in the cool of the day. And it is of great use in
Morality, when we know our temper to be inclined to wrath, or that we have just
provocations thereunto, that we endeavor to allay them by some outward or
inward temperament; by walking, that is, by a private discussing of the matter;
or by arguments of Forbearance, to mould our thoughts from anger or revenge.
And in a garden, that is, by Diversions; and in the cool of the day, that is,
by mollifying or refrigerating of that heat, unto which the Sun of Passion
would otherwise incite us.

And Adam and his wife hid themselves from the presence of the Lord God among
the trees of the garden. 17.
I wonder that Adam and Eve, who had so lately eat of the tree of Knowledge,
should so soon lose their Knowledge, to think that Gods Omnipresence could be
sheltered by the shade of trees. And we are more foolish in following their
steps thus; when we have done amiss, we run as it were from Gods presence, and
instead of imploring his forgiveness or assistance, we study which way to
umbrage our faults, and mix our selves with the society of others; as if either
the innocence of others should be a plea for our selves, or the diversions
which Company affords should obliterate the sense of our transgressions.

Cap. 3. Ver. 9.
And the Lord God called to Adam, 18.
and said to him, Where art thou? It is said that King Mithridates understood
seventy two Languages, yet he had thousands more to learn: for every individual
Creature has a language, and that language (though diversified by Organs) is
universally the same, for if several men of several Nations stand near a Tree,
which by the force of the Hewers is ready to fall, the universal language is
Take heed. And though men differ in Letters and Articulations, yet we differ
not in the sense which the Tree kindly speaks to us, and the Standers by are
Interpreters. And thus upon all occasions the voice of God by his several
Organs calls upon us, and his voice is labial, dental, and guttural, even as
ours; for if he speak from his lips, that is, things pleasing to us; or from
his teeth, that is, things displeasing to us; or from his throat, that is,
things indifferent; yet still in all he affords an intelligible voice to us,
which Adam well understood before God said in express terms, Adam, where art
thou? And doubtless the invisible expostulations between them were to this
effect: How now, Adam? Thou, whom I created from nothing; thou, whom after
Creation I made superintendent of all Creatures, and for whose sake I made them
all to be a pleasure to thee; thou, who were to Prune and Dress those
delicacies which I had Planted in the Garden; Thou, who had the freedom of
Art to imitate and imbellish what I had fixed in the nature of each Plant; Thou
who had the Knowledge of all Creatures, and a more particular, neerness to
the Creator; must thou so seclude thy self, that I must say, Where art thou?
Art thou performing thy duty? art thou enjoying what I allow thee, or doing
what I Commanded thee? And to this effect did the voice of God speak to Adam;
who answered;

Cap. 3. Verse 10.
And Adam said, 19.
I heard thy voice in the Garden, etc. It is not enough to hear Gods reproving
voice, but Divines say, that to repentance there belongs Confession,
Contrition, and satisfaction. He confessed his fear, but not his fault; nor was
there any Contrition, but for his Nakedness, not his Crime: and for
satisfaction, it was impossible, for he having disobeyed in eating what was
forbidden, he could not satisfy by uneating what he had eat. Vomit is not a
discharge of drunkenness, but an additional Crime. Charitable Actions do not
satisfy for extortion, but rather adds a greater Crime, by getting and
dosposing of that which ought not justly to be at his disposition. So that he
heard Gods voice, and showed his Terror, but no Confession, de discovered his
guilt, but no Contrition; he gives Excuses, but no satisfaction to a God who
had been so kind, so liberal, so indulgent to him.

And I was affeard. The proper English word expressing Fear is affeard, not
afraid; for afraid comes from Fray or Fraction of that Unity which ought to
be with men; but affeard is from auferre, or a supposition that something shall
be taken from us. And the Latin word for Fear is timor, that is, a present
apprehension te mori, that the object of fear will produce death to the event:
for though we do not discoursively (as here) dilate upon the Circumstances, yet
whatever happens to a man by loss or cross, yet the result is immediately in
the breast of man, timor, or te mori, that such an accident will occasion
death. And I find it in the Syriac, (of which I have writ in my Preface to the
Proverbs) where it is said, The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom;
it is translated Timor Mortis, The fear of death is the beginning of wisdom. And
this was the beginning of Adams Wisdom in his imperfections; for whilst he was
in Perfection he neither feared nor was ashamed of his Actions, or that Death
would ensue: And Doubtless the nearer our Actions are done to such uprightness,
the nearer we are to his primitive perfection: But sin, or disobedience,
either to God or Man, causes both shame and fear. Now the reason of his fear
is given;

Because I was naked. 20.
He was deprived (says the Chaldee) De vest Onychina, of his garment of virtue
which was restrained to obedience, in not eating the Fruit, or forbearing to do
what was forbidden; in not dressing the Garden, or pursuing just, honest and
beneficial employments to himself and others; and thereby not doing what was
Commanded, and being sensible that he had divested himself of his garment
Perfection, and that he had no defense for his disobedience, he tried what the
Shades of the evening and the trees would do.

And I hid my self. 21.
The Text says not in what manner he hid himself, but it is much that neither
the Tincture of his former perfection, nor the fear of God which is the
beginning of Wisdom, which certainly he knew as well as Solomon. And we may see
by this Text, that he had the fear of the Lord, yet it did not teach him David's
lesson, If (said he) I ascend up to Heaven thou art there; if into the deep,
thou art there also, etc. For then he could not have been, so ignorant of Gods
omnipresence, as to think that a few trees, or bushes, or caves, or the night
could hide him. For my part I think his hiding an additional sin equal to the
eating the Fruit: first, by distrust of Gods kindness, who might have pardoned
him, if he had not fled from the offense; for this in our Laws Consummates the
Crime: and next as great a distrust, that God could or would not cloth him in
his nakedness. And it continues still an Error in his posterity, who (in Want,
or Poverty, or in our offenses) betake our selves to subterfuges, which
aggravates the crime even with God and Man.

Cap. 3. Ver. 11.
And God said, Who told thee that thou wast naked? 22.
Have thou eat of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou should not
eat? This word Who might be an argument for the Prae-Adamite; as if there were
some other man to converse with, had not God explained himself in the sequel of
the question, Have thou eaten of the tree? etc. To show, that even dumb
Creatures may convince us of our errors, and the virtues which are in them
correct us of our vices. Things which are of a sanative nature tell us our
charitable duty to others; things of a destructive nature tell us we are to
avoid the doing of what is prejudicial to others. And it seems this tree had a
double nature; it had a virtue to tell him the goodness he had lost by his
disobedience, and an evil quality to teach him excuses. And it is no wonder this
tree should have this double quality, when we see the Be suck out of every
herb Honey, full of good and medicinal virtues; and supplies her sting with a
matter poisonous, hurtful, and evil. And the truth is, not this Tree only, but
all individual Creatures have their good and evil in them. The good of the Tree
was in the present pleasure to the eye and taste, the evil was in some
poisonous quality, which not only infected him and Eve with all their
infirmities, but by a traductive quality has made us desire and do those
things we should not. Nor need we wonder at this continuing quality, when we
see the Gums of Trees continue a Balsom for an hundred years: And the Italians
hold, that the longer some Poisons are kept, they are the more efficacious. And
both of them have not only power over the Body, but the very Mind, (which is
very near of kin to the Soul.) So that the virtues of some things make men good
by rectifying their tempers, the vicious quality of the same intoxicate, and
make men mad or worse: Nay, the virtues of the same individual Creature
restores to life, the vicious part a present death. But that which is more
considerable, is the Nicety between good and evil things; many times good
things prove poisons by their ill use, and Poisons or ill things prove
sometimes the best Antidotes.

Cap. 3. Ver. 12.
And the man said, 23.
The woman thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree to eat, and I did
eat. Disobedience is the Nurse of Ingratitude, and Ingratitude of Impudence.
Thus Adam instead of thanks for his Meet helper implicitly reviles God, who
gave her; not considering that she was given rather to help then advise; or if
to advise, yet he had the deliberative part in himself, to do or not to do, as
he thought most prudent; but without debating that with God, he with impudence
told God as it were, that it was Gods fault to give her to him; and since he
had given her, and that he was to show all expressions of kindness unto her,
who had recommended it to him, he thought himself obliged rather to observe her
then him: and thereupon without any more circumstance or excuse heard, She gave
it me, and I did eat.

Cap. 3. Verse 13.
And the Lord God said to the woman, 24.
What is this that thou have done? God said to Adam, Where art thou? though he
knew where he was; and to the Woman, What have thou done? though he knew what;
yet neither of these kind Questions could beget a civil or confessive answer,
but the Man said, the Woman gave it to me; and the Woman said, the Serpent
beguiled her: but neither of them, though they knew they had done the fact,
would acknowledge their own disobedience in doing it; for then possibly God
would have raised some Antidote from that, or some other tree, without a future
Savior, to have Cured the infection of the Evil, and to have fixed the benefit
of the good. But she ungrateful and Impudent as he, Replies, that the Serpent
beguiled her, and she did eat.

And the Woman said, 25.
The Serpent beguiled me. There need no inquiry into the History of Nature, to
know what kind of Serpent that was which beguiled Eve, when as we see every Man
is daily subject to be tempted by the same or the like Serpent. Pride is this
Serpent that tempts us to Ambitious actions; Covetousness this Serpent that
tempts us to injure others; Luxury this Serpent that tempts us into forbidden
Embraces; Wine this Serpent that steals into our veins with arguments of
Color and Taste, Improving the spirits, and solacing our dejections, until at
last it so Captivates our Reason, that when God asks where we are, we cannot
answer; or what we have done, we can only say with Eve, The Serpent has
beguiled us. Certainly it is a great punishment on our Natures that we cannot
Judge; or if we do, that we connot refrain from Excuses, and make those
offenses, which in themselves are none. For Ambition rightly placed is a
virtue, Covetousness Frugality, Luxury (if derived from the Constitution) is
but a more natural desire, Wine a Comforter. He is happy who can carry a
Balance always in his Mind to weigh his intentions and actions: And what is
thought or done, not to be too Censorious of himself or others. For there are
certain positives wherein our Judgments connot err, and therein to say the
Serpent beguiled, is no justifiable Excuse, but in things indifferent. Ecel. 5.
Solomon's Rule is very good, My Son, let not thy mouth accuse thy self of sin:
make not those things sins which are, more; and Commit not those, which
Certainly are.

Cap. 3. 14.
The Lord said unto the Serpent. 26.
The Serpent is called the subtilest Beast, yet doubtless every Creature has a
proportionable understanding of Gods voice. Psalm. 19. The Heavens declare (or
speak) the Glory of God; (which he first Communicates to them) the Firmament
speaks his handy work: one day tells another what is to be done the next, and
one night certify another what deeds are done therein, there is neither speech
nor Language but their Voice is heard through the world. Every individual thing
either in its operation or virtual Communication speaks that to others which
God speaks to them: For speech is not only that of which the Ear participates,
but the other senses do (as it were) hear it equally with the Ear. We see the
flowers speak their various colors; this flower says, I am Red, another
Yellow, a third Mixed; and we do but repeat their speech in saying what Color
they bear. And besides, what individuals do afford our senses, they also
administer discourses to our Reason and Judgment; how this or that is to be
virtually applied: from one we get a letter, from another a syllable, from a
third a word, from a fourth a sentence, from a fifth an effectual speech. And
all Creatures, though we know not how they understand their proportion of
speech which God speaks to them, yet they understand it, and only Man has the
disputative part granted to him; for though the Serpent was the subtilest
Beast, yet God would hear none of his subtle replications or Evasions. But God
said to Adam, Where art thou? And, Who told thee that thou were naked? And,
Have thou eaten? etc. To which three questions Adam gave three answers; Thou
gave me the Woman; she gave it me, and and I did eat. Then he put but one
Question to Eve, What have thou done? To which she made two answers, The
Serpent beguiled we, And I did eat: to show that she also was Limited in her
tongue, though she would give two answers to one question. So that by this Text
we see, that Man may enjoy a certain discourse, or ratiocination with God (for
this was after Adams fall) but the Woman a very little. But other Creatures are
Subject to his Voice without ratiocinating, for without Answer from the Serpent
The Lord said to the Serpent,

Because thou have done this, 27.
etc. It is not sufficient to refrain from Evil our selves, but we are not to
tempt others to it either by precept, suggestion, or Example. That this Serpent
had a Cunning wit the Text shows, that he was Beautiful, some Writers affirm;
Whether he eat or not let Commentators agree; for if considered as a Serpent,
what good was the knowledge of good to him? if Considered as the Devil, the
eating could not add to his Knowledge of goodness, because he knew more in his
Primitive perfection then could be added to him by secondare means. However we
may believe, either by remembrance of his former Condition, or by eating this,
he knew goodness notionally, not practically; but the Evil he not only knew,
but tempted Eve to the Knowledge of it. And this by his subtilty and Beauty,
two such temptations to that sex, that their virtues must seem to resist the
harmony of Nature by resisting of them, especially when they meet in one
Persorn. And herein methinks Eve was more excusable then Adam, for here was a
Lovely Serpent, a delicate Fruit pleasing to the Eye, delightful to the taste,
and of a promising virtue; What Woman could well resist those Temptations? Now
Adam had no more to tempt him, (as appears by the Text) then an implicit Love
and Kindness to his Wife, for she gave it him, (without any persuasive
induction that we read of) and he did eat. Now God did justly begin the
punishment with the first offender (the Serpent) and gave sentence on him for
tempting before he did it on those that were tempted, one being a premeditate,
wilful and affronting act, against his possitive Commands, the other occasional.

Thou art Cursed. 28.
Cursing is an intentional Revenge, and Revenge is mine, says God. But because
it is sweet and pleasant to the taste, and indeed has a relish of Ambition, we
Mortals) who have only power to intend, and not a positive power to act
revenge) do Lavish our spirits into execrations, which is an affront to the
Deity, as high as can be given; and it is often seen, that by them they heap
Coals of fire on their own heads; for when there is such a Concretion of Evil
spirits (as attend Curses) summoned together, they must fix somwhere, and
(says Solomon) A curse causeless shall not take effect where it was intended:
And then it must necessarily fall upon him that did intend it, which is but
suitable to Divine Justice; and therefore in things provoking our passions we
must follow Gods Example herein, who first examined the fact by these
Interrogatives, Where? Who? What? and those acknowledged, he gave his Curse,
and not before: we are not to be guided by provocations, but deliberations; and
the Targum says, God called these three, viz. Adam, Eve and the Serpent into
Judgment before he gave his sentence; and we see that a Curse is a thing of
that transendent Nature, even Man and Beast, and the Earth it self, have felt
the effects of it. And though David (a Man after Gods heart) did abound with
them, as we may read in his Psalms, and imprecated God for their performance,
and many of them granted; yet upon perusal of the History of his life we shall
find many of them to take no effect on those he desired, and some of them
Retorted on himself and family. God knows his own disposures best, and that
many times the success of our Curses would be the greatest Curse to our selves,
for he will execute them his own way. So that we show our duty and piety
toward him in forbearing, and our greatest folly in pronouncing them.

Above all Cattle, 29.
and all beasts of the field. By Cattle is meant tame Beasts, and by Beasts of
the field, wild beasts. (as I have shown elsewhere.) Now in the first part of
the third Chap. the Serpent is said to be the subtilest of the wild beasts, and
consequently more subtle then the tame, for their want of fears, and their
having (by a domestic Attendance) almost all things necessary provided for
them, they have need of that subtilty or craft which is requisite for the
wilder. However the Curse seems first to descend on the tame beasts, which in
our Translation is rendered instead of Cattle, Cursed be thou above thy
fellows; to show that the tame were his fellows, for therein was part of the
Serpents subtilty, to be too subtle for the tame, by his dissimulation of his
tameness; and more subtle then the wild, by Contriving more inventions. I must
confess I am posed at the Almighties severity herein, unless it were because
they were such fools to associate with a Beast of such a subtle and treacherous
nature; and it ought to be a Caveat to all innocents, to be circumspect in
their intermixture with such dangerous Companions; yet this daily happens both
in Families and States; which can carse be prevented but by a sedulous care of
our selves and actions, and well weighing the nature and inclinations of
others; seeing it is our Fate to be intermixed with such, we mush abstract the
wisdom of the Serpent from his subtilty, and be as wise as he, and retain that
innocence wherein we are Constituted, whether it be like the Dove, or Lamb, or
such other Creatures, whose gentle natures ought to be our examples.

On thy Belly shall thou go, 30.
and Dust shall thou eat all the days of thy Life. The Targum of Jerusalem
adds, Thy feet shall be cut off, and thou shall cast thy skin every seven
years, and there shall be de^ly poison in thy Mouth. Here the Targum explains
this Curse by reading, that his feet should be cut off, and that he should cast
his skin, and his mouth be full of poison which intimates, that he had feet,
and that his skin or beauty was permanent, and that his breath was sweet and
pleasing before the curse. Now it was not the want of feet that made the curse,
for many creatures have the like want, as Snakes and Insects, yet are accounted
perfect in their kind: Nor the eating dust, for most do so; for what creature
in some proportion does not daily eat it? For though it is said the Camelion
lives by Air, yet it is the Atoms or dust in the air that nourishes it: Nor
casting the skin, for most creatures do so every seventh year; and Physicians
hold that the skins of serpents and Snakes so exuviated are very Medicinal, nor
having poison in their mouth; for most Creatures in some proportion afford the
like, both Man and Beast; but the changing of that due frame, proportion and
constitution to another which is worse, and that was, and still is the curse
that hangs on us: For if our Eyes be made perspicuous, our Ears Musical, our
Touch delicate, our Taste distinctive, our smell preservative, our Limbs
straight, and our Mind pure and serene, in bodies harmoniously Composed; yet
if we dim our Eyes, deafen our Ears, vitiate our touch, taste, or smell,
obfuscate our minds by the ill contracts or habits of our bodies; These are
the curses upon the use of forbidden fruits, that is, the use and habit of Evil
Actions; for to use our sound and perfect constitutions otherwise then God by
Reason prompts us to, is a decurtation of our feet, and an exuviation of our
Constituted beauty, which sills us with such venomous qualities, that even our
very Breaths are infections to those who are more virtuous.

Cap. 3. Verse 15.
And I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, 31.
and between thy seed and her seed, and it shall bruise his Head, and thou
shall bruise his Heel. The Targum of Onkelous reads the latter part of this
verse thus, Ipse Recordabitur, He shall remember thee, and what thou did to
him from the beginning, and thou shall observe him in the end.

The Targum of Jonathan renders that part thus; Et erit, And it shall come to
pass, when there shall be Sons of the Woman which obey the precepts of the Law,
they shall use their endeavor to strike thee at thy head: but when they shall
forsake the precepts of the Law, thou shall study to bite them in their heels;
but to them it shall be a medicine to thee, because they applied the medicine
to the heels in the days of the King Messiah.

This Text is of an ambiguous nature; but because Jews and Christians make it
the first Prophetic Text concerning a Messiah, and having written something of
the Diversity of Religions, I shall refer this to some other place, to be
discoursed of more at large. And though my Notions herein may differ from other
Writers, yet without prejudice I hope to Christian Religion.

Cap. 3. Ver. 16.
And to the woman he said, 32.
I will greatly multiply thy sorrows in thy conception, and in sorrow shall
thou bring forth children. The Targum reads it, I will multiply thy affliction
and pains by the blood of thy virginity and conceptiou: which shows, that as
the Virgin Mary without fraction of any Membranes, which causes that virginate
effusion of blood, and consequently pain; and also without pain in conception
or eduction brought forth a child: so should every woman ('it is supposed) have
enjoyed the like benefit, had not this curse come upon them. I confess, it is
scarce conceivable how fractions or extensions of parts could be without pain,
but we see how Oils and other Arts prove Emunctions and Lenitives. And we need
not doubt of the Almighties power and kindness in imparting unto them such
knowledge, whereby they should have enjoyed a progeny with pleasure, both in
Admission; Ejection, Conception, and Emission, without that Philosophical doom
(not only upon Man but other creatures) that all creatures after Coition are
sad; which I will not dispute whether it is because the pleasure is so short,
or some intermixture of pain concurrent or expectant; so that there is an
immediate and inexpressible sense of the departure of some Animal Spirits from
them, which are to supply another body, as it were robbing them of their Native
properties. But for her complying with the Serpent, and thereby disobeying God
and Man, she is justly doomed to those pains, which certainly are no way
compensated with those pleasures which Tirisius tells us of, for those
pleasures which are, are rather Inductives, and ensnare into pains and
tortures, then any real pleasures: for we may observe, that those who enjoy the
most, are loaded with Diseases and Distempers, either in Youth or Age, able to
restrain the most Libidinous from enjoying their Phansies more then Realities.

And thy desire shall be to thy husband. 33.
Our Translation in the word Desire follows the Hebrew; and Desires are in
Latin Desideriae, derived from Sydera, the Stars; in which formerly, and now in
this Age, we place such an efficacy, as to think they have a power over, or
virtue to guide our actions: and such a desire ought every woman to have
toward her husband.

Other Translators call Desire Cupiditas, from Cupid, which is Cuipio: that is,
that our desires should be to such, as to whom we may attribute a Piety or
Goodness: and upon the like account the wife ought to have her desires toward
her husband.

Others render the Latin for Desire Amor, that is, a morte: that she is to
believe, he is of power to preserve her even from dying by his vigilant care
over her: and therefore she ought to have her desires toward him, even for her
own preservation.

Others read Desire Conversio tua, etc. that she is to turn and move according
as her husband thinks fit to govern: for going two ways can never be succesful
and is opposite to a Conjugated Love.

Others read Necessitus tua; that is, Necessasesse; that is, there is so
perfect a necessity in obedience, that it must be performed by the wife, lest
she cease to be, or at least to enjoy any contentment to her self or husband.

The Targum reads it Appetitus tua, (a petione;) that is, whatever she desires
of her husband must be in a submissive and petitionary way.

Now though our Version says only Thy desire shall be to thy husband, it does
not exclude his to her, even in the same senses as before recited: for
doubtless as the question is undecided, whether we see by Extramission or
Intromission: so it is in the desires between Man and Woman, whether the object
of him attracts her desires, or the object of her attracts his; or whether it
be an unexpressible uniting of visuals in a moment; (by visuals I mean the form
and figure of what is seen, as well as that which sees.) And it is hard to find
out this Attraction by other demonstration then this or the like Experiment:
Take a piece of Iron untouched by a Loadstone, and such an other piece of Iron
as has been touched, of an equal weight with that which is untouched; lay
these upon two pieces of Cork of equal weight, and flote them upon the edges of
a vessel of water: then fix a thread from side to side of the vessel, at an
equal distance from the two Irons, mounted on their Corks opposite to each
other, and the Irons with their Corks will by an equal pace swim toward the
thread or center to meet each other, and then both will join with an amicable
embrace, as if neither would yield to an Attraction, but by a stately, easy,
and equal motion, so mutually move to an union at their center. And though it is
said, her desire shall be to her husband, yet he is not to hide or retract his
mutual and reciprocal love and desires; but to let them meet in one center and
conjugated affection.

And he shall rule over thee. 34.
Regulabi^ in our Translation; that is, he shall be as a King to guide thy
public affairs: and dominabitur, says another; that is, he shall be a Director
also in thy domestic concerns. Both which we translate, He shall rule over
thee; that is, be a rule or guide to thy actions. Or, as Stars are supposed to
guide inferior bodies by their influence; so by his piety and exemplary life to
direct and guide her to an upright conversation, and in all hazards of life and
death to cherish or prevent them. And were this disposition in husbands, and
that imitation in wives, the curse would be a blessing; but the curse is still
in refractoriness of obedience. And women are still subject to repeat what the
Serpent taught, viz. that they may eat: that is, that they may taste of
forbidden fruit, and take irregular courses, thinking to gain experimental
knowledge, and that they shall not die, or be accused thereby for disobedience.

Cap. 3. Ver. 17.
And to Adam he said, 35.
Because thou have hearkened to the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the
tree the which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shall not eat of it. It is the
voice that gives the chief distinction to the several kinds of living
creatures, and the species of those kinds are also distinguished by it; so that
there is scarce any individual of any kind, which has not some audible found
or voice different from each individual of the same kind; and though each kind
agree in the intention of their voice appropriate to each kind, so that they
understand each other, as the Horse his kind, the Sheep his; yet Man, who is
the rational Judge, does perfectly apprehend (even in his imperfect station)
that the individuals of each kind have different voices: even the Nightingales
differ, though not in their Notes, yet in their Keys, some higher, some lower.
But in all creatures which have Musical voices Man undertakes the Umpirage: and
in respect of his own race, there is no creature to whom he attributes so much
pleasure, as to the voice of a Woman; and the more if he has some additional
Affection for her person: for it is known, that their very speech has
captivated some men, not for the Rhetoric of what she speaks, but the mere
Phantasm of her voice. And if we do this whilst we are under this state of
Imperfection, who almost could blame Adam whilst he had the perfection of
Judgment, and she the accomplishment of what could make her a perfect voice, so
far to indulge his harmonious mind as to hearken to it? So that certainly God
was not angry with him for this, but is was for his hearkening to her voice of
temptation, to such a voice as did not only please the appetite of Adams ear,
(for that was dispensible;) but such a voice as provoked him to an inordinate
act, in doing what he was forbidden; for our delights and contentments ought to
be guided, not by what is simply pleasurable and contenting to our selves, but
what is just and suitable to Gods commands.

Cursed be the ground for thy sake. 36.
We had need to take care of our actions, whenas we sey by the Text, and daily
see how many Innocents suffer by our misactions. The Targum says, that the
ground was cursed because it did not warn Adam of this transgression. And it
may be the Lord Bacon had his Fancy from the Targum, that the Earth was a
great animal, and that the breath thereof was the Sea, which caused the Ebbing
and Flowing. If so then, as it had knowledge within it self of all Gods
commands, so it ought to have admonished Adam, and not doing it occasioned this
curse.

In sorrow (or tears.) 37.
Tears and Sorrows are synonimous, for we do not express our sorrows so
effectually as by tears; for groans and sighs are but evaporations of our
troubled spirits, but tears are a more condensed and contracted evidence of our
sorrows, as if recollected and distilled from all the suffering parts of Man.
And therefore David prays, that God would imbottle his tears; of which I have
spoke more in the Chapter of Immortality.

And though we ost shed tears for joy, yet they give such a compressure to all
parts, that they seem to be derived rather from the cistern of sorrow then joy,
because there usually follows such an immediate discomposure both to the body
and mind of those who shed them.

Shall thou eat thereof all the days of thy life. 38.
The Chyle that feeds us in the womb, the Milk when we are born the varieties
of food in our Youth and Age, is but a nimble transmutation of the Earth, so
little, that the greatest part in few hours naturally turns to earth again; and
that which stays longer, (our Blood, Flesh, and Bones) is still but earth in
various forms and colors, even every minute subject to accidental alteratioas
into its original mass: this is our Curse. But what food we should have had
void of such transmutations or corruptions, nor Schools nor Human Reason can
inform us, only our Faith believes, that when the days of life are ended, that
our corruption shall put on incorruption, and our mortality immortality: in
which state we shall be above the use and decay of Elements, because that
Beautifical Vision which we expect will make us perfect, without any other
supplement but it self, which consists not in fullness of any matter, but
unexpressible Illuminations.

Thorns and thistles shall it bring forth to thee. 39.
We may observe that Gods curses upon those Innocents have some mixture of
blessings; for the Earth is made part of our Human bodies, and Thorns and
Thistles have their sanative virtues on us, as well as prickles to hurt us.
Spina signifies as well the Backbone, wherein our strength and health consists,
as those prickles which offend us. And Joseph of Arimathea's Staff was
transformed into a Thorn rather then any other Shrub, as a Signal of his
Profession. And Tribulus (a Thistle) may as well be called Tri^bulla, a
threefold Ornament, intimating the Trinity, which should be more discovered to
us, as Tribulations or Trouble. And these Tribuli (or Thistles) have their
virtues too as well as their offenses: and it is remarkable, that one of the
kinds of these Thistles is called Christ's Thistle by the Herballists, upon
supposition that the Crown wherewith Christ was in part crucified, was made of
the pricky substance of that Thistle. So that as the Earth was cursed in
bringing them forth, yet they had some kind of honor to be made use of upon so
signal an occasion. And Thorns are of that great use in this part of the world,
as that whereas before things seemed to have a Community, now by Enclosures and
Fences made of them each man enjoys his own propriety with more secureness. And
the Thistles give a testimony of the rich' ness of the ground where they grow
and by Transplantation turn to an effectual nourishment, as Artichokes, etc.
Thorus and Thistles do not exclude more pleasant Plants, for amongst Gods
curses there are blessings, and his mercies flourish with his justice.

Cap. 3. Ver. 18.
And thou shall eat the herb of the field. 40.
Soon after Man was created, in the 29th. verse of the first Chapter, says God
to Adam, I have given you every herb, and it shall be to you for meat: there
the Injunction was upon the Herb, that it should be for the food of man; but
here it is said, Thou shall eat the herb of the field, and here the Injunction
was upon Adam to eat. He was at some liberty before to eat, but now his food is
restrained; and therefore some do question whether we do not multiply Adams
transgression by our continued eating of other creatures, which were not then
allowed to us: for if we consider the numerous living creatures, whose blood is
shed to fill our Appetites, we have nothing almost to plead for the doing so
but Custom, or some necessity to lessen the number of those creatures, lest
they should grow so numerous as to destroy those herbs of the field that should
feed us; or their Carcases by death be more offensive then the Ordure which we
extracted from them. So that by this extravagancy of food we seem to continue
our curse, in that we cannot frame and comply our Appetites to that which
doubtless would be most beneficial to our tempers; especially if we consider
the virtue of herbs, either in their flowers, brauches, or roots, not only
sanative, but more safely nutrimental to our health then any other food.

Cap. 3. Ver. 19.
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat bread, until thou return unto the
ground. 41.
As Tears proceed from the motions of Joy and Sorrow, and seem to be extracted
from the most internal parts, and so distilled from the eye, the most delicate
part of Man: so Sweat by labor or pain is the extraction of the outward parts
into a liquid matter, passing through the Pores, to ease it self by discharging
that oily and watery substance. Now some parts are more apt then others to vent
it, and such in Physic are called the Sudatory parts, as the Armholes, etc.
because being naturally kept more warm, the Pores are more passable: Now the
Brow or Face being more bony then those, yet do as quickly send forth that
humor as the other parts, and the rather because the Spirits run toward the
Brain, and that Pan has many Sutures about it, through which that humor is
more quickly vented. And there is some relation to the word Sudor Sweat, and
Suturae Suitors; for through those the Brain does more easily purge itself by
Sweats; and they more commonly upon the Brow, near which the Sutures are, then
any other part.

Thou shall eat bread. 42.
It is not probable that Bread (as we now take it) was known in Paradise;
therefore the word Cibum is more used by Translators then Panem: that is,
whatever food he should eat for the future, he was to labor and take pains for
it, and that must necessarily produce sweat to the brow or face.

Until thou return to the ground: 43.
for of dust thou were made, and to dust thou shall return again. Concerning
these read my Discourse of Immortality. The Targum adds, And from dust thou
shall rise again, that thou may give a reason for all things thou have done
in the day of the great judgment.

Cap. 3. Ver. 20.
And Adam called his wife Eve (or Eva) because she was the mother (filiorum) of
all (the sons of men) living. 44.
If we will give credit to the History of other Nations, there were other
people then in being, and many years before; but the Children of Adam and Eve
(say they) were the select people from which God did derive that Church, which
has spread over the greatest part of the world; first by them, then the
Patriarchs, then the Jews, then Christians: and the Turks and Jacobines assume
an Interest, and do as hardly admit us as we them to the undeniable Progeny of
those two Ancestors. But all agree, that at one time or other we came from the
earth both by Father and Mother; and by experience we agree thither we shall
return again: and most agree to a Resurrection of rewards or punishments for
our virtues or offenses.

Cap. 3. Ver. 21.
And to Adam and his wife the Lord God made coats of skins, and clothed them.
45.
Our English cannot render the words better then coats and clothed; though we
cannot suppose that there were either coats or clothes in the infancy of the
world, unless we will make it an argument for the Prae-Adamites: but according
to the Arabic they were clad with the Hides of Beasts. But the Targuim of Vz
says, God took off the Serpents skin which tempted them, and put it on them:
and it was but just that the Tempter should be so served; and it is wished those
garments have not infused such a continued subtilty into their successive
Generations, that the most part of the world consists of Subtilty and Cheats
even to this day, and their former garment of Onyx or Virtue is now scarce
known to us but by its name.

Cap. 3. Ver. 22.
And the Lord God said, 46.
Behold, the man is become like one of us, to know good and evil: and now lest
he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and live for ever.
The tree of good and evil, and the tree of life, have been discoursed of in the
precedent Sections: that which may be added concerning the tree of life is,
that it should have such virtue as to make Adam by his eating thereof live for
ever. It is much that Eternity should so puzzle the world, whenas we see here
that it had been gained merely by the sense of tasting or eating; for certainly
even the best things we know or can attain to come first to our Senses, then to
our Reason and Intellect; yea, even the greatest Notions of Faith have their
original from some Sense, because by being sensible of things which Sense
illustrates to us, we believe greater that are not so sensible: And Eternity it
self is apprehended by us with the contemplation of a Beatifical Vision, which
we see comparatively by those glorious creatures of light, etc. which with
variety of contentments we daily behold; and so by the gradations of whatever
we see, touch, taste, hear, or smell, the Contemplative man may mount them to
such a pious degree, that every sense will as it were enjoy a present eternity,
which does not altogether consist in an undetermined continuance, but in a
continuance which infolds all imaginary contentments, which can be gradually
supposed by the most elevated senses. And though Adam was debarred from eating
of this tree, yet our Divines say, that we now eat it Sacramentally; and
without a Manducation there can be no Sacramental Faith. So that Sense is the
first act which leads us to an ineffable higher sense, communicated to us by
that tree of life of which we so eat; and this gives us so perfect a sense of
eternity, that this thin shadow of Mortality cannot keep even the present
fruition from our senses, and those senses wrap us in their present enjoyment.
For we see in common Experiments, that Salts (and things of such agile natures)
pass with ease through several Mediums: so may our Seases if they will employ
their activities otherwise then to carnal uses. Which Adam not doing,

Cap. 3. Verse 23.
Therefore the Lord God sent him forth to till the ground, 47.
from whence he was taken. It appears by the seventh verse, that Adam was made
of the dust of the ground, not within the circuit of the Garden or Paradise;
and in the 15. ver. that he was put into Paradise, and there to dress and keep
pleasurable what God had made pleasant to him: but here in this three and
twentieth he is put out of the garden to till that ground from whence he was
taken; and there by tilling to add Art to Nature, to change his pleasure into
labor, and his ease into industry. He, who was the first man, had but a small
enjoyment of felicity; and we, who are his successors, feel the momentariness
of our contentments here; they pass away like a flash of Lightning, which
vanishes with its sight. Advancements to Honor do but tumble us so many
degrees lower, Riches sill us with cares, Plenty with diseases, Pleasures with
sorrows; and the same dust that in the Sunshine of Prosperity is raised beyond
its center, is by the Showers of Adversity turned into mire and dirt, and made
so contemptible, that all passers by do shun it. And thus by a circular motion
we are made, exhaled, deprest, and involved in the restless common mass of
earth, undistinguishable from all things. But in our souls, which seem to have
nothing to do here, but to attend the motions of our dust, and to give an
account of every atom thereof, when the Cherubims shall be permitted to admit
us into that heavenly Paradise, which we believe is reserved for us.

Cap. 3. Ver. 24.
So he drove out the man, 42.
and he placed at the east end of the garden of Eden Cherubims, and a flaming
sword which turned every way, to keep the way of the tree of life. The Arabic
Translation says Angels instead of Cherubims, which word Angels in a general
notion includes all the Degrees of Angels: now the Schoolmen agree that there
are nine Orders of them, viz. (according to Dionysius) Seraphims, Cherubims,
and Thrones, Archangels, Angels, and Virtues; Dominations, Principalities, and
Potestates. Yet they do not all agree in the ranking them; for some place
Cherubims in the last Order but one: but whether first or last, we find the
Order of Chetubims only appointed to this service. And as for the Flaming
Sword, the word Versatilis is used here for Turning every way, and is the same
word which described the Serpent that tempted Eve, viz. Serpens versatilis, and
thereupon it may well be conjectured, that by this flaming sword, etc. is meant
an order of evil Angels, appointed also to guard the way to the tree of life.
For as there are Nine Orders of good Angels, so the Schools make nine Orders of
Evil Angels, viz. Beelzebub, Diabolus, and Belial; Asmodeus, Satan, and Merim;
Abaddon, Asteroth, and Mammon. Now of these Merim (the sixth Order) is called
Demon Igneus, and is that Order (say they) which guides the Lightning and
Thunder, and all ignital motions: and the study of Divination by fire is called
Piromancy. So that this Tree being kept by Evil Angels, Intimates to us that
Immortality should not be gained by any of the race of Humanity, until God
thought fit to open the way to it, and dismiss those Guards, and then the Good
shall eat of that tree of Life, and the one thereby enjoy their endless
felicities, and the others their endless miseries, if Origens Opinion be not
more favorable to the latter. But concerning Angels I have written elsewhere.

Cap. 4. Verse 1.
And Adam knew his Wife, 49.
and she conceived and bare Cain, and she said, I have gotten a man of the
Lord. The Arabic Translation says Coivit instead of Cognovit; however both
words signify the Doing the Act of Generation, which is still but a Tilling of
earth, according to command. For how many have died in the very act, either by
suffocating of the Spirits, or too violently transmitting them? But I observe,
that the word Cognovit is used by almost all Latin Translators, and I conceive
justly rendered from their Original, which comes from Cognitio, Knowledge. And
therefore we need not wonder that so many Philosophers did contend, that the
Venereal Sense should be ordained a Sixth Sense, because (as I suppose) all our
Knowledge is made Derivative by that act. Besides, the commixture of Spirits in
Coition make such Congratulatory expressions to each other, that their very
souls seem to be in an Extacy, whilst the spirits are thus in Communication,
and mutually imparting, as it were the Method of Creation, now in the instant
to be traduced into a procreation. By the way I observe it is said, that God
drove out the Man, but the Woman's expulsion not mentioned; yet here she showed
the first example of her goodness and kindness, without Cumpulsion to follow
and accompany him in all his labors and misfortunes, which is the most
excellent property of a wife: yet she was no sooner come into the wide world,
but she showed her Ambitious mind; for the Targum of Jerusalem reads this, and
Adam knew his wife, who desired an Angel: and that Targum says, that she
Conceived and brought forth Cain and said, I have got a Man, or Angel of the
Lord; from whence that opinion might arise, That Men's bodies were only prisons
here below for Angels, and that which we call souls are no other then
imprisoned Angels, and that after this Confinement they return again to the
Beatifical vision. However her ambition was punished in her production of Cain,
who set the first bad example of Cruelty and Imhumanity.

Cap. 4. Ver. 2.
And she again bore his brother Abel: 50.
and Abel was a keeper of sheep, and Cain a tiller of the ground. We find
nothing in this Text of the Education of Adams two sons in their Infant years;
but so soon as they were fit for employment, Adams discretion guided the
choice, and Eves fondness did not obstruct it, (which is a good rule for
mothers:) He saw the mild nature of Abel, and robustous nature of Cain, (as is
evident by their story.) And it is said here by the Septuagint, Fact us est
instead of Fuit; Abel was made, that is, Abel by that nature which God had
infused into him was made fit for that Employment: And Adam perceiving his sons
temper pursued it, and made Abel, that is, employed him in that calling which
was suitable to his nature. And the like Adam did by his son Cain, according to
his nature. We cannot force the temper or natural inclinations of our children,
but when we know them, we should rather improve then divert their honest
inclinations; and certainly these two Employments, as they were at first
insused into the two sons of Adam, so there is room enough for all their
posterity to take a share of them. For if we consider the Pastorul life of
Abel, which is not only restrained to Sheep, for pastor is as well a Herdsman
as a Shepherd, but has a latitude of inspection into all such Creatures as
keep together in Flocks and Herds; which indeed is most usual in tame beasts:
and from thence we learn Wisdom, Sagacity, Sobriety, Temperance, and almost all
Moral virtues; by them we come to know Government, the effects of Union, which
keeps them from danger; and indeed almost all Physical Notions, as well
Terrestrial as Celestial: and therefore it is no marvel that a Pastoral life
has such real and universal Encomiums, seeing it affords not only all the
varieties that Contemplation can afford or administer to us, but withal so
multifarious a mixture of the Active life, that nothing can be more
satisfactory to us; especially if we consider the Products of those Creatures
which are under their Tuition, whether alive or dead, by their Wool, Hair,
Ordure, Teeth, Fat, Entrals, etc. (of which I have writ elsewhere.) Next, if we
consider the Agricolist from Cain, where Industry, Art, and Nature do concur;
how many various Productions there are to encourage Labor and Art by several
Grains, Trees and their Fruit, Quarries, Minerals, and Earths, we may safely
conclude that there is no Constitution but may be fitted with a suitable
Employment, both advantageous to themselves and others. Neither can any Parent
be to seek in their election and recommendation of Employment to their
Children, because their Infant years seem as it were to be allowed to the
Parent, during that time to weigh and consider of Employments adequated for
them. Now those other Professions, which fill the world with Contests, are not
the proper Employments which were transmitted to us by Abel and Cain, but
rather adventitious and intrusive; and we may see by their stories how
dangerous it was and has been to admit a Diversion from those Original
Rudiments, especially in making Religion their pretense, as will be shown in
the next Discourse between Cain and Abel.

Cap. 4. ver. 3. to 17.
A Digression concerning Cain and Abel.
And Cain offered to the Lord of the fruit of the ground, 51.
and Abel of the firstlings of his flock; and the Lord accepted Abels, and not
Cains. Whereupon Cain was angry, and upon dispute with Abel slew him, for which
God was displeased, and banished him. But yet Cain seemed to repent of the
fact, whereupon God in favor set a mark upon him that none should kill him:
and he went and lived in the east of Eden, where he begot children, built a
city, and called it by his sons name. What had Cain to do with a voluntary
oblation of his labors, (for as yet we see no order therein from God) as if he
took a pride in them? Abel had as much reason to begin as he, but Abel did not
meddle in such matters, till Cain set him an example: and this may be the chief
reason why Cainn sacrifice was rejected, whatever Josephus affirms; for hereby
he did intrude to that which did not concern his vocation, and afterward as it
were to sit in judgment with God Almighty, by disputing what Sacrifice was
acceptable, and what not, and why God refused one and accepted the other, and
which should be best the Contemplative or Active life. In which controversy
methinks I hear Cain (as discontented at Gods refusal) say to Abel; Is this
that just God our father Adam tells us of? Was it Justice in that God, think
you, to punish him so severely for eating a little fruit; whereas he that had
power to make him, had as much power to hinder him from committing that offense
against his Creator? Was it Justice, think you, to banish him from all
felicities, and make him the subject of all miseries, who but a little before
was made his Image and similitude? How can it consist with a Divine Power to be
so inconstant? Or was it Justice toward me, that seeing we were commanded to
till the ground in the sweat of our brows; and according to that command I have
dug and delved, and from my industry, and merely from a pious mind, have
dedicated my Labors to him as an acceptable sacrifice; was it Justice in him
to refuse my sacrifice, and accept of yours, brother Abell? for you lead a mere
Lazy life, and offered nothing as the Issue of your sweating Labors, or worthy
to be esteemed a sacrifice; yet does this God accept of your Laziness, and
reject my Industry. And therefore (says Cain) I understand no more than this,
(which is the Targum of Jerusalem) that there is a God that created the world;
but yet he governs without any relation to good works, and is merely partial;
for else why should he accept thine, and not accept mine? And the Targum of
Jerusalem makes him more passionate, and affirms, that there is no judge of
good or bad, nor no world to come, nor reward for the just, nor punishment for
the wicked, nor that the world was created or governed by his mercy, because
(says he) my offering is not accepted, and thine is. But Abel was as positive
(in which the Targums agree) who replied and said, There is a God; that he is
no accepter of persons; that there will be a day of Judgment; and that he is a
Righteous Judge; and that there is another world to come; and that there is a
reward for the just, and a punishment for the wicked: and this affirmative was
sealed with Abel's blood; for in this heat of contest Cain slew him, and
thereby made him the first Martyr for Religion. And thus we see how the
Disputes of the Ceremonial parts of it introduced the questioning of the
Fundamentals, (as at this day:) and here we see Disputes turned into Passion,
Passion to Rebellion, (the younger Brother, that is, the inferior against the
elder or superior;) Rebellion to Murder, and almost the highest Murder,
Fratricide. And yet it is a Riddle to us, how God disposes of his Justice; for
notwithstanding Cain's great offenses against God and Man, by murdering his
Innocent Brother, by his rugged answer to God, ( Am I his Keeper?) and by his
despair of God's Mercy; Yet I say, Cain, being convinced (as appears by his
acknowledgment) that he had finned both in shedding blood, and denying God's
Power, Goodness and Justice, order and disposure; and that his sin was beyond
forgiveness, and greater than he could bear; God was so merciful as to set a
mark upon Cain, to keep him from danger: and Cain had so much glory in the
world as to build a City for a Monument to his posterity; whilst innocent Abel
never obtained any higher Memorial than a great stone called by that name, 1 Samuel 6.8. and that blood which lay weltering in the dust, was called the blood
of Righteous Abel, Mark 23.35. near 4000 years after the shedding of it. From
whence it may be observed, that unless we know the time, circumstances,
occasions, and secret reasons and designs of God's disposures, we cannot make
any true collections who are good or bad by outward appearances, actions, or
accidents; for the good endure Miseries, and are punished with infamous death;
the bad go free from impunities, and enjoy felicities, Titles, Honors,
Preservations, and pass in quiet to their graves, and both good and bad have
sometimes a share of both. Nor is it possible to make a Judgment or these
Rewards, because no man can punctually know the exact time of another
Conversion or Perversion; that secret is only known to God himself, and we are
not to doubt of Gods Power or Justice from the Consequences of humane
felicities or infelicities; or think that present Rewards are Gods
approbations, or infelicities his inflictions: nor ought we to trouble our
selves with the Method or differences of other men's devotions, but we are to
mind our own quiet or industrious Employments, there being sufficient choice
(as I said) out of those principles of Pasturage and Agriculture to busy all
sorts of ingenious Natures and Tempers, without meddling with any Controversy
in Devotions, or questioning of God's acceptance of what we or others do,
being done with outward Conformity of worship, and inward clear intentions to
please him. For the business of Religion is a particular Employment not
pertaining to Pasturage or Agriculture, which, as I said, contains all Temporal
Employments. And when men did multiply, God did think fit to set up
Melchisedeck, which was thought to be Seth, because men for the future should
not make their voluntary Oblations without directions from such a function as
was properly ordained for it. And after him the Levitical Order, purposely to
direct and instruct men in their duty of Devotion and Spirituals. And as Cain
and Abel were punished for intruding into their Function (which may seem to be
then dispensible, in respect there were none ordained to it,) so it is as
inconsistent and dangerous for that Order to meddle with the Functions of Cain
and Abel, unless it be by way of inspection, or contemplation of God's
Creatures, but not of occupation or mixing of Functions; for by one the State
is destroyed, by the other the Church. And I further observe, that the first
Priest we read of was King of Salem, to show that the directions in that
function did proceed from the King or Government, which is best able to judge
of its own Method in offering to God what is fit and consonant to its
constitution: and the Order of Priests are to give their suitable instructions,
so as these different Vocations may neither interfere nor incroach on each
other, as properly belonging to the supreme Magistrate to keep them in a true
Balance.

Cap. 5. Verse 3.
And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years, and knew his wife again, 52.
and begot a Son in his Likeness, after his Image, and called his name Seth.
For she said, God has appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain
slew. I observe that these two exemplary Parents did not torment themselves
with passion for the murder of their eldest, and deprivement of their youngest
son; or that they (as it were) lost them in the prime of their youth, when they
had been instructed in civil and Religious duties, and were Capable of such
Employments (as may be collected by the Text;) or for the want of such
associates and assistants to their enjoined Labors: None of these (I say) did
promote a passion in them, or any reluctance against their Creators disposure,
it seeming equal to have no Children, or to have them with the care of
Education and the anxieties in the loss of them, or the discontents which may
happen by their ill deportments; but with patience and silence they undergo
what God thought fit to permit, and a blessing did follow it; for he had
another son in his Likeness after his Image, which (says the Targum) was like
him in features, and like Abel in goodness of disposition; for as Abel was a
keeper of Sheep, and Cain a husbandman, this son Seth (as is conceived by some)
was that Melchisedeck, as I said, who was a Priest of the Living God. And thus
in some measure every man's Patience and submission begets some Reward, which
has a similitude to his expectation.

Cap. 5. verse 4.
And the days of Adam after he begat Seth were eight hundred years, 53.
and he begat Sons and Daughters. According to some Rabbis Adam had thirty
sons and thirty daughters; and though it be said here, he begat sons and
daughters; yet it does not exclude such danghters as were begotten before Seth,
which those Rabbis say were two, Calmana and Deborah, and that they were the
Wives of Cain and Abel, and if so, then probably when Abel was slain Cain took
them both to be his wives; and then admit that they were all four born within
four years of Adams Expulsion out of Paradise, then within thirty years they
might be all four capable of procreation, and have Children; so that the
pre-Adamite needs not seek for the assistance of another Nation to People the
Land of Nod, or the City of Enoch, since upon an easy multiplication in less
then one hundred years, they and their progeny might easily produce and carry
thither above five thousand persons.

Cap. 5. verse 5.
And all the days of Adam were nine hundred and thirty years. 54.
Eternity is so Circular, that a thousand years are but as a day, and a day but
as a thousand years; our knowledge of it is in the Abstract, and therefore
there is framed to us some Epoches and progresses by which this Eternity moves
in its Circle; and to pass by Minutes, Hours, and those smaller gradations, we
come to days, weeks and months, and years; and we make the Year to consist of
Months, the Months of Weeks, and the Weeks of days. Now those who are not
guided by those proportions, do make a diversion from these equal paths wherein
Eternity would guide us; and those who seem to be confounded in their various
Commensurations; for some accounted four weeks or eight and twenty days to be a
year, others seven months or eight and twenty weeks; others accounted their
years by Winters, others by Summors; some by Nights and Days artificial,
supposing I presume the Winter to be the dead time of the year, and the Night
no part of our life, and therefore ought not to be Computed within the compass
of the Living year. But in later Ages the year was settled according to the
Natural day, consisting of four and twenty hours, and the Sun and Moon dividing
it into twelve Months, or thirteen Moons, or fifty two Weeks; within the year
contained three hundred sixty five days; but there happening six hours over in
the year (to supply all defects by way of Intercalation) they have added one
day at the end of every fourth year, which is called the Bisseztile or Leap
year, because in that year by that addition of one day there happens two days
which must necessarily be called Sextilis Calend arum Martii, by reason of the
interposition of that day, consisting of the forty six hours interposed; so
that all those lesser Computations of the year being reconciled to my hand, I
may go clearly upon the Literal sense (as I have hitherto done in these
discourses) and affirm, that Adam lived Nine handred and thirty years,
accounting the years either according to the Julian or Gregorean Settlements,
one being but 186. days more then the other in 930. years: For were it months
or quarters, Mahalael and Enoch, who begat children at sixty five years, would
not have been out of their Infancy when they are said to beget Children: nor do
I see any ground why we should doubt that they lived so many years (accounting
according to our Computations) when as they were nearer to the original
perfection wherein Adam was made, and knew the sanative virtues of all things;
nor had they those temptations of Exorbitancies which grew up with the
exuberancy of the world. Besides, we see even in our times to what great Ages
Men and Women have arived even to two and three hundred years, though Climes,
constitutions, vitiations by food, and other inordinacies do distemper that
harmony of nature, by which our forefathers did subsist.

Now nine hundred and thirty years want but seventy of a thousand, and a
thousand are but as a span; the span is but what it can grasp, and why should
we labor to grasp that which (whether we hold or not) is equal at present, but
disadvantagious not only in the riddance of Anxieties, but also procrastinating
those happy Expectations, which even Common Reason guides us to believe. For
though there is no mention made in our Translations how Adam was disposed of
after he died, yet the Targum of Jerusalem says, Mortuus est, and collectus
fuit e medio Mundi: And it is sufficient he was taken out of the midst of the
troubles and anxieties of the world. And there can be no doubt, but that he who
was imprisoned here nine hundred and thirty years for his offense, and had worn
the badges of mortality in the skins of dead Beasts for his clothing, and
dug his grave so often in cultivating the Earth, as a reward for his frugality
and industry (after his death) enjoyed such quiet felicities as I hope will be
given to all such as shall live and die here in a clear submission to our
Creators Will.

And he died. 55.
We read of three sorts of death; the Violent, which befell Abel; the Natural,
Adam; and the Transmutative, Enoch: yet these distinctions relate only to the
manner, for death is the same to all; and as the Poet says, there are a
thousand ways to it. If it be forced, it is still a death; or transmuted, (which
is a kind of insensible force) it is still a death; or according to the extent
of Nature, when she or the soul being weary of the confusions of this life,
retires and hides it self from performing any further offices to the body; it
is still a death. And though Adam is said to live nine hundred and thirty
years, which is three hundred thirty nine thousand six hundred thirty six days,
(in which I compute the Bissextile days) and if those days be accounted by
hours, and those hours by minutes; yet it may truly be said, that so many
minutes as he lived, so many minutes he died; for the Casualities which
occasion death are as many as those which attend our lives, and therefore he
which lives longer than another, passes by only so many more Casualties; his
life is not the longer, though prolonged, because death has still an Interest
in every prolongation, and is so clearly concerned, that it is not to be judged,
who is living or who dying. At our Birth we break the Prisons of Death, and lie
at the mercy of Midwives, or other Keepers for our Evasions; in our Infancy,
Nurses and Tutors; in our Youth, our Extravagancies; in our riper years, our
discretion and indiscretion, madness and sobriety, are equal attendants; in
Age, diseases and infirmities are ready to usher us to the Grave (a more severe
Prison;) and yet with little difference, for the grave of the womb gives life
to us, and the other by our death gives life to multitudes of vermin; they by
Corruption enrich the Earth, the Earth by that fertility affords us food, that
food supports life: And so there is a Circulation of Generation and Corruption;
and those possibilities being in either, it is hard to judge which is living
which dying. And it is not only thus in Terrestrials, but even in Celestials:
The day dies, the night produces another, that dies again. And so in those
glorious Creatures in the heavens there is also a visible Rotation of living
and dying, and our life and death is but as night and day. And it seems an
incivility toward God, or rather an affront to his disposure, to desire a long
life, as if we would afford no room to our successors, or permit God to be seen
by any but our selves in his unexpreffible variations. And therefore the most
consonant way to our Immortality is to live in a continued mortification: For
so we shall live by dying, and die by living.

Of Life, Death, Resurrection, and Immortality: As also of the Chemistry of
Nature operating in our souls and bodies by which they are forced to rejoyn.
1 Cor. 15.22.
FOr as in Adam all die, so in Christ (the second Adam) all shall be made
alive, or have resurrection from the dead. The joint operation of man's soul and
body is called Life; the Cessations of those joint motions Death. The
operations and constant exchanges which Nature admits of are perplexities; for
nothing in life is pleasure but the enjoyment of an equal and contented mind;
knowing our selves totally, or in our particles, to be every minute hurled
about with the vicissitude of Constitutions; the Cessation, (or at least our
want of knowledge what is done in the grave) seeming to be our quiet: But how
far, or how long it continues it is hard to judge, seeing our corrupted parts
are hourly traversing into various Productions, of which we consist, and into
which we return again. But by reason of this Cessation or seeming separation
(not only of soul and body, but of the parts of the body into millions of
forms) we (to support our belief in the union of our parts) seek after the
progresses and inclinations of other Creatures to theirs, (notwithstanding
their several Contingent obstructions;) and therefore I think fit to set down
several observables. And in the first place that Experiment of reviving a Plant
out of its ashes is a noble piece of Chemistry, Dr. Browns Religio Medici.
and serves well to this purpose. And though such a revived Plant may want some
of its Accidents, yet the very revivification of it, if it gains not a full
satisfaction to Immortality, yet it affords us a fair testimony of the
possibilty of our Resurrection; for then all the Accidental defects of nature
shall be volatile, but the virtues and perfections of nature fixed. Indeed if
we could find out by art a revivification of Vegetables in all their accidents,
we should make Immortality too common: it is enough if a man can make any
experimental inducement to his faith, and give an imitation to future
perfection.

The whole Art of Chemistry, what is it (as I conceive) but to dissolve the
nature of a Creature, and to recollect it again, if not into its superfluous
accidents, yet into a noble Evidence of its virtues? And this is done not so
much by the force of Arts, as by the secret instinct and greediness of its own
disposition to unite its scattered nature. And that which is worthy of
obfervation for our use in this Art is, Let the gross body of any Creature be
dissolved or dissected into many parts, that remaining part which is visible to
us, after its dissolution, may by art be made to represent the form of it self
whilst it had an entire being. This may be seen from the distillation of
Plants, (that is, the Extract of them:) As for example; Make of Rosemary such a
Liquor as we call the sulphur, by some the essence or spirit of it, and put it
into a Viol or glass closed up, as Chemists do, after a little settling it shall
by a certain kind of vapor or mist represent to the eyes the very shape of
Rosemary.

And this may be more easily illustrated by another Experiment: About the
spring time (when the bark begins to run,) take a young Ash, and saw it off
about a foot from the ground; then make a Concave hole in it, and cover it, and
the sappy juice or blood of it will rise up and fill the hole: then Lave out so
much water as rises in it, and put it into a glass, and stop the glass, as
Chemists do, by closing the Metal of the glass, and every spring you shall
discern in the glass as it were an Ash tree. Now I cannot tell whether the Mist
mentioned in Genesis was the Essence with which God then endued all Vegetables,
making them conspicuable to Man, which before was not. And by this we may judge
of the rational and vegetative soul; this had perfection of information from
this Mist which watered the Earth: The other from the breath of the Almighty.
And whether by this breath is meant a misty and waterish humor (if with
reverence we may so conceive of the divine breath, or according to my former
opinion) is uncertain: But if either, then the Operations of the one may well
advance the belief of the other. And if this Experiment should hold in man's
body as in Vegetables, how easy is it to conceive the manner of man's
resurrection, when by God Chemistry the Essence of each man in an instant
represents to God (or to Man, being made capable of such a sight) the true
Effigies and proportion of his body?

And in this notion, why may not I make use of that Metaphorical Speech of
David? Put my tears into thy bottle, O Lord; which tears were the tears of
Compunction and sorrow for sin, proceeding from a Contrite heart, and a devout
brain, not from the Redundancy of a salt humor: so that I may call such tears
the very Liquor of life. Now whether such Cordial tears, if they were put into
a glass, would represent Man, David (that understood the secrets of God) knew
best. And the experiment were not unworthy the Trial by a Penitent Christian,
to weep till he saw himself in his own tears. But because there is seldom in
man that true distillation or extract of tears which there ought to be, the
experiment may be fallible.

But that which may more easily be tried, is to take a Starling, and cover it
with two wooden hollow dishes, and it will weep it self to death; and that
Liquor were a fit subject for the Experiment of sensitive souls, till we can
meet with a more certain one for the rational. But to go a little further with
some notions or fancies concerning our Resurrection.

If by a Cabalistical Geometry it could be found out how many humane bodies the
Earth could afford out of its bulk, of which men's bodies were at first, are
still, and shall be (as it were) remade, allowing to each humane body, such a
proportion of its mould or dust as will make it suitable to the most perfect
pattern, (for the best Divines hold we shall rise with perfect bodies, and of
such perfect dimensions as I have writ in a former Chapter in this book) I
believe the general resurrection might then be known. If also by an Historical
Account it might be given in how many such parts of the Earth have been already
informed by souls, and how much still remains to be informed. But because Art
may be fallible in so great a work of Fancy, we must submit to Faith; by which
I believe, that when the whole Earth shall be disposed into bodies, that which
we call the General Resurrection will follow: And that when Heaven and Earth
shall pass away, the bodies of the wicked shall remain in the place of the
Earth, which shall be their Hell; and the bodies of the just in the place of
the Celestial Orbs, which shall be their Heaven.

This kind of Resurrection or resumption of our Earth does not cross the
Scriptures, but confirm them; which says, the Earth shall be no more, and that
it shall be Consumed by fire: for by this resumption or transformation, the
Earth shall (as it were) be turned into nothing, because its parts shall become
another thing. And there is a necessity that fire should do this, for we see
how metals will admit several mixtures with other metals; but let fire come
once to dissolve them, and they will all run with violence each to his proper
kind. Now seeing this, I can easily believe that each body (though divided into
Millions of parts) in the general Conflagration will run nimbly through all
mediums to that soul, which once in one bulk they owned, and which I still
believe with a diffusive virtue constantly hovers over it in its dissections.
And in this dissolution or mutation (to confine my speculations to what our
Divinity imparts) the godly, being of a more refined metal, shall run one way,
and the ungodly (as David says) shall be put away like dross.

Now that our Terrestrial bodies shall not be consumed or annihilated by this
fire, I have seen experimented in Iron Kilns, (where the Iron stone is
dissolved) there you shall very often find large pieces of Charcole fall down
with the Liquid Iron into the Furnace, This Charcole is made of the Withy-tree,
which grows frequently in Worcestershire, where I first observed it.
and from thence, when the Iron is let forth, it will swim out with it, but
floting on the top of the Iron; and those pieces of Charcole the fire has no
power over, or does not consume.

But that which gives a more delicate relish to the soul is another trivial
Experiment, that if a Combustible matter be joined to that which is not so
Combustible, the less Combustible will preserve the Combustible from
destruction. As for example:

Take a piece of Thread, and tie it close about a piece of Iron, and the flame
of a Candle will never burn it; so out bodies (though combustible) being then
joined to our souls of a spiritual and uncombustible matter, will be preserved
from destruction and power of the Fire.

And though these Conclusions by Fire be pertinent to the manner of our
resurrection in so many variations, yet because the reunion of our parts is the
knottiest piece of our belief, I shall assist mine with two Observations,
concerning the Magnetic and concatenating virtue of most Creatures, either
entire, or in parts; by which may be seen their inclination to union. As in the
greedy society of men to men, and sometimes fat men to lean, and lean to fat,
either to supply the defect, or deduct the superfluity of either; beasts to
beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Trees, Herbs, and Stones, to their kind; or in the
dismembring or dividing of most of these, how sensibly the parts divided seem
to covet and fly to a Rejunction: as may be experienced in our dismembered
parts, but more fully in Snakes, Eels, Worms, (whose divided parts will run to
each other.) The Experiment is more eminent in two pieces of raw Beef (cut from
one Beast) put into a pot of water, wherein adding a competent proportion of
Comfrey, let them boil a while, and they will close together; but if the flesh
be from two beasts, the Comfrey will not cement them. But the Demonstration is
more noble in Metals, of which take several pieces of Gold, Brass, Silver,
Iron, Tin; make them into the shape of Pins, two of each sort, and lay them
gently upon water in a Basin, (and if it be carefully done they will not sink;)
then you shall perceive, that as they float, they will naturally hunt about to
find each its proper kind; As Brass to Brass, Tin to Tin, etc. and drawing near
to their own, will seem to embrace with a certain joyful violence. The second
observation is of water: Take of that which runs through several Minerals, and
distill it, and when the liquid part is evaporated, the fixed matter that remains
will lie in distinct parts, according to the number of Minerals which the water
has passed through. Thus our bodies, like several Liquors of different weight,
(though jumbled together) will of themselves return to their due place, and
position; and though they be promiscuously tossed and used for the present by
the several contrary and oblique course of the spears, and other interposures,
yet the first mover once ceasing and giving stop to the rest, all nature will
return to a quiet harmony, and every Genius to embrace its own individuals: Or
else I conceive that the Composition of Man (in his secundary productions since
his Creation) being merely compacted of variated or corrupted Elements; which
makes some incline to Philosophy, others to Rusticity; some of the disposition
of Birds, others of Beasts. Having thus past through the whole nature of other
Creatures, as Trees, Flies, Worms, Birds, Beasts, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire,
etc. All substances, from whence innumerable species are derived, shall at the
last Conflagration or general Resurrection be dissolved into humanity, to make
each man more or less intelligible, according to the natures of those
individuals of which he has had an ingrossment or participation.

Epilogue.
THese several Philosophical Notions support my Faith in the belief of Divine
Matters. If there be any man of so steadfast a faith, who cares not for the use
of Reason, Sense, or Fancy, in the conceiving of these and other Mysteries, I
commend and admire him; he may in time remove Mountains: for my part, God has
made me a Rational Creature, and in Divine matters, what cannot be comprehended
by my Reason, I shall implore his grace to give me faith to believe the
possibility of them. In the mean time I shall be humble in my Enquiry after
them, and if I may borrow something from Nature, and from Fancy, from Sense,
or Reason, to instruct me in such Mysteries I shall not neglect them: But I
shall study by not knowing them, to keep my Devotion, For the Etymology of
Phansee is no mere than I would fain see.
rather than to lose it by too curious a speculation. My Knowledge in Nature,
my Fancy, Sense, and Reason, shall be all subject to Faith; not doubting but
Faith will afford them all such a supernatural Light as shall be profitable to
their dull constitutions. The knowledge of Nature is fallible; Sense, Fancy,
and Reason, may be deceived; but true Faith cannot: Therefore they shall always
follow my Faith. In which pursuit if they meet with any stop, I will give them
leave to stay awhile, but not too long, lest they lose her way, her guide, and
her object.

FINIS.
The INDEX.
A. ADam, page 149. Affections, 139. Angels, 154, 157. Apparel, 150. Appetite,
138, 141. Art, 82.

B. BAse, 15. Beasts, 96, 130. Birds, 96. Breath, 13.

C. CArnality, 35. Cattle, see Beasts, Circumspection, 131. Coition, 156.
Colors, 96. Contentment, 27. Creation, 1, 2, 17, 28, 30. Cupidity, 137.
Cursing, 129, 133, 142.

D. DArkness, see Light: Day, 49, 98, see Years. Death, 51, 98, 173. Desire,
137, 138. Disobedience, see Obedience. Devil, 93. Dominion, 84. Dust, 21, 29.

E. EArth, 144. Eye, 33. Education, 158. Evil, see good.

F. FAith, 171, 187. Fear, 118. Felicity, 153. Food, 144, 146, 148. Fruit, see
Trees and Plants, 102.

G. GArden, 26. Garments, 111 God, 28, 52, 53, 112, 117. Gold, see Minerals,
19, 20, 40. Good, 100.

H. HErbs, 95, 96, 146. Hermaphrodite, 79. Husband, 140.

I. INdustry, 43. 152. Image, 77.

K. KNowledge, 58.
L. LAW, 45. Life, see Soul and Trees, 54, 158, 172, 176. Light, 49. Love, 108.

M. MAn, 9, 10, 20, 21, 29, 76, 79. Marriage, 70, 72. Messiah, 134. Midst, 34.
Minerals, 34, 185. Months, see Years. Multiplying, 82.

N. NAkedness, 75. Names, 58. Navigation, 41. Necessity, 138. Noses and
Nostrils, 24. Nothing, 57. Numbers, 8, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 36, 38, 52, 53.

O. OBedience, 45, 57, 97, 98, 100, 102, 109, 123, 136, 140.
P. PAradise, see Garden. Passion. 114. Patience, 168. People, 169. Plants, see
Trees, 29, 32, 34, 144.

R. REason, 151, 187. Religion, 161. Resurrection, 176. Rib, see Bones, 16, 63,
65, 68. Rivers, 36, 40.

S. SAcrifice, 87. Serpent, 93, 94, 124. Sin, 124, 128, 129, see Virtue and
Vice. Sleep, 62. Sorrow, 143. Soul, 18, 25, 133, 176. Speech, 126, 127. Spirit,
26, 31. Stones, 38, 40. Sweat, 147.

T. TEars, 143. Temptation, 95, 96. Time, see Years. Trees, 34, 35, 40, 45, 48.
52. 116, 151. see Plants. Trials, 112.

V. Virtue and Vice, 121. Voice, 140, 112. Voluptuousness, 137.

W. Wife, 107. See Marriage and Man and Obedience. Woman, 55, 56, 57, 65, 69,
70, 80, 128, 135, 137. See Man.

Y. YEars, 170.
FINIS.

