LET this Book called Political Arithmetic, which was long since Writ by Sir
William Petty deceased, be Printed.

Given at the Court at Whitehall the 7th day of November. 1690. Nottingham.

Political Arithmetic, OR A DISCOURSE

Concerning,

The Extent and Value of Lands, People, Buildings; Husbandry, Manufacture,
Commerce, Fishery, Artizans, Seamen, Soldiers; Public Revenues, Interest,
Taxes, Superlucration, Registries, Banks; Valuation of Men, Increasing of
Seamen, of Militia's, Harbors, Situation, Shipping, Power at Sea, etc. As the
same relates to every Country in general, but more particularly to the
Territories of His Majesty of Great Britain, and his Neighbors of Holland,
Zealand, and France.

By Sir WILLIAM PETTY, Late Fellow of the Royal Society.

London, Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock, and Hen. Mortlock at the
Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1690.

TO THE KINGS Most Excellent MAJESTY.
SIR,
Whilst every one meditates some fit Offering for Your Majesty, such as may
best agree with your happy Exaltation to this Throne; I presume to offer, what
my Father long since writ, to show the weight and importance of the English
Crown.

It was by him styled Political Arithmetic, in as much as things of
Government, and of no less concern and extent, than the Glory of the Prince,
and the happiness and greatness of the People, are by the Ordinary Rules of
Arithmetic, brought into a sort of Demonstration. He was allowed by all, to be
the Inventor of this Method of Instruction; where the perplexed and intricate
ways of the World, are explained by a very mean piece of Science; and had not
the Doctrins of this Essay offended France, they had long since seen the light,
and had sound Followers, as well as improvements before this time, to the
advantage perhaps of Mankind.

But this has been reserved to the felicity of Your Majesty's Reign, and to the
expectation which the Learned have therein; and if while in this, I do some
honor to the Memory of a good Father, I can also pay Service, and some
Testimony of my Zeal and Reverence to so great a King, it will be the utmost
Ambition of

SIR, Your Majesty's Most Dutiful and Most Obedient Subject* Shelborne.

PREFACE.
FOrasmuch as Men, who are in a decaying condition, or who have but an ill
opinion of their own Concernments, instead of being (as some think) the more
industrious to resist the Evils they apprehend, do contrariwise become the more
languid and ineffectual in all their Endeavors, neither caring to attempt or
prosecute even the probable means of their relief. Upon this Consideration, as
a Member of the Commonwealth, next to knowing the precise Truth in what
condition the common Interest stands, I would in all doubtful Cases think the
best, and consequently not despair, without strong and manifest Reasons,
carefully examining whatever tends to lessen my hopes of the public Welfare.

I have therefore thought fit to examine the following Persuasions, which I find
too current in the World, and too much to have affected the Minds of some, to
the prejudice of all. viz.

That the Rents of Lands are The fears of many concerning the Welfare of
England.
generally fallen; that therefore, and for many other Reasons, the whole
Kingdom grows every day poorer and poorer; that formerly it abounded with Gold,
but now there is a great scarcity both of Gold and Silver; that there is no
Trade nor Employment for the People, and yet that the Land is under-peopled;
that Taxes have been many and great; that Ireland and the Plantations in
America and other Additions to the Crown, are a Burden to England; that
Scotland is of no Advantage; that Trade in general does lamentably decay; that
the Hollanders are at our heels, in the race of Naval Power; the French grow
too fast upon both, and appear so rich and potent, that it is but their
Clemency that they do not devour their Neighbors; and finally, that the Church
and State of England, are in the same danger with the Trade of England; with
many other dismal Suggestions, which I had rather stifle than repeat.

It Is true, the Expense of foreign The real Prejudices of England.
Commodities has of late been too great; much of our Plate, had it remained
Money, would have better served Trade; too many Matters have been regulated by
Laws, which Nature, long Custom, and general Consent, ought only to have
governed; the Slaughter and Destruction of Men by the late Civil Wars and
Plague have been great; the Fire at London, and Disaster at Chatham, have
begotten Opinions in the Vulgus of the World to our Prejudice; the
Nonconformists increase; the People of Ireland think long of their Settlement;
the English there apprehend themselves to be Aliens, and are forced to seek a
Trade with Foreigners, which they might as well maintain with their own
Relations in England. But notwithstanding all this (the like whereof was always
in all Places), the The Improvements of England.
Buildings of London grow great and glorious; the American Plantations employ
four Hundred Sail of Ships; Actions in the East India Company are near double
the principal Money; those who can give good Security, may have Money under the
Statute-Interest; Materials for building (even Oaken-Timber) are little the
dearer, some cheaper for the rebuilding of London; the Exchange seems as full
of Merchants as formerly; no more Beggars in the Streets, nor executed for
Thieves, than heretofore; the Number of Coaches, and Splendour of Equipage
exceeding former Times; the public Theaters very magnificent; the King has a
greater Navy, and stronger Guards than before our Calamities; the Clergy rich,
and the Cathedrals in repair; much Land has been improved, and the Price of
Food so reasonable, as that Men refuse to have it cheaper, by admitting of
Irish Cattle; And in brief, no Man needs to want that will take moderate pains.
That some are poorer than others, ever was and ever will be: And that many are
naturally querulous and envious, is an Evil as old as the World.

These general Observations, and that Men eat, and drink, and laugh as they use
to do, have encouraged me to try if I could also comfort others, being
satisfied my self, that the Interest and Affairs of England are in no
deplorable Condition.

The Method I take to do this, The Author's Method and Manner of Arguing.
is not yet very usual; for instead of using only comparative and superlative
Words, and intellectual Arguments, I have taken the course (as a Specimen of
the Political Arithmetic I have long aimed at) to express my self in Terms of
Number, Weight, or Measure; to use only Arguments of Sense, and to consider
only such Causes, as have visible Foundations in Nature; leaving those that
depend upon the mutable Minds, Opinions, Appetites, and Passions of particular
Men, to the Consideration of others: Really professing my self as unable to
speak satisfactorily upon those Grounds (if they may be called Grounds), as to
foretell the cast of a Dye; to play well at Tennis, Billiards, or Bowls,
(without long practice,) by virtue of the most elaborate Conceptions that ever
have been written De Projectilibus and Missilibus, or of the Angles of
Incidence and Reflection.

Now the Observations or Positions The Nature of his Positions and Suppositions.
expressed by Number, Weight, and Measure, upon which I bottom the ensuing
Discourses, are either true, or not apparently false, and which if they are not
already true, certain, and evident, yet may be made so by the Sovereign Power,
Nam id certum est quod certum reddi potest, and if they are false, not so false
as to destroy the Argument they are brought for; but at worst are sufficient as
Suppositions to show the way to that Knowledge I aim at. And I have withal for
the present confined my self to the Ten principal Conclusions hereafter
particularly handled, which if they shall be judged material, and worthy of a
better Discussion, I hope all ingenious and candid Persons will rectify the
Errors, Defects, and Imperfections, which probably may be found in any of the
Positions, upon which these Ratiocinations were grounded. Nor would it
misbecome Authority it self, to clear the Truth of those Matters which private
Endeavors cannot reach to.

THE Principal Conclusions OF THIS TREATISE ARE,
CHAP. I. That a small Country, and few People, may by their Situation, Trade,
and Policy, be equivalent in Wealth and Strength, to a far greater People, and
Territory. And particularly, How conveniences for Shipping, and Water
Carriage, do most Eminently, and Fundamentally, conduce thereunto. Page 1 Chap.
II. That some kind of Taxes, and Public Levies, may rather increase than
diminish the Commonwealth. page 35 Chap. III. That France cannot, by reason of
Natural and Perpetual Impediments, be more powerful at Sea, than the English,
or Hollanders. 51 Chap. IV. That the People, and Territories of the King of
England, are Naturally near as considerable, for Wealth, and Strength, as those
of France. page 64 Chap. V. That the Impediments of Englands Greatness, are but
contingent and removeable. page 87 Chap. VI. That the Power and Wealth of
England, has increased above this forty years. page 96 Chap. VII. That one
tenth part, of the whole Expense, of the King of England's Subjects; is
sufficient to maintain one hundred thousand Foot, thirty thousand Horse, and
forty thousand Men at Sea, and to defray all other Charges, of the Government:
both Ordinary and Extraordinary, if the same were regularly Taxed, and Raised.
page 101 Chap. VIII. That there are spare Hands enough among the King of
England's Subjects, to earn two Millions per annum, more than they now do, and
there are Employments, ready, proper, and sufficient for that purpose. page 104
Chap. IX. That there is Money sufficient to drive the Trade of the Nation. page
110 Chap. X. That the King of England's Subjects, have Stock, competent, and
convenient to drive the Trade of the whole Commercial World. page 112
ERRATA.
PAge 7. line 25. read the Rent. p. 8. l. 21. r. a part. p. 20. l. 3. r. for
cheap. p. 21. l. 14. r. cold, moist. p. 26. l. 7. r. that Church. p. 32. l. 7.
r. yearly profit. l. 18. r. to be the value. p. 47. l. 4. r. fifty thousand. l.
28. r. sixteen thousand. p. 49. l. 13: r. the said half together. p. 52. l. 6.
r. should bring. p. 59. l. 24. r. they coast. p. 72. l. 8. r. or above. p. 91.
l. 9. r. Exotic^. p. 95. l. 13. r. paying for.

CHAP. I. That a small Country and few People, by its Situation, Trade, and
Policy, may be equivalent in Wealth and Strength, to a far greater People and
Territory: And particularly that conveniences for Shipping and Water-Carriage,
do most Eminently and Fundamentally conduce thereunto.
THis first principal Conclusion by reason of its length, I consider in three
Parts; whereof the first is, That a small Country and few People, may be
equivalent in Wealth and Strength to a far greater People and Territory.

This part of the first principal Conclusion How one Man by art and one Acre of
Land by improvement may be equivalent to many.
needs little proof; forasmuch as one Acre of Land, may bear as much Corn and
feed as many Cattle as twenty, by the difference of the Soil; some parcel of
Ground is naturally so defensible, as that an Hundred Men being possessed
thereof, can resist the Invasion of Five Hundred; and bad Land may be improved
and made good; Bog may by draining be made Meadow; Heathland may (as in
Flanders) be made to bear Flax and Clover grass, so as to advance in value from
one to an Hundred; The same Land being built upon, may centuple the Rent which
it yielded as Pasture; one Man is more nimble or strong, and more patient of
labor than another; one Man by Art may do as much work, as many without it;
viz. one Man with a Mill can grind as much Corn, as twenty can pound in a
Mortar; one Printer can make as many Copies, as an Hundred Men can write by
hand; one Horse can carry upon Wheels, as much as Five upon their Backs; and in
a Boat, or upon Ice, as Twenty: So that I say again, this first point of this
general Position, needs little or no proof. But the second and more material
part of this Conclusion is, that this difference in Land and People, arises
principally from their Situation, Trade, and Policy.

To clear this, I shall compare Holland A Comparison of Holland and Zealand
with France.
and Zealand, with the Kingdom of France, viz. Holland and Zealand do not
contain above one Million of English Acres, whereas the Kingdom of France
contains above 80.

Now the Original and Primitive difference holds proportion as Land to Land,
for it is hard to say, that when these places were first planted, whether an
Acre in France was better than the like quantity in Holland and Zealand; nor is
there any reason to suppose, but that therefore upon the first Plantation, the
number of Planters was in proportion to the quantity of Land; wherefore, if the
People are not in the same proportion as the Land, the same must be attributed
to the Situation of the Land, and to the Trade and Policy of the People
superstructed thereupon.

The next thing to be shown is, that Holland and Zealand at this day, is not
only an eightieth part as rich and strong as France, but that it has advanced
to one third or thereabouts, which I think will appear upon the Balance of the
following particulars, viz.

As to the Wealth of France, a certain That the Lands of France, are to the
Lands of Holland and Zealand, as 8 to 1 in value.
Map of that Kingdom, set forth Anno 1647. represents it to be fifteen
Millions, whereof six did belong to the Church, the Author thereof (as I
suppose) meaning the Rents of the Lands only: And the Author of a most
Judicious discourse of Husbandry (supposed to be Sir Richard Weston,) does from
reason and experience show, that Lands in the Netherlands, by bearing Flax,
Turnips, Clover-grass, Madder, etc. will easily yield 10 l. per Acre; so as the
Territories of Holland and Zealand, should by his account yield at least Ten
Millions per annum, yet I do not believe the same to be so much, nor France so
little as abovesaid, but rather, that one bears to the other as about 7, or 8
to 1.

The People of Amsterdam, are one The Buildings of Amsterdam are about half in
value to those at Paris.
third of those in Paris or London, which two Cities differ not in People a
twentieth part from each other, as has appeared by the Bills of Burials and
Christnings for each. But the value of the Buildings in Amsterdam, may well be
half that of Paris, by reason of the Foundations, Grafts, and Bridges, which in
Amsterdam are more numerous and chargeable than at Paris. Moreover The Housing
in France above five times the value of those in Holland and Zealand.
the Habitations of the poorest People in Holland and Zealand, are twice or
thrice as good as those of France; but the People of the one to the People of
the other, being but as thirteen to one, the value of the housing must be as
about five to one.

The value of the Shipping of Europe, The Shipping of Holland 9 times that of
France.
being about two Millions of Tuns, I suppose the English have Five Hundred
Thousand, the Dutch Nine Hundred Thousand, the French an Hundred Thousand, the
Hamburgers, and the Subjects of Denmark, Sweden, and the Town of Dansick two
Hundred and Fifty Thousand, and Spain, Portugal, Italy, etc. two Hundred and
Fifty Thousand; so as the Shipping in our case of France to that of Holland and
Zealand, is about one to nine, which reckoned as great and small, new and old,
one with another at 8 l. per Tun, makes the worth to be as Eight Hundred
Thousand Pounds, to Seven Millions, The Comparison of Holl. and France in the
India's
and two Hundred Thousand Pounds. The Hollanders Capital in the East India
Company, is worth above Three Millions, where the French as yet have little or
nothing.

The value of the Goods exported The exportations of France and Holl. and is as
21 to 5.
out of France into all Parts, are supposed Quadruple to what is sent to
England alone; and consequently in all about Five Millions, but what is
exported out of Holland into England is worth Three Millions; and what is
exported thence into all the World besides, is sextuple to the same.

The Moneys Yearly raised by the The Revenues of France.
King of France, as the same appears by the Book entitled (The State of
France) Dedicated to the King, Printed Anno 1669. and set forth several times
by Authority, is 82000000 of French Livers, which is about 6 Millions of Pounds
Sterling, of which sum the Author says, that one fifth part was abated for
non-valuers or Insolvencies, so (as I suppose) not above Five Millions were
effectually raised: But whereas some say, that the King of France raised Eleven
Millions as the of the effects of France; I humbly affirm, that all the Land
and Sea Forces, all the Buildings and Entertainments, which we have heard by
common Fame, to have been set forth and made in any of these seven last Years,
needed not to have cost Six Millions Sterling; wherefore, I suppose he has not
raised more, especially since there were one fifth Insolvencies, when the Tax
was at that pitch. But Holland and Zealand, paying 67 of the 100, The Taxes
paid by Holl. and Zealand.
paid by all the United Provinces, and the City of Amsterdam paying 27 of the
said 67; It follows that if Amsterdam has paid 4000 l. Flemish per diem, or
about 1400000 l. per annum, or 800000 l. Sterling; that all Holland and
Zealand, have paid 2100000 l. per annum: Now the reasons why I think they pay
so much, are these, viz.

1. The Author of the State of the Netherlands says so.

2. Excise of Victual at Amsterdam, seems above half the Original value of the
same, viz.

Ground Corn pays 20 Stivers the Bushel, or 63 Gilders the Last; Beer 113
Stivers the Barrel, Housing of Rent, Fruit of what it cost; other Commodities
1/7,, 1/9, 1/12; Salt ad libitum, all weighed Goods pay besides the Premises a
vast sum; now if the expense of the People of Amsterdam at a medium, and
without Excise were 8 l. per annum, whereas in England it is 7 l. then if all
the several Imposts above named, raise it Five Pound more, there being 160000
Souls in Amsterdam, the sum of 800000 l. Sterling per annum will thereby be
raised.

3. Though the expense of each head, should be 13 l. per annum; it is well known
that there be few in Amsterdam, who do not earn much more than the said expense.

4. If Holland and Zealand pay p. an. 2100000 l. then all the Provinces
together, must pay about 3000000 l. less than which sum per annum, perhaps is
not sufficient to have maintained the Naval War with England, 72000 Land
Forces, besides all other the ordinary Charges of their Government, whereof the
Church is there apart: To conclude, it seems from the Premises, that all
France does not raise above thrice as much from the public charge, as Holland
and Zealand alone do.

5. Interest of Money in France, is The Difference of interest between Hol. and
France.
7 l. per cent. but in Holland scarce half so much.

6. The Countries of Holland and Zealand; consisting as it were of Islands
guarded with the Sea, Shipping, and Marshes, is defensible at one fourth of the
charge, that a plain open Country is, and where the seat of War may be both
Winter and Summer; whereas in the others, little can be done but in the Summer
only.

7. But above all the particulars hitherto The superlucration between France
and Holl.
considered, that of superlucration ought chiefly to be taken in; for if a
Prince have never so many Subjects, and his Country be never so good, yet if
either through sloth, or extravagant expenses, or Oppression and Injustice,
whatever is gained shall be spent as fast as gotten, that State must be
accounted poor; wherefore let it be considered, how much or how many times
rather, Holland and Zealand, are now above what they were 100 years ago, which
we must also do of France: Now if France has scarce doubled its Wealth and
Power, and that the other have decupled theirs; I shall give the preference to
the latter, even although the 9/10 increased by the one, should not exceed the
one half gained by the other, because one has a store for Nine Years, the other
but for one.

To conclude, upon the whole it seems, that though France be in People to
Holland and Zealand as 13 to 1, and in quantity of good Land, as 80 to one, yet
is not 13 times richer and stronger, much less 80 times, nor much above thrice,
which was to be proved.

Having thus dispatched the two first Branches of the first Principal
conclusion; The causes of the difference between France and Holl.
it follows, to show that this difference of Improvement in Wealth and
Strength, arises from the Situation, Trade, and Policy of the places
respectively, and in particular from Conveniences for Shipping and Water
Carriage.

Many Writing on this Subject do so magnify the Hollanders as if they were
more, and all other Nations less than Men (as to the matters of Trade and
Policy) making them Angels, and others Fools, Brutes, and Sots, as to those
particulars; whereas I take the Foundation of their achievements to lie
originally in the Situation of the Country, whereby they do things inimitable
by others, and have advantages whereof others are incapable. First, The Soil of
Holland and Zealand The reasons why rich Land is better than course Land tho of
the same Rent, and consequently why Holl. is better than Fran.
is low Land, Rich and Fertile; whereby it is able to feed many Men, and so as
that Men may live near each other, for their mutual assistance in Trade. I say;
that a Thousand Acres, that can feed 1000 Souls, is better than 10000 Acres of
no more effect, for the following reasons, viz.

1. Suppose some great Fabric were in Building by a Thousand Men, shall not
much more time be spared if they lived all upon a Thousand Acres, then if they
were forced to live upon ten times as large a Scope of Land.

2. The charge of the cure of their Souls, and the Ministry would be far
greater in one case than in the other; as also of mutual defense in case of
Invasion, and even of Thieves and Robbers: Moreover the charge of the
administration of Justice would be much easier, where Witnesses and Parties may
be easily Summoned, Attendance less expensive, when Men's Actions would be
better known, when wrongs and injuries could not be covered, as in thin peopled
places they are.

Lastly; those who live in Solitary places, must be their own Soldiers,
Divines, Physicians, and Lawyers, and must have their Houses stored with
necessary Provisions (like a Ship going upon a long Voyage,) to the great wast,
and needless expense of such Provisions; the value of this first convenience to
the Dutch, I reckon or estimate to be about 100000 l. per annum.

2ly, Holland is a Level Country, so The advantages from the level and
windmills of Holl.
as in any part thereof, a Windmill may be set up, and by its being moist and
vaporous, there is always wind stirring over it, by which advantage the labor
of many thousand Hands is saved, for as much as a Mill made by one Man in half a
Year, will do as much Labor, as Four Men for Five Years together. This
advantage is greater or less, where employment or ease of Labor is so; but in
Holland it is eminently great, and the worth of this convenience is near an
Hundred and Fifty Thousand Pounds. The advantages from Holl. of Manufacture and
Commerce. The Situation of Holl. and Zeal. upon the Mouths of three great Rivers


3ly. There is much more to be gained by Manufacture than Husbandry, and by
Merchandise than Manufacture; but Holland and Zealand, being seated at the
mouths of three long great Rivers, and passing through Rich Countries, do keep
all the Inhabitants upon the sides of those Rivers but as Husbandmen, whilst
themselves are the Manufactors of their Commodities, and so dispense them into
all Parts of the world, making returns for the same, at what prices almost they
please themselves; and in short, they keep the Keys Trade of those Countries,
through which the said Rivers pass; the value this third convenience, I suppose
to 200000 l.

4ly. In Holland and Zealand, there Nearness to navigable Waters.
scarce any place of work, or business (...) Mile distant from a Navigable
Water, and the charge of Water carriage is generally but 1/^, or 1/20 part of
Land carriage; Wherefore if there be as much trade there as in France, then the
Hollanders can out-sell the French 14/15 of all (...) expense, of all
Traveling Postage (...) carriage whatsoever, which even in England I take to
be 300000 l. p. an. ^here the very Postage of Letters, costs the People perhaps
50000 l. per annum, though Farmed at much less, and all other Labor of Horses,
and Porters, at (...) six times as much; The value of this convenience I
estimate to be above Three Hundred Thousand pounds per annum.

5. The defensibleness of the Country, The defensibleness of Holland.
by reason of its Situation in the Sea upon Islands, and in the Marshes,
Impassible ground Diked and Trenched, especially considering how that place i^
aimed at for its Wealth; I say the charge of defending that Country, is easier
than if it were a plain Champion, at least 200000 l. per annum.

6. Holland is so considerable for keeping Harboring of Shipping at small
expense.
Ships in Harbor with small expense of Men, and ground Tackle, that (...)
saves per annum 200000 l. of what must be spent in France. Now if all (...)
natural advantages do amount to above one Million per annum Profits, and (...)
the Trade of all Europe, nay of the whole World, with which our Europeans (...)
Trade, is not above 45 Millions p. (...) and if 1/50 of the value be ^/7 of the
Profit, it is plain that the Hollander may Command and Govern the whole Trade.

7. Those who have their Situation Advantages from Fishing.
thus toward the Sea, and abound with Fish at home, and having also the
command of Shipping, have by consequence the Fishing Trade, whereof that of
Herring alone, brings more yearly Profit to the Hollanders than the Trade of
the West Indies to Spain, or of the East to themselves, as many have affirmed,
being as the same say viis and modis of above three Millions per annum Profit.

8. It is not to be doubted, but those Advantages by Naval Provisions.
who have the Trade of Shipping and Fishing, will secure themselves of the
Trade of Timber for Ships, Boats, Masts, and Cask; of Hemp for Cordage, Sails,
and Nets; of Salt, of Iron; as also of Pitch, Tar, Rosin, Brimstone, Oil, and
Tallow, as necessary Appurtenances to Shipping and Fishing.

9. Those who predominate in Shipping, Fitness for Universal Trade.
and Fishing, have more occasions than others to frequent all parts of the
World, and to observe what is wanting or redundant every where, and what each
People can do, and what they desire, and consequently to be the Factors, and
Carriers for the whole World of Trade. Upon which ground they bring all Native
Commodities to be Manufactured at home, and carry the same back, even to that
Country in which they grew, all which we see.

For, do they not work the Sugars of the West Indies? The Timber and Iron of
the Baltic? The Hemp of Russia? The Lead, Tin, and Wool of England? The
Quicksilver and Silk of Italy? The Yarns, and Dying Stuffs of Turkey, etc. To
be short, in all the ancient States, and Empires, those who had the Shipping,
had the Wealth, and if 2 per Cent. in the price of Commodities, be perhaps 20
per Cent. in the gain: it is manifest that they who can in forty five Millions,
undersel others by one Million, (upon account of natural, and intrinsic
advantages only) may easily have the Trade of the World without such Angelical
Wits and Judgments, as some attribute to the Hollanders.

Having thus done with their Situation, I come now to their Trade.

It is commonly seen, that each Country Artificial advantages of Trade.
slourisheth in the Manufacture of its own Native Commodities, viz. England for
woollen Manufacture, France for Paper, Luic-land for Iron Ware, Portugal for
Confectures, Italy for Silks; upon which Principle it follows, that Holland and
Zealand must flourish most in the Trade of Shipping, and so become Carriers and
Factors of the whole World of Trade. Now the advantages of the Shipping Trade
are as follows, viz.

Husbandmen, Seamen, Soldiers, Artizans Husbandmen, Seamen, Soldiers, Artizans,
and Merchants, are the very Pillars of a Commonwealth, and a Seaman is three
of them.
and Merchants, are the very Pillars of any Commonwealth; all the other great
Professions, do rise out of the infirmities, and miscarriages of these; now the
Seaman is three of these four. For every Seaman of industry and ingenuity, is
not only a Navigator, but a Merchant, and also a Soldier; not because he has
often occasion to fight, and handle Arms; but because he is familiarized with
hardship and hazards, extending to Life and Limbs; for Training and Drilling is
a small part of Soldiery, in respect of this last mentioned Qualification; the
one being quickly and presently learned, the other not without many years most
painful experience: wherefore to have the occasion of abounding in Seamen, is a
vast convenience.

2. The Husbandman of England earns but about 4 s. per Week, but the Seamen
have as good as 12 s. in Wages, Victuals (and as it were housing) with other
accommodations, so as a Seaman is in effect three Husbandmen; wherefore A
Seaman equivalent to three Husbandmen.
there is little Ploughing, and Sowing of Corn in Holland and Zealand, or
breeding of young Cattle: but their Land is improved by building Houses, Ships,
Engines, Dikes, Wharfs, Gardens of pleasure, extraordinary Flowers and Fruits;
for Dairy and feeding of Cattle, for Rape, Flax, Madder, etc. The Foundations
of several advantageous Manufactures.

3. Whereas the Employment of other Men is confined to their own Country, that
of Seamen is free to the whole World; so as where Trade may (as they call it)
be dead here or there, now and then, it is certain that some where or other in
the World, Trade is always quick enough, and Provisions are always plentiful,
the benefit whereof, those who command the Shipping enjoy, and they only.

4. The great and ultimate effect of Silver, Gold, and Jewels, are Universal
Wealth.
Trade is not Wealth at large, but particularly abundance of Silver, Gold, and
Jewels, which are not perishable, nor so mutable as other Commodities, but are
Wealth at all times, and all places: Whereas abundance of Wine, Corn, Fowls,
Flesh, etc. are Riches but hic and nunc, so as the raising of such Commodities,
and the following of such Trade, which does store the Country with Gold,
Silver, Jewels, etc. is profitable before others. But the Labor of Seamen, and
Freight of Ships, is always of the nature of an Exported Commodity, the
overplus whereof, above what is Imported, brings home money, etc.

5. Those who have the command of Reasons why the Hollanders Sail for less
Freight.
the Sea Trade, may Work at easier Freight with more profit, than others at
greater: for as Cloth must be cheaper made, when one Cards, another Spins,
another Weaves, another Draws, another Dresses, another Presses and Packs; than
when all the Operations abovementioned, were clumsily performed by the same
hand; so those who command the Trade of Shipping, can build long slight Ships
for carrying Masts, Fir-Timber, Boards, Balks, etc. And short ones for Lead,
Iron, Stones, etc. One sort of Vessels to Trade at Ports where they need never
lie a ground, others where they must jump upon the Sand twice every twelve
hours; One sort of Vessels, and way of manning in time of Peace, and cheap
gross Goods, another for War and precious Commodities; One sort of Vessels for
the turbulent Sea, another for Inland Waters and Rivers; One sort of Vessels,
and Rigging, where haste is requisite for the Maidenhead of a Market, another
where 1/^ or part of the time makes no matter. One sort of Masting and Rigging
for long Voyages, another for Coasting. One sort of Vessels for Fishing,
another for Trade. One sort for War for this or that Country, another for
Burden only. Some for Oars, some for Poles, some for Sails, and some for
draught by Men or Horses, some for the Northern Navigations amongst Ice, and
some for the South against Worms, etc. And this I take to be the chief of
several Reasons, why the Hollanders can go at less Freight than their
Neighbors, viz. because they can afford a particular sort of Vessels for each
particular Trade.

I have shown how Situation has given them Shipping, and how Shipping has
given them in effect all other Trade, and how Foreign Traffic must give them
as much Manufacture as they can manage themselves, and as for the overplus,
make the rest of the World but as Workmen to their Shops. It The Policy of
Holland.
now remains to show the effects of their Policy, superstructed upon these
natural advantages, and not as some think upon the excess of their
Understandings.

I have omitted to mention the Hollanders were one hundred years since, a poor
and oppressed People, living in a Country naturally cold and unpleasant: and
were withal persecuted for their Heterodoxy in Religion.

From hence it necessarily follows, that this People must Labor hard, and set
all hands to Work: Rich and Poor, Young and Old, must study the Art of Number,
Weight, and Measure; must fare hard, provide for impotents, and for Orphans,
out of hope to make profit by their Labors: must punish the Lazy by Labor,
and not by cripling them: I say, all these particulars, said to be the subtle
excogitations of the Hollanders, seem to me, but what could not almost have
been otherwise.

Liberty of Conscience, Registry of Conveyances, small Customs, Banks,
Lumbards, and Law Merchant, rise all from the same Spring, and tend to the same
Sea; as for lowness of Interest, it is also a necessary effect of all the
premises, and not the Fruit of their contrivance.

Wherefore we shall only show in particular the efficacy of each, and first of
Liberty of Conscience; but before I enter upon these, I shall mention a
Practice almost forgotten, (whether it refers to Trade or Policy is not
material,) which is, the Hollanders undermasting, Undermasting of Ships.
and sailing such of their Shipping, as carry cheap and gross Goods, and whose
Sale does not depend much upon Season.

It is to be noted, that of two equal and like Vessels, if one spreads one
thousand six hundred Yards of like Canvase, and the other two thousand five
hundred, their speed is but as four to five, so as one brings home the same
Timber in four days, as the other will in five. Now if we consider that
although those Ships be but four or five days under Sail, that they are perhaps
thirty upon the Voyage; so as the one is but 1/30 part longer upon the whole
Voyage than the other, though one fifth longer under Sail. Now if Masts, Yards,
Rigging, Cables, and Anchors, do all depend upon the quantity and extent of the
Sails, and consequently hands also; it follows that the one Vessel, goes at one
third less charge, losing but one thirtieth of the time, and of what depends
thereupon.

I now come to the first Policy of the Dutch, viz. Liberty of Conscience;
Liberty of Conscience, and the Reasons thereof in Holland.
which I conceive they grant upon these grounds. (But keeping up always a Force
to maintain the Common Peace,) 1. They themselves broke with Spain, to avoid
the imposition of the Clergy. 2. Dissenters of this kind, are for the most
part, thinking, sober, and patient Men, and such as believe that Labor and
Industry is their Duty toward God. (How erroneous soever their Opinions be.)
3. These People believing the Justice of God, and seeing the most Licentious
persons, to enjoy most of the World, and its best things, will never venture to
be of the same Religion, and Profession with Voluptuaries, and Men of extreme
Wealth and Power, who they think have their Portion in this World.

4. They cannot but know, That no Man can believe what himself pleases, and to
force Men to say they believe what they do not, is vain, absurd, and without
Honor to God.

5. The Hollanders knowing themselves not to be an Infallible Church, and that
others had the same Scripture for Guides as themselves, and withal the same
Interest to save their Souls, did not think sit to make this matter their
business; not more than to take Bonds of the Seamen they employ, not to cast
away their own Ships and Lives.

6. The Hollanders observe that in France and Spain, (especially the latter)
the Churchmen are about one hundred for one, to what they use or need; the
principal care of whom is to preserve Uniformity, and this they take to be a
superfluous charge.

7. They observe where most endeavors have been used to keep Uniformity, there
Heterodoxy has most abounded.

8. They believe that if of the People were Heterodox, and that if that whole
quarter should by Miracle be removed, that within a small time of the People
were Heterodox, and that if of the remainder would again become Heterodox some
way or other, it being natural for Men to differ in Opinion in matters above
Sense and Reason: and for those who have less Wealth, to think they have the
more Wit and Understanding, especially of the things of God, which they think
chiefly belong to the Poor.

9. They think the case of the Primitive Christians, as it is represented in
the Acts of the Apostles, looks like that of the present Dissenters, (I mean
externally.) Moreover it is to be observed that Trade does not (as some think)
best The Trade of any Country is chiefly managed by the Heterodox party.
flourish under Popular Governments, but rather that Trade is most vigorously
carried on, in every State and Government, by the Heterodox part of the same,
and such as profess Opinions different from what are publicly established:
(that is to say) in India where the Mohammedan Religion is Authorized, there the
Banians are the most considerable Merchants. In the Turkish Empire the Jews,
and Christians. At Venice, Naples, Legorn, Genoua, and Lisbone, Jews, and
Non-Papist Merchant-Strangers: but to be short, in that part of Europe, where
the Roman Catholic Religion, now has, or lately has had Establishment; there
three quarters of the whole Trade, is in the hands of such as have separated
from the Church (that is to say) the Inhabitants of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, as also those of the United Provinces, with Denmark, Sueden, and
Norway, together with the Subjects of the German Protestant Princes, and the
Hans Towns, do at this day possess three quarters of the Trade of the World;
and even in France it self, the Hugonots are proportionably far the greatest
Traders; Nor is it to be denied but that in Ireland, where the said Roman
Religion is not Authorized, there the Professors thereof have a great part of
the Trade. From whence it follows that Trade is not fixed to any All the Papists
Seamen of Europe are scarce sufficient to Man the King of Englands Fleet.
Species of Religion as such; but rather as before has been said to the
Hetrodox part of the whole, the truth whereof appears also in all the
particular Towns of greatest Trade in England; nor do I find reason to believe,
that the Roman Catholic Seamen in the whole World, are sufficient to Man
effectually a Fleet equal to what the King of England how has; but the
Non-papist Seamen, can do above thrice as much. Wherefore he whom this latter
Party does affectionately own to be their Head, cannot probably be wronged in
his Sea-concernments by the other; from whence itt follows, that for the
advancement of Trade, (if that be a sufficient reason) Indulgence must be
granted in matters of Opinion; though licentious actings as even in Holland, be
restrained by force.

The second Policy or help to Trade Firm Titles to Lands and Houses.
used by the Hollanders, is securing the Titles to Lands and Houses; for
although Lands and Houses may be called Terra Firma and res immobilis, yet the
Title unto them is no more certain, than it pleases the Lawyers and Authority
to make them; wherefore the Hollanders do by Registries, and other ways of
Assurance make the Title as immovable as the Lands, for there can be no
encouragement to Industry, where there is no assurance of what shall be gotten
by it; and where by fraud and corruption, one Man may take away with ease and
by a trick, and in a moment what another has gotten by many Years extreme
labor and pains.

There has been much discourse, about Of the introducing Registries into
England.
introducing of Registries into England; the Lawyers for the most part object
against it, alleging that Titles of Land in England are sufficiently secure
already; wherefore omitting the considerations of small and oblique reasons pro
and contra, it were good that enquiry were made from the Officers of several
Courts, to what sum or value Purchasers have been damnified for this last ten
Years, by such fraudulent conveyances as Registries would have prevented; the
tenth part whereof at a Medium, is the annual loss which the People sustain for
want of them, and then computation is to be made of the annual charge of
Registring such extraordinary Conveyances, as would secure the Title of Lands;
now by comparing these two sums, the Question so much agitated may be
determined; though some think that though few are actually damnified, yet that
all are hindered by fear and deterred from Dealing.

Their third Policy is their Bank, the use The Banks of Holland
whereof is to increase Money, or rather to make a small sum equivalent in
Trade to a greater, for the effecting whereof these things are to be
considered. 1. How much Money will drive the Trade of the Nation. 2. How much
current Money there is actually in the Nation. 3. How much Money will serve to
make all payments of under 50 l. or any other more convenient sum throughout
the Year. 4. For what sum the keepers of the Bank are unquestionable Security:
If all these four particulars be well known, then it may also be known, how
much of the ready Money above mentioned may safely and profitably be lodged in
the Bank, and to how much ready current Money the said deposited Money is
equivalent. As for example, suppose a Hund. thous. Pounds will drive the Trade
of the Nation, and suppose there be but Sixty thousand Pounds of ready Money in
the same; suppose also that Twenty thous. Pounds will drive on and answer all
Payments made of under 50 l. In this case Forty of the Sixty being put into the
Bank, will be equivalent to Eighty, which eighty and twenty kept out of the
Bank do make up an Hundred, (that is to say) enough to drive the Trade as was
proposed; where note that the Bank keepers must be responsible for double the
sum entrusted with them, and must have power to levy upon the general, what
they happen to loose unto particular Men.

Upon which grounds, the Bank may freely make use of the received Forty
thousand Pounds, whereby the said sum, with the like sum in Credit makes
Eighty thousand Pounds, and with the Twenty reserved an Hundred.

I might here add many more particulars, The Hollanders are seldom Husbandmen
or Foot Soldiers.
but being the same as have already been noted by others, I shall conclude only
with adding one observation which I take to be of consequence, viz. That the
Hollanders do rid their hands of two Trades, which are of greatest turmoil and
danger, and yet of least profit; the first whereof is that of a common and
private Soldier, for such they can hire from England, Scotland, and Germany, to
venture their lives for Six pence a day, whilst themselves safely and quietly
follow such Trades, whereby the meanest of them gain six times as much, and
withal by this entertaining of Strangers for Soldiers; their Country becomes
more and more peopled, forasmuch as the Children of such Strangers, are
Hollanders and take to Trades, whilst new Strangers are admitted ad infinitum;
besides these Soldiers at convenient intervals, do at least as much work as is
equivalent to what they spend, and consequently by this way of employing of
Strangers for Soldiers, they People the Country and save their own Persons from
danger and misery, without any real expense, effecting by this method, what
others have in vain attempted by Laws for Naturalizing of Strangers, as if Men
could be charmed to transplant themselves from their own Native, into a Foreign
Country merely by words, and for the bare leave of being called by a new Name.
In Ireland Laws of Naturalization have had little effect, to bring in Aliens,
and it is no wonder, since English Men will not go thither without they may have
the pay of Soldiers, or some other advantage amounting to maintenance. The
Method of computing the value of Men and People.


Having intimated the way by which the Hollanders do increase their People, I
shall here digress to set down the way of computing the value of every Head one
with another, and that by the instance of People in England, viz. Suppose the
People of England be Six Millions in number, that their expense at 7 l. per
Head be forty two Millions: suppose also that the Rent of the Lands be eight
Millions, and the profit of all the Personal Estate be Eight Millions more; it
must needs follow, that the Labor of the People must have supplied the
remaining Twenty Six Millions, the which multiplied by Twenty (the Mass of
Mankind being worth Twenty Years purchase as well as Land) makes Five Hundred
and Twenty Millions, as the value of the whole People: which number divided by
Six Millions, makes above 80 l. Sterling, to be valued of each Head of Man,
Woman, and Child, and of adult Persons twice as much; from whence we may learn
to compute the loss we have sustained by the Plague, by the Slaughter of Men in
War, and by the sending them abroad into the Service of Foreign Princes. The
other Trade of which the Hollanders have rid their Hands, is the old
Patriarchal Trade of being Cow-keepers, and in a great Measure of that which
concerns Ploughing and Sowing of Corn, having put that Employment upon the
Danes and Polanders, from whom they have their Young Cattle and Corn. Now here
we may take notice, that as Trades and curious Arts increase; so the Trade of
Husbandry will decrease, or else the Wages of Husbandmen must rise, and
consequently the Rents of Lands must fall.

For proof whereof I dare affirm, that if all the Husbandmen of England, who
now earn but 8 d. a day or thereabouts, could become Tradesmen and earn 16 d. a
day (which is no great Wages 2 s. and 2 s. 6 d. being usually given) that then
it would be the advantage of England to throw up their Husbandry, and to make
no use of their Lands, but for Grass Horses, Milch Cows, Gardens, and Orchards,
etc. which if it be so, and if Trade and Manufacture have increased in England
(that is to say) if a greater part of the People, apply themselves to those
faculties, than there did heretofore, and if the price of Corn be no greater
now, than when Husbandmen were more numerous, and Tradesmen fewer; It follows
from that single reason (though others may be added) that the Rents of Land
must fall: As for Reasons why Rents do fall.
example, suppose the price of Wheat be 5 s. or 60 pence the Bushel; now if the
Rent of the Land whereon it grows, be the third Sheaf; then of the 60d. 20d. is
for the Land, and 40 d. for the Husbandman; But if the Husbandmans Wages,
should rise one eighth part, or from 8 d. to 9 d. per Diem, then the
Husbandmans share in the Bushel of Wheat, rises from 40 d. to 45 d. And
consequently the Rent of the Land must fall from 20 d. to 15 d. for we suppose
the price of the Wheat still remains the same: Especially since we cannot raise
it, for if we did attempt it, Cornwould be brought in to us, (as into Holland)
from Foreign Parts, where the State of Husbandry was not changed.

And thus I have done with the first principal Conclusion, that, A small
Territory, and even a few People, may by Situation, Trade, and Policy, be made
equivalent to a greater; and that convenience for Shipping, and Water-carriage,
do most eminently and fundamentally conduce thereunto.

CHAP. II. That some kind of Taxes and Public Levies, may rather increase than
diminish the Wealth of the Kingdom.
IF the Money or other Effects, levied What shift ing of Money from hand is
profitable or not.
from the People by way of Tax, were destroyed and annihilated; then it is
clear, that such Levies would diminish the Commonwealth: Or if the same were
exported out of the Kingdom without any return at all, then the case would be
also the same or worse: But if what is levied as aforesaid, be only transferred
from one hand to another, then we are only to consider whether the said Money
or Commodities, are taken from an improving hand, and given to an ill Husband,
or vice versa: As for example, suppose that Money by way of Tax, be taken from
one who spends the same in superfluous eating and drinking; and delivered to
another who employeth the same, in improving of Land, in Fishing, in working of
Mines, in Manufacture, etc. It is manifest, that such Tax is an advantage to
the State whereof the said different Persons are Members: Nay, if Money be
taken from him, who spends the same as aforesaid upon eating and drinking, or
any other perishing Commodity; and the same transferred to one that bestows
it on Clothes; I say, that even in this case, the Commonwealth has some little
advantage; because Clothes do not altogether perish so soon as Meats and
Drinks: But if the same be spent in Furniture of Houses, the advantage is yet a
little more; if in Building of Houses, yet more; if in improving of Lands;
working of Mines, Fishing, etc. yet more; but most of all, in bringing Gold and
Silver into the Country: Because those things are not only not perishable, but
are esteemed for Wealth at all times, and every where: Whereas other
Commodities which are perishable, or whose value depends upon the Fashion; or
which are contingently scarce and plentiful, are wealth, but pro hic and nunc,
as shall be elsewhere said.

In the next place if the People of any Taxing of new works a benefit to the
Commonwealth.
Country, who have not already a full employment, should be enjoined or Taxed
to work upon such Commodities as are Imported from abroad; I say, that such a
Tax, also does improve the Commonwealth.

Moreover, if Persons who live by The taxing of Idlers.
begging, cheating, stealing, gaming, borrowing without intention of restoring;
who by those ways do get from the credulous and careless, more than is
sufficient for the subsistence of such Persons; I say, that although the State
should have no present employment for such Persons, and consequently should be
forced to bear the whole charge of their livelihood; yet it were more for the
public profit to give all such Persons, a regular and competent allowance by
Public Tax; than to suffer them to spend extravagantly, at the only charge of
careless, credulous, and good natured People: And to expose the Commonwealth to
the loss of so many able Men, whose lives are taken away, for the crimes which
ill Discipline does occasion.

On the contrary, If the Stocks of laborious and ingenious Men, who are not
only beautifying the Country where they live by elegant Diet, Apparel,
Furniture, Housing, pleasant Gardens, Orchards, and Public Edifices, etc. But
are also increasing the Gold, Silver, and Jewels of the Country by Trade and
Arms; I say, if the Stock of these Men should be diminished by a Tax, and
transferred to such as do nothing at all, but eat and drink, sing, play, and
dance; nay to such as study the Metaphysics, or other needless Speculation; or
else employ themselves in any other way, which produce no material thing, or
things of real use and value in the Commonwealth: In this case, the Wealth of
the Public will be diminished: Otherwise than as such exercises, are
recreations and refreshments of the mind; and which being moderately used, do
qualify and dispose Men to what in it self is more considerable.

Wherefore upon the whole matter, to know whether a Tax will do good or harm:
The State of the People and their employments, must be well known; (that is to
say,) what part of the People are unfit for Labor by their Infancy or
Impotency; and also what part are exempt from the same, by reason of their
Wealth, Function, or Dignities; or by reason of their charge and employments;
otherwise than in governing, directing and preserving those, who are appointed
to Labor and Arts.

2. In the next place computation must be made, what part of those who are fit
for Labor and Arts as aforesaid, are able to perform the work of the Nation in
its present State and Measure.

3. It is to be considered, whether A judgment of what taxes are advangeous.
the remainder can make all or any part of those Commodities, which are
Imported from abroad; which of them, and how much in particular: The remainder
of which sort of People (if any be) may safely and without possible prejudice
to the Commonwealth, be employed in Arts and Exercises of pleasure and
ornament; the greatest whereof is the Improvement of natural knowledge.

Having thus in general illustrated this point, which I think needs no other
proof but illustration; I come next to intimate that no part of Europe has
paid so much by way of Tax, and public contribution, as Holland and Zealand
for this last 100 Years; and yet no Country has in the same time, increased
their Wealth comparably to them: And it is manifest, they have followed the
general considerations abovementioned; for they Tax Meats and Drinks most
heavily of all; to restrain the excessive expense of those things, which 24
hours does (as to the use of Man,) wholly annihilate; and they are more
favorable to Commodities of greater duration.

Nor do they Tax according to what Men gain, but in extraordinary cases; but
always according to what Men spend: And most of all, according to what they
spend needlessly, and without prospect of return. Upon which grounds, their
Customs upon Goods Imported and Exported, are generally low; as if they
intended by them, only to keep an account of their Foreign Trade; and to It is
probable that Holland and England are grown richer under taxes.
retaliate upon their Neighbor States, the prejudices done them, by their
Prohibitions and Impositions.

It is further to be observed, that since the Year 1636, the Taxes and Public
Levies made in England, Scotland, and Ireland, have been prodigiously greater
than at any time heretofore; and yet the said Kingdoms have increased in their
Wealth and Strength, for these last Forty Years, as shall hereafter be shown.

It is said that the King of France, at The difference of Princes Revenues.
present does Levy the Fifth Part of his Peoples Wealth; and yet great
Ostentation is made of the Present Riches and Strength of that Kingdom. Now
great care must be had in distinguishing between the Wealth of the People, and
that of an absolute Monarch; who takes from the People, where, when, and in
what proportion he pleases. Moreover, the Subjects of two Monarchs may be
equally Rich, and yet one Monarch may be double as Rich as the other; viz. If
one take the tenth part of the Peoples Substance to his own dispose, and the
other but the 20th. nay the Monarch of a poorer People, may appear more
splendid and glorious, than that of a Richer; which perhaps may be somewhat the
case of France, as hereafter shall be examined. As an instance and application
of what has been said, I conceive that in Ireland wherein are about 1200
Thousand People, and near 300 Thousand Smokes or That Ireland may be more
advantageously taxed by a Pole in Flax.
Hearths; It were more tolerable for the People, and more profitable for the
King; that each Head paid 2 s. worth of Flax, than that each smoke should pay 2
s. in Silver; And that for the following reasons.

1. Ireland being under peopled, and Land, and Cattle being very cheap; there
being every where store of Fish and Fowl; the ground yielding excellent Roots
(and particularly that bread-like root Potatoes) and withal they being able to
perform their Husbandry, with such harness and tackling, as each Man can make
with his own hands; and living in such Houses as almost every Man can build;
and every House-wife being a Spinner and Dyer of Wool and Yarn, they can live
and subsist after their present fashion, without the use of Gold or Silver
Money; and can supply themselves with the necessaries above named, without
laboring 2 Hours per diem: Now it has been found, that by reason of
Insolvencies arising, rather from the uselessness than want of Money among
these poor People; that from 300 Thousand Hearths, which should have yielded 30
Thousand Pound per annum; not 15 Thousand Pound of Money could be Levied:
Whereas it is easily imagined, that four or five People dwelling in that
Cottage, which has but one smoke; could easily have planted a ground-plot of
about 40 foot square with Flax; or the 50 part of an Acre; for so much ground
will bear eight or ten Shillings worth of that Commodity; and the Rent of so
much ground, in few places amounts to a penny per annum. Nor is there any skill
requisite to this practice, wherewith the Country is not already familiar. Now
as for a Market for the Flax; there is Imported into Holland it self, over and
above what that Country produces; as much Flax, as is there sold for between
Eightscore and Two Hundred Thousand Pound; and into England and Ireland is
Imported as much Linen Cloth made of Flax, and there spent, as is worth above
a Million of Money. As shall hereafter be shown.

Wherefore having shown, that Silver Money is useless to the poor People of
Ireland; that half the Hearth Money could not be raised by reason thereof; that
the People are not a fifth part employed; that the People and Land of Ireland,
are competently qualified for Flax; That one Pennyworth of Land, will produce
Ten Shillings worth of the same; and that there is Market enough and enough,
for above an Hundred Thousand Pounds worth; I conceive my Proposition
sufficiently proved; at least to set forwards and promote a practice, which
both the present Law and Interest of the Country does require: Especially,
since if all the Flax so produced should yield nothing, yet there is nothing
lost; the same time having been worse spent before. Upon the same grounds, the
like Tax of 2 s. per Head, may be raised with the like advantage upon the
People of England; which will amount to Six Hundred Thousand Pound per annum;
to be paid in Flax, Manufactured, into all the sorts of Linnens, Threads, Tapes,
and Laces; which we now receive from France, Flanders, Holland, and Germany;
the value whereof does far exceed the sum last mentioned, as has appeared by
the examination of particulars.

It is observed by Clothiers, and others, Duties put upon redundant Commodities
may be a harmless Tax.
who employ great numbers of poor people, that when Corn is extremely
plentiful, that the Labor of the poor is proportionably dear: And scarce to be
had at all (so licentious are they who labor only to eat, or rather to drink.)
Wherefore when so many Acres sown with Corn, as do usually produce a sufficient
store for the Nation, shall produce perhaps double to what is expected or
necessary; it seems not unreasonable that this common blessing of God, should
be applied, to the common good of all people, represented by their Sovereign;
much rather than the same should be abused, by the vile and brutish part of
mankind, to the prejudice of the Commonwealth: And consequently, that such
surplusage of Corn, should be sent to public Storehouses; from thence to be
disposed of, to the best advantage of the Public.

Now if the Corn spent in England, at five shillings per Bushel Wheat, and two
shillings six pence Barley, be worth ten Millions Communibus annis; it follows
that in years of great plenty, when the said Grains are one third part cheaper;
that a vast advantage might accrue to the Commonwealth, which now is spent in
over-feeding of the People, in quantity or quality; and so indisposing them to
their usual Labor.

The like may be said of Sugar, Tobacco, and Pepper; which custom has now made
necessary to all sorts of people; and which the over-planting of them, has
made unreasonably cheap: I say it is not absurd, that the Public should be
advantaged by this extraordinary plenty.

That an Excise should be laid upon Corrants also, is not unreasonable; not
only for this, but for other reasons also.

The way of the present Militia or Of a Tax by a grand Militia, and by two
other sorts of Armies.
Trained-Bands, is a gentle Tax upon the Country; because it is only a few days
Labor in the year, of a few Men in respect of the whole; using their own
goods, that is their own Arms. Now if there be three Millions of Males in
England, there be above two hundred thousand of them, who are between the age
of sixteen and thirty, unmarried persons; and who live by their Labor and
Service; for of so many or thereabouts, the present Militia consists.

Now if an hundred and five thousand of these, were Armed, and Trained, as
Foot; and fifty thousand as Horse; (Horse being of special advantage in
Islands) the said Forces at Land, with thirty thousand Men at Sea; would by
Gods ordinary blessing, defend this Nation, being an Island, against any Force
in view: But the charge of Arming, Disciplining, and Rendezvousing all these
Men, twice, or thrice a year; would be a very gentle Tax, Levied by the people
themselves, and paid to themselves. Moreover if out of the said number part
were selected, of such as are more than ordinarily fit and disposed for War,
and to be Exercised, and Rendezvoused fourteen or fifteen times per annum; the
charge thereof being but a fortnights Pay in the year, would be also a very
gentle Tax.

Lastly, If out of this last mentioned number, again should be selected, making
about twelve thousand Foot, and near six thousand Horse, to be Exercised, and
Rendezvoused forty days in the year; I say that the charge of all these three
Militias, allowing the latter six weeks Pay per annum; would not cost above one
hundred and twenty thousand pound per annum; which I take to be an easy
burden, for so great a benefit.

Forasmuch as the present Navy of For supplying the Navy, and Merchants with
Seamen.
England requires thirty six thousand Men to Man it; and for that the English
Trade of Shipping, requires about forty eight thousand Men, to manage it also;
it follows, that to perform both well, there ought to be about seventy two
thousand Men, (and not eighty four thousand) competently qualified for these
Services: For want whereof we see, that it is a long while, before a Royal Navy
can be manned; which till it be, is of no effectual use, but lies at charge.
And we see likewise upon these occasions, that Merchants are put to great
straights, and inconveniences; and do pay excessive rates for the carrying on
their Trade. Now if twenty four thousand able bodyed Tradesmen, were by six
thousand of them per annum, brought up and fitted for Sea-Service; and for
their encouragement allowed 20 s. per annum for every year they had been at
Sea, even when they stay at home, not exceeding 6 l. for those, who have served
six years or upward; it follows, that about 72000 l. at the medium of 3 l. per
Man, would Salariate the whole number of twenty four thousand; and so,
forasmuch as half the Seamen, which manage the Merchants Trade, are supposed
to be always in Harbor, and are about twenty four thousand Men, together with
the said half of the Auxilliaries last mentioned, would upon all emergencies,
Man out the whole Royal Navy with thirty six thousand, and leaving to the
Merchants twelve thousand of the abler Auxilliaries, to perform their business
in Harbor, till others come home from Sea; and thus thirty six thousand,
twenty four thousand, and twelve thousand, make the seventy two thousand above
mentioned: I say that more than this sum of 7^000 l. is fruitlesly spent, and
over paid by the Merchants, whenever a great Fleet is to be fitted out. Now
these whom I call Auxilliary Seamen, are such as have another Trade besides,
wherewith to maintain themselves, when they are not employed at Sea; and the
charge of maintaining them, though 72000 l. per annum, I take to be little or
nothing, for the reasons abovementioned, and consequently an easy Tax to the
people, because Leavyed by, and paid to themselves.

As we propounded that Ireland A Herring Tax upon Scotland.
should be Taxed with Flax, and England by Linen, and other Manufacture of the
same; I conceive that Scotland also might be Taxed as much, to be paid in
Herrings, as Ireland in Flax: Now the three Taxes ( viz.) of Flax, Linen, and
Herrings, and the maintenance of the triple Militia, and of the Auxilliary
Seamen abovementioned, do all five of them together, amount to one Million of
money, the raising whereof is not a Million spent, but gain unto the
Commonwealth, unless it can be made appear, that by reason of all, or any of
them, the Exportation of Woollen Manufactures, Lead, and Tin, are lessened; or
of such Commodities, as our own East and West India Trade do produce, forasmuch
as I conceive, that the Exportation of these last mentioned Commodities, is the
Touchstone whereby the Wealth of England is tried, and the Pulse whereby the
Health of the Kingdom may be discerned.

CHAP. III. That France cannot by reason of natural, and perpetual Impediments,
be more powerful at Sea, than the English, or Hollanders now are, or may be.
POwer at Sea consists chiefly of The qualities of Ships fit for the defense of
England.
Men, able to fight at Sea, and that in such Shipping, as is most proper for
the Seas wherein they serve; and those are in these Northern Seas, Ships from
between three hundred to one thousand three hundred Tuns; and of those such as
draw much Water, and have a deep Latch in the Sea, in order to keep a good
Wind, and not to fall to Leeward, a matter of vast advantage in Sea Service:
Wherefore it is to be examined, 1. Whether the King of France, has Ports in
the Northern Seas (where he has most occasion for his Fleets of War, in any
contests with England) able to receive the Vessels abovementioned, in all
Weathers, both in Winter and Summer Season. For if the King of France, would
bring to Sea an equal number of fighting Men, with the English and Hollanders,
in small floaty Leeward Vessels, he would certainly be of the weaker side. For
a Vessel of one thousand Tuns manned with five hundred Men, fighting with five
Vessels of two hundred Tuns, each manned with one hundred Men apiece, shall in
common reason have the better offensively, and defensively; forasmuch as the
great Ship can carry such Ordnance, as can reach the small ones at a far
greater distance, than those can reach, or at least hurt the other; and can
batter, and sink at a distance, when small ones can scarce pierce.

Moreover it is more difficult for Men out of a small Vessel, to enter a tall
Ship, then for Men from a higher place, to leap down into a lower; nor is small
shot so effectual upon a tall Ship, as vice versa.

And as for Vessels drawing much water, and consequently keeping a good Wind,
they can take or leave Leeward Vessels, at pleasure, and secure themselves from
being boarded by them: Moreover the windward Ship, has a fairer mark at a
Leeward Ship, than vice versa; and can place her shot upon such parts of the
Leeward Vessel, as upon the next Tack will be under water.

Now then the King of France, having no Ports able to receive large windward
Vessels, between Dunkirk and Ushant, what other Ships he can bring into those
Seas, will not be considerable. As for the wide Ocean, which his Harbors of
Breast, and Charente, do look into; it affords him no advantage upon an Enemy;
there being so great a Latitude of engaging or not, even when the Parties are
in sight of each other.

Wherefore, although the King of France were immensely rich, and could build
what Ships he pleased, both for number, and quality; yet if he have not Ports
to receive, and shelter, that sort and size of Shipping, which is fit for his
purpose; the said Riches will in this case be fruitless, and a mere expense
without any return, or profit. Some will say that other Nations cannot build so
good Ships as the English; I do indeed hope they cannot; but because it seems
too possible, that they may sooner or later, by Practice and Experience; I
shall not make use of that Argument, having bound my self to show, that the
impediments of France, (as to this purpose) are natural, and perpetual. Ships,
and Guns do not fight of themselves, but Men who act and manage them; wherefore
it is more material to show; That the King of France, neither has, nor can
have Men sufficient, to Man a Fleet, of equal strength to that of the King of
England. ( viz.)

The King of Englands Navy, consists The qualifications of Seamen for defense.
of about seventy thousand Tuns of Shipping, which requires thirty six thousand
Men to Man it; these Men being supposed to be divided into eight parts, I
conceive that one eighth part, must be persons of great Experience, and
Reputation, in Sea Service: another eighth part must be such as have used the
Sea seven years and upwards; half of them, or 4/8 parts more, must be such as
have used the Sea above a twelvemonth, viz. two, three, four, five, or six
years, allowing but one quarter of the whole Complements, to be such as never
were at Sea at all, or at most but one Voyage, or upon one Expedition; so that
at a medium I reckon, that the whole Fleet must be Men of three or four years
growth, one with another. Fournier, a late judicious Writer, making The Number
of Seamen in France.
it his business to persuade the World, how considerable the King of France
was, or might be at Sea, in the ninety second and ninety third pages of his
Hydrography, says, That there was one place in Britany, which had furnished
the King with one thousand four hundred Seamen, and that perhaps the whole
Seacoast of France, might have furnished him with fifteen times as many: Now
supposing his whole Allegation were true, yet the said number amounts but to
twenty one thousand; all which, if the whole Trade of Shipping in France were
quite and clean abandoned, would not by above a third, Man out a Fleet
equivalent, to that of the King of England: And if the Trade were but barely
kept alive, there would not be one third part Men enough, to Man the said Fleet.

But if the Shipping Trade of France, be not above a quarter as great as that
of England, and that one third part of the same, namely the Fishing Trade to
the Banks of Newfoundland, is not peculiar, nor fixed to the French; then I say
that if the King of England (having power to Press Men) cannot under two or
three months time Man his Fleet; then the King of France, with less than a
quarter of the same help, can never do it at all; for in France (as shall
elsewhere be shown) there are not above one hundred and fifty thousand Tun of
Trading Vessels, and consequently not above fifteen thousand Seamen, reckoning
a Man to every ten Tun. As it has been shown that the King of France, cannot at
present Man such a Fleet, as is above described, we come next to show that he
never can, being under natural, and perpetual Impediments: viz. 1. If there be
but fifteen thousand Seamen in all France, to manage its Trade, it is not to be
supposed, that the said Trade should be extinguished, nor that it should spare
above five of the said fifteen thousand toward manning the Fleet which
requires thirty five thousand.

Now the deficient thirty thousand The ways whereby the French must increase
Seamen.
must be supplied, one of these four ways, either, first by taking in Land men,
of which sort there must not be above ten thousand, since the Seamen will never
be contented, without being Why Seamen dislike Landmen.
the major part, nor do they heartily wish well to Landmen at all, or rejoice
even at those Successes, of which the Landmen can claim any share; thinking it
hard that themselves, who are bred to miserable, painful, and dangerous
Employments, (and yet profitable to the Commonwealth) should at a time when
booty and purchase is to be gotten, be clogged or hindered, by any conjunction
with Landmen, or forced to admit those, to an equal share with themselves. 2.
The Seamen which we suppose twenty thousand, must be had, that is hired from
other Nations, which cannot be without tempting them with so much Wages, as
exceeds what is given by Merchants, and withal to counterpoise the danger of
being hanged The danger of English Seamen their serving the French.
by their own Prince, and allowed no Quarter if they are taken; the trouble of
conveying themselves away, when Restraints and Prohibitions are upon them; and
also the infamy of having been Apostates, to their own Country, and Cause: I
say their Wages must be more than double, to what their own Prince gives them,
and their assurance must be very great, that they shall not be at long run
abused or slighted by those who employed them; (as hating the Traitor, although
they love the Treason.) I say moreover, that those who will be thus tempted
away, must be of the basest, and lewdest sort of Seamen, and such as have not
enough of Honor and Conscience, to qualify them for any Trust, or gallant
Performance. 3. Another How Men learn to be good Seamen.
way to increase Seamen, is to put great numbers of Landmen upon Ships of War,
in order to their being Seamen; but this course cannot be effectual, not only
for the above mentioned Antipathy, between Landmen, and Seamen; but also,
because it is seen, that Men at Sea do not apply themselves to Labor and
Practice, without more necessity than happens in over-manned Shipping. For
where there are fifty Men in a Vessel, that ten can sufficiently Navigate, the
supernumerary forty will improve little: But where there shall be of ten but
one or two supernumeraries, there necessity will often call upon every Man to
set his hand to the Work, which must be well done at the peril of their own
lives. Moreover Seamen shifting Vessels almost every six or twelve months, do
sometimes Sail in small Barks, sometimes in midling Ships, and sometimes in
great Vessels of Defense; sometimes in Lighters, sometimes in Hoighs, sometimes
in Ketches, sometimes in three Masted Ships, sometimes they go to the
Southward, sometimes to the Northward, sometimes the Coast, sometimes they
cross the Ocean; by all which variety of Service, they do in time complete
themselves, in every Part, and Circumstance of their Faculty: Whereas those who
go out for a Summer, in a Man of War, have not that variety of Practice, nor a
direct necessity of doing any thing at all.

Besides it is three or four years at a medium, wherein a Seaman must be made;
neither can there be less than three Seamen, to make a fourth, of a Landman:
Consequently the fifteen thousand Seamen of France, can increase but five
thousand Seamen in three or four years, and unless their Trade should increase
with their Seamen in proportion, the King must be forced to bear the charge of
this improvement, out of the Public Stock, which is intolerable. So as the
Question which now remains, is, whether the Shipping Whether the Shipping Trade
of France is like to increase.
Trade of France is like to increase? Upon which account it is to be
considered, 1. That France is sufficiently stored, with all kind of Necessaries
within it self; as with Corn, Cattle, Wine, Salt, Linen Cloth, Paper, Silk,
Fruits, etc. So as they need little Shipping, to Import more Commodities of
Weight, or Bulk; neither is there any thing of Bulk Exported out of France, but
Wines, and Salt; the weight whereof is under one hundred thousand Tun per
annum, yielding not employment to above twenty five thousand Tun of Shipping,
and these are for the most part Dutch, and English, who are not only already in
Possession of the said Trade, but also are better fitted to maintain it, than
the French are, or perhaps ever can be: And that for the following Reasons. (
viz.) 1. Because Reasons why it cannot.
the French cannot Victual so cheap as the English, and Dutch, nor Sail with so
few Hands. 2. The French for want of good Coasts and Harbors, cannot keep
their Ships in Port, under double the Charge that the English and Hollanders
can. 3. by reason of Paucity, and distance of their Ports, one from another,
their Seamen and Tradesmen relating to Shipping, cannot Correspond with, and
Assist one another, so easily, cheaply, and advantageously, as in other places.
Wherefore if their Shipping Trade, is not likely to increase within themselves,
and much less to increase, by their beating out the English, and Hollanders,
from being the Carriers of the World; it follows that their Seamen will not be
increased, by the increase of their said Trade: Wherefore, and for that they
are not like to be increased, by any of the several ways above specified, and
for that their Ports are not fit to receive Ships of Burden, and Quality, fit
for their purpose; and that by reason of the less fitness of their Ports, than
that of their Neighbors; I conceive, that what was propounded, has been
competently proved.

The aforementioned Fournier in the ninety second and ninety third pages of his
Hydrography, has labored to prove the contrary of all this, unto which I
refer the Reader: Not thinking his Arguments of any weight at all, in the
present case. Nor indeed does he make his Comparisons, with the English or
Hollanders, but with the Spaniards, who, nor the Grand Seignior, (the latter of
whom has greatadvantages, to be powerful at Sea than the King of France) could
ever attain to any illustrious greatness in Naval Power: Having often
attempted, but never succeeded in the same. Nor is it easy to believe, that
the King of England should for so many years, have continued his Title to the
Sovereignty of the Narrow Seas, against his Neighbors (ambitious enough to
have gotten it from him) had not their Impediments been Natural, and Perpetual,
and such, as we say, do obstruct the King of France.

CHAP. IV. That the People and Territories of the King of England, are
naturally near as considerable for Wealth and Strength, as those of France.
THE Author of the State of England, Of comparison between the Territories of
England and France.
among the many useful truths, and observations he has set down; delivers the
Proportion, between the Territories of England and France, to be as Thirty to
Eighty two; the which if it be true, then England, Scotland, and Ireland, with
the Islands unto them belonging will, taken altogether, be near as big as
France. Tho I ought to take all advantages for proving the Paradox in hand; yet
I had rather grant that England, Scotland, and Ireland, with the Islands before
mentioned; together with the Planted parts of Newfoundland, New England,
New-Netherland, Virginia, Maryland, Carolina, Iamaica, Burmoudas, Barbados,
and all the rest of the Carribby Islands, with what the King has in Asia and
Africa, do not contain so much Territory as France, and what planted Land the
King of France has also in America. And if any Man will be Heterodox in behalf
of the French Interest; I would be contented against my knowledge and judgment,
to allow the King of France's Territories, to be a seventh, sixth, or even a
fifth greater, than those of the King of England; believing that both Princes
have more Land, than they do employ to its utmost use.

And here I beg leave, (among the A Proposition for quitting Ireland and the
Highlands of Scotland.
several matters which I intend for serious,) to interpose a jocular, and
perhaps ridiculous digression, and which I indeed desire Men to look upon,
rather as a Dream or Resvery, than a rational Proposition; the which is, that
if all the movables and People of Ireland, and of the Highlands of Scotland,
were transported into the rest of Great Britain; that then the King and his
Subjects, would thereby become more Rich and Strong, both offensively and
defensively, than now they are.

It Is true, I have heard many Wise Men say, when they were bewailing the vast
losses of the English, in preventing and suppressing Rebellions in Ireland, and
considering how little profit has returned, either to the King or Subjects of
England, for their Five Hundred Years doing and suffering in that Country; I
say, I have heard Wise Men (in such their Melancholies) wish, that (the People
of Ireland being saved) Island were sunk under Water: Now it troubles me, that
the Distemper of my own mind in this point, carries me to dream, that the
benefit of those wishes, may practically be obtained, without sinking that vast
Mountainous Island under Water, which I take to be somewhat difficult; For
although Dutch Engineers may drain its Bogs; yet I know no Artists that could
sink its Mountains. If Ingenious and Learned Men (among whom I reckon Sir Tho.
More, and Des Carts) have disputed, That we who think our selves awake, are or
may be really in a Dream; and since the greatest absurdities of Dreams, are but
a Preposterous and Tumultuary contexture of realities; I will crave the umbrage
of these great Men last named, to say something for this wild conception, with
submission to the better judgment of all those that can prove themselves awake.

If there were but one Man living in England, then the benefit of the whole
Territory, could be but the livelihood of that one Man: But if another Man were
added, the rent or benefit of the same would be double, if two, triple; and so
forward until so many Men were Planted in it, as the whole Territory could
afford Food unto: For if a Man would know, what any Land is worth, the true and
natural Question must be, How many Men will it feed? How many Men are there to
be fed? But to speak more practically, Land of the same quantity and quality in
England, is generally worth four or five times as much as in Ireland; and but
one quarter, or third of what it is worth in Holland; because England is four
or five times better Peopled than Ireland, and but a quarter so well as
Holland. And moreover, where the Rent of Land is advanced by reason of
Multitude of People; there the number of Years purchase, for which the
Inheritance may be sold, is also advanced, though perhaps not in the very same
Proportion; for 20 s. per annum in Ireland, may be worth but 8 l. and in
England where Titles are very sure, above 20 l. in Holland above 30 l.

I suppose, that in Ireland and the High-Lands in Scotland, there may be about
one Million and Eight hundred thousand People, or about a fifth part of what is
in all the three Kingdoms: Wherefore the first Question will be, whether
England, Wales, and the Low-Lands of Scotland, cannot afford Food, (that is to
say) Corn, Fish, Flesh, and Fowl, to a fifth part more People, than are at the
present planted upon it, with the same Labor that the said fifth part do now
take where they are? For if so, then what is propounded is naturally possible.
2. It is to be enquired, What the value of the immovables (which upon such
removal must be left behind) are worth? For if they be worth less, than the
advancement of the price of Land in England will amount unto; then the Proposal
is to be considered. 3. If the Relict Lands, and the immovables left behind
upon them, may be sold for Money; or if no other Nation shall dare meddle with
them, without paying well for them; and if the Nation who shall be admitted,
shall be less able to prejudice and annoy the Transplantees into England then
before; then I conceive that the whole proposal will be a pleasant and a
profitable Dream indeed.

As to the first point, whether England That England and the Lowlands of
Scotland will feed all the People of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
and the Low-Lands of Scotland, can maintain a fifth part more People than they
now do (that is to say) Nine Millions of Souls in all? For answer thereunto, I
first say, that the said Territories of England, and the Low-Land of Scotland,
contain about Thirty Six Millions of Acres, that is four Acres for every Head,
Man, Woman, and Child; but the United Provinces do not allow above one Acre
and, and England it self rescinding Wales, has but three Acres to every Head,
according to the present State of Tillage and Husbandry. Now if we consider
that England having but three Acres to a Head as aforesaid, does so abound in
Victuals, as that it makes Laws against the Importation of Cattle, Flesh, and
Fish from abroad; and that the draining of Fens, improving of Forests,
enclosing of Commons, Sowing of St. Foyne and Clovergrass, be grumbled against
by Landlords, as the way to depress the price of Victuals; then it plainly
follows, that less than three Acres improved as it may be, will serve the turn,
and consequently that four will suffice abundantly. I could here set down the
very number of Acres, that would bear Bread and Drink, Corn, together with
Flesh, Butter, and Cheese, sufficient to victual Nine Millions of Persons, as
they are Victualled in Ships, and regular Families; but shall only say in
general; that Twelve Millions of Acres, viz. of 36 Millions, will do it,
supposing that Roots, Fruits, Fowl, and Fish, and the ordinary profit of Lead,
Tin, That the value of all the quitted Lands and immovable goods and charge of
transplantation are* not worth above 17 Millions.
Iron-Mines, and Woods, would piece up any defect, that may be feared.

As to the second, I say, that the Land and Housing in Ireland, and the
High-Lands of Scotland, at the present Market rates, are not worth Thirteen
Millions of Money; nor would the actual charge of making the Transplantation
proposed, amount to four Millions more: So then the Question will be, whether
the benefit expected from this transplantation, will exceed Seventeen Millions?

To which I say, that the advantage will probably be near four times the last
mentioned sum, or about Sixty nine Millions, Three Hundred thousand Pounds.
For if the Rent of all England and Wales, and the Low-Lands of Scotland, be
about Nine Millions per annum; and if the fifth part of the People be
superadded, unto the present Inhabitants of those Countries; then the Rent will
amount unto Ten Millions 8000 l. and the number of Years purchase, will rise
from seventeen and, to a Fifth part more, which is twenty one. So as the Land
which is now worth but Nine Millions per annum, at seventeen Years purchase,
making 157 Millions and, will then be worth Ten Millions Eight Hundred thousand
Pounds, at Twenty one Years purchase; viz. Two Hundred Twenty Six Millions, and
Eight Hundred thousand Pounds, that is Sixty nine Millions, and Three Hundred
thousand Pounds more than it was before.

And if any Prince willing to enlarge That those who purchase Ireland shall
weaken themselves
his Territories, will give any thing more than Six Millions or half the
present value for the said relinquished Land, which are estimated to be worth
Thirteen Millions; then the whole profit, will be above Seventy Five Millions,
and Eight Hundred 600 l. Above four times the loss, as the same was above
computed. But if any Man shall object, that it will be dangerous unto England,
that Ireland should be in the Hands of any other Nation; I answer in short,
that that Nation, whoever shall purchase it (being divided by means of the said
purchase,) shall not be more able to annoy England, than now in its united
condition. Nor is Ireland nearer England, than France and Flanders.

Now if any Man shall desire a more clear explanation, how, and by what means,
the Rents of Lands shall rise by this closer cohabitation of People above
described? I answer, that the advantage will arise in transplanting about
Eighteen Hundred thousand People, from the poor and miserable Trade of
Husbandry, to more beneficial Handicrafts: For when the superaddition is made,
a very little addition of Husbandry to the same Lands will produce a fifth part
more of Food, and consequently the additional hands, earning but 40 s. per
annum (as they may very well do, nay to 8 l. per annum) at some other Trade;
the Superlucration will be above Three Millions and Six Hundred thousand Pounds
per annum, which at Twenty Years purchase is Seventy Millions. Moreover, as the
Inhabitants of Cities and Towns, spend more Commodities, and make greater
consumptions, than those who live in wild thin peopled Countries; So when
England shall be thicker peopled, in the manner before described, the very same
People shall then spend more, than when they lived more sordidly and
inurbanely, and further asunder, and more out of the sight, observation, and
emulation of each other; every Man desiring to put on better Apparel when he
appears in Company, than when he has no occasion That the difference between
England's and France's Territory is not material.
to be seen.

I further add, that the charge of the Government, Civil, Military, and
Ecclesiastical, would be more cheap, safe, and effectual in this condition of
closer co-habitation than otherwise; as not only reason, but the example of the
United Provinces does demonstrate.

But to let this whole digression pass for a mere Dream, I suppose 'twill serve
to prove, that in case the King of Englands Territories, should be a little
less than those of the King of France, that forasmuch as neither of them are
overpeopled, that the difference is not material to the Question in hand;
wherefore supposing the King of France's advantages, to be little or nothing in
this point of Territory; we come next to examine and compare, the number of
Subjects which each of these Monarchs does govern.

The Book called the State of France, makes that Kingdom to consist of Twenty
Seven thousand Parishes; and another Book written by a substantial Author, who
professedly inquires into the State of the Church and Churchmen of France, sets
it down as an extraordinary case, that a Parish in France should have Six
Hundred Souls; wherefore I suppose that the said Author (who has so well
examined the matter) is not of opinion that every Parish, one with another,
has above Five Hundred; by which reckoning the whole People of France, are
about Thirteen Millions and a half; Now the People of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, with the Islands adjoining, by computation from the numbers of
Parishes; which commonly have more People in Protestant Churches, than in
Popish Countries; as also from the Hearthmoney, Pole Money, and Excise, do
amount to about Nine Millions and.

There are in New England, about 16000 Men mustered in Arms; about 24000 able
to bear Arms; and consequently about 150000 in all: And I see no reason why in
all this and the other Plantations of Asia, Africa, and America, there should
not be half (...)
a Million in all. But this last I leave to every Man's conjecture; and conse
quently, I suppose, that the King of England has about Ten Millions of
Subjects, ubivis Terrarum Orbis; and the King of France about Thirteen and a as
aforesaid.

Although it be very material to know the number of Subjects belonging to each
Prince, yet when the Question is concerning their Wealth and Strength; It is
also material to examine, how many of them do get more than they spend, and how
many less.

In order whereunto it is to be considered, that in the King of Englands
Dominions, there are not Twenty thousand Churchmen; But in France, as the
aforementioned Author of theirs does aver, (who sets down the particular number
of each Religious Order) there are about Two Hundred and Seventy thousand; viz.
Two Hundred and Fifty thousand more than we thinkare necessary, (that is to
say) Two Hundred and Fifty Thousand withdrawn out of the World. Now the said
number of adult and able bodied Persons, are equivalent to about double the
same number, of the promiscuous Mass of Mankind. And the same Author says, that
the same Religious Persons, do spend one with another about 18 d. per diem,
which is triple even to what a laboring Man requires.

Wherefore the said Two Hundred and Fifty thousand Churchmen (living as they
do) makes the King of France's Thirteen Millions and a half, to be less than
Thirteen: Now if Ten Men can defend themselves as well in Islands, as Thirteen
can upon the Continent; then the said Ten being not concerned to increase their
Territory by the Invasion of others, are as effectual as the Thirteen in point
of Strength also; wherefore that there are more Superlucrators in the English,
than the French Dominions, we say as follows.

There be in England, Scotland, Ireland, The multitude of Clergy's do lessen
the K. of France's People, the multitude of Sea and Naval Men doincrease the K.
of England's Subjects.
and the Kings other Territories above Forty Thousand Seamen; in France not
above a quarter so many; but one Seaman earneth as much as three common
Husbandmen; wherefore this difference in Seamen, adds to the account of the
King of England's Subjects, is an advantage equivalent to Sixty Thousand
Husbandmen.

There are in England, Scotland, and Ireland, and all other the King of
England's Territories Six Hundred thousand Tun of Shipping, worth about four
Millions and a of Money; and the annual charge of maintaining the Shipping of
England, by new Buildings and Reparations, is about part of the same sum;
which is the Wages of one Hundred and Fifty thousand Husbandmen, but is not the
Wages of above part of so many Artisans as are employed, upon Shipping of all
sorts; viz. Shiprights, Calkers, Ioyners, Carvers, Painters, Block-makers,
Rope-makers, Mast-makers, Smiths of several sorts; Flag-makers, Compass-makers,
Brewers, Bakers, and all other sort of Victuallers; all sorts of Tradesmen
relating to Guns, and Gunners stores. Wherefore there being four times more of
these Artisans in England, etc. than in France; they further add to the account
of the King of England's Subjects, the equivalent of Eighty Thousand Husbandmen
more. The K. of England's Territories are in effect but 12 Miles from Navigable
Water, the King of France's 65.


The Sea-line of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the adjacent Islands, is
about Three thousand Eight hundred Miles; according to which length, and the
whole content of Acres, the said Land would be an Oblong, or Parallelogram
Figure of Three thousand Eight hundred Miles long, and about Twenty four Miles
broad; and consequently, every part of England, Scotland, and Ireland, is one
with another, but Twelve Miles from the Sea: Whereas France containing, but
about one Thousand Miles of Sea line, is by the like method or computation,
about Sixty Five Miles from the Sea side; and considering the paucity of Ports,
in comparison of what are in the King of England's Dominions, as good as
Seventy Miles distant from a Port: Upon which grounds it is clear, that England
can be supplied, with all gross and bulkey commodities of Foreign growth and
Manufacture, at far cheaper rates than France can be, viz. at about 4 s. per
cent. cheaper; the Land carriage for the difference of the distance between
England and France from a Port, being so much or near thereabouts. Now to what
advantage this convenience amounts, upon the Importation and Exportation of
Bulkey Commodities, cannot be less than the Labor of one Million of People,
etc. meaning by bulkey Commodities all sorts of Timber, Plank, and Staves for
Cask; all Iron, Lead, Stones, Bricks, and Tyles for building; all Corn, Salt,
and Drinks; all Flesh and Fish, and indeed all other Commodities, wherein the
gain and loss of 4 s. per Cent. is considerable; where note that the like Wines
are sold in the inner parts of France for four or Five Pound a Tun, which near
the Ports yield 7 l. Moreover The decay of timber in Englan. is no very
formidable matter
upon this Principal, the decay of Timber in England is no very formidable
thing, as the Rebuilding of London, and of the Ships wasted by the Dutch War do
clearly manifest; Nor can there be any want of Corn, or other necessary
Provisions in England, unless the Weather has been universally unseasonable
for the growth of the same; which seldom or never happens; for the same causes
which make Dearth in one place, do often cause plenty in another; wet Weather
being propitious to Highlands, which drowneth the Low.

It is observed that the poor of France, have generally less Wages than in
England; and yet their Victuals are generally dearer there; which being so,
there may be more superlucration in England than in France.

Lastly, I offer it to the consideration The K. of England's Subjects spend
near as much as the K. of France's.
of all those, who have traveled through England and France; Whether the
Plebeians of England (for they constitute the Bulk of any Nation) do not spend
a sixth part more than the Plebeians of France? And if so, it is necessary that
they must first get it; and consequently that Ten Millions of the King of
England's Subjects, are equivalent to Twelve of the King of France; and upon
the whole matter, to the Thirteen Millions, at which the French Nation was
estimated. The greater spendor of the King of France, no certain argument of
the greater Wealth of his People.


It will here be objected, that the splendour and magnificencies of the King of
France, appearing greater than those of England, that the Wealth of France must
be proportionably greater, than that of England; but that does not follow,
forasmuch as the apparent greatness of the King, does depend upon the Quota
pars of the Peoples Wealth which he levyeth from them; for supposing of the
People to be equally Rich, if one of the Sovereigns levy a fifth part, and
another a fifteenth, the one seems actually thrice as Rich as the other,
whereas potentially, they are but equal.

Having thus discoursed of the Territory, Comparison of the foreign Trade of
England and France,
People, Superlucration, and Defencibleness of both Dominions, and in some
measure of their Trade, so far as we had occasion to mention Ships, Shipping,
and nearness to Ports; we come next to enlarge a little further, upon the Trade
of each.

Some have estimated, that there are not above Three hundred Millions of People
in the whole World. Whether that be so or no, is not very material to be known;
but I have fair grounds to conjecture, and would be glad to know it more
certainly, that there are not above Eighty Millions, with whom the English and
Dutch have Commerce; no Europeans that I know of, Trading directly nor
indirectly, where they do not; so as the whole Commercial World, or World of
Trade, consists of about Eighty Millions of Souls, as aforesaid.

And I further estimate, that the value of all Commodities yearly exchanged
amongst them, does not exceed the value of Forty Five Millions: Now the Wealth
of every Nation, consisting chiefly, in the share which they have in the
Foreign Trade with the whole Commercial World, rather than in the Domestic
Trade, of ordinary Meat, Drink, and Clothes, etc. which bringing in little
Gold, Silver, Jewels, and other Universal Wealth; we are to consider, whether
the Subjects of the King of England, Head for Head, have not a greater share,
than those of France.

To which purpose it has been considered, that the Manufactures of Wool,
yearly exported out of England, into several parts of the World, viz. All sorts
of Cloth, Serges, Stuffs, Cottons, Bays, Says, Frize, perpetuan^s; as also
Stockings, Caps, Rugs, etc. Exported out of England, Scotland, and Ireland, do
amount unto Five Millions per annum.

The value of Lead, Tynn, and Coals, to be Five hundred thousand pounds.

The value of all Clothes, Housholdstuff, etc. carried into America, Two
hundred thousand pounds.

The value of Silver, and Gold, taken from the Spaniards Sixty thousand pounds.

The value of Sugar, Indico, Tobacco, Cotton, and Caccao, brought from the
Southward parts of America Six hundred thousand pounds.

The value of the Fish, Pipe-staves, Masts, Bever, etc. brought from
New England, and the Northern parts of America, Two Hundred Thousand pounds.

The value of the Wool, Butter, Hides, Tallow, Beef, Herring, Pilchers, and
Salmon, exported out of Ireland, Eight hundred thousand pounds.

The value of the Coals, Salt, Linen, Yarn, Herrings, Pilchers, Salmon,
Linen Cloth, and Yarn, brought out of Scotland, and Ireland, 500000 l.

The value of Salt peter, Pepper, Callicoes, Diamonds, Drugs, and Silks,
brought out of the East Indies, above what was spent in England; Eight hundred
thousand pounds.

The value of the Slaves, brought out of Africa, to serve in our American
Plantations Twenty thousand pounds; which with the Freight of English Shipping,
Trading into Foreign parts, being above a Million and a, makes in all Ten
Millions one Hundred and Eighty thousand pounds.

Which computation is sufficiently justified by the Customs of the Three
Kingdoms, whose intrinsic value are thought to be near a Million per annum,
viz. Six hundred thousand pounds, payable to the King; 100 thousand Pounds, for
the charges of Collecting, etc. Two hundred thousand pounds smuckled by the
Merchants, and one Hundred thousand pounds gained by the Farmers; according to
common Opinion, and Men's Sayings: And this agrees also with that proportion, or
part of the whole Trade of the World, which I have estimated the Subjects of
the King of England to be possessed of, viz. of about Ten of Forty Five
Millions.

But the value of the French Commodities, brought into England,
(notwithstanding some current estimates,) are not above one Million Two hundred
thousand pounds per annum; and the value of all they export into all the World
besides, not above Three or Four times as much; which computation also agrees
well enough, with the account we have of the Customs of France; so as France
not exporting above the value of what England does; and for that all the
Commodities of France (except Wines, Brandy, Paper, and the first patterns and
fashions for Clothes, and Furniture (of which France is the Mint) are imitable
by the English; and having withal more People than England; it follows that the
People of England, etc. have Head for Head, thrice as much Foreign Trade as the
People of France; and about Two parts of Nine of the Trade of the whole
Commercial World; and about Two parts in Seven of all the Shipping:
Notwithstanding all which it is not to be denied, that the King and some great
Men of France, appear more Rich and Splendid, than those of the like Quality in
England; all which arises rather from the nature of their Government, than from
the Intrinsic and Natural causes of Wealth and Power.

CHAP. V. That the Impediments of Englands greatness, are but contingent and
removable.
THE first Impediment of Englands The disunion of the Territories of England is
an impediment, of its greatness The different Legislatures another impediment.
greatness is, that the Territo ries thereunto belonging, are too far asunder,
and divided by the Sea into many several Islands and Countries; and I may say,
into so many Kingdoms, and several Governments, ( viz.) there be Three distinct
Legislative Powers in England, Scotland, and Ireland; the which instead of
uniting together, do often cross one another Interest; putting Bars and
Impediments upon one another Trades, not only as if they The colonies
belonging to England a diminution to the Empire.
were Foreigners to each other, but sometimes as Enemies.

2. The Islands of Iersey and Gernsey, and the Isle of Man, are under
Jurisdictions different from those, either of England, Scotland, or Ireland.

3. The Government of New England (both Civil and Ecclesiastical) does so
differ from that of His Majesty's other Dominions, that it is hard to say what
may be the consequence of it.

And the Government of the other Plantations, does also differ very much from
any of the rest; although there be not naturally substantial reasons from the
Situation, Trade, and Condition of the People, why there should be such
differences.

From all which it comes to pass, that small divided remote Governments, being
seldom able to defend themselves, the Burden of protecting of them all, must
lie upon the chief Kingdom England; and so all the smaller Kingdoms and
Dominions, instead of being Additions, are really Dimunitions; but the same is
remedied by making Two such Grand Councils, as may equally represent the whole
Empire, one to be chosen by the King, the other by the People. The Wealth of a
King is Threefold, one is the Wealth of his Subjects, the second is the Quota
pars of his Subjects Wealth, given him for the public Defense, Honor, and
Ornament of the People, and to manage such undertaking for the Common Good, as
no one or a few private Men, are sufficient for.

The third sort are the Quota, of the last mention Quota pars, which the King
may dispose of, as his own personal inclination, and discretion shall direct
him; without account. Now it is most manifest, that the aforementioned
distances, and differencies, of Kingdoms, and Jurisdictions, are great
impediments to all the said several sorts of Wealth, as may be seen in the
following particulars. First in case of War with Foreign Nations, England
commonly bears the whole burden, and charge, whereby many in England are
utterly undone.

Secondly, England sometimes Prohibiting the Commodities of Ireland, and
Scotland, as of late it did the Cattle, Flesh, and Fish, of Ireland; did not
only make Food, and consequently Labor, dearer in England, but also has
forced the People of Ireland, to fetch those Commodities from France, Holland,
and other places, which before was sold them from England, to the great
prejudice of both Nations.

Thirdly, It occasions an unnecessary trouble, and charge, in Collecting of
Customs, upon Commodities passing between the several Nations.

Fourthly, It is a damage to our Barbados, and other American Trades, that the
Goods which might pass thence immediately, to several parts of the World, and
to be sold at moderate Rates, must first come into England, and there pay
Duties, and afterward (if at all) pass into those Countries, whither they
might have gone immediately.

Fifthly, The Islands of Iersey and Gernsey, are protected at the charge of
England, nevertheless the Labor, and Industry, of that People (which is very
great) redounds most to the profit of the French.

Sixthly, In New England, there are vast numbers of able bodyed Englishmen,
employed chiefly in Husbandry, and in the meanest part of it, (which is
breeding of Cattle) whereas Ireland would have contained all those persons, and
at worst would have afforded them Lands on better terms, than they have them in
America, if not some other better Trade withal, than now they can have.

Seventhly, The Inhabitants of the other Plantations, although they do indeed
Plant Commodities, which will not grow so well in England; yet grasping at more
Land, than will suffice to produce the said Exotiics in a sufficient quantity
to serve the whole World, they do therein but distract, and confound, the
effect of their own Endeavors.

Eighthly, There is no doubt that the same People, far and wide dispersed, must
spend more upon their Government, and Protection, than the same living
compactly, and when they have no occasion to depend upon the Wind, Weather, and
all the Accidents of the Sea.

A second Impediment to the greatness The different Understanding of
Prerogative, and Privileges of Parliament, Law and Equity, Civil and
Ecclesiastical; the Supreme Legislature of Ireland, etc.
of England, is the different Understanding of several Material Points, viz. Of
the Kings Prerogative, Privileges of Parliament, the obscure differences
between Law and Equity; as also between Civil and Ecclesiastical Jurisdictions;
Doubts whether the Kingdom of England, has power over the Kingdom of Ireland,
besides the wonderful Paradox, that Englishmen, Lawfully sent to suppress
Rebellions in Ireland, should after having effected the same, (be as it were)
Disfranchised, and lose that Interest in the Legislative Power, which they had
in England, and pay Customs as Foreigners for all they spend in Ireland,
whither they were sent, for the Honor and Benefit of England.

The third Impediment is, That Ireland Want of Natural Union for want of
mixture and transplantation.
being a Conquered Country, and containing not the tenth part as many Irish
Natives, as there are English in both Kingdoms, That natural and firm Union is
not made, between the two Peoples, by Transplantations, and proportionable
mixture, so as there may be but a tenth part, of the Irish in Ireland, and the
same proportion in England; whereby the necessity of maintaining an Army in
Ireland, at the expense of a quatter of all the Rents of that Kingdom may be
taken away. The unequal inconvenient method of taxing.


The fourth Impediment is, That Taxes in England are not Levied upon the
expense, but upon the whole Estate; not upon Lands, Stock, and Labor, but
chiefly upon Land alone; and that not by any equal, and indifferent Standard,
but the casual predomihancy, of Parties, and Factions: and moreover that these
Taxes are not Levied with the least trouble, and charge, but let out to
Farmers, who also let them from one to another without explicit knowledge of
what they do; but so as in conclusion, the poor People pay twice as much as the
King receives.

The fifth Impediment is the inequality Inequality of Shires, Diocesses,
Parishes, Members of Parliament, etc.
of Shires, Diocesses, Parishes, Church Livings, and other Precincts, as also
the Representation of the People in Parliament; all which do hinder the
Operations of Authority in the same manner, as a Wheel irregulary made, and
excentrically hung; neither moves so easily, nor performs its Work so truly,
as if the same were duly framed and poised.

Sixthly, Whether it be an Impediment, that the power of making War, and
raising Money be not in the same Hand, much may be said; but I leave it to
those, who may more properly meddle with Fundamental Laws.

None of these Impediments are Natural, but did arise as the irregularity of
Buildings do, by being built, part at one time, and part at another; and by the
changing of the state of things, from what they were at the respective times,
when the Practices we complain of, were first admitted, and perhaps, are but
the warpings of time, from the rectitude of the first Institution.

As these Impediments are contingent, so they are also removeable; for may not
the Land of superfluous Territories be sold, and the People with their
movables brought away? May not the English in the America Plantations (who
Plant Tobacco, Sugar, etc.) compute what Land will serve their turn, and then
contract their Habitations to that proportion, both for quantity and quality?
as for the People of New England, I can but wish they were Transplanted into
Old England, or Ireland (according to Proposals of their own, made within this
twenty years) although they were allowed more liberty of Conscience, than they
allow one another.

May not the three Kingdoms be United into one, and equally represented in
Parliament? Might not the several Species of the Kings Subjects, be equally
mixed in their Habitations? Might not the Parishes, and other Precincts be
better equalized? Might not Jurisdictions, and pretenses of Power, be
determined and ascertained? Might not the Taxes be equally applotted, and
directly applied to their ultimate use? Might not Dissenters in Religion be
indulged, they paying a competent Force to keep the Public Peace? I Humbly
venture to say, all these things may be done, if it be so thought fit by the
Sovereign Power, because the like has often been done already, at several
Places and Times.

CHAP. VI. That the Power and Wealth of England has increased this last forty
years.
IT is not much to be doubted, but Many Territories have been added to England
within about forty years, and many improvements made.
that the Territories under the Kings Dominions have increased; Forasmuch as
New England, Virginia, Barbados, and Iamaica, Tangier, and Bumbay, have since
that time, been either added to his Majesty's Territories, or improved from a
Desert condition, to abound with People, Buildings, Shipping, and the
Production of many useful Commodities. And as for the Land of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, as it is not less in quantity, than it was forty years
since; so it is manifest that by reason of the Dreyning of Fens, watering of
dry Grounds, improving of Forests, and Commons, making of Heathy and Barren
Grounds, to bear Saintfoyne, and Clovergrass; meliorating, and multiplying
several sorts of Fruits, and Garden-Stuffe, making some Rivers Navigable, etc.
I say it is manifest, that the Land in its present Condition, is able to bear
more Provision, and Commodities, than it was forty years ago.

Secondly, Although the People in England, Scotland, and Ireland, which have
extraordinarily perished by the Plague, and Sword, within this last forty
years, do amount to about three hundred thousand, above what have dyed in the
ordinary way; yet the ordinary increase by Generation of ten Millions, which
doubles in two hundred years, as has been shown by the Observators upon the
Bills of Mortality, may in forty years (which is a fifth part of the same time)
have increased 1/^ part of the whole number, or two Millions. Where note by the
way, that the accession of Negroes to the American Plantations (being all Men
of great Labor and little Expense) is not inconsiderable; besides it is hoped
that New England, where few or no Women are Barren, and most have many
Children, and where People live long, and healthfully, has produced an
increase of as many People, as were destroyed in the late Tumults in Ireland.

As for Housing, the Streets of London The Housing of London doubled in value.
it self speaks it, I conceive it is double in value in that City, to what it
was forty years since; and for Housing in the Country, they have increased, at
Newcastle, Yarmouth, Norwich, Exeter, Portsmouth, Cowes, Dublin, Kingsaile,
Londonderry, and Coleraine in Ireland, far beyond the proportion of what I can
learn have been dilapidated in other places. For in Ireland where the ruin was
greatest, the Housing (taking all together) is now more valuable than forty
years ago, nor is this to be doubted, since Housing is now more splendid, than
in those days, and the number of Dwellers is increased, by near ^/^ part; as in
the last Paragraph is set fort.

As for Shipping, his Majesty's Navy The Shipping very much increased with the
Reasons thereof.
is now triple, or quadruple, to what it was forty years since, and before the
Sovereign was Built; the Shipping Trading to Newcastle, which are now about
eighty thousand Tuns, could not be then above a quarter of that quantity.
First, Because the City of London, is doubled. 2. Because the use of Coals is
also at least doubled, because they were heretofore seldom used in Chambers, as
now they are, nor were there so many Bricks burned with them as of late, nor
did the Country on both sides the Thames, make use of them as now. Besides
there are employed in the Guinny and American Trade, above forty thousand Tun
of Shipping per annum; which Trade in those days was inconsiderable. The
quantity of Wines Imported was not near so much as now; and to be short, the
Customs upon Imported, and Exported Commodities, did not then yield a third
part of the present value; which shows that not only Shipping, but Trade it
self has increased, somewhat near that proportion.

As to Money, the Interest thereof was Interest of Money abated near half.
within this fifty years, at 10 l. per Cent. forty years ago, at 8 l. and now
at 6 l. no thanks to any Laws which have been made to that purpose, forasmuch
as those who can give good security, may now have it at less: But the natural
fall of Interest, is the effect of the increase of Money.


