Katherine Pettus, November. 1. 1654.
Plaintiff Margaret Bancroft, Defendent In Chancery.
THe Plaintiff a poor Widow, oppressed in an extraordinary manner by the
power of the Defendent and her friends in this suit in Chancery, now of 23.
years continuance, wherein the Plaintiff sueth sor an Orphans portion against
the Defendent, the Widow and Executrix of Mr. Thomas Bancroft, the Executor
that raised his whole Estate by his Executorship.

The Plaintiff through this Suit is above 2000. l. in debt, and some of her
Creditors are ready to perish for want of their Moneys, is brought to sue in
forma Pavperis, has sold and pawned all the Goods and means she had any
ways for her subsistence, and has been and is forced to take up money at
Brokage after 20, 40, and 60. l. in the hundred, and has nothing left to live
upon, but is supported upon Alms and Charity, her whole Estate, for her self,
her Fatherless children, and Creditors, being in and upon this Suit.

The Orphans portion is, by virtue of, and according to, the Orders of Court,
Cast up, and Certified by a Master of Chancery, to amount unto 6720. l. upon
the first of March, 1651. (and after 6. ^ per Cent. since, comes now unto
7795. l.); yet the Master has taxed but 100. l. for the Plaintiffes Costs,
whereas the Plaintiff, and her late Husband the Orphan have spent in this
suit, near 2000. l. if not full so much.

The sa^d Thomas Bancroft, the Executor, above 18. years ago, at his Death,
and within three weeks before his death, when this Suit had continued above
Four years against him, left to the Defendent his Wife, and their Children,
being only three Daughters, whereof the two elder were richly Married before,
and he had given them answerable Portions, a personal Estate of above 5000.
l. and a real Estate of 300. l. a year Lands of inheritance, or thereabouts;
All which he raised and bought, after he had possessed himself of the
Testators estate, and this Orphans-portion.

The Defendent Margaret Bancroft, after she had stood out all process of
Contempt in Chancery, and obscured her self, for almost Seven years together,
was, by the Plaintiffes procurement, with much trouble, searching, and charges
to the Plaintiff, arrested by a Sergeant at Arms upon the 6.th day of July,
1648. and was Committed to the Fleet, where after she had been about a year
Imprisoned, she removed her self from thence by a Habeas-corpus unto the Prison
of the V^per-Bench, where she still remains, obstinatly refusing to make
satisfaction to the Plaintiff; And the Estate of the said Thomas Bancroft, is
so fraudulently passed away, by himself and the Defendent, si^ce the b^ginning
of this Suit, for the use of the Defendent, and their Children, that the poor
Plaintiff can get no fruit nor benefit of her Suit, though she has an
Ordinance of Parliament of the 8th of August 1643. That she should receive the
fruit and benefit of her Suit by the Ordinance and Authority of both Houses of
Parliament.

The Plaintiff humbly represents this short part of her Case to the
Honorable Committee, that is to bring in a Bill for the Relief of Creditors
and poor Prisoners, most humbly praying, That in the said Bill there may be
some special provision made for such like Cases; And that the words in the
late Act for the Relief of Creditors and poor Prison^s ( But a settlement or
Grant made by such Prisoners of their Estates, or any part thereof, or made by
any other Person, for whose debt the said Prisoner is Imprisoned of his or her
Estate real or personal, or any part thereof, to any of their Children or
Heirs apparent, upon Marriage or otherwise, after a Debt contracted, is not to
be accounted a Purchase or Conveighance to be allowed, further then to cause
restitution of the Money, which was really paid to, and received by, such
Prisoner, or other person upon such Conveighance or Grant) may be put into
the said Bill and like Act to be made; which Words will save much trouble in
the proof of fraudulent Deeds, which the leaving out thereof in the late
Ordinances would have put unto; And that there may be, Understanding, upright,
and impartial Judges.


