Villare Cantianum: OR KENT SURVEYED and ILLUSTRATED. Being an exact
DESCRIPTION of all the Parishes Buroughs, Villages, and other respective
Manors Included in the County of KENT; And, the Original and Intermedial
Possessors of them, even until these Times.

Drawn out of Charters, Escheat-Rolls, Fines, and other Public Evidences; but
especially out of Gentlemen's Private Deeds and Muniments.

By THOMAS PHILIPOTT Esquire; formerly of Clare-Hall in Cambridge.

TO WHICH IS ADDED An Historical Catalogue of the High-Sheriffs of KENT:
Collected by JOHN PHILIPOTT Esquire; Father to the Author.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be sold at his House over
against the Anchor Inn in Little Britain. M.DC.LIX.

modern bookplate

To the Nobility and Gentry of KENT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
I Have at last demolishd those difficulties which intercepted this Work, in
that progress it endeavored to make, to offer it self up both to yours and the
public view. Yet I do not deny, in a Piece made rugged with so many knots,
several Mistakes and Omissions must (through Inadvertency and Misinformation)
have slipped in; some of which had their first extraction from the Press, and
some their birth from my Pen: All which I have collected into a Table of
Addenda, which is immediately subsequent to the Preface, whither the Reader may
retire to disperse all scruples.

Secondly, I have not added any Numerical Alphabet, to direct the Reader, since
the Book is so Alphabetically digested, that the Work is a Directory Beam or
Ray to it self: To which I have annexed, as an Appendage, a particular
Description of all the circumambient Kentish Islands.

Thirdly, I have not so tied my self up to those severer Discourses which I
have extracted from either public or private Record, but that I have
embroidered this Piece with Discourses of a softer complexion; as at
Bilsington, I have unfolded the Causes of the Depravation of the ancient
Clergy, both in Doctrine and Manners; at Birling I have discovered the nature
of that Tenure, Antiquity called Tenure per Baroniam; at Ewell I have
unravelled the first Institution of the Knights Templers, and the probable
causes of their total extirpation; at Newington Lucies I have discoursed
largely of Vrne Enterment; at Rodmersham, no less of the Institution of the
Knights Hospitallers; at Werth I have treated of the Antiquity of Seals; at
Wymings Would, of the Ancient Dignity of the Pileus; and have at several other
places enterlac'd this Work with collateral Discourses of the same tincture.

Whatsoever this Piece may appear in the whole Frame and Bulk of it, I do
assure you it was not born without your Influence, it is ready to die at your
Command, and cannot live but by your Acceptance. But I know you have both Art
and Candor; and as I cannot but hope, but that a merciful Interpretation will
be emergent from the first, so I cannot doubt but the last will give so noble
an Allay to your Justice, that if it cannot totally absolve, yet it may at
least excuse

(My Lords and Gentlemen) The humblest of your Servants THOMAS PHILIPOTT.

A Table of ADDENDA or OMISSIONS.
Courteous Reader,
I Here represent to thy View those Mistakes and Omissions (I mean the most
material ones) which I promised to rectify in my Epistle; those which follow
are to be pardoned by thy Charity, or at least supplied by thy Candor. And
first, Page 7. Line 36. for Beanors read Beacons. p. 8. l. 9. add had. l. 10.
for this r. these. l. 11. expunge to it. In the List of the Lieutenants of
Dover Castle. p. 14. after Sir Henry Heyman add Col. Algernon Sidney. p. 18. l.
42. for in Hundredo r. in isto Hundredo. p. 20. l. 19. add of. l. 44 and 46.
for Robert Waller r. Robert VValleran. p. 21. l. 5. for Smerdlin r. Swerdlin.
p. 39. l. 44. for required r. repaired. In Tottington and Eccless at Alresford.
p. 47. l. 27. for of his Heir r. by his Heir. l. 29. for Ancestors r.
Successors. In Nevills Fleet at Ash. p. 51. l. 23. for Ark r. Ash. In Fleet at
Ash. p. 53. l. 16. add whom. Following an old Pedigree of Poynings I have at
Easthall in Aynsford. p. 45. at Tottington in Alresford. p. 47. Northcrey. p.
108. Horsmonden. 190. printed that Tho. de Poynings matched with Joan Sole Heir
of Sir Richard de Rokesley; upon perusal of the Pipe-roll of the seventeenth of
Edward the second, I find that this Sir Richard died and left two Daughters his
Coheirs, Agnes the eldest was wedded to Tho. de Poynings, and Joan the
youngest was matched to Hugh de Pateshul. In Badelesmer. p. 56. l. 33.
acknowledge r. acknowledgement. l. 37. his only Son r. his only Brother. In
Digges Court. p. 60. l. 7. an Appendage to it r. an Appendage to this Name. In
the Description of Hartanger. p. 60. l. 31. this must be all added -- passed it
away to Richard Merywether, in whose Descendant Line the Title flowed with so
even and undisordered a Chanel, that it is still wrapped up in this Name and
Family. In Brabourne. p. 69. l. 26. following an old Glossary of Sidrach
Petits, I have rendered 40 Ambras Brasii. forty Plates of Brass; upon a second
Review, I find that Ambras in old Record is the contracted word for Amphoras
and Brasium signifies Malt, so it must be rendered forty Measures of Malt. In
my desciption of Brabourne I likewise have omitted the Manor of Comb, of
which I now give this Account: Comb was anciently the Habitation of Gentlemen
of that Surname of considerable repute in this Track; for Rich. de Cumbe, and
Simon de Cumbe his Son, were assistants to Sir Jo. de Northwood when he was
Sheriff of Kent the twentieth of Edward the first: the last of this Name was
Will. de Cumbe, who dying without Issue Male in the reign of Rich. the second,
his Sole Inheritrix brought it to be possessed by her Husband John Scot of Scots
Hall, from whom it is now devolved to Edward Scot Esquire. In Beausfield. p.
67. l. 1. for Henry the ninth r. Henry the eighth. l. 2. for Henry the fourth
r. Edw. the third, and then add this -- and then it came to be enjoyed by
Malmains, and was resident in this Family, until Tho. Malmains dying without
Issue Male his only Female Heir brought it to swell the Patrimony of John
Monins Esquire. In my Description of Bireholt in Brabourne. p. 70. l. 3. and an
old Arbor Radicalis r. and as it appears by an old Arbor Radicalis. In my
Description of Bokingfold in Brenchley. p. 73. l. 46, and 47. for, but he being
infortunately attainted in the fourth year of the abovesaid Prince, as being
one of the Partisans of the Duke of Somerset, r. but he being infortunately
attainted in the first year of Q. Mary, as being one of the Partisans of Jo.
Dudley Duke of Northumberland, and the same Mistake is to be rectified in my
Description of Bokenfold at Goudherst, where p. 173. l. 26 and 27. for John
Seymour Duke of Somerset r. Jo. Dudley Duke of Northumberland, and then again
l. 30. the fourth year of Edward the sixth r. the first year of Q. Mary. In
Biddenden. p. 77. l. 28. for Sir Anthony Mayney Knight and Baronet, r. Sir
Anthony Mayney Knight. In Bidborough. p. 78. l. 36. for conveyed it, r.
conveyed the whole Manor. At VVevering in Boxley. p. 90. l. 2. the twenty
fourth of Q. Mary. r. the second of Q. Mary. In my Description of Dodingdale at
Canterbury. p. 94. l. 13. John Bentham r. John Betenham. In my Description of
the Dungeon at Canterbury, the same page l. 29. for par Cirocearum r. par
Chirothecarum. In Chalk p. 96. l. 52. for, and that Prince afterward devolved
it to Sir George Brook r. and from that Prince it afterward devolved by Grant
to George Lord Brook. In Chilham p. 116. l. 12. to his Son Giles de Badelesmer
r. to his Brother Giles de Badelesmer. In Dartford. p. 128. l. 19. for Edw.
Darcy Esquire; r. Sir Edward Darcy Knight. l. 20. Will. Gough r. Will. Gouge. In
Horsemans place at Dartford, the same page l. 53. for 30th year r. 38th year.
l. 55, and 46. Twislton r. Twissleton. At Newhall in Dimchurch. p. 131. l. 52.
one and twenty Lords r. four and twenty Lords. In Clavertie in Elham. p. 140.
l. 24. for Sir Henry Hamon r. Sir Henry Heyman. In Eightham. p. 141. l. 11. for
one of the Lords of Holland r. one of the Earls of Holland. In Farleigh p. 150.
l. 25, and 26. for Thomas Floyd of Gore Court in Otham Esquire r. Mr. Robert
Newton of London Grocer. In my Description of Blackheath. p. 163. l. 57. for
John Tiler r. Wat. Tiler. In Egerton in Godmersham. p. 171. l. 7, and 8. for
Joan his Sole Daughter r. Joan his Daughter and Coheir, for indeed so she was;
for Jo. Comin Earl of Badzenoth died and left two Daughters and Coheirs, Joan
was matched to David de Strabolgie, and Elizabeth was wedded to Richard Talbot.
In my Description of Kingston by Barham. p. 205. l. 55. for to his Son and Heir
Giles r. to his Brother and Heir Giles. At West-Halks in Kingsnoth. p. 208. l.
41. for his second Son r. his fourth Son. In my Description of Brising at
Langley. page 212. l. 11. for Leven Buffkin r. Ralph Buffkin. In Apulton and
Southwould at East-Langdon. p. 211. l. 5. for Edward the third r. Edward the
second. In my Description of Leeds Castle p. 214. l. 8. for his Son r. his
great Grandchild. In my Description of Goulds and Shepway at Maidston. p. 223.
l. 8. for -- to Sir Walter and Gervas Henley Esquire r. to Thomas Henley Esquire;
leaving out Sir Walter. In Sheals at Maidston. p. 223. l. 45. for Walter Henley
Esquire r. Thomas Henley Esquire. In my Description of Parrocks and Ewell at
West-Malling p. 232. l. 19. for the last of which r. the first of which. In
Hogshaws at Milsted. p. 239. l. 11. for Sir Jo. Took r. Mr. Jo. Took. In Milton
Septuans. p. 239. l. 34. for Sir Thomas Fogge r. Sir Francis Fogge, and then l.
38. for Sir Rob. Honywood r. Mr. Rob. Honywood. In my Description of St. Mary
Crey at Orpington. p. 260. l. 39. (it came) is left out, and then l. 41.
Richard the second is omitted. In Gore Court in Otham p. 263. l. 54. for -- by
purchase made the Inheritance of Thomas Floyd Esquire; r. by purchase made the
Demeasn of Nathaniel Powell Esquire, who not many years since conveyed it to
Thomas Floyd Esquire. Since my writing this Book I find that Sir Walter and
Thomas Henley his Brother purchased Land at Otham and Gore Court of Sir Henry
Isley before his Attaint, that at Otham descended to the Successors of Thomas
Henley, that at Gore Court devolved to Colepeper, who had married one of the
Coheirs of Sir Walter Henley. In Archers Court at River. p. 282. l. 53. this
must be added -- But part of Archers Court was by Bandred or Brandred in the
reign of Edward the fourth conveyed it to Sir George Brown of Bechworth
Castle, whose Successor Sir Thomas Brown alienated it to Mr. Isaac Honywood,
who dying without Issue bequeathed it to his Nephew Col. Henry Honywood Esquire
now proprietary of it: the Manor of Archers Court with the Demeasn annexed to
it holds in grand Serjeantie with this Condition united (a strange one) that
the present Owner or Owners should hold the Kings Head when he passes to
Calais, and by the working of the Sea should be obliged to vomit. In
Swanscampe. p. 307. l. 42, and 43. for the fourteenth of Richard the second r.
the thirteenth of Richard the second, and then again the same page l. 45. this
is omitted -- who had before a considerable Interest in Swanscampe by Descent
from his Ancestor Richard Tabot, who had married Elizabeth one of the two
Coheirs of Jo. Comin Earl of Badzenoth, and Joan his Wife, one of the Sisters
and Coheirs of Aymer de Valence Earl of Pembroke and Lord of Swanscampe. At
West-Well. p. 355. l. 15, and 16. for -- and so it rested in the Crown, until
not many years since it was granted to Sir Nicholas Tufton of Hothfied: r. --
and was exchanged with Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury by the Crown in the
twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth, whose Predecessors had a large share in
it long before, but was again reassumed by Q. Elizabeth in the Vacancy of that
Sea, and afterward it rested in the Crown until almost our Memory, and then it
was granted away to Sir Nicholas Tufton of Hothfield Father to the right
honorable Io. Earl of Thanet now proprietary of it. There are some other
Mistakes in this Work as at Uphery in Gillingham. p. 168. it is printed that
Sir Henry Cheney exchanged that Manor with Q. Elizabeth, and she passed it
away to Sir Edward Hobby; upon a second Review I find it was not exchanged, but
conveyed by Sale in the sixteenth year of that Princess by Sir Henry Cheyney to
Dr. Alexander Nowell Dean of Paul's. At Potts Court in Babchild, Bradhurst,
Queen Court in Ospringe, More Court in Reynham, Pitstock in Rodmersham, and the
Island of Hearty, Samuel Thornhill r. Richard Thornhill, which Richard was
Father to Mr. Samuel Thornhill, Grand Father to Sir Timothy Thornhill and Sir
Io. Thornhill, and great grandfather to Col. Rich. Thornhill eldest Son of Sir
Timothy, which Col. Richard is lately deceased, and Charles Thornhill Esquire,
Son and Heir of Sir John now surviving, whose great Grandfather Mr. Richard
Thornhill, above mentioned, purchased Mere Court in the twelfth year of Queen
Elizabeth, and Potts Court, Bradherst, Queen Court in Ospringe, Pitstock and
Hearty, in the thirteenth year of that Princess, of Sir Hen. Cheyney, and made
his Son Samuel joint purchaser with him. At Pencehurst what I have written
concerning the Manor of Pencehurst Halymote. p. 270. must be retracted and
altered, and read thus. Pencehurst Halymote alias Otford VVild was anciently
held in Lease by the Successive Lords of Pencehurst, of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, as being a Limb of their Manor of Otford, which Manor being
exchanged by Will. Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, with Henry the eighth,
this being a relative Appendage to it, was added likewise to the Revenue of the
Crown, and was resident in the Royal Patrimony until these times, and then it
was conveyed by the State to Col. Robert Gibbons.

To his worthy Friend THO. PHILIPOTT Esquire; Upon his Diligent Survey of the
Manors of KENT: Entitled, VILLARE CANTIANVM.
THou have approved, Friend, by thy worthy Pen
The Saying of that learned Sage, that Men
Are not born for themselves: Our Friends do claim
In us a share; our Parents do the same:
Our Country for a third comes in; nay, it
Boasts than the rest a more inherent right.
How as a Friend, and Child, thy Duty thou
Discharged have, thy more Familiars know!
This I affirm, that of his Country none
Has better merited than He alone.
Lambert submit, and Weever too give place;
Nay, thou great Cambden stand aside: Alas!
You have but posted through our Country, and
As if pursued, have feared to make a stand:
Whereas amongst us He both born and bred,
In every Hundred, Parish, House to have led
His whole Age seems: and amongst us to have lived
Ere since from Records Rights could be derived.
Bold Briton then! when it is a Crime to be
A Gentleman; and when an Enemy
He Is therefore thought, and in Arms to have been,
In whose House Arms and Ancient Coats are seen:
When Gules to him his Blood, Or his Estate
To this has cost; when a true Sable-Fate
From Painted Sables to a Third has sprung;
Thou dare assert what others fear to own:
Thou dare by thy more equal Pen unite
(What powerful Wrong has often disjoined) the Right
Owner with his Possessions; to the Son
His Fathers Titles, and Dominion
With care transmitting; and the Heir do tell
How he his Clods derives: Could thou as well
Instruct him how his Manors to employ,
As thou do how, and whence he does enjoy
The same; then Scorned Letters would at last
Above Profaning Ignorance be placed:
Nor had thou traveled at thine own expense
So many Miles; but know thy recompense
Is from thy self: whilst thou a Name do give
To Ancient Families, thine Own shall live.
JOH. BOIS of Hode Esquire;

The Preface to the READER.
ANtiquity is the great Luminary of Time, which dispels those Clouds, that like
a gloomy Skreen, interposing between the object and the understanding, cast it
into Error and Misapprehension: And not only of Time but of History too;
History, that faithful Register of things past, That great Informer of the
present, and certain Prophet of the Future; By it we may discover the Print
which former Ages made, and treading that, know how to decline the crooked and
Irregular Paths of Danger and Misfortune. Antiquity is like the lamp in
Tullia's Urne, that representing to our view by Grains and by Scruples the
Relics and dust of our long-since expired Ancestors, which perhaps lay
scattered in the Wilderness of their own Dispersion, erects a Monument to their
Remembrance, so inaccessable to all the onsets and impressions of age and
oblivion, that then only it shall languish into Decay and dissolution when
Nature her self, and Time, the moth of Nature, shall lie gasping in their own
ruins, and the Universe it self shall confess its Ashes.

And certinly, amongst all those Trophies which antiquity has fixed upon the
face of this Island, there is none more Copious, if we consider them for
quantity; nor more Conspicuous, if we represent them in their quality, than
those that it has left scattered upon the Continent of Kent: and this must be
obvious to the most easy Intellect, when it shall discover that in all the
Eruptions of forain Invaders upon this Island, the first track of that
Thorough-fair has been laid in, or very near, this County, by which they have
farther penetrated into the Bowels of this Nation. We will wave that fiction of
Brute and a party of Fugitives (originally) as the Legend insinuates of Trojan
Extraction, and discarded from Italy for some Misdemeanor there acted) fixing
here, as likewise that Series of the Kings Subsequent to him, being wholly
obtruded upon us by seduced and misguided Histories; the brain indeed of
Jeffrey of Monmouth being both the Forge and the Anvill from whence those
sparks brake forth at first, which made up that Ignis Fatuus after which the
world so long has wandered.

First then the Roman Eagles endeavored to surprise and seize on the Dominion
of this Island, though they were once or twice so rudely gripped by the Britains
near Chilham in Kent, and some of their noblest Plumes torn from them, that
they were forced to fly back into Gaul to new impe their Feathers but breaking
in again with a recolected and multiplied strength, the Liberty of this Nation
stooped, and became a prey to their victorious Tallons, And now it was ordered
that all Pleas, Escripts, Decrees, Edicts, and other things of public
Cognizance should be issued out in the Roman Dialect, that so the roughness of
the Britains, which their warlike inclinations had so long entitled them to,
might not only by degrees be filled off, but that likewise being suppled and
softened by the Roman Culture, they might without any regret or resentment
support that load of slavery that sat so heavy on their shoulders, and so at
last become wholly riveted and incorporated into the Roman Empire.

But this was only in intention, for the accomplishment and perfection of it,
was superseded by the Inroad of the Goths and Vandals into Italy, which like an
Inundation in many signal conflicts had almost swept away the Imperial
dignity, and so torn the whole Bulk of the Roman Empire, that its very Spirit
was ready to ebb out at those breaches. So that in fine, the Emperor was
forced to retrive the Guards and Stationary Legions scattered over this Island,
with these like a new stock of spirits to improve and fortify the Heart of the
Roman Empire, which was ready to bleed out its life at those wounds that the
hands of these Barbarous Nations had inflicted on it.

And now the spirits of the Britains (a stronger Butteress against the
Eruptions of the Picts than the Wall erected by the Romans) being by the
Engines of a long and habituated Servitude, cowed and broken into a degenerate
Effeminacie, they lay open to all the Assaults and impressions of the insolent
Invader; so that they were forced either to resign up themselves to the fury
and inclemency of the Sea, or else offer themselves up to the Rage and
Barbarity of a Savage enemy: And now, being divested of all protection at
home, and all hope of supply from abroad, being forelaid and intercepted by the
Invasion of the Goths on the Empire, they made their addresses to the Saxons, a
Martial People then inhabiting that nether part of Germany, which is washed by
the Rivers of Elve, Weaser, and Rhine, who instantly upon Covenant and
assurance of a vast Guerdon to balance their services, under the conduct of
Hengist and Horsa, embarked for Britain and landed in the Isle of Thanet, and
shortly after with such vigor and animosity repressed the insolences of the
Picts, that they shut them up within the Cloisters and Recesses of their own
Mountains. But it might be said of them, as it was anciently of Religion;
Religion brought forth Riches, and the Daughter devoured the Mother: So these
Saxons, from Assertors and Protectors of the Britains, became at last Invaders
of them; for they representing to the other Saxons the healthfulness of the
Air, and the temperateness of the British Clime, who were over-stocked and
cloyed with excess of People, and were willing to evacuate that surcharge of
Inhabitants into forain Colonies, they instantly attaqued any advantage that
might put them into Hostility with the Britains; and pretending that that
Compact so solemnly stipulated and transacted between them and Hengist was
infringed and violated, they poured themselves in like a Cataract upon this
Island, so that the Britains to secure themselves from the fury of this Deluge,
after many vigorous attempts to make it flow back again, shut up themselves
within the Solitudes and Recesses of Wales and Cornwall, whilst on their
ruins their adversaries erected and fixed their Saxon Heptarchie; which again,
after many mutual encounters, wherein almost every Turfe of this Island was
bespattered and bedewed with Blood, found a public Tomb in the West Saxon
Monarchy.

But scarce was the Basis of it established, whose Ciment was so much Blood and
Tears; But God, who corrects the Ambitious by retaliation and chastises the
insolences of one Invader by casting another into Competion with him, put the
Dane into Balance with the Saxon, who like a whirlewind threw himself upon
this Island so that all blooming Glories of the Saxon Greatness did wither and
shrivell up, being suddenly nipt and blasted by this Northern tempest. I shall
not discypher the long, many, and impetuous encounters between these two fierce
Nations, with the effusion of Blood and the ruin and Depredation that
discomplexioned every part of the Land; indeed, they are of so disordered a
Memory, and then so blended and confounded in the Persons, Times, and Places,
upon which the Scene of these deformed Tragedies is intricately fixed, that it
would be (as one well observes) another war to the Reader to overlook them. In
brief, after a signal combat personally commenced between Edmund Ironside and
Canutus, in the Isle of Atheleny, both armies on either shore, being
Spectators, the Saxon Diadem was by reciprocal compact to be divided between
them: which after the decease of Edmund Ironside at Oxford; which, whether it
were Natural or Artificial, is yet a controversy, wholly invested the
Temples of Canutus.

But alas! upon what a frail and uncertain Pedestal is all humane greatness
settled? For the luster of this new erected Monarchy had no sooner displayed its
beams in Canutus, but like an unthrifty Taper it began to glimmer in Harold,
and absolutely expired in Hardiknute, who dying issueless, the current of
Royalty ran back again into the chanel of the Saxon Blood, which flowed in the
veins of Edward Surnamed the Confessor; who likewise deceasing without Issue,
William Duke of Normandy upon a pretended Donation from the last Edward
entitles himself to the right and interest of the English Diadem.

But this certainly was invail'd, for no Testamentary collation can ravell or
disorder succession, which with an indissolueble link is chained and fastened to
the nearest of Blood, and of which the Nation is to take the sole and proper
Cognizance:) And to assert his title (which was fixed on the point of his sword)
he arives in Sussex with a numerous Army, to check whose farther Progress in
this Island, Harold advances likewise with a considerable Army (whose body had
before evapourated its best and noblest Spirits at those wounds which it before
had received in a bloody encounter comenc'd with Harold Harsanger King of
Norwey:) And nere that place where afterward was founded the Abbey of Battle,
puts his claim to the Scepter, likewise to the Decision and Umpirage of the
Sword, and after a fierce dispute found the Tomb of his new purchased Royalty
in the carriage of this Field, upon whose ruins, William now a Conqueror,
climbs up the Ascent of the English Throne.

His first design (after he had scattered all those clouds of discontent that
might have possibly have enwrapt the rays of acquired Majesty in some new
umbrage,) was to take a Survey of each man's particular interest and Patrimony,
which was inroll d and recorded in a public Register commonly called Doomsday
Book; upon pretense, that from a general computation of the Revenue of the
Nation, he might discern what strength might be collected to intercept the
violent attempts of any forain Invader upon this Island. But indeed to make a
strict inquisition into the Forfeitures of the Lands of those that had been in
Hostility under the Ensigns of Harold against him, that with those he might
not only endear and gratify his Partisans, but likewise by reinvesting the
chiefest of his adversaries in those possessions which were by their Enmity
escheated, oblige them to maintain his Title and Scepter. Yet it is
observeable, that he engaged all those that had received any Lands or Demeasnes
of him, either by any new concession or re-investiture to hold them in Escuage,
that is by Knight Service, by which they were obliged whenever either
public necessity or his Commands did exact it of them, to attend his Person,
either actually or virtually, that is by Proxy with Horse and Arms; and by
this art he had always a power in reserve to repress and scatter all
Solleviations or sudden Insurrections at home, and contradict all the Attempts
and Animosities of Adversaries from abroad; that so he might become
considerable to his enemies, and useful to his Friends. Thus have I
compendiously wound up the several Invasions made on this Island, in which
Kent was so much concerned. But there is another Invasion that I have not yet
numbered, which has been more ruinous and distructive to the noblest Families
of this Island than any of those above recited: and that is the Riot and
Excess, that like an Infectious Cloud, whose noisome womb drops nothing but
disease and Pestelence, has lately broke in upon this Nation, and so withered
the Root of the most ancient Gentry, that they have shrunk into their own
ruins, and fallen negelcted and forgotten: Indeed our modern Luxury is like the
Poison of the Viper, it blasts invisibly, and distroys insensibly, and they
that are softened with it are like a Tree, that feeds those worms that must
devour it; or like Iron, that supplies that rust which will corode it. Indeed
it is observable, that those Families have continued in their splendour longer
whose seats and habitations have engaged them to a remoter distance from the
Verge and Sphere of the City, than those whose Revenue and Patrimony has
confined upon a place infected with so much Debaucherie, and let loose into so
great excess. Yet, it is remarkable that the cadets, or younger slips issued out
from some of those stems, who by their own vicious exorbitancie have crumbled
into an inreparable decay, by being inoculated upon other Families, have by
this transplantation contracted newsap and verdure, and again sprouted out and
florish'd. For Families are like the River of Arethusa, they sometimes sink in
one place or County, and again rise in another.

I shall now take the County of Kent under Survey or Prospect, and represent to
the public view, those several Antiquities which in my search I found to lie
wrapped up either in common Records, or shut up in the private Muniments,
Escripts, and Registers of particular Families; from whom I have endevour'd to
pluck off the veil that they may for the future stand as an Alphabet to point
out those Families that are yet in being, that are totally exinguish'd or that
lie entombed in other Names and Extractions, which by Marriage have swallowed up
the Heir general: In the pursuit of which I confess I have not cloistered my
self up in the nice restraints of any precise or particular Method, because
that flood, both of private and public inteligence, which like a Torrent
broke in upon me, swept away whatsoever my busy fancy had built upon the sands
of any curious or Methodical invention; But it is here, as in some Rivers who
though they wander in a crooked and irregular channel, yet are they the same
Streams still, as long as they hold correspondence with their first Fountain
and original.

I shall remit all to the Justice and Candor of the Reader, with the first he
may arraigne and censure, with the last absolve and excuse

Thomas Philipott.

VILLARE CANTIANVM: OR KENT Surveyed and Illustrated.
KENT, in Latin Cantium, has its derivation from Cant, which imports a piece
of Land thrust into a Nook or Angle: and certainly the situation has an Aspect
upon the Name, and makes its etymology authentic. It is divided into five
Laths. viz. St. Augustins, Shepway, Scray, Aylesford, and Sutton at Hone; and
these again are subdivided into their several Bailywicks; as namely St.
Augustins comprehends

Bredge, which contains these Hundreds: 1 Ringesloe 2 Blengate 3 Whitstaple 4
West-gate 5 Downhamford 6 Preston 7 Bredge and Petham 8 Kinghamford
and Eastrie, which contains these: 1 Wingham 2 Eastrie 3 Corniloe 4
Bewesborough


Shepway is divided into Stowting, and that into these Hundreds: 1 Folkstone 2
Lovingberg 3 Stowting 4 Heane
and Shepway into these: 1 Bircholt Franchise 2 Streat 3 Worth 4 Newchuch 5 Ham
6 Langport 7 St. Martins 8 Aloes Bridge 9 Oxney



Scray is distinguished into Milton Comprehends 1 Mylton 2 Tenham
Scray 1 Feversham 2 Becton under Blean 3 Felborough
Chart and Longbridg 1 Wye 2 Birch-Holt Barony 3 Chart and Long-bridge 4
Cale-hill
Seven Hundreds 1 Blackbourn 2 Tenderden 3 Barkley 4 Cranbrook 5 Rolvenden 6
Selbrightenden 7 Great Bernfeild.



Alresford is resolved into Eyhorn is divided into 1 Eyhorn 2 Maidstone 3
Gillingham and 4 Chetham
Hoo 1 Hoo 2 Shamell 3 Toltingtrough 4 Larkfield 5 Wrotham
and Twyford 1 Twyford 2 Littlefield 3 Lowy of Tunbridge 4 Brenchly and
Hormonden. 5 Marden 6 Little Bernfield 7 Wallingston



Sutton at Hone does only comprehend the Bailywick of Sutton at Hone, and that
lays claim to these HUNDREDS.

1 Axstane 2 Little and Lesnes 3 Blackheath 4 Bromely and Bekenham. 5 Dartford
and Wilmington. 6 Rooksley 7 Codsheath 8 Somerden 9 Westram
These Hundreds were parcel'd out into such a proportion or number of Boroughs,
Villages or Tythings, containing ten Householders, whereof (as the Saxon Laws
and Customs inform us,) if any one should commit an unlawful Act, the other
nine were to attach and bring him to Reason. If he fled, thirty one days were
enjoined him to appear: if in the mean time apprehended, he was forced to
restore the Damage done; otherwise the Free-borough-head (that is to say the
Tythingman) was to take with him two of the same Village, and out of three
other Villages next adjoining as many (that is, the Tythingman and two other of
the Principal men) and before the Officers of that Hundred purge himself and
the Village of the fact, restoring the Damage done, with the Goods of the
Malefactor; which if they sufficed not to satisfy, the Freeborough or
Tythingman must make up the rest, and besides take an oath to be no way
accessory to the Fact; and to produce the offender, if by any means they could
recover him, or know where he were. Besides, every Lord and Master stood
Borough for all his Family, whereof if any servant were called in question, the
Master was to see him answer it in the HUNDRED where he was accused; if he
fled, the Master was to resign such goods as he had to the King: If himself
were accused to be aiding or privy to his Servants flight, he was to clear
himself by five men, otherwise to forfeit all his Goods to the King, and his
man to be Outlawed. These Links thus intermutually fastened, made formerly so
strong a chain to hold the whole frame of the State together in Peace and
order, as all the mingled policies upon Earth, all the inter-leagued Societies
of Men cannot represent a straiter Form of combination.

As touching the other Customs of Kent, they have been so fully discussed by
Mr. Lambert in his Kentish Perambulation, that I shall not much insist in the
discovery of them: only I shall something winnow the word Gavelkind, because
from that it is pretended the Tenure it self is derived. First, it is
suggested, that the word Gavelkind is amassed together of three Saxon
Monosyllables, that is to say, Goef ele Kent: but how this Custom should be
originally established on three Syllables by the corruption of Time thus
crowded and shut up in one word, is altogether ambiguous and mysterious: For,
if we shall unvail the word of its Saxon Habit, and put it into an English
dress, it will signify thus much, Give all Child; and how much nonsense lurks
in that expression, I think is easily discernable: Indeed the phrase should be,
if we would attempt to spin any thing of advantage out of it, Goef ele Kendern,
Give all Children, But how much of incongruitie and non-coherence lies wrapped up
even in this, I believe is obvious enough; yet admit there were none, how four
Syllables all of different vowels in their termination, should at length by the
depravation of Language be all confusedly shuffled and stiv'd into this one
word Gavelkind, will certainly appear to the most easy apprehension disputable
enough.

For my own particular, I Am convinced (with submission to cleerer speculations)
that this word Gavelkind is derived from the Saxon word Gabel, which in the
Latin we render Census, and put into English signifies some Rent-Service, or
Tribute issuable from such and such Land, on which it is fixed as a solemn
evidence of some homage due to the Prince or supreme Magistrate, for that
security which is received both in life and propriety by his defense and
tuition. And certainly this is something proportionate to Reason; for all
Gavelkind-Land is held in the Tenure of free-Soccage, which is charged with
this manner of Rentcharge or imposition; and so in several Latin Records is
represented under the Notion of Terra Censualis.

It Is true, that by the ancient custom of Germany, called Land-Skiftan, the
Lands of the deceased was by equal portions to be distributed amongst all the
Sons; but then it is as probable that this Tribute or Gabel did accompany it,
because the most essential part of this Custom has through the Channel of
many hundred years flowed down to this present Age, and is in force in sundry
places in Germany at this instant: For though the Hernelickheis or Lordship, as
they style it, descend Patrimonially per Jus Dominatus, by the right of
Signorie to the elder Son, yet all the Land exclusiely from that is equally
divided between the Cadets or younger Brothers, only returning some
inconsiderable Rent-Service to the Prince, as a character of that Fealty thy
owe him for sheltring them in their several Patrimonies by his mutual support
and protection.

Certain it is when Hengist transported his Saxons first into Britain, that
Custom of Land-Skiftan was wafted over with them, and was by him allowed to
his Abettors and Partisans when they were invested in their new Acquists and
Possessions in Kent, as all other Franchises and Immunities were, which before
in Germany they were by prescription endowed with, that they might more
vigorously improve his designs upon this Island; yet still it is possible he
reserved out of those Demeasnes thus by Grant couveyed to his accomplices, some
Annual Tax or Gabel (though perhaps of a low and narrow value) as a signal
acknowledgement that the Superiority or Sovereignty was solely lodged in him.

There are two other Customs which are properly calculated for the Meridian of
Romeney Marsh, and perhaps through inadvertency were not recited by Mr.
Lambert, and they are these: First, the King had anciently no Wast there, and
secondly he had no Wracks, but they were appropriated to those Manors of the
Mersh that confined on the Sea; and surely if we fathom their original we shall
find their foundation established on much of Reason. For first, how could the
Crown entitle it self to any Wast there, where the Sea by its impetuous
encroachments did engage the Inhabitants to cast up Mounts, and erect Banks in
any place which they should find most proportionate to their defense against
the fury of so formidable an adversary? For the second, it is very equitable
that they that are interessed in an expense of that vastness in which the
Public (by the obligation of necessary consequences) is so much concerned and
wrapped up, should have something of Emolument indulged to them by the careful
Munificence of the Prince, to poise and balance those important disbursements
which the ill neighborhood of the Ocean does oblige them to, in fortifying the
Mersh with perpetual Defenses and Dams against its assaults and eruptions.
Having thus discovered something in relation to the Customs of Kent, before I
advance farther into the Land, I shall represent what care our former Kings
have embarked themselves in, to secure the Sea, by fixing Sea-watches and
other Military Guards upon all the Avennues and Inlets of the Coast, to
repress and check the attempts of any bold Intruder, as if their own safety
and indemnity were folded up in the security of this County.

Touching then Sea-watches upon the Coast, there are three Presidents, and a
Mandate from the King to the Sheriff in a time of a more modern inscription for
performing the like service. The first containing the watch by night in Record
is styled Vigiliae minutae, which are due of right and custom to be made by
the Men of certain HUNDREDS, as by the Title thereof, and the Writ for
Execution of the same may appear.

The second concluding the Day-watch, hence called Wardan is arbitrary, and at
the pleasure of those which in time of war and common danger had authority to
appoint them, of these there are three examples, one of the 9 of Edward the 3.
(which I intend principally to trace, as being the original to the other) which
year he made preparation to invade France, and to vindicate his Title to the
Crown, and the other the 20. of Edward the 3. in which year he sailed into
France and triumphed in the Signal battle of Crescey.

The third describes to whose charge several parts of the shore were assigned
for defense, in the 29, of Fdward the 3. At what time he past into France and
was victorious in the Encounter of Poictiers. It discovers also what parts of
the Shire were to resort to the Coast for protection of the same. This order is
arbitrary also, as they that in the Record are styled Rectores Comitatus (that
is, Lieutenants of the Shire) shall think meet to appoint.

Warda assessa per Dom. Willielmum de Clinton omitem de Huntingdon, Johannem de
Cobham, and Thomam de Aldon in Com. Cantii super Costeram Maris Anno Regni
Regis Edwardi Tertii undecimo.

Videlicet, apud la Yenlade in Hoo.
Prior Roffensis 8 Homines ad Arma. Philip de Pimpe 2. Thomas Malmains 2.
Joannes de Fremingham 2. Stephanus de Dalham 2. Thomas Walran 2. Johannes
Gifford 2. Henry de Gresford 1 Hominem ad Arma. Hobilers supra eandem Wardam.
Rogerus de Escheker. Johannes Atford. Robertus Viane. Henricus Lomes. Robertus
le-Fane. Michael Summers de Higham Jo. Mortimer de Clives.

Summa, hujus Wardae 13. Homines ad Arma, and 7. Hobilers.

Vigiliae minutae super Costeram Maris per Homines diversorum Hundredorum
Villatarum sicut in antiquo tempore fieri consuevit.

Hundredum de Hoo 9. Homines ad vigilandum apud la Yenlade, viz. Hundredo de

Hoo 2. de Malling 1. de Shamed 5. de Deriford 1.

Vigiliae de Shepeia.

Juxta Feversham debent fieri de 33. Hominib us, unde de Milton and Merden 25.
de Bocton 3. de Feversham 5.

Apud Denge Nesse per 12. unde de 7. Hundredis omnes. Apud Swale per 5. unde de
Milton and Marden omnes. Apud Greistone per 12. Homines, unde de Whitstaple 1.
de Blengate 3. de Kinghamford 2. de Westgate 2. de Downhamford 2. de Brugge 2.
Apud Elmes per 6. Homines, unde de Sancto Martino 2. de Oxneia 1. de
Aloes-Bridge 2. de Longport 1. Apud Broadhul per 6. Homines, unde de Street and
Worth 4. de Newchurch 1. de Hamme 1. de Henei. Apud Sebroke per 12. Homines,
unde de Longbridge and Chart 3. de Calehid. 3. de Bircholt 1. de Wye 5. Apud
Sangate per 6. Homines, unde de Folkston 4. de Lovingborough 1. de Stouting 1.

Warda de Shepey apud le Swale.
Humfridus de Norwood 2. Homines ad Arma. Thomas de Rokesly 2. Johannes de
Morston 1. Hobilers super eandem.
Laurence de Ottringden. Bernard de Punch. Jo. Fitz Richard.

Summa, 5. Homines ad Arma, and 3. Hobilers. Priorissa de Shepey

Warda apud Fordmer in eadem.
3. Homines ad Arma. Hobilers super eandem.
Willielmus de Middleton. Bartholomeus Watton. John Peyferer de Shepey.

Summa, 3. Homines, ad Arma. and 3. Hobilers

VVarda apud Werden in eadem.
Abbas de Boxle 2 Homines ad Arma. Margareta quae fuit uxor Willielmi de Ore 1.
Robertus Cheyne 1. Hobilers super eandem.
Stephanus Bockland. Johannes Frendister. Johannes Er.

Summa 4 Homines ad Arma and 3. Hobilers.

Warda apud Mosehole in eadem.
Prior de Leeds 3. Homines ad Arma. Hobilers super eandem.
Rob. de Folkston. Bartholom. Savage. Thomas Savage. John Donkin.

Summa patet, viz. 3. Homines ad Arma, and 4. Hobilers.

Warda apud Ride in eadem.
Matilda de Idel 1. Hominem ad Arma. Domina Johanna de Bocland 1. Hobilers
super eandem.
Johannes de Bladechild. Walter de Wise. Rogerus de Norwood.

Summa, 2. Homines ad Arma, and 3. Hobilers.

Warda apud Greston.
Joanna uxor Thomae Feversham 2. Homines ad Arma. Margareta Champaigne 2.
Hobilers super eandem.
Arnold de Eseling. Michael de Bromely. Robert At Berton. John de Esthure. Hamo
de Herst. Johannes de Sobbing.

Summa, 4. Homines ad Arma, and 6. Hobilere.

Warda apud Tenet.
Abbas Sancti Augustini 12. Homines ad Arma; Magister Henricus de Shorn. 2.
Homines ad Arma Hobilers.
Thomas Posin 5. Henry de Stoners 6. John Shereve. Will. de Manston 2. Robert
Sherve 3. Petrus Heyward 4.

Warda apud Sandwich and Sanctam Margaretam apud Dale.
Prior Ecclesiae Christi Cant. 10. Homines ad Arma. Joannes Malmains Miles 2.
Nicholas de Sandwico 2. Johannes de Walmer 1. Joannes de Goshall 1. Nicholas
filius Thomae de Sandwico 1. Thomas Chich 1. John Sandhurst 1. Tho. filius
Johannis Retling de Retling 1. Hobilers.
Henry Thornton. Rich. de Reting. John Soles. Thomas de Allen. Tho. de
Goodneston. Henry Daniell. John Petit. John Foulmede. Henry Brudelond. John
Sheluing. Edw. Staplegate. William Berton. Richard Godwin. Ric. Fitzbernard.
John Betleshanger. John Erdoryard. Tho. Groting. Nigellus Whetare. Thomas
Chelmi^n.

Adhuc de Eadem Warda apud Walmer.
Abbas de Langdon 1. Hominem ad Arma. Prior Sancti Gregorii 2. Prior de Dover
3. Abbas Sanctae Radegunde 3. Domus Dei de Dover 2. Abbas ne Feversham 2.
Hobilers.
John Penny. John de Polre. Will. Whitfield. John Fitz. John at Check, Thomas
Perot. Rob. Grensted. Jacob Kinsgwood. Eudo Shillingheld.

Warda assessa per Dominum Willielmum de Clinton, Comitem de Huntingdon,
Joannem de Cobham, and Thomam de Aldon, in Comitatu Cantii super Costaram Maris
Anno Regni Regis Edwardi tertii undecimo.

Warda apud Denge Mersh.
Henricus de Valoins, Miles, uum Hominem ad arma, Abbas den Reding unum,
Joannes de Betham unum, Johannes de Beteringden unum, Stephanus de Fersham
unum, Joannes de Winch unum, Margeria de Shurland unum, Isabella de Rokesley
unum, Isolda Inge unum, Amicia de Cobham duos, Homines ad Arma, Joanna quae
fuit uxor Walteri de Huntingfield duos homines ad Arma. Summa Hominum ad Arma
apud Dengemersh 14. Hobilers super eandem,
Willielmus Aleyn, Jo. Ellis de Dengemersh, Haeredes Roberti de Sharsted,
Robertus Samson, Haeredes Roberti, Pysenden, Adam Henry, Adam William,
Willielmus Thirbarne, Robertus At Hall Thomas At Capell, Margeria quae fuit
uxor Hamonis Colbrand, Thomas Brown, Jacobus At Capell.

Et quod unusquisque praedictorum Hominum ad arma habeat secum sagittarium
bonum (that is, a good Archer or Bowman) super costaram Maris.

Et quod fiat signum ubique supra costaram Maris, and ubi necesse fuerit lebe
elevetur cum Pitchpot, and non cum minuto ligno, quia hujusmodi signa magis
apparebunt and longius durabunt.

Warda apud Denge Mersh per 12. homines de septem hundredis.

Warda apud Helms Kenell per 7. homines, unde de Hundredo St. Martini 2. de
Oxney, 2. de Aloes Bridge 2. de Langport 1.

Warda apud Broadhull, per 9. Homines, unde de Hundredo de Street 2. de
Hundredo de Worth 2. de Hundredo de New-church 2. de Hundredo de Felborough 3.

Warda apud Seabroke, per 12. homines, unde de Hundredo de Hamme 1. de Hundredo
de Longbridg and Chart 3. de Hundredo de Calehill 3. de Hundredo de Bircholt,
and de Hundredo de Wye 5.

Warda apud Leswale per 4 homines de Middleton and Marden. 9

Warda apud Sangate per 4 Homines, unde de Hundredo de Folkston and Longbredge
2. de Stouting 2. and de Petham 1.

Warda assessa super costaram Maris per Johannem Cobham, Rogerum de Northwood,
Thomam de Brockhull and Willielmum Langley Vicecomitem post Pascham Anno Regni
Regis Edwardi tertii vicessimo, Regni vero sui Franciae octavo.

Warda apud Denge Mersh.

Prior de Bilsington cum aliis sibi assignatis prout Nomina eorum
particulariter sunt in praedicto veteri Rotulo scripta ad numerum 14. hominum
Hobelarum ibidem quorum Nomina recitantur in praedicto antiquo Rotulo ad
Numerum personarum.

Minuta Vigilia ibidem (vid.) per 12. Homines de septem Hundredis.

Custodes assignati super litora Maris periculosa per Rectores commitatus
praedicti, scilicet Cantii 12. Die Maii Anno Regni Regis Edwardi tertii
quadragessimo quinto.

Apud Castrum de Saltwood.

Dominus Archiepiscopus Cantuariensis custodiat Castrum suum de Saltwood cum
rationabili posse suo in Confortatione Villarum de Heth and Rumney; and litora
Maris juxta Sangate ajdacentia una cum auxilio Hominum Patriae illius juxta
modum consuetum.

In Insula Taneti.

Abbas St. Augustini and prior Ecclesiae Christi Cantuarenfis, Thomas Chich,
and Thomas de St Nicholao una cum Hominibus Insulae.

Apud Dale sue Dele.

Johannes de Cobham, Rogerus de Cobham, Willielmus de Cobham, and Thomas de
Cobham, Milites apud Dele and illas Parts.

Apud Estrye.

William de Paveley Miles, Galfridus de Colepepper, Richardus Charles and
Jacobus de Peckham, apud Eastrey versus parts Maris.

Apud Walmer.

Johannes de Criol, Prior Sancti Gregorii, Prior de Leeds, Abbas de Lesnes,
Thomas de Morrant, and Henricus de Apuldrefeild, und cum Hominibu; Patriae.

Apud Greiston.

Dominus de Say, Robertus de Nottingham, Willielmus de Apulderfield, Thomas
Feversham, una cum hominibus Patriae.

Apud Acrise respectu de Folkston.

Johannes de Clinton, Stephanus de Valoins, Johannes Berry, Radulphus de St.
Ledger, Arnoldus St. Ledger, Thomas Travers, Milites; Johannes de Brockhull and
Johannes Fremingham cum Auxilio Patriae versus Dover.

Apud Yenlade.

Episcopus Roffensis and Prior Roffensis apud Yenlade in Hoo.

Apud Lidde and Promhill.

Prior de Tunbregge, Prior de Combwell, Prior de Bilsington, Johanne;
Colepepper, Johannes Diggenby, Rogerus Diggenby, Thomas Archeriges, Johannes
Bynott, and Willielmus Horn, apud Lidde and Promhill una cum Hominibus de
septem Hundredis.

In Insula Shepey.

Abbas de Boxley, Johannes de Northwood, Thomas Apuldrefeild Miles, Johannes
Raston, Willielmus Syme, Johannes de Manney, Richardus de Blore, in Insula de
Shepey unacum Hominibus ejusdem Insulae nec non Hundredorum de Tenham,
Gillingham, Middleton and Marden.

Before I shut up this discourse concerning Sea-watches, I shall represent to
the Reader the Draught of a Praecipe directed to Gervas Clifton Esquire,
Sheriff of Kent, in the 26. of Henry the Sixth, by that Prince, by which we may
calculate the extent and Latitude of those commands he was to regulate himself
by in his care and provision for the defense and Indemnity of this County
against the eruptions of any foreign violence whatsoever.

Rex Vicecomiti Kantii salutem. Quia datum est nobis intelligi quod nonnulli
inimici nostri super Mare se tenentes, regnum nostrum Angliae in diversis locis
ingredi intendunt, etc. Nos malitiae suae obviare volentes, tibi praecipimus,
firmiter injungentes, quod statim visis praesentibus infra Balivam tuam
taminfra libertates quam extra, ubi melius and expeditius videris faciendum, ex
part nostra public Proclamari facias, Quod omnes and singuli Ligei nostri de
Baliva tua, qui Vigilias apud Promhill, Helmes, Kenell, and Denge Mersh, ac in
aliis locis ibidem adjacentibus and convicinis super Costeras Maris antiquitus
custodire debeant and solebant, hujusmodi Vigilias in eisdem locis custodiant
and custodire faciant: It a quod (defectu Vigiliarum praedictarum) sub poena
forisfacturae omnium quae nobis forisfacere possunt, damnum, periculum aut
gravamen nobis aut populo nostro non eveniat ullo modo and quod Legei nostri
Commitatus tui, Signa vocata Beanors in locis consuetis, per quae gentes de
adventu inimicorum praedictorum congruis Temporibus poterint praemoneri, ponant
and poni faciant: Et hoc sub periculo incumbente nullatenus omittatis. Test me
ipso apud Westminster. quarto die Augusti. Anno Regni nostri 29.

Because there has been frequent mention of Hobilers in the abovesaid
discourse, I shall discover to the Reader a brief portraiture of them, as I
have copied it by that Original which has been pencil'd out by the learned
industry of Sir Henry Spelman in his Glossarie.

The word Hobiler, says he, is derived from the French word Hobill, which
imports as much as a light quilted Cassock; and indeed all the Latin Records
say they should be Wampasa armati, which signifies or denotes a Jack; and in
some parts both of Germany and the Low Countries, at this day Wampas is used to
express a Doublet or a short Cassock: and if you will know with what Horse they
were equipped or furnished for service, the abovesaid Author will tell you, that
every Hobiler should be Mediocri eque instructus, and ad omnem motum agili; a
Horse of no great proportion, but light, and fitted for all manner of service.

Having represented to the Reader how sedulous the Princes of this Nation were
in Modern times to secure the Maritime shores of Kent, which like a Girdle of
sand almost invest this County, I shall now discover briefly and in Landscape
how they were guarded, fortified, and preserved in times of an elder
Inscription; which discourse I shall marshall under the Notion of Littus
Saxonicum.

We are now come to speak of the Seacoast, which the Romans termed LITTUS
SAXONICUM, that is, the Saxon Shore: and as the opposite Shore unto it from the
River Rhene to Xantoigne in France, had a Ruler over it from Dioclesians time,
whom Marcellinus calls Tractus maritimi Comitem, that is, the Count or
Lieutenant of the Maritime Tract; the book called Notitia Provinciarum styles,
The honorable Earl or Lieutenant of the Saxon-shore along Britain; whose office
was, with Garrisons set upon the Shore in places convenient, to repress the
depredations, spoils and robberies of Barbarians, but of Saxons especially, who
grievously infested Britain. And he had relation in point of Command unto the
Right Honorable General of the Footmen, whom they called Presentalis, who
besides the Garrisons lying at the Havens assigned unto him at all assays for
the defense thereof, Victores juniores Britannicianos, Primanos juniores, and
Secundanos juniores (these are the names of certain Bands or Companies) these
he had for his Underofficers to it. Principem ex officio Magistri presentalium
a part peditum numerarios duos, Commentariensem, Cornicularium, Adjutorem,
Subadjuvam, Regerendarium, Exceptores singulares, etc. The Formalities of the
Ensigns and Commission assigned to this great Officer are thus described in my
former Author, Notitia Provinc.
and were instituted about MCC years now past, or about Theodosius the II.
which falls near the last times, wherein the Roman Empire extended it self
hither: diagram of Saxon shore depiction of book F L INTALL COMORD P R
Faelix liber injustus notariis laterculi continens mandata ordine principis
aut Primicerij.


OTHOMA DUBRIS LEMANNI BRANODVNVM GARIANA REGVLBIVM RVTVPIS ANDERIDOS PORTVS
ADVRNI



This Comes littoris Saxonici was as Admiral of that time, and placed against
the Maritime incursions of the Saxons, or those of the West part of Germany
that were known most commonly by that name; the charge or Impress of his
ensign was 9 Maritime Towns, but thus placed on the form of the whole Island;
that which appears in the Canton of the Banner, besides the Towns names is
thus expounded by Pancirollus who notes them to be Sigles, and parts of words
so well and commonly known in the Office of the Court of the Notaries, or of
the Clerks of the Crown, that it needed not they should be more largely
expressed; the words he thinks are these, Faelix liberinjunctus Notariis
laterculi continens mandata ordine Principis or Primiceru^, which was the
Master or President of the Clerks of the Crown: And for his Garrisons he had
under him MM. CC. Foot, and CC. Horse, with his Officers thus expressed

Sub dispositione viri spectabilis COMITIS LITTORIS SAXONICI per BRITANNIAM.

Praepositus numeri Fortensium, OTHOMAE, Praepositus numeri Tungricanorum,
DUBRI, Praepositus numeri Turnacensium, PORTU LEMANNO, Praepositus equitum
dalmatarum Branodunensium, BRANODUNO, Praepositus equitum stablesianorum
Garianonensium GARIANNONO, Praepositus cohortis primae Vetasiorum, REGULBIO,
Praepositus legionis 11. Aug. RUTUPI, Praepositus numeri abulcorum, ANDERIDA,
Praepositus numeri exploratorum, PORTU ADURNI. Officium antem habet idem vir
spectabilis COMES hoc modo, Principem ex Officio Magistri Praesentalium a part
peditum Numerarios duos ut supra, ex officio predicto Comentariensem ex officio
superradicto, Cornicularium Adjutorem, Subadiuvam, Regerendarium, Exceptores
Singulares Et relics Officiales.
For the Maritim Towns within this Government are mentioned here, Othoma is
conceived by Mr. Camden, and some other learned men, to have been in the
Hundred of Dengy in Essex, in the same place or near where St. Peter's in the
Wall is. And to this day does not Brithlingsey a Town adjacent, remain a
Member of Sandwich, and under the Government of the Lord Warden of the
Cinque-Port.

Besides the Testimony of sundry inquisitions of survey of the Lord Wardens
Admiral jurisdiction; Do they not cross in direct line from the
South-Foreland, which is by Margate in Thanet, and so turning up to Reculver,
cross the main Ocean to the Langrell Point in Essex, passing along St. Peter's
in the Wall, where this Othoma is said to have been, Dubris was DOVER: Lemanni
or Lemannis (which is Pertus Lemanni in Antonius, and Limn in Ptolmy, but not
it seems as the word (...) is significant in Greek but as it was made from the
British name) LIME, or LIMEHILL in Kent, the place where Caesar landed when he
Conquered Britain; And does not Shipwey (the place where the Lord Warden of the
Ports takes his Oath upon his first entrance into that Government) lie in
LIME, and is yet within his Government as also Hyth, which implies as much as
Portus in Latin, that is, Haven, one of the 5 Ports adjoining, and
Stutfall-Castell at the foot of LIME-HILL, was it not a Fortress built by the
Romans for defense of the Saxon Shore, Regulbium RECULVER, at which the water
Genlade or Wantsum entered in, and passing by Sarre a place yet under the Lord
Wardens jurisdiction, insulated the Isle of Thanet, Rutupis RICHBORROW near
SANDWICH on the same Shore, and Anderida was situate near. NEW ENDEN in Kent,
upon the river of Rother, that anciently passed by Apeldore, and disembogued it
self into the Ocean at Romney; one of the Ports upon the Saxon Shore, and under
the Lord Wardens government; Portus Adurni is supposed to have been Arundel. or
Edrington near Shorham in Sussex, Branodunum is taken for BRANCASTER in Norfolk
and Gariono or Gariononum for YARMOUTH both of them lying upon the Saxon Shore
in Norfolk. And do not the Barons of the Ports enjoy a Privilege upon the said
Coast, sending yearly two of their said Barons as their Bailiffs to join with
them of Yarmouth, since they were incorporated in the Administration of public
Justice, during the free Fishing Fair, which thing they have used to do before
ever the Town of Yarmouth was built. The Fortress where the Garrison appointed
for the defense of this part of the Saxon Shore was resident, is now called
Burrough-castell adjoining to the River of Yare, as Mr. Camden has observed in
his description of that Place.

The Barons of the Ports did Anciently send 7 of their Barons Bailiffs to
Yarmouth, and after reduced that number to 4 whereof 2 were sent to see justice
and right done among the Portsmen that did Fish upon the Saxon Shore, where
Branodunum in Norfolk stood, and in those times they continued 40 days, which
since has been reduced to 2 Bailiffs; and their time of stay to 20 days, the
Cerimonial of their entrance and reception into Yarmouth, continues some
similitude of what is before expressed yearly upon the Vigil of St. Michael the
Arch-angell; the Bailiffs of the Barons of the Ports, with the Banner or Ensign
of their general incorporation displaid, and of this form ride on horseback
into the said Town, to the house provided for them, during their abode there;
and are to be received with civil and mutual respect by the Magistrates of
that Place.

The Officers Atending upon the Bailifs of the Barons of the Ports are these A
Register, A Sergeant of the Banner, A Sergeant of the Horn, Sergeants at Mace.


Cinque Ports arms: three lions passant guardant conjoined to as many ships'
hulls

As for that Officer called the Sergeant of the Horn, be it understood as an
ancient note of the Ports tenure by Cornage, from King Canutus time, by which,
as the best Customals of the Cinque Ports inform me there Moots and public
Assemblies are summoned, Sonitu Cornu.

Having entered into a Discourse of the Cinque Ports, I shall take a farther
propsect of those privileges they were invested with, from or before the
Conquest, especially by that signal Charter, which was granted to them in the
20 year of Edward the first. First, then they were exempted from all Taxes and
Tallages, that they might with more vigor and alacriry be encouraged and
emboldened to attend the public Service.

Secondly, they had Sac and Soc, Sac is a privilege to take Cognizance of
causes either Criminal or Civil within their own Courts, Soc is a power planted
in them to compel all persons which live within the Confines of their
Liberties, to plead in their Courts, and from hence anciently they were called
Socmanni, that is, Suitors to that Court, where they were forced to plead.

Thirdly, they had Toll and Theme, Toll was a Liberty of buying and selling
within their own juisdiction, and a power to receive the Toll or Gabel imposed
on commodities there vended. Theme is both a civil and coercive power or
jurisdiction settled in them by Charter, over all those who are inhabitants of
the Cinque Ports, or any of the limbs or members of them.

Fourthly, they had Bloodwith and Fledwith, Bloodwith is a power to punish the
effusion of Blood; Fledwith is an authority to punish those who having
committed any misdemeanor or outrage, and seeking to secure themselves by
flight, are again seized upon, and offered up to deserved Justice.

Fifthly, they had Pillorie and Tumbrell, Tumbrell was an Engine much
resembling our Cucking-stool, and was instituted to restrain the fury of loud
clamorous and impetuous Women.

Sixthly, they had Infangetheof and Cutfangetheof, that is a power to imprison,
and upon just and legal evidence (which is the Lanthorn of the Law) to execute
all those, though Forainers and Aliens which should commir any felony in places
subject to their jurisdiction.

Seventhly, they had Mundbriech; that is, a privilege to raise banks and
mounds on any persons land whatsoever, whose propriety lay within their
jurisdiction, to secure the common Interest from the eruptions and casual
Inundations of the Sea*

Eighthly, they had Waives, called by a general name in old Law-Latin
Weveragium, and Strays Waives was a word of a common latitude, used to signify
all those things, either wandering Chattel, or other goods, which being waved
or lost, and not claimed within a year and a day, were to be possessed by those
within whose jurisdiction they were seized, according to that of the Civil
Law, Quae nullius juris sunt, and pro derelictis habentur, cedunt occupanti.
Strays is a word of a more circumscribed and restrained sense, relating only to
straggling Cattle; to whom if none did entitle themselves by claim in a year and
a day, their propriety was invested in those who possessed them.

Ninthly, they had Waste and Strep, or Estrepment Waste was that parcel of
common earth which by prescription and custom belonged to the Crown, but by
Charter was enstated on them. Strip or Estrepment is a power granted to them to
cut down Trees within their own jurisdiction, without impeachment of waste.

In the tenth place, they had the grant of Flotsom, Jetsom, Witsom: Flotsom
were goods upon some visible wrack floating to the shore Jetsom, were goods in
a storm thown over board to preserve the Ship, and sinking did again buoy up
themselves, anr were again by the agitation of the waves thrown on the Strand.
Witsom were goods driven to the shore, when there had not been for some space
any wrack visible; from whence they were anciently styled Goods of Gods mercy;
Wit, in old English importing as much as Misericordia in Latin.

Their eleventh privilege was to be a Guild, that is a Fraternity or
Combination of men that had all the Franchises of Court Leet and Court Baron
annexed to them; as likewise they were endowed with a power upon emergent
occasions to improve the common interest, to lay Assessements and Taxes upon
the Inhabitants of the Cinque Ports and their Members; the word Guild being
extracted from an old Latin word called Geldo, which signifies to tax.

Their twelfth Franchise was, to assemble at Shepway, which was anciently
called the Portmote or Parliament of the Cinque Ports; there they punished the
infringers of their privileges, and amerc'd all those who being Inhabitants of
the Cinque Ports, or of those Towns which were circumscribed within their
Jurisdiction, sued out of those Courts which were properly established to hear
and determine all causes arising within their Liberties; here likewise they had
Authority, by Royal Concession, to make Bylaws and Ordinances, for the common
good and profit of the Cinque Ports, and for the better Regulating (as the
exigency of Affairs might seem to exact) the Herringfishing at Yarmouth; and
that this Court in the power of it might appear to be the Counterpane of that
great Original of Power, the high Court of Parliament, all appeals from the
inferior and subordinate Courts of the Cinque Ports were transmitted and
transferred to this of Shepway.

Lastly, the Barons of the Cinque Ports claim by inherent Custom and
Prescription, which is grown up and confirmed by a tacit consent between them
and the King, to support the four Staves of the Canopy that covers the Kings
Head at his Coronation, and after to dine at the uppermost Table in the great
Hall, on his right hand.

There are other Franchises and privileges circumscribed within the Verge and
Circumference of the above-recite a Charter, as the taking cognizance of the
Assize of Bread and Beer, and some others; which because they are not of that
importance or consideration as those which before were rehearsed, and moreover
finding that they are calculated for the Meridian of many other Corporations
besides that of the Cinque Ports, I have at present forbore any farther Recital
of them.

Now if any one will enquire what the Cinque Ports were to act by way of
recompense or retribution for these so solemn and signal Characters and
Demonstrations of royal favor; To this I answer, That they were to find fifty
and seven Ships at their own Charge, for the space of fifteen days, to attend
the King whenever he should pass the Seas; whereof Hasting was to find one
and twenty, Sandwich five, Hieth five, Romney five, and Dover one and twenty;
each of which was to be furnished with one and twenty men, and a Garcion or
Boy, the Masters stipend was to amount to 6^ the Constables to a Sallary of the
same value, and each vulgar Mariner was to have three pence per diem; and if
the obligation of affairs so required it that they attended the King beyond the
extent of fifteen days, then they were for the time following to be supported
in their expenses at the charge of the Crown. Now because the wisdom of
aftertimes thought this too vast and burdensome an expense, to be solely and
wholly sustained by the Cinque Ports, therefore there were several other Towns
and Villges that lay scattered in the Body of this Nation, that were made
Members and Limbs of the Cinque Ports, and invested and fortified with the same
Immunities and Liberties, that they might by consequence be enwrapt and engaged
in the same common expense. The Names of those which are situated in Kent are
as follows: viz. Sandwich had the Addition of Fordwich, Sarre, Ramsgate,
Deal, Walmer, and Stonor. Dover had Feversham, Birchington, St. John's, St.
Peter's, Ridlingswould, and Folkstone. Hieth had West- Hieth. Romney had old
Romney, Lydde, Promhill, Dengemersh, and Orwelston. Hastings and Winchelsey had
in Kent as their Appendages, Bekesbourn, Grench, and Tenterden. As a L'envoy to
the Cinque Ports, I shall represent a Summary, or Bedroll of all those Persons
of esteem that have had the Honor to have been dignified with the Title of
Lord Wardens of the Cinque Ports; which Scroll or Register I have collected out
of an ancient Manuscript, and are in their Series or Succession as follows,
viz.

1 John de Fiennes, 2 James de Fiennes, 3 John de Fiennes, 4 Walkelinus de
Magninot, 5 Allen de Fiennes, 6 James de Fiennes, 7 Matthew de Clear, 8 William
de Wrotham. 9 Hubert de Burgo, He that so stoutly asserted the Interest of King
John, and the Castle of Dover likewise, against Lewis the Dolphin of France. 10
Bertram de Criol. 11 Richardle Gray, 12 Henry de Braybrook, 13 Edward then
Prince, but after King by the Name of Edward the first; and Henry de Cobham was
his Substitute. 14 Henry de Monteford, 15 Roger de Leybourn, 16 Stephen de
Penchester, 17 Sr. Robert Ashton, ibidem sepultus, id est Dubri. 18 Simon de
Crey, 19 Hugh le Spencer, 20 Edmund de Woodstock, 21 Reginald de Cobham, 22
Bartholomew Ld. Burgherst, or Burwash, 23 John le Beauchamp, 24 Sr. Ralph
Spigurnel, 25 Sr. Robert Herle, 26 Robert Earl of Cambridge. 27 Simon
Burleigh, 28 Henry le Cobham, 29 Sr. John Enrosse, and in some Copies le-Rosse.
30 Sr. Thomas Beaumont, 31 Edward Duke of Aumerle and York. 32 Sr. Thomas
Erpingham, 33 Prince Henry, after King Henry the fifth. 34 Humphry Duke of
Gloucester, 35 James Fiennes Lord Say, whom Jack Cade beheaded. 36 Edmund Duke
of Somerset, 37 Humphry Stafford Duke of Buckingham, 38 Simon Montfort, 39
Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick, 30 Will. Earl of Arundell, 31 Richard Duke of
Gloucester, after Richard the third. 32 Sr. William Scott, 33 James Fiennes Lord
Say, Henry in his Fathers life time after Hen. the eight. 34 Arthur Plantagenet
Viscount Lisle, Natural Son to Edward the fourth, 35 Sr. Edward Poynings, 36
Henry Earl of Richmond, 37 Sr. Edward Guldeford, 38 George Boleyn Viscount
Rochfort. 39 Sr. Thomas Cheyney, 40 Sr. Will. Brook Lord Cobham, Hen. Brook Lord
Cobham, 41 Henry Howard Earl of Northampton. 42 Edward Zouch Lord Haringworth.
43 George Villiers Duke of Buckingham, 44 Theophilus Howard Earl of Suffolk, 45
James Duke of Lenox and Richmond,
Having discovered to the Reader a scale of those who were successively Lord
Wardens of the Cinque Ports, I shall now from Authentic Records and Registers
represent a Catalogue of those who were substituted Lieutenants of Dover-Castle
alterna vice under them.

Hugh de Montfort, Temp. Gulielmi Rufi and Henrici primi. Simon de Averenches
Temp. Gulielmi Rufi and Henrici primi. John de Stoner, Temp. Gulielmi Rufi and
Henrici primi. Alan de Heyton, Temp. Hen. 2di. Henry de Essex, Temp. Hen. 2di.
Mat. de Clear Temp. Ric. 1mi. Will. de Albemarle, Temp. Ric. 1mi. Simon de
Averenches Temp. Ric. 1mi. Barthol. de Crioll, Temp. Ric. 1mi. Tho. Bassett,
Temp. Regis Joannis. Will. de Huntingfield, Temp. Regis Joannis. Will. de
Wrotham, Temp. Regis Joannis. Will. de Brewer, Temp. Regis Joannis. Alan de
Buckland. Temp. Regis Joannis. Sr. Richard D'angervill. Temp. Reg. Joannis and
Regis Hen. 3di. Bertram de Hells, Temp. Hen. 3tii. Rob. de Burgherst, Temp.
Hen. 3tii. Rob. Walleran, Temp. Hen. 3tii. Henry de Cobham, Temp. Hen. 3tii.
Henry Montfort, Temp. Hen. 3tii. Roger Leybourn. Temp. Hen. 3tii. Reginald le
Viscount, Temp. Edw. 1mi. Thomas de Insula, Temp. Edw. 1mi. Rob. de Burgherst,
Temp. Edw. 1mi. Bertram de Crioll, Temp. Edw. 1mi. Will. de Averenches, Temp.
Edw. 1mi. Rob. de Hereford, Temp. Edw. 1mi. Joh. de VValde VValde wars chare,
Temp. Edw. 1mi. William de Lea, Temp. Edw. 2di. Peter de Hanekin Temp. Edw.
2di. John de VValde wars chare, Temp. Edw. 2di. William de Scotten, Temp. Edw.
2di. Nicholas de Crioll, Temp. Edw. 2di. Giles de Baldelesmer, Temp. Edw. 3tii.
Sr. Thomas Brockhull, Temp. Edw. 3tii. William Barry, Temp. Edw. 3tii. Ralph
de Valoigns his, Temp. Edw. 3tii. Robert Herle, Temp. Edw. 3tii. Andrew
Gulford, Temp. Edw. 3tii. Peter Read, Temp. Edw. 3tii. Rob, de Wellesham bis,
Temp. Edw. 3tii. Roger de Wellesham, Temp. Edw. 3tii. James Haut, Temp. Ric.
2di. Sr. Richard Malmain, Temp. Ric. 2di. Sr. William Walworth, Temp. Ric. 2di.
Sir Joh. Devereux, Temp. Ric. 2di. Peter Wigmore bis, Temp. Ric. 2di. John
Clinton, Temp. Ric. 2di. John Hakenthorp, Temp. Ric. 2di. Arnold Savage, Temp.
Ric. 2di. Sir Richard Dering. Temp. Ric. 2di. Sr. Rob. Berney, Temp. Hen. 4ti.
Sr. Philip Lewis, Temp. Hen. 4ti. Andrew Boteler, Temp. Hen. 4ti. Richard
Barrey, Temp. Hen. 4ti. John Mortimer, Temp. Hen. 4ti. Tho. Fitz-Allen Earl of
Arundell, constituted Lieutenant under Hen. Prince of Wales, the 13th. of Hen.
the 4th. Temp. Hen. 4ti. and Hen. 5ti. Richard Nedham, Temp. Hen. 5ti. and Hen.
6ti. Sr. Thomas Keriet, Temp. Hen. 5ti. and Hen. 6ti. Gervais Clifton. Temp.
Hen. 5ti. and Hen. 6ti. Richard Nedham, Temp. Hen. 6ti. William Keriell, Temp.
Hen. 6ti. Richard Witherton. Temp. Hen. 6ti. Thomas Hextall. Temp. Hen. 6ti.
Otwell Worceley. Temp. Edw. 4ti. John Greenfend, Temp. Edw. 4ti. Edmund Ince,
Temp. Edw. 4ti. Thomas Guldford, Temp. Edw. 4ti. Edward Cobham, Temp. Edw. 4ti.
Sr. John Scott, Temp. Edw. 4ti. Sr. John D'evereux, Temp. Edw. 4ti. Philip
Fitz-William, Temp. Edw. 4ti. Philip Fitz-Lewis, Temp. Edw. 4ti. Philip Lewis.
Temp. Edw. 4ti. Jeffery Lowther, Temp. Edw. 4ti. and Hen. 7mi. Sr. Edward
Poynings. Temp. Edw. 4ti. and Hen. 7mi. Sr. William Scott, Temp. Edw. 4ti. and
Hen. 7mi. Sr. John Bourchier. Temp. Edw. 4ti. and Hen. 7mi. Sr. William Scott,
Temp. Hen. 7mi. and Hen. 8vi. Edward Thwaits, Temp. Hen. 7mi. and Hen. 8vi.
Richard. Dering, Temp. Hen. 7mi. and Hen. 8vi. John Copledike, Temp. Hen. 7mi.
and Hen. 8vi. Richard Dering ter. Temp. Hen. 7mi. and Hen. 8vi. Richard Dering,
Temp. Hen. 8vi. Edw. 6ti. and Regi. Mariae. John Monins, Temp. Hen. 8vi. Edw.
6ti. and Regi. Mariae. William Crispe. Temp. Hen. 8vi. Edw. 6ti. and Regi.
Mariae. William Crispe, Temp. Regi. Eliz. Richard Barrey, Temp. Regi. Eliz. Sr.
Thomas Vane. Temp. Regi. Eliz. Sr. Thomas Vane, Temp. Regis Jacob. Sr. Thomas
Waller, Temp. Regis Jacob. Sr. Robert Brett, Temp. Regis Jacob. Sr. John Brook.
Temp. Regis Jacob. Sr. Thomas Hamon, Temp. Regis Jacob. Sr. Hen. Manwaring,
Temp. Regis Jacob. Sr. John Hippesley. Temp. Regis Jacob. Sr. John Hippsley,
Temp. Regis Caroli. Sr. Edward. Dering, Temp. Regis Caroli. Sr. Joh. Manwood,
Temp. Regis Caroli. Sr. Tho. Colepeper, Temp. Regis Caroli. Sr Edward Bois,
Temp. Regis Caroli. John Bois Esquire, Temp. Regis Caroli. Sr. Hen. Heyman,
Temp. Regis Caroli. Col. Tho. Kelsey. Temp. Regis Caroli.
I might have been more copious in my Discourses of the Cinque Ports; but
because I intend to publish a particular Treatise relating solely to their
Immunities, and their just Right to take cognizance of the Fishery at Yarmouth;
I shall no farther insist upon this subject, but proceed. KENT, upon the first
eruption of Hengist and his Saxons upon this Island, was represented by himself
and his Partisans under that fair and noble Character, that after he had in
many bloody Decisions broken the strength of the Britains, upon their ruins he
laid the foundations of that greatness, on which he afterward established the
Throne, by which he ascended to the height of Majesty, and was the first of the
Saxons whose hand swayed the Kentish Scepter; indeed Cyning the old Saxon word
implies no more but one that is dextrous and cunning in the managery of the
public Affairs, and such a one was Hengist; from whom the Series of the Kings
of Kent, which I am now to mention, did as from their Fountain primitively
stream forth: 455 1 Hengist, 488 2 Eske or Osca, 512 3 Octa, 532 4. Immerick,
561 Ethelbert the First Christian King, Founder of Christ-Church in Canterbury,
St. Paul's in London, and St. Andrews in Rochester. 617 6 Eadbald, 641 7
Encombert, 665 8 Egbert 1. 673 9 Lotharius, 686 10 Edrick, 693 11 Wightred, in
some copies Muthred, 726 12 Egbert 2d. 749 13 Ethelbert the 2d. 759 14 Alwick,
who was slain at Otford by Offa. 794 15 Ethelbert the 3d. Surnamed Pren, 797 16
Guthred, 805 17 Baldred, who in the year 827 lost both Life and King dome to
Egbert.

Egbert having thus broken the Kentish Forces, and inoculated the Scepter of
Kent upon that of his own, the Title of King was for ever entombed in the
Ruins and Tomb of the slaughtered Baldred; nor was this County dignified with
any Title at all, until the Reign of Edward the Confessor, and then that
Prince created Godwin Earl of Kent; a man of so low and obscure an extraction,
that the concurrent Testimony of all Authors does affirm he was Bubulci
Filius, the son of a Cowherd: yet notwithstanding, he made himself so
considerable by his Eruptions on several parts of this Island by Land, and his
depredations by Sea, that our English story swells with the rehearsal of his
Acts of Devastation and Piracy. Now if you would know from whence the Latin
word Comes deduces its original, that is, the Genus both to the French word
Count, and the Saxon word Earl or Eorlederman, (for that was the more ancient
term;) I shall in a brief Model represent it to you. The making of Counts
anciently, as is affirmed by Trebellius Pollio in the life of Macrianus, was in
Contubernium Imperatoriae Majestatis adsciscere, to take some select Persons
into the Chamber and fellowship of the Imperial Majesty: that Tiberius had some
such, is most certain; for, Suetonius in his life mentions Comites Largitionum
expeditionumque; whose first institution is by Seneca in his sixth Book de
Been. Cap. 34. referred and ascribed to Gracchus and Livius Drusus; they, says
he, apud nos primum instituerunt segregare Turbam suam, and alios in secretum
recipere: and then again, Habuerunt itaque isti amicos primos, habuerunt and
secundos; and it is recorded of Alexander Severus by Lampridius, that Amicos
non solum primi ac secundi loci (which were certainly those persons which he
had separated from the vulgar mass of men) sed etiam inferiores aegrotantes
viseret. And Tacitus in his Book de Bello Germanice relates, that the Prince
had duodecem Comites, or twelve Companions assigned him, who transacted the
great Affairs both of War and Peace; from which Model it is probable the 12
Peers of France had their first original. In Ages of a lower step, these
Comites were frequently called Reguli. In Cantia, says Malmsbury, Omnis
justitia laborabat sub cujusdam Gorongiregimine, qui tamen sicut omnes Reguli
insulae Vortigerno substernebantur. Afterward when Hengist had established his
Kentish Kingdom, the Title of Earl began to commence in Otho and Ebusa,
Brothers to the abovesaid Hengist, as the same Malmesbury observes in his Tract
de Gestis Regum Cap. 3. And the Title of Earl was anciently expressed by the
word Comes amongst the Saxons, for to King Ethelberts Charter for the
foundation of the Abbey of St. Augustins, cited by Reynerus, there are these
subscriptions, Ego Hamigilus Dux laudavi, and then, Ego Ocea Comes consensi,
Ego Graphio Comes benedixi; and there is an old Epitaph quoted by Mr. Seldom in
his Titles of Honor, the substance of which is this; that Alwain which was
Founder of Ramsey-Abby, was Comes and Aldermannus totius Angliae: but in
decursion of Time, this word Eolderman being used by others besides those to
whom it was proper and analogical, it began to languish into disuse, and the
Title of Thane and Earl was assumed, which last has remained in force until
this day: Now the relief of a Thane (who was certainly an Earl by office,
rather then Title) if he were of the first rank, that is, had the custody of
some County under the King, which he paid to the Crown, was four Horses two
sadled and two unsadled: two Swords, and four Spears, and as many Shields; And
if he were of the second rank, he paid two Horses, one sadled and one unsadled,
one Sword, two Lances, as many Shields, and fifty Marks in Silver; sometimes,
if he were a Thane of an inferior rank, he paid eight-pound, and frequently
three-pound. The relief which an Earl paid constantly to the Crown after the
Norman Conquest was (as Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, does demonstrate
out of several Records) was an Hundred pound.

Now the benefit which did accrue to the Count or Earl, besides a Barren and
naked Title to support the dignity of his Person in its due Magnificence and
Splendour, was the third penny arising out of the Profits of the County. Algar
Earl of Mercland (as Doomsday Book informs us) had the third penny of the
County of Oxford, and the Borough of Stafford under Edward the Confessor. And
Mawde the Empress when she created Milo Earl of Hereford, assigned to him for
the support of his Honor, the third penny of that County: Many examples of the
like condition are discoverable in Mr. Selden's Titles of Honor, whither I
refer the Reader. And as they had the third penny, so they had frequently the
Castle of the County annexed to their Title, but when by experience the Kings
of England were instructed how fatally pernicious it was to have so many local
powers concurrent with theirs, that by the strength of their retreat, and the
number of confederates and Partisans, seemed even to outpoise the Royal
Authority, it was by a Statute made in the 13th. year of Richard the 2d. for
the future interdicted and prohibited.

Now if you will enquire when Earls or Counts from being absolute became
Feudal, Sr. Henry Spelman in his Glossarie will tell you that it was Tempore
Othonum, and sub excessu Merovinae stirpis in Gallia, that is, about the year
onet housand.

Now as concerning the Ensigns of Investiture, with which the Earl was created,
it was anciently only with the Cincture of a Sword, but about the latter end of
Edward the first, the Coronet began to be in use, for Aymer de Vallence Earl of
Pembrook who died in the 16th. year of Edward the 2d. had one, as appears by an
instrument of William de Lavenham, cited by Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor,
by which he acknowledges the receipt of it from Sr. Henry Stacheden in the 12th.
year of Edward the 2d. Richard Earl of Arundel died in the 49th. year of Edward
the 3d. and by his last Will dated the fifth of December, gives his Noblest and
Richest Coronet to his Son the Lord Richard Fitz-allan, his second to the Lady
Joan his eldest, and the 3d. he bequeaths to the Lady Alice his youngest
Daughter.

What the Counts Palatine were I shall now demonstrate: they were taken
immediately a Palatio, from whence they assumed their name; and were
customarily such as had the nearest relation to the Prince, either by
friendship or Affinity, and to whose care and administration, he did entrust
such or such a Province; and the more to improve and enable them in the
discharge of their Duty, did unite some privileges and Franchises to their
office; as erecting Courts of Judicature, appointing Judges to sit in them, and
determine by signal decision upon causes both Criminal and Civil, and others of
the like nature, that were of that luxutiant latitude, that they had the Stamp
and Character of something which resembled Regality fixed upon them. He that
will discover by example more of this honorary Title may read Mr. Seldens
Titles of Honor whither, to decline all superfluity of discourse, I refer to
the Reader.

I have now done with the Title, I shall now proceed to unwind the Register of
those who were Earls of Kent subsequent to Earl Godwin.

1067 1 Odo Bishop of Baieux, half Brother to William the Conqueror, Lord
chief Justice, and Lord Treasurer of England. 1141 2 William de Ipre, 1227 3
Hubert de Burg Lord Chief Justice of England. 1321 4 Edmund de woodstock Son to
King Edward the first. 1330 5 Edmund Plantaginet, 1333 6 John Plantaget, 7
Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, in right of Joan his wife, who was Daughter of
Edmund of Woodstock. 1360 8 Thomas Holland, 1397 9 Thomas Holland Duke of
Surry, 1400 10 Thomas Holland Lord High Admiral of England. 1461 11 Will.
Nevill, Lord Fauconbridge. 1464 12 Edmund Gray, Lord Ruthin, Lord Treasurer of
England, created Earl of Kent by King Edward the 4th. 13 George Gray, 14
Richard Gray, 15 Reginald Gray, 16 Henry Gray, 17 Charles Gray, 18 Henry Gray,
19 Anthony Gray, Clerk, Parson of Burbage in the County of Leicester,
Grandchild of Anthony 3d. Son of George Earl of Kent above mentioned. 20 Henry
Gray, 21 Anthony Gray Earl of Kent, now living, 1658. but in his Minority.

Having represented in Prospect the Comites and Consules, the Earls and Consuls
which were originally to manage those Provinces subordinate to the Roman
Government; I shall now take cognizance of those which were anciently styled
Vice Comites and Proconsules, and had care of the Provincial revenue (in
relation to which they were termed Questores Provinciarum) and the jurisdiction
of some Causes only (as our Sheriffs have of diverse Actions Viscontiel) and
inquiry of Causes Criminal, but not determination of them. In the Saxon times
they were sometimes called Ealdormen, and in Latin Vice Comites, which was
applied to them, not as they were subservient to the Earl, but as they
administered justice when he was either dead or absent. It Is true, if we
dissect the word Earldom, we shall discover the last syllable: Dome is deduced
from Dominion, and implies that the Marshal and Civil Government being
anciently subordinate to Counts and Earls, there was some Analogy and
resemblance in the Official Dignity of an Earl, and a Sheriff, and certainly
the word Sheriff imports no less, a word contracted from the Saxon word
Schyregereve, or Schyregrave.

The word is best interpreted by the Laws, entitled the Confessors, where we
read thus, Sicut modo vocantur Greves qui super, alios Praefecturas habent ita
apud Anglos antiquitus vocabantur EALDORMEN, quasi seniores non propter
Senectutem cum quidem adolescentes essent sed propter sapientiam: they were
called anciently EALDORMEN, say those Laws, not in respect of years, but
wisdom. And we find Henry the 3d. made his Son Prince Edward the five last
years of his Reign, Sheriff of Bedford and Buckingham. The black Prince was
often Sheriff of Cornwall under Edward the 3d. And Prince Henry in the life of
his Father Henry the 4th. is found to have been Sheriff of Cornwall, and it was
done by these Sagacious Princes, with this intent, that their Sons, when they
should ascend the Throne, might be more dexterous in the Course and Conduct of
the revenue of the Crown. And as these Princes were invested with this Office,
so we find both Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Earls, and Barons held this
Dignity; nay, sometimes Queens and Countesses, Dowagers too, with an allowance
of a Shire-Clerk, which after resolved into him, we call the Undersheriff. And
it was usual long since, as the Statute Law now likewise asserts it, that the
Census or Possession of some Demeasne in the County, admits a capacity to hold
the office, and answer the King the Profits of the County; otherwise, they are
illegal and liable to exception; and in this respect, sometime the King
committed four Counties to one man, if he were possessed of Lands in them all, as
Hubert de Burgo was at one time Sheriff of Kent, Norfolk, Suffolk, and Lincoln,
and was allowed a meet person to be his Substitute or Shire-Clerk in the ninth
of Henry the third.

If any shall demand how long there have been Sheriffs under this quallified
Notion, as I have before represented and portrayed them, I must remit them to
King Alfred the Founder of Englands peace, and the divider of it into Shires
and Provinces; not to Gervas of Tilbury, whose definition of the Name is very
deficient, making the office merely suppletory to the Count or Earl, nor to
Polidore Virgil, who being by birth an Alien, would obtrude a false opinion
upon us, that the offices of the Chancellors and Sheriffs were instituted since
the Norman Conquest; For evidence to the confutation of him, we may read the
Testimonies remembered by the most learned Seldom, in the subscription of King
Edreds Charter, to the Abbey of Crowland there after Abbots, Dukes and Counts
follow, Ego Afor vice Comes audivi. And in another Saxon Charter, to the same
Abbey there is this clause inserted, Ego Livingus Clericus istud Chirographum
manu mea subscripsi, and Domino meo Theroldo tradidi; which Records do
indisputably, I think subvert his Assertion.

The next Annotation upon our proconsulary Officer, is the continuation of
those that in elder time held it many years together; as for example, the
Cornhills did in Kent, whereby their own Surname was discontinued, and the
officiary Name le Sheriff, and le Viscount swallowed up the other, and the
relict of Reginald (de Cornhill) le Viscount, in a Concession of Land to the
Chapel of Lukedale in Littlebourn, is styled in the Latin Instrument Vice
Comitissa Cantii, and a Manor of his in Minster in the Isle of Thanet, has
from this Surname obtained the Title of the Sheriffs Court. But when it was
found inconvenient for one man to hold the place any long time, in regard of
his Account, and other enormities emergent; provision was made by Statute that
none should serve two years together, but should be two years at least divested
of the Office ere he served again in the same County.

Touching the Sheriffs Letters of attendance, injoyning all Archbishops,
Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Bishops, Barons, etc. to assist him, it
shows in Lankskip and Perspective afar off, the Latitude anciently of his
authority; but since the institution of Lords-Lieutenants, the Beams of his
power have shone forth with a more dim and contracted light: So much shall
suffice for the explication of its Name, as it is Officiary. Now a word or two
how it became Honorary, because as from the Consul or Count, Time and Royal
Authority has extracted the Princely Dignity of Earl, which being for the most
part enstated in elder times on the Kings kindred, has caused the use of that
addition ever since to all of that rank: So likewise the State and Degree of a
Vicount, has a participation of that Attribute, and are called Cosen by the
Sovereign, and in the Scrutiny made by the Chancellor of the Order of the
Garter at every Feast of St. George, during the time of Vespers, if there were
any stall void; A Viscount is admitted as the lowest degree of Princes. The
first that under this Title had Parliamentary Dignity and Precedence of all
Barons with us, was John de Beaumont created Viscount-Beaumont in the 18th.
year of Henry the sixth without any relation to the Office. The Circle or
Coronet of this Degree being by its figure distinguished from an Earls, as a
Marquesses is from a Dukes. They that would take an exact survey of the
official part of this ancient Minister in all its Dimensions and Appendages,
let them consult Dalton, who has very exactly and usefully discovered to the
world all the Ingredients which make up this Office.

I shall before I proceed to draw out the Catalogue of the Kentish Sheriffs,
represent to the world a summary List of Archbishops, Earls, Bishops, and
others of high eminence, which managed this Office, either personally or
virtually; as well in other Counties as in Kent. And first, Queen Isabel had
the Sheriffwick of Cornwall diverse years before her Husband Edward the 2d. was
thrust out of the world by an unnatural death, and some years under the Reign
of her Son King Edward the 3d. Margaret Widow of Edward Earl of Cornwall held
this Office in the County of Rutland the five last years of Edward the first,
and as many years in the beginning of King Edward the 2d. And after the next
three years Margaret the wife of Pierce Gaveston Earl of Cornwall answered King
Edward the 2d. the Profits of that County. Elizabeth Countess of Salisbury had
the County of Wilts committed to her Anno. 1216. the 21 of Henry the third, and
John Dacus was her substitute.

William Earl of Salisbury was Sheriff of Huntingdon and Cambridge the 16th and
17th. of King John, and Sheriff of Lincoln six or seven years together: The
Earls of Warwick were often Sheriffs of Warwick and Leichestershire under
Edward the 3d. and also of the County of Worcester most part of that Kings
Reign; indeed the office of Sheriff was so frequent in that Family that it
almost appeared to be Hereditary to the Beauchamps: Ralph Earl of Chester was
Sheriff of that County the first of Henry the third, and of the County of
Lancaster the second year of the same King.

Walter Lord Archbishop of York, was Sheriff of Nottingham the fifty fourth
and fifty fifth of K. Henry the third, and Hugo de Stapleford was his
Shire-Clerk; Hilarious Bishop of Lincoln was Sheriff of Lincolnshire the ninth,
tenth, eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth of Henry the third, and Ralph Regnald
was his Shire-Clerk. Hilarious Bishop of Chichester was Sheriff of Sussex and
Surry the eight of Henry the second.

Richard Bishop of Salisbury was often Sheriff of the County of Dorset under
Henry the third, and of Hampshire at the same time. Joceline Bishop of Bath,
was Sheriff of Somerset under Henry the third, and Peter Bishop of Winchester
the first eigth years of Henry the third. Walter Bishop of Carlisle was
frequently Sheriff of Cumberland under Henry the third, and Robert his
successor was often Sheriff of the same County under Edward the first; and both
of them had their Shire-Clerks. Walter Bishop of Coventry and Liechfield, was
often in this office under Richard the first in the County of Stafford. Ralph
Abbott of Michelen was Sheriff of the Counties of Somersett and Dorset the
seventh of Henry the third.

Many more Presidents of this Nature could be unfolded, but I think these are
competent Testimonies enough to discover both the Dignity and Eminence of this
ancient and illustrous office; only this may be deduced from these examples:
That some Counties heretofore were joined with their next Neighbors for ease of
the service, as Sussex and Surry, Devon and Cornwall, Somerset and Dorset,
Hampshire and Wilts, Warwick and Leicester, Cambridge and Huntingdon, Norfolk
and Suffolk, Essex and Hartford, etc. most of which were separated by Queen
Elizabeth and the rest taken in sunder by the late King Charles.

I shall now endeavor to unravel the Catalogue of the Sheriffs of Kent, as I
find them Registered either in the Pipe-Rolls, or other Evidences; and I have as
much as posibly I could, Recorded the places where they inhabited, which will
much improve and enforce that light which I am to distribute to the world: in
Relation to those places I am in my subsequent discourse to treat upon.

And first, I find Osward a Saxon held diverse Lands in Kent, as Herst, Hagalei,
Norton, Chert, Stepedon, with Tunsdal, and Tongue, during the Reign of Edward the
Confessor; all which Lands were in the Conquerors Time, possessed by Hugo de
Port: This Osward also held Delce Hadon, Alneiton and Har and Sham. He was
Sheriff of Kent under the Confessor, as appears by the prime Record of the
Nation, Domes day Book, where speaking of Tarentford in Axtan Hundred it is
thus entered, Homines de in Hundredo testificantur, quod de isto Manerio Regis
ablatum est unum Pratum, and unum Alnetum, and unum Molendinum and XX. acrae
Prati, etc. Dicunt etiam quod Osward tunc Vicecomes praestitit ea Alestano
Praeposito London, and modo tenet Heltus Dapifer and Nepos ejus. Hamo and as
frequently Hanno Lord of Marourd, in the Hundred of Littlefield, and of Blen in
the Hundred of Whitstaple, and Lavinton in the Hundred of Downhamford, of
Estursete; Briested (now I take Brasted) Nettlested, Ditton, and diverse other
Lands in Kent, was Sheriff at the Time of the General Survey entered by the
Conqueror into his Domes day Book. The Records of Christ Church, and the Deeds
of the Hospital of St. Lawrence near Canterbury, prove that Hamo Son of Etardes
de Crevequer, did in the Reign of Richard the first and K. John hold diverse of
the Lands, if not all above recited. He continued Sheriff (as then was very
usual during life; which was enlarged until about the middle of Henry the
first, for in the year 10111, which is the 11th of Henry the first, Hugh Abbot
of St. Augustins granted Bodesham and Smethetum to this Hamo, Quod ipse (as
says the Deed) si opus fuerit Ecclesiae and mihi, vel successoribus meis de
praedictis in Comitatu, vel in Curia Regis contra aliquem Baronem, consulat,
adjuvet, and succurrat exceptis Dominis suis quorum Homo manibus suis fuerit.
At the same time this Hamo restored to the same Abbey in the Town of Fordwich in
this Form. Hamo Cantii Vicecomes and Henrici Regis Anglorum Dapifer timore Dei
ductus reddo Deo, and Sancto Petro Apostolorum Principi, and Sancto Augustino
Anglorum Apostolo, and Abbati Hugoni, and Fratribus ejusdem loci Villam de
Fordwich. Hanc Donationem meam per Psalterium Sancti Augustini and per
cultellum meum super principale Altar ejusdem Ecclesiae manibus meis misi, etc.

William de Aynsford was Sheriff of Kent, after Hamo in the Reign of Henry the
first, for in the Chartularies of St. Augustine in Canterbury, I find a
Transcript of the Kings writ thus, Henricus Rex Anglorum Willielmo de Aynsford
salutem, fac just habere Abbati de Sancto Augustino consuetudinem suam de
Niwentona in Denariis Averiis and operationibus, etc. And the Deed from William
Son to Henry the first is here entered, and imports as much as the former;
Willielmus Filius Regis Willielmo Vice Comiti de Kent salutem; Fac recognosci
per Homines Hundredi de Middletuna quas consuetudines in Villa de Niventona,
etc. This Family of Ainsford ended about Edward the first, and one of this Name
was Sheriff of London.

Norman Fitz Dering was Sheriff of Kent, under K. Stephen, unto whom Queen Maud
directed her Writ concerning some Land given by her to the Nun Helmida ad
faciendam Domum suam in Elemosinam apud Fauresham post Mortem ejus; Volo (says
the Queen) ut Ecclesia Sanctae Mariae de Fauresham pro salute Domini mei Regis
Stephani, and mea, and Filiorum nostrornm and Statu Regni nostri habeat
praefatam Terram in perpetuum.

He and his Brother Godred Fitz Dering are Test to a Deed of their Brother
Osbert de Morinis (so called because his Brother was a Fleming) which Deed is
Registerd in the Chartularies of Saint Augustins, wherein he to that Abbey gives
six Acres and an half of Land in Thanet, for the supply of a Light in the
Chapel of St. Mildred; within the Abbey aforesaid; Pro salute Animae suae, and
Animi Uxoris ejus Ermelinae, and in Honorem Sanctae Virginis Mildrethae. This
Norman Fitz Dering held Lands at Ashford, East Farleigh, Lose, Bircholt and
Bedesham.

Rualonus or Ruallo de Valoigns was Sheriff of Kent, in the first year of K.
Henry the second, in the year of our Lord, 1154, as appears by the Records of
the Pipe Office, (which I must now exactly trace) where the Sheriffs Accounts
are enrolled. His Seat was at Swerdlin in Petham, and sometime at Tremworth in
Bocton Alulph.

Ralph Picot was Sheriff the second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
years of K. Henry the second. Adam Picot supplied part of the last year, and
Hugh de Dover the rest.

Hugh de Dover descended from Fulbert de Dover, to whom the Castle of Chilham
with the Manor of Kingston and other Knights Fees were granted by K. William
the Conqueror, in Defense of Dover Castle, was Sheriff of Kent the eighth,
ninth, tenth, eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth and fourteenth years of Henry the
second: His Residence was sometimes at Chilham Castle, and sometimes at
Kingston.

Gervas de Cornhill was Sheriff of Kent the fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth,
eighteenth, ninteenth, and twentieth of Henry the second. His Seat was Lukedale
in Littlebourn.

Robert Fitz Bernard was joined with Gervas de Cornhill in the twenty first of
Henry the second: and after that year was expired, he exercised the Office
alone till the thirtieth of the said Kings Reign. His Capital Mansion was
Kingsdown near Ferningham.

Arnoldus, but of what Family is not yet discovered, was Sheriff of Kent the
twentieth second of Henry the second.

William Fitz Neal was Sheriff of Kent the thirtieth of Henry the second: and
Will. Fitz Philip was joined with him. Where his Residence was is uncertain.

Allan de Valoigns was Sheriff of Kent the thirty first, thirty second, thirty
third and thirty fourth of Henry the second. His Seat was frequently at
Swerdlin in Petham, and often at Repton in Ashford.

Henry de Cornhill Son to Gervas de Cornhill above recited was Sheriff of Kent
in the first, second and third years of Richard the first. His Seat was at
Lukedale.

Reginald de Cornhill was Sheriff of Kent the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh,
eighth, ninth, and last year of K. Richard the first, and during the whole
Reign of K. John; and in the twelfth year of his Reign, John Fitz Vinon of
Haring in Selling Juxta Hyth was joined to him for Execution of the said Office
in Kent. His Seat was at that Mansion in Minster in Thanet: Which at this
instant from his being so constantly Sheriff, preserves the Appellation of the
Sheriffs Court.

Hubert de Burgo that great subject, which was afterward Earl of Kent,
Constable of the Castle of Dover, and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, was
Sheriff of Kent in the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh
of K. Henry the third; during which Time one Hugh de Windlesore, whose Estate
lay at Werehorn, was joined to him as his Assistant. In the eight year of K.
Henry the third, Roger Grimstone was joined with him as his Assistant, and
continued so the eighth, ninth, and tenth years of King Henry the third. In the
eleventh of the said Kings Reign, William Brito was joined unto Him and
continued his Assistant in that Office till the seventeenth of King Hen. the
third.

Bartholomew de Criol Lord of Ostenhanger, was Sheriff of Kent, from the
seventeenth to the twenty fourth year of K. Henry the third.

Humphrey de Bohum Earl of Essex, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty fourth and
twenty fifth of K. Henry the third: He was at that Time possessed of the
Manor of Bilsington in this County, as I find by a Fine levied by him of the
said Manor the twenty fourth of Henry the third.

Peter de Sabaudiae (or Savoy) being Earl of Savoy, and Uncle by the Mothers
side unto Eleanor the wife of K. Henry the third, was made Earl of Richmond in
Yorkshire, and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports: He dwelt in the House in the
Strand, from him named the Savoy: He was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty sixth of
K. Henry the third, and Bertram de Criol was joined with Him.

Bertram de Criol of Ostenhanger, in Relation to that vast Estate which accrued
to him by matching with Eleanor one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Hamon
Crevequer Lord of Leeds Castle, and of Matilda his wife, Daughter and Heir of
William de Averings Lord of Folkston, was called the great Lord of Kent; held
the Office of Sheriff the twenty seventh of Henry the third, and John de Cobham
was joined with him that year: But the twenty eighth, twenty ninth, thirtieth,
thirty first, and thirty second years of Henry the third, he held the Place
alone.

Reginald de Cobham was Sheriff of Kent, from the beginning of the thirty third
of Henry the third, to the end of the fortieth of Henry the third, and in the
forty first of Henry the third, one Walter de Bersted was joined with him in
the Execution of that Office; he died the forty second of Henry the third, and
Roger de Northwood and his other Executors answered for the Remainder of that
year.

This Walter de Bersted was Constable of the Castle of Dover the forty sixth of
Henry the third.

Hugh de Monfort the Kings Nephew had the Custody of the County of Kent and the
Hundred of Milton granted to him in the forty second of Henry the third, Pat.
48. Mem. 12.

Fulk Peyforer was Sheriff and Custos of Kent the forty third of Henry the
third. His Seat was sometimes at North Court in Eseling, and sometimes at
Colbrige in Boughton Malherbe.

Jo. de Cobham was Sheriff of Kent the forty fourth of Henry the third: He
served the first Part of the forty fifth, and Robert Waller served the rest,
and Walter de Redmarleg was under him. Robert Waller and Thomas Delaway under
him held the Sherivaltie of Kent the forty sixth and forty seventh of Henry the
third. His Seat was at Monkton in Thanet.

Roger de Leybourn was Sheriff of Kent the forty eighth of Henry the third, and
Fulk Peyforer was Custos of the County the latter part of that year, and three
parts of the year forty ninth. In the fiftieth year John de Bourn was joined
unto him, and so continued till the fifty second of Henry the third, and Fulk
de Peyforer was Custos of the County again the last three parts of that year.
His Seat was at Leybourn Castle in Kent.

Stephen de Penchester was High Sheriff of Kent the fifty third and fifty
fourth of K. Henry the third, and Henry de Leeds was his Assistant or Shire
Clerk. His Seat was at Pencehurst.

Henry Malmains of Pluckley and Waldershare was Sheriff the fifty sixth of
Henry the third, and continued part of the first year of K. Edward the first,
in which Office he deceased, and John his Son answered for the Profits of the
County the first half year, and William de Hever for the other half year.

William de Hever of Hever Castle in Kent, was Sheriff part of the first year,
and all the second year of Edward the first.

William de Valoigns of Smerdlin and Repton was Sheriff of Kent the third,
fourth, fifth, and sixth years of Edw. the first, and the last year was
supplied for part thereof by Henry Perot of Knowlton.

Robert Scotton was Sheriff of Kent the seventh, eighth, ninth, and tenth years
of Ed. the first, in which year he died, and Robert his Son accounted for the
remainder of that year.

Peter de Huntingfield, so named from the Manor of Huntingfield, which he and
his Ancestors held in Eseling in Kent, of the Castle of Chilham, by a whole
Knights Fee; was Sheriff of Kent the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth of Edw.
the first.

Hamon de Gatton of Throuley in Kent, was Sheriff the fourteenth of Edward the
first.

William de Chellesfield, so named of the Town of Chellesfield, of which he and
his Ancestors were many years possessed, was Sheriff of Kent the fifteenth,
sixteenth and seventeenth of Edward the first.

William de Bramshot, so named of a Town in Hantshire, of which he and his
Ancestors were Lords; was Sheriff of Kent in the eighteenth and ninteenth years
of Edward the first.

John de Northwood Knight, Son of Sir Roger Northwood Knight, was Sheriff of
Kent in the twentieth year of Edw. the first, and for the latter part of the
year Richard de Cumbe and Simon de Cumbe his Son and Heir served for him: In
the twenty first year he was Sheriff again, and John de Bourn was joined with
him: Afterward, in the twenty eighth year of the abovesaid Prince, as likewise
in the twenty third year and twenty fourth year of his Reign, he was Sheriff of
this County and held the Office alone.

John de Bourn had the Custody of Kent in the twenty second year, and then
again in the twenty third and twenty fourth years of Edw. the first. Henry de
Bourn his Father made a Purchase of Lands and Rents in Dodington of Matilda the
Daughter of John de Dodington in the forty seventh year of Henry the third.

William Trussel was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty fifth and twenty sixth years
of Edward the first.

Henry de Apulderfield of Apulderfield in Coudham, now contractedly called
Apurfield, served the latter part of the twenty sixth year, but was Sheriff
alone in the twenty seventh year of Edw. the first.

Henry de Cobham of Rundal in Shorn, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty ninth
and thirtieth years of Edward the first, and for part of the thirty first year
the Barons of the Exchequer appointed Elias de Morton of Dodingdale in
Canterbury to serve in his stead.

Waretius de Valoigns of Tremworth was Sheriff of Kent the latter part of the
thirty first, and then again in the thirty second year of Edw. the first.

William de Cossenton of Cossenton in Alresford, was Sheriff of Kent in the
thirty fifth year of Edw. the first.

Jeffery Colepeper of Bay-Hall in Pepenbury, was Sheriff of Kent the thirty
sixth thirty seventh, thirty eighth and thirty ninth years of Edward the first.

Sheriffs of Kent in the Time of Edward the Second.
Sir Henry de Cobham of Rundale in Shorn, formerly mentioned, was Sheriff of
Kent in the first year of K. Edw. the second, and again in the ninth year of
this Prince.

John le Blund of Sundridge in Bromley, descended from Peter de Blund, who was
Constable of the Tower of London in the thirty fourth year of Henry the third,
was Sheriff of Kent in the second, third, and fourth years of Edward the
second: And dying in the fifth year of that Prince, when he was likewise
Sheriff; Edward his Son served our the Remainder of the year for him, and
continued in the Office part of the year following.

William de Basing of Kenardington enrolled amongst the Knights of K. Edward
the first, that merited so victoriously in the Wars in Scotland; was Sheriff of
Kent the seventh year of Edward the second; and John de Haudloe the younger, of
Court, at Street in Limne was joined with him.

John de Malmains of Malmains in Stoke in the Hundred of Hoo, was Sheriff of
Kent in the tenth of Edward the second, and part of the eleventh.

John Fremingham of Fremingham, was Sheriff of Kent part of the eleventh year
of Edward the second; and for three parts of the twelveth year, which he
likewise served, Henry de Sarden was united as an Assistant to him.

William Septuans Son and Heir of Sir Robert Septuans, whose Seat was at Milton
Septuans near Canterbury, was Sheriff of Kent part of the thirteenth, and
entirely the fourteenth year of Edw. the second, and Henry Sarden was his
Assistant; He continued in the Office the fifteenth and part of the sixteenth
year of the abovesaid Prince, and Ralph Savage of Milsted was joined with him.

John de Shelving Son of Thomas de Shelving of Shelving in Wodnesborough, was
Sheriff of Kent, part of the sixteenth, and part of the seventeenth year of
Edward the second; and John de Fremingham was joined as an Assistant to him.

John de Fremingham was Sheriff of Kent part of the sixteenth year, entirely
the eighteenth, and lastly part of the ninteenth year of that unfortunate
Prince Edward the second; and Ralph de St. Laurence served out the Residue for
him.

Thomas de Toniford his Attorney accounted for the Profits of his Office for
him.

Sheriffs of Kent in the Time of Edward the third.
Ralph de St. Laurence whose Ancestors extracted their Surname from St.
Laurence in the Isle of Thanet, was Sheriff of Kent in the first year of Edw.
the third, and again for part of the sixth year of that Prince, which was
supplied by Tho. St. Laurence his Son.

William de Orlanston, so Surnamed from Orlanston in Rumney Mersh, was Sheriff
of Kent in the second year of Edward the third, and the next year following he
continued in the Place; and John de Shelving before mentioned was joined with
him.

John de Shelving was again Sheriff of Kent, in the fourth year of Edward the
third, but died the same year, as the Inquisition taken after his Death does
evince, and John de Walmer supplied the Remnant of the year for him.

Roger de Reynham served part of the fifth of Edward the third.

John de Bourn before mentioned, continued in the Office of Sheriff of Kent,
part of the fifth year of Edward the third.

Thomas de Brockhull of Brockhull in Saltwood, was Sheriff of Kent the sixth
year of Edward the third, and Lawrence de St. Lawrence was his Assistant for
part of the year: but in the seventh and eleventh years of this Kings Reign, he
executed the place alone.

Stephen de Cobham, of Roundale in Shorn, Son and Heir of Henry de Cobham, was
Sheriff of Kent the eighth, ninth, and tenth years of Edward the third.

William Morant of Morants-Court in Chevening at the foot of Morants-Court
Hill, was Sheriff of Kent the twelfth and thirteenth years of Edward the third,
during his Sherivalty. This abovesaid Prince issued out a Mandate to him to
take care that but one Bell should be rung in any Steeple toward the Seacoast
in Kent.

Henry de Valoigns of Repton in Ashford, was Sheriff of Kent the fourteenth
year of Edw. the third, John de Merworth of Merworth Castle in Kent, was
Sheriff of this County in the fifteenth year of Edward the third, and in the
year following John de Vielston was joined with him. This Family of Merworth
descended from the St. Laurences, and took this Surname from their Seat at
Merworth.

John de Vielston of Vielston, now vulgarly called Vilson in Shorham, was
Sheriff of Kent the sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth, nineteenth, and
twentieth years of Edward the third.

William de Langly of Knolton in East Kent, was Sheriff of Kent the twenty
first, twenty third, twenty fourth, and twenty fifth years, and part of the
twenty six year of Edward the third, and Arnold Savage of Bobbing served part
of the twenty third year for him.

John de Fremingham of Fremingham, was Sheriff of Kent the twenty second of
Edw. the third, Richard Stone was for this Man part of the twenty first of
Edward the third.

James la Pine of East-Hall in Morston, and Helburg in Reculver, was Sheriff of
Kent part of the twenty sixth, and part of the twenty seventh of Edward the
third which Stephen Broad served for him.

William Apulderfield of Bedmancore in Lingsteed was Sheriff of Kent part of
the twenty seventh and entirely the twenty eighth year, and thirty first year
of Edward the third, and afterward executed that office in the thirty fourth,
thirty fifth, thirty sixth, thirty eigth, and forty fourth of Edward the third.

Reginald de Dike of Shelvich in Kent was Sheriff of this County in the twenty
ninth of Edward the third, he married Lora Widow of Sampson Attleeze
Guardianship of the said Sampsons Children, much improved his Estate, and
purchased Lands in Shepey, Shelvich, and Rutlandshire; He lies buried in an
obscure Chapel on the North-side of Shelvich Church.

Gilbert de Hells of Hells in Wodnesborough, and of St. Margaret Hells in
Darent, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirtieth year of Edward the third; he was
Son to Bertram de Hells, Lieutenant of Dover Castle under Reginald de Cobham.

Ralph de Fremingham of Farningham was Sheriff of Kent the thirty second of
Edw. the third.

Will. Makenade of Makenade House in Preston by Feversham, was Sheriff of this
County the thirty third year of Edward the third, and dyed that year.

William Pimpe of Pimpes Court in Nettlested, was Sheriff of Kent the thirty
seventh, forty fifth, and forty ninth years of Edward the third, and dying that
year Reginald his Son served it out for him.

Jeffery Colepeper of Preston in Alresford, was Sheriff of Kent part of the
thirty ninth year of Edward the third, and entirely the forty seventh.

John Colepeper of Bayhall in Pembury was Sheriff of Kent the thirty ninth,
fortieth, and forty third years of Edward the third.

Sr. Richard Attleeze of Leez Court in Shelvich was Sheriff of Kent the forty
first year of Edward the third.

John de Brockhull of Brockhull in Saltwood was Sheriff of Kent the forty
second year of Edward the third.

John Barrey of the Moat in Sevington was Sheriff of Kent the forty sixth of
Edward the third. He was descended from Sr. John de Barrey that was in Being
under King Richard the first, King John, and Henry the third; There be many
Monuments of them in Sevington Church, which do illustrate their quallity, and
frequent Testimonies of other nature that show they were of eminent rank among
the ancientest Gentry of this Shire.

Jeffery Colepeper of Preston in Alresford, Son of Walter Colepeper was Sheriff
of Kent the forty seventh of Edward the third.

Robert Nottingham of Bayford in Sedingbourn was Sheriff of Kent the forty
eight of Edward the third, and dyed the same year, and Richard de Southwell
served out the year for him.

Nicholas at Crouch, so named from his Habitation near the Cross, was Sheriff
of Kent the fifth year of Edward the third. He had Issue Thomas-at-Crouch who
having no Children, Alice one of his Sisters married to John Petit of
Shalmesford, and Isable the other matched to John Barrey of Sevington, became
his Heirs.

Henry de Apulderfield of Otterpley in Challock was Sheriff of Kent the fifty
first year of Edward the third, in which year that victorious Prince died.

Sheriffs of Kent in the time of Richard the second.
Thomas de Cobham of Roundall in Shorn was Sheriff of Kent in the first year of
Richard the second. William de Medmenham was Deputy to this Thomas de Cobham.

John de Fremingham of Fremingham or Farningham was Sheriff of Kent the second
year of Richard the second, and again the seventeenth year of that Prince.

James de Peckham of Yaldham in Wrotham was Sheriff of Kent the third, and then
again the twelfth year of Richard the second.

William Septuans of Milton Septuans upon the River of Stoure, was Sheriff of
Kent the fourth year of Richard the second.

Arnold Savage of Bobing Court near Sedingbourn, where he had a Castellated
House, was Sheriff of Kent the fifth, and then again the ninth year of Richard
the second.

Thomas Brockhull of Cale-hill in Little Chert, was Sheriff of Kent the seventh
and eighth years of Richard the second.

Robert Corbie of Boughton Malherb, was Sheriff of Kent the eighth year of
Richard the second.

Ralph St. Ledger of Vlcomb in Kent, was Sheriff of this County in the tenth
year of Richard the second.

William de Guldford of Hempsted in the Parish of Benenden was Sheriff of Kent
the eleventh year of Richard the second.

William Burcestre descended out of the County of Southampton, was Sheriff of
Kent the thirteenth year of Richard the second.

Richard de Berham Son of Henry de Berham of Berham Court, was Sheriff of Kent
the fourteenth year of Richard the second.

Thomas Chich of the Dungeon near the Walls of Canterbury, was Sheriff of Kent
the fifteenth year of Richard the second.

William Barry of the Moat in Sevington, Son of John Barry was Sheriff of Kent
the sixteenth year of Richard the second.

Thomas Colepeper of Pepenbury, was Sheriff of Kent part of the seventeenth,
and entirely the nineteenth year of Richard the second.

Nicholas Haut of Waddenhall near Elmston where he dwelt, was Sheriff of Kent
the nineteenth year of Richard the second.

Thomas St. Ledger of Ottringden was Sheriff of Kent the twentieth year of
Richard the second,

Nicholas Potin of Queen Court in Ospringe was Sheriff of Kent the twenty first
year of Richard the second.

John Boteler of Graveney, contractedly called Graney, was Sheriff of Kent the
twenty second year of Richard the second, which was the last year of that
Prince.

Sheriffs of Kent under Henry the fourth.
Robert Clifford brother of Richard Clifford Bishop of London, was Sheriff of
Kent the first year of Henry the fourth, and Robert Saunders was his Deputy.

Thomas Lodelow descended out of Wiltshire, was Sheriff of Kent the second year
of Henry the fourth, but died before he had served out the year; so that John
Digg of Diggs Court in Barham, was upon his decease authorized to discharge the
said office for the remainder of the year.

Thomas Chich of the Dungeon in St. Mary Bredimans Parish in Canterbury, was
Sheriff of this County the third year of Henry the fourth.

Richard Cliderow of Gouldstanton in Ash near Sandwich, who was constituted in
the Reign of Henry the fourth, Admiral of the Seas from the Thames mouth,
along the Saxon shore to the West; was likewise Sheriff of Kent the fourth, and
most part of the fifth year of the abovesaid Prince.

Tho. Swinbourn Esquire, owner of much Land in the County of Essex, was Sheriff
of Kent the sixth year of Henry the fourth, and kept his Shrievalty at
Thevegate in Smeth.

Michael Horn of Horn place in Apuldore, was Sheriff of Kent the seventh year
of Henry the fourth.

Edward Haut of Hauts place in Petham, and of Bourn, was Sheriff of Kent the
eighth year of Henry the fourth.

William Snaith of Addington was Sheriff of Kent the ninth year of Henry the
fourth.

Reginald Pimp of Pimps Court in East Farleigh, Son of William Pimp of Pimps
Court, and Nettlested, was Sheriff of Kent the tenth year of Henry the fourth.

John Darrell of Cale-Hill in little Chert, eldest Brother of Sir William
Darrell under Treasurer of England, was Sheriff of Kent the eleventh year of
Henry the fourth.

William Notbeame descended out of Suffolk, where his Family was of generous
rank, but whose Residence was at Ash near Sandwich, was Sheriff of Kent the
twelfth year of Henry the fourth, and in the seventh year of Henry the fifth
was returned amongst those who did Portare arma antiqua.

William Cheney of Shurland in Shepey, Son of Richard Cheney, was Sheriff of
Kent the thirteenth year of Henry the fourth, in which year this Prince
deceased.

Sheriffs of Kent under Henry the Fifth.
William Cheney above mentioned, continued Sheriff of Kent the first year of
Henry the fifth.

William Cliford of whom mention was formerly made, was again Sheriff of Kent
in the second and third years of Henry the fifth.

William Langley of Knolton, was Sheriff of Kent the fourth year of Henry the
fifth.

John Darrell of Cale-hill above recited, was again Sheriff of Kent the fifth
year of K. Henry the fifth.

Richard Cliderow of whom mention, was made in the fourth and fifth years of
Henry the fourth, was now Sheriff again in the sixth year of King Henry the
fifth.

John Burgh was Sheriff of Kent the seventh year of Henry the fifth; During
this man's Shrievalty there came a special Writ from the King, to elect out of
the most fit and able Knights and Esquires of the County that bore Arms from
antiquity, twelve of the most sufficient to serve as Lances for defense of the
Kingdom.

William Haut of Hautsbourne, was Sheriff of Kent some part of the eighth, and
all the ninth year of K. Henry the fifth.

John Darrell of Cale-hill, was Sheriff of Kent the tenth year of Henry the
fifth, in which year that successeful and triumphant Prince paid the last Debt
he owed to Nature, and the first which he owed to Sin.

Sheriffs of Kent in the Reign of Henry the Sixth.
John Darrell of Cale-hill, who was Sheriff of Kent when K. Henry the fifth
deceased, continued Sheriff in the first year of Henry the sixth.

William Cheyney of Shurland, who was Knighted in the ninth year of K. Henry
the sixth, was Sheriff of Kent in the second year of that Princes Government.

John Ryk^ld of Estlingham in Friend bury near Rochester, was Sheriff of Kent
the third year of K. Henry the sixth.

William Clifford of Bobbing, who had been Sheriff of Kent in the first year of
K. Henry the fifth, was elected to take that Office in the fourth year of K.
Henry the sixth.

William Colepeper of Preston in Alresford, Son and Heir of Sir John Colepeper,
was Sheriff of Kent the fifth year of Henry the sixth.

Thomas Ellis of Burton in Kennington, was Sheriff of Kent the sixth year of
Henry the sixth.

William Scot of Scots Hall in Smeeth, was Sheriff of Kent the seventh year of
Henry the sixth.

John Peche of Lullingston was Sheriff of Kent the eighth year of Henry the
sixth.

John St. Ledger of Ulcomb was Sheriff of Kent the ninth year of Henry the sixth.

John Guldford of Halden alias Lambin in the Parish of Rolvenden, was Sheriff
of Kent in the tenth year of Henry the sixth.

William Bures who held much Land at Bromeley and Greenwich, and was descended
from William de Bures who held part of a Knights Fee in Bromley, the twentieth
year of Edward the third. At making the black Prince Knight, was Sheriff of
Kent the eleventh year of Henry the sixth.

Richard Woodville of the Moat in Maidston was Sheriff of Kent in the twelfth
year of K. Henry the sixth.

William Clifford of Bobbing and of Shorn, of whom mention is made twice
before, was now again chosen Sheriff the thirteenth year of Henry the sixth.

William Manston of Manston in the Parish of St. Laurence in the Isle of
Thanet, was Sheriff of Kent the fourteenth year of Henry the sixth.

James Fiennes of Kemsing and Seal, afterward created Lord Say and Seal, and
High Treasurer of England, was Sheriff of Kent the fifteenth year of Henry the
sixth.

Richard Waller of Gromebridge in Spelhurst, who took Charles Duke of Orleans
Captive at the Battle of Agin Court, was Sheriff of Kent the sixteenth year of
K. Henry the sixth.

Edward Guldford of Halden in Rolvenden, was Sheriff of Kent the seventeenth
year of Henry the sixth.

Gervas Clifton who married Isabel Widow of William Scot Esquire, and lived
upon his Wives Estate at Brabourn in Kent, where he lies buried, was Sheriff of
Kent the eighteenth year of Henry the sixth.

John Yerde of Denton near Berham, was Sheriff of Kent the ninteenth year of
Henry the sixth.

John Warmer of Votes Crey, was Sheriff of Kent in the twentieth year of Henry
the sixth.

William Mary's who lived at Ufton in Tunstal, was Sheriff of Kent in the
twenty first of Henry the sixth.

Thomas Brown Knight, Treasurer to the Household of K. Henry the sixth, was
Sheriff of Kent in the twenty second year of that Prince.

William Cromer of Tunstal, who married Elizabeth Daughter of James Lord Say
and Seal, was Sheriff of Kent the twenty third year of Henry the sixth: This
was that William Cromer who was barbarously assassanated by Jack Cade, whilst
he vigorously sought to oppose that Rebel in his Expedition toward London.

John Thornbury of Feversham, was Sheriff of Kent the twenty fourth year of
Henry the sixth.

William Isley of Sundridge, was Sheriff of Kent the twenty fifth year of Henry
the sixth.

William Kene who lived at Well Hall in Eltham in Right of Agnes his Wife Widow
of John Tatersal, was Sheriff of Kent the twenty sixth year of Henry the sixth.

Stephen Slegge of Wouldham near Rochester, was Sheriff of Kent the twenty
seventh year of Henry the sixth.

William Cromer who was Sheriff before in the twenty third, was now again
Sheriff in the twenty eighth year of Henry the sixth.

Gervas Clifton that had served this Office in the eighteenth year of this
Kings Reign, was called again to discharge in the twenty ninth of K. Henry the
sixth.

Robert Horn of Horns Place in Apuldore, was Sheriff of Kent the thirtieth
year of Henry the sixth.

Thomas Ballard of Horton near Canterbury, was Sheriff of Kent the thirty first
year of Henry the sixth.

John Fogge of Repton in Ashford Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the thirty second
year of Henry the sixth.

Sir John Cheyney of Shurland and Patricksbourn Cheyney, was Sheriff of Kent
the thirty third year of K. Henry the sixth.

Philip Belknap of the Moate in Canterbury, was Sheriff of Kent the twenty
fourth year of Henry the sixth.

Alexander Iden of Westwell who slew Jack Cade, and married the Widow of Will.
Cromer slain before by that Rebel, was Sheriff of Kent the thirty fifth year
of Henry the sixth.

John Guldford of Halden Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the thirty sixth year of
Henry the sixth; This Man flourished under the Scepter of Henry the sixth,
Edward the fourth, under whom he was Sheriff, and likewise Comptroller of his
Household; Richard the third, at whose Coronation he was Knighted; and lastly,
that of Henry the seventh, by whom he was admitted (as his Monument in the
Middle Isle of the Body of Christ Church in Canterbury does attest) into his
Privy Council.

Sir Gervas Clifton who formerly in the eighteenth and twenty ninth years of
this Prince had managed this Place, was again summoned to execute it in the
thirty seventh year of Henry the sixth.

Sir Thomas Brown of Bechworth Castle in Surrey, was again Sheriff of Kent in
the thirty eighth year of Henry the sixth.

John Scot of Scots-Hall Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent part of the year above
mentioned: He was afterward Knighted by K. Edward the fourth, and by him
called to be of his Privy Council, Deputy of Callis, and Comptroller of his
Household.

Sheriffs of Kent under K. Edward the fourth.
John Isaac of Howlets in Patricksbourne, was Sheriff of Kent the first year
of King Edward the fourth.

Sir William Peche of Lullingston Knight, was Sheriff of Kent the third and
fourth years of Edward the fourth, and had likewise the Custody of the Castle
of Canterbury annexed to his Office, as this Record does inform me. Rex
concessit Willielmo Peche Milititotum Commit. Cantii una cum Castro
Cantuariensi, ac constituit eum Vicecomitem Cantii, ac ei concessit 40 libras
Annuas, quousque ei dederit 40 libras Annuas in speciali, Taellio and
Haeredibus Masculis Pat. 2. Edw. quarti, Part secunda.

John Diggs of Diggs Court in Barham, was Sheriff of Kent the fourth year or
Edw. the fourth.

Alexander Clifford of Bobbing Court Son of Lewis Clifford Esquire, was Sheriff
of Kent the fifth year of K. Edward the fourth.

Sir William Haut of Hautsbourn Son of William Haut and Elizabeth his Wife
Sister to Richard Woodvill Earl Rivers, and Aunt to Elizabeth Woodvill Queen of
England, and Wife to K. Edward the fourth, was Sheriff of Kent the sixth year
of that Prince.

Sir John Colepeper of Pepenbury and Bedgebury, was Sheriff of Kent the seventh
year of Edward the fourth.

Ralph St. Ledger of Ulcomb Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the eighth year of
Edward the fourth.

Henry Ferrers of Chilesmore and Tamworth in the County of Warwick, was Sheriff
of the County of Kent in the ninth year of Edward the fourth: He married Mawde
one of the Coheirs of William Hextall of Hextall Place in great Peckham.

John Brumston of Preston near Feversham Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the tenth
year of Edward the fourth: This year the King likewise by his Letters Patents
committed to his Custody the City of Canterbury.

Richard Colepeper of Oxenhoath in Little Peckham, was Sheriff of Kent the
eleventh year of Edward the fourth.

James Peckham of Yaldham in Wrotham, was Sheriff of Kent the twelfth year of
Edward the fourth.

Sir John Fogge of Repton in Ashford, sometime Comptroller of the House to
Edward the fourth, was Sheriff of Kent the thirteenth year of that Prince.

John Isley of Sundridge Cousin and Heir General of William Isley who was
Sheriff of this County the twenty fifth of Henry the sixth, was Sheriff of Kent
the fourteenth year of Edward the fourth.

Sir William Haut of Hautsbourn formerly mentioned, was again Sheriff the
fifteenth year of Edward the fourth.

John Green who lived at Scadbery in Chiselhurst, in Right of his Wife
Constance Widow of Sir Thomas Walsingham, was Sheriff of Kent the sixteenth of
Edward the fourth.

William Cheyney of Shurland Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the seventeenth year
of Edward the fourth.

Richard Haut of the Moat in Ightham younger Brother to Sir William, was
Sheriff of Kent the eighteenth of Edward the fourth.

Richard Lee of great Delce^ in Rochester, was Sheriff of Kent the ninteenth
year of Edward the fourth.

Sir John Fogge of Repton formerly mentioned, was again Sheriff of Kent the
twentieth year of Edward the fourth.

Sir George Brown of Bechworth Castle Son of Sir Thomas Brown, was Sheriff of
Kent the twenty first of Edward the fourth.

Richard Haut of the Moat in Ightham who served the Office of Sheriff of Kent
the eighteenth of Edward the fourth, was after he had been three years from the
place, according to the Statute, made Sheriff of Kent again the twenty second,
year of Edward the fourth, in which year this worthy Prince cast off the
Luggage of humane Frailty, by paying the last Debt he owed to Nature.

Sheriffs of Kent under Richard the Third.
Sir William Haut of Hautsbourn that had been Sheriff twice before in the Time
of K. Edward the fourth, was made Sheriff of Kent again in the first year of K.
Richard the third, from Michaelmass the twenty second of Edward the fourth, to
the ninth of April, and then to the twenty third, which day K. Edward the fifth
fell an Oblation to the Avarice and Ambition of his usurping Uncle, who cast
trains no less for his Life then for his Crown; and then again to the twenty
fifth of June, and from the twenty sixth of June, until the Michaelmass
following Sir Henry Forrers supplied the place of Sheriff for him.

John Bamme Esquire of the Manor of Grench in Gillingham, descended from Adam
Bamme Lord Mayor of London, was Sheriff of Kent in the second year of Richard
the third.

Sir Robert Brackenbury of the Moate in Ightham, was Sheriff of Kent the third
year of Richard the third.

Will. Cheyney Esquire of Shurland, was Sheriff of Kent the last year of Rich.
the third.

Sheriffs of Kent under Henry the Seventh.
William Cheyney of Shurland Esquire, Sheriff of Kent the seventh year of
Edward the fourth, and last of Richard the third, continued in that Office the
first year of K. Henry the seventh.

John Pimpe of Pimpes Court in Farleigh and Lose Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent
the second year of Henry the seventh.

Sir Henry Ferrers of great Peckham Knight, who was Sheriff before in the fifth
year of Edward the fourth, was Sheriff of Kent again in the third year of Henry
the seventh.

Walter Roberts of Glastenbury in Cranbroke Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the
fourth year of Edward the fourth.

Sir William Boleyne Knight of Hever Castle and of Seal, Son of Sir Ieffery
Boleyne Lord Mayor of London, and Anne his Wife Daughter and Coheir of Thomas
Lord Hoo and Hastings, was Sheriff of Kent in the fifth year of Henry the
seventh.

Sir William Scot Son and Heir of Sir John Scot, was Sheriff of Kent in the
sixth year of Henry the seventh. This our Sheriff new built Scots Hall, which
was before decayed and ruinous.

John Darell of Cale-Hill Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the seventh year of
Henry the seventh. He was Esquire of the Body to that Prince, and Captain of
the Launciers in that part of the County wherein he lived, and having had his
Estate torn from him by Richard the third, as being a Correspondent of Henry
the seventh, had it restored to him with several other Manors by that Prince:
He was Father to Sir James Darell who was Knighted at Turwin by K. Henry the
eighth, and was Captain of Hames Castle, and Governor of Guisnes.

Thomas Kemp of Ollantie near Wye Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the eighth year
of Henry the seventh; He married Emeline one of the two Daughters and Coheirs
of Valentine Chich, and Philippa his Wife Daughter and Heir of Sir Robert
Chichley Knight sometime Lord Mayor of London, and Brother to Henry Chichley
Arch Bishop of Canbury.

Sir Richard Gulford of Halden who was Knighted at Milford Haven, and made
Banneret at Blackheath, was Sheriff of Kent the ninth year of Henry the seventh.

John Peche of Lullingston Esquire, who afterward received the Order of
Knighthood, was Sheriff of Kent in the tenth year of Henry the seventh.

John Dig of Digges Court in Berham, was Sheriff of Kent the eleventh year of
Henry the seventh.

Sir James Walsingham of Scadbery in Chiselhurst, was Sheriff of Kent the
twelfth of Henry the seventh.

Lewis Clifford of Bobbing Court Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirteenth
year of Henry the seventh.

Robert Wotton of Boughton Malherbe Esquire, afterward Knighted, and made
comptroler of Callis was Sheriff of Kent the fourteenth of Henry the seventh.

Alexander Colepeper of Bedgebury Esquire in Goudherst, was Sheriff of Kent in
the fifteenth year of Henry the seventh: He afterward received the Order of
Knighthood.

Thomas Iden of Westwell Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the sixteenth year of
Henry the seventh.

Sir William Scot of Scots Hall, who was Sheriff in the sixth year of Henry the
seventh, was Sheriff of Kent again in the seventeenth year of that Princes
Government.

Ralph St. Ledger of Ulcomb Esquire, Son and Heir of Ralph St. Ledger, was
Sheriff of Kent the eighteenth year of Henry the seventh.

William Cromer of Tunstal Esquire, who afterward received the Order of
Knighthood, was Sherift of Kent the ninteenth of Henry the seventh.

John Langley of Knowlton Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the twentieth of Henry
the seventh.

Sir Thomas Kempe of Ollantie Knight of the Bath, was Sheriff of Kent the
twenty first of Henry the seventh.

Sir Alexander Colepeper of Bedgebury, was Sheriff of Kent again the twenty
second year of Henry the seventh.

Henry Vane of Tunbridge Esquire, second Son of John Vane of Tunbridge Esquire,
was Sheriff of Kent the twenty third year of Henry the seventh.

Reginald Peckham of Yaldham in Wrotham Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the twenty
fourth of Henry the seventh, in which year that Sagacious Monarch shook off the
Garment of his Mortality.

Sheriffs of Kent under the Scepter of Henry the Eighth.
Sir William Cromer of Tunstal Knight who was Sheriff before in the ninteenth
of Henry the seventh, managed that Office again, and was Sheriff again of this
County in the first year of K. Henry the eighth.

James Dig of Digges Court in Berham Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the second
year of Henry the eighth.

Sir Thomas Boleyne of Hever Castle Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the third
year of Henry the eighth, in the fifteenth year of Henry the eighth, he was
made Knight of the Garter, and Treasurer of the Kings House, in the seventeenth
year he was created Viscount Rochford, and in the twenty first of Henry the
eighth he was invested with the Title of Earl of Wiltshire and Ormond.

Sir Thomas Kemp of Ollantie made Knight of the Bath at the Marriage of Prince
Arthur Eldest Son to Henry the seventh, was again Sheriff in the fourth year of
Henry the eighth.

Sir John Norton of Northwood in Milton Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the fifth
year of Henry the eighth.

Sir Alexander Colepeper of Bedgebury Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the sixth
year of Henry the eighth.

Tho. Cheyney of Shurland Esquire, afterward made Knight of the Garter, was
Sheriff of Kent in the seventh year of Henry the eighth.

Sir William Scot of Scots Hall Knight, was made Sheriff of Kent the eighth
year of Hen. the eighth, and before that in the sixth and seventeenth years of
Hen. the seventh.

Sir Thomas Boleyne of Hever Castle Knight, was again Sheriff of Kent the ninth
year of Henry the eighth.

John Crispe of Quekes at Birchington in the Isle of Thanet Esquire, was
Sheriff of Kent in the tenth year of Henry the eighth.

Sir John Wiltshire of Stone near Dartford, Comptroller of Callis, was Sheriff
of Kent in the eleventh year of Henry the eighth.

John Roper Esquire of St. Dunstans without the Walls of Canterbury, and of
Well Hall in Eltham, was Sheriff of Kent the twelfth of Henry the eighth.

Robert Sonds of Town Place in Throuley, and of Sonds Place in Darking in
Surrey, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirteenth year of Henry the eighth.

Sir John Fogge of Repton in Ashford, was Sheriff of Kent in the fourteenth
year of Henry the eighth.

George Guldford of Hemsted in Beneuden Esquire, who married Elizabeth Daughter
and Heir of Robert Mortimer of Mortimers Hall in Essex, and the Lady Elizabeth
Howard his Wife Daughter to John Lord Howard Duke of Norfolk, was Sheriff of
Kent the sixteenth of Henry the eighth.

Sir William Haut of Haut bourn Knight, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas Haut made
Knight of the Bath, at the Marriage of Prince Arthur with Katharine of Castile,
was Sheriff of Kent the sixteenth year of Henry the eighth.

Henry Vane of Tunbridge Esquire, who was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty third
year of Hen. the seventh, discharged that Office again in the seventeenth year
of Hen. the eighth. This Henry Vane is he that had Command in an Expedition
into Scotland in the beginning of the abovesaid Prince. [Vide Speed.]

William Whetenhal of Hextal Place in East Peckham Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent
in the eighteenth year of Henry the eighth.

Sir John Scot of Scott Hall, was Sheriff of Kent in the nineteenth year of
Henry the eighth.

William Kempe of Oslantis Esquire, who afterward was invested with the Order
of Knight hood, was Sheriff of Kent in the twentieth year of Henry the eighth.
He was second Son of Sir Thomas Kempe, and after his elder Brother Christopher
Kempe deceased without Issue, succeeded in the Patrimony: He married Eleanor
Daughter and Heir of Robert Brown Esquire, third Son of Sir Thomas Brown of
Bechworth Castle. Sir Edward Wotton of Boughton Malherbe Knight, who matched
with Dorothy one of the Daughters and Coheirs of Sir Robert Read Knight Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty first of
Henry the eighth.

William Waller of Gromebridge in Spelherst Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the
twenty second of Henry the eighth.

Sir Richard Clement of the Moat in Ightham, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty
third of Henry the eighth.

Sir William Finch of the Moat in the Parish of St. Martins in Canterbury, was
Sheriff of Kent the twenty fourth year of Henry the eighth.

Thomas Roberts of Glastonbury in Cranbroke Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the
twenty fifth of Henry the eighth.

Sir Thomas Poynings of Ostenhanger Knight, afterward created Lord Poynings in
the thirtieth year of Henry the eighth, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty sixth
year of Henry the eighth. He married Katharine Daughter and Coheir of John Lord
Marney, but deceased without Issue in the thirty seventh year of the abovesaid
Prince.

Sir Edward Wotton of Boughton Malherbe was again Sheriff of Kent the twenty
seventh of Henry the eighth.

Sir Thomas Wiat of Allington Castle, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty eighth
year of Henry the eighth. He married Elizabeth Daughter of Sir Thomas Brook
Lord Cobham by whom he had Issue, Sir Thomas Wiat afterward beheaded.

Sir William Haut of Hautsbourn, was again Sheriff of Kent the twenty ninth
year of Henry the eighth.

Sir William Sidney of Pencehurst Knight Banneret Tutor to Prince Edward
afterward Edward the sixth, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirtieth year of Henry
the eighth. He was Son and Heir of Nicholas Sidney Esquire, who married Anne
Daughter of Sir Will. Brandon Knight, slain at Boswor^h Field, Aunt to Charles
Brandon Duke of Suffolk: This Nicholas was Son and Heir of William Sidney
Esquire, by Thoma^in his Wife, Daughter and Heir of John Barrington Esquire,
descended from the right ancient and Knightly Family of Barrington of
Barrington Hall in Essex.

Sir Anthony St. Ledger of Ulcomb Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirty
first year of Henry the eighth.

Anthony Sonds of Throuley Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirty second of
Henry the eighth.

Reginald Scot of Scots Hall Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirty third
year of Henry the eighth.

Sir Henry Isley of Sondridge and of Farningham, was Sheriff of Kent the thirty
fourth of Henry the eighth.

Sir Humphry Style of Langley Park in Bekenham Knight, Son and Heir of John
Style Alderman of London, and Elizabeth his Wife Daughter and Coheir of Sir Guy
Wolston Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirty fifth of Henry the eighth.

Sir John Fogge of Repton, was Sheriff of Kent the thirty sixth year of Henry
the eighth.

Sir Percival Heart of Lullingston Knight, was Sheriff of Kent the thirty
seventh year of Henry the eighth.

Henry Crispe of Quekes in Birchington in the Isle of Thanet Esquire, who
received the Order of Knighthood before his Death, was Sheriff of Kent in the
thirty eighth year of Henry the eighth, in which year this Prince shrunk to
Ashes.

Sheriffs of Kent in the Time of K. Edward the Sixth.
William Sidley of Scadbery in Southfleet Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the
first of Edward the sixth.

Sir George Harpur of Sutton Valence, was sheriff of Kent in the second year of
Edward the sixth.

Thomas Colepeper of Bedgebury, Son and Heir of Sir Alexander Colepeper, was
Sheriff of Kent in the third year of K. Edward the sixth.

Sir Thomas Wiat of Allington Castle, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas Wiat, and
Grandchild of Sir Henry Wiat, was Sheriff of Kent in the fourth year of K.
Edward the sixth.

Sir Henry Isley of Sundridge, was Sheriff of Kent in the fifth year of K.
Edward the sixth.

Sir John Guldford of Hemsted in Benenden, was Sheriff of Kent the sixth year
of K. Edward the sixth. After this year, this Pious young Monarch was not long
Lived, for all his early blooming Glories were shortly after blasted by a too
sudden Death.

Sheriffs of Kent under Queen Mary.
Sir Robert Southwell of Merworth Knight, afterward Master of the Rolls, was
Sheriff of Kent in the first year of Queen Mary. He held Merworth (where he
lies buried) in Right of his Wife Margaret Daughter and sole Heir of Sir Thomas
Nevill Speaker of the Parliament in the time of Henry the eighth, and one of
his Privy Council, and third Son to George Nevill Baron Aburgavenny.

William Roper of Well Hall in Eltham, was Sheriff of Kent in the first and
second year of Philip and Mary.

Sir Thomas Kempe of Ollantie near Wye, was Sheriff of Kent in the second and
third year of Philip and Mary, part of the year was supplied for him by Thomas
Moile Esquire.

George Vane of Badsell Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the third and fourth
year of Philip and Mary.

Thomas Wotton of Boughton Malherbe Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the fourth
and fifth year of Philip and Mary: In which year Callis was lost, which Blow
sat so heavy upon her Heartstrings, that the Cordage not able to undergo the
Pressure, was cracked with the Burden which was lodged upon it.

Sheriffs of Kent under Queen Elizabeth.
Thomas Wotton of Bonghton Malherbe continued in that Office part of the first
year of Q. Elizabeth, and the remainder of the year was supplied by Nicholas
Crispe Esquire, who kept his Shrivealty at Grimgill in Whitestaple, but more
properly Greenshields, from a Family so called who were once Proprietaries of
it.

Warham St. Ledger of Ulcomb Esquire, afterward Knighted in the year 1565, was
Sheriff of Kent in the second year of Queen Elizabeth.

John Tufton of Hothfield in Kent Esquire, Son and Heir of Nicholas Tufton
Esquire, who was possessed of Tufton in Nordiam in Sussex, was Sheriff of Kent
the third year of Queen Elizabeth.

Richard Baker of Sisingherst in Cranbroke Esquire, Son and Heir of Sir John
Baker, Chancellor of the Exchequer, and one of the Privy Council to Q. Mary,
was Sheriff of Kent in the fourth year of Q. Elizabeth.

Sir Thomas Walsingham of Scadbery in Chiselhurst Knight, was Sheriff of Kent
in the fifth year of Q. Elizabeth.

Sir Thomas Kempe of Ollantie Knight, that was Sheriff before in the third year
of Q. Mary, served in that Office again in the sixth year of Q. Elizabeth.

John Mayney of Biddenden Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the seventh year of Q.
Elizabeth, but died before his year was out, and the rest of the Time was
supplied by William Isley of Sundridge Esquire. This our Sheriff married
Margaret Daughter and Heir of Ralph Johnson of Ticehurst, Son to Alderman
Johnson of London, which Ralph matched with Dorothy one of the two Daughters
and Coheirs of Thomas Morton of Lechlade in the County of Gloucester Esquire.

John Sidley of Southfleet Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the eighth year of
Queen Elizabeth.

William Cromer of Tunstal Esquire, Son and Heir of James Cromer Esquire, was
Sheriff of Kent in the ninth year of Queen Elizabeth.

John Brown of Reynolds (and as ordinarily styled Brown's Place) in Horton
Kerbie, was Sheriff of Kent the tenth of Q. Elizabeth.

Edward Isaac of Patricksbourne Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the eleventh of
Q. Elizabeth.

John Lennard of Chevining Esquire, Son and Heir of John Lennard of the same
place Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the twelfth year of Q. Elizabeth.

Walter Mayney of Spilsil in Staplehurst Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the
thirteenth of Q. Elizabeth.

Sir Thomas Vane of Badsel Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the fourteenth year
of Q. Elizabeth.

Thomas Willoughby of Boreplace in Chiddingstone Esquire, Grandchild of Sir
Thomas Willoughby of the same Place, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
was Sheriff of Kent in the fifteenth year of Q. Elizabeth.

Sir James Hales of the Dungeon without the Walls of Canterbury, was Sheriff of
Kent in the sixteenth year of Q. Elizabeth.

John Tufton of Hothfield Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the seventeenth year
of Q. Elizabeth.

Sir Thomas Scot of Scots Hall was Sheriff of Kent in the eighteenth year of
Queen Elizabeth.

Edward Bois of Fredville in Nonington Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the
nineteenth of Q. Elizabeth.

Thomas Wotton of Boughton Malherbe Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the twentieth
of Q. Elizabeth.

Thomas Vane of Badsel in Tudeley Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty
first year of Q. Elizabeth.

Thomas Sonds of Throuley Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty second
year of Q. Elizabeth.

Sir George Heart of Lullingstone Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty
third year of Q. Elizabeth.

Sir Richard Baker of Sisingherst Knight, was Sheriff of Kent the twenty fourth
of Q. Elizabeth.

Justinian Champneis of Hall Place in Bexley Esquire, Son of Sir John Champneis
Lord Mayor of London, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty fifth year of Q.
Elizabeth.

Michael Sands of Town Place in Throuley Esquire, afterward Knighted, was
Sheriff of Kent in the twenty sixth year of Q. Elizabeth.

William Cromer of Tunstal Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty seventh
year of Q. Elizabeth.

Sir James Hales of the Dungeon in Canterbury, was Sheriff of Kent the twenty
eighth of Q. Elizabeth.

John Phineux of Haw Court in Herne, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty ninth
year of Q. Elizabeth.

Richard Hardres of Hardres Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirtieth year
of Q. Elizabeth.

William Sidley of Southfleet Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirty first
year of Q. Elizabeth.

Thomas Willoughby of Bore Place in Chiddingstone Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent
in the thirty second year of Q. Elizabeth.

Sampson Lennard of Chevening Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirty third
year of Q. Elizabeth.

Robert Bing of Wrotham Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirty fourth year
of Q. Elizabeth.

Michael Sonds of Throuley Esquire, wrs Sheriff of Kent in the thirty fifth
year of Q. Elizabeth.

Sir Edward Wotton of Boughton Malherbe Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the
thirty sixth year of Q. Elizabeth.

Thomas Palmer of Wingham Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirty seventh
year of Q. Elizabeth.

Sir Moile Finch of Eastwell Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirty eighth
year of Q. Elizabeth.

Thomas Kempe of Ollantie in Wye Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirty
ninth year of Q. Elizabeth.

Martin Barnham of Hollingbourne Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the fortieth
year of Q. Elizabeth.

Roger Twistden of Fortune Hall in great Peckham Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent
in the forty first year of Q. Elizabeth.

John Smith of Ostenhanger in Stanford Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the
forty second year of Q. Elizabeth.

Thomas Scot of Scots Hall Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the forty third year
of Q. Elizabeth.

Sir Peter Manhood of St. Stephens near Canterbury Knight, was Sheriff of Kent
in the forty fourth year of Q. Elizabeth: In which year that Religious,
Prudent, and victorious Princess resigned up her Noble Soul to that God who
first infused it.

Sheriffs of Kent in the Time of King James.
Sir Peter Manwood of St. Stephens, continued Sheriff of Kent the first year of
K. James.

Sir James Cromer of Tunstal Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the second year of
K. James.

Sir Thomas Baker Knight, second Son of Sir Richard Baker of Sisingherst
Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the third year of K. James, and kept his
Shrievalty at Sisingherst.

Sir Moile Finch of Eastwell Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the fourth year of
King James.

Sir Norton Knatchbull of Mersham Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the fifth year
of K. James.

Sir Robert Edolph of Hinxhill Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the sixth year of
K. James.

Sir Edward Hales of Wood Church Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the seventh
year of K. James.

Sir William Withens of Southend in Eltham, was Sheriff of Kent in the eighth
year of K. James.

Sir Nicholas Gilborne of Charing Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the ninth year
of K. James.

Sir Maximilian Dalison of Halling near Rochester Knight, was Sheriff of Kent
the tenth of K. James.

Sir William Steed of Steed-Hill in Haretshat, was Sheriff of Kent the eleventh
year of K. James.

Sir Anthony Aucher of Hautsbourne Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the twelfth
year of K. James.

Sir Edward Filmer of East Sutton Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the thirteenth
year of K. James.

Sir Edwin Sandies of Northbourne Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the fourteenth
year of K. James.

William Beswick of Spelmonden in Horsemonden Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent the
fifteenth year of K. James.

Gabriel Livesey of Hollingbourne Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the sixteenth
year of K. James.

Sir Thomas Norton of Bobbing and Northwood in Milton Knight, was Sheriff of
Kent in the seventeenth of K. James.

Edward Scot of Scots Hall Esquire, afterward made Knight of the Bath at the
Coronation of K. Charles, was Sheriff of Kent the eighteenth of K. James.

Sir John Sidley of the Friars in Alresford Baronet, was Sheriff of Kent in the
nineteenth year of K. James.

Sir Thomas Roberts of Glastenbury in Cranbroke Knight and Baronet, was Sheriff
of Kent in the twentieth year of K. James.

Sir George Fane of Burston in Hunton Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty
first year of K. James.

Sir John Heyward of Hollingbourne Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty
second year of K. James: In which year this Monarch cast off his humane Frailty
to surrender his Soul to God.

Sheriffs of Kent under the Scepter of K. Charles.
Sir Thomas Hamon of Brasted Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the first year of
K. Charles.

Sir Isaac Sidley of great Chart Knight and Baronet, was Sheriff of Kent in the
second year of K. Charles.

Basel Dixwel of Folkstone Esquire, afterward Knighted, was Sheriff of Kent in
third year of K. Charles.

Sir Edward Engham of Goodneston Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the fourth year
of K. Charles, and had a Dispensation under the Kings Hand and Signet, to
inhabit within the County and City of Canterbury during his year of Shrievalty,
and to find a meet Person to attend at the Assizes in his Place in regard of
his indisposition of Body.

Sir William Champion of Combwel in Goudherst Knight, was Sheriff of Kent the
fifth year of K. Charles.

Jo. Brown of Singleton in Great Chart Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the
sixth year of K. Charles, and kept his Shrievalty at Hinxhill Court.

Sir Robert Lewknor of Acris Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the seventh year of
K. Charles.

Nicholas Miller of Horsnels Crouch in Wrotham Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in
the eighth year of K. Charles.

Sir Thomas Styles of Watringbury Knight and Baronet, was Sheriff of Kent in
the ninth year of K. Charles.

Sir John Baker of Sisinghurst in Cranbroke Baronet, was Sheriff of Kent the
tenth year of K. Charles.

Edward Chowt of Surrenden in Bethersden Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the
eleventh year of K. Charles, and kept his Shrievalty at Hinxhill.

Sir William Colepeper of Preston in Alresford Baronet, was Sheriff of Kent in
the twelfth of K. Charles.

Sir George Sonds of Lecze Court in Shelvich Knight of the Bath, was Sheriff of
Kent in the thirteenth of K. Charles.

Sir Thomas Henley of Coursehorne in Cranbroke Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in
the fourteenth year of K. Charles.

Sir Edward Masters of East Langdon Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the
fifteenth year of K. Charles.

David Polhill of Otford Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the sixteenth year of
K. Charles.

James Hugison of Lingsted Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the seventeenth year
of K. Charles.

Sir William Brockman of Bithborough in Newington Belhouse Knight, was Sheriff
of Kent in the eighteenth year of K. Charles, but being called to manage this
Office by that King when he was in Arms at Oxford, he was thought by the
Parliament then sitting, to be a Person in that Juncture of Affairs, not
fitting to have the Manegerie of a Place of so great Concernment, and was
accordingly supplanted.

Sir John Honywood of Evington Court in Elmested Knight, was chosen by the
Parliament then sitting, to serve the Sheriff of Kent part of the eighteenth
year of King Charles, and continued in that Office the nineteenth year and
twentieth year of the abovesaid Princes Reign.

Sir John Rayney of Wrotham Baronet, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty first
year of K. Charles.

Sir John Henden of Biddenden Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty second
year of K. Charles.

Sir Stephen Scot of Hays by Bromley Knight, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty
third year of K. Charles.

George Selby of the Moat in Ightham Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty
fourth year of K. Charles: In which year that Noble, but unfortunate Monarch
was put to Death.

Sheriffs of Kent since the Death of K. Charles.
Henry Crispe of Quekes in Birchington Esquire; was Sheriff of Kent part of the
year 1649, and part of the year 1650, but in Respect of age and indisposition
of Body, his place was supplied by Sir Nicholas Crispe Son and Heir.

George Curtis of Chart by Sutton Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent part of the year
1650, and part of the year 1651. He was chosen to serve upon the Decease of
William Draper of Crayford Esquire, who was named to serve, but died not long
after his Nomination, but by reason of Age and the Craziness of his
Constitution, his Son Norton Curtis Esquire, discharged the Office for him.

Thomas Floyd of Gore Court in Otham Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent part of the
year 1651, and part of the year 1652.

Bernard Hide of Bore Place in Chiddingstone Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent part
of the year 1652, and part of the year 1653.

The right Honorable Sir John Tufton Earl of Thanet, was Sheriff of Kent part
of the year 1653, and part of the year 1654.

Sir Humphry Tufton of the Moat by Maidston Knight, was Sheriff of Kent part of
the year 1654, and part of the year 1655.

Sir Michael Livesey Baronet of East Church in Shepey, was Sheriff of Kent the
Remainder of the year 1655, and part of the year 1656.

Sir Michael Livesey Baronet, was again Sheriff of Kent the residue of the year
1656, and a part of the year 1657.

Charles Bolles of Rochester Esquire, is now Sheriff of Kent 1658.

Having a in succinct Register represented to the Reader an Historal View of
those who were successively Sheriffs of this County, as high as the Light of
Public Record will guide us to discover, I shall now in a narrow Landscape give
him a Prospect of those who in elder Times were styled Conservatores Pacis,
from whence our modern Justices of the Peace may have seemed to have extracted
their Original Institution: They were first established by Edward the third,
and then invested and fortified with an Authority and Power of a very wide
Latitude, but suitable indeed to an Office of so much concernment and
importance as they were entrusted with, the main End of their Place in the
first Foundation of it was as appears Pat. de Anno primo Edwar. tertii Pars
prima Memb. septima in Dorse, to array and train the Inhabitants of each
respective County where the Scene of their Power was laid, that so they might
be put into a Capacity to repress all homebred Insurrections within; and secure
the Nation from the Eruptions of foreign Invaders from without, and it is
further evident Pat. de Anno duodecimo Edwar. tertii Memb. 16. in Dorso. and
again Pat. de Anno decimo Edw. tertii Pars secunda Memb. 35. in Dorso. They
were authorized by two Commissions to reduce all Vagabonds and Wanderers, to
dissipate all mutinous and riotous Conventions, and to suppress all Thieves and
Outlaws, and all other Persons disaffected to the Peace established; and to
vindicate and assert the two Statutes of North-Hampton and Winchester in all
the Ends and Consequences of them, both which Laws direct an Inspection into
the Premises. The Catalogue or Register of those who were Conservatores Pacis,
for the County of Kent does here ensue.

Pat. 1. Edwar. 3. prima Pars Memb. septima in Dorso. Bartholomeus de
Burgherst. Johannes de Ifield. Pat. 3. Edwar. 3. Par. prima Memb. 16. in Dorso.
Bartholomeus Burhurst. Johannes de Cobham. Joannes de Ifield. Pat. 5. Edwar. 3.
Par. prima Memb. 24. in Dorso. Johannes de Cobham. Johannes de Ifield. Pat. 6.
Edwar. 3. Par. prima Memb. 22. in Dorso. William de Clinton. Tres vel duo
eorum. John de Cobham. John de Segrave. Thomas Feversham. Par. 6. Edwar. 3.
Par. prima Memb. 11. in Dorso. Willielmus de Clinton. Quinque quatuor tres and
duo eorum. John de Cobham. Galfridus de Say. John de Segrave. Otho de
Grandison. Thomas de Feversham. Pat. 9. Edwar. 3. Par. 2. Memb. 24. in Dorso.
Johannes de Cobham. De Confirmatione Pacis ac Statuti Northampton and cujusdam
Ordinationis ne qui alicubi incedant armati ad terrorum Populi. Thomas de
Aldon. John de Segrave. Par. 10. Edwar. 3. Par. 2. Memb. 18. in Dorso
Willielmus de Clinton. De Feloniis and Malefactoribus notorie suspectis
insequendis, and de audiendo and terminando Felonia Transgressiones and
Excessus. Radulphus Savage. Thomas de Aldon. Quatuor vel Tres eorum. Johannes
de Hampton. Willielmus de Reiculuar. Pat. 12. Edwar. 3. Momb. 16. in Dorso.
Johannes de Cobham. Tres vel duo eorum. Thomas de Aldon. Jo. de Warrena Com. de
Surrey. Thomas de Brockhull. Willielmo de Clinton Com. de Huntingdon. Quos,
etc. Willielmus de Orlanston. Pat. 18. Edwar. 3. Par. 2. Memb. 35. in Dorso.
Johannes de Cobham. Tres vel duo eorum in Com. Kantii. Thomas de Brockhull.
Otho de Grandison. Willielmus de Morant. Stat. 18. Edwar. 3. Cap. 2. In this
year the Statute was made that ordained that their should be two or three
Wardens of the Peace in every County. Pat. 29. Edwar. 3. Par. prima Memb. 29.
in Dorso. Galfridus de Say. Willielmus de Thorpe. Otho de Grandison. Arnaldus
de Savage. Stephen de Valoigns. Willielmus de Norton. Pat. 31. Edwar. 3. Par.
prima Memb. 17. in Dorso. Galfridus de Say. Willielmus de Norton. Willielmus de
Thorpe. Thomas de Lodelow. Pat. 31. Edwar. 3. Par. 2. Memb. 11. in Dorso.
Rogerus de Mortuomari. Comes de March Constabularius Castri Dovoriae, and
Custos quinque Portuum. Will. de Thorpe a Judge. Radulphus de Spigurnel. Will.
de Norton a Judge. Stephanus de Valoigns. Thomas de Lodelow. Willielmus Warner.

In this year it being found by Experience that the former Number of the
Wardens of the Peace settled by the Statute of the eighteenth of Edw. the third,
before mentioned, was not sufficient for the good Governance of this County; It
was further provided by an Act made in the thirty fourth year of Edward the
third, Cap. 2. Ordaining that their should be in every Shire one Lord, and with
him three or four of the best in the County, and three or four learned in the
Laws assigned for keeping of the Peace, and to restrain Offenders. In the next
Commission awarded after this Act, these eighth Persons are recited for the
abovesaid Purpose, Viz. Sir Robert Herle then Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports,
and Constable of Dover Castle; John de Cobham of Cobham, Roger de Northwood of
Northwood, Ralph de Fremingham of Fremingham or Farningham, Thomas de Lodelow,
Robert Vinter of Vinters in Boxley, John Barrie of Sevington, Thomas Hartredge
of Hartredge in Cranebroke. But this Restriction was not so permanent, but that
in short space the Number was very much augmented, as by the subsequent Series
in the first year of Richard the second may very well be observed.

Pat. primo Rich. secundi Pars prima Memb. 20. in Dorso. Justiciarii ad pacem
conservandam assignati.
Edmundus Comes Cantabrigiensis, Constabularius Castri Dovoriae. Johannes de
Cohham. Robertus Belknap. -- A Judge. Stephanus de Valoigns. Henry de Astry or
Astie. -- A Judge. Willielmus Horn. Thomas de Shardelow. -- A Judge.
Willielmus Topcliff. Thomas Garwenton de Well. Nicholaus Hering. Willielmus
Tiltombe. In Lastis de Sheringhope Shepwey St. Augustines and Septem Hundredis
in Com. Kantii.
Willielmus Makenade. Test Rege apud Westmon. primo Die Aprilis.
Johannes Francis. Thomas Hatredge. John Bird de Smeth.
Justiciarii ad pacem conservandam assignati.
Idem Edmundus Comes supradictus. Johannes Cobham. Robertus Belknap. Thomas
Colepeper. Henricus Astie. Johannes Fremingham. In Lastis de Alresford Sutton
and Leucata de Tunbridge in Com. Kantii.
Jacobus de Peckham. Thomas de Shardelow. Test Rege ut supra.
Willielmus Topclive. Nocholaus Hering. Willielmus Makenade.


After by the Statute of the twelfth year of Richard the second, Cap. 10. and
the fourteenth year of the same Prince, Cap. 11. it was prohibited that there
should be any more than six Justices of the Peace in any Commission besides the
two Justices of Assise, and certain Lords who were assigned in the Parliament
it self. But in Times subsequent to these, when the Womb of Vice (like the
Mudde of Nile) was more fertile in the production of Crimes, and the Seeds of
Contention began to be sown more plentifully in every furrow of this Nation,
which sprang up again in a numberless Variety of Discord and Animosity; these
Restrictions were broke, and the Catalogue of Justices was improved to that
Volume, to which it is swollen at present.

Before I descend to a particular Description of the Parishes of this County, I
should take cognizance of all those Towns and Villages which by the indulgence
of former Princes were invested with the Charter of Market and Fair: But this
has been so exactly performed lately by Mr. Kilbourn, that I shall at present
decline this Task.
Indeed all of them had this Passage inserted in the Original Grant, Quantum in
Nobis est, so that many of them when they came to be discussed before the
Judges Itinerent at the general Assizes, Quo Warranto they were held, that is
to say, what Authority they had to support them, were if they were found
convenient and necessary ratified, confirmed, and continued; but if again they
were deemed needless and superfluous, they were at these public Conventions by
the power of the Law then planted in the Judges, vacated and discarded, This
may likewise be added, that many of them were granted with this Intention of
their first Institution only to enforce and Aggrandize the Signorie of those
Manors which were parcel of the Demeasn of those eminent Persons to whom those
above mentioned Royal Charters and Concessions were indulged; as, Sutton
Valence, Court at Sreet, Shinglewell, and others; and when the Title and
Possession of those Places was either by Purchase or Marriage cast into the
Tenure of other Proprietaries, the Virtue of these Grants began to be
dis-spirited, and the Custom of Keeping up Markets and Fairs at these Manors
and Parishes began insensibly to shrink into disuse and intermission. It is
farther observable, that at diverse Places which were endowed with these above
mentioned Privileges, as, at Brenchly, Charlton by Greenwich, and other
Parishes, the Market and Fair was observed and held in the Churchyard, and on
the Sunday; it being the great Design of the Romish Clergy of those cloudy
Times, to whom Godliness was great gain, in the practical sense, at once to
charm the peoples Devotion and Benevolence: But, as if there were in the Vogue
and Estimate of that Age, a greater Degree of Sanctity entailed on the
Churchyard, then on the Sunday, the holding either Market or Fair in that
Place was by a Statute made in the thirteenth year of Ed. the first, Chapter
the sixth, wholly interdicted and prohibited; but though the Churchyard were
thus empaled, and fenced in with this new Law, the Sunday lay open and exposed
to all Disorder and Profanation, until the Reign of Henry the sixth, and then
that pious Prince resenting with regret the many Enormities and other Excesses
of a black Complexion, which were occasioned by the Conflux of people assembled
at these public Meetings, and which had foully stained and debauched the
purity of this Solemn Festival, did by Statute made and ratified in the twenty
seventh year of his Reign, Chapter the fifth, for the future forbid the keeping
of any Markets or Fairs in any Place whatsoever on the Sunday.

I shall now take a Prospect of all the Parishes, Villages, and Manors, which
are circumscribed, within the circle of this County; but before I wade farther
in this Discourse, I shall represent upon what reasons or foundations Manors
were first instituted and established, by example and resemblance of the King's
policy in the institutions of Tenures, (says Sir Francis Bacon:) The great men
and Gentlemen of this Realm did the like, so near as they could; as for
Example, when the King had given to any of them two thousand Acres of Lands,
this party proposing in this place to make his Dwelling, or (as the old word
is) his Mansion House, or his Mannor-house, did devise how he might make his
Land a complete Habitation to supply him with all manner of necessaries; and
for that purpose, he would give of the uttermost parts of these two thousands
Acres, one hundred, or two hundred Acres, or more or less, as he should think
meet, to one of his most trusty Servants, with some reservation of rent to find
a horse for the wars, and go with him when he went with the King to the wars,
adding vow of Homage, and the oath of Fealty, Wardship, Marriage and Relief.
This Relief is to pay five pounds for every Knights Fee, or after the rate for
more or less at the entrance of every Heir: which Tenant so created and placed,
was, and is to this day called a Tennant by Knights Service, and not by his own
person; but of his Manors, of these he might make as many as he would; then
this Lord would provide that the Land which he was to keep for his own use,
should be plowed, and his harvest brought home his House required, his Park
pailed, and the like; and for that end he would give to sundry other of twenty,
thirty, forty or fifty Acres; reserving the service of plowing a certain
quantity, or so many days of his Lands, and certain Harvest works, or days in
the Harvest to labor, or to repair the House, Park, Pail, or otherwise; or to
give him for his provision, Capons, Hens, Pepper, Commin, Roses, Gilliflowers,
Spurs, Gloves, or the like; or to pay him a certain Rent, and to be sworn to be
his faithful Tenant, which Tenure was called a Soccage Tenure, and is so to
this day; howbeit, most of the plowing, and Harvest services are turned into
Money Rents: the Tenants in Soccage at the Death of every Tenant, were to pay
Relief, which was not as Knights Service is, five pound a Knights Fee; but it
was and is still one years Rent of the Land, and no Wardship or other profit to
the Lord. The remainder of the two thousand Acres he kept to himself, whith he
used to manure by his Bondsman, and appointed them at the Courts of his Manor
how they should hold it, making an Entry of it into the Roll of the
Remembrances of the Acts of his Court; yet still in the Lords power to take it
away, and therefore they were called Tenants at Will, by Copy of Court Roll;
being in truth Bondmen at the beginning; but having obtained freedom of their
persons, and gained a custom by use of occupying their Lands, they now are
called Copyholders, and are so privileged, that the Lord cannot put them out,
and all through custom; some Copyholders are for Lives, one, two, or three,
successively; and some Inheritances, from Heir to Heir, by custom, and Custom
rules these Estates wholly, both for Widows Estates, Fines, Harriots,
Forfeitures, and all other things. Manors being in this sort made at the
first, reason was that the Lord of the Manor should hold a Court, which is no
more then to assemble his Tenants together, at a time by him to be appointed;
in which Court he was to be informed, by oath of his Tenants, of all such
Duties, Rents, Reliefs, and Wardships, Copyholds or the like, that had happned
unto him; which information is called a Presentment, and then his Bailiff to
Seize and Distrain for those Duties, if they were denied or withheld, which
is called a Court Baron; and herein a man may Sue for any Debt or Trespass
under Forty pound value, and the Freeholders are to judge of the Cause up on
proof produced upon both fides; and therefore the Freeholders of these Manors,
as incident to their Tenures, do hold by Suite of Court, which is to come to
the Court, and there to judge between no party and party in those perty
Actions; And also to inform the Lord of Duties, Rents, and Services unpaid to
him from his Tenants: By this course it is discerned, who be the Lords of
Lands, such as if the Tenants die without Heir, or be attainted of Felony or
Treason, shall have the Land by Escheat.

I now proceed, to trace out the several Parishes of Kent, and marshal them
Alphabetically; yet in this Scrutiny, I have not tortured their Names, until
by a nice and curious Anatomy, they confessed themselves to be either of
British, Roman or Saxon Extraction; because, at once to decline, and unravel
this Difficulty, I have cast them into a peculiar Register by themselves, which
shall stand as an Appendage to the Book, and first therefore, to go on, I begin
with Acris.

A. A.
ACris is a small Parish lying in the Hundreds of Folkston and Lovingborough,
and was held in the twentieth of William the Conqueror by Anketellus de Rosse;
from which Name it passed away by Grant to the Cosentons of Cosenton in
Alresford, to hold of the Barony of Rosse, and of his Manor of Horton near
Ferningham: This Seat being thus annexed to the Demeasn of this Family, came
down to William de Cosington, who is in the List of those Kentish Gentlemen
whom K. John in the eighteenth year of his Reign by pardon absolved, for having
taken an Oath to Lewis the Dolphin of France; Charles King of Navarre (as the
private Evidences of Cosington inform me) in the year of Grace 1366. settled an
annual Pension of a thousand Crowns on Sir Stephen de Cosington, and Sir
William his Son, for their remarkable Service performed against the Enemies of
his Crown and Scepter. The last of this Family, which held this Manor, was Sir
J. Cosington, who concluded in three Danghters and Coheirs about the the latter
end of Henry the eighth, matched to Duke Wood, and Alexander Hamon; and upon
the Disunion of the Estate into Parcels, the last by Female Interest, was
invested in Acris, and his Successors remained Lords of the Fee until the
Beginning of K. James, and then a Fatalitie like the former, brought the
Patrimony of this Family to be possessed by two Daughters and Coheirs, so that
Sir Robert Lewknor having matched with Katharine, who was one of them, became
in her Right entitled to this Manor, and left it to his Son Hamon Lewknor
Esquire; who deceasing not long since has transmitted it during the Minority of
his Son to his Widow Dowager.

The Manor of Brandred lies in this Parish, and belonged to the Abbey of St.
Radigunds, until the suppression, and then it was by Henry the eighth
exchanged with the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, in the twenty ninth of his Reign,
and remained parcel of that Patrimony, which acknowledged the Signorie of that
See, until these tempestuous Times shook it off.

Addington in the Hundred of Larkfield, was as high as any Track of Evidence
can transport me to discover, the Inheritance of a noble Family called
Mandeville, and diverse Deeds of a very venerable Antiquity, being without date,
and now in the hands of Mr. Watton, do attest Roger de Mandeville in those
elder Times to have been Lord of the Fee; but before the end of Edward the
second, this Family was vanished, and had surrendered the possession of this
place to Robert At Checquer, in whom the possession was but of a narrow Date,
for he not long after alienated his Interest in it to Nicholas Dagworth, as is
evident by this Record registered in the Book of Aid kept in the Exchequer, De
Nicholao de Dagworth pro uno Feodo Militis, quod Roberius de Scaccario. tenuit
in Addington de Warreno de Montecanisio 40. s. That is, Nicholas Dagworth in
the twentieth year of Edward the third, paid a respective Supply of 40. s. for
his Manor of Addington, which both he and Robert At Checquer, which enjoyed it
before him, held of the Honor of Swanscamp Castle, as being the capital Seat
of the Barony of Mountchensey, under the Notion of a whole Knights Fee. But in
this Family the Title was a Volatile as in the former, for before the going out
of Edward the third, I find it passed away from Dagworth to Sir Hugh Segrave,
and he in the seventh year of Richard the second, alienated it to Richard
Charles, descended from Edward Charles Captain and Admiral of the Seas, from
the Thames mouth Northward, in the reign of Edward the first, as appears Pat.
34. Edwardi primi. But he was scarce warm in his new Acquists, but he expired
in two Daughters and Coheirs, Alice matched to William Snaith, and Joan married
to Richard Ormeskirk; but this Manor upon the Distinction of the Estate into
Parcells was entwined with the Demeasne of Snaith, and he dyed possessed of it
(as the date of his Tomb in Addington Church informs me) in the year 1409. but
dyed without Issue-male, so that his sole Daughter and Heir being wedded to
Watton made it the Inheritance of that Family, and here have they planted
themselves ever since that Alliance, and have performed many signal Services to
this County by being invested with places of Trust, as Justices of the Peace,
Commissioners of the Sewers, and other Officers of the like Condition, which
has much enforced and multiplied the eminent Reputation of this ancient Family.

Allington in the Hundred of Lark field is eminent for an ancient Castle within
the Limits of it; which, as Mr. Darrell and Mr. Mersh do assert, was erected by
William de Columbariis, or Columbers; and this Mr. Darrell, who was very
curious in Disquisitions of this Nature, more possitively affirms, because in
the eighth year of Henry the third, when (as appears by the Records of the
Tower) there was an exact Survey taken of all the Castles of England, and of
those who were either Proprietaries of them, or else the respective Castellans
or Guardians, one of the above mentioned Family was found to be possessor of
this Fortress, and was also Lord of the Manor, which was still annexed to the
Castle; but this Name was of no long continuance in the Tenure of either, for
about the latter end of Henry the third, they came to own the Signorie of Sir
Stephen de Penchester, Lord Warden afterward of the Cinque Ports, to whom and
to Margaret his Wife, Daughter of the famous Hubert de Burgh Earl of Kent, King
Edward the first granted a License in the ninth year of his Reign, as appears
by the Patent-Rolls of that Time to erect a Castle, and to fortify and
embattle at Allington; so that it seems it was only before Fortalitium, some
small Fortress, and could not be marshalled under the just Notion of a Castle,
until it had received new Symetrie and Dimensions, by those Appendages and
Supplements which were added to it by this great Man; and having thus
established this Pile, it came to own his Name, and is in some old Records
called Allington Penchester, and not undeservedly; for in the eighth year of
Edward the first, he obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Manor of
Allington, and also a Market Weekly on the Tuesday, and a Fair yearly three
days, on the Vigil, the day, and day after St. Laurence, but deceased without
Issue Male; so that after his Exit, it came to acknowledge Stephen de Cobham,
who had married his Daughter and Coheir, and he inocculated his own Name upon
it, and called it Allington Cobham, which flourished several Descents in this
Family, until the beginning of Edward the fourth, and then I find it in the
possession of Brent, but remained not long in this Name; for in the eighth year
of Henry the seventh, John Brent passed away the Castle and Manor of Allington
to Sir Henry Wiat one of the Privy Council to that Prince, but his unfortunate
Grandchild Sir Thomas Wiat, having by his Defection in the second year of Queen
Mary, forfeited it to the Crown, it remained there until Queen Elizabeth
granted it to Jo. Astley Esquire; Master of her Jewels, whose Son Sir Jo. Astley
dying without Issue, it came by Descent to Sir Jacob Astley, created Lord
Astley by the late King at Oxford, whose Descendant does now enjoy the
Possession of it.

Alkham in the Hundred of Folkston, has diverse places in it of Account.

Malmains by vulgar Corruption of the word called Smalmains, with Hollmeade,
which was ever accounted an Appendage to it, are first to be considered. In the
twentieth year of Edward the third I find Thomas de Malmains Son of Nicholas de
Malmains, (who was Possessor of both these Places in Times of an elder
Computation,) paid respective Aid at making the black Prince Knight for his
Lands at Alkham. But after this I find no more intelligence given me by Record
of this Family, for about the beginning of Henry the fourth I discover John
Alkham (who extracted his Surname from this Parish, and it is very probable had
here his Mansion, though now it have found a double Sepulcher, that of
Oblivion, and its own Rubbish) to have been possessed of them both, which he held
in Castle-Guard Tenure of Dover Castle, and paid a subsidiarie Supply for them
in the fourth year of that Prince, at the Marriage of Blanch his Daughter; from
which temporary Assessement or Contribution, several Parcels of Land in this
County have ever since contracted the Name of Blanch-Lands. In Alkham the
Signorie of both Places did reside, until the beginning of Henry the seventh,
and then they were demised by Peter Alkham to John Warren Gentleman; in which
Name after they had continued until the latter End of Henry the eighth,
Malmains was passed away to Brown, who in our Memory conveyed it by Sale to
Lushinton; and Hollmeade was by the same Vicissitude annexed to the Demeasn of
Wollet, a Name that is grown reverend by an Efflux of many Ages both here and
at Elham.

The Manor of Hoptons, another place considerable in Alkham. If you will
search who was in elder Times possessed of it, the private date, less Deeds will
inform you, that anciently it was the Inheritance of Peter de Hall, but was not
long permanent in the possession of this Name, for in the twentieth year of
Edward the third, (as appears by the Book of Aid) it was the Inheritance of
William de Bourn; and here it seems the Title was more constant, for in this
Family it was resident until the beginning of Henry the sixth, and then it was
alienated to Baker of Caldham, in whom it had not long continued, but by his
Daughter and Coheir it became the Inheritance of Robert Brandred, from which
Name about the latter end of Edward the fourth it passed away by Sale to Brown
of Bechworth Castle in Surrey, and here it fixed, until that Age which came
within the Verge of our Grandfathers Remembrance, and then it was demised to
Godman, in whose Descendants the Propriety now continues.

Evering is the last place of Account in Alkham, it was the possession of a
Family so called which branched from the ancient Lords of Folkston, surnamed
Averenches, whose Arms were (as is manifest by ancient Armorials) Or five
Cheverons Gules, and these Everings, bare Or five Cheverons Azure. Wolwardus de
Evering held it under the Notion and by the Service of a whole Knights Fee, in
the Time of Henry the second, of the Lords of Folkston. And by a successive
Channel of many Descents has the Title flowed so constantly in this Family,
that this Seat is at this instant annexed to their Inheritance.

In this Parish is an Eyle-Bourn which rises in the bottom at Dillingore,
which the Inhabitants presage to be a fatal presage either of Death or Dearth;
and in a short Distance of Time and Place, from no appearance of Head or
Spring, sends forth such store of Water that a Vessel of considerable Burden
may float therein; then the Water being enforced into a Stream runs down to
Chilton, and disgorges it self into that River, which meets the Sea at Dover.

Apuldore in the Hundred of Blackborn, in the year of Grace 1032. was by an
especial License first obtained from Canutus and Elfgiva his Queen, and given
by Eadsin Bishop of Sr. Martins without Canterbury, to the Prior and Monks of
Christchurch, and est de cibo little, says the Book of that Convent; that is, it
was granted to them for a Supportation of Diet. In the eleventh year of Edward
the third there was a License granted to the then Archbishop, and others by his
Royal Patent, obsternere quendam antiquam Trencheam, quae ducit a Brachio
Maris vocato Apledore versus Villam de Romney, those are the Words of the
Record; that is, to intercept and dam up a certain Trench or Channel which
proceeds from an Arm of the Sea called Apledore, (for then it seems the Sea
flowed up to this place, though now it have wholly deserted it) and leads to
the Town of Romney; But to proceed, Apledore having by the abovesaid Donation
been linked to the Ecclesiastical Patrimony, continued wrapped up in that
Interest, until the Resignation of the Revenue of the Priorie of Christchurch,
into the hands of K. Henry the eighth, and then he settled it by a new grant on
his new erected Dean and Chapter of Christ Church.

Horns place in this Parish was the Seat for many hundreds of years of
Gentlemen of that Surname. William Horn was one of the Conservators of the
Peace in the first year of Richard the Second for this County, and Michael
Horn was Sheriff of Kent in the seventh year of Henry the fourth, and held his
Shrievalty at Apledore, and from him did the propriety of this place descend
to Anne Horn the last of this Name, who matched with Benedict Guldford
Esquire, who in her Right, as being the sole Inheritrix of this place, became
Lord of this Seat, but he denying the Oath of Supremacy, which began about the
twelfth and thirteenth of Queen Elizabeth to be tendered to Romish Recusants,
and sheltring himself by a Recesse and Flight into foreign Parts, fell under
the displeasure of the Queen, and his Estate under the Fury of a praemunire; so
that this Manor was torn away from his Interest by a Confiscation of it to
the Crown, and shortly after the above mentioned Princess granted it to her
faithful Servant George Chowte Esquire, from whom it is now descended to his
great Grandchild Mr. Edward Chowt Lately Deceased.
Esquire, a Person who for his Support of Learning in these Times, (wherein if
some whose Palates do decline it with regret and disgust, might be confirmed in
that licencious Liberty which they pretend to, they would scarce leave us the
Title page, to inform Posterity, that their was once Religion or Learning
inhabiting amongst us,) cannot be mentioned by the Fautors and Abettors of
Literature, or at least the Pretenders to it, without some grateful
acknowledgment.

Dean Court in this Parish was the Mansion of a Family who borrowed their
Surname from this Town, and were called Apledore, and sealed with a Pile
surmounted with a Fesse, which was their paternal Coat, but before the latter
end of Edward the third, this Family found its Sepulcher in a Female Heir, for
Thomas de Apledore, dying witout Issue, Elnith his only Sister entitled her
husband William Roper to his Estate here, and in the confining Marsh; and by an
uninterrupted Right derived from this Alliance, has the title of this place
been supported in the Family of Roper, for so many Descents, that it is now at
last devolved to the right honorable Christopher Roper Baron of Tenham, in whom
it is at this instant resident.

There was a Castle anciently here at Apledore, which when the Danes in the
reign of Etheldred Father of Edmund Ironside, made this County the Scene of
their Devastations, was mingled by the flame they put it into, in the year 892.
in its own Rubbish, yet like a Phaenix, it rose into new shape and frame again,
out of its Ashes, and continued in the Register and under the notion of the
Castles and Fortresses of this County, until the year, 1380. and then (as How
relates in his Chronicle, who likewise represents the former Tragedy,) the
French making an hostile Eruption on this part of the County, made it once more
a pitied and calamitous heap of flame and ruin; out of whose dismantled
relics (the Church now visible was not only repaired, but as some from
ancient Tradition affirm, wholly reedified; a probable Argument of the ancient
Grandeur, Magnificence and Strength of this now totally-demolished Fortress.

I had almost omitted the Manor of Frenchay, which likewise lies within the
Circle of Apledore, and had in elder Times, as appears by old evidences, Owners
of that Surname; but the greatest Glory that it achieved, was, that ever since
the reign of Edward the third, until the Government of Henry the eighth, it
acknowledged the Family of Haut for its Proprietaries, the last of which was
Sir William Haut, who concluded in two Daughters and Coheirs, whereof Joan the
youngest matched to Sir Thomas Wiat, shared his estate at this place, but he
being attainted in the second year of Queen Mary, this was confiscated to the
Crown, and lay there until the twenty fourth of Queen Elizabeth, and then it
was granted back to George Wiat Esquite, whose Son Sir Francis Wiat, not many
years since, passed it away to Thomas Floyd of Gore-court in Otham Esquire, and
he in the year 1636 alienated it to Sir Edward Hales of Tunstall Knight
Baronet, whose Grandchild Sir Edward Hales is now in possession of it.

Apledore had anciently a Market to be observed here weekly, granted to it, by
Edward the third in the thirty second year of his reign, which since is
vanished into Disuse by Intermission.

Adisham in the Hundred of Downhamford, was given to the Monks of St. Augustins
(as appears by Christ Church Book) by Ethelbald Son of Ethelbald King of Kent,
Anno Domini 616. Cum Campis, Silvis, Pascuis, etc. (as the Record mentions) ad
illam pertinentibus, ad Cibum Monachorum Ecclesiae Christi Cantuariae, liberam
ab omnibus servitiis, and fiscali Tributo exceptis tribus istis
Consuetudinibus, id est, Communi Labor, de quo nullus excipiatur Pontis
Constructione, vel Arcis; and whereas we frequently trace in ancient
Chartularies these three Letters L. S. A. which may at first appearance seem to
wrap up some gloomy and mysterious sense, they import no more but this, that
Lands which were given by Charter to the Church should be Liberae sicut
Adisham, that is, be fortified with the same Franchises and Liberties as
Adisham Originally was. The Austins for some Hundreds of years have been
Tenants for this and the Manor of Godmersham to the Church, as if to improve
and gratify the Memory of Augustine their first Abbot the Monks of Christ
Church were determined to plant some of their Patrimony in that Name, though
perhaps but of accidental Coincidence.

Aldington is the next place to be remembered in the Hundred of Street, and
Bircholt Franchise more eminent, because here are chosen the Officers yearly
relating to the Manors of Romney Mersh. Queen Edgiva mother to King Edmund,
and King Edred gave this Town to Christ Church in Canterbury, in Gross with
other Lands Anno Dom. 961. But in the General Survey of the Churches Lands in
the Conquerours Time, the Archbishops had twenty one Sullings or Plough-Lands
there, and was valued together with the Appurtenances at Stouting and Lyming at
107 l. and 25 Burgesses held of it. The Archbishops of Canterbury, did usually
retire to their Mannor-house here, and had both a Park empailed, and a Chase
for Deer, called Aldington Frith, by which Name we express Places where Deer
ranged at large, as in a Forest. But when the Kings of England intended to
pare off something of the Revenue and Power of the Archbishops, which was in
their Estimate of too vast and wide an Extent; this Manor, with many other,
was passed away by Exchange to the Crown in the twenty ninth of Henry the
eighth, by Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury.

Ruffins-Hill in this Parish, was the Seat of the Godfrey's ancient Gentlemen,
whose Estate by two Daughters and Coheirs came to the Clerks of Kingsnoth, and
the Blechendens. But whether descended from Godfrey le Falconer the Son of
Balder, unto whom K. Henry the second assigned, gave, and granted much Land in
these Parts, to hold in Serjeantie, by the Service of keeping two Hawks for the
King and his Successors, I cannot positively say. Much of the Land lay in
Hurst, and the Manor is called Falconers Hurst; and those that for many
Generations held it, resolved into the Name of Michel-Grove; whose Heir General
brought this and other fair Demeasns to Shelley's Ancestor of Michel-Grove, in
whose Name it resides at present. The Coat very well alluded to their ancient
Name and Tenure, and is Quarterly Argent and Azure over all a Falcon Or. Hurst
was formerly a Parish; and the Church was dedicated to St. Leonard, but it is
now languished into Decay and Ruin, and the Inhabitants assemble for the
Performance of divine Offices at Aldington.

Ainsford in the Hundred of Axtane lies upon the River of Darent, and gave
Seat and Surname to a worthy Family that continued till the Time of Edward the
second: It has the Ruins of an ancient Castle, which reckons them and the
Arsicks to have been the Founders.

There is another Seat in this Parish of venerable Antiquity, called, Arkesden,
whose owners bore the same for their Surname, and were of the Number of the
Grand Assise in King John's Time; after them the Cobhams were possessors of it,
and Reginald de Cobham had License the fourteenth of Edward the third, to
Castelate his House, and paid respect of Aid for the same the twentieth of
Edward the third, at the making the Black Prince Knight: From the Cobhams of
Sterborough it came by the Heir General to the Lord Burgh or Borough, from whom
by Sale it devolved its Right on Sir Samuel Leonard Father of Sir Stephen
Leonard, which Sir Stephen enjoys it at this Day.

Southcourt and Mayfield are two Manors lying in the Precincts of this Parish,
and did anciently relate to the Archbishop of Canterbury, from whom by
exchange they passed over to Dunham, and from that Family to the Wiats, in
which Name and Family they remained, till upon the Attainder of Sir Thomas Wiat
they escheated to the Crown, which by Grant invested their Right and Interest
in J. Leonard of Chevening, from whom they are now come down to be the
Possession of Sir Stephen Leonard of West Wickham.

There is yet another ancient Seat within the Verge of this Village, whose Name
is Maplescombe, and partly is situated in this, and partly in Kingsdown. This
place although it now carry a desolate Aspect by reason of its Ruin and
Depopulation, was anciently of a high Repute and Estimate. William de
Chellerfield (he whom I suppose lies entered in Halsted Church) held it (as
Testa de Nevil informs me,) in the twentieth year of Henry the third, but his
Family had not been possessed of it until the latter End of Edward the second,
when the Vicissicude of Sale carried the Title off to Rokesley of Rokesley in
North-Crey, and Roger the Son of Thomas de Rokesley held the Lordship by a
whole Knights Fee in the twentieth year of Edward the third, of Richard de
Rosse of Horton Kerkbie, and he held it of the Successor of Robert de Arsick,
and he of the King; yet I find some part of it to have acknowledged the
Signorie of the Family of Merworth, for Roger de Merworth in the eighteenth
year of Edward the first; obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Lands at
this place; and in the fortieth year of Edward the third, John de Merworth,
this Man's Grandchild, was by purchase wholly invested in the Possession, and
held it at his Decease, which was in the forty ninth year of that Prince, and
John de Malmains was his Heir, who passed it away to Nicholas de Brember, of
whom I shall speak more at Merworth; and he being attainted in the tenth year
of Richard the second, there was a return made in the twelfth of that Prince,
that he held this Manor at his Conviction, upon which that Prince in the
thirteenth year of his Reign grants it to John de Hermensthorpe, and he not
long after passed it away to Richard Fitz-Allen Earl of Arundel, and his Son
Thomas Earl of Arundel dying without Issue Male 1416. Joan one of his Sisters
and Coheits brought it to be the Possession of her Husband Will. Beauchamp
Baron of Abergavenny, whose Son likewise dying without Issue Male in the ninth
of Henry the fifth, Elizabeth his sole Inheritrix united it to the Patrimony of
Edward Nevil, and in his Descendants did the Title remain, until our Fathers
Remembrance, and then it was conveyed to Lovelace, and is now by Margaret Sole
Heir of Richard Lovelace annexed to the Demeasn of Mr........ Cook of Lanham
in Suffolk.

Easthall in this Parish was parcel of the Revenue of Rokesley of Rokesley, but
when Sir Richard de Rokesley determined with the Name in a Female Inheritrix,
She, by matching with Sir Thomas de Poynings, entitled that Name to the
Propriety and Jurisdiction of this place, in which Family it continued until
the fourteenth year of Henry the eighth, and then it being found after a
serious Inquisition, that Sir Edward Poynings, who deceased the twelfth year of
that Princes Government, had neither lawful Issue, nor any Collateral Alliance,
which could start a Title to his Estate, it escheated to the Crown in, whose
Demeasn this Manor was locked up until King Henry the eighth granted it to
Sir Roger Cholmeley, who suddenly alienated his Interest here to Sir Martin
Bows; and he the first year of Edward the sixth, conveyed it again to Percival
Heart of Lullingston Esquire, in whose Successor, Mr. William Heart of
Lullingston Esquire, the Title is now resident.

Littlemote and Petham are two Manors likewise in this Parish, which augmented
the Revenue of Sibell, a Family of deep Antiquity as any in this Track, who
were for many Hundred years possessed of Petham, and of the House which is called
Littlemote likewise, as is evident by their Coat Armor viz. a Tiger viewing
himself in a Mirror, or Spigel, both carved and embossed very anciently in
Wood, as likewise represented to the view in old colored Glass, though much of
the Land that relates to this Mansion devolved to Sibel about the Beginning of
Henry the seventh, by the Heir of Cowdale, whose Arms, viz. Arg. a Cheveron,
Gules between three Bulls Heads Cabosed Sables, both empailed and quartered
with this Family, are yet visible in many Places of the House; finally, after
these two Places had so many Descents been fastened to this Family, they came
down at last to John Sibel Esquire, who concluded in a Female Heir called
Elizabeth, matched to Mr. Robert Bosvil Ancestor to Thomas Bosvil Esquire, who
in Right of this Alliance is now Heir apparent to the Signorie of them.

There is one part of the Church is called Arsicks Chancel, and diverse Lands
hereabouts are held of the Honor of Arsick by Knights Service, and Robert de
Arsick that came in with William the Conqueror, was one of those that were
Assistants to John de Fiennes for the securer Guard of Dover. Castle. He had
eighteen Knights Fees assigned to him, of which these lay in Kent, viz.
Fremingham (idest) Farningham, one Knights Fee, Mayplescombe one Knights Fee,
Nutstted in Kent one Knights Fee, Comb in Kent one Knights Fee, Bekewel in
Kent one Knights Fee. The rest lay most in Oxfordshire, and some in Dorset,
Wilts, and Lincolnshire. In the Reign of Henry the second, Manasser de Arsick
was of eminent Note in the County of Oxford, and Mr. Camden in describing that
County, affirms the principal Seat of their Barony to be at Coggs, and that the
Daughter and Heir was married to Hubert de Burgo, who was Earl of Kent.

Alhallows in the Hundred of Hoo, with the appendant Manor of Shawsted, did
anciently celebrate the Memory of Delapole; John De la Pole held it in the
twentieth year of Edward the third, and paid a respective supply for it at
making the Black Prince Knight, and in this Family was the possession permanent
until the Reign of Henry the fourth, and then it was transmitted by sale to
Zouch of Haringworth, written in ancient Court Rolls and other Muniments De la
Zouch; and here the Title was resident until it was by Descent wafted along to
John Lord De la Zouch, who being a great Assertor of the Cause and Quarrel of
Richard the third against Henry the seventh, like some noble Fabric, in whose
Joints the Rain has dwelt, and supplanted the Contextures of its Pillars,
fell under the Misfortune of his Royal Master, and sunk in the Ruins of the
fatal Field of Bosworth, and in the first year of Henry the seventh, being
attainted by Parliament, his Patrimony escheated to the Crown, and then that
Prince granted his Estate here to his faithful Partisan, Sir Henry Wiat, whom
he had newly taken into his private Councels, and from him did it successively
come down to his Grandchild Sir Thomas Wiat, whose Estate here was much
improved and augmented by the Addition of Windlehill, another Manor in this
Parish, which as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 82. did in the forty seventh year of
Edward the third, belong to the Abbot of Reding, and upon the suppression of
that Cloister, by Henry the eighth, was by his liberal Concession made Parcel
of his Inheritance, and remained so until the Reign of Q. Mary, and then being
attainted and convicted of High Treason in the second year of that Princess,
his Estate here fell back to the Crown, and continued there until K. James in
the Beginning of his Reign passed away Shawsted and Windlehill to the City of
London, and they again by their Trustees invested the Propriety of them by Sale
in Sir William Garaway of London, Father to Sir Henry Garaway Knight, in whose
Descendants the Title of them is still resident.

Place House in this Parish is secondly to be remembered, which was anciently
part of the Demeasn of the illustrious Family of the Pimps of Pimps Court in
the Parish of Loose near Maidston, and Philip de Pimp was one of those Men at
Arms which the Prior of Rochester was to furnish out for the Guard of the
Seacoast at Genlade or Yenlade in the Hundred of Hoo, in the eleventh year of
Edward the third. In Times of a more modern Inscription I find Thomas Pimpe the
elder to be Buried in Alhollows in Hoo, and that he made his Will the twenty
seventh of August, (as appears by the Repertorie of Rochester Diocese,) and in
the fourteenth of Edward the fourth, William and John were his Sons. Elizabeth
unmaried, Margery Lady Prioress of Malling, and Alice a Nun there, Sir William
Hampton about that Time bought much Land of him; He (I mean this Sir William
was Lord Mayor of London in the Time of Edw^rd the fourth,) but whether this
Place was part of this Purchase or not, there is no Light from any public
Intelligence can illustate it, certain I am that the Coppingers imediately
almost after this Time became possessors of the Place, and the Propriety is
now by Female Right of a Daughter and Heir of a Branch of these Coppingers
resolved into Sir Harbotle Grimston of Essex.

Alresford anciently written Aiglesford has Places of considerable
Animadversion within the Limits and Boundaries of it. The Priory or rather now
the Skeleton of it, was founded by Richard Lord Gray of Codnor, Anno Dom. 1240,
in the twenty fifth of Henry the third for Carmelite or White Friars in Honor
of the Virgin Mary; the Mother of this Lord was Isolda Daughter and Coheir of
Hugh Bardolph Lord of Hoo in Kent, from whom he inherited fair Possessions in
this County: And many of his Posterity, in Relation to that Particular, were
buried in the Conventual Church of this Monastery. Upon the suppression it was
granted with the Royalty of it by Henry the eighth to Sir Thomas Wiat, from
whom it descended to his Son Sir Thomas Wiat, upon whose Defection, this being
with other Lands escheated to the Crown, Queen Elizabeth granted it to Mr. J.
Sidley, and he bequeathed to his Brother Sir Will. Sidley, and from that Name
it was lately passed by Sale unto Sir Peter Ricaut, whose Heir 1657, conveyed
it by the same Vicissitude to Mr. Caleb Banks of Maidston.

Tottington and Eccles two Manors in this Parish, Richard Son of Malger de
Rokesley, gave Tiths of Tottington to the Priory of Rochester; See Textus
Roffensis.
anciently belonged to the Family of Rokesley, of whose Heir General it came to
of Poynings, and Richard Lord Poynings; the eleventh of Rich. the second, held
the Manor of Tottington, which with Eccles one of his Ancestors in the Time of
King Henry the sixth, gave in frank Marriage with his Daughter to J. Palmer of
the Courtlodge in Snodland Esquire; whose Posterity after they had held them
some space of Time, sold them to Warcup, descended from the Warcups of
Cumberland, in which Name the Tenure was not long resident, for by Sale it was
alienated to Sidley of Southfleet, and his Successor suddenly after by the like
Fatalitie invested Ricaut in Eccles, and Madox in Tottington.

Cosington is a Seat of much Eminence in this Parish, and gave Residence and
Surname to a Knightly Family of the same. And King Edward the first rewarded
Sir Stephen de Cosenton whom he had made Banneret in the twenty eighth of his
Reign, for his signal Service at Carlaverock in Scotland, with a Charter of
Free Warren to all his Lands at Cosenton Acris, and South-Burton vulgarly
called South-Blabden in Elham in Kent. The Manor it self holds by Knights
Service of the Barony of Rosse of Horton Kirbie, from whom they received it by
ancient Feoffement, and bear in similitude of their Lords the Rosses, the same
Charge in their Arms, viz. Azure three Roses Or. The Arms of Rosse being Or
three Roses Gules; But when in the Beginning of Hen. the eighths Government,
the Fatality of Time had concluded this Family in three Daughters and Coheirs
married to Duke, Hamon, and Wood; this Manor of Cosenton accrued by
Co-partition to Duke, in which Name it has ever since resided. There was a
Free Chapel belonging to this Mansion founded, as private Evidences advertise
me, by Sir Stephen de Cosenton, which is now crumbled into so desolate an Heap
of Rubbish, that we can hardly trace out its Ruins even amidst its Ruins.
There was another Free Chapel in his Parish annexed to Tottington by Richard
Lord Poynings in the eleventh year of Rich. the second, which has been so
dismantled by the impressions of Time, and the fury of the Elements, that there
is very little Testimony or Evidence remaining that this Oratorie ever had a
Being.

Preston in this Parish of Alresford is a Seat of that venerable Antiquity, and
has for so many Descents been incorporated into the Demeasn of Colepeper, that
it is questionable which is the ancient Cradle or Seminary of this Family
either Bayhall in Pepenbury, or Preston in Alresford; Sir Thomas Colepeper as
the old Evidences and Muniments of this Name instruct me, was of this Family,
and was Governor of Winchelsey under Edward the second, by whom he was
beheaded for defending that Town in behalf of the Barons then combined in an
hostile League against him: Walter de Colepeper flourished under Edward the
first and Edward the second, and sealed with a Bend engrailed, which is still
the paternal Coat Armor of this Family; which I the rather mention, because
these Deeds are the first of that Nature which I have seen since Sealing with
Coats of Arms grew customary in this Nation, and argues him to be a Man of
eminence in this County, as did that spreading Revenue likewise of which he
died possessed, not only here, but at Farleigh, Peckham, Wrotham, and diverse
other places, in the first year of Edward the third. John Colepeper was a Judge
in the Reign of Henry the sixth, and concluded in a Daughter and Heir, who by
matching with Harrington, added a considerable Supplement to the paternal
Revenue of that noble Family. I shall not more dilate my self in this
Discourse, it is enough that I inform the Reader, that this ancient Seat which
has been for so many Centuries of years under the Signorie of this Name, is
yet so constant to the Interest of this Family, that it is at this instant knit
to the Inheritance of Sir Richard Colepeper Knight and Baronet.

Roes Place in Alresford pretends to a deep Root in Antiquity likewise, as
being the Seat and Original of the ancient Family of Roe, and from hence the
Roes of Chafford in Ashurst, those of Essex, and he that was Lord Mayor of
London, have primitively in a full Channel flowed out; and in this Family was
the possession lodged, until that Age we style our Grandfathers, and then it
was carried off by Sale to Tailor; which Family not many years since concluding
in a Female Inheritrix, She by matching with Warcup, has espoused the
possession of this place to that Name and Family.

Near this place, Vortimer the valiant British King gave Battle to Hengist the
Saxon, after he had given a Victorious overthrow to the Britons at Creyford; in
which conflict Horsa and Catigern, Brethrento both the Generals, were stain,
and the Saxons repulsed into the Isle of Thanet, their first assigned
Habitation, not daring to enter and reinvade the Continent whilst Vortimer
survived. Catigern was interred in that Plain which spreads it self on the
Hanging of that Hill, which looks down on Cosenton, where to this Day his
Monument remains, being four vast Stones pitched somewhat after the Manor of
Stonehenge on Salisbury Plain, but of greater Breadth then they, though not so
thick or long, whereby it appears like a small Sheepcote, and is vulgarly
styled Cits-Cotehouse, which is graphically here intitated. The like Monument
was erected for Horsa at Horsted near Rochester which storms and Tempests under
the Conduct of Time have utterly extinguished.

monument to Catigern viewed by two men, one holding a shepherd's crook; sheep
grazing off to the right Joanni Wroth de Aula Blendonensi in Bexley Armigero:
graphica^ hanc Jumuli Catigernici Delineationem suis Sumptibus Aere incisam.
Thomas Philipott Lubens devovet.


Ash by Sandwich lies in the Hundred of Wingham, and contains many Places
within its Precincts very considerable. The first is Welmestone, which is
situated partly in this Parish, and partly in Wingham. Though it be now
obscure, it was in elder Times made more conspicuous, by being one of the Seats
of Residence of the Noble Family of Septuans, William de Septnans or Sepuans
was in the possession of it at his Death, which was in the twenty fifth year of
Edward the third, Rot. Ese. Number. 5. and in this Family did the Title of this
place by the steps of several Descents pass along until the latter End of
Henry the eighth, and then it went from this Family by Exchange for other Land
to Sir Walter Henley, who not long after conveyed the Demeasn Land or
Mansion House to Alday, and the Manor it self to Solley; in Alday the demised
premises had not been long resident, when they were sold to Mr. Benedict
Barnham, by one of whose four Coheirs, the Fee-Simple devolved to the Earl of
Castlehaven, whose descendant conveyed it to Brigham.

Goshall in this Parish must not be forgotten, it was the Residence anciently
of a Family of that Surname, made more eminent by the production of Sir John
Goshall a worthy Knight, who flourished in the Reign of Edward the third and
Richard the second, and lies entombed in Ash Church, in complete Armor, and
his Skeleton underneath, his Arms are also depicted in his Shield, viz. Azure a
Lion Rampant within Semee of Cross Crosselets Argent. The Heir General of
this Family was wedded to St. Nicholas of the Isle of Thanet, and after the
Title had for some Ages settled in this Family, it was by a Daughter and Heir
transmitted to John Dynley Esquire, whose Descendant about the Beginning of
Queen Elizabeth conveyed it to Roper, Ancestor to Christopher Roper Baron of
Tenham, who has lately alienated his Interest in it to Sir Edw. Monins.

Checquers in this Parish of Ash, was a very ancient Seat of a Branch of the
Family of Septuans, who from their Residence here, contracted the Surname of
Checquer or Atchecquer, and so were styled in several old Records; and after
this Mansion had remained a Series of some Generations in the Name of Septuans
and Checquer, it shrunk into a Daughter and Heir matched with Alday; in which
Family, after it had some Time resided it was by Sale lately passed away to Mr.
Tho. Harfleet, and now owns his Descendants for its instant Possessors.

Hells Twitham is swollen up to some Repute since it was the Revenue of the
Hells, a Family of generous Rank in this County, but stayed not long in the
possession, for about the Beginning of Edward the third, they had surrendered
their Interest to Twitham, a noble Family, and of deep Extraction, in this
Teritory; Bertram de Twitham died possessed of it in the third year of Edward the
third; Alanus de Twitham his Son was likewise found invested in it at his
Decease, which was in the twenty fifth year of the abovesaid Prince; and
lastly, Alanus the Son of Theobald Twitham held it in the fourth year of
Richard the second, and left it to Mawd his sole Daughter and Heir, by whom the
Title was transplanted into Simon Septuans, in whose Family the Propriety has
for many Ages, even until this instant, by an unbroken Link been seated.

The next place which obviates my Discovery, is Overland, the which in the
twenty fifth year of Henry the third, was by the Royal Charter of that Prince
granted to Bertram de Crioll, and so being made Parcel of his Demeasne, it
remained fastened to his Interest until the Beginning of Edward the first, and
then it was passed away to Leybourn, and was held by Juliana de Leybourn, the
Heir general of Roger Lord Leybourn; who in relation to that vast Patrimony
her Birth entitled her to, might be justly styled the Infanta of Kent, and
she was first espoused to John de Hastings, and secondly to William de Clinton
Earl of Huntington, who held it at his Death in her Right, which was in the
twenty eighth year of Edward the third, but she deceased without Issue, in the
forty third year of the abovesaid Prince, by either of them, and there being
none, that by the strength of any Collateral Alliance, could pretend any
Interest or Title to the Estate, it escheared to the Crown, and lay there
until Richard the second bestowed it by Grant on Sir Simon de Burley Knight of
the Garter, and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports; but he being attainted in the
tenth year of that King, it returned to the Crown again, and then it was by the
the same Prince settled on the Abbey of Childrens Langley, and was involved in
the Patrimony of that Cloister, until the general Suppression in the Reign of
Henry the eighth, and then it was granted in the thirty fifth year of that
Prince to Sir Thomas Moile and Sir Walter Henley, and they not long after
conveyed their joint Interest in it to Harfleet, Who almost in our Fathers
Remembrance alienated it to Bargrave, from whom the same devolution brought it
over to Solley, who not many years after transmitted it by Sale to Mr. Jo. Ward
of London, whose Widow, Mrs. Katharin Ward now holds it in Right of Dower.

Goldstanton in this Parish is a second place of Note, and was as high as the
Beam of any Evidence will guide me to discover the Patrimony of Leybourn, Roger
de Leybourn, who was in the Register of those Kentish Gentlemen who were
pardoned by the Pacification, called Dictum de Kenelworth, for seeking to
support with seditious Arms the Cause and Quarrel of Simon de Montfort, held
it in the fiftieth year of Henry the third, and from him did it descend to his
great Grandchild Juliana de Leybourn, who dying without Issue or Alliance in
the forty third year of Edward the third, this with Overland escheated to the
Crown, but was granted out again by Richard the second to Sir Simon de Burley,
who being attainted and convicted of high Treason in the tenth year of his
Reign, that Prince linked it by a new Donation to the Abbey of Childrens
Langley. But yet I find that in the Reign of Henry the fourth, Richard Cliderow
(who was Sheriff of Kent in the fourth year and most part of the fith year of
that Prince, and then again in the sixth year of Hen. the fifth,) held it I
suppose only as a Lessee, and kept his Shrivealty at this Place; a Man he was
of no contemptible Account in those Times, as I shall discover more amply at
little Betshanger which was his capital Seat. But to return, after this Manor
had made its abode in the Demeasne of the above mentioned Covent, until the
Dissollution in the Reign of Henry the eighth, it was then torn off, and
granted to Tho. Lord Cromwell Earl of Essex, upon whose Attaint, in the thirty
second year of the above said Prince it escheated back to the Crown, and then
it was granted in the thirty fourth year of Henry the eighth, to Vincent Engham
Esquire, whose Descendant Sir Tho. Engham, some few years transplanted his
Concernment in it by Sale into Mr.......... Courcelis of London.

Nevills Fleet in this Parish was more anciently called Butlers Fleet, as being
parcel of the Revenue of that Family, and the Book of Aid in the Exchequer,
which makes an enumeration of the ancient Owners, mentions one Richard de
Boteler, to have been its ancient Possessor; but in the twentienth year of
Edward the third, when that Book was taken, William Lord Latimer of Corbie,
Knight of the Garter, and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports held it; and in the
thirty eighth obtained by the Charter of that Prince, a Market to be held at
Ark on the Thursday, and a three days Fair at our Lady Day; and from him, as in
diverse Records it is evident, did it acquire the Name of Latimers Fleet, but
stayed not long under that Title, for he determined in Eleanor his Daughter and
Heir matched to John Lord Nevill, who in her Right became Lord of this Manor,
and from him did it contract the Title of Nevils Fleet, and lay couched in the
Patrimony of this Name until the Beginning of Edward the fourth, and then it
was alienated to Cromer, and James Cromer in the eleventh year of Henry the
seventh, alienated it to John Isaac, from whom not long after it was brought
over by Purchase to Kendall, and in that Name it fixed, until the Beginninig
of Henry the eighth, and then it was alienated to Sir John Fogge, and he before
the end of that Prince conveyed it to Ralph, in which Name it was resident
until the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, and then it was demised to Spracklin,
and Sir Adam Spracklin almost in Times under our Fathers Cognizance passed it
away to Harfleet, in which Family you may at this instant find it.

Molands in this Parish gave Seat and Surname to a Family so called, who before
the end of Edward the second were worn out, and then it became the possession
of Harfleet, alias Septuans, who much improved the House with additional
Buildings, where the Arms of this Family do stand yet in Panes of very old
colored Glass, with this Motto annexed, Dissipabo inimicos Regis mei ut
paleam; alluding either to their Coat, which was three Fans, such as they fan
and winnow Corn with, or else to William de Septuans, who dyed in the year
14011. and warred, as the Records of this Family inform me under Edward the
third in France, and by his Will registered in the Prerogative Office at
Canterbury, which I mention for the Novelty of it, he gives Manumission or
Freedom to diverse of his Slaves or Natives; and Sir William Septuans was his
Son, who lies buried in Christ Church in Canterbury, and as his Epitaph on his
Tomb instructs me, dyed in the year 1448. and from him did the Title stream in
this Name, until the Reign of Henry the eighth, and then I find this Seat in
the possession of Robert Read; but it was not long out of the Name, for about
the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, I find it reinvested again in Harfleet, and
remains an eminent Mansion of this Family at present.

Many of this Surname lie buried in Ash Church, for those three Altar Tombs in
the Church yard, and those on each side the North Door, were the Repositories
or Exchequers, that treasured up the Remains of diverse of this Family, all
which had their Figures and Arms insculp'd in Brass, annexed to their
Sepulchers, which by the impression of Times, and the Assaults of Sacrilegious
Hands are quite dismantled, and torn off.

Wingham Barton is another eminent Manor in this Parish, which belonged to the
Archbishop of Canterbury; and when John Peckham founded his College at
Wingham in the year 1282. there was an Exhibition settled on that Seminary or
Brotherhood, issuing out of this Manuor, from whence it is supposed by some it
contracted the Name of Wingham Barton; though I rather conjecture it was called
so from its Situation, in opposition to another of that Name, called Firmins
Barton, lying by Canterbury. But to proceed, this continued Archiepiscopal,
until the twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth, and then it was exchanged by
Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, with the Crown, and rested there, until Q.
Elizabeth granted it to Sir Roger Manwood, whose son Sir Peter Manwood passed
it away by his Trustees not many years since to Sir William Curteen of London,
and he gave it in Dower with his daughter matched to Henry late Earl of Kent,
who upon his decease ordered it to be sold to discharge some Debts, and was
accordingly not long since by his Countess conveyed by Sale to Mr. James
Thurbarne of Sandwich, one of the Cinque Ports, Son of James Thurbarne Esquire,
a Justice of Peace in this County in the Reign of K. James, whose Ancestors
from 1331 have continued very eminent in the Cinque Ports, especially in
Hasting and Romney, as also in Romney Mersh, as appears by diverse ancient
Records. But the ancient Mannor-House was in the fourth year of Edward the
sixth granted to Sir Anthony St. Ledger, and his Descendant Sir Anthony St.
Ledger of Boughton, about the Beginning of King Charles passed it away to Mr.
Vincent Denn of Wenderton, who gave it to his Nephew Mr. Thomas Denn, and he by
Testament settled it on his Brother Mr. John Denn, who dying without Issue
bequeathed it to be shared by his four Sisters, by whom it is designed to be
sold to pay Debts and Legacies.

Chilton lies likewise in Ash, and claims our Remembrance, because it yielded a
Seat, and afforded a Surname to William de Chilton, who held it at his Decease,
which was in the thirty first year of Edw. the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 19. But
after his Exit, it dwelt not long in his Name; for in the fourth year of Edward
the third, William Baude died seized of it, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 25. And
here again the Title was as fickle, and unstable, for in the thirty seventh
year of Edward the third, I find the possession was departed from Baude, and
cast into the Patrimony of Thomas Wolton, who at that Time held it at his
Death. Rot. Esc. Number. 13. But after this Family went out, I find the
Inheritance more fixed and permanent, for by diverse old Court-Rolls that were
taken in the latter End of Edward the third, I discover William de Septuans
whose successors were since called Harfleet, to be possessed of it, and from him
is the Propriety drawn through the successive Series of many Descents to the
Harfleets of this Age, who are still entitled to the Signory of it.

Hells is in the Register also of those Manors which are within the Circle of
this Parish, and gave Seat and Surname to a Family of no shallow Antiquity in
this Tract; Thomas de Hells obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Manor of
Hells in the eighteenth year of Edward the first; Bertram de Hells was
Lieuetenant of Dover Castle in the Reign of Edward the second, under Reginald
Lord Cobham, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Constable of Dover Castle:
Gilbert de Hells of Hells Court, was Sheriff of Kent the thirtieth of Edward
the third, and in this Name did the Propriety lodge until the Reign of Edward
the fourth, and then it was by sale transplanted into Wroth; and the Title
there settled until the latter End of Henry the seventh, and then it was by the
same Vicissitude carried off to Peake, where the instant Inheritance is
resident.

Laverocks is another Seat in Ash, possessed by Worthy Men of that Name, one of
them lies buried Cross legged on the North-side of the Quire, with his Arm
placed on his Shield; finally, after this Family had for Descents been
Proprietaries of this place, it came to be possessed by Anthony Laverock who
deceased without Issue Male, so that his Estate here came the eighteenth of
Henry the seventh by Parnel his Daughter and Heir, to be possessed, by Edward
Monins Esquire, and they both not long after passed it away to Peake, in whose
Posterity and Name, the Title is yet remaining.

Fleet is the last Manor in Ash, which is ennobled by having as (high as any
Track of Record can guide us to a Discovery) the Earls of Oxford for
Proprietaries; Hugh de Vere Earl of Oxford held it at his Death, which was in
the forty eighth year of Henry the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 26. After him it came
down to Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford, his Son, and he likewise enjoyed it at
his Departure, which was in the twenty fourth year of Edw. the first, Rot. Esc.
Number. 62. In the fifth year of Edw. the third Robert de Vere Earl of Oxford, was
possessed of it at his Decease; Rot. Esc. Number. 71. In Ages of a nearer Approach
unto us, Robert de Vere Duke of Ireland and Earl of Oxford held it, but he
attempting to support the waning and declining Prerogative of Richard the
second against the Assaults which some of the potent Nobility endeavored to
make upon it, in the tenth year of that Princes Government, was ruined in a
Battle commenced near Burford, after which he attempting to decline the Fury of
that Field by Flight, was infortunately drowned. After whose untimely Decease
this Manor being folded up in the rest of his Estate, was seized upon as
forfeited to the Crown in the sixteenth year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc.
34. Part secunda. But it seems it was restored by Henry the fourth, for
Matilda this Man's Mother, wife of Thomas Earl of Oxford held it at her Death,
which was in the fourteenth year of Henry the fourth, Rot. Esc. Number. 17. from
it passed along to John Earl of Oxford, who so vigorously asserted the Interest
of the House of Lancaster at the Battle of Barnet, where his Valor was ruinous
to him, for his Army was discomfited, and the great Leader of that Day, the
Earl of Warwick, disdaining to outlive so black and finister a Misfortune,
found his Sepulcher in the Carnage of that Field, but he was reserved for
better Times, having provided for his safety by a timely Escape; he was
afterward attainted in the twelfth year of Edward the fourth, Rot. Esc. Number.
28. and this Manor as an Escheat annexed to the Royal Revenue, where it made
its abode until the first year of K. Henry the seventh, and then that Prince
after Bosworth Field (where he obtained both the Crown and Victory together,
principally by the Courage and Conduct of the above mentioned Earl) restored
this Manor to this worthy Person, as a guerdon of so great Obligations; and in
this Family did it afterward without any Interruption continue until the
Beginning of Q. Elizabeth, and then Gurson, which was a principal part of it,
was sold by John Earl of Oxford, to Hamon, and the Residue of this Manor to
Peyton and Harfleet; in which Families the Interest of this Manor thus
resolved and split into Parcels is at this instant resident.

Richborough Castle called sometimes Ratesborough, though now it be only
eminent by those majestic Ruins, which at distance court the Eye of the
Beholder; yet in Ages of a more reverend Inscription, it was of more
considerable Account. Ausonius in his Poems mentions one Flavius Sanctius, who
was Commander in Chief of this Fortress, as appears by this Distich.

Militiam nullo qui Turbine sedulus egit,
Praeside laelatus quo Rutupinus Ager.
And in another Distich he Records the Death of his Uncle Contentus, who paid
the last Debt he owed to Nature at this Place, upon whose Ashes he drops this
Memorial.

Et Patruos Elegia meos reminiscere Cantus,
Contentum Tellus quem Rutupina tegit.
If you will hear more of this Castle, I shall represent it to you as Leland
describes it in the thirtieth year of Hen. the eighth, at which Time he visited
several Parts of this County: The Site of the old Town or Castle (says he) is
wonderful fair upon a Hill, the Walls which remain there yet be in compass
about almost as much as the Tower of London, they have been very high, thick,
strong, and well embattled, the Matter of them is Flint, marvailous and long
Bricks, both white and red, of the British Fashion; The Ciment was made of the
Sea, and small pibble. There is a great likelihood that the goodly Hill about
the Castle, and especially toward Sandwich has been well inhabited, Corn
gr^ws there in marvailous plenty; and in going to Plough, there has been Time
out of Mind, and now is, found more Antiquities of Roman Money, then in any
place else of England.

Surely Reason speaks that this should be Rutupinum, for besides the Name
somewhat touches, the very near passage from Calis Cliffs, or Calis, was to
Ratesborough and now is to Sandwich, which is about a Mile off, though now
Sandwich be not celebrated, because of Goodwin Sands, and the Decay of the
Haven: There is a good Flight shot off from Ratesborough toward Sandwich, a
great Dike cast in a round Compass, as if it had been for Defense of Men of
War, the Compass of the Ground within is not much above an Acre, and it is very
hollow by casting up the Earth; They call this place their Little Borough,
within the Castle is a little Paroch Church of St. Augustine, and an Hermitage;
I had Antiquities of the Hermit, who is an Industrious Man; not far from the
Hermitage is a Cave where Men have sought and dug for Treasure, I saw it by
Candle within, wherein were Conies, it was so straight, that I had no mind to
creep far in. In the North-side of the Castle is an Head in the Wall, now sore
defaced by the weather, they call it Q. Berthas Head; near to that place, hard
by the Wall, was a Pot of Roman Money lately found. Thus far He. The Ancient
Lords of the Castle were the Earls of Oxford, and Edward Earl of Oxford in the
Beginning of Q. Elizabeth alienated it to Gant.

Ash juxta Faukham, lies in the Hundred of Acstane, anciently written
Clacstane, and was in elder Times the Inheritance of the Latimers, William de
Latimer held it in the thirtieth year of Edward the first, and by the Royal
Indulgence of that Prince obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Manor of
Ash which he held of Roger de Mowbray. After the Latimers were worn out, the
noble Family of Grandison succeeded in the possession, and Otho de Grandison
held it, as appears by the Book of Aid, in the twentieth year of Edward the
third, at making the Black Prince Knight, by the fourth part of a Knights Fee:
But after this, there is little Evidence that it was long constant to the
Interest of this Family, for in the Reign of Richard the second, it was wrapped
up in the Demeasn of Cressel, a Family that were entitled to a large Revenue,
both at Chiselhurst, Hartley, and elsewhere in this Track, but it seems took no
deep root at this place, for in the fourth year of Henry the fourth, the
Knights Hospitalers held it at the Marriage of Blanch, that Princes Daughter,
but whether they had it by Purchase or Exchange from Cressell, the Record in
the Exchequer does not specify; and here it became fixed and was esteemed as
one of the principal Manors relating to their Order in this County, until the
Reign of Hen. the eighth, and then in the thirty seventh year of that Prince,
not without much contest and struggling, this was with the rest of their Revenue
surrendered, and being made parcel of the Income of the Crown, K. Edw. the sixth
about the second year of his Reign granted it to Sir Martin Bows, and he had
Issue Will. Bows, who determined in two Daughters and Coheirs; Eliz. matched
to Will. Buggin, and Ann married to Sir Edmund Fowler, who divided his
Patrimony; and this upon the partition, was united to the Revenue of Fowler,
and continues still to acknowledge his descendants for Proprietaries.

South-Ash is another Manor in this Parish, which had Owners in elder Times of
that Name, for in the Book of Aid, I find that John at South-Ash paid an
auxiliary supply for his Manor of South-Ash at making the Black Prince Knight;
but it is possible this Man's original Name was Hodsoll, and borrowed this Name
from the Situation and Position of his Habitation, which was Southerly; and
that which induces me to this Conjecture is, that upon a perusal of the
original Evidences, I find that the Family of Hodsoll, was long before
possessors of this Manor, a particular Series of whom I could discover to the
Reader, but that I will not clog this Treatise with superfluities, nor is this
Manor departed from the Signorie of this Name, but is at this instant involved
in the patrimony of Mr. William Hodsoll.

Hodsoll and Halywell are two other little Manors in Ash, whereof the last
has been the Seat of Hodsoll, who borrowed their Surname from the first many
hundred years; and in Relation to this assumed the bearing of three Stone
Fountains, two and one, such as used to be dedicated to some Saint, and were
frequented anciently by such who reposed any Confidence in his virtue and
miraculous efficacy, whose Name they bore; and of this Figure was that Stone
Well at Brackley commonly called St. Rumbals Well, much frequented in the misty
Times of Popery, for the Cure of sore Eyes, and other Maladies, and that this
was the ancient Coat of this Family is most certain, for William Hodsoll, who
in several Deeds writ himself Esquire, both in the Reign of Henry the fifth,
and Henry the sixth, sealed with the three stone Fountains only; but now I know
not upon what consideration the Fesse Wavee is added; so that that the Coat is
now Azure a Fesse Wavee between three stone Fountains Argent: But to proceed,
as Hodsoll and Halywell have for so many Generations owned the Title of that
Name and Family, so has no Vicissitude of Time so carried off the Propriety of
them, but that they are still the present Demeasne of Mr. William Hodsoll.

North-Ash is another Manor in this Parish, which has been accounted a Limb
of the great Manor of St. John's at Sutton at Hone, and upon the Suppression of
the Alberge of the Knights Hospitallers here in England, who for many hundreds
of years had owed this Manor, was by Henry the eighth granted to Sir Maurice
Dennis, by whose Coheir it came to Wrote, and he passed it away to Thomas Smith
Esquire, who upon his Decease gave it to his second Son Sir Tho. Smith, in
whose Descendants the Interest of it is wrapped up at present.

Scotgrove is the last place of Account in Ash, it was in Ages of a very high
Ascent, the Estate of a Family called Torpell. Mabilia Torpell, Widow of John
de Torpell, who held it in the Reign of Henry the third, dyed in the enjoyment
of it, in the Time of Edward the first, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 27. In Times
of a lower Gradation, I find this Family vanished, and then this Manor came to
be under the Signorie of Catwick, and John de Catwick held it, and paid
respective Aid for it; (as appears by the Book of Aid) at making the black
Prince Knight. After this Family had deserted the possession of this place, I
discover by some old Deeds that Commence from the Reign of Rich. the second,
that the Frankenhams were Lords of the Fee, who before the latter end of Henry
the fifth were gone out, and then it came to own the Propriety of Poynings, and
went along with this Name until it devolved to Sir Edward Poyning, who had it
in possession at his Death, which was in the twelfth year of Henry the eighth,
and after a solemn and signal Inquisition taken in the fourteenth year of
that Monarch, to discover if there could be traced out any collateral Alliance
(for he dyed without any lawful Issue) that could justify a Claim to his
Estate, and there none appearing who could do it, this Mannot with much other
land escheated to the Crown, and then the abovesaid Prince granted this to
William Lewknor Esquire; in which Family it had not rested many years when it
was conveyed by Sale to Vane, from whom by the like Vicissitude in that Age we
call our Fathers, it came to be the Possession of Walter of Faukham.

The Priorie of St. Helens in London, had some Interest at South-Ash, in the
fourth year of Henry the fourth, as appears by the Rolls of Blanch Lands kept
in the Exchequer, but whether upon the Suppression it were wrapped up in the
Manor of Ash, and so conveyed in the general Concession or Grant, as being a
Perquisite, I am uncertain.

Ashford in the Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, was one of those Manors which
was marshalled under the Jurisdiction and Propriety of the eminent Family of
Crioll; Simon de Crioll, in the twenty seventh and twenty eighth year of Henry
the third, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Manor of Ashford, and
Mawde de Crioll his Widow dyed seized of it in the fifty second year of Henry
the third, and left it to her Son Will. de Keriell, who, as Will. Glover
Somerset Herald out of an old Court Roll does attest, confirmed that change his
Mother had designed in her life time, and passed away this Manor to Roger de
Leybourne for Stocton in Huntington-shire, and Rumford in Essex, and from him
did it come down to his great Grandchild Juliana de Leybourn, sole Heir of
Roger de Leybourne, whose second Husband William de Clinton Earl of Huntington,
was possessed of it at his Death, which was in the twenty eighth year of Edward
the third. Rot. Esc. Number. 59. And after him Juliana his Countess deceasing
without Issue, and without Kindred, in the forty third year of the abovesaid
Prince, it escheated to the Crown, and this Monarch desiring to enhance the
Revenue of the Church rather then his own, gave it to the Deans and Canons of
St. Stephens in Westminster, which Donation was confirmed by Richard the
second, in the twelfth year of his Reign, and afterward more amply ratified
with all the Franchises it was anciently fortified with, in the twenty first
year of his Rule, as appears Pat. 1. Memb. 35. par 3. and with it conveyed
diverse Lands here at Ashford and elsewhere, which were formerly relating to the
Family of Leybourne, but being granted to Sir Simon de Burleigh, returned back
to the Crown upon his Attaint, which was in the tenth year of the abovesaid
Prince, and here in the Revenue of this Cloister did it make a secure abode,
until the rough Hand of Henry the eighth, like that of Aeolus, scattered such
a Tempest upon these and all other Cloisters, that they shrunk into a common
dissolution, and then this Manor, being in that whirlwind ravished from the
Church, and transplanted into the Crown, was by that Monarch granted with
Westure (which was purchased by Cardinal Kempe of Aldon, about the twenty
eighth of Henry the Sixth, and settled on the College of Wie, and came to the
Crown upon its Supression,) to Sir Anthony Aucher and Jo. Polsted, and they not
many years after conveyed them by Sale to Sir Andrew Judde, who expiring in a
Female Heir called Alice, she by matching with Sir Thomas Smith. annexed them
to his Revenue and from him is both Ashford and Westure come down by descendant
Right, to his great Grandchild, Philip Viscount Strangford.

Repton in this Parish was the Seat of that ancient Family of Valoigns;
Waretius de Valoigns in a Deed whereby on Ash Wednesday in the the forty fifth
year of Henry the third, releases some Services due to his Manor of Swerdlin,
to Cecilia Widow of Richard Greenbold, writes himself of Repton. Rualonus de
Valoigns was Sheriff of Kent, in the first year of Henry the second, and dwelt
sometimes at Repton, and sometimes at Tremworth. The last of this Family at
this Place was Waretius de Valoigns, who concluding in two Daughters and
Coheirs, one of them by matching with Sir Tho. Fogge, brought this and much
other Land to own the Title of that Family, and they afterward made this their
Seat, which was productive of Persons as eminent for Piety, Prudence and Valor
as any that this County, either in Times which have been tempestuous, or else
in those which have been calm and serene, has been fertile, in one of which
was Sir Io. Fogge Comptroller of the House, and Privy Counselor to Edward the
fourth, who founded a College here at Ashford, consisting of a Prebendarie as
the Head, and of certain Priests and Choristers as Members. But to proce^d,
after this Seat had so many Generations acknowledged the Interest of this
Family, it was in the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, alienated by George Fogge
to Sir Michael Sonds, and he conveyed it to John Tufton Esquire, whose great
Grandchild the right Honorable John Tufton Earl of Thanet is the instant Lord
of the Fee.

There was a perpetual Chauntry here at Ashford, in a certain Chapel
dedicated to the Virgin Mary, which was founded by Will. de Sodington, for
which he had a Concession from royal Authority, as appears Pat. 17. Edw. 3.
part secunda Memb. 37. The Land which was tied to support it, lay in Ashford,
Willesborough, Charing, and Kennington, which upon the Suppression being
dispersed into many Hands, I shall decline any farther labor to trace out.

Ashford had a Market upon the Saturday, which was allowed by the Judges
Itinerant to William de Leybourn, in the seventh year of Edw. the first, which
being thus ratified and confirmed, continues in force upon that Day, even at
this instant.

I had almost forgot Merdall, which is the last Manor in this Parish; It was
included in the Patrimony of Corbie, until Robert Corbie of Boughton, Malherbe
concluded in a Daughter and Heir called Joan Corbie, matched to Sir Nicholas
Wotton twice Lord Mayor of London; by which Marriage all that vast Demeasne
which acknowledged the Interest of that Family, came to be united to this, and
continued many years couched in their Inheritance, until at length, that is
almost in our Grandfathers Remembrance, by Sale it devolved to Sprot, who not
many years since conveyed his Right in it to Sir Thomas Finch Earl of
Winchelsey, Father to the right honorable Heneage Earl of Winchelsey now Lord
of the Fee.

Ashurst or Ashenhurst in the Hundred of Watchlingstone, with the Manor of
Buckland, as an Appendage annexed to it, was anciently the Demeasne, as the
Doomsday. Text informs us, of Philip de Gerund, and Hugh de Gerund this man's
Successor, was seized both of Ashurst and Buckland; likewise in the twenty
sixth year of Edward the first, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 71. But after this
Family determined in a Daughter and Heir, who matching with Chalfhunt made that
Family possessors of the Fee, and Henry Chalfhunt, as we trace by Record, held
it in the forty fifth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 14. And after
they went out, it came about the Beginning of Henry the sixth, by the Heir
General of this Family to be possessed by Had, whose Successor about the
Beginning of Henry the eighth, conveyed it to Waller of Grome-bridge; and from
this Family, after some Interval of Time, it was carried off by Sale to Thomas
Earl of Dorset, Lord Treasurer of England; and from his Descendant the Title
went away not many years since, by the same Fatality, into Rivers of Chafford,
in which Family the Title both of Ashurst and Buckland are at this instant
placed.

Chafford next invites our Survey, it was for some Descents the Possession of
the Roes or Rows streamed out from that original Fountain, which was of this
Name and Family at Roes Place in Alresford; and from these two those numerous
Branches have issued out, which like so many divided Rivulets have dispersed
themselves into so many parts of this Nation; but though this Family be here
(like a River licked up by a Summer Sun,) shrunk into Oblivion, and the Name
wholly dried, yet has the Title of this Seat found out another Chanel, for by
Sale it now flows in the Name of Rivers, and Sir John Rivers Baronet,
Crandchild to Sir John Rivers Knight and Baronet; descended from the ancient
Family of Rivers of River Hill in Hantshire, upon the late Decease or his
Brother Sir Thomas, is now Proprietary of it.

Aythorne in the Hundred of Eastry was given to the Monks of Christ Church by
Ulfred Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 824, in exchange for the Manor
of Berham, but the principal Honor which did accrue to it, was, that it was
parcel of that Estate which claimed the Family of Badelesmer for Inheritors,
and lay involved in their Demeasn until the unfortunate Attainder of
Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer in the Reign of Edward the second, when being by
this Tempest rent off from his Name and Patrimony, it made its abode in the
Revenue of the Crown, until K. Edw. the third granted it to Sir John de
Bondon, who in the eighteenth year of that Prince, conveyed it to John de
Gildesburgh. After whose Exit it came by the same Devolution to be possessed by
Thomas Holben, who in the twelfth year of Richard the second, passed it away to
Robert Dane; And now there being an Interval or Gap in the private Evidences,
which have an Aspect on this place, I must next represent Robert Web
possessor of it, who in the fourth year of Henry the sixth, transplanted his
Interest in it by Sale into John St. Clear, and he not long after by the same
Fatalitie transmitted it to Sir Walter Hungerford, who about the latter End of
Henry the sixth settled the Right and Title by Sale on Sir Thomas Brown of
Bechworth Castle in Surrey, Comptroler of the House to the abovesaid Prince,
who in the twenty seventh of his Reign, as appears, Pat. 27. Hen. 6. Number. 37.
obtained the Grant of a Fair to be held yearly on St. Peter's Day, and in this
Family the Propriety and Title was fixed until the sixteenth of Q. Elizabeth,
and then it was conveyed by Thomas Brown Esquire; to Francis Santon, and his Son by
the same Vicissitude in the twenty eighth of the abovesaid Princess alienated
it to Sir William Rither of London; who dying without Issue Male, settled this
Manor on Susan one of his Coheirs, first matched to Sir Thomas Caesar, and
after to Mr. Thomas Philipott, second Son to Sir John Philipott of Compton
Wascelin in Hantshire, and She upon her Decease gave it to her only Son by her
second Husband Mr. Villiers Philipott, who has lately conveyed it by Sale to
Mr. John Brett of London.

B. B. B.
BAbchild, but in all ancient Records, Escripts, and all other Monuments of
Antiquity, written Becanceald lies in the Hundred of Milton, and did, as old
Deeds testify relate to the Savages, a Family whom elder Times represented
under a Character of much eminence in this Tract. Arnold de Savage held this
Manor in the forty ninth of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 39. Part
secunda, and in this Name the Title stood some years, until it sunk into a
Daughter and Heir, who being wedded to William Clifford, branched out from the
Cliffords of Cliffords Castle in Herefordshire; the Title of this Manor with
the Name, was folded up in this Family, and here for some interval of Time it
continued, until that common Fate which shifts and changes the Scene of
Majesty it self, as well as the Face of more subordinate Interests, transferred
this Manor by Purchase to William Coting about the Beginning of Q. Elizabeth,
from whom not long after, it passed away by the same fatality to William Biggs,
Ancestor to that Gentleman his Descendant both of the Name and Family, who is
now in the enjoyment of it.

There was at Radfield in this Parish anciently a Free Chapel, which is now
only obvious to the Eye, by that Mass of Ruins in which at this present, it
seems to lie gasping, the Founder and Uses are both unknown; upon the
suppression, the Demeansn which was annexed to it, was by the Concession of
Edward the sixth, enstated on John Bateman, and his Successor John Bateman has
by Testamentary Donation, not long since conferred it on John Bateman of
Wormesell.

There was another Oratory or Chapel, whose Ruins are yet visible, near the
Verge or Margin of the Road, and here Pilgrims which did usually visit the
shrine of Thomas Becket, at Canterbury, frequently entered to offer up their
Orizons, before they advanced any farther in their Pilgrimage; the Oratory as
far as possible Conjectures guide us to assert, was erected in Memory, and
Celebration of that Counsel, held here by Archbishop Brigthwald under
Withredus, or as some Copies have it Muthredus K. of Kent, in the year 692. He
that will read the Results and Decrees of this Council, may have Recourse to
Sir Henry Spelman's Concilia Anglicana, or his Collections of the English
Councels, where he shall find the Constitutions and Canons of this Synod
represented in an exact Register to posterity.

Potts Court in Babchild vulgarly called Petts Court, was parcel of the Demeasn
of the Priory of Dertford, as appears by an Inquisition taken in the eleventh
year of Edw. the fourth, Rot. Esc. Number. 69. and continued united to it until
the suppression in the Reign of Henry the eighth, and then it was cast into the
Revenue of the Crown where it lay, until Edward the sixth in the last year of
his Reign granted it to Sir Thomas Cheyney, whose Son Henry Lord Cheyney about
the thirteenth year of Q. Eliz. passed it away to Samuel Thornhil Esquire, in
whose Descendant Line the Propriety of it is yet continuing.

Morris Court is a third place of Note in Babchild, in elder Times it gave Seat
and Surname to a Family of that Denomination, as appears by the ancient
Muniments of this Seat, but before the latter End of Henry the fourth this
Family was vanished, and then I find the Enghams settled by Purchase in the
Inheritance, and John Engham as appears by ancient Court Rolls, held it in the
Reign of Henry the fifth and Henry the sixth, and after him did the Title by
successive Inheritance transmit it self to his Posterity, even until those
Times which grew near our Grand Fathers remembrance, and then it was by Sale
translated into Wolgate, whose Ancestors had their Habitation at Wolgate Green
in Throuley; and after it had for some years acknowledged this Family for
Proprietaries, it was conveyed to Tilghman descended from the Tilghmans of
Snodland, from which Name it was again by as sudden a transmission alienated to
Carselock of Feversham allied to John Carselock the last Abbot of the Priory
there, at the suppression of it; and this Name being lately here by Defailance
of Issue totally extinguished, the Heirs of this Family as Knowler and others,
so designed by Testament, do now possess it.

Badelesmer in the Hundred of Feversham, was the Seat of that Family, which for
the great sway and influence they had once in this County, although they have
their Existence now only in Annals and History, deserve a serious Remembrance;
Giles Lord Badelesmer, as the Annals of St. Augustins instruct me, was slain in
the year 1258. in a Battle against the Welsh, whilst he by endeavoring to
unite them to the English Scepter, attempted to assault their Liberty, and they
as vigorously asserted it; Guncelin de Badelesmer dyed possessed of this Manor
in the twenty ninth year of Edward the first, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 50. and
lies buried in Badelesmer Church, with his Portraiture crosseleg'd cut in Wood,
and so much left of his Name, as discovers to us that it is He who lies there
enterred; and although there has such a vast Interval or Decursion of Time
intervened since his Sepulture, yet neither has Time, nor our modern Zeal,
more fierce and ravenous then that, so defaced it but that the Effigies
insculped crosseleg'd is yet obvious and visible; and this I believe will
sufficiently refute the opinion of the vulgar, who believe this Figure on the
Tombstone to be the representation of some Giant; and this Guncelin had Issue,
Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, that opulent and powerful Baron of Kent, who was
witness to the Charter of Edward the second, by which he confirms the
Franchises and Privileges of the City of London, in the twelfth year of his
Reign, and there subscribes himself Steward of the Kings Hostell, and was
certainly a very eminent Person, for in the year 1316, when Sir Richard de
Rodney was invested with Knighthood by the abovesaid Prince, the Ceremony of
putting on his Spurs was performed by Maurice de Berkley, and Bartholomew de
Badelesmer; but he had not been long swollen to this vast Dimension of power, but
their arose a Tempest which blasted all his blooming Glories, for Isabel Wife
and Queen to Edward the second, having by several good Offices performed
between her Husband, and his disobliged Barons, so becalmed and softened all
their Animosities, that they became intombed in a mutual Pacification, was so
inflamed at her denial of Lodging, and Accommodation in Leeds Castle by Thomas
Colepeper the Castellan under Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, that she egged and
pushed on the King to a Revenge, which was done so effectually, that the Death
of the Castellan was the Expiation of so unfortunate an Insolence, and the
Loss of the Head of the Lord Badelesmer, taken Prisoner not long after near
Pontfrait, and the forfeiture of his Estate paid the price of his Ambition; and
thus this magnificent Baron, who like a straight and procere Elm grew tall in
Title, and like its luxuriant Branches, did spread wide in the extent of his
Power and Revenue, was by this Storm supplanted, and his Patrimony broken to
pieces, being gathered up by escheat into the Royal Demeasne; and in this
Shipwreck did this Family lie involved, until the second year of Edward the
third, and then the indulgent Munificence of that Prince, boy'd it up out of
those Ruins wherein it appeared almost to have been sunk, and by Patent
restored him to his Estate here and elsewhere; and he in a thankful
acknowledge to Heaven for this Restitution, according to the Piety of those
Times, erected here a House for Black Canons, or Canons of St. Augustins, as
the Record, pat. 13. Edw. 3. Memb. 6. does amply testify, and dyed in the
twelfth year of Edward the third, and left his Estate to his only Son Giles
Lord Badelesmere, who dying without Issue; his four Sisters, Margery first
married to William Rosse Lord Hamlake, and then remarryed to Tho. Arundell;
Margaret matched to Sir John Tiptoft, Elizabeth first wedded to William Bohun
Earl of Northampton, and afterward to Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, and Mawde
espoused to John Vere Earl of Oxford, became his Coheirs, and that Land here at
Badelesmer, which was not before settled on the Monastery, upon the partition
was knit to the Patrimony of Vere, and he dyed possessed of it in the thirty
fourth year of Edward the third, and left it with the Title of Baron
Badelesmer, to his Successors, one of which was Jo. Earl of Oxford, who was
attainted in the twelfth year of Edw. the fourth, for supporting the House of
Lancaster at the Battle of Barnet, but was restored both in Blood and Estate,
but he never was possessed of this Manor, for I find that upon the Suppression
of this Cloister at Badelesmer, it escheated to the Crown, and then Henry the
eighth granted it to Sir Robert Southwell, and he in the second year of Edward
the sixth, alienated it to Sir Anth. Aucher, and he upon his decease gave it to
his Son Jo. Aucher, who dying without Issue male, Ann his sole Inheritrix,
brought it with her to her Husband Sir Humphrey Gilbert, who about the middle
of Queen Elizabeth alienated it to Sir Michael Sonds, and from him is the
instant Signorie devolved to Sir George Sonds Knight of the Bath.

There is another Manor in this Parish of Badelesmer, called Goddisland, and
gave Seat and Surname to a Family which formerly had their Mansion at this
Place, and John de Goddisland is mentioned in the Book of Aid to have held it
in twentieth of Edward the third, and when after some Flux of Time, this Name
was ebbed away from this place, the Atwoods succeeded, so styled from their
Habitation, nere the Wood, and Robert Atwood died seized of it in the sixth
year of Richard the second, and when this Family began to Decay, the Sawyers
came in and were Possessors of the place; but long the Fee was not settled in
this Name, for the Title about the Beginning of Henry the seventh was engraffed
by Purchase on Cheyney, from which Family by the like Current, it flowed about
the Beginning of Q. Elizabeth into Snode, and from them not many years since it
was by Sale wafted over to Franklin.

Barham in the Hundred of Kinghamford gives Name to that spacious Plain, where
the Britons encountered Caesar and his Army at his first Landing at Deal, and
after a signal Conflict, repelled them back to their Ships. The old Family of
Fitz-Urse, were formerly Lords of this Manor, and resolved into the Name of
Berham, after such Time as one of them called Randolph Fitz-Urse, being
Ringleader of three other Cavaliers of the Kings Court, had impiously
assassinated Archbishop Becket. The Fact being so barbarous in the Estimate of
those Times, that flying into Ireland he abandoned the Name of Fitz-Urse, and
took that of Mac-Mahon, as Mr. Camden Notes. Certainly as he was the Actor, and
thereby more stained then the rest, so was he much more culpable, beause he
held this Manor of Berham of the Sea of Canterbury, by the Service of half a
Knights Fee, so it appears by the Record of the Aid kept in the Exchequer, and
paid in the twentieth of Edw. the third; yet did not this Name vanish at this
place, but still was enforced, and multiplied into many Descents from whence
issued Gentlemen of a prime and eminent Note in this Track, until lately that
Fate which Shuffles both Families and Kingdoms into Disorder and Oblivion,
has torn this Manor now from this Name, and by purchase brought over the
Propriety of it to Fotherby.

Shelvingborough is a second Manor in this Parish, not to be waved in this
Survey, because it was sometimes one of the Seats of John de Shelving, who held
it in the seventeenth year of Edward the second; But this Family determining
not long after in a Daughter and Heir, She by matching with Haut, annexed this
Manor to the Patrimony of this Family; and in this Name the Title was carried
along by the Clew of many Descents, until it devolved to Sir William Haut; who
about the latter End of Henry the eighth, concluded in two Female Coheirs,
whereof Elizabeth was matched to Sir Thomas Colepeper of Bedgebury, who brought
this along with her to that Family, and he about the Beginning of Edward the
sixth, divested himself of the possession, and by Sale transmitted his Right in
it to Mantle, where after the Title had by some small continuance made some
little respite, it was conveyed by Sale to Carlisle; and here the Propriety,
was as transient, for an Alteration of the same resemblance, not many years
since, made it the possession of Hopday.

Diggs Court in Barham was the Mansion of the ancient Family of Dig or Diggs,
which Family about four Hundred years since, that is about the Reign of Richard
the first, had the Aldermanry of Newingate in Canterbury, as part of their
Inheritance, which it seems was not (as now) elective, but as Freehold, either
demisable or devisable ad Libitum of him or her that held the same: or if
neither demised nor devised of him nor her in Life Time, but indisposed of at
Death, then as Inheritance or Fee, it descended to the next Heir at Law; These
Aldermen every one of them, kept within their own Wards, and happily (as the
Jews held theirs) had at their several Gates a Court assembled every three
weeks, which was called of our Ancestors, sometimes the Hundred Court,
sometimes the Wardmote, that is the assembly or the meeting of the Hundred or
Ward, or the Portmote, as the Jurisdiction was called Portsoka. John or Diggs
was in the year 1258, a great Benefactor to the Franciscans, who had then newly
planted themselves at Canterbury, and purchased for them an Island in that City
called Binnewight. Emit Insulam vocatam Binnewight in Cantuar. and locum Portae
super Stourstreet, ad opus Fratrum Minorum, and tempore opportuno transtulit
Fratres ad illam. As Leland records of him: Adomarus de Dig one of this
House, was a Judge in the Reign of Edward the second, and possessed much Land
about Reynham and Newington, which still represents his Name to Posterity, and
is called Diggs Mersh; John Diggs of Diggs Court, was Sheriff of Kent part of
the second year of Henry the fourth, and John Diggs his Grand child was Sheriff
of Kent in the fourth year of Edward the fourth, his Son and Heir was John
Diggs Esquire, who likewise held that Office in the eleventh year of Henry the
seventh, this our Sheriff had Issue James Diggs of Diggs Court Esquire, who was
likewise Sheriff of Kent the second year of Henry the eighth, and Justice of
the Peace for this County almost all the Government of that Prince; he was
Father of Leonard Diggs Esquire, who was Grand Father to Sir Dudley Diggs of
Chilham Castle, Master of the Rolls 1637, who almost in our Memory passed away
this Seat which had been for many years an Appendage to it, to Captain Halsey
of London; who not long after alienated it to Alderman Soame of the same place,
who not long since conveyed it to Sir Basil Dixwell of Terlingham in Folkstone
Knight and Baronet, whose collateral Descendant, that is, his Nephews Son and
Heir, Mr. Basil Dixwell is Proprietary apparent of it.

Barfreyston in the Hundred of Eastry, was anciently held by Castle-Guard of
Dover Castle by John de Wybarne, and when this Family had abandoned the
possession, which was about the latter End of Henry the fourth, it came to be
held by Harward, and when some years it had been wrapped up in the Interest of
this Family, it was transmitted by Sale about the latter End of Henry the
sixth, to Sir Thomas Brown of Bechworth Castle; and here the Title lodged,
until the Beginning of Henry the eighth, and then part of it was passed away
to Wood, but the Manor it self rested in Brown, until the Beginning of Q.
Elizabeth, and then it was conveyed to Mr. Thomas Bois whose successor Mr. John
Bois not many years since alienated it to Sir Anthony Percival of Dover.

Hartanger and Soles are two Manors situated within the Precincts of this
little Parish, who both had owners so Surnamed. The first after it had been
folded up in the Demeasn of Hartanger until the Reign of Edward the second,
was by Purchase made the Inheritance of Perot of Knowlton, and Thomas Perot
died seized of it in the fourth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 31.
but this Name determining not long after in a Female Heir, She by matching with
Langley of Warwickshire, linked it to his Patrimony; and William Langley in
Right of this Alliance, was possessed of Hartanger in the fourth year of Henry
the fourth, and here it made its abode until the latter End of Henry the
sixth, and then it was conveyed by Sale to Sir Thomas Brown aboved mentioned,
and his successor about the Beginning of Henry the seventh. But the Manor of
Soles remained longer in the Name and possession of that Family, John Soles
held it at his Decease, which was in the forty ninth year of Edw. the third,
Rot. Esc. Number. 40. Part secunda, whilst this Family flourished under the
Notion of one of the most ancient of East-Kent, but continued here but until
the fourth year of Henry the fourth; and then I find it linked to the
Inheritance of Thomas Newbregge of Fordwich, and in his Posterity did the
propriety fix, until the Beginning of Henry the seventh, and then the Name
expired, having tranferred the Interest they had in this place to Mr. William
Bois Ancestor to Mr. John Bois of Hode, who passed away some part of it not
many years since to Sir Anthony Percival, but transmitted the Remainder to his
Son and Heir Mr. John Bois of Hode Esquire.

Bradherst with its two small appendant Manors Petesworth and Meresworth,
vulgarly called Meresborough, is situated in the Hundred of Eyhorne, and was
formerly folded up in that wide and spacious Revenue, which was the paternal
Inheritance of the Lords Leybourne of Leybourne Castle, the last of which was
Roger Lord Leybourne; in whom the Name determined, as the Estate did afterward
in his sole Daughter and Heir Juliana de Leybourne, who having no Issue
surviving, neither by her first Husband John de Hastings, nor her second,
William de Clinton Earl of Huntington, nor any who by a collateral Relation
could fortify or furnish out a claim to her inheritance, these Manors which
were a Limb of it, were invested by Escheat in the Crown, and by Edward the
third were not long after settled on his newly erected Abbey of St. Mary Grace,
on Tower Hill; and remained wound up in the Revenue of that Cloister, until
the Common dissolution did unravel it, and resigned these respective Manors,
with the Remainder of their Demeasn up to the Crown; and here the Propriety of
them made its abode, until the third year of Edward the sixth, and then they
were by the Royal Concession of that Prince, passed away to Sir Thomas Cheyney,
whose Son and Heir Sir Henry Cheyney Lord Cheyney of Tuddington, alienated all
his Interest here, in the thirteenth year of Q. Elizabeth to Samuel Thornhill
Esquire who upon his Decease gave his Estate here to his second Son Sir John
Thornhill of Bromley Knight, whose Son and Heir Charles Thornhill Esquire, has
now the Signorie of it.

The Church of Bradherst though thrust into an obscure and silent Corner,
amongst Woods and other dark Recesses, yet is enobled with a Monument of one of
the Knightly Family of Northwood, which has this Epitaph endorsed; Hic jacet
Willielmus Northwood, cum quatuor suis Filiis, verus Haeres Domini de
Northwood; It is probable this Family had some Retreat or Mansion here at this
Parish, which upon their abandoning of Bradherst, languished away insenbly into
Ruin, so that the Memory of it now is altogether neglected and forgotten.

Blackmanston in the Hundred of Worth, had a Family of good Account in this
Tract, named Marings or Marins, which it called Proprietaries, Thomas de
Marings held it at his Decease, which was in the twenty sixth year of Edward
the first, and so did Joan Widow of Roger Marins his Son, as appears by two
Inquisitions taken after her Decease, one in the sixteenth year of Edward the
third, and the other in the twenty third year of that Princes Reign; but after
this I do not find this place long permanent in this Family, for in the forty
fourth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 10. Henry de Hauts of Haut
bourne died possessed of it, and from him did the Title by an even Clew of
succession come down to Sir William Haut, Son and Heir of Sir Thomas Haut of
Hautsbourne, who deceased without Issue Male, so that this Manor of
Blackmanston, upon the Division of his Estate, came by Joan one of his two
Daughters and Coheirs to fall under the Possession and Signory of Sir Thomas
Wiat, but continued not long tied up in his Demeasn, for this noble but
unfortunate Person being engaged past all Retreat in a Disastrous Combination
against Q. Mary, was attainted of High Treason and beheaded in the second year
of that Princess; and so this place being rent off by Escheat from this Family,
it lay couched in the Income of the Crown, until the twenty ninth of Q.
Elizabeth, and then it was granted by that Princess to Roger Parker Esquire,
who was one of her Pages; and he not long after conveyed it by Sale to Sir
William Hall of Bibrook in Kennington, and his Son Nevil Hall Esquire in the
year 1630, alienated his Right in it to Sir Edward Hales Knight and Baronet,
whose Grandchild Sir Edward Hales now of Tunstal Baronet, upon the late Decease
of his Grand Father abovesaid, now succeeds in the Possession of it.

Bekesbourne in the Hundred of Downhamford, distinguished from the other
Bournes which are linked to each other by the River of Leving, by the ancient
Owners Name the Bekes. It has long time been a Member to Hasting in Sussex,
and enjoys like Liberty with the Cinque Ports, which K. Edward the third made
Declaration of by a special Writ in the forty third year of his Reign. At which
time, and long after there was a small Navigation out of the River of Stoure up
to this place: Richard de Beke as we read in Testa de Nevil, a Book kept in the
Exchequer, held some Lands here in grand Serjeantie to find one Ship each Time
K. Henry the third should pass the Seas.

The Archbishops of Canterbury had here a small but elegant House, very
commodious for their Recesse or Retirement, the River brought so conveniently
about it, that the Trouts the principal Fish there, are plentifully useful unto
it.

Garwinton a Manor and House most elegantly and commodiously situated in this
Parish, was possessed by certain Gentlemen that extracted their Denomination from
this Seat, and held the same by Knights Service of the Abbot of St. Augustins
near Canterbury, and Thomas de Garwinton a Man of valuable Consideration on
this side of the County, was eminent here in the twentieth year of Edward the
third, and from him did it descend to his great Crandchild Thomas Garwinton, in
whom the Male Line determined, for he dying without Issue in the eleventh year
of Henry the fourth, Joan his Neice matched to Richard Haut, a Cadet of the
Hauts of Hauts-Bourne, was after a serious Inquisition found to be his Heir
General, and She having entitled her Husband to this Manor, his Son Richard
Haut in Right of this Alliance was enstated in it, but he concluding likewise
in a Female Inheritrix called Margery, She She by espousing William Isaac of
Hopland knit this and much other Land to his inheritance, whose successor by
the same Fatality expired in a Daughter and Heir, first matched to Sydley, and
secondly to Sir Henry Palmer, on whom She settled this Manor, and his
Descendant Sir Henry Palmer passed it away to Lieutenant Colonel Prude slain at
Maestricht Father to Mr. Searles Prude, whose two Daughters and Coheirs have
lately conveyed it to Mr. George Curtis.

Bekenham near Bromley helps to give Name to the Hundred wherein it is placed,
and of old time was held by Gentlemen, called in Latin Records de Rupella, in
French de la Rochel, and in English Rokeley, and were in their original
Etymology extracted from Rochel in France, Richard de Rokeley died seized of
this Manor, in the fifth year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 6. and was
succeeded in the Possession by Philip de la Rokeley, and he held it likewise at
his Death, which hapened in the 23 year of Edw. the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 39.
and left it to his Sole Daughter and Heir Isolda de la Rokeley matched to
William Bruin, by whom She had Issue Sir Maurice Bruin, Chamberlain to K. Edw.
the third, honored with the Summons to Parliament as Baron amongst the Peers
of this Realm, who by a Right derived to him from his Mother, was possessed of
this at his Death, in the twenty ninth of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 38.
and transmitted a wide and spreading Revenue to his Posterity here, at
Southokenden in Essex, and at Roumere in Hantshire, which last was given in
Appendage to a younger Son, from whom the Bruins of Athelhampton in the County
of Dorset, are lineally descended. But when after a fair continuance this
Family had flourished at this Place, the Distaffe prevailed against the Spear,
and Sir Henry Bruins two Daughters and Coheirs about the Beginning of Edward
the fourth, divided his Inheritance, each of them having a first and second
Husband: Alice the eldest was first married to Robert Harleston of Essex
Esquire, and after to Sir Thomas Heveningham; and Elizabeth second Daughter was
wedded first to Thomas Tirrell of Heron in Essex Esquire, and after his Decease
to Sir William Brandon Knight, who was Standard Bearer to Henry the seventh at
Bosworth Field, where he was stain in asserting his Cause and Quarrel against
Richard the third, and he had Issue by her Sir Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk,
the Flower and perfection of English Chivalrie in his Time, who sometimes kept
his Residence at this place, (not as Proprietarie, but only as Lessee, for the
Sole Inheritance upon the Division of Bruin's Estate accrued to Tirrell;) and
here entertained Henry the eighth, with all the Cunning Pomp of Magnificence,
as he went to bestow a Visit at Hever, on his discarded, and repudiated wife
Ann of Cleve. But to go on, this Manor as I said before, being annexed to the
patrimony of Thomas Tirrell, Humphrey Tirrell his Grandchild to whom it
descended, passed away one Moietie of it in the thirty fifth year of Henry the
eighth to Ralph Warren, and the other to Henry Park; Warren alienated his
Proportion not long after to Bradbury, from which Family about the latter End
of Q. Eliz. it came over by Sale to Sergeant Gent, who gave it in Dower with
his Daughter to Sir George Dalston of Cumberland, who in our Memory conveyed it
to Sir Patrick Curwin of the same County, and he some few years since sold his
Interest in it to Sir Oliver St. John of Batricksey in Surrey, who upon his
Decease gave it to his Son then Mr. Walter, but now upon the Death of his
Nephew, Sir Walter St. John Baronet, the other Moitie by Joan sole Heir of the
abovesaid Henry Park, came to be the Inheritance of Mr. Robert Leigh descended
out of Cheshire, whose Successor about the latter End of King James alienated
it to Sir Henry Snelgrave, from whom it descended to his Grandchild Mr. Henry
Snelgrave, who not long since passed it away to Mr. Walter, now Sir Walter St.
John Baronet, who lately has exchanged the whole Manor, for other Land with
his Brother Mr. Henry St. John.

Langley in this Parish is a second Seat of eminent Account, which was in elder
Times the Possession of John de Malmains, who obtained a Charter of Free Warren
to his Lands in Bekenham, in the twelfth year of Edward the second, which was
renewed to Henry de Cliffe, to whom they accrued by Purchase from Malmains, in
the third year of Edward the third; but stayed not long in the Tenure of this
Family, for before the going out of Edward the third, I find the Propriety
invested by Sale in Langley, to which Family the Foundation of that HOuse owes
in part its Original, on which they ingraffed their own Name, which has
flourished under that Title ever since, though the Family be withered away and
gone, the last of which Name at this place was Ralph Langley, who with Roger
Twisden, Stephen Monins, Edward Monins, John Edingham or Engham, Richard
Edingham, John Berton of Cotmanton in Shouldon, John Berham, John Betenham of
Shurland in Pluckley, and others, Gentlemen of prime Rank in this County, were
summoned to appear before Robert Poynings and John Perry, in the twelfth year
of Henry the sixth, to disclaim the Title of the House of York, and this Ralph
died in the year 1451, and ordered Langley and other demeasns at Bekenham to be
sold for the discharging his Debts, the purport and Effects of which Will were
accordingly performed, and his Estate at Bekenham and Langley, passed away by
Sale to John Violett, whose Successors enjoyed it until the Beginning of Hen.
the eighth, and then it was conveyed to John Styles Esquire; who much enlarged the
House with a supply of Buildings, and from him is it by Descent devolved to be
the instant Possession of his Successor Sir Humphrey Styles Knight and Baronet.

Kelseys lies likewise in this Parish, and may justly exact our Notice; by
Deeds written in a Character that has an Aspect upon the Reign of Henry the
third, John de Kelsey, William de Kelsey, and others of that Surname are
represented to have an Interest in this Seat, and from hence it is probable the
Kelseys of Surrey did derive their first Extraction, however by the Injuries of
Time they have been in succeeding Generations cast under the umbrage of an
obscurer Fortune: But I return, After this Family had deserted the Possession
of this place, which was before the latter End of Richard the the second, I
find the Brograves stepped in, and by purchase became Lords of the Fee, a
Family which in very old Deeds writ themselves Burgrave, and sometimes
Boroughgrave, though now a more easy Pronunciation has melted it into
Brograve, which represents the Etymology of the Name, to have been in its
Original perfectly Saxon. In the year 1479, there was a License granted (as
appears by the Records of Rochester) to William Brograve by the then Bishop of
that Diocese, to erect an Oratory or Chapple at his Mannor-house of Kelseys,
the Vestigia or Relics of which are yet obvious to an inquisitive Eye, and
from this William did the Title and possession in an even Current come down to
Mr. Thomas Brograve, who being not many years since deceased, his Widow Mrs.
Martha Brograve now in respect of Jointure, enjoys the present Possession of it.

Foxgrove is the last place of Account in this Parish, it had in elder times
Proprietaries of this Surname; for I find John de Foxgrove paid respective Aid
for it in the twentieth year of Edward the third, at making the Black Prince
Knight. After this Family succeeded Bartholomew Lord Burwash, and he held it at
his Decease, which was in the twenty ninth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 44. and from him it descended to his Son Bartholomew Lord Burwash, who in
the forty third year of the abovesaid Prince, passed it away to Sir Walter de
Paveley, and in his Family it remained until the latter End of Richard the
second, and then it was conveyed to Vaux of the County of North-Hampton, and
there made its abode until the latter End of Henry the sixth, and then it was
alienated to John Grene Esquire, and he died possessed of it in fourth year of
Edward the fourth; and in this Family did the Title reside, until the
Beginning of Henry the eighth, and then it was demised to Beversea, and
Humphrey Beversea, I find held it in the eighteenth year of Henry the eighth,
and his Descendant passed it away to Luke Hollingworth, and he about the
Beginning of K. Edward the sixth, sold his Interest in it to Alderman Sir Jo.
Oliff of London, and he dying without Issue Male, Joan matched to John Leigh of
Addington Esquire, was his sole Heir, and in Right of this Alliance, did it
come down to Sir Francis Leigh late of East-Wickham; whose Widow Dowager the
Lady Christian Leigh, is now in Possession of it.

Bexley, and in ancient Deeds written Bekesley, lies in the Hundred of
Rokesley; and did in Times of elder Inscription belong to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, for Anno 805. K. Kenulfus gave Bexley to Archbishop Vefred ad opus
Ecclesiae Christi; and his Successor to improve his Interest in this Manor,
obtained a Market to be held weekly at this place upon the Tuesday, and a Fair
upon Holy-Rood-Day yearly, in the ninth year of Edward the second, as appears,
Pat. 9. Edw. 2. Number. 49. and here the Title it lodged until it came to the
Crown in the twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth, by Exchange with Tho.
Cranmer then Archbishop, as appears by the Records of Christ Church, and was
passed away by King James to Sir Io. Spilman his Majesty's Jeweller, originally
extracted out of Germany, and he suddenly after conveyed it to that resplendent
Luminary of Englands Antiquities, Mr. William Camden Clarenceux King of Arms,
and he upon his Decease gave it to Brasennose College in Oxford, from whom the
Lady Christian Leigh of East-Wickham holds it now as Lessee.

Blinden Court in old Deeds written Bladindon, is the next object of our
observation; It was in elder Times the Possession of Jordanus de Bladindon or
Blindon, who about the first year of Richard the first passed it away to
Walsingham, in which Family it was resident until the latter end of Henry the
fourth, and then it was carried over by Sale to Ferbie of Paul's Crey, and one
of this Family about the Beginning of Henry the sixth transported it by the
same Alteration to William Marshall, and he not long after conveyed it to
Rawlins; but it settled longer here, for it remained linked to the Demeasne of
this Name almost until our Grandfathers Remembrance and then it was by
Purchase made the Inheritance of May, who not many years since alienated his
Concernment in it to Wroth, and is at present, part of the Demeasne of John
Wroth Esquire, descended from the ancient Family of the Wroths, of Durants in
Essex.

Hall Place in this Parish is the last place which summons our Remembrance; It
was in times of a more ancient Character, the Inheritance of a Family called
Athall, the last of which was Thomas Athall, who in the forty first year of
Edward the third, conveyed it to Thomas Shelley of Gaysam in Westerham; and in
this Name, after the Title like a fixed Inmate had for many Generations dwelt,
it came down to William Shelley Son of John Shelley Esquire, who in the tweny
ninth year of Henry the eighth passed it away to Sir John Champneys of London,
from whom it descended to his Grandchild Mr. Richard Champneys Esquire, who
some few years since alienated his Interest here to Mr. Robert Austin of London.

Brasted in the Hundred of Codsheath was a Manor which anciently related to
the Family of Clare, who were Earls of Gloucester and Hertford, and held is in
grand Serjeanty of the Archbishops of Canterbury, as they were originally, and
de Jure, Stewards to the Lord Archbishop at the Time of his Installment and
Inthronization. Ric. de Clare dyed possessed of it in the forty seventh year of
Henry the third, and so did Gilbert de Clare in the twenty fourth year of
Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 107. From whom it came down to Richard de
Clare, who in the nineteenth year of Edward the second, ended in Margaret his
sole Heir, matched to Hugh de Audley, who in her Right was not only Earl of
Gloucester, but likewise Lord of this Manor, and enjoyed it in the twenty first
year of Edward the third; but he likewise going out in a Female Heir styled
Margaret, She by matching with Ralph Stafford Earl of Stafford, wedded the
Title to his Inheritance, nor did it dislodge or depart from it until it
escheated to the Crown upon the Attainder of Edward Stafford Duke of
Buckingham, who was convicted of high Treason in the thirteenth year of Henry
the eighth, where it had not long rested, but the abovesaid Prince by Patent
settled the Right of it on Sir Henry Isley, who being interessed past recovery,
in the Design of Sir Tho. Wiat, forfeited both Life and Estate to the Crown,
and then Queen Mary upon his Conviction, granted it to John Lennard Esquire,
from whom it is now transported by Descent to his Successor Francis Lennard
Lord Dacres, who is the instant Lord of the Fee.

There is another Manor and Seat in Brasted, venerable enough for its
Antiquity, anciently called Stockets, but now Crow-place, it was so denominated
from the Stockets which first held it, Walter de Stocket, and sometimes in old
Deeds written Stock and Stoke, possessed it by the fourth part of a Knights Fee,
in the Time of Edward the first, and after this Name began to languish into
Decay, it was by a Daughter and Heir brought over to Crow, extracted from the
Crows of Norfolk, who from the Reign of Richard the second, held it in a
continued Track of Succession, even until our Time and then it was passed away
from Sir Sackville Crow, by Sale to Sir Robert Heath, who dyed Lord Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, made so by the late King at Oxford, whose Son and
Heir Mr......... Heath Esquire is now entitled to the Signorie of it.

Bredge gives name to the whole Hundred wherein it is placed, and in Times of a
more ancient Date, was clasped up within that Revenue, which did augment the
paternal Inheritance of Cheyney, Sir Alexander de Cheyney, (as appears by
ancient Muniments, was possessed of this place in the reign of Edward the first,
and is in the Register of those eminent persons who accompanied that Prince
into Scotland, and was for his important Service against that Nation, made
Bannerent by that King at Carlaverock, in the twenty eighth year of his
Government, and from him did it by the links of several Descents, after a
large Efflux of Time devolve to Henry Lord Cheyney, who about the Beginning of
Queen Elizabeth passed it away to Mr. William Partrich Esquire, whose
Grandchild Sir Edward Partrich not many years since conveyed it to Mr. Arnold
Brame of Dover, descended from one of this Name who was Secretary to Charles
the fifth.

Blackmanbury is a noted Seat in this Parish, and had still the same Owners in
Times of a more ancient Character, with Garwinton in Bekesbourn, as namely the
Garwintons, the last of which was Tho. Garwinton, who held it at his Death,
which happened in the eleventh year of Henry the fourth, and by the Heir
General of this Family it devolved to Haut, issued out from the Hauts of
Hautsborne, and when this Family determined, the Female Heir brought this Seat
to Isaac, after Isaac was worn out of a great part of this Manor of
Blackmanbury, it became the Possession of Henry Lawrence Esquire, descended
from the Lawrences of Dorsetshire, and he held it, as appears by a Court Roll
in the thirty sixth year of Henry the eighth; and in both these Families was
the joint Propriety of this Manor resident until about the middle of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and then the whole Demise was by mutual Consent
passed away from Isaac, and Lawrence, to William Partrich Esquire, Grandfather
to Sir Edward Partrich, who not many years since conveyed it to Mr. Arnold
Brame of Dover, and he upon the Foundation of the ancient Fabric, has erected
that magnificent Pile which obliges the Eye of the passenger, both to
Admiration and Delight, and which like a Phaenix seems to have arose more
glorious out of its Ruins.

Bereacre is a third Manor in Bredge, which in the twenty first year of Edward
the first acknowledged it self to be under the Signorie of Walter de Kancia, as
appears by an Inquisition taken at the same time after his Death, Rot. Esc.
Number. 7. But before the twentieth year of Edward the third, this Family was
extinguished, and then it became the Propriety of Bereacre, who assumed his
Name from this Manor, and John de Bereacre paid a respective Supply for it (as
appears by the Book of Aid) at making the Black Prince Knight in the twentieth
year of Edward the third. After Bereacre was gone out, the Family of Lichfield
was concerned in the Possession, who likewise were Lords of much Land about
Eastry, Tilmanston and Betshanger, and in this Name was the Title placed until
the twenty second year of Edward the fourth, and then Roger Lichfield by Sale
conveyed it to William Haut, and he had Issue Richard Haut, who left only
Margery, who by matching with William Isaac, resigned up this Manor to the
Possession of that Family, but long it was not planted in this Name, for before
the latter end of Henry the eighth, it was alienated to Petit and Weeks, and
they again not many years after transmitted it by Sale to Nailor of Renvill,
from whom by the same Devolution it was almost in our Fathers Memory carried
down to Smith and Watkins.

Beauville, alias Bew^field, or Whitfield lies in the Hundred of Bewisborough,
is a small Parish mounted aloft on those Hills that run from Barham down to
Dover Castle, The Lord Giles Badelesmer anciently held it, and gave it in Frank
Marriage with his Daughter Elizabeth whom Jo. Northwood of Milton took to Wife,
and here it continued with the Interest of this Family several Descents,
until at last it devolved to John Northwood of Northwood in Milton abovesaid,
from which Name and Family the Fate of Sale took it off, and brought it over
about the latter end of Henry the eighth to Jo. Bois Esquire, Ancestor to Mr.
Io. Bois of Fredvill Esquire now living, and in this Family the Possession is
still resident.

The Manor of Linacre is seated within the Circuit of this Parish, and gave
both Seat and Surname to a Family so called, and from whom Linacre that
composed the Latin Grammar in the Reign of Henry the ninth, was lineally
extracted, but this Name here was expired, before the end of Henry the fourth,
and then by some Court Rolls I find that John Monins was invested in the Fee,
and here for some Decursion of Time the Right and Interest of this Place did
abide, until at length about the Beginning of Henry the eighth, the Title by
Sale fell under the Signory of Chelesford or Chelford, from which Name the same
Fate conveyed it to Mr. Io. Bois whose Successor Mr. Io. Bois of Fredville
Esquire, by descendant Right does now enjoy it.

East and West Berming in the Hundred of Twyford, was in Times of a very high
Ascent the Possession of a Family who derived their Surname from this Place,
William de Bermeling dyed seized of it in the twenty second year of Edward the
first, Rot. Esc. Number. 27. and had likewise the Advowson of the Church, after
him Robert de Bermelin held it in the thirty first year of Edward the first.
Rot. Esc. Number. 123. When this Family was gone out, the Freminghams came into
the Possession, John Son of Ralph de Fremingham was in the enjoyment of them at
his Death, which was in the twenty third year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 145. and so was his Successor John Fremingham in the twelfth year of Henry
the fourth, Rot. Esc. Number. 15. But after this I find no more of this Name
interessed in the Possession the next Family which was invested in the
Inheritance were the Pimpes, a Name very eminent and no less ancient in this
Track, John Pimpe held them and Ledhock at his Decease, which was in the ninth
year of Henry the fifth, Rot. Esc. Number. 35. from whom the Title streamed down
to Reginald Pimpe Esquire, in whose Tenure they were at his Death, which was in
the sixteenth year of Henry the sixth; from Pimpe they were carried away by
Purchase to the noble Family of Stafford, Dukes of Buckingham and Earls of
Stafford, in which Name they had not long continued, when Edward Stafford Duke
of Buckingham in the thirteenth year of Henry the eighth being convicted of
high Treason for consulting with a Wizard and a Monk touching the Succession
of the Crown, forfeited his Estate here and his Life together, and then King
Henry the eighth, by royal Concession planted the Propriety of these Places in
Sir John Rainsford one of his Privy Council, and his Son Sir Henry Rainsford
passed them away to Sir Henry Isley, and he having infortunately enwrapped
himself in the unhappy Design of Sir Thomas Wiat, an Attempt which was
plausible and specious enough in the Intention of it, as being enameled and
gilded over with the glorious Pretenses of asserting the Orthodox Religion,
and defending the public Liberty against the Eruption of Strangers, but very
ruinous and disastrous in the Effects and Consequences of it, as was very
visible upon this worthy Person, who in the first year of Queen Mary, was
convicted of high Treason and executed at Sevenoke, where he dyed with as much
Constancy and Alacrity of Spirit, as he had lived with Integrity, upon whose
untimely Exit, the Crown seized upon his Estate, and that Princess in the same
year he was destroyed granted his Estate here to Sir John Baker her Attorney
General, from whom the Title and possession of Berming is flowed down to his
Successor Sir John Baker Baronet, who in Right of this Descent, is now
entitled to the Patrimony of both these Manors.

Halls Place in this Parish gave Seat and Surname to a Family so styled, who in
ancient Deeds were written At-Hall from their Habitation at some more eminent
Mansion, but before the end of Edward the third this Family was vanished, and
the Signory of this Place surrendered to Colepeper of Preston, yet some part of
it I find by old Deeds was passed away to Clive, which Jo. Clive about the
seventh of Henry the fourth alienated to Peter Colepeper, and he in the tenth
year of the abovesaid Prince, conveyed Hall Place to Sampson Mascall,
originally extracted from a place called Mascalls in Brenchley; and in this
Family the Possession was fixed until the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, and
then it was conveyed to Alchorne, the Cradle or Fountain of whose Family was at
Alchorne in Rotherfield, and in this Name is the Fee-Simple of this Place still
resident, though the use and profits of it be for a long Series of years made
over to Mr......... Cook late of Stepney, and his Descendants.

West-Bere styled so in Opposition to Bear in St. Margarets nere Dover, with
the Appendant Manor of Hopland, is situated in the Hundred of Blengate, the
last of which was not called so from the growth and production of Hops there
formerly planted, as the vulgar Tradition affirms, the Introduction of Hops
into this Nation, being not of that Antiquity, but from a Family exceeding
ancient, who, (as appears by Deeds without Date) were in elder Times possessors
of it; but before the end of Edward the first, this Family was mouldered away,
and and then the eminent Family of St. Lawrence, who likewise were Lords of
West-Bere by purchase from Hugh de Bear, and about the latter end of Edward the
first, were invested in the Tenure of both, claimed the propriety, and Thomas
St. Lawrence, and John de Swalclive paid Relief for their Lands at West-Bere
and Hopland, as the Book of Aid instructs us in the twentieth year of Edward
the third; and in this Family of St. Lawrence, did the Propriety of both these
Manors reside, until the Beginning of Henry the sixth, and then Hopland was
conveyed to John Isaac, in which Name it was resident until the latter End of
Queen Elizabeth, and then it was conducted down by Sale to acknowledge Tourney
of Saltwood, and he by a like Alteration transplanted his Interest in it not
many years since into Steed, but West-Bere came by the Daughter and Heir of
this Family to Apulderfield, and again by the Female Heir of Sir William
Apulderfield to Sir John Phineux, and he settled it on his second Brother the
Heir General, of whose Descendant not many years since being wedded to Sir
John Smith it is now become the Possession of his Grandchild Philip Viscount
Strangford.

Bersted in the Hundred of Eythorne, was the Seat of the noble Family of
Crevequer, before they removed to Leeds Castle their Seat and Residence, and in
Doomsday Book where there is a particular Account taken what Manors Hamon de
Crevequer was possessed of in the twentieth of William the Conqueror, it is
written Briested, which could not be meant of Brasted, which was the Signory
and Possession of Gilbert de Clare in the Reign of Henry the first, as appears
by the Records of Christ-Church in Canterbury, where this Earl and his
Successors are said to hold the Manor of Brasted, as Senescalli Archiepiscopi
Cantuariensis in sua Inthronizatione, whereas this Manor had never any such
Tenure united to it, and remained parcel of the Patrimoniall Demeasne of
Crevequer, until Hamon de Crevequer having embarked himself in the Quarrel of
Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester, made Shipwreck of his Estate here at
Bersted, which was wrung from him by Henry the third, and though he was
pardoned by the Pacification of Killingworth made in the fiftyeth of that
Princes Reign, yet I do not find that he was ever reinvested in Bersted, so
that it remained in the Crown until the tenth year of Edward the second, and
then it was exchanged for other Land with Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, but he
having by an ambitious Defection forfeited this and much other Land in the
fifteenth year of Edward the second, it lapsed back again by an early
Confiscation to the Crown, and lay involved there until the fourth year of
Edward the sixth, and then being looked upon as wrapped up in the Manor of
Leeds Castle as indeed it had been in Appendage unto that, and the Castellans
of it, it was granted at that Time to Sir Anthony St. Ledger, from whom it
descended to his great Grandchild Sir Warham St. Ledger, who about the latter
end of King James exchanged it with Sir Richard Smith for Salmeston in the Isle
of Thanet, and two thousand pound in Money to poise the Exchange, and make the
Balance even, and he not long after passed it away to Sir Thomas Colepeper of
Hollingbourn, who has lately enstated it on his Son and Heir Sir Cheyney
Colepeper, who is entitled to the present Signory of it.

Milgate in this Parish was anciently a Manor, though now by Intermission the
Homage is lost and shrunk into Disuse and Oblivion; It was in Ages of a more
Antiquity, the possession of a Family called Coloigne, Robert de Coloigne was
possessed of it, and the Record taken after his Decease will inform you that he
dyed seized of it in the thirty fifth year of Edward third, as appears Rot.
Esc. Number. 52. Part prima. And in this Name, melted by a softer pronunciation
in Times of a lower Date into Coluney, did the propriety of it reside until
the Reign of Edward the fourth, and then by an old Survey of Bersted, I find it
in the Hands of Thomas Coluney, and this was in the fourteenth of that Princes
Reign, when most of this County was surveyed, but after him I find no more of
this Family entitled to the Possession, for in the Beginning of Henry the
seventh it was annexed to the Inheritance of Stonehouse, whose ancient Seat was
at Haselwood in Boughton Malherbe, where they flourished for many Generations,
even down unto our Times, and was constant to the Interest of that Name, until
the Beginning of Q. Elizabeth, and then it was passed away to Sir Thomas Floyd
Receiver to that Princess, and Justice of the Peace for this County, and he
much took off from the Obscurity of this Seat, by adding an additional
Magnificence, by making the ancient Fabric swell into the Dimensions not only
of a stately but an elegant Pile, by an augmentation of Building, and from him
did it devolve by Descent to his Grandchild Mr. Thomas Floyd Esquire, who some
few years since transplanted his Right in it by sale into Mr....... Cage.

There is another Manor in this Parish called Stone-house, which formerly lay
couched in that Revenue which gave support to the Priory of Christ Church, but
upon the Resignation of the Demeasn of that Cloister into the Hands of Henry
the eighth, it was by a new Grant linked to that Patrimony, which was to be
subservient to the Interest of the Dean and Chapter of Christ Church, which had
newly then from the Authority and Munificence of that Prince, received its
first Establishment. And certainly from this place, did the Stone-houses both
of Kent, Berkshire, and Buckinghamshire, either as Tenants to the Monks of the
abovesaid Cloister, or else as having some Mansion, or Habitation of theirs,
situated no far distance from this Manor, anciently extract and spin out the
primitive Original of their Name and Family: This is my conjecture, which I
leave to more sober and severer Understandings either to embrace, or else
abandon and discard.

Brabourne in the Hundred of Bircholt Franchises, was a Record drawn out of an
old Manuscript, does engage me to affirm the Inheritance in Times of a very
ancient Date of a Lady called Salburga the Words of the Record that strengthen
this Assertion are these; Provaeda Matrona Nomine Salburga Domina de Brabourne
Testamentum constitit, ut qui tenerent Brabourne darent annuatim Sancto
Augustino 40 Ambras Brasii, (that is, Plates of Brass) 4 Boves, 15 Arietes, 20
Panes, 1 Piss. Butyri, 1 Piss. Casei, 4 Carucatas Lignorum (that is, four Carts
Loads of Wood) 20 Gallinas, ea Lege ut Monarchi singulis Diebus cantarent pro
anima ejus, Psalmum Exaudiat te Dominus, etc. This Records attests the
abovesaid Lady to have died about the year 864. In Times of a lower Descent, I
find Alexander de Strabolgie Earl of Athol, who flourished here in the Reign of
Henry the third, and Edward the first, to have held it, and from him did it
devolve to his great Grandchild, David de Strabolgie Earl of Athol, who held it
at his Death, which was in the thirtieth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 19. and left it to his Son David de Strabolgie, who dying in the forty
ninth year of Edw. the third without Issue Male, Elizabeth matched to Sir
Thomas Percy, from whose Heir General the Lord Borough of Ster-borough was
descended, and Philippa wedded to John Halsham of Halsham in Sussex, shared his
Inheritance: but this Manor upon the Partition acknowledged her for
Inheritrix, and She was in Possession of it at her Death, which was in the
nineteenth year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 31. and by a Right
derived from her did John Halsham possess it at his Decease, which was in the
second year of Henry the fifth, Rot. Esc. Number. 8. and from him did it descend
to his Son Sir Hugh Halsham Knight, who deceased in the twentieth year of Henry
the sixth, and left only Joan Halsham his Daughter and Heir, who was wedded to
John Lewknor of Sussex Esquire, and so this Manor by this Alliance became the
Inheritance of that Family, but made no long abode in their Name, for the
abovesaid Io. Lewknor, and Joan his Wife in the fifth year of Edward the fourth
passed it away to Sir John Scott Comptroller of the House to K. Edward the
fourth, and from this Sir John Scott is Mr. Edward Scott Esquire, by an
uninterrupted Channel of an Original unquestioned Descent extracted, who is at
this instant, by a Right transplanted unto him from many illustrious
Predecessors, entitled to the Possession of this place.

Bircholt in this Parish, is made more eminent in this Account, because it
affords a Name to the whole Hundred wherein it is situated; by Deeds of a very
reverend and venerable Aspect, which by the obsolete and antiquated Character
seem to have been written in the Time of K. John and Henry the third, it is
made the Inheritance originally of a Family called Bircholt; Stephen de
Bircholt possessor of this Manor paid respective Aid for it (as appears by the
Book of Aid) at making the Black Prince Knight, in the twentieth year of Edward
the third. But after the Reign of this Prince, I do not find long permanent in
this Family, for in the Reign of Henry the fourth, several old Court Rolls
discover to me one Richard Halk or Hawke of Westhawks in Kingsnoth, to be
planted in the Possession, and an old Arbor Radicalis or Tree from whence
branches out the several Descents of Hawk or Halke, and which is now preserved
amongst the Evidences of Bircholt House; this Family is made to have been
Proprietaries of this Manor ever since the Beginning of Richard the second,
nor is yet departed from the Name, but remains at this instant knit to the rest
of the Demeasn of this ancient Family.

Heminge is the last place of account in Brabourne, which anciently yielded
both Seat and Surname to a Family of that Appellation; I shall not need to make
a Recapitulation from Deeds without Date, of the Antiquity of this Family at
this place, it is enough that I shall inform the Reader that after it had been
the Possession of this Name (as may be traced out by Evidences) almost three
hundred years, it was conveyed by William Heminge in the second year of Edward
the sixth to Peter Not, in which Name the Title is now resident.

Benenden in the Hundred of Cranbrooke was, as Doomesday Book informs me, if
not all yet for a principal part of it possessed by one Godricus or Godric. In
Benenden mansit Godricus (says the Record) and tenet XX. Acras in Alodio suo.
What this Alodium was, the Civilians, and out of them Sir Henry Spilman in his
Glossarie will inform you. Alodium est praedium liberum (says he) nulli
Servituti obnoxium, quod opponitur Feudo, nam olim Feuda non possent vendi sine
consensu Domini. At Alodium vero est. quod per omnem haeredum seriem discurrit,
and cuivis e populo (etiam reclamante Domino) dare possit aut venundari. The
result of all which is this, that the word Alodium signifies a Free Inheritance
or Patrimony, not chained up to any particular Service whatsoever, which has
the least Resemblace or symtome of servitude, either by Custom, Prescription,
or Law imprinted upon it, and may in English be styled Free Soccage, and which
being transmitted and conducted along by an uninterrupted Series of Descent
from Posterity to Posterity, might be pawned, mortgaged or alienated to any
Person whatsoever; whereas on the contrary, Lands which were Feudal could not
be passed away without the Lords consent: And this agrees with the Municipal
Laws of France, which anciently styled those Persons whose Lands were fortified
with that Tenure, Leuds Francs, id est, Nobiles nullius Domini Imperio evocati,
Homines sui Juris, and non Feudalis, id est, nullo Feudi Gravamine coerciti vel
restricti; that is, Men of a noble Extraction, free and unrestrained, whose
Demeasns were not manacled and tied up with the Obligations of any Tenure which
was Servile, as those whose Lands were Fendal: But enough of this, I shall now
return to Benenden, which as it gave Seat to the above mentioned Godricus, so
it seems his Descendants extracted there Surname from thence, and assumed the
Denomination of Benenden, and bare for their Arms in a Shield Azure a Lobster
Or, and certainly were of Account in this Track, for John the Son of Roger de
Benenden, held a Knights Fee in Benenden in the twentieth year of Edward the
third: But as all Families are chained up to a fixed Period, (like the Sea
which is it self bound in with a Girdle of Sand) so had this its conclusion
likewise, for Joan Benenden the Heir General of this Name, by matching with Sir
William Brenchley Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, fastened this Manor
to his Inheritance, and they both lie buried in Christ Church in Canterbury, He
died, as the Date upon their Tomb, for they slumber under one Marble, insorms
me, in the year 1446, and She in the year 1453. But after his Decease the Title
of this place, did quickly acknowledge another Proprietary, for the Heir
General of this Family matched to More of More Court in Ivy-Church, where
having been many Generations, they dislodged from so solitary an Habitation,
and planted themselves at Benenden, where they erected a House and adopted it
into their own Name, by styling it More Court, but though it still stand an
Alphabet to the Memory of this Family by bearing their Surname, yet did it not
many years after its first Institution and Frame acknowledge the Signory of
this Family, for John More Esquire, in the first year of Q. Mary, conveyed it
to Mr. William Watts, from whom by successive Right it is now come down to
Mr.......... Watts, and owns him for its present Proprietary.

The Manor of Hempsted in this Parish, anciently, that is, about the twentieth
year of Henry the third, belonged, as appears by the Book in the Exchequer,
called Testa de Nevil, to Robert de Hempsted, from whence he assumed his
Surname, which could not make the Title long lived in his Family; for about the
Beginning of Edward the third, I find it passed away to Echingham of Sussex,
and James de Echingham held it by the fourth part of a Knights Fee, in the
twentieth year of Edward the third, at making the Black Prince Knight; but
after this the Title was not long constant to the Interest of this Family; for
about the Beginning of Richard the second, I find it in the Hands of Sir Robert
Belknap the Judge, who being attainted in the tenth year of that Prince, by the
Malice and crooked Arts of a factious and insolent Nobility, there was Survey
taken of his Estate in the fourteenth year of his Reign, and then this Manor
with the residue of his Estate escheated, being annexed to the Crown, it was by
Richard the second granted to William de Guldford Sheriff of Kent, in the
eleventh year of that Prince, descended from Henry de Guldford, a great
Benefactor to the Priory of Taning, in the twenty eighth year of Edw. the
first, and who is mentioned in the Book of Aid to have held the Manor of
Wickham near Lidde in Kent, by Knights Service, in the twentyeth year of Edward
the third; and the abovesaid William having thus by the Favor of his Prince
obtained this Manor, made it his Seat, and transmitted it to his Successors,
who much improved it with the Supplement of Additional Buildings, so that it
has not only formerly for many Generations continued to be the Seat of this
Family, but is likewise a Mansion relating to this Name at this instant.

Great Maytham in Benenden was a Manor which related to the Propriety of the
noble Family of Malmains, whose principal Seat was at Malmains in Stoke, in the
Hundred of Hoo; Nicholas Malmain Grandchild of John Malmain who likewise held
this Manor in the twentieth year of Henry the third, paid a proportionate
supply for Maytham at making the Black Prince Knight, in the twentieth year of
Edw. the third, and died possessed of it in the twenty third year of that Prince:
But after this it was not long permanent in this Name, for in the fourth year
of Henry the fourth, Nicholas Carew held it at the Marriage of Blanch that
Princes Daughter, and in his Family was the Title constant until the latter
End of Henry the eighth, and then it was passed away to Thomas Lord Cromwell,
afterward created Earl of Essex, who being convicted of High Treason in the
thirty second year of Henry the eighth, it escheated to the Crown, and that
Prince in the thirty third year of his Rule granted it to Sir Thomas Wiatt, who
the same year conveyed it by Sale to Sir Walter Henley of Coursehorne, the
Kings Sergeant at Law, and he not long after disposed of it to Thomas Colepeper
of Bedgbury Esquire, who had wedded Hellen one of his three Daughters and
Coheirs, and he in the last year of Edward the Sixth alienated some part of the
Land which related to it to Richard Parker and Anthony Franklin, but the Manor
it self rested in Colepeper of Bedgebury, until the late King granted it away
not many years since to Alderman Wright of London, as being forfeited to the
Crown, because the Lord of it did not pay those Scots and Assessements which
were laid upon him toward the Reparation of the Banks of the Mersh; and by
Margaret the Daughter and Coheir of the abovesaid Alderman, is it now become
the Inheritence of Mr. Richard Cordall of London Esquire.

Lowden or little Maytham is the last Manor in this Parish, and was wrapped up
in that wide Estate which in this County claimed the Family of Atteleeze for
Proprietaries, Sir Richard Attleeze held four Knights in Rolvenden and Benenden
in the twentieth year of Edward the third, whereof this was parcel, but he
dying without Issue in the year 1394, as is manifest by the Date on his Tomb in
Shelwich Church, Marcellus Attleeze his Brother became the Heir to his Estate,
but this Manor was not long after resident in this Name, for in the fourth
year of Henry the fourth, which happened about the year 1403, (as appears by
the Record kept in the Exchequer, called the Roll of Blanch-Lands) it was
possessed by Thomas Aucher, and he paid respective Aid for it at the Marriage of
Blanch that Princes Daughter, and from him did it devolve by Descent to his
Grandchild John Aucher of Losenham Esquire, who concluded in Ann Aucher his
sole Heir, who was matched to William Colepeper second Son of Sir John
Colepeper of Bedgebury, and so this Manor with much other Land came to own the
Dominion of that Name, and remained annexed to that Family many Descents,
until not many years since it was by Sir John Colepeper of Losenham created
Lord Colepeper at Oxford, passed away to his Brother in Law Mr....... More.

Bethersden in the Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, contains several places in
it considerable, the first that summons our Notice is Bethersden Lovelace,
which celebrates the Memory of a Family called Grensted, now vulgarly styled
Grenstreet, who were its elder Proprietaries, the last of whom was Henry de
Grensted a man of eminent Repute, as the Records of this County testify, in
the Reign of Edward the second, and Edward the third, but fell under some
Umbrage and Obscurity, when he passed away his Estate here to Kinet, in whom
the Possession was very volatile, for William Kinet in the forty first year of
Edward the third, conveyed it by Sale to Jo. Lovelace, who here erected that
Structure that for so many Descents has born the Name of this Family, and was
the Seminary or Seedplot from whence a Race of Gentlemen issued forth, who have
in Military Affairs atcheived Reputation and Honor, with a prodigal Loss and
Expense both of Blood and Life, and by their deep Judgment in the municipal
Laws have deserved well of the Common Wealth, and as by their Extraction they
are descended from noble Families, so from hence have sprung those of Bayford
in Sedingbourn and Kingsdown, with the right Honorable the Lord Lovelace of
Hurley, and other Gentlemen of that Stem in Barkeshire; but alas! this Mansion
is now like a Dial when the Sun is gone, that then only is of use to declare
that there has been a Sun, for not many years since Colonel Richard Lovelace
eldest Son to Sir William Lovelace the last of this Name at this Place, passed
away his Right in Bethersden Lovelace to Mr. Richard Hulse descended from the
ancient Family of Hulse of Norbury and Astly in Cheshire.

Surrenden the elder House to that of Pluckley, for they both had one Ancestor,
was the Seat for many Generations of Gentlemen of that Name, in Deeds without
Date they are frequently written Suthrinden, and continued here until the
Reign of Henry the sixth, for in the second year of Henry the fourth, I find by
a Fine levied that year that Robert Surrenden sells Lands in Bethersden to John
Goldwell, and this Robert had Issue John, who passed it away about the
Beginning of Henry the sixth to Cardinal Kemp, who settled it in the twenty
eighth year of the abovesaid Prince on the College of Wye, then newly by him
erected, but when that College and all its Demeasne was in the thirty sixth
year of Henry the eighth surrendered into the hands of that Prince, it was by
Grant united about the thirty seventh year of his Rule, to to the Patrimony of
Sir Maurice Dennis Captain of Calais, and he in the second year of Edward the
sixth alienated it to Sir Anth. Aucher, in whom it was resident but until the
fourth year of that Prince, for then it was conveyed by Sale to Philip Chowte
Esquire, Standard Bearer to King Henry the eighth at the Seige of Boloign,
where he wan and at cheived much Honor to himself and Posterity, which was
remarkably testified by his Sovereigns Assignation of a Canton of that
Standards impression to his ancient Coat, viz. Party per pale Argent and Vert,
a Lion Passant Gardant Gules, and from this worthy Person did Surrenden by
Paternal Devolution come down to his Successor Mr. Edw. Chowte, being lately
deceased, it is with some Restrictions and Reservations by Will, bequeathed to
his only Brother Mr. George Chowte, whose Ancestors having very much enhaunsed
and improved the Beauty of the ancient Structure, by additional Buildings, it
has now contracted the Title of Surrenden Chowte, as that at Pluckley has
assumed to it self that of Surrenden Dering.

Frith is the last place of Account in this Parish, it was in Ages of an higher
date, the Patrimony of the Mayneys, as appears by several old Deeds now in the
hands of Mr. George Chowte, who were a younger branch issued out from that Stem
which was planted at Tunstall, as is evident by an old Latin Will of John de
Mayney, who dyed possessed of this place in the fiftyeth year of Edward the
third, where he gives an Obit to pray for his own and the Soul of his Kinsman
Sir Walter de Mayney; after the Mayneys were departed from the Possession of
this Manor, the Darrells of Cale Hill became the Proprietaties of it, and in
the Reign of Henry the sixth, by several Deeds, too redious in this place to
enumerate, I find John Darrell to be possessed of it, and in this Name was the
Title permanent until the latter end of the Reign of Henry the eighth, and
then it was passed away to Gibbons, descended from Hole in Rolvenden the
original Fountain and Seminary of this Family, the last of which Family at
this place was Thomas Gibbon^, in our Crandfathers Memory concluding in Lidia
Gibbon^ his Daughter and Heir, she by matching with Edward Chowte of Surrenden
Esquite, has made it now the Inheritance of his Grandchild Mr. George Chowte
Esquire.

In a peculiar Chancel on the Northside, the Parish Church of Bethersden
belonging to Lovelace there was a perpetual Chauntry founded about the thirty
eighth year of Hen. the sixth, by Richard Lovelace Mercer and Merchant
Adventurer of London, a younger Son of this Family, which was confirmed by the
Royal Authority of the abovesaid Prince.

Brenchley in the Hundred of Harmondon Twyford, was parcel of that vast
Patrimony which was entitled to the Signory of the Earls of Gloucester and
Hertford, whose Surname was Clare, Robert de Clare Earl of Gloucester and
Hertford held it at his Death, which was in the twenty first year of Edward the
first, and lest it to his Son Gilbert de Clare, who deceasing in the eighth
year of Edward the second without Issue, Hugh de Audley in right of his Wife,
Sister and Heir to the abovesaid Gilbert, (whom our Printed Books of Nobility
call Isabell, though in the Inquisition taken after his Death, which was in the
twenty first of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 39. She is styled Margaret)
entered upon the Inheritance of this place but the Fatality of the other Family
did likewise cleave to this, for the Spindle prevailed against the Spear;
Margaret being Sole Daughter and Heir to this Hugh Audley, in whom the Name at,
this place met with a sad enterment, and the Estate by her matching with Ralph
Stafford Earl of Stafford, found another Proprietary, and he in her Right held
it at his Decease, which was in the forty sixth year of Edward the third, and
transmitted it to his Son Thomas Earl of Stafford, who likewise was in the
enjoyment of it at his Death, which happened in the sixteenth year of Richard
the second, and from him was the Possession transported along by an unbroken
Thread of Descent to Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham, and Earl of Stafford,
a Man magnificent, but unfortunate, who being accused of high Treason,
attainted and beheaded in the twelfth year of Henry the eighth, and his Estate
here confiscated in the thirteenth, and rested in the Crown until the
abovesaid Prince in the thirty first year of his Reign granted it to Paul
Sidnor, and he not long after passed it away by Sale to William Lambert
Esquire, who settled it upon the College of Alms people at Greenwich, which is
vulgarly called Q. Elizabeth's College, with a Limitation reserved, that the
Heirs male of his Line might hold it in Lease for ever, and in case they might
fail, that the last might dispose of it by Testament or Deed to whom he
pleased; by virtue of which Reservation, Mr. John Lambert of Sevenoke Esquire
is at this instant Lessee to the College for this Manor.

Bokinfold in this Parish is an eminent Manor which belonged to that Chauntry
and Chapel which was founded here by Hamon de Crevequer (and confirmed as
appears by the first Book of Compositions, kept amongst the Records of the
Church of Rochester,) with the Demeasne appertaining to it, in the forty first
year of Ed. the third, and continued being thus forseited and secured by the
Royal Charter, untouched, until the general Suppression; and being dissolved,
the Revenue which anciently supported it, was in the thirty first of Henry the
eighth, carried of by Grant to Paul Sidnor Esquire, who not long after passed
it away to Sir John Gates, to whom it was again confirmed in the first year of
Edward the sixth; but he being infortunately attainted in the fourth year of
the abovesaid Prince, as being one of the Partisans of the Duke of Somerset, to
whose Service, and for whose Cause he sacrificed his Head, this returned to the
Crown, and dwelt in its Revenue until Queen Elizabeth granted it away again to
Katharine Tongue, who suddenly after alienated her Interest in it to Revell, and
he about the latter End of Queen Elizabeth passed it away to Colepeper, from
whom in our Fathers Memory it went away to Dyke, and very suddenly from him
again to Mr. Benedict Barnham, by one of whose four Daughters and Coheirs it
came to be the Patrimony of Soam, who lately has demised his whole Concernment
in it to Mr. George Brown formerly of Spelmonden in Kent, now of Buckland in
Surrey.

There was formerly a Park at this Place, for in the second year of Edward the
second, Bartholomew de Badelesmer held the Manor and Park of Bockinfold in
Fee, by grant from that Prince, and the advowson of the Free Chapel of the
same; and Edward the second in the nineteenth year of his Reign, being on his
way to France, to do his Homage for the Duchy of Apuitain, suddenly drew back
his Foot, and retired to this Place, where he reposed himself, and caused many
to be indicted for their unlawful and irregular hunting in the Park at
Bokinfold, nor has Time so dismantled or disparked it, but that yet there are
some Memorials or Vestigias, remaining which attest the Truth of the Premises.

Criolls Court is another Manor in Brenchley, which by Joan Daughter of Bertram
de Crioll, and Heir General of her Brother John de Crioll it came to Sir
Richard de Rokesley, and by his Daughter and Heir Joan to Thomas de Poynings
whose Successor Sir Ed. Poynings dying in the twelfth year of Hen. the eighth
without Issue or any collateral Alliance, in the fourteenth year of that Prince
it escheated to the Crown, afterward it was granted in the thirty first year
of that Prince to Paul Sidnor Esquire employed as Agent to that Prince into
Spain and he not long after alienated it to William Lambert Esquire, who settled
it upon the College of poor people at Greenwich of his Erection, with a
Reservation that the Heits male of his Line might hold it in Lease for ever, by
virtue of which limitation it is now enjoyed by Mr. John Lambert of Sevenoke
Esquire.

Parrocks in this Parish was anciently a Manor relating to a Family of that
Denomination, which continued Lords of the Fee until the latter end of Henry
the seventh, and then it was by Sale conveyed to William Hextall Esquire, who
dying without Issue male, Margaret his sole Daughter and Heir brought this and
much Land beside to be the Inheritance of William Whetenhall Esquire, from whom
the right of Descent wafted it down to his Successor Sir Richard Whetenhall,
who in the twelfth year of Queen Elizabeth demised it to William Brook Lord
Cobham, who not long after passed it away to Sir Thomas Nevill Grandfather to
the right honorable Mildmay Earl of Westmerland now Possessor of it.

Mascals, Capgrove or Capgrave, and Chekeswell, are three Manors in Brenchley
also, which as the Book of Aid informs me, were in the tweneieth year of Edward
the third, in the possession of John de Capgrave, and it is probable that John
Capgrave an eminent Monk, an Ornament to Learning, and to the Priory of Christ
Church, who flourished in the year 1484, and is mentioned with so much Honor
by Pitseus, was descended from this man, in whose Name these Manors were not
after this long permanent, for as the learned and laborious Sidrach Petit does
inform me in his Inquest of Kent, they fell in the Reign of Richard the
second, under the Signory of Vaux, whose Successor about the latter end of
Henry the sixth alienated his Propriety in them to Humphrey Stafford Duke of
Buckingham, whose unfortunate Grandchild Edward Duke of Buckingham being
attainted in the twelfth year of Henry the eighth, these with the Residue of
his Estate escheated to the Crown; from which not many years after, they were
passed away to Edward Ferrers Esquire, and he conveyed his Right to Whetonhall,
who about the beginning of King James demised them to Ouldsworth, who not long
after sold them to Bartue, and he almost in our Memory transmitted them by Sale
to Mr. Cha. Tucker Father to the present Owner.

The Rectory of Brenchley was given by Richard de Clare to the Canons of St.
Mary Magdalen in Tunbridge, and compounded with the Bishop of Rochester, with
this Provision reserved, that the Rector for the Time being should pay two wax
Tapers of four pound Weight to the Priory of Tunbridge at the Feast of St. Mary
Magdalen. The Manor which was annexed to this Rectory, was upon the
Dissolution of this Cloister in the thirty first year of Henry the eighth
granted to Paul Sidnor, and he not long after passed it away to William Waller
Esquire, from which Family not many years since it was by Purchase invested in
the Family of Courthop.

Moatlands was the Inheritance of a Family who extracted their Surname from
hence, and were called Brenchley, a Branch of which was Sir William Brenchley
Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, who founded a Chauntry or Chapel in
the Navy of the Cathedral at Canterbury, and dyed in the year 1446 without
Issue; nor did these Lands continue much longer in the Name, for in the
Beginning of Edward the fourth I find them in the Tenure of More, who had
matched with the Heir General, and here the Propriety of this place remained
interwoven, with the Inheritance of this Family until that Age which fell
under our Fathers Remembrance, and then it was transplanted by Sale into
Roberts, the Family with now possesses it.

There are two other Seats in this Parish, which may deserve our notice; the
first is Cats-Place, which gave Seat to Hugh de Cat, and in Recompense took its
Denomination from him, and after the Title of it had lodged in this Name many
Descents, even until the Reign of Henry the sixth, it was passed away to
Tilden, of Tildens Place in Marden; and after the Possession had some Ages been
united to their Interest, it was some few years since unfastned, and the
Propriety of it carried over to Bassage.

The second is Vanes, which yielded both Seat and Surname to as Illustrious a
Family as any in this Track, Robert Vane or Fane (for they are proimiscuously
so written in ancient Rolls) paid respective Aid for it, at making the Black
Prince Knight, in the twentieth of Edward the third, and is from him by a
continued Series still transported along in the Demeasn of this Name and
Family; so that here (if my Light fail me not) should I look for the original
of that Noble Name and Family, that since has so fairly spread into so many
several Branches issued primitively from this first original Stem.

Bredgar in the Hundred of Milton, has several places in it observable; The
first is Bexon, from whence the Borough of Bexon or Bexon Street derives it
self; It gave Surname to a Family in whom in clder Times the Inheritance was
planted, and there is yet extant in the Church Windows in colored Glass a
superannuated Portraicture mangled by rude hands, and demolished almost by the
Injuries of Time, with this Inscription affixed to the pedestal, Orate pro
Anima Joannes de Bexon, which discovers to us whose Effigies is represented by
it; this John Bexon flourished in the Reign of Edward the second, as appears by
Deeds, and Edward the third, and had Issue John Bexon likewise Rroprietary of
this place, after whom I can track no more of the Family at Bredgar: In the
Reign of Richard the second, I find it invested in Tongue, who it is probable
were extracted originally from Tongue, not far distant, a Family of good estimate
in this County, for I find by some old Deeds, that Semanus de Tongue who in the
sixteenth year of Richard the second, was Tenant to the Maison le Dieu in
Ospringe, for Lands at Lurdinden in Challock, sealed with a Bend cotised
between six Martletts, and sometimes with the Bend uncotised, and from him are
the Tongs who are now Possessors of this place, originally descended.

Swanton Court was parcel of that Estate which claimed the Lords Leybourn for
Proprietaries, and from them descended to the Heir General of the Family,
Iuliana de Leybourn, who dying in the forty third year of Edward the third
without Kindred, or without Issue, either by Hastings or Clinton, this upon a
Defailance of both escheated to the Crown, and King Edward the third, in the
fiftieth year of his Reign settled it upon the Abbey of Grace upon Tower Hill, in
whose Reverue it rested until the Suppression of that Cloister, and then it was
by Henry the eighth in the thirty sixth year of his Reign granted to
Christopher Sampson, and he in the second year of Edward the sixth conveyed it
to Sir Thomas Wiat, and he being attainted in the second year of Queen Mary, it
returned by escheat to the Crown, from whence by a new concession it came over
to Reader, who not many years since conveyed his right in it to Aldersey,
branched out from the ancient Family of Aldersey, of Aldersey in Cheshire: so
that it is now the Inheritance of Terrey Aldersey Esquire.

The College of Bredgar was converted from a Parish Church, first into that we
now call a College, by Robert then Parson thereof in the reign of Richard the
second, which was establishsd and ratified (says Harpsfield) by Thomas
Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury; and in this Capacity or posture it stood
until the Dissolution, and then being born away into the royal Revenue, it was
by Exchange with the Crown, in the twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth,
annexed to the revenue for the future of the Archbishop of Canterbury.

There is a place in this Parish called Man's, as being in elder Times a Mansion
of that Name, as Deeds both of an ancient and modern Date do inform me, which
whether it were the ancient Seat of the Man's, who have since been transplanted
to Canterbury, is uncertain; only it is very probable, because it had
Proprietaries of that Denomination, that this was the Fountain whence this
Family issued forth.

Brenset in the Hundred of Aloesbridge had still the same Proprietaries with
Newington Belhouse near Hieth, and therefore is called Newington Brenset; and
thither for farther satisfaction I shall refer my Reader, only I must inform
him, that here is an old Mansion in this Parish, which for several Descents was
the Seat of the Edolphs, before they were transplanted to Hinxhill, and
certainly in elder Times were of good Account in this County, and writ their
Names in old Deeds Edulf; for so is Stephen Edulf written in an old Commission,
directed to him, John Peckham and Martin Horn, wherein they were made
Collectors for the Cinque Ports in the sixth year of Richard the second; but
now this Family has deserted this Place, having not many years since alienated
their Interest here to Mr. John Fagge of Rye, Father to John Fagge of Wiston in
Sussex Esquire, to whose Revenue it remains now annexed.

Betshanger in the Hundred of Eastry, was in elder Times the Patrimony of a
Family called Marney or Marin for so the Name is promiscuously written; Jo. de
Marney, who is in some old Deeds called Marins, obtained a Charter of Free
Warren to his Manor of great Betshanger the first year of Edw. the first; but
it seems this Franchise did but improve the Sale, and make it more fit to be
enjoyed by another, for not long after it was conveyed to John de Soles, so
called from his Habitation near some Ponds, and he died in the enjoyment of it,
in the forty ninth year of Edw. the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 40. Part secunda.
But after this it was not long constant to the Signory of this Family, for
about the Beginning of Richard the second, I find it possessed by Bertram de
Tancrey Lord of Tancrey Island in Fordwich, and his Descendants enjoyed it
until the latter end of Henry the fourth, and then it went away by Sale to
Rutter; from which Name about the Beginning of Edward the fourth, it came to
Lichfield, whose Arms are yet visibly obvious in ancient Pains of Glass at Dane
Court in Tilmanston, viz. Bendee of six Pieces Azure and Ermin, and in this
Family it continued until the Beginning of Henry the eighth, and then by the
Heir General of this Name it became united to the Patrimony of Thomas Cox
Esquire, Customer of Sandwich, who about the latter end of Henry the eighth,
conveyed it by Sale to Mr. John Bois, Ancestor to John Bois Esquire, who by
Paternal Devolution is now entitled to the Signory of it.

Little Betshanger was a Seat relating to the Family of Cliderow, which in
elder Times was of eminent Account in this Track, yet I find that John de St.
Philibert held Lands here in the thirty first year of Edward the third, but the
Manor it self was an Appendage to the above mentioned Family; He was Knight of
the Shire, in the seventh year of Henry the fourth.
Roger de Cliderow flourished here in the Reign of Edward the second, and
Edward the third, and as appears by Seals affixed to old Evidences, which
commence from the last Kings Reign, bore for his Coat Armor upon a Cheveron
between three Eagles five Annulets, his Successor Richard Cliderow was Sheriff
of Kent the fourth and most part of the fifth year of Henry the fourth; he was
constituted soon after Admiral of the Seas, from the Thames mouth along the
Saxon Shore to the West; for in those Times the Admiralty was divided sometimes
into three, and most commonly into two Divisions, one beginning at the Thames
mouth was Admiral of the Northern Seas, the second was Admiral from the Thames
mouth Westward, and the third had the command of the Irish Seas; but in this
man's Time King Henry the fourth, in the eighth year of his Reign, reduced it
under one Person, and granted it with more ample and wide Authority under his
Brother John Beauford Earl of Somerset. But to proceed after the Title of this
place had remained locked up in the Demeasn of Cliderow, until the latter end
of. Hen. the eighth, it passed away with the Female Inheritrix to Thomas
Stoughton Esquire, by whom he had three Daughters, who were Coheirs to their
Mother, Elizabeth matched to Thomas Wild Esquire, Helen married to Edward
Nethersole, and Mary wedded to Henry Paramour, who by a joint conveyance pass
away their right to their Father in the twentieth year of Queen Elizabeth, and
he in the twenty first year by Deed re-enstates his right in them, and they
again by a concurrent and mutual consent alienate their Interest here in the
twenty eighth year of her Rule to Mr. John Gookin, and he about the first year
of King James conveyed it to Sir Henry Lodelow, who not many years since passed
it away to Mr. Edward Bois of Great Betshanger Father to Mr. John Bois Esquire,
the present Lord of the Fee.

Bicknor in the Hundreds of Milton and Eythorn, was in elder Times the
Habitation of a Family of that Surname, Sir John de Bicknor and Sir Thomas de
Bicknor accompanied King Edward the first in his successeful Expedition into
Scotland and are found Recorded in the Register or Bedroll of those Knights who
were made Bannerets at Carlaverock Castle by that Prince, in the twenty eighth
year of his Government; but after this, this Manor stayed not long in the
Tenure of this Family; for in the Reign of Edward the second, it came to
acknowledge the Dominion of Roger de Leybourn Baron of Leybourn Castle; from
whom it descended to his Sole Daughter and Heir Juliana de Leybourn, who dying
in the forty third year of Edw rd the third without Issue and without Kindred,
it devolved by Escheat to the Crown, and then that Prince settled it by a new
Donation on the Abbey of St. Mary Grace on Tower Hill, where it continued until
the public Suppression and then being surrendered up to the Crown, it was in
the thirty sixth year of Henry the eighth granted to Christopher Sampson, and
he in the second year of Edward the sixth passed it away to Sir Thomas Wiat;
from whom not long after it came by the same conveyance to own the Interest of
Reader, who about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth alienated his Right in it
to Terry, who almost in our Memory, partly by Sale, and partly in respect of
Alliance, settled the Propriety of it on Aldersey, so that Mr. Farnham Aldersey,
a second Brother of Terrey Aldersey of Swanton Court Esquire, is now Lord of
the Fee.

Biddenden in the Hundreds of Barkeley, Cranbroke and Blackbourn, had an old
Family which took both Seat and Surname from hence, and when this was consumed
and vanished, the Mayneys were the next who were successively Possessors of it,
John de Mayney died seized of this and other Lands confining upon it, in the
fiftieth year of Edward the third, and was Son of Sir John de Mayney who
flourished here, as appears by Deeds, under the worthy Character of Knighthood
many years before; and to this Name was the Possession by a continued and
unbroken Series of Ages wedded, until some years since the Title was by Sale
divorced from this Family, and conveyed by Sir Anthony Mayney Knight and
Baronet, to Sir Edw. Henden Chief Baron of the Exchequer; and he by Testament
transmitted it to his Nephew Sir John Henden, who having lately paid a Debt to
Nature which we all owe, his Son and Heir Edw. Henden Esquire, does at this
instant enjoy it.

Allards is another ancient Seat in this Parish, which for many Generations
past, until of late, acknowledged it self to be the Mansion of that Name and
Family, and from hence was Gervas Alarar or Allard descended, who was Captain
and Admiral of the Navy, set forth by the Cinque Ports in the first year of
Edward the first, as appears, Pat. 34. Edwardi primi, but now the Distaffe has
prevailed against the Lance; for this Name having been lately wound up in a
Daughter and Heir, the Possession of it in her Right is now transplanted into
Captain Terry Aldersey of Swanton Court in Bredgar Esquire.

Castwisell is a third place in Biddenden worth our Consideration, it was in
Times very ancient Parcel of that Estate, which did in this County relate to
the Moiles, extracted from Moiles Court at Bodmin in Cornwall, and certainly
did as high acknowledge the Signory of this Knightly Family, as any Land they
held in this County, for though by some old Deeds not bounded with any date, I
find the Name of John de Castwisell affixed as Test, yet by those old Deeds
and Muniments, which have an Aspect upon this Manor, I discover that Walter
Moile Knight in the sixth year of Edw. the third did grant to Reginald and
William Sand: all those Lands, Tenements, Rents and Services which Simon
Gidinden ad Formam late held of the said Sit Walter, as of his Manor of
Castwisell, and by a subsequent Deed dated in the twenty third year of Henry
the sixth, I find that Margaret Widow of William Scapis of Burmersh, did grant
to Walter Moile which was the Judge, all that Message and Land she held in
Biddenden, and by a Deed of a more modern Inscription, that is one which
comences from the twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth, I find that Thomas
Moile of Eastwell Gentleman, afterward dignified with the order of Knighthood
by the abovesaid Prince, conveyed it to Stephen Rogers Gentleman, and from him
is Mr. Jonathan Rogers, now possessor of this place, originally descended.

Bidborough is the last place which shuts up the Lowy of Tunbridge, here were
Lands which were the Inheritance of a Family called Chauney, the first of whom
with whom I meet with in Record is Thomas le Chauney, who paid respective Aid
for it at making the Black Prince Knight (as appears by the Book of Aid) in the
twentieth year of Edward the third, and continued in his Family diverse years
after his Exit; for in the latter end of Henry the fourth, I find George
Chauney possessed of it; but after him I can trace out no more of this Family who
held it; the next who succeeded in the Possession were the Palmers, as is
manifest by some old Court Rolls, which represent one Thomas Palmer to have
been Lord of the Fee in the Reign of Ed. the fourth, and Henry the seventh, but
made no long stay in this Name; for about the Beginning of Henry the eighth, it
was alienated to John Vane Esquire, and the descendant of this Family Sir Ralph
Vane being attainted in the fourth year of Edw. the sixth, it escheated to the
Crown, and Queen Elizabeth in the first year of her Rule granted it to Henry
Carry Lord Hunsdon, of whom more hereafter.

Ramhurst is another little Manor in Bidborough, which the Book of Aid informs
me in the twentieth year of Ed. the third, to have been possessed by a Family
called Warehall, and remained in their possession until the Reign of Henry the
fourth, and then it was passed away to Colepeper, whose Ancestor John Colepeper
died seized of some Estate here in the forty eighth year of Edward the third,
as appears, Rot. Esc. Number. 29. and in this Family was the Propriety resident
until the latter end of Henry the eighth, and then it was transferred by Sale
to Lewknor, from whom, in that Age which came within the Verge of our
Grandfathers Remembrance, it was alienated and demised to Dixon, in Right of
which Conveyance it is the instant Possession of Mr. Edward Dixon Esquire.

There is an House in this Parish called Bounds, and in ancient Deeds called
Bunds, which, as Tradition avers, was the utmost Margin or Limit which bounded
that League of Earth which has been since known by the Name of the Lowy of
Tunbridge, and was given by Will. Rufus to Gilbert Earl of Briony and Eu,
because his Castle of Briony had been before by Violence torn from him by
Robert Duke of Normandy, because this Earl had been a Promoter, or at least a
Fomenter of the Designs of his Brother King William.

The Manor of Bidborough it self had the same owners with that of Tunbridge,
as namely, the Earls of Clare, Audley, and Stafford, and escheating by
forfeiture to the Crown, upon the attaint of Edw. Stafford Duke of Buckingham
in the twelfth year of Hen. the eighth, it was by Q. Elizabeth granted in the
first year of her Reign to Henry Carry Lord Hunsdon, whose Son George Carry Lord
Hunsdon dying without Issue Male his only Inheritrix Elizabeth wedded to
Thomas Lord Barkley linked it to his Patrimony, and he in the Beginning of King
James conveyed it to Sir Thomas Smith, Grandfather to Robert Smith Esquire,
who lately died possessed of it.

Bilsington in the Hundred of New-church, was folded up anciently in that
Patrimony which acknowledged the Dominion of John Mansel, a man of eminent Note
in the Reign of Henry the third, as appears by that Chain of offices which
adorned his Greatness; for he was Constable of Dover-Castle, Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports, Provost of Beverley, for the abovesaid Prince, and Queen Eleanor
his Wife, and Treasurer of the Church of York; but he not long enjoyed it, for
he in the twenty seventh year of Henry the third, made God his Heir, and
divested himself of the propriety of it, to settle it on the Priory of
Bilsington, which was of his Foundation and Endowment, and by dedication
entitled to the Patronage of the Virgin Mary, and was furnished with white
Canons, or Canons Pramonstratenses; and in this condition did it remain, until
not only this, but all other Orders in this Nation, having warped and revolted
from their original Integrity, and those closer Engagements and narrower
Restraints, the Rules of their primitive Institution tied them up in, a
dissolution of Manors called for a Dissolution of Demeasn; but now, whether
those who did so zealously pretend to correct their Lives, did not more
seriously intend to reform the Ecclesiastical Patrimony, and arraign them, not
according to the Guilt of their Crimes, but the Hainousness of their Estates,
will fall under a sober Consideration; that the Excesses of the Romish Clergy
were high, their Imperfections many, and their Irregularities clamorous, is
without controversy; now what the Causes were which unfastned the Ligatures of
streighter Discipline, which like so many Nerves did both move and tie together
all the Limbs of the Body Ecclesiastic, I shall now briefly discover: The
first Cause of this Depravation was the removing and abating those Persecutions
which had so long with a sad and bloody pressure grated upon Christianity,
under the Scepter of ten Heathen Tirants; and we know that the Fable tepresents
to us, that when the Laurel, the Guerdon, and Salary of Triumphs, and the
Sweat of the Laborious shoulder, withered and shrunk into Decay, the Figgettee
sprang up our of its Ruins, which is the Emblematick Type of Softness and
Effeminacy; and we read that the Lamps of Tullia and Terentia burnt with a
clear and uninterrupted Flame, as long as they were Recluse to the Cloisters of
their Urnes and Vaults, and dwelt in the Scene and Comprehension of Darkeness;
but when they were brought out into the Public, like Camphire, they evaporated
into the Air that fed them: So the Primitive Christians who shone with such a
bright and constant Beam in the Night and Agony of their Affliction, when they
were melted with the warmth and Sunshine or a calm and prosperous Fortune,
began to slacken into Luxury and Excess, Folly and Disorder; and they that had
dared Axes and Racks, Wheels and Gridirons, the Teeth of Beasts and the Fury of
Men, the Heat of Persecution and the Flame of Oblation; and in brief, had been
inexpugnable to all the Artifices and Engines of Torture, contrived by impious
men, fell afterward cheaply and tamely, like those who are smothered with
Roses, stifled with Perfumes, and strangled with a silken Halter. The second
Cause, that elder observations insinuate to us, to have been the Reason of the
Clergies deviation, is, that vast heap of temporal Treasure with which
Constantine loaded the Bosom of the Church; so that it may be truly affirmed,
Religio peperit Divitias, and Filia devoravit Matrem; for Poverty, though like
a straight and narrow Girdle it does with its close and uneasy stricture pinch
and afflict us, yet it keeps the Garment from falling into Looseness and
Disorder; whilst superfluity of Wealth is apt to untie those Restraints which
are cast upon the Will, and unshackle those Fetters which are laid upon the
sensual Appetite, rendering our Thoughts vain and trifling, foolish and
impertinent, and our undertakings wild and irregular, making us soft and easy
for the impressions of Vice; but difficult and incapable of the influences of
Virtue, and the nobler Designs of Religion: For it is farther observable, that
from Riches evaporate the Fumes of Luxury and Ambition, which like those Mists
which exhale from the Crudities of a raw Stomach, debauch the understanding,
and disorder Reason, and muffle them up in (...) Veil and in a Cloud; and they
that view the Light of Truth, which is the great Luminary in the Firmament of
the Church, through the Vapors of secular Interest, are like those who take
the Prospect of a Star, through a gross vaporous Body of Air: they behold it by
the Chanel of so polluted a Medium, they view it in an uneven and uncertain
Paralax. The third Cause of the ^efection of Ecclesiastical Persons in the
Church of Rome, from the severer Obligations of their original Institution, is
this; the Pope had newly entitled himself to a vast and uncircumscribed Power,
and found that there was an Obligation imposed upon him to support the Clergy
in all their Excesses and vicious Sallies, that so they might be obliged to
engage the Pulpit and the Pen, in the asserting of that Authority which the
Western Emperors vainly endeavored by frequent Contests and Struglings to wring
out of his Hands, and reinvest in themselves; and they looking up, and
discovering that he beheld their Disorders with a calm and an indulgent Brow,
let loose the Golden Reigns of Discipline; and it is no wonder if at any Time
the Bridle of Government be slackned, when the Snaffle that should keep it
steady and even, has lost its two Bosses, Fear and Punishment.

But I have digressed, I now return; After the Suppression had entitled the
Crown to this Maunor, which formerly supported the Convent of Bilsington, King
Henry the eighth in the thirty seventh year of his Reign by Royal Concession
made it the Inheritance of Sir Anthony St. Ledger of Ulcombe, in which Family
the Title was permanent, until the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, and then his
Son Sir Warham St. Ledger passed it away to Sir Francis Barnham of London
Knight, Sir Walter de Bernham was one of those who was at the seige of
Carlaveock in Scotland with Edward the first in the twenty eighth of his Reign,
Knights and bore the Paternall Coat of this Family, viz. Sables, A plain Cross
engrailed between sour Crescents Argent.
whose great Grandchild Master Robert Barnham Esquire, by Paternal devolution
and descent, does now claim the instant Signory of it.

Neither Bilsington in this Parish is that Manor, which anciently was held by
a Family called Staplegate of Staplegate in Natindon, who claimed to be the
Kings chie Butler at his Coronation. The first that I find possessed of it was
Edmund de Staplegate to whom it was derived by Purchase, about the middle of
Edward the third; from Richard Fitz Allan Earl of Arundell, whose Ancestors
held it many years before, and he having thus entered upon it by his Acquist,
dyed possessed of it in the twenty ninth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number.
58, and left it to his Son and Heir Edmund de Staplegate, and he in the first
year of Richard the second put in his claim to be chief Butler at his
Coronation, as holding this Manor by the Tenure of grand Serjeantry to
discharge that Office; to evacuate his claim, Richard Earl of Arundell exhibits
a Petition and Plea, wherein he asserts that the Office of chief Butler was
never annexed to this Manor of Bilsington, that his Family had enjoyed it both
before the Possession and after the Alienation of it, and therefore desired he
might perform it that Solemn Day; upon the discussion of the whole
Controversy, it was ordered, that that Day the Earl of Arundell should
discharge it with a salvo jure, that it should not infringe the Right of
Staplegate or any other that should pretend a Right or Title to it for the
future. But to proceed, this Family held this Manor until the Beginning of
Henry the sixth, and then the Fate of Sale carried it away to Cheney, and Sir
John Cheney Knight was seized of it at his Death, which was in the seventh year
of Edward the fourth, and from him was it wafted down by the Thread of Descent
to his Successor Henry Lord Cheney, who about the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth
alienated his Propriety in it to Sir Francis Barnham of London Knight, from
whom by Successive Right the Title is now devolved to his great Grandchild,
Master Robert Barnham Esquire.

Birling in the Hundred of Larkfield, was belonging, when the great Survey of
England was taken, called Doomsday Book, to one Ralph de Curva Spina, and tha
ancient Seat of those who were the possessors of it was at Comport or Comford
Park in this Parish; but before the End of Henry the second, the above
mentioned Family was worn out, and then I find a Family called Crescie to
succeed in the Inheritance, William de Crescie had a grant of Liberties in
Birling in the fifth year of King John, but his Name and Family after this did
not long continue to possess them, for before the Expiration of the long and
tempestuous Reign of Henry the third, it was departed from them, and planted in
th Revenue which did call that Family of Say Proprietaries; the first of whom
was William de Say, who was one of those who stuck so close to the Cause and
Quarrel of Simon de Montfort the active Earl of Leicester, after whose Ruin at
the Battle of Evesham, and the total Discomfiture and Dissipation of of his
Forces in that signal Conflict, he was found in the Register of those Kentish
Gentlemen who were pardoned by the pacification at Kenelworth, and died possessed
of it in the twenty third year of Edw. the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 48. and in
some old Deeds it is called Caput Baroniae de Say; now the vulgar opinion was
formerly that that thirteen Knights Fees and a half made up a Tenure per
Baroniam now how much in value a Knights Fee was, was the Question in elder
Times, some affirming it to be 50 l. others 30 l. and diverse again but 25 l.
but the common received opinion is which has been generally allowed of by all
our Law Books, that it is in Estimate but 20 l. consisting of eight Carucates
or Hides of Land for they are coincident allowing to every Carucate or Ploughed
Land an 100. Acres, which was anciently thought to be as much as one team of
Oxen could plough up in a year; but the Tenure it self which was compounded of
these Knights Fees was altogether uncertain, for unless it be that Manscript
styled Modus Tenendi Parliamentum, which is of no higher Age then the Reign of
Edward the third, there is no Record does state or fix it, Walter de Meduana or
Mayney Ancestor to the Mayneys of Linton held twenty Knights Fees as appears by
the Red Book kept in the Exchequer, Folio 84, yet was not under the Repute of a
Baron, Walter de Wahull had the possession of 30. Knights Fees, and John de
Port of 50. yet neither of them out of so vast a Tenure could multiply or
enforce to themselves the Style or Title of Baron, whereas on the contrary
Roger de Leybourn, who married the Coheir of Vipont, and was really a Baron,
makes a recognisance of his Service, as appears by Kirkbies Inquest kept in the
Exchequer, and taken in the ninth year of Edward the first, but for two Knights
Fees and an half; from all which recited passages is evinced that this Title of
Baronage flowed only from the Favor and Indulgence of the Prince, who by his
Writ or Summons called those who had merited well by some worthy undertakings
to this Dignity and Title, and not from the vastness of their Patrimony, though
this did very much concur afterward to support their Baronage in its true
Value and Luster. But to proceed, Jeffrey de Say this Man's Successor had view
of Franck Pledge here in the eighth year of Edward the third, that is, as
appears by the Statute of Frank Pledge made in the eighteenth year of Edward
the second, he was to take Cognizance of those Disorders and Excesses in his
Court Baron that were committed by those which held in Free-Soccage of his
Manor of Berling, as well as of those which held in Knights Service or Villen
age; and this Jeffrey in the thirty third year of Edward the third dyed possessed
of this place, Rot. Esc. Number. 37. and left it to his Son William de Say, who
likewise was in the Tenure of it at his Death, which happened in the forty
third year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 43. Part secunda, and
transmitted it to his Son John de Say, who likewise held it at his Decease,
which was in the sixth year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 67. and from
him did it devolve by descent to his Son and Heir Jeffrey Lord Say, who about
the latter end of Richard the second alienated his Interest here by Sale to
Richard Fitzallan Earl of Arundell, Lord Treasurer and Lord high Admiral of
England; from whom it came over to his Son Thomas Fitzallan Earl of Arundell,
and Lord Treasurer of England likewise, who dying in the year 1416. without
Issue, Joan one of his Sisters matched to William Beauchampe, summoned to
Parliament, as Baron of Aburgavenny, in the sixteenth year of Richard the
second, became his Coheir, and so he by this Alliance was acknowledged for Lord
of the Fee, but his Son Richard Beauchampe created Earl of Worcester in the
year 1420, dying without Issue male in the ninth year of Henry the fifth,
Elizabeth his sole Daughter and Heir by matching with Edward Nevill, who in her
Right became Baron of Aburgavenny, annexed Birling and Comfort Park to his
Revenue, and he dyed possessed of it in the sixteenth year of Edward the fourth,
and from him did it descend to his great Grandchild Henry Lord Aburgavenny, who
in the twenty ninth of Queen Elizabeth dying without Issue male, gave it to his
Kinsman Sir Edward Nevill afterward Baron of Aburgavenny, whose Grandchild
John Nevill Lord Aburgavenny possesses now the Signory of it.

Bobbing in the Hundred of Milton was the ancient Seat of the illustrious
Family of Savage, Roger de Savage obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his
Lands at Bobbing Milsted, and elsewhere in the fifth year of Edward the second,
his Father Sir John de Savage, was engaged with Edward the first, at the
remarkable Siege of Carlaverock in Scotland; in the twenty eighth year of his
Reign, and there for his Signal Service, was with Thomas Savage his Brother
created Knight Banneret; Sir Arnold Savage this man's Grandchild was Sheriff of
Kent the fourth and ninth years of Richard the second, and was afterward
Speaker of the Parliament, in the second year of Henry the fourth, as appeats
by the late printed Abridgement of the Parliament Rolls preserved in the Tower,
and was one of the Privy Counsel to that Prince, as appears by the private
Evidences of this Family, his Daughter Eleanor was first matched to Sir
Reginald Cobham, by whom she had no Issue, and after was remarried to William
Clifford Esquire, Son of Sir Lewis Clifford Knight of the Garter, descended
from Clifford of Cliffords Castle in Herefordshire; who upon the Decease of his
Wifes only Brother, this Sir Arnold Savage without Issue in her Right, as Heir
General entered upon his Estate here at Bobbing, and was Sheriff of Kent in
the fourth year of Henry the fifth, and again in the thirteenth year of Henry
the sixth, his Kinsman Robert Clifford Esquire, Brother to Richard Clifford,
first Archdeacon of Canterbury, secondly Bishop of Worcester, and thirdly
Bishop of London; was Knight of the Shire for Kent, in the eighth year of Henry
the fourth, and lies buried in the middle Isle in the Body of Christ Church in
Canterbury though now his Portraicture in Copper with the Inscription affixed,
with the many Coats declaring his Descent and Alliance, are torn off and
defaced; the above mentioned William had Issue, Lewis and John, Lewis had Issue
Alexander Clifford Esquire, who was Sheriff of Kent the fifth year of King
Edward the fourth, and he had Issue Lewis Clifford Esquire;, who was likewise
Sheriff of Kent the thirteenth of Henry the seventh, and from this Lewis was
Henry Clifford lineally descended who almost in our Fathers Remembrance passed
away his Interest here to Sir Coniers Clifford, and the Lady Mary his Wife
Widow of Southwell, whom he had made joint purchaser with him in the
Conveyance, after whose Decease she was remarried to Sir Anthony St. Ledger of
Ireland, by whom she had Issue Sir Anthony St. Ledger now of Wierton House in
Boughton Montchentsey, who by a Right derived from a Donation of his Mother
divided the Manor of Bobbing with his two half Brothers Henry and Coniers
Clifford, all whom not many years since by mutual and joint Consent alienated
the whole demise to Sir Edward Duke of Cosington, and he not long after passed
away his Right in it by. Sale to Sir Richard Gurney of London, from whom the
same Vicissitude and Conveyance has now brought it to be the Patrimony of his
Brother in Law Captain Henry Samford Esquire.

Borden in the Hundred of Milton has nothing memorable in it but the Manor of
Criolls and Poyles, for they were always united together, and were parcel of
that spreading Demeasne which fell under the Signory of Bertram de Crioll, and
he dyed possessed of them in the twenty third year of Edward the third, and left
it to John Crioll his Son and Heir, who dying without Issue, Joan his Sister
and Heir General brought this and much other Land to be possessed by her Husband
Sir Richard de Rokesley; but he likewise deceasing without Issue, the same
fatal Vicissitude brought it by Joan sole Daughter and Heir to be the Patrimony
of Thomas de Poynings, in which Family the Title flowed with an uninterrupted
Current until it devolved to Sir Edward Poynings, who dyed in the twelfth year
of Henry the eighth, without Issue lawfully begotten, and as it appears by the
last Inquisition taken after his Decease in the fourteenth year of that Prince,
without any respective Kindred that could legally entitle themselves to his
Estate, so this Manor escheated to the Crown, and was granted by the abovesaid
Prince to Sir Thomas Wiat, who lost it again upon his attainder in the second
year of Queen Mary, but was restored again by Queen Elizabeth in the twenty
fifth year of her Reign to his Son George Wiat Esquire only for life, for the
Reversion thereof was by King James, by his Letters Patents bearing Date the
fifteenth Day of June in the sixteenth year of his Reign, granted to Thomas
Hooker and Jo. Spencer Gentlemen, who join after in a fine and settle it on the
Heirs of Mr. George Wiat, in the second year of King Charles Sir Francis Wiat
was found to be his Heir, who with his Ladies Consent, Dame Margaret Wiat did
by good and sufficient Assurance in Law not many years since convey it to Isaac
Seward Gentleman.

Sutton Barn is a little Manor in this Parish remarkable only in this, that
Roger de Savage Son of Sir John Savage, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to it
in the fifth year of Edward the second; and continued with the Name until the
Heir General carried it away with Bobbing to Clifford, in which Family it
remained until the latter end of Henry the eighth, and then it was passed away
to Platt, Ancestor to Mr....... Plat of Borden, who now enjoys the Inheritance
of it.

Bonnington in the Hundred of Street did anciently appertain to the Knights
Templars, and being found in the Register of their Demeasne at their total
Suppression, which was in the second year of Edward the second, it was in the
seventeenth year of that Princes Rule by a new Provision made by Act of
Parliament, settled on the Knights Hospitallers, or of St. John's of Jerusalem,
and so lay enwrapped in their Patrimony which was wide and spacious in this
Track, until the Reign of Henry the eighth, and then by the Suppression of
this Order it was made parcel of the Royal Revenue, until the abovesaid
Prince in the thirty fifth year of his Government granted it to Sir Thomas
Moile, and he not long after conveyed it by Sale to Sir James Hales of the
Dungeon near Canterbury, from whom it devolved by successive Right to his
Successor Sir James Hales, who almost in our Memory alienated his Interest in
it to Sir William Man of Canterbury.

Singleton is another Manor in Bonington, which was the Inheritance of a
Family which anciently extracted its Surname from the abovesaid Parish, and was
called Bonington, of which Family was Ni. de Bonington who paid respective Aid
for this Manor at making the Black Prince Knight; after this Family was
extinguished, which was about the Beginning of Richard the second, the
Breslands, a Family who were Owners of a plentiful Estate in East Kent, were
entitled by Purchase to the Possession of this Manor, and continued in the
Tenure of it until about the latter end of Henry the fourth, and then it
passed away (as appears by some ancient Court Rolls to Cobbe, whose Arms, viz.
Argent a Cheveron between three Cocks Gules (if not assaulted by the barrous
rudenesle of these Times) stand in old colored Class both in the Churches of
Bonington and Limne. But to proceed, Singleton had for several Generations and
Ages been folded up in that Demeasne which related to this Family, it was
carried down by the Vicissitude of Time to Edward Cobbe Esquire, who about the
Beginning of Queen Elizabeth deceased without Issue male, and so both this
Place and Cobbs place in Aldington, became the Inheritance of Sir John Norton
of Northwood, by matching with Alice sole Daughter and Heit of the abovesaid
Edward, and from him did it transmit it self by Descent to his Successor Sir
Thomas Norton of Northwood, who dying without Issue male, Elizabeth his Female
Inheritrix brought this to be parcel of that Estate which acknowledges the
Signory of Sir James Hales now of the place or Court called the Dungeon near
Canterbury.

Brookland in the Hundred of Aloesbridge, anciently was wrapped up in the
Patrimony of a noble Family called Passeley, whose Seat was at Thevegate in
Smeth, Edmund de Passeley is the first whom in public Record I discover to
have been possessed of it, as appears by an Inquisition taken after his Decease
in the nineteenth year of Edward the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 57. but the abode
of this Family at this Place was no longer then until the end of Henry the
fourth, and then it was by John Passeley alienated to the Lord Cobham of
Sterborough, and here was the Tenure and Title more transient and volatile then
in the former Family, for Thomas Lord Cobham of Sterborough dyed in the
eleventh year of Edward the fourth, and left it to his sole Daughter and Heir,
Ann matched to Edward Borough, afterward in her Right Lord Borough of
Sterborough, and Lord of this Manor; and in this Family was it fixed, until
Thomas Lord Borough, Grandchild to the abovesaid Edward, about the middle of
Queen Elizabeth, passed it away to Eversfield of Sussex, from whom by as quick
a Transition it was alienated to Godfrey of Lidde, where after it had some
small Time been settled, a Mutation like the former united it to the Propriety
of Wood, and he about the Beginning of King James demised it by Sale to Mr.
John Fagge, Grandfather to Mr. John Fagge Esquire, one of the Justices of the
Peace for the County of Sussex, who is the instant Lord of the Fee.

Brook in the Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, was given to the Priory of
Christ Church by Charlemanus a Priest, which Donation was first ratified by the
Charter of Henry the first, and secondly confirmed by that of Henry the second:
In the Conquerours time you will find it thus represented, Rodbertus de Romeney
tenet 1 Manerium de Brock, ad firmam de Cibo Monachorum, and pro 1 Sulling
defendebat se, and nunc pro Dimidio, and valet 4 l. This upon the Surrender of
the abovesaid Cloister, and its Revenue into the Hands of Henry the eighth, was
enstated on the newly erected Dean and Chapter of Christ Church, and there was
lodged until this Age of Discomposure and Distraction, and now it is rent off.

Bromley gives Name to the whole Hundred where it is situated, and has been
many Ages part of the Demeasne of the Church, since it was given (as appears by
the Records of the Church of Rochester) by John Later a Goldsmith of London to
the Bishop of that Sea in the year of our Lord 1300.

There are two Seats within this Parish which were always of temporal
Interest, and pretend to a deep Antiquity; The first is Sundridge, which
formerly was the Patrimony of a noble Family called Blund, Peter le Blund was
Constable of the Tower of London the thirty fourth of Henry the third, and
Ralph le Blund his Grandchild paid respective Aid for his Lands at Bromley,
which he there held by a whole Knights Fee of the Bishop of Rochester, in the
twentieth of Edward the third; and when this Name was entombed in a Female
Heir, this Seat went with her to the Willoughbies, from whom the Earl of
Lindsey is descended; and when some years it had rested in this Family, by the
Circumstance of Purchase, it became the Patrimony of Booth; when this Name was
likewise wound up in an Heir General, the Betenhams of Pluckley by matching
with her, became Lords of this Manfion, and and continue still Proprietaries of
it.

Simpsons is the second Seat of Account, though in Ages of a later Inscription
it contracted that Name, yet anciently it was the Demeasne of Bankewell, a
Family of Signal Repute in this Track, John de Bankewell had a Charter of Free
Warren to his Lands in Bromley, in which this was involved in the thirty first
of Edward the first, and Thomas de Bankewell dyed seized of it in the thirty
fifth year of Edward the third, and when this Family was shrunk at this Place
into a final extinction; the next who were eminent in the Possession of it,
were the Clarks, and one William Clark that flourished here in the Reign of
Henry the fifth, that he might not be obnoxious to the Statute of Kernellation,
obtained License to erect a strong little Pile of ^ime and Stone, with an
embattell'd Wall encircled with a deep Moat, which is supplied and nourished
with a living Spring; but this man's posterity did not long enjoy it, for about
the latter end of Henry the sixth, John Simpson dwelt here by right of
Purchase, and he having much improved the ancient Fabric, settled his Name upon
it, and indeed that is all that is left to Evidence they were once Owners of it,
for in an Age or two after this, it was conveyed to Mr. John Styles of Bekenham
Esquire, from whom descends Sir Humphrey Styles Knight and Baronet, Cupbearer
to the late K. Charles, and him does Simpsons confess for its instant Owner.

There is a Well in the Bishops Park, called St. Blases Well, which anciently
had an Oratory annexed to it, dedicated to St. Blasius, which was much
frequented at Whitsontide, because Lucas who was Legate for Sixtus the fourth
here in England, granted an indulgent remission of forty Days enjoined
Penance, to all those who should visit this Chapel, and offer up their
Orizons there, in the three Holy Days at Pentecost

Boughton Montchensey is placed in the Hundred of Twyford, and has that
Addition annexed to it, to signify to us that it was once the Possession of
the Family of Montchensey whose principal Seat was at Swanscamp, where I shall
treat more largely of them, but though originally they held this Place, yet it
was not long a Branch of their Demeasne, for about the Beginning of Henry the
third, they had deserted the Possession, and surrendered it up to Hougham of
Hougham by Dover, and Robert de Hougham dyed possessed of it in the forty first
year of Henry the third, and had Issue Robert de Hougham, after whose Death the
Spindle prevailed against the Spear, for he concluding in Daughters and
Coheirs, Bennet one of them was matched to John de Shelving, and he by a Right
derived from her, was invested in the Possession, and dyed seized of it in the
fourth year of Edward the third, and so did his Widow in the twenty second year
of that Prince, and with them the Name of Shelving expired in a Daughter and
Heir called Helen, who was affianced to John de Bourn, and so he in her Right
became entitled to the Signory of this Manor; but before the end of Richard
the second, this Family found likewise its Tomb in a Female Inheritrix, who was
married to Haut of Hauts Place in Petham, and Edward Haut held this Manor in
the eighth year of Henry the fourth, as appears by the Pipe Roll relating to
that Time; but after this it was not long united to their Inheritance, for
about the latter end of Henry the sixth, by an old Court Roll I find it in the
Tenure of Reginald Peckham Esquire, and Katharine Peckham Widow of James
Peckham his Son held it at her Death, which was in the seventh year of Henry
the seventh, and after her, Thomas Peckham Esquire her Descendant enjoyed it at
his Decease, which was in the twelfth year of Henry the eighth, and left it to
his Son Reginald Peckham Esquire, who about the latter end of the above
mentioned Prince passed it away to Sir Thomas Wiat, and he not long after
alienated it to Robert Rudston Esquire, who having been entangled in the
unsuccesful Design of that Knight, forfeited it to the Crown, but was
reinvested again in it by a new Concession in the second year of Queen Mary,
and much improved the ancient Structure with the increase of Building, in the
years 1567 and 1576, and left it to his Son and Heir Belknap Rudston Esquire,
who by his last Will and Testament settled it on his Kinsman Sir Francis Barnham
in the year 1613, from whom it is now descended to that worthy person Mr.
Robert Barnham Esquire his Son and Heir.

Wierton House is a second place to be considered of in this Parish, it borrows
its Surname from Adam de Wierton, who as appears by old Deeds which by the
Antiquity of their Character seem to commence from the Reign of King Henry the
third, was Possessor of this place, and having inocculated his own Name upon
it, it sprouted out, not in loose Suckers and Excrescencies, but in those who
were by lineal Descent from him justly and successively entitled to the
Propriety of this Manor; until the latter end of Richard the second, and then
it was by Sale transmitted to Robert Purse, and there is one of this Name; but
whether this Man or his Son I am uncertain who was Lord of Wierton House who
lies buried in Boughton Church in the North Isle, with this Inscription on a
Plate of Brass affixed to the Wall, Hic jacet Robertus Purse qui obiit 145*
and bona multa huic contulit Ecclesiae; that is, he built the Belfrey and the
North Isle, and those are the good Works registered in his Epitaph; and over his
place of Sepulture, his Portraicture in painted Glass was preserved entire
until the eruption of the late intestine War, and then the tempestuous and ill
managed, or rather overheated Zeal of these Times, which like an overheated
Brain still concludes in Madness, disordered it into a Heap of Ruins; after
this man's Exit, I do not find it acknowledged this Family long, for Robert
Purse this man's Son, alienated it to Richard Norton, and his Wife Margaret
Norton lies enterr'd within that Seat which belongs to Wierton House, as the
Date on her Tombstone instructs me, in the year 1470, and in this Family did
the Title for many Generations inhabit until that Age which fell under our
Cognizance, and then it was demised by Sale to Sir Anthony St. Ledger of
Ireland, who still is the Proprietary of it.

Holbrook is the last Place to be taken Notice of in this Parish, it was
anciently involved in the Demeasne of a Family which in ancient Deeds and Court
Rolls were written Halbroke, and bore, as is evident in old Registers and
Armorials, Azure A plain Cross between four Mullets Or, Frettee of the first,
and having continued here many Descents, about the Beginning of Henry the fifth
languished away, and then the Propriety of this place came to confess the
Signory of Haut of Hautsbourn, and dwelt in their Patrimony until Sir William
Haut determined about the latter end of Henry the eighth in two Female Coheirs,
whereof Joan was matched to Sir Thomas Wiat, and he in her Right was enstated
in the Inheritance of this place, and about the latter end of Edward the sixth,
the Contract being fortified with his Ladies consent, passed it away to Smith,
Ancestor to Mr........ Smith, who still possesses it as part of his Inheritance.

Boughton Alulph or Aluff in the Hundred of Wye, had this appellative
Distinction united to its Name, to intimate to us, that in the Saxons Time it
owned the Jurisdiction of one Alulphus a Saxon, into whose Name to derive his
Memory down to us, it has been ever since adopted; But in the Ages after the
Conquest, it was wrapped up in the Estate of the ancient Family of Burgherst,
now vulgarly called Burwash, Robert d^ Burgherst is the first who is brought on
the Stage by public Record and presented to our Remembrance, and he held it at
his Death, which was in the thirty third year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc.
Number. 41. and is amongst the Register of those who accompanied that Triumphant
and Succesfull Prince in his fotunate Expedition against the Scots, and he left
it to his Son Stephen de Burgherst, who in the second year of Edward the second
obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Manor of Boughton Aluff, and in the
third year of that Prince, paid his Debt to Nature; from whom it descended to
his Son Stephen de Burwash who had a Renovation of the former Charter of
Free Warren confirmed to this Manor in the first year of Ed. the third, his
Son and Heirwas Bartholomew Lord Burgherst, who had a Charter of Freewarren
confirmed to all his Lands, in which this was involved in the twelfth and
sixteenth years of Edward the third, and was certainly a Person of much
Eminence in those Times, for he is recorded by Daniell in his Chronicle to have
been one of those, to whom the abovesaid Prince committed the Conduct of his
Army at the Battle of Crescy, and was summoned to sit in Parliament as Baron,
as appears amongst the Summons of that Age, he deceased in the twenty eighth
year of Edward the third, his Heir apparent was Bartholomew Lord Burgherst, who
was Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household, and was frequently summoned to sit
as a Peer of the Realm by Edw. the third, as it appears Registered in the late
printed Abridgement of the Records of the Tower; and he in the forty third year
of Edward the third passed away this Manor and much other Land to Walter de
Pavely; in Paveley the Possession was resident but until the Beginning of
Richard the second, and then it was conveyed to Trivet; but here it was of no
long fixed continuance neither, for Sir Thomas Trivet about the fifteenth year
of the abovesaid Prince passed it away to Lewis Clifford, from whom it
descended to his Successor, Lewis Clifford Esquire, who in the twelfth year of
Henry the sixth, by a Fine then levied, transplanted his right in it into
William Wenlock, and he not long after transmitted it by Sale to Richard
Beauchampe Baron of Aburgavenny, whose Son Richard Baron Aburgavenny concluded
in Elizabeth Beauchampe his Sole Heir, who was matched to Edward Nevil in her
Right Lord of this Manor, whose Descendants constantly remained invested in
the Inheritance until the latter End of Henry the eighth, and then it was
alienated to Sir Thomas Moile, and he dying without Issue Male, Katharine his
Daughter and Coheir fastened it to the Demeasn of her Husband Sir Thomas Finch,
where it has ever since remained so constant, and permanent, that it now
confesses the Signory of the right honorable Heneage Finch the instant Earl of
Winchelsey.

Seaton, Ulley, and Potbery, are three little Manors lying within the Verge of
this Parish, the first of which held in grand Serjeantie of the Crown, with
this respective Service to be performed by the Lord of the Fee, Esse vantrarius
Regius quando Rex iverit in Vasconiam, donec per usus fuerit pari Solutarum
pretio 4 d. which wiser Heads, who pretend to unravell the Intrigues and
Criticisms of Law Latin interpret thus, to be the Kings fore Footman, when he
shall go into Gasconie, until he has worn out a pair of Shoes, which cost 4
d. All these Manors were wrapped up in the Demeasn of Crioll, and Bertram de
Crioll died seized of them in the twenty third year of Edward the first, whose
only Daughter Joan being matched to Richard de Rokesley, called in some old
Records Sir Richard, upon the Death of her Brother John de Crioll without
Issue, entitled her Husband to that large Patrimony which called her Father
Proprietary; but he dying without Issue Male, Joan his Sole Heir wedded to
Thomas de Poynings, knit together the Demeasn of Crioll and Rokesley, and cast
it into his Possession; and here it made its abode until the eleventh year of
Richard the second, and then the Title of these Manors came by Eleanor the
general Inheritrix of Poynings, to submit to the Dominion of Henry Earl of
Northumberland, and his Successor Henry Earl of the same place alienated them
in the twenty third of Henry the eighth to Sir Thomas Cheyney, William
Walsingham, and William Fitz Williams, and they conveyed them to Sir
Christopher Hales, and his Son Sir James sold them to Sir Thomas Moile, by
whose Coheir they devolved to Sir Thomas Finch.

Buckwell in Boughton Alulph, was the Seat of a Family called Bekewell, as
appears by an Inquisition taken after the Death of Henry de Bekewell, in the
tenth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 72. by which he is found to have
been then possessed of it, and so was his Successor Henry Bekewell by a
subsequent Inquisition taken in the seventeenth year of Richard the second,
Rot. Esc. Number. 97. After this Family was worn out, the Possession of this Place
was united to the Inheritance of Wode, and here it remained fastened until the
thirty fourth year of Henry the sixth, and then Robert Wode passed it away by
Sale to Mr. Walter Moile, Father to John Moile Esquire; who was Justice of the
Peace for this County, in the Reign of Edward the fourth, and Henry the
seventh; and from whom Mr. Robert Moile is lineally branched out, who now
enjoys this Mansion: And so much for the Seat it self. The Manor which is now
entwined with it, was for the principal part of it, the Inheritance of
Burgherst or Burwash. Robert de Burgherst possessed it at his Death, which was in
the thirty third year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 41. From whom it
devolved to his Successor Bartholomew Lord Burgherst Knight of the Garter, who
in the forty third year of Edward the third, by a Deed of Feoffment, invests it
in Sir Walter de Paveley Knight likewise of the Garter; from Pavely it came
over by Purchase to be the Possession of Sir Robert Belknap one of the Judges
under Richard the second, who having disgusted the Duke of Gloucester that Kings
Uncle, and others of the Nobility, who were knit into a Junto, for Protection
of the Peoples Liberties, against the Inroades of the Regal Prerogative, which
peradventure that unfortunate Person had endeavored to extend beyond its just
Confines, was empeached of High Treason, convicted and banished into Ireland,
in the tenth year of the above mentioned Prince, and his Estate for the most
part confiscated, amongst which was his Land at Buckwell, which King Richard
the second, in the twelfth year of his Rule, granted to the Dean and Canons of
St. Stephens in Westminster, and I find one Semana de Tongue to have held it in
Lease of that Chapter at her Death, which was in the second year of Henry the
fifth, Rot. Esc. Number. 29. and so did Kimberly afterward in the third year of
Henry the sixth, Rot. Esc. Number. 33. After this Family was disseised, I find the
Moiles to have held it as Lessees to that Covent, until the general
Dissolution in the Reign of King Henry the eighth, and then that Prince granted
the Fee-Simple to John Moile Esquire, Son of Robert Moile Esquire, who as the
Records of this Family restifie, was Justice of the Peace of this County, and
one of the Esquires of the Body to that Prince, and from this John Moile is the
Title by Hereditary Succession streamed into Mr. Robert Moile, who is the
instant Lord of the Fee.

Barton is another Manor, which partly is situated in Wye, and partly in
Boughton Alulf, and had Owners of that Surname, who were invested in the
Possession until the twenty eighth year of Henry the sixth; and then it was
conveyed to Cardinal Kempe, who settled it on his newly instituted College of
Wye, in whose Revenue it lay folded up, until upon the suppression it was
surrendered into the Hands of Henry the eighth, in the twenty ninth year of his
Government, and was not long after conveyed by Grant to Sir Thomas Moile, and
he passed it away to his Brother Mr. Walter Moile, from whom it is now
descended to his Successor, Mr. Robert Moile the Heir apparent of it.

Bocton under Bleane gives Name to the whole Hundred, wherein it is placed. It
was one of those Manors which anciently belonged to the Archbishop of
Canterbury; but by whom it was given, because the Records of Christ Church in
that particular are silent, I must, if you will look for its appraisment in the
Time of the Conqueror, Doomsday Book will inform you. Bocton, (says that
Record) est Manerium Archiepiscopi, and in Tempore Edwardi Regis defendebat se
pro V. Sullings, and dimidio, and nunc similiter, and fuit appretiatum in
Tempore Edwardi Regis X lb. Et Archiepiscopus habet inde C s. XV s. and III.
Denarios de Gablo. Nunc autem valet XX lb. Sed tamen reddit XX. and V lb. de
Firma, and Archiepiscopus habet suum Gablum ut supra.

Boughton or Bocton Court, is the first place of secular Interest which claims
our Notice; it formerly (though now shrunk into a Mansion of mean Concernment)
did contribute both Seat and Surname to a Family so called, and one John de
Bocton, as I discover by Deeds held it in the Reign of Edw. the second, and
Edward the third: In times more modern it is in Sir Jo. Rowths Evidences called
Swayford, from the Swayfords who were next Possessors of the Fee; those who
succeeded the Inheritance were the Bingers, now called Bengers, from whom the
Bengers of Hougham by Dover, are issued out, and after this Name had flourished
here from the entrance into the Government of Henry the fifth, till toward the
Reign of Henry the seventh it expired, and then the Hales were the successive
Proprietaries, from whom by Sale the Right was wafted over to Wood, and from
this Name did a Fatality resembling the former bring it down to Rowth, in
Relation to whom Sir John Rowth is now entitled to the Fee-Simple of it.

Brinley in this Patish does celebrate the Memory of Sir Laurence de Brinley,
who flourished here about the Reign of Edward the first; and in this Family was
it for a Series of some Descents resident, till one of them sold it to John
Roper a younger Branch of the Ropers of St. Dunstans, in whose Posterity after
the Title had been sometime planted, it was by a Daughter and Heir made the
Inheritance of Aires; and when this Family after some abode here determined in
a Daughter and Heir, the same Female Right threw it into the Revenue of the
Rowths descended from the Rowths of Darbyshire, from which Alliance Sir John
Rowth claims at this instant the Possession.

Nash Court is a Seat of very reverend Antiquity, especially since for some
Centuries of years it has been (as is apparent by their own private Evidences)
the Mansion of the Hawkins, a Family of deep Descent, and illustrious Account
in this Track, but made more eminent by being the Cradle of that Learned
Gentleman Sir Thomas Hawkins, who for his accurate Translation of Caussinus his
holy Court from the French Original into English, and his other well polished
Labors, cannot be decyphered or limned out to Posterity under too worthy an
Attribute.

Colkins is the last place, though not of the least Account, which in this
Parish is to be considered; it was built by John Colkin originally a Citizen of
Canterbury, and he at his Death, which was in the tenth of Edward the third,
was in possession of it; there are several of this Man's Posterity which lie
entombed in Boughton with a Griffin Segreant, which was their Paternal Coat,
affixed to the Front of the Gravestone, William Colkin and Agnes his Wife, are
there enterr'd with this Inscription, Orate pro anima Will. Colkin and Agnet.
Ux. qui quidem obierunt, Anno Dom. 1460. and the rest is defaced; this Man's
Father John Colkin sleeps there with this Inscription annexed, to the Marble,
Hic jacet Johannes Colkin qui obiito ctavo Die Aprilis, Anno Dom. 1405. But not
long after the Decease of William Colkin abovesaid, did the Possession of this
Seat continue permanent in this Family, for his Son John Colkin sold it to
Henry Petit Father to Cirjacus or Sidrach Petit, who drew up a Survey of all
the Manors of Kent, which held by Knights Service of the Crown, in the twenty
eigth year of Henry the eighth, from whom Mr. Petit the present Lord of Colkins
does extract both his Descent and Title.

Dane Court in this Parish also cannot be passed by without some Inspection: In
elder Times Sir Allan de Dane challenged the Signorie of it, and as he took his
Surname from it, so he had his Habitation here, in the Reign of Edward the
third, and it continued a Mansion for his Descendants diverse years after; but
in the Reign of Henry the fourth, I find the Foggs Lords of the Fee, the last
of which that held it was Sir Jo. Fogge, who died possessed of it, as appears by
his Will, in the seventeenth year of Henry the seventh, and left it to his Son
and Heir Sir Jo. Fogge, from which Family not many years after it came to own
the Propriety of Petit of Colkins, in the Descendant of which Family the
Interest of it is yet resident.

Tho. At Hurst here founded a Chapel in the eighth of Richard the second, and
dedicated it to Saint Nicholas, which was for the use of Lazars and poor
Leprous people, lodged in an Hospital not far distant of this Man's Foundation
also.

Bourdfield or Boresfield in the Hundred of Eyhorn was formerly a Parish, and
the remains of some part of the Stonework of the Church, as likewise the Bounds
of the Churchyard are yet obvious, but since its decay it has been
incorporated into Oltringden, and is now looked upon as an Hamblet of that
Parish. It was for many Descents the Patrimony of the Lords Cobham of
Sterborough, and so continued until Thomas Lord Cobham died in the eleventh
year of Edward the fourth, and left one only Daughter and Heir called Ann
Cobham, who was matched with Edward Borough after in her Right as Heir General
created Lord Borough of Sterborough, from whom this Manor descended to his
Grandchild Thomas Lord Borough, who in the twenty fifth year of Q. Elizabeth
conveyed it to John Pakenham, and he not long after alienated it to John Lewin
Esquire, in which Family it remained until our Remembrance, and then by the
Heir General it was carried off to Rogers of the County of Somerset, and the
like vicissitude has by the Female Inheritrix of that Family brought it now to
acknowledge Charles Cavendish Viscount Mansfield Heir apparent to William
created Marquess Newcastle by the late King at Oxford.

Bishops-Bourn in the Hundred of Bredge and Petham, is called so because it was
given by K. Kenulfus at the Request of Athelard Archbishop of Canterbury to
the Priory of Christ Church, in the year of Grace 789, and in the Charter there
is a Recital of one Aldhun a pious Citizen of Canterbury, who first bequeathed
it to that Covent, and the Charter of Confirmation informs us that it was given
to the Monks, ad Vestimentum little, for a supply of Vesture. In the year 811.
Archbishop Ulfred exchanged Eastry of Bourn, with the Covent above mentioned,
and in the Demeasne of that See it lay couched until the latter end of Hen.
the eighth, and then Tho. Archbishop of Canterbury exchanged it for other
Lands with Sir Thomas Colepeper of Bedgebury, who in the thirty fourth year of
the abovesaid Prince conveyed it to Sir Anthony Aucher Ancestor to Sir Anthony
Aucher Knight and Baronet, the instant Proprietary both of this and Hautsbourn,
which next summons a Remembrance.

Hauts-bourn before it was enlarged with the Additional Appellation of Haut;
afforded both Seat and Surname in elder Times to a Family of venerable
Antiquity in these Parts; John de Bourn lived here, and had a Charter, of
Free Warren granted to it in the seventeenth year of Ed. the first; but when
this Name resolved into a Daughter and Heir, who was married to Shelving, this
Manor lost the Name of Bourn, and was called by Addition Shelving Bourn, and
remained sometime under that Notion, until a Vicissitude of the same Nature
with the former, entombed this in a Female Inheritrix likewise, who being
married to Edw. Haut, the first Addition was removed, and wrapped up in a
second, for thenceforth in public Records it was frequently styled
Hauts-bourn, and so continued under that Name and in that Family, until Sir
William Eaut about the latter end of Hen. the eighth, dying without Issue Male,
this Family determined in two Daughters and Coheirs, one of whom called Elizab.
being matched to Sir Thowas Colepeper of Bedgebury, brought Bourn to be the
Inheritance of that Family, and he in the thirty fourth year of Henry the
eighth, passed it away to Sir Anthony Aucher, descended from Aucherus the
Saxon, who was of eminent Note at Newenden in this County, of whom more shall
be spoken when I come to treat of that place.

Bursted is the last Place to be taken Notice of in this Parish, which in
ancient Deeds is written Burghsted, and was the Inheritance of a Family of that
Surname, but the chiefest Honor which it acquired in times of a more modern
Aspect, is, that for several Descents last past it has constantly confessed it
self to be part of the propriety and Patrimony of Den, a Cadet of the Denns
of Den Hill.

Boxley in the Hundred of Maidston, had an Abbey filled with Cistertian Monks,
and founded by William de Iper of Flanders, advanced by King Stephen to be Earl
of Kent in the year 1145; K. Richard the first, as the Register of this Abbey
denotes, was a great Benefactor to the Covent, who were originally transported
hither from Clarevall in Burgundy; upon the Suppression, the House with the
Demeasne adjacent was in the thirty second of Henry the eighth, granted to Sir
Thomas Wiat, Father to Sir Thomas Wiat, one of his Privy Counsel, a man of an
unbroken though a calamitous Virtue, who thinking it a less stain to forfeit
his Estate, then to debauch his Consience, stuck close to that Sacramental
Covenant, by which he and the rest of the Council had obliged themselves to
Henry the eighth, to preserve as much as in them lay his two Daughters Mary and
Elizabeth from confederating with any foreign Alliance, and so engaged in that
Design which over set him, and sunk him and his Patrimony into that Ruin; we
find him and it lost at present, for upon his Attainder, Queen Mary in the
second year of her Reign, granted out his Estate as if it were by Retail to
several sons, but this Manor and some other small pieces were given back to
the Lady Joan Wiat his Widow, for the support of her self and Family; and this
is all which of that vast and wide Revenue of his, which lay scattered in this
and other Counties is held by his Posterity at this Day.

Wevering in this Parish is a Manor held by Knights Service, and Waretius de
Shelving Son of John Shelving, and Hellen de Bourn Daughter and Heir of John de
Bourn held it by this Tenure, to find a Horse for the Kings Army in Wales; Cum
uno Sacco and Brochia pro Esquilar ipsius Domini Regis, so it runs in the Latin
Record taken in the third year of Edward the third; after this man's Decease,
John de Shelving was this man's Heir, and in his Right enjoyed this Manor,
though it was not wholly his till he married Benedicta Daughter and Coheir of
Robert de Hougham, who likewise held some part of it, and then he transmitted
it entire to his Son William Shelving, whose Sole Daughter and Heir being
married to Edward Haut of Hauts Place in Petham, who was Sheriff of Kent in the
eighth of Henry the fourth, this and an opulent Demeasne beside became
interwoven with the Revenue of that Family; and here the Possession seemed to
be laid up till Sir William Haut of Hautsbourn, this man's great Grandchild dyed
and left only two Coheirs, Joan matched to Sir Thomas Wiat, and Elizabeth
married to Sir Thomas Colepeper of Bedgebury, so wavering by this Alliance
accrued to Sir Thomas Wiat, from whom in the twenty fourth year of Queen Mary
it was by forfeiture torn away, but was in the twenty fourth year of Queen
Elizabeth restored with the Manor of Boxley to the Lady Joan Wiat, Widow of
the abovesaid Sir Thomas, and her Son George Wiat for three Life's; the
Reversion was sold by King Charles to Mr. Stephen Alcock who alienated the Fee
Simple to Sir Francis Wiat.

Vinters is contained also in Boxley, it gave Seat and Surname to as noble a
Family and of as deep Antiquity as any in this Track; Roger Vinter lived here,
who was one of the Conservators of the Peace for the County of Kent in the
eighteenth year of the Reign of Edward the third, he deceased in the forty
seventh of the abovesaid Princes Government, and John Vinter was his Heir, who
sold Vinter, to Fremingham in the tenth year of Henry the fourth, from whom it
was conveyed by a Female Inheritrix to Isley of Sundrich, and here it rested
till Sir Henry Isley being folded up in the same attempt with Sir Thomas Wiat,
upon the blasting of that Design forfeited his Interest in it to the Crown;
Queen Mary granted it to Cutts, who some years after divested himself of his
right in it, and by Sale disposed of it to Sir Cavaliero Maycott, who suddenly
alienated it to Covert, who transferred it by the like Devolution, about some
five and twenty years since to Sir John Tufton Knight Baronet, whose second Son
Sir Charles Tufton, upon the late Decease of his Brother Sir Benedict Tufton is
the present Lord of the Fee.

I had almost forgot to mention, which certainly must much improve the Honor
of this Place, that King Edward the second in the fifteenth year of his Reign
lying at Boxley Abbey granted the Charter to London, to elect yearly one of the
City at their own pleasure to be their Mayor.

Boughton Malherbe in the Hundred of Eyhorne, did very probably take its
Denomination from a Family of that Surname, who were of eminent Account in the
County of Devon; for I find Sir William de Malherbe was witness to a Deed of
Reginald de Mohun, by which he gives much Land to the Abbey of Axminster, as
appears Pat. 14. Hen. tertii Memb. 33. part prima. In the Reign of Henry the
third, by several old Deeds I discover it to be marshalled in the List of those
Lands which confessed Robert de Gatton Son of Robert de Gatton, (who was one of
the Recognitores magnae Assisae in the second year of King John) to have been
its Proprietarie, and he dyed possessed of it in the forty eighth year of Henry
the third, and left it to his Son Hamo de Gatton, in whom the male Line
determined; so that this Manor upon the Partition of his Inheritance, devolved
by Elizabeth his Daughter and Coheir to be the Patrimony of William de Dene,
who obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Lands here, in the renth year of
Edward the second; but he not long after enjoyed the Benefit of this
privilege, for he conveyed it to Robert Corbie, who in the thirty sixth year
of Edward the third had License by this Princes Grant to build after a
fortified Manor, the Terms are Kernellare and Turrellare, that is, to make
Cranies and Loopholes to discharge Crossebows and other missile Weapons, and to
embattel with Towers and Curtain Walls the Manor House at Boughton; from him
it descended to Robert Corby his Son and Heir, who dyed and left only one
Daughter and Heir Joan married to Sir Nicholas Wotton twice Lord Mayor of
London; and so by Female Right this Manor became the Possession of this
Family, and in a continued Series was it carried down from Sir Nicholas, to
Thomas Lord Wotton not many years since deceased, whose Lady Dowager Mary
Daughter and one of the Coheirs of Sir Arthur Throgmorton of Paulers Perry in
the County of North-Hampton, as parcel of her Jointure, did lately before her
Decease enjoy it.

Colbridge Castle lay in Boughton Malherbe, under the Hill toward Headcorne,
and has found a Sepulcher now under its own Rubbish; King Henry the third in
the forty third of his Reign granted License by his Charter to Sir Fulke
Peyforer, to fortify and build after a Castle-like Manno this Mansion House at
Colbrge; it came after to be the Possession of Roger Lord Leybourne, and from
him did descend to Juliana Leybourne, his Sole Heir, who matching with William
Clinton Earl of Huntington made it his Inheritance; but he deceasing in the
twenty eighth of Edward the third without Issue, and his Lady after dying and
leaving no visibleor avowed Alliance, knit to her by the indisputable tie of
Consanguinity to claim it, it escheated to the Crown, and K. Richard the second
in the twenty first of his Reign granted it to the Royal Chapel of St. Stevens
in Westminster, where it remained till the Dissolution, and then it was granted
in the second year of Edward the sixth to Sir Edward Wotton, from whom by a
successive Right of Descent it was transmitted to his great Grandchild Thomas
Lord Wotton of Marley, whose Widow the Lady Mary Wotton does at this instant
possess it.

Lastly, Chilston is an eminent Seat and Manor likewise situated within the
Precincts of this Parish: In the fifty fifth year of Henry the third, Henry
Hussy had a Charter of Free Warren to his Manor of Chilston, and his
Grandchild Henry Hussy died seized of it in the sixth year of Edward the
third, and in this Family was the Inheritance in an undivided Succession
resident till our Grandfathers Memory, and then Henry Hussy by Sale translated
the Propriety into John Parkhurst, whose Successor Sir William Parkhurst
alienated it to Richard Northwood, whose Son Mr. Oliver Northwood by the same
transmission passed it over to Cieggat; he very lately disposed of his
Concernment in it to Mr. Manly of London, who very lately has conveyed it to
Mr. Edward Hales, Grandchild to Sir Edward Hales of Tunstal Knight and Baronet.

Buckland in the Hundred of Feversham, was (as Sidrach Petits Inquest into the
Manors of Kent informs me) as high as the Reign of Henry the third, the
Possession of John de Buckland, who it seems extracted his Surname from hence,
and is likewise mentioned in Testa de Nevil to have held Land in this Track in
the twentieth year of Henry the third: But before the end of Edward the second,
this Family was vanished from this place, and immediately after they were gone
out, the Frogenhalls of Frogenhall in Tenham, were entitled to the Possession,
and Richard Frogenhall was seized of it at his Decease, which was in the thirty
fourth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 37. and from him did it descend
to John Frogenhall Esquire, who was with Edmund Brook Lord Cobham, then Ceneral
of the Kentish Forces under Richard Earl of Warwick, at the Battle of
North-Hampton, where the House of Lancaster by that vigorous Assistance the
Kentish men that day afforded the House of York, received so fatal a Wound,
that all the Art of the Lancastian Partisans, could hardly ever after close it;
and this Man had Issue Thomas Frogenhall, who about the Beginning of Henry the
seventh, passed it away to Gedding; and Thomas Gedding, in the twenty fifth
year of Henry the eighth, held this Manor, and conveyed it by Deed to Henry
Atsea of Herne; and he in the thirtieth of Henry the eighth was possessed of it
at his Death, and from him did the Thread of Descent guide the Title down to
his Grandchild William Atsea, who in the tenth year of King James conveyed it
by Sale to....... Saker of Feversham Gentleman, whose Son Mr. Christopher Saker
in our Fathers Memory alienated it to Sir Basil Dixwell of Terlingham in
Folkstone Knight and Baronet, who upon his Decease about the year 1641, gave it
to his Kinsman Mr. John Dixwell Esquire, in whom the Possession is still
resident.

Buckland by Dover is situated in the Hundred of Bewsborough, and was a Branch
of that spacious and wide Demeasn which made the Patrimony of Hamon de
Crevequer so considerable in this County, and he held it at his Decease, which
was in the forty seventh year of Henry the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 33. Afterward
I find the Wilghebies or Willoughbies invested in the Possession, and Thomas de
Willoughbie was seized of it at his Decease, which was in the seventh year of
Edward the second: But the Title had no long residence in this Family, for in
the Reign of Edward the third, I find it in the Tenure of Barrie of Sevington;
for Agnes Wife of William Barrie was possessed of it in Right of Dower, as
appears by an Inquisition taken after her Death in the forty eighth year of
Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 7. After the Barries were worn out, the
Callards or Calwards, now vulgarly called Collard, became Lords of the Fee, a
Family of deep Extraction in this Track, and who were in elder Times entitled
to the Possession of Land and Houses in Canterbury, as appears by a Composition
made between the Monks of St. Austins and those of Christ Church, in the forty
first of Edward the third, recited by Mr. Somner in his Survey of that City,
Page 192. wherein it is mentioned that the Abbey of St. Austins had purchased
Land and Houses of John Calward. But to proceed, after this Family had for
diverse Descents held this Manor in a fair repute, ( John Callard Esquire,
being one of those who accompanied Sir Henry Guldford of this County to serve
Ferdinand of Castile in his War commenced against the Moors, where for some
Signal Service performed against those Infidels, he had this Coat assigned to
him and his Posterity, by Clarenceux Benolt, vid. Girony of six pieces Or and
Sables over all three Blackmores Heads decouped) in our Fathers Memory they
surrendered the Possession of this place by Sale to Fogge, who not many years
after passed away his Concernment in it, by the same conveyance to Mr. William
Sherman of Croyden Esquire, Steward both to George Abbot and William Laud
Successively Archbishops of Canterbury.

Dudmanscombe is another Manor in this Parish, which in elder times made up
the Revenue of the Priorie of St. Martins in Dover, and continued annexed to
that Cloister until the general Suppression, and then being torn from the
Church, it was again exchanged with Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury by
Henry the eighth, in the twenty ninth of his Reign, and so remained wound up in
the Demeasn of that Sea, until that ruinous and fatal popular Tempest which
arose in these Times supplanted it, and cast it into the Possession of a
secular Interest.

Burham in the Hundred of Lark field is in Doomsday Book written Burgham, and
was in the twentieth year of William the Conqueror held by Ralph de Curva
Spina. In Ages of a lower Approach to us, I find it under the Signorie of
Jeffrey de Say, and he died possessed of it in the twenty third year of Edward
the first. Rot. Esc. Number. 48. and for the future remained so chained to the
Propriety of this Family, that it was esteemed Parcel of their Barony of
Birling, and when Jeffrey Lord Say in the Reign of Richard the second ended in
two Female Coheirs, one matched to John Lord Clinton, and the other called
Joan, wedded to Sir William Fiennes, this upon the Division of the Estate
accrued to Fiennes, and coming again by the Heir General of Fiennes Lord Dacres
to be possessed by Leonard, William Leonard Son and Heir of Fiennes Leonard, a
younger Branch of that House, has lately passed it away to Mr. Francis
Barnham, and Mr. Edward Maplesden.

There was in old Time a Fountain within the Limits of this Parish at a place
called Haly-Garden, venerable it was, and of no small Account amonst the
People, who for the sanctity they conceived was in it, ascribed divine
Attributes unto it, as the Name imports for what we call Holy, our Ancestors
long time since styled Halyg, as Halyfax in Yorkshire, from holy Hair, that
that the People devoutly esteemed, and frequently with blind credulity visited.
In the seventeenth of K. Richard the second, the Friars Carmelites of Alresford
obtained a Grant by Letters Patents to bring the Water from that Fountain in
Haly-Garden to their Monastery in Alresford, to what purpose, they that will
survey the Designs of the Monks of those Times, may easily discover.

Burmersh in the Hundred of Worth was a Member of that Patrimony, which in
Times of a higher Calculation, related to the Abbey of St. Augustines in
Canterbury: and had here a Mansion called Abbots Court, which is an Adjunct to
this Manor, and had this Denomination imposed upon it, because the Abbot of
that Covent used to sojourn here when he came to survey that Demeasn, which
augmented the Revenue of that Abbey, and lay spread into Romney Mersh. This
Manor upon the Surrender of the Patrimony of that Cloister into the Hands of
Henry the eighth, in the twenty ninth year of his Reign, was in the thirty
fifth of that Prince granted to William Finch Esquire, whose Successor Sir
Thomas Finch Earl of Winchelsey not many years since passed it away to Sir
Ralph Whitfield Sergeant at Law, whose Son and Heir Sir Herbert Whitfield is
now Lord of the Fee.

C. C. C.
CAnterbury has so exactly in all the Parts and Limbs of it been described and
surveyed by Mr. Somner, that I should exceedingly eclipse the Labors of so
inductrious a Pen, if I should go about to Pourtray that in any contracted
Landscape, which has been before represented to the Public, pencilled out in
so large and exquisite a Volume: Only some few things are there omitted, which
in this Search I shall take notice of, and so proceed.

The Augustine Friars, or Convent of Black Canons in Canterbury, was founded by
Thomas de Bonington, Pat. 17. Edw. secundi, Memb. 18. Part secunda.

The Prior of the Trinity in Canterbury was accustomed to receive two pence
upon every Vessel of Wine coming into the Port of Sandwich, Rot. Claus. Hen.
tertii Memb. 17.

Baldwin de VVereval had a Charter in the second year of K. John for the
Aldermanry of Westgate in Canterbury.

Hubert de Burgh Earl of Kent had the Castles of Canterbury, Dover, and
Rochester granted to his Custody, Carta 12. Hen. tertii.

King Henry the third in the sixteenth year of his Reign at Canterbury took the
Fealty of the Knights and Free Tenants of Kent, as likewise of the Barons of
the Cinque Ports, K. Henry the third in the forty eighth of his Reign grants a
Pardon for Life to Francis de Balsham, for that She was hanged for Felony at
Canterbury from nine of the Clock on the Monday till the rising of the Sun next
Day, and yet escaped with Life, Pat. 48. Membra 24. I should not have mentioned
this, but that an Accident proportionate to this in all the Circumstances of
it, happened to one Ann Green, who not many years since being hanged at Oxford
for the supposed Murder of her Child, miraculously escaped with Life.

King Edward the first Landed at Dover 1274, and restored diverse Liberties to
Canterbury, which before were seized into the Hands of the Crown, Pat. 4. Edw.
1.

There was a Chauntry founded in St. Dunstans Church by John Roper for two
Priests to celebrate at the Altar of St. Nicholas in that Church, Pat. 4. Hen.
4. Part prima, Memb. 29.

There was another Chauntry mentioned by Mr. Somner, founded by William
Brenchley Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, for one Priest to celebrate at
the Altar of St. John Baptist in Christ Church, for the support of which he
gives one House in St. Elphage Parish, and ten pound Rent issuing yearly out of
his Lands at Bilsington, Pat. 25. Hen. 6. pars 1. Memb. 15.

The Manor of Dodindale had originally owners of that Name, for as Mr. Somner
in his Survey of Canterbury out of the Records of St. Augustins instructs us,
Haymo the Son of Guido de Dodindale, gave the Tithes of Dodindale to the Priory
of St. Augustins: But it seems it was but for certain years, for in the Reign
of Henry the second (as the same Records testify) Robert de Marci gave the
Tithes of this place, to the Hospital of St. Laurence; so far he in that
laborious Piece of his has exhibited to the public view who were its ancient
Possessors when it bore the Name of Dodindale; now out of the private Evidences
it must be my Task who were its Proprietaries since it carried the Name of
Morton; By a Deed without date Elias de Morton (from whom it assumed the Name
of Morton, which has clove to it ever since) demises the Fee-simple of it to
Hugh Fitzvinon, a Family which had large possessions at Selling by Monks
Horton, whose Daughter Eugenia Fitzvinon passes it away by Deed to Nicholas de
Twitham in the twentyeth year of Henry the third, and he immediately after by a
Deed not bounded with any date, settles it in Robert de Polre; but whether his
Successor sold it to J. Chich or not, is uncertain, because there is a vacancy
or gap in in the private Evidences, though the Records of St. Augustins make
him to have some Interest in it in the year 1330. The next that I find to have
been entitled to the possession were Hardres and Isaac; who in the twenty
second year of Henry the sixth conveyed it away to William Say for the use of
Robert Rigdon, but it seems the title did not long fix here, for he in the
thirty third year of the abovesaid Prince, transmits all his concernment in it
by sale to William Barton and John Whete, and they by mutual consent in the
eighteenth year of Edward the fourth alienate it to Edward Pargate, who
transmitted it to his Son and Heir John Pargate, from whom descended Edward
Pargate who in the twenty fifth year of Henry the eighth demises it to Peter
Bruin; and after the Title had many years united to this Family, Henry Bruin
dying without Issue gave it to his Sister Jane Bugge who in the first year of
King James cast her Right by Sale into her Kinsman John Bruin, who in the fifth
year of that Prince by the same alienation translated the Title into William
Den, who deceasing without Issue Male, Margaret his only Daughter and Heir
brought it over to her husband Edw. Hougham, after whose death it is to devolve
to two Daughters who are the surviving Issue of that Wife, namely Elizabeth
matched to Mr. Edward Rose of Chistlet, and Ann wedded to Mr. John Betentham
now of Canterbury.

The Dungeon is another Manor in Canterbury, It was formerly belonging to an
ancient Family called Chich; Ernaldus de Chich was a man of principal note
under Henry the second, Richard the first, and K. John, and the Aldermanry of
Burgate in Canterbury did in elder times appertain to this Family; Thoma. Chich
was was Bailiff of Canterbury 1259. and again in the year 1271. was a principal
Benefactor to the Church of S. Mary Bredin in Canterbury, whose Name in an old
Character, together with his Effigies, are set up in the west Window, as his
Coat is likewise in Stone-work in the Chancell; John Chich was Bailiff of
Canterbury in the twenty third, and again in the twenty sixth year of Edward
the third, in the year 1320. Robert Malling then Commissary of Canterbury gave
Sentence upon clear Evidence by ancient muniments and otherwise, that the
Hospital of St. Laurence in Canterbury should not only receive the Tithes of
the Manor of the Dungeon, but likewise of 300. Acres adjacient to it, but this
was not without the Tie or Tribute of some Remuneration, for in Autumn John
Chich who was then Lord of the Dungeon, was to receive for his Servants five
loaves of Bread, two Pitchers and an half of Beer, and half a Cheese of four
pence; and he himself was to receive unum par Cirocecarum ferinarum, one pair
of Holyday Gloves, and one pound of Wax in Candles, and for his Servants three
pair of Gloves; Thomas Chich this man's Son was Sheriff of Kent in the forty
fourth year of Edward the third, and held his Shrivealtie at the Dungeon, but
in Valantine Chich this man's great Grandchild, not only the male line but
likewise the possession of this place failed, for he about the beginning of
Edward the fourth passed it away to Roger Brent Esquire; and he died seized of it
(as appears by his Will recorded at Canterbury) in the year 1486. But in this
Family it was not long after this resident, for in the beginning of Henry the
eighth, by an old Court Roll I find one John Butler of Heronden in Eastrye
possessed of it, and he conveyed it to Sir John Hales Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, and when Leland visited Kent, which was in the thirtieth year of
Henry the eighth, he lived here, and from him is it now come down to his
Successor Sir James Hales the instant Proprietarie of it.

The Moate, alias Wyke, is a third Manor within the precincts of Canterbury,
and had owners of that Surname; For I read in Testa de Nevill that Stephen de
VVyke possessed it in the twentyeth year of Henry the third, and paid respective
Aid for it at the marriage of Isabel that Princes Sister; and in the Book of
Aid, where there is an Enumeration of the ancient owners, there is a Recital of
Stephen de Wyke, William le Taylour, John Tancrey, and Richard Betts, who had
an Interest in it; but before the beginning of Richard the second, all these
Families were mouldred away and vanished: For in that Kings Reign I find it by
the Court Rolls of this place in the hands of Sir Richard de Hoo, and Richard
Skippe, and they about the latter end of Richard the second by deed conveyed it
to Simon Spencer, and he some few years after alienated it to John Standford
Gentleman, who suddenly after Passed it away to Richard Smith, in whose hands
it had not long continued, when the same Devolution brought it over to John
Eastfield Esquire, Son of Sir William Eastfield who was Knight of the Bath, and
Lord Mayor of London in the year 1438. and from him it was by Sale carried off
to William Rogers, and he by a Fine levied in the thirty third year of Henry
the sixth demises and sells it to Philip Belknap of Canterbury Esquire, Mayor
of that City in the year 1458. and Sheriff of Kent in the thirty fourth year of
Henry the sixth; he married Elizabeth Daughter of John Woodhouse Esquire; by whom
he had Issue Alice his only Daughter and Heir, who was matched to Henry Finch
of Nitherfield Esquire; Father of Sir William Finch Banneret, who in his Mothers
right was invested in the possession of the Most, and from him is it now by
Successive right devolved to the Right Honorable John Lord Finch, created
Baron of Fordwich by the late K. Charles, when he was Lord Keeper of the great
Seal of England.

St. Dunstans in Canterbury was the Ancient Seat of the noble Family of Roper,
William Rosper or de Rubra Spatha for so the Name is written in old Dateless
Evidences, and Elnith his Wife the Daughter and Heir of Edward de Apuldore,
flourished in the Reign of Henry the third, and were great Benefactors to the
Priorie of Saint Martins in Dover, John de Rubra Spatha, or Rosper did eminent
Service in Scotland under Edward the third, for which that Prince rewards him
and William Clifford (as appears by a Deed recorded in the Earl of Dorsets
Pedigree) about the twenty ninth year of his Reign, with the third part of
those Forfeitures that were due from the Jews then inhabiting in London, for
the Violation of some Penal Statutes enected against them. Edmund Son of Ralph
Roper was an eminent Man in the Reign of Henry the fourth, and Henry the fifth,
under whom he was Justice of the Peace for this County, and died the third year
of Henry the sixth 1433, and lies buried in this Church of St. Dunstans; John
Roper his Son, and John VVestcliffe, as the Records of this Family instruct me,
were Correctors and Surveyours of the Customs of the Cinque Ports in the
ninteenth year of Henry the seventh: Jo. Roper his Grandchild was Attorney
General to Henry the eighth, and Prothonotary of the Kings Bench, as appears by
the Inscription on his Monument in St. Dunstans Church 1524, and Will. Roper
who was Sheriff of Kent the first and second year of Philip and Mary, and
matched with Margaret Daughter of Sir Thomas More Lord Chancellor of England,
who (as the Inscription on her Monument) was Graecis Latinisque Literis
Doctissima, succeeded his Father in the Office of Prothonotary of the Kings
Bench, which he discharged with much of Fidelity and Care fifty four years, and
left it to his Sor Thomas Roper Esquire 1577, in which year he died; and from
this Thomas is this Manor of St. Dunstans, which for so many Centuries of
years has constantly confessed the Signorie of this Name, now descended to his
great Grandchild Mr. Edward Roper Esquire.

Capell in the Hundred of Folkstone was parcel of that Estate which celebrated
the Family of Averenches to have been its Proprieraries, which continued no
longer in the Name then the End of K. John; for then William de Averenches
dying without Issue Male, Matilda his only Daughter and Heir brought Capell
with the two little Manors, Halton and Wolverton alias Wolton, to be possessed
by Hamon de Crevequer, called in the Language of those times, the great Lord of
Kent; from him they descended to his Son and Heir Hamon de Crevequer, who dying
about the forty seventh year of Henry the third without Issue, his Estate in
Kent and elsewhere was seized on by that Prince, as having died in Actual Arms
against him, but was by the Act of Pacification made at Kenelworth in the
fiftieth year of his Reign restored to his four Sisters, whereof one was
espoused to John de Lenham, the second was matched first to Nicholas de
Sandwich, and next to John de Segrave; Matilda the third was wedded to Bertram
de Crioll, and the fourth was married to William de Pateshull; but upon the
Division of the Estate, Capell, with its two Appendages Halton and Wolton,
accrued to Crioll, by whose Daughter and Heir they came to Sir Richard de
Rokesley, and then by Joan his Sole Inheritrix to Tho. de Peynings; in which
Family they remained until the twelfth year of Henry the eighth, and then Sir
Edward Poynings dying without any lawful Issue, they came by Mary his natural
Daughter to Edward Lord Clinton, to whom they were by Grant confirmed in the
thirtieth of that Princes Reign, and he in the second year of Q. Mary passed
them away to Mr. Henry Herdson, whose Grandchild Mr. Francis Herdson conveyed
them to his Uncle Mr. John Herdson, and he dying without Issue, settled them on
his Kinsman Sir Basil Dixwell Knight and Baronet, whose Kinsman Mr. Basil
Divwell of Broom in Barham is now Proprietarie of them.

Caldham high mounted, is another Manor in this Parish, which informs us, that
in elder times a Family of that Denomination held it, which before the End of
Richard the second had passed it away to Baker, a Family of good Account in
this Track, who had a peculiar Chancel belonging to them in Folkstone Church
near the Vestry Door over the Charnell House; John Baker was Gentleman Porter
of Callis under Henry the fifth and sixth, and dying without Issue male, Robert
Brandred who had matched with one of his two Coheirs was planted in the
Possession, and he about the latter end of Henry the sixth passed it away to
Sir Thomas Brown, whose Grandchild Sir Matthew Brown exchanged it with Henry
the eighth about the thirty sixth of his Reign, and he granted it away to
William Wilford, John Bennet and George Brigges; and they in the thirty seventh
of his Government alienated their Right in this place to John Tufton Esquire,
Ancestor to the right Honorable John Earl of Thanett, who still possesses the
Signory of it.

Charlton in the Hundred of Blackheath, anciently written Ceopleton; that is,
the Town inhabited with honest, good, stout and useful men for Tillage, and
Country business; It anciently belonged to William Fitz Oger, as Doomsday Book
says, and was after given to the Monastery of Bermondsey near Southwarke, by
Robert Bloett Bishop of Lincoln, Anno sexto Willielmi Secundi. King Henry the
third gave the Prior of that House Liberty by his Charter in the fifty third
year of his Reign to hold a Market there weekly, and a Fair once in every year,
three days together, viz. upon the Eve, upon Trinity Sunday, and two days
after; the Market was held weekly upon the Monday, and was not long since
ciscontinued; but the Fair is not disused but kept yearly upon St. Lukes day,
and called Horn Fair, by reason of the great plenty of all Sorts of Winding
Horns, and Cups, and other Vessels of Horn there brought to be sold. King
James granted the Manor to Sir Adam Newton Knight and Baronet, Tutor to Prince
Henry; who there has built a goodly brave House, and left the Care with his
Cost, to enlarge and beautify Gods House, the Parish Church, to Sir David
Comingham Knight and Baronet, late Coforer to Prince Charles; Mr. Newton his
Brother, and Mr. Peter Newton Gentleman Usher to the late King Charles, who
have most amply discharged that Trust, and in a manner new builded a great Part
thereof, and erected the Steeple new from the Ground, and furnished it with a
good Ring of Bells, decorating the same Church without and within so worthily
that it surpasses most in the Shire.

Kedbroke near Charlton was formerly a Parish, but when the Church decayed, and
the paucity of the Inhabitants could not support the Charge that was to
maintain the same, they were by Composition annexed to Charlton; it is of late
become of better Note since it pleased King Charles to create Sir William
Harvey Knight and Baronet, and Baron Harvey of Rosse in Ireland, a Peer of this
Realm; also by the Name of Baron Harvey of Kedbroke: it being part of his
Ladies Inheritance, as being Daughter and one of the three Coheirs of Brian
Annesley Esquire, who having it in Lease from the Crown, bought the Fee-simple
of Edward Blunt of Wrickelmersh Esquire, to whom it was conveyed by his Father
in Law, Sir William Garaway of London Knight, who had purchased it of King
James in the Beginning of his Government; to whose Royal Demeasne it had been
fastened ever since the Suppression of the Priory of Bermondsey, (in whose
Patrimony it was involved) in the Reign of Henry the eighth.

In the time of King Henry the sixth, Pat. 26. Hen. sexti Part secunda Memb.
27.
the Church of Kedbroke was appropriated to the Priory of St. Mary Overies in
Southwarke, the Vicarage not endowed, but being shrunk into Decay and Solitude,
the Inhabitants for many years last past have resorted for the performance of
Divine Duties to the Parish Church of Charlton.

Chalk in the Hundred of Shamell, was parcel of that Demeasne which related to
the Abbey of Bermondsey, as appears by Kirkbies Inquest, a Book kept in the
Exchequer, and collected in the ninth year of Edward the first, wherein that
Cloister is represented to have had the Possession of this place at that Time;
and here it remained until the general Dissolution snatched it away in the
Time of Henry the eighth, and that Prince afterward devolved it to Sir George
Brook, from whom it descended to his Great Grandchild Sir William Brook, who
dying in the year 1643 without Issue male, it came over to his Kinsman Sir Jon
Brook as Reversioner in Entail, and he some few years since passed it away to
James Duke of Lenox lately deceased, whose Son Esme Stuart now Duke of Lenox,
is the Heir Apparent of it.

Felborough Clam Lane and Rainhurst were a Limb of that wide Revenue which lay
scattered and diffused over the face of all this Hundred, and acknowledged it
self to be under the Signory of the Family of Cobham; Henry de Cobham held
them, as appears by Kirkbies Inquest, in the ninth year of Edward the first,
and so did his Grandchild John de Cobham in the thirty sixth year of Edward the
third, Rot. Esc. Number. 43. Part secunda. And in this Family and its Descendants
did they settle, until the Reign of Henry the sixth, and then by an old Survey
of Chalk, I find them in the Hands of Brent, and continued in their Possession
until the eighth year of Henry the seventh, and then Jo. Brent Esquire; conveys
them, as appears by a Fine levied in that year to Sir Henry Wiat, and his
unfortunate Grandchild Sir Thomas Wiat, having by an unsuccesseful Solleviation
or Rising, forfeited them to the Crown in the second year of Queen Mary, they
remained there until Queen Elizabeth in the thirty seventh of her Rule granted
them in Lease to Sir Peter Manwood, who passed it to Menfield, and he to Mr.
James Crispe, but the Fee-simple still remained lodged in the Royal Revenue,
until the late King Charles passed it away to the City of London, in the year
1630, and that City the same year they were granted, conveyed them to Mr. James
Crispe, who upon his Departure disposed them by Testament to his two Sons Mr.
Thomas Crispe and Mr. James Crispe.

Challock in the Hundred of Calehill has two places in it, which may
deservedly come within the Register of those Manors which are in this Survey
to be recorded: The first is Otterpley, which was an eminent Seat belonging to
the ancient Family of Apulderfield. The first that I find of Note in any
public Record to have possessed it, was Henry de Apulderfield, who had the Grant
of a Market and Fair to his Manor of Apulderfield in Coldham, in the thirty
eighth year of Hen. the third; and this man's great Grandchild Henry de
Apulderfield was Sheriff of Kent the fiftieth of Edward the third, and held his
Shrievalty at Challock. His House was near East-well in the Earl of Winchelseys
upper Park, called Apulderfields Garden, which is now so obscured in its own
Ruins, that we now with Difficulty trace out its Sepulcher, made up of its own
complicated Rubbish; but this Manor, as to some Proportion of it, was passed
away before he was Sheriff, to Edmund de Hant, who held it at his Decease,
which was in the forty fourth year of Edward the third; but neither of these
Families lasted longer then the Beginning of Richard the second; for then I
find it entirely invested in Richard Lord Poynings, who in the eleventh year of
that Prince was possessed of it at his Death, and left it to his Sole Heir,
Eleanor matched to Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, in whose Successors the
Right was constantly fixed, until the twenty third year of Henry the eighth,
and then it was conveyed by Henry Earl of Northumberland, to Sir Thomas
Cheyney, William Walsingham, and William Fitz-Williams, and they immediately
after re-conveyed it to Sir Christopher Hales, and his Son Sir James Hales
about the latter end of Henry the eighth alienated it to Sir Thomas Moile, by
whose Daughter and Coheir Katharine, it came to be the Inheritance of Sir
Thomas Finch, unhappily Shipwract by New Haven in France, a Person who deserved
a longer Life, and not so dark a Fate; from whom by paternal Descent it is now
transmitted to the right honorable Heneage Finch now Earl of Winchelsey.

Loringden and Deane are places in Challock worthy of Consideration. There is a
Tradition very frequent amongst the Country people in this Track, that
Loringden now altogether desolate and full of solitude, was once the Mansion of
Gentlemen of this Name, one of which should have waged Combat with one of the
Apulderfields of Otterpley not far distant, about building a Chapel in the
Valley, which was pretended by Loringden to be erected on Land that was of his
Fee-simple; but because this without some more solid Foundation to support then
Fame and Vulgar Report, will appear but legend, I will re-present to you what
the original Muniments and Evidences have discovered to me in Relation to those
who were Possessors of this place. That there was a Family which bore the Name
of Lourdingden or Loringden, is most certain, for there is a place in Challock
which yet continues the Name of Lorindens Forestal; but when I consulted the
private Evidences of this place, I found upon a serious Disquition they reached
no higher then Henry the fourth, and in his Reign, it acknowledged it self to
be of the Propriety of Cadman, a Family grown into a reverend esteem by a long
Prescription in this Track; but the Name of Dean continued in being till the
Reign of Henry the sixth, and was in very ancient Deeds, some of which are not
limited with any Date, written At Dean and A Dean, and in that Princes Reign
was by Sale passed away to the above mentioned Family of Cadman; in which Name
both Loringdean and Dean remained clapsed up, till the entrance of K. James,
and then by a Sole Daughter and Heir they went over to Plomer, who almost in
our Memory transferred his Right in both of them by Sale to Pierce.

The Church of Challock being fallen down, was new erected by the
Apulderfields, as the Glass windows and Stone work in diverse places,
embroidered and diaper'd with the Voided Cross, which was their paternal Coat
Armor, do more then sufficiently testify.

Cranebrook gives name to the Hundred wherein it is seated, a Town very
populous, in respect it was one of the first places where the Manufacture of
Clothing was professed and practiced, being brought into England in Edward the
thirds Reign, who by proposing rewards, and granting many Immunities, trained
Flemings into this Nation in the tenth year of his reign, to teach the English
that Art of Draperie, or Weaving and making woollen Cloth, which is esteemed at
this day, one of the Butteresse which sustains the Commonwealth; and certainly
for making durable Broad clothes with very good Mixtures and perfect Colors,
Cranebrook does with the most that way excel.

The first place of note in it, which obviates the eye, is Sisingherst; but
more properly and truly written Saxenhurst; and as Bittenden, not far distant
derives its Name from the Brittons, so in most probability did this take and
assume its Denomination from the Saxons. In Testa de Nevil, a Book kept in the
Exchequer, which is a memorial of those who holding their Lands in the Knights
Service paid relief in the twentieth year of Henry third, toward the Marriage
of the Kings Sister. There is mention of John de Saxenhurst who was taxed for
his Lands here at Cranebrook, which certainly was this Sisingherst, with the
two little Manors of Copton and Stone; which had always the same Owners with
Sisingherst: In times of a more modern Character, the Berhams by the Female
Heirs of Saxenhurst were Lords of Sisingherst, with its two adjuncts Copton and
Stone; Richard de Berham who was Sheriff of Kent in the forty fourth year of
Edward the third was here resident, and is written of this place; and Henry de
Berham this man's Father paid respective Aid at the making the Black Prince
Knight, in the twentieth year of Edward the third, for sundry parcels of Land
which he held in Kent, and amongst the rest, for his Lands at Cranebrook; and
in this Family was the possession of this place, with that of Copton and Stone
concentered till the latter end of Henry the seventh, and then part of
Sisingherst with Copton and Stone was sold to Mr. Tho. Baker Father to Sir John
Baker Attorney General, and of the Privy Counsel to Queen Mary, and likewise
Chancellor of the Exchequer, and under-Treasurer, who purchased the residue,
and raised that Magnificent Pile within the Park, which now charms with so
much Delight the eyes of the Spectators; and from this man by the channel of
paternal and lineal Descent is the Inheritance of Sisingherst, Copton, and
Stone, emptied into Sir John Baker Baronet, the instant Lord of the Fee.

Secondly, Glastenbury is not to be forgotten, since it is of so great a Name
elsewhere, and is called as the other is from Glastney the Saxon Idiome of Inis
Witrin, the Watery or Glassie place. The House which stands in a Park is moated
about, and has been for many Generations the capital Mansion of the ancient
Family of Rokchurst, ever since Stephen Rokehurst or Roberts of Curtesden, and
in old Records sometimes written Rokehurst Den in Goudherst, about the
beginning of Henry the fourth married Joan Sole Heir of William Tilley of
Glastenbury, (whose Ancestors had flourished at this place, as private Evidencs
instruct me, ever since the reign of Edward the first) and in right of that
Alliance became Lord of this Mansion. This Stephen Roberts, alias Rokehurst,
was Grandchild of William Roberts, alias Rokehurst, and that William was great
Grandchild of William de Rokehurst, who in the reign of William the
Conqueror, as the Evidences of this Family inform me, came out of Anandale in
Scotland into England; and to preserve the memory of this man, did the Family
till the Government of Henry the seventh, write Roberts alias Rokchurst, till
in the East window of the North Chancel of the Church of Cranebrook, which was
built by Walur Roberts Esquire; in that Princes Reign, as also in most of his Deeds
and Conveyences the alias was left out.

Coursehorne finds place to be remembered in the Map of Kent, and then must not
be forgotten here; it has been for above three hundred years (as appears by
private Records) the Inheritance of Henley, in an Escheat Roll taken in the
seventeenth year of Edward the third, and marked with the number 92. After the
death of Richard Haudloe, who it seems had Lands at Cranebrook, there is
mention of one Gerva; Henley that was one of the Jury and concerned in the
Inquisition: But that which much improves the Fame of this Mansion, is, that it
was the Cradle of Sir Walter Henley Sergeant at Law, a man of eminent repute in
this County in the Reign of Henry the eighth, and by his three Daughters and
Coheirs, Elizabeth married to....... Waller of Grome-bridge, Hellen first
matched to Thomas Colepeper of Bedgbury, secondly to Sir George Somersett, and
thirdly to Thomas Vane of Burston; and lastly Ann wedded to Richard Covert of
Slaugham in Sussex, knit those Noble Families together in one Alliance, but
Coursehorne did by Descent come over to his Brother Gervas Henley Esquire, from
whom Sir Thomas Henley now of Coursehorne is lineally extracted.

Another ancient place there is in Cranebrook, called Hartridge, the possession
in times past of a worthy Family of that Surname, among them chiefly to be
remembered is Thomas Hartridge, for he was one of the Conservators or Justices
of Peace in this County in the thirty fourth year of Edward the third, when
there was but eight only in the whole Shire. It has been since much honored
by the Will fords, who by James Willsford a most worthy Senator of London,
derive themselves from the right ancient Family of Willsford of Willsford in
Devonshire, and are fairly spread from hence into many Branches both in this
County, and elsewhere; and after it had thus for diverse Descents been resident
in this noble Family, the Possession was in our Fathers remembrance united by
purchase to the Patrimony of Tindall, now of Sutton Valence.

Fifthly Betenham is not to be passed over in silence, which is a Note worthy
Place in this Parish, that gave both Seat and Surname to the Betenhams, but
when the eldest Line had only three Daughters and Coheirs, matched to More,
Dering, and Fisher, who divided the Patrimony, this in his Wifes right was
annexed to the Demeasn of More, and this after More had alienated his Interest
in it, came to acknowledge for Sole Owners the Roes, of which Family was the
right Noble Sir Thomas Roe Knight, Chancellor of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, and of the Privy Council to the late Kidg Charles, and several years
Ambassador to the Great Mogor, Great Turk, King of Sweden, and lastly to the
Princes of the Protestant Union in Germany, in the year 1642. After which
Negotiation most prudently transfacted, he returned, and died; but in this
Family it remained not long, for in the remembrance of that Age our Fathers
lived in, it was by Sale demised to Mansfield, in whom the Possession is at
this present settled.

There are two places more which may be registered in this Inventorie. The first
is Plechinghurst, which was an ancient Seat belonging to the Sharpeighs of
Sharpeigh, a Family of deep rooted Antiquity in this Track; Robert de
Sharpeigh flourished here at Cranebrook about the beginning of Edward the
first, and was witness to a Deed of William de Brindens of Brinden: In this
Parish formerly the Linds, and now the Holdens; but this Deed is without Date:
another Robert Sharpeigh of Sharpeigh and Cranebrook, as I find by an ancient
Roll was in Commission as Justice of the Peace about the latter end of the
Government of Henry the seventh: But as all sublunary things are crushed and
overturned by the wheel of an inconstant Vicissitude, so by Consequence are our
Possessions likewise; for, after this place had been for so many Descents the
Inheritance of this ancient Family, it was almost within the Verge of our
Remembrance, first alienated to Martin, and by him not long since by Sale
demised to Walter.

The second is Buckhurst, which is the last place of Account within the circuit
of this Parish. If we go to trace the Antiquity of thse Families, who were the
ancient Proprietorrs of it, we shall find that it acknowledged Hadloe and
Buckhurst for its elder Possessors, that the first had some concernment here,
not only the private Deeds and Muniments of this place do evince to us, but
likewise by an Inquisition taken after the decease of Richard de Hadloe, by
which it is evident he held some Estate here in the seventeenth year of Edward
the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 32. And that the second Family had some Interest
here, not only the Authority abovesaid does justify, but the Name it self does
tacitly insinuate that this Mansion formerly gave Seat and Denomination to the
Family of Buckhurst; in times of a lower step, that is, in the Reign of Henry
the seventh, I find it in the Tenure of Drayner; but how it devolved to this
Family, I cannot discover; It is enough that it continued united to their
Dimeasn, until the beginning of Q. Elizabeth, and then it was conveyed to
Alexander Coachman, in whose Descendant the Signorie and Interest of it has
ever since been constantly resident.

Cranebroke had the Grant of a Market to be observed weekly there on the
Saturday, in the eighteenth year of Edward the first, as appears Cart. Edw. 1.
Number. 92.

I had almost forgot to tell you that there is a place in this Parish called
Holden, which with Hawkeridge has for some Centuries of years acknowledged the
Holdens for its Proprietaries, and are still united to the Patrimony of this
Name and Family, which for such a vast Succession of time has been planted at
Cranebroke.

There was a Chapel at a place called Milkhouse, in the Eastern part of this
Parish founded and endowed by John Lawless, about the latter end of Henry the
seventh, which upon the general Dissolation of Chantries and all other
Religious Fraternities by Henry the eighth, was by that Prince about the latter
end of his Rule granted to Sir John Baker of Sisingherst not far distant, whose
Revenue is yet in the possession of Sir John Baker his Successor.

There was another Chapel founded at Sisingherst (as the Evidences of that
place do insinuate) by John de Saxenhurst; which was reedified by the late Sir
John Baker, and by a Deed delivered to John Bancroft Bishop of Oxford devoted
to the Service of God, and dedicated as it was before to St. John the
Evangelist: After the reception of this Instrument, which was in the year 1637.
it was by the same Bishop Consecrated; first, by a Prayer at the entrance of
the Chapel, then by others made at the Seats, Pulpit, and Communion Table;
the effect of all which was, that God would accept of it for a House, and
likewise of the Prayers and Devotions that in that Oratorie were offered up by
the faithful People of God to his Honor and Service.

Charing in the Hundred of Calehill, is in Saxon written Cering, and by that
Name King Kenulf in the year 799. made Restitution of it to Christ Church in
Canterbury at the humble request of Archbishop Athelard, for King Offa had
taken it away from that Church in the time of Archbishop Janibert; and being
thus regained to the Sea, it continued so till the great Exchange made in the
twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth with that Prince by Archbishop Cranmer;
the Fee-simple was planted in the Crown: In the time of the Conquest in the
Notitia of the Archbishop and Cathedrals Lands, because they held it in
ancient Demeasn (that is, they had possessed it long before the Conquest) and a
Mannor-house or Palace there, it was called Proprium Manerium Archiepiscopi. In
the time of Edward the Confessor it went for eight Sullings or Plough-Lands,
but in the twentieth year of William the Conqueror it was rated in Domsday
Book at seven Sullings, because one Plough-Land was laid into his Demeasn. The
Church dedicated to St. Peter and Paul, was anciently famous by a traditional
relation, (which I am not much moved with, for it wants the stamp of venerable
Authority) which did affirm, that the Block on which St. John the Baptists Head
was cut off, was brought into England in the Reign of Richard the first, and
kept in this Church.

The first place of secular Interest which does occur, is Pett, the Evidences
of this place now in the hands of Sir Robert Honywood do mention the Petts to
be in Ages of a very high Assent, that is, about the Reign of Henry the third,
and Edward the first, Proprietaries of it but public Records reach no farther
than Newcourt Lord of the Manor of Newcourt not far distant; Jeffrey de
Newcourt Son of Walter de Newcourt paid respective Aid in the twentieth year of
Edward the third for his Lands at Newcourt and Pett. After the Newcourts were
gone out, the Hatches were by Purchase planted at Pett and Newcourt; they were
called so from their abode near some Gate or passage, for one of them who was
Possessor of these two places, was written Hugh at Hatch; from this Family by
Sale about the latter end of Henry the seventh, the right of Pett and Newcourt
devolved to William Warham; and in some Copies of Fines which I have seen by a
false Transcription written William Warren, and this man sold them both again
in the entrance of the Reign of Henry the eighth to Robert Atwater, who
determining in Mary Atwater his Sole Heir, She by matching with Robert Honywood
Esquire of Henewood in Postling, wound up the Interest of these two places Pett
and Newcourt into the Demeasn of that Family, so that they now own Sir Robert
Honywood his great Grandchild the Sole Proprietary of them.

Stilley is another little Manor lying within Charing, and was anciently
enwrapt in the Revenue of Frene, John de Frene who flourished in the Reign of
Henry the third, is mentioned in Testa de Nevill, a Book collected in the
twentieth year of that Prince, to have paid Aid at the Marriage of the Kings
Sider, for Lands which he possessed at Charing; after in the twentieth year of
Edward the third, there is a recital in the Book of Aid of Sir Thomas de
Brockhull Son of Sir William de Brockhull, who paid an Auxiliary supply at the
making of the Black Prince Knight for his Lands which he held at Saltwood,
Calehill, Charing, and other places in this County; but after this the
Possession was not long resident in this Family, for Henry Brockhull this man's
second Son, to whom these Manors of Stilley and Newland were assigned for
livelihood, about the twelfth year of Henry the fourth, transmitted them by
Sale to John Darell Esquire, Son of Sir William Darell, who was extracted out
of the right ancient and Knightly Family of the Darells of Sesay; from whom Sir
John Darell of Calehill, and Lord of this Manor of Stilley, is originally and
lineally issued out.

Wickins is another Manor circumscribed within the Limits of this Parish, it
was originally the Patrimony of Brent, a Family well endowed in this Track, and
certainly was as ancient a Seat of this Family as any which lay involved in
their Revenue, for John Brent Son of Robert de Brent of Charing paid respective
Aid for Lands which he held here in the twentieth year of Edward the third, and
William Brent who was Son of Hugh Brent of Charing, made his Will the twenty
seventh year of Henry the sixth, and disposed of this place to his Son Hugh
Brent; and this Hugh had Issue William Brent, who composed his Testament in the
tenth year of Henry the seventh; and this William was great Grandfather to
Thomas Brent, in whom the Male Line determined, so that Margaret his Sister
became his Sole Heir, who by matching with Jo. Dering of Surrenden Dering
Esquire, has made Wickins ever since parcel of the Demeasn of that Name and
Family.

Newland is another eminent Manor in Charing, which gave Seat and Surname to a
Family so styled: Sir John de Newland lived here in the Reign of Edward the
first, and sealed with an Escollop upon a Cheveron for his Coat, which is yet
visible in ancient Registers, and other venerable Monuments of Antiquity; but
before the latrer end of Edward the third, this Family was extinguished at this
place, and then it became parcel of the noble Family of Brockhull of Cale-Hill,
and continued folded up in their Possession until the twelfth year of Henry
the fourth, and then it was passed away by Deed from Henry Brockhull to John
Darrell Esquire, from whom it is by successive Devolution now transported to
his Successor Sir John Darrell of Cale-Hill Knight.

Eversley next courts us to a Remembrance, it lies partly in Charing, and
partly in Stacefield, and though now obscure, yet in elder times was made
eminent by being one of the Mansions of Brian de Eversley, a Man very eminent
in the Reign of Henry the third and Edward the first, and is mentioned in the
Leiger Book of Feversham, to have been a Benefactor to that Covent; but his
Piety could not secure the Title to his Posterity, for about the beginning of
Edward the third, I find it planted in the Posfession of Peiferer, by the Heir
General of which Family called Julian, it came to be the Possession of Thomas
St. Ledger, and he died possessed of it in the tenth year of Henry the fourth, and
bequeathed it to Mary his Daughter and Coheir, espoused to Henry Aucher, from
whom it was wafted down by descendant Right to his Successor Sir Anthony
Aucher, who about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth alienated it to Michael
Sond; Esquire, afterward created Sir Michael Sonds, from whom it is now
devolved to his Descendant Sir George Sonds Knight of the Bath.

Tremhatch in old Deeds Tramhatch, lies likewise in Charing, and is advanced
and ascended to some Note and Estimate, since it was honored by being parcel
of the Patrimony of Barham, a Family which was made splendid by an eminent
Repute, and no less considerable by a spreading Revenue which they held in this
County, of whom I shall speak more when I come to Barham Court in Terstan, one
of the principal Mansions of this Name: Finally, after it had for several
Descents confessed the Propriety of this Family, it was by Richard Barham
conveyed by a Fine levied the eleventh year of Henry the fourth to John Haut,
where the Title was not so fixed as in the former, for he not long after by a
semblable Alteration passed it away to Henry Malmains, and who about the Reign
of Henry the fifth determined in two Daughters and Coheirs, whereof was Agnes
wedded to Thomas Gouldwell, and so by this Alliance Tremhatch was enwrapped in
his Patrimony, and continued in the Descendants of this Name until the forty
second year of Q. Elizabeth, and then it was alienated by John Gouldwell and
Cicely his Wife to Robert Gaunt, whose Son Thomas Gaunt died possessed of it
1625, and gives it first to his Brother George Gaunt, and in Defailance of
Issue to Thomas Carlisle, who in Right of the premises is now invested in the
Possession.

Broughton is a Manor which is likewise circumscribed within the Limits of
Charing, and had Owners likewise of that Surname. Adam de Broughton and
sometimes written Brocton, flourished here about the Reign of Edward the first,
and his Descendants enjoyed the Propriety of it until the latter end of
Richard the second, and then it was alienated to Paunsherst, Thomas Paunsherst
made his Will in the year of our Lord 1472, and gave it to Thomas Paunsherst
his Son, and he made his Will in the year 1503, and disposed of it to his
Daughter Joan Paunsherst, and in Defailance of her Issue, to his Kinsman Thomas
Pain; She deceased without Issue, and so the Remainder devolved to be the
Inheritance of Pain, in which Name it remained until times of our
remembrance, and then it was alienated to the Father of the instant
Proprietary, Withick.

Here was a Chauntry at Charing founded, as an ancient Survey of this Parish
instructs me, by Sir John Burley, who bare Quarterly Or and Sables, and was
called successively Burley's Chauntry the Duty enjoined the Priest that was to
officiate, was to pray for the Souls of Sir John Burley, Sir William de
Burleigh, and the Descendants of that Family, the Demeasn which was to support
it, was upon the suppression granted to Sir Io. Darell Ancestor to Sir John
Darell of Cale-Hill, who now is in the Enjoyment of it.

Acton is the laft place of Account in Charing, which is eminent in respect of
that relation it had to the ancient and noble Family of Beaufits, who made it
their Seat before they were transplanted to Twidal in Gillingham. Robert
Beaufits, as appears by an ancient Court Roll held it in the Reign of Henry the
third, and from him did it descend to his Grandchild Robert Beaufits, who about
the fourth year of Edward the third, planted himself at Twidal: but yet this
still continued in the Name until the Reign of Henry the seventh, and then
this Name expiring in Daughters and Coheirs, one of them called Joan by
matching with Robert Arnold made it the Propriety of that Family, and he had
Issue William Arnold, who conveyed it about the the middle of Henry the eighth
to Sir Anthony Sonds, whose Grandchild Sir Richard Sonds in our Fathers
remembrance alienated it to Hutchins, from whom by the Hands of Mr. Nicholas
Nicholson, who was made his Feoffee in Trust to discharge Debts and Legacies,
it is now come over to Godden.

Chartham in the Hundred of Bredge and Petham, is a Manor belonging to the Sea
of Canterbury, but of whose Donation I know not; only Doomsday Book represents
it thus appraised, Certeham est Manerium de vestitu Monachorum, and T. E. R.
defondebat se pro IIII Sullings, and nunc similiter, and est appretiatur XX and
V lb.

Having done with Chartham, I shall now discover what places are enclosed
within the Verge of it, which were always of temporal Interest.

Densted is another Manor in Chartham, which in the twentieth year of Edward
the third was held by John the Son of Sir John Polre of Polre in Harbledowne,
but only as Lessee to the Priory of Leeds, to which Covent it was given by
Hamon de Crevequer about the forty seventh year of Henry the third, pro salute
Animae suae and Antecessorum suorum, says an old Note extracted out of the
Coucher Book of the Prioty; yet the whole Manor did not accrue to this
Cloister by the former Donation, for in the eighth year of Rich. the second,
Rob. Bovehatch, as appears, Rot. Esc. Number. 81. being convicted of Felony, was
found to have held some Land here at Densted, which upon the Forfeiture, was by
that Prince, it is probable, as was customary in those times, settled on the
Priory of Leeds, and lay wholly couched in their Revenue until the public
Dissolution in the reign of Henry the eighth rent it off, and then it was in
the thirty seventh year of Henry the eighth granted to John Tufton Esquire, and
he about the third year of Ed. the sixth alienated it to Richard Argal Esquire;
from whom not long after it came over by Sale to Mr. Bartholomew Man, and he
about the Beginning of Q. Elizabeth conveyed it by Sale to William Lovelace
Esquire, Sergeant at Law to that Princess; and his Son Sir Will. Lovelace,
about the Beginning of K. James, passed it away to to Sir Will. Cullimore,
whose Lady not long after conveyed it to Tho. Steed of Steed-Hill, and he not
many years since demised it to Sir Tho. Swan of Southfleet, whose Son and Heir
William Swan Esquire enjoys the instant Signorie of it.

Howfield is a second place which calls for our Notice, it was as high as any
Evidence can furnish me with Intelligence, to steer me on to any old Discovery,
the Patrimonial Inheritance of Fogge, a noble and Knightly Family as any in
this Track: Sir Thomas Fogge who inhabited at Toniford, about the latter end of
Edward the third, purchased this and Toniford of John de Toniford, about the
last year of that Princes Rule, and in the Revenue of this Family did the Title
of this Manor for many Descents lie rolled up, till some few Generations since
it was alienated to Colepeper, where after some short residence, the Possession
by the same Fate was transplanted into Vane, from whom not many years since it
went away by Sale to Sir Will. Man See more of this Family of Man at Bredgar.
of Canterbury, who is the instant Proprietary of it.

But the place in Chartham of most eminent Account is the Manor of
Shalmesford-Bridge, so called because the Mansion House is situated near the
Bridge, which crosses the Stoure. It was for many Generations the Inheritance
of a Family which had here their Seat, and derived from hence their Surname,
and continued down in an uninterrupted succession in the Possession of this
Family, until about the beginning of the reign of Henry the seventh, (as
appears by the Deed which I have seen) Ann Daughter and Sole Heir of William
Shalmesford was wedded to John Petit, and so by this Alliance the Fee-simple of
this place was lincked to their Patrimony; but in our Fathers Memory the Tie
was broken, for William Petit this Man's Successor deceased without Issue Male,
and left only three Daughters his Coheirs, Katharine married to Michael Belke,
Elizabeth matched to Giles Masters, and lastly Dorothy espoused first to
William Masters, secondly to John Meriwether, and thirdly to...... Parker of
North-Fleet, who shared his Revenue; but this upon the separation of the
Estate, did improve the Demeasn of Michael Belke with its accession, from whom
it is descended to the present owner Mr........ Belke, now Vicar of Wye, issued
out from the Belkes of Coperham's Sole in Shelvich, which has been in the
Tenure and Possession, as it now is, of this Name and Family, as the private
Evidences of the place do manifest, almost four hundred years.

There is yet another petty Manor in Chartham called Shalmesford Street, but
more truly and originally the Mansion of Bolles, for it was the Interest of
that Name and Family who had large Possessions at Chilham and the parts
adjacent, but upon my viewing the private Evidences of this place, some of
which reached to Edw. the third, I could not discover that any of them were
ever represented under the notion of Gentlemen, or that there was any Coat of
Arms insculped on their Seats, after Bolles was worn out, which was about the
beginning of the reign of Q, Eliz. the Possession was by Sale surrendered to
Cracknal, from whom in that Age which bordered upon our remembrance, it was by
the same Fatality conveyed away to Michel, who claims the present Possession of
it.

Chetham with Gillingham are knit into one Hundred, so that it gives Name to
that Track wherein it is situared; it was in Ages of a very high Pedigree, the
Seat of the Potent, Ancient, and Illustrious Family of Crevequer, and was Caput
Baroniae, or the principal Manor which related to their Barony, before they
transplanted themselves to Leeds Castle, and frequently writ Domini de Cetham;
Hamon de Crevequer lived in the Time of the Conqueror, and is mentioned in the
great Survey, styled Deomesday-Book, and he had Issue Robert Crevequer, or de
Crepite Cord, who was joined as an Assistant to John Fiennes in the Guard of
Dover Castle, and he was Grandfather to Robert Crevequer who erected Leeds
Castle, and had Issue Hamon de Crevequer, who matched with Matilda de
Averenches, Daughter and Heir of William de Averenches, by whom he had Issue
Hamon de Crevequer, who was so involved in the Design and Combination of Simon
de Montfort, which was to retrench the Prerogative of Henry the third, that he
made the Breast of Prince Edward, eldest Son to that King, boil with so much
Passion and Animosity, that it could not be appeased or allayed, until he had
appointed Henry Cobbam his Substitute in his Constableship of Dover, to
dismantle and raze his Castle at Leeds, and seize on this Manor as the
Expiation and recompense of so great a Defection and Folly; and although his
Crimes were afterward absolved and entombed in the Pacification of
Killingworth, yet I do not find that ever Chetham was restored to him, for in
the tenth year of Edward the second, that Prince exchanges this Manor and
diverse other pieces of Land with Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, for the Manor of
Adresley and the Advowson of the Church in Shropshire: But he soon after
insculped these Benefits of the Kings in Sand, a weak Register to record so
many important Obligations, and by his Confederacy with Tho. Earl of Lancaster,
and others of the mutinous Nobility, forfeited both this and his life at
Canterbury; upon whose Tragedy it resolved again into the Revenue of the
Crown, and there rested until K. Edw. the third, in the second year of his
Reign restored it again to his Son Bartholomew Badelesmer, and he dying in the
twelfth year of that Kings Government without Issue, Margaret matched to
William Rosse, and re-married to Thomas Arundel, and Margery another of his
Sisters matched to Sir Jo. de Tib itot, and Coheirs, shared his Inheritance at
this place. Sir John Tibitot in his Wife's right died seized of it in the
thirty third year of Edw. the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 39. And Margaret Widow of
Will. Rosse, and Wife of Tho. Arundel, was in possession of a Moitie of it at
her decease, which was in the thirty seventh year of Edw. the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 62. And from these two did it descend by the successive steps of paternal
progression, to Tho. Lord Rosse, who was beheaded at Newcastle upon Tine and
attainted in the fourth year of Edw. the fourth, as a Complice of the House of
Lancaster; and likewise to John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester, who was attainted
and beheaded in the year 1470, as a Partisan of the House of York: so that the
whole Manor by the several Attaints being swallowed up in the Revenue of the
Crown, it was by Edw. the fourth in the eighteenth year of his Reign granted to
Roger Lord Wentworth and Margaret his Wife, Widow of Tho. Lord Rosse, and Tho.
Lord Wentworth this man's Successor, about the Beginning of Q. Eliz. alienated
it to Barnham and Slany, who immediately after disposed of their right in it by
a joint Sale to Barker, from whom by the like Fate within the Verge of that
Age, which fell under our Grandfathers remembrance, it came over to Sir Rob.
Jackson; and he not many years since conveyed it, by Sale to Sir Oliver
Boteler, Grandfather to Sir Oliver Boteler Baronet, in whom resides the
present Signorie of it. But Waldeslade was given by Rich. the second in the
eleventh year of his Reign (as the Book called Feoda Militum kept in the
Exchequer intimates) to the Abbey of Canous Langley, frequently written
Childrens Langley, and lay involved in their revenue till the general
Dissolution, and then King Henry the eighth in the thirty fifth year of his
reign granted it to Sir Thomas Moile; from whom the Fee-simple by Amy his
Daughter and Coheir devolved to Sir Thomas Kempe, and he in the tenth year of
Q. Eliz. passed it away to Jo. Mabbe, who in the twentieth of her reign
alienated it to William Emes, from whom in the twenty fifth of that Princess
it devolved to Richard Fogge Esquire; and he in the twenty sixth year of her
Government conveyed it to Mr. Ex Autographis penes Rich. Lea de Delce magna
Armig.
Tho. Cocks, who in the thirty sixth of that Queen transferred it by Sale to
Mr. Richard Lea; from whom it descended to his Son and Heir Captain Rich. Lea
of Great Delce Esquire, and he by Sale gave up his right to his second Brother
Mr. Thomas Lea, who dying without Issue gave it to his Nephew the instant
Proprietary Richard Lea now of Great Delce Esquire.

The late Repair of the Parish Church, and new Building of the Steeple commends
the religious Care and Cost of his late Majesty's Commissioners and Officers of
the Navy Royal in the year 1635. But the Arsenals, Storehouses and Shipdocks
erected by the late K. Charles, are so magnificent and universally useful, that
they are become a principal Pillar of the Nations support, so far as they
relate to the naval defense of it, and affords variety of employment, by the
Manufacture of Cordage, as also by the Careening and Building of Ships.

Chetham Hospital called St. Bartholomews, was founded by Gundulphus Bishop of
Rochester in the time of William Rufus, to which the Norwoods of Norwood, and
the Crevequers (as the Records of the Church of Rochester do specify) were
plentitul Benefactors.

Chart Magna or Great Chart gives Name to the whole Hundred which lies about
it, and has thereby a tacit Note of Antiquity and eminence annexed to it, and
was in the Saxons Time called Seleberts Chert. In the year of Grace 788. King
Cenulfe or Kenulfe at the Request of Archbishop Athelard regranted this place
to the Sea of Centerbury, for Offa sometime before had wrested it from
Archbishop Janibert. In the Time of the Conquest, when the Church Demeasn was
rated, this was valued at three Sullings or Plough-Lands.

Goldwell is an ancient Manor and Mansion in this Parish, which was for many
Ages and Descents the Inheritance of the noble and illustrious Family of
Goldwell, which in Times of an elder Aspect, gave them both Seat and Surname,
out of which two learned Bishops descended, Jam. Goldwell who was Bishop of
Norwich in the year 1472, and principal Secretary of State to Edw. the fourth,
who obtained a Grant from that Prince to found a Chauntry in Great Chart, as
appears, Pat. 15. Edw. 4. Pars tertia. And Tho. Goldwell Bishop of St. Asaph,
in the year 1555. But alas! after this Manor had been so long seated in the
Patrimony of Goldwell, it was at length alienated (such is the volatile and
unsettled temper of all earthly Inheritances) not many years since by J.
Goldwell to Sir Will. Withins, and he passed it away to Sir J. Tufton Ancestor
to the right honorable Jo. Tufton now E. of Thanet, who by paternal Descent is
now entitled to the Possession of Goldwell: but Goddinton by Joan Goldwell who
was Daughter and Heir to Tho. Goldwell, a branch sprouted out of the principal
Stem at Goldwell, came to be the Inheritance of Tho. Took, and has for sundry
Generations continued in that Name till this Day, some of which lie buried in
Chart Church with very fair Inscriptions, unless the Sacrilegious Impiety of
these Times has ravished away the Brass which should stand an Alphabet to
their Dust; and in the upper Church windows, about the second Story, their
Gentry, Descent, Matches, and Alliance is most amply expressed in their Armories,
and that (unless the wildness of some barbarous Hand have lately demolished
them) in colored Glass.

Chelmington is another Manor in this Parish which gave Surname to a generous
Family, who I believe had here their Mansion too, though by the repeated and
successive Impressions of Age it be now entered in Rubbish and Oblivion;
finally, after this place had for many Descents been wrapped up in the Revenue of
this Name and Family, it devolved at last to John Chelmington, whose Effigies
is represented to us in one of the Church windows by an armed Portraicture, who
deceased in the reign of Henry the fourth without Issue Male, so that Eliz.
Chelmington was his Daughter and Heir, who by matching with Roger Twisden Esquire;
cast it into the Patrimony of that noble and ancient Family, in respect of
which original Alliance the right of this Manor is now fixed in Sir Roger
Twisden Knight and Baronet, a person to whom for his learned Conduct of these
my imperfect Labors thorough the gloomy and perplexed paths of Antiquity, and
the many Difficulties that did assault me, I am signally obliged.

Little Chart lies in the Hundred of Calchill, and does involve that place
within the Precincts and Circumference of it, which gives Denomination to the
whole Hundred; It was restored to the Monks of Christ Church in Canterbury by
Kenulfe King of Mercia, at the request of Archbishop Athelard or Atheldred, in
the year of Grace 799. for King Offa had before violently torn it off from the
Patrimony of the Church, as appears by that ancient Record called the Book of
Christ Church. In the year 1044, one Elleric Big confirmed this Donation, and
it went then as it had done before by Assignation toward the supply of their
Diet; And the Notitia of the particular Manors belonging to Christ Christ in
the Doomsday Record speaks thus; Litel Cert. iterum est Manerium Monachorum,
and de Cibo eorum, quod in T. E. R. id est, Tempore Edwardi Regis se defendebat
pro III Sullings, and nunc pro duo and dimidio and valet VIII lb. The other
half Sulling or Ploughland was at that time held by William Fitz-Herminfrid of
the Archbishop of Canterbury in Fee, and was called Pett. This Manor was many
Generations since given in Fee-Farm by Grant from the Monks of Christ Church to
the Brockhulls, who transmitted it with Calehill to John Darell Esquire; in the
fourth year of Henry the fourth, and under that Notion or Capacity it continued
till the suppression, and then it was confirmed to Sir James Darell by King
Henry the eighth in Fee-Ferm, there being a small Rent issuing out of it
reserved to the Dean and Chapter of Christ Church, and under that Character is
it now come down to Sir John Darell the instant Lord of the Fee.

Calehill is that eminent Manor in Little Chart which gives Name to the whole
Hundred, it was under the Scepter of Henry the third, the Inheritance of a good
Family called Frene, who (as appears by Seals and other Authentic Records of
Armorie) bare for their paternal Coat Or a Flower de Lis within a plain Bordure
Sables, in Allufion and Assimulation to that Pluckly, of whom it is probable
they held some Land in this Track, who bore Or only a Flower de Lis Sabler;
Hugh de Frene in the first year of Ed. the first, obtained a Charter of Free
Warren to his Manor of Calehill and Stilley in Charing: But before the middle
of Edw. the third, this Family was departed from the Possession of this place,
having surrendered the Propriety of it, and Stilley in Charing to Sir Thomas
Brockhull second Son of Sir William Brockhull, and he paid respective Aid for
his Manor of Calehill, and his Lands at Charing, at making the Black Prince
Knight; Thomas Brockhull his Son was Sheriff of Kent the seventh and eighth
years of Rich. the second, and held his Shrievalty at Calehill, and he had
Issue Hen. Brockhull, who in the fourth year of Hen. the fourth conveyed
Calehill to Ex Autographis Jo. Darell de Calchill Militis.
John Darell Esquire; younger Brother of Darell of Sesay and elder Brother to Sir
Will. Darell under-Treasurer of England, which John was Steward of the Lands of
Hen. Chichley Arch-B. of Cant. a place in those Times of a large Trust, and as
eminent a Concernment, and in the twelfth year of the abovesaid Prince Hen.
Brockhull mentioned before, passed away Stilley in Charing to John Darell
abovesaid, from whom it came over to his Successor James Darell, who by a
Charter of Inspection in the third of Hen. the sixth, had the Franchise or
Privilege of Free Warren renewed to his Manors of Calchill and Stilley in
Charing, which was originally granted to Hugh de Frene: John Darell Esquire; was
Sheriff of Kent the seventh of Hen. the seventh, he was afterward dignified
with the Order of Knighthood, and was so eminent a Partisan of that Prince,
that he had his Estate torn from him by See Rot. Par. de An. tertio Ric. 3
Memb. 6.
Richard the third for his Fidelity to his Cause and Quarrel, which, See
Originale An. 2. Hen. 7. Rot. 17. in the Treasurers side in the Exchequer.
with thirteen other Manors lying dispersed in the County of Worcester was
granted to him again by Henry the seventh before mentioned, and was made
Captain of the Lanciers for this part of the County wherein he lived. Sir James
Darell was his Son and Heir, who was Governor of Guines and Hames Castle near
Calais, Thus have I in prospect represented when Jo. Darell above mentioned
originally extracted from the Knightly Family of the Darells of Sesay in
Yorkshire, deserted that County, to transplant himself into Kent, and fix his
residence at Little Chart, from whom Sir John Darell who now enjoys the Signory
of Calehill, and Propriety of Stilley in Charing, by a Derivation of many
Descents (all of whom were very considerable in their Generations, as their
Monuments and sepulchral Inscriptions remaining in their own Chapel of St.
Katharines in Little Chert Church, do at this instant eminently manifest) is by
a just and un-interrupted Series originally and lineally extracted

Burleigh is another Manor, partly in this Parish, and partly in Charing,
which had anciently Owners who bore that Surname, and there is a place in
Charing Church, which at this Day is known by the Name of Burleighs Chauntry,
which is very probable was founded by them; after the Burleighs were
extinguished and abstracted from the Possession of this place, which was about
the Beginning of Edward the third, the St. John's written in Sir John Darells
Latin Deeds De Sancto Johanne, became Lords of the Fee; but long this Manor
was not refident in them, for before the end of Edward the third, this Family
of St. John was crumbled into Decay and Oblivion, and having disloged from the
Possession, a Family called Dalingryg of eminent Note in Hantshire, were
entitled by Purchase to the Proprtety of it, and Sir Edward Dalingryg by a
Fine levied the first year of Richard the first, passed it away to Roger
Dalingryg, and Alice his Wife, and they not long after by the same Vicissitude
conveyed their united Interest here to Brockhull of Cale hill, and Hen.
Brockhull in the fourth year of Henry the fourth, transmitted it by Sale to
John Darrell Esquire, and from him by the Chanel of sundry Descents is the
Right now descended to Sir John Darrell, who has the instant Fee-simple of it.

Chart Sutton sometimes called Chart Green, is seated in the Hundred of
Eyhorne; within the Confines of this Parish there is an ancient Manor and
Mansion called Norton place, it gave Name to as ancient a Family as any in this
Track, in the South-Windows of the Church there was the Effigies of Stephen
Norton, with his Arms on his Tabard or Surcoat, viz. Argent a Cheveron between
three Crescents Azure, who flourished in King Richard the seconds Time; and in
a Turnament of the Kentish Gentlemen, I find one of this Name in a Tabard of
the Arms above mentioned, encountering one Christmasse of East Sutton not far
distant, who was in like manner so habited in a Surcoat charged with his Arms,
which meetly express the Owners name, viz. Gules upon a Bend Sables three
Wassail Bowls Or, which likewise stand in the SouthWindows in Sutton Church.
But the Effects of Gavelkind did at length grind this Family to a small Remain,
so that in the Times which did almost border upon those our Fathers lived in,
this Seat was by Norton sold to Baker, from whom by the same Fatality not long
after it went away to Sir Edward Hales Grandfather to Sir Edward Hales Baronet,
who is the present Proprietary of it. But though the Family be worn out at this
place, yet from a Cadet of this Name, who did once possess Wierton in Boughton
Quarry, now the Mansion of Sir Anthony St. Ledger, did Sir Gregory Norton now of
Sussex Knight and Baronet lately deceased originally sprout forth.

There is another place in this Parish called the Den of Ivetegh, which was
anciently the Inheritance of a Family who bore that Name, and though the Deeds
now in the Hands of my Cozen Mr. Thomas Petley of Vilston, do discover the
Possession to be resident in this Name, no higher then the Rule of Henry the
fixth, yet it is probable, because the Name was local it was theirs long beyond
that Time; from Ivetegh it came to Mascall, a Family whose Estate was formerly
at Berming, and from this Name it was by Sale demised to Lamb, who some three
descents since alienated his Interest in it to Perry, extracted from the Perrys
of Worcestershire; but this Family lately determining in Females, Elizabeth
married to Mr. Thomas Petley of Vilston, Ann, and Mary, these three are the
Vihble Coheits of that Estate which related to it.

Crayford in the Hundred of Little and Lesness contains diverse places in it of
eminent Consideration; fitst, Howbery, offers it self up to our View: It was in
the Reign of Henry the third, and Edward, as appears by ancient Court Rolls and
other Evidences, the Patrimony of the noble Family of Northwood, who held it
for several Descents in an uninterrupted Channel, until the Reign of Richard
the second, and then the Title and Propriety of it was by the Revolution of
Sale transplanted into Abermill, but here the Possession was so cursory and
transient, that before the end of Henry the fourth, it was surrendered to
Nicholas Carew of Surrey, and John Cornwallis of London, who by joint
Concurrence in the fifth year of Henry the fifth conveyed it to Richard Bryan,
and he in the first year of Henry the sixth passed it away to Roger Apylton,
one of the Auditors to that Prince, and his Father Henry the fifth, and Agnes
his Wife Widow of Thomas Coveley or Cowley, and the Reversion in Fee to her Son
Thomas Cowley, which accordingly after her Decease descended to him, and from
him it was transported by Descen to his Grandchild John Cowley, who in the
twenty second year of Henry the eighth, alienated it to John Judde, whose Son
Henry Judde about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth resigned up the Possession
by Sale to Sir Richard Fane; in whose Family after it had fixed until that
Age, which was within the Confines of our Fathers Remembrance, it was by
Purchase made the Patrimony of Draper, and is still the Inheritance of
Master........ Draper now in his Minority.

Newbery is the second place of Account, which was in elder Times ennobled by
being parcel of that Inheritance which confessed the Dominion of St. John, and
Edward St. John, as appears by the Records of this place, flourished here in
the Reign of Edward the first, and Edward the second, and dying without Issue,
left his Estate here to Isabell his Sister and Coheir, matched to Henry de
Burgherst, and he in her Right dyed possessed of it the twenty third year of
Edward the third, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 94. part secunda. After this
Family was crumbled away at this place, I find it folded up in the Demeasne of
Poynings, the last of which who enjoyed it was Thomas Poynings, who about the
Beginning of Henry the sixth, conveyed it to John Kingston Esquire, in which
Family it made its abode until the Reign of Henry the eighth, and then I find
it departed from this Name, and cast into the Possession of Sir Thomas Lisley,
whose Descendant about the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth conveyed it to Apylton
of Marshalls Court in this Parish, where they had been resident many Descents
before, and Roger Apylton gave this and Marshalls Court in Dower with his
Daughter Frances, matched to Mr. Francis Goldsmith, who almost in our
Remembrance passed away Newberry to Draper, Ancestor to Mr. Draper now
Proprietary of it; but Marshalls Court was alienated to Pix, whose Descendant
not many years since sold his Interest in it to Mrs. Touse of London, who has
settled it in Marriage on her Daughter matched to Colonel Wood of Kingston on
Thames.

Ellam is the last place of Remark in Crayford, it gave Seat and Surname to a
good old Family, who for many Descents passed under the Notion and Estimate of
Gentlemen, before they deserted the Possession of this Seat, and bore Argent a
Sword in Bend Dexter Sables: Henry Ellam dyed 1471, and lies entombed in
Crayford Church; John Ellam deceased 1481, and had there likewise his place of
Sepulture, both whose Monuments Time and a Casual Fire invading the Church,
have miserably dismanteled; the last of this Name who was possessed of this place
was John Ellam, who in the sixteenth year of Henry the seventh alienated it to
Henry Harman, who was then Clerk of the Crown, in which Family it continued
until the latter end of King James; and then it was passed away with May
Street, (which Henry Harman abovesaid purchased of Cowley and Bulbeck of Bubeck
Street in this Parish, in the twentieth of Edward the fourth) to Draper, whose
Descendant Mr....... Draper is entitled to the Interest of both these places.

The Arch Bishops of Canterbury had anciently some Concernment in Crayford, for
as I find by Record William Arch Bishop of Canterbury in the twentieth of
Richard the second, obtained the Grant of a Market to this place to be weekly
observed on the Tuesday, and a Fair yearly on the Vigil, the Day of our Ladies
Nativity, and four Days after.

Northcrey lies in the Hundred of Rokesley, and though an obscure Village in it
self, yet is made eminent by containing within its Limits the Manor of
Rokesley, which contributes a name to the whole Hundred, it was as high as can
by Record be traced, the Inheritance of Rokesley, Greogrie de Rokesley Lord
Mayor of London in the year 1275, which was in the third year of Edward the
first, an eminent man in those times he was, for as by the Chartularies of
London it appears, he was Keeper of the Kings Exchange in London, and Saymaster
General of the Kings Mint; nor was his Son of less reputation, for Sir Richard
de Rokesley, so was he called, was Seneschal of Poictou, and Governor of
Montreul in Picardy about the latter end of Edward the first, but died without
issue Male, and left Joan his Daughter and Heir, who was matched to Sir Thomas
de Poynings, Father of Richard Lord Poynings, and so Rokesley became the
Inheritance of that Family: but Northcrey remained longer in Rokesley, for
Roger de Rokesley a Cadet of this Family paid respective Aid for Northcrey in
the twentyeth year of Edward the third, but it seems went out without Issue, so
that Northcrey devolved to Poynings as the next of Alliance; for Richard Lord
Poynings died seized of both these Manors in the thirteenth year of Richard
the second, Rot. Esc. 148. whose Sole Heir Elianor was married to Henry Piercy
Earl of Northumberland, whose Successor Henry Earl of Northumberland in the
Reign of Henry the eighth, in the twenty ninth year of that Prince bequeathed
by Testament these Manors to the Crown, where they lay involved till the same
Prince by Grant made them the Inheritance of Sir Roger Cholmeley, one of his
Judges, who not long after alienated them to Sir Martin Bows, and he had Issue
William Bows, who concluded in two Daughters and Coheirs, Elizabeth married
to Mr. William Buggin Esquire, and Ann married to Sir Bdmund Fowler, who
shared his Patrimony, but Northcrey, and Rokesley upon the partition was
annexed to the Demeasn of Buggin, from whom it is descended to Mr. William
Buggin his Son, in whom the Possession is now resident.

Jackets Court in this Parish was a place which gave Seat and Surname to
Gentlemen of this Name: I have seen an old Roll of Kentish Arms, wherein Jacket
of Jackets Court is recorded, but the Arms were of so antiquated an Aspect,
that I could not distinguish neither the Color nor Charge; from Jacket by Sale
it went away to Switzer, a Name of signal Antiquity in this Track, though never
under the repute of Gentlemen, one of which in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth
conveyed it to Edmund Cook Esquire, whose Son Mr. Lambert Cook passed it away
to Alderman Leman, and he surrendered his Right in it to Whiffen, by whose
Daughter and Heir it is lately come to be the Inheritance of Mr. Thomas Bales
Esquire, Barrister at Law.

Rokesley and Northcrey were formerly two distinct Parishes, till Cardinal
Reginald Pole, when he visited Kent, which was in the year 1557, finding it
convenient by reason of their Situation, and the narrowness of the Demeasn, to
lay them together, united them into one, so that Rokesley (the Church by disuse
being languished into decay) has been ever since esteemed an Appendage to
Northerey.

Paul's Crey or Paulins Crey, lies in the Hundred of Rokesley, and gave Surname
to Sir Simon de Crey, who was Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports in the third and
fourth year of Edward the first, and afterward in the twenty eighth year of
that Princes Reign accompanied him in his victorious Expedition into Scotland,
and is in the Register of those Kentish Cavaleirs who were embarked in that
successful Design. After this Family was worn away, Champneys, a Name of
celebrated Note in the County of Somerset, was Lord of the Fee, Hugh de
Champneys is mentioned in the Book of Aid to have paid some respective supply
for this Manor at the making the Black Prince Knight in twentyeth year of
Edward the third; and Champneys Field, so called at this day, which lies in Sir
Thomas Walsinghams Park, and has been for many Descents the Walsinghams, was
belonging to this man; From Champneys it came down to Scroop, a Noble and
Ancient Family extracted out of the North Riding of Yorke-shire; Sir Henry le
Scroope died possessed of it in the fifteenth year of Richard the second, and
Thomas Scroope after him held it at his Decease, which was in the fifteenth
year of Edward the fourth; after Scroope was gone out, I find Talbot, which was
in the Reign of Henry the seventh, to be fixed in the Possession of this place,
and is in some Deeds written Talbot of Grafton; by whose Daughter and Heir it
devolved to Danbie, in the time of Henry the eighth, descended from the Danbies
of Middleham Castle in Yorke-shire; in which Family after the Possession for
diverse years had inhabited, it was about threescore years since sold away to
Mr. James Smith of London, who deceasing without Issue Male, this by Mary his
Sole heir is come to acknowledge Mr. Edward Waller of Beaconsfield Esquire for
its instant Possessor.

Kitchin-Grove is a small Manor in this Parish, which for many Ages since was
the Demeasn of Ferby, written in ancient Deeds Ferbey; from whom sundry
Descents since, it came by purchase to Heron, but was not of that continuance
here as in the former Family; for after some fifty years Possession it was in
the Reign of Henry the seventh alienated to Walsingham of Scadbury, Ancestor to
Sir Thomas Walsingham, in whom the Propriety of it is at this instant resident.

John Dynley had license here in the sixteenth year of Edward the third to
build a Bridge over the River, leading to his Demeasn Land at Hockenden in this
Parish, which with Walkelins has been for above two hundred years the
Inheritance of Sir Leonard Ferby and his Predecessors, Pat. Anno 16. Edw.
tertii Part. prima.

Votes-Crey in the Hundred of Rokesley, takes that Denomination from one Vote,
the owner thereof in the Conquerours time; in Ages of a more modern Descent,
the Rokesleyes were Proprietaries of it, and Gregory de Rokesley was seized of
it at his death, which was in the twenty ninth year of Edward the first, and
left it to his Son Roger de Rokesley, who by a fine levied in the thirty third
year of the abovesaid Prince, passed it away to John Abel, Margerie his Wife,
and Walter his Son, which Walter after by the same Devolution translated his
right in it to Sir Simon de Vaughan, who in the twentieth year of Edward the
third paid respective Aid for it at the making the Black Prince Knight: Then
this Manor came to Warner, whose Successor John Warner was Sheriff of Kent in
the twentyeth year of Henry the sixth: and it is probable by some empaled Coats
in the Church windows, that the Heir General of Vaughan was married to Warner;
but the two Statues upon an Altar-tomb in the Church, likewise (which the
Injuries of Time and impious Sacrilege together, have almost demolished,)
belonged to Sir Simon de Vaughan, and were when Mr. Robert Glover made his
Collection of the Kentish Monuments, entire, after the Coheirs of Warner wedded
to Jo. Herne and Denham divided his Inheritance at this place, and upon the
partition, this accrued to Herne, and Christopher Herne Esquire in the twenty
first year of Henry the eighth, passed it away to William Walsingham Esquire,
who upon his decease gave it to his Son and heir Sir Francis Walsingham,
principal Secretary of Estate to Q. Elizabeth, who about the middle of this
Princesses Government alienated it to Mr. John Gellibrand from which Name and
Family the possession is at this instant it came down to Mr. John Gellibrand of
London.

Chellesfield in the Hundred of Rokesley, afforded in elder time both Seat and
Surname to a Family of principal Account, who obtained a Market to this their
Manor weekly on the Monday, and Simon de Chellesfield upon his Plea of
prescription before the Judges Itinerant in the seventh year of Edward the
first, had an Allowance of it, and William de Chelsfield had a Charter warren
to his Lands in Chelsfield, Shoram, Nockholt, and Orpington, in the twelfth
year of Edward the first; from Chelsfield it passed away to Otho Lord
Grandison, who paid respective Aid for this Manor by the sixth part of a
Knights Fee, at the making the Black Prince Knight, in the twentieth year of
Edward the third: but there it had but a frail abode, for Sir Thomas de
Grandison this man's Son, conveyed it over by Sale to Richard Lord Poynings,
whose Daughter and Heir Eleanor matched to Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland;
and in his Line was the Right of it for some Descents interwoven, till in the
Reign of Henry the seventh, it was by Sale resigned up to James Walsingham
Esquire, whose Son Sir Edmund Walsingham alienated it to Giles, in the Reign of
Edward the sixth, which Giles descended from Giles of Lords in Shelvich, where
for many years before they had been planted; and from Giles, about the latter
end of Q. Elizabeth, it came over by purchase to Captain Henry Lee of London,
who going out in Sisters and Coheirs, it is now come by two of them to Sergeant
John Clerk of Huntington-shire, the principal Possessor, and Mr. Thomas Norton
of London.

Ferneborough is but a Chapel of Ease, devoted to the honor of St. Giles, but
belongs to the Mother Church of Chelsfield, which is dedicated to St. James, as
appears by the Records of the Church of Rochester: It was a principal Seat of
the Lord Grandison, who made this the Head of their Barony; William de
Grandison held it at his death, which was in the ninth year of Edward the
third; Otho de Grandison obtained a the grant of Market to Ferneborough, in the
eighteenth of Edw. the first, which was renewed to Hen. Earl of Lancaster in
the eighteenth year of Edward the third, and the grant of a Fair added at the
Feast of S. Giles the Eve, and Eight days following.
Otho Lord Grandison this man's Son, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to it in
the eighteenth year of Edward the third; but long after this it did not remain
linked to the Inheritance of this Family, for in the Reign of Richard the
second, I find Fleming invested in the Possession, whose Tenure was very
transitory; for not long after by Purchase it was brought into the Demeasn of
Petley, from whom by as swift a Fatalitie it went away to Peche of Lullingston,
which Family determined in Sir John Peche, in the Reign of Henry the seventh,
who dying Issueless, Elizabeth his Sister and heir, brought this, and a
spacious Inheritance to her husband John Heart Esquire, from whom M. William
Heart now of Lullingston Esquire is lineally extracted; and in right of this
Alliance is at this present entitled to the Possession and Signorie of
Ferneborough.

There is a third Manor in this Parish called Godington, which was anciently
the Habitation of a Family which was represented to the world under that Name;
Simon de Godington paid respective Aid for his Manor of Godington at the
making the Black Prince Knight, in the twentieth year of Edward the third; (as
the Book of Aid informs us,) and after this Family expired at this place,
Richard Lord Poynings became Lord of the Signorie of it, from whom with Eleanor
his Daughter and Heir it went over to Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, but
did not long fix in that Family; for, for almost two hundred years last past,
the Possession has been constantly united to the Name of Haddon, a Family of
principal Account in this Track, as may appear by their Arms, viz. A Leg couped
and wounded, which are Registered in the old Rolls and Ordinaries of Kentish
Armorie, always with this addition, Haddon of Kent, and sometimes of Godington
in Kent.

Hewat is another small Manor in Cheslfield, One Jeffrey de Hewat was possessed
of it in the Time of Henry the third, ut apparet ex Charta sine Data.
which was for many Descents the Petleys of Down originally, from whom it
devolved to a Cadet of that Family, who planted himself at Moulsoe in this
Parish, and there is a Deed in the hands of Mr. Thomas Petley of Vielston, of
John Coldigate of Coldigate, a Farm in Halsted, which bears Date from the
eleventh year of Henry the fourth; to which one William Petley of Chelsfield is
Test. After it had been resident for sundry Generations in this Branch of
Petley, which sprouted out from those of Down the Title in that Age which
ushered in this, was by Sale from Edward Petley transferred to Mr. Thomas
Petley of Vilston in Shorham; another Branch shot out from the principal Stem
of the Petleys at Down, and he left it to his second Son Mr. Ralph Petley of
Riverhead in Sevenoke, not long since deceased, whose Heir (who is Proprietary
of this place) is at this instant in his Minority.

Northsted is situated likewise in Chelsfield, and in the reign of Edward the
third, confessed a Family called Francis for its Proprietaries; Simon Francis
held it at his death, which was in the thirty second year of Edward the third,
Rot. Esc. Number. 33. and acquired it by Purchase of Otho de Grandison, who held
this and Chelsfield, as appears by the Book of Aid, in the twentieth year of
the former Prince; but about the beginning of Henry the fourth, this Family had
surrendered the possession of this Manor to Vuedall or Udall a Noble Family,
and Masters of much Land both in Surrey, Sussex, and Hant-shire; Sir John de
Vuedall was one of the Knights who was with Edward the first at the Siege of
Carlaverock; Sir Peter D'Vuedall sat as Baron in Parliament the eighth and
ninth of Edward the second; Nicholas Vuedall was Constable of Windsor under
Edward the third, John Vuedall was Sheriff of Sussex and Surrey, the second,
fourth, and seventh years of Henry the fifth; and again the first, fifth, and
twelfth year of Henry the sixth; William Vuedall was Sheriff of Sussex, and
Surrey, the eighth of Henry the sixth, and he in the sixth year of that Princes
Government conveyed it to John Shelley of Bexley, whose Successor William
Shelley about the latter end of Henry the eighth, passed it away to Mr. John
Leonard of Chevening, whose great Grandchild Henry Lord Dacres not many years
since conveyed it to the Lady Wolrich, who upon her decease settled it on her
Kinsman Mr........ Skeggs, of the County of Huntington.

Chelsfield had a Market obtained by Otho de Grandison in the eighteenth year
of Edw. the first, to be held there weekly on the Monday, and a Fair to be
observed there yearly, by the space of three days at the Feast of Saint James.

Choriton in the Hundred of Folk-stone, was the Inheritance of an ancient
Family called Scotton; Robert Scotton, who was Sheriff of Kent the seventh,
eighth, ninth, and tenth years of Edward the first lived here, and held his
Shrievalty at this place, and was of eminent Rank in this Track; for he was
Lieutenant of Dover Castle under the Prince abovesaid, and held this Manor
under the Estimate of a whole Knights Fee of the Lord of Folkstone: But before
the latter end of Edward the second, this Family had diserted the Possession of
this place, and surrendered their Interest here to Valoigns; whose Time was
very brief in the enjoyment of it; for Waretius de Valoigus dying without Issue
Male, this Manor accompanied his Daughter and Coheir, and was upon the
division of his Estate linked with much other Land to the Demeasn of her
Husband Sir Thomas Fogge, who was Knight of the Shire for Kent several times
under the Scepter of Edward the third, and Richard the second; Sir Francis
Fogge another of this Family, lies entombed in Cheriton Church with his
portraicture Cross-legged affixed to his Sepulchral Stone, which implies that
he had obleiged himself by some vow to assert the Cross and Sepulcher of our
Savior; finally, after the Propriety of this place, had by the Current of
many Descents flowed in this Family, it devolved to George Fogge Esquire, who
about the latter end of Q. Elizabeth passed it away to Mr. Henry Brockman,
Grandfather to Mr. James Brockman Esquire, the instant Lord of the Fee.

Enbroke is another Manor in Cheriton, which in the twentieth year of Henry
the third was the Patrimony of Peter de Alkam, and after his Descendants were
Extinguished at this place, it came by the ordinary fate of Purchase to
Enbroke, who having erected a Mansion upon the Demeasn, it is probable adopted
it into his own Surname, and called it Enbroke; John de Enbroke held it in the
twentieth year of Edw. the third, and paid an auxiliarie supply for it (as
appears by the book of Aid) at making the Black Prince Knight; Michael Enbroke
was a great Benefactor to the Fabric of Choriton Church in the time of Rich.
the second, and it is probable those ancient Tombs yet visible related to these
two, or some of this Family, the last of which was John Enbroke, who flourished
here in the Reign of Henry the fourth; after whose departure it came to be
enjoyed by Thorold or Torold, and Walter Torold conveyed it to Nicholas Evering
in the seventeenth year of Henry the sixth, in which Family the Possession was
permanent and constant, until that Age which was circumscribed within our
Grandfathers remembrance, and then it was alienated to Mr. John Honywood of
Elmsted, Ancestor to the instant Proprietary John Honywood of the same place
Esquire.

The Tombs in the Church adorned with several Portraictures and Sculptures of
Persons deceased, related to these two formerly recited Families, which the
rude hand of Time has crushed into the disorder of so great a Ruin, that now
even the Monuments and Sepulchers themselves have found an enterment in their
own Dust and Rubbish.

Godinton in Great Chart was an ancient Mansion of a Family of that Surname,
Place Godinton Court Wurthin, Singleton, and Nin House in Page 105. after
Chelmington.
Simon de Godinton lived here, as appears by very ancient Deeds, and so did
Lucas de Godinton likewise; John de Godinton is portraied in Coat Armor in an
ancient window in the North-Isle of the Church, having an aspect upon a
Crucifix in the same Glass placed above him, accompanied with eleven others of
eminent note in this Track depicted in the same posture with him; and this John
had Issue William de Godinton, who flourished here, as appears by his Deed in
the fourth year of Richard the second, but before the beginning of Henry the
fourth, had passed away his Interest here to Richard, Simon, and John
Champneys, and they in the sixth year of the abovesaid Prince conveyed it to
Thomas Goldwell, Son of William de Goldwell, and he determined in a Daughter
and Heir called Agnes, who was affianced to Thomas Took of Bear, by whom he
had Issue Ralph Took, Richard and John; Ralph went into Hertfordshire, Richard
planted himself at Bear by Dover, and John Took by Donation from his Father
was invested in Godinton, and continued ever since an eminent Seat of that
Family, and is at present the residence of that worthy person Captain Nicholas
Took, descended from See Fox Acts and Mon. page 182. Holinshed Chro. page 2.
Stows Chr. page 103.
Sieur de Toque or Toc, who is recorded in the Rolls of those who entered
England with William the Conqueror, who has so industriously and elegantly
cultivated and improved our English Vines, that the wine pressed and extracted
out of their Grapes seems not only to parallel, but almost to out-rival that
of France.

Court Wurthin is a place of good Account in Great Chart, which likewise
afforded a residence to Possessors of that Surname, William de Wurtin by his
Deed without Date demises Land which lay circumscribed within his Manor of
Wurtin, to Quikemanus de Bear; Henry de Wurtin is in the Register of those
twelve eminent persons who are depicted kneeling in a Glass window in this
Church; the last of this Name at this place was Thomas de Wurtin, who about the
beginning of Henry the fourth passed it away to Thomas Goldwell, by whose Heir
General it came with Godinton to Thomas Took of Bear, who settled it on his
third Son Mr. John Took; from whom it is successively by Descent come down to
my Noble Friend Captain Nicholas Took Esquire.

It is observable, that there is a Coat of Augmentation united to the Paternal
Coat of this Family, which the Tookes of Godinton bear in the first quarter,
viz. Argent upon a Cheveron between three Greyhounds-Heads crased, Sables,
three Silver Plates, which was given to John Took by Henry the seventh, as a
reward for his diligence in that Embassy in which he was employed by that
Prince; the Plates were an Emblem of his Guerdon or Salary, and the
Creyhounds-Heads a Symbol of his Celeritie.

Singleton is another eminent Mansion in this Parish, which had owners of that
Surname, and bore in ancient Armorials, as appears by their Deeds, Two
Cheverons between three Martletts; Henry de Singleton is one of those twelve
eminent Persons that are depicted kneeling in Coat Armor in a window in Great
Chart Church, and John Singleton this man's Successor was Justice of the Peace
for this County in the Reign of Richard the second, and Henry the fourth, as
appears by an old Roll of the Justices of those times collected by Thin: But
after this man's Exit, the Title was not long wedded to this Family, for about
the latter end of Henry the sixth, I find the Edinghams or Enghams to be by
Purchase entitled to the Possession, wh^ added much to the Luster of the
ancient Pile, by adorning its Fabric with increase of Building, and contniued
proprietaries of it until the beginning of King James; and then it was passed
away by Sir Edward Engham, to Richard Brown Esquire, a Cadet or younger Branch
of the Browns of Betsworth Castle in Surrey, from whom it descended to his
Grandchild Mr. Richard Brown, who being very lately deceased, it is now in
behalf of Dower, the Habitation of his Widow Mrs. Elizabeth Brown, Daughter of
Sir William Andrews of Lathbury in the County of Buckingham.

Nin-House shall not pass without some mention, because it was the residence of
John at Nin, who is in the Register of those twelve Worthies who are pourtraied
kneeling in Coat Armor in an ancient window in this Parish Church; whose
posterity enjoyed it until the beginning of Henry the sixth, and then it was
alienated to Sharp, and Will. Sharp mingled with the Ashes of his five Wives
(as the Inscription on his Sepulchral Stone instructs us) rests in the
nethermost part of the South Isle of this Church, and as the Date endorsed on
his Tomb informs us, deceased in the year of Grace 1499. and from him did the
Propriety of this Mansion by the Devolution of sundry Descents come down to
Mr........ Sharp lately deceased, whose Heirs do still enjoy it.

Chevening in the Hundred of Codsheath, had owners of that Name, in times of
higher Assent, who were of no dispicable account. Adam de Chevening was one of
the grand Assise in the time of King John, and had his residence here, and
likewise derived his Name from hence; and the heirs of William de Chevening
paid respective Aid for the Manor of Chevening by the half part of a Knights
Fee, (which Adam de Chevening formerly held of the Archbishop of Canterbury)
in the twentieth year of Edward the third, at the making the Black Prince
Knight; when the Chevenings went away from the Possession of this place, the
Family of Delapole, who were Lords of the Manor of Pool in Southfleet, were
Seated in the Inheritance, for John de Lapole held it in the tenth year of
Henry the sixth; but long after this did it not continue constant to this Name,
for by Sale the whole Demise was put into the Tenure of Isley, and William
Isley held it at his death, which was in the fourth year of Edward the fourth,
Rot. Esc. 34. and in the Demeasn of this Family was the Inheritance folded up,
till Sir Henry Isley in the Reign of Edward the sixth fixed the Propriety of
it by Sale in John Lennard Esquire, who lies enterred in Chevening Church; in
right of which original Grant, Francis now Lord Dacres his great Grandchild is
invested in the present Inheritance of it.

Chepsted in this Parish, was so called from the Market of Fish there long
since used; for there such as imported fish from Rye on the Seacoast, thence
called Rypers, made their Stage, and on fresh horses carried it to London. Just
as Chepe-Side, and other places beginning with Chepe, give Addition and
Distinction from other Towns of like Name where Markets are kept. That this
Manor had Proprietaries of this Name is evident, for John de Chepsted Son of
Cohn de Chepsted paid respect of Aid for this Manor which was held by Knights
Service, of the Archbishop of Canterbury in the twentieth year of Edward the
third, at the making the Black Prince Knight; the Heir of Chepsted (as appears
by an old Pedigree in the hands of Sir Sackvil Crow) was matched to John de
Bore, and the Heir of Bore to Stockett, who passed away Chepsted about the
latter end of Henry the sixth, to William Isley Esquire, whose unhappy
Successor Sir Henry Isley being attainted in the time of Q. Mary, it escheated
to the Crown, where it has ever since been resident.

Morants Court lies in Chevening likewise, and contributed both Seat and
Surname to a Knightly Family who were Proprietaries of it. King Edward the
second in the fourteenth year of his Reign granted Charter-warren to Jurdan,
and William de Morant in all their Lands in Chevening, Shoram, Otfood, Brasted,
Sundridge, and Chidingston; William de Morant was Sheriff of Kent the twelfth
and thirteenth year of Edw. the third, and had Issue Sir Thomas Morant, whose
heir General brought this Seat to Peckham, in which Family the Title lay
couched till our Fathers Memory, and then it was demised to Blackswell, who
some few years since has by Deed and other Conveyance settled his Right in it
on Mr. Watson of the County of Oxford.

Chiselhurst in the Hundred of Rokesley, has several places within the
confines of it, of signal Account. The first is Scadbery, which had Owners of
that Surname, which about the twentieth of Edward the third, were extinguished;
for then John de Scadbery deceased without Issue male, so that this ancient
Seat devolved to be the Patrimony of Osmund de Walsingham, descended from the
Knightly Family of Walsingham in Norfolk, who matched with Ann his sole
Daughter and Heir, and having planted himself in this County, he began to
sprout out and flourish into a Series of such worthy Successors, that this
Family was justly registered in the Catalogue of those who were esteemed the
most ancient and eminent of this County, having in this latter Decursion of
Time, been for six Descents Knights; which, that I may the better represent to
the Reader, the Splendour of this Family I shall destinctly name; the first was
Sir Thomas Walsingham, who was born the third year of Henry the fifth, and he
had Issue Sir James Walsingham, who was Sheriff of Kent the twelfth year of
Henry the seventh, whose Son and Heir was Sir Edmund Walsingham, who was
Lieutenant of the Tower twenty four years, and he had Issue Sir Tho. Kinsman to
Sir Francis Walsingham the famous Secretary of Estate to Queen Elizabeth; Sir
Thomas Walsingham was Son and Heir of Sir Thomas above mentioned, and he had
Issue Sir Thomas Walsingham, who is the instant Proprietary of Scadbery.

Frogpool is another ancient Seat in this Parish, which in Henry the thirds
Reign confessed the Signory of a Family called Barbur, Thomas le Barbur
obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Lands in at Chiselhurst in the thirty
eighth of the above named Prince. But before the latter end of Edward the
second, this Family was moldered away, and then it came to be possessed by a
Family called Cressell, who were Lords of much Land about Hartley, Faukham, and
other places in that Territory, and bore for their Coat Armor, as appears
depicted in ancient Colored Glass in Chiselhurst Church, Sables A Fesse
Argent between three Chaplets Or; John de Cressell in an old Survey of
Rochester is remembered to have been a liberal Benefactor to this Church in the
Reign of Edward the third, and from the Government of that Prince, does the Age
of the above mentioned Coat seem to commence, and this is the Reason, why
another John Cressell of this Family, is in the seventh year of Henry the fifth
recorded in the Register of those, Qui portabant Arma antiqua. Finally, after
the Propriety of this noted Mansion had continued so many Descents wrapped up
in the Patrimony of this Family, it was about the latter end of Henry the
eighth transmitted by Sale to Dyneley, and Sir John Dyneley in our Remembrance
demised his Concernment in it to Mr. William Watkins, to whose Care and
industrious Expense, the additional Building annexed to the ancient Structure,
does owe its original; and he having thus improved it, transmitted his Right
in it by sale some few years since to Mr. Philip Warwick.

Chiddingston in the Hundred of Somerden has the Addition of Cohbam, as being
the Inheritance of the Lords Cobham of Sterborough Castle; Henry de Cobham had
in the ninth year of King John a Charter for all his Lands in Kent, of which
these at Chiddingston with the two little Manors of Reynsley and Tihurst: In
Ages of a lower Step, Reginald Lord Cobham, who was summoned to Parliament, as
Lord Cobham, of Sterborough in the twenty second year of Edward the third, died
possessed of them in the thirty fifth year of that Prince, Part prima Rot. Esc.
Number. 62. And here the Right continued, till in Thomas Lord Cobham this man's
great Grandchild, the Male Line failed and resolved into Ann Cobham, who was
matched to Edward Borough Lord of Gainsborough in the County of Lincoln, whose
Grandchild Thomas Lord Borough, some fifty years since passed away his Right in
Chiddingstone, Reynsley, and Tihurst, which had devolved to him by his
Grandmother to Stretfield; whose Son deceasing without Issue Male, they became
the Inheritance of four Daughters and Coheirs matched to Dillingham,
Shetterden, Powell and Tailor, only Reynsley before his Death was sold to Mr.
Christopher Knight, whose Heir does now possess it.

Burwash Court in this Parish was the Patrimony of the Lords Burgherst, by
vulgar Depravation of the Name, called Burwash; Stephen de Burwash had a
Charter of Free Warren to all his Lands in Kent, in the first year of Edward
the second, Robert de Burgherst or Burwarsh possessed it at his Death, which was
in the thirty third year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 41. and his Son
Bartholomew Lord Burwash in the forty third year of Edward the third, by Deed
passes away much of his Land in Warwickshire, and Kent, to Walter de Paveley
and Matilda his Wife, in which this lay involved; from Paveley it came down by
Purchase to John de Bore, Trivet and Vaux whose Successors conveyed Burwash to
John Alphew in the Reign of Henry the sixth; Alphews Coheirs were married
to....... Brograve, and Sir Robert Read Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas
in the Time of Henry the seventh, who in his Wifes Right carried away Burwash
as parcel of her Dower; but this man determining likewise in Daughters and
Coheirs, Katharine one of them was wedded to Sir Thomas Willoughby, second Son
to Christopher Willoughbie of Eresbie, which Sir Thomas was likewise Lord Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, Eliza. was matched to Sir Tho. Totihurst, and a
third was married to Th. Wotton Esquire; Sir Thomas Willoughbie Esquire, Son
and Heir of Sir Tho. who joined in a Fine with his two Uncles even now
mentioned, in the sixth year of Edw. the sixth, and so by a mutual Concurrence
with them, their united Concernment in Burwash was passed away to Mr. John and
Mr. Robert Seyliard of Delaware; in whose Name and Revenue the Title and
Propriety of this place has ever since kept so permanent an Abode, that it is
still the Inheritance of Mr. John Seyliard now of Delaware Esquire.

Bore Place with the Manor of Milbroke and Boresell, was formerly the
Inheritance as high as Henry the third of a Family which assumed its Surname
from hence, and was called Bore, and likewise took in to his Arms a Bore for
his Cognizance; in this Family the Right of these places successively dwelt,
till John Bore in the Time of Henry the sixth transplanted his Interest in them
by Sale into John Alphew, by whose Coheir they came over to her Husband Sir
Robert Read, and from him they went away by Katharine one of his Coheirs to Sir
Thomas Willoughbie, whose great Grandchild Percivall Willoughbie, who having
matched with Bridget, one of the four Coheirs of Sir Percival Willoughbie of
Notinghamshire, divested himself of his Title to both these places, to improve
his Interest in that County, and not many years since alienated them to Mr.
Bernard Hide of London Esquire, one of the Commissioners of the Custom House
to the late King Charles, whose Grandchild Mr. Bernard Hide is upon his Fathers
late Decease now enterred into their Possession of Milbroke and Boreplace: But
Boresell now vulgarly called Bowsell, was sold to Edmund Thomas of Whitley near
Sevenoke, who is now in the enjoyment of it.

Chilham in the Hundred of Felborough, was by William the Conqueror, as the
Pages of Doomsday Book instruct us, assigned to Fulbert de Dover under the
Notion of a whole Knights Fee, for his Assistance and Association to John de
Fiennes in the Guard of Dover Castle, which eminent employment thus imposed
upon him, did induce him to wave his original Surname of Lucy, and assume one
derived from his Office, yet Richard de Lucy this man's Son, did it seems take
up again his primitive Surname, for when King John by his Charter in the
sixteenth year of his Reign, Cart. 24. Number. 37. restores to Rose de Dover,
called in the Latin Record Rohesia, the Castle of Chilham with all its
Appendages, he calls it there the Land which was her Grandfather Richard de
Lucy's Inheritance: This Rose de Dover was sometimes written in old Deeds de
Lucy, in Relation to which she sealed with three Pikes, Fishes called Lucii in
Latin.
she matched with Richard base Son to King John, by whom she had two Daughters
and Coheirs, Lora married to William de Marmion, and Isabell espoused to David
de Strabolgie Earl of Athol, who in her Right became Lord of the Castle and
Manor of Chilham, and transmitted it to his Son John Earl of Atholl, who for
his frequent Acts of Hostility and Rebellion against Edward the first, in his
Contest with the Scots, being by the Fate of War made Captive, was at
Canterbury hanged on a Gibbet fifty Foot high, that he might be as eminent in
his Punishment, as he was before conspicuous in his Crimes, and being cut down
half alive, had his Head struck off, and his Trunk cast into the Fire, a
Savage Manner of Punishment, and hardly heard of before amongst us; upon his
Shipwreck and Confiscation of Estate, it rested in the Demeasne of the Crown,
till King Edward the second, in the fifth year of his Reign, as appears Part
prima Pat. Edwardi secundi, granted the Castle and Manor of Chilham to
Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, who quickly after lost it by his Perfidiousnesse
and Disloyalty to that Prince, so that it returned to the Crown; and the
abovesaid Prince, as is evident by Pat. 15. and 16. Edwardi secundi, restores
the Castle and Manor with all the Goods and Chattels in it, which belonged to
Bartholomew Badelesmer, to David de Strabolgie, Grandchild to the first David,
for Life only, which upon his Expiration was again united to the Royal Revenue,
and in the third year of King Edward the thirds Government, it was by Patent
granted to Bartholomew Badelesmer, Son to the abovesaid Lord Bartholomew; and
he dying in the twelfth year of Edward the third, left it to his Son Giles
Badelesmer, who deceased without Issue, and so his four Sisters became his
Coheirs; one of which called Margaret, by matching with William Lord Roos of
Hamlake, united the Castle and Manor of Chilham, which accrued to her upon the
Division of the Estate to his Revenue, from whom successively it did devolve by
a continued Rivulet of Descent, to his Successor Thomas Lord Rosse, who
asserting the Cause and Quarrel of the House of Lancaster, was in a Battle
commenced between Edmund Beaufort Duke of Somerset, and John Nevill Marquess
Montacute made Captive to the Partisans of the House of York, and in the third
year of Edward the fourth, sealed his Faith to that Cause which he contended
for, with the Loss of his Head, which was struck off at Newcastle; but it
seems the Manor and Castle of Chilham, was before this untimely Fate of his,
upon his being engaged in Arms with the Accomplices of the House of Lancaster,
by Edward the fourth, in the first year of his Reign granted to Sir John Scott
of Scotts Hall, one of his Privy Counsel, Pat. Anno pri. Edwardi quarti Part
4. Memb. 24, but it was but for Life, for afterward it returned to the Crown,
and rested there till Henry the eighth by royal Concession planted the
Propriety in Sir Thomas Cheyney, who inhabited here when Leland made his
Kentish Perambulation, which was in the Beginning of the Reign of that Prince,
from whom it came down to his Son Henry, created Baron Cheyney by Queen
Elizabeth, who having by Riot and Profusion and other exorbitant Excesses,
wasted a noble and plentiful Patrimony, in the tenth year of that Queens
Government, alienated the Manor and Castle of Chilham to Sir Thomas Kempe,
whose Son Sir Thomas Kempe concluded in four Daughters and Coheirs, Dorothy
married to Sir John Cutts, Ann matched to Sir Thomas Chichley, Amy wedded to
Sir Henry Skipwith, and Mary espoused to Sir Dudley Diggs, who being concerned
in this Estate, the three first by a joint Concurrence, passed away their Right
to Sir Dudley Diggs and his Lady, who was Master of the Rolls in the year 1636,
and a great Assertor of his Countries Liberty in the worst of times, when the
Sluices of Prerogative were opened, and the Banks of the Law were almost
overwhelmed with the Innundations of it; from whom it is descended to his Son
Mr....... Diggs Esquire, in whom the Propriety and Interest of this Manor and
Castle does still continue.

Easture in this Parish, was the Seat of a Family which was known by that
Surname, and in several ancient Deeds, which are not bounded or limited with
any Date, there is mention of John de Easture, who lived here in the Reign of
Henry the third and Edward the first; after this Name was vanished, the
Apulderfields of Otterpley in Challock, a younger Branch of the Apulderfields
of Bedmancore, were invested in the Possession; and of this Family was Henry de
Apulderfield, who was Sheriff of Kent in the fifty first year of Edward third,
and likewise Proprietary of this place; but when this Family resolved into a
Daughter and Heir called Isabell, she by matching with John Idelegh, who had a
large Income about Mepham, Chalk, and Cobham, cast it into the Inheritance of
that Family, where it had not long remained, but a Vicissitude like the former
carried it by Agnes the Female Heir of William Idelegh to Christopher Ellenden,
who was Master of a good Estate about Seasalter and Damian Bleane, which Name
not many years after shrunk into a Daughter and Heir likewise called Mary,
descended from Thomas Ellenden, who was about the Reign of Henry the seventh
matched to Edward Thwaits, so that in her right that Family became settled in
the Inheritance of this place, and remained in the Possession, till in that Age
we style our Grandfathers, it was by Sale translated into Morton, descended
from the ancient Family of the Mortons of Millbourn St. Andrews in the County
of Dorset, whose Successor Mr. George Morton not many years since passed away
his Interest in it by Sale to his Uncle John Finch Baron of Fordwich, and Lord
Keeper of the great Seal in the year 1640.

Youngs is another Manor in Chilham, which by Deeds of a very high gradation
in time, which step into the Reign of Edward the second, appears to be the
Possession of a Family of that Appellation; and when that was decayed and worn
out at this Place, the Beverleys who were a Family which had been planted at
Tancrey Island in Fordwich ever since the latter end of the Reign of Edward the
third were ingraffed in the Inheritance, and continued by an undissolved Chain
of several Ages seated in the Propriety of it, till George Beverley the last
of this Name at this place in our Grandfathers Remembrance, demised his right
in it by Sale to George Barley, where the Title found no long abode, for he
passed away his Interest to Fleet, extracted from the Fleets of Fleet in the
Isle of Thanet, who suddenly after alienated it to Shepherd, from which Family
almost in our Remembrance it was by Purchase brought over to own the Signorie
of Sir Dudley Diggs, who upon his decease transmitted it to his eldest Son
Mt........ Diggs Esquire, in whom the present Propriety of it is fixed.

Dane Court is a fourth Manor within the Limits of Chilham, not to be waved or
declined in this present Survey: It was anciently the Patrimony of Thomas de
Garwinton of Well in Littlebourne, and he held it, as appears by ancient Court
Rolls, in the Reign of Edward the first, and Edward the second, whose great
Grandchild William Garwinton of Well in the eleventh year of Henry the fourth,
dying without Issue, upon a serious debate and winnowing of Collateral
Alliances, Joan Wife of Richard Haute was found to be his Cousin and Heir, and
so this place became in her Right the Inheritance of this Family; but this man's
Son called Richard, likewise not long after deceasing without Issue male,
Margerie his only Daughter, who was matched to Will. Izaack, about the latter
end of Henry the seventh, became his Heir, and so it fell under the
Jurisdiction of that Name, and remained entwined with their Demeasn, till it
about the beginning of the Government of Q. Elizabeth, was by Edward Izaack
sold to Hales; from which Family in that Age our Fathers lived in, by the same
conveyance it went away to Spracklin, issued out from the Spracklins of St.
Lawrence in Thanet, in which Name the Possession is at this instant resident.

There is a place in this Parish on the South Side of the River stretched out
on a long green Hill, which the Common People (who bear the greatest sway in
corrupting of Names) call Jelliberies Grave. The History it self will evidence
the original of this denomination. It was about this place that Julius Caesar
respited his farther remove or advance into the bowels of this Island, upon
intelligence received that his Fleet riding in the road at Lymen not far
distant, had been much afflicted and shattered by a Tempest; whereupon he
returned, and left his Army for ten days, encamped upon the brow of this Hill,
till he had new careen'd and rigged his Navy; but in his march from hence was
so vigoriously encountered by the Britons, that he lost with many others
Leberius Durus Tribune and Marshal of the Field, whose Obsequies being
performed with solemnities answerable to the eminence of his Place, and
Command, each Soldier as was then Customary, bringing a certain quantity of
earth to improve his place of Sepulture into more note then ordinary, caused
it so much to exceed the proportion of others elsewhere; and from hence it
assumed the name of Julaber, whom other vulgar heads, ignorant of the truth of
the story, have fancied to have been a Giant, and others of them have dreamed
to have been some Enchanter or Witch.

It is probable the Romans built something here at Chilham, for when Sir Dudly
Diggs dug down the ruins of the old Castle, to make space for the
foundation of that exact and elegant House which he there erected, there was
the Basis of a more ancient building discovered, and many Aeconomical vessels
of the Roman antique mode traced out in that place, besides the Keeper of the
Castle, which is yet preserved, has a Senate House adorned and furnished with
Seats round about, shaped out of an excellent durable Stone.

Oldwives Leas is the last place in the Inventorie of those Manors which lie
within the Limits of Chilham. It was in elder Orthographie written Old-woods
Leas, as being indeed the Patrimony of a Family so called, as appears both by
Deeds without Date, and of a more modern Constitution, and continued Lords of
it until the Reign of Henry the sixth, and then the Daughter and Heir General
of John Oldwood annexed it to the Inheritance of Pain, in which Family it was
without any pause or interruption resident almost until our Fathers memory,
and then this Name was entombed in four Daughters and Coheirs; two of which by
the first Wife were matched to Cob, and Philipot of Feversham, and the two
other which were the Issue by the second Wife were espoused to Petit and Prude;
but this upon the division of the Estate into portions augmented the Revenue of
Cob, and is still for ought I know wraped up in the Demeasn of the Heirs and
Descendants of this Family.

Chilham by the influence and procurement of Alexander de Balioll, and Isabell
his wife had the grant of a Market to be held weekly on the Tuesday, and a Fair
yearly by the space of three days, viz. the Vigil, the day of the Assumption
of our Lady, and the day after in the ninteenth year of Edward the first, which
grant was renewed and confirmed to Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer in the ninth
year of Edward the second, as appears Pat. 9. Edw. secundi. Number. 57.

Chillenden in the Hundred of Eastry, gave Surname to a Family so styled, and
there is a recital in Deeds very ancient, which extract their Original from the
time of Henry the third, of John de Chillenden, Edward and William de
Chillenden, who had an Interest in this place in Ages of a lower step; the
Bakers who were Lords of Caldham by Capell, were in the Possession of this
place, and after they were gone out, the Family of Hunt about the Government of
Henry the sixth by Purchase were settled in the Inheritance; and here the Title
for two or three Descents was Successively permanent, and then the same
inconstant Revolution which carried it to Hunt, wafted it over from that Name
by Sale to Gason, which Family I find to be of no despiscable Antiquity about
Ickham and that Track; and when it had for some years been linked to their
Revenue, it was for some two or three Ages since alienated to Hamon, Ancestor
to Anthony Hamon Esquire, into whom by original Descent, the hereditarie Right
of this place is at this present collected.

Chistlet in the Hundred of Whilstaple, was given to the Sea of Canterbury, by
Ethelbert King of Kent, under the notion of Cistelet; and here the Archbishops
of Canterbury erected a Magnificent Mansion which they called Ford; and empaled
a certain proportion of Land into the form of a Park, as if they had judged it
meet to justify the first Donation of this Christian Prince, who by election
and design intended it for a chosen portion of Earth, devoted to the support of
this Archbishopric.

Clive formerly Cloves-Hoo, lies in the Hundred of Shamell, called so from its
situation either on some elevated precipice, or else its being cloven or rent
in some part of it, from the Continent by water. It was in the Conquerours time
called Bishops-Clive; and in the Pages of Doomsday Book it is thus rated, Cliva
est Manerium Monachorum, and est de vestitu eorum and in T. E. R. se defendebat
pro II. Sullings and Dimidio and est appretiatum XVI. However the place at
present may be represented obscure and despiscable, being shrunk from its
former Glory, yet in those Ages wherein the Saxons flourished, it was ennobled
with several Synods which were held here, both National and Provincial, wherein
several Rules and Constitutions were enacted and established both to fetter up
the Exorbitances of of the Clergy within the Channels and shores of the
Ordinances and Decretals Ecclesiastical, and likewise to empale the
Irregularities of the Laity, who then began to be debauched into disorder and
excess, within the restraints and boundaries of the Laws temporal: I shall now
exactly unweave them as they are Registered by the learned Spelman in his exact
Collection of the Councels held before the Conquest: The first was held in the
year 742. under King Ethelbald, and Archbishop Cuthbert. The second under
Ethelbald King of Mercia, accompanied with the principal of his Nobility, and
Archbishop Cuthbert invested with his Bishops, Abbots, and other
Ecclesiastical Persons, in the year 747. The third was celebrated under
Archbishop Athelard in the year 798. The fourth Synod or Council was convened
at this place under Kenulf King of Mercians, and Athelard Archbishop of
Canterbury in in the year 800. The fifth was called together under the
abovesaid King Kenulf, and Archbishop Athelard, in the year 803. The sixth was
assembled in the third year of Bernulfe King of the Mercia, in the year 822.
that Prince himself with Vlfred Archbishop of Canterbury, being both present
and president at it and over it: The result of this eminent Synod was to rescue
and restore to the Patrimony of the Church Lands called Haerghes,
Hereforddinglond, Gedding and Comb; which by the Sacrilegious violence of some
impious men, even in those times had been ravished away from the Ecclesiastical
Demeasn. Their eighth and last was a small Synodal Convention collected into a
Body under the above mentioned King Bernulf, and Archbishop Ulfred, in the
year of Grace, 824. And it is observable, that in these Assemblies, and in
other Recorded by Sir Henry Spelman; either the King immediately, or else some
Thane, (which was a Dignity equivalent to our English Baron;) who did Personate
the Prince, was jointly President with the Bishop; that as one took Cognizance
of the Affairs of the Church, so the other managed the Concernments and
Interest of the State; and this was done with much of Reason and Prudence in
the original Constitution of these Synods, for the mingling the divided
Interests of the Laity, and Clergy together; and making them mutually to
interfere, extinguished all jealousy and Emulation between them, and by
consequence all those black effects and inconveniences, which are still the
Retinue to those two Furies; for we cannot be so Citizens of the Commonwealth,
but we must be Sons of the Church; nor so Sons of the Church, (the Temporal
and Spiritual Interest are so complicated together) but we must in some
relation be Citizens of the Commonwealth; and what causes annoyance to the
one, creates disturbance to the other; for like Hippocrates Twins they laugh
and mourn, and live and die together: But to proceed, when this Manor had for
many Ages been incorporated with the Inheritance of the Church, Henry the
eighth judging the Clergy grown too Luxuriant in a wide Revenue, pruned off
this, and Malingden a Manor which was ever an Appendage to Cliffe, as two
superfluous Excrescencies; and engraffed them again in the Royal Demeasn; but
suddenly after, Cliff was by this Prince granted to George Brook Lord Cobham,
and he left it to his Son Sir William Brook Lord Cobham, who enstated it by
entaile on his second Son George Brook, and in Defailance of Issue male, by
him surviving, to the next Heir male of the Name; after this man was beheaded
at Winchester, in the second year of King James, this devolved to his Son Sir
William Brook, who dying without Issue male, in the year 1643. Sir Jo. Brook
now Lord Cobham became his Heir.

Malingden was by Queen Elizabeth granted to William Ewens, who quickly after
this Concession, transferred his Interest in it by Sale to Brown, from whom by
as sudden a Decursion the Title by Purchase went in to Sompner, who (in Times
which almost attaque our Remembrance,) sold it away to Hills.

Perry Court in Cliffe, was always a Limb of the Revenue of the Family of
Cobham, and so for many Hundred years continued, till Henry Brook Lord Cobham
being wound up in that fatal and mysterious Design of the noble but unfortunate
Sir Walter Rawleigh, in the Time of King James, forfeited this to the Crown;
but this Seat was by the abovesaid Prince, after the Death of Frances Widow to
the abovesaid Henry Lord Brook, granted to Robert Cecill Earl of Salisbury in
Reversion, who married Elizabeth Brook this Lords Sister, and his Son Will.
Earl of Salisbury Knight of the Garter, and Captain of the Band of Pentioners
to his late Majesty, passed it away by Sale to Bernard Hide of London Esquire;
whose Grandchild Mr. Bernard Hide does enjoy the present Fee-simple of it.

Cardans is the last Manor in Cliffe, which (until the public Dissolution
tore it off, (belonged to the Charter House in London; and being thus ravished
away, was by Henry the eighth in the thirty first year of his Reign, granted to
Thomas Gethins; from which Family not many years since, it passed away by Sale
to Oliver Leder, and was lately, if it be not still, in the Tenure and
Possession of that Name.

West-Clive vulgarly called West-Cliff, in the Hundred of Bewsborough, was the
Patrimonial Inheritance of the Lord Cobham of Sterborough: Castle in Surrey, a
younger Branch of the Lord Cobham of Cobham, Reginald de Cobham second Son of
John de Cobham was summoned to Parliament as Baron of Sterborough in the twenty
second year of Edward the third, and dyed possessed of this Manor, and much
other Land in Kent and Surrey, in the forty fifth year of Edward the third,
Rot. Esc. Number. 15. and so it remained interwoven for some Descents with the
Demeasne of this Family, till Thomas Lord Cobham this man's great Grandchild
resolved into Ann Cobham, who was his Female Heir, who by being espoused to
Edward Borough Lord Gainsborough, linked this to his Demeasne and Propriety;
but it was unloosned in Thomas Lord Borough this Man's Grandchild, who in the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth alienated his Interest in it to Guibon, whose
Grandchild Mr Thomas Guibon is invested in the instant Possession of it.

Bear Court or Manor in this Parish, was formerly a parcel of the Demeasne of
a Family who in times more ancient fell under this Denomination, Williant de
Bear was Bailiff of Dover, and was to account the profits to the Constable of
Dover Castle, Anno secundo Edwardi primi, Memb. 19. and Anno quarto Edwardi
primi, Memb. 34. After this Family had waved the Possession of this place, the
Tookes were settled in the Inheritance, and by a Decursion of many Ages, have
brought down the Inheritance to Mr. Charles Took who is the instant Possessor
of Bear.

Cobham in the Hundred of Shamell, afforded a Seat and Surname to that noble
and splendid Family, Sir Hen. de Cobham, Sir Reginald de Cobham, Sir Stephen de
Cobham, Sir Henry de Cobham le Uncle; are enrol'd in the Register of those
Knights who were assistant to K. Edward the first at the Seige of Crlaverock in
Scotland in the twenty eighth year of his Reign.
who from hence borrowed the original Denomination of Cobham, and certainly
this place was the Cradle or Seminary of Persons, who in elder times were
invested in Places of as signal and principal a Trust or Eminence, as they
could move in, in the narrow Orb of a particular County; Henry de Cobham was
one of the Recognitores magnae Assisae in the first year of K. John, who were
in some proportion equivalent to the Judges Itinerant, for they took Cognizance
of all Causes Criminal, declared to be so by the Laws then in force, and
likewise determined in sundry Actions of a mere Civil Aspect, either Real,
Personal, or Mixed; Reginald de Cobham Son of John de Cobham, was Sheriff of
Kent, from the Beginning of the thirty third year of Henry the third, to the
end of the fortieth year of the said Prince, and was again Sheriff in the forty
second year of the above mentioned Prince, in which year he dyed, and Roger de
Northwood and his other Executors, answered for the Remainder of the year; Sir
Henry de Cobham was Sheriff of Kent, the twenty ninth, thirtieth and part of
the thirty first year of Edward the first, he is written in the old Rolls of
the Arms of the Knights of Kent, Henry Cobham le Uncle, that is, he was Uncle
to the Lord Cobham; he lies buried in Shorn Church, with his Portraicture,
armed in Mail and Crosselegg'd, with a Barons Robes cast over; but whether he
were ever actually engaged in the Defense of the Cross and Sepulcher of Christ
against the Assaults of Infidels, is uncertain; for it was customary in those
times, if they did but vow to undertake the protection of the Cross in the
Christian Quarrel, to insculpe their Figures upon their Sepulchers armed and
Crosselegged: This abovesaid Sir Henry de Cobham was again Sheriff of Kent in
the first and ninth years of Edward the second; Stephen de Cobham Son and Heir
of this Sir Henry, was Sheriff of Kent the eighth, ninth, and tenth years of
Edward the third; Tho. de Cobham was Sheriff of Kent in the first year of
Richard the second; John de Cobham was one of the Conservators of the Peace in
this County, in the third, fifth, sixth, ninth, twelfth, and eighteenth years
of Edward the third, a place of no small Consequence in that Age, the end of it
being to appease Tumults, regulate and bridle the Disorders and Excesses of all
Irregular Persons, whether Felons, Outlaws, or other Malefactors, of what
Complexion soever; and lastly, to secure the Peace of the County from all
Eruptions, either inbred or foreign: This man had Issue Thomas Lord Cobham,
Father to John Lord Cobham, in whom the male Line determined, so that Joan
became his Daughter and Heir, who was first matched to John Delapole, secondly
to Sir John Ouldcastle, by whom she had only a Daughter that died an Infant,
and thirdly to Reginald Braybrook, who dyed as (appears by the Inscription on
his Tomb) in Cobham Church, in the year 1433, and by him she had only Joan who
was Heir to them both, and she by being wedded to Thomas Brook of the County of
Somerset Esquire, knitt Cobham and a large Income besides, to her Husbands
Patrimony. And this man had Issue by her, Sir Edmund Broke, who was summoned to
Parliament as Baron of Cobham, in the twenty third year of Henry the sixth, and
he was, in the direct Line, Ancestor to Henry Broke Lord Cobham, Lord Warden of
the Cinque Ports in the first year of King James, who being too deeply
concerned in the Design of Sir Walter Rawleigh which was as some, (who pretend
to unravell it in the whole Webb, by private Collusion and Treaty with Count
Aremberg the Spanish Legate, to draw over some Forces from Flanders, by whose
powerful Concurrence they might engage this Nation in the Flame of Civil
Contention, since from that they expected their Light, though others wrap it up
in so many Vails and Umbrages that the whole Scene of this Attempt becomes
perplexed and mysterious,) made the forfeiture of his Estate here at Cobham,
though not his Life, become the price of his undertaking, which being thus rent
away by this Escheat from the Patrimony of this Family, was soon after, by King
James, invested by Grant in his Kinsman Lodowick Stuart Duke of Lenox, who
expiring without Issue, it did successively devolve to his Nephew James Duke of
Lenox; upon whose late Decease, it is come over to....... his Duchess Dowager
only Daughter to George Villiers Duke of Buckingham, in whom the blood of those
three noble Families, Villiers, Manours, and Beaumont, appears to be
concentered.

Cobham-Colledge was founded by John, Baron Cobham of Cobham, in year 1362 for
a Master and Chaplains to pray for the Souls of him, his Ancestors, and
Successors.

Cobham-Bury lies likewise in this Parish, and was always esteemed as an
appendant Manor to Cobham, having originally and successively the same
Proprietaries: and being found wrapped up in the Patrimony of the unfortunate
Henry Lord Cobham, it escheated upon his Attainder to the Crown; and was
suddenly after, by King James, granted to Robert Earl of Salisbury, whose Son
and Heir the right honorable Robert Cecill Earl of Salisbury, some few years
since transferred his Right in it by Sale to one Zachary King, of Watford in
the County of Hertford.

Henherst is the last place of note in Cobham which, as the Records in
Rochester inform me, was given to the Priory of Leed; Castle by Robert de
Crevequer upon his Foundation of that Cloister, and continued folded up in its
Revenue, until the Whirlwind of the general Suppression rent it off, and King
Henry the eighth granted it to George Lord Cobham, who immediately after
conveyed it to Sir George Harpur Esquire, whose Son Sir Edward Harpur about the
Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, passed away his Concernment here to Mr. Thomas
Wright; from whom it descended to his Son and Heir George Wright Esquire, who,
dying without Issue, gave it to his Kinsman Sir George Wright, and his Son not
many years since surrendered it by Sale to Doctor Obert, Physician to the late
Queen Mary.

The Tithes of this Manor were given by one Goscelinus (as the first Book of
of Compositions at Rochester discovers to me) in the year 1091, to the Priory
of St. Andrews in that City, which upon the Suppression were by King Henry the
eighth, granted to George Brook Lord Cobham, which upon the Attainder of his
unfortunate Grandchild, Henry Lord Cobham, in the second year of King James,
returned to the Crown: and here the Propriety made its abode, until the late
King Charles, by his royal Concession, made them the Inheritance of Mr. Stephen
Alcock of Rochester, Esquire.

Cobham had the Grant of a Market weekly on the Monday, and a Fair yearly on
the Day of St Mary Magdalen, procured to be observed there at those stated
times abovesaid, by John Lord Cobham in the forty first year of Edward the
third.

Because I have mentioned before, and shall have frequent occasion to mention
hereafter those Kentish Gentlemen who were embarked with Edward the first in
his victorious and triumphant Expedition into Scotland, and were dignified with
the order of Knighthood for their Assistance given to that Prince, in his
succesfull and auspicious Siege of Carlaverock, in the twenty eighth year of
his Reign; I shall represent to the Reader a List which I have collected from
an Authentic Roll, gleaned from very ancient Registers and other Records, by
that eminent Antiquary Robert Glover Esquire.

Sir Henry de Cobham Sir Reginald de Cobham of Cobham and Roundall in Shorn.
Sir Stephen de Cobham Sir Henry de Cobham le Uncle Sir Simon de Leybourn Sir
Henry de Leybourne of Leybourne Castle, Sir Jeffrey de Say de Birling. Sir
Ralph de St. Ledger Sir John de St. Ledger of Vlcombe Sir Thomas de St. Ledger Sir
Jeffrey de Lucy Sir Aymery de Lucy of Newington Lucies Sir Thomas de Lucy Sir
John de Northwood Sir John de Northwood his Son of Northwood in Milton Sir John
de Savage Sir Thomas de Savage of Bobbing Court Sir Roger de Savage
Sir Stephen de Cosington: in another old Roll there is mention of Sir William
de Cosington, it is probable they were deslinct persons, but both of Cosington
Hall in Alresford.

Sir Peter de Huntingfield of West-Wickham. Sir Robert de Crevequer, but of
what place is not mentioned in the Roll. Sir Simon de Crioll of Walmer Sir
Maurice de Bruin de Bekenham Sir Bartholomew de Burgherst of Plumsted Sir Fulk
de Peyferer Sir William de Peyferer of Ottringden Sir Robert de Shurland of
Shurland in Shepey Sir Alexander de Cheyney of Patrick bourn Cheyney Sir Thomas
de Bicknor Sir John de Bicknor of Bicknor Sir Robert de Septuans of Milton
Septuans Sir Henry Fitz-Aucher of Losenham in Newenden Sir John de Hadloe of
Court at Street Sir William de Valoigus of Repton in Ashford Sir William de
Basing of Kenardington Sir Simon de Crey Sir William de Crey of Paul's Crey Sir
Stephen de Gravesend of Nutsted Sir John de Champneys, of what place is not
mentioned, but it is probable of Champneys in Paul's Crey Sir Robert de
Eastangrave of Eastangrave in Eden Bridge Sir John Abell of Hering Hill in
Erith Sir Nicholas de Malmains of Malmains in Stoke Sir Richard de Rokesley of
Rokesley in North Crey Sir Jeffrey de Camuill of Westerham Sir John Segrave of
Folkston Sir William Peche Sir Robort Peche of Lullingston. Sir John de
Newenham of Newenham.
Coldred in the Hundred of Eastrie, was a Branch of that Estate which related
to the Fraternity of the Maison de Dien in Dover, to which in the fourteenth
year of S. the first they obtained a Charter of Free warren which was looked
upon in that Age as a privilege of vast extent and circumference; upon the
Dissolution in the reign of Hen. the eighth, it was by royal Concession from
that Prince, added to the Demeasn of Rich. Monins Esquire; great Grandfather to Sir
Edw. Monins Baroner to whose Signory and Jurisdiction the propriety of this
place at this instant submits it self.

Popshall in this Parish was anciently wrapped up in the Demeasn of Orlanston of
Orlanston. William de Orlanston held it, as appears by an Escheat-roll marked
with the number 86, in the reign of Hen. the third, and transmitted it to his
Son Will. de Orlanston, who in the fifty first year of the abovementioned
Prince, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Lands at Orlanston, and
Pophall from him it descended to Will. de Orlanston, who had Issue Jo. de
Orlarston, who held it in possession at his Decease, which was in the forty
sixth year of Edw. the third, and had Issue Will. Orlanston who by Sale
transplanted the Interest of this place into Rich. Berham; in which Family
after the Title had for some Generations been resident, a Vicissitude of the
same Resemblance with the former, cast it into the possession of Horn branched
out from the Horns of Horns-place in Apuldore, who after some years
investiture in the propriety of Popshall, determined in a Daughter and Heir,
who was espoused to John Diggs from whom in a direct Line Sir Dudley Diggs of
Chilham-castle was extracted, who alienated his right in this place to Sir
Will. Monins Knight and Baronet, whose Son Sir Edw. Monins Baronet, enjoys the
instant Fee-simple of it.

Coldham in the Hundred of Rockesley, is in the Pages of Doomsday Book written
Caudham: which denotes the bleak and chil situation of it; In the twentieth
year of Will. the Conqueror, it was parcel of the Demeasn of Gilbert de
Magninot, being involved in those Knights Fees which were assigned to him to be
assistant to Jo. de Fiennes in the defense of Dover-castle. And in this Name
after it had some three Descents been lodged, this Manor went away about the
beginning of K. Stephen to Will. de Say, with the Daughter and Heir of this
Family. Will. de Say this Man's Son, is in the Front or Van of that register,
which comprehends the Names of those Kentish Gentlemen who were embarked in the
holy Quarrel with Rich. the first at the Siege of Acon. Geffrey de Say was one
of the Recognitores magnae Assisae in the second year of K. Jo. the Nature of
which office, and the Latitude of its Authority, I rust and Concernment; I have
before unsolded at Cobham. Will. de Say was with Henry the third, in his
expedition into Gascony in the thirty seseventh year of his Rule.
Geffrey de Say was with Edw. the first at the Siege of Carlaverock in the
twenty eighth year of his reign, and for his noted Actings there, was honored
by that Prince with Knighthood, and dyed possessed of this Manor in the
fifteenth year of Edw. the second, and had the repute of a Baron at his
Decease, as had all his Successors likewise, holding Birling Couldham, and
other places by that Tenure, which is styled per Baroniam. Geffrey de Say had
view of Frank-pledge here in the eighth year of Edw. the third, and was engaged
with that Prince, in the thirteenth of his reign, in his triumphant Designs
upon France. Sir Will. Say was his Son and Heir, who went out from his
Tabernacle of humane frailty in the forty third year of Edw. the third, Rot.
Esc. Number. 43. and bequeathed his Estate here at Coldham to Geffrey de Say his
only Son surviving, who going out in two Daughters and Coheirs, Joan one of
them was matched to Sir Will. Fiennes, from whom descended Ja. Fiennes his
second Son, who was summoned to Parliament at Bury as Baron Say and Seal the
first of March, in the twenty fifth year of the abovesaid Prince, and This Ric.
Fiennes, was created Baron Dacres in the seventh of Henry the sixth.
Rich. Fiennes eldest Son, who matched with Joan Sole Heir of Tho. Dacres,
eldest Son of Tho. Lord Dacres of Hurstmonseaux, who had this Manor by Descent
from his Father; from whom in a continued Series it came down to Gregory
Fiennes Lord Dacres, who in the thirty sixth year of Q. Elizabeth, dyed without
Issue; and so Sampson Lenard Esquire, by marrying with Margaret his Sister and
Heir became Heir to Coldham, and a large Inheritance besides, and his Son Hen.
Lenard in the reign of K. James, was created Baron Dacres, from whom Francis
Lenard now Lord Dacres, and proprietary of this Manor is lineally extracted.

The Manor of Apulderfield by contraction now called Apurfield lies in the
precincts of this Parish, which was long time possessed by Gentlemen that took
their Surname from thence, and branched numerously into diverse parts of this
Shire; Hen. de Apulderfield in the thirty eighth of Hen. the third, obtained a
grant of a Fair and Market to his Manor of Apulderfield. In the eleventh year
of Edward the second, John de Insula had a Charter of Free Warren granted to
his Manor of Apulderfield, which was renewed to Stephen de Ashway in the
thirty eighth of Edward the third, who had a free Chapel annexed to it; and in
this Family of Ashway did the Title of this place for many Generations settle,
till at last the common vicissitude of Purchase made it the Demeasn of Denny,
from whom it came over by the same Alienation to Fiennes, and is now in right
of Margaret Fiennes, Sister to Gregory Lord Dacres, matched to Sampson Lenard,
devolved to his great Grandchild Francis Lenard the present Lord Dacre.

The Hamlet of Bettred, is the last place considerable in Coldham or Coudham;
It was in elder times the Inheritance of Richard de Cherfholt, who was
discharged of Reveship by Jeffrey de Say, in the fifteenth year of Edw. the
second, which Lord it seems bore a particular affection to this place: for in
the seventh year of Edw. the third he brings a pleading for a yearly Fair to be
kept at this Hamlet, on the day of St. Laurence, that is, on the tenth day of
August, which was allowed by Jo. de Stonar, then one of the Justices Itinerant:
But to go on, this abovementioned Ric. dying without Issue-male, his Daughter
and Heir who was matched to William de Manning, knit it to the possession of
this Family: he dyed the seventeenth year of Edw. the third, and was Son of
Stephen de Manning, of whom there is mention in old Deeds which have an Aspect
upon the third, fourteenth, eighteenth, and twenty third years of Edward the
first, and he was descended of Simon de Manning, to whom John Silvester of
Westerham demises Land by Deed in the fourteenth year of Rich. the first, and
who (as an old Pedigree which relates to this Family, does record) was engaged
in the Holy War, in defense of the Cross and Sepulcher of our Savior, against
the Saracens and Infidels under Rich. the first, and from this Simon de
Manning, Mr. Sam. Manning now of London, and Mr. Edw. Manning of Kevington are
by successive Right derived to them by many Descents, originally and lineally
extracted.

Cosmus-Damianus-Bleane lies in the Hundred of Whitstaple, and contains three
places within the Boundaries of it, which may fall under a Survey. The first is
Well-court, which was anciently parcel of that Estate which did own the Family
of at Leeze for its Possessors. Sir Richard at Leeze dyed possessed of it in the
year 1394. but going out without Issue, Marcellus at Leeze was his Brother and
Heir, who concluded in two Daughters and Coheirs, Lucy first married to Jo.
Norton, and after to Will. Langley of Knolton in Kent, by both which she had
Issue; and Cicily wedded to Valentine Barret of Perry-court: but Norton and
Langley as Heirs to the eldest Daughter, shared the Estate here at Well-court;
and for many years did their Interest remain thus interwoven, till is the
eleventh year of H. the eighth, Tho. Son of Jo. Langley, releaseth all his
right in this place to his Kinsman Sir Jo. Norton, and he in the third year of
Edw. the sixth, passes away his Concernment in it by Sale to Tho. Green, whose
Successors George and Tho. Green, in the seventh year of K. James, alienated it
by mutual Concurrence to Jo. Best, in whose posterity the title and propriety
is at this instant resident.

The second is Lambert Lands a Manor which is couched partly within the Limits
of Hernhill, and partly within the Verge of this Parish; It was in elder times
an Appendage to the revenue of Feversham Abbey: but when the storm of
Suppression, which happened in the Government of the reign of H. the eighth,
had ravished it away from the patrimony of the Church, and lodged it in the
Crown, it was by that Prince in the thirty sixth year of his reign granted to
Tho. Arden; but it seems it was but for Life, for after he was Barbarously
assassinated by his Wife, and her inhumane Accomplices in the reign of Edw. the
sixth, and left no Issue; that Prince granted it to Sir Henry Crispe of Quckes,
in whose posterity the title was permanent, till that Age our Fathers lived in,
and then it was alienated to Sir Jo. Huett of the County of Darby, who is yet
the proprietary of it.

Hoad-court is, and always was, part of the Demeasn of East-bridge Hospital,
holding of the Master thereof. East-bridge, was formerly an Inn, for poor
devout Pilgrims, who came to offer up their Visits and Orizons to the shrine of
Tho. Becket, after the demolishing of which, in the reign of H. the eighth,
this Hospital sprang up out of its Luines, and in the reign of Q. Eliz.
Dr...... Laws being then Master of East-bridge Hospital, it was granted for
three lives to He was Steward to five Arch-bs. of Cant. Judge of the Chancery
at Dover, under 3 Lord Wardens, and Recorder of Canterbury.
Sir Jo. Bois, a person of an exemplary and regular life, as appears by his
diffusive Charity, for he founded Jesus Hospital in the Subburbs of North-gate
at Cant. which he furnished with eight Brothers four Sisters and a Warden, all
very plentifully provided for; he died without issue, and left his estate here
to his Nephew Mr. Tho. Bois, who erected for him a magnificent tomb in the Nave
or body of Christ-church, which the assaults of impious and savage hands have
demolished and utterly defaced; but though this Monument be thus crushed into
uncomely ruins, yet he has transmitted his Fame to posterity, which, whenall
the gandy and pompous Trophies of Art languish and shrink into their own Ashes,
shall stand (both Brass to his Tomb and Marble to his Stone): But to proceed,
from Mr. Thomas Bois abovementioned, is the propriety of this Manor devolved
to his Grandchild Jo. Bois Esquire; a person who for his ingenious and candid Love
to Literature may be justly said to be worthy of better times, but fit for
these; that is, though his Merit should have been calculated for the best of
days, yet it is made more eminent by his support of Learning in the worst.

Cowden in the Hundreds of Somerden and Westerham, did anciently with its
revenue, support the College of Lingfield in Surry, till the public
dissolution came and tore it off, and then it was by H. the eighth granted to
H. Earl of Arundel, from whom it suddenly after devolved by sale to Wiskenden,
whose Grandchild not many years since deceasing, left it divided between his
two Sons, one of which has lately alienated his Moiety to Ashdown, though the
other proportion still continues in the Name of Wickenden.

The Moat is an eminent Seat in Cowden, which for many Generations confessed
the Signory of a Family called Cousin or Cosins, as is evident from several
Deeds of certain parcels of Land which relate to this Mansion, as the capital
message which were conveyed, some by Sale, some by resignation, from one Cousin
to another. Whence this Family was originally extracted, I cannot collect,
because the evidences of this place (from which I am to borrow my Intelligence)
extend no higher then this Family, yet it is probable their first Cradle was in
Norfolk, where in elder times they were eminent: for in the sixteenth year of
E. the second, I find one Jo. Cousin obtained License by parent to found a
Chantry at Norwich, as appears Pat. Anno 16. E. 2. Part secunda Memb. 4. but
whether this Family seated here were derived from him immediately or not, is
uncertain. Sure I am, that after they had for many Descents been planted here,
about the latter end of Henry the sixth, it began to crumble away; for in the
thirty second year of that Prince, William Cousin by Deed passed it away to
William Hextall, William Gainsford and Nicholas Gainsford, in the fifth year of
Edward the fourth; Hextall surrenders all his Interest here to William
Gainsford Esquire, so he is written in the Deed, and from him did it descend to
Nicholas Gainsford, whom I find to be Justice of the Peace for Sussex and Kent
in the reign of Henry the seventh, and from him is that Family successively
branched out, who are the instant proprietaries of this place.

Waystrode is another obscure Manor in this Parish, which was the possession
of as obscure a Family, which bore that Surname, who continued Lords of the Fee;
until the Beginning of Henry the sixth, and then it was passed away to May, in
which Name it had not been permanent until the latter end of that Prince, but
the same revolution conveyed it into the possession of a Family whose Surname
was Still, in whose Successors the title has remained so constant, that the
Inheritance of this place is at this instant resident in this Name and Family.

Cowling in the Hundred of Shamell, had still the Barons Cobham, of Cobham) of
whom I have discoursed so largely at that place) for possessors and came down
along with them to John Lord Cobham, who expired in Joan Cobham his Daughter
and Heir, who was first espoused to John Delapole, secondly to Sir John
Oldcastle, who for asserting the Doctrine of the Lollards, notwithstanding his
many great Achievements in Military Commands, which rendered him gracious with
his Prince, and glorious in our Chronicles, he was in the first year of Henry
the fifth, quite subverted by a Romish Tempest raised by the Ecclesiastics of
those Times, and martyred in a most inhumane manner, by hanging him first, and
burning his Body also; thirdly, she was matched to Reginald Braybrook, by whom
she had only Joan her Daughter and Heir, who was wedded to Thomas Brook of the
County of Somerset Esquire; from whom descended William Lord Brook Lord Warden
of the Cinque ports in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, who gave this Manor to
George Brook his second Son; and he being unhappily entangled in that
mysterious Design of his Brother Henry Lord Cobham, and Sir Walter Ramleigh,
by the Loss of his Head at Winchester, did expiate this unhappy undertaking;
but this being settled by entail and in Marriage also upon his Son, who was in
this latter Age known by the Name of Sir William Brook, was by King James
restored to this person then in his Minority, upon whose Decease it descended
to Sir John Brook as the Heir male of the Family, who was created Lord Brook,
by the late King at Oxford.

Cowling Castle was erected by John Lord Cobham by Concession from Richard the
second, as appears Pat. 4. Richardi secundi; which grant of his in the whole
Tenor of it, he caused to be inscribed in a large Table of Stone upon the Front
of the Castle: so careful was he to conform to the Laws of the Land, which had
a particular Aspect upon private embattelling, a Species of Fortification,
prohibited si facta fuerit sine Licentia Domini Regis.

The Manor of Mortimers in this Parish, was the patrimony of Gentlemen of that
Surname. Hugh de Mortimer who had a Grant of a Fair to Cliff in the forty first
year of Henry the third, was possessor of this place; In Ages of a lower
descent, John Mortimer (who in the eleventh year of Edward the third, was to
provide an Hobler or Light Horseman, for the security of the Coast about
Genlade in Hoo) lived at this place, which had long before born the Name of his
Ancestors; After this Family had left it, the Inglefields a noble Family in
Barkesshire, descended from Ex veteri Rotulo Familiae de Inglefield.
Hasculfus de Inglefield, who flourished about the latter end of King Canutus,
were by purchase ingraffed in the possession; and here in this Name did the
Title setle, till about the latter end of Henry the seventh, and then it was
alienated to John Sidley Esquire; Auditor to that Prince; from Sidley it went over
by purchase to Polhill, Ancestor to George Polhill Esquire; eldest Son of Sir
Thomas Polhill, who is the present possessor of it.

Crundall in the Hundred of Wye, was one of the Seats of the noble and ancient
Family of Hadloe, who had here a Mansion which at this day perpetuates their
memory, and is called Hadloe place; John de Hadloe had a Charter of Freewarren
to Crundall and Hadloe, in the first year of Edward the third; he was son to
John de Hadloe, who dyed seized of it in the eleventh year of Edward the first,
Rot. Esc. Number. 25. Of this Family was Nicholas Hadloe son of Edmund de Hadloe
who ended in Amabilia Hadloe who matched with Honewood of Honewood in Postling:
but Crundall and Hadloe, were sold away before to VVaretius de Valoigns, by
whose Daughter and Coheir they came over to Th^mas de Aldon, and in that Name
they continued several descents, until the former Fatality brought it to
languish into a Female Heir, who was wedded to Heron of the County of Lincoln,
who desirous to draw all his estate into an entire Bulk, passed away his
estate here to Kempe; and there it had no long continuance neither, for by Mary
one of the Coheirs of Sir Thomas Kempe, it went away to Sir Dudley Diggs, who
suddenly after divested himself of his right to Crundall and Hadloe-place, and
in our Fathers memory passed them away by Sale to Mr...... Gay.

Tremworth in this parish, See more of Valoigns at Swerdlin in Petham.
was one of the ancient Mansions of Valoigns. Allan de Valoigns who was Sheriff
of Kent in the thirty first, thirty second, thirty third, and thirty fourth
years of Henry the second, had his Residence here as well as at Repton in
Ashford, and is often written in the pipe-Rolls of those years Valoigns de
Tremworth; from this man did descend VVaretius de Valoigns, who in the
fourteenth year of Edward the third, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his
Lands at Tremworth, Hougham, and other places in Kent, and in whom the male
Line failed, for he concluded in two Daughters and Coheirs, one of whom was
matched to Aldon, and so Tremworth came to own the Jurisdiction and Dominion of
that Family; and here it remained for diverse Descents, till Time, that with
successive Vicissitudes rolls all things into their determined period, brought
this Family to find its Tomb in a Female Heir, who was married to Heron; from
which Family about the reign of Henry the eighth, it passed away by Sale to
Kempe, of which Family was Sir Thomas Kempe, who dying without Issue male, left
it to his Brother Mr. Reginald Kempe; and he had Issue Thomas Kempe, who
deceasing without Children, this Thomas his two Sisters married to Clark and
Denny, became his heirs, and upon the Division of the Estate Tremworth was cast
into the Revenue of Denny, by whose Daughter and Heir it is lately become the
Demeasn of Mr. Robert Filmer, second Son of Sir Robert Filmer of Sutton, not
long since deceased.

Winchcombe is an ancient Seat likewise in Crundall, which ever since the Reign
of Edward the second, has acknowledged the Carters (as appears by private
Evidences) for its uninterrupted Proprietaries, and is still in the Tenure and
possession of that Name and Family.

Cuckston anciently written Cuckleston, lies in the Hundred of Totlingtrough,
and was given to the Church of Rochester by Ethelwolfe Son of King Egbert, See
Textus Roffensis.
first Monarch of the English Saxons; this King Ethelwolfe after his decease,
which happened to be about the year 857. was (for his several and exemplary
acts of Charity and pious Munificence toward the Church, of which Cuckston
till these unhappy times ravished it away, stood a visible Monument) Recorded
in the Register of Saints.

VVhornes-Place in this Parish was erected by Sir William VVhorne, who was
Lord Mayor of London in the year 1487. upon which (though he settled his Name)
he could not so fasten it to his Family, but that the next Age by Purchase
brought it over to Vane, where the Title had not long fixed, but the vicissitude
of Sale alienated it to Barnewell, who about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth
sold it to Nicholas Lewson of the County of Stafford Esquire; whose Grandchild Sir
Richard Lewson desirous to settle himself in his own County, where a vaste
Estate lay spread, which had been transmitted to him from his Ancestors, passed
away this by Sale to John Marsham Esquire, originally extracted from the
Marshams of Norfolk, where many years before they had flourished under no
contemptible Estimate.

D. D. D. D.
DArent in the Hundred of Acstane, is very often written North-Darent, it
belonged in the Conquerours time to the Archbishop of Canterbury, as the
Record called Doomsday Book instructs me) and was exchanged for the Manor of
Lambeth by Hubert Walter Archbishop, Lord Chancellor, and Lord Chief Justice,
with Gilbert Glanvill Bishop of Rochester, in the year of our Lord, 197. which
exchange was afterward confirmed by Richard the first.

Saint Margaret-Hills now united to this Parish, had formerly a Church, which
being decayed, and the Congregation diminished, it was by Cardinal Pole in the
year 1557. incorporated into Darent. It was anciently, and is so still,
distinguished by the Name St. Margaret-Hills, which additionall Character it
borrowed from a Family originally called Hells, and then by Tradition and
Vulgar corruption afterward styled Hills; a Family which had large Possessions
both here at Dertford, and at Ash likewise by Sandwich; John de Hells had a
Charter of Free Warren to his Manors of Hells and his Estate at Dertford, in
the seventeenth year of Edward the first; and from this John de Hells did Sir
Edmund Hills descend; and he about the beginning of Edward the sixth, alienated
this Manor to Lane, whose Son Henry Lane went out in a Daughter and Heir
called Martha, who matched to Edw. Rolt, descended from the Roults of
Bedford-shire; in Right of which Alliance Mr. Thomas Rolt his Grandchild, is
now invested in the Possession of this Place.

Dartford gives name to that Hundred wherein it is situated, and before the
Foundation of the Nunnerie, was a Manor which was wrapped up in the Demeasne of
the Crown; there was a Family called Tingewike, which had it in Lease, for when
King Edward the third, Pat. An. primi Edw. tertii Memb. 6. granted the
Royalties of the Manor of Dartford, to Edmund of Woodstock Earl of Kent,
paying, as a Rent-Service, of 30. l. per annum, it is mentioned in the Patent
that he should hold them all in as ample a manner as Alice Tingewike formerly
had done, upon his decease, it reverts to the Crown, and the same King Edward
in the year 1355. and in the fiftieth year of his Reign, erects here a
Nunnerie, whose Lady-Abbess and the Nuns of the Covent were for the most part,
in succeeding times, elected into this Cloister out of the noblest Families of
the Nation. Upon the suppression, King Henry the eighth converted the House
into a Palace for his own habitation, and under that notion it continued, till
K. James by exchange passed it away to Robert E. of Salisbury, who conveyed it
to Sir Edw. Darcy, whose Grandchild, Edward Darcy Esquire, descended from the
noble Family of Darcy of Yorke-shire, at this instant possesses the Fee-Simple
of it.

The Manor of Temple in this Parish, was involved in that Revenue, which was
marshaled under the Jurisdiction of the Knights Templers, as the very Name does
seem to insinuate, and upon the total disannulling this order here in England,
was, by a Statute made in the seventeenth year of Edward the second, settled on
the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, where it was fixed and constant, until
the disbanding of that Order likewise in this Nation by King Henry the eighth,
and then it was annexed to the Patrimony of the Crown; and rested there, until
K. James exchanged it, with Robert, E. of Salisbury, who sold it to Edw. Darcy
Esquire; whose Grandchild Edw. Darcy Esquire; has lately conveyed it by Sale, to his
Brother in Law Mr. Will. Gough.

The Manor of Charles is Seated in this Parish, and was a Branch of that
Estate which fell under the Signorie of the ancient Family of Charles, from
whom it assumed its appellation. Of this Family was Edw. Charles, who was
Captain and Admiral of the Fleet, from the Thames-Mouth Northward, as appears
Pat. 34. Edw. 1. after this Family had left the Possession of this place which
was about the beginning of Richard the second; Nicholas de Brember was planted
in the Propriety: but he was scarce warm in his new achieved Purchase, but he
fell under the guilt of high Treason, only for being too fast in his Loyalty
and Faith to his Prince, and too loose in his fidelity to his Country, for
there it seems that blind distinction had its first rise and growth which like
some Alembeck distilled and dropped the Power of the King distinguished apart
from his Person, upon the forfeiture of his Life and Estate together, which was
in the tenth year of Rich. the second: It was by that Prince suddenly after
conveyed by grant to Adam Bamme Lord Mayor of London: in which Family after it
had for many Ages been seated, (it was as appears by an exemplification now in
the hands of Mr. Took of Dartford) transmitted by Sale to Death, who about the
latter end of K. James passed it away to Goldsmith of Marshals-Court in
Creyford; who some few years since sold all his Concernment in it to Mr. Tooks,
branched out from the ancient Family of the Tooks of Bear in West-Clive;
though, since this Name settled at Dartford, it has by Depravation been called
Tuke.

Horsemans-Place is a Mansion of good account likewise in Dartford; in the
sixteenth year of Edward the second, I find it owned one Thomas de Luda for
Proprietarie, between whom and Thomas de Sandwich Abbot of Lessnes, there was a
Composition about that time touching the passage of a Current of Water. But
this Family before the end of Edward the third, had deserted the Possession;
and then (by old Court-Rolls and other Evidences) I find it in the Tenure of
John Horsman, who, it is probable new built this Mansion, and on the old
Foundation established this new-Name; and he had Issue Thomas Horseman, who
about the beginning of Henry the sixth, dying without Issue, gave it to his
Widow Margaret Horseman, re-married to Shardelow, and she, upon her decease, in
the ninteenth year of Henry the sixth, bequeathed it to her Kinsman Thomas
Brown, whose Daughter and Sole Heir Katherine, annexed it to the Patrimony of
Robert Blague, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and he had Issue by her
Barnabie Blague, who in the thirty third of Henry the eighth conveyed it by
Sale to Mr. John Bear, who much adorned and augmented the ancient Shell or
Structure of this Seat in the thirtieth year of that Princes Reign; but left
his Acquists thus increased and improved to Ann his Sole Heir matched to Mr.
Christopher Twislton, descended from Twislton Castle in the County of
Lancaster, whose Successor Sir Jo. Twislton, Knight, and Baronet, is now by
descendant, Right Possessor of it.

At Stanpit, in this Parish, there was a Chapel founded by one Thomas de
Dertford and dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, for one Priest to celebrate
divine Offices for the Soul of the Founder. In this Parish, there was likewise
a perpetual Salary established by one Thomas Martin to pray for the Soul of the
Founder, and Light-lands which were given by John Grovehurst.

Denton in the Hundred of Shamell, was given to the Church of Rochester by a
Noble man called Brichric and Efswith his Wife: but it seems there had been
some Invasion made upon the Original grant; for (as the Book called Textus
Roffensis informs me) it was restored to that Cathedral by William the
Conqueror, and was in aftertimes when Henry the eighth, upon the Ruins of
the Priory of St. Andrews raised the Dean and Chapter of Rochester, by royal
Concession united to their Demeasn.

Denton in the Hundred of Eastry with the appendant Manor of Tapington, now by
Contraction called Tapton, were in Times of very ancient Inscription, both
couched in the patrimony of Yerd; and though several datelesse Deeds represent
this Family to have been possessors of both these places, as high as the reign
of K. Jo. and H. the third: yet the first of this Name, whom Record discovers
to us, to have been eminent, was John de Yerd who held the Manors of Denton
and Tapington, by that Service which they call ad Wardam Castri Doveriensis,
and paid a respective Supply for them, in the twentieth year of Edward the
third, at making the Black-Prince Knight, and from this man did the possession
of both these places flow down to Jo. Yerd Esquire; who was Sheriff of Kent in the
nineteenth of Hen. the sixth, and he had Issue John Yerd, who conveyed
Tapington to Jo. Fogge Esquire; and he again by a Fine levied in the fifteenth year
of Edw. the fourth, passed away his Interest in it to Richard Haut, and he
determined in a Female Heir called Margery Haut, matched to William Isaac, who
annexed Tapton to his Demeasn, and in his descendant line the propriety
remained until that Age which was enclosed within the Circle of our
Grandfathers remembrance, and then it was alienated to Bois. But Denton with
some part of the revenue of Tapington, continued longer in the Yerd, until Jo.
Yerd the last Heir male of this Family, going to London, fell sick in
Southwark, and dyed without Issue, and was enterr'd in St. Margarets-church,
afterward converted to the Court of Marshalseys: so that Langley of Knowlton,
in right of a former Match with the Heir General of this Family, was entitled
to the possession of Denton, and the Demeasn of Tapton: but Edward Langley the
last of this Name dying Childlesse in the reign of Henry the eighth, in
relation to a former Match of the Heir General with Peyton, Sir Robert Peyton
of Cambridgeshire became Heir to his Estate in Kent; whose Successor Sir Robert
Peyton, passed away all his Interest here to Bois. Bois by Sale demised
Tapington to Verier; who almost in our Remembrance conveyed it to Mersh, the
instant proprietary: But Denton was by Bois alienated to Rogers, who in those
Times our Fathers lived in, translated his right into Swan; who not many years
since, sold it to Sir Anth. Percival of Dover, and he not long since
transplanted it by Sale into Phinees Andrews of Hartfordshire Esquire.

Wigmere is a third Manor in this Parish; there was a Family of this Name in
East-Kent: for in diverse old Evidences which I have seen, there is mention of
Will. de Wigmere, and diverse others of this Name; but for many Ages it
acknowledged the Signory of Brent, and so continued till the Beginning of Q.
Eliz. and then Tho. Brent dying without Issue, Margaret, married to Jo. Dering
of Surrenden Dering, became his Heir; in Right of which match, the Family of
Dering is entitled to the instant possession.

Madekin lies partly in Denton, and partly in Barham, and owned a Family of
that Surname, (as appears by the Evidences now in the hands of Mr. Oxenden,)
and continued by a thread of several descents fastened to this Name; but about
the beginning of Henry the sixth, the Succession of the Title was disordered,
and by Sale translated into Sednor, where the possession for many years dwelt,
till at last upon some Acquists in Brenchley, they withdrew themselves thither,
and passed away their Interest here to Brook; in whom after it had continued
three descents, the Fate of Sale, cast it into the Inheritance of Brooker; and
by Elizabeth the Daughter and Heir of that Family, it not long after descended
to Sir Henry Oxenden, whose Grandchild Henry Oxenden Esquire, now possesses
the Signory of it.

Davington in the Hundred of Feversham, was given to the Cloister of
Black-Nuns, which was founded there by Fulke de Newenham, and dedicated to St.
Mary Magdalen. In the thirty ninth of Henry the third, that Prince confirmed
them their Lands, and invested them with several privileges as appears Chart.
39. Hen. tertii Memb. 5. In the seventeenth of Edward the third, the King sent
his Writ to the Sheriff of Kent to be certified of the Estate and Revenue which
belonged to this Nunnery: for the Abbess and Nuns petitioned for relief, in
regard their Income was not sufficient to support them; and Jo. de Vielston
then Sheriff of Kent, returned per Sacramentum proborum and legalium Hominum,
that they had not a competent Demeasn for Subsistence; that whereas formerly
there were twenty six Nuns, now there were but fourteen, and that those could
not live upon the revenue of the Covent, but had the Charity of their Friends
to supply them. Thus did the Cloister of Davington remain a Seminary of
religious Women, whilst their revenue without, was the Fuel which supported and
nourished the Flame on the Altar. But when the reign of Henry the eighth
approached, which became decretory and critical to all these Nurseries of a
lazy and speculative Devotion, the demeasn which sustained this Covent, was by
Henry the eighth plucked away, and in the eight and thirteeth year of his
Government was by patent knit to the patrimony of Sir Thomas Cheyney. And his
Son Sir Henry Lord Cheyney, in the eighth year of Q. Eliz. conveyed it by Sale
to Jo. Bradborn, descended (as appears by his Seal affixed to his Deed, by
which he alienates it again in the tenth year of Q. Eliza. to Avery Giles) from
the Bradborns of Darbyshire. But in this Family the residence of it was very
brief and transitory; for his Son Francis Giles in the twentieth year of Q.
Eliza. passed it away to Mr. Jo. Edwards; and from this Family though the Fate
of purchase did not rend it away, yet that of marriage did: for this Jo.
Edwards leaving only one Daughter and Heir called Ann, she by matching with Io.
Boade of Essex Esquire, linked this to his revenue, and from him it is
descended to Mr. Io. Boade the present Lord of the Fee.

Little Davington or Davington-court, not far distant from that house which was
the Nunnerie, was formerly wrapped up in that Demeasn, which confessed the
Dominion of the Earls of Atholl Lords of Chilham, by whom the Mansion it self
was built; as their Arms in Stone-work in the great Hall before they were taken
down by Mr. Tho. Mills did abundantly testify; and having for many years
acknowledged their Signory at last it devolved to David de Strabolgie Earl of
Atholl: who dying without Issue-male, in the forty ninth year of Edw. the
third, left it to Philippa, one of his two Coheirs who was matched to Io.
Halsham; and from him did a successive Right bring it down to Sir Hugh Halsham
his Grandchild, who about the beginning of H. the sixth passed it away to Ja.
Drylond who determined in one Daughter and Heir called Constance Drylond who
was matched to Sir Tho. Walsingham of Scadbery Knight, who in her right became
possessor of it, and transmitted it to his Son Sir Ja. Walsingham, who was
Sheriff of Kent in the twelfth year of H. the seventh, and kept his Shrievalty
at Davington; and from him did it descend to his Grandchild Sir Tho.
Walsingham, who almost in our Grandfathers remembrance conveyed it by Sale to
Simons, and he not long after to Coppinger. And his Son having about the
beginning of K. James mortgaged it to Freeman; they both joined, and by mutual
Concurrence fixed their right in Mr. Tho. Mills of Norton, who deceasing
without Issue-male, it came by Ann his Sole Daughter and Heir, to be the
Inheritance of Sir Io. Mill of South-hampton, who conveyed it to his Brother
Dr. Mill, and he some few years past, alienated it to his Kinsman Mr. Tho.
Mill, and he serled the propriety of it on his Son Mr. Tho. Mill, who has very
lately transmitted all his Right in it by Sale to Tho. Twisden Esquire Sergeant
at Law, now of Brabourn in East-Malling.

Since my Writing of this, I have discovered by an old Survey of Davington,
collected by Mr. Tho. Mill^, that Io. Lewknor of Sussex Esquire; had in the twenty
first year of H. the sixth an Interess in Davington-court derived to him by
Joan his Wife, Sole Inheritrix of Sir Hugh Halsham, which he not long after
passed away to Mr. James Drylond.

Detling in the Hundred of Maidstone, gave Name to a Knightly Family famous for
Fortitude and Chivalrie, in token whereof a Massy Lance all wrearhed about
with thinn Iron place is preserved in the Church (like that of William the
Conquerours at Battle in Sussex) as the very Spear by them used, and left as a
memorial of their Atchivements in Arms, and an Emblem also of their
extraordinary Strength and Ability; In which respect those in Bedington-Hall
in Surrey, celebrate the renown of the Carewes achieved at Tilt and Turnament;
and that in Lullingston-Hall in Kent the like for the Peches; As also that in
Gerards-Hall in London, upon which a Romance is dressed up by the vulgar report,
fancying he was some Giant, when the truth is, he was of the Knightly Family of
Gizors, and Constable of the Tower; and this his Capital Mansion was
Castellated, as the Seat of the Basings was, another strenuous Family at
Basings-Hall in London; these matters allude much to the manner of the Romans,
whose Victories were aplauded, and the Victors in their Triumphs extolled by
Trophies and other Monuments and Ensigns of Honor, as Pancirolus, Rosinus, and
others have judiciously observed, that have treated of these kind of Rituals:
But to return to the Subject, from which this discourse has diverted me, in
this Family of Detling did the Possession of this place for many Ages remain
constantly seated, till the beginning of the Reign of Edward the fourth, and
then John Detling written, in some Old Deeds, Brampton alias Detling,
transmitted it by Sale to Richard Lord Woodvill, Lord of the Moat in Maidston
not far distant, created Earl of Rivers, Lord Treasurer and Constable of
England, by his Son in law King Edward the fourth in the year 1466. whose
Grandchild Anthony Woodvill Earl Rivers, being attainted upon supposed Treason
in the first year of Richard the third, which was made so by that Usurper, and
those black Engines which he had raised upon him, because he too cordially
asserted the Interest of Edward fifth, it escheated to the Crown; and that
Prince in the second year of his Government granted it to Sir Robert
Brackenbury Lieutenant of the Tower, who it seems disliking a Tenure which was
caemented with Blood, passed away his right immediately after to Richard
Lewknor who had some estate here before, by matching with Eleanor Coheir of
Tho. Town, which Tho. Town wedded to Bennett Heir of John Detling, and this
Richard Lewknor about the latter end of Henry the seventh, gave it in franck
Marriage with his Daughter to Hills. Hills resolved into two Daughters and
Coheirs, one of which was married to Vincent, and the other was matched to
Martin, and so upon the Division to avoid all Disorder and Confusion, Detling
was split into two Manors, one was called West-Court, which accrued to
Vincent, and the other was termed East-Court which was annexed to the Demeasne
of Martin. Martin, about the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, sold East-Court to
Web, in which Name after it had for several years been fixed, it was in our
Fathers Memory passed away to Smith, who not many years since alienated it to
Sir Edward Henden one of the Barons of the Exchequer, who upon his Decease gave
it to his Nephew Sir John Henden; and from him it is now descended to his
eldest Son Edward Henden, Esquire: But Westcourt was by Vincent passed away to
Morton, of Whitehorse in Croyden, in which Family the Inheritance is yet
remaining.

Dimchurh in the Hundred of Worth, has nothing to make it memorable but that
it was formerly the Inheritance of Twitham. Bertram de Twitham, held Lands here
at his Death, which was in the third year of Edward the third, as appears Rot.
Esc. Number. 115. And from him it came down to Theobald Twitham, whose Daughter
and Heir Mawd was married to Simon Septuans, from whom descended John Septuans
whose Daughter and Heir was matched to Fogge, who in her Right was entitled to
much Land here at Dimchurch, and in other places of the Mersh; but the Family
of Poynings had likewise some Interest here: for Michael Poynings was seized in
Fee of some Lands in Dimchurch, in the forty third year of Edward the third
Rot. Esc. Number. 14. Part secunda, and in this Name was the Possession carried
on until the Beginning of the Reign of Henry the sixth, and then it was
alienated to Fogge.

Newhall in this Parish is the place where those which are the Lords of Romney
Mersh, that is, of so many Manors which lie within the Precincts the Liberties
of it, assemble yearly to compose Laws for the better regulating and securing
the Banks of the Mersh, against the perpetual Invasions and Encroachments of
the Sea

Ditton in the Hundred of Larkefield, with its two Appendages Brampton and
Sifleston, were in times of a very high ascent, the Patrimony of a Family
called Brampton; the Book of Aid, (which makes a Recapitulation of the ancient
owners, informs us. that anciently they were Bramptons, that is, in the Reign
of King John, and Henry the third (as the Pipe-Rolls relating to both those
Kings times discover to us.) Afterward, in the Reign of Edward the first, I
find the Aldons (by the Pipe-Rolls) to have been Proprietaries of both these
places; but, it seems, the Possession remained not long with them: for, in the
third year of Edward the second, I find Stephen de Burghurst or Burwash died in
the Possession of them, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 4. And here the Title
continued until the forty third of Edward the third, and then the Lord
Bartholomew Burwash this man's Grandchild, conveyed them to Sir Walter de
Paveley Knight of the Garter, and he, in the first year of Richard the second,
passed them away to Windlesor or Windsor: in which Family the Inheritance was
placed, until the fifteenth year of this Prince's Reign, and then they were
conveyed to Sir Lewis Clifford; but in this Name they made no long abode
neither. For, about the middle of Henry the sixth, I find they were alienated
to Colepeper; and I discover, Richard Colepeper enjoyed them at his decease,
which was in the second year of Richard the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 28. and in
this Family was the Possession lodged, until the latter end of Henry the
seventh, and then the vicissitude of Purchase brought them to acknowledge the
Interest of Leigh, and Thomas Leigh exchanged them with K. Henry the eighth;
and that Prince in the thirty seventh year of his Reign, passed them away to
Sir Thomas Wriothesley: and in the original grant it is recited, that they
devolved to the Crown by exchange with Thomas Leigh Esquire, and he not long
after demised them to Sir Robert Southwell, who in the second year of Queen
Mary conveyed them to Sir Thomas Pope, in which Family they remained until the
latter end of Queen Elizabeth, and then they were alienated to Wiseman, from
whom almost in our Memory they were by Sale translated into the Patrimony of
Sir Oliver Boteler of Teston, Grandfather to Sir Oliver Boteler Baronet, who
now is entitled to the Propriety of them.

The Ropers held some Estate here at Ditton by Purchase from Clifford in the
Reign of Henry the fifth, which Edmund Son of Ralph Roper died seized of, in
the third year of Henry the sixth as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 33. which his
Successor not long after alienated to Colepeper.

Dodington in the Hundred of Eyhorne, contains several places in it, of no
contemptible Estimate. The first is Sharsted, which was the Patrimony of a
Family which was known by that Surname. Robert de Sharsted enjoyed it at his
death, which was in the eighth year of Edward the third Rot. Esc. Number. 61. But
after this man's departure, I do not find that it owned this Family any farther,
for this man's Sole Daughter and heir was matched to John de Bourne Son of John
de Bourne, who was Sheriff of Kent the twenty second, the twenty third, and
twenty fourth years of Edw. the first, and after in the fifth year of Edward
the third: Certainly, this Family was in times of a very high Gradation, as
eminent for Estate, as it was venerable for its Antiquity; Henry de Bourne
made a Purchase of Lands and Rents in Duddington, of Matilda the Daughter of
John de Duddington, (as appears by a Fine levied in the forty seventh year of
Henry the third; and the abovementioned John de Bourn obtained a Charter of
Free Warren to his Lands at Bourne, Boxley Dodington, and other places, in the
eighteenth year of Edward the first; and from this John de Bourne, did Mr.
William Bourne in an even stream of Descent issue forth, who almost in our
Remembrance, passed away Sharsted-Court to Mr. Delawne of London, whose Son
Mr........ Delawne is the instant Proprietarie of it.

Ringleston is a second place of note in this Parish: of which there is a
Tradition, that it borrows its principal Appellation from a Ring and a Stone;
which those who were Tenants to this Manor were to hold for such a proportion
of time, as an emblem of their acknowledged Homage and Subjection: But this is
but a fabulous romance in the whole frame of it; the truth is, Ring, in Saxon,
imports as much as Borough or Village, so that Ringleston signifies no more but
the Village-Stone, that is, some eminent Stone which was placed there, to
signify and discover the utmost extent and limits of the Borough. Having
unveiled the Name, and dispelled the Mist of the former fiction, I shall now
exhibit to the public view, who were the ancient Possessors of it; and first
I find the Chalfehunts, a Family of a spreading Demeasne and no less
reputation in this Track; Henry de Chalfehunt died possessed of it in the forty
fifth year of Edward the third Rot. Esc. Number. 14. After him Humfrey Son and
heir of Thomas Chalfehunt was in the enjoyment of it at his Death which was in
the ninth year of Richard the second Rot. Esc. Number. 14. After this Family was
expired, the Hadds a Family which was sometimes written Haddis and sometimes le
Had, (which argues it to be of French Etymology) was planted in the
Possession, and remained many years invested in the Fee, till about the
beginning of Q. Elizabeth, it passed away by Sale from them to Archer, from
whom not many years after the same fatalitie brought it to devolve to Thatcher,
who not many years since alienated both the Title and Demeasn to Allen; and he
in our Memory, sold one moitie of it to Ford, and settled the other proportion
of it upon his Daughter and Heir, who was matched to Giles.

Down-Court in Dodington, is an ancient Manor, which in elder times owned the
Signorie of Simon de Dodington, who flourished here in the Reign of K. John,
and Henry the third, and was entitled likewise to the Patronage or Advouson of
the Church: but he determined in an only Daughter called Matilda de Dodington,
who in the forty first of King Henry the third (as appears by a Fine levied in
that year) passed away her Interest here to John de Bourne in which Family the
Title many years after rested, until about the latter end of Henry the sixth
it was conveyed to Dungate of Dungate-Street in Kingsdowne. And Andrew Dungate
the last of this Name at this place, dying without Issue male, his sole
Daughter and Heir was marched to Killigrew, who likewise about the entrance of
Henry the eighth, expired in two female Coheirs, whereof one was wedded to
Roydon; the second to Cowland. In Roydon The Pssession was but brief; for he,
about the latter end of Henry the eighth, alienated his Proportion to Adye, a
Name deeply rooted in this Track, whose Successor Mr. John Adye still enjoyes
the capital Message or Mansion called Down-Court; but the Manor it self
which accrued to John Cowland upon the Division of the Estate was by his Will,
made 1540. ordered to be sold to discharge Debts and Legacies, and was
according to the Tenure of the premises, not long after conveyed to Allen,
Ancestor to him who is the instant owner of it.

Down, in the Hundred of Rokesley, is so called from its eminent situation; it
was in times of elder Aspect, the Habitation of a Family which passed under
that Surname. Richard de Down who flourished under Edward the first, and
Edward the second, lies buried in the Chancell of the Church, but with no date
upon his Tomb: Soon after this Family was expired, the Petleys became Lords of
the Fee, and Stephen Petley is Recorded in the Book of Aid, to have paid an
Auxiliary supply for Lands at Down, at making the Black Prince Knight, in the
twentieth year of Edward the third: and in this Family was the Title of this
place successively wrapped up for many Generations, until about the latter end
of Henry the eighth, it melted away with the Name. For Jo. Petley resolved into
four Daughters and Coheirs, Agnes the eldest was matched to Jo. Manning, the
second was espoused to Bird, the third was wedded to Casinghurst of Valous, and
the fourth was married to Childrens: and upon partition of the Estate this
Manor fell to be the Inheritance of Manning, and in this Name for many years
it remained constant, until in our Fathers Remembrance, it went away by Sale
to Sir Nicholas Carew of Beddington in Surrey, and his Son Sir Francis Carew,
conveyed it to Ellis of London, who not many years since alienated his Right in
it to Colonel Richard Sandys, third Son of Sir Edward Sandys of Northbourne;
but Down-Court was long before passed away by Manning to Palmer, which was
separated from the Manor of Down, and singly sold by it self.

The Arms of Philipot and Petley, are extant in the South-window of the
Chancell, with this Inscription affixed to the Pedestall of their two
Pourtraicttures, Orate pro Animabus Jo. Petley, and Christiana Uxoris, and Jo.
Petley and Aliciae Filiae Tho. Philipot........ ac Parentum little.

E. E. E. E.
EGerton in the Hundred of Calehill, has two places within the Verge of it
remarkable: The first is Barmeling, which was the Seat of a Family of that
Surname, Robert de Bermeling, and in old datelesse Deeds called Sir Robert de
Barmeling: he held it at his Decease, which was in the fifty third year of
Henry the third, and left Issue William de Bermeling, who was also in the
enjoyment of it at his Death, which was in the twenty second year of Edward the
first, and so did Robert de Bermeling who made his Exit the thirty first of
Edward the first, and here in this Family has the Propriety by an undivided
Track of Succession; been so fixed and permanent, that it is yet the
unseperated Inheritance of this Name of Barmeling.

The second is Bruscombe: This was a Branch of that Demeasn which formerly
acknowledged the Chitcrofts for its Possessors, a Name of very great Antiquity
both here and at Lamberherst. Agnes wife of Richard Chitcroft held it at her
Death, which was in the eighteenth year of Edward the second, Rot. Esc. Number.
198. After Chitcroft was worn out, the Beaumonts were invested in the
Possession, and John de Bellemont or Beaumont deceased in the enjoyment of it,
in the twentieth year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 14. But not long
after this the Title ebbed away from this Name, and by a successive Channel of
Vicissitude, was powered into Baron, a Family originally extracted out of the
West, where they are yet in being; John Baron died seized of Bruscombe the
second year of Henry the fifth. The Family which succeeded this in the
Inheritance, upon their Recesse which was about the latter end of Henry the
sixth, were the Wottons of Boughton Malherbe, in which Family the Title and
Propriety has been ever since so constantly resident, that it still rests in
the Descendants and Heirs of Tho. Lord Wotton of Marley.

Eltham in the Hundred of Black heath, anciently called Ealdham, did anciently
belong in part to the King, and partly to the Mandevills, from whence it came
to be called Eltham Mandeville. King Edward the first granted that Moiety which
belonged to himself to John de Vescy a potent Baron in the North, in the ninth
year of his Reign, and in the twelfth year, ennobles his former Concession, and
gives him a new Grant to hold a Market weekly and a Fair yearly at his Manor
of Eltham. In the fourteenth year of the abovesaid Prince, John de Vescy with
his Knowledge and Consent, made an Exchange with Walter de Mandevill, for that
Proportion of Eltham in which he was Interessed, and gave the sixth part of the
Manor of Luton in Bedfordshire, for one Message with the Appurtenances in
Eltham and Modingham: This John de Vescy died without Issue in the eighteenth
of Edward the first, and William his Brother succeeded in the Possession, and
was Lord Vescy, and had Issue by Isabell Daughter of Robert Perington, Widow of
Sir Robert de Wells, William de Vescy his lawful Son born in the year 1269,
who died without Issue in his Fathers life Time at Conway, and was buried at
Malton. Then William de Vescy having a base Son called William Vescy de Kildare
born at Compston in the County of Kildare 1292, Fines de Anno 24. Ed. primi
Will. de Vescy sold to Anth. Beck, Bishop of Durham the Manor of Eltham with
the Appurtinances which Isabell the Widow of John de Vescy held for term of her
Life.
begotten upon Dergavile his Concubine, Daughter to Dunwald a petty Prince in
Ireland, he made a Feoffment of all his Lands in England, to Anthony Beck
Bishop of Durham to the use of William Vescy of Kildare his base Son; and also
infeoffed King Edward in Kildare in Ireland, and in Sproxton, in Scotland for
License of his good Leave and Assent to the other Feoffment.

William de Vescy of Kildare was slain in the Wars of Stripling in Scotland.
The King of England himself being then present in Person; By which means the
State being in the Bishop of Durham, he disposed of Alnewike Castle in the
North, to Henry de Percy, that had married Idonia de Clifford: and considering
that the Estate of Lands at Eltham came from the Crown; the said Bishop
reserving an estate for life, disposed of them back again to the Crown: he
himself dyed there, the twenty eighth of March 1311. In the fifth year of
Edward the second, and had bestowed great cost in building there. The
Stone-work of the outward Gate being Castle-like, is a remnant of the work of
that Time: The Palace it self being much more modern and Augmented by several
additions of the Kings of England, who in a manner kept here their constant
residence, and here were made the Statutes of Eliham, the precedents for
Government of the Kin^s House to this day. The Bishop of Durham being dead, K.
Edward the second kept his residence here, 1315, 9, Edw. 2.
and his Q. was here brought to bed of a Son called John of Eliham.

K. Edward the third intending to give a princely reception to K. John of
France, which had been Prisoner in England, and came over to visit the King,
1363.
and dyed before his return, entertained him here at Eltham.

K. Henry the fourth kept his last Christmas at Eliham. 1412.


K. Henry the fifth his Son and Successor, lay there at Christmas likewise,
when he was fain to depart suddenly for fear of some that had conspired to
murder him.

K. Henry sixth made it his principal place of residence, and granted the
Tenants of the Manor of Eltham, a Charter of renovation of a Market in the
seventeenth of his reign; which contains more ample privileges than any such
grant that yet I have seen, as will be likewise evident to those who will
peruse the original Record of that year in the Tower of London.

K. Edward the fourth greatly to his cost repaired the House, Pat. Anno 21.
Edw. 3. pars 2. Memb. 2.
and enclosed Hornpark, so called, being the Site of the Manor of West-horn,
which was anciently in the Kings Demeasne; For King Edward the third, in the
twenty first year of his reign granted liberty to all his Tenants of this
Manor to be toll-free throughout England.

K. Henry the seventh set up the fair Front there, toward the Moat, and was
usually resident there. I find in a Record, (in the Office of Arms) that he did
usually dine in the Hall, and all his Officers kept their Tables there; and at
such time as he created Stanley Baron Monteagle, by reason of some Infection
then reigning in and near the City of London none were permitted to dine in the
Kings Hall but the officers of Arms, who at the serving in the Kings second
Course of meat according to the Custom, came and proclaimed the Kings style,
and the style of the said new Lord.

King Henry the eighth built much at Greenwich with Bricks made here at Eltham,
and then neglected this place; yet he lived here sometime, and kept a royal
Christmas at this place, 1515. There is an ancient place in this Parish called
Henleys, which in the time of King Edward the third, was a Marnor belonging to
John de Henley, whose House was moated about, the situation is yet extant below
the Conduit-head; but he dying without Issue, it came by his gift to King
Edward the third, and was annexed unto the Manor by William de Brantingham his
Feoffee.

The Manor East-horn and Well-hall, was in the year 1100. possessed by Jordan de
Iriset or Brinset first establisher of the Order of Knights Hospitallers here
in England. In Ages of a lower Descent, that is, in the reign of Edward the
third, it was held by John de Poultney, and from that Family about the reign of
Richard the second, it devolved by Sale to Chichley; John Tatterst all married
Agnes the Daughter of John Chichley of Wolwich Son of William Chichley Alderman
of London, and by her had VVell-hall and Easthorn; he had Issue by her two
Daughters, Ann was married unto Sir Ralph Hastings, and Margery was married
unto John Roper Esquire: and Agnes their Mother was remarried to Will. Kene,
who likewise had Issue by her, from whom the Mansells of Wales are extracted,
and by this Descent are of the Blood and Kindred of Henry Chichley Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Founder of All Souls College in Oxford: but
VVell-hall and East-horn, were united to the patrimony of Roper, and have
continued here so fixed that they are the present Inheritance of Edward Roper
Esquire.

To this Manor the Chancel of St. Michael in the South Side of Eltham Church
belongs called sometimes Tatershalls Chancel. In the windows, the Matches
before mentioned are impaled in Colored glass.

The utmost extent of this Hundred Eastward reaches to Shooters-Hill, so
called of the Thievery there practiced, where Travelers in elder Times were so
much infested with Depraedations and bloody mischiefs; that order was taken in
the sixth of Richard the second, for the enlarging the Highway according to
the Statute made in the Time of King Edward the first, so that they venture
still to rob here, by prescription; Pat. 6. R. 2. pars 2. Mem. 34.
and some have been so impudent, to offer to engage the Sun shining at midday,
for the repayment of money called borrowed, in a Theevish way, to the great
charge of the Hundred that still was in the Counter-bond; and King Henry the
fourth granted leave to Thomas Chapman, to cut down, burn, and sell, all the
Woods, and Under-woods growing and confining to Shooters-Hill, Pat. 7. H. 4.
pars 2. Memb. 12.
on the South Side, and to bestow the money raised thereby, upon mending the
Highway. Surely Prince Henry his Son, and Sir John Falstaff his make-sport,
so merrily represented in Shakespeare's Comedies, for examining the Sandwich
Carriers, loading at this place; were not the Surveyers.

Mottingham in the Hundred of Blackheath, is a Hamlet and member to Eltham,
enjoying like privileges, which are annexed to both these places, as being of
ancient Demealn. It was formerly written Modingham, denoting that it was
proudly situated, (for so we interpret Mod in old English:) It passed away from
the Crown, with the Manor of Eltham to Jo. de Vescy, and returned back again
with it, inhabited in the time of K. Edw. the third by the Family of Bankwell;
and after, in the reign of H. the sixth, by the Chesmans: the last of which
Name which held this place, was Tho. Chesman, whose Female-heir Alice, brought
this Seat to her Husband Rob. Stodder, Ancestor to Will. Stodder Esquire; not long
since deceased, who was proprietary of it.

A strange and mavelous Accident happened at this place upon the fourth day
of August 1585, in a Field which belongs to Sir Percival Heart. Betimes in the
morning, the ground began to sink, so much, that three great Elme-Trees were
suddenly swallowed into the Pit; the tops falling downward into the hole: And
before ten of the Clock, they were so overwhelmed, that no part of them might
be discerned, the Concave being suddenly filled with water: the Compass of the
hole was about 80. yards, and so profound, that a sounding line of fifty
Fathoms, could hardly find or feel any bottom; ten yards distance from that
place; there was another piece of ground sunk in like manner, near the
highway, and so nigh a dwelling house, that the Inhabitants were greatly
terrified therewith.

Edenbridge in the Hundred of Westerham, was ever esteemed a Chapel of ease,
to the Parish of Westerham. The first that I discover by the beams of Record,
to have been possessed of Edenbridge, were the Stangraves, who had here their
capital Mansion, which was known by their Name. John de Stangrave obtained a
Charter of Free Warren to Edenbridge, in the twenty sixth year of Edw. the
first. Sir Rob. de Stangrave was his Son and Heir, who was with Edw. the first,
at the Siege of Carlaverock in Scotland, and there for his generous Service
received the Order of Knighthood, and dyed seized of Edenbridge and Stangrave,
the twelfth year of E. the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 52. After the Stangraves were
vanished, the Dynleys were settled in the Signory of these abovementioned
places; Jo. de Dynley had a Confirmation of the Chatter of Free Warren to
Eden-bridge, in the fourteenth year of Edward the third, and immediately after
passed away his Interest here to Hugh de Audley Earl of Gloucester, Lord of the
Manor and Castle of Tunbridge, by whose Daughter and Heir, the Lady Margaret
Audley, Stangrave and Edenbridge, came to acknowledge the Signory of Ralph
Stafford, Earl of Stafford, and he dyed seized of them in the forty sixth year
of Edward the third; and in this Family of Stafford, as they were successively
Earls of Stafford, and Dukes of Buckingham, was the propriety of these places
resident, until the twelfth year of Henry the eighth, and then Edward Duke of
Buckingham, Lord high Constable of England, having unadvisedly consulted with a
Monk and a Wizzard touching the Succession of the Crown, fomented so Vast a
Stock of Fears and Jealousies in the Brain of that Cautious Prince, that they
could not be extinguished but by his Blood, which was poured out on a Scaffold
as the last expiation of that Treason, which was by Cardinal Wolsey pinned upon
him, and likewise of his Prince's Fury. Upon this his untimely Exit, his Estate
escheated to the Crown, and King Henry the eighth not many years after, granted
Westerham, Eden Bridge, and Stangrave, which were parcel of the Confiscation,
to Sir John Gresham Knight, from whom they by Descent are now devolved to
Marmaduke Gresham Esquire, who enjoys the instant Possession of them.

Delaware is a Seat of very venerable Account in this Parish: It was the Seat
of Gentlemen of that Name as high as the Reign of Henry the second, as appears
by old Evidences, now in the Hands of Mr. Seyliard; of which, Robert de la Ware
was the last, who about the latter end of Edward the third, went out without
Issue-male: so that Dionysia Delaware, who was matched to William Paulin,
became Heir to this place. In Paulin it remained constantly resident, till the
beginning of the Rule of Henry the sixth, and then William Paulin determined in
a Daughter and Heir likewise, who was wedded to John Seyliard of Seyliard in
Hever, which is still in the Possession of Mr. Seyliard of Gabriells in this
Parish; and who descended from Ralph de Seyliard, who flourished about the
Reign of King Stephen: In an old Pedigree of Seyliard, now treasured up amongst
the Evidences of Delaware, there is enrolled the Copy of a Deed without date,
by which, Almerick d'Eureux Earl of Gloucester, who flourished in the Reign of
Henry the third, demises Lands to Martin at Seyliard, and other Lands called
Hedinden to Richard at Seyliard, who were Sons of Ralph: from which Ralph, John
Seyliard Esquire, now Proprietary of this an^^ent Mansion of Delaware, by a
Steady and unbroken Current of many Descents in a Direct Line is originally
extracted.

The Manor of Sharnden in this Parish, was parcel of that Estate which
belonged to the Lords Cobham, of Sterborough Castle not far distant, and
continued folded up in the Patrimony of this Family, till the Government of
Edward the fourth; and then Thomas Lord Cobham of Sterborough deceasing without
Issuemale, Anne, matched to Edward Lord Borough of Gainsborough, became his
Heir: in which Name and Family, the Title of this place successively streamed
down, till almost our Times; and then the Lady Katharine Borough, to whom it
was assigned by Thomas Lord Borough her Husband, to defray Debts and other
Uses, passed it away to Sir Edward Richardson, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, whose Grandchild the Lord Edward Richardson Baron of Cromartie in
Scotland, does now possess the Signory and Inheritance of it.

Elham in the Hundred of Lovingborough, is anciently written Helham, which
denotes the Situation of it in a Valley amongst Hills. Though now the
Magnificent Structures, which in elder Times were here, be dismantled, and have
only left a Mass of deplored Rubble to direct us were they stood, yet in
Doomsday Book it is written, (that the Earl of Ewe a Norman, and near in
Alliance to the Conqueror) held it, and left the Reputation of an Honor unto
it, as the Record of the Aid granted at the making the Black Prince Knight in
the twentieth of Ed. the third, does warrant. For the Manor of Mount adjacent
to Elham, is said to be held of the Honor of the Earl of Ewe by Knights
Service. In Testa de Nevill, there is mention of Gilbert Earl of Ewe, who then
paid respective Aid in the twentieth year of Henry the third, at the Marriage
of Isabell that Prince's Sister. From this Gilbert Earl of Ewe, it went away to
Edward eldest Son to Henry the third, who obtained a Market and Fair to Elham,
by Charter in the thirty fifth of Henry the third, and after he had fortified
it with these Privileges, in the forty first year of the abovesaid Prince,
conveys it by Sale to Boniface of Savoy, Archbishop of Canterbury. Boniface,
to decline the Envy and Emulation of his English Opposites, which he and the
rest of those Forreiners and Aliens, had contracted upon themselves, by their
practical Turbulencies in the Managery of the principal Affairs of State,
under Henry the third, passed it away by Sale to Roger Lord Leybourne, a great
Partisan and Confederate of Simon de Montforts, the popular Earl of Leicester,
in his Quarrel commenced against Henry the third, about removing of Strangers
both from his Counsels and Throne, for which after the Battle of Evesham;
where that Simon was defeated and slain, he was by the Pacification made at
Kenelworth, in the fiftieth year of Henry the third, absolved and pardoned;
soon after which he dyed, and left this Manor with much other Revenue, to his
Son Henry Leybourn and he was seized of it at his Death, which was in the
twenty eighth year of Edward the first, from whom it went down to his Son Sir
Roger Leybourn, who dying without Issue-male, Juliana Leybourn his Sole
Daughter and Inheritrix, entered upon the Inheritance, and she was first wedded
to John de Hastings, and after to William de Clinton Earl of Huntington, but by
neither had she any Surviving Issue, nor yet any collateral Alliance, that
could put in any pretended Claim to rescue it from an Escheat, so that in the
forty third year of Edward the third, in which year she dyed, it devolved to
the Crown; and Richard the second granted it to Sir Simon de Burley, Knight of
the Garter, and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, a Man of great Virtues, and no
less Vices; whose Pride and Ambition first galled others, and lastly wounded
himself, and like some Physic, wanting a peccant Matter to work upon, preys
upon the Vitalls themselves. For bandying against some of the Nobility, who
pretended the Preservation and Sheltring of the peoples Interest against the
impetuous Eruptions of an arbitrary Prerogative, he was empeached of high
Treason in the tenth year of Richard the second, and was convicted and
executed, upon whose Calamitous Tragedy, this by Escheat reverts to the Crown;
and the abovesaid Prince in the twelfth year of his Reign, by Grant, annexes it
to the Revenue of the Canons of St. Stephens in Westminster, where it was fixed
until the public Suppression removed it, and united it once more to the
Patrimony of the Crown, Richard de Albaney principal Butler to King. William
Rufus, gave the Tithes of Elham to St. Andrews in Rochester See Textus Roffensis
and then King Edward the sixth, granted it, in Lease for fourscore years, to
Sir Edward Wotton, one of his Privy Council, whose Son Thomas Wotton Esquire,
passed it away by Sale to Alexander Hamon Esquire, who determining in two
Daughters and Coheirs, Mary married to Sir Edward Bois of Fredvill, and
Katharine wedded to Sir Robert Lewknor, this in his Wifes Right came over to
the last: but the Reversion in Fee was in the Beginning of the late King
Charles, by Sir Charles Herbert Master of the Revells purchased of the Crown;
and he some few years since, alienated all his Concernment in this Manor to
Mr. Alst a Dutch Merchant of London.

Elham, had the Grant of a Market procured to it, on the Monday, by the power
of Prince Edward, in the fifty fifth year of Henry the third, which was after
allowed and approved of before the Judges Itinerant, when he was King, in the
seventh year of his Reign.

Shotle^field in Elham, was, as high as the Reign of Edward the second, the
Inheritance of a Family called le Grubbe, who had Possessions of a considerable
Value, about Yalding by Maidston, and Nonington in East-Kent: In the third year
of Edward the second, Henry Peers, and in another old Deed, styled Pers or de
Petris, from his Habitation nere some place of a Rocky constitution, demises
some parcels of Land lying in Elham, and Lyming, to Thomas le Grubbe, who is
written in the Deed de Shotlesfield, and from this Thomas, did the Title
descend by paternal Devolution to John Grubbe, who in the second year of
Richard the third conveyed it by Sale to Thomas Brockman of Liming, and his
Grandchild Henry Brockman in the first year of Queen Mary, alienated it to
George Fogge of Brabourn Esquire, and he about the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth, sold his Interest in it to Bing, who in that Age which was
circumscribed within our Fathers Remembrance, transplanted the Title by Sale
into Mr. John Masters of Sandwich, from whom it descended to Sir Ed. Masters of
Canterbury; and he, upon his late Decease, gave it to Dr..... Masters his
second Son Dr. of the Civil-Law.

Mount and South Blabden with Jaques Court, were Manors which were involved in
the Patrimony of Anketellus de Rosse, and he in the twentieth year of W^lliam
the Conqueror, held them as appears by the Record of Doomsday Book: from
which Name they passed away to Cosenton with Acris, but with this Clause
reserved, that South-Blabden and Acris should hold the Manor of Horton by
knights Service, which was a principal Seat of this Family of Rosse, before it
was sold to Kirkby; In the seventh year of King Edward the third, Stephen de
Cosington obtained a Charter of Free Warren to these above recited Manors.
This Man was Son and Heir of William de Cosenton, who was Sheriff of Kent in
the thirty fifth year of Edward the first, and is sometimes written of Cosenton
and sometimes of Mount in Elham, and from these two did Sir John Cosenton
extract his Genealogy, and with it his Title to these two Manors; and he
deceasing about the latter end of Henry the eighth, without Issue-male, his
three Daughters,....... married to Duke, Joan matched to Wood, and Elizabeth
wedded to Alexander Hamon Esquire, became his three Coheirs, and parted a large
Patrimony. Upon the Division Wood obtained South-Blabden and Jaques Court, and
Hamon carried away Mount: Wood's Heir alienated the two first to Sir John Wild
of Canterbury, whose Son Colonel Dudley Wild, upon his late Decease, has
bequeathed them to his Widow during Life: Hamon's Heir determined in two
Daughters and Coheirs, Mary was espoused to Sir Edward Bois of Fredvill, and
Catharine was matched to Sir Robert Lewknor, descended from the noble and
Illustrious Family of Lewknor in Sussex, who in his Wifes right was invested in
the Possession of Mount, who upon his Death, transmitted it to his Son Mr.
Hamon Lewknor, whose Widow Mrs...... Lewknor, eldest Daughter to Dr. Hen.
Kingsley Archdeacon of Canterbury is now in the enjoyment of it.

Canterwood is another Manor in this Parish, whose Possessors, I confess, I
could never trace out, by any Print of public Record; therefore I endeavored
to give my self Satisfaction, by the private Evidences: but, the Heir being
under Age, the Deeds were deposited in the Hands of those who represented my
Design in Surveying them through the Mists of Cautious Jealousies and
Distrusts, and so my Attempt became fruitless. All the Intelligence I could
gain (as in Relation to that place) was collected from an old Manuscript, whose
Hand seems contemporary to the Time of Henry the eighth, and what I have
drained from thence, I shall now represent to the Reader. Canterwood, says this
Escript, was formerly the Estate of Thomas de Garwinton de Well in
Littlebourne, who flourished in the Reign of Edw. the second, and Edw. the
third, whose great Grandchild Will. Garwinton dying without Issue, Joan his
Kinswoman, matched to Richard Haut, was, in the ninth year of Henry the fourth,
found to be his Heir, not only to this place, but to much other Land in this
Territory; and she had Issue Richard Haut, who concluded in a Female Heir,
whose Name was Margery, who by matching with William Isaac, linked this Manor
to his Revenue. Thus far this Manuscript. Who were the Possessors since, the
Court-Rolls which do not ascend very high, now in the Custody of Mr. Hugben,
discover: The first Family which they recite is Hales, and it remained in the
Inheritance of that Name, till toward the end of Queen Elizabeth, and then it
was by Sale transported over to Manwood, who some few years after, disposed of
his Interest in it, by the same Alienation to Sir Rob. Lewknor, upon whose
Decease it devolved to his Son Mr. Hamon Lewknor Esquire, who has upon his
Death during the Minority of his Son left the Possession to be enjoyed by his
Widow.

Bowick is a sixth place, which must now come within the pale of this
Discourse. It was in Times of elder Inscription the Seat of the Lads, who in
diverse of their ancient Muniments and Evidences writ de Lad. Now if you will
know, where that place is seated, I answer, it is situated in Chart by Sutton,
where there is an ancient Farm, which formerly had the Repute of a Manor, and
is at this instant, as it was in Ages of a higher Step, known by the Name of
Lads, and was till, almost our Grandfathers Memory, in the Tenure of that
Family; after Lad was departed from the Possession of this Place, the
Nethersolls, by Purchase were, about the Beginning of Henry the seventh,
incorporated into the Possession, and staid in it some few years, and then
alienated their Interest here to Aucher, who about the latter end of Henry the
eighth, resigned the Title by Sale to Wroth, in which Family it was resident,
until some few years since it was passed away to Elgar.

Oxroad is a seventh Manor in Elham. In a very old Court-Roll, now in the
hands of Mr. Shetterden of Eltham, one John de Oxroad is represented to be the
Possessor: and in others of a more modern Complexion, which bear date from
Henry the fourth, and so downwards, until the beginning of Henry the eighth,
the Hinckleys are discovered to us to be the Proprietaries of it, and then this
Name was extinguished in a Daughter and Heir: for Isabell was the only Child of
Thomas Hinckley, who by espousing Joan Been, carried this place into the
Possession of that Family, where it was constantly fixed, until of late years,
the Title was by Sale transplanted into Mr. Daniell Shetterden of Eltham,
descended from the Shetterdens of Shetterden in great Chart, which Land they
have possessed for diverse hundreds of years.

Ladwood is an eighth Manor in this Parish, written in old Evidences Ladswood,
from whence we may spin out a more then probable Conjecture, that, before the
erecting the house by Rolfe, it was a Wood belonging to Lad of Bowick; but for
some hundreds of years, that is, fince the latter end of Edward the third, it
has constantly related to the Family of Rolfe, a Name which Mr. Thin
conjectures in a Pedigree which he collected of this Family, was contracted
from the ancient German Name Rodolphus: and Mr. Lambert, in his Kentish
Perambulation, mentions one Rolph a Saxon, who added much to the Castle of
Rochester, from whom it is not altogether improbable, this Family, which has
been so ancient at Elham, might extract their first original.

Clavertie is the last place in this Parish, which may exact our mention: it
did belong before the Suppression to the Knights Hospitallers, and was one of
those places, in this Track, which was a Commaundry to the more general
Seminary of this Order planted at Edwell. Upon the Dissolution of this Order,
here in England, by Henry the eighth, who condemned their Disorder and Luxury,
only to improve his own, like the Lapwing, who cries most when she is farthest
off from her Nest, this was added to the Demeasne of the Crown: and King Edward
the sixth granted it to Peter Heyman Esquire, who was one of the Gentlemen off
his Bedchamber, and great Grandfather to Sir Henry Hamon Baronet, who was the
late Proprietarie of this Manor of Claverty, a person to whom if I should not
affirm my self signally and extraordinarily engaged, I deserved to be
represented to Posterity under the darkest Complexion of Ingratitude.

Eightam, Hamon de Crevequer held Eigtham in the Reign of K. John, and then
Sim. de Crioll, in the Reign of Henry the third, as appears by old Evidences.
vulgarly but corruptly and falsely called Ightam, lies in the Hundred of
Wrotham, and has that Denomination imposed upon it, from the eight Hams or
Boroughs which lie within the Verge of it. The first is Eightham it self, the
second is Redwell, the third is Ivie-Hatch, the fourth is Barrow Green, the
fifth is St. Cleres, the sixth is the Moat, the seventh is Beaulies, and the
eighth and last is Oldborough, which puts in its Claim to be of Roman
original; for when Leland visited Kent, which was about the beginning of Henry
the eighth, there was some Remains of an ancient Fortification: and it is
probable that this being the way which led to the great Roman Colonie at
Noviomagum, now called Woodcot in Surrey, was at this place fortified upon all
emergent occasions, to secure their Retreat, from any hostile Eruption. The
Manor of Eightam it self, was the Possession of William de Inge, one of the
Judges in the Reign of Edward the second: this William de Inge was by his
Country and Parentage of the County of Bedford, and had Issue William de Inge,
who matched with Margery, Daughter of Henry Grapenell, and dyed seized, in the
fifteenth of Edward the second, of this Manor of Eightham: his Daughter and
Heir Joan was wedded to Eudo Lord Zouch of Harringworth, and William le Zouch
of Harringworth, dyed possessed of it, in the fifteenth year of Richard the
second, Rot. Esc. Number. 64. And in this Name was the Propriety of this place,
for sundry Generations successively resident, until the beginning of Henry the
seventh, and then it was alienated to Sir Robert Read Sergeant at Law, and Lord
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, who not long after going out in four
Daughters and Coheirs, Dorothy matched to Sir Edw. Wotton, Margaret married to
Sir John Harecourt of Elnall in the County of Stafford, Katharine wedded to Sir
Thomas Willoughbie Lord Chief Justice of the Common pleas, and Eliz. espoused
to Tho. Totihurst Esquire; they divided his Inheritance, and this Manor: upon the
Distinction of it into parcells, this was added to the Revenue of Willoughby;
from which Family, in our Grandfathers Remembrance, it passed away by Sale to
Jam. descended from Jacob van Hastrecht who was anciently seated in Cleve,
Ancestor to Will. James alias Hastretcht Esquire, thrice Knight of the Shire,
within the Circle of five years, who by Paternall Derivation, is now Lord of
this Manor of Eightam.

Before I leave this Discourse of Eightam, I must inform the Reader of two
things. First that Edward the second, in the ninth year of his Reign, granted
License to Will. de Inge the Judge, to hold a Market here Weekly on the Monday,
and a Fair yearly at Eightham, by the space of three days, viz. the Vigill, the
day of St. Peter and Paul, and the day after. Secondly that the Family of James
now Possessors of Eightam, were originally called Hastrecht, as being Lords of
a place of that Name near Gouda, and were branched out from the ancient Family
of Arkell, Ex Autographis penes Do. Will. James.
as likewise was that of Bouteslaw, both which Families bear the same Coat,
without any visible Distinction with Haestrecht, viz. Argent two Bars Crenelle
or Counterembattel'd Gules three Pheon; or Broad Arrow Heads, in Chief Sables.
Roger James, Son of Jacob van Hastrecht, came out of Cleve, (whither his
Ancestor a younger Son of the Lord of Hastrecht, had been chased by one of the
Lords of Holland, because his Father, who likewise was forced to Drunen near
Huesden, by that Count, had been an eager Partisan of his enemy, the Bishop of
Vtretcht) into England, about the beginning of Hen. the eighth, and being
called after the Belgic mode, Roger Jacobs, the English by a more soft and
gentle pronunciation, filed off the roughness of the Accent and by melting it
into a more narrow Volume, contracted it into James. By marriage, the Family of
Haestrecht and Arkell above mentioned, are allied to the eminent House of
Wassenaer, issued out from the ancient Counts of Holland, as likewise to the
Family of Waermont near Leyden, who matched with the Heir of Hastrecht of
Drunen, (where this Family had for many Descents been planted, ever since their
first expulsion thither, by the Earl of Holland) who was Colonel of a Regiment
of Foot, and Drosart of Breda, when it was under the Government and Scepter of
the King of Spain.

St. Cleres is the second place of Note in this Parish; it was formerly called
Aldham, as being for many years the Patrimony of that Family, the last of which
was Sir Tho. de Aldham, who resolved into three Female Coheirs:....... matched
to Newborough of the County of Dorsett, Margery matched to Martin de Pecham,
and Isolda wedded to John St. Clear. Upon the partition of his patrimony, this
place was, about the beginning of Ed. the third, annexed to the Inheritance of
St. Clear, and so it becamein procedure of Time styled Aldham St. Cleres: but
Custom and vulgar Use did not long after file off the first Appellation, so
that it has for diverse Generations, been styled singly St. Cleres. Isolda St.
Clear Widow of this John, did, in the twentieth year of Edward the third pay
respective Aid, for her Lands at Eightham, at the making the Black Prince
Knight. And in this Family did the Stream of Possession carry down the
Possession of this place, till toward the latter end of Henry the seventh, and
then it was alienated from this Name and settled in Richard Empson, the grand
Projector, who had wire-drawn, by his close and dextrous Artifices, the
Treasure of the Kingdom into such subtle Threads, as he had almost wound it
all into the Kings Exchequer: But he being convicted of Felony for his many
Excesses, in the first year of Henry the eighth, this was confiscated to the
Crown, and there it was not many years after by that Prince, granted to Sir
Thomas Bullen Knight of the Garter, and created Earl of Ormond and Wiltshire,
in the year 1529, whose unfortunate Son George Viscount Rochford, being blasted
with the black Aspersion of Treason, which was multiplied and enforced to that
Bulk, that the weight of it sunk him upon a Bloody and untimely Scaffold, and
then this Manor upon the Death of his Father, which was in the thirtyeth year
of Hen. the eighth, was seized on by the Crown, as being settled before on him
and his Heirs male, of whom this unhappy Lord was the last: Some few years
after, it was by Royal Concession from the abovesaid Prince, made the
Patrimony of George Moulton Esquire, of Moulton in Hadloe, a Man of high Repute
in those Times, and much interessed in the Favor of Henry the eighth: whose
Grandchild Robert Moulton Esquire, almost in Times within the pale of our
Remembrance, alienated his Right in it to Sir John Sydley Knight and Baronet,
who has upon the old Foundation erected that magnificent Pile, which for the
Grandeur, Elegance, and Majestic Aspect it carries to the public View,
surrenders a Priority, but to few Structures in this County.

The Moat is the third and last place which summons our Remembrance. It was in
elder Times the Inheritance of Ivo de Haut, who flourished in the Reign of King
John, and Henry the third: his Grandchild was Henry de Haut, who held this
Manor at his Decease, which was in the forty fourth of Edward the third, Rot.
Esc. Number. 34. his Grandchild was Nicholas Haut, who was Sheriff of Kent, in the
ninteenth year of Richard the second. Afterward, I find that Richard Haut
Grandchild to this Man was Sheriff of Kent, the eighteenth year of Edward the
fourth: and again in the twenty second year of the abovesaid Prince, he was
second Brother to Sir William Haut of Hautsbourne, who was Sheriff of Kent in
the sixth year of Edward the fourth, and great Uncle to Sir William Haut. But
this Richard Haut, having with John Fogge, John Guldford Esquire, John Darell
Esquire, James Horn of Westwell, William Clifford, Reginald Pimpe, John Pimpe,
and Edward Poynings of Marsham or Mersham, embarked himself in the Designs of
Henry Earl of Richmond, John Darell Esquire; and John Pimpe Esquire, had the Grant
of thirteen Manors lying in Worcestershire, made to them, which accrued to
the Crown upon the Attaint of Humphrey Stafford Esquire, in the second year of
Henry the seventh, as appears Origin. Anni 2. Hen. 7. Rot. 17. in the
Treasurers side in the Exchequer.
and the emotion of Henry Duke of Buckingham, he was attainted in the third
year of Richard the third, as appears Rot. Par. de Anno 3. R. 3. Memb. 6. And
then the Moat, by the Favor and Indulgence of that Prince, was conferred on
Sir Rob. Brakenbury, Lieutenant of the Tower: but he enjoyed it not long, for
Henry abovesaid, having triumphed in a Successeful Encounter at Bosworth field
over Richard the third, and all his Partisans, this was restored to Richard
Haut abovesaid, in which Family it remained until the latter end of Henry the
seventh, and then by an old Court Roll I find it in the Possession of Sir
Richard Clement Knight, who was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty third year of
Henry the eighth: he dyed without any legitimate Issue, and lies entombed in
the Chancel of Eightham Church; and Jo. Clement was his Brother and Heir, whose
Daughter Ann Clement, was married to Hugh Pakenham, who in her Right possessed
the Moat, and he about the Reign of K. Edw. the sixth, joining with Sir William
Sidney, who had matched with Anne his only Heir, passed it away to Sir John
Ailen, Lord Mayor of London in the year 1526, and then again 1536, who left it
to his Son Sir Christopher Allen, and he about the latter end of Queen
Elizabeth, conveyed it by Sale to John Selby Esquire; whose Son Sir William Selby
dying without Issue, to continue it in the Name, gave it to Mr. George Selby,
of London, whom it acknowledges at this instant for Lord of the Fee.

In the North-side of the Church of Eightham, in an Arch in the Wall beneath
the Quire, lies the Representation of a Knight wrought in Stone, and his Arms
pourtrayed on the Coat Armor on his Breast, (according to the usage of eminent
Soldiers) in the Reign of Edward the third. This was Sir Thomas Cawne,
extracted originally out of the County of Stafford; he had not much Land of
Inheritance in Kent, all I find was at Nulcomb, a place so called in Seal, as
appears by his Deed of Purchase, of John Ashburneham, dated the thirty ninth of
Edward the third: but matching with Lora de Morant, the Daughter and Heir of
Sir Tho. Morant of Morants Court, (after his Death remarried to James de
Peckham) he thereby improved and enhaunsed his Fortune in Kent. He died without
Issue, for ought as yet can be discovered; his Arms as they be inserted in the
Rolls and Registers of Staffordshire, are empaled in the Chancel window with
the Arms of Morant.

Elmested in the Hundred of Wye, was a Limb of that Revenue, which fell under
the Signiory of the noble and ancient Family of Heringod. In Testa de Nevill,
there is mention of Stephen de Heringod, who paid respective Aid in the
twentieth year of Henry the third, for Lands which he held at Hardres and
Elmsted. Stephen de Heringod this man's Grandchild, dyed about the beginning of
Edward the first, and determined in a Daughter and Heir called Grace de
Heringod, who was matched to Philip de Hardres: and so this Manor in her
Right, became incorporated into the revenue of this noble Family, and remained
for many Generations fastened to this Name, until the Age which almost
commenced from our Fathers Memory; and then Dane-Court a Branch of this Manor,
was sold to Cloak, and Elmested it self by the same Fatality, went out to
Marsh, whose Successor very lately has fixed his Interest by Sale in
Lushington.

Evington Court is an ancient Seat in Elmested, which was the Inheritance of
Gentlemen of that Surname, who bare a Fesse between three Steel Burgonets for
their Coat Armor: and in a Book coppied out from old Deeds and digested into a
just Volume, by William Glover Somersett Herald, and now in my Custody, there
is the Copy of an old Deed without date, wherein William Fitz-Neal, called in
Latin Filius Nigelli, does pass over some Land to Ruallo de Valoigns, which is
fortified by the appendant Testimony of one Robert de Evington, who was
Ancestor to the Evingtons of Elmsted, of whom there is mention in the Deeds of
this place, in the Reign of Hen. the third, and Edward the first. After this
Family was gone out, the Gays a Family of no mean Account in this Track, were
incorporated into the Possession, descended originally out of France, where
there is a Family which even at this Day is known by the Name of Le-gay, and is
planted in Normandy, from whence those of Jersey and Gernesey are extracted, a
Branch of which is transplanted into South-Hampton, and there for ought I know
flourishes at present. And to justify the Truth of this their Extraction, in
the Leiger Book of Horton-Priory, there is mention of one John le Gay who was a
Benefactor to their House, and though they are called at this day, only,
without the Addition, Gay; yet this has happened by Disuse and Intermission,
by not adding it in their Customary writing and affixing it to their Name. But
to proceed: Evington Court though it was not originally erected by this Family,
yet certainly it was much enforced by Supplement, and additionall Building; for
diverse places of the House are in Relation to the Name, adorned with
Nose-Gays. In Conclusion, after it had owned many of this Name of no vulgar
Rank for its Proprietaries, it was, about the beginning of Henry the seventh,
by Christopher Gay, alienated to John Honywood Esquire, of the eldest Family of
the Honywoods; from whom in a direct Line, Edward Honywood Esquire, Son and
Heir of Sir John Honywood, lately deceased, is extracted, and is now invested
in the Possession of this place.

Elmested had the Grant of a Market obtained to it, to be observed weekly on
the Thursday, and a Fair yearly on the Vigil, and Day of Saint James, by the
Procurement of Henry de Haut Pat. 28. Edwardi tertii N. 20.

Elmeston in the Hundred of Wingham, was parcel of the Demeasne of the Lord
Leybourn: Juliana de Leybourn Wife of Roger de Leybourn, had an estate here at
her Death, which was in the first year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 86.
and her sole Heir was the Lady Juliana Leybourn, first married to John de
Hastings, and after to William de Clinton, but dyed without Issue by either, in
the forty third year of the Reign of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 57. and
as it appears without any visible Alliance, that could justify their Title to
her Estate: for the Crown feised upon it as legally escheated, Richard the
second granted Elmston to Simon Burleigh, and upon his Attaint it returned to
the Crown.
by Defailance of any who could pretend a Claim unto it. King Richard the
second, about the fourteenth year of his Reign, granted it to the Abbey of
Childrens Langley. Before I proceed any farther in this Discourse, I shall
justify what I before asserted, that is, that the first Husband of Juliana de
Leybourn, was John de Hastings a Kinsman of Lawrence de Hastings, Earl of
Pembroke, but not his Son John de Hastings, as some suppose: and this is
obvious, if we consider that William de Clinton deceased by the Testimony of
all, in the twenty eighth year of Edward the third, Juliana his Widow called in
the Escheat Roll Comitissa de Huntington, dyed in the forty third year of that
Prince, and John de Hastings Earl of Huntington in the year 1375, which
happened in the forty ninth year of Edward the third, which must necessarily,
upon a serious Computation of Time, fall out six years, after this Countesse's
Decease, to whom had she been matched, she would have preserved the Style of
Comitissa de Pembroke, and not that of Huntington.

But to return into that Track, from whence this Digression has made me
wander; after it remained Cloistered up in the Revenue of the Church, for
diverse Ages, until the Title was by the General Dissolution dislodged, and
in the thirty fifth year of Henry the eighth, was by Royal Concession from
that Prince, invested in Sir Walter Henley Sergeant at Law, and a Man under an
eminent Character in those Times; from whom, about the beginning of King Edward
the sixth, it passed away by Sale to Linch, a Family of good Antiquity in Kent,
from whom the Linches of Lemster in Ireland are primitively descended, and have
been for some Descents seated at Linch Knock, a Castle in that Province. After
the Linches, the Gibs's about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, were by
Purchase seated in the Inheritance, and continued in it, until very lately the
Title was unfixed, and, by the Transposition of Sale, planted in Mr. Jaques of
London.

Erith in the Hundred of Little and Lesness, was a Manor which was
circumscribed within the Revenue of Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, that powerful
Baton, whose Story I shall pencill out more exactly at Leeds-Castle: but,
before him, Guncelin de Badelesmer, This Guncelin de Badelesmer, was Justice of
Chester. See Mr. King's Vale Royal.
who lies buried at Badelesmer, with a fair Pourtraicture upon his Tomb, cut
out in Wood, enjoyed it, and held it at his Decease, which was in the twenty
ninth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 50. And this Guncelin, was Son
to Giles de Badelesmer, who, as the Annals of St. Austins informs us, was slain
at a Battle commenced against the Welsh, in the year 1258, whilst he
vigorously asserted the Interest of his Country, against their wild Excursions:
But to advance where I first left off, Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer before
mentioned, had such a particular Affection to this place, that in the ninth
year of Edward the second, he obtained a Charter of Free Warren to this Manor,
and suddenly after, by his Confederacy with Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and the
rest of the Nobility knit together in Combination against that Prince,
forfeited his Estate and Life to the Crown. And then Edward the second, (as
appears by the Patent Rolls of that time) in the fifteenth year of his Reign,
grants it for life to David de Strabolgie Earl of Atholl, Son to the
unfortunate John Earl of Atholl, who was offered up a Sacrifice to the Fury of
Edward the first, because he had done too little for him, and too much for his
bleeding and gasping Country of Scotland; and this Earl held it at his Decease,
which was in the first year of Ed. the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 85. After his
Death, it reverts to the Crown, and then King Edward the third, not only
reverses the Process and Judgment, issued out against Bartholomew Lord
Badelesmer, but likewise by Patent in the second year of his Reign, restores
this Manor and diverse other Lands to Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer his Son. And
he dyed seized of it, in the twelfth year of that Prince's Reign, but left no
Issue-male; so that his four Daughters became his Heirs, whereof Eliz. was one
of them, who was first matched to William Bohun Earl of Northampton, and after
to Roger Mortimer Earl of March, to whose Patrimony this in his Wives Right
upon the Quadripartite Division of this wide Estate, was united; and Edmund de
Mortimer this Man's Son, enjoyed it at his Death, which was in the fifth year of
Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 43. And left it to his Son Roger Earl of
March and Ulster, and he had Issue Roger Mortimer, and Ann who married Richard
Plantagenet de Conisburgh, Earl of Cambridge, second Son of Edmund of Langley
Duke of York: and this Richard Earl of Cambridge having involved himself with
Henry Lord Scroop, and Sir Thomas Gray of Northumberland, in a Treasonable
Design, against the Life of Henry the fifth, in the second year of his Reign,
as he was embarking at South-hampton for France, there to justify his Title to
that Crown by the Power of the Sword, was convicted and executed, and left
Issue Richard Plantagenet: who was, in the year 1426, created Duke of York, and
upon the Decease of his Mothers Brother Roger Mortimer Earl of March, without
Issue, he became not only Heir to his Estate, but likewise to that of his Right
to the Crown, which first had devolved to him, and after his Death to this his
Sister Ann Countess of Cambridge, Mother to this Richard Duke of York: from
Philppa Wife to Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, their Grandfather; which
Philippa was sole Heir of Lionell Duke of Clarence, third Son of Edward the
third, and elder Brother to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, fourth Son of that
Prince, from whom the Lancastrian Family, had wiredrawn, and spun out, a
forced, usurped, and distorted Title to the English Diadem. Upon his Decease at
the Battle waged at Wakefield, where he found an untimely Sepulcher, whilst he
most vigorously disputed his Claim to the Scepter, against the House of
Lancaster; this manor with the Crown, devolved to his Son King Edward the
fourth, and here it dwelt with the Royal Revenue, until King Henry the
eighth, in the thirty sixth year of his Reign, passed it away to Elizabeth
Countess of Shrewsbury, Widow Dowager of George Earl of Shrewsbury; by whom
she had Issue John, who dyed unmarried, and Ann first matched to Peter Compton
Esquire, by whom she had Issue Sir Henry Compton, who was Heir to her Estate
here at Erith, and secondly wedded to William Earl of Pembroke; Sir Henry
Compton had Issue William created Earl of North-hampton, in the sixteenth year
of King James, and Sir Thomas Compton, who dying without Issue, gave his Estate
here, which was settled on him by his Father, upon his Marriage with Mary
Countess of Buckingham, to his Nephew Sir William Compton a younger Son of
Spencer Earl of Northampton, who has very lately alienated his Interest here,
to Mr. Lodowick of London.

Bedenwell in this Parish had formerly the Repute of a Manor, when it was the
Inheritance of a Family called Boreford or more vulgarly Burford: Rose de
Burford held it at her Death, which was in the third year of Edward the third,
Rot. Ese. Number. 52. And afterward I find James de Burford obtained a Charter of
Free Warren to his Lands at Bedenwell in Erith, in the thirty fifth year of
Edward the third. After this Family was expired, which was before the end of
Richard the second, it came to be the Possession of Draper, descended from an
ancient Family of that Name in the County of Notingham, who concluded in a
Female Heir. For William Killom matched with the sole Daughter of John Draper,
by whom he obtained Bedenwell; but with this Proviso that he should change his
Name to Draper, which has been ever since both by Draper of Crayford, and
Draper of Hering-Hill in Erith punctually performed. But since this solemn
Stipulation, Bedenwell in several pieces has been sold to Turner, Gainsford
of Crowherst in Surrey, (who not many years since, alienated his Proportion to
Cholmeley) and others; so that being thus broken into Fragments, it has now
lost the estimate of a Manor, and is to be entombed in Silence.

Hering-Hill is a place not to be forgotten, having been in elder Times the
Residence of a Family called Abell. The first whom I find represented to us,
under a Character of estimate, was Sir John Abell, who was in the List of the
Kentish Knights, which were Assistant to King Edward the first, at his Siege of
Carlaverock in Scotland; John Abell his Successor was a Judge (as is manifest
by the patent Rolls, of the Tower) in the eighth year of Edward the second, and
it is very probable, that it was either this John Abell or his Father, that
obtained a Charter of Free Warren to the Manor of Catford in Lewsham (which
was after sold to William de Montacute) in the twenty third year of Edward the
first. In the Reign of Henry the fourth: I find, by the Registers of the Crown
Office, one Edward Abell to have been in Commission for the Peace, and he lies
entered in Erith Church, not in the Coemitery or Churchyard: though I
confess, upon a large square Plate of Wood, there is a Register of those
accurately enrolled, who were Possessors of Hering-Hill, from John Abell the
Judge, down to another John Abell who dyed possessed of it about the latter end
of Queen Elizabeth; but the date is so violated by Time and the Impression of
the injurious Elements, that it is hardly visible, much less intelligible; the
last of this Family at this place, was John Abell, who about the year 1611,
joining with his Father Samuel Abell, alienated his Concernment here to Mr.
William Draper, whose Successor Mr..... Draper, now of the County of Oxford, is
the instant Proprietary of it.

Lesnes Abbey was founded by Richard de Lucy, Lord Chief Justice of England
under H. the second, in the year 1179 and dedicated to St. Thomas the Martyr,
the Saint of Canterbury, who as he had been above the Kings Will on earth, was
now above his Faith in Heaven, being after his, but early Canonization, grown
into such Veneration and Estimate, that Orisons and Prayers, Shrines, and
Altars, Abbyes and Temples, were offered up to his Name, of which this was none
of the least, being a House of black Canons, or Canons of St. Augustins. This
Richard de Lucy the Founder, was Son of Richard, who was Son of Roger de
Chilham, and he was Son of Fulbert de Dover, who entered into England with
William the Conqueror, and changed his Name of Lucy to Dover, (of which,
first, there is not only a Signiory or Lordship, but likewise a Family at this
instant remaining in France) because he was one of those eight, to whom certain
Knights-Fees were assigned by William the Conqueror, to be Assistant to John
de Fiennes, in the Guard of Dover Castle; thus much for his Extraction. Now for
his Dignity, he was not only Lord Chief Justice, but likewise Protector of
England, in the twelfth year of Henry the second, in his Absence in France,
which great Office he managed with so much Fidelity, Prudence, and Magnanimity,
that when the Earl of Boloign invaded this Island, in the thirteenth year of
the abovesaid Prince, he was forced to retire with Shame Confusion, and Loss:
which Action must certainly have improved his Name to a very high Estimate, in
the Opinion of those Times. Yet notwithstanding he divested himself of that
Pomp and Pageantry, these great Offices had made him glitter with (which
Conquest, that he made upon himself within, was of more Importance, then any he
could have achieved without) and clouded himself in a Monks Cowle, and became
the Prior to that Covent, he himself had erected, and there likewise found his
place of Sepulture: And it is probable, that those Coffins, with Pourtraictures
insculped, which were discovered in a Grotto or Vault, upon the breaking down
the Foundation of this House, in the Government of King James, were the
Exchequers which treasured up, not only the Relics of this Sir Richard de
Lucy, but likewise the remains of others of the same Family: But to proceed,
the Prior of this place was in that Repute, that it was customary for him (as
the Records of the Church of Rochester tell us) to have his Induction into this
place, either by the Bishop immediately, or else by some Proxy, who
represented the Bishop of Rochester's Person. And in this State it continued,
until Cardinal Wolsey laid the Foundation of his eminent College of
Christchurch in Oxford, and thenwith the consent of the present Abbot, in the
year 1525, it was suppressed, and the Revenue of this Cloister, being found in
the Hands of the abovesaid Cardinal at his Death, was by Henry the eighth,
united to the Income of the Crown, where it dwelt, until it was granted to
William Brereton Esquire, who being engaged in the fatal Business of Katharine
Howard, was attainted, and executed, upon whose Tragedy, it returned to the
Crown; and was in the thirty eighth of Henry the eighth, granted to Sir Ralph
Sadler; and he not long after passed it away to Mr. Henry Cook; in whose
Successors, the Possession was resident, until almost our Remembrance, and
then it was conveyed to Sir Thomas Gainsford of Crowherst in Surrey; who not
many years since, demised his Right in it to Mr. Haws of London; who dying
lately without Issue, has settled it for ever, on the Hospital of St.
Bartholomews in Smithfield.

In the ninth year of Edward the second, Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, obtained
the Grant of a Market to Erith, on the Thursday, and a three Days Fair at St.
Cross, and another three Days Fair, the Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday in
Whitson Week.

Lesnes, had by the Mediation of William de Wilton, a Grant of a Market,
procured to be observed there on the Thursday, and a Fair to continue yearly
the Eve, Simon and Judes Day, and three Days after, as is manifest, Pat. 41.
Henrici tertii Memb. 48.

Estling in the Hundred of Feversham, gave Surname to a Family, who had here an
eminent Mansion called Northcourt, the last of which Family, was Ralph de
Estling, whose Daughter and Heir Alice de Estling, about the Beginning of Ed.
the first, was matched to Fulke de Peyforer, Custos of the Fleet, and
Westminster in London, who in her Right became Lord of this place, and in the
thirty second year of Edward the first, to enforce his Interest here, obtained
a Charter of Freewarren to this place; and in this Family did it reside, until
the latter end of Edward the second, and then was Northcourt, Denton, and
Plomford, Manors, which came along to Peyforer with Northcourt, were sold away
to Roger Lord Leybourn; and his Widow Juliana de Leybourn held them at her
Decease, which was in the first year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 86.
And after her Decease, they devolved to John de Hastings, a Kinsman of Lawrence
de Hastings Earl of Pembroke, who was the first Husband of her Daughter and
Heir Juliana de Leybourn; after his Decease remarried to William de Clinton
Earl of Huntington, who in her Right was likewise possessed of them, but likewise
Deceased without any Issue by her, in the twenty eighth of Edward the third,
after whose Death, it is more then probable, she continued a Widow. For in the
Inquisition taken in the forty third year of Ed. the third, she is styled
Comitissa de Huntington, and was found upon a serious winnowing, both of her
Direct and collateral Alliances, to have no Heirs that could directly pretend
to the Title, so that her Estate here lapsed to the Crown, and King Edward the
third, in the fiftieth year of his Rule, granted the Manors of Northcourt,
Denton, and Plomford, to the Abbey of St. Mary Grace on Tower Hill, where they
rested until the Dissolution: and then King Henry the eighth, granted them to
Sir Thomas Cheyney one of his Privy Council, whose lavish and unthrifty Son
Henry Lord Cheyney, after his Estate mouldered away by Retail in the eighth
year of Queen Elizabeth, passed them away to Martin James Esquire, whose great
Grandchild, Mr. Walter James, is at this instant the indisputable Proprietary
of them.

Huntingfield in Estling, gave Surname to that illustrious Family of
Huntingfield, and stands a Monument to this Day, to enforce and perpetuate its
Memory to Posterity, though the Name be long since extinguished, and gone out in
two Daughters and Coheirs, being entombed in Coupledick and Norwich. The
capital Seat of this Family, was at West-Wickham, on the Skirts of Surrey,
where I shall make a more ample mention of them: but they had other parcels of
Land, which lay scattered in the several Parishes of Northsleet, Mepham,
Ludsdown, Cobham and other places, and it is probable this Family was possessed
of an Estate likewise in Somersetshire. For in Mr. Bishe, late printed Notes
upon Upton, one Walter de Huntingfield, is represented as Test to that
memorable Compact, which bears Date the twenty eighth of April, in the forty
second year of Henry the third, and was made between Henry de Ferneburgh, and
the Abbot and Covent of Glastenbury, to defend the Lands of the abovesaid
Abbot, against all the Claim or Pretense, of the Bishop of Bath and Wells, with
the Dean and Canons of the same place, or any of their Champions; and
certainly, this Walter de Huntingfield, is he, who is mentioned, to have paid
respective Aid, in the Book called Testa de Nevist, for much Land which he held
in Kent, at the Marriage of Isab. the Kings Sister, in the twentieth year of
Henry the third. The last of this Family who was possessor of this Manor was
Sir John Huntingfield, who was summoned to sit as a Baron in Parliament, in the
thirty sixth year of Edw. the third; and he passed it away to Sir Sim. de
Burley, in whom it was resident, until the tenth year of Richard the second;
and then he being by Parliament convicted of high Treason, for seeking in a
Time, when too much Loyalty was ruinous, to support the shaking Prerogative of
his Prince, against the Assaults and Impressions made upon it, by some of the
ambitious Nobility; This Manor with Northcourt, likewise in this Parish, which
was granted to him upon the Decease of Juliana Countess of Huntington,
escheated to the Crown, and there made its abode, until the twenty first of
Richard the second, and then that Prince, settled it by a new Grant, as appears
Pat. 1. An. 21. Ric. 2. Memb. 35. Pars tertia. On the Dean and Canons of St.
Stephens in Westminster, and continued chained to their Revenue, until the
Link was by the general Dissolution of Religious Gonventions, in the Reign of
Henry the eighth, untied and broken, and then being cast into the Demeasne of
the Crown, it was in the thirty fifth year of Henry the eighth, granted to
Alured Randolph, and John Guldford Esquires, and they not long after, conveyed
their Interest in it by Sale to Sir Thomas Moil, from whom the same Fatality in
the seventh year of Edward the sixth, carried it away, and transplanted it into
John Wild Esquire: and he not long after, transmitted his Concernment in it to
Gates, and from this Name, the Propriety about the Beginning of Queen
Elizabeth, was by the Vicissitude of Sale, conveyed to Martin James Esquire,
Examiner of the Chancery, from whom the Title by descendant Right is flowed
down to his great Granchild, Mr. Walt. James, who is now in the Possession of
it.

Estling had the Grant of a Market, obtained to be held there Weekly, and a two
Days Fair at St. Cross, by the Mediation of Fulke de Peyferer, in the thirty
second of Edward the first.

Diven Arnold is a third place of mark, in Estling. It is called so, because it
was in Ages of a very venerable Inscription; the Inheritance of a Family called
Dive, and it had the Addition of Arnold, because one Arnoldus de Dive possessed
it, and is often mentioned in Deeds without date, and was Test to a Deed,
whereby John de Valoigns, does convey Lands to Robert de Dive, Prior of the
Hospiral of St. John's of Jerusalem; which is justified by a fine levied between
the said John and this Robert, in the ninth year of Henry the third. And in
this Family did it continue, until the Beginning of Richard the second, and
then it was alienated to Sharp, of Nin-place in great Chart, in which Name the
Signorry and Title was for sundry Generations constant, until about the latter
end of Henry the seventh, it was conveyed away to Thurstan of Challock, a Name
of great Antiquity in that Parish, from whom not many years after it went over
by Sale to Jo. Wild Esquire, and he, in the entrance of the Government of Queen
Elizabeth, by the same Revolution, disposed of his Right in it to Gates, who
alienated it after to Croyden, who in our Fathers Remembrance, transmitted it
by Sale to Bunce, and continues still in the Revenue of that Family.

Eastry gives the Name to the whole Hundred wherein it is seated, and was given
to the Church in the year of Grace nine Hundred seventy and nine, by King
Egelred, that is, Etheldred, Father to Edmund Ironside, Et est de Cibo
Monachorum, say the Records of Christ-Church, that is, it was granted to the
Monks for the Support of their Kitchen, and was in the first Intention of the
Gift, I believe, invested in the Ecclesiastical Revenue, purposely to expiate
that Murder, which was at this place acted upon the Persons of Ethelbert and
Etheldred Brethren of Egbert King of Kent, by one Thunner: as if that dark
Tincture of Guilt, which the effussion of this Royal and Innocent Blood, had
stained the earth with, could not have been assoiled without so munificent a
Donation. In the time of Edward the Confessor, this Manor was held by the
Monks of Christ-Church, under the Notion of Seven Plough-lands, nor was it
represented under a less Bulk in the Reign of William the Conqueror, and was
rated in the Whole, in Doomsday Book, at Thirty eight Pound, Ten Shillings,
and Threepence.

There was an ancient Tradition that that Altar-Tomb, which was placed at the
East End of the little Chapel, which belonged to Eastry Court, was the
Sepulcher wherein the Relics of the two Princes (mentioned before, to have
been murdered,) were enshrined: nay it went farther and did affirm that there
was a Light hovered constantly about that Tomb, as if the Clearness of the
Innocence of those who slumbered under that Repository, could not have been
manifested better, then by the Beams of such a perpetuate Itradation.

Shrickling is a Manor in this Parish which had always the same Possessors
with Knowlton. Thomas Perrot held it the fourth of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 31. By whose Daughter and Heir, it devolved to Langley, and from Langley
by the Heir General to Peyton: only I find Sir Edward Ringley Knight Marshall
of Callis, and Bailiff of Sandwich, both by Water and Land, lived at Estry, in
the Reign of Henry the eighth, and enjoyed this Manor, in Right of his Wife
Elizabeth Widow of Edward Langley Esquire.

Heronden in this Parish, was the Seat of a Family known by that Surname, who
bare for his Coat Armor a Heron with one Tallon erected, and gaping for
Breath. One of this Family lay buried near the Chancel, in the Time of Robert
Glover Somerset-Herald, with his Pourtraicture and Coat of Arms in Brass
affixed to the Tombstone: both which by the rude Hand of some sacrilegious
Person, are now torn away; yet is the Coat-still extant in very old Rolls and
Registers, in the Heralds Office, where the Family is called Heronden of
Heronden. Nor is the Name less ancient, as appears by Deeds which commence
from the Time of Henry the third, which related then to this House and Name. In
the Reign of Richard the second, this Family determined in a Female Heir, who
was matched to Boteler of Botelers Fleet in Ash, and she annexed this Place to
the Patrimony of this Family, in which Name the Title of this Place, has been
ever since successively laid up.

Ewell in the Hundred of Bewsborough, was a principal Mansion of the Knights
Templers, to which much Land was united, both in this Track, and in Romney
Mersh, where they held the Manors of Hony-Child and East-Bridge, as appears by
the Book called Liber de Terris Templariorum, collected in the year 1130, and
kept in the Exchequer. They were founded in the year 1118, in manner following.
Cetrain Knights obliged themselves by Vow, in the Hands of the Hands of the
Patriarch of Jerusalem, to serve Christ after the manor of Regular Cannons, in
Chastiry and Obedience, renouncing their own Wills for ever: they likewise
professed to defend the Cross and Sepulcher of our Savior from the Eruptions
of Infidels, and to secure the highways for the Indemnity of Pilgrims, from
the Ambushes of Free-booters, that they might more freely visit the place of
our Saviors Agony and Crucifixion. They were called Templers, either from
their Vow to defend the Temple, or else, from those Lodgings which were
assigned them, near that place, by Baldwin the fourth King of Jerusalem. This
order in the second year of Edward the second, was totally suppressed throughout
Christendom. The Crimes alleged against them, were Pride, Covetousness, for
did and unaturall Uncleanness, and lastly private Collusions and Treaties with
Infidels, which tended to the Subversion of the Christian Cause in Palestine,
all which they solemnly renownced at their Death, which best interprets their
Innocence to future Times: for certainly it was impossible, that an Order which
had tied themselves up, upon their Institution, within the Limitations of so
strict a Vow, could universally at one Time, and in all places of the World
where they were established, degenerate into those black, horrid and prodigious
Crimes, wherewith their Enemies bespattered them. But indeed those who have
fathomed the Cause of this their total Abolition, find, that they were warping
with some Compliance too eagerly to a Combination with the Emperor, who was
then in Contest with the Pope, about vindicating his temporal power in Italy,
and elsewhere, from the unjust enchroachments made upon it by that See. Which
his Holiness descrying, wrapped them up in those pretended Crimes, as the Roman
Persecutors did the ancient Christians, in the skins of Beasts, that they might
more easily be devoured. Upon this their Dissolution, their House here at
Temple Ewell, was given to the Knights of St. John Baptist of Jerusalem, an
Order rather restored then instituted by one Girardus, whose Vow was almost
coincident in all the Ingredients of it, with that of the Knights Templers. And
in their Demeasne did this place lie wound up, until the final Dissolution,
in the Reign of Henry the eighth; and then being linked to the Revenue of the
Crown it was fixed there until the sixth year of Edward the sixth, and then it
was granted to William Cavendish Esquire, and he the same year conveyed it to
Christopher Sackvill, and Winefrid his Wife, who about the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth, alienated it to John D^niell, who about the latter end of that
Princess, dying without Issue-male, his Estate here devolved to his two
Daughters and Coheirs, matched to Mab and Wiseman, who both concurred, and by
joint Consent alienated the Propriety of this place, about the beginning of
King James, to Mr..... Angel of London, whose Son Mr...... Angel of Crowherst
in Surrey, is now entitled to the Fee-simple of it.

Borestall Banks in this Parish, was, as high as any Evidences do lead us to
discover, part of the ancient Patrimony of the illustrious Family of Diggs of
Diggs-Court in Barham, John de Dig of this Family, was Alderman of Canterbury
in the year 1258, and was a great Benefactor to the Franciscans, who were newly
seated at Canterbury: and purchased for their Support, an Island called
Binnewith, in that City, and from this John de Dig, did descend Roger de
Dig, who paid respective Aid at the making the Black Prince Knight, for his
Lands at Berham, and other places in the twentieth year of Edward the third,
and dyed seized of this Manor, in the third year of Richard the second, Rot
Esc. Number. 19. John Diggs his Successor, was Sheriff of Kent, in the second year
of Henry the fourth, and John Diggs, was Sheriff of this County, the fourth, of
Edward the fourth, and this Man's Son, who also bore his Name, was Sheriff of
Kent in the eleventh year of Henry the seventh. Briefly, after it had for many
Descents, owned the Interest of this Family, it was in the tenth year of Queen
Elizabeth, conveyed away by Sale to Stokes, in which Family, the Possession was
permanent, until of very late Time, and then it was alienated to Captain
Temple of Dover.

F. F. F. F.
EAst-Farleigh lies in the Hundred of Maidston, and was given to the Prior and
Monks of Christ-church in Canterbury, by Ediva the Queen, Mother of the two
Kings Eadred and Edmund in the year 941, and was as Mr. Lambert out of some old
Records conjectures to find the Covent with Eele-Pies. If you will see how it
was rated in the Conquerours Time, Doomsday Book will tell you that Farnelege
est Manerium Monachorum, and est de Cibo eorum, and in tempore Edwardi Regis se
defendebat pro VI. Sullingis, and est appretiatum XXII lb. This Manor upon the
Resignation of the Revenue, of the abovementioned Cloister, coming to the
Crown, King Henry the eighth, in the thirty fourth year of his Reign granted
this and West-Farleigh, which was given to the Priory of Christ-Church, by
Queen Eleanor, in exchange, for the Port of Sandwich, which Donation of hers,
Edward the first, (as the Book of Christ-Church informs me) fully ratified and
confirmed, and likewise devolved from the Crown, upon the former Surrender, to
Sir Thomas Wiatt, who was then one of his Privy Council, and remained entwined
with his Demeasne, until his unfortunate Attaint and Tragedy, in the second
year of Queen Mary, brought them back, as escheated and forfeited to the Crown,
The Manor of East-Farleigh of vast Extent, was lately sold by the State to
Colonel Robert Gibbons
and then that Princess the same time, granted the Manor of West-Farleigh,
and the Site and Demeasne of East-Farleigh to her Attorney General Sir John
Baker, who dying in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, gave East-Farleigh, to
his second Son Mr. John Baker, and West-Farleigh to his Son and Heir Sir
Richard. Jo. Baker had Issue Sir Richard Baker, who about the latter end of
Queen Elizabeth, passed away East-Farleigh to Sir....... Vane of Burstow in
Hunton, in whose Descendants, the Propriety of it continues, at this instant:
but West-Farleigh, devolved by Descent from the abovesaid Sir Richard, to his
great Grandchild Sir Jo. Baker Baronet, who has very lately conveyed it by
Sale to Mr. Thomas Floyd of Gore Court in Otham Esquire.

Smiths Hill in East-Farleigh, has been ever since the Reign of Henry the
sixth, the Residence of the Brewers: though that Seat where they were anciently
planted before was Brewers in Merworth, which was a Mansion entitled to the
Possssession of this Family some hundreds of years, and from whence William de
Brewer did originally issue out, who was Lieutenant of Dover Castle, under King
John, to whom that King directs a special Praecipe or Command to deliver that
important Fortress to Hubert de Burgh Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, as
appears Pat. 17. Reg. Joannis Memb. 2. Number. 102. This I rather mention, to
manifest that this Family anciently, as now, has been under no contemptible
Character in this County.

Totesham Hall lies within the Limits of West-Farleigh, and was the Mansion of
a Family of eminent Rank in this Track, Jo. de Totesham was one of the
Recognitores magnae Assisae, as appears by the Pipe Rolls, in the Reign of King
John, and he was Grandfather to John de Totesham, who held this Seat at his
Decease, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 17. Taken in the fifth year of Edward the
third. And from him did it, in an uneven Channel of Successive Interest, come
down to Anthony Totesham Esquire; the last of this Name, at this place, who
about the latter end of Henry the eighth alienated this and Henherst in Yalding
to Chapman, in which Family the Posession dwelt, until the latter end of Queen
Elizabeth, and then it was by the same Conveyance passed to Lawrence from which
Name not many years since, it went away by Purchase to Augustine Skinner
Esquire, descended from an ancient Family of the Skinners in Lincolne-Shire,
and now by this new Acquisition transplanted into Kent.

Farningham in the Hundred of Clackstan, vulgarly called Acstane, with the
Moiety of Chartons, was in the Time of the Conqueror, held of the Archbishop
of Canterbury, by Ansgodus Rubitoniensis, that is, Ansgod de Rosse, and was
rated in Doomsday Book at one Sulling or Ploughland, as it was before in the
Reign of Edward the Confessor. But this Name of Rosse determining here about
the end of Henry the third, it came afterward to be the Pattimony of
Fremingham, and Ralph de Fremingham, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to this
Manor, in the fifty fifth year of Henry the third, after whom it descended
fortified and fenced in, with this new acquired Privilege, to John de
Fremingham, who was first Assistant to John de Malmains of Faukham, not far
distant, in his Office of Sheriff, which was in the tenth of Edward the second,
and was afterward Sheriff of this County himself, in the twelfth year, and
then again in the eighteenth and nineteenth years of the abovementioned
Prince; and dyed possessed of Farningham, in the twenty third year of Edward the
third, Rot. Esc. Number. 145. Pars secunda. Ralph de Fremingham this Man's Son, was
Sheriff of Kent, the thirty second of Edward the third, and in the twentieth
year of that Prince, paid an auxiliary Contribution, at the making the Black
Prince Knight, for Lands conveyed over to him by his Father, and whose Tenure
was in Knights Service, and lay in this Parish, and held them at his Decease,
which was in the thirty eighth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 19.
This Man's Son and Heir was John Fremingham, who was one of the Conservators of
the Peace of this County, in the first year of Richard the second, and Sheriff
of Kent in the second year of that Prince, and afterward had the Custody of
this County again, in the twelfth year of Henry the fourth, but dyed without
Issue; so that Ann his Sister, matched to Roger Isley, of Sundrich, became his
Heir: and so Farningham, was with her, brought to acknowledge the Interest of
this Family, from whom it devolved to John Isley, whose Widow Alice Isley, dyed
possessed of Farningham, in Right of Jointure, in the first year of Henry the
eighth, and from her it devolved to her Son Thomas Isley, and he dyed seized of
it in the eleventh year of Henry the eighth, and it was found at his Decease,
that it was held in Knights Service of Dover Castle, by the payment of a
Rent-service, of twenty one Shillings per An. and had the Estimate of a whole
Knights Fee. After him his Son Sir Henry Isley, succeeded in the Possession of
this place, and being infortunately convicted of high Treason in the second
year of Queen Mary, Farningham and Chartons escheated to the Crown: and that
Princess, in the same year, granted it back to his Son William Isley Esquire,
and he in the third and fourth of Philip and Mary, by a Deed enrolled in
Chancery, passes away Farningham and the Moiety of Chartons, to William Roper
Esquire, Grandfather to Sir Anthony Roper, and Mr. Henry Roper, from whom upon
(...) a Will made by his Brother Sir Anthony Roper, wherein he demises the
Fee-simple to Sir John Cotton of Cambridge-Shire, it is by Verdict taken away,
and enstated on the above mentioned Person.

The other Moiety of Chartons, gave Surname to a Family, who held it as appears
by Testa de Nevill, in the twentieth year of Henry the third. In Times of a
lower Descent, it was the Possession of a good old Family, called Groveherst.
William de Groveherst paid respective Aid for it, at making the Black Prince
Knight; and from him it devolved to his Successor Richard Groveherst, who in
the Reign of Henry the fourth, determined in three Daughters and Coheirs,
espoused to Richard Tickhill, Richard Hextall, and John Petit, who about the
Beginning of Henry the sixth, passed one Moiety of it to John Martin, whose
Successor and Descendant Edward Martin abovementioned, passed it away with
Franks, mentioned in Horton, Kirkby, in whose Revenue it lies now couched,
about the beginning of Q. Elizabeth to Alderman Bathurst, from whom, with
Franks, it is now devolved by Descent, to be the Inheritance of Sir Edward
Bathurst,.

Ralph de Fremingham, obtained a Weekly Market to his Manor of Farningham, on
the Tuesday, and a Fair yearly to continue for four Days, the Vigil, the day of
St. Peter and Paul, and two days after, by Grant from Henry the third in the
fifty fifth year of his Reign, Pat. An. 55. Hen. 3. Memb. 12. Which Grant was
renewed and confirmed to John de Fremingham, in the seventh and eighth years of
Richard the second.

Chimbham is another Manor in this Parish, which did give Name to a Family of
that Appellation, for I find in the Book of Aid, that when John de Fremingham,
pays Aid for his Manors of Farningham and Chimbham, there is a Recital of
Lawrence de Chimbham, which formerly held it in the Reign of Henry the third.
But it is evident both by that Record, and by the Inquisition taken after his
Death which was in the twenty third year of Edward the third: that John de
Fremingham held it, and transmitted it to his Son Ralph de Fremingham, whose
Son and Heir John Fremingham, dying without Issue, Ann his Sister entered upon
the Possession of this, as his next Heir, and brought it with her to her
Husband Roger Isley of Sundridge. And so this Family became concerned in it,
and kept their Interest here until the Reign of Henry the seventh, and then it
was passed away to Sibill of Littlemoat in Ainsford: in which Name the
Propriety had not been long wrapped up, when this Family, found its Sepulcher in
a Female Heir. For Ed. Sibell, the last of this Name, resolved into a Daughter
and Heir, matched to Hide: and he not many years since, conveyed it by Sale, to
Alderman Bunce of London.

Fairfield in the Hundred of Langport, was given to the Church of Christ-Church
in Canterbury, by St. Edm. Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor of the
University of Oxford, about the year 1238, and more to fortify the Donation,
affixed his Seal, ( Sigillo suo confirmavit, say the Records of Christ-Church)
to the original Grant. This upon the Suppression, was upon the Institution of
the Dean and Chapter of Canterbury, by Henry the eighth, confirmed by Grant to
them.

Faukham in the Hundred of Acstane, was the Seat, and gave the Surname to an
ancient Family called Faukham. The first whom I find upon Record is Walleran de
Faukham, who flourished here in the Reign of Henry the second, as appears by
the Book called Nova Feoffamenta, taken in that Princes Reign, and kept in the
Exchequer. Afterward in Times of a more modern date it acknowledged the
Signory of the Lord Grandison, Baron of Ferneborough, and Otho de Grandison, is
said, in the Book of Aid, with Gilbert de Kirkbie, to have held one Knights Fee
in Faukham of the Bishop of Rochester, which Rose de Faukham and William de St.
Clear of Ford in Wrotham formerly held, and this Otho Lord Grandison held it at
his Death, which was in the thirty third year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 41. And left it to his Son Thomas Grandison, who dyed without Issue in the
forty ninth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 36. So that his Estate
here and in other places, was divided between his Sisters and Coheirs; whereof
this, came to be possessed by Sir John Northwood, in Right of Agnes one of his
Sisters, from whom by a constant Line of Succession, it was guided down to his
Son Sir Roger Northwood, who was extinguished in a Female Heir called Albina
Northwood, matched to John Diggs of Diggs Court in Berham Esquire: who was
Sheriff of Kent in the second year of Henry the fourth, and so in her Right,
this Manor devolved to this Family, and lay couched in their Estate until the
latter end of Henry the eighth; and then it was passed away to Barham of
Berham-Court in Teston. In which Name the Propriety had not been long resident,
when Thomas Barham Esquire, concluded in a Daughter and Heir called Ann, who
was espoused to Sir Oliver Boteler, who cast this into his Revenue, from whom
it is now come down to Sir Oliver Boteler Baronet, only Son of Sir William
Boteler, slain at Cropready Bridge, in asserting the Royal Quarrel.

Frendsbury in the Hundred of Shamell, has several places in it worthy of our
Cognizance. The first is Eslingham, which was given to the Church of St.
Andrews in Rochester, by Kenulfus King of Mercia, as the Book called Textus
Roffensis informs me: But by the Registers of that Church, I find that John de
St. Clear, held it in Lease of the Covent, about the ninth year of Edward the
third; and after him a Family called Neal, who had large Possessions about
Higham, were Lessees to the Cloister. In the sixth year of Henry the sixth, I
find John Rykeld held it, and kept his Shrievalty at this place: after him a
Family called Frogenhall, was by Right of Lease in the Reign of Henry the
seventh, possessed of it, but upon the Suppression of this Monastery of St.
Andrews, in the twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth, this Manor was found to
be Lease to Audley and Fisher; and then the Fee-simple in Reversion was granted
to Thomas Lord Cromwell Earl of Essex: who, being by the Malice of his Enemies,
who had raised all their Black Engines of Mischief upon him, aspersed with the
Calumnious Reproach of high Treason, was attainted in the thirty second year of
Henry the eighth, and made a Peace Offering to the Fury of his irreconcilable
Adversaries; then this, by Escheat, returns back to the Crown; after which that
Prince, by his Royal Concession, makes it the Inheritance, of Sir Will. Drury
of Norfolk, in which Family it remained, until Times of our Knowledge and
Remembrance, and then the Interest was by Sale, translated into Henry Clerk
Esquire, Sergeant at Law, and late Recorder of Rochester, from whom it is now
come down to his Son and Heir Francis Clerk Esquire, collaterally descended
from that eminent Soldier Sir John Clerk of Willoughby in Warwickshire, who
took Lewis de Orleans Duke of Longueville Prisoner, in that memorable Encounter
commenced between Bomy and Spours, Villages not far distant from Terowan or
Terwin, in the fifth year of Henry the eighth, which was Signally testified by
that Prince, when by his Favor and Command, there was annexed this
Augmentation to his paternall Coat viz, upon a Canton Azure a Demi Ram Saliant
Argent, armed Or, between two Flower de Lis of the last, over all a Batton or
Truncheon (which intimates to us, that that Captive-Duke, was one of the
Marshalls of France) Dexterways in Bend, of the Second.

Chaddington is a second place of Account, and represents to our Remembrance,
the Lords Cobham, who were in elder Times, Lords of the Fee. John de Cobham
dyed seized of it, in the twenty eighth year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc.
Number. 42. And from this John, did it successively flow down to Henry Lord
Cobham, who was attainted in the first year of King James, upon whose
Conviction, this Manor escheated to the Crown; and that Prince some few years
after, granted it to his Kinsman Lodowick Duke of Lenox; but he dying without
Issue, it descended to his Nephew James Duke of Lenox lately deceased, whose
Duchess Dowager during the Minority of the Duke, her Son, holds the present
enjoyment of it.

Goddington is a third place, which calls for our Consideration: It was parcel
of the Patrimony of the ancient Family of Charles. Robert Charles, who was
possessed of Land about Hilden in Tunbridge, and was Bailiff of the Forest or
Chase there to Robert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, was seized of it at his
Death, which was in the twenty ninth year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number.
74. From whom it devolved to Nicholas Charles, who dying without Issue in the
eleventh year of Richard the second, Alice one of his Sisters and Coheirs
brought this to be the Inheritance of William Snaith, Sheriff of Kent in the
ninth year of K. Henry the fourth, descended from William de Snaith, who was
made Chancellor of the Kings Exchequer, during Pleasure, in the fifty fifth
year of Edward the third: but this Family likewise going out in a Daughter and
Heir, she by matching with Watton, whose Ancestor held Lands at Rydley nere
Ash, in the twentieth year of Edward the third, annexed it to the Incom of that
Family, in which Name the Title has ever since, by an even and permanent
Succession resided.

Wainscot is the last place of any Eminence. It was a Branch which was
engrafted upon that Demeasne which fell under the Signiory of the Colepepers of
Alresford. Walter Colepeper of Preston in that Parish, held it at his Death,
which was in the first year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 80. And into
the Patrimony of this Family did the Right of it, by a Succession of many
Descents, even seem to have bin riveted, having continued constant to this
Name, from the above mentioned Walter Colepeper, until the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth; and then it was alienated to Randolph,, from which Family in Times
which were within the Circle of our Fathers Remembrance it passed away by Sale
to Summers, descended from William Somer, Chancellor of the Exchequer in the
Reign of Henry the sixth who held much Land in the Hundred of Hoo, whose Son
not many years since passed it away, to Mr. Robinson of Rochester.

Frensted in the Hundred of Eyhorne, was honored anciently, by being parcel of
the Patrimony of the noble Family of Crombwell, written so in elder Times,
though since a softer pronunciation has been quilted into the Name, so that in
Times of a more modern Aspect, it has been written Cromwell, who had here a
Seat called now Meriam Court, but in elder Orthography written Mereham Court.
The first of this Family whom I find possessed of it, was John de Crombwell, who
in the eighth year of Edward the second, as Sir Henry Spelman, in his Glossary,
in the Word Banneretus, cites the Record out of the Office of the Pell, was
written Banneret. Now what these Bannerets were, I shall briefly unfold: they
were formerly called Vexilliferi, because their Investiture anciently, was, by
delivering to them a Guidon, which was nothing but a Pennon cut off at the end,
which before flowed out into an acute Angle, and now was fashioned and composed
into a Square. And as anciently, thirteen Knights Fees, did in the vulgar
Estimate, make up a Tenure per Baroniam; so did ten Knights Fees compose a
Banneret, out of which he was (whenever the Affairs of the Prince did
require) to bring into the Field twelve or sixteen Chevaliers or Horsemen, and
those Persons of no cheap or inconsiderable Account, but such as could (as Sir
Henry Spelman notes, ex Praediis and Peculio proprio) out of their own
Patrimony, Equipp, Horse and furniture of Arms, proportionate to the Service
they were to be embarked in.

But to proceed: Ralph de Crombwell, Son of the abovesaid John, in the ninth
year of Edward the second, obtained a Charter of Free Warren, to his Lands here
at Frensted and Meriam Court, but his Family, after the Grant of this
Franchise, did not long possess their Inheritance here; for Richard de
Crombwell, this man's Son, about the Beginning of Edward the third, passed it
away to Hugh Girund, in whom the Title was as sickle and volatile: for he
determining in Mawd his Sole Daughter and Heir, she by matching with Henry de
Chalfhunt, made it his Patrimony, and he in his Wifes Right, was seized of it
at his Death, which was in the forty ninth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 14. And in this Family, did the Propriety of Meriam Court, and other Lands
at Frensted, continue invested until the Entrance of Henry the sixth; and then
it was passed away to Had, now called Hadds, and William Had held Meriam
Court, and the Land annexed to it here at Frensted at his Decease, which was in
the thirty fourth year of Henry the sixth, and in this Family was the
Possession constantly resident, until that Age which fell within the Circle of
our Grandfathers Knowledge; and then it was conveyed to Archer, from which
Family some few years since, it went off by Sale to Thatcher.

Yokes Court is another ancient Seat in Frensted, which, as high as any Beam,
either of Public Record, or private Muniments, can conduct me to a Discovery;
I find, acknowledged the noble Family of Northwood, and owned the Interest of
that Family, until the thirty fifth of Edward the third, and then Roger de
Northwood dying without Issue-male, bequeathed it to his only Daughter and
Heir, Albina Northwood; who by matching with John Dig of Diggs Court in
Berham, united this Seat to the Interest of that Name and Family, and they to
keep Life in her Memory, (a small Preferment beyond the Fate of humane
Frailty,) that had improved their Paternal Inheritance with so great a
Supplement of Additional Estate, erected a fair Monument over her Ashes in
Berham Church, and adorned it with a French Epitaph, which instructs the
Reader, whose Dust sleeps beneath the Marble Repository. Indeed in this Act,
this Family seemed to be Corrivalls with the Egyptians, who expended more upon
the Structure of their Tombs then Houses, because they knew they were to dwell
longer in them. But I have digressed. I now proceed: Thus have you seen how
this Seat fell under Signiory of Diggs, and the succeeding Records of this
Family will inform you, that the Title made its abode in this Name, until
almost that Age we call our Fathers; and then it was transmitted by Sale to
Archer, from whom not many years since, a Fatality like the former, has now
brought it to be the Possession of Thatcher.

Feversham affords a Name to the whole Hundred wherein it is placed. In the
year 812, in the Charter of Kenulf King of Mercia, it is called the Kings
little Town. It seems it was of no bigg Dimension then, though it be multiplied
and swollen into a greater Bulk since; yet, as small as it was, Athelstan in the
year 903, held a public Moot or great Counsel here, (which Assemblies since
the Normans entering here were termed Parliaments) and enacted several Laws, in
this Convention. Probably enough, it belonged to the Crown in elder Times, and
was a Mannor-house of the Kings: for William the Conqueror (as the Records of
St. Austins testify) gave the Advowson of the Church, to that Abbey, in the
year 1072, and the Manor it self to a Norman, in Recompense of some signal
Service. But when King Stephen, resolved to erect the Abbey there, he compounded
with William de Ipre Earl of Kent, and gave him the Manor of Lilly-Church in
Exchange for it, and his Queen Matilda, raised a stately Monastery which she
stored with Monks, of the Order of St. Bennet, which were brought thither by
Clarembald the first Abbot, from the Abbey of St. Marys at Bermondsey in
Southwark, and procured a Letter to be writ from Peter Abbot of that place, to
absolve and release them from all Obedience, to the Order of the Cluniac's. And
here was K. Stephen, Matilda his Wife, and Eustace Earl of Boloign, his Son,
Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Constable of Dover Castle solemnly
entered. Of which former King it is observed, that though his Reign were rough
and tempestuous, by Reason of his perptuall Debates and Contests, with Mawd the
Empress and her Son, concerning the Title; yet were there more Religious
Convents erected in his Rule then either before or after; which made it appear
though the Times were bad they were not impious. And certainly, from the uneven
and imperfect Prospect, which those Times folded up in the Flame and Smoke of
Civil War, have afforded us of this Prince, and of his Sway of the Scepter, we
may conclude that in all things, he was fit to be a King, but that he was one.
Thorn the Chronicler relates two Contests that happened between the Monks of
St. Augustins and others: the first was between them and King John animated by
Hughbert Archbishop of Canterbury touching the Right of Patronage, of the
Church of St. Mary Charity at Feversham. The K. apprehending the Advowson of
the Church, belonged to him, or at least made to believe so by the Archbishop,
presents a Clerk to the Church, and commands his Presentment should be
received, which they not only disobeyed, but ejected the Clerk, and sent
diverse of their Monks to maintain the Possession of the Church by strong Hand.
Which the King understanding, commanded Reginald de Cornhill the Sheriff, to
disseise them and restore his presented Clerk, which he in Order to the Kings
Injunction, not without a vigorous Resistance by the Monks effected. Upon
which, the Monks complain to Stephen the Popes Legate, who then was there
journeying to Rome, and in his Way sojourned at their Cloister. And he
compassionating their Condition, advised them to send their Prior to Rome,
least the Power of the Sea Apostolic might, by this Affront and Inroad upon
it, be trampled under Foot. Hereupon the Pope, upon Advertisement received,
issues out a Commission to understand the Matter in Debate: But the Monks upon
a serious Debate with themselves, knowing the King's impetuous Temper, they
found out a more compendious Method for an Accommodation, and presented the
King with two Hundred Marks in a Purse, and a meet Palfrey for his Saddle, by
which Donative they so endeared the K. that they obtained Restitution of their
Right, and made him for the future, their gracious Patron.

Another Conflict fell out after this, between the Abbot, and Mayor and Burgers
of this Town, about some Intrusions and encroachments made by the Townsmen, as
was pretended, upon the Franchises of the Church. You may be sure Thorn who
relates it, is warped with a partial Engagement to his own Fraternity, and with
that Caution you may read him. Upon the Dissolution made in the Reign of Henry
the eighth, this Manor with all its Privileges returned to the Crown, and lay
incorporated with its Revenue until the Reign of King Charles. And then it was
granted to Sir Dudley Diggs of Chilham Castle, who not long after settled it on
his second Son Mr. Jo. Digg, who not long since demised it to Sir George Sonds
of Leeze-court.

Fishbourne in this Parish, is an ancient Manor, from whence a Family of that
Surname borrowed its Appellation. One John de Fist bourn was a Witness to that
Charter, by which a place called Messewell was given to Feversham Abbey, in the
Reign of Henry the second. Afterward, in the Reign of Edward the third, I find
the Dreylonds to be possessed of it, but their ancient Seat, was at Cokesditch in
this Parish. For in a Deed dated the twenty fifth year of Edward the third,
John the Son of Stephen Dreylond, whereby he demises some Land in a place
called Crouchfield, to William Makenade, writes himself of Cokesditch; and in
this Family did the Interest of Fishbourne continue, until the Beginning of
Henry the eighth. And then it was alienated to Simons, to which Name the Title
has remained constantly allied to this Day. Nor was Cokesditch fixed in
Dreylond by a Tenure more permanent, for katharine Sole Heir of Sir Richard
Dreylond, was matched to Reginald Norton of Milton Esquire, and so with her
both the Name and Propriety of this place were entombed in this Family; and
this Reginald upon his Decease, gave it to his second Son William Norton, and
from him successively was it transmitted to others of that Line, until those
Times which confined upon our Fathers Remembrance: And then it was alienated to
Parsons, who was not long seated in his new Acquists, but he conveys it away to
Ashton, by whose Daughter and Heir it is lately transplanted into Buck.

Frittenden in the Hundred of Cranbroke, resolves it self into several places
which call for our Notice. The first is Comden. It was clapsed up within the
Revenue of the Priory of Leeds, until the Storm or Hurricano rather, in the
Reign of Henry the eighth, threw it into the Demeasn of the Crown. And then
that Prince, in the thirty second year of his Reign, conveyed it by Grant to
Sir Walter Henley, and he in the thirty fourth year of Henry the eighth,
transmitted it by his Deed to Sir John Baker, whose Successor Sir John Baker,
even in those Times which entrenched on our Remembrance, passed it away to
Mr....... Cleyton of London.

Bewper is the second place of account in this Parish. It was in elder Times an
Appendage or Fragment of that Demeasn, which did contribute to the Support of
the Abbey of Feversham, and upon the Suppression of that Cloister or Seminary,
by Henry the eighth, it was in the thirty fifth year of that Princes Reign,
granted to Sir Thomas Moil, who not long after passed it away to Robert Prat.
And his Son Master Franci. Prat, primo Elizabethae, by Fine conveyed it to Mr
Edward Bathurst, who not many years after, transplanted his Interest here by
Sale into Sir Richard Baker, Ancestor to Sir Jo. Baker of Sisinghurst Baronet,
who now by paternal Succession, is entitled to the instant Signory of it.

Wallinghurst and Buckhurst are two petty Manors, which belonged to the Abbey
of Feversham, but upon the Suppression of that Covent, they were pared off, and
by Grant from Henry the eighth, in the twenty ninth year of his Reign, were
enstated upon Thomas Lord Cromwell Earl of Essex. But long he was not endowed
with them: for in the thirty second year of that Prince's Government, he was
bespattered and blasted with an Accusation of high Treason, which the Subtlety
of his Adversaries had woven so closely together that he was entangled in it;
and being attainted, forfeited both his Life and Estate to the Fury, I cannot
say Justice, of an incensed Prince: Amongst the Ruins of his Patrimony, these
two places were comprehended, and upon his Shipwreck it returned to the Crown.
And then King Henry the eighth, by a new Grant in the same year they escheated,
passed them away to Sir John Baker of Sisingherst in Cranebroke, from whom they
are now come down to Sir John Baker Baronet, his Successor.

Upper Peasridge was involved in that spacious Inheritance, which fell under
the Dominion of the Lord Badelesmer, of whom I shall speak more at Leeds, and
when he by his Disloyalty had forfeited both Life and Fortune to the Crown,
this was enwrapt in the Escheat. But was restored in the second year of Edward
the third to Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer this Man's Son, and he in the twelfth
year of that Prince, held it at his Death, Rot. Esc. Number. 44. But Giles his
only Son dying without Issue, his great Estate was split into parcells, and
this with some more of his Demeasne was allotted to Mawd his Sister and Coheir,
who was matched to John Vere Earl of Oxford, and he in her Right was possessed of
it at his Death, which was in the thirty fourth year of Edward the third, Rot.
Esc. Number. 84. And in this Family did it reside until the Beginning of Henry
the fourth, and then it was passed away by Sale to St. Ledger, to whose
Patrimony it remained annexed until the Government of Philip and Mary; and
then an Alienation like the former, brought it over to Lone, descended from the
Lones of Lancashire, where there is yet a House of the Name: and being thus
fixed in this Family, the Possession continues still united to it.

Fordwich in the Hundred of West-Gate, was given to the Abbot and Monks of St.
Austins (as the Annalls of that Convent testify) by King Edward the Confessor,
and was given ad Vestitum, for Reparation of their Apparel. And there is a
Tradition, that Hemp-Hall which was an Appendage to this Manor, did pay a
quit-Rent in Hemp: but certainly it must be then for the use of those secular
persons which related as Officers and Servants to this Cloister; for the Monks
themselves being under the Rule of Bennet, harrowed their Skin with Shirts of
Hair, and slept vestiti in their Apparel, the more to tame and control the
Mutinies and Disorders of the Flesh. But to advance: After this Manor (which
the Piety of former Ages had planted in the Revenue of the Church) had for a
large Decursion of Time owned no other Proprietary; it was by the Dissolution
in the twenty ninth of Henry the eighth, emptied into the Income of the Crown,
where it lay, until Edward the sixth in the seventh year of his Reign, granted
it to Sir Thomas Cheyney, and he not long after alienated his Concernment in it
to John Johnson, from whom it came over by Purchase to Paramour, who passed it
away to the Lady Elizabeth Finch, Widow of Sir Moile Finch, whose Son Thomas
Finch Earl of Winchelsey, almost in our Memory passed it away to John Finch
Baron of Fordwich, late Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, in the year
1640, and in him does the instant Signory of it reside.

Folkstone does contribute a Name to the Hundred in which it is situated. The
Manor it self with the Manor of Walton, was given to the Nunnery by Eadbald
King of Kent, which it seems was of that Repute in those Times, that Eanswide
his Daughter was there veiled a Nun, under the Rule of St. Bennet; and Ermenred
and Ercombert his Sons, changed their hopes of a Crown, into those of one more
celestial, and folded up all their Earthly Glories in a Monastic Cowle, which
they assumed at this place, under the Discipline of St. Bennet. But this
Cloister was some Ages after, partly by the Fury of the Danes, and partly by
the Impressions of the Sea, reduced into a heap of Ruins: so that in the Reign
of William the Conqueror, William de Muneville laid the Foundations of a new
Priory in another place of the Town; which was much augmented afterward by
William de Averenches, who had married his only Daughter. But it seems upon the
former Devastation of this religious Seminary, the Manor had returned to the
Crown: for in the year one thousand thirty and eight, Canutus restored to
Christ-church in Canterbury (as the Records of that Covent do intimate) this
Manor of Folkston; which Athelstan, Son of King Edward, in the year nine
hundred twenty and eight, had formerly granted to them for the health of his
Fathers Soul, and to the Honor of Vlfhelme Archpriest of Canterbury, but with
this Restriction, he limits and bounds this his Concession, that this Manor
thus returned to the Church, should never be alienated by the Archbishop
without the Consent of the King and the Covent of Christ-church, who, it
appears, joined with William the Conqueror and the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and fastened it again to this Priory, where it remained, until it was torn away
by the Suppression, in the Time of Henry the eighth, and annexed to the Crown:
Afterward that Prince, in the thirtieth year of his Reign, transplanted his
Interest in it and Walton, by Grant into Edward Lord Clinton, and he the same
year passed them away to Thomas Lord Cromwell Earl of Essex, who being
attainted in the thirty second year of the abovesaid Prince: the Propriety of
Folkston and Walton, returned to the Crown, and resided in the Royal Patrimony,
until the second year of Queen Mary, and then they were regranted to Edward
Lord Clinton abovesaid, who not long after conveyed them to Mr. Henry Herdson,
whose Grandchild Mr. Francis Herdson, alienated them to his Uncle Mr. John
Herdson, about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth; and he upon his Decease
(without any lawful Issue,) gave them to his Nephew, Sir Basil Dixwell Knight
and Baronet, descended from the ancient Family of Dixwell in the North Riding
of Yorkshire. Who likewise making his Exit without any lawful Issue, Mark
Dixwell Esquire his Nephew became his Heir, and from him is the Propriety of
both these places descended to his Son and Heir, Basil Dixwell Esquire.

The Nunnery of Folkston abovesaid, being much defaced, was in the Time of
Henry the third, reedified and reestablished by John de Clinton, and John de
Segrave, and Julian his Wife; which was upon this second Erection stored with
Nuns, who were to live as formerly, under the Rule of St. Bennet, and dedicated
to St. Peter and St. Eanswith. But when it was found, in the second year of
Henry the fifth, that it related by foreign Dependence to the Abbey of Lolley in
Normandy, it was by that prudent and cautious Monarch Suppressed.

There were five Churches anciently in Folkston, three of which were dedicated
to St. Peter, St. Mary, and St. Paul; all which and one more, whose Name is not
now obvious, were long since by the Assaults of the Elements, and Devastations
of men, utterly dismantled: only that which was erected in the year 1095. by
Nigellus de Muneville, and devoted to St. Mary and St. Eanswith, has been too
hard a Morsel for the teeth of Time to consume.

Folkston had the Grant of a Market procured to be held here weekly on the
Thursday, by the Mediation of Geffrey Fitz-Peter, in the sixth year of King
John, which was confirmed to William de Averenches, in the sixteenth year of
the abovesaid Prince, and renewed to Sir John Segrave, in the twenty second
year of Edw. the third.

Richard the second granted to Sir John Clinton, that a Market should be
observed weekly at Folkston, on the Wednesday, and a Fair yearly on the Vigil,
and Day of St. Giles, as appears Pat. 13. Richardi secundi Membr. 14. Pars 2.

Eabald King of Kent, about 1000 years since, built a Castle at the South part
of this Town of Folkston, which being shrunk into Decay, William de Averenches
erected a Fort in the year 1068, on the Foundation of the formerly demolished
Pile, whose ruinous Shell or Skeleton is yet visible,

I have seen a Leaf by some injurious Hand torn out from the Leiger Book of
Folkston, which sets forth the entertainment which the Family of Poynings were
to have, when they came to hear Mass at the Priory; a subtle Artifice used by
the Monks of that Age, to catch the Benevolence of the noblest and most opulent
Families of the Nation, that certainly (had not the Statute of Mortmain, or Law
of Amortization made in the seventh year of Edward the first, restrained and
contracted the unlimited Bounty of the Laity to these religious Cloisters,)
almost all the Land which was of secular Interest, had been ingulphed in the
Revenue of the Church: so that as one well observes this over-active and
operative Devotion, would have dedicated all to God, and have left Little or
Nothing to have given to Caesar.

Terlingham and Ackhanger, were the Patrimony as high as the Reign of the
Conqueror (as Doomsday instructs us) of William de Muneville, the Repairer and
Restorer, if not Founder and Establisher of Folkston priory. By whose Daughter
and Heir they devolved to William de Averenches, who had Issue William de
Averenches, in whom the male-line failed, so that Matilda de Averenches his
Sole Heir by matching with Hamon de Crevequer, Baron Leeds Castle, made them
parcel of his Demeasne: who by his Addition, so swelled his Estate, that he was
styled the great Lord of Kent, and was of that Esteem in this County, that by a
general Consent and Council of the Barons of the Cinque Ports, the Custody of
the Seacoast from Hastings to Pool, was committed to his Care and Inspection,
Pat. 19. Hen. tertii Memb. 14. And he held these Manors at his Death, which
was in the forty seventh year of Henry the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 33. And left
them to his Son Hamon de Crevequer, who was enwrapt in the Faction and
Rebellion of Simon de Montfort Earl of Leicester, raised against Henry the
third; but was, by that Act of Oblivion and Clemency, styled Dictum de
Kenilworth, passed by that Prince in the fiftieth year of his Reign, called to
Mercy, and to most part of his Estate, excepting Leeds-Castle, Bersted,
Chetham, and some other pieces, but dyed without Issue; so that Eleanor matched
to Bertram de Crioll, Juliana first matched to Nicholas de Sandwich, and
secondly to Roger de Segrave, and two others who were wedded to Lenham, and
Pateshull, became, as they were his four Sisters, his four Coheirs. And upon
the partition of the Estate, these two Manors came over to be the Patrimony of
Crioll, and Bertram de Crioll above mentioned held them at his Death, which was
in the twenty third year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 48. And left them
to John his only Son, who dying Childlesse, Joan his Sister matched to Sir
Richard de Rokesley, became his Heir: but he determining likewise in a Female
Heir called Joan, she by espousing Sir Thomas de Poynings, Father of Michaell
de Poynings of Terlingham, raunged these places under the Demeasn of that
Family, in which they remained, until the latter end of Henry the seventh: and
then Sir Edward Poynings, gave them in Dower, with Mary his natural Daughter to
Thomas Lord Clinton, whose Son Edw. Lord Clinton, about the Beginning of Queen
Mary, by Sale passed them away to Herdson, from whom by Testament they came
over to Dixwell, in which Family the Possession of them is still permanent.

Morehall is a small Manor in this Parish, to which, William de Valentia
obtained a Charter of Privileges, in the twenty seventh year of Henry the
third. After him I find the Morehalls to be Possessors of it, who ingrafted
their own Name upon it, and John de Morehall, paid respective Aid, at the
making the Black Prince Knight, for his Manor of Morehall, in the twentieth of
Edward the third. After this Family was extinct, the Bakers of Caldham, about
the Reign of Henry the fourth, were invested in the Possession, and not many
years after, Brandred by one of the Coheirs of Baker, became Lord of the Fee:
from which Family, by Sale, it passed away to Sir Thomas Brown, from whom
descended Sir Matthew Brown Knight, who in our Grandfathers Memory conveyed his
Right in it to Godman, who is still Lord of the Fee.

Hope-House in Folkston, belonged to the Houghams, a noble and knightly Family
inhabiting at Hougham not far distant, and Robert de Hougham dyed seized of it
in the forty first year of Henry the third. In the Reign of Edward the second,
I find the Clintons possessed of it, and William de Clinton Earl of Huntington,
dyed seized of it in the twenty eighth year of Edward the third: and from him
it descended to his Kinsman John de Clinton, great Grandfather to John Lord
Clinton, who about the Beginning of Henry the seventh, sold it away to Davis,
from which Family by a Daughter, and partly by Purchase: it came over to
Lessington, and he in our Fathers Remembrance, alienated his Concernment in it
to Hopday, whose Son is the instant Possessor of it.

Bredmer or Berdmer, is the last place worthy any Consideration. It is partly
situated in Folkston, and partly in Cheriton; that there was a Family of this
Name, was most certain. For in ancient Deeds and Court Rolls of Valoigns, who
was Lord of Cheriton after Scotton: I find frequent mention of several of this
Name, who held Land of this Family. But in the Book of Aid, I find William de
Brockhull held the fourth part of a Knights Fee in Cheriton, which was this, in
the twentieth year of Edward the third. From this Name by Elizabeth Heir of
Thomas Brockhull, it came to be the possession of Richard Selling Esquire, and
here it rested until the Beginning of Henry the eighth, and then it was passed
away to Edmund Inmith, a Retainer to Thomas Lord Clinton, who gave it to his
second Son Edmund Inmith, and he was extinguished in two Daughters and Coheirs:
one was married to Reyner, and the other to Baker, who in her Right shared this
place, and in the Reign of King James, passed it away by Sale to Ben, who holds
the instant Possession of it.

G. G. G. G.
DEptford in the Hundred of Blackheath, and Lath of Sutton at Hone, so called
from the deep Channel of Ravens-purg'd. The River that here slydeth into the
Thames, was heretofore called West-Greenwich, from the turning of the River
Thames in such a crooked Compass, and the green Meddows adjacent. Gislebert
Magminot or Magminiot, for he was a great Favorite to William the Conqueror,
was one of those eight Barons and Trustees, that were joined to John de
Fiennes, for the sure Guard of Dover Castle, and were assigned competent Lands
for the maintenance of that Service: his Castle or Site of his Barony, has
been long time buried in its own Ruins, yet some remains of Stony Foundations,
make me conjecture it stood nere Says Court in Bromfield, upon the Brow of the
Thames Bank near the Mast Dock where the Skeleton of Sir Francis Drake's Ship
was laid up, and in a very short time nothing left of her: but the Fame of her
Captain and Steersman, cannot perish, so long as History shall last.

But to return to the former Subject, it may appear by the Quire of Dover
Castle, transmitted on Record in the King's Exchequer, that it had the
Reputation of a Barony and these Knights Fees were held of it.

Pevinton Kanc. duo Feeda Militum.
Estswale Kanc. unum Feedum Militis.
Davinton Kanc. duo Feoda Militum
Cuckleston alias Cuckston Kanc. unum Feodum Militis.
Waldeswareschare Kanc. 3. Feoda Militum.
Leckhamsted-Bucks unum Feodum
Kennington-Hert. duo Feoda Militum.
Gothurst Northampton unum Feodum Militis
Hertwell-Northampton duo Feoda Militum.
Brandiston-Suffolk. duo Feoda Militum
Hecchesham-Surrey duo Feoda Militum
Whitfield Kanc. unum Feodum Militis.
Coudham-Kanc. duo Feoda Militis.
Bredinghurst Kanc. unum Feodum Militis.
Thornham, Kersoney, tria Feeda Militum
Bingbery, Kanc. tria Feeda Militum
Brickhill-Buck: unum Feodum Militis.
Haec sunt Feoda de Baronia de Magminot, quae tenentur de Willielmo de Say,
quae ipse tenet de Rege per Baroniam: Et reddunt Wardam ad Castrum Dovoriae.
Per 32. Septimanas.

You may find mention of Walkelme Magminot, in the Catalogue of the Lord
Wardens. But the Daughter and Heir of this Line, was married to Say, from whom
it came to be called Says-Court, which Name it still retains: And was by
reason of the Commodiousnesse of the Meadows belonging to it, and Stalls there
erected, made a place, in the Time of the late King, for feeding Sheep and
Oxen, served by Composition for the Kings House.

William Duke of Suffolk, held the Manor of West-Greenwich, and one Message
in Deptford, Anno 29. Hen. 6. by West-Greenwich, which was meant by that which
we now call Deptford Strand: and by Deptford, is meant the upper Town, where a
fair strong Stone Bridge, lately erected, does acknowledge the sole Royal
bounty of K. Charles, by this Inscription.

This Bridge was re-edified at the only charge of King Charles, in the fourth
year of his Reign, Anno Dom. 1628. In former Times it w as repaired at the
Charge of the Contry adjacent. For I find by a Record in the Tower. Esc Anno.
20. Edw. 3. n. 66. Quod Reparatio Pontis de Depeford, pertinet ad homines
Hundredi de Blackheath, and non ad homines Villarum de Eltham, Moding-ham, and
Wolwich.

The Treasurer of the Navy, has here a commendable and convenient House for
his Residence at the Dock, to view the building and repayring the States Ships
and what is most expedient for the Manufacture of Cordage, Anchors, and other
Provisions for Ships, by which means the Town is so greatly increased in small
Tenements, and the Statute for Cottages, excepting Market Towns, and such
places as are used for building of Ships, that for number of Inhabitants and
Communicants, it may compare with diverse Counties in the Kingdom: which great
Increase of the Parish, caused them to new build another Isle on the North-side
the Church, to which the East-Indian Company of Merchants were good
Benefactors, And the Chancel enlarged with beautiful Additions, partly at the
Cost of Sir William Russell Knight and Baroner, Treasurer of the Navy, and the
circumspection of Doctor Valentine, the late learned and worthy Incumbent of
the place.

Adjoining to the Church, The Company of Navigators and Seamen, incorporated by
King Henry the eighth, have a Hall or House for their meetings and
Consultations. Certainly the use of this Society, is most considerable and
commendable: for the Commonwealth, upon all Occasions, may from them receive
necessary Intelligence of all the Roads, Waterings, Depths, and Conveniences,
of most part of the Maritime places in the Known World.

One thing more I have to mention: and that is Hacham, which was, in K. Hen.
the seconds Time, the Seat of Hacham, lying upon the Confines of Kent and
Kent-fields or Kent-lands, within this County; as Kent-Hatch in Westerham, is
the very outside of this Shire: As that place toward Surrey, called
Kent-House, designs the Bounderies of this County, between Bekenham and
Croydon. Diverse Inquisitions, taken since that time, have found Hacham to be in
Kent.

And I believe the Manor of Bredingherst, before mentioned, was formerly in
this Shire, which is now slipped into Surrey at Peckham Rey, in Camberwell. The
Reception of Prisoners, from the County of Surrey, being for a good Space used
to be at New Cross, has begot an opinion, that there was the outside of Kent:
but those that will justly denote the Ambitus and Bounds, must not think it
begins at Kent-street, because it is so called of the Road-way into Kent. Nor
that Kentish Town by High-gate, is part of this Shire, though it partake of the
Customs of Gavel-kind. Nor at Sir Thomas Waterings, Kanc. Inq. 7. R. 2. n. 30.
post Mort. E. fillii Tho. Dolsil.
where the Pilgrims to St. Thomas of Canterbury, that disobedient and
pertinacious Archbishop, watered their Horses. But a small Bridge beyond
Hatcham, in the Road to London, near which is a Road or Way to Bredingherst,
which by an Inquisition, taken in the seventh of King Richard the second,
appears to be in Kent.

In the forty third of Edward the third, it appears, that the Manor of
Hachesham, was granted to the Prioresse of Dertford, Cause. 43. E, 3. M. 6.
and many parcels of Land that came by Escheat, as held of that Manor, lying
in Surrey, after the Death of Jo. the Son of Jo. Adam, were confirmed to that
Foundation by the King: all which returning into the Hands of Henry the eighth,
upon the public Suppression, this Manor, with its Appendages, was for ever
settled by the Crown, on the Company or Brotherhood of the Haberdashers in
London.

East-Greenwich is the next Town to Detford, so called, because it stands
more Eastward then the other, formerly spoken of. In Latin named Viridis
Sinus, in Saxon Grenawic, that is, the Green Town, upon the Turning Creek of
the River.

In the Time of the Danes Invasion, they often made their Road at this place,
and made it remarkable, by their Cruelty, showed unto Ealphege Archbishop of
Canterbury: whom in the year of our Lord, a thousand and twelve, they cruelly
executed with most exquisite Torments, whose Death together with the cause
thereof Ditmarius Mersepurgius, who about the same time lived, has thus, in
the eighth Book of his Chronicles described. I understood (says he) by the
relation of Sewald, a pitiful Deed, and therefore memorable, namely, that the
perfidious Crew of Norman Soldiers, under Thurkill, as yet their Captain, took
that excellent Prelate, Archbishop of the City of Canterbury, named Ealphege,
with the rest, and them after their wicked manner imprisoned and bound, yea and
put him to endure Famine, and unspeakable pains. This good man moved with
humane Frailty, promises unto them a Sum of Money, and for the obtaining
thereof, did set down a Time between. That if in this Space, he could not by
some acceptable Ransom, escape this momentary Death, he might yet in the mean
while purge himself with many a Groan, to be offered as a lively Sacrifice unto
the Lord.

But when as the Time and space appointed were come and gone, this greedy Gulf
of Pirates, called forth the Servant of the Lord, and in threatning-wise demand
this Tribute promised unto them, to be speedily and out of hand paid. Then he,
as a Meek lamb, Here am I, quoth he; ready to undergo, (even for the Love of
Christ) whatsoever ye presume now to do against me, that I may deserve to
become an example of his Servants: and nothing am I troubled at this day. And
whereas I seem unto you a Liar, it is not my own Will, but great need and
Poverty that has done it: This body of mine, which in this Exile I have loved
over much, I present as culpable unto you; and I know it is in your Power, to
do with it what ye intend: but my sinful Soul, that regards not you, I
humbly commend to the Creator of all things. As he was thus speaking, the whole
Rabble of these profane Wretches hemmed him round about, and gets together
diverse and sundry weapons to kill him: which when their Leader Thurkill saw a
far off, he came quickly running, and crying, do not so I beseech you, and here
with my whole heart, I deliver unto you all my Gold and Silver, and whatsoever
I have here, or can by any means come by, save my Ship only, that you would not
sin against the Lord's anointed. But this unbridled anger of his Mates harder
then Iron and Flint, was nothing mollified with so gentle Words, and fair
Language of his, but became only pacified by shedding his innocent blood, which
presently they altogether confounded and bleanded with Ox-heads, Stons as thick
as Hail, and Billets hurled at him.

And to the memory of this said Ealphege, is the Parish Church here
consecrated. But far more splendid has this sumptuous Palace been, ever since
Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, Brother to King Henry the fifth, builded the same,
and called it Placence; And likewise the Castle, and enclosed the Park: For
doing them both, he had the King's Charter XI. Hen. 6. Rex concedat quod
Humfridus Dux Glocestriae, and Elianora uxor ejus, possdent Karnellare Manerium
suum de East-Grenwich, and Imparcare CC. Acras terrae inter Manerium suum
praedictum. For it was not lawful for any man to fortify his House, or raise
a Castle or place of Defense without License from the Crown, for Fear of inward
Sedition: and was therefore inquirable before the Escheator in the twenty
fourth Article of his Office. Item de Castellis and Dominicis Karnellatis sine
Regis licencia. The word having its derivation from Charneux, whichin French
signifies the indented Form of the Top of a Wall, which has vent and crest,
commonly called Imbattelling, because it was very serviceable in fight to the
Defendant within, who might at the loops or lower places, and other cranies in
the Walls and Bulworkes, annoy the Enemy, that assailed the same, and might
also shroud himself under the higher Parts thereof.

Afterward King Edward the fourth, bestowed some cost, to enlarge this work.
Henry the seventh, followed and beautified the House, with the Addition of the
Brick Front to the water side. But King Henry the eighth, as he exceeded all
his Progenitors in setting up sumptuous Houses, so he spared no Cost in
Garnishing Greenwich.

Queen Ann, in the time of King James, builded that new Brick-work toward the
Garden, and laid the Foundation of the House of Delight, toward the Park,
which Queen Mary, has so finished and furnished, that it far surpasses all
other of that kind in England.

In Memory of the many Camps that have been here, Certain places within this
Parish, are called Combs, namely East-Combe, where that godly good Gentleman
William Lambert Esquire dwelt, that gave us the first Description of this
Country, in his Perambulation, and made this work the more easy to any, that
should endeavor further Progress therein; Facile est inventis addere,
difficile invenire.

Westcombe with its Appendant Members, related to the noble Family of
Badelesmer, and upon the Attainder of artholomew Lord Badelesmer, escheating to
the Crown, they lay clasped up in its Revenue; until King Richard the second
granted them to Sir Robert Belknap the Judge; upon whose Attainder, they were
granted in Fee to Robert Ballard Esquire Pincernae suo his grand Boteler. That
is the Manors of Westcombe, and Spittlecombe in Greenwich, two Watermills in
Detford, with their Appurtenances in Charlton and Writle-mersh, after which
that Name, continued a long time in this place, of whom you may read more among
the Sheriffs of Kent, until about the fourth of Philip and Mary, Westcombe was
altenated by Nicholas Ballard, to John Lambert Esquire, whose Successor Thomas
Lambert, not many years since, alienated it to Hugh Forth: from whom it is
lately gone over by Sale, to Mr...... Biddulph of London.

Soon after the Conquest, this Greenwich, was parcel of the Possessions of the
Bishop of Liseux in France, and bore Service, to Odo then Bishop of Baieux, and
Earl of Kent. After, the Manor belonged to the Abbot of St. Petres of Gaunt in
Flanders, till such time, as King Henry the fifth, seizing into his Hands (by
occasion of War) the lands of the Priors Aliens, bestowed it together with the
Manor of Lewsham, and many other Lands also, upon the Priory of the
Brotherhood to the Monks of Shene which he had then newly erected, to which it
remained till the Time of King Henry the eighth, who annexed it to the Crown,
unto which it now belongs, and is called the Honor East-Greenwich.

Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, were both born here; and King Edward the
sixth, a Miracle of Princely Towardness, ended his Life, in the same House.

King Edward the third, 1376, in the fifty first year of his Reign founded the
Religious House of Friars Aliens, or Dominican Friars. Sir John Norbury Knight,
high Treasurer of England, is reckoned a Benefactor to the same, after the
Dissolution of this House, and its Annexion to Shene by King Henry the eighth.

Another House of observant Friars was erected here, by King Edward the fourth,
as we read in Jo. Rosse. Circiter Annum Regni Edwardi quarti, venerunt Fratres
observantes Ordinis Minorum ad Greenwich, and habebant Cantariam and Capellam
Sancti Crucis. And King Henry the seventh, builded that House for them
adjoining to the Palace, which is yet there to be seen.

There are moreover in the Town, two Colleges or Alms houses, for the
Sustentation of poor Persons, the one builded by William Lambert Esquire, which
he named the College of Queen Elizabeth's poor People, and as the Prying
Adversaries of out Religion then observed, was the first Protestant that built
an Hospital.

The other standing by Thames-side, was founded by Henry Howard, Earl of
Northampton Lord Privy Seal, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Knight of the
Garter. And enlarged and Beautified the Castle, (which is famous in the Spanish
Fables) from whence there is a most fair and pleasant Prospect open to the
River, winding in and out, almost redoubling of it self, the green Medows and
Marshes underlying the City of London, and Country round about. Described by
Berkley in his Euphormio.

And also for a L'env'oy to Greenwich, you may read the Verses of Leland the
Antiquarian Poet adjoining to Greenwich. Blackheath, of which the Hundred
takes the name, so called of the color of the Earth, or Bleacheath of the
high and cold Situation, for bleak signifies cold. Also Campus Martis, it may
well be called: for besides the Burden of the Danish Camps, it has born three
rebellious Assemblies. One in the time of King Richard the second, Moved, as
shall be farther declared in Offham, by John Tylar, whom William Walworth, then
Mayor of London, slew with his Dagger in Smithfield, and thereupon, upon the
Tradition comes, that the City had given them, for an Augmentation to their
Eschochen, a Dagger in the Dexter-point or Canton, so to be born by them for
ever.

Jack Cade that Counterfeit Mortimer, and his Crew, conducted the second, who
araying themselves here, and passed to London, where they did to Death the Lord
Say, and others, and executed their malice upon the Records and Monuments of
the Law; Burning down the Office of Arms, which was then kept at Cole-Harbour,
burning, destroying their Rolls, Registers, and Books of Armory; Their main
Drift and Design, being to bring in Parity.

And their Insurrection was here assembled, by Michaell Joseph Blacksmith, and
the Lord Audley, under the Reign of King Henry the seventh; at which time they
and their Accomplices received their just Desert: the Common Numbers of them,
being discomfited and slain, and the Leaders themselves, taken, drawn and
hanged.

Of this last, there remains yet, to be seen upon the Heath, the place of the
Smith's Tent, called commonly his Forge; and of all, there the great
grave-Hills of such as were buried, after the overthrow. These Hills, in the
West-Country, upon diverse Champions and Plains (where is no small Store of the
Like) are called Barowes, of the old English word Burghes; which last word,
melted into Buryings, (being a Spring of the old Stock) we do yet retain alive.

The first and last of these Commotions were stirred of Griese, the Common
people conceived for the Demand of two Subsidies. Of which the one was
unreasonable, because it was taxed upon the Polls, and exempted none. The other
was unseasonable, for that it was exacted, when the heads of the common people
were full of Perkin Warbeck.

The third and middlemost, grew upon a grudge, that the People took for
yielding the Duchy of Aniou, and Maine, to the King of Sicily: The coming of
whose Daughter, (after that the King would needs have her to Wife,
notwithstanding, his precontract made with the Earl of Armenac) was not so
joyfully embraced, by the Citizens of London upon Blackheath, wearing their red
Hoods, Badges, and blew Gowns, as in Sequel the Marriage and whole Government
it self, was known to be detested of the Country Commons, by bearing in the
same place, Harness, Bows, Bills, and other Weapons. Thus far, the Story of
Blackheath proves but sad and tragical: That which remains, is of a more
glorious and splendid condition, consisting of Ovations and Triumphs; for when
the Emperor of Constantinople, came to require Aid against the Turks, King
Henry the fourth, with all Princely respect, went to meet him at this place,
and so conducted him to London. And when King Henry the fifth, returned from
his victorious Conquest of France, the Lord Mayor and Citizens of London, went
forth in their best Equipage, to attend his Reception at this place, at which
time the King made many Knights Bannerets; And K. Hen. the eighth, that
excelled in all Triumphal matters met Anne Cleve, daughter to the Dake of Cleve.

Graveney in the Hundred of Boughton, was in the year of our Lord eight hundred
and eleven, by Archbishop Vlfred, bought of King Kenwolfe, (as the Book of
Christ-church, sets it forth,) ad opus Ecclesiae Christi, to the repair of the
Cathedral. In the year of Grace eight hundred and thirty, Werhardus a Priest of
much Power in England, (by the injunction of the Archbishop) gave Graveney to
the Monks of Christ-church, which had been before snatched away, and then
passed under the Notion of thirty two Hides; and if you will see how it was
rated, in Doomsday Book, it is thus there represented: Graveney, est Manerium
Monachorum, and est de Vestitu eorum, quod Richardus Constabularius tenet in
Feodo de Archiepiscopo, and tamen reddit firmam Monachis, and pro 1 Sulling se
defendit. This Manor by the Successive Proprietaries, was held in Fee, of the
Archbishop of Canterbury.

Here was a Family called Gravenell, who were Lords of this Manor, which John
de Gravenell, dyed possessed of, in the fifty sixth year of Henry the third.
Afterward I find the Fevershams, a Family so called, held it. Richard
Feversham was seized of it at his Death, which was in the thirteenth year of
Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 100. But deceased without Issue-male, so
that his only Daughter Joan matched to John Boteler became his Heir. This John
Boteler, was high Sheriff of Kent, in the twenty second year of Richard the
second. But dyed likewise without Issue-male, so that his Estate here, which
devolved to him by Female Right, by the same Fate, was carried away to John
Martin, one of the Judges of the Common Pleas, who married Ann his Sole Heir,
and this Man lies buried in Graveney Church, under a Fair Stone inlaid with
Brass, and his Pourtraicture insculped thereon, with this Inscription affixed.
Hic jacet Joannes Martin, Justiciarius de communi Banco, qui obiit 24 Octobris,
1436, and Anna Uxor ejus.From Martin, the Propriety of that Estate here, which
had been diverse years entitled to this Name, went by Purchase into Pordage of
Rodmersham, in which Family the Possession has for several Generations been
constantly resident.

Gravesend in the Hundred of Toltingtrow, was anciently the Possession of a
Family called Cramavill, who had likewise very considerable Possessions in
East-Kent. Henry de Cramavill, held it at his Death, which was in the fifty
fourth year of Henry the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 8. And Joan, Wife, I believe, of
Henry de Cramavill, was seized of it at her Decease, which was in the eighth
year of Edward the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 53. After this Family was gone out, I
find the Lord of the Fee, to be Reginald de Cobham, who was in Possession of it
at his Death, which was in the forty fifth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 15. and in Ages of a lower Step, another Reginald Cobham, was seized of
it, in the seventh year of Henry the fourth: and from him, by the Heir General
it came down, to Braybrook: and by the Heir general of that Family, it was
transmitted to Brook, of the County of Somerset, from whom descended the
unfortunate Henry Brook, Lord Cobham, who being attainted in the Beginning of
King James, forfeited this Manor to the Crown: in whose Revenue it lay
involved, until the late K. Charles granted it to his Kinsman James Duke of
Lenox, upon whose late Decease, it is now become the Inheritance of his Son
Esme Duke of Lenox, now in his Minority.

Milton near Gravesend, in the Hundred of Shamell, was an Ingredient which made
up that Estate, which fell under the Signory of the Montchenseys, Lords and
Barons of Swanscamp. Warren de Montchensey, obtained a Charter of Free Warren
to his Manor of Milton, in the thirty seventh year of Henry the third, and he
had Issue William de Montchensey, who held it at his Death, which was in the
fifty second year of Henry the third: and left it to Dionis his Female
Inheritrix, wedded to Hugh de Vere, by whom she having no Issue, that might
transmit the Possession to his Family; the Interest of it was, by Joan, Sister
and Coheir of the abovementioned William, knit to the Patrimony of her Husband,
Aymer de Valence Earl of Pembroke; whose Son William de Valence dying without
Issue, Isabell his Sister and Coheir, being wedded to Lawrence de Hastings,
afterward Earl of Pembroke, united it to his Demeasn, and his Grandchild John
de Hastings, about the beginning of Richard the second, passed it away to Sir
Simon de Burley, who being attainted of high Treason, in the tenth of his Rule,
because, according to his Oath, being Knight of the Garter, and Lord Warden of
the Cinque Ports, he endeavored to underprop, like some Butteresse, the sinking
Prerogative of his Master, against the onsets of some of the ambitious
Nobility, it escheated to the Crown. And then the aforesaid King, in the
fourteenth year of his Government, granted it to John Holland Earl of
Huntington; and he not long after conveyed it by Sale, to Reginald Cobham,
whose Widow, Elizabeth was remarried to William Clifford Esquire, and he in her
Right, I find, was possessed of it in the ninth year of Henry the fourth. But
after his Death, it reverts to Braybrook, who had matched with Joan the Heir
general of Cobham, and he determining likewise in an Heir general, matched to
Brook, of the West-country, it devolved with Cobham, to acknowledge the
Signiory of that Family, but continued not long in their Possession: for about
the Beginning of Edward the fourth, I find it in the Tenure of Robert Brent,
from whom it descended to his Son William Brent, who in the eighth year of King
Henry the seventh, conveyed it to Sir Henry Wiatt; and from him did it come
down to his Grandchild Sir Thomas Wiatt, who being attainted in the second year
of Queen Mary, it escheated by Confiscation to the Crown, and then it was
granted to George Brook Lord Cobham, and went along with that Family, until
the beginning of King James, and then Henry Lord Brook having embarked himself
in the unhappy Design of Sir Walter Rauleigh, was atrainted of high Treason,
and his Concernment in this Manor, was forfeited to the Crown, and was, not
many years after, by the abovementioned Prince, granted to Mr. George Tucker
of Gravesend; whose Grandchild Mr. George Tucker, has lately passed away all
his Interest here to Mr...... Hamon, of Queenhith in London.

Parrocks is likewise situated within the Circle of Gravesend, and had owners
of that Surname, as is evident by an ancient Record, which testifies, that
Robert de Parrock, Pat. de An. 52. H. 3. Memb. 10.
obtained a Market, weekly on the Saturday, and a Fair yearly to endure for the
Space of three Days, viz. the Vigil, the Day of St. Edmund, and the day after,
in the fifty second year of Henry the third. Afterward, this Manor was linked
to the Revenue of the Crown, but whether it was thus annexed by Sale, or by
Exchange, I confess, I am ignorant: only I find by the original Patent, that
in the sixth year of Richard the second, it was granted to Sir Simon de Burley;
upon whose Attaint, in the tenth year of the abovesaid Prince, it devolved to
the Crown, and Richard the second, not long after, settled it on the Abbey of St.
Mary Grace on Tower Hill, in whose Revenue it remained until King Henry the
eighth tore it off by the Public Dissolution, and united it to the Royal
Revenue, where it had its fixed abode, until the thirteenth year of King
James: and then it was granted to Mr. William Salter; who not many years after,
passed it away to Mr. James Crispe; from whom in our Memory, partly by
Purchase, and partly by Exchange, it went over to Mr. Jo. Child, in whose
Descendant the Propriety is still permanent.

Gravesend, had anciently a Market on the Thursday, and a Fair yearly on the
Day of St. Edward the Confessor, both granted to this Town, in the thirtieth
year of Edward the third.

Gillingham, was a Manor always relating to the Archbishops of Canterbury,
though the Donation by the Book of Christ-church be not specified. If we survey
the Pages of Doomsday Book, they will give us this: Gilling ham est proprium
Manerium Archiepiscopi, and in tempore Ewardi Regis se defendebat pro VI.
Sullings, and est appretiatum hoc quod Archiepiscopus habet inde in Dominio
VIII. lb. etc X.s. The Archbishops of Canterbury, had here an eminent Palace,
and held their Residence at it, and gave Consecrations here to Bishops, as we
find it recorded in the Book called Textus Roffensis, or, the Text of Rochester.

East-court, and West-court in this Parish, were anciently knit together, and
resided in a Family called Gillingham. Richard de Gillingham, Son of Thomas de
Gillingham, held it at his Death, which was in the twelfth year of Richard the
second, Rot. Esc. Number. 176. And left it to his Son Thomas Gillingham, who
resolved into two Daughters and Coheirs; Margaret married to John Thorpe, who
in her Right, had West-court; and Isabell, matched to William Crensted, who
brought along with her East-court. But as all things have their Fate and
Vicissitude, they did not long acknowledge the Dominion of either of them; for
Thorpe sold West-court to Nicholas Lawson, of Whoorn-place in Cuckston, who not
long after, by the same Devolution, passed it away to Duling of Rochester, by
whose Female Heir, it is now come over to Mr. Stephen Alcock: but Thorp; Ferme,
on which he had planted his own Name, he alienated to Short, and from this
Family it went away again by Sale to May of Rochester. Greensted endowed
Benedict Webb, his Sisters Son, and in that Relation his Heir, with the Title
and Propriety of East-court, whose two Grandchildren Thomas and Christopher
Webb, by a mutual and joint Concurrence, divested themselves of their Right,
and by Sale surrendered it up to Will. Painter Esquire, Great Grandfather to
Mr. Allington Painter, the instant Proprietary of it.

Twidall, is another Manor of eminent Account, and had Owners likewise of that
Appellation. The first, that I find of the Name, in Mr. Painter's Evidences,
which held both this and Dane-court, is Robert de Twidall, and he slourished
here about the Reign of Henry the first, and he had Issue Adam de Twidall, from
whom was lineally extracted, Richard de Twidall: who in the fourth year of
Richard the second, passed away this, and Dane-court, to John, the Son of
Robert de Beaufitz, originally descended from Read in Marden. But in this
Family, the Possession was not very permanent, for in some Descents after, the
Name went out into into Joan Beaufitz and other Coheirs: and she by matching
with Robert Arnold of Sussex, did enstate the Possession of both these places,
upon this Name and Family, and he bequeathed them as Dower, to his Daughter
Elizabeth Arnold: and she, in the thirteenth year of Henry the seventh,
conveys them over to her Brother Henry; and his Son William Arnold, in the
eighteenth year of Henry the eighth, transports his Right in them by Sale to
Thomas Benolt Clarenceux King of Arms: from whom the like Conveyance, in the
twentieth year of that Prince, brought itto Sir Hen. Wiatt, one of the Privy
Council, to Hen. the 8, whose Son Sir Tho. Wiat, in the thirtieth year of that
King, exchanged them for other Lands with the Crown: from which immediately
after they were conveyed by Grant to Christopher Sampson, who not many years
after, transplanted his Interest by Sale, into Thomas Parker: who conveyed away
his Right in Twidall, to William Painter Esquire, great Grandfather to Mr.
Allington Painter, who now enjoys it: but Danecourt, was by Purchase brought
over to Short, in whom it had not long continued, but the same Fatality carried
it away to May of Rochester.

The Grange in this Parish, sometimes written Grench, did in the Conquerours
time, appertain to the old Lords called Hastings, Ancestors of the Lord
Hastings now Earl of Huntington. In the Book called Testa de Nevill, kept in
the Exchequer we read that one Manasser de Hastings, held Grench by Serjeanty
under King Hen. the third, and the particular Office, in some more modern
Records is described, viz. that it is held of the King (and not of the
Cinque Ports as some do suggest) by Serjeanty, to find two men and two Oars in
the Ship, which carries over the King from Dover to Whitesand by Callis. From
Hastings, it came over by Purchase to Richard Smelt Alderman of London: whose
Daughter and Heir Margaret Smelt carried it away to Richard Croyden likewise an
Alderman of London: in whom the male-line failing, Margery his Sole Heir was
matched to John Philipott Esquire, Alderman of London in the Reign of Edward
the third, and Lord Mayor of London, in the Reign of Richard the second, by
which Prince he was invested with the Order of Knighthood, for being so
signally instrumental in the Ruin of Wat Tiler, Jack Straw and his seditious
Accomplices, and had after the Addition of Gules, A plain Cross between four
Swords Argent, Pomell'd, Or, as a Coat of Augmentation annexed to his Paternal
Coat, viz. Sable a Bend Ermin, for setting out a Fleet of Ships, at his own
expense, and vanquishing John Mercer, and his piratical Rabble, who had so
infested the narrow Sea, that the Trade of the Merchant, was brought into a
deplorable Condition; and had sunk, had he not buoyd it up again, by his Care
and Magnanimity. Yet how laudable soever the work were, it escaped not the Envy
of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, who questioned him at the Couucel-Board,
for that he being a private Person, had embarked himself in an Attempt of so
much Concernment, without Order and License first obtained by the State: but by
the noble Favor he received from his honorable Friends there, especially
Rychard Fitzallan Earl of Arundell, whose Arms he placed in his House, as a
Monument of Gratitude, and left him a Legacy in his Will, he was fetched off
with Reputation. But to proceed, in Right of the former Alliance, he was
planted in the Possession of this Manor, and from him it devolved to his
Grandchild John Philipott Esquire. And he in the eleventh year of Henry the
sixth, exchanged this Manor with Sir Richard Bamme, Son of Adam Bamme, Lord
Mayor of London, for Twiford in Middlesex, and from him it descended to John
Bamme Sheriff of Kent in the second year of Richard the third. And he gave it
to his Daughter Katharine Bamme, who passed it away by Grant to Kempe and
Wiatt. Sir Thomas Kempe sold his moiety to Sir Thomas Wiatt, who having
forfeited this to the Crown, by his unhappy Defection in the second year of Q.
Mary, it lodged in the royal Revenue, until Queen Elizabeth in the twenty
fourth year of her Rule granted it back again, to the Lady Joan Wiatt, and her
Son George Wiatt Esquire; who in our Fathers memory, alienated it to Hayward: from
which Name by the Heir General of this Family, it is lately brought to
acknowledge Mr. Will. De Lawn of London for its present Proprietary. There was
a Chapel belonging to Grench, which upon the Inquisition returned into the
Court of Augmentation; but upon the Suppression in the Reign of Hen. the
eighth, was affirmed to have been erected by Sir John Philipott. I confess I
have seen no other Record, to evince any thing to the Contrary, and therefore I
acquiesce in that Testimony.

Vpbery is the last Manor in Gillingham, which was a Limb of that Demeasn
which related to the Nunnery, at Minster in Shepey: and when the whirlwind of
the common Dissolution in the Reign of Henry the eighth, had shook this into
the Revenue of the Crown, that Prince in the thirty eighth year of his Reign,
passed it away by Grant, (as appears by the original Patent) to Sir Thomas
Cheyney; whose Son Henry Lord Cheyney, exchanged it with other Lands with Queen
Elizabeth, and she (as is manifest by the Patent now in the Custody of
Brasen-nose College) granted it to Sir Edward Hobby; who about the latter end
of her Reign, conveyed it to the Reverend Alexander Nowell, Dean of Paul's: and
he dying without Issue, in the year 1601, left it for ever to Brasennose
College in Oxford, with this Proviso, that one of his Alliance should hold it
in Lease from that Society for ever, paying to the College an 100 Marks per
Annum, according to the Tenure of which Testamentary Restriction, it is now
enjoyed by Col. Tho. Blount of Wriklemersh Esquire.

Gillingham had a Market procured to it, to be held weekly, on the Thursday,
and a Fair to be observed yearly at the Feast of St. Cross, and seven days
after, by John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, in the eleventh year of Edward
the first, as appears Cart. Number. 3.

Lidsing, is the last place of Account in this Parish, it was, in Ages of a
higher Ascent, the Inheritance of an ancient Family, called Sharsted. Simon de
Sharsted possessed it at his Death, which was in the twenty fourth year of Edward
the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 42. In Ages of a lower Computation, I find Roger de
Say, to be possessed of it; and he about the fiftieth of E. the 3d. gives it to
Rob. Belknap the Judge, who about the tenth year of Richard the second, was by
Sentence from Parliament, exiled into Ireland, for too vehemently asserting the
Prerogative of the Crown, which in the Estimate of those Times, was thought to
have opened those sluices too much, which would have let in the Inundations of
an arbitrary Power upon the people's Liberties. But this Manor was again
restored by that Prince who looked upon this person as his Martyr, to him as
its ancient Possessor, in the twenty second year of his Reign, and he by his
Deed, bearing Date the eighth of October, in the second year of King Henry the
fourth, gives it to the Priory of St. Andrews in Rochester, for one Monk who
was a Priest, to celebrate Mass for ever for the Soul of his Father John
Belknap, and for the Soul of his Mother Alice, Wife of the said John, and
likewise for the Soul of himself, and all his Successors, in the Cathedral of
Rochester. This, upon the Dissolution of the former Priory, was by Henry the
eighth, upon his Institution of the Dean and Chapter of Rochester, granted to
them for their support and Alimony, and rested in their Revenue until these
Times.

There was another Chauntry founded at Twidall, by John Beaufits, which he
makes provision for, by his last Will, the twenty second of November, in the
year of our Lord, 1433, and orders it to be dedicated to John the Baptist, and
likewise that one Priest should there celebrate Mass for the Soul of Himself,
his Wife Alice, his Father John, his Mother Isabell, and his Uncle William
Beaufitz: the Seats in the Chapel, and other Remains, declare it to have been
formerly a neat and elegant Piece of Architecture.

Here was a signal Encounter (as the Annals of St. Austins testify) between
Edmund Ironside, and Canutus the Dane, wherein, after a Sharp Debate, the Dane
was broken and discomfited.

At Gillingham likewise (as Thomas Robburn a Monk of Winchester testifies) was
acted that bloody Tragedy by Earl Godwin, who slew all those Normans who
arrived with Edward unto the tenth man, for which his Name as well as his
Conscience, stands bespattered and stained with an indelible Character of
Ignominy, and Cruelty to all Posterity.

Goodwenston in the Hundred of Feversham, was the ancient Seat of Chich. The
first of Eminence, was Ernaldus Chich, who was a man of principal Account in
the Reign of Henry the second, Richard the first, and King John: nor were they
more eminent here, then they were at Canterbury, where they had large
Possessions, and unto them did the Aldermanry of Burgate appertain. Thomas
Chich of Goodwenston, was a prime Benefactor, to the Church of St. Mary Bredmin
in Canterbury, where his Name together with his Effigies are in an old
Character set up, in the West-window, as his Coat is likewise in the Chancel,
insculped in Stone-work. He was Bailiff of Canterbury, an Office not
contemptible in those Times, in the year 1259, and again in the year 1271.
Thomas Chich, this man's Son, was Sheriff of Kent in the forty fourth year of
Edward the third, and held his Shrievalty at Goodwenston. Thomas Chich, this
Man's Son, was Sheriff of Kent likewise in the fifteenth year of Richard the
second, and he was Grandfather to Valentine Chich, who matched with Philippa
Daughter and Heir of Sir Robert Chichley, Brother to Henry Chichley,
Archbishop of Canterbury, but dyed without Issue-male: so that his three
Sisters and Coheirs wedded to Kemp, Judde, and Martin, shared his Inheritance,
and by a joint Consent, about the Beginning of Henry the eighth, passed away
their Estate here and at Ewell, in this parish, to Pordage of Rodmersham: and
from this Name about the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth it passed away to Fagg
descended from the Faggs of Willesborough, where I find by the Court Rolls of
the Manor of Brabourne, that one Andrew Fagge held Lands there of that Manor,
in the Reign of Edward the third. But to go on, the Faggs had not long been
planted in their new achieved Purchase at this place, when Robert Fagge
concluded in two Daughters and Coheirs, Ann who was matched to Sir John Proud,
who was unhappily slain at the Groll, in the year 1628, whilst he did
vigorously pursue the Quarrel of the States General, at that Siege against the
Capital Enemy of their Religion, and Liberty, the Spaniard: and Mary espoused
to Sir Edward Partrich, for his first Wife, but dyed without any Issue
surviving by him. Sir John Proud left only one Daughter called Ann, who was
first wedded to Sir William Springate, and secondly to Mr. Isaac Pennington,
eldest Son to Isaac Pennington, Lord Mayor of London in the year 1643, in Right
of which Alliance, he at present holds this Manor of Goodwenston.

Goodneston by Wingham vulgarly called Gonston, lies in the Hundred of Wingham
and was formerly parcel of the Patrimony of Hastings Earl of Pembroke,
bequeathed to him by his Kinsman John de Hastings; who was first Husband to
Juliana, the Heir general of Roger de Leybourn. John de Hostings held it at
his Death, which was in the forty ninth year of Edward the third, and so did
his Son John de Hastings after him, and brings a pleading for it in the
fourteenth year of R. the second. After them the Malmains were possessed of it,
who had some Estate here before, which they had by Purchase from Pine and
Beauchamp, about the Beginning of Edward the third, and in this Family did it
remain, until Henry Malmains, about the year........ deceased without
Issue-male, and then by Agnes his Daughter and Heir married to Thomas Goldwell,
it came to own the Jurisdiction of that Name and Family, but was not long
fastened to it: for he ended likewise in a Female Heir called Joan, who was
wedded to Thomas Took of Bear Esquire, and so by her it was united to the
Revenue of this Family, and here rested; until that Age which came within the
Circle of our Grandsathers Knowledge, and then it was passed away to Henekar,
from which Name in Times almost of our Cognizance, it went away by a Revolution
like the former to Kelley, who conveyed it to Engham, descended from the noble
Family of the Enghams, of Woodchurch, who flourished so many Ages at Edingam,
and Pleurinden in that Parish.

Bonnington in this Parish, is the ancient Seat, from whence the numerous and
Knightly Family of Bois, did as from their original Fountain issue out, into
Fredville, Betteshhanger, Haukherst, and other parts of this County; and do
derive themselves from John de Bosco, who is mentioned in the Battle-Abby Roll,
of those who entered this Nation with Will. the Conqueror: and certainly they
have not been much less at this place then 17 Descents, as the datelesse Deeds
of several of this Family who writ themselves of Bonnington, do easily
manifest. Nor has it yet deserted the Name, or departed from the Possession of
Bois, being at this present, part of the patrimony of Sir John Bois, to whose
paternal Arms, the late King for his eminent and loyal Service performed by
him at Donnington Castle, added as an Augmentation, upon a Canton, Azure, a
Crown imperial, Or.

Rolling, is a third place in this Parish to be taken notice of: It contributed
a Seat as well as a Surname, formerly, to a Family called Rolling. Thomas
Rolling held some Lands in Lease at his Death, which was in the fisteenth year
of Ric. the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 143. which Lands belonged to a Chauntry in
St. Peter's Church in Sandwich, and lay in Eastry, near his Manor of Rolling.
After this Family was worn out, the Idley's who had large Possessions about
Mepham, Cobham, and Higham, as appears by the Inquisition taken after the Death
of John Idelegh, in the forty third year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number.
58. Part secunda, were by Purchase seated in the Possession, and preserved it
until the Reign of Henry the eighth; and then it was alienated to Butler of
Heronden in Eastry; from whom in the Beginning of the reign of Q. Eliz. it went
away to Roger Manwood, Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer: whose Son Sir Peter
Manwood, in our Fathers Remembrance, alienated it to Dickenson, from whom not
many years since it was brought over to be the Possession of Master..........
Richards.

Godmersham in the Hundred of Felborough, was given to the Monks of
Christ-Church in Canterbury, by Beornulfus King of the Mercians, in the year of
Grace eight hundred twenty and one, free as Adisham; and it was, at the Request
of Archbishop Vlfred, to supply the Covent both with Food and Raiment, which
Grant Archbishop Egelnoth, who it seems had some Interest in the Place, in the
year one Thousand thirty and six, did fully confirm. And in the year one
thousand three hundred fourscore and seven, Thomas Arundell Archbishop of
Canterbury, with the especial License of Richard the second, appropriated the
Tiths of the Rectory of Godmersham, to the Church of Christ-church, to the
Support and Maintenance of the Fabric of the Church abovesaid.

If you will see what Value was set upon this Manor in the Time of the
Conqueror, I shall afford you a Sight of it, out of Doomsday Book. Godmersham
(says that Register) est Manerium Monachorum, and de Vestitu eorum, and in
Tempore Edwardi Regis, se defendebat pro VIII. Sullings, and est appretiatum
XX. lb. sed tamen reddit XXX. That is, it paid a Rent of thirty pound to the
Church.

Yolands and Ford, are two other little Manors in this Parish, which
acknowledged themselves anciently to be parcel of the Inheritance of Valoigns.
And Robert de Valoigns, dyed possessed of these and much other Land in this
Track, in the nineteenth year of Edward the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 41. Henry de
Valoigns, this man's Son, was Sheriff of Kent, in the fourteenth of King Edward
the third, and he had Issue Waretius de Valoigns, and Stephen de Valoigns who
planted himself at Gore-Court in Otham, and is represented in Record, to be one
of the Conservators of the Peace for this County, in the twenty ninth, and
thirty first years of Edward the third: but Waretius de Valoigns determined in
two Daughters and Coheirs, one was matched to Fogge, and the other to Thomas
Aldon, Son of Thomas de Aldon, who was one of the Conservators of the Peace in
Kent in the tenth and twelfth years of Edward the third, and he in her Right
was entitled to the Possession of these places. And in this Family did it for
diverse years continue, until the ordinary Mutation of Purchase rolled them
into the Inheritance of Austin; to which Name, the Title remained constantly
linked, until that Age we style our Grandfathers, and then they were by
Richard Austin, passed away by Sale to Broadnix, so that they are now by
paternal Right, devolved to Thomas Broadnix Esquire, in whose Estate the
instant Propriety of them does lie involved.

Egerton in Godmersham was a Manor which formerly swelled the demeasn of the
noble Family of Valence, who were Earls of Pembroke. Aymer de Valence Earl of
Pembroke, held it at his Death, which was in the seventeenth year of Edward the
second, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 75. And leaving no lawful Issue, this, upon
the partition of his Estate, increased the Revenue of John Comin Earl of
Badzenoth in Scotland, who had married Joan one of his two Sisters and Coheirs:
But long it remained not here, for he deceased without any Issue-male, so that
Joan his sole Daughter, matched to David de Strabolgie Earl of Atholl, became
his Heir, and he in her Right, was found to be invested in the Possession, in
the first year of Edw. the third, as is manifest Rot. Esc. Number. 85. And from
him did it devolve by Descent, to his Son and Heir, David de Strabolgie, who in
the seventh year of Edward the third, by Deed, settled it on his Kinsman Sir
Henry de Hills, which, Katharine his Widow and Countess confirms, the
twentieth year of that Prince: Gilbert de Hills, lies buried in Godmersham
Church, and as appears by his Pourtraicture in his Armor, was a person of
Eminence in that Age, wherein he flourished, and from him, and Sir Henry de
Hills, did issue forth many eminent and worthy Successors, who were
Proprietaries of this Manor, until that Age which fell within the Precincts
of our Crandfathers Memory, and then it went away by Sale to Scot, a Cadet or
younger Sprig of the Scotts of Scotts-Hall: the Heir General of which Family,
was Mrs. Dorothy Scott, who being lately matched to Mr. Daniell Gotherson, he
in her Right is now (though not without a signal Contention at Law, with some
collateral Pretenders to the Title) peaceably planted in the Possession of it.

Godmersham as the Records of Christ-church inform me, had the Grant of a
Market, to be observed weekly on the Tuesday, and a Fair yearly upon the
Thursday and Friday, in Whitson Week by the Prior of Christ-church, in the
Reign of Edward the third.

Goudherst in the Hundred of Marden, with the inherent Manor of Bedgebury,
were the ancient Patrimony of a Family of no cheap Account in this Track,
which, as it chose one of these Manors for its Seat, so did it derive its
Surname from thence likewise, and was called Bedgbury, and certainly were of a
very high Ascent in their Extraction. For in a Deed without Date, one John de
Bedgebury demises some parcels of Land to William de Comden of Comden House in
this Parish, and the Seal affixed to this Deed is a Cavalier on Horseback,
armed, like one of the Knights Templers, which argues that he lived before the
Suppression of that Order, and assumed that Impresse out of his particular
Affection to them; or else, which was customary in those Times, out of some
signal and solemn vow, to maintain the Temple of our Savior, from the
Assaults and barbarous Impressions of Infidels, which these persons were by
their Oath, and first Institution, obliged vigorously to defend also. John de
Bedgebury, this man's Successor, paid respective Aid for his Lands at
Goudherst, and likewise for his Manor of Bedgebury, at making the Black Prince
Knight, in the twentieth year of Edward the third, and left these above recited
Manors to his Son John de Bedgebury who dying without Issue, his Sister became
his Sole Inheritrix, who by matching with Thomas Colepeper of Bayhall in
Pepenbury, Sheriff of Kent in the eighteenth year of Richard the second,
fastened the Propriety of these places, to the Interest of this Family, where
they continued undivided, but in the thirty eighth year of Henry the eighth,
Court Shingley was by Thomas Colepeper alienated to Stephen Darell: but
Goudherst and Bedgebury, were not plucked away from this Family, by this
Alienation, but continued united to their Estate, so that at this Day they own
Thomas Colepeper Esquire, for their Proprietary.

Combwell was a Priory of Black Canons, under the Rule of St. Augustine, and was
founded by Sir Robert de Thurnham, and dedicated to the Honor of St. Mary
Magdalen. Their Revenue lay scattered in Marden, Stapleherst, and Goudherst; in
which last, there was an obscure Cell, or Convent of Nuns, which had their
principal Subsistence by their Charity, whose Ruins are yet visible, though
their Revenue, was so narrow, that no Record informs us where it was situated.
Upon the Dissolution in the Reign of Henry the eighth, this devolving to the
Crown, that Prince in the thirty fourth year of his Government, granted it to
Sir John Gage, one of the Justices of the Peace, both for Sussex and Kent; and
his Successor conveyed it to Colepeper, who immediately after, passed it away
to William Campion Esquire, Ancestor to Sir William Campion, who was offered up
a Sacrifice, to the Cause and Quarrel of the last King at Colchester, in the
year one thousand fix hundred forty eight, and in his Heirs is the Interest of
this Manor at this instant resident.

Finchcocks is a third place of note in this Parish, made more eminent in that
it was the Mansion of a Family of that Surname, whom, although I find invested
in the Possession of this place, ever since the fortieth year of Henry the
third, yet do I not discover that any of the Family was illustrious by any
important undertaking, or famous by any eminent Office. The next Family which
stepped into the Possession was Horden of Horden; and he became Proprietary of it
by Purchase about the Beginning of Henry the sixth, one of which Family was
Edward Horden Esquire, who was Knight of the Greencloth to Edward the sixth,
Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth: who dyed without Issue-male, and left his
Estate to be shared between two Daughters and Coheirs, Elizabeth matched to Mr.
Paul Bathurst, descended from Bathurst Street in Nordiam, and Mary espoused to
Mr. Delves of Fletchings, who in her Right carried away Horden, where
certainly, the above-recited Family had flourished under a noble Estimate; for
Edward Horden the last of this Name was issued out from William Chichley,
second Brother to Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury; and for some
considerable Service performed to the Crown, had the Augmentation of a Regal
Diadem, upon a Canton added to his paternal Coat, by Queen Elizabeth. But to
proceed, Finchcocks by the abovementioned match, devolved to be the Possession
of Bathurst, and so owns it self at this Day, to be the Estate of this Name and
Family.

Patenden is another place which gave Seat and Surname to a Family of no vulgar
Repute in this County, and was seated in its Possession, as appears by original
Deeds and other old Records, as high as the Reign of Edward the first, and
where, in the twenty ninth year of Henry the sixth, there was issued out a
Commission to Gervas Clifton Esquire, then Sheriff of the County, to return all
those, who did portare Arma antiqua. Amongst the Register and Catalogue of
those who were then returned, Patenden is recorded, who was Lord of this place,
and from him did the Propriety of this place by Descent glide down to his
Successor, who, in those Times we style our Fathers, passed it away by Sale to
Mr. Bathurst.

The Borough of Twisden, is a fifth place, which invites us to a Survey. It was
in elder Generations the Inheritance of Twisdens, upon whom, I may without any
Supply of Flattery, strew those just Attributes of Ancient and Noble. The
first, that I find by Deed to be of this Family, Possessor of it, was Adam de
Twisden, and he was seized of it, This Rog. Twisden was Steward to the Abbey of
St. Augustins a place of great Trust in those Times.
in the one and twentieth of Edward the first. In times of a lower Descent,
Roger Twisden was possessed of it, and in the fifth year of H. the fourth,
affixes to a Deed now in the Hands of Sir Roger Twisden, of Roydon Hall,
Baronet, the Signature or Impression of a Cockatrice on Wax. The Crest, which,
at this Day, is annexed to the paternal Coat of this Family, a rare thing in
those Times when Crests were infrequent and unusual, and began to be
customary, when those eminent Familyes who were embarked in the two Factions,
of York and Lancaster, assumed them to serve as Evidences or Symbols of
Distinction, whereby the Son might avoid the plunging his Sword in the Bowels
of his Father, or a Brother the Sheathing his in the Entrails of his Brother.
But to proceed, the last of this Name, who possessed this place, was Roger
Twisden, who about the Beginning of H. the sixth, passed it away to Roger
Twisden, and he immediately after conveyed it by Sale to Geffrey Allen, who
about the latter end of H. the sixth, settled the Right of it by Deed in Thomas
Windhill. And thus far do the Copies of diverse original Evidences, which
relate to this Place, extend and no farther. After this, it was for diverse
Descents wrapped up in the Propriety of Austin, who not many years since expiring
in a Female Inheritrix, she, by matching with Mr. Foul a Cadet of the Fowls
of River-Hall in Sussen, has made it the present Possession of that Name and
Family.

Shingley is another Manor in Goudherst, which belonged to that Revenue which
did own the Signory of the Priory of Leeds, and upon the suppression, when the
Patrimony of this Cloister was broken to pieces by the Scepter of Henry the
Eighth, this was in the thirty sixth year of that Prince granted to Thomas
Colepeper of Bedgebury Esquire, with all the Privileges which it was fortified
with, when it related to the abovementioned Cloister, as namely to be
Tith-free, etc. But the Title (such a Moath and Canker cleaves to the Patrimony
of the Church when it is transplanted) made no long stay in Colepeper, for in
the thirty eighth year of Henry the Eighth, this Thomas Colepeper alienated it
to Stephen and Thomas Darrell; but in this Family likewise was the Possession
of as frail a permanence: for they nor long after conveyed it to William
Campion Esquire, Counselor at Law, from whom it descended to Sir William
Campion Governor of Borestall House near Oxford, for His Late Majesty, and who
was after slain at Colchester, asserting the Royal Interest, and in his
Descendants is the Propriety of it still wrapped up.

Bokinfold is the last place of Consideration in Goudherst; it was a Manor
which related to that Chauntry, which was founded here by Hamon de Crevequer,
and confirmed with all the Franchises annexed to it by Edward the Third, in the
one and fortieth year of his Reign, and in this Patent of Inspection and
Ratification, it is mentioned that Hamon de Crevequer, was its Founder: But the
common Dissolution in the Reign of Henry the eighth, renting away (like some
sudden and impetuous Torrent) this Manor from those Ends and Uses it was
first designed to, lodged it in the Crown, and then the abovesaid Prince in the
one and thirtieth year of his Reign, granted it to Paul Sidnore Gentleman, and
he not long after conveyed it to Sir John Gates; but he being one of the
principal Emissaries or Accomplices of John Seymour Duke of Somerset, being
inwrapped and engaged past Recovery in the Design of the above said Duke, sunk
in the Ruins of that unfortunate Peer, and was convicted of High Treason, and
beheaded on Tower Hill, in the fourth year of Edward the sixth. Upon his
Tragedy, this Manor returned to the Crown, and stayed there, until the
Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, and then it was granted to Katherine Tongue, who
not long after passed it away to Colepeper of Bedgebury, who, almost in our
remembrance, passed away that part of this Great Manor, which is circumscribed
within the Verge of Goudherst to the instant Proprietary Brewer.

Joan Widow of Roger de Bedgebury, in the third year of Richard the second,
obtained a weekly Market to Goudhurst on the Wednesday, and a Fair yearly on
the Day of our Ladies Assumption, Cart. de Anno tertio Richardi secundi, Numb.
13.

H. H. H. H.
HAckington, otherwise called St. Stephens, lies partly in the Hundred of
Bredge and Petham, and partly in that of Westgate, and did in elder Times
appertain to the Monks of Christ-Church in Canterbury, until it was exchanged
by the Prior, and that Covent and the Monks of it, with Stephen Langton,
Archbishop of Canterbury, for other Houses situated near the Priory of St.
Gregory's in Canterbury, and he having here at Hackington erected a new
Fabric, bestowed and settled it on his Brother Simon de Langton, Archdeacon of
Canterbury, from whom it successively came down to the following Archdeacons,
and became their fixed Mansion until the Reign of Henry the eighth, of those
who were invested with that Office: But in the general suppression, the impious
hand of sacrilege having plucked it off from the Church; it was annexed to the
Crown, and continued there until Queen Elizabeth granted it to Sir Roger
Manwood, chief Baron of the Exchequer, and from him did it devolve to his
Grandchild, Sir John Manwood, who passed it away in our Memory to Colonel Sir
Thomas Colepeper, Colonel of a Regiment of Foot in the Low Countries, in whose
Descendants the Possession is now resident.

In Times of a very high Ascent, Archbishop Hubert, and after him Archbishop
Baldwin had a Design to have erected a College first here at Hackington, and
then upon second Thoughts at Lambeth; but the Monks of Christ-church, believing
that this intended new Seminary of Religion, might something by its
Interposition darken the Glory and Grandeur of their Covent, first by Alanus
their then Prior, and afterward by Proxy, so vigorously opposed this Project
at Rome, that by the Favor and Indulgence of the then Popes, it was vacated and
extinguished: But in times subsequent to these, these Monks having much
endeared Stephen Langton, the then Archbishop, by bestowing some Signal Favors
on Simon de Langton his Brother, the Controversy, which was fomented by the
above mentioned Design, by his compliance with the Monks was appeased, and
entombed in an amicable Pacification.

Broad-oake is another little Manor in Hackington, which anciently made up the
Demeasne of the Noble Family of Hadlow: for Nicholas de Hadlow, I find had a
Charter of Free Warren to his Lands at Medgrove and Broadoake, in the one and
twentieth year of Edward the first: After Hadlow was extinguished, the ancient
Family of Hardres of upper Hardres were ingrafted in the Inheritance, and one
Edmund Hardres, as I discover by an old Court-roll, held it in the fourth year
of Henry the 4th. and after him his Grandchild George Hardres died possessed
both of the Lands at Medgrove and Broadoake, in the one and twentieth of Edward
the fourth, and in this Name was the Possession constant until the Beginning of
Henry the eighth, and then they were passed away by Sale to Sir Edward Boughton
of Burwash in Plumsted, and his Son Thomas Boughton Esquire, in the seventh
year of Edward the sixth, alienated them to Reginald Highgate and William
Hanwick, and they not long after conveyed them to...... Roper Esquire, from
whom they are now by Descent transmitted to his Successor, Mr. Edward Roper of
Well Hall in Eltham.

Shalford and Medgrove were always annexed to Hackington above mentioned, of
which they were accounted, but as Limbs or Ingredients, and in the fourteenth
year of Queen Elizabeth, were granted in Lease for Life to Sir Roger Manwood
for Life, but the Fee-simple remained in the Crown, until about the Beginning
of King Charles, and then they were granted to Sir Edward Sidhenham, and Mr.
Smith, and they not long after passed them away to Mr. Robert Austin, then of
London, but now of Bexley in this County.

Hadlow in the Hundred of Hadlow Borough and Littlefeild, gave both Seat and
Surname to a Family ancient and conspicuous enough in this Track: but whether
the same with that Family which was seated at Hadlow-place in Crundall, is
altogether ambiguous; certain I am that Edmund de Hadlow died seized of it in
the thirty second of Edward the third, and from this Name in the subsequent Age
it came to the Crown, but whether by Escheat, Exchange, or Purchase; no Beam,
scattered from any private or public Record, can so far enlighten my
Knowledge as to discover. Henry the sixth, in the twenty fifth of his Reign,
granted this and many other Possessions, lying about the Skirts of the Lowey of
Tunbridge to Humphrey Stafford Duke of Buckingham, and with this Name it went
along till Edward Stafford being infortunately offered up a Sacrifice to the
Malice and Ambition of Cardinal Wolsey, in the Reign of Henry the eighth, and
the Loss of his Head having been the expiation of some Vanities, which he had
been too much Guilty of, the Right by his Attaint flowing back into the Crown,
it was invested in the twentieth year of Henry the eighth by Royal Concession
in John Vane Esquire, whose Successor Sir Henry Vane, not many years since sold
it to Thomas Petley, whose descendant now enjoyes it.

Peckham in this Parish was part of the Patrimony of the Noble Family of
Peckham, and one John Peckham (as the Book called the Survey of the Manors of
Hadlow, taken in the fourteenth year of Edward the fourth informs me) anciently
possessed it, from which Name it was by Sale rent away, and incorporated into the
Interest of Colepeper; for John Colepeper (as the above mentioned Survey
instructs me) sold it to Leigh, and after the Possession had been for some
intermission of Time riveted into this Family, it was by the same Alienation
taken away, and by John Leigh transmittted to Sir George Rivers, whose Son Sir
John Rivers, did lately upon his Decease as his Heir successively claim it.

The Manor of Fromonds is mentioned likewise in the abovesaid Survey: It gave
Surname to Fromonds, Ancestor to Fromond of Cheame in Surrey; but whether it
yielded Seat likewise, is the Question. Certain it is, it staid not long in
this Name: for Richard Fromond sold it to Colepeper: nor was it long fixed or
constant in this Family neither; for Richard Colepeper after the ebbing away of
some successive Generations cast the Possession by sale into John Fromond
again, originally extracted from the above mentioned Richard Fromond: and to
this Name this Seat and its Interest continues (for ought I can yet discover)
at this instant fastened and united.

Causton is the next (because it owned a Family of that Surname) that claims
our Consideration. It was in Ages of higher Ascent, the Demesne and Interest of
some of this Name; but whether the Caustons of the County of Salop were issued
from hence, or these of this Seat extracted originally from thence, is yet
under dispute; and the more, because Eviderce of Deeds, which is the Lant horn,
not only of Antiquity, but sometimes of Reason likewise, is wholly wanting. It
is without Controversy, this Mansion was not long in the Caustons, for the
thread of Succession was interrupted and broken, and Hugh Causton by Sale
conveyed it over to the Wattons of Addington: nor was it long resident here,
for William Watton sold it to Thomas Peckham branched out from the Peckham, of
Yaldham in Wrotham, from whom by a like Mutation that changed the Scene and
Face of the Title; it was alienated to Vane, and after some stay in that Name,
lately by Purchase made the Propriety of Maynard of Mayfeild in the County of
Sussex.

Totlingbery had the Repute of a Manor also, and was the Mansion sometime of
that Name, till Time the great Channel of all Things, that either sinks or
preserves them, carried it down from John Totlingbery, to the Family of Roberts
of Glastenbury in Cranbrook, and the same stream of vicissitude wafted it not
long after from Walter Roberts the Last of that Name, which enjoyed it, to John
Vane Esquire; where (no Record or Evidence suggesting yet any thing to the
contrary) I think it yet continues.

Goldhell may be looked upon as a place of some importance, since some Families
of Estimate have been Possessors of it, for first it was the Possession of the
Bealds; so they are styled in the Survey. And when this Family began to moulder
away, the Title by Sale shifted it self to the Fromonds, a Name eminent enough
in this Track: and when they began to languish away into the common Familty of
Families: John Fromond sold it to the Colepepers of Oxenhoath. And this Branch
of the Colepepers concluding at last in three Daughters and Coheirs; one of
them being wedded to Cotton of Lanwade in the County of Cambridge, made this
Part of the Revenue of that Family; but they desiring to contract their
Interest into a nearer Circumference, cast this by sale into the Possession of
Sir George Chowne, to whose Successor it very lately entitled it self.

Goding and Crombery are Manors of some Signal Respect, since they
acknowledged themselves to be part of the Patrimony of Fromond, a Family by an
eminent Succession of Gentry noble and conspicuous, which being by Time broken
and disordered; it not long after was by Thoma Fromond sold to John Goding.
From whom after the series of that Name was by the same alteration interrupted;
it was conveyed to the Peckhams, where it hao not long made its Residence, but
the Title by purchase (like an Orb never much in repose) rolled it self from
Thomas Peckham into Vane, where for some years it has rested.

The Manor of Moateland^ shall be the last mentioned, (though not in the above
specified Survey, yet) in mine, in Relation to this Parish. The first Family
that I track in the Record to be Possessors of it, were the Bakers of
East-Peckham, in which Name the Propriety of it lay wrapped up, till Richard
Baker did divest himself of his Right, and passed it over by Sale to Burgess:
where it had not long dwelt, but the same Change untwined it. For Thomas
Burgess alienated it to Henry Leigh, and in his Successor (till a clearer Ray
of more Modern Intelligence, directs me to believe the Contrary) I think the
Possession is resident.

There are two other Seats of Venerable Account in this Parish. The Manor of
the Rectory is the first, which in the year 1287. was by Thomas de Inglethorp
Bishop of Rochester (as the Records of that Church signify) appropriated to
the Knights of St. John, otherwise called the Knights Hospitalers, and remained
locked up in their Demeasne, until the public Suppression snatched it away,
and united it to the Crown, where it lodged until the second year of Edward the
sixth, and then it was granted to Sir Ralph Vane, whose Descendant about the
middle of Queen Elizabeth passed it away to Roger Twisden Esquire, Captain of a
Troop of Kentish Gentlemen at the Camp formed at Tilbury, to oppose the Hostile
Eruptions of the Spanish in the year 1588. And from him it is now come by
Descent to be possessed by his Grandchild, that learned and accomplished
Gentleman Sir Roger Twisden of Roydon Hall, Knight and Baroner.

The second is Fish-Hall, the Mansion formerly of John de Fisher, so called,
because he was invested with a Privilege by Gilbert de Clare, Earl of
Gloucester, and Lord of the Lowey of Tunbridge, to have the Fishing freely and
uncontrouledly within his Jurisdiction, or as far as it did extend, so that
from this Immunity or Franchise, his Posterity contracted the Surname of
Fisher, and for some Ages, did the Right of it remain interwoven with the
Demeasne of this Family, till Richard Fisher sold it to John Vane Esquire, from
whom the same Revolution not long after transported it to Rivers of Chafford,
and now the Title is ingrafted into a younger Branch of that Family.

Halling in the Hundred of Shamell, has nothing remarkable in it but the Manor
of Langridge, alias Bavent; for so it is written frequently in Records, and
indeed not without some Reason to support the Orthography; for in Times of
elder Prescription, it gave both Seat and Surname to a Family that had that
Appellation, and there is some Track or Print yet of the Ruins of a
Mansionhouse in that Field, which is at this Day called Bavents; and Roger de
Bavent died in possession of it in the thirty first year of Edward the third:
and when this Name was worn out, the next which we find in Succession to be
Proprietary of it, was Langridge, a Branch spouted out from that Stem of
Langridge, which was anciently planted in the County of South-hampton. And when
this Family was decayed and vanished, and had left nothing to evidence to us
that it had once a Being here: but the adopting this Manor into its Name, the
Possession went into Melford, and here, after it had had some short abode, it
abandoned this Family, and cast the Interest of it into the Patrimony of
Raynwell, whose Successor after some short Flux of Time (as appears by the Book
of Aid kept in the Exchequer) sold it to Robert Wotton, in the seventeenth year
of Henry the seventh, and he suddenly after alienated this and other Lands to
Whorne of Cuckston; nor was the Title any length of Time lodged in this Name;
for a Fate of the same condition with the former carried it over to Vane, from
whom it flowed away in the same Current, and by Sale emptied it self into
Barnewell, nor was it less permanent there, for the same inconstant Tide
wafted it down to Nicholas Lewson, and Sir Richard Lewson his Grandchild,
desirous to wrap up all his Interest within the County of Stafford, alienated
his Kentish Lands to several persons, and sold those which were part of his
Demesne here to Barber.

The Manor of Halling it self was given to the Church of Rochester, by Egbert
King of the West Saxons, in the year of our Lord 838. and has continued parcel
of the Churches Patrimony in an uninterrupted Succession of Time, till the year
1643. and then the Title was raveled and discomposed.

Halden in the Hundred of Blackborne and Barekley has nothing worthy in it that
may oblige a Remembrance, but only Hales-place, from whence, as from their
Fountain, the several Streams of the Hales, that in divided Rivulets have
spread themselves over the whole County, did originally break forth. But where
this Hales-place is now placed, or in what Angle of the Parish it is situated:
I confess I cannot instruct my self, unless it be that Great House which was
the Original Seat of the Scots, before they planted at Congerherst in
Haukherst, and which Reginald Scot sold to Sir Edward Hales. Indeed it is often
mentioned in the Pedigree of Hales, and likewise in the Deeds of that Family,
as lying in Halden, which is evidence enough that there was such a Mansion in
this Parish; though peradventure through Neglect and Disuse, and by altering
its Possessor, it have at present lost its Name.

Halstow in the Hundred of Hoo, was anciently part of the Barony of Bardolph,
but did not long rest here, for Isolda the Daughter and Coheir of Hugh de
Bardolph, being married to Henry Lord Gray, this was thrown into that Scale
(with other Demesnes of vast Estimate) which did after swell the Revenue of
this Baron into a huge Dimension. But, as all sublunary matters have the Fate
of an uncertain inconstancy written in indelible Characters upon them, so had
this; for Richard Lord Gray, this man's Successor, sold it to John Lord Cobham,
and he died possessed of it in the thirty sixth year of Edward the third, from
whose Heir an equivalent Vicissitude resigned it up to the illustrious Family
of Zouch; and William La Zouch, extracted from the Zouches of Haringworth in
the County of North-hampton, died actually possessed of it in the fifth year of
Richard the second; and after the Title had been some years knit to the
Relation and Interest of this Family, it was at length torn off by the rough
Hand of Time, and by Sale surrendered up to Norris, from whose Heir by as quick
a Transition it conveyed it self over to Sir Edward Hales Grandfather to Sir
Edward Hales Baronet, now surviving.

Halsted in the Hundred of Codsheath was the Inheritance of a good old Family
called Malavill, who were of no contemptible Account in this part of the
County; for in the Pipe-Rols, relating to the Reign of King John, I discover,
that Robert de Malavill was one of the Recognitores magnae Assisae, in the
fourth year of that Prince, and then again in the seventh year of his Rule, he
was dignified with that eminent Place of Trust, and he had Issue William de
Malavil, who was in the enjoyment of this Manor at his Death, which was in the
Reign of Henry the third, as appears by an escheat Roll, marked with the number
56. And in this Family did the Right and Title of it lie involved, until the
latter End of Edward the third; and then the noted Family of Bures stepped by
Purchase into the Possession, and John Bures, (as appears to me by an old Deed)
held it in the fourth year of Richard the second; he was Son of William Bures,
who paid respective Aid for part of a Knights-fee, which lay in Bromley, in the
twentieth year of Edward the third, at making the Black Prince Knight; and
William Bures Son of John lies entombed in Halsted Church, pourtraied at length
in Brass, and mail'd in Armor upon a fair Gravestone, being Marble, with this
Inscription: Hic jacet Willielmus Bures Armigeri Dominus Manerii de Halsted,
qui obiit 1454. And this was he who was Sheriff of Kent, in the eleventh year
of Henry the sixth: But after his Death it was not long in the Fruition of this
Name; for about the Beginning of Edward the fourth, I find it in the Hands of
Thomas Bourchier, descended from the Bourchiers of Essex; and he about the
Latter End of that Prince, passed it away to Stephen Petley Esquire, who lies
buried in Halsted Church. And in this Family was the Title fixed, until the
Beginning of King James, and then the Fatality of Sale did alternate the
Possession, and annexed it to the Inheritance of Sir Thomas Watson, who dying
without Issue-male; his only Daughter and Heir was espoused to Sir William
Pope, afterward created Earl of Down in Ireland by King James, and so in her
Right this Manor became the Inheritance of his Son, the Right Honorable
William Earl of Down, who not many years since passed it away to Mr. Edward
Ash, whose Widow Mrs......... Ash, holds it at this instant in Right of Dower.

Halstow in the Hundred of Milton, has nothing memorable in it, but Berkesore
alias Basser-court, which was, as high as any print of Antiquity can direct me
to discover, the Patrimony of the Church; for King Stephen devoted it to find a
supply of perpetual Lights before the Chest or Shrine ( ante Capsam, those are
the words of the Record) of Anselme the eminent Archbishop of Canterbury; and
it has been many years past held by the Darrels of Cale-hill as Lessees, and
is still by that Right enjoyed by Sir John Darrell of the same place.

The Church of Halstow, (as the Records of Christ-church instruct us) was given
by Boniface Archbishop of Canterbury, to buy Books, for the Chaunter of that
Covent.

Hamme in the Hundred of Eastry, was, as the Records of Christ-church in
Canterbury inform me, given to the Prior and Monks of that Covent in the year
934. by one Eylfleda; but how it was rated in the Conqueror's Time, when, if
not all, yet at least the principal part of this County was surveyed, the Pages
of Doomesday Book are silent: In brief, the Moity of this Manor, (for one Half
of it was always under the Jurisdiction of Lay-proprietaries) being by the
Donation abovesaid, made parcel of the Spiritual Patrimony, remained treasured
up in the Revenue of the Church, as in an unviolable Exchequer, until both the
Covent of Christ-church, and all its Demeasne, was surrendered into the Hands
of Henry the eighth, and that Prince in the thirty fifth year of his Reign,
granted that part of it which belonged to the Priory of Christ-church to Sir
Thomas Moile, who not long after passed it away to Sir Robert Oxenbridge
Knight, from which Family in our Grandfathers memory it went away by Sale to
Bois of Betshanger.

The other Moity of Hamme, belonged to the Criolls of Walmer, of which Family I
shall speak more at that Place: Simon de Crioll, as I discover by old Deeds,
held it in the Reign of King John and Henry the third, and transmitted it to
his Son Nicolas de Crioll, who held it at his Death, which was in the one and
thirtieth of Edward the first, and from him did it by the steps of several
Generations descend to Sir Thomas Crioll, who was slain at the second Battle of
Sr. Albans, tamely, and in cold Blood; that is, he was beheaded by Queen
Margaret, wife to King Henry the sixth, in the thirty eighth of that Prince's
Reign, because he had been an eager Partisan of the House of York, and being
thus infortunately cut off, left that great Estate he was possessed of, in this
County, to two Daughters and Coheirs, one of which was matched for his second
wife to John Fogg of Repton Esquire; Son and Heir of Sir William Fogg, and he had
Issue by her Thomas Fogg, Sergeant Porter of Callis Esquire, a Place of eminent
Trust and Concernment in those Times. And he ended in two Daughters and
Coheirs; Anne first matched to Mr. William Scott, Brother of Sir Reginald; and
secondly, to Mr. Henry Isham, and Alice first wedded to Edward Scott, of the
Moat in Sussex Esquire, and after to Sir Robert Oxenbridge, of the County of
South-hampton; but the Moity of this Manor of Hamme, upon the dividing the
Estate into equal Portions, fell to be the Inheritance of Edward Scott, in
Right of Alice his wife, and his Descendant in our Grandfathers Remembrance
alienated all his Interest and Concernment here, to Bois of Betshanger, whose
Successor Mr. John Bois of Betshanger Esquire, is now entirely possessed of this
Manor; as namely, of that Moity, which came over to this Family, by Purchase
from Oxenbridge, as well as of that, which devolved to this Name, by Purchase
from Scott.

Harbledowne in the Hundred of Westgate, though at present but an obscure
Village, and not of much Eminence, was in Time of more ancient Date famous for
three memorable Places. First, for an old Chapel situated upon the Margin of
that Precipice which overlooks that way which leads to Canterbury. In which
Oratory, as Tradition informs us, was preserved the Slipper of Thomas Becket,
taken from one of his Feet after his being destroyed at his own Church at
Canterbury, and which, as Report insinuates, was bespattered with his Blood;
this being curiously enchased with Diamonds (so much did those Times dote on
this then reputed Saint and Martyr) was let down for Passengers, who traveled
to Canterbury to offer up their Orizons at his Shrine, to adore with a kiss;
nor was it returned, but full fraighted and laden with the Benevolences of
devoted Pilgrims.

The second was Polres, which anciently had and still keeps the Repute of a
Manor; John de Polre, Son of John de Polre paid respective Aid for it, in the
twentieth year of Edward the third; and when after some expiration of Time,
this Family began to find the common Sepulcher which wairs upon all Humane
Glory, Decay and Oblivion; the Martins, a Name of generous extraction in this
Track, stepped in and by Purchase became Lords of the Fee, and held it, till the
Name being contracted into Anne Sole Daughter and Heir of Jo. Martin by
marriage with Roger Brent; it was knit to the Patrimony of that Family, and so
for some years remained undissolved, till the Union by Sale was broken; and not
long since passed over to Sir Thomas Bind; where, at present, the Possession is
wound up with the other Demeasne of that Family.

The Manor of Beverley is a third place of Note in Harbledowne. It was the
Sear of the ancient Family of Beverley, before they removed to Tancrey Island
in Fordwich; and having remained Proprietaries of it many Generations, by
Efflux and Descent it was guided down to William Beverley Esquite, from whom
the Title ebbed away, and in whom the Name determined; for, he deceasing
without Issue Male, Beatrix was his only Daughter and Heir, who was matched to
Thomas Norton Esquire, by which Alliance, the Title of this place became
inter-woven with his Inheritance, and continued clasped up in it, until the
middle of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and then it was conveyed to Merseday,
in which Family it had a settled Residence, until some sew years since the
Mutation of Sale brought it to one Mr........ Richardson for its Proprietary.

Lanfranck, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 1071. Founded an Hospital at
Harbledowne for Lepers, employed afterward to the Use of aged people. William
Wittlesey Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 1371. founded a Chauntry here,
and dedicated it to the Honor of St. Nicholas, which Foundation, in the year
1402. Was by Archbishop Arundell fully ratified and confirmed.

Nether-Hardres in the Hundred of Bridge and Petham, is eminent for two Places
situated within the Precincts and Ambuts of it. The first is Hepington, which
certainly was anciently the Chichs of the Dungeon in Canterbury; for I have
seen a Record, wherein Nicolas Mesingham releases his Right in this and diverse
other Lands confining on Canterbury to Tho. Chich. But let it be granted, it
was theirs; certainly the Title was very volatile and uncertain; for I find the
Foggs when they expired, to be next in Possession of it, which was as high as
the entrance into the Reign of Hen. the fourth. And here for some Ages the
Title fixed it self, till at length the Fatality of Time passed it over by Sale
to Hales, one of whose Successors has lately sold the Mansion House to Sir
Thomas Godfrey, but still preserves the Propriety of the Manor it self in his
Name.

Lindeshore, but vulgarly called Linsore, is the second Place that Objects it
self to a Consideration. In the eighth of Edward the third an Original Fine
represents it to be Thomas de Garwinton's; and here many years the Possession
was resident, till Joan his Niece, became (by Reason her Nephew Thomas
Garwinton, Grandchild to this Thomas de Garwinton died without Issue) the Heir
General of this Family, and she being married to Richard Haut, a Cadet of the
Hauts of Hautsborne, alias Bishops-Bourne, made this, part of their Demeasne;
but this Name not long after concluding in Margery Haut, Sole Daughter and Heir
to Richard Haut; she being made the wife of William Isaac of Blackmansbery in
Bridge, involved this in her Husbands Revenue, to which, after it had been some
time united, it was by Sale from this Family carried over to John Brent
Esquire: and this Name, some narrow Distance of Time after resolving into a
Daughter and Heir called Margaret, who was married to John Dering, this became
part of his Estate, and so continued till his Successor not long since sold it
to Young of Canterbury.

Upper or High Hardres, call it which you please, is placed in the Hundreds of
Bridge, Petham, and Lovingborough, and gave name to a Family which certainly
was of Saxon-extraction, being compounded of two Saxon words; Erd, which
signifies Earth; and Reys, which signifies Rivulets or small Drils of water.
And, more to establish this Opinion, the Record of Doomes-day Book informs us,
that Rodbertus de Hardres held half a Sulling or Ploughed-land in Liminge, in
the twentieth year of William the Conqueror: this man was Ancestor to Philip de
Hardres, who was one of the Recognitores magnae Assisae, in the Reign of King
John, and his Son Philip de Hardres was a man of that Eminence under the
Government of Henry the third, that he matched with Grace, Daughter and Heir of
Stephen de Harengod; and I have seen an old Deed, which bears the form of a
Latin Will, wherein this Stephen settles his Manor of Elmested, and other
Lands in this Track upon this Philip de Hardres; which Deed, though not dated,
certainly relates to the Time of his Decease, which was in the one and fortieth
of Henry the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 23. But though this Manor gave Surname to
Hardres; yet I find some others had an Interest in it, or at least some part of
it, before it absolutely and solely came to confess the Signory of this Name:
Oliver de Bohun obtained a Charter of Freewarren to his Lands at High Hardres,
in the first year of Edward the first, which was renewed to Nicolas de Hadlow or
Hallow, who had not long before purchased the Inheritance of the above said
Family at this place, in the one and twentieth year of the above mentioned
Prince; but about the latter end of Richard the second, I find this Family
quite dislodged from this place, and the Sole Demeasne and Propriety wrapped up
in the Family of Hardres: one of whom, by Name Henry Hardres, was one of the
Justices of the Peace for this County, in the Time of Henry the fourth, and
Henry the fifth; and from him, is descended Sir Richard Hardres, now Lord of
this Manor, who by a Title riveted and incorporated into him by a Chain of
many uninterrupted Descents, does now claim the Signory of it.

Southcourt is another little Manor in Upper Hardres, which in elder Times was
entitled to the Propriety of Garwinton, a Family of signal Estimate and deep
Root in this Track; for in an old Pedigree of Isaac, I discover that Thomas and
William de Garwinton, were in the List of those Kentish Gentlemen that
accompanied Henry the third in his Expedition into Gascony, in the thirty
seventh year of his Reign, which Design by the ill Conduct of his Affairs, and
worse Managery of his Arms, was very ruinous and full of dysaster, to that
Prince: But this Family, about the eleventh year of Henry the sixth (as I have
showed in Bekesbourne) being extinguished without Issue; the Heir General
brought this Manor to be possessed by Haut, from whom some two Descents after,
the same Fatality brought it to be enjoyed by Isaac, in whom the Propriety was
resident, until the Beginning of Henry the eighth; and then it was conveyed to
Diggs, a Family which had some Interest in it (as appears by the Book of Aid)
in the twentieth year of Edward the third, and some Descents before; and from
this Name not long after the same Alienation carried it off to Hales of the
Dungeon, in which Family it has remained so constant, that it is the instant
propriety of Mr...... Hales, a younger Branch of that Family.

Hartlip in the Hundred of Milton has diverse places of Account in it: First,
Gore Court, which was, in Times of an elder Aspect, the Inheritance of a Family
of that Appellation: and I find that Henry at Gore held it at his Decease, in
the one and thirtieth year of Edward the third, and remained with the Demeasne
of this Name, until the Beginning of Henry the fifth, and then it was
transmitted by Sale to Werdecre or Werdegar, and here it fixed, until the
seventeenth year of King James: and then William Werdegar, Son of George
Werdegar, passed it away to Sir Nicholas Tufton, whose Son and Heir John Earl
of Thanet is now the Owner of it. Juliana de Leybourne had some Estate here at
Gore Court, which, at her Decease, in the three and fortieth year of Edward the
third, escheating with the Remainder of her Estate to the Crown, was by that
Prince, in the fiftieth year of his Government, settled upon the Abbey of St.
Mary Grace on Tower Hill, which he had before founded in the twenty fourth year
of his Reign, and lay involved in the Patrimony of that Cloister, until the
general suppression, and then it was granted by Henry the eighth to William
Werdegar, whose Successor sold it with that part of it, which was always of
secular Interest, to Sir Nicolas Tufton.

Popes-hall in this Parish had Owners likewise of that Surname, who likewise
were entitled to some Estate at Gaesden in Tenterden, and continued Lords of
this Seat, until the latter end of Henry the seventh, and then it was by
Richard Pope Gentleman, transmitted by Sale to Christopher Bloer, by whose
Daughter and Heir called Olympia Bloer, it devolved to be the Inheritance of
Mr. John Tufton Ancestor to the Right Honorable John Earl of Thanet, now
Possessor of it.

Ealgar or Ealdigar, now vulgarly by melting away the L, called Eager Court or
Eagar Croft, was anciently, as appears by several old Deeds without Date, the
Patrimony of William de Elmested, but continued not long in this Family; for in
the thirteenth year of Edward the first, I find it folded up in the Inheritance
of Roger de Northwood, and in this Name the Title was resident until the
Beginning of Henry the sixth, and then it was transplanted by Sale into Norton
of Borden, from whom in the fourth year of Edward the fourth, part of it was
passed away by Sale to Champneys, and in the eighth year of that Prince, the
Remainder was by the same Fatality, brought to confess the Signory of the
abovementioned Family, from whom, Thomas Rider, held it in Lease, in the Reign
of Henry the seventh; and in the seventeenth year of that Prince, passed away
all his Interest and concernment in it to Mark Harris, but the Propriety of
this place, continued still in Champneys. And from him, did part of it, in the
twenty fourth year of Henry the eighth, pass back again by Sale to Norton, and
the Remainder in the thirty second year of that King's reign, was by the same
conveyance wholly remitted to the above recited Family, and made its abode here
until the fourth and fifth year of Philip and Mary; and then John Norton, by
Sale conveyed his Right in it, to Gilbert Fremlin, and he in the fifteenth year
of Queen Elizabeth, alienated all his Concernment in it, to John Palmer
Esquire, Father of Sir Anthony Palmer, and Grandfather of Dudley Palmer
Esquire, the instant Possessor of it.

There is a Manor in this Parish, vulgarly and corruptly called Grayney, but
in old Deeds Graveney, as being indeed the Patrimony of a Family of that
Surname: of which Stem was Stephen de Graveney, whom, as private Record informs
me, held it in the reign of Edward the first, and in his Descendants, I find it
successively constant and fixed, until the Reign of Henry the sixth. And from
that Prince's Rule, I must make a leap to the Government of Henry the eighth,
and then I find it in the Tenure of John Mayney of Biddenden Esquire, great
Grandfather of Sir John Mayney of Linton Knight and Baronet, the present Lord
of the Fee.

Hartley in the Hundred of Acstane, made up a part of that Patrimony, which
came within the Circle of that Revenue, which owned for Proprietaries the Lords
Montchensey, whose capital Seat was at Swanscamp, where I shall treat more
largely of them; but it seems they had a special regard to this Manor, for
Warren de Montchensey, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to Hartley in the
thirty seventh year of Henry the third, and left it enobled and secured with
this Franchise to his only Son, William de Montchensey, who dying without
Issue, Joan his Sister and Heir by marching with William de Valence Earl of
Pembroke, entitled him to this Manor, and she held it at her Death, which was
in the first year of Edw. the second: from whom it devolved to her Son Aymer de
Valence, who dying without Issue-male in the seventeenth year of Edward second;
Isabell de Valence his Heir General, united it to the Inheritance of her
Husband Lawrence de Hastings, afterward Earl of Pembroke, from whom it came
down to his Grandchild John de Hastings. And he deceasing without Issue, in the
year 1389, left it to his Kinsman Reginald Gray, and he brings a pleading for
this and other Land, against John le Scroope, in the fifteenth year of Richard
the second, and in the second year of Henry the fourth, as appears by the Book
of Dover in the Exchequer, he was peaceably fixed in the Possession, and was a
person of considerable Rank and importance in those Times, for he bore a pair
of gilt Spurs at the Coronation of the abovesaid Prince. But no eminence of
Birth or Dignity can chain the Possession of a place to a Family, when the
Title leans upon the Wheel of an inconstant and ebbing Estate. For the
Revolution of Sale about the latter end of Henry the sixth, carried it from
this Name to Penhale, and John the Son of Emma Penhale, as appears by the Book
of Dover in the Exchequer, held it in the second year of Edward the fourth, but
the Propriety was not long constant in this Family: for about the latter end of
Henry the seventh, I find it in the Tenure of Cressell, but it was not long
permanent in this Family neither: for about the Beginning of Henry the eighth,
it was by Sale transplanted into Ballard, and here the Possession rested until
the latter end of Edward the sixth; and then it was alienated to William Sydley
Esquire, Ancestor to Sir Charles Sydley Baronet, who now is entitled to the
Right and Propriety of it.

Hastingleigh in the Hundred of Bircholt, did anciently confess the noble
Family of Haut, to be its Proprietaries, and was in their Possession until the
beginning of Henry the fourth, and then Edward Haut passed it away to Robert
Poynings of Ostenhanger, and in the Revenue of this Family was enwrapt, until
the Decease of Sir Edward Poynings; in the twelfth year of Henry the eighth,
and he dying without any Issue of his Body lawfully begotten, (and there being
none that could justly entitle himself by Right of Blood or Alliance to his
Possessions) it devolved by Escheat to the Crown, and K. Edward the sixth, in
the last year of his reign, by Royal Concession invested the Right of this
Manor in the City of London, and there it is still resident.

Hawkherst in the Hundred of Barnefield, was granted by William the Conqueror
to the Manor of Wye, which with all its Appendages, was to hold of the Abbey of
Battle, and remains (though that Abbey be suppressed) a Member or Limb of that
Court to this Day.

Congerherst in this Parish, was a Mansion that formerly gave Seat and Surname
to a Family so called, and which in a Successive Series did relate to this
Name, until Mildred Congerherst, Sole Daughter and Heir of Thomas Congerherst,
matching with Thomas Scott, made this the Propriety of that Family, to which it
is still united.

The Royalty and Rents of Haukherst upon the Suppression of the Abbey of Battle,
were in the thirty third year of Henry the eighth, granted to He was likewise
Privycounsellor to those three Princes, and one of the Executors of Henry the
eighths Will.
Sir John Baker Attorney General, and Chancellor of the Exchequer to that
Prince, King Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary; but Differences and Clashings,
breaking out between the Descendant of Sir John Baker, and the Heir of the Lord
Hunsdon, Lord of Wye, touching claims; to bury all future Animosities in Amity
and mutual Compliance, Sir Henry Baker, in the seventeenth year of King James,
conveyed it to Henry Carry Lord Hunsdon, now Earl of Dover; who some years
since, passed it away to Sir Thomas Finch, Father to Heneage Earl of
Winchelsey, now Lord of the Fee.

Haukherst had a Market anciently, now shrunk into Disuse, on the Tuesday, and
a yearly Fair three Days, viz. the Vigil, the Day of St. Lawrence, and the Day
subsequent to it, both procured by the Abbot of Battle, (as the original patent
instructs me) in the fifth year of Edward the first.

Hawking in the Hundred of Folkstone contains two little Manors within its
Verge, which must not be passed over in Silence. The first is Bilchester, which
belonged to the Knights Templers, but upon their Suppression, in the second
year of Edward the second, it escheated to the Crown, and remained there until
new provision was made, by the Statute called Statutum de Terris Templariorum,
passed in the seventeenth year of the abovesaid Prince, to enstate it on the
Knights Hospitalers, and make it part of their Revenue, and accordingly was
united to their Patrimony, nor was any hand so bold as to tear it off; until
the general Suppression of this Order, in the Reign of Henry the eighth, did
invest it in the Crown: and that Prince in the thirty third year of his Reign
granted it to Sir Anthony Aucher in Lease: and he not long after, assigned it
to Thomas Sommersall, by whom it was made over to Richard Simonds, but the
Fee-simple continued in the Crown, until the year 1648.

The second is Fleggs Court, which was folded up in that Demeasne, which
related to the Abbey of St. Radigunds, and upon the Suppression of that
Cloister, was exchanged by Henry the eighth, in the twenty ninth year of his
Reign, for other Lands with Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, and so
remained free from violation, until these Times wrapped it up in the Demeasne of
that See.

Hedcorne in the Hundred of Eyhorne, containd within its Limits, First
Modenden, vulgarly called Mottenden, where was a Monastery for Monks of the
Order of Crouched Friars, and founded by Sir Ric. de Rokesley: the Head of
which Covent, was called Minister, and in the cloudy Times of Popery, was much
resorted unto by the enchanted Vulgar, by reason of some special Privileges
they were endowed with, as of granting of pardons, and others of the like
Nature: all which met with their Sepulcher in the Ruin of this Abbey, and that
fatal and destructive Wound it received in its final Dissolution, from the
Hand of Henry the eighth, which Prince, upon its escheating to the Crown,
granted it in the thirty sixth year of his Government, to Sir Anthony Aucher.
And he, in the second year of Edward the sixth, passed it away to Sir Walter
Henley, by whose Daughter and Coheir it came to Thomas Colepeper of Bedgebury
Esquire; who in the sixth year of Edward the sixth, conveyed it to Christopher
Sackvill Esquire, from which Family in our Grandfathers Remembrance it came
over by Sale to Franklin; and his Successor George Franklin dying without
Issue, bequeathed it by Testament to his Kinsman Sir William Sydley, whose
Grandchild Sir Charles Sydley Baronet, is entitled to the instant Fee-simple
of it.

Kents Chauntry is a second Place of Account in Headcorne, called so because
here was a Chauntry founded by one John Kent, in the sixth year of Edward the
fourth, and a large Demeasne settled upon it, to support the Chauntry Priest
that was to officiate there; all which upon the suppression was in the two and
thirtieth year of Henry the eighth, granted to Sir Anthony St. Ledger, whose Son
Sir Warham St. Ledger, about the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, passed it away by
Sale to Beresford of Westernham, from which Family in our Memory it went away
to Southland; and he very lately has alienated it to Mr....... Belcher, now
Minister of Gods Word at Ulcombe.

Kelsham is a third Seat in this Parish, which may challenge our Consideration;
because it was the Residence formerly (though now transformed into a
Farm-house) of Gentlemen known by this Surname, who might have been ranged and
marshalled amongst the prime Gentlemen of this County, and bare for their Coat-
Armor Sable, a Fesse engrailed Argent, between three Garbes, Or. One of them
stood depicted in colored Glass in the Church windows, with his Arms upon his
Tabard; but by the Assaults of Age, and other wild and sacrilegious
Impressions, is now utterly defaced and demolished; nor is the Family in any
better condition, that having many years since deserted the Possession of this
Place; for about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth it was conveyed to Johnson:
from whom very lately, it is come over by Purchase to Stringer.

Rishford is a fourth Manor circumscribed within the Bounds of Headcorne,
which in the twentieth year of Edward the third, was possessed by a Family called
Pend, who (as it appears by the Book of Aid) paid a respective supply for it,
at making the Black Prince Knight. And here is much Land in this Parish, which
bears the Name of Pend, a probable Argument of the Antiquity of it in this
Track: nor did it yield to Time, or desert the Possession of this Place, but
was constant in the Tenure of it, until that Age we call our Grandfathers, and
then it was alienated to a Family called Dominie, alias Fullaker; the last of
which Name at this Place was Christopher Dominie, alias Fullaker, who not many
years since passed it away to Mr. John Hulks of Newenham, whose Son and Heir
Mr. Stephen Hulks, does now possess the Signory of it.

Herietsham in the Hundred of Eyhorne, was anciently a Limb of that Estate
which was entitled to the Possession of the Noble Family of Crescy: Hugh de
Crescy died seized of the Manor, in the forty seventh year of King Henry the
third, and his Grandmother Margery was Daughter of William de Cheyney of
Patricksbourne Cheyney, as appears Claus. 52. Henrici tertii Memb. 6. in Dorso.
But he deceased without Issue, and so his Brother Stephen de Crescy became his
Heir and Lord of Herietsham, and in this Family it continued until the latter
end of Edward the second, and then the Possession of this Place went from
Crescy into Northwood, as is manifest by the Book of Aid, where Roger de
Northwood is represented to have held this Manor, and have paid a
proportionate Aid for it, at making the Black Prince Knight, in the twentieth
of Edward the third, and he deceased seized of it in the thirty fifth year of
that King's Reign. And in this Name it remained fixed until the Beginning of
Henry the fifth, and then it was transplanted into the Interest of a Family
called Adam, who had large Possessions in Essex, and bore for their Paternal
Coat vert, a Plain Cross, Or; and John Adam held it at his Death, which was in
the ninteenth year of Henry the sixth, and left it to his Son John Adam; after
whom I do not find any more of the Family possessed of it: for in the Reign of
Edward the fourth, I discover by some Court Rols that James Peckham of Yaldham
Esquire, was Lord of the Fee; and Reginald Peckham his Son, that was Sheriff of
Kent, in the last year of Henry the seventh, kept his Shrivalty at Herietsham;
but after this, it was of no long continuance in this Family; for in the
fifteenth year of Henry the eighth, Reginald Peckham passes it away by Sale to
Edward Scott Esquire, and he not long after transmits it by the same conveyance
to John Hales one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and from him one Moiety of it
went away by Sale, in the twenty eighth of Henry the eighth, to John Norton
Esquire; and the other not long after to Sir Anthony St. Ledger. Norton conveyed
his proportion to Ashburnham of Sussex; and both St. Ledger and Ashburnham, in
the Time almost of our Fathers Remembrance, by a concurrent Sale demised their
joint Right in it to Sir John Steed, whose Successor, Doctor...... Steed,
Doctor of the Civil Law, is the instant Proprietary of Herietsham.

East Farbon and Bentley, are two little Manors in this Parish, which belonged
to the Priory of Leeds; and upon the suppression, were made parcel of the
Revenue of the Crown, and remained there until King Edward the sixth, in the
fourth year of his Reign, granted them to Sir Anthony St. Ledger, whose great
Grandchild Sir Warham St. Ledger, about the Beginning of King James, passed
them away to Mr......... Steed, Father to Doctor Steed; who upon the Decease
of his Nephew Cromer Steed without Issue Male, as Reversioner in Entail, is now
settled in the Possession of these two Manors.

West Farbon, sometimes in old Deeds, called little Herietsham, lies likewise
in this Parish, and was granted in the two and fiftieth year of Henry the
third, to William de Valentia, Earl of Pembrooke: But after him I track no more
of the Family at this place; For in the twentieth year of Edward the third, at
making the Black Prince Knight, it was held by John Pennington; and in the
fourth year of Henry the fourth, when Blanch that Prince's Daughter was
married, it acknowledged it self to be under the Signory of the above mentioned
Family, and continued diverse years after united to their Interest: But in the
Reign of Henry the eighth, I find them quite vanished from the Possession, and
a Family called Head or Head, entitled to the Inheritance; and in this Name
did it make its abode, until the Reign of Edward the sixth, and then it was
conveyed by Sale to St. Ledger, where it rested until the Beginning of King
James, and then it was alienated by Sir Warham St. Ledger to Mr. Benedict
Barneham, who left four Daughters and Coheirs, matched to Audley, Constable,
Doble, and Soame, who equally shared his Estate; and this upon the
distinguishing of it into just Proportions, augmented the Revenue of Constable.

Harbilton is another ancient Manor in Herietsham; It was, in the twentieth
year of Edward the third, the Inheritance of Thomas de Malmains; for at that
Time, as appears by the Book of Aid, he paid a subsidiary supply for this and
other Lands, at making the Black Prince Knight. After this Family was mouldred
away, which was before the End of Richard the second, I find the Family of
Maris was settled in the Inheritance. William Maris who was Esquire, first to
Henry the fifth, and after to Cardinal Kempe, was Possessor of it, and so was
his Son William Maris Esquire, who was Sheriff of Kent, in the one and
twentieth year of Henry the sixth. After this Family, I find the Moils, about
the latter end of the former Prince's Government, to have stepped into the
Inheritance; the first of which was Walter Moile, who was Justice of the Peace
for this County, in the Reign both of Henry the sixth and Edward the fourth,
and left this, and a spacious Patrimony besides, to his Heir John Moile
Esquire, whose Son Robert Moile, about the Beginning of Henry the eighth,
alienated it to Geffrey St. Ledger Esquire, from whom the Title for many years
streamed into this Family, until in that Time, which fell under our
Grandfathers cognizance, it was passed away by Sale to Steed, Ancestor to
Doctor Steed, who is the instant Possessor of it.

Marley and Hopme Mill, and in other Copies written Holme Hill, did with their
Income support the Chaunter of the Canons of Paul's, to whose office they were
annexed. A Place certainly in elder Times of important Account; for in the
Records of Christ-church, from whence Pitseus has collected his Inventory of
the English Writers, there is mention of one Joannes de Teneth, a Man as
exemplary for his Piety, as he was eminent for his Learning, who was Chaunter
to that Covent; but this Office being entombed in the Ruins of those Canons of
Paul, in the General suppression; the Revenue which upheld it, was fixed in the
Crown, until King Edward the sixth granted both these Places to Sir Edward
Wotton, one of his Privy Council, whose Grandchild Sir Thomas Wotton, was by
King James invested with the Dignity and Title of Thomas Lord Wotton of
Marley, and was by Thomas Lord Wotton his Son, settled in Marriage upon his
Daughter Katherine Wotton with Henry Lord Stanhop, Son and Heir apparent to
Philip Earl of Chesterfeild, and is at this instant in relation to the former
settlement devolved in Abeyance to her Son, the Right Honorable Philip Stanhop,
the present Earl of Chesterfeild.

Hern in the Hundred of Blengate, has nothing memorable in it but Haw-house, a
Limb or portion of that wide Demeasne that the eminent Family of Apulderfield
held in this Track; and when this Name that had been deeply rooted in
Antiquity, Hern had a Market procured to be held there weekly on the Monday:
and a Fair yearly upon the Vigil, and Day of St. Martin, by the Archbishop of
Cant. in the twenty fifth of Ed. the third as appears Cart. Number. 31.
and had spread to a large extent, in the Latitude of it, was circumscribed in
a Daughter and Heir called Eliz. matched with Sir Jo. Phineux: this Seat was
made by Female Interest, an Addition to the Income of this Family, and here it
remained undivided from it, till this Name determined in John Phineux Esqu;
issued from a younger Line of this Family, who left only one Daughter and Heir,
married to Sir John Smith, Grandfather to Philip Viscount Strangford, who in
relation to that Right this Match has invested in him, is now the instant
Proprietary.

Seas or At Seas Court is likewise involved within the Sphere and Limits of
this Parish: it was in Records anciently styled so, though now through Disuse
it be languished into an Intermission, having lost its Name, and the Estimate
of a Manor likewise. For a Succession of some Ages, it owned the Name and
Interest of At Sea, till Fate and Time, that are the common Sepulcher of
Families, by Sale gave up the Fee-simple, an Age or two since, to Knowler,
whose Heir does yet entitle himself by Right of his Predecessors purchase, to
the Possession of it.

Hernehill in the Hundred of Boughton, has two Places in it, which may make it
remarkable: First, Durgall Stroude, which was, in Times of higher Track, the
Martin's a very noble and illustrious Family in this Territory, whose capital
or principal Seat was at Graveney, not far distant: and here, after it had
flourisht, by the Decursion of some Ages, it fell into a Daughter and Heir,
called Margaret, Sole Daughter and Heir to Matthew Martin, who was married to
William Norton of Cokesdish in Feversham, and in her Right did he become
Proprietary of this Manor, from whose Heir Thomas Norton, the Property or
Fee-simple was by Sale transferred into the Possession of Sir John Wild of
Canterbury, to whose Heirs General the Propriety of this Manor does at present
relate.

Secondly, there is another Seat in this Parish, vulgarly called Apes Court,
alias Lockley; but, indeed, in truer Orthography writ Epes-Court, a place so
despicable, that it had not been worth the Memorial, but that in all the
circumstances of probability the Epes's of Canterbury assumed, if not Seat, yet
at least Surname from thence; and it is the more possible, because the Epes's
have been ancient Tenants to the Church of Canterbury, for the Manor of
Seas-alter, divided by a near Distance from this place; in Ages of a more
modern Date, the Nevinsons were the Lords of the Fee, and certainly this was
their ancient Mansion, before they were transplanted to Eastry; this being sold
in the Reign of King James by Sir Roger Nevinson to Sir John Wild of
Canterbury, in whose Heirs General ( Dudley Wild Esquire, his only surviving
Son being lately deceased without Issue) the Possession continues fixed.

Hever in the Hundreds of Somerden and Ruxley, had in elder Times a Castle, See
more of this Family at Northfleet.
which was the Capital Seat or Manor built by Thomas de Hever, who had liberty
by the Charter of Edward the third, granted to him in the fourth of his Reign,
not only to embattle his Mansion here, but likewise had Free Warren annexed to
his Lands in this place. William Hever deceased without Issue Male, and left
only two Daughters and Coheirs; Joane married to Reginald Cobham of
Sterborough, and the other wedded to Brocas, whence in Records it is sometimes
called Hever Cobham and Hever Brocas, and when the Cobhams went out, the
Bullens were the immediate Purchasers; for Geffrey Bullen purchased this Place,
and his Grandchild Sir Thomas Bullen Knight of the Garter, and Earl of Wilts,
lived here, who was Father to Anne Bullen, Wife to Henry the eighth; and as he
had here his Habitation, so likewise he has here his Sepulcher, and lies
emtombed in Hever-church; but when his Son George Viscount Rochford, upon
pretense of some black Crimes acted against the Majesty of Henry the eighth,
fell under the Censure of High Treason; this upon his Attainder or Conviction
was escheated to the Crown, and began to be reputed a Mansion of some Estimate,
when Anne of Cleve for some Time lived here, and made it her residence; but, in
Times subsequent to this, I find it eminent for nothing, till King James
granted it to Sir Edward Waldgrave, whose Successor yet possesses it.

Heys in the Hundred of Rokesley, was formerly under the Jurisdiction of the
Squirries, a Family under a signal Notion of Eminence in this part of the
County, and was concluded some Ages within their Patrimony, till it was bounded
by two Daughters and Coheirs; one of which called Dorothy, was married to
Richard Mervin, the other styled Margaret, matched to Sir William Cromer, who
in Right of their Father Thomas Squirrie, who held Heys in the eighteenth year
of Henry the sixth, entitled themselves to vast Possessions in these parts;
but this Manor upon the Division accrued to Mervin, and in his Posterity some
years it found an abode, till by Sale the Interest was transmitted to Peche;
but Sir John Peche deceasing without any Issue Male, his only Daughter
Elizabeth married to John Heart Esquire; extracted from the Hearts of the County of
Hertford, was found to be his Heir, and in Relation to that Mixture, or
conjunction, does this Family yet continue Proprietaries of it.

Hinxhill in the Hundreds of Chart and Longbridge, was part of that Estate
which belonged to the Family of Strabolgie, Earls of Atholl; but whether or not
it devolved to Alexander Balioll, Earl of Atholl by Isabell his Wife, one of
the Coheirs of Richard de Dover, Lord of Chilham, is altogether uncertain;
because no Record that I ever yet saw, reaches beyond the above mentioned
Alexander; this man's Son was John Earl of Strabolgie and Athol, who having
forfeited it in the Reign of Edward the first, whilst he endeavored to buoy up
the Liberty of his Country of Scotland, which then seemed to be sunk in its own
Ruins, being trampled upon by the succesful Attempts of that Prince, it for
some years increased the Royal Revenue, until David de Strabolgie, Earl of
Atholl, the first that altered his Name from Balioll to Strabolgie, having
expiated his Fathers Disservices, by being constant to the Party and Interest
of Edward the second, against the Eruptions of the Nobility, which then bandied
in Combinations against him, had this with much other Land, restored to him in
the fifteenth year of that Prince; from whom it descended to David de
Strabolgie his Grandchild, who dying in the forty ninth year of Edward the
third, left it to Philippa his Daughter and Coheir matched to John Halsham of
Sussex, by whom she had Issue Hugh Halsham, who about the Beginning of Henry
the sixth, passed it away to Sir Robert Scott, Lieutenant of the Tower of
London 1424. And he concluding in Alice Scott, a Female Inheritrix, she by
matching with William Kempe, Nephew of Cardinal Kempe, linked it to the
Demeasne of that Family, and here it remained until Sir William Kempe, about
the latter end of Henry the eighth, alienated it to Browning, from which
Family, about the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, it passed away by Sale to Mr.
Robert Edolph, whose Grandchild Mr. Robert Edolph dying in the year 1632.
without Issue, gave his Interest in it with Godchepes to his beloved Wife:
Cicelie Edolph remarried to Sir Francis Knowls of Reading, and she passed away
the Moiety of it (the other proportion of it being invested in Mr. Thomas
Edolph the third Brother) with Godchepes, now called Goodchepes, to her
Husbands second Brother, Mr. Samuel Edolph, who some few years since conveyed
his Interest in Hinxhill with this by Testament to his Brother in Law Mr. John
Angel of Croherst in Surrey, to discharge Debts and Legacies; and he, that he
might the more effectually perform the Contents of the Will, has lately passed
away the Moiety of Hinxhill with Goodchepes, to Edward Chowte of Surrenden
Chowte in Bethersden Esquire, lately deceased.

W. liham is another Manor in Hinxhill, which was folded up in the vast
Demeasne of Crioll, by whose Daughter and Heir it came to Rokesley, and by the
Female Inheritrix of Rokesley to Poynings: in which Name it continued until the
twelfth year of Henry the eighth, and then Sir Edward Poynings dying without
any lawful Issue; after a signal and solemn Inspection, by several
Inquisitions into his collateral Alliance, no Claim being laid unto his Estate,
this Manor escheated to the Crown, in the fourteenth year of that Prince, and
then King Henry the eighth, by Grant passed it away to Sir Richard Damsel, who
not long after transmitted his Right in it to Goldhill, who in our
Grandfathers Memory alienated it to Mr. Robert Edolph, whose Grandchild Mr.
Robert Edolph gave it with his Interest in Hinxhill and Goodchepes to his Wife
Cicelie Edolph, who passed away the Moiety to Mr. Samuel Edolph, and he devised
it by Will to Mr. Angel, who has transferred his Right in it by Sale to Mr.
Edward Chowte.

The Farm called Godchepes or Goodchepes, in this Parish; for an unbroken
Series of many Generations had Owners of that Surname, as appears by an
Inquisition taken after the Death of Thomas Godchepe, in the one and thirtieth
year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 47. and remained fastened to their
Inheritance, until the latter end of Henry the eighth, and then by a strange
and mysterious Fatality the Propriety of it was carried off, to Barrow. The
Story is represented thus: John Barrow being an Attorney, was called to frame a
Settlement by Deed of Thomas Godchepe, and by his Direction was desired to
insert eight Persons into the Deed, who were successively to inherit his
Estate, and being asked by this John Barrow, whether he should add the Names
of any more, he was answered (because there had formerly been reciprocal
Obligations of Friendship between them) that he should place his own next after
those eight above mentioned. It pleased the eternal Arbiter of humane Affairs,
so to order the vicissitude of things that those eight Persons recited in the
Deed, deceased without Issue; so that his Estate here at Godchepe devolved to
Barrow, as his Heir at Law, from whom by Elizabeth his eldest Daughter and
Coheir, it came to Mr. Robert Edolph.

Hoo gives Name to the Hundred wherein it is situated, and was a principal
Branch of that Revenue, which fell under the Dominion of Bardolfe: Robert de
Bardolfe held it under the Notion of a whole Knights Fee, as appears by the red
Book kept in the Exchequer, in the Reign of Henry the second: and from him it
came down to Hugh Bardolfe, who was rated for it after the same Account, in the
second year of Richard the first; but Hugh Lord Bardolfe his Son, not long
after concluded in three Daughters and Coheirs. Mawde was matched to Nicholas
Points, Margaret was married to Robert Aguillon, and Isolda was espoused to
Henry Lord Gray of Codnor, which divided the Inheritance of that Family at this
Place. But that Proportion of it which was annexed by this Alliance to Points
and Aguillon, was passed away by a Joint Sale to John de la Pole, and he paid
respective supply for his Lands at Hoo, which were rated at half a Knights Fee,
at making the Black Prince Knight, in the twentieth year of Edward the third;
but before the latter end of Henry the fourth; this Family was worn out, and
that Estate they held here was by Purchase involved and swallowed up in the
Inheritance of Gray, who before was entitled to the Moiety of this Manor, as
descending from Henry Lord Gray of Codnor and Isolda his Wife, Coheir to Hugh
Lord Bardolfe, and in this Family did it continue until Henry Lord Gray of
Codnor, in the twenty second year of Henry the sixth, dying without Issue Male,
left it to be Patrimony of Daughters and Coheirs, one of which brought it to
be the Inheritance of the Lord Zouch; but in this Family it had not long
remained, when John Lord Zouch having pursued the Interest of the House of
York, did exemplify his Zeal to it, by his being embarked in the Cause and
Quarrel of Richard the third, in that signal and fatal Encounter at Bosworth
Field, where the Title of the two Houses York and Lancaster was put to the
bloody Arbitration of the Sword; for which, after the Crown and Scepter by that
happy Contest devolved to Henry the seventh, he was in the first year of that
Prince's Rule attainted, and his Estate here granted to Sir Henry Wiatt, one of
the Privy Council to the said Monarch, whose unfortunate Grandchild Sir
Thomas Wiatt, being likewise attainted in the second year of Queen Mary, it
escheated, upon that Confiscation, to the Crown, and there was lodged until
King James, about the third year of his Reign granted it to Robert Earl of
Salisbury, whose Son Robert Earl of Salisbury sold it quarto Caroli to Sir
Edward Hales Knight and Baronet; from whom it is now come down to his
Grandchild, Sir Edward Hales Baronet, in whose Revenue, it, at this instant,
is involved.

Beluncle is another Seat in this Parish, whose Antiquity pleads for a
Remembrance: the first Family whom I find in Record to have been possessed of it
was Foliot. Jordan de Foliot held it in the Time of Henry the second, and
Richard the first, by the fifth part of a Knights Fee; and from him did it
descend to Richard de Foliot, his Son and Heir, who in the twentieth year of
Henry the third, passes it away by Fine to Reginald de Cobham, who was Sheriff
of Kent, from the thirty third year of Henry the third, to the fortieth of that
Prince, and was accounted one of the principal Seats which was couched in the
Demeasne of this Family; and, in diverse old Pedigrees and other Deeds, they are
written Cobham of Beluncle. Of this Family was Henry de Cobham, who was
summoned to Parliament as Baron, in the seventh year of Edward the third:
Stephen de Cobham, who was summoned in the eighteenth year of that Prince: And
Thomas de Cobham, who was summoned as Baron, in the thirty eighth year of that
Prince. And in Cobham, and then Brook, did it continue, until Henry Lord Cobham
and his Brother George Brook, in the first year of King James, being entangled
in that cloudy Design of Sir Walter Rawleigh, which continues muffled up in a
Mist until this Day, forfeited both their Estates, and the last his Life. But
King James restored this to Henry Lord Cobham, who dying without Issue it
devolved to Sir William Brook Son of George Brook, and he likewise deceasing
without Issue-male, in the year 1643. it came over to Sir John Brook, now Lord
Cobham, as Reversioner in Entail.

Hollingbourne in the Hundred of Eyhorne, was given to the Monks of
Christ-church in Canterbury, for to supply them with Diet, by Athelstan Son of
Ethelred, which Manor he had before purchased of his Father; and in the year
909. with his License and Consent bestowed it on that Covent, free as Adisham.
If you will discover how it was rated in the Conquerors Time, Doomesday Book
thus represents it to you, Hollingbourne (says that) est Mancrium Monachorum,
and de Cibo little and in Tempore Edwardi Regis se defendebat pro VI. Sullings,
and nunc similiter. Et est appretiatum inter totum hoc Maneriam XXX lb. This
being thus fixed, remained from the Original Donation, locked up in the
Ecclesiastical Patrimony, until the twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth, and
then it was surrendered into that King's Hands by the Prior and Monks of the
Covent aforesaid, and he that year exchanged it with Thomas Cranmer Archbishop
of Canterbury.

There was the Gallows which appertained to the Priory of Christ-church here
erected at Hollingbourne, where those who had committed Murders, Felonies, or
other Trespasses worthy of death, within the liberties of that Covent, were
according to their privilege of Infangtheof and Outfangtheof, brought to
exemplary punishment: See Somner Fol. 286.

There is a Manor in this Parish called Ripple, which had Owners of that Name;
for in the thirtieth of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 91. I find that
Richard de Ripple held this, and other Lands, which he had in Lease from the
Priory of Christ-church at his Decease, but it only gave him Surname, and then
left his Family; for before the latter end of Edward the third, it went from
this Name to Sir William Septuans, and he enjoyed it at his Death, which was in
the forty third year of Edward the third; and transmitted it to his Son William
Septuans, who not long after conveyed it to John Gower, in which Name it lay
couched until the Reign of Henry the fourth; and then it was alienated to
Brockhull, a Cadet of that Stock which flourished so long at Calehill, and here
it continued for many Descents in this Family, until the Beginning of Queen
Elizabeth: and then Henry Brockhull dying without Issue-male, Anne his only
Daughter and Heir brought it to be the Inheritance of Sir John Tailor, in which
Family after it had lodged only until the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, it was
passed away to Sir Martin Barnham.

Elnothington is another Manor in this Parish, which had Owners likewise of
that Surname; for in a Deed of Adam de Twisdens, which bears Date from the one
and twentieth of Edward the first, one William de Elnothington is Witness: But
after this man, I find no more mention in any Record of the Name: In the Reign
of Edward the third, I discover Sir Arnold St. Ledger of Ulcombe to be possessed
of it, and in the forty second year he makes a Composition with diverse of his
Tenants for Lands that they held of this Manor, and from him like an
uninterrupted Thread, did the Title of this place pass thorough many Descents
of this Family, until at last it devolved to Sir Anthony St. Ledger, who almost
in our Memory alienated it to Sir Thomas Colepeper.

Pen-Court is another Seat in Hollingbourne worthy our Notice. It was in elder
Times the Patrimony of a Family called Pen; but whether the Pens of Codcot in
the County of Bedford, were descended from them or not, is uncertain; in Brief,
before the end of Edward the third, this Family was worn out, and then the
Donets succeeded, but held this Seat not long: for by the Heir General it
devolved with much other Land to St. Ledger of Ulcombe, and here it rested
until almost our Remembrance: and then it was passed away to Sir Thomas
Colepeper; and he again conveyed it to Mr. Mark Questwood of London, who, upon
his Decease, settled it for ever on the Company of Fishmongers in London.

Muston is likewise within the Verge of this Parish: upon perusal of the
ancient Deeds and Court-rols, I found it to be written Moston, as giving Name,
in the Reign of Edward the first, to a Family of that Appellation, which about
the Beginning of Richard the second, was wholly crumbled away, and had
surrendered the Possession to Wood, in which Family the Inheritance has ever
since been permanent.

Greenway-court, is the last place considerable in this Parish; It was as high
as the Conduct of any Evidence can guide me to discover, parcel of the
Patrimony of Atleeze, and Sir Richard Atleeze, dying without Issue, in the year
1394, gave it to his Brother Marcellus Atleeze, by whose Daughter and Coheir,
it came to be possessed by Valentine Barret of Pery-Court; and he, about the
Beginning of Henry the fourth, conveyed it to Fitz Water, in which Family it
remained, until the Reign of Edward the fourth; and then it was alienated to
St. Ledger, with whose Inheritance it continued, until almost our Age; and then
it was by Sale transplanted into Sir Alexander Colepeper, who upon his Decease,
gave it to Sir John Colepeper of Losenham.

Hope in the Hundreds of Langport and St. Martins, has nothing memorable in it
but Crawthorn, which for those worthy persons, who have successively held it,
calls for some Memorial; for first, the Cheyneys were (as appears by ancient
Evidences) Lords of the Fee: and when they went out, the Henleys about the
latter end of Hen. the eighth, were the next eminent Possessors of it: and in
the Descendants of this Family, did the propriety reside, until the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth; and then it was alienated to Thomas Lord Borough of
Sterborough, who not long after conveyed it to Took, of Bear in Westcliffe,
from whom it came over to Mr. Charles Took of Bear, and he has lately, by the
Vicissitude of Sale, transplanted his Concernment in it, to his Nephew Mr.
Edward Chowte, who being lately deceased without Issue-male, has settled it on
his only Brother Mr. George Chowte.

Higham in the Hundred of Shamell, had anciently a Nunnery: but the original
Chartularies, and other Records being lost, the Founder is unknown. King Hen.
the third, by a Charter of Inspection, as appears Carta 11. part secunda,
Memb. septima, reviews the Liberties of this Cloister, and confirms them, and
adds this Franchise or Immunity to the former, that this Parish lying couched
in their Demeasn, should hold a Fair on Michaelmas Day, and two days after.
This Manor, upon the Suppression, was by the Bounty of King Henry the eighth
enstated for ever on St. John's College, in Cambridge, and there at present it
continues.

The places of most eminence, which were of secular Interest, are Great and
Little Okeley, which both were formerly united, though since dissever'd and
plucked asunder by Sale. In the twentieth of Ed. the third, I find them wrapped
up in the Possessions of John de St. Clear, who held them by the fourth part of
a Knights Fee, of the Honor of Montchensey, that is of Swanscamp-Castle, from
whose Descendant, about the latter end of Edward the fourth, they were both
passed away to Neile of London, who about the latter end of Henry the seventh,
conveyed Great Okeley to John Sydley Esquire, Ancestor to Sir Charles Sydley
Baronet, the instant Inheritor of it. But little Okeley by the same
Transmission was transferred to Colemeley or Cholmeley, who about the latter
end of Queen Elizabeth, resigned up his Interest by Sale to Thompson, from whom
the ordinary Vicissitude of purchase not long since conducted the Title down to
Best.

Merston was formerly an independent Parish of it self, though since annexed to
Higham, and had a Church dedicated to St. Giles, whose Ruins, in despite of
the Impressions of Age, yet represent themselves to the smallest Glance of a
curious Eye. It was, before it fell into this Darkness and Obscurity, made
something illustrious by being the Inheritance of John de St. Clear: and when
this Family found its Tomb, the Name of Smith Stepped in, and rose upon its
Ruins. And when this was expired at this place, which was about the Beginning
of Henry the eighth, Jordan put in his Claim to the Possession of it; but about
the latter end of the abovesaid Prince, I find this Family extinguished,
because the propriety of this Manor was by one of the above mentioned Names
conveyed to Anthony Tutsham, who not long after alienated the premises to
George Brook Lord Cobham; from whom, by descendant Right, the Interest of it
is devolved to Sir John Brook, restored to the Barony of Cobham by the late
King at Oxford, who now possesses this place as Reversioner in Entail to Sir
William Brook, who dyed without Issue-male in the year 1643.

Horsmonden in the Hundreds of Brenchley, Horsmonden, and Larkefeild, was
folded up in the Patrimony of Rokesley, a Family of a large Revenne, and as
wide a Repute in this Track, from whom it descended to Richard de Rokesley, by
whose Inheritrix it was linked to the Patrimony of Thomas de Poynings, from
whom by the steps of diverse Descents it went down to Sir Edward Poynings, who
deceasing without any lawful Issue, in the twelfth of Henry the eighth: and
there being not any that could by a pretense of collateral Alliance entitle
themselves to his Estate, the Crown made it its own Interest by Escheat, and
then the above said Prince, in the thirty sixth of his Reign, granted it to
Richard Darell: and his Son George Darill, in the tenth of Queen Elizabeth,
conveyed it to Richard Pain, who not long after alienated it to Beswick,
Ancestor to Mrs. Mary Beswick, who dying without Issue, has settled it by
Testament for life on Mr....... Haughton.

Groveherst with its relative Appendages, Capell, Augustpits, Hoath, and
Sneade, were lately passed away by Mr. Whetenhall of great Peckham to Mr.
Francis Austin, whose Ancestor William Whetenhall Esquire, had them annexed to
his Demeasne by matching with Margaret Sole Heir of William Hextall, who about
the Beginning of Henry the sixth, had purchased the four last places of Capell,
Cheseman, Hoath, and Sneade, Families who had been entitled to the propriety
of them many Descents before: But Groveherst was linked to the Demeasne of
Kichard Hextall, Father of William above mentioned, by matching about the
latter end of Richard the second, with Anne one of the three Coheirs of
Richard Groveherst, whose Ancestors had been possessed of it many hundred years
before.

Lewis Hoath was in Times of elder Track, the Demeasne of John de Groveherst,
who lies buried in Horsmenden Church, and was a Priest in Orders, and dying so,
bequeathed this Manor by Testament to the Abbey of Begham, upon whose
suppression, by the importunate Desire of Cardinal Wolsey, it being found
incorporated with the Demeasne of the above said Monastery, it became parcel of
the Revenue of the Crown, and remained there, until Queen Elizabeth by Royal
Concession passed it away to Anthony Brown Viscount Montague: but by a sudden
Revolution, it was by Sale transmitted to Beswick, whose Heir General Mrs.
Mary Beswick, has lately by Will, settled it on Mr........ Haughton.

Sprivers is likewise under the Repute of a Manor; and had in elder Times,
Owners of that Surname: for I find that Rob. Spriver, dyed possessed of it, in
the year 1447, and by his Will, gives it to his Son Robert Spriver: and
certainly from this Seat, the Sprivers which are scattered into some places of
Kent, though now under the Eclipse of an obscure Character, branched out
originally. In Times of a more modern Aspect, the Vanes were the Proprietaries
of it; and when this Name began to fade away, the Bathursts were the next
successive Possessors, in whom the Title was not many years settled, but that
by the same transitory Devolution, it was put over to Malbert, from whom by as
quick and as sudden a Mutation, it was incorporated into the Interest of Murgan.

Spelmonden celebrates the Memory of a Family which bore that Surname;
Bidmonden in Horsmonden, was a Cell but not conventuall, belonging to the
Priory of Beaulieu in Norman; and being rent off, by Henry the fifth, it was
settled on the Priory of St. Andrew in Rochester, and after by H. the eigth, on
the Dean and Chapter of that City.
for in the Deeds and Evidences which concern this Seat, there is a frequent
recital of John de Spelmonden, who was Possessor of this Place. After this
Family had deserted the Inheritance of it, the noble and eminent Family of
Poynings, was planted by Purchase, in the possession of it. Michael Poynings
enjoyed it at his Death, which was in the forty third year of Edward the third.
Rot. Esc. Number. 14. part secunda, and from him, did the Title glide along in
the Interest of this Name, until it came down to Sir Edw. Poynings; and he, in
the fourteenth year of Edward the fourth, alienated his Concernment in it to
John Sampson, and he had Issue Christopher Sampson: who in the thirty seventh
year of Henry the eighth, passed it away to Stephen Darrell; and his Son George
Darrell, in the tenth year of Queen Elizabeth, sold it to Richard Pain of
Twyford in Middlesex; and he in the twenty eighth year of the abovesaid
Princess, translated his Right in it by Sale into William Nutbrown; and he in
the twenty ninth year of the same Queens Reign, conveyed it to George Cure of
Surrey Esquire: from whom, immediately after, it went away by Sale to Arthur
Langworth; and from him by as quick a Vicissitude to William Beswick Esquire,
Son to....... Beswick, Lord Mayor of London, in the year of our Lord........
and his Grandchild Mrs Mary Beswick, dying not long since without Issue, she,
by Testament, gave it in Lease to Mr....... Haughton, now of Chelsey in
Middlesex, originally extracted from the ancient Family of Haughton, of
Haughton Tower in the County of Lancaster.

Horton in the Hundred of Stowting, was a Manor which belonged to that Priory,
which was founded here by Robert de Vere, Earl of Oxford, Lord great
Chamberlain of England, and dedicated to the Honor of St. John Baptist, it
being a Cell to the Priory of Jews, and stored with black Monks of the Cluniac
Order. Adelina Daughter of Hugh de Montfort, was a principal Benefactresse to
this House, and so were the Honywoods of Henewood in Saltwood not far distant.
The first remembered in the Register, is Edmund de Honywood, who flourisht in
the Reign of Henry the third. Upon the General surrender of the Estate of
Abbyes, into the Hands of Henry the eighth, this by that Prince, in the twenty
ninth year of his Reign, was granted to Thomas Lord Cromwell Earl of Essex; but
he being infortunately attainted in the thirty first year of the abovesaid
Prince; this Manor returned to the Crown, and was resident there, until King
Charles passed it away by Grant, in the fourth year of his Reign to the City of
London, and they 1630, conveyed it to George Rook Esquire, Father to Mr.
Lawrence Rook, who enjoys the instant Signory of it: but the Abby-house was by
Henry the eighth, upon the fatal Execution, of the abovementioned Lord,
granted to John Tate of the County of North-hampton Esquire; and he in the
sixth year of Edward the sixth, sold it to Walter Mantle Esquire; who being
infortunately involved in the Design of the noble but unhappy Sir Thomas Wiatt,
in the second year of Queen Mary, forfeited this to the Crown, where, after it
had for some interval of Time been lodged, it was in the thirteenth year of
Queen Elizabeth, restored to the abovesaid Walter Mantle, and from him, did it
come down to his Successor Mr. Walter Mantle, who was the present Possessor of
it 1657.

Sherford, alias East-Horton, is another Manor in this Parish; it was a Branch
of that Demeasne, which fell under the Jurisdiction of Retling. Sir Richard de
Retling was found in the enjoyment of it at his death, which was in the twenty
third year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 12. and left it to Joane his
Sole Daughter and Heir, who brought it, by espousing John Spicer, to be parcel
of his Inheritance: and he died invested in the Possession of it, in the tenth
year of Richard the second, and from him it devolved to his second Son John
Spicer, who assigned it as Dower to his Wife Joane, and she was found to hold
it in Possession at her Death, which was in the fifth year of Henry the fifth,
Rot. Esc. Number. 9. and in this Family did it reside, until that Age which
bordered upon our Fathers Remembrance; and then it was passed away by Spicer to
Morris, in which Family the Propriety is still Resident.

Horton in the Hundred of Acstane, was held by An. Retellus Rubitoniensis or
Rosse, in the twentieth year of William the Conqueror, as Doomesday Book
instructs me. Alexander Rosse, another of this Family, and Lord of this Manor,
was one of the Recognitores Magnae Assisae, an Office of Eminence, and no less
Concernment. In the first year of the Reign of King John, William de Rosse
held a Knights Fee in Horton and Lullingston, and left it to his Sole
Inheritrix, Lora de Rosse, who about the latter end of Edward the first,
brought it to be the Possession of her Husband...... Kirkbie, who by this
Match, being entitled to this place removed out of Lancashire, where was his
ancient Mansion at Kirkbie Hall, and seated himself at Horton, where he
re-edified the Castle, which as Darell relates, in his Tract de Castellis
Cantii, did acknowledge the Rosses for its Founders, and built the Manor
House, upon which he engrafted his own Name, from whence it has ever since
acquired the Attribute of Horton-Kirkbie. But it was not long united to this
Name; for about the Beginning of Henry the fourth, this Family was extinguished
in a Female Inheritrix, who was matched to Thomas Stoner of Stoner in
Oxfordshire, Father and Mother of Sir Thomas Stoner, who was Father to Sir
William Stoner, who by Anne Daughter and Heir of John Nevill Marquess
Montacute, had Issue John Stoner, who died Issue-lesse, and had forfeited
Horton Castle to Henry the seventh, by confederating with the Lord Audley, in
his Insurrection against that Prince: and Anne a Daughter matched to Sir Adrian
Fortescue, by whom he had the Manor of Kirkbie Court, and by her only a Female
Inheritrix, called Margery Fortescue, matched to Thomas Lord Wentworth,
Ancestor to Thomas Lord Wentworth of Nettlested, created Earl of Cleveland, in
the first year of King Charles; but Kirkbie was passed away by Sir Adrian
Fortescue to Sir James Walsingham, in the Beginning of Henry the eighth, whose
Grandchild, Sir Thomas Walsingham, about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth,
alienated it to Alderman Hacket of London, in whose Posterity the Propriety of
it resides at this Day; but Horton Castle continued in the Crown, until King
Henry the eighth granted it to Robert Rudston Esquire; by the Heir General of
which Family it is at this instant become the Inheritance of Mr....... Michell
of Richmond.

Franks is an eminent Seat in this Parish, which was the Mansion of Gentlemen
of that Surname, who about the latter end of Henry the third, came out of
Yorkshire, and planted themselves at this place, and writ their Sirnames in
very old Deeds, and other old Evidences Frankish, and bore for their
Coat Armor, as appears by Seals A Salteir engrailed........ After Frank, John
Martin, about the Beginning of of Henry the sixth by purchase, became invested
in the Possession, and he upon his Decease, which was in the year 1436.
bequeathed it to a younger Son, who bore his Name, and was called John Martin,
from whom, by paternal Succession, it came down to his Grandchild Edward
Martin, who about the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, alienated it to Lancelot
Bathurst, Alderman of London; who erected that elegant and magnificent Fabric,
which is now the possession of my noble Friend, his Grandchild, Sir Edward
Bathurst.

Reynolds is a third place of considerable importance; it was the Seat of
Gentlemen of that Denomination, and were rooted by a Prescription of so many
years in the Possession of this Place, that it is a Controversy, whether those
at Belso in Essex, or these here, were of the most venerable Antiquity; one of
them in one of his Deeds writes, Rogerus Filius Reginaldi. It is not bounded
with any Date, and from this Orthography which was Customary in those Times,
the Name of Reynolds, or Fitz Reynolds, did by vulgar Acceptance and Use,
first borrow its Original, But to advance in my Discourse. After this Seat had
for sundry Descents been constant to this Name and Family; it was, about the
latter end of Edward the fourth, transmitted by Sale to Sir John Brown, Lord
Mayor of London, in the year 1480. from whom it came down by paternal Descent
to his Son and Heir, William Brown Esquire, who assigned it for subsistence to
his second Son, John Brown Esquire, who was Sheriff of Kent, the tenth year of
Queen Elizabeth, and held his Shrievalty at this place; and in this Name did
the Title dwell, until not many years since it was dislodged, and by Sale
transplanted into Sir John Jacob; from whom the like Fatality has lately
transported it, and cast it into the Inheritance of Sir Harbottle Grimston of
Essex, Baronet.

Horton upon Stoure, near Canterbury, lies in the Hundred of Bridge and Petham,
and was involved in that spacious Inheritance, which acknowledged the Signiory
of the Lord Badelesmere. Bartholomew Lord Badelesmere, Steward of the Household
to Edward the second, in the second year of that Prince, gave it in
Franke-marriage with his Daughter Joane Badelesmere to John de Northwood; and
that this was Customary in that Age, wherein the Times were dry for any
pecuniary Supply, is most certain; for John de Northwood, this man's great
Grandchild, in the eighth year of Richard the second, gave it in
Franke-marriage with his Daughter to Christopher Shukborough of the County of
Warwick Esquire, and he in the ninth year of Henry the fourth, alienated it to
Gregory Ballard Esquire, whose Posterity for many years did successively
possess it, until Nicolas Ballard, in the fourth year of Philip and Mary,
passed it away by Sale to Roger Trollop Esquire; and he in the second year of
Queen Elizabeth, by Bargain and Sale demised his Interest in it to Sir Edward
Warner, then Lieutenant of the Tower, and he in the sixteenth year of the
Government of that Princess, conveyed it to Sir Roger Manwood, Lord chief Baron
of the Exchequer, whose Son Sir Peter Manwood, almost in our Fathers Memory,
disposed of his Right in it by Sale to Mr. Christopher Tolderbye, who left it
to his Son Mr. Christopher Tolderbye, and, he deceasing without Issue, Jane his
only Sister and Heir, by matching with Sir Robert Darell of Cale-hill (a man
eminent both by his Integrity and Hospitality, according to the accustomed
Genius, which always waited on this Family) brought it to be possessed by that
Name; upon whose Decease it devolved to his second Son Mr. Edward Darell, who
is the present Lord of the Fee.

There was an eager Contest between John Beckford Vicar of Chartham, and
Christopher Shukborough Esquire, Lord of Horton, touching the celebration of
Divine Offices in the Chapel at Horton; as likewise the Administration of the
Sacraments: and it was improved to that Animosity, that there was a mutual
Appeal made to William Courtney, then Archbishop of Canterbury, who directed a
Commission to John Barnett his Official, in the year 1380. to hear and
determine the Controversy, and upon a serious sifting and winnowing this whole
Affair, the Debate was wound up upon this Conclusion, that there should be a
solemnization of all Divine Offices in the above mentioned Chapel, exceptis
tantum D. functorum Sepulturis and exsequiis, only the Dead were to receive
their enterment in the Church of Chartham.

Hothfeild in the Hundreds of Chart, Longbridge, and Cale-hill, was wrapped up in
the Demeasne of the Lord Badelesmer, who held it in Grand Serjeanty of the
Archbishop of Canterbury; that is, he was to serve up water to the Archbishop
at his Installment or Inthronization to wash his Hands, and had Pelvim and
Lotorium; so are the Words of the Record: he was rewarded with the Vessel which
contained the Water, and likewise the Towel which dried his Hands, and he was
likewise to be his Chamberlin the Night of his Instalment, and was recompensed
with the Archbishops Bed, as his Guerdon. Bartholomew de Badelesmere Son of
Guncelin, died possessed of it, in the fifth year of Edward the second, Rot. Esc.
Number. 5. And left it to his unfortunate Heir Bartholomew Lord Badelesmere, who
by his mutinous Association with the Rebellious Nobility, having in the
sixteenth year of Edward the second, forfeited this to the Crown; it lay
entwined with the Royal Revenue, until Edward the third, in the second year of
his Reign, restored it to his Son Bartholomew de Badelesmere, who in the
twelfth year of that Prince's Government, dying without Issue, his four Sisters
became his Coheirs, whereof Margaret married to the Lord William Rosse of
Hamlake, cast this Manor into the Inheritance of that Family, and he in her
Right died seized of it, in the seventeenth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 60. And from him, did the Title by a lineal transmission, pass down to
Thomas Lord Rosse, who vigorously endeavoring to support the sinking Title of
the House of Lancaster, was by John Nevill Marquess Montacute, discomfited in
the North, and taken Prisoner, and after beheaded at Newcastle, upon whose
Dysastrous Tragedy, this Manor was laid hold on by the Crown, as an Escheat:
and King Edward the fourth, in the fourth year of his Government, granted it to
Sir John Fogge of Repton for Life only, who was Treasurer of his Household, and
one of his Privie-Councel; and whom King Richard the third, invited afterward
out of the Abbey of West-minster, where he had taken Sanctuary for fear of some
Mischief, intended him by that Usurper; and in the presence of a numerous
Assembly, gave him his Hand, and bad him be confident, that he was thenceforth
sure unto him in Affection. This I mention, the rather, because diverse of our
Chronicles, have erroneously mentioned, that he was an Attorney, whom this
Prince pardoned for Forgery. But to proceed: After the Decease of Sir John
Fogge, who dyed in the seventeenth year of Henry the seventh, it returned to
the Crown, and lay there until Henry the eighth, granted it to John Tufton
Esquire, Ancestor to the right honorable John Earl of Thanet, who now by
paternal Right, claims the Possession of it.

Swinfort is a Manor in Hothfield, which afforded a Surname to a Family so
called: but whether Sir Otho Swinfort, Husband to Katharine Swinfort, who was
afterward Concubine to John of Gaunt, was extracted from this Family or not,
is uncertain; because I cannot discover they were ever of any Eminence. In
Henry the fifths Reign, I find it in the Possession of Bridges, descended from
John at Bregg, one of those eminent persons, that are depicted kneeling in Coat
Armor, in a Window in Great Chart Church. And there is a place in that Parish,
which still bears the Name of this Family, and is called Bridge, being divorced
by no great distance from this Manor: and in this Family did the Propriety of
this place continue, until the latter end of King James; and then it passed
away by Sale from Bridges, to Sir Nicholas Tufton Father to the right
honorable John Earl of Thanet, the instant Owner of it.

Faulesley, vulgarly now called Fausley and Fousley, was the Patrimony of a
Family, which borrowed not only its Source and Extraction, but its Denomination
likewise from hence. Sir John Faulesley, was an eminent person, in the Reign of
Richard the second, being frequently in his Time, as appears by the late
printed Abridgement of the Records in the Tower, summoned to sit in Parliament
as Baron: but although this Family was made eminent by this worthy person, who
was an elder Branch of this Stem; yet in succeeding Generations it began to
crumble away, into Obscurity and Decay: and was at last ground to so narrow a
proportion of Estate, that about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, this Manor,
which had so long been espoused to the Interest of this Name and Family, was
carried off by Sale to Drury; in which Family it was resident, until the
latter end of that Princess, and then it was alienated to Paris; who
immediately after conveyed it to Bull; and he transplanted his Right by Sale
again into the same Family; from whom, a like Vicissitude brought it to be the
Inheritance of Sir Nicholas Tufton, Father to the right honorable John Earl of
Thanet now Possessor of it.

At Hothfield, in a field not far removed from Ripley, a Manor belonging to
Alexander Iden Esquire, was Jack Cade that Counterfeit Mortimer (who was mufled
up, in that Name, by the House of York, only to fathom the depth of the
people's Affection to their Title, which was to take its Rise from that person)
encountered, and in a single Combat, offered up to the Justice of Henry the
sixth, by the abovesaid Alexander Iden, who was not only by that Prince,
recompensed with a considerable Reward, for so important a piece of Service,
but likewise invested with the Honor of Knighthood, the present Age wherein he
lived, admired him; nor shall there be any History for the future, which shall
not Record him. From the Heir General of this Family, is Mr. George Brown
Esquire, lately of Spelmonden in Kent, and now of Buckland in Surrey, by his
Grandmother originally descended.

Hougham in the Hundreds of Bew borough and Folkstone gave Seat and Surname to
a Family of as reverend an Estimate for Antiquity, as any in this Track. Robert
de Hougham, dyed seized of it, in the forty first year of Henry the third, and
left it to his Son This Robert de Hougham was with Edw. the first, at the Seige
of Acon in Palestine.
Robert de Hougham, who was Castellan of Rochester Castle, in the Reign of
Edward the first, and dyed seized in the possession of this, and the Custody of
that, in the second year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 14. But in the
next Descent, this Family was entombed in two Daughters and Coheirs, one was
married to John de Shelving, and the other to Waretius de Valoigns, who in her
Right entered upon the Inheritance, and in the fourteenth year of Edward the
third, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Manor of Hougham, but enjoyed
neither his new acquired Privilege or Inheritance long; for before the latter
end of Edward the third, he dyed, and left a large Inheritance to be shared by
his two Daughters and Coheirs, one whereof was wedded to Sir Thomas Fogge of
Toniford, and the other to Thomas de Aldon, to whose Revenue upon the
Partition, this was annexed, and he was found in the enjoyment of it at his
Death, which was in the thirty fifth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number.
10. Part prima. But here the Possession likewise, before the end of Henry the
fourth, was as volatile, and full of Vicissitude; for by the Female Inheritrix
of this Family, it came to be the Demeasne of Heron: who, after he had some
years owned the propriety of it, alienated the Fee-simple to Phineux, in which
Name and Stem, when it had for many Descents, in a constant procedure,
flourished; and had been productive of persons, of the highest Office and
Trust, as they could be invested with, in Relation to the Service of this
County, it was not many years since, passed away from this Family, and sold to
Master Neview of Dover.

Little Hougham, is a second Manor in this Parish: It was, in Ages of a very
high Ascent, the Revenue of the ancient Family of Basing. William de Basing,
held it at his Death, which was in the ninth year of Edward the second, Rot.
Esc. Number. 21. From whom it desceuded to his Grandchild John Basing, who dyed in
the Tenure of it, in the seventh year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 6.
After whose Decease, it continued in the Name, until the Beginning of Henry
the sixth, and then it was alienated to Clive, vulgarly called Cliffe, a Family
of eminent Account, in the Counties of Salop and Essex; and in the Possession
of this Family it dwelt, until the latter end of that Prince, and then by
Purchase, it was made the Patrimony of Hextall, a Eamily who extracted their
original, out of Staffordshire; and here it resided, until the latter end of
Edward the fourth, and then it was transmitted by a Daughter and Heir to
Whetenhall; who sold it to John Bois Esquire, Ancestor to Jo. Bois of Fredville
Esquire, who is entitled to the present Signiory of it.

Maxton is a third place, which must not be waved in this Discourse: It was in
elder Times divided between two Families called Madekin, and Walsham. Stephen
de Madekin, was not only Lord of Madekin in Denton, and the Moiety of this
place, in the year one thousand seventy and seven, but likewise Land at
Canterbury, as appears by Mr. Sompner, in his Survey of that City, page 415.
And Will. de Walsham, who in the thirty seventh year, was possessed of the other
Moiety of this place gave, about that year by Charter, some land to the
Incumbent or Parson of St. Nicholas of Harbledown. After these two Families had
deserted the Inheritance, I find the Archers, about the Beginning of Edward the
third, to be entitled by Purchase to it, and William le Archer (so he is
written in the Book of Aid) paid an Auxiliary Supply for this Manor, in the
twentieth year of Edward the third, at making the Black Prince Knight; but his
Son William Archer, in the twenty first year of Richard the second, passes
away his Right by Sale to John Alkham of Alkham, a Family that had taken deep
Root in Antiquity downwards, and had a spreading Revenue upwards in this Track;
but, before the end of Henry the seventh, were consumed and crumbled away, and
then the next Family which succeeded in the Possession was Herman, who was
likewise owner of Mary-place in Crayford, and in this Name did the Interest of
it fix, until the latter end of Queen Elizabeth and then it was alienated to
Andrews, who some few years after demised the Fee-simple to Pepper, and he
almost in the Verge of our Remembrance sold it to Sir Thomas VVilford of Ilden,
and he in our Memory alienated it to Richards of Dover.

Although the greatest part of this Manor was of secular Concernment, yet I
find that the Prior of St. Martins in Dover had some Interest in it, as appears
by an Inquisition taken after the Death of John Atte-hall, where it is proved
in the sixteenth year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Numb. 129. Part
secunda, that he held Lands at his Death at Maxton of that Covent.

Siberston is the last place of Account in Hougham; it gave Name in elder Times
to a Family so styled; for in an old Deed without Date, in the Hands of Mr.
Whittingham-Wood of Canterbury, lately deceased, I find Richard de Siberston
demises it to John Monins, and in another Deed I discover that John Monins Son
of John Monins, passes the third Part of his Manor of Siberston to John Monins
the elder, in the thirty ninth year of Edward the third. And this I think is
Authority sufficient to evidence to the Public, that it was a parcel of that
Estate that owned the Interest and Signory of that eminent Family, in which it
lay couched until the latter end of Henry the eighth, and then it was by Sale
transplanted into Pepper, whose Successor in our Fathers Remembrance conveyed
it to Moulton of Retherhed, vulgarly called Redriff in Surrey, in whose
Descendants the Inheritance of it does still continue.

Hunton in the Hundred of Twiford, celebrates the Memory of an ancient Family,
called Lenham, who were once Proprietaries of it. Nicolas de Lenham obtained a
Charter of Free Warren to his Manor of Hunton, in the forty first year of
Henry the third; but about the Beginning of Edward the third, the Interest of
it was departed from this Family, for William de Lenham determined in Eleanor
de Lenham, his sole Inheritrix, and she by matching with John Gifford, wrapped up
this and Bensted, another little Manor in this Parish, which likewise was
parcel of Lenhams Estate, in the Demeasne of that Family; and he and his Wife
paid Releif for Hunton and Bensted, in the twentieth year of Edward the third,
at making the Black Prince Knight. But after this, it was not long permanent in
this Family; for about the Beginning of Richard the second, it was passed away
with Bensted to John Lord Clinton, who in the twenty eighth year of Edward the
third, was found Heir to his Cozen William Clinton, Earl of Huntington; for
that Land which he held Jure proprio and nativo, not Jure uxoris Julianae de
Leybourne in this County. And the Effigies of this John, and of his Grand
child...... Lord Clinton (who paid Relief, in the fourth year of Henry the
fourth, for his Manor of Hunton, at the Marriage of Blanch that Prince's
Daughter) have escaped the furious Barbarity of these Times, and stand yet
undemolished in the Church-Windows: and from this last did it descend to John
Lord Clinton his Successor, who about the Beginning of Henry the seventh
alienated the Fee-simple to Sir Henry Wiatt, one of the Privy Council to the
said Monarch, and his Son Sir Thomas Wiatt the elder died seized of it, in the
thirty fourth year of Henry the eighth, and transmitted it with Bensted, which
his Grandfather likewise bought of the Lord Clinton, to his unfortunate Son
Sir Thomas Wiatt, who adhering too strictly to an unhappy Clause in the
Testament of Henry the eighth, which obliges his Council not to suffer his
Daughters to espouse any Forrainer, involved him in that dysastrous Design,
which could not be expiated, but by the Forfeiture of his Life and Estate, in
which this Manor of Hunton being concerned; it was in the second year of Queen
Mary granted to her Attorney General, Sir John Baker of Sisinghurst, from whom
the Title in the Stream of Succession, lately glided down to his Heir General
Sir John Baker Baronet, Son and Heir to Sir John Baker Baronet, not many years
since deceased.

Burston is another Manor in Hunton, which is eminent for being the Seat of
John de Burston, which the Dateless Deeds that relate to this Family, from the
probable Conjecture of the Handwriting, which is calculated for the Reign of
Henry the third, record to have lived in that Prince's Time, and there was Land
likewise about Wye and Crundall, that acknowledged the Jurisdiction of this
Family; for in the forty fifth year of Henry the third, Waretius de Valoigns
Knight, makes a Release of his Title to some Lands in those Parishes to John de
Burston, and in this Family did this Seat remain for many Descents, and was
productive of men of no despicable Account in this Track: amongst whom William
Burston was returned, in the twenty ninth year of Henry the sixth, by Gervas
Clifton then Sheriff, inter illos qui portabant Arma Antiqua. In the Reign of
Henry the eighth, Alderman Head of London was resident here, and added much
both of Building and Magnificence to this Fabric; but certainly it was only as
Lessee; for I cannot find that he was ever Proprietary of it, for about the
Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, it was sold by Burston to Sir Thomas Vane, who
upon his Decease gave it to his second Son...... Vane, from whom it descended
to his Heir Sir George Vane, whose Widow Dowager the Lady...... Vane is now in
Possession of it.

Hunton had the Grant of a Market procured to it by Nicolas de Lenham, on the
Tuesday, and a yearly Fair to continue five Days, the Vigil, the Day of the
Assumption of our Lady, and three Days after, Pat. 41. Henrici tertii Memb. 7.

Hucking in the Hundred of Eyhorne, is involved in the Manor of Hollingbourne,
and was enstated on the Prior and Convent of Christ-church, when that by a
munificent Donation, augmented the Revenue of that Priory.

Yet there is an ancient Seat in this Parish, called Rumpsted, which never was
couched in the Spiritual Patrimony; for it had anciently Owners of that
Appellation. Sir William de Rumpsted held this, and a Castellated Mansion in
Sevenoke, of that Denomination, in the Reign of Edward the first, and he had
Issue Sir John Rumpsted, possessed of this place and Rumpsted in Sevenoke, and,
as the Tradition asserts, educated Sir William Sevenoke, Lord Mayor of London,
in the year of Grace 1418. In Ages of a nearer Descent to us, that is, in the
third year of Henry the sixth, I find Richard Peverell to have enjoyed it. And
in Times subsequent to these, the Peckhams; but their Possession was very
frail, for in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, I find it to be in Fig, a Name of
no despicable Character in this Parish; but it was very transitory here
likewise; for about the Beginning of King James, the Title was interwoven with
the Interest of Thompson, who in our Fathers Remembrance, conveyed it by Sale
to Mr....... Tailor, Fruiterer to the abovesaid Prince; and his Discendant, not
many years since alienated it to Mr. Stringer of Goudherst.

I. I. I. I.
ICkham in the Hundred of Downehamford, was given by King Offa to
Christ-church, and to the Monks of that Covent, in the year 781. under the
Notion of fifteen Plough-lands, and was for a Supplement of Diet. This Donation
in the year 958. was confirmed by Athelward, Odo the Archbishop of Canterbury,
being then present, and attesting the Ratification: In the Time of Edward the
Confessor, when the first Design of Doomesday Book was started; it was rated at
four Sullings or Plough-lands: nor did it fall in that Account, when that
general Register was perfected, which was in the twentieth year of the
Conqueror, defending it self at the same Estimate, and upon the Appraisment was
valued at thirty pound. And here it was fastened until King Henry the eighth
finding the Revenue of the Church was diffused into too wide a Latitude and
Circumference, contracted it by a general Dissolution into a narrower Orb, and
having rent off this Manor from the Ecclesiastical Demeasne, like an
Excrescence sprouting out from a luxuriant Stem, he ingrafted it again by his
Letters Patent, on the Dean and Chapter of Christ-church, and they settled it
by Lease on Edward Isaac a Noble Confessor for the Protestant Religion, in the
Reign of Queen Mary, when so many were sent to Heaven, like so many Elias's
Flammeis vecti Quadrigis in Chariots of fire, who rather chose to desert his
Country, then abandon his Religion, and to lose his Estate rather then to
debauch or relinquish his Conscience, as his Epitaph on an old Tablet affixed
to a Pillar contiguous to his Gravestone in the Nave of Christ-church at
Canterbury does instruct us. Upon his Recesse, this was seized upon by the
Crown, and Queen Mary by Grant united it to the Revenue of George Lord Cobham,
whose unfortunate Grandchild Henry Brook, being attainted, in the Reign of
King James, that Monarch restored his Estate, forfeited here, to Robert Cecill
Earl of Salisbury, his Brother in Law, whose Son Robert, now Earl of Salisbury,
holds the instant Possession of it, but has lately alienated some part of it
to Mr. Roger Lukin of London.

Apulton is a second Manor in Ickham, written in old Deeds Apylton, as being
the Inheritance of a Family of that Name; for in an old Deed of Reginald de
Cornehill, that was owner of Lukedale in Littlebourne, not far distant, one
William de Apylton of Ickham is a Witness; but whether this Family was knit by
any Relation to the Noble Family of the Apyltons of Essex and Suffolk, I am
uncertain. Afterward, the Denis's were possessed of it, and one John Denis of
Apulton in Ickham, who was Sheriff of London, in the year of Grace 1360.
Founded here a Chauntry, in the Reign of Edward the third, as appears by an old
Manuscript, in the Hands of Mr. Thomas Den, lately deceased, and was called
Denis Chauntry, and the Lands which relate to it, are at this Day styled Denis
Lands: After this Family was worn out, I find one Adam Oldmeade, by the private
Deeds, to be in the Reign of Henry the fifth and Henry the sixth, owner of it;
from whom before the latter end of that Prince, it came over by Sale to Bemboe,
and from him to Hunt, in which Family it made no long stay. For about the
latter of Henry the seventh, I find it alienated to Dormer, a Branch of the
Dormers of Buckinghamshire, and from this Name not many years after it went
away to Gason, a Name very ancient in this Parish, and here likewise was the
Possession of as brief a Date; for Dormer by Sale passed it away to Hodgekin
(whose Ancestors were formerly possessed of Uffington in Gonston, and transmitted
it by Sale to Ashenden) and here likewise was the Title very variable, for
within the Circle of fourscore years it acknowledged not only this Family; but
Rutland, Winter, and Dee, to have been its Successive Proprietaries: from the
last of which, not many years since, it was by Sale carried off to Frostall, in
which name it is still resident.

The Manor of Baa in this Parish, had anciently Possessors of that Surname, as
appears by an old Fragment of Glass in the Church Windows, whereon is
superscribed this incoherent Inscription. Hic...... Ba..... and at the Pedestal
of another antiquated Portraiture Thomas de Baa. After the Baas, the Wendertons
of Wenderton in Wingham, were possessed of it for several Generations, until
William Wenderton, about the Beginning of Henry the eighth, passed it away by
Sale to Hugh Warham Esquire, Brother to the Archbishop, and he gave it in
Dower with Anne his Daughter, matched to Sir Anthony St. Ledger, Lord President
of Ireland, whose Descendant Sir Warham St. Ledger, passed it away to Mr.......
Denue of Den Hill in Kingston, whose Heir Mr. Thomas Den, late Recorder of
Canterbury, almost in our Memory alienated it to Curling.

Before I leave Ickham, I must inform the Reader that Peter de Ickham, was born
in this Parish; a man whom both Ball in his Centuries, and Pitseus in his
Track, de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis, do highly magnify for a man of eminent
Literature: whither I refer my Reader.

Ivie-church in the Hundred of St. Martins and Aloesbridge, contains sundry
Places within its Confines, not to be entombed in silence. The first is
Capells-Court, the Seat of a Family of that Surname, and were written
frequently At Capell, and in Latin de Capella, and were a Family certainly of
signal Account in Kent, as appears by their Land, which lay scattered in
Linton and Boxley, where John de Capell held Land called Tattellmell in that
Parish, in the thirty seventh year of H. the third, as appears by a Charter of
Inspection, of that Prince, wherein he confirms Land to the Abbey of Boxley,
which bordered on the Land of John de Capell at Tattellmell. Richard de Capell
this Man's Successor, dyed possessed of Capell Court in Werehorn, and this here,
in the fifteenth year of Richard the second. But after this Man's decease, it
did not long remain annexed to the Name: for this Family expiring in a Female
Heir, she by matching with Harlackenden, of the Borough of Harlackenden in
Woodchurch, united it to the Patrimony of this Family, and here it rested
until the Beginning of King James, and then Deborah, Sole Daughter and Heir of
Walter Harlackenden, a Branch of the abovesaid Stem by espousing Sir Edward
Hales, late of Tunstall deceased, entwined it with his Demeasne: upon whose
Death, it devolved to his Grandchild Sir Edward Hales, now of Tunstall Baronet.

Cheyneys Court is a second place of Account in this Parish, and had this Name
imposed upon it, because it lay folded up in the Revenue of that Name, of that
Family, Alexander de Cheyney, who flourished in the Reign of Henry the third,
and Edward the first, in the ninth of which Prince's reign he was one of that
Catalogue, as appears by Kirkbie's Inquest kept in the Exchequer, who was
embarked in that successful War, which was commenced by that Monarch against
the Welsh, and dyed possessed of this Manor, in the twenty fourth year of his
Government. After whose Decease, it was constantly resident in this Family,
until Henry Lord Cheyney. Son of Sir Thomas Cheyney, about the latter end of
Queen Elizabeth, passed it away by Sale to Mr. Richard Knatchbull, whose Heir
General, Sir Norton Knatchbull, Knight and Baronet, extracted originally, from
the Knatchbulls of Limne, where I find the Name by Deeds, very ancient, is now
in the Possession of the Demeasne, but the Manor was conveyed by Sale to Sir
Walter Roberts.

More Court is a third place in Ivy Church, which must not find its
enterrement in Silence because it was the ancient Seat of the Moors, now
Barons of Mellifont in Ireland, before they were transplanted into More-place
in Benenden, by matching with the Heir general of Sir William Brenchley, Lord
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, under Henry the sixth, and this is evident by
a Fine levied, between John the Son of Thomas de Iden, and John de More of
Ivie-church (so he is named in the Record) by which, the said John passes away
Land to John de More of Rolvenden, in the year of Grace 1280. And in this
Family for many Generations was it constant and permanent, until the latter
end of Henry the seventh; and then the common Vicissitude of Purchase (which
like a Moath or Canker, frets into ancient Titles) brought it to be the
Possession of Tailor, and here it was settled until in the second year of
Edward the sixth, (as by an Exemplification, now in the Hands of Thomas Tailor
Esquire; is evident) it was divided between William and John Tailor Gentlemen; and
they immediately after, by a joint and mutual Concurrence, alienated their
Interest here, to Peter Godfrey Gentleman, Great Grandfather to Sir Thomas
Godfrey, now of Hepington in Nether Hardres, who is the instant Proprietary of
it.

Iwade in the Hundred of Milton, is a small Parish, situated no great distance
from the Swale, which exposes it self to the injurious Impression of many Fogs,
and other sullen Vapors, which exhale, from the adjacent Marshes; so that,
the Air becoming by these Mists, contagious and unheathfull, we must expect,
that it cannot be very populous, nor contain many places in it, considerable in
their Account. The only place of Note being Colshill-hall, a place in its Name,
proportionate to its Position, though formerly it had Owners of its own
Appellation: for in a Deed of William de Codshill, who held Land at Middleton
Bobbing, and elsewhere, and which bears Date, from about the fiftieth of Henry
the third, I find one John de Colsted a Witness. But in Times of no great
distance, from that Prince's Reign, I find the Alefs or Alephs, possessed of it,
and to this Family: does the ancient Shell or Fabric of the House, owe the
principal part of its Structure; especially that, which by its Antiquity
obliges the Eye to so much Regard and Veneration as is evident by the Hall,
which in diverse places is diaper'd with an A. and then a Leaf, a Rebus, which
treasures up the Relic of the Name, remaining unwritten. And appears to be
exceeding ancient, by the Character calculated for the Reign of Edward the
third. From whose Time, until the Beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
it continued knit to this Name of Alef; and then Thomas Aleph, the last of this
Name, being extinguished in a Daughter and Heir called Margaret, matched to
John Monins Esquire, this by that Alliance, became the Inheritance of that
Name, but made no long abode in their Revenue: for in our Grandfathers memory,
it went away by Sale from Monins to Lewin; and Lewin, not many years since,
concluding in a Female Inheritrix, she by being affianced to Rogers, branched
out from Rogers of Brianson in the West, linked it to the Inheritance of that
Family, where it had as brief a Residence; for Rogers not long since, dying
without Issue-male, Elizabeth his only Heir, by her espousalls with Charles
Cavendish, Lord Mansfield, has now interwoven it with the Propriety and
Income, relating to that eminent and illustrious Family.

K. K. K. K.
KEmsing in the Hundred of Codsheath, is a Parish, which, in Respect of its
Circuit and Dimension, is but despicable; but, in Relation to those Persons who
in elder Times were Possessors of it, it is not inferior in its value to
scarce any Parish in this Hundred. The first that I find to be its Proprietary,
was Falcatius de Brent, and he is mentioned in the Red-book kept in the
Exchequer, to have held it in the Reign of Henry the second, and was Castellan
likewise of Kemsing-Castle, a place then of important Concernment, though now
it is Skelleton it self, be shrunk into such a desolate and neglected Mass of
Rubbish, that it would be now as difficult to trace it out or find it, as it
was formerly to conquer it. And this Man's Son, was that Falcatius de Brent, so
famous in our Chronicles for those wild Disorders and Sallies arising from
those Boilings and Evaporations which were cast out by the Calentures of Youth,
rather then from any vicious Habit, contracted from several Acts of Excess,
and riveted into his Soul. Yet, it seems, these Excursions of his, did so
disgust King Henry the third, that he made the Forfeiture of his Estate here,
pay the price of his Vanities. Indeed, that name, his Misfortunes rather then
his Treasons, seem to Challenge. And then that Prince, in the sixth year of his
Reign, granted it, with the Manor of Sauters in Sutton at Hone, to Baldwin de
Betun Earl of Albemarle, in Right of his Wife Hawis, Daughter and Heir of
William le Gross Earl of Albemarle, and Lord of Holdernesse. And this Baldwin,
had, by her, two Daughters and Coheirs, Hawis the eldest of them, was married
to William le Marshall Earl of Pembroke, to whom her Father gave with her in
Marriage, Kemsing Sawters, and much other Land in this County: but this Man's
Successor, Anselme le Marshall Earl of Pembroke, dying without Issue, Robert
Bigod Earl of Norfolk, by Mawd his Mother, the Heir General of the Family, as
being Sister to Gilbert Marshall Earl of Pembroke, entered upon the Estate of
that Family, here at Kemsing: and he passed it away to Otho Lord Grandison,
with the Advowson of the Church of Kemsing, in the eleventh year of Edward the
first. And after this Family was worn out, I find the Says to Step into the
Inheritance, and Geffrey de Say, held it at his Death, which was in the forty
third year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 24. Part secunda. From whom,
the Propriety flowed down to his Successor Geffrey Lord Say, and he concluded
in two Daughters and Coheirs, whereof Elizabeth, one of them was affianced to
Sir William Fiennes: who in her Right was invested in Kemsing, and from him was
the Title by Descent transported over to William Lord Fiennes, Son of James
Lord Fiennes, and he in the second year of Edward the fourth, passed it away to
Sir Geffrey Bolein, Great Grandfather to George Viscount Rochford, who was
beheaded and left no Issue, in the Reign of Henry the eighth, so that this upon
his Father Sir Thomas Boleyn, Earl of Wilts, departure without any other
Issue-male, in the thirtieth year of Henry the eighth, devolved to that Prince,
who seized upon it in Right of his Wife, the unfortunate Anne Bullen, who was
eldest Sister to the unhappy Viscount. And here in the Revenue of the Crown did
it lie couched, until Queen Elizabeth, in the first year of her Reign, passed
it away by Grant to her Kinsman Henry Carry Lord Hunsdon, Son of William Carry,
Esquire of the Body to Henry the eighth, and of Mary his Wife, Sister to Q.
Anne, Mother to the above said Princess, and his Grandchild Henry Earl of
Dover, alienated his Right in it to Richard Earl of Dorset, and he not many
years since, passed it away to Mr....... Smith, vulgarly called Dog-Smith, who
upon his Decease settled the Fee-simple for ever on the Hospital of St. Thomas
in Southwarke.

There was an old Knightly Family, which took their Surname from this Parish,
and was styled Kemsing, and their Coat was Argent, a Fesse and Cheveron,
interlaced Sables, now quatered by Mr. William Heart of Lullingston Esquire, in
Right of Peche, who married the Heir General.

Kenardington in the Hundred of Blackborn, is by Contraction called Kenarton:
and although it cannot much boast of the healthful situation thereof, yet it
has had Lords and Owners of a very great Estimate; Will. de Normannia held it
in the Reign of K. John, and part of the Reign of Henry the third, as appears
by the Pipe Rolls, which relate to those Times, and concern this County: Rafe
de Normanvill is registered in the list of those Kentish Gentlemen, who were
with Richard the first at the Seige of Acon in Palestine.
After him his Son Thomas de Normannia or Normanvill; for so he is written in
the ancient Rolls succeeded in the Possession of it, but died in the eleventh
year of Edward the first, without Issue-male; so that by his only Daughter and
Heir it devolved to be the Possession of Sir William de Basing, with the Manor
of Cockride likewise, which was folded up in her Inheritance, and was one of
those Knights who accompanied King Edward the first, in the twenty eighth year
of his Reign, in that succesful Expedition which he was engaged in, when he
undertook the Conquest of Scotland. After him, William de Basing held it, and
was Sheriff of Kent, in the eighth year of Edward the second; and dying in his
Shrievalty, Margaret his Widow accounted for the Profits of the County, as the
Records of the Pipe Office set forth. Sir Thomas de Basing his Son died seized
of it, in the twenty third year of Edward the third, and paid respective Aid
for it under the Notion of a whole Knights Fee, at making the Black Prince
Knight, and left it to John his Son, a Child of eight years of Age, who after
was Knighted, and died possessed of it in the seventh year of Richard the second,
and left it to Thomas his Son and Heir, then eleven years of Age, and he had
Issue Thomas likewise, who dying without Issue, John Basing his Uncle was found
to be his Heir, but was scarce planted in his new acquired Patrimony: but he
also, in the twenty fourth year of Henry the sixth, expired without Issue, so
that the Inheritance devolved to Alice his Sister matched to Thomas Mackworth,
as the Heir General of the Family. And thus were the Basings at this Place
extinguished, who before they planted in Kent, were registered amongst the prime
Gentlemen of Middlesex: Solomon de Basing was Sheriff of London, the last year
of King John; Adam de Basing was Lord Mayor of London, in the thirty sixth year
of Henry the third; and Robert de Basing succeeded in that Office, in the
seventh year of Edward the first, and Basings-Hall ows both his Name and
Foundation to this Family; and John Stow in his Survey of London, ascribes to
them the Degree of Barons of the Realm. But to return into that Path from
whence this Discourse had diverted me. After Mackworth, which, by Female
Devolution, was possessed of this Manor, was worn out, which was about the
Beginning of Henry the seventh: The Horns of Hornes-place in this Parish, were
by Purchase settled in the Inheritance. Gentlemen certainly they were of as
eminent Account as any in this Territory, and had been Proprietaries of this
Seat for many Hundreds of years; for one Ralph de Hurne of Kenardington, was
one of the Recognitores magnae Assisae, in the Reign of King John, Persons,
who, before the Office of Justice of Peace was instituted, did supply their
Place, and were much in Resemblance, like the Grand Inquest at this Day, being
assistant both by their presence and concurrent Counsels to the Justices in
Air, in all the great Decisions which did relate to Causes Criminal, emergent
a tribus Forisfacturis, or the three Forfeitures, Murder, Felony, and Breach of
the Peace. But to proceed: In this Family, did the Propriety both of
Hernes-place and Kenardington thus purchased of Mackworth, lie rolled up
together, until the twelfth year of Queen Elizabeth, and then Bennet Horn the
Heir General of both these being matched to...... Guldford a Romish Catholic,
he, to decline the Oath of Supremacy, fled beyond Sea with his Wife, upon whose
Recesse the Crown seized upon that Estate, which had formerly accrewed to him
in behalf of his Wife at this place, as escheated upon the Statute of
praemunire. And the above said Princess immediately after, granted the
Premises thus forfeited to Walter Moile of Buckwell Esquire, Ancestor to Mr.
Robert Moile, who claims the present Signiory both of Kenardington and
Hornes-place.

Kenington, in the Hundreds of Chart and Longbridge, was a Manor which always
related to the Crown, as is intimated by the Name, where lie tacitly couched
some Hints of those who were Proprietaries of it. And Keningbrooke, which is
circumscribed within the Limits of this Parish, was annexed by William the
Conqueror to his Royal Manor of Wye, and was looked upon as an Appendage to
it, and followed the Fate of it at the common Dissolution, when the other was
plucked away from the Patrimony of Battle Abbey, in which ever since the
Original Donation of William the Conqueror it had been resident, and was with
the Manor of Wye, by Queen Elizabeth granted, in the first year of her Reign,
to her Kinsman Henry Carry Lord Hunsdon: and his Grandchild Hen. Earl of Dover,
not many years since, passed it away by Sale to Sir Tho. Finch, Father to
Heneage Finch, now Earl of Winchelsey, in whose Revenue it is at this instant
settled.

Bibrooke is a second Place in Kenington, which claims some Consideration. It
was, as appears by very old Evidences, the Patrimony of a Family called Godwin,
which flourished here in the Reign of King John, Henry the third, and Edward
the first; but after this it began to wither, and before the latter end of
Edward the third, was altogether crumbled away, the last of whom that I find by
public Record to be invested in the Possession, was William Godwin, who
enjoyed it at his Death, which was in the thirty second year of Edward the
third, Rot. Esc. Number. 93. The next Family after this, which was entitled to
the Possession, was Belknap; but Sir Robert Belknap being infortunately
attainted and banished, in the tenth year of Richard the second, to whose Cause
and Quarrel he had wholly vowed his Life and Service, and his Estate, as to the
principal part, confiscated, in which this lay involved, the same Monarch, in
the thirteenth year of his Reign, granted it to William Else, who was at that
Time one of the Conservators or Justices of the Peace of this County, whose
Capital Seat was at Burton in this Parish, though in very old Deeds it is
written Burston, as being indeed the Seat of a Branch of that Family, from whom
it came over about the latter end of Edward the second, to Else, but in the
Name of Else the Title of Bibrooke was not long-lived; for about the Beginning
of Henry the sixth, I find it by Purchase invested in Shelley, by whose Heir
General it devolved in the Time of Edward the fourth, to May, from whom not
long after it was alienated to Tilden, where it continued, until about the
Beginning of Queen Elizabeth; and then the same Revolution transported the
Title to Best, who about the latter end of that Princess, passed it away by
Sale to Hall, Ancestor to Mr. Nevill Hall, the present Lord of this Mansion;
but Burton was more constant to the Family of Else, and remained linked to the
Patrimony of that Name, until that Age, which bordered upon our Fathers
Remembrance, and then it was demised by Sale to Hall, in whose Descendant Mr.
Nevill Hall, the Propriety is at present resident.

Keston in the Hundred of Rokesley, belonged (in the twentieth year of William
the Conqueror, as the Pages of Doomsday Book inform me) to Gilbert de
Magninot, and there it is written Cheston: and continued in his Name, until
the latter end of King John; and then by the Heir General of this Family, it
came to be possessed of Say, of Says-court in Deptford: but stayed not long in
this Name, for in the twenty fourth year of Edward the first, Alexander de
Cheyney dyed possessed of it, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 26. But in his Posterity
likewise, it had no long Residence; for about the Beginning of Edward the
third, it was conveyed to Stephen de Ashway; and he in the thirty eighth of
this Prince, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Manor of Keston. And
here the Title fixed, until the Beginning of Henry the fourth, and then it was
alienated with Baston, which had still the same original and successive
Proprietaries with Keston, to Squerris of Squerries-court in Westerham: and
here it made its abode until the latter end of Henry the sixth, and then it
devolved by Dorothy Daughter and Coheir of Thomas Squerrie, to Richard Mervin
of Fountell in Wiltshire, who passed away Keston and Baston, both which accrued
to him, upon the Division of Squerrie's Estate, to Philp Reynolds, and Thomas
Tregarthen, as his Trustees; and they, in the eighth year of Edward the fourth,
convey them both to Richard Scroope and Stephen Scroop; from whom about the
latter end of Edward the fourth, they came to Henry Heyden Esquire; and he in
the first year of Richard the first, as is manifest, by an old Court-rol, held
a Court here at Keston; and from him, did the Propriety, by the Steps of
several Descents, come down to that worthy Person Sir Christopher Heydon; who
about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, demised all his Interest in Keston and
Baston, to Sir Samuel Lennard, whose Son Sir Stephen Lennard, is still
entitled to the Fee-simple of them.

Mr. Camden conjectures in his Britannia, something of the Name of Caesar, to
be couched in the Etymology of this place, because at Baston, adjoining, there
is an ancient Camp, stupendous for the height of double Rampires, and depth
of double Ditches, hardly paralleled elsewhere, and questionless the work of
many Laboring Hands. Of what Capacity it was, is not now exactly to be
discerned, much of it being overgrown with a Thicket: but very vast it was, as
may be collected, from its remains, which are yet apparent. And most probable,
it is that Camp which Julius Caesar pitched, when the Britons, with their
united strength, gave him the last Battle; and then the success, being not
equal to their Courage, retired, and gave him way to pierce into Surrey, and
so toward the Thames by Noviomagum, or Woodcott, where he planted a spacious
City and standing Camp.

Kingsdown in the Hundred of Wrotham, is spread into two Manors called
Northcourt, and Southcourt, both which anciently acknowledged themselves, to be
parcel of the Demeasne of Fitz Bernard, who flourished here, under the Notion,
and in the Degree of Barons, and had this Manor by Grant from Henry the first,
and with it, had these privileges, annexed to it, Toll and Theme, Sac and Soc,
Furcas in Latrones Captos, that is, Infangthef and Outfangthef, Tumbrell and
Pillory, and lastly, Assisam Panis and Cerevisiae, that is, a power to take
Cognizance, of the Weights, and Measures of Bread, and that Beverage, which was
then in use, within the Precincts of this Manor; and all these were allowed to
Ralph Fitz Bernard, as granted before by Henry the first, by the Judges
Itinerant, in the seventh year of Edward the first, and this Man was Son to
John Fitz Bernard, who was rated, after the value, of a whole Knights Fee, for
his Manor of Kingsdown (as appears by Testa de Nevill) in the twentieth year
of Henry the third, at the Marriage of Isabell, that Prince's Sister. Thomas
Fitz Bernard, Son to Ralph abovementioned, enjoyed it at his Death, which was
in the sixth year of Edward the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 31. And from him, it
descended to John Fitz Bernard, who in the thirty sixth year of Edward the
third, dyed without Issue, upon whose Decease, the four Daughters, of
Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, matched to Rosse, Vere, Mortimer, and Tiptoft,
entered upon the Possession, (...) Heirs to their Mother, who was Sister and
Heir, to this John Fitz Bernard, and upon the Breaking the Estate into
Parcells, upon the Partition, this was united to the Demeasne of Wiliam Rosse
of Hamlake, in Right of his Wife Margaret, who was Coheir likewise to her two
Brothers, Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, and Giles Lord Badelesmer, who both dyed
without Issue: and John Rosse this Man's Son was in the Possession of it at his
Death, which was in the seventeenth year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number.
49. And from him, did it glide down to his unfortunate Grandchild Thomas Lord
Rosse, who was attainted and beheaded at New Castle in the fourth year of
Edward the fourth, whilst he endeavored to support the sinking House of
Lancaster, upon whose Shipwreck, this was annexed to the Revenue of the Crown,
and in the eighteenth year of his Reign, Edward the fourth, restores it for
Life, to Margaret, Wife of Roger Lord Wentworth, who was Widow of Thomas Lord
Rosse: but after his Deeease, it returned to the Crown, and slept in its
Revenue, until King Henry the eighth, passed it away by Grant, to John
Wilkinson; from which Name, about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, it was
conveyed to Richard Lovelace, who dying without Issue-male, Margaret matched to
Henry Cook of Lanham Esquire;, became his Heir, and in her Right, is now entered
upon Northcourt and Southcourt, which make up the Manor of Kingsdown.

Hever is another Manor in Kingsdown, which was parcel of the Demeasne of the
ancient Family of Hever, of Hever Castle in this County. William de Hever, had
a Charter of Free Warren, to his Lands here, and at Hever, in the ninth year of
Edward the first, which was renewed to Thomas de Hever, in the fourth year of
Edward the third, but he did not long enjoy it: for he dying without Issue,
Joan his Sister and Coheir, matched to Reginald Lord Cobham, became Heir to his
Estate at this place, and he in her Right, dyed possessed of it, in the thirty
fifth year of Edward the third. But before the latter end of Richard the
second, this Family was worn out, and then the Family of Urban succeeded by
purchase in the Possession. John Urban held it at his Death, which was in the
eighth year of Henry the fifth, Rot. Esc. Number. 75. And left it to his Sister
and Heir Emma Penhale, and she enjoyed it at her Decease, which was in the
fifth year of Hen. the sixth, Rot. Esc. Number. 43. But it was not long, after
this, in the Tenure of this Name: for Richard Lovelace, by his last Will, in
the year 1465, which was made in the fifth of Edward the fourth, ordains, that
his Feoffees make an Estate of this Manor of Hever, which he purchased of
Penhale, to Katharine, his Daughter; and if she dye without Issue, as she did,
then he wills, that it descend to John Lovelace his Son and Heir: and from this
John did it, by an uninterrupted Series of Descent devolve to Rich. Lovelace;
and from him, did it go away by Margaret his Sole Daughter and Heir to Henry
Cook of Lanham in Suffolk Esquire, in which Name it is at this instant resident.

Chipsted is a third Manor in Kingsdown, which indisputably gave Seat and
Surname to a Family so called. For I find, Adam de Chipsted dyed possessed of it
at his Death, which was in the forty first year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 16. And after this Family was extinguished, the Mowbrays were planted in
the Possession, and continued in the Inheritance, from the latter end of
Richard the second, until the Beginning of Henry the sixth; and then it was
passed away by Sale, to John Martin, Justice of the Common Pleas, whose Son
John Martin in the thirty third year of Henry the sixth, alienates it to Thomas
Underdown of Dertford; and he, not long after, gives it to Richard Thetcher, of
Warbulton in Sussex; and he in the nineteenth year of Edward the fourth, sold
it to William Atwood; and his Son Robert Atwood, in the thirteenth year of
Henry the eighth, demises one moiety of it to Nicholas Tailor, and the other
Moiety, in the twenty second year of the abovesaid Prince, to Sibill of
Littlemoat in Eynsford. William Tailor, and William Atwood, in the first year
of Queen Mary, pass away their Proportion of it to Sir John Champneys, and his
Son Justinian Champneys, not long after alienates his Interest in it to
Lovelace, and by the Heir General of that Family, it is now devolved to Mr.
Henry Cook abovementioned: the other Moiety by Ann Sole Heir of Lancelot
Sibill, came to be possessed by Mr. John Hope: in which Name it did not long
remain; for in our Memory, it was by Sale, demised to Mr. Hodsoll, of Hodsoll
in Ash, and he is now in the enjoyment of it.

Woodland is the last Manor in this Parish, and was anciently a Chapel of
Ease to Kingsdowne, till in the year 1557. it was by Reginald Fool then
Cardinal and Archbishop of Canterbury united to Wrotham. But the Manor is
still circumscribed within the Precincts of Kingsdown. It was formerly a Branch
of that Revenue which owned the Title and Jurisdiction of that powerful Baron,
Hamon de Crevequer, and he died possessed of it, in the forty seventh year of
Henry the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 33. But, after him, I find not much more of
this Family at this Place; for in the ninth year of Edward the third, John, Son
of John St. Clear enjoyed it, as appears by the Inquisition taken after his
Death, Rot. Esc. Number. 48. Afterward I discover Thomas St. Clear to be possessed
of it at his Death, in the fourth year of Henry the fourth, and so was Margaret
St. Clear Widow of Philip, in the first year of Henry the sixth, and Thomas
St. Clear held it in the twelfth year of Edward the fourth; and from his
Descendant, about the latter end of Henry the seventh, it passed away by Sale
to Pett of Pett-house in Sevenoke, and John Pett his Successor sold Woodland,
in the seventeenth year of Queen Elizabeth, to William Row of London; by the
Daughter and Heir of which Family, even in our fathers Memory, it came over to
the instant Possessor, Jenny of Norfolk.

Kingsdown in the Hundred of Milton, was given by Hubert de Burgh, to his newly
erected Maison le Dieu in Dover, which was to be a Retreat for the Knights
Templers, when they visired Temple Ewell, and other Lands they enjoyed in this
Track; but this Manor, upon the total Suppression and Abolition here in
England, was in the seventeenth year of Edward the second, united to the
Revenne of the Knights Hospitalers, and remained annexed to their Demeasne,
until the common Dissolution supplanted it, and then King Henry the eighth,
granted it to Sir Thomas Cheyney, who in the first year of Queen Elizabeth, by
Sale conveyed it to Mr. Thomas Finch, from whom it is now by Descent come down
to be the Inheritance of his Successor Mr. Thomas Finch.

Kingston in the Hundred of Kinghamford, was one of those Knights Fees, which
was assigned to Fulbert de Dover, for to be assistant to John de Fiennes, in
the Guard of Dover Castle. And indeed it has been disputable, whether this, or
Chilham, or both jointly, were that which in Writings is styled the Honor of
Fulberts. William de Dover was Test amongst the Magnates in the Charter of
Mawd, the Empress, for creating Miles of Gloucester Earl of Hereford; and from
this man did it descend to Richard de Dover, who was base Son to King John, and
assumed that Name, because he had matched with Roesia or Rose de Dover, the
Heir General of that Family. But he dying in the Beginning of Henry the third,
Rot. Esc. Car. Number. 237. lest it to Isabell his Coheir, wedded to David de
Strabolgie Earl of Atholl, whose unfortunate Son John, Earl of Atholl, a man of
an unbroken, though a Calamitous Fidelity toward his Native Country of
Scotland, seeking to rescue the Liberty of that Nation from those Fetters,
which the Hand of Edward the first would have put upon it, was in an
unsuccesful Encounter taken Captive, and offered up to the Fury of that Prince
on a Gibber fifty Foot high; at London, says Daniel; at Canterbury, says an
old Manuscript, late in the Hands of Sir Dudley Diggs: which last was rather
the Stage on which his Tragedy was represented, because that City was almost
contiguous to his two great Manors of Chilham, and this of Kingston. Upon his
fatal and deplorable Exit, aggravated, because so much Virtue and Courage, did
rather seem to exact Chaplets and Laurels, than so black and ruinous a
Catastrophe; this Manor was linkt to the Crown, until King Edward the second,
in the fifth year of his Reign, grants it to Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer,
Steward of his House; but he not long after by an ungrateful Defection, having
forfeited it again to the Crown; that Prince by a new Concession invests it for
life in David de Strabolgie Earl of Atholl; but, after his Disease, which was
in the first year of Edward the third, that Prince in the second year of his
Reign, restores it to Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, who dying without Issue,
left it in the twelfth year of Edward the third, to his Son and Heir Giles, who
not long after deceasing likewise without any lawful Issue, it came to be
divided between his two Sisters and Coheirs, Margaret wedded to William Lord
Rosse of Hamlake, and Margerie matched to John Tiptoft; but before the end of
Edward the third, this Family had wholly departed from this place, and the
entire Possession was surrendered up to Rosse. For Thomas Lord Rosse, dyed
possessed of it, in the seventh year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 68.
And from him, did the Title slide down to his unhappy Successor Thomas Lord
Rosse, who was attainted in the fourth year of Edward the fourth, and his
Forfeiture brought it to the Crown, where it rested, until the abovesaid
Prince, granted it to Roger Lord Wentworth. And Margaret his Wife, Widow of
Thomas Lord Rosse, in the eighteenth year of his Rule, he conveyed it to him,
because he had been a great Supporter of his Party and Title, and then to her,
because she was Sister to John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester, who was offered up,
as an Oblation by the Lancastrian Faction, to his Cause and Quarrel; and from
this Roger, did it come down to his Successor Richard Lord Wentworth, who in
the twenty first year of Henry the eighth, demised it by Sale to Thomas
Colepeper Esquire, in which Family it continued, until the thirty fourth year
of that Prince: and then it was conveyed away to Sir Anthony Aucher, whose
Successor Sir Anthony Aucher of Bourne Baronet, not many years since, conveyed
it by Sale to Mr. Gibbons of Westcliff, who settled it in Marriage, upon his
second Son Dr. Gibbons, not long since deceased, in whose Descendants, the
Propriety is still resident.

Ilding in Kingston, in Times of as high a Step as any Records can ascend to,
was the Garwintons of Bekesbourn, as appears by that Signal Controversy,
commenced between Thomas de Garwintor, and Theobald de Twitham, touching some
lands couched within the Verge of his Manor of Ilding: and the Question was so
knotty and perplexed, that Henry de Cobham, Geffrey de Say, Hugh de St. Ledger,
Ralph de St. Ledger, Gile; de Badelesmere, Fulk de Peyferer, Robert de Malevill,
Alexander de Rosse, Robert de Gatton, Robert de Campania, Richard de Bear,
Henry de Sorne, Henry de Enbroke, Alured de Corton; and other Gentlemen of
prime Account in this Track, were chosen Recegnitores magnae Assisae, in the
second year of King John, by their Prudence and dextrous Conduct, to soften and
becalme this Difference. But to go on: after the Signory of this place, had for
many Ages, been constant to this Family, it devolved to Thomas Garwinton, who
dying without Issue, in the eleventh year of Henry the fourth, Richard Haut who
had married Joan Garwinton, his Heir General in her Right was entitled to the
Possession of this place; but his Son and Heir Richard Haut, was the last which
held it: for Margery his Sole Inheritrix, united it to the Inheritance of
Isaac, in which Name it stayed, until the Beginning of Henry the seventh, and
then it was transmitted by Sale to Diggs of Diggs-court in Berham, and remained
clasped up in their Revenue, until that Age, which almost was concluded in the
Circle of our Remembrance, and then it was by Sale transplanted into Wilford,
so that the Lady Eliz. Wilford, Widow Dowager of Sir Thomas Wilford, is now by
Right of Jointure in Possession of it.

Parmested is a third place which calls for a Survey: it was as high, as any
Evidence drawn from Record will instruct me to discover, the Inheritance of a
Family which bore that Surname: for in diverse old Deeds which I have surveyed,
I find one Hugh de Permested to be a Witness, which is very probable, was Lord
of this Place. But before the latter end of Edward the second, this Family was
worn out, and that of Garwinton planted in the Possession, as appears by an old
Fine levied in the eighth year of Edward the third, by Hugh Garwinton in which
he passes away his Estate at Permested, to Thomas Garwinton: from whom it
descended to his great Grandchild William Garwinton, who dyed possessed of it, in
the eleventh year of Henry the fourth, Rot. Esc. Number. 45. But left no Issue, so
that Joan his Kinswoman, matched to Richard Haut, became his Heir; and he had
Issue Richard Haut, in whom the Male-line concluding, William Isaac, in Right
of his Wife Margerie, who was Daughter and Heir to the abovementioned Richard,
entered upon his Estate here at Permested; and about the Beginning of Henry the
eighth, passed it away by Sale to Edward Knevet, of Newington Belhouse Esquire,
and his Daughters and Coheirs, by joint Sale, demised it to Tho. Lord Cromwell:
and he in the twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth, alienated it to
Christopher Hales Esquire, afterward knighted, first Attorney General, and
then Master of the Rolls, under the abovesaid Prince, and his Son Sir James
Hales, conveyed it away to Thomas Alphew alias Alphy, Yeoman. From this Man it
came over by Sale in the fifth year of Queen Elizabeth to William Down of
Maidstone Draper, and he in the sixth year of that Princess, transmitted it by
the like conveyance to Doctor Vincent Den, Doctor of the Civil Law,
Grandfather to Mr. Vincent Den of Grays Inn Esquire, the present Lord of
the Fee. A Person to whose Conduct and supply this particular Survey ows a
grateful Remembrance, because, by his Concurrent Aid, it was guided along
through all those Difficulties which might have probably intercepted it in its
farther progress.

Denhill in this Parish was not only the Seat, but likewise the Seminary of a
Family of eminent Note in this County; Ralph de Den held much Land in Romney
Mersh, and likewise at Buckhurst in Sussex (as appears by an old Roll now in
the Hands of the Earl of Dorset) about the twentieth of William the Conqueror,
and is styled in the Record, Son of Robert Pincerna, a Name imposed upon his
Father from being, as is probable, either Butler or Sewer to Edward the
Confessor, an Office of no vulgar Account in those Times. Sir Alured de Den
flourished in the Reign of Henry the third, and was a Person of signal Estimate
in that Age; for when the Laws of Romney Mersh were compiled by that venerable
Judge, Henry de Bath, from which all England receives Directions for Sewers,
this Sir Alured and Nicolas de Haudloe were his Associates and Assistants in
the Composure of them, in the forty second year of Henry the third, on Saturday
next after the Nativity of St. Mary; and which makes this Sir Alured de Den
more remarkable, he sealed even in that Age, divided by so remote a Distance
from us, with three Leopards Heads couped and full faced, which is the ancient
paternal Coat of this Family. Indeed if I should enter into a particular
Discourse of all those Persons who have been originally extracted from this
Family, and were formerly eminent, not only within the private Sphere of this
County, as being invested with the Commission of Justices of the Peace, and
other Offices of public Trust and Concernment, but likewise shone like Stars
of the first Magnitude, within the two Orbs of Divinity, and the Law both
Civil and Municipal; the Survey of this Place, which I intend to retrench
within as narrow Bounds as may be, must swell into a particular Treatise; it is
enough therefore to inform the Reader, that it has been so many Centuries of
years folded up in the Propriety of Den. that there is no Gappe at all in the
Succession between Ralph de Den the first of that Name, and Tho. Den Esquire; the
last who in a direct Line enjoyed it. Nor has it yet departed from the Name;
for the above mentioned Thomas, lately deceasing without Issue-Male, Vincent
Done of Gray's Inn Esquire, collarerally issued out of this Family, by matching
with Mary his youngest Daughter and Coheir in Right of this Alliance, is now in
the instant Possession of it.

Kingsnoth in the Hundreds of Chart and Longbridge, did in elder Times give
Sear and Surname to a Family which assumed its Denomination from hence, who
bore as appears by Seals appendant to their ancient Deeds, Ermin upon a Bend,
five Cheverons, and John de Kingsnoth, who flourished here about the latter end
of Edward the first, sealed with that Coat, and this Inscription encircles the
Seal, Sigillum Joannis de Kingsnoth. Yet I find Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer,
who was attainted, in the seventeenth year of Edw. the second, had some
Interest in this Manor, which upon his Conviction escheated to the Crown, and
rested there, until Richard the second, granted it out again to Sir Robert
Belknap the Judge, who had not long before purchased that proportion which
Kingsnoth was concerned in: So that by this Concession it came entirely to own
the Signory of this Family. But he being infortunately attainted, and cast into
Exile, in the tenth year of the above said Prince; this Manor was annexed to
the Revenue of the Crown, and was lodged there until Henry the sixth, in the
twenty seventh year of his Reign, granted some part of it to Sir Thomas Brown,
of Bechworth Castle in Surrey, and with it a Charter to enclose a Park, which
had Liberty of Free Warren annexed to it; and likewise, the more to endear him,
licensed this Town to hold a Fair yearly on Michaelmas Day, but the principal
part of it was conveyed by Sale to Cardinal Kemp, who about the twenty eighth
of Henry the sixth settled it on the College of Wye, where it remained until
the Resignation of its Revenue into the Hands of Henry the eighth, in the
twenty ninth year of his Reign, and he by Royal Concession made it the Demeasne
of Thomas Lord Cromwell, afterward Earl of Essex. Who being attainted of High
Treason, in the thirty second year of that Prince, it escheated back to the
Crown, and then a Moiety of it, in the thirty fifth year of his Government, was
granted to Sir John Baker, from whom by hereditary Conveyance it was delegated
and transmitted to his Successor Sir John Baker of Sisingherst Baronet, who
some few years since has alienated his Concerment here, to Mr. Nathaniel
Powell of Ewherst in Sussex. The other Moiety of it lay folded up in the
Patrimony of the Crown, until the first year of Queen Elizabeth, and then it
was by that Princess granted to her Kinsman Henry Carry, afterward created
Baron Hunsdon, from whom by the Channel of Descent, it was transported to his
Grandchild, the Right Honorable Henry Carry Earl of Dover, who in our Memory
conveyed it to Sir Thomas Finch, afterward Earl of Winchelsey, Father to the
instant Proprietary, the Right Honorable Heneage Finch, now Earl of Winchelsey.

Munfidde in this Parish was originally the Seat of the Clere's, written in
their ancient Deeds le Clear. But as all Families have their Vicissitudes and
Tombs; and, like the Sea, which is circumscribed and shut in with a Girdle of
Sand, are fettered to a determinate Period, so was this: for about the latter
end of Edward the third, Henry le Clerc concluded in Susan le Clerc; who was
his Daughter and Heir, and she by matching with Sir Simon Woodchurch, annexed
this Manor to his Patrimony; and he the better to enforce and perpetuate the
Memory of this Alliance, and the Estate, which devolved to him by so fortunate
a Conjunction; inverted his Surname, and writ it for the future Clerc alias
Woodchurch; in which Name the Propriety of this Place continued until the
latter end of Q. Elizabeth; and then it was alienated to Tailor of Shadoxherst,
in which Name, the Interest of it, had not long continued; but that it was in
our Remembrance by Sale conveyed to Whitwick.

West-Halks is a third Manor in Kingsnoth, which in elder Times was ennobled,
for affording a Residence to a Family of this Surname; who bore in ancient
Seals a Fesse between three Hawks, or Falcons, and sometimes one: a Family of
no contemptible Estimate, or shallow Antiquity in this Track, as appears by old
Escripts, Pedigrees, and other venerable Muniments, which represent this Family
under the Character of Gentlemen, for above three hundred years. Sampson de
Halk died about the year 1360, and held not only this place, Ex Autographis
penes Dom. Tho. Tailor.
but much other Land about Petham, and other Parishes in that Track; but about
the latter end of Henry the sixth, this Family had demised the Propriety of
this place to Tailor of great Chart, in which Name it was constantly fixed,
until the latter end of Henry the seventh, and then it was sold to Clerc, who
about the latter end of Q. Elizabeth, passed it away to Robert Honywood of
Charing Esquire; who, upon his Decease, settled it by his last Will on his
second Son by his second Wife, Col........ Honywood now the instant Lord of the
Fee.

Knowlton in the Hundred of Eastrye, was parcel of the Patrimony of the noble
Family of St. Ledger. Hugh St. Ledger (who was one of the Recognitores magnae
Assisae in the Reign of King John) held this Manor in the fourth year of the
Reign of that Prince, and left it to his Son John St. Ledger, who in the twelfth
year of Henry the third, exchanged it for other Lands with Reginald de
Cornhill, and he in the twenty fifth year of the abovesaid Prince, passed it
away by Sale (as the Book of Christ-Church informs me) to the Prior and Monks
of that Covent; but it seems not long after they exchanged it with Thomas
Perot; for he, in the fourth year of Edward the third, died possessed of it, as
appears by his Office, Rot. Esc. Number. 31. and left only a Female Heir, who
carried it along with her to Langley descended out of the County of Warwick,
and being thus chained by this Match to the Interest of this Family, it
remained for many Descents fastened to it, and was productive in several Ages of
Men of no vulgar Account, William de Langley Son of William Langley, was
Sheriff of Kent the twenty first, twenty third, twenty fourth, and twenty fifth
years of Edward the third. William Langley of Knolton, was Sheriff of Kent, in
the fourth year of Henry the fifth, and likewise Justice of the Peace for this
County under that Prince. John Langley Esquire, was Sheriff of Kent in the
twentieth year of Henry the seventh, and had Issue Edward Langley Esquire, who
matched with Elizabeth Daughter of Thomas Peyton, of Peyton Hall, in the County
of Cambridge, descended from Peytonus de Vfford; but he dying without Issue,
about the latter end of Henry the eighth, his Wive's Brother Sir Robert Peyton,
by Reason of a former Match in the Reign of Henry the fifth, between Peyton,
and a Daughter of Langley, entered upon it, as Heir General at Law, and he not
desirous to desert Cambridgeshire, to transplant himself into Kent, assigned
Knowlton for Livelihood, to his second Son Sir John Peyton, Grandfather to Sir
Thomas Peyton, the Primier Baronet of this County, who, as lineally extracted
from him, does enjoy the Propriety of it.

See more of this Family of Peyton in my Discourse of Werd.

L. L. L. L.
LAmberherst lies in the Hundred of Little Bernefield, and was sometimes
written Lamberts-hurst, from Lambert a Saxon Owner; in old English, this Name
imports as much as bright, or holy and glorious Lamp, as Herebert is bright
Lord. Part of this Parish is in Kent, and the other part in Sussex,
distinguished by a small Stream which rises nere Cowden, and glides through
this Town toward Medway. The Lordship of Lamberhurst it self, with the Manor
of Woodroff, belonged to the Monastery of Roberts Bridge, and after the
Dissolution, were, by Henry the eighth, granted in the thirteenth of his Reign
to Sir William Sidney, Tutor to King Edward the sixth, when he was Prince,
whose Successor Robert Sidney Earl of Leicester, sold Lamberherst in our
Fathers Memory to Mr. Porter, and Woodroff to Sir Edw. Henden, one of the
Barons of the Exchequer, who bequeathed it to his Nephew Sir John Henden lately
deceased.

Hodleigh in this Parish, was part of that Demeasne which related to the
College of Lingfield in Surrey, which upon the Suppression, was by Henry the
eighth, granted to Thomas Cardan, from which Family it passed away to Edward
Filmer Esquire, Ancestor to Sir Edward Filmer, eldest Son to Sir Robert Filmer,
lately deceased, to whose Demeasne, the Propriety of it, is at present united.

The Abbey of Begham in this Parish, was founded by Ela de Sackvill, and Sir
Robert de Thurneham, a man of principal Account in the time of Henry the third,
This Priory was suppressed by Cardinal Wolsey.
and filled with Cannons Praemonstratenses, or white Cannons called so from
their Habit. The Manor which belonged to it, was by royal Concession. From Q.
Elizabeth it passed away to Anthony Brown, Viscount Montague, who not long
after alienated the Fee-simple to Alderman Barneham of London, who gave it to
Benedict a second Son; and he dying without Issne-male, one of his Daughters
and Coheirs, married with Dobell of Sussex, and so carried it into the
Inheritance of that Family, where the Possession has ever since been settled.

Scotney in this Parish, which has borrowed that Appellation from its local
Situation, and the over-shooting of the Water, was the Residence of a Family
distinguished by that Surname and Denomination: for one Walter de Scotney, in
Times of high Ascent, was Proprietary of this Place, but added not much
Reputation to this Mansion, (for as Edmund de Hadenham, a Chronicler of great
Antiquity, attests) he in the year 1259, administered poison by tacit Stratagem,
to the Earl of Gloucester, and his Brother, to destroy them; of which the last
dyed, and the first, escaped not without Danger of Life. But to go on: After
this Family was mouldered away at this place, which was about the midst of
Edward the third, the eminent Family of Ashburnham, of Ashburnham in Sussex,
were entitled to the Signiory of it. Roger Ashburnham, who was one of the
Conservators of the Peace for this County of Sussex, in the first year of
Richard the second, had here a castellated Mansion, did sometimes inhabit at
this place, and was by his Successor sold to Henry Chichley Archbishop of
Canterbury who gave it as Dower to his Niece Florence Chichley, married to Jo.
Darrell of Cale-hill: and he assigned it for the Livelihood of his second Son,
whose Posterity have ever since enjoyed it.

Here was also in this Parish the Mansion of the Chitcrofts, a Family of worth
and eminent degree. Their Blazon was precisely the same with the Colepepers of
Bay-hall not far distant, as if they had been a Cadet of the same House. This
is a matter which falls within the Cognizance of my Profession, and because I
meet with diverse ancient Houses in this County, which did the like as well as
in other Counties; I cannot leave it without setting down such Notes and
Observations, as have been made upon it, having met with so many Examples, of
that kind, in the Survey of this Province: For instance, St. Nicholas of St.
Nicholas in the Isle of Thanett, in the very Eastern part of the Shire, and
Peckham in the Western side of this County, bear the same very Coat Armor;
because peradventure, they held Land of the Lord Say, to whose Arms they did
desire their own might be assimilated. Tutsham of Tutsham-hall in
West-Farleigh, and Eastangrave of Eastangrave in Eden Bridge, bear both alike:
Brenley of Brenley in Boughton under Blean, and Rattling of Rattling in
Nonington, have no distinction; Peyforer of North-court in Eseling, and Lenham
of Lenham, lay claim to an Identitie of Impresse or Coat Armor; and lastly, so
did Watringbury of Watringbury, and Savage of Bobbing-court. Now the Reason of
this near similitude, was to preserve the Memory of those, though otherwise of
different Families, who had given them Education; or else, by particular
Feoffments, had endowed them with Land; or lastly, as an acknowledgement of the
Service and Fealty they owed them, because they held their Lands by some petty
Rent, Charge, or Homage, of some principal Manor, of which they whose
Coat Armor they had thus imitated were Proprietaries.

West-Langdon lies in the Hundred of Bewsborough, and was a Manor belonging to
the Abbey of West-Langdon, which was founded by Sir William de Auberville of
Westenhanger Knight, to the Honor of St. Mary, and St. Thomas the Martyr of
Canterbury, and filled with white Cannons or Cannons Praemonstratenses, in the
time of Richard the first. Hugh de Auberville the Founder's Son, and Sir
William Auberville Son to this Hugh, were Benefactors to this House, and this
last, Sir Williams only Daughter and Heir, being married to Nicholas de Crioll
of Bellaview nere Limne Hill, brought this Monastery, to be under the Patronage
of the Criolls, whose Demeasn upon the Dissolution, being made the Incom of the
Crown, it here resided till Queen Elizabeth granted it, with all the
privileges annexed to it, in the thirty third year of her Rule to Samuel
Thornehill of London Esquire, father to Sir Timothy Thornehill, upon whose
Decease his Lady Dowager had West-Langdon assigned to her by Right of Jointure,
as being enstated before upon her in Marriage.

East-Langdon, in the Hundred of Cornilo, did in elder Times augment that
Patrimony, which fell under the Signiory of the Archbishop of Canterbury. In
the year of Grace 824; Ulfred then Archbishop of Canterbury, exchanged this
Manor and Eythorne, with the Monks of Christ-church, for the Manor of Berham,
as the Records of that Priory discover to me: and being thus united to their
Demeasne, it lodged there until the Government of Henry the eighth, and then
upon the Suppression of the above mentioned Cloister, it was surrendered up
with the Remainder of its Revenue, into the Hands of that King, and he in the
thirtieth year of his Government, granted it to Mr. John Masters and Mr. Thomas
Masters of Sandwich, from whom it is now by Descent devolved to be the
Inheritance of his Descendant Richard Masters Esquire.

Apulton and Southwould are two small Manors, which are seated within the
Limits of East-Langdon, and were scarce worth any memorial: but that they were
formerly marshalled under the Demeasne of the eminent Family of Male-mains, in
whom the possession was seated; till Henry Malmains, being embarked in the
rebellion of Simon de Montfort against Hen. the second, had expiated that
Defection with the forfeiture of his Estate, had he not been pardoned and
absolved by the Mediation of the Abbot of Langdon, to which Covent in
Gratitude, his Son and Heir Sir John Malmains in the sixth year of Edward the
third, gave for ever Apylton and Southwood I find upon a second Survey lie both
in Waldershare.
Apylton and Southwould: the last of which, was in the first year of Richard
the third, exchanged by the succeeding Abbot, with It is probable the Ancestor
of Monins purchased Mansuers Langdon of Mansuer a Family in East-Kent.
Robert Monins Esquire, for Mansuers Langdon. These three places upon the
Suppression of this Abbey, were by Henry the eighth, in the twenty ninth year of
his reign, exchanged with Tho. Arch-B. of Canterbury but were reassumed by the
Crown by another exchange 1 mo. Eliz. though Southwould or Southwood was
unjustly snatched away from Edward Monins Esquire, in whose revenue it was
found at the dissolution, upon pretense it had been the former demeasne of the
Abbey of Langdon.

The Borough of Marton or Marton-street so called by Contraction; but more
truly Marshtown, is circumscribed also within the Limits of East-Langdon, and
gave Name to a Family, which from the Situation of the place, did borrow their
first Appellation and were, in old Registers and other records written de
Marisco. And that it was frequent to mould a Surname from the Site of the
place, and after to communicate it to their posterity, as well as from the
place it self is most evident; for Gilbert de Marisco, who was Lord of Wolwich,
in the reign of Edw. the first, did assume that Surname from the Situation of
that place, which was environed in a considerable part of it, with moist and
watery Mersh-land; and so from the low level of this Borough, did the Marshes
now possessors of this place, or the more principal part of it, by right of
Inheritance grown hoary and reverend by a prescription and possession of above
three hundred years, as appears by their own private Evidences, in elder Times
contract the denomitation of de Marisco; which in Ages of a more modern
Pedigree, was melted by Usage, Custom, and common Consent, into the instant
Surname of Marsh.

Langley in the Hundred of Eyhorne, was in elder times the Inheritance of a
Family called Ashway; Will. de Ashway is by the book styled Testa de Nevil,
represented to have held it, and have paid an auxiliary supply for it at the
Marriage of Isabel Sister to Henry the third, in the twentieth year of his
reign. After this Family was withered and shrunk into decay, the Lords
Leybourne were entitled to the Signory of it, and Will. de Clinton Earl of
Huntington held it at his death, which was in the twenty eighth year of Edward
the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 59. in right of his Wife Juliana Sole Heir of Roger
de Leybourn Lord of Leybourne Castle; and she after him likewise was in
possession of it at her decease, which was in the forty third year of Edw. the
third, Rot. Esc. Number. 47. But this after her departure for want of Heirs,
either direct or collateral, escheating with a wide and opulent patrimony to
the Crown, it made its abode there until Rich. the second in the Beginning of
his reign, granted it to Sir Simon de Burley, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports,
and Knight of the Garter; who being infortunately attainted in the tenth year
of Rich. the second, this Manor by escheat reverts to the Crown, and that
Monarch in the eleventh year of his reign, grants the Custody of Langley Park
to William Arch-B. of Cant. which his Grandfather K. Edw. the third, had, in
the ninth year of his reign, by a special Grant, indulged to Will. Lord
Clinton, and Julian his Lady, licensed to be enlarged with 200 Acres of Land;
but the Manor it self was granted to the Dean and Canons of St. Stephens in
Westminster, in the twelsth year of his reign, as appears by an Inquisition
taken at that time, Rot. Esc. Number. 159. and amply confirmed in the twenty first
year of the abovefaid Prince, as appears, Pat. 1. Memb. 35. Part tertia, and
remained folded up in their revenue, until the general Suppression in the reign
of H. the eighth, dislodged the Title and planted it in the Crown; and then
that Prince by a new Concession, made it the demeasn of Leven Buffkin,
descended from an ancient Family of that Name in Sussex; and his Successor in
our Fathers memory, passed it away to Not. Powel Esquire; and he not many years
since, demised his Interest in it by Sale, to Sir Edw. Hales Knight and
Batonet; from whom it is now descended to his Grandchild Sir Edw. Hales of
Tunstall Baronet.

Brising is another Manor in Langley, worthy the remembrance, even in this,
that it gave Seat and Surname to a Family of that denomination. Sarin de Rising
held in the twentieth year of Edw. the third, and paid respective Aid for it,
at making the Black Prince Knight.

In times of a more modern Character the Astrys were invested in the
possession. And Jo. Astry held it at his decease, as appears by an old Will in
the fourth year of Edw. the fourth: of this Family was Ralph Astry, who was
Sheriff of London, in the first year of Richard the third; and likewise William
Astry, who dyed seized of it, in the thirty fifth year of Henry the eighth: but
after his Exit, the Title was of no longer date in the Tenure of this Family;
for the Vicissitude of purchase, about the Beginning of Edw. the sixth, brought
it from this Name to own the Signory of Leven Buffkin Esquire; one of the Justices
of the Peace of this County; and in his posterity did it reside, until those
Times which were of our Fathers Cognizance, and then it was conveyed by Sale to
Powel; from whom, not many years since, the same revolution has devolved it
back into the possession of the instant proprietary Mr. Leven Buffkin.

Lee in the Hundred of Blackheath, in Barbarous old Latin written Laga, was
the residence of an ancient generous Family called Bankwell: and there is a
place in this parish called Bankers, by Corruption of the Name,, which, in
Orthography of more Antiquity and Truth, was written Bankwells; from whence,
certainly, at first issued this Surname. In the thirty first year of Edward the
first, John de Bankwell had a Grant by the King's Charter, to have Free Warren
to all his Lands in Lee, Levesham and Bromley. And in the return of John de
Shelving High Sheriff of Kent, in the sixteenth and part of the seventeenth
year of Edward the second, of all the Knights and men at Arms in this Connty,
William de Bankwell is mentioned in the second degree; he dyed the twentieth
year of Edward the third, and left Thomas Bankwell his Heir; who in the thirty
fifty year of that Prince's Government, deceased possessed of Lee, and a very
large proportion of other Land in Modingham, Sherfholt (now, I think, corruptly
called Shrawfield) Littlecroft Bankers, both in Lee, Bromley, Levesham Eltham,
Chiselhurst, Detling, Langshot, and Wickham by Bromley; and left three Sons,
according to the Custom of Gavelkind, Heirs to his Inheritance, which were
John, William and Robert Bankwell: but upon the distinguishing the Estate into
parcels, Lee, Bankers, and Sherfholt, now corruptly called Shrawfield, fell to
be the patrimony of John Bankwell, and in this Man's Lineage did the Inheritance
of these places diverse years reside; till the Name was circumscribed in a
Female Heir, who being wedded to John Arrapon, brought this place to be an
adjunct to his Inheritance: And here, I confess, for want of information either
from public or private Record, I am at a loss, and cannot discover, whether
by Arrapon it was sold to the Crown, and from the Crown transmitted to
Woodvill, or else immediately passed away by sale to Richard Woodvill, Earl
River, who enjoyed it: but upon his Son's untimely death on a Scaffold at
Pomfret, being by the malice and subtlety of Richard the third, blasted with an
Aspersion of Treason, that fatal Stroke which separated his Head from his Body,
divided his Estate here from this Name and Family, and united it by Escheat to
the Crown: In whose Revenue it was resident, until King Henry the eighth, (as
is manifest by the original Patent) granted it to Sir Thomas Wroteley. In times
of a more modern Aspect, that is, about the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, I
find it in the Tenure of Thomas Sackvill Lord Buckhurst; but how it devolved to
him, I confess, I know not; and from him it descended to his Grandchild
Richard Sackvill Earl of Dorset, who exchanged it with King James; whose
Successor King Charles, sold the Royalty and Fee-simple of it to Ralph Freeman
Lord Mayor of London, who gave it in Marriage with his Daughter and Heir to Sir
George Sonds of Leeze-Court in Shelvich, Knight of the Bath, who by a Right
derived from that Match, is the present Lord of Lee, and its two Appendages
Bankers and Shrawfield.

Leeds, Town and Castle, lies in the Hundred of Eyhorne, and were by William
the Conqueror in the twentieth year of his Reign (as appears by the Text of
Doomsday Book) assigned to Hamon de Crevequer, whom he had constituted one of
the Trustees to assist his Cousin John de Fiennes, in the Conservation and
Guard of Dover Castle, who chose this for the Capital Seat of his Barony of
Crevequer, or decrepito Cord, for so it is rendered in Latin, and of Chetham
near Rochester (for of that place likewise, he and his posterity sometimes writ
themselves Barons) and here erected a stupendous Castle, which because it was
environed with Water, was called the Moat. Hamon de Crevequer married Matilda
Sole Daughter and Heir of William de Averenches, Baron of Folkstone, and had
Issue by her, Robert de Crevequer, who by Disloyalty lost himself, and his
Sovereign's Favor. And then this Manor being seized on by the Crown, King
Henry the third, the more to oblige and endear Roger de Leybourn, gave him this
Manor and Castle in exchange for some Lands which he enjoyed at Troscliff, as
appears Pat. 52. Hen. tertii: But it seems, either he, or his Successor,
quickly re-invested the possession into the Crown, as being a piece of Strength
that the Prince began to look upon with Jealousy and Caution: for Edward the
second, as is manifest, Pat. 10. Edwardi secundi, granted the Manor and Castle
of Leeds with the Advowson of the Priory, to Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer (who
was great Grandchild to Guncelin de Badelesmer, Ex per vetusto Rotulo penes
Edo. Dering, Militem, and Baronettum defunctum.
which Guncelin with his Brother Ralph de Badelesmer, are enrolled in the List
of those Kentish Gentlemen who accompanied King Richard the first, to the Siege
of Acon; and Son to See the late Printed Book, styled the Vale-Royal of
Cheshire published by Mr. King
Guncelin de Badelesmer, who was Justice of Chester in the Reign of Edw. the
first, an Office eminently considerable, and of much importance in that Age) in
exchange for the Manor of Addrisley in Shropshire. And the Advouson of the
Church, and the Addition of this, swelled both his Estate and Ambition to that
height, that he must be Master of all the remarkable places in Kent, or else
his Sails could not fill: For he had the Barony of Fitz-bernard at Kingsdown,
Tongue Castle, Chilham Castle, Ridlingswould, and Hothfield. But such a Tempest
rose at this place, as utterly overwhelmed him with one Gust. The History is
well made up by many Authors; the Abstract is thus. Queen Isabel, Wife to
Edward the second, who had ever been the Nurse of peace, and labored to accord
the King and his Barons, making her progress toward Canterbury, was disposed
to lodge in this Castle, as belonging to the Lord Badelesmer, who had been long
King Edward's Steward; and sending her Marshal to make ready for her and her
Train, they who kept the Castle, told him plainly that neither the Queen nor
any else, should enter without Letters from their Lord. The Queen her self goes
to the Castle, and receives the same Answer: whereupon she is necessitated to
take such Lodging otherwhere as could be provided: Of which Indignity she
complains to the King, who resented it with so much passion, as instantly with
an Army collected in London, he lays Siege to the Castle, carries it, hangs
the Castellan Thomas Colepeper, sends the Lady and Children of the Lord
Badelesmer to the Tower, and seises upon his Goods and Treasure. He, to revenge
this Devastation of his Castle, associates with the Barons, then in Arms, who
pretended the Common good and public Liberty of the People (they being still
that unhappy Vessel which every Tempest shipwracks, but no Calm secures: Or,
indeed, being like the Sea, which never swells into Disorder, until it be
breathed upon by intemperate Winds; and yet even those very Winds break to
pieces those waters which they first raised into Billows and Surges.) But, to
go on; This Design (whether the Foundation, on which it was fixed, were crazy
and infirm or not, I know not) was Ruinous to Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, and
the Barons his Partisans; for they were defeared by the Forces of King Edward,
and amongst the rest this Lord, and the Lord Ashburnham being by their
misfortune made prisoners, were put to Death at Canterbury.

Upon this Shipwreck, this Castle reverts to the Crown; and Archbishop
Arundell having a mind equivalent to his Birth, gets such a Grant of this
Castle, as in many Acts of his, he dates them, At his Castle of Leeds: and you
may observe that this would not serve the turn neither, for he was at the same
time Constable of the late before builded Castle of Quinborough. But the Estate
he had in it determined with him, and then it remained in the Crown, and was
reputed one of the Kings Houses, and the Custody was conferred upon some of the
principal Gentlemen of Kent, whom the King pro tempore favored. And it seems
it had the Reputation to be a piece of important Strength in the reign of Henry
the fourth: for Richard the second, as Fabian in his Chronicle relates fol.
165. was by that Prince sent prisoner to this Castle. In the Reign of Edward
the fourth, I find the propriety of it altered; for that Prince seeking to
endear the St. Legers to him, who were then a Family who had a powerful
Influence upon this County, made Ralph St. Ledger Esquire, Constable of the
Castle of Leeds, and annexed the park too, to his Grant, (for anciently there
belonged two Parks unto it, though both are now clearly disparked and vanished)
but the Fee-simple remained in the Crown, until Edward the sixth in the fourth
year of his Rule, granted it to Anthony St. Ledger his Successor, who was Lord
Deputy of Ireland, and improved the English Interest in that Province by his
Prudence and Magnanimity to that height and Advantage that he reduced most of
the old Septs of the Irih Nobility, and made them become Feodall to the English
Scepter, which could never be accomplished since the first Conquest of Ireland,
till his Time; but his Son Sir Warham St. Ledger was the last of the Name, who
was proprietary of Leeds-Castle, for he sold it to Sir Richard Smith, who not
long after determined in two Daughters and Coheirs, matched to Sir Timothy
Thornhill of Kent, and to Mr. Barrow of Suffolk, who both by mutual Consent did
divest themselves of their Interest in it, and by Sale transplanted the
Inheritance into Sir Thomas Colepeper now of the Parish of Hollingbourne, who
settled it in marriage upon his Son Sir Cheyney Colepeper now Lord of the Fee.

The Priory of Leeds was founded by Robert de Crevequer, soon after the
building of the Cattle, and not long after the Conquest, and stored with black
Canons, or Canons of St. Augustins, and dedicated to St. Mary and St. Nicholas.
The Successors of this Robert de Crevequer were all of them Benefactors. Robert
de Crevequer Son of Dan. de Crevequer, who was Son of Rob. de Crevequer the
Founder, dedit Terras Canonicis de Leed pro Salute Animae Reg. Hen. secundi qui
eum aluit and Militem fecit (says the Coucher Book.) There was a goodly Church
annexed to this Priorie, parallel to many Cathedrals, whose Glory and Beauty
were both blasted when the Priorie above mentioned suffered the Common Calamity
of that great Tempest of the Dissolution. This, upon that Suppression,
augmenting the Revenue of the Crown continued with it, until K. Edward the
sixth in the fourth year of his reign, passed it away by Grant to Sir Anthony
St. Ledger, whose Son Sir Wartham St. Ledger, about the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth, conveyed it to Norden, and not long after alienated his right in it
to Francis Colepeper Esquire, who not long after disposed of it again by Sale
to Norden, in which Family it rested, until the same vicissitude brought it to
be the Inheritance of Covert, from which Family has the Fate of Sale not many
years since brought it to be the instant Patrimony of Sir William Merideth.

Leigh in the Lowey of Tunbridge, is sometimes written West-Leigh, and very
often West-Leigh alias Paul's: It was, in Ages of a very high Gradation, the
Penchester's, and in Doomsday Book there is mention of See more of this Family
at Pencehurst.
Paul de Penchester, who held Lands here, and at Pencehurst; and from this Man
was it by a continued Series, brought down to Sir Stephen de Penchester, Lord
Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Constable of Dover Castle, who exspired in two
Daughters and Coheirs, whereof Joan the eldest, was married to Henry Lord
Cobham, of Roundall in Shorn: and Alice the other, was married to John Lord
Columbers, as appears by an Inquisition taken in the third year of Edward the
third, and she had for her proportion assigned her, the Manors of West-Leigh
and Pencehurst. Sir Thomas de Columbers, was Heir apparent to this John de
Columbers, and Alice his Mother; and he, by his Deed bearing Date from the
eleventh year of Edward the third passed away all his Interest in this place,
to Sir John de Poultney Lord Mayor of London, and he died possessed of it, in the
twenty third year of Edward the third, immediately after, I find Sir Nicholas
Lovain, Son of Guy Lovain, interessed in the possession: but whether it was by
Marriage of Margaret, Widow of Sir John Poultney, or by purchase, I cannot
discover; and he had Issue Nicholas Lovain, who held it as Heir to his Father,
as appears by an Inquisition taken after his Deeease, in the forty fourth year
of Edward the third: but this Nicholas dying without Issue, Margaret Lovain his
Sister, became his Heir, who brought it to her Husband Philip St. Clear of
Aldham St. Clear, Son of John St. Clear: and they by joint Concurrence, by
their Deed of Sale, bearing Date the tenth year of Henry the fourth, passed it
away to the Crown; and that Prince bequeathed this Manor of West-Leigh, with
several other Lands to John Duke of Bedford his third Son, after Lord Regent in
the minority of Henry the sixth; but, he deceasing and leaving no Issue, it
came to Humphrey Duke of Gloucester his fourth Brother, who being strangled by
the procurement of William De la pole Duke of Suffolk in the Abbey of Bury, and
dying without any Posterity, King Henry the sixth in the twenty fifth year of
his Rule, granted this Manor being an Adjunct to Pencehurst, to Humphrey
Stafford Duke of Buckingham, Ancestor to Edward Stafford, who being attainted
of high Treason, in the thirteenth year of Henry the eighth, lost both his
Life, Title, and Estate; and then it was granted by that Prince, to Sir Rafe
Vane, who was made Banneret by that Prince for his remarkable Service in
Scotland: but he being unsuccessefully wound up, in the Business of the Duke
of Somerset, in the fourth year of Edward the sixth, was executed as guilty of
Felony, upon whose ruinous Catastrophe, this Manor by Escheat returning to the
Crown it was in the seventh year of Edward the sixth, granted to Sir William
Sydney, a person of deep Knowledge, and unblemished Integrity, great
Grandfather to Robert now Earl of Leicester, and Proprietary of West-Leigh.

There is another Manor in this Parish called Philipotts, which yielded a
Surname to a Family so styled, and in a Deed which bears Date from the twenty
eighth year of Edward the first, whereby one John de Philipott, does demise
some parcels of Land, to Robert Charles Bailiff of the Forest of Tunbridge, he
writes himself de Philipotts in Leigh: but as all things have their Revolution,
which gives either their own Ruins or Oblivion to them for a Sepulcher; so it
was here: For after this place had for some Hundreds of years been wrapped up in
the Inheritance of this Family, it at last came down to Thomas Philipott, whose
Daughter and Heir Alice, was married to John Petley Esquire, and so Philipotts
fell under the Signiory of that Family: but long it continued not there, for
this man determined in four Daughters and Coheirs, one of whom matching with
Children, a Family so called, interwove it with his Demeasne; in which Name,
after it had for some years been fixed, it was not long since by the Daughter
and Heir of this Name, brought to be the Inheritance of Polhill.

Lenham in the Hundred of Eyhorne, is that place, which Mr. Camden and Mr.
Lambert conelude, was Durolenum, a City of the Romans, mentioned by Antonius in
his Itinerarium; though others would have it to be about Newington, by
Sedingbourn: But finding the consulary way, went through this place; and Roman
Coin found many Times nere the Fosse and Surface of that way: and that the
high Road called Watling-street, continued in the Line of the former, till
Rochester Bridge was built of stone; and all that have written of that way, do
agree that it went through the middle of Kent: I will not further dispute it,
but acquaint you that the Composition of the Name was from Door, Water in the
British, and Lenum which the Romans formed from some such sounding Name in the
British Dialect, and it is the more probable, because from hence is a direct
way to Limen, the Romans Haven nere Hyth.

The Soil and Signiory, were given to the Abbey of St. Anstins by K. Kenwulf
under the Notion of one and twenty Plough-lands in the year 804, and upon the
Dissolution was united to the Crown, till Queen Elizabeth, passed it away by
Grant to Tho. Wilford Esquire, whose Son Sir Tho. Wilford conveyed it by Sale
not many years since to Anthory Brown Viscount Montacute.

East-Lenham was long time since, the Seat of the Husseys, of whom I have
spoken before in Boughton Malherbe. Henry Hussy had a Charter of Free Warren
to his Lands at East-Lenham, Chilston, and Stourmouth, in the fifty fifth of
Henry the third; and from this Man, did thethread of a continued Descent waft
it along to Henry Hussy, who about the twenty sixth year of Henry the eighth,
alienated the Possession to Mr. John Parkhurst, descended from an ancient
Family so called in Norfolk, (one of which Name was Bishop of Norwich, in the
year 1560,) Ancestor to that ingenious Gentleman Sir William Parkhurst who has
lately by Sale transmitted his Right in this Mansion to Mr. Wood of London
Merchant.

Royton in this Parish, had very good Gentlemen so styled, who were no small
space possessed of it, and had a Free Chapel founded by Robert de Royton,
about the latter end of Henry the third, from whence it borrowed the Name of
Royton Chapel, it being annexed to this mansion. The Daughter and Heir of
Royton was wedded to James Driland of Davington, and so this place became
appropriated to the Interest of that Family; but shortly after, Constance
Daughter and Heir of this man, married Walsingham of Chiselhurst, whose Son
James Walsingham, passed it away by Sale to Robert Atwater of Putwood in
Otteringden; and he not long after concluding likewise in a Daughter and Heir
called Mary, she by her Marriage with Robert Honywood Esquire, a younger Branch
of the Honywoods of Elmsted, knit this Place to the Patrimony of that Family;
and Robert Honywood this Man's Son gave it in Dower with his Daughter to
Thomson, descended from the Thomsons of Petham.

There are two other Manors in Lenham of Signal Estimate; the First is
West-Shelve, written likewise Middle-Shelve; it was parcel of the Estate of
Bertram de Criol, and by Joan his Daughter and Heir was linked to the Revenue
of her Husband Sir Richard de Rokesley, from whom the Fate of Female Interest
devolved it on Thomas de Poynings; and to this Family was it for many ages
fastened, till Sir Edw. Poynings, extracted lineally from this Man, in the
fourteenth year of Hen. the eighth, was found to have died both without lawful
Issue, and without Alliance: and so this Name being both in the direct and
collateral Line extinguished, the Crown laid claim to this Manor as de Jure
escheated; and in the seventeenth year of his Government, Henry the eighth
granted it to John Mills, where after the possession had for some Time
continued, it was by Purchase brought into the Inheritance of Darel, by whose
Female Heir it is now brought to own the Signorie of Wilkinson.

Shelve Cobham is another Manor in Lenham which in elder Times was folded up
in the Inheritance of the Lords See more of this Family at Roundall in Shorn.
Cobham of Sterborough Castle; of which Family was Richard de Cobham made
Knight Banneret by Edward the third, as appears, Pat. 15. Edw. tertii Part
secunda Memb. 22. and having continued many Descents, constant to the Interest
of this Family, it did at last devolve to Thomas Lord Cobham of Sterborough,
who dying in the twelfth year of Edward the fourth, without Issue Male; Ann his
only Daughter and Heir, brought it to be parcel of the Patrimony of Edward Lord
Borough of Gainsborough; from whom the Propriety of it did flow down to his
Grandchild Thomas Lord Borough, who conveyed it by Sale to Mr. John Pekenham,
in the twenty fifth year of Q. Elizabeth, and he was possessed of it, but until
the thirty fifth year of that Princess; and then an Alteration like the
former, made it the Demeasn of Boteler, in which Name after it had remained,
until the fifth of K. Charles, it was alienated by Sale to Sir John Melton,
whose Son John Melton Esquire, has lately conveyed it to Mr Solomon Adye.

Sindall is the last place of Account, in this Parish of Lenham; which as
appears by the Evidences of this place, was, in the Reign of King John, and
Henry the third, the Inheritance of a Family of that Surname, and as appears by
some old Rolls and Armorials were Gentlemen of prime Note in this Track, but
continued not long owners of this Mansion; for in the twenty third year of Edw.
the third, I find it in the Hands of Fulk de Peyforer, and in this Family did
it fix, until the latter end of Edward the third; and then it was passed away
to Henman, in which Name the Interest of this Place, from the fiftieth year of
the above Prince, by a derivation of several Descents, until this present year
1658, has been successively resident.

Leveland in the Hundred of Feversham, gave Seat and Surname to a Family of
that Denomination; for I find that Giles de Badelesmer of Badelesmer not far
distant, was pardoned by Hen. the third, for matching with Margaret de Leveland
the Heir of this Place, without the Kings especial License, as is manifest,
Pat. 40. Hen. 3. Memb. 8. But he deceasing before her, she was remarried to
Fulk de Peyferor, who in her Right, died possessed of this place, in the fifth
year of Edward the first: but she had no Issue by neither of these two eminent
persons; so that Rafe de Leveland was her next Heir, who had the Custody of the
Palace of Westminster, and the Fleet; and after his Deeease, Stephen de
Leveland held both these places as his Brother and Heir; This Stephen had a
Daughter and Heir called Joan, first wedded to John Shench, and secondly, to
Edward de Cheyney, who in her Right had the Custody of the Fleet and Palace of
Westminster: But John Shench was her Son and Heir, who by a Right derived to
him by Descent and Succession, held both the Fleet and Westminster, and was in
the Possession both of them and Leveland, at his Decease; as an Inquisition
taken after his Death, in the twenty third year of Edward the third does
signify, and left Margaret his Daughter Heir not only to his Estate at
Leveland; but likewise to those Offices of Trust, which it seems were in those
Times hereditary, and usually lincked together: But this Family of Shench, was
not so entirely invested in the Signory of Leveland, but that a considerable
Proportion of it augmented the Patrimony of Northwood; for Robert de Northwood,
held an Estate here at his Death, which was in the thirty fourth year of Edward
the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 70. and so did Richard de Northwood, and Thomas
Brother of the said Richard, as appears by an Inquisition taken in the thirty
fifth of the abovesaid Monarch, Rot. Esc. Number. 13. Part secunda. But before
the latter end of Edw. the third, both these Families had offered up their
joint Interest here to Richard Lord Poynings, and he died possen of it, in the
twelfth year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 148. and left his interest
here, to be enjoyed by his Kinsman Robert Poynings; from whom an uninterrupted
Line of Descent, brought it down to Sir Edward Poynings, who died in the
twelfth year of Henry the eighth, and there being none, after a serious
Inquisition taken in the fourteenth year of that Prince, who could establish
any Claim or pretense, either in respect of any direct or collateral Affinity
to his Estate, the Crown by Escheat was entitled to this Manor: and here the
Propriety was lodged, until King Henry the eighth, before mentioned granted it
to Sir Robert Southwell, who in the second year of Edward the sixth, conveyed
it to Sir Anthony Aucher; and he not long after passed it away to Sir Anthony
Sonds great Grandfather to Sir George Sonds Knight of the Bath, now instant
Lord of the Signory of it.

Lewsham in the Hundred of Blackheath, was a Manor which belonged to the
Priory which was erected here; but who was the Founder is unknown. Only thus
we find that King Henry the third, by a new Inspection confirmed it, with all
the Franchises and Immunities annexed to it, as appears Cart. 13. Hen. tertii
Memb. 9. It was, when it flourished most, but a Cell of Benedictin Monks
belonging to Saint Peter's in Gaunt, and paid to them 40 s. per Annum, as a
Rent-Service; as appears, Rot. Esc. An. 12. Ric. secundi N. 72. And so
continued, till King Henry the fifth, perceiving the ill Effects and
impressions, which the Influence of Priories-Aliens, and their Fraternities,
might cause upon those Religious persons, who were his Subjects, who were
altogether chained by a Connection of Canonical Obedience to them, suppressed
this and sundry others of the like Nature, and with their Revenue endowed that
stately Monastery, which he erected at Shene, storing it with Carthusian Monks,
and dedicating it to the Name of Jesus of Bethlem: and in the Patrimony of this
Cloister did this Manor lie included, till the total Dissolution in that
general Shipwreck in the Rule of Henry the eighth, and then it returned to the
Crown; and there was lodged, till Queen Elizabeth, in the fifth year of her
Government, granted it to Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick, who soon after
exchanged it for other Lands with the said Princess; and she in the year 1575,
granted it in Lease for a space of forty years to Sir Nicholas Stodard of
Modingham, which expiring in the year 1605, King James passed it away in Lease
for forty years more to Sir Francis Knolls, and the Fee-simple in Reversion to
John Ramsey Earl of Holderness; who dying before the Expiration of the Lease,
gave it to his Brother Sir George Ramsey, whose Son John Ramsey, when the
former Lease was worn out, which was about the year 1645, sold the Fee-simple
to Mr. Reginald Grime.

Catford in this Parish, was formerly a Manor which anciently was involved in
the Inheritance of the Abels of Hering-Hill in Eri^h; and John Abel had a
Charter of Free Warren to this, and other of his Lands in Lewsham, in the
twenty third year of Edward the first, and after this Family was worn out, the
Lords Mountacute were Lords of the Signory, and Fee-simple of it, for William
de Mountacute Earl of Salisbury; obtained by Charter a Confirmation of Free
Warren to this Manor of his of Catford, in the fifth year of Edward the third;
and in this noble Family did the Possession dwell, till Richard de Nevil
married Eleanor Daughter and Heir of Thomas de Mountacute Earl of Salisbury,
and in her Right had the Title of that Earldome, and the Possession of this
Place enstated upon him, and diverse of the Windows of the most ancient Houses
in Lewsham are stained and colored with his Arms. This was that Rich. who
gave up his Life to the Cause and Quarrel of the House of York, and with
Richard Duke of York most resolutely asserting the Truth and Justice of their
Title to the Crown perished in the fatal and unfortunate Battle commenced with
the Partisans of the Lancastrian Claim between Sandall and Wakefield, and
afterward his Son Richard Earl of Warwick (he that broke and piec'd up the
Scepter as he pleased) and his younger Son John Nevil created Marquess
Montacute by Edward the fourth, in the year 1470, fell in that dysastrous
Encounter waged with Edward the fourth at Barnet; upon whose Ruins and Tombs
he built his Throne, and with their Blood coemented the Fabric of his future
Greatness: But whether upon the Shipwreck of this Family, it came by Escheat to
the Crown; or else to George, Duke of Clarence, second Brother to Edw. the
fourth, who espoused Isabel Daughter and Coheir of Richard E. of Warwick is
uncertain, though it is probable it did, because in a Great House of Mr.
Streets at Lewsham, the Arms of the Duke of Clarence, stand empal'd with
Nevil. In Times of a more modern Aspect, Catford was the Polsteds, a Family of
very deep Antiquity in Surrey; for Hugh de Polsted gave Lands called Inwood by
his Deed dated the sixteenth year of King John, to the Abbey of Waversley in
that County; but whether this place came to them, or not, by Grant from the
Crown, or by Purchase from some other, I am ignorant; it is certain that Francis
Polsted, Cousin and Heir to Richard Polsted, sold Catford to Brian Annesley
Esquire, in Reversion after the Decease of Elizabeth Wife of John Wolley, and
Widow of the said Richard, in the twentieth year of Queen Eliz. And He
afterward dying without Issue Male, his two Daughters married to Sir William
Harvey after Lord Harvey of Kidbrook in Kent, and Sir John Wildgoose, shared
the Inheritance of this Place.

There were two Chantreys founded at Lewsham. One by Rich. Walker, for one
priest to celebrate Mass at the Altar of the Trinity for the Founder's Soul:
The other by Roger Fitz, who by the Appointment of his last Will, the
seventeenth of Henry the seventh, devised that his two Houses the Lion and the
Ram in the Stews on the Banckside near London, should be sold to build the
Chantry House, and indow it with maintenance for one Priest to celebrate at the
Altar of the Trinity in Lewsham Church for the Founder's Soul.

Leybourne in the Hundred of Larkfield, was the ancient Demeasn of the Lords
Leybourne, who erected here a Castle esteemed a strong Pile in our Ancestors
Days: however the Ruins and Rags of it at present appear mean and
despicable, yet it has by several Gradations sunk into this Condition. The
first of which Family which I find to be eminent, was, Ex veteri Rot. penes
Edw. Dering Militem and Baronettum desunctum.
Roger de Leybourne who is enrolled in the Catalogue of those Kentish Knights,
who accompanied Richard the first to the Siege of Acon, and another Roger de
Leybourne is in the Roll of this Kentish Gentlemen, who assisted Henry the
third, in his Expedition into Gascony, in the thirty seventh year of his Reign,
and afterward was a principal Partisan of Simon de Montforts in his Emotions
and rude Essorts against his Scepter and Government; for which he was pardoned
by the Act of Amnestia, or Pacification of that Prince, made in the fiftieth
year of his Reign at Killingworth, and this is that Roger which slew Ernulphus
de Monteney, at a meeting of the round Table, in the thirty sixth year of Henry
the sixth, and was the Husband of Eleanor Countess of Winchester. Sir Henry and
Sir Simon de Leybourne are recorded in the List of those Kentish Gentlemen, who
assisted the Edward the first, in his Siege of Carlaverock in Scotland, in the
twenty eighth year of his Reign; and for their signal Service performed in that
Expedition were dignified with the Order of Knighthood. William de Leybourne
one of this Family, was frequently summoned to sit in Parliament as Baron, in
the Reign of Edward the first, and by that Title subscribes in that memorable
Letter, which the abovesaid Prince and all the English Peerage wrote to the
Pope, in the year of Grace 1301, that is, in the twenty ninth of Edward the
first's Government, to justify those Grounds on which the war was then
commenced against the Scots; and this William was Son of Roger de Leybourne,
which Roger was Sheriff of Kent, the forty eighth and fiftieth of Henry the
third. The last of this Family was Roger de Leybourne, who transmitted this
Castle and Manor to his Sole Daughter and Heir Juliana de Leybourne, first
matched to Jo. de Hastings, and secondly, to William de Clinton Earl of
Huntingdon, by both which Husbands She had no Issue: so that dying in the forty
third year of Edward the third, after all Titles were winnowed by a serious
Inquisition, there was none discovered that could by a pretended Claim either
of direct or collateral Alliance challenge her Estate. So that her Patrimony
here lapsed by Escheat to the Crown, after which, K. Richard the second by
patent, in the ninth year of his Reign, Part. prima, Memb. 26. grants it to Sir
Simon Burleigh Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports: but, he being shortly after
attainted with the Cuilt of High Treason, and his Estate consiscated, this
Manor and Castle reverts to the Demeasne of the Crown; and the same King
Richard, in the twelfth year of his Reign, grants it to the Abbey of Grace upon
Tower Hill, and in their Revenue it continued shut up till the Dissolution of
this Covent, and then King Henery the eighth, about the thirty seventh year of
his Reign, granted it to Sir Edward North, who not long after alienated it to
Robert Gosnold: and he in the second year of Q. Elizabeth, gave it to Robert
Godden, who some few years after, by Sale passed it away to Nicholas Lewson
Esquire; of Whorns-Place in Cuckston, whose Grandchild Sir Richard Lewson,
affecting more to live in Staffordshire, alienated his Kentish Lands: amongst
which, this was sold to Henry Clerk Sergeant at Law, and Recorder of
Rochester, who being lately deceased, his Son and Heir Francis Clerk Esquire,
enjoys the Profits and Possession of it, of whose Family I have spoke at
Frensbury, and shall speak more at Ulcombe.

The Grange in this Parish, is the Mansion of Mr. Robert Oliver; and has been
for sundry Descents, resident in that Name, though the Original Surname be
Quintin. They being Descended from Anselinus or Anselmus de Quintin, that paid
respective Aid for the Manor of Woodfold in Yalding, in the twentyeth year of
Edward the third, at the making the Black Prince Knight. Now if you will know
how the Name of Quintin resolved into that of Oliver, I shall inform you.
William Quintin Purchased Lands in Seal called Hilks, the eleventh of February,
and in the eleventh year of Henry the sixth, and in the Deed of Purchase, he is
often called Filius Oliveri, without the Addition of Quintin, and so by vulgar
acceptance, and inadvertency, they came by common mistake to be called Oliver;
yet in all Deeds and other Escripts, to preserve their Ancient and Original
Denomination, they write Oliver, alias Quintin.

Lidde, in old Saxon Records is written Hlida, which certainly was derived from
the Latin word Litus; it importing as much in that Dialect, likewise, as the
Shore, and the Situation of the place, being not far distant from the Sea; does
seem to abett the Etymology. It is Situated in the Hundred of Langport, which
extracts its Name from a Manor in this Parish, called Old Langport, which was
the Possession of a Family whose Surname was Ikin. And John Ikin I find by an
Inquisition taken in the thirty second year of Edward the third, was at his
Death, which was then, possessed of it. After Ikin, a good old Family called
Hund, were Lords of the Inheritance; and Sir John Hund who lies buried in the
Church of Lidde, lived here in the Reign of Henry the sixth. From this Family
it by Sale passed away to Belknap; in, which Name the Possession had not been
long resident, for Sir Edward Belknap Son to Sir Henry Belknap, who Purchased
this place, died without Issue, and so his three Sistrs Anne, Elizabeth, and
Alice, became his three Coheirs, who married to Sir Edward Wotton, Sir Philip
Cook of Giddy-Hall, and Sir William Shelley of Michaelgrove in Sussex, who
sold his proportionable Share in this Manor to Dannett, and from Wotton and
Dannett, two parts of it were afterward conveyed away by Sale to Godfrey, and
the third was alienated by Cook, to Sir Christoph. Man of Canterbury.

New-Langport, called likewise Langport Septuans, was for many Descents the
Patrimony of that Noble Family. Robert de Septuans held it at his Death, which
was in the thirty third year of Henry the third, and after him his Grandchild
William Septuans or de Septemvannis, was possessed of it in the twenty fifth year
of Edward the third, and so remained by the links of some Descents fastened to
the Inheritance of this Family, till William Septuans this man's great
Grandchild, by Sale translated his Right in it to John Writtle, about the
Beginning of Henry the sixth: where after the Possession had some years
settled, it was by Sale supplanted, and Seated in Henry Fettiplace, of
Beselslith, in the County of Oxford; where after it had for many years been
fixed, it was at length sold from this Family, to James. But here it had a very
short abode, for Thomas James falling under a praemunire, in the sixth year of
the Reign of King James, forfeited it to the Crown, and that Prince the next
year after, passed it away to John Lord Haddington; and he not long after, to
discharge some Debts in which he was engaged to Mr. Edward Cropley of London,
passed it over to him for his Satisfaction and re-imbursment.

Jacks, alias Jaques-Court in this Parish, was the Demeasne of Echingham, a
Family of principal Note in Sussex, where they were, Jure Nativo, Seneschalls
of the Rape of Hastings, and of a proportionate Revenue at Echingham in that
County. The first that I find of note in this place, was William de Echingham,
who paid respective Aid, in the twentyeth year of Edward the third, at the
making the Black Prince Knight, for Lands which he held here, and in
Welland-Mersh, by the fourth part of a Knights Fee; and in this Family did it
for sundry Ages reside, and was productive of men that were very useful and
subservient to the Interest of their Country, whereof William Echingham, Son of
the former William, was one of the Conservators of the Peace, for the County of
Sussex, in the first year of Richard the second, and died possessed of this
place, in the fifteenth year of that Prince: But at length the Distaff
prevailed against the Spear; for this Family concluded in a Female Heir; for
Thomas Echingham dying without Issue-male, Margaret his only Daughter was
married to Walter Blount, who had by her Jacks-Court, which he left to his Son
Edw. Blount Lord Montjoy: but he at his Decease leaving no Issue, the
Inheritance of this place, came to Elizabeth his Sister and Heir, married to
Sir Andrew Windsor, afterward created Lord Windsor by Henry the eighth, who
alienated this Mansion to Clache, by whose Daughter and Heir, it came to be the
Possession of Stringer; and he ending likewise in a Female Heir, she brought it
to Scot, a Cadet of Scots-Hall; who suddenly after sold his Right in it to
VVilcocks, by whose two Daughters and Coheirs, in the Memory of these Times, it
came to be divided between their two Husbands Bates, and Knight.

The Manor of Belgar or Belgrave is Situated likewise in Lidde, it was given
with the Manor of Bilsington, to the Priorie of Bilsington, by John Maunsell
the Founder of it; and was exchanged by the Abbot and Canons for other Lands,
not long before the Suppression, with William St. Ledger, by whom it was
alienated to William Middleton, and Edward Arthur, who after they had been
some small time Seated in their new Acquists, by jont-consent passed away their
Right in it to Sherley of Sussex, who in our Fathers Memory, by Sale
transferred the Inheritance to Abdy, descended from the Abdys of Abdy-House in
the Parish of VVaith in Yorke-shire, whose Heir both to the Name and Belgar
also, is Sir Christopher Abdy, a person who for his general Knowledge, may be
called without the circumstance of Flattery, an Exchequer of humane Learning.

Scotney was the Seat of a Family so called; for in the (Book of Aid) there is
a recital of one Richard de Scotney, who held Lands in the Mersh not far
distant: afterward it came to the Ashburnhams of Sussex, but whether by
Purchase, or by Marriage of the Heir of Scotney, is uncertain; though I rather
believe it devolved to them by Marriage, because Scotney in Lamberhurst,
divided by a remote distance from this place, was likewise theirs; from Roger
Ashburnham it came to Henry Chichley Archbishop of Canterbury, and he by Gift
tied it to his Foundation of All Souls College in Oxford, to whose Revenue it
remains at this instant time united.

Nod in this Parish of Lidde, was for sundry Ages the Residence of the Derings,
before they were transplanted to Pluckley, and here are Lands Situated within
the Verge of this Parish, which by an undivided prescription of many Ages have
been named Derings; and Derings-Mersh, (a certain Evidence to enforce the
Antiquity of this Family.) But when they grew more delighted with the Situation
of Pluckley than this place, it was by........ Dering, in the fourth year of
Philip and Mary, alienated to Mr. Peter Godfrey of Lidde, and Surrenden was
tied for his peaceable Possession in it.

Lastly, here is Manerium Summi Altaris, so it is written in old Latin Deeds,
or the Manor of the high Altar, which for many Hundreds of years has been
united to the Vicarage: But whether it were given to find Vestments for the
Priest to Offociate in at the high Altar, or for a supply of wax Tapers, or for
provision of Books to celebrate Mass with, or lastly, for all these Uses,
united and complicated together, I know not, because the original Instrument
which fortified the Donation is lost, and so both the Use and Doner are become
uncertain.

There was a Water in Lidde called Guestling, whose Course the Prior of
Christ-Church did, by an Inquisition taken in the ninth year of Edward the
second, consult how to alter.

If you will discover what price was set on Timber, in elder times, an old
Epitaph affixed to a Tombstone in Lidde Church, will represent it to you. The
Inscription Recorded in old English speaks thus. Of your Charity pray for the
Soul of Tho. Briggs, who died on the Feast of St. Leonard the Confessor, the
year of our Lord, 1442. and did do make the Roffe of this Chirch, as far as
45. Copplings goes, which did cost 45. Marks.

Lidden in the Hundreds of Folkstone and Bewsborough, was a Manor which in
elder Times made up that vast Patrimony which related to the Knights Templers
in this County: but upon the total Extirpation of that Order here in England,
in the Reign of Edward the second, it was by the Statute called Statutum de
Terris Templariorum, made in the seventeenth year of that Prince's Government,
settled by that solemn Act upon the Knights Hospitalers, and remained
treasured up in their Revenue, until the Disbanding and final Dissipation of
this Order in this Nation, by Henry the eighth. And then being by that Prince
rent away, it was in the thirty sixth year of the same Prince, granted to John
Wild Esquire; for Life only, and the Remainder in Fee, to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, and his Successors for ever; in whose Patrimony according to the
tenor of the original Concession, it lay involved until that popular Tempest
which arose in these Calamitous Times, shook it off, and cast it into a secular
Interest.

Coclescombe, and Swinkfield-Mennes, were of the same Complexion with the
former, that is, they were first enwrapped in the Demeasne of the Knights
Templers, and afterward supplanted, and fastened to the Revenue of the Knights
Hospitalers, to whose Interest it continued firm, until the Whirlwind of the
public Suppression in the Reign of Henry the eighth, ravished them away; and
then that Prince in the thirty third year of his Reign, by Royal Concession,
made them the Inheritance of Edward Monins Esquire; from whom, by Successive
Devolution, they are now come down to his Descendant Sir Edward Monins of
Waldershare, Baronet.

Swanton-Court is the last Place in this Parish, which Summons our Remembrance.
It was (as appears by private Deeds, Muniments, and other Authentic
Testimonies) the Seat and Habitation for several Descents of a Family deeply
rooted in this Track, whose Surname was Greenford, and it is possible were
originally extracted from a Manor known by that Denomination in Middlesex: who
after they had flourished by a large Decursion of Time, under a fair and
unstained Estimate at this place, transmitted the Propriety of this Mansion to
John Greenford Esquire, in whom this Family found its Tomb and Period: for he
dying without Issue-male, in the eleventh year of Edward the fourth, Alice his
Sole Daughter became his Heir, and She by matching with John Monins Esquire,
linked this Seat to his Inheritance, and to this Family, and to his Descendants
has the Title ever since been so constantly wedded, that it has suffered no
Divorce, but remains at this instant united to the Patrimony of Sir Edw. Monins
of Waldershare, Baronet.

Lyminge lies in the Hundred of Court-At-Street, and was anciently Famous for
Land which was given here, by Edbaldus, Son of Ethelbert King Kent, to his
Sister Edburga, upon which she erected a Nunnery, and Dedicated it to the
Honor of St. Mildred: But the Manor which belonged to it, was upon the
Suppression, granted by Henry the eighth to the Sea of Canterbury: and
Archbishop Cranmer in the twenty ninth of that Prince's Government, exchanged
it for other Lands with the Crown: and the abovesaid Henry the eighth, in the
thirty sixth year of his Reign, granted it to Sir Anthony Aucher, who after, in
the Rule of Queen Mary, was slain at Callis, whilst he endeavored to make good
that City, and the English Interest together, by a noble and generous
Resistance against the Furious Impressions and Onsets of the Duke of Guise, and
the French Army, who then pressed upon it with a straight and vigorous Seige.
But to go on: after this Place had continued in the Name, since the time of the
first Concession, even till ours, it was lately by Sir Anthony Aucher of
Bourne, sold to Sir John Roberts of Canterbury.

East-Leigh was the Mansion of a Family which took their Denomination from
hence; and there is mention in the Book of Aid, of William de Leigh, and Robert
de Leigh, who held Land of the Archbishop of Canterbury, by Knights Service in
the twentieth of Edward the third: when this Family was vanished, and had
deserted the Possession of this place, which was about the Beginning of Edward
the fourth; the Allens, who came from Borden and Sedingbourne, were ingrafted
into the Inheritance, but enjoyed it not long: for in the Age subsequent to the
first Purchase, it was alienated to Fogge, who by as short and sudden a
Vicissitude, disposed of his Right in it to Cobbe of Cobbes-court, not far
distant, in which Family the Title was as brief, and as uncertain, as in any of
the former; for by them, after a Possession of some few years it was alienated
to Salkeld descended originally from the Salkelds of the North Riding in
Yorkshire and Bishopric of Durham.

Sibeton vulgarly called Sibton and Sifton, is another Manor which is
contained within Lyminge. It was, of higher Calculation, the Patrimony of
Tibetot, a Family of no mean Account, both in the Counties of Leicester and
Nottingham. And Robert Tibetot was possessed of it at his Death, which was in the
seventeenth year of Edward the third: but after this Man, I find no farther
Remembrance of any of his Stock or Posterity at this place, so that it seems
his Son sold it to Walter Leigh, or at Leigh of East-Leigh in this Parish, who
was likewise concerned in an Estate in Hertfordshire, where he was conservator
of the Peace, in the first year of Richard the second, and in this Family did
it reside many years after: For Tho. Leigh held it in Possession at his
Decease, which was in the seventeenth year of Henry the sixth: but after his
Death it was passed away to Allen, where the Inheritance stayed not long; for
from them it went away by Sale into the Patrimony of Sir Jo. Hales, who was
Baron of the Exchequer in the reign of Henry the eighth, whose Posterity an Age
or two since alienated their Interest here to Salkeld.

Limne in the Hundred of Street, in ancient Records written Limen, is improved
into a high Estimate, from those many relics and places of Antiquity, which
lie scattered within the Limitts of it. And though now it carry with it an
uncouth and desolate Aspect, yet it was more flourishing in elder Times, when
Prince Edward Son to King Henry the third, (being then Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports) at this place exacted an Oath of Fidelity of the Barons of the
same, to his Father, against the Maintainers of the Barons War. And at this
Place, or some other member of the Franchise, to which the Court is adjourned
from Shepway, the Limenarcha or Lord Warden, receives his Oath, at his first
Entry into his Office.

Berewick in this Parish, was, upon the Suppression of the Priory of
Christ-church by King Henry the eighth, re-enstated on the Archdeacon of
Canterbury, who had here a Castellated Mansion, long before that tempestuous
Dissolution, seated upon the Brow of a Hill, and affording a delightful
Prospect into France. The Pages of Doomsday Book, represent it thus rated to
us, in the twentieth of William the Conqueror. In Limwarled in Hundred de
Strate, habet Willielmus de Edesham de terra Monachorum, 1 Manerium Berwick de
Archiepiscopo, quod tenuit Godridus Decanus, and pro Dimidio Sullingi se
defendebat, and nunc similiter, and est appretiatum XI. lb.

Court at Street celebrates the Memory of the noble Family of Hadloe or
Haudloe, who as is manifest by ancient Records, were, in Times of a very high
Ascent, Lords of this Manor. Nicholas de Hadloe is in the Roll of those Kentish
Worthies who accompanied Richard the first to the Siege of Acon.
Nicholas de Hadloe, had a Charter of Free Warren to all his Lands in Kent, and
the Grant of a market weekly, and a Fair yearly to his Manor of Court at
Street in the forty first year of Henry the third. John de Hadloe is in the
Register of those Kentish Knights, who accompanied Edward the first into
Scotland; and, for his remarkable Service at the Seige of Carlaverock, was made
Knight and Banneret by that Prince, in the twenty eighth year of his Reign. In
the tenth year of Edward the second, a License or Patent was granted to John de
Hadloe, and Mawd his Wife, to fortify and embattle diverse Castles and Manors
in which this was couched. In the first year of Edward the third, he was
summoned to sit in Parliament as Baron, and left this Mansion thus solemnly
ennobled to Nicholas de Hadloe, in whom the Male-line expired, so that Alice
one of his Daughters and Coheirs, upon the Partition of the Estate, brought
this to be the Patrimony of John Colvill, and he in her Right held it at his
Decease in the seventeenth year of R. 2d. as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 9. And from
him did an uninterrupted Clew of paternal Succession, transport it to Edward
Colvill Esquire, who in the thirty fifth year of Henry the eighth, alienated it
by Sale to Edward Thwaits Esquire; and from him it did descend to Edward
Thwaits, who in the eleventh year of Queen Elizabeth, conveyed it by Sale to
Edward Jackman, and in this Family did it reside, until that Time which fell
within the Circle of our Fathers Remembrance; and then it was passed away to
Sir William Hewett, who upon his Decease by Testament, settled it upon his third
Son the instant Possessor Mr. Will. Hewet.

Bellaview, Otterpoole, and the Appendant Manor of Wellop, are all
circumscribed, within the Verge of Limne. The first of which, was both an
eminent and ancient Seat of the Criolls, before they translated themselves to
Ostenhanger, by matching with the Heir of Auberville; and the two last were
wrapped up in that Revenue, which was as an Appendage both to support and
enhaunce, the Grandeur of it, and went collectively together with Joan Daughter
and Heir of Bertram de Crioll, to Richard de Rokesley, in the twenty third year
of Edward the first, and remained with this Family, but until the next Age;
and the same Vicissitude carried them off, by Joan his Sole Inheritrix, to
Thomas de Poynings, in which Name the Propriety resided until the twelfth year
of Henry the eighth; and then they devolved by Successive Descent to Sir Edw.
Poynings: but he dying without any legitimate Issue, and there being none of
his Alliance, that could by any collateral Affinity, pretend any visible or
manifest Title to the Estate, it devolved by escheat, in the fourteenth year of
that Prince, to the Crown, from which Bellavieu was again suddenly granted away
to Rich. Bernys Esquire; and he not long after disposed of it by Sale to Tho.
Wombwell of Northfleet, who in the twenty fifth year of Henry the eighth,
conveyed it to Peter Heyman Esquire, from whom, not long after, it went away to
Bedingfield, descended from Gentlemen of a deep and ancient extraction in the
County of Suffolk; and in this Family did it fix, until the Custom of
Gavelkind having broken and split this Manor into several parcels, and so made
it the Inheritance of several Brothers, they by a joint Concurrence, alienated
their collective Interest in it to Sir Edward Hales Knight and Baronet,
Grandfather to Mr. Edward Hales, who now enjoyes the Fee-simple of it.

Otterpoole continued in the Crown, until the thirty seventh year of Henry the
eighth, and then it was invested by Grant in Sir James Hales, from which Family
about the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, it came over by Sale to Thomas Smith
Esquire, commonly called Customer Smith, Ancestor to the right honorable Philip
Viscount Strangford, the instant Lord of the Fee.

Wellop another parcel of the escheated Demeasne of Poynings, though it were
granted in Lease to Knatchbull, and others, yet the Fee-simple still lodged in
the Crown, until K. Charles passed it away to Sir Edward Hales Knight and
Baronet, from whom it is now by Descent devolved to his Grandchild Sir Edward
Hales of Tunstall.

Lingsted lies in the Hundred of Tenham, and has two places in it, of
emiminent Reputation. The first is Bedmancore, which was in Times of a very
high Ascent, wrapped up in the Patrimony of Cheyney, of whom I shall speak more
at Patricksbourn Cheyney their principal Seat; the last of which Family that
held it was William de Cheyney, who dyed possessed of it, in the eighth year of
Edward the third, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 58. But after his Decease it was
not long resident in this Name; for in the twenty seventh year of the abovesaid
Prince, I find it in the Tenure of William de Apulderfield, of whose Family
take this compendious prospect. He was descended from Ex veteri Rot. penes Edo.
Dering Mil. and Baronettum desunctum.
Henry de Apulderfield, of Apulderfield in Coudham, who with his Son Henry, are
inserted in the Catalogue of those eminent Kentish Gentlemen who were engaged
with Richard the first, at the Siege of Acon in Palestine. See the Roll of
Gascony.
Henry de Apulderfield another of this Family accompanied Henry the third, in
his Expedition into Gascony, and his Son See the printed Laws of Romney Mersh.
Henry de Apulderfield, with John de Lovetot, did by a Commission dated the
fifteenth of November, in the sixteenth year of Edward the first, sit as
Justices of the Sewers for Romney Mersh. And this Henry was Sheriff of Kent the
twenty sixth, and twenty seventh of the abovesaid Prince, and had Issue William
de Apulderfield the abovementioned Lord of Bedmancore, who was Sheriff of Kent,
in the twenty seventh and twenty eighth of Edward the third, and again the
thirty first, thirty fourth, thirty fifth, thirty sixth, thirty eighth, and
forty fourth years of the above mentioned Prince, and held his Shrievaltie at
Lingsted. Henry Apulderfield his Son, was Sheriff of Kent the fifty first of
Edward the third, in which that glorious Prince paid that Tribute to Nature we
all owe; and from this Man, did Bedmancore descend to his great Grandchild Sir
William Apulderfield, a Man of very great Eminence in the Reign of Henry the
sixth, and Edward the fourth, who concluded in a Daughter and Heir called
Elizabeth, matched to Sir John Phineux, Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench
in the Reign of Henry the seventh, as is attested by his Monument in Hern
Church, and he in her right became possessed of Bedmancore: but it was not long
fastened to this Name, for this Man likewise concluded in two Female Coheirs,
whereof Jane Phineux one of them, matched with John Roper Esquire; and Middred
the other, wedded James Diggs of Diggs-court in Berham Esquire: from the first
Alliance, Christopher now Lord Roper of Tenham, is lineally extracted, and, by
Right of that Conjugal Union, is fortified in his present Possession and Title
to this place.

Next to be remembered is Sewards, the Seat of a second Stock, of the
well-spread Family of the Finches, ever since they married the Heir of place
and Name, and after they had sprouted out into many fair Branches at Kingsdown,
Norton, Selling, and other places; The Sole Heir of this House at Sewards, was
married to Sir Drew Drury of Norfolk Knight, Gentleman Usher of the Privy
Chamber to Q. Elizabeth, a Gentleman of incorrupt Integrity and Wisdom, to
whom we ascribe the building of the great House against the Church, where Mr.
James Hugison kept his Shrievaltie, in the seventeenth year of the late King,
having some years before purchased it of Sir Drew Drury his Heir.

Linton in the Hundred of Twyford, was anciently under the Jurisdiction and
Signiory of Proprietaries called Capell, who had a Seat adopted into their
Surname, and called Capells-court; a Family certainly of great Antiquity, and
no less Revenue in this Track. John at Capell held Lands at Boxley called
Tattelmell, in the thirty seventh year of Henry the third, as appears by that
King's Charter of Inspection, of the Foundation of Boxley Abbey, Cart. 37.
Memb. 9. Thomas at Capell, and James at Capell, were to find two Hobelers or
leight Horsemen at Denge Mersh in the eleventh year of Edward the third. And in
this Family did the Title and Propriety of this place reside, until the reign
of Henry the sixth, and then it was passed away to Baesden; where, after it had
for many years been permanent, it was almost in our Grandfathers Remembrance
transplanted by Sale into Sir Anthony Mayney Knight, Grandfather to Sir Jo.
Mayney Knight and Baronet, the instant Lord of the Fee.

Some part of Linton did for many Descents relate to a Family called Welldish,
who had here a Chapel called Welldish his Chapel, and bore upon their Seals
appendant to ancient Deeds three Talbots passant, upon a Chief a Fox, in the
same posture with the Talbots, which was assumed by this Family, as the vulgar
and constant Tradition of this Parish asserts, to perpetuate, and enforce the
Memory of one of their Ancestors, who was Huntsman to William the Conqueror.
Finally after this Name had been fixed at this place, for so many Descents, a
considerable part of their Estate was in that Age we name our Grandfathers,
passed away to Walter Mayney Esquire, from whom his Successor Sir Jo. Mayney
now claims the Propriety of it.

Littlebourne in the Hundred of Downchamford, was many Hundred years since,
given to the Church of Canterbury (as the Annalls of St. Angustins testify) by
Withredus King of Kent. But here is the Manor of Well in this Parish, which
was always under the Jurisdiction of Lay Proprietaries. It was first the
position of John de Well, sometimes written At Well, from the position of his
Dwelling, which perhaps was in a bottom: but this Man in the forty fourth year
of Hen. the third, made Ranulph Joremer his Feoffe in Trust, who sold it for
his Use to Reginald de Cornehill; by whose Daughter and Heir, it came to
Garwinton of Beakesbourne, and in this Name after it had been fixed some four
Descents, it went away to Haut; for William Garwinton died without Issue; and
so Margaret his Kinswoman, matched to Richard Haute, who was a second stock of
the Hauts of Bourne, became his Heir; but long the Right of it was not united
to his Family; For Richard Haut this Man's Son, left likewise only a Daughter
and Heir called Margery, who altered the Possession, and brought it with Her to
her Husband William Isaac, who had by her Edward Isaac, and he determined in
two Daughters and Coheirs, Mary married to Thomas Apulton of Waldingfield in
the County of Suffolk, and the other, first matched to....... Sydley, and after
to Sir Henry Palmer, who by Donation from his Wife, was endowed with the
Fee-simple of Well Court, and his Successor in our Father's Memory, alienated
it to Lieutenant Colonel Prude, slain at the Siege of Maestricht, who left it
to his Son Mr. Searles Prude, whose two Daughters and Coheirs, are by his Will
after his Widow's Decease entitled to the Inheritance.

Reginald de Cornehill in the forty fourth year of Henry the third, exchanged
Lands with John de St. Ledger, for Lands at Lukedale in Littlebourne, where he
founded a Chantry, which was endowed with a new accession of Land by his Wife
Matilda de Cornehill, and was confirmed by Patent from Henry the third.

Lose in the Hundred of Maidstone, was in old Saxon Records written Hlos: which
imports as much as the Lot or Portion. It was, as the Book of Christ-Church
informs us, given by Ethelwulf King of the South Saxons to Sneta a Widow and
her Daughter, and they gave it back again to the Monks of Christ-Church in
Canterbury to apparel them. In the Conqueror's Time upon the general Survey
recorded in Doonesday-Book, it was accounted as part of the six Sullings of
Ferneleigh.

Pimps Court that gave Name to the Knightly Family of the Pimps, is in this
Parish, although they made Nettlested their more frequent place of abode;
William de Pimpe held this and other Lands by a whole Knights Fee, in the
twentieth year of Edward the third, at the making the Black Prince Knight: and
from this William was John Pimpe Esquire, who was Sheriff of Kent, in the
second year of Henry the seventh, lineally descended, who sold this Place to
Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham Lord Constable of England, whose dysastrous
Fate having engaged him to make some dark Applications to a Wizard and a Monk,
about the Succession of the Crown; Henry the eighth, a Prince of much Jelousie
and Fury. like an Industrious Spider spun out Venom enough out of this unhappy
Address of his, to poison him with the Guilt of High Treason, and so made the
forfeiture of his Life and Fortune pay the price of his Vanity: upon whose
Ruin his Estate was, not long after his Death and Attaint, which was in the
thirteenth year of Henry the eighth, by that Prince granted to his Confident
and Favorite Sir John Rainsford, who after a brief enjoyment of it, passed it
away to Sir Henry Isley, who being attainted in the second year of Q. Mary, for
supporting by his Assistance and Concurrence the Defection of Sir Thomas Wiat
this reverted to the Crown, and the same Princess in the second year of her
Government, granted it by Patent to Sir John Baker, whose Successor Sir John
Baker Baronet, has lately passed it away to Thomas Floyd of Gore Court Esquire.

Luddenham in the Hundred of Middleton, with the appendant Manor of
Bishops-Bush, was a Branch of that spacious Revenue which did in these parts
own the Northwoods for Possessors: and Roger de Northwood in the forty first
year of Henry the third, amongst diverse Parcels of Land which he altered from
the Nature of Gavelkind into Knights Service, (of the which there is a
particular Recapitulation in the Book of Aid) changed ninety Acres of Mersh
Land which lay partly in Iwade, and partly in his Manor of Luddenham into that
Tenure. After the Northwoods, the Frogenhalls were Possessors of this place,
and William Frogenhall had this amongst other Lands in this Track, which he
died seized of, in the eighth year of Richard the second: his Son and Heir was
William Frogenhall Father to Thomas Frogenhall the last of the Name at this
Place; for he left no Issue Male: so that the Daughters became his Coheirs. One
of whom was Anne, who married Thomas Quadring of London, and so this place
became hsi Inheritance, as being her Proportion of Frogenhalls Estate: but it
quickly found an other owner; for Joan Quadring his only Daughter and Heir, by
marrying with Richard Dryland of Cokesditch in Feversham, incorporated it with
the Demeasn of that Family: since which Alliance, it has by a constant
Succession been fixed in the Possession of the Name of Dryland; until of late
years by an Heir General, it came to own the Signory of Kirton.

Luddesdowne in the Hundred of Taltingtrough, was (though now a petty obscure
Village) more noted formerly, when it was the Patrimony of the Barons
Montchensie of Swanscamp-Castle. Warren de Montchensie, one of them, obtained a
Charter of Free Warren to this Manor of Ludsdowne, in the thirty seventh year
of Henry the third: afterward this Man's Successor William de Monchensie held
it, and sat in Parliament as Baron of Swanscamp, and dying in the year 1287,
without Issue Male, left this and diverse other Places to Dionys his Sole
Daughter and Heir, who was married to Hugh de Vere; but died without Issue, in
the year of our Lord, 1314, by which means the Title of this Place diverted to
Joan de Montchensie, Sister to William abovenamed, and She matched in Marriage
with William de Valentia Earl of Pembroke, half Brother to King Henry the
third, and by him had Aymer de Valence, who expired in two Female Coheirs, one
of whom called Isabel, was married to Lawrence de Hastings, who in her Right
was afterward Earl of Pembroke, and Proprietary of the Fee-simple of this
Place; from whom it descended to his Grandchild John Hastings Earl of
Pembroke, who dying in the fourteenth year of Richard the second, left his
Estate in Kent, in which this was involved to his two Kinsmen, Reginald Gray,
and Richard Talbot, and upon the Division of it, this Manor was lincked to the
Patrimony of Gray, and remained until the Beginning of Henry the fixth,
interwoven with the Revenue of this Family, and then I find it under the
Signory of that eminent Peer and glorious Soldier Thomas Montacute Earl of
Salisbury, who in so many remarkable and triumphant Conflicts, asserted the
Interest of this Nation in France, in the Reign of the abovesaid Prince, and at
last received a mortal Wound, by a Splinter of a Window struck into his Face by
a Cannon shot at the Siege of Orleans, of which he died 1428, and left his
Estate here to his Natural Son James Montacute, Ex vetustis Autographis penes
Rich. Lea Arm. de Rochester.
so written in the Deed, but in all our printed Books of Nobility falsely and
corruptly John, and he in the thirtieth year of Henry the sixth, conveyed it by
Deed to Thomas Davy Gentleman, and he not many years after alienated it to
Edward Nevill Baron of Aburgavenny; from whom it was transported by Descent to
his Successor Henry Lord Aburgavenny, who dying in the twenty ninth year of Q.
Elizabeth, without Issue Male, gave it to his second Brother Sir Edward Nevill;
from whom it is come down to his Descendant, John Lord Aburgavenny, the instant
Proprietary of it.

Buckland in this Parish, did acknowledge the Bucklands for its Heirs and
Possessors, who sometimes did inhabit at Preston in Shorham, and sometimes at
this place; which however now obscure and despicable, was of Credit when Sir
John Buckland paid respective Aid for his Lands at Ludsdown, at the making of
the Black Prince Knight, in the twentieth of Edward the third; from Buckland by
a Daughter and Heir, some few Ages since, it came over with Preston in Shorham,
to Folhill, and in that Family is the Title still at this instant resident.

Lullingston in the Hundred of Axtan, was in ancient Records written
Lullingston Rosse; for Anketellus Rosse held Lands here in the twentieth of
William the Conqueror; William de Rosse this man's Grandchild (as appears by
the Pipe Rolls) held two Knights Fees in Lullingston, in the first year of King
John. Alexander de Rosse this man's Son was one of the Recognitores magnae
Assisae, or of the grand Assise about the end of that Prince's Rule; but not
long after this the Possession of this place was not lincked to this Family;
for Lora de Rosse Sole Daughter to William de Rosse, by matching with William
de Peyforer, fastened it to the Revenue of that Stock, from whence it assumed
the Title of Lullingston Peyforer; but it quickly deserted both the Title and
Possessor; for Gregory de Rokesley Lord Mayor of London, in the seventh year of
Edward the first purchased it of the abovesaid William, and in the same year
obtained a Charter Warren to his Lands at this place. In the twentieth year of
Edward the third, John de Rokesley Son to Walter Rokesley and Grandchild to
the before mentioned Gregory, paid Aid for the Manor of Lullingston, which
held by a whole Knights Fee, at the making the Black Prince Knight; In the
thirty third year of Edward the third, Sir John Peche purchased the Manor of
this John de Rokesley; this Sir John was Son to Sir John de Peche, who was Lord
Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Constable of Dover Castle, and was called to
Parliament among the Barons, in the fourth year of Edward the third. In the
same year he bought Lullingston, he obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his
Lands there, which was renewed, and by Confirmation fortified in the thirty
fourth and thirty fifth of Edward the third. Sir William Peche was his Son and
Heir, whose Widow the Lady Joane Peche, who died seized of this Manor, in the
eleventh year of Henry the fourth, lies entombed in St. Mary Woolnoth Church in
London: Sir John Peche was Son and Heir to them both; Sir William Peche was Son
and Heir to this Sir John, who died at Lullingston, 1487, and had two Children
Sir John Peche Knight and Banneret, who died sans Issue; (which Sir John, was a
man of exemplary Account, being Lord Deputy of Calais, and of signal Charity,
as is evident by his Munificence and Bounty toward the Poor; for he founded
the Almshouses at Lullingston, and gave 500 lb. to other Pious Uses, to be
performed by the Grocers Company in London, of which he was Free:) and
Elizabeth marched to John Heart Esquire, who in his Wife's Right, upon the
Decease of her Brother, entered into the Possession of the Premises; from whom
it is transmitted to William Heart Esquire, his great Grandchild, who has the
instant Signory and Fee-simple of this Manor of Lullingston.

M. M. M. M.
MAidstone gives Name to the whole Hundred wherein it is seated: an elegant
Town it is, whether we consider it in respect of the uniform and regular
Building; or of the healthful Situation of it, spreading it self out partly
upon a Hill, and partly upon a Valley; which are interlaced with a small River
which has its Original about Leeds, and on the other side its Banks are washed
with the waters of the Medway; from whence it primitively borrowed its Name,
being in Saxon called Medwegston. The Places of most eminence which are
circumscribed within the Limits of it are,

First Buckland, which is situated on the opposite Banck of the River, upon the
Knob or Knoll of an Hill of easy Ascent; from whence it takes in, a various
and delightful Prospect of the adjacent Valley; It was anciently part of the
Demeasn of the Bucklands; but whether it originally gave Seat and Surname to
them or not, is not evident; because there was another Place, which likewise
bore this Name at Luddesdowne, and which also acknowledged it self to be Parcel
of their Propriety; John de Buckland held it at his Death, which was in the
third year of Edward the third, and his Son and Heir was Sir John Buckland, who
was a Person of remarkable Reputation and Note in this Track; for he had Lands
about Wouldham, Halling, Snodland, Ludsdowne and Shoreham, as well as at this
Place. After this Name went out, the Lords Cobham were Proprietaries of
Buckland, and in this Family was the Possession guided along by an undivided
Clew of several Ages, till the unfortunate Henry Lord Cobham, about the
entrance into the Reign of King James, being with Sir Walter Raleigh and
others, entangled in a Design, which the then present Power after a serious and
solemn Debate adjudged treasonable, he could not unravel himself out of it, but
with the Forfeiture though not of Life, yet of Estate; but this Manor before
his Attaint being settled upon his Lady Francis Cobham, as part of her
Jointure, upon his Decease was granted by the Crown to her, and the Reversion
to Robert Cecil Earl of Salisbury, in respect he had married Elizabeth Daughter
to William Brook Lord Cobham, and Sister to this last Lord Henry, and She
shortly after by marrying with....... Fitz Gerald Earl of Kildare, settled the
present Interest of it in him, and He and his Countess being embarked in a
mutual and joint consent with the abovementioned Earl of Salisbury, passed away
their Right in it, about the year One thousand six hundred and eighteen, to
William Horspoole Esquire, who, in the Memory of these Times, alienated the
Fee-simple to Mr. English of Sussex.

Secondly, the Manor of Maidstone it self with the Palace fall under
Consideration. They were in Times of elder Account belonging to the Family of
Cornhill, and so continued till William de Cornhill desiring to exemplify his
Zeal and Devotion by some eminent Acts of Piety to the Religion which those
Times asserted, gave them to Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, in the
seventh year of the Reign of King John; many of whose Successors were
Benefactors both to the Church and Palace. Boniface of Savoy (Archbishop of
Canterbury) about four hundred years since, built here an Hospital, then styled
the New-work, to the Honor of St. Peter, and Paul, and Thomas the Martyr;
which Hospital William Courtney likewise Archbishop pulled down, and
instituted a College upon the Ruins of it; for secular Priests, devoted to
the Honor of All Saints: And also erected the Collegiate Church, as the Walls,
diaper'd in sundry places, with his paternal Coat, do easily evince.

John Vfford also Archbishop about three hundred years since began the
Foundation of the Palace here; but dying before he had completed the same,
Simon Islip his Successor gave it its Perfection, and being afterward crumbled
into Decay, John Morton likewise Archbishop not only repaired, but augmented
it.

Maidston was governed by a Portreve, until the Time of King Edward the sixth:
by whose incorporation it came to be governed by a Mayor which Privilege being
lost, because this Town was enwrapped in Sir Thomas Wiats Insurrection, against
Q. Mary; Q. Elizabeth not only restored the same, but, to improve it to more
eminence with a farther Addition of Honor, raised it into the Degree of a
Borough.

Maidstone by the Influence of Boniface of Savoy, Archbishop of Canterbury,
had the Grant of a Market procured to be held here weekly on the Thursday, as
is manifest, Pat. 45. Hen. tertii Memb. secunda.

Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, about two hundred and forty years
since erected a Chauntry, for the Brothers of Corpus Christi, now converted
into the Free School, who by the Rules of their Primitive Institution were to
pray for the Fraternity of the Guild.

The Manor and Palace of Maidston being exchanged with the Crown, by Thomas
Archbishop of Canterbury, was by K. Henry the eighth, about the thirty second
year of his Reign, granted to Thomas Wiat the elder, and his unfortunate Son
Sir Thomas Wiat being attainted in the second year of Queen Mary it devolved
by Escheat to the Crown, and continued there until Queen Elizabeth granted it
to John Astley Esquire; Master of the Royal Jewels, from whom it descended to Sir
Jacob Astley, created Lord Astley, by the late King Charles at Oxford, in whose
Descendants the Propriety is at this instant resident. But the Manor continued
in the Tenure of the Crown, even until the Reign of King Charles. For when
King James had by his gracious Charter created Dame Elizabeth Finch, Widow of
Sir Moile Finch of Estwell, only Daughter and Heir of the right Honorable Sir
Thomas Heneage of Copped-hall in Essex Vice-Chamberlane, and one of the Privy
Council to Queen Elizabeth, Vice-Countesse Maidston, to her and her Issue-male,
She obtained the Manor in Fee Farm for ever, and transmitted it to her Son
Sir Thomas Finch, in her Right Earl of VVinchelsey, from whom both the Title of
Viscount Maidston and the Right of the Manor are devolved by Paternal
Succession, to the Right honorable Heneage Finch, the present Earl of
VVinchelsey, and Vicecount Maidston.

Leland notes that the Archbishop's Palace, was anciently a Castle, and I
verily believe it was the Caput Baroniae: for the Archbishops had more than
one, and excepting that at Saltwood, I have diligently Searched, and can find
none so likely as this.

Goulds and Shepway do thirdly expose themselves to our Survey, they were
formerly the Demeasne of Vinter of Vinters, not far distant, and so remained
till Robert Vinter Founded in Maidston Church that Chantry, which bears the
Name of Gould's Chantry, about the fortieth year of Edward the third, and then
he annexed both these places to the Found^tion, for those Divine Offices which
were there to be performed, but upon the Suppression of this Oratorie, King
Henry the eighth granted Goulds and Shepway to Sir Thomas Wiat, who afterward
sinking under the crime of High Treason, in the second year of the Government
of Queen Mary, She upon his attaint, granted them to Sir Walter, and Gervas
Henley Esquire; from which Family by Purchase they came over to Andrews, but stayed
not long there, for in our Fathers Memory they were sold to Sir Humphrey
Tufton, late Sheriff of Kent, part of the year 1654. and part of the year 1655.

Bigons, alias Digons, was the ancient Seat of the worthy Family of the
Mapelysdens, and I have a Deed in my Custody, wherein one Edward Mapelysden is
mentioned, with this Addition, Edwardus Mapelysden de Digons. The Deed bears
Date from the twenty fifth of Edward the third, and after the possession had
been for many Generations Successively resident in this Family, one of this
Name, being unfortunately concerned in the Defection of Sir Thoma; Wyat, was
blasted with the guilt of High Treason, and so by Consequence his Estate by
Confiscation, escheated to the Crown, from which it was granted to Nicholas
Barham, after Sergeant at Law, who did much improve this Fabric, with a
Supplement of Building, from whose Heir it passed away by Sale to Hawle, and
from him again soon after to Sir Francis Berneham, to whom this Mansion owes
much of its Magnificence and Splendour, whose Son and Heir Mr. Edward Barneham
Esquire, has lately alienated his Interest in it, to Mr. Beale of London.

Jordans-Court is a fifth place, which may exact our Notice, because it gave
Seat and Surname to a Family of that Denomination; the next Family, after this
was expired, which held it, was Roper, of the Ropers of St. Dunstans in
Canterbury; and John Roper sold it to Edw. and Will. Brouch, of Bersted about
the thirty sixth year of Henry the sixth, and they quickly after alienated
their Concernment to Atwood, from whom the same Fate, carried it away to
Pierce, who by Sale transmitted his Right to Cook, and he suddenly after
demised it to Crook, where after the Title had made some short abode, the
Possession was passed over to Potkins, extracted from the Fotkins of Sevenoke,
where the Name was very ancient, from Potkin; by his Daughter and Coheir, it
descended to Virgo, who about the latter end of Q. Elizabeth, by Sale
translated the Possession into Washington Justice of Peace, and often in the
Commission of Sewers, who sold it to Godwin, from whom by Purchase, it came to
be the Inheritance of Crisp, who in our Memory conveyed it away to Smith; and
he, some few years since, by Sale, invested the Propriety in Mr. Beckman.

Sixthly, Sheals is not to be forgotten, because it was the Inheritance of
Fremingham, for Ralph de Fremingham died seized of it, in the thirtieth year of
Edward the third, and when this Family went out, the Pimps of Pimps-Court and
Nettlested, by Purchase became Lords of the Fee; from whom the same Fare
brought it to acknowledge the Signory of the Isleys of Sundrich; and here it
continued, till Sir Henry Isley in the Reign of Q. Mary, being attainted of
High Treason, it became Confiscated to the Crown, and She in the second year of
her Government, granted it to Sir Walter Henley Knight, of Coursehorne in
Cranbroke, in whose Name and posierity the Possession has remained Successively
planted till this Day.

Seventhly, Chillington is not to be omitted, because I find it in the Register
of those Lands which acknowledged the Lords Cobham, for Lords of the Fee: And
when John de Cobham had obtained a Charter of Free Warren, in the seventeenth
year of Edw. the third, to all his Lands in Kent, The Manor of Chillington is
Recorded in the Catalogue amongst them. After them, it came (as the Court-rolls
and private Evidences of this place inform me) to acknowledge the Signory and
Jurisdiction of the Mapelysdens of Digons, and remained circumscribed in their
Revenue, till Queen Mary began to weild the English Scepter, and then George
Mapelysden being entangled beyond all retreat, in the unsuccessfull Expedition
of Sir Thomas Wyat, miscarried in that Attempt, and lost his Estate by
Forfeiture to the Crown, and Q. Mary granted it to Sir Walter, and Gervas
Henley Esquire, who not long after sold his Interest in it to Nicholas Barham
Esquire, Sergeant at Law to Queen Elizabeth, and his Successor alienated this
place to Hawle of Wye, whose Grandchild Mr. George Hawle lately deceased, held
the Fee-simple of it.

Lastly, within the Ambute or Limits of Maidstone, stands an ancient
Castellated House called the Moate. It did in times of great Antiquity, relate
to that Patrimony which confessed the Signory of the noted Family of Leybourne:
for Roger de Leybourne obtained the Grant of a Market weekly on the Tuesday,
and a Fair yearly to continue three Days at the Feast of St. Cross, in the
fifty first year of Henry the third, as appears Pat. 51. Hen. tertii Memb. 10.
But before the beginning of Edw. the third, this Name was withered and shrunk
into Decay at this place, and then Bartholomew Lord Burghurst, or Burwash, Lord
Warden of the Cinque Ports, and one of the first Founders of the Order of the
Garter, came to possess it, and Inhabited here in the twenty ninth year of
Edward the third, and possessed the Signory called Shofford, on which the
Castle stands, and which one John de Shofford held by Knights-Service, in the
twentieth year (as appears by the Book of Aid,) of Edward the third. After the
Lords Burghurst, the Woodvills were possessed of it, and removed from Grafton in
the County of North-Hampton, where they had long continued, and lived here. A
fair Monument of Woodvill, on the North-side the Chancell of Maidstone-Church
affirms it: and when King Henry the sixth created Richard Woodvill Constable of
the Isle of Wight, a Baron of this Nation, and elected him into the Order of
the Garter, his Style was, Lord Rivers, Grafton, and De la Moat; which Act of
Grace and Favor, mollified a Sentence and Fine of 1000. lb. imposed upon him,
for matching with Jaquet, Daughter of Peter of Luxenbourg, Earl of St. Paul,
Widow of John Plantagente Duke of Bedford, without the Kings License. But when
King Edward the fourth, had married Elizabeth his eldest Daughter, being widow
to Thomas Marquess Dorcett, he created him Earl Rivers, and Lord of the Isle
of VVight, which Titles he had observed were concomitant in some of the Styles
of the Lords Rivers, or de Ripariis, who were the Ancient Earls of Devon, and
assumed to bear in an Escocheon of pretense upon his own Achievement, the old
Coat ascribed commonly to Baldwin de Ripariis Earl of Devon, viz. Gules a
Griphen Segreant Or: which I note for Critics in Armorie to descant on, and
return to the History of the Place. When this good man, for so he was noted to
be, was miserably massacred by Robert Ridisdale Captain of the Lewd People of
North-Hampton-shire, who took him at Edgcot-Field, and struck off his head at
North-Hampton (Their Will being their Law, and Mischief Minister to their wild
Designs?) all his seven Sons who survived him, died without Issue, and then Sir
Henry Wyatt becomes owner of this place, Grandfather to Sir Thomas Wiat,
afterward his Successor in the Possession of it, whose dysastrous Tragedy is
presented at Boxley, upon whose untimely Exit, Hugh Warham in the second year
of Queen Mary, by Grant from the Crown, enters upon it, from whom Alderman
Rither afterward Lord Mayor of London, and known by the Name of Sir William
Rither, Purchased and Repaired it and left it to his Daughter and Coheir, the
Lady Susan Caesar, whose eldest Son Tho. Caesar Esquire; and his Mother concurring
together, disposed of their Right in it by Sale to Sir Humphrey Tufton Knight,
second Son to Sir John Tufton Knight and Baronet, and Brother to Nicholas
Tufton Earl of Thanett, who was Father to John the present Earl.

There was a Family Surnamed de Maidstone, whose Blazon upon a Monument in
Vlcombe Church is, Sables a Cheveron between three Cups, covered, Argent
Crowned Or, William de Maidston the Kings Valect, being sent to the Court of
Rome with certain Instruments, and other expresses, deceased in his Journey, as
appears Pat. Anno, quinto Edwardi primi, prima Pars.

Pinenden-Heath confines upon Maidston, and is eminent for the Punishment of
Malefactors, and the frequent Assemblies of Freeholders, who here convene to
elect such Persons for Knights of the Shire, as may represent the County in
Parliament. But it was in elder times more famous for that great Convention of
English and Normans, who met there in the fourth year of Will. the Conqueror,
to decide the great Controversy which then broke forth, between Lanfranc
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Odo Earl of Kent, touching some Lands and
Privileges which the said Archbishop alleged were by an unjust Usurpation by
the abovesaid Odo ravished away from the Church: which because it gives us a
full Prospect of that exorbitant and wide power which the Clergy of those
times did entitle themselves to. I shall endeavor to pourtray it in as Brief
and narrow a Landscape, as I have pencill'd it out by Textus Roffensis, an old
Book in Manuscript so called, where it is more voluminously represented.

At Pinenden-Heath (says Textus Roffensis) in the fourth year of William the
Conqueror, there was an Assembly of the gravest and discreetest of the
English and Normans, by a signal Decision and Debate, to deternine of that
Controversy, which did formerly arise between Odo Bishop of Bayeux, and Earl
of Kent, touching some Lands and Priveledges which were detained from the
Church by the said Earl; and Lanfranc Archbishop of Canterbury. The said
Dispute or Debate lasted three Days: after the expiration of which, the said
Archbishop recovered several Lands which he the said Odo and his Tenants then
held, which were Herbert the Son of Ivo, Turold of Rochester, Ralph de
Curva-Spina, and Hugh de Montfort, with all the Franchises belonging to them,
as namely, Sac and Soc, Toll and Theme, Infangtheof and Outfangtheof, Flymena,
Firmth, Grithbreach, Forestall, Heinfare, and Cersett; (the last of which,
because none of our Interpreters of the dark and obscure Terms of the Law do
explain, I shall; It was a Rentcharge of a certain Proportion of Corn in the
ear, paid at the Feast of St. Martin,) with all other Customs greater or less,
both on the Land and on the Water; and it was tried and proved by all the
honest and wise Men both Normans and English who were present, that as the King
himself, holds his Lands quiet, and free in his Demeasne, so the Archbishop
holds all his Lands whoily quiet and free in his Demeasne. In the presence of
these, it was shown by many and most evident Reasons, that the King has no
Customs in the Church of Canterbury, but only three, which are these. If any
man digg in the Kings Highway, or cut down any Tree to stop it, if any man
shall be apprehended and found Culpable, whilst they are in doing such things,
whether Pledges be taken of them or not, yet by prosecution of the Kings
Officer, and by Pledges they shall amend what is unjustly done. The third
Custom is, If any man commit Bloodshed on the Kings Highway; if whilst he
does it he be apprehended and imprisoned, he shall then make amends unto the
King: But if he shall not be apprehended, but depart without giving any Pledge,
the King may not in Justice require any thing of him. And it was at the same
time farther determined, that if any Person did commit Bloodshed, or
Manslaughter, in places which were within the Liberties of the Church of
Canterbury, from the time that the Church left off to Sing Alleluiah, to the
Octaves of Easter; that then he should make amends only to the Archbishop.
And it was likewise showed at the same Time, that whosoever should commit the
Crime of Childwitt, that is, of Bastardy; if it were in Lent, the Archbishop
should have the whole Satisfaction; but if out of Lent, then he should have
only half of it.

There were present at this Assembly, Goisfrid Bishop of Constance the Kings
Substitute, Ernost Bishop of Rochester, Egelric or Agelric Bishop of Selsey and
Chichester, a Man of deep insight in the Constitutions Ecclesiastical, and of
so great an Age, that he was brought in a Wagon, for his Discussion and
Declaration, (says Textus Roffensis) upon the known Laws, Usages, Franchises,
and Customs of Holy Church. Hugh de Montfort, William de Arces, Richard de
Tunbridge; and lastly, Haymo. Sheriff of Kent.

Town Malling and East Malling lie in the Hundred of Larkfield, and were both
Manors which related to that Revenue, which made up the Patrimony of the
Nunnery of Town Malling, which was founded by Gundulphus Bishop of Rochester,
about the year 1090, and dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and had the Church it
self which was likewise named after the blessed Virgin, and the Chapel of St.
Leonards not far distant. Though this Gundulphus was the Founder, yet Haimo de
Heath, as appears by the Records of Rochester, aws an eminent Benefactor to it
about the year 1339. Both these Manors upon the Suppression having augmented
the Revenue of the Crown, they rested there, until the fourth year of Edward
the sixth, and then they were granted in Lease for Life, to Sir Hugh
Cartwright, and upon his Decease, they were passed away upon the same Condition
to Pierpoint; and he conveyed them to William Brook Lord Cobham; whose Son
Henry Lord Cobham, being attainted in the second year of King James, they were
reassumed by the Crown, and after granted in Lease, to Sir Humphrey Delind, a
Man furnished with a liberal stock both of divine and humane Learning; and he
passed away his Interest to Sir Robert Brett: but the Fee-simple continued with
the Crown, until the twenty first of King James; and then they were granted for
ever to John Rayney Esquire, which Concession was fully ratified by King
Charles, (to whom the Profits of these Manors were assigned when he was
Prince, toward the Support of of his Court) in the second year of his Reign,
to Sir John Rayney now of Wrotham Knight and Baronet, which Sir John is
lineally descended from John Reignie (for so the Name in old Deeds is written)
who held the Manor of Edgeford in Devon, and Smitheley-hall in Yorkshire, in
the Reign of Edward the third, still the Possession of this Family. Which John
was originally extracted from Sir John de Reignie, who, as is manifest by the
old Rolls and Registers of this Family, held the Manor of Newton in
Cumberland, in the reign of Henry the third.

West-Malling had a Market granted to it on the Saturday by Henry the third, at
the Instance of the Lady Abbess of that place: to whom and to the Nuns of this
Cloister, the Vicar of East-Malling, was, Jure Loci, always Confessor.

Parrocks and Ewell are two appendant Manors, involved in the Manor of
West-Malling, whose Fee-simple was passed away to John Rayney Esquire, when the
other was linked by Grant to his Demeasne, Ex autographis penes Jo. Reyney,
Millit. and Baronetum
the last of which lay in Brenchley, and was in Lease many years from the
Nunnery to Hextall, whose Female Heir brought it to VVhetenhall; and Sir
Richard VVhetenhall, in the twelfth year of Q. Elizabeth, sold it to George
Lord Cobham, and his Son Henry Lord Cobham, alienated it to Sir Thomas Fane
Ancestor to Mildmay Earl of Westmerland: whose Lease being lately expired, it
is now come to confess Sir John Reyney Knight and Baronet, for sole
Proprietarie.

Borough Court in East-Malling, was parcel of the ancient Demease of the noble
Family of Colepeper of Preston in Alre^ford and was found united to their
Revenue, at the Death of Walter Colepeper Esquire, which was in the first year
of Edward the third; and in this Family did it continue involved for sundry
Ages, till almost in our Grandfathers memory, it was by Sale conveyed away to
Shakerley, descended from the Shakerleys of Shakerley in Lancashire: but it
made no long abode here, for in the Age subsequent to that wherein it was
purchased, this Family resolved into a Daughter and Heir, who was matched to
Beauley, descended from the Beauleys of Beauleys Court in VVouldham, who
brought Borough Court along with her, into the Possession of that Family, and
left it to her only Daughter and Heir Mary Beauley, who by matching lately with
Mr....... Basse of Suffolk, has made it parcel of his Interest and Propriety.

Marden is not parcel only of the Hundred of Middleton or Milton, but an
Appendage of the Manor also: but because they are divided by so remote a
distance, from the abovementioned place, they in elder Times made their
Applications, by humble Addresses to the Crown, of whose Revenue this Parish
was a Limb, to rescue them from that Burden, which crushed the shoulder, and to
permit that this Parish. Suo integro Dominio, and Jurisdictione complecterctur,
might be circumscribed within the Sphere and Circumference of its own Signiory,
without any adherence or Connection to any other: but it seems the Beams of
majesty, not beating with any propitious Influence on this Design, it grew not
up to that Stature, and perfection, it did first aspire to; so that it remained
an imperfect Moiety of a Manor, under which Notion it is represented to us at
present. Yet, in the ninth year of Edw. the first, Eleanor Wife to that Prince,
obtained a Market weekly, and a Fair yearly, to be observed at this place, and
being improved with these advantageous Franchises, it remained marshalled in
the Inventory of the Royal Demeasne, until the second year of King James, and
then it was passed away by Grant to Philip then Earl of Mout Gomery, upon whose
late Decease it was disposed by Will to own the Interest of his second Son Mr.
James. Herbert.

Cheveney, and Cheveney House, are both within the Verge of Marden, and were
entitled to a Family of that Surname. Henry de Cheveney held it at his Death,
which was in the second year of Edward the second Rot. Esc. Number. 59. And after
him Joan the Wife of John Cheveney his Son was in Enjoyment of it at her
Decease, which was in the thirty second year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 5. But after this I find no farther Remembrance of this Family at this
Place; for in the second year of Richard the second, I discover by an ancient
Court-Roll, one William Atweld to have held the Propriety of it: And in this
Family was the Title lodged until the Beginning of Henry the sixth, and then it
was transmitted by Sale to Couper, and in the thirteenth year of that Monarch,
I find one William Couper, to have discharged some Persons of some
Amerciaments, and Fines imposed upon them for not performing Suite and Service
at this Manor of Cheveney: and in this Family was the Interest successively
resident, until the Beginning of Q. Mary, and then this House and Manor being
by the Custom of Gavelkind ground into two Parcels, and those possessed by two
Brothers Coheirs, one of them passed away Cheveney House to Maplesden, in which
name it is yet constant, and the other alienated the Manor of Cheveny to Lone;
from whom Mr........ Lone the instant Proprietary is lineally extracted

Sipherst is another little Manor in Marden, which had Possessors here of that
Surname, until the latter End of Edward the third, and then they being
abolished and the Fee-simple abandoned and surrendered to William Atweld, about
the second year of Richard the second, that Name was entitled to the Estate
here, until the Beginning of Henry the sixth, and then it was alienated with
Cheveney to Couper, in whom the Fee-simple had not been long constant, when it
was demised to John Field, and he made his Will in the seventeenth year of
Edward the fourth, and gives it to his Son Jo. Field, and from him did it by
descendant Right devolve to his Successor Edward Field, who held it the fourth
year of Q. Elizabeth, and after gave it to his Kinsman Thomas Gilbert, whose
Successor Thomas Gilbert having settled it on his Widow Sibil Gilbert, it is
now in her Right possessed by her second Husband Mr. Richard Knight.

Tildens Stubbins, and Brook, are three other inconsiderable Manors in this
Parish: which had three owners of these Denominations, the first of which were
Persons of Eminence in this County, and had an Estate at Wye. Catts place in
Brenchley and at Tilmanston likewise, as it appears by the Book of Aid, where
there is an Assessement laid upon the Lands of William Tilden, in the twentieth
year of Edward the third, at making the Black Prince Knight: But to proceed,
the Propriety of these three Places, were constantly under the Dominion of
these three Families until the latter End of Henry the fourth, and then
Stubbins was passed away to Tilden, in whom both Stubbins and Tildens remained
combined and wound up together, until the Beginning of Henry the sixth, and
then they were demised to Thomas Stidolfe Esquire, and he made his Will in the
year 1453, and therein mentions Stubbins and Tildens to have been purchased of
Tilden and Brook of Richard Brook: but this Family about the Beginning of
Henry the seventh, determining in a Female Inheritrix (matched to Richard Vane
Esquire) united these three Manors to his Patrimony, and from him by the
traverses of several Descents, are they now come down to be possessed by the
right Honorable Mildmay Vane Earl of Westmerland.

Monkton is a Manor in Marden, which made up the Demeasn of the Priory of
Leeds, and upon the suppression of that Cloister, was by K. Henry the eighth,
granted to Thomas Colepeper of Bedgebury Esquire, who not long after alienated
it to Thomas Wilfor'd Esquire, and he in the seventh year of Q. Elizabeth to
Thomas Stanley; in which Family it remained, until our Fathers Remembrance, and
then it was demised by Sale to Mr....... Board of Sussex.

St. Mary Church in Romney Mersh, lies in the Hundreds of St. Martins and
New-Church, and was anciently folded up in that large Demeasn which did
acknowledge the Dominion of the Criolls; John de Crioll or Keriel of a younger
Extraction from Bertram de Crioll held it at his Death, which was in the forty
ninth year of Edward the third, and transmitted it to his Son Sir Nicholas
Criol; from whom by a continued Succession, it devolved to Sir Thomas Crioll
Knight of the Garter, who falling an Oblation at the Battle of St. Albans, to
the Cause and Quarrel of the House of York, by his Daughter and Heir it came to
be the Inheritance of John Fogge Esquire, who left it to his Son Thomas Fogge:
and though he determined in two Daughters and Coheirs, Alice matched to William
Scot, and Anne first married to Edward Scot, and after to Henry Isham, yet it
seems (to improve and continue the Name) he gave this and other Lands to his
Kinsman George Fogge, whose Posterity enjoyed it even until our Fathers Memory,
and then it was alienated to Carkeredge.

St. Mary's in the Hundred of Hoo, was (as appears by Sir Thomas Wisemans
Evidences, for I can trace not any Notice of it in Public Records) in the
Reign of Edw. the fourth, (for no higher do the Deeds arrive at) in the Hands
of one William Halton, who sold the same to William Lemyng Citizen and Grocer
of London, as appears by a Deed dated the twenty second day of October, in the
eighth year of the said King's Reign. Afterward I find this abovesaid Manor
in the Hands of Sir John Brook Lord Cobham, in the Reign of Henry the seventh;
but from whom it came to him the Evidences do not discover: but I find, that in
the seventh year of that King's Reign, the said Lord Cobham sold the abovesaid
Manor to Sir Robert Read, then Sergeant at Law, but after Lord Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas; who concluding in three Daughters and Coheirs; Dorothy
matched to Sir Edward Wotten of Boughton Malherbe; Katharin wedded to Sir
Thomas Willoughbie second Son of Christopher Willoughbie Lord Willoughbie of
Eresbye; and Margaret married to Sir John Harcourt of Elnal, in the County of
Stafford, this Manor of St. Mary's in her right, descending to this Family,
the abovesaid Sir John and the Lady Margaret his Wise, did, in the thirtieth
year of Henry the eighth, exchange the said Manor of St. Mary Hall with John
Wiseman Gentleman, for the Priory of Ronton, in the County of Stafford: since
which Time the said Manor has continued in the Name of Wiseman, and is at
this instant in the Possession of Sir Thomas Wiseman of Riven Hall, in the
County of Essex, Knight.

Newland is a Manor Situated in St. Mary's, which was, as high as can be
traced, by any Track of Evidence, the Inheritance of Somer, vulgarly now called
Summers. Richard le Somer made his Will, as appears by the Records of Rochester,
in the year of Grace 1347, and died seized of this Place, Lands in Halstow,
Higham, Leigh, and elsewhere, and from him did it come down by the Channel of
Descent to John Somer, who was Chancellor of the Exchequer, in the Reign of
Henry the sixth, who was a great Benefactor to the Priory of Christ-Church, in
whose Cloister the Arms of this Family remain insculped in Stone as a Memorial
of his Beneficence, the last of this Family who held this place, was Sir
William Somer, who was thrice employed as public Ambassador to foreign States
by Queen Elizabeth, and he deceased without Issue Male, so that his two
Daughters matched to Sir Alexander Temple, and Sir James Cromer became his
Coheirs; but this Manor of Newland upon the Petition was united to the Demeasn
of Temple, whose Heir has lately passed it away to the Treasurers of the
Chest, for sick and mained Seamen at Chetham.

Mershham in the Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, was given by Siward and Mawde
his Wife to the Monks of St. Augustins for support of their Diet, which
Concession of their's, was afterward confirmed (as appears by the Book of
Christ-Church) by the Royal Authority of Edward the Confessor, and so remained
wrapped up in the Demeasn of the Church till the Dissolution of that Covent,
and then it fell into the Revenue of the Crown; and King Henry the eighth, in
the thirty third year of his Reign, settled it on the newly erected Dean and
Chapter of Canterbury.

Quatherington in this Parish, vulgarly called Quarington, was the ancient
Residence of the Blechendens, till William Blechenden by marriage with Agnes
Daughter and Coheir of....... Godfrey of Aldington became in her Right, Master
of Simnells in that Parish, and so left his Habitation at Mersham, to enjoy his
new Acquists at Aldington; certainly they were very anciently Seated if not at
this place, yet in this Parish, for I have seen the draught of a Pedigree knit
together by Clarenceux Cook, wherein they are brought down from Nicholas de
Blechenden, who flourished here at Mersham in the Reign of Edward the first;
though I confess the Evidences of Quarington reach no higher then Will.
Blechenden who is made in the Pedigree, to be Grandchild to the abovesaid
Nicholas, and who flourished in the Reign of Richard the second after the
Blechendens, the Cleggates of Canterbury became in our Grandfathers Memory, to
be Lords of the Fee; but not long after alienated their Right in it to Eastday
of Saltwood, from whom the like Current of Succession w^fted it over to
Knatchbull, from whom the Right descended to Sir Norton Knatchbull, a Person
who for his Favor and Love to Learning and Antiquity, in Times when they are
both fallen under such Cheapness and Contempt, cannot be mentioned without an
Epithete equivalent to so just a merit.

Mepeham in the Hundred of Totingtrough, was given to the Monks of Canterbury,
for their supply of Diet by Ediva the Queen, Mother of the two Kings, Edmund,
and Eadred, (as appears by the Book of Christ-Church) in the year of Grace 861.
Upon the suppression of that Fraternity, it increased by its Addition, the
Revenue of the Crown; but it was suddenly after in the twenty ninth year of
Henry the eighth, restored to the Church, and so continued till these
unfortunate Times chained it to the Patrimony of the Sea of Canterbury, whose
Archbishops it seems had a special Regard to this place: for William Courtney
one of them, re-builded the Church, which by the Onsets of Time was shrunk into
Dilapidation and Rubbish, and erected likewise some Alms Houses here for the
support and maintenance of the poor of this Parish.

The Manor of Dodmore lies within the Circuit of Mepeham, and was, as high as
the Beam of any Deed can discover to me, the Possession of the noble and
Knightly Family of Huntingfield. Sir Peter Huntingfield by his Deed sans Date
does demise it to his kinsman Walter Huntingfield, and he by Deed likewise
without any Date affixed to it passed it away to John Smith, and he in the
forty seventh year of Edward the third, conveyed his Right in it by Sale to
Richard Ideleigh, from whom the Ideleighs of Easture in Chilham, and Rollingin
at Goodneston in East-Kent originally branched out. But here the private
Muniments of this place, by whose Light I have walked, break off; so that I
must make a Gap in my Intelligence, and skip into the Reign of Henry the
eighth. In the ninth year of whose Government, I find by the Court-Rolls of
this place, one Thomas Cavendish Esquire; to be possessed of it, from whom about the
second year of Edward the sixth it went away to Henry Tailor, afterward within
the Circuit of thirty years; it was the Possession of John Giffard, then of
Walter Power of Brenchley, and after him, of Henry Collins, who in the year
1604. demised his Interest in it to Walter Kipping Gentleman, of Kippings-Cross
in Tuydley, where they were resident before about five hundred year; and now it
is made by Dorothy Kipping his Daughter and Coheir, part of the Patrimony of my
Worthy and Ingenuous Friend Edward Darrell Esquire.

Dean-Court is likewise Seated within the Verge of Mepeham: It was in elder
times a Branch of that wide and opulent Estate which was marshaled under the
Signory of Twitham. Alan de Twitham is enrolled in the Catalogue of those
Kentish Gentlemen who were with Richard the first at the Seige of Acon. Bethram
de Twitham held it at his Death, which was in the third year of Edward the
third, after Alanus de Twitham died seized of it in the twenty fifth year of
the abovesaid Kings Reign, and his Son Theobald de Twitham after him enjoyed
it at his Death, which was in the fourth year of Richard the second, as appears
by the Escheat Roll of that year, marked with the Number 76. and left Mawde de
Twitham heir to his large Possessions in this County, who by marrying with
Simon Septuans of Checquer in Ash by Sandwich, invested him not only in the
Signory of Dean-Court, but likewise in his other Demeasne which lay dispersed
in several Branches over this County, and he had Issue by her, Sir William
Septuans, who matched with Anne Daughter and Heir of Sir Nicholas Sandwich, and
had Issue by her John Septuans Esquire, who likewise wedded Constance Daughter
and Heir of Thomas Else of Sandwich, and had Issue by her John his eldest Son,
to whom he gave Hells, Twitham, Chilton, Molands in Ash, and other Lands in
Kent; Thomas his second Son who had Dean-Court in Mepeham, and other Lands in
this County; and Gilbert Septuans his third Son who had his Manor of Chequer
in Ash abovesaid, and from them it is sometimes writ At Chequer, and
afterward Harfleet, for some eminent Service by him performed at a Town of
that Name in Normandy, (as the private Evidences of this Family do seem to
insinuate) under the conduct of Henry the fifth, and so Successively by Custom
and Prescription, this Name became hereditary to all of the Name of Septuans,
who were either directly or Collaterally linked in Alliance to this Gilbert.
And in the Name of Harfleet alias Septuans, did the Inheritance of this Manor
of Dean-Court sundry Ages reside, till some few years since, it was by one of
this Name, alienated to Mr. Francis Twisden third Brother to Sir Roger Twisden
of Roydon-Hall, Knight and Baronet.

Merworth stands in the Hundred of Littlefield, and gave Seat and Surname to a
worthy Family of Gentlemen, whose Ancestor branched out from a Family called
St. Laurence. William de Merworth is in the Register of those Kentish Knights
who were embarked with Richard the first, at the Seige of Acon, upon which it
is probable the Cross Corslets were taken into the paternall Coat of this
Family. In the fifteenth year of King John, one Roger, the Son of Eustace de
Merworth, brought a Quare Impedit against the Prior of Leeds, for the Adyouson
of the Church of Merworth; Roger de Merworth obtained a Charter of Free Warren
to his Manor of Merworth, in the eighteenth year of Edward the first. In the
twentieth year of Edward the third, (as appears by the Book of Aid) John de
Merworth paid respective Aid for a whole Knight's Fee at Merworth and Crombery
in Hadloe, which he held of the Earl of Gloucester, at making the Black Prince
Knight, in the twentieth year of Edward the third, and an Inquisition taken
after this man's Death, for his Manor of Merworth, (though the Inquisition for
his Manor of Maplescombe and other Lands, was not taken until the forty ninth
of Edward the third) finds John Malmains of Malmains in Pluckley, to be his
Heir, who in the forty sixth year of Edward the third, sells it to Humphrey
Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, and he about the beginning of Richard the
second, conveys it to Nicholas de Brembre Son of Sir John de Brembre, who at
the Battle of Trent, as Mr. Seldom relates in his Titles of Honor page 556.
made himself eminent by a signal encounter with John de Beaumonour in the year
1350. And endeavoring to support the prerogative of Richard the second, in an
Age wherein his Crime was, too much Loialty, against the Assaults of some of the
Factious and Ambitious Nobility, sunk under the weight of their Hatred and
Opposition: and being attainted of High Treason, this in the tenth year of the
abovesaid Prince Escheated to the Crown, and the same King in the thirteenth
year of his Reign, granted it to John Hermensthorpe, who immediately after
conveyed it to Richard Fitzallan, Earl of Arundell, Lord Treasurer, and Lord
Admiral of England; whose Son Thomas Fitzallan dying without Issue, Joan one
of his Sisters and Coheirs matching with William Beauchampe, who was created by
Writ Baron of Abergavenny, in the sixteenth year of Richard the second, knit
this Manor to the Patrimony of that Family, where it continued till Richard
Beauchampe this man's Son dying without Issue-male, in the ninth year of Henry
the fifth, bequeathed it to Elizabeth his Sole Daughter and Heir, who matched
afterward to Edward Nevill Baron of Abergavenny, from whom the Title both of
the Barony and Merworth, flowed down to his Great Grandchild Henry Nevill, who
died the twenty ninth year of Queen Elizabeth, and left this Manor to Mary his
Sole Daughter and heir, married to Sir Thomas Fane, unto whom King James, in
the first Parliament which he held, Restored, Gave, Granted, and so forth, the
Name, Style, Title, Honor and Dignity of Baroness le Despencer, and that her
Heirs Successively should be Barons le Desp near for ever. She had Issue by Sir
Thomas Fane of Badsell in Kent, Sir Francis Fane eldest Son, Knight of the
Bath, whom King James in the twenty second year of his Reign, December the 29.
created Earl of Westmerland, and Baron Burghurst; being likewise by his Mothers
Descent extracted from the female heir of that old Barony: for Edw. le
Despencer, who married Elizabeth Heir of Bartholomew Lord Burghurst, and Rich.
Beauchampe who married Isabell Daughter and Heir of Thomas Lord Despencer, and
his eldest Son Sir Mildmay Fane, Knight of the Noble Order of the Bath, now
Earl of Westmerland, does not only enjoy the Concomitant Titles of Despencer
and Burghurst but the Manor of Mereworth likewise, with all the Royalties of
it, which were not inferior to any which hathreceived Honor by its owners,
for it is holden in Chivalrie, by an entire Knights Fee; and a Free Warren
which was formerly granted to it, is yet extant, and the Conveniences of a
Park, and Conies are not wanting.

Jotes-Court in this Parish of Merworth, had, as appears by several old Deeds,
some without Date, Owners who were written Jeotes: and by contraction of the
Name, called Jotes, but before the latter end of Richard the second, this
Family was crumbled away and gone, and then it came to have the same possessors
with Merworth, as namely, Fitz-Allan, Beauchampe, and Nevill: the last of which
who enjoyed it, was Sir Tho. Nevil third Son of George Nevill Baron of
Abergavenny, which Sir Tho. was one of the Privy Council to Henry the eighth,
and Speaker of the Parliament, and he in the thirty third year of that Prince,
conveyed it by Sale to Sir Robert Southwell, who in the thirty fifth year of
Henry the eighth, by the same Fatalitie, passed it away to Sir Edmund
Walsingham of Scadbery, whose great Grandchild Sir Tho. Walsingham Knight, has
not many years since alienated all his Concernment in it to his Son in Law, Mr.
James Masters.

Swanton-Court is the last place considerable in Merworth. It lay couched in
that Revenue which related to the Knights Hospitalers, until the public
Dissolution supplanted it, and surrendered it to the Crown, and K. Henry the
eighth about the thirty second year of his Reign, granted it to Sir Robert
Southwell, who in the thirty fifth year of that Prince, conveyed it to Sir
Edmund Walsingham of Scadbery, whose Successor Sir Thomas Walsingham of the
same place, has lately passed away all his Interest here to his Son in Law Mr.
James Masters.

Roger de Merworth obtained a Market weekly, and a Fair yearly to his Manor of
Merworth, in the eighteenth year of Edward the first, as appears by an old
original patent in the hands of the Earl of Westmerland.

Middleton is so called, by Reason it is placed in the middle of the Shire, and
gives Name, to the whole Hundred, which is divided, into five Baylywicks, one
whereof is called the Bailiwick of Shepey, because it comprehends that Island.
Antiquity has set a noble Attribute upon it, for in ancient Records it is
styled Regia Villa de Middleton, and here at Kemsley Down, derived from
Campsley, viz. the pastures where the Camp was kept. Within the Parish of
Middleton, is the very place, where, in the Time of King Alfred, Hasten the
Dane, that so much infested France, arrived, and fortified in such manner as he
before had at Apuldore, where he erected a Castle, whose Fragments and Relics
are yet visible.

Our ancient Chroniclers inform us, that this Town, was in a good Condition
till the Ragin of Edward the Confessor: in whose days, during the Disgust
between him and Earl Godwin, such as confederated with the Earl at home, burnt
the King's House here at Middleton, a castellated Palace beneath the Church,
whilst he and his Sons ransacked and ruined many other places upon the
Seacoasts, and Skirts of the Shire.

In Times of a latter Date John de Burgo, the elder, had a Grant by Patent of
the Manors of Middleton, and Marden, in the second year of Edward the first:
and after Margaret Queen of England, had a Grant by Patent likewise in the
tenth year of Edward the second; and after her, Queen Philippa Wife to Edward
the third, had probably this Manor in Dower, for in the nineteenth year of
that King's Reign, as appears Pat. Anno 19. part. prima memb. 26. she grants it
for some term of years, to William de Clinton Earl of Huntingdon, with all the
Liberties annexed to it, reserving only some royal Franchises, which were so
inherent to the Crown, they could not be separated, for an Annual Rent of 200.
lb per Annum; after his Time was expired, it reverts to the Crown, and there it
remained, for ought I can yet discover, till the English Scepter was put into
the Hands of K. James, and then he grants the Manors of Middleton and Marden
for ever to Philip Earl of Pembroke not long since deceased.

There is within the Limitts of this Parish, a Manor called Northwood
Chasteners, which Name complies with the situation, for it stands North from
the Town in a Wood, where Chest-Nut Trees formerly grew abundantly. Stephen the
Son of Jordan de Shepey, desirous to plant himself out of the Island, in some
place not far distant; built here a Mansion House, moated about, Ez veteri Rot.
penes, Edo. Dering, Mill. and Baronettum defunctum.
and a goodly well-wooded Park, stored with plenty of Dear and wild Bores, and
had License from the Archbishop of Canterbury, and religious Men of
Christ-church, to erect a Free-Chappell, which some old People hereabouts, who
remembered it in the declining Age, described to my Father when he visited Kent,
to be a curious piece of Architecture for Form and Beauty. * Rog. de Northwood,
is listed in the Inventory of those worthy Kentish persons, who were engaged
with K. Ric. the first, at his Seige of Acon in Palestine. His Successor was
Sir Rog. de Northwood, who was ever fast and faithful to H. the third, and
having always given himself to a military and martial Profession, conceived it
was ignominious to hold his Lands here, by a lazy and unactive Socage Tenure,
and therefore in the forty first year of Henry the third, changed them from
Gavelkind to Knights Service. He dyed in the thirteenth year of Edw. the first,
and his eldest Son Sir John Northwood succeeded both at Northwood and at Shorn
and in the time of Ed. the first, together with his eldest son Sir Jo. de
Northwood was with that K. in his Wars in Scotland, at the Seige of
Carlaverock. The Manor of Shorn holding by this Tenure viz, to carry a white
Banner forty Days together at their own Charge, when the King should make War
in Scotland. Sir Jo. de Northwood, was called by Writ to sit in Parliament as
Baron, the first of Edw. the second, and his Son John de Northwood was often
summoned to sit as Baron in Parliament, in the reign of Ed. the third.
Certainly a numerous Race of worthy Successors were Possessors of this Manor
of Northwood some of which lie buried crosseleg'd in Milton Church, that had
taken upon them to defend the Sepulcher of Christ, or otherwise professed
themselves for the Wars in the Holy Land. And at last it devolved to John
Northwood, who (as all things are wound upon a fixed and determined Period)
concluded in two Daughters and Coheirs, one married to Barley, of the County of
Hertford, and Joan the other was matched to Sir John Norton whose Ancestors
were derived from one Nicholas de Norton, who flourished in King Stephens Days,
and had much Land about Norton and Feversham, as appears by the Book of St.
Austins. This Sir John Norton's Son, for diverse remarkable Services performed
in Flanders, was knighted by Mary Queen of Hungary, then Lady Regent of the
Low Countries, for Charles the fifth, by the Name of Sir John Norton: and his
Grandchild Sir Thomas Norton, some thirty five years since, alienated it to
Manasser Northwood Esquire, collaterally branched out from the abovesaid John
Northwood, and his Son Mr. Robert Northwood, passed away the Premises by Sale
to Sir John Tufton, third Brother to Nicholas Tufton Earl of Thanet, whose
second Son Sir Charles Tufton, upon the late Decease of his eldest Brother Sir
Benedict is now entered upon it.

Helmes or Holmes is a Manor, which is partly situated in Iwade, and partly in
Milton, and had still the same Proptietaries, as namely Savage and then
Clifford, whither for Satisfaction, I refer the Reader: only this I must add,
that about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, it was rent off by Sale and
planted in the Revenue of Thompson, Ancestor to Mr...... Thompson of Royton
Chapel in Lenham, who is at this instant in the enjoyment of it.

Kempsley in this Parish, puts in its Title, to be of Roman extraction, and
there is something in the Name, and in the Situation, which does seem to
support this original, nor has Time with its destructive Impressions so
defaced it, but that there are some Relics yet remaining of a Camp, and other
antiquated Fortifications.

Middleton in the fifteenth of Edward the first, had a Market granted by that
Prince, to be held there on the Saturday, which continues until this day.

Midley, in the Hundred of Langport, was parcel of the Inheritance of
Echingham, of whom more is spoken at Jacks-court in Lidde; from whom by
Margaret Daughter and Heir of Thomas Echingham, it devolved to Walter Blount
Esquire; from him it descended to his Son Edward Blount Lord Montjoy, who
deceasing without Issue, Elizabeth his Sister and Heir entered upon the
Possession; and she by matching with Andrew Windsor, after created Lord Windsor
by Henry the eighth, swelled the Revenue of that Family, by the Addition of
Midley; who not long after, passed it away to Clache, by whose Daughter and
Heir it came over to Stringer; and he transferred his Right in it by Sale to
Scot; and Scot conveyed the whole Demise to Godfrey, whose Son Sir The.
Godsrey, does now possess the Signory of the Premises.

Milsted in the Hundred of Milton, though an obscure Village in it Self, yet
has been anciently eminent for several noble Families which have had their
Residence within the Circuit of it. For first, Hogshaws gave not only Seat but
Surname likewise to a Family of that Denomination, in whom, when it had for
many years continued, Edmund Hogshaw in the eleventh year of Richard the
second, passed it away to Sir Thomas Lovell, and he dyed seized of it, in the
second year of Henry the fourth, and Thomas Lovell was his Heir; after Lovell,
Greaves by purchase became entitled to the Possession of it; whose Successor
Robert Greaves, in the ninth year of Henry the eighth, passed it away to Roger
Wake, and this Roger Wake, in the fifteenth year of the said Prince's
Government, alienated by Sale his Concernment in it to Richard Bernard; who
some few years after, divested himself of his Right in it, and sold it to Adam
Henman of Lenham, where after the Title some few years had fixed, he in the
twelfth year of Queen Elizabeth, conveyed it over to Amias Thompson, and he
gave it in Dower with his Daughter Alice Thompson, to Sir John Took, from whom
in the memory of these Times, it devolved by Descent, to his Son Captain
Nicholas Took, who passed it away by Sale to Mr. Richard Tilden.

Then we have here secondly another place, which in some old Evidences, is
represented under the Name of Nottingham Court, though now it bears the Name of
Higham. It was the Residence of a noble Family called Nottingham, who were
Owners of a large Patrimony in this Track, and their Arms stand yet in old
colored Glass in Milsted Church, viz. Paly wavee of four pieces, Gules and
Artent. The last of which, was John Nottingham, who expired in a Daughter and
Heir, called Eleanor Nottingham, who by matching with Simon Cheney, second Son
of Sir Richard Cheney of Shurland, brought this and a large Demeasne with it,
to acknowledge the Signiory of that Family, in which Name without any
Vicissitude to transplant the Title it is fixed at this day.

Milton Septuans in the Hundred of Westgate, was anciently a Parish, See more
of this Family at Thurnham.
and had a Church, appertaining to it, though now by disuse it be languished
into decay, and shrunk into so narrow an Estimate, that it has left only an
Oratory or little Chapel, which is yet visible to instruct us, what was its
former Glory, which certainly was of no inconsiderable Account, when it was the
Seat of the elder House of Septuans, who made this their Residence. For
William Septuans, Son of William Septuans, had here is Habitation, when he was
Sheriff of Kent, which was in the fourth year of Richard the second: but long
after this Man, did it not continue in the Name of Septuans: for this Family,
as to that Branch of it, which was planted at this place, shrunk into a
Daughter and Heir, who was matched to Sir Francis Fogge, and so this place fell
under his Revenue. And from him descended Sir Will. Fogge; whose Successor Sir
John Fogge of Repton Knight, passed this away to Sir George Brown of Bechworth
Castle; in whom it remained, till this Man's Grandchild Sir Thomas Brown of
Bechworth aforesaid, partly sold it, and partly gave it in Dower, with his
Daughter Elizabeth Brown, to Sir Robert Honywood of Charing, whose eldest Son
by this Match, Sir Thomas Honywood of Marks Hall in Essex, is now planted in
the Fee-simple of it.

Moldash in the Hundred of Felborough, is a Branch of the Manor of Chilham:
but yet there is the Manor of Flemings alias Bowers, for so it is styled in
Records and Court-rolls, which deserves our Notice. It was in the year 1019, as
an ancient Court-roll, now in the Hands of Mr. Chapman does inform me, in the
Hands of John de Fleming, and probably, here it remained diverse years, though
I can discover nothing, which may evince the certainty of it; for there is an
Intermission or Gap in the Evidences. In the twenty fourth year of Henry the
sixth, as appears by another ancient Court-roll, it was the Possession of John
Treswenall, and in this Name it continued till the Reign of Henry the eighth;
and then it was alienated to Sir Thomas Moile; in whose Posterity the Title and
Demeasne was settled, till our Fathers memory, and then the Fee-simple was sold
away to Mr. Henry Chapman.

Then secondly, there is the Manor of Witherling, who had Owners, who bore
that Surname, and who had certainly the Possession of it, several Generations,
which is manifest from that compliance the Name had with the Mansion, though
the Evidence which I have drained from the Deeds and Muniments of this place,
reaches no higher then the Government of Henry the sixth: for in the thirty
eighth year of that Prince's Rule, Joan Witherling the visible and only
apparent Heir of this Family, transmitted her Interest in it by Sale to William
Keneworth, whose Son William Keneworth by the like Fatalitie passed it away in
the Reign of Henry the seventh, to John Moile of Buckwell, Esquire, extracted
from the Moiles of Bodmin in Cornwall, and this John Moile in the fourth year
of Henry the eighth, sold it to Hamo Vidian, a Name very ancient in Moldash,
for here is a Farm which at this Day carries the Name of Vidian-Forestall and
his Grandchild William Vidian at this instant enjoys the Fee-simple of it.

Mongeham, called for distinction, Great-Mongeham, to difference it from an
Hamlet of that Name, styled Little-Mongeham, lies in the Hundred of Eastry, and
was given to the Church by Eadbert King of Kent, for a supply both of Diet and
Apparel of the Monks of St. Austins, (as the Book of Christ-Church does
insinuate) and, upon the Dissolution of the Covent, and annexing the Demeasn to
the Revenue of the Crown, it was by Henry the eighth, in the thirty third year
of his Reign, granted to the Dean and Chapter of Christ-Church, who conveyed it
in Lease to John Fropchunt, from whom by Purchase it was brought over to Gibs,
and is now the Patrimony and Hereditarie Right of Crayford, a Name of deep and
Extraction in this Territory, by Purchase from the above recited Family.

There is a place in this Parish called Fogs-Court, which is Registered in the
Inventorie of the Manors of this County; and although the Mansion House which
belongs to it, be fallen into so low a degree of Contempt, that it appears now
to be little more than a Caberet or Cottage, yet it calls for some Remembrance,
even in this respect, that it was the Patrimony of that noble and Illustrious
Family, and is the only Place of this County which I have yet met with, that is
adopted into their Surname, from Tho. Fogge Esquire; Sergeant Porter of Callis, who
was the last of this Name which possessed it: by Alice Fogge his Daughter and
Coheir, it came to be the Inheritance of her Husband William Scot, and in this
Family did the Patrimonial Interest of it reside, till almost in our Memory,
the Signory and Propriety of it was from this Family by Sale translated into
Mr. Philip Pownall of Sibertswould.

Great-Barville partly lying in Mongeham, and partly in Tilmanston, is the
third place considerable in Mongeham. It has been for many Descents, which
have made up some Centuries of years, the Possession of Crayford, which are
written in Deeds of a very high Ascent, de Barville Magna: In an old Roll which
sums up those Kentish Gentlemen, who were with Richard Nevill Earl of Warwick,
at the Battle of North-Hampton, (where after a warm and Bloody Debate, the
Title of the House of York by a glorious Victory was evidently asserted.) There
is mention of William Crayford Esquire, who afterward (as some private
Evidences inform me, now in the hands of Mr. Gethins near Burntwood) was made
Bannerett by King Edward the fourth, for his various undertakings and Services
performed in several Encounters, which had an Influence upon the Cause and
Quarrel of the House of York, and bore (as is manifest by his Seal affixed to
several Deeds) Upon a Cheveron, three Eagles heads cresed, which I mention, to
rectify that ^istake which through inadvertency, has crept into our
Visitations of Kent, where ^he paternall Coat of this Family is represented to
have been Upon a Cheveron, t^^^^ Falcons heads erased; and from this eminent
Person is Mr. Will. Crayford Lord of the Manor in expectance, by a Thread of
direct Descent, originally extracted.

Mongeham had an an^^ent Market by prescription on the Thursday, and Bertram de
Crioll had a Grant of i^ by the Charter of Henry the third, which was allowed
by the Judges Itinerant ^n the seventh year of Edward the first, and a Fair
yearly, by the space of three Days, viz. the Eve, St. Luke's day, and the day
after.

Little-Barville is partly Situated in this Parish, and partly in Tilmanston. A
Family called Pix, and sometimes Picks, were for some Centuries of years,
invested in the Possession, and contracted this Name, from some Office (as the
Successive Tradition of this Family affirms) that they were anciently entrusted
with, about the Altar, and the Utensils which related to it, amongst which, the
Pix was the most considerable, as being the Conservatory of the Host; and so e
Pixide nomen elicitum, from their Care and Custody of the Pix, they originally
assumed their Surname: But to proceed; after this Manor had for so many
Descents, acknowledged this Name and Family, about the latter end of Queen
Elizabeth, by Sale it came to confess the Signory of Crayford of
Great-Barville, with whose Revenue the Title and Propriety does at this instant
continue.

Little-Mongeham next offers it self up to our consideration: but of that, I
shall speak more at Northbourne.

Morston in the Hundred of Milton, gave Seat and Surname to a Family that fell
under that Appellation, as is evident by the Book of Aid, where John de Morston
is affirmed to have held it, and to have paid an Auxiliary Contribution for it
at the making the Black Prince Knight. He was descended from Bartholomew de
Morston, who is in the list of those Kentish Gentlemen who assisted King
Richard the first, at the Siege of Acon; But before the latter end of Richard
the second, this Family was worn out, and then it fell under the Signory of
Walter Fitz Walter of Essex, who had beenin elder Times summoned frequently by
Writ to sit as Baron in Parliament, and from the abovesaid Walter, did this
Manor by paternal devolution come down to his Son Humphrey Fitzwalter, and he
held it at his Death, which was in the first year of Henry the sixth and had
Issue John Fitzwalter, who about the latter end of the abovesaid Prince,
alienated it by Sale to Cromer, in which Family the possession was constant and
resident, until the latter end of King James, and then Sir James Cromer dying
without Issuemale, Christian one of his Daughters and Coheirs, by matching with
Sir John Hales upon the distinction of the Estate into parcells, was united to
the Patrimony of that Family, from whom the Right by Descent is now transmitted
to the instant Proprietarie Sir Edward Hales, his Son and Heir, Baronet.

Esthall is another Manor in Morston, which although it be now by the
Vicissitude of Time, and the injurious Impressions of Age, shrunk from its
elder Beauty, into decay and Neglect; yet in Ages of a higher date, it was
adorned with a nobler Character of Splendour, when it confessed it self to be
parcel of the Inheritance of an ancient Family called De la pine, (so they are
written in their old dateless Deeds) and bore for their Arms Sable, three Pine
Apples Or. James De la pine was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty sixth, and part
of the twenty seventh years of Edward the third, and held his Shrievalty here
at Esthall, and died possessed of it in the thirty seventh year of the abovesaid
Prince, and left it to his Son and Heir Thomas De la pine, who about the
beginning of Richard the second, conveyed his Title and Concernment in it to
Thomas St. Ledger Esquire, Sheriff of Kent in the twentieth year of Richard the
second, who dying without Issue-male, Joan, one of his Daughters and Coheirs,
by matching with John Ewias, linked it to the Demeasn of that Name, and from
him did it transmit it self by Descent, to his Son and Heir Humphrey Ewias, who
was seized of it at his Decease, which was in the thirty third year of Henry
the sixth, and from him by a Thread of paternal Succession, was it transported
to his Grandchild William E^ias in whom the Male-line determined, so that by
Alice his Daughter and Heir, it came to confess the Signory of Thomas Hales,
who in the sixth year of Edward the sixth by a Fine and recovery wherein his
Wife was concerned, passed away the whole De^^se to Sir Anthony Aucher, whose
Son, Sir Anthony Aucher, in the ninth year of Quee^ Elizabeth, by the same
conveyance alienated it to Gardener, where the Title was so ^^^atile and
mutable that it stayed with this Family, but until the tenth year of the
ab^^^said Princess, and then it was transplanted by Sale into John Norden, who
in our ^^^^dfathers memory demised it to Pordage, Predecessor to Mr........
Pordage of R^^^ersham, who is now entitled to the Fee-simple of it.

Mere-Court is a third place of Account in this Parish, calle^ (...) from its
Situation near the Sea, which our Saxon Ancestors called Mere, and is
c^^^^marily used in that sense, for any wast heap of Waters, as Lakes, and
Pools, that are (...) all sides locked in by the Land, by the Dutch to this day.
But I cannot find that it ev^^ had any Possessors that extracted their Surname
from hence; for in the Reign of Edward the third, I find Arnold de Savage held
it, and so did his Grandchild Eleanor Savage, who was matched to William
Clifford, and he by this Alliance, became invested in the Possession, and in
this Family did the Title lie couched, until the beginning of Henry the
seventh, and then I can track no farther Evidence of their Possession of this
place: In the Reign of Edward the sixth, I find it to be invested in the Name
of Croft; and remained tied to the Patrimony of that Family, until David
Crofts died in the twenty second year of Queen Elizabeth, and left it to Jo.
Croft, Helen and Margaret, his Daughters; and they, upon the death of their
Brother, who was an Idiot, becoming Joynt-heirs to this place, in the forty
second year of Q. Elizabeth, passed it away to Mr. Stephen Hulks, who
bequeathed it to his Son and Heir Mr. Jo. Hulks, and he upon his Decease, which
was not many years since, gave it to his second Son Mr. Charles Hulks, who now
is in Fruition of it.

N. N. N. N.
NAtindon in the Hundreds of Bridge, Petham, and Whitstaple, is an obscure
Village, not far remote from Canterbury, and only calls for some Remembrance in
this respect, that the Manor of Staplegate is situated within the Limits of
it, which was the Seat of an eminent Family which bore that Surname, who were
Lords not only of this Place, but of much other Land in Romney Mersh; and had
certainly this Denomination ingrafted originally upon them, because they
collected the Kings profits and Customs arising out of the Staple of Wool,
fixed at Staplegate in Canterbury. The first of this Family whom I find eminent
is Edmund Staplegate, who paid respective Aid for his Manor of Bilsington and
his other Lands in Kent, in the twentieth year of Edward the third, at making
the Black Prince Knight; and he was Father to Edmund Staplegate, who at the
Coronation of Richard the second, held that signal Contest before John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, then High Steward at that solemn Inthronization, with
Richard Earl of Arundell about the Office of Chief Butler, as I have before
mentioned in Bilsington. But to return to that Discourse from whence this
emergent Controversy did divert me, Edmund Staplegate in the thirteenth year
of Richard the second, enjoyed this Manor at his Death: but after his Deeease,
the Title was not long lived in this Name, for in the Reign of Henry the fifth,
and Henry the sixth, (as appears by the Testimony of ancient Court Rolls) it
was in the Possession of Leichfield, who was Master of much Land about
Tilmanston and Betshanger, and in the twenty second year of Ed. the fourth, it
was by Roger Lichfield passed away by Sale to William Haut Esquire, Father to
Sir William Haut, in whom the male-line determined, so that by Elizabeth his
Daughter and Coheir, it came to be the Inheritance of Sir Thomas Colepeper of
Bedgebury, who about the first year of Edward the sixth, alienated it to Philip
Chowte Esquire, and from him the like Fate bore off the Title to Sir Anthony
Aucher, and he about the latter end of Edward the sixth, disposed of his Right
in it to Sir James Hales of the Dungeon, Ancestor to Sir James Hales of the
same place, who not many years since, demised the Premises to Mr. Smith of
High-Gate; upon whose late Decease, the Title like a Pythagorean-Soul is
transmigrated into his Heir.

Nettlested in the Hundred of Twyford, was the ancient Seat of the noble and
ancient Family of Pimpe. William de Pimpe, paid respective Aid, for this Manor
and other Lands, which lay not far distant from this place, which he held by a
whole Knights Fee, at the making the Black Prince Knight, the twentieth of
Edward the third; Reginald Pimpe was his Son and Heir, and served out the
Office of high Sheriff of Kent for him, in the forty ninth year of Edward the
third, in which year he dyed. It is probable that this William was knighted,
because there is a Tomb, in Nettlested Church, with this Inscription affixed
to his Tombe-stone: Hic jacet Domina Margareta de Cobham, quondam Vxor
Willielmi Pimpe, Militis; quae obiit 4 Septembris 1337. From whence it may be
probably collected, that the above recited William Pimpe, though he is not
mentioned as a Knight in the Register of the Sheriffs, yet afterward for some
exemplary Services by him performed and managed, might be invested with the
Order of Knighthood. From this Man in the continued Succession of a direct
Line, See more of Pimp in my Discourse of Sea-watches.
did Reginald Pimpe descend, who determined in Ann Pimpe who was his Sole Heir,
and so this ancient Family which had under a venerable Character of Antiquity,
for so many Ages flourished at this place, as the Monuments in the Church, not
yet dismantled, do sufficiently evince, was about the latterend of Henry the
seventh extinguished; and Nettlested fell under the Patrimony of John Scott of
Scotts Hall from whom Edw. Scot Esquire, is lineally extracted; and in Relation
to this Alliance, is the instant Proprietary of Nettlested.

Lomewood is a second place of Account in Nettlested it belonged formerly to a
Cloister of black Cannons in Oxford, dedicated to St. Friswith, which being
suppressed by Cardinal Wolsey, in the year 1525, when he intended to erect the
magnificent Fabric of the College of Christ-church, this Manor was resigned
up to the Crown; and was by King Henry the eighth, in the twenty seventh year
of his reign, granted to Sir Edward Nevill, who gave it in Martiage with his
Daughter Katharine Nevill, espoused to John Roydon Esquire, of Roydon-Hall, in
great Peckham; and he determining in Elizabeth Roydon his Sole Heir, she by
matching with Roger Twisden Esquire, planted it in his Revenue; and from him
has the Interest of Descent transported it along to his Grandchild Sir Roger
Twisden of Roydon Hall Knight and Baronet.

Newenden in the Hundred of Selbrittenden, was erected in the place where the
old Roman City of Anderida was situated, and was called by the Britons Caer
Andred, very aptly by Leland, styled in Latin, Noviodunum, from the Saxon,
Nywandun, in English by Corruption called Newenden, which in the original
imports as much as The new Hill in the Valley.

This was that Station and City of the Romans mentioned in the Banner of the
Count, or Lord Warden of the Saxon Shore, by Pancerollus in his Book called
Notitia Provinciarum, under the Name of Anderida, and sometimes written
Anderidos; and here was the Castle which the Saxons called Andreds Ceaster; and
the great Wood, which stretched out in length, from hence into Hampshire, 80.
miles was named Andreds-wald, and by the Britons Coid Andred, other reasons are
laid down for the Identity of the place, extracted from the Name which the
English Saxons gave it, who termed it Brittenden, that is, The Britons Vale,
from whence the whole Hundred adjoining is called Sellbrittenden, that is, The
Britons Woody Vale.

Here for Defense of the Coast, against the Eruptions of Saxon Rovers, the
Romans placed the Prapositus Numeri Abulcorum, and hither the River of Lymen,
long fince called Rother, was sufficiently Navigable. But soon after the Romans
deserted Britain, it shrunk into Decay, being ruined by the English Saxons;
and yet a mark of the Loss, is covertly couched, under the Name of the
principal Manor, called Losenham, of which something is to be remembered, when
we have done with the History of this place, which I have thus abbreviated.
Hengist, being fully determined to expel all the Britons out of Kent, and
thinking it would much conduce to the improvement of his Design, to recruite
his Army with Troops of his own Nation, called Ella the Founder of the
South-Saxon Kingdom, and his three Sons with a strong Power out of Germany,
and then gave a sharp Assault against this Anderida, but was intercepted at
that instant in his Design, by those vigorous Impressions, which the Britons
out of their Ambushments in the Woods then made upon him. In Fine, after many
Prejudices and Losses both given and taken: Hengist divided his Army, and not
only discomfited the Britons in the adjacent wood but also at the same Time,
forced the City by Assault, and became so enflamed with revenge, that nothing
but the Extinction of the Inhabitants, by a public slaughter, and the total
demolishing of the Town, could supersede or allay so great an Animosity. The
place lying thus desolate, was showed (as Henry of Huntingdon reports) many
Ages after, to inquisitive Passengers, till in the year 791, King Offa gave
this and other Lands to the Archbishop and Monks of Canterbury, ad Pascua
Porcorum, for the Pannage of their Hoggs.

In the Time of the Conqueror, the Archbishops and Monks of Canterbury, held
this Manor of Newenden; and it was rated in the extent of it, but at one
Sulling, and was an Appendage to Saltwood, and in the Patrimony of the Church
did the Title of it remain locked up, till the general Dissolution in the Reign
of Henry the eighth, and then it was unloosned, and by Act of Parliament
fastened to the Revenue of the Crown, where, till these unfortunate Times, it
did successively continue.

Losenham in this Parish, was the ancient Seat of the Auchers, an eminent and
numerous Family; this was both in Kent, Sussex, Nottingham, and Essex; where
they made Coppt-Hall by Epping, the Seat and Head of their Barony, and it is
very probable, they derive this their Name, from Aucherus that was Consul or
Elderman of Kent, and led the power of the County, wherewith, at Richborough,
nere Sandwich, he foiled and defeated the Danes, as Alfred of Beverley writes.
In the Book called Nova Feoffamenta, collected in the Reign of Henry the
second, it is there recorded that that Prince, Rot. pipae de Scutagio Walliae
An. 42 Hen. 3.
gave William Fitz Aucher, the fourth part of a Knights Fee in Essex, called
Lagfare. Richard Fitz Aucher his Grandchild, is in the Number of those Kentish
Gentlemen, who were engaged with Henry the third, in his Expedition into Wales,
in the forty second year of his Reign. Will. Fitz Aucher, See Camdens Britannia
page 307.
another of this Family, held the Manor of Boseham in Sussex, by Grant from
William the Conqueror, and his Rent-service or Acknowledgement, was to pay
into the Exchequer (in whose Time he lived) forty pound of tried and weighted
Silver. Henry Fitz Aucher, fills up the Roll or Inventory of those Kentish
Gentlemen, who assisted Edward the first, at his Seige of Carlaverok in
Scotland, in the twenty eighth year of his Reign, and for his Service there,
was made Knight Banneret. Peter Aucher or Auger (for so in old Records they are
promiscuously written) was Valet to King Edward the second (an Office
equivalent in its Trust and Dignity, to those we called Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber to our late Kings) and it seems was mistaken for a Knight Templer,
in the fourth year of that Prince, because he nourished a spreading Beard (in
that Age an eminent Adjunct of that Order): but Edward the second rectified
this Mistake, and affirmed, that his diffused Beard, did not evince he was a
Knight Templer, as appears Pat. 14. Hen. 2. part secunda Memb. 20. And if it
could any way multiply, or improve the Eminence of a Family, that was so deeply
rooted in Antiquity before, I could tell you, that sundry of this Name and
Family, were Conservators of the Peace, and concerned in other Comissions, both
to levy Taxes, imposed by Parliament, and to have Inspection into Sewers, both
in the Reign of Edward the third, and Richard the second: but I avoid the
recital, lest this Book might swell into too large a Bulk by these curious and
unnecessary Disquisitions. It is enough to inform you, that after this Manor
had for many Centuries of years been wrapped up in the Patrimony of this Family,
it went away by Ann Sole Daughter and Heir of John Aucher of Losenham, to
Walter Colepeper, second Son of Sir John Colepeper, of Bayhall in Pepenbury;
from which Alliance, Sir John Colepeper created Lord Colepeper at Oxford, by
the late K. Charles, claims at this instant the Inheritance and Lordship of
Losenham.

There was in this Parish, a House of Carmelite Friars, called so, because they
came from Mount Carmel in Palestine, and was the first Seminary of that Order
here in England, who, by their Rule were styled, Brothers of Mary the blessed
Virgin, to whom this Covent was dedicated. It was founded in the year of our
Lord, 1241, and in the twenty sixth year of the Government of Henry the third,
by Sir Thomas Alcher or Fitz Aucher, for the Name was often promiscuously
written so, but never Albuser, as Mr. Camden, and Mr. Speed, have printed it,
though, I do not deny, but such a person might be a Benefactor to the
Foundation.

Newenham in the Hundred of Feversham, was parcel of that Demeasn, which
related to the Abbey of Boxley, and continued united to it, till the
Suppression by Henry the eighth; and then it was granted by that Prince to Sir
Thomas Wiatt, in the twenty eighth year of his Government, and he by his
unhappy Defection in the first year of Queen Mary, forfeited it to the Crown,
where it remained till Queen Elizabeth by royal Concession, invested the
Possession in her faithful Servant John Astley Esquire, Master or Conservator
of her Jewels, whose Son Sir Jo. Astley upon his Decease, bequeathed it to his
Nephew Sir Norton Knatchbull Knight and Baronet, who is the instant
Proprietarie of it.

Champions-Court is the second place of Account in this Parish: It was in elder
Times the Mansion and Demeasne of a generous Family, whose Surname was
Campania, and was certainly a Family of eminence in elder Times. Robert de
Campania, is inserted in the Register of those Kentish Gentlemen, who
accompanied Richard the first, to the Seige of Acon. John de Campania his
Grandchild, obtained the Grant of a Market to Newenham weekly on the Thursday,
and a Fair yearly to continue the Vigil, the Day of St. Peter and Paul, and the
Day after; and was one of those Knights of Kent, who was embarked in the Seige
of Carlaverock in Scotland, with Edward the first, in the twenty eighth year of
his Reign. In Times of a younger Aspect, the Name by Depravation, and vulgar
Use languished into Champion; and so continued, till it expired in Daughters
and Coheirs, one of which was Katharine Champion, who by matching with Robert
Corbett, descended from the Corbetts of Morton Corbett, in the County of Salop;
upon the Division of Champions Estate, united this to his Revenue, where it had
not long rested, but the same vicissitude brought this Name to determine in
female Coheirs likewise, two of which called Joan, and Elizabeth, were espoused
to Samuel Slap, and Ralph Heart. Samuel Slap had Issue Joan Slap, who dyed
childlesse; and so this Manor was cast into the Possession of Richard Heart Son
of Ralph Heart; the Successor of Richard Heart, in our Fathers Memory, alienated
his Interest in it, to Sir Henry Spiller, and he not many years since, conveyed
all his Right and Title to it by Sale, to Mr. Weckerlin, descended from the
Weckerlins, a Family of good Rank and Account in Upper Germany.

A third place of Note in Newenham, is Sholand, whih was in the Reign of H. the
third, as an old datelesse Deed discovers to us the Patrimony of Adam de
Stomynton: and after this Name went out, the Bournes of Sharsted in Dodington,
not far removed from this place, were about the twentieth year of Edward the
third, possessed of this Lordship; from them by purchase the Propriety was
carried over to Chevin, descended from the Chevins of Chevins-court in Marden,
and Thomas Chevin of this place, married Thomasin, Coheir of Champion, of
Champions Court in this Parish. From Chevin the Interest of Sholand did descend
by Sale to Maycott; and from them by the same Fate to Adye, a Family of Note
and very much Antiquity as to the Name, in this Track, whose Right it had not
long acknowledged, but by the same Devolution, the Title was invested in
Steer; from whom by Purchase it came over to Sayers descended from those of
Yorkshire, who, in that Age our Fathers lived in, sold his Concernment in it
to Mr. Hugison of Dover, in whose Heirs the Propriety of this place, is at this
instant resident.

Newington-Belhouse, lies in the Hundred of Folkston, and was in the Reign of
King John and Henry the third, the Possession of Hubert de Burgo Lord Chief
Justice of England, and from him it descended to his Son John de Burgo, who in
the fifty fifth year of Henry the third, passed it away by Sale to Thomas de
Belhouse, by the Name of Newington juxta Hieth. And probably this may be a
Reason, why this Family after they had adopted this Manor into their own Name,
assumed a Coat which had some Affinity with that of Hubert de Burgo,
videlicet. Or, upon a Bend Gules three Lozinges Argent and Gules, which I
suppose was done to preserve the Memory of him, of whom it was first purchased.
But to proceed, Sir Thomas de Belhouse great Grandchild of the abovementioned,
paid respective Aid for this Manor by the Name of Newington-Belhouse, in the
twentieth year of Edward the third, at making the Black Prince Knight, and died
possessed of it in the forty eighth year of that Princes Reign from whom a
descendant Right brought it down to his Heir John de Belhouse, who enjoyed it
so narrow a space of Time, that it is left upon Record that he died seized of
it in the forty ninth year of Edward the third, and Robert Knevit a younger Son
of Sir John Knevit Lord Chancellor of England, who had married the Heir
General of this Family, was found to be his Heir, and it was this Robert, or
else probably his Son, who in the seventh year of Henry the fourth, had a
Patent of Confirmation of Liberty of Freewarren to his Lands at Newington
formerly granted to Thomas de Belhouse. After the Line of the Knevits was
extinguished at this place, which was about the beginning of Henry the eighth,
this Manor devolved to the Cloptons: for Edmund Knevit of Stanwaymagna in
Essex, had three Sisters who were Coheirs to him and their Father Edward Knevit
Esquire; Thomasin the eldest was matched to Sir William Clopton of Kentwell in
Suffolk for his second Wife; and Katharine the second Sister was married to
John Clopton Esquire; eldest Son of the abovesaid Sir William; and Dorothy the
third, was matched to Thomas Carnaby: but these desiring to Contract all their
Patrimony within the Verge of Suffolk, alienared this Manor in the twenty
seventh year of King Henry the eighth, with much of their Land in the Mersh, to
Thomas Lord Cromwell, who being attainted in the thirty second year of Henry
the eighth, this Manor escheated to the Crown, and lay couched in its Revenue,
until the first year of Queen Mary, and then it was granted to Edward Lord
Clinton, who in the last year of the abovesaid Princess, conveyed it with all
its perquisites to Henry Herdson, whose Grandchild Francis Herdson almost in
that Age we entitle to our Fathers Remembrance, alienated it to Mr. Henry
Brockman, Grandfather to the instant Proprietarie James Brockman Esquire.

Seen and Bithborough were two ancient Seats which related to the Knightly
Family of Valoigns, of whom I shall speak more in my Discourse of Petham, but
before the latter end of Edward the third, this Family was extinguished, and
then one of the two Daughters and Coheirs upon the Distinction of the Estate
parcells, brought these two places to be the Inheritance of Sir Francis Fogge,
who lies buried Cross-legg'd in Cheriton-Church, with the Arms of Fogge and
Valoigns empal'd upon his Tomb; and from him did the Propriety and Title in an
uninterupted Channel stream down to George Fogge Esquire, who alienated Seen
in our Grandfathers Memory to Honywood, and Bithborough to Mr. Henry Brockman,
who added much to the ancient Building, so that it is now become the Seat of
that Family.

Bertrams in Newington is so called because it was parcel of the Estate of
Bertram de Crioll who died possessed of it in the twenty third year of Edward the
first, and left it to Joan his Heir, espoused to Sir Richard de Rokesley, by
whose Sole Inheritrix likewise called Joan, it was linked to the Demeasn of Sir
Thomas de Poynings, from whom the Clew of Descent guided it down to Sir Edward
Poynings, who dying in the twelfth of Henry the eighth without any lawful
Issue, or any visible kindred that could pretend a Title to the Estate, it
lapsed to the Crown; and Henry the eighth granted it to Thomas Lord Cromwell
upon whose attainder it being again escheated, Queen Mary in the first year of
her Rule granted it to Edward Lord Clinton, who in the last year of that
Princess, passed it away to Mr. Henry Herdson, whose grandchild Mr. Francis
Herdson conveyed it by Sale to Mr. Henry Brockman, in whose Grandchild Mr.
James Brockman the instant Inheritance is fixed.

Blackose is another little Manor in Newington which as Sadrach Petit's
Inquest an Authentic Manuscript informs me, was as high as the reign of Henry
the third, the Possession of Nicholas de Morehall, a Family who were owners of
much Land at Folkstone, and elsewhere in this Track: and in this Name did it
continue until the latter end of Richard the second, and then it was
transmitted by Sale to William Edwy, who paid a proportionate Aid for it at the
Marriage of Blanch Daughter of Henry the fourth, in the fourth year of his
reign, from whence much of our Land in Kent which was rated at the same Time,
and upon the same Design, has assumed the Appellation of Blanch-Lands. After
Edwy went out, which was in the reign of Edward the fourth, it became the
Possession of Wreake, and Thomas Wreake, (as the abovesaid Sidrach Petit who
lived in that Age instructs me) exchanged it with Will. Warham Archbishop of
Canterbury, and continued annexed to the Demeasn of that See, until the great
Exchange made by Tho. Cranmer in the twenty ninth of Henry the eighth, with
that Prince, and then it was made the Demeasn of the Crown; and after some
brief abode there, was granted away to John Honywood Esquire.

Newchurch in Romney Mersh, gives Denomination to the whole Hundred wherein it
is situated, and dilates and spreads it self into several places, which call
for some Remembrance. The first is Peckmanston, which was, as high as the Rays
or Light of any Evidence can direct to a Discovery, the Inheritance of the
Lords Leybourne, and was annexed to that vast Revenue, which they entitled
themselves to, in this County; and so continued, till Sir Roger de Leybourne,
left this with much other Land, to his Sole Daughter and Heir Juliana, married
to William Lord Clinton Earl of Huntington, who dyed in the twenty eighth year
of Edward the third, but without Issue by this Lady, who deceasing likewise not
long after, the Crown, upon a Serious and solemn Disquisition, discovering
none, that upon the Stock of any collateral Alliance, could pretend to her
Estate, seized upon it as an Escheat; and King Richard the second, in the
eleventh year of his Government, granted it to the Abbey of Childrens Langley,
amongst whose Revenue it rested, till the Dissolution of that Covent, and after
that King Henry the eighth by royal Donation, planted the Possession, in the
thirty fifth year of his Reign, in Sir Thomas Moile, a Gentleman in those
Times, of principal Estimate in this County, and of the Privy Council to that
Prince; from whom, by Amy his Daughter and Coheir, it came suddenly after, to
be the Inheritance of Sir Thomas Kempe, who in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
sold it to Thomas Smith Farmer of the Customs to that Princess, and he
bequeathed it to his third Son Sir Rich. Smith by whose Daughter and Coheir,
the Title and Right of it at this instant, is lodged in Mr. Barrow of Suffolk.

Est-Bridge in this Parish, is a second place which exacts our Remembrance.
This with Honychild in St. Maryes Parish, likewise in Romney Mersh, did
anciently belong partly to the Abbey of Bradsole ailas St. Radigunds in Dover,
and partly to the Knights of St. Jo. which upon the general Suppression in the
twenty ninnth year of H. the eighth of all religious Cloisters and Seminaries,
were swallowed up in the Demeasne of the Crown, and lay there, till E. the
sixth, granted them in Lease to Cuthbert Vaughan Esquire, who afterward in the
fourth year of Queen Elizabeth, purchased the Fee-simple of them, of the Crown,
and upon his Decease which happened not long after, disposed of Honychild, to
his Son in Law Roger Twisden Esquire, and Est-Bridge, Sir Will. Twisden, ^old
Honychild to Sir Will. Sydley Grandfather to Sir Charles Sydley the instant
Owner,
to his Wives Son Richard Dering Esquire, in Right of which original Donation,
Sir Edward Dering, of Surrenden Dering in Pluckley, Baronet, great Grandchild
of this Mr. Richard Dering is present Possessor of this Manor of Est-Bridge.

Thirdly Silwell in this Parish, is not to be omitted, it was in elder
Generations an Appendage or Limb, which made up the Body of that plentiful
Income, which appertained to the Abbey of Boxley, in this County, and upon the
Dissolution, was (with much other of the Church Demeasn* by Henry the eighth)
granted to Walter Henley Esquire, after created Sir Walter Henley, and one of
the Privy Council to Henry the eighth, and Edward the sixth. But as though
there had been some fatal malediction, which like original Sin did cleave to
the Possesssion, he left no Issue-male to enjoy that large Patrimony, he had
thus archieved, but concluded in three Daughters and Coheirs, Elizabeth matched
to William Waller of Grome-Bridge, Helen first married to Thomas Colepeper of
Bedgebury Esquire, Secondly, to Sir George Somerset; and Thirdly, to Thomas
Vane of Burston in Hunton Esquire; and then Anne wedded to Richard Covert of
Slaugham in Sussex Esquire; who shared by these matches and alliances, a
considerable part of his Inheritance, in which this Manor of Sylwell was
involved.

Newington in the Hundred of Milton has the Addition of Lucies prefixed before
it, to distinguish it from Newington, in the Hundred of Street. It was the
Ancient Patrimony of the Noble Family of Lucy; the first whom I find amongst
Records of deep Antiquity, was extracted out of Normandy: within the Precincts
of which Province, or upon the Verge and Margent of it, there is a Signory of
that Name yet existent. G. de Lucy (so he is written in the most authentic
Copies of the Battle Abbey Roll) entered England with William the Conqueror.
Fulbert de Lucy, and in some old Registers written Sir Fulbert, changed his
Name of Lucy, into that of Dover, when he was by William the Conqueror made one
of the Assistants to John de Fiennes, in the Guard of Dover-Castle, having
fifteen Knights Fees assigned to him in that Track, for the Support of his
Dignity and Trust. See Seldens Titles of Honor page 644.
William de Dover was one of the Magnates or Peers, who was Test to the
Charter of Maud the Empress, whereby she creates Miles of Gloucester, Earl of
Hereford. Hugh de Dover was Sheriff of Kent, the eighth, ninth, tenth,
eleventh, twelfth, thirteenth, and fourteenth years of Henry the second. Sir
Richard de Lucy was Lord chief Justice and Protector of England, in the Reign
of the above mentioned Prince, of whom I have more largely discoursed at Lesnes
in Erith. Ex veteri Rot. penes Edo. Dering Mil. and Baonettum, defunctum.
Aymer de Lucy, was with Richard the first in Palestine, at the Seige of Acon,
and in Memory of some Signal Service manifested there in that holy Quarrel,
added the Cross Crosselets unto his Paternal Coat, which was before only three
Pisces Lucii, that is Pike Fish. Geffrey de Lucy was frequently summoned to sit
in Parliament, as Baron, in the Reign of Edward the first, as the Rols of
Summons, which relate to that King's Time, now preserved in the Tower,
sufficiently inform us: This Geffrey with his two Brothers, Aymery and Thomas
de Lucy, were engaged with Edward the first, at the Seige of Carlaverock in
Scotland, in the twenty eighth year of his Reign, and there received the Order
of Knighthood. They were Sons to Geffrey de Lucy, who was constituted High
Admiral of England, in the Time of Henry the third, as appears Pat. 8. Hen. 3.
Memb. 4. William and Anthony Lucy, both of this Family, were frequently
summoned to sit in Parliament, as Barons in the Reign of Edw. the third. In the
sixth year of Edward the third, Geffrey de Lucy (who held Lucy's at his Death,
which was in the twentieth year of that Monarch) had a Charter of Free Warren
to this Manor, which privilege was renewed and confirmed by Henry the sixth to
Sir Walter Lucy, in the 27. year of his Reign, in which year he dyed, and left
his estate here to his Son Sir Jeffery Lucy, who with his Sole Daughter and
Heir Mawd Lucy, transmitted this Manor to her Husband Sir William Vaux of the
County of North-Hampton, whose Son Thomas Vaux alienated it about the twenty
seventh year of the Reign of Henry the eighth, to Sir Roger Cholmeley a younger
Branch of the Cholmeleys of Cholmeley in Cheshire: from which Family in our
Grandfathers Memory, it was by Sale passed away to Sead, and from Sead by as
quick a vicissitude it came over by purchase to Osborne, by whom not many years
since it was sold to Pagitt of London.

Tracies is a second place in this Parish, which comes within this List; it was
in elder Times the Inheritance of a Family of that Appellation. John de Tracy
was Test to an old Deed of Richard de Lucy, which I have seen, wherein he
demises some Land to William de Frogenhall, the Deed is without Date; but by
the Antiquity of the Character seems to commence from the Reign of Henry the
third: Whether these Tracies were extracted from the Tracies of Devon and
Gloucestershire, or not, I cannot positively determine, because these of Kent,
bore a different Coat from the other, as appears by all old Ordinaries, Vid.
Argent, two Bends between nine Escollops Gules: After the Tracies had left the
possession of this place, which was about the Beginning of Henry the fourth;
the Colepepers of Bedgebury were by purchase seized of the Fee-simple of it,
but staid not long in the Fruition of it; for in the Reign of Henry the sixth,
the Cliffords of Bobbing Court, not far distant; from whom by Sale in the Reign
of Henry the eighth, it fell under the Signory of Thomas Linacre Priest.

Frogenhall in this Parish likewise was a Branch of that wide Demeasne, which
lay diffused in this Territory, and did acknowledge it self to be of the
possession of the Ancient Family of Frogenhall, whose Seat was in Frogenhall in
Tenham: but whether this were the Land which I mentioned to be by Deed
transmitted to William de Frogenhall, in the time of Henry the third, by Sir
Richard de Lucy, I cannot positively determine, though it was probable it was,
and that afterward, as was usual in those Times, to perpetuate the Memory of
the Possessor, William de Frogenhall. fixed his own Name upon it. And in this
Family did the Possession continue, till Thomas Frogenhall concluded in three
Coheirs, of which Elizabeth was one, who matched with John Northwood of
Milton, and so linked it to the Inheritance of that Family, where it had not
long remained when a semblable Fatality brought this Family likewise to expire
in Daughters and Coheirs; so that this place came by Joane, one of them, to be
the Fee-simple of Sir John Norton, but was not long resident in this Family;
for he, about the Beginning of Henry the eighth, conveyed it to Thomas Linacre
Priest, above mentioned, who dying in the seventeenth year of the above-recited
Prince, gave both Tracies and Frogenhall for ever to augment the Revenue of
All Souls College in Oxford.

The Manor of Newington it self belonged (as an Ancient Manuscript, now in my
Custody, informs me) to a Nunnery which was erected here in this Parish, but by
whom it was founded or endowed is unknown: only this Manuscript I mentioned
before, rehearses a direful Tragedy, which it cites, as is pretended, out of
Thorn the Chronicler of St. Augustins, and other old Manuscripts: It was this.
Diverse of the Nuns being warped with a malicious Desire of Revenge, took the
advantage of the Night, and strangled the Lady Abbess, who was the Object of
their Fury, and passionate Animosities, in her Bed; and after, to conceal so
execrable an Assassination, threw her Body into a Pit, which afterward
contracted the traditional Appellation of Nun-pitt; but this barbarous offense
being not long after miraculously discovered (the Manuscript does not intimate
how;) King Henry the third, in whose Time this Tragedy was acted, seized this
Manor into his Hands, and having by Consent of the Church transmitted the
Nuns, who were culpable, to the secular power, by Death to make expiation for
this Crime; he sent the Guiltless Nuns into Shepey, and after filled their
Cloister with seven secular Canons: four of which not long after (as if some
secret Impiety had lurked in the Walls of the Covent) murdered one of the
Fraternity; upon which the King seises this Manor again into his Hands, which
he had before given back to the support of this new instituted Seminary: two
parts of which laying in the Hamlet of Thetham by the two guiltless Canons,
with the approbation of Henry the third, were assigned to the Abbey of St.
Augustins (though some Writings more Ancient affirm them to be given under the
Notion of two Prebendaries to that Covent) by William the Conqueror; and the
other five parts of this Manor, were by the abovesaid Henry the third, granted
to his Lord Chief Justice, Sir Richard de Lucy, whose Son Almericus de Lucy,
says the Manuscript, did in the year 1278. exchange them with the Monks of St.
Augustins. And thus was this Manor fastened to the Patrimony of the Church, and
so continued, till the General Dissolution in the Time of Henry the eighth
disunited it, and linked it afterward to the possession of the Crown, in whose
Demeasne till the Death of the late King Charles, it lay, ever since the first
suppression, involved.

At this Parish of Newington, not long since were dug up many Roman Urns,
not far distant from the high way or common passage, it being agreeable unto
Roman practice to interre in those places, where their Monuments might be
obvious almost to every Eye, Memorials of themselves, and Memento's of
Mortality unto living Passengers, whom the Epitaphs of great ones were fain to
beg to stay and look upon them. Some of these were of a larger, and some again
of a narrower Capacity, it being Customary amongst the Romans, for the Servants
and Clients to obtain Repositories for their Remains in Urns of a lesser; for
the Masters and Patrons to slumber in Urns of a more wide and spacious
Dimension: and many were so curious, that they contrived vast Family-Urns to
continue their living Relations, wherein the Ashes of their nearest Kindred and
Friends, at least some parcels of them might, as in some common Exchequer, be
treasured up, that so the Union in Life might be multiplied and enforced by an
amicable Correspondence, even in the place of Sepulture; thus the Ashes of
Domitian were mingled with those of Julia, and those of Achilles slept in the
same Urn with those of his Patroclus. That this Usage or Practice of the Romans
extracted its pedigree from Greece is manifest: For all Authors that have taken
a Prospect of the Grecian Rites of Funerals, consent that those of Megara shut
up the Bones of four or five Persons in the narrow Confines of one Repertory,
or Sepulchral-Urn. It is farther observable, that these Urns discovered at
Newington, were several of them embroidered with particular Inscriptions; one
had Severianus pater insculped upon it, another was endorsed with Priscian, and
a third with Fulvius Linus; this also was usual amongst the Romans, not only to
superscribe the Names of those whose Remains were lodged within, but likewise
sometimes to devote their Dust to those Deities they called Topical Gods, such
as were here, Deus Viterineus, Deus Moguntis, Deus Mounus, Dui Civitatis
Brigantum, Camulus Deus Sanctus, Gadunus, etc. Sometimes they endorsed D. M.
that is, Diis Manibns, and then we often meet with Patera's, or Sacrificing
Dishes, Lachrymatories, Vessels of Oil, and other Aromatical Libations, which
Age and a long Date of Time had condensed into the Consistence of Gellies;
sometimes again their Urns were placed or situated near some Bound or
Landmark, and then their Ashes enclosed, were consecrated to the peculiar
Protection of Deus Terminus, and were cloistered in a Repository or Vessel,
much in Figure or Resemblance like a Roman Urn, but only the Cover was more
wide and deep at Top, and this they styled Arca Finalis. Besides these at
Newington, there are many other Examples of such endorsments amongst the
Romans; I shall cull out some few, Marcus Plautius who slew himself for the
Love of his Wife Orestilla, who deceased at Tarentum in her passage to Asia,
that so he might accompany her in Death, as he had done in Life, had his Ashes
blended together with hers in one Urn, whilst this Superscription without
adorned their mingled Dust, The two Lovers. Not many years since there was
dug up near Coggeshall in Essex an Urn, which offered up to the Spectator's
View this Inscription, Coccilli M. that is, Coccilli Manibus. And not many
years before at the Bath was represented to public Inspection, an Urn, with
this Endorsment insculped, Vibia Jucunda An. XXX hic sepulta; I could discover
more of this Nature; But I return. In these Newington Urns, as my Intelligence
instructs me, there were traced out many pieces of Roman Coin, it being
Customary amongst that Nation, not only to enclose Coin or Money, both of
Consulary and Imperial Stamp, by which the Date of their Friends Decease, might
be hinted to an Intelligent Observation; but likewise Fragments of those Things
the Deceased in his Life Time did particularly affect, as namely, Spear Heads,
pieces of Darts and Swords, broken Armor, the Cassis or Helmet, Shields,
Goblets, Berill Rings, besides a great Number of Gems, with Heads of Gods and
Goddesses, and the pourtraiture of several Creatures, fashioned out of Agat and
Amber. Now if any will inquire of me, When this Custom of burning the Dead,
and after depositing their Dust in Sepulchral Urns, became to be in Use amongst
the Romans? I confess I am satisfied the Time is uncertain, though I dare
positively aver, it was originally transported from Greece, where it was used
though with more formality, long before it was adopted into the Usages of this
Nation. For first the Graecians burned only the Bodies of those of more eminent
Account, but denied it to those who were of baser Allay, or of obscurer Fame;
as likewise they did to deceased Infants; to those who were blasted or
destroyed with Lightning, because they superstitiously conceived them enemies
to the Powers above; to those who had impiously laid violent hands upon
themselves; and lastly, to those who had by a perfidious Apostasy, declared
themselves to be Desertors and Betrayers of their Country. Secondly, they
burned only the flesh of the Body, reserving the Bones to be laid up in Chests
or Repertories, which they called Thecae, which amongst the Romans had the
Title of Ossuaria, bestowed on them. Thirdly, they esteemed it so great an
Honor for any person to sleep in his own Native Country, that if he deceased
in any Foreign Region, which was in Amity with them, they there, after their
Customary Manner burned his Body, and with much Solemnity transported his
Relics to the place of his Nativity, and at every Cross Way had their
appointed Feasts, which were made at the Expense of the Relations and Friends
of the Defunct, which they called their Compitalia. Lastly, they strewed
Flowers on the Urns and Repositories of the Dead, and adorned them with
Ribands, as they did the Urn of Philopaemen; but they more particularly
affected the strewing of Myrtle, and Amaranthus, on the Ashes of their departed
Relations, as the Romans did that of the Rose; yet both of them did concur in
the Composition of the Funeral Pile, which was furnished and made up of
Rosemary, Laryx, Yew, Cypress, and Fur, wherein it is probable were couched
some tacit Hints of their surviving Hopes; and in which mysterious
Hieroglyphics, as being Trees which were perpetually verdant, were wrapped up
some secret Inferences of a future Resurrection. That this Custom of Burning
the Dead did afterward by an universal Imitation extend and spread it self to
other Nations. That the Druids and ruling Priests were accustomed to burn their
Dead is expressed by Pomponius: That they held that practice in Gaul, Caesar
expressly delivers: That burning the Dead was used in Sarmatia, is affirmed by
Gaguinus: That the Swedes and Gothlanders did frequently commit their Princes
and more eminent Persons to the Fire, is delivered by Saxo and Olaus: That this
was the old German practice, is also asserted by Tacitus. And that it was
customary amongst the Danes, Several Urns, discovered in Jutland and Sleswick
not many years since, do easily evince, which contained not only Bones, but
many other Substances in them, as Knives, pieces of Iron, Brass and Wood, and
one of Norway a Brass gilded Jews-harp. When this Custom of Burning of the
Dead languished into Disuse, is uncertain; but that it began to vanish, upon
the Dawning of Christianity, as Vapors and Mists scatter before a Morning Sun,
is without Controversy; but when the Light of it did more vigorously reflect,
like a Meridian Beam, on all the gloomy Corners and Recesses of Paganism and
Infidelity; then this Use of Urn-Burial, was wholly superseded, and found a
Tomb it self in the more sober and severer practice of Christianity. And thus
much shall be said concerning these Urns dug up at Newington.

The Manor of Levenoke in this Parish ought in the last place to be taken
Notice of; but the Deeds being dispersed into the Hands of those who are
Strangers both to this County and my Design, I cannot give the Reader that
satisfaction in this particular that I aim at. Only thus much I can inform
him, that by an old Court Roll in the Hands of Mr. Staninough of this Parish,
lately deceased, I discovered that in the Reign of Edward the third, and
Richard the second, it was the possession of John Beau Fitz; and it is probable
by the Heir General of this Name, it devolved to Arnold of Rochester: and more
to fortify this, some ancient Country people at my being there, did assure me,
they had it by Traditional Intelligence from their Predecessors, That that
Knight purchased it of one Arnold; but of that there is no certainty, only this
is positive, that about the latter end of Henry the eighth, that Knight enjoyed
it, and in this Name it remained until almost our Memory, and then it was
conveyed to Gouldsmith, and he alienated it to Barrow, whose Descendant having
morgaged it to Mr....... Alston of London, he very lately has transplanted all
his Right by Sale, into Mr......... Lisle of Middlesex, now deceased.

Nockholt in the Hundred of Ruxley, was a Branch which was incorporated into
the Revenue of the Lord Say. William de Say died possessed of it, in the twenty
third year of Edward the third, and from this man was it transmitted to his
Grandchild Geffrey Say, who concluded in a Sole Daughter and Heir, called
Elizabeth, who was married to William Fiennes Esquire, and so in her Right was
Nockholt united to the possession of this Noble Family; from this man was
Richard Fiennes descended, who enjoyed this Manor successively from him, and
married Joane the Sole Female heir of Thomas Lord Dacre of Hurstmonceaux in
Sussex, who was extracted from Edward Lord Dacre, who was summoned to
Parliament by the Title of Lord Dacre of Hurstmonceaux, in the Reign of Edward
the second, and in her Right was this man summoned to Parliament by the Name of
Richard Fiennes Lord Dacres, in the Government of Henry the sixth. And here did
both the Barony of Dacre, and the Inheritance of Nockholt continue, till
Gregory Fiennes Lord Dacres deceased, in the thirty sixth year of Queen
Elizabeth, and left by Testament Margaret his Sister matched to Sampson Lennard
Esquire, he having no Issue, Heir to his large possessions, amongst which this
Manor was involved; from Sampson Lennard, who was created Lord Dacres, in the
second year of King James; it is now come down by Successive Inheritance to be
the instant Patrimony of his Grandchild Francis Lord Dacres the present Baron
of Hurstmonceaux.

There are two other Manors in this Parish, but of small importance, called
Brampton, and Shelleys-court, or at Ockholt, both which had Owners, who
engrafted their own Surname upon them. There is a recital in the Book of Aid,
of one John de Brampton, who held Land at Nockholt and Ditton, in the Reign of
Edward the first: From this Family, Brampton came by a Female Heir to be the
Inheritance of Petley, who about the latter end of Henry the sixth, conveyed it
to Oliver, alias Quintin, and has been for almost two Hundred years, as
appears by the Evidences now in the Hands of Mr. Robert Oliver, of the Grange
in the Parish of Leybourn, in the Tenure and Possession of that Name and Family.

Shelleys Court, called in the Evidences likewise at Ockholt, was, as high as
the Reign of Edward the third, as the original Deeds now in the Hands of Mr.
Rob. Austin of Bexley inform me, the Inheritance of Shelley, and remained
united to the Possession of that Family, till the Government of Queen Mary; and
then by Sale the whole Demise, was passed away by Sir John Champneys, Lord
Mayor of London, by William Shelley, the last of this Name at this place; from
whom it devolved to his Son Sir Justinian Champneys, who left it to his Son Mr.
Richard Champneys Esquire; and he almost in the Remembrance of that Age we live
in, alienated his Concernment in it, to the present Possessor Mr. Gooday of
Suffolk.

Nonington in the Hundred of Wingham and Eastry, has diverse places in it of
considerable Repute. The first is Fredville, called in old Deeds Froidville,
from its bleak and eminent Situation. Times of an elder Inscription, represent
it to have been the Possession of Colkin, vulgarly called Cokin, who it is
probable erected the ancient Fabric, and brought it into the Shape and Order
of an Habitation: this Family was originally extracted from Canterbury, where
they had a Lane which bore their Name, being called Colkins Lane, and likewise
had the Inheritance or Propriety of Worth-gate in that City. William Colkin
founded an Hospital near Eastbridge, which celebrated his Name to Posterity,
and was called Colkin's Hospital, he flourished in the Time of K. John, and was
a liberal Benefactor to the Hospitals of St. Nicholas, St. Katharine, and St.
Thomas of Eastbridge in Canterbury, as is recorded by Mr. William Somner, in
his Survey of that City Page 116. But to proceed: John Colkin dyed possessed of
Fredvill the tenth of Edward the third, and in his Posterity was the Title
resident, until the latter end of Richard the second, and then it was conveyed
to Thomas Charleton; and he by a Fine, levied the second of Henry the second,
transplants his Interest into John Quadring, in whose Name it made its abode,
until Joan Quadring, the Heir General of Thomas Quadring, this man's
Successor, carried the Title along with her to her Husband Richard Dryland; and
he about the latter end of Edward the fourth, alienated it to John Nethersole;
who by Fine levied in the second year of Richard the third, conveyed it to
William Bois Esquire, descended from I. de Bosco or de Bois, so written in some
old Copies of the Battle Abbey Roll, and in others R. de Bosco or de Bois, who
entered into England with William the Conqueror, which William had Issue
Thomas Bois, who dying in the reign of Henry the seventh, left two Sons: to
Thomas his eldest he devised Fredville, with his Estate there; to William his
youngest, Bonington, and the Lands annexed to it: so that the eldest had the
Fairest, and the youngest the ancient Seat: from Fredville are streamed out
first the Boois's of Hode, the second Branch of the eldest House; Secondly
those of Betshanger; Thirdly Bois of Sandwich issued out from those of
Betshanger. From Bonington are extracted the Bois's of Willsborough, being the
second Branch of the second House; Secondly Bois of Offington, and thirdly Bois
of Hawkherst: From Thomas Bois abovementioned is the Title of Fredville in a
successive Line now devolved to his Successor John Bois Esquire.

Elmington is a second place of Note in this Parish. It was made eminent in
former Times, by being parcel of the Patrimony of Condye of Condies Hall in
VVitstaple, who likewise had some Interest in Fredville by purchase from
Colkin, which William Condy passed away to Thomas Charlton abovementioned.
Which William was Son and Heir to John de Condy, who dyed possessed of Elmington
the fifth of September, in the forty second year of Edward the third, and by
descendant Right was invested in the Propriety of this place, but enjoyed it
not long: for he dying without Issue, Robert Grubbe, who had married Margaret
Sister and Coheir of the abovesaid William, entered upon the Possession. But
he likewise concluding in two Daughters and Coheirs: Agnes one of them by
matching with John Isaac annexed this to his Inheritance, and his Successor
James Isaac, about the latter end of Henry the seventh, conveyed it to George
Guldford Esquire, who not long after transmitted the Interest, he had in this
place by Sale to Betenham; in whom, the Possession was but of a frail and
narrow Continuance, for from this Family, a Vicissitude like the former, about
the latter end of Henry the eighth, carried it away to Sir Christopher Hales,
and his Son Sir James Hales not long after, demised it to William Bois
Esquire, Ancestor to Jo. Bois of Fredville Esquire, who now holds the instant
Signiory of it.

St. Albans is a third place in Nonington, which exacts our Notice: It is
called so, because it was wrapped up in the Revenue of the Abbey of St. Albans,
and did partake of the like privileges as that Monastery enjoyed; a Scale of
which you may read of, recorded in the late printed Monasticum Anglicanum, too
tedious here to recapitulate: It was in elder Times called Esole, and was held
by one Edmund de Akcholt, in Knights Service, whose Arms in Nonington Church,
videlicet, Quarterly Argent and Azure, over all a Bend componee, Or, and Gules,
are yet visible and obvious: This Manor upon the general Dissolution, in the
Reign of Henry the eighth, being found involved in the Patrimony of the above
said Abbey, was in the thirty second year of that Prince, granted with all its
Appendages to Sir Christopher Hales, and his Son Sir James Hales, about the
Beginning of Edward the sixth, conveyed it to John Sticker, who in the fifth
year of that Prince alienated it to Sir Thomas Colepeper of Bedgbery, from whom
not long after the same mutation transplanted it into Sir Thomas Moile, and he
demised the propriety of it by Sale to Thomas Hamon Esquire, Auncestor to
Anthony Hamon Esquire, who now enjoys the present Signory of it.

At the Borough of Wolwich in this Parish is a place called Oxendens, which was
the Original Seminary and Fountain of those of that Name and Family in this
County.

Rattling is another place in Nonington of principal Note: It contributed in
Times of a more Venerable Date both Seat and Surname to a Family of that
Appellation. It would be too tedious and voluminous a Digression to recite all
those whom Ancient Records represent to be the possessors of this Place; I
shall only take notice of Sayer de Rattling, Son of Sir Robert de Rattling, who
was the last of the Name who enjoyed it, and had it in Possession at his
Decease, which was in the tenth year of Richard the second, and left Joane his
Daughter and Heir, who was matched to John Spicer, from whom the Spicers who
were Owners of the Manor of Sherford in Monks Horton in this County, were
collaterally extracted: but it appears they were of no long residence at this
Place; for this Man and his Name together went out in Coheirs; so that Rattling
fell under the Dominion of a new Proprietary, for by Cicely one of them it was
knit to the Demeasne of her Husband John Izaack of Blackmanbery in Bredge, and
by this Alliance the Title became tied to this Family, till Edward Izaack this
man's Grandchild, in the Reign of Henry the seventh, by Sale collated his Right
in it on Sir John Phineux, whose Successor in the next Age after, alienated it
to Nevinson; from whom not so many years are yet elapsed, but that almost our
Memory may attaque the time of the Sale. By the same Fatality, the Possession
and Title was rolled into the enjoyment of the present Owner Sir William Cowper.

Oldcourt is a third place which may exact our Account, it was anciently parcel
of the Demeasne of a good old Family, who derived their Surname from the Parish
of Goodneston, vulgarly called Gonston, by no far Distance removed from this
place, and continued in an uninterrupted Series, from John, William, and Robert
de Godneston, of whom there is frequent mention in private Evidences, and who
flourished in the Raigns of Henry the third, and Edward the first, as their
Dateless Deeds do intimate, until the Reign of Edward the fourth, possessed of
this place, and then it went by Edith Daughter and Heir of Edward Godneston, in
whom the Name was entombed to Vincent Engham, descended from the Enghams or
Edinghams of Woodchurch, from whom it went away by Sale to John Sydley Esquire,
Auditor to Henry the seventh, who added much to the Splendour and Magnificence
of the Sydleys of Southfleet, by those additional improvements, with which he
increased the Patrimony of that Family. When this Name went out, the next
Family which succeeded in the possession of this place by purchase, was Wild of
Canterbury, descended originally from the Wilds of the County of Worcester,
where they are entitled to an Extraction of deep Antiquity, whose Successor
Sir John Wild of Canterbury, in that Age we call our Fathers, passed away his
Right in Oldcourt to Mersh, who holds the instant Fee-simple of it.

Northbourne in the Hundred of Eastry, was given to Christ-church in
Canterbury, by Eadbald King of Kent, (as the Records of that Church do assert)
after his Return to the Christian Faith; for formerly by an open Desertion or
Apostasy, he had renounced those Principles of Religion, which originally had
been infused into him. And being thus cast into the Revenue of the Church, it
remained incorporated in its Patrimony, till the public Dissolution made by
Henry the eighth, dissevered it, and laid it up in the Lap of the Royal
Demeasne, where it continued couched till Queen Elizabeth first granted it in
Lease for Life, to her Foster-brother Saunders, so he was styled, because his
Mother had been her Nurse, upon whose Decease it reverts to the Crown* and King
James upon his first Ascending the English Throne, granted the Demeasne to Sir
Edwin Sandys, The Manor was sold the 1630. to Mr. Edw. Bois, Father to Jo.
Bois of Betshanger Esquire;
a Person who had performed some exemplary Service for him upon his first
admission to the Scepter of this Nation, which obliged him to this Concession,
from whom it is now by Descent transferred to his Grandchild, Son to Colonel
Sandys, who in the late intestine Contests between the King and his two Houses,
received a mortal wound in a vigorous encounter betwixt him and Prince Rupert
at Worcester, of which some time after he languished away, and deceased.

There was when Leland made his Survey of Kent, which was in the Reign of Henry
the eighth, the Relics of an old Stone-house, which the Tradition of that Age
did affirm to have been the Palace of the above mentioned Eadbald. And there
was, not many years before the same Author made this perambulation, as he in
the same Manuscript does assert, a Wall broken down, by which Hole or Inlet was
discovered a little Cell or Chamber into which it opened, where were found the
Fragmentary Remains of two Children, who had in that gloomy Repository been (as
was then conjectured) for many preceding Ages been mured up; and, which did
improve the wonder, in one of these obsolete Skeletons was descried a stiff Pin
of Latin.

Tikenhurst in this Parish, now by Corruption of the first Etymology called
Ticknes, in elder Times was the Revenue of a Family known by that Surname; some
of whom are Witnesses to Deeds of a very high Date, now in the Hands of Mr.
Richard Fogge of Dane-court in Tilmanston. After this Family which had left its
Name ingrafted upon this place was worn out, which was before the Reign of
Henry the sixth, Little Mongcham was given by King Edbert under the Notion of 6
Ploughed Lands to the Abbey of St. Austins.
the Stoddards, from whom the Stoddards of Modingham near Eltham, were
originally extracted, became Possessors of the Fee, and in the Patrimony of
this Family was the Title of this Place for several Generations involved, till
in our Grandfathers Memory, it was by Sale transplanted into the Propriety of
Peyton of Knowlton, so that it is in Right of that Purchase now incorporated
into the Income of Sir Thomas Peyton Baronet, who is the present Lord of the
Fee.

Northfleet was always a Branch of that Revenue which fell under the Spiritual
Signory of Christ-church. By the Pages of Doomes-day Book, we may take a brief
Prospect of what it was in the Time of the Conqueror. Northfleet (says that
Record) in T. E. R. se defendebat pro VI. Sullingis, and nunc pro V. and est
manerium appretiatum XX. and VII. lb. That is, Northfleet in the Time of Edward
the Confessor, did defend it self for six Sullings or Ploughed Lands; but now,
that is in the Time of William the Conqueror, only for five, and upon the
appraisment was rated at twenty seven pound; and thus did it continue riveted
by the Charters of several Princes, which had confirmed the Patrimony of
Christ-church in Canterbury into the Estate of the Church, till that Whitlwind
which arose in the Time of Henry the eighth, threw it into the common
Dissolution, and then by public Authority it was united to the Revenue of the
Crown, and there was fixed, till the year One thousand six hundred and eight,
and then the Title was torn off.

Ifeild, Well, Cosington, and Shinglewell, are four small Manors which are
circumscribed within the Limits of this Parish. They were in Ages of a more
venerable Aspect, the Patrimony of Hever of Hever: William de Hever had a
Charter of Free Warren granted to his Lands at Ifield, and Shinglewell, and
other Lands in Northfleet, in the ninth year of Edward the first, which was
renewed to Thomas de Hever, in the fourth year of Edward the third, but he left
no Heits male, to enjoy this privilege; for he and his Name expired in
Females, whereof Joan one of his Coheirs, was espoused to Reginald Cobham, who
was summoned to Parliament by Writ as Baron of Sterborough, in the twenty
second year of Edward the third, and the other was matched to John Brocas, but
his Estate at these abovementioned places, was upon the Partition annexed to
the Patrimony of the Lord Cobham; from which Family about the reign of Henry
the fourth, it came over to John Rykeld, who with his Son William Rykeld, lies
entombed in Northfleet Church: but it seems this last mentioned William,
deceased without Issue-male, for Rose his Sole Daughter and Heir, was married
to Edward Limsey, descended from Ralph de Limsey, who held the Manor of
Budbrook in Warwickshire, the twentieth of William the Conqueror, as is
testified by Doomsday Book^ and this Man had Issue John Limsey, to whom Ifield
Shinglewell, and the other two places in right of his Mother, did successively
devolve. But it seems the Title of Wells, Cosington, and Ifield, did not long
dwell in John Limsey; for in the first year of Richard the third, he alienated
them to John Young; from which Family in the middle of the reign of H. the
eighth, they came back again to acknowledge the Signiory of Limsey, in whom
again the Possession was as transitory as formerly; for before the latter end
of H. eighth, they were conveyed to Rainsford, from whom, about the Beginning
of Queen Elizabeth they were by Sale passed away to Alderman Garret of London,
and in this Family was the Inheritance lodged, until almost those Times which
fell under the Cognizance of our Remembrance, and then they were disposed of,
by Sale, to Child.

Derndale is another ancient Seat in Northfleet, which in old Evidences, some
of which are not bounded with any date, is styled Derendale, as having in elder
Times (as it appears by old Deeds) Possessors of that Name; and when they had
deserted the Possession, which was before the latter end of Edward the third,
it became the Inheritance of William Wangford, whose Son William Wangford, was
Sergeant at Law, and a great Benefactor to Rochester Bridge; and he being his
Heir to this place, in the fifteenth year of Henry the sixth, passed it away to
John and William Flucke; from whom suddenly after it came over by purchase to
John Rouse, descended from William Rouse of Birling, whose Son John Rouse,
demised Land in Northfleet, as appears by an old Deed, to John Rouse, in the
thirty third year of Edward the third, and this abovementioned John Rouse, in
the tenth year of Edward the fourth, demised his Right in this place to Thomas
Wombwell, and John Clifton Esquire, and this John Clifton, dying without Issue,
in the year 1471, bequeaths his Interest in it by Will to Thomas VVombwell, and
he because he was originally extracted, from a place in Yorkshire called
Wombwell, erected a House here, which he adopted into his own Name, and styled
it Wombwell Hall, which with Dernedale remained involved in the Possession of
this Family, until some few years the Title was by Sale transplanted into
Mr.......... Adye Esquire, Counselor at Law, Son and Heir, to Mr......... Adye
of Dodington.

Shinglewell is another place in Northfleet which may deservedly be taken
Notice of, because Hever is situated within the precincts of it, which was the
Seminary or Seedplot of the ancient Family of Hever, and though Hever Castle by
reason of its Grandeur and Magnificence, was their capital Mansion, yet this
was the original Fountain or Cradle, from whence the Family primitively issued
forth. W. de Hever was a person of note, and was engaged with R. the first at
the Seige of Acon. In the seventh year of the reign of King John, as appears by
the Pipe-rolls of that Time, Hugh de Hever, and Walter de Hever, were
Recognitores magnae Assisae, a place if we calculate it for the Meridian of
those Times, of a very great Latitude of Power, Trust, and Concernment; for
they were looked upon in all Causes either of Criminal or Civil Aspect, as the
representative Body of the County; and from them it is possible our present
Grand Juries, may seem to extract their first Institution. Richard de Hever is
found in the Kentish Register of those, who accompanied Edward the first, in
the nineteenth year of his reign to New Castle, where he summoned the
Pretenders to the Scottish Scepter, to give an Account of the Justice of their
Title to that Diadem. Thomas de Hever obtained a Market to Shinglewell, and two
Fairs, one at Michaelmas, which was to continue five Days, and the second at
the Feast of St. Lawrence, which was to continue three, as appears, Chart. 4.
Edw. 3. Number. 9. After this Family was worn out, the Cobhams by a Right derived
from Reginald de Cobham, who married Joane, one of the Coheirs of William de
Hever, were invested in the Fee, and from them it passed away by Sale, about
the beginning of Henry the sixth, to Rykeld, where the Possession was of no
long Date; for Rose Sole Heir of John Rykeld, by matching with John Limsey,
united this Manor of Hever to his Patrimony, and in this Name was the Title
resident, until the midst of the reign of Henry the eighth, and then it was
alienated to Rainsford, and from this Name the like Devolution, about the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth, carried it away to Garth, who almost in our
Fathers Memory conveyed it by Sale to Mr....... Child, from whom it is lately
come over by purchase to be the Inheritance of Mr....... Fortree, of Greenwich.

Norton in the Hundred of Feversham, was, as high as I can track, the
Inheritance of that Family, whose Surname was de Campania, and whose Principal
Seat was at Champions Court in Newenham. John de Campania had a Charter of
Free Warren, granted by Royal Indulgence to his Manor of Norton, in the thirty
first year of Edward the first, and when this Name had deserted the Possession,
the Title of this place came to own the Signory of John Boteler of Graveney
Esquire, who flourished in the reign of Henry the fourth; but, it is manifest,
was not very stable in this Name; for, by Boteler this man's Sole Heir, it was
incorporated into the Patrimony of John Martin, her Husband, afterward Judge
of the Common Pleas; and in this Family was it resident, till the reign of
Henry the seventh, and then it was conveyed away by Sale to Finch, issued out
from the Finches of Groveherst in Milton. But the same Fatality which brought
it over to Martin, carried it away from the Name of Finch: for this Family in
our Grandfathers Memory determining in a Daughter and Heir, she by matching
with Sonds of Sonds Place at Darking in Surrey, linked Norton to the Demeasne
of that Family; where, after the Possession had some Time been lodged, it went
away by Sale, about the latter end of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, to Mr.
Thomas Mills Esquire, who upon his Decease, which was in the entrance of the
reign of King Charles, by some Addition of Estate still to support the Name,
and improve the Luster of the Family, gave it to his Cozen Mills of Sussex, who
in Right of that Testamentary Donation is the instant Possessor of Norton.

Provenders is an Ancient Seat in this Parish; once the Mansion of a Family of
that Surname, which though it be long since worn out at this place, yet it is
still (under a Character of no despicable Account) in being, in Wiltshire;
where for several Ages last past they have successively settled. I have seen a
Deed without Date, which about the reign of Henry the third, fixes the
possession of this place in John de Provender, and this agrees with Sidrach
Petits Inquisition, who in his curious Survey of several Kentish Manors, taken
in the twenty eighth year of King Henry the eighth, represents this place about
the Time of Henry the third, to be in the Tenure of the abovesaid John de
Provender. After the Provenders, the Quadrins were Possessors, and then
successively the Goldwells of Goldwell, which was in the reign of Richard the
second, were Proprietaties of Provenders, and remained many years invested in
the Signory of it, till the common Devolution of Purchase translated the right
of it to Dryland, a Family of much Splendour, and no less Estate in this Track:
one of which Name, in the reign of Henry the eighth, passed away his Interest
in it by Sale to Robert Atwater Esquire, Justice of Peace of this County in
that Age, and he transmitted it by Sale to Sir James Hales, Son of Sir John
Hales, from which Family, in the Time of Queen Elizabeth, it went over by Sale
to Sayer, in which Family, after the Propriety some few years had rested, it
was almost within the Limits of our Remembrance, sold to Mr. Hugison of Dover,
in Right of which Purchase, after the Decease of her Mother, it is to devolve
to Mrs. Jane Hugison, descended from a second Son of this Family, and lately
matched to She is lately deceased without Issue surviving, so that her Estate
here is to return to Mr. Hugison of Lingsted.
Mr....... Roberts of Canterbury Esquire.

Nutsted in the Hundred of Acstane, was in elder Times couched in the Patrimony
of a Family called Gravesend, which was of no cheap or obscure Account in this
Track; for Sir Stephen de Gravesend is in the Register or Inventory of those
Knights which accompanied Edward the first, in his prosperous Expedition into
Scotland, when by a succesful Reduction, he in the twenty eighth year of his
faign subdued the strong Fortress of Carlaverock in Scotland. Richard de
Gravesend, Bishop of London, the more to improve the Grandeur of Nursted, which
then was entitled to his Name and Family, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to
this Manor, in the twenty seventh year of the abovesaid Prince. In the forty
ninth year of Edward the third, Thomas de Gravesend died, concerned in an
Estate here at Nutsted, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 63. part secunda. But not
all the Manor, for in the twentieth year of Edward the third, Sir John de
Beaumont paid respective Aid for Lands which he held at Nutsted, as appears by
the Record, in the twentieth year of Edward the third. But both these Families,
before the end of Henry the fourth, were dislodged from the possession of this
place, and then I find it cast into the Revenue of a Family called Middleton,
who were not long Lords of the Fee: for in the reign of Henry the sixth, I find
it in the Tenure of Thomas Frowick Esquire, and he by a Fine levied, in the
thirty eighth year of that Prince, conveyed it to Hugh Brent, in which Name it
was resident, until the beginning of Henry the seventh, and then it was
alienated to Martin; but William Martin great Grandchild of John Martin the
Judge, dying without Issue-male, Margaret his Sole Daughter and Heir linked it
unto the Demeasne of her Husband Mr. John Rogers, in which Family, after it had
resided, until that Age which was encircled in our Fathers Remembrance, it was
passed away by Sale to Sidley, and Sir John Sidley of St. Cleres Knight and
Baronet, not many years since by the same Vicissitude conveyed it to John Adye
of Dodington Esquire.

O. O. O. O.
OFham in the Hundred of Larkefeild, was Anciently divided between two Families
Corton and Ditton: Richard de Corton held half a Knights Fee at this place, and
paid respective Aid for it at making the Black Prince Knight, as appears by
the Book of Aid, in the twentieth year of Edward the third, and Ralph de
Ditton paid an auxiliary Contribution for the other Moity, which likewise was
held by half a Knights Fee, at the Investiture abovesaid; but long it
continued not to confess the Signory of these two Families: for Codwell which
was part of the Manor of Offham, was alienated by Richard de Corton to Thomas
de Godchepe, and he was in the enjoyment of it at his Decease, which was in the
one and thirtieth of Edward the third. After Godchepe had deserted the
Possession, I find by some old Conrt-rols, that commence from the Reign of
Henry the fourth, that one John Melford had the Possession, not only of
Godwell, but of Snodbean, and Pepingstraw likewise, which his Father purchased
of the Heirs of Ditton; but not long after this, was the Title of those places
resident in this Family. For about the latter end of Henry the sixth, I find
one Moiety of them passed away to Brown, and the other to Colepeper: in
Colepeper the Propriety remained, until the latter end of Henry the seventh,
and then it was demised by Sale to John Leigh, and he and Sir Matthew Brown
the descendant of Brown, who was invested by Purchase in the other Moiety,
exchanged the whole Manor with Henry the eighth, and he grants it to William
Wilford, John Bennet, and George Briggs, and they in the thirty seventh year of
the abovenamed Prince, convey one Moiety of Offham, Snodbean, and Peping
straw, to John Tufton Esquire, Ancestor to the Right Honorable John Tufton, now
Earl of Thanett, the instant Possessor of it; And the other Proportion, in
which Godwell was included, to Richard Nortop alias Clerk, a Name vulgarly
imposed upon him, which was originally borrowed from his Office, as being Clark
of the Forest of Sherwood, in the County of Nottingham; yet this Name has
been so entailed on his Successors, that it is now grown the paternal
Appellation of the Family, they having many years wrote Clerk alias Nortop: But
I have digressed. The last of this Family was...... Clerk, who not long since,
concluded in three Daughters and Coheirs: Frances one of which, was married to
Mr. Thomas Dowell lately deceased, who by purchasing the other Proportions
allotted to his Wifes Sisters, has now entitled the other Moietie of the
Manor of Offham, to his Descendant now surviving.

The vulgar Tradition of this Parish, is, that Jack Straw that eminent
Incendiarie of the Kentish Commons in the reign of Richard the second (who with
Wat Tiler, who was born at Dartford, were the two principal Emissaries, which
did foment and manage that portentous Commotion, which then brake forth like an
Inundation, and threatened to over-whelme the abovesaid Prince) was born in a
small Cottage, at Pepingstraw in this Parish, from whence he assumed his
Surname.

Ore in the Hundred of Feversham, was, as the Book called Feoda Militum kept in
the Exchequer, informs me, in the thirty eighth year of Henry the third, the
Inheritance of Reginald de Cornhill, but it seems was by a Distance of no long
Time constant to this Family; for in the reign of Edward the first, it became
the Patrimony of Savage of Bobbing Court: for in the twenty third year of the
above recited Prince, John de Savage obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his
Manor of Ore, as it lay involved in his other Demeasnes, to which that
Franchise was granted in the Bulk or General. After Savage was worn away at
this place, the Norwoods of Norwood in Milton, were established in one Moiety
of it by purchase, and the Alephs of Colshall in Iwade, by the same Vicissitude
were planted in the other; Northwood demised his Proportion by Sale to Tomlin,
who for above an Hundred year, down till this instant, has been settled in the
Possession; and the other Moiety did augment the Dowry of Margaret Daughter and
Heir of Thomas Aleph, who was wedded to John Monins Esquire, whose Successor
Sir William Monins, passed it away to Short of Tenterden, to which Family the
Interest of that part of Ore, which was sold by Monins, is at this present
united.

Orpington in the Hundred of Rokesley, was in the twentieth year of William the
Conqueror, wrapped up in the Ecclesiastical Patrimony, and belonged to the
Monks of Christ-church, and if you will make an Inspection into the Pages of
Doomsday Book, and consult that general Register, you will find it at that Time
thus rated: Orpindun, says the Record, est Manerium Monachorum, and de Vestitu
e^rum, and in T. E. R. (that is, in the Time of King Edward the Confessor) se
defendebat pro III. Sullingis, and nunc pro II. Sullingis and dimidio, and est
appretiatum XXV. lb. and tamen reddit de Firma XX. and VIII. lb. From this
Record I observe that William the Norman, surnamed the Conqueror, possessing
himself of the English Scepter and Diadem, by an infirm and crazy Title,
sought afterward to fortify and improve it, by a soft Compliance with the
Clergy, who had then the most powerful Influence, on the Consciences of the
Vulgar; and therefore where he found their Revenue moderately taxed in the Time
of the Confessor, he confirms it, and where in his Estimate the Gabell or
Imposition was scrued or wound up too much, he abates and mollifies it, by
these Engagements perpetually for the future, to oblige and endear them, to
assert and maintain his new achieved Royalty. But to return to my Discourse:
In times of a more recent Inscription, that is, in the seventh year of King
John, the Prior and Monks of Christ-church, obtained a Market to this their
Manor, to be observed weekly on the Wednesday, as appears Carta de Anno
septimo R. Joannis Memb. secund. with which Franchise it continued invested,
until the twenty ninth of Henry the eighth, and then being by the Monks
abovesaid with the Residue of their Revenue into the Hands of that Prince, it
remained with the Crown until the thirty second year of his Government; and
then it was granted to Pereivall Heart, of Lullingston Esquire; to whose pious and
charitable Beneficence, the Alms Houses at this place, owe their original
Foundation; and from him is the Propriety of it, now descended to his great
Grandchild Will. Heart Esquire.

Crofton in this Parish, did formerly swel into so much of Grandeur, and
populacy that it was known for a Parish of it self, till by Fire it was
entombed in its present Desolations, and by the Violence of that wild and
impetuous Element, reduced into a Heap of Flame and Ruins; and certainly those
deplorable Remains which yet expose themselves to an Inquisitive Eye, and the
Groundsells too, and scattered Foundations of Houses, which the Plough often
raises, out of their Sepulcher of Rubbish, and represents to the public View,
do evince this Truth to us, that Towns and Villages, have their stated Period
of Duration, and must at length find a Grave like Men. But though this Village
be shrunk into this disordered Heap, yet still it preserves the Reputation of a
Manor, which it had anciently, when it was the Inheritance of Wibourn, a
Family in elder Times of high Esteem, and a considerable Revenue in this
Territory. Ralph de Wibourn held Lands here, and in other places of Kent, as
appears by sundry ancient Deeds now in the Possession of Wibourne of Halkewell,
in the reign of Edward the first; and did after execute a Deed, for Land in
Wrotham Hundred, in the tenth year of Edward the second. And in the twentieth
year of Edward the third, John de Wybourne, paid respective Aid for his Lands
here and at other places in this County, at the making the Black Prince Knight;
after Wibourne had relinquished the Possession of this place, which was about
the latter end of Edward the third, it went away by Sale to Sir Robert Belknap,
who was attainted and banished, by that Factious Parliament, which was held in
the tenth year of R. the second, for vigorously endeavoring to vindicate and
assert his Prerogative, against the Invasions and Inroads which some of the
turbulent Nobility of those times did attempt to make upon it: but this, though
forfeited and escheated to the Crown upon his pretended Treason, was by Richard
the second restored to Hamon Belknap Lord of Oston in the County of Warwick,
and from him it was by Descent transferred to John Belknap his Son, who upon
his Decease which was in the fifteenth year of Henry the sixth, bequeathed it
to Sir Henry Belknap, who determined in three Daughters and Coheirs, Alice
married to Sir William Shelley, Anne matched to Sir Robert Wotton, and
Elizabeth first wedded to Sir Philip Cook of Giddy-Hall in Essex, and after to
I eonard Dannett of the County of Worcester, who divided his Patrimony; but
this upon ballancing the partition of the Estate, fell upon the poising of it
in equal portions, to be the Demeasn of Sir Will. Shelley, who demised it by
Sale to Sir Rob. Read Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, and he in the
reign of Henry the seventh, passed it away by Grant, to the Hospital of the
Savoy in 'London, where it has ever since, without any Interruption of the
first Donation, remained successively resident.

Bark-hart has obtained a place in the Map of Kent, and therefore shall not
want one in this Discourse. It was built by Percivall Heart Esquire, Father to
the late Sir Percivall: but it was adorned with this Name by Queen Elizabeth,
when she was magnificently entertained at this place, by the above said
Gentleman. Upon her Reception, she received her first Caresses by a Nymph,
which personated the Genius of the House, then the Scene was shifted, and from
several Chambers, which, as they were contrived, represented a Ship, a Sea
Conflict was offered up to the Spectator's View, which so much obliged the Eyes
of this Princess, with the Charms of Delight, that upon her Departure, she
left upon this House (to perpetuate the Memory both of the Author and Artifice)
the Name and Appellation of Bark-hart.

There is a Tradition that Thomas de Beckett, Archbishop of Canterbury, was
born at Tubbingden, whose Demeasne is partly situated in Ferneborough, and
partly in this Parish. But to dissipate this received Fiction, I shall manifest
out of an old Parliament Roll, of the thirty first year of Henry the sixth, the
original Truth, that is, so much of it as concerns his Cradle or place of
Nativity. The Record in its own Dialect, speaks thus. James Earl of Wiltshire,
and Ormond, whose Fader, and many of his Ancestors are lineally descended of
the Blood of the glorious Martyr St. Thomas, sometimes Archbishop of
Canterbury. The which glorious Martyr was born of his Mother, within the Ground
where now is set the House or Hospital of the said Martyr, called St. Thomas
Acres, now in the City of London, where the Body of the said Earl lies buried,
and Dame Joane Beauchamp, late Lady of Burgavenny, Crandame to the said Earl of
Ormond and Wiltshire. For Tubbenden it self; it was Anciently the Demeasne of a
Family which was known by that Surname: for by a Deed now in the Hands of Mr.
Wittingham Wood of Canterbury Esquire, it appears Gilbert Saundre of Crofton
did demise several parcels of Land to John de Tubbenden of Ferneborough, and to
Richard, Philip, John, and Robert his Sons, in the twenty first year of Edward
the first, which justifies it Anciently to be the Possession of one of that
Name. After Tubbenden, Belknap was Proprietary of this place, and then
successively by Alice, his Coheir Sir William Shelley of Michelgrove in
Sussex: from which Family it was brought down by Purchase in the beginning of
the reign of Henry the eighth, to be the Estate of Posier, who after some few
years continuance in the Possession, demised his Concernment in it by Sale to
Dalton issued out from the Daltons of Yorkshire, which Name suddenly resolved
into a Female Heir, known by the Name of Anne Dalton, who by matching with
Aunsell Beckett, linked it to the Demeasne of that Family: from whom it
descended to his Son Matthew Beckett, who upon his Decease bequeathed it to Mr.
John Winterborn of London, who has lately passed it away to Mr....... Gee of
the County of York Esquire.

St. Mary Crey in the Hundred of Rokesley, though it be a Market Town, yet is
but a Chap^el of Ease to Orpington. Before the Conquest, one Elfgat held it (as
Doomes-day Book which makes a Recapitulation of the first Owners informs us) of
the Archbishop of Canterbury: In the Conqueror's Time, Hugh Nephew of Herbert
Bishop of Baion, possessed it under the Notion of a whole Knights Fee. In Ages of
a more modern Date, that is, in the reign of Henry the third, John de Mary's
descended from Thomas de Mary's, who accompanied Richard the first to the Seige
of Acon, enjoyed a whole Knights Fee at Ackmere and Sentling, two eminent
Manors in this Parish, but about the beginning of Edward the first, had
deserted the Possession and surrendered it to Gregory de Rokesley, Grandchild
to John de Rokesley, who likewise was embarked with Richard the first, at the
Seige of Acon; and he, in the ninth of Edward the first, obtained the Grant of
a Market on the Wednesday, and a three Days Fair at the Feast of the
Assumption of the Virgin Mary, to St. Mary Crey, as appears Pat. 9. Edw. 1.
Memb. 35. and left it to his Son Sir Richard de Rokesley, who dying in the
seventeenth year of Edward the second, without Issue-male by Agnes, one of his
Daughters and Coheirs to Thomas de Poynings, in which Name it continued, until
the latter end of Edward the third, and then I find it possessed by Sir Robert
Belknap, who was attainted in the tenth year, and banished into Ireland for too
vigorously attempting to boulster up the Majesty and Prerogative of that
Prince, against the Assaults and invasions which were made upon it by a
Factious Junto of the Nobility; yet it was suddenly after restored to his
Posterity: for in the ninteenth of Richard the second, I find Hamon Belknap
reseated in the Possession, by the Royal Concession and Indulgence of that
Prince, and from him it did devolve to his Grandchild Sir Henry Belknap, which
Family being enterred in Daughters and Coheirs, Sir Robert Wotton by matching
with Anne, that was one of them, entitled himself in her Right to the
Inheritance of both these Places, and so by the Thread of a continued Descent,
was it brought down to Thomas Lord Wotton, who settled them in Marriage upon
his eldest Daughter and Coheir Mrs. Katherine Wotton, who was espoused to
Henry Lord Stanhop, Heir apparent to Philip Earl of Chesterfeild.

Orlanston in the Hundred of Hamme, was the Inherirance of a Family of that
Surname. William de Orlanston is registered in the List of those Kentish
Gentlemen, who assisted Richard the first, at the Siege of Acon. William de
Orlanston his Son held it, in the reign of Henry the third, and obtained a
Charter of Free Warren to it, in the one and fiftieth year of Henry the third,
and more to improve the Grandeur of this his Manor, with Additional
Franchises, he likewise obtained a Market to be weekly observed here, and a
Fair yearly, which was to continne by the space of three Days, at the Feast of
Holyrode, as appears, Pat. de 51. Hen. 3. Memb. 10. The Grant of which Market
was renewed and confirmed to John Kemp Archbishop of York, and after of
Canterbury, in the twentieth year of Henry the sixth. William de Orlanston,
this man's Grandchild, was Sheriff of Kent, in the second year of Edward the
third, and had the Custody of the County some part of the year following, and
died the thirty eighth year of Edward the third, and had Issue Sir John
Orlanston, who was Burgess for Romeney, as appears by some old Records in Dover
Castle, sundry Times, both in the reign of Edward the third, and Richard the
second, and matched with the Daughter and Heir of Sir William at Capell, from
which Alliance proceeded Richard Orlanston Esquire, who died possessed of
Orlanston, in the seventh year of Henry the fifth, Rot. Esc. Number. 16. and left
his Inheritance to be divided between his two Sisters and Coheirs, Margaret
matched to William Parker of Parkers in Werehorne, and Joane espoused to
William Scott of Scotts Hall, who upon the Partition of the Ancient Patrimony,
was invested in his Wife's Right, in this Manor of Orlanston; from whom the
Clew of many Descents has transported the Propriety to the instant Possessor,
Mr. Edward Scott of Scotts Hall Esquire.

Here were Lands divorced from this Place by no far Distance, called
Oswareston: for I find Henry Earl of Augie, gave to the Monks of Bermondsey in
Southwarke his Lands called Oswareston near Romelin, in the Parish of Lyda, and
the Lands of John the Clerk in Bilsington, of which see Vincents Book of
Nobility, Fol. 190.

Westbery in this Parish, was, as high as the private Evidences of this Place
can give us any Prospect to discover, the Propriety of a Family called Prisott,
who was planted here as high as the Reign of Henry the fourth, and it is probable
much higher, though the Deeds reach no farther. Of this Family was Sir John
Prisot the Judge, of whom there is frequent mention in our Law Books, which
have an Aspect upon the Reign of Henry the sixth, and in this Name was the
Title of this Manor carried down to the eighth year of Henry the eighth, and
then it was by Thomas Prisot passed away by Sale to George Hount, in whom the
Possession had not many years been resident, but the same Fatality brought it
over to Reginald Strogle, who was in the Commission of the Peace, in the Reign
of Edward the sixth, and was descended from a Family which was of a very high
Original in Romney-Mersh, where there are some Lands yet which bear their Name.
After Strogle had left it, it came by Purchase to Mr. Bennet Guildford, a
Branch of the Guildfords of Hempsted, who in the beginning of the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, falling under the Censure and Penalty of a Pramunire, for
refusing the Oath of Supremacy, and flying beyond Sea, forfeited this place to
the Crown, and this Princess immediately after passed it away by Grant to
Walter Moile of Buckwell, from whom not many years after this original
Concession, it went away by Sale to Mr. Francis Bourne, Grandfather to
Mr....... Bourne the present Proprietary of it.

Ospringe in the Hundred of Feversham, was anciently a Limb or Appendage of the
Royal Revenue, until King Edward the thind, in the tenth year of his Reign, by
Royal Concession or Grant, passed it away to John de Pultency, afterward Lord
Mayor of London, to hold it in Fee of the Crown, by the Service of a Rose,
offered up or presented as a Symbol of Annual Fealty, and with this Manor he
granted him likewise all the Advousons of-Churches, which formerly related to
it, to hold in Soccage only by the former acknowledgement. In the nineteenth
year of his Reign, the above said Prince grants this John de Pulteney, that
Thomas Son of William de Dene should be accountable to him for all those
Knights Fees which lay in Throuley, Boughton, Malherbe, and Wormesell, and held
of Queen Court and Ospringe: de died possessed of both these places, in the
twenty fifth year of Edward the third, as appears, Rot. Esc. Number. 43. and left
them to his Kinsman Sir Nicolas Loveine (though some part of the Demeasne
belonged to Poulteney, until the ninth year of Edward the fourth) which Sir
Nicholas obtained a an Exemplification by Patent in the thirty eighth year of
Edward the third, how many Knights Fees which lay divided and dispersed into
several places, belonged to his Manor of Ospringe; this Sir Nicholas had
Issue Nicholas Loveyne, and Margaret Loveyne; Nicholas her Brother deceased
without Issue, and so Philip St. Clear of Aldham St. Clear, who had matched
with this his Sister, became his Heir, and she was found to be possessed of these
places at her Death, which was in the tenth year of Henry the fourth, and in
her Right did it descend with Queen Court, (which was leased out by Nich.
Loveyne to Nicholas Potin, who was Sheriff of Kent, the twenty first of King R.
the second, and held his Shrievalty at this place) to Thomas St. Clear who held
it at his Decease, which was in the twelfth year of Edward the fourth, Rot.
Esc. Number. 46. But after his Departure, I do not find it long knit to the
Demeasn of his Family; for about the beginning of Henry the seventh, I find it
in the Possession of William Cheyney of Shurland Esquire, and from him was the
Title of Ospringe and Queen Court derived by successive Right to his Grandchild
Henry Lord Cheyney, who about the thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, passed
them away to Mr. Rich. Thornehill, Great Grandfather to Mr. Richard Thornehill,
Son and Heir of Colonel Richard Thornhill who is at this instant Proprietarie
of it.

Plomford and Bavell, are two little Manors in Ospringe, which belonged partly
to the Nunnery of the Minster in Shepey, and partly to the Abbey of Feversham,
which upon the Suppression of those two Cloisters, were granted by King Henry
the eighth, to Thomas Colepeper Esquire, and he not long after, alienated them
to Sir Thomas Cheyney, whose Son Henry Lord Cheyney, passed them away in our
Grandfathers Memory to Greenstreet of Clacksfield in Borden, and are still
wrapped up in the Inheritance of that Family.

The Maison le Dieu here at Ospringe, was founded by Lucas de Vienna, for the
Knights Templers, and was one of those Mansions, where they reposed themselves
in their progress toward their other Demeasne, which lay spread into
East-Kent, and Romney Mersh. The Revenue which was to support this Seminary,
lay at Lurdenden in Challock, and at Hokeling, Radymersh, Ride and other places
in the Isle of Shepey. In the twenty fifth of Henry the third, Roger de
Lingsted had a Grant of these Lands, for Term of Life, as likewise of all the
Fishery Messuages, Reliese, Revenue, and Homage appertaining to them, as
appears Pat. Anno 25. Henrici tertii, Memb. 30. In the forty second, and fifty
first of Henry the third, there was a Confirmation of Land and Privileges to
this House, and in this Condition it continued, partly under the Knights
Templers, and in lower Ages, under the Knights Hospitallers, until the Tempest
of the general Dissolution, shook it into that neglected heap of Ruins,
wherein at present the ancient Fabric is visible.

Elverland in this Parish is a Manor which for many Generations has been
annexed to the Demeasn of St. John's College in Cambridge.

Selgrave now corruptly called Selgrove, is another Manor in Ospringe: It was
a Branch of that large Inheritance, which lay scattered ore the Face of this
Territory, and acknowledged the Dominion of the noble Family of Norwood: Roger
de Northwood held it at his Decease, which was in the thirteenth year of Edward
the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 25. And transmitted it to his Son Roger de Norwood,
after whom I do not find the Possession was long permanent in this Family: for
about the latter end of Edward the third, Ralph de Spigurnell, was concerned in
it as Proprietarie, and he bequeathed it to his Wife Elizabeth Spigurnell, who
sold it to John Winchelsey, and the Convent of Christ-church in Canterbury, in
the sixteenth year of Richard the second, in whom the Fee-simple continued,
until it was wrested away by the General Dissolution in the reign of Henry
the eighth: and then that Prince, passed it by Grant to George Barley, who not
many years after alienated his Interest in it to Sonds of Throuley, from whom
in our Fathers Memory, it came by Sale to Cleve.

Ospringe, had anciently a House or Maison le Dieu so called, because it was a
Receptacle for Leprous people, and other persons afflicted and assaulted with
Diseases, which in Times of elder Inscription, were still esteemed to be
imposed by the Finger of the Divinity, and this had a Confirmation of ample
Immunities, and Liberties by Patent in the forty seventh, and which were renewed
in the fifty first year of Henry the third.

Otford in the Hundred of Codsheath, was given to the Church and Sea of
Canterbury, by Offa King of the Mercians in the year 785, to expiate the Guilt
of that Blood, which he had before drawn from the Veins of Aleric and his
Kentish Men, in a Battle waged at this place, in the year 774, and which was
aggravated because those he had slaughtered, had their Names enrolled in the
Register of Christians. And which was granted in the original Donation, ad
Pascua Porcorum, to the Pannage of those Hoggs that fed in the Archbishops
Chase; and in the Revenue of this Sea, was the Interest of this Manor
treasured up, till about the Beginning of the Rule of Henry the eighth; and
then some envious Eyes looking about with Regrett and Desire, upon the Diffused
Patrimony of the Church, William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, to
extinguish both the passions of these men, and their ravenous Appetite
together, about the twelfth year of that Prince's Reign, exchanged this Manor
for other Lands, and so it became incorporated into the Revenue of the Crown.

There was a Chantry founded at Rye-house in this Parish, by Henry de
Apulderfield, in the forty sixth year of Edward the third, as appears Pat.
Anno. 46. Edwardi tertii, Part secunda Memb. 19. Whose Revenue upon the
Suppression, was by Henry the eighth, granted to Palmer, which Family had been
of deep Antiquity before in this Parish, and from whence the Palmers of
Snodland, and likewise of Howletts in East-Kent, were originally descended: but
it seems the security of this royal Patent, could not rescue it from being sold
some years after to Bosvill, whose Descendant now holds the instant Fee-simple
of it.

Otham in the Hundred of Maidstone, was a Branch of that Demeasne, which did in
this Track acknowledge the Signiory of the ancient Family of Valoigns. William
de Valoigns, is mentioned in the Book called Testa de Nevill, to have paid Aid
for Lands at Petham, Ashford, and Otham, in the twentieth year of Henry the
third, at the marriage of Isabell that Prince's Sister, and it is probable that
this Will. de Valoigns, dyed possessed of Otham, in the tenth year of Edward the
first, for his Name was William likewise, as appears by the escheat Roll,
marked with the Number 54. after whom his Successor Stephen de Valoigns, held
it, who was certainly a man of some important Account in those Times, for he
was one of the Conservators of the Peace, in the reign of Edward the third.
After Valoigns, the knightly Family of Pimpe, was by purchase invested about
the latter end of Richard the second, both in the Possession of Otham and
Gore-court, and to this Name was the Inheritance both of Otham and Gore-court,
by a Chain of several Descents, successively united; till at last the ordinary
Devolution of purchase brought them over to Isley of Sundrich; and within the
Circle of this Family, was the Propriety of them circumscribed, till the second
year of Queen Mary, and then Sir Hen. Isley, being fatally engaged and
entangled in the unsuccessefull Attempt of Sir Thomas Wiatt, could not unravell
himself, until he had satisfied the Justice of that Queen, with the forfeiture
of his Life, and augmented the Revenue of the Crown, with the Confiscation of
his Estate: from which these two places, as being parcel of his escheated
Patrimony, were by Patent soon after, passed away to Sir Walter Henley, one of
the Sergeants at Law, to the abovesaid Queen Mary, who dying without
Issue-male, bequeathed Gore-court to Hellen his Daughter and Coheir, who was
matched to Thomas Colepeper; and Otham to his Brother Thomas Henley; from whom
it is come down to Walter Henley Esquire, who is the present Lord of the Fee:
but Gore-court was by Colepeper, demised by Sale to Buffkin; where after the
Possession had for several years been fixed, it was almost within the Pale of
our Remembrance, by purchase made the present Inheritance of Tho. Floyd Esquire.

Stoneacre in this Parish is an Ancient Seat, which for some Centuries of years
has acknowledged no other Proprietary then Else, but whether Burton in
Kenington, or this Mansion were the original Fountain, from whence this Family
did extract its first Etymology is uncertain, for once they had one and the
same Possessor. The Deeds that fortify their Interest in this place, reach as
high as the Time of Edward the second, and instruct us, that Ellis which
enjoyes it now, is by a stream of many unintercepted Descents issued out from
John Ellis who possessed it then.

There was the Foundation of a Religious Seminary of Canons, Praemonstratenses
or white Canons, begun at Otham by Ralph de Dene: but the Situation of the
Place, being not accommodated to Health, they were by Ela de Sackvil removed
and transplanted into her new erected Priory at Begham, where till the common
Suppression they continued undisturbed and fixed.

Otteringdon in the Hundred of Eyhorne, does represent to us in Prospect the
Memory of a Family, to whom it contributed in Times more Arcient both Seat and
Surname. Ralph de Ottringden held it at his Decease, which was in the fifteenth
year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 29. But in his Son Sir Lawrence de
Ottringden, both the Name and Male Line failed together, for his Daughter and
Heir brought it along with her to Peyforer, who about the latter end of the
reign of Edward the third, was extinguished likewise by the same Fatality in
Julian Peyforer, who was his Heir General, and she, by espousing Thomas St.
Ledger Esquire, intermixed the Right of this place with the Inheritance of this
Family, and who lies entombed in this Church, with this Compendious
Superscription endorsed upon his Gravestone, Hic jacet Thomas St. Ledger de
Otteringden, qui obiit 1408. But a Revolution as sudden as the former, quickly
snatched away Otteringden from the Patrimony of this Name; for by Joan, who was
Coheir to the abovementioned Thomas St. Ledger, it was rolled into the Revenue
of Henry Aucher Esquire sprouted out from the Illustrious Stem of Aucher of
Losenham, and in this Family was the Interest of this place successively laid
up till the Time of Queen Elizabeth, and then the whole Demise was by Sale
transmitted to Lewin, in whom a Descent or two after the Male-Line determining,
the Female Heir brought it to Rogers of the West, from whom the like Fatality
has lately devolved it to Charles Lord Mansfeld, eldest Son to the Right
Honorable William Cavendish, Marquess of Newcastle.

Putwood is another Manor in this Parish, which in Times of elder Etymology,
did acknowlede it self to be under the Signory of a Family, who extracted their
Surname from Vienne in Dauphine in France; and in several Deeds without Date,
there is mention of William de Vienna, who was invested in Land here at Putwood
and Ospringe, and in the twentieth year of Edward the third, Lucas de Vienna
paid respective Supply, at the making the Black Prince Knight, for Lands which
he held at Putwood and Ospringe. After this Family was dissolved and gone, the
Quadrings, which was about the beginning of Richard the second, were settled in
the possession, where after some small Residence of the Title, it went away by
Sale about the latter end of Henry the fourth, to the Ancient Family of
Goldwell of great Chart: and here, after it had made some cursory abode, the
same Devolution cast it into the Inheritance of Dryland of Cokes-ditch in
Feversham, to whose possession after the Title had, for many years cleaved, it
was transported by purchase into the Patrimony of Atwater, so styled, because
it is probable this Family had formerly their Residence near some Fountain or
Stream, but their Original from whence they primitively issued, was from about
Ospringe: for there I find Robert Atwater possessed Land at his Death, which was
in the fifth year of Edward the third, and in this Name did the Title of the
place lie couched, until the latter end of Henry the eighth, and then by Sale
it was incorporated into the Revenue of Sir James Hales: but long it remained
not thus mingled, for the Fate of purchase untwisted it, and not many years
after threw it into the Possession of Sayer, from whom in Times which almost
bordered upon our Memory, it was by Sale wafted over to Mr. James Hugison of
Dover, and he bequeathed it to a second Son, whose Female Heir Mrs. Jane
Hugison, by lately matching with Mr. John Roberts Esquire, eldest Son to Sir
John Roberts of Canterbury, has entitled him to the Propriety of it.

Herst in this Parish, was the Ancient Demeasne of Filmer, and here were they
seated, until by matching with the Heir of Argall, they were transplanted to
East Sutton. I have seen an old Court-roll relating to the Manor of Monkton in
this Parish, which by the Antiquity of it, seemed to commence from the reign of
Edward the second, although the Date which stood in the Front, by the in urious
Hand of Time, was almost expunged, and (so) hardly legible; wherein at the Foot
of it, there is mention of one Edward Filmour, so he was written in that Age,
from whom it is probable (though now the Name by Time and prescription be in
the last Syllable of it something violated) the present Sir Edward Filmer,
eldest Son to that Learned, Loyal, and Worthy Person Sir Robert Filmer, lately
deceased, is primitively extracted, and this is confirmed by their own private
Evidences, which represent them for many Cenerations, even till this present,
Possessors of this Place, and wherein the Name is frequently written Filmor,
as well as in latter Escripts Filmer.

There is another Manor in Ottringden, which anciently was reputed so, though
now by Disuse and Intermission it has lost that Estimate, and is called
Hall-place, by a very Ancient Court-roll Sans date, now in the Hands of Mr.
Pain. It is represented, in those Times, when it had Tenants and Services
belonging to it, to be the propriety of one Roger Rev, and in that Roll there
is mention of one Thomas Franklin, who held some Lands of this Manor, by
paying yearly the Tribute or Rent-service of one Red Rose, as the Symbol of his
Homage. And now for want of farther Light, from the Ancient Deeds and
Evidences; I must make a leap to the reign of Henry the seventh, and then I
find Eugenius Cock, in the nineteenth year of that Prince, sels it to John
Bunce of this Parish Gentleman, in which Family the possession rested, until
very lately it was by Sale alienated to Mr. Pain.

Monkton is the last place in this Parish of Note: It belonged before the
suppression to the Nunnery of Davington, and was given to that Cloister by
Matthew Son of Hamon Atfrith, upon the first Erection of it, which was in the
thirty ninth year of Henry the third. Upon the suppression and final
Dissolution' of this Covent of Davington, by Henry the eighth, it was by that
Prince granted to Sir Thomas Cheney, whose Son the Lord Henry Cheyney (so
fugitive is the Tenure of Church-Demeasne) in the entrance into the reign of
Queen Elizabeth, passed it away to Godden; who so small a space was resident in
the possession, that he has only left us Notice that he sold it to William
Lewin, descended from the Lewins of Norfolk, whose Son Sir Justinian Lewin
concluded in a Daughter and Heir, who was matched to Rogers of the County of
Somersett, and so in her Right it became interwoven with his Demeasne: but
remained not long thus involved in the Interest of this Name, for in our Memory
he deceased, and left only a Daughter and Heir; who is lately matched to
Charles Cavendish Lord Mansfeld, eldest Son to William Lord Marquess of
Newcastle, so that Monkton in his Ladies Right is now united to his Inheritance.

There are two Chapels in the Parish Church of Ottringden: that on the
Northside of the Chauncel is called Ottringdens Chapel, where the Remains of
several of the Ottringdens, St. Legers, Auchers, and Lewins, lie enterred: that
on the Southside is termed Bunces Chapel, where the Ashes and Relics of
several of that Family slumber, who were of no contemptible Note in this
Parish, where they had a Mansion, which in old Evidences is called Bunces
Court, which has been in their possession, as appears by their own Deeds, some
Hundreds of years; and from hence are the Bunces of Throuley, likewise
originally issued forth.

P. P. P. P.
PAdlesworth in the Hundred of Lovingborough, is so obscure and inconsiderable
a Village, that it should not have filled a place in this Register, but that it
was a portion of that wide Estate which lay spread over the Face of all the
adjacent Territory, and acknowledged it self to be under the Jurisdiction of
the Criolls. Bertram de Crioll died about the middle of. Edward the first, and
left Joan his Sole Heir, who had been before matched to Sir Richard de Rokesley
of Rokesley Court in Northcrey, and so Padlesworth became the Rokesley's, but
did not long cleave to that Name, for he expired likewise in two Female
Coheirs, whereof one of them called Joan was matched to Thomas de Poynings,
and he left Issue Michael Poynings, from whom it came down to his descendant
Robert Poynings, who passed it away by Sale to Fogge of Seen in Newington, in
which Family the Title for many Descents lay involved, even until our Fathers
Remembrance, and then it was alienated to Dynley, who is the instant Lord of
the Fee.

Padlesworth in the Hundred of Larkefeild, was, as high as the reign of H. the
third, the Possession of a Family called Chetwind, who immediately after
exchanged it with Hamon de Gatton, for the Manor of Hocklin in the County of
Bedford, but kept it not long: for after it had continued some small Interval of
Time in this Family, it was alienated to the Noble Family of Huntingfeild,
after whom succeeded Bele, and then it went away by Sale to Bullock, who by the
same Devolution surrendered the possession to Diggs, where it had but a very
transitory abode, for he conveyed it away to Peckham, from whom the ordinary
Mutation made by Purchase, brought it to own the Propriety of Vineley, who
translated his Interest by Sale unto William Clifford of Bobbing-court, and he
about the beginning of Henry the fixed fixed the Title and Possession by Sale in
Robert Bambergh. Where it is to be noted, that this quick and sudden
Revolution of the Title of this place in those Families, which intervened
between Huntingfeild and Bambergh, happened in less then a Circle of fifty
years, (as appears by the original Conveyances now in the Hands of Mr.
Marsham.) But to advance in that Discourse where I broke off; Robert Bambergh
abovementioned, was not long settled in his new Acquists, but he deceased and
left it to his Daughter and Heir, who was matched to Nicolas Wotton Esquire,
from whom in a direct Line it came down to Thomas Lord Wotton, who settled it
in Marriage upon his Daughter and Coheir Katherine Wotton with Henry Lord
Stanhop, eldest Son, and Heir apparent, to Philip Earl of Chesterfeild, and
this Lady has since passed it away to my Noble Friend, John Marsham of
Whornes-place in Cuckeston Esquire, from whose Deeds and Papers I have drawn my
present Intelligence.

Patricksbourn in the Hundreds of Bredge and Pet-ham, in Ancient Records has
still the Addition of Cheyney annexed to it: for indeed it was the first and
original Residence of the Cheyneys, before they translated their Habitation to
Shurland in Shepey, by matching with the Heir of Shurland. Alexander de Cheyney
is registered in the Catalogue of those Kentish Gentlemen who accompanied
Richard the first to the Siege of Acon. In Testa de Nevill, an Ancient Book
kept in the Exchecquer, there is mention of Gulielmus de Casineto (so they are
written in Latin) that is, William de Cheyney, who paid respective supply, in
the twentieth year of Henry the third, at the Marriage of Isabell that King's
Sister, for his Lands at Patriksbourn Cheyney. Alexander de Cheney Grandchild
to the abovesaid Alexander, Rotulus Pipae de scutagio Walliae An. 42. Henrici
tertii.
is enrolled in the List of those eminent Kentish Persons, who in the forty
second year of Henry the third, accompanied that Prince when he marched from
Chester to suppress the emotions of the Welsh. Sir Alexander de Cheyney this
man's Son was with King Edward the first in his victorious and triumphant
Expedition against the Scots, in the twenty eighth year of his Reign (as
appears by the Rolls of those Kentish Gentlemen, who were embarked in that
succesful Design with that Prince) and from this Alexander did the possession
of this place, by an undisordered and even Thread of Descent, through all the
Mazes of Time, transmit it self to Henry Lord Cheyney, and he having by his
excess and exorbitancy embezelled an Estate of vast Extent and Grandeur;
amongst the Rest passed this away, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, to
William Partrich Esquire, whose Grandchild Sir Edward Partrich in that Age
which was within the Verge of our Remembrance, alienated it to Mr. Arnold Brams.

Howletts in this Parish with Hode in Patricksbourn also, were the Ancient
Demeasne of Izaack, and there is a Chancel in the Church, which formerly bore
the the Name of Izaacks Chancel. John Izaack, in the twentieth year of Edward
the third (as appears by the Book of Aid) paid an auxiliary supply for his
Lands at Patriksbourn, at the investing the Black Prince with Knighthood; John
Isaac his Son lies entombed in Patricksbourn Church, with this Inscription
upon his Gravestone, Orate pro Animabus Joannis Izaack Armigeri, and Ceciliae
uxoris eius, qui obiit...... Anno Domini 1443. Thomas Izaack, as the private
Annals of this Family do discover to us, had a Command in France under the Duke
of Bedford, where he performed exemplary Service against the French. The last
of this Family at this place, was Edward Izaack Esquire, who determined in two
Daughters and Coheirs, Mary who was matched to Thomas Apylton of Waldenfield in
Suffolk, and another first wedded to...... Sydley, and after to Sir Henry
Palmer, to whose Son she gave Howletts, as being, upon the Division of her
Fathers Estate, made her Inheritance: from whom Sir Henry Palmer now of St.
Martins-hill in Canterbury, is descended, who has lately alienated Howletts to
Sir Robert Hales Knight and Baronet.

Peckham in the Hundreds of Twyford and Littlefeild, is distinguished from the
other; first by its Bulk and Dimension, this being called commonly great
Peckham; and then secondly by its Situation, being styled in Records
East-Peckham. It was given to the Church of the Trinity, that is, Christ-church
in Canterbury, by Queen Edgiva, to the Monks of that Covent, ad Cibum, for a
support of their Diet and Alimony, in the year of Grace, nine hundred forty and
one: and if you will see how it was rated in the great Register of Domes-day
Book, take here a View of it; Peckham, says that Record, Tempore Edwardi Regis
se defendebat pro VI. Sullings, and so forth: Peckham in the Time of Edward the
King, that is the Confessor, went for seven Plough-Lands, and defends it self
now (that is, in the Time of the Conqueror) after the same Estimate, and was
rated upon the Appraisement formerly at twelve lb. but now is stated at eight.
And, thus regulated, was it for many Ages fastened to the Patrimony of the
Church, until the Dissolution, in the reign of Henry the eighth, unloosned the
Cement, in the twenty ninth year of that Prince; who afterward about the
thirty sixth year of his Reign, grants this and diverse other parcels of the
Church-Demeasne to Sir Thomas Wiatt, who not long after by Livery and Seisin,
passes away his Right in it to George Moulton Esquire: but because there was a
Fine and Recovery wanting, the Sale was imperfect, so that he had it only in
Abeiance (as the Law styles it) or in Expectance, so that the Crown, in the
second of Queen Mary, upon the Defection and Attaint of Sir Thomas Wiat,
finding this in the Tenure of Moulton, seized upon it as parcel of Wiats
Estate, because it had not been before legally conveyed. And here it rested,
till Queen Elizabeth, in the second year of her reign, granted it to Anthony
Weldon Esquire, one of the Justices of Peace for this County under the reign of
Queen Mary, at which Time he became eminent, by his vigorous opposing Sir
Thomas Wiat, in that Design he was then embarked in; and in this Family (though
not without some Struglings and Conflicts at Law, about the Title) does the
Propriety of this Manor at this instant reside.

There is an eminent Seat in this Parish called Roydon-Hall, which was before
called Fortune, but was of no great Account, until about the beginning of Henry
the sixth, and then Roydon of Suffolk, came into this County, and seated
himself here, and erected this Pile, upon which he fixed his own Name, which it
has been known by ever since, though it has changed its Possessor: for this
Family was extinguished in a Daughter and Heir called Elizabeth, who was the
only surviving Issue of Thomas Roydon Esquire, who by matching with William
Twisden Esquire, made it the Inheritance of William Twisden Esquire Great
Grandfather to Sir Roger Twisden Knight and Baronet, who obtained a Charter of
Free Warren from the late King to reduce a certain proportion of Ground into a
Park which is that the House is surrounded with at present, though the House
owe much of its Magnificence and Splendour to the Care and Expense of his
Grandfather Roger Twisden Esquire, and his Father Sir William Twisden Knight
and Baronet.

Alban vulgarly called Auburne, is another place of eminent Consideration in
East-Peckham. This with Black-pits, in this Parish, was anciently the
Inheritance of a Family called Pollard: for John the Son of John Pollard in the
thirty forth year of Edward the first, demises it to Alban de Wandesworth, who,
it is probable, erected some Mansion House upon it, from whence Posterity took
the Advantage to adopt it into his Surname; and from him did it devolve by
successive Right, to his Grandchild William de Wandesworth, who dying without
Issue, gave it to his Widow Mabell Wandesworth, who was remarried to Richard
Ryner; and they both by a joint Concurrence, in the second year of Richard the
second, passed Albans and Black-pits away to John Mew: yet I find a Family
called Onley, interessed in some part of both these Manors, which was
purchased of William de Wandeshine, in the reign of Henry the third; and in
this Family was the Title lodged, until the second year of Richard the second,
and then Joan Only, in whom the Name and Possession both concluded, alienated
her Proportion to the abovesaid John Mew: nor was some parcel of both these
Manors free from the claim of a Family called Goldsmith; for in the ninth year
of Richard the second, Richard Goldsmith, does divest himself of all
Concernment in it, and by Sale transmitts it to John Mew, and from him, about
the latter end of Henry the fourth, both these Manors with all their
Appendages, were passed away to John Tutsham, and Nicholas Remkin of Eastmere:
but he determined in Alize Remkin his Sole Inheritrix, who by matching with
Thomas Rolfe of Tunbridge, brought her Interest in Albans and Black-pits, to be
the Inheritance of that Family, but long the Right of both these places
continued neither in Rolfe nor Tutsham; for about the beginning of Henry the
sixth, they were alienated by Sale to Thomas Stidulfe of Badsell Esquire; and
he by Deed, bearing date 1463, that is, about the third year of Edward the
fourth, settles them on his two Sons Robert and Henry Stidulfe; and in the
Deed, there is a remembrance, that they were purchased of Rolfe and Tutsham.
From Robert they descended to his Son Thomas Stidulfe, who was Heir both to his
Father and his Uncle, but he concluded in a Daughter and Heir, who was matched
(about the latter end of Henry the eighth) to Richard Vane, Ancestor to the
right honorable Mildmay Fane, now Earl of Westmerland, who in Right of this
Alliance, now enjoys Black-pits: but Albans was by Henry Vane, Successor to the
abovementioned Richard, in the year 1589, passed away to Roger Twisden of
Roydon-Hall Esquire, Grand Father to the instant Proprietary Sir Roger Twisden
Knight and Baronet.

Eastmere is another Manor in East-Peckham, which acknowledged a Family called
Remkin, anciently to be its Possessors: John Remkin, was Father of Christian
Remkin, who held it, as appears by an ancient Court-roll, in the thirty fourth
year of Edward the third; and from him, did it, by paternal Vicissitude,
devolve to Nicholas Remkin, in whom the male-line failed: so that Alice his
Sole Daughter became the visible Heir to his Estate, and she by matching with
Thomas Rolfe of Tunbridge, knit this and other Land here at Great Peckham, to
his Patrimony, but it did not long thus continue united, for John Rolfe his
Son, in the sixth year of Henry the sixth, conveys it to Richard Ruyton, and he
in the eighth year of the abovesaid Prince, alienated it to William Hextall:
but he deceasing without Issuemale, Margaret, his Sole Daughter, by her
Inter-marriage with William Whetenhall, originally descended from the ancient
Family of Whetenhall of Whetenhall in Cheshire, cast it into the Possession of
that Name, from whom it is now descended to my worthy Friend Thomas Whetenhall
of Hextall Court, Esquire.

Spilfted is a fourth Manor in this Parish: It was the Inheritance for diverse
Ages (as appears by the Evidences, now in the Custody of Sir Roger Twisden) of
an ancient Family called Cayser; the last of which Name, who enjoyed this
place, was John Cayser, who went out in Daughters and Coheirs; one of which was
wedded to Matthew Chetwind, to whom, this place, upon the Separation of the
Estate into parcells, in his Wifes Right accrued; and he after some small
residence in the Possession, passed away his Right by Sale in the one and
fortieth year of Queen Eliz. to Roger Twisden Esquire. Grandfather to Sir Roger
Twisden Knight and Baronet the instant Lord of the Fee, a Person upon whom I
need drop no other Character, when I say, that in these times, when there is
such a Damp, and Astonishment, by public blastings and discouragements cast
upon Literature, He is both a Gentleman and a Scholar.

Here is likewise a Seat in Peckham very venerable for its Antiquity, which in
old Rolls, is called Hextall Court, and was the Mansion of Gentlemen of
principal Account in this Track. In a Deed without Date, Simon de Hougham, does
demise certain pieces of Land to John de Hextall, which lay within the Limits
of the Parish of Hougham, where anciently this Family enjoyed no contemptible
Possessions, as well as at East-Peckham. The last of this Name at this place,
was William Hextall who dyed without Issue-male, and left Margaret his only
Heir, who was matched to William Whetenhall Esquire, in the reign of Henry the
seventh, descended from the ancient and illustrious Family of Whetenhall of
Whetenhall in the County of Chester, and so it was incorporated into the Income
of that Family, where it has ever since remained; so that it is now the
present Inheritance of Thomas Whetenhall Esquire.

West-Peckham or Little Peckham, in the Hundreds of Twyford and Littlefield,
was annexed to the Demeasne of the Knights Templars, when John Colepeper
founded a Praeceptory here for them, in the year of our Lord 1.... which upon
the final Extirpation, and Dissolution of their Order, here in England, in the
second year of Edward the second, was granted to the Knights Hospitallers, and
was sometimes called a Praeceptory, and sometimes a Commandry. Now a
Praeceptory was a Benefice in Kind, and was termed so; because this, and all
others of the same Capacity, were possessed by the more eminent sort of Templars,
whom the Chief Master created and called Praeceptores Templi; A Commandry was
some principal Manor of the Knights Hospitallers, wherein was placed some
Brother of the Order, who could not dispose of the Profits of it, but was to
manage it only to the Use of the whole Fraternity, deducting so much of the
Revenue, as might support his Livelihood and Subsistence, of which see more in
Dr. Cowells Interpreter, in his Notes and Comment upon the word Commaundry.
This upon the Suppression, was by Henry the eighth, in the thirty second year
of his reign, granted to Sir Robert Southwell, afterward of the Privy Council
to King Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary; who not long after alienated it to
Sir Edmund Walsingham of Scadbery, Lieutenant of the Tower, from whom it came
down by Descent, to my Noble Friend Sir Thomas Walsingham, his Great
Grandchild, who not long since, passed it over by Sale, to his Son in Law Mr.
James Masters.

Oxenheath is an ancient Manor in West-Peckham, and was many Ages past the
Demeasn of Colepeper, Walter Colepeper dyed seized of it, in the first year of
Ed. the third, Rot. Esc. Number. And from him, by Successive Transmission threaded
together by many Descents, did it devolve to...... Colepeper, who determined
toward the latter end of Henry the seventh, in three Daughters and Coheirs:
Margaret the eldest, was matched to William Cotton of the County of Cambridge;
Joyce the second, was wedded to Edmund Howard, a younger Son of Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, who was Father to Katharine Howard one of the unfortunate Wives of
Henry the eighth; and the third was espoused to Barham, of Barham-court in
Teston, and these three Sisters shared his Inheritance, and this upon the
Partition was annexed to the Demeasn of Cotton, whose Successor passed it away
by Sale to Chowne of Faire-lane, in which Name it did not long continue; for
Sir George Chowne, in our Fathers Memory, being desirous to abridge and
contract all his Estate, into the County of Sussex, alienated this Seat to
Nicholas Miller Esquire, who upon his Decease, bequeathed it to his Nephew Sir
Nicholas Miller, to whom we ascribe the new Additions, which are set out with
all the Circumstances both of Art and Magnificence; and is now possessed by his
Son and Heir Hump. Miller Esquire.

Pencehurst is seated upon the utmost Boundary of the Lowy of Tunbridge, and
was an eminent Mansion of a very Ancient Family whose Surname was Penchester,
of whom there is mention in the Great Survey of England, taken in the twentieth
year of William the Conqueror, vulgarly called Doomes-day Book, and in this
Family did the possession reside, until the two Daughters and Coheirs of the
famous Sir Stephen de Penchester, who was Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and
Constable of Dover Castle, in the Reign of Edward the second, and who died
seized of it, in the year of that Prince's Government, Rot. Esc. Numb....
divided the Inheritance; Joane the eldest was matched to Henry Lord Cobham of
Roundall in Shorn, and she carried away Allington-castle, Alice the other
Daughter and Coheir was wedded to John Lord Columbers, and she had Pencehurst,
and other Lands for her proportion. And he had Issue by her Thomas de
Columbers, who by his Deed dated at Pencehurst, in the eleventh year of Edward
the third, passes away his Right in it to Sir John de Poultney, and he in the
twelfth year of the abovementioned Prince, obtained a Charter of Free Warren
to his Manor of Pencehurst, and in the twentieth year of Edward the third,
paid Aid for it, at making the Black Prince Knight; and held it at his Decease,
which was in the twenty third year of that Prince, and left it to his Son
William Poultney, who immediately after alienated it to Guy Lovain, who had
Issue Sir Nicolas Lovain, who held Pencehurst, in the forty fourth year of
Edward the third, and married Margaret eldest Daughter to John Vere Earl of
Oxford, re-married to Henry Lord Beaumont, and after to Sir John Devereux,
Knight of the Garter, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Constable of
Dover-castle, and Steward of the Kings House, in the eleventh year of King
Richard the second. In the sixteenth year of whose reign, he had License by
Letters Patents to fortify and embattel his Mansion House at Pencehurst. His
Daughter and Heir was matched to Walter Lord Fitz-water, from whom the Earls of
Sussex descended: and he had a Brother named Sir Walter Devereux, from whom the
late Earl of Essex was derived, and the Arms of this Sir John Devereux were not
long since extant in a Window, on the North-side of Pencehurst Church; But he
only enjoyed this Manor in Right of his Wife, for after her Death it devolved
to Philip St. Clear of Aldham St. Clear in Eightham, who married Margaret
Daughter of Sir Nicolas Lovain, abovementioned, Sister and Heir to her Brother
Nicolas Lovain, who died without Issue. And by her he had John St. Clear, who
passed away his Right here to John Duke of Bedford, third Son to Henry the
fourth, and he enjoyed Pencehurst at his Decease, which was in the fourteenth
year of Henry the sixth: but dying without Issue, it came down to Humphrey Duke
of Gloucester, fourth Son of Henry the fourth, who was strangled in the Abbey of
Bury, by the procurement and practices of the Duke of Suffolk: and he likewise
going out without Posterity, it returned to the Crown. And Henry the sixth, in
the twenty fifth year of his reign, granted it to Humphrey Stafford Duke of
Buckingham, whose unfortunate Grandchild, Edward Duke of Buckingham,
endeavoring by a specious Semblance of Vanity and Ostentation, gilded with
all the Cunning and Pomp of Magnificence to make himself popular, and entering
afterward into Consultation with a Monk, and another, who pretended to the
dark Art of Necromancy, about the Succession of the Crown, poured in so many
Jealousies into the Bosom of Henry the eighth, which were multiplied to the
height of Treason by the malice of Cardinal Wolsey, that nothing could allay or
appease them, but the Effusion of this man's Blood, in the twelfth year of that
Prince, upon a Scaffold. Upon whose unfortunate Exit, this Manor escheated to
the Crown, and here it remained, until King Henry the eighth, granted it to his
faithful Servant Sir Ralph Vane, who being entangled with John Duke of
Somersett, in that obscure Design, which was destructive to them both, in the
fourth year of Edward the sixth; this was again seized upon by the Crown, as
escheated by his Conviction, and remained with its Revenue, until the
abovesaid Prince, in the sixth year of his Government, by Royal Concession
planted the Inheritance in Sir William Sidney his Tutor, who was likewise Lord
Chamberlain of his Household, and one of his Privy Council: from whom it is
descended to his great Grandchild, the Right Honorable Robert Earl of
Leicester, designed Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, by the late King Charles, and
he is the instant Proprietary of it.

Pencehurst Halymote is another little Manor in this Parish, and had still the
same Owners with Pencehurst, and upon the Tragedy of Edward Duke of Buckingham,
devolving by Escheat to the Crown, lay couched in the Royal Revenue, until the
State not many years since, passed it away by Grant to Colonel Robert Gibbons.

Pepenbury, vulgarly called Pembury, is seated in the Hundreds of Watchlingston
and Twyford, and contains within the Limits of it that noted Seat called
Bayhall, which was the Ancient Seat of the Ancient Family of Colepepers. The
first of which whom I find made eminent by Record, is Thomas de Colepeper, who
was as appears by the Bundels of uncertain years in the Pipe-Office one of the
Recognitores Magnae Assisae, in the reign of King John; a place, if we consider
the Meridian of those Times, for which it was calculated, that is, before the
establishment of the Conservators of the Peace, of eminent Trust and
Concernment. And certainly this man was Father of that Thomas Colepeper, who
was brought upon the Stage, and his Tragedy represented at Leeds Castle, where
he was sacrificed to the Anger of Edward the second, because he was a more
faithful Castellan to the Lord Badelesmer, then he was a Loyal Subject to his
Sovereign, and with his Life he lost his Estate here at Pepenbury: Yet I find
by the close Rols of the seventeenth year of Edward the second, Memb. 5. that
there was much of his Land here, and in other places, by the Indulgence of that
Prince, restored to his Son Thomas de Colepeper, but yet the Manor and this
Seat remained lodged in the Crown; yet certainly it was no contemptible parcel
of Land, that was granted back: for Richard the second by Royal Concession gave
License to Thomas Colepeper to enclose fifty Acres of Land into a Park at
Pepenbury. But to advance: In the twenty fifth year of Henry the sixth, the
Crown devests it self of its Right to both these places, and transplants it by
Grant into Humphrey Stafford the Duke of Buckingham, from whom they descended
to his unfortunate Grandchild, Edward Duke of Buckingham, who lost both his
Life and Estate, being attainted in the thirteenth year of Henry the eighth:
After his Tragedy, they continued until the twenty fourth year of Henry the
eighth, in the possession of the Crown, and then they were passed away by Grant
to Sir Edward Guldford, and again confirmed to him, in the twenty eighth year
of that Prince's reign, and from him not long after by Joane his Female Heir,
they increased the Patrimony of John Dudley, after Duke of Northumberland, and
he in the thirtieth year of Henry the eighth, alienated them to Thomas Cromwell
Earl of Essex, whose Story, Tragedy, and Attaint, in the thirty second year of
the abovesaid Prince, are represented to our view in such obvious Characters,
that I shall not need again to unvail them. Upon his ruinous Catastrophe, they
revert to the Crown, and lay shut up in the Royal Revenue, until the thirty
seventh year of Henry the eighth, and then they were made by a new Grant the
Inheritance of William Wybourn and Anthony Brown Esquires; but that Proportion
which was settled in Brown, was not long resident in that Family; for in the
sixth year of Queen Elizabeth, it was alienated to William VVybourn Esquire:
nor was the Interest of these places of any long Date after this in VVybourn,
for in our Grandfathers Memory, the Fate of Sale annexed them to the Patrimony
of Thomas Sackvill Lord Buckurst, whose Grandchild the Right Honorable Edward
Sackvill Earl of Dorset, not many years since conveyed his Right in them to
Mr....... Amherst.

Halkewell is an eminent Manor in this Parish and was a Branch of that
Demeasne, which fell under the Signory of the Priory of Begham, and so remained
until the Dissolution, and then it was by Henry the eighth, about the Time of
their suppression, that is, 1525. granted to John VVybourn, who was Tenant to
that Abbey upon the Suppression; but was Anciently seated at a place called
Culverdens, whither they arrived from about Crofton in Orpington, where they
originally were planted, about the latter end of Henry the third: and from this
John VVybourn, was Mr. Benjamin VVybourn descended, who upon his late Death
has left this Manor to his Widow Mrs. Blanch VVybourn, eldest Daughter to Sir
John Philipott of the County of South-Hampton.

Bencrouch, Highlands, and Prigles, were Manors which related to the Patrimony
of the Abbey of Rothers-bridge in Sussex, and in the year 1525, were pared off
from the Ecclesiastical Revenue by Cardinal Wolsey, when he laid the
Foundations of his Stately College at Christ-church in Oxford, which, like
some Embrio, for want of Maturity, became imperfect and indigested by his
Death, and then these places, being found in his Hands at his Decease, were
seized upon by Henry the eighth, who in the twenty fourth year, granted them to
George Guldford Esquire, who not long after, conveyed them by Sale to Sir
Alexander Colepeper, who had a Confirmation of them from the Crown, about the
thirty fifth year of that Prince's Government, and in this Family did they
continue laid up, until the Title was in our Fathers remembrance, dislodged,
and by Sale resigned up to Nicholas Miller Esquire, who upon his Decease
without Issue, left them to his Nephew, Sir Nicholas Miller; and he upon his
late Decease, has left them to his Son and Heir Humphrey Miller Esquire.

Preston situated in the Hundred of Feversham, contains sundry places within
the Boundaries of it, of no vulgar Account. The first is Makenade, which was
the Mansion for many Ages, of Gentlemen of that Sitname, whereof William
Makenade was Sheriff of Kent, in the thirty third year of Edward the third, and
held his Shrievalty at this House, which then was of more Magnificence, though
now it lie almost gasping in its own Ruins, being crushed into that Disorder
by the rough Hand of Time; from this Man it descended to his Grandchild
William Makenade, who in the eighth year of Henry the fourth, dying without
Issue-male, Constance Makenade, his only Daughter became his Heir, who carried
this Seat along with her, to her Husband John VVaterslip, by whom she had Issue
Margaret, matched to Henry London, and Joan wedded to Thomas Matthew, who upon
the Division of the Estate, shared this House, and the Land which related to
it; in which Family after the Inheritance had been for several years shut up,
it at length by Sale went out to Maycot, who about the Beginning of Queen
Elizabeth, passed it away by Sale to Martin James Esquire, Register of the
Chancery, whose Great Grandchild Mr........ James, enjoys the present
Fee-Simple of it.

Perry Court in Preston was the Mansion of a good old Family called Barrett,
who enjoyed this Seat as high as the reign of Edward the second, and then, I
find it was under the Signiory of one John de Perry, to whom, and to whose
Family it seems, it afforded anciently, both Seat and Surname: Valentine
Barrett, who matched with Cicelie, Daughter and Coheir of Marcellus At Leeze,
and Niece of Sir Richard At Leeze, was the last of the Name who held this
place; for he determined in Cicelie his only Daughter and Heir, who was wedded
to John Darrell of Cale-hill Esquire, for his first Wife, who was elder Brother
of Sir William Darrell, under-Treasurer of England, branched out from the
knightly Family of the Darrells of Sesay in York-hire whose Heir General
matched with the Ancestor of Dawney, now Proprietary of that place, and by this
Alliance, Perry Court came to be knit to to the Demeasn of Darrell of
Cale-hill, for many Descents, until, in the reign of Henry the eighth, it fell
to be divided between two Brothers, Sir James Darrell Knight, and John Darrell
Gentleman. John Darrell in the first year of Henry the eighth, alienated his
proportion to Stephen Jennins, and he in the sixth year of that Prince,
conveyed it to Thomas Michell and he in the eighth of his reign, passed it away
to Robert Dokket, who two years after demised it to Alan Percy; and Alan Percy
in the fourteenth year of Henry the eighth, transmitted it by Sale, to John
Park, who likewise purchased the other Moiety, the same year of Sir James
Darrell, and so became sole Owner of Perry Court, from whom by Elizabeth his
Sole Daughter and Heir, it was carried off, to John Roper of Lingsted Esquire,
and he in the twenty fifth year of Q. Eliz. transferred all his Concernment in
it to William Finch, by whose Daughter and Coheir, it was annexed to the
Inheritance of Sir Drue Drewry of Norfolk, and he in the Beginning of King
James, passed it away to Thomas Bennet Esquire, whose Descendants are still
entitled to the Possession of it.

Westwood is a third place in Preston not to be declined in our Account. It
was, as high as I can trace out, under the Jurisdiction of the eminent Family
of Poynings. Michaell Poynings, who was Son of Thomas Lord Poynings, held it at
his Death, which was in the forty third year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 14. And from him did it by a constant Tide of uninterrupted Interest,
surrender it self up to Sir Edward Poynings, who in the fourteenth year of
Henry the eighth, dyed without any lawful Issue, and as it appeared too then
without any collateral Alliance, that could by any Title knit by never so far
distant an Affinity to him lay the Foundations of any pretended Claim to his
estare; so that it escheated to the Crown, and K.H. the eighth in the thirty
second and thirty third of his Rule granted it to I. Limsey, who not many years
after, passed it away to Alderman Garret of London Ancestor to Sir John Garret
of the County of Hertford Baronet, in whom the possession of this place is at
this instant resident.

Preston in the Hundred of Wingham, was the Inheritance of the Lord Leybourn.
William de Leybourn, had a Grant of a Market and a Fair, to his Manor of
Preston, in the thirty fifth year of Edward the first; from whom it descended
to his Son Roger de Leybourn, who went out in a Daughter and Heir called
Juliana Leybourn, so often mentioned in this Discourse, who first matched to
John de Hastings, a Kinsman of Laurence de Hastings Earl of Pembroke. That he
was not his Son, is most evident, for then he must by Consequence, have been
her second Husband: for William de Clinton who was her second Husband, and has
been by public Records, always so reputed, deceased by the Testimony of all,
in the twenty eighth of Edward the third: Juliana his Wife, in the forty third
year of that Prince, Rot. Esc. Number. 57. And John de Hastings in the forty ninth
year of Edward the third, which upon a serious Computation of Time, makes it
impossible that this John de Hasting, whom all conclude to have been her first
Husband should be that John, who was Son to Laurence Earl of Pembroke; nor
could it be any other William de Clinton, then this before mentioned. First,
because he was the last Earl of Huntington of the Name. Secondly, if we should
make him to be any other, he must be designed Husband for this Juliana, after
the Death of this John de Hasting, who survived this Juliana six years, as
appears by the former ballancing of Time, which will appear altogether absurd
and impossible. Thirdly, all do concur, that this William de Clinton who was
her second Husband, was Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, in the twelfth year of
Edward the third, Admiral of the Narrow-Seas Westward in the fifteenth year,
and had the Custody of all the Kings Forests Southwards beyond Trent, in the
seventeenth year of that Prince's Government, which could be no other, than
this William Earl of Huntington, who although he were fruitful in Offices, he
was not so in Children, for he dyed without Issue by this Lady Juliana, who
after his death remained in the State of Widowhood (for ought I can yet
discover) until her decease: for in the Escheat-roll mentioned before, she is
styled Comitissa de Huntington, upon whose death, none appearing either
directly or collaterally, who justly could entitle themselves to her Patrimony,
the Crown claimed it as an escheat; and Richard the second, granted it to Sir
Simon de Burleigh, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, who being afterward
attainted, in the tenth year of that Prince it was re-invested in the royal
Revenue, and was not long after by Richard the second, granted to the Abbey of
St. Mary Grace on Tower Hill, and some part of it to the Priory of Canons
Langley, and sometimes written Childrens Langley: and here it dwelt until the
general Suppression, and then King Henry the eighth, in the thirty fifth year
of his reign, granted it to Sir Thomas Moile, whose Daughter and Coheir Amy
Motle, incorported it into the demeasne of her Husband Sir Thomas Kempe: where
it had had no long abode, when this Sir Thomas dyed without Issue-male, and
left his estate to be divided between four Daughters and Coheirs: Anne one of
whom, carried this away to Sir Thomas Chichley, of the County of Cambridge,
whose Son Thomas Chichley Esquire, has lately by Sale transmitted his Right in
it, to Mr...... Spence, and Mr. Robert Spence of Baukham in Sussex.

Preston by VVingham had the Grant of a Market procured to it on the Monday,
and a Fair of three days continuance, at the Feast of St. Cross, in the thirty
fifth of Edw. the first. Sir Simon de Burleigh, had the Grant of a Market
renewed to this place on the Friday, and a Fair by the space of three days at
the Feast of St. Mildred the Virgin, in the tenth year of Richard the second.

Petham gives Name in part, to that Hundred wherein it has its Position, being
called the Hundred of Bredge and Petham, and was always a Manor folded up in
the revenue of the Archbishop, though I confess I cannot trace out in the
wilderness of Antiquity who was the first Donor. If you peruse the Pages of
Doomes-day Book, you will find it there thus represented; Petham est proprium
Manerium Archiepiscopi and in Tempore Edwardi Regis se defendebat pro VII
Sullings, and nunc similiter, and est appretiatum XX lb. And this is enough to
refute that mistake in Eadmerius not long since printed by Mr. Seldom: which I
believe is only by Accident and not voluntary, which says that Anselm mortgaged
or pawned Peckham to the Monks of Canterbury which was long before given to
them by Q. Edgiva: Indeed it should have been printed Petham; that being always
as you have seen a Manor of the Archbishops, till it was engaged, which it
seems was never redeemed; for it continued in the revenue of the Monks in
Christchurch, until the Dissolution; and then it was transplanted into the
revenue of the Crown, and lay there until K. James in our Fathers memory
granted it to Tho. Thompson Esquire; Ancestor to Mr. Thompson Esquire; who now enjoys
the possession of it.

Swerdling is a Manor in this Parish of as eminent Account as any in this
Track, and was the Capital Mansion of the Noble and ancient Family of Valoigns.
Ruallo de Valoigns was Sheriff of Kent in the first year of Henry the second,
and in the Pipe-rolls of that year, is written of Swerdling: and he was witness
to King Stephen's Charter, Rot. Pipae de An. 13. Hen. tertii.
whereby he grants the Mill at East-Bridge in Canterbury to the Monks of
Christchurch. Waretius de Valoigns is in the Catalogue of those Kentish
Gentlemen who assisted Richard the first at the Siege of Acon in Palestine.
Robert de Valoigns had the Repute of a Baron in the thirteenth year of Henry
the third, and under that Notion held the fourth part of a Knights Fee of
Wallingford Castle. Allan de Valoigns, was Sheriff of Kent, in the thirty
first, thirty second, thirty third, and thirty fourth years of Henry the third,
and held his Shrievalty at Swerdling. Waretius de Valoigns in the forty fifth
year of Henry the third, by his Deed remits diverse Services to Cicely Wife of
Robert de Grencbold which were due from her to his Manor of Swerdling. William
de Valoigns was Sheriff of Kent the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth years of
Edward the first, and his Son Sir William de Valoigns was engaged with Edward
the first at the Siege of Carlaverock in Scotland, and for some remarkable
Service there performed, received the Order of Knighthood. Henry de Valoigns
was Sheriff of Kent in the fourteenth year of Edward the third, and he had
Issue Waretius de Valoigns, in whom the Male-line failed, so that his two
Daughters, (one matched to Sir Thomas Fogge Grandchild to Otho Fogge, who came
out of Lancashire into Kent about the Beginning of Edw. the first, and the
other wedded to Tho. de Aldon) became his Heirs: and this upon the breaking of
the estate into parcels fell to be the proportion of Fogge, in which Name after
it had for diverse ages continued fixed, it was in that Age we style our
Grandfathers alienated to Spelman, and this Family not many years since
determining in a Female Heir, it is now by matching with her become the
Inheritance of Hadds.

Sapinton in Petham was the Inheritance of a Family called Bregge; for in the
forty second year of Edward the third, I find Jo. Bregge conveys this Manor to
Sir Richard Atteleeze, and he dying without Issue, it descended to Marcellus
Atteleeze, who was his Brother and Heir at Law; but he suddenly after expired,
and with him the Name in Daughters and Coheirs, whereof Luce who was one of
them, was first matched to John Norton Esquire; and after to William Langley of
Knolton, whose Heirs about the latter end of Richard the second, concurred in a
joint and mutual Bargain and Sale, and passed away their Interest in this
Manor; which was too much disordered and ravel'd whilst it lay thus mingled,
to George Ballard Esquire; from whom by the Clew of several Ages the Title went
along to Nicholas Ballard Esquire, who about the latter end of Philip and Mary,
alienated it to Langford, and from this Name the four Brothers joining in the
Sale; in that Age which was circumscribed within our Fathers Remembrance, it
was carried off by Sale to Cranmer of Canterbury, whose Son Mr......... Cranmer
is by Descent, successively entitled to the present Propriety of it.

Hauts-place in this Parish was the Fountain from whence that noble Family
which fell under that Surname originally streamed out, which afterward
dispersed it self in sub-divided Rivolets over the face of this County. Ivo de
Haut, the first of this Name that ancient Record represents to us, is mentioned
in a Book kept in the Exchequer called Liber de Terris Templariorum, which is a
Survey of those Lands that Order held in England in the year of Grace One
thousand one hundred and eighty; and there it is affirmed that he held this
Manor of Temple Waltham, and from this Ivo de Haut did the Title in a
never-ebbing Current of Descent glide down to Sir William Haut, who was Sheriff
of Kent in the sixteenth year, and then again promoted to that Office in the
twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth, and not long after deceased, and with
him the Name found its Funeral in two Daughters and Coheirs, one of which
termed Elizabeth, was matched to Thomas Colepeper of Bedgebury Esquire, to whom
this place in the right of his Wife devolved. And from his Family in the Age
within the confines of our Grandfathers Remembrance, it was passed away by
Sale to Salkeld, who not many years since conveyed the Possession over to
Bateman.

There was a Chauntry founded at Depden in this Parish (as appears by a
Manuscript in the Hands of Mr. Thomas Den Recorder of Canterbury, lately
deceased,) founded and endowed by William Gratian Priest in the Reign of Henry
the fourth; Whose Revenue upon the Dissolution of this Chauntry in the second
year of Edward the sixth, was granted to Jo. Come and Richard Almot, who not
long after passed it away to Wilt. Forbrasse Yeoman, a Name in some old Deeds
written Fortbrasse, which argues it to be of French extraction, and from this
Family it was about the Beginning of K. James carried off by Sale to Gregory,
who within the Verge of some few years fast past, alienated the Title to
Sladden of Liminge.

Postling lies in the Hundred of Hene, and was, in Ages of a very high Ascent,
the Patrimony of the Noble Family of Columbers, a Name in Times of elder
Cognizance of very great reputation in the West of England; Philip de
Columbariis or Columbers, held it at his Decease, which was in the fifth year
of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 5. But after him I discover no more of this
Family at this place. The next that is represented to be Possessor of it, is
Hugh de Audley, and he held it as appears by ancient Court-rolls in the reign
of Edward the second, and Edward the third, and passed it away to Delves of
Delves Court in the County of Chester, where it seems it had no long abode; for
about the forty third year of Edward the third, John de Delves alienates it to
Richard Earl of Arundell; for which the Earl is pardoned, because he purchased
it without License first obtained from the King as appears, Pat. de Ano 43.
Edw. tertii Part secunda Memb. septim. And in this Family was it for many
Generations fixed and resident; until the thirty eighth year of Henry the
eighth, and then it was by Sale transmitted to Sir Anthony Aucher. But the
Tenure of it in this Family was brief and Transitory; for about the Beginning
of Q. Elizabeth it went away from this Name to Robert Cranmer Esquire, Nephew
to Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, who expiring in a Female Heir, she
brought it along with her to Sir Arthur Harris of Crixey in Essex; from whom it
is devolved to his Son and Heir Sir Cranmer Harris, who holds the instant
Possession of it.

Henewood is another Manor in this Parish, from whence the Honywood of
Elmsted, and those of Pett in Charing do extract their Surname: And Edmund de
Honywood who in the reign of Hen. the third is remembered in the Front and Van
of those in the Leiger Book of Horton Priory, who were munificent Benefactors
to that Covent, is set down there to have been of Postling, and as this Place
was then, so is it still through all that Flux and Decursion of Time which has
since elapsed, wound up in that revenue, which acknowledges the Signorie and
Jurisdiction of this ancient Name and Family.

Pluckley in the Hundred of Calehill, was originally a Manor which owned the
Archbishops of Canterbury for Lords of the Fee, until Lanfranc Archbishop of
Canterbury gave it to William Brother of John de Cobham, who in the Grant is
styled Miles Archiepiscopi; not that he was ever any Knight or Soldier that
attended upon him; but that he granted him this Manor to hold in Knights
Service of him and his Successors, which was very usual and customary for the
Archbishops and other great Prelates to do; until King Edward the first
growing jealous of the Power and Grandeur of the Clergy, who endeavored by
their Bounty and magnificent Donations to oblige both the principal of the
Nobility and Gentry, and chain them up by these extraordinary Engagements to
their Devotion, caused the Statute called Quia emptores Terrarum, in the one
and twentieth of his reign to be made, which restrains and supersedes for the
future all new Creations of Manors. But to proceed, William de Cobham being
thus enstated in this Manor, in Gratitude to the first Donor, altered his Name
from Cobham to Pluckley. Sir Richard de Pluckley this man's Grandchild,
flourished in the reign of King Stephen, and Henry the second, and founded the
Church at Pluckley; and from this man did William de Pluckley lineally branch
out, in whom the Male-Line concluded, so that Agnes his Daughter and Heir, by
matching with John Surrenden Esquire, cast Pluckley into the Possession of that
Name and Family: where it had not long sojourned, when the same Vicissitude
brought it over to Haut: for James Haut wedded Joan Heir General of John
Surrenden, and so became Possessor of Pluckley; but in this Name the Title was
as volatile and mutable as in the former: for this man went out in Daughters
and Coheirs, one of them was wedded to Gouldwell, and Christian the other was
matched to John Dering Esquire, in whose Right he was entitled to the Signory
of Pluckley. Now if you will inquire, where lay the ancient Land of Dering, if
my Assertion might be credited, I should affirm, that it was at Stamford by
Hieth, where they were Lords of some part of the little Mannot of Heyton: for
by an old Roll, I find that Normanus de Morinis, married Kineburga Daughter and
Heir of Deringus, and his Son as was Customary in those Times, called himself
Deringus de Morinis, and matched with Elveva Sister and Heir of Alanus de
Heyton, and so was invested in the Propriety of the Manor of Heyton, from whom
it successively came down to Richard Fitz Dering, who was Son of Dering, and
great Grandchild to this man, who was the first who deserted the Surname de
Morinis, and assumed that of Dering, and died possessed of the Manor of Heyton,
in the forty second year of Henry the third. And from this Richard Fitz Dering
is Sir Edward Dering Baronet, now lineally extracted, who is the instant Lord
of Pluckley and Surrenden Dering, where Sir Edward Dering Knight and Baronet,
not many years since deceased, raised that elegant Structure, as eminent for
its Magnificence and Beauty, as it is for its Contrivance and Curiosity.

Pevington was formerly a Parish, and had a Church dedicated to St. Mary,
though it be now languished into Dis-use, and grown an adjunct to Pluckley; The
Patrons as well as Proprietaries of it were the Pevingtons, a Knightly Family,
who borrowed their Surname from hence. The first whom I meet with, is Sir Ralph
de Pevington, who flourished here, in the reign of King John, and King Henry
the third, and was Father to Sir William de Pevington, who likewise died
possessed of this Manor, in the fifty fourth year of Henry the third, from whom
descended John and William Pevington, who dying without Issue, in the seventh
year of Henry the fourth, Amabilia their Sister, matched to John Gobion, became
their Heir, and she lies buried in the Church of Austin-Friars at Canterbury,
and is mentioned to have been a liberal Benefactresse to that Cloister, about
the Time of her Decease, which was 1405. and had Issue by him Julian their only
Daughter, who was about the twenty seventh year of Henry the sixth, matched to
William Brent, from whom descended Thomas Brent, in whom the Name and Male-Line
together was extinguished, so that Margaret Brent matched to John Dering, was
the visible Heir of his Estate, amongst which this Manor of Pevington, was
enwrapped, which came down in Right of this Alliance to Sir Edward Dering
Knight and Baronet, who upon his Decease gave it after the Death of his Mother,
the Widow Dowager of Sir Anthony Dering, to Mr. Henry Dering, the eldest Son by
his last Lady.

Malmains in Pluckley, was the Inheritance of a Family of that Surname. Eleanor
Wife of John de Malmins died seized of it, in the fourteenth year of Edward the
third, Rot. Esc. Number. 51. And after by Court-rols, I discover Henry Malmains to
be possessed of it, from whom it descended to Richard Malmains, who died (as the
Date upon his Tombstone in Plukley Church discovers to us) in the year 1440.
and left John Malmains his Heir, after whom I descry no farther mention of this
Family; at this place: The next Family which succeeded in the Inheritance was
Dering, not by any Right derived from Haut: for they had espoused the Heir of
that Name before Malmains was extinguished: nor could it be by any Female Heir
achieved, for there were but two Coheirs of this Branch of Malmains, who were
wedded to Monins and Gouldwell. And if it be answered that Dering married the
Heir of the eldest House: To that I answer, that Nicholas Malmains, who was of
the elder Line, deceased in the twentieth year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc.
Number. 15. and left only a Daughter and Heir, who was matched to William de
Grandison: so that it is evident by the Premises, that this Manor of Malmains
devolved to Dering the instant Proprietary, not by any match of Haut, or of
this Family it self, by any Female Heir or Coheir of Malmains, but by Purchase
only.

Shurland is the last place of Account: It has been the Patrimony of Betenham
of Betenham in Cranbroke, for many Hundred years. Stephen de Betenham is
mentioned in Court-rols, which take their Rise or Date from the Government of
Hen, the third: and certainly this is that Stephen de Betenham, which is
mentioned to be one of the Recognitores Magnae Assisae, (an Office of very
great Importance in elder Times) in those Pipe-rols, which relate to the reign
of King John; and from this Stephen has the Title of this place, by a constant
and even Chain of Ages, threaded together into an unbroken Succession, come
down to Mr. Betenham, who holds the present Signory and Possession of it.

Plumsted in the Hundred of Lesnes, was in the year of Grace 960. given by King
Edgar, to the Abbot and Convent of St. Augustins in Canterbury (as Thorn their
Chronicler testifies) under the Notion of four ploughed Lands, which afterward
Godwin Earl of Kent, violently tore from their Patrimony, and settled upon his
Son Tostius: but it was restored to that Seminary by William the Conqueror, and
remained fastened to their Revenue, until the rough hand of Henry the eighth, by
a public suppression unlinked it, and then it was by that Prince, in the
thirty sixth year of his reign, granted to Sir Edward Boughton of
Burwash-court, from whom it is now devolved by Descent to his Successor
Mr....... Boughton.

The Abbot of St. Augustines, to add more eminence to this Manor, not only
obtained a Charter of Free Warren to Plumsted, in the thirty sixth year of
Henry the third; but likewise by Grant procured a Market to be held here weekly
on the Tuesday, and a Fair yearly three Days, at St. Nicolas, videlicet, the
Eve, the Day, and Day after; both which were allowed before the Judges
Itinerant, in the seventh year of Edward the first.

Plumsted had anciently Laws and Ordinances for the better securing the Mounds
and Banks of the Mersh, against the Eruptions and Inundations of the Thames,
which almost were of the same Resemblance and Complexion with those of Romney
Mersh. A Scale of several Statutes, are delivered to us by Rastall in his
Abridgement, which concerned the Inning and preserving of Plumsted Level. The
first was enacted in the twenty second year of Henry the eighth, Cap. 3. and
was printed. The second was made in the fourteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, and
was never printed. The third was ratified in the twenty third of Queen
Elizabeth Cap. 13. and printed. The fourth and last was confirmed, in the
twenty seventh year of Queen Elizabeth, Cap. 27. and likewise printed.

Burwash-court is an eminent Seat in this Parish; made more illustrious by
being wrapped up in the Revenue of the Noble Family of Burgherst or Burwash.
Bartholomew de Burgherst died possessed of it, in the twenty eighth year of
Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 38. And left it to his Son Bartholomew Lord
Burwash, who in the forty third year of the abovesaid Prince, coveyed it with
much other Land to Sir Walter de Paveley, Knight of the Garter, in which Family
it continued, until the reign of Richard the second, and then it was alienated
to William Chichley, Alderman of London, who left it to his Son John Chichley,
by whose Daughter and Heir Agnes, it came to be possessed by John Tattershal of
VVell-hall in Eltham: who about the beginning of Henry the sixth, conveyed it
to Boughton, in the Descendants of which Family, it had a permanent abode,
until that Age that our Remembrance had an Aspect on, and then it was passed
away to Mr. Rowland Wilson of London, and he upon his late Decease, gave it to
his Daughter and her Heirs, who was first matched to Doctor...... Crisp, and
now secondly to Colonel...... Row of Hackney.

R. R. R. R.
RAdigunds, vulgarly called the Abbey of St. Radigunds, leads up the Van of this
Register: It was founded by Hugh the first Abbot, who was before a Monk in the
Priory of Christ-church, in the reign of King Stephen, as the Book of
Christchurch, and the Return into the Court of Augmentation made in the twenty
ninth year of Henry the eighth, do both inform me. Their Rule was derived from
Austin Bishop of Hippo, their Habit Black, whence they are sometimes styled
Black-Canons, and sometimes Canons of St. Austins. The Revenue which
appertained to this Cloister, lay not fat divided from this place, as namely at
Alkham, Sotemore, Comb, Hawking, Padlesworth, and Pising, where they had a
Manor, as appears by an Inquisition, taken in the thirty fifth year of Edward
the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 147. This upon the Dissolution lapsing with all its
Revenue to the Crown, King Henry the eighth, exchanged Pising with Thomas
Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury; but the Manor of St. Radigunds it self,
remained annexed to the Royal Revenue, until Queen Elizabeth in the thirty
second year of her reign, granted it to Simon Edolph Esquire, descended from
the Edolphs of Romney Mersh, where they were very ancient, in whose Successor,
Sir...... Edolph, the propriety of this place is still resident.

Raculver in the Hundred of VVhitstaple, had a Monastery founded here, for
Monks to live under the Rule of St. Bennet: But the Manor it self was given
with all its Train of Appendages, as namely, Pasture, Glebe, Mersh-land, and
the adjacent Shore, and estimated at twenty five Mansions or Cottages, bis
denis senisque estimatum Cassatis (those are the words of the Record by King
Eadredus, in the year nine hundred forty and eight) to the Sea of Canterbury,
in the presence of his Queen Edgiva, and Archbishop Odo: and if you will
descry what Estimate it had in the Time of the Conqueror, Doomes-day Book will
afford you a discovery. Raculf Tempore Edwardi Regis se defendebat pro VIII.
Sullings, and est appretiatum XL. lb. and II. lb. V. s. tres Minutes (that was
a Coin I believe equivalent to our now English Pence) minus.

Though the Church be now full of Solitude, and languished into Decay; yet when
Leland made his Perambulation, it was in a more splendid Equipage. If you
please to hear him, he thus describes it; The old Building of the Abbey Church,
continues (says he) having two goodly spiring Steeples. In the entering into the
Quire, is one of the fairest and most ancient Crosses, that ever I saw, nine
Foot in height, it stands like a fair Column. The Basis is a great stone, it
is not wrought; the second Stone, being round, has curiously wrought and and
painted the Images of our Savior Christ, Peter, Paul, John and James; Christ
says Ego sum Alpha and Omega; Peter says Tu es Christus Filius Dei vivi. The
sayings of the other three, were painted, Majusculis Literis Romany, but now
obliterated. The second Stone is of the Passion, The third Stone contains the
Twelve Apostles. The fourth has the Image of our Savior hanging and fastened
with four Nails, and sub pedibus sustentaculum: The highest part of the Pillar
has the Figure of a Cross. In the Church is a very ancient Book of the
Evangelies, in Majusculis Literis Romany, and in the Borders thereof is a
Crystal Stone, thus inscribed, Claudia Atepiccus. In the North-side of the
Church, is the Figure of a Bishop painted under an Arch; In digging about the
Church, they find old Buckles and Rings: The whole Print of the Monastery
appears by the old Wall. And the Vicarage was made of the Ruins of the
Monastery. There is a neglected Chapel out of the Churchyard, where some say
was a Paroch-Church, before the Abbey was suppressed, and given to the
Archbishop of Canterbury. Thus far he.

But the greatest Honor which in elder Times did accrue to this Village, was,
that King Ethelbert, after he had founded the Abbey of St. Austins, removed his
Residence from Canterbury, and fixed his Palace at this place, which his
Successors the Kings of Kent, enobled by their presence; but when this Kingdom
was swallowed up in that of Mercia, and Mercia afterward in that of the West-
Saxons; Reculver had the Grant of a Market procured to it on the Thursday, by
William Arch-B. of Canterbury, in the 7th. of Edw. the second.
this Mansion of theirs found a Sepulcher likewise in their Ruins; so that now
we can trace it out no where, but in Annals and History, since even the very
Ruins of the Ruins themselves, have now got an unknown enterment.

Helburgh is an ancient Seat in this Parish: The first that I find possessed it,
was Nicholas Tingewike, originally descended from Tingewick in the County of
Buckingham, and who likewise held large possessions at Dartford, and he dyed
seized of it, in the fourteenth year of Edward the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 182.
After this Family deserted the possession, the Pines became its Proprietaries,
of which Family was James de la Pine, who was Sheriff of Kent, in the twenty
sixth, and twenty seventh years of Edward the third, and was in the possession
of this place at his Decease, which was in the thirty third year of Edward the
third, Rot. Esc. Number. 13. And left it to his Son Thomas Pine, after whom I meet
with another James Pine, who about the Beginning of Henry the fourth, passed it
away to Cheyney, and in this Family did it reside, until the Beginning of
Queen Elizabeth; and then the Lord Henry Cheyney, who then began to retail
himself, and his estate out to Ruin in parcels, alienated this to Maycott,
whose Son Sir Cavaliero Maycott, that eminent Courtier in the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, and King James, in the entrance of that Prince into his Government,
passed it away to Sir Christopher Clive; and he immediately after, conveyed it
away to Contry, vulgarly called Cuntry, whose Son Mr. Thomas Contry, almost in
our memory, cast it by Sale into the possession of Sir Edward Masters of
Canterbury, whose Son Richard Masters Esquire, is entitled to the instant
possession of it.

Reinham in the Hundred of Milton, with Mere-court was, in the reign of H. the
first, the patrimony of the noble Family of Camville. Robert de Camville, was
engaged with Richard the first, at the Siege of Acon in Palestine. Robert de
Camville his Son, Rot. pipae: de An. 41. Hen. 3.
was an Assistant to Henry the third, in the forty second of his Rule, when he
marched from Chester against the Welsh. Geffrey de Camville was frequently
summoned to sit in Parliament as Baron, in the reign of Edward the first. After
this Family was worn out, the noble Family of Leybourn of Leybourn Castle, was
entitled to the Inheritance. Henry de Leybourn, held it in the twenty eighth
year of Edward the first, and so did Thomas de Leybourn, in the thirty fifth
year of that Prince's Government, Rot. Esc. Number. 10. And so did his Brother
likewise, William de Leybourn, who held the greatest part of it at his Death,
which was in the third year of Edward the second; and transmitted it to his
Kinsman Roger de Leybourn, in whom the Male-line determined, and he left it in
Dower to his Wife Juliana de Leybourn, who held it at her Death, which was in
the third year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 86. And after her Decease,
it was enstated on his and her Daughter and Heir Juliana de Leybourn, who for
her vast Income, merited the Title of Infanta of Kent; and she married for her
first Husband John de Hasting, a Kinsman of Laurence de Hasting: but he dyed
without any Issue by her, upon whose Exit, she was espoused to William de
Clinton, Earl of Huntingdon, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, who likewise
deceased without any posterity by her, in the twenty eighth year of Edward the
third; after whose Decease she continued a Widow until her Death, which was in
the forty third year of the abovementioned Prince, Rot. Ese. Number. 57. And is
styled in the Escheat-roll Comitissa de Huntington, which fortifies the former
Assertion, that she continued in the State of Widowhood, till her dissolution;
upon whose decease, the Crown upon an exact and solemn Inquisition,
discovering none that could enforce any Claim either directly and lineally, or
else by collateral deduction, entitled it self to her estate, as legally
escheated: and that Prince, in the fiftieth year of his reign, grants it to the
Abbey of St. Mary Grace on Tower Hill; where it was fixed, until it was by the
Suppression, wrested away, and then K. Edward the sixth, in the second year of
his reign, granted it to Sir Thomas Cheyney, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports,
and one of the Privy Council to that Prince: whose Son Henry Lord Cheyney, in
the thirteenth year of Q. Elizabeth, passed it away by Sale to Samuel Thornhil
Esquire, who upon his decease, gave it by Testament to his second Son Sir John
Thornhil not many years deceased, whose eldest Son Charles Thornhill Esquire,
is the present Heir to the propriety of it.

Silham is a second place considerable. It was the Mansion formerly of a Family
of no despicable extraction, whose Surname was Donett: John Donett dyed possessed
of this and part of the Manor of Reinham, in the thirtieth year of Edward the
third, Rot. Esc. Number. 57. And left them to his Son John Donett, who likewise
was in the possession of them at his Death, which was in the thirty sixth year
of the abovenamed Prince; and had Issue John Donett, in whom the Male-line
failed, so that his Lands at Reinham, and Silham, devolved by Margery his Sole
Daughter and Heir, to John St. Ledger Esquire, Sheriff of Kent in the ninth year
of Henry the fourth, and was descended from Hugh St. Ledger, who was one of the
Recognitores magnae Assisae, (an Office of a very great Latitude and
Circumference of power in elder Times) in the second and seventh years of King
John. In the St. Legers, the possession of these places rested not long; for
not long after that Interest which he had in Reinham, to Cheyney, and Silham to
Bloer; Cheyney transmitted his Concernment, with that part of Reinham that
related to the Priory of Leeds, to Samuel Thornhill Esquire, who disposed of it
upon his death, as is abovesaid: but Christopher Bloer, determined in Olympia
Bloer, his Heir General, who brought it over to Mr. John Tufton, in the reign
of Henry the eighth; from whom it is now come down, to the right honorable John
Tufton Earl of Thanett, who possesses the present Signory of it.

Reyersh in the Hundred of Lerkefield, though a Village of no great Account in
it self, Carews Court in Reyersh was for many descents the Inheritance of a
Family of that Surname, and remained locked up in their Demeasn until the
twelfth year of H. the sixth; and then Nich. Carew, demises it by Deed to Tho.
Watton, who upon his Decease settled it on his Nephew Will. Watton; and from him
the Thread of many descents has guided the Title down to the instant
Proprietary Mr. Will. Watton of Addington.
yet is disengaged of its original Obscurity, by the splendour and eminence of
those who successively possessed it. The first whom I find concerned in it, was
Hugh de Crescie, originally, in all probability, extracted from Crescie who is
mentioned in the Battle Abby-roll; and he dyed seized of it, in the forty
seventh year of Henry the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 42. After this Family was
mouldered away, the Says of Coldham were interessed in the possession, and
Geffrey de Say possessed it in the fifteenth year of Edward the second, Rot. Esc.
Number. 20. The next Family in Succession to these was the Mowbrays, and Elizabeth
Wife of Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and Daughter of Richard Earl of Arundell, held
it at her Decease, which was in the third year of Henry the sixth, Rot. Esc.
Number. 25. And so did her Son John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, who deceased in the
eleventh year of Henry the sixth, Rot. Esc. Number. 129. And was descended from
John Mowbray, who held it (as appears by ancient Court-rolls (as parcel of the
Barony of Bedford) in the reign of Edward the second. After the Mowbrays, the
Nevill, Barons of Aburgavenny, were invested in the Fee, and remained seated in
the possession, until the reign of Q Elizabeth, and then Henry Lord Nevill, in
the twenty ninth year dying without Issue-male, it was disposed with much other
Land to his Brother Sir Edward Nevill, from whom it is now brought down to his
Grandchild John Lord Nevill, who enjoys the instant Inheritance of it.

Ridley in the Hundred of Acstane, acknowledges it self to have been anciently
a Branch of the patrimony of the Lords Leybourn: and Rog. de Leybourn, in the
55th. year of H. the third, sells Ridley excepting the Advowson, to Bartholomew
VVodeton. In which Family the Title was not very permanent; for in the reign of
Edward the third, I find the VVallis's to have been its Proprietaries; Augustine
Wallis obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Manor of Ridley in the twenty
second year of Edward the third, and dyed possessed of it, in the twenty eighth
year of that Prince's Government, Rot. Esc. Number. 55. After the VVallis's were
expired and vanished, the Rickhills held this Manor, where it was not long
constant; for William Rickhill about the sixteenth of Henry the sixth,
conveyed it by Deed to Tho. Edingham or Engham; who again in the ninteenth year
of the abovesaid Prince, passed it away by Fine to Robert Savery; from which
Name not many years after, it came by the same Vicissitude, to be the
Inheritance of Bevill, in whose Descendants it remained, until the Beginning
of Henry the eighth, and then it was by purchase fastened to the demeasn of
Fitz: and Walter Fitz by Deed, whose dare commences from the twenty seventh of
Henry the eighth, conveyed it to Will. Sidley of Southfleet Esquire; Ancestor to
Sir Charles Sidley Baronet, to whom upon the late Decease of his Brother Sir
William Sidley, it owns for its present Possessor.

Ridlingswould is a Member of Dover, Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer obtained the
Grant of a Market to Ridling swould and a three Days Fair at St. Nicolas, in
the ninth of Edward the 2. as appears, Pat. 9. Ed. 2. N. 57.
and was parcel of the Honor of Fulberts, and Fulbert de Dover held it, as
appears by Doomes-day Book, in the twentieth year of William the Conqueror, in
Ages of a nearer Approach to us, that is, in the reign of Henry the third.
Richard de Dover, and Roesia his Wife were possessed of it, as appears, Ex
Bundellis Annor. incertorum Henrici tertii, Rot. Esc. Number. 237. When this
Family went out, the Badelesmeres stepped in. Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, that
powerful Baron, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Lands here, in the
ninth year of Edward the second, and was Steward too, to the Household of King
Edward the second, as appears by a Confirmation of the Charter of the City of
London, which bears Date from that year of Edward the second, and to which he
as Test writes himself Steward of the Kings Household; but not long after being
entangled in that Combination, which was made by Thomas Earl of Lancaster, and
sundry other Barons against that Prince, he forfeited both his Estate and Life,
as the price of that seditious Attempt; but this with much other Land was
restored to his Son Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, in the second year of Edward
the third, but he died without Issue, in the twelfth year of that Prince, Rot.
Esc. Number. 44. So that his large Revenue was proportionably divided between his
four Sisters and Coheirs, whereof this was a Limb, and fell in upon the
partition to the Inheritance of John Vere Earl of Oxford by Matilda de
Badelesmer, and he held it at his Death, which was in the fortieth year of
Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 38. But in this Family it did not long
continue after his Exit; for in the reign of Richard the second, I find Robert
Belknap possessed of it, and enjoyed it at his Death, which was in the second
year of Henry the fourth, after his Return from his Exilement into Ireland,
whither he was banished for his too active asserting the Prerogative against
the Liberty of the Populacie, in the tenth year of Richard the second. In the
second year of Richard the third, I find William Belknap Esquire, was in the
Fruition of it at his Decease, Rot. Esc. Number. 16. and from him did it devolve
to his Successor Sir Henry Belknap, in whom this Name was extinguished, so that
his Estate was resolved into several parcels, which came over to Alice his
Daughter and Coheir matched to Sir William Shelley, Anne married to Sir Robert
Wotton, and Elizabeth wedded to Sir Philip Cook of Giddie-hall in Essex, and
in these Families did the complicated Interest of this place remain
concentered, until that Age, which fell under our Grandfathers Cognizance, and
then it was by joint-Concurrence passed away to Edelph, from whom it is brought
down to Sir...... Edolph, who holds the present Signory of it.

Oxney-house in this Parish, was an Ancient Seat of the Noble Family of Criol.
Matilda Widow of Simon de Criol died possessed of it, in the fifty second year of
Henry the third, and transmitted it to Bertram de Criol, who held it at his
death, which was in the twenty third year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number.
After him his Son Bertram de Criol was settled in the possession, but was not
long lived after his Father, for he died in the thirty fourth year of Edward
the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 37. and left it to his Brother John Criol, who dying
without Issue, it was brought over to his Sister Joan Criol, who by matching
with Sir Richard de Rokesley, made it the Inheritance of that Name and Family,
and was in possession of it at her Death, which was in the fifteenth year of
Edward the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 95. From whom it came down to Thomas Lord
Poynings, who had espoused Agnes one of the Coheirs of them two, and in Right
of this Alliance was his Successor, Richard Lord Poyning found invested in it
at his Death, which was in the fifteenth year of Richard the second, Part
prima, Rot. Esc. Number. 53. and left it to his Kinsman Robert de Poynings, who
passed it away by Sale to Tame, and in the fourth year of Henry the fourth,
Robert Tame paid respective Aid for it, at the Marriage of Blanch that Kings
Daughter. After Tame was worn out, the Sidleys possessed it, and John Sidley
Esquire, who was Auditor to Henry the seventh, added much to this House, as
well as to his Estate, and from him is it now descended to Sir Charles Sidley
Baronet, whom it owns for present Lord of the Fee.

Ripple in the Hundred of Cornile, was a Manor which always related to the
Abbey of St. Austins, and was, in the Surrender of this Abbey into the Hands of
Henry eighth, in the twenty ninth year of that Prince, found to be involved in
the Demeasne of that Covent, from whom it went over to the Crown, and remained
there until Queen Elizabeth, in the thirty second year of her Government,
passed it away to Sir John Hall, who not long after alienated his Interest here
to Gokin, in which Family the Propriety has ever since continued. But Watling
was originally of secular Concernment, and was wound up in the Patrimony of the
Lord Leybourn. Thomas de Leybourn enjoyed it at his Decease, which was in the
thirty fifth year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 10. From whom it went
along with the Residue of his Estate to his Son Sir Roger de Leybourn, with
whom the Male-Line sunk into his Sepulcher, and Juliana de Leybourn was his
Sole Heir, and she was first matched to John de Hastings, and afterward to
William de Clinton Earl of Huntington, but had no Issue by neither, nor was
there any which could, by a Claim of collateral Affinity, stave off the Claim
and pretenses of the Crown unto her Estate; so that, upon her Decease, which
was in the forty third year of Edward the third, that Prince seized upon her
Inheritance as an Escheat, and his Granchild Richard the second, granted this
to the Abbey of Chidrens Langley, upon whose suppression it devolved with all
its perquisites to the Crown; and Henry the eighth, granted it in the thirty
fifth year of his reign to Sir Thomas Moile, one of the Justices at that Time
of this County, from whom by Amy his Daughter and Coheir, it was cemented into
the Patrimony of Sir Thomas Kempe: but it was not long after unsodered, for in
the beginning of Queen Elizabeth it was sold to William Sherley of Sussex, who
in our Grandfathers Remembrance alienated it to Crayford of Mongeham, whose
Successor (not without an eager contest commenced with one Durbon and Kidder,
by his Predecessor, who pretended an Interest in it, conveyed to them by an
antecedent Judgment, acknowledged by the abovesaid Shirley) is now settled in
the Possession of it.

River in the Hundred of Bewsborough, contains two remarkable places within the
Boundaries of it. The first is Kersoney, which was the Inheritance of a Family
called Paganell, or more vulgarly Paynell. Isolda Wife of John Paynell, held it
at her Death, which was in the seventeenth year of Edward the second. In Times
of a lower Descent, I find it in the Tenure of Phineux, the last of which Name
at this Place was Sir John Phineux, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, in
the reign of Henry the seventh, and he determining in Daughters and Coheirs,
Jane one of them, by matching with John Roper of St. Dunstans Esquire, made it
the Patrimony of that Family, from whom in our Grandfathers Remembrance, it
was passed away to Best, Ancestor to Mr....... Best of Canterbury Esquire, who
is the instant Proprietary of it. The second is Archers-Court, which gave both
Seat and Surname to a Family so called; one Nicolas Archer held it in the first
year of Edward the second, and so did Thomas le Archer, in the third year of
Edward the third, and left it to his Son William Archer, who paid respective
Aid for his Lands here at River, and at Atterton, and Coperland, in the
twentieth year of Edward the third, at the making the Black Prince Knight. From
Archer it came to a Family called Baudrede, and continued diverse years in this
Name, until in the first year of Edward the fourth, it was conveyed by Sale
with Coperland to Thomas Doilie Esquire. Afterward, in the reign of Henry the
eighth, it was exchanged with the Crown, and that Prince, in the thirty sixth
year of his managing the English Scepter, granted it to Sir James Hales, in
whose Family it remained until almost that Time, which we entitle to our
Fathers Remembrance, and then a part of it was passed away by Sale to Lee, but
the other parcel continued constant to the Interest of Hales, until not many
years since, not only that proportion, which was in the possession of Lee, but
likewise that other abovementioned, were both alienated by their respective
Proprietaries to Sir Hardres Waller.

Rodmersham in the Hundred of Milton, was the Inheritance of a Family, whose
Surname was Pine: John de la Pine enjoyed it, in the twentieth year of Henry
the third, as appears by private Evidences, and so did James de la Pine his
Grandchild, who deceased in the thirty seventh year of Edward the third, and
left it to his Son and Heir James de la Pine, a Child of nine years old, at his
Fathers Exit; and he preserved it until the latter end of Richard the second,
and then it was transmitted by Sale to Podach, now called vulgarly Pordage,
descended originally from John de Podach, who flourished as appears by an
ancient Pedigree, relating to this Family, in the reign of Henry the third, and
held Lands in the County of Devon, which bore his Name, and was called Podach;
and from this abovementioned John, is Mr. Tho. Pordage alias Podach, now of
Rodmersham, by a multiplied Efflux of many Descents lineally extracted, and
bears now the Fesse in his Coat Armor, plain, whereas by ancient Monuments,
and Seals affixed to old Evidences it is manifest, his Ancestors bore it
Checque. Upon what Grounds, the modern Alteration is established, I confess I
know not; it is enough, that the Dignity of the Family, is yet supported, by
that ancient Inheritance, which they have for so many Ages, and yet do
possess, here at Rodmersham.

Pitstock in Rodmersham, is a little Manor, which augmented the Revenue of the
Nuns of Minster in Shepey, but when that ruinous Tempest broke forth in the
reign of Henry the eighth, which like an Hurricano tore up by the Roots the
Ecclesiastical Patrimony, this was supplanted and thrown into the Demeasne of
the Crown, and then the abovesaid Prince, in the twenty ninth year of his Rule,
granted it to Sir Thomas Cheyney, and his Son Henry Lord Cheyney, about the
thirteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, alienated it to Samuel Thornhill Esquire,
who upon his Decease, gave it to his second Son Sir John Thornhill, from whom
by descendant Right, it is now come over to his Son and Heir Charles Thornhill
Esquire.

Newburgh is partly situated in Rodmersham, and partly in Lingsted, and
anciently had the Estimate of a Manor, and gave Name to a Family that was
represented to the World, under that Notion, as appears, by very old Deeds
without Date, in the Hands of Mr. Bartholomew May, too tedious here to recite.
In the twenty fourth year of Edward the first, Isabell, Wife of Henry de
Apulderfield, held it at her Death, and in the Copy of the Inquisition Roll, it
is called Manerium de Newburgh: but in Ages of a more modern Complexion, it
fell from its former Reputation, and by Disuse shrunk into Neglect and
Contempt, and is now only eminent, in that it was involved in that Estate, that
by Elizabeth Coheir of Sir William Apulderfield devolved to Sir John Phineux,
who finding his Sepulcher in Female Coheirs, Jane one of them, brought it over
to her Husband John Roper Esquire, and from him by paternal Efflux, is the
Title now wafted along, to the right honorable Christopher Roper, Baron of
Tenham, removed by no wide Distance from this place.

St. John's is the last Manor in Rodmersham, to be taken Notice of; though the
First in its Degree of Eminence because it was a principal place belonging to
the Knights Hospitallers. An Order that was established and instituted by
Gerardus, but fenced in, and empaled with New Orders and Rules, by Raimundus a
Podio, lest, debauched and softened by secular Interest, in Decursion of Time,
they might have sallied out into some Disorder and Excess. At their first
Installment, they were to be eighteen years of Age, at least, and none who were
without the Verge of that Time, were capable of this Order: they were to be
neither of Jewish nor Turkish Extraction, lest they might seem tacitly to wrap
up those principles in their Blood, which by their Vow, they were engaged to
destroy. Their Pedigree or Genealogy, was to be wholly Christian, and that of
no coorse, but of a more refined Temperament; for their Birth or Parentage was
to be noble, and that not to be sullied with the impure Tincture of Bastardy.
Yet even this Restriction had a gentler sense quilted into it, for if they were
the Natural Sons of Princes, their Birth was enobled, and the Rigor of the
Rule, was by so eminent a Descent softened and allayed, and they made capable of
this Order. Then they were by a general Obligation, to defend the Sepulcher of
Christ, to protect Pilgrims, against the Eruptions of Infidels, in their visits
made to the Holy Land, to foment no Clandestine Animosities, by engaging in
private Duells amongst themselves, which were blasted with the Black Character
of Illegality; and if the Princes of Christedome were entangled in intestine
Dissentions amongst themselves, they were to shroud themselves, under an
impartial Neutrality, lest they might destroy that Christianity, which by Oath
they were obliged to assert, if they should embark in any impious Sidings, or
partial Combinations. Lastly, they were abstracted by their Vow of Poverty,
Chastity and Obedience, from all secular Employments, or Negotiations, lest the
Fumes of Temporal Interest might cloud their Eyes, in their prospect toward
the Sepulcher; in order to which, they were not to exercise any Mercantile
Affairs, or the Designs of Usury; they were, if possible, to receive the
Sacrament thrice every year, and if not interrupted to hear Mass once a day. I
have now done with the Ingredients which made up their Vow, I shall now come to
the form of their Installment.

As for the Method of their Investiture, it was cast into this Mould. They had
a Sword delivered to them, intimating they should fight with Magnanimity; and
this was guarded with a Cross Hilt, to declare that they were in all
Encounters to vindicate and maintain the Cross and Sepulcher of our Savior.
Then they were struck thrice over the Shoulders with that Sword they were
invested with, to insinuate, that they should sustain all Contumelies and
Indignities, for the Cause and Defense of Christian Religion. Then fourthly,
this Sword was wiped, to instruct them that their Lives were to be assoiled
from the Spot of all open and scandalous Impieties. Fifthly, they had guilt
Spurs placed upon their Heels, to show first, that all temporal Improvement of
Wealth, was to be cast behind the Designs of Piety and Religion; or secondly,
to demonstrate, that Riches were but the Gloss, or Parjet, but Honor and
Virtue, was the Solid Body, designed by the Spur it self, that was to support
and sustain it. Sixthly, they had a lighted Taper put into their Hands, by
that, to discover, that by an eminent Integrity and exemplar Piety, like the
Irradiation of that Luminary, they were to make themselves conspicuous to those
who were involved in the Mists and Umbrages of a dark and gloomy Infidelity.
Lastly, after these Formalities performed, they were obliged to repair to
Mass, where I leave them.

Their Customary Habit was a black Cloak, being the best Ensign, or Symptom
of a solemn external Sorrow, and on this was a Cross potent between four
Crosses Patee, designing the five wounds of our Savior; they wore constantly
when they appeared in public, a red Belt, intimating they were at all times
ready to bleed, in Defense of the Cross and Sepulcher, and on that was fixed a
white Cross, to manifest the Purity and Innocence of that Cause and Religion
which was contended for.

This Order was first brought into England, in the year of Grace 1100, by
Jordan de Briset, in some old Deeds written Brinset, Lord of Well-hall at
Eltham in Kent, and Muriell his Wife, who founded a House for them at
Clerkenwell, and dedicated it to St. John, which afterward became the Head of
their Alberge here in England, to which this Manor continued united, as
parcel of their Demeasne, until the Dissolution in the Reign of Henry the
eighth, like a general Deluge, swept it away, and transported it into the
Revenue of the Crown, and that Prince by Royal Concession, made it the Estate
of William Pordage Esquire, in whose Descendant, Thomas Pordage Esquire, the
present Inheritance of it remains at this instant placed.

Rochester is a City which in elder Times, was as eminent for its Antiquity, as
it was for its Strength and Grandeur; and had not those violent Impressions,
which the rough hand of War formerly defaced it with, demolished its Bulk, and
discomposed its Beauty, it peradventure might have been registered at this day
in the Inventory of the principal Cities of this Nation. It was governed by a
Port Reve, until King Edw. the fourth, in the second year of his Reign, raised
it into a higher Dignity, and decreed by his royal Grant, that it should
thenceforth be governed by a Mayor and twelve Aldermen, and to this Monarch
does this City owe much of its present Felicity, a Prince certainly he was,
full of Complacence and Benignity, of a munificent Mind, and an obliging
accostable Nature, guilty only of some humane Frailties, common to all, and
adorned with many signal Virtues, scarce resident in any one, who did not
voluntarily sail into that Sea of Blood, which was let loose in the Civil War,
commenced between Him, and the Partisans of the House of Lancaster, but rather
was driven into it, by the Tempest of his ill Fortune.

Having represented the City in its Modern Face or Aspect, I shall now draw the
Curtain something wider, and discover its Pourtracture in its calamitous
Sufferings, occasioned by the Invasions, not only of an entaged Enemy, but
likewise, which is worse, by the Onsets of its own incensed Prince; and these
two mixing together have much disordered the Ancient Glory and Splendour of it.

In the year 680. Eldred King of Mercia harrassed Kent, and by an impetuous
Inroad laid it wast. And as particular Lamentations are not distinguishable in
universal Groans; so in this public Depopulation of the County (then
Kingdom,) the Tragedy and Devastation acted by that Prince, at that Time, upon
this City, was not resented with that Regret, as so deplorable Ruin might seem
to exact, which had it been singly poured out upon this City, it could not have
been repeated or rehearsed without a bleeding Heart, and a weeping Eye.

In the year 986. King Etheldred infested Rochester with a Siege, having
entertained some discontent or disgust against the Bishop, and would not
dissolve his Leaguer, until the said Bishop had expiated his Offense with the
Sacrifice of an hundred pounds, a Sum of importance in those dry Times, though
inconsiderable in these profuser ones of ours, where commonly the pecuniary
Supply, that is extracted from the Subject, is steeped in his Tears.

In the year 999. the Danes invaded Canterbury, and though by the vigorous
Resistance and Magnanimity of the Defendants, their Assaults were made null,
yet at length by the treacherous Combination of an insidious Party within, it
was rather betrayed then subdued, and miserably depopulated by the Barbarous
Adversary, the Signatures of which Devastation are yet visible: and though the
wideness of the Orifice, which that wound had made, be something closed up with
the Hand of Time, yet there is a huge Scar left, to represent to Posterity the
Greatness of the former Ruin. After they had thus harrassed and defaced that
City, they (to improve their Victory) advanced to Rochester, where the
Inhabitants astonished with an Example of so much Terror, after some faint
Opposition against the Danish Impressions and Onsets, gave themselves up to
Flight, and this City to a Calamitous Depopulation.

In the year 1130. Henry the first, with the Archbishop of Canterbury, were
present at the Consecration of St. Andrews Church in Rochester, which was then
brought to perfection, having been before much empaired by the Iron Teeth of
Time: But then the Fury of the Elements began to enter into a Corrivalship or
Competition with the Fury of Enemies; for by a casual Eruption of an Accidental
Fire, the whole City almost found an unfortunate Sepulcher in its own Ashes:
But it seems like a Phaenix, it rose again into new Beauty and Order out of
these Ashes and Embers, but did not long continue in this Condition; for in the
year of Grace 1177. which was in the Time of Henry the second, it was again
assaulted by the Outrage and Fury of this implacable Element, the Impressions
and remaining Signatures of which Conflagration, are obvious to the Inspection
of an Inquisitive Eye, even until this Day.

In the year 1225. it was by the Indulgent Bounty of King Henry the third,
invested with a Wall, and that this Fortification might be of more Concernment,
it was likewise secured or fenced with a Ditch.

In the year 1251. A Solemn Tornament was held at Rochester, wherein the
English entered the Lists against those Strangers or Forrainers, (who having in
that Age a great Concernment in the Ear of Henry the third, had likewise a
strong Interest in his Heart, and by consequence a powerful Impression or
Influence upon the public Affairs of those Times) wherein they managed the
Honor of this Nation, with so much Courage and Gallantry, that they forced them
with Shame and Confusion to retire into the City, and as if that were not a
Shelter of sufficient Importance, to seek for their Security in the Castle.

The Castle.
THat there was in the Age before the Norman Invasion, the Rudiments, or, if I
may so say, the Embrio of a Castle represented to the World under imperfect
Lineaments or Dimensions, here at Rochester, is most certain; For the Records
of the Cathedral inform us, that Egbert King of Kent, in the year 763. gave
certain Lands to Eardulfe, Bishop of Rochester, situate within the Walls of the
Castle of that City, which argues that there was some Trench or Fortification,
even in those Times, which was in Strength by the Analogy of Proportion
equivalent to the Fortresses of that Age, and so might merit by Resemblance the
Name of a Castle, though the Bulk and Grandeur of it was added in Times of a
more Modern extraction: For in the Time of the Conquest, I find that the Bishop
of Rochester received Land at Alresford for Land at Rochester proportionate to
it to erect a Castle on, which was in all probability, only to enlarge the
Boundaries of the old one, which peradventure was thought too contemptible in
those active Times, to secure so important a Pass, as this of Rochester, was,
without the Additional Supply of some new Strength. And that these
Augmentations did acknowledge, if not for their Founder or Author, yet at least
for their eminent Benefactor, Odo Bishop of Bajeux, and Earl of Kent, half
Brother to the Conqueror, is without Controversy; a man who was afterward
dignified and adorned with the Office of Lord Chief Justice of England, a place
of the most eminent Trust in that Age, and which was often managed by the Kings
of England personally themselves, and from the Marble Seat in Westminster Hall,
did deliver their Decisions and Determinations of Law, from whence in Ancient
Seals and other Sculptures, they are often represented to us sitting in
Judicature upon this Marble Seat, and hence result those Customary Expressions
in Original Writs, and other Processes, Coram Nobis, and, Test Rege, and
sometimes, me Ipso apud Westmon. and some other Phrases and Terms in our
Ancient Law Books of the same Complexion, as namely such a one, Allocutus est
Nobis sedentibus supra Sedem Marmoream: which justifies that the Kings of
England did sometimes personally sit and assist in Judicature, in that Court we
now call the Upper Bench, where like a great Orb or Glob of Light, they
dispersed their Beams of Mercy and Justice into all the parts of our English
Horizon, and dispelled all those Crievances, which, like so many Fogs or Clouds
exhaled from corrupred Nature, seemed to eclipse the Serenity of this Nation.
But I wander too much; I now return. This Accumulation of Offices and
Dignities, could not so engage this abovementioned Odo, to the Interest of
William Rufus his Nephew; but that he first enwrapped himself in a Combination
with some of the discontented Nobility, whose Endeavors were to ravish the
Scepter out of the Hand of that Prince, and place it in the hand of Robert Duke
of Normandy, his eldest Brother, and afterward to fortify this Design,
started out into an open Defection and seized upon this Castle of Rochester:
but William Rufus with so much Expedition and Courage crushed these Attempts,
that they became abortive: for in the year 1088. he besieges his Uncle Odo in
this Fortress, and presses upon him with so much Vigor and Animosity, that he
forces him to surrender to discretion, but though he took not away his Life, he
did that of his Liberty, and sent him Prisoner to Tunbridge-castle, not under
the Notion of Bishop of Bajeux; for that would have infringed and invaded the
Franchises of the Church, but under that of the Earl of Kent.

After this there was by the mediation and umpirage of Robert Fitz Hamon, and
Henry Earl of Warwick, a Composition made between William Rufus and Gundulphus
Bishop of Rochester, the Result of which was this: The Prince was to confirm
the Manor of Hedenham to this Sea, and the Bishop, to balance this Concession
with something which had the Face of Retribution, was to expend sixty pound, in
some additions to the Castle, and accordingly erected the great square Tower, a
Morsel which has been too hard for the Teeth of Time, and by the vastness of
the instant remaining Skeleton, witnesses the strength of it to Posterity, when
it was in its primitive Grandeur, before the Rage of War, and the Fury of
Elements threw it into this wild Disorder and Confusion; yet it is even in this
shattered Condition, a better Alphabet to the Memory of the Bishop its first
Founder, then his own Monument or Repository, for that lies entered in
forgotten and neglected Ruins, but this still preserves his Name, and is
called Gundulphus's Tower.

And being thus improved and fortified, with these new Accessions, it is not to
be wondered at, that this Piece, was of that signal Estimate, in elder Times,
that King Henry the first, by the Advice of his Council, in the year 1126,
granted the Custody of this Castle, and the Office of Castellan, annexed to it,
to William the then present Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Successors, with
free liberty to erect a Tower, that is another Fortress, equivalent or
Correspondent to Gundulphs Tower, which before was erected for the Defense of
this City and Castle.

In Times succeeding to these, that is, in the year 1215, William de Albineto
or Albiniaco, in the Latin of those Times, and written D' Albinet, in the
Usage of ours, was Governor of this Fortress, for the factious party of the
mutinous Barons, who were then in actual Arms against King John, but this
Prince invested it with a formal Leaguer, and after the bloody Debate of a
three Months Siege, forces the abovementioned D' Albinet to a Surrender,
wherein though the Virtue of the Opponent, was considerable, yet it was ruinous
to him, and the Event has left us Faith enough to believe, that Strength
without the Concurrence of a Loyal Principle which may support it, is like an
Egyptian Reed, which ordinarily runs into the Fingers, and wounds them which
lean upon it.

In the year after this, the Nobility, then combined and in Arms against King
John, finding that their Forces were much empaired and diminished by several
unsuccesful Encounters with that Prince, and that they must be forced to resign
themselves up to those rigorous Conditions that he would impose upon them,
called in Lewis the Dolphin of France, who landing in the Isle of Thanett, with
a considerable Army, advanced to Rochester, and by the concurrent Assistance of
the Barons, who had united their strength with his, made such a furious Onset
upon this Castle, that like a Tempest which bears down all before it, he
carried it by Assault.

In the year 1264. broke out that fatal Contest between Simon Montfort Earl of
Leicester, and Henry the third, the Foundation or Original of which was this.
That Earl being the great Assertor of the English Liberty against the turbulent
Eruptions of Forrainers, endeavored to tear away those Strangers, that being
placed too near the Royal Throne, had obstructed and forelaid all the Avenues
and Passages both to the Heart and Ear of that Prince: and this dismal
clashing (like the Collision of two Flints) was productive of so wasting and
destructive a Fire, that it had like, not only to have consumed the Crown and
Scepter, but likewise to have cast the whole Kingdom it self into a heap of
Flame and Ruins, some Sparks of which were darted hither. For this Earl about
the Time above specified begirt the City and Castle of Rochester, with a
powerful Army, and that he might multiply all Advantages to himself, which
might enforce his Design, and intercept the Succor intended the Besieged, he
burned the Bridge, whose Frame was then made up of Wood, and destroyed a
Fortress that was placed upon it, which was compounded of the same Materials,
and having effected this, he pressed so hard upon the Castle, that he not only
pillaged the adjacent Church and Abbey, but likewise subdued the outward Ward or
Gate, and had certainly by an absolute Conquest at chieved the whole, had not
King Henry arrived most opportunely, and by a succesful encounter wrested both
Earl Warren, who had so vigorously maintained it, and that likewise, from the
Impressions of his Fury.

After this, I find little of Moment to have been acted at this place, only I
find the Castle to have been deposited in the Hands of several eminent Persons,
who were extracted from Families, whose Blood was of as noble a Tincture as any
in this County, and these held it under the Notion of Castellani or Guardians
of it, an Office of a very important Concernment in elder Times. The first of
which, who was entrusted with it, was William St. Clear, whose Ancient Seat,
before his Successor by the Match of the Coheir of Aldham removed to Ightam,
was at Woodland in Kingsdown, and he died in the Tenure of this place, in the
forty eighth year of Henry the third. After him, I discover Robert de Hougham
Lord of Hougham by Dover, to have had the Custody of it, and he died invested
in this Office, in the second year of Edward the first, and in the next year
after Robert de Septuans, from whom the Harfleets of East-Kent are descended,
had the Care and Command of it. In Times of a nearer Approach to us, I find
William Keriel or Criol, was entrusted with the Care and Government of it, and
was possessed of this Charge at his Death, in the first year of Henry the fifth.
After whose Exit, the Custody was committed to Thomas Lord Cobham, and he held
it at his Decease, which was in the eleventh year of Edward the fourth. But
after this, it began so to languish away into its own Ruins, that it grew
rather an Object of Pity, than of Envy, and rested amongst the Manors of the
Crown, until King James, in the seventh year of his Reign, granted that goodly
Skeleton of the Castle, which yet courts the Eye of the Beholder, to an
Admiration of its former Strength, with all the Services annexed to it, to Sir
Anthony Weldon, of Swanscamp, whose Son and Heir Ralph Weldon of Swanscamp
Esquire, is the instant Lord of the Fee.

There is much Land in this County held of this Castle, whose Tenure is perfect
Castleguard: for upon the Day prefixed for the discharge of the quitt-Rent,
relating to it, there is a Banner displaid and hung out (anciently it was over
the Castle-Wall) and all those who are Tenants to this Manor, and are in
Default by their Nonappearance, and do not discharge their Customary Duties,
and Services, the Penalty imposed upon their Neglect, is, that the Return of
every Tide of the adjacent River which finds them Absent, doubles their Service
or quitt-Rent.

The Bridge which is almost contiguous to the Root or Basis, was anciently,
when the Frame was of Timber, removed to a farther Distance, and crossed the
Stream, over against the Hospital of St Mary's, at Stroude. But this was by
Simon de Montfort when he besieged Rochester, ruined by Fire, and although it
was re-edified and repaired not long after, yet some twenty years subsequent to
this Misfortune, it was swept away by Ice, so that it appears the Elements
entered into a Corrivalship or Competition, which should make the most ruinous
Impression, on this unfortunate Structure.

But after this, that is, in the reign of Richard the second, all those
abovementioned Dysasters and Inconveniences, which might again have assaulted
the Bridge, were for the future prevented; for Sir Robert Knolles, a Person who
had improved, and enhaunsed his Fame, to the highest Degree of Eminence, by his
glorious and succesfull Managery of the English Affairs, and Interest in
France, seeking to make himself as useful to his Friends, that is, his
Contrymen, as he was before considerable to his Enemies, mastered the Course of
the River, and somewhat nearer to the Castle as in a place more fit, both for
the Soliditie, and fastness of the Soil, as likewise for the breaking of the
impetuousnesse of the Current, erected the Bridge of Stone which is now
visible, fixed, and established on one and twenty Arches, and by this Victory
over the Elements, made his Triumphs more illustrious, than he had done before,
by all the Conquests of his Adversaries: for in these he only seemed to have
out-gone all others, but in this, to have outdone himself.

Being thus fixed and Strengthened, there was a Statute enacted in the one and
twentieth year of Richard the second, wherein there is Provision made for its
future Security, there being several parcells of Land, which are mentioned in
that Act, tied and obliged for its continual Maintenance and Repair, whenever
the Injuries of Time, or those of the Elements, should deface or impair it.

The Chapel or Chantry in old Records, styled the Chantry of Rochester Bridge,
was founded in the year 1399, by John de Cobham, and was dedicated to the holy
Trinity, and was called at the first Institution, All Souls Chapel, because
Prayers and other Orizons, were there to be offered up, for the Redemption and
Health of all Christian Souls, and likewise a Stipend or Exhibition was there
settled, for the Support and Maintenance of three Priests, or Chaplains,
particularly, to pray for the Souls of John de Cobham the Patron and Founder,
Sir Robert Knolles, to whom the Bridge owed its primitive Establishment,
William Wangford and Eleanor his Wife, John Fremingham and Alice his Wife,
William Makenade, and Sir William Rickhil; and likewise for the Souls of some
who were deceased before the Foundation of this Chapel, as namely for the Soul
of John Buckingham, formerly Bishop of Lincoln, and Sir William Wall worth, the
eminent Lord Mayor of London, to whose Virtue and Valor, London, owes the
Addition of the Dagger, which was annexed as an Augmentation to the Arms of the
City.

The Priory was founded by Ethelbert King of Kent, and dedicated to the Honor
of St. Andrew, and stored with Monks who were to live under the Rule of St.
Benedict, though afterward, as Mr. Lambert out of the Book of Rochester
observes, they altered their Rule, and conformed themselves to the Canon of St.
Augustine Bishop of Hippo, but were reduced again to the primitive Institution
of St. Benedict, in the year 1080, by Gundulphus then Bishop of Rochester, in
which Design, he was aided and supported by Lanfranc the active Archbishop of
Canterbury. In Ages of an elder Inscription, there were several Contests brake
forth between the Monks of Christ-church in Canterbury, and those of this
Covent; the first Struggling, to bring the Election of the Bishop of Rochester
into their Chapter, which the last, Sticking close to their own inherent
Rights and Privileges, endeavored to disannul, and wholly to circumscribe his
Election within the Precincts of their own Chapter. Two Presidents, which
represent to Posterity the whole State of this Controversy, do occur in
Record. The first appears in the year 1227, when after the Death of Benedict,
the Bishop of Rochester, elected to succeed him, Henry Sandford, a Man of
exemplary Piety, so that he was inculpable for his Life, and of unfathomed
Learning, so that he was in that Age, almost unparallelled for his Knowledge,
which could not stave off the Monks of Christ-church, to justle the Election,
pretending that the pastoral Staff or Crosier of Rochester, de Jure, ought to
have been brought to their House, after the Decease of the Bishop, and that the
Election was to have been made in their Chapter. This occasioned much Heat,
for the Monks of Rochester, vigorously asserted their own Choice, so that it
was referred to the Decision of the Archbishop, and he again put it over to the
Umpirage of Delegates, who hearing the parties concerned, and poising the
Allegations, produced by either side to sustain the Justice of their own Cause;
they by a final Determination, declared the Right to reside in the Monks of
Rochester. But it seems this Fire, was only allayed, not extinguished: for in
the year 1238, it brake forth again, and the occasion which gave Fuel to it,
was this. The Monks of Rochester, had elected Richard Wendover for their
Bishop, which so exasperated and disgusted the Monks of Christ-church, that
suspecting their own Power, they, more to enforce and multiply their Strength,
and evacuate that Election, entitled Archbishop Edmund to their Cause. But
the Monks of Rochester disclaiming, by a tame Remissness, either to foment or
palliate their own undoing, appealed to Rome, where after the chargeable
Commencement of a three years Suit, the Innocence and Justice of their Cause
was recompensed with the Triumph of the Day, upon which they returned home
exalted with the Joy of their Success, and enacted in their Chapter, that the
annual Feast of St. Cuthbert, on which Day they archieved this signal
Conquest, should be doubly solemnized, both in their Church and in their
Kitchen. But as they were successful in their rancounters with the
Archbishop, so they were very unfortunate in that intestine Discord, which
burst out between them, and their own Bishop Gilbert Glanville; who not only
forcibly wrung from them their Goods, Ornaments, Writings, and other Muniments,
but likewise divested them of a considerable Portion of their Lands,
Possessions, and Privileges, which forced them to appeal to Rome for Redress;
where they embroiled themselves in a tedious Law-Sute, which engaged them to
that vast expense, that they were constrained to coin the Silver of Paulinus
Shrine into Money, to support them in so expensive and costly a Contest; and
this much embased for the future that Esteem which the World formerly had
entertained both of the Piety and Sanctity of the Monks of this Cloister.

But these Contests did not so much prejudice or endamage this Cloister within,
though accompanied with much Heat, as the Devastation occasioned by the Element
of Fire without: for in the year 1130. when Henry the first, with a great
Convention of the Nobility and Bishops was then present to solemnize the
Consecration of St. Andrews Cathedral and Church, which was then newly
finished, a sudden Flame broke out, whose Assaults upon this Covent, did much
deface and empare the Glory of the Ancient Fabric. And as if this impetuous
Eruption had not been enough to diminish the Beauty of it, there was another
Fire in the year 1177. which was about the latter end of Henry the second,
which exercised its Fury upon it, even to a total Depopulation of this
Cloister; yet after all these Disasters, wherein it is disputable, whether the
Rage of men, or that of the Elements, were more destructive, by the Charitable
Beneficence and Piety of that Age, it arose like a Phaenix, more Beautiful and
vigorous, even out of its Embers and Ashes, and continued in that condition,
until the general Dissolution, in the reign of Henry the eighth, and then that
Prince having suppressed this Covent, and torn off their Revenue, upon their
Ruins he established a Dean and twelve Prebends, and endowed them for their
future support with that Demeasne, which for the principal part of it, as
namely, Wouldham, Halling, Snodland, Trottescliff, Denton, Longfeild, Borestal,
Lidsing, and Stoke, in the Hundred of Hoo, had been formerly annexed to the
abovementioned Cloister.

The Cathedral, with the Bishopric of Rochester, united to it, were founded
and established by that pious Monarch Ethelbert King of Kent, and the first
Bishop to whom was entrusted the Pastoral Staff or Crosier by Augustine, the
Apostle of the Saxons, was Justus, the abovementioned Prince, not only
assenting unto this Election by his Presence, but likewise contributing to the
Support of the Person so chosen, and his Successors by his liberal Beneficence.
And indeed it is remarkable, that in all those Revolutions and Vicissitudes,
which have rolled and varied the Fate of things and Affairs, since the Seeds of
Christianity were sown so plentifully by the Hand of Augustine in this Island,
that the Chair of this Bishopric was still fixed at Rochester, whereas many
others have in sundry parts of the Nation suffered diverse Translations to other
places then that where they at first were established; and the Reason is,
because by the Order of William the Conqueror, such Bishops as were before
resident in Towns and Villages, were forthwith to transplant their Seat into
walled Cities and places of Defense, the more to oblige the populacie, not only
to repair thither for the Exercise of Devotion, but likewise to augment the
Commerce and Bulk of those Cities, by such numerous Assemblies; but in this
Command of his, Rochester could not be interressed or concerned, that was
invested with a Wall, or something equivalent to it long before the Age of the
Conqueror. I should now unfold a Catalogue of those Bishops that swayed the
Crosier of this Sea, beginning with Justus, and concluding with John Warner the
instant Bishop of this Diocese; but this is so obvious, both in Goodwin, and a
late Manual, styled The Help to History, that I shall only historically Record
the most eminent of them, and proceed. The first of whom I find to be Justus,
who was translated from this Sea, to that of Canterbury, a Man whose Integrity
of Life breathed out a noble perfume when he was living, and his Body, if we
may credit the Fabulous and Superstitious Legend of that Age, no less grateful
an Odor when he was Dead, for it is reported that his Relics being to be
removed after their Enterment many years before, cast forth (not the Stench or
Steam of Putrefaction) but a Sent so odorous and fragrant, that it did not
annoy, but exceedingly delight the Nosthrils of those who were present; but
indeed this might be possible without the Concurrence of a Miracle, if we
consider that those Remains of his might be rescued from the Fate of
Corruption, by the Adjuncts or Circumstances of Nard, Balm, Spicery, and
Perfume; so that the Miracle seems to be imposed by the Monks on the Laity of
that Age, only to excite both their Devotion and Benevolence.

Paulinus, who was the third Bishop, who succeeded him, converted Edwin King of
Northumberland, and Edelburga his Queen, to Christianity, and so justly merited
the Title of Apostle of that Province, for which he was recorded after his
Death in the Register of Saints, and had his Body so far ennobled, that it was
wrapped up in a silver Shrine.

Ithamar, who next succeeded him, had his Relics likewise enshrined in after
Times by Gandulphus Bishop of Rochester, which was not only repaired, but very
much adorned and beautified by Bishop John his Successor, because (as the Book
of Rochester intimates, he was redeemed, by touching his Relics, ab acerrimo
Oculorum Dolor, from some sharp Distillation which did afflict his Eye.

Arnostus was present at Pinenden-heath, at the great Debate touching some
Lands, which were unjustly ravished away from the Church.

Gundulphus his Successor erected the white Tower in Rochester-castle: and
whereas he at his first Instalment, found but six Canons in the Covent of St.
Andrews, he so liberally endowed it, that he left it replenished with
threescore Monks of the Order and Rule of St. Benedict.

Tobias, whom I should have mentioned after Ithamar, was (as Harp field out of
the Records of Rochester) a man very dextrous and skilful in the Tongues, and a
general Magazine of all other Learning both Divine and Humane beside.

Walter de Merton, Lord Chancellor of England, did not only found the College
of Merton at Oxford, but likewise laid the Foundation of an imperfect College
at Maldon in Essex, which by his Death was left unfinished. He died in the year
1277. and lies buried in his own Church at Rochester, to which in his Life Time
he had been a Munificent Benefactor. In Gratitude to whose Memory Sir Henry
Savil, and the Fellows of Merton College, erected a Magnificent Monument, in
the year 1599. over his Ashes, which though it be much empaired both by Age,
and the injurious Affronts of these impious Times; yet shall the Name of this
great man be the best Steward to his own Dust: and when his Sepulcher it self
shall lie enterred in its own deplored Rubbish, this shall stand unto it self
an everlasting Tomb and Epitaph.

Hamon de Heath was Confessor to Edward the second, and a liberal Benefactor to
this Church; He built the House at the Manor of Halling, which in some Ancient
Records is styled his Palace.

Joannes de Scapeia, or John de Shepey was Lord Treasurer of England three
years.

Richard Young was a principal Contributor to the Reparation of the Church at
Frendsbury, and wholly glazed the Windows: where not long since his
pourtracture was exposed to the public View; a good Index, not only to his
Memory, but likewise to the Remembrance of so pious a Work.

John Low was born in the County of Worcester, and was a man in the Estimate
of Bale, who writ his Life, not only of signal Piety, but likewise an Exchequer
of all manner of Learning.

John Fisher was a man of vast Knowledge, which yet was Ruinous to him for
asserting the Papal Supremacy, when it was invested in Henry the eight, by an
Act of Parliament; he offered up his Life on a Scaffold, as a Sacrifice to that
opinion.

Nicolas Ridley was a man of an inculpable Life, and of a wide Knowledge, who
was so an irrefragable Assertor of the Protestant Religion, that he gave
himself up at Oxford, to the Fury of Fire and Faggot for the Testimony of what
he before had professed: and has by his exemplary Life and Death, taught the
Adversaries of Episcopacy this Lesson, that it is possible that the Seed may be
pure as well as the Soil; that is, the persons of the Men, as well as the
Office, may be incorrupt.

John Warner is the last, who brings up this Catalogue, in whom the instant
Title of this Bishopric is resident, a man worthy of better Days, yet fit for
these; who for his vast Encouragement of Learning in the best of Times, and his
pious Support of it in the worst, cannot be mentioned without an Attribute.

There have in elder Times many Contests and Animosities broke out between the
Bishops of Rochester and Worcester; and the Fuel which fomented and supplied
this Fire of Contention, was, that both these Prelates pretended to the Support
of the Crosier before the Archbishop of Canterbury in all Processions, and
other Acts of public and signal Solemnity; but in Fine, the Crosier or
Pastoral Staff was fixed or settled in the Hand of the Prelate of Rochester, and
has been by Prescription ever since united as a convicted and Inherent
Privilege to this Diocese.

Before I wave my Discourse concerning this Bishopric, I must inform the
Reader, that there are some peculiars which are annexed to the Deanries of
Croydon and Shorham, and this has entangled and engaged many in much
Difficulty to trace out the last Wills and Testaments of those who deceased
within the Confines and Precincts of these peculiars. To unravel therefore
these Niceties for the future; I shall represent a just Scale of these excepted
places, out of the original Records of the Church of Rochester themselves, that
those which can find no satisfaction in the Registers of Canterbury, or Records
of Rochester, may yet discover what they are in pursuit of, in that Office,
wherein these are enrolled and filed. But before I unwind their Catalogue, I
shall in brief wrap up what in former Times has been delivered touching the
Office of Rural Deans, by Duarenus and others, who have more copiously dilated
themselves upon this Subject. This Officer was certainly brought into the
Church to supply the place of those whom Antiquity styled the Chore-Episcopi,
who were commonly Assistants to the Bishop: For indeed where the Diocese was
of that vast Latitude and Extent, that the Managery of so great a Trust was
disproportionate to the Discharge of one single Person, it was necessary that
his Care should be supported by the mutual Counsel and concurrent Advice of
others, whose prudence might improve the Affairs of the Church: and upon the
going out of the abovementioned Office, as being obsolete and antiquated, this
of the Rural Dean came in. And to him did the Bishop entrust an Inspection into
the Lives of the Clergy, and from him did receive an exact Account of Scandal
in its whole Latitude, and other vicious Excesses, which might by an impious
Connivance have added more blackness to the Cassock: He was likewise, by
Delegation from the Bishop, to take Cognizance of all Errors and Deviations
from that which in that Age was reputed Orthodox Doctrine, that neither the
Foundation nor Superstructure of Religion might be assaulted. And lastly, where
the Diocese was wide, and of a large Territory, it frequently happened that the
Probate and Administration of sundry Testaments in diverse places, was committed
to his Care and Sway; and he was likewise entrusted with a Seal, with the Name
of the Bishop, whose Office by Deputation he was to discharge, and not his own,
insculped upon it: which upon his Decease, or relinquishing this Office, was to
be surrendered up into the Hands of the Bishop of the Diocese for the Time
being, that he might dispose of it as he should judge convenient. Thus much of
the Rural Dean: the Peculiars of which I before promised a Catalogue, are as
follow: Ainsford Rectory and Vicarage. Bexley Vicarage. Brasted Rectory.
Chiddingtone Rectory. Chevening Rectory. Cliff Rectory. Crayford Rectory.
Darent Vicarage. East-Malling Vicarage. East-Peckham Vicarage. Ferningham
Vicarage. Gillingham Vicarage. Grain Vicarage. Heys Rectory. Hever Rectory.
Hunton Rectory. Igtam Rectory. Mepham Vicarage. Northfleet Vicarage. Orpington
and St. Mary Crey Rectory. Otford Chapel. Pencehurst Rectory. Sundrige
Rectory. Sevenoke Rectory and Vicarage. Stansted Chapel. Wrotham Rectory and
Vicarage.


Having done with the Church, I shall now descend to those Manors which lie
circumscribed within the Precincts and Verge of this City. The first is
Borestall, which, as Textus Roffensis denotes and signifies unto us, was given
to the Church and Monks of St. Andrews, by Kenulfus King of Mercia, and was, as
the Records of that Church testify, de Cibo eorum, to support their Table with
a constant supply of Diet, and rested annexed to their Demeasne, until the
Fatality of the General Dissolution ravished it away, and afterward it was by
Henry the eighth, when he established a Dean and Chapter upon the Ruins of
this abovementioned Priory, linked unto that Revenue, which he granted them
for their future subsistence.

The second is Great Delce, which had owners of that Surname, as is evident by
Testa de Nevill, and other Records both of a public and private Stamp; but, it
appears, was not of any permanent continuance in this Name: for before the
middle of Edward the first, it was gone from that, and united to the Inheritance
of Haspall. Geffrey de Haspall, enjoyed it at his Death under the Notion of the
fourth part of a Knights Fee, as appears by an Inquisition, taken in the
fifteenth year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 25. The next Family in
Succession after this, which was entitled to the Possession (as is evident by
the original Deeds, now in the Hands of Lea) was Molineux, derived from those
of Sefton in Lancashire, but he remained so inconsiderable a Space in the
Inheritance, that like Cato in the Theater, he only stepped into it, that he
might go out again; for about the Beginning of Edward the third, as appears by
the testimony of an ancient Court-roll, Benedict de Fulsham, was invested in
the Patrimony of it in the thirtieth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number.
20. And from him, did it stream down in the Channel of successive Interest, to
his Descendant Richard Fulsham, who likewise was in the Enjoyment of it at his
Decease, which was in the fifth year of Henry the fifth, Rot Esc. Number. 17. But
after his Exit, I find no farther mention of any of this Family, to have been
possessed of this place; for, in the ninth year of Henry the fifth, Reginald
Love, died seized of it, and transmitted it to his Successor, who held it
until the latter end of Henry the sixth, and then the Revolution of Purchase,
brought it to be the Demeasne of William Venour, and it was found to be his
Possession at his Death, which was in the first year of Edward the fourth, Rot.
Esc. Number. 24. But after his Departure, the Title was very unsettled and
inconstant; for within the Circle of some Months after, it was by Sale from
this Name, rolled into the Tenure of Markham descended from the ancient Stem of
the Markhams, of Nottingham-shire, where after a very transitory abode, it was
by the same Fatality, carried into the Possession of Tate; who about the first
year of Edward the fourth, passed it away to Sir Richard Lea, Lord Mayor of
London, descended from an ancient Family of that Name, in the County of
Worcester, and his Son was Sheriff of Kent, in the nineteenth year of Edward
the fourth, and held his Shrievalty at his new acquired Manor of Much Delce,
and from him by an even thread of Descent, has the Title and Propriety been
conducted down to Richard Lea Esquire, who is the instant Proprietary of it.

Horsted borrows its Name from Horsa, Brother to Hengist the Founder of the
Saxon Kingdom here in Kent, who fell by the Sword of the Britons at Alresford,
as an expiatory Sacrifice, to balance the Loss of Cartigerne, Brother to
Vortimer, General of the Confederate British Forces, who was offered up in that
signal Encounter, as an Holocaust to the Saxon Fury; and there is something,
which even at this Day, lies wrapped up in the Name, that induces us to believe,
that Horsa after his slaughter, recieved the Rites of his Funeral at this
place; and in our Grandfathers Memory, there were the scattered Remains of
diverse huge Massy Stones, which Storms and other Impressions of Time, have
now altogether demolished: and these certainly were, in elder Times, composed
into the Figure of a Monument, to shroud the Ashes of this Horsa; as those at
Cits Cothouse, above Alresford, were framed into the same Proportionate Mould,
to secure the Dust, or at least to point out to Posterity the Memory of
Cartigern.

The Manor it self, was enwraped in the Patrimony of the noble and ancient
Family of Apulderfield. William de Apulderfield, obtained a Charter of
Free Warren to his Lands at Horsted, in the thirty eighth year of Henry the
eighth. In Times of a lower Descent, I discover it in the Possession of Warren;
for John, Son of Edmund Warren, held it at his Death, which was in the twelfth
year of Edward the third. After Warren had quitted the Inheritance, I find the
Fulshams by Purchase to be entitled to the Fee-simple of it; and Benedict de
Fulsham, enjoyed in at his Decease, which was in the thirtieth year of Edward
the third, and paid relief for this and Much Delce, under the Notion of the
fourth part of a Knights Fee, at making the Black Prince Knight, in the
twentieth year of the abovesaid Prince. After this Family was worn out, it had
successively the same Possessors with Much Delce, so that it came with that
Manor by Purchase from Tate, to Sir Richard Lea Knight; and from him is the
Title by successive Descent, transported to Rtchard Lea Esquire, the present
Possessor.

Snodherst is another Manor which lies partly spread into Chetham, and partly
into the Limits of Rochester, was, as high as I can trace any Record, a Branch
of that Demeasn, which fell under the Dominion of Badelesmer, and though
Bartholomew Lord Bade^lesmer, had by his perfidious Disloyalty, forfeited it in
the Reign of Edward the second; yet was it in the second year of Edward the
third, restored to his Son Bartholomew Badelesmer, who in the twelfth year of
that Prince, dyed without Issue, and left it to his Brother Giles Badelesmer,
who likewise deceasing without Issue; Sir John Tiptoft, in Right of Margery his
Wife, one of his Sisters and Coheirs, entered upon the Inheritance of it: but,
before the twentieth of Edward the third, had alienated it to Benedict de
Fulsham, for he in that year, as appears by the Book of Aid, paid respective
relief for it, at the making the Black Prince Knight, After Fulshams were
extinguished at this place, it had the Fate to own the Jurisdiction and
Interest of those, who were the Successive Proprietaries of Much Delce, so that
it is now knit to the present Inheritance of Richard Lea Esquire.

Little Delce is the last Manor which is circumscribed within the Precincts of
this City. It was, in Ages of a very high Calculation, the Possession of the
noble, illustrious, and ancient Family of Sherington, written in old Deeds,
Piperolls, and other Evidences, Serington, and sometimes Scherington, but most
frequently Sherington: whose original and principal Seat, was at
Sherington-hall at Cranworth in Norfolk, though they had other Manors, which
bore their Name, which anciently were folded up in their Demeasne, as namely
Sherington in the County of Buckingham, Sherington in Sussex, Sherington in the
County of Hereford, and Sherington in Lancashire, yet, as I take it, in their
Possession. But to proceed, Odo de Serington, or Sherington, for the Names are
Synonyma or coincident, held this Manor in the thirty first year of Henry the
first, and was enterred in the Cathedral of Rochester; and when Robert Glover
Somerset Herald, collected his Miscellany of Church-notes, in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth, there were some Relics of his Monument, offered up to the
Survey of a curious and Inquisitive Eye, which now the Sacrilegious Barbarity
of impious Mechanics, and the injurious Hand of Time together, have wholly
dismantled. After Sherington was worn out, I find a Family, called Pugeis,
invested in the Inheritance, and there is mention in the ninth year of Edward
the first, in Kirkbies Inquest (a Book kept in the Exchequet,) of one Richard
Pugeis who then held it: but before the latter end of Edward the third, this
Family had deserted the Possession, and transmitted his Concernment in it by
Sale to Richard Charles, and he enjoyed it at his Decease, which was in the
fifth year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number 92. And so did Nicholas Charles
his Successor, in the eleventh year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 16.
And Robert was his Son and Heir, who dying without Issue, it was united to the
Demeasne of Richard Ormeskirk, in right of Joan, Sister and Heir of the
abovementioned Robert; and he in the third year of Henry the fourth, alienated
it to Henry Perey, Earl of Northumberland; and he not long after, passed it
away to Rickhull, in which Family it rested, until the seventeenth year of
Henry the sixth, and then it was by Deed conveyed from William Rickhull
Esquire, to Thomas Glover, and Henry Hunt, who had then the Custody or
Guardianship of Rochester-Bridge, and to the successive Wardens of it, toward
the Preservation and Reparation of its Fabric for ever; so that at this
instant, it is parcel of that Revenue, which rescues this noble Structure from
Decay and Ruin.

Nashenden next offers it self up to our Remembrance. In the reign of Edward
the second, I find it entitled to the Possession of a Family called Aspall,
and in the twentieth year of Edward the third, John Aspall, paid respective
Aid, at making the Black Prince Knight. But before the latter end of Richard
the second, this Family, had surrendered the Inheritance of this place to
Peckham: the last of which Name, which held it, was John Peckham, who (as the
Records of Rochester-Bridge informs me) in the reign of Henry the sixth, made
it part of that Demeasn by Sale, which was to support, with its Income, the
Fabric of Rochester Bridge, in whose Revenue, you may at this instant, still
find it resident.

Rolvenden gives Name to the Hundred wherein it is placed, and is resolved into
several places of eminent Consideration, which do not only call for a Survey,
but even exact it: The first is Halden, called in Records the Manor of Lambin,
alias Halden, and the Reason of this Denomination is, because it assumed the
first part of this Name from Lambinus de Langham, who held it under the
Distribution of a whole Knights Fee (as the Book called Testa de Nevill
demonstrates) in the twentieth year of Henry the third, at the Marriage of
Isabell that Prince's Sister, at which Time he accounted so for it: After this
Family was departed from the possession of this place, which was about the
beginning of Edward the third, the Haldens were by purchase settled in the
Possession, and William de Halden Son of John de Halden, died seized of it, in
the fiftieth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 45. and left it to his
Son John Halden, but he expiring, about the beginning of Henry the fourth, in
Joan his Daughter and Heir, she by matching with John Guldeford Esquire, made
it parcel of his Patrimony, and from him it devolved by Descent to Sir Richard
Guldeford, who was Knighted at Milford-haven by H. the seventh, and was
afterward one of the Privy Counsel to that Prince. In the eighth year of his
reign, he with Courage and Prudence opposed James Lord Audley, and his Cornish
Squadrons, in that Eruption which they made upon this County, and in the Battle
waged near Deptfordbridge, between King Henry the seventh, and those Rebels,
represented such signal Testimonies of personal Magnanimity, that he was by
that Prince made a Banneret at Black Heath. His Son Henry Guldeford Esquire, in
the first year of Henry the eighth, went into Spain, and engaged himself under
Ferdinand and Isabella, King and Queen of Castile and Aragon, in their Wars
commenced against the Moors, and demeaned himself with that Fidelity and
exemplary Resolution in all Conflicts entertained with those barbarous
Infidels, that upon the Reduction of the Province of Granada, the
abovementioned Prince, for his signal Service performed in his and the
Christian Quarrel, added to his Paternal Coat as an Augmentation, A Pomgranet
slipped upon a Canton, being the Arms of that regained Province, and likewise
dignified him with the Order of Knighthood. In the fourth year of Henry the
eighth, he was again invested with the abovesaid Order by that Prince, and in
the fifth of his reign, he commanded one of the Royal Navy called the Regent,
in which Ship he acted Things worth the future Remembrance in that Sea Fight,
which was waged between the English and French near Britain, and in the same
year (as appears by the Original Patent bearing Date the twenty eighth of May)
he was made Standard Bearer of England, and carried it at the Siege of Terwin:
His Son Sir Edward Guldeford, in the fifteenth year of Henry the eighth,
received the Order of Knighthood, for his Service at Tourney, and was Captain
of the Horse under the Duke of Suffolk, at the second Siege of Terwin, which
was in the fifteenth year of that Prince, and not long after reduced
Boghan-castle, taking the Advantage of the Winter, which had sealed up the
Marshes, which environed it, and made it almost inaccessible in a Frost. In
fine, this worthy Soldier and Patriot dying without Issuemale, left this
Manor of Halden to be enjoyed by Jane his Sole Inheritrix, matched to John
Dudley Duke of Northumberland, and he having unhappily engaged himself in that
ruinous Design, which was to divest Queen Mary of the Royal Diadem, and place
it on the Head of the Lady Jane Gray, wedded to his Son Guilford Dudley, was in
the first year of that Queen, for that insolent Attempt, which proved
unsuccessful, attainted and beheaded, his Estate here being confiscated to the
Crown, the Manor was given by that Princess to Sir John Baker, her Attorney
General, Ancestor to Sir John Baker Knight and Baronet, who at this Instant
enjoyes the Manor, but the Demeasne of it was granted to Sir Henry Sidney,
whose Grandchild Robert Earl of Leicester, not many years since conveyed it to
Sir Thomas Smith of London, whose Grandchild Robert Smith Esquire, lately died
possessed of it.

There are twelve Denns which hold of this Manor of Lambin, alias Halden, and
at the Court-day elect twelve Officers, called Beadles, to collect the
Quit-rents, which relate to it: The Names of them here ensue, Midsell in
Rolvenden, Stallenden in Rolvenden, Ramsden in Benenden, West Bishoppenden in
Benenden, Folkinden in Benenden and Sandherst, Holnherst in Benenden,
Elderherst in Halden and Tenterden, Ilehinden in Woodchurch, Mensden in
Tenterden, Strenchden in Tenterden, Smeeth in Stone in the Isle of Oxney,
Blackbrooks and Pisenden in Witresham.

Casingham is a second place of Estimate. In Ages of a very high Ascent, I find
it had Owners of the same Surname; for, in Testa de Nevill, I find that William
de Casingham held the Manor of Casingham, now corruptly called Keinsham, with
Orlovingden, another inconsiderable Manor annexed unto it, in the twentieth
year of Henry the third, and paid respective Aid for it accordingly, under the
Notion of the fourth part of a Knights Fee, at the Marriage of Isabell that
Prince's Sister. In Times which were immediately subsequent to the departure of
this Family from this place, that is, in the Government of Henry the fourth, I
find by an Ancient Court-roll, the Moors to have been possessed of it, and kept
it in their Inheritance, until the reign of Henry the eighth, and then it was
conveyed to Gibbons of Rolvenden; from which Family, about the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth, as appears by the Court-rols, now in the Hands of my Learned
Friend Mr. Kilbourn, it went away to Hay or Hays of Sussex, and in this Name it
remained until that Time which bordered upon our Fathers Remembrance, and then
it was alienated to Everden or Everinden, descended from the Everindens of
Everinden-house in Biddenden, where they are recorded by the private Deeds of
that place, to have been resident many Hundred years, until in the second year
of Queen Mary, it was passed away by Sale to John Mils, Ancestor to the present
Proprietary. But to proceed, the Continuance of this Family at this place, was
but brief and transitory; for not many years since, it went away by Sale from
this Name to Muns, where the Inheritance still continues.

Fresingham sometimes written Fersingham, and vulgarly called Frensham, is the
last place of Account in Rolvenden. It had in the twentieth year of Henry the
third, as appears by Testa de Nevill, a Family of that Name which was its
Possessor; for John de Fresingham or Fersingham held it then, and paid for it
after the Rate of the fourth part of a Knights Fee, at the Marriage of Isabell
that Prince's Sister. And in this Family did it remain until the latter part of
Edward the third, and then the Vicissitude of Purchase brought it to be the
Demeasne of Norwood, and in this Name was it resident, until the reign of
Edward the fourth, and then, as appears by the old Rols of this Manor, it was
conveyed to Guldeford, and Sir Henry Guldeford, upon his Decease, gave it to
his second Son Sir George Guldeford, from whom it descended to his Grandchild
Sir Edward Guldford, who about the beginning of King James passed it away to
Mr. Foul, who bequeathed it to his second Son Mr....... Foul, who sold it to
Sir Edward Hales Knight and Baronet, Grandfather to Sir Edward Hales, who
possesses the instant Signory and Fee-simple of it.

Hole in this Parish was a Seat which had Owners of that Surname, for in the
year 1340. Henry at Hole demises this place-by Deed to his two Sisters Honor
and Alice; but for many Descents last past, Edmund Gibbons was of this Family,
who founded the Free School at Benenden, and settled 30. l. per Annum for its
endowment.
it has been the Patrimony of Gibbons, who held Land in this Parish in the
year 1326. and was the Seminary or Original Seed-plot, whence all of that Name
and Family in Kent primitively sprouted forth, and though Sir William Segar did
assign to Mr. Gibbons of Westcliff, A Lion Rampant between three Escollops,
and to this Family, A Lion Rampant between three Ogrises, as their Coat-Armor,
yet in ancient colored Glass at Hole now the Inheritance of Colonel Robert
Gibbons, the paternal Coat of this Family is represented to have been, Or, A
Lion Rampant Sables charged with an Escarbuncle Pomettee and Flourette of the
first, which I mention that this Family now of Hole might receive no prejudice
by his Mistake or inadvertency.

Fersham in this Parish, was (as appears by some dateless Deeds) the Patrimony
of Sir John de Fersham. Stephen de Fersham, this man's Successor, in the
eleventh year of Edward the third, found a man at Arms for Guard of the Sea
Coasts, which implies he was of eminence in those Times: In Times of a latter
Date; that is, in the reign of Henry the fourth, I find it possessed by
Guldeford, and remained with the Revenue of that Family until the latter end of
Queen Elizabeth, and then it was passed away to Dike of Sussex, whose
Descendants by their Trustees and Commissioners, not many years since conveyed
their joynt-Interest in it to Mr. Thomas Bromfeild of London Merchant.

Old Romney in the Hundred of Langport, is eminent for two or three places
which lie within the Confines of it, which are both of Spiritual and Secular
Concernment. The first is Agne-court and Orgarswike, not distant by any
considerable Difference of space from this Town, and which was once a Parish
entirely in it self, until, it is probable, the unhealthful Situation made the
Inhabitants vary their Station and dislodge: which were both given by Offa King
of the Mercians, in the year seven hundred eighty and one, to the Prior and
Monks of Christ-church, ad Pascua Porcorum, say the Records of that Covent,
that is, for the feeding or grazing of their Hoggs. And it is possible that the
Foundation of this Grant was the profuse Effusion, not only of Christian, but
of Innocent Blood, which had been so prodigally wasted, to be subservient and
ministerial to the ambitious Interests and Passions of the abovementioned
Prince, and though peradventure he had endeavored to wash off those Crimson
Stains which stuck upon his Hands, besmeared with the Blood of Ethelbert King
of the East Angles, and others, with penitential Pears; yet he deemed that an
insufficient Expiation to assoil himself from his contracted Guilt, unless he
made his Compunction more visible and conspicuous, by a Munificent
Manifestation both of his Piety and Charity together.

Bear or Berry-court in Old Romney (for it carried the first Appellation in
very Old Evidences) is a Mannot which has contracted a Reputation from those
large Quitrents and other Services which appertain unto it, rather then from
the Dimension and extent of its Revenue, which is but narrow and circumscribed;
Nicholas de Bear held it, in the twentieth year of Henry the third, as appears
by an old Court-roll, which has an Aspect upon that Time. He was Son of
Richard de Bear, who was one of the Recognitores Magnae Assisae (an Office of a
wide circumference of Trust in that Age) in the second year of King John, in
the great Controversy which was started between Richard de Garwinton, and
Theobald de Twitham, concerning Land at Ilding in Kingston. In the twentieth
year of Edward the third, I find that Robert Forneaux, Robert Atwood, and
Thomas Tutwise had some Interest in Berry-court, and paid respective Aid for
it, as the Book of Aid informs me, at making the Black Prince Knight: But
before the beginning of Richard the second, I find the Title wholly concentered
in Belknap; for Sir Robert Belknap the Judge, did not only hold it in the first
year, but likewise in the tenth of that Prince: at what Time being attainted
and banished, by the Malevolent Concurrence of some ambitious Lords, whose
Influence like a Confederacy of Malignant Aspects in the Stars, combined to
Ruin him, this by Escheat was invested in the Crown, and was by Royal
Concession (as appears by the Original Patent) conveyed in the thirteenth of
Richard the third; to John Brockman. In Times of a lower step, that is, in the
reign of Henry the eighth, I find it in the Possession of John Newland: but
whether by Purchase from Brockman or not, for want of Intelligence, I cannot
discover. And in this Family the Propriety continued, until the latter end of
Queen Elizabeth, and then it was conveyed to Sir George Perkins, from whom
almost in our Memory the same Mutation brought it to confess the instant
possession of Mr....... Aldridge of Tilers near Reding.

Rucking in the Hundred of Hamme, in Ancient Records written Roking, was, by
the Piety and Charitable Munificence of King Offa, in the year seven hundred
eighty and one, given to the Prior and Monks of Christ-church, and was in the
Original Donation granted ad Pascua Porcorum, for the Pasture of their Hoggs,
and it continued clasped up in their Revenue, until the Tempest of the general
Dissolution arose and overtook it; for, there being a Surrender of the Revenue
of this Covent, into the Hands of Henry the eighth, in the thirty third year of
his reign, he united it to the Dean and Chapter of Christ-church, which he
shortly after established and molded out of their Ruins, and here it
continued until a late Storm arose again, and tore it off.

Barbedinden is another eminent Manor within the Boundaries of this Parish,
which had in Ages of a more Ancient Inscription Proprietaries of the same
Denomination; William de Barbodinden held it at his Death, which was in the
ninth of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 3. And left it to his Son and Heir
John de Barbodinden, who in the twentieth year of Edward the third, as appears
by the Book of Aid, paid an Auxiliary supply for it at making the Black Prince
Knight. After this Family was extinguished, Robert Belknap the Judge succeeded
in the Possession of it: and I do not find, that, though the Crown upon his
Attaint, seized upon much of his Estate, that ever his Interest here was
ravished away from him; for he was in Possession of this place at his Death,
which was in the second year of Henry the fourth, and disposed it by Will, to
his Son John Belknap, who about the Beginning of Henry the sixth, alienates it
to Engham: amongst whose Demeasne, the Propriety of this Manor had not many
years dwelt, but the Title was by Sale supplanted, and cast into the Possession
of Sir Matthew Brown Knight, and his Son Thomas Brown Esquire, in the last year
of Edward the sixth; passed it away by Sale to Anthony Lovelace Esquire,
Ancestor to Richard Lovelace, who some few years since, alienated his entire
Concernment in it, to the late Possessor Mr. Richard Hulse, descended from the
ancient Family of Hulse, of the Borough of Hulse, lying within Namptwich, in
the County of Chester.

S. S. S. S.
SAltwood in the Hundred of Hene, has an open Prospect into the Ocean, which
flowed up much nearer, then now it does, and imparted its Nature to its Name:
for in Latin it is written de Bosco Salso. The Archbishops of Canterbury, had
here formerly a magnificent Castle, which Time has much dismantled; and a Park
well stored with Dear, now vanished and gone. Many Manors in this Track, are
held of it by Knights Service, which justly made it to be counted and called an
Honor. It was granted to the Church, in the year 1096, by one Halden, who for
Grandeur and opulency, was reckoned one of the Princes of England. The Value
and extent of it, are more particularly set forth, in the Records of the Church
of Canterbury, in the Conquerour's Time, and they speak thus: In Limwarlaed in
Hundred. de Head, habet Hugo de Montfort de Terra Mouachorum I Manerium
Saltwode de Archiepiscopo, and Comes Godwinus tenuit illud, and tunc se
defendebat pro VII Sullings (That was Godwin Earl of Kent, who by a possessory
right, held many Towns along this Coast) and nunc sunt V. and tamen non
Scottent, nisi pro III. Et in Burgo de Head sunt CC. and XXV. Burgenses, qui
pertinent huic Manerio, de quibus non habet Hugo nisi III. Forisfacta (for it
lies in the Franchise of the five Ports, and the King was to have their Serice
and est appretiatum XXVIII. lb. and IIII. This was Hugh Montfort, who was one
of those powerful Men, which entered England with William the Conqueror.

In the Time of K. Henry the second, Henry de Essex, Baron of Ralegh in that
County, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports (pro Tempore) and the King's
Standard Bearer in right of Inheritance held this Castle of the Archbishop,
who having in a leight Skirmish against the Welsh in Flintshire, not only cast
away his Courage, but his Standard also; was appealed of high Treason, and in a
legal Duel or Combat, vanquished by his Challenger, and being possessed with
regret and shame, contracted from this Defeat, shrouded himself in a Cloister,
and put on a Monks Cowle forfeiting a goodly Patrimony and Livelihood, which
escheated to King Henry the second. But Thomas Beckett acquainting the King,
that this Manor belonged to his Church and Sea; that Prince being beyond the
Seas, directed a Writ to K. Henry his Son (the Draught of which is represented
to us by Matthew Paris, whither I refer the Reader) for Restitution: But in
regard of new emergent Contests, between King Henry the second, and that
insolent Prelate, it was not restored unto the Church until the Time of
Richard the second.

The Castle was magnificently enlarged and repaired by William Courtney,
Archbishop of Canterbury, in the Time of Richard the second, as his Will does
declare, and his Arms in Stone-work eminently demonstrate, and remained, after
his Decease, annexed to the Archiepiscopal Revenue, until Thomas Cranmer in
the twenty ninth of Henry the eighth, exchanged it with that Prince. And his
Son King Edward the sixth, in the fourth year of his Reign, granted it to
Edward Lord Clinton, who not long after conveyed it to Mr. Henry Herdson, whose
Grandchild Mr. Francis Herdson, passed it away, about the latter end of Queen
Elizabeth, to Robert Cranmer Esquire, by whose Daughter and Heir, Ann Cranmer,
it devolved to Sir Arthur Harris of Crixey in Essex, whose Son Sir Cranmer
Harris, not many years since, alienated it to Sir William Boteler, Father to
Sir Oliver Boteler Baronet, the instant Lord of the Fee.

There is an old vast Mansion House of Stone, at Brochull in this Parish, on
the side of a Steep Hill, which was the Seat and ancient Residence of a Family
as eminent for Antiquity, as any in this Track, and extracted their Surname
from hence, and were called Brochull, who flourished here in Knights Degree,
and in some Parliaments in the Time of Edw. the third, and Edw. the fourth,
sat there as Knights of the Shire. Margaret the Wife of William, builded, or
caused to be built, an Isle on the Northside the Parish Church. You may rove at
the Time by the rudeness of the Words, which are here transcribed out of the
East Window, where they stand engrossed, in an antiquated Character: Margareta
La Famma Gillam de Brockhilla fio Fera sata Shapella.

From hence branched forth the Brockhills, or Brockhulls (for anciently they
were written so, both ways) both of Cale-hill, and Aldington Septuans in
Thurnham: But the Male Line failing here in Thomas Brockhull, Elizabeth his
Sole Daughter and Heir, brought it to be possessed by Richard Selling, in which
Family, after the Interest of it, stayed until almost our Fathers
Remembrance, it was by the same Devolution, carried off to acknowledge the
Propriety of Tournay.

Sandhurst in the Hundred of Selbrittenden, was, with much other Land granted
by King Offa, in the year 791, to Christ-church in Canterbury. But Betherinden
was always of temporal Interest; for it afforded both Seat and Surname, to a
Family of this Denomination, and John de Bethrinden, dyed seized of it, in the
year of Edward the third: But not long, after, did it reside in this Family;
for this Name expired in a Female Inheritrix, who was matched to Finch, who
united this Seat to his Demeasne; and here it lay until the Beginning of Queen
Elizabeth, and then it was rent off by Sale, and placed in Pelham; and from
this Name a Mutation of the same Circumstance, took it away; and, in our
Fathers Remembrance annexed it to the Inheritance of Fowl, and remains still
with the Descendants of that Family.

Aldrinden is a third place of Account in Sandhurst, had Owners of that
Surname: of whom Roger de Aldrinden, as the private Deeds of this place do
inform me, was the last in the Male descent, who left it to his Daughter and
Heir Christian Aldrinden; and she in the twenty second year of Edward the
third, passed it away to John Sellbrittenden; who not long after, alienated it
to Thomas Bourne, and he held it as appears by an old Court-roll, in the first
year of Richard the second; and from him did it by the Chain of Descent, pass
along, until it arrived at John Bourn, who dying in the fourth year of Edward
the fourth, settled it by Will, on Joan his Female Inheritrix, matched to
Thomas Allard, and by this Alliance, did it descend to his Son Henry Allard,
who had Issue John Allard; who alienated his Right in it by Sale, to John
Twisden Gentleman, in the thirtieth year of Henry the eighth; from whom it came
down to his Successor Mr. William Twisden; who about the Beginning of King
James, sold it to Mr. Thomas Downton Esquire, Father of Mr. Richard Downton of
Istleworth Esquire, Justice of the Peace for the County of Middlesex, now
Proprietary of it.

Combden is another Manor in this Parish, which was anciently possessed by Fulk
de Ballard; that Fulk, who, as appears by the Book called Testa de Nevill, in
the Exchequer, paid a respective supply for Land in Sandhurst, at the marriage
of Isabell Sister to King Henry the third, in the twentieth year of that
Prince: but not long did the Propriety of this place, rest in this Family; for
in the reign of Richard the second, I find it in the Possession of the
Whitfields, an ancient Family, descended from Whitfield in Cumberland, of which
Stock was Sir Ithan de Whitfield, who in behalf of the Barons, then knit
together in an hostile confederacy against their Prince, (as an old French
Manuscript informs me) tue Borough-bridge 15. Edwardi secundi, il est oit
contre le Roy, defended Borough-bridge against Edward the second. And ever
since the Government of that Prince abovementioned, was this place constantly
fastened by the Thread of many Descents to the Patrimony, though not of this
Family, yet of this Name, until Sir Ralph Whitfield deceasing not many years
since, bequeathed it by Will to his Daughter Mrs. Dorothy Whitfield, who has
now brought it by Marriage to be the possession of John Fotherly Esquire.

Here is a place in this Parish, which, however it be now under a cloudy and
obscure Character, was in Ages of a higher Gradation, the Inheritance of the
Noble Family of Twisden: and certainly here they lived, when they writ, de
Denna Fracta, and from them it has borrowed the Title of Twisden-street or
Borough, which it retains to this Day. Indeed Twisden in the Original Saxon,
imports no more but the broken Valley, or the Vale distinguished into two
pieces,

Shadockherst in the Hundreds of Blackborn, Chart, Longbridge and Ham, was the
Inheritance of a Family called Forstall, and sometimes written at Forstall,
which were of no contemptible Extraction in this County; for in several Ancient
Deeds, I find John at Forstall, and Richard at Forstall to be Witnesses, and it
is probable they were Possessors of this Manor, though the private Deeds reach
out to our View, no higher discovery then the reign of Henry the fifth; for in
the third year of that Prince's reign, Joan Forstall passes it away by Deed to
Stokys, vulgarly called Stokes, and in that Family was the Interest of it many
years clasped up, until at last the ordinary Vicissitude of Purchase brought it
to be the Demeasne of Randolph, who had an Estate likewise about Burham near
Maidstone. And from this Name, about the beginning of King Edward the sixth, it
went away by Sale to Sir John Tailor, who in the twenty fifth of Queen
Elizabeth, passed it away to John Tailor Esquire, Ancestor to Thomas Tailor
Esquire, who is now invested in the Possession of it, and from whom I confess
I have received my Intelligence concerning those who were the former
Proprietaries of it.

Criols-court in this Parish was one of those Seats which related to the
Patrimony of Bertram de Crioll, and he died seized of it, in the twenty third
year of Edward the first, and left it to his Son John de Crioll, who deceasing
about the beginning of Edward the third without Issue, it devolved to Joan his
Sister and Heir, who was matched to Sir Richard de Rokesley: but he likewise
determined in Agnes Rokesley, who was one of his two Female Coheirs, and she
by matching with Thomas de Poynings entitled that Family to the possession of
that wide Estate, which devolved to her in Right of her Mother, and from him
did it descend to his Successor Sir Edward Poynings, Son of Robert Poynings, a
man very eminent in the Government of Henry the seventh. For this Sir Edward,
in the first year of his Rule, immediately after he had triumphed over Richard
the third in Bosworth-field, was chosen one of his Privy Council to manage the
public Interest of the Nation: Afterward he most vigorusly opposed James Lord
Audley, and his Cornish Squadrons being then in Defection to Henry the seventh,
in the tenth year of his reign. And this Sir Edward held it at his Death, which
was in the twelfth year of Henry the eighth, though his Office was not found
until the fourteenth of that Prince, and then it being discovered that the
whole Stock and Lineage of this Family were extinguished, and that there were
none who were legally begotten (for Sir Thomas Poynings was his natural Son)
that either in a direct or collateral Line, could pretend a Title to his
Estate, it escheated to the Crown. And Henry the eighth afterward passed it
away by Grant to William Tailor, whose Sutcessor Mr. Thomas Tailor passed it
away to George Tailor, and he had Issue Mr. John Tailor, who concluding in Anne
his Sole Daughter and Heir, she by a Match with Whitfeild, annexed it to the
Demeasne of that Name, from whom again, not many years since, it came over by
Sale to More, who very lately has alienated it to Mr. Thomas Tailor Esquire.

Mincing-court, vnlgarly so called, but Originally, and in Old Records styled
Minikens-court, is likewife circumscribed within the Verge of Shadock herst. It
was parcel of that Income which did support in elder Times the Hospital of St.
Jacobs in Tanington by Canterbury, which was founded to be a Receptacle of
Leprous Women, and confirmed by Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury, about the
beginning of King John: and to this Covent did it relate, until the reign of
King Edward the sixth, and then though it had not been torn off from the
Revenue of the abovesaid Hospital, by the violent Hand of Henry the eighth; yet
it was alienated by that Prince, and in the second year of his Rule it was
granted to Robert Tatteshall Esquire, to hold of his Manor of East-Greenwich,
tantum per Fidelitatem Servitii, and from him immediately after it came over by
purchase to Sir Edward Wotton. And when Cardinal Poole visited Kent, in the
year 1557. he was found invested in it, and from him did it by paternal
Delegation devolve to his Successor Thomas Lord Wotton, who settled it upon his
eldest Daughter Katherine, upon her Marriage with Henry Lord Stanhop, Son and
Heir to Philip Earl of Chesterfield, and this Lady not long since has
alienated her Interest in it to Mr. Thomas Harfleet of Canterbury.

Stalesfeild in the Hundred of Feversham, was a Limb of that vast Revenue which
fell under the Jurisdiction and Signory of the Knights Templers, and is
registered under that Notion, in that Book kept in the Exchequer, styled Liber
de Terris Templariorum. And in Mr. Robert Glovers Church-Notes of Kent, there
is in this Church represented the Pourtracture of a Chevalier maled in Armor,
whose Face is only visible, and that pourtracted with a long Beard, which
induces me to believe, that it was the Effigies of some eminent Person of this
Order; for in all the Sculpture and Imagery of the Knights Templers, both
Ancient and Modern, they are still delivered to Posterity under that
Representation. And Peter Auger falling under the Censure of a Knight Templer,
in the fourth year of Edward the second, though Valett to that Prince, because
he nourished a long and diffused Beard, was absolved and discharged by his
Master, by satisfying the public, that though he wore a long Beard, he was no
Knight Templer. But to advance in my Survey; After that fatal Tempest, which
was conjured up by the Magic of the Court of Rome, and its Emissaries, had, in
the second year of Edward the second, shook this Order into a total
Dissolution, this Manor which lay clasped up in their Revenue, was united by
Royal Concession to the Demeasne of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, and
there it dwelt, until the general suppression, in the reign of Henry the
eighth, dislodged it, and threw it into the possession of the Crown, where it
lay involved, until King Edward the sixth, in the fourth year of his
Government, by Grant planted the Propriety in Sir Anthony St. Ledger, and he
immediately after passed it away to Sir Anthony Aucher, who was afterward slain
bravely disputing the Interest of the English Nation at Calais, against the
Assaults of the French: and his Successor, about the beginning of King James
alienated it to Salter, from whom it is now come down to Sir Nicholas Salter,
who is entitled to the instant Fee-simple of it.

Darbies-court in this Parish gave Seat and Surname to a Family, which was
known to the World by no other Denomination, and certainly was a Family of
generous Account in this Track; for in very ancient Registers and Rols of
Kentish Gentry; I find this Coat to be borne by this Name, videlicet, Party
per Cheveron embattelled, Or, and Azure, three Eagles counterchanged: And of
this Family was John Darby Esquire, who was Sheriff of London, in the year
1445. and built the South-Isle of St. Dionis Back-church near Lime-street,
where the Windows represent to our View the abovementioned Coat, as the best
Index to the Memory of so munificent a Benefactor: But to proceed; Before the
beginning of Henry the fourth, the Propriety of this Mansion was by Sale
conveyed from Darby to St. Ledger, where its abode was of as brief a
continuance; for the Male-line failing in Thomas St. Ledger Esquire, who bought
it, by Joan his Daughter and Coheir wedded to Henry Aucher Esquire, it came
over to be the Inheritance of that Family, and in their Revenue was constantly
fixed, until the Age and Remembrance of our Grandfathers, and then it was
alienated to Sir Michael Sonds of Eastry, from whom by hereditary Right it
devolved to Sir Richard Sonds of Throuley, who in his Lifetime passed it away
to his Son and Heir Sir George Sonds, now of Leeze-Court in Shelvich, Knight of
the Bath, to whom the Possession of this Manor at this instant is entitled

Stamford in the Hundred of Folkstone, is in it self, a small obscure Village,
but made eminent by containing within the Limits of it, Ostenhanger, a Seat of
as much Account and Eminence, as any in the County. The Demeasne which related
to it, was divided between the two noble Families of Crioll and Auberville:
Bertram de Crioll, was Sheriff of Kent, in the twenty seventh year of Henry the
third, and is written in the Pipe-roll of that year, of Westenhanger, a Name
coincident with the other. Sir William de Auberville lived at the Borough of
Westenhanger, when he founded the Abbey of West-Langdon, in the Time of Richard
the first: he had Hugh de Auberville, who likewise (as appears by the Leiger
Book of that Covent, being, a liberal Benefactor to that Cloister) was his Son
and Heir, and he had Issue Sir William de Auberville, in whom the Male-Line
determined, and he had only a Female Inheritrix, espoused to Nicholas de
Crioll, whether of a. Younger House, or else a Younger Son to Bertram de Crioll
abovementioned, I cannot discover: Bertram de Crioll, had Issue Bertram de
Crioll, who dyed possessed of a great Proportion of Ostenhanger, in the twenty
third year of Edward the first, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 48. And left it to
Joan his Daughter, married to Sir Richard de Rokesley, who upon the Decease of
her only Brother John de Crioll, without Issue, became his Sole Heir. This Sir
Richard de Rokesley, was one of those eminent Kentish Gentlemen, that
accompanied King Edward the first into Scotland, and for his signal Service
performed at the Siege of Carlaverock, was made a Banneret by that Prince: See
Rot. Pipae de Anno 17. Edw. 2.
but he likewise expired in two Daughters and Coheirs; Agnes one of them, was
wedded to Thomas de Poynings; and Joan the other, was matched to Walter de
Pateshull. Upon the Partition of the Estate, Rokesley's Interest in
Westenhanger wholly accrued to Poynings, and he had Issue Nicholas de Poynings,
who was summoned to sit in Parliament as Baron, the thirty third year of Edward
the third: Michael Poynings, who was likewise summoned to sit in Parliament as
Baron, the forty second year of that Prince; and thirdly Lucas de Poynings, who
in the year abovesaid, was honored with the same summons. Upon the Devision of
the Estate, Westenhanger was annexed to the Demeasne of Michaell de Poynings,
and he had Issue Thomas de Poynings, who was summoned to sit in Parliament as
Baron, in the sixth year of Henry the fourth, his Son and Heir was Robert
Poynings, who in the twelfth year of Henry the sixth, with John Perry, were
designed by Authority, to take the Subscriptions of those Kentish Gentlemen,
who were summoned in, to renounce the Title of the House of York, which it
seems was then in secret Agitation, to be set up against she House of
Lanc^ster; and this Robert, was oftentimes summoned to sit in Parliament as
Baron in the reign of that Prince. The last time I find him summoned, was in
the twenty third year of his Government, and his Son and Heir was Robert
Poynings, who was likewise summoned to sit in Parliament as Baron in the reign
of the abovementioned Monarch, and deceased the eighth year of Edward the
fourth, and left his Estate here to that worthy Person his Son and Heir Sir
Edward Poynings, of whom more hereafter. I shall now discover, how that
Division of Ostenhanger, which devolved to Nicholas de Crioll, by the Heir of
Auberville, was passed away: Nicholas de Crioll, had Issue John de Crioll, who
in the nineteenth year of Edward the third, obtained a License, to found a
Chantry in the Chapel of St. John's in Ostenhanger, and endow it with one
Message, forty five Acres of Glebe, and six Acres of Pasture situated in Limn,
as appears Prima Part Pat. de Anno 19. Edwardi tertii Memb. 4. And before, in
the seventeenth year of that Prince, was permitted by Grant from the Crown, to
embattle, and make Loop-holes in his Mansion house at Ostenhanger, as is
manifest, secunda Part Pat. de Anno 17. Edwardi tertii Memb. 34. And he left
it secured and invested, with these new acquired Franchises, to his Son Sir
Nicholas de Crioll, and he dyed seized of it in the third year of Richard the
second, Rot. Esc. Number. 40. And from him did it successively devolve to Sir
Thomas Keriell or Crioll, who was slain at the second Battle of St. Albans, in
the thirty eighth of Henry the sixth, whilst he asserted the Quarrel of the
House of York, and dying without Issue-male, Thomas Fogge Esquire, in his
Wife's Right, who was one of his Daughters and Coheirs, entered upon his
Estate here at Ostenhanger, and about the latter end of Edward the fourth,
passed it away to his eldest Brother Sir John Fogge of Repton, who died possessed
of it, in the seventeenth year of Henry the seventh, and bequeathed it by
Testament to his Son and Heir Sir John Fogge, who about the beginning of Henry
the eighth, demised his Concernment here to Sir Edward Poynings; which Edward
Poynings was one of the Privy Council to Henry the seventh, and lived here,
when he so vigorously in the tenth year of that Prince, opposed the proceedings
of James Lord Audley, who was afterward defeated at Black Heath, and likewise
was Lord Deputy of Ireland, and Knight of the Garter, and by his Influence on
that Nation, was that eminent Statute enacted, which ever since has been
adopted into his Family, and called Poynings-Law. He was likewise at the Siege
of Terwin, with Henry the eighth, and was there for his eminent Service created
Knight Banneret, and Governor of that Town. He died in the twelfth year of
King Henry the eighth, and was found after a serious Inquisition taken after
his Death, in the fourteenth year of that Prince, to have neither any Issue
lawfully begotten, nor any collateral Alliance, that could by any remote
Affinity eptitle themselves to his Estate, and so by Escheat it became invested
in the Crown: but King Henry the eighth, out of his indulgent Bounty, by Royal
Concession made it the Inheritance of his natural Son Thomas Poynings, who was
a Person of excellent and elegant Composure, and eminent Merit, and was made
Knight of the Bath, at the Coronation of Queen Anne, in the twenty fourth of
that Prince's reign, and afterward having represented to the World signal
Demonstrations in a public Joust or Tournament, of a remarkable Strength and
Courage, was in the thirty sixth year of Henry the eighth, called to sit in
Parliament, as Baron Poynings of Ostenhanger: but in the thirty seventh of that
Prince's reign, deceased without Issue, upon whose Exit this Mannot reverts to
the Crown, and there lay couched, until the first year of Edward the sixth, and
then it was granted to John Dudley Earl of Warwick, afterward Duke of
Northumberland: upon whose Attainder, in the first year of Queen Mary, it
became again parcel of the Royal Patrimony; and afterward Queen Elizabeth,
about the beginning of her reign, passed it away by Grant to her Kinsman Sir
Thomas Sackville, and he not long after, alienated it by Sale to Thomas Smith
Esquire, vulgarly called Customer Smith, who much enhaunsed the Beauty of the
Fabric, which had been empaired and defaced with Fire, with magnificent
Additions: from whom it is now transmitted by paternal Descent to his great
Grandchild, the Right Honorable Philip Smith Viscount Strangford, who has
made it his principal Residence.

The Manor of Heyton, lies likewise in Stamford, which was anciently possessed
by a Family of deep Antiquity, which was known to the World by that Surname,
and bore for their Cognizance in Ancient Armorials, Gules three Piles Argent.
Alanus de Heyton, called in some old Records Alanus Vicecomes, because he was
joined as an Assistant to Ralph de Picot, Sheriff of Kent in the execution of
his Office, in the third, fourth, and fifth years of Henry the second, held a
whole Knights Fee of Gilbert de Magninot, in the Government of that Prince, but
deceased without Issue; so that Elveva his Sister matched to Deringus de
Morinis Son of Norman de Morinis, became his Heir, from whom the Manor of
Heyton descended to his Son Deringus de Morinis, who still writ himself in his
Dateless Deeds, Dominus de Heyton, and so did It is probable this was the
Richard Fitz-Dering, who was with Richard the first, at the Siege of Acon.
Richard Fitz-Dering his Grandchild, who died possessed of it, in the forty
second year of King Henry the third, and left it to his Son Peter Dering, who
likewise held this Manor almost all the reign of Edward the first, and from
him did it descend to his Son and Heir Richard Dering, who was Brother to Sir
Robert Dering, who was one of the Knights of St. John of Jerusalem: and this
Richard, about the eighth year of Edward the second, passed it away to William
Scot of Smeth, from whom by an uninterrupted and unbroken Clew of many
Generations, was the Possession carried down to those Scots, who were
Proprietaries of it in that Age, wherein our Grandfathers flourished, and then
it was demised by Sale to Smith, which Family it still confesses for Possessors.

Stansted in the Hundred of Wrotham, represents to our Remembrance an Ancient
Family called Grapinell, who were once Owners of this place, and flourished
here under the Scepter of Henry the third, and Edward the first: but going out
in Daughters and Coheirs, Margeria one of them, by marching with William de
Inge, who was a Judge, in the reign of Edward the second, knit this Manor to
the Inheritance of this Family, and he died seized of it, in the fifteenth year
of Edward the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 42. and left it to his only Daughter and
Heir, in an old Pedigree called Isolda: but more truly Joan; for in the
Inquisition taken after the Death of Eudo la Zouch, to whom she, was matched,
which was in the twentieth year of Edward the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 31. it is
found that he held this Manor in Right of his Wise Joan, Sole Heir of William
de Inge. And from this Eudo did Thomas la Zouch Baron of Haringworth descend,
who died possessed of it, in the sixth year of Henry the fourth, Rot. Esc. Number.
17. and so did his Son Henry Lord Zouch, who was the last of this Name who was
possessed of this place at his Decease, which was in the twenty sixth of Henry
the sixth. After the Zouches the Colepepers were by purchase from them
entitled to the Possession, and Richard Colepeper was found to hold it at his
Death, which was in the second year of Richard the third, and from this Family,
about the beginning of Henry the seventh, it passed away to Thomas Leigh, whose
Son John Leigh gave it to his natural Son Richard Leigh, in the year 1575. and
he not long after alienated it to Bing of Wrotham, from which Family it is very
lately carried away to William James of Ightam Esquire, one of the Justices of
the Peace of this County, a Person who for his Affection to Learning and
Antiquity, cannot be mentioned without an Attribute.

Soranks in this Parish, was the Seat of a Family, which borrowed its Surname
from hence, and had the Repute of a Manor, in the reign of Edward the third.
For Roger de Sorancks held this Manor (as is evident by the Book of Aid kept
in the Exchecquer) in the twentieth year of Edward the third, by Knights
Service of the Archbishop of Canterbury. But after the reign of that Prince,
it was not very constant to the Interest of this Name; for about the beginning
of Richard the second, I find it in the possession of Thomas Mortimer, Lord of
the Manor of Mortimers in Cowling, and he in the twentieth year of the
abovesaid Monarch, passed it away to William Skrene, and when this Name was
worn out at this place, the Family of Wood was ingrafted in the possession, and
rested there until the latter end of Henry the seventh, and then it was by
Thomas Wood passed away to Robert Barefoot, in which Family the Title was as
transient; for Thomas Barefoot this man's Son, in the third and fourth of Philip
and Mary, alienated it to Henry Fanshaw, who almost in our Fathers Remembrance
conveyed the Fee-simple unto Lance.

Stansted had the Grant of a Fair obtained by William de Inge the Judge, in the
ninth year of Edward the second, to be held yearly, for the space of three
Days, at the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, as appears, Cart. 9. Edwardi
secundi Number. 40.

Stapleherst in the Hundred of Twyford, was as appears by Ancient Deeds and
Inquisitions, as to some part of it, folded up in the large Patrimony of
Fremingham, whose capital Residence was at Fremingham or Farningham, where I
have treated more largely of them: but when the Male-line of this Family
determined in John de Fremingham, Joan his only Sister matched to John Isley
Esquire, Son of Isley was found to be his Heir, in the second year of Henry the
fourth, and in her Right Roger Isley Son and Heir of this John, entered upon
it, and from him the Land here, by a successive Thread of Descent, was wafted
down to the Noble, but unfortunate Sir Henry Isley, of whom more presently: but
another parcel of this Manor did acknowledge the Signory of Pimpe of
Nettlested, and William Pimpe died possessed of it, in the year of our Lord 1375.
as part of his Knights Fee called Pimps: and in his Line did the Title flow
constantly along, until it devolved to Reginald Pimpe Esquire, who about the
twelfth year of. Henry the seventh, demised it by private Deed to John Isley
Esquire, from whom it came down to his Grandchild Sir Henry Isley, who being
entangled too fatally in the ruinous Design of Sir Thomas Wiat, was in the
second year of Queen Mary attainted, and his Interest in this Manor connscated
to the Crown, which was granted out of it again that present year to Sir John
Baker, Ancestor to Sir John Baker Baronet, who is still entitled to the
Propriety Isley had formerly in this place.

Boxley Abbey was formerly concerned in some Demeasne likewise here at
Stapleherst, as appears by an Inquisition taken in the third year of Edward the
third, Rot. Esc. Number. 134. which upon the suppression of that Abbey, it was with
the Manor at Boxley relating to that Convent, by Henry the eighth, granted to
Sir Thoma. Wiat, who being attainted, in the second year of Queen Mary, it
escheated to the Crown, and then it, was by that Princess the same year granted
to her Attorney General Sir John Baker, whose Successor Sir John Baker of
Sisingherst now enjoyes it, as couched in his Manor of Stapleherst.

Newsted is a Manor in this Parish, which was annexed to the free Chapel
erected at this place by Hamon de Crevequer, and invested with ample
Privileges, which Donation of his, and all the Franchises united to it, was
confirmed (as appears by the first Book of Compositions kept in the Registers
Office at Rochester) in the forty first year of Edward the third: But when the
Statute in the first year of Edward the sixth, had overturned all Chauntries,
this Manor was swallowed up in the Revenue of the Crown, and then the
abovesaid Prince, by his Royal Concession planted it in the Patrimony of Sir
Edward Wotton, Ancestor to Thomas Lord Wotton of Boughton Malherbe, who settled
it in Marriage on Katharine-Wotton his eldest Daughter and Coheir espoused to
Henry Lord Stanhop, and she by her Feoffees in Trust has demised the
Fee-simple to Mr. Robert Oliver of Leybourn.

Loveherst is another Manor in this Parish, was parcel of that Estate, which
by its Income supported the Priory of Leeds, and upon the Suppression, was by
Henry the eighth granted to Sir John Gage, in the thirty fourth year of his
reign, and he in the thirty sixth of that Prince, demised it to Thomas
Colepeper Esquire, who not long after alienated it to Thomas Wilford Esquire,
from whom about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, it passed away by Sale to Mr.
John Baker, in whose Descendants the Title is yet resident.

Engeherst presents it self next to our View, it is now vulgarly called
Henherst, in Ages of an higher Ascent Engeherst, for some old Deeds without
Date bounding some Land in this Parish of Stapleherst, make it situated juxta
Terras Osberti de Hengherst supra Dennam de Engherst, and from this Den or
Valley, did that Ancient Family, called Engherst or Hengherst, take the first
Extraction of its Name, who bore, as appears by several Seals, for their
paternal Armory, Barrie of six pieces, and having continued in the possession
of this place for many Descents, at last the Inheritance was transmitted to
Henry Hengherst, and he in the twenty third year of Henry the sixth, by his
Feoffees in Trust, setles it on his Kinsman John Nash, and in his Family, I
find it in the reign of Edward the fourth, and Henry the seventh; and here for
want of clearer Intelligence, I must leap to the reign of Queen Elizabeth, and
then the Fee-simple was invested in Roberts, and from this Family, about the
latter end of that Princess, it went away by purchase to Moodye, who in our
Fathers Memory alienated it to Samuel Ovenden, by whose Daughter and Coheir
Elizabeth Ovenden, it is now come to own the Heirs of her late Husband Mr.
Partrich Tindall.

Spilsill-court is the last place of Account in this Parish, it was (as appears
by very Ancient Deeds) the Residence of a Family of that Name, which before the
end of King Edward the second, was crumbled into Decay, and then the Stangraves
succeeded in the Possession; for Robert de Stangrave at his Decease held some
Estate at or in Spilsill, in the twelfth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 52. But about the latter end of Edward the third, this Family was likewise
mouldered away, and then it came to own the Signory of Maynie, descended from
Walter de Meduana or Maynie, a man of that Repute, as appears by the red Book
in the Exchecquer, Fol. 84. that he held twenty Knights Fees in this County:
but Mayneys situated in Bredgar, was the Ancient Seat of this Name, who having
possessed for so many Successions and Descents this Seat, did not many years
since transplant their Interest in it by Sale to Sharpeigh, by whose Daughter
and Heir it is now become the Inheritance of Mr. George Thompson of London.

Swalcliff in the Hundred of Blengate, was given by Eadbald King of Kent, as
Thorn the Chronicler of St. Augustins informs me, to the Cloister of St.
Mildred, at Minster in Thanett; and was, when her body was translated, by King
Canutus, to the Abbey of St. Augustins in Canterbury, brought over along with
it, and knit to the Patrimony of that Cloister: and the Monks of that Covent,
granted it away to be held in Fee, by a Family which took its Denomination from
thence, and were called Swalclive, and they held it the twentieth year of Henry
the third, as Testa de Nevill informs me, and paid an auxiliary Contribution
for it, at the Marriage of Isabell that Prince's Sister; but before the end of
Edward the first, this Family was expired and then the Family of St. Lawrence
was settled in the Possession. Thomas de St. Lawrence held it, as appears by the
Book of Aid, kept in the Exchequer, in the twentieth year of Edward the third,
at making the Black Prince Knight, and dyed possessed of it, in the twenty second
year of that Prince, Rot. Esc. Number. 9. And from him did it descend to his
Grandchild Thomas St. Lawrence, who settled it in Marriage with Katharine his
Daughter and Heir, matched to Sir William Apulderfield, who determining in
Daughters and Coheirs, Elizabeth one of them, espoused to Sir John Phineux,
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, brought it to confess the Signory of
that Family: but, he deceasing without Issue-male, Jane his only Daughter and
Sole Inheritrix, being matched to John Roper Esquire, this Manor became by
this Alliance, inoculated into his Patrimony, and was resident in this Name
until the Beginning of King James; and then it was conveyed to Mr. Benedict
Barnham, by one of whose four Daughters and Coheirs, its Right and Title
devolved to Soam of Suffolk, who not many years since, alienated his
Concernment in it to Perry, who has lately transmitted it by Sale to Gould.

In the year 946. King Eadred gave Land at Swalclive to Heresigus one of his
Servants, and he again gave it to the Abbey of St Augustins conditionally, that
a place of Sepulture might be reserved for him within their Cloister.

Snave in the Hundreds of Aloes-Bridge, Ham and Newchurch, was as high as I can
discover, a Portion or Member of that Patrimony, which confessed the Signory of
Haut; and so continued, until Joan Daughter and Coheir of Sir William Haut
being made the Wife of the unhappy Sir Thomas Wiatt, a man of an unstained,
though an unsuccesseful Virtue, this by Female Right became parcel of his
Demeasne: but when he and his Patrimony were demolished by that impetuous Gust
of Misfortune, which sunk them both into a heap of Ruins, in the second year
of Q. Mary, this upon his Conviction of high Treason, being escheated to the
Crown, that Princess in the third year of her Government, passed it away to
Sir Henry Sidney, Knight of the Garter, and Lord Deputy of Ireland, whose
Successor the Right Honorable Robert Earl of Leicester not many years since
conveyed it to Sir George Stonehouse.

Snavewick in this Parish, was anciently wrapped up in the Demeasn, of the Abbey
of St. Augustins, but being pared off in the general Suppression, by the rough
Hand of Henry the eighth; It was in the thirty fifth year of his reign, granted
for Life only, to Sir Walter Henley: but upon his Decease it returned to the
Crown, and lay there until the late King Charles, about the Beginning of his
reign, granted it to Mr. Patrick Black a Scotchman, who not long after, granted
it in Lease to Sir Edw. Yates of Barkeshire, and conveyed the Fee-simple in
Reversion to Mr. Rob. Austin now of Hall-place in Bexley.

Swanscamp in the Hundred of Acstane, has contracted an eminent Character of
Reputation, since Sueno or Swain fixed here his Camp, when he invaded England,
to expiate by a plenary Revenge, that Blood, which in so prodigal an Effusion,
was by Etheldred let loose from the Veins of his Danish Subjects, universally
in this Nation; and certainly it was this Swain, that erected the Castle here
to preserve a Winter Station for his Ships, and though it now lie gasping in
its own Rubbish, yet there are yet some Characters and Signatures remaining,
which evidence and declare to us, that there was once a Fortress there, where
there is nothing now but dismantled Ruins. The Tradition of the Country is,
that, that Valley which interposes between that Hill, which ascends up to
Northfleet, and that which winds up to Swanscamp, was once covered with Water,
and being locked in on each side with Hills, made a secure Road for Shipping,
which invited the Dane to make it a Winter-Station for his Navy: and the same
Report will tell you likewise, of Anchors which have been dug up about the
utmost Verge of that Mersh, which is contiguous to the Thames, and certainly if
we consider the Position of this Valley, which is nothing but a Chain of
Mershland, interlaced with a Stream called Ebbs fleet, which swells and sinks
with the Flux and Reflux of the adjacent River, and the Dimension of their
Ships, then at that Time in use, which were not of any extraordinary Bulk, this
Tradition is not improbable.

Near this place, Stigand the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Egelsine Abbot of
St. Augustines, assembled the Kentish Men into an Army, pretending it was
better to dye like Men in asserting and vindicating their Native Liberties,
with. Swords in their Hands, then like Slaves to prostitute themselves to the
Insolence of the Conqueror, by a cheap and tame Submission with Halters about
their Necks: which had so great an Influence and Impression upon their Spirits,
that they resolved their Franchises and themselves should find one Tomb
together, rather then they would give up both, to the Sword and Will of an
imperious Victor; and indeed soon after they managed their Stratagems with that
Success, that William Surnamed the Conqueror, advancing with his Normans into
Kent, to reduce Dover-Castle, which was then made good against him, he and his
Army dropped into those Ambushes, which the Kentish Inhabitants had strewed for
him, where he had indisputably perished, had he not by Charter fortified and
confirmed those Immunities, they then contended and strugled for, and which
remain unviolated either by any foreign or domestic Eruption even until this
Day.

The Manor of Swanscamp it self, was, as far as Record can guide us to
discover, the Inheritance of the Montchensies, called in the Latin, Repertory
de Monte-Canisio: and Hubert de Montchensey (as appears by Doomsday Book) was
the first of that Name of any Eminence, who was Lord of the Fee; and after him
his Son William de Montchensey, by paternal Right held it, and so dyed in
Possession of it, in the year 1287; from whom it descended to Dionis his
Daughter and Heir, and in Relation to her, to her Husband, Hugh de Vere, who
became by this Addition of Estate, thus accruing, Baron of Swanscamp, and sat,
under that Notion, in the Parliament, which was summoned in the first year of
Edward the second: but he dying without Issue, William de Valence Earl of
Pembroke, claimed it in Right of his Wife, Daughter and Heir to John de
Montchensey, second Brother to William de Montchensey who was Father in Law to
Hugh de Vere abovementioned; from whom it descended to his Son Aymer de
Valence, who dying without Issue, in the seventeenth year of Edward the third,
Isabell his Sister matched to Lawrence de Hastings, became his Heir, who in her
Right was Earl of Pembroke, and Baron of Swanscamp; and left it to his
Grandchild John de Hastings, Earl of Pembroke, who dying without Issue, in the
fourteenth of Richard the second; in the fifteenth year of that Prince,
Reginald Gray, and Richard Talbot in respect of Marriage, were found to be his
Heirs, and upon the Partition of the Estate, this was united to the Demeasne of
Talbot, in which Family, after it had rested until the latter end of Henry the
sixth, it was conveyed to Sir Thomas Brown of Bechworth Castle, whose Son Sir
William Brown, in the twelfth year of Edward the fourth, surrendered them into
the hands of Edward the fourth, for the use of his Mother Cicely Duchess
Dowager of York, upon whose Decease it returned to the Crown, and lay there
until the first year of Q. Elizabeth, and then it was granted to Ralph Weldon
Esquire; great Grandfather to Colonel Ralph Weldon the instant Lord of the Fee.

Alcharden alias Combs is another place in this Parish, worthy this Survey. It
was, many Hundred years since, the Inheritance of a Family called Cumbe or
Comb, who continued resident in the Possession, until the reign of Edward the
fourth, and then it went away from them, by Sale to Swan of Hook-House in
Southfleet, in which Family it was fixed, until the Beginning of Queen
Elizabeth, and then it was conveyed to Lovelace, who not long after, passed it
away to Carter, and he alienated it to Hardres, from whom, about the latter end
of Queen Elizabeth, the Vicissitude of Sale carried it off to Fagge, who in the
tenth year of King James, transmitted it by Sale to Hudson, whose Descendant
not many years fince, demised it by Sale to Mr. Richard Head of Rochester.

Ince-Grice is the last place considerable in Swanscampe. It related before the
general suppression to the Priory of Dartford: but being torn off by King Henry
the eighth, it was by Edward the sixth, in the fifth of his reign, granted in
Fee-Farm to Martin Muriell: but the Fee-simple remained in the Crown, until
Queen Elizabeth, in the fifth year of her Rule, passed it away to Edward
Darbishire and John Bear, who not long after jointly conveyed it to Jones, who
in our Fathers Memory alienated it to Holloway, whose Son and Heir Mr. Thomas
Holloway has lately demised his Interest in it to Captain Edward Brent of
Southwarke.

Staple in the Hundred of Eastry, has two places memorable: First, Crixall
which was Anciently written Crickleaddshall, when in Ages of a higher Ascent it
confessed the Family of Brockhull for its Owners, which were Lords of it but
until the twenty eighth of Edward the first, and then it was settled upon a
Daughter: but whether she brought it or not by Marriage to Wadham, which Family
I find about the latter end of Edward the third, to have been possessed of it, I
cannot discover; and where the Light of Record is dim, I must acquiesce in
silence. William Wadhaem, as I trace out by an old Pedigree of Fogg, lived in
the reign of Henry the fourth, Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth, under the
Scepter of which Princes he managed the Office of Justice of the Peace for the
County of Somerset, and left his Estate here to his Son and Heir Sir Nicholas
Wadham, who determined in a Daughter and Heir, matched to Sir William Fogg, by
which Alliance this Manor came to be ingrafted into the Inheritance of that
Family, and rested there until the first year of Henry the eighth, and then it
was passed away by Sale from Sir John Fogg Knight, to Ralph Banister. In Times
of a lower Descent, that is, about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, I find it
by Court-rols possessed by Tucker, who about the latter end of that Princess
alienated his Concernment in it to Smith, who in our Fathers Remembrance
transplanted the Title by Sale into Doctor Fotherbie Dean of Cantorbury, whose
Son Mr. Charles Fotherbie continues now Proprietary of it.

Secondly, Grove-place offers it self up to our Notice, as being the Habitation
of a Knightly Family, called Grove, who in old Deeds are sometimes written, at-
Grove, and sealed, as appears by the Labells-affixed to their Evidences, with
three Escollops upon a Cheveron: In the reign of Henry the sixth, I find it
devolved by Descent to Sir John Grove, who was a great Benefactor to the Church
of St. Peter's in Sandwich, where he lies buried with the Arms abovementioned
upon his Shield: but not long after, this Family determined in a Daughter and
Heir, who linked this Seat to the Inheritance of St. Nicholas, who about the
latter end of Edward the fourth, conveyed it to Quilter, in which Name it was
resident, until the latter end of Henry the eighth, and then it was passed away
to Linch, and has remained ever since incorporated into the Revenue of that
Family: so that at present it is come down to Mr. John Linch, a Noble Confessor
for the Interest of the Church, and Protestant Religion.

There is a Family in this Parish called Omer, which as appears by old
Court-rols, Tombs, Deeds, and other Evidences, have been constantly resident
almost four Hundred years.

Seasalter in the Hundred of Whitstaple, did belong to the Priory of
Christ-church: but by whom it was given, the Records of that Covent are silent:
only I find that it was part of that Revenue which supported their Diet and
Table, and likewise I discover that Pope Gregory the ninth, in the tenth year
of his Papacy, by his Bull appropriated the Parsonage to the Priory
abovementioned, and likewise was granted for the better improving their
Livelihood and Subsistence. If you will see under what Notion it passed, in
the twentieth year of William the Conqueror, Doomesday Book will inform you,
that it was valued upon the Terrier at two Carucats of Land, and upon the
Appraisment was rated at five pound. This Manor upon the Resignation of that
Estate, which related to the Convent abovesaid, into the Hands of Henry the
eighth, was settled by that Prince on the newly erected Dean and Chapter of
Christ-church, and there it remained, until these calamitous Times.

Ellenden in this Parish belonged to the Abbey of Feversham, and was (as the
Lieger Book of that Covent informs me) given to the Monks of that Cloister by
John Ellenden, and here it was incorporated and fixed, until the public
Dissolution unhinged, and unrooted it, and planted it in the Crown: and
afterward King Henry the eighth, in the thirty fifth year of his Government
granted it to Mr. Thomas Arden, miserably afterward assassinated by his Wife
at Feversham; and he the same year conveyed it to John Nedeham, from whom it
came over to his Son and Heir John Nedeham Gentleman, and he in the thirty
second year of Queen Elizabeth, alienated it to Mr. Michael Beresford of
Westerham, who not long after passed it away to Sir George Newman Doctor of
the Civil Law, and Knighted in the sixteenth year of King James: and from him
by successive Right, it is now descended to his Son and Heir George Newman of
Rochester Esquire.

Seal in the Hundred of Codsheath, was a Manor which belonged to the Crown
until the first year of King John, and then it was passed away by Grant to
Baldwin de Betun Earl of Albemard; and Hawis his Daughter and Heir, by matching
with William Mareschall Earl of Pembroke, incorporated it into his Demeasne:
but Gilbert Mareschall this man's Successor deceasing without Issue, Roger de
Bigod Earl of Norfolk, in Right of Mawde his Mother, who was Sister and Heir
General to the abovesaid Gilbert, was settled in the possession of this Manor,
and he in the eleventh year of Edward the first by Gift or Donation transmits
it to Otho Lord Grandison, a man certainly of great power in those Times; for,
as it appears, Pat. 4. Edwardi primi, he had a certain Agreement woven. of
sundry Articles, and made between Henry the third, and the King of Castile,
deposited in his Custody, in the fourth year of Edward the first; And in the
fifth year of that Prince, as appears Pat. 5. in seedula, he had the Government
of Jersey, assigned to his Care during Life; After this Family of Grandison
went out, which was about the Beginning of Richard the second (for Thomas de
Grandison, dyed possessed of Seal, in the forty ninth year of Edward the third,
Part prima Number. 62) the noble Family of Brian of Holoway in Devon, was
invested in the Possession, and Sir William Brian or Briene, for so he is
styled on his Tomb, dyed possessed of it in the year 1395, and lies buried in
Seal Church, mailed in Armor, with a Huntsmans Horn at his Head: upon which
the Conjecture of the Country is, that he was a great Hunter, when the Truth
is, it was placed there, to signify or denote the Tenure of some part of his
Land, which was in Cornage. But to return: the next Family which succeeded
Brian, in the Inheritance of Seal, was the ancient Family of Fiennes, and this
as I find by some Court-rolls, was in the reign of Henry the fourth, and James
Fiennes, second Son of William Fiennes Esquire, was, the first of March, in the
twenty fifth of Henry the sixth, summoned to the Parliament at Bury, as Baron
of Say and Seal: but this place, after this newly achieved Honor, continued
not long in this Name; for William Lord Say, in the second year of Edward the
fourth, passed it away to Geffrey Boleyne, Grandfather to Sir Thomas Boleyne,
who was made Knight of the Garter, and Treasurer of the Kings House in the
fifteenth, created Viscount Rochford in the seventeenth, and lastly raised to
the Earldome of Wiltshire, and Ormond in the twenty first of Henry the eighth:
but his unfortunate Son George Viscount Rochford, being beheaded and leaving no
Issue, it devolved to Queen Elizabeth, in Right of Queen Anne her Mother one of
the Sisters and Coheirs, and she in the first year of her reign, passes it by
Grant to her Kinsman Henry Carry, whose Grandchild Henry Carry Earl of Dover
alienated it by Sale to Richard Sackvill Earl of Dorset, who passed it away in
our Fathers Memory to Richard Smith, vulgarly called Dog Smith, and he not many
years since deceasing without Issue bequeathed the Fee-simple of it to St
Thomas Hospital in Southwarke.

Hall-place in Seal is a second place of Account, It was in the thirty sixth
year of Edward the third, as an old Rentall discovers to me (and farther none
of the ancient Evidences do reach) the Patrimony of Thomas Champneys, and he
makes it over in part to Sir William Wroth of Enfield, and he in the second
year of Richard the second, alienated all his Right and Interest in it to
Thomas Lovell, but some part remained unsold until the nineteenth of the
abovesaid Prince, and then it was wholly invested by Sale from Robert
Champneys, in the aforesaid Thomas Lovell, and he by his Feoffees in Trust, as
namely John Osborne, John Arnold, Richard Marshall, and John Atsheath, conveyed
it in the eleventh year of Henry the fourth, to Thomas Theobald or Tebald, and
Mawde his Wife, and so by this Purchase, did it become the Inheritance of this
Family, and made its abode here, until the twenty fourth year of Henry the
seventh; and then John Theobald alienated it to William Porter, which Family it
is probable were concerned in it before: for in the tenth year of Edward the
fourth, I find John Alphey releases by Deed his right in Hall, to William
Porter Esquire; and from William Porter abovesaid, did the Title slow down in
the Chanel of paternal Right, to Mr. Andrew Porter, who concluding in a
Daughter and Heir called Elizabeth, it is now by matching with her, become the
Patrimony of Mr. Peter Stowell, Register of the Diocese of Rochester.

Stidulfe is a third Manor in Seal, which afforded both Seat and Surname to a
Family so called. Robert de Stidulfe, is mentioned in Deeds without Date to
have held this, and much other Land in Seal. In the thirty sixth year of
Edward the third, I find, Reginald Stidulfe of Stidulfe, accounts with Thomas
Champneis for Land held of his Manor of Hall. And lastly I discover, that
William Stidulfe, about the eleventh year of Henry the sixth, by Sale, conveyed
it to William Quintin, whose Son William, changed the Name of Quintin into
Oliver, upon what Grounds I have discovered at Leybourn; and in this Name was
this Manor lodged until the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth; and then it was
passed away to Richard Theobald, whose Son John, exchanged it with his Kinsman
Stephen Theobald, who dying without Issue-male, left two Coheirs, Katharine
matched to Edward Michell, and Margaret wedded to David Polhill, who shared his
Inheritance, and this upon the Division of the Estate, augmented the Revenue of
Michell, and his Descendant Mr....... Michell, is now the Heir apparent of it.

Sedingbourn in the Hundred of Milton, has several places in its confines
remarkable, whereof Bayford and Goodneston first claim our Notice, the last of
which had a Castle, whose Banks and Ruins are yet visible; it anciently
acknowledged the Family of Nottingham, who likewise in elder Times were possessed
of Bayford for Proprietaries. Robert de Nottingham flourished in the reign of
Edward the first, and dates several of his Deeds in the Beginning of that
Prince's Rule, apud Castellum suum de Goodneston. Robert de Nottingham his
Successor, was Sheriff of Kent, the forty eighth year of Edward the third, and
held his Shriovalty at Bayford in Sedingbourn, in which year he dyed, and was
found to have held at his Death, Lands at Sharsted, Pedding in Tenham, a place
called Newland, and another called la Herst, Higham in Milsted, Bixle in Tongue,
now called Bex, and lastly Goodneston and Babford, now named Bayford in this
Parish, all which descended to his only Son John Nottingham; whose only
Daughter and Heir Eleanor Nottingham, was matched to Simon Cheyney, second Son
of Sir Richard Cheyney of Shurland, who brought all this spreading Revenue, to
acknowledge the Signory of this Family, and the Coats of Cheyney and
Nottingham, viz. Azure six Lions Argent, a Canton Ermin and Gules, two Pales
wavee Argent stand empaled in Milsted-church, in colored Class. But this
Alliance, though it much enhaunsed by additional improvement the Patrimony of
Cheyney, yet could not so strongly entwine the Interest of Bayford and
Goodneston with this Name: but that about the latter end of Henry the sixth,
they were conveyed away by Sale to Lovelace; for Richard Lovelace of Queenhith
in London, a younger Branch of the Lovelaces of Bethersden, made his Will the
first of April 1465, and there ordained that his Feoffees should make an
Estate of his Manors of Bayford and Goodneston in Sedingbourn, which he had
purchased of Cheyney, to John Lovelace his Son and Heir, which accordingly was
performed, and he invested in the Possession of them; and from him did they by
Descent devolve to his Crandchild Thomas Lovelace, of Kingsdown, who in the
tenth year of Queen Elizabeth passed them away to Mr. Ralph Finch; from which
Family they went away by the same Revolution, almost in our Fathers Memory to
Alderman Garret of London, who had Issue Sir John Garret, of the County of
Hertford, whose Widow Dowager the Lady..... Garret by right of Jointure, now
enjoys the Profits of both these Manors.

Chilton is another Manor in Sedingbourn, which had Owners of this Surname,
who likewise held another Manor of this Name in Ash, both which places William
de Chilton held at his Death, which was in the thirty first of Edward the
first: but after his Exit, it did not long confess the Propriety of this
Family; for about the Beginning of Edward the third, it was demised by Sale to
Corbie, and Robert Corbie was possessed of it at his Decease, which was in the
thirty ninth year of that Prince, Rot. Esc. Number. 9. and he had Issue Robert
Corbie, whose Sole Daughter and Heir, Joan Corbie espoused Sir Nicholas Wotton,
twice Lord Mayor of London, by whom this Manor and much other Land, came by a
fruitful Augmentation, to swell the Inheritance of this Family, yet I find the
Interest in Chilton was not solely lodged in Corbie; for by ancient Deeds I
discover that an old Family called Maris was concerned in some part of it
likewise. John de Maris held a Knights Fee in Wicheling, and much other Land at
Herietsham, the twentieth year of Ed. the third, as likewise the Manor of
Ackmere in St. Mary Crey in Castle-guard of Dover-castle: and his great
Grandchild William Maris, was Sheriff of Kent the twenty first year of Henry
the sixth, and was Esquire to Henry the fifth, and afterward to Cardinal
Kemp, and lies entered in Preston Church, with so much of the Inscription left,
as may instruct the Reader, that his Ashes slumber beneath the Tombstone: yet
before his Decease he had alienated his share in this Manor to Nicholas Wotton
Esquire, from whom the united Interest of this place came down to Thomas Lord
Wotton, who not many years since settled it in Marriage on Katherine his eldest
Daughter, matched to Henry Lord Stanhop, Son and Heir to Philip Earl of
Chesterfeild lately deceased, who still enjoyes the propriety of it.

In the year 1232. Henry Bishop of Rochester, as Thomas Rudborne a Monk of St.
Swithens in Winchester does relate, came on a Sabbath Day with much exultation
out of Sedingbourn Church, and desired the people to express their Joy, because
on that Day by the efficacious prayers of the Church, Richard the first,
formerly King of England, and many others, were ransomed from the Flame and
Torment of Purgatory.

In Sedingbourn Church there was a Monument of Sir Richard Lovelace, inlayed
richly with Brass, who was an eminent Soldier in his Time, and Marshal of
Calais, under Henry the eighth, with his Pourtraiture affixed in Brass, which
the Injuries of Time, and the Impiety of Sacrilegious Mechanics, have utterly
dismantled and defaced.

Selling in the Hundred of Boughton, did in Ages of the highest Discovery,
acknowledge the Signory of the Putots, and William de Putot was in Possession
of it at his Death, which happened in the thirteenth year of Henry the third.
After the Putots the Lords Badelesmer were invested in the possession. Guncelin
de Badelesmer was possessed of it, in the twenty ninth year of Edward the first,
Rot. Esc. Number. 50. and left it with a spacious Inheritance to his Son
Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, who having involved himself in a ruinous
Combination with some others of the mutinous Nobility against Edward the
second, lost both his Life and Estate in that unsuccesful Defection, but this
Manor was restored to his Son, in the second year of King Edward the third,
and was known by the Name of Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer: but did not long
enjoy his new acquired Inheritance; for in the twelfth year of the
abovementioned Prince, he died without Issue, and left his Estate to be shared
between four Sisters and Coheirs, whereof Margaret the eldest was espoused to
Sir John Tiptoft, and he in her Right entered upon the possession of this
place, and died possessed of it, in the thirty third year of Edward the third,
Rot. Esc. Number. 39. from whom the Title came down to John Tiptoft, created Earl
of Worcester, in the year 1450. and invested afterward with the Office and
Dignity of Lord Treasurer and Lord Constable of England: but asserting too
eagerly the Cause and Quarrel of the House of York, he was crushed and
overwhelmed with that weight, with which the Partisans of the Lancastrian
Faction did endeavor to sink and oppress the Supporters of that Family, and
was offered up a Victime to the successful Fury of Richard Earl of Warwick, who
being an Apostate of the House of York, was the principal Engine upon whom the
Designs and Interess of the Lancastrian Party then moved: Upon the untimely
Death and attaint of this Earl, which was in the year 1570. this Manor was
annexed to the Revenue of the Crown, and though Edward Tiptoft this man's Son,
was the next year after his Fathers unhappy Exit, restored by Edward the
fourth, both in Blood and Dignity; yet I do not discover any Restitution made
of Selling; so that it rested in the Crown, until Edward the sixth, in the
fourth year of his reign, granted it to Sir Anthony St. Ledger, who immediately
after passed it away to Sir Anthony Sonds of Throuley, one of the Justices of
the Peace of this County, and Gentleman of the Bedchamber to this Prince, and
his Father Henry the eighth, from whom it is now come down by Paternal efflux
of the Title to Sir George Sonds Knight of the Bath, who is entitled to the
present possession of it.

Oven-court in this Parish anciently gave both Seat and Surname to a Family,
which was known by that Denomination; but whether they were extracted from the
Owens of Wales, and contracted this Name of Oven by vulgar Acceptance, no
Record does manifest; certain it is they were, as appears by old Rentals and
other Muniments, possessors of this place, as high as the reign of Henry the
third.

The next Family which (after this was worn out) did step into the possession,
was Drilond of Cookes-ditch in Feversham, a Name of generous Extraction; for in
the reign of Edward the third, John the Son of Stephen de Drilond, demises some
Land at Crouchfeild in Feversham, by a Deed bearing Date from the twenty fifth
year of that Prince, to William de Makenade, and in that Instrument he writes
himself Knight. After Drilond was extinguished, which was about the beginning
of Edward the fourth, the Foggs became Proprietaries of it, and remained for
diverse years Lords of the Fee, until at last the alternate Devolution of
Purchase brought it to be the Inheritance of Crouch, where it did not long fix,
for in the year 1588. Giles Crouch alienated it to Michael Sonds Esquire,
afterward Knighted, from which Family in our Fathers Memory it was conveyed by
Sale to Franklin, from whom the same Devolution has brought it now to Lamb,
who holds the instant Signory of it.

Before I pass from Selling, I must inform the Reader, that the greatest
Honor which this Town acquired, was, that it was the Cradle of William Selling
bred up amongst the Monks of Christ-church, who obtained License from the
Chapter of that Covent, to travel into Italy, and prosecute his Studies at
Bononia, where he arrived to that perfection of Knowledge, that he was advanced
to be Prior of Christchurch, and was after sent by Henry the seventh, in whose
Eyes his Worth was very visible, as his Ambassador to the Pope. Those
incomparable Books, which were placed in the Library, which related to the
Covent, by his Care and Munificence, amongst which was Tullies invaluable
Tractate de Republica, not long after his Death, by an Accidental Fire, found
an unhappy Sepulcher in their own Ashes. He died as full of Fame as of Years,
in the year of Grace 1494. And has his Epitaph registered by the industrious
Pen of Mr. Somner in his Survey of Canterbury.

Smerden in the Hundreds of Calchill, Blackborne, and Barckley, did Anciently
relate to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and was part of that Revenue which did
keep up the Grandeur and Magnificence of that Sea, rescuing it from all
cheapness and contempt, which induced John then Archbishop of Canterbury, this
being so eminent a part of the Spiritual Patrimony, to obtain a Grant of a
Market to be observed here weekly on the Monday, as appears, Pat. 6. Edwardi
tertii Number. 47. But the principal place, which was always of secular Interess
within this Parish, is Romden, which was the Patrimony of an Ancient Family,
called Hengherst, and in more modern Times Henherst, who were entitled to
large Demeasnes at Woodchurch, Stapleherst, Yalding, and other places in this
County; but made no long abode here at Romden, for William Son of Osbert de
Hengherst, so he calls himself in his Deed without Date, demised it to John de
Calch, and in this Family it continued until the latter end of Richard the
second, and who after Calch succeeded in the Inheritance, because I can collect
no farther Knowledge from original Evidences; I confess I am ignorant, so that
I am forced to leap over diverse Kings reigns into that of King Henry the
eighth, and then in the twenty fourth year of that Prince, I find that John the
Son of Stephen Rogers alienates it by Sale to Stephen Drayner, and it is
probable Rogers purchased it of Norton, which Family, as appears by the
Feudaries Book, held much Land here at Smerden, and at or near Romden: But to
return; In Drayner the Interest of this place was fixed, until the seventeenth
of Queen Elizabeth, and then William Drayner passed it away by Sale to Sir
Roger Manwood, and he in the eighteenth year of that Princess, alienates it
again to Martin James Esquire, Remembrancer of the Exchecquer, and from him by
the Devolution of successive and paternal Right, it is now come down to
acknowledge the Propriety of Mr..... James.

Snergate in the Hundred of Aloe bridge celebrates the Memory of an Ancient
Family styled Alarar. Gervas Alarar was Captain and Admiral of the Fleet of
Ships set forth and furnished by the Cinque Ports, in the fourteenth year of
Edward the first, and Gervas Alarar was his Grandchild, whose Widow Agnes
Alarar was in possession of it at her Death, which was in the forty second year
of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 1. But before the end of Henry the fourth,
this Family was shrunk into an Expiration, and then Walter Moile, who was a
Judge in the reign of Henry the sixth, succeeded in the Possession, and he by a
Fine, levied in the thirtieth year of Henry the sixth, demises it to Hugh
Brent, from whom about the latter end of Edward the fourth, it was conveyed to
Cheyney, and in this Name it was fixed, until Henry Lord Cheyney, in the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth, alienated it to Henry Nevill Lord Aburgavenny,
who in the twenty ninth year of Queen Elizabeth, dying without Issue-male; Mary
Nevill was found to be his Sole Inheritrix, and she by matching with Sir Thomas
Vane knit this Manor to his Patrimony: and his Son Francis Vane created Earl
of Westmerland, in the twenty second of King James, alienated it in our Fathers
Memory to Jackman, who not long after sold it to Sir Edward Henden, one of the
Barons of the Exchecquer, who upon his Decease gave it to his Nephew Sir John
Henden, whose Son and Heir Edward Henden Esquire, now enjoyes the Signory of it.

Smeth in the Hundred of Bircholt, has in the Limits of it Scots-hall which is
now and has been for diverse Descents the Inheritance of eminent Gentlemen of
that Surname, whom I dare aver, upon probable Grounds were originally called
Balioll. William Balioll, second Brother to Alexander de Balioll, frequently
writ his Name William de Balioll le Scot, and it is probable, that upon the
Tragedy of John Earl of Atholl, who was made prisoner by Edward the first, and
barbarously executed, in the year 1307. (whilst he endeavored more nobly then
successfully to defend the gasping Liberty of Scotland, against the Eruptions
of that Prince;) this Family to decline the Fury of that Monarch, who was a man
of violent passions, altered the Name of Balioll, to that of their Extraction
and Country, and assumed for the future the Name of Scot. That the Surname of
this Family was originally Balioll, I farther upon these Reasons assert. First,
the ancient Arms of Balioll College in Oxford, which was founded by John
Balioll, and dedicated to St. Katharine, was a Katharin-Wheele, being still
part of the paternal Coat of this Family. Secondly, David de Strabogie, who was
Son and Heir to the unfortunate Earl abovesaid, astonished with an Example of
so much Terror, altered his Name from Balioll to Strabogie, which was a Signory
which accrued to him in Right of his Wife, who was Daughter and Heir to John
Comin Earl of Badzenoth and Strabogie, and by this Name King Edward the second,
omitting that of Balioll, restored Chilham-castle to him for Life, in the
fifteenth year of his reign. Thirdly, the Earls of Bucleugh, and the Barons of
Burley in Scotland, who derive themselves originally from Balioll, are known at
this instant by no other Surname; but Scot, and bear, with some inconsiderable
Difference, those very Arms which are at present the paternal Coat of this
Family of Scots-hall. Having thus traced out the Name, I shall now represent a
Scale of those eminent Persons, who have either directly or collaterally been
extracted from Scots-hall. Sir William Scot, who was knighted the tenth of
Edward the third, was Lord Chief Justice, and Knight Marshal of England, in the
reign of that Prince. Sir Robert Scot was Lieutenant of the Tower, in the year
1424. Sir John Scot was Comptroller of the House, one of the Privy Council to
Edward the fourth, and Marshal of Calais. Thomas Scot who was first Bishop of
Rochester, next of Lincoln, Provost of Beverley, Archbishop of York, Lord
Chancellor of England, and Privy Councellor to King Edward the fourth, altered
his Name from Scot to Rotheram, as being the place of his Education and
Nativity; but, it is probable, originally issued out from this Family. Sir
William Scot, who was Son to Sir John abovementioned, was Lord Warden of the
Cinque Ports. Sir John Scot his Son, was knighted by the Prince of Castile, for
signal Service performed by him, against the Duke of Gueldres. Sir Reginald
Scot was Captain of the Castle of Callis. Sir Thomas Scot was Commander in
Chief of the Kentish Forces, who assembled upon the plains by Northbourn, to
oppose the Spanish Invasion, in the year 1588. All of which were either
directly or collaterally Predecessors (being of the same Family) to Edward
Scot, now Proprietary of Scots-hall Esquire, who was Son and Heir of Sir Edward
Scot, who was made Knight of the Bath, at the Coronation of K. Charles.

Thevegate is a second Manor in this Parish, which was in elder Times, the
Inheritance of Gentlemen, of no mean Account in this Track. Robert de Passeley
or Passelew, (for they are promiscuously so written) was Treasurer of England,
under Peter de Rivallis, in the reign of Henry the third, as Mat. Paris in the
Life of that Prince does record. Edmund de Passeley, was with Edward the
second, at Borough-Bridge in the seventeenth year, as the Pipe-roll of that
Time, discovers; and probably was instrumental in the Defeat, given there to
the Nobility then in Arms against that Prince; and from him this Manor did
descend to John Passeley Esquire, who in the reign of Edward the fourth,
determined in Elizabeth his sole Heir, matched to Reginald Pimp Esquire, who
likewise had the Fate to conclude in a Female Inheritrix called Ann, who was
wedded to Sir John Scot, of Scots-hall, and She united Thevegate, to the
Revenue of that Family; and from him is the Right of it by Descent transportted
to his Successor Edward Scot of Scots-hall, Esquire.

Smeth had the Grant of a Market procured to it by the Archbishop of
Canterbury in the tenth year of Edward the third,

Shepebourn in the Hundred of Wrotham, was the Patrimony of an ancient Family
called Bavent, whose principal Estate lay in Sussex and Surrey. Adam de Bavent,
in the twelfth year of Edward the first, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to
his Manor of Shepbourn, and in the thirteenth year of that Prince's reign, had
as appears Pat. 13. Edwardi primi, Memb. 28. a Grant of a Market weekly to this
place, to be held on the Monday, and a Fair for three Days Space, at the Feast
of St. Giles; and this Adam de Bavent or else his Son, was one of those eminent
Kentish Gentlemen, who was embarked with Edward the first, in his Expedition
into Scotland, and was one of those who were created Bannerets at the Siege of
Carlaverock in the twenty eighth year of his reign. Roger de Bavent, was
summoned in the fourteenth year of Edward the second, to sit in Parliamennt as
Baron; After whom I find no more mention of this Family, as Possessors of this
Manor: for it is probable, the Religion and muffled Persuasion of those Times,
had so warped the Piety and Devotion of this Family, that they settled it on the
Priory of Leeds: for by an old Rental of that Covent, I find it wrapped up in
their Demeasn, in the reign of Edward the third, and remained parcel of their
Income, until the general Shipwreck in the reign of Henry the eighth; and then
it was in the thirty sixth year of that Prince, granted to Sir Ralph Vane, and
Anthony Tustham Esquire, who not long after having passed away his Interest in
it, to Sir Ralph Vane, it has continued ever since, to acknowledge the
absolute Signory of this Family so that the right of it now rests in Sir Henry
Vane, Son and Heir to Sir Henry Vane Secretary of Estate to his late Majesty.

Fairlane is an eminent Seat in this Parish, which likewise did confess the
Signory of the Family of Bavent; but before the latter end of Edw. the third,
they had abandoned the Possession of it, and then it came to confess the
Signory of Colepepers, who remained Lords of the Fee, until the latter end of
Henry the fourth; and then it was transmitted by Sale to Chown; in which Family
after the Propriety had been constantly resident, until that Age which almost
was circumscribed within the Verge of our Remembrance, Sir George Chown the
last of this Name at this place, desiring to contract his Revenue solely within
the Confines of Sussex, alienated his Estate here to Sir Henry Vane,
Comptroller of his late Majesty's Household, and principal Secretary of
Estate, who having much beautified and adorned the ancient Fabric with new
Additions, upon his late Decease, bequeathed it to be enjoyed by his Lady
Dowager.

Stelling in the Hundred of Lovingborough, was with Wadenhall (which lies
partly in this Parish, and partly in Petham) parcel of the Inheritance of the
illustrious Family of Haut; and William de Haut had Stelling and Wadenhall in
the first year of Ed. the first, and this abovementioned William founded a
Chapel at VVadenhall, and dedicated it to St. Edmund the Saxon King of the
East Angles, and in this Family these Manors continued until the latter end
of the reign of H. the sixth, and then Will. Haut, lineally extracted from the
abovesaid William, conveyed Stelling to Humphrey Stafford Duke of Buckingham:
and this being forseited to the Crown, upon the Attainder of his Grandchild
Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham in the thirteenth year of Henry the eighth,
this lay enwrapped in the royal Revenue, until Queen Mary, in the first year
of her reign, granted it with much other Land to Edward Lord Clinton, who about
the last year of that Princess, alienated it to Mr. Henry Herdson, whose
Grandchild Mr. Francis Herdson, about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, passed
it away to Mr. John Herdson his Uncle, who dying without Issue, disposed of it
by Will to his Nephew Sir Basil Dixwell of Terlingham in Folkstone; from whom
by descendant Devolution, it is now come down to his Heir General Mr. Basil
Dixwell of Broom in Barham. But VVadenhall remained in the Name of Haut, until
by the Steps of several Descents, it was wafted along to Sir William Haut, one
of whose two Daughters and Coheirs called Elizabeth, being wedded to Sir Thomas
Colepeper of Bedgebury, brought it to acknowledge the Interest of that Family;
and he having exchanged it with Edward the sixth, it confessed the Signory of
the Crown, until Queen Elizabeth, in the forty second year of her reign,
granted it to Sir John Sotherton, Baron of her Exchequer, whose Heir, in the
memory of these Times, gave up his Right in it by the Fatality of Sale, to Mr.
Benjamin Pere of Canterbury.

The Advowson of the two Parsonages, or Rectories of Stelling and Upper
Hardres, were granted to the Priory of Tunbridge, in the twenty sixth year of
Edward the third, Pat. 3. part 2. Memb. 3.

Selling in the Hundred of Street, has several places in it which cannot be
declined without some Memorial: Willmington and Somervill, are the first that
occur, and they gave Seat, and one of them Surname, to a Family of Repute in
that Age, because I find they had Land in other places in the County. Roger de
Wilmington, held the Possession of them at his Death, which was in the eleventh
year of Edward the third, and left his Estate here and elsewhere, to be shared
between his four Daughters and Coheirs, matched to Ordmere, Bromming, Brockhull
and St. Laurence; but upon the Division of the Estate, these accrued to St.
Laurence, and in Right of paternal Devolution, John St. Laurence, Son of Thomas
St. Laurence, held these at his Decease, which was in the tenth year of Richard
the second, and from him their right devolved to his Son Thomas St. Laurence,
whose Sole Daughter and Heir Katharine, brought them to be the Inheritance of
Sir William Apulderfield; who about the latter end of Henry the sixth, passed
them away to Ashburnham and Till: and the first of those, having wholly settled
his Right in them by Sale in Till, they rested in this Family, until the reign
of Henry the eighth, and then Peter Heyman Esquire, having wedded the sole
Inheritrix of Till, they were transplanted into the Patrimony of that Family;
and from him the Propriety descended to his great Grandchild my worthy Friend
Sir Henry Heyman Baronet, lately deceased.

Haringe is a second place of Consideration: it was, as high as any Clew of
Record can lead us, the Possession of the Gurneys. Hugh de Gurney, who is in
the Register of those who entered England, with William the Norman, held it
under his Scepter. In Ages almost of the next Step or Descent, the Sharsteds
had it; and Robert de Sharsted, who flourished under Edward the first, Edward
the second, and dyed in the eighth year of Edward the third, was possessed of it
at his Decease; but this Name was suddenly worn out, for in the Time subsequent
to this, Henry Brockhull of Brockhull in Saltwood enjoyed it, who likewise had
some Interest in Wilmington and Somervill, which his Successor sold to
Ashburnham; and here the Propriety made its abode, until the latter end of
Henry the sixth, and then it was conveyed to Inglethorp; and to the Demeasne of
this Name it was linked, until the Beginning of Henry the seventh; and then it
was wafted over by Sale to Morton; and here the Title lodged until our
Grandfathers memory; and then it was alienated to Willonghbie; and Sir Francis
Willoughbie, sold his Concernment in it to Ralph Heyman Esquire; from whom it
came over to his Son and Heir Sir Peter Heyman, who some years since upon the
Marriage of his second Son Peter Heyman, settled it on him, whom yet it owns
for, Proprietary.

Hodiford is the last place of any Estimate: In elder Times a Family was settled
here which borrowed its Surname, as it did its Residence, from this Mansion;
for John Hodiford or Hodinorth, was Lord of the Demeasne: but when this Name
departed from this place, the Cardens were the next in order, who were
Possessors of the Fee; from whom by the Vicissitude of Sale, it was transmitted
to Cobbe, where the Title had not long been lodged, but it was by the like
Devolution, conveyed by James Cobbe the last of the Name who enjoyed it, to
Thomas Godfrey Esquire; a Person to whom by several Engagements both of
Learning and Friendship, I stand now obliged.

Shelvich in the Hundred of Feversham, was formerly the Patrimony of Atleeze, a
Family of no contemptible Value in this Circuit, who laid the Foundation of a
House near the Leas, and from its Situation extracted their Surname: but the
greatest Honor which accrued to this House in elder Times, was, that it was the
Cradle of Sir Richard Atleeze, who was Sheriff of Kent in the reign of Edward
the third, and several times a Member or Burgess of those Parliaments, which
assembled in that Age: but dying without Issue, Marcellus Atleeze, his only
Brother became his Heir, but he not long after made his Exit, in two Daughters
and Coheirs, whereof Lucy the eldest was matched to John Norton Esquire, and
Cicely the youngest, was wedded to Valentine Barret of Perry-court: but Norton
upon the Division of the Estate, was in his Wifes Right, entitled to this
Manor; and in this Family, after the Title had for many discents resided, it
was by an ever Thread of Succession, guided down to Sir Thomas Norton of
Milton; who not many years since, passed it away to Sir Richard Sonds,
originally extracted from an ancient Family, which about the reign of Henry the
third, had their Habitation at Sonds-place at Darkin in Surrey, whose Son and
Heir Sir George Sonds, Knight of the Bath, by Descent from him, claims the
Interest and Signory of it, and has upon the old Foundation of Leeze-Court,
erected a Pile so set out with all the cunning and Pomp of Magnificence, that
it is scarcely to be out-rivalled by a Fabric of that Bulk, in any part of the
English Nation. Sir Richard Atleeze, lies entombed in Shelvich Church, under a
fair Gravestone, with his Portraicture in Brass annexed, as likewise that of
his Lady, as fairly insculped, with this Epitaph affixed to both their Figures.
Hic jacet Dominus Ricardus Atleese Miles, ac Domina Dionisia uxor ejus, qui
quidem Ricardus obiit Anno Dom. 1394.

Coperhams-Sole in this Parish, for several Centuries of years, has confessed
the Belks to have been its Proprietaries: who it is probable extracted their
Name out of Denmark, where the Name is yet spreading, and the Family noble and
numerous. Stephen de Belk is mentioned in Testa de Nevill, a Book kept in the
Exchequer, to have paid respective Aid for Land which he held in this Track, at
the Marriage of Isabell Sister to Henry the third, in the twentieth year of
that Prince's reign, which is enough to justify the Antiquity of this Family
in this Track.

Shepeards Forstall was for many Descents the possessionof a Family called
Ruck, one of whom lies entombed at Rye, and was an eminent Person, in the reign
of Henry the eighth, being Bow-bearer to that Prince, and bore for his Coat
Armor, as it appears affixed to his Gravestone, Sables a plain Cross Argent
between four Flower de Lis Or. The last of this Name which held this place, was
Nicholas Rucks, who about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, dying without
Issue, gave it to his Nephew Mr. Nicholas Oliver, who has lately passed it
away by Sale to the College of Alsoules in Oxford.

Lords is the last place of Account in Shelvich: in the reign of Edward the
second, and Edward the third, it had Owners of that Surname: but ever since the
latter part of Richard the second, it has constantly acknowledged the Family
of Giles, until this present, to have been its successive proprietaries. One of
this Family, called Alexander Giles, was Steward to the Abbot of Lesnes, in the
reign of Edward the third, and I have seen a Release under his Hand and Seal,
given to one John Walden of Erith, in the twenty fifth of the abovesaid
Prince, for some Services due from that Person of the Covent abovesaid.

Sevington in the Hundreds of Chart and Longbridge, was, in Ages of as high as
any Record can step to, the Barrie's, a Family of great Antiquity in this
Track. Sir Robert de Barrie is in the Register of those, who were engaged in
Ireland, under Henry the second, where he was the first, as Mr. Camden reports,
which manned and brought the Hawk to hand; and grew up to that Repute, as he was
called by the Irish Barriemore, or the great Barrie. William de Barrie, this
man's Successor, was one of the Recognitores Magnae Assisae, for this County, in
the Time of King John, and lived at the Moat in this Parish, where many of his
Successors, who were Lievtenants of Dover-castle, and Conservators of the Peace
in Kent, had their Residence: the last of whom was Robert Barrie, whose Female
Heir brought this Manor to Radcliff, and he not many years since conveyed the
Moat to Alcock, by whose Daughter and Heir it is now united to the Demeasne of
Bois.

Sevenoke is like a Fountain which streams into several places of Note, which
we cannot pass by without some Consideration. The first is Blackhall, which
was the possession of a Family called Totihurst: the first whom I find possessed
of it was William de Totihurst, and he flourished here, as appears by the
ancient Court-rols, a great part of the reign of Edward the third, and Richard
the second. The next whom I find by the same Evidences settled in the
Inheritance, is Thomas Totihurst, and he held it in the reign of Henry the
fifth, and Henry the sixth, and had Issue Robert Totihurst, who was, as appears
by an Inscription upon his Tomb, Servant to Cardinal Bourchier, and died
possessed of this Manor, in the year 1512. and transmitted it to his Son Thomas
Totihurst Esquire, Justice of Peace of this County, who about the beginning of
Queen Elizabeth, alienated it to Sir...... Boswell Grandfather to Sir Leonard
Boswell, who dying without Issue, his Sister the Lady...... Boswell, Widow of
Sir William Boswell, as Heir General to her Brother, is now entered upon it.

Brabourne is the second place of Account. The first whom I find possessed it,
was Baldwin de Betun Earl of Albemarle. Falcatius de Brent, who so vigorously
asserted the Cause and Quarrel of King John against his Barons, and afterward
merited very much of his Son Henry the third, at the Battle of Lincoln, where
a considerable part of those Forces which Lewis the Dolphin of France had
transported into England, to support the Confederacy of the Seditious Barons,
was dissipated and discomfited. But afterward, all National Animosities being
charmed into Slumber by a general Peace, he desiring still to improve the Flame
of War since from that he expected both Heat and Light, seized on the Castle of
Bedford, which was not wrung from him without the Expense of much Blood and
Treasure: to expiate which Crime, his Estate here and else where, was in the
fifth year of Henry the third, forfeited to the Crown, as being the Price of so
great an Insolence: And then the abovesaid Monarch granted it wholly to Baldwin
de Betun Earl of Albemarle: and Hawis his Daughter and Coheir, brought it to
her Husband William Mareschall Earl of Pembroke: but Gilbert Mareschall this
man's Successor, dying without Issue, Roger de Bigod Earl of Norfolk; in Right
of Mawde his Mother, who was his Sister and Heir, entered upon it, and he, in
the eleventh year of Edward the first, gives it to Otho Lord Grandison. After
this Family was worn out, I find by an ancient Courtroll, one Walter de
Pevenley or Pemley, possessed of it, in the reign of Edward the third, and he it
is possible erected the House, which in old Deeds is written Pevenley or
Pemley-court. But, before the beginning of Henry the sixth, this Family was
extinguished and gone, and then the Ashe's were the succeeding Proprietaries, a
Family which before were Lords of much Land in this Track, and in ancient Deeds
were written de Fraxino, from their Habitation near some place planted with
those Trees; and it is probable derived their Descent from Thomas de Esse, who
was one of the Recognitores Magnae Assisae, in the fourth year of King John, as
appears by the Pipe-rols of that Time: and certainly to this Name did a
considerable part of the Fabric of the House owe its first Original, as
appears by the Coat in diverse of the Windows, videlicet, Azure three Cheverons
Argent. In fine, after this Seat and Manor had for many years been resident in
this Family, it was about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, alienated to
Sir...... Boswell, whose Grandchild dying without Issue, his Sister the Lady
Margaret Boswell, is now become the Heir General of this place.

Rumpsted and in very old Evidences written Rumpshot, was the Inheritance of a
Family, which was known by that Surname. It is superfluous to inform the World
how many, by old Deeds, are represented to have been possessors of this place,
amongst whom Sir William de Rumpsted is most eminent, who flourished here, in
the reign of Edward the third, and, as the constant and successive Tradition of
the Inhabitants of this Parish is, was Foster-father to William de Sevenoke,
who was found a desolate and forlorn Orphan in the hollow Body of an Oak, and
received both Reception and Education from the Charity and Benevolence of the
abovementioned Person: In whose Lineage the propriety of this place did not
long after settle; for by an old Court-roll, I find it in the reign of Henry
the sixth, in the Tenure of Nisell: but this Family not long after determining
in a Female Heir, she by matching with Bear, brought it to acknowledge it self
to be of the Interest of this Family, but staid not long in the Name; for about
the beginning of Henry the eighth, it was made by purchase the possession of
Peckham, from whom not many years after, by the same fatality it went away to
Bedell. Nicholas Bedell, in the third and fourth of Philip and Mary, demised it
to John Stacy of Hollenden, and John Stacy, in the fourth and fifth of Philip
and Mary, conveyes it to Richard Lone, and his Successor Mr. Richard Lone has
very lately by Sale transmitted his Interest here to Thomas Lambert, formerly
of West-Combe in Greenwich Esquire.

Knoll is the last place of Account in Sevenoke: It had, in Times of elder
Inscription, the same Owners with Brabourne, and Seal, not far distant, as
namely, Falcatius de brent, Baldwin de Betun Earl of Albemarle, William
Mareschall Earl of Pembroke, and Roger de Bigod Earl of Norfolk, who in the
eleventh year of Edward the first, granted it with Seal, and much other Land,
which devolved to him in Right of Mawde his Mother, who was Sister and Heir to
her Brother Gilbert le Mareschall Earl of Pembroke, to Otho de Grandison, and
in his Descendants did it continue until the beginning of Richard the second,
and then it was conveyed by Sir Thomas Grandison to Geffrey de Say; yet I do
not find that the possession of this place was entirely planted in Grandison,
for an Inquisition taken after the Death of Reginald de Cobham, in the thirty
fifth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 62. Part prima, represents him
to have had some share or concernment in it; yet how ever it were thus broken
into parcels, the Inheritance of this Manor, was wholly, after this, placed in
Geffrey de Say, as appears by some Court-rols, which commence from the reign of
Richard the second: but he determining in Daughters and Coheirs, Joan one of
them upon the Division of his Estate, brought this as an Addition to the
Patrimony of her Husband Sir William Fiennes: and in this Family, when the
possession had had a Respite, until the reign of Edward the fourth, it was by
Sir William Fiennes passed away by Sale to Thomas Bourchier Archbishop of
Canterbury, who added much of Pomp and Magnificence, by a new Supplement or
Superstructure to the ancient Pile or Fabric, and dying bequeathed it to the Sea of Canterbury, as a convenient Palace for his Successors: but when William
Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, in the reign of Henry the eighth, saw that
the Grandeur of this Mansion was looked upon both with an Eye of Emulation and
Envy, by the Laity of those Times, he to allay that Murmr and Regret, in the
twelfth year of the abovesaid Prince, exchanged it with the Crown: and here it
rested, until Edward the sixth, in the second year of his reign, granted it to
Edward Seymour Duke of Somerset, Protector of the Realm, in the Minority of
that Prince. Who being convicted of Felony, in the fourth year of that King, it
escheated back to the Crown: and then it was in that year, by a new Grant,
settled on John Dudley Duke of Northumberland: but he being intoxicated with the
Fumes of Ambition, broke out into such treasonable and seditious practices,
against the Right and Title of Queen Mary, that they could not be explated, but
with the Loss of his Life, and Forfeiture of his Estate: and then this Seat
upon his unsuccessful Exit, returning to the Crown, it was by the abovesaid
Princess granted to her Cousin Reginald Poole Cardinal, for his Life, and a
year after, as he should by Testament dispose. After his Death, it reverts
again to the Crown, and then Queen Elizabeth, in the third year of her reign,
grants it to Robert Dudley Earl of Leiceister, and he the same year resigning
it back into the Hands of his Sovereign, it was by Lease made over to John
Lennard of Chevening Esquire: but the Fee-simple was by Royal Concession
invested, in the seventh year of Queen Elizabeth, in Thomas Sackvill Lord
Buckhurst, and his Grandchild Richard Sackvill Earl of Dorset, almost in our
Remembrance, conveyed the Fee-simple (reserving it yet still in Lease to
himself and his Heirs, paying such a Rentcharge, as is there specified, for
ninety and nine years) to Mr. Richard Smith, vulgarly called Dog-Smith: who
upon his Decease, not many years since, settled the propriety of it for ever
upon St. Thomas Hospital in Southwarke.

The Honor of Sevenoke was granted by Queen Elizabeth, to her Kinsman Henry
Carey Lord Hunsdon, in the first year of her reign, from whom it devolved to
his Grandchild Henry Carey Earl of Dover: he passed it away by Sale to Richard
Sackvill Earl of Dorset, who alienated his Interest in it to Mr. Richard Smith,
who upon his abovementioned Decease, gave it with Knoll, which both were
exchanged, and so united to the Royal Demeasne by William Warham, to the
Hospital of St. Thomas in Southwarke.

Kepington is the last place considerable in this Parish, which was wrapped up in
that Demeasne, which owned the Signory of the Lords Cobham of Cobham, as
appears by an Inquisition taken, in the thirty fifth year of Edward the third,
Rot. Esc. Number. 62. Part secunda, and after a Decursion of several Descents,
came by the Heir General of this Family, to be possessed by Brook, whose
Descendant, about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, conveyed it to Burges, and
by his Sister and Heir it came over to Hanger, who alienated it to Cowper, and
he not long since to Mr. Thomas Farnaby.

Spelherst in the Hundreds of Somerden, Codsheath, and Watchling stone, has
many places in it of Repute. First, Grome-bridge which is a Chapel of Ease
belonging to Spelherst, and is dedicated to St. John: it is in old Registers
written Gromen-bridge, and Gormen-bridge from some Saxon, who was anciently
Owner of it, as Godmanchester in Huntingtonshire, upon the same Account, in old
Orthography, bears the Name of Gormonchester, a Saxon having been possessor of
it of that Denomination. This Manor in elder Times confessed the Dominion and
Title of the Noble Family of Cobham: Henry de Cobham, and Joan his Wife,
obtained a Market to be observed weekly on the Thursday, and a Fair three Days
yearly, videlicet, the Vigil, the Day of St. John Port-latine, and the Day
after, as is manifest from an old Charter, which I have seen, whose Date
commences from the fourteenth year of Edward the first, the Market and Fair
were kept, where now the new Chapel is erected by the piety and expense of
that Worthy Patriot John Packer Esquire, late one of the Clerks of the Privy
Seal. After the Cobhams were departed from the possession of this place, the
Lords Clinton became, by purchase, Proprietaries of it: and John de Clinton,
who was often summoned to fit as Baron in Parliament, in the Time of Richard
the second, died possessed of it, in the twenty second year of that Prince, Rot.
Esc. Number. 16. from whom the Title flowed in this Family, until the latter end
of Henry the fourth, and then it was passed away to Waller of Lamberherst,
where, and in Sussex they were before Masters of very ample Possessions; for
Thomas Waller, and Katharine his Wife, granted to Thomas Waller of Lamberherst
his Father, Richard Brenchley and John Brook, all his Lands, Messuages, and
Tenements, in the Villages and Parishes of Rotherfeild, Witheham, Wadhurst;
Lamberhurst, Little Horsted, Alfricheston, and Bucksted, together with the
moiety of the Advouson of the Church of Little Horsted, as appears, Claus. 11.
Richardi secundi in Dorso Memb. 35. Richard Waller Esquire, was Sheriff of
Kent, the sixteenth year of Henry the sixth, and kept his Shrievalty at
Grome-bridge, and was before Sheriff of Surrey and Sussex, in the twelfth year
of that Prince. This is that renowned Soldier, that in the Time of Henry the
fifth, took Charles Duke of Orleans, General of the French Army Prisoner at the
Battle of Agin-court, brought him over into England, and held him in honorable
Restraint or Custody at Grome-bridge, which a Manuscript in the Heralds-Office
notes to be twenty four years: in the Time of which his Recess, he newly
erected the House at Grome-bridge upon the old Foundation, and was a Benefactor
to the repair of Spelherst Church, where his Arms remain in Stone-work over the
Churchporch: but, lest such a signal piece of Service might remain entombed in
the Sepulcher of unthankful forgetfulness, the Prince to convey the Memory of
this glorious Action to Posterity, assigned to this Richard Waller, and his
Heirs for ever, an additional Crest, videlicet, the Arms or Escocheon of
France, hanging by a Labell on an Oak, with this Motto affixed, Hae Fructus
Virtutis. This Richard was great Grandfather to William Waller of
Grome-bridge Esquire, Sheriff of Kent, the twenty second of Henry the eighth,
and he was Father to Sir Walter Waller, who was Grandfather to Sir William
Waller now possessor of Winchester-castle, and Father of Sir Thomas Waller:
which Sir Thomas, almost in our Fathers Memory, passed away Grome-bridge to
Thomas Sackville Earl of Donset, whose Grandchild Edward Earl of Dorset, not
many years since conveyed it to John Packer Esquire, Father to...... Packer
Esquire, now possessor of this place.

There was a Chauntry founded at Grome-bridge, in the thirty eighth year of
Henry the third, by William Russell, and Hawis his Wife, as appears by the
first Book of Compositions in Registro Roffensi.

Hollands in this Parish next calls for a View: It was, in Ages of a very high
Date, the Patrimony of a Noble Family of that Surname, and are in the
Chartularies of this Parish, recorded to have been great Benefactors to the
Church of Spelherst, and were allied to Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, who
matched with Joan Daughter of Edmund of Woodstock: but, before the beginning
of Henry the sixth, this Family was worn out, and vanished, and then the
Wallers stepped into the possession, in which Family the Right of it did many
years reside, until it was in our Fathers Memory alienated to Thomas Sackville
Earl of Dorset, from whose Successor it passed away by Sale to Lindsey, and
from him, not many years since, the like Revolution carried it off to Caldicot.

Ferbies is another Seat of no vulgar Consideration in Spelherst, if we
consider that it gave Surname to a Family of important Account in this Track,
who had their ancient Residence at this place, and sealed as high as Edward the
third, with a Fesse Ermin between three Goats heads erased, in Labells affixed
to their Deeds, which was the Paternal Coat Armor of John de Fereby (for so is
the Name written in ancient Muniments) who flourished, in the reign of Edward
the second, and Edward the third. But this man's Posterity being desirous to
transplant themselves to Paul's Crey, where they had before purchased Lands,
called- Hokinden of Dynley, about the latter end of Richard the second,
conveyed that Estate they had here, about the beginning of Henry the sixth, to
Waller of Grome-bridge, and continued for many years folded up in the Revenue
of that Family, until very lately it varied its Possessor, being by purchase
made the Inheritance of Alderman Chiverton of London.

Rust-hall in this Parish, had likewise Proprietaries of that Surname, one of
which Family called John Rust, was Mayor of Feversham, in the reign of Henry
the sixth, and there lies entombed, and about that Age. this Family surrendered
their Concernment here by Sale to Waller, in which Name it resided, until the
forty second year of Queen Elizabeth; and then it was conveyed by Richard
Waller Esquire, to Mr. George Stacy; who not long after passed it away to Bing,
in which Family the Possession is at this instant fixed.

Ewherst is the last place which must be mentioned, and indeed it is worth our
Recording, because this and Read in Marden, was the ancient Patrimony of Read,
many Discents before. Sir Robert Read Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
in the reign of Henry the seventh, transplanted himself to Chiddingstone, by
matching with the Coheir of Alphew, yet still remained Possessor of this place,
which he transmitted with Katharine one of his four Daughters and Coheirs,
matched with Sir Thomas Willoughbie, and after the Title had been knit to this
Family, by the Links of some Discents, it was by Sale not long since
transferred to Knight.

Siberts-would vulgarly called Shepeards-well, lies in the Hundred of
Bewsborough, and has two places in it worth our Notice. The first is
West-court, which was given (as the Records of Christ-church testify) to
Alfric the Abbot, by King Etheldred in the year 944, and conveyed not long
after by Scotlandus the Abbot his Successor, to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and has been ever since as a Limb or Branch of that See.

Upton-court is a second place of Repute. Several old datelesse Deeds discover
to us, that it was in elder Times the Patrimony of a Family called Vpton: from
whom it is probable, that the Vptons of Feversham, who for many years have
flourished there under a fair Estimate of Antiquity, were originally descended:
but before the end of Edward the third, this Family was crumbled away at this
place, and then the Goldsburghs or Goldsboroughs, were invested in the
Possession, and remained Masters of this Seat, until the Beginning of Henry
the seventh, and then this Name began to moulder away into Decay and Oblivion,
and surrendered their Interest here by Sale to Guldford, in which Name it found
an abode, until the latter end of Henry the eighth, and then it was conveyed
to John Bois Esquire, Ancestor to John Bois of Fredvill Esquire; now Lord and
Proprietary of it.

Swink-field in the Hundred of Folkstone, was originally, and as high as any
Evidence will leave us any Track or Print to walk by to a Discovery, the
Possession of the noble Family of Crioll, who held here two little Manors
called Bouington alias Bointon, and Northcourt, which were both given by
Nicholas Keriell or Crioll, in the third year of Richard the second, to one
John Phineux Esquire, for that Protection and Shelter, which he by a
Magnanimous and vigorous Assistance supplied him with, even to the saving of
his Life, at the Battle of Polcteirs, and being thus fastened to this Family,
the Interest of both these places, continued intermingled with their
Inheritance, until they came, by successive Descent, to be possessed by John
Phineux Esquire, extracted from a Son by a second Wife of Sir Jo. Phineux the
Judge, who determined in a Daughter and Heir, matched to Sir John Smith, who in
her right was invested in the Propriety of both these places, from whom they
are now come down to his Grandchild Philip Smith Viscount Strangford.

There was a Praeceptory here at Swingfield, which belonged to the Knights
Hospitallers, of the Nature, Capacity, and Condition of which I have spoken
before at Little-Peckham, which upon the Suppression of their Order here in
England, was by Henry the eighth, in the thirty third of his reign, granted to
Sir Anthony Aucher; who not long after passed it away to Palmer, descended from
an ancient Family of that Surname in Sussex, so that it is now the Inheritance
of Sir Henry Palmer of Wingham Baronet.

In the twentieth year of Edward the third, John Monins held Land here, and
paid respective Aid for it, as the Book of Aid informs me, at making the Black
Prince Knight. I should not have mentioned this Record, but to show, that this
noble and eminent Family, (I am bold to call them so, since the abovementioned
John Monins, is styled in the former Record, Esquire) can put in its claim to
as high and illustrious Descent, as the most of the Families of this County can
justly and primitively entitle themselves to.

Snodland in the Hundred of Lark-field, was given to the Priory of St. Andrews
in Rochester, by Egbert King of the West Saxons, in the year 838, and is an
Appendage to Halling, being settled by Henry the eighth, upon the Suppression of
the former Covent, on the Dean and Chapter of Rochester.

The Courtlodge by the Church, was, as high as I can by the Guide and Direction
of Evidence trace out, the Palmers, who, as appears by very ancient Deeds,
sealed with a Cheveron between three Palmers Scrips. William le Palmer, who was
Owner both of this and Rye-huose in Otford, flourished here in the reign of
Edward the third, and stood depicted in the Church-Window, with the
above-recited Arms on his Tabard or Surcoat, until some rude hand defaced the
Signature. Another of this Name, lies entombed in Snodland Church, whose
Epitaph alluding to his Name, is registered by Weaver, amongst his printed
Monuments, of the Diocese of Rochester; and after this Name was extinguished
at this place, the Leeds's were the next Family, who by purchase entitled
themselves to the Possession of it and I remember amongst some Church-notes of
this County, collected by the eminent Robert Glover Esquire, there is mention
of one Will. Leeds, who lies entered in Snodland Church, with his Arms viz, A
Fessee between three Eagles, affixed to his Graves-stone: but it seems the
Date, Pourtraicture, and Coat, being insculped in Brass, were by sacrilegious
Handstorn off: for now there is no appearance of them, nor of this Family
neither, who not many years since, dispossessed themselves of their Interest in
this place, and by Sale gave it up to Whitfield of Canterbury.

There is a second Seat in Snodland called Holoway-court, and in the Book of
Aid, mention is of one Henry de Holoway that held it in elder Times, about the
Beginning of Henry the third: but upon a serious perusal of the evidences, and
Muniments, which did relate to this Mansion, I found it, as high as they
reached, that is, to the reign of Edward the third, to be the Inheritance of
the Tilghmans: and several very old Panes of Glass are colored with that Coat
of Arms, which the Tilghmans are entered with, in the last Visitation of Kent,
and in this Name was the Possession for many Descents permanent, till some
forty years since, or more, it was by Sale conveyed to Clotworthy, extracted
from the Clotworthies of Devon, who by Testamentary Donation, transmitted the
Interest of it to his Sisters Son Mr. Thomas Williams.

Stone in the Hundred of Feversham, was, when it flourished most, but a Chapel
of Ease to Tenham; but it is grown up to some Repute, since Simon de Langton,
Archdeacon of the Church of Canterbury, Brother to Stephen de Langton, the
Archbishop, gave to the Monks of Christ-church in Canterbury, in the year
1227, omnes Decimas Majores and Minores, de Copton and Eylwarton, infra Limits
Capellae de Stone. Now this Copton and Eylwarton were Manors, anciently given
to the Monks of Canterbury, by Edmund Son of Q. Edgiva, ad victum little for the
supply of Diet in the year of our Lord 980.

Wildemersh in this Village deserves a Remembrance; in that it was part of the
Patrimony of the ancient Family of Donett; for it was in the enjoyment of John
Donett at his Death, which was in the thirty fifth year of Edward the third.
But not long did it fix there; for J^mes Donet his Successor, dyed without
Issue-male, and left only a Daughter and Heir called Margery, who being married
to John St. Ledger, this in her right went into the Possession of that Family;
from whom the ordinary Revolution of Sale, conveyed it to Richard Dryland, from
which Name by the like Chanel, the Inheritance slowed into Sir Anthony Aucher,
Predecessor to Sir Anthony Aucher of Bourne: and here for ought I yet can
collect, is the Fee-simple of it settled.

Stone in the Hundred of Acstane, had formerly a Castle, which acknowledged the
Northwoods for its founders, as their Arms insculped in the old Stone-work now
dismantled did easily demonstrate. In the twentieth year of Edward the third,
John de Northwood, paid respective Aid at making the Black Prince Knight, for
his Manor and Castle, and although it now lie wrapped up in its own Ruins,
yet the Shell or Skeleton of it, within which Sir Richard Wiltshire laid the
Foundation of that Frabrick now extant represents to the eye some symptoms of
its former strength and magnificence. From Northwood, it passed away by Sale to
Butivant corruptly called Bonivant, and from this Family a Fatalitie like the
former carried it down to Cholmley: from him by as quick a Current the Fee
simple was transported to Chapman, whose Widow Elizabeth Chapman, being
re-married to Jo. Preston, he in her Right as I find by some Court-rolls was
possessed of it; but her Son Thomas Chapman about the latter end of Henry the
eighth concluded in Anne his Sole Heir who by matching with Mr. William Carew
devolved the right on his Family; from whom, in right of that Alliance it is
now descended to his Successor Mr. Henry Carew.

Littlebroke in this Parish did first own a Family of that Surname, as is
evident from ancient Dateless Deeds, wherein Laurence at Broke is re-presented
to have been Possessor of it; but this Family before the end of Edward the
third, had deserred the Possession, and transplanted it by Sale into Northword;
and John Northwood about the latter end of Richard the second, passed it away
to Roger Apylton; which Roger lies buried (as the Date on his Tomb informs us)
in Crayford Church, in the year 1400. And from him does Sir Henry Apylton
Knight and Baronet, not only claim his Descent, but his Interest in this
Manor also.

The Manor of Cotton is embraced within the Precincts of Stone likewise: It
was, as high as any private or public Record can conduct us on to a Discovery,
the Possession of Killingworth of Hackstaple, at Sutton at Hone, and in this
Family was the Title by a successive Derivation of several Descents preserved,
until the entrance of Henry the eighth, and then it was conveyed by George
Killingworth Esquire, to Sir Richard Wiltshire; from which Family not long
after, the Propriety of this place was, by a Fate proportionate to this,
planted in Apylton, Ancestor to Sir Henry Apylton Knight and Baronet, now Lord
of the Fee.

Stoke in the Hundred of Hoo, was given to the Priory of St. Andrews in
Rochester, by Eadbert K. of Kent, in the year 762. And upon the suppression
being surrendered to the Crown, it was by Henry the eighth settled on his newly
erected Dean and Chapter of Rochester. But here are two places which are of
secular Interest. The first is Malmains, which yielded both Seat and Surname to
a Family which fell under that Denomination; for I find John de Malmains Son of
Henry died possessed of it, in the tenth year of Edward the second, and in this
Family it remained until the latter end of Richard the second, and then it was
conveyed to Iden, a Family of generous Rank in elder Times about Rolvenden, and
here it lay couched in the Demeasn of this Family until the latter end of Henry
the eighth, and then it was passed away to Jo. Park, who dying without Issue
Male, settled it on Elizabeth his Sole Heir matched to John Roper Esquire; from
whom by paternal succession the Inheritance is come down to his Descendant
Christopher Roper Baron of Tenham. Tuders is the second, which anciently
confessed a Family of that Appellation to be its original Possessors, whose
Name was in all probability primitively Theodore; for I have seen an ancient
Roll of Kentish Arms, wherein Tuder of Stoke bears the same Coat with Owen
Theodore vulgarly called Tuder, viz. Azure a Cheveron between three Helmets
Argent: But to proceed: When this Family dislodged from this place, for want of
Intelligence I confess I know not, only in the Reign of Henry the eighth I
find it possessed by Woodward, in which Family the Title remained invested until
the entrance of Q. Elizabeth, and then it was conveyed to Wilkins, from whom by
a quick Alienation it went away, and resigned up its Interest by Sale to
Bright, and in the Revenue of his Descendant is the Propriety of it yet
wrapped up.

Stourmouth in the Hundred of Blengate, was a piece of that large Revenue,
which owned the Signory of Hussy. In the fifty fifth year of Henry the third,
Henry le Hussy obtained a Charter of Free Warren, to his Manor of Stourmouth,
and his Grandchild Henry le Hussy died possessed of it in the sixth year of
Edward the third, but, alas, neither the Nobleness of the Name, nor wideness
of the Franchise, could keep this Family from departing from this place; for
about the latter end of Henry the fourth, I find it in the Tenure of the
eminent Family of Apulderfield; but settled not long here; for Sir William
Apulderfield about the middle of Edward the fourth concluded in Elizabeth
Apulderfield, who was his Sole Daughter and Heir, who by matching with Sir Jo.
Phineux Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in the Reign of Henry the
seventh made it his Demeasn: but the Title of this place did not long fix here;
for, he dying without Issue Male, Jane his only Daughter, became his only Heir,
who by espousing of Jo. Roper Esquire; of St. Dunstans in Canterbury, linked it to
the Demeasn of this Family; from whom in a continued Current of descent the
Propriety of it is now flowed down to William Roper, a Cadet or younger Branch
of this Stem.

Shorn in the Hundred of Shamell, was, as high as the Reign of K. John, the
Patrimony of the Noble Family of Nevil. Jordanus and in some old Deeds written
Jollanus de Nevil held the Manor of Shorn as appears by the Pipe-Roll of that
year, and John de Nevil was his Son and Heir, who held this Manor in the
thirtieth year of Henry the third, but after him I can track no farther Mention
of this Family at this place; for in the fifty fourth of Henry the third, as
appears by the Pipe-roll of that year, I discover Roger de Norwood to be Lord
of the Fee, this was that Roger de Norwood, who disdaining to have his Lands
held in that Lazy and sluggish Tenure of Gavelkind, changed it into the more
active one of Knights Service in the fourteenth year of Henry the third, still
reserving to himself by that License by which he obtained a Grant of the first,
to reserve the ancient Rent whereby his Lands held even in the Time of the
Conqueror: and he in the thirteenth year of Edward the first, died possessed of
this Manor and all its Perquisites at Oisterland in Cliff and other places,
and left it to his Son and Heir Sir John de Norwood, who together with his
eldest Son Sir John de Norwood accompanied that triumphant Prince Edward the
first in his Victorious Design undertaken against the Scots in the twenty
eighth of his Reign. The Manor of Shorn holding by this Tenure, viz. to carry
a White Banner forty Days together at their own Charges, whenever the King
should commence a War in Scotland, as appears by an Inquisition taken after the
Death of Roger de Norwood in the thirty fifth year of Edward the third; Rot.
Esc. Number. 23. Part secunda. And this was customary not only in England, but
elsewhere; for Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor observes out of Prelusius's
his Discourses upon the State of Poland, in the year 1530, Albert Marquess of
Brandenburg and Mr. of the Teutonick or Dutch Order in Prussia, receives his
Investiture into that Duchy, per Vexilli Traditionem, by the Delivery of a
Banner from the Hands of Sigismund K. of Poland, and his Brother. George at his
being enstated in that Signory by this Ceremony, was suo and Fratrum Nomine
Vexillum contingere, in his own, and the Name of his Brother, to place his
Hands upon the Banner: and when the abovementioned Banner was delivered to an
Heir who had not his Title and Right free from the Claim of an ambiguous and
perplexed Competition, he was only admitted ad Contactum Extremitatum Vexilli
ejusdem to touch the utmost or extreme parts of this Banner. The Tenure which
was annexed to this Investiture was this, to assist the K. of Poland with an
hundred Horse, whenever he should personally advance into the Field against
an enemy.

But to return: John de Norwood was the last of this Name whom I find settled in
the Inheritance of Shorn and he enjoyed it at his Decease, which was in the
second year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 35. But before the latter end
of the Reign of that Prince, it was removed from the possession of Norwood, and
by Sale placed in the Noble and ancient Family of Savage of Bobbing Court; but
not long after Sir Arnold Savage determining in Eleanor his Sole Inheritrix,
who was first wedded to Sir Reginald Cobham, by whom she had no Issue; and
after to William Clifford Esquire, she by this Alliance united it to the
patrimony of this last Family, and here it lay involved until the beginning of
Q. Elizabeth, and then it was passed away by George Clifford to Nicholas Lewson
Esquire, Grandfather to Sir Richard Lewson of the County of Stafford, who
desiring to circumscribe and collect his scattered Interest which lay dispersed
in several parcels in this County, into the closer circumference of
Staffordshire; alienated this Manor, almost in our Remembrance with all its
Adjuncts, at Oisterland in Cliff and other perquisites and out-Skirts to Mr.
Woodier of Rochester, in whose Lineage and Name the Title of it at this instant
lies treasured up.

Ockington in this Parish was a Limb that made up the Body of that Revenue
which anciently did swell into so vast a Bulk and Dimension in this Track, and
acknowledged for proprietaries the Noble Family of Cobham, as appears by an
Inquisition taken in the sixth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 45.
where Stephen de Cobham was then found to have been possessed of it at his Death;
and from him was the Title in a successive stream of Descent wasted down to the
Reign of Hen. the seventh, and then it was by Sale transplanted into Sir Henry
Wiat, where it flourished being supported with the Sap and Verdure of so Noble
a Family, until the fourth year of Edward the sixth, and at that Time it was by
Sale torn off from this Name, for then Sir Thomas Wiat alienated it to Sir
Anthony St. Ledger, and he passed it away to George Brook Lord Cobham about the
seventh year of Edward the si^^^, whose great Grandchild Sir William brook
Knight of the Bath, dying in the year 1643, without Issue Male it cescended to
Sir John Brook restored to the Barony of Cobham by the last King in the year
1644, as being Reversioner in entail.

Roundal though now shrunk into neglected Ruins, was in elder Times the first
Seat of the noble Family of Cobham, from whence upon its Decay they were
transplanted to Cobham Hall, and was the Cradle of Men very eminent in their
respective Generations of whom take this brief prospect. Ex veteri Rotulo penes
Ed. Dering Militem and Bar. dejunctum.
Henry de Cobham is enrolled in the List of those Kentish Gentlemen who were
concerned with Richard the first at the Siege of Acon. Rotulus Pipae de
Scutagio Wallia.
Reginald de Cobham accompanied Henry the third in his expedition against the
Welsh in the forty second year of his Reign. Sir Henry, Sir Reginald, Sir
Stephen, and Sir Henry de Cobham who lies buried here at Shorn, are in the
Catalogue of those Kentish Knights, who supported the Cause and Quarrel of
Edward the first, at the Siege of Carlaverock in Scotland, in the twenty eighth
year of his Reign. Jo. de Cobham was frequently summoned to sit in Parliament
as Baron, in the Reign of Edw. the third. Richard de Cobham was made Knight
Banneret by Edward the third, for his exemplary Service performed against the
Scots, as appears Pat. Edw. tertii Part secunda Memb. 22. This Manor
escheating to the Crown upon the Attainder of Henry Lord Cobham in the second
year of K. James, it was by that Prince granted to Lodowick Duke of Lenox, who
upon his Decease bequeathed it to his Nephew James Duke of Lenox, who being
lately dead, Esme Duke of Lenox his only Son is now heir apparent of it.

Stowting lies in a Hundred which borrows its Name from this place. In the
reign of K. John, sundry ancient Records which have an Aspect upon that
Prince's Time inform us that Stephen de Haringod was Lord of this Manor, and
had the Grant of a Market to be held weekly at this place on the Tuesday, and a
Fair to be observed yearly for the space of two days, viz. the Vigil and Day
of Assumption of the Virgin Mary, as is manifest, Cart. 16. Joan. Number. 43. and
died possessed of it in the forty first of Henry the third. But after this man's
exit, I can track no more of this Stem or Stock, to have been proprietaries of
it. The next Family which was successively entitled to the possession was the
noble Family of Burghurst or Burwash, the first of which, whom by some old
Deeds I discover to have held this place, was Bartholomew de Burwash, who
received the Order of Knighthood by Edward the first; for his Noble and
generous Assistance given to that Prince at the Seige of Carlaverock in the
twenty eighth of his Reign, and he had Issue Stephen de Burwash, who obtained a
Charter of Free Warren to his Manors Stowting, Sifleston, Ditton, and Burwash
in Chiddington, in the first year of Edward the third, and died possessed of this
Manor and Hundred in the third year of that Prince's Government, as appears,
Rot. Esc. Number. 41. and from him did it descend to his Grandchild Bartholomew
Lord Burwash who in the forty third of the abovesaid Monarch conveyed this
Manor with much other Land to Sir Walter de Paveley Knight of the Garter, in
which Family the possession was constant, but until the beginnning of Richard
the second, and then it was passed away by Sale to Trivet; from whom the same
Fatalitie about the fifteenth year of that Prince brought it over to Sir Lewis
Clifford, and by Descent this devolving to his Successor Lewis Clifford, he in
the twelfth year of Hen. the sixth, conveyed it by a Fine then levied to
William Wenlock, who not long after alienated his Right in it to Richard
beauchampe Baron of Aburgavenny, who had Issue Richard Beauchampe in whom the
Male Line determined, so that Elizabeth his only Daughter and Heir being
matched to Edward Nevill, brought this Manor and the Barony of Aburgavenny to
be united to that Family, and continued linked to the Demeasn of this Name,
until it was by Descent brought down to Henry Nevill, Baron Aburgavenny, who
about the latter end of Henry the eighth, passed it away to Sir Thomas Moile,
whose Daughter and Coheir Amy Moile united it to the Inheritance of her Husband
Sir Thomas Kempe, whose Son Sir Thomas Kempe settled it on his Brother Reginald
Kempe, and from him it descended to his only Son Mr. Thomas Kempe, who dying
without Issue, it came to be shared by his two Sisters and Co heirs matched to
Denny and Clerk, and they not many years since by mutual Concurrence and
Assent, alienated their joint Interest here to Jenkins of Aythorne.

Stockbery in the Hundred of Milton celebrates the Memory of the illustrious
Family of Crioll, who lived here in Reputation amongst the eminent Gentry of
this County, and in the Recital of their Possessions in this Parish, their
Mansion was called a Castle, and diverse of their old Deeds bore Test at their
Castle of Stockbery. Sir Nicholas de Crioll was the first that brought this
Family into Repute and Eminence; for he was one of those who accompanied Edward
the first in the twenty eighth year of his Reign in his fortunate Attempt upon
Scotland, when after a pertinacious Siege he reduced the Castle of Carlaverock,
a piece in the repute of those Times, held almost inexpugnable; and for his
signal Service in that Expedition, was created Knight Banneret, and died
possessed of this place in the thirty first of Edward the first: and in this Name
and Family did the Title of this place by an uninterrupted Current of Descent,
stream down to Sir Thomas Crioll Knight of the Garter, eminent for several
Services performed under the Scepter of Henry the sixth, who being
infortunately beheaded at the second battle of St. Albans, whilst he
endeavored to support the Title of the House of York in the thirty eighth year
of Henry the sixth determined in Daughters and Coheirs, one of which was
wedded to Edward Bourchier who cast this Manor into his possession, and he in
her Right died seized of it in the fourteenth year of Henry the seventh; but
after this it was not long constant to the Interest of this Family; for in the
twenty third year of the abovesaid Prince, Robert Tate died seized of it, by
right of purchase. And in the Descendants of this Name was the Possession
involved, by a long Series of years, until those Times which almost fell under
our Cognizance, and then this Manor was conveyed to Sir Edward Duke of
Cosington in Alre sord; whose Lady Dowager, in Right of Jointure, has now the
enjoyment of it.

The Manor of Gillested in this Parish, did formerly relate to the noble
Family of Savage, and was wrapped up in those Lands to which John de Savage
Grandchild to Rafe de Savage, who was with Richard the first at the Siege of
Acon, obtained a Charter of Free Warren in the twenty third year of Edward the
first: and Arnold Savage Son of Sir Thomas Savage died possessed of it in the
forty ninth year of Edward the third, and left it to his Son Sir Arnold Savage,
whose Daughter and Heir Elizabeth Savage was first matched to Reginald Cobham,
by whom she had no Issue, and after to William Clifford Esquire, second Brother
to Robert Clifford, who was often Knight of the Shire in the Reign of Henry the
fourth, whose Posterity in Right of this Alliance were possessed of this place,
until the latter end of Hen. the eighth, and then it was altenated to Knight,
Ancestor to Mr. William Knight, upon whose Decease his sole Daughter and Heir
Mrs. Frances Buck, Widow of Mr. Peter Buck of Rochester lately deceased, is now
entered upon the Possession of it.

Cowsted is another place of Account in Stockbery: It was in Times of an elder
Inscription written Godsted, as giving Seat, and yielding a Surname to a Family
so called. William de Codested alias Godsted held it at his Death, which was in
the twenty seventh year of Edward the first, and had Issue William de Codested,
who was likewise in possession of it at his Death, which was in the Enjoyment
of it in the ninteenth year of Issue Richard de Codested, who was in the
Enjoyment of it in the ninteenth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 43.
which was the time of his Decease: and from him it descended to John de
Codested styled by the vulgar John de Cowsted, who bare for his Arms Gules
three Leopards heads Argent, which was assumed by Higham, who about the
beginning of Richard the second, matched with the Sole Heir of this Family, and
in this Name it remained, until the beginning of Henry the sixth, and then it
was partly by Sale, partly by marching with a Daughter of this Family enstated
upon Petit, in which Family the Title of this place was fixed and permanent,
until those Times which came within the precincts of our Grandfathers
Remembrance devolved it to O borne: but Edward O borne, not many years since,
determining in Mary his Sole Heir, she by espousing of William Fagge, has knit
it to that Revenue, which now confesses his Descendants for proprietaries.

Stodmersh in the Hundred of Downhamford, was innobled anciently, by being
parcel of the Revenue of the Saxon Kings of Kent, and rested in their Demeasne
until Lotharius, one of the Kentish Kings, made Godd his Heir, and as Thorn
records in his Annals, settled it on the Abbey of St. Augustins, and remained
successively interwoven with the Patrimony of that Convent, until the public
Suppression, in the reign of Henry the eighth, rent it away: and then that
Prince, in the thirty seventh year of his reign, granted it to John Masters,
and he upon his Decease settled it on his Son Mr. Thomas Masters, and he dying
without Issue-male, left it to his Daughter and Coheir Elizabeth Masters, who
by matching with Mr. William Courthop knit the propriety of it to his
Inneritance, and he had Issue Mr. Thomas Courthop, who, in Right of this
Alliance, is now entitled to the instant possession of it.

Stroude in the Hundred of Shamell, was granted in the eleventh year of Henry
the third, by the same Prince, Magistro and Fratribus Militiae Templi
Solomonis, that is, to the Knights Temples, who had here an eminent Mansion,
which from its being of their possession, has ever since acquired the Name of
the Manor of Temple. After the suppression of this rich and magnificent Order,
in the second year of Edward the second, upon what pretenses, and colorable
Insinuations, I have discovered in my Description of Temple Ewell, this Manor
was united to the Crown. And though a principal part of the Lands, which
related to this Order in this County, before their Dissolution, was by that Act
of Parliament, called, Statutum de Terris Templariorum, settled on the Knights
Hospilaters; yet this was lodged in the Royal Revenue, until the twelfth year
of Edward the third, and then he conferred it by Grant on Mary Countess of
Pembroke, who about six years after bestowed it on the Abbess and Sisters
Minorites of the profession of St. Clare, at the Abbey of Denney in
Cambridgeshire, to which place she had removed them from Waterbeach, where they
were first planted by her. And here did this Manor reside, until another
Tempest, more fatal and ruinous then the former, arose in the reign of Henry
the eight, which like a Whirl-winde ravished it away from the Revenue of the
Church, and then that Monarch in the thirty second year of his reign, made it
the propriety of Edward Elrington Esquire. But it seems the Title of
Church-Land is stuck so thick with the Curses of the first Donors, that it
becomes like a Moath received into a Garment, which like an ungrateful Guest,
commonly destroys the House which entertained it, and so it was here; for, in
the same year it was granted, the abovesaid Person alienated it to George Brook
Lord Cobham, whose unfortunate Grandchild Henry Lord Cobham, was enwrapped in
that obscure and mysterious Design of Sir Walter Rawleigh, which was muffled up
in such a complicated Veil of that magical Mist called Reason of State, and
other Intrigues of wrested policy, that it remains dark and perplexed, until
this Day; indeed the Crimes of this unhappy Gentleman, were by the mercenary
Tongues of some Lawyers, who were in pension to the Interest of those, who then
steared the Helm of State, and who like some Trumpeters, knew how to sell their
Breath to the best advantage, aggravated and multiplied to that Bulk and
Dimension, that he was convicted of high Treason, in the beginning of King
James, and though he lost not his Life, he did that of his Estate, here at
Stroude, which was by the abovesaid Prince conferred by Grant on Robert Cecill
Earl of Salisbury, principal Secretary of Estate, in Respect he had matched
with Elizabeth Brook, Sister to this unfortunate Lord, from whom it descended
to his Son, the Right Honorable William Cecill, Captain of the Band of
Pensioners to his late Majesty, and Earl of Salisbury, who in our Fathers
Memory, passed it away to Mr. Bernard Hide Esquire, one of the Commissioners of
the Custome-houes, to the late King Charles, and he upon his Decease gave it to
his third Son Mr. John Hide, who not many years since alienated it to James
Duke of Lenox, from whom after some brief possession, it was conveyed to Mr.
Blague, whose Son Mr. Izaack Blague by Descendant Right is now entitled to the
Propriety of it.

The Chapel of St. Nicholas in Stroud, was by Gilbert Glanvill Bishop of
Rochester, with the Consent of the Prior of Rochestor, William Archdeacon of
the same See, and likewise of the Parish Priest of Frendsbury (within the
Precincts of whose Village, Church, and Congregation, it was in elder Times
circumscribed) erected, and improved into a Mother Church, and that for these
two Reasons. First, it was divided by too great Distance from the Church of
Frendsbury: And secondly, the Inhabitants began to multiply to that Number,
that it was probable that in Decursion of Time, the above recited Church would
be in no Capacity for the Reception of so great a Conflux: and therefore it was
judged convenient by the Authority of that Age, to establish Stroud into a
Parish, independent to Frendsbury, and assign to it not only a Churchyard, for
the Sepulture of their Dead, but likewise a Competency of Tiths ( excepta
solummodo Decimatione Bladi, that is, I conjecture, the Tithery of Grass only
excepted) for the Support of the Incumbent for the Time being, as the Records
of the Church of Rochester inform us.

Shorham in the Hundred of Cods-heath, has several places within the Verge of
it, which may deserve our Notice. The first is Preston, which was the Seat of
an eminent Family, called Buckland, who bore for their Cognizance Argent an
Eagle Sables beaked and ungued, Or. Alan de Buckland, was a noted Person in the
Time of King John, and being Lieutenant of Dover-castle, that Prince directs a
Command to him, and William de Brewer, who was joined in Commission with him,
to surrender Dover-castle to Hubert de Burgh for his Service. Sir Thomas de
Buckland of this place had Buckland in Maidstone, and Buckland likewise in
Ludsdown, and flourished in the reign of Edward the third, and in several
Deeds, to which he was witness, subscribes himself Miles. In brief, after this
Family had continued possessors of this Mansion, until the latter end of Henry
the sixth, it devolved to Thomas Buckland, who dying without Issue-male, Alice
his only Daughter and Heir, by matching with Thomas Polhill of Polhill-street
in Detling, cast it into the Inheritance of that Family, from whom it came down
to Mr....... Polhill, who being not many years since deceased, his Widow
Mrs....... Polhill, is now in the enjoyment of it.

Palstres alias Planars and Sepham, are two ancient Seats, likewise situated
within the Confines of Shoreham, and had both Owners of that Surname. William
de Planar, as appears by Deeds without Date held the first, and so did John de
Planar, in the reign of Edward the first, and died possessed of it, in the forty
seventh year of that Prince's reign, and in this Family did it continue, until
the beginning of Henry the sixth, and then it was conveyed to Sepham of Sepham,
an eminent Family in this Parish, who bore for their Coat Armor, Argent three
Cinque Foils pierced Sables, and were descended from William de Sepham, who
died possessed of this place, in the fifteen year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 12. and having continued Lords of both these Manors, of one by Descent,
and of the other by purchase, until the latter end of Henry the seventh, Mr.
John Sepham, who had in the fifth year of that Prince, made an acknowledgment
for them to the then Archbishop of Canterbury, of whom it seems they both
held, passed away Sepham to William Martin, and Palstres to Cobbe, in which
Families after they had remained, until the latter end of Henry the eighth,
they were both demised to Mr. Francis Sandbach, by whose Sole Heir Alice
Sandbach, they came to be the possession of David Polhill, Ancestor to Mr.
David Polhill, who upon the late Death of his Grandfather Mr. David Polhill is
invested in the Tenure of them.

Vielston now by vulgar Acceptance of the Name, called Vilson, is another Seat
of eminent Account in Shoreham. It primitively gave Seat and Surname to a
Family which radically was as deeply planted in Antiquity, as any Family which
then flourished on this part of the County, some of the old Evidences, now in
the Hands of my Cozen Mr. Thomas Petley, reach as high as the Government of the
reign of Henry the third, and then Hamon de Vielston, demises several parcels
of Land to Sepham of Sepham, Timberden of Timberden Farm in this Parish
likewise, and several others of obscurer Account, whose names are too tedious
to recite, by Deeds not circumscribed with any Date, which argues him to be a
Man in that Age illustrious, both for Descent and Demeasn. In Times which
approached nearer to ours, John de Vielston, who paid respective Aid at making
the Black Prince Knight, for his Manor of Vielston, was eminent and was
Sheriff of Kent, in the sixteenth, seventeenth, eighteenth, nineteenth, and
twentieth years of Edward the third; and he left Issue John Vielston, who
deceasing without Issue, John Ross his Sisters Son, about the latter end of
Richard the second, became his Heir, and he had Issue John Ross, who dyed about
the latter end of Henry the sixth, without any Posterity, so that he bequeathed
it to his Kinsman John Berd; who in the fourteenth year of Edward the fourth,
sold it to John Palmer; from whom it went away by Sale in the eighteenth year
of the abovementioned Prince, to Richard Page, where it made its abode, till
the nineteenth year of H. the seventh; and then Edmund Page this Man's Son, cast
it by Sale into the Inheritance of Richard Wood, who in the fourth year of
Henry the Eighth, alienates the Fee-simple to Robert Blague, and he in the
sixth year of that Prince demises it to William Petley of Halsted, and he upon
his decease bequeaths it to his second Son Mr. Thomas Petley, from whom in a
direct Line is my Cousin Mr. Thomas Petley descended, in whom (by original
derivation from him) the Interess and Right of this ancient Seat is at this
instant invested.

The Castle of Shorham, was, if not built by, yet certainly very anciently in
the Possession of the Family of Aldham, of Aldham St. Cleres in Kemsing, one of
which Name was Castellan of this place, in the eighth year of Henry the third,
and was Ancestor to Sir Thomas de Aldham, who flourished in the reign of Edward
the second, and Edward the third, in whom the Male-line ended, so that his
three Daughters matched to Francis St. Clear, Martin de Peckham, and John de
Novoburgo or Newborough of Newborough in the County of Dorset, became his
Coheirs, and this Castle upon the Distinction of his Estate into parcels, was
annexed to the Demeasn of Newborough; in which Family, after the Title had as
in a constant Chanel flowed until the reign of Henry the eighth, it was
diverted by Sale into Polhill, in which Family and Name, the Propriety has
ever since, until this instant, been fixed and permanent.

Southfleet in the Hundred of Axstone, did belong to the Priory of St. Andrews
in Rochester, and was given to that Covent by Hamo de Heath, in the year of our
Lord 1346, which was not long before his Decease, and I find by an old
Manuscript which represents to us the Liberties and Franchises which were
settled upon this Cloister, that the Prior had by Prescription a Charter of
Free Warren, to his Manor of Southsleer: yet though it were fortified with
this Privilege, Hook in Southfleet, has been for some Centuries of years, the
Seat of the Swans who in the Reign of Richard the second, as appears by their
own Deeds writ Genmen.
it could not be secure from that Tempest which arose in the reign of Heury the
eighth; which like a Whirlwind ravished it away from the Patrimony of the
Church, and lodged it in the Revenue of the Crown, where it dwelt until the
thirty seventh year of Queen Elizabeth; and then it was by Concession from that
Princess, passed away to William Peter of Writtle Esquire, who was Son to Sir
William Peter, Secretary of Estate to King Edward the sixth, Q. Mary, and Q.
Elizabeth; and he immediately after alienated it to Alderman Garret of London,
whose Successor in our Fathers Remembrance, conveyed it by Sale to Sir William
Sidley of Scadbery, from whom it is now come down by a Chain of Descent to his
Grandchild Sir Charles Sydley Baronet, the present Lord of the Fee.

Pole vulgarly called Poole, is another Manor in Southfleet, And was in elder
Times the Inheritance of a Family called Berese, for I find by a fine levied in
the thirty seventh year of Henry the third, that Richard de Berese, fells this
Manor under the Notion of a Carucate of Land to Reginald de Cobham of Roundall
in Shorn; and from him did it by a continued Thread of Succession, devolve to
John Cobham Esquire, in whom the Male-line of that Name ended, and he dyed
seized of it in the ninth year of Henry the fourth, Rot. Esc. Number. 10. And let
it to Joan his Sole Inheritrix, who, by Reginald Braybrook her third and last
Husband, had Issue Joan her only Daughter and Heir, who brought this Manor and
a liberal Revenue besides, to her Husband Thomas Brook of the County of
Somerset Esquire, Grandfather to Thomas Lord Brook, who about the Beginning of
Henry the seventh, passed it away to Sir Henry Wiat, one of the Privy Council
to that Monarch; from whom it descended to his noble but unfortunate Grandchild
Sir Tho. Wiat; who in the second year of Q. Mary, forfeited this and his Life
together; so that from thenceforth, it was clasped up in the Income of the
Crown, until Queen Elizabeth, in the twenty fifth year of her reign, restored
it to his Widow the Lady Joan Wiatt, and George Wiat Esquire his Son and Heir,
father to Sir Francis Wiat, who upon his Decease, left it to his Widow Dowager
the Lady..... Wiatt, who is now in possession of it.

Scadbery in Southfleet has been for some Centuries of years, the possession
of the Family of Sidleys, who were in Times of very high Ascent, seated in
Romney Mersh; for there are some Lands there, which at this Day they call by
the Name of Sidleys, and Sidleys Mersh. In this Mansion there is a Room, whose
sides are covered with Wainscot, and on one of the Plates or Pains, which
appears to be exceeding ancient, the Arms of Sidley are carved in embost-work,
viz, A Fesse wavee between three Goats heads erased, and these Letters
underneath, W. and S. with the year of our Lord affixed in Figures, whose Date
commences from 1337. And although the Structure of this House, has like a
Snail shifted its ancient Shell, yet in all its Mutations, and Vicissitudes,
which must certainly have very much disordered the Fabric, when it was cast
into a new mould and frame, and ravelled and discomposed the Materials: yet
this Panel of Wainscot, has been, like a Relic, religiously preserved, to
justify not only the Antiquity of this Seat, but of the Family of Sydley also,
which is presumed to have been resident at this place, before the
abovementioned Calculation: from whom Sir Charles Sidley Baronet, claims the
Original of his Title to this Mansion, and his Extraction or pedigree likewise,
untwisted, into many Descents, and now at last wound up in him.

Shouldon in the Hundred of Deal, has two remarkable places which are situated
within the Limits of it. First, Hull presents it self to our View, it was
formerly under the Signory of the illustrious-Family of Rattling or Retling in
Nonington. Thomas de Retling paid respective Aid for this, and diverse other
Lands of ancient Inheritance in the twentieth year of Edward the third, at the
making the Black Prince Knight, and left it to his Son Sir Richard de Retling,
whose Widow the Lady Sarah Retling, and afterward Wife of John de St.
Laurence, died possessed of it in the tenth year of Richard the second, and left
it to John Spicer who had married Joan Daughter and Heir to her first Husband:
but he concluding in a Daughter and Heir, by this his first Wife called Cicely,
who was Heir to her mother Joan Spicer, she by matching with John Isaac, knit
it to the Propriety of that Family. But before the twenty first of Henry the
sixth, he had fixed the Inheritance in John Bresland, in whom it was not long
resident; for he suddenly after altered his right, and about the Beginning of
Edward the fourth, put it over by Sale to Phineux of Swink-field, whose
Successor Robert Phineux, by as quick and early a Vicissitude, placed the
possession about the Beginning of Henry the eighth, in George Monins Esquire;
whose Successor in that Age which was circumscribed within the Pale of our
Fathers Remembrance, passed it away to Crayford of Great Mongeham.

Secondly, Cotmanton puts in its Claim for some memorial likewise, even in this
respect, that it was the Demeasne of the noble Family of Crioll or Keriell, who
were of some considerable Repute in this Track, as appearsby by the Book styled
Testa de Nevill kept in the Exchequer, where they are represented in the
twentieth year of Henry the third, to have held Land in this Skirt of the
County, and in Ages of a modern Aspect, that is, in the twentieth year of
Edward the third, I find John de Criol, gave a pecuniary supply at the making
the Black Prince Knight: but before the end of Edward the third, he was
departed from the possession of this place, which by Sale was resigned up to
Roger Dig, and he dyed in the possession of it in the third year of Ric. the
second, Rot. Esc. Number 19. And in this Family it continued, until the reign of
Henry the seventh, and then it was alienated to Barton, descended from the
ancient Family of Barton, of Barton-hall, in the County of Lancaster; from whom
the like Mutation about the latter end of H. the eighth carried it off, to the
Family of Brown; and from them it passed away by Sale into the Possession of
Richardson, upon whose going out, the Family of Smith, by a Devolution like the
former, not many years since, stepped into the Inheritance of it.

Sundrich in the Hundred of Codsheath, was the Possession (as high as any
Light, collected from Antiquity, can waft us to a Discovery) of an Ancient
Family called in Latine-Records de Insula, and in English Isley. John de
Insula, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Lands at Sundrich, in the
eleventh year of Edward the second, and he had Issue John Isley, who married
Joan, Daughter to Sir Ralph de Fremingham, and by her had Issue Roger Isley
Esquire, who in Right of his mother, became Heir to his Uncle John Fremingham
Esquire, who deceased without Issue, in the twelfth year of Henry the fourth,
and this Roger Isley, had Issue William Isley Esquire, who was Sheriff of Kent,
in the twenty fifth year of Henry the sixth, and he had Issue John Isley
Esquire, who was Justice of the Peace, and Sheriff of Kent, in the fourteenth
year of Edward the fourth, and deceased in the year 1484, as appears by an
Inscription affixed to his Monument, yet extant (notwithstanding the late
general Shipwreck of the Remains of Antiquity) in Sundrich-church, and he had
Issue Thomas Isley Esquire, Father of Sir Henry Isley, who was Sheriff of Kent,
in the thirty fourth year of Henry the eighth, and again in the fifth year of
Edward the sixth: but being unhappily entangled, in the dysastrous Attempt of
Sir Thomas Wiat, was upon the frustrating of that Design and the Dissipation,
and Discomfiture of those Forces who were to support it; in the second year of
Queen Mary, convicted and attainted of high Treason, and executed at Sevenoke;
upon whose Tragedy this Manor with all its Appendages escheated to the Crown:
but was the same year restored to his Son William Isley Esquire, who was
Sheriff of Kent, part of the seventh year of Queen Elizabeth; after whose
decease, the Title of this place, which had so many Centuries of years like an
Inmate dwelt in this Name and Family, ebbed away to another Proprietary; for in
our Fathers Memory it was alienated by Sale to Brooker, who not many years
since, passed it away to Mr. John Hide, second Son to Mr. Bernard Hide, one of
the Commissioners of the Custom House to his late Majesty.

Brook-place in Sundrich, so called from its contiguous Situation near some
Drill of Water, did acknowledge for many discents, the Signory of Isley, the
last of whom who dyed possessed of it, was William Isley Esquire, who held it at
his Decease, which was in the fourth year of Edward the fourth, Rot. Esc. Number.
34. After whose Exit, it came to John Isley Esquire, who not long after, passed
it away to John Alphew, and he determinig in two Daughters and Coheirs, one of
them by matching with Sir Robert Read Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas,
in the reign of Henry the seventh, linked it to his Patrimony: but he likewise
went out in four Daughters and Coheirs, Katharine one of which, was matched to
Sir Thomas Willoughbie, Lord Chief Justice likewise, of the Common Pleas, and
so he in her right was possessed of this place; from whom it came down to his
Successor, Thomas Willoughbie Esquire, who about the latter end of Queen
Elizabeth, conveyed it by Sale, to Mr. Hoskins of Oxted in Surrey, descended
from an ancient Family of that Name in Hereford-shire, whose Successor Mr.
Charles Hoskins, being lately deceased, the Fee-simple rests now in his Son and
Heir.

Hethenden or Henden is another Manor in Sundrich, which was folded up in the
Demeasn of the powerful and illustrious Family of the Clares, who were Earls of
Gloucester and Lords of Tunbridge by whose Heir general it devolved to Audley:
and this Family by the same Fatality, languishing into a Female Inheritrix, she
by matching with Stafford, cast this Manor into his Revenue, and in this Name
was the Propriety resident, until, Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham, was
infortunately attainted, in the thirteenth year of Henry the eighth, it was by
escheat, annexed to the Demeasn of the Crown, and made its abode there, until
King Henry the eighth, in the thirty fifth year of his reign, granted it to Sir
John Gresham, and he dyed possessed of it, in the first year of Queen Elizabeth,
after whose Decease it remained constant to the Interess of this Family, until
the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, and then it was alienated to Sir Thomas
Hoskins of Oxsted in Surrey, in the Descendants of which Family the Signory and
Propriety is at this instant remaining.

The Roman Fosse or Way which extended or stretched out it self from Oldborough
in Igtham to Baston in Heys, and afterward to Woodcot in Surrey, did cut
thorough this Parish; for not many years since, in digging near Come-banke, a
Seat so called, which did formerly relate to the Isleys, and is situated in
Sundrich, were discovered many Roman Urns of an antic Shape and Figure, from
whence we may probably collect thus much, that there was formerly erected some
Fortress, at or near Combe-banke (its Situation being fitted for such a
Design) by the Roman Generals, to secure their forces in their March to
Noviomagum or Woodcot, against any Impression or Eruption of the Britons.

Sturrey in the Hundred of Blengate, was a Manor by a Prescription of many
Generations wrapped up in the Patrimony of Apulderfeild, a Family whom we shall
have occasion often to mention thoroughout the Body of this Survey, and here it
continued till this Name met with its Tomb in a Daughter and Heir, known by the
Name of Elizabeth, who was wedded to Sir John Phineux: and although he likewise
concluded in a Female Heir, matched to John Roper Esquire, who drew along with
her a great portion of the Estate, yet this still remained fixed in this Name
and Family, even till our Fathers Memory; and then John Phineux Esquire died,
and left this, and other vast possessions to his Daughter and Sole Heir
Elizabeth Phineux, who brought them over to her Husband Sir John Smith, eldest
Son of Sir Thomas Smith, and Grandfather to Philip Smith Viscount Strangford,
who by Right planted in him by so worthy a Predecessor, does entitle himself to
the Interess and possession of it.

Mayton in this Parish, though now of no great Importance, yet formerly gave
both Seat and Surname to a Family that passed under that Appellation, from whom
by Sale the Inheritance was transplanted into Diggs, where for some Descents,
without any Interval it made its abode, till it was by Leonard Diggs
Grandfather to Sir Dudley Diggs, sold to Goodhugh, by whose Daughter and Heir
it became the Demeasne of Baggs, which Name likewise going out here into a
Daughter and Heir, she by matching not long since to Farmer, has made it to own
him for its instant proprietary.

Sutton by Walmer lies in the Hundred of Cornilo, and was the Inheritance of a
good old Family, called Stroude. Peradventure it assumed its Denomination from
the Shore not far distant, and was sometimes, in the Saxon Denomination, called
Strond, and as often Stroude; John de Stroude held it, as the Book of Aid
denotes, in the reign of Edward the first, and when this Family was worn out,
the next who were invested in the possession, were the Criols, and Nicholas
Criol or Keriel, held it at his death, which was in the third year of Richard
the second, whose Grandchild Sir Thomas Keriel being an active Champion of the
Cause and Quarrel of Edward the fourth, against the House of Lancaster, was
slain in the second Battle of St. Albans, where the Title of both Parties was
put to the bloody decision of a Field, who leaving only two Daughters and
Coheirs, one matching with John Fogge Esquire, incorporated this into his
Revenue, from whom by purchase, the Right was settled in Whitlock, where it
tarried not long, but was by the like devolution transplanted into Maycot, from
which Name the same Fate of Sale carried it into the possession of Stokes, who
in our memory by the like alienation, transmitted his Interess here to
Meryweather.

Sutton, commonly called East-Sutton, lies in the Hundted of Eyhorne, and was
formerly the Braybrookes; Henry de Braybrooke, one of the Lord Wardens of the
Cinque Ports, had Lands here; and in this Track (as the Book of Aid, and the
Book called Feoda Militum, in the Exchequer, do both inform us) his Son was
Gerard Braybrooke, and his Grandchild was Reginald Braybrooke, whose Heir Joan
Braybrooke married to Thomas Brook of the County of Somerset: but whether this
Reginald Braybrooke gave this Manor to pious Uses, or not, and principally to
the Abbey of Leeds adjacent, I cannot positively determine, upon the Suppression
it was granted (as being parcel of the Demeasne of the Convent of Leeds) by
Henry the eighth, in the thirty seventh year of his reign to John Tufton
Esquire, who passed it away by Sale to Mr. Richard Argall, whose Heir Elizabeth
Argall, being married to Edward Filmer Esquire, made it the possession of that
Family, and by a communicative Right from him, does his Grandchild Sir Edward
Filmer, Son to Sir Robert Filmer lately deceased, now hold the possession and
propriety of it.

Sutton Valence, and Chart by Sutton, both lie in the Hundred of Eyhorne: the
last of which contracted the Appellation, from formerly owning William de
Valence Earl of Pembroke, to be Lord of the Fee, who certainly instituted that
Castle, that now even in its Relics and Fragments with much of venerable
Magnificence overlooks the Plain: And when Aymer de Valence his Son concluded
in a Female Heir Isabell, she was wedded to Lawrence Lord Hastings, who in
relation to her became not only Earl of Pembroke, but Lord of Sutton-Valence
also, and from him did it descend to his Grandchild John Hastings Earl of
Fembroke, the last Earl there of that Name, who transmitted his Title of that
place to Reginald Gray, and Richard Talbot, who flourished here about the reign
of Henry the fourth, and they had this Manor by Testamentary Donation, in the
fourteenth year of Richard the second. In the next Age subsequent to this, I
find the Cliffords of Bobbing-court, to be the Proprietaries, and to this
Family was the Inheritance in a constant Union fastened, till Nicholas Clifford
Esquire, deceased without Issue-male, and left only one Daughter and Heir,
called Mildred, who was first married to Harper; secondly, to More; thirdly, to
Warren; and lastly, to Blount: but she had only Issue by Harper and More; for
in her Right Edward Lord More of Mellifont in Ireland, and Sir Edward Harper
divided the Possession: but the first desiring to contract his whole Revenue
into Ireland, and the other to make this adjacent to his principal Seat of
Ruspar-hall in the County of Derby, Sir Edward Harper alienated this to Sir
Edward Hales Knight and Baronet, and the Lord More, Chart by Sutton to the same
worthy Person, Grandfather to Sir Edward Hales Baronet, who not only enjoyes
the Title of his Ancestors Dignity, but that of the Possession in these places
likewise.

Cheyneys-court in this Parish has been adopted into that Name, since it for
many Descents acknowledged the Jurisdiction and propriety of that Family: and I
could unravel a Successive Series of many of that Name (but that it is
superfluous) who were Lords of the Fee; it is enough, that Sir Thomas Cheyney
sold it to Iden, which Name suddenly after resolving into two Daughters and
Coheirs, one matching with Brown, and the other with Barton, the last made it
parcel of the Patrimony of that Family, and when some years it had been
continued in the possession of Barton, it was in our Memory by Sale brought
over to be the Demeasne of Wollett, and it is now (but whether by Purchase, or
by the Right of a Female Heir or not, I cannot ascertain my self) the propriety
of Jordan.

Sutton at Hone lies in the Hundred of Acstane, and gives Denomination to the
whole Lath wherein it is situated. It was long since a Manor relating to the
Revenue of the Knights Hospitallers, who had here a Mansion House, called St.
John's, where they often made their Retreat, when they visited their other
Demeasne Land, which lay circumscribed within the Verge of this County: but
their Estate here was much enforced and improved by the Addition of the Manor
of Grandison, which whether it came to them by Purchase or Donation from Thomas
Lord Grandison, who died the forty ninth year of Edward the third, is
uncertain. Upon the Suppression of the Alberge of these Knights of St. John of
Jerusalem here in England, their Revenue was assumed into the possession of the
Crown: and King Henry the eighth, bestowed by Grant on Sir Maurice Dennis St.
John's; and to him does that magnificent and elegant Pile, where now the
Countess of Leicester makes her Residence, owe the first Institution of its
Shape and Beauty, though it has been since extremely enlarged by the Additions
both of Bulk and Ornament by Sir Thomas Smith. But to proceed, St. John's was
conveyed from Sir Maurice Dennis by his Coheir to Thomas Cranfeild, whose
Grandchild Vincent Cranfeild, has lately alienated his Right to Mr. Hollis of
London Merchant.

Haly Sawters is another Manor in Sutton in Hone: a place though now obscure
in it self, and not re-presented to our Remembrance but by Annals and Record,
yet in elder Times it was raised up to a higher degree of Estimate, when it had
Proprietaries, whose Nobility and Title added both Value and Luster unto it.
The first of which Register whom I trace in Record to be entitled to the
Possession was Laurence de Hastings Earl of Pembroke, and he died seized of it
in the twenty second year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 47. from whom the
Title came down to his Son John de Hastings, and he likewise was in the
enjoyment of it at his Decease, which was in the forty ninth year of Edward the
third, Rot. Esc. Number. 70. After this Family, had deserted the Inheritance, I
find Richard Fitz Allen Earl of Arundel to be invested in the Possession, and
he died in the Tenure of it in the one and twentieth year of Richard the
second, Rot. Esc. Number. 2. From whom it devolved to Joan his Daughter and
Coheir matched to William Beauchamp Baron of Aburgavenny, whose Son Richard
Lord Beauchamp dying without Issue Male, Elizabeth his Sole Daughter, espoused
to Edward Nevill Baron of Aburgavenny in her Right be came his Heir, and he in
the sixteenth year of Edward the fourth died possessed of this Manor of Sawters.
And here for want of Light both from public or private Record; I cannot
discover to my Reader or my self whether or not it passed away immediately from
Nevill to Maio, whom I find about the beginning of Q. Elizabeth to be planted
in the Possession, though the Affirmation of some old people of this Parish,
who derived that Knowledge they have of it from the Tradition of their
Ancestors that assert it did. Thomas Maio in the twenty eighth of Q. Elizabeth
passed it away to Rich. Paramour, and he presently after disposed of it by Sale
to Sir Henry Brook, who conveyed it to Robert Wroth Esquire, and he to Edmund
Hunt Esquire, who alienated Haly and Sawters to Mr. William Hewson in the
thirty fourth year of Q. Elizabeth, whose Son Mr. William Hewson of London
transmitted Haly with Sawters by Sale, some few years since, to Mr. Edward
Badbie.

Grandisons is the last place remarkable in this Parish: It was the ancient
Inheritance of the noble and illustrious Family of Grandison; before Otho de
Grandison, who was Governor of Jersey for life by Grant from Edw. the first in
the fifth year of his Reign, did transplant himself to Seal, which he had
purchased in the thirteenth year of that Prince. William de Grandison this man's
Son was likewise Lord of this place, to whom K. Edward the second assigned the
Value of 44 lb. yearly Rent out of his Manor of Dartford, in Exchange for the
Manor of Iden and other Lands in Sussex, and from this Man did the Signory of
this Manor accrue by Descent to his Grandchild Sir Thomas Grandison, who
dying without Issue in the forty ninth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number.
62. left it partly to John de Northwood, who had married Agnes his Sister and
Coheir, and partly to Margaret his Lady Dowager, who died possessed of it in the
eighteenth year of Richard the second: but after her Exit, the Title was not
long permanent in Northwood; for in the twenty first year of the Prince
abovesaid, Richard Fitz Allen Earl of Arundel held it, and died that year
possessed of it: And here I confess for want of Light and just intelligence I
must make a Leap to the Reign of Henry the sixth, and then I find it in the
Tenure of Richard Nevill Earl of Warwick, and it is probable it devolved to him
by the Heir of Beauchampe. After his Decease it became the Possession of George
Duke of Clarence, who had matched with Isabel his Daughter and Coheir, by whom
he had Issue Edward Plantagenet Earl of Warwick, who was offered up on an early
Scaffold, to the waking suspicions, and weary Jealousies, of those two politic
Princes, Henry the seventh, and Ferdinand of Castile, being invited to an
escape, from his long Duress in the Tower, by the Arts and Stratagems of that
eminent Impostor, Perkin Warbeck: But indeed those who have calculated this
Action, and surveyed the whole Scene of this Tragedy, have discovered that his
nearness to the Crown, as being the last Relick of the Male-Line of
Plantagenet, was the cheiefest Ingredient in the severe Sentence, of this
unfortunate Gentleman. After his expiration, this Manor came over to be the
Patrimony of his Sister, Margaret Countess of Salisbury, who was matched to Sir
Richard Poole, by which marriage this Manor was annexed to his Demeasn, and he
had Issue by her Henry Poole, who with his Mother was attainted in the Reign of
Henry the eighth, upon whose fatal Shipwreck, Grandisons was in the thirty
fifth of that Prince placed by Grant in his Brother Geffrey Poole, who not long
after passed it away to Sir Thomas Moile, by whose Daughter and Coheir it came
to be the Inheritance of Sir Thomas Kempe, and he about the tenth year of Q.
Elizabeth conveyed it to Mr. Jo. Mabbe, who not long after transmitted it by
Sale to Sir Christopher Heron, who about the beginning of K. James alienated
his concernment here to Cole, by whom not long after it was demised to Sir
Thomas Smith, second Son of Customer Smith of Westenhanger; in the Heirs and
Descendants of which Name and Family, the Possession is still resident.

Hackstaple is likewise within the Bounds of this Parish: and was, as high as
the reach either of private or public Evidence can bring down any light to our
knowledge the Killingworth's; and here, for an indivisible succession of Ages,
did the Possession fix, and reside, until at last the common Fate of Families,
brought this Name here at Hackstaple to find its interment or Grave in a
Daughter and Heir; for George Killingworth had an only She-Inheritrix whose
name was Elizabeth, and she was matched with Christopher Eglesfield Gentleman,
so that Hackstaple in her right, was intermingled with the Demeash of this
Family: and here some years did it by this Conjugall Knot appear fastened, till
lately the Possession received an alienation; for Francis Eglesfield of London,
Son to Christopher Eglesfield some few years since sold it to Mr Christopher
Searle.

T. T. T. T.
TAningnton is situated in the Hundred of Bredge and Petham, and in Times of a
very ancient Inscription did own the Name and acknowledge the Signory of a
Family called Wallis. Richard de Wallis held it in the twenty first of Edward
the first, and as it appears by the Pleas of that year had a signal Contest
with the Prior of St. Gregory's in Canterbury, about his Right to the
Presentation of that Church. After Wallis was worn out, it fell under the
Signory of a Family called Mesingham, but it seems was not long resident in
their Possession: for about the beginning of Richard the second, Nicholas
Mesingham releases to Thomas Chich all his Interess and Right in Tanington, and
other Lands situated in Heckington and other places, but here likewise was the
Possession as brief and inconstant; for before the Expiration of the Reign of
Henry the fourth, I find it by purchase from Chich and Wallis, settled in the
Tenure of Geo. Ballard; and he died seized of it in the eighth year of Henry
the sixth, and in this Family did continue until the reign of Edward the sixth,
and then it was alienated by Nicholas Ballard Esquire, to Sir James Hales of
the Dungeon; from whom the right by Successive Delegation is now transmitted to
Sir James Hales the instant Lord of the Fee.

Terstan in the Hundred of Twyford, was involved in the Revenue of the Crown;
until Eleanor Q. of England exchanged this and West-Farleigh with the Monks of
Christ-Church for the eminent Port of Sandwich: which Exchange Edward the first
(as appears by the Records of that Cathedral) by his Charter fully strengthened
and confirmed. Yet though it was prop'd and supported by that Authority, yet it
could not be so fastened and riveted into the Ecclesiastical Patrimony, but
that, that storm which arose in the reign of Henry the eighth, tore it away:
and then that Prince in the thirty fifth year of his rule passed it away to Sir
John Baker; from whom it is now devolved by successive right to his descendant
Sir John Baker of Sisingherst Knight and Baronet; and he has lately passed it
away to Mr. Jasper Cleyton of London.

Barham Court in this Parish re-presents to our remembrance, that it was once
the Mansion or ancient residence of the noble and illustrious Family of Barham:
this Name was, in Times of a very reverend Inscription, written Fitz-Urse.
Randal Fitz. Urse was one of those four who were concerned in the Assassination
of that turbulent and ambitious prelate Thomas Becket Archbishop of
Canterbury, who though peradventure for his violent invasion made upon the
royal prerogative of his Sovereign Henry the second, might have deserved the
Guerdon of an exemplary Death; yet the manner of taking him off cartied with it
so deformed an Aspect in those times which were wholly consecrated and offered
up to a superstitious Adoration of his memory, and contracted so black a
Character on those who were interessed in his extra-judicial ruin, that Randal
Fitz-Vrse fled into Ireland, and there altered his Name to Mac-Mahon, which in
Irish imports as much as the Son of the Bear; upon his recess, Robert de Barham
his Kinsman entered on his Estate here at Terstan, and from him did it descend
by paternal Devolution to his great Grandchild John de Berham, who was by
Henry prior of Christ-Church created public Notary of the Diocese of
Canterbury in the year 1309, an Office of as much Eminence as it was of Trust
and Concernment, and which the abovesaid Henry received by Commission to invest
any with, whom he should discover to be fortified with Abilities, proportionate
to so illustrious an employment from Bassianus de Alliate Count Palatine of
Millaine: and he again was empowered and commissionated to grant it to any whom
he should judge meet to receive it, by Authority delegated and transmitted to
him originally from the Emperor, and it is probable that it was the above
mentioned John de Berham or his Son who paid an Auxiliarie supply for his Lands
at Terstan as appears by the Book of Aid, at the making the Black Prince
Knight, in the twentieth year of Edward the third: and in that Roll kept in the
Exchequer wherein there is mention of all those of this County who paid
respective Aid in the fourth year of Henry the fourth, at the Marriage of
Blanch that Monarch's Daughter; there is a Recital of Nicholas Berham, who
contributed a supply for his Lands at Terston, and from him by an
un-interrupted Line of succession was the Title of this place conducted down to
Thomas Berham Esquire, who determined in a Daughter and Heir called Anne
Berham, who by her intermarriage with Sir Oliver Boteler descended from an
ancient Family of that Name in the County of Bedford made this Seat which had
been so many centuries of years in the Tenure of this Family, alter its
Proprietary, and become the Patrimony of another Name; Sir Oliver Boteler had
Issue Sir William Boteler Knight and Baronet, who fell a Sacrifice to the late
King's Quarrel, whilst he vigorously asserted his Cause and Interest at
Cropredy Bridge; but left Issue the instant Proprietary Sir Oliver Boteler
Baronet, whose Ancestors in Bedford hire were descended from Thomas Pincerna,
who flourished in the reign of King John, and did Seal with a Covered Cup, with
this Inscription (as appears by the old Deeds of this Family) encircling the
Seal, Sigillum Thomae Pincernae and it is possible was chief Butler to the
abovesaid Prince; from which eminent Office of his, his Successors assumed the
Surname of Boteler.

Tenham contributes and affords a Name to that Hundred where it is placed, but
is of more Eminence and repute, since it was given to Christ-Church in
Canterbury, at the Entreaty of Athelard, by Cenulfe K. of the Mercians by the
Estimate of twelve Plough-Lands; for the like Proportion of Land in Balance to
the exchange in Creges Emeline, that is, the Isse of Elmely by Crogdepe that is
the water which parts the Royalty of Swale between Tenham and Feversham. And
in the Patrimony of the Church did it lie wrapped up till the suppression of all
Frieries, Abbeys, and other Religious Convents by Henry the eighth: and then
Thomas Cranmer finding that the spreading Demeasn of the Church, was in danger
to be torn off by the tallons of Avarice and Rapine, he to mortify the growing
Appetite of Sacrilegious Cormorants, in the first of December and in the twenty
ninth year of that Prince's Government, exchanged it with the Crown, and
thenceforth it was accounted a Limb of the Royal Revenue until King James by
grant invested Sir John Roper in it, and presently after created him Baron
Roper of Tenham, (in Gratitude it seems for that Service he performed, in being
the first who openly proclaimed him King in the County of Kent) and by
successive Derivation from him does his great Grandchild Christopher now Lord
Roper of Tenham, not only possess the Dignity, but the Royalty of this
Manor likewise.

There is another Seat in this Parish, called Frogenhall, which in elder Times
had the repute of a Manor, though since by Disuse, that Character is almost
shrunk away from it. That it was a Mansion of the Frogenhals, is most evident;
for Richard Frogenhall was seized of it at his Death, which was in the thirty
third year of Edward the third, and Thomas Frogenhall was his Son and Heir, who
resigned up his Interest in it, with Anne his Daughter and Heir to Thomas
Quadring: and not long after by the same Mutation, was the Interest of it by
this man, with his Daughter and Heir Joan Quadring, given up to Richard Dryland
Esquire, who likewise not many years after going out in a Daughter and Heir,
called Katharine, she by being wedded to Reginald Norton Esquire, by that
Conjugal Union, knit Frogenhall to the Interest of that Family, where after it
had been some Ages fixed, it was by purchase brought to be the Inheritance of
Green, who (upon what Exigent or Occasion I know not) in the Conveyance is
called Green, alias Norton: but in this Name it made no permanent Residence;
for even in our Memory, from Green by Sale the Title and Right of it was
translated into Clerk.

Tenham had the Grant of a Market procured to it on the Tuesday, and a Fair to
continue yearly three days, at the Assumption of the Virgin Mary, by Boniface
Archbishop of Canterbury, as appears, Pat. 44. Henrici tertii Memb. 37.

Tenterden, in the Hundred of Tenterden, had its denomination, as some vulgar
Phansies conjecture, from the tenderness of the Soil adjacent to it: but
indeed it was in elder and more true Orthography, written Theinwarden, that is,
the Thanes or Theins, Ward, or Guard in the Valley; for it was very probable it
was subservient to that Signory or Dominion, which the Governor of
Andredswaldt (so called by the Saxons: but Anderida by the Romans) did
exercise, and pretend to, in this Track of the County. Now if you will question
where this Castle of Anderida or Andredswaldt was placed; I answer, it was upon
Reding-hill, not far removed from this place, a Fortress in those Times of
eminent Value and Reputation, though since by the multiplied Onsets of Time
upon it, it lies forgotten in its own neglected Ruins; yet though this be
languished away both in Fame and Fabric, Tenterden has sundry Seats in it,
which may make it eminent enough. First, Heronden resigns it self up to an
Inquisition, though now it be scattered into several parcels, yet anciently it
was collected, as into one Name, so into one possession likewise; and the
ancient Ordinaries in the Heralds Office, do assign a Coat to this Name,
something proportionate to it, that is, an Heron rising upon its wing, and
gaping for Breath: but when Time began to invade this Family, and break it into
parcels, one part of this Seat was sold to Sir John Baker, Predecessor to Sir
John Baker, who is now the possessor of it: but the other parts of it stayed
longer in this Name; for Heronden not long since sold some part of it to Mr.
John Austin lately deceased, and the Remainder was passed by the same
conveyance to Mr. Short.

Pitlesden is the second which requires our Notice, it gave Seat to a Family so
called, which remained in possession of it, till Stephen Pitlesden died and
left a Daughter and Heir, whose Name was Julian, who by marrying with Edward
Guldeford, made this parcel of the Revenue of that Family, and here without any
Interruption was the Inheritance planted, till John Guldeford Esquire
transferred his Right by Sale, to Sir John Baker, one of the Privy Council to
Queen Mary, whose Grandchild Sir John Baker Knight and Baronet, Father of Sir
John Baker Baronet now of Sisingherst in Cranbroke, did some years since
alienate the possession of it to Mr. Jasper Clayton of London Mercer.

Lights Notinden and East. Asherinden, are two other Manors in Tenterden,
which belonged partly to a Chauntry, founded here by John Light, and partly to
Brook near Wye, and were, upon the suppression of the One, and Dissolution of
the Priory of Christ-church to which Brook related, granted by Henry the
eighth, to Sir John Baker Attorney General to that Prince, Edward the sixth,
and Queen Mary; and from him are they now devolved by paternal Right to Sir
John Baker of Sisingherst Baronet.

There is a place in this Parish, called Finchden, which in our Grandfathers
Memory was purchased by Sir Edward Hales, Ancestor of the Family of Finch; from
which Mr. Edward Finch, now of Tenterden, is originally descended, which in
Times of an elder Character, gave Surname to a Family called Finchden: one of
whom called William de Finchden was Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, in
the Time of Edward the third, and sometimes in the old Law Books, which have an
Aspect on his reign, is written Finchden, and sometimes contractedly Finch; and
it is probable the Name was originally Finch, only Den was added to it (which
was customary and usual in elder Times) because this Family had their Dwelling
in some Habitation, whose Situation was near some Valley.

Tenterden was governed by a Port-reve or Bayley, as the original Patent
informs me, from the thirty sixth year of Henry the sixth, until the forty
third year of Queen Elizabeth, and then it was by Patent from that Princess
ordered to be governed by a Major and Jurates, and so it has ever since
continued.

I had almost forgot Elarinden, which is the last place of Note in Tenterden,
and celebrates it self to be parcel of the Manor of Frid or Frith in
Bethersden, and was involved in that Revenue, which did confess the Signory of
the Noble Family of Mayney, and was found to be in the possession of John de
Mayney, at his Decease, which was in the fiftieth year of Edward the third,
Rot. Esc. Number. 39. and lay couched in that Demeasne, which related to this
Name, until the reign of Henry the sixth, and then it was passed away to
Darell, and remained involved in the Patrimony of this Family, until the
seventeenth year of Henry the eighth, and then it was alienated by John Darell
Esquire, to Sir John Hales, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and from him by
a Devolution of successive Descent, is it now come down to Sir Edward Hales of
Tunstall Baroner.

Tilmanston in the Hundred of Eastrie, has diverse Seats within the Verge and
Boundaries of it, not only of Reputation and Account, in Respect of their own
Antiquity; but likewise in Relation to those Persons who were possessed of them.
First, there is North-court and Dane-court, both were anciently under the
Dominion of one Person, and continue interwoven still, though they have
borrowed these several Names in Respect of their opposite Situation. John de
Sandherst made a Claim of Liberties in North-court, the sixth year of Edward
the first, Christian his Daughter and Heir was married to William Langley of
Knowlton, who in her Right possessed this Manor, and by a new Ins^ection had the
former Liberties exemplified, the thirty seventh year of Edward the third, Pat.
37. pars prima Memb. 21. and after that the possession of this place had by an
even Line of Descent been drawn thorough this Family, it did at last by an Heir
General devolve to Peyton, and by a Derivative Title from him, does Sir Thomas
Peyton of Knowlton Baronet, hold the instant enjoyment of it. But Dane-court
was passed away by Langley to Fenell, and from him by the like Transition, it
came over to Thomas Cox Customer of Sandwich, and he by Sale invested the
Interest of it in Fogge, Ancestor to my Noble Friend Richard Fogge Esquire, now
Possessor of Dane-court, a Person to whom for that Intelligence he has
contributed to me in Relation to the Noble Families of Crioll and Valoignes,
whose Heirs General matched with Fogge, and who formerly by those Alliances,
annexed a vast Revenue in this County to this Name, I am signally obliged.

South-court in this Parish was in Times of eldest Inscription, as appears by a
Survey of this Parish, taken in the eighteenth year of Edward the third, and
which lies now in the Hands of Mr. Anneslow Gardener of Haling in Croyden, Sir
John de Tittesden: but certainly the possession was not long resident here; for
not long after, I find the Lord Martin of Devon to be Proprietary of it, from
whom in the reign of Henry the sixth, the Right of it was by Sale conducted
down to John White, after made Sir John White, a Merchant of the Staple at
Canterbury, and when this Name deserted the possession of this place, the next
who succeeded in the subsequent Series was Cox, from whom by purchase the Right
came into Fogge, and from that Name, by the Fate of Sale, was it made the
Inheritance of Peyton, from whom by Communicative Derivation and Descent, it is
incorporated into the Demeasne of Sir Thomas Peyton.

Toniford in the Hundred of West-gate, did afford both Seat and Surname to a
Family, which came under that Appellation; and there is mention in the Book of
Aid of John Toniford, who lived here about the beginning of Edward the third:
but this Family was worn out, about the latter part of that Prince's Reign, And
the next in Order, who was Lord of the Fee, was Sir Thom is Fogge, who
flourished here in the reign of Edward the third, and Richard the second, and
after it had been for sundry Descents fixed in this Name and Family, the
Interest which they had here, was by purchase brought over to claim Vane for
its Possessor, where likewise the Title was as unstable: for not many years are
consumed, since it was alienated from their Revenue, and made by Sile the
Demeasne of Captain Collin, or Sedingbourn.

Tongue in the Hundred of Milton, was anciently called Thewng and Thawng, which
import as much in Saxon, as Thong in English; for the common Opinion derived
from a universal Tradition, and that asserted and justified by an uninterrupted
Assent of elder Times, is, That Vortiger the British King, gave Hengist and
Horsa, as a Symbol and Pledge of his Affection, so much Land to erect a
Fortress on, as could be environed and circumscribed, by the Hide of a Beast
cut into Thongs, which accordingly was performed, and the Castle thus
established, in Memory of the original Donation, was in the Saxon Dialect
styled Thwangceoster or Thong-castle: and this Story is made more probable and
plausible, because Matthew of Westminster affirms that Aurelius Ambrosius by
many provocations endeavored to engage Hengist, and his Saxons to a Battle at
Tongue in Kent: and that there was a Castle here, the Fragments and Remains of
some Fortifications near the Mill, do easily evince; though they lie now
gasping in so deplored an heap, that only the Rubbish of its Ruins are
discernable; yet certainly in elder Times it was a Fortress of Importance; for
the Moat of the Castle is yet so wide and deep, that it contributes Water
enough to drive a Mill. But to proceed; After the Conquest, it constantly
acknowledged the powerful and eminent Family of Badelesmer, and Bartholomew
Lord Badclesmer obtained the Grant of a three Days Fair at St. Giles, to be
observed at Tongue, as appears, Pat. 9. Edwardi secundi Number. 57. But when he, by
his Defection, in the sixteenth year of Edward the second, had forfeited this,
and the residue of his Patrimony to the Crown, this by the indulgent favor of
Edward the third, was in the second year of his reign, restored to his Son
Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, who died possessed of it, in the twelfth year of the
abovesaid Prince, and left it to his Brother Giles de Badelesmer, who dying
without Issue, it accrued upon the Division of the Estate, to be the Portion of
Edmund Mortimer Earl of March and Vlster, who had matched with Elizabeth Widow
of William Bohun Earl of Northampton, and Sister and Coheir of the abovesaid
Giles, and he in the fifth year of Richard the second, was found in her Right
to have died possessed of it, as appears, Rot. Esc. Number. 43. and from him it
descended to his Grandchild Edmund the last Earl of March, who being embarked
in that War, which was commenced by Henry Lord Percy, Surnamed the Hotspur of
the North, against Henry the fourth, made Shipwreck of his Estate here at Tongue,
and was seized on as an Escheat by the Crown, and lay involved in the Royal
Revenue, until Henry the sixth, in the twenty seventh year of his reign,
granted it to Sir Thomas Brown of Bechworth-castle, both Controller and
Treasurer of his Household: but his Son Sir George Brown, in the eleventh year
of Edward the fourth, surrendered it back to the Crown, for the Benefit and Use
of Cicely Durchess Dowager of York, Mother of the abovesaid Prince: After
whose Decease it reverts and flows back into its ancient Channel, and was
esteemed a Limb of the Royal Patrimony, until the first year of King Edward the
sixth, and then it was by that Prince granted to Sir Ralph Vane, as a Guerdon
of that eminent and signal Service he performed in Scotland, when he was
employed thither with Sir Ralph Sadler, by King Henry the eighth: and he not
long after conveyed his Interest here to Sir Rowland Clerk, and from him in
the fourth year of the abovesaid Prince, it passed away by Sale to Solomon
Wilkins, in which Family it remained until the latter end of Queen Elizabeth,
and then it was alienated to Mr. William Pordage of Rodmersham Ancestor to Mr.
Thomas Pordage, who still is in possession of it.

Cheeks-Court is a second place of Importance in Tongue, it was anciently written
Checks Court, as indeed affording both Seat and Surname to a Family, which in
very old Deeds, and other Monuments, is frequently named At Check, and
sometimes de Check^ell; In the reign of Edward the second, I find William de
Cre entitled to the possession, but held it not long: for in the ninth year of
that Prince, I find the Signory invested in Peyforer, who died that year
possessed of it, as appears, Rot. Esc. Number. 43. But before the latter end of
Richard the second, this Family determined to Julian Peyforer a Sole Heir, who
brought it along with her to her Husband Thomas St. Ledger of Ottringden
Esquire, who concluding in two Daughters and Coheirs matched to Ewias and
Aucher, his Estate came, in the renth of Henry the fourth, to be shared by
those two Families, who not long after passed away their right here and in
Elmeley to Cromer, in which Family the Propriety remained until the Beginning
of King James, and then it was sold by Sir James Cromer to Allen.

Throuley in the Hundred of Feversham, was the capital Mansion of the Gattons;
for Hamon de Gatton, had it in possession at his decease, which was in the
twentieth year of Edward the first, Ex Autographis Georgii Sonds Militis.
and Elizabeth Gatton was found upon the Inquisition to be his Sole Heir, who
married William de Dene, and so by this Alliance it came to own the possession
of that Family: and this William had a Charter of Free Warren granted to his
Lands here in the tenth year of Edward the second, and after him Thomas de Dene
held it at his Death which was in the twenty third year of Edward the third.
And William de Dene, by right from him, possessed the Inheritance; whose Daughter
and Coheir, Benedicta Dene, being married to John Shelving, it went into the
patrimony of that Family, which shortly after determined likewise in Daughters
and Coheirs: one of which called Joan, was matched to John Brampton alias
Detling, of Detling-court, and so it was made a Limb of his Domeasne: but here
it stayed not long neither, for this Name quickly sunk into a Female Heir,
known by the Name of Benedicta Brampton, alias Detling, who was wedded to
Thomas At Town, who had much Land about Charing: but Throuley being in his
Wifes right, incorporated into his Revenue, he transplanted himself into this
Parish, and here erected a Seat, which he adopted into his own Name, and called
it Town-place: but suddenly after, he concluded in three Daughters and Coheirs;
Eleanor married to Richard Lewknor of Bodshead in Challock, Benet married to
William Watton of Addington; and Elizabeth wedded to Will. Sonds of Sonds-place
at Darking in Surrey, who divided Towns Estate: and Throuley, with Town-place
it self, upon the partition, sell to be the Lot or portion of Richard Lewknor,
who sold them to Edward Evering, from whom by Mary his Daughter and Heir,
married to John Upton of Fever ham, Town-place went into the possession of that
Name; and from Vpton, by Sale, it was carried over to Shilling, where after
some few years the Title had rested, it was by a Revolution of the same Nature
and Semblance, transplanted into Sonds: from which purchase Sir George So^^s
Knight of the Bath, now derives his Right and Inheritance, in the Manor and
Signory of Town-place.

VVilderton in Throuley was eminent formerly, for being marshalled under the
Revenue of Giles Lord Badelesmer, Father to Bartholomew Lord Badelesmer, who by
his opposing of Edward the second, at Leeds Castle, forseited this and his
Life, together, to the offended Justice of that Prince: but when his Sons
Barth. and Giles Lord Badelesmer were by Edward the third, restored to their
former Dignity, and likewise to a principal part of his Estate, this was folded
up in that Restitution; for when these abovementioned Brothers deceased
without any lawful Issue, their Sisters were found to be their Coheirs, and
Margery one of them, being married to William Lord Rosse, brought this to a
piece of his Revenue; from whom by Sale it went into the possession of Lewknor
of Bodshead in Challock. And when this Family was divested of it, the
Inheritance was by purchase, settled in Evering, descended from the Everings of
Everings-court in Alkham by Dover, where after it had some years found a
continued Residence, the Name and Title dissolved together: for Edward Evering,
left only Mary Evering his Sole Heir, who matching with John Upton Gentleman,
that Alliance fixed Wilderton in the Possession of that Name: and part of it,
was in some years subsequent to this Match, sold away to Arnold Terrey of this
Parish, but the Residue is yet constant to the Interess of Mr. Vpton of
Feversham, a person in whom the Scholar and Gentleman, are so evenly mixed, as
to a Composition of Perfection, that it is yet a Question, which of them is the
most predominant.

There was a religious House in Throuley, which was a Cell to St. Bertins at
St. Omer in Flanders: but when Henry the fifth, perceived the ill Consequences
of having Fraternities, and other religious Cells and Covents in this Nation,
which had in a manner their dependances upon other States, contrary
peradventure in Interess and Affection to this; he suppressed this, and many
other of the like Condition, and out of their Ruins and Revenue, he erected
the magnificent Monastery at Shene, whose first Foundation entitles it self to
his Piety and Munificence.

Thurnham in the Hundred of Eyhorne, was the Patrimony of an ancient and
Knightly Family of that Surname, made more eminent by the production of Sir
Robert de Thurnham, a person of considerable Account in the reign of Richard
the first, which Prince he accompanied to the holy War, having before his
designing himself to that Quarrel, disposed his Estate to pious Uses, whereof
this at Thurnham was settled on the College of Lingfield in Surrey, and having
thus disroabed himself of his secular Inheritance, he with much Vigor and
Alacrity assumed the Crusado or Vow to rescue the Sepulcher of our Savior out
of the possession of Infidels, which resolution he so nobly prosecuted, that he
offered up his Life as an Oblation to the Justice of that cause which he had
before so generously asserted; After his Decease this remained cloistered up in
the patrimony of the College of Lingfield, until the general suppression, and
then growing parcel of the royal Revenue, it lay there until King Edward the
sixth granted it to Sir Edward Wotton, whose Anceftor Sir Nicholas Wotton was
invested long before in some part of this Manor, which did acrue to him in the
reign of Henry the fourth, by Joan Sole Heir of Robert Corbie, and from this
Sir Edward above mentioned, was it entirely transmitted to his great
Grandchild Thomas Lord Wotton, who having settled it in Marriage on his eldest
Daughter Katherin Wotton matched to Henry Lord Stanhop, she by Sale has lately
given up her right to Mr...... Godden of London.

Binbery is an eminent Manor in this Parish, which, as high as the Testimony
of any either public or private Evidences can instruct me, did own the Signory
of Northwood. Roger de Northwood held it at his Death, which was in the thirty
fifth year of Edward the third, and so did his Successor Roger Northwood in the
last year of Henry the fifth. But after this I do not find it long constant to
the Interest of this Family; for about the beginning of Henry the sixth, I find
by some ancient Court-rolls that it was passed away to John Thwaits; and he in
the eighth year of that Prince, conveyed his right in it to William Gascoigne,
in which Family the Title continued until the beginning of Edward the fourth,
and then it was transplanted by Sale into Cut, or Cuts, and in this Name the
Interest of this place was constantly lodged, until the beginning of King
James, and then it was demised to Sir Samuel Lennard of West-Wickham, whose Son
Sir Stephen Lennard is at this instant by paternal Right invested in the
possession of it.

There was a Dysastrous Accident happened here at Binbery and it was this, as
the Tragedy is represented to us out of the old Evidences of the Lord Wotton.
The Lady Northwood in the Time of Edward the third, standing on the precipice
or hanger of a Hill to see a Fox dug out which had earthed himself there,
the Foundation being loose and Sandy sunk under her, and the hanging Hill shot
down so much earth upon her that she was stifled to Death with the unequal
pressure, e're they could disengage her from that weight, which crushed her
into this early Ruin.

Upon the Brow of the Hill not far removed from this place, are the Ruins of
an ancient Fortress called Godward Castle, which Mr. Darell in his Tract. De
Costellis Cantii conjectures might borrow its Name from Godar dus a Saxou,
whereas it is more probable it did extract its etymology from the goodness and
eminence of its situation, as those Intrenchments at Stowting derive their
Denomination from their tenable force and fortitude: and certainly this is
adequate to reason and its own elevated position it being so settled, that it
did not only secure the way which led from the Roman Colony at Newington by
Rainham, but it is possible was a speculatory station much in use amongst the
Romans, to survey the Approaches of enemies, in the Valley below.

Aldington Septuans in Thurnhem, was the Cradle of an ancient Family of that
Surname. Ex Rot. penes Ed. Dering Mil. and Baronettum defunctum.
Robert de Septuans is inserted in the Register of those noted Kentish persons,
who were engaged with Richard the first at the Siege of Acon. See Rot. Pipe de
Scutagio Wallia.
Rob. de Septuans his Son was embarked with Henry the third in his expedition
against the Welsh, in the forty second year of his Reign. Sir Rob. de Septuans
was his Son and Heir, who was honored with that Dignity by Edward the first
for his exemplary Service performed at the Siege of Carlaverock, in the twenty
eighth year of that Prince, and he was father to Will. de Septuans who was
seized of it when he deceased, which was in the twenty fifth year of Edw. the
third, but it seems it was not long permanent in the Tenure of this Name; for
immediately after the Gowers had it, and John Gower when he died was in the
enjoyment of it, which was in the forty third year of Edward the third; from
whom not many years after, it was by purchase transported to John Brockhul
Esquire, and with the Demeasn of this Family did the right of this place many
years appear to be interwoven, till Anne Daughter and Heir of Henry Brockhull,
married to Sir John Tailor, and then both the Name and Estate were swallowed up
in this Family, where the possession for sundry Ages remained, till lately it
was conveyed by Sale to Freake issued out from the Freakes of the County of
Dorset, who by marrying the Darghter of Sir Thomas Colepeper of Hollingbourne
has planted himself in this County.

There was a Castle anciently in Thurneham, which as Darel affirms in his Tract
de Castellis Cantii, had both its Name and Foundation, from Godardus a Saxon,
being called Godard Castle, which is so despicable an Heap, that not the least
Crumbs or Fragments continue of the Ruins, which might signify to us the lest
symptom of its former strength and Grandeur.

Tunstall in the Hundred of Milton, did about the twenty ninth of Henry the
third, confess it self to be under the Dominion of Walter de Gray, who was Lord
Paramont of this place, but long did not remain invested in the Signory of it;
for in the forty fourth year of Henry the third, I find John de Burgh descended
from Hubert de Burgh, in the possession of it: and he that year by the
favorable compliance of that Prince, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his
Manors of Norton and Tunstall; but before the latter end of Edward the first
this Family had deserted the Inheritance of this place, and then the next which
succeeded proprietarie of it was Thomas de Brotherton Earl of Norfolk, who
ending in Daughters and Coheirs, Margaret one of them (being first matched to
John de Segrave, and afterward to Walter de Mayney descended from Walter de
Meduana or Mayney, who held twenty Knights in this County, in the reign of
Henry the third) brought this to be the Demeasn of her second Husband, Walter
de Mayney, a person on whom the Beams of Majesty reflected with so vigorous
impression, that he was summoned to sit in Parliament as Baron in the reign of
Edw. the third; and in whom that Prince reposed so great a confidence, that as
Daniel represents to us in his Chronicle, he and his Son Edward the Black
Prince, fought under his Colors in a private Habit against Monsieur de Charmy
a Frenchman near Calais in Picardy, in the twenty third year of his reign, and
deceased full of Fame and of Years in the forty fixth of that Prince: but
determined in Anne Mayney his Sole Inheritrix, who by matching with John
Hastings Earl of Pembroke linked this Manor to his Inheritance; but he dying
in the thirteenth year of Richard the second, Reginald Gray, and Richard Talbot
were found to be his Heirs, and they bring a pleading, in the fifteenth year of
the Prince abovesaid, against John le Scroope, who pretended some Title to his
Estate; and having rescued it from collateral Claim about the beginning of
Henry the fourth, conveyed it to Sir Robert Knolles, who in the seventh year of
that Prince, passed it by Fine then levied to Sir William Cromer Lord Mayor of
London; his Son William Cromer Esquire, who was Sheriff of Kent in the twenty
third year of Henry the sixth, and was afterward in the twenty seventh year of
that Prince barbarously assassinated by Jack Cade, whilst he endeavored to
impeach that Arch-Incendiarie in his March toward London. He married Elizabeth
Daughter of James Fiennes Lord Say and Seal, by whom he had Issue Sir James
Cromer Father of Sir Will. Cromer, who was Sheriff of Kent the ninteenth year
of Henry the seventh, and the first year of K. Henry the eighth, and George
Cromer who was Archbishop of Armagh in Ireland. This Sir William had Issue
James Cromer Esquire; from whom descended Will. Cromer Esquire; his Son and Heir
who was Sheriff of Kent the ninth and twenty seventh of Q. Elizabeth, and had
Issue Sir James Cromer of Tunstall Knight, Sheriff of Kent in the second year
of K. James, in whom the Male-line determined; so that Francis his Daughter by
his first Wife matched to Sir Matthew Carew, Elizabeth his Daughter by his
second Wife wedded to Sir John Steed of Steed-hill, and Christian born likewise
by that Venture, married to Sir John Hales eldest Son to Sir Edward Hales of
Wood-Church, became his Coheirs. Upon the partition of the Estate, Tunstall
was shared by Sir John Hales; from whom it is now descended to his Son and Heir
Sir Edw. Hales Baronet, who lately has begun to erect, upon the ancient
Foundation, a Frabrick of that stupendous Magnificence, that it at once
obliges the eye to Admiration and Delight.

Vfton is a place of Repute Seated in this Parish: but it is raised up to a
higher estimate, since we find it was anciently parcel of the patrimony of
Shurland; for Robert de Shurland had a concession by Charter of Free Warren to
sundry of his Lands in Kent, amongst which, there is a recital of Vfton:
afterward in Times subsequent to this, by the Heir General of Shurland it was
cast into the possession of Cheyney, and Will. de Casineto (for so this Name is
rendered in Latin Records) or William Cheyney held it at his Death, which was
in the eighth year of Edward the third; and after for many Descents it had layn
included in the Interest and propriety of Cheyney, it was by a Daughter and
Heir put into the Demeasn of Astley; from whom again the like flux of
Circumstances bore away the Inheritance, and transferred it to Harlackenden,
the instant Lord of Vfton.

Gore-Court in this Parish in Times of elder Derivation was the Seat of a
Family whose Surname was At-Gore, and sometimes in ancient Court-rolls written
De la Gore, called so from their Habitation, which was situated near some
public way; Gare, Gate, and Gore, importting no more in the Saxon Dialect then
some common passage. But to proceed: Henry At-Gore held Gore-Court when he
deceased, which was in the thirty first year of Edward the third, and for
several Generations was the Inheritance knit to his Name till the common
Fatalitie of Time, brought it to expire in Alice Gore the Heir General of this
place, and of John Gore the last of the Male-line who enjoyed it; and she
disposed of her Concernment in it to Will. Croyden in which Family after the
possession had resided, it was alienated to Wood, descended from the Woods of
Muston in Hollingbourne, in whom the right of Gore-Court continues still
invested.

Tunbridge gives Name to that we style the Lowy of Tunbridge, and is a small
Territory within it self, called in old Latin Records Districtus Leuca de
Tunbridge, and was formerly subservient to the Dominion of those noble Persons,
who were Lords of the Fee. The first of which, was Richard de Clare Earl of
Brionie in Normandy, to whom it was by William Rufus granted upon this emergent
Occasion. This Richard was an earnest Abettor and supporter likewise of the
Designs of this Prince, upon his Brothers Territories in Normandy, and so by
consequence an active partisan of his, which made the Breast of Robert Duke of
Normandy to boil with such Animosity and passion against Him, that the Flame
of his Hatred kindled the Flame of a War which could not be extinguished, but
by the Depredation of this Earl's Estate, and the utter subversion of his
Castle of Brionie, which was left an Heap of Flame and Ruins, which caused
William Rufus to risent his Calamitous Condition with so much Regret and
Commiseration, that he granted him as much Land here at Tunbridge, as would
spread into a League both in the Extent and Longitude of it, and in the Breadth
and Latitude of it likewise; and Gemeticensis reports that this Richard brought
over the Rope with which he was to measure it, in the same Ship which
transported him and his Retinue. From this Richard who founded the Castle, the
right of Tunbridge was by Descent translated into his Son Gilbert de Clare the
first Earl of Hertford and here did the Signory many years find a residence,
till Isabel Sister and Coheir of Gilbert de Clare by matching with Hugh Audley,
brought this to be the Inheritance of that illustrious Family, where it had not
long remained, but Margaret Daughter and Heir of Hugh Audley by marrying with
Ralph Stafford made it a Branch of their patrimony: nor did it depart from this
Family, till the Vanity of Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham embarked him in
that Design, which the Malice of Cardinal Wolsey aggravated with those
Circumstances of Hatred, by blowing of wild Conjectures into the Ears of Henry
the eighth, who was naturally a jealous Prince, and emulous of any new blooming
Glory, that he was stained with the black Tincture of Treason, which sunk him
into an untimely Sepulcher, and his Estate by forfeiture into the possession of
the Crown. Edward Duke of Buckingham being thus convicted, in the twelfth year
of Henry the eighth, there was a great Controversy started forth, in the
thirteenth year of that Prince's reign, as appears by our Law Books, in the
Parliament then convened, whether or not there were ground enough in the Crimes
objected against him to establish an Attainder upon: and it was carried in the
Affirmative that there was; upon which this Castle, with all the Manor of
Dachhurst, alias Hilden-borough, with all the appendant Services and Quit-rents
united to them, did escheat to the Crown, and remained there, until Queen
Elizabeth dissevered the Manor of the Castle from her Interest, and made it by
Grant the possession of her Kinsman Henry Lord Hunsdon, whose Son George Lord
Hunsdon, about the beginning of King James, passed it with his Daughter and
Heir to Thomas Lord Berkley, who conveyed it to Sir John Kenedie, from whom not
long after, by the same Conveyance it fell under the divided Signory of
Ferrers, Gosson, and Johnson, and they by a mutual Consent sold their Interest
in it to Sir Peter Vanlore, by whose three Daughters and Coheirs, matched to
Sir Henry Zinzin, Sir Alexander Sterling, and Robert Crook Esquire, it is now
divided between those three Families. Although the Onsets of Time, and the
Assaults of Enemies together, has thrown the Beauty and Strength into such a
rude Confusion, that it now lurks in its own Rubbish; yet formerly it was
eminent for being the Scene of much Feude and Contention, between the Kings of
England, and the Barons then in Arms against them.

In the year 1088. Odo Bishop of Bajeux and Earl of Kent, making a Defection
from William Rufus, to those Barons who sought to support the Title of his
eldest Brother Robert, placed one Gilbert in this Castle, for the Defense of
it, which enforced that King to invest it with a Siege, and compelled the
Castellan to a Surrender, and afterward having taken Odo himself, imprisoned
him in this Fortress, from whence he afterward made a successful Escape.

In the year 1215. Falcatius de Brent, during the Military Contests King John
had with his Nobility, by Force wrung this Castle from the Earl of Gloucester,
and maintained it for some Time with signal Evidences of Magnanimity to the
Kings Behoof and Use.

In the year 1231. upon the Decease of Gilbert, the then Earl of Gloucester,
seized the Wardship of his Heir, and entrusted the Custody of this Castle to
Hubert de Burgh Earl of Kent. This occasioned an eager and impetuous Contest
between the King, and Richard Archbishop of Canterbury; the Archbishop
pretended, because the Castle held of his See, therefore he, de Jure, ought to
have the Custody of the Heir in his Wardship. To which the King replied, that
the whole Earldome held of him, and that he might commit the Custody of the
Lands to whomsoever he pleased. This caused the Archbishop, boiling with much
Heat and Passion, to Appeal for Redress to Rome, where he managed this
Controversy with that vigorous dexterity, that the Pope issued out a solemn
determination on his behalf: but his Decease in his Journey homewards,
superseded the Execution of the Papal Sentence.

The abovementioned King Henry, in the year 1259. granted License to Richard
de Clare Earl of Gloucester, to wall and embattle his Town of Tunbridge, in
these Words in that Charter, Claudere Muro et Kernellare, which latter Word
being made Latin out of the French Charneaux, imports that indented Form of
the Top of a Wall, which has Vent and Crest, commonly called embattelling,
very serviceable to the Defendants within, not only to annoy the Enemy, but
likewise to shroud and secure himself from the Fury of any outward Assault.

This Mode of Fortification was in elder Time with much Caution prohibited
within this Nation, out of a Jealousy that it might foment any inward
Sedition, and was therefore, amongst many other Articles, inquirable before the
Escheator de Domibus Kerneliatis. But the War breaking out not long after this,
between the King and Simon de Montfort, to whose Interest the Earl of
Gloucester was by a Solemn Combination closely united, the Grant of the
abovementioned King was made ineffectual, and not the least Symptoms of the
intended Wall are at this instant visible.

In the year 1263. the War growing hot between Henry the third, and Simon de
Montfort, the King sets down before Tunbridge-castle, and forces it to
snrrender to discretion; and therein found, amongst others, the Countess of
Gloucester. From whence I collect, that in those Times it was esteemed, if not
the only, yet at least a principal Mansion, of those great Lords of Tunbridge,
the Earls of Gloucester.

In the first year of Edward the first, there was a Summons issued forth by
Hugh de Bigod Earl of Norfolk, and Governor of the Hundred of Hoo, to enjoin
Richard de Clare Earl of Gloucester, to appear before him to assoil himself
from such Accusations, as should be objected against him, which principally had
an Aspect upon the War waged by him and Simon Montfort against Henry the third.
To which he alleged in his Defense, that he ought not to answer, but before
the Kings Justices of Air; upon which a Commission was issued out, in the
third year of Edward the first, to hear and decide the Controversy, and Sir
Stephen de Penchester, and John de Rigate, were the two Justices appointed by
the King for the final determination of it: and they upon a serious winnowing
of the whole Matter in Debate, did absolve the said Richard from the Crimes
with which he had been unjustly bespattered; and the rather, because as to the
principal part of them, they had been before entombed in the pacification of
Killingworth, made in the fiftieth year of Henry the third.

After this, I cannot find by that ancient Manuscript, they style the Chronicle
of Tunbridge, that there was any signal Action commenced at this place, because
the Castle with all its perquisites, not long after by the Heir of Audley,
coming into the possession of Stafford, they planted themselves at
Stafford-castle, their principal residence; and so this Fortress being
neglected and deserted, languished away insensibly into decay and ruin: only
in the reign of Edward the first, I find that upon an Inquisition or Survey of
the Privileges of the Earls of Gloucester, as they were Lords of Tunbridge, it
was concluded that the Archbishop of Canterbury had nothing to do within the
Lowy or League: That the Earl had Return of Writs, Creation of certain
Officers, an especial Sessions in Air; all which by Intermission are shrunk
long since into disuse.

In the year 1264. to allay all emergent Controversy for the future; Boniface
the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Richard Earl of Gloucester, decreed that
there should be a Perambulation made concerning their respective Bounds: and it
was not long after likewise concluded between the patties abovesaid, that Earl
Richard should hold his Manor of Tunbridge, and other Lands of the Archbishop
by the Service of four Knights Fees, and to be high Steward, and high Butler,
which Office was likewise to be transmitted to his Successors, at the Feast of
the Archbishops Inthronization, taking for their Service in the Stewardship,
seven competent Robes of Scarlet, thirty Gallons of Wine, thirty pound of Wax
for his Lights, Livery of Hay and Oats to feed fourscore Horse for two Nights,
the Dishes and Salt which should stand before the Archbishop in that Feast;
and at their departure, the Diet of three Days at the Sole Expense of the
Archbishop, at four of their Manors, in any of the four Quarters of Kent,
wheresoever they pleased to fix ad minuendum sanguinem; so they repaired
thither with fifty Horses only. To his Office of chief Butlership was allotted
seven Robes like the former, twenty Gallons of Wine, fifty pound of Wax for
furnishing out of Lights, Livery for sixty Horse for two Nights, the Cup
wherewith the Archbishop should be served, all the empty Hogsheads of Beer,
and for six Tun of Wine, so many as should be drunk under the Bar also. The
Articles of which Composition in Times subsequent to this Compact, were
punctually performed between the Successors of either Party.

First, in the year 1295. between Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, and Robert
Winchelsey; next, between the said Earl, and Archbishop Reynolds; then between
Hugh Audley the Earl of Gloucester, and the Archbishop John Stratford; after
that, between Hugh Stafford Earl of Stafford, to whom the Castle and Manor of
Tunbridge, did devolve in right of the Heir General of Audley, and Simon
Sudbury; and lastly, between William Warham the Archbishop, and Edward
Stafford the last Duke of Buckingham of that Name, in whose untimely Sepulcher
these two great Offices found their final Enterment, and he executed the
Stewardship in his own person, and the Butlership by his deputed Delegate Sir
Thomas Bourchier Knight.

The Priory of Tunbridge was founded by Richard de Clare, in the year of Grace
1191. and stored with Canons Regular, or Canons of St. Augustins, and dedicated
to St. Mary Magdalen, which upon the Petition of the Founder, was confirmed by
Pope Celestin, in the same year it was erected.

In the year 1353. an unhappy Fire seized upon it, which almost reduced the
whole Structure into Ashes: to balance which Dysaster, the Church of Leigh was
appropriated to this Covent, that by this additional support, this Cloister
thus defaced with Flame might again recover its former, not only Bulk, but
Splendour likewise.

Somerhill is now an eminent Seat in this Parish, and was certainly in elder
Times allotted, as a Mansion, or place of Residence by the Earls of Gloucester
to those Gentlemen who were Bailiffs of their great Chase called South-Frith,
one of whom was Richard de Philpot of Philpots in Leigh, not far distant, who
flourished here, in the reign of Henry the third, and is written in an old
Deed, Balivus Forestae de Tunbridge sub Ricardo Comite de Clare. After him I
find, one Nicholas Charles exercised this Office, and flourished in it, in the
reign of Edward the second: and when he went out, diverse of the Family of
Colepeper and Vane, who were Lords of much Land here about Tunbridge, were
successively invested in it, whose Names it would be too tedious and
impertinent to enumerate. But to return: That this Seat was anciently destined
and devoted to the Uses above recited, is very probable, because it is situated
on the Verge and exterior Margent of the Forest, and so by its commodious
position, had a peculiar Aspect upon those Affairs, wherein this Chase and its
Jurisdiction was concerned. In fine, after it had been subservient and
ministerial for many hundred years to the successive Signory of the several
Families of Clare, Audley, and Stafford, it was in the thirteenth year of Henry
the eighth, by that unfortunate person Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham, who
was crushed into an heap of Ruins, by those dark and black Engines, which
Cardinal Wolsey, that subtle Artificer of Mischief, had raised upon him, was
with much other Land forfeited to the Crown, and Queen Elizabeth about the
middle of her reign, by Royal Concession made it the Demeasne of her faithful
Servant Sir Francis Walsingham, principal Secretary of Estate, who dying
without Issue-male, left it to his Daughter and Heir Frances, who was first
matched to the Invaluable Sir Philip Sidney; secondly, to Robert Earl of Essex;
and thirdly, to Richard Burgh Earl of Clanrickard, created Earl of St. Albans,
August the twenty third, in the year 1628. to whose Son Vlike Burgh, lately
Earl of St. Albans and Clanrickard, she bequeathed this Manor of Somerhill.

Hilden is another Manor in Tunbridge, and was, as high as I can track any
Record, the possession of the Noble Family of Vane, who are written in very old
Deeds, A Vane, and was certainly their ancient Seat; before, by matching with
the Heir of Stidolfe, they became possessors of Badsell. Henry A Vane makes his
Will in the year 1456. He was the Son of John A Vane, who flourished at this
place, in the reign of Edward the third: but his Predecessors enjoyed it, as
appears by Original Evidences, many years before. From Henry Vane it came over
to John a Vane, whose Son John Vane, in the tenth year of Henry the seventh,
conveyed it by Sale to Dixon, descended originally from the Dixons of Scotland,
Gentlemen of no despicable Account in that Nation, and in their possession has
it, ever since the first purchase, been constantly settled.

Dachurst, alias Hilden-borough, had the same Possessors still with Tunbridge,
and being forfeited, in the thirteenth year of Henry the eighth, by Edw.
Stafford Duke of Buckingham, its Demeasne was in the fourteenth year of that
Prince, granced to William Skeffington Esquire, in whose Descendant the
propriety is yet resident: but the Manor it self rested in the Crown, until
not many years since it was conveyed by the State to Colonel Robert Gibbons of
Hole in Rolvenden.

Bardens and Hadloe are two little Manors in Tunbridge, both which had Owners
of that Surname. John de Barden held the first, as the Book of Aid informs us,
and paid respective Aid for it, at making the Black Prince Knight, in the
twentieth year of Edward the third: and the dateless Evidences relating to
Hadloe, do assure us both of the Antiquity and Truth of the second. And in the
Tenure of the first did Bardens remain, until the reign of Henry the fourth,
and then changed its Owner, and came entirely to be possessed by Hadloe, but
remained not long in his Name; for John Hadlow dying without Issue, Alice his
Sister married to John Woodward, became his Heir; and she in her Widowhood,
about the latter end of Henry the sixth, passed away Bardens to John Hopdey,
and he in the thirty eighth of Henry the sixth, alienated his Right to William
Hextall: but Hadloe devolved to John Woodward, Son of John Woodward abovesaid,
and he in the thirty seventh of Henry the sixth, demises all his Interess in
Hadloe to William and Henry Hextall: and he the same year by Deed releases all
his Right in Hadloe to William; which William, not many years after dying
without Issue-male, Margaret his Sole Daughter and Heir, brought these two
Manors to be the Inheritance of her Husband William Wherenhall Esquire, whose
Son William Whetenhall Esquire, about the middle of Henry the eighth, passed
away Bardens to Andrew Judde Esquire (who erected the Almshouses here at
Tunbridge) and Hadloe to William Waller Esquire. Judde died without Issue-male,
and left his Estate to Alice his Sole Heir, matched to Thomas Smith Esquire,
vulgarly called Customer Smith, and he upon his Decease gave Bardens to his
second Son Sir Thomas Smith of London, in whose Descendants the Title yet is
resident: but Hadloe descended to Richard Waller, Son to William abovesaid, who
about the forty second year of Elizabeth, alienated it to George Stacy, and he
about the beginning of King James, demised it again to Bing, whose Successor
Mr. John Bing, in our Remembrance passed it away to Mr. David Polhill Esquire,
whose Grandchild Mr. David Polhill, upon the late Decease of that his
Grandfather is now entitled to the possession of it.

Hollenden is the last place in Tunbridge to be taken notice of, which spreads
its appendant Demeasne into the Parish of Leigh, and was in Ages of a very high
Gradation, parcel of the Patrimony of the ancient Family of Fremingham: for in
the fifty fifth year of Henry the third, I find that Ralph de Fremingham
obtained a Charter of Free Warren to several of his Manors in Kent, in the
Register of which was Hollenden. In Times of a more modern Aspect, that is,
about the reign of Henry the fourth, I find it by some old Court-rols to be the
Cheyneys, and there are several parcels of Land that relate to this Manor,
which are adopted into their Name, and are called Cheyneys Fields; and in this
Family did the Manor continue, until the latter end of Henry the eighth, and
then it was alienated to Waller, to whose Inheritance it continued united,
until that Age which fell within the Circle of our Fathers Cognizance, and then
it was passed away to Crittenden, which Family at this instant is entitled to
the Signory of it. But part of the Demeasne which is spread into Leigh, was
about the beginning of Henry the seventh, conveyed to Stacy, whose Successor
almost in our Remembrance alienated it to Turner, and he not many years since
demised it to James Pelset.

Tuydley, anciently written Twidley, lies in the Hundreds of Wachlingstone and
Twyford, and was not worth the Consideration, were it not for Badsell; where a
Family who extracted their Surname from hence, had long since their Habitation,
from whom by a Daughter and Coheir the Inheritance went into Stidulph, from
whom the Stidulphs or Stidolfes of Surrey are originally branched out; a Noble
Family certainly, and of eminent Genealogy, there being frequent mention in
that Book, which they call the Survey of the Lowey of Tunbridge, taken in the
fourteenth year of Edward the fourth, of this Name and Family: but when the
successive mutation of Time had crumbled the Name of Stidolfe at this place
into a Daughter and Heir, called Agnes, upon her espousals with John Vane,
Badsell became incorporated into the Interest and Concernment of that Family,
and by a Communicative Right issuing out from this Alliance, does Milmay Fane
now Earl of Westmerland entitle himself to the instant propriety and
possession of Tuydley and Badsell.

Kippings Cross in Tuydley has been (as appears by several old Dateless
Evidences and other Monuments) for many hundred years the Seat and Inheritance
of Kippings, who bore for their Coat Armor, as it appears exemplified and
confirmed to Robert Kipping of Brenchley Gentleman the fifth of September, in
the thirty seventh year of Henry the eighth, Loringee Or and Azure upon a chief
Gules A Lion passant Or langued and armed Azure. But this Family after such a
vast continuance here and at Brenchley, not many yeart since determined in two
Daughters and Coheirs: Dorothy the eldest was married to Edward Darrell
Esquire, second Son to Sir Robert Darrell of Calchill, and Mr. James Darrell
fourth Son of Sir Robert above mentioned, and now secondly to Thomas Henshaw of
Kensington Esquire, descended from the ancient Family of Henshaw of Henshaw in
Cheshire.

V. V. V. V.
ULcomb in the Hundred of Eyhorne was the patrimony of St. Legers (written in
Latin Records de Sancto Leodegario.) Sir Robert de Sancto Leodegario entered
into England with Will. the Conqueror, and was of that high repute, that,
according to the received Tradition of this Family, he with his Hand supported
that Prince, when he first went out of his Ship to Land in Sussex; afterward,
when in the twentieth of that King's Government, there was an universal Survey
taken of each Man's particular Demeasn, thoroughout the Nation, who was of any
Account or Eminence, which we call Doomsday Book, there is a recital of the
above mentioned Robert de St. Ledger to have held Lands at Ulcomb, which the
Evidences of this Family do inform us, were taken from a Pagan Dane whom he
before had conquered, and who inhabited at this place. Guy de St. Ledger, as Mr.
Fuller discovers to us in his Ecclesiastical History, was appointed by William
the Conqueror to be an Assistant Knight to Adelmere one of the Monks of Ely.
Raefe de St. Ledger is registered in the Roll of those Kentish Gentlemen, who
accompanied Richard the first to the Siege of Acon, and, as the Inscription on
his Leaden Shroud in the Vault of this Church does signify, was engaged in the
Holy Quarrel fifteen years. Another Rafe St. Ledger, and Hugh St. Ledger were
Recognitores magnae Assisae in the second year of K. John. Sir Rafe de St.
Ledger, Sir Jo. de St. Ledger, and Sir Tho. St. Ledger, were with Edw. the first
at the Siege of Carlaverock in the twenty eighth year of his Reign; and for
their signal Achievements there received the Order of Knighthood. Indeed in
times subsequent to this there was scarce almost any noble and generous
undertaking, but the Annals of our English History represent a St. Ledger
concerned and interessed in it. And for their Collateral Alliances by which
they became knit in Consanguinitie to several illustrious Families, none in
that particular have been more Successeful then themselves: Sir Thomas St.
Ledger second Brother to Sir Rafe St. Ledger married Anne Duchess of Exeter,
Sister to King Edward the fourth, and so became twisted into the Family of that
Prince, by a Nearness of Alliance, as he had before been taken into his Bosom
by a union of Friendship, by whom he had only Ann his Daughter and Heir, who
was wedded to Sir George Manners L. Rosse; from whom the Earls of Rutland are
in a direct Line branched out: Sir James St. Ledger this man's Brother matched
with Anne one of the Coheirs of Thomas Boteler Earl of Ormond; from whom the
St. Legers of the County of Devon were extracted; out of which Stem was Sir
William St. Ledger, who was Lord President of Munster in Ireland, one thousand
six hundred forty and two: Sir Anthony St. Ledger Father of Sir Warham, was Lord
Deputy of Ireland, which place he managed with much of Prudence and
Magnanimity; his second Son Sir Anthony St. Ledger Father to Sir Anthony St.
Ledger now of Wierton House in Boughton Monchensie, died Master of the Rolls in
Ireland; which Office he discharged with a great deal of Faith and no less
integrity; Thus have I in Landscape pourtraied this noble Family, which in an
undivided Chain of Descent was settled at Ulcomb from the Conquerour's Time even
till of late, and then Sir Anthony St. Ledger alienated his right in it, which
was grown reverend by a prescription of so many Ages, to Sergeant Clerk of
Rochester, Father to Mr. Francis Clerk, descended from Henry Clerk, who was
second Brother to Sir John Clerk, who took the Duke of Longuevil prisoner at
the Battle fought between Bomy and Spours.

The Church of Ulcomb belonged to Christ-Church in Canterbury and being
Snatched away was restored by K. Edmund in the year 941. And about 430 years
since was made a Collegiate Church by Stephen Langton Archbishop of
Canterbury, and the Head thereof was called Arch-presbyter.

Boycot is another Manor in Ulcomb, which afforded both Seat and Surname to a
Family of that Denomination, as appears by several old Deeds, some of which are
without Date, which remember Stephen de Boycot, John de Boycot, and Alexander
Boycot, which last flourished here in the Reign of Edward the third, and
Richard the second; and from him did it by paternal Delegation devolve to John
Boycot; and he had Issue John Boycot and Stephen Boycot, one which sold his
Proportion which accrued to him by the custom of Gavelkind to Richard
Hovenden, and the other by the like alienation transmitted his Interest in it
to William Adam, from whom it came over by Donation to Thomas Glover, as is
specified in the Deed of Sale, by which the abovementioned person in the first
year of Henry the seventh, alienates it to Richard Hovenden. After Hovenden was
crumbled away, it came by purchase to be the possession of Clerk of
Wood-Church, the last of which Name which was entitled to the Inheritance was
Humphrey Clerk Esquire, who in the ninteenth of Q. Elizabeth alienated it to
Thomas Sands, and he in the twentieth year of the abovesaid Princess, conveyed
it to the Lady Elizabeth Berkley, whose Grandchild Mr........ Berkley Esquire,
is now proprietarie of it.

Kingsnoth is the last Manor in Vlcomb: It was part of that Demeasn which
related to the Abbey of Feversham, and continued united to its patrimony, until
the public Dissolution filed it off, and then it became the Interest of the
Crown, until Henry the eighth in the thirty second of his reign granted it to
Sir Anthony St. Ledger Knight of the Garter, Lord Deputy of Ireland, and one of
his Privy Council, whose Son Sir Warham St. Ledger in the tenth year of Q.
Elizabeth conveyed it to William Isley Esquire, who not long after passed it
away to Anthony Sampson, who in the twenty first year of Q. Elizabeth alienated
it to James Austin; and he in the year 1599 sold it to Robert Cranmer, who
dying without Issue Male, Anne his Daughter and Heir brought it along with her
to her Husband Sir Arthur Harris of Crixey in Essex, who upon his Decease gave
it to his second Son Mr. John Harris and his Son and Heir Mr. Cranmer Harris of
Lincolns Inn enjoys the instant Inheritance of it.

Vp-Church in the Hundred of Milton, was in elder Times in the Register of
those Lands, Manors, and Hereditaments, which owned the dominion of the
illustrious Family of Leybourn. Rog. de Leybourn in the fiftieth year of H. the
third had a Grant to hold his Lands at Hartlip, Reinham, and Up-Church, by the
fourth part of a Knights Fee, and from him did the Clew of successive Descent
in a continued Track transport it to his Great Grandchild Juliana de Leybourne
Widow of John de Hastings (not Father of Laurence de Hastings E. of Pembroke,
as some have erroneously printed, but his Kinsman) and next of William de
Clinton Earl of Huntington, whom she survived, and died possessed of this Manor
in the forty third year of Edward the third, and as the inquisition after her
Decease informs us, without any Issue or kindred who might supersede the
Interest of the Crown, by pretending a direct or Collateral Title to her
Estate: so that King Edward the third by escheat became invested in this
Manor, as a Limb of the Estate thus acquired, who in the fiftieth year of his
reign, settled it on the Abbey of St. Mary Grace on Tower Hill, of his Foundation
and Endowment; and having remained treasured up in the Revenue of that
Cloister, until the general suppression, it was then plucked off, and by King
Henry the eighth granted in the thirty first of his Reign to Thomas Green
Esquire, whose Descendant in our Fathers memory passed away his Concernment in
it to Apsley.

Ham, Sharpenash, and West-court, are three little Manors situated within the
Circuit of this Parish, and were parcel of that Patrimony, which related to the
Abbey of St. Augustins: which upon the Dissolution of that Fraternity (the vast
Demeasn which appertained to it, being more heinous in the Eyes of Henry the
eighth, than those Crimes and Offenses though peradventure of a Complexion dark
enough, which were charged upon the Covent;) He, I mean the Prince abovesaid,
ravished them away from the patrimony of the Church, to incorporate and
interweave them with the Revenue of the Crown, where their Title and propriety
was not long lodged; for K. Hen. the eighth conveyed them by Grant to Will.
Hach, descended from Hach of Aller in Devon, who not long after passed them
away to Tho. Green Esquire; written in his Deeds, alia Norton: where, after the
possession of them, had some years continued the Interest of all these Manors,
was by the Mutation of Sale, transported into Aldersey, Ancestor to Captain
Terry Aldersey of Swanton Court in Bredgar, now Lord of the Fee and Signory of
these above recited places.

W. W. W. W.
WAldershare in the Hundred of Eastry, was in elder Times the Seat of an
eminent Family called Malmains. John de Malmains is recorded in an Ancient Roll
of those Gentlentemen which entered England with William the Conqueror, and
engaged with him at the Battle of Battle. John de Malmains, as Mr. Fuller in
his Ecclesiastical History does represent to us was Standard Bearer to the
Norman Footmen, and was joined by William the Conqueror as an Assistant Knight
to Otho one of the Monks of Ely. Henry Malmains is registered in the Bed-roll of
those Kentish Gentlemen who assisted Richard the first at the Siege of Acon.
See more of this Family of Malmains in the Catalogue of Sheriffs.
John de Malmains is registered in the Pipe rolls amongst those who were
Recognitores Magnae Assisae in the reign of K. John, a place of that Latitude
of Trust and Authority, that those who managed it were frequently selected out
of the chiefest Knights and most eminent Gentlemen of the County. Sir Nicholas
de Malmains was engaged with Edward the first at the Siege of Carlaverock in
Scotland in the twenty eighth of his reign, and for his worthy undertaking
there received the Dignity of Knighthood, and from him did Waldershare descend
to Nicholas de Malmains, who died possessed of this and much other Land in the
twenty third year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 160. and from him
descended Henry Malmains his Grandchild, who dying about the beginning of
Henry the fourth without Issue Male left his Estate here at Waldershare to
Agnes his sole Daughter and Heir matched to Thomas Goldwell of Great Chart: yet
had this Henry a Kinsman called Thomas Malmains Son of John Malmains, who had a
considerable share of this Manor of Waldershare, which by his Heir General
devolved to John Monins Esquire, who about the beginning of Henry the sixth,
purchased all that Demeasn and Interest which Tho. Goldwell was entitled to
here, and so became sole Lord of Waldershare. This John Monins was descended
from John Monins, who in the twentieth year of Edw. the third held Lands at
Swink-field, as appeats by the Book of Aid, by the Title of Esquire, and was
allied to William Monings or Monins, (for in old Records they are written so
promiscuously) who was several times Knight of the Shire for Norfolk, as
appears by the Record in the Tower, whose Title is De Expensis Militum in the
time of Richard the second; and John Monins this Man's Son was a person of so
eminent Notice in this County, that he obtained an Indulgence under the Seal of
Sixtus the fourth, bearing Date 1474, to carry along with him a Priest and a
portable Altar for celebration of divine Offices in his necessary Journeyings;
and John Monins this Man's Grandchild, and Son of Robert, compounds with Tho.
Hobbys in the twentieth year of Hen. the seventh for ten Marks as part of his
Fine to be excused from being made Knight of the Bath at the creation of Henry
his Son Prince of Wales: Edward Monins Esquire; was Justice of the Peace for Kent
the latter part of the reign of Henry the eighth: and he was Ancestor to Sir
William Monins, who was made Knight and Baronet the twenty ninth day of June in
the ninth year of K. James by the Name of Sir William Monings of Waldershare,
and from him is not only this Title, but likewise the signory of this Manor
now devolved by paternal right to his Son and Heir Edward Monins Baronet.

Walmer is a Member of Sandwich, and so in no Hundred: It was one of those
principal Seats which owned the jurisdiction and signory of the noble and
spreading Family of Crioll, written frequently likewise Keriel. The first, whom
I find to be possessed of it, was Matilda de Criol Widow of Simon de Crioll, and
she in right of Dower was in possession of it at her Death, which was in the
fifty second of Henry the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 34. The next of this Name whom
the Beams of public Record represent to me to be possessor of it, was Nicholas
de Crioll, who enjoyed it at his Death, which was in the thirty first of Edward
the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 39. In Ages of a nearer Approach unto us, John de
Crioll in the forty ninth year of Edward the third died seized of it, and so
did William Keriell in the first year of Henry the fifth; Rot. Esc. Number. 21.
and left it to his Son Sir John Crioll of Sarre in Thanet, (who, as an old
Pedigree of this Family informs me) was in eminent Command under Henry the
fifth in his successful Expedition into France, having the Conduct of several
Kentish Squadrons at the Battle of Agincourt, and died laden more with Honor
then with Years in the ninth year of Henry the sixth, and left Sir Thomas
Crioll or Keriell, Knight of the Gatter, Heir both of his Estate and Virtues:
of whom because our Chronicles speak so much, I shall not be silent. He was
Governor of Gourney in Normandy, in the ninth year of Henry the sixth under
John Duke of Bedford the Regent; not far from which Place, he defeated the
Earl of Britain and in that discomfiture slew six Hundred, and took two
Hundred Prisoners. In the fourteenth year of Henry the sixth, the Duke of
Burgundy infested Crotoy with a Siege, which being successefully raised by the
Lord Talbot, Sir Thomas Keriell assaults his Rear with that Courage, that he
forced that Duke to a Disorderly Retteat, leaving his Canon and Carriages
behind him, as the Reward of his Valor and Fortune. In the twenty seventh year
of Henry the sixth, he was sent over into France with fifteen hundred men as a
fresh supply to buoy up the sincking Affairs of the English in that Nation,
with which he recovered many pieces of strength: but overlaid with Multitude in
an Encounter at Formigney by the Earl of Clermont and the Constable of France,
after he had with unparalled Testimonies of personal Courage endeavored to
preserve the Fortune of the Day, he received a Defeat; the Enemy buying his
Victory at so dear a rate, that it almost undid the Purchaser. Lastly, his Fate
cast him into that Civil Contest, which broke out between the two Houses of
York and Lancaster, and being satisfied with the Justice of those principles
upon which the first had engaged in Arms, became an eager Assertor of its Claim
to the Diadem, and having enbarked himself with Richard Earl of Warwick then
the Atlas of that Faction, in defense of it, at the second Battle of St. Albans
perished in the Ruins of that Field, and by an unstained though a Calamitous
Fidelity, became the great Example of Loyalty to the House of York. And he
dying without Issue-male, one of his Daughters and Coheirs, by matching with
John Fogge of Repton Esquire, brought this Manor upon the partition of the
Estate between Fogge and Bourchier, who wedded the other, to be annexed to the
Demeasn of that Family, and upon his Decease it descended to his Son Thomas
Fogge Sergeant Porter of Callis, who dying without Issue-male, Anne Fogge who
was one of his two Daughters and Coheirs, Aregrim a Saxon held the Manor of
Minshull in Cheshire, (as Doomsday Book testifies) in the Time of the
Conqueror ut liber homo.
first matching with William Scot, and afterward to Henry Isham, brought this
to be parcel of the Inheritance of her second Husband; but his Son Edward
Isham, about the latter end of Q. Elizabeth, concluding in Mary Isham his only
Inheritrix, she by espousing Sir George Perkins united it to his Patrimony and
he settled the Reversion of it after his Wives decease upon Mary his Daughter
married to Sir Richard Minshull of Cheshire, created Baron of Minshull 1642,
(descended from that eminent Soldier Michael de Minshul, who for his glorious
service performed in the Quarrel of Richard the first at the Siege of Acon, had
the assignment for ever of the Crescent and Star for the Coat Armor of this
Family.) And he and the Lady Mary Perkins concurring in a joint Sale, passed it
away in the second of King Charles to James Hugison of Lingsted, whose Son John
Hugison Esquire, by descendant right is entitled to the Possession of it.

Waltham (in the Hundreds of Bredge, Petham, and Stowting) was anciently a
Member of that Revenue; which acknowledged the Interess of the Knights
Templers, as appears by a Survey taken of this Manor, in the year of Grace,
one thousand one hundred and eighty, and registered in the Book styled de Terris
Templariorum, which is preserved in the Remembrancers Office in the Exchequer:
and in that Survey, there is mention made of Ivo de Haut, who held Lands at
that Time of Temple Waltham, lying at Petham not far distant, which justifies
the Antiquity of that Name in this Track. Upon the total suppression and
extinction of this Order here in England, on pretense of some prodigious Crimes
stuck upon it (which whether they were imaginary or real, must be discussed in
that Critical Day, when the secrets of all Hearts, and the Bottom of all
Secrets shall be opened;) this Manor of Waltham, was in the seventeenth year
of Edward the second, by Grant invested in the Knights of St. John of
Jerusalem, commonly called the Knights Hospitalers, and here in this Order it
rested, until the reign of Henry the eighth: and then being dissolved, by that
impetuous Tempest, which like a Hurricano, fell upon this and all other
Conventual Orders in this Nation, it was swallowed up in the Revenue of the
Crown, and there lay couched, till the latter part of Queen Elizabeth; and then
it was, in the forty second year of her swaying the English Scepter, granted to
John Manwaring Esquire, from whom by Hope Manwaring his Daughter and Heir, the
Interess went to Humphrey Hamond: upon whose Decease, she was re-married to Sir
Robert Stapylton, a Person who has erected his own everlasting Tomb and
Epitaph, in those exquisite Translations of his, of Pliny's Panegyric to
Trajan, Juvenal's Satyrs; and lastly, Strada's History of the Wars, and other
Transactions of the Low Countries, who by purchase from his Son in Law Mr.
Manwaring Hamond, holds the instant Fee-simple of it.

Eshmerfeild is another eminent Manor in Waltham, and calls for some Respective
Account; because in Ages of a higher pedigree, it confessed it self in the
Revenual of the signal Family of Crioll; for Bertram de Crioll, possessed it at
his Death, which was in the twenty third year of Edward the first, and though
he expired in a Daughter and Heir, yet it continued still in the Tenure of a
younger House, until Bennet Daughter and Coheir of Sir Thomas Crioll, who was
slain at the second Battle of St. Albans, brought it to her Husband John Fogge
Esquire, whose Son Thomas Fogge, about the beginning of Henry the seventh,
alienated his Right and Concernment in it to Sir Thomas Kempe, in which Family
the Inheritance remained until the latter end of Queen Elizabeth, and then it
was passed by Sir Thomas Kempe this man's Grandchild to Roger Twisden Esquire,
whose Grandchild Sir Roger Twisden Knight and Baronet, conveyed it to Sir John
Ashburnham: to whose Widow the Lady Ashburnham it accrued upon his Decease, as
having been before by special Compact made part of her Dower, so that she at
this instant, has the Use of the emergent profits and income of it.

Whetacre is another small Manor, that lies within the Circle of this Parish,
not worth the memorial, were it not for a Family which extracted its Surname
from hence; for I find Nigellus de Whetacre mentioned in the Book of Aid, to
have held Lands here, in the twentieth of Edward the third: In Times of a lower
Date, that is, about the reign of Henry the sixth, I find the Family of Hels or
Hills, descended from the Hels of Hels-court in Woditon to be planted in the
possession: and in this Name was the Interest of it constant, until the
beginning of Edward the sixth, and then it was alienated to Prude, whose
Successor couveyed it to Alderman Cockain of London, from whom the same Stream
of Vicissitude carried it into Beacon.

Watringbury in the Hundred of Twiford, was, in Ages of a very high Gradation,
the Patrimony of a Family which enjoyed that Surname, and held not only the
Manor of Watringbury it self: but Chart and Fowls, which lie within the
Precincts of this Parish likewise; and bore for their Coat-Armous Argent six
Lionceux Rampant Sables: in assimilation, I believe, of the Lord Leybourne his
Neighbor, who was a Person of a vast power, and no less Estate in this Track:
but before the latter end of Henry the third, this Family was extinguished and
vanished, and then the next Family which stepped into the possession of these
places, upon the extinction of this, was the Noble Family of Leybourne of
Leybourne-castle. Thomas de Leybourne held it at his Decease, which was in the
first year of Edward the second, and transmitted them to his Successor Roger de
Leybourne, who died seized of them, in the beginning of Edward the third, and
left only one Daughter and Heir, called Juliana Leybourne, who in Relation to
that vast proportion of Revenue which accrued to her upon his Decease, was
styled the Infanta of Kent, she was first married to John de Hastings a Kinsman
of Lawrence de Hastings who was Earl of Pembroke, who dying without any Issue
surviving by this Lady, upon his Decease she chose for her second Husband,
William de Clinton Earl of Huntington; but by him likewise had no Issue as
appears by the Inquisition taken after her Death, which was in forty third year
of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 57. nor could there be any discovered, that
by collateral Affinity to this Lady by her Fathers side could elude the
Escheat, by pretending a Title to the Estate, so that it devolved to the Crown,
as the Common Heir, Jure patronatus, as the Civillians call it, by Right of
patronage and protection: and King Edward the third, in the fiftieth year of
his reign, granted Watringbury, Chart, and Fowls, which were parcel of the
abovementioned Revenue of Leybourne to the Abbey of St. Mary Grace upon
Tower Hill: in whose Revenue they lay couched till the general suppression, in
the twenty ninth of Henry the eighth, and then they were by that Prince, in the
thirty sixth year of his reign, granted to Giles Bridges, and Robert Harris,
who immediately after passed them away to Sir Robert Southwell, from whom by as
quick a Transition they went away to Sir Edward North, and he alienated them to
Sir Martin Bows, from whom they passed away to Sir John Baker, who suddenly
after divested himself of his Right to them, and sold them to Nevill de la Hay;
where it is to be noted that these Revolutions of the Title fell out in less
then thirty year. Nevill de la Hay had Issue George de la Hay, who about the
latter end of Queen Elizabeth, passed away Watringbury to Wilkinson, and Chart
and Fowls to Roger Twisden Esquire; Wilkinson in our Fathers Memory conveyed
Watringbury by Sale to Sir Tho. Style Knight and Baronet, Father to Sir Tho.
Style Baronet the instant proprietary of it. Chert and Fowls, descended to Sir
William Twisden Knight and Baronet, Father to Sir Roger Twisden, now possessor
of them both, to whose Papers I owe for the latter part of my Intelligence
concerning the successive Possessors of these above recited Manors.

I had almost forgot to inform the Reader, that in the fourth year of Edward
the second, Henry de Leybourne, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Lands
at Watringbury; amongst which Chart in this Parish is particularly recited.

Westbery is another Manor in this Parish, which had anciently proprietaries
of that Surname; the last of which Name was John Westbery, who deceased without
Issue, and so transmitted his Right in it by Testament to Agnes Ellis his
Niece, and she in the twenty third year of Henry the sixth, alienated her
Interess in it to Richard Fishbourne, in whom it was not long resident; for he
in the thirty third year of that Prince, conveyed it by Sale to Sir Thomas
Brown of Bechworth-castle in Surrey, Controller of the House, and Privy
Councellor to Henry the sixth; from whom by an even Stream of Descent the Title
flowed down to his Successor Sir Thomas Brown, who in the twenty fifth year of
Queen Elizazeth, passed it away to Roger Twisden Esquire, Grandfather to Sir
Roger Twisden Knight and Baronet, in whom the present propriety of this place
is resident.

Canons is the last Manor in this Parish. It is called so, because it
anciently belonged to the Prior and Canons of Leeds; and, after it had for many
Ages rested in the Demeasne of this Convent, it was by the Dissolution, in the
reign of Henry the eighth, which like a general Inundation broke in upon the
Patrimony of the Church, swept away: but was by Grant from that Prince
suddenly after settled on the Dean and Chapter of Rochester, and made a Branch
of their Revenue.

Watringbury had the Grant of a weekly Market on the Tuesday, and a three days
Fair at the Feast of St. John Baptist, both procured to it by Hugh de
Leybourne, in the fourth year of Edward the second.

East-Well in the Hundred of Wye, was anciently the possession of a Family,
which extracted its Surname from hence, Matilda de Eastwell held it at her
Decease, which was in the fifty second year of Henry the third, Rot. Esc. Number.
32. But soon after this, this Family was faded away at this place, and then it
devolved to be a Limb of that Revenue, which acknowledged the Jurisdiction and
possession of Bertram de Crioll, and he held it, in the twenty third year of
Edward the first: but his Son John Crioll dying without Issue, about the
beginning of Edward the third, it came down to Richard de Rokesley, Seneschall
and Governor of Ponthieu and Monstreul, as appears, Pat. 1. Edwardi secundi,
in the reign of Edward the second, who had married Joan Sole Daughter, and now
Heir of Bertram de Crioll: but the same Vicissitude, not long after carried it
off from this Name; for he went out likewise in two Daughters and Coheirs, one
of whom called Agnes, by matching with Thomas de Poynings emtombed the Name in
his Family, and the Estate here at East-well, and elsewhere, in his Patrimony:
but (as one ingeniously observes) the World it self, is but a great Ball cast
down into the Air to sport the Stars, and all the depopulations of Kingdoms,
and ruin of Empires, is but their pastime; so I may likewise infer, that great
Families, from their tumblings and rollings, are but the mockery and disports
of Time, and so it appeared here; for Richard Lord Poynings, Successor to the
abovesaid Thomas, died the eleventh year of Richard the second, and left his
Estate here to his Sole Daughter and Heir, Eleanor matched to Henry Percy Earl
of Northumberland, in whose right he became Lord Poynings, and so Eastwell
became linked to his Revenue, and dwelt in this Name, and supported the Signory
of Percy, until the Fate of Sale dissodged it; for in the twenty third year of
Henry the eighth, Henry Earl of Northumberland passes it away to Sir Thomas
Cheyney, William Walsingham, and William Fitz Williams, and they not long after
conveyed it to Sir Christopher Hales, Attorney General to Henry the eighth, and
he died possessed of it, in the thirty third year of that Prince, and left it to
his Son Sir James Hales, who not long after alienated it to Sir Thomas Moile,
Chancellor of the Court of Augmentations, who erected almost all that
stupendous Fabric, which now so obliges the Eye to Admiration, and left it to
Sir Thomas Finch, who had married Katharine his Daughter and Coheir, a
Gentleman who merited a calmer Fate, and a Nobler Tomb; for after many gallant
Archievements performed at Newhaven in France, he suffered Shipwreck in his
return to England, and left it to his Son Sir Moile Finch, who very much
enlarged Eastwell-court, with both sumptuous elegant and convenient
Additaments, and left it in Dower to his Widow Elizabeth Finch, Daughter and
Heir of Sir Thomas Heneage first created Viscountess Maidstone by King James,
and after Countess of Winchelsey, in the year 1638. by King Charles: from whom
both the Honor, and East-well descended to her Son Thomas Earl Wenchelsey, and
from him to his Son, the Right Honorable Heneage Finch now Earl of Winchelsey,
and Viscount Maidston.

Since I am so happily engaged to a Discourse of this eminent Family of Finch,
I shall discover in Landscape the deep Antiquity of their first Extraction. They
were originally descended from Henry Fitz-Herbert, Chamberlain to King Henry
the first, who married the Daughter and Heir of Sir Robert le Corbet, and had
Issue by her a Son named Herbert, and he was Father to Herbert Fitz-Herbert,
who by his first Wife Lucy Daughter and Coheir of Milo Earl of Hereford, and
Lord High Constable of England, had Issue a Son named Peter Fitz-Herbert, from
whom the Herberts Earls of Pembroke originally issued out, and by his second
Wife Matilda (after his Deeease, remarried to the Lord Columbers) he had Issue
Matthew Fitz-Herbert, who was one of the Magnates or Barons, at the compiling
of Magna Charta, and was one of the powerful Partisans of King John, at the
making the accord between that Prince and his Barons, at Running-Mead, between
Windsor and Stanes; his Son likewise called Matthew Fitz-Herbert, was the
fourth Baron mentioned in the Roll of that Parliament, which was convened at
Tewksbury. The alteration of this Name into Finch, was about the tenth of
Edward the first, at which Time Herbert Fitz-Herbert purchased the Manor of
Finches in Lidde, of which being entire Lord, as he was not of Netherfeild, he
assumed his Surname from that, as many other Families fell in that Age, under
the same Mutation, and borrowed Sirnames from those places which were wholly
under their possession and Signory. In the eighth year of Edward the second,
there was a Supersedeas issued out, mentioning that Herbert Fitz-Herbert,
called Finch, was a Ward, in the twenty eighth year of Edward the first, and so
could not personally serve with the King in his Wars in Scotland, and therefore
was released of his Escuage for all his Estate in Kent and Sussex, which
together with some of the ancient Patrimony, and several Knights Fees at
Netherfeild in Sussex, and elsewhere, are not yet departed from this Noble
Family.

Westwell in the Hundred of Calchill, was confirmed to the Monks of
Christ-church in Canterbury, for a supply in their Diet, in the year 1241. But
it seems they were questioned, Quo Warranto they possessed this Manor, and after
a Solemn Decision, per patriam, it is affirmed and attested in the Confirmation
of the abovesaid Prince, that it was enstated upon them by his Predecessors,
and continued afterward unquestionably parcel of the Demeasne of the Cloister
abovesaid, until it was resigned by the Monks of Christ-church, into the Hands
of Henry the eighth, and so it rested in the Crown, until not many years since,
it was granted to Sir Nic. Tuston of Hothfield. The Parsonage anciently
belonged to the Archbishop of Canterbury, until Thomas Arundell the
Archbishop gave it, in the year 1397. to the Monks of Christchurch, to
counterpoise those vast expenses which they were to be at in re-erecting the
Nave or Body of the Cathedral, (called Aulam Ecclesiae by Eadmerus) which Simon
de Sudbury plucked down, and had intended that it should like a Phoenix, have
rose more glorious out of its Ashes: but was intercepted in his Design by a
sudden Death, being beheaded by Wat Tiler, and the confluence of his impious
and barbarous Accomplices. This Church thus appropriated, was confirmed to the
Monks abovesaid, in the year 1400. by King Henry the fourth, and upon the
suppression was re-enstated upon the Dean and Chapter of Christ-church by
Henry the eighth.

Ripley-court is a Seat of good Antiquity in this Parish, and more eminent,
because it afforded a Surname to Gentlemen of good Rank in this Track, of
which Number was Richard de Ripley, who died seized of this Manor, in the
thirtieth year of Edward the first, Rot. Esc. Number. 91. and in an old Deed is
called Miles Archiepiscopi, that is, he held this Manor of the Archbishop by
Knights Service: but before the latter end of Edward the third, this Family was
vanished, and then the Brockhuls and Idens succeeded in the possession: the
last of which was a Family of great Antiquity, and no less Revenue, about Iden
in Sussex, and Rolvenden in this County. For in the year 1280. as appears by a
Fine levied that year; John the Son of Thomas de Iden, passes away Lands to
John de More. And of this Family was Alexander Iden Esquire, Sheriff of Kent,
in the thirty fourth year of Henry the sixth, who in the twenty eighth year of
that Prince, slew Jack Cade, who had borrowed the disguised Person of Mortimer,
excited thereunto, as was the Opinion of those Times, by the Suggestions of
Richard Duke of York, to fathom the Peoples Affections to that man, in the
strength of whose Title he intended in the future to claim the English Diadem.
But the Attempts of Cade being disappointed by the formerly infatuated, but now
disenchanted Multitude's deserting of him, who began to risent his Fraud and
Imposture upon their total Dissipation, shrouded himself in some of those
Grounds which belonged to Ripley-court, and lay not far distant from Hothfeild,
and were then in the Tenure of William Iden Justice of the Peace, and Father
of the abovesaid Alexander: where being discovered, he was by that Worthy
Person, offered up a Sacrifice to the Justice of Henry the sixth. But I have
digressed, I now return: After this Seat had for so many Descents been the
Residence of this Family, and the Cradle and Seminary of many Worthy Persons,
who had been subservient and ministerial to the Honor and Interess of this
County, by their Magnanimity and Prudence; it went away from Iden by Sale to
Darell; and George Darell, in the last year of Edward the sixth, conveyed it to
Baker, Ancestor to Mr....... Baker of Windsor, now proprietary of it.

Diggs-court is another eminent Seat in this Parish, which was the Mansion of
the Noble Family of Diggs or Dig, who promiscuously writ themselves in elder
Times sometimes of Barham, and sometimes of VVestwell, as appears by many of
their ancient, Evidences and other Muniments yet extant. In the reign of Edward
the third, there was one Adomarus de Dig, who frequently writ himself of
Westwell: but whether it were he that was the Judge, or not, I cannot
positively aver. In fine, after this place had for many Ages acknowledged the
Signory of this Family, it came down to John Dig, in whom the Male-line
ended; so that his Female Heir being wedded to Henry Aucher, annexed it to the
Revenue of that Family, and from him has the Title by a Thread of many years,
been guided down to Mr....... Aucher.

Dean-court may be registered likewise in the Catalogue of the principal
Manors of this Parish. It was in Times of elder prescription the Inheritance
of Hussie, who likewise was entitled to the possession of Dean-court in
Wingham, now the Mansion of the Oxendens, by purchase from this Family. Henry
Hussie, a man of great power, as appears by that large Estate he was Lord of,
both at Wingham, Lenham, Boughton, Malherbe, and elsewhere, died possessed of
this Manor, in the eighteenth year of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Numb. 36.
and from him did it in an even and an undivided Current glide along in this
Name, until the latter end of King Henry the eighth, and then it was passed
away by Sale to Milan, in which Family the propriety of this place is now
resident.

Nash-court is the next place in Westwell, that calls for our Survey; in old
Deeds I find a Family that sometimes writ At Ash, and sometimes Nash, into
which the former Name resolved, who were possessors of it: In Times of a lower
Step, that is, in the thirty second year of Edward the third, as appears by the
close Roll of that year, Rot. Esc. Number. 94. Alanus de Hanekin held it: but
before the latter end of Richard the second, this Family had quitted the
possession by Sale to Brockhull of Calchill, and was not long after, that is,
about the twelfth year of Henry the fourth, by Henry Brockhull, conveyed to
John Darell Esquire, Sheriff of Kent, in the eleventh year of Henry the fourth,
and Brother of Sir William Darell, under-Treasurer of England, and in this Name
it was permanent, until the last year of Edward the sixth, and then it went
away by Sale to Sharp of Nin-house in great Chart, and has been now for five
Descents resident in that Family.

Beamonston, vulgarly called Beamston, is partly situated in West-well, and
partly spread into East-well: but the greatest part of the Demeasne is
circumscribed within the Bounds of this Parish. And in the twentieth year of
Edward the third, as appears by the Book of Aid, was held by Thomas at More,
at making the Black Prince Knight. But before the fourth year of Henry the
fourth, this Family was extinguished; for at the Marriage of Blanch that
Prince's Daughter, as appears by the Roll of Blanch Lands kept in the
Exchequer, John Amias was possessed of it, and paid respective Aid for it, as
having purchased it of At-More: and in this Name did it reside, until the reign
of Henry the seventh, and then it was conveyed by Sale to John Moile Esquire,
Father to Sir Thomas Moile, who left this, with much other Land to Katharine
his Daughter and Coheir matched to Sir Thomas Finch, in Right of which
Alliance, it is now devolved to be the Inheritance of his great Grandchild
Hencage Finch the instant Earl of Winchelsey.

Perytowne lies likewise within the Limits of Westwell, and is registered in
the Catalogue of those Lands that William de Aldon died possessed of, in the
thirty fifth year of Edward the third; and continued chained to the Inheritance
of this Family, until about the twenty seventh of Henry the sixth, it was
passed away with much other other Land to Cardinal Kempe, who settled it in the
twenty eighth year of that Prince, on his newly erected College of Wye, and
rested there until the twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth, and then it was
resigned into the Hands of that Prince, and he in the thirty eighth year of his
reign, granted it to Thomas Cawarden or Carden Esquire, and he not long after
conveyed it by Sale to Sir John Baker of Sisingherst, whose Successor Sir John
Baker Baronet, has this present year 1657. alienated it to Nathaniel Powell of
Ewherst in Sussex Esquire.

Woditon or Wolton, is the last place of any Note in Westwell: It was
originally parcel of the Inheritance of a Family called Wolton or Woditon. Ivo
de Woditon held it in the year 1236. and left it to his Son John de Wolton, who
had Issue Richard de Woditon or VVolton, a man of principal Note, in the
twentieth year of Edward the third, who held both this Manor, and VVoditon by
Berham, which he held of the Archbishop of Canterbury by Knights Service at
making the Black Prince Knight. And in this Man's Successors did the Propriety
constantly reside until the latter end of Henry the sixth, and then some part
of it was conveyed to John Hampton, and he about the beginning of Edward the
fourth passed it away to Richard Rasel, who died possessed of it, as appears by
his Will in the twentieth of that Prince; but there was some part remained
unsold, until William Wolton dying 1540, ordered it by his Deed to be passed
away to Feoffees in Trust to discharge Debts, which accordingly was performed
and the Remainder conveyed to Rasell, in the Descendants of which Name and
Family the entire propriety is at this instant remaining.

Werehorne in the Hundreds of Ham and Blackbourne, was partly under the
Jurisdiction of the Church, and partly under the Signory of temporal and Lay
Proprietaries: that Moitie of it which was of secular Interest, belonged to a
Family called Bedford. Rich. de Bedford obtained a Grant of a Market to it
weekly on the Tuesday, and a Fair of three days continuance at the Feast of St.
Matthew, as appears Cart. 52. Henrici tertii Memb. 12, which was renewed and
confirmed to the abovesaid Person in the eighth year of Edward the first; and
he in the seventeenth year of that Prince died possessed of it, as is manifest,
Rot. Esc. Number. 20. But after him it was of no long date in the Tenure of this
Family; for in the reign of Edward the second, I find it in the possession of
Hugh de VVindlesore or Windsor; but was not long chained to their Patrimony
neither; for about the beginning of Edward the third, it was alienated to
Moraunt of Moraunts Court, but about the beginning of Richard the second, Sir
Thomas Morant (Son of William Moraunt Sheriff of Kent the twelfth and
thirteenth year of Edward the third, to whom that Prince issued out a Mandate,
that but one Bell should be rang in any Steeple toward the Seacoast in Kent)
determined in a Female Heir, who was matched to James Peckham of Yaldham
Sheriff of Kent the third and twelfth of Richard the second, and was as the
private evidences of this Family inform me, originally descended from Hugh de
Peckham, who was Constable of the Castle of Rochester under K. John in the
first year of his reign; and he in her right became entitled to that Interest
Moraunt had in this place: and in this Family it remained until those Times
which approached near the Confines of our Grandfathers remembrance, and then
it was passed away to Ellis; from whence in Opposition to the other Moitie
which was of spiritual Concernment it was called Werehorne Ellis, and from this
Family not many years since it was carried off by Sale to Tufton, in right of
which purchase the right honorable John Earl of Thanet is now invested in the
possession of it.

The other Moietie which belonged to the Church, was given in the year of Grace
1010, by Elphegus Archbishop of Canterbury to the Monks of Christ-Church, and
was for the provision of their Garments. And if you will discover how this was
rated in the twentieth year of William the Conqueror, the Record of Doomsday
Book will discover: In Limwarled, says the Note, and in Hundred de Hamme habent
Monachi Sanctae Trinitatis de vestitu eorum 1. Manerium de VVerehorne 1.
Sulling, and est appretiatum LXs. This Manor being by the Monks and Prior of
the Convent aforesaid surrendered into the Hands of Henry the eighth in the
twenty ninth year of his reign, it lay couched in the Demeasn of the Crown,
until the seventh year of K. James, and then it was by Grant passed away to
Tho. Paget, and Thomas Twisden who in opposition to the other Moity which was
of temporal Interess, called this, Werehorn Twisden: and they not long after
passed it away to Sir Thomas Tufton, Grandfather to the right honorable John
Earl of Thanet the instant Possessor of it.

Tinton in VVerehorne was a Manor which anciently belonged to the Priory of
Horton near Hieth; but upon the suppression all its Demeasn being annexed to
the Crown, this was lodged there until the beginning of K. James, and then it
was by that Prince conveyed by Grant to Sir William Sidley of the Frierie in
Alresford, Grandfather to Sir Charles Sidley Baronet the present Lord of the
Fee.

Capell in this Parish gave Seat and Surname to a Family so called, whose
Demeasn lay spread into Ivie-Church, Linton, Boxley, Horsmonden, Capell by
Brechley, Capell in the Isle of Shepey and this Parish. John de Capell
flourished here in the reign of Henry the third, who was (as appears by the
Leiger Book of Boxley) an eminent Benefactor to that Covent; and from him
descended Sir William at Capell, an eminent Knight of this County, in the
reign of Edward the third and Richard the second, who left it to his Son
Richard at Capell: and he dying without Issue, in the fifteenth year of Richard
the second, Sir John Orlanston in right of his Wife, who was his Sister and
Coheir entered upon his Inheritance at this place, and left it to his Son
Richard Orlanston Esquire; who deceased without Issue in the seventh year of Henry
the fifth: and so upon the Division of the Estate, William Scot who had
espoused Joan one of the Sisters and Coheirs, was planted in the Inheritance
of this place; and from whom it is now devolved to be the possession of Edward
Scot of Scots-Hall Esquire.

Ham is another eminent Manor in this Parish which gives Name to the whole
Hundred, and was, as high as the Ray of any Intelligence will guide us to
discover, folded up in the paternal Demeasn of the ancient Family of Orlanston.
William de Orlanston obtained a Charter of Free Warren to his Lands at
Orlanston, VVerehorne, and other places, in the fifty first of Henry the third,
and being fenced in with this Immunity, it came along by the Steps of Several
Descents to Richard Orlanston Son of Sir John Orlanston, who dying without
Issue in the seventh year of Henry the fifth, as is manifest, Rot. Esc. Number.
16. Joan one of his two Sisters matched to William Scot of Scots-Hall; and
Margaret the second, wedded to William Parker of Parkers in this Parish, became
his two Coheirs: and upon breaking the Estate by mutual Division into parcels,
this in the second year of Henry the sixth was annexed to the Patrimony of
Scot, and from him did the Thread of successive Descent transmit to Mr. Edward
Scot of Scots-Hall Esquire, who still by paternal right enjoys the Inheritance
of it.

Parkers is another Manor which next summons our remembrance, which afforded a
Surname, as it gave an Habitation to a Family so styled. Edward Parker held
Lands in Werehore, Westerham, and other places at his Decease, which was in the
ninth year of Edward the second, as appears, Rot. Esc. Number. 1.14. and in this
Name was the Title and Inheritance constant until the reign of Henry the
eighth, and then I find by several Court-rolls one John Engham to be fixed by
purchase in the possession: and in this Family did it remain uninterrupted
until the beginning of K. James, and then it was by Sale conveyed to Tailor,
who not long after demised it to Collins; from whom not long since it came by
purchase to Squire, and he not many years since passed it away to Dr.......
Kingsley Archdeacon of Canterbury, in whose Descendants the Propriety of it,
is still resident.

Hampton Coclescombe is the last place considerable in Werehorne; which gave
Name originally to a Family which here had their Habitation, and likewise were
possessors of much Land at Westwell, and other places; and having lived here
many Descents, the possession of this place at last devolved to John Hampton,
who about the latter end of Edward the fourth passed it away to John May of
Bibrook: whose successor John May concluding about the latter end in a Daughter
and Heir called Alice matched to John Edolph it came to be the Inheritance of
that Family; but did not long confess the Signory of it; for this John Edolph
deceased without Issue-male, and left it to his sole Daughter Elizabeth matched
to William Wilcock, who expiring likewise in two Female Heirs, Martha matched
to Edward Ratcliff Doctor of Physic, and Physician to Q. Elizabeth, and K.
James; and the second matched to William Andrews, they divided this Manor as
parcel of his Inheritance. William Andrews in the twenty ninth year of Q.
Elizabeth, demised his proportion to Rowland Bridges and Robert Philipson. And
Edward Radcliff alienated that part of it which accrued to him in the forty
third year of Q. Elizabeth to Edward Rolt and Andrew Mersh.

Westerham gives Name to the whole Hundred wherein it is placed, and was in
elder Times the patrimony of a Family called Camville, which was of some
eminence in this Track. William de Camville, and G. de Camville entered England
with William the Conqueror. Thomas de Camville was one of the Recognitores
magnae Assisae in the seventh year of K. John: and Geffrey de Camville was with
Edward the first at the Siege of Carlaverock in Scotland; in the twenty eighth
year of his reign, and there received the Order of Knighthood, and here this
Family concluded: for afterward I find this Manor in the Hands of the Abbot
of Westminster, who obtained a Market weekly to be held at this place on the
Monday and a Fair yearly upon the Vigil, the day, and day after the Nativity of
our Lady, as appears, Pat. 25. Edwardi tertii Number. 32. And here it remained
with their revenue, until the Suppression of that Cloister in the reign of
Henry the eighth; and then being rent away by that Tempest, it was in the
thirty second year of that Prince, granted to Sir John Gresham, which
Concession was again confirmed to the Lady Beatrix Gresham, Widow of Sir Thomas
Gresham his Son by Queen Elizabeth, from whom it is now devolved to Marmaduke
Gresham Esquire; the Heir apparent of the Family.

Broxham is a place of eminent Account in this Parish. John de Insula or Isley,
was Lord of this Manor, and obtained a Charter of Free Warren here, in the
eleventh year of Edward the second. After the Isleys were gone out, the Ashways
successively stepped into the possession. Stephen de Ashway obtained a License to
enclose a Park here in the forty first year of Edward the third, the Characters
and Relics of which are not so generally demolished and disparked by Time,
but that they are still obvious to a Curious eye* yet this Privilege could not
fix it long in this Family; for about the latter end of Richard the second, I
find it by Sale cast into the possession of Edward Lord Clinton, who held it at
his Decease, which was in the first year of Henry the fourth, Rot. Esc. Number.
16. But here likewise the Title was as volatile and transitory; for about the
Beginning of Henry the sixth, John Lord Clinton passed it away to Thomas
Squerie, who was Lord of Squeries-court in this Parish, and was descended from
John de Squerie: whom I find by some old Evidences to have lived at Westerham,
in the Reign of Henry the third, and it is possible, either erected or very
much augmented the Seat called Squeries-court. The Arms viz. a Squirrel
brousing on a Hasell-nut, are depicted in very ancient colored Glass in
Westerham-church: but this Thomas abovementioned, dying in the seventeenth
year of Henry the sixth, without Issue-male, Margaret his eldest Daughter
matched to Sir William Cromer, and Dorothy his youngest, wedded to Richard
Mervin of Fontels in Wiltshire, became his two Coheirs: and upon the division
of the estate, Squeries-court and Broxham were annexed to the patrimony of
Cromer, in which Family they made their abode until the reign of Henry the
eighth; and then William Cromer Esquire, having by some Delinquencie forfeited
them to the Crown, that Prince granted them to Thomas Cawarden or Carden
Esquire; from which Family about the middle of Queen Elizabeth's reign, they
went off by Sale to Beresford, who almost in our memory sold Squeries-Court to
Sir George Stroud, and he some few years since, alienated it to Thomas Lambert
Esquire, who has lately demised it to Mr...... Leech: but Broxham was conveyed
to Mr. Tho. Petley of Vilston, whose Grandchild Mr...... Petley is the Heir
apparent of it.

Well-street and Gaysam in this Parish, did anciently confess the two Families
of Atwell and Shelley for its proprietaries. William Atwell held Wellstreet, as
appears by an ancient Court-roll, in the thirty fifth of Edward the third, and
Thomas Shelley in the forty sixth year of the same Monarch, settles Gaysam by
Testament on Thomas his Son and Heir, who in the eighth year of Richard the
second, conveys it to his Son Thomas Shelley, whose Descendant about the latter
end of Henry the sixth, demised it to John Potter; and his Successor about the
Beginning of Henry the fourth, purchased VVellstreet of the Heirs of Cothull,
and is in the List of five of this Family who lie buried in Westerham-church,
and this Branch of the Name here, was descended from John Potter, who held
Lands at Dertford the twelfth of Edward the second, and whose posterity
continued Lords of these two places, until the Beginning of King James, and
then...... Potter dying without Issue-male, his only Daughter and Heir brought
them to be the Inheritance of Sir John Rivers of Chafford, who not many years
since, demised his Interest in Well-street, to Mr. Thomas Smith of Milk-street
in London Scrivener.

Valons in this Parish was formerly the Mansion of a Family called in old
datelesse Deeds de Valoniis, and in English Valons: but the greatest Honor
which accrued to it, was, that Islip Abbot of Westminster, bought it in the
reign of Henry the seventh of Casinghurst, a Family which had been possessed of
it many Descents before, and gave it to his Servant William Middleton, who
much improved it with Building. And in his Family it was resident until the
latter end of Queen Elizabeth, and then it was conveyed to James Verseline
descended out of Flanders, who gave it with his Daughter Anne Verseline, to
Peter Manning, from which Family not many years since it passed away to Mr.
Randall Manning of London, whose Son and Heir Mr. Thomas Manning is now in the
enjoyment of it.

Werd or Werth in the Hundred of Eastry is a Parish if you consider it in its
precincts, but narrow; if in position, low and unhealthful, or, if again in its
number of Communicants, not considerable; but yet there are two places within
the Ambuts and Boundaries of it which claim some consideration. The first is
the Manor of Sandowne, which was anciently the Perots, who held this Manor as
the private Deeds of this Name and Family inform me, as high as the Reign of
Henry the third. Thomas de Perot died possessed of it in the fourth year of
Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 31. and then it was found fenced in, and
fortified with these privileges; It had Infangthef and Outfangthef, Toll and
Theme, Sac and Soc, Tumbrell and Pillory and other Franchises of the like
Complexion; but after this, the Tenure was but of a brief Duration in this
Name; for the Female Heir of Perot brought this Manor with much other Land to
Langley of the County of Warwick, and about the Reign of Henry the fifth there
was a match between this Family and Peyton of the County of Cambridge, which
match at length brought this Manor to descend to this Family. For Edward
Langley of Knolton Esquire, deceasing about the beginning of Henry the eighth
without Issue; Sir Robert Peyton of Peyton Hall entered upon this and other
Lands as his Heir at Law; and he assigned it to his second Son John Peyton
Esquire, from whom it is now descended to Sir Thomas Peyton Baronet, the
instant proprietary of it.

Before I leave this Discourse of Sandowne, I must inform the Reader that the
Family of Peyton above mentioned and that of Ufford were primitively one, and
bore the same paternal Coat, were known by the same Name, and were both deduced
from the same Root and Original, Ex Autograph's penes Dom. Tho. Peyton
Baronettum.
only Peyton was the elder House. Now the ground on which the Mutation of the
Name was established, was briefly this; John de Peyton flourished in the reign
of Henry the second, and left four Sons; whereof the three eldest were named
John, Robert, and John: to John the eldest, he gave his Manor of Peyton lying
extended into Stoke Neyland, Boxford, and Ramsholt Parishes in Suffolk: to
Robert his second Son he gave his Manor of Ufford lying in Suffolk likewise,
who altered his Name from Peyton, and assumed that of Ufford, a Name borrowed
from that Signory of which he was become newly possessor, and from him the Name
of Ufford was communicated to the Earls of Suffolk and other persons of eminent
Repure in those Generations wherein they flourished. John de Peyton the third
Brother, by Deed without Date demises all his Interest in Boxford to his elder
Brother John de Peyton (by that Name he there calls him:) which justifies nor
only the Antiquity but the Seniority of this Family of Peyton before that of
Ufford. And from John de Peyton the elder above mentioned are the Peytons of
Cambridgeshire, and Sir Tho. Peyton of Knolton Baronet originally descended.

Lidde in ancient Records written Hlyden is a second Manor in Werd of
considerable Account, ever since it was given at the Request of Janibert the
Archbishop by K. Offa in the year 874 to the Monks of Christ-Church (as the
Records of that Church discover to me) under the Notion of three Sullings or
Ploughlands. And the Instrument which confirmed this Donation, was signed with
the Marks that is Crosses of Offa the King, Janibert the Archbishop, Kenedrith
the Queen, three other Bishops, five other Abbots, Duke Edbald, and eleven
other principal Persons or Noblemen. And that this was the manner of Signature
in elder Times, that is, the affixing of Crosses to all public Instruments and
other original Donations, is most certain; For Sealing came into England with
Edward the Confessor, who being bred up in Normandy, in which Province, and in
France the Use of affixing Seals to Deeds had been in Use long before his Time,
introduced that Custom and way of Signature into this Nation, as being more
conspicuous and distinguishable than that of Crosses, or those other ways of
confirming of Grants of Land, either to the Church or to secular Uses, which
was either per Collocationem Gladii seu Cultelli supra Altar, by the placing
or laying a Sword or Knife upon the Altar, whereby those which did make
Donations of Land did tacitly insinuate that their Honor was involved in their
Conscience, or else per Traditionem Surculi vel stipitis, which Custom is yet
observed in our Copyhold Land, where Surrenders are made by delivery of a
Turfe, Twig, or white Wand. But sealing with Coats of Arms, was not brought in,
until the reign of Edward the first, but were borne by persons of Honor on
their Tabards or Surcoats: two Examples of which I have seen, one of William
Warren Earl of Pembroke, who in the second year of Henry the second, sealed
with the Figure of a Chivaler on Horseback; his Caparisons, Tabard, and Shield,
being all Checquee, the paternal Coat of this Family; the other was of Richard
Curzon of Croxall in Derbyshire, who in the reign of King John, stands in a
Window pourtrayed in his Surcoat, surmounted with a Bend, charged with a
Martlet. And this was done in Imitation of the Heralds, who wore the Arms of
those Princes they serv^d on their Tabards, as Badges to distinguish them from
the Heralds of other Princes, either in the Time of War or Peace. Indeed Seals
in higher Ages, were of that sacred Estimate, that being lost, they were
decryed by the owners, least they might be affixed to any surreptitious
Instrument, which might prejudice either their Fame or Estate. And in the
interval of their Absence or Loss, the Owners abovesaid were accustomed to
Seal with the Seal of the Bishop of the Diocese, or else with that of the next
adjacent Abbot, all Deeds and Instruments, either of Public or private
Interess. But to return: this Donation of Offa's, though thus secured and
strengthened, could not shelter this Manor, from the Rage of ahat Tempest,
which, in the twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth, like a Whirlwind caught it
up in the Patrimony of the Church, and dropped it into the Revenue of the Crown,
where it lay until Queen Elizabeth, in the Beginning of her Reign, passed it
away by Grant to William Lovelace Esquire, Sergeant at Law, whose Son Sir
William Lovelace, not long after, demised it by Sale to Sir John Smith,
Grandfather to Philip Viscount Strangford, who now enjoys it.

Wickham Brews in the Hundred of Downhamford, distinguished from other places
of that Name, by the Addition of the Surname of Brews, which Family were Lords
thereof. In the twentieth year of William the Conqueror, Odo Bishop of Baion
and Earl of Kent, held this place of the Gift of his half Brother which was
that Prince; and Trendle Park adjoining there, was a Composition between the
Archbishop and this Man, for certain Land of the said Archbishop, to be
enclosed and included within the said Park at Trendley: which signifies thus
much unto us, that Woodstock which boasts it self, to be the first enclosed
Park of England, was not so ancient as this at Trendley. In Times of a more
modern Character, that is, in those which commence from the reign of Henry the
third, it acknowledged the Brewses Barons of Brember in Sussex to be its
proprietaries, who engrafted their own Name upon it, which has sprouted out,
and flourished upon it until this Day. William de Brewosa or de brewe held it,
and was several times summoned to sit in Parliament as Baron, in the reign of
King Edward the first, and Edward the second, and dyed in the ninth year of the
last Prince, Rot. Esc. Number. 204. After this Family had deserted the possession,
which was about the Beginning of Edward the third, it became the Inheritance of
many of the most eminent Nobility of this Kingdom. I shall represent them out
of some ancient Court-rolls in a Compendious Series. Edmund Plantagenet Earl of
Kent held it in the fourth year of Edward the third. William Longspey had it in
the the twentieth year of the abovesaid Prince, and paid an auxiliary supply
for it at making the Black Prince Knight. John Earl of Kent dyed seized of it
in the twenty sixth year of Edw. the third. Thomas Holland Earl of Kent, and
Joan his Wife, Sister and Coheir of the abovementioned Earl, were possessed of it
in the thirty fifth year of Edward the third. Lucie Wife of Edmund Holland Earl
of Kent, was seized of it in the second year of Henry the sixth. After whom it
devolved to Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, and he held it in the third year of
Henry the sixth. Joan the Wife of Sir John Gray one of the Sisters and Coheirs
of the abovesaid Edmund, was invested in the possession in the fourth year of
the abovesaid Prince. Not long after this, it came to own the Signory of the
Tiptofts, and continued fastened to their patrimony, until the renth year of
Edward the fourth. When John Tiptoft Earl of Worcester, being empeached of
close Confederacy and Combination with the abovesaid Prince, then forced into
Exile, was by the Parliament then principally molded out of the Lancastrian
Faction, attainted and beheaded, and his estate here confiscated to the Crown,
and there was lodged until the first year of Queen Elizabeth; and then it was
granted to Anthony Brown Viscount Montague, who in the year 1592 deceased, and
left it to his Son and Heir Anthony Brown Viscount Montague, and he settled it
upon his second Son Mr. Stanislaus Brown, who now is in the enjoyment of it.

East-wickham is situated in the Hundred of Little and Lesnes, and celebrates
the memory of the noble Family of Montchensey, and was wrapped up in their
Demeasn. William de Montchensey, held it at his Death, which was in the fifty
second year of Henry the third, and left it to his Sole Daughter and Heir
Dionis, matched to Hugh de Vere, but he dying without Issue in the seventh year
of Edward the second, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 51. the Title and possession
diverted to William de Valentia Earl of Pembroke, half Brother by the Mothers
side to Henry the third, who had matched with Joan Sister and Heir to William
de Montchensey before named; from whom it descended to his Son Aymer de
Valence, who dying without Issue, Isabell one of his Sisters and Coheirs who
was affianced to Laurence de Hastings, summoned to sit in Parliament by Edward
the third, as Earl of Pembroke, upon the approportioning the estate, entitled
her Husband to this Manor; and from him was the Title carried down, to his
Grandchild John de Hastings Earl of Pembroke, who was in possession of it at
his Decease, which was in the thirteenth year of Richard the second, Rot. Esc.
Number. 30. And Reginald Gray was found to be his Heir, in which Family it
remained, until the Beginning of Henry the sixth; and then it was passed away
to William Lord Lovell who was often summoned to sit as Baron in Parliament,
in that Prince's reign: and from him it came down to his Grandchild John Lord
Lovell, summoned to sit in Parliament as Baron in the second year of Edward the
fourth; and he about the Beginning of his reign, passed it away to John Lord
Howard, afterward created Duke of Norfolk, who being a close and eager
Complice of Richard the third, sunk in his Ruins, in the Battle commenced at
Bosworth; and Henry of Richmond, having by that successeful Combat ascertained
himself to the English Scepter, seized upon this Manor by Escheat, in the
first year of his Reign, as relating to a person who had actually appeared in
Arms against him: and being thus united to the Crown, it lay couched in its
Revenue, until the seventh year of Edward the sixth; and then it was granted
to Sir Martin Bows; who not long after passed it away to Alderman Oliff of
London, who left it to Joan his Sole Daughter and Heir, matched to John Leigh
Son and Heir of Nicholas Leigh of Addington in Surrey Esquire, Father to Sir
Oliff Leigh, who much enhaunsed the Magnisicence of the ancient Fabric, with
increase of Building, and left it to his Son Sir Francis Leigh, whose Widow the
Lady Christian Leigh, in Right of Dower, is now in Possession of the Signory of
it.

VVest-Wickham in the Hundred of Rokesley, is much enobled by being anciently
entitled to the possession of the eminent Family of Huntingfield. Peter de
Huntingfield, held it, who was Sheriff of Kent, the eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth years of Edward the third, and is registered in the Scroles of those
Kentish Gentlemen, who accompanied Edward the first, in his Victorious
Expedition into Scotland, in the twenty eighth year of his reign, when he
reduced Carlaverock by a successeful Seige, for which his merit was repayed
with the Honor of Knighthood, his Son and Heir was Walter de Huntingfield, who
in the eleventh year of Edward the second, obtained a Charter of Free Warren to
his Manor of West-Wickham, a Market weekly on the Monday, and a Fair yearly on
the Vigil and day of St. Mary Magdalen, as appears Pat. 11. Edwardi secundi,
Number. 23. And left it invested with these Privileges to his Son and Heir Sir
John de Huntingfield, who paid Aid for three Knights Fees, which he held in
this County, at making the Black Prince Knight, and was a Man of that Eminence,
that he was summoned to sit as Baron in Parliament, the thirty sixth year of
Edward the third, and several other Times, during the Reign of the abovenamed
Prince. William de Huntingfield this man's Son, was summoned likewise many Times
to sit as Baron in Parliament about the latter end of Edward the third, but
dyed without Issue, so that Joan and Alize Huntingfield his Cozens, matched to
Copledike and Norwich, were his Heirs: and by an old Deed, I find that one John
Copledike held this Manor by Right of Partition, the last year of Richard the
second; but it was not long after this fixed in the Patrimony of this Family;
for in the seventeenth year of Flenry the sixth, Thomas Squerrie died possessed
of it, and left it to his Son and Heir John Squerrie, who dying without Issue
in the fourth year of Edward the fourth. Dorothy one of his two Sisters and
Coheirs entitled her Husband Richard Mervin upon the Division of the Estate to
the propriety of this Manor; and he not long after passed it away to Richard
Scrope, who in the seventh year of Edward the fourth alienated it by Fine to
Ambrose Creseacre, who not long after transmitted it by Sale to Henry Heyden
Esquire, to whom the principal part of the ancient. Pile now visible, ows its
Erection, and from him did it devolved to that eminent Scholar and Soldier
Justice of the Peace, and Captain of the trained Bands of this County in the
Reign or Queen Elizabeth, Sir Christopher Heydon, who about the latter end of
that Princess passed it away to Sir Samuel Lennard, Father to Sir Stephen
Lennard, who is entitled to the present propriety of it.

Wymingswould in the Hundred of Wingham, contains within the Circuit or Limits
of it an ancient Seat called Nethersole, from its situation near some Pool or
descending Pond; and was as high as the Time of K. John and Henry the third,
the possession of a Family which was represented to the world under this
Surname; for as it appears by the Original Deeds and Evidences which fortify
the Title of this Mansion, Richard de Nethersoll flourished here about the
Government of the abovesaid Monarchs, and from him was it by a perpetuated
Succession chained together by an uninterrupted Link of Descent brought down to
the days of Henry the eighth, and then I find by a Roll of the Nethersolls in
the Hands of Mr. Nethersoll of Canterbury not long since deceased, that it was
the Inheritance of one John Nethersoll Esquire, one that retained to the Court
of Henry the eighth, and a person whom that Prince did by especial Indulgence
license even in his presence for some distemper in his Head occasioned by some
accidental Circumstances, indutum esse Pileo, to be covered with a Cap, which
certainly both in elder and modern times, was a symptom either of Honor or
Liberty. For the snatching off the Cap or Pileus of Tarquinius Priscus by an
Eagle, and the placing it on his Head again, was by the Augurs interpreted as a
presage of his future possessing the Roman Diadem. When slaves received their
manumission they were said to be ad Pileum vocati, their liberty was
demonstrated to be completed by putting on a Cap. The Gladiators anciently for
their magnanimity or personal Courage expressed in mutual Conflicts between
themselves in public Theaters were rewarded as a Guerdon of their Victory vel
Palma, Rude, seu Pilo. The Lacones being made free Denisons of Sparta more to
exemplify their achieved Liberty, never went into the Field against the
Common Enemy but Pileati: Amongst the Africans the placing of the Pileus or Cap
upon the top of a Spear was a tacit citation or summons to Liberty, and an
Intimation to shake off the Fetters of Tyranny. Erasmus in his Chiliads calls
the Cap spectatae virtutis Insigne, and from this he conjectures, that the
putting on of Caps on the Heads of Judges, Doctors and Masters of Art, when
they were invested with the above mentioned Degrees, derived its first
Original, which custom is still in Force in our public Comitia, or
Commencements at the two Universities of Cambridge and Oxford; and likewise in
our Courts of Judicature at the Creation or Investiture of Sergeants at Law:
But to return into that Track from whence this Discourse has made me straggle:
As the Seat was anciently folded up in the Revenue of Nethersoll; so it is
still, mauger all the vicissitudes of Chance, wrapped up in that Propriety
which relates to the Descendants of this Name and Family.

Wingham gives Name to the whole Hundred where it is placed, and was in elder
Times one of those eminent Manors, which augmented the Revenue of the
Archbishops of Canterbury, and being by an unjust Detention ravished away, it
was by the indulgent Piety of K. Edmund restored in the year 941. If you will
see how it was rated in the Time of the Conqueror, Doomsday Book will give
you this Prospect of it. Wingham (says that Record) est Manerium Archiep. and
T. E. R. defendebat se pro XL Sullings, and nunc pro XXX and valet C lb. I find
nothing memorable of this Manor after this, but that it was enchanged in the
twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth, by Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury for
other Lands with the Crown; and continued with the Royal Demeasn until the
middle of K. James, and then it was conveyed by Sale to the City of London,
which City not many years since passed it away to the instant Owner Sir William
Couper Knight and Baronet.

Wingham had the Grant of a Market procured to it in the seventh year of Henry
the third, by the mediation of Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury. The
College of Wingham was founded by John de Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury in
the year 1278, to be a College or Seminary of Secular Priests, the Head of
which Fraternity was called Praepositus. This upon the suppression being with
its whole Revenue invested in the Crown, K. Henry the eighth granted the
College to Sir Henry Palmer (descended from an ancient Family of that Surname
in Sussex) Ancestor to Sir Henry Palmer Baronet, now proprietary of it.

Wenderton is an ancient Seat in this Parish (eminent for its excellent Air,
Situation, and prospect) which for many hundreds of years had owners of that
Surname, one of whom called John Wenderton is famous in Fox's Martyrologie for
the penance imposed upon him by William Courtney Archbishop of Canterbury, at
his Castle of Saltwood, in the year 1390 for being refractory in the Discharge
of some Services which were due to his Manor of Wingham. The last of this Name
which enjoyed this Seat was John Wenderton, who in the first year of Henry the
eighth passed it away to William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and he upon
his Decease which was about the year 1533 gave it to his Brother Hugh Warham,
and his Successor Hugh Warham about the beginning of K. James transplanted his
right in it by Sale into William Manwood Esquire, and he about the beginning of
K. Charles conveyed it to Vincent Den Gentleman, who left it to his Nephew
Mr. Thomas Den of Grays Inn, who dying without Issue settled it by Will on
his Brother John Den of the Inner Temple Esquire, who likewise deceased
without Issue, and bequeathed it to his four Maiden Sisters. Roger Lukyn
Gentleman who matched with one of them purchased the Remainder of the other
three, and so is become now sole Proprietary of it.

Twitham in this Parish gave Seat and Surname to an eminent Family in this
Track; Alan de Twitham is recorded in the Register of those remarkable Kentish
Gentlemen, who supported the Cause and Quarrel of Richard the first at the
Seige of Acon; and having continued many Descents Possessors of this Manor,
the Name at last determined in a Female Heir called Isabel, who by matching
with Richard Oxenden united Twitham to the Demeasn of that Family, where the
Title has ever since made so constant and uninterrupted an abode, that it is
still the Inheritance of Mr. Henry Oxenden of Brook place.

Brook place is the last place of estimate in this Parish, which in elder Times
was wrapped up in the Inheritance of Wenderton, and having continued many
Descents interlinked with this Family, the Name and Title found one Sepulcher
together for Jane Wenderton the Heir General of the Family by matching with
Richard Oxenden Gentleman fixed it in his Inheritance, and he much enhaunsed
this ancient Seat with Additional Improvements, and from him the Right of
Descent has now made it the Patrimony of Mr. Henry Oxenden.

Whitstaple gives Name to the whole Hundred which surrounds it, and was a
Branch of that ample Patrimony, which increased the Revenue of Alex. de Baliol,
E. of Atholl, and he held this and a place called Grafton in this Parish, as
likewise a wood called Northwood not far distant, in the Reign of Henry the
third, and left it to his Son and Heir John Earl of Athol, who having with an
unsuccessful zeal endeavored to support the sinking Interest of the Kingdom
of Scotland, against the violent Eruptions of Edw. the first, which like an
impetuous Inundation, sought to bear down all the Glory of that Nation, into an
irrecoverable Ruin, was in an unfortunate Encounter made Captive by that
Prince, and being attainted of high Treason, and Executed, his Estate here by
Escheat devolved to the Crown, and was by Edward the second, in the ninth of
his reign granted to Bartholomew Lord Badelesmere: but he having again lost it
by his Revolt and Defection in the sixteenth and seventeenth years of that
Prince, it revolved to the Crown and continued there, until K. Edward the third
in the second year of his Reign restored it to Bartholomew de Badelesmer his
Son, who died in the twelfth year of the abovesaid Prince, and left it to his
Brother Giles de Badelesmer, and he deceasing without Issue it accrued by Mawde
one of his Sisters and Coheirs to be the Inheritance of John Vere Earl of
Oxford, and he held it at his Death, which was in the thirty fourth year of
Edw. the third, and to this Family it remained by the Links of many Descents
successively fastened, until at last that Revolution which is made by Sale cast
it into the possession of Phineux; the last of which who enjoyed it was John
Phineux Esquire, who concluded in a Daughter and Heir called Elizabeth, who by
matching with Sir John Smith of Ostenhanger, knit it to his Estate, from whom
by the Devolution of Descent it is now come to confess for proprietary the
right honorable Philip Viscount Strangford his Grandchild.

Secondly, there is Chestfield, which was the Mansion of a Family which bore
that Surname, and although I can trace none higher by any public Record then
James Chestfield, who paid respective Aid for it at the making the Black Prince
Knight, as is manifest by the Book of Aid collected in the twentieth of Edward
the third, yet it is upon possible Conjectures to be argued that they were
far more ancient here, because they assumed their Denomination from this
Seat; from Chestfield about the latter end of the Government of Richard the
second, it came over by purchase to Henry Reyner; but whether he issued from
Borden, or the Reyners of Borden from him, I cannot discover; but it is very
probable he determined in four Daughters and Coheirs matched to Edmund Meade,
Jo. Badkin, John Reynolds, and John Springate, who concurred in one united
Consent, and by one common conveyance demised their Interest in it to John
Roper of St. Dunstans; from whom Edward Roper Esquire, now of Well-hall in
Eltham, claims the instaut Demeasn and Signory of it.

The third is Grimgill so vulgarly called, but originally and more properly
Greenshield, for so it is in Records of an elder Aspect always written. It was
the Seat of a Family that was known by that Appellation, and although the
Breviat of the private Evidences which relate to it, discover to us owners of
the Name no higher then John Greenshield, who flourished here about the
entrance into the reign of Henry the sixth, and who was Father to Henry
Greenshield, whose Will is Registered at Canterbury, and which bears Date from
the last of Edward the fourth; yet it is more then probable that they were
eminent here long before, because the above-recited John and Henry
Greenshields, were Lords of no despicable or narrow fortune not only here, but
about Sandwich and Wodnesborough likewise; from Greenshield by sale the
propriety passed over to Quekes of Quekes in Birchington, who suddenly after
being extinguished in a Daughter and Heir, all his Interest in Grimgill, was
with her transported in Marriage to Crispe, originally extracted out of the
County of Gloucester; and Nicholas Crispe Esquire held his Shrievalty here,
which was in the second year of Q. Elizabeth; from Crispe it was by purchase
conveyed into the Revenue of Paramour, where after it had for several years
been fixed, it was very lately taken off from this Family, and by Sale made the
Possession of Mr. Twiman of Canterbury.

Fourthly, here was Condies-place which was the Residence of John Condie, who
had in the reign of Edward the third contracted upon himself, (which is yet
indelibly fixed upon his Memory) a Character of high Account, because he had
made an eminent Enemy of the Kings Captive in Congressu Bellico, those are the
words of the Record in a personal Combat; for which he had thirty pound per
Annum settled upon him out of the Kings Profits of the Staple at Canterbury by
Charter or Grant from Edward the third dated the seventh day of July in the
fourteenth year of his reign. Now if you will know, where this memorable Action
was commenced, the same Record will inform you, that the Scene of it was laid
at Swine in Normandy: But to proceed: this Man not long after he was thus
adorned with these Tophies of Honor, paid that Debt to Nature, which we all
owe, and left Condies Hall to his Son William Condy, who dying without any
lawful Issue, Margaret Condy one of his Sisters became his Coheir, who by her
espousals with Robert Grubbe made Condies Hall parcel of his Demeasn; but he
likewise in the Age subsequent to this determining in Females, Agnes one of his
Coheirs being wedded to John Isaac of Blackmanbery in Bridge, did much swell
and improve his Patrimony, with that Additional Estate she united to his, and
here in this Name was the possession for sundry Descents resident, even till
our Fathers Memory. But here for want of Intelligence, I can proceed no
farther; and indeed the Place being fallen from its original Name by Disuse,
and that Repute it was under, when it was possessed by so noble proprietaries, is
now only fit to find the Common Sepulcher of Oblivion.

Wicheling in the Hundred of Eyhorne, was folded up in the Patrimony of the
noble Family of Cobham of Sterborough issued out from the Cobhams of Cobham
Hall, and of this Family was Reginald de Cobham, who was frequently summoned to
sit in Parliament as Baron, in the reign of Edward the third, and from this
worthy person did this Manor by successive Devolution come down to Thomas Lord
Cobham of Sterborough, who deceased in the eleventh of Edward the fourth, and
left his Estate here and elsewhere, to Anne his sole Daughter and Heir marched
to Edward Lord Borough called to sit in Parliament as Baron of Sterborough and
Gainsborough, in the reign of Henry the seventh, and from him both the Title of
Baron and of this Manor flowed down successively to his Grandchild Thomas Lord
Borough, who passed away the Inheritance to Edward Filmer Esquire, whose
Grandchild Sir Edward Filmer in relation to that purchase, challenges the
instant right and revenue of it.

Willesborough in the Hundreds of Chart and Longbridge has nothing to make it
memorable but that it was a principal piece of that revenue which in this
County related to the noble and ancient Family of Brent; of which was Falcatius
de Brent, a man whom our English History pencils out to us under a Character of
the most perfect Courage and Magnanimity, though disordered with some wild
Sallies and Excesses: which peradventure may be attributed to the Evaporations
of youth, which is always volatile and airy, rather then to any settled and
contracted Habit of vicious Distempers, and mutinous passions which was lodged
within Him. But to proceed: when Willesborough had by a successive thread of
many Ages been guided along through several Descents down to John Brent, he
died and left John Brent his Heir, who expiring without Issue, Margaret his
eldest Sister became the Inheritrix of all his possessions, and she being
matched with John Dering Esquire of Surrenden Dering, this place by Female
right became transplanted into the Patrimony of that Name and Family, and Sir
Edward Dering about the year 1635, conveyed it to Robert Scot of Canterbury
Esquire, whose Son and Heir Thomas Scot of Canterbury Esquire is now
proprietary of it.

Wilmington in Hundred of Dartford resolves it self into two Manors which
exact a peculiar Cognizance, and the first is Rue Hill (so it was anciently
written though now by vulgar Acceptance it is called Row Hill.) It was in
Ages of a higher Track, the patrimony of an illustrious and generous Family
called Gise, who were in those times as eminent for the largeness of their
possessions, as they were for the Antiquity of their Extraction; and from hence
were the Gises of the Counties of Hereford and Gloucester originally sprouted
out. Anselmus de Gise had a Charter of Free Warren granted to his Lands at Rue
Hill in Wilmington, in the twenty second year of Edward the first; but it
appears the Possession of this place, invested and fortified with this Grant
was not long after united to this Family; for John Gise this man's Grandchild
sold it to Nicholas Brember, who in the twelfth year of Richard the second,
being blasted with an impeachment of high Treason, fell an Oblation to the fury
of those Lords, who upon pretense of asserting the public Liberty, sought to
fetter up the majesty and prerogative of their Prince, within those narrow
Restraints, and Limits which they prescribed to empale it in, and pare off the
power of the Crown (which like Sampson's Locks being shaved Kings remain like
other men.) Upon his attaint Rue Hill resolved into the revenue of the Crown,
and King Richard the second in the fourteenth year of his reign granted it to
Adam Bamme of London, and in his Lineage was the Inheritance of it sundry
Generations wrapped up, till in our Grandfathers memory it was alienated to
Brett; from whose successor the same Alteration rolled the possession not many
years since into Smith.

The second is Highlands which was parcel of the Demeasn of the Knights of St.
John of Jerusalem, and upon the Dissolution of their Alberge here in England,
was granted about the thirty fifth year of Henry the eighth to Sir Thomas
Moile, and Sir Maurice Dennis; the last of which passed away his Concernment in
it to Sir Thomas Moile by whose Daughter and Coheir called Amy Moile, it came
to be possessed by Sir Thomas Kempe; who left it to his Son and Heir Sir Thomas
Kempe who conveyed it to his Brother Mr. Reginald Kempe, who in our Fathers
memory passed it away to Lancelot Bathurst Esquire, Father to Sir Edward
Bathurst, who is the instant proprietary of it.

Wodnesborough lies in the Hundred of Eastrie, and spreads it self into many
places of no despicable Account. First there is Shelving, which was as high as
any Evidence, can waft us to discover, the Demeasn of Houghham of Hougham by
Dover, a Family rooted in as deep Antiquity as any in this Track. Robert de
Hougham is enrolled in an ancient Register of those Kentish Gentlemen, who
supported the cause and Quarrel of Richard the first at the Seige of Acon. Sir
Robert de Hougham his Son died possessed of it in the second year of Edward the
first, and left Robert Hougham his Heir, who determined in Daughters and
Coheirs; so that Benedicta Houghham one of them being married to John
Shelving, this became his Demeasn, where he erected a House, upon which he
fixed his Surname, and called it Shelving, which in those Times was of
considerable Repute, though since by the frequent impressions of Age, it is
shrunk into Decay and Obscurity, from Shelving one Moitie of it by Sale was
transmitted to St. Ledger, and so continued distinguished in the Interest of it,
till both Shelving and St. Ledger did by a mutual Concurrence pass away their
joint right in it to Dynley: where it had not long been Seated, but the like
Fatality transferred the Possession of it to White; and here the Title of it
was as unfixt and unstable also: for from this Family by purchase it was
carried into the Revenue of Knight, who in our memory altered his Interest in
it by Sale to Mr. Solomon Hougham of Sandwich, primitively issued out in a
Collateral Line from Sir Robert Hougham, upon whose late Decease his Son and
Heir Mr. Richard Hougham is now possessor of it.

Ringleton does secondly exact some Remembrance: It was anciently the Interest
of Perot; for Thomas Perot held it at his Death, which was in the fourth year
of Edward the third; but when this Name was extinguished in a Daughter and
Heir, William Langley by matching with Her entitled himself to the Possession
of this place, in which Family the Inheritance for sundry Generations was
settled, till the Vicissitude of Time by Sale conveyed it into the Demeasn of
John White, who was originally a Merchant of the Staple, and did by several
Acts of exemplary Munificence, evidence himself to be a liberal Benefactor to
Canterbury. But long it was not fastened to the Possession of this Name; for his
Successor alienated it to Butler of Heronden in Eastrie, from which Family
Ringleton by the same Mutation was brought to own the Possession of Neame, and
his Son Daniel Neame sold it to Spencer of Sandwich, whose Successor Nicholas
Spencer dying without Issue, his Sister who was wedded to Hughs descended from
Hughs of Middleton Stony in the County of Oxford, who was branched out from the
Hughs of North Wales, by a Relative right deduced from that Alliance, has
planted the present Possession in the Patrimony of that Name and Family.

Thirdly upper Hamwold may fall under a Disquisition, because it was wound up
in the Estate and Propriety of Greenshield, whose principal residence was at
Greenshield in Whitstaple, corruptly called Grimgil, where I have spoken more
largely of this Family: only this I shall add, that Henry Greenshield, who
died in the last year of Edward the fourth, was a munificent Benefactor to the
poor and other indigent and necessitous people of the Town of Sandwich, to whom
he bequeaths by his last Testament very liberal Donations for their relief and
support: After this Family of Greenshield was mouldered away at Hamwold, I find
the Elis's invested in the Possession, but whether by Alliance or Purchase I
cannot discover. After they went out, the Family of Francis was by Purchase
from them, seated in the Inheritance, to whose Interest it was not many years
united, for from them it passed away by Sale to Wilson, where the Title was not
less violate, and cursory; for from Wilson the like Alienation translated the
right of it into Parboe, whose Widow Mrs. Parboe does now enjoy it, as being
made part of her Jointure when first she matched with Parboe.

Fourthly, Grove and upper Hamwold are two little Manors circumscribed
likewise within the Limits of Wodnesborough; and were in the thirty second year
of Ed. the third the Inheritance of Pet. de Goldesburgh, or Goldesborough, but
the Title made no long abode in this Name after this Man's Exit; for both,
about the latter End of Richard the second, were conveyed to Langley of
Knowlton, from whom as sudden a Devolution, about the latter end of Henry the
fixth, passed them over to Sir John White of Canterbury a Merchant of the
Staple, and he died possessed of them in the ninth year of Edward the fourth, as
appears, Rot. Esc. Number. 25. After this Family was worn out, I find Stokes
planted in the Possession; from which Name about the latter end of Henry the
eighth, they came over by Purchase to one Nicholas Mois Gentleman, and when
that Family deserted the Possession which was in our Grandfathers Remembrance
a Fatality proportionate to the former, made them both parcel of the Patrimony
of Everard, by whom not many years since, they were alienated to James to the
Inheritance of which Family they remain yet linked and united.

Fifthly, Poltmans vulgarly called Poultmans yielded both Seat and Surname to a
Family of some Estimate in this Track, who had here a Castellated Mansion,
invested with a Moat, and continued Lords of this Habitation, until Peter
Poltman by descendant right came to be possessed of it, and he about the
fifteenth year of Richard the second conveyed it by Fine to Langley of
Knowlton, in whom the Propriety was settled but until the latter end of Henry
the sixth, and then it was passed away by Sale to Sir John White: who, dying
seized of it in the ninth year of Edward the fourth, by Testament ordered it to
be sold for the improvement of Acts of Charity, and pious Uses, and was
according to the Tenor of his will conveyed by Sale to Boteler of Heronden in
Eastry, and there it made its abode until our Fathers Remembrance, and then it
was passed away to Benskin, in which Family the Title is yet permanent.

Woditon in the Hundred of Kinghamford has three places in it of considerable
Estimate. The first is Gedding which K. Cedwall and Keneldrith his Queen, in
the year of Grace 693 gave to Theodore Archbishop of Canterbury, and the
Covent of Christ-Church in Canterbury, free (as the original Donation informs
me) as Adesham, and was by them afterward assigned to the Sacrist or Sexton of
Christ-Church, for his livelihood and Subsistence, an Office in elder Times of
no contemptible Account in the Repute and Vogue of the Monks of that Cloister;
for the sacred Utensils of the Church were not only committed to his Care and
Custody, but he was likewise to make Preparation for the Celebration of the
Mass, and the performance of other divine and sacred Officers, and because he
might be more active and vigorous in the Managery and execution of his Trust,
these Underofficers were to be subservient and and ministerial to him, their
Catalogue sollows.

1 Custos de Wexhouse. 2 Primus serviens Ecclesiae ad pulsandum. 3 Vigil
Ecclesiae. 4 Plumbarius Sacristae. 5 Duo Clerici Altaris beatae Mariae. 6 Duo
Clerici Tumbae and Martyrii. 7 Quatuor servientes Ecclesiae ad pulsandum. 8
Vitriarius, and Garcio ejus. 9 Ostiarius Chori. 10 Serviens Feretri. 11
Aurifriga and lotrix Ecclesiae.
For which last (the rest being of easy understanding,) I conceive it was one
that either wrought the Church Vestments, or Hangings, and the like, in Gold,
or that refreshed them, when they were dim or tarnished. But to proceed: this
Manor being with the Remainder of the Revenue of the Priory of Christ-Church,
surrendered into the Hands of Henry the eighth, in the twenty ninth year of his
reign, who afterward in the thirty first of his Government granted it to Mr.
Edward Foch of Hells Court in this Parish; from whom it descended to Thomas
Foch of Monkton in the Isle of Thanet Esquire, who deceasing not many years
since gave it to his second Son Major John Foch of London, and he has lately
passed it away to his elder Brother Thomas Foch Esquire.

Hells is a second place of Note, which for diverse Descents, until the reign of
Henry the fourth, confessed no other Proprietaries, but Hells of Hell. Court in
Ash: and then, they abandoning the Possession, it came to be enjoyed by
Merywether, and remained linked to the Patrimony of this Name, until the latter
end of Henry the eighth, and then by a Female Inheritrix is came to confess the
Signory of Foch, in Right of which Alliance it is now the Inheritance of Thomas
Foch Esquire.

Wickham Bushes is another Manor which has its Situation within the Limits of
Woditon, and was, as the Light of the most ancient Evidences does guide us to
believe, the Patrimony of Guldeford; for Henry de Guldeford, (as the Book of
Aid discovers to us) did hold it by Knights Service, of Geffrey de Say, in the
twentieth year of Ed. the third; but in a Descent or two after, this Family was
shrunk away from the possession of this place, and then the ancient and
illustrious Family of Dig of Digge's Court in Berham, was the next which
succeeded in the Propriety and Inheritance, and to this Name was the Title of
this place, by a successive Series of many Generations fastened, till in our
Fathers Memory it was by sale rent off, and by that Alienation linked to the
Revenue of Coppen, in whose Demeasn the Interest of it at this Day continues
included.

Woodchurch in the Hundred of Blackbourn, was the Habitation of a Family of as
deep Root in Antiquity as any in this Track, who extracted their Surname, as
well as borrowed their first Original, from this place. Roger de Woodchurch is
the first who does occur, who in the ancient Evidences and the Deeds of this
place, which are not cloistered within any Date finds a frequent Mention, and
from him (as appears by an old Pedigree of this Family) did it devolve to his
Grandchild Sir Simon de Woodchurch, who is in the Register of those eminent
Persons who accompanied Edward the first in his Victorious and triumphant
Expedition into Scotland, where his Victories entailed upon his Memory the
Character of Malleus Scotorum, but in this Sir Simon: the Name though not the
Male Line determined, for he by matching with Susan, Heir of Henry le Clerk of
Munfidde, brought a large Inheritance to own the Signory of Woodchurch; and his
Successors in Gratitude to a Family which had added so much of splendour, and
annexed so plentiful a Revenue to this Name, altered their paternal Appellation
from Woodchurch to Clerk; and so in all their Deeds subsequent to this Match,
have written Clerk alias Woodchurch ever since. But as all Families have their
Descent and Period, as well as Gradation and Ascent, so had this; for after
this Manor had for so many hundred years continued in this Family which had
been productive of Men which had been planted in places of the greatest
Eminence, by which they were obliged to perform Service to their Country, it
came down at last to Humfrey Clerk Esquire, who about the year 1594, passed it
away by Sale to Walter Harlackenden Esquire; by whose Daughter and Heir called
Deborah Harlackenden, it was united to the Revenue of Sir Edward Hales Knight
and Baronet: upon whose late Decease it is now descended to his Grandchild Sir
Edward Hales Baronet, who is entitled to the instant Signory of it.

Pleurinden in this Parish is a Branch of that Estate which fell under the
Signory of the ancient and Knightly Family of Engham, very frequently in old
Deeds and other Monuments written Edingham, and sometimes Hengham: In a Deed
wherein there is mention of a Match between....... one of the Coheirs of Sir
Stephen de Penchester, and Henry de Cobham, and wherein some Land is conveyed
over to Cobham, there are these Persons recorded to be Testes to it, William de
Savage, William de Our, Otho de Grandison, and Roger de Hengham. The Deed is
very ancient, and though not confined to any strict or precise Date, yet
commences from the reign of Edward the first, and from this Roger did Vincent
Engham Esquire lineally descend, who in the....... year of Q. Elizabeth, passed
it away by Sale to Roger Twisden Esquire, Grandfather to Sir Roger Twisden
Baronet, in whom is fixed the instant Propriety of it.

Tounland is another Manor in Woodchurch which had anciently Owners of that
Surname. Rafe de la Thun died seized of this Manor and other Lands in
Woodchurch the forty third year of Hen. the third: After him I find Richard de
Tunland possessed of it in the reign of Henry the third, and Edward the first;
and had Issue Thomas de Tunl^nd who died seized of it in the fifth year of
Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 13. and left it to his Son and Heir John de
Tunland, who was an eminent Benefactor to the priory of Leeds, to which Covent
he added this Manor to improve their Revenue at the time of his Decease, which
was in the forty seventh year of Edward the third, and here it remained until
the Dissolution, and then it was granted by Henry the eighth to Thomas Lord
Cromwell: and after his Attaint in the thirty second year of his reign, being
escheated, it was in the thirty fifth of Henry the eighth regranted to Sir
Thomas Moile Chancellor of the Court of Augmentation, and he in the thirty
sixth year of Henry the eighth, passed it away by Sale to William Goodwin, and
Tho. Ancos, and they not long after alienated their Right in it to Lucas: in
which Family it continued but until the Beginning of Q. Elizabeth, and then it
was conveyed by Sale to Thomas Godfrey, whose Son James Godfrey in the tenth
year of Q. Elizabeth, transferred it by the like Devolution to Mary Guldford;
and she again in the eleventh year of that Princess demised it to Richard
Guldford, and he not long after sold it away to Shelley of Michelgrove, and
John Shelley as I find by a Court Roll relating to this place, held it in the
eighteenth of Q. Elizabeth, and in the Descendant of this Name and Family is
the Inheritance of it, if I be not misinformed, at this instant placed.

Henherst is the last place considerable in Woodchurch, which was the
possession of a Family of that Denomination, of whom I have spoken at
Stapleherst, where they enjoyed another Manor of this Name, and of which
Family this here was but a Cadet or younger Slip, and was written sometimes
Henherst, and as often in old Deeds Engherst, and continued Owners of this
place, until the reign of Henry the seventh, and then it devolved to Sir Thomas
Hengherst, who was the last of that Name which held this place, for he dying
without Issue Male, Humfrey Wise who had matched with his Daughter and Heir in
her right was invested in the Inheritance of it, but he deceasing likewise
without Issue Male, his sole Inheritrix united it by marriage to the Revenue of
her Husband Mr. Robert Masters, Great Grandfather to Mr. Edward Masters of
Canterbury; in whom the propriety of this place is at this prefent continued.

Henden likewise is an Appendage to Woodchurch, from whence certainly the Name
of Henden originally streamed out, though it be brought down to our Times in so
crooked and perplexed a Chanel, that we cannot discover it in all the wanderings
and Digressions of it, though the Family was made more conspicuous, by Sir
Edward Henden one of the Barons of the Exchequer to the late King Charles: who
for his clear speculation and insight into the deepest and most mysterious
Intrigues of the Municipal Law of England, was commonly called the Picklock of
it. But this is a Diversion: The ancient Proprietaries of Henden, represented
to us by the eldest Records, were the Lords Burwash, very frequently written
Burghherst, and Bartholomew Lord Burwash had a Charter of Free Warren granted
to Henden, in the eighteenth year of Edward the third. And when this Family had
deserted the Possession of this place, the next which successively held it were
the Capells of Capells Court in Ivie-Church, and Richard Capell died seized of
it in the fifteenth year of Richard the second: and here, after it had been for
some Generations fixed, the Name resolved into a Daughter and Heir, who was
matched unto Harlackenden, and so it became twisted into the Revenue of that
Family, and so remained till Deborah Harlackenden the Heir General of Walter
Harlackenden, a Branch of this Stock, by being wedded to Sir Edward Hales
Knight and Baronet, Grandfather to Sir Edward Hales now of Tunstall Baronet,
wound it up in the Demeasn and Interest of that Honorable Family.

The Borough of Harlackenden is situated in this Parish, and has been for many
hundred of years the Patrimonial Demeasn of that Name and Family, as appears by
a Tomb in the Church of Woodchurch, whose Inscription signifies that one of
them lies enterr'd there a little after the Conquest: and though the Character
be in the proportion and Shape of it very much like that which was in use in
the reign of Hen. the fourth, and Henry the fifth, and so makes the Truth of it
disputable, yet to this it is answered, that there was an old Tombstone there
before, with the same Inscription upon it, insculped peradventure in a Saxon
Character, or such an one as was proportionate to that time in which that
person died, who lies there entombed: which being decayed his Successors to
perpetuate and enforce the Memory of so ancient a Predecessor, fixed this Stone
upon his Grave, and, to make the Memorial more obvious, did cause the Epitaph
to be engraven in such a Letter, as was Customary to the Time of that Prince,
in whose reign it was laid upon the Ashes beneath. In Greys Inn Hall by
particular Inspection I have observed the Arms of this Family, viz. Azure A
fesse Ermin between three Lions Heads erased Or, to be painted in an upper
Window, which appears to be of very venerable Antiquity, and this justifies
those fair Attributes of Noble, Ancient, and Illustrious, which may with very
good Reason be entitled to this Family, of which is Thomas Harlackenden
Esquire, who by inherent right transmitted to him by a never-ebbing stream of
so many multiplied Descents is the instant proprietary of this Borough.

Edingham, vulgarly called Engham, is the last place of Account within the
Verge of Woodchurch, and was, in Times of elder date, before they transplanted
themselves to Singleton in Great Chart, the Mansion of the Enghams: who as they
placed here their Seat, extracted from hence to their Surname a Family
doubtless of profound Antiquity, and no less Reputation; as may appear by those
large Possessions which they were interessed in, in several parts of Romney
Mersh, written in old Records sometimes Edingham, and by Contraction Engham,
and very frequently Hengham. And it is very probable from the Identity of the
Name, that Rafe de Hengham the eminent Lord Chief Justice in the reign of
Edward the first was of this Family. Pat. de Anno secundo Ed. tertii Part
secunda Memb. 23.
Sir Audomer (or Aymer) de Engham was Justice of Chester in the second year of
Edward the third, and was issued out originally from this Family, and it is
possible Audomar or Odmer de Hengham who lies buried in Christ-Church at
Canterbury in the year 1411 was his Son and what much enhaunses the Honor of
this Family, he is written in the Latin Inscription affixed to his Tomb
Audomarus Hengham Armiger: and in this Name was the Inheritance of this place
conducted along through many Generations of the Enghams, even till our
Grandfathers Memory, and then it was by sale alienated to Baker, who is now
the Possessor of that Seat which formerly made the Name of Engham, so
conspicuous in this County.

Wolwich has been in elder Times written Wolnewich, is in the Hundred of
Lesnes, and was the propriety of Gilbert de Marisco, who stands first in the
Inventory of those who were its former possessors, and he held it about the
Beginning of Edward the first, and assumed this Name de Marisco, from that
Estate which he enjoyed in the Mersh beneath this Town: and it seems his
Fortune was of no narrow Dimension, for he held this Manor under the Notion of
half a Knights Fee, in the above mentioned Prince's reign of Warren de
Montchensie Baron of Swanscampe: After him Sabina de Windlesor possessed it about
the seventeenth year of Edward the second, by the fourth part of a Knights Fee
also, of the Barony of Montchensie at Swanscampe. And then next successively to
her did John de Pultney hold it in the twentieth year of Edward the third, as
this Lady had held it before by the fourth part of a Knights Fee, and of the
Honor of Montchensie in like manner: from whom it passed away to William
Chichley, a Kinsman of that eminent Prelates Henry Chichley Archbishop of
Canterbury. And this man had Issue John Chichley, who deceased without Issue
Male, and left only Agnes his Heir matched with John Tatersal, who flourished
here in her right much of the Rule of Henry the sixth, and some of that of
Edward the fourth, and then alienated the Interest of this place to Boughton,
in which Family the Interest of it remained, til by sale it was divided from
it, and united to the patrimony of Heywood, where it seems the Title was
supported with no constant possession; for shortly after, almost in less then
our Fathers Memory the right of it was by the former Fatality translated into
Sir Nicholas Gilbourne Father to Henry Gilbourne Esquire, to whom this Manor
gives up the right of its present possession.

It appears that the Commissions of Sewers which are now yearly issued for to
make a diligent Inspection into those Banks and the Defects of them, which
protect and secure the adjacent Mershes from the encroachments, and eruptions
of the Thames was of authentic and ancient use; for a Commission went out (as
is manifest by Pat. 17. Edwardi secundi) for repairing a very great Breach the
waters by an Inundation had made into the Mershes which lie extended between
Wolwich and Greenewich.

Wrotham gives Name to the whole Hundred where it is seated, and is registered
in the List of those Manors which formerly increased the revenue and supported
the Dignity of the Archbishops of Canterbury; and if you will see how it was
rated in the Time of the Conqueror, consult Doomsday Book, and that speaks
thus, Wrotham est Manerium Archiepiscopi and T. E. R. defendebat se pro VIII
Sullings and est appretiatum 24 lb. and continued treasured in their patrimony
until the twenty ninth year of Henry the eighth, and then it was exchanged by
Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury with the Crown, and lay clasped up in
the Kingly revenue until the sixth year of Edw. the sixth, and then it was
granted to Sir William Mason, who partly passed it away by sale, and partly
gave it in Dower with his Daughter matched to Robert Bing Esquire, whose
Successor Mr. John Bing has lately passed away his entire Interest in it to Se
more of this Family at Eigtham, where I have rendered an Account how they
altered the Name of Haestrecht to James.
William James of Eigtham Esquire; descended from an ancient Family called
Haestrecht near Vtrecht: to which Family Will. Camden Clarenceux King of Arms
through mistake and inadvertency assigned Argent a Cheveron between three Mill
Rinds Sables as the paternal Coat of this Family; whereas, had he made a
serious Review, he would have discovered that the Original Coat of Haestrecht,
was Argent two Bars Crenellee Gules three Pheons in chief Sables; which
mistake, that I may the better rectify, I have represented both in Sculpture,
to the view of the Reader.

Wrotham had a Market procured to it by Walter Reynolds Archbishop of
Canterbury in the eighth year of Edward the second.

Wingfield is a second Manor in Wrotham which in Times very ancient
acknowledged the propriety of Quintin a Family though not of signal, yet of no
cheap Account in this Tract; and was by Gilbert Quintin and Joan his Wife in
the thirty first year of Henry the eighth, passed away by Fine to James
Peckham, from whom by a Clew of several Generations it was conducted down to
James Peckham Gentleman, who about the beginning of K. James conveyed it to
Nicholas Miller of Horsnells Crouch Esquire; who deceasing without Issue bequeathed
it to his Nephew Sir Nicholas Miller; upon whose late paying that Debt we all
owe to Nature, it is now Humf. Millers Esquire.

Yaldham or Aldham is another Seat of considerable Account in Wrotham,
especially since it celebrates the Memory of Thomas de Aldham, who by a pious
Assistance supported the Arms and Cause of Richard the first when he was
engaged at the Siege of Acon: and from him it descended to Sir Thomas de
Aldham, who determining in three Daughters and Coheirs, Margery one of them by
matching with Martin de Peckham, descended from John de Peckham (who likewise
fills up the Catalogue of those Kentish Gentlemen, who by their signal Courage
made themselves considerable under Richard the first at the Siege of Acon.) did
augment his Patrimony by the Union of hers at this place to it. And from him
has an undisturbed Channel of many Descents flowing through sundry worthy
persons of very remarkable Repute in their respective Generations, brought it
down to confess the Signory of Reginald Peckham Esquire.

Barsted is the last Manor in Wrotham which accrued to James Peckham by
matching which the Sole Heir of Sir Thomas Moraunt, and has lain ever since
wrapped up in the Demeasn of that Family, so that at present it is part of the
patrimony of Reginald Peckham of Yaldham Esquire.

Ford in this parish has been for some Centuries of years the possession of
Clerk, very frequently written in old Evidences le Clerk. John Clerk Son of
John Clerk was the second Baron of the Exchequer about the beginning of the
reign of Henry the sixth, from whom in a lineal succession Sir William Clerk
did descend: who when this Nation was engaged in the Flame of the late Civil
Contention, offered up his Life to the Commands of his late Majesty, in that
signal Confflict which was commenced between Sir William Waller and the Royal
party at Cropreadie Bridge: and, which is more remarkable, after he had
received a mortal Wound, as if he had had a greater Care of his Friend's
Security then of his own, poured out his last Breath in this Expression, Look
to Sir William Butler, for I saw him fall. After whose Decease the right of
this Mansion being included in the jointure of his Lady Dowager, she in
Relation to that first settlement now holds the possession of it.

Pleckston was formerly a Borough appertaining to Wrotham: but by an ordinance
of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, bearing Date from the year of
our Lord, 1647, it was enacted, there should be a Collection thoroughout this
County, toward the erecting a Parochial Church at this place, and the
establishing a Congregation proportionate to it, which was effected
accordingly; so that now it has the Repute of a Parish, separate and distinct
from Wrotham, and contains within its Limits the Manor of Sore, which was in
times of a more ancient Complexion parcel of the patrimony of the Colepepers of
Preston in Alresford; for Walter Colepeper, dyed possessed of it, in the first
year of Edward the third, from whom an uninterrupted flowing of Descent, wafted
the Title down to Sir Thomas Colepeper of Preston, who passed it away to
Nicholas Miller Esquire, of Horsnells Crouch in Wrotham, and he upon his
decease, disposed of his Right in it to his Nephew Sir Nicholas Miller of
Oxenhoath, upon whose late Decease, it descended to his Son and Heir Humphrey
Miller Esquire.

Wormsell is a small despicable Parish, in the Hundred of Eyhorn, and was ever
esteemed an Appendage to the Manor of Boughton Malherbe, and had ever the same
Proprietaries, as namely, Gatton, Dene, Corbie, and lastly Wotton; in which
last Family it remained until the latter end of Henry the eighth; and then it
was passed away to Dynley, where it rested until our Fathers Memory; and then
it was conveyed to Sydley, so that it now owns the propriety of Sir Charles
Sydley Baronet.

Wouldham lies in the Hundred of Larkefield, and was given to Ernulf Bishop of
Rochester, by Ethelbert King of Kent, in the year 762, who for this and other
his Munificent Donations, by which he so much enlarged, and multiplied the
Revenue of the Sea at Rochester, is represented to us at this day, by the
Records of that Church, under the Character and Pourtraicture of pius
Ethelbertus: but the Steeple, and much of the Fabric of the Church, owe their
original to the Charity and Beneficence of Stephen Slegge, who was Sheriff of
Kent in the twenty seventh year of Henry the sixth, and bequeathed by his Will
in the thirty sixth year of that Prince's reign, a 100. Marks, to be disbursed
and expended on the Church and Steeple of Wouldham.

Rings is a small Manor that spreads it self partly into Wouldham, and partly
into the Parish of St. Margarets not far distant, but was eminent formerly,
because it was the Demeasn in part of the noble Family of Cosington of
Cosington in Alresford, the other Moiety acknowledging the Signory of Carter;
Cosington sold his proportion to Whorne of Whornes-place in Cuckston; and
Carter alienated his to Laurence, who not long after, by a mutual Deed of
Conveyance, passed away their joint Interest in it to Hadds of Meriam-court in
VVicheling, who was scarce settled in his new purchase, but he by Sale
transplanted his right in it into Thomas Roydon of Roydon-court in Peckham, who
was one of those, who in the thirty first year of Henry the eighth, altered, by
Act of Parliament, their possessions from the Nature and Tenure of Gavelkind to
that of Knights Service. From Roydon, this place (as appears by the private
Evidences of Mr. John Marsham) by the former Alienation, was carried into the
Demeasn of Brockhull of Aldington Septuans in Thurnham, where the possession
was not long resident; for Henry Brockhull conveyed it away to Nicholas Lewson
of the County of Stafford, whose Grandchild Sir Richard Lewson, desiring to
circumscribe his Revenue within the more close circumference of Staffordshire,
sold his Concernment here to John Marsham Esquire, originally extracted out of
Norfolk: to whose Name, those learned pieces which he has made public, as
namely his accurate Disquisitions upon Daniel; and his elaborate Preface,
prefixed to the monastic Survey, styled Monasticum Anglicanum; shall stand in
future Ages, both Urn and Epitaph.

Starkeys is another place wholly involved within the Limits of VVouldham, but
formerly it was not known by this Name: for in Times of elder Aspect I believe
it could scarce entitle it self to any Mansion though it had the Repute of a
Manor, and under that Notion is it mentioned to be held by Sir John Buckland,
in the twentieth year of Edward the third, as appears by the Book called Feoda
Militum kept in the Exchequer, where it is styled the Manor of
Little-VVouldham. After this Family was worn out, the Newmans were the next;
who, by purchase from them, became possessors of the Fee, but stayed not long
in the Tenure of it; for in a Descent or two after, Henry Newman alienated the
Inheritance to Humphrey Starkey one of the Barons of the Exchequer, in the
reign of Henry the seventh, who erected here that House, which ever since has
been adopted into his Name; he was descended from the Starkyes of VVrenbery and
Oulton in Cheshire, and lies entombed under a fair Monument, in the Parish
Church of St. Leonards Shorditch in London, which the Injuries of time, and
impious Mechanics together have much empaired, but it seems the Name of the
House could not entail it on his posterity, for his Successor sold it to Sir
John Rainsford, a man of great Demeasne about Lose, East and VVest-Barming, and
of no less Authority with Henry the eighth; who not long after conveyed it
over to Lamb; from whom the Fate of Sale, brought the Inheritance to Nicholas
Lewson Esquire, whose Grandchild Sir Richard Lewson, upon those motives which
incited him to alienate Rings, which was to contract his whole Demeasne into
Staffordshire, transferred his Right in this likewise, to Jo. Marsham Esquire;
formerly one of the six Clerks: of whose Learning and Merit I have spoken, when
I treated of Rings.

Beaulies-court is the last place of Note in this Parish to be discoursed upon:
it was formerly in Records written Sellers, and gave Surname to a Family known
by that Appellation; for John at Seller (under that Orthography he is recorded
in the Book of Aid) held this place by Knights Service of the Bishop of
Rochester in the twentieth year of Edward the third; and the Arms of this
Family, stand depicted in an old pane of Glass, yet remaining in
VVouldham-church, videlicet Argent a Salteir between four Mullets Gules, and is
now quartered by Beauly; for when this Name concluded in a Female Heir, she by
her espousals with Beauly, knit this Seat and the propriety of it to their
patrimony; who, for some Additions they angmented the House with, changed the
Name of Sellers into Beaulies-court, and by a Right brought down to him by a
Chain of Sundry Generations from the former Alliance, does Mr. Thomas Beauly,
now of London Merchant, claim his present Interest in it.

Wye gives Name to the whole Hundred wherein it is placed, and is in Latin
Records frequently called Vaga, or wandering, and in the British Dialect it
imports as much, from whence they imposed the Name of Wye, on a noted River in
Herefordshire, from its crooked and perplexed Digressions. It was a Manor
which belonged to the Crown before the Conquest, and King William the first,
gave it to Battle Abbey: I recite the Donation, because it reserves the Earl of
Kents Deniers or tertium Denarium, a singular Testimony of grounding and
conferring the Dignity, and justifies the unparallelled Title it has, of being
called Regale Manerium de Wye, The Royal Manor of Wye; for the Signory of 22
Towns lying cross the Country from hence to Battle pertain unto it.

Aldons, Dods, VVest-Sture, Bromsford, Shotenton, with the Manor of the
Vicaridge were given by John Kempe, first Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord
Chancellor of England, and after Cardinal to the College of Wye, which he had
erected and dedicated to St. Martin and St. Gregory; which, upon the
Suppression, were settled in the patrimony of the Crown, till Queen Elizabeth
granted them to her Kinsman Henry Carry Baron of Hunsdon, whose Grandchild Henry
Earl of Dover, not many years since conveyed them to Sir Thomas Finch Earl of
VVinchelsey, whose Son Heneage Earl of VVinchelsey, has the instant Signory of
them.

Ollantigh was a place of no Account, till Cardinal Kemp instituted here an
Oratory or Chapel, which is yet annexed to the House, but the Mansion it self
was built by Sir Thomas Kempe, made Knight of the Bath, at the marriage of
Prince Arthur, eldest Son to Henry the seventh, and in this Name the possession
continued, till Sir Thomas Kempe this man's Successor deceased without
Issue-male, and left four Daughters and Coheirs, matched with Diggs, Cutts,
Chichley, and Skipwith; who all by mutual Consent did divest themselves of
their right to this place, and by Sale transmitted it to Sir Timothy Thornhil,
whose Grandchild Mr. Hen. Thornhil (though not without much struggling and
Contest, there being lately another Title derived from Reginald Kempe, Brother
to Sir Tho. set up against his) does hold the instant propriety of it.

Wilmington is an ancient Seat in this Parish which had formerly the Reputation
of a Manor, and was parcel of the Revenue of the noble Family of Corbie; for
Robert de Corbie did enjoy it at his Death, which was in the thirty ninth year
of K. Edward the third: and after this Family was dislodged from the
Possession, the Chivalers came in and enjoyed the Inheritance, for William
Chivaler held it at his Decease, which was in the first year of Richard the
second, after whom John Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, possessed it about the year
1461, who dying without Issue, John Howard his Kinsman was invested with the
Title of Duke of Norfolk, as being descended from the Lady Margaret Daughter of
Thomas de Brotherton first Duke of Norfolk in the first year of Richard the
third, and with his Title he had the Inheritance of Wilmington, which did not
remain knit any long space to his Name: for in the year 1486, he found an
untimely Sepulcher with his Master Richard the third in the Ruins of Bosworth
Field, where he offered up his Life to the Cause of that Prince, as a grateful
Expiation of those Favors which he had received from his Bounty, after whose
Decease this place by Escheat was swallowed up in the revenue of the Crown,
where the Possession slumbered, till K. Edward the sixth about the second year
of his reign granted it to Edward Paget Esquire, in which Family it resided
until our Fathers Memory, and then it was conveyed to Barrow.

Bilting is another place in Wye of no vulgar Estimate. It lies partly in
Godmersham, and partly in this Parish, and was for many hundred years the
patrimony of a Family which bore that Surname, and remained linked to their
Demeasn, until the ninth year of Q. Elizabeth: and then William Bilting
deceasing without Issue, Arthur Franklin, and Richard Vidian were found to be
his Heirs, and upon the Division of the Estate into parcels, this swelled the
Estate of Franklin with a new Addition, and continued in that Name, until not
many years since partly by Sale, and partly by Marriage it was settled upon Mr.
William Cowper of Maidstone, upon whose late Decease it is now devolved by
successive Right to his Descendant Mr........ Cowper now in his Minority.

Perry Court is the next place which obliges us to a Consideration. It was
wrapped up, in that Demeasn which related to the College of Wye, and was
purchased by Cardinal John Kempe of Thomas Aldon (whose Ancestors had held it
many Descents before) in the twenty eighth year of Henry the sixth, and by him
annexed to the College above mentioned, of his own Institution and Foundation:
But the public Dissolution in the reign of Henry the eighth having snatched it
away, it was by the Grant of that Prince made the Inheritance of Mr. John
Buckler, who about the beginning of Edward the sixth, passed it away to Sir
William Damsel emploid as Agent from that Prince to the Crown of France, and
he going out in four Daughters and Coheirs, one of them by matching with
Burston made it upon the disunion of the the Body of the Estate into parcels, a
Limb of his patrimony; and remained so, until our Fathers remembrance, and then
it was conveyed to Moil of Buckwell, and was not many years since conveyed by
Robert Moile Esquire, alienated by Sale to Sir Thomas Finch, afterward Earl of
Winchelsey, Father to Heneage Finch Earl of Winchelsey now Proprietary of it.

Raymonds is the last place of Account in Wye, which afforded a Seat, and gave
a Surname to a Family so called, and were eminent in this Parish many hundred
years since, as being Stewards to the Abbey of Battle for Lands near this place,
and it is probable this place was the original Seminary or Fountain from whence
the Raimonds of Essex, Norfolk, and other Counties in this Nation, deduced
their primitive Extraction: But to advance in my discourse: this Family of
Raymond having long since abandoned the Signory of this place, it has been for
sundry Descents the Inheritance of Beck, and is still entitled to the
propriety of one of this Name and Family.

Y. Y. Y. Y.
YAlding in the Hundred of Twyford: It was in old Saxon Orthography written
Ealding from the Watery Situation of the Meadows. It was made eminent by being
parcel of the Inheritance of the Earls of Gloucester whose Surname was de
Clare, under whose Signory it remained till Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester
and Hertford, who deceased in the eighth year of Edward the second, and left
Margaret de Clare his sole Heir, who was married to Hugh de Audley, who became,
in right of his Wife, Lord of the propriety of Yalding, and Earl of Gloucester
likewise; but enjoyed neither no considerable space of Time; for he died in the
twenty first year of Edward the first, and left no Issue Male: so that Margaret
Audley became his Heir, who by matching with Rafe Earl of Stafford, cast it
into his patrimony; and he at his Death, which was in the forty sixth year of
Edward the third in her right was found to be possessed of it; and in this Family
did the Inheritance fix it self till the reign of Henry the eighth, and then
Edward Stafford Duke of Buckingham, descended in a direct line from the
abovesaid Rafe Stafford, having by his own improvidence and miscarriage laid
himself open to the Malicious Assaults of Cardinal Wolsey, He by blowing of
wild Conjectures into the Ears of King Henry the eighth, blew up the fire of
his rage into that height and fury, that nothing could extinguish it but the
Blood of this Peer poured out by an untimely Effusion upon the Scaffold: upon
whose unfortunate Decease his Estate by Forfeiture and Escheat devolved to the
Crown. And K. Henry the eighth suddenly after granted Yalding to his Kinsman
Hen. Somerset E. of Worcester, whose Father Charles Somerset he in the seventh
year of his Government by a new Creation had adorned with that Title; from whom
not long after it was by purchase incorporated into the Patrimony of Nevill
Baron of Aburgavenny, whose Successor is John Nevill both in the Barony, and in
the Inheritance of Yalding.

Woodfold is a place not to be declined without some Consideration; because it
was a place formerly of no contemptible repute: for Anselmus de Quintin,
originally issued out from the ancient Family of Boupton in Wiltshire held it
in the twentieth year of Edward the third, by the fourth part of a Knights
Feee, (as the Book of Aid testifies) at the making the Black Prince Knight; and
here after the Possession diverse years had resided, it shrunk away from this
Family, and by purchase was carried into the Inheritance of Burton, where
likewise it was some Generations settled, till the same Vicissitude, made it as
inconstant here, as it had been to the former Family, and by Sale transported
the right of it to Vane, a younger Branch of Vane Earl of Westmerland, in whose
Name and Posterity the Patrimonial Interest of it continues still wrapped up.

Lodingford is another manor in Yalding, which belonged to the priory of
Bermondsey, and upon the Suppression of that magnificent Cloister, was annexed
to the revenue of the Crown, but made no long abode there: for Henry the eighth
granted it to Tho. VVood Esquire, and he not long after alienated it by Sale to
George Fane Esquire, Ancestor to the right Honorable Mildmay Fane, now Earl of
Westmerland, the instant Lord of the Fee.

Yalding had the Grant of a Market to be observed there weekly, procured to it
by Hugh de Audley; and a Fair to continue three Days yearly, viz. the Vigil,
the Day of St. Peter and Paul, and the subsequent to it, as appears, Pat. 12.
Edw. secundi N. 57.

The Description of the ISLANDS.
ELmeley is an Island not far removed from Feversham, but yet is situated in
the Hundred of Milton, it was in elder Times parcel of the Demeasn of Peyforer.
Fulk de Peyforer held it at his Death, which was in the fifth year of Edward
the first, from whom it was transported by Descent to his Son Fulk de Peyforer,
who likewise was in possession of it at his Decease, which was in the ninth
year of Edward the second: but before the latter end of Edward the third, this
Name and Family was shrunk into a Daughter and Heir called Julian, who by
matching with Thomas St. Ledger, annexed that Interess that Family had in this
Island to his Inheritance, and from him the like Vicissitude carried it off to
Hen. Aucher, who had espoused Joan his Coheir; but before the latter end of
Hen. the fifth his right in Elmeley was by Sale transplanted into Cromer of
London, who likewise before had purchased some proportion of Estate which the
Heirs of Sir Rob. Knolles Feoffee in Trust for Gray, and Talbot passed away
1000 Acres in Elmeley to Sir Will. Cromer 7. Hen. 4.
Hastings had in this Island by a right deduced from Mayney; for Sir Walter de
Mayney Knight of the Garter, died the forty ninth year of Edward the third, and
left only a Sole Daughter and Heir called Anno, who by matching with John
Hastings Earl of Pembroke, brought Tunstall and much other Land here in Elmeley
and elsewhere, to be the patrimony of that Family: But to proceed: Elmeley
being thus entirely made the Demeasn of Cromer, continued linked, to this
Family many Descents, until Sir James Cromer the last of this Name almost in
our memory died and left three Daughters and Coheirs surviving (for Martha the
fourth died unmarried) to share his Estate. Frances was matched to Sir Matthew
Carew, Elizabeth married Sir John Steed, and Christian espoused Sir John Hales;
and so these three dividing Elmeley* the Descendants which claimed from Carew
and Steed, have very lately by Sale conveyed theirs, and so by Consequence the
Sole Interest of this Island unto Sir Edward Hales of Tunstal.

Grain Island lies in the Hundred of Hoo, and had still the same Owners with
the Manor of Malmains in Stoke not far distant. Nicholas Malmains held it at
his Death which was in the twenty third year of Edward the third, and from him
did the Title stream in this Family until the beginning of Henry the fourth,
and then it went away by Sale to Iden of Ripley Court in Westwell, and in this
Family did the Possession dwell, until the beginning of Henry the eighth, and
then it was alienated to John Parks Gentleman, and he not long after dying
without Issue Male, Elizabeth his Sole Inheritrix, who was wedded to John Roper
of Bedmaneore in Lingsted Esquire united it to his Patrimony, and from him is
it now descended to his Successor Christopher Roper the instant Baron of Tenham.

Hearty lies in the Hundred of Feversham, and did anciently acknowledge the
Dominion of the Abbot and Covent of Feversham, until John, Abbot of that place
in the tenth year of Henry the eighth obtained a License from the Crown to
alienate it to Thomas Colepeper Esquire; but here its abode was of no long
Moment; for about the latter end of Henry the eighth it was transmitted by Sale
to Sir Thomas Cheyney, whose Son the Lord Henry Cheyney about the middle of Q.
Elizabeth passed it away to Samuel Thornhill Esquire great Grandfather to
Mr........ Thornhill, the instant Owner of it.

Oxney Island is an Hundred within it self. The first place of eminence which
offers it self to a Survey, is Witresham, which anciently belonged to the Monks
of Christchurch, and was given to that Cloister, in the year 132, by Edsin
Bishop of St. Martins without Cant. but upon the Suppression of that Covent in
the reign of Hen. the eighth, this Manor with all its appendant was Immunities
granted to Hen. Crispe Esquire; whose Son Nicholas Crispe, held it the sixth of Q.
Eliz. and after him James Hales Esquire: and he in the thirteenth of that
Princess alienated it to Freak, in which Family it remained until the
Beginning of King James; and then it was conveyed by Sir Thomas Freak, to Sir
Thomas Bishop, and he in the sixteenth year of the abovesaid Prince, gave it in
marriage with his Daughter Mrs. Jane Bishop, to Edward Alford Esquire; and she
in right of that original Settlement does now hold this Manor.

Palstre is another Manor in Witresham, which represents to us the memory of
John de Palstre, who was anciently Lord of the Fee: but before the end of
Edward the third, this Family was vanished; and then the Charles's, a Family of
generous rank at Addington were settled in the possession, and Richard Charles
held it, in the fifth year of Richard the second, and so did Nicholas Charles,
who dyed possessed of it in the eleventh year of that Prince, Rot. Esc. Number. 16.
And from this Family by Alice one of the Coheirs, it devolved to William Snath,
and he concluding in a Daughter and Heir, she by matching with Watton, brought
it to be united to the patrimony of this Family. And here it made its Re dence
until the reign of Heury the sixth; and then it was passed away to Robert
Rudston Esquire, who being embarked in the reign of Queen Mary, in the Design
of Sir Thomas Wiatt, although he did not forfeit his Life, yet he did that of
his Estate, which by the special Indulgence of that Princess, was granted back
to him, in the second year of her reign, in which this was involved, which
remained with this Family until almost our Time; and then it was passed away
to Sir Edward Henden, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, who dying not long
since without Issue, gave it to his Nephew Sir John Henden, Father to Edw.
Henden Esquire; the instant Lord of the Fee.

Owlye is another Manor in Witresham, which anciently was written Ovely, as
having owners of that Surname, who stayed not here until the Beginning of
Richard the second, but were extinguished, and left the possession to Ao
Odiarne, a Family anciently of good Note. After whom I cannot (because the
private Evidences are embezel'd) discover what Families were successively
planted in the possession. Only I find it about the latter end of Henry the
eighth, in the possession of Mayney of Biddenden, in whom the Interest
continued, until some few years since it was alienated by Sir John Mayney of
Linton Knight and Baronet, to Peter Ricaut Esquire, who has lately alienated
his right in it to Mr. Menell of London.

Ebeney was given to the Monks of Christchurch in Canterbury, by K. Athulfus,
at the particular entreaty and instigation of Ceolnoth the Archbishop, in the
year 832, to the Reparation of their Cloister and Cathedral. The words
registered in the Latin Record are these, Anno Domini 832, Rex Athulfus
instinctu Ceolnothi Archiepiscopi dedit Ebeneyam ad opus Monachorum, Libere
sicut Adisham. But when the Impieties of the Monks, who had cloistered up
Religion it self in a Lazy Cell, grew so clamorous, that they called for
Vengeance upon their Seminaties, that Storm arose in the reign of Henry the
eighth, which by the Dissolution of their Covents, expiated their
Irregularities; this Manor was surrendered to the Crown, and the abovesaid
Prince, in the thirty second year of his Government, granted it to Sir Walter
Henley Sergeant at Law, who dying without Issue-male, his three Daughters,
namely Elizabeth married to William Waller Esquire, Hellen first wedded to
Thomas Colepeper of Bedgebury Esquire; secondly to Sir George Somerset; and
thirdly to Thomas Vane of Burston Esquire; and Anne matched to Richard Covert
of Slaugham, as his Coheirs entered upon his Inheritance, and then this place
upon the Division of his estate, increased the Demeasn of Richard Covert
Esquire, from whom by the Devolution of a descendant right, the title is now
lodged in his Successor Mr...... Covert.

VVoodrove in Ebeney, acknowledged in elder Ages a Family for proprietaries,
known by the Name of Mocking, who had a revenue likewise about Milton,
Stockbury, Hartlip and Shepey, of no despicable Bulk. John Mocking Son of
William Mocking flourished under the Scepter of Edward the first, Edward the
second, and held this Manor at his Decease, which was in the eleventh year of
Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number. 75. And in this Family did the possession fix,
until the reign of Henry the fourth, and then it began to ebb away from this
Name, and flow by the conveyance of Sale into Guldford: and in a very old
Schedule which enumerates the Manors, which related to John Guldford, who
lived under the Government of Henry the fourth and Henry the fifth, this is
registered in the Catalogue; and from him did it come down to Sir Edward
Guldford, whose Daughter and Heir Joan, brought it to be the patrimony of John
Dudley Duke of Northumberland, and he gave this Manor with no small demeasn at
Halden, in Dower with Mary his Daughter, matched to Sir Hen. Sidney Lord Deputy
of Ireland, and Knight of the Garter, a person of that Value and Eminence, that
he that would discover him represented in his best Features and proportion must
view him in his Worthy and Signal undertakings in Ireland, where he will find
him better pourtraid, than he can be by any faint or drowsy Attributes, that
drop from my humble and unequal pen; and from him did this Manor in right of
this Alliance, descend to his Grandchild the right honorable Robert Earl of
Leicester, who not many years since passed it away to Sir Edward Hendon, one of
the Barons of the Exchequer, who upon his Decease gave it to his Nephew Sir
John Hondon of Biddenden, and he not long since alienated it to Mr. John Austin
of Tenterden; from whom it is lately devolved by Death, to be now the
possession of his second Brother Mr. Rob. Austin of Hall-place in Bexley.

Brocket is another Manor in Ebeney which had possessors as appears by ancient
Deeds of that Name, who likewise were written in Evidences Brocket; but whether
the Brockets of Brocket-hall in the County of Hartford, were descended from
these, or these from them, I cannot discover: But the greatest honor which this
obscure Manor has acquired, is, that ever since the reign of Henry the
fourth, until the thirtieth year of Henry the eighth, it acknowledged the
noble Family of Guldford; and then it changed its proprietaries: for that year
it was by John Guldford Esquire, conveyed to Sir John Hales Baton of the
Exchequer, from whom it is now come down to own the proprietary of his
Descendant, Sir Edward Hales of Tunstall Baronet.

The Island of Shepey, comes next to be treated of: It called by Ptolomie
Toliatis, in Latin Insula Ovium, in Saxon Sceapige, all agreeing in their
Verdict, that it was so named from its plenty of Sheep. It is environed with
the mixed Waters of the Thames, and Medway on the West, the Swale or Genlade on
the South, and the Main Ocean beats on the East and North; more celebrated for
the fertility of the Soil, then Salurbity of Air which is gross and thick,
causing Aguish Infirmities, that keep long Residence, they get possession,

Quinborough, or rather originally Kingsborough, as Konisbergh in Prussia, is
now corruptly called Quensborough, acknowledged King Edward the third for the
Founder, who (having wedded Philippa Daughter of William Earl of Henault and
Holland, and his occasions often calling him to pass into her Fathers
Dominion, whose Aid and Assistance he required in the great enterprise, for the
Recovery of his undoubted right to the Diadem of France) heerected this strong
and stately Fottresse for defense of the mouth of the Thames, and his own
secure Accommodation. And because the Situation of this place was unhealthy, he
(to allure Inhabitants) in the year 1366, enobled the Town with a Charter of
Incorporation, wherein he indulges by Grant ample privileges and Immunities
unto it, as namely to hold two Mercates weekly, one on the Monday and the other
on the Thursday; and two Fairs yearly, one at the Feast of St. James, the other
on the twenty fourth of March, and to make Choice of Burgesses to send to
Parliament. The principal Architect and Surveyout of the work, was William
Wickham, after Bishop of Winchester, who had been formerly employed in that
kind, at the reedifying Windsor-castle, when his good patron John de Vuedal,
was Constable there. This man used to inscribe on the edifices thus erected,
this Inscription, This made Wickham, whereby some conceived, he arrogated to
himself the Cost and payment of the Structure, and informed the King thereof:
but his ingenious exposition satisfied that Prince, when he showed him that by
his Inspection and Insight into those matters, he had obtained both his
Ecclesiastical and secular promotions, being made Bishop of Winchester, first
Keeper of the privy Seal, and then of the King's Conscience, his last Gradation
or Ascent being to be Lord Chancellor of England. When King Edward had
perfected this Castle, he instituted a Chief Governor, who was for the future,
to carry the Title of Constable, like as at Dover-castle, and elsewhere. The
Catalogue of those who succeeded in that Command, I have set down. The care and
cost of King Henry the eighth, in the year 1536 to repair this place, when he
erected Fortresses for Defense of the Sea Coast, drew this Eulogie from the Pen
of Leland, Castrum Regius editum recepit
Burgus, Fulmina dira, and Insulanos
Tutos servat, ab omni, vel omni.


Constables of Quinborough Castle.
JOhn Foxly a valiant Soldier and faithful Servant to King Edward the third,
was the first Constable of Quinborough Castle, which Office he received the
thirty sixth of Edward the third.

50. Edw. 3. John of Gaunt 8. Rich. 2. Robert de Vere. 16. Rich. 2. Arnold
Savage of Bobbing Court. 20. Rich. 2. William Scroop 1. Hen. 4. Sir Hugh
Waterton 4. Hen. 4. Sir Jo. Cornwallis, Lord Fanhope, Knight of the Garter. 10.
Hen. 4. Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury. 1. Hen. 5. Gilbert Vmfreville
28. Hen. 6. Humfrey Stafford Duke of Buckingham. 1. Edw. 4. John Northwood
Esquire.... Edw. 4. George Duke of Clarence. 1. Rich. 3. Thomas Wentworth 2.
Rich. 3. Christopher Collins 1. Hen. 7. William Cheyney 2. Hen. 8. Sir Francis
Cheyney 3. Hen. 8. Sir Tho. Cheyney of Shurland Knight of the Garter. 1.
Reginae Elizab. Sir Robert Constable Sir Edward Hobbie Philip Earl of Pembroke
and Montgomery, Baron of Shurland, and Knight of the Garter.

Minster is the next place of Account in this Island, and is contracted from
the Latin Word Monasterium, from whence this Town has its Appellation, and may
challenge the third place amongst our English Nunneries. For Sexburga Daughter
to Ercombert King of Kent (to whom and the Virgin Mary, the Church of this
Parish is devoted and dedicated) in the year 664, erected a Religious House at
this place, and liberally endowed it, for the Sustentation of vayled Virgins.
The second was founded by Eanswith Daughter of Eadbald King of Kent, at
Folkston. And the first had its Institution at Liminge, likewise in this
County, by Eadburga, and erected to the Honor of the Virgin Mary and St.
Mildred. But the Antiquity of this Cell, and the Sanctity attributed to it by
elder times, could not so skreen or rescue it from the Heat of War, but it was
thrice sacked and dismantled by the barbarous irruptions of the Danes, within
less then an Age, which by usual Account is said to be thirty year. The first
misfortune happened to it in the year 832, when thirty five Sail of them rived
here and rifled it. The second and third time, was in the year 851 and then
again in the year 855, by the Armies of them who wintered their Ships within
this Island. Besides these depredations the accomplices of Earl Godwin, and his
Sons, in the Time of their proscription and exile, which was in the year 1052,
landed in this Island, and miserably harrassed it, by filling all places with
Ruin and Devastation. Indeed Religion when it glitters with a splendid and
full revenue, is like the Pictures of the ancient Saints, apparelled in rich
Garments, which some have been enticed to rob, not out of ill Will to their
Sanctity, but love to their Shrines, and Beauty of their Clothes; Persecution
and the Robes of Humility were the Attire of the primitive Church, and when she
is dressed up in gaudy Fortunes, it is no more then she merits: Yet sometimes
it occasions the Devil, to cheat her of her Holiness; and impious men by an
unjust and injurious Sacrilege, to cheat her of her riches. But I have
digressed: I now return into the Track of my Discourse, and must inform my
Reader, that although the Glory of this Cloister, was so bowed down and broken
with these misfortunes, that it appeared almost sunk in its own Calamities: yet
by the piety of subsequent Ages, it was buoyed up again: but more especially by
the indulgent Charity of King Henry the fourth, who in the first year of his
reign confirmed their old privileges, and to those added by patent many new.
And in this Condition it continued until the general Dissolution or Deluge,
and then it was by Henry the eighth, in the twenty ninth year of his reign
granted to Sir Thomas Cheyney: and his Son Henry Lord Cheyney, having in the
Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, exchanged it for other Lands with that Princess;
she regranted it to Sir Edward Hobby, who had matched with her Kinswoman
Margaret, Daughter of Henry Lord Hunsdon, and his Son Sir Edward Hobby, about
the middle of King James passed it away to Mr. Hen. Richards, and he upon his
Decease bequeathed it to Gabriel Livesey Esquire; and he, almost in our
Remembrance, conveyed it to Sir John Heyward, who settled it upon his two
Feoffees in Trust, Sir Francis Buller of Cornwall, and Sergeant Clerk of
Rochester, for such Charitable Uses, as they should think proportionate to that
Conveyance,

The Manor of Northwood, is situated in this Parish, which was the Inheritance
of Jordanus de Scapeia, for so he is written in old datelesse Deeds, and he had
Issue Stephen de Northwood, who was the first whom I find in Record, to have
assumed this Appellation, and he was Father to Sir Roger de Northwood, who lies
buried in Minster Church, with an Inscription affixed to his Monument, which
seems by its more modern Character, to have been corrupted; It is this: Hic
jacet Rogerus Northwood, Miles, sepultus ante Conquestum. Indeed his Figure is
fairly insculped in Brass, with that of his Lady Bona lying by him, who was
Sister and Heir of William de Wauton. The vulgar upon a credulous error every
where affirm, that all those who are thus buried, were enterr'd after the
Conquest; when it is certain that many were entombed in this posture, many
years before the Conqueror, that had obliged themselves by Vow, to defend the
Cross and Sepulcher of our Savior, against the Fury and Assaults of Infidels.
Sure I am, the Tomb next to this appears to be far more ancient, and of so
venerable a Form, that its like does not occur in any other place; there is
not any Letter of Inscription left, only the Coat is a sure Testimony, that it
was one of the Ancestors of the Family of Northwood. But to proceed: John
Norwood one of this House, as the private Records of the Family testify,
feasted H. the fifth, at the Red Lion in Sedingbourne, and the Wine amounted
upon the wole account but to 9. s. and 9. d. Wine being then rated but at a
penny the pint. W. Northwood another of this Name, and Family, did signal
Service at the Battle of Agincourt, and afterward at the Battle of Vernoile,
which was managed by John Duke of Bedford, Regent of France. He was Kinsman of
John Northwood, who was the last of this Name at this place; for he about the
latter end of Edward the fourth, alienated it to William Warner Esquire;
whose Son and Heir William Warner, about the Beginning of Henry the eighth,
demised it to Sir Thomas Cheyney, and his Son Sir Henry Lord Cheyney, having
exchanged it for other Lands with Queen Elizabeth, it remained with the Crown,
until King James in the second year of his reign, granted it to the right
honorable Philip Herbert Earl of Montgomery, and afterward Earl of Pembroke.

Newhall is another little Manor in Minster, which Fulke Peyforer dyed seized
of, in the ninth year of Edward the second; and from him it devolved by descent
to be the patrimony of his great Grandchild Fulk Peyforer, and his Sole Heir
Julian carried it away to Thomas St. Ledger of Ottringden, whose two Female
Coheirs being matched to Aucher and Ewias, shared his Inheritance, and about
the reign of Henry the fifth, passed it away by Sale to Cromer, whose Successor
William Cromer, having about the latter end of Henry the eighth, by some
misdemeanor, forfeited it to the Crown, it was granted to one Stephen Grain,
in which Family it remained until the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, and then
it was alienated to Small; from which Name, the same Vicissitude not many years
since carried it off to Luck; who transmitted his Right in it to Mr. Henry
Newton, who has lately demised it to Mr. Josias Gering of London.

Rishingdon is the last place of Account, which is circumscribed within the
Limits of Minster. It was in the twenty third year of Edward the first, wrapped
up in the patrimony of Savage: for at that time John de Savage obtained a
Charter of Freewarrren, to several of his Manors in Kont, in the Number of
which this is registered for one; but in the reign of Edward the third, the
possession was departed from this Family, being purchased by Philippa Wife and
Queen to Edward the third, and settled upon the Hospital of St. Katharines near
the Tower, in whose demeasn it has layn involved ever since. In the fourteenth
year of the reign of Richard the second, John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, the
King's Uncle, was Lessee to that Hospital, as appears Rot. Esc. Number. 113. Which
I mention to discover to the Reader, that even in those Times, Persons of the
greatest eminence did not disdain to be Tenants for an Estate to an Hospital.

East-Church is the next place which comes to be considered: Which though
obscure in it self, yet is made eminent by Shurland, which is a Limb of this
Parish, and anciently did own a noble Family which bore that Surname; the last
of which was Sir Robert de Shurland, who was one of those Kentish Bannerets,
which were made by King Edward the first, at the Siege of Carlaverock, in the
twenty eighth year of his reign, and to whom the former Prince, as a farther
Symbol or Testimony of his Merit, granted a Charter of Free Warren in the
twenty ninth year of his reign, to his Manor of Shurland: not long after which
he deceased, and lies entombed under an Arch in the Southwall, with his
pourtraicture insculped in a Marble, in Minster Church, whose Tomb is become
the Scene of much Falsehood and popular error; the vulgar having dug out of
his Vault, many wild Legends and Romances, as namely that he buried a Priest
alive, that he swam on his horse two miles thorough the Sea, to the King, who
was then near this Island on Shipboard, to purchase his pardon; and having
obtained it, swam back to the Shore: where being arrived, he cut off the head
of his said Horse, because it was affirmed, he had acted this by Magic: and
that riding on hunting a twelvemoneth after, his horse stumbled and threw him
on the Scull of his former Horse, which blow so bruised him, that from that
Contusion he contracted an inward impostumation, of which he dyed; and in
memory of which, an Horse Head is placed at his Feet; which fictitious Story,
is rent into the disunion of so many absurd circumstances, that I shall
represent to the Reader, the Foundation on which this fabulous Natrative was
formerly established, which is no more but this. Sir Robert de Shurland
abovementioned, being Lord Warden of the Cinqueports, and a man of eminent
Authority under Edward the first, obtained Grant of privilege by Charter, to
have wrack of Sea upon his Lands confining on the Sea Shore, near Shurland:
now the extent of this Royalty is evermore esteemed to reach as far into the
Water, upon a low ebb, as a man can ride in, and touch any thing with the point
of his Lance, and so you have the explication of this marvel; and the couching
either of whole Creatures, or part of them, at the Feet of worthy personages,
is most frequent both now and in elder Times, that these inanimate
Representations might be the Symbols or Hieroglyphics, to intimate to
posterity those Virtues which were resident in them when alive. But to proceed:
the abovementioned Sir Robert de Shurland, having improved his Reputation with
many noble and worthy Actions, left That only to perpetuate his Name to
posterity, having no Issue-male to continue it: for he left only one Daughter
and Heir, matched to W. de Cheyney of Patricksbourn Cheyney, who was son and
heir to Sir Alexander de Cheyney, who is in the Inventory or List of those
Knights Bannerets, who were ennobled with that Dignity, by E. the first, at the
Siege of Carlaverock, in the twenty eighth year of his reign, and in Right of
this Match, dyed possessed of it, in the eighth year of E. the third, Rot. Esc.
Number. 58. And from him did it come down to his great Grandchild, Sir John
Cheyney who was Knight of the Garter, and frequently Knight of this Shire, in
sundry Parliaments, under the Government of Henry the fourth, in the first year
of whose reign, as our Chronicles inform us, he was sent Ambassador to several
foreign Princes, to represent to them the Reasons or Motives which induced him
to assume the English Diadem, and in the first and second year of that Prince,
he was chosen Speaker of Parliament. Sir William Cheyney another of this Family
of Shurland, was first a Judge, and secondly Lord Chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, in the reign of Henry the fifth: but the greatest Honor this Manor
achieved, was when it came to be possessed by Sir Thomas Cheyney who was Knight
of the Garter, Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, Constable of Quinborough
Castle, and one of the Privy Council to Henry the eighth, and he had Issue Sir
Henry Cheyney, created Henry Lord Cheyney of Tuddington by Queen Elizabeth, who
having exchanged this Manor of Shurland with that Princess, it remained with
the patrimony of the Crown, until the second year of King James; and then it
was by royal Concession from that Prince, made the Inheritance of Philip Earl
of Montgomery, and after of Pembroke, upon whose late decease it is now come to
confess the Signory of his second Son Mr. James Herbert.

Kingsborough is another Manor in this Parish, whose Name tacitly intimates to
us, that it was involved formerly in the Revenue of the Crown, and was the
place which the Inhabitants frequented, not only for the holding of a Court,
for the choice and election of the Constables of the Island: but likewise here
assembled to nominate and appoint those Wardens or Bailiffs, that were to take
Cognizance or Charge of the passage called King ferry; which divides the
Island, and the main Land of me County; this Manor after it had for many
Generations layn folded up in the royal Demeasne, was by Queen Elizabeth,
granted to Mr. Henry Carry; who about the Beginning of K. James, passed it away
to Swaleman, whose Descendant is still entitled to the propriety of it.

Leisdon next offers it self up to our view, which was parcel of that estate
which acknowledged the noble and ancient Family of Gray or Rotherfield in
Sussex for its ancient Owners, The first which made this Family eminent was
John de Gray, who was frequently summoned to sit in Parliament as Baron, in the
reign of Edward the third, and dyed possessed of this Manor in the thirty third
year of that Prince, Rot. Esc. Number. 38. And so did Robert Gray his Successor,
in the second year of Henry the fourth. After his Exit, I do not find it long
constant to the Signory of this Name: for about the Beginning of Henry the
sixth it was alienated to Lovell; and by virtue of this purchase, Sir William
Lovell held it at his Death, which was in the twenty third year of Henry the
sixth. After this Family had abandoned the possession, the Cheyneys of Shurland
were by purchase planted in the Inheritance, and remained settled in the
Fee-simple of it, until Sir Henry Lord Cheyney, exchanged it with Queen
Elizabeth.

Nuts called so vulgarly, but in the ancient Court-rolls named Notts, as being
the Inheritance of a Family called Not, is a little Manor in Leisdon, which
after it had for many descents acknowledged no other proprietaries, but this
Family, about the Beginning of Edward the fourth, was rent from them by
purchase, and transplanted into Bartholomew, a Family which were Owners
anciently of much Land about Lingsted, Throuley, and other places in that
Track, and continued Masters of this Lordship, until the reign of Henry the
eighth; and then it was conveyed to Sir Thomas Cheyney; whose Son Sir Henry
Cheyney about the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth, passed it away to Sampson, a
Family which had been possessors of Sampson-court, not far distant many hundred
years; and were descended from William Sampson, who was frequently summoned to
sit in Parliament as Baron in the reign of Edward the first. From Sampson it
was again in our Fathers Memory carried off to O^borne, in the Descendants of
which Family the right is still fixed.

Werdon is the last place of Account in this Island; It was in times of an
elder Inscription involved in the Inheritance of Savage of Bobbing, and in the
twenty third year of Edward the first, Sir John de Savage obtained a Charter of
Free Warren to his Manor of Werdon: But before the middle of Edward the third,
this Family had surrendered their Interest here to Fremingham; for John de
Fremingham dyed seized of it, in the twenty third year of Edward the third: but
whether it devolved with other Land by the Heir general of Fremingham to Isley
or not, is uncertain, because those privtae evidences which relate to this
Manor, extend no higher then the reign of Edward the fourth; and then I find
the propriety of it in Norton, in which Family after the possession had resided
until our times, it was conveyed to Edmund Took of Dartford Esquire; Barrister at
Law, now proprietary of it.

Thanet lies, if not all, yet most part of it, circumscribed within the Hundred
of Ringleslow: It is styled in Greek by ancient Authors (...), in Latin
Thanetum, and in the Saxon it is curtailed into Thanet, which an old Manuscript
which I have seen, deduces from two Saxon Words Thane and Yete, which in that
Language then employed as much as the Lords-Entrance: but for my particular, I
believe that the Saxons, when upon the Donation of it to them by Vortiger, they
first entered into this Island, finding that Thanetum was a Latin Name imposed
upon it by the Romans, who had but newly then deserted the Protection of this
Island, new-softned the Name by contracting it, and then quilted it into the
Alphabet of their own Language, and called it Thanett; and that this is
probable, I shall evince from circumstances, Punio in Latin signifies to
punish, from whence the Saxons styled that place by Maidstone, where they
punished Malefactors Pinandun Hoath: So Castrum was a Name used by the Romans
to signify or express any Castle or Fortress, which the Saxons upon their
admission into this Island, finding it to be imposed upon all places of
strength and importance, adopted it into their Dialect, and from the word
Castrum extracted the word Ceaster. I could instance in many other particulars,
but that I should both weary my Reader, and clog this Discourse with
Superfluities: I shall therefore from the untwisting the Name, descend to the
Description of the Island.

Serre, now vulgarly called Sarre, is the first place of Note which offers it
self up to a view: It was anciently a Parish, until peradventure the
unhealthinesse of the Soil; for it now confines upon Marshes (where formerly
glided that Gullet of Seawater, now wholly stifled with Sand) which made
Thanett an Island, as may plainly appear by an ancient Mapp, printed by the
original, and now extant in the Book called Monasticum Anglicanum) or else from
the insalubrity of the Air, which being polluted with those black and foggie
vapors which ascend from a loose and soggie earth, very frequently leave a
venomous Tincture upon the Blood and Spirits of those Inhabitants, who are
subject to the impression of such pernicious exhalations, forced those who
dwelt in Serre, to abandon so sickly a Habitation; and so the Parish by
degrees, began to languish away into that Solitude, we see it is shrunk into at
present. The Church was dedicated to St. Giles, but at present lies entombed in
such forgotten Ruins, that scarce the least Remains are visible. The Manor it
self was one of the ancient Seats of the noble Family of Crioll. Bertram de
Crioll augments the Register of those Kentish Gentlemen, who were with Richard
the first at the Siege of Acon in Palestine. Bartholomew de Crioll another of
this Name and Family, was Lieutenant of Dover-castle under the abovesaid
Prince. Simon de Crioll was with Edward the first, at his prosperous Siege of
Carlaverock, and for his generous Assistance there, received the Order of
Knighthood, and from him it came down to Sir William Crioll, Father to Sir John
Crioll who held it in the Beginning of Henry the sixth, as appears Pat. 9. Hen.
6. Par. prim. Memb. 19. And from him was it transmitted to his Son Sir Thomas
Keriell, Knight of the Garter, a Man of that worth and eminence, in that time
he lived in, that I might seem something to obscure his Glory, if I should not
represent to the Reader, some of those honorable Achievements, which he
performed in France, the Relation of which I have omitted in my Description of
Stockbury and Walmer. In the ninth year of Henry the sixth, he being Governor
of Gourney in Normandy, issuedout of that place, and harassed not only that
Province, but fought with the Earl of Bretaigne, who was sent to oppose his
Eruptions, and after a sharp Combat gave him a remarkable discomfiture, killing
about six hundred, and captivating two hundred Soldiers. In the fifteenth of
Henry the sixth, he seized upon the Duke of Burgundie's Carriages and Cannons
leaving Cretoy (a Fortress then in possession of the English, and not long
before distressed by the abovesaid Duke) furnished with victual for six hundred
men, for the space of a twelvemonth. And lastly in the twenty seventh year of
Henry the sixth, he was sent over into France, with a supply of 1500 men to
recruit the English Army, where he did as much with so small a quantity of men,
as could be expected from humane Courage, and having reduced some pieces of
strength, he encountered the Earl of Clermont at a place called Formigney,
where being overlaid with Multitude, after he had given most signal Testimony
of his valor, and discharged all those duties which might have secured and
preserved the Honor of the English Nation, and the Glory of the day, by which
he declared himself to be not only a prudent Man, but an expert Commander, he
was defeated: But to proceed, after the Family of Crioll went out from the
possession of this place, which was before the latter end of Henry the sixth,
John White Esquire, became Lord of the Fee, and held it at his Death, which was
in the ninth year of Edward the fourth: but after his Decease it was not long
resident in this Name: for in the reign of Henry the seventh, and Henry the
eighth, I find it the Inheritance of Bear, and was fixed in this Family, until
the Beginning of Queen Elizabeth; and then it was passed away by Sale to Rush,
ancestor to Sir Francis Rush, who not many years since concluding in two
Daughters and Coheirs, one of them by matching with Sir George Wentworth of
Wentworth Woodhouse in Yorkshire, third Brother to Sir Thomas Wentworth, late
Earl of Stafford, has made it his instant patrimony.

Downebarton is the next place which occurs, and challenges our Survey. There
was a Family Surnamed Exeter, that had large possessions at or near this place,
and were planted in the Tenure of them many Centuries of years: In the fourth
year of Henry the sixth, Margaret Widow of John Exeter, held Lands at
Downebarton in Right of Dower, as appears by an Inquisition taken after her
death, which commences from that time. But the principal Honor this place
anciently recieved, was, that it was a Manor which fell under the Signory of
the Archbishops of Canterbury, as is manifest by an Inquisition taken in the
twenty first of Richard the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 7. Which represents to
posterity what Lands and Manors Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury held at that
time; nor did it depart from the revenue of this Sea, until the 29. year of
Henry the eighth; and then being exchanged with the Crown by Tho. Cranmer
Archbishop of Canterbury, it was granted away to Henry Crispe Esquire; in
which Family it was fixed until those times which were circumscribed within
the Verge of our Fathers Remembrance, and then it was conveyed to Paramour,
from which Name not many years since, the vicissitude of purchase carried it
away, and has now made it part of the demeasn of Daniel Harvey of
Combe-nevill, in Kingston upon Thames Esquire.

Quekes in Birchington was the ancient Seat of an ancient Family which bore
that Surname, and after it had for many descents acknowledged it self to have
related to that Name, it devolved by paternal descent to John Quekes, who about
the Beginning of H. the seventh, expired in a Daughter and Heir who was matched
to.... Crispe, extracted from the Crispes of Oxfordshire, who had flourished
there many Generations before, (as appears by an old pedigree now in the hands
of Sir Nicholas Crispe of London) under the Notion of Gentlemen of the best
Rank; nor did this Family wither by being thus transplanted, and inoculated
upon a foreign Stem, but rather did gather new Sap and Verdure, which made it
so exceedingly sprout forth, that Henry Crispe Esquire, who was Sheriff of Kent
in the thirty eighth of Henry the eighth, and was afterward honored with
Knighthood, did shoot up to that power, and grew so tall in Title, that he was
in the dialect of those Times called Regulus Insulae, or the Governor of the
Isle of Thannet; and from this worthy person, is Henry Crispe Esquire, Heir to
Sir Henry Crispe not long since deceased, and now proprietary of Quekes,
originally descended.

West-gate in Birchington was wrapped up in that vast demeasn which was
entitled to the possession of the noble and powerful Family of Leybourn of
Leybourn-castle. Will. de Leybourn Son of Roger de Leybourn, held it at his
Death, which was in the third year of Ed. the second, Rot. Esc. Number. 56. And
left it to Roger de Leybourn, from whom with the rest of his diffused patrimony
in this County, it came to his only Daughter and Heir Juliana de Leybourn,
first matched to John de Hastings, Brother or Kinsman to Laurence de Hastings
Earl of Pembroke, and then to William de Clinton Earl of Huntingdon, but
survived them both, and dying without Issue in the forty third year of Edward
the third, she made God her Heir to this Manor, and gave it to the Abbey of St.
Augustins, and in the patrimony of that Cloister did the Title of this Manor
lie locked up, until the general Dissolution in the reign of Henry the eighth,
unloosened it, and then linked it again by a new Augmentation to the demeasn of
the Crown; and then the abovesaid Prince, in the thirty fifth year of his
reign, granted it to Sir Tho. Moile, who not long after passed it away to Bear,
a Family of good account in this Island, as being descended from Richard de
Bear, who was one of the Recognitores magnae Assisae for Kent, in the second
year of King John, as appears by the Pipe-roll of that time; and from this Name
about the latter end of Q. Elizabeth, did it by purchase come over to Den of
Denne-hill in Kingston, whose Successor Mr. Thomas Den of Denne-hill, Reader
formerly of the Middle Temple, and Recorder of Canterbury, dying lately without
Issue-male, his four Daughters ( Thomazin married to Sir Nicholas Crispe,
Bridget matched to Sir John Darrell of Calehill, Dorothy wedded to Mr. Roger
Lucan, and Mary espoused to Vincent Den Esquire) became his Coheirs, and and
this upon the division of his Estate, augmented the patrimony of Sir Nicholas
Crispe.

Dandelion in the Parish of St. John's, was the Seat of a Family in elder times
called Dent de lion, as appears by diverse ancient Deeds, some without dare,
some as high as Edward the first: but about the Government of Henry the fourth,
the Name was melted down, and made more soft and easy, and transplanted into
Dandelion, as appears by several Deeds of one John Dandelion, which commence
from that Kings reign, and the reign of Henry the fifth, and he had Issue John
Dandelion, who about the Beginning of Edward the fourth, determined in a
Daughter and Heir, matched to Petit of Shalmesford near Chartham, and lies
buried under a fair Marble in St. John's, with a plate of Brass (if the
Barbarity of these times, have not ravished it away) affixed to it, designing
the time of his death, and by a Right fortified and made firm, from this
Alliance, does this ancient Seat now acknowledge the Signory of Mr. Henry Petit.

Nash-court in the Parish abovesaid, was anciently the possession of the
Garwintons, of whom I have spoken at Bekesbourn, where was their capital
Mansion, and went along with the Interest of this Family, until William
Garwinton the last of this Name dying without Issue, in the eleventh year of
Henry the fourth, bequeathed this and much other Land to Richard Haut, who had
married Joan his nearest Kinswoman and Heir general of the Family; and he left
it to his Son Richard Haut, who left only one Daughter called Margery, who was
his Heir, and she by marching with William Isaac made it parcel of his
Inheritance; and in memory of this Alliance, the Windows of this Mansion, are
in several Pannels of Glass adorned with the Arms of Haut and Isaac, and near
them are placed the Arms of William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, empaled
with those of his Sea; for of him, and his Predecessors did this Mansion hold.
After Isaac was gone out, which was about the latter end of Henry the eighth,
the Lincolnes by purchase became Lords of the Fee, and held it until the midst
of the reign of Queen Elizabeth; and then it was passed away for some
Courtesies obtained by the Heir of this Family, to Sir Roger Manwood Chief
Baron of the Exchequer; and his Son Sir Peter Manwood alienated it in our
Fathers Memory to Cleybrook, from whom it descended to his Son Mr. William
Cleybrook, who upon his decease left it to his Widow Mrs. Sarah Cleybrooks
remarried to Mr. George Somner slain at Wye-bridge, in the year 1648, and now
lastly to Mr. James Newman, and after her decease the Reversion to his Kinsman
Mr. Alexander Northwood and his Heirs.

Dene and Hengrove are two Mannots circumscribed likewise within the precincts
of St. John's, and were involved in the spreading Demeasn of the powerful Family
of Leybourn, as appears by a solemn Inquisition taken after the decease of
William de Leybourn, who dyed possessed of them in the third year of Edward the
second; and from whom they came to his Grandchild, Juliana Sole Heir of Roger
de Leybourn, who having no Issue, in the forty third year of Edward the third,
either by John de Hastings, or William de Clinton Earl of Huntingdon,
constiuted the Abbey of St. Augustins, her heir to both these places (a more
certain Inheritor then any loose Unthrift in the devout estimate of those
Times) with this Clause annexed, that the Brotherhood of that Covent, should
pray for the Souls of John de Hastings, Laurence de Hastings Earl of Pembroke,
John de Hastings his Son, and lastly for that of William de Clinton Earl of
Huntingdon; Which grant of hers was confirmed (as appears by Thorn the
Chronicler of St. Augustins lately printed) by Edward the third, in the year
1363, and it is probable that those two Chapels, which the fabulous Tradition
of the Island is, were erected at the two abovesaid places, by two Virgins,
were built by the beforementioned Juliana, for two Chauntry Priests, to
celebrate Mass for the Souls of her two deceased Husbands. But to proceed,
upon the Suppression of the Abbey of St. Augustins, by Henry the eighth, these
two Manors being united to the demeasn of the Crown, the Fee-simple was lodged
in the Royal patrimony, until King James in the Beginning of his reign,
granted them to Mr. William Salter, who demised them to Mr. Manasser Norwood,
whose Grandchild Mr. Alexander Norwood, for ought I know, is yet the
proprietary of them.

Salmeston is the last place of account in St. John's, and did belong, as
appears by a Quo Warranto, cited at large in the late printed Chronicle of
Thorn, to the Abbey of St. Augustins, in the year 1362, and remained treasured
up in the Demeasn of that Covent, until its final Suppression in the reign of
Henry the eighth, and then being rent away from the Church, it was by a new
settlement enstated again upon the Church, being granted by the abovesaid
Prince, in the twenty ninth of his Rule, unto Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury,
and is at present held in Lease for Life, by the Lady Mary St. Ledger, Widow of
Sir Warham St. Ledger, who had it in Exchange when he passed away the Manors of
Bersted and Leeds Castle, to Sir Thomas Colepeper of Hollingbourne.

Fleet is a place of Account which is situated partly in the Parish of St.
John's, and partly in St. Peter's, and was the Inheritance, in Ages of a very
high Extraction, of a Family who were written in Latine-Records de Fleta, and
were planted here, as appears by their datelesse Deeds, about the reign either
of King John, or Henry the third. And when in times of a more modern
Inscription, they began to seal with Coats of Arms, appendant to private
Muniments and Evidences; I find the parernal Coat of this Family, to have been
Checquee....... upon a Canton a Lion Rampant....... which still lies registered
in all old Ordinaries and Alphabets of Arms, and other ancient Rolls and
Records of the Kentish Gentry: but as all Families have their Ebbings and
Vicissitudes, so had this. For in our Fathers Memory, one of this Family
expired in a Daughter and Heir, who was matched to Philipott; and in our Memory
another of this Name concluded in two Females, married to Smith and Pomflet,
and so the ancient patrimony of Fleet, being thus crumbled into parcels, is now
divided between these three Families.

Dane-court is another Seat of good Antiquity, and is placed likewise in Sr.
Peter's; It afforded both Seat and Surname to a Family called Dane, who bore for
their Coat Armor Gules four Flower de Lis, Or. But the Custom of Gavelkind
having split this Family into two branches, and consequently rent the estate
into two parcels, one of these branches withered away, before the end of Henry
the fourth, and went out in a Daughter and Heir called Margaret married to John
Exeter, and she by paternal right held some Lands here at Dane-court, at her
decease, which was in the fourth year of Henry the sixth. But the other branch
of this Family flourished something longer; for about the latter end of Henry
the sixth, John Dane the last of this Family at this place, determined in a
sole Daughter and Heir, who was matched to Den of Den-hill, who had in her
right Dane-court: but possessed not long his new Acquists, for about the latter
end of Edward the fourth, I find it the Norwoods; from whom in the Chanel of
successive Interest the Title flowed down to Mr. Alexander Northwood, who has
lately alienated all his Concernment in it to Mr...... Smith.

Ellington is an ancient Seat in the Parish of St. Lawrence, which was the
Residence many Ages since, of a Family called Ellington, some of which lay
buried under very ancient Gravestones, in this Church of St. Lawrence, with
Inscriptions too upon them, as Mr. Sprackling not long since deceased informed
me: but the Injuries of time and barbarous Hands, have now so violated those
Remembrances, that even the memory of this Family, were it not for private
Evidences which still preserve Life in it, would have found a Tomb in Oblivion,
as well as their Ashes: But to proceed: After this Family had been fixed here
for many Descents, about the latter end of Edward the fourth, it vanished away
from this place, being succeeded in the possession by Thatcher, a Family of an
high Antiquity, as to the Name, both here in Thanett, and at Canterbury. For in
the Crown-Office, I discover, as the Record is cited by Mr. Somner in his
Survey of that City, Page 77. that a dysastrous Accident brought an untimely
Fate to one of this Name; for Simon the Son of Adam de Colynham, and Henry the
Son of Henry Thetcher, in the seventeenth year of K. Edward, Son of Edward the
King that is ( Edward the second, Son of Edward the first) were sitting in a
place beneath the Ground, at Monksdane near Canterbury, and were preparing of
Lime-stones, quos per infortunium Terra supercidit, it a quod corpora eorum
conquassabantur, unde moriebantur incontinenter, says the Latine-roll: That is,
the earth sunk in upon them, and crushed them into the disorders of an early
Sepulcher. But to return: After this Seat had rested in this Name, until the
Beginning of Queen Elizabeth; it was passed away to Spracklin and remains part
of the Demeasn of Mr...... Spracklin, Fellow of Peterhouse in Cambridge at this
instant.

Manston is another ancient Seat in St. Laurence, which was the Inheritance of
Manston for many Generations. Richard de Manston, as I find by the Bundles of
uncertain years, kept in the Pipe-Office, was one of the Recognitoros magnae
Assisae in the Time of King John: from whence we may conjecture, that even in
those times of so high an Ascent, this Family was under no narrow or
contemptible Character or Repute. In latter times, that is, in the fourteenth
year of Henry the sixth, I find William Manston was Sheriff of Kent, and held
his Shrievalty at this place: and he had Issue Nicholas Manston, who matched
with Eleanor, only Daughter of Edmund Haut Esquire; and had Issue Julian his Sole
Heir, who was matched to Thomas St. Nicholas of Thorn in the Parish of Minster
in Thanett, which Seat accrued to his Grandfather, by the Heir of Sir John
Goshall. This Thomas St. Nicholas, dyed in the year 1474, and by his last Will
recorded in the Prerogative at Canterbury, he disposes his Body to be buried
before the Image of St. Nicholas, in the Chancel of Thorn at Minster, and Roger
St. Nicholas was his Son and Heir, who determined in a Daughter and Heir called
Elizabeth, matched to John Dynley of Worcestershire. Whose Successor about the
latter end of Queen Elizabeth, conveyed his Right in Manston, Powcies, (which
likewise was annexed to the revenue of St. Nicholas by the Heir of Goshall) and
Thorn in Minster, to Sir John Roper afterward created Baron of Tenham, by
King James, whose great Grandchild the Lord Christopher Roper, does still enjoy
Manston and Thorn, but Powcies is lately passed away by Sale to Edward Monins
of Waldershare Baronet.

Vpper-court is a third place in St. Laurence, which may exact our Notice,
because it augmented the demeasn for many Generations, of the illustrious
Family of Crioll, of whom I have spoken before in Sarre, and remained parcel of
their Inheritance, until the latter end of Henry the sixth; and then it was
passed away by Sir Thomas Crioll, to John White Esquire, and he dyed possessed of
it in the ninth year of Edward the fourth: but before the latter end of Henry
the seventh, the possession of this place had deserted this Name, and was cast
by Sale into the Revenue of Bear, and was constant to their Signory, until
almost the times which bordered upon our Fathers Remembrance, and then it was
by Sale conveyed to Johnson, in which Family it is at this instant resident.

Nether-court is the last Seat in St. Laurence, which calls for our
remembrance; It was in Times of an elder Inscription wrapped up in the
Inheritance of the ancient and knightly Family of Goshall of Goshall in Ash,
and continued in their possession until the reign of Henry the fourth, and
then this Family going out in a Daughter and Heir, she by espousing St.
Nicholas, made it come to acknowledge the Signory of that Family, and was
permanent in their Name, until the latter end of Henry the seventh, and then a
Vicissitude proportionate to the former, made it parcel of the Demeasn of John
Dynley of the County of Worcester Esquire, who matched with Elizabeth, Sole
Heir to Roger St. Nicholas, and remained united to their Interest until the
Beginning of the reign of Q. Eliz. and then the right this Family held in it,
was by Sale transplanted into Maycott; from whom not long after the same
Devolution brought it to Lucas, where after some small abode, the Title
discarded that Name, and came by purchase to own John Anthony for proprietary;
and he in our Fathers Memory passed it away to Mr.... Johnson, in whose
descendants the Jurisdiction and possession of this Mansion remains still
concentered.

Minster is an eminent Manor which anciently belonged to the Abbey of St.
Augustins, being fenced in, and invested with several Franchises, and signal
Immunities; and when King Canutus translated the Body of St. Mildred to
Canterbury, and deposited it in a peculiar Shrine in the Chapel of St.
Augustin's Abbey, a Draught of which is represented to the Readers View, in Mr.
Somners Survey of Canterbury; this Manor with all those Appendages (which like
so many Limbs, made up the Body of that demeasn, which supported the Cloister
of St. Mildred, as namely the Manors, of St. John's and St. Peter's, and St.
Laurence) was translated by that Prince likewise, and linked by his
Confirmation, to the Abbey of St. Augustins. But how both Minster and those
other Manors abovesaid, came originally to be the ecclesiastical patrimony,
shall be now my task to discover.

Egbert or Egbright the third Christian King of Kent, after Ethelbert had by a
tacit Consent or Connivance, permitted one Thunner, to paddle in the Blood of
his two Kinsmen; or, as William of Malmesbury will have it, his Brothers called
Ethelbert and Etheldred, persons of a pregnant (hope who like two early Stars,
as soon as they began to glitter and shine, fell suddenly into Umbrage, and
were hid and eclipsed, with their own Ruins;) he to assoil his hands from
those stains, this murder might seem to have bespattered them with, and to make
some Recompense or Expiation for so barbarous and clandestine an Assassination,
made an Herodian-oath, that he would give Domneva, Mother of these slaughtered
Innocents, whatsoever she would demand of him; and she, biassed and warped by
the Advice of the Monkish Counselors of those times asked of him as much
Ground to endow an Abbey with, as a tame Deer, which she had nourished, could
Run over at a Breath: to which the King had immediately consented had not one
Timor opposed this design, saying, It was too great a Boon for her to ask, or
for him to grant, upon which the earth opened, (says Thorn the fabulous
Chronicler of St. Augustins) and swallowed him up, and became both his Grave
and Executioner: and the place where he sunk in, was (as the abovesaid Author
asserts) until the reign of Richard the second, which was the time he lived
in, called Timors-leap Well. The King amazed with this stupendous Accident,
assented to her Demand, and the Deer being let loose ran forty eight
Ploughlands over, before it desisted.

And thus Domneva, by the Aid and Concurrence of the King, erected within the
precincts of Minster, a Monastery for veiled Nuns, over which she constituted
Mildred the first Abbess, who was Daughter to Wolfchere King of Mercia: and
she gathered to her Assistance an Assembly of seventy Virgins, who being
defirous to renounce the World, were here veiled for Nuns, by Theodorus then
Archbishop of Canterbury. And it seems this Mildred was a Virgin of that
austere, regular, and inculpable Life, in the Vogue and verdict of those cloudy
times, that her name is registered in the Calender of English Saints, and had
that Title attributed to her, both whilst her Body lay at Minster, and after
its translation to St. Austins. He that will survey the Bed-roll of her
Miracles recorded at large (one of which was, that when the Danes in the reign
of King Etheldred, harrassed this Island, and put this Cloister at Minster into
a heap of flame and ruins, her Body remained entire, amidst the Embraces and
Scorchings of that devouring and ravenous Element) let him read Thorn lately
printed, and the Book called Nova Legenda Angliae; and when he has done, he
will find that wisemen will laugh, not in Applause, but in Contempt of such
religious Romances. But I return to Minster, which, as I said before, being
transplanted into the patrimony of St. Augustins by Canutus Hugh, the Abbot of
that Cloister, to rescue this Town from that decay which menaced it, upon the
removal of the Body of St. Mildred; in the year 1116, obtained from Henry the
first, a Charter to hold a Market weekly at his Manor of Minster, which by
disuse and intermission, shrunk into neglect and oblivion: But the greatest
blow which was given to it, was the final suppression of the abovesaid Abbey;
and then it was rent from that Covent, and came to own the Signory of the
Crown, and was lodged in its revenue, until the ninth year of King James, and
then it was with the appendant Manors of St. John's, St. Peter's, and St.
Laurence, granted to Sir Philip Carry, and John Williams Esquire, whose Sons and
Heirs Sir John Williams, and John Carry Esquire, do now divide the Inhetitance
of it.

Sheriffs-court in this Parish (but more anciently styled in old Records
Sheriffs-hope) was the possession of Reginald de Cornhill, who had the Custody
of this County so long, that it was almost hereditary to him; so that he lost
his own Name, and assumed that of le Sheriff; from whence this place borrowed
the Appellation of Sheriffshope: but this could not so fence-in the title or
chain the possession to this Family, but that about the Beginning E. the third,
it came to confess the Corbies for proprietaries; and Robert de Corbie held it
at his death, which was in the thirty ninth of Edward the third, Rot. Esc. Number
9. and had Issue Robert Corbie, in whom the Male-line was wound up, so that
Joan his Daughter and Heir, by matching with Sir Nicholas Wotton, twice Lord
Mayor of London, annexed it to the demeasn of that Family, and from him did the
title by an unintercepted Current of Descent, glide down to Thomas Lord Wotton,
who settled it in marriage upon his eldest Daughter Katharine Wotton wedded to
the Lord Henry Stanhop; and she, not many years since, conveyed it by Sale to
Mr. Hen. Paramour, lately deceased, Brother to Mr. Thomas Paramour now Lord of
the Fee.

Monkton is a Manor, that almost from the first Infancy of Christianity in
this Island, was wrapped up in that demeasn, which was under the Signory of the
Monks of Christ-church in Canterbury, and, as the Book of Christ-church informs
me, was given to that Church by Ediva or Edgiva mother of Edmund, and Eadred or
Edred, both Kings, in the year 961. And if you will see how it was rated in the
Conquerours time, the Pages of Doomsday Book will inform you. Monkton (says
that Register) est Manerium Monachorum sanctae Trinitatis (that is
Christ-church,) and est de Cibo eorum, and in tempore Edwardi Regis, se
defendebat pro XX sulling is, and nunc se defendebat pro X and VIII, and est
appretiatum XL lb. This upon the surrender of the patrimony of Christ-church by
the Monks of that Cloister, into the hands of Henry the eighth, in the twenty
ninth year of his reign, was by him not long after, enstated on his new erected
Dean and Chapter of Christchurch, and continued until these Times, annexed to
their Revenue.

Monkton had Liberty to keep a Market weekly, which was obtained by Grant from
Henry the sixth, in the seventeenth year of his Rule, by John Salisbury then
Prior of Christ-church.

Stonar is the last place to be taken Notice of in this Island, and although it
be a Parish now without Inhabitants, and a member of the Cinque Ports belonging
to Sandwich, and has not enough left of its former Buildings, to direct you to
its original Situation; yet was it formerly a Haven-Town, and had a Fair held
there yearly five Days together, before the Feast of the Translation of St.
Austin which was granted to this place in the year 1104. In the reign of
William Rufus, about the year 1090, there arose a Suit in Law, between the
Londoners, and the Abbot of St. Augustins, (to whom this Manor was given, with
the residue of that revenue, which belonged to the Nunnery at Minster by King
Canutus, upon the translation of the Body of St. Mildred to that Cloister) as
touching the right of the Haven of Stonar, wherein by the favorable Aid of the
Prince, the Citizens (as Spot Chronicler to that Abbey reports) had the
overthrow. But the utter ruin and subversion of the Town, happened in the year
1385, about the ninth of Richard the second, at what time the French with 18
Sail of Galleys, designing to infest the Maritine parts of Kent, landed and
laid this Town of Stonar in Ashes, which ever since has found a Sepulcher in
its own Rubbish. And accuses the bad Government of Sir Simon de Burley, the
then Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports, and Constable of Dover-Castle as chief
Author thereof. For when his demands were utterly refused and denied, and not
suffered to have the inestimable Ornaments and Riches of St. Thomas Beckets
shrine, and the Jewels of St. Augustins removed to Dover-Castle, upon pretense
of safe-keeping them there, then he grew slack and remiss in securing the
Seacoast, and Isle of Thanett, so that when the Abbot of St. Augustins had
raised a considerable Strength of his Tenants about Northburn, and, bending
toward the Island, endeavored to have passed over at Sandwich; Sir Simon de
Burley would not permit him, so that he was constrained by a long and redious
March all Night, to go about by Fordwich and Sturrey into the Island, and made
such vigorous resistance, that the Enemies fled to their Galleys, without doing
any farther prejudice to the Islanders. Then Sir Simon procures the King to
send out his Mandate under the great Seal of England, requiring all that had
Lands, or belonged to Sandwich, to be Commorant there, and to find competent
Arms, according to the Quality of their Estates and Faculties, upon pain of
Imprisonment, and Forfeiture of all they had to loose. And sends in the Kings
Name to the Abbot to remove with his Forces from Thanet, to the Guard of
Sandwich, as a place of more Importance: But the Abbot (says Thorn that
continued the Chronicle of Spot) neither astonished with the power of the
Enemy, nor seduced with the Inticements, or terrified with the Menaces of the
Traitor Burley, remained in the Island to defend his own and his Tenants
possessions. After this, there is nothing observable at this place, until the
Suppression of the Abbey of St. Austins, and the Resignation of its Revenue,
into the hands of Henry the eighth, when this Manor with the rest of their
demeasn, having improved the patrimony of the Crown, it was in the fourth and
fifth of Philip and Mary, granted to Nicholas Crispe Esquire, from whom it is
now descended to Mr. Nicholas Crispe his Successor, the instant Lord of the Fee.

There was in elder times a Guard assigned for the security of the passage
between Sandwich and Stonar; for I find that Ed. the second granted Will.
Turk for Life in the seventh year of his reign, the passage between Stonar and
Sandwich, and the Perquisites and Emoluments emergent from it; which Grant, was
in the eighteenth year of that Prince, renewed by Patent, and invested for
Life, with all its adherences, in Ralph St. Laurence of the Isle of Thanet. And
then again in the thirteenth year of Edward the third, I find that that Prince
grants John Giboun, Marmario suo, those are the words in the Latin Record: but
what they import in English, I confess I am ignorant of the profits of the
passage between Sandwich and Stonar, for the defense and protection of it.

I shall wind up this Discourse, with informing the Reader, that the chiefest
Scenes both of War and Peace, have been laid in or near this Island. Rutupis or
Richborough on the opposite Shore, was an eminent Fortress of the Romans, and
the first presidiary Station that Antiquity represents them to have erected
within Britain. When Hengist arrived with his Saxons, to support the harrassed
and afflicted Britons, against the eruptions of the Picts, he first landed in
this Island, and when his Forces were broken by Vortimer at the Battle of
Alresford, he made Thanet his Retreat and Shelter; When Austin the Monk arrived
here in England with the light of Truth, to dispel the mists of Paganism and
Infidelity, and disseminate the Christian Religion amongst the Saxons, he found
his first Reception in this Island. How often the Danes made Thanet a Winter
Station for their Navies, when they made their barbarous Impressions on the
Maritime Coasts of this Nation, I think our Chronicles do sufficiently inform
us. And lastly, when Lewis the Dolphin was called in by the mutinous English
Barons, to assert their Quarrel with additional Supplies against King John, he
laid the first Scene of that War in this Island, which he afterward scattered
on the Face of this unhappy Nation.

The ETYMOLOGY, DERIVATION, and DEFINITION, of all the Hundreds and Parishes
mentioned in the Map of KENT, as they are derived from some Saxon Radix.
BLackheath is from a Saxon Radix. Bleach is turned into Bleke, which suites
with the high open and cold ^ituation of the Heath, which gives name to the
Hundred. Bromley in old English from Brom and Leah, which is Pasture now
called Ley, and is the same with Bromefield. Lesnes, at present called Lezen
denotes Meadow-Pasture in old English. Axtane suitable to the nature of Soil,
full of loose Stones, which yet is covered with Oaks, Ache in Saxon being an
Oak. Rookesley, in old Eng. a Pasture in which Rooks do Breed, as here they do
frequently. Codsheath, that is, the Heath on the hanging hill, commonly called
Godsheath. Westerham, that is, The Town standing in the Western Limits of the
Shire. Somerden, that is, The fruitful green hill in the Valley. Hoo and
sometimes written How, is of Saxon derivation from their word Hougen, which
signifies high, and sorteth well with the Situation of this Hundred that is
mounted aloft, and proudly overlooketh both the Rivers of Thames and Medway.
Shamell, written in Saxon, Scamell, is deduced from Schamell in Saxon a Stool,
and it is possible there was much Fish and Flesh exposed here to Sale on such
Seats. Toltingtrough, written in Doomsday Book, Toltentreu, derived from the
Saxon word Tealtrean to Totter, and Treow a Tree: the many Hills and Valleys in
this Hundred making it seem as if the Trees tottered, Chetham in old English
written Cetteham; The dwelling, placed on a rising hill. Wrotham, that is
Wortham, so named from the plenty of worts, that is, Wholesome herbs and plants
growing there. Lark-field, in Saxon written Learchenfeud, that is, the
Archersfield. Twyford, from the Situation within the two Rivers that insulate
the whole Hundred well-neer. Watchlingstone, that is, from the plenty of
whetstone dug in this Hundred. Brenchley, that is, Pastures full of well
branched Hedg-towes in old writing called Branchesley. Marden in old time
written Mireden: it broke well that name, for it stands in a Myry dirty Den.
Eyhorne formerly written Heihorne, and signifies the turning of water.
Maidston, in the Romans time was called in the Notitia, Medio vagum, in the
S^xons Medwegston, from the River supposed to run through the midst of the
Province. Milton, truly Midleton (so the Saxons rendered it, and truly too)
because it lies toward the midst of the County as it runs in longitude.
Tenham written anciently Teinham that is, the Town within the enclosure: from
Tein, Septum; and Ham, Vicus seu Oppidum. Feversham, as unhealthy as Tenham,
carries the very Tokens of it in the name. Boughton has the Radix of the
wooddiness of the down or hill under which it stands: and this definition may
suffice for all other of this Name elsewhere in Kent. Felborough gives name to
an Hundred; but where the place is cannot I yet discover: near to Chilham it
must be, and if I should show you my conceit of the place, you might happily
descant as much on me, as I do on it. Yet in regard the Barrow or grave where
J^l^us Laberius, Fieldmarshall to Julius Caesar, is yet remaining in view
there, it were no great torture to fetch it from thence: for Barrow is used for
a grave or little hill where burials have been. Chart-magna was anciently
granted by a Saxon King to Christ-Church in Canterbury: and as we call places
held by such devise, Bocland; so came this to be called Chart, and Cert in
Saxon. Wye so named from the water springing there and falling into Stour a
greater River. Bircholt, that is, The Birchen wood, Holt is the Saxon word for
wood. Calehill written Ceale hill from its naked and bleak Situation: Ceale in
Saxon signifying Callow. Ashford, Originally Eshetisford implying the great
plenty of Ashen Trees growing about the Forde. Blackborne is of as easy
definition as Blackwater, the color of that Element gives Addition to both.
Tenterden; see more of it in the Parishes. Barkley, that is, the Pasture
planted with Trees yielding Bark for Tanne, the Teutonicks or Saxons call a
Tanner, Barker. Cranebroke so called from the frequent resort of Cranes to the
Brook there. Rolvinden the Valley which rowls in and out. Selbrittonden, that
is, the Brittons woddy Den. East and West Bernfield may either seem to be
derived from Barren, which in English signifies likewise Barren, contracted
into Bern; or else from Beorn, which in Saxon signifies a Noble man: and it is
possible the custody of these two Hundreds was committed to one of that Rank.
Newynden, that is, the New Town in the Den. It being risen forth of the Ashes
of Anderida a Roman City thereby called by the Saxons Andredswald. Ringesloe
corruptly for Kingesloe the Kingshill. Blenegate, that is, the way to the Blene
or Common of Hearbage. Whetestable, that is, a steadfast place for wheat.
Westgate, that is, the West Gate of the City of Canterbury. Downhamford, that
is, a Ham upon a descent of an Hill by a Forde. Preston, that is, The
Priest-Town. Bridge, that is, The Town where there is a Bridge. Kinghamford,
that is, now called Kingston near Berham down that belonged to the King, and
all about it to the Archbishop and Church. Sea-Salter from its situation on
the Salt Sea. Wingham from its position between two Rivolets that incompass the
Eastern part of it like wings. Corniloe, that is, The Corney Hill, lo, that
is, Cumulus. Bewsborough now called Bewfield and Whitfield, from the French
word Beau for white and fair. Longport, that is, Long Town by Canterbury toward
Sandwich. Folkestone, that is, a Town Populous and full of Folk, so was this,
for in it there were four Churches a Monastery and some out-Chappels.
Lovingboroe however different in Orthography. This name be now from Lyminge it
must be found there or no where else. And because Opinion without proof is but
discourse and descant; Harken to the Evidence at Lyminge, which Edmerus a Monk
of Christ-Church in Canterbury calls Lovingborough and the Records of that
Church. Nonnesborough was the first house of veiled Virgins in England called
Nuns; and though the name of Lyminge was forlet and forlorn, and Nuneborough
passed current; and in short space, one liquid being changed into another, N.
into L. Loneburgh and that by a second mutation in Lovingborough you have the
disquisition and true result. Stowting so called from some old Fortresses and
Roman ramperes there. Heane in British signifies old. Birchholt Franchise or
Barony is by that addition known from a former Hundred, where the name is
Etymologized. Street, that is, A place where the Romans Praetorian way lay from
Lyme to Cant. now called Sonestreets began; in place of which we call the
viaregia. Worth signifies a place made strong and Teneable by fortifying. Ham,
that is, Home, Capitale Messuagium. Langport ut ante. St. Martine, A place of
Account heretofore by Romeney. New Church, that is, of later foundation. Aloe
bridge written anciently Alulphs bridge, that is, the Bridge of Alulphus some
Saxon. Oxney the Oxens water. Ackridg, that is, The Ridg of Oaks which in old
English are called Aches. Addesham from the old English and, that is, the old
ham, and so is this in Records. Addington of like Radix; only Ham implies an
open place, as Ton an enclosed one, from Tinan the Saxon word to hedge and
inviron. Alkham written Healkham, the Town in a Corner, from Healk in Saxon a
Corner. Allington is derived from the River Aigle, contracted into Ayl.
Aldington: here antiquity gives the Name, for And we say Ald, and now call it
it Allington. Allhallows, from the Churches Dedication which some call All
Saints: but the first is in the Hundred of Hoo, the second in Shepey. Apuldore,
written in Saxon Records Apuldre, that is, the Town fruitful in Apples. Ash
from that kind of Tree. Ashhurst, a wood of Ashes. Aylesford, from the Ayl
River so called after past Maidstone which imparteth its name to. Aynesford,
originally written Anglesford, The English men's Ford. Badelesemere, that is in
old Eng. the Circuit of Bad unfertile Pasture. Badchild, written in Saxon
Bekenceld, the chill or unhealthy water. Bapchild, in Saxon Beckchill, the
unhealthy chill water, a small stream they called a Becks and Chill implies
cold and Aguish Berfreiston, the Friars Court-Town. Bereham; derived from Bear
a Court, and Ham, a Village. Barming, woody Pasture, or rather Berme-Ing, the
moist pasture, Berme importing moisture. Becksbourne, for distinction from the
other Bornes, taking its Name from the Family of Beke that held part, and
sometime called Livingebourn from Archbishop Livinus, that built a Palace
here for himself and his Successors. Beausfield, from the fair open prospect
which it has to Sea and Land. Bekenham, from the Beke or small stream arising
there. Belsington, The fair Prospect, or rather, the Town by the watery pasture,
from Eyle in Saxon importing watery. Benenden from the Saxon word Binan within
or twofold. The Parish has several Dens in it. Bethersden, written
anciently Beatrixden, that is, Beatrix's Valley. Betshanger, originally
Vitalshanger, from one Vitalis owner of it near the conquest; hanger, because
seated on the hanging hill. Berested I find it near the Conquest to be of the
possession of the Crevequers of Leeds and I might deduce it from Bury or Bear,
old English for the Lords Court or dwelling, and then it fignifies the place
where the Court is, as Berewick is the way to the Court; if you consider the
Soil, you may call it Barren Sted. Bexley, contracted from Bekesley, Beke
signifies a stream, and Ley pasture. Bicnor, and Bicknore, from Becn and Nor,
Becn signifies a sign or symboll, and Nor the North, from whence the Saxon word
Beacnan to beckon or give some sign. Becn signum seu symbolum Becnan signum
dare. Bidborough, that is, by the Borough of Tunbridge, called Southborough,
the Saxon th being turned into d. Biddenden, in old English Bithanden, by the
Denns, for so is the situation of it in the weld of Kent. Birchington, The Town
where the Birch grew. Berling, that is, The Court lying on the Pasture. Bishop
borne, the Borne belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury. Blackmanstone,
written Bleachmanstone, that is, Man's bleak Town. Bobbing, it is probable is
deduced from an old Dutch word called Boban, which signifies to extend or
stretch it self out, and Ing a Meadow. Bocton, that is, the Town held by Book
or Charter. ( Boughton and Malherbe) ill Pasturage. Bocton (that is, Boughton)
Aloulph from Alulphus, a Saxon owner of it. Bonington, the Town bounded with
the Lawnds, from the Saxon word Bonna importing the Bound. Borden, from the
Breed of wild Bores on the Chestnut hills thereby. Burham, the Ham by or in the
Borough. Burmarsh, written anciently Burghmersh, the Marsh by the Borough.
Borefield, The Bores field. Boughton Montchelsey, from Montchensy, the old Lord
of Swanscomb was Lord of this place also. Boxley, that is, the Pastures full of
Box trees. Brabourne, from Bradebourne, East and West, the Broad Bourne.
Bradhurst, that is, the Broad Wood. Bradsted, vel locus latus. Bredgare, the
broad way. Brenset, from the brakish and brinish water. Brook, from its being
seated near some Brook. Brookeland, that is, Land by the Brook or water Course.
Bromefield, where the Fields are troubled with Broom. Buckland, that is,
Bockland: Boc is a Book or Charter by which Land was granted. Canterbury,
written Canterberig. The Kentish-Men's Berg or Fortress. Capell, that is, de
Capello. Chart-ham, that is, the Town held by Charter. Great and Little Chart,
written anciently Cert, which in Saxon signifies a Charter. Chalk de Calce.
Challoke, that is, De Quercis Nudatis. Charleton, that is, Ceorlton in Saxon,
The Grange or lusty Husband-mans Town: from this Radix, Churl comes. Charing
written anciently Cering extracted from the Saxon word Cerran to turn, there
being diverse wents and wanderings at this place. Chellesfield, The Chill and
cold place. Chepsted, that is, the Market place Locus nundinarius. Cheriton,
that is, from the growth of Cheries there. Chevening, from its lying under that
great hill which runs to Guldeford in Surrey which our Ancestors called
Chevins. Chidding stone in Sax. Ced-ingston, that is, the Town on the Brow of
the Lawnd: Ced in Saxon importing the Brow or Descent: Or, it is possible from
Cedwine, some Saxon Owner. Chilham; Some have distilled something of Julius
Caesar's name, conjecturing it to have been called Juliham for Julius-ham.
Indeed there he lost Julius Laberius Durus Camp-Master, or Field Marshal.
Chillenden, so called from the cold place it stands in. Chiselhurst, from the
growth of wood so called. Chistelet in the infancy of Christianity was given to
the Church of Canterbury by the Name of Cistelet, that is, the chosen lot or
portion. Cliffe from the situation upon the Cliffe in the Hundred of Hoo,
famous for a Synod held there. Cobeham Hall and Cobeham Town anciently Coptham,
that is, the Head-Village: from the Saxon Copt an Head. Coldred a village that
stands high and Bleak in East Kent and may brook the name of Cold-rode.
Cosmus Bleane. The Churches Dedication is to St. Cosmus and Damian. Cowden from
that sort of Beast called Cows which are in other places called Keyne. Coudham,
The Cold-ham near Baston and Down. Cowling The Cow's pasture. Crayford in old
Deeds Crecanford from the Ford or River Crecan which gives name to St. Mary
Crey. Paul's Crey, North Crey (and Footes Crey, from one Votes that held it in
the Conqueror's time.) Cucston, in Doomsday Book written Cocleston. Coclecoe is
an old privilege to be free from answering in a place, foreign to where he
inhabits. Crundall The Dale under a high-Crown'd hill. Darent named so from the
River on which it stands. Dartford contracted from Darentford on which it
stands. Davington or Devington, extracted from Dew which imports Dew or
Moisture, Ing a Meadow, and Ton a Town. Deal sometime written Dale, shows the
situation to be in a plain valley. Denton the Town in a Descending place.
Deptford, that is, the Deep Ford. Detling, that is, lying deep under a high
hill. Dimchurch, written anciently Demchurch, that is, the Church upon the Dam.
Ditton from Dike which in old time was written Dyghton, and from thence the
contract, Ditton. Dodington, The Town on the Sedgy Lawnd from Dod that
signifies the Sedge on the Bank of a River; or rather, from Duda some Saxon
Owner. Dover; by the Romans called Dubris, from the British word Dufir, which
signifies steep. Down, a small Town high situated. Eastbridge, that is from
its Eastern standing in the Marsh. East-Church in Shepey, from the like
Situation. Eastwell from the low situation in a bottom. page 354. Edenbridge,
that is, from the Bridge and River Eden. Eden, so called quasi Aqua, i.e. Ey
Saxonice, and vallis i. e. Den, The Riveror water in the Den or Valley.
Egarton, a Parish bleakly and sharply situated. Eigtham called so from the
eight Hams or Boroughs contained within it. page 140. Elmesley, The Elmey
pasture. Elmested, denominated from Elmested, locus. Elmeston, The Town among
Elmes. Elham or Helham, quia inter Colles locatur. Eltham, Eldham, the old
Town. Eseling, quia in Orienti part jacet Estling. Ewell, the watery bottom.
Eythorne, olim scribitur Eigthorne, The eighth Thorn. Fairefield, in the Marsh
de bello Campo. East and West Farleigh were written Ferneleigh from Fern
Fern, and leigh a Shelter or Covert. Farneburgh, from the Soil about it
yielding Fearne and Brakes. Farmyngham, The ancient name is Fremingham from the
stream running through it as Fremington in Devon, from a small stream running
through it into Tawe. Faulkeham and Falkeham villa populi. Fleet both North and
South, that is, from the Thames that sometime came up. Fordwich, that is, the
crooked turning river. Frensted, and vulgarly Wrensted, Freons-sted the
Freemans place. Frittenden, derived from Frith, a Chase; and Den, a valley.
Frensbery anciently Freons-Berig the Freeman's Court. Gillingham, derived from
some Gill or Rivolet passing through it, and emptying it self into the Medway.
Godmersham Land given to God, and that Church, bounded by Meres. Goodneston,
that is, a good fertile Town and Country. Gowdhurst, anciently and properly
writtten Goodhurst, The good Wood. Graveney, expounded by the ensuing Town:
Gravesend quasi Grevesend the Limits of the Liberty. The other, expressing a
moist and watery place of like Liberty. Grainey Isle, from Corn and Greyn so
called. Greenwich the turning of the River through the Green Meadows. Grome,
the Bridge over a small stream called Grome, and by it a Mansion house so
called. Guston, that is, Goston, where Goss and Furs did grow. Hadlow from
Heafod, contracted into Head and Low, importing the small Head or knob, Cumulus
in Latin. Hakington now called St. Stephens, the land proportioned into Hages.
Haga in Saxon denoting a Circle. High Halden written anciently Healden, that
is, the Healthful Valley. Halling written Healling Heathful Meadow. Halsted,
that is, Hail or Healthy place. Halstow written Haly stow, Holy place. High
Halistow, Holy place given to provide Service Books for Christ-Church, in the
Saxons time. Ham by Sandwich Signify small Homes or dwellings. Ham by Warhorne
Signify small Homes or dwellings. Harbledown, that is, The Hill of pasture and
Herbage. Upper and Nether Hardres are derived from Erd the earth, and Reys
little Rils or Brooks. Haretsham written Heretsham, the Lords Town. Hearty
Island lying in the Form of a Heart Insula Cordis vel Cordialis: or rather from
Herets-Ey, in Saxon the Lords water. Hartley, Herets-ley, the Lords pasture.
Hartlip, Labium Cordis, Hastingleigh is derived from two Saxon words, Heastan
which signifies the Highest, and Leah, campus or Locus. Hawkhurst, that is,
Hawkeswodd where Hawks had Eyeries. Hawking, that is, Hawks Meadow. Hawtes
Bourne: The Hawtes after Shelving owed Bourne. Hearne, so called from the
Breeding of Hernes there. Bid translates Herne by Casa, as if Herne signified
a House. Hearnehill distinguished from the former by the situation under
Boughton hill. Hedcorne famous for the best and chief Corn and biggest Poultry.
Heys yielding plenty of Hay. Hever deduced from two Saxon words, Hey water, and
Over signifying some passage over the water. Higham, that is, Highly seated.
Hinxell, that is, Hynds-hill. Hythe, that is, Portus, a Haven for Ships to
arrive in. Hollingbourne, the Bourn rising in the hole. Hoo from Hough in
Saxon, high. Hope in Romney Marsh Ecclesia spei. Horsmanden, The Horsmans
Valley. Horton Kirkby, that is, by the Church. Horton by Chartham. Horton
Monks, the Durty Town, from Hoar which imports any Filth. Hoathfield, that is,
Heathfield. Hougham, The high Town. Hucking anciently Houge-Ing, the high
Lawnd. Hunton or Huntington, The Town to hunt in from the Saxon word Huntan.
Ifield written Eyfeld, that is, the watery Field Ightham, See Eigtham. Ickham,
anciently Yeockham, the Town of arable Land, from Yeock an Acre of Land.
Ivychurch, written anciently Eyvey Church, that is, the Church by the water.
Iwade vulgarly, originally Eywade, The passage over the water. Kempsing, from
some Camp or Fortress. Kenardington, from Kein-Erd-ington, no Earth in the
Town, from the Moorish Situation. It is probable likewise it might derive its
Name from one Cyneward a Saxon Owner. Kennington from Cinningston, the Kings
Town. Keston, Keysers Town by Baston the old Roman Colonie. Kingsdown by
Farningham. Kingdowne by Milsted, The Kings Hill. Kingston by Barham, The Kings
Town. Kingsnoth, the Kings portion, from Snoth or Sneath, which in Saxon
signifies portion. Knolton, the Town on the Knoll of an Hill. Lamberhurst, The
wood of Lambert. Langdon East and West, the long down or hill. Langley, the
long pasture. Lang Port, long Town or Port. Laybourne, the Pasture Bourn, Aqua
in Palude. Lee, i. e. Leigh, in old English, Lega in old Lat. a sheltry place.
Leeds, written Leods Castle: The Peoples Castle, that is, something belonging
to the people. Lenham, a Station called by the Romans Duro-Lenum, the water of
Lenum. Leigh by Tunbridge, under the hill. Leigh by Greenwich, under the
shelter. Leisdown, the Pasture Down. Leveland, written in Saxon Leofland, that
is, Terra Dilecta. Lewisham, the watery Town. Lydd, from the Saxon Lida,
denoting the Shore. Lyme, called by the Romans Limen, that is, Portus, for they
landed here at there second attempt. Lyminge, written Limening, The Pasture by
Limen. Lingsted, the place where Fern grows, Ling in Saxon denoting Fern.
Linton or Lington, The Ferny Town. Little Pourne, to distinguish from
Beaks-Bourne, and the other Towns of that Termination upon the Bourn.
Longfield, from the long extent of it. Lose, written in ancient Saxon Hlose,
which signifies Lot, being indeed allotted by Donation to the Priory of
Christ-church. Luddenham, written anciently Loudenham. Luddesdown, anciently
Leodsdun, the peoples hill, from the Leod the People. Lillingston, written
Lollingston, from the Purling stream running by it. Maidston, written anciently
Medwegston, that is, Medways Town. Malling, defined by Mr. Lambert to come from
the rising of water springs there called Meolling. Maplescombe, that is, the
valley of Maple trees. Marden vide ante inter Hundredor. nomina. Margate in
Thanet, written Meregate, that is, the way to the Sea, from Mere the Sea, and
Gate a way or passage. St. Margarets near Dartford. St. Margarets near
Rochester. St. Margarets At Cliffe near Dover. St. Marey, On Crey River. St.
Mary's, in the Hundred of How. Marsham the Town in the way to the Mersh. St.
Martines by Canterbury. Mepeham, written in Saxon Meopen-Ham, that is, the
solitary Village. Mereworth, the fortified place, derived from Worth a
Fortress, and Mere a Fence or Boundary. Mersham the same as Marsham. Mers-ton,
an Obscure place above Frendbury, the Name is taken from its nearness to the
Mersh. Midley, that is, in the middle of the pasture a Parish and Church
decayed and now sine Cura. Milsted, the place near some Mill. Milton quasi
Midleton, the Town near the mid County. Milton juxta Gravesend, in the mid way
between the two Manors of Parock and Gravesend. Milton by Canterbury, that is,
from a Mill there placed. Minster both in Shepey and Thanet have their Names
from the Monasteries that were there. Moldash, a mould on which Ashen Trees
take growth. Mongeham magna and parva, i.e. Monks ham. Monkton in Thanet, the
Monks Town. Moreston, that is, the Town by the Moor. Mottingham, the Town
proudly seated, it is derived from Mod in Saxon Proud or lofty. Nackington or
Nattington, the Town on the Neck of the Lawnd. Nettlested, that is, the place
where Nettles grow. Newenham in the way between Ospringe and Hollingborne, so
called in respect of some old Station thereby, it may be now not known.
Newchurch in Romney Marsh, later built then the neighbor Churches. Newenden, a
new planted Town by Anderida, an old Roman Station and City. Newington by
Sittingborne, so called because risen up since the Romans Colony and Station
near Key-Coll-hill, that is, Caesar's Colony in this Parish. Newington near Hyth
in like respect as the former, because of some old Station of the Romans at
Castel-hill: where and near the shorn Cliffe, Roman Coin has been found,
says Leland. Nokeholt, that is, a Corner in the wood, in old English Noke is a
Corner. Nonington, belonging to Nuns. North-Bourne, that is, The North Brook.
Norton, in respect of situation in opposition to Sutton, that is, Southton.
Nutsted, that is, Nucum locus. The Nut-Country. Offaham, as derived from some
Donation of K. Offa. Orgars wick in Romney Marsh: Wicke signifies in old
English a way, and sometimes vicus, and Orgarus some Saxon Owner. Orlanston
sive Orlaston, from Over contracted into Orelanston, that is, the Town above
the Mersh. Orpinton, is much changed in the present Orthography; for Dorpendun
was the old name partly British and Saxon, signifying the head of the water
rising under the Hill there. Ospringe, so called from that small Ouse or Brook
springing there. Ostenhanger, the Viscount Strangfords house so called from the
Eastern situation: Oast is East, and hanger represented a hill of easy assent.
Otteham, from the growth of Oats there. Ottford, that is, the River where
Otters Breed. Ottringdun, The hill and pasture fit for the sowing of Oats.
Our by Davington, so named from its situation over the Brook betwixt it and
Feversham, contracted into Ore. Oxney, The Oxens Island. Padlesworth, The Court
seated in a Ground infested with Frogs, from Padle in Saxon a Frog. Paul's Crey,
from the Churches Dedication, and the River Crey on which it stands. Patricks
Bourne, from the Churches Dedication. Peckham East and West, written Pekenham,
that is, the Town on the Peak or Top of the Hill. Penshurst, the head of the
wood Brit. and Sax. Pepenbury, commonly Penbury, from its position being the
Head of the Bury. Petham, the Town lying low in a pet or pit. Fluckley, the
Pasture made by grubbing up the wood. Plumsted, the place where plenty of plums
grew. Preston juxta Wingham, the Priest-Town. Preston in Ayle-ford, a Mansion
of the Friars. Queenborough, A Town incorporated and a Castle builded by King
Edward the third, for Queen Philippa Daughter to the Earl of Henault. Radigunds
Abbey alias Broadsole, a Monastery founded near a broad soal or pond. Rayneham,
the Town over the Reys or Water-tydes, and inlets for passage as St. Mary Over
Rey in Southwark. Reculver, is that Regulbium mentioned by Pancirollus in his
Notitia Provinciarum: one of the Stations of the Count of the Saxon Shore.
River in the valley near Dover, so called of the River. Richborough, called
Ricksborough in old Deeds, that is, the Kingdoms Borough, from Rick a
Kingdom, and Burgh a Borough or fenced place in Saxon. Rydlingswould, The Down
where there was pasture for Horse. Ridley, the Horse pasture. Reyesh, the Ashen
water, Rey is a little Rill. Rippeley, the Pasture bank. River-hill by
Sevenoke, full of Ripes and Springs. Rochester, Roffanceaster, in the Romans
time built by one Roffe says Bid. Rodemarsham, the Roadway into the Marsh,
Rokeing, The pasture frequented with Rooks. Rolvenden, contracted into Romden,
and Rounden, so named from the rolling Valley. Romeney, the Romans water, that
before the enclosure of Romney Marsh was Navigable up to the Foot of Limen-hill
and Stutfall Castle. Saltwood, so called of its bordering on the Salt Sea.
Sandhurst, that is, the wood on the Sandy Soil. Sandwiche, Wiche is a turning
River in a Sandy soil. Seal written Zeal, and Dela Zeal, because the Pilgrims
used here to lodge, who went to visit St. Thomas Beckets Shrine at Canterbury.
Selling, from Sell which signifies Timber, and Ing a Meadow or low Ground as
Ingulphus uses it. Selling juxta Feversham, the same. Sevenoke, that is, from
seven great Oaks that grew there. Sevington, that is, the Town with sewing
ponds. Shadoxhurst, that is the hurst of shady Oaks. Shelvich, from its being
seated or standing on the Shelvingwich, which signifies some turning Brook or
River. Shepey Island, so named from the Breeding and Feeding Sheep. Sholedon,
the Hill upon the Shole or Shore. Shorn, in old English Sorne, made shorn or
naked. Shoreham, not derived from the Seashore as that in Sussey: but from
Sore Bare. Siberts would, Siberts Sheep walk. Sittingbourne, that is, from a
bubling and boiling like Bourne arising there. Smerdene, the Fat-Valley. Smede
and Smeth, in old English, a smooth plain field. Snave, A Trench or Bank
artificially cut. Snargate, Snare-Gate, the way cut, from the Saxon word Snere,
cut. Snothland, vulgarly Snodland, lying with a snout into Medway. Spelehurst,
the Learned Wood. Stalesfield, the Field on the Bank from Stey in Saxon, a
Bank. Stanford, that is, Stony Brook. Stanstead, that is, Stony place.
Staplehurst, Staple signifies firm sure and certain, and Hurst a Wood. Steling,
from Steal-Ing, the Stall on the Lawnds. St. Stephens, by Canterbury. Stoake in
Hoo, is Locus in Latin as Sted, and gives termination to many places.
Stodemersh, the Mersh devoted to the Breeding of Mares: Stood in Saxon being a
Mare. Stockbery, that is, the Woody Bery, or Fortress in the Woody place: for
here was a Castlelet of the Criols heretofore. Stone, Ad lapidem, here was an
ancient Castle of the Northwoods in a stony Country. Stone by Ospringe, is so
derived from the soil. Stoner more aptly Stonoore, an ancient place on the
North-side of Sandwich Haven where a Town had been. Nore, i.e. North. Stowting,
a Town where the Romans made some place of strength near the forced way from
Lyme to Canterbury. Stourmouth, that is, Ostium fluvii de Stour. Stroud, the
same with Strand, that is, the Bank of Medway against Rochester. Stoutfall
Castle, a work of the Romans under Lymehill, invironing ten Acres of ground, a
strong piece in our Ancestors Opinion, which from thence and the enclosure the
name was imposed; Stout strong, and Faud turned into Fauld a Fold, contracted
since into Fall. Sondridg, so called from the Ridg of Sand lying there. Sutton,
South-Town. Sutton Valence, because Valence E. of Pembroke was Lord of it.
Swale Cliffe, so called because of its standing near the water Swale.
Swainscombe, a valley, into which the course of the Thames came up, and Swain
of Denmark wintred his Fleet there. Swinefield, the Field where Swine did
frequent; like Swinested, Swinesey, Swinbroke, and Swineford. Shinglewell by
Northfleet, a low soil stony and full of Shingle; or else from the use of wood
instead of tyle which we call shingle. Tanington, written anciently Thanington,
that is, the Thanes or Lords Town on the Pasture. Teinham, the enclosed
Village, from Tein, septum. Tenderden, or rather Thein-warden, the Thanes Guard
in the Valley. Terston, from the Town's being torn and divided by the Medway.
Thurnham, Thurn in Saxon is a Tower, according to Ortelius, and here in this
Parish stood Goodward-Castle high upon the Top of Thurnham-hill. Throwley, in
Saxon a passing through pasture Grounds. Tilmanston, a soil employed to
Tillage. Tongue, a Parish, and a decayed Castle, of old called Thong, as if
ambuted by lines which the Saxons called Thongs. Trottescliffe, vulgo Troseley,
it lies under a steep hill, and takes its termination from Trottes to vex, and
Cliff an hill. Tudeley, and sometime Twidley, two pastures. Tunbridg, from the
many Bridges in the Town, there being seven in the high Road through the Town.
Tunstall, written Dunstall, that is, the place upon the Hill. Vlcombe, and
sometime I have seen it written Welcombe, it is holden of the honor of Augie
or Ew, and signifies the old valley. Upchurch near Rainham, so named from the
Churches standing high upon the side of an hill. Upnore, a Castle upon the Nore
or North-side of Medway, below Frendsbery. Warehorne, from Hurne a Corner, and
Ware a place. Waldershire, that is, pertaking of the Wald, that is, wood
Country. Walmer, the Wall against the Sea. Waltham, the Ham in the Wood. St.
Werburgh, the dedication of Hoo Church. Weredon, the hill in Shepey by the Sea
Ware. Watrinbury, the Courton the watery Meadow. West-Bere, the West Court or
Bergh. West-Cliffe, near Dover Castle, the West Cliffe. West-Hith, the West
Port, Hith is Portus. Westerham, the farthest Western Town in Kent. Westwell,
the Town of Situation in a low West place. Whetestable, the Staple place for
Wheat. Wichling, that is, the crooked or winding Pasture. Wickham, that is,
Domus super vicum West. Wickham East, the same from Wic the high way.
Wickham-Breus, vulgo Brooks, is so called from the liquidness of the place, and
the Lord Breux of Brember Lord of it. Willesborough, that is, the Borough in a
low place. Welmington, so called, in Saxon Wells are called Bottomes. Wemings
Would, the Sheperdesses Woulds. Wingham, so named of the two Rivers which
inclaspe it like two wings VVitersham, that is, VVaterisham in the Isle of
Oxeney. VVouldham, that is, the Town under the Would. VVolwich, written
anciently VVoldwich, that is the Turning River under the Would. VVoodchurch,
that is, the Church in the Wood. VVinsborough, that is, VVodensborough, from
Woden the Saxons Mercury to whose worship they dedicated one day in the week
from thence called Wednesday. Wotton, quia Boscatus, VVoddeton. VVerth, the
Court. VVormshill, Mons virmium. VVrotham secund. G. Lambert, the Town of
Worts. Wye, so called from the water VVy, being a Name given to many places in
respect of some stream or Brook, in British it signifies Vaga or wandering.
Yalding, Ing says Ingulphus signifies a Meadow or low ground, it is written
anciently Ealding, that is, the ancient Meadow.
In the Letter L, Lidden is omitted, which signifies the Valley near the Shore,
Lida in Saxon signifies Littus, and Den a Valley.

FINIS.
depiction of scale The scale of English miles
map of Kent A NEW DESCRIPTION OF KENT
Divided into the five Lathes thereof and subdivided into Baylwickes: and
Hundredes; with the parish Churches contained within every of the same
Hundredes. All which, for better understanding, are distinguished with
varyetye of colors. Comprehendinge as well the Cities: the usual Market
towns: and the Ports, with their members lying in Kent: As also such of the
howses of the Nobylitie and Gentrye as the Plott could conveniently receive.
Wherein moreover the nature of the soil (whether plain, Hyllye, or wooddye) is
more diligently observed: and the tractes of Ryuers (...)




