The Antiquity, Legality, Reason, Duty and Necessity OF PRAE-EMPTION AND
POURVEYANCE, FOR THE KING: OR, Compositions for his Pourveyance: As they were
used and taken for the Provisions of the KINGS Household, the small charge and
burden thereof to the PEOPLE, and the many great Mischiefs and Inconveniences
which will inevitably follow the taking of them away.

By FABIAN PHILIPPS.

Manilius 3, Perque tot Aetates hominum tot tempora and Annos
Tot Bella and varios etiam sub pace labores.
Virgil Aeneid. lib. 8. -- Sic placida populos in pace regebat
Deterior donec paulatim Decolor Aetas
Et Belli Rabies and Amor successit habendi.
London, Printed by Richard Hodgkinson, for the Author, and are to be sold by
Henry Marsh, at the sign of the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane, 1663.

To the Right Learned and truly Noble Lord, Christopher Lord Hatton, Baron of
Kirkby, Knight of the Bath, Governor of the Isle of Guarnesey, and one of the
Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
THE Holy Evangelist St. Luke in his Gospel and History of the Acts of the
blessed Apostles, when he inscribed or Dedicated it to his friend Theophilus,
has given us to understand that the Dedication of Books unto such as would
read and peruse them is no late or Novel usage; for it was in those times, or
shortly after, not thought to be unfitting or unnecessary to take the
approbation and opinion of Grave and Learned men, of such things as were to be
made public, as Plinius Junior in his Epistles informs us so that it may with
reason and evidence be concluded that the Dedication of Books was not
originally to procure the favor of some great or good Man, neither were the
Epistles Dedicatory heretofore acquainted with those gross Flatteries,
untruths, or immense and accumulated praises of the Patrons or their Ancestors,
which some Foraign Printers for their own private gain, do use in publishing
Books out of some Copies and Manuscripts left by the deceased Authors, or as
too many German and other Authors have of late stuffed their Dedications
withal, which Heroic and great Souls do so little relish, as the Books
themselves would meet with a better entertainment if they came without them;
but one of the best and most approved usages of Dedications, has certainly and
most commonly been derived from no other Source or Fountain, then the great
desire which the Author had (there being before printing most probably but a
few Copies sent abroad) to receive the friendly censure and approbation of some
Learned man, who would in those days carefully read and peruse it; and not as
now too many men do oscitanter and cursorily take a view only of the
Frontispice or Title, and lay it in the Parlor or Hall Windows to be idly
turned over by such as tarry to speak with them, or else crowd it in their
better furnished then read or understood Libraries, to make a Muster or great
show of such Forces as they have to bring into the Field of Learning when there
shall be any occasion to use them, but neither then or before are able to find
or say what is in them.

But your Lordship being Master of the Learning in Books as well as of an
excellent well furnished Library, with many choice Manuscripts never yet
published, and very many Classick Authors and Volums printed and carefully
picked and gathered together out of the Gardens of good letters, which an
unlearned and reforming Rebellion, and the Treachery of a wicked servant hired
to discover them, did very much diminish.

And your Eye and Judgment being able before hand to Calculate the Fate of the
Author in the good or bad opinion of all that go by any Rules or measure of
right Reason, Learning or Judgment. I have adventured to present unto your
Lordship these my Labors in the Vindication of the Legality, Antiquity, right
use and necessity of the Praeemption and Pourveyance of the Kings of England,
or Compositions for the Provisions of their Royal household, for that your
Lordship is so well able to judge of them, and having been Comptroller of the
household to his Majesty's Royal Father the Martyr, King CHARLES the First, and
to the very great dangers of your person, and damage of your Estate, like one
of David's good servants gone along with him in all his Wars and troubles, when
as he being first assaulted, was enforced to take Arms against a Rebellious and
Hypocritical part of his people in the defense of himself and his people, their
Religion, Laws, and Liberties, and the Privileges of Parliament, and not only
remained Faithful to him, during his life, but after his death unto his
banished and strangely misused Royal Issue, when Loyalty and Truth were
accounted crimes of the greatest magnitude, and like some houses infected with
the plague, had more then one set upon them with a Lord have mercy upon us.

And did whilst that blessed King continued in his Throne and Regalities, so
instruct your self in those Excellent Orders and Government of his house, as
you have been able to enlighten and teach others, amongst whom I must
acknowledge my self to have been one, and out of a Manuscript carefully
collected by your Lordship concerning the Rules and Orders of the Royal
household, which your Lordship was pleased to communicate unto me to have been
very much informed, which together with the many favors with which you have
been pleased to oblige me, the encouragements which you have given me to
undertake this work, and the great respect and veneration which I bear unto
your Lordships grand accomplishments in the Encyclopaidia, large extent and
traverses of all kind of learning, and your knowledge of Foraign Courts and
Customs, which being very extraordinary, if you were of the rank of private
men must needs be very much more when it shall be added to the eminency of your
Birth and quality, and the Trust and Emploiments which his Majesty has been
pleased deservedly to confer upon you, have emboldened me to lay these my
endeavors before your Lordship, submitting them to an utter oblivion and
extinguishment, and to be stifled in the Birth or Cr^dle, if they shall not
appear unto your Lordship to be worthy the public view and consideration.

Wherein although some may feast and highly content their Fancies with
censuring me, that I have been to prodigal of my labors in proving either at
all or so largly the antiquity or legality of the Kings just Rights unto
Prae-emption and Pourveyance or Compositions for them, when as the Act of
Parliament in Anno 12* of his now Majesty's reign, for taking them away does
give him a Recompense for them; yet I may, I hope escape the censure or blame
of setting up a Giant of Straw, and fighting with it when I have done* or of
being allied to such as fight with their own shadows, or trouble themselves
when there is neither any cause or necessity for it, when as the Act of
Parliament for taking away Pourveyance and the Court of Wards and Liveries, and
Tenures by Knight Service, either of the King or others in Capite, or Socage in
Capite did not expressly allege or allow those Tenures and the incidents
thereof to be their just rights, but only that the consequences upon the same
have been much more burthensom, grievous and prejudicial to the Kingdom, then
they have been beneficial to the King; and alleging also that by like
experience it has been found that notwithstanding diverse good, strickt and
wholesome Laws, some extending as far as to life for redress of the grievances
and oppressions committed by the persons employed in making provisions for the
Kings household, and of the Carriages and other provisions for his occasions,
yet they have been still continued, and several Counties have submitted
themselves to sundry rates, Taxes, and Compositions to redeem themselves from
such vexations and oppressions, and that no other remedy will be so effectual
as to take away the occasion thereof, especially if satisfaction and recompense
shall be therefore made to his Majesty his heirs and Successors, so as very
many or most of the seduced and factious part of the people of this Nation
having in the times of our late confusions been mislead or driven into an ill
opinion of it, may with the residue of the people be easily carried along with
the crowd to a more then imagination, that the Pourveyance and Prae-emption,
was no less then a very great grievance, and that his Majesty was thereby
induced to accept of a recompense or satisfaction for it, and permit the people
to purchase the abolition of that which they supposed to have been a grievance,
which do appear neither to be a grievance nor recompense, but a great loss to
the King, and as much or more in the conclusion consideratis considerandis to
the people.

And that the vulgar, and men of prejudice and ignorance are not so easily, or
with a little to be satisfied as the learned, and that in justification of a
business from those Obloquies so unjustly and undeservedly cast upon it, and so
highly concerning the King and his people, and in a way nullius ante trita
pede, altogether untroden (wherein I cannot honor and obey the King as I ought,
if I should not take a care of the rights of his people which is his daily
care, nor love them or my self, if I should not do all that I can to preserve
his regalities) I can be conscious to my self of many omissions and
imperfections, in regard of sundry importunities of Clients affairs and some
troublsome business of mine own which either could not or would not give me any
competency of time or leisure, but did almost daily, and many times hourly
take me off as soon as I was on, and so interrupt and divert me, as I had
sometimes much ado when I got to it again, to recollect my scattered thoughts
and materials, and Writing as the Printer called for it, with so great a
disturbance and a midst so many obstructions, may possibly be guilty of some
deformities in the method or style, some defects or redundancies, impertinent
Sallies or digressions, or want of coherencies which might have been prevented
or amended, if I could have enjoyed an Otium or privacy requisite for such an
undertaking, or have had time to have searched the Archives, and too much
unknown or uninquired after Records of the Kings just and legal Regalias, or
those multitudes of liberties, customs, and privileges which the Lords of
Manors and their Tenants do at this day enjoy by the favor of the King and
his royal Progenitors, or to have raked amongst the rubbidge of time long ago
tripped over, and the not every where to be found Abdita rerum, or recesses of
venerable Antiquity, or to have viewed all at once what I had done in its parts
and delineations, and perused it before it was printed in a complete Copy with
a deliberation necessary to a work of that nature and concernment.

But howsoever I speed therein I shall like those that brought the Pigeons or
Turtle Doves instead of a more noble sacrifice, content my self libasse
veritati, to have offered upon the Altar of truth, what my small abilities and
greater affections could procure whereby to have incited such as shall be more
happy in their larger Talents to assert those truths which I was so willing to
have vindicated, and to have rectified that grand and popular groundless
mistake and prejudice, which multitudes of the common people have by the late
Usurping Powers been cunningly taught to have against it; And whether they
intended evil or good thereby, might be easily misled or mislead themselves to
scandalize such an Ancient, Legal, and reasonable custom, and Right of the
King, when (as the great Civilian Paulus says) Rerum imperiti censuram sibi de
rebus quibusdam arrogant and volentes esse Legis Doctores nesciunt de quibus
loquuntur nec de quibus affirmant ambitiose pervicaciter insolenter inepte de
magnis rebus statuere: And it was but a trick of the godless Tyrant and his
company of State Gypsies to make the people the more able or willing to
covenant and engage for the maintenance and perpetuity of their Sin and
Slaverie, and to bear and suffer greater burdens, taxes, and oppressions then
ever Englishmen did before: And whatsoever the Fate of these my labors shall
appear to be, can conclude in magnis voluisse sat est, and subscribe my self

Your Lordships affectionate servant Fabian Philipps.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. THe Antiquity of the Royal Pourveyance and Praeemption for the
maintenance of the Kings Houses, Navy, Castles and Garrisons, attended by a Jus
Gentium, and reasonable Customs of the most or better part of other Nations,
page 9. CHAP. II. Of the Use and Allowance of Pourveyance in England and our
British Isles, p. 44. CHAP. III. The reason of Praeemption and Regal
Pourveyance, or Compositions for the Provision of the Kings Household. p. 97.
CHAP. IV. The right use of the Prae-emption and Pourveyance, or Compositions
for them. p. 234 CHAP. V. Necessity that the King should have and enjoy his
ancient rights of Prae-emption, Pourveyance or Compositions for them. p. 268
CHAP. VI. The small charge of the Pourveyance or Compositions for it, to or
upon such of the people as were chargeable with it. p. 329 CHAP. VII. That the
supposed plenty of money, and Gold and Silver in England, since the Conquest of
the West Indies by the Spaniards, has not been a cause of raising the prices
of food and victuals in England. p. 341 CHAP. VIII. That it is the interest of
the people of England to revive again the Ancient and legal usage of his
Majesty's just rights of Praeemption and Pourveyance, or Compositions for them.
p. 400
The Antiquity, Legality, Reason, Duty and Necessity of Prae-emption and
Pourveyance, for the King: Or, Compositions for his Pourveyance, as they were
used and taken for the Provisions of the Kings Household, the small charge and
burden thereof to the People, and the many great Mischiefs and Inconveniences
which will inevitably follow the taking of them away.
THat wise Council and Saying of Solomon, the wisest of Men as well as Kings,
To fear God and honor the King* Prove. 24.21.
and not to meddle with them who are given to change, should if it were not a
part of the Sacred Volumes not be denied an admission into every man's care and
observation to follow that advice, as well as to believe that it is good to do
so, when as every Nation in the World, in every age and generation of mankind,
may by woeful experience many times acted over subscribe unto it, or be ready to
make Oath or Affidavit of the many ill consequences which have very often
happened in the Trial and event of the contrary, and is the more to be followed
in the retaining of good Laws, or not changing them upon Light, seldom, small
or inconsiderable inconveniences, for that those ancient and righteous Judicial
and Moral Laws of Moses written or dictated by God himself, and originally
fitted for the Jewish Government, and the Manners and Customs of that his
Darling and beloved people, were not certainly intended to Lacquie, after the
humors, designs, passions or Interests of men, and those people who were to
obey and observe them, but to remain and continue as fixed and permanent, as
they were good and profitable, for otherwise they would not have been commanded
to be Deuteronomy. 6*8.9.11.18.
taught their Children and after Generations, to be laid up in their hearts and
their Souls, written upon the Posts of their houses, and on their Gates, bound
for a Sign upon their hands, and as Frontlets between their eyes.

For howsoever other Laws which have not so divine an Original, or not being de
jure Naturae, and drawn from that holy and excellent fountain of Scripture, are
and may upon a true (not fantastic or imaginary ballancing) and due
consideration of Conveniences, with Inconvenien^es, be alterable, and either
totally taken away or reformed. Yet when the ages past, and daily experiences,
have not only told us, but all the people of the world, that new Laws cannot
give us that certainty of their effects which the old have done, nor can be
like Crystal, so clear and transparent, as to give us beforehand a liberty of
discerning the effects hoped for, and that experience is by much a better guide
then hopes or expectation; we may with some assurance of reason conclude that
Licurgus did not ill to ordain that de legibus semel receptis and probatis
disserere non liceret, that the goodness of Laws experimented, should be
honored rather then called in question, and did not merit a repoof when for
fear of the Inconstancy of the Lacedaemonians, or a less understanding part of
them, he caused an oath Plutarch in vita Licurgi.
to be taken, that those Laws which he had devised for them, should not be
altered until his return from Delphos, where or at Creet he pined himself to
death, to make them perpetual, and that Solon was not likewise to be blamed, in
imitating him so far as to ordain an Oath to be taken by the people of Athens
Plutarch in vita Solonis.
not to change the Laws which he had ordained for them, but would rather endure
a ten years absence, not much unlike a banishment from that his beloved
country, because he would not give them any occasion or temptation of changing
them, and that our late Factious and ignorant Legislators have been far
exceeded and outgone by the inferior and overwise seeming Members, or parts of
the body natural, represented in Menenius Agrippa's happy Fable to the
seditious Romans of the mutiny of the Members of the body natural, against the
Belly or Paunch thereof who did not in all that contention and desire of some
better (as they thought) order to be enacted betwixt it and the Members, many
of them having several intents and interests, propose as our late Giddy
Reformers have done any thing against the Soveraignity or Supremacy of the
Head, or to dislocate or cast it into a meaner situation or condition amongst
its inferiors, upon pretense that it might be more serviceable if it were
placed in a Co-ordination, in the middle of the body, or to reside nearer the
Belly or Feet, and be a Concomitant of them and their more ignoble Offices
would conduce to a better Reiglement of the affairs of the Belly, and the rest
of the inferior Members, or a more even walking, or at least not so often
stumbling of the Feet, and prevent many a prejudice to those now more remote
parts from its ordinary care and protection.

And we cannot therefore without some wonder, contemplate the vast difference
which appears to have been betwixt all the heretofore popular Pretenses, and
intended Reformations of the Athenian and Spartan Commonwealths now
sufficiently quieted and purged of those humors by a Turkish Tyranny, and that
of the Romans in their many Tumults and Seditions under their many several
sorts of Governments, and our godly (as they called themselves) Reformers of
laws, and amenders of male administration (as they supposed) in Government,
when as those Greeks and Romans being Heathens, could pursue their ends without
rapine and plundering of their fellow citizens, but our men of Ignorance and
Innovation, could in their vertigo and overturning of Kingdoms and good Laws,
find the way to all manner of Ravage Rapine and Injustice, to enrich and
advance themselves by that great gain and spoil which they met with, by the
alteration of Laws, and invadeing their Neighbors and other men's Proprieties.

And at the same time when they made their Juggling self denying Ordinanc^, and
pretended so much to Revelations and Gifts extraordinary could think of nothing
more then making themselves great by the ruin of their betters, the
afflictions of the poor and needy, the Widows and Fatherless.

And rather then fail of their prey which had such a pleasant Haut-goust or
relish cooked and palated for them by the Devil, would pretend all our Laws and
good and reasonable Customs to be as bad as they were ancient, and rather call
their Forefathers fools for enacting or permitting them, then acknowledge
those Excellencies, Reason, Justice and Goodness, which were every where to be
found in them, as if more then six thousand years of the Worlds age already
past, were not time enough to teach mankind necessary helps for its well being
and preservation; or as if God having given man a reasonable Soul, endued with
all those eminent faculties which he communicated unto it, had confined the
right use of them to the later part, decrepit, and old age only of the world,
and permitted all the experiments of the long lived Patriarchs, and their
succeeding Generations, and all the Rules of Prudence and Wisdom, which the
former ages had observed and found to be good and useful for the sons of men,
to be so bound up in the bundles of vanity, or not worth the heeding, as every
Chimaera or Megrum of the less understanding* and more distempered part of the
people should be better and more to be followed, and therefore to be taken in
and receive as great an entertainment and applause as the Children of Israel
did their Golden Calfe with shouts and acclamations, whilst Moses as they
thought had tarried too long with God Almighty in the Mount, for his direction
in the making of Laws, or as the Romans did the more to be respected, twelve
Tables of Laws then those of their Mechanic and vulgar Judgments and
reasonings which the wiser and more noble, not the illiterate and foolisher
sort of their Citizens and people had learned, well considered, and brought
home from Athens and other cities of Greece, as fit to be observed or imitated.

When as it might rather be remembered that God in his infinite mercy, to the
works of his own hands, did so early distribute the Beams of his Right Reason
and Illumination, as the days of old were not without wisdom, which being from
everlasting and rejoicing afterward in Prove. 8.31.
the habitable parts of the Earth, her delights were with the sons of men.

And therefore Jeremy no Fanatique or man of an Imaginary or self conceited
mistaken holiness, but inspired by God Almighty, and filled with the wisdom
from above, did not tell us as many of our Novelists and Commonwealth-mongers,
and the would be wise of the Rota's or Coffee-houses would make us believe that
all the succesful experiments which the long lived world had approved to be
right reason, were either burdensome or oppressive, and not to be any longer
esteemed, or that the paths of wisdom were worn out, and not at all to be
walked in, but with a thus says the Lord, enjoined us, as if there and no
where else it were to be found to stand in the Jeremy. 6.16.
ways, and see and ask for the old Paths, where is the good way, and walk
therein.

But that would have been to their loss, and rather then fail of their
purpose, or forsake their beloved ignorant intermedling in Government, they
could never think any thing to be well, until they had made all things ill, and
like Children, would have liberty to do what they list, which would do them as
much good, as the liberties of their misusing the power of the Sword, or in
meddling in matters too high for them, did in these last unhappy Twenty years,
and as little conduce to the public, or their own good and safety, as for
Children to be permitted the use of Swords or Pistol^, whereby to kill and
mischief one another, or of fire to burn themselves, or set their Parents
houses on fire, or as they are said to do in Gonzaguas new discovered world in
the Moon, to govern their parents, cannot find the way to obey Laws and
reasonable Customs, unless their narrow Capaci^ies, or small Understandings may
apprehend the cause of it, the reason of it must like the Lesbian rule be made
to be as they why^^sie or fancy it, and obedience to Kings or Laws, cut out to
their Interest and Conveniences.

And will not believe that they have Liberties enough unless like Swyne got
into a Garden, they may foul and root up all that is good and beautiful in it.

And with their cries and gruntings could never be at quiet until they had
trampled upon Monarchy, and the majesty and loveliness of it, dug up the
Gardens of Spices, and stopped the streams of our Lebanus. And the late blessed
Martyr King Charles the First, was no sooner in the defense of our Magna
Charta, and the Laws and Liberties of England murdered, but they and their
Partisans must frame a Commonwealth, and pretend a necessity thereof for
avoiding the intolerable (as they falsely called them) burdens and oppressions
of the people amongst which is ranked that great and most notorious piece of
untruth, that the Carttaking for the King, impoverished many of the people, and
that the Pourveyance cost the Country more in one year then their Assessments
to the Army, which with other matters contained in that most untrue and
malicious Declaration of the Parliament of England, as they then called
themselves, beraing date the 17. day of March 1648. are more against truth or
any man's understanding, then the tale of Garagantua's mighty mouth and stomach
of eating three hundred fat Oxen at a meal, and having five or six men to throw
mustard into his mouth with shovels: And as false as it was, must for an edium
to the late King, and his Monarchical Government, be translated into Latin,
and sent and dispersed by their Emissaries into all the parts of the Christian
world: And from thence or some of the other, I may not say causes, but
incentives or delusions, the people, too many of whom were enticed or made to
believe any thing though never so much against truth, reason, common sense and
their own knowledge, must be taught; for they could of themselves not find any
cause to complain of it, to believe that Declaration to be true, to the end
that whilst they did then bear and had long before endured very great
assessements and burdens they might be enabled, and be the better in breath to
sustein for many years more a seaventy* and sometimes a ninty, and not seldom
one hundred and twenty thousand pounds monthly Taxes and Assessments, besides
many other greater impoverishments and oppressions, obedience must be called a
burden, every thing but ruining honest men, and destroying of Loyalty an
oppression, and every thing but vice and cheating to maintain it a grievance,
for the Truths sake, therefore which every good and honest man is bound to
submit unto, and de^end, and in vindication of his late Sacred Majesty, and the
Laws and Honor of my Country, the too much abused England by such Tricks and
Villainies, and upon no other motive, byasse, or concernment, but to make that
scandal which only becomes the Father of Lies, and the causelesness of that
complaint appear in their Deformities and proper colors.

I shall by an enquiry and search for the Original and Antiquity of Royal
Pourveyance, as to the furnishing of several sorts of Provision for the Kings
House and Stable, at a small or lesser rate then the markets, and a praeemption
for those or the like purposes used in this and most Nations of the World,
bring before the Reader the Laws and Acts of Parliament in England, allowing it
the Legality, Reason, Necessity, and right use of it, the small charge and
burden of it, and the consequences which will inevitably follow the taking of
it away, which we hope will remove the ill opinion which some worthy men
heretofore, by reason of an abuse or misusage only, and some very learned men
of late misled by them, have had of it.

CHAP. I. The Antiquity of Regal Pourveyance and Praeemption, for the
maintenance of the Kings Houses, Navy, Castles, and Garrisons, attended by a
Jus Gentium, and reasonable Customs, of the most or better part of other
Nations.
WHich being not here intended or understood to be by an invadeing of the
peoples Rights and Properties in their movables or immovables, but a receiving
or imposing of that which public welfare, and the contracts or respects of
Subjects in general or particular have for benefits received, and to be
continued, reduced into reasonable Customs, and made to be as a most ready and
willing Tribute, Oblations, or Duty to their Kings and Princes, may go as high
as Filial duty and Paternity, and a retribution or gratitude for the peace and
plenty which their Subjects and people enjoy under their Government, Love,
Honor, and Reverence for their Protection and self Preservation, public weal
and safety, and of every man's particular included in the General, and was to be
found in the Genesis 43.24. and 26.
morning of the world, as well as in the afternoon and evening of it; when as
Joseph relieving the Egyptians necessity, which a national Famine had brought
upon them, gave them Lands and Seed-Corn to sow it, that they might have food
for their Households and little ones, and made a Law over the Land of Egypt to
this day, that the King* should have the Fifth part (of the yearly profits)
except the land of the Priests only which became not Pharaohs: And in the Reign
of King David, when the Moabites 1 Samuel 25. 2 Samuel 8.
being become his Subjects sent him Gifts, and Shobi the Son of Nahash and
Rabbab of the Children of Ammon, and Machir the Son of Ammiel of Lodebar and
Barzillai, the Gileadite of Rogelim, in his sorrowful march against his Son
Absalom, brought Beds and Basins, Earthen Vessels, Wheat and Barley, Flower,
Parched Corn, Beans, Lentils Parched, Honey, Butter, Sheep and Cheese of Kyne,
for David and the people; and in all or most of the Circumstances of what was
lately used in England, was no stranger in the happy and famous Government of
King Solomon the wisest of men 2 Samuel 1.17
whose wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the East Country, and all the wisdom
of Egypt, for besides the Victuals and Provision which his twelve great
Officers or Socage Tenants provided for him and all that came unto his Table;
all the Kingdoms which he reigned over from the River (of Euphrates) unto the
Land of the Philistines, and unto the border of Egypt, and all other his
Dominions 1 Reg. 4*21, 22, 23.
brought Presents unto him, and his provision for one day, was thirty measures
of fine Flower, threescore measures of meal, ten fat Oxen, Twenty Oxen out of
the Pastures, and an hundred sheep, besides Hearts, Roe Bucks, Fallow Deer, and
fatted Fowl. And all the Earth sought to Solomon, to hear his wisdom which God
had put in his heart, and they brought every man his present, Vessels of
Silver, Vessels of Gold, Garments, Armor, Spices, Horses and Mules, a rate
year by year; 1 Reg. 10.24, 25.
And he raised a Levy out of all Israel, and the Levy was thirty thousand men,
and sent them to Lebanon, as workmen, ten Thousand a month by course, and two
months at home, and Judah and Israel were many, as is the sand which is by the
Sea in multitude, eating and drinking, and making merry* and dwelt safely every
man under his own Vine, and under his Figg Tree, from Dan even unto Beer-Sheba
all the days of Solomon, and as Josephus de (...). Jud. lib. 8.
Josephus says, had Tribute Gatherers over the Syrians, who brought him
Provision toward the keeping of his house and horses. Mesha King of Moab,
rendered unto Ahab King of Israel, 2 Reg. 3.
a Tribute of one hundred Thousand Lambs, and an hundred Thousand Rams with the
wool, some of the Philistines brought Jehosophat King of Judah, Presents and
Tribute Silver, and the Arabians brought him Flocks, Chron. 16.
seven thousand Rams, and seven hundred Hee-goats. And in the measure and
description of the Holy City, showed to the Prophet Ezekiel, in the Twenty
Fifth year of Jehoiakims Captivity Ezekiel 45. and 48.
a portion of the City and Suburbs and Oblations were appointed for the Prince.

Which custom or right due to the Kings or Governors, was not after the long
and lamentable Captivity of the Children of Israel, at their return and
building of Jerusalem, either forgotten or thought fit to be laid aside, when
as the Righteous Nehemiah, considering the necessities of the people, refused
the bread of the Governor, Nehemiah 5.18.
and that which was prepared for him daily, which was one Ox and six thousand
sheep, and also Fowls, and once in ten days, store of all sorts of wine.

Nor was that usage and way of remuneration to Superiors, confined only to the
pedagoguie of the Jews, under the Severities of their Mosaical Laws, or their
being so much weaned from avarice or selfishnes by their remissions in their
years of Jubilee their many oblations, free will, offerings, and chargeable
Sacrifices, and no less a penalty then death ordained for not obeying their
Princes or Magistrates, but was by a light of nature and emanation of right
Reason, some way or other brought or carried to the Greeks, no despisers of
wisdom or prudential imitations.

Agamemnon at the siege of Troy, was able to treat the chief of Hom. Iliad.
the Grecian Army in his Tent, with all fitting provisions; And Eustathius the
Scoliast says that the King had, at the devision of any spoils, an
extraordinary share assigned him for such entertainments.

The Spartan Kings had in all Sacrifices the Chynes and the skins for their
honorary Fees (as amongst the Hebrews, the Priests had the shoulders) and in
that popular rustic and unmanerly Commonwealth of the Boemus de moribus
Gentium.
Lacedaemonians, their Kings even in the time of their insolent Ephori, who
dominered over them, and when they lived and were maintained ex publico, out of
the public, could not be denied by the Laws of Lycurgus in egressibus, their
marches or progresses, capere quaecunque pecora libuerit, to take what Cattle
they pleased, Et singulis quoque Calendis, mensium singula pecora eis, e
publico data fuerint. And in the Calends of every month, the people gave or
presented Cattle unto them, Apollini immolanda, to sacrifice to Apollo, and
when their Pythii, or those two whom the Kings did use upon occasions, to send
to Delphos to consult the Oracle, were publicly to eat with them, Regibus ad
Caenam non euntibus binae Chaenices, id est Semimodia Farinae and uni singulae
Cotylae, (i. e.) sextarii presentibus dupla data fuerint, if the Kings, (for
sometimes they had two) came not to the place appointed to eat with the Pythii,
certain large proportions of meat, wine, and other Provisions were sent them,
and when they did come, had a double proportion, more then the Pythii, allowed
them.

The Athenians whilst they were a Republic, highly valuing, and carefully
preserving their Liberties, had their Tolls and vectigalia publica, their
Senators as well as their Judges having an allowance or pensions out of them
and their Sitophilaces and Frumentatores or Overseers of the Corn, were able to
take care of the Provision of Corn, quod in atticum emperium adveheretur, duas
parts in urbem mercatores defer cogerent, that two parts of the Corn which
should be brought to Sigonius d^ Repub. Athen. 540. and 541. Eudaeus in
Pandect. 192.
Athens, should be by the Merchants brought into the City.

By the Pattern whereof, or from the Laws of Nature and right Reason, the
Romans in the greatest opinion and rufle of their Liberties, were not also
without their vectigalia, quae ex importatione and exportatione rerum vaenalium
capiabantur, Imposts for the import and export of things to be sold, and
besides the App^an. l. 1.
decumamanum frumenti, their Tenth or Tithes of the Husband-mens Corn, which
was delivered unto them, the Magistrates had sine pretio, freely and without
recompense their emptum, or that which was bought for a certain sum of money,
or at a rate Rasinus de antiquitate Romans 993.
quam Aratores vendere accepto ex S. Ct^. pretio cogebantur quod frumentum
Romam ad alendum populum a magistratibus Romany mittebatur, which the Farmers
being compelled by the Law or order of the Senate to take a certain price for,
was sent by the Magistrates to Rome, to feed or nourish the people, Pancirollus
Comment in notitiam imperii occidentis, ca. 5.
Tenebantur Campani, Samnites, Lucani, B^utii and Tusci, aliqui unam and semis,
alii, duas decimas pecorum quas alebant populo Romano exhibere, the Campanians,
Samnites, Lucani, Brutians, and the people of Tuscany, were bound yearly to
send to Rome, some one and a half, others two Tenths of their Cattle, which
they bred pro Annona for their provision, and had also that which was called
Rosinus de Antiqu^tat. Rom ca. 14.24. and lib. 10. c. 22.
Estimatu^ quia estimaba^ magistratus and in cell^^ sua^ in usu^ familiae suae
asportabatur, because that according to the Magistrates rate, it was brought
into their Houses o^ Granaries* and interdu^ pro frume^t^ pecunia^ acciperent,
and was sometimes released or discharged for money, did usually impress workmen
and many things necessary to the building of Forts or Castles, or other uses in
their Military and Public affairs, their Consuls had at their coming into
their Provinces, honoraria, or Presents Honoris loco in respect and honor done
unto them, and did at their coming into a Province* as L. Posthumus Albinus the
Consul did, litteras mittere ut sibi magistratus obviam exirent locum public
pararent in quo diverterentur jumentaque cum exirent, inde praesto essent, send
their Mandate or Letters to the Magistrate, requiring him to meet them, and
provide a Lodging and Carriages to be ready when he should depart. And besides
other Tributes, imposed upon Countries Annotations upon Tacitus.
subdued, had a portion in Corn, commonly the Tenth part, bebesides other
necessaries for the Provision of the Lieutenant and Soldiers maintained there,
and for other like purposes at a reasonable price. Julius Caesar being Consul
with Tibullus, anno urbis conditae 691. made a Law that when any Magistrates of
Rome, passed by any Province, the people should furnish them with Hay and
Victuals. L. Julia de Magistratibus.
Et Angariarum and Parangariarum praestatio inter Vectigalia quae Regalia
dicuntur annumeratur quia ea Regis aut Imperatoris jura propria sunt cum olim
eo nomine significarentur munera onerum vehendorum provincialibus imposita, and
Cart-taking or pressing of ships, carts and horses, were under the names of
Angaria and Parangaria, not infrequently taken to be Regalities and Rights due
to Emperors, Kings or Princes, who had their Annonarii and praefecti Annonae,
Surveyors or Pourveyors of Corn, and in times of dearth did cause it to be
given to the people without money. Cod. tit. de cursu publico Ant. Thisius de
celebero Rep^b.
Jus quoque Angariarum and Parangariarum supremus habet magistratus quo jure
necessitas incumbit equos plaustra naves prestandi, the power of pressing
horses, carts or ships belongs to the Supreme Magistrate, and there is by
Law, a necessity of furnishing them.

In the time of Trajan the Emperor, who for his goodness and excellent
Government was called herba parietaria, the wall Flower, and deliciae hominum,
the delight of his people, presides provinciarum evectiones dabant, did license
or did give warrant for the taking of carts and horses, and then and
afterward, Tributa and species ex Provinciis exactae ad aulam principis in
Rhedis and Jumentis cursus publici transferebantur, the Tributes and Provisions
gathered in the Provinces, were by Carriages and the Horses of the public,
carried to the Palace of the Prince, or to his Army, insomuch as si immunitas
aliquibus concedatur neque ab Annona, neque ab Angariis, neque veredo excusari
possunt nullusque ab hoc onere nec Ecclesia excusabatur Pancirol. in no^itia^
utriusque Imperii ca. 6.
in the Grants of exemptions or immunities, Pourveyance and Cart-taking were
not to be included, for that none, nor the Church it self were to be excused
from such duties, whence ships as Vlpian says came to be arrested by Princes,
and employed for public use, and Simon of Cirene was made to carry the Cross
of our Blessed Savior, Maranta speculum aureum part 6. de executione
sententiae.
Judex pro Justicia exequenda capere potest Asinum vel Equum, vel currum a
subdito ut cum eo ducatur malefactor ad supplicium, a Judge in order to
Justice, and to carry a malefactor to execution, may command a man's horse,
ass, or cart to be taken, and likewise, officialis pro servicio publico potest
capere jumentum alienum pro mittendis victualibus in exercitum, vel pro
servicio Bart. in l. jubemus u^ nullam navem 1^ in princip.
Regis vel Baronis, aut facere mandatum de persona, and semper debet dari
salarium angariato constitutum, an Officer may for the service of the public
impressed, another man's horse, and himself also, to carry victuals to the Army,
or for the service of the King, or a Baron, giving the Salary or rate allowed,
the Presides or Governors of Provinces Novel. Majoran. tit. 1. de Curialibus.
euntes ad aliquam civitatem unam tantum angariam and duos paranedos and
totidem officium petere possunt, in their Journey to any city or town, might
impressed one Carriage and two Palfreys.

Et ita invaluerunt istae consuetudines, and so strong such or the like customs
came to be, as the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinianus did in their Rescripts
order that Cujat. tit. 48. ad librum 10. Cod. Justinian. 1429.
ubi iter arripimus omnes debeant solita ministeria exhiberi and neminem ab
Angariis Parangariis vel plaustris, vel quolibet munere exc^sari, when they
were to make any expedition or progress, every man should in all Provinces or
places, through which they should pass, perform their accustomed duties, and
that no man should be excused from furnishing of Carts or from other payments
or services. And did upon some complaints, that messengers sent into the
Provinces, to carry tidings of Victories, Leagues or public Joys, did take
too much for the Pourveyance, or si sacros vultus inhiantibus forte populis
inferimus, when the Emperors should themselves bless the people with their
presence in their Progress, did ordain Cujacius Commentar and Expositio Novel.
tit. 63.
ne quid accipiant immodicum* that they should not be unreasonable or
immoderate in it. And the Emperor Leo did ordain that no man should deny his
Service in murorum extructione seu comparatione frumenti aliarumque specierum,
for the building of walls, providing of Corn and other Provisions.

Upon a remission of some Tribute by the Emperor Valentinianus to Numidia, and
both the Mauritania's quatuor millia aureorum and ducentas tantum solverent,
and ducentas militares Annonas and 800. capita id est equorum pabula
singulasque Annonas solidis quatuor per annum jussit aestimari, they were
ordered to pay but yearly Four thousand and two hundred Crowns, Twelve hundred
measures of Military Corn or Provisions, and Fodder or Provision for eight
hundred horses, every one of those Annonae or quantities being ordered to be
rated at four shillings Pancirollus Comment. in notiti^m Imperii occidentis c.
65.
Justinianus tanti sed solidis quinis singulas Annonas compensari mandat, and
Justinian ordering the same proportions, did command five shillings to be paid
for every of those Annona's or quantities.

In that ancient custom of Posts or speedy Messengers instituted by Zenopbon.
lib. 8. Paidiae.
Cyrus amongst the Persians, and brough^ into use amongst the Romans by
Augustus Caesar before the coming of Christ, provincialium paecunia equi cum
hominibus ad currendum destinatis alerentur, the Country or Provinces did bear
the charges of men and horses, Pancirollus in ^otitia Imperii orientis.
quod Severus Imperator postea abolevit id fisci onus esse jubens, which
Severus the Emperor afterward took away and put that charge upon himself, as
Princes do sometimes in other matters upon some necessity or reasons of State,
but not for any evil in the thing it it self no more being signified thereby
then the remission of some Subsidies in England: after they were Granted to
Queen Elizabeth, can declare them to be evil or inconvenient, for it seems by
Spartianus, it was Spartianus cap. 6. in Seve^o.
only done in regard that he desired se commendare hominibus, to get an
applause of the people, stabula tamen in quibus equi a^ebantur provincialium
sumptibus reficiebantur. but the Stables notwithstanding in which the horses
were kept, were to be Repaired by the people. The Terciocerius an Officer so
called, did look to the Bastages or public Carriages, Et res transvehendas and
transvectas ut frumentum Constantinopolim devehendi, did order or send out
Warrants for Carriages for the Emperors Journeys, or to carry Corn for the
public to Constantinople, Et in diversis orientis Regionibus erant corpora se^
collegia na^tarum quorum quique per vices onera publica far cogebantur
propter quod incommodum a muneribus civilibus immunes erant and a Tributis
liberi and quandoque ad mercedulam Philici nomine accipiebant Pancirollus
Comment. in notitiam Imperii orient. 86.
And in diverse parts of the East there were certain Corporations or Societies
of Men, of which every one by Turns were compelled to those public Carriages,
in consideration whereof they were freed from the bearing of all Offices in the
Commonwealth, and from Tributes, sometimes receiving a small reward, called
Philichus* in mediterraneis quoque jumenta and plaustra habentes eidem oneri
erant obnoxii quae Angaria vocatur; And in the Mediterranean they which had
Carts and Horses were subject to the like duties.

The Wisigothes had their erogatores Annonae per singulas civitates and
castella, LL. Wisigoth* lib. 9. tit. 6.
their Stewards for all provisions in all Cities and Castles. And Theodoricus
King of the Goths, though so great an enemy to the Civil Law, and the Laws of
other Nations, as he forbad the use of them with a nolumus sive Romany
legibus, sive alienis, LL. Wisigoth lib. 2. tit. 9.
institutionibus amodo amplius convexari, and would (as our Pride the Drayman,
and Hewson the Cobbler, and many of our Committee men wereof late troubled with
reason and our English Laws) be no more vexed with them, could give
notwithstanding such an entertainment to the right reason of them concerning
Pourveyances, as when he enjoined a care in distributing the Annonae or
military provisions, he could say additum est etiam beneficii genus ut in
presenti devotione praeceptis Regis, Cassiodorus variarum l. 12.
nec divina domus (the Kings house in the respectfull language of those times)
videatur excepta sed totum communiter sustineatur, and would have that benefit
extended to his own House, that it might also be sustained by it.

And had them so much at his command as he appointed Annona^ praebendas infirmo
venienti ad locum pro recuperanda sanitate, Ibidem. lib. 11.
provision to be made for one that was for his health removed to a better air.

Those Annonae being not only confined to corn, but comprehending omnia
alimentorum genera, Leg. Jul. de Annon. Cujacius Paratitl. in lib. Cod.
Justiniani
all manner of yearly provisions for victuals, quae praediorum Provincialium
Domini conductoresque tuendi exercitus causa quotannis praebebant, C. de Annon.
and Tribut. veg^tius
which the Provinces subject to the Roman Empire yearly paid toward the
support of the Army, Lib. 1. tit. de Annon. and Tribut.
Et solebant preberi in speciebus ipsis verum constitutione (postea rediguntur
ad praetia definita in delegationibus quae eo nomine singulis officiis dantur;)
and were usually paid in kind, but were afterward reduced to certain prices by
Officers appointed to that purpose, qua Annonae eis debitae taxantur and
capita, aut praetia ecrum quae sumunt ex tributis illius, Cujacius in lib. 1
Cod. Just^niani 52.
vel illius provinciae, vel ex publicis Horreis, by whom the Provisions of the
Provinces, or that which were taken out of the public Barns or Granaries were
duly rated, Et quae militaribus palatinisque officiis ex eorum qui possessiones
tenebant collatione erogabantur, and gathered by the Emperors Officers, which
Doctor Ridley in his view of the Civil and Ecclesiastical Law extends to all
things necessary for the Princes House and Family. Ridleys view of the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Laws.


In the time of Charlemaigne, or Charles the Great, who subdued the Goths, and
other Northern and unruly Nations, infesting the Roman Empire, Tractatoria
Legatorum, the Treatments or entertainment of Messengers, by a custom borrowed
from the Romans, for such as were by the Kings Letters or Warrants sent to, or
by the Emperor, were usual, and they might make use of horses, adscriptis etiam
bonis and mansionibus quibus sumptu publico ali deberent, Cod. Th. and
Justinian. lib. 12. and Cuja^ius.
and had houses and lodgings assigned, where out of the public, provisions
should be made for them, and quid unicuique in itinere commeatus praestare
deberet vary pro dignitate et qualitate personarum plus Episcopo quem rex
mittebat Abati, Bignonius Not. in lib. 1. Marculfi 465.
e^ Comiti non tantum minus autem vasallo decernebatur, which were to be
according to the dignity or quality of the persons sent, as more to a Bishop,
less to an Abbot or Earl, less then that to a more inferour, et a subditis et
provincialibus suppeditarenur* Capitl. lib. 4. cap. 72.
and were furnished by the Subjects and People of the Countries, and it was a
great favor for some Religious Houses and for Bishops and Churchmen to be
exempted from it, Et per singula territoria discurrentes mansionaticos et
paravedos accipiunt, and all places where they came were to have some
entertainments; tunc namque solebant subditi hospitio non modo recipere missos
et legatos Principis, Comites, Duces, et eorum ministros verum et viaticum eis
pro unius cujusque dignitate praestare, for then the Subjects were not only to
receive the Kings or Princes Messengers or Earls, Bi^n^nius Not. in Marcul^um.
or Dukes and their Attendants employed in their Affairs, but to give them
entertainment according to their dignities; and it was so especially ordained,
as de missis nostris discurrentibus says, an express Law of that good and
virtuous as well as great Emperor, vel ceteris propter utilitatem nostram iter
agentibus ut nullus mansionem contradicere eis presumat, Capitl. Ca^. M. lib.
3. c. 1.39^
no man was to deny any employed upon his service entertainment in his house,
regis quoque recipiendi idem onus provincialibus incumbebat ejusque rei cura ad
mansionarium; and the King was in his Progress or traveling, to have the like,
and the care thereof belonged to an Officer called Mansionarius, or Mansionum
Marescallum the Marshall, or as we now call it, the Harbenger, Hinckmarus Ep.
3. c. 23.
to whom says Hinckmarus out of Adalhardus, it belonged, ut in hoc maxim
sollicitudo ejus intenta esset ut susceptores quo tempore ad eos illo in loco
Rex venturus ^sset propter mansionum preparationem ut opportuno tempore
prescire potuissent ne aut tarde scientes propter afflictionem family
importuno tempore peccatum, aut isti propter non condignam susceptionem, to
take great care that those who were to receive the King when he should come,
might have such timely notice, as for want thereof the Family might not be put
to the greater trouble, or punished for not worthily entertaining him; And the
old French whom Franciscus Hott^mannus would make to be the freest of all
Nations, Hottoman Franco Gali^a.
were so used to those paratas or pastus, making provisions for their Kings,
Bignonius Not. in 1. lib. Marculsi 447. and 448.
as they did make livrees (a term now used in France for provisions or meats,
which in specie were daily provided for the Kings house.)

Et olim magistris hospitiijus Annonae quae in Comitatum Regium importabatur
per praeconem statuendi praetium eosque poenis gravioribus mulctandi,
Vincentius Lupa^us de Magistrate. Franciae lib. 1.
qui societatem coiissent ut Annona Carior esset; and therefore the Stewards or
great Officers of the Kings Household did heretofore appoint the rates of
provision for the Kings house, publicly proclaim it, and punish such as did
confederate to raise the prices or make them dearer, Et non hospicium modo Regi
aliisque ab eo missis dabatur verum and parabantur alimenta, not lodging or
house-room only, but food and provisions were to be provided for the King, or
such as he should employ upon his occasions.

Nor was it unusual amongst the ancient Germans, who totam spirantes
libertatem, though they were loath to come behind any Nations of the world in
freedom, ex omnibus quae terra producere solet usui necessariis exceptis vix
bubus and semmibus ad excolendam terram idoneis de ceteris quantum necesse
fuerit militi profuturis ad regios usus suppeditare aequum illi arbitrentur,
Otho Frifinge^siis de gistis Friderici lib. 2. ca^ 12.
of all which the earth produced, and was necessary for use, except Oxen and
seed to sow the ground withal, and might supply the Army, to furnish some part
for the use of the King.

In Franconia, that great part or Circle of the German Empire which is washed
with the Rhine, non antea Vindemiare cuiquam concessum quam domini quibus
decimae debentur permiserunt, Botmus de mo^ibus Gentium.
and suis expensis* decimam in domini Torcular infer debent, no man was to
gather and press his grapes without the Lords license, and every man was at his
own charge to bring the tenth part thereof to their Lords.

By the Laws of the Ripuarians or Borderers upon the Rhine, LL Ripuar.
a penalty of 60 shillings was to be imposed upon him qui Legatarium Regis, vel
ad Regem, seu in utilitatem Regis pergentem hospitio contempserit, who should
refuse to lodge any Ambassador of the Kings, or sent unto him.

LL. Lombard. 3. tit. 2 Imperator Carotas.
And amongst the Lombards such a care there was to be in every man of all the
Kings concerns, as nemopresumat ad Regem venienti mansionem vetare and quae
necessaria sunt sicut vicino suo ei vendat, no man was to deny any of the Kings
Lieges, lodging in his journey to the King, but was to sell him things
necessary as cheap as to his Neighbor.

In Poland which is an Elective Kingdom, and where the people take no small
care of their Liberties and Privileges, the Agrestes and Ascriptitii, Socage
Tenants and Husbandmen, besides their Rents paid to the King in money, Martinus
Cremerus de Regn^ Poloniae.
Pensitant Pecuarias, Frumentarias, Avenarias and aliarum rerum pensiones, nec
Agricolae, sed et oppidani quin et equites, sive milites non penitus immunes
sunt, do provide, Cattle, Corn, Oats and other provisions, and not only the
Husbandmen, but the Burgers: neither are the Knights or Gentry altogether free
from it, Jumenta autem ei quacunque iter facit, et canes cum venatoribus ejus
alere necesse habent, but do furnish horses and carriages and provisions for
his Hounds and Hunters. Boemus de moribus G^ntium.
And the Kingdom being divided into four parts, Rex in orbem quotannis
invisit, the King every year visits them in his Progress, e quorum singulae
ternis mensibus alunt Regem Regumque Comitatum, and every Province for the
space of three months do furnish him and his Court with provisions of
victuals.

Mosconiae T^pograph.
The dull and frozen Muscovite or Russian denies not his Prince his labor when
he calls for it, or a part ex ferarum exuviis, of the surres which he gets.

The Tartars as fierce and unruly as they are, and a nasty People nearly
related to beasts, who live in Tents all the Summer, and remove from place to
place with their Cousins the Cattle, Thu^^us. lib. 69.
and in their Cottages or ugly Houses daubed with their Cattles dung all the
Winter, drink Mares milk, and eat Horseflesh, carrion, and garbage, bestowing
many times no more Cookery upon it then what ^he wind and sun affords them, do
willingly furnish their Prince or great Chan with horses and all kind of
household provisions as well in time of Peace as War.

The Laplanders and Samoites bordering upon the Dane and Russe, when they hold
their Mart at Cola upon St. Peter's day, cannot keep it, unless the Captain of
the Wardhuyss, that is Resiant there for the King of Denmark be present,
Fletchers History of Russia.
or send his Deputy to set prices upon their Stock Fish, Train-oyl, Furs, and
other Commodities, as also the Emperor of Russia's Customer or Tribute Taker,
to receive his Custom, which is ever paid before any thing can be bought or
sold.

At Naples a Tribute is yearly paid pro singulis focis pro hospitiis
praesidiariorum, S^gethus de Principatibus Italiae.
and nobilium quorundam qui Proregem comitantur, by every house toward the
charge and provision of the Presidents and Nobles which attend the Viceroy,
and every two years great Donations are presented from the Churches.

The Grand Duke of Florence or Tuscany, vectigal quod ipsi darium vocant pro
animalibus quae Florentiam ducuntur percipit, has a Tribute which they call
there Dairo, for all Cattle which are brought to Florence.

In Hungary, Leges Hungariae 537. Decret. P^ssonien. Anno 1^66. A^tic. 14. and
Decret. Posonien An. 1600. Artic. 13*
which has been in this and the foregoing Century or Age an Elective Kingdom
in the House of Austria, the Coloni, Fa^mers, or Husbandmen and Common People
are obliged ad gratuitas operas and labores sex dierum, to work six days for
nothing in the fortifying of Castles and Garrisons; and anno 1600. propter
penuriam Annonae: and defectum jumentorum, by the scarcity of victuals and
defect of Horses and Cattle for Carriages, the States of Hungary not being able
to promise certam vecturam victualium* what victuals they could carry and
provide, did hope, if God send them more plenty, quod non de^runt regnicolae
qui praetio quantum fieri potuit victualia convehent, that the Inhabitants of
the Kingdom would take care that victuals may be provided and carried as cheap
as may be.

Messenius de Legibus Suecorum Gothorum, lib. 2.53.
The Swedes who do boast themselves to be the remaining parts of the
Ostrogothes, and are an Elective Kingdom, are omnia tributa and census
Regidebita vehere and transfer juxta Regis voluntatem, to carry and bring to
the King his Tributes and Rents (which are there much in provision) or where
else he shall please to dispose of them.

And by that grand guide of Reason, the Civil Law, which in all the Kingdoms
and Provinces of the Christian World is the Cynosura or Pole-starre, by which
for the most part their Governments are steered and directed. That custom of
Pourveyance for the Princes private as well as public use was ever so
inseparable and usual, and so little scrupled at or complained of, as it grew
to be as universal as it was ancient, and in the later time, and old age of the
Civil Law, as well as the morning, youth and age of it, to be justly accounted
to be principis privilegium and gloriosae militiae currus et naves accipere
subditorum pro vehendo res de loco ad locum si sibi necessarium fuerit tam pro
casu suo* Julius Fe^re^us de re and disciplina militari 137. Sect. 155. and 157.
quam probello, a Privilege and Right due to Princes and the public welfare,
to impressed and take Ships and Carts of their Subjects when there shall be need,
as well for their own use and occasions as in times of war, Et si naves and
plaustra tempore exercitus occultentur poterunt confiscari de j^re, Alber de
Rosa in l. jubennis c. de sacrosanct. Ecclesia.
and talem confiscationem esse legitimam, says Ferettus, who wrote no longer
ago then in the Reign of the Emperor Charles the Fifth and our King Henry the
Eighth, Ferettus de disciplina militari 137.
cum agatur de honor and commodo universali ac de principis Imperi^, and if
Ships and carriages or carts should be hid whereby they might not be taken for
the use of the Army, they were by Law to be confiscate; and such a confiscation
is lawful when the public honor and profit are concerned, or they are seized
by the Princes order. And Ulpian says ad onus fructuarii pertinet si quod ob
transitum exercitus penditur, and si quid m^nicipio nam solent possessores
certam partem fructuum municipio vili^r^ pre^io addicere, et ad fructuarium
haec onera pertinebant, it belongs to the Tenant or Farmer, if the Army pass
that way, to pay contribution, and also to a Garrison for the Tenants, and did
use to send in a certain part of provisions at cheaper rates then ordinary.
Ulpian in l. Si pendentes.

L. 3. de muneribus patrimon. lib. 10. c. l. 3.


And in oneribus patrimoniorum etiam hospit^m susceptio ponenda est, the
lodgings and free quarter of persons employed for the use of the public were
likewise to be born plerumque enim militibus supervenientibus, L. 3. sect. in
eos mil^es D. de muneribus.
vel publicis personis ea iter facientibus hospitia in civitatibus praebere
oportuit; and commonly if any Soldiers or public persons travailed that way,
they were to have lodgings and free quarter in Cities, Et ab his oneribus quae
patrimoniis, vel possessionibus indicuntur, neque numero liberorum, neque ullo
alio privilegio quem excusari, and from which public charges which are laid
upon men's Patrimonies or Estates, no man was to be excused by having many
children, or by any other privilege; Ab hoc tamen hospitiis recipiendi munere
militibus veteranis medicis Philosophis vacatio immunitasque principum
constitutionibus indulta est, from which notwithstanding old Soldiers,
Physicians and Philosophers or (poor Scholars) were only so favored by the
Prince as to be exempted.

In Spain, a Kingdom very fruitful in Taxes, and never or seldom parting with
any that have been once raised or charged upon the people, witness their
Cruzado's for the holy war, and Assessments for the expelling of the Moors:
there is a Consilium or Tribunal which has cognizance, and judges de Annona
concerning corn and other provisions: And the King continues to this day
(which might spare contribution toward the maintenance of his house) a decimam
omnium vaenalium, Mariana de redditibus Hispaniae.
tenth of all sorts of things which are sold, imposed by King John ob belli
subsidium, upon occasion of a war in Anno 1366.

Mariana, ibid.
In Portugal the King has his public Tolls and Alfandega's ex quibuscunque
vaenalibus out of all victuals and commodities, of some a tenth, some a fifth,
and of others some other part.

The Commonwealth of Venice so mingled, and as well as may be composed of an
Aristocratie, Democratie, and a small part of Monarchy, and with such a harmony
and content of her Citizens as the Doge or Duke Senate and Magistrates (rather
then the common people) are by many worthy Authors and Writers reported to
enjoy a most clear and satisfying liberty, have their Proveditori All-sale, who
rent the Salt Pits, and take care that the City be served at reasonable rates,
their Signori della Grascia, who do supervise Cheese, Bacon and salt things,
Signori del vino, Johannes Co^onicus Syno^fis de Repub. Ven^t.
who look to the condition and rates of all kind of wines, and a sort of
Aediles called delle ragion vecchie whose office it is to entertain foreign
Ambassadors or Princes, Ja. Howells Survey of the City of Venice and Contarenus
de Repub. Venet.
and to defray their charges at the public expense of St. Mark; and their
Signori delle bia^i who are to take order that the City be well provided with a
sufficient proportion of wheat and other grain. And their Duke having speciem
regiam, non potestatem, the show of a King only, but little of the power, and
qui aulam non alit ut liberi principes, sed congruam solam familiam, Contarenus
de Repub. Venet.
though he keeps not a Court as free Princes do, but only a private Family,
has ex publico aerario, a yearly Salary, and the greater because every year he
is to feast the Principal of the Senate, and ne ullus praeteritus videatur
veteri instituto ac lege constitutum est, to the end that none may seem
neglected, by an ancient Law and Custom, is to send every winter five wild
Ducks to every Citizen that has voice in the great Council.

The States of the United Provinces in the Netherlands, who are well contented
to call themselves Hooge Mogende and Groot Mogende great and high and mighty
Lords, and like a Corporation of Kings govern the people by a false persuasion
of liberties, under more burdens and Taxes then they ever endured under their
Earls of Holland and Friesland, and their German and Spanish Monarchs, can in
their Low Country and levelling humor, and the ill measure which they take of
reverence to their betters, afford the Prince of Orange and his Court and
Household, which is not small, a freedom from Excise, upon the buying of all
provisions for his house, which after the rate of its griping would go a great
part of the way to as much as what the King of England saves by his
Pourveyances, and the like to the Queen of Bohemia her Retinue and Court when
she was resident amongst them, Ambassadors of foreign Princes, the English
Company of merchants of the Staple, their Armies and common Soldiers when they
are ^n the field or a Leaguer for all their victuals and such like provisions,
their ships and men of war at sea, and to the University of Leyden for their
Wine and Beer.

The States General having great and fitting stipends from their several
Provinc^s, whom they represent in an Assembly or standing Counsel at the Hague,
and the Deputies of every Province sent to the Hague, when their Comitia, or as
it were, Parliaments are there assembled have each of them four Florens, or our
eight shillings a day allowed them, the Princes of Orange, besides their great
places of Captain General by Sea and by Land, which yielded them great profits
as well as power, had 1000 pounds sterling a month stipend, e^ cum in castris
agebant, et in ipsa erat expeditione when they were in the Leagure or any
service of war had for a present given them, Philippus Caesius a Zesen de
Leone Belgi^o 186. and 226.
forty thousand Florens being almost four thousand pounds sterling for a
Present or Honorary, magnaque pecuniae vis qu^ centum millia persaepe excedeba^
in eundem conferebatur, and a great sum of money, over and above which many
times was more then one hundred thousand Florens, or ten thousand pounds
sterling for Spies, Intelligence, and other necessaries without any account to
be given for it: which stipends of the Prince of Orange, and the States of
Holland, or the Duke of Venice, including their charges of Diet, Servants and
Retinue, and all other necessaries belonging to the honor of their employments,
being paid in money, or raised by Taxes or Excise out of the people, have no
other difference with the Pourveyance or Royal provision for Kings or Princes,
but that the stipends are in money, and a gross sum large enough to take in
all occasions and necessaries, and most commonly more then needs. And as to
that particular, being a great deal more then the Pourveyance or compositions
for it would amount unto, many times falls more heavy upon the people in the
lump then it does or could in a Pourveyance by distribution of it into small
parts; for that Commonwealths and those Free States or Combinations of
governing and taxing are never no loosers by making finding or taking advantage
of necessities, or catching opportunities of burdening the people, and getting
such overplus as may either help to enrich their Treasuries, and furnish out
their magnificence in public, or too often their private and particulars,
wherein our cunning Churchwardens and Epitomes of Free States in their
Parishes and the Grandees of some of our Cities and Corporations are very well
instructed.

In the German Empire now much lessened in its ancient rights and pre^ogative
by granting them away to several Princes Hanse Towns and Imperial Cities, by
indulgences, necessity of State affairs, or want of money, the Angariae and
Parangariae, duties of furnishing horses and carts upon any public necessity,
are not denied to the Emperor, and upon occasions of war extraordinariae
collationes prastantur que Fodron appellantur, Vulteius number. 7. Otto Or^^gensis
de jure publico Imperii Romani.
et ea appellatione non solum pabulum equorum quod Futter vocatur, set et
frumentum hordeum aliaeque res ad Imperatoris exercitum victui, extraordinary
provisions called Foder are furnished, which in the German or high Dutch
signifies not only horse meat, but corn, barley, and other food for the
Emperors Army, Et aliorum sententia verior esse videtur qui dicunt
extraordinariam collationem, quae pro Imperatoris Utilitate, et necessitate
indicitur supra ordinarias et statas indictiones census et tributa. And the
better opinion is* that Pourveyance or Provisions may be taken for the
necessary occasions of the Emperor over and above his Tributes, or what is paid
unto him. And as that excellently learned D. Weymondus now deceased Chancellor
to the Prince Elector of Brandenburgh, was pleased to inform me at his late
being here together with Prince Maurice of Nassau, Ambassadors from that Prince
Elector prae-emption, and a power of ordering moderate rates and prices in the
Markets is passim in tota Germania, now in use in all Germany as well by the
Emperor as the Electors, and many other lesser Princes.

And if the French who have yet their Terms des droits de Bordage of provisions
which Tenants were obliged to furnish for the Kings Household, and their grand
Provost de l' hostel Lord Steward of the Kings house, met priz et tax a pain
vin viandes foin et avoine, had in the year 1654* power to rate the prices of
wine, victuals, hay, provender, and all things appertaining to the provision of
the Kings House.

And were wont to be very wary in parting with Regalities, have by any ill
advice turned away the honor of hospitality, and that magnificence and good
which arises thereby to their Kings and Princes, and put their Court to
board-wages, which falling short, or coming to be ill paid or long forborne will
but starve the Houseshold, and so keen the appetite and projects of the Court
when they shall be every day pursued by their own necessities, and put in mind
to make what shift they can for themselves, as that Nation which is already
overspread with Taxes as with a Garment, may in due time, if they do it not
already, easily acknowledge the difference betwixt this Kingdom and its just
Laws and Liberties, and the present mode or fashion of that which by departing
from their ancient and better Laws and Constitutions* is now for the most part
cut into Tallages and Commands in war, Titles and Outsides of honor, and
Offices granted not to the deserver, but the best Chapman, and betwixt making
Pourveyance for the Kings Household, and necessaries to support his Regalities,
and paying as many kinds of Gabels and Impositions instead of it, as there be
weeks in the year, and the rich and plentiful living of our English Yeomen,
Francklins and Farmers, and their Paysants whose hardship and beggarly way of
living makes them to be but as Slaves to their Gentry and Nobility. And the
dependencie of the Noblesse, or the Nobility and Gentry upon the King for
charges and places, making them so little able to want or be without their
Trade of war, as if there be no foreign wars, they do commonly make it
out in rebellions and combustions amongst themselves, which bringing a large
addition to the ordinary burdens of the Paisants or Countrymen, renders them
ever unable to purchase themselves some freedom or exemption of Taxes, by
getting themselves to be made Gentlemen, and taking share in the fortune and
ravage of war; and that being not to be compassed, are to live as well
contented as they may in being their drudges, and to take it for a happiness to
make some of their children to be their Lacquies or Jack Puddings, very fine
for a little time of every year, when their fantastical Apish clothes are new*
but in rags, foul and lousy linen, and vices, all the year after.

And that the custom and usage of Pourveyance, and the smaller trouble and
charge thereof, will be much better which being by the light of nature and
irradiations of wisdom and right reason, not only confined to the Jews,
Graecians, Romans and Europe, has diffused and spread it self to the
Mahumetans, and the more remote Heathen, as may appear by good Authors and
Writers of their Customs and usages, and by our Ambassadors sent from hence
in the behalf of our Merchants as the learned and greatly experienced Sir
Thomas Roe, besides many Sea Captains, Navigators and Traders into the farther
parts of the World, as Captain Hawkins* Sir John Davis, Mr. Methwold, Captain
Saris, Captain Whittington, Mr. Courtop, Mr. Peyton and others, and of some
French and Venetians trading into the East and West Indies, Tartary, and other
far distant places, whose written relations in their adventurous discoveries
of most of the habitable parts of the earth, and search after Trade and
Commerce, were very carefully collected by Mr. Samuel Purchase

For in that great extent of Kingdoms and Provinces belonging to the Grand
Signior or Emperor of Turkey, there comes yearly to the Ottoman Port from Egypt
great store of of Dates, Prunes and other dried plums of diverse sorts, which
the Cooks do use in their dressing of meat, great quantities of honey from
Valachia, Transylvania and Moldavia, which are presented to the Grand Signior,
and oil (of which there is an unspeakable consumption made) brought from Modon
and Coron in Graecia, the Saniack Begh of that Province, being bound to see the
Port sufficiently served therewith. The Butter (of which there is also spent a
great quantity in that it is much used in most of their meats) comes out of the
Black sea from Mogdania, and from Caffa in great Ox and Buffale hides, and
fruits of all sorts are daily brought for Presents.

In the great Empire of Persia there are urbes complures alimenta donantes, una
panem, altera ova, Brissonius de regno Persiae, lib. 1.
alia obsonia suppeditant, many Cities which have several assignations for
furnishing provisions for the King and his public uses, and the Subjects do
over and above other great Tributes, pay other things toward the maintenance
of the King, as those of Armenia, Horses, Babilonia, four months victuals, the
rest of Asia eight, and other Regions their particular commodities, and some of
his Guard receive no money but victuals for their wages.

The ancient more Eastern or Cathaian Tartars do daily from October to March
send unto their great Chan great store of cattle. And on his Birthday great
Presents; and it is the custom of those which bring Presents unto him at
New Years tide (which the Rulers and Governors of Provinces never fail to do;)
or at other times of the year to present nine times nine of gold and horses,
and of all that they bring, so as sometimes he has at once one hundred
thousand horses; and when he has any use of his Dukes, whom they call Morscis
or Divoimorscis, they are bound to come and bring with them their Soldiers to
a certain number, every man with his two horses at the least, the one to ride
on, and the other to kill when it comes to his turn to have his horse eaten.
And the Governors of Countries and Provinces do send the best of the wild
beasts, which the Hunters take as Stags, Boares, etc. unto the Emperor in Wains
or Ships many days journey, and if far distant, the skins only to make
armor.

In China, and the vast Provinces thereunto belonging, where they think they
have a Monopoly of wit and bragging of their two eyes, would not willingly
allow the Europeans any more then one, every house not privileged, pays a
Tribute toward the expenses of the Kings Household, and the great numbers of
the Royal Line, which (in a Country where Polygamy is allowed, are many
thousands,) are all maintained at the public charge, every man pays a Tribute
for his person, lands and trees, and all that he has: Every Province yearly
sends its Legates or Deputies; and all his kindred bring Presents unto him, in
so much as ten thousand Vessels in a year are employed by water to carry
Tributes and provision for the Kings Household, and all dainties and things of
worth or value presented to him for the service of him and his house.

The greatest part of the King of Fez his Tribute is paid in corn, cattle, oil
and butter.

In Guinea the King has a Custom of fish which is sent by his Slaves every
morning to his house. And the Prete or Emperor of Ethiopia has of that King
besides gold an yearly Tribute of three thousand five hundred M^les, and three
hundred Horses.

And it is a custom in the East Indies near the Portugals Dominions, that when
any Viceroy comes newly over all the Kings bordering upon Goa which have
peace and friendship with the Portugals, do send their Ambassadors unto him to
confirm their Leagues with great and rich Presents, which do amount unto a
great mass of treasure.

In the Province of Goa, as appears by the confirmation of their Customs by
Tractat. Don Duarte de Meneses.
John King of Portugal in the year 1526. and that which is now continued and in
use amongst them under the government of the Portuguez, at what time soever the
chief Master of the Ports with the Clerks or Clerk of his charge together, or
any one of himself shall go to the Island about matters concerning the Kings
affairs, or any one whom they shall send to the Island, or to the Towns of the
same, they are to give them their meat according to their use and custom: and
also to the Kings Factor or Officer of that Office, when they shall go thither
to provide in any matters concerning the Kings Affairs; or the Towns of the
Island, and whatsoever footman shall go of any message pertaining to the Kings
service, or the recovery of any of his Rents they shall give him every day,
that he shall be there without dispatching two measures of Rice for his meat,
or one Leal (a piece of money of the value of our three farthings) to buy
Betre, which is an herb that they do use to eat, and out of their Trade or
Customs do pay one per cent. for provision of Fortresses.

In the Kingdom of Barnagasso the King has besides Silks and Cloth of Gold,
and other precious things for Tribute, Horses, and pays himself 150. Horses
to Precious, or Prete John Emperor of Ethiopia, of whom he holds.

The Kingdom of Oghy, besides a Tribute of Gold and Silver, sends him yearly
a thousand Beeves.

In Ethiopia the Prete or Emperor upon the coming or returning of Ambassadors,
gives order to his Subjects or Vassals to furnish them with provisions for
their Journey, and not long ago commanded one to whom he had but a little
before given a little Lordship, containing not above 80. Houses and two
Churches to furnish an Ambassador with five hundred Loads of Corn, a hundred
Oxen, and a hundred Sheep.

The Gozagues do yearly pay to their King, besides great quantities of Gold and
Silver, a thousand Beeves alive.

The Maldives do yearly pay unto their King the fifth part of the grains which
they sow, and give him a Portion of their Coco's and Limmons; and besides
their Taxes compound also for fruits and honey.

The Princes and great men in Varennius lib. 10. de regno Japan.
Japan do contend who shall give most to the Caesar, and almost impoverish
themselves by their Presents: All the houses in the City of the Kings Residence
are by the King taxed toward the making of Fortresses.

In Firando in Japan, when any foreign Merchants are by the King invited to
see Plays and public Shows, they send Presents to him, and every foreign
Merchant that comes thither, may not sell his goods until he has carried a
Present to the Emperor. And when any of the Kings white Elephants are brought
unto him, the Merchants in the City are commanded to come and see him, and
bring every one a Present of half a Ducat, which altogether amounts to a
great sum of money.

In Industan when the Mogol goes abroad, or in progress, every one (says Sir
Thomas Roe) by whose house he passes is to make him a Present, Sir Thomas Roe
himself doing it when the King or Mogol rode to the River of Darbadath. All the
Persian Merchants do bring their goods first to the Mogol, who buys what he
pleases, and after his Officers have set the rate they may sell to whom they
will. All men strive to present him with all things rich and rare, and no man
petitioneth him for any thing empty-handed, and thereby come to preferment,
some giving him one hundred thousand pounds in Jewels at a time.

The King of Achen commands those of Tecoo to bring thither their Pepper, which
none may buy but he, and puts off his Surat commodities in truck to them at
what rates he pleases, and oftimes sends his commodities to Priaman and Tecoo,
enforcing them to buy them at his own rates, none being suffered to buy or sell
before he has vented his own.

At Bantam the Governor or Protector so called uses to send in the Kings name
to the people to serve him with sacks of Pepper, some a hundred, some fifty,
some ten, some five at the Kings price, which was a Riall less in a Sack then
the Merchants paid: Diverse bring Presents of Rice and Cashes, and some bring
imbroidered cloth for the Kings wearing.

Nor were the more civilized part of the Heathen only accustomed to the way of
Pourveyance or bringing provisions or presents to their Kings and Princes, but
the wild and savage part of them were by the Laws of nature, and glimmerings
of the light of reason, taught to do it.

In Mexico in the West Indies, and its large Dominions under the Emperor
Montezeuma, containing 100 Cities and their Provinces, the people did pay a
certain yearly Tribute to the King for water brought by pipes into the City:
Those that hold lands did yearly pay unto him one third part of their fruit and
commodities which they had or did reap, as gold, silver, stones, dogs, hens,
fouls, conies, salt, wax, honey, mantels, feathers, cotton, and a certain fruit
called C^cao, which they there used for money; also all kinds of grain,
Garden-herbs and fruits: Some Towns paid 400 burdens of white Mantles, others
great Tropes of wood full of Maiz, Fri^oles, etc. some four hundred burdens of
wood, others four hundred planks of Timber; some, every six months brought
four hundred burdens of Cotton-wool, and others, two thousand loads of Salt,
two hundred pots of Honey, twenty Xacaras of Gold in powder, and some a Truss
of Turkey stones, and paid besides the King of Alzopuzalco a Tribute of Fur
and Willow-trees toward the building of a City.

Diverse Provinces are bound to provide firewood for the Kings house amounting
unto two hundred and thirty weight a day, which was five hundred men's burdens,
and for the Kings particular Chimnies they brought the Bark of the Oak.

The Incas or Indian Kings before the coming of their unlucky loving friends
the Spaniards had their Tributes yearly brought unto the Court, and when any
work was to be done, or any thing to be furnished for the Incas, the Officers
knew presently how much every Province, Town and Family ought to provide, and
by their Registers strings and knots, knew what every one was to pay even to a
hen or burden of wood.

And as Inea Garzilasco de la Vega a Native of Cozco, relates in his book of
the ancient customs of those Countries, did amongst other Tributes make and
furnish clothes and Arms to be used in war.

In Virginia the Weroances under-Lords or petty Kings did hold their lands,
habitations and limits to Fish, Foul or Hunt, of their sovereign, King Powhatan
to whom they pay Tributes of Skins, Beads, Copper, Pearl, Dear, Turkies wild
Beasts and Corn.

And in all Savage Countries the English Merchants and Navigators, as Mr.
Edward Winslow, a man afterward too well known amongst the plundering and
mistaken godly at Haberdashers Hall, has related, at his return from thence
do make presents to the Savage Kings,

In New England the Sachims or Lords are subject to one Sachim, to whom they
resort for protection, and pay homage; neither may any make war without their
privity; every Sachim knows the bounds and limits of his Country, and that is
as his proper Inheritance and out of that, if any of his men desire Land to set
their corn, he gives them as much as they can use, and puts them in their
bounds. Whosoever hunteth, or kills any venison (which is there much of their
food) he brings him his Fee, which is the fourth part of the same, if it be
killed on the Land, but if in the water, then the skin thereof. Once a year the
people are provoked by the Pinieses, Knights or Counselors of the Sachims to
bestow much corn on the Sachim, who bring him thereupon many Baskets of corn
and make a great Stack thereof.

In Florida, where they all go naked, and do but little exceed the beasts of
the field in understanding, and want the wit of most part of the Nations of the
world to cover their nakedness, they can notwithstanding crowd in amongst them
and subscribe to that rule and part of right reason in making retributions and
acknowledgements to their Kings or Governors for self-preservation; so as a
Lord of that Country brought the Governor of the Plantation, which was made
there, two Deer skins, and in one Town they made him a present of 700 wild
hens, and in other Towns sent him those which they had or could get.

A Ca^ique at Panico near Florida and his men, as their manner is, weeping in
token of obedience, made the Governor a Present of much Fish.

And this custom of Pourveyance and grateful acknowledgments, being thus
diffused and to be found amongst the far greater part of all the Nations of
the world, we may well conclude it to be almost as universal as the use of
Beds, Physic, Horses and Shoes, or the custom of washing of hands, and so
generally, as if the Sun had in his journies been employed by God Almighty, the
Author of all Wisdom and Goodness, to scatter and infuse it with his light
into the minds and understandings of mankind.

And that those few places or parts of the world which have not that custom,
because their Kings are their Peoples Heirs, take what part of their Estates
they please, and govern by an Arbitary power, may when they arrive to a better
understanding acknowledge and bewail the want of it.

And that from these and the like customs of real and willing obedience, love
to their Princes and their honor and dignity, in which their native Countries
and themselves did partake and had so great a share, came those great and
marvailous public works.

As the Piramides of Egypt, the Obelisk cut by Semiramis out of the mountains,
the Pensil Gardens made by Nebuchadonosor, the costly and most magnificent
Temple of Solomon, which was seven years in building by one hundred eighty
three thousand six hundred men employed therein, the second Temple at Jerusalem
which was 8 years in building, and 10000 workmen at a time working upon it, a
part of the River Euphrates cut and brought into Tigris, Ninive built and
walled 480 furlongs about and 10000 workmen at a time employed.

The stupendous and great Wall of 40 leagues in length built in China; the
Picts Wall as yet a wonder in its ruins and remains, built betwixt some part
of England and Scotland of 80 miles in length, by Adrian the Emperor; and
another in or near the same place by the Emperor Severus, Grahams Dike in
Scotland built by Caraus^us; the Vallum Barbaricum, a great Wall or Trench made
by the Emperor Julian in Germany to defend it against the incursions of the
Barbarians; the four great Highways or Roads in England called Watlingstreet,
the Fosse, Erminstreet and Iknelstreet, leading to the four Quarters or several
parts of the Kingdom; the Aquaeducts stately Buildings Palaces, Castles and
Forts, and many other public works built by the Romans, and the greatest part
of the Nations of the World, serving to beautify and adorn as well as
strengthen it, which could never have been made or done by the greedy rates of
workmen, or the extremities or hire of the utmost farthing.

And hence it will be now time to imbark for old England and our British Isles,
the more ancient habitation of the Britains.

CHAP. II. Of the Use and Allowance of Pourveyance in England, and our British
Isles
WHere those prudential as well as ancient, just and reasonable Customs, being
by a long usage of time incorporated into the Civil Law, and so universally
allowed and received amongst many Nations, as they may well be said to be
established jure naturae and gentium, by a Law of Nature and Nations, could not
be any stranger, when as the Romans by the conquest of it, and the Governors
and Legions transported hither, were not likely to leave behind them their own
Laws and Customs, especially such as these which had been appropriated to
Martial affairs, and the support of the Honor and Dignity of the Governors or
Lievtenants of Provinces.

For in Britain when Julius Agricola in the Reigns of Nero and Domitian
governed for the Romans, such kind of Pourveyance for public uses, or support
of the Magistrate was taken, as Tacitus in vita Agricolae.
Tacitus his Son in Law in his life relates when he did frumenti and tributorum
auctionem aequalitate munerum mollire circumscisis quae in quaestum reperta,
mollify the augmentation of Tribute and Corn, with equal dividing of burdens,
cutting of those petty extortions, which grieved the Subjects (more then the
Tribute it self) for it seemed that the Romans had engrossed all the Corn of
the Country, and instituting a Monopoly thereof, compelled the poor Britains to
buy it again of them at their price, and shortly after laying a new charge upon
them, as to victual the Army, or the like, to sell it again under foot, and
the Cart-takers for carriage of provision did use to take up Carts at places
far distant and make them pay well to be spared, whereas the same thing,
says Sir Hen. Savile the learned Scholiast or Commentator upon Tacitus, might
have been done without molestation of the people, but not with like gain to the
Officers; nor were our Ancestors the Britains so unhappy in their friends the
Saxons, likely to be unlearned in those customs of Pourveyance, when that
great and famous Lawyer Papinian, did afterward at York for some years
together under the Emperor Severus, as our great Seldom dissertat. ad Fletam
478. and 479.
Seldom intimates, dicere and docere jus Caesareum, keep the Courts of Justice
according to the Roman Laws, and that those Laws flourished and continued here
as directors and assistants of their Government for more then 350 years after,
that is to say from the fiftith year of Christ to about the year 410, since
when or before the Irish paid very anciently their Coshery or exactio Dynastae
Hibernici, quando ab incolis and sub ejus potestate clientela victum and
hospitium capiebat pro seipso suaque sequela, Ware de Antiquitatibus Hiberniae.
Tributes to their Kings or Rulers of lodging and victuals for them and their
Retinue, and so long continued it as it is not yet out of the memory of some
men with how much honor and esteem an Earl of Desmond lived in the Reign of
Queen Elizabeth amongst his Tenants in Ireland, where when he yearly made his
Progress, they having comfortable bargains, were some for one day and night,
others for two, and some for a greater part of time, to entertain him and his
no small company.

And those reasonable Customs of Pourveyance without destroying of property
have not been disused, but have with relation to public uses or benefits kept
company with our municipall Laws and Customs during all the Saxon times,
until the Reign of Canutus the Danish King, who notwithstanding his Agreement
with King Edmond Ironside, made in a single combat in Alney Mead before
Gloucester in Campo Martio view of the Danish and English Armies, to divide the
Kingdoms of England and Denmark betwixt them, having by the death of that
valiant Saxon King, and his own and others treachery gained and gotten to
himself the whole Kingdom, murdered Edmond Ironsides kindred and friends,
denied his children their fathers right in the Kingdom of the Simeon Dunelm,
175, 176, and 178.
West Sexes, and banished them, deprived his Cousin Olaus of the Kingdom of
Norway, and acting an haughty and domineering Tyranny, thought his Prerogative
to be so boundless, that he took it ill that the Chronic. Bromton 912.
Sea (which is only commanded by him that stilleth the raging waves, and rides
upon the wings of the wind) did not adore his feet, and run back like the river
Jordan; and having Demeasns and Provisions enough of his own for the
maintenance of his Household, and lazy and unruly Lourdanes, did in a
contrivance of some ease to the people in small or less considerable matters
the better to please them, and assure his new Dominions sapientum adhibito
Consilio, by advice of his Parliament or LL. Canuti 67.
Council in Anno 1010. ut quo prius opprimabatur onere populum liberaret, that
they might be freed from the burden with which (as he said) they were formerly
oppressed; amongst other things, by a Law, Order and Command, his Officers, as
the learned Mr. Lambard has out of the old English or Saxon published it, ut
ex aratione and praediis suis propriis quae sibi fuerunt ad victum necessaria
suppeditent neque alius quisquam victui sui adjumenta praestare invitus
cogatur; atque si eorum aliquis hoc nomine mulctam petierit is proprii capitis
estimationem Regi dependito, that out of his own Demeasnes they should provide
necessaries for his Household, and that none be compelled to furnish any
provisions: And if any of his Officers should impose any penalty upon them, for
not furnishing such provisions, he should himself forfeit or pay a great sum of
money, amounting to near as much as he was worth. But as John Bromton, who
wrote in the Reign of King Edward the third, has recited that Law, it does
something differ from that which Mr. Lamberd has mentioned, and is only in
these words, praecipio praepositis meis omnibus ut in proprio meo lucrentur,
and inde mihi serviant, and nemo cogatur ad firmae adjutorium aliquid dare nisi
sponte sua velit, all his Reeves (or Officers) were commanded that they should
make the best profit they could of the Kings Lands for his use; and that no man
should be compelled to add or pay any thing more then his Rent or Farm, unless
he should do it of his own accord; Chronic. Johannis Bromton 930.
Et si quis aliquem inde gravabit werae sua Reus sit erga Regem, and if any
should disturb them therein they should forfeit and pay a Fine to the King.

And that Law (or Edict, or Proclamation rather then a Law) taken as it is
either in Bromton or Lambard, was but only intended, as the title and body of
it signifies, de victu ex praediis regis concerning his Tenants in his own
Lands and Demeasnes, and any provisions to be made by them over and above their
Rents, but did not discharge Cart-taking, or other parts of the Royal
Pourveyance in his own Demeasnes, nor extended to any Lands or people other
then the Kings own Demeasnes, and can signify no more then his desire to spare
the Tenants of his own Lands from being charged with any provisions for his
House, who, as Sir Edward Coke says in his Comment or Annotations upon Coke 2.
part. institutes Comment* in Artic. super Chartas.
Magna Charta, and the Statutes of Articuli super Chartas, being the Kings
Tenants in ancient Demeasne, have ever since enjoyed many great privileges, as
to be free from payment of Toll, paying of wages to the Knights of the Shire
which serve in Parliament, and the like.

And were by special privilege granted by William the LL. Gulielmi
Conquestoris 2.
Conqueror, to have upon Judgments obtained against any that did them wrong,
double the forfeitures and penalties (or damage) which were to be adjudged to
any other.

And the word (...) as Mr. Somner says in his Glossary victum proprie sonans,
signifying only some provision of victuals reserved, it is not likely that, the
firmae adjutorium in Bromtons Translation of that Law or Edict of King Canutus
could be meant or expounded, that no provisions should at all be paid; for then
it would have signified the whole Rents to have been acquitted if no moneys had
been used to have been paid together with provisions. Or if as the judicious
Spelmans Glossar. in verbo fi^ma 274.
Sir Hen. Spelman says, the word Farm does import tam redditus pecuniarias ex
elocatis provenientes quam Annonarias, as well for rent in money as corn, and
other provisions for housekeepings, and pro caena prandio corrodio convivio
epulis et omni mensae apparatu sumitur, and is taken for a Corrody, Supper,
Dinner, Feast, or any other provision to furnish the Table; and that some money
and some provisions were paid for their Rents; it remains a doubt what that
favor intended by Canutus his Law or Edict should be interpreted to be, or how
much of that Kings provisions toward the keeping and maintenance of his house,
were by him remitted; or if it shall be understood to have been only in alba
firma quae argento penditur non pecude. only in money, which if at all was very
seldom used in those times; that also must be denied to have been either the
meaning or practice of that Law or Edict of Canutus, when as the Tenants of the
Crown have been found to have paid their provisions for Housekeeping in Edward
the Confessors reign before the Conquest, and after in the reigns of William
the Conqueror, William Rufus, and part of the reign of Henry the first; so as
the way to get out of it will be in all probability to understand it to be no
otherwise then a fo^bidding the rapines and the outrageous taking of the
peoples Cattle, Corn and Provisions by his unruly Danes, who had so lately been
invading and plundering enemies, and were scarcely denizend.

For in the same LL. Canuti 78.
Parliament we find his Law, that Dona potionis honoraria aliaque debita
Dominis officia in suo semper statu immutato manerent, honorary oblations or
customs for drink, with other duties (of Tenants to their Lords, should
continue as formerly and remain unchangeable. And the Customs of England
afterward extant, and to be found in old Charters and Doomsday book, do
accordingly often mention Bordland to find provisions for the Lords Houses or
Tables, Dro^land, to drive their Ca^tel to Fairs, Markets, etc. Berland, to
bear or carry provision of victuals or the like for them or their Stewards in
their remove from place to place* Po^ura or Drinklan, or Scot ale, a
Contribution by Tenants toward a ^otation, Drinking, or an Ale, provided to
entertain the Lord or his Steward coming to keep his Courts, Somner Treatise of
Gavelkind.
Gavel Malt, Gavel Corn, and ad defer^endum and cariandum ad costas and
expensas tenentium usque ad granarium* and to carry it at the Tenants charges
to the Lords Granary, Gabulum mellis or Rent-honey, (...)-gavel, Rent-oates*
Wood-lede, to carry home his wood, Gavel or Rent-timber to repair his house,
and Gavel dung, to carry out his dung, often used in Kent, where they think
that in liberties and privileges they do surpass most of the other parts and
Provinces of England. And could at the same time also lay a greater burden upon
the people then his pretended ease amounted unto in that his Law touching his
own Demeasnes, and enjoin the Romescot or Peterpence for every house or
chimney, which he had given the Pope larga ma^u and penhenniter, as Chronic.
Bromton 912.
Bromton says, and a charge upon the people to a perpetuity, as he thought of
that which the former Kings had made, but some temporary grants of; to the Sea
of Rome, with great penalties for the non payment thereof: And under severe
mulcts comm^nded the yearly payments of the Ciricksea^ or Oblations for First
fruits to the Church, which was then, as Mr. Somner says, a census s^^e in
gallinis, sive in aliis rellus pro aedium decima solvendis, a Rent or Duty to
be paid in Henns or other things for the Tithes of their Houses, or as a
Symbolum or munus, gift or offering.

And though William the Conqueror had a great affection to establish Leges
Noricas, Danish or Norway Laws then used in many Provinces, yet was England so
happy in its unhappiness* as he did not, but precibus Anglorum atque
Normannorum deprec^tus, tired with the petitions and importunities as well of
his Normans as the English, ut per animam LL. Edwardi C^isessoris.
Regis Edwardi qui sibi post diem suum concesserat c^ronam and regnum, and
cujus erant Leges, nec aliorum extraneorum exaudiendo concederet eis sub
legibus perseverare paternis, as he respected the soul of King Edward who gave
him the Crown and Kingdom, and whose Laws they were, and not any strangers,
that he would not hearken unto them, but give them leave to enjoy the Laws of
their Ancestors; whereupon consilio habito and precatu Baronum, by the advice
and counsel of the Barons, when his conquering Normans as well as the subdued
English thought it to be most for their good and safety to be governed by
Edward the Confessors Laws, and the good old Customs of England, he did after
an enquiry of Chronic. Le^ebfeldense.
duode^im sapientiorum de quo libet comitatu quibus jurejurando injunctum fuit,
twelve of the wisest men of every County upon their oaths restore to them
patriae leges; their own Laws, especially the Laws of LL. Gulielmi
Conquestoris, 59.
Edward the Confessor, which were first instituted by King Edgar, and had long
lain asleep; but at the same time took a care by a Law made on purpose, ne quis
domino suo debitas praestationes (which did then and anciently signify
services and duties to be done) LL. Gulielmi Conquestoris, 34.
subtrahat propter nullam remissionem quam ei antea fe^erit, that no man upon
any release or discharge made thereof should withhold or deny his service or
accustomed dues to the Lord, which repealing as it were Canutus his Law did not
certainly exclude the King or his Successors in their own particulars, when as
he procured by another Law, ut jura regia illaesa servare pro viribus conentur
subditi, that all his Subjects should endeavor all they could to preserve his
Regalities, Et ex illo die (the Laws of Canutus vanishing probably as those of
Cromwell did) Leges Sancti Edwardi multa autoritate veneratas, and per
universum regnum corroboratas et observatas, and from that time the Laws of
Edward the Confessor were greatly reverenced, and through all England observed.
For we find not that Law of Canutus either repeated or mentioned (as the Laws
of some of the Saxon Kings were) or any thing of that nature enacted or
confirmed in or by the Laws of Edward the Confessor, William the Conqueror* or
King Henry the the First; but on the contrary the Laws of Edward the Confessor
confirmed by William the Conqueror do expressly ordain, that debent enim et
leges e^ libertates jura, et justas consuetudines LL. Edwardi Confessor.
regni, et antiquas a bonis predecessoribus (which could not well be meant or
intended of any of Canutus* or any the Denelage or Danish Laws) approbatas
inviolabiliter modis omnibus pro posse suo servare, every man ought to his
utmost to keep and conserve the Laws, Liberties and Rights, and the just and
ancient Customs of the Kingdom.

The Abbot of Ramsey was by a Charter of William the Conqueror exempt from
Spelman ^n verbo Angaria
carriages and Pourveyance.

And the Book of Doomesday, which was made in the sixteenth year of his Reign,
and remains ever since an unquestionable record of the Kingdom, is not without
some vestigia or footsteps of Pourveyance in the Reign of that good, and to
this day ever honored King, Edward the Confessor, where it is said that tempore
regis Edwardi reddebat civitas de Tit. Gloucestrescire.
Gloucester xxxvi l. numeratas xii. sextaria mellis ad mensuram ejusdem Burgi,
and xxxvi. Dacras ferri, C. virgas ferras ductiles ad claves navium Regis, and
quasdam alias minutas consuetudines in Aula and in Camera Regis, in the time of
King Edward the Confessor the City of Gloucester did pay yearly six and thirty
pounds in money, twelve measures of honey containing six Gallons a piece,
according to the measure of the Town, six and thirty Dacres (a proportion then
known by that term) of Iron, and one hundred Rods of Iron, to make nails for
the Kings Ships, and certain other small Customs for the Hall and Chamber of
the King; Et in Sciptone Rex tenet de annona xv l. the King had fifteen pounds
per annum provision of corn and other victuals.

The Bordarii often mentioned in Doomesday Book were such as held Lands mensae
domini designatas and esculenta indicta, videlicet ova, gallinas, aucas,
porcellos, et hujusmodi ezhiberent, appropriate to a Pourveyance for the Kings
Table, furnishing Eggs, Hens, Geese, Pork and the like; and for the Huscarles
or household servants so called, concerning whom it is there said Tit.
Dorsetscire, and Spelman in verbo Bordarii 202.
Et gilda pro december hidis, scilicet ad opus huscarlum unam marcam argenti, and
he paid taxes for ten hides, that is to say, a mark of silver for the use or
maintenance of them, Tit, Northantesceire reddit firmam trium noctium (vel
edulia ad caenam unam) 30. lib. ad. pondus, made provision for one night of the
value of thirty pound; and tit. Oxenefordsc. Comitatus Oxeneford reddit Spelman
glossar. in verbo firma 275.
firmam trium noctium, hoc est 100 lib. furnishes provision for three nights
of the value of 100 pound. Et Doomsd. tit. Wilts. Wilton. quando Rex ibat in
expeditione, vel terra, vel mari habebat de hoc manerio xx. sol. ad pascendos
suos Buzcarlos, aut unum hominem ducebat secum pro honor quinque hidar^m, when
the King went upon any expedition by land or sea, he was to have out of that
Manor twenty shillings to feed his Buzcarles, Mariners or Seamen; or took for
every five hides of land, or that then (esteemed honorable) quantity of land a
man with him.

But howsoever if that of Canutus discharging Pourveyance were a Law neither
altered nor repealed, it did but like his Laws touching Ordeal, and delivering
over the Murderer to the Kindred, and other of his Laws which proved to be
unpracticable, rather make the matter worse then better, by his renouncing
Pourveyance in his own Demeasnes: for that Law and Resolution of his did meet
with so little observance, as in the Reign of King William Rufus, and a great
part of the Reign of his Brother King Henry the First, the Kings Servants and
Court for want of their former provisions grew to be so unruly, as Hist. Edmer.
lib. 4.22.94.
multitudo eorum qui curiam ejus sequebantur quaeque pessunda^ent diriperent
and nulla eos cohibente disciplina totam terram per quam Rex ibat devastarent;
and a multitude following the Court, took and spoiled every thing in the way
which the King went, there being no discipline or good order taken; Et dum
reperta in Hospitiis quae invadebant penitus absumere non valebant ea aut ad
forum per eosdem ipsos quoru^ erant pro suo lucro far ac vendere aut
supposito igne cremare, ^ut ^i potus esset lotis exinde equ^rum suorum pedibus
residuum illius per terram effundere aut aliquo alio modo disperdere solebant;
and when they could not consume that which they found in the houses whereinto
they had broken, made the owners carry it to the Market, and sell it for them,
or else burnt their provisions, or if it were drink, washed their horses feet
with it, or poured it upon the ground, in so much as quique pre^ognito regis
adven^u sua habitac^l a fugithant, every one hearing before hand of the Kings
coming, would run away from their houses, which probably bringing in a dearth
or scarcity of co^n, might be the cause of the Tenants of the Kings Demeasne
Lands, bringing in the later end of the Reign of King Henry the First, (for
then it was and not before, as it appears by Edmerus and William of Malmsbury
who lived in his time) to the King their Plowshares instead of Corn to Court on
their backs, and making heavy complaints of their poverty and misery, procured
that King to change their Rents, which before were used to be paid for the most
part in corn, cattle and provisions, and were wont abundantly to supply his
household occasions, and with which in primitivo regno statu post
conquisitionem, the Kings of England* from the Conquest until then did
plentifully, as Lib. rub* in Scaccario.
Gervasius Tilburien^is, who lived also in his Reign has related defray the
charges of their Courts and Households into money with six pence in the pound
overplus, left the value of the money should afterward diminish: but whether
Canut^^ his Law were then in force or not, or could be sufficient to abrogate
those Jura Majestatis, Rights or Prerogatives of our English Kings, we find
King Henry the first after those disorders (in his greatest compliance with the
English, and his need of their aid to defend him against the pretensions and
better Title of his elder Brother Robert Duke of Normandy, and his cou^ting of
them unto it per libertates quas sanctus Rex Edwardus spiritu Dei provide
sancivit, by the ancient Laws and Liberties of holy King Edward, which he had
granted them, and a promise to grant them any other) retaining his Pourveyance,
Mat. Paris 62.
and putting it into better order; for as William Malmesbury has recorded it,
Malmesbury lib 5.91.
Curialibus suis ubicunque villarum esset quantum a Rusticis gratis accipere
quantum and quoto praetio emere debuissent edixit transgressores, vel gravi
pecuniarum mulcta, vel vitae dispendio afficiens, directing and ordering those
of his Court in whatsoever places he should abide, what and how much they were
to receive from the Country people gratis, and without money, and at what
prices and rates they should buy other things, under great penalties of money
or punishment by death, and was optimatibus venerabilis and provincialibus
amabilis, reverenced by the Nobility and beloved by the common people; and in
his Charter, which was for a great part of it the original of our Magna Charta,
where Mat. Paris 240. and 258. and Charta H. 1. de libertatibus.
omnes malas consuetudines quibus regnum Angliae unjust opprimebatur inde
aufert, he took away all the evil Customs with which England was oppressed; Et
quas, as the Charter says, in part hic posuit; and which were in part
recited, and with which the discontented Barons and Nobility of England
claiming their ancient Liberties, were so well contented in the 14. year of the
Reign of King John, when Steven Langton Archbishop of Canterbury produced it
unto them, as, gavisi sunt gaudio magno valde and juraverunt omnes quod pro
hiis libertatibus si necesse fuerit decertabunt usque ad mortem; they greatly
rejoiced, and swore that they would if need were contend unto death for those
Liberties: there is no mention of any evil in Pourveyance, nor any order for
the taking of them away. And might as justly and rationally continue in the
Reign of King Henry the second his Grandchild, as that custom or usage for the
Bishops and dignified Clergy to take their provisions of the Inferior Clergy,
and their Carriages or Carts which Pope Alexander in a Council or Synod held at
Rome, where were present the Bishops of Durham, Norwich, Hereford and Bath, and
diverse Abbots sent from England, did notwithstanding many complaints not
against the Pourveyance it self, but the immoderate use of it, only limit and
restrain them, secundum tolerantiam in illis locis in quibus am^liores fuerint
redditus and Ecclesiasticae facultates, De^retum Alexandri Papae in part
posteriori, Annal Rogeri de Hoveden, 333.
in pauperibus autem mensura tenenda, to be moderately taken in such places as
had more large possessions and Ecclesiastical Revenues, and less of those who
were in a poorer condition; and then and long before the Domini hundredorum,
Lords or great men having the command or jurisdiction of Hundreds, uti comes
aut vicecomes as the Ea^l or Sheriff of the County had, Spelman glossar in voce
Hundredus.
multa inde auxilia tributa sectas aliasque praestationes cum ad utilitatem tum
ad voluptate^ Cerere^ nempe and frumentu^ receperunt, etc and received many
aids, tributes, and Pourveyances as well conducing to their profit as pleasure
cujus hodie nomine Annuum penditur tributum pecuniarum, for which now there is
a certain rent in money paid. Nor could the rights of Pou^veyance and
Prae-emption be any thing less then denizend in Scotland, or the Northern parts
of our British Isles, when as the Civil and universal Law of the World was
there so long ago entertained, and yet continues the great Director and Guider
of their Justice, where in Anno 1487. in an Act of 14. Parliament King James
the 3.
Parliament made by King James the third anent strange^s bringing in victuals
and utheris merchandice, it is provided, that quhair any victuals of
merchandise cummis, gaining for the King, that his Comptroller after that the
price be maid with the strangers sall have sa meikle of the first and best as
is needful to the Kings proper use for the quihilk full payment but delay; and
their learned Craig in the Reign of our King James doubts not to reckon the
Angari^ and Parangariae plaustrorum and navium praestationes, furnishing of
Carriages and Ships for public uses, inter ea quae Regalia dicuntur, and quae
in annexo patrimonio numerantur, amongst those Regalities which are annexed to
the Crown of Scotland Craig. de feudis apud S^o^os D^eg. 14.
eo quod ad conservandam Regni dignitatem ex consensu ordinum constituta sunt,
in regard that by the consent of the Estates is thereby conserved the dignity
of the Kingdom.

And their Ce^sus Cani, Rent or Provision, quh^^t, beir, aytes, or uther kind
of victuals, reckoned by Bolls of Wheat, Skene de verbor^^ significatione.
and Chalders of victuals, not yet forsaken or laid by, may induce any man to
believe that they were well acquainted with those just and ancient observances.
And in that Charter of our King John's at Mat. Paris 323.
Running Mede near Stanes (being the same word for word which was after so long
and bloody wars confirmed, by King Henry the third) which was made when his
weaker forces were ready to be encountered by a far stronger of his boisterous
Barons, there is no denying of Prae-emption and the reasonable part of
Pourveyance, the former of which as long as the fifth Commandment in the
Decalogue, and the acknowledgements and respects of inferiors to superiors, the
honor due to Kings and Patribus Patriae, and the common civilities of mankind
shall continue in force, and be practiced and unrepealed, is certainly to be
continued, and should not be disturbed by any the Sons of men who would
preserve the honor and dignity of their Prince and Common Parent; for it was
there only agreed that nullus constabularius vel Ballivus noster capiat blada
vel alia Catalla alicujus nisi statim inde reddat denarios; No Constable or
Bailiff of the King shall without present payment take any Corn or Cattle of
any man's, aut respectum inde habeat de voluntate venditoris, unless the Seller
should be contented to give day for it Charta Regis Johannis de libertatibus
Angliae. 9 H. 3. ca. 19. and 21.
Et nullus Ballivus noster* vel Vice-comes, vel alius capiat equos, vel caretas
alicujus pro cariagio faciendo nisi reddat liberationem antiquitus statutum
scilicet pro careta ad duos equos december denarios per diem, and pro careta ad
tres equos quatuordecim denarios per diem; And that none of the Kings Bailiffs,
Under Sheriffs or other take any man's carts or horses for the Kings carriages
without paying the ancient rate or Livree appointed, that is to say for a Cart
and two Horses ten pence a day, and for a Cart and three Horses fourteen pence.

Nor did the Conservatores libertatum Angliae enforced upon Mat. Paris 641.
King Henry the third in his troublesome Reign make any quarrels or
restrictions concerning it.

In Charta Foreste made at the same time, no 9 H. 3 ca. 7.
Foster or Bedil was to make Scota^^, or gather Garb, Oats, Corn, Lamb or Pig,
nor any gathering but by the view and oath of twelve Rangers, the Exception
allowing the things in casibus non exceptis, and proving that such things might
in such manner be then reasonably and lawfully taken. And in that Kings Regin
Writs were frequently sent to the Sheriffs, as appears in the To. Claus. H. 3.
close Rolls, to make provisions of Mutton, Puletry, Geese, Eggs, etc. against
Christmas and other principal Feasts, and sometimes to the Chamberlains of
London to make provision of wine, Cl^us. 1 H 3. m. ^5.
Spices and Furs to be paid de denariis Regis, and at other times to some
others to make provision of Corn, Claus. 29 H. 3. m 11.
Bacon, etc. for fortifying a Castle, promising that the Sheriff should make
payment, and be allowed upon his account out of the profits of the County, so
as although the provisions for the Kings own Household, or for public uses,
were not taken without moneys to be paid for them, yet they were, as it may
well be supposed, at reasonable prices, and by a privilege or prerogative of
Praeemption, and not always at such prices as the avaritious humor of the
Sellers should exact, 13 Ed. 3.6. Brook Leet 26. Dier 13. Coke 2. part.
Institutes 72.
when the Sheriffs in their Turns or Leets might compel them to reasonable
rates. And Sir Edward Coke will hardly be brought off from a mistake, in
alleging in his Comment upon the Statute of Artic^li super Chartas, that when
the Kings of Englands provisions C^ke 2 par^e institutes and in Artic. super
^ha^tas 543
began to fail, and could not be had as formerly out of their own Demeasnes,
there were Markets kept at the Court gates, which being not in the Reign of
King Henry the first, who changed his Provision Rent into money, do not appear
to have been afterward in his time, or of the next succeeding Kings, Stephen,
Henry the 2. Richard the 1* or King John, and King Hen. 3. who needed not to
have made use of his Sheriffs to have furnished his Christmas or other household
provisions, if Markets with that decency and regard which belonged to a Kings
Court, where those great Kings, and a daily confluence of their then no small
Nobility, with their usual Trains and Attendants, and many times foreign
Princes or their Ambassadors were to pass, had been or were then kept at the
Court gates: for Britton de me^ures ca. 30.
Britton who wrote in the Reign of King Edward the first, only says that the
Clerk of the Market, or he which was to look to the measures was to go with
his Standard from Market to Market when he found the Market to be within the
Virg^, otherwise to make the Bailiffs to appear before him.

Tertio Ed. 1. ca. 7. it was enacted, that of Prises taken by the Constables or
Castellanes upon such folk as be not of the Towns where the Castles are, no
Constable or Castellane from thenceforth should exact any price or like thing
of any other then of such as be of the Town or Castle; and that it be paid, or
else agreement made within forty days, if it be not an ancient price due to
the King, or to the Castle, or the Lord of the Castle.

Tempore Ed. 1. ca. 2. It was ordained that no Officers of the King or of his
Heirs should take Corn, Leather, Cattle, ot any other goods of any manner of
person without the good will and assent of the party to whom the goods
belonged: And ca. 3. the King granted for him and his Heirs that all Clerks and
Laymen of the Land, should have their Laws Liberties and free Customs as
largely and wholly as they have used to have the same at any time when they had
them best. And if any Statutes have been made by him or his Ancestors, or any
Customs brought in contrary to them or any manner of Article contained in that
Charter, willed and granted that such manner of Statutes and Customs should be
void and frustrate for ever.

Anno 28 Ed. 1. Artic. super Charta^ ca. 2. upon complaint that the Kings
Ministers of his house did to the great grievance and damage of the people take
the goods as well of the Clergy as the Laity without paying any thing, or else
much less then the value; It was ordained that no Pourveyors should take any
thing but for the Kings House; and touching such things as they should take in
the Country of meat and drink, and such other mean things necessary for the
house, they should pay or make agreement with them of whom the things should be
taken, nor take more then should be needful to be used for the King, his
Household and Children, with a Proviso therein, that nevertheless the King and
his Counsel did not intend by that Estatute to diminish the Kings Right for the
ancient prices due and accustomed, as of wines and other goods, but that his
Right should be saved unto him in all points.

Anno 16 Ed. 2. Hill. 16 E. 2.
the King sent his Writ to the Justices of the Court of Kings Bench, then not
so fixed as now or of later times, to command them to take care to punish the
Infringers of those Laws.

And howsoever the Articles and inquiries in the Eyres in the Reign of King
Edward the first were to enquire and punish those Sheriffs, Constables or
Bailiffs which took any victuals or provisions for the King or his Household
(which shows that then also no Markets were kept at the Court gates, nor that
all the Kings provisions were there bought or taken) contra voluntatem eorum
quorum Catalla fuerint, without the will of the owners (which in all
probability was to be regulated and persuaded by that duty and loyalty which
every good Subject coming to a Country or City Market did bear to his
Sovereign, and the Preserver by his authority and power of not only what they
brought to Market that day, but what was left at home, or to be brought at
other times to Market) and the words sine consensu and voluntate, etc. without
the consent of the Seller are to be interpreted and understood, says Sir Coke
2. part Institut. 543.
Edward Coke to have been inserted in that and other Statutes; for that
Pourveyers would take the goods of such men as had no will to sell them, but to
spend them for their own necessary use.

But afterward some abuses like weeds getting in amongst the best, corn or
greatest care of the watchful Husbandman happening in the manner of
Pourveyances, by taking them without warrant or threatening the Sellers or
Assessors to make easy prices, or not paying ready money or the Market rate
for them, or taking more then they needed, or by greater measures, and making
the Pourveyances for diverse Noblemen belonging to the Court, as of the Duke of
Gloucester in the Reign of King Henry the sixth: and in his time also some
Hostlers, Brewers, and other Victuallers keeping Hosteries and Houses of
retailing victuals in diverse places of the Realm, having purchased the Kings
Letters Patents, to take Horses and Carts for the service of the King and
Queen, did by color of them take horses where no need was, and bring them to
their Hosteries and other places, and there keep them secretly until they had
spent xx.d. or xl.d. of their stuff, and sometimes more, and then make the
owners pay it before their horses could be delivered, and sometimes made them
pay a Fine at their will, and at other times took Fines to show favor, and not
to take their horses, and many times would not pay for the hire of the said
horses and carts, diverse Acts of Parliament upon complaints at several times in
Parliament of the said abuses committed by Pourveyers were made to prohibit and
provide against them, but none at all to take away the Pourveyance it self, or
Prae-emption, or the Kings just Rights and Prerogatives therein, but a saving
of the Kings Rights especially provided for in many of them, as

Anno 10 Ed. 3. ca. 4. The Sheriff shall make Pourveyance for the Kings horses.

Anno 18 Ed. 3. ca. 4. In the Commissions to be made for Pourveyance the Fees
of the Church shall be exempted in every place where they be found.

Anno 25 Ed. 3. ca. 1. after that in Anno 20 Ed. 3. diverse Pourveyers had been
attainted and hanged for fending against those Laws: and that in the 23. year
of that Kings Reign diverse of the Kings Pourveyers were indicted for breach of
those Laws. It was enacted that If any Pourveyer of victuals for the King
Queen or their Children should take Corn, Litter or Victuals without ready money
at the price it commonly runs in the Market, prized by Oath* by the
Constable and other good people of the Town, he shall be arrested, and if
attainted, suffer pains as a Thief if the quantity of the goods the same
require.

Cap. 6. No Pourveyer shall take, cut or ^ell wood or Timber for the Kings use
for work growing near any man's dwelling house.

Et cap. 7, Keepers of Forests or Chaces shall gather nothing, nor victuals,
nor sustenance without the owners good will, but that which is due of old right.

Cap. 15. If any Pourveyer take more sheep then shall be needful, and be
thereof attainted, it shall be done to him as a Thief or a Robber.

Anno 36 Ed. 3. ca. 6. No Lord of England nor none other of the Realm of what
estate or condition that he be, except the King and the Queen his wife shall
make any taking by him or any of his Servants of any manner of victuals, but
shall buy the same that they need of such as will sell the same of their good
will, and for the same shall make ready payment in hand according as they may
agree with the seller. And if the people of Lords, or of other, do in other
manner, and thereof be attainted, such punishment of life and of member shall
be done of them as is ordered of the buyers, the occasion of the making of
which Statute, and the preceding Act of Parliament of 25 Ed. 6. before
mentioned, Sir Coke 2. part. Institutes 545.
Edward Cook informs us was a book written in Latin by Simon Islip Archbishop
of Canterbury, (and before that a Secretary of State and Privy Councellor) to
King Ed. 3. called Speculum Regis, sharply inveying against the intolerable
abuses of Pourveyers and Pourveyance in many particulars, and earnestly
advising* and pressing him to provide remedies for those insufferable
oppressons and wrongs offered to his Subjects, which the King often perusing,
it wrought such effect, as at diverse of his Parliaments, but especially in his
Parliament holden in the 36 year of his Reign, he did of his own will without
the motion of the great men or Commons, as the Record of Parliament speaks,
cause to be made many excellent Laws against the oppressions and falsehood of
Pourvey^rs.

2 R. 2. ca. 1. Upon complaint made in Parliament, that Pourveyors and Buyers
did take Provisions of the Clergy, and enforce them to make carriages against
their Liberties; It was enacted that the holy Church should have and enjoy her
Franchises and Liberties in all points in as ample manner as she had in the
time of the Kings noble Progenitors Kings of England; and that the great
Charter, and the Charter of the Forest, and the good Laws of the Land be firmly
holden and kept, and put in due execution, saving to the King his Regality
(which is in the Record, but omitted in the Print;) by which Statute says Coke
2. part. Institutes Comment. in confi^mationes Chartarum 526
Sir Edward Coke, there was nothing enacted but what was included in Magna
Charta.

And in the same Parliament it was ordained that the Statutes heretofore made
should be kept; and that Petitions in Parliament, 2 R. 2.
all Clerks should have their Actions against such Pourveyors by Actions of
Trespass, and thereby recover treble damages. And in 7 R. 2. cap. 8. it was
ordained that no Subjects Chator shall take any victuals or carriages to the
use of their Lords or Ladies without the owners good will, and the party
endamaged, if he will, shall have his Suit at the Common Law.

2 H. 4. cap. 15. Pourveyance of the value of forty shillings or under for the
Kings house shall,l be paid for presently upon pain of forfeiture of the
Pourveyors Office.

23 H. 6. ca. 14. If any Buyer or other Officer of the Duke of Gloucester, or
of any other Lord or person, take any Victuals, Corn, Hey, Carriages, or any
other thing of the Kings Liege people against their will, or without lawful
bargain, but only for the King and the Queen and their houses, they shall be
arrested; and if any of the said buyers other then of the King and Queen shall
be convicted of such unlawful taking he shall pay treble damages.

28 H. 6. ca. 2. None shall take any persons Horses or Carts without the
delivery of the Owner or some Officer, nor any money to spare them, saving
always to the King his Prerogative and his Pre-eminence of and in the
premises.

And in the care of our Kings to redress the peoples grievances, and satisfy
their complaints against the Pourveyors rather then the Royal Pourveyances; it
may be understood also that they did not altogether lay aside the preservation
and care of those ancient and most necessary rights and parts of the Kingly
Prerogative, by their Answers given in diverse Parliaments to the Petitions of
the People concerning it, as

13 Ed. 3. The Commons pray in Parliament, that all Pourveyors as well with
Commission as without shall be arrested if they make not present pay; whereupon
it was agreed that the Commissioners of Sir William Heallingford, and all other
Commissioners for Pourveyance for the King be utterly void.

14 Ed 3. Ordered that the Chancellor by Writs do pay the Merchants of Barton
and Lynne for their Pourveyance of corn.

17 Ed. 3. The Commons pray that remedies may be had against the outrageous
taking of Pourveyors.

The Statutes made shall be kept, and better, Resp.
if it may be, devised.

20 Ed. 3. That payment be made for the last taking of victuals.

Order shall be taken therein. Resp.


They pray that Pourveyors not taking the Constables with them according to the
Statute of Westminster, shall be taken as Thieves, and the Judges or Justices
of Assize or the Peace may inquire of the same.

The Statutes made shall be observed.

21 Ed. 3. Upon a complaint of the Commons, Resp.
That whereas in the Parliament in anno 17. and the next Parliament before, it
was accorded that Commissions should not issue out of the Chancery for Hoblers,
and taking of Victuals, etc. the said Ordinances are not kept.

Resp.
If any such Imposition was made, the same was made upon great necessity, and
with consent of the Prelates, Counts, Barons, and Autres grandees, and some of
the Commons then present, notwithstanding the King will not that such undue
Imposition be drawn into consequence, but wills that the Ordinances in this
Petition mentioned be well kept.

And as touching the taking of victuals, always saving the Kings Prerogative,
his will is, that agreement be made with such of whom the same are and shall be
taken.

The Commons alleging, That whereas it was lately ordained and assented by the
King and his Council, that men and horses of the Kings Household should not be
harbinged in any part of the Country, but by Bill of the Marshall of the House
delivered to the Constable, who should cause them to have good sustenance for
themselves and their horses as should be meet, and cause their victuals to be
prised by the men of the same Towns, and before their departures should pay the
parties of whom the victuals were taken, and if they did not their horses
should be arrested; and that contrary hereunto they depart without payment,
pray that in every Bill mention be made of the number of horses, and that no
more but one Garson be allowed, and that payment according to the Statute may
be made from day to day.

Resp.
The King is pleased that this Article be kept in all points according to the
form of the Statute.

They complain that the Pourveyors of the King, Queen and Prince severally do
come yearly assess and Towns severally at ten Quarters of Oats more or less at
their pleasure, and the same do cause to be carried away without paying for
the same; and pray that such Tallages and Pourveyance may be taken away.

The King will forbid it, Resp.
and that no man take contrary to such prohibition, saving to him, the Queen
his companion, and their Children, their rightful takings.

Eodem Parliamento, whereas the horses of the King, Queen and Prince do wander
into diverse parts, doing much hurt and damage to the people, and that hay,
oats, etc. are taken contrary to the Ordinances already made, the Commons pray,
That the King will ordain that those horses may abide in some certain place of
the Country where they are, and that Pourveyance may be had for them in
convenient time of the year by the Deputies, as may be agreed between them and
the owners of those goods.

The King is well pleased that the Ordinances already made shall be kept, Resp.
and that Pourveyances may be made for his best profit and ease of his People.

45 Ed. 3. That no Pourveyance be made for the King but for ready money, and
that the King be served by common measure.

The Statutes made before shall be observed. Resp.


They complain of the decay of the Navy by reason tha^ sundry men's ships were
stayed for the King long before they served, the Masters of the Kings Ships do
take up Masters of the Ships as good as themselves.

The King will provide Remedy. Resp.


46 Ed. 3. They complain that Ships arrested have been kept a quarter of a year
before they pass out of the Port, and in that time the Masters or Mariners
have no wages.

Y pleist al Roy que le Navy soit maintain and guard a greindre ease et profit
que fair se poet. Resp.


Eodem Parliamento, The Commons desire the King and his Council, that whereas
it is granted that no Pourveyance be but where payment is made at the taking,
that it will please him that his Ordinance be holden as it was granted.

Resp.
It pleases the King, that he that finds himself grieved shall pursue it,
and right shall be done him.

47 Ed. 3. That the Statute made whereby buyers of the Kings Household should
pay readily may stand, and that no man be impeached for resisting them therein.

The Statute therefore provided shall be kept, and who will complain shall be
heard. Resp.


Eodem Parliamento, That Masters of Ships and their Mariners may be paid their
wages from the day of their being appointed to serve the King.

Resp.
Taking of Ships shall not be but for necessity, and payment shall be
reasonable as heretofore.

They pray, That Masters of Ships may have allowance for their Tackling worn in
the Kings service.

Resp.
Such allowance has not been heretofore made.

50 Ed. 3. That the Kings Carriages for himself and his Household may be of
Carts and Horses of his own, and not to charge the Commons therewith.

Resp.
The King knows not how these things may be brought to pass, but if they be
he will charge the Steward and Officers to make redress.

The Commons of Norfolk require that payments may be made to them and to all
their Countries for sheep taken by the Pourveyors far under the price against
the Statute.

This Bill is otherwise answered within the Bill of Buyers. Resp.


The Commons of Devon pray that they may be paid for victuals taken of them by
the Duke of Britain whilst he lay there of long time for passage, and that from
thenceforth no protection be granted to any passenger to take any victuals
ooher then for present pay.

Let the offenders for time past pay, and answer, and for to come the King
will provide. Resp.


50 Ed. 3. That the Kings Pourveyor take of the Provision the Clergy, and cause
them also to make carriage for the King, against the Ordinances and Statutes
thereof made.

2. That the owners of the Ships taken up for the Kings service may be
considered for their losses in the same, and that Mariners may have the like
wages as Archers have.

It shall be as it has been used.

2 R. 2. Resp.
The Commons of the Duchy of Cornwall show how by taking up their Mariners,
the Spaniards lately burned all their Ships, and otherwise much e^damaged them;
and the like complaint was made by all the Seacoasts, and therefore pray remedy
may be had.

The King by advice of his Council will provide remedy therefore Resp.


3. R. 2. The Commons by their Speaker pray that it would please the King to
appoint by Commission such as should enquire by all means of the Kings charges
as well of his Household as otherwise.

The King grants it, his Estate and Royalty always saved; and it was enacted
until the next Parliament, Resp.
That every Master of a Ship shall have for his reward for every Tonne weight
for such his vessel as shall be taken up to serve the the King for every
quarter of a year that they shall remain in his service three shillings four
pen^, beginning the first day of their entering into the haven or place appointed.

5 R. 2. The Commons made Recapitulation of their requests, and namely of the
Ordinance concerning Pourveyors,

Whereto it was replied for the King, That his charges were great as well
concerning sundry particulars there uttered, as like to be greater for the
solemnity of his marriage with the Lady Anne Daughter to the mighty Prince
Charles Emperor of Rome; the which Lady was newly come into the Realm, the
tenth part of which charges the King had not in treasure or otherwise; and that
therefore it was, as necessary to provide for the safety of the Kings Estate as
for the Commonwealth.

6 R. 2. The Commons pray, That the Statute of Pourveyors may be observed, and
that ready payment may be made.

Resp.
The Statute therefore made shall be observed.

2 R. 2. The Commons pray that every Ship taken up for the Kings service may
toward her apparrelling take for every quarter, two shillings of every Tonne.

That the Statutes of Pourveyors and Buyers be executed, and that the Justices
of the Peace have power to hear and determine the same.

That the Estate of the Kings Household be yearly viewed once or oftener by the
Chancellor, Treasurer and Keeper of the privy Seal, and that the Statutes
therefore appointed may be observed.

Resp.
The King grants to the first at his pleasure, and to the second he grants.

10 R. 2. That every owner of a ship serving the King may have for every
quarters service of the same his Ship three shillings four pence of every Tonne
Leighter, or little Ship.

The King has committed the same to his Counsel to be considered. Resp.


14 R. 2. They require remedy against Masters of Ships and Mariners.

The Admiral shall appoint them to take reasonable wages, or punish them. Resp.


17 R. 2. Pray that Remedy may be had against the Officers in London, who exact
of Drovers bringing Cattle into Smithfield the third Beast.

The Mayor and Sheriffs of London shall answer the same before the Council.
Resp.


20 R. 3. A Bill was exhibited in Parliament amongst other things for the
avoiding of the outrageous expenses of the Kings House, upon which particular
the King seemmed much offended, saying he would be free therein, and that the
Commons thereby committed offense against him and his dignity, which he willed
the Lords to declare to the Commons, and their Speaker was charged to declare
the name of him who exhibited the said Bill; which having done, and the Bill
delivered to the Clerk of the Crown, the Commons came before the King showing
themselves of heavy cheer, and declared they meant no harm, submitted and
craved pardon; and Sir Thomas Hexey a Clergie-man, who exhibited the Bill, was
by Parliament adjudged to die as a Traitor, but at the request of the
Archbishop of Canterbury and other Bishops pardoned for life, and ordered to be
by Sir Thomas Percy Steward of the House delivered to the custody of the
Archbishop.

Anno 1 Hen. 4. The Commons pray that the King may have only two Tons of wine
of every ship of wine coming to any port in the name of prize.

Resp.
It shall be as heretofore.

6 H. 4. That the owners of every Ship or other Vessel serving the King may
have allowance of every Tonne weight of the same Vessel three shillings four
pence for every quarter toward the apparrelling of the said ship.

Resp.
The Statute therefore appointed shall be observed.

7 and 8 H. 4. That all the Statutes touching buyers and Pourveyors may be
executed, and that payment may be made for victuals taken by the Kings
Pourveyors from the time of his Coronation.

Resp.
The King is willing to do the same, and that all Statutes of Pourveyors be
observed.

11 H. 4. The King promises convenient payment for victuals taken by his
Pourveyors.

Thomas Chancer chief ^^tler to the King shows what prices of wine the King
ought to have of every Ship, and how much the King was deceived thereof, that
the Citizens of London being exempt from the same, did use notwithstanding to
make strangers free thereof.

Resp.
The King sent for the Citizens heretofore, and further wills that none shall
enjoy any such liberty unless he be there a Citizen res^a^t and dwelling.

3 H. 5. The Commons pray that no Ship be taken to serve the King by any
Letters Patents, but that the same Letters Patents may be seen before the
Mayor* and other Officers of the Town, that hire of the freight, may be by them
made and ready payment had*

Resp*
The Statutes heretofore made shall be observed.

18 H. 6. Order was taken for the payment of the Kings debts and provision of
his Household, and authority committed to the Kings Council to take order
concerning Pourveyors, and the fourth part of the Tenth and Fifteenth to be
employed to the payment of the Pourveyance for his Household.

20 H. 6. The Commons pray that certain Lords, such as the King shall please,
may have authority to settle good order in his Household, and that ready money
be paid for victuals, carriages, and other dispenses of the same House.

Be it as is desired, Resp.
provided that this extend not to impeach any Assignments, Grants, Payments,
Benefit or Interest to any man lawfully granted, or had before this Parliament.

27 H. 8. cap. 24. The Kings Pourveyors may for the provision of the King,
Queen and their Children take all victuals, corn, and other kinds of things
whatsoever according to their Commissions, as well within the Liberties and
Franchises as without, any Grants, Allowance, or other thing to the contrary
notwithstanding.

1 and 2 Phil. and Man. It was ordained by Act of Parliament, That no
Commission of Pourveyors should continue above six months; the County to be
named where Beeves, Weathers Lambs Calves, Swine, Salt-fish, Corn, Butter,
Cheese, Bacon, Conies, Pigs, Geese, Capons and Hens, and any other provision of
victuals were taken, the proportions and numbers of them and a Docquet to be
made all things taken. And cap. 6. No victuals shall be taken by the Kings
Pourveyors within five miles of the Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, nor
in Oxford or Cambridge upon pain of forfeiture of four times the value,
provided that the Act be not put in execution at any time or times whenever
the Queen and her heirs and successors shall please to come to both or any of
the said Universities, or within seven miles of either of them, but be
suspended during that time and no longer.

5 Eliz. cap. 5. Composition Fish heretofore granted to the Queens Majesty by
the Subjects of this Realm travailing into Iseland, may be taken by her
Majesty's Officers and Pourveyors in such sort as the same has been lawfully
used to be taken before the making of this Act, saving to the Queens Majesty
her Heirs and Successors, and to all other persons such Fishes as be known and
used to be called Regal Fishes, whereunto her Majesty or the said other
persons have or shall have right or interest for such recompense as heretofore
has been accustomed.

13 Eliz. cap. 21. Reciting the said Act of the 2 and 3 of King Phillip and
Queen Mary; and that since diverse of the Townships, Inhabitants and Res^ants
within the Limits and Precincts aforesaid, having converted the benefit of the
said Act to their private use and commodity without any profit or commodities
to the poor Scholars of either of the said Universities, whereby the Queens
Majesty was not only not served of provision of Corn, Grain, and other victual
to be taken for her Majesties-provision, but also the said Universities were
defrauded of the benefits and commodities to them intended. It was ordained
that no person whatsoever, nor the Pourveyors of the Queen her Heirs and
Successors, nor no Badger or Poulter should take or bargain grain, or victuals,
within the compass of five miles of the said Universities, or within the Towns
of Oxford and Cambridge without the consent of the Chancellors or
Vice-Chancellors in writing under the Seal of either of the said Universities
first had in writing: And if any person or persons within the said Precincts
should refuse reasonably to serve the necessary provision of the said
Universities, that then it should be lawful to any of the Queens Majesty's
Takers or Pourveyors to provide any corn or victual of any such person or
persons within any part of the precinct aforesaid for the use of the Queen, as
should be declared and notif^ed to the said Pourveyors or Takers to be persons
not worthy of the said privilege, for not reasonably serving the necessities
of the said Universities by the Chancellor or Vice Chancellor for the time
being of either of the said Universities with the assent of the two Justices of
Peace res^ant within the said Universities, Town, or County under the hands and
Seals of the said Chancellor, or Vice Chancellor, and the said two Justices of
the Peace, as the said Pourveyors or Takers lawfully may in any other place
within the said Precinct, and not otherwise; Provided that the Act shall not be
put in execution at any time or times whenever the Queens Majesty, her Heirs
and Successors shall come to any of both the Universities, or within seven
miles of either of of them, but shall be in suspense during that time only and
no longer.

And King Henry the seventh, who in the rage and scuffle of a fortunately
fought Battle at Bosworth field, having found his Crown thrown into a Hathorn,
or bush of Thorns, as a presage of the cares which usually attend the wearers,
and by marriage once accounted the best of unions, happily established himself
in the Kingdom, and stopped the issue of blood betwixt those two great contending
Families of York and Lancaster; and having afterward (as no giddy but a
probable tradition, has left it in the successive memories of the servants of
the Royal household) for the better government and order of his Expenses of his
House, and their provision of Diet, put a rate or Reiglement as well in the
quantity as quality and price thereof, which in those cheaper times was little
less then the Market rate, or but that which might reasonably be afforded. It
continued uncomplained of in the Reign of King Hen. 8. when Cardinal Wolsey
Lord Chancellor of England, and the Kings Privy Council made certain
Reiglements and Constitutions touching the well ordering and government of the
Kings Household; the motives thereof were therein expressed to be al honne^r de
Diu and a honneur and profit de Saint Eglise, and al honneur du Roy and a son
profit and du profit de son peuple, for the honor of God, and the honor and
profit of holy Church and the King and his People.

Which Rules and Rates being not held to be a public grievance in all his
Reign, and the Reigns of King Edward the sixth and Queen Mary, some of the
Counties in the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, though the people
thereof were most commonly well paid for their provisions by the Queens
Pourveyors, finding some trouble and attendance in the procuring their moneys
to be paid for their commodities which were sometimes taken upon credit, by
reason of so many Offices, Cheques, Intrada's and Comptrolments, which they
were to pass through at the Court, did about the fourth year of her happy Reign
petition her to accept the value in money to be yearly paid by the Countries,
which she by no means hearkening unto, it came afterward to an agreement what
proportion those* and several other Counties should yearly serve in Oxen,
Calves, Muttons, Poultry, Corn, etc.

In which she was so careful to preserve her Subjects and People from
grievances, or just causes of complaints, as in Coke comment in Artic. super
Chartas.
Anno 32 of her Reign Nicholls one of her Pourveyors was attainted of Felony,
and hanged for forcibly taking provisions without money: and those compositions
and agreements for provision of the Household continuing all her glorious and
happy Reign, and all the Reign of the peaceable King James, it was in the
eighth year of his Reign in the case betwixt Va^x and Newman resolved by the
Judges, and allowed for law, that it was lawful for a Pourveyor (paying for
them to take Cattle for the Kings House by virtue of the Kings Commission, and
cited the book of 18 H. 6. 19 b. to that purpose. And in the third year of the
Reign of King Charles the Martyr were none of the grievances then complained of
in order to the obtaining of the Petition of Right, and confirmation of the
Peoples Rights and Liberties, or of those which were then alleged to be
infringed. Although that in the Reign of King James some of his Pourveyors
having taken greater quantities of provision for his House and Stable then ever
came or were needful to his use, and caused Timber to be cut down: thereupon
in Anno 2. of his Reign it was resolved by all the Coke i^ Mag. Charta 36.
Judges of England and Barons of the Exchequer upon mature deliberation, that
the Kings Pourveyors could take no Timber growing upon the Inheritances of the
Subject, because it was parcel of their Inheritances no more then the
Inheritance it self, of which the King and his Council being informed, he did
by a Proclamation dated 23 Aprilis anno 4 of his Reign prohibit such their ill
dealings, and diverse Pourveyors were afterward punished by the Court of
Star Chamber for Pourveying of Timber growing without the consent of the
owners.

Nor had that fatal and ever to be bewailed Remonmonstrance of the House of
Commons in Parliament the 15. of December 1641. in which was too industriously
amassed and put together all the errors imaginable in the Government and Reign
of that pious Prince, and more then could be proved any thing to charge upon
the Pourveyance or Compositions for the provision of the Kings Household, but
only that the people were vexed and oppressed with Exact Collection of passages
betwixt the King and Parliament 7.
Pourveyors and Clerks of the Market, neither in their nineteen Propositions in
June, 1642. sent to the King at Oxford, wherein they would have lessened his
power all they could, and extended their own, was there any thing proposed for
the taking away of the Royal Pourveyance, or Compositions, or in other
propositions afterward sent thither, or in the Treaties at Uxbridge and the
Isle of Wight.

Nor if causes and circumstances be as they ought, to be well weighed in the
Balance of Judgment, and all things rightly considered, could be any
grievance or cause of complaint.

When as the remote Counties which had less benefit by the constant residence
of Q. Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles the First, in their Chamber of
London, the heart of the Kingdom did bear very little, and the near adjacent
Counties; which by heightning their Markets and prices of all sorts of
Commodities by a large improvement of their Lands and Rents to above twenty
times more then ^t was in the Reign of King Henry the seventh, and ten times
more then it was in the eighteenth year of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth might
better afford it, did not pay or bear much in the Pourveyance or Composition,
which were made by the Justices of the Peace in each County upon consultation
and agreement with the Officers of the Green-cloth in the Kings House, for
serving in a certain quantity of provisions out of every County at such rates
and prices as were agreed on betwixt them, as by a few instances of many may
easily appear by what was yearly charged upon the Counties of Essex, and
Midlesex, near adjacent to London, and the Counties of Derby, Worcester and
York, which were more remote, viz.

The Kings price Total. l. s. d. l. s. d. Wheat 500 quarters at 0 6 8 166 13 4
Oxen fat 20 at 4 0 0 80 0 0 Muttons fat 300 at 0 6 8 100 0 0 Veals 300 at 0 6 8
100 0 0 Porks 100 at 0 6 8 33 6 8 Boars 6 at 0 13 4 4 0 0 Bacon Flitches 30 at
0 2 0 3 0 0 Lambs 1200 at 0 1 0 60 0 0 Essex.
Geese 5 dozen at 0 4 0 1 0 0 Capons 10 dozen at 0 4 0 2 0 0 Hens 30 dozen at 0
2 0 3 0 0 Chickens 150 dozen at 0 2 0 15 0 0 Pullets 40 dozen at 0 1 6 3 0 0
Hay 134 loads at 0 8 0 53 12 0 Oats 1426 quarters at 0 4 0 285 4 0 Litter 120
loads at 0 4 0 24 0 0 Wood 769 loads at 0 3 0 115 7 0 Coals 250 chalder at 0 13
9 171 17 6 Sum 1201 0 6

Kings price. Total. Wheat 200 quarters at 0 6 8 66 13 4 Veals 40 at 0 12 0 24
0 0 Veals 100 at 0 6 8 33 6 8 Green Geese 20 doz. at 0 3 0 3 0 0 Capons course
10 doz. at 0 4 0 2 0 0 Hens 20 dozen at 0 2 0 2 0 0 Midlesex.
Pullets 20 dozen at 0 1 6 1 10 0 Chicken 40 dozen at 0 2 0 4 0 0 Hay 202 loads
at 0 4 0 40 8 0 Oats 211 quar. 2 bush. at 0 4 0 42 5 0 Litter 180 loads at 0 4
0 36 0 0 Wood 200 loads at 0 3 0 30 0 0 Sum 285 3 0

The Market price. Total. Difference. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. 1 16 8 916 13
4 640 0 0 10 0 0 200 0 0 120 0 0 1 0 0 300 0 0 200 0 0 1 4 0 360 0 0 260 0 0 1
3 4 116 13 4 83 6 8 4 0 0 24 0 0 20 0 0 0 10 0 15 0 0 12 0 0 0 8 0 480 0 0 420
0 0 0 18 0 4 10 0 3 10 0 Essex.
0 16 0 8 0 0 6 0 0 0 12 0 18 0 0 15 0 0 0 6 0 45 0 0 30 0 0 0 10 0 20 0 0 17 0
0 1 10 0 201 15 0 140 19 0 0 12 0 855 12 0 570 8 0 0 10 0 60 0 0 36 0 0 0 7 0
26^ 3 0 153 16 0 1 10 0 373 0 0 203 2 6 4266 6 8 2931 2 2

Market price Total Difference 2 0 0 400 0 0 333 6 8 1 2 0 44 0 0 20 0 0 1 2 0
110 0 0 76 13 4 0 18 0 18 0 0 15 0 0 0 16 0 8 0 0 6 0 0 0 12 0 12 0 0 10 0 0 0
10 0 10 0 0 8 10 0 0 6 0 12 0 0 8 0 0 Middlesex.
1 10 0 303 0 0 262 12 0 0 12 0 126 15 0 84 7 0 0 10 0 90 0 0 54 0 0 0 7 0 70 0
0 40 0 0 1203 12 0 917 19 0

Kings price. Total. l. s. d. l. s. d. Oxen lean 40 at 2 13 4 106 13 4 Derby*
Muttons lean 200 at 0 4 8 46 13 4 Wax 200 weight at 0 0 8 per lb 7 9 1 Sum
160 15 9

Kings price. Total. Oxen fat 20 at 4 0 0 80 0 0 Muttons fat 200 at 0 6 8 66
13 4 Worcester.
Stirks 20 at 0 10 0 10 0 0 Lambs 150 at 0 1 0 7 10 0 Sum 164 3 4

Kings price. Total. Yorkshire.
Oxen lean 110 at 2 10 0 275 0 0

Price of the Market. Difference. l. s. d. l. s. d. l. s. d. 6 10 0 260 0 0 153
6 4 0 14 0 140 0 0 93 6 8 Derby.
0 1 4 14 18 8 6 9 4 414 18 8 254 2 4

Market price Total Difference 9 10 0 190 0 0 110 0 0 1 0 0 200 0 0 133 6 8 2
13 4 53 6 8 43 6 8 Worcester.
0 8 0 60 0 0 52 10 0 503 6 8 339 3 4

Market price Total Difference 7 0 0 770 0 0 495 0 0 Yorkshire.


And may show with what justice, equality and due consideration those
profitable Agreements and Compositions were made by the several Counties when
as they did bear no other parts of the whole Compositions yearly served in kind
for provisions for his Majesty's late Royal Fathers House; and they in the
general were no more then as follows.

Compositions which were served in kind for Provisions of his late Majesty's
House.
l. s. d. Wheat 3790 quarters at 0 l. 6 s. 8 d. 1263 6 8 Oxen fat 578 at var.
pretium 1980 6 8 Oxen lean 915.110 at 50's. pr. rest at 53 s. 4. d. 821 13 4
Muttons fat 5150 ad var. prec. 1575 0 0 Muttons lean 1850 ad var. prec. 373 6 8
Veals 1231 ad var. prec. 386 16 8 Porks 310 ad var. prec. 88 13 4 Stirks 410 ad
var. prec. 183 0 0 Boars 26 ad 13 s. 4 d. prec. 17 16 8 Bacon. 320 flitches. ad
var. prec. 17 10 0 Lambs 6820 ad 12 d. prec. 341 0 0 Butter 40 Barrels ad 45 s.
br. 60 0 0 Geese 145 dozen ad var. prec. 28 0 0 Capons course 252 dozen ad 4 s.
doz. 50 8 0 Henns 470 dozen ad 2 s. doz. 47 0 0 Pullets course 750 dozen ad 18
d. doz. 56 5 0 Chickens course 1470 dozen ad var. prec. 126 10 0 Wax 3100 weight
ad 8 d. lb 115 17 8 Sweet Butter 46640 lb. ad var. prec. 804 6 8 Charcoals 1250
loads ad 13 s. 9 d. load 859 7 6 Tallwood 3950 loads ad 3 s. load 442 10
Billets. 3950 loads ad 3 s. load 442 10 Faggots 3950 loads ad 3 s. load 442 10
Herrings 60 br. ad 13 s. 4 d. br. 40 0 0 Wine Caske from the Vintners 600 Ton
at 3 s. 4 d. per Ton 100 l.

And will upon the severest examination or inquiries appear to be no more then
necessary for the food and provision of the Kings Household, those great Lords
and Officers of State and persons of honor, extracted from the best Houses and
Families of England which stand before him, and manage the many several offices
and employments in his House, their Tables Diet and Bouche of Court allowed
them; the many Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen and Yeomen which attend him in
their monthly or weekly turns and courses, and do take their Diet and Lodging
therein, which being not a few, and yet not much above the ninth part of the
10000 which daily follow the Court of France, made up of an hideous dissolute
and unruly number of Pages, Lacquies and Footboyes, could not possibly be
provided for and honorably and worshipfully maintained with lesser proportions
in that princely, honorable, and plentiful manner in which the King and his
royal Progenitors have always kept their household and family and according to
the honor and worth of those who are faithfully and decently to serve and
attend him, where frugality and prudence, (which as anciently as in the later
end of the reign of King Edward the first, when Fleta lib. 2. ca. 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, and 24.
Fleta a treatise so called was written appears not to have been a little) and
a not sometimes but daily care of expending no more then needs must, by those
excellent Rules and Orders from the highest Office in the Court unto the lowest
thorough all the ranks and degrees of it, without any lessening or diminution
of the honor of it, which are not to be equalled or patterned in the Economy
or government of any of the Nobility, Gentry, Merchants Citizens, or sorts of
people whatsoever in the Kingdom.

Where Honor, and Majesty, sat in its greatest luster, where the expenses were
great and princely, and yet such, as compared with other men's families, might
seem impossible to bring the year about with so little, where Prudence and
Largess, Bounty, and Providence, were so combined, and entered into a League
and Association, as if the Queen of Sheba, before the Erinnis of our fiery and
factious Spirits had lighted us with her hellish Torch, to our shameful
Misdoeings, and Miseries, had viewed the honor of our King, and the order of
his house, his many officers, and their manner of sitting at their meat, the
attendance of his ministers, and their English (not Frenchified or
Fantastical) apparel, she would not only have said as she did concerning
Solomon's Court and State, Blessed and happy are they that serve and stand
before him (who has power opportunity and means at all times to prefer and
advance them, and their merits) but have wondered how it should have been done
with so small an yearly expense, so little noise or trouble, and in so goodly an
order.

Which the more then seldom extraordinary Ambassadors of foreign Princes,
coming hither may subscribe unto, when as for some days before their Audience,
they have with some of every sort of the Kings Servants and Officers, selected
to that purpose seen themselves attended in the plenty State and greatest of
Royalty of the King or Prince from which they were sent, and in the mean time
nothing wanting or missing in that of the Kings attendance, or magnificence, in
his Court o^ Family.

From whence at all times, Carelesnes Profusenes, and all manner of wast were
so banished, as the Porters at the Gates were charged to watch and hinder the
carrying out of meat and provision by such as should not, the Pastrie rated in
their allowances for Spice, Sugar, Corance, etc. the servants took an oath of
duty and obedience; and the Treasurer and Comptroller to make due allowance and
payments with favorable demeanings, and cherish love betwixt the King and his
people.

In Anno 7 Jac. Rates and orders were made and set touching the Kings
Breakfast, and his particular fare as to qualities and proportions for Dynner
and Supper, and Fish days; for the diet of the great Officers and all other
Officers and Servants having diet, and the like on the Queens side; Rates for
Bouche of Court for Mornings and Evenings, Lights and Candles, and the Yeomen
of the Guards diet; and Beef ordered to be on Flesh days for the King, Queen
and Household.

In anno 16 Jac. by advice of the Earl of Middlesex, Sir Richard Weston Knight,
Sir John Wolstenholme, Sir William Pyt Knight, and other discreet men very much
experienced in the Affairs of the world, appointed to lessen as much as might
be the charges of his house: many good orders were made for the regulation of
the Kings* Household, some abatements made in the allowance for his Breakfast by
his own order, a Limitation and stint of Joints of Meat to make Jellies, and
all other compositions: the number and names of all Noblemen and Ladies
attending the Court to be quarterly presented. And that the Prince should pay
for his diet at his coming to Court (which the most narrow-hearted and frugall
of fathers in private Families and Societies have not done (and his Countrymen
of Scotland, and many English could not say he was) according to the rates he
paid at his own House, and that when he should repair to any of the Kings
Houses in remote places, he should pay for such of the Kings provisions as he
should expend there according as they should be worth at the next Market. And
yet in all that frugality and care to prevent wast, and the daily meeting of
some of the Officers of the Greencloth in the Compting house, there were 240
gallons allowed at the Buttery Bar per diem, three gallons per diem at the
Court gate for thirteen poor men, six Services or Mess of meat, and seven
pieces of Beef per diem as wast and extraordinary for the Kings honor. And
there was no Sunday or other day of the week but the Tables of the great
Officers and Lords entertained many Lords, Knights and Gentlemen which were not
of the Household, but came to see the King, or make and attend their petitions
and suits: and few Gentlemen of quality, Citizens or other persons of those
multitudes whose business or desires to see the Court brought them thither, but
were taken in as Guests to dinner, with some of those many other Officers of
the Court that had diet allowed them, it having been an ancient custom after
the King was set to dinner to search through all the Lodgings and Rooms of the
House to find out Gentlemen and Strangers fit for and becoming the invitation
of the Kings Servants to the Kings meats and provision for his servants: and in
all those treatments and largess of housekeeping there wanted not a sober
plenty of wine and beer out of the Kings Sellers, and an open housekeeping
with so much sobriety as if it had not been an open housekeeping; wherein no
drunkenness or debauchery was to be seen, as is too commonly in the now almost
out of fashion open or free housekeeping at Christmas or other Festivals.

18 Jac. Regis Diverse Ordinances were made for the diminution of the charge of
the Kings housekeeping, the allowances of wast to be given daily for the Kings
honor reduced to a certainty, viz. 200 loaves of bread, 240 gallons of beer,
remains of Wax and Torch-lights to be returned, the number of Artificers,
Victualle^s and Landresses ascertained, number of Carts for Carriages stinted
and proportioned to all degrees and Offices, the charge of the Stable being
almost doubled to what it was in Queen Elizabeth's time, to be lessened as much
as may be; none to be sworn Servants, before the number of Officers should be
reduced to what was formerly no Offices or Places in the Kings House to be
sold, and all other good Orders to be put in Execution, and yet could at the
same time by his especial grace and favor remit to certain places some of his
compositions.

Nor did those contrivances and endeavors to lessen the Kings charge of
housekeeping die with King James, but were found to survive to his Son, and
Successor his late Majesty King Charles the first, in the third year of whose
Reign half the allowance for household diets was abated on fasting nights, and
the carriages in every office reduced to a certain number: and when the
composition or Country provision of Oxen or Sheep did by the Courts frugality
sometimes exceed or make an overplus, they were sold and exactly brought unto
an account for the defraying of other household charges, where, as his Royal
Progenitors used to do, he could in his greatest wants, and care of all
fitting Espargne in his own diet and household, cause the Lord High Stewards
Table in time of Parliament to be constantly abundantly and extraordinarily
kept and furnished, to treat and dine the then numerous nobility and persons of
honor coming to the Court and Parliament.

But all that was of Innocence, ancient, legal and just Rights in it, backed
and seconded by right Reason, the Laws and reasonable Customs of the Land,
the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy taken by all Magistrates, Justices of
Peace, Officers, and many of the better sort of the people, and of every
Freeman of every Trade and Company in London, and ordered to be taken by all
men in the Kingdom to defend and maintain the Rights and Jurisdictions of the
King and his Crown, and the interests, concernments, good, honor, safety,
welfare and happiness of every man in particular being involved in that of
their King or Prince, were not enough to persuade those who had found the
sweetness of ruining him and all which were loyal and well affected to him,
from pursuing the sinful and abominable ends and designs of themselves and
their great Master of Delusion the Devil, to murder him: but whilst they hunted
him like a Partridge upon the mountains, and through more persecutions of mind
and body, and a longer time then ever the righteous and holy David endured in
his greatest afflictions, could take all that he had from him, his Lands,
Revenues and Estate, and so much as his Plate for religious uses for his
Chapel and Devotion, sell the Coats of the Yeomen of his Guard, break in scorn
his great Seal of England by the hand and hammer of a common Blacksmith (which
showed what they intended to the life of the owner) drive and engage all men
into a monstrous Rebellion and a slavery, which proved to be the consequence
and just reward of it, and deprive him as much as they could of the loyalty,
duty, love and obedience of his people, and having abundantly enriched
themselves and their Godless praying party by the Crown Lands and Revenues of
the Church, most of the Nobility and Gentry, and many other good men and their
Families, did not think it reasonable to serve their Master for a little, but
as a further reward and recompense for their care and diligence to oppress and
ruin their King and his better Subjects, would be sure to make for themselves
as good a Pourveyance and Provision as they could, upon pretenses of some
little losses in their own small and necessitous Estates, and allow one another
besides their gain of plundering, and traitorous and sacrilegious purchases
out of the improvements of the Common misery, and washing as well as wasting
three Kingdoms over in blood, some fifty pounds some ten, some four pounds a
week toward their support and maintenance, and to make their proportions the
more plausible, and to seem something reasonable, would not leave out of the
account the well stretched Items of the losses and charges of their
Grandchildren and married Sons and Daughters; and when they had finished their
ungodly work, murdered the King, Monarchy, Magna Charta, Petition of right, and
the Laws and Liberties of the People, and converted their own sins into the
bloody and unsure foundation of a Commonwealth, founded upon the blood and
murder of their Sovereign, and many thousands of his loyal and religious
Subjects, and the perjury of themselves and as many as they could persuade or
constrain unto it, and the greatest of iniquities; and made the people (who got
as much ease by it as the Ass in the Fable, who thought to make his burden of
Sponges the lighter by lying down in the water with them) believe that when two
parts in three of the Kingdom were undone to enrich a third, and brought under
a slavery and arbitrary power of the mechanic and ruder sort of them, that
their freedom from Pourveyance and Cart-taking was an especial deliverance,
which amongst other wonderful things, as they called them, pretended to be
done for them, being only to buy Sadles for their reforming Legislators to ride
upon their backs; and a favor much of kin to that of Pharoahs kind usage of
the Children of Israel, when he set Taskmasters over them to afflict them with
burdens, made their lives bitter with hard bondage, caused them to make bric^,
and double the Ta^e thereof, and gather the straw, was recompense sufficient
for all their money and sins laid out in that wicked and detestable cause, and
for all that which they were to endure in this life and the next, and in that
seeming holy but assured cheating a miserable and strangely deluded Nation,
continued like the Egyptians in their way to the Red sea, and oppressing of
Gods people, until their Oliver and grand Impostor and Instrument had
outwitted and undermined them, and ins^ead of many Tyrants had set up his
single Tyranny; and having from an indebted and small Estate, made much less by
a former drunken and debauched conversation, by which he was so straightened as
not to be able to buy some oats or pease to sow a small parcel of ground, but
to borrow some of a friend upon his promise of a Repayment upon his hoped for
increase at Harvest, did notwithstanding neither then nor after a more
plentiful crop of his wicked doings, and that great Estate which the sins of
a factious and wicked part of the people had made him Master of, ever find the
way to satisfy or repay.

And having largely pourveyed for himself, better then he could do in his
Brewhouse, and put an Excise upon Ale and Beer, and intoxicated as many as he
could seduce with an opinion that Rebellion was Religion, and gotten an
Arbitrary power, with a large Revenue in Lands which was the Kings and other
men's, an Army of twenty thousand Foot and ten thousand Horse, and a formidable
Navy to be maintained at the peoples charge to continue their misery, and three
hundred thousand pounds per annum to defray the charges of his tyrannical
Government, took himself to be a Child of Providence, and something more then
one of the smallest Branches of Cromwell alias Williams King Henry the eights
Barber, and therefore in order to a Kingship or something by another name
amounting to as much, made it his work to disguise and metamorphose the ancient
Government, decry our fundamental Laws and every ancient constitution, dig up
by the roots all that was not novel or assistant to his designs, and fit to
make a head out of the Heels; and after he had taken an oath to maintain and
preserve the Laws and Liberties of the people imprisoned Sergeant Maynard,
Sergeant Twisden, and Mr. Wadham Windam, who pleaded in the behalf of a Client
for them, thought it to be conscience, Law and Latin good enough to call our
Magna Charta, magna Farta, and did so order his Convention, or thing called a
Parliament of England, compounded and made up of time-servers, and a Medly of
Irish and Scottish of the like complexion as they were brought in Anno 1656. by
one of their Tools called an Act of Parliament to ordain that pourveyance or
Composition for the Kings house (which they were taught to allege to be a
grievance to the people and very chargeable (when there was none at all at that
time in being in England, nor was ever intended by many of the worshipful
Mushrooms to be,) thereafter, should no more be taken under pain of Felony.

And was as great a kindness and ease to the people as if they had ordained
that no more Subsidies (which seldom amounted to more then a tenth part of the
late yearly Taxes should be imposed by Parliament, but Assessments at 70
thousand pounds, or one hundred and twenty thousand pounds per mensem, as often
and as long as that which they called the supreme Authority should have or
feign a necessity for it; or that offenders should be no more sent for by the
Kings messengers, or tried by Juries and the known Laws of the Land, but at
Cromwells High Court of Justice or Shambles lined with red or bloody Bays: or
that there should be no more use or trouble of the Train Bands, but an Army of
30000 domineering Redcoats or Fanatics with their Bashaws or Major-Generals
maintained at the peoples charge to keep or make them quiet under their
vassalage, or slavery, or that there should be no more Coat and Conduct money,
long ago remitted by King Charles the Martyr, but free quarter as often as any
Plot should be feigned and contrived to Bugbeare them into more Taxes and
Garrisons, and make them the more willing to pay new Assessments, and content to
embrace their miseries.

But the Varnish and Fucus of those State-Mountebanks and Intruders being by
time and many years lamentable experiments discovered, found out and detected
by all men which had not been gainers by it, or bound their understandings and
reason apprentices to the witchcraft or enchantments of the Devil and his
Angels, chattering and canting Scripture on purpose to wrong and ensnare them.

If any in our times of pretense of much reason and little or no practice of it
shall be so over inquisitive or curious as to demand.

CHAP. III. The reason of Prae-emption and Regal Pourveyance, or Composition
for the Provision of the Kings Household.
WHich deserves a place inter Regalia and insignia Majestatis, amongst the
special parts of Prerogative and denotations of Royal Majesty, it will besides
the universality of it, and the allowance, direction and examples of the Law of
Nature and Nations before demonstrated, be as obvious to all that will not
wilfully or purposely forsake the great road or highway of Reason and Truth,
and creep into By-pathes of Error and Fancies, as the causes and right reason
of tributes* self-preservation, gratitude and retribution for public benefits,
and the support of that happiness, peace and plenty, which every man that would
not be a Candidatus amongst such as are listed for Bedlam, would not only
willingly enjoy but leave as a Legacy to his posterity.

And the objections that every ^eller is to ask what price he pleases for that
which is his own, that no man by Law can lesse^ or take that liberty from him,
which jure naturae, by the Law of Nature is due unto him, and that Jura naturae
sunt immutabilia, the Laws of Nature are not be abrogated, that every Buyer is
to have a free disposal of his own money, is not to be restrained in the
pleasing of his appetite or f^ncy, or providing for his necessities or
occasions in the giving what rate he will, or laying out of his own money, will
be too weak to hinder or interrupt our passage to the conclusion or proving of
it to be rational.

For that the Laws of Nature, which takes care of particular men's just rights
and liberties, do take a greater for the general well-being of mankind, and do
many times enforce particulars in order to common good, to yield and give place
to Generals, and God himself, the natura naturan^ great Master and Governor of
Nature, and the greatest and most prudent of all Legislators, having all things
past, present and to come before him and uno intuitu, looks at once into
them, who may well be believed to be better skilled in the making of Laws then
any of the sons of men, who at the best can only view the things that stand
before them, or which are weakly imprinted in their memory, did in the
righteous Laws which he made for his beloved people of Israel and Children of
the Promise, limit the taking of Interest for the money which was their own,
commanded them not to be usurers* to the poor of that people, and if they took
a garment for a pledge to restore it unto Exodus 22. v. 24 and 25. and 23. v.
11.
the borrower before the going down of the sun, ordered them to release their
Creditors at the seven years end, and permit the poor to enjoy their Lands,
their Vineyards and Olive-yards in that year of rest, and not to sow or till
Leviticus c^. 25. v. 11, 14.
their Land in the Jubilee or fiftieth year, but to return every man into his
possession, and in selling ought unto their neighbor, or buying ought of his
hand, they should not oppress one another: And the good Nehemiah the righteous
governor of a Remnant of that people, did not take it to be out of the power of
the chief Magistrate to abate or mitigate unmercifull and hard hearted bargains
and contracts in the lending of money one unto another, but was angry, and made
them Nehemiah cap 5.
forbear their usury, and restore to the Mortgagers their Lands, their
Vineyards, their Olive-yards, and their houses also, the hundredth part of the
money and of the corn, the wine and the oil which they exacted of them, and
bound them unto it by an oath.

From the pattern, or by imitation of which unquestionable Laws came that rule
or reason given by the Wisigothes in a Law of theirs, prohibiting the stopping
of the passage of ships or boats upon great rivers, upon the pretense of a
right of Fishing, LL. Wisigoth. lib. 8.39.
ut nullus contra multorum commune commodum suae tantummodo utilitati
consulturus, that no man taking care only of his own private profit more then
that of the Commonwealth, or many should do it, and our English Kings for
public utility and common good, which according to that Axiom of the Civil
Law, that privatorum conventiones juri publicae derogare non debent, private
men's interests or bargains are not to inconvenience or disturb the Public, is
to take place of every man's particular, long before any Acts of Parliament were
made to bring usury into some reasonable compass, have punished excessive
usury, not suffered any man Spelman* Glossar. in vocekernellare*
kernellare, to embattel or build his house in the manner or form of a Castle,
though it were upon his own ground, or at his own charge, nor to make a Park in
his own ground without the Kings License; and from the rule of Interest
Republicae ut re sua quisque been utatur, that it is for the good of the
Commonwealth, that every one should so use his own as not to do any hurt to
the public, punished one that set his corn on fire; and in the Case of one
Barrel in 5 Eliz. did by Decree of the Court of Star Chamber sequester part of
his Estate to preserve it from his Extravagant expenses, and hinder him from
undoing of his wife and children, the abuse of propriety, and the evils arising
by a misusage of it, being only thereby restrained as the prohibiting and
punishing a Nuisance, by a Writ or Indictment, or the bringing or suing out a
Curia Claudenda, for not making of Fences, and the like remedies which our Laws
of England have in many cases provided only to but and bound every man's
propriety, but not to take it away or do any harm or hurt unto it, agreeable
to the opinion of Grotius, who tells us out of the almost Christian De Offic.
155.
Tully, that it is contra naturam ex hominis incommodo nostrum augere commodum,
and natura non patitur ut aliorum spoliis nostras facultates copias opes
augemus, against the rules of nature to increase our Estates, or gain by the
spoils and damage of other men Et doli mali vox, says that learned Grotius de
^^re ^elli and pacis lib. 2.215. and 231.
Grotius, and omne significat quod naturali juri and equitati repugnat, and
that every thing which is contrary to equity and the Laws of Nature are to be
interpreted fraud and deceit, neque vero tantum intellectum rerum, sed and in
voluntatis usu quaedam contrahentibus inter se aequalitas debetur, and ne plus
exigatur quam par est; and that not only in the right apprehension or
understanding well what is bought, but in the exercise of the will, there be an
equality (or rule of equity) kept and observed betwixt the contracters, so as
nothing be exacted or required more then is fitting.

From whence the power of keeping Markets and Fairs, and of the meetings or
gathering together of the people to buy or sell thereat, which have been so
exceedingly profitable to the people, and so abundantly useful, and not to be
wanted, was so originally in government, and so inherent to Monarchy and
Magistracy, as without the Kings License or approbation it could not without
the danger of sedition or ill intended or dangerous Assemblies or Meetings of
the people, be left to every man to do what he would in coming thither, nor be
consistent with the Rules of Justice to permit the rich and mighty to oppress
the weak and needy by enhaunce of prices, using false weights or measures,
deceitful dealing or sale of corrupt and unwholesome victuals: and in that
particular also had no worse a foundation and original then the Laws and
command of the Almighty and the King of Kings, Levit. 19.35, 36.
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment in mete, yard, in weight, or in
measure, just balances, just weights, a just Ephah and a just Hin shall ye
have, a false balance is an abomination to the Lord, but a just weight is his
delight, a just weight and balance are the Lords (or as the Latin has it
Judicia Domini sunt) Proverbs 11. v. 1. and 16. v. 11.
all the weights of the bag are his; Levit. 27.3
and omnis aestimatio siclo Sanctuarii ponderabitur, and the Shekel of the
Sanctuary was to be the Rule or Standard: Et statutum ergo erat in Haebraeor^m
republica, ut omnes venditiones, emptiones, omnesque contractus qui pecunia
conficiebantur probatis siclis juxta justum Sicli Sanctuarii conficerentur; and
it was therefore, says Menochius de Repub. Hebrae orum lib. 7. ca. 10. and 11.
Menochius, a Custom or Law amongst the Hebrews, that all buying sellings and
contracts made for money should be according to that Shekel, and magistratibus
constitutis ementium indemnitati consultum est, and the care that buyers should
not be deceived, belonged to the Magistrate.

The Athenians had their (...) Sigonius de Repub. Atheniens^um lib. 4. ca. 3.
ad quos pertinebat curare ut venditores justis mensuris uterentur, Officers
like our Clerks of the Market, which did oversee and take care that the sellers
should sell by just and true measures, and the other Cites and parts of Greece
were not without their Officers, qui negotiationi and Nundinationi praefuerunt,
which were appointed to look to the Markets and Fairs, which Aristotel Politic.
Aristotle likes so well of as he makes it to be primum ex necessariis, more
then ordinarily necessary.

To which were something near related the (...) at Athens, qui curabant ut
frumentum farinae and panes justo pretio venderentur e^rumque december in urbe jus
dicebant quinque in Piraeo, which ordered corn, bread, and other provisions to
be sold at reasonable rates, ten of which had their Judicatories in the City it
self and five in the Piraeum or Haven.

Whence probably the Romans their imitators, and after subduers, having learned
it, had their Persius Sat. 6. and Juvenal Sat. 10. Rofinus de A^ti^u^tat. Rom
u. ^ib. 7. cap. 24.
Aediles Cereales qui falsas mensuras frangebant, which broke any false
Measures they could find, and imposed Fines upon offenders, quibus, as St.
Hierom says D. Hier. Ep. 4.
vendentium rabies coercebatur, the extortion of sellers was hindered, and some
ages after under their Emperors Pancirollus in notic. Imp. occidentis ca. 5.
vini carnis and sabi^ curam prefectus Annon^ habebat ut ne immodico pretio
obsonia venderentur, the Prefect or Surveyor of victuals and provision did take
care that wine, flesh, salt and victuals, should not be sold at unreasonable
prices aestimabantur pecora pro anni fertilitate and usu temporum, and set the
rates of Cattle according to the plenty of the year or accustomed rates, Et
pec^rum carniumque, and aliorum ad victum civium spectantium prefectus urbis
arbiter erat: And the Governor of the City had also a power of rating the
price of Cattle, flesh and other victuals: and the Civil Law informs us that
in every Town of the Cod. lib. 10. de Po^der.
Roman Empire, which was once extended over a great part of the world, there
were some appointed to look to weights and measures.

Which the Goths (as small friends as they were of the Civil Laws) so well
liked as they could not but cut out a pattern by it, and the Franks, Germans,
Swedes and Spaniards, and all other Nations of Europe within the large lines of
Communication of the Jus Caesareum, or Civil Law, though some of them as the
Dutch, Hungarians and others gain the greater Excise or Tribute by the rise or
heightning of the prices of many things which are sold at the Markets, in the
great and Western Empire of the Romans, held to be so consistent with Digest.
lib. 27. tit. 1.26. Cassiodorus varia^. lib. 6.18. and 23. Marant. Specul. Aur.
part 4.9. did. Jud. and de indic mercator.
right reason, and the ends and good of Government as by the love and liking or
necessity of it they would make that and no other the path and readiest way to
suppress or prevent the peoples too much exacting and oppressing of one another
in the daily use of victuals and necessaries, as the Banda's or rates set by
the Magistrates in Rome, Florence, Italy and Spain upon Butchers meat and other
sorts of victuals and commodities, so as a child may be sent to Market and not
be cozened will sufficiently evidence.

The Wisigothes ordained double the price, quantum de justo pretio fraudatum
est, as much as was over and above their just price to be restored by the buyer
to the seller; Et si in LL. Wisigoth. lib. 5.6.
contractu venditionis minus precium datum fuerit and per fraudem; if in the
bargain a lesser price was given by deceit, aut etiam contra voluntatem
vendentis amplius datum* precium, or a price greater then the seller would have
taken.

And Four times the Edictum Theodorici Regis in Lindenbrogio 259.
value of what was gained by deceipts by false weights or measures was to be
paid to the party grieved.

The old LL. Almanorum capitl. 78.
Almans did rate and set the price of Oxen.

The Emperor Charlemaigne commanded the Longobards, ut mensurae secundum
jussionem suam aequales fiant, that their measures should, as he had ordained,
be LL. Longobard. lib. 3. tit. 22. and Goldastus constitutiones Imperial. 151.
equal, and in time of scarcity and famine limited the price of Oats and
Barley.

The Emperor Frederick the Second in Anno 1224. ordained that deprehensus in
dolo cibaria prohibita vel corrupta, vel vinum lymphatum pro puro vendendo,
That if any of the Constitut. Sicularum lib. 3. tit. 36.
Sicilians should deceive another, or sell prohibited or corrupt meat, or bad
and adulterated wine (though by no worse ingredients then water) for good, he
should pay a pound of the purest gold to his Exchequer: if he were poor, and
could not pay it, he should be beaten, and if taken in the fault the second
time should loose his hand, and the third time should be hanged; Et ad legitima
pondera and mensuras merces quaslibet vendere voluit venditores; and commanding
that all things should be sold by just weights and measures, ordained that
whosoever should be found guilty in doing contrary thereunto, should pay a
pound of the purest gold to his Treasury quam si dare non poterit condemnatus
cum pondere and mensura ad collum ejus appensis in sui paenam (a well deserved
punishment, and every where to be imitated) and aliorum exemplum per terram in
qua fraudem commiserit public fustigetur, which if he should not be able to
pay, he was with the weight or measure hung about his neck for a punishment to
deter others from doing the like, to be beaten about the place where the
fraud was committed, for the second offense to have his hand cut off, and for
the third to be hanged.

The Leges Swecorum collectae per Reginaldum Ingemundum, l. 7 ca. 1. and 2.
Swedes ordained that all movables should be bought presentia testium, before
witnesses, and imposed penalties upon any deceits used therein.

And in the former France, (for the modern ought to be distinguished from the
ancient, as having for the most part since unhapily exchanged their ancient
Laws and Liberties for an Arbitrary power) the survey and correction of weights
and measures is as it was formerly, un droit de la couronne a right of the
Crown, and anciently there were Roys des Merciers en toutes les Provinces de
France proueus par le grand Chambrier de France qui avoyent la visitation des
poids et balances, some Officers called Kings of the Charles Loyseau du droit
de Police ca. 9.
Mercers in every Province of France, appointed by the great Chamberlain of
France, which were to visit the weights, measures and balances; and Tiller
says that the grand Chambellan himself was therefore sometimes called Roy de
Merciers and quand l' office Feodall du grand Chambrier avec ses dependances a
es^e reiiny a la Couronne par le Roy Francois le premier en l' an. 1545 les
Roys ont bien commis des visiteurs ou Roys des Merciers, etc. King of the
Mercers; and that when the Office Feodal of the great Chamberlain with its
dependances was united to the Crown by King Francis the first in the year 1545.
the Kings of France have since appointed those visiteurs, etc. Et qu'en la
menue merchandise qui sont les victualles et autres, petites, commoditez pour
l' entretien et usage iournalier du peuple les Juges de Police y peuvent mettre
tax et fair tout autre reglement pour empescher les Monopoles et autres abus
mesme pour fair fournir l' habitant avaunt le Marchand qui les vent revendre;
and as touching small Merchandise, as victuals, and other the like commodities
for the daily use of the people, the Magistrates, or Judges appointed for that
purpose, may set a rate or price, make orders to prevent ingrossings,
monopolies, or other abuses, and command the seller to furnish the Inhabitants
before such as buy to sell again; Et de cet article dependent les poids and
mesures pour ce qu'en vain y mettroit en le prix si le poids et mesures n'y
estoient certaines and justes; And to them the care of weights and measures
appertained, for that otherwise it would be in vain to set the price, if the
measures and weights should not be certain and just.

And our Saxon Kings did think the Markers deserved a more then ordinary care
to be taken therein, when as King Alured or Alfred, as good in his government
as his name, did as Sir Henry Spelman thinks most probably, ordain Court Leets
to be holden twice a year in singulis Villis in every (or many) Towns of the
Kingdom, and that in the multitude of those very atnient little Courts, which
our Nobility and Gentry have ever found to be very useful for their own just
rights and power over their Tenants in their Regalities (as they are now
called) and subordinate Jurisdictions; and if well observed and looked unto
would be for the public good and profit both of the King and all sorts of his
people. The Steward gives at this day in charge to the Juries (little or not at
all observed, the more is the pity, to the great inconveniences and
grievances of the people) to inquire of deceits and abuses in Trade, or such as
make or sell deceitful wares, or sell by false weights and measures, of Bakers
and Brewers which keep not the assise, prices, and quantities according to the
Writing or (Roll) of the (Kings) Marshalsey, of Victuallers, and Fishers,
selling at unreasonable rates; of Forestallers, Regrators, and Ingrossers, or
which buy up Corn, Butter, Cheese, and other victuals with an intent to sell
again to advance the price thereof, etc. King LL. Ed^vardi 2.
Edward in Anno 912. did ordain that no man should buy any thing without a
voucher, nor out of a Town, unless in presence of a Magistrate or other good
men. King Aethelstani 12.
Athelstane about Anno 930. orda^ned that extra oppidum quicquam viginti
denariis carius aestimatum, no man should buy any thing out of a Town of above
the value of twenty pence or within the Town, but in the presence of the
Magistrate or the Kings Officer. King LL. Edgari 8.
Edgar did about the year 960. ordain the price wool with a nec pluris is
vendatur, that more should not be given for it. LL. Canu^^ 9. and 22.
Canutus made a Law against false weights and measures, and no man in City and
Country was to buy any thing living or dead exceeding the price of four pence
without the testimony of four good witnesses; and if he did and another claimed
it, he should not vouch him that sold it.

The LL Edwardi C^nfessoris. 24.
Thol or Toll, as we now call it, was before and at the Conquest usually paid
pro liberate vendendi and ^mendi, for license to buy or sell, or as a Tribute
upon the sale thereof.

Every man was Ibidem 38.
prohibited to buy any thing sine fidejussoribus, without Vouchers or Pledges:
And if the Seller had not Pledges, he was to be stayed or arrested until he
had brought a warranty: Et si quis aliter emeret quod stulte emisset cito
perdet; And if any should otherwise buy he was quickly to loose what he had so
foolishly bought.

By the Laws of LL. Gulielmi Conquestoris 43.
William the Conqueror nemo emat quantum quatuor denariis aestimatur, neque de
re mortua, ne que de viva absque testimonio quatuor hominum, aut de Burgo, aut
de villa; no man was to buy any thing which amounted to the value of 4 d.
without testimony of four witnesses of the Town or Village; Et ut nulla viva
pecunia vendatur aut ematur nisi intra civitates; et hoc ante tres fideles
testes, nec aeliquam rem vetitam sine fidejussore and warranto quod si aliter
fecerit solvat and persolvat* and postea forisfacturam; nor to sell or buy any
thing for money but within Cities, and before three witnesses, nor without a
Voucher or warranty; and if any did otherwise they were to be fined, and at
last incur a forfeiture. Ibidem 60.
Item nullum mercatum vel forum fieri permittatur, nisi in civitatibus regni,
and jus suum commune and dignitatis coronae quae constituta sunt a bonis Ibidem
61.
predecessoribus suis deperiri non possunt, nec violari, sed omnia rite, and in
aperto, and per judicium ^ieri debent, likewise that no Market be kept but in
Cities, so that the right of the King and the dignity of his Crown, as it was
constituted in the times of his good predecessors, might not be lost,
defrauded, or violated; and that all things be rightly and openly done
according to right and justice.

King Henry the 1. his Son (says the Monk of Malmsbury) Sel^en Janus Anglorum
and Malmesbury in leg bus Hen^^ci prim^ collect. per Seldenum and edit. per Cl.
R^gerum Twisden Equit. Aurat.
corrected the false Ell or Measure, so called of the Merchants, brachii sui
mensura adhibita omnibusque per Angliam proposita, and causing one to be made
according to the measure or length of his own arm, ordered it to be used
through all England, and in his Laws reckons the punishment of false Coiners,
and prohibiting and punishing of Forestall, or forestalling of Markets, inter
Jura, his Rights and Royal Prerogatives; quae Rex Angliae solus and super omnes
homines habet in terra sua, which belonged to him only as King of England, and
Houeden, in H. 1.
without an Act of Parliament ordered the rate and value of money, which being
the mensura rerum, measure and guide of all things in commerce and dealings one
man with another, has no small influence or power in the heightning or
lessening of the price of things, and is such a part of Sovereignty, as the
Parliament in their 19. high and mighty and unreasonable propositions sent unto
the late King Charles the Martyr in his troubles in June 1642. never attempted
to restrain or take from him.

In the Reign of King Henry the second, when (as Ranuphus de Glanvilla Chief
Justice of England under him, says in that book, which is generally believed
to have been written by him) the Laws and Customs of England, being ratione
introductis and diu obtentis, founded upon reason, and long used, had arrived
to that perfection, as pauperes non opprimabantur adversarii potentia, nec a
limitibus Judiciorum Glanvill in Proae^mio and lib. 14. cap. 7.
propellabat quenquam amicorum favor and gratia; the poor were not oppressed by
their adversaries power, nor did partiality or friendship hinder any from
Justice, the inquiry and punishment of false measures and all manner of
deceipts did appertain Coronae Regis, to the King only.

Justices in Air were after the return of King Richard the first from his
Captivity sent into all Counties of England to enquire amongst other things de
Hoveden Annal part posterior. 423.
Faeneratoribus and vinis venditis contra Assisam and de falsis mensuris tam
vini quam aliarum rerum, of Usurers, and of wine sold contrary to the Assize,
and of false measures as well of wine as other things.

In Anno quarto of King John, being thirteen years before the granting of Magna
Charta de Libertatibus Angliae, the great Charter of the Liberties of England,
the King did by his Edict and Proclamation command the Assize of bread to be
strictly observed, under the pain of standing upon the Pillory, and the rates
were set, Mat. Paris 208.
and the Assise approved per Pistorem (as Matthew Paris says) Gaufridi filii
Petri Justiciarii Angliae, and Pistorem R. de Thurnam, by the Baker of Jeoffry
Fitz Peter Justice of England, and the Baker of R. of Thurnam.

And in the Magna Charta, and Liberties granted by him afterward: at Running
Munde or Mead near Stanes assented (which our Ancestors and Procurers of that
Charter believed to be for a public good) that una mensura vini and cervisiae
sit per totum Regnum, and una mensura bladi scilicet quarterium Londinense, and
una latitudo pannorum tinctorum and russetorum, and Char^^ Regis Johannis in
Mat. Paris 258.
haubergetorum) panni genus, a kind of Cloth, says Sir Henry Spelman, then so
called) there should be throughout all England one measure of Wine and Beer,
and the like of Corn, and of the breadth of Cloth died, and russet, or other
kinds.

And was confirmed by 2. H. 3. cap. 25.
King Henry the third his Son in Anno 9. of his Reign, who by an Ordinance made
by the Kings command, and on the behalf of the King (howsoever it be styled a
Statute, and is placed in our Statute book collected by Mr. Poulton, amongst
those which he calls Statutes incerti temporis, made in the Reigns of Hen. 3.
Ed. 1. or Ed. 2. but cannot assign by whom or in what years or times, but in
all probability in the Reign of King Henry the third) did ordain that no
Forestaller which is an open oppresser of poor people, and of the Commonalty,
and an enemy of the whole Shire and Country, which for greediness of his
private gain does prevent others in buying Grain, Fish, Herring, or any other
thing to be sold coming by Land or waters, oppressing the poor and deceiving
the rich, and c^rrieth away such things intending to sell them more deer,
should be suffered to dwell in any Town; he that shall be convict thereof shall
for the first offense be amerced and lose the thing so bought, and for the
second time have judgment of the Pillory, the third time be imprisoned and
make Fine; and the fourth time abjure the Town. And this Judgment to be given
upon all manner of Forestallers, and likewise upon them that have given them
counsel, help, or favor.

And providing that his people should not be oppressed with immoderate and
unreasonable prices in the buying of food and victuals and other necessaries
did by his Writ limit the price of Lampreys; ^laus. 10. H. 3. m. 23.
and had, as his Royal Progenitors such a power and just Prerogative of
regulating and well ordering of Markets and Fairs, as notwithstanding any
Charters or Grants of Fairs and Markets to Cities and Towns, he did in anno
quinto of Claus. ^. H. 3. m. ^.
his Reign, upon a complaint of some Merchants of Lynn, that when they came to
sell their goods and Merchandise at Norwich, the Merchants (or Tradesmen) took
away their goods and Merchandise to the value of three hundred marks; by his
writ give them power to arrest and seize any goods of the Norwich Merchants
which should come to any Fairs at Lyn, until that Justice should be done unto
them: And in Claus. 49. H 3. m. 11. in do^s^.
anno 49. of his Reign commanded the Barons of the Exchequer that they should
inroll, and cause to be executed his Letters Patents of a Confirmation to the
Citizens of Lincoln of a Charter of King Henry the second his Grandfather, that
the Sheriff and other the Kings Officers and Ministers of Lincolnschiry should
not hinder foreign Merchants to come to Lincoln to trade there ita
rationabiliter and just, as reasonably and justly as they were wont to do in
the times of his great Grandfather Henry the first, his Uncle King Richard, and
his Father King John, or at any time in his own Reign, until his first going
over the Seas into Britain; for the Kings of England, says the learned Sir
John Davies Sir John Davies A^gument upon the question of Impositions.
have always ^ad a special Prerogative in the ordering and government of all
Trade and Traffic in Corporations, Markets and Fairs within the Kingdom,
which the Common Law of England does acknowledge and submit unto, as amongst
many other things may appear, by the Charter granted to the Abbot of
Westminster mentioned in the Register of Writs wherein the King does grant to
the Abbot and his Successors to hold a Fair at Westminster for two and thirty
days together with a Prohibition, Register 167.
that no man within seven miles thereof should during that time buy or sell but
at that Fair.

Whence for the freedom of Markets and Fairs, protection in going and
retorning, and other immunities had their extraction and original, and no less
just and reasonable then ancient foundation, those duties of Toll or Tribute
for all things sold in them, and the Exemptions of the Kings own Tenants or in
Ancient demeasn, by writs de quietos esse de Theloneo to be Toll-free,
Register 258.
a regale, and power (not denied to any foreign Prince or King in
Christendom, or the States of Holland in their free, as they would be called,
Commonwealth) the benefit and authority whereof most of the Nobility and
Gentry of this Nation, tanquam Reguli, as little Kings, do by the Charters and
Grants of the Kings of England, or a Prescription or time immemoriall, which
supposes it now, enjoy in their Manors under that part only of his
Prerogative, and many Cities, Boroughs, and Towns Corporate, by their Charters
have likewise not only before the 49 of Henry third, but in almost every Kings
Reign since their Liberties, Customs, and Franchises concerning their Markets
and Fairs, and the assise and correction of victuals.

Whence also were deduced the Standard kept in the Exchequer for all weights
and measures, the Kings power of the Mynt, coining, enhauncing, or decrying the
value of moneys, and his public Beam or Weighhouse in London, where all
Merchandise brought from beyond the Seas are or should be justly weighed.

And whence it came that King Henry the 3. in the ninth year of his Reign
caused the Constable of the Tower of London to arrest the Ships of the
Cinque Ports on the Thames, and compel them to bring their Corn to no other
place but only to the Queens Hithe, charged in anno undecimo of his Reign the
said Constable to distrain all Fish offered to be sold in any place but at
Queen Hithe, and that Tolls and payments were then and formerly made and paid
to the Kings use for Corn, Fish, and all other provisions brought thither, or
to Down or Dowgate (the rent and profit whereof were afterward in Pa^. 31 H. 3.
anno 31. of his Reign granted and confirmed to the Mayor and Commonalty of
London at 50 l. per annum Fee-farme.) And in Anno 14 H. 3. foreign Ships laden
with Fish were ordered to unlade only at Queen Hithe, and if any did contrary
thereunto he should be amerced forty shillings.

Whence also proceeded that well known and ancient Office of the Clerk of the
Markets in the later end of the Reign of King Edward the first, Fleta lib 2*
^ad. 8.
who was not to be a stranger in the prices or rates of the Markets, for his
Office extended something further then the care of just weights and measures,
and, as Sir John Davies says, was to oversee and correct all abuses in Markets
and Fairs, it being said in Fleta, that ipse in notitia assisarum panis, vini,
mensurarum, cervisiae debet experiri, ut inde notitiam habeat pleniorem, he
ought well to inform himself of the assizes of Bread; Measures, Beer and Wine
(the later of which was not assised or rated by the assisa panis and cervisiae
in anno 51 of Henry the third) and no man could be fitter to watch and hinder
(for the Justices in Air came but twice a year or seldom into every County)
Forestallers, or such as made the Markets dearer, or inform or give evidence
thereof to the Justices in Air, or Juries impanelled by them, then the Clerk
of the Markets, who was probably attendant in all the Iters or Eyres, for
otherwise the Juries who had it then in charge to inquire of false weights and
measures, or such as buy by one measure and sell by another, would have wanted,
or not so well have had their evidence; and the Justices in Air could not so
well inquire in their Eyres or Circuits de custodibus mensurarum, of the
Guardians of the measures (or Clerks of the Market, for so they may be
understood to be) which took bribes or gifts to permit false Measures, if there
had been but one Clerk of the Market infra villatas and virgam hospitii Regis,
within the Townships or Virge of the Kings House: or if as Sir Edward Coke
supposes, the Clerks of the Market had been penned within the narrow compass
of the Kings House and the Virge thereof, or that the cares of the Fairs and
Markets, and the Justice of the Kingdom as to that concernment had been but
only calculated for the Kings Household, and confined unto it.

When as Bracton a learned Judge sub ultima tempora Henrici Tertii, in the
later end of the Reign of King Henry the third, has recorded in his book de
Legibus and consuetudinibus Angliae, of the Laws and Customs of England* the
Justices in Air did enquire Bracton lib. 3. de Coronae 116. and 120.
de mensuris factis and juratis per Regnum si servatae sint sicut praevisum
fuit and de vinis venditis contra Assisam, etc. of the Measures sworn to be
observed whether they were kept as it was ordained, and of Wines sold contrary
thereunto: And was of opinion that it was gravis praesumptio contra Regem and
coronam, and dignitatem suam si assisae statutae and juratae in regno suo ad
commuem Regni sui utilitatem non fuerint observatae, a great offense against
the King, his Crown and Dignity, if the assizes or rates which were appointed
and sworn to be kept in the Kingdom to the common profit or weal public
thereof, should not be kept.

Which do fully evidence that those ancient Rights of the Crown were inquirable
in the Eyres and Leets long before that which is called a Statute of view of
Frank pledge in anno 18 Ed. 2. was made, which at the best was but declaratory
of what was before the Common Law, and some other ancient Customs of England.

And anno 51 H. 3. in the assisa panis and cervisae being as Decrees or Rates
ordained (which as to Ale and Drink the Judicious and right-learned Sir Henry
Spelman believes was Spelman Glossa^. in voce assisa.
altioris originis, and as ancient as 18 R. 1. mutatis ratione seculi mutandae,
to be altered and changed according to the rates and prices of Barley, and what
they made it with) and confirmed by Inspeximus of the Ordinances of diverse
Kings of England the Kings Progenitors, which set the assise of Bread and Ale,
and the making of measures; and howsoever styled a Statute, appears not to have
been an Act of Parliament, but an Exemplification only made of those Ordinances
and Orders by King Henry the third at the request of the Bakers of Coventry,
mentioning that by an Act of Parliament made in the first year of his Reign, he
had granted that all good Statutes and Ordinances made in the times of his
Progenitors aforesaid, and not revoked, should be still holden, in which the
rates and assise of bread are said to have been approved by the Kings Bakers,
and contained in a Writing of the Marshalsey (of the Kings House where the
Chief Justice and other Ministers of Justice then resided) and by an Ordinance
or Statute made in the same year for the punishment of the offending Bakers by
the Pillory, and the Brewers by the Tumbrel or some other correction. The
Bailiffs were to enquire of the price of Wheat, Barley and Oats at the Markets;
and after how the Bakers bread in the Court did agree, that is to wit waistel
(which name a sort of bread of the Court or Kings House does yet retain) and
other bread, after Wheat of the best, of the second, or of the third price;
also upon how much increase or decrease in the price of wheat a Baker ought to
change the assize and weight of his bread, and how much the wastel of a
farthing ought to weigh, and all other manner of bread after the price of a
quarter of Wheat (which shows that the Trial, Test; Assay, or Assize of the
true weight of bread to be sold in all the Kingdom was to be by the Kings
Baker of his House or Court, and that there was the Rule or Standard) and that
the prices should increase or decrease after the rate of six pence.

And Fleta an Author plane incognitus, as to his name (says Mr. Seldom)
altogether unknown who writ about the later end of the Reign of King Ed. 1.
tells us, that amongst the Fleta lib. 1. cu. 10. and lib. 2.75. and Seldom.
dissert. in Fletam.
Capitula coronae and itineris, the Articles in the Air concerning the Pleas
of the Crown which were not then novel, or of any late institution) enquiries
were made de vinorum contra rectam assisam venditoribus, and de mensuris, item
de Forstallariis victualibus ^^nalibus mercatum obvi^ntibus per quod carior sit
inde venditio, and de non virtuosis cibariis; of wine sold contrary to the
assize of Measures and Forestallers of the Market to make victuals dearer, and
of such as sold corrupt food or victuals.

An. 31 Ed. 1. it was found by inquisition that Bakers and Brewers, and others
buying their corn at Queen-Hithe were to pay for measuring, portage, and
carriage for every quarter of corn whatsoever from thence to Pat. 17 E. 2.
Westcheap, St. Anthonies Church, Horshoo Bridge, to Wolsey street in the
Parish of Alhallowes the less, and such like distances, one ob. q; to
Fleetstreet, Newgate, Cripplegate, Birchoners Lane, East-cheap, and
Billingsgate, one penny.

17 Ed. 2. Stowes Survey of London*
By command of the King by his Letters Patents a Decree was made by Hamond
Chicwel Mayor, That none should sell Fish or Flesh out of the Markets appointed,
to wit, Bridge-streat, East-cheap, Old-Fishstreet, St. Michaels Shambles, and
the Stocks, upon pain to forfeit such Fish or Flesh as were sold for the first
time, and for the second offense to lose their Freedom.

And so inherent in Monarchy and the royal Praerogative was the power and
ordering of the Markets, and the rates of provision of victuals, and
communicable by grant or allowance to the inferior Magistrates as the King, who
always reserves to himself the supreme power and authority in case of male
administration of his delegated power, or necessity for the good and benefit of
the public, is not thereby denuded or disabled to resort unto that sovereign
and just authority which was always his own, and Jure coronae, does by right
of his Crown and Regal Government belong unto him, as may appear by the
forfeiture and seizing of Liberties and Franchises, and many other the like
instances to be found every age.

And therefore 41 King E. 3. without an Act of Parliament, certain Impositions
were set upon Ships and other Vessels coming thither with Corn, Salt, and other
things toward the charge of cleansing Romeland. And 3 Ed. 4. the Market of
Queen Hithe, being hindered by the slackness of drawing up London Bridge, it was
ordered, Stows Survey of London, 6^2.
that all manner of Vessels, Ships or Boats, great or small resorting to the
City with victuals should be sold by retail, and that if there came but one
Vessel at a time, were it Salt, Wheat, Rye, or other Corn from beyond the Seas,
or other Grains, Garlic, Onions, Herrings, Sprats, Eels, Whitings Place,
Codds, Mackarel, etc. it should come to Queen-Hithe and there make sale; but if
two Vessels came, the one should come to Queen-Hithe, the other to
Billingsgate; if three, two of them should come to Queen-Hithe; and if the
Vessels coming with Salt from the Bay were so great as it could not come to
these Keys, then the same to be conveyed to the Port by Lighters.

Queen Elizabeth by advice and order of her Privy Council in a time of dearth
and scarcity of corn, commanded the Justices of Peace in every County to
enforce men to bring their Corn to the Markets, limited them what proportions
to sell to particular persons, and ordered them to cause reasonable prices, and
punish the Refusers.

And the like or more has been legally done by the Kings authority in the
Reign of King James and King Charles the Martyr, in the beginning of whose
Reign by the advice of all the Judges of England, and the eminently learned Mr.
Noy the then Attorney General, rates and prices were set by the Kings Edict,
and Proclamation, upon Flesh, Fish, Poultry, and most sort of victuals, Hay,
Oats, etc. commanded to be observed.

All which reasonable laws, constitutions and customs were made, confirmed,
and continued by our Kings of England by the advice sometimes of their lesser
and at other times of their greater Councels the later whereof were in those
early days, composed of Bishops, Earls and Barons, and great and wise men of
the Kingdom, not by the Commons or universal consent and representation of
the people by their Knights of the Shires or Burgesses, sent as their
Procurators ad faciendum and consentiendum, to consent unto those Acts of
Parliament which should be made and ordained by the King and the Barons and
Peers of England; for they were neither summoned for that purpose, nor
represented in Parliament until Anno 49 H. 3. and in Anno 26 or 31 Ed. 1. were
called thither only ad faciendum quod de communi consilio per Comites, Barons,
and ceteros Proceres, to do those things which by the King and the Barons and
Nobiltiy) by their Common Council should be ordained, and the Procuratores
Cleri, Proctors or Representers of the Clergy (not Bishops who sat in
Parliament, and were summoned unto it as a third Estate, and Barons inter
Proceres Regni, amongst the Nobility of the Kingdom) ad consentiendum, to
consent only to such things as should be ordained in Parliament, as has been
learnedly and accurately proved by examination of ancient Records and
Parliament Writs by Prynne second part of a brief Register of the forms of
Parliamentary Writs, 22 39.67.
Mr. William Prynne in his second part of a Register and Survey of several
kinds and forms of Parliament Writs.

And may well be deemed to be no less then Law and right Reason, when as diverse
Acts of Parliament made by the advice of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the assent of the Commons summoned and called unto Parliament by the Kings Writ
to consent only unto such Laws as should be made therein, with the Royal assent
and breath of life given by the King unto such Acts without which those
Petitions and Bills which were intended, and desired by the people to be Acts
of Parliament, are but as the matter, to the form, presented unto the King in
his great Council and Parliament, and amount unto no more in the best of value
and constructions which can be put upon them, then Petitions and Requests, or
as bodies without souls, or pieces of Silver or Gold uncoyned, having not the
power or effect of money without Caesar's Image and Superscription and the Royal
Stamp and Authority given them, have enacted and ordained the same or the like
cares and provisions, as that without date made in the Reign of King H. 3. or
Ed. 1. or Ed. 2. and to be found amongst the Statutes of 17 Ed. 2. if all or
some of them were not made by the Kings Royal Authority and power only, that
the Toll of a Milne shall be taken according to the custom of the Land,
strength of the watercourse, either to the twentieth or four and twentieth
corn; and the measure whereby the Toll must be taken, was to be agreeable to
the Kings measure, and taken by the rate and not by the heap or cantell.

The Assise of Cap. 6, 7.
Ale to be according to the price of Corn. Cap. 8.
Butchers to be punished which sell unwholesome flesh: ^ushels, Gallons, and
Else shall be kept by Mayors, Bailiffs, etc. signed with the Kings Seal, and he
that buyeth or sells with any other shall be amerced. No ^ap 9.
grain shall be sold by the Heap or Cantell but Oats, Malt, and Meal. Wines by
the Act of Parliament of 4 E. 3 cap 1^.
4 Ed. 3. shall be assaied twice a year, and be sold at reasonable prices, and
a Cry (or Proclamation) made that none should be so hardy as to sell wines but
at a reasonable price, regarding the price that is at the Ports from whence the
Wines came, and the expenses, as in carriage of the same from the Ports to the
places where they be sold. No 5 E. 3. ca. ^
man may sell Ware at a Fair after i^ is ended. Victuals 23 E. 3. cap. 6.
shall be sold at reasonable prices; and Butchers Fishmongers, Regrators,
Hostelers, Brewers, Bakers, Poulters, and all other sellers of all manner of
victuals shall be bound to sell the same victual for a reasonable price,
having respect to the price, that such victuals be sold at in the places
adjoining; so that the said Sellers have moderate gains, and not excessive,
reasonably to be required according to the distance of the place from whence
the said victuals be carried.

None 25 E. 3. cap. 3.
shall Forestall Wines and Victuals, Wares and Merchandises coming to the good
Towns of England by land or by water to be sold. Auncel weight shall be put
out, and weighing shall be by equal balances, every measure shall be
according to the Kings Standard, and be striked without heap.

It shall be 31 E. 3. cap. 2. Ibidem ca. 5.
Felony to forestall or ingross Gascoine wine: Red and white wine shall be
gauged; Balances and Weights shall be sent to all the Sheriffs of England, and
all persons are to make their Weights and Balances by them. And 31 E. 3. cap
10.
in anno 31 Ed. 3. because says the Statute the Fishers, Butchers, Poulters,
and other sellers of Victuals in the City of London, by color of some
Charters, and by evil intepretation of Statutes made in advantage of the
people, that every man may freely sell victuals without disturbance, and that
no Mayor, Bailiffe, or other Minister ought to meddle with the sale. It was
accorded and assented, That every man that brings victuals, whatsoever they
be, to the City by land or by water, may freely sell the same to whom shall
please him without being interrupted or impeached by Fisher, Butcher, Poulter,
or any other, and that the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City may rule and
redress the defaults of Fishers, Butchers, and Poulters, as they do of those
which sell Bread, Ale or Wine.

In the same year upon the complaint Statute of Herring^. 31 Ed. 3. ca. 2.
of the Commons that the people of great Yarmouth did encounter the Fishers
bringing Herrings to the said Town in the time of the Fair, and buy and
forestall the Herrings before they come to the Town: And also the Hostlers of
the same Town which lodge the Fishers coming thither with Herrings, would not
suffer the said Fishers to sell their Herrings, nor meddle with the sale
thereof, but sell them at their own will as dear as they will, and give to the
Fishers what pleases them; whereby the Fishers did withdraw themselves from
coming thither. It was enacted that Herrings should not be bought or sold upon
the sea. That Fishers be free to sell their Herrings without disturbance of the
Hostelers, that when the Fishers will sell their Merchandises in the Port they
shall have their Hostelers with them, if there they will be, and in their
presence openly sell their Merchandises; and that every man claim his part for
the taking after the rate for the same Merchandises so sold. That no Hosteler
or other buy any for to hang in their houses by Covin, nor in other manner at a
higher price the last then forty shillings, but less in as much as he may. That
no Hosteler nor any of their Servants, nor any other shall by land or Sea
forestall the said Herrings. No vessel called Piker of London, nor of no other
place shall enter into the said Haven to abate the Fair in damage of the
people. That all the Hostelers be sworn before the Wardens of the Fair, and
enjoined upon a great forfeiture to the King to receive their Guests well and
conveniently, and to aid and ease them, reasonably taking of every Last that
shall be sold to other Merchants then the said Hostelers 40 d. That of Herrings
sold to the same Hostelers to take in their houses, the same Hostelers shall
take nothing, and that because of the profits which they shall have of victuals
sold to their said Guests, and of the advantage which they have more then other
of carriage of Herrings so by them bought and hanging in their houses, and for
the advantage of 40 d. the Last, take upon them for the payment of all the
Herrings that shall be sold by their assent to any persons, and the hundred of
Herring shall be accounted by sixscore, and the Last by ten thousand. That the
people of London at such Fair shall bring the Last from Yarmouth to London for
one Mark of gain, and not above, That the Fishers be compelled to bring the
remnant of their Herrings not sold in the Road of Kirkley to the Fair to sell
them; so that none sell Herring in any place about the haven of Yarmouth by
seven miles, except in three Towns of Yarmouth, that is to say, Easton, Weston,
and Southton, unless it be Herrings of their own Fishing.

The Ibid ca. 3.
Chancellor or Treasurer taking to them Justices and other the Kings Council,
shall have power to ordain remedy touching the buying and selling of Stock Fish
of Saint Botolph, and Salmon of Barwick, and of Wines and Fish of Brist^ute and
elsewhere, to the intent the King and his People may better be served, and
have better Markets then they have had before this time; and that the
Ordinances by them made in this party be firmly holden.

Doggers and Landships of Blackney Haven shall discharge their Fish there,
Ibid. ca. 1. and 2.
the price of Dogger-fish and Loichfish, that is to say, Lob, Ling and Cod,
shall be assessed by the Advice of the Merchants and Rulers coming to the Fair
of Blackney, and of the owners of the ships before any sale be made, which
shall be holden during the Fair; Every man shall buy Herrings openly, and not
privily at such price as may be agreed betwixt him and the seller. And 36 E. 3.
Ordinance of Petri^g.
no man shall enter into bargain upon the buying of the same, till he that
first comes to bargain shall have an end of his bargain greable to the seller,
42 E 3. c. 7.
and that none increase upon other during the first bargain.

Londoners 6 R. 2. ca 7.
and other shall sell victuals by retail: Sweet wines may be sold by retail at
the price of Gascoyne wines: Victuallers shall have but reasonable gains
according to the discretion of the Justices of Peace: there shall be but eight
Bushels striked to the Quarter; the several 13 R. 2. c. 8.15 R. 2. ca. 4.2 H.
6. ca 11.18 H. 6. ca. 8.
measures of vessels of wine, Eels, Herrings and Salmons, 12 E. 4. c 8.
and vessels of Oil and Honey to be gauged.

12 E. 4. ca. 8. Diverse Patents being granted under the great Seal of England
to diverse persons to be Surveyors and Correctors of beer, ale, wine and
victuals within diverse Cities, Boroughs and Towns, it was ordained, That they
should be void, and that the Mayors, Bailiffs, and chief Governors of Cities,
Boroughs and Towns Corporate shall be the only Searchers and Surveyors of
victuals; for that every City, Borough, and Town of substance in England for
the most part have Court Lee^s and views of Frank-pledge holden yearly within
the same Cities, Boroughs and Towns, surveying of all victuals therein, and
correction and punishment of the offenders, and breakers of the Assise of the
same which ought not to be c^ntraried.

Ordinances made by 22 E. 4. c. 2.
Guilds, Fraternities, and Companies of Trade shall be examined and approved by
the Chancellor, Treasurer of England, or Chief Justices of either Benches, or
three of them, or by Justices of Assise in their Circuits, to prevent and
hinder unlawful Ordinances as well in prises of wares as in other things to
the Common hurt and damage of the people. When any victualler is chosen Officer
in any City (except 3 H. 8. c 8.
London, York, and Coventry) Borough or Town Corporate, which by virtue of his
Office should have the Assising and Correction for selling of victuals, that
then two discreet and honest persons neither of them being Victuallers, shall
during that time be sworn truly to sess and set the price of victuals; such as
sell false and mixed Oils to be searched and punished, and such as destroy wild
^oul, whereby formerly the Kings most honorable Household Ibid. ca. 14.25 H. 8.
ca. 11.
and the houses of Noblem^n and Prelates were furnished at convenient prices to
be punished.

Upon complaint made for enhauncing of prices of victuals 24 H. 8. ca. 3. and
4.25 H 8 ca. 2.
the prices thereof shall be assessed by the Kings Counselors and Officers,
and they which have victuals to sell shall sell them at the same prises.

The 28 H. 8.14.37 H. 8.23.5 E. 6.17.
Prises of the But, Tun, Pipe, Hogshead, etc. of all kinds of wines when it
shall be sold in gross, shall be set by certain of the Kings great Officers.

Whosoever shall buy or sell any 32 H. 8. ca. 8 Ibidem ca 14.
F^sant or Partridge saving the Officers of the Kings, Queens, or Princes
houses shall forfeit for every Fesant six shillings eight pence, and for every
Partridge three shillings four pence to the King.

Conspiracies 37 H. 8 23.
made by Victuallers touching selling of victuals shall be grievously punished.

Taverns Ibidem.
may be appointed in every City, Borough or Town Corporate to sell wine by
Retail.

None Ibidem.
shall retail wines but in Cities, Market Towns, etc.

Vintners Ibidem.
which sell by Ret^il in Towns Corporate shall be assigned by the head Officers
thereof, and in other Towns by the Justices of Peace.

And 2 and 3 E. 6. ca. 3.
2 and 3 Ed. 6. by a temporary Act expired with the time therein limited,
which may show the minds and intents of the makers, and what was then thought
convenient for that small part of time, and being probably only done upon some
grounds or reasons of State for the present, or in ease of the people, or some
popular design of the then ruling Lord Protector, was not then, nor at any
time after thought fit to continue any longer, it was ordained, That no
Pourveyor or other person by authority of any Commission or other Warrant shall
during three years (then) next ensuing pourvey, or take for the provision of
the Kings Household, his Sisters, or any others, any Corn, Beeves, Muttons, etc.
Wood, Coal, Straw, Hay, or any kind of Victuals without the full consent of the
owner, and at such price for ready money as the owner or Pourveyor can agree;
nor shall take for any of the Kings Affairs, or the Wars or otherwise any
Goods, Chattels, or other things whatsoever (saving Barges, Ships, Carts, and
things necessary) without the consent of the owners, and at such prises for
ready money as the owner and Pourvey^rs can agree (except Posthorses for which
shall be paid a penny a mile) and the King will allow to the owner of every
Cart taken for his household four pence a mile, and for the Wars and other
Carriages three pence a mile.

The 3 and 4 E. 6. ca. 1^.
Lord Chancellor of England, Lord Treasurer, Lord President of the Kings
Council, Lord Privy Seal, and the two Chief Justices, or any five, four, or
three of them are authorized to set prises of wine, and none to sell either in
gross or by retail above those prises*

No 5 and 6 E. 6. c. 14.
Cattle shall be bought but in open Fair or Market but by a Butcher, provisions
of household Butter or Cheese, shall not be bought to be sold again, except it
be by retail in open Shop, Fair, or Market. 5 Eliz. ca* 12
Forestallers and Regrators shall be punished, Badgers and Drovers licensed by
three Justices of the Peace of the County, and enter into Recognizances not to
forestall or ingross, provided that all Cities and Towns Corporate may assign
and license Pourveyors for their provisions.

Which power of regulating weights and measures, and reduction of victuals to
reasonable prices and rates was no stranger in Ireland, whither many if not all
of our then Laws were transmitted by King John, by exemplification under his
great Seal of England, and all our Laws reasonable Customs and Acts of
Parliament both before and afterward were by Act of Parliament called Poynings
Act or Law, allowed and enacted to be Laws in that Kingdom in the Reign of our
King Henry the seventh.

Nor in Scotland where the assizes of weights and measures were ordained by
King James the first in Parliament in Anno Domini 1426. And it was also
ordained by 6. Parliament James the second and Reg. Majest.
King James the second in Parliament, that Schireffes, Bayllies and uther
officiars both to burgh and to land take and inquire at ilk Court, that they
haldquhat persons within their bounds by is victual and haldis it till a
dearth* and punish them which sall be found to offend therein, and besides
their uther punishment the victual that they have be escheated to the King.

All which may declare and give us to understand how unreasonable it would be
that the King, who by his Oath and Kingly Office is to keep all his people from
oppression, which being one of the great sins of Sodom, as the Prophet Ezekiel
16.49.
Ezekiel tells us in that she strengthened not the hand of the poor and needy,
caused God to say he would come down nd see the oppressions of his people
should take no order to preserve himself from the more then formerly deceipts
of his own people, and their enhaunce of prises.

King Edward the second therefore, and his Council after that the Commons of
England had in the Claus. 3 E. 2. ^. 2. in d^^s.
second year of his Reign granted him in Parliament an aid of the five and
twentieth part of their goods upon condition that he would answer and redress
their grievances, which they in eleven Articles had then presented unto him, in
some of which they complained that their Corn, Victuals, Poultrie, and Fish as
well fresh as salt were taken by those which called themselves the Kings
M^nisters, and paid nothing for it, nor gave them any manner of satisfaction,
by which they were greatly impoverished: And he had answered, that there was an
Ordinance made of those prises in the time of his Father King Edward, which was
for the good of the King and his people: and willed that it should be kept and
observed in all parts, did in the fifteenth year of his Reign upon occasion of
his being at Cirencester in the County of Gloucester with diverse of the
Nobility and great men of the Kingdom, not think it to be any violation of the
Laws formerly made for the regulation of Pourveyance to command and ordain by
his Letters Pa^ents directed to the Sheriffs of Gloucester, Worcester, and
Wiltshire in the words following, viz.

Rex. vic. and al. ministris de Com. Glouc. Wigorn. and Wilts. salutem cum
sumus in partibus Cirencestr. cum pluribus magnatibus pro negotiis, etc. and
pro nostra and ipsorum pat. 15 E 2. m. 5.
sustentatione plura victualia oportet providere, and plures frumentum hab^ntes
ea penes se retinent, non curantes illa vendic. exp^nere nisi excessiva
Caristia nos volentes sustentac. ^orum providere prout decet* assignavimuus
Johan. Hampton and al. ad supervidendum blada in Com. praedict. and ad emend.
ubi blada invenerint pro pretio rationabili jam currente de quo ipsi
respondeant illa quo pretio empt^ ^runt and ad liberand. pistoribus and
braciatoribus furnend. braciand. and vend. dictis magnatibus, etc. that a
reasonable price should according to the ordinary Market rate beset upon Corn.

No^^ere the Writs or Commissions de providentiis pro Rege faciendis, to buy
and make provisions for the Kings household in Pat. 7 E 2. part. 1. m 2^. Claus.
37 E. 3. part. 1. m. 26. Pat. 1. part. 3 R. 2 m. ^9. Pat. 1 H 4 part* m. 8.
7 E. 2. 37 E. 3. 3 R. 2. 1 H. 4. and other Kings Reigns directed to the
Sheriffs of several Counties, to whose oaths and Offices it belonged by the
just and ancient Laws and Customs of England, to cause men to sell victuals
and necessary provisions at reasonable rates and prices, or Writs sent to the
Sheriffs to make provisions for some of the Kings of Scotland and their Trains
in their passage as they came to London to do their homage unto some of our
Kings, esteemed to be any breach of the peoples Liberties.

Neither did Queen Elizabeth that delight and love of her people, enriching as
well as easing and filling them with peace and plenty; who was never of the
opinion of Oliver Cromwell, that grand Master of Iniquity (who as careful as he
would seem to be of the peoples ease and liberties in his afterward
counterfeit kindness of taking away the Royal Pourveyance) could when he was
Lieutenant General of an Army of a distempered and disobedient part of the
Parliament, being moved by a Gentleman of Bedfordshire for some ease of their
great Assessements and Burdens, answer, that he could never believe that the
Countrymen were poor or not able to bear them as long as they could whistle at
the Plow and Cart) but so contented them in her happy Government, as the 20.
day of November, the beginning of her Reign, is yet, though above one hundred
years ago, gratefully remembered with the ringing of Bells in many of the
Churches of England, conceive or understand it to be any grievance to the
people for the Sovereign or Lex viva, the maker, Protector, and Preserver of
many of those good Laws which they enjoyed, to ordain and publish by the advice
of her Privy Council, who by the happy and sage conduct of all her affairs,
were well known by the effects as well as the causes, the Mediums as well as
the success, to be as wise and prudent a Council as any Prince of Christendom
had to attend them.

That the Clerk of the Market in avoiding of the danger of the loss of his
Office and further punishment at her pleasure, should duly and substantially
put in execution all such things as to his charge appertains, as well for
vittails to be had seasonable* good, and wholesome in the Towns and places near
unto the Court, as for the just observing of Weights and Measures assigned and
assessed; and likewise for settling of convenient and reasonable prises as well
upon Meat and Drink, Horse-meat, Lodging, Bedding, and other things in such
cases accustomed, so as the Noblemen attending in the Court, and all Suitors
and others following the same, be not compelled in default of the said Clerk to
be put unto excessive charges for their expenses, but such indifferency to be
used therein as the plenty or sterility considered should accord with equity:
And straightly charged, that no person of what estate or degree soever should
in any wise pay m^re for Vittail, Horsemeat, Lodging, or otherways then after
the prises that should be assessed by the said Clerk of the Market, in avoiding
her Highness displeasure, and further punishment at her Graces pleasure.

Which as to the enforcing of reasonable rates and p^ises for victuals and
household provisions, was no more then that which all Majors and Bailiffs of
Cities, Boroughs, Merchant Towns and others, and of the Ports of the Sea, and
other places, are by the Statute of 23 E. 3. c. 6. Lambard (...) 4^3, 448.
23 Ed. 3. cap. 6. authorized to do, and is to be given in charge and inquired
of by the Justices of Peace of every County at their Quarter Sessions.

For if by the rules of Reason, Policy, and Prudence, it was always adjudged
to be necessary and profitable for the people in general that the King or
Prince should restrain them from deceiving or oppressing one another, or not
permit the cunning, false, or richer part of the people to deceive and put what
rates or prises they please, or can heighten and invent upon the plain dealing
honest simple hearted, poor and necessitous part of them, but should rather
resist the Nimrods and Tormentors of them, and by putting them into some method
of righteousness, imitate the care and designs of the Almighty, to succor,
relieve, and help the poor and needy. And that it can never be for the good of
the Nation so to encourage the evils and deceitfulnes of men's hearts one
toward another, as to suffer every one to hatch or spawn as many cheating and
cozening tricks, perjuries, deceipts and false or aequivocal oaths as they can
possibly, or under a counterfeit show of godliness, make contrive and invent to
blind, deceive, delude or oppress one another; or to be like Cut-purses, Jews,
Bandities, Wild Arabs, or crafty deceitful Bannyans, to the well-doing as well
as well-meaning, little part of the people, or like Rooks cawing, wrangling,
and making a noise in the trees, make it their perpetual business when they are
not asleep to steal and filch away one another Nests and provisions, and being
guilty of as bad themselves, to be in a perpetual watch of keeping as well as
they can their own, whilst they are busy in stealing from others, or to make
old England to be a Country of Rooks and Jackdaws.

It cannot be certainly adaequate to any rule of Justice, that the King who is
to make it his daily care to provide peace plenty, and benefits, for all his
Subjects, regulates by his Magistrates and Officers rates and prices of
victuals at Markets and Fairs, moderates and abates such as are excessive and
unreasonable, Book of Entries 49 ^. Hill. 2 H. 7. ^ol. 11 pl. 11.
and by Law may seize, as forfeit, the Court Leets of Lords of Manors, for not
providing Pillories to punish offending Bakers; and ordains by his Laws, that
every Lord or other having the privilege of a Market shall forfeit it, if he
have not a Clerk of the Market to look unto it, should provide blessings for
every one but himself, and partake of none or very little of them, and that his
Subjects should not be at liberty to cozen and oppress one another, and yet
every man should be at liberty and make it his design and business to cozen
and lay burdens upon him, which would be as little for the good of the body
politic as it would be in the body natural, to wear the head downward; and
make it to be subservient to the business and humor of the ignoble, and less to
be taken care of parts of the body.

Or to give liberty not only in a Siege or public necessity, like that of
Samaria, but at all other times, unto as many as will like the gain or content
of it to be as Bears and Wolves one to another, and by hardening of their
hearts, and oppressing one another, make a Wilderness and Desert in our Land of
Canaan, which if well ordered flows with more then milk and honey, and by
reason of an universal pride, engrossing, enhauncing and cheating to maintain
it, cause a dearth when there may be a plenty.

And reducing him thereby into the condition of the 2 Reg. c^ 6.
King of Israel in that Siege, when an Asses head was sold for fourscore pieces
of silver, and the fourth part of a kab of Doves dung for five pieces of
silver, enforce him to answer as he did the woman which cried unto him, Help my
Lord O King if the Lord do not help thee, whence shall I help thee out of the
Barn floor, or out of the Wine Press.

Or that the King when he shall (as the 1 Reg. 18.
King of Israel did) in an unseasonable and dry year, search the Land for grass
to save the peoples horses, mules, and beasts alive, should let his own not
partake of his cares, but perish, and whilst he mittigates unjust and
unconscionable rates and prices in the Markets, be^ himself exposed to all
manner of unconscionable and deceitful dealings.

Which his just and always until now allowed right of Praeemption, which
heretofore made the Kings provision for his household when it was bought in the
Markets or Fairs to be much cheaper then what were bought upon the vie, or
endeavors who should give most to purchase it at such unreasonable prices as
the Sellers could strain or scrue them unto. And the Commissions not seldom
made by his Royal Progenitors to the Sheriffs and other Officers and
Magistrates, which had the delegated power of Assise and Correction of Markets
and unreasonable prices, and the rating of them to make his household
provisions; and where the Pourveyors and the owners could not otherwise agree,
were to be rated and ascertained, as some Acts of Parliament and Statutes have
appointed, by Constables and some honest men of their Neighborhood upon their
oaths, (which cannot be supposed to make, or admit them to be high or
immoderate) together with a due regulation of the Markets by the Clerks of the
Markets; and that care with the Law enjoyneth the Lords of Manors in their
Court Leets, the Sheriffs in their Tornes, the Justices of Peace of every
County, and the Magistrates of every City and Towns Corporate, to take in the
supressing of unreasonable prices, Forestallers, Ingrossers, and Regrators,
which are no small part of the causes of them, would have prevented or greatly
lessened: And the Markets would not have risen to that excess of price which is
now heavily complained of, and every where to be met with, by the sleepiness or
sluggishness of Magistrates and Justices of the Peace neglect of their oaths
and duties, which are too often and easily obliterated or put out of memory, by
sprinkling or dipping them in the waters of some Lethe or Oblivion, or by some
unrighteous or unbecoming partialties, connivance and kindness to their
Neighbors and friends, or such as they would make to be their friends, a
timerousness or unwillingness to displease or irritate such as are or may be
their enemies, or the allurements and temptation of their own Interests, in
letting their Lands at the rack, or very much dearer then it was when the Kings
price or compositions were agreed upon; and by tentering the Tenants Rents,
enforce them in requital thereof and care of themselves, to stretch as much or
more the prices of their Cattle and Commodities, because their Landlords were
insatiable, and did never think their Rents high enough raised, as long as they
could find any pretenses to raise them higher, or any one to give them the
utmost penny, when they should not be able to pay their Rents, maintain their
wives and children, and have some little comfort or encouragement by their
honest labors unless they should as much as they could make every thing as
dear as they could, and imitate or exceed them.

All which combining and strongly confederating together his mersere malis,
have brought many an evil upon the Kingdom, made our Atlas burden much the
heavier, the poorer sort of the people to be greatly impoverished and devoured
like sheep, and the landed and richer part, like the Israelites with Quails in
their mouths, murmurring in the midst of their peace and plenty, and thinking
that to be thanks enough for them and all their Mannah.

And like those which distempering their bodies, and breeding and causing their
own diseases, are unwilling to acknowledge themselves to be the Authors of what
they complain of, but would willingly make the air and heavenly influences to
be in the fault; and when they make the high ways the fowler by their own
travailing and riding in them, and the worse for the next that shall come after
them, will lament the deepness or foulness of them.

Or as Landlords which can grievously complain and wonder at the high rates of
Flesh, Fish, Corn, Butter Cheese, and other household provisions at the Markets,
when the enhauncing of their own pride, extravagancies, and profit to maintain
them, and sequestring themselves from the virtues and hospitality of their
more beloved and honored Ancestors, when they have any thing to buy themselves,
will not as they should, lay the blame upon their own letting their Lands by
exact and strict measures of the Acres, Rods, and Perches to the utmost rack
and farthing, and in many places (by as much indiscretion as
unconscionableness) apportion and limit the wood which the Tenants are to burn
or use by the loads, as if it were something more precious, or to be brought by
degrees to be weighed by the pound or ownces, and will have more rent many
times to be paid for it then can possibly be made of it, with as many nomine
paenes, and impossible to be kept Covenants and restrictions as hard-hearted
curiosity and diffidence can contrive and invent to the sometimes ruin or
great losses of the Tenants in their endeavors to improve and make their Farms
yield as much as their Rents do amount unto, which necessitates them to sell
every thing which they have to sell at the highest rates.

And by so letting their Lands at the highest rent, and ten times higher then
their Grandfathers (some only few good and worshipful imitators of their
Progenitors virtues excepted) or as much as can be gotten, are not only the
greatest cause of the enhaunching of all prices of provisions, but by making
another as great an advantage to themselves.

Do, when as they do not pay Rents as their Tenants do for the Lands out of
which they raise their commodities, add to the prejudice of the Buyers by
holding of them up to the rates and humor of the Markets, and getting as much
as they can possible for what they themselves do sell and send to the Markets.

And by such or the like profitable and beneficial customs, which are sweet
in the mouth or unto the taste, but may be bitter in the stomach or digestion,
of making their benefits by the losses or oppression of the Buyers, which at
the Markets with those reckoned and included which are at home, and to be fed
with what is bought or brought from thence are forty for one that are sellers,
and those that have either Lands of their own, or at a Rent are not one in
every twenty for those which have not, have very much enlarged their own
Estates and impoverished the Commonalty.

Wherefore all those of our Nation, which like the wanton, and at last unhappy
Sybarites, now troubled with a great deal more under a slavish government and
dominion of the Turks, then the crowing of the Cocks in the night time to
disturb their sweet sleeps or repose which once they were so foolish as to
account an inconvenience, would but summon in their consciences and a right
understanding of causes and effects to the Tribunal of reason, and observe the
dictates of that and common right.

The Praeemption which was never used to be denied to praeheminence, but
always attended it as an insepeperable Concomitant and Consequence, and so
esteemed to be rational, as the rude and unmannerly Dutch with their heads in a
piece of a Rug, and their good manners running out of their knees, can afford
it to the lowest rank of their Heeren, self-created Lords or States, or to a
Schepen or Sindic, Sheriff or Recorder of a Town, would not be found to be a
grievance and where any Privileges, as there ought to be many, are associate
and incorporate with Sovereign Majesty, the King of England, under whose grants
and allowance only every Seller as well as Buyer at Fairs and Markets claims
and enjoyes the liberty of buying and selling, should not himself be unkindly
used, or his Pourveyors debarred the liberty of a first Buyer, which was in
Anno 720. or thereabouts, understood to be so necessary and inherent to Kingly
authority and Supereminence, the reverence respect and duty belonging unto it,
and a privilege so just and reasonable and becoming Subjects to be well
contented with, and the Regality of Kings not to part with, as King Ina one of
our Saxon Kings did by a Law prohibit Fore Fang, or Captio Obs^ni^rum quae in
Foris aut Nundinis ab aliquo fit priusquam Minister Regis ea caeperit quae Regi
fuerint necessaria, the taking or buying of household provisions by others in
Fairs or Markets before the Kings Minister or Pourueyor took those things which
were necessary for the King, the words of that Law, as the learned Spelman
Gloss^^. in voce Fore fang, and L.L. Inae cap. altero ante penult. M. S.
Sir Henry Spelman has in the Version rendered them de Fore fang ((...) in
Saxon signifying ante or before, and (...) prendere or to take) i. e. de
preventione decrevimus per totam Angliam quod idem judicium teneri debet; We
ordain that this Law of Prevention (or Praeemption) be firmly holden throughout
all England. And is more fit to be allowed unto the King whose just Rights and
Jurisdictions every man is sworn or ought to swear to maintain and defend. If
there were no fifth commandment in being, or any other Praecept in Scripture
to honor and obey the King then unto Lords of Manors, having Markets and Fairs
belonging unto them, or the Lord Mayor or Sheriffs of London, or the
Magistrates of any other City or Town Corporate in England; for a greater
observance is certainly to be tendered unto the King even in that particul^r of
Praeemption (which may well be believed by all that are not Quakers) whose
Tenants all the people of England are mediately or immediately by some or other
Tenure: Then that which is usually done to Lords of Manors, Justices of Peace,
or Country Gentlemen by their Tenants or poorer sort of Neighbors, who if they
chance to catch any Woodcocks or Partridges in any of those Gentlemen's Lands,
will bring them to their ^ouses to sell at such cheap and easy rates as they
shall please to give for them; and if, which seldom happens, they should carry
them to the Markets and not thither, are sure enough to be chid for it, and
crossed and denied in any greater matter which they shall have to do with
them. And is but that or a little more courtesy which Butchers Fishmongers, and
other Tradesmen selling victuals or provisions in great quantities, and all
the year or often unto their constant Customers, will not for their own ends
fail to do or neglect, or to sell unto them at easier rates then unto others,
and find themselves to be many times no loosers by it, insomuch as some have
lately well afforded to sell to a constant Customer for great quantities at the
same rate it was 40 or 60 years before.

And the Compositions of the Counties for Pourveyance to serve in Beef, Mutton
Poultry, Corn, Malt, and other provisions for the Kings Household, and the
maintenance and support of it at a more cheaper rate then the Markets yield,
which when they were first set, was but the Market rate or a little under, long
ago made and agreed upon by the greater Officers of the Kings Household, and
some Justices of Peace in every County, and easily and equally taxed and laid
upon the whole, and not upon any particular man which was poor or of a small
Estate not fit to bear it.

May be with as much and more reason allowed and cheerfully submitted unto as
those many now called quit rents, or Rent services, which the most of our
Nobility, Gentry and others (not for some few of them do yet hold some of
their Tenants to their ancient and reasonable Customs) do receive, and their
Tenants easily and willingly pay for their several sorts of ^apola Gavels or
Tributes charged upon their Lands before and since the Conquest in Kent (a
County recounting with much comfort of their many Privileges and beneficial
Customs) and most parts of England Somners Treatise of Gavelkind Customs in
Kent.
as Gavel Earth, to Till some part of their Landlords Ground; Gavel Rip, to come
upon summons to help to reap their Corn; Gavel R^d, to make so many perches of
hedge; Gavel Swine, for pawnage or feeding their Swine in the Lords Woods;
Gavel werk, which was either Manuopera by the person of the Tenant, or
Carropera, by his Carts or Cariages, Harth-silver, Chimney-money, or
Peter Pence, which some Mesne Lords do yet receive; Were Gavel in respect of
Wears and Kiddels to catch Fish, pitched and placed by the Sea coasts; Gavel
noht or Fother, or Rent Spelman Glossar. in v^cibus Fodrum, Sigonius de Regno
Italiae lib. 7.
Foder, which did signify pabulum or alimentum ut Saxones antiqui dixerunt,
and comprehended all sorts of victuals or provisions, as the old Saxons
interpreted it for the Lord probably in his progress or passing by them, and
was in usage and custom in the time of Charlemaigne the Emperor, about the
year of our Lord 800. when the people of Italy, Regi venienti in Italiam
solvere tenebantur pro quo saepe etiam aestimata pecunia pendebatur, were to
provide Foder or provisions for the King when he came into Italy, in liew of
which, money to the value thereof was sometimes paid, and was long after taken
to be so reasonable as it was by the Radenicus in gestis Friderici lib. 2. ca.
5.
Princes and Nobility of Italy acknowledged in an Assembly to be inter Regalia,
as a Prerogative due to the King.

And after the Conquest for Somner of Gavelkind 116
Aver Land or Ouver Land carriage of the Lords Corn to Markets and Fairs, or of
his domestic utensils says the learned and Judicious Mr. Somner, or household
provisions, of the Lord or his Steward when they removed from one place to
another, sometimes by horse Average, sometimes by foot Average; one while
within the Precinct of the Manor, thence called In average, and at other times
without, and then called Out Average; whereupon such Tenants were known by the
name of Avermanni or Bermanni; Smiths Land holden by the service of doing the
Smiths work: the not performing of which several services so annexed to the
said several sorts of Lands, and their Tenures made Coke 2. par. Instit. p. 204.
them to be forfeited, which though not exchanged and turned into Rents Regis
ad exemplum in imitation of the indulgence and favor of King Henry the first
to the Tenants of his demeasne Lands either then or shortly after, but many of
them, as appears by Mr. Somner continuing in Kent, to the Reign of Henry the
third, others to Edward the first, and Edward the third, and some in other
places, to the Reign of King Henry the sixth, and in all or many of the Abbeys
and Religious Houses until their dissolution in the later end of the Reign of
King Henry the eighth notwithstanding that the Lords of Manors and Leets,
receiving those free or quit Rents, as they were called of their Freeholders
and Tenants belonging unto their several Manors in lieu and recompense of those
services, did or ought, in their Court Leets twice a year holden, cause to be
presented and punished any unreasonable prises for provisions or victuals sold
in Markets and Fairs, o^ otherwise; or if they have not Leets, are when they
are Justices of Peace authorized to do it, and by that until their Interests
persuaded them to let their Tenants use all manner of deceipts in their
Marketings, and get what unreasonable prises they pleased, so as they
themselves might rack their Rents far beyond former ages, might have had
their provisions until this time at as low and easy rates as the Kings
provisions and Compositions were at when they were rated and set by the
Justices of Peace in the several Counties, and all others of their
Neighborhood might also have enjoyed the benefit of the like rates which the
Law intended them.

And the King may as well or better deserve and expect as many Boons or other
services as the Nobility and other great men of the Kingdom do,
notwithstanding many Privileges and Indulgences granted by their more liberal
Ancestors, and better bestowing their bounties to their Tenants; And to be
furnished with Carts and Carriages at easy rates as well as the Earl of
Rutland is at this day for nothing, upon any removal from Belvoir Castle in
Lincolnshire to Haddon in Darbyshire and elsewhere from one place to another,
with very many Carts of his Tenants, which are there called Boon Carts, when as
all Lords or Gentlemen of any rank, place, or quality in the Kingdom do take
it to be no burden or grievance to their Tenants to permit them to pay their
respects and obligations unto them in that way, or upon a New Years day, or
when they shall invite them to a Christmas dinner, or do them any courtesy to
bring them a present of Capons or Chickens, or the like, or when they come to
welcome them home from London, or have any request how little soever to make
unto them, are afraid to approach them without bringing some offering or
mediation, though it be but a bottle of such pitiful wine as the Vintner of
the next Market Town can furnish them out of a Vessel but little bigger.

And the Lord of the Manor of Harrow in the County of Middlesex had in Anno 21
R. 2. a Custom belonging to that Manor, that by summons of the Bayliffe upon a
General Reap day or Magna precaria, then so called, the Tenants as well free
as Copiholders should yearly amongst them do 199 days work for the Lord
within the Manor, Somner Treatise of Gavelkind.
and every one having a Chimney should send a man thither for that purpose; and
where there is no Custom to oblige it, or the like, some courtesies amounting
to near as much are as often to be found as the love and good will to a
Landlord or a man of quality, or fear of his ill will or displeasure: Nor is it
unusual for Parishioners to help a Parson or Minister of a Parish to reap and
carry in his corn, or to fetch coals or wood for him many a mile distant.

And will be as much and more according to the dictates of right reason, as for
a Patron of the Advowson of a Church to be for ever entitled to the
presentation of it, because his Ancestors, or those under whom he claim, did
at the first build and endow it with the Gl^be land and their own Tithes,
though the Parson presented by him unto it is to repair the Chancel, Coke 2.
part. 5. report. 81.
and the Parishioners tax one another to maintain and keep the other parts of
the Church in good reparations; or that the Patron and Ordinary should in a
vacancy charge the Glebe with some yearly payments.

Or for those that have Grants of Fairs or Markets or enjoy them by
prescription, to take their Toll which (unless there be found a special
custom that the Sellers should do it) is to be paid by the Buyers; and money
for Pickage and Stallage, or for Toll called Travers, or passage by some ways,
and Thorough Toll, for driving or passing through some Towns, etc.

And the Assistances, Aids, or Contributions in his Majesty's Pourveyance and
Composition for his housekeeping, may be as much (and more) warranted by the
rules of right reason, as they are in matters of Policy, and well ordering of
some Societies and subordinate Governments in and concerning the Kingdom, and
as they are when the Merchants of the English Staple at Dordrecht and
Hamborough, do tax and receive a certain sum of money upon every English
Cloth sold beyond the seas, and to employ that and the admittances, and making
free of Apprentices of the old or new Hanse.

And the Fines assessed upon the Infringers of any Orders of the Companies to
defray the charges and support thereof; or as the Lord Mayor of London for the
time being by Custom or Charter of the City, takes for Scavage or Shewage of
all Merchandise brought to London a certain rate by the Tonne or Pack so much
as amounts to above three hundred pounds besides the profits of the Tolls,
Pickage and Stallage of Fairs and Markets, with an allowance of fourscore
pounds out of every one of the 8. Coal-meaters places, and for Cattle brought
to Smithfield to be sold, and Eels, Fish and Corn imported, and many other
things toward the charges of his extraordinary housekeeping for the credit and
honor of the City in the time of his Maioralty, which the simplest and poorest
Citizen never grumbles at, but acknowledges to be for the good of the City,
and the Company of which he is free (for he must always in the year of his
Maioralty be taken in as a Freeman of one of the twelve ancient and principal
Companies of the City, as the Mercers, Goldsmiths, Gro^ers, Cloth-workers,
Fishmongers, etc. though before he was free of some other Company) largely
contributing to the charges of him and his Pageants upon the day of his
Initiation or Lord Majors day; so as the twelve Companies are every year never
able to escape a great part of the charges of that day, and besides an
allowance of five hundred pounds, or a considerable sum of money toward that
years expenses out of the Chamber and Revenues of the City, has the Livery men
of every of the many Companies or Corporations of Trade* bringing him 40 s. in
retribution of a Dinner, and a small silver spoon of the sixth part of the
value, every Citizen of any considerable Estate taxed and contributing to the
charges of Triumphant Arches or Entertainments of their King or Prince upon
extraordinary occasions, every Company bearing and helping out the charges of
the Livery-men Wardens, and chief of their Company, many rich Bachelors, or men
so called, though some of them are married, created in the Lord Majors Company
only for the service of that day, paying six pound a man, and others of that
Company paying four pound a man to be of the Budge, and to wear their Gowns
faced with a furre so called; and the other Companies have Bachelors created or
chosen for that day out of the Yeomanry, so styled, which besides their
something extraordinary charges in Feasts at their admissions, and in apparel
and habiliments for that day, do likewise contribute to the charges and
worship of their particular Companies for that day, which enables them to drain
the Capons and White-broath and puts them in a capacity of most courageously
storming the Custards in their Grusty Garrisons, and of the better overseeing
of the Company and Mystery of their Trade at their no seldom comfortable
meetings and rejoicing in the creatures: the Lord Mayor having also the benefit
of great Fines of four hundred pounds or more a man imposed upon twenty or
thirty in a year, or too many more then need, who after such time as his
Lordship in his Fishing for Fines has drunk unto them, shall be unwilling, or
not think themselves fit to be an Alderman or Sheriff.

And as consonant and more agreeable to right reason as the quarteridge of
never less then five pence every quarter of year, and twelve pence per annum to
be distributed as their Company pleases to the poor, paid by every Freeman of
which there are very great numbers to every of their Halls or Companies, two
shillings and six pence for binding, and thirteen shillings and four pence for
making free of every Apprentice, six pence per annum for every Yeoman or
Freeman of the Company under the Livery, and two shillings per annum of every
one of the Livery toward the expenses of their Barge, when with as much
magnificence as they can they do with Trumpets, Drums and Music by water in
their several Barges, adorned with the Banners and Arms of their Companies or
Gilds, conduct and attend their Lord Mayor to be sworn at Westminster, although
the City of London and every Company in London are abundantly or very well
endowed with lands of inheritance of a great yearly value, and great stocks of
money by Gifts and Legacies.

And no less reason then the imposing of a penny upon every Broad Cloth brought
to sale to Blackwell-hall in London to be paid to the Chamberlain of London to
the use of the City for Hallage, which the Judges of the Kings Bench in Mich.
Term 32 and 33 Eliz. Cokes 2. part. 5. Relat. Cases de Bylawes and Ordinances.
in the Chamberlain of Londons Case adjudged to be lawful, because it was as
they then declared pro bono publico, in regard of the benefits which the
Subjects enjoyed thereby, and for the maintenance of the weal public, and can
not be said to be a charge to the Subject when he reaps benefit thereby* and
resembled it to Pontage, Murage, Toll, and the like, which as appears by the
book of 13 H. 4.14. being reasonable, the Subject will have more benefit by it
then the charge amounts unto, and that the Inhabitants of a Town or Parish may
without any Custom, make Ordinances and Bylawes for the reparation of a Church
or Highways, or any thing which is 44 E. 3 19.
for the weal public, and in such cases the greater part shall bind all the
rest.

And as much to be approved as the wages of the Knights of the Shires and
Burgesses coming to Parliaments, which are taxed and levied of the Counties,
Cities and Boroughs, some few as those which hold any Lands parcel of an
Earldome or Barony only excepted; and the charges of the Convocation or Clergy
assessed upon the Clergy; The Synodals, Lind^wood const^tutiones Angliae and
constitut. O. bo^oni.
Procurations, Proxies, and payments made and paid by every Minister to defray
the charges of the Arch Deacons in their Visitations every year, and the
Bishops every three years, who are enabled to recover them by the Statute of 34
and 35 of Henry the eighth cap. 19. Oblations, Easter and other offerings, for
the further supply and maintenance of the Ministry, Tributes, Customs and
allowances to Governors of Colonies and Plantations, as Virginia, New England,
Barbados, etc. or 10 s. or some other rate given by Merchants to the Consuls at
Venice, Smirna, Aleppo, Ligorne, etc. toward their support, to assist them in
the matter of Trade, and procuring Justice from the Superiors of the
Territories: The Pensions, Admissions, and Payments in the Universities and the
several Colleges and Halls therein, for their support with Taxes also
sometimes imposed for public Entertainments of the King, Queen, Prince,
Chancellor of the University, or some other Grandees, although every College
and Hall is endowed with large yearly and perpetual Revenues in Lands, the
Admittances, yearly Pensions and Payments, together with the sale and rent of
many Chambers in the Inns of Court, Chancery, or Colleges or Houses of Law,
toward the maintenance, charges and support of the honor of those Societies;
and contributions not seldom made and enforced toward public Treatments and
Masks, the payments and rates in Parishes for Pews, Burialls, tolling a
passing Bell, or ringing him and his companions at Funerals; which if not
enough to defray the charges of the many Feasts and Meetings of the
Churchwardens and Petty States of the Parish, repairing of the Church, new
painting and adorning it, buying new Bell-ropes, casting one or more Bells,
building the Steeple something higher, or making a sumptuous Dial with a
gilded Time and Hourglass, are sure enough to be enlarged by a Parish Rate or
Tax more then it comes to.

Or that which is paid by the poor Tankard or Water-Bearers at the Conduits in
London, where every one pays three shillings and six pence at his admittance,
and a penny a quarter toward the support of that pitiful Society.

Or those contributions ( sic magna componere parvis* to represent great things
by small, and the vegetation or manner of the growth of an Oak by that of the
lowly Shrubs) which are made by a more impoverished sort of people; Johnson of
the order and government of Ludgate.
the Prisoners for Debt in Ludgate by Orders and Constitutions (so necessary is
Government and Order, and the support thereof even in misery) of their own
sorrowful making in their narrow confinements, that the Assistant which is
monthly chosen by all the Prisoners to attend in the Watch-hall all day to
call down prisoners to strangers which come to speak with them, change money
for the Cryers at the Grates, keep an account in writing what money or gifts
are every day sent to the Prisoners, or given to the Box, to charge the Steward
with it upon the Account day, see the Accounts truly cast up, the Celler
cleared by ten of the clock at night of all Prisoners, and the Prisoners to be
at their Lodgings quietly and civily, has his share of six pence allowed out
of the Charity money every night, whereof two pence is to be for the Assistant,
two pence for the Master of the Box, and the other two pence allowed in money or
drink unto him which is the running Assistant, or unto the Scavenger for
bearing 2 candles before him at nine of the clock at night, and rings the bell
for Prayers, is the Crier for sale at the Markets for the Charity men, of light
bread taken by the Lord Mayor or Sheriffs, chumps of Beef or any other things
sent in by the City Clerk of the Market, and unsized Fish by the water
Bayliffe, with many other small employments, for which his Salery is four
shillings eight pence per month, and two pence out of the sixteen pence paid
by every Prisoner at his first coming: And the Scavenger who is to keep the
house clean has for his standing Salery five shillings eight pence per month,
two pence for every Prisoner at his first coming, out of the sixteen pence
table-money by him paid, and a penny out of every Fine imposed upon offenders
for the breach of any orders. Every Prisoner paying at his first coming,
besides many other Fees, fourteen pence for entering his name and turning the
key, five shillings for a Garnish to his Chamber-fellows to be spent in coals
and candles for their own use, or for a Dinner or Supper, and sixteen pence to
one of the Stewards of the House for Table-money, out of which candles are to
be bought for the use of the House every night set up in places necessary, etc.
notwithstanding that it has above 60* l. per annum belonging unto it charged
upon lands in perpetuity, and many other considerable and misused Legacies
which have been settled and bestowed upon that should be well privileged Prison.

And as much and more reasonable (as the general protection and defense is
above any particular, and the public benefits do exceed any that are private)
as those payments and services which being derived from gratitude or
retribution for benefits received which (highly pleasing the Almighty, and
being lovely in the eyes of all men) which are not only enjoyed, but held fast
and enforced by all the Nobility, Gentry, and richer sort of men in England,
when it happens to be denied, as the services and customs of all their Tenants
to grind their corn at their Lords Mill, or baking their bread at his common
Oven in some Borough or Market Town,

The Reliefs in Tenures by Knight Service or Chivalry fixed and appropriate
unto those Fewds and Tenures, and paid at the death of every Tenant dying
seized, being at the first never condescended unto by the Tenants by any
paction or stipulation betwixt them and their Lords. But although there was
anciently and originally betwixt the Lord and the Tenant, Bodin de Repub. ca. 7.
mutua fides tuendae salutis and dignitatis utriusque, says Bodin, a mutual
obligation betwixt the Tenant and the Lord to defend one another Estate and
Dignity, or as Craig says pactionibus interpositis de mutua Tutela upon
certain agreements to defend one another, were lately notwithstanding received
and taken by the Nobility and Gentry as a gratitude, and in that and no other
respect, were by the Tenants willingly paid unto them.

The Reliefs paid by the Heirs of Freeholders in Socage after the death of
their Ancestors, which being not paid by Tenants for years by a rack Rent, do
appear to have no other commencement but in signum subjectionis and
gratitudinis, a thankful acknowledgement for benefits received.

Or those duties and payments which many Lords and Gentry do enjoy in
Cumberland, Westmerland, and many of the other Northern Counties which were not
at the first by any original contract or agreement as to their Tenants
particular services, for so it could not be a custom, but the Tenants at the
first upon the only reason of gratitude (until it had by length of time and
usage uninterrupted, gained the force of a custom, and that the succeeding
Heirs and Tenants were admitted according to those customs) did as willingly
observe and acknowledge them.

The Fines uncertain at the will of several Lords which the Nobility and
Gentry of other parts of England do receive and take of their Copihold Tenants
under the penalty of a forfeiture if not paid in a reasonable time after they
were assessed; and the privileges which they retain of seizing their Tenants
Copihold Lands as forfeit, whether the Fines were certain or uncertain, if they
sued Replevins against them, distraining for their Rents or Services, and had
no other parents or original until custom had settled it then the Tenants
grateful acknowledgements of the Lords or his Ancestors former kindess and
benefits bestowed upon them or their Progenitors.

And the Socage Lands and Freeholders might be Tallied, or have a Tax laid upon
them by their Lords at their will and pleasure as their necessities or
occasions required, as well before as after the Statute de Tallagio non
concedendo, made betwixt the years 25 and 34 Ed. 1. and if it had been an Act
of Parliament, and not a Charter could bind only the King as to his
extraordinary, but not to his legal Tallages, until custom by the kindness
or favor of time, and the courtesy and good will of their Lords did permit
them by a desuetude of imposing, and a well rellished custom of the Tenants
not paying to enjoy their easy and cheap bargains and freedom of their Lands
for which they should do well to remember better then they do their
Benefactors, and be more mannerly and grateful then of late they have been,
and were before those indulgencies held to be so accustomed and usual, as it
was not seldom found by Inquisitions and Juries upon oath that such or such
land was holden, Et Talliari potest, etc. And might have Taxes or a greater
Rent laid upon them by the Lord of the Manor, in so much as the Kings demeasne
Lands were not free from Tallage, which will be evident enough by a presentment
of a Jury of Nottinghamshire before the Justices in Air in anno 8 E. 1. or
King Edward the first, when the Kings Letters Patents, of a Grant of the Town
of Retford to the Burgesses thereof and their Heirs in Fee Farm was found and,
mentioned in these words, viz. In Baga de quo warranto in Com. Not. and
placitis de Ragemannis coram Justic. Itinerant. in Com. Not. anno regni Regis
8. incipiend. nono. in Recept Scacar^i.
Edwardus Dei gratia, etc. Sciatis nos concessisse, etc. Burgensibus nostris de
Retford quod ipsi and eorum haeredes de cetero habeant and teneant ad feodi
firmam de nobis and haeredibus nostris in perpetuum villam nostram de Retford
cum pertnen, reddendo inde nobis and haeredibus nostris per manus suas proprias
december libras per annum ad Scaccarium nostrum ad festum Sancti Michaelis pro
omnibus serviciis, etc. Salvo inde nobis and haeredibus nostris Tallagio nostro
cum nos, and haeredes nostris Dominica nostra per Angliam fecimus Talliari,
etc. reserving to himself and his Heirs a Fee Farm Rent of ten pounds per
annum, and the power of Tax or Tallage (or improving) what he had granted unto
them when he should have occasion to make a Tax or Tallage upon all his
Demesne Lands in England: And until Rents were racked (of which the Kings of
England and the Officers of their Revenue in land were seldom or never yet much
guilty) and that Rents were improved as high as the profits of Lands, all the
Lands of England except the Copihold and Customary lands, by Fines certain and
the courtesy of time and their Landlords suffering their good will and charity
to be reduced into thankless customs, escaped it) were liable to be made
contributaries to many of the necessities or occasions of the Lords of Manors,
who formerly did not make Leases and take Fines to lessen the rents, as they
do now* by a high rate or rule of interest and disadvantages, procuring their
rents to be advanced as it were in the name of a Fine before hand; nor if the
Lands were holden in Capite by Knight service until time and their Princes
favors had disused it, could make a Lease unto any Tenant of such Lands but by
license, and then also for no longer a term then 3. or 7. years. And their
Lands and Rents, except Capite and Knight Service and Copihold land, and lands
in Frank Almoigne, being capable of no higher Rents or improvement, cannot now
be any more by them Tallied, (which in effect is but a calling for more rent,
or raising it, which every Landlord may do where his Tenants are at Will, or
when their Leases are expired) when they are now all but those Lands, before
excepted, as to the King and the mesne Lords, and the Lands of the Freeholders
and Cop holders at the utmost or a very high rent.

And such Tallage is at this day not laid aside by our Neighbors of France,
Estate de la France par N. Besog^e en l' An. 1661.
in very many places were les Tailles se paient par ceuz du Tiers estat c'est a
dire par les habitans Roturiers des Villes non Franches Bourgs and Villages a
proportion des biens du Taillable sans qu 'il ait este besoin d' asembler les
Estats pour ce suiet; those kind of Taxes are paid by the third Estate or
Commonalty, that is to say, by the Inhabitants (or common people of the Towns
and Boroughts not infranchised or freed from it by the King according to the
proportion of their goods or movables without any assembly of the Estates to
that purpose, except in Languedoc, Provence, Burgogne, Daulphine, and
Britain, where when the King and his Council have resolved what the Tailles
shall be les terres and immeubles seulement sont Taillables, the lands and
immoveables only are tailleable, and their near friends the Scots did long ago
so well like of gratitude as they enacted and held it to be a good Law, that
Lands holden in few Ferme pay and ane certain zierly dewty nomine Feudi Firm
may be recognosced be the Superior for none payment of the few dewtie, and that
two manner of ways, the first ex provisione and naturae contractus by operation
of law and the nature of the contract; Skene de verborum significatione.
for the few Fermorer not pay and his few Ferme for his ingratitude and
unthankfulnes Tinis and forfaltis his few Ferme be the disposition of the Law
quhilk as zit was not in practique and use in Scotland. And the English
Landlords were so unwilling to part with any privileges which brought them in
any power, gain or profit, as where they held any of the Kings ancient
Demesnes, in Fee Farm, and the King did cause his ancient Demesnes to be
Tallied, the Lord or Fee Farmer under him would sue forth the Kings writ,
commanding the Sheriff that in case the lands were ancient Demeasne, Register
of ^ writs 87.
and hucusque consueverit Talliari and was until then accustomed to be
Tallied, that rationabile Tallagium ei habere faceret de libere Tenentibus suis
in manerio praedicto sicut prius fieri consuevit, he should cause the
Freeholders of the said Manor to pay unto their Lord such reasonable Tallage as
was accustomed.

And with as much or more reason were the Pourveyances or Compositions for them
allowed and established as the hitherto never complained of in Parliament or
accounted to be grievances Herezelda, Herriot services, or Herriots, which
Skene an Author of great authority amonst the Scots, defines to be Ske^eu^ ad
Tit. de Herezeldis in Quon. attach. ca. 25. Alciat. lib. 1. parerg. ca. 45. and
Spelman glossar* in voce Heriotum and Neo^^acitus de feudi^ Hollandici^.
gratuitae donationes quae ab husbando seu agricola datur domino suo ratione
dominij and reverentiae, the free gifts or remunerations of the Tenants to
their Lords in the reverence and respect which they bear unto them.

Which the Hollanders, those grand contesters for Liberties, do call Laudemia,
and notably increase their small Revenues in lands with them: And in England,
says the learned Spelman, Non nisi post mortem husbandi solvitur is only paid
after the death of the Tenant, and differs from a Relief; for that a Relief
is in case of Inheritance, but an Herriot in a lesser Estate, as for life, etc.
and being formerly and in the Saxon times of a greater value, by the giving or
paying to their Lords Shields, Swords, Spears, Helmets, Horses furnished, and
money, according to the several qualities and estates of the Tenants have been
since by the example and indulgence of our Princes imitated by the Nobility and
Gentry, reduced to the best horse or beast, and if none to the best household
stuff, but so greedily attached, or seldom remitted by the Landlords, as the
poor man's single Ewe Lamb in the parable of the Prophet Nathan to David, or a
Cow which should give the lamenting Wife and Children some nourishment and
sustenance, are seldom able to escape their Bailiffes, or such as are sent to
fetch them.

And if it be reason for the people to make such payments and contributions,
and observe such respects to their Landlords and subordinate Governors or
Superiors, as much, and greater surely ought they to pay unto their Pater
Patriae, the protector and defender, as well of those that receive those
duties, as of those that pay them, and are and should be enough to awaken and
rouse up their gratitudes, and imprint in their memories the never enough to be
requited benefits and blessings received by our Kings and Princes, as much as
if with a forfeiture upon the not doing or observing those Agreements, they had
been as strongly annexed and incorporated into our Lands and Estates, as that
of the Service or Conditions of Lands given to hold by the Tenures of Knight
service which as some Civilians hold, Repetit. l. Imperial in Bartholmeo
Camerari 769.
ipsi sanguini cohaerent, are inherent in the very blood of the Tenants, which
being the most noble, gentile, rich, and better sort of the people, were when
the Pourveyance was in being, the most fit and likeliest to be charged with the
Payments or Contributions toward it; and were therefore in several Kings
Reigns sometimes singly and often charged with public Ayds or Taxes, and very
much more then other of the people, as twenty shillings for every Knights Fee
granted by Parliament to King Richard the first six and twenty shillings eight
pence for every Knights Fee to King John, and as much at another time to him
toward his Wars in Wales, twenty shillings upon every Knights Fee toward
his Voyage into Normandy, and forty shillings at another time, and as much
twice assessed in the Reigns of King Henry the third toward his Wars in
Gascony, twenty shillings upon every Knights Fee by Henry the fourth (the
Wars in Scotland by King Edward the first and Edward the second, and of
France by King Edward the third, and the personal and chargeable services of
most of the Nobility and Gentry therein probably procuring them some relaxation
of not having their Fees or Lands so charged as formerly.) And besides other
incidents belonging thereunto, are by the Fewdists said to be so more then
ordinarily tied up unto gratitudes and the more especial duties and
obligations thereof; as such a Tenant forfeits his Lands in Fee, Si percipiat
magnum periculum domino imminere, and ultro sine requisitione servicium non
offert; if he perceived any danger imminent or likely to happen to his Lord,
and did not of his own accord offer his service to prevent it; or if his Lord
were a Captive or in prison, ought to contribute toward his redemption, or if
he should happen to fall into distress, was to relieve him as far say some of
the Fewdall Laws (which by stipulation or paction, being not at the first
agreed upon, or included in the General words of defending the Lord and his
Dignity, was with many other their grateful observances afterward
particularized and deduced from such customs as gratitude only had in process
of time introduced) and as much as amounted unto the Moiety of one years Rent,
or si ^esoldus discurs. Politic 741. and Commentar. dua^eni Wesenbech and
Contii in Consuetudine Veud^rum Obertu^ de Feudis lib. 2. ^t. 24 and 28.
Spelman glossar. in voce auxilium.
dominum in acie periclitantem deseruerit, if he left his Lord in the field,
and was ungrateful; And by our Laws of England, if he or his heirs did not
unto the Lord, or any of his Heirs of whom the Lands were holden, his services
within two years, was upon a Cessavit per Biennium brought by the Lord, and no
sufficient distress to be found to forfeit the Lands so holden.

And from no other source or original was derived Escuage for the Tenants by
Knight service not attending the King or their Lords in the wars, which,
Littleton ca. 3. Escuage.
as Littleton says, was because the Law intends and understood it that the
lands were at the first for that end freely given them, whence also came the
Aid to make the eldest Son of the King a Knight, and to marry the eldest
Daughter and the like assistances or duties unto the mesne Lords as grateful
acknowledgements for the Lands holden of them, which the Freeholders in Socage
are likewise not to deny, and were not at the first by any Agreement betwixt
the King and his particular Tenants, nor likely to be betwixt the mesne Lords
and their Tenants when the Lands were given them; for that some of the mesne
Lords might probably be without Son or Daughter, or both, or any hopes to
have any when they gave their Lands, and their Grants do frequently mention,
pro homagio and servicio, in consideration only of homage and service to be
done.

And being called auxilia sive adjutoria, Aids or Assistances to their Lords
(who could not be then in any great want of such helps when the portions of
Daughters were very much in virtue, and little in money, and the charges of
making the eldest Son a Knight, the King in those days bestowing upon all or
many of them some costly Furs and Robes, Claus. H. 3.
and the other charges consisting in the no great expenses of the furnishing
out the young Gentleman to receive the then more martial better used and better
esteemed honor of Knighthood) were reckoned by Bracton in the later end of the
Reign of King Henry the third, Bract^n lib. 2. tract. 1. cap 16. number. 8.
inter consuetudines quae serviciae non dicuntur nec concomitantia serviciorum
sicut sunt rationabilia auxilia; amongst those customs which are not
understood to be services nor incidents thereof if they be reasonable.

But were de gratia and ut Domini necessitas secundum quod major esset vel
minor relevium acciperet, and proceeded from the good will of the Tenants to
help their Lords as their occasions or necessities should require, Et apud
exteros (says Sir Henry Spelman) non solum Spelman glossar. in voce Auxilium.
ad collocandas sorores in matrimonium, sed ad fratres etiam Juniores milites
faciendos; And with some foreign Nations (as the Germans, old Sicilians and
Neapolitans) not only toward the marriage of the Sisters of their Lords, but
to make also their younger Sons Knights.

For, the good will and grateful retorns of the Subjects to their Kings and
Princes, and of the Tenants to their Lords were not only since the Norman
Conquest, but long before practiced and approved by the Britains the elder and
most ancient Inhabitants of this our Island and other world, as is manifest by
the Ebidiu or Tributum Spelman glossar. in voce Ebed^^.
paid per Nobilium haeredes Capitali provinciae domino, the Heirs of the
Nobility or great men after the death of their Ancestors to the Lords or chief
of the Province, like unto (as Sir Henry Spelman says) our relief (which
Hottoman terms Honorarium, a free gift or offering) And that learned Knight
found upon diligent enquiry amongst the Welsh, who by the sins of their
forefathers and injury of the Saxons are now contented to be called by that
name, as Strangers in that which was their own Country, that that Ebidiu was
paid at a great rate non solum e praediis Laicis, sed etiam Ecclesiasticis, not
only by the Laity but the Churchmen

And being not discontinued amongst the Saxons, was besides the payment of
Reliefs attended with other gifts and acknowledgements of superiority as well
as thanks; for Gervasius Tilburiensis in the Reign of King Henry the second,
when the people of England had not been so blessed and obliged as they were
afterward with the numberless Gifts, Grants and Liberties which in the
successive Reigns of seventeen Kings and Queens after preceding our now King
and Sovereign were heaped upon them, found oblata presents, gifts or offerings
to the King to be a well approved Custom, and therefore distinguished them
into Ex nigro libro in A^chiv^ ^iscali sive recept.
quaedam in rem and quaedam in spem, some before hand for hopes of future
favors, and others for liberties or other things given and granted by the
King, and the Fine Rolls of King John and Henry the third his Son will show us
very many Oblata's or Free Will Offerings of several kinds, Fines 6 Johannis.
which were so greatly valued and heeded as King Henry the third and his Barons
in or about the 23 year of his Reign (which was thirteen or fourteen years
after his confirming of Magna Charta) did in the bitter prosecution and charge
of Hubert de Burgo Earl of Kent and chief Justice of England, Mat. Paris 336.
demand an Account de donis and xeniis of gifts and presents (amongst which
Carucagii or carriages were numbered) spectantibus ad Coronam appertaining to
the Crown.

And upon that and no other ground were those reasonable Laws or Customs
founded, that the King might by the Laws of England grant a Corody, which Sir
Henry Spelman ex constitut. Sicul. lib. 3. Tit. 18. defines to be quicquid
obsonii superiori in subsidium penditur, provisions of victuals made for
superiors; Et ad fundatores Monasteriorum, and to the Founders of every
Monastry, though by the Constitutions of Othobon the Popes Legate in the Reign
of King Henry the third, Spelman glossar. in v^ce Corredio, and F. N. ^. 230.
the Religious of those houses were forbidden to grant or suffer any to be
granted or allowed e communi jure spectabat corrodium in quovis suae
fundationis monasterio nisi in libera Eleemosina fundaretur, it belonged of
common right to grant a Corrody in any Religious houses of their foundation, if
not founded in Frank Almoigne, disposuit item Rex in beneficium famulurom
suorum corrodium, etc. likewise the King might grant to any of his household
servants a Corrody in any houses of the foundation of the Kings of England, and
as many were in all by them granted as one hundred and eleaven, which that
learned Knight conceived to be an argument that so many of the Monasteries were
of their foundation, Et issint de common droit, says the learned Judge
Fitzherbert in his Natura Brevium, and also of Common Right the King ought Fitz
Herbert Novel Natura Brevium 230. A.
to have a reasonable Pension out of every Bishopric in England and Wales for
his Chaplain, until the Bishop should promote him to a fitting Benefice.

Which if the compositions for Pourveyances being reduced into contracts, and a
lawful custom, were or should be no other then gratitudes, may be as
commendable and necessary, as those well approved Examples of thankfulness
recorded in holy writ, of Genes. 21. v. 23.26.
Abraham's giving King Abimelech Sheep and Oxen for his kindness showed unto him
in the Land wherein he had sojourned: Araunah bowing himself with his face to
the ground before King David when he asked him to buy his threshing floor, and
being willing not only to have given it him if he would have accepted it, 2 Samuel ca. 24. v. 21, 22, and 23.
as a King and unto the King, as the Text says, the Threshing floor, but Oxen
also for burnt sacrifice.

And The custom of Strangers (much more to be observed by Subjects who are
under greater obligations) in the Queen of Sheba's presents of an hundred and
twenty Talents of gold, and of spices very great store, 1 Reg. 10.
and precious stones, which she had before hand prepared and brought with her,
and gave him at her departure, or in acknowledgement of her entertainment. And
of Naaman the Sirians pressing the Prophet Elisha very hard after he was cured
of his leprosy by no long or troublesome medicines to take a blessing of him,
2 Reg. 5.
which may be understood to be no less an offer then a good part of ten talents
of silver, six thousand pieces of gold, and ten changes of raiment which he
took with him when he began his journey unto him to seek his cure.

And more expressions of thankfulness then the Royal Pourveyance amounts unto
may certainly be due unto the King, who does not as many great and small
Princes or States usually do in Germany and Italy, build Forts upon some or
many rivers or passages, which may streighten, incumber, or terrify Merchants
with their Merchandise, or other men that travail in the day time, or at other
seasonable times upon their occasions and affairs, to enforce a Toll or
payments of money, nor make a Sundt or Baltic of the Auss or passage from
Bristow to Wales, or out of Lincolnshire over the Hum^er to Hull, or at Barwick
or Newcastle, or in the passage betwixt Dover and Calais, which might yield him
even of Strangers a benefit or profit as considerable, or very near as much as
the Danish King does of the Sund.

Suffers not the people to be troubled in their going to Markets and Fairs, or
passing to and fro with their goods or inland Commodities or Merchandise with
any such paages, payages or moneys as are now paid by Passengers through the
diverse great and small and many several Territories of the Nobility or Lords of
Manors in France for carriage of Goods or Merchandise, some of which payments
are called Barrage, by reason of a Bar put cross the way; or Charles Loys^a^
traite des s^igneuri^s.
Billets in respect of a Billet which is hung upon a tree to denote the
entrance into another Territory, or Pontage for the passage over a Bridge, or
Prevoste for the Customs or Rights due in their passage to the Lord of that
Jurisdiction, or the Travers which is paid by every one which carries any
thing to sell out of the Manor, Jurisdiction or Territory, and altogether do
make so great a trouble to the Carters, Voituriers, Passengers, or people, and
the affairs of Merchandise, loosing much time in paying their Billets almost in
every Parish as they pass finding out and tarrying for those that are to
receive it; and in some places having Soldiers, or some hungry and almost
starved companions placed to receive it, and Billets hung out many times where
they should not, and being constrained thereby to seek by-ways to escape such
their too far extended exactions, and hazard themselves if catched to pay une
gross amend more then otherwise they should, as the Commonalty and poor
People of France, who have little more for their hard labors and drudgery to
comfort them then a Lenten or slender diet all the year, with Taxes, Rags and
Apish fashions, had rather pay another Tail or Tax to the King, or twenty times
as much to the Lords in their petites so^erainetes, little Royalties, then to
be so much encumbered.

Which our Traders and Travailers are not at all troubled with, but are excused
at Markets and Fairs, Cities or Towns of Trade by a Toll, which is more ancient
then the Conquest, or a few Centuries, are now taken by the King where he or
his Progenitors have not granted them away unto others at the same or some
easy rates, which they were at some hundreds of years or long ago, when the
price of a fat Sheep or Mutton was but twenty pence, and the Toll in some
places; (for they vary according to custom) at one half penny, a Sheep,
amounted unto a fortieth part of the then value of a fat Sheep, which is now
not seldom rated and sold at 20 s. (and may therefore be the more contentedly
paid, and if raised up together with the Pickage and Stallage, and for the
Pens to the now rates of victuals and provisions, would according to the
difference betwixt the then small value of silver, and that which is now more
then twice as much, and at 5 s. and a penny the ounce, and settled again in the
Crown from whence it first came to many Lords of Manors, some of whom do make
80 l. per annum by it, go a great way toward the loss or charges which the
Counties do pretend were laid upon them by the differences betwixt the Market
prises and the rates which they did in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth agree by
their Compositions to serve in the provisions for her and her Royal Family, or
if raised up proportionably unto the price which it bears in the Markets and
Fairs since those Tolls were first set and imposed (which must needs be
understood to have a greater respect to the value then the numbers;) or what
they have been enhaunced since the 24. year of the Reign of Henry the eighth
after the ounce of Silver was raised to five shillings, when a pound of Mutton
was by Act of Parliament not to be sold above a half penny farthing; and in
Anno 34 of Henry the eighth, Stows Survey of London 421.
25 Boards or Stalls in the Stocks Market in London for Fishmongers paid rent
yearly to the City 34 l. 13 s. 4 d. and for eighteen Butchers Boards or Stalls
one and forty pounds sixteen shillings and four pence, or the Reign of King
Henry the first, which was long after the custom of paying Toll, when the rate
or price of a Mutton for the Kings provision was Gervasius Tilburiensis in
Archizo Fiscali apud Recept. Scacc^^ii, and Spelman gloss^r. in verbo Firma.
secundum constitut^m modum, according to the then valuation and rate set at no
greater a price then four pence (so great a difference had two hundred years
betwixt that and the Reign of King Edward the second made in the rates and
provisions for victuals) would make an increase of the rates for Pickage and
Stallage, and for Toll as much or more after no greater a rate then twenty
shillings for a fat Mutton (which is now often exceeded) as five to one, and
come up very near unto the pretended loss or difference in serving in the
provisions for the Kings house.

And if it did not may be well afforded, and was abundantly recompensed by the
indulgence of his Royal Progenitors King John and King Henry the third his
Son by their Magna Charta, Agreement, or Accord made with their then
powerful Barons and Church men, and a discontented and seditious Commonalty
(since reduced into Laws, and confirmed by thirty Acts of Parliament) wherein
the people having many liberties granted them by those Kings the great Lords
Prelates, and superior part of the Clergy of whom they held, which they could
not then claim as rights, but were to be received as favors, and as much to be
valued as their pardon and indemnity which was granted unto them by the same
Charter, King John therein promising them that all those Customs and Liberties
Magna Charta Regis Johannis apud Mat. Paris 255. and 256.
quantum ad se pertinet erga suos and omnes homines de regno suo tam Laici quam
Clerici observent quantum ad se pertinet erga suos, as much as belonged to him
he would observe toward all men, and that all as well Laick as spiritual
should as much as belonged to them observe them toward such as held of them.

And by the late King Charles the Martyr who took but one hundred pounds for
the Relief of an Earldome which was anciently accounted to be but of the yearly
value of four hundred pounds per annum, 9 H. ca. 2.
Seldom 2 part. titles of honor.
the least of which are now three or four thousand pounds per annum, very many
double as much, and some sixteen or twenty thousand pounds per annum, when as
the hundred pounds was then according to the now value of silver above three
hundred pounds.

And to disburse in household provisions according to the difference betwixt the
rates and prises of victuals as they were in the Reign of King Edward the
second, which was above 80 years after the granting and confirming of Magna
Charta by King Henry the third, when a Capon was sold for two pence, and what
they are now will not be the fourth part as to some sort of provisions and
victuals, and as to others not the sixteenth of that hundred pounds for the
Relief of an Earldome, and so proportionably in other reliefs, and the sum of
five pounds for the relief of a Knights Fee, which is but the fourteenth part
according to the difference betwixt the ancient and then value of the lands
belonging unto a Knights Fee, now estimated but at three hundred pounds per
annum, many of which are four or five hundred pounds per annum, and others of a
greater yearly value, as the lands are lesser or more improved nearer or
farther distant from London the grand Emporium of the Trade and Commerce of the
Nation, and the residence of the King and his superior Courts of Justice.

Charta H. 1 in Mat. Paris 240.
And are but the Antiqua Relevia, ancient Reliefs, which King Henry the first in
his Charter of Liberties granted to the people, did not reduce unto any certain
sums, but ordered to be justa and legitima.

And but two hundred Marks for the Relief of a Marquis, and two hundred pounds
of a Duke (although there were at the time of the making of those great
Charters neither Dukes nor Marquesses in England, or any such Titles in being)
and one hundred pounds for the relief of a Baron.

And if the wars had not hindered him from those and other his dues, but 20 s.
for every Knights fee according to the Statute in anno 3 E. 1. toward the
marriage of his eldest Daughter, and making his eldest Son a Knight; and no
more of every twenty pounds per annum in Socage.

Did not according to the Equity and Preamble of the Act of Parliament de anno
quinto Eliz. cap. 4. which in regard that the wages and allowances limited and
rated in former Statutes were in diverse places too small, and not answerable to
that time, respecting the advancement of prices of all things belonging unto
Servants and Laborers, and that the Law could not conveniently without the
great grief and burden of the poor Laborers and hired men be put in execution,
and to the end that there might be a convenient proportion of wages in the
times of scarcity and plenty, did repeal so much of the said former Statutes as
concerning the working, and wages of Servants and Laborers, and enacted that
the wages of Artificers Laborers and Servants should be yearly assessed by the
Justices of the Peace and Magistrates in every County, City and Town Corporate
with respect to the plenty and scarcity of the time, and other circumstances
necessary to be considered, endeavor to raise them to any higher sums, or make
them proportionable to the present values of lands and money, rates and prices
of victuals.

And by the favor of his now Royal Majesty, who delighting in the vestigiis
and paths of his many indulgent and Royal Progenitors, though his own very
great wants and necessities, and their daily importunities might have advised
him not to have kept the road of his Ancestors liberality and bounty, but to
reserve some kindness for himself and his more urgent occasions, did not as
King Henry the third and several other Kings of England his Successors cause
his Taxes and Assessements by Parliament to be assessed upon oath according to
the full and true value of the peoples Estates, Mat. Paris 380.
or as was done by King Edward the sixth since the Statute of 6 Ed. 3. for
restraining the Parliament aids to the old Taxation upon the assistance or
relief then so called, given unto him by Parliament, and make enquiries upon
oath of the best values of the substance of such as were to pay that Relief,
Dismes and Subsidies* and by the oaths also of those who were to pay them* and
caused some to be sworn to value clothes to the end that the King might receive
payment of Relief for every cloth; or as Queen Mary did, cause an enquiry to be
made upon oath of the value of the goods and lands of such as were liable to
the payment of Fifteens Dismes and Subsidies in the 2, 3, 4, and 5, years of
her Reign: But in his Assessments, Aids or Subsidies granted by Parliament did
imitate his Royal Father King Charles the first, who took and received all his
Subsidies at two shillings eight pence in the pound for goods and movables,
and four shillings for lands and immoveables, (with defalcation of debts, Anno
4 Car. 1.
and consideration of a greater then ordinary charge of children) assessed by
an express exception without oath, and the Commissioners left at liberty to
assesse themselves and the Assessors according to the old and easy Taxations.

Takes and receives his First Fruits, or the first years value of Bishoprics,
Spiritual Promotions and of Benefices not under ten marks per annum* and
Vicarages not under ten pounds per annum, (since treble those values) as they
are said to be in the Kings books, and for the Tenths of their Spiritual
Promotions after no greater a rate or yearly value, which no Act of Parliament
ever obliged him to do, then they were long ago valued, with some very small
increase or raising long since in a very few of the Bishoprics (but in many,
as Canterbury, York, Durham, Lincoln, Coventry and Lichfield, Exeter, Ely,
Winchester, and Norwich, much abated) when as now by the rise of money and
prises they are greatly different from what they then we^e, and are of some of
those Benefices and Spiritual Promotions, but the eighth or tenth, and of many
but the twentieth part.

And receives his prae-Fines and post-Fines, Licenses and Pardons of Alienation
upon Common Assurances at less then a tenth, and many times less then a
twentieth part of the true yearly values of the lands or rates which the Law
(ordering the compositions to be upon oath) intends him, after the example of
his Royal Father, who permitted the yearly value of lands in Capite and by
Knight Service to be found by Juries and Inquisitions at the tenth part of the
now true yearly value, when as by oath they were to find and certify the true
yearly values, and all the Lands of the Kingdom but his own are raised and
improved generally ten to one, or very much in very many parts, and particulars
thereof more then what they were two hundred years last past in or about the
Reign of King Henry the sixth, when as the errable and pasture lands which are
now in Middlesex let at fifteen or sixteen shillings per annum an Acre, and
Meadow commonly at forty shillings, and sometimes at three pounds the Acre;
were in Anno 1 Ed. 3. at a far lesser yearly value, when two Toftes of Land,
one Mill, fifty acres of Land, and two acres of Wood in Kentish Town near
London was of no greater yearly value then 20 s. and 3 d. and the courser sort
of pasture land in Essex now let for 8 or 9 s. the Acre, and Meadow at twenty
or thirty shillings the Acre, was then in that County, and in many fertile
Counties within sixty miles (and far less) of London valued but at eight
pence per annum, and four or five pence the Acre errable, and the like
valuations were holden in licenses of Mortmain in all his extents or values of
lands seized for taken into his hands.

Received their primer seisins at the like small yearly rate, and took for
suing out of Liveries, which may be resembled to a Copiholders admittance, not
a fifth part proportionably to what is now paid by Copiholders to their Lords
of Manors; and respites of homage, as they were taxed and set in anno primo
Jacobi, in a very easy manner.

Did not in the valuation of Lands and Estates, as some Lords of Manors have
been known to do, whereby to rack and oppress the Widows and Fatherless,
employ some Sycophants or Flatterers of the Manor to overvalue them, or have
some Decoyes in the assessing of Fines to seem willing to pay or give as much
when they are sure to have a good part of it privately restored unto them
again, or cause their poor Tenants to be misled, and the more willingly cozen
themselves by crediting hard and erroneous Surveyes, taking Leases of their
Copihold Estates or using some other unwarrantable and oppressive devices,
worse then the Pharisaicall Committees did in the renting of lands they had no
title unto, when they did put men to box one another by overbidding themselves
at their wickedly improving Boxes. Instructions of King James to his Council of
the Court of Wards and Liveries.


But did according to his Father King James his instructions given to his
Council of the Court of Wards in the assessing of Fines for the Marriages of
the Wards and renting of their Lands (which too many of the Nobility and
Gentry, and other of his Subjects did never or very seldom order the Stewards
of their Manors to do) order that upon considerations which might happen
therein either by reason of the broken estate of the deceased want of provision
for his wife, his great charge of children unprovided for, infirmity or
tenderness of the Heirs, incertainty of the title or greatness of the
encumbrances upon the Lands, they should have liberty as those or the like
considerations, should offer themselves to use that good discretion and
conscience which should befit in mitigating Fines or Rents to the relief of
such necessities.

Suffers the Fees of his Chancery and Courts of Common Pleas and King's Bench
for the small Seals, to be receved; Petit Parliament. 21 Ed. 3. n. 43
as they were in the Reign of King Ed. 3. and the Tenths reserved upon the Abbey
and Religious lands at no greater an yearly value then they were in the later
end of the Reign of King Henry the eighth, when they were first granted, though
now they are of a four times or greater yearly value. The Fees of the Seals of
Original and Judicial Writs and Process in Wales, as they 34 H. ^ ca. 26.
were in the 34. year of the Reign of King Henry the eighth when the English
Courts of Justice were there first erected; takes six pence a piece for Capons
reserved for Rent in Queen Elizabeth's time; the issues of lands forfeited unto
him upon Writs of distringas at such small rates as six shillings eight pence
upon one distringas, and 10 s. at another, which the Law intends to be the
profits of the Lands distrained, betwixt the Test and the return of the Writs,
which would have amounted unto twenty times, or a great deal more, and
receives his Fines upon Formedons* and oath real Actions granted and issuing
out of the Chancery at most gentle and moderate rates, his Customs inward and
outward at easy rates proportionable to such small values as the Merchants
advantage to themselves shall give in, or the Officers or Commissioners for the
King at the Custome-houses shall at random and without view think to be a
favorable and easy estimate.

Some single ones, of which before recited undervaluations, besides the profits
of the Tolls of Fairs and Markets if rightly and justly paid according to the
true improved values, or two of the most of them would make up in a constant
Revenue unto him a great deal more then the Compositions for his Pourveyances
yearly and lately amounted unto by the difference betwixt his rates or prices
and those of the Market.

A due consideration whereof if there were nothing else to put in the Balance
might induce the Earls, Marquesses and Dukes of England who have received their
honors and dignities from his Royal Progenitors, to permit him as well to enjoy
his Pourveyance, and reasonable support and maintenance of the honor of himself
and his Royal Family, as they do take and receive of him their Creation
moneys, being anciently a third part of the fines and profits of the Counties
whereof the Earls are denominated, since reduced to a certain and yearly sum of
money, when as also not a few of them have had great and large Revenues given
them by his Royal Progenitors to uphold and sustein their Dignities and Honors.

And the Bishops whose Bishoprics and Baronies, and most of the Revenues
belonging unto them were of the foundation of the Kings Royal Ancestors, and
received their Investitures* and Temporalties from him, may if they shall think
the Compsitions for Pourveyances ought not to be charged upon the Revenues of
the Holy Church, and that of the Clergy but shall claim some privileges and
exemptions therein, be pleased to remember that although Simon Islip Archbishop
of Canterbury being in many things a man of a severe life and discipline, did
write his Speculum Regis aforesaid, or a book so called, sharply inveighing
against the Kings Pourveyors, and their manner of taking the Pourveyance
without money or due payment; in some sense and feeling probably of the taking
of it from the Clergy complained of by them in the Parliament of 18 of Edward
the third, they being no longer before exempted from it (some only as the Abbot
of Battle and others specially privileged excepted) then the first year of the
Reign of that King, Charta Gulielmi Conquestori^ in notis Seldeni ad Hist.
Edmeri
who as Matthew Parker in the life of Walter Reynold Archbishop of Canterbury
mentions, being very well pleased with the Clergy for so freely contributing
to his Wars; did in Parliament not only restore unto them vetera and
antiquissima privilegia Ecclesiae Anglicanae, the old and ancient Rights of the
Church of England (which by Magna Charta could as to Cart^ taking claim but the
same freedom which those did who held by Knight service, viz. that their own
Carts used in their Demeasnes should not be taken for the Kings use) but de
novis auxit (i. e.) de non exigendis a Clero in regis hospitium esculentis
poculentis, vecturis and similibus, gave them new privileges, that is to say,
to be freed from furnishing of Carts and provisions of victuals for the Kings
Household.

Yet he and all other the Bishops of England could at the same time (and their
Successors after them do unto this day justly and lawfully) take and receive in
their Visitations once every 3 years a certain Rate or Tax set upon every
Benefice propter hospitium toward the charge of their expenses, house keeping
and victuals, which, says Stephens discourse of Procurations, Synodals, etc.
44.
Mr. Stephens in his learned and judicious Treatise of Procurations and
Synodals, are Perquisites or Profits of their Spiritual Jurisdictions, as
creation money given to a Duke or Earl for the maintenance of his honor, and
by reason of the great Trains and Attendance of Bishops heretofore with one
hundred or two hundred men and horses at a time, some of the Visitors carrying
Hounds and Hawks with them, and sparing not the exempt and privileged placed,
it grew to be so excessive as interdum Ecclesiastica ornamenta subditi exponere
tenebantur, the poor Clergy were enforced to make provision for them, by
selling their Church plate and ornaments; and it was therefore by a
Constitution of Boniface the eighth, about the year 1295. ordained that the
Archbishops should be limited unto 40 or 50 men and horses, the Bishops to 20
or 30, the Cardinals unto 25, and the Archdeacons unto 5 or 7, and they were
prohibited to carry Hounds and Hawks along with them; and that also bringing
but little ease to the inferior Clergy (says Stephens Ibidem 13.
Mr. Stephens) because when victuals were not furnished they being left
unlimited in Compositions or sums of money to be taken in lieu or recompense
thereof, broke down the doors of Monasteries and Churches, taking where they
were denied what they could lay their hands on, which caused the Council of
Vienna in the year 1311. to declaim against and prohibit such doings, which
being not redressed might have put Simon Istip in mind who was betwixt that and
1349. when he was elected Archbishop of Canterbury in almost the zenith and
height of his preferment, as Councellor and Secretary to King Edward the
third, and Keeper of the Privy Seal, to have written as well against the abuse
of Visitations and Procurations, if the Book which I have not seen, and is only
to be found in Sir Robert Cottons excellently well furnished library, do not
(as I could never understand it did) mention them, as against the abuses in the
manner of making the Kings Pourveyances.

But was the cause howsoever that Pope Benedict the twelfth, about the year
1337. which was the eleventh year of the Reign of King Ed. 3. did make a Canon
or Constitution to settle a proportionable rate of money to be paid in lieu of
victuals or provisions out of all Churches, Monasteries, and Religious Houses
not exempted, and where custom and the smalness of the Benefices have not
lessened it, was, as Lindewood says in the Reign of King Henry the fifth of
and out of every Benefice for the Archdeacons procuration no less then seven
shillings and six pence, which was for each man attending him twelve pence
toward the defraying of his charges (being then a great ordinary) and eighteen
pence for the Archdeacon himself, as well when they did visit as when they did
not. And even Simon Islip himself whilst he was so busy about other men's
failings was not without some of his own, nor was so great a friend to Justice
in every part of it, or in his own particular as he might have been; for when
he had been (as Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, one of his reverend
and worthy Successors, in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth records it) at some
extraordinary charges in repairing of his Manor house at Wrotham in Kent, and
obtained a License from the Pope to tax all the Clergy of his Province at a
great in every twenty marks toward his expenses therein, the Collectors did
(probably by his privity) so order it, that they gathered a Tenth; which being
complained of could never be refunded: And if he and his Successors had not
continued the custom of their Procurations and other profits raised from the
Clergy toward their more honorable and necessary support, would have been
blamed as much as he was by Mat. Parker Antiquitates Britannicae 244.348.
Matthew Parker and others long before his time with a male audivit, for
releasing to the Earl of Arundel for 240 marks the yearly payment of 26 red and
fallow Deer in their seasons to the Arcbishops of Canterbury.

Who as well as other Bishops can take and receive Subsidium Cathedraticum,
which is a duty of prerogative and superiority, Quarta Episcopalis, which is
given to them for the reparation of Churches, which if the Cathedrals be not
intended thereby is not bestowed upon the Parochial Churches, which the
Rectors and Parishioners are now only charged with.

Do continue their taking also of Proxies, being an exhibition toward their
charges for their visitation of Religious houses, since dissolved, and not now
at all in being, and permit their Archdeacons in some Dioceses to receive
their Pentecostalia or Whitsun farthings for every Family yet used and taken by
the Bishops and Archdeacons of the Diocesses of Worcester and Gloucester, and
be well pleased with some good Benefices many times allowed them in Commendam
to make out and help the inequality of the Revenues of some of their
Bishoprics, with the greater charges and expense of their spiritual dignities.

And their middle sort of Clergy can be well content to e^ke and piece out
their Benefices with the comfort of the Lands belonging to a Deanery, Prebenda
or Prebendship of Lands and other Revenues annexed to the Cathedrals, many if
not most of which with the Deanerles and Prebendships thereunto belonging (as
the Deanerie and twelve Prebends of Westminster by Camde^ 1. part. Annals of
Queen Elizabeth in Anno 1560.
Queen Elizabeth) were of the foundation and gift of the Kings Royal
Progenitors.

Which comfortable and necessary supports of our Bishops administered by their
Clergy, are ex antiquo, and long ago resembled by some or the like usages in
Ireland, where the Coloni or Aldiones, such as hold in Socage of the Irish
Bishops, did besides their Rents and Tributes erga reparationes Matricis
Ecclesiae quidpiam confer, give something (yearly) toward the reparation of
the Cathedral or Mother Churches, and the Spelman in voce Heren^ciis.
Herenaci another sort of Tenants so called, did besides their annual rent
cibaria quaedam Episcopo exhibere, bring to the Bishop certain provisions for
his Household (which was very frequent with the Tenants of Lands holden of our
English Abbeys and Religious Houses) and by an inquisition in the County of
Tirone in anno 1608. it was by a Jury presented upon oath that there were
quidam Clerici sive homines literati qui vocentur Herinaci, certain learned men
of the Clergy who were called Herinaci and ab antiquo seisiti fuerunt, etc. And
anciently were seized of certain lands which did pay to the Archbishop or
Bishop of the Diocese quoddam charitativum subsidium refectiones and pensiones
annuales secundum quantitatem terrae and consuetudinem patriae, a dutiful and
loving aid, and some provisions and pensions according to the quantity of their
lands and custom of their Country, and the grants of such lands as appears
by a Deed of the Dean and Chapter of Armach in Anno Domini 1365. to Arthur and
William Mac Brin for their lives, and the longer liver of them at the yearly
rent of a mark and eight pence sterling una cum aliis oneribus and servitiis
inde debitis and consuetis, with all other charges and services due and
accustomed had in them sometimes a condition of quam diu grati fuerint and
obedientes, so long as they should be grateful and obedient unto them.

Wherefore the Barons, Nobility and Gentry of England who did lately enjoy
those beneficial Tenures by Knight Service (now unhappily as the consequence
and greater charges and burdens upon the people will evidence, converted as
much as an Act of Parliament in the twelfth year of the Reign of his Majesty
that now is can do it into Socage) which were at the first only given for
service and assistance of their King and Country and their mesne Lords in
relation thereunto, and have besides the before recited conditions many a
beneficial custom and usage annexed and fixed unto them, and at the
dissolution of the Abbeys and Religious Houses had much of the Lands given and
granted unto them and their Heirs in tail, or otherwise with a reservation of a
Tenth, now a great deal below the value, can do no less in the contemplation
of their honors, dignities and privileges received from them, and many great
favors continued unto their Heirs and Successors from Generation to
Generation, then do that in the matter of Praeemption, Pourveyance or
Contribution toward the Composition or serving in of victuals or Provision for
his Majesty's Royal Household, and the honor of his House and Kingdom, which
their Ancestors did never deny.

The Lord Majors of London who do take and rereceive yearly a payment or
Tribute called Ale-silver, and the Citizens of London who do claim and enjoy
by the Kings Grants, Charters, or Confirmations a freedom from all ^olls and
Lastage throughout England, besides many other large privileges and
immunities, and the Merchants of England, and such as trade and travel through
his Ports, and over his Seas into foreign parts and are not denied their Bills
of Store to free their Trunks, and wearing Clothes and other necessaries
imported or exported from paying any Custom and other duties, which with many
other things disguised and made Custome-free under those pretenses for which
the Farmers of the Customs have usually had yearly allowances and defalcations
would amount unto a great part of the peoples pretended damage by the
compositions for Royal Pourveyance, should not trouble themselves with any
complaints or calculations of it, when as both Citizens and Merchants can
derive their more then formerly great increase of trade and riches from no
other cause or fountain then the almost constant ^esidence of the King and
Courts of Justice in or near London, and the many great privileges granted
unto them and obtained for them by the Kings and Queens of England.

The Tenants in ancient Demeasne claiming to be free from the payment of Tolls
for their own household provisions, and from contribution unto all wages
assessed toward the expenses of the Knights of the Shires, or Burgesses sent
unto the Parliament, which Comment. in Artic. super Chartas 542, 543.
Sir Edward Coke believes was in regard of their helping to furnish the Kings
Household provisions, though since granted to other persons, and their services
turned into small rents now much below what they would amount unto, and many
Towns and Corporations of the Kingdom, Vide Act for Subsidies in Anno 4 Car. 1.
the Resiants in the Cinque Ports and Romney Marsh, Universities of Oxford and
Cambridge, and the Colleges and Halls therein, and the Colleges of Winton and
Eaton claiming to be acquitted from the payment of Subsidies by ancient
Exemptions, may be willing to pay or bear as much as comes to their share in
that one of the smallest parts of duty which is not to be refused by such as
will fear God and honor the King.

And all the Subjects of England who enjoy their Common of Estovers in many of
the Kings Woods or Forests, Pannage or feeding of Swine with Acorns, or
fetching of Fern from thence, Privileges of Deafforrestations, Assart lands,
Pourlieus, and Browse wood, and have Common of Vicinage, and Common appendant
not only therein, but in most of his Manors by a continuance or custom of the
charity, or pity of his Royal Progenitors, and where they have no grant to
produce for those and many other favors will for refuge, and to be sure not to
part with it, fly to praescription and time beyond the memory of man; and
suppose that there was a grant thereof, because that possibly there might have
been one, should not think much to let him partake of some of their thanks and
retributions, which will not amount to one in every twenty for all the benefits
which they have received of his Royal Ancestors, or do yearly receive of him.

Nor should forget that God Almighty the maker of heaven and earth, giver of
all good things, and bestower of blessings, who fed his people of Israel with
Quails in the Wilderness where none were bred, Manna where none was either
before or since, and made the Rocks to yield water, did in his Theocraty or
Government of them by his Laws and Edicts written by his own finger, or spoken
by his own mouth, give all the Nations of the Earth a pattern or direction for
Pourveyance and grateful acknowledgements in his reserving the Tenths or
Tithes for his Priests or Clergy, notwithstanding their Glebe, Leviticus 38. v.
32, 33. Numbers 18. v. 21.
and 48 Cities with the Pomaeria's or Lands belonging unto them, and their
shares and parts out of the multitudes of Sacrifices, with many other Fees and
Privileges which were for a further support and provision for them great
offerings of Oxen, Numbers ca. 7.
Silver and Plate brought unto the Tabernacles by the Princes and the Heads of
the houses of their Fathers, which God himself directed Moses to receive and
dispose amongst the Levites, and the offerings at the Feast of the Passover,
Numbers 9. v 13.
which later if not brought were to be very poenal to the refuser, in being to
be cut off from his people; their Offerings and Free-gifts and First Fruits,
and that which was brought by Gods direction as a Pourveyance for the building
of the Tabernacle, which was then the only Church.

Which our forefathers the Britans as well as the Saxons had so good a mind to
imitate as they did in the Feast of St. Martin, Fleta lib. 8. ca. 47. Spelman
glossar. in voce Ciricksceat.
yearly offer to the Church for their Ciricksceat, or contributions to the
Church, certam mensuram bladi Tritici, a certain measure or quantity of wheat,
and at Christmas, gallos and gallinas Hens and Cocks, which in a Synod or
Council holden in Anno 1009. at Aenham in England, were interpreted to be
Ecclesiastica munera, contributions to the Church, and long before that
established by a Law of King Ina's under a great penalty, Inae LL. ca. 4.
Canuti LL. ca. 10.
and by a Law of Canutus long after laid under a greater penalty of eleven
times the value of the Bishop, and two hundred and twenty shillings (then a
very great sum) to the King.

And it may be remembered that our Savior the blessed Son of God whilst he was
upon Earth, and was the Messiah or King of Israel long before prophesied, and
to ride as a King in a kind of triumph into Jerusalem, Zach^ 9.9. Mark 11. v. 3.
and would not use unfitting or unjust ways and means unto it, did send two of
his Disciples for a Colt, or Foal of an Ass, to ride upon, with no other answer
or satisfaction to be given to the Owner, but that the Lord has need of him,
and straight way he will send him hither; which a learned Commentator upon that
place understands to be some exercise of a Kingly power to convince the
stubborn Jews of his Kingly office.

But if the Royal Pourveyance or Compositions for them shall be so unhappy as
not to be able to grow or prosper upon the Stocks of gratitude, or those every
days benefits, quae magna accipientibus ac etiam dantibus, which are great to
the receivers if rightly valued, and great and costly to the givers, which the
people of this might be fortunate Island have for those many ages and hundreds
of years past had and received of the Kings and Monarchs thereof.

The contracts and agreements made with the several Counties for the
Pourveyances and their willing submission thereunto if the King had no former
right (as he had a sufficient one) thereunto, can no less then induce an
Obligation, Bracton de actionibus ca. 2. and Oldendorpius in locis communibus
Actionum Juris Civilis 9. and 11.
and that naturalem rationem and honestatem naturalem juris and fidei vinculum
quibus necessitate omnes astringuntur, natural reason and honesty with the
Bonds and Ties of the Law and common faith which ought to be in every man, and
one unto another; And being the great Peacemakers, cement and quiet, if
observed as they ought to be, in all the affairs of mankind, brings with them,
or are to enforce a necessity of performance.

But if the obligations which the faith and contracts of one man to and with
another, which generally binds the most rude and ignorant of mankind, and the
Heathen as well as Christian shall not be able to make any impression upon us.

Or if Gratitudes, Duties and Retributions to our King and Common Parent can by
any rules of Law or Reason be interpreted or understood to be no more then a
Custom.

All the subordinate ranks and degrees of the People and Subjects of England
might be persuaded to follow the counsel given by the blessed Redeemer of
Mankind, which the Emperor Severus and some of the Heathen Roman Emperors by
the only light of nature could, as if they had read his Gospels, propose
afterward almost in the very same words of Do unto others as they would have
others do unto them, and believe that the legal privileges and customs of
the King in his Praeemption, Pourveyance, or Composition for his Household (who
gave or confirmed unto them all their Privileges and Customs) being
rationabiles, Glos. in ve^b. usque ab hoc tempus c. servi^tium 18 q. 2.
and by the Civil Law are unde^stood to be legitime praescriptae, most
reasonable and lawfully prescribed or used, when they are bona fide and but for
forty years, and ought to be inviolabiles quia nec divino juri, nec legibus
naturae and Gentium sive municipalibus contradicunt, inviolable when they
contradict not the Laws of God, Nature and Nations, and the Laws of the Land,
neither are nor can be any grievance, but are justly due unto him as he is
their Supreme, when as it was well said by Judge Barkeley in his Argument in
the Exchequer Chamber in the Case of the Ship Money unhappily there put to a
dispute, the whole Realm is but one body (whereof the King is the head) and all
the Members do center in that body) and if one member (epecially the head do
suffer) all the rest will suffer with him; and though every man has an
Interest in the Commonwealth, yet the Kings Interest is incomparable and beyond
all others.

And the Compositions for the Pourveyance, being not only a duty and a custom
now above 88. years reckoned but from the 3. year of the reign of Queen
Elizabeth, Camd^^ 1 (...)* Annals of Queen El^zabeth.
(which was the time of the first agreement, or compositions for the most of
the Counties of England and Wales) to the death of King Charles the Martyr, and
from his death to the restoration of Charles the second, his Son and our
gracious Sovereign in the twelfth year of his Reign, A^ciat. lib 5. a^ ^ust.
will yield no less a Total of years then one hundred, which is justly
accounted to be a time immemoriall or beyond the memory of man, and makes a
more warrantable prescription and ground of Title then that in King Henry the
seconds Reign tempore Henrici Regis Avi, in the time of King Henry the first
his Grandfather, or post coronationem suam, after his own coronation, or post
ultimam transfretationem in Normanniam, after his last going over into
Normandy, or that in Henry the thirds time, post ultimam transfretationem in
Britanniam; or that time of Limitation by the Statute of 32 H. 8. ca. 2. of 50
years, for bringing of Writs of Right and Formedons, etc. And in the Kings
case, being a greater Epoch, period, or account of time* must needs be the
best of Prescriptions and the greatest of Customs, because it was not gained
as most of the peoples Customs or Prescriptions were, the best of which had no
other original then the continuance of favors of those that bestowed and
permitted them to be enjoyed, or a neglect of taking or calling for duties
until time had overrun and covered them with that which is now called a
Custom or Prescription, but were established by a threefold obligation
composed of a Right or Duty, a very ancient Custom backed by the Laws of God,
Nature and Nations, and a Contract, made and continued by the people to their
King, built upon the best and greatest of considerations, which the Prophet
David in the 15 Psalm, if it had not been beneficial, but to some loss or
damage, advises not to be broken.

And merited the bettter observance, in that Queen Elizabeth did but the year
before call into her Mint and reduce unto pure silver the moneys which her
Father King Henry the eighth had so much debased with a mixture of brass, as it
was scarcely half the value in silver, which made the price of commodities so
much or a great deal the dearer, Camden 1. part Annals of Queen Elizabeth in
Anno 1560.
and by her Edicts did all she could to bring down the prices in the Markets,
which then began to swell more then there was any cause for, and in her
composition and agreement with many or most of the Counties of England and
Wales the next year after, did but accept of what then they understood might,
as the learned and judicious Mr. Camden has informed us, justo pretio, at a
reasonable or Market rate be, well afforded.

And the Lords of Manors who according to the several customs thereof think it
not unreasonable to enjoy their Chevagia or Chiefage, which Cowel takes to be
pecunia Annu^ data potentiori tutelae patrociniique gratia, a small yearly
payment paid by Tenants as acknowledgments, for favors and help received, or
to be received, and take their reliefs of their Tenants in Socage, in some
places by custom a years value, and in some but half as much, and in others
more according as their customs vary, the least of which in value of money
does twice exceed what it amounted unto formerly, and enjoy their Free Warrens
and Fishings, with many other Privileges and immunities by Grant or
Prescription, and with the Yeomanry, and lower ranks of people, can be content
to claim the benefit of their Customs de non decimando, of paying no Tithes at
all for Lands formerly belonging to the Cistercians, Knights Templers,
Hospitlers, or Knights of St. John of Jerusalem, or of a modus decimandi, of
paying but a penny or some little yearly sum of money in lieu of all Tithes,
and make an inheritance of the greatest part of 3845 Impropriations with the
Smoke-pennies, or Peter or Chimney pence, Weavers funeral monuments 176. and
Si^ Roger Twisdens Vindication of the Church of England 77.
which being formerly paid unto some Abbeys and Religious Houses, and coming
afterward to the Crown in the Reign of King Henry the eight, and granted out
again by him, are in many places as Appendants unto some Manors paid unto this
day; And think it no grievance to enjoy them and many other privileges, which
wereby Grants, or Exemptions by Papal Constitutions, designed to Religious and
not any Lay uses.

And the customary services of their Tenants, to repair ways and Bridges,
contribute to the maintenance of a Priest or Preacher, or to the marriage of
poor Maids, or to carry Milstones some miles distant to their Milnes, to do
suit of Court, or be Butler, Baker, or Carver at some Festivals, and can
notwithstanding all the sometimes tedious Suits in Law of their Tenants, who
hold by Fines uncertain, and their complaints crammed in a great purse made of
many little ones, attended with staves and ill-smelling shoes and feet,
travailing for relief to Westminster Hall, and the superior Courts of Justice,
with store of outcries of grievances and oppressions, filling every Alehouse
they come in with the lamentable tediously told stories of that which they do
many times but guess to be like them, raise their Fines for admittances unto
two years present value, which amounts unto sixteen or twenty times as much as
the ancient value and demand, and take ten or thirteen shillings an Acre to
reduce the Fines uncertain to a smaller certainty.

Can take the Optimum Animal, LL. Gulielmi Conquestoris ^9*
or best horse or beast for a Herriot at the death of their Tenants when it
exceeds the value of as much as 40 or 50 or 100 to one, of what it was at the
Conquest, when it was reduced from a greater to that lesser rate and within a
month or less after take as much as they can get for an Admittance of the
Widow or Heir of the deceased (which in Copihold Estates differs very Little
from a Relief) and in some places, as in Cumberland, Westmerland, and some
adjacent Northern Counties compel them, besides their formerly perilous
enjoined services annexed to their Lands, to be ready night or day to repel
the incursions of their plundering and unruly Scottish Neighbors, to pay a
thirtieth penny after the rate or assise of their old rents upon every
Alienation, and a twentieth upon the death or change of a Landlord, which were
formerly more easy, and have been since only raised to those higher rates in
regard of a greater value since put upon lands, household provisions and
commodities, should not murmur at the small oblations which in no burdensome,
great, or general contributions are to be made unto the King for the
maintenance of himself and his Royal Family.

And the Copiholders who can when they please think themselves happy in their
customs of Fines certain, which patientia and charitate in jus transi^runt,
crept by the charity and sufferance of their Landlords into that which they do
now call Tenant rights, when as the lands which they do now hold is in the
improved yearly value ten or sixteen or twenty times, in many places more then
the former yearly value, and are by so much beyond the intention either of the
Lords or Tenants, the Grantors or Grantees when those Fines certain were at the
first set or accepted, and in those Tenant Rights, as they call them, and many
of their Customs, have in many places large Pastures and Meadows of many Acres
yearly thrown out at Midsummer, or the first day of August, or some other time
in the Summer, or latter end thereof, for a Township to inter Common for three
quarters of every year, or some months, and in some places have Common
belonging to their Copyholds, for paying to the Lord of the Manor yearly (as in
Grayes Case in Hill. 37 Eliz. a hen and five eggs, Cokes ^. part. 5. Reports.
much increased in price since that collateral recompense (as it was in that
case resolved to be) was first taken, continued, and preserved unto them by the
care of the King and his Laws, by Inquiries formerly in the Eyres or Circuits,
de novis consuetudinibus levatis, if any oppression, or new customs were
imposed by their Lords; and no sooner complained of any, but had their remedies
by a writ of ne injuste vexes, Glanvil lib. ^2. cap. 9. and Coke Magna Charta
ca. 10.
where their Lords did indebita servicia exigere, require customs and services
not due, or writs to command their Lords to keep their Courts when the
necessities of Justice and the Tenants required them, Fitz. He^bert: brief de
droir* patent. N.^.B* and Register of Writs.
seizing them if they did not do Justice, causing their Lands to be seized for
not holding of their Courts, or for wrongful proceedings, or requiring
unreasonable rents and services, taking unreasonable Amerciaments and the like,
and gives remedies by his Courts of Chancery, Common Pleas, King's Bench and
Exchequer, to any unreasonable exactions or hard-heartedness of their
Landlords, and those Acquittances and Freedoms which the King, and his most
illustrious Progenitors have given many of the people of England to be free, de
omni praestatione, of furnishing Corn, Lamb, and Wool, to the use of the
Forresters of Buckstall, or assisting them in the Chase when the King comes to
hunt; or of Tristris, to hold Greyhounds; or of Sumage, or carriages by Horse
or Carts; or Chiminage, for traveling through the Forests; C^ke 4 ^h. part
Institutes.
or of Bridgebote, to be quit of making of Bridges in the Forests, or their
bounds; and granting likewise that ancient privilege to the Nobility, Bishops,
and Barons, coming to Parliament, or returning from thence, to kill one or two
of his Deer, in any of his Forests, Chases, or Parks, should be as unwilling
to see his Royal Liberties, Legal Customs, and Privileges infringed, denied,
or taken from him, as their own.

But if neither gratitude for benefits and favors recieved in particular by
every Family, Kindred and Generation, in the Nation, one time with another,
from the King, or his Royal Progenitors, immediately or mediatly, nor contracts
nor customs can oblige or persuade to that small part of Subjects duty in the
Praeemption, or royal Pourveyance, or compositions for it, which Oliver, and
his Accomplices, the Contrivers of much of our late sins, shame, and misery,
taught them by a strange mistaking, to call a burden or grievance.

They should not deny them as retributions and oblations which they are to make
unto their King (if he, or his royal Ancestors, had not in every age and Kings
reign given them any honors, dignities, estates, lands, liberties, or
privileges) for his protection only, and care of them, and for their peace,
plenty, and good Laws, and the happiness imparted by them, (which is not to be
outweighed by any assistance which they can give unto their Prince, and
Defender of their faith, as well as their estates) or as tributes which Peter
Martyr, Pe^er Martyr, Commen^. in lib* 1. Reg,
a godly and learned foreign Protestant Divine, ca^^^d hither by K. Ed. 6. to
assist in the work of Reformation, says, are velu^i symbola subjectionis and
mercedis cujusdam eorum laborum, qui sua propria neglexerint, and ideo necesse
est ut de publico provideatur, as signs of subjection and retributions for
their cares of the people whilst they neglect their own affairs; and
therefore, it is fit, they should be provided for out of the public by
Tributes, which, besides the allowance which our Savior Christ the Son of God
the greatest of Legislators gave of them, were so necessary and usual, as fere
cum Regibus esse nata nullamque pene gentem fuisse unquam quae Regibus atque
Magistratibus suis de publico non solvent tributa unanimis est Historicorum ac
Politicorum consensus, Besoldus in discurs. politic. de Aerar^o ca. 1. and
Bullinger de Vec^igal. ca. 1.
they were as ancient almost as Kings, and brought into the world with them,
says Besoldus, and it is the unanimous opinion of all that know any thing of
history and policy, that there never was Nation in the world which did not pay
tributes to Kings and Magistrates.

And may deem his just and legal prerogatives and reasonable privileges and
customs in his rights of Pourveyance to be as deservedly belonging unto him
his Royal Crown and Dignity, as Swans not and marked, and Whales and
Sturgeons, Cas^ de Swanns Coke 7. ^elat. Stamford pleas of the Crown, and
Bracton lib. 3. de corona.
which Bracton tells us do propter privilegium and de jure gentium, by
privilege and the Law of Nations belong unto the Crown, and Porpoises,
Dolphins, and all other Fishes strange for bulk, rarity or quality, for that by
custom the Sovereign Prince (say the ancient Sea Laws of Oleron) ought to have
his share, demand, or pleasure therein, and with good reason; for the Subject
owes obedience and tribute to his Sovereign, Pat. 20 Ed. 3. m. 1.
who may as his Ancestors grant Kaiage and Plankage, and ought to h^ve as much
right and as great a privilege, not yet rest ained o^ taken away by his Royal
Progenitors assent to any Act of Parliament in his Praeemtion and royal
Pourveyance, as King Henry the third had in the fourth year of his reign, who
being to transport his Army into France, commanded by his Proclamation omnes
victualium mercatores, all Market folk in the Counties of Berk. Southt.
Somerset, Dorset, and Wiltshire quod veniant ad Portsmouth cum victualibus, and
quod nullum mercatum teneatur in Comitat. praedict. quamdiu, etc. to bring
victuals and provisions to Portsmouth, and that no Markets should in the mean
time, or as long as the Army there continued, be kept in the said Counties,
which would of necessity abate the prices.

Ex libr^ C^mput. Garderob^ 34 Ed. 1. ex part Rememb. Reg.
Or as King Ed. 1. did in anno 34 of his Reign, assign Robert Bacon the
Sheriff of Cambridge and Huntington Shires, ad blad^ emenda infra Ballivam
suam per visum and ordinationem Willielmi de sancto Georgio and Gulielmi de Say
milit. mitend. usque Berwicam super Twedam ad expensas hospitii, and exercitus
Regis in guerra Scotiae, to buy and provide corn within his Baliwick by the
view and assistance of Sir William St. George and Sir William de Say to be sent
and conveyed to Barwick upon Twede for the provisions of the Kings Household and
Army in the wars of Scotland, viz. 40 quarters de frument. and 425. quarters
Brasii, prec. quarter 4 s. and 425 quarters 3. avenae prec. quarter 2 s. 6 d.
40 quarter of corn and 425 quarter of Malt or Barley at 4 s. a quarter, and 425
quarter of Oats at 2 s. 6 d.

Pa^. 33 Ed. 3. pat. 3. m. 4.
Or as King Ed. 3. had by his Letters Patents in the three and thirtieth year of
his Reign to seize and take Falcons and Hawks to his use, and limit the price
of them, en le Cite de Londres, and les lieux environ cibien en ^au come en
terre cest a scavoir le falcon gentil pour 20 solz le Tersel gentil pour 10
solz. and le Laner pour demi mark destre payer par les mains des ses visc^nts;
in London and the parts adjacent, as well upon the water as the land, that is
to say, twenty shillings for the Falcon-gentil, ten shillings for the
Tersel-gentil, and a noble for a Laner, to be paid by the Sheriffs, which has
an affinity or near resemblance with Solomon's Merchants receiving the
linnen-yarn which came from Egypt at a price. 1 Reg. 10.28.


Or to grant a Toll without act of Parliament as well before as since the
Conquest for murage or repair of the walls of Towns, as Ipswich, Harwich, Pat.
11 E. 3. m 5.3 part. 22 E. 3 part. 1. m. 20. Pat. 24 E. 3. part. 2. m. 16.25 E.
3. part. 2. m. 9.28 E. 3. part. m. 4. Pat. 12 E. 3. part. m. 15. Pat. 12 E. 3.
part. 1. m. 2. Pat. 11 E. 3. part. 3. m. 5.
Newcastle upon Tine, Ludlow, etc. or Cities, as London, Norwich, York,
Bristol, etc. which must of necessity raise the rates of commodities brought
thither to be sold; and by the same power or authority remit or release them;
and being granted to many Cities or Towns but for three of seven years, or as
to London for five years, or some other short term since expired, is, as may be
feared, under a color of custom or praescription as yet continued.

Or being Sovereign of the British seas, to take weekly for all Herring taken
therein, six pence for every Ton, and the like for other fish every three weeks
either of his own Subjects or foreign Nations; Rot. Parl. 2 R. 2. and Seldens
Ma^e clausum.]
or for his Admiral under him to take the tenth of all the Prizes, or Ships of
his Enemies taken at the Sea, and money for Anchorage, paid by every Ship for
their quiet riding in the river of Thames, or any of the Kings Harbors.

And with as good reason as the Burrow Mealis in Scotland, where quilibet
Burgensis debet domino Regi pro Burgagio quinque denarios annuatim and dicuntur
incorporari, ^. Parliamen^ James 1. ca. 8. Spelman in verb. ^o^row mealis.
annexique Fisco and patrimonio Regis, every Burgess was to pay five pence per
annum for his mealis (which Sir Henry Spelman interprets to be a Farm
appropriated to buy provisions in regiae mensae apparatum, for the Kings Table
or Household) and are said to be incorporate and annexed to the Patrimony of the
King and his Exchequer.

Borrow Laws ca. 39.
Or as the Provost of Edinburgh or other borough Towns in Scotland may take and
receive four pence upon every quarter of Malt of ilk Brewster quhe brewes aill
all the zeir four pennies, and for ^ne half zeir tw^ pennies.

As the Apprisers of flesh are appointed to apprise it at the Kings price ilk
days of the Markets, and to admit the eath of the ^^s^er in that matter.

Statutes of David the second, An^o 13^7.
And as by the Statutes of King David the second, it was ordained that for
relief of the inward parts of the Realm, quhair woll hes course and quhilks ar
burdened with customs, and that the remanent parts of the Realm may be made
equal with them in all services and burdings. It is Statute that certain
sommes and quantities of victual quhareof there is abundance in these utward
parts (sick as Marts beir and sicklike sall be taken up zeirly at the
Chamberlains command to the expenses of the Kings house according to the prices
quihilk in auld times used to be taken up in these places.

5. Parliament Mary 1551.
Queen Mary, the Lord Governor, and Lords of secret Counsel havand respect to
the great and exorbitant dearth risen upon the will and t^me Fowls, ordained
the prices thereof, as 5 s. (Scottish) the Swan* the black Cock and gray hen,
six pennies (twenty of their pennies being but two pence) the Woodcock four
pennies, and the dous^n of Laverocks and uthers small birds four pennies, etc.

And by as good reason as King James the sixth his Majesty's Grandfather
confirmed the Acts of Parliament made by his noble Progenitors for the
stanching of dearth of Victuals, 7. Parliament King James 6. An. 1581.
and setting order and price on all Stuff, and ordained all Earls, Lords,
Barons, as well within regality as royalty, and their Bailles to landwart, and
the Provestes and Bailles of all B^rrows and Cities to cause the said Acts to
be put to due execution, every ane within their bounds and Jurisdiction
respective makand and constitutand them Justices to that effect, with power to
make and appoint Statutes and Ordinances for the special observation of the
saidis Acts at every head Court zierly.

Assigned money and victuals of several Shires and places in Scotland, 9.
Parliament James 6. 1585.
to the keeping of the Castles of Edinburgh, Dunbartane, Strivilinge, and
Blacknes.

Declared the tenths of all Herrings taken in the Scottish Seas to be due unto
him as King of Scotland and all infestments and Alienations in few ferme or
utherwaies, and all dispositions quhatsumever in all time bygane, and to cum,
15. Parliament James the sixth.
of the Assise Herring to be nil and of no avail, because the said Assise
Herring pertanis to the King as ane part of his Customs and annexed property.

And by as much (or a greater) warrant or assent of reason, as King Henry the
5. of England did in a Patent or Grant of the Lord Lieutenancy of Ireland to
James de Boteler Earl of Ormond, authorize him ad victualia sufficientia and
necessaria pro expensis hospi^ii sui ac Soldariorum suorum in quocunque loco
infra terram predictam per Provisores hospitii sui and alios ministrossuos
unacum Cariagio su^ficienti, Pat. ^. H. 5. m. 9.
pro eisdem tam in^ra libertates quam extra feodo Ecclesie duntaxat excepto pro
denariis suis rationabiliter solvend capere and providere juxta formam
diversorum Statutorum de hujusmodi provisionibus ante haec tempora factorum, to
take victuals sufficient and necessary for the expenses of his Household and his
Soldiers by his Pourveyors and other Ministers in any place whatsoever in
Ireland, with carriages sufficient for the same, as well within liberties as
without, the Fees of the Church only excepted, at reasonable prises, according
to diverse Statutes made concerning provisions.

And was so well grounded upon Law and reason, as all the succeeding Lord
Lieutenants or Deputies of Ireland have ever since not wanted those necessary
privileges to attend their high and honorable trusts and employments, and
could so little be parted with, in the 19. year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, Cam^en. 2 part. Annals of Q Elizabeth de Anno 1576.
when Sir Henry Sidney was Deputy of Ireland, as the Earl of Desmond, the
Viscount Baltinglas, and other unquiet spirits refusing to pay the provision or
Cease, as they there called it for the Lord Deputies house, and the Soldiers
in Garrison, which the learned Camden says was exactio rei Annonariae certo
pretio, provisions to be furnished at a certain rate or price ad alendum
proregis familiam militesque praesidiarios, for the Lord Lieutenants or
Deputies Families, and the Soldiers in Garrison, quasi non exigenda nisi ex
authoritate Parliamentaria, as not due unless it were ordained by authority of
Parliament: and sending over their complaints into England, the Lords of the
Privy Council upon the hearing and bate thereof committed them, and those which
remained in Ireland, and had sent them, were in like manner imprisoned until
they should submit to the payment and furnishing thereof; for that it appeared
by the Records of that Kingdom to be antiquitus institutum an ancient
constitution, and jus quoddam Majestatis, a part of the right appertaining to
the sovereign Power, Praeeminence or Kingly Praerogative, quae legibus non
subjicitur, nec tamen legibus adversatur ut Jurisprudentes judicarunt, which
being not against the Laws was not to be subjected to them, says that worthy
Historian, the Queen then only ordering the Lord Deputy to use as much
moderation as he could in taking those Provisions or Pourveyances.

And as necessary as that most prudently governing Queen (who as King James her
Successor says, Rex Jacobus in his ^asilicon Doron, or instructions to his Son
Prince Henry.
prudentia and faelicitate imperandi omnes ab Augusto principes superavit, in
the wisdom and happiness of her government out went and exceeded all the
Princes of the world since Augustus Caesar, understood it to be when by a
warrant under the hand of the Earl of Leicester, Master of her horse, bearing
date the 3. of July 1574. she commanded the furnishing of four able Cart Horses
or Geldings, with all manner of furniture for draughts to serve her during the
Progress. Or as he by a just authority derived from her by his letter bearing
date the 29. day of June before, autho^ized the Knight Marshall to apprehend
and punish all such, as George Middleton one of the Surveyors of the Stable
should inform not to have done their duties in furnishing provisions for the
Stable, and by his warrant bearing date the 20. of October 1574. which was in
the seventeenth year of her reign directed to the high Constable of Elthorne in
the County of Middlesex commanded the Inhabitants to furnish the arrears of
composition Oats for the years 13, 14, 15, and 16. then last past, as also the
composition Oats for that present year: And the like to the Constables of the
hundred of Isleworth in the said County, and by a warrant under his hand in the
year 1576. in the 19. year of her reign, ordered the taking up of 16 Ambling
Mares for the service of her Majesty at reasonable prises in such places as
they should think meet.

Stowes Survey of London.
And by as much right and reason as the Mayor and Magistrates of London did in
the seventh year of the reign of King Edward the second set prises on victuals,
and ordered no more to be taken for a fat Ox then 24 s. a fat Goose two pence
half penny, a fat Mutton twenty pence, a fat Capon two pence, a fat Hen a
penny, two Chickens a penny, three Pigions a penny, and 42 Eggs a penny, and as
the present Lord Mayor does or should daily and weekly by his Officers rate and
set prices upon all Fish, M. S. of the ancient order and government of the City
of London.
Cheese, Salt, Onions, Garlic, Oats, Pease, Victuals and Fuel brought unto
London by water, and upon all manner of Grain and Victuals brought by land, and
to commit to prison such as disobey, which does or might make his own
provisions to be much the cheaper. Pat. 8* Ed. 2. p^rt 2. m. 7. and 21.


Or as the Mayor of London did in the 8. year of the reign of King Ed. 2. take
for the strengthening of Newgate and the Gaol therein, and the repair of
certain Chambers there by the Kings grant or License ^ertam consuetudinem de
rebus vaenalibus, Pat. 10 Ed. 2. part. 2. m. 11.
a certain Toll or Custom of things to be sold, or the like shortly after in
auxilium, or aid to build a new Bulwark upon the wall of the City near the
house of the Friars predicants.

Or as there was a Fee Farm rent of 80 l. per annum to the King and his
Successors auntiently and long ago reserved, payable by the Town of Droitwich
in Worcestershire for their Salt Pits, wherein their Burgers do claim by
proportions an estate of inheritance.

Or as in the Colleries of Newcastle upon Tine, wherein the Owners of the Soil
have an inheritance and propriety, the King and his Progenitors have a legal
allowance or imposition of twelve pence upon every Chaldron of Coals.

And with better reason may set a rate or price year by year upon his household
provisions then Solomon did, who though he in the Trade managed for himself in
sending his ships to Ophir to fetch gold and silver, 1 Reg. c^. 10*
made it to be (in the large expression or manner of speech) as plentiful as
stones in the streets, yet he did not give to all or any of the Tribes of
Israel their Lands or Possessions, who had them at their first coming into the
Land of Canaan by Joshua and divine appointment allotted unto them, and not
given unto them by any of their Kings.

Or if he gave them any (which does not appear) did not do it so largely as our
William the Conqueror did in the rewarding of those that assisted him, if what
he so gave amounted but unto as much as would in those days make a competent
living or maintenance, Spelman ^loss in voc^ (...)
for 10000 Knights and their Heirs (which some that lived in or near his time
believe to have been more then for 60000 l. and valued but at 20 l. per annum,
as they were reckoned in 1 Ed. 2. would amount unto 200000. pounds per annum;
and if but at three hundred pounds per annum, which is now the least,
improvement would amount unto as much as three millions per annum sterling,
besides large quantities of Socage lands, with twice or thrice as much more in
the several reigns of our succeeding Kings, given to the people in lands and
yearly revenues of inheritance.

Nehemiah 5. v. 10.
Or then Nehemiah who having the provisions allotted to the Governor, and in
compassion of the poverty of the people for that part of time remitting it;
could tell them that he might exact it of them, but did not give them any Lands
or Possessions, and being but as a Conductor or Governor of them, had not, if
he would, wherewithal to do it.

So as all degrees, ranks and orders of the people of England may, if the
difference or value betwixt the former and present market rates and prices,
should be the Jonas that troubles their ship and affairs, permit it to take its
rest, and be as well contented with that in the Kings case as they are in many
of their own, when as many of them can retain and keep without any murmur or
grudging above 30 thousand pounds per annum* lands of inheritance, or as some
have computed it above eighty thousand pounds per annum (being almost all the
certain and real revenues which are remaining to the Crown) holden of his
Majesty and his royal Progenitors in Fee Farm at the small rents, which were
at the first, and long ago reserved thereupon, when as at the times when they
were first reserved, they were in the intention of the Donors, or the
allegations likewise, or intentions of the Donees proportioned according to the
then yearly value of the Lands, which are now improved in many or much of them
to a twentieth, thirtieth, fortieth, fiftieth or sixtieth part more then they
were, and if they were not (as they are) at all, or so very much improved, are
no more then one in three to the price or value which silver now bears by the
Ounce, more then formerly, and five pound of that rent when it was first
reserved would according to the rate of 2 d. a Capon in King Edward the seconds
time, Stowes Survey of London 925. in quarto.
many of the Fee Farm rents having been more anciently reserved) have bought
60* Capons at the then Market price, and now at two shillings six pence a Capon
(which is less by six pence or twelve pence in a Capon then the King now paieth
for them) will buy but forty, or if as they were in the beginning of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, at six pence a piece in the Market, would buy 200 Capons,
and at two shillings six pence but forty, and the five pounds Fee Farm ^ent in
King Edward the second's time, when a fat sheep was sold for twenty pence would
buy thirty, but now at twenty shillings a fat Sheep no greater a number then
five: And the Kings losses and the Tenants gains thereby will many times
multiplied yearly exceed the yearly sum which they pretend is lost in the
Compositions for his Majesty's Pourveyance.

And all the people of England who do pay Tithes in Corn, Cattle, etc. in
kind, when Corn at the rate which Wheat was sold at in 51 Hen. 3. (when the
Assize of Bread and Ale was set or confirmed) but at 12 d. a quarter is at 32
s. a quarter, which was the price in 3 Caroli primi, now 34 years since, when
by a Statute made in that year, it might when it should happen to be so cheap
be transported into the parts beyond the seas, not the thirtieth part of that
then esteemed to be an easy, and reasonable price, or at two shillings six
pence the quarter, supposed in 51 H. 3. to have been a rate which in a dearer
time it might have risen unto, would be but the thirteenth part of two and
thirty shillings, or at twelve shillings the quarter, which was in those
ancient times deemed to be the highest rate that any dearth or scarcity could
bring it unto, is but little more then one part in three of that medium or
moderate rate in 3 Caroli of 32 s. the quarter, and far short of the rate of
40 or 48 shillings a quarter, when it is now reckoned to be cheap and
reasonable, or of 4 l. a quarter, as it is in this present year much dearer,
are not to deny the payment of the improvement of their Tithes by their own
industry, or what they exceed the first intentions or grant of them.

And that part of the people which do pay their Tithes to Impropriators and
Lay men, cannot be ignorant that the first intention and right use of them is
so laid by and disused, as the hospitality, relief of the poor, repair and
adorning of Churches, which were some of the causes for which they are paid,
and which the Abbeys and Monasteries when they were in being took a greater
care of then those that lay it out in the excess, pride, vanities and humors
of themselves or their lavish and expencefull wives, and convert all their
hospitality and care of the Poor and Churches into gilded Coaches and
Butterflye Lacquies, which being most of the household which can be afforded to
be kept, are carried up and down the streets of London, that grand Magazine and
Nurserie of all vices, at the end or breech of the Coaches, whilst the Church
is but meanly repaired and ill-favouredly kept at the charge of the Parishes,
the Poor not pitifully but beggarly and in a woeful manner provided for by a
rate or tax of the Parishes, the Vicar not allowed the fifth if it be a small
Appropriation, or in many places where they are greater little more then a
tenth* and at the best not enough to keep him and his wife and children from
being the prognostics of a fam^ne, and comes short at the years end of Mica's
Salary, of ten shekels of silver, Jud. ca. 18.
a suit of apparel and his victuals, which renders him a scorn to the wicked,
and a pity to those that love God and goodness, who are not certainly mistaken
when they think a better allowance would yield them better Preachers.

May be as little displeased with the failing or falling of the Kings price or
rate for his household provisions, as they were in being quitted of Cerage or
Waxscot, thrice a year paid toward the charge of candles in the Churches. Or
as the Landlords or Lords of Manors, who do now receive their Rent-services or
Quit-rents at a far lesser value then they were originally intended, or now
are, or the Tenants and those that pay them, who are by so much more the
gainers.

And the Town of Alesbury in the County of Buckingham may the better bear her
part of the Composition for the Royal Pourveyance, for that the Town it self
and their then liberties and privileges were freely granted by some of the
Kings Royal Progenitors to hold in Capite by the service of keeping all the
distresses of Cattle, etc. (which in those days were many) which the King or
his Sheriff, or other Ministers in the County of Buckingham should cause to be
taken for his debts, and feed them in the common Pasture of Alesbury: And to
take for every Colt, Ox, Horse, and Cow not milcht a penny, for every four
Sheep a penny, Inquis. 10 E. 2. n. 142.
for every four hogs a penny; and for every day and night whilst they stay
there pro singulis districtionibus for every distress a penny: And the Sheriff
was to bring his distresses taken for the King no where else, which the Town by
a disuse being altogether freed from do not at all murmur at that which was
given them for no other intent or purpose.

Esc^et 23 E. 3. post mortem Roberti de Byker.
Also the owners of the Manor of Byker in the County of Northumberland which is
holden of the King by the Serjeanty to receive and keep safe at Bykere all
distresses taken within that County for the Kings debts; not being now troubled
at all with the distresses taken for the Kings debts, need not repine at the
Pourveyance or Compositions for it.

For they and all other are to consider that if the Kings Royal Progenitors had
not, as King Henry the first, condescended to accept of the rents, or such part
as was usually paid in provisions for his housekeeping, the lands which they or
those which claim under them have ever since held, and are so greatly improved,
as five or more to one in some places, and twenty or more in another allowing
them a variation according to the nature or fertility of the ground, or
distance nearer or further from London or other Towns of trade or intercourse;
or the Sea Ports might well have born the charge of the Kings provisions,
though they do now so much exceed their Market rates.

And that as that King and his Successors have exchanged it for money, which
makes them to be the greater loosers, and the Tenants the greater gainers, by
so much as the money* reserved for rent falls under the now value of money and
the Market price; for things to be bought with it, would amount to a great deal
more then the pretended losses by the Kings Pourveyance or compositions for it.

That the Law, Justice and Equity which binds the King to that prejudicial (as
it has since happened) condiscention of his Royal Ancestor King Henry the
first, in taking money for his provisions, ought a fortiori, to bind his
Subjects to those beneficial contracts made by their Forefathers and
Predecessors with Queen Elizabeth, if they stood upon equal terms with him,
and owed him neither gratitude, allegiance, or subjection.

That he who is so great a looser by the change and alteration of times, and
his own and his Royal Progenitors bounties and indulgences, might howsoever be
allowed to be a little gainer in that one particular of the Compositions for
his Pourveyances (for in every thing else he is abundantly a very great looser)
and ought as well to take an advantage by it as the Clergy, and Impropriators
of England do by the rise and increase of their Tithes and imp^ovement of
their Glebes, and are sure to be gainers by the difference in the value and
price of commodities, when as they sell their corn at the highest rates, and
make the improvement of their Glebes to follow the rise of money and the
Markets.

And may take it to be no Paradox or stranger to any man's understanding or
belief, that the King who by his Laws has ordered, that reasonable prises and
rates should be taken for victuals and household provisions for himself and all
his people; and if his Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Clerks of the Markets, and
the Lords and Stewards of Court-leets had but imitated the care of their
Predecessors in the execution of the trusts committed unto them by their
Sovereign and his Laws; or of the Sheriffs in the reign of King Henry the
third, when as the King by his Writ being petitioned to give the Sheriff of
Bedford a power to dispense with the Vintners in the Town of Bedford for
selling wine above the rates and assize, does it in these words, Rex, etc. Vic.
Bed. salutem, Quia Villa de Bedeford distat a quolibet portu maris duas dietas,
tibi praecipimus quod permittas Vinitar. Claus. 10 H. 3. m. 13. in dorso.
Bed. Sextarium vini Franc. vendere pro 8. denar. and sextarium vini Andeg.
Wascon. and de Blanc. pro 10 d. non obstante, etc. Test R. etc. allowing them
to take for a pint and a half, if the Sextarie was then accounted to be no
greater a measure of wine 7 d. and for the like measure of white wine of Anjou
and Gascoine 10 d.

And had not, as they do daily, too much neglected the execution of the Laws,
and laid by their duties to God, their King, and Country, and by being over
wakefull and diligent to improve their estates and private interests, taken a
Nap or fit of sleeping in point of time, far beyond that of the seven
notorious Sleepers, might at this day have been out of the reach of the
causeless murmur of those who, as they were seduced and fooled by Oliver and
his Associates, in the greatest of iniquities, can make a Non causa to be a
cause of their Complaints and of a grievance to themselves, when as they and
many of their fellow Subjects are and have been the only and immediate causes
of it, and if rightly considered, is a real grievance to the King, and to all
that buy more then they sell.

And that if the King and his Laws had been as they ought to have been better
obeyed and observed in such a Land or Kingdom as England is, which is justly
accounted to be blessed with so much peace and plenty, and such an overplus of
all things good and pleasant as well as necessary for the sustenance of the
People or Inhabitants thereof, as a deer year is not heard of above once at the
most in ten or twenty years, but many very cheap ones.

The rates or prices agreed upon by the Counties in the fourth year of the
reign of Queen Elizabeth would have been enough and sufficient, or more then
enough, if the Acts of Parliament of 25 H. 8. ca. 2. to suppress the enhaunce
of the then Market rates, which may well be supposed to have been much cheaper
then what it was in Anno 4 of Elizabeth, and the Statutes of incerti temporis.
or King Henry the third, 3 and 4 Ed. 6. ca. 19. and 5 Ed. 6. ca. 14. against
Forestallers had been duly put in execution.

And that the 12. Counties bordering upon London and adjacent, as Middlesex,
Essex, Kent, Surrey, Sussex, Hertford, Buckingham, Berkshire, Bedford, Oxford,
Cambridge and H^ntington Shires, making no small gains by the vent and rise of
their provisions and commodities, and an high improvement of their Lands beyond
all other Counties and Parts of England, would if the Markets had been
regulated and kept down to such just and reasonable prices as might have been
well enough afforded, have for want of their now great rates for victuals and
commodities night and day sent unto London, that greatest belly and mouth of
the Kingdom, and their racking or improving of their Lands, been constrained
to let fall and diminish their rates and prices, and follow the regulating of
the Markets, and make their prices and rates to be conformable to the Laws and
plenty of the Kingdom, which would have brought unto them and their Estates a
greater or more then supposed damage, many times, and very far exceeding the
pretended losses of serving in their proportions of the Kings provisions, as
they were agreed upon.

And if this shall not be believed without experiments or demonstrations, they
may be quickly brought to assent unto that which will certainly p^ove to be a
truth, that if the King should, as King Henry the second, keep his Court and
Parliament for a time at ^larendon in Wiltshire, or, as King Edward the first
did, keep his Court and Parliament in Denbigh-shire at Ruthland (too often
mistaken and called Rutland) or at Carnarvon in Wales, or at York, where
whilst he was busy and employed in his Wars against the Scots, he kept his
Terms and Court for seven years together, or as many of the former Kings did
keep their Christmas and other great yearly Festivals sometimes at Nottingham,
other times at Worcester Lincoln, and other places far remote from London. And
as the Sun yearly diffuseth his li^ht and heat in his journey through the
Tropicks, some at one time, and some at another unto all parts of the world; or
as the blood in the body natural daily circulates, visits and comforts all the
parts of it, should enrich and comfort most of the parts of his Kingdom with
the presence and influence of his Courts and residence.

Those rates and prises in the Composition for Pourveyances would rather prove
to be too high a rate and allowance then too little.

As it happened to be in Anno 1640. when the late King and Martyr was enforced
to be with his Court and Army about Newcastle upon Tine on the borders and
confines of Scotland where the cheapness of victuals and other provisions at
the Market rates in those parts fell to be very much under the Kings rates or
allowance according to the Compositions for his Pourveyance made in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, which the Inhabitants and People thereabouts understood so
well, as a great store, and far more p^ovisions being daily brought in at
those rates then the King and his then more then ordinary numerous retinue
could expend, he was (which many that were then present can testify) enforced
by a Proclamation to forbid the bringing in of great quantities, or more then
was necessary.

And if the rates which Queen Elizabeth accepted her provisions to be served in
by the Counties had been agreed to have been paid in money and not in kind, and
had by the fall of the Markets, which the Laws well executed would in a
Kingdom of peace and plenty have easily brought to pass, been too high a rate,
and more then the provisions served in kind would have amounted unto, those who
made that agreement for themselves and the Counties and places which they
represented could not have receded from it, no more then she or her Successors,
if the provisions served in kind should have grown cheaper, or might have been
had for less money, or been bought by her Officers at easier rates then the
Compositions, could without the help of a Proviso, with honor or Justice have
desired that her provisions might not have been served in kind by the several
Counties of England and Wales, but that the money or rate then agreed upon to
have been the price of those provisions should have been yearly paid into the
Exchequer to be disposed of for that purpose, which probably might have been
the reason that at the first agreement made by several Counties for the
Compositions, some for 3 years, some for four, and some for seven, there was a
proviso that either party disliking (which until our mad times or quarrelling
with the fifth Commandment, and finding fault with every thing that fed not
the rebellious humor, was not at all done by the Counties) should be at
liberty, and free from that agreement.

For there can be no reason (unless ingratitude and unreasonableness, neglect
of Laws and Duties, breach of Faith and Contracts, and reasonable Customs unto
the King and Sovereign shall be installed virtues, and put in the seat of
reason, and understood to be no otherwise) that when all the Lands of the
twelve adjacent and neighbor Counties of London have been so exceedingly, and
to such a height improved, and the Lands of all the other Counties of England
and the Dominion of Wales have by neighborhood and communication largely
likewise, and more then formerly, improved and raised their rents and estates
by the rise and greater prices given for Corn, Cattle, Victuals, and all other
Household Provisions more then they were heretofore, the Landlords made to be so
very great gainers, and the Tenants if they be no great gainers, sure enough to
be made savers by heightening the prices of Corn, Cattle, and all other
victuals and household provisions, the King only should bear the burden, and not
partake of some of the fruits (if there were nothing else to require or deserve
it) of their great advance and increase in all their Estates and Revenues.

And that he by whose power, alliance, and interest with foreign Princes the
People of England do enjoy the trade as well inward from for^aign parts as
outward into them, the many privileges and immunities procured for our
Merchants by his famous Progenitors and Predecessors, as that of Burgundy and
the Neatherlands, France, Spain, Portugal, Ligorne, the Russian or Muscovy
Trade, the Hanse or Hamborough, Turkish and East-Indie Trades; for all which
but Burgundy and the East-land Trades our Merchants are beholding to Queen
Elizabeth and King James, the Rex Pacificus, with the Trades now beginning to
flourish in and with our English Colonies in Virginia, Bermudas, Barbados, St.
Christophers, Mevi^, New England and Sianam, etc. which do serve to augment
our plenties and delicacies in England, and his protection of them and all
their Trades with foreign Princes by his Leagues, Confederacies and
Ambassadors and allowing them the freedom of the Seas and Ports and that
beneficial Trade for the London Woodmongers or Colliers to Newcastle upon Tine
for coals, where their Chaldrons by which they buy, are more then double to
what they sell and measure by at London* and the owners of the Colleries to
gain their custom, do not only sell at cheap and easy rates, but give and
allow them for nothing, seven and sometimes eight or nine Chaldron of their
great and double chaldrons or measures in every twenty or score of chaldrons;
and notwithstanding their easy and small rates can by engrossing and keeping
them upon the River of Thames unsold, and a combination and confederacy among
themselves sell their coals at 24 or 30 s. a single or London chaldron, and
think that also not to be gain or profit enough unless they can upon any Frost
or increase of winter weather, or the news (sometimes but feigned or pretended)
that a Ship or two of coals were cast away by storms, raise their coals 2, 3,
5, 10, or 20 shillings more in a chaldron when they please, to the damage of
the Rich, and great oppression of the Poor, who buy their coals by the peck,
and must pay a greater rate for them then their labors and small earnings
every day from 4. in the morning until 12. at night will amount unto; and did
in the times of Rebellion, and pretense of Gods glory to be advanced by it,
continue their mystery of trade and oppression to such a height and impudence,
as when it was proved at a Sessions at the Old Bailey in London, that they might
sell cheaper, and the Lord Mayor and Justices had put a rate upon coals, and
ordered that they should sell accordingly, neither the fear of Laws or
Magistrates was able to persuade them to an obedience, or diswade or deter
them from their Liberty of sinning, should be denied such a legal, ancient and
reasonable duty.

And may believe that the granting and permitting of Marts, Fairs and Markets
at home, and the improvement of his Subjects Estates and Revenues, a five times
mo^e in some places and ten in others, within the space of 200 years last past;
and 20 times more then what they were before that period by their peace and
liberties, may very well deserve so small an acknowledgement and return, and so
petit a privilege as the having of a Praemption and his Provisions served in
for his household at reasonable prices, which is no more then what the Law it
self enjoyneth to be done unto all the People and Subjects of England from the
highest to the lowest, and to the poorest as well as unto the abundantly or
indifferently rich.

And that when in our Magna Charta, or great Charter of our Liberties, the
Praeemption and Pourveyance was not denied upon present payment for all under
40 shillings, and for the rest within forty days after, and the Cart-taking
upon the payment of ten pence a day for a Cart with two horses, and fourteen
pence a day for three secundum antiqua pretia, after the old rates for which
now are allowed better rates, and being afterward confirmed by King Henry the
third in a solemn procession of the King, Archbishops, Earls, Barons, and the
most eminent men of the Kingdom with candles or torches burning in their hands
in Westminster Hall, Mat. Paris 86^.
denouncing excommunication, direful curses and Anathema's against the
Infringers thereof by the candles or torches flung upon the ground, and wishing
that so their souls might burn in hell. And the same Magna Charta being by
thirty Parliaments since confirmed and accounted to be part of the peoples
Birthright.

It can be no less then the greatest of reason, that those his Liberties and
Privileges mentioned and agreed therein should be as well preserved unto him
as those of the people unto them, and with the greater reason in that his were
always his own, and many of theirs but newly granted them.

And that he was not in the confirming of Magna Charta, without some care of
preserving his own rights and privileges, as appears by his Writ or
Proclation (better in former times then now obeyed) sent unto the Sheriff of
York in these words, Cum probis hominibus nostris libertates concesserimus per
Cartas nostras in quibus continetur (that which we have of that excellent Law
and Charter, being by many learned men believed to be but a Transcript) quod
nihilomninus salve sint omnibus libertates, and liberae consuetudines quas
prius habuerunt libertates nostras de quibus maxim specialis mentio in Cartis
praedictis facta non est nobis volumus inviolabiliter observari unde tibi
districte praecipimus quatenus omnes libertates nostras usitatas tempore domini
Johannis Regis patris nostri quas quidem nobis non subtrahimus ex speciali
mentione facta in praedictis Cartis nobis facias firmiter observari nullius
obstante reclamatione sicut usitatae fuerunt temporibus antecessorum nostrorum,
Claus. 9 H. 3. m. 9.
and maxim tempore predicti patris nostri, wherein he having granted that
their Liberties which they had before should not be prejudiced, commanded him
that all his Liberties and Privileges which were not specially mentioned and
granted away in those Charters should be specially observed, notwithstanding
any allegation to the contrary, as they were used and accustomed in the times
of his Ancestors, and especially in the Reign of his Father King John.

For the reason which gives Aaron and his Sons, the Clergy, their Tithes and
Pourveyance, should persuade the people to think the Composition for
Pourveyance to be no burden, when as it is as short of the Tithes as one unto a
hundred.

And it should be reason, if any thing can be reason, and it be not fled after
Astraea into the upper Regions, and left some counterfeit and false resemblance
instead of it, that all, or many, or most of the males and men of England, and
such as in the Court Leets and elsewhere have taken the Oath of Allegiance
(which all the men of England and their generations are so born under, Calvin's
Case in C^kes 2 part 5. Reports, and Lord Chancellor Ellismeres post Nati, or
argument concerning them.
as by the Laws and Customs of England it is and ought to be as Connaturall
and Congaeniall unto them) and the Oath of Supremacy, to maintain and defend
the Kings Rights and Jurisdictions; and all the Citizens and Freemen of London,
and other Cities and Corporations of England taking an Oath to the like
purpose, all the Freeholders of the Kingdom holding of him immediately
swearing in their homage and fealty to do him service and be faithful unto
him; all the Copiholders holding of him, swearing unto him their Fealty, and
all the Freeholders and such as hold of their mesne Lords by Knights service or
Socage in their homage and fealty unto them, excepting their allegiance and
duty to the King, should have as great a care not to deny him those parts of
his Jurisdictions, Praeeminences and just rights, as they would not to perjure
and forswear themselves, or bring the curses and woes attending such grievous
sins, or the breach of that part of Magna Charta upon the heads of them and
their posterities, which a Kings assent to any Acts of Parliament for the
taking away or extinguishing such individua and annexa Coronae jure diadematis
potestatis atque authoritatis, Gregor Tholosan. Syntag. Juris universi
inseparable parts of Majesty and the Rights of his Crown, Regal power and
Prerogative: If any Law or Sanction could enable him to that which all Laws
both Civil and Common do deny, will not be sufficient to acquit or discharge;
for although the dispensation of Oaths by those to whom, and for whose benefit
they were made, be in some cases allowed by the Canon Law, and some Roman
Casuists do believe that violation of oaths have been well dispensed withal
by those for whose interest and benefit they were made, it will not be hard to
determine in the greatest veneration of Parliaments, which are to be obeyed
actively or passively, and of whose acts no man is so much as to think evil,
that Laws of that kind when they shall be by importunities and necessities made
or enacted against the Laws of God and right reason cannot give an absolution
for oaths violated, (...) Comment. 398.6.
nor if they could be excused, for the not payment of those most necessary
duties to their King and common Parent in foro humano, in this world, will ever
be excused in foro animae, in the next.

And if the Parliament in Anno 18 Eliz. took it to be for the good of the
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, that the Colleges, Halls and Houses for
Students therein should receive the third part of their Rents in Corn and Mal^,
and ordered them so to do* and that their Tenants who had then and have since
such comfortable Bargains and Leases under them as every man is glad to
purchase or get them, and inroll themselves for their Tenants, wherein if a
deer year comes once in 7* or 10 years, and their Bargains happen to be so much
the worser, as the prises which are to be ruled according as the like was sold
the Market day next before the Rent day exceeds the former or cheaper prices,
the yearly profit notwithstanding of their Lands being always more then the
Rent, and six or nine cheap years to one may pacify their complaints or
grudgings; the King certainly may expect as much or more care to be had of him
and his housekeeping as there was of the Universities, Colleges and Halls,
and not to be denied in his particular of Pourveyance or compositions for it
that which every man thinks reasonable in his own.

Nor to be made so great a sufferer under those heaps of mischiefs and
inconveniences which by the great and excessive rates and prises put upon
victuals and household provisions daily more and more increasing do assault
and lessen his too small a Revenue.

Neither should be rendered more helpless, and in a worser condition then the
Lords of Leets, Sheriffs in their Turns, Justices of Peace in their Counties,
Magistrates in Cities and Towns Corporate, Pat. 46 Ed. 3. part. 2. m. 17.
Judges in their Circuits, the University of Oxford, who has liberty to punish
the breakers of the Assise of Bread, Beer and Ale; and the University of
Cambridge, who may require the Mayor of the Town to make the Assise in the
presence of the Chancellor of that University, Pat 10 Ed. 3. part. 1. m. 36.
Pat. 4 R. 2. part. 2. m 34.
and if it be not well observed may himself punish the offenders by the
authorities and power only derived from the King.

Who may with better reason, justice and equity claim and keep his Rights of
Praeemption, Pourveyance and compositions for it then the Stret gavel was in 4.
Ed. 1. claimed by the Lord of the Manor of Cholmton in the County of Sussex,
Mich. 4 E. 1 co^am Rege.
that every Tenant of that Manor should (yearly) give two shillings (then a
good sum of money) pro itu and reditu for his going out of the Manor, or
returning into it; or as the Town of Maldon in Essex did in the fifteenth year
of the Reign of that King claim by ancient custom Totteray which was a payment
of four pence for every bushel and a half of corn sold there, 4 pence for
Stallage and a Mark penny, Hill 15 E 1.
viz. 1 d. per illos qui truncos extra domum in vicis ejusdem ville habuerunt,
for every one which had pipes or gutters laid or made out of their houses into
the streets, and de omnibus pascentibus mariscum de pecoribus, of all that had
cattle going or feeding in the Marsh, for every Horse two pence, Ox two pence,
Bullock a penny, and for every five Sheep two pence, quae praestatio vocatur,
which in the language of the Civil and Common Law was usually understood to be
Pourveyance or furnishing of necessary provisions.

Or as the Town of Yarmouth, which was made a Port or Haven by Letters Patents
of King Edward the first, did anciently, and do now take and receive of the
Herring-Fishers a certain Prize of Pourveyance of Fish and Herring toward the
maintenance and repair of their Haven,

Or as the Lord Roos of Hamlake, from whom the Earls of Rutland are descended
did claim and enjoy as belonging to Belvoir Castle, Escaet. 23. E. 3. post
mortem Gulielmi de Roos de Hamlake.
custumam ibidem vocat Palfrey silver, quae levari debet annuatim de villis, a
Custom called Palfrey silver, which ought to be levied every year of the Towns
of Botelesford, Normanton, Herdeby, Claxton, Muston, Howes, Barkeley, Queenby,
and aliis Hamlettis, and of other Hamlets.

Or as King Edward the third had to send his Writ or Com^^ssion to the
Magistrates of the Town of Barwick (...) Tweed, to inquire Si pisces marini and
Salmones in aqua de Tweed capt. usque villam praedictam duci and in vico vocat
Narrow Gate, Pat. 22 Ed. 3. part 1. m. 1. in dorso.
venditioni exponi and de custumis inde Regi solvend. if the Sea Fish and
Salmons taken in the River of Twede were brought to the Town of Barwick upon
Tweed, and put to sale in the street called Narrow-gate, and of the Customs to
be paid for them to the King.

More especially when the Judges in 11 Hen. 4. did resolve it to be Law as well
as reason, ^r^ayd del Roy 29.
that the Pourveyor or taker for the King might take victuals (or provisions)
at a reasonable price to the use of the King against the will of the party
^elling them.

Which unless the Laws of God, Nature and Nations, and the Laws of the Land,
reasonable Customs, Liberties Rights and Privileges should be all and every
thing in the peoples own cases and concernments, and nothing at all in the
Kings, and that the duty of Subjects* honor of the King, and support and
maintenance of him who supports and defends them and all that is theirs in
their just and legal Interests, should be but as the Astronomers lines and
terms of art in the firmament, as Zones, Tropicks, Meridian, Zodiac, and the
Ursa major and minor, etc. merely imaginary and undemonstrable, may with as
much or greater reason be understood to be no burden, as the late design (if it
should take effect) of the Petition of the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common
Council of the City of London lately presented unto the House of Common in
Parliament in order, as they allege to the honor, happiness and prosperity of
the Kingdom, Vide Petition of the Lord Mayor and Common Council of London to
the Commons in Parliament assembled in April, 1662.
that the Governor, Deputy and Assistants of their desired Company of the
^nglish Merchants trading into Italy, and the Domini^^ of the French King, and
the King of Portugal, and of all other Merchants thereafter to be taken into
that Association, may, besides other emoluments to be taken of the Merchants,
have power for the maintenance of the Government to take and receive upon all
goods to be exported and imported not exceeding one twentieth part of the
Customs, as they are on all goods, except Wines, and on wines not exceeding
one fourtieth part of the Customs as they now are.

Which twentieth part after no greater a reckoning then four hundred thousand
pounds per annum for the Customs (which if not too much defrauded, are more
likely to be eight hundred thousand pounds per annum) will be twenty thousand
pounds per annum, and if eight hundred thousand pounds per annum, will come
near unto as much as the pretended losses of the Counties in the Compositions
for the Pourveyances.

And the people of England would find the Pourveyance and Compositions for them
to be for their own good and profit, as well as there is a great and every
where to be acknowledged reason for it not denied to be reason in their own
cases, affairs and dealings one with another) by the want of greater benefits;
if the King should shut up all his Ports, and forbid all Trade with foreign
Merchants inward or outward, as some Kings and Princes have commonly and
ordinarily done, and as Commonwealths, and those that call themselves Estates
do as well as Kings and Princes in case of hostilities, and upon reason of
State, or some other extraordinary occasions.

Or put down (as God forbid he should) or seize as forfeited by misuser, which
many will be found to have deserved, all the Fairs and Markets in the Kingdom,
or some great part of them; or forbid for some time, as has been anciently
done, all the Markets in two or three Counties, and command the people to bring
their victuals and provisions to be sold where the Kings or the Public
necessities or occasions wanted them, or allow but one or two in a County at
the chiefest or greatest of Cities or Towns; or as King Henry the third did
strictly command the assise of bread, wine, c^a s. 20 H. 3. m. 24 in dorso.
beer and victuals to be kept in Oxford in debito statu secundum precium bladi,
and sicut in aliis Burgis and Villis, as it ought according to the price of
corn, and as was used to be in other Towns and Burrows, threatening them, that
if they neglected to do it, he would seize and take the Town into his own
hands; and at the same time setting a rate or price upon wines, gave the
Magistrates of that Town to understand, that whoever did otherwise, ad corpus
suum graviter se caperet, and omnia vina sua a Vice-comite suo Oxon. in manum
suam capi praeciperet, should be arrested and have all his wines seized, or
limit them to such rigorous observances, as the Saxon and some of the Norman
Kings did command and require to have witnesses and Vouchers for all that the
people should sell or buy. Or if upon that or some other causes or grounds
there were no Markets or Fairs to resort unto, or vent the plenty or overplus
of the peoples corn, cattle, fruits, fish, flesh, butter, cheese, poultrie, or
other provisions or commodities: and that by tarrying at their own houses they
could not be informed what rates they would yield, or what some over-lavishly
have given for the like or for less or worse then theirs, which is usually a
great cause of the enhaunce of prices in the endeavors of all people to get as
much for their commodities as they find others have gotten, or as much or more
as by any pretenses or frauds they can procure for them, there would be so much
and so great a cheapness and plenty of our native commodities as would draw
along with them, or cause a great abatement in the rates of setting* or letting
of land, and bring us again into some part of that hospitality, charity and
alms deeds, which our pious Progenitors made to be a great part of their cares
and business, and rescue us from those great sins of avarice, envy, Pride,
uncharitableness, cozening, cheating and oppression, under which the Land
groans, and for which Gods judgments like a sword hanging over our heads in a
small silk or hair, are ready to destroy us.

And we should quickly find by the want of Fairs and Markets that which our
daily experience now tells us to be true, that they are the Markets and Fairs
which do make and yield a greater price then can be had at home at the peoples
own houses; that the Markets and Fairs, which are a blessing and happiness to
the people, granted by our Kings and Princes, not now to be wanted, with a
Safety, and Protection in viis (Regiis) aquis Silvis and Semitis, in or through
his highways, or by land or water (very often denied by private men through
their own lands and Jurisdictions) which our forefathers not deserving to be
called fools by their les^ wise generations for obtaining for them so many good
Laws and Liberties, understood to be so much the Kings rights and favors, as
in the old Grants and Charters made by the King of any lands or liberties unto
them, they thought themselves never safe enough unless those words and
privileges were specially inserted. And it is obvious to all men's experience,
that by the intercourse and commerce of the people one with another in the
accommodation of one another wants, affection, interest present necessities or
occasions, the prices of all manner of commodities, victuals, and provisions
have been very much raised and heightened more then formerly; or when the buyers
were not so numerous, and that the vie and biddings which are usually found and
to be met with at Fairs and Markets, do much raise and enhaunce them far
above the real worth, or for what otherwise they might be had with a
reasonable gain and profit for the things themselves, or recompense for labor
of bringing them thither, as is often found in the way of Holland and some
other foreign parts; now used by our English and other Merchants of Londan, in
selling goods or merchandise by an inch or small piece of candle set up to burn
for a small time, with a condition that he that bids most before it be out
shall have it, in which contest or striving who shall have the commodity; the
hasty or over-biddings as the candle goes almost out makes the price to be
sometimes a fifth and sometimes a tenth more then it is truly worth; and if it
chance to be no loss or but a small one to him that winns the bargain, it is
because it may more conduce to some one particular occasion or affair which
that party has for it more then another.

That the Markets or Fairs in Cities or great Towns of trade where there are
more people, a larger expense and more delicate way of living brings the
sellers or Market people a meli^ur march, or better gain or return then they
would or could get by carrying it to some lesser Town or place not so much
frequented. And that the ground and soil near those Market Towns are much
bettered and imp^oved by the ordure, dirt and dung of Horses or Cattle in the
Streets or Stables carried out and laid upon it.

That the loss supposed by the duty or compositions for the Pourveyance would
not come up to the fortieth or fiftieth part of what they would be otherwise
loosers in the fall of their rents and prices.

And be at last assured to their losses that there can be no reason that all or
many of the people who can now take or receive advantage by their own
heightning and enhaunce of the prices of provisions at home or at the Markets,
and so greatly improve their estates by it against the min^ and intent of the
King and his Laws, should stretch and raise all they can their rates and prises
upon him, or should in his particular of his Praeemption, Pourveyance, or
Compositions for it, take advantage or benefit by their own wrongs or breach of
the Law, which by the rule or maxim of the Civil Law, that N^mo ex suo delicto
meliorem suam conditionem facere potest, no man is to make himself a gainer by
his own evil doings is not permitted, De cius de regul* Juris regul. 176*
and our Common Law is not willing to allow a man to take benefit de son tort
of his own wrongful actions.

Or if that shall not be enough to make the experiment let the most froward and
unwilling to that Duty and reasonableness of the Praeemption or Compositions
for Pourveyance, suppose that which was grown to be almost more then a
supposition* that Oliver the Cheat as well as Darling of the Factious and
Rebellious part of the people, and the Patrono of all or many of their wicked
doings, had as William the Conqueror all the Lands of England in his demeasn
power or disposing, and given to all the people more then eight parts in nine
(the Tithes or Tenths being reserved to God and the Clergy) with all their
Liberties, Courts-Leet and Baron, Franchises, Privileges of Free Warren,
Fishing, Trade and Commerce, Markets, Fairs and Tolls, with many other
Immunities and Freedoms which the bounty and indulgence of our more lawful
Kings and Princes have from age to age, and one generation to another, given
and granted to them and their heirs in perpetuity, special or general tail,
and think but how willing and glad they would have been before they were given,
or afterward (the late little benevolence being given to the King after the
greatest Act of Oblivion or Indemnity, which ever Englishmen or any other
people had bestowed upon them, teaching us the difference betwixt after and
before and between a willingness to receive benefits and promises of gratitude
and thankfulness after they are had and received) to have given him in
perpetuity as much or a great deal more than ever the P^aeemption, Pourveyance
or Composition for it would have amounted unto, and imprecated curses and woes
as many or more then the plagues of Egypt to have fallen upon them and their
after generations neglecting it; for it is ever to be understood that the
Subsidies, Assessements and other Ayds given to the Kings and Princes of
England by their Subjects and People in Parliament, or at any time taken or
otherwise received by them, have been more with respect unto their own
particular Estates, included in the safety of his greater, and his granting
them free and general pardons, not only for offenses criminal committed one
against another, but for offenses committed against the King, and encroachments
and intrusions upon the royal Revenves, and for his Royal protection and
defending of them, and preserving them in their peace and plenty, then as for
any retributions or acknowledgements of their favors showed to any or many in
particular.

There being as much reason for the King to expect and receive the presents or
acknowledgements of his people, 1 Reg. ca. 10. v. 15. and 25.
as it was for King Solomon to take his presents sine quibus, (says the great
and excellently learned Grotius) Reges Orientis adire non solebant, Grotius
Annotat. ad vet. Testament.
without which the people were accustomed not to come unto their Kings, and
continued long after to be a custom, as may be understood by the Kings or Wise
men coming out of the East to worship and adore our blessed Savior at his
birth, and is at this day not disused in the Africa and Asiatick Countries.

And did not, nor ought to dull or lessen the alacrity and payment of other
necessary duties and tributes, when as Solomon, besides the provisions of his
Household, brought and served in every year by a rate; and what he had of the
Governors of the Country (which if they were not provisions, or conducing
thereunto, might be some other Tributes) and did receive Gold and Tributes (or
Customs) of the Merchant men of the Traf^ick of the Spice Merchants. 1 Reg. ca.
10. v. 15. and* 25.


For if it has been reason every where, and amongst all Nations where either
subjection and duty to superiors, or humane prudence had any entertainment or
abode, to take as much care as may be of general and public safeties* when the
safeties of particulars are included and comprehended in them, and to be
willing in the common or public calamities of a War already fastened upon
them, or hope to prevent them, readily to contribute to their Princes, or
permit them to take provisions sometimes without any price at all, and at other
times but at reasonable prises, in order to their preservation, or repelling of
evils or inconveniences which would a great deal more molest or trouble them,
or to give him or his Army free quarter, as the men of Israel and Juda did unto
David their King, or bring or send victuals and provisions to his Camp or
marching Army, and can think it no ill husbandry though they have but the day
before paid contribution to the Enemy, had much of their Cattle and Provisions
taken away by the Enemy, a Husband, Brother, or Son killed, women and
children slain and butchered, and the bloody and dreadful Scenes or Pageants
of War every where to be seen, heard of, or lamented, or to do as the Danes
did lately to the unjustly invading Swedes, give money to keep their houses
from spoiling or burning.

It can be no less then reason to contribute something yearly to a King, who
not only keeps us from those and many other woes and miseries by land and by
Sea, but daily heaps and multiplies his blessings upon us in protecting and
defending us; and not only gave many of us our Vineyards, but procures us all
to sit quietly under the shadow, pleasure, content and fruitfulness of our ow^
vines; and by his care at home and abroad preserves us and our Estates in an
envied peace and plenty.

And be the more willing to allow him his Praeemption and Compositions for
Pourveyance, which amounts not unto the two hundredth or five hundredth part, and
sometimes not the one thousand part or more of the expense and losses which
war and the many times not to be avoided unruliness and spoil thereof may
bring upon them.

Unless like Ulisses Companions transformed into Swine by the accursed charms
of a Cir^e, or inticements of selfish or foolish interests for the maintenance
of our vices and luxuries, we should think it to be either Religion, Duty,
Conscience, Reason, or Prudence, to take all we can from a King, who is the
Guardian of all his people, and a nursing Father to the Church, which his Royal
Progenitors, Kings of England, were so long ago accustomed to rank amongst
their principal cares, as in the 23. year of the Reign of King Edward the
first it was alleged in a pleading, and allowed for law and right reason, that
Ecclesia est infra aetatem, and in custodia Regis qui tenetur jura and
haereditates ejusdem manu tenere and defendere, Mich. 23 Ed. 1. coram. ^eg^.
the Church is as an Infant under age, and in the custody of the King, who is
bound to defend and maintain its rights, estates and hereditaments, who governs
by no Arbitrary will or power, but by our known Laws, which are so excellent
beyond all the Laws of other Nations, so rational, so binding and transcendent,
so carefully watching over the peoples liberties and proprieties, such a
Buckler, Guard and strong Tower of defense unto them, and poenal to all that
shall but execute any unjust or illegal commands, tending to the violation of
them, (not to be denied by the most seditious, and undutifull Subjects, when
they shall but be pleased to be friends and at peace with their reason and
understanding) as if by any divine punishment proceeding from an iratum Numen,
an angry and just God, after ages should find England to be governed by a King
or Prince as cruel as Nero or Commodus, and as arbitrary and unruly as some of
the Roman or Eastern Emperors have been, there cannot until the sword shall
have cut the strings of our Magna Charta, and silenced or banished the Laws, be
any oppression or evil happen to the people, without the Balm of Gilead, and
remedies as quickly brought and found out by our Laws as there can be any
necessities or occasions of them.

Wherefore we should not like people altogether transported and carried out of
humanity into a Lycanthropia or woolfish nature, think it to be rational,
honest, or becoming us instead of every man's saying, Domine quid retribuam,
Lord what shall I render thee for all thy benefits, to make it the greatest of
our care, employment, and business not only to take from the King, but keep all
we can from him.

And if they would or could tell how to do it without the just reproach of
disloyalty, dishonesty and villainy, should not do it in his Praeemption,
Pourveyance, or Compositions for it, when it concerns him so much and so nearly
in his honor, and the daily bread and sustenance of himself and his Royal
Family, when he expendeth for want of his Pourveyances or compositions for
them, yearly more then he did when he enjoyed them, as may appear by a just
account and calculation lately made by his Majesty's special command, no less
then seventy three thousand six hundred seven pounds fourteen shillings and
seven pence in his Household and Stable provisions, besides the extraordinaries
of Carriages for his Navy, Provisions and Ammunition, and what would have been
added unto it, if he had, as other Kings or Princes, gone his Summer Progress,
when the want of it is so unbecomming a King, and the aspect of it when he had
it, was in

CHAP. IV. The right use of the Praeemption and Pourveyance, and Compositions
for them.
SO lovely and very well employed, and canont by rules of truth, reason and
understanding be gainsaid by the most disffaected and worst of Subjects, when
they shall but please to take into their consideration*

That the magnificence and bounty of a King in his house, and the method and
manner used therein is no small part of the increase, continuance, and support
of his power, reverence, honor, and awe; which are so necessary and essential
to the good and well-being of a King and his People, as they cannot be wanted,
but are and should be the adjuncts and concomitants of the Royal or Princely,
dignity and like Hypocrates Twins, subsist in one another, which the wisdom of
the Ancients as well as modern, and all Nations and People under the Sun, and
even the naked, wild and savage part of them have by a Jure Gentium and
eternal Law of Nature, derived from divine instinct, allowance, and pattern in
the infancy of the world, Genes. 6 19.
and through all the times and ages of it so well approved, as they could never
think fit to lay aside or disuse the practice of it; for it cannot be by any
rule of reason supposed that the fifth Commandment, Genes. 41. v. 42, 43.
being at the Creation of mankind after Gods own Image, written in the heart of
him and all his after Generations, and justly accounted to be comprehended in
those Precepts of the Law of Nature, and the righteous Noah, with which the
world, was blessed, as well before the flood as afterward, and before the
Children of Israel had received the Decalogue or ten Commandments, in the
dread and astonishment of Gods appearance to Moses in Mount Sinai; there was
not a distinction at the first, and all along holden and kept betwixt Parents
and Children, and Kings or common Parents and their Subjects, in the fear and
reverence of Children to Parents, and of Subjects to their Kings and
Sovereigns: when as Noah, though preaching to the old world in vain and to no
purpose, as they made it, was so mighty a man, and so well beloved and
observed, as he could by Gods direction cause to be brought into the Ark two of
every sort of the species of all irrational living creatures in order to their
preservation for the Generations which were to survive the threatened deluge,
which without some more then ordinary extent of power could not be compassed by
him, if he had been but an ordinary man, or but one of the common people, who
hearkened not unto his preaching, and had no better an opinion of his Ark or
Floating-house, then as a Dilirium, or his too much adoring the Images of his
own fantasy.

Pharaoh King of Egypt having those requisites and decorums, which the Kings
and Princes of those early days had appertaining to their Royal
super-eminence and dignities, Genes. 41. v. 42, 43.
could upon Joseph's extraordinary deserts array him in fine linen and silks,
put a gold chain about his neck, make him to ride in his second Chariot, and
cause a Cry or Proclamation to be made before him, that every man should bow
the knee.

David, that was but the Son of Jesse the Bethlemite, and once a Keeper of
his Fathers few sheep, as his envying brother told him, in the Wilderness (or
Common) and was taken, as God himself said, from the Sheepcoat, would not, when
he came to be King, omit the dues and regalities, which belonged unto Kings,
though he could in a grateful acknowledgment say unto God, Who am I, 2 Samuel 7
18. 1 (...). ^6 1.
O Lord God, and what is my house that thou have brought me hither; but could
think it comely and fitting for him as a King to dwell in a house of Cedars.

And King Solomon his Son, who expending 7 years in the building of the Temple
and House of God, was thirteen years in building of his own house, and another
magnificent and stately house of the Forest of Lebanon, and another for the
Queen his Wife, which was the Daughter of Pharaoh, 1 Reg. 7. 1 Reg. 10.
had 300 shields of beaten gold, three pound to every shield, put into his
house of the Forest: his sumptuous Throne of Ivory over-laid with the best
gold, the like whereof was not in any Kingdom; drinking vessels, and all the
vessels of Gold in that house; and kept that state and order in his Tables, in
the sitting of his servants at meat, the attendance of his Ministers and their
Apparel, and his Cup-bearers: as the Queen of Sheba coming unto him with a
very great Train, was so much astonished thereat, and the house that he had
built, as there was no more spirit in her, and confessed, that what she had
seen with her own eyes was more by half then what was told her in her own Land.

All which being allowed by God as necessary honors for Kings, conservations of
respects, and allurements to the obedience and esteem which were to be paid and
performed by the people, were not put in the Catalogue of that Prince and great
Master of wisdoms failings, or not walking in the ways of God, or doing that
which was right in his eyes, and keeping his Statutes and Judgments, as his
Father David did.

Neither were those Royal and great Feasts made long after by Ahasuerus, which
reigned from India unto Ethiopia, Ester ca. 1.
over an hundred and seven and twenty Provinces, to his Princes and Servants,
the Nobles and Princes of his Provinces for one hundre^ (...) eighty days: Or
the state of that mighty King when (...) showed the honor of his Excellent
Majesty* when as white, green, and blue Hangings, were fastened with cords of
fine linen and purple to silver rings and pillars of marble* with Beds of gold
and silver, upon a pavement of red, blue, white and black marble, and gave them
drink in vessels of gold, according to the state of the King, put under any
note or character of blame.

But those and other due respects have so always attended the world, and the
good order and government of it under Monarchy, and Kings and Princes through
all the changes and chances thereof, as it may be taken to be as universal a
Law of Nature and Custom or Nations, as the duty and honor of Children to
their Parents, and the love of Parents to their Children, when we find all the
Kings and Potentates of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America to have maintained
their Honors and Regalities by the state which they used in their Palaces and
extraordinary Buildings, witness the House or Palace of Julius Caesar, who, as
Plutarch says, had ornatus and majestatis causa, some Acrosteria or fastigia,
Turrets or Pinacles for ornament and majesty placed thereupon, the Escurial of
Spain, the Louvre of France, the Palaces and Piazza's of the Roman Emperors of
those of Greece and the Grand Signieur, the Colleges public and costly
buildings of the Kings of Fez and Morocco, the stately Palaces of the Sophy or
Emperor of Persia, the Mogol, Emperor or Dairo of China, the Caesar of Japan,
and the quondam Emperor of Mexico in the West Indies, which stood not alone or
solitary for the wonder of passengers, or habitation only of Jack-daws, as too
many of (...) uses of our Nobility and Gentry do now for ^ant of hospitality
or the owners residence, but were ever attended with a numerous and fitting
retinue of Servants, extracted out of the best and greatest Families of their
Kingdoms, and the wisest and most virtuous, who, as the Scripture says, being
clothed in silks and fine raiment, had the honor to stand before Princes, who
had their Crowns of gold, rich habiliments and costly utinsils, their Jura and
insignia Majestatis, rights and Ceremonies appropriate to Majesty, and an
Apartment state or fence betwixt them and the common usage or contempt of the
people: The which was so customary and usual in David's time, a^ forespeaking
the royalty of Solomon, which was to succeed him, he does in his Psalms or holy
Songs inform us, that the Kings glory is great in Gods salvation, P^alm 22.
and Psalm 25.
who has laid Honor and Majesty upon him; all his garments smell of Myrrh
Aloes and Cassia, out of the Ivory Palace whereby they have made him glad: upon
his right hand did stand the Queen in gold of Ophir; the Kings Daughter is all
glorious her clothing is of wrought gold, and her raiment of needle work.

Nor would the outward pomp and show of Kings and their Palaces, Apparel,
Ensigns of Honor and Majesty, and all those Rites and ornaments which do
belong unto their Grandeur and Majesty be entire, or as it should be, if there
were not a plenty and state also in their feeding daily recruits of nature and
life, and hospitality.

All which put together in a comely and most necessary combination and harmony,
do with the virtue, power, prudence and goodness of Kings and common Parents,
constitute and make that honor which does justly belong unto them, and so
necessary as God himself commanded it by word of mouth, twice wrote it with his
own finger, and by an early example severely punished Korah, Dathan and Abiram
for murmuring against Moses.

And therefore the Apostle Peter instructed by the Holy Ghost, commands us (as
if one could not be without the other) to fear God and honor the King: And
Aristotle who had been much at home as well as abroad, and no young beginner or
Pupil in Politics, but a Master of that most excellent and useful kind of
learning, how to govern and obey, could even in his ignorance of God and of the
Scriptures, which he thought not worthy his reading, Aristotle lib. 2. de Repub.
conclude that, Qua in civitate non maximus virtuti honos tribuitur in ea
optimus civitate status stabilis and firmus esse nullo modo potest; no
Commonwealth can be lasting or happy where the greatest honor is not given to
virtue: And St. Hierom, a better Tutor in Christianity tells us, Hieron. Epist.
that ubi honor non est, ibi contemptus, ubi contemptus, ibi frequens injuria
and indignatio and ibi quies nulla; where there is not honor there is contempt,
and where there is contempt, there are injuries and anger, and where anger and
wrath no manner of quiet, which to the Common people when Princes are wronged
and enforced to take arms or use the sword, is as good as a wind or Brawl
amongst glasses.

And that which my worthy friend, the very virtuous and learned Franciscus
Junius, the Son of that pious and learned Franciscus Junius, who with
Tremelius the Jew translated the Bible or Book of God out of the original
languages, has in his laborious travails and searches into the old Reunick,
Gothic, Danish and Frisick languages, and the Etymologies and Antiquities of
the old Greek and Celtick Languages, and the Saxon with her people derived from
them, been pleased to communicate unto me, is not unworthy observation, that
the word Lord was anciently amongst the English Saxons (...), and afterward
came to be called (...), from whence per contractum or abbreviaion it came to
be called lord, Et quotquot se in magnatis alicujus clientelam se
commendaverant appellaverunt dominum suum (...), quood suppeditasset panem (i.
e. omne alimentum) qui (...) dicebatur. And as many as came to be under the
protection of any Lord, or to hold Lands of them, did call their Lord (...),
which signified a giver of bread, because he afforded them bre^d, which was
called (...), to which Etymology agre^th the Cambro-Britannick, or Welsh
derivation by Mr. John Davies, where he deriveth Satrapa^ nobilem dominum, a
Nobleman Lord o^ Governor of a Province, ab Hebraea radice significante pavit
and rexit homines, from an Hebrew root or original, signifying one that fed as
well as governed men, which Goropius Becanus allows to be the meaning of the
Dutch word H^^t, which signifies prebentem vel offerentem alimenta* a giver of
victuals and food; from which word (...), says Mr. Junius, who although he be
a Dutchman born, yet is very well acquainted with the English language by many
years conversation amongst us, remains amongst us to this day the word loaf
(or b^ead) and the word Lady so much esteemed amongst us, and misused and
altered in the ancient and honorable origination of it was (...) a bread giver,
not a converter of their Husbands and his Ancestors Manors, Lands, Woods and
Hospitality into Coaches, Lacquies, and the ^urnishing out of their over-costly
Jewels and Apparel, Paintings, and making new faces, Black-patches or the
Devils Brand-marks, forty, fifty, or a hundred pounds lost in a night or
afternoon at Cards, and running up and down like so many costly and expensive
Cleopatra's, and half a dozen or a dozen of Mark Anthonies after them; make it
their business to be lascivious and luxurious, to tempt and be tempted, and do
the Devil service.

When their Mothers and Grandams were better employed in the more honest and
honorable employments of hospitality, housekeeping, charity and almsdeeds,
and receiving the love, honor and applause of their Tenants and poor
Neighbors.

And their Husbands Ancestors if of any time or standing, and not upstarts,
made it their honor as well as business to imitate their Progenitors, the old
(not now drinking) Germans, who as Tacitus mentions in their Customs, Tacitus
d^ Mori^us Germanorum c 1.13* and ^4.
were to their Princes in pace decus, in bello praesidium (which may show us
the grand esteem, ancient and noble use of Tenures by Knight Service) an honor
in Peace and a Guard in war; and made it their glory, si numero and virtute
comitatus emineant, if they had a great number of Tenants and Retainers
following them, insomuch as ipsa plerumque fama Belli profligant, the fame and
fear of them did many times prevent wars and promote peace; Et quum ventum in
aciem turpe principi virtute vinci turpe comitatui virtutem principis non
adaequare, and infame per omnem vitam at probrosum superstitem principi suo ex
acie recessisse illum defendere tueri sua quoque fortia facta gloriae ejus
assignare praecipuum sacramentum est Principes pro victoria pugnant Comites pro
Principe; and when they were in battle the Prince or King took it to be a shame
and dishonor to be outdone in valor, and those who attended him thought it to
be as much unworthy not to imitate him, and a great disgrace all their life
after to leave him in the field and come home without any wounds, their
greatest care being to defend him, and to asc^ibe and offer all their valiant
Acts to his renown and glory, their Prince fighting for victory, and their
Attendants for their Prince, Magnaque and Comitum aemulatio quibus primum apud
principum locus exigunt principis liberalitate illum bellatorem equum illam
cruentam victricemque frameam nam epulae and quanquam contempti largi tamen
apparatus pro stipendio cedunt, and vied who should be nearest their Princes in
all their dangers, and believed themselves to be well rewarded, if by the
bounty of the Prince they had such a charging Horse, or such a bloody and
conquering Spear bestowed upon them: for as to wages they were very well
contented with Feasts, and a large provision of victuals, though homely dressed.

And by such or the like longa series, or continuance of duties and obedience
to Princes, kindness and hospitality of the more great and powerful to the
meaner, came that strength and honor of our Nation; not by screwing or racking
their Tenants, and the Lands which they let them, but by easy and cheap
bargains, when the Tenant would be well content to make his Rents to his
Landlord to be as much in love and retribution as in money; and both were no
loosers when provisions for housekeeping were so much and excessively reserved
or presented; Spelman Gloss. in voce Firma.
for Prisci autem moris (says Sir Henry Spelman) profusius hospitalitas
annals reditus in eduliis collegisse; in the times of great hospitality, the
manner or custom of Landlords was to reserve provisions for housekeeping for
all (or some) of their Rents.

And those reservations of provisions grew to be so excessive, as before the
Conquest, lege cautum fuit de quantitate eduliorum reddenda, it was by a Law
ordained by Ina King of the West Saxons, betwixt the years 712. and 727. how
much rent in provisions should be taken or reserved for every 10 Hides or
Plough lands, which Sir Henry Spelman understands to be a prohibition, that no
man should take or reserve more, viz. LL. Ina 70.
Mellis dolia, Hogsheads or vessels of Honey (of which it seems there was then
great plenty and much used) 10 Panes, loaves of bread 300 Amphorae Cervisiae
Wallicae duodenae, twelve Rundlets of Welsh Beer or Ale Amphorae Cervisiae
tenuioris, Rundlets of small Ale or Beer 30 Oxen 2 Weather Sheep 10 Geese 10
Hens 20 Cheeses 10 Gallons of Butter, 9 Salmons 5 Twenty pound weight of Hey or
Provender 10 And Eels 100


Which was but a small Rent, as Rents are now heightened for ten Yards or plough
Lands; and the Heirs of those which held such proportions of Lands, upon those
or the like easy Rents, or afterward paid, and do now pay only as
Freeholders, certain small Quit-rents in money proportionable to the then small
rates of such provisions, may thank God that the alteration of times and rates
of provisions, have made them in such a condition, as to be very well enabled
to perform their duties to their Prince in an easy contribution for the
composition for the Royal Pourveyances.

And that most necessary duty of the Kings Royal Pourveyance, if he had not
power to regulate and bring down the excessive prises of provisions, and at
Markets, as well for the ease and benefit of his Subjects as himself, might be
the more willingly and cheerfully submitted unto and performed, when as it is
for the good of the head and principal part of the body Politic, and when as
that which the members do contribute, is communicated to all the members and
parts of it, in the preventing, hindering, or keeping off greater
inconveniences, burdens and troubles, which would otherwise fall upon them, or
serves to support and maintain many of themselves and their Sons and Daughters
in the service of the King and his Court, which has raised many Families
(which now either forget or overlook their beginnings, originals, and
founders) or to relieve many poor, and others who do partake of those National
Blessings of Peace and plenty, which are maintained by the honor, well-being,
and prosperity of the King which procures them.

And should not be disliked, but rather rejoiced in, when we shall recount unto
our Children and posterity the magnificence and hospitality of our Kings, when
the great Hall at Westminster, capable and large enough to entertain three of
the largest Courts of Justice in the Nation, besides many Shops of Trade built
by the sides thereof, and receives the feet of some hundreds of the Natives
which four times or Terms in the year do come thither to demand it, was
heretofore but the Common Hall or dining Room of King William Rufus.

That Henry the 2. caused corn to be laid up in store in Granaries to be given
to the poor in the time of dearth in the parts of Anjou and Main, and fed every
day out of his Granaries a thousand persons, from the beginning of April until
new corn was gotten.

Claus. 23 H. 3.
Henry the third in the 23 year of his Reign did by his Writ command William de
Haverhull, and Edward Fitz Odo, that upon Friday next after the Feast of St.
Matthias, being the Anniversary of Elianor Queen of Scotland his Sister, they
should cause to be fed as many poor as might enter into or be entertained in
the greater Hall of Westminster.

Ibidem m. 14.
And in the same year did by his Writ likewise command the said William de
Haverhull to feed fifteen thousand Poor at St. Peter's in London on the Feast
day of the Conversion of St. Peter.

Ibidem m. 18.
And four thousand Poor upon Monday next after the Feast of St. Lucie the Virgin
in the great Hall at Westminster.

Claus. 28. H. 3.
Commanded in the 28 year of his Reign Hugh Gifford and William le Brun, that
upon Friday next after the Epiphany, they should cause to be fed in the Hall at
Windsor, ad bonum focum omnes pueros, paup^res, and Egen^s quot inven^re
p^terint, it a quod aula impleatur, si tot inveniantur, at a good fire all the
poor boys and needdy, so that the Hall may be filled, if so many might be
found.

Claus. 32 H. 3. m. 15.
Also in the 32 year of his Reign commanded William de Haverhull, and Edward of
Westminster, quod singulis diebus a die Natalis Domini usque ad diem
Circumcisionis computatis illis duabus diebus impleri faciant magnam Aulam
Regis de pauperibus, and eos pasci; That every day from Christmas to
Newyears-tide, reckoning and including those two days they should fill the
great Hall of Westminster with poor and feed them. And in the same year
commanded the said William de Haverhull his Treasurer, and Edward Fitz Odo to
feed upon the day of Edward the Confessor pauperes in magna Aula
Westmonasterium sicut fieri consueverunt, Claus. 32 H. 3. m. 17.
and ipsis monathis pittantiam eadem die sicut consueverunt habere faciant, the
poor as they were accustomed to do in the great Hall of Westminster, and to
give the Monks their accustomed pittances (or exceedings.)

Which would have cost more then a little, if prices and plenty of provisions
for food and victuals had not better accorded then now they do, or if the King
had not had his Prae-emption and Royal Pourveyance, or that his Prerogative had
been no more in regulating of the Markets, and such prises as the avarice of
the sellers should enforce upon the buyers, then to pay for his own household
provisions double or treble the worth and the utmost farthing.

And 174 l would not have been sufficient for King Edward the first his Son by
his Writ directed to John L^vetot and Jeofry de Newbald, Ex Archiv. T^^r.
London.
Guardians of the Temporalities of the Bishopric of Durham, to allow unto
Alexander King of Scotland coming to London to the Coronation of his Brother in
Law guarded with a goodly Troop of Knights and Gentlemen, pro expensis suis per
quinque septimanas, videlicet singulis diebus centum solidos in veniendo ad
Westmonasterium ad mandatum ipsius Domini Regis, and inde ad parts suas
redeundo, etc. for his expenses for five weeks, that is to say, five pounds for
every day in his coming at the Kings command to Westminster (to do him homage)
and returning from thence.

At whose great Feast and Coronation the said Alexander King of Scotland came
(as an old Manuscript cited by Mr. Weaver mentions) to do him servyse and
worschip.

Weaver's funeral monuments 456.
And whahne King Edward was coronyd and annyontyd as right heir of Eng^lond
with much honor and worsschyp. Aftur Mass, the King went to his Paleys for
to hold a ryall fes^e, among them that him had done servyse and worsschyp.
And whahne he was set at his mete, King Alexandre of Scotland come to do him
servyse and worsschyp with a queyntyse, and an hundred Knights with him,
horsed and arayd. And when they wered light of their horse, they let their
horse goon whether they would, and they that would take them had them to their
own behofe without any challange. And aftyr that come Sir Edmond, King Edwards
Brother, a curtayse Knight and a gentyl of renoon, and the Earl of Cornwayle,
and the Earl of Glowcestre. And aftyr them come the Earl of Penbroke, and the
Earl of Warren, and each of them led on their hondes be themself an hundred
Knights disgyse in their Arms. And when they weren a light of their horse
they let them goo whedyr they would, and they that cowd them take, had them
stylle at their own lyking* And when all this was done, King Edward did his
dyligens and his might to amend the Relme, and redress the wrongs in the
best manner, to the honor of God, and profit to the Crown, and to holy Cherch,
and to amend the anoyance of the Common people. The worthiest Knight he was of
all the world of honor and worsschyp, for the grace of God was in him, and he
ever had the victory of his enemies.

Which is here repeated to show how well the people of those times liked any
honor done to their Kings, and rejoiced in it.

And not only in the better course and customs of those times, but in all the
after ages, until that in which we now are, when the pride, luxury and vanity
of the Nation have conquered and almost extirpated all the hospitalities of
England, and made vice and sinful prodigalities the only care and employment
of their time and Revenues, could not leave or forsake the paths of their more
prudent Progenitors, when the Nobility and Gentry by their charities,
alms-deeds, bounties and benificences, building of Churches, permitting of
Copihold Estates, being only ancient allowed and continued charities and
succouring of the poor and needy; founding of Monasteries, Priories and
Religious houses, the then grand supports and Magazines of charity, relief and
alms-deeds to the poor, to travelers and strangers, and the sick and needy,
granting of large proportions of Commons unto Villages and Townships in that
which was part of their own Demesnes, and Common of Estovers and Turbary for
their wood and firing in diverse of their Woods and Forests, did so continue
the honorable customs of a great hospitality, retinue and Attendance, great
love and good will to their Tenants, who enjoying Lands and Leases under them
at small and reasonable Rents, took them to be their tutelar Gods, and as helps
and refuges in all their necessities.

And so intent upon charity were those better and less sinful times, and so
much were the necessities of the poor taken to heart, as the Bishops and
Prelates in venerable B^d^'s time, which was long before the Conquest, had, as
he writes, always on their Table at meals an Alms dish, wherein was carved
some good portion of meat out of every dish brought unto the Table, which the
poor were sure to have besides the fragments left.

Ethelwald Bishop of Winchester in the Reign of King Edgar about the year of
Christ 963. did in a great Famine sell the Plate belonging to the Church to
relieve the almost starved people.

Walter de Suffild Bishop of Norwich in a time of great dearth in Anno 1245.
sold all his Plate, and distributed the money made thereof unto the poor.

Robert Winchelsey Archbishop of Canterbury about the year 1293. gave besides
the daily fragments of victuals expended in his house every Friday and Sunday
unto every Beggar which came unto his gate a loaf of bread sufficient for a
day, Stowes Survey of London.
and in times of scarcity relieved on those days four hundred, and some times
five hundred poor people.

Nor was the housekeeping, retinue and attendance of the Nobility and Gentry
in those and after ages so small or sparing, as it is now in too many of them
who having racked their Tenants to the utmost, can leave their Ancestors great
and stately houses in the Country as if they had been lately infected with the
plague, or were haunted with some Devils or Hobgoblins, and employ their
expenses, which would have been more honorably laid out in hospitality, in
treatments of two or three hundred pounds at a time; and some of our prodigal
Gentry expending fifty, threescore, or an hundred pounds in a Suit of Apparel;
can give it away after twice or thrice wearing to a Pimp, Sicophant, or
flattering Servant, and lose two hundred or five hundred pounds in a night at
Dice or Cards; give a hundred pounds for a needle work Band, and expend two
hundred pounds per annum for Periwigs, and all the racked Revenue either laid
out by themselves or their wives (who vie who shall spend most) in the wicked
and vain pursuits of a detestable luxury; and as if they held their Lands not
as formerly, by Knight service, but by Lady service* and their Ancestors had
taken pains to leave them estates to play the madmen withal, do make sin the
only Errand and employments of their lives and conversations; and by their
prodigal expenses and confining themselves to some few dishes of meat dressed
at the Common Cooks in London, do leave their Footboys and Servants so little
of it, as they are many times constrained to be glad with the bones and scraps,
which would have been better bestowed upon Beggars, and have reason enough to
believe that their Masters can do no miracles, nor multiply loaves of bread or
fishes*

But our Nobility and Gentry demeaned themselves in a more honorable, noble,
and Christian way, as may be understood by that of Thomas Earl of Lancasters
expenses in housekeeping in the Reign of King Ed. 2. when money was scarcer
than now it is, and yet the account from Michaelmas in the 7. year of the Reign
of that King, unto Michaelmas in the 8. year of his Reign, being but for one
year, was in the Buttery, Pantry, and Kitchen three thousand four hundred and
five pounds.

And there was paid for 6800 Stock-fishes, so called, and for dried Fishes, as
Lings, Haberdines, etc. 41 l. -- 6 s. -- 7 d. for one hundred eighty four
Tonnes, and one Pipe of Clarret wine, and one Tonne of white wine 104 l. -- 17
s. -- 6 d. gave costly Liveries of Furs and Purple to Barons, Knights, and
Esquires, and paid in that year 623 l. -- 15 s. -- 5 d. to diverse Earls,
Barons, Knights and Esquires for Fees.

The housekeeping of the Nobility being not then mean or ignoble, when in the
fourteenth year of that Kings Reign, Stowes Survey of London.
Hugh Spencer the elder was by Inquisition found to have been possessed of at
his several Houses or Manors 28000 Sheep, 1000 Oxen and Steers, 1200 Kine with
their Calves, 2000 Hogs, 300 Bullocks, 40 Tons of Wine, 600 Bacons, 80 Carcases
of Martilmas Beef, 600 Muttons in the Larder, and 10 Tons of Sider.

Richard Nevil Earl of Warwick in the Reign of King Henry the fifth had in his
house oftentimes six Oxen eaten at a Breakfast, and every Tavern was full of
his meat, and he that had any acquaintance in his house might have there so
much sodden and roste, as he could prick and carry upon a long Dagger.

Cardinal Woolsey Archbishop of York in the Reign of King Henry the eighth,
kept no small house, when as his Master Cook in the Privy Kitchen went daily in
Velvet and Satin, with a chain of Gold about his neck, had two Clerks of the
Kitchen, a Surveyor of the Dresser, a Clerk of the Spicery, four Yeomen of the
ordinary Scullery, four Yeomen of the silver Scullery, two Yeomen of the
Pastery, and two Pastery men under them; in the Scalding house a Yeoman and two
Grooms, In the Buttery two Yeomen Grooms and two Pages, In the Pantery two
Yeomen, and in the Waferie two Yeomen.

Nicholas West Bishop of Ely in the year 1532. in the 23 year of the Reign of
King Henry the Eighth, kept continually in his house one hundred Servants,
giving to the one half of them 53 s. 4 d. a piece (then an allowance for a
Gentleman Servant, but now by an unreasonable and illegal rise and exaction of
servants wages not the half of a Carter or Ploughmans wages) and to the other
40 s. a piece, and to every one of his Servants four yards of broad Cloth for
his Winter Gown, and for his Summer Coat three yards and a half, and daily gave
at his gate (besides bread and drink) warm meat for two hundred poor people.

Edward Earl of Derby in the Reigns of Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth had 220
men in Checque Roll, fed sixty eight aged persons twice every day, besides all
comers, appointed thrice a week for his dealing days, and every good Friday
gave unto two thousand seven hundred poor men meat drink and money.

The Lord Cromwell in the declyning times of charity, as Mr. John Stow well
observed, served twice every day at his ga^^ two hundred poor people, with
bread meat and drink sufficient, all the Gentry making it to be their honor in
their lesser orbs to measure their Actions by those as good and honorable
patterns.

And proportionable to their hospitality, and the state and dignity of our then
Nobility were the numbers of their Servants in their houses at home, or in
their journies or riding abroad, many of the Knights and Gentlemen's Sons of
England making it to be the best of their breeding, education, and way to
preferment, to serve or retain unto them, insomuch as notwithstanding the
Statute made against giving of Liveries or Badges 1 R. 2. cap. 7. and the
suspicion which some of our Kings and Princes, and King Henry the seventh had
of their greatness and popularities, the great (so called) Earl of Warwick in
the Reign of King Henry the sixth, rode with six hundred men in red Jackets,
embroidered with ragged staves before and behind.

Thomas Audley Lord Chancellor of England usually rode with many Gentlemen
before him with coats guarded with velvet, and chains of gold, and his Yeomen
following after him in Liveries not guarded.

William Paulet Marquess of Winchester did ride with a great attendance in
Liveries, and gave great relief at his gate; and Edward Duke of Somerset did
the like.

Stows Survey of London.
John de vere Earl of Oxford in the Reign of Queen Mary, notwithstanding the
rigor of the Law against Liveries and Reteiners, which King Henry the seventh
did so turn against one of his highly deserving Ancecestors, as it cost him a
fine of ten or fifteen thousand marks, was accustomed to ride from his Castle
of Hedingham in Essex to his City House at London Stone, with eighty Gentlemen
in tawny velvet Liveries or Coats, and Chains of Gold about their necks before
him, and one hundred tall Yeomen in the like Livery of Cloth following him,
with the cognizance of the Blew Bore embroidered on their left shoulder.

Which being the custom of the good people, Subjects and men of Honor in
England, in those more honorable, more performing, and less complementing
times, but since withering, and growing fruitless and out of fashion, when that
great commander Luxury had with his Regiments and Brigades of vices, new
fangles and vanities, subdued, and put the people to a greater contribution
toward such their wicked and vain expenses, and all that they can now make
shift for is too little to support and bear out their extravagancies. It is
well known and experimented to the great comfort of such as lived within the
virge of the Kings houses and residence, that the Hospitality of the Kingdom,
like the heart in the body natural, the primum vivens beginner and conservator
of life, beginning in the Kings house, and propagating and diffusing it self in
and through as many of the Nobility and Gentry, as being de meliori lut^, of a
more then ordinary extraction, did strive, as much as became them, to imitate
Royal Examples, would be in the Kings house the ultimum m^riens, the last which
expired. And that besides the necessary grandeur and magnificence of the Kings
household, plenty, and variety of meat and drink, to entertain at his Officers
Tables the, Nobility, Gentry and Citizens, which had any occasion to come
thither, and 240 gallons of Beer allowed the poor every day at the Buttery
Bar, three gallons every day at the Court gate for thirteen poor men; six
services or mess of meat, and seven pieces of beef a day as wast and
extraordinary for the Kings Honor; the chippings of bread sometimes (more then
should be) and the fragments and knapstry of broken, or quarter, or half joints
of meat, carcases of Fowl and Poultry, pieces of Pie-crust, or other provisions
carefully and daily gathered, and put into several Almes-baskets left at every
Table and Chamber in the Court, and distributed unto the poor by two Grooms and
two Yeomen of the Elemosinary or Almnery, who enjoy an yearly Salary and
maintenance from the King for that only employment, which has fed and
supported many poor Families in and about Westminster as well as Common
Beggars; the Lodgings and accomodations of Nobility and Gentry resorting to the
Court, have so greatly enriched all the Streets and parts about it, as that end
of London and parts adjacent, have, like trees planted by the water side, so
very much prospered as Westminster, which originally had but some scattered
houses adjoining to the Abbey and the Kings Palace, came aftewards to be a
Borough Town and Corporation, endowed with great Liberties and Privileges,
and sending Burgesses to the Parliament, and afterward to be a City; and the
people of other parts, as birds haunting the woods for shelter, shade or
succor, observing the plenty and happiness which they enjoyed, have built and
made their nests and habitations as near as they could unto that place and
Royal seat of bounty, charity, and magnificence, insomuch as the swelling and
increase of London at this day every where to be seen not without some
admiration in her Extent and buildings, has within this and the last Century
of years very much outgrown that ancient City it self; Graunts observation of
the London Bills of Mortality.
and as Mr. John Grant and some others have truly and ingeniously observed,
extended it self Westward, and as near as it could unto the Royal bitation, as
if that were more to be desired for a neighborhood then the River of Thames,
the Exchange, or Custom House of London, and places of Trade and Traffic.

They therefore that shall remember how his Majesty's Maundie or Charity, kept
as his Royal Ancestors ever did upon the Thursday before Easter, or Eve of
Good Friday, with a Joul of Salmon, a Poll of Ling, 30 red Herrings, and as
many white, garnished with ^erbs in new clean wooden dishes, four six penny
loaves of Court bread, cloth for a Gown and a Shirt, a pair of New Shoes and
Stockins, and a single penny with a twenty shillings piece of gold overplus,
put in several little purses, given to as many poor old men as the King is
years old; and the state and decency observed in the distributing of it; after
their feet washed and dried, and the King with a condiscention and unexampled
humility, beyond the reach and example of any of his Subjects, kneeling upon
his knees, and devoutly kissing the feet of those his Almes-men, cannot
certainly tell how to murmur at such an hospitality or Provisions, which
afforded him the means wherewith to do it.

Nor should the many cures which he yearly does unto such as are Lame, Blind,
Diseased, or troubled with the Disease called the Kings Evil (because he cures
it) the patience and meekness which he employeth in it, and the yearly charge
of at least three thousand pounds per annum, which his Angel Gold of the value
of ten shillings, and a silk Ribbon put about the neck of every one, be they
rich or poor, young or old which do come to that English Pool of Bethesda to
be healed and cured, be forgotten or thought unworthy a gratitude, or some
remuneration or acknowledgements.

Neither can any that ever understood or read of the round Tables of our King
Arthur, the great Roger Mortimer, and the famous Hospitality of England
continued through the British* Saxon and Norman times all the turmoyls and
troubles of the after Generations in their greatest extremities of the Barons
wars, and the direful and bloody contentions of the two great discording
Houses of York and Lancaster, with the vast quantities of Land given besides to
Monasteries and Religious Houses to the great increase of Charity and
Alms-deeds, which was then the only Trade driven or thought on in the way to
Cabo di buona speranza, and the everlasting rest of the righteous; the large
proportions of Lands given for Chantries in a then supposed pious care of
themselves, and their Progenitors great gifts and remunerations to Servants,
and courtesies and kindness to Neighbors and Tenants, when most of our Nobility
and Gentry thought themselves not great unless they were good, nor a Gentleman,
because he had only the insignia virtutum, Armories and marks of the honor of
his Ancestors descended unto him, without the virtuous, noble and heroic
qualities, which were the cause or original of them, when pride and interest
the Devils Deputies were not the Sovereign which they most obeyed, vanity and
all the folli^s of sin the neighbors which they loved as themselves; when
virtue was not reckoned, as it is now amongst too many, a base or simple
companion, nor honor turned into a Pageant, or n^men inane, or only made a
pretense to deceive men's expectations; when almost every English Gentleman was
in his Parish, and amongst his Tenants like Job that good accomptant of his
talents, a deliverer of the poor that cried, the fatherless, and him that had
none to help him; caused the Widows heart to sing for joy; was eyes to the
blind, feet to the lame, brake the jaws of the wicked, plucked the spoils out
of his teeth; grieved for the poor, wept for him that was in trouble; and sat
chief, and dwelt as a King, Job 29.
in the Army as one that comfort the mourners; the ears that heard him
blessed him, and the eye that saw him gave witness to him, when men gave care
and waited, and kept silence at his counsel: (although it must be acknowledged
that there are now some of the Gentry more learned and accomplished then in
former ages, and might equal or go beyond their worthy and honorable
Ancestors, if they would but imitate their Alms-deeds and hospitality, and not
permit their greater expenses in matters less warrantable and laudable, to make
and enforce an ava^ice, or Rubiginem animarum, canker or rust of the soul to
hinder or keep them from it).

And Gentlemen were not then as too many now are, the fools of the Parish, and
so little valued as they are now, when too many of them may be beaten and kicked
in the Marketplaces, in the view and sight of their over-racked and disobliged
Tenants, piget and pudet dicere, I would there were no cause or occasion to
speak it,) and with their few attendants of Sicophants, Pimps and Foot-boyes,
be as little helped or regarded by the Common people as a ridiculous pride and
a large and wastfull retinue of sins and folly ought to be,

But kept great hospitalities, and were heretofore in their houses in the
Country, as the Dii Tutelares of the poor, or such as were in any want or
necessit^es, the Cities of refuge in all their distresses; the Esculapius.
Temple for wholesome or honest medicaments or unmercinary cures of wounds and
diseases which the good Ladies and Gentlewomen, their Wives or Daughters were
then well practiced in, and had great respects and reverence paid unto them for
it.

And see how little is now done in any of those kinds, if he has any fear of
God or care of goodness, love, or respect to his Country and posterity forbear
a bewailing of the ruin and decay of the moralities, virtues and honor of
England, and wonder how that only remaining relic of our forefathers
magnanimity and virtues, that seed plot of love and good will, which the Angels
in their song and rejoicing at the birth of our Jesus and Redeemer proclaimed
to be a blessing; that seminary of reverence, honor and respect; that ligament
and tie betwixt the inferiors and superiors; that incitement and
encouragement to reciprocations of love and duty; and that heretofore so famous
and well employed strength and power of the Nobility and Gentry should be
disused and laid side: and that those laudable pious and honorable actions of
Hospitality and Charity, in which our Kings of England so much delighted, and
by a solemn and thrice repeated cry or proclamation made by one of the
Heralds, of a Largess, a Largess at the creation of every Baron, Earl, or
Duke, (being as the cry or joy of the Harvest mentioned in the holy Scriptures)
and at St. George's Feasts, did put the Nobility and Gentry in mind to do the
like in their several orbs and stations, should be now restrained by the want
of Pourveyance, or Compositions for it, or that there should be any endeavors
to decay and hinder it at the fountain or well head, by stopping the pleasant
and refreshing waters which gladded our Sion, and the Inhabitants thereof, and
made it to be the terror of all the Nations round about us, or that any should
think it to be for the good and honor of England to lessen that hospitality and
plenty in the Kings House or Court, which is so pleasing and suitable to the
humor and constitution of the English Nation; has gained the Kings of England
so much love at home, and honor abroad; maintained so fair a correspondency and
intelligence betwixt the Court and Ministry, and relieved the poor and needy,
the Widow and the Fatherless.

And is so essential and proper to Majesty, as David when he offered sacrifice
unto the Lord after the bringing back of the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.
did give to every one of the people* men and women a Cake of bread, a good
piece of flesh, and a Flaggon of wine; and so customary as the Romans could not
think themselves secure in the good wills and affections of the people without
their Epulae and public Feasts and caressing of the people, Dionis. Halicarn.
lib. 2.
which Julius Caesar nor his Successor Augustus would not adventure to omit.

Nor Domitian and Severus who gave oil, wine, and other necessary provisions,
a Fin* Lois d' Orleans ovver^ures de^ Parlements.
as Lois d' Orleans rightly understood it, d' concilier l' amor de leurs
Subjects quils prenoient par lebouch^, to procure the love of the people, who
were taken by the mouth: and was so customary in France as well as England, as
at a great solemnity there after that our King Henry the fifth had espoused the
Daughter and Heir of France, and the people of Paris in great numbers went unto
the Louvre to see the King and Queen of England sit at meat together with their
Crowns upon their heads; but being dismissed without an invitation to eat or
drink by some of the Officers or Masters of the household, as they were
accustomed, they murmured exceedingly; for that when they came to such grand
solemnities at the King of Frances Court, they used to have meat and drink
given them in great plenty, Mo^^^rele^ lib. 1. ca. 2.62.
and those which would sit at meat, were by the Kings Officers most abundantly
served with wine and victuals* and at extraordinary Feasts, as that at the
marriage of King Henry the fifth of England, and the Lady Katherine Daughter of
Charles the sixth King of France, had Tables furnished with victuals set in the
streets, where they which would might sit and eat at the Kings charges, as was
afterward also done at Amiens at the enterview of Lewis the eleventh of
France, and Edward the fourth of England.

And was there in those days most laudably used, a fin d^ unir le peuple au
Roy and les pieds a la test pur affirmir le corpse politic, and le lier par
une gracieuse voire necessaire correspondence, to the end to fasten the people
unto the King, and the feet unto the head, to strengthen the body politic, and
unite all the parts thereof by a loving and necessary compliance; and was an
usage so well entertained in other Nations, Lois d' Orleans les ovvertures des
Parlements ca. 8.

Guagninus iu descript. Mosco viae lib. 1. c. 46. Aelianus lib. 4. va^^ar.
Histor.


as the Tartars and Laplanders, would not be without it, and the Graecians
thought themselves dishonored, if there were not a more then ordinary care to
entertain strangers of free cost, insomuch as a Law was made amongst the
Lucani, to punish such as took not a care of them; and the Swedes and Goths
esteemed it to be so great an unworthines not to do it, as they did by a Law
ordain, That whosoever denied lodging or entertainment to any strangers, and
was by witnesses convicted to have thrice offended in that kind his house was
to be burned. Jo. Magnus lib. 4. cap. 2.


Those or the like kind and charitable customs having so crept through the
cranies of humane understanding and right reason into the ruder sort of the
heathen; as in some parts of Africa the King thinks he is not beloved of his
people unless he does sometimes feast them, John Leo Hist. of Africa.
and the heads of the Cowes which are killed for that provision, are painted
and hung up like pictures in his Chamber as for an honor to the King, whereby
such strangers which did come to his Court might perceive that he was a good
King.

Being like the Agapes or Love Feasts, allowed by St. Paul, and those which the
primitive Christians continued as an excellent Custom and usage, when the
rich, as Tertullian witnesses, brought to those public feastings meat and
provisions, and fed and feasted the poor, which were so useful and
well-becoming all such as intended or desired the comfort and blessing of it,
as that thrifty as well as magnificent Commonwealth of Venice, do not only
order and encourage yearly Feasts among the several ranks and Classes of their
Citizens and people, but do make an allowance to their Duke or shadow of
Monarchy for the feasting of the principal of the Senate, and to send yearly in
the winter to every Citizen a certain petty present of wild foul.

And if the virtue of charity, which St. Paul makes to be the chief, or summa
totalis of all the virtues and excellencies which humane nature or frailties
can be capable of; and will not allow that of speaking with the tongues of
Angels (which certainly is more to be valued then our last twenty years English
complement) nor the gift of prophecy and understanding of all mysteries and all
knowledge; 1 Corinthians. ^3.
neither the having of such a faith as might remove mountains, to be any more
then nothing in him or a noise or emptiness, if charity be not joined with it,
be so superlative.

The people of England as well as their Kings and Princes were not mistaken
when they did so heed, and thought it necessary to be observed, as a good part
of the Tithes given by Aethelulph in the year after the birth of Christ 855.
not only of his own Lands in demeasne, but as most of the Writers which lived
nearer that time, have, as the most learned and judicious Seldom rightly
observed it, extended unto a grant made by the consent omnium Praelatorum ac
Principum suorum, Seldom Hist. of Tithes, and Ingulphs hist.
qui sub ipso variis provinciis totius Angliae praeerant, of all the Bishops
and Prelates, and the Princes and Earls, which under him governed in the
several Provinces, and whether the Tithes came first to be settled here by that
great King Ethelulphus, and his Bishops and great men; or were assented unto or
granted afterward by the piety and devotion of particular men, and the owners
of lands and goods, of which very many grants do occur, before they were
settled by a very just and binding authority of the Secular and Ecclesiastical
power and authority in this our Isle of great Britain, some part of them may be
certainly said to be in the use and application of them to the Church and
Ministry, and sacred uses dedicated and designed for hospitality.

Which the People of did so greatly regard and look after, as the supposed want
of it in the reverend Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury begot a project in the
reign of King Henry the eighth, as Doctor Peter Heylin, that learned and great
Champion of the Church of England, and the truth even after he was blind has
recorded it.

Whereby a design was laid by a potent and over-busie Courtier to ruin the
Revenues belonging to that Archbishopric, by informing the King that the
Archbishop of Canterbury had fallen much Wood, let long Leases for great
Fines, and made great havoc of the Revenues of his Archbishopric, whereby to
raise a fortune to his wife and children; and with so large a Revenue had kept
no Hospitality; that it was more meet for Bishops to have a sufficient yearly
stipend out of the Exchequer, then to be encumbered with Temporal Revenues, and
that the Lands being taken to his Majesty's use, would afford him besides the
said Annual stipends a great yearly Revenue. But the King rightly apprehending
the device, sent the Informer on an errand about Dinner time to Lambeth-house,
where he found all the Tables in the great Hall, to be very bountifully
provided, the Archbishop himself, accompained at Dinner with diverse persons
of quality, his Table exceeding plentifully furnished, and all things
answerable to the port of so great a Prelate; wherewith the King being made
acquainted at his coming back, gave him such a rebuke for his false
information, and the design which was built upon it, as neither he nor any of
the other Courtiers du^st stir any further in that suite.

And the common people of England have always with so much reason, loved and
applauded Hospitality, good Housekeeping, Alms Deeds, and works of Charity,
(and in that besides their own benefits and concernments did but delight in the
ways of God which he has commanded, and is well pleased with,) whereby the
heretofore famous and greatly beloved Nobility and Gentry of England, have
gained so much love, honor, power, reverence, and well deserved esteem, as the
greatest part of the respects which are now afforded, and paid by them unto
their Issues and remaining generations, are as unto too many of them, more in
remembrance of the good and virtuous deeds of their Ancestors, then any
personal good or virtue is either to be found in them, or according to the
courses which they now hold, is so much as expected from them, who think a name
or title like some gaudy Sign-post hung out of an empty ill governed and worse
furnished house, where vice and all manner of sins in their horrid and ugly
deformities being treated and entertained, do crawle up and down like Toads,
Frogs, and Serpents in some dark and loathsome Dungeon, or that a pedigree
deriving their discents from some or many Heroes and Worthy Patriots, is honor
enough for them, do scorn all but their own foolries, and suppose a witty
Drollery, and the Friskes and Funambuloes of an ill governed wit, or of brains
soaked and steeped in drink, more to be valued then the wisdom in the Proverbs
of Solomon, hate vice and admonition, shun virtue and morality as they would do
the burst and fire of a Granado; and believe d^ink^ng, Dicing and Drabbing to
be a more Gentile and cleanlier way of Hospitality, and make the common people,
whilst they stand almost amazed at their Debaucheries and irregularities, ready
to swear they are illegitimate, or some Changelings crept into the name and
estate of their Hospitable and virtuous Progenitors; and if any of them should
be well affected and inclined to walk in the ways of their Ancestors, and keep
good houses, can never be able to do it by reason of the no Reason of their
Ranting and expensive Wives, twenty of which sort of new fashioned women (for
there are some, though not so many as should be, which are or would be helpers
to preserve and increase their Husbands estates, not to waste or destroy them)
would if they might enjoy their spending humors, in the wasteful course of
their lives be able to consume the value of all or the greatest part of the
Lands and Estates in a County.

But however such kind of people shall so misuse their estates and Talents, our
Kings and Princes being to guide their Actions by higher and more transcendent
rules then any of their Subjects did in the better times of virtue and
Hospitality, are not certainly to be restrained in the magnificence and state
of their Housekeeping, nor to have the means whereby they should do it,
diverted or diminished; when as Alexander the Great, answered some that ^ound
fault with the greatness of his gift or bounty to a mean man, The gifts of
Kings are not altogether to be proportioned according to the men who receive
it, but of the King that gives it; and as the Duke of Savoy said unto King
Henry the fourth of France, when he found him unwilling to grant or remit unto
him the Marquisate of Saluces, John de Serres Hist. of France.
Kings do wrong the greatness of their courage, if they shall not give great
things.

For if there were no necessity of a largeness of heart and expenses in
Hospitality in the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, they would not be good
Subjects to blame it in their King, nor honorers of him, unless they should, as
they ought and are enjoined by their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
maintain and defend his Honor and Jurisdictions, who by the preeminency of his
Imperial Dignity is not to want that which should help to support and adorn it,
when as to that, and the preservation of his people who are to sub^ist and be
protected by his welfare, honor, and happiness, there will be a real and very
great.

CHAP. V. Necessity that the King should have and enjoy his Ancient Right of
Pourveyance, or Compositions for them.
FOr that there is, and should be always a necessity to observe the Laws of
God, Nature, and Nations right reason, and the Laws and reasonable Customs of
England, and of honoring and obeying the King, and keeping him from mischiefs
and inconveniences, and that the members of the body Politic, should as every
part of the body natural does, be willing to assist and contribute unto the
good and well being of the head and better part of it.

And although that sin the fruitful parent of all our evils and miseries, be
not in numero eligibilium, or to be put within the pleas of necessity, yet
goodness, virtue and the duties of holy life, are propter se expetibilia for
their real benefits and excellencies to be desired and thirsted after, as the
Heart pants and thirsts after the water brooks.

And it would be neither wisdom nor goodness in the people to subject the King
to an yearly loss of seventy three thousand six hundred seven pounds fourteen
shillings and seven pence, which he did the last year loose in his
housekeeping by the want of his Pourveyance or Compositions for them, and by
the excessive Rates and Prices of Provisions for his household, which were put
upon him by the avarice and ill custom of such as sold or furnished them
besides his greater then formerly charge of Carts, and other parts of the Royal
Pourveyance, and drive him thereby into wants of money, which may either cause
him to be more sparing then he would be otherwise, in his Royal favors, bounty,
indulgences, and Charity to his people, or to seek after and take those many
legal and just advantages to support himself in his Kingly Office which the Law
affords and cannot be denied him, or give a greater liberty or attention then
otherwise he would to his necessities, or the designs, or invention of those
who by finding out ways of supply to an over-burdened and insufficient Royal
Revenue, may show the people their errors in the denial of just rights and
duties, and by putting him to inconveniences, exceedingly increase and
multiply their own; and that it would be much better to imitate the prudence of
Abigail, who to make some recompense to David's keeping safe all that
appertained to her husband N^bal, so that nothing was missing, whilst he was a
wall unto him and his people by night and by day, made haste and took two
hundred Loaves two Bottles of Wine, five Sheep ready dressed, five measures of
parched Corn, an hundred Clusters or Lumpes of Raisins, and two hundred Cakes
of Figgs, and entreated him to accept of the blessing or present which she had
brought unto him, 1 Samuel ca. 25.
then the indiscretion, ingratitude, and folly of her Husband Nabal; and
consider that even the Beasts of the Forest would think themselves more happy
and safe when the Lion shall have his Food and Diet provided for him and his
family, then that he and the young Lions should roar for hunger, and that it
would be better for the Shephard to bring him a Lamb or two of the Flock, then
to enforce him in the extremity of hunger to come and take away three times as
many more and carry to his Den.

That the Turks may as they have for many ages past rejoice in the foolish
covetousness of the Citizens of Constantinople, whose generations may curse and
abominate their selfishness, and then supposed wisdom in denying their Emperor
money and means to defend them, bewail the loss of Greece, and weep unpittied
for their children when they are by the command of that grand Tyrant of the
Mohammedan Empire, taken from them, and driven like herds of Cattle and Flocks
of Sheep, never more to know or remember their parents, or be of the Christian
Religion, to his Serraglio, where the Males are bred up in the service of his
wars or civil affairs, and many of their daughters made to be his Concubines.

And the French may lament their ill usage of their King Charles the seventh in
his great extremities in refusing necessary Aids to resist the successes of our
English Conquering forefathers, which brought the Pesantry and lower ranks of
that ^ince Gabelled and over Salted people, not only to their present miseries,
and that fertility of Taxes which is since most fatally rivetted and entailed
upon them, but the loss of all their liberties.

Experience having told our Progenitors how much the necessities and wants of
some of our Kings and Princes, have heretofore given way to the excursions of
some of their servants and Ministers, upon the rights and liberties of the
people, which made the Lords and Commons in Parliament frequently in sundry
Ages and Parliaments past, to take a great care for the support and honor of
their Housekeeping, the preserving of the Kings Rights and Revenues, and the
punishment of such as were any cause of the waste or diminishing of it.

And that a supply of the Kings wants, or for the payment of his debts, could
never yet, nor can be so Arithmetically made or proportioned either as to what
was past or to come, as to even the Tax or Assessements of the people, or to
make them to be just so much and no more then the Kings wants, but were always
like the Tax in France for money to buy the Queen Pins; or the Aids given to
some Foreign Princes to marry their eldest daughters, which amounted unto many
times double the sum of the greatest portions which they gave with them; or the
Aides in England to make the Prince or the Kings eldest son a Knight, when the
expenses never came near the sum contributed, and as heretofore the City of
London and other Cities and Corporations have done in their Taxes and Subsidies
leavyed upon the Citizens and Townsmen, which did usually by a considerable
everplus furmount the necessities and occasions of them.

Or if there could be any Reason, Prudence, or Religion, for the people to
permit their Sovereign who is to protect and defend them to live under the
Tyranny, discredits and pressures of Debts and necessities, when as that which
is grievous or too much for him to bear, may easily be supplied or helped by a
contribution of the multitude, or many giving every one a little.

It cannot be for their good that the Kings small Revenue, and the Hospitality
and honor of his housekeeping should be subject to the enhaunce of Prices,
cosening and cheating of Tradesmen, and of every one which his Officers and
Servants shall have occasion to deal with, or that the Royal Revenues should be
like Pharaohs lean kine, devoured by the fat, or daily tormented and gnawn upon
like Titius heart in the Fable, with greedy and never gorged Vultures.

Which if the King and his Revenue could bear at the present, will be every
year and oftener more increased, as the pride of the people and their avarice,
and cheating to maintain it shall multiply.

When such a great Provision of Meat and Victuals as is necessarily to be made
for the Kings household, and his multitude of Servants and Attendants, will when
his Provision shall not be sent in (as formerly to his Court which did prevent
it) sweep and take away the best sorts of Provisions from the Markets, and as
experience has already told us, make scarce and dear, all Commodities not only
in the Markets within the Virge, or in or near London, but in the more remote
places, or threescore miles off, and as far as Salisbury, all that can be
brought to the Markets near the Kings residence or his occasions.

Teach the people to heighten their Prices whose measure and rule of Conscience
is to ask high rates, and take as much as by any pretenses, tales, falsehoods or
devices they can get; and more of the King, Nobility, and Gentry, then of the
Mechanic or Common people, and get thereby unjustly of the King more then all
their Subsidies and Assessements (if they be not very great) shall come unto.

And if the great enhaunce of Prices were not or could not be so great a
consumption of the Kings Revenue, it must needs be altogether indecent and
unbefitting the Duty and Honor of Subjects to their Kings.

That the Kings Harbingers should be so ill entertained as one of them was
lately by one of the Tribe of Na^al at Windsor, at the solemnities of the Feast
of the Garter, who answered his demand in the Kings name for lodgings for some
of the Kings Court or retinue, that the King had quitted his Pourveyance, and
was now no more unto him then another man, and he was at liberty to let his
lodgings to any one who would give him six pence more.

Or as one of his Pourveyors was by a London Poulterer by Trade, and a Captain
by a sinful and mistaken Commission, who (upon the engagement of an
unwarrantable Covenant, with hands lifted up to heaven to testify his Loyalty
to the late King Charles the Martyr, whilst with the same hands he did fight
against his Person and Authority for liberty of Conscience, to destroy him and
his more Loyal and Honest Subjects, did no longer ago then the last Christmas
(when he should have bewailed his Rebellion, and the sad account which he was
to make to God for those numberless sins which he had accumulated by engaging
in such an ungodly and unwarrantable war, and should have bin more thankful for
his Majesty's Pardon and Act of Indemnity, and abhorred and repented his
former wickedness) buy against the will of the Kings Pourveyer, three Bitterness
which he was bargaining for and buying of a Poulterer, and though he was
informed by the Pourveyor that he was buying, and had bid money for them for
the King, could in a most unchristian, rude, and barbarous manner, say, He
cared not a Turd for the King, he had bought and would have them, and would by
no means be persuaded to permit the Kings Pourveyer to have them.

Or that every Clown and Carter* and every man's Kitchin-Maid, shall in matters
of Market and Provision, be at liberty to buy Salmons, Phesants, Partriches,
Bustards, or the like, fitter for the King then their Masters or Mistresses out
of his Pourveyers hands.

Or if the product of the taking away of the Pourveyance and Compositions for
them could be so innocent as not to swell and multiply the Kings charges beyond
its just or former dimensions, there will be many other Evils and
Inconveniences, by enforcing the Officers and servants of the Kings-houshold
to buy and provide his and their food and provisions as the common people do
theirs, when they shall be larded or inlaid with all the oaths, deceits, and
pretenses which the invention of the Market people can possibly lay upon it,
and when that and many over-reaches and cou^ening tricks shall be endured,
cannot by the carelessness of the Clerks of the Market, and too many of the
Justices of the Peace, be always at any certainty that they do not buy the Beef
of some diseased Ox or Cow, which had the knavish help of a Butcher to make
man's meat of that which was more fit to make a Feast for the Crows, or such
Dogs as should have the happiness to smell out the Carrion, and go a share with
them, or that the Poultery which they shall buy were not killed by some
accident or disease, as many times they are before they are brought or offered
to be sold.

And if that and all the many other mischiefs and inconveniences which shall
happen by taking away the Kings Pourveyances and Compositions for them,
levelling him, and his Officers, and Servants, and ranking them in the business
of Markets amongst the Vulgus and Plebeians, or common or rudest sort of the
people, and rendering them in the particular of Pourveyance in a worse
condition, and more to be exacted upon then many of the Nobility, Gentry, and
Lords of Manors are, whose Tenants are not at liberty to use them, either as
Strangers or Inferiors, and in as bad a condition as the poorest or meanest
laborer of the Parish, were fit to be endured or could be reckoned amongst the
honors and respects due unto the Soveraignity and Majesty of Kings, there will
be added and brought to those heaps of evils, another of no small detriment in
the rise of the wages and main^ainance of the Kings Officers and Servants, who
were hithe^to paid and encouraged more by the plenty of the Kings Provisions,
and their Tables and Diet, and some Fees and avails allowed them out of it,
then by the yearly Wages and Pensions which were given unto them, which being
when they were first given of a far greater value then now they are, and were
then esteemed sufficient for his great and subordinate officers and servants,
being as they ought to be men of honor, worship, and reputation, are and will
be now without those Diets, Fees, and Allowances, by the alteration of the
times, and the Rates and Prices of Apparel and victuals, and the Wages and
keeping of their own servants and manner of livelihood (in regard that, they
which are to stand before Princes, are by allowance and pattern of Holy Writ,
to be more then ordinarily Dieted, Apparrelled, and Clothed) too petit and
unworthy for a King to give, or for such his servants to take, and without any
possibility of a comely and decent maintenance and subsistence in the service
of a King, which requires a more honorable and well accoutred Retinue, then any
of his Nobility, Gentry or Subjects.

As may appear by the Lord High Admirals yearly Fee of two hundred Marks. The
Treasurer of the household besides his Table 123 l. -- 14 s. The Cofferers Fee
besides his Table 100 l. Carvers fifty Marks a piece. Cup-bearers fifty Marks a
piece. The Pages of the Privy Chamber forty shillings a piece. The Captain of
the Guard 14 l. The Sergeant of the Ewries Fee 11 l. -- 8 s. -- 1 d. -- ob.
Sergeant of the Bakehouse 11 l. -- 8 s. -- 1 d. -- ob. Sergeant of the Pantry
11 l. -- 8 s. -- 1 d. -- ob. Seven Yeomen five pound a piece. Grooms Fee 2 l.
-- 13 s. -- 4 d. Two Pages forty shillings a piece. Sergeant of the Cellar 11
l. -- 8 s. -- 1 d. -- ob. Sergeant of the Pastry 11 l. -- 8 s. -- 1 d. -- ob.
Sergeant of the Poultry 11 l. -- 8 s. -- 1 d. -- ob. Clarks Fee 6 l. -- 13 s.
-- 4 d. Four Yeomen Pourveyors 7 l. -- 13. s. -- 4 d. a piece. Two Yoemen of
the boiling house fifty pounds a piece. Three Grooms 2 ^. -- 13 s. -- 4 d. Two
Pages forty shillings a piece. Clarks Fee 6 l. -- 13 s. -- 4 d. Sergeant of
the Wood-yard 11 l. -- 13 s. -- 4 d.

Which small yearly Pensions to the great and other Officers before mentioned
as they are termed above stairs are made out and supplied by some other Fees
and profits belonging to their places and the favor and bounty of the King in
other profits and emoluments by suits and requests on the behalf of themselves
and others bestowed upon them.

And the Officers or servants below Stairs, as they are called, have their
offices and places enlarged by some availes and allowances, as may be instanced
in these particulars, viz.

The Sergeant of the Ewrie has by ancient custom for his Fee all Dyaper spent
by the King only dampened or damnified.

The Sergeant of the Bakehouse, all the Bran coming and arising of all the
Wheat baked for the which he does find all Bolting Clothes.

The Sergeant of the Pantry, the Cover-pans, Drinking Towels, and other Lynnen
Clothes dampened.

The Sergeant of the Cellar, the empty Caskes of Wine spent, and Cupboard
clothes damnified.

The Yeoman Trayer has for his Fees all the Lees of the Wines within four
fingers of the Chyme of all the Wines spent, and all the Wines shed with
drawing.

The Yeoman of the Bottles all the drinking Towels Dampened or Dampnified.

The Sergeant of the Pastery is to have by like ancient custom the Bran of the
Meal spent, the Legs of Beeves at four principal Feasts in the year only, and
all the Legs of Muttons bakt through the year stricken in the first joint.

The Sergeant of the Poultery, the Gray Cony skins from Alhallontide to
Shrovetide.

The Clerk has all the black and Dun Coney Skins.

The Sergeant of the Accatrie, the Head of the Ox, the Tongue, Midriff, Panch,
and four Feet.

The Yeoman and Grooms have the Belly-peice, Sticking-peice, and Rump of the
Ox, the Sheeps head, Gather, and Calves Feet.

The Boiling house has for Fee, the dripping of the Roast, the stripping cut
off from the Brisket and Surloine piece of Beif, and the Grease coming of the
drawing of the Beif out of the Lead being in the Kettles or Pans.

And the officers of the Woodyard, all the small Taps of Woods of the Kings
Fell for the expenses of his household.

All which several sorts of Fees, allowances and avails, are not by the orders
of the Kings house to be had or taken without the Comptrolment and view of the
Clerks Comptrollers, or the Clerk in every office.

And being in many things but parallel, and like unto that which the Nobility
and Gentry do allow unto their servants for rewards and encouragements, as to
the Gentleman of the Horse, the cast or over-ridden horses, to the Keepers of
Parks the Umbles, Shoulders and Skins of Deer, a Fee of ten shillings permitted
to be taken of every one that has a Buck or Do given them, and the Browse and
windfall Wood, to servants, the going of some Horses or Sheep in their grounds,
to Cooks the Kitchin-stuffe, and to Butlers the chippings and waste Bread and
Beer, etc.

Are in the case of diverse of the Kings Officers and servants, eiked and
peiced out by the Kings bounty and grace in some pieces of Plate given to them
for new years gifts, which in Anno 25 H. 8. (and it is likely that the same or
something like unto it, was and is every year retained as a custom) in what
was given by him unto diverse of his Nobility, Bishops, and household officers
and servants amounted unto above one thousand pounds sterling, as appears by an
account signed with the Sign Manual of that King communicated unto me by Mr.
Thomas Falconbridge one of the Deputy Chamberlaines of the Exchequer, In
Recept. Scac^ar.
very well skilled in our English Antiquities, and a great lover and preserver
of the Ancient Rolls and Records in the Office of the Receipt of the Exchequer,
and by many other allowances, and some permissions and connivences to support
the honor of our Kings in their household affairs, Trains, and attendants which
would not otherwise be allowed or permitted, and would cost the King as much or
more in Wages or other Pensions if they were not, nor would need to be if the
Rates and Prices of livelihood did not so exceedingly and beyond all measure
and reason surpass the ancient Wages and Pensions of the Court which may escape
any, either the severe censures or sullen murmurings of some of the people,
when as the difference in the Kings Wages and Rewards to and upon his officers
and servants, betwixt what was heretofore (to make no greater a retrospect,
then one hundred or two hundred years ago) and what he is now necessitated
unto, reaches a great deal beyond the peoples extraordinary charges in his
Pourveyance and compositions; and that his Officers and Servants are not as in
the reign of King H. 3. French and Poictovins, or Bohemians, as in the Reign of
King R. 2. or Gascoignes, as in the Reign of his Supplanter King H. 4. but are
for the most part English, and the sons or sons in Law, Nephews, kindred, and
relations of those that are to furnish the provisions of his household at some
under value or loosing rates and prices, and in that way are no great loosers
or none at all; if it were not every one of the peoples interest as well as
duty to help the King in his provisions for housekeeping, who is their Buckler
and ready help upon all occasions, and gave many of them that which may very
well enable them to do it.

And it cannot become either the Majesty or business of the King if he had as
he has not a large Demeasne, Vineyards and Olive Trees, 1 Chronicles. ca. 27^
as David and the Kings of Israel and Juda had, who kept Tillage in their own
hands, and had flocks of Sheep and Lambs, and Herds of Cattle feeding in Sharon
and the valleys, wherewith to make and perform their often sacrifices, which
(though not so great as that which Solomon made at the Dedication of the Temple
when he sacrificed twenty and two thousand Oxen and twenty thousand Sheep) were
with his many other sacrifices every year upon the Altar of the Lord which he
had built before the Porch of the Temple very costly and chargeable (and yet
had his household provisions yearly served in by a rate.)

To engage or trouble himself and the Officers and Servants of his Court being
men of another manner of extraction and business in the low and laborious
labors, or skill of Ploughmen, Herdsmen, or Husbandmen, or of buying and
selling Cattle, when they are not at all instructed or educated therein, or to
have their Court and Palaces encumbered with the making of Butter and Cheese,
breeding and feeding of Poultry with the employments belonging thereunto, which
are usually managed by those inferior ranks and degrees of women, who are only
necessary for those or the like kind of Encumbrances, which however it may
with other sorts of people be very subservient and consistent with Hospitality
and house keeping, and the necessaries thereunto; and that the breeding and
raising of their own household provisions, and the having it of their own, did
heretofore very much enable our Nobility and Gentry in their Hospitalities and
housekeeping, yet it was never according to the prudence and wisdom of the
Egyptians, Greeks and Romans, Boemus de mo^i^us Gentium, Sigonius de Repub
Athenien. lib. 1.481. and de Antique Ju^e Prov^iciarum l^b. 2.
and by all or the major part of Nations thorough so many ages and so much
experimented right Reason, thought fitting or becoming the Majesty, State, and
employment of Kings and Princes, who (as Quintius Cincinnatus well understood
it when he left his Plough and Country life, to help the Romans his Countrymen,
when in their great distress they choose him to be their Dictator:) are more
especially to employ their time and cares in military affairs, and the daily
importunities and troubles of State and Government.

And when those kind of high and important affairs shall give them any ease or
respiration, Aristotel. politic. lib. 7. ca. 9.
Opus est quiet and otio ad virtutem c^mparandam and ad Rempublicam gerendam;
It is requisite (says Aristotle) that universal searcher into Nature, and all
manner of Learning and Policy,) that such as govern or employ themselves in
Magistracy should have leisure to contemplate Virtue, and the best ways, and
means, of Government; and that in optima Republica, the best kind of
Government (by which he understands Monarchy, which he else where prefers
before all other, and calls it Divine) nec certe Agricoloe, men that busy
themselves in Husbandry are not to be admitted into it.

Which being granted by all that are in any Amity or correspondence with their
own understanding, it will by a most undeniable consequence or conclusion,
necessarily follow, that the Officers and Servants of the King are either to
buy his provisions for housekeeping at the Markets, or where else it may be
had, or take, or receive it as formerly they did by ancient right and custom
by way of Pourveyance and Composition, and that the buying of it as he does
now, when he has not his Pourveyance and Composition, will if they pay not
ready money, but add instead of interest a greater rate then they shall pay who
do buy with ready money, and if they do buy with ready money, which in such a
consumption, as the Kings Estate and Revenue languisheth under, they are not
likely to do, will not be able after such exorbitant rates long to continue
payment of ready money, and if those notwithstanding who shall be employed be
not the honester, may take of the Kings Officers more money then they lay out,
and by serving his provisions in at a certain rate, gain a quarter or fourth
part of the price in every thing they buy. Such or the like good services being
now by a general way of Shift and cosening, bred and nursed up by the late
unhappy Rebellion and liberties of sinning, and are now so much in fashion, as
too many of the Cook-maids or servants in private houses and families will out
of every joint of meat, and things which they are sent to buy at the Market, or
in any other place, Tax and sconse their Master or Mistresses purses, as much
as their ill Consciences shall direct them, and think they have bad services if
they have not besides their meat, drink, lodging, and as much wages again as
fromerly they had, the benefit of their Basket, as they term it, and going to
Market to cozen or cheat ten or fifteen pounds more then their yearly Wages,
and if their Masters to prevent it shall agree with the Butcher to serve them
at a rate all the year for Beef, Veal, Lamb and Mutton, will be so impudent as
to threaten to carry their Masters custom some where else, or not pay the money
which is sent to pay them, unless they may have poundage allowed them, and may
after that rate and fashion of their pride and cheating their Masters to
maintain it, make themselves in a little time to be free of the Corporation of
Judas, whilst too many Citizens or Tradesmen, notwithstanding the great care
which they seem to take of Truth and Religion, preaching of the Word, purity of
the Gospel, Family Duties, Catechizing their servants, repetition of Sermons,
walking the ways of God, and a good conscience, and their fear of the increase
of Popery, Superstition, Idolatry, and the impending judgments of God for the
sins of the Nation, can by most wicked combinations entice and allure their
customers, servants, to cozen and cheat their Masters by stretching the
reckonings, and making them, to be due unto themselves, can give them an
allowance or present out of it of ten shillings, or some other sum of money in
a Bill of four or five pounds, and give an acquittance for it, as if they
themselves had received it.

So as all manner of cozening and artificial and newly devised trim ways of
cheating, under the pretense and color of Religion, honesty, and doing of
faithful service, having like some Epidemick and general contagion, infected
and spread it self through almost all the ranks and degrees of the people; the
King who is like to be most abused by it, has now a greater necessity then
ever of his Compositions for Pourveyance, and of the several Counties serving
in their Provisions, for that otherwise so great a number of Harpies and
Gyps^es as his officers and servants shall meet with, in the buying of his
household Provisions, will make a great allowance or assignments in money for
household expenses, which several Acts of Parliament in the Reign of King H. 7.
King H. 8. Queen Elizabeth and King James, did in aid of the Pourveyance or
Compositions for them limit and appoint to be paid toward the charge of
housekeeping, out of several parts of the revenue, as some out of the profits
of the Court of Wards, some out of Fee Farm Rents, and others out of the
Customs, yet unrepealed, to be but as a very little, and render it altogether
insufficient, and not the one half so much in value as the allowance or money
shall seem to be.

Or if the King had had a yearly sum of money to be yearly charged upon the
people, and paid by them in lieu of the Pourveyance, as it was designed by a
Bill for an Act of Parliament thrice read in the house of Peers in Parliament
in the first year of the Reign of King James and passed, and sent down to the
house of Commons, and being by them not assented unto, but another Bill for an
Act of Parliament prepared and sent up in stead of the former, and the
abolishing of all Pou^veyance, and fifty thousand pound per annum in recompense
thereof, granted to be leavy^d upon the Lands in every County of England, and
prosecuted no further then the twice reading of that Bill.

Such an yearly sum of money, being afterward yearly drawn and forced from
those uses by some greater necessities, would have left the King to more wants,
and his people to a greater necessity of supplying him, or if it had been then
as it is now supposed to be, satisfied by a grant of the moiety of the Excise
of Ale, Beer, Sider, Perry, and other compounded drinks, to be yearly paid to
him his heirs and Successo^s, those yearly profits would have been under the
like fate of being otherwise employed, and whether in that way, or by the fifty
thousand pound per annum to be charged upon the people, would not have been a
just and ad^equate recompense for the yearly loss (if no more) of seventy three
thousand six hundred pounds fourteen shillings and seven pence, which the King
now sustaineth for want of his prae-emption, Pou^veyance, or Compositions for
them, by how much the sum of seventy three thousand six hundred pounds fourteen
shillings and seven pence per annum, if no fur^her addition of damage should
happen, exceeds fifty thousand pounds per annum, and by how much the moiety
of such an Excise might as it does now fall a great deal short of the estimate
or yearly Income, which it was believed to be.

Nor can come up unto that equality or rule of justice which ought to be in
laying of Assessements or Taxes upon the common people for a general and
public good wherein every man being concerned ought to contribute, for that
such a Tax or Imposition for the Pourveyance, will be as wide of it, as to lay
the burden of the rich upon the poor, compel the Aged, Lame, or Impotent* to
maintain the young more healthy and able, or to enforce a contribution of the
County of Oxford, toward the Sea Walls, Inning of Marshes, or draining of
Fennes in Norfolk and Lincol^eshire, constrain men to freight out Ships and pay
custom for the goods of Merchants, when they shall partake nothing of the
gains, and make all the Counties and people of England* to pay a far greater
Tax then the Compositions for Pourveyance amounted unto for to purchase a
discharge of Compositions for Pourveyance, which lay but lightly upon all but
twelve or thirteen Shires or Counties which are near adjacent unto London, and
gave them little or no trouble at all, to ease those twelve or thirteen
Counties which gained ten times more by the Pourveyance, and the Kings
residence at London, then what they ever paid or contributed toward it.

And may well miscarry in the hopes ot wishes of the peoples content or
approbation, when as such a recompense as the King is supposed to have by it,
and as much again laid upon the people by the fraud and exactions of the
Brewers and sellers of Ale and Beer, etc* and the peoples oppressing and
cheating of one another, by pretense and color of it, and in the Farming or
collecting of it shall be extorted or taken out of the necessities or excess of
his subjects, the groans and complaints of the poorer sort of them, and the
murmurings and discontents of the rich and more able to bear it, who will not
be persuaded but that it is an Artifice of the Nobility and Gentry, to ease
themselves of other necessary duties and payments by taking it off their own
shoulders, and putting it upon theirs.

And the poorer sort of people who were never used to be troubled with any
charge or payments toward Pourveyance and Compositions, and by their weakness
of Purse and Estate, are always more sensible and complaining of any burdens
which shall be laid upon them; shall as they will find themselves to be
loosers in the rise and heightning of all victuals and provisions to be bought,
as much or more then the yearly charge of the Kings Pourveyance and
Compositions did amount unto, for that the Kings price will increase that of
the Nobility, that of the Nobility will raise the Gentry in their prices, and
the unreasonable rates and prices which the Gentry must be constrained to give,
will raise that of the common people, and a price once raised and fixed, but
for a little time is so by the craft and sinful pretenses of the sellers kept
up and continued as it seldom falls again, but rises higher and higher, and as
far as they can possibly stretch or strain it, so as none will be gainers but
the sellers, who are not a third part of the people, and their gains must be
made out of the losses and damage of the King and two parts of the people.

Who will also be put in a worse condition when the King by a daily waste and
consumption in his Revenue by such exactions and prices imposed upon him in
buying his household provisions at such intolerable rates and prices, as the
unbounded avarice, gnawing and grinding advantages of the sellers shall be
pleased to put upon him, shall for want of his Pourveyance or Compositions be
enforced to lay down his Officers and Servants Tables, and put all or most of
his servants to Board-wages, and that the money which shall be intended or
assigned to pay them, shall afterward upon some emergencies or necessities of
State affairs for the defense or preservation of himself or his people be
transferred to other important uses.

When the wants and cravings of his servants who cannot live by unpaid Arrears,
may set them to hunt the people for monys which they suppose may by reason of
some neglected rights or concealments, be due from them to the King their
Master, or to devise projects, and persuade him to strain his Prerogative in
the reformation of known abuses in Trade, or other dealings, wherein many of
the people do appear to be very great gainers, more then by Law or Conscience
they ought, to be, to the end that he might help his servants, who think it to
be reasonable enough for them to essay lawful ways and means to support
themselves, whilst they conceive that they should not have wanted their daily
bread or maintenance, if the business of the Commonwealth, and the Kings care
of the people in general had not bereaved or deprived them in their particulars.

And that their sufferings, want of Wages and fitting maintenance was to
procure the welfare and happiness of their fellow subjects.

Or if that way which many times galls and vexes more in the manner then the
things themselves shall not extend unto their relief, will at the best after
dangerous discontents and commotions in the minds of the people, but beget
larg^ Taxes and Assessements in exchange of projects or some other necessitated
incursions upon the peoples liberties, or produce some Artifices of Policies of
State to raise money from them, as the Crusadoes by the Popes in the Reign of
King Henry the third, Mat. Paris 803.913.
and dispensing for money with such as had engaged to go to the wars in the
holy Land, and were sick or not able, or had a mind to ^arry at home; or as
some Kings and Princes have done by pretending fears of invasion from some
neighbor Princes, or a necess^ty of transporting the war out of their own into
an enemies Country, and when they had raised great sums of money and made ready
their Armies, dismissed all but the money which was gained by them, to return
home again upon an overture of a peace, or a certainty that there was no need
or likelihood of wars.

When it is well known that the people had no just cause to complain of the
Pourveyance or Compositions for it* nor of the Cart taking, as to themselves or
their servants, when the Masters had two pence a mile allowed them for their
Horses and Carts, which most commonly went not above twelve miles from their
habitations, the Horses having no want of Grass, Provender, or Hey; the men had
better Beer and Victuals then they had at home. And the owners of Carts and
Horses within the Virge of the Kings houses, or Palaces, or in the way of his
progress, were no loosers by his coming when either for his recreation or
refreshment, or to visit the several parts and Provinces of his kingdom, he
should think fit to make his progress to meet with and redress any complaints
or grievances which should happen therein.

So as the fault must needs be in themselves, if they would now find fault
with that which they could not do before; when as those just and ancient rights
of the Kings of England, and duties of their subjects, were always so
necessary and inseparable to the Crown and their Imperial dignity, as that if
our ancient Kimgs of England had not enjoyed those their just rights (which the
fury of the Barons wa^s against King John, and his son King Henry the third,
and those grand advantages which they had over those Kings in so great a
commotion of the people, which the power and interests of those Barons (for all
had not laid aside their loyalty) had stirred up against them, did not in the
making and confirming of our Magna Charta think fit to deny them if they paid
the antiqua pretia ancient rates and hire) they could not without an immense
charge, which we do not find they were at have removed so often and so far as
they did from London, to their several houses and Palaces (which their many
Forests, Chases, and Parks, for their disport and Hunting in several Counties
and remote parts of the Kingdom will evidence, that they did not seldom do) and
make so many Voyages into Normandy, as our Norman Kings William Rufus and Henry
the first, and their successor Henry the second, and he and his son King John,
and Richard the second did into Ireland, or as other of their predecessors did
into Wales, or as King James did from and into Scotland, or King Charles the
Martyr, his son when he went thither to be Crowned, nor keep their Christmas
and other Festivals, or their Parliaments as many of our Kings and their
successors did in several places of the Kingdom, which their Letters Pattents
dated from thence, do frequently testify, or the term as King Edward the first
did at York.

Neither could our late Royal Martyr King Charles the first have made so good a
shift as he did to remove himself and his Court Northerly, and to York in the
year 1641. to save himself from the London tumults, nor have gathered Forces,
or had means or time to defend himself and his people, if he had released and
forbid his Pourveyances by Act of Parliament, but must like a Bird without
Feathers, or with broken wings, have been taken with a little running after,
and been brought back again by the Sheriff of the first County he had escaped
into, which the Rebellious pa^ty in the late distempered and fatally unhappy
Parliament, were confident would have been the consequence of his going away
from them without granting unto them his regality, and surrendering up the care
and protection of his people into their arbitrary way of governing them in his
name to their own use, and as they pleased by Votes and Ordinances.

If his officers and servants could not when the Factious party in that
Parliament had seized his Rents and Revenues, have hired a Cart for his use
without an order or provision of Carts and Horses made by the appointment of
two of the next Justices of Peace, or at a lesser rate then six pence a mile,
or what more every rich sturdy Clown, or his rude unmannerly servants should
have demanded of them to be paid before hand, and upon refusal of their Carts
or Carriages should have had no other remedy but to complain to the Justices of
Peace to compel or punish them.

The want of which part of the Royal Pourveyance, as well as his other
Pourveyance and Compositions for them, hindering his now Majesty in the last
Summer 1661. when he intended a Progress to visit his loyal City of Worcester,
the Roy^l ever to be remembered Oak, and the places of his marvelous escape in a
grateful acknowledgement of Gods never to be forgotten mercies showed unto him
in that his greatest of distresses, so as he could not either then or ever
since perfect or put in execution, that his pious and most Christian-like
resolution may inform every one that is not more then deaf to all reason, that
it was the Nations concernment that the King should not have wanted the
assistance of his Pourveyance to have gone to the place of that his
extraordinary deliverance, to have rendered thanks for himself and his people,
who may be said to have been delivered in him, and escaped with him.

And if it had not been such an ancient right, should not have been denied him
in his necessities; which Cicero who was as great a Commonwealths man in Rome
and lover of it, Tully lib. de. offici^^.
as any of our Republicans could be in England, was of opinion, ought to be
obeyed, ubi pro salute Reipublicae, Molina de ^^st. and Jur. Tom 3. disput^t.
674. and C^^ar^u. ad ^ep. peccatum.
where it is for the good of the Commonwealth. And Molin^ and Couarruvias, do
think it no adventure to conclude that in that case Subditi non sunt excusati
in foro conscientiae, si tributa collectas, etc. detrectent aut fraud
circumveniant, Subjects are not in conscience to be excused if they delay or
deny to pay their Tributes or dues, or shall use any deceit in the payment of
them.

For it can be no other then the weal public, and an universal good and
benefit that the King, who although he be Gods Deputy, is not as he is
Omniscient or Omnipres^nt, nor can at once or a far off see and understand all
the Actions of his subjects, should like the Sun in his course visit at several
times as many parts and places of his Kingdom as he can, and it must needs be a
great damage to his people that the King who is not to be chained like the
Roman Gods to the Capitol, or forced into the condition of some Foggy Citizen
of London, who being born within the sound of Bow Bell, thinks it a great
adventure to travil any further; should be kept for want of his Pourveyance,
from the knowledge of his people, who can not justly complain that their
burdens, or grievances when there are any (as some will always be in the most
Pacifique and happy Government, and are many times not at all occasioned by any
public affairs or inconveniences, but by the peoples afflicting and
oppressing one another (a small matter being to a weak man, or of an encumbered
estate, or overcharged with children, misfortunes, or debts, a burden or
grievance, which to one that is otherwise, would seem light or trivial, and
scarce worth the taking notice of.)

Are not remedied, or can no sooner get through the throng or crowds of
pleasures, designs, or interests, which too much and too often infest and
injure the Courts of Princes and their good intentions, or that they cannot
find intercessors or opportunities when they shall for want of his Pourveyances
and progresses, confine him to one place of residence, nor may wonder that he
is so much in want of money, and complain that they should so often be enforced
to give entertainment to Subsidies, Taxes, and Assessments to supply him, and
the public affairs, when as they themselves do not only increase his wants by
putting dear rates and unreasonable prices upon him, but constrain him by
reason of the loss of his Pourveyance, to reside altogether at London, where
nothing but devout cheating and knavery is cheap, when David was sometimes at
Hebron, and Solomon at Gibeon as well as at Jerusalem. And it must needs be very
necessary that Kings should sometimes by their progesses visit their several
Provinces, and inquire into the contents or discontents, weal or woe of their
Subjects, when they have not an hundred eyes like Argus, nor Lynceus his sharp
sight to see as he is said to have done at a great distance, nor can make use
of their own eyes and ears, the truest and best Intelligencers, if they shall
be always tied up to one and the same House or Palace, where the mists and
clouds of Flattery, the bane and ruin of Princes and their Kingdoms, and
people, and multitudes of varnished designs, do hourly interpose, keep out or
abuse any true information which shall be given or made unto them of the
grievances of the people, who like Cripples, or Mephibosheth, lame of their
feet, cannot reach the gracious eyes or ears of their Prince, but must give
against their wills advantages to every lying and deceitful Ziba, to misuse or
divert the effect of their Princes cares and good intentions which makes
Progresses to be so useful, and to have been heretofore so observed and
unneglected by our English as well as all other Kings and Princes, whereby to
understand as Philippus Honorius says, Philipp Honorius Thesaur. Politic.
La natura di subditi, the manners and employment well or ill being of their
subjects, and the performance, or neglect of subordinate Governors, and to
rejoice, and comfort themselves in their love and acclamations, and should
therefore have their eyes like Gods-providence, running to and fro the Land, as
much as mortality and its frailties can permit them, which has taught the
great Monarch of Industan not only yearly to make his progresses into several
parts of his Dominions, but wherever he resides to show himself, every evening
out of his window about Sun setting to the people, and to cause a little Bell
to be hung in the room where he sits, by the cord whereof conveyed without the
door, and suitor or petitioner may ring the Bell and be admitted. And the
unhappy Childerick King of France, keeping too much within doors all the rest
of the year, could notwithstanding be persuaded to exhibit and show himself to
the people every May day.

The necessity and good use of Progresses being to be subscribed unto, and
acknowledged when the King shall diffuse his comforts to all that shall be
within the circumference or neighborhood of his abode, when he shall not by his
Royal influence and neighborhood, make one part of his Kingdom an East or West
Indies, and all the rest or the major part thereof to be a Greenland, or place
uncomfortable, but extend his bounty and goodness at several times and seasons
to all his people.

When many a petition and request shall not need to make a costly journey to
London, when the prices of the Markets raised higher then they were before by
his Train and Retinue coming amongst them, and the confluence of many people
from all parts within or near unto the neighborhood, shall reimburse the
Sellers a great deal more then those parts, or their neighborhood, did pay or
were charged with, either for Compositions for Pourveyance, or Cart taking,
when some Cities and Towns, as many have done shall be much the better by an
enlargement of their Charters, or a grant of some immunities and privileges to
them their successors and after generations in perpetuity.

When some families may be forever made happy as one was in a progress of King
James, when a careful Gentlewoman with her seven young children, having too
small an estate to educate them, being purposely placed in a stand where the
King was brought to shoot at a Deer, and pleasantly tendered to the King as a
Hen with her seven Chicken, gave his Princely charity and bounty the
opportunity to take them into his care and service when they came to be fit for
it, and brought either all or most of them to great preferments, when poor
people or their children being lame or diseased with the sickness called the
Kings Evil, may be freed from their otherwise tedious journeys and charges in
going to London, their abode there and returning home, which if a Tax were laid
upon their Parishes to furnish, would come to as much if not more then the
charge of Cart taking and Pourveyance did cost them. When our Pool of Bethesda
shall be Itinerant, and the good Angel shall yearly ride his Circuit to bring
blessings and cures to those that need it, and where a multitude of people
shall not be the cause of uncovering the roof of any house to let down the
sick in their beds to be healed.

All which with many other comforts and benefits which the King by his progress
or residence brings to all which are or shall be near it. The City of York in
the North parts of England, and her adjacent and neighbor Provinces would
purchase at a greater rate then the Pourveyances or Compositions for them, do
or did ever yearly amount unto, and being like to be great and glad gainers by
it, would be most cheerfully willing and ready to carry or remove his
travailing goods or utensils from or to any of his Royal houses at his no
contemptible or unreasonable rates or Prices.

O^ the City of Worcester, or Town of Shrowsbury, with their adjacent bordering
Shires would in the prospect or certain gain of it, be not at all discontented
or troubled at the neighbo^hood of such an enriching staple comfort.

Which every man may believe when as he must be a great stranger to England, as
well as to common sense and understanding, who cannot apprehend how much relief
an old fashioned English Gentleman's house (for we must distinguish betwixt rich
hospitable good men, and those who being weary of Gods long continued mercies
and patience, do think they are not Gentlemen or well educated if they do not
swear as fast as they can God damn me, and the devil take me, and make
themselves, and their wives and children, their estate, and all that they have,
the prey and business of Tailors, Vintners, Cooks, Pimps, Flatterers, and all
that may consume them) is unto two or three Cottages or poor peoples houses
near unto it, what small Villages and Towns, and how mean, unfrequented; and
poor Oxford and Cambridge were before the founding of those famous
Universities, and the Colleges and Halls in them? How many Villages and some
Borrough Towns have been founded and built by the warmth and comfort of the
Kings Palaces, as Woodstock, etc. how many have been built or much augmented by
the neighborhood of Abbeys and Monasteries, etc. as Evesham, Reding, Bangor,
St. Albans, etc. and of Bishops houses, as Croydon, Lambeth, etc. though many
or most of the Religious Houses in England and Wales were at the first designed
and intended for solitude; How many great Towns and Villages in Middlesex,
Essex, and Kent have been more then in other Counties more remote, built or
much augmented and increased by the Kings residence at London, and the Port
Towns and convenience for Shipping? How many Farmers in Berkshire and other
Counties near London, have more then in those farther distant converted their
Barns into Gentlemen's Halls, or stately houses, and began their Gentility with
great and plentiful revenues to support it? What addresses or suites are often
made to Judges in their Circuits to transfer the keeping of the Assizes from
some City or Shire Town, to some other Town in the County to help or do them
some good, by the resort and company which comes to the Assizes, as to keep it
at Maidstone and not at Canterbury in the County of Kent; at Woolverhampton,
not at Stafford in the County of Stafford, etc. or to keep Terms in a time of
Pestilence, and adjornment from London to St. Albans, Hertford or Reding? and
how like an Antwerp or the Skeleton, or ruins of a forsaken City, the Suburbs
of London, now the greatest and beautifullest part of it would be if the
residence of the King and his Courts of Justice should be removed from thence
or discontinued? How many thousand families would be undone and ruined? and how
those stately buildings would for want of that daily comfort which they
received by it, moulder and sink down inter rudera, under its daily ^uines, and
give leave to the earth and grass to cover and surmount them, and turn the new
Troy, if that were not a fable, into that of the old.

Which the Citizens of London very well understood, when in the reign of King
Richard the second, and the infancy of those blessings and riches which since
have happened to that City by the Kings of England, making it to be their darling
or Royal Chamber, that King was so much displeased with them, as besides a fine
of ten thousand pounds imposed upon them for some misdemeanors, their liberties
seized, their Mayor committed prisoner to the Castle of Windsor, and diverse
Aldermen and substantial Citizens arrested; he removed his Court from London,
where not long before at a solemn Justes or Tourney, he had kept open house for
all comers, they most humbly and submissively pacified ^im, and procured his
return to so great a joy of the Citizens, as they received him with four
hundred of their Citizens on horseback clad all in one Live^y, and p^esented
the King and Queen with many rich gifts.

All which and more which may happen by the Kings want of his Pourveyance or
Compositions for them, and keeping him and his Officers and Servants in want of
money, or streightning him or them in their necessaries and daily provisions
may persuade every man to subscribe to these Axioms, that the more which the
King has the more the people have.

That whosoever cozens and deceives the King, cozens and deceives the people,
that the wants and necessities of the King and common parent which is to be
supplied by the people, are and will become their own wants and necessities.

That it cannot be for the good or honor of the Nation, that the King, who is
not only Anima, Cor, Caput, and Radix Reipublicae, the Soul, heart, head, and
foundation of the Commonwealth, but the defender and preserver of it, should
either want or languish in his honor and estate, when as unusquisque subditorum
says Valdesius Regi ut Capiti, cordique suo oppitulari debeat precipue ad
dignitatem Regiam Regnique auhoritatem publicam tuendam cum ut membrum
particeps fit gloriae qua Caput fruitur, Valdesius in proaem^o de praerogat.
R^gum Hispaniae.
every subject ought to assist his King as he would do his own head and heart,
and more especially to maintain and defend his Kingly dignity and authority for
that every member in the body pertakes of the good and honor which the head
enjoyes.

That it cannot be for the good or happiness of subjects to necessitate the
power of their Prince, or enforce him to try how far it can extend or prevail
to free himself from wants or pressures incumbent upon him* when as common
observation can tell us that small Brooks or Rivolets being stopped or obstructed
in their creeping Maeanders, or way unto the greater Rivers who are to conduct
and lead them into the great assembly or collection of waters, will go out of
their former gentleness, and either enforce a passage by inundations or break
their way through all the Barricadoes which can be made to restrain them, and
that the more they are endeavored to be restrained, the more they do rage, and
easily overcame and bear down before them all that can come in the way of their
combined fury stirred up and heightened by the necessities which were put upon
them. That a want of Revenue in a King to discharge common and ordinary
necessaries, makes necessitatem invincibilem and violentam, which says
Aristotle, ^od^n lib. 4. and 5. de repub. Aristot. Politic.
proposito and electioni prohibet and obstat, such an irresistible and violent
necessity as it enforces that which was never intended, nor would otherwise
have been done (which the Wisdom and Spirit of God in the vision which he
showed unto the Prophet Ezekiel, of the building and order of the Holy City,
Ezech. 46.8,
and the Revenues of the Prince held fit to prevent by a competent Revenue)
That Armies do notwithstanding all the cares and commands of their Generals,
and the severest Laws and Discipline of war, prohibiting spoil, rapine, or
plundering, break out for want of pay and necessaries into all manner of
disorders and oppressions, and that we need not enquire of the days of old, or
the Ages past, of the numberless mischiefs and inconveniences which have
inevitably followed the wants of Princes and the effects of power put on or let
loose by necessities.

And may sadly remember that the people of England denying the late blessed
King and Martyr his Customs of Tonnage and Poundage, did not only put him and
the cause of his Protestant Allies and friends into many disadvantages for want
of those aides which he would otherwise have been enabled to give them, and
enforced him to fall short of his desires and intentions therein, but to give
way to many of his craving Scots and wanting servants to take in the assistance
of his Royal Prerogative, and stretch it further then ever he intended. That
notwithstanding all the care which he could take that such grants and letters
Patents should not transgress or go beyond the bounds of the Law and the right
reason and use of it, and did upon the granting of many of those Patents, cause
the Patentees to become bound in Recognizances of great penalties to surrender
up their grants and letters Patents, if at any time he or his Council should
equi^e it. And had of his own accord in the year 1639. and 1640. by his
Proclamation called in above thirty of such Patents and Commissions as either
had been or were likely to be grievances unto the people, and in the beginning
of that long and unhappy Parliament had graciously condescended to th annulling
or abolition of all that did but resemble grievances, or were but likely to
produce them.

And that those Letters Patents, Commissions and Grants which were called
Projects and Innovations were invented and promoted by many Citizens Tradesmen,
Gentlemen and others, who being none of the Kings servants, did court and woe
the Kings Prerogative unto it, and busily employed some of the Kings servants
to go shares with them in the gain or profit thereof, none or very little,
whatsoever was pretended; coming to the King or his Treasury, and began with
the necessities which a causeless discontented part of the people, did most
unadvisedly and undutifully put upon their King, whom they would not suffer to
be at any rest, until he had engaged himself and his Allies in a war with
Spain, and the then greatly prevailing house of Austria, for the recovery of
the Palatinate, and to make a breach with France for the relief of Rochel and
the Hugonots, and left him afterward in the midst of the troubles, expense and
danger thereof, without any aid or assistance to go through as well as he could
with it.

And may now understand how much better it had been to have acquiesced in the
many precedents and authorities of the Kings just and legal power of sending
his writs to the Cinque ports, and many maritime Towns and Counties, many if
not all of whom were by Tenure or Custom in lieu of many liberties and
privileges granted unto them by the Kings Royal Progenitors, which they do yet
enjoy to send or furnish out a certain number of Ships as their own charges,
when the King should have any public occasion or necessity, and to have
continued the Kings most just and ancient rights and regalities in his Tenures
in Capite and by Knight Service, which by Land together with a fixed and
certain aid of Shipping, contributed by the Cinque Ports and Maritime Towns and
Counties, would together with his Commissions of Array, have enabled him upon a
short warning never to have wanted most puissant and gallant Armies and Forces
both by Land and by Sea, consisting not of hirelings and strangers, but such as
would have fought pro Aris and Focis, for their own as well as their Princes
interest, and would not easily turn their backs, betray or fly from their Wives
and Children and their own Estates, then to put the King for want of them to a
yearly charge, of no less than eight hundred thousand pounds per annum by Sea
and by Land for the peace, security, and honor of the Nation, which did not
before cost the late King fourscore thousand pounds per Annum.

Or to be charged with an everlasting Excise as to the moiety of the Excise of
Ale, Beer, Sider, Perry, etc. which did no^ the last year amount unto more than
one hundred and five thousand pounds per annum in recompense of the yearly
profits of the Kings Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, and what he
loses by his want of Pourveyance and Compositions for them, both which did
yearly amount unto a far greater benefit, what an ill bargain both the King and
the people have by the laying by of the one, and granting the other; how small
an advantage the people got by their heretofore invisible Keepers of their
Liberties, who did all they could to keep them from them, or by Oliver, their
quondam Protector, and whether the turning of their freedom into a slavery, and
the entreating of him by that which by a dreamed authority of Parliament, they
called the Petition and advice to accept o^ ten hundred thousand pounds per
Annum, to be charged upon the people without a Land Tax for the maintenance of
a Navy ten thousand horse and Dragoons, and twenty thousand Foot, (to keep them
and their posterities in sin and slavery) with such other supplies as should be
needful to be raised from time to time, and three hundred thousand pounds per
Annum in like manner to be raised for the support of his Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government, were less trouble and charge than the Kings Tenures in
Capite and by Knight Service, and his Compositions for Pourveyance, the
greatest yearly profit by the Tenures, in what was paid to the King, not
amounting unto above one hundred thousand pounds per Annum, and the Pourveyance
which saved the King in his Household expenses above one hundred and forty
thousand pounds per Annum, not charging the people in these late times of
enhaunce of prices above Sixty five thou-pounds per annum.

Who when they shall have paid double or treble more then the Excise is rated
at by color of the Excise which was by Act of Parliament given to the King and
his Heirs and Successors, in supplement of his exhausted and overwasted
Revenue, and racked and oppressed one another by occasion or pretense of the
charge of it, cunning and avari^e of the selling and richer part of the people,
Merchants, Retailers, and Mechanics of the Nation, every one striving to put
the damage from themselves, and shift as much as they can the burden upon
others, will by a lamentable summa totalis find how little they have gained by
putting their Prince into necessities, and how small a gain or blessing they
will leave to their posterities*

When by begging, getting and keeping all they can from the King and cozening
him all that they can; the common people unless they will have their body
Politic to be without a head, and as they were in the Time of Usurpation when
there was no King in Israel, busied like the Beasts of the Forests, and Fishes
in the Sea in devouring and oppressing one another in a Chaos of villainy and
confusion, cannot subsist or maintain themselves in peace and plenty without
enabling the King to support himself to protect an^ defend them.

And may without any violence used to their judgments believe that it was
better with the common people of England when they paid for their Farms, some
rent in money, and some in provisions of housekeeping, when by the hospitality
of their Landlords, they were sure to partake of them, their Lands and Rents
being not tortured or drawn up to the highest pin or screw of the Rack or any
possible improvement which might be made of it. And the plowing of some part of
their Lords Demeasnes, reaping or carrying in of their Corn, and helping them
to fetch home some Wood or Coals, did not amongst a many of Tenants according
to their proportioned services for which they reckoned the love, protection,
and hospitality of their Landlords, to be satisfaction enough amount unto the
Twentieth or Thirtieth part of the rack Rent which now they do pay and have not
so much as a Cup of Beer or a morsel of Bread given them when they come to pay
it.

Which the people of Scotland may to their cost experiment, if they should as
the rustic part of the people of England have done, never think themselves
happy until they have shaken off the services and obligations to their Lords
and Benefactors, and in stead of paying some Chald^rs of Victuals Mailes and
other more easy duties, have their Lands let by their Landlords to the utmost
penny and bidding; and like the Israelites in their Egyptian bondage make Brick
and gather the Straw and pay a Rent as much as the Land or Farm can possibly
yield or it may be a great deal more.

And may persuade the people that there is a grand necessity attended with many
other great necessities that the King should have again his just and harmless
rights and prerogative of prae-emption, Pourveyance and Compositions, and as
great a necessity for the people if they will avoid those heaps of evils and
inconveniences which may otherwise happen upon them and their posterities to
desire that he should have it.

When the oppression of the Markets, and the peoples working upon one another
necessity, the most part of them walking by no rule of piety, virtue, morality,
humanity, charity, or conscience, but laboring all they can in their actions
to advance the kingdom of Sin and Satan, and their own everlasting punishments,
shall by their wicked and illegal enhauncings, ingrossings, combinations, and
contrivances, make the prizes of every thing to be so immense and unreasonable,
as the vicious and Rooking part of the people will, if such rates and prices
shall hold on, continue, and grow higher and higher, as they are like to do
without some Bando or reiglement, and a greater care taken by the Justices of
Peace, and Clerks of the Market, then hitherto they have been pleased to bestow
in the execution of their places and duties undo and beggar the virtuous, or
such as shall be enforced to buy at such unreasonable rates their provisions of
food and livelihood, and make, as a Jew lately well observed* none but the
richer part able to live with any plenty or content, u^terly ruin the middle
ranks of the people, and enslave and beggar the poorer, who must like the
Gibionites be well contented to be hewers of Wood, and drawers of Water, that
they may live, and eat bread.

And that all that the King and his Council can do by putting in practice the
ancient usage of a Jury impannelled by the Clerk of the Market within the Virge
of the Court, and commanding them upon their Oaths to set a marketable and
reasonable rate according to the usual prices of Victuals and household
provisions in Markets and elsewhere, which all men were enjoined by His
Majesty's Proclamation strictly to observe, cannot now that the Pourveyance or
Compositions for it are laid aside, keep their rates and prices within the
bounds and limits of any reason, but the people are so insatiable in their
gains, and so cuning to promote their unjust designs therein, as they do not
only not keep the Kings rates, but to enlarge their profit and prices do all
they can to bribe and go a share with some of his Pourveyers.

When it is very evident and demonstrable, and our own happiness might tell us,
if we did not too much mistake and abuse it, and make our sins to be the
product of it, that now, that in England, by laying down of Tillage more than
it should, there is more Pasture and Land to feed or fatten Cattle ten or
twenty to one then ever it had before, and that this our fruitful Isle has
both for Tillage and Pasturage, agros luxuriantes, rich and fertile Lands,
watered and enriched with many Rivers, her Mountains and Downs covered and
replenished with Sheep, and far more then they were before the Reign of King
Edward the third, abounds with Corn, Butter, Cheese, and all manner of
Commodities for the u^e and livelihood of mankind and by a greater improvement
of all the Lands of the Kin^dom within this last Century or hundred years,
then was in three or four hundred years before, and by watering, marling, and
burning the more barren parts of it, is gone far beyond the time and
expectation of our Fathers and Progenitors, either Britains, Saxons or
Normans; and is in the yearly value of Land increased in many parts or
particulars thereof twenty, thirty, or forty to one more then it was, insomuch
as we may to our comfort say and believe that Foreign Writers were well
acquainted with our happiness when they called England the Court of Ceres, and
(as Charles the great* or Charlemaigne of France our neighbor was wont to term
it) the Granary of the Western world, Speed Hist. of Great Britain in P^coemio
a Paradise of Pleasure and Garden of God, and was many ages before in the
British times so fruitful in all kind of Corn and Grain, as the Romans were
wont yearly to transport from hence with a Fleet of eight hundred vessels, then
but something bigger then Barges, great store of Corn for the maintenance of
their Armies; and our Britains could before those large improvements of Lands
and Husbandry which have been since made in it, declare unto the Saxons when
they unhappily called them in to their aid, and took them to be their friends,
that it was a Land plentiful and abounding in all things.

Pope Innocent the fourth in the Reign of our King Henry the third, called it
Hortus deliciarum, Mat. Paris in Anno 1246.
a Garden of delights ubi multa abundant, where all things are plentiful. And
in the Reign of King Edward the third where there was small or very little
enriching or bettering of Lands compared with what it is now, the English
Leigier Ambassadors at Rome hea^ing that Pope Clement the sixth had made a
grant, as he then took upon him, to the King of Spain of the Fortunate Islands
(now called the Canaries) did so believe that to be England which was then
granted by the name of the Fortunate Islands, as they made what haste they
could home to inform the King of that which they believed to be a danger.

And may now more then ever well deserve those Encomiums or commendations which
our industrious Speed has given it* that her Valleys are like Eden, her Hills
as Lebanon, her Springs as Pisgah, her Rivers as Jordan, and has for her Walls
the Ocean, which has Fish more then enough to feed her people, if they wanted
Flesh and had not as they have such innumerable Herds of Cattle, and flocks of
Sheep, such plenty of Foul, Fruit, Poultery, and all other provisions on the
Land for the sustenance and life of man, to furnish the delicacy of the richer
part of the people, and the necessities of the poorer, if they would but lay
aside their too much accustomed Lazines and carelesseness, with which the
plenty of England has infected her people, and not suffer the Dutch to enrich
themselves and make a great part of their vast Commerce and Trade, by the Fish
which they catch and take in our British Seas, multiplying the stocks of their
children and Orphants, whilst too many of ours for want of their parents
industry, have none at all or being ready to starve or dye, do beg up and down
the streets, when the waters have made her great, the Deep has set her on high
with her Rivers running round about her plants, and sent out her little Rivers
unto all the Trees of the field, when she is become the Merchant for many
Isles, has covered the Seas with her ships, which go and return a great deal
sooner then Solomon's Ships to or from Ophyr, searches the Indies and the
remotest parts of the earth, to enrich her borders and adds unto her
extraordinary plenty, the Spices, Sugar, Oil, Wine, and whatsoever foreign
Countries can produce to adorn our Tables, which former Ages wanted, or had not
in so great an abundance.

And that her people are now (if so much) no more numerous than formerly, by
her emptying of multitudes of her Natives into Ireland, since the Reign of King
Henry the Second, many of whose Inhabitants have been English, transplanted,
and gone thither, by our many great Plantations, since the middle of the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, sent into America, as Virginia, Bermudas, New England,
Barbados, St. Christophers, Maryland, Charibe Isles, Me^is, etc. By our many
Voyages at Sea, and to the Indies more than formerly; our Fishing in Newfound
Land, which we had not in former days, our Nursery of War, and Regiments of
English in Holland, and the United Provinces, and our greate^ than formerly
Luxury, use of Physic, and shortning the lives of the richer part of the
people by it.

When the Provisions for the Kings Household, or the Compositions for them, in
so great a plenty as England, is now more than formerly blessed with,
notwithstanding that we do keep fewer Vigils, and Fasting Eves than heretofore,
and do, as it has been an usage and custom of this Nation, eat more flesh in
every one month of every year, the time of Lent excepted, (which since the
Reformation of our Religion, and the return of it from the now Church of Rome,
to that which is more Orthodox, is very little at all, or not so well observed
as our Laws intend, and it ought to be) than all France, Spain, and the
Netherlands do in every year; would if the Universal Pride and Luxury of the
people, and their Racking and Cheating one another to maintain it, did not
hinder it, be as cheap, or cheaper afforded than it was heretofore.

Grand Rebellion) has helped the Back to cozen the Belly, and the Back, with
its Brigade of Tailors, and all other the abused and retaining Trades to
Lucifer, has cheated, and rooted out Love, Charity, and good Housekeeping,
and retrenched much of the Provisions, which were wont to be better employed.

England and Wales, and their yearly Revenues, which, at the old easy rates,
were in, or about the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, computed to be
sufficient, and enough to maintain fifteen Earls, which after the rate of Earls
in those days, and their great Revenues, could not be a little, fifteen
hundred Knights, six thousand two hundred Gentlemen, and an hundred Hospitals,
besides ^wenty thousand pounds per Annum to be given to the King, many, if not
all of which, were by Privileges, or otherwise exempted from Pourveyance, and
being at a low, and great undervalue, in the latter end of the Reign of King
Henry the Eighth, now above one hundred years since, of the yearly value of one
hundred eighty six thousand five hundred twelve pounds eight shillings penny
farthing, Vide in (...) funeral monument^, an information given to Queen
Elizabeth of under valuation^ in the su^pression of the Abbie^, etc.
now improved unto more then Ten times that yearly value are for the most part
of them come to be the inheritance of Laymen. And too much of the Revenues of
Bishops, which by a sacrilegious alienation from the Church are not enjoyed by
any of the sons of Levy.

A great part of the Lands belonging to Monasteries or Religious houses by
custom or exemption become

The greatest part of 3845. Appropriations or Impropriations ad mensam, unto
several Monasteries and Religious houses, for the better support and
maintenance of their hospitality, and which before contributed nothing to the
Kings Pourveyance now made to be a Temporal and Lay inheritance.

Many Forests and Chaces, and a great part of other

No Escuage paid since the Reign of King Henry the Edward the sixth, Queen Mary
and Queen Elizabeth, and very many Copyhold estates (which usually paid nothing
at all to the provisions for the Kings household) converted into Freeholds.

Many Fenns and Imbancked Marshes, consisting of hundred thousand Acres Drained
or recovered from the Sea.

An Espargne or saving more then formerly, of much or losses by the Kings
Pou^veyances in the purchase or procuring the Popes Bulls (which as was
affirmed in the Parliament of 25 H. 8. had betwixt that time and the fourth
year of the Reign of King H. 7. cost the people of this Kingdom threescore
thousand pounds Ste^ling) by being no more troubled with provisions to
Benefices, S^owes An^a^.
many chargeable Oblations to the Church, and money spent in Lamps or Ta^ers,
Pourveyance or provisions for the Popes Legates, Shrines, Copes, Altarages,
extraordinary Masses, Dirges, Trentals, relaxations, faculties, grants,
aboltions, Pensions, Censes, Procurations, rescripts, appeals, and long and
chargeable journyes to Rome, where as well as in England, (as their own Monks
and W^iters affirm) the Pope did, Angariis and Injuriis miseros exagitare, poll
and pill the wretched English, made Walter Gray a Bishop of England in the
Reign of King H. 3. pay one thousand pounds for his Pall* and at the breaking
up of every general Council, extorted of every Prelate a great sum of money
before he would give them leave to depart, chid William Abbot of St. Albans for
coming to take leave of him without any present, (...) Alba^ M. S.
and when he offered him fifty marks, checked and enforced him before he went
out of his Chamber to pay one hundred Marks, the fashion being then for every
man to pay dear for his Benedictions, lay down his money ready told before his
Holiness feet, Man* Paris (...).
and if present Cash was wanting, the Popes Merchants and Usurers were at hand,
but upon very hard conditions to supply it. And so great were his Emunctiones,
as Matthew Paris calls them exactions and impositions in England, as a bloody
Wolf tearing the Innocent sheep, by sometimes exacting a third part of the
Clergies goods, and at other times a twentieth by aides toward the defraying
of his own wars and other pretenses, sometimes exacting the one half of an
yearly revenew of their Benefices, and enjoining them under the penalty of
their then dreadful Excommunications not to complain of it or publish it, Mat.
Pari^ 7^6, 717.
sending his Legates or Predicatores to wring and preach money out of the
peoples purses pro negotio Crucis, under colo^r of making a war to regain
Jerusalem and the Holy Land, out of the hands of the Saracens, and by such a
multitude of other contrivances and extorsions as all the Abbotts of England,
vul^u Flebili and capite d^^nisso were with great sorrow and lamentation
enforced to complain to the King of the impossibility of satisfying the Pope,
eos incessanter torquen^i, Man. Paris 514
incessantly grinding and tormenting them, and of his avarice, and exactions
toto ^undo detestabiles to be abhorred of all the world. By Dispensations,
pardons, lice^ces, Indulgencies, vows, pilgrimages; Writs cal^ed perinde
valere, breeves, and other instruments of s^^dry natures, names, and kinds, in
great (...) which in the Act of Parliament of ^5 H. 8. (...) the exonerating of
the Kings subjects from (...) and impositions paid to the Sea of Rome, (...)
said to have greatly decayed and impoverished (...) ^^t^llerable exactions, of
great sums of money, the subjects of the Realm.

A freedom from the chargeable giving of great qu^ntities weani^g of that
Clergy by the reformation of the Church o^ England, from their over-sucking or
making sore the Breasts or Nipples of the common people, which the murmuring
men of these times, would if they had as their forefathers tried it more then
seven times, and over and over be of the opinion of Piers the Plowman in
Chaucer (who being of the Romish Church, wrote in the unfortunate Reign of King
Richard the second, when the Hydra of our late Rebellious devices spawned by
the not long before ill grounded Doctrines, and treasonable positions of the
two Spencers, father and son began to Craule) complaining, That the Friars
followed folk that were rich,
And folk that were poor, at little price they set;
And no Cors in the Kyrkeyard, nor Kyrke was buried,
But quick he bequeth them ought or quit part of his det.


Advises his friend, Go confess to some Friar and show him thy sins,
For while Fortune is thy friend Friars will thee love,
And fetch the to their Fraternity, and for thee beseech.
To their Prior Provincial a pardon to have,
And pray for the pole by pole if thou be pecun^osus.


Brings in a Friar persuading a sick Farmer to make his confession to him
rather then to his Parish Priest, and requesting him as he lay upon his
deathbed to bestow a Legacy upon his Covent.

Give me then of thy Gold to make our Cloister,
Quoth he for many a Muskle and many an Ouster,
When other men have been full well at ease,
Has been our food, our Cloister for to rease;
And yet God wot unneath the foundement,
Performed is ne of our pavement,
Is not a Tile yet within our wones.
By God we owen forty pound for stones.
And in his Prologue to his Canterbury Tales thus Characters such a Friar, Full
sweetly heard he confession.
And pleasant was his absolution;
He was an easy man to give penance,
There as he wist to have a good pitance.


The di^use of the old and never grudged course of Sponte Oblata's gifts or
presents to the King, and the Aurum Reginae, Gold or presents made and given to
the Queen in return of their Gifts and favors received from the King.

Great liberties and privileges, by grants of free Warren, Mines, Felons and
Outlaws goods, Deodands, England, granted since the ninth year of the reign of
King Henry the third, when for the like and some other liberties then confirmed
unto them, the people of England not having half so much before that time
granted unto them as by the bounty and Indulgences of the succeeding Kings and
Princes, they have had since, took it to be no ill bargain to give unto the
King, for that his grace and favor a Subsidy of the Fifteenth part of all
their movables, not loosely rated or much undervalued as their posterities
have found the way to do*

Abundance of Wood and Timber sold and destroyed Garagantuas lusty Mare
whisking down with their Tails whole Woods and great store of Timber in them
of two or three hundred years growth.

A lesser number of servants and retainers, and charge R. 2. ca. 7. and 8 E. 4.
ca. 2. made against too great a number or the abuse of them, when as now many
Gentlemen can put a Coachman and Carter into one, and supply the places of a
Servingman, Butler, and Tailor, by one man fitted for all those employments.

Edward the third, by our quondam flourishing Trade of Clothing, until that
our late giddy times of Rebellion had so very much lessened and impaired it.

Colchester, Sudbury, etc. and of stuffs at Norwich, Canterbury, Sandwich,
Kiderminster, etc. erected and encouraged before our long and late unhappy
wars, and the reign and Rapine of Mechanic Reformers.

The Lands of Wales greatly improved since the Henry the fourth, and his severe
Laws which denied them the intercourse, commerce, and privileges of England.

The freeing of some of the Northern Counties, as Cumberland, Westmerland, and
Northumberland from the trouble, charge, and damages of maintaining their
Borders against the Scottish, formerly and frequent outrages, invasions, and
taking away their goods and cattle by day and by night.

And the like freedom from the incursions and depraedations Welsh assured and
settled upon the four Shires or Counties of Gloucester, Worcester, Hereford,
and Shropshire, by the guard and residence of a Lord President of Wales and the
Marches thereof.

Abundance of Markets and Fairs now more then formerly granted, so as few or no
parts of England Wales can complain of any want of them within every four or
five miles distance.

Great sto^e of Welsh, Scottish and Irish-cattel now England, when as few or
none were heretofore.

Horses, Oxen and Cattle now by Law permitted to be

A greater profit made to many private Lords of etc. more then heretofore.

Many Fruit Trees bearing Apples, Pears, etc. yearly

Many Rivers made Navigable, and Havens repaired.

The loss of Cattle and great damages by Inundations Sewers.

etc. or by the disorder or Rapines of any of them.

etc.

etc. and Corn when it is not cheap, prohibited to be exported.

etc.

Convenient provisions made for Vicars in case of

The goods of Foraigners to be taxed for the payment



Commotes or unlawful gatherings of money in Wales, and the Marches thereof
taken away.







Interest for money lent, reduced to a lower rate then

No Tillage or errable land to be laid down, but as

Merchants Strangers permitted to Trade and sell England, and buy and sell
things ve^dible; and a great improvement of Trade and Merchandise six or seven
times exceeding that which was in or before the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

Fishgarthes in the Rivers of Ouse and Humber ordered

The passage upon the River of Severne freed from

The bringing of Silver Bullion into England by our Exchangers, until the
disuse of it now of late preventing all abuses in the coin or money of the
Kingdom.

Merchants Aliens, and Merchants of Ireland, ordained England upon the
Commodities thereof and every Merchant Alien to find Sureties that they shall
not carry Gold or Silver out of this Realm.

The keeping of great numbers of Sheep by rich men,

Ordinances made for Bakers, Brewers, and other

The prices of victuals to be rated and assessed by the

Rents of houses in Staple-Towns to be reasonable and





si sua bona Norint, if they could but be content with their happiness, and
know how to use it.

Pigmies or Dwarfs to those which are now so immense and Gigantine.

So as if the Laws of God, Nature and Nations, right reason, and the heretofore
well approved custom of England, with the care of avoiding of evils and
inconveniences, which was wont to be the primum mobile and greatest Orator in
worldly affairs, to incite and stir up most men's cares and preventions (many of
whom have had cause to lament the not allowing of that and oother the Kings
ancient and just rights, and a due submission thereunto cannot persuade or lead
them unto that great part of reason and duty called Prae-emption, Pourveyance
or Compositions for them; the consideration of the l^berties and happiness
which they do now enjoy more then many of their Ancestors might certainly drive
or carry them into their more laudable ways and courses.

When the peoples want of a liberty of unmannerliness or Praeemption before
their Sovereign or his servants on his behalf, begets no other loss or
grievance unto them then a disturbance of their Fancies, or their not obtaining
that which did not become them or their Humor of hindering their betters from
having of it, or to make a vie betwixt them and the Kings servants, either to
hinder him from having of it, or to make him pay for it a great deal more then
it was worth.

Which David's three Worthies who hazarded their lives, 2 Samuel 23.
And brake thorough the host of the Philistims to draw water out of the Well of
Bethlehem, and brought it to David who longed and had a desire to drink of it,
would never have done but would have been ashamed to offer unto their Prince so
great an indignity.

And the charge and enhaunce of the prices of all Commodities necessary for
household provisions, will by the needless racking of rates and prices, and the
Insana praetia intolerable rates and prices, which the King by the avarice and
insatiableness of the sellers is and shall be enforced to give, so infect and
spoil the markets of such part of the people as shall have occasion to buy,
which are many to every one that is a seller, those that are sellers having
sometimes also occasion to be buyers, as if the wisdom of the King and his
great and Privy Council prevent it not, there will in a few years be ten times
or a greater charge more then was in the same year when the Pourveyance or
Compositions for it were abolished, imposed upon the subjects by the Tyranny of
rates and prices then ever the Compositions for the Kings Pourveyance or
household provisions did amount unto.

And when the difference in the Compositions for the Kings Pourveyance betwixt
the Market rates and the Kings price, do amount at the utmost but unto sixty
five thousand pounds per annum or thereabouts, and is charged upon so many and
in so easy and petit proportions.

And being no greater a charge or inconvenience, the people who in a legal and
Parliamentary way are to help him to sustain and bear his burdens, if they love
and tender their own good and the well being of themselves and their
posterities, will too prodigally cast away too much of their own happiness, and
as much of their own Estates, if they shall for want of so small and easy
accommodations which are so just, and so necessary to the honor and support of
their Prince, enforce him into so great a prejudice and damage as to pay yearly
four times as much as sixty five thousand pounds per annum, shall amount unto,
in many, if not all the particulars of his household provisions, as may be
instanced in four and twenty shillings, the price of a Sheep, which was in the
Compositions to be served in at three shillings four pence; A^ Ox twelve
pounds, which was to have been furnished at four marks; three shillings or two
shillings six pence for a Hen, which was to be furnished for two pence, Vide
Act of Parliament 18. Eliz cap 6. touching the Colleges in the Universities of
Oxford and Cambridge, reserving a third part of their rents in Corn, or Mal^*
etc.
four shillings for a Goose which was to be sent in for four pence, Lambs at
twelve pence a piece, for which he now pays eleven or twelve shillings, and at
Christmas sixteen* or twenty shillings, Wheat at ten pence a Bushel (the Market
rate being no more for Wheat in 18. of Queen Elizabeth) for which he lately
paid before the late dearth 7 s. 6 d. a Bushel, and cannot furnish sixteen
dishes of meat to the Table of one of his great Officers of his household, if
report be true under twenty shillings a dish.

And if weather beat^n by such an exaction and enhaunce of prices, he shall
seek a shelter or Port by putting one thousand two hundred and forty servants
(the Queens servants above and below stai^s not included) to Board^wages, the
profits and allowed avails of their places which contrary to the Laws of
England, the honor of the King, the weal and profit of him and his people too
many have dea^ly bought and paid for, will to reduce their vails and profits of
their places into a certain yearly Board-wages, their standing Wages and
Pensions being so very petit and inconsiderable cost him in such an
unreasonable and intolerable exaction, and enhaunce of Rates and Prices as
there is in the Markets, ten times more in money and twenty times more in some
then what he now paies, if his servants shall not like hunger bitten, starved,
and ragged Beggars, be enforced to torment as well as shame him with their daily
Petitions and importunities, or be as the naked attendants about the Salvage
Kings.

Or if he shall not make them recompense for the losses of their Diet and
availes arising by it will undo and ruin very near so many Families and
Dependencies who have nothing to live upon but his Majesty's service and their
hopes of subsistence by it.

Or if the loss of Pourveyance or Compositions for them shall in his
housekeeping endamage him but two hundred thousand pounds per annum, it will
with one hundred thousand pounds per annum profit which was heretofore made by
the Tenures, amount unto three hundred thousand pounds per annum, which will be
more then that part of the Excise which was allowed in lieu of the Tenures and
Pourveyance; and the supplemental Revenue of the Chimney money deductis
deducendis will yearly bring into the Kings Exchequer.

So great a damage will arise unto the King by the loss of his Pourveyance and
Compositions for them; and so much the greater, if he shall put his servants
(which never King of England was yet enforced unto, and the Nobility and Gentry
of England, until of late disdained to do) to Board-wages, and give them
recompense for their losses; and will be not only a very great damage and
inconvenience in the consequence to the people.

But a great dishonor unto the King, whose sublimity, Majesty and Honor is not
to be measured or managed by the narrow rules of private men or housekeepers,
for although it may relish very well with some that have Tables daily furnished
at the Kings charge to feed so many as depend upon it, and entertain such men
of quality as shall come to his Court about his or their affairs, and would
much advance their private purses, and do well in their own families to have
the expenses of it turned into a yearly Pension in money, wherein the King is
like to be as much a saver as King Charles the Martyr, was when he allowed Mr.
Andrew Pitcarne the Master of his Hawks ten shillings per diem to provide
Pigeons, Pa^. 1. Ca^. 1.3 Part.
Hens, and other meat for his Hawks; and as he and many of his Progenitors have
been in converting allowances or provisions into Salaries.

And that some of those who advise a Sparing, not at all becoming the grandeur
and honor of a Prince to make themselves the greater gainers by his bounty to
be worse employed upon themselves, may suppose that which might be a fit
Espargne in their own lesser Orbs and Oeconomies, may serve for the Court and
Family of an English King, and that the Grandeur and Magnificence thereof would
be but little or not at all lessened by some thriftie contrivances and
abatements calculated only for their own Meridian, and that the Power,
Authority, and Virtue of a Prince, can well enough subsist without the prop and
support of that due Awe and Reverence which are to attend the Majesty of Kings,
and that some in their short sighted Policies may reckon such or the like good
husbandries to be no small part of Prudence and Providence very laudable and
fit to be put in practice.

Yet the Laws of God, Nature and Nations, and the state and magnificence of
Kings and their Princely Families, allowed as well as mentioned in the Book of
God and Holy Writ, as that of Pharaoh, Saul, David, Solomon and Ahashuerus. The
State and Magnificence of all the Christian and Heathen Kings and Princes,
Grecian Magistrates, Roman Consuls and Dictators, Venetian Doges, and Dutch
Stadtholders, and our laudable customs of England, can teach every man who has
not abjured his own reason as well as the Laws of God and Nature, and the
reasonable customs of England, how very necessary the honor and State of
Princes are to the obedience and good Government of the people, how much they
conduce to their well-being; how the observance, honor, and reverence due unto
Kings, are lessened by the meannesse of their Servants, and diminishing their
State and Port, how unsafe and insipid such new found policies and contrivances
would be; and that the dishonor of the Prince is the unsafety and dishonor of
the people, who may easily and every where find a necessity of his Pourveyance
or Compositions for it, and no reason at all to deny it.

When the total of the charges of it will be so useful to their Sovereign, so
becoming his Royal Dignity, so necessary to the honor and splendour of his
housekeeping, and that the parts which shall be charged upon particular men to
make up that total, will be so petit and inconsiderable, as our Laws and the
Compositions for Pourveyance had ordered it.

CHAP. VI. The small charge of the Pourveyance or Compositions for it, to or
upon such of the people as were chargeable with it.
AS may evidently and undeniably appear by the Compositions for Pourveyance
which were agreed to be paid by the several Counties, As,

For the County of Anglisey in Wales which has eighty three Parishes, but five
pounds, which is for every Parish not one shilling three pence, it being
commonly in every County charged only upon the Lands of inheritance of the
greater size or quantity, (not upon Copyholders or small Freeholders) and upon
those kind of Lands which were most proper for it and could better afford it as
Wheat, Malt, etc. upon Errable Lands and Cattle upon Pasture, etc.

For the County of Mountgomery who we^e to provide yearly but twenty Sturks or
smaller sized Cattle so called, or sixty pounds per annum, and had Fifty four
Parishes, whereof five or six were Borough Towns, which made the charge upon
every Parish to be little more then twenty shillings per annum.

All the charge of the Compositions for the Kings provisions being only of one
hundred and eighty Sturks in Wales and its thirteen shires or Counties which
costs that Dominion yearly no more then three hundred and sixty pounds.

The County of Worcester which has one hundred and fifty two Parishes, paid
but four hundred ninety five pounds besides the Kings p^ice or rate allowed for
provisions served in kind, which is but three pounds and seven shillings or
thereabouts to be assessed upon every Parish.

Derbyshire having one hundred and six Parishes, paid but two hundred fifty
four pounds two shillings two pence, which is something less then fifty
shillings upon every Parish.

Yorkshire, which has four hundred fifty nine Parishes, besides many large
Chapelries was charged with no more then four hundred ninety five pounds, which
was not two and twenty shillings upon every Parish one with another, and would
not be six pence a year upon every house one with another, if no respect were
to be had to the real or personal Estates of the proprietors which admits of
large differences or proportions more or less then one another.

The County of Midlesex having seventy three Parishes, besides what are in the
London Suburbs, paid but nine hundred seventeen pound nineteen shillings,
which by her great benefits by the Kings constant residence in it, is in a
better condition with her few but v^ry plentiful and numerous Parishes, then
the Counties further distant, and by the letting and setting of their Lands,
Houses, and Lodgings, and the great rates and prices of all the Commodities
which they sell to other people gains forty to one at the least of what they
loose by the Kings prices for his Pourveyance or household provisions, the City
of Westminster, and the Suburb Parishes of London, consisting more of houses
then Lands or Pasture and being not at all charged or troubled wi^^ (...).

The County of Essex paid for Composition but two thousand nine hundred thirty
one pounds two shillings and two p^nce, and having many of the benefits which
Midlesex enjoys far exceeding the charge of the Compositions for Pourveyance,
has four hundred and fifteen Parishes, which is little more then seven pound
five shillings upon every Parish chargeable, for the Compositions and
provisions served in kind.

Bedfordshire which has one hundred and sixteen Parishes, paid but four
hundred ninty seven pounds eight shillings four pence, which was but four
pounds five shillings nine pence upon every Parish.

The County of Buckingham which has one hundred eighty five Parishes, two
thousand forty pounds sixteen shillings and six pence, which was but something
more then eleven pounds upon every Parish one with another.

Berkshire having one hundred and forty Parishes, but one thousand two hundred
and fifty five pounds seventeen shillings and eight pence, which did not charge
every Parish with nine pounds per annum.

Cheshire having sixty eight Parishes and furn^shing but 25. lean Oxen at the
Kings price - 2l. -- 13s.-4d. a piece Total -- 66 l. -- 13 s. -- 4 d. at the
Market price -- 6 ^. -- 10 s. Total -- 162 l. -- 10 s. -- 0. Difference -- 95
l. 16 s. -- 8 d. was not thereby charged with more then one pound nine
shillings upon every parish.

Cornwall having an hundred sixty one Parishes, and furnishing but Ten fat
Oxen at the Kings price -- 4 l. Total ^0 l. Market price -- 10 l. Total -- 100
l. Difference -- 60l. did bear not so great a contribution as eight shillings
upon every Parish.

The County of Devon having three hundred ninty four Parishes, and furnishing
but Ten fat Oxen at the Kings price -- 4 l. Total -- 40 l. Market price -- 10
l. Total -- 100l. Difference -- 60 l. Muttons fat 150. at the Kings price -- 6
s. -- 8 d. Total -- 50 l. Market price -- 18 s. Total -- 135l. Difference --
85l. paid no greater a sum in that yearly Composition then ten shillings upon
every parish.

Gloucestershire which has two hundred and eighty parishes paid but four
hundred twenty two pounds seven shillings eight pence, which was not one pound
eleven shillings upon every parish.

Hertfordshire numbering one hundred and twenty parishes, paid but one thousand
two hundred fifty nine pounds ninteen shillings four pence, which laid upon
every parish but about ten pounds ten shillings.

Herefordshire furnishing but 18. fat Oxen at the Kings price -- 4 l. Total --
72 l. Market price -- 10 l. Total -- 180l. Difference -- 108 l. and having one
hundred seventy six par^shes, made every one of them a contributary of no more
then about twelve shil^ings six pence upon every parish.

Kent having three hundred ninety eight parishes, and being a very great gainer
by the Kings so constant abode in his Chamber of London, more then its charge
of Pourvey^nce amounted unto, paid but three thousand three hundred thirty four
pounds and six shillings, which laid upon ever parish for Composi^ions for the
Pourveyance, no more then about eight pounds ten shillings.

Lincolnshire which has six hundred and thirty parishes, and paid but one
thousand one hundred seventy five pounds thirteen sh^llings and eight pence,
charged every parish with no more then about nineteen sh^llings six pence, or
thereabouts.

The County of Northampton having three hundred twenty six parishes, and being
like to be no looser by its gainful vicinity to London, and the Royal
Residence, paid no more toward the Pourveyance and Compositions then nine
hundred nine^y three pounds eighteen shillings four pence, which was for every
parish very little more then three pounds.

The County of Norfolk having six hundred and sixty parishes, paid but one
thousand ninety three pounds two shillings and eight pence, which charged every
parish not with one pound eleven shillings.

Somersetshire which has three hundred eighty five parish^s, and paid no more
then seven hundred fifty five pounds fourteen sh^llings eight pence, laid no
greater a leavy for the Composition for Pourveyance upon every Parish then
about forty shillings.

The County of Surry having one hundred and forty parishes, and paid no more
then one thousand seventy nine pounds three pence, rendered every parish a
contributer for the Pourveyance of not above seven pounds nineteen shillings.

The County of Sussex which has one hundred and twelve parishes, and paid no
more to that kind of contribution then one thousand and sixteen pounds two
shillings six pence, makes every Parish to be charged with no greater a sum or
proportion then three pounds thirteen shillings six pence or thereabouts.

And London which is and has been the greatest gainer by the residence of the
King and his principal Courts of Justice at Westminster, and by the confluence
of the people, not only of this Nation, but many Merchants and people from all
parts of the Christian word, is grown to be the grand Emporium and Town of
Trade in England, mighty and strong in shipping, a Merchant-like Tyrus for many
Isles, and as great and famous as any City or Mart Town of the World, to whom
all the Ships of the Sea with their Mariners do bring their Merchandise; the
most of Nations are her Merchants by reason of the multitude of the Wares, of
her making; and with the multitude of her riches and Merchandise makes all the
other parts, Counties, Cities, and Borough Towns of the Kingdom, as to riches,
money, and Trade, her vassals and retailers, does for all these benefits
contribute with the out Ports only for the Kings Grocery ware, which if it
could be called a contribution, did in some years amount according to the full
price but unto two thousand pounds per annum, and in other years but unto
sixteen hundred pounds or there abouts, and is raised and charged by way of
Impost upon the gross quantites of such kind of Merchandise; and being repayed
the Merchant by the retailer, and by the buyer to the retailer, was no more in
the fifth year of the Reign of King Charles the first in the Impost or Rates of
Composition then as follows, viz.

Rates of Composition for Grocery wares for his Majesty's House.
Pepper The hundred pound xviii. d. Cloves The hundred pound xviii. d. Mace The
hundred pound xviii. d. Nutmeggs The hundred pound xviii. d. Cynamon The
hundred pound xviii. d. Ginger the hundred pound xii. d. Raisons of the Sun the
hundred weight iii. d. Raisons great the piece i. d. ob. Proyns the Tun xvi. d.
Almonds the hundred weight v. d. Corrants the Tun ii. s. Sweet oil the Pipe
iii. s. Sugar refined the hundred weight viii. d. Sugar, powder, and Mukovadoes
the C. weight v. d. The Chest xx. d. Sugar corse and paneles the C. weight iii.
d. Figs the Barrel i. d. Figs the Piece ob. q. Figs the Topnet ob. Dates
the hundred weight viii. d. Rice the hundred weight iiii. d. ob. Olives the Tun
iiii. s. Castle and all other hard Soap the C. weight vi. d. Anniseeds the
hundred weight ii. d. Licorish the hundred weight ii. d.
And so petit as in a pound of Raisins of the Sun now sold for four pence a
pound, it falls to be less then the eighth or tenth part of a farthing increase
of price in every pound of Raisins of the Sun.

And as inconsiderable in the charge or burden of it, laid upon the Grocers or
Retailers as that of their pack-thred and brown paper, which in the vent of
those commodities and accommodation of Customers are freely and willingly given
into the bargain.

And when the Brewers in London, and four miles about, did before the granting
of the Excise upon Ale and Beer, and taking away of the Pourveyances or
Composition for them, pay four pence in every quartet of Malt which they
Brewed, the Composition thereof amounting but unto three thousand five hunded
pounds per annum, being now remitted and not paid by reason of the said Excise,
that yearly Impost or Composition, did not only lie upon the Brewers, but was
dispersed and laid upon all their Customers and Inhabitants of London, who
paying for it in the smalness of their Ale and Beer and of the measure, were
notwithstanding no loosers by it, when as the damage that the poorest sort of
housekeepers received thereby, came not, when their gains were least, unto the
twentieth penny nor of the richer, to the hundredth or two hundredth penny of what
they gained by the Kings residence, by trade, letting, of lodgings, or the
greater rent of their houses; and if the Brewer had paid it himself, and not
laid it upon his Customers, might for his privilege in Brewing in the Cities
of London and West^minster, and not being removed or punished for the Nuisance,
have very well afforded so small a sum as four pence in every quarter of Malt,
containing (...) Berkshire, Cheshire, Cornwall, Devonshire, Gloucestershire,
Hertfordshire, Herefordshire, Kent, Northampton, Norfolk, Somersetshire,
Surrey, Sussex and London, may give the prospect of the rest) and how small the
proportions were, which were charged upon such as were to bear or pay them, may
make it appear that that so much now of late complained of charge of
Pourveyance or Compositions for them will be so little as there will be no
cause at all for it, when as the yearly charge of buying Babies, Hobby horses,
and Toys for children to spoil as well as play with (which costs England, as
has been computed, near one hundred thousand pounds per annum) or of amending
the High ways, yearly Treatments given to Harvest Folk, or the expenses of an
Harvest Goose, and a Seed Cake given yearly to their Plow-men, keeping a Wake
or Parish Feast every year, or the monyes which the good Women in every Parish
and County, do expend in their Gosshippings, at the birth of their Neighbors
Children, or many other such like trivial and most cheerful and pleasing
expenses, will make the foot of the account as to the several kinds of those
particulars to be a great deal more then the charge of that necessary duty of
Pourveyance or Compositions for them which was so ^asy and petit as in most of
the Counties of England, it was many times not singly rated or assessed by it
self, but was joined with some other Assessements, and in Kent, where more was
paid then in any one County near London, it was so little felt and regarded, as
a Tenant paying one hundred pounds rent per annum, for his Land, did not think
it to be of any concernment for him to reckon it to his Landlord, and demand an
allowance for it.

Which caused the people of Oxfordshire, Barkshire, Wiltshire, and Hampshire,
upon his now Majesty's most happy restoration, receiving his gracious letters,
offering them the Election of suffering him to take his Prae-emption and
Pourveyance, or to pay the Compositions, to return answer by their letters,
which were read before the King in his Compting-house in White Hall, that they
humbly desired him to accept of the Compositions.

And all the other Counties and the generality of the people of the smaller as
well as greater Intellectuals, to understand it to be so much for the good of
the King and his People, as many of them are troubled and discontented that he
has them not.

And they who causing the Markets and the prices of things to be so
unreasonably dear and excessive by their own raising of prices for their own
advantages, may when they please make the difference betwixt the Kings rates
and theirs to be none at all, or much lesser if they would but sell as cheap as
they might afford their commodities according to the plenty of Victuals, or
provisions which is in England. The high prices and rates which are now put
upon Victuals and Provisions for Food and Housekeeping being neither enforced
nor occasioned by any plenty of Gold or Silver in England, and if there were
any such store or abundance of it, non causatur effective, cujus effectus est
necessarius nisi aliunde impediatur, could not be so the sole or proper cause
of it, as if not otherwise hindered it could not want its necessary effect.

Berkshire, Cheshire, Cornwall, Devonshire, Gloucestershire, Hertfordshire,
Herefordshire, Kent, Northampton, Norfolk, Somersetshire, Surrey, Sussex and
London, may g^ve the prospect of the rest) and how small the proportions were
which were charged upon such as were to bear or pay them.

That so much now of late complained of charge of Pourveyance or Compositions
for them will be so little as there will be no cause at all for it, when as the
yearly charge of buying Babies, Hobby-horses, and Toys for children to spoil
as well as play with (which costs England, as has been computed near one
hundred thousand pounds per annum) or of amending the High ways, yearly
Treatments given to Harvest Folk, or the expenses of an Harvest Goose, and a
Seed Cake given yearly to their Plowmen, keeping a Wake or Parish Feast every
year* or many other such like trivial and most cheerful and pleasing expenses
will make the foot of the account as to the several kinds of those particulars
to be a great deal more then the charge of that necessary duty of Pourveyance
or Compositions for them which was so easy and petit as in most of the
Counties of England, it was many times not singly rated or assessed by it self,
but was joined with some other Assessements* and in Kent where more was paid
then in any one County near London, it was so little felt and regarded as a
Tenant paying one hundred pounds rent per annum, for his Land, did not think it
to be of any concernment for him to reckon it to his Landlord, and demand an
allowance for it.

And the people of Oxfordshire, Barkshire, Wiltshire, and Hampshire upon his
now Majesty's most happy restoration, receiving his gracious letters, offering
them the Election of suffering him to take his Prae-emption and Pourveyance, or
to pay the Compositions, returned answer by their letters, which were read
before the King in his Compting house in Whitehall, that they humbly desired
him to accept of the Compositions.

And all the other Counties and the generality of the people of the smaller as
well as greater Intellectuals do understand it to be so much for the good of
the King and the people, as many of them are troubled and discontented that he
has them not.

And they who causing the Markets and the prices of things to be so
unreasonably dear and excessive by their own raising of prices for their own
advantages, may when they please make the difference betwixt the Kings rates
and theirs to be none at all, or much lesser if they would but sell as cheap as
they might afford their commodities according to the plenty of Victuals, or
provisions which is in England. The high prices and rates which are now put
upon Victuals and Provisions for Food and housekeeping being neither enforced
nor occasioned by any plenty of Gold or Silver in England, and if there were
any such store or abundance of it, non causatur effective, cujus effectus est
necessarius nisi aliunde impediatur, could not be so the sole or proper cause
of it, as if not otherwise hindered it could not want its necessary effect.

CHAP. VII. That the supposed plenty of money, and Gold, and Silver in England
since the Conquest of the West Indies by the Spaniards, has not been a cause
of raising the prices of food and victuals in England.
BUt will upon a due examination, be too light in the Ballanee of Truth and
Reason, and deserve a place in the Catalogue of vulgar Errors.

For that the rise of Silver in its value or denomination by certain gradations
or parts in several Ages from twenty pence the ounce by King Henry the sixth by
his prerogative to thirty pence, Lex M^. c^toria pe^ Gerard Mal^nes.
and between his Reign and that of Queen Elizabeth to forty pence, and after to
forty five pence, and after to sixty pence, Sir Ralph Madd^sons ^ngland^ In and
Ou^.
ours being of a finer standard mixture or Allay then that of France, the
united Belgicque Provinces, or the ha^se or Imperial Cities of Germany, and is
now as high as five shillings and a penny the ounce, comes far short of the now
or then enhaunce of victuals and commodities, and makes so large a
disproportion as the abundance of that could not be probably the cause of the
dearth of victuals, and all manner of Commodities, for that the plenty of those
bewitching and domineering metals of Gold and Silver, supposed to be betwixt
the Times of the discovery and subduing of the Indian Mines in the Reign of our
King Henry the seventh, which was about the year of our Lord, one thousand five
hundred and five, and the middle of the Reign of King Edward the sixth, when as
those Irritamenta malorum, American riches, and the alurements of them, did not
in the time of Charles the fifth Emperor, who outlived our King Henry the
eight, amount unto for his account, any more then five hunddred thousand Crowns
of Gold, and with that and what came into Europe to the Spanish Merchants
Accounts, our English hav^ng not then learnt the way to the West Indies, or to
search the unknown passages of the unmerciful Ocean could not have so great an
influence upon England, which was no near neighbor to the Indies, as to cause
that dearth of Victuals, and all commodities which was heavily complained of in
the reign of King Edward the sixth, M. S. of Sir Thoms Chamberlaines.
and if it had, there would not have been any necessity of King Henry the 8.
embasing or mixing with Copper so much as he did the Gold and Silver Coin of
the Nation, or that the price of the ounce of Silver should be raised betwixt
the Reign of King Henry the 7. and the middle of the reign of Queen Elizabeth
to sixty pence or five shillings the ounce, and though it must be granted that
the raising of the ounce of Silver by King Henry the 8. or King Edward the 6.
to five and forty pence, and afterward by some of his successors to sixty
pence, and the making of more pence out of an Ounce then was formerly, might be
some cause of the enhaunce of the price of victuals and commodities. And that
some of our Gallants or Gentlemen of these times forgetting the laudable
f^ugality of their ancestors, who had otherwise not have been able to have le^t
them those Lands and estates which do now so elevate their Poles, ^ay by
coiting their money from them, as if they were weary of it, many times
ignorantly give out of their misused abundance more money, or as much again as a
thing is worth, or not having money to play the fools withal in the excess of
gluttony or apparel, or the pursuit of their other vices may sometimes by
taking them upon day or trust, give three or four tim^s more then the
commoditys would be sold to another for ready money, the seller being many
times never paid at all, and if he should reckon his often attendance and
waiting upon such a customer to no other purpose but to tire himself and never
get a penny of his money, would have been a greater gainer if he had given him
his wares or commodityes for nothing, and if after many years he should by a
chance meet with his money, loses more by his interest then the principal
amounted unto.

Yet if Parliaments which have been composed of the collected wisdom of the
Nation, and their Acts and Statutes which have been as they are understood to
be made with the wisdom, and universal consent of the people of England, and
tanta solemnitate, and with so great solemnity (as Fortescue in the Reign of
King H. 6. and the Judges in Doctor Fosters Case in 12. Jac. Regis, do say they
are) may be credited, Coke 11. Reports.
the plenty of Gold and Silver, was never alleged or believed to be a cause of
the dearness of Victuals and provisions.

When as the Statute of Herring made in the thirty fifth year of the Reign of
King Edward the third, when the Trade of Clothing was in a most flourishing
condition, Statute of Herring, 35 E. 3.
such a Trade necessarily inducing and conferring some plenty of money,
declares the cause of the dearness of Herring to be because that the Hosts of
the Town of great Yarmouth, who lodged the Fishers coming there in the time of
the Fair, would not suffer the Fishers to sell their Herrings, nor to meddle
with the sale of the same, but sell them at their own will as dear as they
will, and give the Fishers that pleases them, so that the Fishers did withdraw
themselves to come there, and the Herring was set at a greater dearth then
there was before, and that men outvied and overbid each other.

For if the many accidents concurring to the enhauncing of the price of any
thing or commodity beyond its ordinary and intrinsicque worth and value, shall
be rightly considered as famine the unseasonableness of the year or harvest,
blasts or Mildews of Corn, transportation, fear of an approaching famine,
keeping Corn and provisions from Markets, and hoarding them up, e^ther for the
peoples own use, or to catch an opportunity of the highest rates, the scarcity,
or surpassing excellency of it, obstructions which wars, policy, or
controversies of Princes or neighbor Nations, one with or against another, may
put upon it a general Murrain or Mortality of Cattle, Inundations of waters,
great store of provision or foder for Cattle, or a gentle Winter; the charge
and burden of a new Toll or Tax, a present necessity to have the thing
desired to be bought or had, which the crafty and covetous seller has taken
notice of, the importunity of an affection, to have it although it cost a great
deal more then the worth of it, or the convenience for one more then another,
which may recompense the damage in giving too much for it, or more then was
otherwise needful, making it to be a good bargain for that particular person,
time or place, which would not be so for others, and the Market people
imitating one another high demands or avarice, by taking advantage of some
particular persons folly, or over-bidding and keeping up the excessive rates of
the Market, to the same or a more unreasonable price, and not being willing to
let them fall again to a lower price, though there be plenty and reason enough
to do it, unlawful combinations and confederacies of Trades men to raise their
prices, or cause their wares to be made Slight or insufficient, unconscionable
adulterating of Commodities, and making them seem what they are not, to raise
the greater prices, evil Artifices of Forestallers of the Markets, Ingrossers
and Regrators, who for their own ungodly gains can make a dearth and scarcity
in the midst of plenty, and like Caterpillars spoil and devour the Hopes of the
years fertility, the Landlords racking of rents* and the price of all manner of
household provisions and other things raised by the Tenants to enable them to
pay them; an universal pride and vanity of the Nation and enhaunce of prices to
support them, plunder, miseries, and desolations of War; numberless tricks and
deceipts of Tradesmen, and fraud of the common and Rustic part of the people
in the Counties near London, in keeping many of their Cattle half a mile or
some little distance from the Fairs until the Evening, or much of the day be
spent, to make them to sell at greater rates; frequent deceits of stocking or
Tying up the Udders of Kine, a day before hand to make them swell and seem to
give great store of Milk: And as many other tricks of Trade and deceit as the
Devil and deluded consciences can invent.

And truly looked upon as causes or concurrent parts of the cause of the now
grand and most intolerable inhaunce of the rates and p^ices of Victuals,
household provisions, and other Commodities, there will be little or no room for
the supposed plenty of Gold and Silver to be either a cause or so much as any
part of a cause of it.

Nor can be well imagined, when as notwithstanding that betwixt the middle of
the Reign of King Henry the eight, and the beginning of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, the Gold and Silver Mines of the West Indies had by the Spanish
cruelty to the Indians and their almost extirpation afforded such quantities of
these baits of Satan and temptations, as two hundred and sixty millions of
Gold, Lewis Roberts Map of Commerce.
did appear by the Records of the Custom house of Sivill, to have been brought
from the West Indies into Spain, all the plenty of that riches, either by our
Merchants bringing in of Bullion from Spain and its other Kingdoms and
Provinces by Commerce or return of Merchandise did not so in England raise and
enhaunce the rates and prices of Victuals and household provisions, but that we
find the Parliament of 24. H. 8. ordaining that Beef Pork, Mutton and Veal
should be sold by the weight called haber dupois, no person should take for a
pound of Beef or Pork above one half penny, nor for a pound of Mutton or Veal
above half penny farthing, did believe they might be reasonably so afforded.

And the rates of Victuals and household provisions notwithstanding so
increasing as in the year following. It was ordained, That Governors of Cities
and Market Towns upon complaint to them made of any Butcher refusing to sell
victuals by the weight, according to the Statute of 24 H. 8. ca. 3. might
commit the offenders toward until he should pay all penalties limited by the
said Statute, and were enabled to sell or cause to be sold by weight all such
victuals for ready money to be delivered to the owner; and if any Grasier,
Farmer, Breeder, Drover, etc. should refuse to sell his fat Cattle to a Butcher
upon such reasonable prices as he may retail it at the price assessed by the
said Statute. The Justices of Peace, Majors, or Governors should cause
indifferent persons to set the prices of the same which if the owner refused to
accept then the Justices, etc. should bind him to appear the next Term in the
Star Chamber, to be punished as the Kings Council should think good.

And the same Parliament Enacting, That upon every complaint made of any
enhauncing of prices of Cheese, Butter, Capons, Hens, Chickens, and other
Victuals necessary for men's sustenance without ground or cause reasonable in
any part of this Realm, or in any other the Kings Dominions, the Lord
Chancellor of England, the Lord President of the Kings most honorable Council,
the Lord Privy Seal, the Lord Steward, the Lord Chamberlain, and all other
Lords of the Kings most honorable house, the Chancellor of the Duchy of
Lancaster, the Kings Justices of either Bench, the Chancellor, Chamberlains,
under Treasurer, and the Barons of the Kings Exchequer, or seven of them at the
least, whereof the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, the Lord President of the
Kings Council, or the Lord Privy seal to be one, should have power and
authority from time to time, as the cause should require, to set and tax
reasonable prices of all such kind of Victuals how they should be sold in
gross or by retail, and that after such prices set and taxed, Proclamation
should be made in the Kings name, under the great Seal, of the said prices, in
such parts of this Realm, as should be convenient for the same.

Was not of op^nion that the plenty of Gold and Silver were any cause of the
enhaunce of the prices or rates of Victuals; but did in the preamble of that
Act declare, That forasmuch as dearth, scarcity, good, cheap and plenty of such
kind of Victuals happens, rises and chances of so many, and diverse
occasions that it is very hard and difficult to put any certain prices to any
such things, yet nevertheless the prices of such Victuals, be many times
enhaunced and raised by the greedy covetousness and appetites of the owners of
such Victuals by occasion of engrossing and regrating the same more then upon
any reasonable or just ground, or cause to the great damage and impovershing of
the Kings subjects.

Si^ Thomas Chamberlain, qui mores hominum multorum vidit and urbes, who by
his several Embassages from England into Foraign Countries in the Raigns of
King Henry the eighth, and King Edward the sixth was not a little acquainted
with the customs of other Nations, as well as his own, did in the Reign of King
Edward the sixth, M. S. Sir Th^^a^ Chamberla^ne.
in a Treatise entitled Policies to reduce the Realm of England unto a
prosperous wealth and estate, dedicated unto the Duke of Somerset, then Lord
Protector, assign the causes of the high prices and dearness of Victuals (far
less then what is now) to be abasing of Coin, and giv^ng more then Forty pence
for the ounce of Silver, engrossing of Commodities, the high price of Wool,
which caused the Lords and Gentlemen, being by the suppressing of the Abbeys
and liberality of King Henry the eight, waxen rich, to convert all their
grounds into Sheep Pastures, which diminished Victuals; ten Lordships to the
great decay of Husbandry, being sometimes employed only to the Pasturage of
Sheep, and lessened the plenty of Calves, Butter, Eggs, Cheese, Chickens, Hens,
Capons, Ducks, Geese, Beef, Piggs, Por^, and Bacon, the labor of the
husbandman, wife and servants increasing more Victuals thorough the whitemeat
of one Cow in one year being well pastured, and her Calf taken from her at a
month old, then her body being fat amounted unto, the dearth of Victuals,
causing the greatness of price of other Commodities, and the overcharging of
Commons by raising the Rents of enclosed grounds.

The very judicious and lea^ned Camden does not believe the plenty of money to
be the sole or principal, if any cause of the high prices and rates of
Victuals, but refers it to Politicians to dispute among themselves, Camdens
Remains.
whether the dearth of all things (now very much exceeded) which most complain
of does proceed from plenty of Gold and Silver since the discovery of the West
Indies, or from Monopolies and Combinations of Merchants and Craf^smen,
transportation of grain, or from the pleasure of great personages, who ^o most
highly rate such things as they do most like, or excess in private persons, or
from all these.

And Gerard Malines, a Learned knowing and judicious Merchant, is (in his
learned Tract or Book called Lex Mercatoria, written in Anno 1622. of opinion
that the General dearth of all things within this Realm, where there is no
scarcity of provisions for the Back and Belly, and yet food is dear, and there
is a dearth, proceeds from the Husbandman, who lays the fault upon the Noblemen
and Gentlemen for raising of their Rents, taking of Farms into their hands, and
making of enclosures, Noblemen and Gentlemen, alleging the fault to be in
Merchants and Artificers for selling things dearer then in times past, which
caused every man to make the most of his own, and the Artificers and workmen
raising their wages when they do buy all things dearer.

To which the Merchants in their ordinary and lawful course of Trade and
Merchandise (without those lately practiced illegal waye^ of Ingrossings, when
as one having bought up all the Pepper which was in London, and recruiting and
adding more unto it, made thirty thousand pounds clear gain thereof) being more
to be tolerated then other men, in regard of the hazard of Seas, Pirates and
Imbargoes which many times attends their business and affairs do but very
little contribute, but the disease and evil is more intrinsicke within our
selves and at home, and proceeds (where it is not upon scarcity as of Corn,
etc. which happens not often nor continues long) not from the increase of
money or people, but of pride, selfishness, oppressing of one another, and the
non-execution of many good Laws which are yet in force and unrepealed, as may
evidently appear to any that will but look back and su^vey our Bigone and
former times.

For although money which notwithstanding the opinion of some learned men that
pecunia was derived a pecude from the use of Cattle in exchange of other
commodities, was as anciently in use as the times of Abraham and Jacob, be as
it has of long time been in this and many other pa^ts of the world, the
exchange rule or measu^e in commutations and commerce, and should be in some
sort the Par in the prices or rates of all Commodities to be bought or
exchanged by it, yet the avarice and craft of people, never satisfied with
gaining advantages one upon another, the power of some, and weakness of others
in Estate or Judgments, have so far transgressed the rules which ought to be
in that measure, or the Justice which every man owes one to another, an^ to do
as they would be done unto, as the plenty or want of money not abased or
corrupted, is seldom (as to the generality) the cause of the dearness or
cheapness of things* and if it could so happen or appear to be so, neither of
them can be any causa potens, an only or mere cause in it self of the dearth
or cheapness, or the excessiveness of the prices or rates of provisions to be
bought or provided with it.

It being not to be denied but that the scarcity or want of money does many
times enforce a Tenant to sell his Corn or Cattle at cheaper rates and prices
then he otherwise would do, whereby to be able to pay his Landlord his Rent at
the time appointed; or an Indebted Gentlemen to sell his Lands much beneath the
worth or true value of it, to avoid greater inconveniences, or ^edeem himself
out of the Paws of a Panther like usurer, and his biting Interest; and that
the plenty of money at the same time in the buyer, makes it to be much cheaper
unto him then otherwise it would have been, and renders the scarcity or want of
money in the one, and the plenty of it in the other, to be a cause of the small
rate or price of the commodity, or that which is sold; and howsoever it be
admitted that the prices and rates of commodities or things to be bought with
money, may sometimes have a respect or regard to the true and intrinsic value
of the Coin or money which is to be given for it; and that at some times there
may be more money or Coin in a Kingdom then there is or can be at another time,
yet that grand Witch or Inchantress which insinuates it self into most men's
loves and affections (the small and contemptible (the more is the pity)
society of Scholars, Philosophers and Vertuosi's only excepted) is so
predominant and powerful, as Auri sacrafame^, the greedy appetite of Gold and
Silver, and the insatiablenes thereof veri^ying the long ago experimented
saying of the Poet, that Crescit amor nummi quantum ipsa pecunia crescit. the
love of money increases as the money does, will not allow us to believe that
there is no hoarding or keeping it from the knowledge or use of others, or that
there is such an equal distribution of it, that every one like the children of
Israel gathering their Manna in the Desert, might go out and fill their Homers,
or as much as might be sufficient for their necessary provisions, when this age
wherein we live has told us, that Sir William Craven an Alderman of London,
could besides a great estate purchased in Land, leave at his death in money
four hundred thousand pounds, which was more overplus and spare money then all
the men in that large County of York, from whence originally he came, could
make or cast into a Treasury. That Sir William Cokaine an Alderman of London,
could within a few years after, notwithstanding great portions given unto two
of his daughters in marriage, the one unto a Baron, and the other unto an Earl,
dye possessed of a personal Estate worth 200000 l. and seized of such an Estate
of Inheritance of his own getting, as enabled his son to be made an Irish
Viscount, which was more then all the men in the County of Bedford, from whence
he was descended, could have made in overplus and spare money; and that Paul
Bayning an Alderman of London, could about the same time, besides an Estate in
Land of inheritance, of almost six thousand pound per annum, make a total of
his personal Estate, of about one hundred and forty thousand pounds, which was
as much or more then many thousand men in the County of Essex could above their
necessary expenses make in ^n overplus or sum of money.

And that if money were in England, as plentiful as it was in Jerusalem in the
happy Reign of the wise King Solomon, when it was said to be in as much
abundance as the stones in the streets, yet if Corn, Cattle, and food should be
scarce, the greatest plenty of money we can imagine would not deliver us from
that dearth which was in that Kingdom, not many years after, when Samaria was
besieged, making the excessive rates of an Asses head, and a Kab of Pigeons
Dung; and whether money be scarce or plentiful, if there should be a famine as
it was in Israel when there had been no rain in three years, when the heavens
were as brass, and the fruits of the earth failed, no man can with any reason
believe that the great rates or prices of Corn, Victuals, and household
provisions were because there was plenty of Gold and Silver, for if there be a
scarcity of the thing to be bought, it must be the want of that, and not the
abundance of money that makes the dearness, which if it be never so much cannot
increase that little that is of the Commodity or thing to be bought, nor the
want of money make it to be any cheaper; the want or plenty of it contributing
in such a case nothing at all to the making that to be dear, which when there
is more of it, will be sold at a cheaper rate and for a little money, and
whether they that are to buy it have little or more of money, the want of money
constraining him that sells to sell cheaper, and the great store of money,
sometimes but not often or generally persuading the buyer to give more then one
that has not so much, will be d^awn to give for it.

For as it is true that in Virginia where their principal Barter or Exchange is
by Tobacco instead of money, and is there many times used as their Coin or
money; that where any man there is in want of Tobacco, and must needs have it,
he will be willing to give more Beavers Skins, or any other commodities which
he has for it, then he would otherwise do if Tobacco were more plentiful or
easier to be had. And as certain likewise that when there is great store of
Tobacco, and it is (in the language of Merchants and Tradesmen) but as a Drug
and of little price or value, there will not be so much of other things or
commodities given for it.

So it will be as true and certain that there is in no Kingdom or Country of
Christendom, especially in our Britain and other world where (howsoever some
Cosmographers and Chartes or Mapps, would by a great mistake make Gold to be a
Native) the Sun is not so amorous as to beget us Mines of Gold, nor is there
any probability that there ever were any, neither is there any Tagus or River
bringing any golden Sands along with it. And that which we have of Silver is
but rarely and seldom intermixed, and lurking in our Mines of Lead; there can
be no ground for our belief or reason that there should be such a disesteem or
under valuing of Gold and Silver, in regard of any plenty of it, as was amongst
the Americans or West Indians, when they would give great quantities of it for
Knives, Beads, or other Toys which the novelty of them or their desires to have
them, made to be precious, or that there should ever be such a surfeit of Gold
and Silver which most of the sons of men do desire to get or keep, as to make
all things dear which are to be bought with it, or to hinder that cheapness of
things to be bought with it, which will be of necessity where there happens to
be an abundance, which is the true and never failing cause of cheapness
abstracted and altogether a stranger to any supposed plenty of money, neither
the want of money or plenty of it, being generally any sole proper or efficient
cause of cheapness or dearness, which residing in the commodity to be bought or
fold tanquam in subjecta materia, as in its matter or subject regulates and
makes the price when there are no frauds or Artifices to disturb it according
as there is a scarcity or plenty of that which is to be bought or sold, which
is the cause that the scarcity of money has not in all ages made or enforced a
cheapness of commodities or household provisions to be bought with it, nor a
plenty of money made a dearness or enhaunce of prices, nor any thing like or
within many degrees of that which is n^w or ^ath been within forty years last
past, and they therefore will err toto Caelo, who by misplacing the cause,
would make the plenty or scarcity of the mensura or money to be either the
cause of the scarcity or plenty, dearness or cheapness of the Mensurata or
things to be bought with it, as by a retrospect into the course of former times
and ages may be plainly manifested.

Where we may find the Britains when the Barbarians drove them back to the
Sea, and the Sea put them back to the Barbarians, grievously tormented with a
famine and mortality which raged in the Land; and with great desolations
wrought by that dearth, Hig^on in ^ibli^^^eca Cattoni^na.
and after they had by repressing their enemies gained some peace, and that
produced such a plenty and abundance of all things, as the like before no age
had seen, to have fallen into great Riots and Excesses, plenty of money (there
being then none or little in the Land) not being any cause of the dearth or
scarcity, nor scarcity of the money of the plenty of provisions.

The Saxons being oppressed with the invasion of the Danes, and enforced to pay
them a Composition of sixteen thousand pounds, shortly after twenty thousand
pounds, afterward twenty four, then thirty, and lastly forty thousand pounds,
until all the Land was emptyed of all her Coin, did not find their Victuals
to be cheap in regard of their want of money, but Victuals and all things to be
bought with it to be dear by reason of the spoil of wars and Murrain of Cattle.

And they having in Anno Domini 1066* met with Talions Law, and the Divine
vindicta, or punishment for their perfidiousness to the Britains hastened by
their excess of pride, the women wearing as Ordericus vitalis, a contemporary
of William the Conqueror tells us far longer Trains or Garments then was
necessary, and the men striving to overtake the pride and vanity of Absalom in
his hair or Bush of Excrement, and so subdued and conquered as they were
enforced to be shaved and wear their hair shorter, their Lands being given away
to his Normans, the greatest part of the Nobility and Gentry extirped, many of
the common people glad to be vassals and Tenants to those Lands which before
were their own, and had nothing to recompense their losses, but the retaining
of their good old Laws; and their Masters and Conquerors having gathered all
the money and riches of the Kingdom into their Chests and possessions, there
was, after the harrassed English had gained some peace, and that the long
languishing Olive branches began again to recover their Sap and Verdure, so
small an improvement of the rent of Land amongst the Normans plenty of money as
in the valuation of Lands in the sixteenth year of the reign of William the
Conqueror, there was such a wonderful small value put upon Lands, fifty or
sixty and more to one less then it is now (the commodities and Cattle raised
thereupo^, being in all probability proportionable thereunto) as in Drayton no
unfruitful place in Cambridgeshire, Hist. Ingulph. and libe^ Censualis, or
Domesday.
the Abbot of Croyland had fourteen or fifteen yard Lands, twelve Villains,
three Bordmen, three Soccage Tenants and two Meadows, which in the time of
Edward the Confessor, were of the value of five pounds per annum, and at that
time but four pounds and ten shillings.

In the Reign of King Henry the first, which began his Reign in the year of our
Lord one thousand one hundred, when the Normans had something more improved
their Lands and possessions, their plenty of money made out of the English
miseries, Iu ingro lib. Sceti. and in glossar Henrici Spelman in voce Fi^ma.
did not banish their cheapness of victuals and provisions, but left them at
those small rates of one shilling for the Carcass of an Ox, and four pence for
a sheep, and no more for the Provender of twenty horses, the Denarius or
English penny then being probably as the Roman which was but the fourth part of
an ounce of Silver which in coin or money made no more then twenty pence.
Camdens Remains.


In the latter end of the Reign of King Richard the first, who began his Reign
in Anno Domini, one thousand one hundred eighty nine, Ho^eden part posterior,
424.
and after his redemption from his imprisonment by the Emperor of Germany in
his return from the Holy Land, when money was so scarce in England as to make
up the sum of one hundred thousand Marks for his ransom, the Church Plate and
Chalices were pawned, an Ox or Cow was but of the price of four shillings, a
Hogg ten pence, a sheep of the finer Wool ten pence, and six pence of the
courser.

In the Reign of King Edward the first, whose reign commenced in the year of
our Lord God one thousand two hundred fifty two, when there was as much plenty
of money as peace, and an increase of Trade under his ^appy and prudent
Government, Scotland conquered and subdued, and such a plenty of money, as some
Esterlings or men of Germany, from whom our Sterling money is well conjectured
by Sir Henry Spelman, to receive its denomination) were here employed to coin
our money; the Market price of an Ox was eight shillings and six pence; twenty
six seames (or sums or horse-loads, or quarters) of Barley was at forty three
shillings, Extent m^ne (...) de ^i^burgh p^incipis, 27. E. 1.
a quarter of Oats for fourteen pence; and the yearly value of an Acre of
Meadow was in Buckinghamshire, apud altum firmam, at the Rack, but eight pence
per Acre, and so small a power had the plenty of money then upon the price of
victuals, as upon the payment of money agreed to be paid upon a Bond or Deed
(which was not likely to be for any long time) as the Case at Law tempore, E.
1. Cited in 9. E. 4. informs us the price of a quarter of Barley, which was at
the time of the making of the Bond or Deed but three shillings a quarter, was
before the time of payment for it, In qu^t^am baga entitulat. Rageman apud
Recept. Sc^i^.
come to be thirty and two shillings a quarter, which might happen from some
other causes, and not at all by reason of any extraordinary store of money
which the Kingdom was then blessed withal.

In the eighth year of the Reign of King Edward the second, which was in the
year of our Lord God one thousand three hundred and fifteen, a Parliament was
assembled at London, where all or most of the Prelates and great Lords of
England, were with the Commons assembled, ^aith, Thomas Walsingham, Walsingham
hist. Ang^^ae, 106*
ad tractandum de statu regni and alleviatione rerum venalium (a matter now
mo^e then ever necessary) to consult of the State of the Kingdom, and the
taking down the price of victuals which says Walsingham was then so high, ut
vix posset vivere plebs communis, as the common people could scarce live, and
would have been in a worse condition if the Landlords had then let their Lands
at the Rack, or beyond the value, as many of them do now, and many of the
household provisions had been sold as they are now more then twenty times, and
others ten or fifteen times more then they were then, where it was ordained
that an Ox not fed with grain, should be sold for sixteen shillings, and if
with grain and fat for four and twenty shillings, and no more; a fat Cow of the
best sort for twelve shillings, a fat Hogg of two years old three shillings and
four pence, a Mutton fat and shorn for fourteen pence, and for one that was
unshorn, one shilling eight pence, a Goose for two pence half penny, a Hen for
a penny, and four Pigeons for a penny. And though immediately after in the same
year there followed such a very great famine, as Flesh and Corn were scarcely
to be had, Hens and Geese seldom found, Pigs and Swine, wanted Food, and Sheep
dyed of the Rot or Murrain, yet a quarter of Malt was sold for a Mark, and a
quarter of Corn for twenty shillings; and upon the great dearth which happened
in the next year after, making such a famine, as Horseflesh was good Diet for
the poor, and causing a repeal of the Act of Parliament which was made the year
before touching the price of Victuals, three quarts of strong Beer was then
sold for three pence, and of small for two pence, which in that sad and horrid
famine the Magistrates of London understood to be so unreasonable, as they
prohibited it to be sold at so high a rate, in the City, and ordained that no
more then three half pence should be taken for three quarts of strong Beer, and
a penny for small; and the King by his Proclamation likewise commanded that in
all parts of the Kingdom three quarts of Beer should not be sold for more then
a penny.

In the 21. year of the Reign of King Edward the third, notwithstanding any
enhaunce of prices made or occasioned by the great famine which was in the
eight and ninth years of the Reign of King Edward the second his Father, and
the continuance of it for four or five years afterward by reason of the
Murrain of Cattle, and a more then ordinary unseasonableness of those years,
twenty quarters of Corn were furnished for the Kings use and taken by the
Sheriff of Kent at eleven shillings the quarter, as appears by a Tally struck
for the payment thereof, yet extant in his Majesty's Receipt of the Exchequer,
In Rec^pt Sca^ca^ii.
and although that in the year next following by reason of a peace with France,
and the great victories before obtained against it by the English, when the
King was rich and the people rich, which makes a Kingdom completely rich, with
the riches and spoils gained thereby, and that great store of Gold and Silver,
Plate, Jewels, and rich vestiments sparsim per Angliam in singulorum domibus,
were almost in every house in England to be found, and that in the 23. year of
the Reign of the said King, so great a mortality of men and Cattle happned ut
vix media aut decima pars hominum remaneret, as scarce a third part and as some
were of opinion, not above a tenth part of the people remained alive, which
must needs have made a plenty of money, and tunc redditus perierunt, says the
Historian, Walsingham hist. Angliae, 168.
hinc terra ob defectum Colonorum qui nusquam erant remansit inculta tantaque
miseria ex bis malis est secuta quod mundus ad pristinum statum redeundi
nunquam postea habuit facultatem, insomuch as Rents (or Tenants) for Lands were
not to be had, the Lands for want of husbandmen, remained untilled (which would
necessarily produce a dearth and scarcity of Victuals) And so great was the
misery as the Kingdom was never like to recover its former condition.

And that in the 25. year of the Reign of King Edward the third, by reason of
the Kings coining of groats and half groats, Walsingham hist. Angl^ae 169.
less in value then the Esterling money, Victuals were through all England more
dear then formerly, and the Workmen, Artificers, and servants raised their
Wages yet in Anno 12 R. 2. though there was a great dearth, yet Wool was sold
for two shillings a Stone, a Bushel of Wheat for thirteen pence, Sir Richard
Bakers ^h^onicle or hist. of England, 166.
which was then thought to be a great rate, a Bushel of Wheat being sold the
year before for six pence.

And in Anno 14. of King R. 2. in an account made in the Receipt of the
Exchequer by Roger Durston the Kings Bailiff, In qua^am ^aga (...). R^geman in
Recept. Scacca^^i
he reckons for three Capons paid for Rent four pence half penny, for thirteen
Hens, one shilling and seven pence, for a P^ow^share paid for Rent eight pence,
and for four hundred Couple of Conies at three pence a couple, one hundred
shillings.

In Anno 2 H. 5. the Parliament understood four pounds thirteen shillings four
pence to be a good yearly a^lowance or salary for a Chaplain, 2 H. 5. cap. 2.
being men of more then ordinary quality (so great a cheapness was there then
of Victuals and other provisions for the livelihood of men) and for Parish
Priests, six pounds per annum for their Board, Apparel, and other necessaries;
and being to provide that Jurors which were to be impanelled touching the life
of man Plea Real or Forty Marks damage should be as the Statute of 42 E. 3. c.
5. required men of substance, good estate and credit, did ordain that none
should be Jurors in such cases but such as had forty shillings per annum in
Lands above all charges, which was so believed to be a good estate in 5 H. 8.
c. 5. which was almost one hundred years after, as the Parliament of that year
did think it to be an estate competent enough for such kind of men.

In the Reign of King Henry the sixth, after that France, a great and rich
neighboring kingdom was wholly conquered and possessed by the English, who had
not then learned their waste^ul Luxuries or Mimick fashions, and could not with
such an increase of Dominion and so great spoils and riches transported from
thence hither, but be abundantly and more then formerly full of money; the
price and rates of Victuals was so cheap, as the King could right worshipfully,
as the Record says, keep his Royal Court, which then could be no mean one with
no greater a charge then four and twenty thousand pounds per annum; and in the
33. year of his reign, which was in Anno Domini, one thousand four hundred
fifty and five, Rot. Part* 33. H. 6.
by assent of Parliament granted to his son the Prince of Wales, but one
thousand pound per annum, whilst he had Dirt and Lodging for himself and his
servants in his house, until he should come to the age of eight years, and
afterward no more then 2000. Marks per annum for the charge of his Wardrobe,
Wages of servants, and other necessa^y expenses, whilst he remained in the
house of the King his ^ather, which was then thought sufficient to support the
honor and dignity of the Prince and heir apparent of England, though now such a
sum of money can by some one that m^ndeth his pleasure more then his estate,
and the present more then the future, be thrown away in one night or day at
Cards or Dice.

In Anno 37 H. 6. Inquis. inter e^idencias Johann^^. Ferrers ^rn^ge^i.
Meadow in Derbyshire was valued but at ten pence per Acre, and errable Land at
three pence.

In the 22. year of the Reign of King Edward the fourth, Ter^ino P^^che 2^. ^.
^.
which was ^n the year of our Lord one thousand four hundred eighty and two,
the price and value of six Oxen was at the highest valuation but ten pounds.

In the seventh year of the Reign of King H* 7. which was in Anno Domini one
thousand four hundred ninety and two, Wheat was sold at London for twenty pence
the Bushel, which was then accounted a great dearth, and three years after for
six pence the Bushel; Bay Salt for three pence half penny, Namp^wich Salt for
six pence the Bushel, white Herrings nine shillings the Barrel, red Herrings
three shillings the Cade; in the fifteenth year of his Reign Gascoign Wine was
sold at London for forty shillings the Tun; and a quarter of Wheat for four
shillings.

In the 24. year of the Reign of King Henry the 8. a fat Ox was sold at London
for 26 s. and an half penny a pound for Beef and Pork, 24 H. 8 cap 3.
and a half penny farthing a pound for Veal and Mutton, was by Act of
Parliament thought to be a reasonable price, and with gain enough afforded.

In the fourth year of the Reign of Queen Mary, which was in the year of our
Lord God one thousand five hundred fifty and seven, when very many families and
multitudes of the people of England had been but a little before greatly monyed
and enriched by the lands and spoil or the Monasteries and other Religious
houses and their large possessions, Wheat was sold before Harvest for four
Marks the quarter, Malt at four and forty shillings the quarter, and Pease at
six and forty shillings and eight pence, S^r Richard Bakers history of England.
but after Harvest Wheat was sold at London for five shillings the quarter,
Malt at six shillings eight pence; and Rye at three shillings four pence the
quarter, and in the Country Wheat was sold for four shillings the quarter, Malt
at four shillings eight pence, and in some places a Bush^l of Rye for a pound
of Candles, which was worth but four pence,

In the eighteenth year of Queen Elizabeth, when the Act of Parliament was made
in favor of the two Universities of Oxford and Cambridge, that the Colleges
and Halls should take a third part of their rents in Corn, Malt, 18 Eliz cap. 6.
etc. the price of a quarter of Wheat was valued but at six shillings eight
pence the quarter, and Malt at five shillings, and the Tenants or Lessees might
(if it should be cheaper) make their election to pay them after the rate as it
should be the next Market day before their rents should grow due.

Anno 25. Eliz. four good Legs of Mutton could be bought in London for four
shillings, two Roasting Piggs for two shillings and six pence, four Pullets for
four shillings four pence, and four Legs of Pork for four shillings and six
pence, which may prove that the Compositions for Pourveyance made with the
County of Essex in or about the fourth year of her blessed Reign for six
shillings eight pence a quarter of Wheat, six shillings eight pence for a
Mutton, no more for a Pork, and eighteen pence for a Hen* was if not more or as
much, but a very little below the Market. In Anno 34. Eliz. after her many
glorious successes against the Spanish King, with whom she had no commerce or
alliance to bring any fruits of his golden Mines into England, and the many
plunderings and ransackings of his Indian Treasurs by our famous Drake, and his
worthy contemporaries in their high adventures, and the enriching of our Land
and people thereby, that, or any other plenty of money, did not so increase (if
at all it had been able) our Market prices, for food and household provisions,
but that they might be bought at London at less then half the rate they are
now at, and the whole charges of a plentiful Diet for a society of twenty four
Gentlemen of no ordinary quality or condition with Beef, Mutton, Beer, Bread,
Rabits, Chickens, Geese, Capons, Piggs, Fish, Sawses and Oysters, and the
charges of Fire, Washing of Table Clothes and Napkins, the Cooks and Butlers
Salaries, and all other appu^tenant expenses of household Provisions, with
Suppers as well as Dinners came then by the week but unto six pound five
shillings and fou^ pence, which amounted unto very little more then five
shillings a man. In Anno 43. Eliz. two necks of Mutton were bought for one
shilling and ten pence, and four large Shoulders of Mutton for five shillings
six pence, and a weeks Commons for the same society and number of quality which
might have contented Justices of Peace and men of worship, came but to eight
pound ten shillings seven pence, which charged every man with little more then
seven shill^ngs a piece.

In Anno 20. Jac. after that England had suffered too many of the hungry and
never satisfied Scottish Nation, not only to partake of her plenties here, but
to carry home all the moneys and riches which an over kind and gracious
Sovereign sending away few of their desires unanswered, had so liberally
distributed amongst them, and the more then formerly profusions and expenses of
^ur own nation, making such a scarcity of money as might have made provisions
for housekeeping cheap, if the supposed Rule of plenty of money would make them
dear, the rates of victuals and provisions met with some augmentation
notwithstanding more then needed.

And in quarto Car. primi, when too many men's unnecessary expenses, and the
higher rack and rent of Lands had informed every man that victuals and
household provisions were dearer then they should have been, the rates and
prices of diet and household provisions be-but a little more advanced.

And the stretch of prices and rates of victuals and household provisions, from
that time keeping pace with the rack and increasing of Rents, or rather out
going them, and so far surpassing the bounds of reason and moderation, as well
as the customs and usage of former times and ages, as a Tenant by several
Leases of a Farm in the County of Essex, almost forty miles distant from
London of no extraordinary Lands, being raised since the beginning of the Reign
of King James from five and twenty pounds per annum, to eight and thirty pounds
per annum, after that to sixty pounds per annum, was most unconscionably turned
out of his Farm this present year, because he could not afford to give his
^acking Landlord, one hundred Marks per annum, and too many of the Landlords,
Tenants, and Selle^s vying who should most drain and disadvantage the purses of
the buyers, or those which had need of their Lands or Commodities (as if God
Almighty the revenger of oppressions and relief, at one time or another, or by
one way or another of such as suffer by it, had only made and ordained mankind
to devour and take advantages one of another) have so brought the Markets and
prices of household provisions, from those formerly more moderate, gentle and
easy to those immoderate and unconscionable rates which are now imposed upon
the buyers, as we may plainly see from whence they do proceed, and that the
raising and increase of the price of the ounce of Silver could not cause or
effect them.

For although that our Denarius, both Anglo, Saxonick and Norman had more
weight and Silver in it when the ounce of Silver was valued but at twenty then
when it was at thirty pence, and that had more weight and Silver in it then
when it was at forty or five and forty pence, then as it is now at five
shillings the ounce, and that a Denarius or English penny, is but now the
sixtieth part of an ounce; and that when it was in the reign of King Henry the
sixth, raised to thirty pence the ounce, in regard of the enhauncing of money in
foraign parts, and that our Denarius or penny passed as Mr. Malines says in
his Lex Mercatoria for three half pence, and in the reign of King Edward the
fourth for two pence, when the ounce of Silver was raised to forty pence, and
so continued until the raigns of King Edward the sixth and Queen Elizabeth,
Malines Lex Mercatoria.
and was then valued a three pence, because the ounce of Silver was enhaunced
to sixty pence or five shillings, and that all three pences coined by that
Queen did weigh but a penny weight, and the six pence but a two penny weight,
which is rather to be understood as to the weight of the penny or two pence in
the coining or mynting of it, then to the denomination of it or the value as
the people did receive or pay it in Commerce and exchange, when as six single
pence or three two pences we^e then as they are now esteemed and taken for no
less then a six pence in one entire piece of coin, and a Queen Elizabeth's six
pence does now pass in payment for three times the value of a two pence, yet
our Caesar's value or rate put upon it making our now Denarius or penny to be
current at the rate or value which the former Denarius or penny was, and the
King giving at his Mint or Exchange for those or any other coyns of Silver,
after the rate as the ounce of Silver is now at; and the buyers of things or
commodities can put it away in payment for a penny, and the seller can pass it
away for as much as he received it, there is no wrong at all done by it when it
passes in England (though the intrinsic value will be only looked upon in
Foraign parts) for a greater value then it is, as in some of the Heathen
Countries, where Rice and sometimes Cocao Nuts pass for their money, or as the
Dutch have done when some of their Towns have been straightly besieged in
allowing the Townsmen and ^arrison to make use of Tynne, Leather, Philippus
Caesius a Zesen in Leone Belgico.
or Paper for money, and not only promised but at the raising of the siege
rendered them in good money as much as that went or was taken for, or as our
King James did when he made good Queen Elizabeth's promise, and paid good money
for that Copper or base money which her necessities in the Irish wars had made
use of for the present, or as our farthing Tokens or brass did no hurt but a
great deal of good when they went for more then the intrinsic worth or value:
And therefore such high rates and prices of victuals and household provisions
may well be understood to be the product of other causes, and not of any plenty
of money which could not cause either a scarcity of provisions (which is one of
the grand causes of high rates and prices) or when there is a plen^y of
provisions enforce any great rates and prices for them.

But if it should be otherwise, and that the valuing of Coin, above their true
and real values should have no small influence upon the prices and rates of
food and household provisions, yet they did not always proceed passibus aequis,
keep even pace one with another, when as from the ra^sing of the ounce of
Silver to forty five pence; those pieces of Coin which went before for a
penny, were as Mr. Malines says, taken in payment in the Raigns of King Henry
the eighth, Edward the sixth, and Queen Mary for two pence, and when the ounce
of Silver came to be five shillings or sixty pence in the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, went for three pence though it waighed but a penny weight, the
prices or rates of victuals and household prov^sions would not keep company with
the intrinsic value of the money; but conten^ing themselves with the
denomination or what it was then or is since only curr^nt for, are at this day
gone excessively beyond the rise of the ounce of Silver, and so unreasonably as
they do exceed all measure and reason; and those proportions which were
formerly holden betwixt the coin and the Bullion; and Master Malines in his
book called Lex Mercatoria, attributting all or or the most part of the
dearness of all sorts of household provisions to the raising of the Rents of
Lands, Gerard Malines Lex Mercatoria, 47. and 147.
will hardly be able to reconcile that contradiction with what he seems at
the same time to be very positive in, that according to plenty or scarcity of
money, commodities, do* generally become dear or good cheap; and that so it came
to pass of late years that every thing is enhaunced in price by the abundance
of Bullion moneys which come from the West Indies into Europe, and the money it
self being altered by valuation, caused the measure to be made lesser, whereby
the number did increase to make up the tale, being augmented by denomination
from twenty to forty, and in later years, from forty five to sixty, it being
always to be remembered that the rareness or scarcity of every thing does
augment the value, and that it is the value which begets an esteem and makes it
precious, and that Silver being in the infancy of the world very much esteemed
and valued, and has to the decrepit and old age of the world more and more
increased its value and esteem, the rising of the price or rate of the ounce of
Silver by King Henry the sixth, King Henry the eight, and Queen Elizabeth might
as well proceed from the scarcity of it, as from any policy or reason of State
to keep our Silver at home, and not permit it to be carried away by Foraign
Princes enhances, or putting a denomination upon it over and above its real
value, or to keep the balance of Trade and Commerce even betwixt us and them;
and that as it has been rationally enough said by some that the denomination
of coin passes by the connivance of the Magistrate insensibly, and as much
without damage or inconvenience to the people, as the permissive moneys have
done amongst Brokers and Merchants Cashiers, and as it is now daily
experimented by the Brass or Copper farthing since the causeless suspention of
the farthing tokens by the late over turning Reformers (because they were
established by his late Majesty's Letters Patents, or upon some other new found
Politic pretenses) which some Tavern keepers and Chandlers do take the
boldness to stamp with an inscription of their own names and places of abode.

And it would be near of kin to a wonder, and the reason of it lie
everlastingly hid and undiscovered, that any plenty of monys here should so
swell our rates and prices, and make every thing dear which is to be bought
with it, and make a plenty of provisions to be as a scarcity, when as there
have been no such effects or consequences thereof found amongst other Nations.

For the Hollanders who by the Artifice of their Banks and greatness of their
Trade, do give laws to all the commerce and money of Christendom, and a great
part of the Pagan Nations, and in their long wars with the King or Spain for
above sixty years together have been a means to waste and consume all the Gold
and money which his Indies or other large and over taxed Dominions could
furnish, and had it spent upon or amongst them, and having little Lands of
their own, but much of their provisions and victuals from the neighboring
Countries and Nations could not in that great plenty of money and Trade,
wherein they are known to abound, live so cheaply as they might (if the heavy
burden of continual Taxes and Excise which are there the only or a great part
of the cause of their dearness were separate and abstracted from the natural
and genuine rates and prices thereof) where Fish, Fowl, Carrets, Turnips,
Apples, Pears, and many other household provisions, are (notwithstanding the
burden of their Excise) much cheaper then in England, if store or plenty of
money could be any efficient cause of high rates and prices for victuals and
household provisions.

In France the Paysants which are the greatest part of the people, will tell us
that there is money little enough, and that there would (if it were not for
their Hydras and multitudes of Taxes and Gabels) be cheapness enough of all
manner of household provisions, when their Wines and flesh notwithstanding that
or any supposed plenty of money are cheap enough.

In Scotland the moneys and riches which that Nation gained from England by
King James his coming to the English Crown, and the bounties of that King and
his Son King Charles the Martyr, with the three hundred thousand pounds
sterling, for brotherly assistance given to a factious and Rebellious part of
them, by a party of Covenanting English Rebels, to ruin their King and the
race and posterity of their benefactors, together with the two hundred thousand
pounds sterling, far exceeding the pay as well as wickedness of their Master
Judas, given them to sell their pious and distressed King (who in a confidence
of their Covenanting pretenses, Faith and promises had fled to their Army for
refuge, which with the help of his loyal English subjects might easily have
preserved him as well as themselves from the miseries and destruction which
afterward happened) never appeared to be any cause of the dearness of victuals
and household provisions more then ordinary, or what proceeded from other
accidents or causes.

In Germany, where the Bavarian Silver Mines have of late made a plenty of it,
and every petty Prince and principality has a regality and privilege of
coining, their Dollars are much allayed and mixed with a baser metal, and
their Hanse and Imperial Cities do enjoy a great commerce by Sea and Land, they
do not complain of the high rates and prices of victuals and household
provisions.

The Kingdom of Sweden whose Copper Mines are their Indies, and do furnish
plenty of Copper money, with a value in its weight and materials as much as
their denominations which the coyns of Gold and Silver, necessarily requiring
an allay and some mixture are never blessed with, has in a plenty of that base
money, no high rates or prices upon their native commodities, but (...)
reasonable as fish enough may be bought for three pence to dine twenty men.

Rome which receives the money as well as feet of many strangers, is the Mart
or Forum for the dispatch of most of the Ecclesiastical, and too much of the
civil affairs of the Catholic Nations, and by her claimed Vicariat or
Lieutenancy from Jesus Christ, and an Empire in Ecclesiastical affairs has her
Taxes, Tenths, first fruits, Oblations, Jubilees, Indulgences, pardons, and
other attractions of money, large Territories, Church Land Revenues, and the
disposal of many privileges and principalities, and famous Channels cut for
the Gold and Silver of the Catholic and most enriched Nations, to run into the
Ocean of its ever filling and never emptying Treasury, can at the same time
whilst she fits as Queen and delights her self in the several Magazines and
Storehouses of her abundance of riches, enjoy a very great plenty and
cheapness of household provisions.

The Commonwealth of Venice with her wonderful Amass of Treasurs, by which she
has for some years last past made wars with the g^and Seignior, the Behemoth
and Leuiathan of the East does, notwithstanding as she did before those wars
bless her inhabitants with a competent cheapness.

The Kingdom of Naples and Duchy of Milan who with their Garrisons and Armies
of Spaniards to the natives in a forced and unwilling obedience are the
expenditors and wasters of much of the King of Spaines incomes from India and
other his Dominions, do not find that to be the cause or occasion of any
dearth or high prices of victuals amongst them.

The grand Duke of Florence with his great commerce and riches brought into
that Country by granting of great privileges to his Port of Legorn, and the
Merchants of other Nations trading thither, filling his subjects and people
with more then formerly and ordinary plenty of money did not thereby so
establish the unhappiness of buying their victuals and provisions at
unreasonable prices, but that there, as well as in other principalities and
Provinces of Italy (which by the Trade of Legorn and neighborhood of Rome, and
her Ecclesiastical Merchandise are greatly enriched) there is so little reason
for an enhaunce of the prices and rates of food or provisions as they can be
honest gainers by an easy Banda or Reiglement of what is to be paid for them.

In Spain where the common people do only hear of the arrival of many millions
of Gold and Silver from the West Indies, and have little of that but a great
deal of black money or Maravedis, their great rates for flesh do not arise from
the abundance of their money, either of the one kind or of the other, but from
the barrenness of the Country and the little use thereof, procuring no dearness
in their Oranges, Olives, and Lymmons and other fruits, and delicacies of that
mountainous Country.

In the East Indies which is one of the Suns darlings, whether our English
Merchants carry more money then they should, and where their mountains and hills
bring forth great quantities of precious stones and Jewels, Gold and Silver,
and bestows upon them an abundance thereof, enough to adorn themselves and the
people of the utmost Isles, there are no high rates put upon food or victuals.

In China, where there is no want of money, they have Rice and other meat for
the sustenance of man very cheap, and to be had for almost nothing in the
Philippina Islands, three Hens were sold not long ago for a Rial, which is no
more then six pence English money; a Dear for two Rials, and a Hogg for eighteen.

And our Countriman Mr. Gage in his journey in Anno 1625. from St. John de
Ulhua to Mexico in the West Indies, where the world had as it were laid up its
Treasures of Gold and Silver, found Beef, Mutton, Kid, Hens, Turkies, Fowls
and Quails to be so plentiful and cheap as he was astonished at it, nor was it
any store of money in Virginia, which heightened there for some times the
prices of all things, but the Merchants giving greater sums of money to the
Savages then they needed, neither in New England in Anno 1636. when a Cow was
sold for two and twenty pounds, which the next year after upon the arrival of
more might be had for eight pounds.

And as little is any supposed plenty of money in old England, when three
millions of Gold (too much of which is since transported) were coined here
betwixt the years 1622. and 1630* and two hundred thousand pounds per annum
brought hither from Spain to be coined for some years betwixt that and 1640.
(now no more coming so long a voyage to our Min^) the cause or reason of those
excessive and intolerable p^ices and rates of victuals and household
provisions, even to an oppression of the buyers, and a consumption of their
estates, making the greatest most universal and extended g^ievances and
oppression of the Nation.

When as there is and has been for some years of late in England, the greatest
want of money and Trade which should introduce and procure it that ever it
languished and groaned under for three hundred years last past, by an universal
poverty, and want of it by reason of twenty years great and heavy Taxes which
yearly enforced and called for more money then the King of Spain, during that
time, received for his West Indies for his own account, or England ever paid in
Taxes, all being summed up together in the space of 500. years before, together
with a gene^al pride and luxury since wasting and carrying away that little
that was left of our money, whilst all or the most of our Gold have been
enticed and transported into Foraign Countries by reason of the fineness of our
Standard, and their putting a greater value upon our coin, much of our Silver
has in coin or Plate been carried into Ireland and Scotland, and from thence
or from England into Foraign parts, and that little which remained of it
together with a great part of our Silver converted into Gold and Silver Lace,
or other vain and needless manufactures, some millions of money employed here
by the Dutch at interest, because that their own Country, yielded not above
four per cent. for it, called home and taken away by reason of our distempers
and troubles, the bringing of interest by our usu^ping Legislators to six per
cent. whereby to advance the sale of loyal men's lands which they had without
law or reason taken from them, eighty thousand pounds in coin and Silver
Bullion, or Ingotts of our small ^emainder of money yearly carried out of
England by our East Indian company into the East Indies or Persia, to purchase
Spices and many superfluous and transmarine commodities, without which our
forefathers could live longer, more plentifully and healthy then now they do.
And so little money left in the Nation in general or amongst the common people,
as they are many of them being dragged by their necessities, enforced to endure
the greatest bitings and extortions from the Usurers, and the Cancer or
Gangreen of Usury and Brokage grown so high and intolerable, as by a judicious
computation lately made there are no less then 3000. public and private
Brokers and Harpies in and about the City of London, taking forty, sixty, or
eighty per cent. far exceeding that of the Jews, or the Caursini, when they
to^m^nted England with their unmerciful Usuries until they were banished many
of our Merchants by reason of the adulterating of our Commodities, and taking
away the credit of them, or by the inticements of an unlawful gain buying their
Corants at Zant, and Silks and other Commodities in the Levant and Turkey, with
pieces of eight, and their Deal and Timber in Norway with Dollars, which has
made such a scarcity and want, as all the Silver money coined in the Kingdom by
the late Parliament so called, with their dolorous Cross and ill tuned Harp,
amounted when it was called into the Mint after his Majesty's restoration to no
more, with some store of Brass, Copper, or Lead counterfeit money crept in
amongst it, then five hundred thousand pounds sterling, or thereabouts; and
that which went about of the Coins of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King
Charles the Martyr, not being estimated to be much above as much more, no^
making a total with both, included together of more then a million and a half
of sterling moneys, which amongst four millions of people, if that should be
the account of the number of the inhabitants, men, women and children in
England, there being not likely to be many less, would afford but seven
shillings and six pence to every one, and if the money in the Kingdom should as
some have guessed it more at random, then upon certainty or p^obability amount
unto twenty seven hundred thousand pounds, or to make it numerum rotundum, for
the more even and easy computing of it three millions sterling would yield
every one but fifteen shillings, which renders the money of the kingdom to be
lamentably scarce and too little for the people, and may without the blame of
being over sanguine or credulous induce any man to believe that the credit
which the people have one with another, far exceeds the money of the Nation,
that they which are any thing rich in the Kingdom, the Nobility, Gentry, and
such as live upon their Lands and Estats without trading only excepted, are
but as the Pikes in the Ponds or Rivers which devour and feed upon the
multitude and smaller Frye of F^shes, that there is no such plenty of money now
in England, when poverty and want are as Regiments of armed men breaking in
upon every County and part of England and Wales, the lamentations of the poor
and such as are undone for want of trade and employments, are as the noise of
many waters, and the excessive rates and prices of victuals and household
provisions are to seek for some other causes or originals, then a supposed
plenty of money, when as there is no housekeeper but feels the burden and smart
of them, and may hear almost every body, not as Usurers which do it to conceal
their money from such as might over importune them to borrow it, or to heighten
the necessities of such as they may scrue up to their exactions, or in a greedy
humor or appetite never think they have money enough, but as a people exhausted
and impoverished by wars and luxury, lamenting their want of money, and that
every Town, Corporation, City and County of the Kingdom, the more vain and
prodigal part of the people who make have to spend all that they have or can
come at only exepted have too many symptoms and signs of a poverty and want
of Trade, and tire themselves with the complaints of it.

And it cannot be either want or plenty of money which causes such
extraordinary rates and prices of food and household provisions, servants and
workmens wages, greatness of Rents, and the intolerable and unreasonable
prices of all that are to be bought either for the Belly or the Back, now more
then it was twenty years ago, and then more then it was some hundred years
before, making the sin of oppression and cozening one another, to rise like the
waters of Noah's Flood prevailing and increasing greatly, but the wickedness in
the hearts of men doing and devising evil continually, oppressing, and cheating
one another.

For it was not an abundance of money that has made Beef to be at three pence,
Mutton four pence a pound, and to be much dearer at Christmas and other
Festivals, then at other times in the year but an evil custom only, and the
will and pleasure of the Butchers, or that has raised ^he Board wages of a
Footmen to be seven shillings and a valect du Chamber or extraordinary
Servingman ten shillings a week, that makes good Butter to be at nine pence a
pound, when it was within this twenty years commonly one year with another but
at six pence per pound, and three Eggs a g^oat; a Maidservants wages to be
four pounds a year, and a Ploughmans five or six pounds a year, but because the
Maids will wear Silks and Gold and Silver Lace, and the Clowns their clothes
after the Gentleman's mode or ^ashion, or that has doubled workmens wages, but
because they will eat of the finest sorts of meat, and be as Trim as pride and
Ribbons can make them.

That causes Milk at London in a time of as many or more Cowes and Pasturage
then ever, to be at one penny a qua^t for some little time in Summer, and three
half pence and some times seven farthings a quart all the year after, when as
John Stow not long ago deceased, has left it amongst his memorials, that in
his youth he fetched many a half penny wo^th of Milk from a Farm by the
Minories near London, and never had less then three Ale pintes for a half penny
in the Summer, nor less then two Ale pintes for a half penny in the Winter. Nor
any excess of money that brings many poor Artizans and their pitiful fed
Families to do suite and service to the Chandlers, who having made their
Mathematical Lines upon their Cheeses, can enforce them to be content with such
small penny worths of that, and such farthings-worth of Butter, as they shall
think fit to allow them.

No such scarcity of fruit nor store of money two years ago amongst Gallants as
to make a dozen of Pears cost six and thirty shillings, or of Peermains this
year, when a dozen of them may be bought by others for a penny to give a penny
a piece for them, but the small acquaintance of those that gave it with their
forefathers frugalities.

Nor any discovery of a new Indies or Atlantic Islands that makes twenty
shillings a pound to be given for Cherries, or ten shillings a peck for green
Pease, but because their fancies or disorderly appetites will not tarry until
the Markets come to be cheaper, when Cherries may be had for a groat a pound,
and a peck of as good or better Pease for the same price, and can give twenty
shillings for a small Apricock* or Spring Garden Tart, when the next morning
they have nothing to satisfy the men of Items or reckonings for their long
forborne and clamorous debts.

No increase of money but the profusion and luxuria Triumphans of the times we
now live in, which (by a peculiar carelessness of our Gentry eating their meat
before they inquire what is to be paid for it, which all other Nations do as
much abhor as wonder at) has raised the reckonings of the Vintners who can sit
in their little Sentry houses turning over the leaves of their Bibles, and yet
as if they were to be the Collectors of the Devils Revenues can multiply their
Wine as they find their Guests over much taken with it, and increase their
scores according as the company are careless, or when the Gallants are willing
to let their Mistresses or Dalilas know how readily they can expend their monys
in those or the like exercises, and never be daunted at a reckoning of 13 s. 4
d. for a couple of green Geese, when they were every where to be met withal for
two shillings a piece, ten shillings for two brace of Partriches, and four
pound for a Collar of Brawn, and the Cooks so unwilling to come far behind them
as to think themselves not paid unless they may have three shillings six pence
for a Neats Tongue and Turnips, seven shillings for a Shoulder of Mutton with
Oysters, for a Potage thirty shillings, eight tame Pigeons eleven shillings,
dressing a dish of Carpes fifteen shillings, a dish of Whitings and Flounders
ten shillings, dressing a dish of Smelts eight shillings, for a Neck of Mutton
three shillings and six pence, a Shoulder of Mutton five shillings and six
pence, and for a Calves head hashed ten shillings.

No over flowing of our English purses which has made a load of Wood which
has been bought in some Woodland Counties of England within the memory of man
for a penny a load as much as six Oxen could draw, to be now seven or eight
shillings a load, but the devouring Iron works and the scarcity of Wood, or
that has made our Newcastle Coals when they are now at the cheapest to be a
third part dearer then they were.

No Surfeit of money or scarcity of horses that has brought a horse within
these twenty years last past, from ten pounds price for a man of worship or
good estate and reputation, to be sold for twenty, thirty, forty or fifty
pounds, and sometimes a hundred pound, though they be only for travailing, and
no Barbary or Foraign breed, or race horses, nor could they be really so much
worth, but that the prices are only advanced according to the pride, humor or
affection of some, and imitated and brought into a custom by others who were
loath to come short of them in their folly, which makes those or greater prices
to be kept up or demanded by the subtle Countrymen or sellers, who by such
indiscretions and humors can make their Market advantages greater then ever
they were before.

Or that makes in our greatest want of money a Go^get for a Lady or Gentlewoman
to cost eighty or one hundred or two hundred pounds, and a yard of Flanders or
Frenchified Lace, at the rate of fou^ty or fifty pounds, or a Lady in the
Country to ^read and trample upon a Gorget which her husband had brought her
from London, because it had not cost above sixteen pounds, or a young Merchant
to wear a Band or thirty pound price, when as twenty pounds per annum in Fee or
for life was in the Parliament of primo E. 2. which was in Anno domini 1307.
accounted to be a good Revenue to maintain a Knight, his Lady and Family in a
worshipful manner, and keep good horses, men and Arms for the service of his
Prince and Country.

No Inundation of money from Foraign Countries, but the knavery of the Tanners
and Curriers, and transportation of Leather, and to enable the Shoomakers Wives
to wear Lace upon their Gorgets of forty shillings a yard, that makes a Hide of
Leather which within the memory of a young man was sold for twelve shillings,
now to cost thirty shillings or above, and the making of a pair of Shoes to a
Journeyman which was wont to be for five pence, not to be now under fourteen
pence, and that makes our Gentlemen's plain Shoes which were heretofore sold
for three shillings, not to be now under six shillings, when there are more
Cattle killed and spent then ever, and Boots are not so frequently* worn as
they were in the later end of King James his Reign (when the Spanish Ambassador
the Conde of Gondomar, could pleasantly relate when he went home into Spain,
that all the Citizens of London were Booted and ready as he thought to go out
of Town) and that for many years since all the men of the Nation as low as the
Plowmen and meanest Artizans which walked in their Boots, a^e now with the
fashion returned again as fo^merly to Shoes and Stockings.

Neither is it plenty of money that makes Scholars or men of Learning never
less regarded, more poor and scorned, to pay double or many times treble the
rates and prices for Books, then they did twenty years ago, because the rates
and prices of books are by the unconscionable Arts and Trade of the Stationers,
proportioned and kept up to a penny a sheet, which of late was usually paid for
Pamphlets sold and cried up and down the streets to publish the madness and
rebellion of an hypocritical and wicked part of the people, or that causes
China Orenges which at a dearer rate then elsewhere are to be had at the
Playhouse door five for a shilling, but within the house, in that which is
called the Pit not to be had of the woman that sells them, under three for a
shilling, because for a Monopoly of the only selling of them in the Playhouse,
she gives one hundred pounds Fine, and thirty pounds per annum Rent, and has
such a power and dominion over some of the peoples purses, who take it to be an
honor to be foolish and ready upon any terms to part with their money and be
their own Pick pockets, as they that sit in the eighteen pence Rooms or
Galleries may have four for a shilling, and those that sit in the twelve penny
Rooms or Galleries are seldom denied five for a shilling.

It was not the plenty of money but Prodigality which in Holland and the
Netherlands not long since made Tulips, whose glories are in the varieties of
their most excellent Colors and abasements in the want of Odor to accompany
them, to be at two or three hundred pounds sterling a piece until those insane
and causeless prices were decryed and forbidden by the Edicts or Placaets of
the States General, and that an hundred, or sixty, or fifty, or forty pound
sterling, could be here given for a Root of a Tulip, when as now in an
abundance or commonness of them, one or two hundred of them may be had for five
pounds.

It is not an abundance of money, but abundance of Devil, sin and vice, and all
manner of villainies which makes all Commodities to be so dear at London, and in
its adjacent Counties; our Cloth to be as dear again as it was but lately, and
not half so honestly made; the binding or putting an Apprentice to a Draper or
Grocer, which not long ago could be done for twenty or thirty pounds, cannot be
now under an hundred, or an hundred and twenty pounds, and that many which do
now come to buy any thing of a Tradesman, can hardly escape the temptation of a
bribe, or some share in the bargain to permit him to sell his sophisticated or
adulterated wares at as high a price as he can possibly get for them, or that
makes house-rents (when the undone people in the Countries flock to London to
see if they can find a better subsistence) one part in three dearer then it was
twenty years ago.

Nor an abundance of money in Spain and other Foraign kingdoms that makes as
some ingenious Travilers have well observed, provisions of victuals to be much
dearer in or under the chief City of a Nation or Country, then it is at a
distance from it, or that makes an Hen Egg to be sold at Madrid for three
pence, when as twelve may be had for a penny in Gallicia or places more remote.

Nor that in Ireland, whither too much of our money is transported, and many
pieces of Eight which our Merchants have imported into England, and being here
afforded at three shillings three pence a piece, do there yield the exporter
five shillings a piece, and makes a greater plenty of money to be there then
should be; there does notwithstanding continue such a cheapness of victuals and
household provisions, as it made a Maidservant when she was lately sent to
Market to come home with a complaint that she paid five pence for a Hen, and
could have but fourteen Eggs for a penny.

For it is not scarcity of money that makes victuals to be so cheap in
Yorkshire, where many of the Gentry do many times want no money for Horse Races
and other needless expenses, but the far distance from London, and want of vent
for their Commodities, And besides the causes above mentioned proceeding from
frauds and the peoples oppressing one another: it will be ubique and semper,
every where and at all times true that many times sola universaque hominum
libido non natura rebus omnibus pretium suum posuerit, Philippus Caesius a
Zesen in Leone Belgico 16.
it is the unruliness of men's appetites which causes things to be dear.

And whether our money or Bullion be more or less then it was heretofore, or
more imported then exported, there would not be such a cry and complaint of the
want of money, if the prudence of our more generous and hospitable Ancestors
had not been as it is so much slieghted and thought unworthy our imitation, and
that our estates had been the rule and measure of our expenses, of which if an
account were taken but in some particulars, which since the flight and
banishment of our English Hospitalities, has more then formerly wasted the
money and Revenues of England, it will be found that the laying aside or
scorning, or seldom usage of the grosses viandes Butchers or course meat, as it
is now disdainfully termed, and the substantial food and diet of Beef and
Brewesse, Mutton, Veal, Po^k, B^con, etc. and the introducing in stead of them
many Foraign quelque chooses, or fantastically made Dishes Oleos, Fricasses and
Potages, hant gousts, and provoking sawces in the steed of a more wholesome Diet,
with rich Wines and many costly Confections, Banquets and perfumes at the
disert or end of meals or repasts, have spent and cost more then the pious,
more noble prudent and worthy custom of hospitality, building of Castles, and
the building and endowing of stately Churches and Monasteries ever did, and
that the money spent in some one vain and costly Dish, adorned and enriched
with Amber gris, making a charge of ten or twelve pounds would in the later end
of the Reign of King Henry the eighth have gone a great part of the way in the
defraying of the expenses of an Ox or a Beef by a Gentleman or good
Housekeeper (for in those days they were synonimas or Termini convertibiles)
every day in the Christmas to entertain his friends and Tenants and feed the
poor. And that if the charges of our delicacies, encouragements and incentives
of the most mortal sins, heaping upon those that use them, the dangers of
immortal punishments, with that which has within these last century or hundred
years been expended more then formerly in Wine, which in King Henry the eighths
days was so little used to be drunk by Pints or Quarts, or great quantities in
Taverns, as they were like some medicaments, or Cordials usually sold, and to
be had at Apothecaries Shops.

And of all that has been since vainly spent in Pictures, Coaches, Dice and
Cards more then their forefathers, excess of Apparel building of stately
houses, and laid out in Plate and the Furniture, and adorning of them when he
is but a Son of contempt, and a Citizen of the lowest rank, that has not his
Country House (which though it cost five or six thousand pound the building
must scornfully be called a Wash house) with gallant Gardens, Fountains and
Orchards, and as much or more Plate then the Nobility or Gentry were wont to
have, with very costly Hangings of threescore or one hundred pounds a Suit.

Vast sums of money yearly spent more then formerly in the purchase and taking
of Tobacco and those smoaky delights and contemplations, twenty, thirty or
forty times greater Portions given with Daughters in marriage, many of whom are
so ill bred and habituted unto it, as they seldom fail to spend in a short
time that and three times as much more of their Husbands Estates (which did not
long ago put the wise Spaniard in mind by a Law or Pragmatico to cause a
restraint and limitations of Portions to be given in marriage with Daughters)
and can in a month or night lose as much or more at Cards then the Portions of
their Grandmothers, the Daughters of Knights and men of worship amounted unto,
besides what is disbursed by some of our Ladies African she-monsters and
high-flying Gentlewomen of the sinful mode and fashion in artificial
beauties, black patches, extraordinary washings, and as they hope, invisible
Fucusses: and persuading their Husbands not to trouble themselves with the
dirty husbandry, and greasy Hospitalities, as they please to style them, of
their Fathers or Grandfathers, but to turn their care into Cards, Sedans and
Coaches and their Chimneys to Tobacco-pipes.

And an Account were taken of all which has been spent and paid more then
formerly in the high rates and prises more than needed of all that has been
worn or eaten since the beginning of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, and
extraordinarily paid in Servants and Workmens wages.

All the money which has been spent more then formerly, in sugars, fruits,
spices, and other forragin delicacies and superfluities, all the money which
has been made of the wood and timber more then ordinarily cut down and sold,
(which yielded as much as the purchase of the Lands where it grew could come
unto, and had been carefully planted and preserved by our forefathers for
shipping, and better uses then to pay the debts or furnishing out the vanities
and wickedness of their profuse generations; and all the money spent in
Watches, worn by almost every Citizen of the better sort and their Apprentices,
with a constant rent paid quarterly to keep them in order, more then 60000
pounds per annum vainly spent in the twelve penny jobs in Hackny Co^ches, and
in Perruks or Periwigs, when Clarks and some foolish Tradesmen must not be
without them, though they cast 5 l. a piece. All that has been spent in Jewels
or Counterfeits of them, and in making the superfluous Trains or length of our
Gentlewomans Gowns* all that has been expended in the payment of interest and
Brokage to keep up our pride and luxury, and twenty Millions sterling at the
least lately thrown away in a dir^ful and bloody sacrifice to a most wicked
rebellion, were or could be recalled again and amassed, and put into a public
Treasury, it would be as much, if not greatly exceed that so famous, Aerarium
or Storehouse of gold and silver, jewels and precious stones of the City or
Commonwealth of Venice, and more then enough to erect a Bank or Mont Piete
which might have furnished the Nation with money at a less interest upon pawns
then fifty or sixty per cent. and stills our more then ordinary cries of want
of Trade and money.

And when all that is spent, and not to be found at home in the circulation of
Trade or Exchange, but for the most part di^bursed and sent abroad in the
acquests of pride and luxury: And that we are so mad and prodigal in the
scattering and consumption of that little which remains when every Ass thinks
it to be a good bargain to sell or pawn his skin and ears, that ^e may (which
he will never be able to compass) look like a Lion, every Goose would be a
Swan, every Owl a Nightingale; and our Tailors (some whereof are grown so rich
as to ride in their Coaches) and do make their Bills accordingly, almost tired
with trimming up too many of our fantastic Gentry, cutting out their Lands and
Estates into clothes, and bestowing their money and credit in ribbands and
apish garnishes; one hundred pounds or more can be spent in a Supper or
Treatment at the Bear at London Bridge, and forty pounds at a Feast in a
private House o^ Family, when it was more then any of their Ancestors had in
Land or yearly rents, and many of our Merchants and Citizens in London are, as
they think, but ill accoutred unless us Lucullus the Luxurious Roman after his
conquests and spoils of foreign Countries, they may keep their Coaches and
support their unnecessary expenses, with the spoils of a good conscience, and
their ill-gotten riches by tricks and contrivances of Trade, and at the time of
the greatest complaints of want of Trade and money and the direful and
unwelcome news often assailing their ears of such or such a too gallant
Tradesman broken all in pieces, can make a Wedding dinner for about eight and
twenty persons with one hundred and fifty costly dishes of meat, and like some
great Eastern Monarcks, continue their feasting for several days after, when
not a few of our Citizens must ordinarily have their Wives and Daughters in the
Fashion, and richest sort of Apparel of cloth of Silver, Plushes, Velvets and
Satin, garnished with more costly pearls and jewels then our great and good,
(because they were used to be as good as great) Ladies were wont to deck and
adorn themselves upon high and solemn Festivals, with their Clossets abundantly
furnished with rarities, and their gold and silver Watches hanging by their
sides, and too many of their Wives will be out of Tune or sick, and in danger
to miscarry, if a bed with the furniture of threescore or one hundred pounds
price, and a Chamber better and better furnished for every child her husband
thinks is lawfully begotten, may not be provided for her, and too many of them
and their Daughters will by no means be left behind their neighbors in
Fashions or Folly; and if any one of them by over-pampering themselves chance
to slip into the chambers of death, must have no less then three hundred
pounds bestowed in a Funeral, her hearse trimmed up as stately as the
Armes-painters and Abusers can devise it with Tapers burning in great silver
Candlesticks hired at the Goldsmiths, and four or six women in mourning fitting
to attend it, to show the beholders the unbecoming pride and vanity of it, and
a Shop keepers Wife whilst her husband complains of want of trade, must not
want a Velvet Gown; every Servant must (as much as their wages will reach unto)
imitate their Master and Mistresses in their clothes, and the fashion of them,
which Queen Elizabeth did well prevent when she caused the Tailors to enter
into Bonds or Recognizances, not to make clothes finer then the degree of such
as were to wear them, every Cotager and Day-labourer will do what they can to
eat of the best and live after the rate of a Farmer, every Farmer live and have
his diet like a Gentleman, every Gentleman of the smallest estate whatsoever
strives to live like a Knight, and some Gentlewomen taking themselves to be
higher born then any of their kindred, or nearest relations can remember, will
not think their husbands do their duty unless they permit them like Baronesses
to have Carpets and foot paces on the ground when the Madam so called shall
have a mind to sit in her garnish of sin and foolery, to receive the visits of
those which when the Marmalet is eaten, do most commonly appear to have come
only to view and censure her pride; every Knight will spend and live like a
Lord or Baron; and the sons and daughters of too many of our Gentry, ready to
tear them in pieces to enforce them to make them an allowance proportionable to
their pride and prodig^lities, whilst the Gentlemen racking and raising their
Rents beyond the yearly Income and value of the Tenants Lands, are too often
the cause that the Tenants do put as high rates and prices as they can upon
their commodities to be sold or sent to the Markets, and use as many Cheats as
the Country Devil can invent for them, to abuse and cozen the buyers, the
Citizens raise the price of their wares and commodities to maintain their
delicacies; workmen their wages because victuals are so dear, and servants by a
sinful necessity of pride, never think they have wages enough to the end that
they may wear better Clothes then they should do, and King William Rufus Hose
or Breeches of three shillings price or a Mark, as he was afterward persuaded
to believe it then thought to be magnificent and worthy enough for a mighty
Kings wearing, is not now a rate or price enough for a Ploughmans ordinary
wearing: And the improvements of our Lands and Estates, do seem to have served
for no other purpose then to improve and multiply our sins and vices, whilst
the hospitality and virtues of England like the brave British Caractacus or
Catacratus Prince of the Silures, following in his chains the triumphs of the
Romish Conquerers, are made to be the attendants of the Triumphs of our vices
and wickedness, and Truth and Honesty like the distressed Naomi and her
daughter Ruth going their mournful Pilgrimages to find a better entertainment.

So as there must needs be a want of Trade when there is so great a Trade
driven of pride and vanity, and a dearness of all things when every one almost
some poor and despised Moralists and men of Religion, and care in their ways
and walkings only excepted, makes what shift he can per fas aut nefas to save
and get what he can for himself, and there is scarce a courtesy done for one
another without a bribe or fellow-feeling, the sons are ready to betray their
parents, and the parents to prostitute and deliver up their children to the
slavery of sin for the support of their pride and luxuries; the most of our
friendships and realities now turned into a lying, most dissembling and
accursed complement, and the rich making it their hoc age, and only business
to oppress the poor, who since the fall and dissolution of our Abbeys and
Religious Houses are so impoverished and increased, as a Gentleman of the same
and no more Land and Estate, then he had forty years ago, paying but three
shillings four pence per annum, is now constrained to pay forty shillings per
annum, and the rates and prices of workmens wages, victuals, and every thing
else so increased, and beyond reason more then was formerly, as may appear by
the difference betwixt what was in Anno Domini, one thousand four hundred
thirty and seven, in the sixteenth year of the Reign of King Henry the sixth,
now but two hundred thirty and two years ago, when ^hichely Archbishop of
Canterbury, built that famous College of All Souls in Oxford, there was paid
to a Stone-cutter, but two shillings ten pence a week, a Carpenter four pence a
day, a Sawyer fourteen pence a hundred for sawing of boa^ds a Joiner five pence
half penny a day, and but sixteen pence for himself and his servant for two
days, four pence a day to laborers, Ex libro comput. Johannis Druel
Supervisoris remanent in Colligio Omnium Animarum in Academia Oxon.
five pence a day to such as dug stones, four pence a day for a Cart and for
a weeks Commons, for Mr. John Wraby (who was comptroller of the works, and an
eminent man in those times) fourteen pence, for his servant ten pence for the
meat of his horse for a week ten pence half penny, and for the expenses o^ Mr.
John Druel Surveyor of the works travailing with two servants and three horses
from Maidstone to Lambeth, and their charges at Lambeth for two nights and two
days seven shillings. And what is now paid to workmen, when a Carpenter will
have three shillings a day, and eighteen pence, or two shillings a day for his
man, and eighteen or twelve pence a day for a common laborer; as there is never
like to be any more easy or reasonable rates for household provisions or
workmens Wages, or any hospitality to be found in England, nor any thing else
of virtue or goodness, unless the wisdom of the King and his great Council
shall prevent that Ultimam ruinam, great and destroying ruin which citato
cursu, as to the peoples Estates in this life, and sending their souls into the
other world with a Lord have mercy upon us, is galloping upon the Nation, and
will never be prevented either by preaching or Church Censures, or the King and
his Nobilities own examples, without some severe and well observed Sumptuary
Laws, now very much wanted by an unhappy repeal of all in that kind which we
had before, and without which all that can be done to hinder and destroy an
innundation of miseries, which by our pride and luxury far surmounting any of
our forefathers is suddenly like to overrun us, will be to as little purpose
as that which the King of Achen is said to do when he and all his nobilty,
Hackluits Voiages lib. 3
do in the blindness of their Religion, upon a certain day in every year ride
in great pomp and procession to the Church to look if the Messiah be come, and
not finding him, as they supposed to be come, the King returns riding upon that
Elephant which he prepared for the Messiah to ride upon.

And until those daily growing and dangerous Evils, and sins of pride and
luxu^y which have undone the greatest of Empires and Kingdoms, ruined the
Britains by the Saxons, and the Saxons by the Danes and Normans, shall be
curbed and redressed, there needs no petition to be made for an assent or
subscription to this known and sadly experimented truth. That there is a great
want of money, and it is not any plenty of money which makes such an enhaunce
of the rates and prices of household provisions, and of all other things to be
bought or sold, but our pride begetting an ungodly selfishness, and pride and
self interest begetting all manner of cheating to maintain them, which have
brought those evils of evils upon us, and made those miseries and wants, are so
every where complained of, and have destroyed all honesty, friendship, and
obedience, and taught the people by such wicked necessities, and imitating one
another good success by their evil actions, to run over all Laws and penalties
that can be threatened or laid in the way, and that the King having no Elixir or
means to transmute all the metals in this Kingdom to an infinitum of Gold and
Silver to furnish the vanity of the peoples expenses, there must in so
universal a prodigality and profusion as is in the Nation, be^yond the reach
and compass of the peoples means and estates, when a Bricklayer must wear silk
Stockings, and his wife a Whisk of four pounds p^ice, and an Alewoman if she
has turned up the D^vel Trump, and be but a little beforehand, will think her
self not well apparelled if her Gowns be not of silk or bedaubed with Gold or
Silver Lace; every ordinary man's house must be furnished with one piece of
plate, if not many more; the weighty Silver money be melted down into Plate,
and all or a great part of the Bullion and Foraign coyns exported as soon as
they are imported, needs be a want of money; and that when Kit or Christopher
Woodroofe a rich Citizens son in the later end of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
marrying the daughter of a great Lord of this Kingdom, which wore a Silver Leg
in stead of a better, which had been cut off to prevent a greater mischief by a
Gangreen, had a mad and strange custom to throw his shillings upon the Thames
to make them in the language of the Boys to dive and leap as Ducks and Draks;
it was no marvail that he was many times when he wanted money, necessitated to
steal his wives silver Leg in a morning before she was up and pawn it.

And that the Tyranny and Tricks of Trade, oppression of the Markets, and the
arbitrary power which the people take to impose high and unreasonable rates and
prices one upon another (which exceeds most of the evils imaginable in a time
of peace (do make a great addition to the poverty of the Nation, too many of
whom do make their own burdens, and complain of them when they have done, and
may be eased themselves if they would but ease others.

And that as the people of Florence do more cheerfully endure those many great
Taxes and Burdens which the grand Duke imposes upon them, because by a Banda
or rule for the rates and prices of victuals and household provisions, so as
those which are sent to buy cannot be cheated or injuried they enjoy such a
cheapness as makes them a recompense, the people of England would not take
their Taxes and Assessements for the public to be much or any great burden, if
by reducing the Market prices and rates to a reiglement intended by our Laws,
they might not so much cozen and oppress one another, but be the better enabled
to live cheapely and to pay them.

CHAP. VIII. That it is the interest of the people of England to revive again
the Ancient and legal usage of his Majesty's just rights of Praeemption and
Pourveyance, or Compositions for them.
ANd now that the lines from all the parts of the Circumference of this
discourse concerning the lawfulness and necessity of the Royal Praeemption and
Pourveyance, or Compositions for them, are met in the center or conclusion of
it, every man that is not over Biased by his own conceit or prejudice, or
carried into an obstinacy or uningenious resolution not to alter his opinion or
obey so great a truth, because he once thought or said, or declared otherwise,
will I hope be so far persuaded by the light and rules of right reason, as to
understand that Praeemption which is founded upon the Laws of Nature and
Nations, has been as ancient a custom in the world as that of Civility and
good manners, and lived here in England, the age of Methusalah is an ancient
and undoubted right of the Kings, and that the Royal Pourveyance or respects to
be paid in that particular from subjects to their Kings, and Princes for the
supportation of their honor may well deserve an approbation when the Laws of
God and the Laws of men, and the Civil, Common and Canon Laws have not denied
it. And the Laws and customs of Nations have made it as common and necessary as
the use of houses, fire, and water, and Arms for offense and defense,
uncovering or bowing of the head in sign of reverence, wearing of Shoos or
Sandals for the defense or safeguard of the Feet, or any thing else which has
met with a customary and universal approbation, and have so prevailed with most
of the rational inhabitants of the world, as the people of Japan, who howsoever
they be averse to many of the customs of other Nations, Varenius de regno
Japan.
as to delight to have their Teeth^black when others do desire to have them
white, mount their horses on the right side, when as we and many other Nations
do on the left, do not as we do uncover their heads in saluting each other, but
only untie some part of their Shoos or Sandals, nor do arise to any which do
come to salute them but sit down, are notwithstanding unwilling to come behind
other Nations in the duty of Pourveyance and honor of their Prince, which may
induce us to subscribe to that common principle of Nature and Nations, that
there is and will be a necessity of the Royal Prae emption and Pourveyance or
Compositions for them, and that there is a noble use of them.

Nor to think it burdensome, when as what the Country loses by their
Compositions or serving in the Kings provisions after his rates, or by his Cart
takings, do not every year one with another amount unto so much as the Papal
impositions which before the reign of King Edward the sixth, were Annually laid
upon their fortunes and estates, or drawn beyond the Alps by Romes artifices.

Or that it is the duty which every man owes to God and his King and Country,
and the good of himself and his own posterity to further and advance the
peoples cheating and oppressing of one another, or to cause the King to pay the
dearer, or incur so great a damage as now it plainly appears he does in his
housekeeping for want of his Pourveyance, when as all the Landed and rich men
in England, all the Farmers, and all the Citizens and Tradesmen of the Nation,
the later of whom like aqua fortis can eat and make their way to be sauers
thorough the dearest or highest rates, or prices of household provisions, by
adulterating or raising their Commodities, or as a London Brewer lately said
concerning the Excise upon Ale and Beer, that it should never hurt him whilst
there was water enough in the Thames, those of that profession being not
contented to be repaid by the housekeeper, the six pence rated for the Excise
upon every Barrel of six shillings Beer, unless they may leave out of such a
Barrel of Beer six penny worth of Malt, and make it by an half Boiling of it to
save the expense of fire, little better then so much half sodden water, and are
not satisfied also with such an unchristian cozening of the people, and making
their drink by such their doings, and putting in Broom and other noxious
ingredients in stead of Hopps, to be as unwholesome as it is weak and naughty,
unless they may likewise cozen the King of his Dues upon the Excise, and put as
many tricks as they can upon him and his Laws and Officers, and when by these
and many other devices they make themselves very great gainers by the Excise in
abusing both the King and his people are as busy as any in raising the cry
against the Excise as a very great grievance; and when all the Mechanic and
Rustic part of the Nation, workmen, day-laborers, maidservants and
menservants shall not only be savers but gainers by the enhance of rates and
prices, and the King only and the poor of the Kingdom be the very great
loosers and sufferers by it.

Or for the interest of the body Politic, that the pinch and hardship should
lie all on the Princes part, and he only be the greatest looser by his want of
Praeemption, Pourveyance or Compositions of the Counties as he had formerly, be
as an Amorite or stranger in our Israel, and pay usury for his victuals, by
being constrained to give two parts in three, or more sometimes then forty per
cent. for the household provisions which his officers and servants do buy or
provide for him, four parts in five in many things, and six parts in seven in
some other more then the Market rates and prices were in the beginning of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth when the Compositions were made by the Counties and
willingly assented unto, or that now there is a greater plenty of Food and
household provisions, Trade and Manuf^cture then were in the former ages, and
all things may be afforded to be sold as cheap as they were retroactis seculis,
or some hundred years ago, or as they were in the four and twentieth year of
the Reign of King Henry the eight, and cheaper then they were in the beginning
of the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, every thing should be dearer to him then to
others, or that so great an increase of Rates and Prices, as have been within
this last hundred years, and all the mischiefs and inconvenienc^s of them which
have been brought upon the King and his people by private and particular
interests the non execution of good Laws, and the neglect and carelesseness of
the subordinate Magistrates, Justices of Peace, and Clerks of the Markets,
should with an addition be continued and fixed upon the King, who if he should
resume but his Tolles in Fairs and Markets, which the Civilians do rightly
enough derive a tollendo from taking, many of which are now accounted to be as
the proprieties and inhe^itance of private men or Lords of Manors, and are in
some cases more by the indulgence of the Kings Royal Progenitors, and a
prescription claimed by long enjoyments or continuance of favors then de jure,
or were by grants or confirmations, allowed where they were before but usurped
and withheld from him, and a Royalty and prerogative so anciently allowed in
the Roman Empire as Valens and Valentinian the Emperors a mercatoribus seu
negotiatoribus quae ad domum imperialem pertinent exegerunt necessitatem
debitam pensionum ex emolumentis negotiationum, L. de Commer^. and Mer^^t. C.
did raise a good part of their Pourveyance or provisions for their household
out of the Tolles or profits made by Fairs and Markets, those of the people of
England who do claim an exemption from the payment of them and those very many
proprietors of Lands or Manors, who by many Royal grants and favors do claim
and enjoy the profit of the Tolles, would find to be a greater damage and
prejudice unto them then that which the Olivaria^ party, and the troublers of
our Israel pretended to be by the Royal Pourveyance or Compositions for them,
or should as he never does let his Lands to the uttermost penny, measure his
gifts or bounties by that of private men and proportion his favors according to
his wants or occasions of keeping or saving what he can for himself, or the
ingratitude or forgetfulness of those which receive them, and be as unwilling
to answer and acknowledge benefits, as too many are unto him, or take his
Reliefs, Herriots First fruits, Fee Farms, Quit Rents, Customs, Fines for
alienation Fines certain or uncertain of his Copyhold estates at the full and
present value, and the Fees for his Seals in Chancery, and the other Courts and
all his Subsidies according to the alteration of monys, and the disproportion
betwixt the present and the former rates, there would be cause enough for them
to acknowledge his favou^s already received, and believe that those small
retributions in his Pourveyance or Compositions for them, will bear so small a
part in the Balance, as they should rather lay their hands upon their mouths,
and rest assured that they which are daily craving and gaining by the King, and
blessed with a peace and plenty under his government, cares and protection should
be ashamed to make him to be so great a looser, and themselves such gainers by
his loss and damages.

And that it can no way become them to suffer him, that granted or confirmed
their Fairs and Markets to be oppressed by them, pay a shilling and many times
more for every groat he disburses for his necessary occasions, and at the same
time in the distribution of his bounties and rewards give a shilling and more
for every groat which he intended to give, shall be kind to every body, and
receive in acknowledgement thereof no more then to get and keep all they can
from him, which in their own particular estates would bring no less then ruin
to all the people of England, and those that so very much enrich themselves by
putting him to more expenses then should be.

And that it was and will be for the good of the people unless the oppressing
and cheating one another, shall be understood to be for their good, that the
King and his subordinate Magistrates should correct and regulate the deceits
and excess of rates and prices in Markets, as those of the Fishmongers of
London were by King Edward the first when they were fined five hundred Marks
pro illicitis negotiis and Forstallamentis and aliis transgressionibus in
officio suo Piscatorum, Pat. 18. E. 1. m. 15.
for Forstallings and other unlawful practices in their Trades; or as King E.
3. did when upon a Complaint made by the Commonalty of the City of London, that
the Butchers (such a watchful eye was then kept, more then now upon, the
deceits of Trade) did stick and fasten the fat of great or fat Oxen upon the
flesh of the lean, whereby to promote the sale and price in deceptionem populi,
Claus. 14. E. 3. m. 28.
to the damage and deceit of the people, he commanded the Mayor to provide a
remedy, or as an Assise of Bread and good and needful Ordinances for Bakers,
Brewers, Inholders, Vintners and Butchers, was set and made (there being an old
Assise book made and Ordained in Anno 12 H. 7.) by the Lords of the Privy
Council to Queen Elizabeth, viz. John Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir Christopher
Hatton, William Lord Burghley, Henry Earl of Derby, Charles Lord Howard, Henry
Lord Hunsdon, Thomas Lord Buckhurst, Sir Francis Knowles, Sir Thomas Heneage,
Sir John Fortc^cue, and Sir John Wolley, or the Decree (if had been observed)
which was made in the Star Chamber the thirteenth day of November, Anno 11. of
the Reign of King Charles the Martyr, after consultation had with diverse
Justices of the Peace, and the Certificate of all the Judges of England, viz.
Sir Thomas Richardson Knight, Sir Robert Heath Knight, Sir Humfrey Davenport
Knight, Sir John Denham Knight, Sir Richard Hutton Knight, Sir William Jones
Knight, Sir George Croke Knight, Sir Thomas Trevor, Knight, Sir Ge^rge Vernon
Knight, Sir Robert Barkley Knight, and Sir Francis Crawley Knight; and
confirmed by the Kings Letters Patents under the great Seal of England the 14.
day of December then next following, that No Inkeeper or Ostler within the
Cities of London and Westminster, or ten miles distant (who have since made
such excessive rates, as have affrighted many of their Customers away who find
it less chargeable to come to London in passage Coaches, or send their horses
back into the Country to find out more honest Inkeepers) should take above six
pence for Hay for a horse standing night or day, nor more then six pence for a
peck of Oats of the measure called Winchester measure; No Tavernor or
Victualler selling Wine by Retail, should sell or make ready for sale any sort
of Flesh, Fish, or other victual save bread, nor procure to be set up the Trade
of a Cook within the same house, or in any Shop or Room thereunto belonging, or
in any house near adjacent, nor permit or suffer any Flesh, Fish or other
Victual, except bread to be brought into the house to be there eaten by any of
his Guests. And did likewise upon hearing of diverse Inkeepers, who could not
deny but that the rates before specified were competent, further ordain that
where Grain and Hey should (at a further distance from London) be sold at
lesser prices, there the rates and prices should be accordingly, And that that
Ordinance should continue in the County of Middlesex, until it should be made
to appear to the Justices of the Kings Bench, and in other Counties and places
to the Justices of peace, that because of the increase of prices in the parts
adjoining, greater rates should be necessary to be permitted, and that
thereupon other rates should from time to time be set, and being set were
commanded and en^oyn^d to be strictly and duly observed until by the like
authority they should be altered.

And cannot deny but that if the King and his Royal Progenitors, if they could
ex praevisione by some foresight of things to come (of which supernatural
eminencies there is a non datur or denial even to Kings and Princes) have
understood that their ancient and lawful rights of Pourveyance and
Prae-emption, would in return of all their benefits daily and yearly heaped
upon their subjects, have been ever thought to have been a grievance or
oppression, or endeavored to be withheld from them, they might have saved as
much and more, as that would have come unto by reserving upon all their
bounties, and grants or Leases of their Mann^rs, or Lands, their Pourveyance or
household provisions, or when they gave Lands of inheritance, rendering small or
disproportionate Rents or Fee Farms, to the greater yearly value which they now
appear to be might have added so much of Pourveyance or provisions as might
have taken away that causeless murmur against the Pourveyance, which our old
Saxon King Aethelstane, who reigned here in Anno Dom. 938. understood to be so
necessary for his housekeeping, as when he had subdued the Wel^h Princes, and
made them his Tributaries, he caused them to Covenant with him at Hereford, not
only to pay him yearly twenty pounds weight of Gold, and three hundred of
Silver, but five hundred head of Cattl^, with Hawks and Hounds to a certain
number, toward which payment by the Statutes of Howel D^a, says our
Industrious Speed, Speed. Hist* of England and (...) VV^lle^se.
the King of Aberfraw was charged at sixty six pounds (an Early Composition
rate for Pourveyance) the Prince Dinemore, and the Prince of Powys being to pay
the like sums of money.

And that now to deny it unto the Crown, is a greater injustice and injury,
then to have denied it to Queen Elizabeth, King James or his son King Charles
the Martyr, or in some hundred years before, for that then our Kings and
Princes might have preserved themselves and their successors from the rapines
and unconscionable rates and prices of household provisions which some of his
subjects might have forborne to impose upon their King though they do it upon
others.

That if in the Reign of King Henry the seventh, a Law or Act of Parliament had
been made, that for one hundred and fifty years after to the end to make a
Treasury or provision of money (which Commonwealths and many Kingdoms are not
without) for the protection and defense of the people against invasions or
emergent evils, the prices taken in the Markets more then formerly over and
above the genuine and real worth of the Commodities, should be collected and
laid up for the good of the Public, or that all that took Lands to Farm should
pay ten times the former yearly value, and all things bought in the Market,
should like the King of France his Salt, be for some things at three or four
times, or for others at ten, fifteen, or 20. times beyond the true value, it
would not be imaginable how near the peoples murmuring would have arrived to
that of the Children of Israel in the Desert, when they forgot the mercies and
wonders of the Almighty; or that they would have been brought to any manner of
belief that ever they should have been able to bear so great and so
intolerable (as they would have called it) a burden.

And yet now that time and custom like Milo's Calf carried until he be a
Bull, and being a Bull found to be no heavyer then when he was a Calf; the
burden is not so heavy at the last, as they would have believed it would have
been at the first, because the people have hitherto made shift to bear it, by
cheating or impoverishing one another, and by laying the burden one upon
another, will dispendio reipublicae, to the not to be avoided loss and ruin of
the Commonwealth, be for some time longer able to endure it, if the rich may
grind and devour the poor, and the King now his Pourveyance is taken away must
bear the greater part of the burden.

That if the King before he had granted the greatest Act of Pardon, Bounty and
Indemnity that ever any, or all the Kings of England had done before him to a
company of Factious and Rebellious people, who had out done either Sheba or
Shimei, or any of the sons of Zeru^ah, and deserved less then any of their
forefathers unless the murder of his Royal Father, and all the groundless
obloquies and reproaches which they could cast upon him, the banishing and
persecuting of himself and his brethren, murder and ruin of his loyal
subjects, and dispossessing him of his Estate, Kingdoms and Revenues for twelve
years together, and all things endeavored which might load him or them with
scorn and indignities, can by any Fanatics or Factious people, be proved
(which it never can) to have been by dispensations or communication with God,
and a living and walking in the spirit, had taken in again to the Crown all
those forfeited Rights, Franchises and privileges which had been heretofore
too liberally given or granted from it, and reserved a ten times greater
Pourveyance then is by any now complained of, the people of England, would have
been so glad with their Quails, as they would have blamed themselves for
murmuring without a cause either before or after they had them.

And that those who could adventure to transgress the Laws which by their
Idolized Covenant they bound themselves to observe, and buy Places and Offices
in the Kings household, the greatest part of the profits whereof were made by
the Kings allowance of Diet, may now that many of those Dyets and Tables are
taken away, come to a better understanding of the necessity and right use of
Pourveyance and Compositions for them.

That the allowance of fifty thousand pounds per annum proposed as a recompense
for his losses in the want of his Pourveyance, is not to be found in the moiety
of the Excise of Ale and Beer settled upon him and his heirs and successors,
for that the benefit thereof will not make amends for what he lost by his
Tenures in the yearly Revenue thereof (for as to the honor, regality and right
use of it, that and Ten times more and all that could be given in money or an
yearly rent, would not have been enough for the purchase.)

That thrice the sum of fifty thousand pounds per annum, cannot balance so
great a loss and damage as the King sustains by his remitting of the Royal
Pourveyance or Compositions for them.

That the splendour and magnificence of the Kings house cannot be so well
supported by any certain yearly allowance in money, nor the Squeeze and enhance
of the Markets be so well escaped as they will be by that most easy, laudable,
and accustomed way and establishment of the Royal Pourveyance or Compositions
for them, and that it can be no less then an undeniable truth and reason that
it is the duty and should be the care of every good subject to further rather
then hinder the Royal Pourveyance or Compositions for them.

That the mischiefs and inconveniences of taking away the Royal Pourveyances or
Compositions for them have so visibly and often appeared to every unprejudiced
eye or judgment, as there is scarce an Englishman, unless it be Cornelius
Holland, one of those that helped to kill the heir for his inheritance, and
would rather have Pourveyance to be a grievance, then that he should fail of
getting to him and his heirs Creslow P^stures in Buckinghamshire, which were
appropriate to the fatting of the Kings lean Cattle for the provision of his
household as every man may well conclude that it will be more for the good and
ease of the people who can never be rich or happy when their Prince is poor or
necessitous, and if they love themselves are to love and support him, that the
King should have his Prae^emption and Pourveyance, or Compositions for them,
then that he should be so much dishonored or oppressed as he is already and
like to be more and more for want of it.

Which should be numbered amongst those ancient and legal privileges and rights
belonging to sovereignty, pu^chased by the cares and labors of our many English
Kings and Monarchs, with the hazard of their lives, fortunes and estates in the
preservation of the welfare of the people, and a Monarchy which is of more
then one thousand years continuance, and being a duty ought to be more
cheerfully submitted unto, then any Ordinances, By Laws, or Customs of any
Cities, Borough, Towns, or Corporations, or those of the Lords of Manors, by
Grant, Allowance or permission of Royal Indulgences, or those of the City of
London, that great ingrosser of Liberties and privileges, who besides their
Court of Wards and Orphans, which yeildeth them very great yearly profits and
advantages do receive and take amongst many other things not here particularly
mentioned by a Grant of King Henry the third of his Tolles at Queen Hithe,
Belines Gate and Downgate, and else where in the City of London, for a small
Fee Farm Rent of fifty pounds per annum (if enjoyed by so good a title) which
were formerly taken for the Kings use, For every Tun of Beer carried from
Billingsgate by Merchant Strangers beyond the Seas four pence, Ex antiquo
Codice M.S. de custumes de London in Bibliotheca Cl. viri Galfridi Palmer
Milit. and Baronetti Attorn. General. Regis Caroli Secundi.
out of every hundred of Salmons brought to Queen Hithe by foraigners, or such
as are not free of the City two Salmons, for every thousand of Herrings bought
in Shops an ha^f penny; twenty six Mackarels out of every Mackarel Boat; one
Fish out of every Dosser of Fish not having in it Mullet Ray Congre Turbut,
etc. Two Salmons out of every Bark which brings Salmons out of Scotland; some
Sprats out of every Boat or Bark with Sprats two pence of every Oyster Boat;
out of every Bark or Boat of Haddocks twenty six Haddocks; out of every Ship or
Bark laden with Herrings from Yarmouth two hundred Herrings; for all kind of
Fish brought to London after the same rate as was paid to the King at London
Bridge; for every Ship, Bark or Vessel not belonging to London, or the Cinque
Ports which comes within the Orlokes two pence, five Eggs in every hundred
brought to London; for Poultery brought thither on horseback three Farthings,
and on foot an half penny; for every load of Cheese two pence, for every dozen
of Sheep brought to Smithfield to be sold an half penny; for every Cow or Beast
bought out of the Franchise a penny; and of every foraigner bringing Cows,
Beeves, Sheep, Swine or Porks to Smithfield to be sold, betwixt the Feast of
St. Martin and Christmas, the third best Beast, Sheep, Swine or Pork after the
two first best (or some Composition for them) and if the Beast be of the value
of a Mark, the Bailiff was to restore forty pence for his skin, and might take
for lean Hogs or Porks brought thither to be sold betwixt Hock tide and
Michaelmas, the third best next af^ter the first best, or twelve, or six pence
in lieu thereof; which with their other Tolles and Perquisites, and the yearly
Scavage or Shewage, and the profit of Tronage and Pesage at the Balance
together with their yearly income by the Cole Meters places, would if the King
for the better supply of his Pourveyance should take into his own hands as they
are now Collected and taken, either in money or in specie, the above mentioned
Tolles and Customs (which are but the Irradiations and participations of the
power and authority of the King imparted unto them for the better order and
management of the peace and affairs of the people in those lesser Orbs) and as
was covenanted in a confirmation of the Fee Farm of three hundred pounds per
annum for the Shirivalties of London and Middlesex by King John in case of
taking away or granting any of the profits thereof) release and discharge the
said Fee Farm Rent of fifty pounds per annum, bring a good assistance to his
charge of Pourveyance and household provisions, and make him some amends and
recompense for his daily great damages sustained in his more then formerly
expenses for his household provisions by making his so constant abode in that
his Imperial Chamber.

Being privileges better to be liked and approved then many of those which are
not discommended, in Military affairs where a Colonel of horse has liberty
besides his pay of a Colonel to reckon a pay for a Captain, though he has
none, and to be allowed for a certain number of spare Horses, and to Muster and
take pay for ^ix of his own servants, and the like for one in every of the six
Troops of his Regiment.

And may be allowed a sovereign as well as those daily and frequently
practiced, given, received and taken acknowledgments of Favors, Reciprocations
and discharges of obligations which are in and thorough the Kingdom performed
as well as expected by all the people of the Nation one unto another, and by
all mankind in their several actions and affairs one with another, and their
dependencies and relations one unto another.

And as little to be omitted as the duty and privilege of the Prae-emption of
the Tyn at a reasonable rate, with many other allowances and liberties in the
Counties of Cornwall and Devon, not to be denied to the King or his Royal
Predecessors Kings of England, who before they had granted them away, had all
or the greatest part of the Lands or soil where the Tynne Mines are.

For it cannot be any injustice, or have so much as any aspect of wrong or
oppression that he whose Royal Ancestors have granted and confirmed to all his
people their liberties and privileges, should seek to preserve his own which
helps to preserve theirs, and be unwilling to part with them and his
praestationes Angariarum and Parangariarum* Plaustrorum and navium, etc. his
Pourveyance, Cart taking and impressing of Ships, which as Bossius cited by
Zecchius, Zecchius de principat. administratione
says, Regi competunt ratione Excellentiae ejus dignitatis quae Regalia
dicuntur, for that as Zecchius alleges, multa adjumenta sunt ti necessaria
ut dominium intus and externe Tueri valeat, many things are necessary for a
Prince to defend his Dominions at home as well as abroad.

Or if any should be willing to have it to be no duty, and would be such
strangers to the Scriptures, and the right interpretation and meaning thereof,
as to think that the fifth Commandment extends only to parents natural when
any shall have a mind to respect them, or to let their Fancies run as wild as
the zealous reformer did at Cr^ydon in the beginning of the grand Rebellion,
when he would have prohibited the reading of that and the other Commandments in
the Decalogue, by alleging that they were made by the Bishops, they cannot; if
they will not throw away their Reason and understandings, but acknowledge that
if Uriah could rationally conclude it to be unfit for him to go to his own
house and take the comfort of it, when his Lord Joab and the servants of his
Lord the King were encamped in the field, 2 Samuel 11.12.
and has been ever since applauded for it: It cannot be thought to be
correspondent to the greatness and Majesty of a King or the duty of his
subjects that he should want those ordinary and no very chargeable respects and
conveniences of Pourveyance or Compositions for them, and the privilege to
have his goods in progress or upon removals carried for him at easy rates by
his subjects, and such as hold of him or have been raised and brought to what
they have by the bounties and Royal influences of him and his Princely
Progenitors, and protected and defended by them, when as many of the Nobility
and Gentry of England, do enjoy those or the like services from their Tenants,
for letting them heretofore have good penniworths of them, or in hope that they
may hereafter be good unto them, and should not at all grumble or grudge to
perform those duties and remunerations to their King, whose honor and
jurisdictions they are sworn to defend and maintain, when they can do it
willingly to others upon l^sser hopes or gratifications, and that he has
already, and may as well deserve it, as that great and honorable family of the
Cliffords late Earls of Cumberland, whose heir the Lady Anne Clifford Countess
of Pembroke, Dorset and Mountgomery, does at this day of her obliged Tenants in
the North, whose Carts are not to be denied at any removal from her Castle of
Skipton in Craven in Yorkshire, by certain proportioned journeys to her Castle
of Appleby in Westmerland, where her Tenants in that County are to furnish
yearly six hundred Hens, or a groat for every H^n, and six hundred Bushels of
Oats distinguished or called by the name of Sergeant Oats, and those in Craven
as many Hens or six pence for every Hen, or as others who take benefit by such
or the like retributions, Customs and usages in other parts of England, or the
North thereof as Boon Hens, etc. at Sheffeild in the County of York, once the
inheritance of the great Talbots, or as the Prior of Canterbury did of his
Tenants who in every Manor were bound ex antiqua consuetudine providere Priori
ibidem de quodam Palifrido competenti tempore novae creations suoe, Pat. 3 E.
39. part 1. m. 6.
by ancient custom to present the Prior at his election or first admittance, a
Palfrey fitting for him.

Or which the Prior of Rochester did of his Tenants of the Manor of Haddenham
in the County of Buckingham, who by ancient custom in the eighteenth year of
the reign of King Edward the third, were to Mow and make the Lords Hey, Weed
his grain in his demesnes, pay certain Rent Corn called Booting Corn, and five
hundred threescore and three Eggs at Easter, which in Anno 18 H. 6. were by an
agreement made with the Prior of Rochester, released for the sum of three
pounds, and an increase of Rent from thence forward, 18 E. 3. inter
consuetudines de Haddenham in Com. Buck
viz. for every Yard land twelve pence, every half yard land six pence, every
Cotland eight pence, and every worthy (some Tenants so called) four pence,
which is to this day paid and continued.

And being besides obliged by their customs to the works and services
following, viz. That every Tenant holding a yard land, and the Tenants of two
half yard lands ought to plough the Demeasne lands of the Lord two days in the
year, viz. in Winter and in Lent, for which they were to have their dinner
allowed by the Lord, every Tenant holding a yard land, ought in harvest upon a
flesh day, as also upon a Fish day to be assigned by the Reeve or Bailiff to
find two able persons, every holder of a half yard, every Cotland or Cottogea,
and every worthy ought to find the same day one able and lawful person with
Hooks or Sickles to reap the Lords Grain in his Demeasnes for which they were
to have their dinner allowed them at the charge of the Lord or his Farmer,
every yard land ought to carry half a quarter of the Lords grain to Oxford
(being about twelve miles distant) to Wallingford (near as much) or to Wickham
(being about ten miles distant) being Market Towns near adjoining to Haddenham,
and all the Carriers were to have one penny in common to drink the morrow they
ought not to work, every yard land, ought to carry to Marlow eleven quarter of
Grain of ancient measure at three terms of the year, to be quit from all
things by six weeks after, and to carry the Lords grain from his demeasnes into
his Barn from the furthest field four loads, from Dillicot field six loads, and
if they carry nearer, then all the day if it please the Lord; also if the Lord
shall buy Wood, every Yard land ought to carry two loads of Wood from the place
into the Lords Yard, so it be ready to carry before the Feast of St. Michael,
otherwise each Yard land should only carry a horse load, so as they may in one
day go and return, and all that week they should remain quiet, likewise if the
Lord should build houses he ought to buy Timber, and the men, viz. his
Coppyholders ought to bring it home, viz. each hide every day one Load, until
the whole be carried, so as they may in one day go and return; also if it
please the Lord to send for fish four hides ought to be summoned, and two shall
go for fish to Gloucester, which is about six and thirty miles from thence, and
other two shall carry it to Rochester upon their own cost, and they should
remain quiet until they return; all the Cotterels and worthy Tenants ought to
wash the Sheep of the Lord and to sheer them, and fully to perform all
thereunto belonging, and have nothing therefore; and if a theif should be taken
in the liberty of the Lord, the Cotterel Tenants should keep him.

And were so due, and of so long a continuance as though the Tenants (some few
only excepted which would not partake of the Composition, and are still
contented to do their work and carriage services) did upon a reference made by
King James to Henry Earl of Manchester Lord President of his Council in Anno
1624. to hear and determine the differences betwixt Sir Henry Spiller then Lord
of the said Manor, and the Tenants concerning that and other matters within a
short time after, viz. in the first year of the reign of King Charles the
Martyr, agree for a Release of the said services not acquitted in Anno 18 H. 6.
to pay yearly unto the Lord of the Manor and his heirs after the rate of three
pence for every Acre and a penny for every Message or Cotage which had no land
belonging unto it.

Or as many the like beneficial customs and privileges at this day enjoyed by
the Lords of some thousands, or more of Manors in England, which beloned unto
the Abbeys and Religious houses for which they have quit Rents or other
payments not unlike the Compositions for the Royal Pourveyance.

Or that the Steward of the Kings house should not if the Kings Pourveyance and
Prae-emption had not been remitted by Act of Parliament, have authority to do
as much as the Steward of the Kings house did about the eighteenth year of the
Reign of King Edward the second, notwithstanding so great privileges,
immunities and exemptions granted and confirmed to the City of London, command
that no Fishmonger upon pain of imprisonment and forfeiture of his goods and
chattels should go out of the City to forestall any Sea or fresh fish, Ex
antiquo Codice M.S. des Customs de Londres.
or send them to any great Lord or Religious house, or any person whatsoever,
nor keep from coming to Town until the hour appointed for selling be past,
until the Kings Achators or Pourveyers should have made their Pourveyance to
the use of the King.

Or that the King of England whose Royal Ancestor King Richard the first, did
not only give to many Religious houses, as to the Priory of Royston in
Cambridgeshire, diverse exemptions and privileges, to be free from Carriages,
etc. but de Regalium domorum aedificatione ac omnimoda operatione of works
toward the repair or building of the Kings houses, Ac ut silvae eorum ad
praedicta opera aut ad aliqua alia nullo modo capiantur, Carta Abbatiae Sancti
salvatoris confirm. per H. 3.
and that their Woods or Timber should not be cut or taken for that or any
other purpose, and whose other Royal Progenitors have abundantly furnished
diverse Abbeys and Religious houses with privileges to be free of Carriage by
Carts, Summage upon horses de Thesauro ducendo, Convoy of the Kings Treasure,
de operationibus Castellorum Pontium Parcorum and Murorum* work to be done in
the building or repairs of Castles, Bridges or Walls, Cart. 17. H. 3. m. 6. in
2. part Dugdals Monastic. Anglic.
and de vaccarum solutione quae dari solebant pro Capitibus utlagatorum, and
the payment of certain Cows or Cattle to redeem the forfeitures of Outlaws, and
exemptions from payment of Fumage, or Chimny money, Lestage or license to carry
away from Markets what they had bought, or in release or discharge of customs
such as at Beleshale in Warwickshire belonging to some Religious house where
they were to Mow three days at the charge of the house, three days to Plow,
and at the charge of the house to reap one day, Dugdales 2 part Monastic.
Anglic. 528.
and to have a Wether Sheep or eight pence or twenty five loaves or pieces of
bread, one of the best Cheeses in the house, and a measure of Salt, and if any
horse Colt were foled upon the lands, he was not to be sold without license,
nor were any of the Tenants to marry a daughter without license, and by the
custom of the Township of Berstanestone in Warwickshire, horse Colts foled
upon the land, were not to be sold without license, for which a penny was to be
paid, nor any of their daughters to be married without license, etc. which in
diverse old Charters, and confirmations of our Kings and Princes, do frequently
occur, may evidence that such or the like were once undeniable duties to their
Kings and Benefactors, and only released in favor of those which were the
owners and proprietors of the lands and privileges, and being now enjoyed,
were formerly regalities and rights inherent and vested in the Crown of
England, should retain no liberties or privileges for himself.

And that the Quit Rents as they are now called and taken by the owners and
proprietors of some of the Abbey and Religious Lands for Eleemosinae's, 2 part
Monastic. Anglic. 264.
or Alms-money given by Founders or other charitable persons, and many a sum of
money formerly paid for Mortuaries, Pardons, Indulgences, Pitances or
Pourveyances and Oblations which are at this time kept on foot and received
under the name and notion of Quit Rents, might put them in mind how necessary
it is for them to perform the duty of Pourveyance to the King being the heir
and successor of many of those which gave them.

And how unbe^oming the duty of subjects pertaking the benefits thereof, it
would be that the King whose Royal Ancestors, Saint Edward the King gave for
ever to the Abbey of St. Edmonds Bury the Manor of Mildenhall in Suffolk to buy
wheaten bread for the Monks to prevent their necessities of eating Barley bread,
Dugdales 2 part Monastic. anglic. 187.206*297.
which he perceived them to do when he came once to visit them; King John gave
for ever to the Abbey of St. Albans, and King Edward the first (as many other
Kings of England have done to other Monasteries and Religious houses) gave and
confirmed for ever to the Abbey of St. Edmunds Bury diverse Manors, Lands,
Tyths, and yearly Revenues of a very great yearly Revenue to maintain their
Hospitalities, Pitances and Liu^^es of servants and for the relief of strangers
and poor people coming thither, should now have his own Hospitality and the
means to support it taken from him.

And that if all the customs, privileges, and Royalties as they are called
which are now performed and willingly assented unto by Tenants, and enjoyed by
the Lords of other Manors by the power and privileges derived unto them from
the King and his Royal Progenitors were truly represented and brought to a
public view; together with all the privileges, liberties, exemptions and
immunities granted unto the Cities, Boroughs and Towns Corporate of England; it
might be wondered how they that enjoy so much and so many liberties and favors
from the King and his Royal Progenitors by grants or prescribed Indulgences
should think there could be any reason to deny him those his most just,
necessary and ancient rights and liberties of Pourveyances or Compositions for
them, when at the same time they are so careful to preserve and keep their own.

And it would be something more then unfitting that the King whose Royal
Ancestors have allowed so many of his subjects those privileges and liberties,
should be debarred from a greater right and legal liberty in his own case; or
when he should make his progress to Chester should be refused that privilege
more ancient then the Conquest of having of every Yard land two hundred Capons,
or Caponets, a fat or stand of Beer, and a certain quantity of Butter, Lib.
Domesday tit. Cestre
which as appears by the book of Domesday, were by custom or Tenure to be
provided for him, and not enjoy as much liberty as Hugh Earl of Chester did
when he could privilege Nigell de haulton, his Constable and his heirs, Quod
omnia quae ad praedicti Nigelli opus erant necessaria emant ministri sui ante
omnes alios in Civitate Cestriae nisi praenominati Comitis ministri
praevenerint sine cujuscunque contradictione, that his servants should in the
City of Chester without contradiction have a Prae-emption before any but the
Earls servants and Officers; or as the Abbot of Burgh who had a P^ae^emption
in all necessaries concerning the Abbey, and a privilege to pay an half penny
cheaper then others in every hundred of Herring; or the Abbot of St. Albans,
who was by the Charter of King John to have a prae-emption for any of his
provisions to be bought in London, Dugdales 2 part Monastic Anglic.
as well as any of the Kings Officers, the Abbot of St. Edmonds Bury having a
like privilege for his Fodder Corn.

That the King of England, whose Royal Ancestor King Aethelstane was able to
give to the Church of Beverlye, quasdam avenas vulgariter dictas Hestcorn
percipiendas de Dominiis and Ecclesiis in illis partibus, certain Oats commonly
called Hestcorne, to be taken out of his Demeasnes, and the Churches in those
parts which by the dissolution of the Religious houses are now probably claimed
and enjoyed by Laymen, and did in Anno Dom. 936. ex sua Regalitate, by his
Kingly authority, says the History of that Foundation, give toward the
Hospitality and relief of the poor coming to the Hospital of St. Peter's or St.
Leonards in York, de qual bet Caruca Arante in Episcopatu Eboraci unam Travam
bladi out of every yard land of errable in the Bishopric of York one Thrave
(which is four and twenty sheaves) of Corn, Et ex consensu Incolarum
Episcopatus Eboraci Rex habuit, says that Historian, Travas praedictas sibi
and successoribus suis sic quod exterminaret lupos patriam devastantes, and was
ofterwards granted by the consent of the inhabitants upon condition that he
would destroy the Wolves which wasted that Country, 2 part Dugdales Monastic.
Anglic. 367. and 368.
Erat siquidem in Diocesi Eboracensi tanta adtunc multitudo luporum quod omnes
fere villanorum bestias devorarunt, for there were in that Diocese such a
multitude of Wolves (which King Aethelstane thereupon destroyed) as they almost
devoured all the Beasts and Cattle belonging to the Countrymen, should now
that the County and Bishopric of York have in all the after ages and
successions of our Kings not only received of them many and greater benefits,
but have been by their many good Laws and Governments protected and defended
from all manner of Wolves be denied so small an observance or retribution as
the Pourveyance or Compositions for them which were charged upon that County or
Bishopric did amount unto, and at the same time do either not pay those
Thraves of Corn, which would far exceed the Pourveyance charged upon that
County, or have compounded for them, or do pay them to such as have obtained
Grants of the Lands and Revenues belonging to that Hospital.

Or that he whose Royal Ancestor King Henry the second took a care as appears
by the black book in the Exchequer, that the Barons of the Exchequer (who were
then taken to be a part of the Kings household) should have their provisions at
easier rates then others, Et de victualibus suae domus in urbibus and Castellis
and maritimis nomine consuetudinis nihil solvunt: Ex nigro lib. apud Recept.
S^^^c^arii.
Quod si minister vectigalium de hiis quicquam solvere compulerit, dummodo
presens sit serviens ejus qui suis usibus empta fuisse oblata fide probare
voluerit Baroni quidem exacta pecunia restituetur inde in integro and improbus
exactor pro qualitate personae pecuniarum penam luet, and pay nothing for
custom for the victuals or provisions for their houses in Cities, Castles and
Maritime places; and if any Officer should compel them to pay any thing for
them whilst^their servants were ready to testify and prove that they were
bought* to their use, the money was to be again restored, and the party so
wickedly exacting it, amerced or fined according to the quality of his person.

And that our succeeding Kings and Princes causing a Pourveyance and provision
of Diet to be made for the Justices of Assize and Justices of the Peace at the
Assizes, and Sessions by the Sheriffs in every County, and making an allowance
for the same out of the Exchequer, and Q. Elizabeth in Anno 1573. finding that
to be troublesome and inconvenient for the Sheriffs, ordained that charge to be
defrayed out of her Coffers, as may appear by a Copy of a letter from the Lords
of her Privy Council, communicated unto me by my worthy and learned friend Mr.
William Dugdale and here inserted, After our hearty commendations, whereas of
long time many Gentlemen, some eligible to be Sheriffs, Ex autograph. in Bib.
C^ttoniana.
some that have been in Office in some of the Counties of this Realm, have both
in Parliament and other places complained of the great burden and charge
sustained in the said office of Sheriffwick, by reason as they have alleged
of the large Dyets and other charges of the Justices of Assize and Gaol
delivery, yearly increasing in such sort as many Gentlemen, very meet for that
office in respect of their wisdom and dexterity to execute the same, though not
so meet for wealth to bear the charge of expenses, have of late years made most
earnest suits to be forborne, only for want of wealth to bear that burden, the
Queens Majesty calling this cause now of late into her remembrance, has
thought it very necessary to cause the same to be considered by her Council,
and remedy to be provided therefore as the cause may bear it: And in
consideration thereof it is by her Majesty and us of her Council well perceived
that by the petitions of diverse of the Sheriffs in sundry Counties appearing in
the Exchequer for the allowances for the Dyets and other charges of the said
Justices, the same are yearly grown more and more in charge to the said
Sheriffs, and consequently her Majesty thereby more charged then in reason
ought to be allowed* And therefore to remedy this matter it is determined by
her Majesty with the advice of us of her Privy Council, That the Sheriffs shall
not after this Lent Assizes defray the charges of the Justices of Assizes
Diets, but that the said Justices shall have of her Majesty several sums of
money out of her Coffers for their daily Diets, during the time that heretofore
the Sheriffs have been chargeable withal within their Counties, with which
determinations the more part of the said Justices have been by diverse of us of
her Majesty's Council made acquainted, and thereof we have thought good to give
you knowledge, as we do the like to all other Sheriffs in the Realm, to the
intent you may after this Lent Assizes forbear to enter into such further
charges; and yet it is meant that you shall against the Summer-Assizes by the
authority of your office, aid and assist the servants of the said Justices that
shall require your advice or help to make provisions for their Masters Diets,
and for lodgings and houseroom at as reasonable charges as may, and ought to be
for the Queens Majesty's service, and as reason also requires, that the said
Justices in respect of their painful and careful services for administration of
Justice should be both honorably and favorably used in all things requisite
for their own persons and train, whereof we trust both you as Sheriffs now
being, and all other succeeding you will have a care and due regard. Finally,
we also warn you, that now, when you shall be unburdened hereof, as of a matter
long time complained, you do not for your private respect enter into any such
an unnecessary charge, as has not in former times of the King her Majesty's
father, or other her Progenitors been used nor allowed; for it is not meant to
give you allowance hereafter of any thing upon your account, that shall not be
well warranted to be allowed unto you, we also have given notice unto the
Justi^es that it shall be very convenient that at the first coming to the place
appointed for the Sessions, they do begin to hear and determine the causes of
the prisoners in your charge, and so far forth as it conveniently may be done
proceed to the delivery of the Goal, before they proceed to the Assizes,
whereby the attendance of the multitude of the Justices of Peace shall not need
to be so long as if the Goal delivery should be last. And therefore we will
that you do so make ready your Goal and prisoners, that the Justices may first
finish that service, being the principal cause of their Sessions, and so we bid
you right heartly farewell, from Hampton Court the 21. day of February 1573.

For these next Assizes it shall suffice that you make provision for two Messes
of meat well furnished, and in case over and besides that you shall demand any
further allowance of the Justices Diets, it is not meant you shall have any
allowance for the same afterward, you see what order it has pleased her
Majesty to take herein.

Your loving friends W. Burghley A. Warwick F. Knollis R. S^dleir E. Lyncoln F.
Bedford T. Smith Wa. Mildmay. T. Sussex. R. Leycester. Fr. Walsingham



and that expense being since ordered to be defrayed out of the Fines and
profits of the Counties after the rate of four shillings per diem, at the
Assizes and Sessions to every Justice of the peace, and two shillings per diem
to the Clerk of the Peace, and the King being at more then 10000 l. per annum,
charges to the Judges of the superior Courts at Westminster, who by their
Circuits do to save his people a great deal more charges cause a cheap and
impartial Justice to be twice in every year brought into every County, and is
at many other yearly expenses to others in the administration of Justice (for
which Cromwell and his fancied Parliaments thought a large yearly allowance to
be little enough) makes an yearly allowance of one thousand one hundred and six
pounds thirteen shillings and four pence per annum to the Lord President of
Wales and the Justices attending that Court for the provisions of their Diet
with an allowance of Diet to the Justices of Wales in their great Sessions,
twenty four shillings per diem to the Domestic Clerks or servants of the Lord
Chancellor, an allowance of Forty Marks per annum to the Kings Remembrancer in
the Exchequer (which may show what cheapness was formerly) for the diet of
himself and of his eight Clarks who ought to table with him; the like for the
Treasurers Remembrancer and his twelve Clarks, and to the Clark of the Pipe
five pence per diem for his diet every day when he sits in Court; and the
like to the Comptroller of the Pipe, should be now put to seek his own
Provisions or Pourveyance at the dearest and most disrespectful rates; or that
the Kings servants and Officers of his household in whose honor or dishonor the
Majesty whom they serve (as that of David was in the reproach of his servants
or Ambassadors sent to the King of Ammon) is not a little concerned, should now
for want of the Pourveyance or Compositions for them, complain that the beauty
is departed from the Kings house, his servants are become like Hearts that find
no Pasture, and they that did feed plentifully are desolate in the streets.

And that the servants of the Abbot of St. Edmunds Bury were in a better
condition when as he could allow John de Hastings the Steward of the Courts of
his Manors who claimed the said Office by inheritance a Provision when he came
at night unto him, for eight horses and thirteen men with an horse load of
Provender, and Hey sufficient, Wine and Beer, Inquis de Statu Senescalli
Abbatis de Burgo* sancti Edmundi in Escaet 30 E. 1. n. 13.
twenty four Wax Candles* in the Winter time and twelve in the Summer, eight
loaves of Bread for his Greyhounds, two Hens for his Hawks, and pro se and
hominibus suis honorabilem sustentationem in Cibo and potu, and an honorable
provision for himself and his servants in meat and drink. And as those of the
children of Israel which returned from the Captivity, lamented the difference
betwixt the glory of the first and second Temple, bewail the desolation of the
house wherein the Kings honor dwelled, and the alteration and reducing of it to
what it is now from that which it was in the raigns of Queen Elizabeth, King
James, or King Charles the Martyr.

And that Foraigners and Strangers who were wont so to magnify and extol the
Hospitality, state and magnificence of the King of Englands Court and
housekeeping, as that Philip Honorius, after an exact survey of many other
Kingdoms and their Policies has publicly declared that no Nation in the world
goes beyond our Britain in the honor of the Kings Court and household, Philip
Honorius Thesau^ Politic.
in maggior numero di servitori con maggior distinctioni d' officii e gradi,
multitude of servants, Officers and distinction of degrees, and cannot be
ignorant of the respects and honor done by all Nations to Foraign Princes
though no Monarchs or their superiors in their passages and journeys through
any Towns or Cities beyond the Seas, by making them presents of Wine, Fish,
Oats, and the best of household provisions which those places afforded, and that
even those mechanic souls of Hamborough and Amsterdam, can think it worthy
their imitation, shall find the King of England, whose Ancestor Offa King of
the Mercians in Anno Dom. 760. would be so little wanting to himself and his
posterity in the preserving the honor and rights of Majesty, as he ordained
that even in times of peace himself and his successors in the Crown, Speed
Hist. of England and Leiger Book of St. Albans.
should as they passed thorough any City, have Trumpets sounding before them to
show that the person of the King (says the Leiger book of St. Albans) should
breed both fear and honor in all which either see him or hear of him, to be so
scanted de ea sublimitate and amplitudine augustaque illa Majestate, in that
honor and reverence which his predecessors would never abate any thing of as
his Officers and servants, like some Beggars who are not used to be trusted
with a Mess of Pottage to be put into their hands when they buy it at the Cooks
stall, unless they shall first lay down their little piece of Coin for it,
shall like some Mounsieur Mal-regard, be enforced to pay for a Cart or horses
before hand, as if there were no other way to deal with them.

And in stead of being as the children of the servants of Solomon when Nehemiah
long after returned with the children of Israel from Captivity found in the
Registers in order to a preferment (there being then no selling of Places in
fashion) be afterward no where to be found, Nehem. c. 7.
unless it be in the Role of the Beggars, or that they who have spent their
times and industry in the hopes and expectation of their Princes favor, should
(when the Jews who as the learned Grotius has recorded, would not suffer any,
Qui ministerio fuerant Regio alterius se quam Regis successoris ministerio
addicere, Grotius Annotat. in lib. 3. Regum c. ^.
who had once served the King to serve any but his successors (which our Kings
of England have frequently observed) be constrained to betake themselves to the
services of subjects, or such as they can find have a mind to entertain them.

And not only his servants who are or should be well wishers to the return of
Pourveyance or Compositions for them, Vide the Oaths of the Treasurer and
Comptroller of the Kings house.
some of whom as the Treasurer and Comptroller are by the orders of the house
to be sworn That all things in the Kings house be guided to the Kings most
worship, and that they search the good old rule, worshipful and profitable of
the Kings Court used before time, and them to keep and better if they can.

But all the people of the Nation should remember that the honor and
magnificence of David, and that Royalty of Solomon which amazed the Eastern
world in the distribution of their Officers and servants in their houses and
order the^eof were justly numbered amongst the greatest Actions of their might
and Majesty.

And that the wisdom of our King Henry the seventh was not a little conspicuous
in the happy effects which it produced, when after a retu^n from his troubles
and afflictions in his great care and wisdom to prevent and avoid the like, and
make such an establishment of the Crown for himself and his posterity (which he
had as happily as unexpectedly attained unto) as might continue to as long a
duration as the world was capable of, he did so order his Court and household,
as it was a composure and assembly of men of the best birth, education,
fortunes and estates, qualities, endowments and reputation in every County of
the Kingdom, were most popular best allied and beloved therein and had no small
influences upon their Tenants, Allies and dependencies, some of whom he made to
be the Gentlemen of his Privy Chamber, Esquires of the body, Pensioners,
Carvers, Cupbearers, Sewers, Ushers and Waiters, and made the Yeomen of his
guard out of the best of the Yeomandry, or such as were recommended by the
Gentlemen of his Privy ^hamber, or other of his servants of the higher ranks,
which together with other carefully picked and well chosen servants not
introduced by money or the avarice of such as were about him, disguises,
parti^lities, or false recommendations were as so many Intelligencers Eyes and
Ears to the better ordering of his Government and affairs which were then in a
nice and perplexed condition, or as the Wheels in Ezekiels vision and the eyes
in them, to inform as well as Act, served as a glass in the absence of
Parliaments to represent unto him from time to time the symptoms and
indications of the peoples contents or discontents, and if any thing were to be
rectified for the good of his subjects, or done by him were by the great
obligations which the people and such as were not his servants had and owed
unto them which were his servants (and were sure to have them reciprocally to
be their Advocates and Intercessors to the King for favors to be granted or
done unto them) the most sure, silent, and never failing engines and
contrivances to accomplish their sovereigns just and reasonable ends; by which
excellent and ever to be imitated order, and very easy to be put in practice
in the choice and election of such as were to serve and stand before him (which
is and ever has been one of the greatest pa^ts of prudence, either in the
manage of smaller affairs in every man's private Family, or that of a K^ngdom
which is the Complexum or comprehension of all of them.

And such an happy as well as wise and successeful constitution (which many of
the Heathen Princes, and those that live in the dark of understanding do not
omit for their own security, by making the children of their subjects to be
their servants, and bred up in their Courts as Hostages and Sureties for their
parents good behaviors) made and observed in his Court, and within doors
conjoined with that without doors, by agreement and good accord with the then
potent Barons and great men of the Kingdom (who by their hospitalities and
letting of their lands at small Rents, which were as Loadstones to attract the
hearts and affections of the common people, did not only augment their own
grandeur, but like Solomon's Lions upholding his Throne, employed it in the
support of the honor and magnificence of their King and Sovereign) did to the
unive^sal content both of Prince and people Domi forisque, atchieve and bring
to pass his many great and difficult affairs, by imitation whereof and
continuing that or the like course King Henry the eighth his son did deliver
his people and Kingdom from the Impositions of Rome, wherewith it had formerly
been much troubled. And Queen Elizabeth likewise waded through those many
difficulties which had beleagured her Crown and Scepter, and did those other
great actions in defense of her self and her people which have laid her up in
glory, and made her remembrance to be as precious as the Spikenard, or the
sweet smelling Mirrhe, and the most precious of Odors.

The consideration whereof and what will necessarily follow by any contrary
course to be held, and the lessening of Officers and servants by the want of
Pourveyance or Compositions for them, upon pretenses of thrift and good
husbandry, or being supernumerary may inform us that it will not only diminish
and cloud the Majesty and splendour which is necessary to be in the Courts of
Princes, where the people should behold as well as rejoice in the State and
honor of their Kings, which in England did outgo and surpass all that of our
neighbor Princes, but break the Links of that golden chain of order in the
English Court, when it will be apparent that such as otherwise may seem to be
supernumeraries are not to be judged or looked upon as they would be in private
families (where their concernments are most commonly with a respect unto profit
more then Worship or Honor) that Princes are to have and keep a greater State
then any of their subjects, and that such a State which is some times made up
of Supernumeraries, cannot be lessened where the high State and Honor of a King
is to be maintained, which (some great or public occasions, as at Coronations,
Funerals, Triumphs, etc. only excepted) is principally to reside in his house
or fixed Station; and therefore it cannot be for the good of the people, or be
correspondent to the Majesty of a great King, that a lesser number of Maces
should be born before him, or that there should not be so many servants of one
and the same employment, but if the grandeur and magnificence of the King could
be served with a lesser number of servants, the pretended surplusage would be
necessary enough in order to the preferring and pleasing of his people, and to
give them encouragement to love and honor him which is their head, and to make
it their business to preserve and keep up the honor and g^eatness of the King
and his Court, which David in the order and placing of Officers and servants in
the house and Temple of the God of Israel, as well as in his own, did not think
impertinent as the several distributions and pluralities of Officers to places
of one and the same nature will sufficiently evidence, and to do otherwise,
would as little conduce to that Decorum which ought to be in a Kings Family, as
some indigested advice would do in the propounding, that there might be a
sparing of a great yearly charge of the Band of Gentlemen Pensioners, who were
anciently those that served in War, and ad latus principis, in a pitched field
or Battle, and were by Covenant and Indenture, which are frequently mentioned,
and to be found in the Records and ancient memorials of the Kingdom, his
Pensioners only for that purpose, because that the King is at a charge of a
Life Guard, which cannot comprehend and take in the uses for the Gentlemen
Pensioners in their guarding the King within doors, where there is a greater
decency and honor in them and their service, then can be in the Esau's or men
of the Field, and such as are only useful in the direful Sacrifices to
Bellona, where the Majesty of a King is laid aside and by a present necessity
exchanged for a sword, and the bloody and unmajestick business of it, and would
be as little for the profit of a King within the Virge of that honor which
should encompass and attend him and his affairs, as to suppose that the Master
of the household (which certainly has been as ancient as the household it self,
and never but once for ought appears to the contrary intermitted, and then by
the cunning insinuation and self ends of one that was too instrumental in the
introducing of our Trojan Horse) is useless and supernumerary, for that the
Treasurer, Comptroller, Cofferer, Clerks of the Greencloth, and Clerks
Comptrollers, may amongst them and altogether discharge and supply the care and
business of it, which will appear to be no more then suppositions and
pretenses, when as the Office of Master of the household, which if well executed
and as it ought to be, is of most necessary use and of a greater Fatigue and
trouble then any other of the household; is not at all comprehended in the Lord
Steward or great Master of the households place, nor within the Offices of
Treasurer, Comptroller, Cofferer, Clerks of the Greencloth, or Clerks
Comptrollers, but has as all the rest of the Officers of the Greencloth have
his peculiar and particular charge, which is to inspect all the under Offices
of the household, and to be as a Corrigidor or Surveyor of those numerous
Officers and servants which are therein (unto which the other great employments
and high honor of the Lord Steward, and the Treasurer and Comptroller, who are
of his Majesty's Privy Council, will not permit them always to attend) to call
in question and prosecute the punishment of such under Officers and Servants
and their irregularities as deserve it, and keep a constant watch and eye upon
their actions, and cause the daily orders and commands of the great Officers to
be obeyed and executed by the inferior as well as the set and known Rules of
the house, which is now more then ever necessary, and not to be wanted when
there are so very great and many disorders which a^e heightened, and more and
more increased by the want of the Royal Pourveyances or Compositions for them,
and by the enhaunce of rates and prices of household provisions (which do more
infest the Purse and profit of the King then any supernumerary Officers and
servants have as yet done) and hinder him from regulating these unallowable
improvements, and (as they are called) Fees and perquisites of some Offices and
Places in his Court by an Augmentation of the ancient Wages and Salaries of his
servants now far too little and unable to support them in his service, which
the monys wasted in the damages and loss sustained for want of his Prae-emption
and Pourveyances, and by those otherwise remediless irregularities would have
easily accomplished.

And all the people of England and their after generations may take it to be no
less then their duty as well as their interest, and (if the irrational
creatures were but to be Judges of it) a common gratitude to endeavor all they
can, and to be willing that those ancient Rights should be continued and
preserved to the King and his successors.

And having no small concernment in the honor of their Kings, which by its Rays
and R^flexions communicated unto them was, and ever is, and will be as
necessary for the good and welfare of the King and his people, as either
Credit, Cloths, Jewels, or any thing else they can have or adorn themselves
withal, when as their own interest or well or ill being, is involved in the
Kings.

May understand it to be no less their interest to uphold the honor of the King
and his house, then it was the interest of their forefathers, who if they had
not found it to be a more then ordinary concernment of themselves and every
good subject to be assistant thereunto, would not so often have been
petitioners in several Parliaments and several Kings Raigns for the well
ordering of the Kings house.

And being not ignorant how much all people are won and kept by hospitalities
and benefits, or lost for want of them, should not be instrumental to mudd or
stop the fountain, but cherish rather and keep the hospitality of the Kings
house as carefully as the Romans did their Vestal fire, and the Anci^ia or
sacred Sheilds, as some special part of the salus populi, and believe that it
was for the interest of the Nation that some Lords of the Kings Privy Council
in the 21. year of the Reign of Henry the eighth, even in the decay and
expiring of Hospitality, and almost all other the English virtues, did amongst
other Articles of Impeachment exhibited to the King against Cardinal Woolsey
(who kept a very large and ample Hospitality in his own house) charge him, that
where good hospitality has been used to be kept in houses and places of
Religion in this Realm; Coke 4. part Institutes 91* and Hist. H. 8. by the
Lord Herbert of Cherbury.
and many poor people relieved thereby the said hospitality and relief is now
decayed and not used: And it is commonly reported that the occasion thereof is
because the said Lord Cardinal has taken such Impositions upon the Rulers of
the said houses, as well for his favor in the making of Abbots and Priors, as
for his visitation by his authority Legatine: And yet nevertheless takes of
such Religious houses such yearly and continual charges as they be not able to
keep hospitality as they were used to do, which is a great cause that there be
so many Vagabonds, Beggars and Thieves. And where the same Lord ^ardinal has
said before the suppression of the Religious houses which he suppressed, that
the possessions of them should be set to Farm amongst your Lay Subjects, after
such reasonable yearly Rent as they should well thereupon live and keep good
hospitality, now the demeasne possession of the said houses since the
suppression of them have been surveyed, met, and measured by the Acre and set
above the value of the old Rent, etc.

That Judge Walmesly, one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas at
Westminster, did not appear to be an ill Commonwealths man, when upon his death
bed (as some few other old fashioned English Gentry have lately done) charge
his heir to continue his custom of good housekeeping and using his Tenants
well.

That when King James in the thirteenth year of his Reign, being persuaded that
it did greatly conduce to the welfare of his people, did by his Proclamation or
Edict command all the Gentry of the Kingdom to repair at the Feasts of
Christmas then next ensuing unto their several Countries and habitations for
the only ends of hospitality and housekeeping; To. pat. 13. Jacobi.
and that such as were Justices of the Peace and did not, should be put out of
the Commission of the Peace, he did not think his own heirs and successors
should ever be straightened in the means that should maintain their own
Hospitalities.

And that we have had of late the happy effects experiments and fruits of good
housekeeping and usage of Tenants by what was done by the late Loyal and Noble
Marquess of Worcester, when as he could by that, and the love of his Tenants
and dependencies in the beginning of the late unparalelled Rebellion, assist
his distressed King with great supplies of men and money, and help him that was
then almost helpless to form an Army to defend our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, as well as his own Rights; and by the late Marquess of Hertfords
bringing to his rescue great numbers of his Tenants, and have nothing to hinder
our belief, that Sir George Booth could never so gallantly as he did have
engaged almost two thousand of his friends and Tenants to open the passage to
his now Majesty's happy restoration of himself to his Rights, and us to our
Religion, Laws, and Liberties, if it had not been for his and his Fathers small
Rents and great hospital^ties.

And that we shall but destroy our own interest, and appear to be ill affected
to our own as well as the weal public if we shall contribute any thing to the
burdening of his now Majesty with an enhaunce of Rates and prices most
unconscionably put upon household provisions, and so beleaguer him with
necessities for want of his Pou^veyance or Compositions for them as he shall
not be able himself to do that which for reason of State and the care of the
welfare of his people, he would command others to do.

For it will be obvious to every man's understanding that our so famous
Universities of Oxford and Cambridge and the glorious structures of their
Colleges Halls and habitations of the Muses with their prudent foundations and
statutes, and great endowments of Lands and Revenues thereunto belonging,
causing those Universities as much to excel all other the Universities of the
world, as the Sun that grand Flambeau and most Illustrious Torch and light of
the Firmament does the lesser, and communicated Lights would by the rise of
prices for victuals and household provisions neither then suspected or expected
to have ever been able to come to such immoderate rates as they have since
arrived unto, have notwithstanding all the care and forecast of their Founders,
and the great yearly Revenues thereunto belonging, sunk into the Rubbidge of
those goodly buildings, and lost the intentions of their most noble and pious
Founders, if it had not been for the care and prevention of the Statute of 18.
Eliz. (justly accounted by Mr. Camden, to be a principal means of the support
of those Universities) which provided that the third part of the Colleges
yearly Rents and Revenues should be for ever paid and reserved in Corn, Malt,
and other provisions for housekeeping.

That it cannot be for the good or honor of the Nation to hinder the King from
being a Trajan, or herba parietaria, a sweet smelling Wall Flower, or deliciae
hominum, by taking away or obstructing the Magnetic virtue of his Hospitality
or attraction of the love of his people.

And that to overburden our head, or heap necessities upon the King, would
bring us within the blame and censure of the judicious Bodin, a man not meanly
learned in Politics, who decrying all unbecoming Parsimonies in a King, or his
Family, delivers his opinion, that sine Majestatis ipsius contemptu fieri non
potest ea res enim Peregrinos ad principem aspernandum and subditos ad
deficiendum excitare consuevit; Bodin de Repub. lib. 6.
That to lessen the number of a Kings servants or attendants, cannot be done
without a contempt or diminution of Majesty it self, and that it may cause
strangers to despise him, and his own subjects to Rebel against him, and gives
us the example and ill consequences which may thereby happen by the misguided
frugality of Lewis the 11. King of France, who when he had put out of his
household those that were of the Nobility and Gentry, made a Physician his
Chancellor, and his Barber his Herald and Ambassador, and how little good the
people of France and their posterity have gained by his dishonorable and
unkingly Parsimoney, when he did usually wear a course cloth suit and greasy
old hat, and at the same time was but busy to load them with Taxes, and lay
the foundation for as many more in perpetuity; and may now remember with grief
how little was saved by sending his Barber as an Ambassador to propound a
marriage with Mary Duchess of Burgundy, then the greatest heir of Christendom,
and that the Burgundian scorn of such a simple Messenger, lost him and all
France the advantage of having her and those seventeen great and rich Provinces
which have since been the cause of so much War and trouble to the Christian
world to be united and incorporate to the Crown of France, Philip. de Comines
hist.
and that thirty years late wars and expense of blood and many millions of
money raised by Taxes, have but enforced a Conquest of less then a six^eenth
part of those great and rich Territories, which might once have been had at a
cheaper rate.

And if we would but regard the honor of the English Nation, and the gratitude
which like the blood was wont to circulate and attend their hearts, should
blush to take a lesser care of the Kings rights and preheminences then our
ancestors were accustomed to do, who in a Parliament of King Edward the third
in the 42. year of his Reign, declared, That they could not assent to any thing
which tended to the dish^rison of the King and his Crown to which they were
sworn. And in a Parliament in the fourteenth year of the Reign of King Richard
the second, did pray the King, That the prerogative of him and his Crown might
be kept, that all things done or attempted to the contrary might be redressed,
and that the King might be as free as any of his progenitors were.

Or to deny those ancient rights of Prae-emption and Pourveyance, or the former
Compositions for them, to a King who has rescued us from a slavery from which
we could not redeem our selves, and restored all the Factious and Rebellious
parties to their forfeited Laws and Liberties.

Or that he should meet with no better acknowledgements then that those who
professed that their lives, estates and fortunes should be at his dispose in
order to his service, and that they would be Tenants in Cord, should by
denying h^s Prae-emption and Pourveyance, or Compositions for them, but be
Tenants in Ore, and by their high rates and impositions upon his household
provisions, make it their business to take ex Ore suo that which should
maintain him and his household.

And that the King who publicly professed that he was much troubled that his
people should come flocking as they did to Whitehal, to see him where he had
nothing to ^eed them, should now be so much necessitated, or imposed upon as he
is by his want of Pourveyance and the former way of Compositions for them; or
that the maligners of our English honor and prosperity should publish it in
Gath or Askelon, or have cause to upbraid us with, Hic clarae virtutis honos?
haec gloria sceptri
Hoc magni Decus Imperii tales ve Triumph^s.
Are these the promises? This the high renown,
Great Empires Honor? Glory of a Crown.
Or that our Returns should be no more to a King, who does not as the
Commonwealths of Greece, the spawn and Nursery of Republikes, Greece. Cedrenus
lib. 3. ca. 39. and Zonaras.
fill their Treasuries with Taxes, and impose, ten Drachmas upon every house,
Assessements upon every payment of Silver money and Taxes upon Beggars and
Whores, and such as were made Free, upon Cattle, Dung, Horses, Mules, Asses,
Oxen, and 3. pence upon every Dog, or the Fumaria Tributa, Chimney money
leavyed by Nicephorus the Emperor (the Chimney money which is now taken in
England, being of late only granted by Act of Parliament and consent of the
people to supply the decayed revenues of the Crown) with a Tax likewise upon
every man that grew suddenly rich upon a presumption that he had found some
Treasure, which by Prerogative belonged to the Emperor, a Canon or Canonicum
Tributum, ordinary or constant yearly Tribute amounting in the whole to as much
as 17 s. six pence, besides a Sheep, Lib. 1. Juris Oriental.
six Bushels of Barley, six Bushels of Bran, six measures of Wine, and thirty
Hens imposed upon every village, Julius Caesar Bullinger de Vectigalibus.
having thirty Chimneys imposed by ^saacus Commenius the Emperor, or a Tax upon
the rich to excuse the poor.

Nor as the Romans did whilst they were a Commonwealth impose a Tax or
Imposition (but in case of present great necessity, Roman Empire.
and by the peoples consent in Parliament) de agris and Pascuis, or a Land
Assessement to make an Aerarium or Treasury to supply future emergencies, or
Collect Aurum vicesimarium, Zecchius de principat. administrat.
a twentieth peuy of every man's estate, ad ultimos Casus, to support the
Commonwealth when it should happen to be ^istressed, Appian lib. 2. de bellis
Civil.
or a Tax before hand to defray the charge of a war in Gaul, when there should
be any, or Poll-money (without common assent) and an imposition or Tax upon
salt, nor raise Taxes and Tributes as they did Tributim a singulis ad Tributum
solvendum aerario bellis exinanito, to fill again their Treasuries exhausted by
War, a Tax or rate upon Wine, a tenth of all Corn, Oil, Cicero pro leg. Manilia.
and fruits of the earth, and a twentieth penny of the estates of such as were
made free, Su^tonius in vita Julii Caesaris.
a vectigal or tribute for Fish in Lakes and Fish ponds, a yearly pension for
every house in Rome, their Aedilitia vectigalia, a tribute to maintain their
Theaters or Play Houses, Siliquaticum, a certain Toll in Markets and Fairs,
Cicero lib. Epist. ad Q. fratrem.
Vectigal macelli an Excise upon all flesh and Victuals, a Tenth of Legacies,
the Decumae* or Tenths of the profits of Lands given by a Husband to a Wife, or
a Wife to a Husband if they had no children; Legia Papia.
and a Portorium or custom for exportation or importation of Commodities.

Did not make his Census or Assessements so poenal in the not due discovery of
the peoples estates, as the Romans those great pretenders to love and liberty,
did in theirs wherein wives, servants, and children were not exempted sub poena
publicationis inflicta his qui nollent bona sua aestimari v^l mala fide minoris
quam valerent aestimari paterentur, Livius Hist. Roman.
under the penalty of a forftiture of their goods if they should refuse to have
their estates Assessed, or suffer them to be under valued, and exact a rate to
be paid for the burial of such as died extra patriam, Dio. Cass. lib. 50.
and were brought home to be buried, or such taxes as were afterward imposed
by the Emperors of Rome, when that grand and universal Commonwealth revolved
into its first constitution and a Monarchy, as a third part of the revenues of
all men made Free in Italy, and a fourth of the Natives or Freeholders imposed
by Lepidus and Antonius in their T^iumvirate with Augustus, Plutarch in vita
Antonii Strabo in lib. ult. and Dio. Cass. in Augusto.
or as Augustus Caesar the best of their Emperors or Monarchs did, who exacted
the fourth part of every man's revenue, and the eighth of every man's goods which
were made free, to furnish an Aerarium militare, or Magazin of money for the
souldery, a Centesima pars, or hundred penny of all things sold; a twentieth
part or penny of all Legacies and grants of inheritance, the Vicesima quinta or
twenty fifth part of all things sold in the Country Market Towns, the
Quinquagesima or fiftieth part of wild Beasts brought to be sold, and fifteen
pence sterling (for the piece of money taken out of the Fishes mouth which paid
the Poll-money for our Savior Christ and Peter, is by good authors reckoned to
be two shillings and six pence sterling) for Poll money the hundred part of all
things bought or sold within the Empire, taxed before the Civil Wa^s, and
continued by Tiberius (though the people after their Civil Wars ended,
petitioned to have it abolished) toward the supply of his Aerarium militare,
Treasury for the Army, and Exacted a fourth part of the value of every thing
sued for at Law; a great penalty upon every one which compounded without
license; a certain number of Sesterties upon every marriage contracted, an
eighth part of all wares and commodities sold imposed by Caligula, and a part
of every poor Laborers Wages and of every Beggars Alms; an Impost upon Urine by
Vespasian, and the Stews by Severus the Emperor, Lampridius in Alexandro Severo.
and a part of Artificers, and Waggoners gains; some impositions set upon the
heads of Beasts, and Tiles of houses, and a Vectigal umbrae and aeris, a Tax
for the shade of the Plantane Tree by some of the ancient Emperors, and when
they had the Revenue of a great part of the world at their command, and had the
spoils and treasures thereof, P^libius.
and might the better have spared their own people, for that two Legions or
twelve thousand men were enough to Conquer and awe a Kingdom, and a Foot
soldiers pay was in those days of so great a cheapness (as a fat Kid was sold
in Portugal for an obolus then passing for about a penny farthing, which was
the price of four men's Dinners in L^^bardy, and a Medimni or three Bushels of
Barley was commonly sold for four Oboli being in the beginning of the third
Punick war but two Oboli, Valen. in l. modios 9. suscept. lib. 10. C. 70.

Symmachus lib. 9. Epist. 10.


would not forbear to leavy the fiftith part of the peoples Corn, a fourtieth
of their Barley, and a twentieth of their Wine and Bacon; Praestatio Tyronum,
when they took money to free soldiers and young men from warfare, which was
causa exitii, a cause of the ruin of Rome, and that of Valens the Emperor,
taking money of the people of every Province which per vices, or by turns were
bound to furnish a sold^er, Paulus Diaconus lib. 2.
quod cladem attulit Romano Imperio cum nemo militaret, which d^stroyed the
Roman Empire, when as men had rather pay money then serve their Country as
soldiers, Praestatio Lustralis, which was paid to the Emperor every five years
for every thing bought or sold, which was not in proprio rure, of the proceed
or growth of their own lands; Vectigal Allelengyum, Bullinger de Vectigalibus.
a Tax when the poor were listed or Mustered for war, and the rich ordered to
pay a certain rate to buy Arms and Provision for them, vectigal Chartiaticum,
an Assessement upon Gards, Vectigalia de fluminibus, a Tax upon Rivers and
Lakes, Aurum glebale, or Coronarium, an yearly oblation (so called) to the
Treasury, Solarium an yearly rent upon houses built upon the waste, a Tax upon
all Miners or Metal men, D. de Publican.
paid upon their first admission; a certain rate or imposition set upon Brass,
Iron, Brimstom, Chalk, Alum, Pitch, Xiphilinus in Neron^ and Lampridius.
Whe^stones o^ Quarries of Stone, and Vectigal pro mortuis, a Tax upon the dead
or upon their Burials, of which Boundicia or Boadicia our warlike British
Princess complains, that amongst the Romans, mori non licet fine tributo and
mulcta, they could not dye without a Tax paid for it.

Nor (not to mention the meru^ ^mperium almost unlimited despotical or
arbitrary power of the great Turk, Emperors of Russia, Industan and Persia, and
other Eastearn, Asian or African Princes over the estates and fortunes of their
subjects) does not do as the Bishop of Rome does, Rome.
who besides his large Demeasnes great Dukedomes and Territories now called the
Church Land, taking up a fifth or sixth part of I^aly, and the Tributes and
Donatives flowing from all the Clergy and people of the Kingdoms and Provinces
which are yet content to acknowledge his supreme (as he calls it) Vicariat, and
his great Amasses of Treasure gotten by Bulls, Indulgences, Jubilees, Pardons
and Dispensations, making in the Total a greater and far less troublesome
Revenue then the West Indies ever amounted unto, can by an artificial selling
of all Favors and benefits which he either gives or grants sub Annulo
Piscatoris or otherwise, and Multiplication of Officers cut and Cantelled into
too many, where a lesser number would serve as Masters of the streets, to look
to the buildings thereof, Chaplains to sing Mass to the Palfrey men, Office of
the Abbreviators in the Chancery, General of the Church, Cardinal Chamberlain,
Clerks of the Chamber, Apostolical prefect of the signature of Justice, or of
causes delegated for it, prefect of the signature of Grace, Congregation
office, or Court for Rivers, Waters and Bridges, Congregation for the Fountains
of the streets, Congregation to hear the grievances of the people (which are
made faster then they can complain of them) the Office of the Datary, under
Doctor and Revisers, Paticipant, Pronotaries, twenty four under Secretaries,
twenty Registers of Supplications, the Summist or chief Broker in the sale of
all Officers (which in the Court or Palace, are very many and are subdivided
into many of a sort, and has one of each for a retribution or allowance to
himself) yiedling his Holiness a great yearly Revenue; Writers of the
Paenitentiaries, Apostolical Writers, Apostolical Chamberlaines, Judge of the
Confidences, who is to take care that there be no Simony (when as there is
nothing almost more frequent) Auditor of the Contradictions, Corrector of the
Contradictions, Participant, Master of the Ceremonies, the Keepers of the
Chains, and the Popes four secret Sweepers, who by their Exactions and
Improvements of their places and shifts do like so many devouring Minotaures of
the people lurk in their several Labirinths of Fees and extortions, and keep
the people lean whilst they themselves are overgrown with Fat, and where there
are so many Officers and men employed to catch Fees and money, as the people and
those that do bear the burden, are like those that are stung with the Fly of
that Country called Tarantula, may in a pleasant madness content themselves as
well as they can by the custom of enduring that which renders them not so
sensible as they would otherwise be of it.

And the Citizens of Rome and mechanics making it the more easy by the gains
and profit which they make by the confluence of the people and strangers
thither, and those which do pay so much money to the Popes supernumerary
Officers, selling at greater rates to others, what they themselves paid very
dear for, and being men of other Kingdoms and Nations, do make the cries and
complaints which happen thereupon, to come short of his Holiness ears, or
audience of the Court of Rome, where the other Impositions and Taxes likewise
laid upon the people were so intolerable, as a Pasquil no longer ago then the
Popedom of Sixtus Quintus made himself and others as merry as they could in
making haste to dry his Shirt in the Sun least his Holiness should lay some Tax
upon the heat thereof.

Nor as the King of Spain does in his Kingdom of Naples, Naples.
where besides extraordinary aids, he receives a Donative every two years from
the people of a very great sum of money, which is reduced to an ordinary
Revenue, Philip Honorius Thesaur. Politic.
takes a Tax for the Chimneys or Fires in every house yearly to be paid toward
the Wages of soldiers and an allowance to be made to such of the Nobility as
attend the Vice Roy, another Tax toward the Garrisons, and a great Tax upon
Silk and Cards, Victuals and household provisions, where the people having
besides four thousand Barons or Titulado's, with many petty Princes, Dukes,
Marquesses and Earls to domineer over them, do find the great plenty of that
Country converted into a poverty of the common people.

Nor as the great Duke of Tuscany imposes (besides other Assessements upon
extraordinary necessitys) eight per cent. upon Dowries, Tuscany.
and as much upon the sale of all immoveables, according to the full and real
value, the tenth part of the Rent made by houses or lands leased, a rate upon
every pound of flesh sold, Philip Honorius Thesaur. Politic.
and upon Bills of Exchange, and when he is to raise any great sum of money
makes his list of all the rich men able to fu^nish it, who not dareing to deny
it, are within twenty eight months after repaid by a general Tax laid upon
the people, exacteth an Excise upon Roots and Herbs, or the least thing
necessary for the life of man bought or sold, or brought to any Towns, and a
Tax likewise to be paid by every Inholder, Brewer, Baker, and Artificer; and of
every man travailing by land or by water who pays money at every Bridge or Gate
of a Town, Sir John Davies Treatise of impositions
and if he does not pay, the Gabeller Arrests him, and is ready to strip him
naked to see what Goods he has which ought to pay a Gabel.

Neither as the King of Spain does in Milan where his subjects do the better
endure their multitude of taxes by his moderating la voragine de gl. interesse,
Milan.
their grand usury cutting off or restraining le spese superflue, superfluous
expenses, and havendo gli occhi apperti all mani de Ministri, and by the
Magistrates keeping a strict watch and eye upon the Ministers of State and
Justice, who do notwithstanding so load and oppress the people, as it is grown
into an Adage or Proverb. Il ministro di Sicilia rode quel di Napoli mangia and
quel di Milano divora, the Governors and officials of Sicily do gnaw the
estates of the people, those of Naples eat them, and those of Milan devour them.

Nor as in Spain where the people being Tantalized may hear of Gold and Silver
brought from the West Indies, Spain.
and sometimes see it, but it being altogether employed to maintain soldiers
Garrisons and designs in the services of their Princes never to be satisfied
ambition of piling up Crowns, Scepters and Titles one upon another, as if they
intended to give their neighbor Princes no rest until they had built
themselves a Piramid of them, passes away from the subjects like a golden
Dream, leaving them a certain assurance that the Gold and Silver of America,
has but increased their Burdens and Taxes, and that besides their servitios
ordinarios, ordinary and formerly accustomed services paid and done, and the
Subsidies called Des millions, upon extraordinary occasions and necessities
granted in their Parliaments or Assemblies of the Estates, and the charges
which the people are put to for librancas, Warrants or Assignments for moneys
to be paid like a late and ill invented way of Poundage here in England, and
the E^comienda's, or recommendations to Offices, Places or Dignities, or the
Venteia or sale of them, and the appointing Alcaldes or Officers of Justice in
the Towns and Villages, and Corregidors o^ Governors to look to their obedience
to Laws and Taxes, and the profit of their inquisitions do pay the Alcavala or
tenth of every man's estate first raised at a twentieth by Alph^nsus the
twelfth, in An. Dom. 1342. to expel the Moors, and since though they be long
ago driven away, made a perpetual Revenue, Collect out of all Lands, Houses,
Goods and Commodities which are sold; and from Artificers, Workmen, Tavern
keepers, Manufactures, Butchers, Fishmongers, Markets, etc. And for every thing
sold, or which they take money for, an Almoxariffe and do take a tenth of all
Foraign Commodities imported and exported, a tenth of all Merchandise exported
to the West Indies, Marian lib. lib. 16. and Linsc^tanus.
and a twentieth when they come thither paid for importation, Vectigalia
decimaru^ portuum siccorum, or puertos secos, a tenth of all Commodities
carried by Land out of the lirtle Kingdoms of Valentia, Arragon and Navarre,
and out of Portugal into any part of Spain, and from Spain into any of those
Kingdoms two Ducats from the Natives of Spain, and four of Strangers for every
Sack of Wool exported, El Senneor-capo de la moneda, a Real or six pence out
of every six Ducats coined in the Mint; a Tax called the Almodraua out of the
Tunny Fishes, a great yearly Revenue out of salt, El exercitio, a tribute for
the maintenance of the Galleys and Mariners la Monoda Forara, which is seven
Maravedis for ever Chimney, a Tax upon Cards, Quicksilver and Russet Cloth made
in Spain, and the Maestrazgos, a great Revenue yearly raised upon the Rents and
Estates of the Knights of the Orders of St. Jago Calatrava and Alcantara'la
Cruzava, or benefit of the Kings selling of the Popes Pardons, to eat Flesh in
Lent or ti^es prohibited, granted to maintain the charge of War against
Infidels or Heretics, yearly yiedling eighty thousand pounds sterling; the
terzae or thirds out of the Lands and Estates of the Ecclesiastics and Clergy
for the maintenance of the wars and defense of the Catholic Religion over and
above the Excusado or ordinary Revenue of a Tenth by the grant of the Pope of
all the goods and Lands of the Church which yeildeth yearly six hundred and
twenty thousand Ducats, besides the State Artifices of getting Bulls or
Warrants from the Pope to lay heavy Taxes upon the Clergy, as in Anno 1560. to
leavy every year for five years together, three hundred thousand Crowns with a
liberty of lengthning that time, if the Pope should think fit to furnish fifty
Galleys against the Infidels and Heretics; and two years after an Addition of
four hundred thousand Ducats per annum, and at another time three Millions for
six years to be yearly paid by the Clergy, vast sums of money yearly raised out
of their Wine and Oil for some years, insomuch as the Cardinal Ossatus
complaining of it, says, That nullus est Clerus in toto orb Christiano qui
majoribus oneribus prematur quam Clerus Hispaniae, no Clergy in the Christian
world is more oppressed with Taxes then the Clergy of Spain.

Does not lay such Taxes or Impositions as the people of Portugal do bear by
the Alfandega's or Impositions upon all Merchandise (Corn excepted) Imported,
Portugal.
upon some a tenth, upon some a fifth, and in some places some other par^s, a
Tax upon Wood, Wine, Oil, Fruit, Flesh, Fish, Blacks or Negros, servants or
slaves sold Puertes secos, or for goods or commodities carried to be sold by
Land; a Tax upon Cards, besides many Almoxariffadgo's laid upon the Towns and
people, a particular Tax upon Tunny Fish, a third part yearly collected of the
Rents and profits of all the Revenues belonging to every City and Town in the
Kingdom, every one having some appropriate unto them, and of Fines and
penalties imposed upon any quen^s therein.

Does not do as the Emperor and German Princes do by their people and subjects,
Germany.
who besides the Dranksteur, Bierrecht Biersteur, or Excise upon drink and
their Schoorstein oder Caming gelt or Chimny money Frawlensteur certain
quantities of Wine appropriate to the Prince, and those many Consuetudines quae
praestantur in recognitionem Dominii directi and Jurium Dominicalium, Customs
and services which are to be performed to the Emperors or chief Lords of whom
they hold and their Laudemia's Leh^wahrs or Reliefs, which if it be a Hahe
Leh^wahr, is of great men or Estates a Twentieth penny, in Ecclesiastical Fees
or Revenues two Dollers per cent. and in the Kleine lehne wahr or small Estates
or Revenues, a sixteenth penny, and over and above what is paid for Licenses of
Alienation, or for lehn gel^ for a Live^y or investiture into Lands, Han^^ohn,
an Oblation for any thing written in a subjects favor by the Prince, and Recht
steur a payment of money toward the maintenance of the Courts of Justice, do
take Turkensteur, a Tribute for war or defense against the Turks, Krieg steur,
a Tax for the payment of soldiers; Forced gelt, Forest money; Mase gelt, money
paid for measures; Malschwein, for Swine, Last gelt, Ton money or gaging of
vessels, Pf^ug gelt, a Tax upon every Plow, B^lcken gelt Timber money, Haupt
vizh money for the head of every Beast, Zehenden vam Fleisch wein corn Erbsen,
Tenths of Flesh, Wine, Corn and Herbs, Hausen gelt, a Tax upon houses, Frey
gelt, money upon the making men to be free; Schuck gelt Shoo money, Brucken
gelt Bridge money, ^eg gelt way money, or for passage, Auf^nauch gelt or
Auf^arth money paid in Cities and Towns for being chosen into any Office or
Magistracy, and Abefarth Abschusz Ablosung when one removes his Family or
household from one City or Town to another, and is to pay a tenth of any goods
sold upon such removals, Toll or Foriscapium to be paid by the buyer over and
above the price agreed to be paid to the seller, Accisz upon all Commodities
sold and spent, and a Land steur Tribute upon Lands which is ex voluntate
superioris and ob necessitatem supervenientem variantur, imposed (for the other
as aid against the Turks, and for payment of soldiers are to be by public
assent ordained at their Diets or Parliaments) it the pleasure of the Prince,
and varied according to occasions or necessities.

And so many other Taxes and payments for the public, says B^soldus, ut
nominibus laboretur, as there are scarce names enough for them, Besoldus de
Aerario. Public.
so that as free and full of liberties as that Nation did heretofore suppose
themselves to have been, they do find by their Taxes and payments that the
feathers which their Electors, Dukes, Margraues, Counts, Barons, and Imperial
Cities have e^ther taken by force, gained by favor or purchased for money from
the Imperial Roman Eagle, which Crantzius and other good Authors do heavily
complain of, have but increased rather then eased the burdens of the common
people.

Does not as the King of the French, who besides his Fouages or Chimney money,
which (though they of Gulen did heretofore so little like of as they rebelled
against our famous English Black Prince for imposing twelve pence upon every
Chimney) they believe in that and the other parts of France to be accustumez de
toute Anciennete, allowed by all Antiquity, the services and profits Feodall,
le Paulet, or a Tax of four Deniers upon every liver, or two shillings of the
yearly value of Offices, profits of Prizes at Sea, and of the Admiralty, Tenths
and first fruits payable by Ecclesiastical persons Escheates, Ottroyes,
Licenses, and Dons gratuits, gifts, or oblations and Regalities, does continue
as perpetual a Tax called le Tailon, imposed by King Henry the second, in the
year one thousand five hundred forty nine, to increase the Wages of the
soldery in regard of the dearness of victuals, and the burdens which the men at
Arms or Gens d' arms, did lay upon the Laborers and common people, la Creue,
or augmentation for the pay of the Army, an Impost of the twentieth penny upon
Wine sold in gross, the eighth, upon all in Normandy by retail, and a Tax upon
all drink, now made a constant Revenue of the Crown; a Tax upon every vessel of
Wine (which in the time of Julius Caesar, had no Imposition or burden laid upon
it) carried into Walled Towns, or the Suburbs, and to pay as much though it be
transported from thence again before it be sold* B^llinger de Vectigalibus.
The Gabell upon Salt, which being imposed by Philip the long, with a
Protestation that it should continue but a while, and afterward by Philip de
Valois in the year one thousand three hundred twenty eight, who declared that
he intended not to incorporate it to the Royal Demeasnes, and being remitted by
Charles the fifth in the year one thousand three hundred sixty nine, is since
made perpetual and annexed to the Royal Revenue and the King and his
successors, are become the only Merchants of Salt, whereof every house is to
take a certain proportion loaded with the Kings Tax and Imposition upon it,
though it be more then he have occasion to expend, the aequivalent or
aequipollent which in Narbonne was granted for the abolition of an old Tax of
the twentieth part of the price of all movables sold by retail about the year
one thousand four hundred and sixty, and agreed to be paid by a Denier in every
Liver, not only for all movables but of Flesh and Fish sold by Retail, and
the sixtieth part of all the Wine bought to sell again, and is paid in Au^erg^e
for a liberty to buy their Salt where they please, and to be exempt from the
Tax and Imposition of buying it at the Kings Granaries or Salt Magazines (being
with Wine a great part of the natural commodities of the Country) besides the
other Impostes, Entries or Customs to be paid in Towns, or for Peages and
passages by Land or Water, la subsistence, which in the Reign of King Henry the
fourth and since have been leavyed, pour fair subsister les soldats dans les
quartiers d' hyver moyennant quoi on devoit estre exempt du logement de la Gens
d' arms durant l' hyver, to keep the soldiers in or to maintain them in their
quarters all the Winter, and to be exempt from the trouble of lodging them in,
their houses, la sold d^ 50 mill hommes, a Tax for the wages of fifty
thousand men first laid upon the Cities and Walled Towns by King Francis the
first, for that they could hinder their passage thorough their Towns, or coming
into them and after upon the Country, to be paid without exemption of persons
or allowance of privilege with an addition of charge added thereunto by an
Ordinance of that King for the maintenance of the seven Legions of Foot
consisting of six thousand men a piece for the safeguard of the Kingdom, the
tenths of all the Benefices and Dignities, Ecclesiastics and Commonalties
erected into Benefices, which have a Revenue in perpetual succession, les
deniers Communs, or moneys imposed upon Cities and Towns for the repair,
fortification or defense of them, or of any Castles or Forts, to which all are
to contribute without exemption; the rights and payments due out of very many
Bishoprics, and Archbishopricks for Quints and Requints, Rachapts, Censives,
Lots, Ventes, Saisines, Amandes, Justices, Greffes, Auboines and confiscations,
the Estappes or Annonae militares, free quarterings or Provisions for the
Armies or soldiers in their March, or encampings, contributions in times of
peace, pour le Ban and arriere Ban, upon Fiefs and Tenures, lev^es de Chevaux
and Charriotts, a leavy upon Carts and Carriages, and le Traicte and Imposition
foreign, being a twentieth penny, and extending to all commodities that are
carried by Land out of the Kingdom into other Kingdoms and Territories, as out
of France into Catalonia, Spain, Lorraine, Savoy, Flanders and Italy, makes as
much as an Excise upon Corn, Wine, Oil, Flesh, Fish, Poultery, Herbs, Fruits,
and all sorts of Victuals and Provisions for the Belly and the Back.

All which before mentioned Taxes and Impositions being become as the Sieur
Girard du Haillan says, Gerard du Haillan de l' estat. des affairs de France.
who wrote in the later end of the Reign of their King Henry the fourth,
Patrimonial and Hereditary, or as Droits du Domaine, without any distinction
betwixt the times of war or peace; and leavied as the ordinary Revenues of the
Crown of France have been by the Artifice of Lewis the 11. and other his
successors, more then doubled or trebled, by other Tailles, Taxes, and
Impositions which are laid upon extraordinary occasions by the Kings
Ordonnances or Letters Parents, quand bon lui s^mble, at his own will and
pleasure, and so much as the Sieur de Haillan, complains that ilz ne se sont
contentez des dites Tailles mais peu a peu ont mis sur le dos du pa^ure peuple
les autres impositions and depuis on a mis Taille sur Taille, and imposition
sur imposition don't la France se est esmeue contre ses Roys and ils en ont
cuide perdre la France, they were not content with those (ordinary) Taxes, but
by little and little have put upon the backs of the poor people, Tax upon Tax,
and Imposition upon imposition, which caused a sedition and rebellion amongst
the people which had almost lost or destroyed all France; and in stead of
diminishing are more and more increased, though their good King St. Lewis, who
reigned in Anno Domini, one thousand two hundred and thirty, did upon his death
bed in the words of a dying man (as Bodin says) inserted into his last Will
and Testament, exhort his son Philip to be legum and Morum sui Imperii Custos
and vindex acerrimus ac ut vectigalibus and tributis abstineret nisi summa
necessitas ac util^^atis publicae justissima causa impellat, Bodin de Repub. l.
6.
to be a Guardian and severe observer of the Laws and customs of his Kingdom,
and abstain from Taxes and Impositions, unless there should be a great
necessity, or it should appear to be for the good of the people, and that
afterward Philip de Valois did in an Assembly of the three Estates in Anno one
thousand three hundred thirty eight, Enact and decree ne ullum Tributi aut
vectigalis genus nisi consentientibus ordinibus imperaretur, that no kind of
Tallage or Tax should be leavyed without the consent of the three Eastes.

So very many have been day after day added, as there is not to be wanted a Tax
or Imposition for Pi^s for the Queen, and for Clouts against her time of
Childbed, with Daces or Tributes, Peages, Impositions upon the going out and in
of Towns and other places, Taxes for passage, upon the high ways, Emprunts
generaux and particuliers, borrowing of money in general or particular ( ad
nunquam Solvenda, never to be paid again) vente and confirmation des offices,
sale of Offices and places of Justice and Judicature (which their ancient and
fundamental Laws and customs do forbid) and being cut into small parts and
multiplied do make up a very great Total or number, and by a common and public
Merchandise of them, have increased those great corruptions, delays and
intrigues of Justice by appeals and otherwise, which our learned Fortescue,
Chancellor to our King Henry the sixth, observed in the time of his Exile, was
no small grievance of the people, and made that litium fertilitas, abundance of
suits and controversies; which their own Learned Bodin does ingeniously
acknowledge to be so very many, as vix in omnibus Europae Regionibus and
imperiis tot lites sint quam in hoc unto Imperio, Bodin lib. 6. de Repub.
there are not so many suits in Law almost in all the Counties and Kingdoms of
Europe put all together as they were (in his time) in that one Kingdom of
France, which besides the Ottroys or aids granted by the three Estates and
universal consent of the people upon public and great emergencies and
occasions, are with many Arbitrary Taxes and Assessements, as the King or the
necessities of War or State shall require, much the more burdensome to the
Pesants Bourgeois and Artizans, or a third or lower estate of the people, for
that all the Clergy so long as they live Clericalement, without taking of Farms
or dealing in Lay matters, which with their Tenants and dependencies have been
in the Reign of King Henry the fourth, reckoned to be an hideous number, are to
be exempt from the Tailles or Arbitrary Taxes, as likewise all the Nobility and
Gentry, which are many and very numerous, both in the greater and lesser sort
of them, and that most men of any Estate both of the long Robe, or Lawyers, or
soldiers, or other lower ranks do by purchase procure themselves to be of the
nobless or Gentry, for that they are thereby to be freed from arbitrary
Tallages, insomuch as some thousands have been at once enfranchised, made
Gentlemen and enrolled into that condition or quality for such lands as they
hold in their hands, there being amongst those which are exempted also reckoned
the Domestics of the King and Queens, the house and Crown of France, and their
sons, daughters, brothers and sisters if they do not Traffic or negotiate
further then with the increase of their own Lands and Revenues.

With such also as are exempt by pa^ticular Mandates, and Ordinances of the
King, as amongst the soldiers and Life Guards, the Captains, Lieutenants,
Cornets, Guidons, Quartermasters, men at Arms, Archers, Fourriers and other
Officers of Companies, Provosts of the Marshals, and their Lieutenants,
Paymasters of the Companies, Commissaries and Comptrollers at war,
Contrerolleur general, and other Officers of the Ar^illery, Mort or dead pays
Mint Masters, and such as do work in the Mint, the Kings Secretaries, the
Rectors or Governors of Universities, Heads of Colleges, Notaries, Bedels,
Scholars, or such as are actually Students, Physicians, Presidents,
Counselors, Advocates, Proctors, Greffiers or Officers of Courts of Justice,
Ushers of Courts, Sovereign and other Officers, also all Office^s in inferior
Courts which are as many almost as there are V^llages, Stewardships, Bayliages,
or petit jurisdictions) as the Lieutenants Criminel and Civil, general or
particular, their Counselors, Greffiers, and other Officers, and the chief
Magistrates of Toulouse during the year of their Magistracy.

And are so much the more a burden and grievous to the common people by the
partial^ty of the Elections, or those in every Province which are the Tax
Masters and by the exactions of the Collectors and particular receivers,
Controlleurs generaux Receivers, generauz Tresoriers de l' Espargne Commis,
inspectors of the Revenue and Clercs des Finances, which their great Henry or
Henry the fourth did so well unde^stand to be a torment and a trouble to the
people, as he said that On fait payer double Taille l' une est a moy and l'
autre aux officers la second rend la premiere insupportable car les despens
que f^nt les officers montent plus que la Taille, Hist. de la Mort. de Henry. 4.
my people do pay double Taxes or Tallages, by paying as much to the Officers
as to me, which do make the Taxes insupportable for the charge of the Officers
do exceed that of the Tax.

Insomuch as the Paisants, Artizans and common people of France, may bewail the
loss of the virtues of the old Gauls and Franks, their Ancestors and
predecessors, that the Parliament of Paris, once the guide of that Nation, and
representing the three Estates of that Kingdom, is now become but an
extraordinary Court of Justice to verify the Kings commands and Edicts with a
Car tell est nostre plaisir, for so is our will and pleasure, and lament the
change of their Government and ancient constitutions, and the wasting and
dismembring of the ancient Domaine and Revenue of the Crown of France, which
notwithstanding it be a part of the Oath of the Kings of France at their
Coronations not to alien any of that sacrum Patrimonium, or perpetual
maintenance intended for the Crown, and the returns of those many great
Appennages and childrens Estates created out of them by the Escheat or coming
back of Normandy, Britain, and other great Provinces, and many Revnions,
Rachapts and Retraicts is now de cursu temporis, by a long course of time and
necessities of State or Royal munificences languished and brought into the
small compass of twenty thousand pounds per annum sterling, the Forests and
Chases not included, so as that Crown and the Important affairs thereof are now
only upheld and supported by Taxes and a grand and yearly Revenue raised out
of them to help to maintain soldiers and Armies, the Tax making a more then
ordinary necessity of Armies, and their pay and maintenance, a necessity of
multitudes of Taxes imposed upon the people.

Who may now believe that they are under a harder fate then the common people
of the old Gauls were, whom Julius Caesar, now above seventeen hundred years
ago found to be under so much vassalage and contempt, as he says, Caesar's
Comment. lib. 6.
apud Galls nihil fere plebe contemptius, amongst the Gauls nothing is more
contemptible then the common people, by how much it is now increased, and made
more then it was then, by their Taxes and poverty, affording them little more
comfort then to be sometimes able to purchase some of our English old Shoos
transported thither as a Merchandise, and some of our old Cloths, Carbonadoed,
and trimmed up or revived a la mode de France.

Does not use his subjects as those of Lorraine, Lorraine.
who besides their many Taxes as near of kin as they are in neighborhood to
many of those in France, Sir John Davies Treatise of Impositions
do pay a certain Tax for the pa^ns of Glass in their Windows.

Nor as those of Ferrara, Ferrara.
now a Territory of the Church of Rome, where besides the defraying of their
former Dukes charges in the expenses of his house and family (which was wont to
be nobly kept, with a stable of four hundred horses) or disbursed upon his own
person, or for gifts, or Pensions or maintenance of Garrisons, and the great
profit which is made yearly by Fish taken in the Lake of Comachio, Philip
Honorius Thesaur. Politic.
the people do pay a tenth of the true value of all things exported and
imported, and as much out of every Contract, Lease, Gift, or Alienation, and
endure the gnawings and bitings of the Officers and Tax Masters, which are to
them as unwelcome as the Lice and Frogs, some of the Plagues of Egypt, every
time that they come amongst them.

Nor as the State and Republike of Venice that Lottery of liberty, Venice.
where the people (besides their Taxes upon public necessities, as when in the
wars against the Emperor Maximilian, all but the poorest sort paid a moiety of
their Rents) being not excused by the yearly Taxes, payments, or Aids of
140000 Aurei or fifteen shillings sterling, out of Padua 36000 Vincenza ninety
thousand, Verona 1000450. Bergamo six thousand, Philip Honorius Thesaur.
Politic.
Friuli thirty thousand, Dalmatia ten thousand, besides what they have yearly
out of Zant, Candy, and Corcyra, do pay a great Excise or Imposition upon Oil,
Wine, Corn, Iron, Fruit, Wood, Bakehouses, Mills, and all Commodities, exported
and imported* and do with their burdens on their backs, but draw blancks in
stead of real immunities and liberties, admire and talk of the inestimable
Treasury and Arsenall of that City which sits as a Lady upon many waters and
please themselves with the glimmering and far distant hopes that they or some
of their posterities may one time or another by the chance of the Balloting
Box, come to be a Senator or Clarissimo, or obtain some gainful Magistracy* or
the Procuratorship of St. Mark, and are notwithstanding so little pleased with
their Taxes and Tax-masters, when they do better think of it as their Masters
the Doge and Signory, dare not at home Trust any of their Natives with any
commands or generalship in their hired Armies, but do rather adventure the
success and conduct of the wars in the hands of Foraigners and other Nations.

Does not do as the King of Sweden, who (besides his Aids from the people for
public occasions, Sweden.
which by an eternal Law of Nature and Nations and self preservation, are never
denied to Kings or Princes, takes in that Elective Kingdom a tenth of all
Mines, Fruit, Barley, Butter, Fish, Oxen and Hides, with a Tax upon Furs as the
cold increases or decreaseth, the Nobility and their Tenants contributing
nothing but in case of war to any public Taxes or Assessements, when they bear
a Moiety, has for the most part the Furs of Lapland brought unto him yearly
for the use of himself and such of his Court as he shall please to bestow them,
giving the Merchants or such as bring them some small retributions, and
rewards many of his Nobility, and sometimes strangers with the vassalage of
diverse of the Boors and Husbandmen of the Nation, who having few or no
liberties of their own can make themselves gainers by invading Germany, and
pretending to fight for the liberties of other men.

Does not do as the Dutch United Provinces and their hoghen Mogen or
Corporation of Kings, Holland and the United Provinces.
are pleased to do, who besides their Schoorsteen gelt or Chimney money yearly
paid, and other moneys raised upon extraordinary necessities, do yearly exact
and leavy de twee honder^ste penning, two hundredth penny, and the thousandth
penny of every man's estate toward the charges of the wars, and as ordinary
payments and Assessements, Philip Caesius a Zesen in Leone Belgic.
quae semel recepta, as some of their own do acknowledge semper exiguntur, once
crept into a custom are always leavyed de imposte^ v^n de huizen, which is an
eighth penny paid out of the Rent of every house, and a Gulder, or our two
shillings for every man or Maidservant, which the Master or Mistress is bound
yearly to pay, and as much for every Wagon or Boat, the Ships or greater
Vessels having a rate imposed upon them according to the Tun six gulderen, or
twelve shillings sterling per annum upon every Coach, almost a sixth penny of
the Rent of Lands per annum as the Magistrate shall estimate it, four Stivers
and a half, almost our five pence for every Acre of Land sowed with Corn or
other things for every month from the time of the sowing of it, until the
Reaping or Harvest thereof, the four^ieth penny, and in Amsterdam the eightieth
penny as well as the fortieth of all Houses, Lands or Ships sold which as to
the houses is so often as the State is believed to get in a few years the full
price or value thereof, den impost van veze gelde brieven, which is upon every
paper wherein any Contract, last Will and Testament, Petition or Act in any
Court or Assemly, or before any Magistrate, shall be written to be of any force
or validity, and to be sealed in the Margin of every leaf of Paper with a small
seal, two stivers or two pence half penny, and with a greater seal if it be of
more concernment four stivers or five pence, the Impost van onge^on cerde
processen, for a Fine paid for not making good an Action or Suite for every
fifty Guilders, or five pounds sued for, thirty stivers or three shillings
English, ^out gelt a certain quantity of salt sold by the Magistrates at a
certain rate or price to every Family or Town, Excise upon Beer, French,
Spanish, Rhenish, and Brandewine, Oils, Vinegar, Butter, Corn, ground at the
Mill, Pease, Fatches, Barley, Oats, Pease dried or undryed in the Oven, Apples,
Pears, Nuts, Grapes, Herring, Salt, Fish, Candles either Wax or Tallow, Turfs,
English or Scottish, Coals, Tobacco, Soap, Pitch, Lead, Brick, Cloth, Silk and
Cloth of Gold, Convoy G^lden Convoy money for guarding Ships at Sea; and haven
gelden for money to maintain and repair their Ports and Havens, a seventh penny
of the price of all Beasts or Cattle sold, three stivers for every month for
every young Beast of three years old or above, and two for Horses, the ninth
penny of the price of Sturgeons and Salmons, the eighth of the price of Wood,
and the ninth of Tapestry, Hangings, and guilt leather, their licenten or money
to be paid for Passes, or License to carry Merchandise into the enemies Country
or Quarters, for every Hog or Pig killed three stivers and a half for every
gulder of the value, cum multis aliis, with many other Taxes and Assessements
not here recited, the most of which notwithstanding seven or eight years
perfect and complete peace with their potent and long provoked enemy the
Spaniard in more then threescore years wars, Masses of money expended on both
sides can be yet kept on foot and continued upon the pretenses of paying of
debts incurred, or to provide and furnish a Treasury against future
contingencies, or to keep the government in the hands of the hoghen moghen,
high and mighty Lords the States, who have tasted the sweetness of governing
their fellow subjects, by laying out of the peoples money and imposing Taxes to
maintain that frame of a Commonwealth, which pessimo exemplo, has so much
troubled Christendom, and cost them more blood and money then would have
subdued the Turk, and sent him from his Ottoman Port to abide the Resurrection
of his Mahomet or worthless Progenitor at Mecca, and they that thought
themselves undone and ruined in the beginning of the Duke of Alvas government,
if they should pay a tenth for all that was bought or sold and made that to be
one of their causes to shake off their obedience, and engage in a war against
their lawful Prince, could since endure more then ten times greater Taxes and
Impositions, and can now be content to pay excessive rates and prices for all
things that they do buy or use, and greater Taxes and Tributes then any the
most absolute King or Prince would adventure to impose upon his subjects, Et
haec omnia test Grotio tempus and majora and ferendi assuetudine molli^ra
f^cit, Philippus Caesius a Zesen in Leo^e Belgico and Grotius in Epist.
which as the learned Grotius says, time and a custom of bea^ing such burdens
have made more easy, and their Magistrates cunningly obse^ving the disposition
of that people, quaestus inhiantem ac magis pecuniae quam gloriae ac honoris,
to be more greedy of gain and money then of honor or glory, for so Meteranus
and Strada describes their nature and conditions, Strada Decad. 1.
have put them on and encouraged them to a liberty of gain and enriching
themselves as well as their Commonwealth and made that to be as the sugar to
sweeten the bitte^ness of their Taxes. Quae hic multo graviora Graviora ac in
aliis si^ dictis non liberis Regionibus, which are there greater then in other
Countries, which are said to be not so free, Et ex hac Regiones ac urbes seu
potius earum Magistratus liberum absolutumque exercent Imperium Imo liberius
and absolutius quam multis est Regibus in sibi subjectos, Philippus Caesius a
Zesen in Leone Belgico, Sect. 6.130, 131.
populus autem eodem respecto multo subjectos servilioris and addictioris est
conditionis quam ullae aliae in Europa gentes; and by this means those
Provinces and Cities, or rather their Governors or Magistrates do exercise a
^ull and absolute Dominion over them, yea a greater and more absolute then many
Kings do over their subjects; and the people are the^eby made to be under a
greater vassalage, and in a more servile and slavish condition then any other
Nation in Europe, and it is therefore more then a surmise that lucri faciendi
effraenata licencia, an unbounded license in the Magistrate to Tax the people,
and a license to the people in stead of a liberty to Trade and coz^n one
another, makes them so patient to undergo those vectigali^ ac Collationes
aliaque servil^a onera, Taxes, payments and servil burdens, which otherwise
they would be unwilling to endure.

All or most of which being continued and lying heavy upon them, upon pretenses
of debts incurred for the public to be paid, or otherwise have made such a
dearth of all household provisions, as that notwithstanding that their huge
Granaries at Amsterdam are always stored with abundance of Corn to transport
and sell to all other Nations and Kingdoms where they find any scarcity or
want of it, a family of ten persons, more then one half whereof have been young
children, have this last Winter amongst other Victuals, as Flesh, Fish, Roots,
etc. been enforced to spend 17 s. sterling in a week in ordinary and common
bread, and twelve shillings sterling within the same Circle of time for Turfe
or Firing, and the generality of the Nation, are sinking so fast into a
poverty, as by an exact account taken thereof, there have been this last year
more then in any of the former years above eighty thousand Pawns brought into
the public Lumbard at Amsterdam; and may teach them and all the world at last
how great the difference will be betwixt a natural and hereditary Prince,
governing by the known Laws of a Nation, and with less charges, and that which
is only upheld by the power of money and Taxes to make and preserve an
interest for those who are the only gainers by it.

Did not in any of his necessities as some of his predecessors Kings of England
have done in theirs both before and since the Conquest, continue and take the
Tax of Dane gelt (laid to expel that Nation out of England) after they were
quieted and returned home, nor as many of the English Lords of diverse Manors
have done, and do to this day require and take of their Tenants, Peter pence,
or Chimney money, amounting in some Manors to considerable sums, though it
was long since abolished by Act of Parliament, and was not to be taken in that
kind, or for that purpose, nor does by wars or impositions impoverish his
people as some of his neighbors have done or made them to complain as the
common people of Normandy did not long ago, De secret des Finances de France.
that they were une uraye Anatomy de corpse humain auquel ne rest plus que les
os le Peau and encore foulez, like an Anatomy of a man's body which had nothing
but bones and skin left upon it, and that also foul enough, but has made them
in the generality richer then himself, and more abounding in plenty and riches
then any Nation of Christendom.

And being the son and heir of the Crowns and Kingdoms as well as afflictions
of his Royal Father King Charles the Martyr, who in the Halcion, and peaceable
days of the former part of his Reign did so much abhor the mode or manner of an
Arbitary Government, as he did imprison in the Tower of London that Monarch of
Letters and Learning, the great Seldom, together with Mr. Oliver St. John, for
but having in their custody or divulging a Manuscript or discourse written by
Sir Robert Dudley a titular Duke of Tuscany, and an English Fugitive of the way
and means how to make the King a great Revenue according to the manner of
Gabels or Taxes in Italy, borrowed by Mr. St. John out of Sr. Robert Cottons
famous library (where it had otherwise slept) and caused his Attorney General
to exhibit a Bill in the Star Chamber against the now Earl of Clare, the said
Mr. Seldom and Mr. St. John for the publishing of it, though but in Manuscript,
and was so far from any action, desire, or intention of a Tyrant, as when he
might like the Dairo or Emperor of Japan, have wallowed in riches and
pleasures, and as a Minotaur have fed upon the liberties of the people if he
would have but delivered up the Church of England and his subjects, and their
after generations as slaves to the Arbitrary will and Government of a
Rebellious part of the people calling themselves a Parliament, he did on the
contrary not only most constantly endure all the miseries, dangers, and
ignominies, which they could cast upon him but rather then he would betray or
give up their Religion, Laws, or liberties, laid down his life as a sacrifice
to preserve them, and hav^ng before his death established our excellent Laws of
Magna ^harta, and made them stronger and more binding then ever they were
before, by confirming them and other their liberties and customs under the name
and notion of their petition of Right, and at the signing or ratification
thereof, used a saying or sentence deserving to be written in Letters of Gold,
which he called his Maxim, and declared to be his own, That the peoples
liberty strengthens the Kings prerogative, Vide Petition of Right, and the
Kings answer thereunto in Anno 3 Car. primi.
and that the Kings prerogative is to defend the peoples liberty, did not for
all those unparalelled sufferings and great Misusage of his Father and himself
take any advantage of those that forfeited their interest in those excellent
laws and liberties, but pardoning all their transgressions, restored them to
all that they could but so much as pretend unto.

And notwithstanding that he and his Royal predecessors had quamplurimisdonis
and largitionibus, by their very many favors and bounties to such as deserved
well of the Commonwealth, and had been instrumental in the preservation, or
promoting the good of it, given away the most part of the Crown Lands, and many
of their Regalities does not make an Aera^ium or Treasury of money for himself,
or his own particular use out of his own revenues, separate from that of the
public, as Lewis the 12. of France did, but does with that very small part of
his Lands which remains, and his legal and undeniable rights and prerogatives
without any Taxes or Impositions laid upon the people, other then what is
assented unto by themselves, and their representatives in Parliament, bear and
support the burden and continual charges of the Government and [affaires
thereof.

Which should rouse and stir up the hearts and affections of his people of
England, and persuade them who have now, and had before the Taxes raised to
improve Rebellion, fewer Taxes and impositions laid upon them, then any Nation
within the walk or perambulation of the Sun, and are the freest and do enjoy
more liberties, immunities and privileges then any people of the world, not to
deny or withhold from him, and of his just Regalities rights and preheminences,
but think it to be more necessary for their good and well-being to permit him
to enjoy his Prae-emption and Pourveyance, or Compositions for them, then that
which many of our Acts of Parliament have done to enjoin the repairs of Havens
and Peers (as was in the last Session of Parliament for the Peer of Dover) or
of Sea-walls, and to raise money by a Tax for the doing of it, or to repair and
continue ancient houses, and as necessary as for Seamen to pay a certain rate
for lights or fires upon the Sea Coasts to prevent Shipwracks.

And not suffer our selves to be out done by the Heathen, and those that knew
not the living God, nor called upon his name, and the Persians who adoring the
Sun in stead of God the maker thereof, could in their Kings progress munera
offerre neque vilia vel exilia neque nimis praetiosa and magnifica, bring him
presents, neither precious nor contemptible from which etiam Agricola and
opifices, Workmen and Plowmen, were not ^reed from bringing Wine, Oxen and
Sheep and some other sorts of Provisions, as Cheese, Fruits, etc. and the first
fruits of what the earth brought forth, quae non Tributi sed doni loco
censebantur, which were not received or given as Tributes but as Oblations and
free gifts, Aelianus Hist. variar. lib. 1.
which custom, kindness, and duty from the people to their Prince, being so
innate and usual, made the poor Synetas, when unexpectedly he met with
Artaxerxes and his Train, Brissonius de regno Persiae lib. 1.
rather then fail of something to offer, of which he was then altogether
unprovided to hasten to the River and bring as much water as he could in the
palm of both his hands, hilari laetoque vultu faustis votis bonisque verbis
quantum potuit ornare, and with a cheerful countenance wishes, and prayers for
the health of the King, present it unto him.

Suetonius in Augusto Cassiodorus lib. 6 Epist. 7, and Rosinus de Antiquitat.
Roman. 54.
Or by the Romans, who amongst thirty thousand false Gods, not being able to
find the light and knowledge of the true God, did not grudg the charge of
costly sacrifices, ad aras and in Aedibus honoris and virtutis, in the Temples
of honor and virtue, could yearly throw money into the deep Lake or Gulf of
Curtius in Rome, pro voto and salute Imperatoris, as offerings for the health
and happiness of their Emperors, and all the City and Senate, Calendis Januarii
velut publico suo parenti Imperatori strenas largiebant, give new years gifts
to the Emperor as their public parent, and bring them into the Capitol though
the Emperor was absent, and make their Pensitationes or Compositions for
Pourveyance for their Emperors to be a Canon or rule unalterable.

Cause the moneys imposed by the Pro-consuls and Praetors by the direction of
the Comes Praetorii, Bullinger de Vectigalibus popul. Roman
to be brought into the Arcam sacrarum largitionum, Treasury for moneys for the
Emperors bounties or expenses, and could at the same time, notwithstanding a
plenty of Taxes, and the panem Gregalem, pitiful course bread allowed to the
common people, and Twenty thousand Talents, which make 60* Millions of German
money yearly imposed and gathered out of the Provinces, Lipsius lib. 2. ca. 1.
de magnitud. Imper. Roman.
as the Learned Lipsius has made up the account, willingly pay their frumentum
honorarium, Pourveyance or provisions of Corn to the Pro-consuls and Praetors
toward the maintenance of their families.

Or by our long ago old and worthy Ancestors, Tacitus de moribus Germanorum.
the stout hearted Germans, who as Tacitus says, did sua sponte and ex more
viritim confer principibus Armenta vel fruges quae pro honor accepta
necessitatibus subvenirent, man by man of their own accord did customarily
bring or send to their Princes Herds of Cattle, and some of the fruits of the
earth, as presents and oblations, which being taken for an honor done unto
them, did likewise much conduce to the defraying of their charges or
necessities.

Or by the Shunamitish woman, who could in honor and respect to Elisha the
Prophet, 2 Reg. cap. 4*
not only constrain him to eat bread, but advise here husband to make a little
Chamber in the Wall, and set for him there a bed and a Table, and a stool, and
a Candlestick, to the end that when he passed that way he might turn in
thither, or by the Jews, who being hard hearted, stubborn and stiffenecked
enough, did in their unexpected return from captivity, under the conduct of
Nehemiah, when they were so compassed about with dangers and enemies, as they
that wrought in rebuilding Jerusalem, and they which did build on the wall,
Nehem. 4.17.
and they that bare burdens with those that laded, every one with one of their
hands wrought in the work, and with the other held a weapon, and wanted not the
company of fears and poverty to attend them, think it notwithstanding to be a
part of their own preservation, to allow their Governor a fit and honorable
daily Pourveyance or provisions for his family and household.

Or by the Witch of Endor who made haste to kill her fat Calfe, 1. Sam. 25.
took flower and kneaded it, baked unleavened bread, and caused Saul and his
servants to eat.

Or the Egyptians who in their now. Hochpot or Gallimaufry of the Turkish,
Jewish, and Christian Religions, can with great costs and charges, public
Feastings and Triumphs, yearly welcome into their Country their Fertilizing
Nile.

Or the modern Germans who do yearly, besides their many other public Taxes
and Assessements, pay to the Emperor a stewer scholz schukung, being an
extraordinary Tribute in subsidium and laborum and pro regimine generali,
Besoldus de Aerario pub.
toward the defraying of the charges of the Government, and his expenses and
care therein.

Or the Rhodians who took so much care of the honor of their City or little
Commonwealth, as upon the fall by an Earthquake, Bodin lib. 6. d: Repub.
of their Colossus or huge and immense pillar or image of seventy cubits high
devoted to the Sun, spoiled many of their Ships in the Harbor, and wanting
money themselves, sent their Ambassadors to the Senate of Rome, and to diverse
Kings and Princes (who contributed largely) to entreat some money and aid to
help to set it up again.

Or by the Dutch who notwithstanding the great yearly stipends and allowance
made to their high deserving Princes of Orange or Stadtholders, In memoriali
stipendiorum sive honorariorum quae principes Auriaci perceperunt ab ordinibus,
etc
did redeem for them some of their Mortgaged Lands and Territories and within
the compass of seventy years last past, gave them in honorariis, gifts and
presents, to the value of many Millions of sterling money.

Or the Spaniards who could in the Reign of the Emperor Charles the fifth,
about the year one thousand five hundred and twenty, make it the request of the
Parliament or Iunta of the Kingdoms of Castile and Leon, that his Grandmother
Queen Isabells Royal house might be put into such order and estate as might
become her Royal person and the honor of those Kingdoms, Hist. of Spain
that her house be provided of all things befitting her dignity and consent,
that in his Majesty's progress lodging and linen should be allowed gratis for
those of his household and Court, so that he exceed not the term of six days,
which expired they should pay for their lodging according to the ordinary rate
and custom; likewise that the soldiers of his guard should have free Quarter
after the usual manner, an^ that for the lodging of seventy of his Officers,
the Cities, Towns and Villages should contribute without exemption by an
Assessement to be made for that purpose.

Or by the West Indians in Guaxara, who by order of the high Justice, do
deliver unto Friars travailing that way, if they have no money, Horses to ride
on, Gages Survey of the West Indies
or to carry their carriages or provision without money so that at their
departure they write it down in the Town book what they had spent, and not
abide above four and twenty hours in the Town, where by a contribution their
expenses are defrayed.

Or by the old Irish, one of which being a Tenant of Termonland or Land
belonging to the Church, and unwilling to change his old customs for new, said
to the Bishop of Dermot, of whom he held his Lands, non debet dominus mutare
censum antiquum sed si careat rebus necessariis vaccis pinguibus, Spelmans
glossar in vocibus Corba and Herenachii.
etc. debet ad nos mi^tere, Et nos debemus subministrare nam quaecunque nos
habemus Domini sunt and nos etiam ipsi illius sumus: My Lord ought not to
change his ancient Customs, Rents or services due out of the Land, but if he
wants necessary provisions for his house and family, as fat Cows, etc. we
ought to furnish them, for whatsoever we have are his, and we our selves are
the Lords.

Or by the modern Irish or inhabitants of Ireland, who notwithstanding the
Pourveyance or Compositions for Pourveyance and Prae-emption, allowed to the
Kings Lord Lieutenant of that kingdom, could since the abolition of that most
useful and necessary custom in England, offer (if Fame did not mistake her
self) an yearly supply of 3000. Irish Oxen or Cattle toward the support of the
King and his Family, and have besides in their Act of Parliament lately made
for the execution of his Majesty's Declaration for the setlement of that
kingdom, consented, That the Lord Chief Justice of his Majesty's Court of Kings
Bench, the Lord Chief Baron of his Majesty's Court of Exchequer, Vide Act of
Parliament and Declaration.
and the Master of the Rolls, or any other his Majesty's Officers of that
Kingdom for the time being, shall and may have and receive such Port Corn of
the Rectories, Impropriations, or Appropriate Tithes forfeited unto or vested
in his Majesty, his heirs and successors, which have been formerly paid or
reserved.

Or by the Scots, a people never as yet exceeding, or so much as keeping even
pace with their neighbors of England in civilities, kindness, and gratitudes,
who when their King Malcolme, who reigned in Scotland in Anno Dom. 1004. had
given and distributed all the Lands of the Realm of Scotland amongst his men,
Skenes Regia Majestas.
and reserved na thing, as the Act of Parliament of 22 Jac. 3. bears in
property to himself, but the Royal dignity, and the Mute hill in the Town of
Scone, could give and grant to him the ward and relief of the heir of ilke
Baron, quhan he sold happen to deceis for the Kings sustentation.

And did notwithstanding so well esteem and allow of those ancient rights of
Pourveyance or Compositions for them, as in the Reign of their King James the
4. in the year of our Lord 1489. The Lords spiritual and temporal, and uthers
his Leiges did declare in Parliament that it was the Kings property for the
honorable sustentation of his house according to his Estait and honor, 2
Parliament King James the fourth.
quhilk may not be failized without great derogation of his noble Estaite, and
that his true lieges should above all singular and particular profit desire to
prefer the noble Estaite of his Excellence, like as it was done in the time of
his may noble progenitors of good mind; And did therefore think it neidful
expedient and reasonable; And did statute and ordain that full derogation
cassation and annullation be maid of all Gifts, Donations, Infeftments, Fewes,
life Rents given by his Hieness to quhat sumever person or persons, sen the day
of his Coronation, swa that all Lands, Rents, Customs, Burrow, Mailles,
Ferme^, Martes, Mutton; Poultery, avarage, carriage and uther Duties that were
in the hands of his Progenitors, and Father, the day of his decease
notwithstanding quhat sumeuer assignation or gift be maid thereupon under the
Great Seal, Privy Seal or uthers be all utterly cassed and annulled, so that
the haill profits and Rents thereof, may cum to the King to the honorable
sustentation of his house and noble Estaite.

Or so much degenerate from the Britains our Ancestors and predecessors, who
were heretofore so glad of any occasions to express their love and honor of
their Princes as when they made their progress, or had any occasion to visit
any of their houses, they flung the doors off the Hinges, and gave them open
hearted, and free entertainment.

Nor deny those respects and duties to our Kings, which no other Nations do,
refuse to their Kings or Princes, which may make us to be an hissing and
reproach to other Nations, and by using our head so ill to be esteemed as the
(...) people without an head, or the Sciopedes, who are reported to have such
large feet as they can when they please cover their head with it, and never let
it be said, that when a factious and rebellious part of our people could in the
year 1656. suppose it to be their Interest to exchange with Cromwell their
Antichrist or Mahomet, their Religion, Laws and liberties for his Tyrannical
and Arbitrary will and pleasure, and petition him in their Conventicle or
pretended Assembly of Parliament that he would besides the remainder of the
Kings, Queens, and Princes Revenues, not disposed of (except Forests and
Chaces, and the Manors thereunto belonging) and of all the Lands of
Delinquents in the Counties of Dublin, Kildare, Clare and Katerlaugh, the
forfeited Lands in Scotland which were great and considerable, two parts of the
Recusants Lands in England not compounded for; and all Debts, Fines, Penalties,
Issues and casual profits belonging to the Keepers of the liberties of England,
so miscalled, which was by them and their fellow Usurpers settled upon him, and
was of it self a Revenue too great for all the Brewers of England, to accept of
ten hundred thousand pounds sterling per annum to be leavyed upon the people
with such other supplies as should be needful to be raised from time to time by
consent of that which they Nick named a Parliament, and three hundred thousand
pounds per annum to be raised for the charge of the Administration of Justice,
and support of Government, which he thinking not enough to serve his wicked
occasions, designs, or desires to ^lay or keep in exile the heir of the
Kingdoms, Vide his speech at a conference in April, 1657.
tells his dutiful Parliament at a conference in April 1657. that the charge of
the Government, would yearly amount unto ninteen hundred thousand pounds
sterling; and therefore though the war with Spain should cease, desired that
the thirteen hundred thousand pounds per annum, might have six hundred thousand
pounds per annum more added thereunto; and that that could be willingly
assented unto, and all the Loyal party enforced and driven to submit to those
and as many more burdens and payments as should be necessary to keep them and
their posterities in a perpetual slavery, we should when the Kings Revenue real
and casual much enlarged since his happy Restoration, and yet appearing not to
be enough to go through with his important and necessary occasions, and to
amount but to nine hundred and fifty thousand pounds per annum (his Revenue in
lands being also included) take it to be consistent with the duty of subjects
to put in dolio perforato, a vessel that leaks more then ordinary, or wants a
bottom, the remembrance of all the benefits and ^avors of our King and
Sovereign.

Who hears no body say or do as that great Commander, and as much a Gentleman
Mounsieur de la Noue did to his Grandfather the great Henry of France, who
finding himself much obliged unto him, when he was King of Navarre and full of
troubles, for raising and bringing to his assistance one hundred horse well
furnished at his own charges, and unfurnished with money to recompense him,
sent a grant by Letters Patents unto him and his heirs of certain Crown lands
lying near unto his estate, which the virtuous and generous la Noue not
thinking fit to receive, brought back again to the King with these words, Sire
ce m'est beauecoup d' honneur and de contentment de receuoir ces tesmoignages
de la bonne v^lonte de votre Majeste and je ne les refuserois pas si vos
affairs estoient en estat de fair tells liberalites Quand je vous verray
Sire au dessus vos Ennemis and possedant des biens proportionnees a la grandeur
de vostre courage and de vostre naissance je receuroy de bon Caeur vous
gratifications, Moises Amirault en la vie de la Noue.
pour cette heure si vous vouli^z recompencer de ceste facon tous ceux qui vous
serviront, vostre Majeste seroit incontinent ru^nee. Sir, These testimonies o^
your Majesty's good will toward me, and the honor which you have done me
therein, do very much content me, and I would not refuse them, if your
Majesty's affa^^s and estate were in a condition to afford such bounties, and
when I shall see your Majesty to have overcome your enemies and possessing, an
estate becoming your grandeur and birth, I shall be very willing to accept of
your gratifications, in the meantime if you shall go on in a way of
recompencing in this manner all those which shall serve you, your Majesty will
be suddenly ruined, and by no means would receive it, but all his life after
continued a great Warrior, and suffering most heroically in the troubles and
affairs of his Sovereign, lost his life in them.

Or imitate Jesurum, who like an Heifer waxing fat, kicked against the cause of
it, or do as the Athenians, taken by Philip King of Macedon, did at the Battle
of Chaero^ea, Plutarch. Apothegmes.
who could not remember his favors in releasing of them out of their Captivity,
unless they might have what they lost also restored unto them.

Or be guilty of a national Ingratitude, the sin whereof being (next to
blasphemy) the most ugly and horrid of all other sins which can be in a
particular man, was so abhorred by the heathen as Hippocratidas, did as some
wise Christians have since done, wish it were made a crime as punishable as
Felony.

Or so despoil our Land of its ancient virtue and love to their Princes, as to
have Nabalisme encouraged, and our Araunahs and Barzillai's to dye childless
and unimitated, or suffer our selves to be misled by any Temptations of
particular sparing or profits to do as some of the worser sort of the late
reforming Traitors did, pick out the choicest Jewels of the Crown, and put in
counterfeits in stead of them, or hearken to the Siren songs of those, who for
an advantage, which may before the account be cast up, prove a greater
disadvantage, will suppose it to be for the good of the Nation to disuse and
lay by those necessary duties, and grateful acknowledgements of Pourveyance and
Compositions for them to their King and Sovereign, which Renatus Choppinus, a
learned French Advocate in his Treatise of the Domaines and Revenu^ of France,
Choppinus de Domainio regum Franciae lib. 1.15.
styles Dominicum jus primitus sceptris addictum in necessarios Regiae mensae
Aulaeque sumptus and honorificum ad summi Imperii and inclitae decus Majestatis
conservandum, a part of the Kings Domaine belonging and annexed to the Royal
Scepter, and appropriate to the necessary uses and provisions of the Kings
Court and household for the honor and conservation of the Rights of Majesty.

And was with us in England in the Case of one Richards a Pourveyor, combining
with some Constables to charge the Country with more then the Pourveyance
amounted unto (for which he was grievously fined and punished) no longer ago
then in Michaelmas Term in 3 Jac. certified by all the Judges of England to be
a prerogative of the King at the common Law, Sir Francis Moors reports.
Richards Case, 764.
and that all the Statutes, which have been made, to correct abuses in
Pourveyance took not away Pourveyance but confirmed it, for qu^ tollit
iniquitatem firmat proprietatem and confirmat usum, the taking away of the
abuse confirms the Right, and when the Reputation and credit of a Town, and
City shall be so dear unto the Inhabitants, as they will to preserve ancient
Customs, supply the charges thereof with public contributions, as the Town of
Yarmouth does in entertainments frequently given to strangers of quality
coming thither, and the Town of Droitwich in Worcestershire, Smith de repub.
Anglican.
can allow the yearly profit of four of their Salt vats, or portions of Salt so
called for the like purpose, shall endeavor all they can to lessen that of the
Kings.

And the Gentry of Cheshire, who are above those of many other Counties well
known to preserve the ancient honor of the English Hospitalities, and are
accustomed to send provisions of meat one to another, to help to bear out the
charges of their entertainments, when any of their friends come unto them, will
not do well to murmur at so small an yearly contribution for the provision of
the Kings household, as ninety five pounds sixteen shillings eight pence per
annum, which is all was charged upon that County.

Nor can all the housekeepers of England, who do well understand that the
breeding and raising of their own victuals, and household provisions, by and out
of the profits of their Lands, are a great help to their housekeeping, and
makes it to be far cheaper and easy unto them, then to buy all that they spend
at the Markets, where every one does improve their gain and Commodities, and
put the loss and hardships upon the buyers, think it to be their duty to put a
necessity of these inconveniences upon the King, which they do all they can to
avoid themselves.

Or when the designs of profit, or hopes of reciprocations of courtesies one
from another, do ordinarily invite the people in their commerce or affairs one
with another, to a custom of some little favors or ease in their buyings and
bargains, as the Baker his one loaf of bread to the dozen; the Brewer a Barrel
of strong Beer at Christmas; the Tallow Chandler his Christmas Candle; the
London Draper his handful, or more then the yard called London measure, and
that of the hundred and ten pound to some hundred of things sold by weight, and
one hundred and twenty to others, and the Vintners sending some Hippocras at
Christmas to their yearly and constant Customers and the like, can suppose it
fit to save, such a petty contribution as the Kings Composition for
Pourveyance, which throughout England, do scarcely amount to so much as those
small Civilities, and being saved, will probably be spent in pride and
vanities, or for worse purposes.

Or to weaken the hand of our Moses, which they should rather help to sustain
and strengthen, and when all Nations rejoice in the power, might, and Majesty
of their Kings, shall make it their business to eclipse or diminish it by
cutting of our Sampsons locks, and that which should promote it.

For if the men of Israel are said to do well when they persuaded their King
Ahab not to hearken to the insolent demands of Benhadad the King of Syria to
deliver him his silver and gold, 1 Reg. 20.9.
etc. the people of England must needs be believed to do ill to deny the King
so necessary a part of his Regality which was more precious then gold and
silver, and put him to a treble or very much greater then formerly expenses in
his household provisions, when the mercies of God which have hitherto spared our
transgressions, accomplished our unhappy warfare, broken the staff of the
wicked, driven them far away that would have swallowed us up, and restored our
Princes and nobles, and mighty men, the men of war, the Judges and Prophets,
the prudent and the ancient, so as the light has shined upon them that dwelt
in the Land of the shadow of death, our Cities have not been laid waste, our
valleys have not perished, nor our habitations been made desolate, should put
us in mind to be more mindful of his Vicegerent and anointed, and remember how
much and how often he did threaten his judgments, and brought many upon his
chosen people of Israel for their ingratitude, and how much he was offended
with them for not showing kindness to the house of Gideon and Zerubbaal, Jud.
8.35.
according to all the goodness which he had showed to Israel, and that as
Bornitius says, Quicquid boni homo civisque habet and possidet quod vivit quod
libere vivit quod been quod beat omniumque rerum and bonorum usu and interdum
etiam copia ad voluptatem utitur fruitur totum hoc benificium Reipublicae
Civilique ordini acceptum est referendum, Bornitius lib. 5. cap. 1. Novel 8.
cap. 10. Sect. 2.
that whatsoever a subject enjoys or possesses, that he lives and lives
freely, well and happily, and abounds with pleasure and plenty are benefits
proceeding from the Commonwealth, and good order and government thereof.

And that omnis homo, every man Et res singulorum in Republica conservari
nequeant nisi conservetur res publica sive communis adeoque singuli sui causa
impendere videntur quicquid conferunt in publicum usum, every man's particular
estate, cannot be in any condition or certainty of safty, unless the
Commonwealth be preserved, so that whatsoever is laid out or expended for the
Commonwealth, is at the same time laid out and expended for every man's
particular, and that St. Chr^sostom was of the same opinion, when he said, In
Epist. ad Romans homil. 23.
that ab antiquis Temporibus communi omnium sententia principes a nobis
sustentari debere visum est ob id quod sua ipsorum negligentes communes res
curant universumque suum otium ad ea impendunt quibus non solum ipsi sed and
quae nostra sunt salvantur, That anciently and by the opinion of all men,
Princes ought to be supported by their subjects for that neglecting their
private affairs, they do employ all their power and care for the good of the
Commonwealth, whereby not only what is their own but that which is the
subjects are preserved.

That the King whose Royal progenitor King Edward the third could take such a
care of the honor and Pourveyance of the City of London (as to grant to the
Mayor of London, who by reason of the wars, had not for two years received that
great profit which he was wont to receive, Pat. 18 E. 3. part 2. m. 45
de mercatoribus Alienigenis illuc confluentibus, of Merchants strangers
resorting thithe^) one and twenty pounds per annum, de reddit: diversorum
messuagiorum and shoparum ibidem, out of the Rents of diverse Messuages and
Shops in London, in relevamine status sui, for the maintenance and support of
his estate, might have as much care taken (if duty and loyalty should not be as
they ought to be the greatest obligations) of his more ancient rights and
Pourveyance or Compositions for them.

And may consider that if such an inseparable right and concomitant of the
Crown of England should hereafter appear not to be alienable by any Act or
exchange betwixt the King and the people, they and their posterities will have
but an ill bargain of it, if the Pourveyance or Compositions for them, should
hereafter by any reason or necessity of State be resumed, and the Excise or
imagined satisfaction granted as a recompense for that, and the taking away of
the Tenure in Capite and by Knight service should be retained.

That it cannot be for the good or honor of the English Nation, that our King
should be reproached as some of a light headed and a light heeled neighbor
Nation observing his want of Pourveyance, have of late very falsely, that he had
not wherewithal to buy bread for his Family.

Or that other Nations should think our English so Fanatic, or improved to
such a madness by a late rebellion, as to embrace the opinion of Arise Evans,
that pitiful pretender to Prophecy and Revelations, who when the men of the
Coffee-house Assembly, or Rota mongers, were with their Quicksilver Brains;
together with some Rustic or Mechanic nodles framing a new Government or
moddel for a Kingdom torn in pieces, would likewise shoot his Bolt, and
publicly in Print advise that the best way would be to Elect some honest p^or
man of the Nation to be King only during his life, and allow him but one
hundred pounds per annum, which would be a means to keep off all Plots and
Treasons against him, or any ambitions, or designs to enjoy his Office, and
when he should die to chose another for the term of his life, and so
successively one after anoth^r upon the same, and no better terms or allowance.

Or that we have a mind to do by our gracious King as the Fifth-Monarchy-men,
do by their King Jesus, who notwithstanding all their pretenses of setting him
upon his Throne, are well enough content to gather what they can the while for
themselves, and Blaspheme, abuse, and crucify him in his members.

And that it will be better to subscribe to that which is amongst all civilized
Nations and people taken to be an Aphorism or Maxim irrefragrable, Galeot
Martius d' Doctrine. promise cap. 15.
that om^e imperium omnisque Reipublic^ forma validissimo munimento tuetur
Auctoritate eorum penes quos simmum Imperium existit, Boccalin. 2. Ragguagl. 15
and Boterus.
that all Kingdoms and Governments are most strongly fortified and defended by
the authority of those who do govern, that praeclara de Imperio existimatio sue
reputatio multa efficit and plura non nunquam quam vis and Arma, that the
esteem and reputation of a King or Governor, does many times bring greater
advantages then power and Armies, That it is patrimonium principis, as much to
a King or Prince as his Patrimony or inheritance, and certissima Imperii and
salutis publciae tutela, a most certain guard and defense of a King and his
people, which Saul well apprehended when upon the displeasure of Almighty God
threatened by Samuel, 1 Samuel 15.
he entreated him to honor him before the Elders of his people.

And that if a long duration of a right or custom, and quod semper quod ubique
and quod ab omnibus approbatum, that which is and has been always every where
and of all people, so much allowed and practiced, should not be enough (as it
has in many other things which have a lawful prescription) the reason right
use and necessity of it, and the avoiding of those many inconveniences which
will inevitable follow the disuse of it, may persuade us to recall again and
revive the duties of Prae-emption and Pourveyance or Compositions for them, and
to petition the King by our Representatives in Parliament as our forefathers
did in 14 R. 2. that the prerogative of him and his Crown may be kept, and that
all things done to the contrary may be redressed.

That so our King may as Solomon, who feasted all the people for seven days and
seven days, 1 Reg. 8.66.
even fourteen days, have wherewithal to maintain his own honor and the love
of his people, an^ give portions of meat, as the Prophet Daniel and others had
in the house of Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon, Dan. 1.5.
that the people may with gladness and rejoycings enter into the Kings Palaces
and the King not doubt of their affections, though the waters should roar and
be troubled, and the mountains shake with the swellings thereof, that his love
unto them may from his throne exhale and attract theirs and distill it down
again upon them, as the rain upon the grass or showers that water the earth,
and that our England, which was heretofore the happiest Nation that ever the
Sun beheld in his journeys, may be once again the land of love and happiness,
and that the people may be as busy in their gratitudes to their Prince, as the
Rivers are in the tender and payment of their Tributes to the Ocean.

Moribus antiquis stent res Britanna viresque. FINIS.
ERRATA, OR FAVLTS escaped in the Printing.
PAge 12. line 11. intersere and took only. p. 13. l. 27. insert enabled. p.
15. l. 10. dele had, and besides insert with, and l. 11. had. p. 26. l. 27.
intersere middle. p. 27. l. 19. dele and. p. 30. l. 23. dele for a present. p.
30. l. 19. dele Sir. p. 42. l. 9. dele and Shoes. p. 50. l. 8. dele i. in
deferiendum. p. 51. l. 22. intersere not only. p. 62. l. 30. dele and. p. 68.
l. 30. dele and, and intersere and. p. 71. l. 9. intersere of. p. 79. l. 28.
dele thereupon. p. 98. l. 8. intersere to. p. 100. l. 30. dele and. p. 107. l.
26. dele about. p. 81. l. 7. for eighteenth read fourth. p. 113. l. 13.
intersere de offendi quietos, and dele de quietis esse. p. 131. l. 23.17. pro
20. p. 133. l. 18. intersere them. p. 139. l. 3. intersere if. p. 142. l. 1.
intersere all. p. 153. l. 3. dele which. p. 154. l. 9. dele and them, and
intersere as. p. 170. l. 7. dele which, intersere 15. and l. 25. dele pounds
and intersere marks. p. 195. l. 22. dele and. p. 196. l. 26. dele 3. p. 198. l.
16. dele Fisher and read Flesher. p. 231. l. 4. dele and. p. 236. l. 8. read
delirium. p. 261. l. 12. dele Ministry, intersere Country. p. 264. l. penul^
dele of. p. 266. l 6. dele Nobility and. p. 280. l. ult dele and, read to him
who. p. 281. l. 21. dele all or. p. 302. l. 1. read where he took all, and dele
that notwithstanding. p. 337. l. 1. intersere being and but. p. 339. l. 14.
dele or. p. 365. l. 18. intersere and, and l. 19. dele eighteen pence for a
hen. p. 374. l. 2. read so, and ibidem l. 28. read keep. p. 377. l. 10. dele
for, and read from. p. 391. l. 19. read still. p. 450. l. 30. dele no^. p. 455.
l. 14. read Almoxariffadgos. p. 456. l. 11. dele quents. p. 459. l. 7 put in
the m^rgent France. p. 467. l. 26. read panes. p. 468. l. 18. read out of
Brescia* p. 480. l. 27. intersere which, and 29. read Ambassadors.


