AN ELEGY OFFERED UP TO THE Memory of his Excellency ROBERT Earl of Essex
and Ewe, Viscount Hereford, Lord Ferrers of Chartley, Bourchier and Lovaine,
late GENERAL of the PARLIAMENTS Forces.
THE MOST NOBLE ROBERT EARL OF ESSEX AND LO: GEN: OF THE FORCES FOR K: and
PARL:



AS some tall Oak against whom the envious Wind
Often in impetuous Hurricans combined
Does stand unmoved, although assaild by all
The angry Gales, yet of it self does fall
When there is scarce Breath enough in the sullen Air
To ravell or disturb a Virgins Hair:
So this brave Lord who like a swelling Rock
At Keynton, Newbury, had stood the Shock
Of death, unmoved, where he himself had flung
Amidst his Troops with all his Terrors Hung
This death at last did like a drousie sleep
Over his becalmed unguarded Senses creep.
What Springs of Tears shall we disburse? what Terse
Curld Metaphors now stick upon his Hearse?
Tears are but dull and, common rights they are
The stipend of each vulgar Sepulcher
Here Seas themselves should be lav'd out, and streams
Be licked up by the Sun's refulgent Beams
That in the day's great Eye there might appear
For this great Ruin too, a Funeral Tear
Whole Cataracts should be exhald, and then
Distilled in liquid Obsequies again,
Such shoures are most proportioned to his Fate
And to his loss such Tears Commensurate,
What Shrine or Trophies shall our lavish Art
As Tribute to his Ashes now impart?
What Dole of Obelisqu's shall we entrust
To stand as Alphabets unto his Dust?
Alas (Great Lord) what Urne is fit for thee?
Who to thy self art Urne and Elegy
And for Supporters we our selves become
Congealed with Sighs Supporters to his Tomb.
What Gummes or Spices shall we now prepare
TO enshrine his Dust: since they but fluid are
And obvious to Decay so soon, they will be
Transformed themselves into more Dust then He,
No, He has left his Name, which shall embalme
His Earth, and all Corruption so becalme
This when, his Sear-cloath is Dissolved and Spent,
Shall to it self be its own Monument;
What Tapers now shall we afford his Shrine?
About the Chaos of his Dust to shine
That Fire which glowed within his Honored Breast
And is locked up now in his Marble Chest
Shall fill their Room, and from the gloomy Night
Of his dark Vault, Dart a perpetual Light.
What Heaps of Palm and Laurel shall we lay
As Chaplets dropped upon his livelesse Clay?
No let us rather Sprigs of Olives strew
Upon his Monument, which there will grow,
And by our Tears manured shall so increase
It shall be styled by all the Arc of Peace.
How Crippled now Nature does seem, her Frame
Is disproportioned and her Junctures lame
Since from her Bulk this mighty Limb is lop'd;
And as when Flowers by early Fate are crop'd
From off their Stalk the mourning Stem appears
As if it wept their loss bathed ore with Tears:
So now when He that seemed even to Cement
Nature's vast Fabric, from her Building's rent
By Death's unthrifty Hand, the whole Compact
By this one Blow is so resolved and slack'd
It Is feared 'twill languish into Dust, and all
The heap of Men entomb too in its fall,
For at that Breach thy Soul flew out at, we
Our selves (Great Lord) must bleed to Death with Thee
Since then (Fair Soul) thou by thy Fate do gain
Triumphs and Palms, and we alone sustain
The Loss, and Death attempting to benight
With his blind Clouds the Glory of thy Light
With which so long amidst our Orb you shone
Has fixed thee now a Constellation
In Heaven above, look from thy brighter Sphere
On us, who like dull Ants lie grovelling here
Maimed by thy Death, and if lean Envy dare
To rake or paddle in thy Sepulcher
May she grope out her way to that, and find
Thou with thy Spotless Beams did strike her Blind;
Enjoy thy Crown of Glory then, and be
As from all Guilt, so from all Envy free,
And if in after ages, any Stone
Shall be by bold Detractors at thee thrown
It Will turn a precious one, and so combine
To make this Crown of Glory brighter shine.
Thomas Philipot.

LONDON, Printed for William Ley at his Shop in Paul's Chain.


