LIGEANCIA LUGENS, OR LOYALTY LAMENTING

The many great Mischiefs and Inconveniences which will fatally and inevitably
follow the taking away of the Royal Pourveyances, and Tenures in Capite and by
Knight Service, which being ancient and long before the CONQUEST, were not
then, or are now any Slavery, Public or General Grievance.

With some Expedients humbly offered for the prevention thereof.

By Fabian Philipps.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Andrew Crook, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Green-Dragon in St Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

Ligeancia Lugens, OR Loyalty Lamenting: The many great mischiefs and
Inconveniences which will fatally and inevitably follow the taking away of
Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, which being Ancient and long before
the Conquest, were not then or are now any Slavery Public or General
Grievance.
THe King will upon occasion of War want in Capite.

Their Homage, which is the Seminary and Root

The Education of the Heirs of persons disaffected in Capite, when they shall
be in ward or minority.

His Tenants will be the more enabled to alienate

Provision for maintenance, education and portions

Finding of Offices after the death of the Ancestors,

Genealogies and Pedigrees darkened, and Descents

Contention concerning the rights of Guardianship

The Mothers of Fatherless Children in their minority

Or make them to be a prey to the kindred of

Or to Trustees, Executors, or Administrators, Guardianships.

There will not be so good a means as formerly

Nor for preventing of the Heirs of Tenants in Capite to be disinherited by
Heirs by second Ven^ers, forged Conveyances or Wills, frewardness of an aged
Father or cunning of a Stepmother.

In Socage and that ignoble or Plow-Tenure there in Capite and by
Knight Service.

All the Ancient Baronies which are annexed Earldomes and Baronies, and the
newly created Baronies being by Law and the signification of the words, a
Complexum of honorary possessions belonging to Earls and Barons, as well as of
the honor and title residing in their persons, cannot now be properly called
Baronies, and he that was a Baron before will in a strict interpretation of the
Feudal Laws, from whence they had their beginning, be no more nor no better
then a Soke-man.

Alter and disparage the fundamental and ancient Socage, which no Baronies in
the Christian World ever did, or can be found to do.

The ancient Earls and Barons who hold as in Capite and per Baroniam, as the
Earl of Arundell, who holds by the Service of Eighty four Knights Fees, and
the Earl of Oxford by thirty, and many others may be greatly prejudiced.

The Nobility and Gentry of England will mesne Tenures by Knight Service be
disabled to serve their Prince as formerly, or bring any men into the Field.

The Subjection and Rights of the Bishop of Man, who holds immediately of the
Earl of Derby, will be taken away.

The profits of the Kings Annum* Diem and Vastum will be lost or greatly
disturbed, and his and the Nobilities and Gentries Escheates, which as to a
third part of that which is holden in Capite or Knight Service could not before
have been conveyed away, will be in no better condition.

Our Original Magna Charta (which is holden in Capite) and all the
Confirmations of the English Liberties, Franchises of the City of London, and
many other Cities and Boroughs which before 9 H. 3. did use to send Burgesses
to Parliament will be enervated.

Destroy or weaken the ancient Charters of London, for what (except their Court
of Wards or Orphans) concerns their Customs and Husting Courts.

Put into fresh disputes the question of Precedence England and Spain, which
belongs to England, in regard it holds of none but God, and has Scotland,
Ireland, and the Isle of Man holding in Capite of it.

Not well agree with the honor of England Garnesey and Jersey, which are a
part of Normandy, to hold of the King by Feif roturier, or the Principality of
Wales and the Isles of Wight and Man to hold in Socage.

Damnifie all the Nobility and Gentry in their Magna Charta, and a greater then
that, twice written by the finger of God himself, do without a crime forfeiting
it, or a just consideration or recompense for it, (which a relaxation of their
own Tenures and Services will not amount unto) forbid to be taken away.

Prejudice the Families of Cornwall, Hilton and Venables, who are called
Barons, as holding per Baroniam, though not sitting in Parliament.

Bring a dis-repute upon the Esquires and Gentry of England, whose original was
from Tenures by Knight Service.

Take away a great part of the root and foundation of the Equestris Ordo which
was derived out of Tenures in Capite.

Blast and enervate the degree of Baronets.

Take away the cause of the eminent degree of Banneretts.

Make our heretofore famous Nation in Feats of Agreste genus hominum, or a race
of Rusticks like the Arcadians.

Take away or weaken all the Manors and Court Barons in England, which were
derived or had their original from Tenures in Capite.

Turn Tenures in Capite, which from the Duty of Homage and acknowledgment of
Sovereignty a Latere, and no more then what one man holding by a Lease for
years is by Law bound to do to another.

Release the aid of the Maritime Counties and Ports in case of War and
Invasion.

Extinguish the Duties which every Hundred upon the Sea Coasts do owe in that
which which was called

Discharge the Mises or Payments which in Wales and Cheshire are due to the
Kings of England at their

Indamage the King in his other R^galities, as in Cinque Ports, finding fifty
ships upon occasion of War, and many reservations of Honor and profit upon
Tenures in Capite, Knight Service, and Socage in Capite, which if revived and
well looked after would almost raise an Army and furnish a great part of the
Provisions thereof.

The King upon occasion of War shall never be Standard, but will be left to
hire and provide an Army out of the Rascal^ity, faithless, unobliged, rude,
deboisht, necessitous, and common sort of people.

If a War should break forth before a Rent-day

May have his Money and his Rents seized, as Magazines and Rents were in the
beginning of the late Wars.

Can have no manner of assurance in a Sedition

Destroy the hopes of the Bishops ever sitting again

Disable the King and his Successors from recovering

Shake or dislocate, if not take away that great Baronage and Peerage of
England, and their Rights of Sitting in the House of Peers in Parliament, who
sit there as Tenants in Capite and per Baroniam, and are summoned thither in
fide and homagio, in the faith and homage by which they are obliged, which
Proviso's not always arriving to their ends or intentions, or a Saving of the
Rights of Peerage, of Sitting in the House of Peers in Parliament, will not be
able to insure or give them a certainty to be left in as good a condition as
they were before.

Disfranchise the Counties Palatine of Lancaster, Chester, Durham, and the Isle
of Ely, which relate unto Palaces of Kings, (not Plows,) and are no where in
the Christian world to be found holden by any other Tenure then in Capite.

Make our Nobility and Gentry to hold their Roturiers or Paysants of France do
theirs; and in Socage, which, as Sir Henry Spelman says, Ignobilibus and
rusticis competit Spelmans Glossar. 261.
nullo feudali privilegio ornatum and feudi nomen sub recenti seculo perperam
and abusu rerum auspicatum; belongs only to rusticks and ignoble men, and being
not entitled to any feudal privilege has of late times improperly and by
abuse gained the name of Fee.

Loosen the foundation of such ancient Earldoms

Hazard the avitas consuetudines, ancient Rights in Capite and by
Knight Service.

Take away, or lessen, as to the future, the fame English Nation, which in
feats of Chivalrie (not Socagerie) extended as far as the Roman Eagles ever
flew, and had no other bounds then the utmost parts of the earth.

Render them in Tenure, and that which at first

Will not be consistent with the honor of England, Capite and by
Knight Service retained in Ireland, and Scotland, and not in England; and to
lessen the honor and strength of the English Nobility and Gentry in England,
by reducing their mesne Tenures into free and common Socage, whilst the better
and more Noble Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service shall be enjoyed in
those inferior and dependent Kingdoms.

Or if taken away in Ireland, and reduced into free Socage, will in all
probability meet with as many inconveniences as the like may do in England, and
lose the Kings of England that Service which by reason of the Tenures in Capite
was always in a readiness, and made use of by their Progenitors upon all
occasions of War and necessity, as well in England as Ireland.

And if the like shall be done in Scotland, where Rhodomontading, where they
are not resisted, are best if not only to be Governed by their dependencies
upon their Superiors and Benefactors, and holding their Lands by Military and
Knight Service, (as that Kingdom it self does in Capite of England, as it was
stoutly asserted by our King EDWARD the First and His Baronage of England;)
there will happen such a dissolution or distemper of that body politic as
will exceed all or any imagination before hand, and the inferior sort of people
will by such an alteration of their Tenures be like hunger bitten Bears, let
loose to as bad if not a worse kind of levelling then our Phanaticks would not
long ago have cut out for the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
now happily conjoined under their rightful King and Sovereign.

Will greatly derogate from the honor of the English Christendom do use, and
will be as inconsistent with the honor of England as it would be to have their
Kings, in a complaisance of a troublesome and unquiet part of the people, not
to be Crowned nor Anointed, not to use a Scepter, or have a sword born before
Them, not to make Knights, or not to do it in the ancient and usual manner,
which the Kings of other Nations and Kingdoms have ever done and enjoyed; or to
have the Earls of England (as if they were only Comites Parochiales, Governors
of Villages, mentioned by Goldastus, or Dijck Graven; or men of small honor in
Holland, appointed to look to their Sea-banks) not to wear their Circulos
Aureos, Coronets of Gold.

Will not accord well with the Rules of Justice to take away Knights Fees or
Tenures by Knight Service

But break the Public Faith and Contracts of those that hold of the King or
them.

The recompense of 150000 l. per Annum, will not be adequate to the loss of the
Tenures in Capite England it self can balance; and which the King of France, or
the King of Spain, in their several Dominions, would not for an yearly Revenue
of many hundred thousand pounds part with, but would think it no bad bargain to
be re purchased after the same or a greater rate.

It will be as unsafe as unusual, to turn into a Rent that which was intended
for the defense of the Kingdom.

And to charge all men's Lands with recompense to be made for it, will be
against Justice, Equity, and

Or if by Excise upon Ale and Beer, will do the like, and lay the burden of the
rich upon the poor, and extend Capite as all the Colleges in the Universities,
and Hospitals of England are, whose expenses will be also enlarged by it.

Will be a seminary and complication of Grievances.

May be afterward legally taken away by Petitions to Parliaments, or illegally
(which God forbid,) by an Insurrection or Mutiny of the common people as in
Naples, France, etc.

Will not be an honorable Revenue, nor ever

The people will be double charged by the Brewers l. per Annum, for 150000 l.
per Annum.

And whether Excise, or not Excise, the King, St John argued in the case of
Ship money, he had the Tenures in Capite allowed for the defense of the
Kingdom.

Or the miseries of an actual War shall overwhelm or oppress Him, shall be
told as His Royal Father was by that part of the Parliament which sat at
Westminster in 1642. That He ought not to put in execution His Commissions of
Array, because His Tenures in Capite were for the defense of the Kingdom.

And that by several Statutes and Acts of Parliament in the Reign of King E. 3.
it shall be said that he is restrained not to Impressed Hoblers, which were as
our Dragoons, or Archers, or Footmen, who are thereby not to go out of their
Counties but in case of necessity and coming in of Foreign enemies.

Or shall have need to succor His Allies, make a diversive War, or embroyl an
Enemy, shall be answered, That they are quit of all Services but the holding
their Lands of Him, by doing of fealty, which they will be apt to interpret
according to their Interest, the humor of their faction or party, or as their
designs or better hopes in a change shall direct them.

Must be enforced for the safety of His people, if the Tenures shall be taken
away, to raise and maintain a standing Army.

And a standing Army, and standing Assesments Capite have lately been supposed
to be to any in particular.

It will derogate from the honor of the King, Pater Patriae, not to be trusted
with the protection of Orphans, so much as the Dutch, who have a Court of
Orphans.

Or as the City of London, who by ancient Custom have an absolute Court of
Wards, called a Court of Orphans, which may by overthrowing the Kings Court of
Wards come under the like fortune.

Be a means to defraud Creditors and Purchasers, who cannot for want of Offices
or Inquisitions found Capite and by Knight Service, so well as formerly know
how the Debtors Lands are settled, or what is in fee simple to charge the Heir.

Be against the peoples Oaths of Supremacy to desire the diminishing or taking
away the Kings Rights or Jurisdiction.

Take away His Power and Means of protecting in Capite have like Sea walls and
banks, proved not strong enough to withstand and keep out the Floods of
Sedition, it cannot now surely be for the good and safety of the people either
to weaken as much as may be, the strength which was before in them, or to have
none at all.

Draw a Curse upon the Posterities of those that

Make the common people insolent, and teach

And by such an easiness of granting away so great Norman slaveries, and of
enforcing their Lords to take two years purchase for them; and that Landlords
might be st^nted and ordered to take what the factiously well-affected Tenants
should call reasonable in the leasing and renting of their Lands.

Carry along with it and abolish the Royal Pourveyances, 1 Reg. 10. 24, 25. 2
Reg 4. 21, 22, 23. Nchem. 5. 18. Sigonius de Repub. Athen. lib. 4. 540. and
541. Martin: Cromerus, lib. 2. de Regno Poloniae. Bignonius in notis ad lib. 1.
Marculfi 465. Rosinus de Antiquitat Romans lib. 7. 14. 24. lib. 10. cap. 22. LL
Wisigoth. lib. 9. tit. 6. LL Ripuar. tit. 65. Cujacius tit. 48. ad 10. cod.
Justinian 14 29 Tacitus in vita Agricolae. Ridley's View of the Civil and
Ecclesiastical Law. 9 H. 3. cap. 21.
Israel, were never in that glorious and ever commended Reign of King Solomon,
nor in that long after pious order and Government of the good Nehemiah, found
to be a grievance, nor taken to be so amongst the Greeks, Poles, Romans,
ancient Britains, Franks, and Germans, those great Assertors of Liberties, or
the most of the Nations of Europe, (not cast unhappily into Commonwealths,
where they only dream of freedom, but cannot find it;) but were used in the
West Indies long before the Spanish courtesies and care of their conversion, had
engrossed their gold, destroyed the most of their Natives, and made the relidue
their slaves; And in China, and most parts of the habitable World.

And being a Jus Gentium, and a part of right Reason so universally allowed and
practiced, were as Oblations or recompenses for tolls or pre-emption, or for
some other confiderations, cheerfully paid to our Kings of England, and so
butted and bounded with good Laws, and so easy, as the Tenants did neither
care to provide against it in their Leases, or reckon to their Landlords those
little and seldom payments and charges which were occasioned by them.

And by throwing the Purveyance into the same Bill or intended Act of
Parliament, for taking away the Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, has
since caused the King to pay three times or more then formerly he did, as 12d
per pound for Butter, where it was before but three pence; twelve shillings a
hundred for Eggs, where it was before but three shillings; and eighteen pence a
mile for a Cart to carry his goods or provision, when it was before but two
pence a mile in Summer, and six pence in winter; twelve pounds for a Beef or an
Ox, which before was willingly and without any oppression of the Counties,
served in at fifty shillings.

Render the One hundred and fifty thousand pounds per Annum of Excise*money for
the intended recompense for the profit and honor of his Tenures, Court of
Wards, and Pourveyance, to be no more (if it could clearly come up to that
sum) then Thirty seven thousand and five hundred pounds, but if with
allowances and charges in the collecting, and arrears and bad payments, or
otherwise, it should amount (as it is likely) to no more then One hundred
thousand pounds per Annum, the clear of that to the King, three parts in four
of his prizes enhaunced being deducted, is like to be but Twenty and five
thousand pounds per Annum.

Which when the Excise (wherein the King himself shall now pay a Tax or Excise
for his Beer and Ale) and other Assessments shall every day more and more make
dear the Markets, and that the people shall, to make themselves more then
savers, stretch the price of their Commodities, and make an addition to the
former years rates and demands, for all sorts of victuals and provision of
livelihood, or that the King or His Pourveyors shall over and above that be,
for want of ready money, enforced to pay a treble or more interest for buying
upon Time or days of payment; will also within the compass of seven years
vanish into a Cipher.

And if the Excise, for the burden and grievance thereof, should also be taken
away, the King having no provision made in the Act for taking away his Tenures
in Capite and by Knight Service and of his Pourveyance, (^or the intended
recompense of that part of the Excise therein mentioned) to resort back again
in such a case to the former profit of his Tenures and ease of Pourveyance.

Will then not only have given away those two great Flowers of His Crown for
nothing, but be as much a looser in what he shall over and above pay for his
household provision, Cart taking, and other necessaries, as he shall pay a
greater rate then his former pourveyances came unto, which in 200000 l. per
ann. which may well be conjectured to be the least which will be expended in
that kind) will, considering three parts in four of the prizes enhanced,
amount to no less a detriment then one hundred seventy five thousand pounds per
Annum, besides what must be added to that loss for what shall be paid more then
formerly for Timber and materials for the Navy, and repair of the Kings Houses,
Castles and Forts, and by the peoples every year more and more raising their
priaees upon him.

And then the bargain or exchange betwixt the King and the people for the
Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, and his Pourveyances, besides the
giving away so great a part of his Prerogative and Sovereignty will arrive to
no more then this. The King shall remit the yearly revenue of Eighty eight
thousand and seventy pounds per Annum, (defalcations for exhibitions and
allowances for Fees, Diet, and other necessaries and charges first deducted)
which was made by the Court of Wards in the year 1640, besides Thirteen
thousand two hundred eighty eight pounds profit for those kind of Tenures
which in that year was collected and brought into the Exchequer, which will
make a Total of One hundred one thousand three hundred fifty eight pounds per
Annum.

Or if but Eighty one thousand two hundred eighty eight pounds, all charges
cleared and deducted, as it came unto in Anno 1637. which was 13o Car. primi,
both which was easily paid by the Nobility, Gentry, and richest and most able
part of the people, for or in respect of their Lands holden in Capite, which
were never purchased but frankly given for their Service, Homage, and incidents
thereunto apperteining.

And release the ease and benefit of his Pourveyances, which did not in all the
Fifty two Counties of England and Wales, by the estimate of what was allowed
toward it in Kent, being thereby charged only with Twelve hundred pounds per
Annum, or thereabouts, put the people of England to above Forty thousand pounds
per Annum charges; which totalled and summed up together with the profits of
the Tenures in Capite in An. 1640. being 16o Car. will make One hundred
forty*one thousand three hundred pounds, or One hundred and twenty thousand two
hundred eighty eight pounds, all necessary charges satisfied as it was in 13o
Car. primi.

Shall give away that One hundred forty one thousand three hundred pounds, or
One hundred and twenty thousand two hundred and eighty pounds per Annum, and
loose One hundred and fifty thousand pounds per Annum in the buying of his
Household provisions (besides what more shall be put upon him by a further
enhaunce of prizes) for to gain One hundred thousand pounds for that moiety of
the Excise of Ale and Beer, to be paid out of the sighs, daily complaints and
lamentations of the poorest sort of the subjects, and the discontents and
mournings of nineteen parts in twenty of all the people, who by the payment of
that Excise will be made to bear the burdens of others, to acquit less then a
twentieth part of them, of those no ruining payments not often happening to be
charged upon them by reason of those kind of Tenures; or for nothing, if that
Excise should be taken away.

Prejudice the King in his Honor (which Saul, Samuel not to dishonor him before
the people, understood to be of some concernment) and his Estate, in not
affording his Pourveyors a pre-emption in the buying provision for his Royal
Family, Tables and Attendants, which all the Acts of Parliament made concerning
the Regulating of Pourveyances never denied. The Princes of Germany are allowed
in their smaller Dominions, the Caterers of every Nobleman frequenting the
Markets, the servants of every Lord of a Manor in England do enjoy, and the
common civilities of mankind, and but ordinary respect of inferiors to their
superiors do easily persuade.

Will not agree or keep company with that honor nor with the gratitude of those
who often enough come with their Buckets to the Well or Fountains or his mercy,
or are not seldom craving and obtaining favors of him, to refuse him those
small Retorns or Acknowledgments for his bounties, nor prudence to show him the
way to be selfish or sparing in his kindeness to them.

Shame our promises and protestations made unto sins and madness of a factious
part of his subjects had cast him, of sacrificing their lives, fortunes and
estates, and all that they had for him, that had rescued them from an utter
destruction; and yet when he had told them of his wants, and how much it
troubled him to see his people to come as they did flocking to see him at
Whitehall, that he had not wherewithal to entertain them or make them eat,
make such have to take away his ancient Rights of Pourveyance, or daily and
necessary support of Him, his Queen, Children and Servants, and for
entertainment of Ambassadors of Foreign Princes which for three days until
they have their Audience, which is so sumptuous and extraordinary as it costs
him at the least three or four hundred pounds a day.

When as the ill-nurtured and unmannerly Dutch (gnawing a pickled Herring and
an Onion in one hand and a piece of ruggen bread in the other) can in their
slovenly and small moralities to their Prince of Orange allow him and his Court
(which after the griping and high rate of their Excise goes a good part of the
way to as much as what the King saved by his Pourveyances) a freedom from
payment of Excise upon all Provisions, and the like to the Queen of Bohemia,
and Ambassadors of Foreign Princes all the year, and to their Army and every
common Soldier when they are in the field or leaguer or upon a march, to the
Ships of Merchants as well as those of War in their Victualling, and to the
English Company of Merchants of the Staple there residing, and deny not the
Universitie of Leyden a freedom of having their provision of Wine and Beer laid
in Excise-free.

When the Lord Mayor of London has an allowance or tolls out of Oats and
Sea-Coals which are brought to be sold to London of Stallage and Pickage in the
Markets and Faires, out of Cattle brought to be sold in Smith-field, and many
other things toward the charge of his extraordinary Housekeeping in the Year
or Time of his Majorality, which the simplest and poorest Citizen never
grumbles at, but acknowledges it to be for the honor of their City, has every
Company or Corporation of Trades bringing him forty shillings in retribution of
a Dinner and a cheap Silver Spoon, every Citizen contributing to the charge of
Triumphal Arches in entertainment of their Prince upon extraordinary occasions,
every Company bearing the charge of the Livery men and chief of their Company
in their Pageants on the Lord Mayors days, and every little Borough-Town in the
Country can be well content to help one another in the charges which are put
upon it when the King shall in his Progress receive any entertainment from them.

Such a great provision as is necessarily to be made and Attendants, will, when
much of his Provision shall not be sent (as formerly to his Court which did
prevent it) sweep and take away the best sorts of Provision from the Markets,
and as experience has already told us, make scarce and dear all that can be
brought to the Market near the Kings residence or his occasions.

Teach the people, whose measure and rule of Subsidies or Assessments shall
come to, and render him in no better a case or condition (as to prices or good
husbandry) in buying his necessary provision (as they say) by the penny, then a
Landlord that lets a Farm of 50l. per Ann. to his Tenant, and takes his rent in
Wheat, Malt, Oats, Wood, Beef, Mutton, Veal and Poultry, at such rates as he
shall exact of him.

Every Clown or Carter, every man's servant or Kitching-maid shall in matters of
Market and Provision be at liberty to buy a Salmon, Phesants, Partridges, or
Bustards, and the like, (fitter for the King then their Masters) out of his
Pourveyors hands, and do by him as a Trim over-monied Citizens wife did by a
Gorget of 60l. price, (now too low a price for those kind of Gentlewomen)
which she bought in Anno 1641. in the beginning of our pretended religious but
irreligious War out of the Queens hand, and being afterward sent to with a
proffer of some advantage, could find neither manners nor duty to persuade her
to part with it.

And the e will be then but few Araunahs, who David and his Servants came to
buy his 2 Reg. 24. v. 20. and 22.
Threshing-floor for to build an Altar, bowed himself before the King on his
face upon the ground, and answered, Let my Lord the King take and offer up what
seems good unto him; Behold, here be Oxen for burnt-sacrifice.

But every Nabal will be ready to answer our David and his Pourveyors or
Servants, Who is David, and who is the son of Jesse? or as one of that kindred
1 Samuel 25. 10.
did lately to the Kings Harbinger a: Windsor at the solemnities of the Feast
of the Garter, when he could say the King had quitted his Tenures and
Pourveyance, and was now no more to him then another man, he was at liberty to
let his Lodgings to any one would give him sixpence more; though the poor
Persian (so much celebrated in History) who rather then he would offer nothing
to his Prince in his Progress by his Cottage, could run to the next water and
bring as much of it as he could carry in hish and for a present, would, if he
were now alive, in a horror and detestation of so great a bestiality and such a
Monstrum horrendum, take his heels and run quite away from such an ingratitude
or inhumanity.

Disable the Brewers, who complaining heavily of Tormenters (as they call them)
will by the mysteries of their Trade lay the burden as much as they can upon
their customers, and will not be able to give as much as formerly to the
Maltsters, nor the Maltsters to those that sell the Barley, but all of them
shifting of the burden one upon another will be a cause of the enhancing of the
rates of Beer and Ale, vitiating or making of it worse, and by false Gaugings,
Expilations and Tricks of Excise men lesser measures used by the Retailers, and
every ones laboring to ease themselves as much as they can, and using too many
devices to make themselves savers, or to increase their gain by the pretenses
of it, will not fail to bring a huge trouble, much damage, and many
inconveniences upon the people, and the poorer part of them.

Will very much in the matter of Pourveyances Oliver and his Conventions were
content not to molest) now thrown into that bargain, diminish the magnificence
and grandeur of the Kings hospitality, which the surplusage of his Tables,
plenty in his Kitchings and Cellars, and every where else to be found in all
the places and offices of his Court, did not only cause an admiration to
strangers, but yield a comfort and relief to many sorts of
neighbor-inhabitants, streets and villages adjacent, and a great support of the
poor, who in the Reign of King Henry the Third, were (besides the daily crumms,
fragments, and relics of his household provision) not infrequently fed and
Treated by that King; who, as our public Records can tell us, did several
times send out Warrants and Writs to provide Victuals ad alendos pauperes
Claus. 31 H. 3.
in Westminster Hall, for as many poor as it could contain, being a better
kind of expense then those vain, unnecessary and costly Treatments which our
young Gallants and some Tradesmen do now too often make their Gentlewomen and
Mistresses in Hide Park and Spring Garden, to show them how little at present
they value money and how much they may want it hereafter.

And at the same time can think every public duty to be a grievance and every
little too much which they contribute to their Prince.

Who (if Pourveyances shall be taken away) will Sheba (as she that came once
out of the South to see King Solomon) may never come to view their Princes
Court, the manner of his Servants sitting at their Tables and eating of their
meat, the attendance of his Ministers and their apparel.

Take away not only the honor but the public in Capite, by Knight Service and
per Baroniam, which are justly and highly esteemed in all Kingdoms and
Principalities which are so happy as to live under Monarchy the best of
Governments, and deprive our selves of those nerves and sinews which fix and
consolidate the fidelity, peace and welfare of Monarchies, and the best part
also of those feudal Laws, wherein are contained many of the Laws and Rights of
Kingdoms, Marquisates, Earldoms, Baronies, and their dependencies.

Tenures in libero and communi Soccagio per fidelitatem tantum pro omnibus
servitiis, in free and common Socage by Fealty only for all services so
universally extended as to make all the English Tenures to be in that
condition, will be dangerous rather then profitable to the King and people,
whose good and safety consists in a due obedience of the people to their
Prince, and not in that which may invite and encourage Sedition and Rebellion,
and is fitter to be trusted to a Kingdom of Angels (which was once not without a
Lucifer (a pretender to great Light) and his rebelling party then to a people
(many of whom being not fully cured of a disobedience more then ordinarily
acted to the ruin of their King and his three Kingdoms, are now in a full
career of all manner of vice and wickedness, running over all the Laws of God
and man, and wholly given up to their pride and Luxury, and an interest and
care to maintain them.

They that could then mis-interpret Scripture, Parliament, rebel and fight
against their King, multiply Grievances under color of remedying them, destroy
him and endeavor to do the like to his Children and Successors, and all the
loyal Nobility and Gentry, which according to their Allegiance and Tenures of
their Lands made have to his Standard and Defense, will now think they have
gotten better Fig Leaves, either to cover any thing they shall attempt against
their King and Sovereign, or for abiding with Gilead beyond Jordan, and not
coming to help or assist him, in regard that for all manner of services they
are only to do him Fealty, which they may disguise according to their several
humors and interests.

Will unhinge the Government and take away the Ties and Obligations which were
betwixt the King and his Subjects, the Nobility and better part of the people,
and the more common and inferior sort of them, untie their bonds of Obedience,
and let them loose to a liberty of ruining and undoing themselves by not obeying
their Sovereign, which is not to be hazarded upon the hopes of Tenures in
Cord, when the impression and remembrance of Benefits are as frail and little
immortal as Gratitudes, or the love and kindness of many friends or children
which hardly survives days or months or a few years, and at the most do not
outlive the first Receivers, but do most commonly within a few days, if not
hours after, wax faint and languish; and though they did at the first really
mean and intend the thankfulness they promised, can as quickly as the Scots did
by the late Kings extraordinary favors and concessions, even to the giving
away almost all that he had in Scotland, or as some of their Brethren in
England did in their undertakings to make him a glorious King, forget what they
promised or should do; and having got power into their hands, be most rigid and
severe in the exercise and employment of it and their liberties against those
which granted them.

Make the head of our English Body Politic not Communication, do serve and
attend the motions and directions of the head and principal part for the well
being of the whole body; but to be set in such an unfixed, unsafe, and unusual
order, as it shall neither be able to protect it self or those who depend upon
it, and have no other ligaments but Fealty, and the too often broken oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, which can never attain to those great Obligations of
Homage and Service of War; which being annexed to the Land it self, had
besides the Bond of Loyalty another also of Gratitude attending upon it, and
as a threefold cord not easily to be broken, must of necessity far surmount
that so small a one as Fealty, which being little more then our modern ill
used daily Complements, will prove such a small something, as when Interest,
Profit, Humors or Factions shall either altogether or apart stand in the way of
them or any of them, will be made to be little more then nothing.

Mutilate and lame our Ancient best regulated and Monarchy, and make it to be
as paralitick on the right side, and wanting the natural and right use of its
right Arm and Leg; and applying no better a remedy then a plaster of Excise,
drawn from the rebelling and necessitous example of a Neighbor Republique or
Democratie, put the power and ability of serving the King in his Wars, of
helping him to preserve the Salus Populi or good of the people, and performing
the Oaths and Duty of Allegiance, (a great part whereof was before in the
Nobility and Gentry, who were the best educated, more knowing and virtuous part
of the people, and better understanding the order and affairs of Government and
the Loyalty which at all times and upon all occasions did belong unto it) into
the hands and humor of the ignorant, misunderstanding, rude and giddy
Plebeians or Common people.

Deprive the King and people of those Strengths, in Capite and by Knight
Service (who were as so many little and inoffensive Garrisons and Forts in
every County to defend it) to make head against the sudden invasion of an
Enemy, put him to a stand, and prevent (which was evidenced by the late use and
terrors of Olivers County troops) the overrunning or gaining of whole
Territories or taking of places of Strength, until greater neighbor forces or
an Army be imbodyed, or to be as so many Brigades or Auxiliaries well horsed
and furnished (with their Tenants) to attend their King in a diversive War, as
they were in Anno 1640. in that unfortunately suspended Expedition or Inrode
into Scotland against those Rebellious COVENANTERS against the Laws of God as
well as those of their Sovereign.

Decay and impoverish the Kings Revenue, and Piety and Prudence, too weak to
defend himself or resist the torrent of Sedition and Rebellion, which like an
inundation of many waters rushed in upon him.

Exchange the ancient and noble Guards of England in Capite and by
Knight Service, for a standing Guard or Army of Hirelings, or men whose
Fortunes are worn on their Backs as their Clothes, or by their sides as their
Swords, which upon any necessity or mischance happening to the King, may, for
want of pay (as the German Ruyters or Lancekneghts) or by insolence or
presumption of their numbers or strength (as the Praetorian Bands amongst the
later Romans) or the Turkish mutinous Janisaries; or by being inconstant and
faithless, as the Cosacks and Tartars usually are to the Poles; ruin and
forsake him, or by an humor of making Remonstrances and intermedling in State
matters, Innovating of Laws, changes of Government, and sacrificing to the
Ignorance of their own mechanic Brains and new found destructive Politics,
destroy the people and their liberties, as our late Colonels and Captains of
the new edition, and the Agitators and Self-canonized Saints did attempt to do
when they would make themselves to be so much concerned in the good of the
people as to set up a Law of the Sword and a Committee of Safety to make no man
to have any safety or property but themselves, and called every thing
Providence which proceeded from their own unparalled Villainies.

Renverse and overturn many of the fundamental

Perpetuate a Moiety of the Excise upon Ale, Inheritance for the people, and by
the example and custom thereof be by degrees a means to introduce the whole
Excise, which in the Oliverian usurpation was laid upon them; and though it may
not happen in the life time of a gracious Prince, Father of his Country, and
Preserver of his peoples Rights and Liberties, may afterward, like Nessus's
poisoned shirt upon the back of our Hercules and former Government, canker, eat
up and destroy all their labors and industry.

Will cut off our Sampsons Locks, and bereave Shield and Spear of his mighty
men of War, and when all things Antimonarchical should be rooted out, will be
a fruitful plantation and product of the greatest of Antimonarchicks, and be
that which our English Monarchy never yet saw or allowed; and if Gods mercy
prevent not, may be as good a guest as a Canker or Snake in the Bosom of it.

All which and more evils and inconveniences then can at present be either
foreseen or enumerated, and will (as to very many of them) as certainly follow
the taking away of Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, as effects do
usually their causes, Cromwell the Protector of his own Villainies as well as
our Miseries) very well understood, when, in order to the destruction of the
King and his Family, the ruin of all the Nobility and Gentry, and the rooting
up of Monarchy, and every thing which did but resemble or help to support it;
he did all he could to take away Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service.

And having a constant and standing Army of Thirty thousand Horse and Foot
allowed to him and his Successors by his Instrument of Government, or Rod of
Scorpions, and a Revenue of Nineteen hundred thousand pounds to maintain
himself in his intended unlimited Monarchy, and to keep the people in slavery,
cozening, cheating, and ruining all Loyal and honest men under the Hypocrisy
and pretense of intentional Godliness, and Two hundred thousand pounds per
Annum for the provision of his House and Servants, found himself no way
indammaged by destroying Tenures in Capite or by Knight Service, or concerned
to retain or keep them.

Which being the most noble sort of Tenures, most ancient, free, and
privileged, will if they shall be truly and judiciously put in parallel and
balance with those of the original and proper Tenures in Socage, who as Coloni
and adscriptitii, tied to Socage.
their husbandry and plowes, did (as Sr Edward Cook says) Arare and Herciare,
Plow and Harrow their Lords Lands, and do many other servile works; or with
such a Socage as those many Tenants hold their Lands by, which hold by a
certain small rent of Sir Anthony Weldens Heir for Castle-guard to the ruined
Rochester Castle in Kent, to pay 3 s. 4 d. nomine poenae for every Tide which
after the time limited for payment shall run under Rochester Bridge.

Or with Copyhold Tenures, (which at the first being frankly given for years
or life, and after by a continued charity turned to a Customary Inheritance)
were bound up to many inconveniences, Copyhold.
as not to lease their Lands or fell Timber without their Lords license, and
many forfeitures, payments and customs, some at Fines uncertain, at the will
of the Lord, after the death of their Ancestor, and which upon a suit or appeal
in the Courts of Justice or Chancery are never mitigated or brought lower then
two years present and improved value; and where the Fines are certain, do in
many places pay as much or more, in some places where they pay less pay after
the rate of five pence per Acre, and in other eight pence per Acre, or higher
as the custom varies; and pay Herriots, not only upon the death of the last
Tenant but upon Surrenders; and in some places the Widows having no Free Bench
(as they call it) or Estate in the Lands after their Husbands; and where they
have that or Dower, which is seldom in other places, do forfeit if they marry
again; or in some places, if they commit fornication or adultery in their
Widdow-hood; and if the Lords of Manors put the Tenants out of their Copyhold
Estates upon a forfeiture, they have by Law no remedy but to petition to them,
can have no Writ of Right-close to command their Lords to do them right without
delay according to the custom of the Manor, no Writ of False Judgment at the
Common Law given in the Lords Court, but must sue to the Lord by Petition, nor
can sue any Writ of Monstraverunt to command their Lords, not to require of
them other Customs or Services then they ought, must grind at the Lords Mill
and bake at his common Oven, and not speak irreverently of them.

Or those kind of Tenures of Lands in Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmerland,
and the North parts of England, which pay a thirty penny Northern Tenant-Right.
Fine at every alienation, and a twenty penny Fine upon the death of an Ancestor
or of their Lord, according to the rate of the small yearly rents of their
Lands, which were at the first freely given for service in War, and to repel
the Scottish Incursions, now much insisted upon and called Tenant-Right.

Or Lease-holders which are racked or pay Fines, Lease-holders.
and a Rent, as much as any will give for them under harsh and strict
Covenants, conditions, forfeitures, and Nomine Poenae's, without a standing
Army and Assessments and a Troop of Horse (as was done in Olivers time) to
scout in every County, to awe, terrify, abuse and sometimes rob the
Inhabitants.

Or the now so much desired Tenure of free and Free Socage.
common Socage, (many of which are under the payment of a Tenth every year, of
the value as they were first granted) by Fealty only for all services, with a
standing Army or Assessments, though far lesser, as it is hoped, instead of
Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, will be more desirable and prove a
greater freedom then either the old Socage Tenure, which in Kent they did
sometimes willingly exchange, to hold the same Lands by Knight Service, or the
Copyholders or Northern Tenant-rightmen, or the free and common Socage by
Fealty only and no other Services.

None of which have or can justly claim as the Tenants in Capite and by
Knight Service do those ancient and honorable Rights, Immunities and
Privileges which justly belong unto them, nor their Beraultus in Commentar.
and Spelmans Glossar. 261. and in verb. leta, 431.
Court Barons and Court Leetes, with the privileges of basse Justice, doing
Justice to their Tenants for small Debts under Forty shillings, correcting and
overseeing the Assize of Bread and Beer, Weights and Measures, corrupt Trin.
18. E. 1. in placit inter Abbatem de Leicester and Abbatem de Selby.
Victuals, punishment of breach of the Peace, swearing Constables, making
By-lawes, power of administering the Oath of Allegiance, Inquiries concerning
Victuallers, Artificers, Workmen, Laborers, and excess of prizes of Wines, etc.
Inquiries after Seditions, Treasons, etc. and presenting and certifying them or
any other thing that might disturb the Peace and Welfare of their King and
Country, and by keeping the lesser Wheels in order, did contribute much to that
of the greater, and every one (as little and subordinate Reguli and petty
Princes) enjoying under their Kings and Sovereigns that which to this day (as
well as anciently) have been called Royalties, which being but pencil'd and
drawn out of Regal favors and permission, are in Fide and Homagio deduced from
those Tenures; For all which free Gifts, Emoluments, Immunities and
Privileges, they had no other.

Burdens or Duties incumbent upon Tenures in Capite and Knight Service.
THen to go to War well arrayed and furnished Escuage.
with the King or his Lieutenant General (which every Subject if he had not
Lands freely given him is in duty bound to do) or his mesne Lord when Wars
should happen, which in a common course of Accidents may be but once or not at
all in his life time, and then not to tarry with him above forty days or less
according to their proportion of Fee or Lands holden at their own charge (which
is a greater favor then to go along with him all the time of his Wars) and for
all the time that they remain afterward in the Camp to be at the Kings charge,
and to have Escuage assessed by Parliament of their own Tenants if they shall
refuse to go also in person.

Their respit of Homage was without personal attendance discharged once in
four Terms or a years Homage.
space for smaller Fees proportionable to the yearly value of their Lands then
three shillings four pence per Ann. which they that held a Knights Fee yearly
paid to their mesne Lords for respite of suit of Court.

Their releif when they dyed, leaving their Heirs Relief.
at full age, was for a whole Knights Fee but Cs. (less most commonly then a
Herriot or the price of their best Horse or beast if they had holden in Socage)
and when they were in Ward paid nothing for it; for a Barony 100 marks, and an
Earldom 100l. of a Marquis 200 Marks, and a Duke 200 l.

The Primer seisin, which though due by Law was Primer Seisin.
never paid until 4o or 5o Car. primi, was like the Clergies First Fruits,
according to a small moderate value a years profit if in possession, and a
Moiety in Reversion; and so small a casualtie or revenue, as in the 16th year
of the Reign of his late Majesty they did but amount unto 3086 l. 9 s. 8 d.
ob. half farthing.

And the charge to the Officers of a general Livery Livery.
(being like to an admittance of a Tenant in a Copyhold estate, but a great
deal cheaper) where the Lands were under value and found but at 5 l. per Ann.
Which most commonly was the highest rate of finding or valuation of it when it
was 100l. per Annum or something more, with all the Fees and requisites
thereunto did not exceed 10l. and the Fine for a Livery where there was a
Wardship, half a years profit after a small value, and so little as in 16 Car.
the account for Liveriess was but 1316 l. 12 s. 4 d. ob. farthing.

And where a Special Livery under the Great Seal of England was sued out, with
a Pardon for Alienations, Intrusions, etc. did not with the Lord Chancellors,
Master of the Rolls, and Master of the Wards, and all other Fees included, make
the charge amount to more then 15 l. or 20 l.

Where a Livery was not sued out as it ought to Mesne Races.
be, the mesne rates and forfeitures (which may be avoided) were either
pardoned or gently compounded, and of so small a consideration in the Kings
Revenue by Wardships, as in Anno 1640. and a time of peace, the Account thereof
amounted to no more then Nine hundred ninety two pounds fifteen shillings two
pence halfpenny half-farthing.

And where a minority happened, which in Times of less luxury was but seldom,
many were either Knighted or Married before they attained to their full age,
and Heirs females were not infrequently married long before their age of 21.
there being not one with another, one in every seven that died leaving an Heir
in Minority.

Which may the better be credited, for that, if Report mistake not, a Family of
Poynings or Pointz, having from the Reign of King H. 1. now almost six hundred
years ago, not had an Heir in minority.

And it is certain enough that in twenty Discents of the Family of Veeres, now
Earls of Oxford, in the space of six hundred years and some thing more, and the
Wars and Troubles which happened in many of them, there have not been but six
in minority when their Fathers or Ancestors died; and the like or less may be
found or instanced in many others.

And for one that is left very young at his Fathers death, there are commonly
nineteen that are of greater age; and for one betwixt five years old and ten,
there are ten that are above the age of ten; and for one that is betwixt that
and fifteen, there are seven that are above it; for that most commonly in such
early marriages as these times affoard, which in great Estates are not seldom
the sons are at age, or a great part of it, before their Fathers death, and do
keep a better account of their Fathers age then they do of their own.

And then the marriages, which now generally Marriage.
bring ten times bigger Portions then one hundred years ago, were most commonly
granted to the mothers, or to the next and best friends, if they petitioned
within a month after the death of the Fathers or Ancestors, and where there
were considerable debts or many younger children, were not rated at above one
years improved value, if the Estates were not indebted or encumbered with
younger childrens portions, and a great deal less if it were, as may easily
occur to any that shall compare the Fines for marriages (appearing in Sr Miles
Fleetwood the Receiver Generals Accounts of the Court of Wards) with the value
of the Lands in Wardship, where very small sums, as 40, 50, 80, or 100 l. Fines
for Marriages, may be found to be set upon an Estate of 2 or 300 l. per Annum.

And most commonly compounded for to the use of the Ward himself, and from Heir
male to Heir Male, although they were six or seven of the Sons of the same
father, for the same fine or compositi on, if the Ward should dye, which, or
the like favor as to Lands, is not used by Lords of Manors upon admission of
Tenants to Copyhold Estates.

The Lands where there were no Dowers or Joyntures Rents.
(which ordinarily did take away a third part or more) were leased for a small
Rent, not exceeding most commonly the tenth part, and very often according to
the troubles, encumbrances and debts upon the Estate, at the fifteenth or
twentieth part, out of which the Ward had an exhibition yearly allowed toward
his Education; if of small age, after the rate of 10l. per Cent. of the revenue
of the Lands, certified by the Feodary; or if at University or in Travel beyond
the Seas, had a better allowance.

The Licenses for Marriage (which is totally denied Licenses to Widows holding
in Capite by Knight Service to marry.
in Copyhold Estates, and would be therein gladly purchased) were of so small
profit to the King seldom happening or cheaply granted, and in that of great
Ladies not called for, as it came to no more in the 16th year of the Reign of
King Charles the First, then 37l. 3 s. 4 d.

And the License to compound with Copyholders To compound with Copyholders.
for their Admittances in the times of the Lords of the Manors, Wardships, so
easily and for a little granted, as in that they came but unto 50l.

The fines upon the making of the Leases or Fines taken by the Court of Wards
upon the Grants of Lands in minority.
Grants of the Lands were small and more pro forma then otherwise at 10 s. 15
s. 12d. 6d, etc. and very small sums of money when they exceeded.

And whatsoever charges or payments may happen by Wardships, which all things
duly considered are less then what is paid upon Copyhold Estates, may by Law
and the favor of former Kings, be for a great part escaped by conveying away
in their life times or devising by will two parts in three of all their Lands
(leaving a third part to descend to the heirs) for payment of Debts and
preferment of Wives and Children, the heirs of Tenants in Capite and men of
any considerable Estate very often marrying before the age of One and twenty
years, and having all or the most part of the Fathers Estate, reserving some
Estate for life, and the Mothers Jointure or Dower excepted settled upon them.

Which they may well be contented with, when as all the charges and burdens (as
some, do call them) which do happen upon those Tenures, are lesser then the
payment of the first fruits of Benefices and Bishoprics to the Clergy, with
Procurations, Synodalls, and other necessary charges in the Bishops
Visitations, lesser then that of Tenths, according to the then true yearly
value, reserved by King H. 8. and E. 6. upon their Gifts, Grants, Sales and
Exchanges of Abbey Lands, lesser then the payment of Tithes, and lesser and more
seldom then the easy payments and burdens upon Copyhold Estates; when as
those that purchased any of those kind of Lands either charged with Tithes or
Tenths, or the Duties or incidents belonging to Lands in Capite and by
Knight Service, did buy them with those Concomitants, which neither buyer nor
seller were able to purchase or discharge; and cannot pretend it to be a
grievance, because they cannot enjoy them freer then they purchased or
expected, no more then he that buys a Calf can complain it was not an Ox,
then he that bought a Copyhold Estate after the rate of an Estate of that
nature, and did suite and service belonging unto it, can afterward think
himself to be ill used, or under any oppression, because it was not freehold;
or he that bought a Lease can justly conceive himself to be injured by him
that sold it, because he has not the Reversion or Fee simple of it.

And should (if rightly examined and duly considered) be no more a cause of
complaint or grievance then the weakness in Estate of a Tenant overwhelmed with
debts, and his disability to pay a cheap and easy Rent of Twenty pounds per
Annum, though it makes that Rent to be a burden, which formerly (and being not
indebted) he found to be none, can make it either to be a grievance or
unreasonable or illegal, or the old age or sickness of a formerly lusty and
healthful man, which renders a small weight to be very heavy, which was at
other times not at all troublesome to him, can make it in it self to be so much
as he now takes it.

Nor are the supposed Grievances and Burdens of Tenures in Capite and
Knight Service, naturally, originally or intrinsecally to be found either in
them or by them, but are often occasioned by the parties groundless complaints,
and the troubles and burdens which they bring upon themselves, who like men
very sick by distempers and diseases of their own making and complaining
heavily of their pains and anguish, can many times only tell that they are
sick, and not as they would or should be, but not whence it came, or if they
could are unwilling to remember the causes of it.

For,

The Reason why they seem to be Burdens and Grievances, and heavier then
formerly
CAnnot be hid from those which shall but enquire and rightly and judiciously
search into the Causes of that which now lies more upon some men's spirits, or
imaginations, then need to be, if they would do by themselves in the Oeconomie
and manage of their Estates and Affairs, as their more prudent and virtuous
Ancestors did, who when Meadow ground was in H. 6. days now not much above 200
years ago, in the most fertile Counties of England, at no greater a yearly
value then 8 d per Acre by the year, and other lands of 4 d. or 5 d. an Acre
per Annum, could keep greater houses or hospitalities by five or ten to one
then they do now, a greater retinue of servants and dependants, gave great
quantities of lands in Common, and Estovers of wood to the poor or whole
Townshipps, live honorably if they were Barons, and worshipfully if they were
Knights, and Esquires, and serve their Prince faithfully, did great acts of
Piety and Charity, by building and endowing of Churches, and stood as greater
and lesser Pillars in their several Counties, did not rack and skrew their
Tenants to the utmost that any would give for lands, with harsh and hard
Covenants and Conditions, did grant Manors, Annuities, and Farms to Gentlemen
in Fee, or for lives, to serve and go along with them and their Prince upon
occasion of wars, were not troubled at their Tenures in Capite and by
Knight Service, did not think those benefits to be any burdens, though great
sums of money were sometimes paid as 6000 l. by a mother of an Earl of Oxford,
and 20000 marks by a mother of in Earl of Clare, in the reign of King H. 3.
for their wardshipps, when marriage Portions or Dowries in money were but
small, and their large and great revenues considered, were but as accumulations
of many lesser wardshippe; were not so much indebted as now, nor so much
enforced to mortgage or sell Lands, get Friends, Servants, or Tradesmen to be
bound for them; to have their Lands extended, or the persons of such of them as
were under the degree of Baronage, outlawed or arrested, were not up to the
ears in Shopkeepers or Trades-mens Books or Items, but lived within the pale
of Virtue and fence of Sobriety, and far better then they do now, when they do
let errable land at 13 or 16 s. per Acre, by the year; Pasture at 20 or 30 s.
and Meadow at 40 s. or sometime 3 l. the Acre per An. were not driven out of
their ancient and former love and reputation in their Countries or
Neighborhood, by letting the Kitchen chimneys of their Country houses fall
down for want of making but ordinary fires in them; but did in their several
orbs and ranks live more honorably and worshipfully then now they do or can,
when they are guilty of few of those great and good actions; did not, as too
many do, spend in the pursuit of Vanities ten times more then their
Forefathers, who had long kept and enjoyed the same or greater Estates; nor sit
up all night* to come home drowsy and discredited in the morning, with the
loss of 4 or 500 l. and sometimes 3 or 4000 l. by gaming; bestow 2 or 300 l. on
a Coach, and 100 or 200 l. upon a Band; Spend more in gaming, drinking, and
whoring, (which their forefathers, though sometimes addicted thereunto, could get
at cheaper rates then by maintaining a costly Corinthian Lais or a sumptuous
Cleopatra) then would pay for the charge of a Wardship, and lose more in a
careless or not at all taking of their Accounts, or looking to their Estates
and Affairs then would twice over discharge it, nor did tamely permit their
flatterers, sycophants, and promoters or concealers of their vices, to go a
share in their Estates and Fortunes: Too many of their eldest sons were not so
mounted to the height of Fashions as to spend more in Powder, Plays, Coaches
and Ribbons (the lesser circumstantials of their vain expenses) then their
forefathers, when they were Heirs apparent had allowed them for all
necessaries, and a better kind of education, and expend more in Peruks or
Periwigs, at 3 or 5 l. price, for every one, then would pay for the charges of
suing out their Fathers Liveries; too many of their wives and daughters did not
racket with a troop of young Gallants, or Gentlemen of Amors or Dalliance; nor
discourse more of Romances then the Word of God, Virtue and good Examples, send
their Linen for the attire of their heads and necks, when they are above one
hundred miles from London, by the weekly Posts, to be washed or starched by the
Exchange-women, hunt after the newest and most costly fashions, sacrifice to
all the parts of pride, gluttony, prodigalities, and luxuries, drive a trade of
black Patches and Painting, give 10, 20 or 40 l. for a yard of Lace; did not
make it their designs to vie with every one they can perceive to wear Jewels,
Diamond Lockets, Necklaces of Pearl, or more costly Apparel then themselves;
did not give insana pretia, extravagant and cheating prices, because such a mad
great woman, or a neighbors purse-emptying wife had given the same, and
'twould be a disparagement to come (as they say) behind them, or wear any thing
at a lesser rate; nor adventure and many times lose 5, 10 or 20l. in an
afteroonn or evening at Cards, which is now become most of their huswifery;
their daughters did not in their hopes of getting Princes to their Husbands, or
impossible great Marriages, help to cast their fathers estates and purses into
a consumption, and spend more money betwixt their age of 13 and 20 then would
have made treble the marriage portions of their Grandams, when 100 l. or 2 or
300 l. was a good portion for a good Knights well-bred Daughter, when 1100
marks was in 2 H 6. a good portion for a marriage betwixt Thomas Lord Clifford
and a Daughter of the Lord Dacre; when Henry Lord Clifford having great and
large Revenues in the North parts of England and else where, did in 33 H. 8.
suppose it to be a good provision for his Daughter Elizabeth Clifford to devise
to her by his last Will and Testament one thousand pounds if she married an
Earl, (which in those days were men of no small revenues) or an Earls son
and heir, 1000 marks if a Baron, and 800 marks if a Knight, and that Henry
Lord Clifford his son did in the 12th. or 13th year of the reign of Queen
Eliz. give by his Will but 2000 l. to his Daughter if she married an Earl or
an Earls son and heir, 2000 marks if a Baron or his son and heir apparent, and
800 marks if she married a Knight, and that 1500 or 2000 or 3000 l. is now but
an ordinary Portion to be given in marriage to rich yeomens sons, or the
smaller sort of Gentry or Silkmen, Mercers, or Drapers, and a great deal too
little for those kind of Haggard Hawks (for there be some though not so many as
should be which live soberly and chastely, and are helpers to preserve and
increase, not spend their husbands estates, as well as their own Portions,) who
fly Steeple high and cannot by any law or persuasion of Scripture, Reason,
Shame, or fear of Poverty, Imprisonment and ruin of their husbands and
children, and their sighs and sorrows be brought to stoop or give way to any
lower pitch, but are more destructive to a husband, who against his will and
for that little quiet and content which he can get, must permit it, then the
mischances of a Rot of Sheep, Piracies or Shipwracks, the sea breaking in upon
their Lands, ruin of Sequestrations or Suretyship, and if they might have
their wills are able to Bankrupt and exhaust the King of Spain and all his
West Indies.

When too many of the young women will not like or love the men, unless they be
as vain and expensive as themselves; and the men to please the women and be
fashionable, must run a vie with them who shall soonest spend all they have, or
can by any sinful courses compass a support or maintenance for it.

And the fathers most commonly so much indebted before they marry their eldest
sons, as they must have their marriage Portions to marry their Daughters, and
for 2 or 3000 l. Portion, make his Daughter in law a Jointure of 4 or 500 l.
per Annum, to free her from the trouble of over-loveing her husband, when as
she shall be after his death so well provided to get another.

When two or three servants wages amount to as much as six heretofore, and a
great deal more per Annum then would have made a good Gentleman's younger son
an Annuity, when great Assessments beleaguer them on one side, and their own
vices and prodigalities, and all manner of costly sins and vanities now so
universally practiced on the other side; Tradesmen use false weights and
measures, and more then formerly tricks and mysteries of Trade, adulterating
their work and commodities, and raiseing the prices to three times more then
heretofore, and by the prodigality and carelessness of not a few of the Gentry,
creep into their estates, and get too great a footing in it, by furnishing them
with vanities, and the country men and Farmers to maintain their growing pride,
and excess making all the haste they can to imitate them, do heighten the
rates of all that they sell; and when the foundations of our Little World
(which was wont to be the best of the Greater) are broken up, and most part of
the people eccentrick and running into excess and disorder; when the
Apprentices and Servants will do all they can to live like Gentlemen, the
Mechanics like Merchants, the Gentry as high as the Nobility, the Maids will
be apparelled like their Mistresses, and the Mistresses as far beyond their
estates as their wits, Vintners and Woodmongers wives and Poulterers daughters
must have Pearl Neck-laces of great prizes, and all ranks and degrees of people
would, (as if they had been chosen Kings and Queens on Twelfth nights, make it
their business to be in their expenses Kings and Queens all the year after) do
not only consume and waste the estates of very many of our Gentry, and disable
them to pay as formerly their necessary Aids, Contributions and Oblations to
their Prince for the safety of themselves and their Countries, but carry them
and all that follow their example beyond an Asiatica luxus, that foreign
luxury of Asia, which, as Juvenal says, -- incubuit victumque ulciscitur orbem,
Conquered and undid the conquering Rome and Mistress of the word; the abuse of
peace and plenty, which the Lydians by the policy of Cyrus did ruin and subdue
themselves withal; and that height of pride and plenty which in Germany did
help to procure their after woeful wars and desolations.

And making us to be almost as mad in our Luxuries as the ridiculous Sybarites,
will suddenly (if Gods mercy and good Laws prevent not) make poor England
(which for Twenty years last past has been kicked, tossed and torn like a
Football by the pocketing and plundering Reformers and their ungodly Wars) to
be a Burden to it self, and not able to support the Excesses and pride of the
people of it; but trembling at the apprehension of Gods long deferred Judgments
for the punishment of it, groan under the burden of those sins which do every
day more and more hasten and draw them down upon us.

And may persuade us when it is too late, that the saving in these last Twenty
years Eighteen hundred thousand pounds which would have been paid to King
Charles the First, and his Majesty that now is, by reason of Wardships and
Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, with many other great sums of money
due to them out of their Royal Revenues, amounting to as much or a great deal
more which the King in his largely extended Act of Oblivion is now pleased to
remit and pardon, will not by a Tenth part make the people of England savers
for what was lost and expended in the Wars by ruins and plundrings, besides
very near Forty millions of sterling money spent in public Taxes and
Assessments to purchase an unhappy Rebellion, and the sad effects and
consequences of it.

So that our Complaints of Tenures in Capite and Knight Service are from a Non
causa, by imagining that to be a cause which was not, for our supposed
grievances, are but like those of hurt and wounded men by their own follies and
distempers, which cannot endure the softest hand or most gentle touch of a
Friend.

Tenterden Steeple was not the cause of Goodwin Sands, nor of Shipwracks at
Sea, but the rage of the Winds and Seas, and the Waves and Billows cuffing
each other.

Nor is our ever welcome Youth, and lamented when it is lost, the cause of
Gouts, Palsies, Dropsies, Hectic Fevers, Consumptions, and many times a worser
Disease, which the Intemperances of young people with no little charge in the
purchase of them have hired to be their attendants.

But they are our more then ordinary pride and vices which have made our
Burdens twenty times exceed any payments or charges by Wardships, which are
(when they happen) sufficiently recompensed by the care and privileges of the
Court of Wards, preserving the Wards Wood and Timber, binding in great Bonds
those which are trusted, to make true and just accounts, calling them (if need
be) often to account, as in the Duke of Buckinghams case, once in every three
years, and redressing wrongs done to them either in their real or personal
estates.

The Hundred thousand pounds and above spent the last year in Coaches and
Feathers extraordinary, and One hundred and fi^ty thousand pounds at the least
spent this year in Ribbons, must be no grievance, but a quarter of either of
the sums spent in Wardships, (which in Scotland in the reign of their King
Malcombe the Second, which was before the Conquest, was not unwillingly yielded
to be the Kings Right, ne non suppeterent Regiae Majestatis facultates, to the
end the King should have wherewithal to defend the Kingdom; which Master St
John in the case of Ship money, and the Parliament (so called) in An. 1642,
were content should be allowed the King for the same purpose) must be
intolerable.

Or like those which let their sacks of Wool fall into the water, and find
them to be much heavier then they were, if our Land be as the shaking of the
Olive Tree, and as the gleaning Grapes when the Vintage is done, and we cry,
Our leanness, Our leanness, and find a disability more then formerly to
perform those Duties and Services which were never denied to be due unto our
Prince in support of his Royal Dignity and the Welfare and happiness of his
people, the cause is allunde, comes another way, and arises from our unlucky
Reformations, public Taxes and Assessments, to assist the ungodly attempts of
those who designed and continued our intestine wars, and from those grand
Impositions which most of the people have laid upon themselves in the purchase
of pride and superfluities, which those who have made it to be so much their
business may know how to free themselves of.

And if the Lands which are holden by such beneficiary Tenures so ancient, so
honorable for the King, and safe for him and his people, and so legal and
rational cum totius antiquitatis et multorum seculorum, concensu, from
generation to generation, and through many generations well and thankfully
approved, usage and custom of them shall be now taken to be burdens, the
owners of those Lands may easily save the labor and trouble of complaining,
and free themselves of those undeservedly called burdens, by restoring of the
Lands according to the rules of right reason, law, and equity, to those or
their heirs, which did at first freely give them, and had the faith and promise
of those that received those no small favors cum onere to perform the Services
and Duties which the Law and a long and reasonable custom have charged upon
them or those which afterward purchased them.

Or if that will not be liked, and we must think we do nothing, unless (not in
a Desert but a Land of Canaan) we outdo the murmurings of the sadly punished
Israelites with Quails in their mouths, when all shall be done as some people
would have it, and that Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, and the Royal
Pourveyances shall be sacrificed to their desires or wishes, they will then
make no better a Bargain of it then those, who repining and grumbling at the
charge of maintaining Sea-walls and Banks, have aftewards found by woeful
experience, that it was far less charge and damage then to have the Sea break
in upon their Marshes and Lands, drown and carry away their Cattle, and be at a
greater charge then formerly in making them up again and maintaining of them.

Or as those that found fault with the Surplice did, when by their unquiet
ignorances they opened the door to an Army of Fanatics and Locusts which did
almost eat up every green thing in the fields of our Religion.

Or as those Murmurers, who thinking Twenty shillings to be a heavy Tax for
Ship Money, Guard of the Seas, and Defense of the Kingdom, to be laid upon 7 or
800l. per Annum (for that was all which was in a year or half a year laid upon
the unhappy Mr Hamdens Lands) were afterward for many years together enforced
to pay the fifth part of their Rents and Revenues to help to destroy the King,
Laws, and Religion, kill their Debtors, Husbands and Children, and near
Relations.

And then the next thing will be to desire that they might have the far
heavier burden of Taxes and Assessments taken off, which if Tenures in Capite
and by Knight Service shall be taken away, can no more be avoided then he that
wilfully shuts out the light of the Sun or the Day, unless he will like
Democritus sit and grow wiser in the dark, can save the greater charges and
expenses of candles and other lights: And will at the last learn to believe,
that when Salus privatorum and omnia bona Civiuin in salute Bodin. de Repub.
Patriae continentur, every private man's good and safety depends upon the Kings
and the Weal public, it will not be for the good and safety of the people to
take away the Lions meat, enforce him to seek his prey or take it himself, or
to suffer the head to languish, in hope that the members or the rest of the
body should be the better for it; who when they are called to the Council or
Parliament of the body natural, are to lay aside all their own Interest and
Concernments, and every one do what they can to cure and help the wants of it.

And that if those Lands which are holden in Capite and by Knight Service had
been at the first purchased at the true and utmost value, and the charges now
incumbent upon them, had been since imposed upon them, when other Lands were
free and not charged with them, there might be reason enough to call them
burdens; But being that they were not at the first purchased, but freely and
frankly given upon those Conditions which were by Agreement promised to be
performed by those that thankfully received them, and would be so now by the
greatest maligners of them or inveighers against them, there can be no manner
of reason, cause or ground to esteem them to be burdens, oppressions or Norman
servitudes (as Ordericus Vitalis and Matthew Paris; the later whereof wrote his
History in the Reign of King H. 3. since which time many Indulgences have been
granted to those kind of Tenures, have been pleased to mistake them) when our
Magna Charta and all our Acts of Parliament have in every age ranked them
amongst the peoples Liberties, and confirmed and made many an Act of Parliament
to support those Regalities.

And when the Parliament of Imo Car. Imi in their great care of their
Liberties, and the taking away of all that might but disturb them, did call
them a Principal Flower of the Crown, which being not used to be made-up or
grow out of Grievances.

Cannot be disparaged by those clamours and cries which have, more then needed,
been made concerning the Earl of Downs concealed Wardship, and the
inconveniences arising thereby, which did not the tenth part of that prejudice
to his Revenue and Estate, which his prodigality and other Extravagancies
afterward brought upon it, and might how soever have been prevented, if his
mother in law or any other of his friends (upon the several Requests of the
Master of the Court of Wards and the Officers of that Court) would have
petitioned and compounded for his Wardship, and not have made those many
Traverses and Denyals in those many Suits of Law and pursuits which were
afterward made to compel them to it.

Nor will that or any other which are pretended grievances be ever equal or
come up to those far exceeding real and certain grievances which too many of
the Fathers in law of England (into whose hands and custody most of the
Wardships or Guardianships are endeavored to be more then formerly put) will,
if those Tenures shall be taken away, bring upon fatherless children, and will
in a short time do more harm to the childrens Estates of the first husband then
ever yet happened by Wardships to the King and mesne Lords.

Which the case of one that twelve years ago had the Revenue of an Infant
amounting unto above 700l. per Annum charged with no more then 1000 l. debt,
and a great personal Estate committed to his Trust, has to this day paid none
or a very small part of it, but keeps the Rents and profits, allowing a small
exhibition to the Infant, to his own advantage.

Of another, that has sold and wasted Woods and Timber of a Minors, to the
value of Ten Thousand pounds sterling.

And many more sad and deplorable Experiments, which abundantly induce to believe
as well as lament them, and are not to be found in those well-ordered and easy
way of the Grants and Dispositions of Wardships which happened by Tenures in
Capite and by Knight Service.

Which may appear to be the better established, and upon greater grounds of
Law, right Reason, Justice and Equity, when as many of the Lords of Manors and
Copyhold Estates who do now enjoy by those Tenures many Rights, Seignories and
commands, with view of Frank-pledge, Deodands, Coke in praefat. 9. Relat.
Felons Goods, Wrecks, Goods of Outlawed persons, and retorna Brevium granted
and imparted to their Ancestors by the bounty and favor of his Majesty's Royal
Progenitors, who did not think it to be a grievance to have Abbey or religious
Lands which were freely given or cheaply granted to them held in Capite and by
Knight Service, though there were at the same time a Tenth of the then true
yearly value reserved, would not upon the pretense and clamours of some
Copyholders concerning Fines uncertain, and the rigours and high demands put
upon them by some Lords of Manors who have 5 or 600 Copyholders in some Manors
belonging unto them, and can ask 13 s. 4 d. per Acre for some Lands, and 10 s.
per Acre for others to permit them to take their Estates hereafter at a
reasonable Fine certain; and whether poor or rich, indebted or not indebted,
and charged with children or not, will seize their Herriots, and take as much
as they can get upon the admissions of the Heir, or the out*cries against the
many costly and vexatious Suits which have tired Westminster Hall, and some
Parliaments concerning Fines uncertain, be well contented.

That their power of rating and taking Fines should be restrained, or that they
should be ordered upon the admittances of their Copyhold Tenants by Act of
Parliament to permit their Tenants without such Fines as they usually take to
surrender and alien two parts in three for the advancement of their Wives,
payment of debts or preferment of Children, as the Kings of England and mesne
Lords have limited themselves, or should be tied upon the death of every Tenant
and admission of his Heir, as King James was pleased to limit him and his Heirs
and Successors.

That upon consideration of Circumstances, which Instructions or Directions of
King James to be observed in the Court of Wards.
may happen in assessing Fines, either by reason of the broken Estate of the
deceased, want of provision for his wife, his great charge of children
unprovided for, infirmity or tenderness of the Heir, incertainty of the Title,
or greatness of Incumberances upon the Lands, there shall be (as those or any
other the bike Considerations shall offer themselves) used that good discretion
and conscience which shall be fit in mitigating or abating Fines or Rents to
the relief of such necessities.

Or to release and quit all their Royalties in their Manors, nor would think it
a good bargain to have no Compensation or Recompense at all for them, or no
more then after the rate of what might Communibus Annis, one year with another,
be made of them; or that they could with justice and equity lay the burdens and
payments of the Copyholders upon the Freeholders and Cotagers.

Which if they do not now take to be reasonable in their own cases, may
certainly give every man to understand how little reason there will be to take
away the dependencies and benefits by Tenures in Capite and Knight Service
holden of the King and mesne Lords.

Or to abridge the King of that harmeless power never before denied to any of
his Ancestors, to create Tenures in Capite and by Knight service, or in grand
Serjeanty for the defense and honor of the Kingdom, upon new Grants of Lands
or Favors; especially when ^s His Majesty that now is, did by His Declaration
of the thirtieth of November last, concerning the establishing and quieting the
Government in the Kingdom of Ireland, (which has been since very much liked
and approved by the Parliament of that Nation) insert a Saving of the Tenures
of the Mesne Lords, and ordained Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service upon
the Lands which shall be set out to the Soldiery for their Arrears.

Or that Tenures in Capite not by Knight Service, with all petit Serjeanties,
(which, as Sir Edward Coke says, is a Tenure as of the Crown, that is, as he
is King) and the Profits and Reservations upon them, which if well gathered
would make some addition to the Royal Revenue, should by the pattern of Olivers
(so called) Act of Parliament be taken away when there are no Wardships
incident thereunto, and that aid to make the Kings eldest Son a Knight, or
marry his eldest Daughter, should Coke 1. part: institut. 126. Fitz Herberts N
B. 82. 25. E. 3. cap. 11.
be taken away in the Capite and Knight Service Tenures, and left to remain in
the former Socage Tenures, or how little it will be for the good of the people
if the intended Act of Parliament shall order the Tenures in Capite by Socage
to pay double their former quit Rents or other Rents or Incidents belonging
thereunto, or to pay for a Relief double their petit Serjeanties or other
Duties reserved.

When as Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service can certainly have no pretense
of Grievance in them, (for they are only pretenses and causeless clamours that
have of late cast them into an odium or ill will of the common sort of people,
or such as do not rightly understand them) but may be made to be more pleasing
unto them by this or the like

Expedient,
IF the Marriage of the Wards and Rents of their lands during all the time of
their minorities computed together shall be reduced to be never above one years
improved value, which will be but the half of that which is now accounted to be
a reasonable Fine, and frequently paid by many Copyhold Tenants, whose Fines
are certain, and would be most joyously paid by those which are by Law to pay
Fines uncertain at the will of their Lords.

That the Archbishop of Canterbury and those other few mesne Lords, who by
ancient exemption and privilege are to have the Wardships of Tenants holding
of them by Knight Service in their Rot. Parl. 20. R. 2. n. 27.
minorities, though they hold other Lands in Capite and by Knight Service of
the King, may be ordained to do the like favors.

That all that hold in Capite and by Knight Service be freed from all
Assesments touching War of their demesne Lands holden in Capite and by
Knight Service, as in all reason they ought, being a Liberty or Privilege
(amongst others) granted to them by the Charter of King Henry the First, the
(Original of a great part of our Magna Charta) in these words, Militibus qui
per Loricas terras suas defendunt terras dominicarum carucarum suarum quietas
ab omnibus geldis and ab omni opere proprio dono meo concedo, ut sicut tam
magno gravamine alleviati, sunt in Equis and Armis, se been instruant ut apti
and parati sint ad servitium meum and ad defensionem Regni mei; that the
Knights which hold by Knight Service, and defend their own Lands by that
Tenure, shall be acquitted of all geldes and taxes of their Demesne Lands, and
from all other works upon condition, that as they being freed from so great a
burden, they be at all times ready with Horses and Arms, for the service of the
King and defense of the Kingdom: Which being long after found out, produced,
and read by Stephen Langton, to the Earls and Barons of England, and Abbots and
others of the Clergy, assembled in St Paul's Church in London, in the great
Contest which was betwixt King JOHN and His Barons about their Liberties,
Gavisi sunt gaudio magno valde (says Matthew Mat. Paris 240, 241.
Paris) and juraverunt omnes in presentia dicti Archi-Episcopi quod viso
tempore congruo pro hiis libertatibus, si necesse fuerit, decertabunt usque ad
mortem; They greatly rejoiced, and did in the presence of the said Archbishop
swear, that if need were they would contend even to death for those Liberties:
And is at this day so little misliked in France, as an ancient Counselor of
Estate of that Kingdom, in the Reigns of the Great Henry the Fourth of France,
and his son Lewis the Thirteenth, in his discourse of the means of
establishing, preserving and aggrandising a Kingdom, is of opinion that those
Fieffs, Nobles, and Tenures by Knight Service, ought to have an exemption, as
they there have, of all manner of Taxes and Impositions, for that they are to
hazard their lives pour la defense de l'Estat, for the defense of the Kingdom.

If where Lands are holden in Socage of the King or any other Person, and there
be a Wardship by reason of the said lands holden of the King in Capite, or pour
cause de guard of some other that holds in Capite and is in minority, the lands
which are found to be holden of the King or any other mesne Lord in Socage,
being taken into consideration only as to the Fine for the marriage, may not be
put under any Rent or Lease to be made by that Court, but be freed as they were
frequently and anciently by Writs sent to the Escheators, now extant and
appearing upon Record.

That Primer seisins be taken away and no more paid.

That the King shall in recompense thereof have and receive of every Duke or
Earl that dies seized of any Lands or Hereditaments in Capite and by
Knight Service, the sum of two hundred pounds; of every Baron two hundred
marks; of every one else that holds by a Knights Fee, proportionably,
according to the quantity of the Fee which he holds, twenty pound for a
Relief.

That encroachments upon wast grounds and high ways, which are holden in
Capite, shall be no cause of Wardship or paying any other duties incident to
that Tenure, if it shall upon the first proof and notice be relinquished.

That in case of neglecting to petition within a month after the death of the
Tenant in Capite, or otherwise concealing any Wardships, or not suing out of
Livery, if upon information brought, issue joined, and witnesses examined, or
at any time before Hearing or Trial of the Cause, the Party offending or
concerned shall pay the prosecutor his double costs, and satisfy the King the
Mesne rates, he shall be admitted to compound.

That only Escuage and service of War (except in the aforesaid cases of the
Archbishop of Canterbury and some few others) and all other incidents except
Wardships, due by their Tenants which hold of them by Knight Service, be
reserved to Mesne Lords, and that the Reliefs of five pounds for a whole
Knights Fee, or proportionably according to the quantity of Lands of that kind
of Fee holden, shall be after the death of every such Tenant Twenty pounds, and
proportionably as aforesaid.

That to lessen the charges of Escheators and Juries for every single Office or
Inquisition to be found or taken, after the death of every Tenant in Capite and
by Knight Service, the time of petitioning within a month after the death of
the Ancestor may be enlarged to three months, and the Shire, Town, City, or
principal place of every County be appointed with certain days or times for the
finding of Offices, to the end that one and the same Meeting, and one and the
same Jury, with one and the same charge, or by a contribution of all parties
concerned may give a dispatch thereunto.

That the unnecessary Bonds formerly taken in the Court of Wards at 2 s. 6 d.
or 3 s. charge upon suing out of every Diem clausis extremum, or Writ to find
an Office obliging the prosecution thereof, may be no more taken, when as the
time limited for petitioning to compound for Wardships, and the danger of not
doing of it, will be engagement sufficient.

That Grants, Leases, and Decrees of the Court may not (to the great charge of
the people) be unnecessarily as they have been at length Enrolled with the
Auditors of that Court, when as the same was done before by other Officers, in
other Records of that Court to which the Auditors may have a free access, and
at any time take extracts out of them.

That a severe Act of Parliament be made against such as shall mis-use or waste
any Wards Estate, Lands, Woods, and Timber committed or granted to them, or any
personal Estate which belongs unto them, or shall not give them fit
education, or shall disparage them in their Marriages, or marry them without
any competent portion, or shall not within a month after the death of such
Ward, or coming to his age of One and twenty years make a true account and
payment unto the said Ward, or his Heirs or Executors, of all that shall be by
them due and payable to him or them by reason of the said Wardship, upon pain
of forfeiture to the use of the said Ward, his Heirs or Executors, besides the
said moneys due and payable to the use of the said Wards, double costs and
damages expended or sustained therein.

And that if any thing of grievance shall appear to have been in the
compositions for Royal Pourveyances, or in Cart taking, which that which was
called a Parliament did (shortly after the death and murder of the King) very
much mistake, when in their Declaration sent into all the parts of the world of
the causes and reasons of their erecting a Commonwealth, they were pleased to
averr (that which the people of England know how to wonder at, but not to make
affidavit of) that they exceeded all their Taxes and Assessments laid upon the
people.

And that if the manage of those ancient customs should require some better
order to be taken, there may be such a reiglement as may consist with his
Majesty's Honor and Profit, and the ease and good of his people.

Or if a Trial and experiment be to be given the people, or those (who like
children will trouble a kind and tender hearted Parent with Requests and
Importunities to give them stones instead of bread and Scorpions for Fishes) of
the Inconveniences of taking away of ancient Landmarks, and good old Laws and
Customs, tried and approved in this Nation for more then One Thousand years,
and a great deal more in others, and the greater and more to be feared
Inconveniences of Excises, losses, and damage to the Royal Revenue, and
committing the Tutelage, protection and ordering of the best Families of the
Kingdom and their Estates during their minorities to the prey and ill
management of those that can get them, and will never so well execute those
Trusts as the King, who has not, nor can (as they) have any private passions,
Interests or Concernments to carry him out of the ways of Justice.

And that if such or the like Regulations to be added by His Majesty or His
Counsel will not be enough to persuade the people from being Pelo's de se, or
longing for their own ruins.

The Act of Parliament intended to take away Tenures in Capite and by
Knight Service, may be with a reservation of Escuage service in War and
Homage, without the incidents of Wardships, and be but as a Probationer to
continue until three years, and the next ensuing Parliament after that time
expended, which may either continue the Act or suffer it to expire.

Which with other Regulations which may be made in separating from the right
use any abuses which may be found to have crept into those Seminaries of Honor,
that standing, more noble, and more obliged Militia, that legal and ancient
Constitution or the management thereof, and giving if need be some better Rules
and Orders, may preserve unto the King and his Successors that great part of
his Regal Jurisdiction and power to defend himself and his people, and to the
People that most ancient and fundamental Law which is attended by many other
Fundamentals, Customs, Rights, and Usages in relation and affinity to it not
to be parted withal, keep us from sero sapiunt Phryges, the fate of those that
would rather repent bitterly and too late, then yield to those counsels or
admonitions which might have prevented it; and from a worse complaint, by as
much as the whole differs from a part, made by Monsieur la Noue, that great
Captain La Noue Discourse Politicques.
and Soldier of France, in the Raigns of their Francis the First, and our Henry
the Eight, and Edward the Sixth, of the alienation and decay of the Feiffes
Nobles and Arrierebans, by granting them in Mortmaine and to Roturiers, or men
ignoble, wherein he informs us, that Francis the First and Henry the Second
(Kings of France) did do all they could to reduce them to their former Order,
and was of opinion that Barbarians have better observed that policy in
Government then Christians, and that the Obligation of those Military Tenures
sont bien estroites, are very binding, Et avec lesquelles les Roys de France
par l'espace de sept cent Ans ont faites chooses memorables, and wherewith the
Kings of France have for seven hundred years achieved great things.

That the wings of our Eagle may not be clipped, nor the paws of our Lion,
which is to defend his Kingdoms and people, lamed, lessened, or cut shorter,
that the common and poorer sort of people may not (as they do begin already)
complain that the Nobility and Gentry have to ease themselves bound heavy
burdens upon them, that we may not (as Bodin Bodin. lib. 6, de Repub.
relates of Henry the Second King of France) fall into his mistake, who raising
a great Tax upon the people whereby to free them from the ravage and
insolences of the hired Soldiers, found it afterward to be an increase of
their grievances.

That the people may not do by their fundamental Laws (which they were but
lately much in love with, and called their Birthrights) as some young
Prodigals do by their Fathers dearly gained Lands, sell them for a mess of
Potage with Coloquintida in it, which would be a greater folly then the hungry
Esau committed; or as some young Gentlemen do, when (to get or save a little
money) they pull down their Ancestors ancient, great, and hospitable Houses,
and sell the Timber, Lead, and materials thereof, to put themselves in a more
speedy way of ruin.

That our King (who in extent of his Dominions and the Antiquity of his Royal
Blood and Descent is superior to the most of Kings and inferior to none) may
not be less then they in his Tenures or the dependency of his people, but be
girt with as much power and majesty as his glorious Progenitors.

That the Mighty men and the men of War may continue, that the Ensign of the
People, nor the Watchmen upon Mount Ephraim may not be taken away, that the
Vintage may not fail and the gatherings not come, that his Servants may not
ask* Where is the Corn and the Wine and not be known in the streets, but may
(as King Solomon's) every man in his course lack nothing, that their Children
(as it was of that wisest of Kings Servants, when Nehemiah long after returned
with the Children of Israel from Captivity) may be found in the Registers, that
the Splendour and Magnificence of the Kings of Englands Courts (far surpassing
those of France, Spain, the Emperors of Germany, and all other Christian
Princes) may not be impaired or diminished, and that our Paths and the glory
of our Lebanon and Excellency of Sharon and the foundations of many Generations
may be restored.

-- Casus Cassandra canebat.
FINIS.

