A Satirical Vision, OR, Tragy-Comedy AS IT Was lately Acted in the City of
BRISTOL, Discovered in a DREAM.

What ill-bred-Stars, or what Saturnian Fate
Did at this Cities Birth predominate,
Unhappy Place, thy Fortune was severe
Business, and Fools are most in Fashion here:
Religion they profess, but yet have none
Wealth is the chiefest Deity they own.
By E: Phileroy.

LONDON, Printed by G. Croom, for the Author. 1684.

TO THE Poor Dejected, and Despairing BRETHREN: THE Dissenting CREW in General,
under what Names or Titles soever, they desire to be Dignified, or
Distinguished.
Worthy Patriots.
I Know not to whom I could more properly make the Dedication of the following
Poem, since it seems naturally to crave your protection, not only as you are
the Subject of it, but because its palpable you have endeavored to monopolize
every thing that has but the appeareance of a Fault: so that it is but rational
to infer that you are able to bear mine too, tho never so Numerous in this
Poem, which I must confess was done in Raptim, and therefore must have the
greater need of such Patrons; not but that its an unquestioned Verity that you
have a sufficient stock of your own, without any addition of mine: For who (in
the Devils Name) has been the fomenters of all feuds and Animosities in this
Nation? But you: Who the Authors, and Abetters of all things that may seem to
oppose the common Tranquillity? But you: Who has endeavored by all that Hell
and Malice could invent, to make our Streets blush in Innocent Blood, and
Involve it once more into its Oliverian Chaos? But you: Who I say, has
endeavored the Total Subversion of Monarchy, the Ruin of three Kingdoms, the
destruction of Religion it self, and the undoing of all that Dare to be its
Proselytes? But you: So that by these and other your unparalelld Villainies (too
Numerous to Incert) you have put Hell to a nonplus, and the Devils, themselves
into Distraction and Amazement, to see themselves out done, and all together
incapable of preparing a place for your reception, adequate to the Worse then
Scythian Cruelties that you have, and would have perpetrated.

But not to make the Porch bigger then all the Fabric, I shall conclude with
this Charitable Prayer, may Poison be your Drink, and Toads, worse than Toads
your chiefest Delicacies, may your Names be Eternally Obliterated from Honors
Book, may your Curse, but equalize your defects, and as you have ever made
Blood your Bolster to lie on, so let Insupportable Greifs be your Play-fellows
and Inseparable Companions.

Adeiu, E. P.

To the Loyal READERS.
Gentlemen,
THere having been never any thing so dismally represented to my Iuvenile
Imaginations, as the late Horrid Proceedings of the Dissenting Crew in General,
and Jack Presbiter in particular, I thought I was obliged upon all occasions to
Expose its Abetters; especially, since they have been pleased to reiterate all
their Pristine villainies in the late Discovered formidable Plot, against the
best of Kings and Governments, and how far this City has been Concerned, I
suppose it would be Tautology in the Highest to Incert.

-- It being known as far
As is the Artick from the Antartick Star
But you great Souls of Numbers (whom Apollo has made Heirs to his ever Verdant
Tree) it is you, I say must Pardon my Pen-Featherd-Muse (who I fear by the
following unbak'd Poem has made Helicon a Puddle not a Spring) and I doubt it
not, when you Consider that she was willing to attempt some thing, nay resolved
that these Miscreants Exit should be attended with a Sheet

But Gentlemen being unwilling to detain you longer with Impertinences, I shall
only pray, that the Fates would be pleased to be so kind as to grant me this
small Request: That when I shall be matriculated amongst the Dead, (if that
with Pythagoras, there be a Metempsychosis) that they would send my soul into a
Cat, Porpois, or Owl: rather than any of these Religious Alchymists, these
Atheists against Earthly Gods -- that pursue,
Deeds after which, no mischief can be new.


To this Prayer, I shall only subjoin my Resolution, which in short is to
profess my self Eternally,

Your Most Devoted Servant E: Phileroy.

TO HIS Ingenious Friend Phileroy, on his Satirical Vision a Copy of which was
exposed and derided.
(1)
LEt factious Knaves and buisy Fools rail on
(The inveterate Foes to the Tribe of Helicon)
Whilst all impartial Men allow
What Is to your merit due,
For when they dissapprove of what you write,
It argues Barrenness of wit
In them, or Spite:
Yet whilst by them your wit's condemned;
It makes you more esteemed
By men of Loyalty and Sense,
For Envy always strikes at the greatest Excellence.
(2)
Write on then (Sr,) whilst empty Critics do
Their malice still pursue,
For your desert by it, does greater show.
Write on, and lash the Soul-less Sots to sense,
And teach the Rebel Crew Obedience,
Desist not Sr, nor think your merit less,
Because not Crowned with due success,
The mighty Laureat (that darling of the Nine)
Who in each Immortal Line,
Does wit and Judgment join,
Whose muse alone boy's up the sinking stage
(Such is the Ingratitude of the unthinking Age)
Is not beneath his Bays, free from their brutish Rage
So senceless Curs (they say) are often known
To bark with fury against the Radiant Moon,
Philo: Phileroy.

A Satirical Vision,
A Pollo's fiery Steeds were gone away,
And quite withdrawn, to give a Noon of Day
Unto the Antipodes, The sable Night
Was now approached, and Day had took 'its Flight
Serene the Air, and now each fragrant Tree
Advanced it self, and all things pleasant be
Dame Flora Struts in her new Livery:
When Pressed with the plague of business, I with drew
Into a Verdant Bower where I might Veiw
The Earth which whileom did in Penance stand
Clad in a sheet of Snow, does now command
Her glorious Slaves, who by their yearly Rise
Do Homage pay and make a Sacrifice:
Mantles of Various Roses now we see
Display themselves, and make a Galaxy,
These with a Purling Brook (whose streams did glide
And paid a Tribute to the Gardens Pride)
So charmed my Senses, that I must resign
And quickly paid my Vows at Morpheus Shrine:
No sooner was my Soul at Liberty,
But through untrodden paths away does sty
Unto a place, where Rebels make their Nest,
And Factions do, as in their causes, Rest:
Faction in all 'its Colors there did Ride,
And saine it would Eternally abide:
A Hodg poch of Religions there did dwell,
Heaven's their Pretention, but their aim is Hell:
A Miscellaneous sort of Rigid Slaves,
Censorious fops, dull Fools, but Cursed Knaves.
Here Is Splay Mouth with his brace of Caps does cry
Hallow my Hearts, Geneva
it is Cowards fear to die;
Let Us then pull down this Babel Monarchy;
We are the Saints; it is we must Rule, not they,
The Earth is ours, they therefore shall obey:
It Is thus Resolved, nor shall thy fate withstand,
But fall (Oh! City) by the unerring hand
Of us the Saints, who must and will Command.
They then in Shoals appear, whose noise appalls,
Much worse then Twenty Jrish Funerals:
The Hidcous Clamor of great Nilos fall
If but to them Compared was but small:
In fine, these Phaetons the world would burn,
And once more all into Confusion turn:
Asirea in great have descends from Heaven
(Hearing the irrevocable) Vote was given)
And being seated in her Splended Chair,
Summons these Miscreants forthwith to appear
And thus accosts them: Oh ye Sons of Hell:
"That only do in Villainy Excel;
"To the Black-Book whether you will or not
"You Are come, and must abide your Fatal Lot
"Your Shameless actions now might shame the Devil,
"That scorn not to be thought the Sum of Evil:
"Oh Impious Age devoted unto ill,
"Void of all Good, and is Resolved still
"To persevere, When will thou taste thy fill?
"It Is you that prosecute a Villainy,
"Which would create a Blush in the Sun to see:
"For if that Transmigration er'e was true,
"It Is now, it is now, most palpable in you:
"For Hell you Claim and take it as your due:
" Oh! Times Oh! Manners which Antiquity
"In all 'its Periods, nere the like could see;
"Nor will Posterity believe that Er'e,
"Such horrid Actions perpetrated were;
"You have resolved to seek out nothing less,
"Then the very Quintessence of Wickedness,
"Fearing to come behind the Age before
"In villainies, you now have Studied more;
"And for applause will act them over and over:
"Hence then dull Plotters, Hence ye Romish Crew
"Make Room for Nobler Sinners that out do
"As far the Devils, as the Devils you,
"Draw near ye Bloodhounds you that fain would bring
"States to Confusion, Ruin to a King:
"Draw near, and for your merits mount the Tree,
"To which your Fathers Copy makes you Free:
"And (since you were Ambitious) you shall have
"The Gates conferred upon you for a Grave:
"And you that did in so much honor Live, W^^^^ams (...) that, (...) argo
pares,

"As Council to maintain Prerogative,
" Justice has seized upon you; make no doubt
"That you shall have, therefore I Spew you out
"But you brave Hero's, you that did Repel
"These factious Zealots, and these broods of Hell;
"You that at Helm in the worst of times did stand,
"Resolving to defend your Native Land,
"And with your Lives maintain great Charles Command
"Blaze forth great Stars, for you shall each appear
"A Constellation in our Hemisphere
"Hence then Geneva Trash, you are out of date
"When these Bright Rays appear, you dissipate:
"Shine on Brave Souls and let these Villains see
"(Maugre their Hellish Arts and Treachery;
"That you shall shine thus to Eternity
"And now I go (methinks I hear the Skys
"Echo your praises in sweet Harmonies,
"I Constitute you all my deputies:
"But when these Brats of Hell shall once expire,
"I Will make the Devils rage, the Damned admire
"The Flames which These shall add unto Their fire,
This said, she in great have ascends the Skys,
And unto the Celestial Mansions Flys
No sooner gone, but faces we might see
As sad as grief could paint, or Masery,
Some howld, and cried, cursed be this Fatal Day
Let dismal Clouds and darkness come, and may
It e're in Times Book be enrolled thus
Black, Hideous, Fatal Inauspicious.
The Judges sat, the First (with dismal Cries
And trembling that un nervd his quaking Thighs)
Appeard, Earledom.
the Devils Enchiridion, he
That was his Factor for Iniquity:
This is the Hieroglyphick of all Vice,
The Scum and Spawne of Fiend now in disguise
Some took him for some Nobleman, and I
First thought there might be some Affinity
By's name, and faith he is Great in Villainy:
His sentence was to teach the Stones to Swim,
To Cut the Water, fill seives to the Brim:
His odious Name when mentioned should imply
The Sum and Abstract of Iniquity;
In fine, if e're he should appear again
To be the Perfect Subject of Disdain.
The next was ordered for to drink good Store
Without Delay of un mixed Helebore, Fin:

When the next came there issued joyful Cries
(Such as did reach the Star-enamel'd Skys)
O Let that Day for ever Banished be, Dies.

And ever hid in dull Obscurity,
Let naught but ill-presaging Owls appear,
Let it be cursed, and quite forgot in the Year.
T was thought sufficient for the next, Dirg.
that He
Should Penannce do, in his Wives Shist, whilst she
Firks him, (as Pluto Nol) Eternally.
The next Appearence was a Speaking Toast
A Living Sponge, Haleo.
that all his Brains had lost:
The Sentance he received in Short was thus;
That he should punished be, with Tantalus.
Some say the Devil's unto Black inclined;
But faith he is Brown, Brow. All us.
and sometimes White we find:
Yet, that this difference reconciled might be,
T was ordered that they still be One, not three,
Since in Black Crimes they all so well agree.
What Prodigy in Nature next does move
Bless us! Coleman
A Horned Beast with Teeth above!
Monster of Nature! Let him never be
Admitted into Man's Society,
Let him be Pimp unto his Rampant Whore
Let him ( Contented Fool) attend the Door
Till Time and Memory shall be no more,
A Wife' Heavens bless us! with a Parboild Face
A Gypsy Varnish to prevent Disgrace.
Next comes of Tigers or of Panthers brood,
Whose Dreadful Healths are Morning draughts in Blood:
Replenish villain^ that Hell does Inspire, Cis.

May Heaven once more Vomit such fleakes of fire
As might make thee and all the Damned admire:
It Was ordered (that when Rising Stars should Spread
Their Golden flames, and Sol withdraw his Head)
For Barking Owls, Ambiguous Bats that he
Without delay should a Companion be,
And hooted quite from all men's Company.
Desert comes next, and he must Merit Well,
Therefore with Staly, he was sent to Hell, Meritus.

And there 't was thought would teach him to Rebel.
Twice Sacred Powers assist my Trembling Quill!
(You that do ever haunt the Sacred Hill,)
Oh! be propitious, Oh lassist my Pen
To anatomize the Deeds of worse than Men.
The next Appearance was the Stygian King
That Prince of Acheron, who with him did bring
A Leash of Beagles, Leycors, Wats, Jack.
who their Game so well
Pursued, that to be firebrarnds of Hell
They well deserved; He therefore did desire
They might be added to his hungry fire:
And since they served so well, without delay,
He begged that he might them their Wages pay;
It Was soon agreed, since they were known to be
The exact Perfection of all Villainy:
With that he Seized them, and with his Nimble wings
(So have I seen how from the Trembling strings
The piercing Arrows quickly fly away)
He breaks the boundless Air without delay:
With that Exalted voices Reach the Skies,
Which was succeeded with Resounding Cries,
" If that in Hell there no more Torments be,
" We Will not come there, because we them must see.
These, Ningdum Cor Flindg Gle -- etc.
by some Mungrel Bats, Succeeded were,
That of this Factious Crew brought up the Rear:
These Sons of Proteus, that do ever Run
With the Current, and adore the Rising Sun;
These present Tenses, that be that or this,
Were by a Speedy Metamorphosis
Transformed, and in a Moment did put on
The Various Forms of the Camelion:
Thus the Rewards of Faction here will be
Shame, or to Dangle on the Fatal Tree;
Hereafter Horror, Pain and Misery.
With that a voice was heard like Thunder Loud,
When it has broke through a divided Cloud
And thus began: -- O! Happy Happy Day
"Be thou e're Crowned with Sols most glorious Ray;
"I'menow imparadiz'd, methinks. I see
"The Gods descend, and jointly do agree:
"To honor it, Kind Neptune lays aside
"His Trident, Aeolus the Winds does hide:
"Methinks I see upon each smiling Wave
"The Sportive Nymphs to Dance, the wind their slave
"To wait upon them, now Apolloe's Quire
"With their melodious sonnets so Inspire;
"That the wild Satyrs Dancing on the Strand,
"Like gazing Stags they in amazement stand:
"Swell then my Charming Joys, and let this Day
"Be Consecrated, let it nere decay,
"Until the Ox take wing and fly away.
"Let Bacchus now in burnished Gold go Round,
"And Music in a well digested sound
"Shall pierce the willing Air in Sweet Contention,
"Raping the willing Ears into Attention,
"Our Tables shall groan with Varietys
"Which may the most Luxurious Pallats please.
"The studied Dishes which shall re-supply,
"Each vacancy will so invite the Eye,
"That only with the fight 't will satisfy:
"In fine we will think that we have lost that hour,
"That adds not to our Pleasure or our Power:
With that the People made the Palace Ring,
Who in their Joyful acclamations Sing,
Long live Great Charles, Long live our Gracious King:
At which with Silken Wings Sleep from my Eyes
Quite disappears, and now away she Flies.
POSTSCRIPT.
YOur Pardon Gentlemen, for Faith my Aerie Genious was not so trusty, as I
imagined, (as I had like to have found to my cost;) For going the other day to
hear what News; I was accosted by a Diminitive Bookseller, who came quivering
and trembling, (as does the Earth when Neptune strikes,) and cried Justice; For
that he was left out in the preceding Poem: whereas ( consideratis
considerandis,) he had deserved it as much as any; I told him he should have
Justice done: Upon which, I have presumed to subjoin this additional Character.

WEll then, to begin with my Gentleman, He is a True Iack-a-Lent that is so
charitable to land a light to others, but himself nothing but a Vapor: And if
ever the Devil appeared in our times like a Samuel, it is he: For take him as
to his appearance he may be tolerably honest; but when Opus, and Usus, are the
case (so it may be privately secured or obtained,) He begs your Pardon, and is
a Devil with an Emphasis: That is to say a True Whigg: So that like the Apples
of Sodom to look on, he may be fair and delectable, but come to the Test is
wholly putrified: Take him in his return from a Tavern, he will make an
Excellent Lawyer, for he ever makes Indentures as he goes: There is a great
disproportion between his head and his glass, the former being ever empty, but
the latter full, provided it be at other men's charges: He is an Exact Italian
in Carnival Time, one side of him French, and the other Spanish; for when a
Whig comes he is True-blew, but if Loyalty appear he is then as true as Steel;
So that with the Marygold he follows the Sun, and opens and shuts with that
that is uppermost. If we may term a Cipher any thing, he may then pretend to be
something; for he was ever such in the Accounts of all that have tried him, if
so we may soon sum up all that concerns him, which in short may be thus:
Newgate (as long as he lives) is The Golledge he belongs to, whither he hourly
expect; to be sent for, in order to be matriculated, The Gallows when he dies)
his unavoidable Receiver, and Hell (after his Exit,) his most certain Ne plus
ultra, where he will undoubtedly cheat Pluto, (as he did all that dwelt with
him upon Earth,) for Quivering, Shaking, and Gnashing of Teeth, he has so
familiarized himself to here because he has resolved they small be no
punishment to him hereafter. But more particularly;

As to his Parentage, he was begot by Proteus on a Chamelion, and for his
Religion it is to choose: for he will Conform, Perform, Reform into any Form, so
as he may be Viccar of Bray, (that is, so as he may be kept from breaking,) yet
to give the Devil his due he is so Religious, that he never awakes but with
this Godly Letany in his mouth, from unfill'd Canns, and empty Bowls, Libera
me; for full ones are now as Natural to him as a Cittern is to a Barber, which,
rather then want he would choose all the Plagues of Ae^gip: He is resolved to
Sympathise with his Trade, and has therefore bound himself up in Sheep Skin,
(and is a Sot) in Folio: He is such a super-annuated Sardanapalus, that I
Question if the Plague was a Woman, whether he would stick to Court it, for so,
3 might be saved ( i: e: himself, Bacchus, and Vanus) he cares not if the World
runs into it is Pristine Deluge again.

In fine, as to his valor it is great. For he is Cozen German to the Satyr that
fell dead at the noise of his own Horn, for going the other day through a
Street, his Sword happened to touch his Leg, at which he was struck into such
an unwonted amazement, that his Limbs were imediately disjointed and un-nerved:
From which perceiving he is never able to disengage himself, I must there leave
him Quivering and Shaking till Time it self shall have.

AN END.

