Tenenda non Tollenda, OR The Necessity of Preserving TENURES IN CAPITE and by
KNIGHT SERVICE, Which according to their first Institution were, and are yet,
a great part of the Salus Populi, and the Safety and Defense of the King, as
well as of his People.

TOGETHER With a Prospect of the very many Mischiefs and Inconveniences, which
by the taking away or altering of those Tenures, will inevitably happen to the
KING and his KINGDOMS.

By Fabian Philipps, Esquire

Claudian Lib. 2. Ne pereat tam priscus Honos qui portus honorum.

Semper erat, nullo Sarciri Consule Damnum.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Leach, for the Author, and are to be sold by Abel
Roper at the Sign of the Sun in Fleetstreet, 1660.

To the Right Honorable Sir Edward Hide Knight, Baron of Hindon, and Lord
Chancellor of England.
My Lord,
EVery man who has not been out of his Wits or his own Country, or like the
Poet Epimenides, who is said to have slept more than Twenty years.

And has but understood or experimented the many Miseryes and Confusions which
our new Reformers and Modellers of Government, (who like unskilful Architects,
cannot amend a part of an house without overturning the whole Fabric upon the
heads of the Owners) have treated the Faction and Ignorance of too many of the
seduced people of this Kingdom withal; And sitting by the Waters of Babylon had
not forgot Jerusalem, or but remembered the happiness of the Condition we
before enjoyed under a gracious and pious Prince in an Ancient, and for many
ages past, most happy Monarchy, and with Tears of Joy welcomed it again in the
Return of his sacred Majesty, and all our peace and plenty from a sad and long
oppressing Captivity, must needs think himself obliged not only to pray for the
Peace of our Syon but to endeavor all he can to uphold the Kings Rights and
Jurisdictions.

Who being our Lex viva, and guarding Himself, us and our Laws, is with them
the sure support of us and all that is or can be of any Concernment to us and
our Posterityes; And therefore when we are taught by our Laws, and the sage*
Interpreters and Expounders thereof, That every Subject has an Interest in the
King as the Head of the We^le Public, and as the inferior Members cannot
estrange them selves from the Actions or Passions of the head, Hollands Case in
Coke^ 4 Reports.
no less can any Subject make himself a Stranger to any thing which touches
the King or their supreme Head, And that not a few but very many knowing and
able men are of opinion not ushered in by Fancy or first Notions, but well
weighed and built with Reason and good Authorities that the exchanging of the
Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, for a constant yearly payment of
100000 l. will level the Regality, and turn the Sovereignty into a dangerous
popularity, and take away or blunt the Edge of the Sword, by which his Majesty
is to defend his people; I could not but conceive it to be my Duty (and a
failer of my Duty and Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy not to do it) to offer
to consideration the antiquity and right use of Tenures in this and other
Kingdoms, that they are no Slavery nor Grievance, how from a project in the
beginning of the Reign of King James, it came to trouble several Parliaments,
the small benefits will come to the Subjects by altering those Tenures, and the
many Inconveniences and Mischiefs which will inevitably follow, and that it is
such a flower of the Crown, as the power of an Act of Parliament, and consent
of the King and his Nobility, and people cannot take away, wherein, though I
may well say it is a matter, as Livy said of his undertaking to write the Roman
History Immensi Operis, and that the disquisition of it requiring greater
Abilities than I can lay any claim unto; and the excellent Order heretofore
used, that all Books of the Law, or very much concerning it* should be perused
and allowed by the Reverend Judges of the Law, before they should be Printed
and published, might have been enough to have made me either to desist, or have
attended their approbation; Yet when the good intentions of many Parliament men
of the House of Commons to make the King a constant Revenue were so busy to
prepare an Act of Parliament to dissolve those more useful and honorable
Tenures into a Socage, which will never arrive to the Salus Populi they aim at.
I have like some well-wishing Roman to his Countries good, in my Cares, and
fear least any thing should hurt, dislocate, or disturb, that well ordered and
constituted Government, under which our Progenitors enjoyed so much Honor,
Peace und Plenty, hasted Currente Calamo, to a modest inquiry into the grounds
and motives, for the dissolution of them, and the Court of Wards, and an
examination of that to be prepared Act in the General (for as to the Preamble,
Cl^uses or Provisoes, they are not permitted to be seen before the Act passes)
the Rogatio Legum as it was amongst the Romans, being not here in use in some
cases as it may be wished it were, and when none else would publicly
endeavor to rescue them, have without any Byasse or partiality as well as I
could, represented what has been the right use of them, and what may be the
Inconveniences if they should be changed or altered, and that they are not
guilty of the charge which is supposed, but never will be proved against them.

And confess that it deserved a better Advocate than my self, who having
attempted to do it horis Succ^s^vis and interturbationes rerum, am Conscious to
my self that much more might have been said for it, and that the matter was
capable of a better form, and might have appeared in a better dress, if my
care to do something as fast as I could, had not for want of time hindered me
from doing what I might.

But I hope that your Lordship who has trod the Paths of Affliction, and in
the attendance and care of a persecuted Monarchy, and an Afflicted most
Gracious Prince, who has born the burden of His own Sorrows and Troubles, as
well as of a Loyal party that Suffered wi^h and for Him and His Royal Father*
have in Your Travails and residence in many Kingdoms and parts beyond the Seas,
viewed and seen the Fundamentals and Order of other Kingdoms, the Policies and
good Reiglements of some, and the Errors and Infirmities of others, will with
your learned Predecessor the Chancellor Fortescue in the Reign of King Henry
the 6^h. the more admire and love the Laws and excellent Constitutions of
England, which as a Quintessence of right reason, may seem to have been
Limbecked and drawn out of the best of Laws, and choice of all which might be
learned out of other Nations, or the Records or Treasury of Time, and find
reason enough to be of the opinion of that well knowing Statesman, Fortescue de
laudibus Legum Angl^ae.
that non minime erit regno accommodum, ut Incolae ejus in artibus sint
experti, and quod domus regia sit tanquam gymnasium supremum nobilitatis regni
schola quoque Strenuitatis probitatis and morum quibus regnum honoretur, and
floret ac contra Irruentes securatur, and hoc revera bonum accidisse non
pottuisset regno illi, Si nobilium fil^i Orphani and Pupilli per pauperes
amicos parentum suorum nutrirentur, and greatly approve as he did of our
Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service (which have heen since better ordered,
and more deserve that, and a better commendation) and to put forth your hand to
rescue them, who have hitherto as great Beams, pieces of Timber, or Pillars,
helped to bear up and sustain the Fabric of our Ancient and Monarchical
Government, and have no other fault, but that they are misunderstood and
misrepresented to the vulgar, who by making causeless complaints and
multiplying them, have done of late by our Laws and best Constitutions, as the
Boys are used to do when they hunt Squirrels with Drums, shouts and Noyses; And
that your Lordship who is able to say much more for that Institution and Right
use of Tenures, will be pleased to accept of my good Intentions, and pardon the
Imperfections of

London 23. November 1660. Your Lordships most Humble Servant Fabian Philipps.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF the antiquity and use of Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service,
in England, and other Nations. page 1. CHAP. II. The holding of Lands in
Capite, and by Knight service, is no Slavery or Bondage to the Tenant or
Vassals. 12. CHAP. III. Tenures of Lands in Capite, and by Knight service, are
not so many in number as is supposed, nor were, or are any public or general
Grievance. 29. CHAP. IV. How the design of altering Tenures in Capite, and by
Knight service, into Socage Tenures, and D^ssolving the Court of Wards and
Liveries, and the Incidents, and Revenue belonging thereunto, (...) out of the
Forges of some private men's imagi^^^ions, to be afterward agitated in
Parlia^^nt. 145. CHAP. V. The Benefits or Advantages which are expected ^y the
people in putting down of the Court of wards and Liveries, and changing the
Tenures in Capi^e and by Knight service, into free and common S^cage. 154.
CHAP. VI. The great, and very many Mischiefs and Inconveniences which will
happen to the King, and Kingdom, by taking away Tenures in Capite, and Knight
service. 157. CHAP. VII. That Tenures in Capite, and Knight service, holden of
the King, and the Homage and Incidents thereunto appertaining, and the right of
the Mesne Lords, cannot be dissolved, or taken away by any Act of Parliament.
The Conclusion. 258.
Errata's, or Faults escaped in Printing, by the have of the Press.
PAge 1 line 1 leave out and, p. 2 l 28 for be read by. p. 6 l 12 for or
Knights, r and Knights, p. 8 l 16 leave out that. ib. r in Capite and Knight
service. p. 9 l 25 for where r were. p. 17 in the margent leave out the
quotation note. p. 21 l 18 r. his enfant. p. 23 l 23 r. be the less free, p.
24, l 26. for was r. were. p. 36. l 12, r them, 20 H. 3.6. p. 38 l 3 for E 1 r.
E 3. p. ib. l 6. r person, 42 E 3.5. p 40. l 31. for of, r. or p. 43. l 18. r
thought to. p. 54 l. 16. leave out and. p. 68 l. 14 leave out was. p^ 81 l. 12
for a^ r. in p. 82 l. 15 for E. 3 r E 1. p. 100 l. 7 for 1648 r. 1643. p. 111
l. 2 leave out his. p. 125 l. 1 for Episcopium, r Episcopum. ib. l 18. r hold
by. ib. l. 23, r nor could, 126. l 12 for ^e r. to. p. 131 l 32. r For it. p.
13^ l. 1 leave out Laws after the. ib. l. 2 leave out the. ib. l. 15 for and
r. for. p. 135 l 6. r or by p. 136 l. 14 for and ^ which. p. 138 in the margent
leave out Litletons quotation, p. 140 l. 13 leave out an. p. 154 l. 10 r. Grand
and Petit. p 159. in the margent for XI r II. p. 162. against l 12 in the
margent put V. ib. against l 33. put VI. p. 163. l 4. for Protections, r
Portions* ib. in the margent against l 8, put VII. ib. against ^ 20, put VIII.
p. 164 l 4. for and, r shall. ib. in the margent against l 15, put IX. p. 165
against l 33. put X. p. 166 against l 5. put XI. ib. against l. 10 put XII. ib.
against l 14, put XIII. ib. against l 26. put XIV. p. 17 r l. 15 for amore r.
more* p. 174 in the margent, for Olbertus r. Obertus. p. 183 in margent for
Lovelaces r. Lo^es. p. 184 l. 16. leavo out in. p. 185 l. 32. leave out they.
p. 187 l. 9. for enernate, r enervate. ib. l 24. for displaced r. displayed* p.
192 l. 15. leave out if not recompensed by some Annual payment. p. 194 l. 8. r.
under the penalties of. ibib. l 9. leave out under the penalties. p. 212, l 22.
r be a Baron, ibib. leave out of Holt. p. 217 l. 2. for derived r. deemed. p.
222 in the margent against l. 15 put L. p. 241 in the margent against l 6. put
LXIV. p. 24^ against l 4 put LXV. p. 246. against 26, put LXXII. p. 247. l 4.
for know r knowing, p. 254. l 20, r which is, ib. 28, r and the^ p. 255 l 24, r
or that. p. 259 l 18. for it r them. ib. l 23 leave out upon all. p. 268. l 4.
leave out and. p. 269, l 15, r or to^ p. 274. l 33 for of, r if. p. 275. l 11,
leave out would ruine^ (...) l, 13, r Baronies would be ruined.

CAP. I. Of the Antiquity and use of Tenures in capite and by Knight service in
England and other Nations.
THe Law of Nature, and that secret and great Director under God, and his Holy
Spirit of all men's Actions, for their safety, and self preservation, by the
Rules or Instinct of Right Reason, and the Beams of Divine Light and
Irradiations; (So far as those Laws of Nature are not contrary to positive and
Humane Laws which are always either actively or passively to be obeyed) having
in the beginning of time, and its delivery out of the Chaos, made and allowed
Orders, and distinctions of mankind, as they have been found to be more Rich,
Wise, Virtuous, Powerful, and Able, than others, and therefore the fitter to
Protect, Defend, and do good unto such as wanted those Abilities and
Endowments, and constituted and ordained the faith and just performances also
of Contracts, Promises, and Agreements, and the acknowledgements of benefits
and favors received, being no strangers to those early days; when the
Patriarch Abraham had leave given him by Abimelech King of Gerar to dwell in
the Land where it pleased him, and that Abimelech in the presence of Phicol the
chief Captain of his Host, who took himself to have some concernment in it,
required an Oath of him, That he would not deal falsely with him, nor with his
Sons son, but Genes. 21.23.
according to the kindness that he had done unto him. and to the Land in which
he had Sojourned; And that Abraham thereupon swore (which somewhat resembles
our Oath of Fealty or Fidelity) and took Sheep and Oxen (for then Pecus was
instead of pecunia, which is derived a Pecude) and gave unto Abimelech, and
both of them made a Covenant.

It will (though as in many other matters not tending to man's Salvation, which
are not expressed in the sacred Story; there is not so full and clear a light
and evidence, as to entitle the holding of Land by the service of going to War
to so great a Warrant or Original, as that of a Scripture direction or
example.) Notwithstanding be no wild or improbable conjecture, that some such,
or the like obligations, more than the affections, and good will, of the
people, did lie upon them, or their Estates, not to forsake their King and
Country in time of Wars and distress, the Law of Nature teaching the necessity
of the Members readiness and combination to preserve the head and its well
being, as well as their own Estates and well beings, in that of their King or
Supreme Governor, and every man's particular in the General, when as the
ancient Inhabitants of the Earth, or some of them at least, as appears by
Jacobs blessing to his Sons upon his Deathbed, became Servants to Tribute, and
Moses by the advice of Iethro his Father-in-law, did choose able men ou^ of all
Israel, and made them Heads over the people, and Rulers, which were afterward
called Captains of thousands, Rulers of hundreds, fifties, and tens, to be as a
standing and certain Militia, and all the people young and old that had not
rebelled with Absalom, went out with David, Rehoboham his Grandchild ou^ of the
two Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, could muster an hundred and fourscore
thousand chosen men which were Warriors, to preserve their Prince in War, and
defend his, as well as their own Estates, and that some such, or the like
obligations, passed betwixt Solomon and Hyram King of Tire, when he gave him
the twenty Cities in the Land of Gallilee.

And that from thence either by Tradition, or Travel of Philosophers or wise
men into those more knowing Countries and Regions of Palestine or Egypt, where
Gods chosen and peculiar people of Israel, had a nearer communication with him,
and his Divine Illuminations, or by those secret dictates, and the Edicts
Statutes and Decrees of the Law of Nature, whereby as the Judicious and Learned
Hooker says, Hooker Ecclesiastic. Polit. lib. 1.
Humane Actions are framed, and the Chincks and Crannyes, by which the wisdom
of the Almighty, that intellectual worker as Plato and Anaxagoras styled him,
is wont imperceptibly to diffuse and impart its impressions, into the Customs
and manners of men.

That custom now about 2293 years ago, used by Romulus in his new established
City or Empire of Rome, took its rise or beginning of appointing the Plebeian
or common people, to make choice of whom they could out of the Patricij,
Senators, or Eminent men, to protect them in their causes or concernments, in
recompense or lieu whereof, the Clyents were to contribute, if need were, to
the marriages of their Daughters, redeem them or their Sons, when they were
taken Gellius lib. 1. cap. 13.
Captives in War, as bearing a reverence or respect to their Lords, or Patroni;
Bud^us in Annotat. ad Pandect.
to the end, that they might be defended by them, and that they should
reciprocally propter beneficium, the help and favor received from them,
maintain and defend their dignity, and that duty or Clientela was therefore not
altogether improperly called Homagium or Homage, as a Service pro beneficio
prestandum, for a benefit had, or to be enjoyed, and accipitur pro patrocinio
and protectione, and taken to be as a patronage and protection, insomuch as
upon the Conquest or reducing of any province into their obedience, they did in
Clientelam se dare Romany, acknowledge a Duty or Homage, either to the Senate,
or certain of the Nobility, or great men to be their Patroni or Protectors,
quae necessitudo, or near relations, which were betwixt t^em, id serebat says
Oldendorpius Oldendorpius.
ut Clientes perpetua Patronorum protectione defenderentur, ac vicissim eos
omni obsequio colerent, brought it so to pass that the Clyents enjoyed a
constant protection of their Patrons, or great men, and exhibited for it a duty
and obedience unto them.

From which kind of Customs, and usages, Tutandae vitae ac fortunarum omnium,
for the defense of life and estate, Oldendorpius.
veluti scintillis quibusdam caepit initium benificiariae consuetudinis quae
aucta est multum propter continuam bellorum molestiam, as from increasing
sparks or small beginnings that beneficial Custom taking its original, which
by continuance of wars and troubles was much increased; another kind of
Clientela was introduced, (though there be as Craig says, a Craig. de Feudis*
great difference betwixt Clientela and Vassalagium,) qua vel dignitas vel
praedium aliquod, alicui datur, ut et ipse istius posteri, et haeredes
beneficii auctorem perpetuo agnoscant, et quasi pro Patrono colant, ejusque
caput existimationem et fortunas tueantur; whereby either some dignity or lands
were given to any one, to the end that he and his heirs should always
acknowledge the giver to be the Author of that benefit, reverence and esteem
him as their Patron and defend him, and his life reputation and fortunes. In
resemblance whereof, or from the eommon principle of Reason, that private or
particular men, or their estates cannot be safe or in any good condition, where
the public is either afflicted, or ruined, was the use or way of Tenures in
Capite, or Knights Service, found out and approved by Kings and Emperors, ut
cum delectus edicitur in Cujacius de seudis. lib. 1.
militiam eant vel vicarium mittant, vel certum ce^sum domini aerario inferant,
that when a muster was to be made, or a going to War, they should either go in
person, or send one in their stead, or pay a certain ra^e in money, and was so
ancient and universal, as whilst the Germans would entitle themselves to be the
first of Nations, introducing it, the Gauls or French were so unwilling to
come behind them, as they endeavor out of Caesar's Commentaries, to make
themselves the right owners of it, where he says, that Eos qui opibus inter
Gallos valebant multos habuisse devotos quos secum ducerunt in bello Soldarios
sua lingua nuncupatos quorum haec erat conditio, ut omnibus in vita commodis
cum ijs fruerentur quorum amicitiae se dedissent, quod si quid pervim
accidisset, aut cundem casum ferrent ipsi, aut mortem sibi consciscerent; the
Gauls which were rich or had good Estates, had some which were devoted unto
them, which followed them in the Wars* and in their language were called
Soldiers, and enjoyed a livelihood under them, and if any evil happened unto
them, either endured it with them, or willingly ventured their lives with them,
others attribute it to the Saxons, ubi jus antiquissimum feudorum semper viguit
et adhuc, says the learned Craig. religiose observatur, where the feudal Laws
were, and are yet most religiou^ly observed, and Cliens and Vasallus, in
matters of F^wds and Tenures, are not seldom in the Civil Law, and very good
Authors become to be as Synonimes, and used one for the other.

And the later Grecians since the Reign of Constantine Gerardus Niger in
Cujacio lib. de feudis.
Porphyrogenneta in the East, and the Roman Emperors in the West, before, and
since the Reign of Charlemain, or Charles the great, were not without those
necessary defenses of themselves, and their people; And such a general benefit,
and ready and certain way of aid and help, upon all emergencies in the like
usage of other Nations, making it to be as a Law of Nations.

There has been in all or most Kingdoms and Monarchies of the World, as well
Heathen, as Christian, a dependency of the Subject upon the Prince or
Sovereign, and some duties to be performed by reason of their Lands and
Estates, which they held under their Protection, and in many of them, as
amongst the Germans, Saxons, Franks, and Longobards, and several other Nations
descending from them; Tenures in capite, and Knight service, were esteemed as a
foundation and subsistency of the right and power of Sovereignty and
Government, and being at the first Craig, de origin f^udor^m, d^eg. 4.
precariae ex domini solius arbitrio, upon courtesy at the will only of the
Prince or Lord, were afterward Annals from year to year, after that feuda
ceperunt esse vitalia, their Estates or Fees became to be for life, and after
for Inheritance.

So as by the Law of England, we have not properly Allodium C^ke 1. part
Inst^t. so. 1. b.
(says Coke) that is, any Subjects Land which is not holden of some Superior,
and that Tenures in capite, appear not to be of any new institution in the book
of Doomsday, or in Edward the Confessors days, an. 1060. in King Athelstans,
an. 903. in King Canutus his Reign, in King Ke^ulphus his Reign, an. 821. or in
King Ina's Reign, an. 720. In Imitation whereof and the Norman (no slavish)
Laws, and usages which as to Tenures, by the opinion of William Roville of
Alenzon, in his Preface to the grand Customier of Normandy, were first brought
into Normandy out of England, by our Edward the Confessor, and the Customs and
Policies of other People and Kingdoms, prudent Antiquity having in that manner
so well provided by reservation of Tenures, for the defense of the Realm.
William the Conqueror sound no better means to continue and support the Frame
and Government of this Kingdom, then upon many of his gifts and grants of Land,
(the most part of England being then by conquest in his Demeasne) to reserve
the Tenures and Service of those, and their Heirs; to whom he gave it in
Capite, and by Knight Service; and if Thomas Sprot Spelmans gloss. p. ^58.
and other ancient Authors and Traditions, mistake not in the number of them
Seldom tit. Hon. p. 692, 693.
(for that there were very many is agreed by the Red Book in the Exchequer, and
diverse Authentiques) created 60215 Knights Fees, which with their Homage,
incidents, and obligations, to serve in Wars with the addition of those many
other Tenures by Knights service, which the Nobility, great men, and others,
(besides those great quantities of Lands and Tenements, which they and many as
well as the King, and others our succeeding Princes, gave Colonis and Hominibus
inferioris notae, to the ordinary and inferior sort of people to hold in
Socage. Burgage, and Petit Serjeantie) reserved upon their gifts, and grants
to their Friends, Followers, and Tenants, who where to attend also their mesne
Lords in the service of their Prince, could not be otherwise then a safety and
constant kind of defense for ever after to this Kingdom; And by the Learned
Spelman* gloss.
Sir Henry Spelman said to be due, non solum jure positivo sed and gentium and
quodammodo naturae, not only by positive Law, but the Law of Nations, and in
some sorts by the Law of Nature.

Especially when it was not to arise from any compulsary or uncertain way, or
involuntary contribution, or out of any personal or moveable estate, but to fix
and go along with the Land, as an easy and beneficial tie, and perpetuity upon
it, and is so incorporate and inherent with it, as it has upon the matter a
co-existence, or being with it; and Glanvil and Bracton are of opinion, that
the King must have Arms, as well as Laws to Govern by, and not depend ex
aliorum Arbitrio, it being a Rule of Law, that quando Lex aliquid concedit, id
concedit, sine quo res ipsa esse non potest, when the Law grants any thing,
it grants that also which is necessary and requisite to it.

And therefore the old oath of Fealty, which by Edward the Confessors Laws was
to be administered in the Folcmotes, LL. Ed. Confessor. cap. 35.
or assemblyes of the People once in every year, Fide et Sacramento non fracto
ad defendendum regnum contra Alienigenas, et Inimicos cum Domino suo, Rege, et
terras, et honores, illius omni fidelitate cum eo servare, et quod illi ut,
Domino suo Regi intra et extra regnum Britanniae fideles esse volunt, by faith
and oath, inviolable to defend the Kingdom against all strangers, and the
Kings Enemies, and the Lands and dignity of the King, to preserve, and be
faithful to him, as to their Lord, as well within, as without the Kingdom of
Britain, which was not then also held to be enough, unless also there were a
tie and obligation upon the Land, and therefore enacted that, debeant universi
liberi homines secundum feodum suum, and secundum tenementa Lambert fo. ^35*
sua arma habere, and illa semper prompta conservare ad tuitionem Regni, and
servicium Dominorum su^rum juxta preceptum Domini Regis explendum and
peragendum; every free man according to the proportion of his Fee and Lands,
should have his Arms in readiness for the defense of the Kingdom, and Service
of their Lords, as the King should command; And it was by William the Conqueror
ordained, quod omnes liberi homines fide et Sacramento Spelman: gloss in verbo
fidelitatis*
affirment, quod intra and extra universum Regnum, Willielmo Regi Domino suo
fideles esse volunt terras and honores suos omni fidelitate ubique servare cum
eo and contra Inimicos and Alieniginas defendere, that all Freemen should take
an Oath, that as well within as without the Realm of England, they should be
faithful to their King and Lord, and defend every where him and his Lands,
Dignity, and Estate, with all faithfulness against his Enemies and Foreiners;
Et Statuit and firmiter precepit, ut omnes, Comites, Barons, Milites, and
Servientes, Teneant se semper in Armis and in Equis ut decet and oportet, and
quod sint semper prompti and parati ad servicium suum integrum explendum and
peragendum cum semper opus adfuerit secundum quod debent de ^eodis and
tenementis suis de jure facere, Appointed and commanded, that all Earls,
Barons, Knights, and their Servants, should be ready with their Horse and Arms,
as they ought, to do, their Service which they owed, and were to do for their
Fees and Lands when need should require, and was beneficial to the Vassal or
Tenant.

CAP. II. The holding of Lands in Capite, and by Knight Service, is no Slavery
or Bondage to the Tenant or Vassal.
FOr his lands were a sufficient recompense for the service which he performed
for them, and his Lord besides the lands which he gave the Tenant, gave him
also a protection and help in lieu of the service which he received from him;
For though as Bodin cap. 7.
Bodin observes, vassallus dat fidem nec tamen accipit* The Tenant makes
fealty to his Lord, but receives none from him, there is betwixt them, mutua
fides et tuendae salutis, et dignitatis utriusque obligatio contracta, a mutual
and reciprocal obligation to defend one another.

And when the Donee had lands freely conferred upon him and his Heirs, upon
that consideration, ( omnia feoda, as well in Capite and Knights service
tenure, as Copyhold and more inferior Tenures, being at first, ad arbitrium
Domini) no man can rightly suppose that he would refuse the reservation of
Tenure and incidents unto it, or imagine it to be a servitude, or any thing
else but an Act of extraordinary favor arising from the Donor, which by the
Civil Law and Customs of Nations, challenged such an hereditary gratitude and
return of thankfulness as amongst many other privileges thereupon accrued to
the Donor, if any of the Heirs of the Lord of the Fee happened to fall into
distress, the Heirs of the Tenant, though never so many ages and descents
after, were to relieve them, Besoldus discurs. Polit. p. 74* Spelman gloss. p.
254, 256. Alber. Gentilis p. 696.
Domini utilitatem proferre et incommoda Propellere, et si cum poterit non
liberaverit eum a morte feudo sive beneficio suo privabitur, such a Donee or
Tenant was to advance the good of his Lord, or Benefactor, and hinder any
damage might happen unto him and forfeit and be deprived of those lands, if he
did not when he could rescue him from death, for Feudum ut habeat, et Dominum
non juvet rationis non est, it is no reason that he should enjoy that land or
benefit, and not help or assist him which gave it, and by our Law, if such a
Tenant ceased to do his service (if not hindered by any legal impediment) by the
space of two years upon a Cessavit per Biennium, brought by the Lord, the land
if no sufficient distress was to be had was forfeited, if he appeared not upon
the distress, and paid the arreares.

And such Tenure carrying along with it an end and purpose in its original
institution, not only of preservation and defense of the Donor, but of the
Kingdom and protection also of the Tenant, and the land which was bestowed
upon him.

And being a voluntary and beneficial paction submitted unto by the Tennant
(insomuch as Feudum, whether derived from the German word Feec or war or a
fide prestanda, or a faedere, inter utrosque contracto is not seldom in the
Civil Law called beneficium,) may with reason enough be conceived to be
cheerfully after undergone and approved of by the Tennants and their Heirs,
receiving many Privileges thereby as not payign any other aids or Tallages
besides the service which their Tenures enjoined them, (which. by a desuetude or
necessity of the times is not now allowed them) not to be excommunicated by the
Pope or Clergy, which ( H. 2. Mat. Paris, 100.
amongst other Laws and Customs observed in the time of his Grandfather, H.
1.) in the Parliament at Clarindon, claimed as a special privilege belonging
to him and those which held of him in capite, (which in those days was worthily
accounted amongst the greatest of exemptions) and of creating like Tenures to
be holden of themselves with services of War Wardship, Marriage, and other
incidents, to have their heirs in minority, not only protected in their persons
and estates, which in tumultuous and unpeaceable Times, was no small benefit,
but to be gently and virtuously educated in Bellicis artibus, feats and actions
of arms taught to ride the great horse and manage him, and himself completely
armed with Shield and Lance, married without disparagement in his own or a
better rank and quality, his equitatura, or Horse and Arms could not be taken
in execution unless he dishonourably absented himself when his service was
required and then all that he had was subject to execution saving one horse
which was to be left him propter dignitatem militiae, and have no usury (which
in those days especially until the reign of E. 1. By Jews and a sort of
foreiners called Caursini was very oppressive and intolerable) run upon them
for their fathers Debts whilst they were in wardship.

Besides many other great privileges belonging to Knights and Gentry (the
original of many of whom was anciently by Arms and military service) allowed
them by our Laws of England, as well as by the Civil Law and Law of Nations, as
to bear Arms, make Images, and Statues of their Ancestors, and by the Civil Law
a pre-eminence that more credence should be given by a Judge to the oath of two
Gentlemen, produced as Witnesses, Barto^u^ de testibus.
then to a multitude of ungentle persons, ought to be preferred to Offices
before the ignoble in ^u^io enim pres^mitur pro nobili^ate ad efficia regenda
and honored in the attire and apparel of their bodies as to wear Silks and
purple colors and ex cons^e^udine non suspenduntur sed decapitantur are not
when they are to suffer death for offenses criminal, Sr. John, Fer^e glory of
generosity. 78.
used to be hanged but beheaded, with many other privileges not here
enumerated, which our common people of England in their abundance of freedom
have too much forgotten.

Were so much respected here in the reign of H. 2. says the eminently learned
Mr. Seldom as one was fined one hundred pounds (which in those days of more
honesty and less money, was a great sum of money) for striking a Seldom tit. ^on.
783.784. ro^. Mag^ H. 2. 39 E. 3 Bracton Chap. de appell de mayhems.
Knight and another forty Marks, because he was present when he was compelled
to swear that he would not complain of the injury done unto him, the grand
Assize in a writ of right which is one of the highest Trials by Jury and Oath
in the Law of England is to be chosen by Knights and out of Knights and a Baron
in a Jury for or against him, may challenge the Panel if one Knight at the
least were not returned of the Jury, if a Ribaud or Russian stroke a Knight
without cause he was to loose the hand that struck him, Kings have Knighted
their eldest Sons, and sometimes sent them to neighbor Kings to receive that
Honor, and Barons, and Earls have taken it for an addition of Honor, and not
any lessening to be knighted.

And had no cause at all to dislike such military Tenures, which were not
called vassalage, as Common People may now mistake the word, but from vassus or
Cliens qui pro beneficio accepto fidem suam autori benificii obligat or from
Gesell, a German word which signifies Socius or Commilito, a fellow Soldier,
the name and profession reason and cause of it being so honorable and worthy.

Or to deem them to be burdens which were at the first intended and taken to
be as gifts and favors, which none of the sons of men, who are Masters of any
sense or reason do use to find fault with, but may well allow them to be very
far distant from Slavery, when as Servitude is properly, Seldom tit. hon. ca.
5.784.
quum quod acquiritur servo acquiritur Domino when that which is gained or
acquired by the servant is justly and properly the Lords, and a freeman is
contra-distinguished by quod acquirit, sibi acquirit, in that which he gains
is his own, or has a property in it and that among the Southern Nations (a
more gentle and merciful bondage being paternd by that of Abraham and his
successors the Patriarchs and allowed by the rules and government of God,) dura
erat servitus Dominorum imperia gravia, service or the condition of Servants
was hard, and the severity of Masters great, who had potestatem vitae and
necis, power of life and death over their Servants who having nothing which
they could call their own, but their misery, were put to maintain their Masters
out of their labors and enduring vilissima et miserrima ministeria, all manner
of Slaveries, ab omni Militia arcebantur were not suffered to know or have the
use of Arms, apud Boreales tamen gentes justior suit semper servitus et
clementior, but amongst the Northern Nations there was a more just and gentle
usage of their Servants for that they did devide their Lands and Conquests
amongst their Soldiers and Servants pactionibus interpositis inter Dominum et
servientem de mutua Tutela upon certain agreements betwixt them for mutual
defense.

Which made our English as well as other Nations abundantly contented with it
as may appear by the acquiescence of them and the Normans, under the Norman and
next succeeding Kings, and of Edward the Confessors Laws, and other English
customs retaining them, the reckoning of it amongst their liberties, fighting
for them, and adventuring their lives and all that they had at the making of M.
S. Mr. Rob. Hill concerning Tenures.
Magna Charta, and in the Barons wars, wherein those great spirits, as Mr.
Robert Hill says, so impatient of tyranny, did never so much as call in
question that great and ancient prerogative, of their Kings or except against
Tenures, escuage, releifs, and other moderate and due incidents thereof.

The care taken in the Parliament of 52 H. 3. Stat. Marl^bridge.
52 H. 3. to prevent the deceiving of the Lords of their wardships by
fraudulent conveyances, or Leases, of 18 E. 10. in the making of the statute of
Quia 18 E. 1. Quia emptores etc.
emptores terrarum, that the Feoffees or Purchasers of Lands holden of mesne,
Lords should hold by such services and Customs as the Feoffor did hold the
Registring and Survey of Knights Fees by H. 2. H. 3. E. 1. E. 3. and H. 6.
Escuage Aids and Assessements in Parliament and the Marshals Rolls in time of
War and necessity.

The esteem anciently held of the benefits and liberties accrewed by them
insomuch as many have by leave of their Lords changed their Socage Tenures into
Knights service, Somner de Gavelkind 60.
and thought themselves enfranchised thereby.

The value put upon them by the Commons of England in the Parliament of 6. H.
4. when they petitioned the King in that Parliament, Rot. Parl. 6 H. 4.
that all Feoffements of Lands and Tenements holden by Knight service, and done
by Collusion expressed in the Statute of Marlbridge might upon proof thereof be
utterly void.

The opinion of Chief Justice Fortescue in the reign of H. 6. in his Book de
laudibus legum Angliae commending them as most necessary as well for the
Commonwealth, Fortescue de laudibus legum Angliae ca. 44.
as for those and their Heirs who held their Land by such Tenures.

The retaining of it by the Germans who did as most of the Northern Nations,
says Bodin, libertatem spirare, only busy themselves to gain and keep their
liberty and from the time of their greatest freedom to rhis present, and now
also, could never tell how to find any fault with them.

Their Princes, Electors of the Empire, and the Emperial Cities, or Hanse
towns, who take thrmselves to be as free as their name of freedom or liberty
does import, not at this day disdaining or repining at them, and the Switzers
in their greatest thoughts of freedom, taking their holding of the Empire in
Capite to be no abatement of it.

The use of them by the ancient Earls and Governors of Holland, Zealand, and
Westfreezland who having been very successful in their Wars without the use of
Tenures in Capite or knights service, Cornel Neos^ad* de Feudi juris scripti
Hollandici, West Frisicique successione ca. 2.4. et 5.
but finding that ipsa virtus amara alioqui per se atque aspera praemiis
excitanda videretur simul uti fisco, ac Reipublicae consuler^tur, says
Neostadius, that the hardship of virtue needed to be sweetened with some
rewards, and that the old custom of the Longobards in creating, and reserving
Tenures in Capite, and by knights service, would be not only a saving of
Charges to their Treasury, but a good, and benefit to their Provinces or
Commonwealth, did create and erect such or the like Tenures.

And to this day by the Scottish Nation in a time, and at the instant of their
late obtaining (if they could be thankful for them) of all manner of liberties
and freedom* do sufficiently evince them to be as far from Slavery as they are
always necessary.

Wherein, if the primitive purpose and institution of Tenures in capite knight
service and Socage be rightly considered, every man may without any violence or
Argument used to his reason or Judgment, if self-conceitedness and obstinacy
do not choke or disturb his Int^l^^ctuals; Easily conclude, whether, if it
were now (...) Choice, he would not rather take Land by a Service or Condition,
only to go to war with the King, or his mesne Lord, when Wars shall happen,
which in a Common course of accidents may happen, but once or not at all in his
life time, and then not tarry with him above forty days or less, according to
his proportion of Fee or Land holden, and to have escuage of his own Tenants,
if they shall refuse to go also in person with him, and to have his heir, if he
chanced to die which in times of less Luxury happened not so often, and but
once perhaps in three or four descents, to be left in his minority to be better
educated than he could have been in his life time, married without
disparagement and himself as well as his own and Childrens estates protected.

Or accept of a Manor freely granted him, to hold of the King, by an
honorable service of grand Serjeanty.

Then to hold in Socage and be ^yed to do yearly and oftener some part of
Husbandry, or drudgery upon his Lords Land for nothing, or pay an annual Rent,
besi^^^ many other servi^e payments and duties as for Rent Oats, rent Timber,
rent Wood, Mal^, rent Ho^y, rent for fishing, and liberty to Plow, at certain
seasons and the like.

And if they had been esteemed, or taken to be a bondage the Rot. Parl. 1 R. 2*
n. 16.
Commons of Eng. certainly in the Parliament of 1 R. 2. Would not by their
Speaker have commended the Feats of Chivalry, and showed to the King that
thereby the people of England were of all Nations renoumed, and how by the
decay thereof the Honor of the Realm was, and would daily decrease. Or in Rot.
Parl. 9 H. 4. n. 46.
9 H. 4. Petitioned the King, that upon seizure of the Lands of such as be, or
should be attainted, or grants of such Lands by the King, the services
therefore due to other Lords might thereupon be reserved.

The good and original benefit whereof derived to the Tenant from the King, or
mesne Lord that first gave the Lands, and the consideration, that by the taking
of that a way, every one was in all justice and equity to be restored to his
primitive propriety and that which was his own, and so to reduce the Lands to
the Heirs of those that at first gave them restraining them might be in all
probability the reason that not only Capite, and Knight service Tenures, but
Copyhold and other Tenures and estates also having as much or more pretense or
fancy of servitude in them, were never so much as petitioned against in
Parliament to be utterly taken away.

Some instance whereof may be had in that of Villinage which being the heaviest
and most servile of all kind of Tenures (though some thousand Families in this
Kingdom (there being anciently some Tenants in villenage belonging almost to
every Manor) by desue^ude and expiration of that course of Tenures, now
esteeming themselves nothing less were never in any Parliament desired to be
abolished. Bracton and F^eta, and other ancient Authors in our English Laws
alleging it to be de jure Gentium and that nihil detrahit liberta^i is not to
be reckoned a servitude, much less surely then are Tenures in Capite and Knight
service, which the learned Grotius in the utmost that he could in his Book de
antiquitate reipublicae Batavicae, allege for the freedom and independency of
the Hollanders, though he could not deny but that the German Emperors did
claim them to hold in vassalage, or as a Feiff o^ the Empire, will not allow to
be any derogation from their liberty, Hugo Gotius de antiquitate Reipublicae
Batavicae edit an. 1630. 53. L. no^ dubito ss. de Captivis.
but concludes, quod etsi optinerent non eo desinerent Hollandi esse liberi,
cum ut Proculus egregie demonstrat nec Clientes liberi esse desinant, quia
Patronis dignitate pares non sunt, unde liberi feudi orta est appellatio, That
if it should be granted it would make the Hollanders not to be free, when as
Proculus very well demonstrateth Clients (or vassails) did not cease to be free
because they are not equal to their Patrons in dignity, whence the name or
Term of franck Fee was derived, and Sr. Henry Spelman says, quemadmodum igitur
omnibus non licuit feudum dare, ita nec omnibus accipere, as it was not lawful
for every one to give lands to hold of him, so it was not allowed to every one
to take, prohibentur enim ignobiles servilisque conditionis homines (et quidem
juxta morem Heroicis seculis receptum) munera subire militaria, for ignoble and
men of servile condition according to the usage of Heroic times, were ^orbid
to attempt military Offices, and Employments, as may be evidenced also in those
ancient Customs and usages of those grand and eminent Commonwealths of Rome,
and Athens, in the latter of which notwithstanding the opinion of those who
deny the use of Tenures by military service, to have been in Greece before the
time of Constantine Porphyrogenneta, it appears that Solon had long before made
a second classis or degree of such as could yearly dispend three hundred
Bushels of Corn, and other liquid fruits, Sigonius de ^ntiquo jure Civi^^n Romans
54.97. et de Repub. Athen. 47.4. Plutarch in vita Solonis.
and were able to find a Horse of service and called them Knights, Soli igitur
says judicious Spelman, nobiles feudorum susceptibiles erant quod
prae^^usticis et ignobilibus long agiliores habiti sunt ad tractanda arma
regendamque militiam. And therefore the Nobility and Gentry were only capable
of such Fees or Tenures in regard that they were more agile and fitter for the
use of Arms and military Government and Order, Perionius de Romans et G^ae^.
Magistrate.
and was therefore called by the French heritages nobles, et liberis et
ing^nuis solummodo competunt, a noble inheritance, and only belonged to men
that were free born and of ran^k and quality.

And were^no longer ago than in Anno Dom. 1637. in the argument of the case of
(...) Ship-mony in the Exchecquer Chamber, so little thought to be a Slavery to
the people, or any unjust or illegal prerogative of the Kings, as Mr, Oliver,
St. John, (none of the reverend and learned Judges of England then
contradicting it) alleged them to be for the defense of the Realm, and that
they were not ex provis^one hominis, not of man's provision, but ex provisione
legis, ordained by Law, and that the King was to have the benefit that accrewed
by them with Wardships primer seisins Licenses of Alienation and Reliefs, as
well to defend his Kingdom, as to educate his Wards.

Nor can they be accounted to be a Bondage or Slavery; unless we should fancy
(which would like a dream also vanish, when men shall awake into their better
senses and reason) that those ornaments in peace and strength in time of war,
which have been for so many ages and Centuries since King Inas time, which was
in an. 721 now above 940 years ago (and may have been long before that) ever
accounted to be harmless and unblameable, and in King Edgars Time, by a
Charter made by him unto Oswald Bishop of Worcester, said to be constitutione
antiquorum temporum, of ancient time before the date of that Charter, were an
oppression, that all ranks and sorts of the People should endure a slavery and
not know nor feel it, nor any of the contemporary writers, ancient or modern
take notice of it, that the Peers of this Kingdom should be in Slavery, and not
know or believe it; The The gentry of the Kingdom should be as worshipful
Slaves, and not understand or perceive it; And the Commons of the Kingdom what
kind of Slaves it should please any, without any cause, to style them; That
Honors, Gifts, and Rewards, Protection, Liberties, Privileges, and Favors, to
live well and happily of free gift and without any money paid for the purchase,
should be called a Bondage, when as a Tenure in Socage, ut ^^kam ^ap. quae per
solam consuetudinem etc. and Coke 1 part. in^^it. cap. 5. (...). 117.
in condemnatos ultrices manus ^^ttant, ut alios suspendio ali^s membr^rum
detruncatione, vel alijs modis juxt^ quantitatem delicti puniat; To be an
Hangman or Executioner of such as were condemned to suffer death or any loss of
Members according to the nature of their offenses, could neither be parted
with, or taken to be any thing but a benefit.

And that a claim was made by one th^^ held Lands in the Isle of Silly, to be
the Exe^cutioner of Felons which there was then usualy done by letting every
one of them down in a Basket, from a ste^p Rock, with the provision only of two
Loaves of Barley bread, and a pot of water to expect as they hung the mercy of
the Sea, when the Tide should bring it in.

And that those which held by the easy and no dishonorable Tenures of being
Tenants in Capite, and Knight^service, should as Mr. Robert Hill a learned and
judicious Antiquary in the beginning of the Reign of King James well observes,
rack and lease their Lands to their under Tenants, at the highest Rents and
R^tes, and neither they nor their Tenants call that a slavery which (though
none at all) may seem to be a far greater burden than any Ten^nt in Capite, and
by Knight service which holds of the King, or any Tenant that holds by
knight service of a mesne Lord endures when as the one is always more like to
have the bag and burden, which he must pay for, laid upon him in his Bargain,
then the other who is only to welcome a gift or favor, for which he pays but
a grateful acknowledgment.

Nor is there in that which is now so much complained of, and supposed to be a
Grievance, which, (whatever it be, except that which may as to some particular
cases happen to the best and most refined Constitutions, and the management
thereof) has only been by the fault of some people, who to be unfaithful, and
deceive the King in his Wardships, or other Duties, have some times cast
themselves into the trouble and extremityes which were justly put upon them for
concealments of Wardships, or making fraudulent conveyances to defeat the just
Rights of the King, or their superior Lords, or by some exorbitances, or
multiplications of Fees since the erecting of the Court of Wards and Liveries
by an Act of Parliament in 32 H. 8. any malum in se, original innate or
intrinsecal cause of evil or inconvenience in them, Active or Pr^xime merely
arising from the Nature or Constitution of Tenures in Capite and Knight
Service. To be found upon the most severe examinations and inquiries which may
be made of them, nor are they so large in their number as to extend or spread
themselves into an universality of grievances, nor were or are any public or
extraordinary Grievance.

CHAP. III. Tenures of Lands in Capite and by Knight service, are not so many
in number as is supposed, nor were, or are any public or general grievance.
FOr the Number of Knights* Fees which were holden in Capite and by Knight
service of the King, have by tract of time Alienations Purprestures, Assarts,
encroachments, deafforrestations, and concealments, been exceedingly lessened*
and decreased. 28015 which were said to be parcel of the 60215 knights Fees
created by William the Conqueror, being granted afterward by him or his
successors to Monasteries Abbyes, Priories, and religious houses, or parcelled
into Glebes or other endowments belonging to, Cathedrals, Churches, and
Chantries, or given away in Mortmain, and very many quillets and parcels of
Land after the dissolution of the Abbyes, and religious houses, not exceeding
the yearly value of forty shillings. And now far exceeding that value granted
in Socage by King Henry the eighth, besides many other great quantities of
dissolved Abbyes and religious Lands granted to be holden in Socage. Much of
the Abbye Lands retained in the Crown or Kings hands, as part of the Royal
Patrimony, and many Manors and great quantities of Land granted to diverse of
the Nobility, gentry, and others, with reservations many times of Tenures of
but half a knights Fee, when that which was granted would after the old rate or
proportion of knights Fees have been three or four knights Fees or more, and
sometimes as much or more then that (no rule at all as touching the proportions
of Lands or Tenures, being then in such an abundance of Land and Revenue as by
the dissolution of the Abbye^ came into the Kings hands or disposing (...) all
kept) which might have made many knights Fees were not seldom granted with a
Tenure, only of a twentieth or fortieth, and sometimes an hundredth part of a
knights Fee, whereby the knights Fees which were granted to the Religious
houses being almost half of the number which William the Conqueror is said at
the first to have created, might well decrease into a smaller number and many
of those which diverse of the Nobility and great men held of the King, as those
of Ferrers, Earl of Darby and the Earls of Chester, those that came by marriage
as by one of the Daughters and Heirs of (...) Earl of Hereford, and Essex, by
escheat, as the Earldome of Clare, or by Resumptions, Dissolution of Priors,
Alien^, Knights, of St. John of Jerusalem Attainders, Escheats or Forfeitures,
which in the Barons Wars were very many, or holden as of honors etc. Merging
and devolving into the Royal Revenue, did take of very many of the number,
especially since the making of the Act of Parliament in 1 ^. 6. cap. 4. that
there should be no Tenure in Capite of the King by reason of Lands coming to
the hands of him or any of his Progenitors, Heirs, or Successors, by Attainders
of Treason, misprision of Treason Premunires, dissolution or surrender of
Religious Houses, And not a few of the Mesne Lords and those which held also of
the King did make as great an abatement in their Tenures, by releasing and
discharging their services before the making of the Statute of Quia emptores
terrarum, granting Lands in Socage, Franck Almoigne, or by copy of Court Roll,
and casting out a great part of their Lands, as well as the Kings of England
did, not Forests, Chases, and many vast Commons which they laid out in
Charity, for the good of the poorer sort of people, infranchising of a great
number of Copyholders, selling and giving away many and great parcels of their
demesne Lands, disparking of many of their Parks, and deviding them into many
Tenements to be holden in Socage, endowing of Churches, Chantries, religious
houses, and the like, the forests, Chases and Commons of the Kingdom making
very near a tenth part in ten of the Lands of the Kingdom, and the Socage
Lands, Burgage, Franck Almoigne, and Copyholds more than two parts in three of
all the remainder of the Lands of the Kingdom. So as it is not therefore
improbable but that there are now not above ten thousand, or at most, a fourth
part of those 62015. Knights Fees to be found.

And that in ancient and former times either by reason that great quantities of
Manors and Lands, as much sometimes as amounted to a third part of a Shire or
County were in the Nobilities or great men's possessions, some of whom held of
the King a 100 or more Manors, and had as many Knights Fees holden of them,
besides some Castles, Forests, Parks, and Chases, or that the two Escheators
which were many times all that were in England, the one on this side, the other
beyond Trent, did not nor could not so carefully look to the death of the Kings
Tenants, which the Statute of 14 E. 3. ca. 8. complains of or that the
smaller sort of Lands in Capite, or mean men's estates were not so much looked
after (And yet the old Records of the Kingdom do speak a great deal of care,
and looking after every part of the Kings Revenew,) the not mentioning in deeds
or conveyances of whom or how the Land was holden, the more frequent use of
Feoffements with Livery and seisin in former times (which being not Enrolled,
hindered or obstructed, the vigilance of the Escheators and Feodaries,) their
sleepiness in permitting where any one Manor or parcel was holden in Capite,
many other Manors or Lands of the same Tenure to be found in the same
Inquisition by an Ignoramus of the Tenure and services and the craft and
industry of many, if not most men to evade and elude, as much as they can, the
Law or any Acts of Parliament, though when they are sometimes catched they
dearly pay for it. Or by some other cause or reason not yet appearing many of
the said Knights Fees are lost and never to be discovered, the Offices post
mortem now extant in the Tower of London, being in the last year of the reign
of King H. 3. in the beginning of whose reign they first began to be regularly
found, and recorded but -- 187. in an. 35. E. 1 -- 153. in an. 20 E. 2 -- 52.
and of the succeeding Kings until the end of E. 4. when such Tenures were most
valued and respected, are in every year but few in number, sometimes less than
200, and many times not above 300, in the most plentiful years of those times.
And of the Knights Fees and Lands holden in Capite and by Knight service which
are now to be discovered in the greatest diligence of Escheators and their
better looking unto them in this last Century of years, where there has been
an Escheator for the most part in every County to look to the Tenures and
Wardships, there will not upon exact search thereof appear to be in an. 21 Jac.
Regis any more than 71.22 Jac. 73 -- in 2 Car. Regis primi -- 112 in 3 Car.
Regis primi -- 85. Custodies and wardships granted, under the great Seal of
England which in Wardships of any Bulk or concernment do most commonly pass
that way leaving those of ordinary and lesser value to pass only under the
Seal, of the Court of Wards and Liveryes and in an. 10 Car. primi. not above --
450 offices post mortem some of which did only entitle the King to a Livery,
are to be found filed and returned; and in an. 11 Car. Regis not above; 580
which may give us some estimate of the small number which now remains of that
huge number which former ages and writers talked of, and that after that rate
if there be 10000 Knights Fees holden in Capite there is scarce a twentieth
part falls one year with another to make any profit or advantage to the King,
by Wardships, Marriage, Reliefs, primer seisin etc.

Nor are there unless by some unluckiness or accidents commonly above one in
every three or four discents in a Family, holding in Capite, which do die and
leave their Heirs in minority, and then also it is either more of less
chargeable to the Family, as the Males shall be nearer unto, or more remote
from their full age of 21, or the Females to their age of 16, some of the
supposed Inconveniences being prevented by an earlier marriage of the
Inheritrixes, or the Kings giving the honor of Knighthood to some of the Males
in their minority, which dispenses with the value of their marriages.

And yet those Tenures Wardships, and incidents thereunto, though so ancient,
legal, and innocent in their use and institution, were not without the watchful
eye and ^are of Parliaments, to prevent or pluck up any Grievances, which like
weeds in the best of Gardens, or per accidens, might annoy or blemish those
fair flowers of the Crown Imperial, as that of 9 H. 3 -- that the Tenant, by
Knight Service, being at his full age when his Ancestor dies shall have his
inheritance by the old relief according to the old custom of the Fees the
Statute of Merton in anno 9 H. 3 ca -- 2. and 3 E. 1 ca -- 2^. the Kings Tenant
being at full age shall pay according to the old custom that is to say five
pounds for a Knights Fee or less according to proportion ca -- 4 and 5. The
Keeper of the Lands of the Heir within age shall not take of the Lands of the
Heir but reasonable issues customs and services, without destruction and wast
of his men and goods, shall keep up the Houses, Parks, Warrens, Ponds, Mills,
and other things pertaining to the Lands, with the issues of the Lands, and
deliver the Lands to the Heir when he come^h of full age stored with Plowes and
all other things, at least as he recieved them ca -- 7. A Widow shall have her
Marriage inheritance and tarry in the chief house of her Husband forty days
after her Husbands death with reasonable Estovers within which time her Dower
shall be assigned, if it were not assigned before,

The Wards shall not be married to Villains or other, as Burgesses where they
be disparaged or within the age of fourteen years or such age as they cannot
consent to marriage, and if they do and their Friends complain thereof, the Lord
shall loose the Wardship, and all the profits that thereof shall be taken, and
they shall be converted to the use of the Heirs, being within age after the
disposition and provision of their Friends for the shame done unto them, a Writ
of Mortd'auncester shall be allowed to the Heir with damages against the Lord
that keeps his Lands after he is of full age. Heirs within age shall not
loose their Inheritance by the neglect or wilfulness of their Guardians, 52 H.
3. cap 7 and 16. The Lord shall not after the age of fourteen years keep a
Female unmarried more than two years after, and if he do not by that time marry
her she shall have an Action to recover her Inheritance, without giving any
thing for her Wardship or Inheritance, 3 E. 1 ca. 22. A Writ of Novel disseisin
shall be awarded against any Escheator that by color of his Office shall
disseise any of his freehold with double damages, and to be grievously amerced
Westmr. 1.3. E. 1 cap. 24 In aid to make the Son of the Lord a Knight or to
marry the Daughter, there shall be taken but twenty shillings for a whole
Knights Fee, and after that rate proportionably ibm. 35. If the Guardian makes
a Feoffement of the Wards Lands, he shall have a Writ of Novel disseisin, and
upon recovery the Seisin shall be delivered to the next friend, and the
Guardian shall loose the Wardship 3. E. 1. ca. 47. Usurpation of a Church
during the minority of the Heir shall not prejudice him, 13 E. 1.5.
Admeasurement of Dower shall be granted to a Guardian, and the Heir shall not
be barred by the suite of the Guardian, if there be collusion, 13 E. 1.7. Next
Friends shall be permitted to sue if the Heir be ^loyned, 13 E. 1.15. If part
of the Lands be sold the services shall be apportioned Westmr. 3.2. Escheators
shall commit no waste in Wards Lands, 28 E. 1 18. If Lands without cause be
seized by the Escheator, the Issues and Mesne profits shall be restored, 21 E.
1.19. where it is found by Inquest that Lands are not holden of the King, the
Escheator shall without delay return the possession Stat de Escheatoribus 29 E.
1. Escheators shall have sufficient in the places where they Minister, to
answer the King and his People if any shall complain, 4 E 3.9.5 E. 3 4. Shall
be chosen by the Chancelour, Treasurer, and chief Baron taking unto them the
chief Justices of the one bench and the other if they be present and no
Escheator* shall tarry in his office above a year 14 E. 3.8. A Ward shall have
an action of waste against his Guardian, and Escheators shall make no waste in
the Lands of the Kings wards 14 E. 3 13. Aid to make the Kings Son a Knight or
to marry his Daughter, shall be in no other manner then according to the
Statute thereof formerly made 25 E. 3 11. Traverses of offices found before
Escheators upon dyings seized or alienations without license shall be tried in
the Kings Bench 34 E. 3 14. An Escheator shall have no Pec of wood, fish, or
venison, out of the wards Lands 38 E. 3 13. An Idempnitate nominis shall be
granted of another man's Lands seized by an Escheator 37 E 1.2. No Escheator
shall be made unless he have twenty pounds Land per annum or more in Fee and
they shall execute their offices in proper person, the Chancellor shall make
Escheators without any Gift or Brokage and shall make them of the most lawful
men and sufficient 12 R. 2.2. An Escheator or Commissioner shall take no
Inquest, but by such persons as shall be returned by the Sheriff they shall
retorn the offices found before them and the Lands shall be let to farm to him
that tendereth a Traverse to the office 8 H. 6.16. Inquisitions shall be taken
by Escheators in good Towns and open places and they shall not take above forty
Shillings for finding an office under the penalty of forty pounds 23 H. 6 --
17. Women at the age of fourteen years at the time of the death of their
Ancestors without question or difficulty shall have Livery of their Lands 39 H.
6.2. No office shall be returned into any of the Kings Courts by any Escheator,
or Commissioner, but which is found by a Jury, and none to be an Escheator who
has not forty marks per annum, above all reprises, the Jurors to have Land of
the yearly value of forty shillings within the Shire* the Forman of the Jury
shall keep the Counter part of the Inquisition and the Escheator must receive
the Inquisition found by the Jury as also the offices or Inquisitions shall be
received in the Chancery and Exchequer 1 H. 8 ca. 8. Lands shall be let to
farm to him that offers to traverse the office before the offices or
Inquests returned, or within three Months after 1 H. 8 ca. 10. the respite of
Homage of Lands not exceeding five pounds per Annum, to be but eight pence the
yearly value of Lands not exceeding twenty pounds per annum to be taken as it
is found in the Inquisition, except it by examination otherwise appear to the
Master of the Wards, Surveyer, Attorney, or Receiver General, or three of them,
or that it shall otherwise appear and be declared in any of the Kings Courts,
No Escheator shall sit virtute officii where the Lands be five pounds per annum
or above, the Escheator shall take for finding of an office not exceeding five
pounds per annum but six Shillings, eight pence for his Fee, and for the
writing of the office three Shillings four pence, for the charges of the Jury
three Shillings and for the officers and Ministers of any Court that shall
receive the same Record two shillings upon pain of five pounds to the Escheator
for every time so offending, the Master and Court shall have power to moderate
any Fines or Recognisances 33 H 8.22. The Heir of Lands not exceeding five
pounds per annum may sue his General Livery by warrant only out of the Court of
wards although there be no Inquisition or office found or certified. The
Interest of every lesser Tenant for Term of years Copyholder or other person
having interest in any Lands found in any office or Inquisition shall be saved
though they be not found by office. The Heir upon an aetate probanda shall have
an oust^e le maines and the profits of his Lands from the time that he comes to
age and if any office be untruely found, a Traverse shall be allowed or a
Monstrans de Droit without being driven to any petition of right though the
King be entitled by a double matter of Record. A Traverse to an office shall be
allowed where a wrong Tenure is found, an ignoramus ^ound of a Tenure shall not
be taken to be any Tenure in Capite and upon a Traverse a Scire facias shall be
awarded against the Kings Patentee 2 and 3 E 6. ca. 8.

And if there had been any certain or common grievances or so much as a
likelihood of any to have risen or happened by such Tenures and benefits which
many were the better for, and had no reason at all to find fault with and w chapter
many more were striving to deserve of the Kings of England and the Nobility and
great men of this Kingdom, the Parliaments that have been ever since the 8 th.
year of the reign of H. 3. would not have made so many Acts of Parliament for
their establishment, or tending to their preservation, and if we should believe
(as it cannot be well denied) that Parliaments have been sometimes mistaken and
enacted that, which they have afterward thought fit to repeal. Yet it comes
not within the virge or compass of any probability, that Parliaments where all
grievances are most commonly represented, should for almost four hundred years
together in a succession of many Kings and Parliaments, enact or continue
grievances instead of remedies, and neither find those Tenures to be
inconvenient, or not fit to be continued, or so much as complain of them, but
as if they were blessings of a part of the well being of the Nation, not at
once but at several times, in several ages, and several Generations, support
and uphold them by after Laws, and constitutions, as, That no Freeman should
from thence give nor sell any more of his lands, but so that of the residue of
the lands the Lord of the fee may have the services due unto him which
belongs to the Fee, Lands aliened in mortmaine shall accrue to the Lord of
the Fee 9 H. 3. ca. 32. and 36. the Ward shall pay to the Lord of the Fee the
value of his marriage, if he will not marry at the request of his Lord for the
marriage of him that is within age, say the Statute and the makers thereof, of
mere right pertains to the Lord of the Fee, 20. H. 3, cap. 7. The Lord shall
not pay a Fine for distraining his Tenant for Services and ^ustomes, 52. H. 3,
cap. 3. A fraudulent conveyance to defeat the Lord of his ward shall be void,
cap. 6. The King shall have primer seisin, neither the heir nor any other shall
intrude into their Inheritance before he has received it out of the Kings
hands, as the same Inheritance was wont to be taken out of his hands, and his
Ancestors in times past, if the lands be accustomed to be in the Kings hands by
Knight service, or Serjeanty, or right of Patronage, 52. H. 3. cap. 16. If an
heir marry within age without the consent of his Guardian before he be past the
age of fourteen years it shall be done according as is contained in the statute
of Merton, and of them that marry after that age without the consent of their
Guardian, the Guardian shall have the double value of their marriage, such as
have withdrawn their marriage shall pay the full value to the Guardian for the
trespass, and nevertheless the King shall have like amends; And if the wards of
malice or by evil council will not be married by their chief Lords where they
shall not be disparaged, then the Lords may hold their lands and Inheritance
until they have accomplished the age of an heir male, that is to wit, of twenty
one years and further until they have taken the value of the marriage, 3 E.
1.22. A Tenaent shall have a writ of mesne to acquit him of his services, and
if the mesne come not he shall loose the service of his Tenant, 13 E. 1.9.
Priority of Feoffment shall make a title for wardship, cap. 16. the chief Lord
shall have a Cessavit against the Tenant if he cease for two years to do his
service writs of Ravishment degard allowed to the Lord, and the Party
offending, though he restore the ward unmarried, or pay for the marriage, shall
nevertheless be punished by two years Imprisonment, 13 E. 1.35. The Feoffee
shall hold his lands of the chief Lord and not of the Feoffor, 18 E. 1. Quia
emptores terrarum, A saving to the King of the ancient aids due and
accustomed, 25. E. 1.6. The King shall have the wardship of his Tenant which
holds in chief and the marriage of the heir, primer seisin assignement of
dower to the widow, marriage of the women Tenants deviding their lands in
Coparcinery holden of him, and they which hold of him in Serjeanty shall pay a
Fine at the Alienation, 17. E. 2. A Freeman shall do his homage to his Lord,
17. E. 2. Knights Fees shall not pass in the Kings grants without special words
17 E. 2.16. he shall be answered the mesne rates of Lands coming to him by his
Tenants death. 28. E. 3.4. and where sundry of the Kings Tenants holding of him
immediately, as of his Duchy of Lancaster, did by sundry Recoveries, Fines,
and Feoffments in use, defeat the King of Wardships of Body and Lands. It was
Enacted that the King, and his Heirs, shall have the Wardship and Custody of
the Body and Lands of cestui que use, and if they be of full age, shall have
relief, notwithstanding any such conveyance, and an exact provision made for
Writs to be granted upon the imbesiling of any such Heir, Rot. Parl. 22 E. 4.
N. 16. and 17. The Lord of Cestui que use, no will being declared etc. shall
have a Writ of Right of Ward for the Body and Land, and the Heir of Cestuique
use being of full Age at the Death of his Auncestor shall pay a relief, 4 H.
7.17. Av^wry may be made by* the Lord upon the land holden of him without
naming his Tenant 21 H. 8.19. And no grievance was thought be in them at the
time of the making of the Act of Parliament of 27 H. 8, 2. when as it was
expressly provided by that Act, that Tenures in Capite should be reserved to the
King of all manors, lands, and hereditaments belonging to Monasteries and
religious houses, which had lands, Tenements, and hereditaments not exceeding
the clear yearly value of two hundred pounds, which he should afterward grant
for an estate of Inheritance; nor did the Parliament in the 31 year of the
reign of that King, retract that good opinion which was formerly had of them,
when enacting that the King and his heirs and Successors should be put in
actual possession of all manors, lands and hereditaments of any yearly value
whatsoever belonging to Monasteries, they saved to the King, his heirs and
Successors, all rents, services, and other duties, as if that act had never
been made; Nor in the Act of Parliament of 32 H. 8. cap. 46. For erection of
the Court of wards and Liveries wherein it is acknowledged that Tenures in
Capite and wardships, with their incidents, did of right belong to the King in
the right of the Imperial Crown of this Realm; In the Act of Parliament of 32.
H. 8. And an explanation thereof in 34 and 35 H. 8.5. giving power to those
that held lands in Capite and by Knights service, to devise two parts thereof
reserving to the King wardship, primer seisin, and Fines for alienation of the
third part, and Fines for alienations of the Freehold, or Inheritance of the
two parts. The Crown being secured of the Tenure of the two parts by the
statute of Quia emptores terrarum. Nor at the making of the statutes of 35 H.
8.14. and 37 H. 8.2. Whereby the King might reserve Tenures in Socage or Capite
at his will and pleasure upon grants of lands not exceeding the value of forty
shillings per annum, belonging to religious houses. And that the Kings former
right shall be saved notwithstanding any Traverse, and a remedy for the rents
of the mesne Lords where the King has the wardships, 2 and 3 E. 6. cap. 8,

And those that held by such Tenures besides the care of so many Acts of
Parliament, were not unhappy also in that provision of the Common Law, where it
was an Article or inquiry in the Air if any Lord novas levavit consuetudines,
had charged his Tenant with any new Customs, if any Escheators or
Subescheators had made any wast in the Wards Lands, or seized Lands which ought
not to be seized. Et omnes illi qui sentiunt se super hiis gravatos, and inde
conqueri voluerint audiantur and fiat eis Justitia. All that were grieved, were
to be heard, Capi^^a itin^ris in vet. magn. Charta 157 158. and Coke 4. part
institutes tit. C^r. Ward.
and have Justice done them and the Tenant had his remedy by a Glanvil lib 12
cap. 9 and 10 Register 4 and 59 Coke magna Charta cap. 10.
writ of ne injuste vexes, where his Lord did Indebita exigere servitia.

And least any thing should but come within the suspicion of a Grievance, or
that the power of the Court of Wards and Liveries, and the latitude which the
Act of Parliament of 32 H. 8. had given it, (which was to be as fixed as the
trust which was committed to it, should in the intervalls of Parliaments or
seldomest Cases be any thing like to a burden or Inconvenience, the disposing
and granting of wardships was by King James his Commission and instructions,
under the great Seal of England in instructions King J^mes in Anno 1622.
an. 1622. to the end that the people might stand assured, that he desired
nothing more, than that their Children and their Lands which should fall unto
him by reason of wardships might after their decease be committed in their
nearest and trustiest friends, or to such as they by will or otherwise commit
the charge unto upon such valuable considerations as are just and reasonable,
that the Parents and Ancestors may depart in greater peace in hope of his
gracious favor; their friends may see their children brought up in piety and
learning, and may take such care as is fit for the preservation of their
inheritance, if they will seek the same in time.

Ordered that no direction for the finding of any Office be given for the
wardship of the body and lands of any Ward until the end of one month next
after the death of the Wards Ancestor, but to the nearest and trustiest friends
of the ward, or other person nominated by the Ancestor in the wards behalf, who
may in the mean time become Suitors for the same, among whom choice may be made
of the best and fittest.

No composition, agreement, or promise of any wardship or lease of Lands be
made until the office be found, and then such of the friends to have preferment
as tendered their Petitions within the month, they yiedling a reasonable
composition.

The Master Attorney Surveyor, and other the Officers of the Court of Wards
were to inform them selves as particularly as they might of the truth of the
Wards estate, as well of his Inheritance, as of his Goods and Chattels, the
estate of the deceased Ancestors, and of all other due circumstances
considerable, to the end the Compositions might be such as might stand with
(the Kings) reasonable profit, and the Ability of the Heirs estate.

No Escheat^r shall enforce any man to show his evidence.

That all Leases of Wards lands (except in cases of concealment) be made with
little or no Fine, and for the best improved yearly rent that shall be offered,
consideration being had of the cautions aforesaid, that no recusant be admitted
to compound or be assignee of any wardship.

That where it shall appear, that neither the King nor his progenitors, within
the space of threescore years last past, enjoyed any benefit by Wardship,
Livery, Primer seizin, Releif, Respect of Homage, Fi^es, or mesne rates of any
lands, the Master and Council of the said Court, were authorized to remit and
release all benefit and profit that might accrue to the King thereby; And in
all cases where covenants were p^^formed to deliver bonds, which were taken
concerning the same.

And that upon consideration of circumstances, which may happen in assessing of
Fines for the marriages, of the Wards and renting of their lands, either by
reason of the broken estate of the deceased, want of provision for his wife,
his great charge of Children unprovided for, infirmity or tenderness of the
heir, incertainty of the title, or greatness of encumbrance upon the lands,
they shall have liberty, as those or any other the like comsiderations shall
offer themselves, to use that good discretion, and Conscience which shall be
sit in mitigating or abating Fines or Rents to the releif of such necessities.

In pursuance whereof, and the course and usage of that Court as well before as
after the said Instructions, Wardships, nor any Custody or Lease of the Wards
or their Lands were not granted, in any surprising or misinforming way, but by
the care and deliberation of the Master and Council of the Court of Wards and
Liveries, upon a full hearing and examination of all parties and pretenders,
they to whom they were granted Covenanting by Indenture under their Hands and
Seals with Bonds of great penalties to perform the same, to educate the ward
according to his degree and quality, preserve his lands and houses from waste,
fell no Coppice, Woods, grant no Copyhold estates for lives, nor appoint any
Steward to keep the Courts without license, and to permit the feodary of the
County where the land lies yearly to survey, and superintend, the care thereof
and had reasonable times of payment allowed them.

And could not likely produce any grievances in the rates or assessing of Fines
for marriages, or for rents reserved during the minority of the wards, or for
primer seisin or any other Compositions, when as the Kings of England since the
Reign of the unhappy R. 2. and the intermission of the Eyres and those strict
enquiries which were formerly made of the frauds, or concealment of the
Escheators or their Deputies in the business of Tenures, and Wardships, and
their neglect or not improving of them, (most of those former Officers and
those that trucked with them not doing that right which they ought to their
Consciences and their Kings and Benefactors.

Have for some ages past been so willing to ease their people, or comply with
their desires, as they have no^ regarded a^ all their own profit, or taken such
a care as they might to retain those just powers which were incident or
necessary to their Royal Government; but by leaving their bounty and kindness
open to all the requests or designs of the people, have like tender hearted
parents given away much of their own support and sustenance, to gratify the
blandishments, or necessities, of their Children, and not only enervated, but
dismembered, and quitted many of their Regal powers and just Prerogatives in
their grants of Lands and Liberties, and thereby too much exhausted and
abandoned the care of their own Revenue and Treasure, as may easily appear to
any that shall take but a view of those many Regalities, Franchises, and
Liberties, which (being to be as a Sacrum patrimonium, unalienable) have
heretofore either been too liberally granted by the Kings Progenitors, of which
H. 3. was very sensible in his answer to the Prior or Master of the Hospital of
St. John's at Jerusalem, Daniel 168.
or not well looked after in those Encroachments, and Usurpations, which have
been made upon them.

Or consider the very great cares and providence, as well as prudence, of
former ages, in the Managing, Collecting, and Improveing of the Kings Revenue
in England, whether certain or casual. The strict Inquiries, and Orders, and
the care of every thing which might make a profit, or prevent a damage which
made some of the Kings of England to be so little wanting money* as King
Canutus, as the Abbey Book of Ramsey has recorded it, Lib. Caenobij d^ Ramsey
Sect. 114. et Spelmans glossar. in ver^^ Fiscus.
was able out of his Hanaper or travailing Trunk, when he lodged at Vassington
in Northamptonshire, to lend the Bishop Etheruus (who s^bita pulsus occasion,
had a great occasion to use it) good store of money.

And that in William the Conquerours time, and in the height of his plenty and
prosperity, no repairs of Castles and Houses were made but upon account by Oath.

Inquiries were made by some of the succeeding Kings and Claus. 3^. H. 3.
their Officers after windfalen trees and a few trees were not given, nor
Cheverons nor Rafters allowed toward the repairing of a Grange, or Farm,
without the warrant of the great Seal of England Judges commanded to look to
the Fines imposed in the Eyre^ or Circuits, and in all the Eyres and Pla^it.
(...) 3 E. 3. Rot. 58.
Circuits, a Clark who kept particular Rolls or Duplicates of the Judges
Rolls, or Records of their Proceedings was for the King especially appointed,
and attended, and as small a sum as 2 d. accounted for a Deodand.

Nor was any thing as far as Humane vigilance, Industry, or Providence, might
foresee, prevent, or remedy, suffered to be done or continue, that might
endammage or lessen the Royal Revenue, which King Henry the 3 d. could so watch
over as the Court of Exchequer has sometimes seen him there sitting, and
taking his own accounts.

Which kinds of wariness, and care, have been so much disused or neglected by
many of his Successors, as though by time and the course thereof, the
alteration of the value of money and Coin from twenty pence the ounce to five
shillings and a penny, the ounce, of Silver, the prizes and rates of Provision
and Commodities to be bought with it almost yearly raised and inhaunced, and
the more chargeable way of living which followed thereupon; might have put them
in mind to have given less, or demanded more, for what was justly their own,
when as in the 14 th. year of the Reign of King Edward the 3 d. 40 shillings
per diem, was thought by the King and his Council to be a royal and sufficient
expense for Edward Baliol King of Scots and his train, whilst he tarried 46 E.
3 par. Parl. 2 in 20 and 34.
at London, and 6 s. per diem when he travailed. And in the reign of King H. 6.
Medow-ground in 23 H. ^. Escaet.
Leicestershire was valued but at eight pence an Acre and that as appears by a
Remonstrance made in Parliament in or about the 11 th. year of the reign of
that King, who was King in possession of France, as well as of England, now not
above 227 years ago, he did right worshipfully as the Record says, maintain
the charge of his household with sixteen thousand pounds Sterling per annum, and
could not then defray it with less than Twenty four thousand pounds per annum,
which now cannot well be done under ten times as much, when an Annuity or
Pension of ten pounds or twenty marks per annum, which was then sufficient for
the Kings better sort of Servants, is now scarce enough for a Footman and the
most ordinary sort of inferior Servants.

Did notwithstanding not lessen their bounty, or raise the Rents or Rates of
their Revenues, but permitted their Escheators in matters of Tenures and
Wardships, to adhere unto their former courses, and find the value of the Lands
in their Offices or Inquisitions, at the old or small yearly values, the rule
which the Escheators took for the finding of the values of the Lands upon
Inquisitions, being at the highest but the tenth part of the true yearly value
(which was the guide also for the rate of the primer seisins where they were to
be taken) and as much lower as the unwarrantable kindness of too many of those
which were trusted, and should have looked better unto it could persuade them.
The Feodaries also upon their Surveys seldom raising the yearly value to more
than about a third part of such a gentle value as he should be entreated to
add to that which the Jurors and Escheators had friendly found it. So as
sometimes a Manor of above one hundred pounds per annum was found but at
thirteen shillings four pence per annum, and other times if mingled with other
lands, of a great yearly value at no more than forty shillings per annum

And no longer ago than in the reign of King Cha^les the first, above one
thousand pound^ per annum, has been found to be but of the yearly va^ue of
twenty Marks. And an Estate -- consisting of very few Manors, and as few
Coppyholders, but most in F^rms and dem^snes upon an improved and almost
racked* Rent worth six thousand pounds per annum, found at no greater yearly
value than one hundred eighty three pounds eleven shillings, which is less
than the thirtieth part, though the Escheators with Knights and Gentlemen, and
sometimes men of greater mark and quality were Commissioners, the Jurors made
up sometimes of Gentlemen, and most commonly of substantial Freeholders, and all
of them, such as might better have understood an Oath, who taking an ill
custom to be warrant enough for a bad Conscience, did when they were by the
Writ to enquire upon their Oaths de vero Annuo valor, of the true yearly value
of the Lands, th^nk that they did honestly and well enough to find it at a very
small or low yearly value, because they were sure it was we^l worth so much.

Neither were the paym^nts o^ (...) of Homage so troublesome, as to make a
complaint of when as by an Order made in 13 Eliz. by virtue of her privy Seal
by the Lord Burghley Lord Treasurer and the Chancellor and Barons of the
Exchecquer, which the Lords and Commons of England in primo Jacobi, did pray
and procure to be enacted by Parliament. It was after such an easy and old
fashioned rate or value of the Lands, as it was but in every fifth Term to be
paid in the Exchecquer by a rate and apportionment, and might have been saved
by an actual doing of Homage as was anciently used to be done upon their
Livery, and first coming to their Lands and their respit of Homage and
howsoever may as well be taken to be a favor as they do of their mesne Lords
or one to another, in paying three shillings four pence per annum as a quit
Rent for respit of suit of Court.

And that it was therein and thereupon also enacted, that no process ad
faciendum Homagium, or fidelitatem, scire facias Capias or distress, should
issue out of the Exchequer, but upon a good ground.

And that the Clerks of the Treasurers Remembrancer in the Exchequer, shall pay
all issues that any shall loose after he has paid ordinary Fine for respite of
Homage, and so may be proved by any of their Acquittances.

Neither were the Rates for Licenses of Alienations burdensome when they were
paid by the rich and improving and most commonly advantage taking purchasors or
by the gainers by the settlement or alteration of Lands or Estates, and are in
passing Fines not usually above a thirtieth part, and so after an ancient and
un-improved small yearly value, as six thousand pounds per annum, has within
three years last past paid but a little above one hundred and twenty pounds for
a Composition or License of Alienation.

Which with other of the Kings casual profits by a long remissness and usage
of some ages past whilst the people to save their own Purses, and favor one
another choosing the open Rode and track and following the precedents and too
common use of under valuations, which has ever been; and is the great
obstructor and diminisher of royal Revenues, would as much as they could never
forsake or go much out of it as is visible enough in the Escuage^ upon Knights
Fees and valuatio^s in several ages and Kings reigns in that of a tenth in 36
H. 3. demanded in Parliament to be paid out of all the Ecclesiastical Revenues
after the full yearly value, where adjuncto magnae verb^ offensionis, as Mat.
Paris 849.
Matthew Paris tells us it was taken the worse in regard it was required to be
taxed non secundum estimationem pristin^m sed secundum, ^stimationem no^am ad
inquisitionem strictissimam not according to the former estimation or rates,
but a n^w and most severe valuation, and was not at all granted. And in a
Parliament at Bury, in 5^ H. 3. the Clergy denied to be rated by the Laity or
Justa and alta taxatione By a just and high valuation. Mat. Paris 100^
Sed tantum ut taxatio staret antiqua, But only that the old taxation might
stand, nor was it much otherwise in the rates of fifteens and other proportions
of taxes granted by Parliaments, though sometimes ordered to be assessed upon
oath the greatest tie and obligations that can be laid upon men and their
Consciences, wherein little or more then a tenth or small part was paid or
collected of the true yearly value.

But like a numerous family of Children spending much, wanting much, and
drawing all that they can from the kind and self-denying common parent,
together with the bounty and munificence which Kings and Princes are not seldom
necessitated unto in the way of Government and care of the generality, would
never be brought to any just valuation or improvement no more than that of
customs for goods exported or imported at the rate of twelve pence in the
pound, and for the subsidies given by Parliament, whereupon no more was used to
be paid than two Parl. 4 Car. primi.
shillings, or two shillings eight pe^ce in the pound, for Movables, Debts,
defalked and 4 s. in the pound, and most commonly not so much according to the
yearly value of Lands, Rents, Annuities or other yearly profits, after an easy
and accustomed great undervaluation, no more than that of Tenths and first
Fruits, or of Taxations or Valuations of Benefices in the Kings Books at the
tenth or fifth of the true yearly value, though every age, of one or two ages
last past, and every thirty or twenty years in the age of Century, in which we
now live, have hugely raised the yearly value of Lands every one striving who
shall do it most in their own particular Estates.

And if there were not (as there are) so very many plain and evident
Demonstrations of it, may well be believed to be possible, when the public,
though made up of the private, is daily gnawed, and preyed upon by the private,
and every one lurches, and takes what he can from the Public, to add to his
private, when the numberless Number of the Private, is more than the Head or
Monarch, when the people are to assesse themselves, and will ease one another,
when interest and partiality are the Loadstones that attracts, and the Cards
and Compasses which the most of men do sail by, every man is a well-wisher to
the Public, but very few well-doers, every one pretends good unto it, but
intend, if not all, yet a great deal more unto themselves, and do make it their
business to be the Kings Cozens, though they are not of the Blood Royal, and
by the help of bad Consciences, and no good affection to the public, or
Commonweal, do think no more evil to be in such purloinings, than to fetch or
take water from a great River, or stones, or gravel, from a vast and high
Mountain.

And the Nobility and Gentry, and most of the Landlords in England, have for
many years last past in the public Assessements, which were made to maintain
the miseries and iniquityes of our latter times to their cost and grievance
experimented, that where the Tenants were to pay for their Stock, they could so
order it, as to lay the most of the Burden upon the Landlords, upon pretenses,
that they had but a small Stock of Cattle when it was in their power not only
to undervalue what they had, but to lessen or make it more, any Fair or
Market Day before or after.

Whereby, and the effects which best discovers the truth and intention of all
men, and their matters be their pretenses never so plausible, much colored or
varnished over, the Conclusion will necessarily follow the Premises, that the
outsides and noise of great ayds and Subsidyes, have been always a great deal
more than the reality of them; that the Kings and Queens of England have always
had in their Revenues fair blossomings or Bloomes, but little more than the
Tenth of it has come to be fruits or gatherings into their Treasuries,
witness, if there were nothing else to prove it, the great and more than
treble or a better Improvement which has been lately made of them, since they
came to be wrongfully possessed by private men; and that the Revenues of the
Kings and Princes of England could never yet arrive to the Fate of great
Rivers, which fertilizeing all the Neighboring shores, and carrying many a
great Burden and Vessel, which daily sail to and fro upon them, are
notwithstanding so far from emptying or impairing themselves, as the further
they run, they are sure enough to be made greater by an Addition of many little
Brooks, and great Rivers which fall into them.

But by a continual emptying and deflux, must of necessity sink it self into a
great decay and deficiency, when as that which was accounted Providence, and
good Husbandry in King H. 2. (or H. 1. if Daniels History.
Samuel Daniel, and others be not mistaken) to change his Rent, Provisions of
Corn and Victuals, which in every County was paid in Specie, into yearly Rents
or Sums of money, because con^luebat ad Regis Curiam, Multitud^ Colo^orum
oblatis vomeribus, in signum deficientis Agriculturae, A Multitude of Plow-men
and Husbandmen, (occasioned probably by the many vast Demeasns, Commons,
Woods, and Forests which then took up much of the Lands of the Kingdom) came
with their Plow-shares to the Court, to show the King the decay of Husbandry,
says the Black Book in lib. nigro Scaccarij and Spelmans gl^ssar in verbo
firma.
of the Exchequ^er; when as a little before a measure of Wheat, for bread for a
hundred men, was valued by the Kings Officers but at one shilling, the Carcass
of a fat Ox one shilling, of a Sheep four pence, and for Provender for twenty
Horses but four pence.

And thought himself to have been on the surer side when he ordered six pence
in every pound to be taken overplus or D'avantage, least the rate and value of
money should diminish, is now not the hundredth part of the value of the old
kind of Rents and Provisions; and reducing also many uncertain Customs into a
certainty of yearly Rents, which being then some thing proportionable unto it,
is not now the 50 th. or 100 th. part of what was then the value in the
intention and estimation, as well of the Kings, which were to receive it, as of
the Tenants who were to pay it; And therefore notw^thstanding the great Estates
and Revenues of some Rebellious Subjects which have sometimes been forfeited,
and came as an accession and supplement to the wasting and dec^ying Crown
Lands, much of them being either in merry or policy restored afterward to the
Heirs of those which justly forfeited them. The languishing Condition of the
Royal Revenues were so little remedied, as the Royal Expenses in defraying the
more expencefull Charges of their household, Family, and princely Retinue. After
the new enhaunced Rates and Prizes, whilst they recelved their Rents and other
Profits after the old, carrying so great a difference and disproportion.

As there is betwixt one hundred four pounds seventeen shillings and six pence,
paid by Thomas Earl of Lancaster, in the reign of King E. 2. for 184 Tuns of
Clarret-Wine, and one Tun of White, but little exceeding eleaven shillings per
Tunn, and that which is now the price of the like quantity and between one
hundred forty seven pounds seventeen shillings and eight pence for seven Furs
of variable Miniver, or powdered Ermin; seven hoods of Purple three hundred
ninety five Furs of Budge for the Liveries of Barons, Knights, and Clerks.
123 Furrs of Lamb for Esquires bought at Christmas as appears by the account of
Henry Leicester the said Earls Cofferer.

Twenty four shillings for a fat stalled Ox, twenty pence for a Mutton, two
pence half penny for a Goose, two pence for a Capon, a penny for a Hen, and
twenty four Eggs for a penny, which were the prizes assessed by the
Magistrates, and then thought to be equal for the Buyer, as well as the Seller,
between the price of Cloth, for two Gowns for the Clarks of the Chamber, to
the Lord Mayor of London now, and that which in the reign of H. 6. cost but two
shillings per*yard, and betwixt the price of a Capon in the middle of the reign
of Queen Elizabeth at six pence, and the rate of 2 s 6 d. or 3 s. which is now
the least will be taken for one.

And that by reason of the Gentry and all private men's racking and inhauncing
the Rents of their Lands, letting it too often by the Acre, and the strictest
measure, and the most that will be bid for it, and the plenty of pride to an
extremity of excess, rather than a plenty of money in the Nation, the rates of
Victuals and Provisions and manner of living, are increased to almost a third
part more than what they were within this 20 years last past.

There must needs follow that Tabes or Consumption which is so apparent and
visible in the Royal Revenue, which will be as little for the peoples good, who
(unless they can think it to be either Goodness or Wisdom in the Members to
make or suffer the head to be sick and languish) are by Subsidies and
Assessements to support it in its sickness or languishing condition, as it
will be for the King to press or persuade them to it.

But least it should be objected, that as the well ordering, right use, and
manage of the best things, is that only which blesses and crowns the
Intention, and first Institution of them, and the ill is that which corrupts
and blasteth all that was hoped for, or expected by it, and that the Innocence
and necessary use of Tenures in Capit^ and Knight service may amount unro a
grievance if the Court of Wards should either by the wickedness, extortion, or
avarice of the Judges, or their ignorance, which is as bad as either, or their
lenity or connivance to the Officers, or those which are employed under them.
intend more their own profit than the Kings, and in stead of being a protection
to Wards, pillage and ruin them and their estates, or be like (as they were
not) an Assembly or Congregation of men met together in the formality of a
Court where rapine, avarice, and injustice, under the vizard or Hypocrisy of
doing justice, strives who shall most advance their ends by a propension to
what is unjust, and an aversion from all that may relieve the oppressed.

It may be necessary to show by whom or what manner of persons that Court of
wards and Liveries was governed, and guided.

Which was not like that Court of Civil Law, upon whose Bench and Tribunal in
our late times of delirium and confusion, sat as Judges two common Lawyers
Hugh Peter's a a Traitor to his King and Country, sometimes a Prompter at a
Playhouse, and afterward an extemporary Preacher, together with an Attorney
at common Law, a Tradesman, and a Country Gentleman, who would not at any time
think it safe, or becoming them in that their never the like practiced in any
age or time before Antipodes or contrarieties* to right reason, or the way of
understanding, or doing Justice, to mention any Text or part of the Civil Law,
though it was daily and learnedly pleaded before them by the Advocates, but
when any Books or Authorities of the Civil Law, were cited and urged, which
their capacities could not reach, some of them like the Woman in Seneca, which
did not complain of her own want of sight, but found fault with the darkness
of the House, could to throw by the trouble or any further consideration of
what they did not understand, find no better a way than causelessely to rail
at, and reproach the Common Law as well as the Civil, and unadvisedly and
publicly declare them to be but Inventions to get money.

Was not like the Court to remove Obstructions in the Godly as they called it,
but ungodly Purchasers, where all the Kings grants after 1636. or thereabouts
were adjudged as null, and not to be allowed, and all manner of obstructions
laid in the way of Loyal and Distressed men, to clear and make an open passage
for their own Party and such kind Purchasers*

Not like that of Haberdashers-Hall, where the Just and Innocent were
Sequesterd (by the tender Conscienced Party as they styled themselves) for
their Allegiance to their King, following of the Scripture, their Consciences,
and the known Laws of the Land were notwithstanding their many Petitions, and
Importunities several years whilst their estates were Sequestered and taken from
them, kept in a starving Condition, before they could be heard, to little
purpose, where Sons and too well descended to be so unworthy, were invited to
accuse their Loyal and Aged Parents, whom the Jews would have rent their
Clothes to have seen, encouraged, and made to be sharers in the spoil of their
Father.

Not like the Committee (or Court improperly called) at Salters-Hall for relief
of Creditors against their imprisoned Debtors, where some of those Judges and
Committees, if not wronged by printed Complaints, were in good hopes to have
made some preparations to sell the Debtors Lands to their Friends or Kindred at
good Penniworths.

Nor like the Committee for Plundring, rather than Plundered Ministers, who to
take away all the Benefices of England and Wales, from the Tribe of Levi, and
confer them upon the Tribe of Issachar, and their Factious, and Mechanique
guifted Brethren, and keep out the Orthodox and learned Clergy, could make
their costly orders for the trial of them that were more Learned then
themselves, concerning the Grace of God, and their utterance for Preaching of
the Gospel with private and deceitful marks, and little close couched or
interposed Letters, hid or put under or over some other Letters, whereby to
intimate to their Subcommittees in the Countries, that howsoever the men were
without exception, and found to be so upon Certificates and Examination, they
were to be delayed, and sent from Post to Pillar, and tired both in their
Bodies and Purses, and be sure never to be instituted and inducted.

But was a Court composed of grave, learned, knowing, and worthy Masters of the
Wards, such as William Marquess of Winchester, William Lord Burghley, and his
Son the Earl of Salisbury, and many other who made not the Court, or any of the
business thereof, to Lacquy after their own Interest.

Had for Attorney Generals of that Court, who sat as men of Law and Judges
therein, and assistants to the Masters of the Wards Richard Onslow Esquire
afterward Speaker of the House of Commons, Sr. Nicholas Bacon Knight,
afterward a most learned Lord keeper of the great Seal of England, and a great
Councellor of Estate to Queen Elizabeth, Sr. Henry Hobart afterward Lord chief
Justice of the Court of Common Pleas, Sr. James Ley Knight and Baronet,
afterward Lord chief Justice of the Court of Kings Bench, after that Earl of
Marleborough, and Lord Treasurer of England, Sr. Henry Calthrop Knight, Sr.
Rowland Wandesford Knight, and Sr. Orlando Bridgeman Knight. now Lord Chief Justice
of the Court of Common pleas, all very eminently learned Lawyers, and of great
estates, honor, honesty, and worth in their several generations, who upon any
difficult or weighty matter of Law, to be discussed in that Court, did usually
entreat the presence, and had the assistance of the Lord chief Justices, Lord
chief Baron, or of any of the other learned Judges of the Land, whom they
should please to invite unto them, where a variety of learning, grave
deliberations, a great care of Justice, and right reason most lively and
clearly represented, have left to posterity as guides and directions for after
ages; those conclusions and resolutions, of cases of great learning and weight
in that Court, reported by the Lord Dier, Cook, and other learned Sages of the
Law.

Nor were the Masters of the Wards Attorneys, Auditors or Escheators loosely
tied by Oaths, as some of the Committee Jurisdictions were, when they did swear
only in general, faithfully according to their best skill and knowledge, to
discharge the trust committed to them, and would not for favor or affection
reward, or gift, or hopes of reward, or gift, break the same.

Or as little restraining them from Acts of Oppression or Injustice, as the
Oath of the Controlers for the sale of the Kings and Queens lands, ordered by
that which called it self a Parliament 17. July 1649. The Oath of the
Commissioners for managing the estates of Delinquents and Sequestrations at
Haberdashers-Hall; Ordered by no better an Authority the 15 of April 1650. or
that, which by that, which would be called an Act of Parliament, of the 10 of
December 1650. for establishing an high Court of Justice within the Counties of
Norfforlk, Suffolk, Cambridge, and Huntington, for the Trial of Delinquents was
only ordered was to be taken by those that were to be the Judges, that they
should well and truly according to the best of their skill and knowledge
execute the several powers given unto them; Which bound them not from doing
wrong, to those whom they made to bear the burdens of all the cruelties which
they could possibly lay upon them.

But were compassed and hedged in by Oaths, Master of the Wards Oath.
as warily restraining, as they were legal, for the Master of the Wards was by
Act of Parliament enjoined to swear to minister Justice to Rich and Poor, to
the best of his cunning and power, to take no gift or reward in any Case
depending before him, 32 H. 46.
and to deliver with speed such as shall have to do before him. Attorney of the
Wards Oath.
The Attorney was sworn truly to counsel the King, and the Master of the
Court, and with all speed and diligence to endeavor the hearing and
determination, indifferently of such matters and causes as shall depend before
the Master of the Wards, and shall not take any gift or reward, in any matter
or cause depending in the same Court. Auditors Oath*
The Auditors sworn to make a true allowance in their Offices to every person,
which shall be accomptant before them, and not to take or recieve of Poor or
Rich any gift or reward in any matter or cause depending, or to be discussed in
the Court but such as shall be ordinarily appertaining to their Offices,
Escheators Oath.
and the Escheators to treat all the people in their ^ayliwicks, truly and
righteously to do right to every man as well to poor as to rich, do no wrong to
any man, neither for promise, love, nor hate, nor no man's right disturb, do
nothing whereby right may be disturbed, let, or delayed, and shall take
their Enquests, in open places, and not privy.

And might better content the people, Then when in former ages the Wardships
and their disposing were left to the care and order of the Chancellor, as to
Thomas B^cket in H. 2. time, Math Paris 101.
or to Hubert de Burgh Chief Justice and Earl of Kent, in the Reign of H. 3.
sometimes to the Treasurers or Chamberlains and most commonly, let to farm by
Escheators, and sometimes by under-Sherifs or when the next Wardships or
Escheats that should happen were before hand assigned toward the payment of
some of the Kings Debts, as to William de Valence Earl of Pembroke in the Reign
of E. 1. or that the Wardships and Escheats which should happen in 6* or 7.
Counties were before hand granted to some particular man.

And can never be so good or for the ease of the people as when the King by a
constant and well ordered Court shall be rescued from the importunityes and
necessityes of great men, and preserved from the Errors which an indulgence or
munificence to so many Cravers, Petitioners, and Pretenders, as do usually
throng the Courts, and presence of Princes, might draw or persuade them unto
and the Wards and their Friends, not put to seek Remedies or just Defenses in
their Suits or Concernments in other Courts amongst a multitude and
intermixture of Causes of another nature, nor to procure an access for their
Petitions to their Kings, or at their Courts or Residences, where a continual
assembly of all the weighty cares and emergencies in Government, will
inevitably enforce or necessitate delays, and notwithstanding the help of some
costly Mediators and intercessors, cannot nor ever could be easily got through,
but may in such a fixed and peculiar Court as that of the Wards and Liveri^^
with a small expense of time, or attendance, and the assistance of certain
allowed Fees to proper and appointed offices, which cannot be any grievance
where they shall be any thing within the bounds of Reason or Moderation, know
how to find out and go to their proper Remedies as readily as an Apothecary can
to his Boxes of Medicaments, or the Physician to the experimented directions of
his Books or Recipes, and were sure to be heard and have redress in a Court of
Justice, guided and governed by wise, and good men, who being as great as they
were good, were fenced and compassed about with comprehensive and restraining
Oaths, enjoining all manner of right, and forbidding the least of Injustice,
and wrong to be done unto the People.

Preserved the estates, inheritance, and evidences of the Wards, guarded, and
rescued the estates of Lunatiques, and Idiots, from those that would deceive
them, helped the Wards in the discovery, and recovery of their debts, and
rights, rescued them from all wrongs, enjoined, and prohibited other Courts
from any cognizance, or determination of their concernments, except when a Will
was to be proved, or an Administration granted, or the like, to, or for the
use, and benefit, of a Ward, and committed the education of such, whose Fathers
dyed Papists, so to Protestants, as many, and amongst them some Earls, and
Nobility, have by the direction of the King, and the care of that Court, been
put under the Tuition of some Bishops, and thereby become Protestants, and
their Posterities fastened in that Religion, most of which cares of that Court,
and benefits received by the people, could not be at all, or not so well had
and enjoyed, when there was no Court, which besides the pr^venting and
punishing of stolen marriages, and many other benefits not here mentioned, may
notwithstanding some deviations, and irregularities, which have been committed
by some Officers, and Clarks, which may easily be remedied, be as useful as
other of the great Courts in Westminster Hall, which were not dissolved or put
down in the reign of King E. 1. because all the Judges of the Kings Bench,
common Pleas, and Exchequer, except John de Metingham, and Elias de Beckingham
were by judgment of Parliament, Spelmans glossar 416. et Daniel 189.
found guilty and grievously Fined for Briberies, extortions, oppressions, and
other great misdemeanors, but to the great good and comfort of the people and
nation, have as before those offenses committed by some of their Judges in the
absence of the King in Gasconie, ever since continued as great Magazines of
Justice, and the Asylums or Sanctuaries of all that are distressed.

So as no Serpent, for ought ever appears, lurked under that green grass, nor
any Crocodile nourished, or bathed himself in those wholesome waters, laid not
his eggs in the Sand of our Estates or Properties, assaulted not the innocent
Passenger, nor spoiled our Flocks of Sheep, or herds of Cattle: and a Marvail
or wonder it may therefore be, that so good, so necessary, and so beneficial an
Institution, should have any Innate, or original evil or grievance in it, and
the quaerulous humor of the vulgar, who, like a herd of Swine, do too often
cry, when one of many of them is but justly pinched or wrung by the ear for his
unjust Trespassings, or as those irrational Guards of the night do use to howl
or bark because one of their kind half a mile off, torments himself in a
Moonlight night in barking at his own or any other shadow, should never
stuff out, or enlarge their complaints, against that which was accounted to be
no grievance in Edward the Confessors time, whose memory was, and is yet like
the Nard, or Spices of the East, and his Laws so venerable, as our English
forefathers could in the loss and ruins of their Country, hide them under his
shrine at Westminster, and thought themselves happy, when as with Tears and
Importunities they obtained of William the Conqueror to be restored to them,
and left them as rich Heir-looms, and a precious Legacy to their Posterity, who
got the care and observation of them to be afterward inserted into the
Coronation Oath of the succeeding Kings of England.

And could no way be suspected not to be highly contented with them, when as
they were Leges propriae, Laws of their own Country, and consuetudines antiquae
in quibus vixerant Patres ^orum Chronic Leichfeldense.
and ipsi in eis nati, and nutriti fuerunt; and the ancient Customs in which
their forefathers were born or bred up in, not collected or put together by
uncertain reports partial or doubtful, upon reasonlesse traditions, or
hear-says of an afflicted trembling, or affrighted degenerate people, under the
sense and miseries of a late Foreign Conquest, but per praeceptum Regis
Wil^elmi electi sunt de singulis totius Angliae Comitatibus 12 viri
sapie^tiores quibus jurejurando injunctum fuit coram Rege Gulielmo ut quoad
possent tramite neque ad dextram, neque ad sinistram, declinantes legum suarum
and consuetudinum sancita patefacerent, nil praetermittentes nil addentes, nil
praevaricando mutantes, orderly and judicially inquired and sought out by a
fair and just election of twelve of the wisest men of every County in England,
by virtue of King William the Conquerours Writs or Commission to whom being
brought into the Kings presence, they were enjoined by oath, that as much as
possibly they could* they, should have a care to do right, and neither incline
to the right hand, nor to the left, and without any omission, addition,
collusion, or deceit should certify their legal Customs, which being done, and
written out by the Kings command, by the proper handwriting of Aldered
Archbishop of York, and Hugh Bishop of London, were by the King ratified by
his Proclamation, and made perpetual, per totum Regnum Angliae inviolabiliter
tenendas sub paenis gravissimis, Throughout all England under grievous
penalties to be observed and kept; And so approved by the people, as about 70
years after, the Citizens of London, (as the continuation of Florence
Wigorniensis mentioned by that learned Knight Sr. Roger Twisden in his preface
to the Laws of William the Conqueror, published by the eminently learned Mr.
Seldom informs us) Continuation Floren. Wigor^ et Sr. Roger Twisden in pr^fat.
ad leges Willielmi 1.
did importune Maud the Empress, ut eis Edwardi Regis Leges observare liceret
quia optimae erant, That the Laws of King Edward might be observed, because
they were the best.

And when William the Conqueror ordered the Rents, and Revenues of such as
held of him, to be paid into the Exchequer, it was non simpliciter nec haeres
ab hereditate, M. S. Cottoniana.
nec ut ab ipso haereditas tollitur, sed simul cum haereditate sub Regis
custodia constitutus temp^r^ pupillaris aetatis, Not to take away the
Inheritance, but to keep and educate him during his Minority.

For It could be no inconvenience to the public welfare of the Nation, to have
the Children of the best rank and quality (for such were then the Tenants in
Capite and by Knight service) virtuously and nobly educated in Arts and Arms,
whereby to be enabled to do their Prince and Country service, and their Lands
and Estates in the interim, to be protected and defended from Neighbor or
other injuries.

Nor to be married to their own degree or a nobler quality, when as by the
means of intermarriages betwixt the Saxons and Normans, as between York and
vincent Catalogue of English Nobility.
Lucia the Sister of Morchar Earl of Northumberland, a Saxon, and Juo Talbois a
great Norman Baron, and betwixt Ralph de waiet a Saxon, by a British or Welsh
Woman, and Emme the Daughter of William Fitz Osbern Earl of Hereford, by which
he was by the Conqueror made Earl of the East- Angles. And many more which
might be instanced, their mutual discontents and animosities calming into
reconciliations and friendships, had the like effect, as the tie and kindness
of the intermarriages had not long before in King Ina's time, who himself
marrying with Guala a M. S. inter L. L. Regis Edwardi.
British woman, and his Lords and great men intermarrying with the Welsh, and
Scots, and their Sons also marrying with their Daughters, the Nation became to
be as Gens una, one people, in a near consociation, and relation, and the
Norman H. 1. afterward found it to be not unsuccessefull in his own marriage
with Matilda the Daughter of Malcolm King of Scots, by the Sister or Niece of
Edgar Atheling of the Saxon Royal line.

It was no grievance when the Charter of Liberties (which was the original of a
great part of our after Magna Charta,) was granted to the people of England by
K. H. 1. who is therein said omnes malas consuetudines quibus Anglia
opprimebatur auferre, to abolish all the evil customs with which England was
oppressed, when it would have been strange that Tenures in Capite, and by
Knight service should remain as a part of the Kings just prerogative, and be so
well liked of, and approved, consilio and consensu Baronum, By advice and
consent of the Barons, if there had been any grievance originally or naturally
in them.

Nor so much as a Semblance of it in the reign of H. 2. Mat Pa^is 99. and 100.
when a general Inquisition was made per Angliam cui quis in servitio seculari
de jure obnoxious teneretur, thorough England What secular or temporal services
due by Law were not performed.

And as little in the Parliament at Clarendon in the same Kings reign, where in
the presence of the King, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and Nobility, Mat. Paris 100.
facta fuit recognitio, sive recordatio, cujusdam partis consuetudinum, and
libertatum Antecessorum suorum, Regis viz. Henrici Avi sui and aliorum quae
observari deb^bant in Regno and ab omnibus teneri, A recapitulation and
rehearsal was made of some of the Customs and Liberties of their Ancestors, and
of the King, that is to say of King H. 1. and others which ought of all to be
observed and kept in the Kingdom, in which there was nothing against the Feudal
Laws or Tenures in Capite, and by Knights service, but many expressions, and
allowances of them.

And if otherwise it would have been something strange that the issue and
posterity of those Barons, should in King John's time adventure all that could
be dear, or near unto them, to gain the Liberties granted by H. 1. with some
addition, and never grudge that King the same Prerogative, when as hazarding
the forfeiture of their own Magna Charta of Heaven, to gain a Magna Charta on
Earth for their posterities. They had greatly overpowered their King, at
Running Mede where their Armies stood in procinctu and acie, Facing one
another, and Pila Mat. Paris.
minantia pilis, Threatening death and destruction to each other, or would so
willingly have hung up their Shields, and Lances, and returned to their peace
and obedience, by accepting of that Magna Charta, if they had not taken it to
be as much for their own defense, and the good of the Kingdom, as it was for
his, nor so willingly afterward in the reign of King Henry the 3 d. his Son
have clad themselves in Steel, made a Combination, and bound themselves by oath
one to another never to submit to a peace, until they had a just performance of
what his Father had granted them, endured the Popes then direful Fulminations,
and never rested until the King himself had confirmed that Magna Charta by a
most solemn oath, in procession with the Bishops who with lighted Tapers in
their hands; anathematized all the infringers thereof, if Tenures in Capite and
the enableing their Prince to defend them, had not been a part of their own
Liberties, nor could they be imagined to be otherwise, when as by an Act of
Parliament also of that King the great Charter was to be duly read in all
Counties of England, and Writs, and Letters were sent to all the Sheriffs of
England, commanding them by the oaths of twelve Knights of every County, to
enquire what were the ancient Rights and Liberties of the People, no return was
ever made that Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service, either were or could
be any obstructions to them or that, so often bloodily contested and too dearly
purchased, Magna Charta, nor was it any public grievance, when as in the
Parliament of 26 H. 3 in a great contest betwixt him and the Baronage and great
men of England, touching his ill Government, and diverse exactions, and
oppressions, the profits which he had by his Tenures and Escheats were said to
have been sufficient to have kept him from a want of money, and oppressing his
Subjects.

Nor in Anno 42. H. 3. when the King upon those great complaints and stirs
betwixt him, and the then Robustious and sturdy Barons of England occasioned by
his misgovernment, which busied the people with Catalogues of grievances, he by
his Writs or Commissions appointed in every County of England; Mat. Paris 977.
Quatuour milites qui considerarent qu^t et quantis granaminibus simpliciores a
fortioribus opprimuntur et inquirent diligenter d^ singulis quaerelis et
injurijs a quocunque factis, vel quibuscunque illatis a multis retroactis
temporibus, et omnia inquisita sub sigillis suis inclusa secum coram Baronagio
ad tempus sibi per breve praefixum; Four Knights, men of known worth and
wisdom, loving and beloved of their Countries, to enquire what grievances or
oppressions the smaller sort of people suffered by the greater, and also of all
injuries and ^^ongs done by any person whatsoever, either lately or formerly,
and to certify it under their Seals to the Barronage, which what ever they
were, or if ever or never recorded, (for they have not for ought appears, been
certified or recorded,) no Record or Historian of that, or the after times,
have said that Tenures in Capite and by Knights service, were thereupon
returned to be oppressive, or so much as inconvenient.

Neither are to be found amongst any of those huge heaps of evils which Matthew
Paris that sower and honest Monk of St. Albons (who lived in those times and
especially remarked them) has delivered to posterity.

The 24 Reformers or Conservators of the Kingdom, in that Kings Reign,
appointed by the Baronage, never intimated any thing of their dislike of that
honorable institution.

It was not complained of upon the refusal of Roger Bigod Earl of Norfolk,
Marshall of England, Humphry Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, Constable of
England and Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, and Hertford, great and mighty
men and of Princely Estates, to go at the Command of King E. 1. Pat. 30. E. 1.
unto his Wars at Gascony, upon pretense that the warning was to short, whereby
the Kings displeasure was so much incurred, Walsingham ypodigm^ N^uster. 487.
a^ Bohun and Clare, to escape the Seizure and forfeiture of their Lands and to
purchase his favor again were glad each of them to marry one of his Daughters,
without any Dowry, and surrender their Earldoms, Honors, Offices, and Lands
unto him, and take back Estates thereof in Tail to them, and the Heirs of
their Bodies upon their wives to be severally begotten, and Bigot surrendering
also to him his Earledom, and Marshals rod together with all his Lands, Claus.
30. E. 1^
and taking Back a grant of an Estate for life in his honors and Lands, the
reversion to the King if he should not have any Issue of his Body begotten the
King in Parliament pardoned them, and John de Ferrari^s, and other Earls,
Barons, Knights, and Esquires, parl E. 1
and all other of their fellowship, confederacy, and Bond and all that held
twenty pounds Land Per annum, whether in chief of the King or other that were
appointed at a certain day to pass over with him into Flanders, their rancour
and evil will and all other offenses committed against him.

Were not in the Roll of general grievances, which the Archbishops, Bishops,
Ea^ls, Barons, and Commons, sent him when he was at the Sea side ready to take
shipping into Gascoigne, Daniels Histo^y 195.
concerning his Taxes, and other impositions. Neither any vestigia, or
footsteps to be found of any grievance by them, in that grand search, or
inquiry by the Commissions of Traile Baston, in, or about the 33 of E. 3. after
intruders into other men's Lands, exactions, and oppressions, or in the
presentiments in the Eyres, when the Justices thereof in several Kings reigns,
carefully travailed into the several Counties and places of England, and found
out, and returned the complaints, and oppressions of every County, and where
the Natives themselves, and the witnesses cannot be supposed to be so much
their own enemies, as to conceal, the Countries oppressions and the Jurors were
solemnly charged to present them upon their Oaths, and if they should omit to
do it, had the malice of their Neighbors to watch and accuse their Perjuries,
and the severity of the Judges, to punish any failings in their duty.

Or in the Reformation which the Lords Ordainers, as they were afterward
called, in or about the fifth year of the Reign of King E. 2. pretended to make
in that unadvised Commission, which he granted them for the Government of the
Kingdom.

No pretense, or so much as a murmur against them by the Reformers in Wat
Tylers and Jack Straws commotion, when they were so willing to overthrow and
extirpate all the Nobility and Gentry, which should withstand their rude and
unruly designs of making all Bondmen free, and taking away Villenage, and of
making Wat Tyler, and several other of their party, Kings in several Counties,
and to devise what Laws they listed.

Or by Jack Cade, or Captain Mend-all as he falsely styled himself when many a
grievance was picked up to color his Rebellion in the reign of King H. 6. but
could find nothing of that for a garnish of his Roguery.

Or Robert Ket the Tanner, in the reign of King E. 6. sitting in judgment
amongst the Rabble, under his tree (as they called it) of Reformation, where
Tenures and Wardships, being so obvious, and every where insisted, upon, they
would not probably have omitted them out of the Roll, or list of their
complaints if there could have been but a supposition, or dream of any
grievance in them, which being the more noble beneficial, and better sort of
Tenures may better deserve an approbation of the People, and Parliaments of
England, than Tenures in Villenage, which by an Act of Parliament in 25 E.
3.18. may be pleaded, and a Villain seized though a liberate proba^d^, be
depending. And it was enacted in the Parliament of 9 R. 2.2. that if Villains
fled into places infranchised and sued their Lords, their Lords should not be
barred thereby, and by an Act Parliament in 8 H. 6.11. that a Villain should
not be admitted* or put to be an Apprentice in the City of London, and by an
Act of Parliament in 19. H. 7.15. If any Bondman purchase Lands, and convey
away the Lands, the Bondman being ^estui que use of th^se Lands, they shall be
seized by the Lord.

Nor did the Act of Parliament of 25 E. 3. 25 E. 3.1.
which provided that none should be constrained to find men of Arms, H^blers,
nor Archers, but by common assent, and grant made in Parliament, mistake when
it inserted a saving, and exception of all those that held by such services.

Neither did the Commons in the Parliament of 5 R. 2. Rot Parl. 5 R. 2.11. and
14.
upon the Repeal in Parliament, of the Manumissions of Bondmen, extorted from
the King by Wat Tyler, and his Rout, or men of Reformation, think they did
themselves, or those they represented, any hurt, when they cried with one
voice, that the Repeal was good, and that at their request the Repeal was by
whole assent confirmed.

Tenures in Capite, and by Knights service, were not complained of in the
Parliament of 13 R. 2. though the Commons in Parliament had prayed, and were
allowed, that every man might complain of the oppression of what person or
Estate soever without incurring the pain of the Statute of Rot Parl. 13. R. 2*
n. 45.
Gloucester (which under great penalties prohibited, false News and Lies of
the Nobility and great men of the Realm, Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of
both Benches, and other great Officers of the Bench) made in the second year of
the King.

Nor was there so much as an Apprehension of any evil in them in the Parliament
of 4 H. 4. where the Commons pray that The Act of Parliament of the 1 of E. 3.
Declarat. Lords and Commons, in Collect. Parliament declarations, 386* and 390.
that none shall be distrained to go out of their Counties, but only for the
Cause of necessity of sudden coming of strange Enemies into the Realm, and the
Statute made in the 18 th. year of the Reign of the said King, That men of
Arms, Hoblers and Archers chosen to go in the Kings Service out of England;
shall be at the Kings wages from the day that they do depart out of the
Counties where they were chosen, and also that the Statute made in the 25 th.
year of the Reign of the said King, that none be compelled to find Men of Arms
Hoblers nor Archers, other than those which hold by such services, unless it
be by common assent and grant made in Parliament, be firmly holden and kept in
all points, it was upon the granting of their desires, and an Act of Parliament
made for that purpos^ (as the Declaration of the Lords and Commons in
Parliament, against the Kings Commission of Array, in an. 1642 mentions)
especially provided, that by force or color of the said supplication, nor of
any Statute thereupon to be made, the Lords nor any other that have Lands or
Possessions in the Counties of Wales, or in the Marches thereof, shall in no
wise be excused of their Services and Devoires due of their said Lands and
Possessions, nor of any other Devoier, or things whereunto they or any of them
be especially bound to the King, though that the same Lords and others, have
other Lands and Possessions within the Realm of England; nor that the Lords, or
other of what Estate or Condition soever they be, that hold by Es^uage or other
Services due to the King, any Lands and Possessions within the said Realm* be
no way excused to do their Services and Devoirs due of the said Lands and
Possessions: nor that the Lords, Knights, Esquires, nor other Persons, of what
Estate or Condition they be, which hold and have of the Grant or Confirmation
of the King, Lands, Possessions, Fees, Annuities, Pensions, or other yearly
profits, be not excused to do their Services to the King, in such manner as
they are bound, because of the Lands, Possessions, Fees, Annuities, Pensions*
or Profits af^resaid.

And might challenge their quietus est, or Proclamation of acquittall, when
there were no complaints made against them in the former ages when there were
so many Taxes laid upon Knights Fees, as 20* shillings then a great sum of
money, and as much almost as 20 marks is now, upon every Knights Fee, imposed
by King R. 1. toward his ransom 26 s. 8 d. upon every Knights Fee by King
John, and another also of the same sum toward his expedition into Wales, 20 s.
upon every Knights Fee toward his Charges in Normandy, and an Escuage of 20 s.
upon every Knights Fee to be paid the one half at Easter, and the other at
Michaelmas besides the Escuage which he had upon the marriage of his Sister
Isabel to the Emperor Frederick, two Escuages imposed by H. 3. and an Escuage
upon the marriage of his Daughter the Lady Margaret to Alexander King of Scots.
20 s. of every Knights Fee by H. 4. the many services in person done by those
which held in capite, and Knights Service, in forinseco servitio, in all the
expeditions and Wars in France, from the time of the Norman Conquest, to the
end of the Reign of E. 4. and at home in the Wars betwixt England and Wales,
and betwixt England and the Scots, where very many Inhabitants of the Counties
of Cumberland, Westme^land, and Northumberland, that held by Cornage a kind of
Knight Service, to blow a horn upon the invasion or incursion of the Scots, and
to help to repel them, and had their Lands sometimes at the Will of the Lords
conferred and given to the younger and more lusty Sons who were able to undergo
that service, could before King James his accession to the Crown of England,
the pacification of the English and Scottish hostilities, and placing them
under one obedience, scarce rest in their beds by reason of the Scots sudain or
nightly alarmes and depredations, driving or stealing their Cattle, and
spoiling all that they had.

And in all the troubles of England before and since the Barons Wars upon any
Rebellions and inquietudes of the people, when those that held by
Knight*service were frequently and hastily summoned to come to the King cum
Equis and Armis, and the great charges, trouble, hazard, and expenses, which
the Lords M^sne, were put unto, by Assessements of Escuage and otherwise; And
that immediately upon the death of the Kings Tenants in capite, and by Knight
Service, the Escheators did usually seize not only the Lands of the greatest of
the Nobility, Gentry, and meaner men; But the Stock and Cattle upon their
grounds, and the Goods in their Houses, insomuch as their Executors were many
times constrained to Petition and obtain the Kings Writs and Allowance, to have
the Stock and personal Estate delivered unto them.

And yet no complaints made at all against those Tenures or necessary defenses
of the Kingdom, nor against Tenures by grand or Petit Serjeanty, in the thirty
confirmations of our Magna Charta, upon as often Breaches to be supposed of it.

Never complained off in the making of thirty six Acts of Parliament concerning
Wardships and Tenures in the several times and Ages from 8 H. 3. to this
present, nor at the making of the Act of Parliament in 32 H. 8. for the
erection of the Court of Wards.

Nor in so many thousand Petitions which have been in 186. several Parliaments,
for almost four hundred years last past, or before 9 H. 3. or ever since this
nation could remember any thing either in our Parliaments Micel-gemots
Wittena-gemots conventus sapientum, or Magna Concilia, where all the
Grievances, and Complaints of the people not to be remedied else where, came as
to the Pool of Bethesda, for help and relief, and wherein if any in some one or
more Parliaments should so much neglect their duty, and the more than ordinary
business and concernments of their Kings, themselves, and Countries with which
they were entrusted, and to which their Oaths of Allegiance, if nothing else,
must needs be their Monitors, it cannot (without a supposition and belief which
will never be able to find entertainment in any rational man's understanding) be
imagined that the whole Nation for so many Ages, past and in so many
Assemblies, of those that should be the Sons of Wisdom, should be bound up
under such a fate of Stupidity or Ignorance, as to represent those that were
sick and not know of it, or that all or any of them should propter
imbecillitatem, vel pernegligentiam, by a to be pitied weakness or negligence,
not either seek or find the way to the ears or audience of so many worthy and
just Kings and Princes as this Kingdom has been happy in, who would have been
as willing to give a remedy as they could have been to seek it, if there had
been any ground or cause for it, that so many Petitions of small concernments,
or of no greater consequence than for the paving of Streets, killing of Crows,
not taking of young Herns out of their nests without license of the owner of
the ground, and the like, should get admittance, and cause Acts of Parliament
to be made thereupon, and that of Tenures in Capite, if any grievance could at
all be found in them, and of so long a continuance (which usually makes light
burdens to be heavy) should be so dipped in a Lethe or Oblivion, as not at all
to be remembered.

Which had nothing at all of grievance in their essence or being understood of
them, in the making of the Statute of 1 H. 8. cap. 12. Coke 4. part Institutes
197.
1 H. 8. against Empson and Dudley, by whom the Kings Subjects had been sore
hurt, troubled, and greived, in causing untrue Offices to be found, retorning
of Offices that never were found, and in changing Offices that were found.

No Grievance perceived to be in them, in Primo Jacobi, 1 Jacobi* 5.
when in the Statute concerning Respites of Homage there was a Proviso, that in
case it shall be thought fit, for the true knowledge and preservation of the
Tenures appertaining to the Crown, and so ordered in the open Court of
Exchequer, that process should issue out of the said Court against any, came not
within the Suspicion or Jealousy of a Grievance, when in the Parliament of 7.
Jacobi Regis, Sr. Francis Bacon then his Majesty's Solicitor, Sr. Francis
Bacons speech in Parliament in 7. Jacobi, touching a Composition to be made for
Tenures in Capite.
in his speech, as one of the House of Commons in Parliament, to the Lords in
Parliament, persuading them to join with the Commons, to Petition the King to
obtain liberty to treat of a Composition with his Majesty for Wards and
Tenures, acknowledged in the name of that Parliament, that the Tree of Tenures
was planted into the Prerogative by the Ancient Common Law of England, fenced
in and preserved by many Statutes, and yeildeth to the King the fruit of a
great Revenue, and that is was a noble Protection, that the young Birds of the
Nobility and good Families, should be gathered and clucked under the Wings of
the Crown.

Nor in Primo Car. primi, 1 Ca^ primi ^.
in the Act of Parliament touching the rating of Officers Fees in the
Exchequer, upon pleadings of Licenses or Pardons for Alienations, when the
Lords and Commons in that Parliament assembled, did declare that the Kings
Tenures are a Principal flower of the Crown (which being in England, the safety
and protection of the people cannot be said or proved to be adorned by their
sorrows and miseries) and ought not to be concealed.

And that in the petition of Right, in 3 Car. primi. wherein all the Grievances
and Burdens of the Subjects, and breaches of Laws and Liberties, that any way
concerned them or their Posterities were enumerated, and remedies for the
future establishment of the quiet, and happiness of the people propounded and
granted, Tenures in Capite, and Knight service, with their incidents, were not
reckoned or accounted as Grievances, though all that troubled the people, were
at that time so largly thought and believed to be redrest as a public joy,
upon the Kings granting of that Petition of Right, was commanded to be
celebrated by the Music and ringing of Bells in every Parish Church of the
Cities of London and Westminster, which vied each with other who should
proclaim and tell their joys the loudest; And the blaze of numberless
Bonfires, representing the flame of the peoples affection toward a most
gracious Sovereign, seemed to turn the sullen night into a morning or day which
the Sun beams had newly gilded, whilst Alecto and her Sister Furies despairing
in their hopes of kindling a sedition, and bringing the miseries of a Civil War
upon us, had thrown by their Torches, and employed their Hellish griefs in the
tearing of their Snakie lo^ks.

Were no Sirtes or Rocks to shipwreck or hurt the people, when Sr. Edward Coke,
who was so willing to have Tenures in Capite and Knight service, to be changed
into Tenures by Fealty only, as of some of the Kings Honors, and all their
Incidents, as Wardships, primer seisin, Licenses of Alienation, etc. taken away
and recompensed by a greater yearly profit, then was, then had or received by
them, and a rent to be inseperably annexed to the Crown, with some necessary
Covenants and Privisoes, as he hoped that so good a motion as had been made in
the Parliament of 18 Jacobi, tending as he thought to the Honor and Profit of
the King and his Crown for ever, and the quiet and freedom of his Subjects,
and their Posterities would one way or other, by the grace of God, and
Authority of Parliament, take effect and be established, could not but
acknowledge between Anno 3. Car. Regis primi, Coke 4. part Institutes tit.
Court of Wards 193
and the 12 th. year of his reign, that the Objection that Wardship was a Badge
of servitude (which would be a Grievance indeed, and of the greatest Magnitude)
was groundless and without a Foundation, for that the King by taking money for
the marriage of the Ward, does it not as for a Ransom, but takes such
moderate sums of money, as in respect of the quality, and state of the Ward He
or She, all circumstances considered, is able to pay, and in regard thereof,
has the protection of the Court of Wards during Minority; And giving Tenures
by Knight service no worse a Character, than the Wisdom of Antiquity, for his
Justification therein, cites a place out of the Red Book Coke 4. Institutes
and lib. ru^. Scac.
in the Exchequer, where it is said that mavult enim princeps domesticos, quam
Stipendiarios Bellicis apponere casibus, the King had rather be served by his
own Subjects, than Hirelings or Stipendary Soldiers.

No Scylla or Charybdis taken to be in them, in the Parl. of 17. Car. prim. at
the making of the Act for the better raising and levying of Soldiers for the
present defense of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, wherein it being said,
that by the Laws of this Realm, none of his Majesty's Subjects ought to be
impressed, or compelled to go out of his Country, to serve as a Soldier in
the Wars, they excepted cases of necessity of the sudden coming in of strange
enemies into the Kingdom, or where they be otherwise bound by the Tenure of
their Lands or Possessions; In the Remonstrance of the House of Commons 15.
December 1641. and that unhappy Amasse, and collection of Complaints against
the Government, the Tenures themselves were not so much as complained of, but
the exceeding of the Jurisdiction of the Court of Wards, Exact Collections of
the King and Parliament Declaratio^s 8.
that thereby the estates of many Families were weakened, some ruined by
excessive Fines, for Composition for Wardships exacted from them, which if in
some few particulars, where the Estate it self was weak, or encumbered with
Debts, or charge of Children, connot rationally conclude or argue the Fines to
be excessive, no more than a common weight or burden which may easily be born
or carried by any man in health, does make it to be of a greater weight or
burden, because another man by reason of sickness, or other disabilities, is
not able to bear or stand under it, or that a reasonable or small rent, which
Tenants are to pay to their Landlords, is therefore too much or unreasonable,
because a poor or decayed Tenant cannot so well bear or pay it as he was wont,
Exact Collect^ons of the King and Parliament Declarations. 8.
or as one that is thriving, or before hand might do; That all Leases of above
One hundred years were made to draw Wardships contrary to Law (when as such or
the like Collusions, were by the Statute of Marlebridge prohibited) and the
Parliament was misinformed, for long Leases under 500. years were not made by
that Court liable to Wardships, and that undue proceedings were used in the
finding of Offices to make Jurors find for the King (which was but to adjorne
or bind them over to the Bar of the Court of Wards, in case that there was any
doubt of the Law or Evidence.

Or when the Lords and Commons in Parliament the second day of June 1642. by
the nineteen Propositions Exact Collection of the K^n^s and Pa^^^am^nts
D^^l^rations 307.
which were (as they alleged) for the establishment of the Kings honor and
safety, and the w^lfare and ^ecurity of his Subjects and Dominions, and being
granted, would be a necessary and effectual means to remove those jealousies
and differences which have unhappily fallen betwixt him and his people, and
procure both his Majesty and them a constant course of honor, peace, and
happiness.

Did propose, petition, and advise, that the Lord high Constable of England,
Exact Collection of the Kings and Parliaments Declarations and Messages. 308.
Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, Lord Treasurer,
Lord privy Seal, Earl Marshal, Lord Admiral Warden of the Cinque Ports, chief
Governor of Ireland, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Master of the Wards,
Secretaries of State, two chief Justices, and chief Baron, may always (which
showed they had no desire for the present or the future to take away the
Tenures in Capite and by Knight service) be chosen by approbation of both
Houses of Parliament.

Did not conceive them to be any Disease or Gangreen in the Body Politic, at
the making of the 2 d. Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Parliament,
dated the 12 th. of January 1642. Concerning the Commission of Array,
occasioned by a book then lately published, Entitled his Majesty's answer to
the Declaration of both Houses of Parliament, concerning the said Commission of
Array, Printed and Published by the care of Mr. Samuel Brown, then and now a
Member of the House of Commons, wherein many Arguments being used (and if they
had been grievances, would not have become the Parliament to have urged or
pressed them as an argument) against the Kings, having power to raise men by
his Commissions of Array, and were then so little denied to be for the
necessary defense of the King and his Subjects, as they were rather taken by
that Parliament to be as the hands and Arms of the body politic, worthy a
continuance and perpetuity, and very well deserving the good opinion which the
Parliament then had of them in the expressions following.

We deny that there is an impossibility of defense, without such power, viz.
the Commissions of Array. And affirm that the Exact. Collect. of the Kings and
Parliament Declarations 850.856.857
Kingdom may be defended in time of danger, without issuing such Commissions,
or executing such power. For, we say, that the Law has provided several ways
for provision of Arms, and for defense of the Kingdom in time of danger without
such Commissions 1. All the Tenures that are of his Majesty by Barony, Grand
Se^jeanty, Knight service in Capite, Knight service, and other like Tenures,
were all originally instituted for the defense of the Kingdom, in time of War
and danger, as appears by the Statute of 7 E. 1. of Mortmain, which says,
servitia quae ex hujus modi feodis d^bentur ad defensionem Regni ab initio
provisa fuerunt, vide Chart. H. 1. irrotulat in libro Rubro Scac. Coke Instit.
75. Bracton 36.37. Britton 162.35 H. 6.41. Coke 8.105. Coke 6.^. Instit. 1 part
103. These Tenures in the Conquerours time were many, and since they are much
increased; and these are all bound to find men and arms, according to their
Tenures, for the defense of the Kingdom.

2. As those Tenures are for the defense of the Kingdom, so the Law has given
to his Majesty diverse Privileges and Prerogatives for the same end and
purpose; that with the profits of them, he should defend himself and his people
in times of danger, of which his Majesty is, and always has been in actual
possession since his access to the Crown.

For the defense of the Kingdom, his Majesty ha^h the profits o^ Wardships,
L^veries, Primer seisins, Marriages, Reliefs, Fines for Alienation, Customs,
Mines, Wrecks, Treasure trove, Escheats, Forfeitures, and diverse others the
like casual profits, That by these he may be enabled to defend the Kingdom, and
that he enjoying them, his Subjects might enjoy their Estates under his
Protection, free from Taxes and Impositions for defense. Therefore it is
declared 14 E. 3. chap. 1. That all the profits arising of an aid then granted
to the King by his people; And of Wards Marriages, Customs, Escheats, and
other profits riseing of the Realm of England, should ^e spent upon the
safeguard of the Realm of England, and on the Wars in Scotland, France, and
Gascoigne, and no places elsewhere, during the Wars. And the Lords and Commons
in Rich. 2 time, (knowing the Law to ^e so) did *as appears ^y the Parliament
^olls 6 Rich. ^. m. 42) pass a ^etition, that the King would live o^ his own
Revenues, and that the Wards, Marriages, Reliefs, For^^itures, and other
profits of the Crown, might be kept to be spent in the Wars for the defense of
the Kingdom.

3. If the said Tenures and casual profits rising by his Prerogative, will not
serve for defense, but more help is necessary, by the fundamental Laws and
Constitutions of this Kingdom, his Majesty is entrusted with a power to summon
Parliaments as often as he pleases, for defense of himself, and his people,
when his ordinary Revenues will not serve the turn; And there is no other legal
way (when the others are not sufficient) but this, and this last has been ever
found by experience, the most sure and successful way for supply in time of
imminent danger, for defense of the Kingdom, and to this the Kings of this
Realm have in times of danger frequently had recourse.

A main end why Parliaments are called, is for defense of the Kingdom, and that
other Supplies th^n th^se before mentioned, cannot be made without a
Parliament.

Nor was there any public or general damage so much as supposed to be in them
the first of February 1642. when in the propositions sent by those Lords and
Commons, which remained in Parliament, to the King at Oxford, to be treated
upon by the Earl of Northumberland, William Pierrepont Esquire Sr. Will. Armin and
Bulstrode Whitlock, Esquire their Commissioners. There was nothing desired or
proposed for the taking away of the Court of Wards or changing of Tenures, but
did conclude that if that which then was desired of the King should be granted,
the Royalty and greatness of his Throne would be supported by the loyal, and
bountyfull affections of his people, Propositions sent by the Parliament to the
King at Oxford 1 of Feb^uary 1642.
and their Liberties and Privileges, maintained by his Majesty's protection
and Justice.

They were no part of the Bills, or Acts of Parliament, sent to the King at
Oxford, in order to a peace in July 1648.

No part of the Demands, or Bills, or Acts of Parliament, proposed by the
Parliament in the Treaty at Vxbridge, betwixt them and the King, 23 November.
1644.

And there was so little of grievance or inconvenience, or none at all to be
found in Tenures in Capite and by Knight service, by reason of any accidents,
for naturally or originally there can be none at all proved to be in them.

As notwithstanding the Vote of the House of Commons in Parliament, made the 20
th day of September 1645.

Which being less then an Embrio, and no more then an opinion of the Major part
of that House, a recens assensio, velleity, desire or intention only, which our
Laws take no notice of; was left to an after more mature deliberation, when an
Act of Parliament should be brought in upon it, and have gone through all its
necessary requisites, formalities, and debates, the Parliament it self were so
little resolved, or beleiving any Grievance to be in them, as the Lords and
Commons by their Ordinance of the first day of November 1645. did ordain that
the Master and Council of that Court, should proceed in all things belonging to
the Jurisdiction of that Court according to Law.

And the House of Commons shortly after, viz. the fourth day of November 1645.
being informed that by reason of a Vote passed in that House the 20 th. day of
September 1645. that the Court of Wards should be taken away, diverse
Wardships, Liveries, Primer seisins, and Mesne rates, which theretofore fell
and happened, were not compounded for as they ought to be; It was declared that
all of them which have happened, or shall fall or happen before the Court of
Wards, shall be put down by the Parliament, shall be answered to the
Commonwealth, and the Master and Council of that Court were required to
proceed accordingly, so as it extended not to any whose Ancestors being
Officers or Soldiers have been slain or died in the service of the Parliament.

But the 24 th. of February 1645. upon occasion of a debate concerning the
Wardship of the Son of Sir Christopher Wray, who dyed as they said, in the
service of the Parliament, an Ordinance was brought in and made by the Lords
and Commons, for the taking away of Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service,
which says one of their allowed Mercuries, was first given to the Crown for
defense of the Kingdom, but the Parliament would take care for other supplies.

But that Ordinance notwithstanding was so little liked of, as that without the
giving satisfaction which they promised to the Nobility Gentry and Mesne Lords
for the loss of their Tenures by Knight service, and satisfaction to the most
part of the Officers of the Court of Wards, it was no more or not much thought
of, but lay from that time in a slumber, until the first of August 1647. when
the mighty Mechanicques of the Army driven on by their ignorant, and seditious
Agitators, who were but the Engines of Cromwell's lurking and horrid designs,
had by their Remonstrances, like Wolves clothed in Sheepskins, bleated, and
seemed to thirst only after godly and purified Reformations, and Hewson the
Cobbler, and Pride the Dr^yman, and others of the College of their n^w
^apientia, busying themselves in State, as well as Parliament affairs, and
thombing the Scriptures, and the English Translations of Livy and Plutarch at
the wrong end, thought every one of themselves to be no less than a Solon and
Lycurgus, admired Agrarian Laws, and other old exploded grievances, dreamed
they were excellent Politiques, and not knowing our good old Laws, but
suspecting them (as well they might) to be averse, and no well-wishers to their
ungodly, and worse than Machiavillian devices, did all they could to destroy
them, root and branch, and at the same time, when (in their New England
Phrase,) they held forth a more than ordinary Care of the Kings Honor and
Dignity, and the freedom, rights and interests of the seduced people, proposed
(or commanded rather) that the Proposals agreed upon by the Council of the Army
to be tendered to the Commissioners of the Parliament residing with the Army 1
August 1647.
Ordinance for taking away the Court of Wards and Liveryes be confirmed by Act
of Parliament, provided his Majesty's Revenues be not damnified therein, nor
those that held Offices in the same, left without Reparation some other way.

Which howsoever it were, to the remaining and small part of that Parliament,
who durst not say it, but found themselves under a force which against many of
their will^* had undertaken to be their Guard and safekeeping, a motive or spur
enough to make them put that Vote and ordinance against the Court of Wards and
Liveries in^o an Act as they* would call it, of Parliament, after 10000 l.
given and paid to the Master of the Court of Wards, for the loss of his place
5000 l. to Sr. Roland Wandesford, Attorney General of that Court 6000 l. to Sr.
Benjamin Rudiard, Surveyer General, 3500 l. to Charles Fleetwood, late
Governor of the destroying Committee of Safety, for his supposed loss by the
Receiver Generals place of that Court, which he pretended he ought to enjoy by
a Sequestration from Sr. Will. Fleetwood his Brother, who was then attending
his Master the King at Oxford, and to Mr. Bacon, 3000 l. for a pretended loss
of his Office, for the making and engrossing of Licenses or pardons for
alienation, all of them but Sir Roland Wandesford, being Members of Parliament,
it did without any mention made or remedy provided for those only supposed
Evils, in Tenures in Capite, and Chivalry in the Billsor intended Acts of
Parliament, which were sent to the King the 3 of March 1647. when he was at
Holmby under a restraint fall asleep for many years after, and left all other
to expect their satisfaction upon the Parliaments promises, and further
proceedings.

And there was so little cause for putting that Sentence in execution against
them, in the judgment and opinion of some of the most knowing sort of the
Arraigners of antiquity, and the actions of their more understanding
forefathers, as Not. Bacons historical Discourses of the Kings of England
202.254.296. and in 2 part 241.
Mr. Nathaniel Bacon in his Historical discourses of the uniformity of the
Government of England under the Britain, Saxon, Danish, Norman and other Kings
of this Isle until the reign of King E. 3. published in Anno 1647. and in his 2
part from King E. 2. until the end of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, printed in
Anno 1651. in a design to make all, or most of the Actions of those our Kings
and Princes and the Nobility and Clergy in their several reigns, for at all of
them (like one of the Ephori sitting in Censure rather than Judgment upon the
Spartan Kings and Government) and the Acts of Parliament, made in the several
Reigns, of those Kings, he aimed, and flung his Fancies, clad in a sober Style
and Gravity, rather than any Truth or Reason, by pretending that they were made
and contrived only under their influence to be arbitrary and oppressive to the
freeborn people of this Nation, for which he got several Preferments under
Oliver the Protector of our burdens and miseries.

Though if the Records and Journals of our Parliaments may be credited (as
certainly they ought to be) before him, most if not all of our Acts of
Parliament were granted and assented unto by our Kings upon the Petitions of
the Commons, representing the people in Parliament as ^alsoms and great
Remedies and redresses of all that they could complain of, deliverances from
the oppressions, frauds, and deceipts of one another, and prevention of evils
which might happen to them and their posterities, wherein our Kings have almost
in every Parliament given away many, and diminished very much of their own just
and legal Rights and prerogatives by granting and confirming their Liberties
and Estates with such an infranchisement and freedom as no Nation or people
under Heaven now enjoyes.

And when as heretofore in former Parliaments they gave to their Kings and
Princes (and many times too unwillingly) any aids or Subsidies, were sure
besides the blessings which accrewed to them by many good Laws and wholesome
Acts of Parliament to gain a great deal more by their Acts of grace and general
pardons only, then the aids and Subsidies did amount unto.

Unless it were in the Reign of King H. 8. when the Abbey Lands were granted
unto him, and in the reign of King E 6. when the Chanterie and remaining pieces
of those religious Lands (were given to him wherein only the Founders and the
religious to whom they properly belonged, were the only loosers) and yet by
reason of King H. 8. his Endowments and erection of the Bishoppricks of Oxford,
Peterborough, Chester, Gloucester, and Bristol, the College of Christ-Church
in Oxford, and the Deanary of Westminster, Deanries and Prebends of Canterbury,
Winchester, Worcester, Chester, Peterburgh, Oxford, Ely, Gloucester, Bristol,
Carlisle, Durham, Rochester, and Norwich, and his large gifts and grants to
diverse of the Nobility, who had formerly been the Founders, or great
Benefactors to many of the Abbyes and Prioryes, and also to other of his
people, and the grants of E. 6. Queen Eliz. and King James considered, very
little of those Lands and Revenues do at this time continue in the Crown.

And our many Acts of Parliament against Mortmaines without the Kings License,
Provisions by the Pope, or any appeals to be made to him* under the most
severe penalties of Praemunire, the Act of Parliament taking away the Popes
Supremacy, the fineing and putting the Clergy of the Provinces of Canterbury
and York, under Premunires by King H. 8. An Oath of Renunciation of all fealty
and appeals to the Pope, an Engagement to observe all Laws made against his
Power, Na^. Bacons historical discourses of the Kings of England* 219.
the loss of 72 Manors or Lordships out of the Revenues of the
Arch-bishopprick of York, and of sundry great Manors and Possessions taken
from the Sees of Canterbury, Ely, and London; The demolishing and dissolution
of Religious Houses, 3845. Parochial Churches, (being more than a third part of
all the Churches in England) impropriated and gotten into the hands of the
Laity, many of the Vicarages confined to the small and pitiful maintenance of
some 20 l. per Annum, others 10, and some but 6 l. per An. several Acts of
Parliament made in the reigns of several other Kings and Princes, clipping the
Clergies Power in making Leases, or chargeing their Benefices with Cure,
restraining their taking of Farms, forbidding Pluralityes, intermedling as
Commissioners in Lay or Temporal Affairs, or to make Constitutions in their
Synods or Convocations without the Kings Assent, may declare how little power
for some hundreds of years past, the Clergy of England, have before or since
the Reformation, either encroached upon, or been able to get or keep.

Finds not in his mistaken Censures and Distortions of most of the Acts of our
Kings and Parliaments to make way in the deluded peoples minds for the erecting
of Olivers Protean, and Tyranical Government.

Any fault with the erection of the Court of Wards and Liveries, nor with
Tenures or Wardships, but justifying them, says, that the relief paid by the
Tenant upon the death of his Ancestor, was in memorial of the first Lords
favor in giving him the Land, and was first settled in the Saxons times, that
the Law of Wardship may seem more anciently seated in this Kingdom, than the
Normans times, that Wardship was a fruit of the Service of the Tenant, and for
the defense of the Kingdom.

Which that Parliament, or the following Conventions, or Assemblies, made no
have to overturn or take away, until Oliver Cromwell that Hyaena, or Wolf of the
Evening, having filled the Kingdom with Garrisons, and several Regiments of
Horse and Foot, amounting to 30000. men, which were to be constantly maintained
at the peoples charge, to keep them quiet in their slavery; had upon the humble
petition and advice of that which he called his Parliament, acknowledging with
all thankfulness the wonderful mercies of God in delivering them from that
Tyranny and Bondage, Petition of advice of the Commons of England assembled in
Parliament in An, ^657*
both in their Spiritual and Civil Governments, which the late King and his
party (which in a Fog or Mist of sin and delusion they were pleased most
injuriously to aver and charge upon them) designed by a bloody War to bring
them under (when as then they were under none, and all but the gainers by the
spoils of those Wars, have since had more Burdens, Grievances, and Taxes
entailed upon them, then ever was in any Nation in Christendom) allowed him in
a constant Revenue for support of the Government, and the safety and defense of
the Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, a yearly Revenue of thirteen
hundred thousand pounds, whereof ten hundred thousand pounds for the Navy and
Army; which far exceeded tha^ which accrewed to the Crown or Kings of England
by Wardships, Tenures, and Ship-mony, which were but casual, and upon
necessity, and but at some times or seldom, and always less by more than
eight parts in ten of those justly to be complained of awful and yearly
Asessements.

Procured the Assembly or Parliament so called in Anno 1657. to awake that
sleeping Ordinance, and dress it into an Act as he called it of Parliament,
wherein It was without any Cause or Grievance expres^, or satisfaction given,
or promised to those that remained the loosers by it, enacted that the Court of
Wards and Liveries, and all Wardships, Primer seisins, and Oustre le maines,
and all other charges incident and arising for, or by reason of any such
Tenures, Wardship, Primer seisin, or Oustre les maines, be taken away from the
said 24 th. day of February 1645. (though notwithstanding this pretended Act,
he could for his own profit continue and take the Fines upon Alienations) And
that all Homages, Licenses, Seisures, Pardons for Alienations, incident or
arising for, or by reason of Wardship, Livery, Primer seisin, or Oustre le
maines, and all other charges incident thereunto, be likewise (according to the
new mode of making retrospective Acts of Parliament) taken away from the said
24 th. day of February 1645. And that all Tenures in Capite, and by Knights
service, of the late King, or any other person (when as the Parliament that
made the Ordinance for taking away Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service,
did as was said, promise that all the mesne Lords, and others which held of the
King, and had others held of them, should be recompensed for the loss of their
Tenures) and all Tenures by Socage in chief to be taken away and turned from
the said four and twentieth day of February 1645. into free and common Socage.

Whereby in all probability, he did but cause those Tenures in Capite, and
Knight service, to be put down, to the end that he might take them up again at
his pleasure, when he should have finished his wished and devilish designs of
making himself a King over a degenerate (as to the generality of the people)
sinful and harassed Nation, or in stead of them, to rule as he had begun, with
his Janisaries, and Bashawes, or Major Generals.

But whatever he or his over awed and flattering Assemblies, would make a long
and often deluded Nation to believe concerning Tenures in Capite and Chivalry,
or that kind of fixed and constant part of the Militia, It was not accounted in
the holy Scripture to be any grievance to the people of Israel, that Saul in
the government of them, 1 Chronic. 12.23, 29, 30, 33.
had in every Tribe, and of every kindred many thousands of men of War of the
most valiant in a standing Militia, as of the Children of Ephraim, twenty
thousand and eight hundred mighty men of valor, famous (and such were our
Nobles and Tenants in Capite) throughout the house of their Fathers; and of
Zebulun, such as went forth to Battle, expert in war, and were not of double
heart fifty thousand; or that of the Children of Benjamin, the greatest part of
three thousand kept the Ward of Saul's house.

Or that David, a King after Gods own heart, did appoint the Chief Fathers and
Captains of thousands and hundreds, 1 Chonic. 27.1.
and their Officers that served the King in any matter of the Courses which
came in and went out Month by Month throughout all the Months of the year, and
of every Course twenty and four thousand (which were as our Knights Fees or
Tenures in Chivalry out of a select or more refined and fit part of the People,
whose Estates, as well as their Persons, made them liable unto it, for the
general Musters or trained Bands did by many hundred thousands exceeding that
number) which were only as a Landguard or ready help and defense upon all
em^rgencyes, and although it be not there said that they held their Lands by
that, or any military Service, yet a great resemblance and affinity may be
discerned betwixt that, and the cause and reason of Tenures in Capite, which
amongst that people was less requisite and necessary, for that they being
always Marshald under Captains of Thousands, Hundreds, Fifties, and Tens, were
by some not expressed Tie or Obligation, or their grand Obedience to the
command of their Kings and Princes, which by a set Law of the Almighties own
enacting, in all matters as well military as civil, Deuteronomy. 17.12,
had no less a punishment than Death affixed to the Transgressors thereof)
always ready to go up to battle with their King, against any neighbor Nation
or others, that did them injury, and leaves but this only difference betwixt
our Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service, and (if they were not then in use
amongst them,) their fixed provisions for wars offensive or defensive, that
theirs was a continual charge upon so many of the people in every year by turns
or courses, and ours upon the Princes, Nobles, and many of the Gentry, and
better part of the people (for all of the Gentry had not the happiness to have
Lands originally given them to hold by such kind of Tenures, or did not
afterward purchase them of the first proprietors of those beneficiary and
noble kind of Tenures) when wars should happen, which being not often, or might
not perhaps be commonly once in forty or more years, were not then also called
out to War themselves but when the King went in person, or sent his Lieutenant,
and then were to tarry with him or send one in their stead at their own charges
but for forty days.

No wrong was done by Solomon to the people of Israel, 2 Chroni^. 8.7.8.
when he made the people that were left of the Hittites, Amorites, Perezites,
Hevites, and the Jebusites, and their Children which were not of Israel, to pay
Taxes and do public work.

And the Children of Israel, no Servants for his work, but men of war, and
chief of his Captains of his Chariots and Horsemen.

Jehoshaphat did not any evil in the fight of the Lord, when as notwithstanding
that the Fear of the Lord had fallen upon all the Kingdoms of the Lands that
were round about Judah, 2 Chronicles* 17.2.3*10.
so that they made no War against him and the Philistines (the old Enemies of
Judah and Israel) brought him presents, and Tribute Silver, and he waxed
exceedingly great, and built in Judah Castles and Cities of Store, placed
Forces in all the fenced Cities of Judah, set Garrisons in the Land of Judah,
he understood it whilst the Lord was with him, 2 Palip. 17.2.10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19; Lib. 1.81.
and he walked in the first ways of his Father David, to be a Salus Populi to
have the men of War mighty men of valor in Jerusalem eleaven hundred and
threescore thousand men which waited upon the Kings besides those whom he put
in the fenced Cities.

It was no Imposition upon the people of Israel, 1 Samuel 14.52.
neither is it in holy Writ made to be any Error in Government, that Saul (whom
our Kings and Nobility in the Creation of military Tenures did but imitate)
when he saw any strong man, or any valiant man took him unto him.

Or that David after he was King, hearing of the fame of the Hebronites, sought
for them, and when there were found among them at Jazer of Gilead Jerijah the
chief, 1 Chronic. 26.31, 32.
and two thousand and seven hundred mighty men of valor made them Rulers over
the Reubenites, and it seems were also but of some part of them, for that in
the next Chapter the Ruler whom he appointed over the Reubenites the Gadites,
and the half Tribe of Manasseth was Eliezer the son of Zichri, and over the
half Tribe of Manasseth in Gilead, Iddo the Son of Zechariah. Nor did Nehemiah
that great and good example of Magistracy put any grievance upon the people,
when as in the re-building of Jerusalem, and to repel the Enemies and
hinderers thereof, (there being as much necessity to defend a City or
Commonwealth, after it is built or established, as it can be in the building,
framing or repairing, of it) he ordered the one half of the servants to work,
and the other to hold the Spears, the shields, Bows, and Habergeons, Nehemiah
4.15, 16, 19, 20, 11. v. 1.14.
and every one of the builders had his Sword girded by his side, and the Nobles
were appointed when the Trumpeter should sound that stood by Nehemiah, because
they were separated one from another to resort thither unto him upon occasion
of ^ight or danger, and did after their work finished, cause the Rulers of the
people to dwell at Jerusalem, and out of the rest of the people by lot, to
bring one of every Tribe to inhabit and dwell in there, such as were valiant,
or mighty men of valor, and had for overseers the principal and most eminent
men, and Zabdiel the Son of one of the mighty men. David did not turn aside
from God, nor bind heavy burdens upon the people, because he had mighty men
about him, and that Joshebbassebet the Tachmonite sat (like a Constable or
Marshal of England) chief amongst the Captains, nor did Solomon bruise the
broken Reeds, 2 Samuel 23.8.
because he had many Princes and great Officers under him, as Benajah, the Son
of Jehoiada, (who served his Father David, and was Captain over his Guard) was
over the Host, Azariah the Son of Nathan, over the Officers, (like as in
England, a Lord great Chamberlain or Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Household)
Zabud the Son of Nathan, Principal Officer, and A^ishar (as a Treasurer, or
Comptrouler) over the Household, none of which could take it for any injury to
enjoy those great Offices and places during the Kings pleasure, but would have
esteemed it to have been a greater favor if they had a grant for life, and
most of all, and not to be complained of, to have it to them, and to their
Heirs, or after Generations, for that all good things and blessings by a
natural propension and custom, amongst the Sons of men, are very desirable to
be continued and transmitted to posterity, and the sacred Volumes have told us,
that it is a reward of wisdom, and virtue, to stand before Princes.

Nor was it any dishonor to the men of Judah, and people of Israel, that the
Queen of Sheba wondering even to astonishment at the Attendance of Solomon's
Servants, 1 Reg. 10.4, 5.
and Ministers, and his Cup bearers, or Butlers, as the Margin reads it,
pronounced them happy that stood continually before him.

Or to the Subjects of Ahasuerus, who reigned from India, Esther 1.10.14.
to Ethiopia, over an hundred and seventeen Provinces, that besides his seven
Chamberlains, or Officers of honor, he had the seven Princes of Persia, and
Media, which saw the Kings face, and sat the first in the Kingdom. Nor any to
our heretofore happy Nation, enjoying in a long Series, and tract of time, an
envied peace and plenty, under famous and glorious Kings and Princes, that they
did give Places, Castles, Manors, and Lands, of great yearly values, to
certain great and well-deserving men, and their Heirs, to serve in great
Employments, Solemnities, and Managements of State Affairs, to the honor of
their Sovereigns, and the good, and safety of the People, in the Offices of
great Chamberlain, high Steward, Constable, or Marshal of England, chief Butler
of England, and the like. For when the gift of the Land it self was a great
kindness, it must needs be a greater to have an honorable Office and
Employment annexed to it, and that an act of bounty done by a Prince, in giving
the Land, should oblige the claim or receiving a far greater, in the executing
of that Office or Attendance, which belonged to it.

And could have nothing of affinity to a burden, when as besides the original
gift of the Lands, which were very considerable, and to be valued, many of
those personal services by grand Serjeanty, were not unprofitable or without
the addition, or accession of other Bounties and Privileges, as the gift to
the Lord great Chamberlain of forty yards of Crimson Velvet, for his Robes,
upon the Coronation day, the Bed and furniture that the King lay in the night
before, the silver Basin and Ewer, when he washed his hands, with the Towels,
and Linnens, etc.

The Earl Marshal to have the granting of the Marshals, and Ushers, in the
Courts of Exchecquer, and Common Pleas, with many other gifts and Privileges,
and Dymock who holds some of his Lands by the service of being the Kings
Champion, and to come upon the Coronation day into Westminster Hall, on
Horseback, completely armed, and defy, or bid battle to any that shall deny
him to be rightful King of England, is to have the Kings best Horse, and were
not in the least any charge to the people, or laid upon them as Cromwell did the
stipends of his mock Lords or Officers of his imaginary Magnificence, to be
paid out of the public Purse or Taxes, as were the self created Lords of his
Counsel, who had 1000 l. per an. for advising him how to fool the people, and
build up himself by the wickedness of some, and ruins of all the rest, or as
the Lord so called Pickering, or Chamberlain of his Household, and the quondam
would be Lord Philip Jones, who was called the Comptrouler of his Household,
had to buy them white staves to cause the people to make way and gape upon them.

No Prejudice to the Commonwealth that the Beauchamps Earls of Warwick, did
hold Land by right of inheritance to be Panterer at the Kings Coronation, and
to bear the 3 Sword before him the Duke of Lancaster, before that Duchy came
again into the possession of the Kings of England, to bear before him the sword
called Curtana, or the Earls of Derby as Kings of the Isle of Man, to bear
before the King at his Coronation the Sword called Lancaster, which Henry the 4
th. did wear when he returned from exile into England, or for the Earl of
Arundel to be chief Butler of England, the day of the Coronation.

No disfranchisement to the City of London that some Citizens of London chosen
forth by the City served in the Hall at the Kings Coronation assistants to the
Lord chief Butler, whilst the King sits at Dinner the day of his Coronation,
Cromptons Jurisdiction of Couts.
and when he enters into his Chamber after Dinner, and calls for Wine, the Lord
Mayor of London is to bring him a Cup of Gold with Wine, and have the Cup
afterward given to him, together with the Cup that contains water to allay
the Wine, and that after the King has drunck, the said Lord Mayor, and the
Aldermen of London, are to have their Table to Dine at, on the left hand of the
King in the Hall. Or to the Barons of the Cinque Ports, who claim and are
allowed to bear at the Kings Coronation a Canopy ^f cloth of Gold over him,
with four Staves, and four Bells at the four corners, every Staff having four
of those Barons to bear it. Also to Dine and sit at the Table next to the King
on his right hand, in the Hall the day of his Coronation: And for their Fees to
have the said Canopy of Gold, with the Bells and Staves.

Or that at the Coronation of Eli^nor, Wife to King Henry the third Marchiones
de Marchia Walliae videlicet Joannes filius Alani Radulphus de m^r^uo mari
Joannes de Monmouth, et Walterus de Clifford nomine Marchiae jus Marchiae esse
dicebant hastas argenteas inveniendi et las deferendi ad sustentandum pannum
Sericum quadratum purpureum, in Coronatione Regum et Reginarum Angliae; The
Lords Marchers of Wales, videl. John Fitz Alan, Rafe de Mortimer, Lib. rub. in
Scac. et Camden Brit* 523.
John de Monmouth, and Walter de Clifford, in behalf of the Marches, did claim
and allege it to be their right, to provide silver Spears or Lances, and with
them to bear or carry a four square Canopy of Purple Silk over the Kings and
Queens of England at their Coronation.

For those Tenures in grand serjeanty, were ever (as in all reason they
deserved to be) accounted to be so honorable as some have made it their
Surname, as the noble Earls of Ormond in Ireland, descended from an ancient
and worthy English Family have done, who carry in their Coat of Arms, or part
of their now marks of honor, or bearing the Symbols, or remembrance of the
Office of chief Butler in Ireland, which with the prisage which is a part of
it, has by King E. the 3 d. been granted to the Ancestors of the now
Marquess, and Earl of Ormond by Inheritance, and a Knightly and good Family of
the Chamberlaines in England, do account it no dishonor to have been descended
from the Earls of Tankervile, who were Chamberlains to our King H. 1. in
Normandy.

And some branches of the noble Family of the Grey's of Wilton, being ancient
Barons of England, holding the Manor of Waddon in Buckinghamshire of the King,
per servitium custodiendi unum Gerfalconem Domini Regis, by the service of
keeping a Gerfalcon of the Kings, do use or bear as a badge or marque of honor
in their Arms a Gerfaulcon, and the Manor of Wymondley, in the County of
Hertford, being holden of the King by Grand serjeanty, of giving to the King
the first Cup of Wine or Beer upon the day of his Coronation, The Family of "
Argentons, being by the marriage of a Daughter and Heir of the Lord Fitz Tece,
become at the Conquest the possessors of it, have thought it honorable says
Camden, to bear in their Shields in memory thereof three Cups argent in a field
Gules.

No oppression to the people of England to be kept safe in their peace and
plenty, from the Incursions of Foreign Enemies, Camden Brit. 353.
when William the Conqueror fortified Dover, a strong and principal Bulwark
betwixt England and France, with whom we had then continual Wars or Jealousies,
and gave to John Fines, then a Noble Man of great prowess and fidelity, the
Custody of that, and the rest of the Cinque Ports, with 56 Knights Fees,
willing him (as that Learned Antiquary Mr. Lambard tells us) to Lambard
perambulation of Kent 362*
communicate some parts of that gift to such other valiant and trusty persons
as he should best like of, for the more sure conservation of that most noble
and precious Fort and Castle,

Who thereupon imparting liberally out of those Lands to eight worthy Knights,
viz. William of Albrance, Fulbert of Dover, William Arsick, Geffery Peverel,
William Mainemouth, Robert Porthe, Robert Crevequer, and Adam Fitz-Williams,
bound them and their Heirs by Tenure of their Lands received of the King to
maintain 112 Soldiers amongst them, which were so divided by Months of the
years, as five and twenty of them were continually to watch, and ward within
the Castle, for their several parts of time, and all the rest ready upon
necessity, each of which eight Knights had their several Charges in several
Towers and Bulwarks, and were contented (as well they might) at their own
dispense to maintain and repair the same.

Of whom diverse of the Towers and Bulwarks do yet, or did but in Queen
Elizabeth's reign bear their names.

No inconvenience or mischief to the public that the Castle and Camden Brit.
505.
Barony of Abergavenny in Monmouthshire, was holden by John Hastings per
Hom^g^^m Wardam and Maritagium cum accide^it and s^ guerra fuerit inter Regem
Angliae and Principem Walliae deberet custodire patriam de Over went sumptibus
proprijs meliori modo quo poterit pro commodo suo and utilitate Regis and
defensione Regni Angliae, by Homage, Ward, and Marriage, when it should happen,
and if War should be between the King of England and the Prince of Wales was to
guard at his own charges the Country called Over went, the best way that he
could for his profit, and benefit of the King, and defense of the Kingdom of
England.

No cause of complaint to the Town, or anciently called City of Leicester, for
that veteri Instituto by ancient Custom, they were to furnish the King with
twelve Burgesses or Townsmen, Camden Brit. 463. in 4^^.
when he went to War, and i^ per Mare in Hosts ibat mittebant quatuor Equos
usque Londinum ad arma comportanda vel alia quae opus essent, he went by Sea
were to send four Horses as far as London, to carry his Arms or other
necessaries.

Nor to the Town of Warwick to be enjoined by Tenure, to send Camden Brit. 505.
twelve of their Burgesses or Townsmen with their King to War, and qui monitus
non ibat centum solidos Regi emendabat, he which was summoned and did not go,
was to forfeit and pay one hundred shillings to the King, And cum contra Hosts
per Mare ibat Rex, quatuor Botesuenas, vel quatuor libras denariorum mittebant,
when the King should bo by Sea against his Enemies, should furnish four
Boat-Swains or Mariners, or send four pounds in money.

No harm done to give Lands at Seaton, which Sr. Richard Rockslye Knight did
hold by Serjeanty to be To. ^in. 11 E. 2. Coke^ 1 part Instit. 70.
vantrarius Regis the Kings fore-footman when he went into Gascoigne, donec per
usus fuit parisolutarum precij 4d until he had worn out a pair of Shoes of
four pence, then the price of a pair of Shoes for a worthy man not 4 s. 6. or
5 s. as they are now. Or Lands to another to furnish duos A^migeros, two
Esquires to march in his Vant-Guard, upon occasion of War with the Welsh.

Or that the Princes of Wales, ab antiquis temporibus very anciently, did hold
that Principality and part of Britain of the Kings of England, in Capite, by
Military or Knight Service, and that, upon that ground only as he was a liege
man and subject of England, Leoline Prince of Wales was for raising of War
against his Superior Lord imprisoned, and hanged or beheaded by King E. 1. and
the Principality of Wales as an Escheat annexed to the Crown of England.

And as little when any held of the King in Capite by some other Service and not
in Chivalry and by Knight Service, as the Town of Shrewsbury to cause 12
Townsmen apud Camden Brit. 530.
Angliae Reges excubare cum in illa urbe agerent; To watch and ward about the
Kings Person (which the affrighted Cromwell with his guilty and terrified
Conscience would have been well content with) totidemque concomitare cum
venatum prodirent, and as many to attend him whilst he rode on hunting, Or when
Richard Pigot of Stanford in the County of Hereford, or his Ancestors had two
Yard Land given him there by the King to hold in Capite per servitium
conducendi Thesaurum Domini Regis, (which Sir Edward Coke calls Firmamentum
pacis, et robur Belli, the Foundation of Peace, and strength of War) de
Hereford usque ad London quotiescunque opus fueries sumptibus Domini Regis et
in redeundo sumptibus suis propriis, et etiam summonendi Episcopium Hereford ad
portas Manerij dicti Episcopi de Bromyard si contingat Dominum Regem praedictum
Episcopum implacitare; By the Service of conducting the Kings Treasure from
Hereford to London as often as there should be occasion, at the Kings charge in
going thither, and at his own, in his retorn, and to summon the Bishop of
Hereford at the Gates or door of his Manor of Bromyard, when it should happen
that the King should implead him.

Never troubled the heart of Roger the Kings Tailor, when the King gave him a
good quantity of Land in Halingbury in the County of Essex, tenendum per
Serjeantiam solvendi ad Scaccarium Domini Regis unum Acum argenteum quolibet
anno in cras^ino Sancti Martini, To hold the Serjeanty of paying yearly at the
Exchequer upon the morrow of St. Martin a silver Needle.

Nor did the Donees, or those who had those Lands of so free a gift or bounty
esteem them to be any burden, could it be heavy or troublesome to their Heirs
or those that should succeed them in those Lands, whenas our Kings did
successively give away so great a part of the Lands of England as were holden
in Capite and by Knight Service, either to follow or serve them in the Wars for
their own defense as well as theirs, or for their attendance (wh^rein they
received more honor than their Princes gained by it) at their Coronations, or
other great Solemnities by grand Serjeanty or by petit Serjeanty, to present
them at some times of the year with a Rose, or a Hawk, or a pair of Spurs, or
an Arrow, to keep them a Hawk or Hounds, provide necessaries in their Progress
for their household Expenses* Sumpter Horses in their Journey to some particular
place, Straw for their Bed, and Rushes for their Chamber, as if they gave away
all to receive almost nothing for it, and so willingly as be put themselves to
some trouble to devise what kind of grateful acknowledgments should be made
them in a perpetuity, or as far as they could reach to a supposed or hoped for
Eternity, and that many of their Tenures where there were not necessaryes in
war or peace reserved, do seem to be but so far for pleasure and merryment, as
they did not care what was reserved, so it was but something, as to hold the
Kings head at Sea when he should sail betwixt Dover and VVhitsand, or hold the
Cord by which the Sail was tied, when the Queen (not to shoot with Guns and
Canons, as some of the Covenanters for the late Kings good could find the way
to do at his deer Wife the Queen Mother that now is) should pass the Seas into
France, cum multis aliis, with many other sorts and kinds, not here to be
enumerated without the trouble of a volume, which those honester times having a
better opinion of gratitude, and not thinking it to be so crazy or mortal as
now every one finds it to be, did liberally create and bestow.

No wrong was done to them that had Lands given to them and their Heirs by a
Mesne Lord, before the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, as our forefathers
the Saxons, long before the Conquest believed; when as Byrhtrick a Saxon of
great note and eminency in Kent, holding Lands of Aelsrick a Mesne Lord, did by
his last will and testament in the first place, give to his natural Lord a
Bracelet of fourscore marks of Gold, one Hatchet of half as much, four Horses,
two of them trapped, two Swords trimmed, two Hawks, and all his Hounds; and to
the Lady his wife, one Bracelet of thirty marks of Gold, and one Horse to
entreat that his Testament (wherein he devised great quantities of land to
diverse persons, and to charitable uses, and the Lords consent was very
necessary) stand may, and prayed his dear leefe Lord that he do not suffer that
any man his Testament do turn aside.

Nor to the County of Hertford, or places adjacent, when Leofranus Abbot of St.
Albans, gave in Edward the Confessors reign, unto Turnot, Waldef, and Thurman,
three Knights, the Manor of Flamsteed in the County of Hertford, to be holden
by the service, ut regionem vicinam contra latrones defend^rent, to the end
that they should defend the neighborhood against Thieves.

And no hurt to the Commonwealth, when as the Nobility and great men of
England, imitating the bounty and munificence of their Kings and Princes, for
the enabling themselves to serve their King and Country, did bountifully give
much of their own Estates* and Demes^s to diverse of their friends and Camden
Brit. 361.
followers to hold of them by Knight service, or some honorable and seldom
services about their Persons or Estates; As the Earls of Oxford, Arundel;
Norfolk, Hereford, and Essex, Hertford, and Gloucester, Leicester, Chester,
Lancaster, Northumberland, and other ancient Earls, did when they severally
gave to those who had so little wrong done them by their kindness, as they have
for many ages, and do yet continue men of worship and great estates in their
Counties, as many as 100 Knights fees, many times more, and seldom less, to be
holden of them by Knight service, which at the now value of Lands, reckoning
every Knights fee as Sr. Edward Cook does, if at 100 l. per annum, which is
the lowest value, would be 10000 l. per annum, and at 200 l. per an. which is
the most probable medium rate, will amount unto no less than 20000 l. per annum.

That Harden Castle in Cheshire, with the lands thereunto belonging, of a great
yearly value in the County of Chester, was given by an Earl of Chester, to be
holden of the Earl and his heirs, per senescalciam comitum Cestriae, Camden
Brit. 604.
by the service of being Stewards to the Earls of Chester.

Or that the Castle and Manor of Tunbridge, and the Manors of Vielston,
Lambards Perambulation of Kent.
Horsmund, Melyton, and Pettis in the County of Kent, were holden by Richard de
Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, of the Archbishop of Canterbury, by
agreement and composition made betwixt the said Earl and Boniface Archbishop
of Canterbury, in the reign of King H. 3. by the service of four Knights Fees,
and to be high Stewards, and high Butlers to the Archbishops of that See at
their Consecration, taking for their service in the Stewardship, seven
competent Robes of Scarlet, thirty gallons of Wine, thirty pound of Wax for his
light livery, of Hay and Oats for eighty Horse for two nights, the Dishes and
Salt which should stand before the Archbishop in that Feast, and at their
departure, the diet of three days at the cost of the Archbishop, at four of
his then next Manors wheresover they would; So that the said Earls repaired
thither but with fifty Horse, and taking also for the Office of Butlership,
other seven like Robes, twenty gallons of Wine, fifty pound of Wax like livery,
for sixty Horses for two nights, the Cup wherewith the Archbishop should be
served, all the empty Hogsheads of Drink, and for six Tun of Wine, so many as
should be drunk under the Bar; all which services were accordingly performed by
Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, at the In^hronization of
Robert Winchelsey Archbishop of Canterbury; and by the same Earl to
Archbishop Reignolds; by Hugh Audley, afterward Earl of Gloucester, to John
Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury; by the Earl of Stafford, to whom the
Lordship of Tunbridge at length came, to Simon Sudbury Archbishop of that See;
and by Edward Duke of Buckingham, to William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury,
and executed the Stewardship in his own person, and the Butlership by his
Deputy Sr. Thomas Burgher Knight.

No disparagement to the Knightly family of the Mordants, in the County of
Essex, that they hold the Manor of Winslowes in Hempsteed, in the said County,
of the Earls of Oxford, by the service of a Knights Fee, and to be his
Champion, and to come to the Castle of Hedingbam the day of the Earls marriage,
riding in complete harness to Defy or bid Battle to any that should deny him
to be Earl of Oxford, and to see what order was kept in the Hall there, which
Robert Mordant Esquire performed in his own person the 14 th. day of December, in
the 14 th. year of the reign of Queen Eliz. being the day of Edward Earl of
Oxford's marriage, though it was not there solemnized.

Or to Sr. Giles Allington, the Auncestor of the now Lord Allington, to hold
his Manors called Carbonnels and Lymberies in Horsed in the County of
Cambridge, by the service of a Knights Fee and a half, and to attend upon the
Earl the day of his marriage, and to hold his stirrup when he goes to
horseback, which service he performed in person at White Hall the 14 th. day of
December in the 14 th. year of the reign of Queen Eliz. being the marriage day
of the said Edward Earl of Oxford, in the presence of the Earls of Bedford,
Huntington, and Leicester, the Lord William Howard, Lord Chamberlain of the
Queens household, and the Lord Burleigh etc.

Those Dreams or Fancies of Grievances by Tenures in Capite and Knight Service,
were never presented in those thousands of Court Leets, or Law days, which
twice in every year now for almost 600 years since the Conquest, and very long
before, made it a great part of their business to enquire upon oath of
Grievances, Extortions, and Oppressions.

Nor in those yearly grand enquests to the like purpose, which have been twice
in every year, for many hundreds of years past, by the oath of the most
sufficient Knights, Gentlemen and Freeholders, of the County of Middlesex.

It neither was, nor is, nor can by any reasonable intendment, be taken to be a
grieveance, to do, or perform that which by the Laws of God, Nature, and
Nations, the Laws, reasonable Customs, and the fundamental Laws of England,
has so often, and through all times and ages, and the memory of man and
Records, which are monumenta veritatis, and vetustatis, ever been allowed,
repeated, and confirmed in Parliament, without the least of any contradiction,
or repeal, and is but upon necessity and occasion to defend the King,
themselves, their Country, Friends, and Neighbors, and to do that which every
Gentleman, and such as are e meliori Luto, of the more refined Clay, and better
born, and bred than the vulgus, or common sort of people would be willing to do
and as that learned French Lawyer B^issonius well observes, Barn. Brisson. in
Basilic. lib. 6. tit. 13.
Qu' en la necessite de guerre toutes l^s gentilz hommes sont tenus de prendre
les A^mes p^ur la necessite du Roy, That in necessity of War, every Gentleman
is bound to take Arms, and go to the Wars, 21 E. 3.^3.45. E. 3.^^.
for the defense of the King, which by our Laws of England, is so to be
encouraged, as it is Treason to kill any man that goes to aid the King in his
Wars, and is no more than what the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy does bind
every Englishman unto, though they should tarry in the Camp more than forty
days, Judges 5.23.
or not have Escuage, or any allowance of their charges from their own Tenants,
and is but that duty which Deborah and Baruch believed that every Subject was
bound to perform, when they cursed Meroz (not as some of our Pulpit
Incendiaries did when they traitorously inverted the Text, to encourage the
people to fight against their King) in that they came not forth to battle to
help the Lord against the mighty, and the loyal Uriah would not forget, when
the King himself could not persuade him to go into his own House, to eat, and
to drink, and lie with his Wife, when the Ark, and Judah and Israel abide in
Tents, 2 Samuel* 11 11.
and his Lord Joab, and the Servants of his Lord were encamped in the open
field, and which the good old Barzillai, in the rebellion of Absalom against
his King and Father David, thought was incumbent upon him, when he could not
bring his loyal mind to think it to be enough to provide the King of
sustenance, while he lay at Mahanami, unless when he himself was fourscore
years old, and could not taste what he eat or drank; he also should come down
from Rogelim, and go as he did with his Son Chimham, over Jordan, with the King
to conduct him, and would not accept of the Kings offer or reward, to live with
him at Jerusalem (which those that hold in England their Lands and goodly
Revenues by those beneficial Tenures in Capite, of a free gift, and in
perpetuity may be said to do and have more also then was offered Barzillai for
the remainder of an old and worn-out life, 2 Samuel 19.31 32, 33.35. and 36.
but says why should the King recompense it with such a reward.

And is but the performance of the original contracts made betwixt the kind
Donors, and the thankful Tenants, and the observing of faith and promises,
which is the ingens vinculum, and next unto the Divine Providence, the grand
support of the world, and the quiet repose and peace of all mankind, makes a
certainty in all their actions, and leads to the Mountain of Holiness, and the
Hill of eternal rest and blessedness.

No grinding of the face of the poor, which (if it were any as it can never be
evinced to be) could not commonly, or ordinarily be in the case of such
Tenures, when as those which are any way concerned in it, are men of good
Estates and Revenues, and would be loath to be under any other notion to pay a
reasonabe Escuage assessed in Parliament, when they went not themselves, or
sent any in their stead, and where their Tenants went not in person to defend
their Lords as well as their King, to have as much assessed upon them, and by
no other than a Parliament, wherein the Commons of England had their
Representatives of their own Election.

Neither were the Kings of England, or the Mesne Lords in the case of those
Tenures any Egiptian Taskmasters, when those that held under them, had such
benefits and bounties of free gift, and if they have been since transferred,
and aliened, that part of it, viz. the Tenures, and a grateful acknowledgement
of the favor of the first givers were neither sold or paid for in the
purchase, but the Services were by Act and operation of Law, and the Statute of
Quia emptores terrarum, reserved to the first Donors, by an express Covenant
in the deeds of purchase to be performed to the Lords of whom they were holden,
and it is a maxim in Law, Quod nemo plus juris in alium transfer potest quam
in ipso est, that no man can grant or transfer a greater right than he has,
or is in him.

And are if a right consideration of things shall not be, as it has been too
much in the times of our late Frenzies, and Distractions, adjudged a praemunire,
or committing high Treason. More noble Tenures than that of Soccage, by how
much a rustic and Plowmans life, and demeanor, was ever in all ages, and
amongst all Nations, which had any civility, and understanding, justly
accounted to be so far inferior to the Equestris ordo, Gentlemen, or men of
more noble employments.

As that those and not the military Tenures were truly accounted to be a kind
of Slavery, according as they were in their original Institution, before the
favor obtained of the King and Mesne Lords, to reduce their drudgeries, to
easy and small quit Rents, and to be but little better than Joshuas Gibeonites,
Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water, or Solomon's Perezites, and Jebusites, to
be employed as his Servants and Workmen.

And as now they are, or expect to be in that which they would imagine to be
their better condition, holding in free and common Soccage, by fealty only for
all services, and being not to be excused from Aids, to make the Kings eldest
Son a Knight, or for the marriage of his Daughter, or to pay a years value of
their Lands, and sometimes double the rent which is to be paid at the death of
every Tenant, and may amount to a great deal more than the ordinary, low, and
favorable rate of five pounds for a releif for every Knights Fee, 50 shillings
for a half, and 25 shillings for a quarter of a Knights Fee, and lesser
according to the smaller proportions of the Lands which they hold; would in all
likelihood if they might but enjoy the ancient, and long ago discontinued
priveledge, which the Tenures by Knight service, in Capite, Charta H. 1. et
Regis Iohannis et 9. H. 3. cap 10.
were to enjoy by the Charter or Magna Charta of King H. 1. of not having Lands
of that kind of Tenure which was in their own Demeasne charged with any other
Assessements or services than what they were obliged unto by their Tenures.

And was no more than what was before the common Justice and right Reason of
this nation, be now very well content to exchange their free as they call it
Socage Lands, which was anciently understood to be no other than feudum
ignobile et plebeium, an ignoble and plebeian Fee or Estate, Spelmans Glossar
260, 261.
and as Sr. Henry Spelman says, nobili opponitur, et ignobilibus, et rusticis
competit nullo feudali privilegio ornatum, et feudi nomen sub recenti seculo
perperam, et abusu rerum auspicatum est, is opposed or contra distinguished to
the more noble Tenures, and being not entitled to any feudal privilege,
belongs only to Ignoble and Rusticks, and has of late times improperly and by
abuse gained the name of Fee, for Lands holden in Capite, and by Knight
service; So as they might be free from all assessements and charges of War,
under which burden the Owners of Lands holden by any kind of Tenures have for
these last Twenty years heavily groaned, and if Mr. Prynne had not publicly
and truly said it did mu^^is parasangis, by many and very many degrees out go
all that was pretended to be a Grievance, by the Court of Wards, and Tenures in
Capite, and by Knight service, which all things rightly considered, are a more
free, beneficial, franck, and noble kind of Tenure, the Marriages of the Heirs
in Minority only excepted, which not often happening are notwithstanding
abundantly recompensed by the freeness of the gift, seldom Services and other
Immunityes.

Then Socage, which those many Tenants which hold by a certain rent of Sir
Anthony Weldens Heir for Castle-Guard to the ruined Rochester Castle in Kent,
to pay 3 s. 4 d. nomine paenae, by way of Penalty for every Tide, which after
the Time limited for payment, shall run under Rochester Bridge, and the Rent
and Arrears refused, though tendered the next day, do not find to be the best of
Tenures, or so good as that of Knight Service, and in Capite.

Which is better than that which the Tenants in Cumberland and other Northern
Parts do claim by a kind of inheritance and Tenant Right, Littleton cap. 9.
wherein they can be well contented to pay their Lord a thirty penny ^ine at
every Alienation, and a twenty penny upon the Death of an Ancestor, or the death
of their Lord according to the Rate of the small yearly Rent which they pay to
their Lords, Fitz Herbert N. B. 12. b. 14. and 165.


Better then all or most kind of Estates or Tenures, and better than that at
will, which many are well apaied with, and better than those of Copyholders,
Mich. 7 E. 4.19.
who if the Lords of Manours put them out of their Estates, have no Remedy but
by Petition to them.

Can have no Writ of Right-Close to command their Lords to do them Right
without Delay according to the Custom of the Manor.

No Writ of false Judgment at the Common Law upon Judgments given in the Lords
Court, but to sue to the Lord by Petition, nor can sue any Writ of
Monstraverunt to command their Lords not to require of them other Customs or
Services than they ought to do.

Are to pay upon their admission an uncertain Fine at the will of the Lord,
who, if they be unreasonable, the most they can be compelled unto by any Court
or Rule of Justice, is a reasonable Fine, commonly adjudged or estimated at two
years value, and either certain or uncertain, are to be paid at the death or
alienation of every Tenant (which do as in Socage happen more often and
constantly than that of Escuage and Knight Service) and have many Payments,
Forfeitures, Restraints, and Dependencyes attending that kind of Estate and
Inheritance, as in some places the Heir to forfeit his Land, if after three
Solemn Proclamations in three several Courts he comes not in, pays his Fine
and prays to be admitted, or shall without any reasonable cause of absence
wilfully refuse to appear after summons at his Lords Court Baron, or to be
sworn of the homage, or deny himself to be a Coppy-holder, pays not his Fine
when it is assessed, or sues a Replevin against his Lord distraining for
Rent-service, pays not his Rent, or permits or commits voluntary wast, by
plucking down an ancient built house, and building up a new in the place, or
cutting Timber without license, may be fined or amerced, if he speak
unreverently of his Lord, or behave himself contemptuously toward him, is at
his Death to pay his best beast, or if he has none, the best piece of his
housholdstuffe for a herriot, and in some places for it varies according to
several customs, is to give the Lord a certain sum of money every month during
Wars, to bear his charges, cannot be sworn of the Homage, or bring a plaint in
the nature of an Assize, until he be admitted Tenant to his Land, the Wife
shall not have her Bench or Life in her Husbands Copyhold Estate, if she marry
without License of the Lord, and in some places, if she will redeem it, must
come riding into the Court upon a ^lack Ram, or as in the manner of South
Peve^ton in Somersetshire, being H* l. 7. E. 1. coram Rege.
an an^ient D^mesne, where a Widow convicted of Fornication, shall as an
Escheat to the Lord of the Manor, forfeit all her Lands and Goods, and the
Tenant is by a peculiar custom in some places before he can enforce his Lord to
admit any one to his Coppyhold to make a prosf^r thereof to the next of the
blood, or to his Neighbors ab orientesole, inhabiting Eastward of him, who
giving as much as another, is to have it, and many more inconveniences, and
unpleasing customs, not here remembered, which they who in the Reign of H. 3.
and E. 1. Or when Bracton and Fleta wrote, were but Tenants at the will of the
Lord, and by an accustomed and continued charity, fixed and settled upon them
and their Heirs, are now become to be the owners of a profitable and well to be
liked inheritance, secundum consuetudinem manerij, according to the custom of
the Manor, could never by any manner of Reason or Justice, require a better
usage, o^ find the way to complain of, until our late horrid and irrational
Confusions, when Injustice accused Justice, Oppression complained of Right^,
and the wickedest o^ Gains, was called the refined Godliness, and when they
got so much encouragement, as in the height of a grand and superlative
ingratitude, to cry aloud and clamor against their Lords who were nothing else
but their, good and great Benefactors, and would make as many as they could,
believe that their Coppyhold Estates which were great Acts of Charity in the
time of the Saxons, were now nothing less than Norman Slaveries.

Are better also than Estates for lives or years, which are not (unless in case
of a seldom happening minority, which is otherwise recompensed) so happy in
their conditions, as Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service, but are more
clogged and encumbered with Covenants or operation of Law, then Knight Service,
as the Tenant to be punished with treble damage, and a forfeiture of Locum
vastatum, the place wasted, for wast committed or permitted to be done, in but
cutting down an Apple tree in an Orchard, or a few Willows or other Trees that
grow about the House, or plowing up land that was not arrable, cannot Assign
his Term, or make a Lease of part of it, or cut down Timber of Wood without
leave of his Lord, is stinted to his fuel or firewood, and to have so many
Loads only to burn, is not to carry any dung of the ground, is to forfeit his
Lease, if he pay not his Rent, if demanded at the time appointed, and many
times strict Nomine Penaes for every day after in which it shall be unpaid,
must carry so many loads of Wood or Coal, every year for his Landlord, pay
quarters of Wheat; Rent Capons, a Boar, or Brawn, a Mutton or fat Calf, and the
like, renewing thereby again the old kind of Socage, by their own Covenants, or
for their own convenience, agreeing to find so many men furnished with Pikes*
or Muskets, in the service of their Landlords, in the time of Wars, which was
not long ago done in Ireland, by some Tenants of the late Lord Conway, which
is no less then a Military Tenure, Wardships, and Marriage only expected.

And whether for lives or years do live under as many other harsh and
uncomfortable Covenants and Conditions, as the wariness, distrust, or griping
of their Landlords, will put or enforce upon them, which he that has not the
property of the Land which he renteth, and knows it to be none of his own, is
to endure the more patiently, because if he will not take it, or hold it, so,
another will be glad to do it, and that Covenants and Obligations which were at
first but voluntatis, at the Tenants will and pleasure, before they were
entered into, do afterward as the Civil Law says, become to be necessitatis,
and cannot be avoided.

So as Tenures in Capite and Knight service, being more beneficial, and most
commonly less troublesome and encumbered, than either Socage, or Copyhold
Tenures, or Estates for lives, or years, which are more than two parts of three
of the Lands of the Kingdom, and are yet well enough endured, purchased, and
daily sought for, and when all is said that can be truly, and rationally
alleged for any good that is in them, that in Capite, and by Knight service,
being the most noble and best of Tenures, will weigh heavier in the balance of
any reasonable, impartial, or knowing man's understanding; it cannot be imagined
from which of the many points of the compass, or Card of the vulgar, and
unruly apprehensions the Wind, or Heri^an of the complaints can come which are
made against them, unless any should be so brutish as to think the payments of
Rent to their Landlords, or the performing of their oaths when they make
Fealty, or their Covenants, Promises, or Contracts, are a grievance.

And therefore until upon any account of truth, or reason, a just, and more
than ordinary care of the King, shall be reckoned to be a Curse, Favor a
Fault, Protection a Persecution, Benefits shall be taken for Burdens,
Blessings, for Bondage, performance of promises, a Sin, and compelling of them
an injury, and gratitude and due acknowledgement for Subsistence, Livelihood
and Liberty, be made a cause of complaint, and every thing that gives the
people not a Liberty to undo, cheat and ruin one another, be called (though
it never deserved it) a grievance, it must and may well remain a wonder never
to be satisfied, how Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service, which until
these distempered times, had no complaint made of them, nor could ever be
proved to be any public, or general mischief or inconveniences, (for seldom,
or as to some particulars, there may be in the best of Institutions, or the
most eminent, or excellent of sublunary things^, or actions, something of
trouble or molestation,) should after so long an approbation of so many ages
past, without any reason given, other then by a bargain for increase, or making
a constant Revenue to lessen the Majesty and just power of our Kings, which the
Parliament will certainly endeavor all they can to uphold, be now so unlucky,
as to be put and enclosed in the Skin of a Bear, baited under the notion of a
grievance, and cried down by a few, and not many of the people, as many other
legal and beneficial constitutions have lately been, by the vote and humor
only of the common people, or a ruining Reformation, which as to that
particular was first occasioned by.

CHAP. IV. How the design of altering Tenures in Capite, and Knight Service
into Socage Tenures, and dissolving the Court of Wards, and Liveries, and the
Incidents and Revenue belonging thereunto, came out of the Forges of some
private men's imaginations, to be afterward agitated in Parliament.
OLD Sir Henry Vane the Father of young Sir Henry Vane, who helped to steal
away the Palladium of our happiness, and under the color of sacrificing to
Minerva, or a needless Reformation, was instrumental in bringing the Trojan
Horse into our Senate, and like the crafty Sinon taught the people, weary of
their own happiness, how to unlock him, and to murder one another, and massacre
our Religion, Laws, and Liberties. And Sir John Savil whose Son the Lord Savil,
afterward Earl of Sussex, (was too busy and active in the hatching of our
late Wars, and troubles) and some other men of design and invention perceiving
about the first or second year of the reign of King James, that his Revenue and
Treasure by his over bounty to his people of Scotland, and their necessitous
importunities and cravings, which is too much appropriate to that Nation, were
greatly exhausted, did to s^rue themselves into some profitable actions, and
employments, upon a pretense of raising the King a constant Revenue, of two
hundred thousand pounds per annum, propose the Dissolving of the Court of Wards
and Liveries, and the changing of Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service,
into free and common Socage, the only attempt and business whereof, bringing
some of them out of their Countries, and colder stations, into the warmth of
several after Court preferments, which like the opening of Pandoras Box, proved
afterward to be very unhappy and fatal to the most of all the kingdom, but
themselves, and those that afterward traded in the miseries and ruin of it.

It was in that Parliament after a large debate, resolved, says Justice Jones,
in his argument of the Ship Money, by the whole Parliament, that such an Act to
take away the Prerogative of Tenures in Capite, would be void, because it is
inherent in the Crown, and it being again in the seventh year and the
eighteenth year of the reign of that King, earnestly afterward moved, and
desired to be purchased of him, and the King ready to grant it, and recomending
it to the Parliament, it was then found upon advice and consultation with all
the Judges of England, to be of prejudicial consequence to the Subject, as well
as impossible, in regard that all Lands as well as persons in the Kingdom,
being to acknowledge a Superiority, if the old Tenures should be put down, a
new of a like nature might be again created, and the recompense given for it
still continue in the Crown, as may be instanced in the Dane-gelt, which
continued here in England, till the reign of King H. 1. long after this Nation
was freed from the Danes, and the Alcavalas or Cruzadas in Spain, being a kind
of Taxes there used and if new Tenures should not be created, the old perhaps
might be again assumed*

And with good reason was then denied when King James was heard to tell his
Son, the late King Charles, That such an yearly Revenue as was offered in lieu
of those Tenures, might make him a rich Prince, but never a great, and when so
many Troops, and Brigades of evils do march in the Rear or Company of that
design, which was so per se and non par^il, as the necessity of Robert Duke of
Normandies, raising of money, for want whereof he pawned that Duchy for ten
thousand pounds, sterling, to enable him in his voyage to Jerusalem, to recover
the holy Land, the imprisonment and troubles of K. Richard 1. in his return
from thence, and his ransom of one hundred thousand marks, of Sam. Daniel 121.
silver, raised by twenty shillings upon every Knights Fee the fourth part of
the Revenues of the Clergy, as well as the Laity, with the tenth of their
goods, and the Chalices and Treasure (which may tell us how little money, and
more honesty England was then able to furnish) of all the Churches, taken as
well here as in the Territories beyond the Seas, to make up the sum, and those
necessities which King John had upon him, and the great want of money which his
Son King H. 3. endured in the Barons wars when he was forced after sale of
Lands and Jewels, to pawn Gascoigne, after that, his Imperial Crown and Jewels
to supply his wants, and having neither credit to borrow, nor any more things
to pawn, Rot. claus. 37. H. 3. Cl^us. 46. et 47. H. 3.
could not deny his wants, the gaging of the Jewels and Ornaments of St.
Edwards Shrine, and in the end as Sir Robert Cotton, if he were the Author of
the short view of the long life, and reign of that King observes, not having
means to defray the Diet of his Court, was constrained to break up House, and
(as Matthew Paris says) with his Queen and Children cum Abbatibus, and
Prioribus satis humiliter hospitia and prandia quaerere, to demand
entertainment and Diet at some Abbeys, and Priories, and confessed to the Abbot
of Peterburgh, when he came to borrow money of him, majorem El^emosinam f^re
sibi juvamen pecuniare quam alicui ostiatim mendicanti Mat. Paris 758.
that it would be a greater act of Charity to lend or give him money then to
one that begs from door to door.

Could never persuade them to any such remedies, worse then their diseases, nor
did the unruly Barons of King H. 3. when they had him or his Father K. John, at
the most disadvantages ever demand it of them or any English man, until the
beginning of the reign of King James, and the broaching of this project, ever
adventure to ask, or give such demands any room or entertainment in their
imaginations, and is more then the Athenians and Romans ever aimed at, who in
all their popular and restless turmoils, seditions, and agitations by the
people or their Tribunes, concerning the Agrarian Laws, and making and changing
of many other Laws, and several forms of Government, did never seek to take
away or root out those long lasting monuments of benefits, and the
acknowledgements and returns of gratitude, which ought to be made of them.

More then the people of France in those hard Conditions which they would have
put upon the Daulphine of France, afterward Charles the fifth of France, in
the troubles and imprisonment of his Father King John in England, in the Reign
of our King Edward the third, and the strange and insolent behavior of the
Citizens of Paris toward him, when the Provost or Mayor, put his own hood half
blew and half red upon his head, and compelling him to wear his Livery, did all
that day wear the Daulphines, being of a brown black, embrodered with gold in
token of his Dictatorship did ever demand, nor did in those great afflictions
and wants which were upon Charles the seventh, when he was reproached by his
Subjects, and the English had so much of France in their possession in the
Reign of our King H. 5. and King H. 6. who by their numerous Armies, and the
gallantry of their nobility and Tenants in Capite, and by Knight Service, were
Masters of the Field, as well as of that Crown, John de Serres history of
France.
as he was in disgrace called the King of Berry, being a small Province,
wherein he made what shift he could to defend himself, and when his Table
failed him, so that he eat no more in public, but sparingly in his Chamber,
attended by his domestical Servants, and had pawned the County of Gyan for
money, ever require to be discharged of their Homages and Tenures, and the
duties and incidents which belonged to them.

Neither did the Justices or domineering Officers of State in Arragon in their
height and extravagancy of power, which (for some time, until by its own
weight, their Tyranny, or the subtle and politic patience of their Kings, it
came to be dissolved into the Royal and proper Rights of that Crown and
Government) they excercised over their Kings, ever make that to be any part of
it, nor did the wants of John King of Arragon, when he had pawned the County of
Roussilion to Lewis the eleventh King of France, nor of Ferdinand the Second,
Emperor, when within these forty years in those devouring and destroying Wars
of Germany, when the pale horse of death, and the red of destruction, rid up to
the bridles in blood, he pawned Lusatia and Silesia to the Duke of Saxony, and
the upper Palatinate to the Duke of Bavaria, beget any such motion of the
people, or Condiscention of their Princes.

And that unhappy project and design, had in all probability no more disquieted
our old Albion, or Britain, sitting upon a Rock mediis tranquilla in undis, in
the midst of all our late Storms and Tempests, which had broken the bag of
Eolus, and getting loose, vied with the raging waves of a distempered Sea, who
should be most destructive, and play the Bedlam.

Had not a necessity of the Parliament in An. 1645. and their want of money to
maintain their Wars, put them again in mind of that way of raising money, all
other that could be almost thought upon as far as the money, which should be
spared by one meal in every family in a week, having been before put in
Execution (so dangerous and of fatal consequence, are sometimes but the
attempts or beginning of designs) and then as the vote tells us, the house of
Commons having received the report from the grand Committee, which was ordered
to consider of raising of monyes for supply of the whole Kingdom, after some
debate thereupon, ordered that the Court of Wards and Liveries, with the Primer
Seisins, Oustres les maines, and all other profits arising by the said Court,
should be fully taken away, and be made null and void.

And that the Sum of one hundred thousand pounds per Annum, should be raised in
this Kingdom, instead of the Revenue thereof, to be disposed for the good of
this Kingdom, and that the proceedings of the said Court, should continue Statu
quo prius, until an Ordinance for taking away the said Court, and paying the
yearly Sum of 100000 l. be brought in, and past both Houses.

Which might well have been forborne, when no general or extraordinary, and not
otherwise to be prevented evils, but only want of money for ought yet appears,
did, or could persuade them unto it for a Subversion of so grand a Fundamental
of the Government, Regality, and Laws, will never be able to avoid the
dangerous consequences which will inevitably follow thereupon, and though it
should be done by Act of Parliament, will but produce and usher in many
numberless mischiefs and inconveniences to the King, Kingdom, Nobility,
Gentry, and the most substantial and considerable part of the people.

And will never be recompensed by the benefits hoped for, or which may happen
by the intended dissolution of that Court, and alteration of those Tenures,
which in the prospect or event will appear, if so many to be no more than these.

Chap. V. The Benefits or Advantages which are expected by the people in the
putting down of the Court of Wards and Liveryes and changeing the Tenures in
Capite and by Knight Service into free and common Socage.


interim, Reliefs, primer seisins, Oustre les maines, Mesne Rates, Liveries,
and assignment of Widow Dower.

The troublesome and powerful process of the Exchequer, costly and long
pleadings

Costly Attendance upon Escheators, and Feodaries, finding of Offices or
Inquisitions post mortem, producing and finding (if the party has a mind to
it) of their Evidences, Compositions, chargeable passing, and obtaining grants
of the custody of the body, and Lands, of Wards.

Trouble and charge of Writs of diem clausit extremum quae plura and mel^us
inquirendum,

Concealment of Wardships, vexatio^s and chargeable hunting after them, and the
cunning or Informers, busy and malicious Adversaries, (which is not often, and
but where the parties endeavor to deceive the King, and the Court, and evade
the Law) and the extremities put upon them by granting it, and the Mesne rates,
to the fierce discoverers, or such as seek profit out of other men's troubles
and afflictions.



per annum, or so much more as the Revenue shall fall short of twenty thousand
pounds per annum, which the alienation office now yields to be added to it,
will be duly answered and paid, to his Majesty which will with all charges and
expenses deducted as is alleged, be as much as was yearly gained to the Crown
by the Court of Wards and Liveries, or any dependances thereof, against which
if there shall be opposed, and put into the other end of the balance, these
inconveniences following they will weigh very much the heavier.

CHAP VI. The great and very many Mischiefs, and Inconveniences, which will
happen to the King and Kingdom, by the taking away of Tenures in Capite, and
Knight Service.
FOR that Lands in Socage will transire ad secundas nuptias, marry again, all
too often within the first year, which the Civil Law reserved for the time of
their mourning, or retiredness from worldly pleasures, and do too commonly
bring the Childrens Estate to be as a Sauce to the hungry enough appetite of a
Father in Law, who being many times as good a Guardian to the Children, as the
Woolf or Fox is to the Lambs, will be sure if he do not spend both the Mothers
and Childrens Estates, and bring them to beggary, to be gnawing and put many a
lurch and trick upon them.

Which might be the Reason that the prudent Romans were so little willing that
the Mothers of any Children should after their Husbands death be the Guardians
of them, as they had a Custom that the Mothers themselves should be in
perpetua Tutela in a perpetual Wardship or Guardianship, for Cicero would have
it that Mulieres propter infirmitatem Consilii, Cicero o^tat. pro Mu^ena.
Women though of full Age should by reason of their unfitness to govern or
give Counsel be, in Tutorum Potestate, have Tutors assigned them, and the
Judicious Cato declared it openly, in publicae Concione in a public Speech
concerning the Oppian Law that, Cato apu^d Livium.
Majores nostri nullam ne privatam quidem rem agere Faeminas ^ine Auctore
v^luerunt, Their Ancestors did not permit Women to meddle not so much as in
private affairs without a Director or Overseer, And Vlpian tells us that, Lege
Atilia sancitum ut mulieribus et pupillis Tutores non habentibus a Prae^ore et
majore part Tribunorum darentur, Ulpian tit. 11. and Sigonius de antiquo Jure
Civium Romans lib. 1 cap. 13.
It was enacted by the Atilian Law, That the Praetor or Lord Chief Justice, and
the greater part of the Tribunes should appoint Guardians to such Women and
Children as had none.

And if the Mothers should either make Corner, for that which she may wish were
otherwise, but cannot help it when she is, Sub potestate viri, Under the Power
of a second Husband.



Tutor Testamentarius, ordained by the Fathers last Will and Testament, or a
Pretore datus appointed by a Judge will not arrive to any better Fate or
Condition than that where there be Executors or Administrators in personal
Estates or Trustees in Real or Personal, for Children and minors, or for
payment of debts, who can many times neglect and forget the dying requests of
Parents, on their death Beds, to to be careful of their Children, and their own
imprecations, that God should do so and so to their own Children, if they
should not perform the trusts, and let out their Consciences Hackney to the
Devil, to find ways to deceive and wrong them, of whom and many other such
Guardianships and faithless performances of trusts, our Courts of Law and
Equity do daily hear more Complaints of frauds and cosenings, than they can
either easily find out or remedy.

Which with that also of Father in Laws do in a woeful experience exceed ten to
one all that has been but only surmised of the Court of Wards, which being a
standing Court where there are no Interest^, but a care only of the Kings and
the Peoples just Rights, and their Oaths cannot be so predominant or
enchanting, as the Interests, advantages or designs of single Persons; And it
is not now to learn that the Mischiefs done to Infants and their Estates are
more where they be in Socage then in Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service,
that there is a great difference between accounts that are to be made to a
Court and impartial Auditors, and where the Guardians will account when or
where they list, and give no security for true Accounts, and discharge of their
trust, and without it are not to be trusted, for that many times they fail in
their Estates and are impoverished, and the Evils that have happened to the
heir of Hele or of Davenport, where some of the Soldiery which were formerly
Tradesmen have in the usurpations of authorities made themselves to be more
then like the Master of the Wards, and tossed and tumbled their Estates and
Marriages at their pleasure, and complaints, are obvious where an Heir by the
unconscionablenesse of Socage, Guardians have by the spoil and wast of their
Woods and Estates* been damnified ten or twenty thousand pounds.

The Kings Tenants will be enabled to alienate their Lands to such as may be
open enemies, or ill affected to his Person, Succession, or Government.

Which will leave him a lesser power over his Subjects, in relation to his
^enants and those that hold of him, then every Gentleman and Lord of a Manor
has in England over his Coppy-holders, or such as hold of them by Leases for
lives or years.

Which every Landlord finds, as well as believes, to be so necessary as Citizens
and Burgers, and all manner of Landlords, do both in little and great estates
and leases, especially provide against letting, setting, or assigning without
their license first had in writing, unless it be sometimes to Wives or
Children, which in the Kings case, in matter of freehold, was in 32 H. 8.
allowed his Tenants, so as they left a full third part to descend to the Heir.

The education of the Heirs in minority of Recusants, or persons disaffected to
the King, or his Government, or to the Orthodox Religion.

Provisions for protections for younger Children, and care of payment of Debts,
preservation of the Wards Estate, Woods and Evidences will be neglected.

The finding of Offices or Inquisitions, post mortem, of the Auncestor, and the
true extent and quantities of the Manors and Lands, and many times the finding
or mentioning of Deeds or Evidences in the Offices, which in ancient as well as
latter times, have given a great light and help to titles and descents of Land,
and the recovery and making out of Deeds or Evidences lost, will now be laid
aside, and all things left in the darkness of ignorance and incertainty.

Genealogies and Pedigrees, which by such Offices have only since the beginning
of the reign of King H. 3. been deduced and brought into great certainties,
will now be left like those of the Welsh, to believe one Ap after another, and
Ap John, Ap Jenkin, Ap David, and whatsoever the wild traditions and boastings
of our New men or upstarts and our Bards, or undertaking ignorant Painters* to
draw money out of their credulous customers purses, shall be pleased to fancy,
and shall not be so happy* as the Jews in their return out of their captivity*
who were not to seek for the registers of their Genealogies, but be like the
dull Thracians, who are said to have so short a memory as not to count above
the number of 4 or 5, Or being like a House with the windows or lights only
backward; or as a people with their eyes only in their backs, and in the time
to come, not be able to give an account of our Ancestors further then our
Grandfathers.

And no other course or way being yet found to preserve the memory or right of
Arms, or certainty of descents of our Nobility and Gentry, the people (which
the more Peysant and Mechanic part will be glad of) will be left to fool and
make one another believe their own Rhodomantadoes and Delusions.

Cause increase and multiply contention betwixt the Kindred and near Relations
of the Orphans and Minors, in striving who shall have the Manage and Protection
of their Lands and Estate, or as too often happens, most cleanly or
hypocritically deceive or ruin them, or make an Interest or Advantage for
themselves, friends, or kindred by their Marriages, which in these last twenty
years, and the practice of Counterfeit Religion and Honesty, calling every
successful knavery a Providence of the Almighty, (who not only hates, but will
punish it;) can take 500 l. or or more at a time to make Mat^hes, where they
pretend great friendships, and in an Age of all manner of cheating and cunning
devices to maintain Pride, is become the beneficial employment of many that
would be thought to be Gentlemen, or people of great respect or worship; and if
a Tradesman or Citizen, whose riches and influence have of late been too much
upon all men or their estates in the Kingdom (more especially those that are
prodigal or vicious) should get a Guardian-ship, may do as the Dutch are now
complained of, who out of their Weis Camer, Chamber, or Court of Orphans, can
send their monyes to trade as far as the East Indies, not for the Childrens,
but for their own advantage, and in the mean time make delays and pretenses
enough not to pay them their money, insomuch as a young Girl whose Parents
dyed when she was but three years old, was of late so out of patience with
Petitioning and attendance, until she was 17. as she had almost clawed out
the Gref^^er^ or Registers eyes, and in the chase of such controversies, which
upon pretenses of nearer of kin, weakness of Estate in some, or bad life and
conversation, and unfitness in other, may as well be lengthened and made to be
very chargeable, as those are concerning Executors or Administrators, which do
too often make the Infants money and Estates the lamentable paymasters.

Whereas in the Court of Wards, Controversies or Competitions for Wardships,
were by reason of the instructions and rules by which they walked, easily and
quietly determined in an hour or little more time spent, Summarily and upon
Petition, only in the Council Chamber of that Court.

There will not be that ready help or care which was used to be, for the
preservation of the Wards estate from false or forged Wills, fraudulent or
forged Conveyances, unjust Entries, and pretended Titles, and other
Encumbrances.

Nor for Tenants in Tail and their Heirs, whose Deeds being found in the
Offices, did many times prevent their disherision by Heirs, by second Venture,
and forged Conveyances or Wills.

Creditors cannot for want of such Offices sound, know how the Debtors Lands
are settled, or what is in Fee-simple to charge the Heir.

An Heir may now be disinherited by the frowardness of an aged Father,
Instigated by the cunning and practice of a Stepmother, whereas a third part
could not have before been conveyed or given from him.

In Socage Tenures there will be nothing for the defense and safety of his
Majesty's Kingdom, Person, and People, when every man shall be holding his
Plow, or be supposed to hold by it, but the moiety of the Excise of Ale and
Beer, to the value of one hundred thousand pounds per annum.

The Kingdom will upon occasion of war or invasion, lose the ready defense, and
personal service of the Nobility, who held per Baroniam, or as Tenants in
Capite, and of many worthy and able men, Knights, Esquires, Gentry, and other
sufficient Freeholders, and men of good Estate and Reputation, well educated
and fitted for war, and completely armed on Horseback, and not like to be
Run-aways or treacherous which hold the remainder, and yet to be discovered
Knights Fees, or any part thereof in an ordinary course of defense for forty
days service (which in those times, and after the manner and way of war, and
the Militia then used, was time enough to determine all or a great part of the
unhappy controversies of War) by, and out of so many several Estates, than at
twenty pounds per annum, since improved to two or three hundred pounds per
annum, with not a few of their Tenants, Friends, Servants, and Attendants,
going along with them, and may call or summon them to go with him out of the
Kingdom in case of a diversive War, or otherwise, which by the Statutes of 1 E.
3.8 E. 3.25 E. 3. and 4 H. 4. and 17 Car. he cannot do to Hoblers, Archers,
Footmen, or the Train Bands, but in case of necessity, and sudden coming of
Foreign Enemies into the Realm, and would have been sure of a gallant Army of
Horse, which being the more active and ready part of an Army, fittest for
charge or retreat, forage or traversing a Country, is by the French whose
Nobless in War are presently on Horseback, and make it their Joy and
subsistence, to appear in the defense of their King and Country, found to be a
great part of the Success in war as well as the Persians have done, who has
many times overcome the Turk by the strength of Horse, as the Hungarians and
Poles have often done; And the Germans and Italians, did heretofore make great
use of their Nobility in Wars, and made their Armies to consist most of Horse,
for that they presumed quod in Equestri militia praevalerent nobiles, that the
Nobility would do best, and prevail when they served on Horseback, Nolden de
^^etu nobilium, 62.
for as the great Estates of England; were held by Knight Service, so it was
most performed on horseback, and such as found or furnished out Horses in War,
were to be men of Gentility and value and did in person go with their Prince or
their Lieutenant) and until H. 5. Time, Gentlemen which every high Constable
and Mechanique, Waterhouse discourse of Arms and Armories.
now thinks it to be too little to usurp the Title of) were not distinguished
by any Title of addition, but by their forinsecum servitium, which was Knight
Service, and in Kent where they claimed Gavelkind, were never put under that
kind of partition.

It must needs be very prejudicial to the King who is to protect his people,
and to his people, who are to be protected by him, when as the King that has
none or very few Inland, Castles, Citadels, or places of strength, as Holland,
Flanders, France, Italy, Germany, and most Nations have to retard the March of
an Enemy landed, until he can summon or call together his Subjects and Forces,
and cannot at once, or upon a sudden, be able to raise so many men as may be
able to encounter, or vanquish him in the Field.

Shall have no Legions, or standing parts of an Army, as Oliver and his Son
Richard had paid at the charge of the public to rally and unite at pleasure,
redress Rebellions, Repel and Oppose an Enemy, and if need be, visit him at
home, and make his Country rather than his own, Sedem Belli, the Stage of War,
to endure the Spoils, Plundrings, Insolences, and free quartering of
Soldiers.

But shall when the Floods shall rore and lift up their voice, his Enemies
compass him in on every side, and there be none to help him, be as a Prince
disarmed, and left to entreat and expect the good will of his people, or the
care which they will be pleased to take for themselves in the first place, and
for him at leisure and hoping that they will not devide into parties of
factions call or summon a Parliament, which will take up forty days or six
weeks, and give the Enemy all that while the mastery of the field, and time
enough to make up all his advantages, and in the mean time must not so much as
require aid of them who have had their lands freely given them, or of those who
hold Offices or Annuities under him, for the performance of their Homages,
Oaths, Fealties, Contracts, Promises, and grateful acknowledgments, and when
the Parliament are met, must tarry until the majority of opinions shall agree
how and in what manner he shall be helped, which will not if it should be
agreed upon the second or third day, but uses not to be in so many weeks, be
speedily furnished when the money must be first raised (which in the late
necessity of disbanding and paying of Soldiers, could not be finished in two
or three months) and the men after leavied, armed, and clothed, which where
the Enemy, shall in the mean time have gained some Forts, Passages, or
Counties, will not be so ready a way, or help at hand, as the use of Tenures,
in Capite which like so many Garrisons invisibly dispersed, but no way
oppressing their several Neighbourhoods are upon the score of gratitude as well
as loyalty quickly called out and imbodied, which made the Kingdom have the
less use of Forts and Castles, and to be able in the Reign of King Stephen by
agreement betwixt him and Henry the second to demolish at once 1150 Castles.

in Capite, and by Knight service, being the Seminary and root of the Oath of
Allegiance, and the Genus or original of Fealty, which says Sir Edward Coke is
a part of Homage, Coke 1. part I^stit. 64.
and is so much says Sir Henry Spelman, Spelmans Glossar. in verb^ Homagij 356*
a part of Homage, as a release of Fealty is a discharge of Homage, which (the
Oaths of Allegiance and Fealty, and the duty of them being now by the delusions
of Satan too much disused, and strangely Metamorphosed into factions) will
though the Oaths of Allegiance and Fealty should fail, remain fixed and
radicated in the Tenures of Lands in Capite and by Knight Service, and when
they concur, do altogether if rightly observed, make a threefold Cord which
will not easyly be broken, and were therefore by as careful as wise Antiquity
invented to fasten Subjects to their Duty, any one of which cannot now with any
safety to the King or his Kingdom and people, be separated or disjointed, more
especially that of Homage, for that former ages understood the Obligation of
self Preservation and Interest to be more binding than Oaths as Salmuthius in
his learned and accurate Comment upon Pancirollus well notes, Salmut^ius in
Pancirollum 280.
Ut amore humani ingenii pro illis habeant maximam Curam, in quibus suam vident
esse positam Substantiam, That men most commonly take most care of that,
wherein their Lands and Estates are concerned, which that ancient Committee-man
and old Sequestrator the Devil well understood when he got an Order or
Permission to ruin the Righteous, Job in his Estate, and our last twenty years
can inform us how impotent and unable Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
Protestations, National Covenants, with hands lifted up to heaven, calling God
to witness Loyalties, hot and fiery Zeals, and pretenses of Religion, setting
up of Christ, and his Interest, and walking with God in the more (as it was
wrongfully called) refi^^ed way of his worship, to resist or stand in the way
of Interest, Dangers, Hazards, Self-seeking, and Self-having, in this world,
but nothing at all in the better.

Which the reserving of Fealty, or its being always to be taken upon Tenures in
Socage, and as well upon Leases for years, as Estates of freehold and
inheritance will not remedy, when as Sir Henry Spelman has well observed,
Fealty, though it be taken upon Oath is not so obligatory as Homage though it
be not taken upon Oath, for that the Words of Homage are devenio homo vester ab
hac die in posterum, de vita, de membro, and de terreno honor verus, and
fidelis vobis ero, and fidem vobis portabo ob terras quas a vobis teneo, I
become from this day forward, your man of life, member and earthly honor, and
shall be faithful and bear faith unto you, for the Lands which I hold of you.
And is not so awful and binding as that which was used in the British or Saxon
times, or shortly after the Conquest, viz. ad defendendum Regnum contra
alienigenas, and contra inimicos, una cum Domino suo Rege, and terras, and
honores, cum omni fidelitate, cum eo servare, and quod illi intra and extra
Regnum fidelis esse voluit, and intra and extra Regnum defendere. that is, to
defend the Kingdom against Foreigners, and Enemies, within and without the
Kingdom, and with the King to defend his Lands and Honors, with all fidelity,
and would be faithful to the King within and without the Kingdom, and that that
which is prescribed by the Statute of 17 E. 2. (in which also the form and
words of the Homage is declared and expressed) ever since used, viz. Quod vobis
ero fidelis et legalis, et fidem vobis feram de tenementis quae de vobis teneo,
et legaliter vobis faciam, Consuetudines et servitus quae vobis facere debeo,
ad terminos assignatos ut deus me adjuvet, that I shall be faithful and loyal,
and faith bear to you for the Tenements which I hold of you, and shall lawfully
do and perform to you all Customs and Services which I ought to do at the
Terms assigned* So God me help, is far less obliging and comprehensive,
Spelmans glossar 268. ^^ 269.
and so little in the opinion of the Tenants or Fealty makers, as sufficit
plerunque; As Sr. Henry Spelman says, si pactos redditus, exoluerit sectamque
Curiae Domini, ex more praestiterit Domini autem non milit at nec armis
cingitur; they most commonly think it extends but to pay the rents agreed
upon, and do the accustomed suit and service to their Lords Court.

Which in the Civil Law, form of an Oath of Fealty, used in the parts beyond
the Seas in this manner, viz. Ego juro ad sancta dei Evangelia quod a modo in
antea ero fidelis ei ut vassallus domino nec id quod mihi sub nomine
fidelitatis commiserit pandam alii ad ejus detrimentum me sciente, I swear upon
the holy Evangelists, that from henceforth I shall be faithful to him ( id est
the Lord) as a vassal to his Lord, nor shall willingly discover to another any
secret which under the name of Fealty he shall commit unto me, was taken and
found to be so slender a tie or obligation, as Alia de novo super fidelitatis
juramento inventa forma et utentium consuetudine quae hodie.

When Obertus de Orto wrote his books de feudis in omni curia videtur obtinere,
(...) Olbertus (...) Orto, lib 2. ^e feudis, and Cujacius Anno^. in eundem lib.
5, 6, 7.
a new form of the Oath of fidelity was found and invented, and is used says
he almost in every Court, and approved by those that used it, Scilicet ego
Titius juro super haec sancta dei Evangelia quod ab hac hora in antea usque ad
ultimum diem vitae meae ero fidelis tibi Caio domino meo contra omnem hominem
(and where it is to a mesne Lord) excepto Imperatore vel Rege, I Titius do
swear that from this hour to the last day of my life I shall be faithful to
thee Caius my Lord against all men, except the Emperor or the King, which
says the great Cujacius by reason that the genuine sense or meaning of the
words would not be so well understood by ignorant men, haec adijci solet, other
clauses and words were used to be added (which amounted to as much as the duty
of one that does homage for Lands holden by Knights service) which Cujacius
thought to be necessary enough, quod plaerique fidem sibi promitti satis non
habent nisi et fidei parts muniaque specialiter enumerentur veleo maxim si
quid contra ea fecerint ut non possint negare se commisisse in Jusjurandum et
feudum amisisse, for that they did not think it to be enough to have fealty and
promises made unto them, unless the duties and parts thereof should be
especially enumerated, to the end more especially that i^ they should do any
thing contrary thereunto, they should not be able to deny that they had broken
their Oath, and forfeited their Fee and Lands, so little were they satisfied
with the slight, or general words formerly used in the Oaths of fealty, though
in more just and honest times, about the reign of Charles the great Emperor,
the word fidelis, or a fealty, did contain in it (howsoever not expressed) a
promise, de tuenda vita et honor domini et si quid aliud specialiter
jurejurando exprimi solet, to defend the life and honor of the Lord and every
thing else, which was specially expressed in the Oath; so great a care was
taken to make the first intentions and promises of those that had those Fees
given them to come up and be answerable to the good will and expectations of
those that gave them.

And therefore it may prove to be of evil consequence, if any of our new Socage
men should like the Snakes thinking themselves the younger by casting off their
Skins, fancy in their old or the next factious humor they shall meet with,
that they are only to pay their rent and do the services belonging to their
Lands, but are not bound to pay that principal part of their natural, as well
as sworn Allegiance, to take Arms to defend the King and the Kingdom, more
especially when they shall hold their Lands, in libero et communi Socagio, et
pro omnibus servitiis per fidelitatem tantum, in free and common Socage by
fealty for all services, which may be more than a little prejudicial to the
Kingdom and the salus populi, safety of the people so much fought for, as was
pretended to exchange the men of Arms and such as are fit for war, as the
Tenures in Capite do truly and not feignedly import, for those that shall
claim exemption from wars, and are by all nations understood to be the
unfittest for it; when those that by Tenure of their Lands and by reason of
their Homage and Fealty, were always ready and bound to do it, and those that
by a fealty not actually or but seldom taken, will suppose themselves not to
be bound at all unto it, but being most disloyal, will as some thousands of
Phanatiques have lately done, imagine themselves to be most faithful, and where
the Knight Service men were to forfeit their Lands so holden, if they did not
do their service within two years, or pay Escuage assessed by Parliament, if
they went not when they were summoned, or sent another in their stead, the new
or old Socage men shall be under no manner of penalty of forfeiture at all.

Which may seem to be the cause that England, and all other Civilized and well
constituted Nations and Kingdoms, did put that value upon Homage (of which
there is some likeness and of Fealty* also in that of the Princes and mighty
men of Israel, and all the Sons likewise of King David submitting themselves at
his command unto Solomon, and giving the hand under Solomon as the margent
renders, Chro^ic^ 29. v 42.
(like that Oath of Abraham's Steward) as they understood it to be of the
Essence of Sovereignty, the great Assistant and preserver of it, and the Bond
of Obedience fixed and radicated in the interest of men's Estates, kept in and
guarded by their fear of loosing them.

And made our Kings so highly prize the Homages of their Subjects, and conceive
them to be the Liaisons, or fastenings that kept their Crowns fast upon their
heads, as King H. 2. when he had unadvisedly made his Son Henry King in his
life time, caused the English Nobility to do Homage unto him, and R. 1.
returning out of Captivity, had found that his Brother John had almost stolen
into his Throne, caused himself to be Crowned the second time, and took the
Homages of his Nobility; and our Kings have been heretofore so careful, as
always at their Coronation, to take the Homages of their Nobility; and after a
vacancy of a Bishopric, not to restore the Temporalties, until the succeeding
Bishop shall have done his Homage.

And appears to be no less valued by Foreign Princes, when as Phillip King of
France would, and did to his cost, refuse to receive the Homage of our King E.
3. by proxy, but compelled him to do it in his own person, for the Duchy of
Aquitain, and an Archduke of Austria, was constrained in person to do his
Homage to the King of France, between the hands of his Chancellor, for
Flan-Flanders, and the now Emperor of Germany has lately and most
industriously travailed through many of his Dominions and Kingdoms, to receive
the personal Homages of the Princes and Nobility thereof, and not omitted to go
to Gratz, and Carinthia, to have it as formally, as really done unto him.

And was such a Jewel in their Crowns, as they could sometimes to pacify the
greatest of their troubles by the Seditions and Rebellions of their Subjects,
find no greater or fitter a pawn or security to assure the performance of their
promises and agreements, than an absolving their Subjects from their Homage and
Obedience (which were as Synonimes, or of one and the same signification) in
case of Breach of promises, as our King Henry the 3 d. did in his necessities
to Richard Marshal Earl of Pembroke, Mat. Paris, 1232.
that he should be freed from his Homage Si rex pactum suum violaret, if the
King should break his agreement, and as the Ancient Earls of Brabant, are said
to have done in their Reversals, or Grants to their Subjects, if they should
infringe their Liberties or Privileges.

Which the seditious party that deposed King Richard the 2 d. knew so well to
be a grand Obligation or Tie, which Kings had upon their Subjects, as they put
themselves to the trouble of inventing a new trick of Treason solemnly in the
name of the three Estates of the Kingdom, viz. Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and the Commons, to renounce their Homages, Fealties, and Allegiance, and all
Bonds, Charges, and Services belonging thereunto, which would have been to as
little purpose, as it was contradictory to all the Rules of Right, Reason, and
Justice, if they had not forced the distressed and imprisoned King by a public
instrument upon Oath to absolve all his Subjects a Juramento fidelitatis and
homagiis omnique vinculo ligeanciae, Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. M. 20.
from their Oaths of Fealty and Homage, and all Bonds of Allegiances, and to
swear and promise never to revoke it, and is so precious inestimable, of so
high a nature, so useful, and of so great a value, as nothing but the Kingdom
it self can be equivalent unto it.

And our Nobility did so esteem of the Homage and Service of their Tenants, and
build as is were their Grandeur and Power upon it, as they did anciently grant
one to another Homagium and Servicium of such and such Tenants. Maud the
Empress gave to Earl Alberick de vere servicium december militum, the Service of
ten Knights. An Earl of Leicester gave to Bygod Earl of Norfolk, ten Knights
Fees, which after the manner of those times, may with reason enough be
conceived to be only the Homage and Service of so many, for the purchase of the
Office of Lord high Steward of England, and John Earl of Oxford in the Reign of
H. 7. did at his Castle of Hedingham in Essex, actually receive the Homages of
many worthy Knights and Gentlemen that held of him.

May very much prejudice in their Dignities in capite and changeing them, and
Knight service Tenures into Socage, when as the Earls of Arundel, do hold the
Castle and Rape of Arundel, which is the Honor and Earldom it self by the
Service of 84. Knights Fees, the Earldom of Oxford is holden by the Service of
30 Knights Fees, and that by a modus tenendi Parliamentum, so believed to be
true, that King John caused it when he sent our English Laws into Ireland to be
exemplified, and sent thither under the Great Seal of England, it is said that
every Earldom consists of 21 Knights Fees, and every Barony of 13 Knights
Fees, and a third part of a Knights Fee, and were of such a value and esteem,
as they were wont heretofore to bring Actions and Assizes for them, and their
Homage and Services.

And so little less in France, as the wealth of that great and populous
Kingdom, is not as may be rationally supposed enough to purchase of the
Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom, the transmutation of their Fiefs nobles
into the Roturier or Feifs ignobles, nor are the Princes or Nobility of Germany
likely to be persuaded out of their ancient Rights and Tenures into that of the
Boors or common sort of People.

The Nobility and Gentry of England, when Standard, and Lions but for want of
those which held Lands of them, and the Tenures by Knight service, will be
forced to abide with Gilead beyond Jordan, and not be able to imitate their
noble Ancestors, Dugdale Illustration of Warwickshire, 116.
nor each or any of them bring to his Service three Bannerets, sixty one
Knights, and one hundred fifty four Archers on Horseback, Dugdale Illustration
of Warwickshire 316.
as Thomas de Bello campo Earl of Warwick, did to E. 3. in anno 21. of his
Reign at the Seige of Caleis, or as the Earl of Kildare did to King E. 3. in
the 25 th. year of his Reign, when he besieged Calice, Spelmans Glossar in
verbo Hobellarij.
when he brought one Banneret, six Knights, thirty* Esquires, nineteen Hoblers,
twenty four Archers on Horseback, and thirty two Archers on foot.

It will take away the subjection of the Bishop Man, who holds of the Earl of
Derby as King of the Isle of Man, and not of the King of England, and therefore
comes not to Parliament.

Take away from the King, Nobility, by Knight service, all Escheats of such as
die without Heirs, or forfeit or be convicted of Felony, and the Kings Annum
diem and vastum, year, day, and wast, where the Lands are holden of Mesne
Lords, the Escheats of those that held of Kings, imediately being so
considerable as the Castle of Barnard in Cumberland, and the Counties of
Northumberland, and Huntington, which the Kings of Scotland sometimes held of
England, came again to the Crown by them, and the power which King Edward 1.
had to make Baliol King of Scots, and to determine the competition for that
Kingdom, was by reason it was held of him, the Earldoms of Flanders, and Artois
were seized by Francis the 1. as forfeited, being Fiefs of the Crown of France,
and Flanders, and many other Provinces, forced to submit themselves upon some
controversies, to the Umpirage of France, of whom they held.

Magna Charta, which was grante by H. 3. tenendum de se and heredibus suis, and
all our Liberties, and the many after confirmations of that Magna Charta, will
be to seek for a support, if it shall be turned into Socage, and the Lib^rties
also of the City of London, and all other ancient Cities, and Boroughs, and
such as anciently and before 9 H. 3. did use to send Burgesses unto Parliament.

Alter if not destroy the Charter of K. R. 1. London for their Hustings Court,
to be free of Toll and Lastage through all England, and all Seaports, with
many other Privileges, which were granted to be held of the King and his
Heirs, and the same with many other immunities granted and confirmed by King
John, with a Tenure reserved to him and his Heirs, for where no Tenure is
reserved nor expressed, though it should be said, absque aliquo inde reddendo,
it shall be intended for the King and the Law will create a new Tenure by
Knight service in Capite. Coke 9. Report, Leonard Lovelaces Case.


A Socage Tenure for Cities and Boroughs, fictio juris, or supposition ^in Law,
which does not sequi rationem, so follow reason, or allude unto it, as to
preserve the reason or cause which it either does, or would signify, but does
not suppose things improper, or which are either Heterogeneous, or quite
contrary.

Put into fresh disputes the question of precedence, betwixt Spain and England,
which being Spaniard, at the treaty of peace betwixt the two Kingdoms, in anno
42. of Q. Eliz. at Calice occasioned by the contests of the Ambassador of
Spain, and Sir Henry Nevil, Ambassador for England, it was argued or adjudged
that England besides the arguments urged on its behalf, viz. Antiquity of
Christian Religion, more authority Ecclesiastical, more absolute authority
Political, eminency of royal dignity, and Nobility of blood, ought to have
precedence, in regard that it was Superior to the Kingdoms of Scotland and
Ireland, and the Isle of Man, which held of i^, that Spain had no Kingdom held
in Fee of it, but was it self Feudatory to France, and inthral'd by oath of
Subjection to Charles the fifth King of France, in anno 1369. holds a great
part of the Netherlands of France, Arragon, both the Indies, Sicily, Granado,
and Navarre, Sardinia, Corsica, and the Canary Islands of the Pope, Portugal
pays an annual Tribute to him; and Naples yearly presents him with a white
Spanish Genner, and a certain Tribute.

Wales, Kingdom of Ireland, Isle of Man, Isles of Wight, Gernesey, and Jersey,
holding of England as their Superior in Capite.

Chester, Lancaster, Durham, and Isle of Ely, if the Tenures should be Levelled
into Socage.

England, who hold as they have anciently diverse Manors and Lands, or Offices
by grand Serjeanty, as for the Earls of Chester, which belongs to the Princes
of Wales, and the eldest Son of the King, to carry before the King at his
Coronation the Sword called Curtana, to be Earl Marshal of England, and to lead
the Kings Host to be Lord great Chamberlain of England, which is claimed by the
Earl of Oxford, to carry the Sword called Lancaster before the King at his
Coronation due to the Earl of Derby as Kings of the Isle of Man, to be grand
Faulconner or Master of the Hawks claimed by the Earl of Carnarvon, and the
Kings Champion at his Coronation claimed by the Family of the Dymocks in
Lincolnshire, and very many others holding by diverse other grand Serjeanties.

Prejudice the Families of Cornwall, Hilton, Venables, who though not
privileged and allowed to sit as Peers in Parliament, are by an ancient
custom and prescription allowed to use the Title of Baron of Burford, Baron
Hilton, and Baron of Kinderton, because they hold their Lands per Baron^am.

Disparage the Esquires and Gentry of England, the first sort of which being as
anciently as the days of the Emperor Julian, called Scutarii, of their
bearing of shields in the Wars, Seldom tit. Hon^^ 875.
and the other as our excellently learned Mr. Seldom teaches us, called
Gentlemen, a gente, or the stock out of which they were derived, or because
they were ex origin gentis of noble kind distinguished from them whom Horace
terms sine gente, or that they had servile Ancestors, had by their fears and
prowess in War not only gained great reputation, but Lands given to them and
their Heirs for their reward, support, and maintenance, from which custom and
usage amongst the Romans, says Pasquier, Pasquier de Rocherches de France
li-se^ond 202.
the French in imitation of the Gauls did call those Esquires and Gen^^^men,
Quilz vi^^ent estre pourv^uz de tells benefices, whom they did see so provided
with those benefices or rewards, Et pour autant quilz veterent ceux cy n' estre
chargez d' aucune redevance pecu^iare a raison de leurs terres benificiales
envers le Prince et outre plus qu'a l' occasion d'icelles ils devoient prendre
les arms pour la protection et d^ffense de Royaume le peuple commenca de
fonder le seul et unique degree de noblesse sur tell maniere de gens, ^or that
they did see that they were not charged with any Assessement in money to the
Prince by reason of the Tenures of their Lands, and that therefore they were
upon all occasions to take Arms for the protection and defense of the Realm.
the people took them to be a degree of Nobility, as appears by the stature of
1 E. 2. touching such as ought to be Knights and came not to receive that order.

Equestris ordo, and ancient and honorable degree of Knighthood in England,
which was derived and took its beginning from the service of their Lands which
were military, for the chief Gentlemen or Free-holdes of every County, in
regard they usually held by Knights service, says the learned Seldom, Seldom
ti^. Honor cap 769, et 770*
were called Chivalers, in the statute of W. 1. touching Coroners, and was so
honorable a Title as the name of Chivaler was anciently given to every
temporal Baron, whether he were dubbed a Knight or no.

Blast and enernate that also of our not

Take away the cause and original of that Banneret, when as such as hold Lands
in Capite, and by Knight service, and had many Tenants also holding of them by
Knight service, were able in a more then ordinary manner to do their King and
Country service, by bringing their own Banner in the Field, which was to be
displaced by the King or his Leivetenant.

Make our heretofore famous English Nation Pastoritium, or agreste genus
hominum, to be Rusticks and Plowmen, which the followers of Romulus, which were
many of them but Rubul^i et opiliones, Sheppheards and Heardsmen, did not take
to be a degree worthy the Founders of that great Empire of Rome, nor could be
content with any les^ then that of their Patricij or Equites, Sena^ors or
Knights; And was therefore called Feudum n^bile et cognoscitur mul^is
privilegiis inhaerentibus, viz. Gardia, Fidelitas, Homagium, Curia,
Consuetudin^s, Jurisdictio in Vassallos, Banni, et retrobann^ privilegium, jus
Columbarij jus molendini, etc. A noble Fee which has many privileges
belonging to it, viz. Wardship, Fealty, Homage, a Court, Customs, Jurisdiction
over Tenants, privilege of Ban, and Arriere Ban, calling them to War in
defense of their Prince, a right to have a Dove-house and a Mill, the two
latter of which others could not heretofore build or enjoy without the Kings
license, Equibus liquet ingentem maneriorum nostrorum multitudinem Normannis,
Spelmans glossar 261.
enim abunde auctam videmus ex privilegiis ad feuda militaria olim spectantibus
originem sumpsisse, by which it is manifest that our great number of Manors
came to be abundantly increased by the Normans, and took their beginning from
the privileges belonging to Knights Fees; Take away all the Manors and Court
Barons of the Kingdom, Spelmans glossar in verbo f^^dum nobile.
which being before the statute of Quia emptores terrarum, created by the
Lords, who parcelled out the Lands, which the King had before given them to
several Friends or Tenants to be held of them and their Heirs by Knight
service, and some other part in Socage, to plow their Lands and carry their
Hay, etc. and to do suit to the Courts (of which the Freeholders are said to
be the Homage) holden for their Manor in whose Jurisdiction the Lands do lie,
and are no small part of the legal and necessary privileges and power of the
Gentry or Lords of Manors over their Tenants, which were as Sr. Edward Coke
says given them for the defense of the Kingdom, Coke 1. part Institutes 58^
and do not only very much conduce to the well ordering of their Tenants, but
to the universal peace and welfare of the Nation, in their inferior Orbs and
Motions subordinate to the higher.

Were all at the first derived out of Knight service, as evidently appears by
Edward the Confessors Laws, wherein it was ordained that Barons qui suam
habent Curiam de suis hominibus, Spelmans glossar
which have their Court consisting of their men and Tenants, Et qui Sacham et
Socam habent id est Curiam et Jurisdictionem super Vassallis suis, LL Edwa^di
R^gis 9.21.
have a Court and Jurisdiction over their Tenants, are to do right to their
Tenants, and by the fall of those many thousand Manors, and Court Barons in
the Kingdoms, which will at the same time dye and perish with the Tenures in
Capite, and by Knight service.

Extinguish the Copyhold Estates, which Barons, will also fall, for as there
can be no Court Baron without Freeholders, so no customary Court without
Copiholders.

And once lost, or but altered, cannot be created again, for that now a Subject
cannot make a Manor, which must be part in demesnes, and part in services, to
hold of him by services and Suit of Court, which is to be by a long continuance
of time a tempore cujus contrarij memoria hominum non existit, and if there be
no Court the Customary Tenants, or Copiholders cannot enter their Plaints, make
Surrenders, and be admitted.

in Capite, which are only so called from the duty of Homage, and the
acknowledgement of Soveraignity, and Headship in the King, into a Tenure in
Socage, which is so far from acknowledgeing the King to be chief, or to engage,
as the other does their Lands, to do him service as it is but a Tenure, as it
were a latere, and is no more then what one Neighbor may acknowledge to hold
or do to another, for his Rent, or money be a Lease for a Life, or one or more
years, or as Tenant at will, and levels and makes rather an equality, then any
respect of persons, which if ever or at all reasonable, or fit to be done, is
in a democratical or popular way of Government, but will be unexampled, and is
not at all to be in Monarchy, and may make many of the people which are not yet
recovered out of a gainful Lunacy, to believe they were in the right when they
supposed themselves to be the Sovereigns.

Ireland, which in the subverting Olivers l. per annum, to turn their better
Tenures and Conditions into worse, will if they be not come again to their wits
expect the like prejudicial bergain.

Bring many inconveniences and mischiefs to the Nobility and Gentry of
Scotland, if Capite, and Knight service, and those which are holden of them as
Mesn Lords, shall as ours, be taken away with their services and dependencies,
Licenses of Alienation, benefits of Investitures, infeodations, and the like,
it being amongst others as a reason given for Wardships in that Kingdom, in the
Laws of Scotland, in the reign of their Malcombe the 2. (which was before the
Conquerours entering into England, Ne non suppeterent Regiae Majestatis
facultates, to the end that the King should have where-withall to defend the
Kingdom.

And a letting loose of a fierce and unruly people, who are best of all kept in
awe and order by a natural and long and well enough liked subjection to their
Mesne Lords and Superiors, into a liberty which cannot be done without a
disjointing and over-turning all the Estates of the Nobility and Gentry of that
Kingdom, and may like our late English Levellers, either endeavor to do it, or
bring themselves and the whole Nation, to ruin by a renversing of the
fundamental Laws, and that ancient order and constitution of that Kingdom,
wherein the estates and livelihood of all the Nobility and Gentry, and better
part of the people are hugely concerned.

And besides a great damage to the King in his Revenues, and profits arising
out of such Tenures, if not recompensed by some annual payment.

England, cannot be denied to be due, and to have been actually and anciently
done, and presidented, and not in one, but several ages, fidem and obsequium ut
vassallos Angliae Regibus, and superioribus dominis jurejurando promisisse, to
have done their Homage and Fealty as vassals to our English Kings, and bound
themselves by oath thereunto, as namely, to Alfred, Edgar, Athelstane, William
the Conqueror, William Rufus, Maud the Empress, Henry the second, and Edward
the first, the later of whom with all the Baronage of England, in a Letter to
the Pope, did upon the search of many Evidences and Records stoutly assert it.

Will be no small damage and disturbance Maldon in Essex one, the Town of Lewis
in Sussex, as the Book of Doomsday informs, where King Edward the Confessor
had 127 Burgesses in dominio and eorum consuetudo erat, si Rex ad Mare
custodiendum sine se suos mittere voluisset, de omnibus hominibus cujuscunque
terrae fuissent colligebant 20 s^lidos and hos habebant qui in manibus arma
custodie^ant, had 127 Burgesses in his deme^ne of the King, and when he sent
any of his men to guard the Seas, they were to gather 20 s. a man, which was to
be given to those that manned the Ships, and in Colchester where the custom
then was, that upon any expedition of the Kings by Sea or Land, every house was
to pay six pence ad victum soldariorum Regis, toward the quarter or livelihood
of the Kings Soldiers, and likewise prejudice him in his grand and Petit
Serjeanties, and many thousand other reservations of honor and profit, by and
upon Tenures in Capite, and Knight service, which revived and called out of
their Cells, wherein those that are to do and pay them, are content they should
sleep, and take their rest for ever, would go near to make and maintain an Army
with men and Provisions.

Capite shall be taken away, shall never be able to errect his Standard and to
call thereunto all that hold Lands, Fees, Annuities, and Offices of him, to
come to his assistance, according to the duty of their Tenures, and the Acts of
Parliament of 11 H. 7. chap. 18. And 19. H. 7. chap. 1. of forfeiting the Lands
and Offices holden of him under the penalties, which was the only means which
the late King his Father had to protect as much as he could himself, and his
Subjects or to manifest the justice of his Cause, in that War which was forced
upon him, and was very useful and necessary heretofore for the defense of the
Kings of England, and their People, and proved to be no otherwise in the Bellum
Ethelredus Abbas Rienal^ensis.
Standardi, so called in the reign of King Stephen, where some of the Barons of
England, and some of the English Gentry, gathered themselves to the Royal
Standard, and repelled and beat the King of Scotland, and in several Kings
reigns afterward repulsed the Scotch, and Welsh Hostilities, and Invasions,
and at Floddon Field in King H. 8 ths. time, when the Duke of Norfolk and his
Son the Earl of Surrey, and diverse of the Nobility and Gentry which
accompanied them vanquished, and slew the King of Scots.

The benefit whereof the Commons of England had so often experimented as in
diverse Parliaments they Petitioned Rot. Parl. 6. R. 2. m. 33.^. H* 4. m. 24.
the King and Lords to cause the Lord Marchers, and other great men, to repair
into their Counties, and defend the borders, and was so necessary in France, to
assemble together the Bans, and Arrierebans which were but as our Tenants in
Capite, as it helped King Charles the 7 th. of France, to recover that Kingdom
again out of the hands and possession of our two Henry's, the 5. and 6. Kings
of England.

And if any Rebellion or Conspiracy shall -- Cum Virgill 1 Eneid.
saepe coorta
Seditio saevitque animis ignobile vulgus.
Fury, and Rage of War shall burn,
And the Ignoble to the worst side turn.


Must be left to hire his Soldiers or Assistance, out of the Rascallity,
Debauched, and Ruder sort of People, and such as know neither how to fight, or
be faithful, if his Treasory or yearly Income, upon such an increased Revenue,
can do it, when as without the necessity of his Subjects, preserving their own
Lands and Estates by performing the duties and service of their Tenures, the
money which the late King could have procured, could never have brought any
considerable number of men to his Standard, of whose fidelity, being Hirelings,
and such of the Vulgar and ignoble part of the people, as had neither courage
virtue or Estate, or such as for a little more pay, would either have deserted
or betrayed him, nor could he be so certain, and assured as he was in the aid
and assistance of that of the Nobility and Gentry, and better part of the
people, virtuously educated, and descended from worthy Ancestors, furnished
out, and ready to attend him, with the haz^r^ of all their Esta^^s and
Fo^^u^es, and whose great Sou^s ^ct^d by a nobler principle, made them scorn to
stoop to any unworthy Actions, basen^sse or villainy, which caused our brave
King H. 5. after the Batte^ at Agencourt, in a Muster, or Leavy, which he was
to make of Soldiers to pass with him into France, publicly to Proclaim,
that none should presume to go with him (for then they needed no other
impressing but the obligation of their Tenures and glory and honor of serving
their Prince, and Country) but such as were Gentlemen, and had Tunicas armo^um,
did bear Arms, except such as had served him at the Battle of Agencourt, though
they had none.

For if a War, which will be sure to loose in Capite, and Knight service, shall
also loose the help of his Ships and Navy at Sea.

And if the King or any of his Successors should be so happy as to have money
in their Treasury, which as the course and charge of War is now, must be no
small sums to hire, provide, and continue an Army, it may be seized on as his
Revenues, and all the money in the Exchequer, and much of his Plate and
Household stuff were in the late Wars, and if he could be so well before hand
as to have any Magazines, may have that as easily taken from him as his
Magazines at Hull, and the Tower of London were, when his Tenures per Baroniam,
and in Capite, and by Knight service were not.

Can have no manner of assurance, that when any sedition or commotion of the
people shall be bred or increased by the practice of some great men, or
inticements of any of the Clergy, and a Bellum flagrans, or a War as sudden
and unexpected as it shall be dangerous, shall break out not only in one, but
several parts of the Nation, that the people or most vulgar and common sort of
Hirelings will especially in a frenzy or humor of sedition be hired or drawn
to fight for him by a small and inconsiderable pay, and the support of an
Hospital when their wounds shall bring them into it, or a small allowance which
the statute allows wounded Soldiers until they be cured, or maimed Soldiers
which are incurable, shall be so very disproportionate to their danger and
hazards.

When the hireing also of common Soldiers upon a sudden and in case of
necessity, will (if he could get them) be more chargeable and difficult then
when he was to be served and defended in his Wars by men of worth and quality,
under the engagement of their Lands and Tenures, which made our former Kings,
besides those aids and safeguards by Tenures of Lands, to stipend and pension
certain of their Nobility and Gentry whom they found most proper and fit to
serve them by Indenture, with so many men at Arms or Soldiers, as for
instance, Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, retained in 46 E. 3. by Indenture
to serve the King in his Wars beyond Seas for one whole year with 100 men at
Arms, of which number himself to be one, 160 Archers, 2 Bannerets, 30 Knights,
and 77 Esquires, a trial or proof whereof would easily have manifested the
difference betwixt the one way and the other, Dugdale Illustration of
Wariekshire 321.
if when the late King in his march or expedition against the Covenanting Scots
in An. 1639. had such a gallant Army as he had of his English Nobility and
Gentry, had disbanded them and taken as well as he could in their rooms only
milites Gregarij, or Tirones, common and mercenary Soldiers; And may expose
him in any distress, when his money or hirelings shall fail him, to that
disloyal and rebellious late opinion too much entertained and taken in by
Newtrals double dealing or time serving people, that where the King cannot
protect them, their Oaths and Consciences gives them a liberty to make the best
bergain they can for themselves,

Take away also the foundation of the House of Peers in Parliament, whom the in
Capite, and per Baroniam, which well might be the grand foundation of so noble
a Senate, when as amongst the Romans, their Senators were Lecti in senatum ex
equestri ordine, Sigonius de antiquo jure Romans
chosen into the Senate out of the degree of Knighthood, and even by Brutus in
his Consulship, and great endeavors to restore that people to their Liberty,
was so approved, as that many ages after, Perseus Macedoniae Rex apud Livium
lib, Livy lib. 42.
42. Equites Romanos appellat principes juventutis and seminarium Senatus,
calls in Livy the Roman Knights, the Princes or Flower of the youth* and the
Nursery of the Senate, Sigoni^s. de antiquo jure Romans 76.
and says that inde lectos in patrum numerum, they where thence chosen to be
Senators, and ex veteri instituto, the Custom was as Isiodore says* that when
the Senators Sons came to be of Age, Perionius de Senatu Romans lib. 25.
they were not to be admitted into the Senate, until they were Knighted. And
Alexander Severus the Emperor, Lampridius in vita Severi.
would not assumere libertos in equestrem ordinem, ordain or make Yeomen, or
such as were n^wly (...) to be Knights, or give (...) (as he did) Lands to hold
by Knight (...), dicens ^ quod seminarium (...) Equestrem ^sse locum, that it
was the seminary for the Senate, amongst the Germans, who were as jealous to
keep their Honor, as they were their Liberties Nobiles vocati Ritter id est
Servator, Nolden de statu nobilium 60. and 62.
Noblemen were termed Ritters, which signifies a Savior or Defender, quod
virtute and fortitudine servent patriam, because by their virtue and manhood,
they defended their Country, amongst whom the degree of Knighthood is worthily
reckoned to be honoris species exercitium nobile and proprium nobilium, a
degree or part of honor, a noble exercise, and proper breeding for Nobility,
hinc militum nomen in Jure feudali pro nobili usurpatur, and thence a Knight
was in the feudal Laws taken and used for a Nobleman, and though Hector
Boethius calls equites Barons, Hector Boethius, Hist. Scot. lib. 11.
speaking of those that paid for Wardship and releifs to Malcolme the King of
Scots, yet Sir Henry Spelman is clearly of opinion, Spelmans Glossar. 85.
that Miles quem ea tempestate Baronem vocabant non a militari cingulo quo
equites creabantur sed a militari feudo quo al^^s possessor and libere tenens
nuncupatus est nomen sumpsit that a Knight, which in those ^imes they called a
Baron, was not so called from the Military Belt or Girdle by which they were
created, but took his title or denomination from the Knights Fee, of which he
was otherwise called Possessor, or free Tenant, had jus Annulorum amongst the
Romans a right to wear Rings, and was gradus ad Senatorium, a step or means to
be a Senator.

For Nobilium Ordo pro seminario munerum praecipuorum habetur, quia liberaliter
educati sapientiores esse censentur says Besoldus the degree of Nobility has
been accounted to be the foundation or original of the greatest Offices or
places, for that being liberally and more then ordinaryly educated, they were
judged to be the wisest, and therefore Comites or Earls being anciently in the
reign of the Emperor Charlemain, (which was in anno Christi, 806.) if not long
before, praefecti Provinciarum, and qui Provincias, Administrabant, the
Governors of Countries, and Provinces under their Emperors and Kings, were
with Dukes also and Barons not only in France, in those times, but in Germany
also, afterward inserted or put into the Matricula, Besoldus de Comitibus and
Baronibus Imperij. Germani 117.
or Roll of the States of the Empire, and in Comitijs jus suffragij habuerunt,
and had voice or judicature in their Dyets, or greatest Assemblies, which
corresponds with that more ancient Custom amongst the Hebrews, Number. 11. Joshua
23. Jeremiah 26.
in Gods once peculiar Commonwealth, where the Princes of the twelve Tribes,
summo Magistratui in consilijs assidebant, did assist the chief Magistrate in
their great Counsels and Arumaeus as well as many other, is of opinion that it
was libertatis pars, a great part of the peoples Liberties, and for their good,
that deliberatio o^dinum consili^ and authoritate quorum periculo, Arumaeus de
Comitiis 7.
res agitur suscipitur and qui apud Principem in m^gna g^^cia su^^, in those
great Counsels Resolves should be made by those who should be in^^ressed, or
pertakers in any dangers or misfortunes, which should happen thereupon Arumaeus
de Comitijs 223.
and jure Comitiorum una and perpetua privativa est mediata subjectio qua qui
infectus est nec Comitiorum particeps esse potest.

That it is a Rule or Law in such Assemblies, that those that sit there, or
have voice and suffrage in it, are to hold immediately of the Empire, and the
Reasons of the first Institution of the Parliament of France, composed of the
Nobility by the ancient Kings of France, and King Pepin was as Pasquier, that
learned Advocate of France, observes in partem solicitudinis, to assist their
Kings, for the better management of the Affairs of Government, who did thereby
communicate les Affairs publiques a leurs premiers et grandes seigneurs come
si avec la monarchy ils eussent voulu enter mesler l'ordre d'vne Aristocratie
et Government de plusi^urs personnages d'honne^r, Pasquier des Recherches de
la France liver 2.72. and 7^.
the public affairs to their chief and greatest Lords, to the end, to
intermingle, and blend with Monarchy, the order and manner of an Aristocratie,
and Government, by many personages of Honor, et ne se mettre en hain des
grand^s Seigneurs and Potentats, and not to draw upon them the envy of their
great and mighty men, Pasquier es Reche^ches de la France livre 2.72, 74, et 76.
Et ^estans les grands Seigneurs ^insi lo^s unis se composa un corpse general de
toutes les Princes et Governeurs par l' advis desquels se viudereient non
seulement les differents qui se presenteroient enter le Roy et eux mais enter
le Roy et ses Subjects, And the great Lords being so united, composed, and made
one general body of all the princes and Governors of Provinces, by whose
advice and council, not only the differences which should happen betwixt the
King and them, but between the King and his Subjects, might be determined, Et
estoit l' usance de nos anciens Roys tell qu' es lieux ou la necessite les
sumomioit se uvidojent ordinairement les affairs par assemblees generales des
Barons, and it was the usage of the ancient French Kings in all cases of
necessity, most commonly to consult of their affairs in the general Assemblies
of their Barons, and accordingly by the directions of reason, or of that and
the more ancient Governments amongst the Greeks, in their great Council of
Amphiction, or of the Romans in their Senate, our Saxon Kings did in Anno 712.
which was almost one hundred years before the reign of the Emperor Charlem^in,
call to their Assemblies, and great Councels for the enacting of Laws, Lambard
d^ Prisc^s Anglerum legibus.
and redressing of Griveances, their regni Scientissimos et Aldermannos
Aldermen, Earls, or Governors of Provinces and the wisest and most knowing of
the Kingdom, and therefor after the Conquest, King John did at the request of
the Barons, not to call to his Parliaments the Barons minores, the men of
lesser estates, which ho^d also in Capite, promise under his great Seal, Ut
Archiepiscopos, Abbares, Comites et majores Barons Angliae sigillatem per
literas summoniri faceret, that he would severally summon to Parliaments the
Archbishops, Abbotts, Earls, and greater Barons of England, and that the
lesser Barons were summoned or sat in Parliament, falsum esse ipsa ratio
suadet, says the no less Judicious than Learned Sr. Henry Spelman, Sr. Henry
Spelmans glossar in diatriba de Baronibus 79, et ^0.
reason it self will not allow for a Truth, when as there was as he observes
ingens multitudo, a great number, et plus minus 30000 quos nullo tecto
convocari poterat, and no less then 30000 which no one house was able to
contain, Quemadmodum itaque says he nequ^ Barons ipsi consiliave majores
neque minores quempiam in Curiis suis ad Judicia ferenda de rebus sui Dominij
admittant nisi Vassallos suos qui de ipsis immediate tenent hoc est milites
suos et tenentes libere ita in summa Curia totius Regni nulli olim ad Judicia,
et Consilia administranda personaliter accersendi erant^ nisi qui proximi
essent a Rege ipsique arctioris fidei and homagii vinculo conjuncti hoc est
immediate vassalli sui; As therefore neither the greater nor lesser Barons do
admit any in their Courts to advise them, or meddle with matters of Judicature
concerning things belonging to their Estate or Jurisdiction, but their Tenants,
and such as hold immediately of them, that is, Freeholders, and such as hold by
Knight Service; So in the great Court of all the Kingdom, none were anciently
personally called to give Judgment and adv^se therein, but such as were near
to the King, and bound and obliged to him by a greater Bond and Tie of Faith
and Homage, that is to say, his immediate vassals, Barons nempe cujuscunque
generis qui de ipsi tenuere in Capite ut videndum est in breve de summonitione
(wherein they are summoned in fide and homagio quibus tenentur, in the Faith
and Homage by which they held) and partim in charta libertatum Regis Johannis,
and Barons of any kind whatsoever which held of him in Capite, as may appear by
the Writs of Summons to Parliament, and the Charter of King John. Hence the
Barons of England are in our laws said to be Nati Consiliarij, born Counselors
of State, and Baro signifying Capitalem Vassallum majorem qui tenetur Principi
Homagij vinculo seu potius Baronagij hoc est de agendo vel essendo Baronem suum
quod hominem seu clientem praestantiorem significat, A Baron who is a chief or
Capital Vassal, is bound to his Prince by the Bond of Homage, or rather
Baronage, which is to be his Baron or man, or more considerable Clyent, and
makes a threefold dvision of Barons, who by Bracton are called Potentes sub
Rege, great or mighty men under the King, and Barons hoc est robur belli, and
Barons, which is as much to say, as the strength of War, into feudal or by
prescription, 1. Qui a priscis feodalibus Baronibus oriundi suam prescriptione
tuentur dignitatem, which being descended from Ancient feudal Barons, do
continue their dignity by prescription, 2. Rescriptitios qui brevi Regio
evocantur ad Parliamentum, Spelmans glossar 80.
which are called to Parliament by the Kings Writs, and 3. Diplomaticos, which
are by Letters Patents and Creation, and that Barons isti Feodales nomen and
dignitatem suam ratione fundi obtinuerunt, those Feudal Barons do hold their
dignity by reason of their Lands and Tenures, and that Episcopi suas sortiuntur
Baronias sola fundorum investitura, Bishops are Barons, only by investiture of
their Baronies Lands and Temporalties; And the most excellently Learned Mr.
Seldom, who was well known to be no stranger to the old and most choice Records
and Antiquities of the Kingdom, does not doubt but that the Bishops and Abbots
did sit in Parliament and were summoned thither only as Barons by their Tenures
per Baroniam, Seldens Epistle to Mr. Vincent concerning his book against York.
and in his Epistle to 47. H. 2. in dors^ m. 7 and Pat 48 H. 3. Seldom tit.
honor 716.
Mr. Augustine Vincent concerning his Corrections of Yorkes Catalogue of
Nobility does most learnedly prove it by many Instances besides that in ^he
Case of Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury in 11* H. 2. and the claim
made and allowed in Parliament in 11 R. 2. by all the Bishop, Abbots, and
Priors, of the Province of Canterbury which used to sit in Parliament, that de
Jure et consuetu^ine Regni Angliae, all Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other
Prelates whatsoever per Baroniam Domini Regis tenentes, Stamford lib. 3* cap.
62.
holding of the King by Barony were Peers of the Parliament which agrees with
the opinion of Stamford that the Bishops, ne ont lieu en Parliament eins in
resp^ct de lour possessions annexes a lour, Camden Brit. 120.122.
dignities have no pla^e in Parliament but in respect of their Possessions
annexed to their Dignities, and that Mr. Camden says that diverse Abbots and
other spiritual men, formerly summonned by writ to Parliament, were afterward
omitted because they held not by Barony, Seldens t^t. honor.
and that it was mentioned and allowed to be good Law in a Parliament of King
E. 3. que toutes les religieuses que teignent per Barony soient tenus de vener
au Parliament, that all the religious which hold by Barony are to be summoned to
Parliament.

And as to the temporal Barons, does besides what he alleges of the Thanes or
Barons of England in the Saxon times, that they held by personal service of the
King, and that their honorary possessions were called Taine-Lands, and in the
Norman times after denoted by Baronies, and the eminent and noted Case of the
Earls of Arundel claiming, and allowed to be Earls of Arundel by reason of
their holding, or Tenure of Arundel Castle, and Sir John Talbots being Lord
Lisle ratione Dominij et Manerij de Kingston Lisle does by 22 E. 3, fo. 18.48.
E. 3. fo. 30. and other good Authorityes conclude, that the Tenure of a Barony
is the main and principal Cause of the Dignity that 130 temporal Barons by
Tenure were called by several writs to assist the King cum equis and Armis,
with horse and Arms, and the spiritual being about 50 were called, ad habendum
servicium suum, and that the greatest number of Barons during all that time
were by Tenure, that the most part of the Barons by Tenure and Writ until the
middle of the Reign of King R. 2. and those that were called by Writ, were such
as had Baronyes in Possession, that the honorary possessions of Earls were
called Honors, and reckoned as part of their Earldoms which were holden in
Capite, the chief Castle or seat of the Earls or Barons were called Caput
Comitatus seu Baroniae, the head or chief of the Earldom or Barony, and that in
this sense Comitatus integer is used for a whole Earldom in the grand Charter,
and Bracton and Servicium quarte partis Comitatus for the fourth part of an
Earldom, that Hugh de Vere Earl of Oxford, Magnavile Earl of Essex and diverse
other ancient Earls were Cingulo Comitatus and Gladio Comitatus cincti girt
with the Girdle or sword of their Earldoms, which he conceives to be an
Investiture.

All which may by the Records of this Kingdom be plentyfully illustrated by
very many instances, and by the Rolls of the Constables and Marshals of England
in which upon the March of the Army of King E.. 1. toward Scotland in the 28
year of that King, Humfridus de Bohun, Comes Hereford and Essex Constabularius
Angliae recognovit per os Nicho^ai de Segrave Baneretti sui and locum suum
tenentis se acquietari per servitium suum per Corpus suum in Exercitu presenti
Scotiae pro Constabularia in Comitatu Hereford, In Rotuli^ Humfridi de Bohun
Comitis Hereford and Essex de recognitione servitiorum Domini Regis Angliae pro
guerrae sua Sc^tie An. 28. E. 1.
Humfry de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex Constable of England, declared by
Sir Nicholas Segrave his Baneret and Lieutenant, that he was to be acquitted
for the Constabulary in the County of Hereford (where it seems some Manors or
Lands in that County were annexed to the said Office or held by grand
Serjeanty) by the Service of himself in the Army for Scotland, I tem idem Comes
recognovit per eundem Nicholaum Servitium trium feodorum Militum faciendum in
dicto Exercitu pro Comitatu Essex per Dominos Iohannem de Ferrariis Henricum de
Bohun et Gilbe^tum de Lindsey milites, Also the said Earl acknowledges by the
said Sir Nicholas Segrave ^^e Service of three Knights Fees to be performed in
the said Army for the Earldom of Essex (which shows also that then those
Ancient Earldoms of England were no other then by Tenure and Feudal) by John de
Ferrers, Henry de Bohun, and Gilbert de Lindsey Knights; And in the same
Constables Roll and at the same time Walter de Langton Bishop of C^ventry and
Li^chfield, recognovit et offert Servitium duorum Feudorum militum pro Baronia
sua faciendum per dominos Robertum Peverel, et Robertum de Watervile, milites,
acknowledged and offered the service of two Knights Fees, to be performed for
his Baronie, by Sir Robert Peverel, and Sir Robert Watervile Knights, and Mr.
Seldom is also of opinion that to hold of the King in Capite, and to have
Possessions as a Barony, and to be a Baron and sit with the rest of the Barons
in Parliament, are according to the Laws of those Times Synonimies.

And upon this and no other ground or foundation is built that as noble and
illustrious as it is ancient Pairage of the 12 pairs of France, all of whom
even the Earldom of Flanders now in the hands of the King of Spain do hold in
Capite or Sovereignty of the French King, and that great and eminent Electoral
College in Germany and the mighty* Princes thereof are no other than Tenants
in Capite and holding their vast Terrytories of the Empire by grand Serjeanry,
and have feuda antiqua concessa and acquisita generi and familiae connexam
habentes Principatibus et Territoriis suis dignitatem Electoralem, and have an
ancient Fee (or Territory) granted and acquired to their Issue and Family,
Rusdorff. vindiciae causae Pala^inae, 34.
and a dignity Electoral annexed to their Principalityes and Territoryes.

And it cannot with any reason or Authority be said or believed that the late
Charles King of Sweden could by the Treaty or Pacification at Munster have been
made a Prince of the Empire, or have had place or voice in their Diets, if he
had not had the Bishopprick of Breme and other Lands and Provinces as Fiefs of
the Empire in his Possession, to have made him a member thereof, and that the
Prince Elector Palatine who by reason of that Territory justly claims the
Vicariat of the Empire, had never been made the eighth Elector if he had not
had part of the Palatinate which he now enjoys.

For certainly if the care and wisdom of our Progenitors or Ancestors, could
not think it fitting to compose that high Court of Judicature of Strangers, or
grant them an Inheritance in it, which had no Lands or Possessions (to make
them a concernment, and to be more careful of the good of the Kingdom) as
Oliver or Dick of the Addresses would have done their Mungrel Scotch, that had
no Lands at all in England, but a stock of Knavery, but would rather bring in
such as had the best Estates, and holden by the most noble and serviceable
Tenures, in order to the defense of their King, and Country, and were the most
honorable, wise, and understanding, then such as had been Servants, or of a
low extraction and race of mankind, and by their folly and whimsies had not
long ago tossed and tumbled about poor England like a Football, which may
call to our remembrance that opinion or a lage of the Ancients, that Jupiter
subd^xit servis dimidium mentis, that God would not allow ^ervants or men little
better, or rudely and ignorantly educated, any more then to be half witted,
some of our late Levellers at the same time making a difference betwixt the
ancient great Estates, of the Peers and Barons of England, and that lesser
which they now enjoy to be an objection against the House of Peers, in
Parliament, for that now as they mistakenly surmised they could not as formerly
be a banck or balance betwixt the King and the people.

And howsoever that the temporal Barons as well those which were since the
middle of the reign o^ R. 2. created by Patent to be unum Baronum Angliae, as
in Sir John Beauchamps Patent to be Baron of Holt, or as many later to have
lo^um, vo^em, et sedem, in Parliamento, to have voice and place in the
Parliament, as those that hold per Baroniam, and that those that hold per
Baroniam, and were Barons by Tenure, do not come to Parliament but when they
are summoned by the Kings Writ, (as the Bishops also do not) and as in the Earl
of Bristols Case was adjudged in the late Kings time, are to have their Writs
of Summons ex debito justitiae, as of right due unto them, yet a first, second,
or third Summons, which is only and properly to give notice when and where the
Parliament begins cannot as Mr. William Prynne has learnedly proved, Mr.
Pryn* Plea for the House of Peers.
any way make or entitle any man which shall be so summoned to be a Peer or
Baron, that is not a Baron by prescription, or was not created, nor does that
Clause in the Patents of Creation, do or operate any more then that such new
created Barons, who are also Tenants in Capite, and as all the other Barons do
ought to do their Homage, shall be one of the Barons in Parliament, and have
voice and place there, deny that they that sit there by Tenure and per
Baroniam, do not sit there and enjoy their Honors and Dignities as Tenants in
Capite, and per Baroniam, or that those that come in by patent amongst them,
do enjoy their places as incorporated and admitted amongst them, and not as
Tenants in Capite, and being added to them, do help to continue the Society or
Court, though they be not of one and the same Original or Constitution, as
Preb^nd added ^o a Cathedral Church, may make them to be of the old
Constitution, but takes it not away, and as the grant of King H. 8. to the
Abbot of Tavestock, quod sit unus de Spiritualibus et Religiosis dominis
Parliamenti, could not have altered his former and better condition if he had
held any Lands per Baroniam; And though the Creations by Patents, may well
enough sustain the privileges of those that sit and were introduced by it, yet
the greater number, or as many of the Earls and Barons as hold per Baroniam,
such as the Earls of Arundel and Oxford, Lords Berkley, Mowbray, Abergaveny,
Fitz walter, Audley, De la ware, and that great number which were before R. 2.
and were not created by letters Patents, and had not the Clause of locum vocem
et sedem in Parliamento, will lose their Peerage, and right of sitting in
Parliament, if the other do not when as their Patents giving them, sedem vocem
et locum in Parliamento, do but entitle them to be of that House whereof the
other Earls and Barons were, and to be but as the former Barons were which hold
per Baroniam, and in Capite; As if a Lord of a Manor could create a man to be
one of his Coppy-holders, he should be no otherwise then as a Coppy-holder of
that Manor, and those Patent Lords do by their Patents hold their Honor and
Dignities in Capite, though it be not expressed in their Pa^ents, and should
pay as great a Releif as the other Earls and Barons do by Tenure, for no man
can sit there but as a Tenant in Capite, and acknowledging his Sovereign,
unless a Coordination should be supposed and that dangerous Doctrine again
encouraged, nor can these by Creation sit if the House should be dissolved, by
the change of the others Tenures, for that they were but Adjuncts and
Associates of them.

Which was so well understood by Sir Edw. Coke to be a shaking, if not an
over-turning of the foundation of that high and most honorable Court, or
Judicatorie, as in the Parliament of the 18 ^h. year of King James, in the
proposition which was then on foot to change the Tenures in Capite and by
Knight service, into free and common Socage, Coke 4 ^h. Part Iu^^^tutes ^it
Court of Wards.
he and some of the old Parliament men advised a Proviso to be inserted in that
intended Act of Parliament, that the Bishops notwithstanding that their
Baronies should be holden in Socage, should continue Lords of Parliament, and
in our late times in that great inundation of mistaken Liberty, when the
outrage of the vulgar and common people, greedily pursued the dictates of their
ignorance and fancy, and that after the House of Lords had been shut up, and
voted to be useless and dangerous, the persons of the Barons of England, which
the Law, and the reasonable and ancient, as well as modern Customs of England,
did never allow to be arrested, were arrested and haled to Prison. In the
seeking a remedy whereof some of the Baronage pleading their Privilege, it was
in Easter Term, Cremer versus Burnet in Banco Regis Pas. 1650.
1650. in the Kings or upper Bench, in the argument of the Countess of Rivers
Case, argued, and urged that all Tenures as well as the House of Lords were
taken away, so that the Court holding that the Privilege was not allowable,
for that she never had reference to the Parliament, or to do any public
service the Cause was adjourned.

Wherefore seeing that the custom of a Court is the Law of a Court, and the
interrupton of a Custom, Coke 9. report Abbot de s^^ata Marcellas case.
Prescription, or Franchise, very dangerous, and Cessante causa tollitur
effectus, the cause or foundation taken away, the effect or building fails,
that a Lord of a Manor is not able to create a Manor, or make a Lease-holder,
or Tenant of one Manor, to enjoy the same privileges which he did formerly,
and be incorporate and a Tenant in another Manor, a House with a Common
Appendent, or which was before belonging unto it, once pulled down, though
built up again, loses its Common and Prescription, or if a Coppyhold estate
come to the Lord by Forfeiture, Coke 4 Rep. 31.
Escheat, or otherwise, if he make a Lease, or otherwise, it is no more
grantable by Copy of Court Roll, or make a Feoffment upon condition, and after
enter for the Condition broken, it shall not be regranted by Copy.

Coke 6. Reports Higgens Case.
And if a man has libertyes by Prescription, and take letters Patents of them,
the matter of the Record drowns or takes away the prescription as was held in
33 H. 8. tit. precription Br. 102. etc.

Or if as in the Acts of Parliament for the dissolution of the Monasteries, the
King shall be before the Tenures be ordained to be in free and common Soccage,
made or derived to be in the actual Se^sin and Possession of all the Lands.

There will be cause and reason enough to make a stand or a pause, and inquire
further into it.

For if the subversion of Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service, will not
totally, or at once, ruin and dissolve the House of Peers in Parliament, or
put upon it a new constitution, it will not be good certainly to leave that
House, and most high and Honorable Court, and all its just Rights and
Privileges, which has already so much suffered by the Assaults and Batteries
of Faction and vulgar Frenzies, to an after question of moote point, whether or
no it be not dissolved or put upon a new Foundation.

And must needs be very dangerous, when as one of the three Estates under the
King (which is Supreme and not Coordinate) viz. the Bishops, and Lords
Spiritual being lopt off, the second which is the Lords Temporal, shall be but
either suspected, or doubted to have a being, and the third which is the House
of Commons, shall upon the next advantage, or distemper of that pa^^y which
lately gained so much by ^ supposing it to be the Sovereign, b^ ^ancied ^o be
above both it and the King, who as the head is above them both, and too much
gratify that late illegal and unwa^rentable opinion, and practice of the
Sovereignty of the House of Commons in Parliament, or that they alone are the
Parliament of England.

Bishops, being the third Estate in Parliament, of ever being restored or
admitted again into it, from which after a force and a protesta^ion solemnly
made against it, and twelve of them imprisoned for making of it, they were by
an Act of Parliament in an. 17. Car. Regis primi, prohibiting them as well as
all other Clergy men to intermeddle in any temporal affairs or proceedings,
excluded the House, had all their Estates afterward by an Ordinance of the
Lords and Commons without being cited or heard, and without the Kings consent,
and after his going from the Parliament, and in the midst of a War, and
Hostilities betwixt them, confiscated and taken from them, and by the taking
away of Tenures per Baroniam, being the only cause and reason of their sitting
there, and constituting them a third Estate, will now after his Majesty's happy
restoration, when the waves and rage of the people are so calmed and ceased, as
the Halcyon is preparing to build her nest, be more then ever made to be
altogether impossible.

Hinder and restrain our Princes from recovery Commerce thereof, will be
according to the rules of policy and good Government, as necessary as that of
David's revenging upon the Ammonites, the affronts done to his Ambassadors, the
Wars of our Edward the third, or H. 5. in France, of the great Gustavus King of
Sweden in Germany, or the now King of Denmarks, and Marquess of
Brandenburghes, Wars upon Charles late King of Sweden.

And when any of those occasions or necessities shall offer themselves, or
enforce a forinsecum serviciu^, or service in foreign wars, shall have none but
Auxiliaries and Hirelings to go along with them, when as several Acts of
Parliament do prohibit the enforcing Hoblers, which were a kind of light
horsemen, Archers, Trained Bands, and common Soldiers, to go out of their
Countries, unless it be in cases of necessity, which the common people know
not how to judge of, and the little Parliament so called in the beginning of
the year 1640. upon the invasion of an Army of ^acti^us Scots, and a letter
produced by the King that they had written for aid to the French King, did not
rightly apprehend, for it is not to be doubted, but that the cheerful and ready
aids upon all occasions given to the Kings of England by the Tenants in Capit^,
and Knight Service, and the Nobility and Gentry, and their Tenants Friend^, and
Followers, taking Arms, and fo^lowing the Royal Standard, was a great cause ^f
their Conquests in France, and Warlike atchivement in that and other parts of
the World, often beating back the incursions of the Scotch and Welsh, and
de^ending the borders.

The taking away of the Knights Fees or Regula quippe feudalis et firma est
quod Dominus nec in totum nec pro part minuere adimereve Jus vassallo quesitum
possit sine culpa eoque non convicto, Rusdor^f vindiciae Causae P^l^tinae ^85^
for it is a fixed and constant Rule in the Feudal Law, That the Lord cannot
neither in the whole nor in part without a forfeiture or conviction of his
Tenant, diminish or take away the Vassals Right, and it would be against Right,
Reason, and Equity not to give a Recompense in Ca^se of pulling down or fireing
a House in a Necessity of War to prevent an Enemy, but much more against it and
our Magna Charta in Case of no Necessity to Sacrifice without a just Recompense
given for it, the Estates and Rights of some to pacify the Fears of others,
and disturb and incumber the Estates of all or a great many to free the Estates
of a few, which would be a^ unjust, as for the Lords of Manors to make
Bylaws, forbidding the Services of their Tenants, and without any forfeitures
or convictions, grant or sell away their Lands or Copyhold Inheritances* to
Strangers, or dedicate the Profits thereof to the public wherein the owners or
Proprietors shall get none or very little share in it, or such as will be
impreceptible, and appeared to be so much against Law and Reason, as when in
the dissolution of the Abbyes and Monasteryes, the Nobility and great men who
had been Founders of many of them, or given a great part of the Lands thereof;
were to be the losers of that which should have reverted or come unto them if
they could not consist with the first Intentions; King H. 8. did take a care to
gratify many of them with great quantityes and Portions thereof, and to some
granted entire Priories and Nunneries of their Ancestors founding, as to John
Earl of Oxford the Priory of Colne, and Nunery of Hedingham in Essex and the
like to many others which might be here remembered

The Public Faith (which was wont to have so much care taken of it when she
borrowed in Capite and Knight Service, and of all the other parts of the people
who by Oaths of Supremacy, Protestations and Covenant were not to prejudice the
King, nor by their Covenant, any other in their Rights and Liberties will now
be broken, which when Livy a Heathen Writer and one that very well understood
affairs of State, upon the making of a Law at Rome to pacify a mutiny, that the
Prisoners for Debt should not be bound or fettered as the manner then was,
could say that Ingens vinculum fidei, a great Obligation or Bond of Faith
amongst men was that day broken, he would have without doubt said more were he
now a^ive as to our breach of Faith amongst men, but a great deal more (if he
had been Christian) as to God Almighty.

Lindimannus in dedic^^ Exercitat, ^eudi and Roth usal in Synops; ad L^ctorem..
1.
Take away not only the Honor, but the public Benefits of those Tenures and
feudal Rights which are so highly and justly esteemed in all other Kingdoms and
Principalityes which are so happy as to live under Monarchy the best of
Governments, as they can give them no other Character then that, Jura Regnorum
Ducatuum Marchionatuum adeoque totius Imperij Leges Fundamental^s ac nervi
quibus Monarchiae Romanae cum ipso senescente mundo languescentis lutei pedes
colligantur in^iis continentur, Calvin in (...) D^d^cator. Juris prudent* fudal.
Therein are contained the Laws and Rights of Kingdoms, Dukedoms, Ma^quisates,
the Fundamental Laws of the Empire, and the Nerves and Sinews by which the
Empire, languishing in the old age of the world has been sustained, And that
Feuda Feudorumque Jura ^^delitatem and ^idem publica^^ pacem and incolumnatem
Communis Patriae firmant ^irmissimum Militiae contra Communes Reipublicae
hosts ne^vum ac praesidium su^ministrat adeoque fulc^a Germanico Romani
Imperi^ (...) desiderant, Feuds and the Rights th^^^of do six and consolidate
the Fidelity, public Faith, Peace and welfare of the Commonwealth, and
administreth the greatest help and strength in war against the Common Enemy,
and is worthy to be called the Prop of the German and Roman Empire.

Make our Nobility and Gentry, who have Roman Eagles flew, to be like the
Roturiers or Paysants o^ France, and a reproach or hissing to all Natioas, or
like David's Ambassadors, when the Children of Ammon had misused them, and
shaved the one half of their Beards, and cut off their Garments in the middle,
2 Samuel 10*4, 5.
even to their Buttocks, and to be put behind all but the Dutch and Switzers,
the former of which, do Trade under Taxes, and Excise and the latter are but
the Mercenaries and Hirelings of the French and Spanish Kings in their Wars and
Hostilities, and ran^king us with them, and those little and despicable
Commonwealths of Luca, and Geneva, cast us into the Giddy, and at last woeful
Presidents and Consequences of the unquiet headed Argentinians, Lindorians,
Citizens of Siena, Genoa, and Florence, who by ruining and rooting up the
Nobility and Gentry, and making three rancks and degrees of their Citizens,
some great, some mean, and the rest of the vulgar, the two last putting out the
first, cast themselves into a Circle of blood and misery, out of which nothing
but their former

Occasion the loss and ruin of purchasers, and Mony-lenders and enlarge their
complaints of double and treble Feoffments and Mortgages which (by the disuse
of the Court of Wards, and finding of Offices after the death of Tenants in
Capite, and by Knight Service, have been more than formerly and wherein some of
our late Reformers were known more to have exercised their wits than their
Consciences) concealed, and Dormant, and fraudulent Assurances carried in the
Pockets of some to pick the Pockets of others, which by reason of the Tenures
in Capite, and finding of Offices wherein the Evidences being produduced, and
many Times found, did not only find but declare what Estate the deceased was
seized of, and if the truth did not then appear, which could hardly be hid,
when as the Jury were commanded by the Writ of Diem clausit extremum, to
inquir^ upon their Oaths of what Estate the last Ancestor dyed seized of, and
that the vigilance and cares of the Feodaries and Escheators who were also to
be present to attend them, would cause them to be the more careful and if the
fraud of the Heir should be able to make its way, or escape thorough them, the
Estate found in the Office would after prove to be an Evidence against them,
and either overthrow or perplex the Knavery of such wicked designs.

The Recompense of 100000 l. per Annum Magna Charta, and the enforcing of 19
men in every 20 to bear burdens which nothing at all appertains to them, will
not be adaequate to the loss of a great part of the Kings Revenue which did
serve for the maintenance of his Crown and Dignity, and to exempt and ease the
Subjects of extraordinary Taxes and Assessements, which the Necessity of
Princes for the good and Defense of the Kingdom must otherwise bring upon them;
Nor to the want of Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, and the Services
and Incidents belonging unto them (being a certain and never failing Defense of
himself and the Kingdom) Castle-guard License of Alienations giving him notice
and continuing him safe in the Change of his Tenants (being so necessary to
Government as some have been grievously fined for alienating their Lands in
Capite without it) Marriage and Dependancy of the Heirs which hold of him,
Livery and Reliefs, Grand Serjeantyes, and a great part of the Honor and
Privileges which all other neighbor Kings and Princes are neither desired to
part with, nor can he persuaded so much to lessen themselves and their
Regalities.

For gold and Silver and precious Stones or any thing less than the whole
Kingdom of England it self is not of value or to be compared to the Honor of a
King, and the homage and duty of his Subjects, the Gratitude, Faith and
Promises of their Ancestors which should descend to them with the Lands holden
by those Tenures, whenas Omnes habent Causam a primo et ex tun^, non ut ex
nunc, are bounden to the Cause which obliged their first Ancestor and
Progenitor, and are to consider that it is now, Per Coll^g. Bononiens. inter
Consil. Francisci Carti Consilium 50. et Rusdorff. in vindicits causae
Palatinae.
as it was then, a most ready means and help which did and does naturally and
kindly arise for the Defense of themselves and the Kingdom, for as it is not
the weight of an inestimable Dyamond or Ruby that makes either of them to be
better than a Flint or any other Stone, but the luster, virtue, and scarceness
of them; and that a greater poise or weight of a man makes not a Solomon an
Alexander Sir-named the great, or an Aristotle, but that all men and things are
to be esteemed according to the virtues and Excellencyes which are in them, so
it will not be the yearly Profit in money which was made of the Wardships
primer Seisins, Liveryes, and Incidents which belong to those Tenures, but the
Homage Duty gratitude and necessary Attendance in War, not only of those that
held immediately of the King, but those that were the mediate Tenants, and came
also with the immediate, the grand and mutual Tie betwixt the King and his
people and the Regality, Prerogative, intrinsical, and true worth and value of
them, when there should be any use of those necessary Defenses of the King and
his Kingdom, in making a diversive War, or succouring his Friends and Allies,
which are not seldom or were in more heroic times justly accounted to be as
Outworks, Ante Murales, or Bulwarks of the Kingdom, and that the Rate which is
now offered for those Tenures, are but like a Tender, or Offer to give the
weight in Gold for an incomparable, not to be got again and unvaluable Meddal,
or for Aarons Breast Plate, Moses rod, or the Scepters of Princes, if they could
have been purchased at all, and by weight.

It will be as unsafe as unusual to take l. per Annum (his own Income by
Licenses of Alienation deducted) for the clear Profit of the Court of Wards
which the Lord Cottington when he was Master of that Court, did but a year
before the Troubles make as much by it, besides the many great and royal
Prerogatives which he shall lose to gain more mischiefs and Inconveniencyes to
himself and his People, then at the present can be instanced or numbered.

per Annum to be charged upon all men's Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments
holden in Capite, or Socage by Copyhold, Leases for Lives, or Tenants at Will,
or for years will be against right, Reason, Justice and Equity, as well as
unwarranted by any hitherto Law or Custom of England to make 19 parts of 20
(for so much if not more will probably be the odds) that were not liable to
Wardships, or any imagined Inconveniences which might happen thereby, not only
to bear their proportionable part of the general Assessements for War but a
share also in the burden of others where it could never be laid upon them and
wherein they, or the major part of them by more than two in three have no Lands
in Fee simple, Fee tail, or by Leases for 100 years or any longer Term nor are
never like to be purchasers of any Lands at all and if they had money to do it
are not likely to buy Inheritances, and if inheritances, not Capite or Knight
Service Lands, when there is by more than 9 parts in 10 of Socage or Copyhold
Lands to be purchased, were not, nor are like to be in any danger of Wardships,
or under any fear or Apprehensions, of it and render the Capite Land three or
four years purchase dearer than it was wont to be, and the Socage Lands three
or four years purchase the cheaper, only to free the Nobility, Gentry and men
of greatest Riches and Estates in the Kingdom, which are subject to those small
Burdens which are only said to be in Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service.

Or if laid upon the Moiety of the Excise etc. or any other native or Inland
Commodity will fall upon those that have no Land as well as those which have,
as upon Citizens Mechanics, Children, Servants, and the like, and heaviest
upon the poorer sort of people, and be a burden which the lowly Cobbler and
reverend Applewomen, the Botcher and Stockingmenders, in their pitiful
subterraneous Tenements, and the poor Women which in the Streets do cry Fruits
and Fish by a double retail, and pay twelve pence a week for the loan of twenty
shillings, and pawn a Petticoat for security, the Chimney Sweepers, Brooom-men
and Beggars cannot escape.

Will be no good way of raising money, Dutch in their grand necessities of War
where they have but few Gentlemen, will not be for the honor of England, and
the Nobility and Gentry of England, to have their provisions of War and Defense
arise out of so low a business as A^e and Beer, and make the Brewers and
Ale-house-keepers, to be as it were the Tenants in Capite, and to supply the
Knight Service in the exchange, of that which is but pretended to be a
Greivance for a most certain and undeniable greivance, and for one Greivance if
it could be proved to be one for a Seminary and complication of Greivances and
to take away wardships from the estates of 1* in every 20. of the people when
they should happen and make 19 in every 20 to be every day in every year in
wardship to an Excise upon a considerable part of their daily Dyer and
Sustenance.

That small Sum of 100000 l. per an. may Naples, and France, and this Kingdom,
can tell us, do sometimes happen, and the wisdom of Kings and Princes do use to
suspect and provide against, or if some other unlucky difference (which God
avert) should happen betwixt the King and his people, may fall into the Case or
Example of the Customs, and Poundage, and Tonnage, in the beginning of the
Reign of his late Majesty, which being stopped by the Parliament, and declared
against, did put him into un^it necessities, and made those unhappy
controversies and misunderstandings betwixt him and many of the shorter
Parliaments, which disabled him from aiding his Friends and Allies, and was the
beginning of our never enough to be lamented national Calamities and
Reproaches; and proved to be the ruin and disturbance also of a great part of
Christendom.

Such an imposed or continued excise, will Brewers and Ale men, and those that
gather and pay it in the first place, be as all excises commonly are, double
charged upon the people, who instead of 100000 l. per an. laid upon their Beer
and Ale, will by the abuse which will be committed therein, as to quantity and
quality, lay and charge another 100000 l. per an. upon the people, and the
Brewer in every 6 d. or 12 d. Excise to be laid upon every Barrel of six
shillings Beer, will be sure to make his Beer so, as he shall get double, if
not more than that Excise amounts unto.

And as it could never have been at first settled without the awe and help of
Garrisons, sixty or ninety thousand pounds per mensem, or the month, which will
be more troublesome and chargeable than 52 Escheators, and as many Feodaries,
who may be men of wisdom Integrity, and good Estates in their Countries; for
there will be a great difference between the charge or yearly Revenue of the
Court of Wards, which is made up of many small parts, and favorable and easy
Rents, Fines and compositions, quietly gathered and paid in by the Justice and
Order of a Court of Wards, and honest and responsable Officers, and 90000 l.
per annum being to be Collected by this Excise at the charge of as much for
every month in the year, from the ruder and most ignorant part of the people,
who will (not Tributorum causam quaerere sed quaeri) sooner murmr and
complain of Taxes or Tributes, than rationally enquire into the causes of them,
and by a weeping and woeful Arithmeticque of the poor, and inferior sort of
people in every County be reckoned to be no great part or piece of Husbandry to
purchase off 90000 l. per annum, yearly charges to free those that held in
Capite, at the rate of 100000 l. (or rather 200000 l. per annum,) which is to
be paid out of the Excise, and pay 90000 l. per mensem, or 60. or 30000 l. per
mensem besides for collecting of it, besides the free quarterings, and other
insolences of the common Soldiers.

And by making that part of the Excise Olivers Sadle had been put upon the
peoples backs, have put them into multitudes of Complaints; And in the Reign of
King James, and that of our late blessed Martyr King Charles, before he was
driven from his Throne, would have been but only in the advising of it more
Capital and offensive, than that which was charged upon the late Earl of
Strafford, and made more in one single fault or crime, than all the
accumulations of Crimes against him could arrive unto, and was so dreadful to
this Nation, and before hand hated, as they were afraid of every thing that
tended that way; So as in a Parliament in the Reign of King James, some of the
House of Commons having been informed that the King had employed a Gentleman
into Holland to inquire concerning the manner and manage of their Excise (which
as afterward appeared upon examination, was but for curiosity and learning
sake) were so troubled at it, as the Gentleman hardly escaped a vote, whether
he should not be most severely punished.

And whether Excise or not Excise, will if those Tenures in Capite, and by
Knight Service, which have hitherto been as the Life and Land-guards of the
King and his people should be taken away, some other ways of means are to be
found out to supply it, for the people being sworn by their Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy, to assist and defend the King and all his Rights and
Jurisdictions, if they would not defend him, and take a care of those Oaths,
will likely be willing enough to defend themselves in defending him; Or if they
should not, their Representatives in Parliament, would as they have for this
twenty years last past, not only assesse them, but make them find Men, Horses
and Arms, for the defense of the Kingdom, which has hitherto been a costly
Knight Service, and so far exceeding forty days Service at their own charges,
as they have besides the outrages, free quarterings, and plunder of Soldiers,
and loss of their debts by the ruin and death of their Debtors, born the
trouble of forty Six months continual Assessements far exceeding the Escuage
and all the Taxes in 600 years before laid upon our Forefathers, and the
question will then be of no great difficulty, whether will be the better, the
old way or the new?

And when the King shall be as he ought to be the Judge of dangers or
necessities, and want the Assistance of his Subjects, and it cannot when the
Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service shall be taken away, be pretended, as
it was in the Case of the Ship Money that his Tenures and Wardships, were to
defend him and the Kingdom in cases of danger and invasion, until a Parliamens
could be Assembled.

Or shall as his late Royal Father was in the later end of the year 1642. when
the long shut up Janus Temple had by the Salij or Priests of Mars been against
his will broken open, and the miseries or troubles of War overwhelmed him and
his loyal people, and the Plowers made Furrows upon his back, being hindered
from putting his Commissions of Array in Execution, be told by the Parliaments
Declaration, that his Tenures in Capite, and their incidents, (and not his
Commission of Array,) were the allowed and ordinary means for his defense,
until more could be obtained from the Parliament, and shall have no military
Tenures but only 100000 l. per annum, or if that should fa^l him.

Or he shall need to transport an Army into an Enemies Country, to keep off, or
hinder an Invasion, succor or back his Allies, whilst they imbroil or weaken
his common enemies, shall be told that he may not impresse any men or
Soldiers, to go out of their Countries, unless he can do it by order of
Parliament, or persuade them that there is a great necessity.

Whether he will not when the people shall cry unto him as the woman that had
in the siege of Samaria, boiled her Child and eat of it, Help my Lord O King,
shall not be able to do any more, then answer, as he did, Whence shall I help
thee, 2 Reg, 6.26, 27. And finds himself as his noble Progenitor King Ed. the
3. publicly declared in a Writ of Error, wherein Blanch, the Wife of Thomas
Wake, of Lidal, was Complainant that he was Ratione dignitatis in exhibitione
justitiae quibuscunque de regno debtor and ad statut^ Progenitorum facta, 29.
E. 3. Coram Rege.
observanda vinculo juramenti astrictus, by reason of his Kingly dignity, a
Debtor to every one of his Kingdom, in the doing of Justice, and bound by his
oath to observe the Laws of his Progenitors, in the care of himself and his
people, whom he is by his Coronation Oath bound to defend and protect, and of
the Salus Populi, ne quid detrimenti Respublica capiat, for the safety of his
People, and to the end that the Commonwealth may receive no damage, be enforced
as it were to raise and keep a standing Army always, in readiness with
Garrisons, to protect both himself and his people.

And then it may be easily experimented whether is the better, to have some
that ought to bear the charges and burdens of their Tenures, if they will enjoy
their Lands, or to have the whole Nation groan and lament under the burden of
maintaining a standing Army and Garrisons, by public Assessements, or to have
the Nobility and Gentry of England, and five or ten thousand men, and all those
that hold of them, to attend them, and be always in readiness by the
obligation of their Tenures, without any charge to the public, or thirty
thousand unruly Soldiers to be yearly or for ever maintained at the charge of
the People.

An instance whereof we need not go further to look for, then in Holland and
Zeland, whenas the Emperor Charles the fifth, liveing out of the Country and
Governing them by Regents or Deputies, and fearing least that Nation in re
militari longo usu bellorum exercita, being by long experience become Warlike,
and holding their Lands by Knight service, simul ingenio soli quod natura
depressum ac uliginosum tum incilibus passim Fossis lac^busque ac paludibus
intercissum haud san^ faciles invasuro aditus confisa ad turbas ac seditionum
praemia converteret, together with the nature of the soil, which was flat and
moorish, and cut into many Ditches, Lakes, and little Islands, would not easily
give him entrance if he should be put to invade them, or send Forces to
suppress any rebellion, or that they confiding in such their strengths, might
prove seditious, and abuse the benefits and intention of their Tenures, Jus^^n.
lib 1.
did in a policy perhaps, such as Cyrus is said to make use against the
Lydians, by giving way to their Vices and Luxury; release (if Cornelius
Neostadius be not mistaken) to them some of their military services (for to
this day the Emperors of Germany, as their Countryman the learned Grotius
confesses, Cornelius Neostadius de ^eud success. apud Hollandie 4.
do claim the benefit of those ancient feudal rights) ea tamen lege ut fundi
Clientelares publicis sunctionibus quibus hactenus immunes fuissent in posterum
non secus atque patrimoniales obnoxij existerent, upon condition that those
Lands so holden should not as hitherto be free from public charges and taxes,
but hereafter should do as others did.

Which has done both sides no good, for those Dutch afterward falling into
discontents with some of their feirce and over rigid Governors, did by
necessity and for want of their Tenures and ancient domestic military Aids
betake themselves to foreign Forces as they could hire them, and have by force
and continual wars in that Country, which has for more then sixty years been
a Cockpit for all Christendom, and the hireling Soldiers of it not only
brought great miseries and neighbor wars upon themselves and all
Christendom, but so tired the Kings of Spain his Successors, and wasted the
wealth and profit of his West Indies, as he has been enforced to make a peace
with them, and allow them to be a free State as they call it, and a Republique.

Are themselves become of a very Active and Warlike Nation, so Lourdish and
unwarlike, as they are only found to be men of Trade, Fishing, and Navigation,
filling their Country with many strong fortified walled Cities, Towns,
Citadels, and Garrisons, and living under the shelter of a constant, well paid,
and disciplined Army, do by the cunning of an universal Trade and Commerce
with almost all the World, and out doing all Nations herein, carry the E^cise
on their backs, and make the States and Richer part (but not the multitude or
poorer) the better for it, and yet sometimes do find the want of their former
Tenures, and the readiness of their aids as in the late wars of Denmark,
where they were concerned to adventure through many dangers to aid the Danes
against the Swedes, found their design more out of order then it would
otherwise have been, for that the Seamen where they do not use to impresse,
would not be persuaded to go at all without a greater pay then ordinary, And
whether that discharge of the Emperor Charles the 5 th. did absolve them from
their Clientelage or holding of the Empire or no? it is well known that they
keep all or most of the incidents belonging to Tenures in Capite, as their
Laudemia's or Reliefs, Investitures, Fines for Alienation, and the like, and
living under those great burdens, and otherwise intolerable Taxes,
Contributions, and Excises, which are made only tolerable by their hostilities
and depraedations exercised upon Spain and its Dominions, do notwithstanding
almost in every Frontier Town in the winter time, make their Inhabitants hold
by a kind of Service as to their own defense, in the alotment of every house or
street, to break daily a proportion of Ice in times of Frost in their Town
Ditches.

England, which were built and endowed at the great charge of the Founders,
with large and perpetual Annual Revenues in many Parishes and places in
England, and the great number of Charities and charitable uses, which since the
Protestant Religion established in England, have by wills and Testaments been
given to the poor, should be taken away and put to other uses, as those loving
and tender hearted Statesmen, the late committee of Slavery rather than Safety,
or the Rump Assembly, were about to do and put into some Godly Treasury, and
they that must pay a great deal more in their Rates and Assessements for the
poor, left to make Affidavits, that the remedy was taken away, and a Disease
put in the place of it.

The King who is Pater Patriae, the great and careful Parent and Father of his
people, and who by God Almighty is trusted with the Welfare, Protection, and
Defense, of them, shall only have that part of the Court of Wards, and kind of
Prerogative left unto him to provide and take care for Lunatiques and Idiots

Shall not now enjoy that ancient and well performed trust of protecting the
Fatherless, nor have that power in looking to Orphans, and their Estates in
their Minorities, as the Dutch and States of Holland have, who (though the
people under the Jurisdiction of that Republique, do hold neither by Knight
Service of it, nor can be well said to hold in Soccage, or as Fie^^ Roturier,
where they have so little Land, but by Navigation rather and Commerce) have
their Wees Kamer, or Court of Orphans, do not think it fitting to trust them
and their Estates to the Mothers, (although they have thereby a Custom and
Pacta antenuptialia, Peckius de pactis antenuptialibus.
a Joyntenancy and power of dispose to their own kindred) nor the kindred on
either side to make their profit by them, and sub amici fallere nomen, under a
color of love and kindness, either ruin them, or leave them to ruin
themselves, by selling them and others good bargains.

And shall not have so much privilege as the City of London has, who by
ancient Custom have an absolute Court of Wards in the City, though it pass
under the name of the Court of Orphans, as may appear by their ancient
Customs, viz. The Mayor and Aldermen that are for the time, Customs and usages
in London in an old M^nuscript in French in Guild Hall.
by custom of the City shall have the Wardships and Marriages of all the Orphans
of the said City after the death of their Ancestors, although the same
Ancestors do hold in the City of any other Lord by what Service soever.

Ought to inquire of all the Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, within
the said City, appertaining to such Orphans, and safely keep them to the use
and profit of such Orphans, or otherwise commit the same Orphans, together with
their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, to others their Friends by
su^ficient Surety found of Record in the Chamber of Guild Hall, to maintain
conveniently the said Orphans during their nonage, and their Lands and
Tenem^nts to repair, and their said Goods and Chattels safely to keep, and
thereof to render a good and loyal account before the said Mayor and Aldermen,
to the profit of the same Infants when they shall come to their age, or when
they shall be put to a mystery, or shall marry by the advice of the said Mayor
and Aldermen.

And that in all Cases except that it be otherwise ordained and disposed for
the same Orphans, or for their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, by the
express words contained in the Testaments of their Ancestors.

And no such Orphans ought to be married without the assent of the said Mayor
and Aldermen, and also where Lands or tenements, Goods and Chattels, within the
City, are devised to an Infant within Age living with his Father, and that such
an Infant is no Orphan, yet by usage of the said City, the said Lands and
Tenements, Goods and Chattels, shall be in custody of the Mayor and Aldermen,
as well as of Orphans to maintain and keep them to the use and profit of the
same Infant, except that the Father of the Infant, or some other of his
Friends, will find sufficient surety or Record to maintain and keep the said
Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, to the use and profit of the said
Infant, and thereof to render a good and loyal account as is aforesaid.

And may if the Kings Court of Wards shall be dissolved, and the Tenures in
Capite Engine and piece of Artillery of the factious, who made great use of
Petitions, and many a causeless complaint to overturn any ancient useful
constitution of the Kingdom, and well approved Rights and Liberties of the
people in general or of some men in particular.

Will renverse and overturn many of the Lazarus out of the grave, or their
winding Sheets.

It will be against the Peoples Oaths of

And against their own safety to weaken the hands and power of their Prince,
that should protect and defend them, and commit the trust of protecting and
defending the oppressed poor to the oppressing Rich, the Chickens to the Kites,
and the harmless Lambs to the cunning Foxes, or greedy Wolves; the weak and the
Innocent to such as shall endeavor to hurt them, and charge and burden
themselves and their Posterities, with a Rent and excise for mischiefs and
inconveniences enough in perpetuity.

Take away that power and ready means the Church of God and the Clergy, and
people, firm peace and unity in God according to his power and to administer
indifferent and upright Justice, by forsaking a certain and willing way of
defense, for a constrained or uncertain, and by taking away the best, for so
much of it, of all defenses, for that which in the very birth of it, is justly
feared to be the worst.

Draw a Curse rather than any expected in Capite and by Knight service, as by
seeking to purchase their Homages, and obedience to their Prince, and a better
and long experimented, and prosperous way of defense of themselves and
posterity, shall seek or endeavor to break the reiterated oaths and contracts
of all their Ancestors, to be but a part and for a short time of the general
defense, of the Kingdom like a Lifeguard, at hand to skirmish and make head
against an Enemy, until a Parliament can be called, and have time to consult
of the means, or the whole Nation summoned for help and imbodied, and will be a
perjury more sinful, then that of the Children of Israel, to the deceitful and
turn-coat Gibeonites, and may be more severely punished by God Almighty, upon
the hereafter withering Estates of those men, and their generations, who shall
not only break their own oaths, and faith, but the oaths and faith also of
their more grateful Ancestors who would never have done it.

Will make our common people, which blessings as they did in these last twenty
years, when they wrested the Sword out of their Kings hands (and by the power
of those two great Devils Interest and Reformation in the abuse, and not right
use of the words, which may well wear the name of those Devils which were
called Legion) to cut murder, pillage and rob the honest and loyal part of the
the people, and lasciviendo in quaerelas and quaestiones, playing the wantons
in their complaints, and evil practices, which they found to be so beaten a
track or rode of prosperity, to the journeys end of their wickedness, complain
of every thing that likes not their fancies, or ignorance, and from Wardships
and Tenures, return again in their ingratitude to God and man, to their late
design of taking away Tithes, and Coppyholds, by enforcing the Lords to take a
year or two years purchase for the rights of their Manors, and Copyhold
Estates, and from thence to the Act of Parliament, intended in our Reformers
late deformations, to abate Rents where the Landlords were not so well affected
as the Tenants, to make or maintain War against their Sovereign.

And if there had nothing been said or written, as we hope there is sufficient
to justify the Innocence or right use of Tenures in Capite and by Knight
service, it had been enough (as it was to the virtuous Seneca, to be persecuted
and put to death by Nero, who loved all Ill and hated all Good) that Cromwell,
that Minotaure, to whom in his Lab^rinth of Subtilties, Hypocrisy, and abused
Scripture, our Laws and Liberties were daily sacrificed by the Flattering
Addresses of a company of Knaves or Fools, very well know after he had cut
down the Royal Oak, and blasted all the lofty Pines and Firres in Druina's
Forest, procured an Act for renouncing and disannulling the Title of our now
most gracious Sovereign, and his Brothers to the Crown of England, and their
Fathers Dominions, and all other which should pretend any Title or Claim, from,
by, or under them, or any of them, how much it concerned his most wicked
purposes of establishing that which should be called a Commonwealth, under His
and his posterities Protectorship, and most Arbitrary and Tyrannical
Government, by a perpetual standing Army of 30000. Horse and Foot, an
intolerable Excise, and monthly Assessements to pay them and set up the other,
or the other House instead of a House of Peers, made up for the most part of
Mechanics transformed into Colonels and Major Generals, and some other who
might have been better Englishmen then to have been catched in the Trap of
Ambition, or Titles made the wrong way; By which he might check the growing
Factions in the House of Commons, and destroy their pretended Soveraignity, Tax
and Rack the estates of all men, and more then a Grand Seignior or Turk ever
durst adventure upon; Command as he should please the Bodies and Souls of the
people, take away every Surculus or little Sprigs that might grow out of the
remaining Sap of that mighty Tree, and every thing that might either contribute
to it, or remain but as Relics of the Regal Estate and peoples happiness, did
by an Ordinance as he called it of himself and his Council the 12 th. of April
1654. not only ordain an Union betwixt the two Kingdoms, but that all the
Nation of Scotland should be discharged of all Fealty, Homage, and Allegiance
which is or should be pretended to be due to his Majesty that now is, and that
neither he nor any of his Royal Brothers, or any deriving from the late King
should hold Name, Title, and Dignity of King of Scotland, and that all
Herritors, Proprietors, and Possessors of Lands in Scotland, should hold their
Lands of their respective Lords by and under their accustomed yearly Boones and
Annual services, without rendering any Duty or Vassallage, and discharged them
of all military services, and well knowing that their old Customs being taken
away, the Court-Barons would also fail, did by another Ordinance erect new
Court-Barons for them.

And having made store of Slaves in that Kingdom, made all the have he could
to complete his wickedness in this, and did the 17 th. day of September 1656.
procure his houses of Parliament or good will and pleasure, rather to do as
much for England, and take away all Tenures in Capite and by Knight service,
and all Homages, and Reliefs, and not only do all he could to destroy the heirs
thereof, but cut the Nerves and let out the blood of a most noble and ancient
Monarchy.

But if there could be any hopes in the Exchange of those innocent as useful
Tenures in Capite, and Knight service, of bettering the condition of the
Commonwealth and people, increasing their Liberties and content, and to
maintain and keep them in a most happy peace and plenty, (which will never be
done if the Sword and Scepter of the King shall only be like the Ensigns and
Ornaments of Regality, and made only to represent a Majesty) there will
another difficulty stand in the way and meet the design of doing it by Act of
Parliament) and offer this question to consideration; Whether an Act of
Parliament, and the consent of the House of Peers, and the desire of all the
Commons and People of England, which must be understood to be signified by
their Representatives, and the Roy le veult, the King giving life and breath,
and being to it can in the great power and respect which ever has been by the
Law, and justly ought to be always attributed unto it. Take away Tenures in
Capite, and by Knight service, grand and Petit Sejeanties, Homage, and all
other incidents belonging unto them, or the right which the Nobility, and
Gentry, and mesne Lords have to enjoy their Tenures by Knight service, and the
incidents thereunto belonging. Which howsoever that in many other things it
has been said, that Consensus tollit errorem, and Conventi^ vincit Legem,
Consents and Agreements are more binding then Law, will by the Laws of God, and
Nature, and Nations, and the Laws of this Kingdom, and the opinion of some
eminent and learned Sages and Lawyers thereof, be resolved in the Negative, viz.

CHAP. VII. That Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service, holden of the King,
and the Homage and Incidents thereunto appertaining, and the Right of the Mesne
Lords cannot be dissolved or taken away by any Act of Parliament.
FOR that Gods Law, and the Law of Nature, and Nations, have taken care not
only to preserve the Rights of Soveraignity, and the means and order of
Government, but the Rights and property of every particular Subject, and do
prohibit all injustice, and it is a Maxim, or Aphorism undeniable that Laws
made against the Word of God, and the Laws of Nature or which are impossible,
or contra bonos mores, right Reason, or natural Equity, will be void in
themselves, be the Seal or Stamp of Authority never so eminent.

And therefore, if as the Law has often determined, that the Kings Charters
are void, and not pleadable by Law, when they are repugnant to the Laws, Acts
of Parliament, Maxims, and reasonable Customs of the Realm, that it is not in
the Kings power by his Charter or last Will and Testament, to grant away the
Crown of England, to another Prince, or Potentate, as it was resolved in the
Case of the supposed grant of King Edward the Confessor, to William Duke of
Normandy, and that grant of King John to the Pope, to hold England, and Ireland
of him, and that notwithstanding the grant made by William the Conqueror, to
Hugh Lupus, of the Earldom of Chester, tenendum per gladium, and ita libere, as
the King himself did hold England, the Earldom of Chester, was holden of the
King, that the grant of King H. 2. to the Monks of St. Bartholomews in London,
that the Prior and the Monks should be as free in their Church, 13 H. 6.
as the King was in his Crown, was adjudged to be void, for that the Prior, and
the Monks were but Subjects, and that by the Law, the King may no more denude
himself of his Royal Superiority over his Subjects, then his Subjects can
renounce or avoid their subjection to their King, and the reason why such or
the like grants of the King by his Charter are void, is not in regard it was
granted without the consent of the people in Parliament, but that it was in
disherison of his Crown, and disabling himself to govern; or if he should by
his grant exempt a man from paying his Debts, or maintenance of hise Wife and
Children, the joining of the Lords and Commons with him in an Act of Parliament
would not make such a Law to be binding or obligatory.

And therefore the King cannot says Dier release or grant a Tenure in Capite
to any Subject, Dier 44. when King Edward the 3 d. granted to the Black Prince
his Son the grant of the Duchy of Cornwall, all Wards, Marriages, and Reliefs,
non obstante, the Kings Prerogative, it was adjudged that the Prince could not
seize a Ward which held of the Kings Ward, 43. Assise plit. 1.
because it belonged to the King by his Prerogative.

And in 2 R. 2. Robert de Hauley Esquire, being arrested and pursued upon an
Action of Debt, in Westminster Abbey, where he took Sanctuary, Rot Parl 2 R. 2
111.72, 73, and 74.
was in the tumult slain at the high Altar when the Priest was singing high
Mass; And the offense and breach of privilege (as it was then pretended to
be) complained of in Parliament by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the rest
of the Prelates and Clergy, and prayed that due satisfaction and amends might
be made of so horrible a fact; It was opposed by the Lords and Commons, and
they vouched Records, and called to witness the Justices and others that were
learned in the Laws of the Land, that in the Church of England, it has not
been accustomed, nor ought to have Immunity for Debt or Trespass or other Cause
whatsoever, except for Crime only; And certain Doctors of Divinity, Canon and
Civil Laws being thereupon sworn and examined before the King himself to speak
the plain truth, said upon mature and sound deliberation, that in case of Debt,
Account, or Trespass, where a man is not to lose life or member, no man ought
to have Immunity in holy Church, and said further (in the highest expressions
those times could afford) that God saving his Perfection, the Pope saving his
Holiness, nor any King or Prince can grant such a privilege, and that if the
King should grant such a privilege, the Church is and ought to be favored and
nourished ought not to axcept of it, whereof offense or occasion of offense may
arise, for it is a sin and occasion of offense (says the Record) to delay a
man willingly from his Debt, or the just recovery of the same; And if an Act of
the Commons alone, or of the Lords alone or of both together, cannot amount to
an Act of Parliament, the King himself cannot grant away his Regality, or
Power, or means of governing by his Charter, or any Act which he can singly
do, his concurrence with both the Lords and Commons can no more make an Act to
confirm that which should not be done or granted, then his own grant or
Charter could have done, or than if he and the House of Commons only had made
an Act; As it appears by the Ordinance which the Lords Ordainers, so from
thence called, did obtain from Edward 2. whereby he delegated much of his Regal
Authority unto them, which was afterward complained of in Parliament, made
void, and the Authors or Lords Ordainers punished; for it has been clearly
asserted by eminent and learned Judges and Sages of the Law, as the Lord chief
Justice Hobart, Sr. Francis Bacon, and Sr. Jonh Davis, Attorney General to King
James in Ireland, that the Superlative power of Parliaments above all but the
King, is in some things for restrained, as it cannot enact things against Right
Reason, or common Right, or against the Laws of God or Nature, that a man
shall be Judge in his own Case, as that the King shall have no Subsidies
whereby to defend himself and his people, that Children shall not obey their
Parents, and the like.

And that Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service, are of so transcendent a
nature, and so radically in the Crown and Fundamental Laws, Case of
Imposi^ions*
as no Act of Parliament can take it away or alter it, and are so inseparable
as Sr. John Davis says that in a Parliament holden in England in the latter
end of the reign of King James, it was resolved by the House of Commons, that
the Wit of man could not frame an Act of Parliament whereby all Tenures of the
Crown might be extinguished.

And Judge Hutton, who in the Case of the Ship Money, would allow the King no
more Prerogative then what could not be denied him, did publicquely deliver it
for Law which in that great and learned Assembly of Judges and Lawyers was not
contradicted, that Tenures in Capite, are so inseparable in the Crown, as the
Parliament will not nor cannot sever them, and the King cannot release them.

And such is the care for the defense of the Kingdom which belongs
inseperably to the King as Head or supreme Protector, so as if any Act of
Parliament should enact that he should not defend the Kingdom, or that he
should have no aides from his Subjects to defend the Realm, such Acts would not
bind, but would be void, because they would be against all natural Reason.

And Judge Crook also does in his Argument against the Ship Money, wherein he
concurred with Justice Hutton, allege that if a statute were made that a King
should not defend the Kingdom, it were void being against Law and Reason.

And when a Parliament is called by the Kings Writ to preserve his Kingdom, and
Magna Charta so little intends that any future Parliament should alter or take
away any Liberties granted or confirmed thereby, or any fundamental Laws, which
are incorporate with the essence of Government, as it has been by several
confirmations of it enacted, that all Laws hereafter to be made to the
contrary, shall be Null and void, and with good reason as to the King and Mesne
Lords, in the changing of their Tenures into Socage, when as ex contractu
obligatio, and ex obligatione Actio, should as well hold in those benificial
pactions, which were in the Creation of those Tenures betwixt the King, Lords,
and Tenants, as in Bonds Bills, and Assumpsits, or any other contracts
whatsoever.

And is so great a part of right Reason, in the opinion of Foreigners, and
according to the Law of Nature and Nations, as in the German Empire, (though it
has heretofore lost much of its power and authority, Conringius de Germanici
Imperii Republic.
by the greatness of some of the Princes, and the many Liberties and
Privileges granted to Cities and Towns) its remaining Prerogatives
notwithstanding are said to be Jura Majestatis and instar puncti divisionem non
recipientia adeoque Imperatoris personae cohaerent ut nec volens ijs se
abdicare aut alium in consortium vocare possit, Arumae^^ de Comitijs Roma^i
Germanici Imperij ca. 3., 2. and. 3.
so inseparable as they are capable of no division, and do so adhere unto the
Emperors person, as he cannot if he would renounce or transfer them over to
any other.

And Bodi^ that understood France very well, Bodin de Republica lib. 1.273.
says, that Si Princeps publica praedia, cum imperio aut jurisdictione and eo
modo fruenda concesserit quo ipse fruetur, etiam si Tabulis jura Majestatis
excepta non fuerunt ipso jure tamen excepta judicantur, if the King shall grant
any of his Lands, to hold as freely, and with as much power and jurisdiction as
he himself enjoyed it, the jura Majestatis, or Regalities are always adjudged
and taken to be excepted though there be no reservation or exception in the
Letters Patents.

Bodin ibm ^59.
And the Parliament of Paris were so careful of the Kings Rights, in Governing
as when Francis the first, had granted to the Queen his Mother, a Commission to
pardon and restore condemned persons, it declared that such a grant quum sine
Majestatis diminutione communicari non possit, seeing it could not be granted
without diminution of his Royal Authority, was void, and thereupon the Queen
Mother intermedled no more therein.

The Conclusion.
WHen all therefore which can be but pretended against Tenures in Capite, and
by Knight service, shall be put together, and said, and done they will come to
no more then this.

The general Assessements for men and Horses, and necessaries for War, whether
men will or no, are a service incumbent upon every man's estate, though they
bought and purchased their Lands, and the Knight service which is now
complained of, is but where their Lands were given them for that purpose, and
ex pacto and voluntate, by Agreement.

For it has always been accounted to be no less than reason, that qui sentit
commodum sentire debet et onus, the Rose and the Prickle must go together, and
he that has the profit may be well contented to do something for it,
especially when it is no more then what he did agree to do, and believed it to
be a favor.

And if they now take those Lands to be a burden, may if they please give
themselves an ease by retorning of them to those that gave it.

And should not be murmured at, or complained of, when as those that live near
the Sea, do live under a Charge or Imposition which is annual, and sometimes
very great upon all. And in Holland are commanded and ordered yearly by the
Dijck Graven, or Magistrates appointed for that purpose, to repair and amend
their Sea walls; Or as it is also in England, by Direction of Law and
Commissions of Sewers, and do but in that though their Lands were dearly paid
for, and not freely given, as those do which hold their Lands by Knight
service, and defend themselves by defending others.

And it will ever be a Rule and Maxim in Loyalty, as well as in Law and right
Reason, that by the Laws of God, Nature, and Nations, as well as of England,
there is and ought to be a natural Allegiance to the King, that Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy do enjoin every Subject to defend his Prince, and his
just Rights and Jurisdictions; And that the safety of every man in particular,
and his own discretion should advise him to it, unless they will think it to be
wisdom in the Citizens of Constantinople, who in the Seige thereof would
rather keep their money and riches for the Turks to plunder, then help
themselves or their Emperor with it, and make thereby themselves and their
posterity Slaves to the enemy of Christendom then put it to the right use of
defending their Prince, themselves, and Posterities.

And will all resolve in this, a defense of the King and his people will be
eternally necessary, an ordinary, a speedy, a ready, a willing, and the most
ingageing and obliging way, will be better then that which shall be
extra-ordinary a far off, and to seek, or be enforced.

And the most ready means for a defense and at hand, must needs be the most
proper and beneficial, for upon that ground Kings have their Treasuries,
Armories, and Arsenals, which Republicques are content to imitate; Our
Constables and Justices of Peace in England, being as standing Officers and
Guardians of the Peace, are more for the safety of the people, when they are
made before hand, to be ready upon any breach of peace, then if they were to
seek, or to be made afterward, and i^ would be no dimunition of the strength
or defense of the Kingdom to have the Nobility and Gentry of England by the
Tenure of their Lands as it were listed, and undertaking upon all occasions to
serve their Prince and defend their Country, for the smallest understandings
can find the way to determine that it will be better and more easy for the
Subject to have the King and their Country served by a Knight service, in
acknowledgment of great Estates only given them for that purpose, than to have
10 or 12000 men provided by the Subjects by a constant Pole money and
Assessement upon them and their Heirs, for a ready Guard and Assistance for the
defense and safeguard of the Country as well as of the King, which the Danes
after their late so great misfortunes and miseries by the incursions and
furious attempts of the Swedes, have learnt to be wisdom, and have therefore
lately bound themselves and their posterities to maintain a guard of 10 or
12000 men to be paid by a Pole or Assessement.

And unless the divine light of reason, and that which hitherto has been
called wisdom, have altered their courses and resolved that which is
retrograde and quite contrary to be the better, the most safe and natural way
will be as it ever has been to have our men at Arms to be Natives rather than
Foreigners, such as are of the better sort, and bred and educated in Feats of
arms, rather then such as have neither skill nor courage, and such as have
Lands and Estates of their own to make a concernment, rather than such as have
none.

Better to have the Nobility and Gentry who are bred and trained up in War, and
understand the necessity and causes of a War to be engaged in the defense of
the Kingdom, than the vulgus who are often called, and too often experimented,
and best know how they came to deserve it mobile and imperitum vulgus, a Beast
of many heads, and without a Superior or Governors, are ^it only to attempt
again the building of Babel, wherein if they were all of one language, they
would for want of agreement or wit, either totally miscarry in the building, or
make it to be an unimitablepeice of deformity.

For it was certainly no fault in Abraham that he had 318 Servants born in his
own house to Arm in a case of necessity to rescue his Brother Lot; Genesis 14,
v. 14.
Nor in David that he had Servants to pass before him to War.

Or when he well understood that the Children of Israel when they had no King,
1 Reg. 15. v. 18. and 19.
and every one followed his own Imaginations, were often delivered into the
hands of the Midianites, Philistims, and many of the Nations round about them,
and that Deborah and Baruch, having undertaken to relieve them were enforced to
pronounce a Curse against thos^ that came not to help the Lord against the
mighty, when Reuben had great devisions, and did abide amongst the Sheep-folds,
Dan remained in Ships, and Ashur continued by the Seashore.

And that he had tasted of the fickleness and infidelity of the men of Judah
and Israel in the Rebellion of Absalom, did though they were afterward so kind
unto him, as to wrangle with the men of Judah for bringing him home to his
Kingdom, and not giving them a share in the honor of it, not think it to be
repugnant to the good and safety of the people to settle a strong and well
formed Militia, and to have a Lifeguard of 24000 valiant men to attend by
months, and courses the safety of his person, and his peaceable Government,
which must needs be better than to be left to the humor of the people to go or
not to go with their Prince to war, as the wind of their Interest, or faction
shall blow them, which may make such kind of aids in the greatest of
necessities to be hardly compassed.

And the Delectus of the Roman Soldiers in their growing greatness, and most
virtuous condition of that State or Commonwealth before their course and custom
of Patronage, and Clyentelage had taken root and gained approbation, and their
often Mutinies and refuseing nomina dare to list or Inroll themselves, unless
usury might be lessoned, and Laws cut out to their Fancies, has told us how
like Egiptian Reeds such a away of raising men to defend the King, themselves
and the Kingdom will be to those that shall most trust or lean upon it.

So that then the Gorgons head and the Bugg-beare of the Tenures in Capite and
Knight Service being only the marriages and putting the Wards Estates under a
rent, whilst they shall be in minority if rationally considered with allowance
of the seldom happening of it or but once in three or four descents, and two
years value being allowed upon the death of every Tenant in Socage or
Coppy-hold Estates, at the admission of every one of their Heirs, will with
their reliefs and herriots, possibly make the account of the money and charge of
the wardship to be something equal, if not a great deal less.

Which howsoever may be removed or made to be more familiar and better
understood or born, if the Tenants in Capite and by Knight Service, shall be
exempted from all other Taxes or Assessements for War, but what belongs to
their Service, as by Law they anciently were and ought to be; the Wards nor
their Estate during that time, being never heretofore charged with any such
Assessements, as our late Tax-Masters have laid upon the People, when as the
fifth, and many times the third part of the Wards yearly Rents, besides a fifth
part of the value of their real estate, and a twentieth of the personal, and
revenew enforced and taken from them to maintain Iniquity, would have saved
more money than the Wardships cost.

Or if that will not still the causeless outcry, that the License of
Alienation (which as well as in Capite and by Knight Service, are by the Custom
of many Manors to be paid in Socage) and the Homages, Grand and Petit
Serjeanties, Reliefs, Primer Seisins, and Liveries, and all other incidents
belonging to the Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, be reserved and
continued to the King and Mesne Lords, and the Marriages of the Wards be put to
a just apportionment and rate (not to boxing or bidding with every pretender,
or such as shall be procured on purpose, and was thought by the Sons of Rapine
to be a parcel of godliness) according to two years present value of the
Estate, and a moderate Rate or Rent for the Lands.

And if that they do not like to sue or be sued in that Court, may do it either
in the Exchequer or Chancery, and try which of those Courts they shall like the
better.

There being no Reason to be shown why Wardships Rents, and Marriage Money
should not be paid as quietly, or without the Noise or Clamor of Oppressioon
by some orderly Course to be taken in the collecting of it, as the first Fruits
of Arch-bishoppricks, Bishoppricks, and all the Clergyes Benefices, which was
at first derived from the Popes Usurpations, and afterward settled in the
Crown, or as the Tenths of all the Monasteryes and Religious Lands which by Act
of Parliament were settled in the Crown for the Support and Maintenance thereof.

And now all the Lines are come in, and meet in one Center, we may ask the
Days that are past, and demand of the Sons of Novelty how it should happen, or
where the Invisible Cause or Reason lurketh, that a People, at least too many
of them, not long ago covenanting, whether his late Majesty would or no, to
preserve his Honor, Rights and Iurisd^ctions, and calling God to witness that
they had no Intention to diminish them, should press or persuade the King to
part with the vitals of his Regalitie, or let out the blood thereof to take in
water instead of it, which that learned John Earl of Bristol, who in his many
Travails and Embassies to foreign Princes, had observed the several Strengths,
Policyes, and defects of Governments of all the Kings and Princes of
Christendom, Motives of the Ea^l of Bristol for adhereing to his (...) Majesty
58.
could think no otherwise of that high and just Prerogative of Kings then that,
to discharge the Tenures in Capite would be consequently to discharge them of
their Service to the Crown.

When as their can be neither Cause nor Reason to make any such Demands, and
that all the Lords of Manors in England who may already find the
Inconveniences of making too many small sized Freeholders, and I wish the
Kingdom may not feel it in the Elections of Parliament men, and Knights of the
Shire, as well as it does already by the Faction and Ignorance of such as
choose Burgesses in Towns and Corporations who many times choose without eyes,
ears, or understanding, would not be well content to have the many perplexed
and tedious Suits at Law betwixt them and their troublesome Tenants about
Customs and Fines uncertain, which in every year do vex and trouble the Courts
in Westminster Hall, or that which the late feavorish Fancies of some would
call Norman Slaveryes should be either a Cause that they must be forced or over
entreated to part with their Copyhold Estates, Herryots, Fines for
Alienations, and all other Incidents thereunto belonging, or that it would be a
good Bargain to have no Compensation or Recompense at all for them, or no more
than after the Rate of what might Communibus Annis one year with another be
made of them.

Whenas to have the intended Recompense for the Court of Wards paid as is now
proposed by a part of the Excise or Curses of the People, or to have the poor
bear the burden of the rich or those to bear the Burden of it which are not at
all concerned in any such purchase or Alteration, and will be an Act which can
have no more Justice or Equity in it, then that the payment of First Fruits
which is merely Ecclesiastical should be distributed and charged for ever upon
the Layety, and the other part of the People as well as the Clergy.

That the Tenths which the Layety and some of the Clergy do now contentedly pay
should be communicated and laid upon all the Kingdom in general in a perpetuity.

That the draining or maintaining the Banks and Sluices and Misfortunes many
times of the Fenns in Lincolnshire and other particular Places should be
charged upon the Esta^es of all the men in England that could not be concerned
either in profit, loss, or D^nger.

Or that in the enclosing of Commons or in Deafforrestations, the Commoners
should have their, Compensation paid by all men in City Town* and Country, for
that which was not (...) nor was ever like to be any Gain or A^va^tage to them.

Or that the losses of Merchants by Shipw^acks, Pirates, or letters of
Reprisal, should be repaired and born by all the rest of the people that went
no partnership or gain with them; Or which way the people of England should
think it to be for their good or safety, that as it was in the days of Saul,
there should not be a Sword or Spear in Israel, that the Lords of England,
whose great Ancestors helped to maintain all our Liberties, being in
Parliament in the 20 th. year of King H. 3. pressed by the Bishops to Enact
that Children born before Matrimony, when their Parents after married should be
legitimate, answered Nolumus mutare Leges Angliae, we will not change the Laws
of England, should not take the overturning so many of the Fundamental Laws
and Liberties of the Kingdom, to be the ruin or destruction of it, to be of a
greater concernment.

And that the King will not think it to be a most Christian as well as an
Heroic answer of John King of France, John de Serres History of France.
when he was a Prisoner in England, to our King E. 3. and was denied his
Liberty unless he would amongst other things do Homage for the Realm of
France, and acknowledge to hold it of England, That he must not speak to him of
that which he neither ought nor would do to Alienate a Right Inalienable, that
he was resolved at what price soever, to leave it to his Children as he had
received it from his Ancestors, that affliction might well engage his person,
but not the inviolable right of the Crown, where he had the honor to be born,
over which neither Prison nor Death had any power, and especially in him who
should hold his life well employed sacrificing it for the Immortal preservation
of France.

And that the people of England should not rather imitate the wisdom as well
as goodness of the Elders of Israel, when as Benhadad not content with Ahabs
Homage, had demanded unreasonable things of him, 1 Reg. 20.8.
Say unto the King, hearken not unto him nor consent.

But remember that it was their Forefathers, which in a Parliament of King E.
3. holden in the 42 th. year of his reign, declared that they could not assent
to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the disherison of the King, and his
Crown, to which they were sworn, that in a Parliament holden in the 14 th. year
of the reign of King Richard the 2 d. the Lords and Commons did pray the King
that the Prerogative of Him and his Crown may be kept, and that all things
done, or attempted to the contrary, may be redressed, and that the King might
be as free, as any of his Progenitors were, which the King granting, gave to it
the force and power of an Act of Parlaiment.

And consider that the innovation of Laws, or change of Customs are dangerous,
and as St Augustine says, non tam utilitate (if there were any profit in them)
prosunt quam Novit^^e perturbant, do more hurt than good by their Novelty, that
it will be unsafe to take away or dig up foundations, that where the
inconveniences in the old Laws are not apparent, and the conveniences to come
by the new not infallible or not likely to deceive our expectation of them, it
will be perilous to change our Laws, more perilous when they be many, and most
of all, when they be fundamental.

That the more Power and Might is in the King, to defend us, the better will be
the Ends which by the Means is intended, and that therefore in the Parliament
of 7 E. 1. the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Commonaltie of the Realm, did
acknowledge that to the King it belonged of his Royal Signory, straightly to
defend force of Armor, and all other force against the Peace, and to punish
them which shall do contrary, according to the Laws and usages of the Realm;
and thereunto were bound to aid their Sovereign Lord at all Seasons when need
shall be, that to make a Captain of a Cripple, or a Constable, which should
keep the Peace in a Parish, and be ready to repel any violence which should be
offered to the Inhabitan^s, to be blind or Bedridden, would not answer the End,
or b^ for the Safety of those that expect it from him.

And that his Majesty's opinion expressed in his Message or Declaration from
Breda, before his return into England, is and ever will be a maxim composed of
very great reason and truth that his Majesty's just rights are the best
preserver of the peoples Liberties.

And may believe before it be too late that to take away Tenures in Capite, and
introduce the inconveniences before mentioned, will be but as a Prologue, or
usher to Levelling, and the gate or entrance, to the Agrarian Devices, and the
supposed Saints taking possession of the Estates of those which they call the
wicked.

And that the laying by of Tenures in Capite, and their services, and making
use of Mercenary and Mechanic Soldiers, may help us to as many miseries and
follies, as we have pertaked of in our late troubles, from our Servants, make
them to become our Masters, and by inureing them to insolences against others,
teach them how to domineer over the people, which shall be their pay-Masters,
after that over Parliaments garbling and purging the House, pulling out, and
putting in whom they please, turn Legislators, and Remonstrance* makers from
their head quarters, make themselves not the Repairers of Breaches, but the
makers and causers of them, ingrosse, all the places and employments of the
Kingdom, throw down Laws and Government, create out of themselves and their own
Party, Mayors, Generals, to tyranize awe the people, and abuse their Laws, and
Liberties, and play the fools at Coffee-Houses, with disputing and discoursing
of Rotas, and Balloting Boxes, and which of their Whimsies, and ignorant
contrivances would best make a Government Committ Perjuries in abundance, and
make their oaths more changeable, and less to be trusted then the Wind or
Weather, or a Lillies Almanac and make it their only business to enslave and
insult over the people, and Metamorphose them into as many shapes of baseness,
perjuries, Hipocrisies, dissembling and wickedness, as poverty hope of gain,
or to get or preserve estates, (though it be but to have Poliphemus his
courtesy to be last of all ruined) fear or flattery, or an accursed ambition to
raise an estate out of other men's miseries, could persuade or draw them unto.

That the taking away of Tenures in Capite and by Knight service, is not
desired by any universal or general Petition at all of the People, that not one
in every 20 of those that are concerned, and hold by those Tenures, nor one in
every 100 of those that hold by other Tenures, and are not concerned, do desire
it. That the injudicial and inconsiderate desires of a very few of the common
people, who do sometimes (as they have many times done in our late troubles,
and too late repented it) outdo Children in asking Stones instead of Bread,
and Serpents for Fishes, are not to be hearkened unto, that the Surfets upon
Liberty, are many times very dangerous, and may prove as fatal and unhappy,
though granted or asked with the best of intentions, as that of giving great
Sums of money to the Scots, in the beginning of our unhappy Wars, and calling
their invasion a brotherly assistance, or that of giving Liberty to the long
Parliament, not to dissolve without their consent.

That if Augustus Caesar, when by his great Prudence he had put the broken
pieces of the Roman Republic, which was Civilibus Discordiis lacerata, woefully
torn with civil Discords into a well composed Monarchy, and blessed the Empire
and a great part of the World with an universal Peace, could find no better a
way to fix and make it lasting, then to put many of the Soldiers under a
Gratitude and Concernment to love and cherish it by giving them Lands for Life
or Inheritance to engage them to their former Duties when occasion should
happen, which saved the Charge and Trouble on all sides, as well to the
conquered as the conquering in maintaining Roman Legions made up of a Medley or
Gallimausry of all manner of Nations.

It cannot now be good when the long lasting Monarchy of England has been
lately and lamentably torn into pieces to make up a Commonwealth, could never
be agreed upon to alter or take away a Course of constant and ordinary defense
which has been for so many Ages past the happy Support of this Ancient
Monarchy.

And that it could not have been any bad or likely to be unsuccessefull Policy,
but a means of an Establishment of our late Soldiers and Controullers had in
the Allowance of their cheap purchases been tied to Tenures by Knight Service
for the Defense of the Kingdom, as the late King of Sweden was to hold of the
Empire by the Treaty of Munster.

And if that Bracton who was a Lord Chief Justice in the Reign of King H. 3.
was of opinion that by a pa^tition of Earldoms and Baronies, Bracton lib. 2.
cap. 34.
deficeret Regnum quod ex Comitatibus and Baronijs dicitur esse constitutum,
would ruin the Kingdom which is constituted of Earldoms and Baronies, he would
now certainly foresee greater Mischiefs and Inconveniences in the taking away
of Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, or changeing them into Tenures in
Socage.

That by the Civil Law, that universal and great Rule of Reason, Insti^ur.
Justiniani in proaemio.
Imperatoriam Majestatem non solum armis decoratam sed etiam legibus oportet
esse Armatam ut utrumque Tempus et Bell^rum et pacis recte possit gubernari,
The Imperial Majesty or Power ought not only to be adorned and strengthened
with Arms and the power thereof, but with Laws, to the end that as well in
time of War as Peace, he may rightly govern.

And that therefore we may well tremble and shake at the name of Innovations,
and desiring to find the way again into the old Paths of Peace, Plenty, and
Security.

Have cause enough to say as the learned Grotius did concerning Holland, (only
changing the word Respublica, into a better of a Kingdom) that multum debem^s
majoribus nostris qui acceptam a primis conditoribus Rempublicam per se
egregiam nostro vero ingenio nostrisque studiis aptissimam pace servatam bello
recuperatam nobis reliquere, we owe much to our Ancestors, who having received
the Commonwealth, which is excellent in it self, and fited to our Customs and
manners from those which first founded it, and left us to enjoy in peace, what
they had recovered in War, and nostrum est si nec ingrati nec imprudentes esse
volumus Rempublicam constanter tueri quam ratio suadet probant experimenta and
commendat Antiquitas. And if we would not be ungrateful or unjust we ought to
defend that Kingdom and Government which Reason persuades us unto,
Experiments approve, and Antiquity commends.

Collapsa ruent subductis tecta columnis. FINIS.

