THE PILLARS OF PARLIAMENT Struck at by the Hands of A Cambridge Doctor, OR, A
SHORT VIEW Of some of his Erroneous POSITIONS, Destructive to the Ancient Laws
and Government OF ENGLAND.

To which is added The true State of the Doctor's Error about the Parliament,
49 H. 3.

By William Petyt, of the Inner Temple, Esquire;

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Simmons, at the Princes Arms in Ludgate Street
MDCLXXXI.

THE PILLARS OF Parliament STRUCK AT By the HAND of A Cambridge Doctor, OR, A
SHORT VIEW Of some of His Erroneous Positions, etc.
ABout a Tear and a half since, I did, in a small Treatise, assert the Ancient
Right of the Commons of England in Parliament: And therein maintained,

That the Commons of England, represented My Discourse. page 1.
by Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament did not begin to be an
Essential part of Parliament, Anno 49 H. 3. by Rebellion.

To which there lately came out a pretended Full and Clear Answer: wherein the
Author thereof affirms,

That the Commons of England, represented Page 1.
by Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament, were not introduced, nor
were one of the three Estates in Parliament before the 49th of H. 3.

The Dignities, Learning and Fame of the supposed Author of the Book being so
great, it is but fit that the Use, End and Scope thereof should be better
known, and understood, than yet it is. In order whereunto I have, for the
Public Good, (got time) to make a small Abstract, or Compendium, of some of
the Principles which the Answerer has asserted and laid down therein. Which
are these following.

The DOCTOR'S POSITIONS.
What Interest the Commons of England had in the Parliaments of the Saxon Times.
THere are no Commons to be found in the Page 20. in the Margin.
Saxon Great Councils.

Nor any thing that tends toward the Proof of Page 13, 14.
the Commons of those Times, to have had any Share of making Laws in those
Councils.

The Commons as at this Day known, not to Page 130. in the Margin.
be found amongst the Community of England in Old Historians.

In the Norman Times.
THat William the Conqueror claimed by Page 35. in the Margin.
the Sword, and made an Absolute Conquest.

For, without doubt, there was no Englishmen Page 37.
in the Common- Council of the whole Kingdom.

For the English had neither Estates nor Fortunes Page 43.
left; and therefore it could be no great matter to them, by what Law, Right or
Propriety other Men held their Estates.

William the Conqueror divided all the Lands Page 176.
in England amongst his great Followers, to hold of him.

The Freemen of England, being French, Flemings, Anjovins, Britains,
Poictovins, and Page 35, 37, 38.
People of other Nations, who came in with the Conqueror, and to whom his Magna
Charta was made; not to Englishmen.

These were the Men the only Legal Men that named, and chose Juries, and served
on Juries themselves, Page 39. Nota. When be agrees they understood not a word
of English Law or Language. Page 30. Nota. As this is precarious, so it is
certainly false and impracticable, and directly against Domes-day-Book, and the
Evidence and Testimony of the Historians and Laws of that very time.
both in the County and Hundred Courts, and dispatched all Country business
under the Great Officers.

If therefore the Justiciaries, Chancellors, Earls, Sheriffs, Lords of Manors,
such as heard Causes, and gave Judgment, were Normans; if the Lawyers and
Pleaders were also Normans, the Pleadings and Judgments in their several Courts
must of necessity have been in that Language, and the Law also the Norman-Law;
otherwise they had said and done they knew not what, and judged they knew not
how: especially when the Controversies were determined by Military-men, Earls,
Sheriffs, Lords of Manors, etc. that understood not the English Tongue or Law:
Or when the Chief Justiciary himself was a Military-Man, as, it often happened,
and understood only the Norman Language; and it is hardly to be believed, these
Men would give themselves the trouble of learning and understanding the
English-Law and Language. Gloss. page 27. Nota. Let him prove it to save his
Credit.


These were the Freemen which made such a Cry, for their Liberties (as appears
by Magna Charta) most of which is only an Abatement of the Rigor, and a
Relaxation of the Feudal Tenures; Nota. Why then may not the like Reason hold
against the Introduction of the Commons to be first a part of Parliament by the
Victorious and Numerous Barons after the Battle of Jews, Anno 49 H. 3. Page
210. They send out Writs in the King's Name to summon a Parliament.
the rest were but only Followers, and helped to augment the Noise; they were
no Lawmakers, as this Gentleman (meaning me) fondly imagines. For it is not
probable that those Men that had the force of the Nation, would permit Men of
Small Reputation to share with them in Law-making. Those that had the Power of
this and other Nations De Facto, always did give Laws, and Tax the People.

After Simon Montford Earl of Leicester and the Numerous Barons had taken Hen.
3. and Prince Edward Prisoners at the Battle of Jews, and a New Government was
framed and set up, they (Anno 49 H. 3.) sent out Writs in the King' s Name unto
diverse Bishops, Abbots and Priors, and to such of the Noblemen as were of
their own Party; to the Sheriffs of Counties, Cities, Buroughs, and the
Cinque Ports.

P. 224. Dugd. Baron, fol 75^. col. 2. The probable cause that moved Montfort
to summon this Convention. Nota. How could that be, when the Numerous Barons
(as they say) had all things in their Power.
And without doubt, as others have Conjectured before Me, the danger that Simon
and his Privado's apprehended from the Concourse of the Nobility and their
great Retinues, and the Example of his and the Barons Practices at Oxford, was
the reason why they (Anno 49 H. 3.) altered the Ancient Usage, and of their
Sending, Directing, and in the King' s Name Commanding the Sheriffs of each
County, the Cities and Buroughs, to send Two Knights, Citizens and Burgesses
respectively.

Nota. Here we have the Original, and all the Authorities and Proofs that the
Commons (as they would have it) began by Rebellion, 49 H. 3. Nota. For no Man
ever dreamed of such an Origin before the Doctor and his Author only.
Hence he affirms,

That the Commons of England, represented Page 1.
by Knights, Citizens and Burgesses in Parliament, were not introduced, nor
were one of the Three Estates in Parliament before the 49th. of H. 3.

For the Commons were not comprehended in Page 163. in the Margin.
the Common University.

For the Noblemen of England, and Council Page 165.
of the Baronage were the Community of England.

Barons Regni called to Parliament at the Page 227. in the Margin.
King's Pleasure.

And what King Henry, a little before his Page 228.
Death, begun; that is, to call such Earls and Barons, Quos Dignatus est, such
as he pleased, Edward the First and his Successors constantly observed.

Having had one great Antiquary's Opinion, (meaning Mr. Camden' s) joined with
Matter of Nota. The Original Author of this Fictitious Change is quoted by
Camden, followed by Sir. Robert Cotton; but slighted, bafled, and proved
evidently false by Mr. Seldom in his Titles of Honor, f. 589. 590. and
contrary to the course of Histories and Records of those Ages.
Fact, upon the Constitution of the House of Lords.

Let us see the Opinion of another concerning the Origin of the House of
Commons, backed also by Matter of Fact. Sir Robert Cotton says, the Victory at
Evesham, and the dear Experience Henry the Third himself had made at Oxford in
the 42d. Year of his Reign, and the memory of the many Streights his Father was
driven to, especially at Runnemede, near Stanes, brought this King wisely to
Nota. How came the Doctor to quote Sir Robert Cotton, since he is expressly
against him? For if what Sir Robert says was true, the Commons were first
called to Parliament by King Henry, after the Battle of Evesham; and then, not
by the Barons, nor in 49 H. 3. And so they began, not by Rebellion as the
Doctor and his Author say.
begin what his Successors fortunately finished, in lessening the Strength and
Power of his Great Lords. And this was wrought by searching into the Regality
they had usurped over their peculiar Sovereigns, and by weakening that Hand of
Power which they carried in Parliaments Nota.
by commanding the Services of many Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to that
great Council.

These were the Reasons why those Kings followed Montfort 's pattern, Nota. Not
a Syllable of Montfort's Pattern in any of his Authors cited by him, except his
own Contemporary Author.
to secure themselves against the Tumultuous, Insolent and Seditious Practices
of the Barons.

And, as according to the Opinions of these great Antiquaries, these new
Constitutions of Parliament had their Nota. All deceived by Camden's Author;
not an Historian or any Record mentioning one word of such an Alteration,
though several lived and writ in the very time.
Origin from the King 's Authority; so from the same Authority and Time it was,
that this most excellent Great Council received its Perfection, Nota. The
Doctor fancies that the present Constitution both of Lords and Commons began,
Anno 49 H. 3. and after, and was settled by E. 1. and his Successors; but proves
not a tittle of the matter of fact.
and became exactly fitted for the Government of these Nations, as it seems to
be very evident from these following Records.

And then the Doctor prints several Nota. The Doctor's manifest Error in making
Writs of Summons to Magna Concilia to be Summons to Parliament.
Writs in the Reigns of E. 1. E. 2. and E. 3. for summoning sometimes one,
sometimes more Knights, Citizens and Burgesses to such Great Councils as had no
power to make Laws, but were only called upon the sudden, to give Advice and
Counsel. Yet the Doctor would have these to be Parliaments, (a plain, if not a
designed Error) with several dangerous Notes or Inferences in the Margin, as
the Reader may observe, page 230, 231, 232, 233, 242, 243, 246, 248, 249.

The King and his Council judges whether and Page 79. in the Margin. Nota.
Thus the Doctor insers from this Clause in the Record: Et tunc fiat eis super
hoc Justitia vocatis evocandis si necesse fuerit.
when Burgesses ought to come to Parliaments.

The Great Charter, commonly attributed to Hen. 3. and styled his The Doctor's
Jani Anglorum facies Antiqua, page 63, 64. Nota. The Doctor, to serve his turn,
fondly designs to destroy Magna Carta of H. 3. and make E. 1. live before his
Father and Grandfather were born. Nota. A convincing Argument that because the
Charter of H. 3. is enrolled by Inspeximus, Anno 25 E. 1. in haes verba,
Henricus, etc. Therefore it was properly his Charter, and not H. 3.
Charter, was properly the Charter of E. 1. or perhaps rather his Explication
or Enlargement of that Charter of King John and H. 3.

For we find not the Great Charter, either of that, or King John's Form, in any
of the Rolls, until the 25th of E. 1. And he had a greater sum of Money for
confirming this Charter than H. 3. had, as it is recorded in the Summons to
Parliament for that purpose.

In this Charter then confirmed, there is no provision Ibid. 64.
made for any Summons to Great Councils, or Parliaments: And the Reason may
well be, because the Constitution Nota. All this is to prop up a new and
mistaken Norton, that Tenants in Capite by Military Service only made the
Parliament, till 49 H. 3.
of Great Councils or Parliaments was lately changed from what it was in King
John' s time, and until the 49th of H. 3. nor perhaps was it so fixed, and
peremptorily resolved on at this time (viz. 25 E. 1.) what it should exactly be
for the future, as to have it made an Article of the Charter: And to this
Conjecture, Nota. Here the Doctor again refers to his mistaken Writs of Summons
to Great Councils for Parliaments, temporibus E 1. E. 2. E. 3. which he has
printed, and by them would give a color to his and his Author's mavelous
change of the ancient Government of the Kingdom, Anno 49 H. 3. never found out
or discovered by any before.
the frequent Variations of Summons to Parliament in those times do give a
probable Confirmation.

Thus far our Doctor.

Nullus Erranti Terminus.

But I will not say with him, that here are any Aerie Ambuscades, Whimseys,
Mavelous Nonsense, Gross Ignorance of Histories and Records, admirable and
idle fancies, and a Troop more of such gentile Expressions, which our Answerer
has been pleased to give that ingenious Gentleman, Mr. Atwood of Gray's Inn,
and my self. All strong Author of Jani Anglorum Facies Nova.
Arguments and high Civilities, scarce well becoming the Doctor in all his
eminent Qualifications.

But to come to

The True State of the Doctor and his Author's Error about the Parliament, 49
H. 3.
AFter Matthew Paris, and Rishanger his Continuer, had given them an Account of
the Wars between H. 3. and his great Barons; and that at the Battle at Jews,
Anno 48. of that King, he and Prince Edward were taken Prisoners by Simon
Montfort, Earl of Leicester (General for the Barons) In the Year following,
which was 49 H. 3. they meet with Rot. Clan. 49 H. 3. in Schedula.
a Schedule affixed to the close Roll; wherein there are Writs of Summons
entered for calling Two Knights for each County; Two Citizens, Two Burgesses for
every City and Borough, and Two Barons for every of the Cinque Ports, to meet
in a Parliament at London in the Octaves of St Hillary. What to do?

Nobiscum ac cum proedictis Prelatis, and magnatibus Dugdale's Origines
Juridiciales, fol. 18. col. 1.
nostris, quos ibidem vocari fecimus super proemissis tractaturi, atque
Consilium impensuri. To treat with him the said King, and with the Prelates and
Great Men of the Land, touching the Premises, and to give their Advice.

Now because this Writ of Summons falls, as the Doctor says, in the Nick of
time with the Historian, when the King and Prince were in custody of Simon
Montfort, He and his Author Page 221.
will needs thereupon nick the House of Commons; and have this Summons to be
the very First and Original Writ of Summons to Parliament, that ever was of
this nature, that in this Critical Tear, at this very time, there began a
wonderful Change, and a mavelous Alteration of the ancient Form of our
English Parliaments; and that before the Commons were never any part thereof;
but then had their Origin and Beginning to be so by this Rebellion.

When as,

1. If that Roll had been lost, as all the Parliament. Rolls of those times
are, it cannot appear that there were any Summons to Parliament, either to the
Lords Spiritual, or Temporal, Dugdale's Origines Jurisd. fol. 18. But to point
out who they were (viz. Barons Majores) that had their first Rise by Writs of
Summons, until 22 E. 1. and afterward, passes my skill, there being no public
Record that does make mention of them till then except that of 49 H. 3
Dugdale's Pref. to his Baronagium Angliae, Tom. 1. The Doctor, page 225.
or Commons, till 22 and 23 E. 1. thirty Years after 49 H. 3. though it is
evident and certain, both from the printed Books and Records, there were above
fourteen Parliaments in the interim. And our Doctor himself and his Author
agree, that both Lords and Commons were present and Parties in the Parliament,
Anno 52 H. 3. at Marlborough, three Years after 49 H. 3. and also in the third
Year of E. 1. (which was eleven Years after 49 H. 3.) at a Parliament at
Westminster, though there are no Writs of Summons, either of the Lords or
Commons, nor any Rolls yet found out of those Parliaments.

2. Neither do their own Historians whom Nota. According to the Doctor, Mr.
Camden and his Author speaks not any thing of the Commons, but only of the
Lords and their Peers.
they make use of, nor Matthew Westminster, whom the Doctor cites too, who writ
in the Reign of E. 1. Son to H. 3. and who particularly gives an Account also
of those Wars, nor any Historiographer or Lawyer, nor any Record of that or
succeeding Ages, ever mention one Word of any such Change or Revolution in 49
H. 3. as our Doctor, and his single Author by tacking Nota. The Doctor and his
Author having tacked and patched together the Historian, and Writs of Summons
to a Parliament, 49 H. 3. is their only Evidence that the Commons begun by
Rebellion in that very Year.
and patching their Historian and Writs together, have inferred and maintained
in their Books. Besides the Form of Acts of Parliament, and Expressions both in
Historians and Records, are the same both before and after 49 H. 3. and in the
Reigns of E. 1. E. 2. and E. 3.

Notwithstanding all which, and Nota. These Arguments, Proofs and Reasons,
besides many more, the Doctor has unfairly concealed from his Readers; yet he
has published to the World his full and clear Answer to my Book, and
particularly to the eighth and ninth Arguments, wherein these Authorities are
urged: the Doctor gives this Answer in these very words, p. 143. His eighth and
ninth Arguments, also his first and second Observations upon the whole matter,
have nothing in them worth a serious Consideration.
that the Doctor well knew that the Citizens and Burgesses were a Constituent
Part of the Parliament in Ireland, Anno 38 H. 3. which was eleven Years before
49 H. 3. as I proved in my Book, p. 71. And also by way of Comparison, p. 79.
That the Cities, Great Towns and Buroughs, 1. Of France. 2. Spain. 3.
Portugal. 4. Denmark. 5. Sweden. And 6. Scotland, have from time immemorable,
both de jure and de facto, had their Delegates or Representatives in the
General Councils, or, in our present Dialect, Parliaments. So that it might
seem very strange, In the Northern Kingdoms, Adamus Bremensis says, that the
Bishops, after the People received Christianity, were received into their
Public Councils. And Loccenius reckons up, among the several Estates, the
Bishops, Nobles, Knights and Deputies of the Country and Cities. The learned
Author of The Grand Question, page 11.
that when the Cities and Buroughs in all the Kingdoms of Europe, were ab
antiquis temporibus, even in the time coeval with their Government, an
essential part of their Common-Councils, or Parliaments; that England, of all
the European World, should not be under the same Constitution before 49 H. 3.

Yet the Doctor and his Author by all their Art and Skill have toiled and
labored to swim against the Stream of so great a Torrent of Reasons and
Testimonies.

To which, in convenient time, shall be added many more Authorities, which are
first to be carefully examined, and cannot be done in so short a time, together
with a Civil and Moderate Reply to the Doctor's Answer; as well on the one hand
to acquit my self from the real Passion of our Doctor, to say no worse, though
common Prudence might have obliged him to more sober Considerations; as on the
other, to vindicate and assert the Honor of our English Nation and
Parliaments, against his and his Author's ill grounded Notions. Which, is true,
I must agree that the General Understanding and Judgment, as well of the Kings
of England, as of the whole English Nation, and all Foreign Writers for so many
Centuries of Years, have been marvellously abused and imposed upon, especially
King James and His late Majesty: Who tell us,

1. That not only the Regal Authority, but King James's first Speech to his
first Parliament in England. Pulton's Stat. 1 Jac. c. 2. f. 1157.
the People's Security of Lands, Livings and Privileges were preserved and
maintained by the Ancient Fundamental Laws, Privileges and Customs of this
Realm: and that by the abolishing or altering of them, it was impossible but
that present Confusion will fall upon the whole State and Frame of this Kingdom.

2. The Law is the Inheritance of every Subject, King Charles the First's
Declaration to all his loving Subjects, published with the Advice of his Privy
Council. Exact Collections of Declarations, p. 28, 29.
and the only Security he can have for his Life or Estate; and the which being
neglected or disesteemed (under what specious show soever) a great measure of
Infelicity, if not an irreparable Confusion, must without doubt fall upon them.

Lastly, I will for the present give but five or six Jnstances, that the
Commons of England, as now distinguished from the great Lords, were an
Essential Part of the General Councils or Parliaments before 49 H. 3.

1. Bracton, a Grave and Learned Judge, who flourished in the time Bracton,
lib. 1. cap. 1. fol. 1.
of H. 3. and an Author beyond the Answerer's Exception, after he had declared
to Posterity that he had bent his mind ad vetera Judicia perscrutanda
diligenter, non sine vigiliis and labor; and whatsoever he found Nota dignum,
he reduced In unam summam perpetuoe memoriae commendandam: declares the Rule,
how Laws were made, not in his own only, but in Ages before.

Cum Legis vigorem habeat, quicquid de Consilio and de Consensu This Authority
the Doctor took no notice of in my Book.
Magnatum and Reipublicae communi spontione, Authoritate Regis sive principis
precedente just fuerit difinitum and approbatum.

That that has the Force and Power of a Law, which shall be justly declared
and approved of by the Council and Consent of the Great Men, and by the General
Agreement of the Commonwealth, the Authority of the King preceding.

2. The Statute of Magna Charta was made and confirmed in Rast. Stat. 9 H. 3.
sol. 1. 3. Id. 12 E. 4. c. 7. It is called, The Laudable Statute of Magna
Charta.
Parliament, 9 H. 3. (which was thirty nine Years before 49 H. 3.) as is
evident by these Authorities, which say that It was made.

1. De Communi Concilio Regni. Regist. fol. 175. Rot. Stat. 25. E. 1. m. 38.
2. Per Comune assent de tut le Roiaume, en temps le Rey Henry nostre Pere. 3.
Per Le Roy, Piers and Commune de la Terre. Rot. Parl. 15 E 3. number. 50. dor.
Enprimes est accord and assentu que la franchise de seint Esglise and la Grand
Chartre and la Chartre de la Foreste and les autres estatatz faitz per nostre
Seignior le Roy and ses progenitors piers and la Comune de la terre pur comune
profit du people soient firmement gardez and maintenez en touz pointz. Rast.
Stat. de An. 15 E. 3. ^. 1. f. 82. It is accorded and assented that the
Franchize of Holy Church, and the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest,
and the other Statutes made by our ^overeign Lord the King, and his
Progenitors, Peers and the Commons of the Land, ^r the common profit of the
People, be firmly kept and maintained in all Points. Rast. ^at. 12 E. 4. c. 7.
The Laudable Statute of Magna Charta, which Statute was made ^r the great
Wealth of all this Land; and in affirmation of the said Statute of the said
^reat Charter, diverse Statutes have been afterward made and ordained. 1. By


