St. Foine Improved, A DISCOURSE Showing the Vtility and Benefit which ENGLAND
Has and may receive by the GRASS CALLED St. FOINE, And answering the
Objections urged against it.

Being useful for all Ingenious Men.

Written by a Person of Honor lately deceased.

LONDON, Printed by S. G. and E. G. for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill,
1671.

St. Foine Improved, OR THE GRASS CALLED St. FOINE.
Vindicated and Commended to all that delight in Husbandry, and other ingenious
Men.
NOtwithstanding the great benefit which diverse places of this Kingdom have
already in part, and are like hereafter to receive more abundantly, by the
improvement of dry and barren Ground, and the increase of Pasture and Meadow
upon them, through the Sewing of the Grass-seed called St. Foine, yet there are
not wanting some, who not only speak themselves, but would also engage the
State against it; as if the common Mother of all the People, could be persuaded
to discourage the industry of some of her Children (for the common good and
wealth of the Kingdom, as well as their own particular advantage) to gratify
some others with the monopoly of all the Hay and Herbage thereof; and to
satisfy rather their imaginary fears (as anon shall be declared) than their
real sufferings; although all they can suffer, is but the abatement of that
gain which they have so long time made by the sufferings of their Neighbors,
making their advantages upon others necessities: And it were very great
partiality, to force any part (and by far the greater part of the Nation to
labor still under their necessities, and not to suffer them to supply
themselves by the improvement of their own Grounds (which proportionably
improveth the stock and riches of the Nation) that some Men might still have
the opportunity to sell their Hay, and let their Pasture so much the dearer.

If these Men could allege, that by this improvement of the dry and barten
Ground, their rich Grounds were made poorer, or less fruitful, or that what was
abated in their Lands was gained by Forraigners, and not by their own fellow
Subjects (which secureth the Kingdom from any loss) they had more color of
reason on their side; but in this case they have none at all: For as the
Commonwealth receives no detriment by it, so neither does any particular man
receive any prejudice thereby, but by accident, if at all; but on the other
side the Kingdom in general is thereby enriched, many private men advantaged
in their estates, without the least injury to any particular Man whatsoever:
for it is well known how great and vast a quantity of Land there has been, and
still is in England and Wales, which of its own nature is neither Meadow, or
any confiderable pasturage, in respect of so great a proportion of ground,
insomuch that the Inhabitants of diverse places have been forced to buy Hay at
excessive dear rates, 20 s. 30 s. 40 s. and sometimes 3 l. and 5 l. a Tun, and
to fetch it by Cart, six, ten, fifteen miles. Others have been forced to supply
the want of Hay by Turnips (as in Norfolk) and all this not sufficing, men have
set their wits on work to get more Pasture and Meadow, whereupon, great Levels
of Fens have been Drained in some Countries; and in other places Meadow and
Pasture has been exceedingly increased by the watering of dry and course
Grounds, and those that having so done, have had opportunity to sell their Hay,
and set their Herbage at very dear rates to their neighbors, now that their
own turn is served, they would pull up the ladder (as they say) after them, and
would hinder others from improving their dry Grounds, in such ways as they are
capable of improvement; as if the Rain were to fall, and the Sun to shine only
on some Men's Lands. The Men of the Vale might as well desire that those of the
Hill-country might not Fold, or Dung their Ground, or Sow any Corn, that so
(having no Corn of their own) they might be forced to buy it at a higher rate
from those of the Dale; and with far greater appearance of reason might they
urge such a restraint, because the Vale being the Granary of the Kingdom would
thereby be encouraged to Sow more Corn, and forbear to turn so much Tillage
into Pasture, and that the Tillage of the Hill-countries does but waste the
strength of Men and Beasts, and the stock of the Kingdom to little purpose, and
will fail the Nation in dry years, and supply it but a little in wet years. In
like manner the Wood-land-countries might with as good reason desire that no
French Furze might be sown (as in Devonshire and Cornwall) nor any Wood planted
in naked Countries, that they might sell their Wood the dearer, or that no
Turfs or Coals might be made use of, (as I have heard) that when Sea-coal began
to be first burnt in London, those that feared the fall of their Wood from the
prizes they formerly sold at, procured a Petition to be preferred to the House
of Commons, against the buring of Sea-coal, as corrupting the Air of the City.
Now though there is hardly any thing so innocent, or useful to Mankind, but
that envy, and self-interest may find somewhat in it to cavil at, yet could I
never hitherto hear of any thing that was objected particularly against this
improvement by St. Foine, faving only that it fills the Nation with over much
Meadow and Pasture, which if it be accounted a nuisance, the same thing bath
been done many other ways, and those not altogether free from particular
exceptions against them.

It cannot be objected here, as against the Draining of the Fens, or the
watering of Meadow, that the Slabb and Mud which remains after the Water is
drawn off the Ground, and the Suns heat comes upon, it corrupts the Air, and
makes it unwholesome. Nor that it indangereth Cattle with the Murrain, for want
of Water, in dry years, as it is found that low and Fen-grounds do, or that it
rotteth or deceives Gattle (as the Hay of some watered Ground does) and which
is but course, and not very good for Sheep at the best. Nor that it destroys
any Fish, or prejudices any Mill, nor hinders Navigation, or pens the Water up
too long upon other Men's Ground above, or keeps it too long from them below, or
that thereby any man's ground is cut away, or that any Man's Common, Fishing,
Fowling, or other way of livelihood is destroyed, or that the Water is carried
off one part, to lie heavier, and more dangerously on another side. All, or
some of which, may be truly objected against Draining of Fens, and Watering of
Meadows, notwithstanding all which the Kingdom has been thought in general so
much advantaged by the increase of Pasture and Meadow (all which St, Foine
does, as anon shall be shown) that it has by particular Acts countenanced the
own, and never discountenanced the other.

But now say some (and this is the only objection that ever I heard against St.
Foine) there is so much Meadow and Pasture in the Kingdom, that there is not
stock to spend it. A strange paradox, that plenty should make the Kingdom
poor; but before I speak directly to that principle (which is that of all
monopolists, tending to the enriching of a few, by the impoverishing of many) I
demand how does the truth of this assertion appear; because in some parts,
where in plentiful years there is always Hay to spare, especially where they
were used to sell their Hay, and never look out to provide stock, therefore
they conclude, that it is so generally and constantly; whereas there cannot be
a clearer demonstration of the contrary, than the cost Men are still at of 40
s. and 50 s. an Acre to improve their Grounds by St. Foine, which they would
never do if they knew not how to get stock to eat their Grass and Hay, when
they had been at so much cost, aad charge to promote it. Nay, it is so far from
that, that notwithstanding the great plenty of old Hay, that was left the last
year, and the improvement by St. Foine, the Inhabitants (even in some Parishes
where there is a considerable proportion of St. Foine) have yet this last year
bought Hay at 20 s. the Tun and more, and fetched it six miles and more by
Cart. And I know a Gentleman that has above 40. Acres of St. Foine, and yet is
forced still to buy Hay for the ordinary stock of his Farm: And surely none
need to fear, but if there be Meat there will be Mouths, and the increase of
Grass and Hay will proportionably increase the stock of the Kingdom; and as
there is more sustinance for Cattle, there will be more buyers of them, and
then there will be more Breeders; and rather than stock should be wanting, the
Improvers by St. Foine will in time breed for themselves and others too, that
Grass having a special quality to beget store of Milk, and that very good,
whence amongst other names it is called Idygala, and will be as proper to
breed, as to feed Cattle.

Now whereas some are ready to impute the abatement of the price of their rich
Grounds and Meadow, to the improvement of St. Foine, it is in (probability) but
a mistake of non causa pro causa, for there has not been so much of it yet
sown, as that it can be generally felt through the Kingdom, as the abatement
of Rents has been, and that as much or more in such Countries where none of
that Grass has been, nor in many miles near them, as in those Countries where
it has been Sown. And as much or more in Farms chiefly consisting of Corn, and
little of Meadow and Pasture, and that for these ten years last past, when very
little St. Foine was Sown or spoken off. So that such abatements of Rent must
proceed from some other causes of the general decay in Trade.

On the other side, that which is feared will be an effect of this, and the
like improvements, is not like to be, for the Sowing of St. Foine does not make
the rich Grounds, and Meadows poor, or more barren. And whereas it may be
thought that the more plenty there is of Grass and Hay, of the less value they
will be, that does not follow neither, and if it did, yet would there no
inconvenience thereby happen to the public. I say it does not necessarily
follow, that the more store there should be of Hay and Grass, the cheaper they
should be, for as I said before, the more meat the more mouths both of Men and
Beasts, and the more of them the more Merchandizers, the more Manufactures, and
the more Money; and every way the more will be the Riches, Strength,
Prosperity, and Glory of a Nation. It may be, that as an uncertain temper of
weather (sometimes heats and sometimes colds) is prejudicial to the natural
body, so will an uncertain and vatiable state of scarcity and plenty prove
hurtful to the body politic, the one starving, and the other glutting it; but
whatsoever lays a foundation of a certain plenty, must needs be of great
advantage to the public; and though there may be some little appearing, or
possibily some real loss to some Men, till such time as they have accommodated
their particular concerns and interests, to such alteration in Trade, as may
happen upon a new Improvement, and till such time as plenty has wrought out it
self a vent, yet this loss is no other than such as the Husbandman seems to
sustain in casting away his Seed, which he will find again at Harvest with
great advantage. As for example, in this Improvement whereby the sustenance of
all sorts of Cattle is increased, as Men find they have more keeping, so will
they look out for more stock of all sorts, and the more Buyers there be the
more Breeders there will also be, and the more Breeders the more Feeders, the
means of feeding as well as of breeding being increased. So that scarcity of
Hay and Grass will sooner make goods cheap than plenty thereof, for Men will
not buy above the prop rtion of the means they have to maintain or feed of what
they buy, and yet those that are necessitated to sell for want of means to keep
their stock must sell though at low rates, which indeed is when there are but
few that have means to keep stock, is the advantage of those few, because they
may buy cheap, and sell deat, but withal it is (as all Monopolies are) very
disadvantagious to the public; for it discourages the Breeders of Stock, and
the less Stock the less Compost and Dung, and the fewer working Oxen and
Horses, and so the less Corn, and the less Meat, Drink, and Clothing, the
fewer people will be in a Nation, and so fewer Soldiers, fewer Tradesmen,
fewer Merchants, because fewer Workmen, and fewer Materials to work upon, and
lesser sustinance for the Workmen.

And if it shall be demanded where we shall have a sufficient stock of Men? I
answer, there is little doubt of the fertility of these Northern Nations of
England and Scotland, if the want of means and subsistence did not put a
restraint upon Marriage (which draws after it diverse other inconveniences, of
Bastards, Beggars, etc and we find by experience that the richest Countries are
best peopled, and freest from Beggars; and it is not to be doubted, but that as
the good husbandry of Densuring or Devonshering of Land (and the like) has
rendered the County of Devonshire a rich and populous Country, which of its own
nature is but a barren Soill. So in time will this improvement by St. Foine,
and other such like, render the Downy and dry parts of England and Wales more
rich and populous. And if it might be supposed that the Kings Dominions could
not afford a sufficient stock of Men and Cattle, for the consumption and
working of inner Commodities when increased: Plenty of good and valuable
Commodities will draw Men from all parts of the world, or at least such
Commodities will be of value in all parts of the world.

If we had such plenty of Corn, Meat, Tallow, Leather, Butter, Cheese, Wax, and
Honey, (for them also St. Foine will certainly increase Bees, so exceedingly
delighting to feed on the Flowers thereof) as that with the surplusage of our
own Consumption we might send over great quantities beyond Seas, and also be
able out of our own abundance to under sell other Nations, we should not need
to fear the vent of them, for our Commodities would be most vendible, because
cheapest. Besides, by having a great quantity of such substantial Commodities
for the life of Man to Transport, we should bring our Export to be far greater
than our Import, which now is feared to fall be ow it, and to be the chief
cause of the want of Money, and Consequently of the decay of Trade in the
Kingdom, and must needs (if not prevented) in time beggar it in the end.

But to such as are afraid of plenty, I shall further say, that it is greater
riches not to need, than to have much money. What are Men the worse, though
they receive less money from their Lands or goods, if all things they stand in
need of for Meat, Drink, Clothing, and other necessaries, may be bought with
less money. And what if Men sell off Goods cheaper, if they can buy them in as
much cheaper.

Indeed some persons would not have so much Money in their Pockets to carry on
a Trade, which is neither prositable to themselves, nor the Kingdom, but very
prejudicial to both; that is excessive Gameing, and Betting at Cockings, and
Races, and other superfluous, that I may not say, luxurious expenses upon
Foreign Commodities, tending (for the most part) to the impairing of the
health of the body, or to the nourishing and venting of the vanity of the mind,
and withal exhausting the estates of particular Men, and the general stock of
the Kingdom, or at least diverting so much thereof from useful Trades and
Employments, to those that are far from being useful or profitable. Wherein if
Gentlemen would by their own moderation set a law to themselves, or that there
might be a restraint put upon them by wholesome Laws (as the Romans both
anciently, and of latter times under the Emper ours were very strict therein)
there would not be such great sums of money diverted from the Trade of the
Nation, for the carrying on of such superfluous and vain expenses (I speak as
to the excess) whilst others in the mean time keep up their moneys, for to be
ready to purchase the Estates of such Unthrists at easy rates, to omit many
other inconveniences that follow thereupon: If such as have no Lands left to be
improved by St. Foine (as few that have any considerable estates but have)
would spare somewhat out of such superfluous and hurtful ways of expense, they
may at easy rates enough purchase good quantities of such Lands, which by this
way of improvement they might sufficiently balance any damage they doubt they
might sustain thereby in their rich Grounds and Meadows.

Again, as I said before, that he is richer that needs not money, than he that
has it, so the best way for a Nation to have plenty of money is not to need
it; for it is necessity that drains away the money of a Nation, and forces
them to buy of Forraigners at dear rates, but when they have abundance for all
necessary uses of their own, what they have to spare brings them in so much
clear money without any deductions for the supply of their own wants from
abroad; and the cheaper our Commodities are in Foreign Markers, the more money
will come into the Nation in the end, and make our Commodities the most
vendible, because cheapest, and because we are able to afford them so. And the
contrary course held by our Merchant-Adventurers in starving the Markets beyond
Sea has not a little prejudiced us in our Manufacture of Cloth, enforcing
other Nations out of necessity to set up the Manufacture of Cloth, which they
neither would, nor could have done (having none or few Materials of their own
growth) if we had not held our Cloth at too high rates, and served Foreign
Markets so sparingly, so that our Neighbors are now able in some sort of
Clothes to under sell us. I have said all this to satisfy the doubts and
jealousies of such as are the owners of rich Pastures and Meadows: but now
admitting they may have some cause of jealousy and doubt; yea, say it be some
damage for a while, yet if it shall excite their industry, as necessity has
done theirs that were possessors of dry and barren Lands, Faelix necessitas
quae ad meliora conducit, and those that have rich Grounds, have far the better
Ground to work upon, for rich Soils are capable of holding their value at
least, if not of improvement several ways; but the dry and high Grounds are
capable of very few ways of improvement. If increase of Pasture and Meadow in
the hill and barren Countries, should induce men in the vale and other parts to
return again to Tillage, and especially to employ some of their rich Grounds
for Hemp and Flax, though it might be some trouble and cost at the first, it
would after turn to far greater profit to the owners, and of singular advantage
to the public, by the increase of such fort of Commodities of our own growth,
and the Manufactures relateing thereunto, besides the advantage which would
after acrew by the change of the Seed; sometimes one sort of Grain, and
sometimes another, which those Grounds would bring forth in great abundance; as
also Rape and Cole-seed, all sorts of Fruits and Garden-stuff, and after return
to good Pasture and Meadow again. A rich Soil is capable of any thing almost,
and the constantly using of it one way, only gratifieth sloth and idleness;
but seasonable change of the best suits with the nature of almost all Grounds,
but especially of rich Soils, and is most prositable to the owners, and to the
public.

I shall now add something, as to the parallel which I heat some in discourse
make between St. Foine and the Planting Tobacco in England, as if there were
the like reason for the prohibiting of the one, as of the other; whereas the
difference between them is very appatent in Reason; Justice, and Policy.

First in Reason, for the English Tobacco (which is laid down as a principal
reason for the restraint thereof) is not so whole some as that which comes from
beyond Sea, nor in reason can be, for want of the like influence of the Sun;
whereas St. Foine is so far from being unwholesome, that it is the most
wholesome Grass that Cattle can eat; from whence some have thought it to be
called St. Foine, that is to say, sanum, faenum, but it is indeed called in
French St. Foine, Country-farm page 697 and 698.
that is sanctum faenum; for that as some say (and those Doctors of Physic
too) it may seem seem to spring out of the Earth, as it were of a more especial
favor from God, not only for the nourishing and facting of Herds of Cattle,
but also to serve for Physic for Beasts that are sick, and in that respect is
called of the Latins Medica.

Secondly, there was cause to restrain the Planting of English Tobacco in
Justice to those that have adventured their lives and fortunes in those
Colonies; so far off from their Native Countries, for the in largentent of the
Kings Territories and Dominions, and have engaged themselves to vend their
Tobacco, only in his Majesty's Dominions, upon promise and assurance, that
their Trade should not be prejudiced by the Planting of Tobacco here in England.

Now the owners of rich Ground and Meadows have no such point of Justice to
insist upon in opposition to such as improve their Lands by St. Foine, but on
the other side it would be great partlality, if not in justice, to hinder men
from improving their Land by their industry, which of common right every man
may do and will be encouraged therein by every wise State, if the public
receive no prejudice there by, as in this improvement I does not but great
advantage; neither does any particular man suffer any injury thereby; for if he
did, the Law would do him right, nor can any man suffer thereby, but by
accident, (if at all) nor at all, but out of his sloth and want of industry.

Thirdly, In Policy: As the Cases relate to the Public, there is a vast and
wide difference. For in that of English Tobacco, as is largely declared in the
preamble of the Act, the Navigation of the Kingdom, and the Consequences
thereof, the enlargement of the King's Domin^ons and Territories by those
American Colonies, the vent of our native Commodities to them, the great Trade
that relates to them, and the King's Customs out of it would be lost, or much
impaired, only to gratify a few Persors in a pedling profit, which they
attempt to make in some patches of Ground, to raise a small quantity of
unwholesome Tobacco, which could not (in any sort) supply the defect of the
other; much less countervail all those other great and weighty Considerations
before mentioned, and yet might be sufficient to discourage those Plantations,
which after would not be so easily restored again.

But in the improvement by St. Foine there is nothing of all this, or like it,
but the contrary in all respects. It is so far from prejudicing Navigation, or
any of the American Colonies, that it rather promoteth both, by furnishing this
Kingdom with great abundance of such Commodities as we vent there, and in
other parts, whereby more Shipping will be employed, and also by this meant
there will be a greater plenty of Beef, Butter-Cheese, etc. for the Provision
of Ships and Seamen: Neither is there any danger of destroying a great and
certain Trade, in attempting to raise a petty one, that will in no sort supply
the want, or countervail the damage of the other. For should St. Foine fail (as
Clover Grass does in a few years) the rich Grounds, and watted Meadows, are not
thereby made more barren, or less capable to supply the necessities of the
Nation then they were before; neither are the Grounds sowed with St. Foine made
barren thereby afterward, but on the contrary, it renders Ground more fertile
and fit for Corn; in so much that such Ground as before was would bring none,
or very mean crops of Corn, being ploughed up after St. Foine, the roots
thereof are as good as any dung unto it, and will make it bear some good crops
of Corn; and then being sowed again with St. Foine, it will, bear it again as
well as ever it did; so that it may continually be renewed when the spirit of
it is spent, with the advantage of some intervening crops of Corn: And in this
sort they in other Countries do order it; and so no doubt shall we also do in
England, when there is more plenty of it.

To conclude, there is not any sort of improvement more profitable, and withal
so innocent as this; for most of other improvements, together with their
usefulness, are some ways injurions to particular men, and inconvenient to the
Public (as in watered Meadows, and draining of Fens has before been remembered)
and yet there is nothing objected against St. Foine, which might not and may
not equally be objected against them, if the increasing of Meadow and Pasture
be a nuisance. And they that are equally and first in the transgression, ought
equally and first to be suppressed: and much rather then an improvement whereof
the usefulness is very great, and in some particulars (as anon shall be
remarked) not to be paralelled by any sort of Natural or Artificial Herbage or
Fodder whatsoever; and yet it is so far from being injurious to any, that it
does not so much as offend the senses, by any ill sight or smell, as watering
and burning Ground does, but is very, pleasant to the eye by its Vernal and
Autumnal verdure and Summers purple vesture, which Flowers (from whence the
Bees so greedily suck their Nectar) cannot but render the Air also more sweet
and wholesome.

To sum up in the end of my discourse the Commodities which will accrue to
particular Men, and the Public by St. Foine; I shall mention in the first
place that which the opposers of it (out of a principle common to all
Monopolists) call a nuisance, viz. the increase and plenty of Pasture and
Meadow, and consequently of the stock of store, and wealth of the Kingdom; and
that especially in such places where there was, and yet is most need thereof.

Secondly, the Grass and Hay that is raised thereby, is beyond all sorts of
Grass and Fodder, in that it is not only Meat, but Medicine, as has before
been said.

Thirdly, this Grass when once well rooted, runs down so deep into the
Ground, that is neither in danger of heat not cold, stirs betimes in the
Spring, lasts long in the Autumn, springs suddenly again after it is cut
down or fed, and wherein it exceeds all sorts of Pasture and Meadow, (except
some watered Meadows on great Rivers, which is not without some prejudice to
Mills and Navigation.) In the driest years, when all the richest Pasture and
up-land Meadows are burnt away, this will be both good Pasture and Meadow. What
a mischief then would it be to deprive the Kingdom of such a Commedity, which
will supply its necessities, when other means generally fail.

Fourthly, this Grass is good both for breeding and feeding of all sorts of
Cattle, and begets so much Milk, and so good, that the Dary maid shall in
one weeks space find a great alteration for the better, both in the color,
quantity, and quality of the Milk, from what any ordinary Pasture will yield.

Fifthly, (to conclude with that sweet and very profitable Commodity It must
certainly raise very much and very good Honey and Wax, Bees delighting so much
to feed upon it.

And therefore unless that which God promised as a Blessing to the Israelites,
seem a Curse to England, viz. A Land flowing with Milk and Honey. I hope no man
will from henceforth endeavor to hinder the increase of St. Foine.

This and the like improvements (if encouraged) cannot but make the Nation
rich, populous and prosperous as we see that of our Neighbors of France and
Flanaers are, from whenee we learn these and the like improvements: but if we
shall choose to follow them in their Vanities and Superfluities, and shall not
withal imitate them in their Virtues and Industry, but discourage what they
encourage and thrive so much by; we may justly fear, we shall be the Tail and
not the Head; always Borrowers and Buyers, and never Lenders or Venders: and so
become the Object of all our Neighbors Affronts and Scorns, which God forbid.

THE SOILS, HVSBANDRY, And USES proper for St. FOINE With the several Manners
of its Improvement; Fit to be known by all that delight in HVSBANDRY.
THe Soils proper for St. Foine, The soils proper.
are the most of dry Grounds, though they be very barren, trial having been
made plentifully on Stony and Chalky Grounds, not worth two shillings the Acre,
which have thereby been improved to be worth forty shillings the Acre, and have
so continued for thirty years.

Sheer and slight Sands, The improper soils.
are the only proper dry Grounds; but mixed Sands, as are generally the Red and
Brown, bear it singularly well: all Clays and other cold and wet Grounds bear
it not.

The times of sowing it are in Autumn, The times of sowing.
from the beginning of August, till the end of September: In the Spring, from
the beginning of February till the end of March; but the earlier it is sown in
either season the better.

For sowing it in Autumn, Sowing it in Autumn.
the Tillage ought to in all respects the same as for Wheat, with this
difference: That before it be sown, the land must be harrowed very fine to
level it: Then sew it, and harrow it in, as other Grains.

There is this way also of doing it with small charge, Another way.
and good success. If Land be sowed with Summer-Corn, and is very free from
Weeds, let the Corn be Mowed low; and so soon as it is off the Ground, turn up
the Land with a Plow, and Harrow it very well, dragging off as much of the
Stubble as conveniently may be; when it is fine, Sow the St. Foine, Harrowing
it in, as before. To wrap or wreath, or raddle the spiks or teeth of the Harrow
not to go into the Ground above two inches and an half.

Note, Note.
In the Autumn, it must ever be sowed alone without Corn.

In Spring, Sowing in the Spring.
the Husbandry, it must be in all respects the same as for Batley: for the Land
must be made very fine, and be Harrowed before it be sowed, as is before
directed. In this season it may be sown with Oats or Barley (but Oats are the
better;) or without either, which is surely best.

If without Corn, Without Corn.
the manner of Husbandry differs not from the former Description of sowing it
in the Autumn. If with Corn, the Corn must be first sowed and harrowed after
the usual manner; then sow the St. Foine and harrow it, as before directed.

New broken Ground cannot be sowed with it, With Corn new ground
till the Crop be first had; after which, the Ground being presently turned up,
and harrowed about Alhollontide, it will be fit to sow the Spring following.

To make present trial whether any Ground will bear it, For p^esent T^ial.
let a small Plot about four yards square be dug with a Spade, and made fine
with a Gardentake, and sow the St. Foine in rows, as is wont to be done with
Garden Pease: If the ground be sward ground, the Turf must be ^^aven off and
cast away, that the remaining Earth may be fine: This must be carefully
enclosed, and if it prosper well, it shows the soil proper: This may be done in
several places, if the soil very, for more assurance.

The consevat on of it.
It must be carefully fenced and conserved from Cattle the first year, nothing
being suffered to come into it: the second year generally it may be Mown, and
the after-grass fed about Alhollontide; but Cattle would not be suffered to
stay in it in wet seasons till the root be strong, which will be the third
Summer. If it be not of sufficient growth to mow the second year, (as in very
dry Grounds, in cold and dry Springs it will not) it may then be fed with
Cattle about the middle of May; but the Cattle would not be suffered to stay
very long on it, for much treading will be hurtful to it being yet tender.

The Uses.
After the second year, all the time it lasts, which is various (for in some
soils it has endured much longer then in others) it may be annually mowed or
fed as is desired, without any repair by dung, or other soil whatsoever: but
it is not convenient to mow the same Grounds constantly, but they should be
sometimes mowed, and other times fed.

For Hay.
If it must be reserved for mowing, it must be laid in by the middle of April at
latest, but Lady day is a fitter time. It is fit to cut when it begins to
flower, which commonly is about the middle of May, sometimes later: It is made
in all respect as other Hay. This Hay is very good for most uses, that other
Hay is; only it seems too gross for Sheep, for Horses it excels.

The seeding it g^een, with great beasts.
When it is designed for Pasturage, it must be laid early, as the beginning of
March, which will render it fit to be fed by the middle of April or May Day at
latest. None but great Cattle would be pastured on it at this time of the year,
which it feeds singularly well, without danger of suffocation, which is
incident to Clover-grass. It breeds abundance of Milk in Milch-Beasts, and the
Butter that is made of it is excellent.

Feeding it with Sheep.
The After-Moth, and Grass that springs in Autumn, in the Grounds that have been
pastured, may Sheep safely be fed with, which it fats suddenly: it is very good
for Ews and Lambs, keeping them in high state, and promoting growth, but they
must not be suffered to go on it past Lady Day.

Note there must be sowed four Bushels upon an Acre.

FINIS.

