LIGHT IN DARKNESS: OR, A CONSIDERATION OF A Comfortable and Instructive
Resignation OF THE Church of God, By an Eminent and Faithful Watchman upon his
Departure.

OCCASIONED

By the sad loss of that Faithful and painful Labourer in the Lord Mr. Thomas
Moor, Junior.

By C. P.

Look away from me, I will weep bitterly; labor not to comfort me, because of
the spoiling of the daughter of my people: For it is a day of trouble, and of
treading down, and of perplexity, by the Lord God of hosts, in the valley of
Vision, breaking down the Walls thereof, etc. Isa. 22. 4, 5. Rejoice not
against me, O mine enemy, When I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness,
the Lord shall be a light unto me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord,
because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute
judgment for me; he shall bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
righteousness. Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover
her, which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God, etc? Mica. 7. 8, 9, 10.
London, Printed in the Year, 1669.

To the Reader.
Christian Reader,
WHAT the occasion of the following Discourse is, thou may see before, viz.
the death of one that labored abundantly in the Work of the Lord, yet not he,
but the grace of God that was with him, whom the Lord, in testimony of high
displeasure to the survivers, took away to himself in the midst of his days
and Work; and thereby has occasioned and increased mourning and lamentation in
the daughter of his Judah. Oh! that while he is thus lifting up his hand, we
may see wherefore he is thus contending with us, that we may turn to him that
smites, and seek the Lord of hosts, lest his wrath further break forth as
fire, and devour, and there be none to quench it.

He was one that was not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for he knew, that it
is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes; and therefore he
determined to know nothing else, in, and unto all things, save Jesus Christ and
him crucified, as he is evidently therein set before us, and pourtrayed unto
us; and did not preach himself, but Jesus Christ the Lord; nor was his zeal
exercised about indifferent things, or lighter matters, for he was well assured
that the Kingdom of God is not meat and drink (and so, not days, and times,
and places, and gestures, and circumstances, and such things as perish with the
using) but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the holy Ghost; and therefore
did in these great things of God's Law serve Christ, and so was acceptable to
God, and profitable to men; he was even set for the defense and confirmation of
the Gospel, and that was to him the joy and rejoicing of his heart; and he had
all his confidence begun and strengthened from the kindness and love of God our
Savior to mankind, and his feeding upon the flesh of Christ that was given for
the life of the World, and the grace of God therein commended, by which Jesus
Christ tasted death for every man, and in the virtue of his blood is raised
again in that same body in which he bare our sins on the Tree; this was the
beginning of his confidence, (and not some secret thing with him, or peculiar
manner of love to him) the reason of his hope, the answer of his good
conscience toward God, the foundation of his faith and hope, the argument by
which he was reconciled to God, and strengthened to look for the mercy of our
Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life; and where-through his heart was purified
and principled to the unfeigned love of the brethren, and to the love of all
men, yea of his enemies; from hence his hearts desire and prayer to God for
them was, that they might be saved. The love of Christ did constrain him to
persuade men, and pray them to be reconciled to God, and receive his grace to
purpose, whether he were looked upon as one besides himself, or as a sober man,
because he thus judged, that if one died for all, then were all dead, and he
died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live to themselves,
but to him that died for them, and rose again. In preaching the word he was
instant in season, and out of season, and was (to that end that Christ might be
magnified, and therein men's good endeavored, and especially the profit of the
household of faith pursued) in journeying often -- in weariness and painfulness,
in watchings often, etc. Who was weak, and he was not weak? Who was offended,
and he burned not? And in preaching Christ he did warn every man (as he had
opportunity) and teach every man in all wisdom, that he might present every man
perfect in Christ Jesus: Whereunto he did also labor, striving according to
his working which wrought in him mightily. He has fought the good fight, he
has finished his course, he has kept the faith; henceforth there is laid up
for him a crown of righteousness, which the Lord the righteous judge shall give
to him at that day, and not to him only, but also to all them that love his
appearing.

Doubtless God in such strokes is signifying his great displeasedness with us,
in removing so untimely one so much framed to a like mindedness with himself in
Christ, whose heart was fixed to endeavor the good of all men, especially of
them that believe, suitable to the mind of the living God, who is the Savior of
all men, especially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10. As if he were hereby
beginning to rise up out of his wonted place of mercy, and to for sake us, and
woe will be to us when he depart eth from us. Oh! that we may consider his work,
and the operation of his hands, lest he destroy us, and not build us up. In
this day su^ely the Lord God of hosts is calling to mourning, and to weeping,
and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloath. Oh! that there may not be
beheld among us joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, and killing sheep, eating
flesh, and drinking wine; But, O daughter of Zion, let tears run down like a
River day and night, give thy self no rest, let not the apple of thine eyes
cease. Arise, cry out in the night, in the beginning of the watches pour out
thine heart like water before the face of the Lord, lift up thine hands toward
him. He has trodden under foot thy mighty men; for this thou have cause to
weep, that thou should procure such testimonies of displeasure to thy self,
and that thine eye, thine eye, should run down with water, because the
Comforter that should relieve thy soul, is far from thee.

Oh! that we may yet turn again to the Lord. We have still a Lord to turn to,
when the servants are removed; the great shepherd to direct our eyes and hearts
to, when under-shepherds are taken away: And to whom should a people seek but
to their God? The Lord lives, though the Fathers are gone, and Prophets do not
live for ever; with him is no variableness nor shadow of turning: And we have
yet encouragement to look to him, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to
anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil, Joel 2. 13. There
is no God like unto him that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage; he retains not his anger for
ever, because he delights in mercy, M c. 7. 18. Let us then lift up our
hearts with our hands to God in the highest, with whom is forgiveness, that he
may be feared; plenteousness of redemption, that he may be hoped in by us; for
the Lord will not cast off for ever: But though he cause grief, he will have
compassion according to the multitude of his mercies; for he does not willingly
afflict nor grieve the children of men, Lam. 3. 31, 32, 33.

But in our turning to him, let us search and try our hearts and ways, and
turn from the things reproved, and which he is discovering us to be guilty of,
and polluted with, otherwise we shall but turn to him feignedly, and not with
the whole heart, Jer. 3. 10. If we will return, let us return to him, and put
away our abomixations out of his sight, Jer. 4. 1. To this end it is that the
Lord's voice is crying to the City, O that we may be men of wisdom, to see his
Name, and hear his Rod, and who has appointed it, Mica. 6. 9, 13. O that that
also may not be verified concerning us, which the Prophet confesses with shame
they were guilty of, that though all this evil is come upon us, yet (though we
assemble together, and seek him, and pray to him, yea seek him daily, and take
delight in approaching to him) we have not made this our prayer unto God, that
we might turn from our iniquities, and understand his truth, Dan. 9. 13. all
his debatings with us are to this end, that our iniquity may be purged, and
this is all the fruit, to take away our sin, Isa. 27. 8, 9. And if we receive
not this end of his, we shall still provoke him to watch upon a further evil,
and bring it upon us. Shall one take up a s^are from the earth, and have taken
nothing? Amos 3. 5. Will he remove his judgments, and cease smiting, and take
away his snares, as it were, while he has effected nothing by them, no surely.
But if we be not reformed by these things, but will walk contrary to him, he
will also walk contrary to us, and punish us yet seven times for our sins, Lev.
26. 23, 24. it will even provoke him at last to send a famine of hearing the
words of the Lord, to remove all left that are in any measure faithful in
seeking the good of others, and to deliver the residue to the multitude. And
this was that which was much dreaded and deprecated by our Brother, a little
before his being removed from amongst us, and has been since threatened, in
some measure, once and again; but hitherto in great mercy, and in a great
measure he has withdrawn his hand, and wrought wonderfully, that his name
might not be polluted. Oh! that, because sentence against our evil work is not
speedily executed, our hearts may not be set in us to do evil; but that we may
by his goodness be led to repentance, and run together unto the Lord, and with
one another, and in the acknowledging and for saking our iniquities, cry
mightily unto him whom mercy pleases, that he may forgive our sins, and heal
our breaches, and be merciful unto, and spare the remnant of his heritage, and
make them blessings in those several parts of the field, where the wise and
gracious sower has sowed them, and that the commandment may be kept without
spot, unrebukable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 6. 12,
14.

The following Treatise has been several months at the Press, and met with
manifold obstructions, otherwise thou might sooner have seen it. Possibly it
has stuck so long there, that we, who are so apt to forget the blow when the
rod is taken off, might be again awakened to some fresh remembrance and
consideration of the sharpness and severity of it, and the greater judgments
threatened in it. And very probably, in some particular testimony of displeasure
to him who undertook the work, and was so altogether unmeet for it, being of
such an uncircumcised heart and lip, I mean

Thine unworthy servant in and for the Lord, CHARLES PHELPES.
Lyn-Regis, August 6. 1669.
Turn us again, Lord, and to us return,
How long, against us, shall thine anger burn?
O pour not forth thy fury still like fire
Mind not our sins for ever, mark not in ire,
Against thy people, their transgressions, but
Say, it is enough, an end to such strokes put.
Many indeed, are our abominations;
Our close, and our appearing provocations.
O we have sinned, and thou in all art just;
Righteous art thou, O Lord, yet since thou do
Excel in goodness, there, help us to trust.
In our sad banished state, when we were all
Undone, and lost, none could recover our fall;
No man could help his brother, thou did then,
In love, a Lamb provide, for us poor men:
O now that grace remember, and a seed
Reserve, to teach the world, thy flock to feed.
C. P.

Light in Darkness.
Acts 20. 32. And now brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his
Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all
them which are sancitified.
THe Apostle in the foregoing part of the Chapter (having sent for the Elders
of the Church of Ephesus) puts them in mind of his faithfulness, and constancy
in service and sufferings, and tells them, that they all should see his face no
more; this he knew, it being, as it may seem, so revealed to him, ver. 25. and
now appeals to them, and takes them to witness, that he was pure from the blood
of all men, ver. 26. and to evidence this that he was not guilty of the blood
of the souls of men (as Jer. 2. 24) he says, For I have not shunned to declare
unto you all the counsel of God* ver 27.

The thing he had declared it was, all the counsel of God, namely, the Gospel
of the grace of God. ver. 24. the kingdom of God, ver. 25 even the testimony of
Christ, as now revealed: in which is shown unto us Gods purpose, and grace, his
counsels of old, which are faithfulness, and truth; as Isay 25. 1. And out of
the bowels whereof, all the Counsels of God concerning mankind as fallen do
issue; and that in which God is giving us good counsel, good doctrine, as
Prove. 4. 2. 6. To the end we might have his testimony, and testimonies therein,
as the men of our Counsels Psalm. 119. 24. this was the Apostles rejoicing now
not before God (for though he knew nothing by himself, yet he was not hereby
justified, 1 Cor. 4. 4. Luke 17. 10. he only desired to have the righteousness
which is through the faith of Christ to appear before God in, even that now
manifested by the faith of Christ unto all (that have sined; in the preparation
tender, and some influencings forth of it) and upon all that believe, Phil. 3.
8, 9. with Romans 3. 22, 23. Gal. 2. 16.) but before them, and as to his
ministration; and so his rejoicing was this, the testimony of his conscience,
that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom but by the
grace of God, he had had his conversation in the world, and more abundantly
toward the believers 2 Cor 1. 12. so when he was ready to be offered up, he
says to Timothy, I have fought the good fight, etc. 2 ^im. 47.

This was that he had not shunned to declare; namely, all the counsel of God,
and so he has kept back nothing that was profitable, ver, 20 he had not
shunned, or drawn back.

He was not deterred from declaring the Gospel by sufferings, and
persecutions, of which he pertook more abundantly, ver. 18, 19. 22, 24. Or
because of false brethren, or false Apostles, least he should displease them;
in lighter matters he complied as far as possible for the Gospel sake, So be
became all things to all men, that he might win some; but he contended
earnestly for the faith, and would not give place by subjection, no not for an
hour, that the truth of the Gospel might continue with them, Gal. 2. 4, 5. 2 Timothy 4. 7. (oh that we were followers together with him herein, then should we
be less contentious about meats, and drinks, and da^s, and places, and
gestures, and circumstances about some lighter matters of Gods law) or because
of any weariness to the flesh, or weakness, and passions in brethren, which yet
was a burden, but declared the testimony in all its branches. Hence he
admonishes them, ver. 28. take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the
flock etc. namely, because he had declared to them all the counsels of God, and
had given them such a good example, they ought therefore to take the more
abundant heed, lest being thus armed, and furnished, they turned back, as Psalm.
78 9. like that 2 Timothy 3. 17. and 4. 1. And this caution he presses home by
that ver. 29. I know that after my departing, shall grievons wolves enter in
etc. Namely, either cruel persecutors, as Mat. 10. 16. or false Prophets. Math.
7. 15. so our Savior tells his Disciples a little before his departure that
soon after, false Christ's, and false Prophets would arise Math. 24, 24. Also of
your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things etc. ver. 3. Namely,
because of sufferings to be endured, and iniquity abounding under forms of
godliness; whereto they might fit themselves by retaining the things reprove^,
^o also our Savior signifies, that as the consequent of these things many
would be offended, Math. 24. 8. 12. So Peter when departing, 2 Pet. 1. 14. and
2. 1. So John, 1 John 2. 18, 19. from hence again he provokes them.

Therefore watch, says he, ver. 31. now there was more abundant need to watch,
when such a faithful watch man was taken away; namely, to watch daily at his
gates for wisdom and to exhort one another; yea in the light of the Lord over
themselves, and one another, that they might be nourished up in the words of
faith, and to watch and pray lest they enter into temptation, and fall from
their steadfastness, or le^t they sleeping, the enemy come, and sow tares,
Math. 13. 25. and proposes his own example to stir them up, namely, that he
ceafed not to warn etc. In which he shows unto us, that in declaring all the
counsel of God, he so did it, as therein, and therewith to warn of the error
of the wicked, both in their thoughts and ways, and it is good to observe it,
that we may be preserved both from such a declaring the counsel, as therewith
to suffer sin upon men; and from such a warning men, as doing it without the
counsel of God, as many do He did so preach Christ, as in and with it to warn
every man; and so warn every man, as in and with the preaching of Christ, his
speech was always with grace seasoned with salt; or otherwise he could not have
been pure from the blood of all men. Col. 1. 28. and 4. 6 2 Timothy 4 2. Ezik. 3.
18.

And in this account the Apostle gives of his faithfulness we may be occasioned
to call to remembrance how much our Brother, lately taken from us, and with the
Lord imitated him herein; He was doubtless much like minded with the Apostle;
and if I should say, I know no man more like minded, who did naturally care for
the prosperity, and good of the Churches, it would not now harm him, nor I hope
offend others, who indeed knew him. How faithful was he in declaring the
testimony of Jesus, as delivered by the Apostles, and for many years warning
therewith; and notwithstanding the reproaches and sufferings he endured from
men and exercises he met with from brethren and the burden of his family and
others with him, even the weak (for his hands ministered to his necessities and
theirs, as the Apostle says, ver. 33, 34. and he coveted no man's gold etc.
Which I will not say the Apostle speaks to shame these, but to wa^n them he
might, as 1 Cor. 4. 12. 14. Nor do I mention this of our Brothers laboring to
shame any; but if in mentioning it, my self, or others be reproved, and God set
it home, let us not reject it, but take shame to our selves that our care was
no more toward him, that he might have been at more liberty to have attended
the things of Christ: and still it was more blameworthy, if any raised or
received any false reports that they might hereby cloak their covetousness, and
shut up the bowels of others) yet his heart was exercised for the good of all,
and especially good of believers, and so exercised, as that his body and
members were employed herein to admiration, considering his great weakness, and
many infirmities, he did gladly spend himself, and was spent for others good,
oh that there were no reason to add the following words in, 2 Cor. 12. 15.

1. The Apostles faithful resignation of this part of his charge (for upon him
came daily the care of all the Churches) I commend you to God, and the word of
his grace.

2. A further declaration of the excellency of the person, and thing to which
he commends them, laid down by way of motive and to persuade them to commit
themselves to God and apply themselves to the word of his grace; Which (God and
word etc. ^is able to build you you up and give you an inheritance etc.

1. The Apostles resignation of his care. And now, Brethren, I commend you to
God, etc.

In which resignation we have,

1. The time of it; Now. 2. The persons whom he resigns, Brethren. 3. The
resignation it self, I commend you etc.
1. The time when he thus solemnly resignes them; Now, namely,

1. When they were full of heaviness, and sorrow had filled their hearts
because of his departure from them for ever, as to any further personal
visiting of them, or being visited by them, he did not cease or fail from among
the children of men (as our Brother, the removal of whom was the occasion of
this discourse, does) but was so taken away from them, that he should be no
more of any personal usefulness to them, as to his bodily presence amongst
them, for they should see his face no more. Oh this is a time of wailing, and
heaviness, when God is taking away faithful ones in the midst of their days,
or work, a day of trouble, and perplexity by the Lord God of Hosts in the
valley of vision, Where the vision of all, even the vision of all visions, and
that in which all may see themselves concerned, the testimony of Christ, in
which (especially and fundamentally in the first branch of it) there is
declared tidings of great joy to all people, has run and flowed abundantly,
like a River in low places, to the causing fatness, and fruitfulness, Isay,
there, a day of perplexity, breaking down the walls that his judgments may
break in, threatening to pla^t his vine in a dry and thirsty ground, this is a
lamentation and shall be for a lamentation: as Ezekiel 19. 13. 14. And the Lord
God of Hosts in this day is calling to weeping, and to mourning, especially
those that are devout persons, fearers of him, Isa. 22 4 5. 12. Acts 8. 2. And
thus were these exercised to whom the Apostle speaks as ver. 37. 38. They all
wept ^ore, and fell on Paul's neck, and kissed him; sorrowing most of all, for
he words that he spoke, that they should see his face no more, it might have
occasioned heaviness though he had departed but for a season; but they sorrowed
most of all because they should see his face no more, and because hereby a way
was made, not only for Gods anger to break forth more immediately: but for evil
men, and seducers to come in amongst them, as ver. 29. 30 Isa. 57 1. 4. 5.
Psalm. 12. 1. 4. And now they might with sadness remember how they had failed in
showing forth Love to him, so as his hands had ministered to his own necessity,
and those that were with him; Yet now when they were thus full of grief, he
thus resigns and commends them to God, etc. To signify;

That when faithful and eminent watchmen, and instruments of help are taken
away, and sorrow is thereby greatly occasioned, this is now proper to moderate
our grief, that we sorrow not as those that have no hope, That he that keeps
Israel shall never slumber, nor sleep, the Lord lives, and is faithful to keep
our souls, supply all wants, and perfect what concerns us, when the good man is
removed, or perished out of the Earth. This therefore he now speaks, that they
might not be swallowed up with overmuch grief, he speaks it not to prevent all
sorrow, it is meet to be humbled under God's mighty hand, and ashamed before
him, when our Father thus spits in our face, who is the God of grace, when he
covers us with anger, and persecute us, when he slayes and pitties not; when he
covers himself with a cloud, that our prayer should not pass through, as La^. 3.
42. 44. And it is an evidence of great hardness, and insensibleness, when Gods
hand is so highly lifted up, not to see, or take notice of what he is
reproving, Isa 26. 11. and 57. 1. Nor does the Apostle here rebuke the^e for
sorrowing, as he does those at ( esarea, who wept because of some troubles that
were to come upon him at Jerusalem, for he was not so taken from them, as from
these, but saw them again, Acts 21. 13 with 25. 1 4, etc. But this he may
speak, and it is proper, to qualify, and moderate our sorrow, that we exceed
not herein, that there is the God of grace still to commit our selves to, and
have our expectation. From in this time of great affliction (Indeed while I am
thus speaking, I am somewhat fearful les^ this con^olation on such an occasion,
be generally needless; I mean, that there is more fear of not sorrowing enough
for such an heavy tellimony of displeasure as God has been ordaining to us,
then grieving abundantly and out of meas r^for it; cut for the sakes of some,
and to restore comfort to them and to their mourners, I speak it, and what is
noted may be a li^ting up, when God is thus casting down in his Providence,
that the Spirit of such may not fail before him surely at such a time, God, and
his grace is sufficient for them 2 Cor 12. 8. 9. 10.

Thus our Savior, when, because he tells his Disciples of his departure,
sorrow had filled their hearts, he now to comfort them, in bis prayer commits
them to God; so now, says he. I am no more in the World, but these are in the
World, and I come unto thee, holy Father keep through thine own name those whom
thou have given me, etc. While I was with them in the World I kept them in thy
name; those that thou gave me, I have kept. etc. (of him it might be
eminently said he was pure from the blood of all (so now I come to thee, and
these things I speak in the World that they might have my joy fulfilled in them
Joh. 16. 6. and 17* 11. 13. So Peter when ready to depart, commends to the
bele^ver^, and commends them to the word of Gods grace, 2 Pet. 1. 12. 16. and
3. 1. 2. 3. 4.

And so the Prophets, and holy men, have comforted, and and encouraged
themselves in the Lord, on like occasions, thus Isaiah doubtless thou art our
Father, though Abraham be i^norant of us (one that was a Prophet, and
powerfully made intercession, who was called, the friend of God, of whom God
says, I know him, that he will ^^mmand his Children, and his household after
him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, etc. In whose steps our Brother
walked, Genesis 20. 7. and 18 18. 19.) And Israel acknowledge us not (one that
behaved himself princ^ly with God, and by his strength, had power with him,
yea, he had power over the Angel, and prevailed, And an Israelite indeed was
our Brother, Genesis 32 28. Hos. 12 3. 4.) thou O Lord, art our Father, our
redeemer from over lasting is thy Name. Isay 63. 15, 16 With this Israel
comforted Joseph, as with respect to himself, and his Brethren and Children,
Israel said. Behold I dye* the P^^phets do they live for ever, Zech. 1 5.) But
God who ha^^ only imm^rtality shall be with you. Genesis 48 21. Thus Micah at such
a time incourages himself, Micah. 7. 1, 7, 9. And David when shut out from the
personal Society of God's people, Yet says he, the Lord will command his
loving kindness in the day time (in the proper season of it, in the day of
prosperity, and in the night his Song shall be with me ^in the time of
affliction, while I sit in darkness, his tryumphing Song over sin, death, hell,
etc. That his own right hand, and his holy Arm has gotten himself the victory)
and my prayer unto the God of Life. See Psalm. 42. 8. with Mica. 7. 8. Psalm. 98.
1. and 84. 10. 11. And oh that we may not forget this consolation in Christ
which still speaks to us, to wit, the Lord lives; but that we may trust, and
rejoice in him, and pour out our requests, and complaints to him, when we look
on the right hand, and behold, but there is none that knows us, refuge fails
us, no man cares for our soul, as Psalm. 142.

2. Now namely when he was departing from them, and had foretold them that
grievous Wolves should enter in among them, and that of themselves men should
arise speaking perverse things, etc. Ver. 29 30. That they might be instruments
of saving themselves, and others, so be signifies to us.

That now its high time for us to apply our selves to God, and to the word of
his grace, when God is taking away, faithful and eminent watchmen, before the
number of their days that are with him are determined, or in the midst of some
good work, now we are called upon especially to awake to Gods righteousness,
that we be not driven away by Wolvish persecutors, or carried about with diverse
and strange doctrines: to stir up our selves to lay ho^d on his strength, and
have our hearts established with grace, yea and to watch one over another, lest
any man fail of, or fall from, the grace of God, fighting the good fight,
holding forth the Word of Life, See how solemnly, on this account, the Apostle
awakens and charges Timothy. I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his
Kingdom (and so thee also for we must all appear before the Judgment seat of
Christ,) Preach the word, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all long suffering, and doctrine. For the time will come
when they need will endure sonnd Doctrine, etc. But watch thou in all things,
endure affliction, etc. For I am now ready to be offered up, and the time of my
departure is at hand; I have fought the good fight, etc. 2 Timothy 4. 1. 7. So
P^ter on like account stirs them up to a being mindful of the Commandments of
the Apostles, etc. 2 Pet. 1. 13. with chap 3. 1. 3. 4. 16. 18. While such
eminent and faithful laborers were living, others might be too remiss, and
negligent, and think they might be excused because these faithful ones were so
forward, and willing to supply their lack of service, and so resolute to war
this good warfare; but when God is depriving of such, he is calling aloud upon
others to watch; and that those to whom he has committed the word of
reconciliation, and given fitness furniture for holding it forth should stir up
the gift of God that is in them, that they may be preserved from the error of
the wicked, and be pure, from the blood of all men, even for preaching Christ,
and therewith warning every man and teaching every man in all Wisdom.

And indeed this resignation is particularly added to that remembrance the
Apostle gives, that he had not ceased to warn every one with tears, and this to
signify, that now especially it lies upon those that go before others in the
word of the Lord to apply themselves to God, and attend his word of grace, that
they may warn all doctrinally, and as need is personally; with the spirit of
meckness, to w^rn the unruly, and deal faithfully, and plainly one with another
in reproving, and rebuking as need requires, and occasion is given, and not to
daub with untempered Mortar* and cry peace, peace, for some may not endure this
afterward: and though (I think) we cannot blame our Brother for unfaithfulness
in this particular, yet he bewailed it that he had not warned when he had
opportunity, and yet surely was a faithful reprover. Oh take heed now
especially of flattering, or giving flattering titles to any, and so of hating
your Brother, and suffering sin upon him, Levit 19. 17. That you may preserve
your selves and one another in the grace in Christ; and warn while others will
hear, as need is, lest they dye in their sins, and their blood be required at
your hands, and let those that are faithful, and upright hearted among the
believers, who are the glory of the Churches, say to those over them, when need
requires; Take heed to the ministry ye have received of the Lord, that ye
fulfill it, as Col. 4. 17. to such purpose the Apostle now commends them to God
etc.

^. The Persons whom he thus resigns, and these he calls Brethren, and speaks.

1. Directly to the elders of the Church* those appointed to be guides to the
rest, who had doubtless also some gift given for feeding the Church, and so at
least were Past^rs, and Teachers: At that time none were chosen into office but
such as were apt to teach: and these he calls, Brethren, we might say in a
manifold consideration; but shall here only say they were Brethren in a
pecu^iar sense, holy Brethren and such as were put into the Ministry, and so
Brethren,

1. To the Apostle,

2. One to another*

1. To the Apostle and so to denote.

That though he was preferred before them; yet they were appointed to the same
Service as he was, in some measure fitted for the work of the Ministry, and
this is for instruction to other beleivers, that they may not despise those
that are over them in the Lord, because they have not such knowledge and
utterance as others who are taken away, but to look upon such as are faithful
in the Lord as Brethren of the Apostles, and of those that have more eminent
gifts, and fitness for holding forth the word of Life; it was a great fault
among the orinthians, and they were reproved for it, that they were pu^t up so
one against another; one was of Paul, another of Apo^l^, etc. Whereas all were
theirs, and they fellow* laborers* 1 Cor. 3. 4. 9. 2 Cor. 6 1. and by their
thus overvaluing some, they were apt to undervalue others, and set light by
them, hence that instruction, and admoni^ion, if Timoth* come, see that he may
be with you without fear; for he works the work of the Lord, as I also d^,
let no man therefore despise him, etc. 1 Cor. 16. 10 11. So again, if any
require of ^itus, he is my partner, and fellow helper concerning you, or our
Brethren, they are the Messengers of the Churches, etc. Wherefore show ye to
them, and before the Churches the proof of your love, etc. 2 Cor. 8. 23. 24.
These though they were not Apostles, nor might have an Apostolical gift yet
were their Brethen.

2. Brethren one to another, and so to instruct them.

1. That they should not lift up themselves one above another, or love to have,
and seek after pre-eminence as did Diot^ephes. 3 John 9. That they should not
seek to Lord it one over another, when he was removed; he himself acknowledges
that he had not dominion over the faith of others, but was an helper of their
joy. 2 Cor. 1. 24. And it was good to follow him herein, and not to seek
dominion one over another (though yet it is good for others to take notice of
their different gifts, and of the faithfulness, and diligence of such as exceed
others therein,) he may use this expression to seal home such an admonition: As
our Savior does; Be ye not called Rabbi for one is your Master, even Christ,
and all ye are Brethren, Mat. 23. 8. the Disciples of Christ are incident to
this evil, and too apt to strive who shall be, and be accounted the greatest,
and now the Apostle, that faithful watchman was taken away, some might be ready
to follow such an inclination, and therefore he may give this title to them to
instruct humility, and to demean themselves one to another as Brethren, who had
all one Master, or otherwise they might fall into that great evil, and speak
perverse things to draw away Disciples after them, of which the Apostle does
premonish, ver. 30.

2. To intimate that they should love one another and take heed of falling out
one with another, that as their hearts were purified in obeying the truth
through the Spirit to the unfeigned love of the Brethren, so now especially,
they should love one another with a pure heart fervently, as 1 Pet. 1. 22. It
was now high time, when this peace maker was taken a way, and God making a way
for his judgments, as ver. 20 30. To love as Brethren, and to endeavor to
seek; and to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, that so they
might, if possible, stop that breach God had been making, and by their being
perfectly joined together Gods blessing might be with them, Psalm. 133.
Otherwise they might cause divisions, and fit themselves for drawing disciples
after them, v^^. 30. I he way to be kept from evil, even from the evil one, and
evil spirits, and their designs, yea from all evil is to be one* as in
judgment, and design, so in affection, so much may be signified in that order
in our Savior's prayer for his Apostles; the first thing, or the end of the
first thing he prays for them is, that they may be one, and the next thing,
that they may be kept from the evil, J^h. 17. 11. 15. thus our Savior even
when his hour was come, within six days before his departure, oftentimes
instructs, and commands his discipl^s to love one another, that so they might
be strengthened against persecutors, and false Christ's and false Prophets see
Joh. 12. 1. and 13. 34. 35. and 15. 12. 17. 20. So the Apostle (...) 1. Joh. 4.
1. 7.

2. And yet the Apostle directs his speech to them as elders for the good of
the Church, and so as including the Church also, and for instruction to them:
not as if the Apostle only commended the elders to the Lord, but it was of
concernment to all, as Act. 14. 22. And so what our Savior sends to the Angels
of the Churches, it was for the good of the Churches Rev. 1. 11. and therefore
at the close of every particular Message, it is said he that has an ear, let
him hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. And so it was them all he
commended to God, etc.

3. The Resignation it self, I commend you to God and the word of his Grace.

In which we shall inquire, and show,

1. Who the person is, and what the thing to which he commends them? 2. What is
here meant by commending, and what is imported therein. 3. Wherefore he now
commends them to this person, and thing?
1. Who the person is, and what the thing to which he commends them.

1. The person is not such, or such an elder; or brother among them, who might
be esteemed more faithful and able then the rest, no; he here commends them not
to Timothy who was now with him ver 4. though he was appointed to some
oversight over them; to charge some that they taught no other Doctrine then
that according to Godliness, and to ordain elders, and deacons, and it is
evident that to this end he was left at Ephesus before this time, in that the
Apostle says, these things I write unto thee, hoping to come unto thee
shortly, 1 Timothy 1. 3. and 3* 14. 15. But now he says he knew they should see
his face no more; Yea though the Apostle gave that high account of him, that he
had no man like minded, Phil. 2. 20 22. Yet he commits them not to him, nor to
any Brother; no, it was possible there might be infirmity, or unfaithfulness
found with them: And yet this I say not to lead ^hy to neglect the fellowship,
and helpfulness of Brethren, it is good to be companions of them that fear him,
and to know them that are over us in the Lord, and admonish us: But the Apostle
here shows his great faithfulness, and abundant care for these, in committing
them to him whose they were, and to whom none is to be compared, or likened;
yea to him, who would, in committing themselves to him, order the hearts of
brethren as might be most for mutual good, for all are his servants, and he
puts earnest care into the hearts of instruments 2 Cor. 8. 16. and so this
resignation is like that Act. 14. 22. When they had ordained them elders in
every Church, and had prayed with fasting, they commended them (no to the
elders but) to the Lord on whom they believed.

The person then to whom he commends them* is God, not Man, simply, and yet not
to God as absolutely, and immediately considered, but to God in Christ, in whom
he is propitious toward us, and through whom he takes care of us poor sinful
ones, it is the God of grace he resignes them to as is imported in saying the
Word of his grace: Who the person here spoken of is, the Apostle helps us to
understand, viz. That it is Jesus Christ, who is said to be the great God and
our Savior, Tit. 2. 14. Immanuel, God with us, who is God in our Nature, and
for us, Isa. 9. 6. I say the Apostle helps us so to understand it by the
immediately foregoing use of it, in v. 28 feed the Church of God which he has
purchased with his own blood, like that, 1 John 3. 16, Herein perceive we the
love of God, because he laid down his life for us, it was God that was manifest
in the flesh, justified in the spirit, and the Father in him, 1 Timothy 3. 16. And
so it was one that was infinitely worthy, one that had bought them, there was
no reason for any to take offense at this resignation, was Paul crucified for
you? did any among them redeem them? no surely, but worthy hereof is the Lamb
for he was slain, and had redeemed them, Rev. 5. 9.

It was God their shepherd to whom he commits them, whose flock they were v.
28. 29. And whom he had bought with one price, after a double consideration,
according to the will of God and our Father.

1. He was such an one as had bought them with his own blood, or with himself
in the virtues thereof, and that in common with all men, for he gave himself a
rans^me for all, as, 1 Timothy 2 6. Namely, for all men, as is evident, in that it
is part of the proof he gives to evidence that God will have all men to be
saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth, ver. 4. And the Apostle there
speaks of his giving himself a price of redemption, not to, but for all, it was
to God he gave himself a ransom; as is also evident that he speaks of it as
done in order of Nature before he was Mediator, and by virtue whereof he is the
Mediator, making intercession for transgresso^s, and to that end he might be a
testimony, and testified in due time, ver. 5. 6. And so he gave himself a price
of redemption to God for all that he might redeem them unto himself, that they
might be his, and he be their Lord, Romans 14. 9. That the sentence of banishment
that was against them might be released to him, and that they might be under
his dispose, that the world through him might be saved, Joh. 3. 17. He is raised
again for our Justification who was delivered for our offenses, and has
received an acquittance from all our sins imputed to him; he was justified in
the Spirit's raising him and has by himself without any knowledge, motion,
compliance on our parts, or any thing required of us, purged our sins, and this
he has done before he sat down on the right hand of the Majesty in high, Heb.
1. 3 And so made peace slain the enmity, drawn all men to himself, so as that
the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, Joh. 5.
22. He has purchased, and bought all men, and hence all Lands, all the earth,
are instructed to make a joyful noise unto the Lord, and to know the Lord is
God, it is he that has made us (when we had marred our selves) and his we are,
we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture, Psalm. 100. 1. 3. 4. He has
bought them who had corrupted themselves, and whose blot it was that they were
not his Children, but were a perverse, and erooked generation, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. 6.
He has redeemed them that speak lies against him, Hos. 7. 13. Yea such as deny
him, and bring upon themselves swift destruction thereby, 2 Pet. 2. 1. in short
he is Lord of all men, because he dyed, rose, and revived f^r them and this to
a gracious end, while called to day; that all men should honor him, as they
should honor the Father, Romans 14. 9. Joh. 5. 22. 23. And has so redeemed them
unto himself, that no man shall perish for ever in that first death, but be
raised by the man Christ Jesus, and then they shall not be judged by the Law as
they fell under it in ^^^m, but by the Law of liberty, in which liberty is
proclaimed from the curse of the Law, Jam. 2. 12. O what a faithful resignation
was this and what encouragement to leave our selves with him, and commit our
selves to him, who has thus manifested his grace! and to moderate our sorrow,
^^ that he lives who was dead, and is alive for evermore, and has the keys of
hell; and death, Rev. 1. 18.

2. More directly the person to whom he commends them it was God who had
purchased them with his own blood, namely, redeemed them out of the World, and
from amongst men, and that through the presenting his blood to them, and
commending it before them in the precious and excellent ends and virtues
thereof in which he was raised from the dead, peace made righteousness
completed, spirit received, a new testament, and everlasting covenant
confirmed, eternal redemption obtained, in glorifying of which by his spirit,
and rendering it thus precious in his testimony, he had redeemed them, and
bought them of themselves, and from their vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1. 18. 19.
Redeemed them unto God out of the kindreds, and tongues, and so from the earth,
and from amongst men, Rev. 5. 9. with chap. 14. 3. 4. Made them willing for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ to suffer the loss of all things, and to
go on to count them as dung, Phil. 3 8. 9. He gave himself to them for them
that they receiving him might give themselves to him, Ephesians. 5. 25. 26. Indeed he
is thus buying all men that come to years of capacity, in due time, reconciling
the World to himself, calling upon all the ends of the earth to look to him
and be saved, 2 Cor. 5. 19. 20. Isa. 45. 22. But many refuse, and when the
price is put into their hands, they have no heart to accept and embrace it; but
when light is vouchsafed, they love darkness rather then ^ight, and this is
their great iniquity, and cause of their everlasting perdition, that when they
are called they are not chosen, that they will not be elected, Joh. 3. 18. 19.
Mat. 22. 11. 14. But these, to whom the Apostle speaks, he had purchased with
his own blood he was their Shepherd and they were his flock in a peculiar
consideration, his Church, his Spouse, and such as were therefore the subjects
of his peculiar love and most special care: Oh excellent one to whom he thus
resigns them? Oh blessed encouragement to trust in him and not be afraid, and
to look for his mercy unto eternal life, who in his love and pity had redeemed
them of God in common with all from the curse of the Law, and through the
commendation of his precious blood had bought them of themselves! Oh what
ground to conclude seeing the Lord was their shepherd they should not want, and
from his grace in laying down his life for them when sinners, and enemies, to
be confident from his love therein commended that much more being reconciled
they should be saved by his life, Romans 5. 6. 10. and 8. 32. Gal. 2. 20. Had the
Apostle committed them to any mean man, how faithful soever, he might have
complained of it as a burden. Even Moses of whom the Holy Ghost gives this
testimony, that he, verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, Heb. 3.
5. Yet complains of that charge lying upon him, Wherefore, says he, have I not
found favor in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all this people unto
me, and the reason of his thus complaining is intimated, when he says; have I
conceived all this people? have I begotten them? that thou should say unto
me, ca^ry them in thy bosom, etc. Numb. 11. 11. 12. As intimating he could have
been more tender had he been the Father of them, but this encouragement we have
in our God; Christ is faithful as a Son over his house, they are his own house
he has conceived them all, he has begotten them, and therefore can, and will
carry them in his bosom (as a Nursing Father bears the sucking child) to that
rest that remains for the people of God, they are his flock whom he has
purchased with his own blood; And therefore he shall feed his flock like a
shepherd, he shall gather the Lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom,
and shall gently lead those that are with young, Isa. 40. 10 11. He who is a
Son over his own house, and who has said, if any man provide not for his own,
and especially for those of his own house be has denied the faith, 1 Timothy 5. 8.
Is one that hates the iniquity, he warns others of, one who loves
righteousness, and hates iniquity, and therefore will provide for his own
house, his own Children which God has given him, who are in an especial
consideration the travel of his soul, he has a fatherly affect on* a motherly
tender heartedness, toward them, can a mother forget her sucking child that she
should not have compassion on the fruit of her womb, yea they may forget but he
will not forget his family, his house, his flock, the price of his blood in
this double consideration.

3. Yea he who has purchased them with his own blood is and God in our nature
and for us, God ever all blessed for ever; Romans 9. 5. One in whom dwells all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily, Col. 2. 9. Who is glorified with the Fathers
own self, with the glory which he had with him before the World was* John 17.
5. All things that the Father has are his, Joh. 16. 15 He is full of grace,
and truth, the fountain of life, one who has all power both in heaven, and
earth, this is the true God and eternal life, 1 John 5 10. He who is their
Shepherd is Lord of all, friends and enemies, who is set down on the right hand
of God in the heavenly places, far above all principallity, and power, and
might, and dominion, and every name that is named; not only in this World, but
in that also which is to come. Ephesians. 1. 17. 22. This is the person to whom he
commends them, one to whom belongs power, and with whom is mercy, who is
beautiful, and glorious, excellent and comely for our escape; and so infinitely
more worthy, then any instrument, and of whom we may say, as Elihu does to Job,
I will answer thee, that God is greater then man, Job. 33. 12. It was to him
whom the Apostle Thomas once (and our Thomas often) called, my Lord, and my
God, J^^. 20 28.

2. The thing to which he commits them, it was not

1. The wisdom of this World, or of the Princes of this World which come to
naught, he commends them not to Logic, Philosophy, or to any such acts, or
Sciences, to find out God by, which are of high esteem with men, and whereby
men think they are fitted for better understanding, and more proffitable,
holding forth the word of Life; though if it had been needful at any time to
have committed them to these, it might have seemed to have been most seasonable
now, considering 1. He speaks to the Overseers and Bishops among them directly.
and 2. He forewarns them of Wolves, coming in among them, and they were
subtle, and powerful, to deceive, and our wisdom would tell us, that we need
these things, for discovering, and confuting them; but the Apostle takes not
this course, but as he had avoided it, and came not with excellency of speech,
or of wisdom, declaring the Test^mony of God (for he was sent to preach it not
with wisdom of words) 1 Cor. 3. 1. and 1. 17. So he signifies the
perniciousness of it; not with wisdom of words, least the cross of Christ,
should be made of none effect, and the Believers faith stand therein. 1 Cor. 1.
17. and 2. 4. and admonishes Timothy the most eminent of the elders of ^^^^sus
of it, 1 Timothy 6. 20 and particularly when he had been telling him, evil men and
seducers shall wax worse and worse, and so be more subtle, and wily, yet he
instructs him (not to seek after the wisdom of the Gentles, but) to continue in
the things which he had learned etc. (And what these things were, and where he
had learned them he signifies, when he says) and that from a child thou have
known the holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation
through says which is in Christ Jesus, to wit, through that Word of faith
believed Acts 24. 24. And to show him, and us, what Scriptures they are which
are able to make wise through faith in Christ, he adds (as I conceive) all
Scripture given by inspiration of God, and to evidence further the excellency
of them he adds, and (not only ab^e to make thee wise, etc. but) profitab^e for
Doctrine (teaching all things) reproof (of evil ways, and vices) correction (of
errors) instruction in righteousness* 2 Timothy 3. 13. 16. Of this also head
monisheth the Col^ssians on like account; beware of Philosophy, and vain deceit
Col. 2. 3, 4, 8, 9. And oh that we may consider it, that we may cease from our
own wisdom, both natural, and ar^ificiall.

2. Nor commits he them to the Law, as a Law of works, or to the works of the
Law, for perfecting thereby what was begun by the Spirit, he directs them not
to that which declares their duty simply* but gives no strength to perform, nay
he blames the Gal^^^ians for turning aside thereto, Gal. 3. 1. 4. But to that
which declares his grace, the Gospel of Christ of which he was not ashamed Rom,
1. 16. in attending whereto* and walking wherein, the Righteousness of the Law
should be fulfilled in them. Romans 8. 4. and so to that which would exclude
boasting every where, and in every thing, and not to their one works, or to the
Law of works or to follow them who have the word of the Lord to themselves,
precept upon precept; such as desire to be Teachers of the Law, and know not
what they say, nor whereof they affirm, Isa. 28. 12. 13. 1 Timothy 1. 9. 7.

3. Nor commits he them to the Scriptures simply, or otherwise then in them, to
come especially to Christ as the great thing therein testified of and so to the
word of his grace men may search the Scriptures, and hear them read frequently,
and yet be ignorant of, and not come unto Christ, and the word of his grace
that they may have life, and so miss of it, John 5. 39. Acts 13. 27. The holy
Scriptures are no otherwise able to make wise to Salvation, then through faith
which is in Christ Jesus (as before) 2 Timothy 3. 15. Oh this is the great thing
in the Scriptures, and that by which God teaches all things, and leads into
all truth, Joh. 16. 43. 14. and unto which he gives testimony Act. 14. 3 and
that by which all the Scriptures may be opened for his testimony of Jesus is
the spirit, of prophecy, the quintessence of all writ, and it is the wisdom of
God, hence our Savior in and by the Light hereof ope^ed the Scriptures to his
Di^ciples, and inflamed their hearts; and opened their eyes to understand the
Scriptures, Luke 24 25, 27, 32. 44. 45. Rev* 19. 10. And it is the power of
God, this was that which Christ was anointed to preach, and he spoke as one
having authority, and not as the Scribes, to whom the vision of all was as a
sealed book, for though they were zealous for, and strict in the observing
lighter matters, yet they passed over the great things of Gods Law, judgment,
and the love of God. Isa. 61. 2. Mat. 7. 20 1 Cor. 1. 22. 23.

The thing then to which he commits them, it is, the word of his grace, not of
ours, as he had directed them to the most excellent person, so here to the most
excellent means for the discovering of him to us; and this to show us further
the praise worthiness of this excellen^ one, and this is added that it may be a
light to u^ in our darkness.

For some might sa^* how shall we know Gods name or his sons N^me, how shall we
know he has bought us, or has any love toward us whether he g^ve himself a
ransom for us, and is our Shepherd, many there are who seem to speak high of
God, that bring an hard report of him, and deny that ^^ cordially loves the
greatest part of men, and so render his grace, and the ground of encouragement
for our coming to him doubtfu^, and even cut off the feet.

Now that we may not be misled by them or by our own thoughts, which in times
of such great correction especially are leading us to call into question his
love, and faithfulness he not only commends them to God, but to the word of his
grace, in which we may so behold him as to be strengthened to hate thoughts, our
own, and others for every word of God is pure Prove. 30. 4. 5. That in God we
may praise his word in the Lord we may praise his word (and so) in God we may
put our trust, Psalm. 56. 4. 10. We need not that any man teach us, but as that
anointing teaches of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, and even as it
has taught us, we shall abide in him 1 John 2. 27.

Now for some usefulnes^ to us in this thing to which he commends them we shall
consider.

1. What is this word of grace. 2. Why it is so called.
1. What is this word of grace.

Surely it is the same which he received of the Lord to testify, even the
Gospel of the grace of God, ver. 24. And which he had preached, even the
Kingdom of God. ver 25. All the counsel of God, ver. 27. Even the Gospel of
Christ, especial as it is now revealed in the Revelation of the Mystery, and
that it is so appears by that, Act. 14. 3. And compared with what goes before,
and follows; There we have an account given us of Paul's exercise at Iconium,
and the success of it, and how God stood by him; for it is said, he gave
testimony to the word of his grace, and when driven from Iconium, he came to
Lystra, etc. And there he preached the Gospel, ver. 6. 7. now ver. 21. 22. It
is said, he returned to Lystra, and to Iconium, and to Antioch, exhorting them
to continue in the Faith namely in that word of faith, which he had preached,
and they had received, in which expression he sums up in one word what he had
preached at those three places, to signify that it was but one thing, and so
that the word of his grace was the same he had preached at Autic^h, Act. 13.
32. 39. and which he preached at Lystra, chap. 14. 7. to wit the Gospel.

Yea it there appears also, that by the word of his grace is meant such a
discovery of it, as the Jews could not endure it was to the Jews, who were
seeking after a sign, a stumbling block; namely, it is, especially in the first
things of it, such a declaration of the grace of God, as in which glad tidings
is proclaimed to every poor sinful creature of mankind, while it is called to
day, to the worst of men, such as were the Gentiles, and so to Idolaters,
Adulterers, effeminate etc see Act. 14. 2. 6 and 13 45. 47. with 1 These. 2. 15.
16. Such as in which glad tidings of great joy is brought unto all people.

2. Now this is called the word of his grace, as in part is intimated and
signified.

1. Because it discovers the grace of the great God, and our Savior Jesus
Christ, and of the Father in him.

1. In what Christ was abased, and became obedient unto for us and has by
means and by virtue thereof effected, and obtained into himself for us. 2. In
what he is now doing. 3. In what he will do hereafter.
2. Because in and with this word he gives Grace to Men.

3. Because he makes them partakers of grace through it, that turn at his
^eproofs.

1. It is called the word of his grace, because herein he discovers his pity
and kindness to Man-ward, and that.

1. In what he was abased and became obedient unto for us, and has by means,
and by virtue thereof effected, and obtained into himself for us, and is
become, his grace is herein greatly evidenced, that we might behold it; he has
manifested his word and grace through preaching* and so

1. His grace was manifested in this, that he has undertook, and was abased
for us, was so excellent an one, it was God laid down his life for us 1 John 3.
16 One who was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with
God, Phil. 2* 6. He was rich, the Lord, and heir of all things, and yet was
abased for us; herein it appears it was grace: there was nothing in us, in that
condition we were in, to deserve such a favor, and so to engage him to it, yea
much that might have hindered, as afterward may be seen. Nor any thing for the
future could be expected from us that might recompense his kindness, yea his
goodness extended not to himself for he could not be added unto, for he was
glorious with the Fathers own self before the World was, this was therefore
grace indeed, and herein the grace of the Father did wonderfully appear, that
he sent forth his only begotten Son, Joh. 3. 16. 1 John 4. 9, 10. He has given
him for a standing witness of it to the people, Isa. 55. 3. 4.

2. His grace was herein manifested, and the Fathers in him, in the great
aba^ement whereto he was abused, and whereto he, this great and glorious one
humbled himself, that he might bring us back to God, and this may be summed up
in one word, that he became poor, as 2 Cor. 8. 9. or we may speak to it, in
these three branches.

1. He was made flesh. 2. Made Sin. 3. Made a curse.
1. He was made flesh, in the beginning was the word, and the word was with
God, and the word was God, etc. and the word was made flesh, 1 ^oh. 1. 3. 14.
God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, Ga^. 4 4. Forasmuch as the children
were partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the
same Heb. 2. 14. He laid hold on the seed of Abraham, Heb. 2. 16. and Adam,
Luke 3. in that body prepared for him in the Womb of the Virgin, the king of
glory made a marriage for his Son, in which our Nature was married, and united
to the divine Nature by a close personal, and inseparable Union, in the person
of the word, the Son of God Man. 22 1. 2. And without controversy, great is
the mystery of godliness, (there was infinite depth of wisdom, contained in it,
and unsearchable riches of grace, that) God was manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy
3. 16, and this was a great abasement, for herein he was made lower then his
own creatures, for a little while inferior to the Angels, which were made by
him for by him were all things created, visible, and invisible, Heb. 2. 9 Col.
1. 16. This is that which is greatly admired. What is man that thou art mindful
of him? and the Son of man that thou vis^^est him? for thou have made him a
little lower then the Angels, Psalm. 8. 4 5. with Heb. 2. 6. 9. Yea as he was
made in a nature inferior to that of the Angels, so in a condition lower then
man, in his first creation, for he took not on him our Nature, as it was when
first created, and before we departed from God but he was made in all points
like unto his Brethren, namely as they were made as the fruit of their sin, as
distinguished from sin it self, Heb. 2. 17. He was in all points tempted like
unto us, sin only ex^epted, Heb. 4. 15. and so he was subject to hunger, Mat.
4. 2. to thirst, Psalm. 22 6. to weariness, (yea it may seem he was weary before
his Disciples) Joh. 4. 6. To weakness Psalm. 109. 24. he was a worm and no man
(or, as some, no strong man Psalm. 22. 6. He himself took our infirmities, and
bare our sicknesses, Mat. 8. 17. He was a Man of sorrows and acquainted with
grief, surely he has born our griefs and carried our sorrows, Isa. 53. 3. 4.
He was subject to fear, and sensible of pain, shame, and reproach, Heb. 5. 7.
and 2. 18. Psalm. 69. 20. Yea as to the things of this World, he was very low,
he was the reputed Son of a Carpe^ter Mat. 13. 55. Yea he himself was a
Carpenter, Mark 6. 3. and was very poor, and needy, so as that others ministered
to him of their substance Psalm. 40* 17. and 109. 22. Luke 8. 3. though he said,
it is more blessed to give then to receive, yet he so humbled himself, as to
receive from others, Act. 20. 35. So poor was he, that when the Tribute Money
was demanded of him, he wrought a miracle to pay for himself and Peter, Mat. 17
27. Foxes have holes, and the Birds of the air nests, but the Son of Man, had
not whereon t^ lay his head, Luke 9. 58. He came not to be ministered unto, but
to Minister, Mat 20. 28. He took on him the form of a Servant, and was a
Servant of Princes, and washed his Disciples feet, etc. Phil. 2, 7. Isa. 49. 7.
He had no form or comeliness in him, no beauty that men desire him, he was
despised, and rejected of men, and his own hid, as it were there faces from
him, he was despised and they esteemed him no^; Isa. 53. 2. 3. He was one whom
man despised, whom the Nation (even his own Nation) abhorred Isa. 49. 7. and oh
that he were not so still in this his great abasement, by many that would be,
and are called christians, and profess themselves to be his disciples who
though they eat their own bread, and wear their own apparel, would yet be
called by his name, to take away their reproach, as Isa. 4. 1.

And this abasement of his, to wit, his taking upon him our nature as subject
to all our infirmities, was needful it behoved him in all things to be made
like to his brethren, Heb. 6. 1. 17.

1. Because otherwise he could not possibly have been further abased for us, as
was necessary; had he not partook with us of flesh and blood he could not have
dyed for us, as Heb. 1. 14. this way God boored, or opened his ear, and ^itted
him to do his will Isa. 50 4. with Heb. 10. 5. for Christ must needs have
suffered, and be risen again, or otherwise we must have necessarily remained in
our sins Act. 17. 2. 3. and thereto it was needfu^l for us that he be so
humbled, it became him for whom are all things, and by whom, that Christ should
suffer that his truth might be fulfilled his justice satisfied and his holiness
evidenced He^. 2. 10. without blood-sheddi^g, there was no remission. Heb. 9.
22 and blood by him to b^^shed unless he had Partake^ of flesh and blo^d, and
so we could not have been said. For ^tis by means thereof he has wrought
Salvation in himself and obtained all things into himself, and by which he is
now saving all men especially them that believe, And will completely save his
Israel hereafter it is all by means, and by ve^tue of his blood, his personal
abatement.

A^ to what he has done, and is become, ^^is by means of death, he has by the
blood of h^s cross made peace ^^l. ^. 20. Slain the ^^^ity, that was in the
sta^e, and condition of mankind, Ephesians 2 14 16. Redeemed us from the curse of the
law, Gal. 3 13. Destroyed Satan, Heb. 2. 14. Obtaintd forgiveness of those
sins i^^uted to the people, Ephesians. 1. 7. Confirmed a new testa^^n of great and
precious promises Mat. 26. 28 Obtained eternal Redemption, Heb. 9. 12. And has
all power and authority given unto him, Ph. 2. 7. 9. Mat. 28. 18. Heb. 2. 9.
Rev 5. 12. In short the Father has so loved the Son, because he so laid down
his life for us, that he might take it again, that he has given all things
into his hands, and he is through s^fferings made perfect f^r us, Joh. 3. 35.
with chap. 10. 17. 18. Heb. 2. 10. Yea

It is by virtue, and through the discovety of his precious blood he gives life
to the World J^h. 6 33. with v. 51 and is redeeming them unto God and whereby
the redeemed ones are purchased, Act. 20. 28. Rev. 5 9. and are justified, Romans
5. 9 and have their consciences purged from dead works to serve the living God,
Heb. 9. 14. and are washed and redeemed from their vain conversation, 1 Pet. 1.
18, 19. Rev. 1. 5. and by which he speaks better things for us in heaven, than
the blood of Abel, Heb. 12. 24. and is the Mediator of the New Testament, that
the called may receive the promise of the eternal inheritance, Heb. 9. 15. Yea,
it is that by which the everlasting Covenant is obtained, confirmed, and shall
be performed, and all that sleep in Jesus raised in due time to the glorious
enjoyment of it, Heb. 13. 20. Zech. 9. 11, 12. Oh precious blood, for it is the
blood of God.

2. It was needful he should take our nature upon him, because otherwise our
debt could not have been legally, or by the Law charged upon him; he was rich
indeed, intiched with the Father's own self, but he was not engaged until he
was pleased to undertake for us: But now being made of a woman, and marrying
our nature to the divine nature in that person of the Son of God, he was by the
will of God made under the Law, Gal. 4. 4. Mat. 22. 1, 2. and all our debts
came upon him, and he became our bondsman, and entered into our obligation, and
was our surety. Even as it is amongst men, though a man be never so rich and
wealthy, yet he is not therefore chargable by the Law to satisfy the debts of
another; but now if he marry a poor Widow, that is greatly indebted, he then
makes her debts which she had fore-contracted to become his to answer for, and
satisfy, and the Law will now lay hold on him: So mankind having in the first
public man contracted such a debt, as they were never able to have discharged,
Psalm. 49. 7, 8. Our Jesus, who though rich yet was not engaged, was pleased by
the appointment of the Father to marry our nature in its Widowhood, as it were,
and so became answerable for the worlds trespasses and debts, which they had
committed, and run themselves into, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21.

3. It was needful he should be made flesh, that the truth of our types of old
might be found in him; and that he might answer what was the custom among the
Jews by God's appointment in the case of redemption; for he was made under the
Law, not only as all mankind was fallen under it, but as the Jews were under
it, and so also he became by his being circumcised, and did observe the Law
given to them, Luke 2. 21, 22. Now in that Law amongst them, if a man had sold
away his possession and was not able to redeem it; or if a man had sold (...)
to a stranger, and could not redeem himself, one of his kin or bret^^^^ might
redeem it, or ^im; the right of redemption apper^ained to such a one, Lev. 25.
25, 47, 49. Yea, in some cases ((...) that of ^^th) though a man were a near
kinsman* and had thereby right to redeem, yet he must marry, and so bu^ also
the Widow; Ruth. 2. 20, and 3. 9. and 4. 4, 5. and i^ was not needful that the
next kinsman must do it, for such a one might be (not only unwilling, but)
unable; any of his kin might redeem, Lev. 25. 25. Now to answer to this;
Mankind had sold their possessions, and alien'd that from themselves; they are
come short of the glory of God in, and unto which he did create them; yea, and
had sold themselves to a stranger for naught, and were utterly unable to redeem
their possession or themselves, Psalm. 49. 7, 8. And Jesus Christ as he was in
the form of God, was not of our brethren, nothing kin to us, he was in a nature
infinitely superior to ours; and those that were kin to us were not only
unwilling, but all of them unable for it: He therefore that the right of
redemption might be his, took upon him our nature, and so became kin to us; For
both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified are both of one,
wherefore he is not ashamed to call them brethren, Heb. 2. 11, 14, 17. And
herein also he ma^ried it in its Widowh^od esta^e, that he might redeem that
which we had aliened and sold, and our selves also, who were sold to a
stranger, even Satan; and so, though others were nearer a kin, yet being waxed
so poor, and fallen into so great decay, that they could not redeem their
brethren, nor give to God a ransom for their own souls, he is become ou^
Redeemer; Our Redeemer from everlasting is his name, Isa. 63. 16. O^! for ever
blessed be he that did not leave off his kindness to such unworthy creatures as
we were become, who were fallen into so great decay, and had ^^ld our selves,
and all we had, and were dead in sins and trespasses; but bought us of the
Father from under the curse of the Law, and restored all we had forfeited, and
aliened into himself for us.

2. Being th^^ made of a woman, and having taken on him our nature, he was made
sin for us, and so became that for us which naturally he was not: Oh infinite
grace! that the holy one of God, yea, he who was righteousness and holiness it
self should be made sin; not that he partook of the pollution or fi^th of it,
for then he could not have redeemed us; such an one became us, who was holy,
harmless, undefiled, etc. he knew no sin, he did no sin, neither was guile
found in his mouth, 2 Cor. 5. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 22. he partook of our nature by a
wonderful work of new Creation, the holy Ghost coming upon the Virgin, and the
power of the highest overshadowing her, so that, that which was born of her it
was an holy thing, Luke 1. 35. he was sanctified and sent into the world, Joh*
10. 36. and was in his incarnation the Son of God; the Lord created a new thing
in the earth, a woman to compass a man, Jer. 31. 22. Genesis 3. 15. Luke 1. 35.
But the guilt of our sins was imputed to him, and it seems it was concerning
him that was spoken, Psalm. 69. 5. My guiltiness is not hid from thee, that
Psalm being a Prophecyof the sufferings of Christ, and the glory following. God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses
to them; for he made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, 2 Cor. 5. 19, 21.
That is, the guilt of all the trespasses of the world which occasioned the
first breach and enmity between God and mankind, was imputed to Jesus Christ;
even of all the trespasses of the world, which the world was guilty of before
the consideration of his undertaking for it, or which they could have been
guilty of before his grace that seasonably brings salvation to all men is
vouchsa^ed. God did lay, or cause to meet upon him the iniquities of us all,
even the guilt of that first offense of the first Adam, in which we all like
Sheep have gone astray, and from whence we are naturally and necessarily ^ound
turning every one to his own way, Isa. 53. 6. And these are said to be his own
sins, Heb. 7. 27. and he confessed them as his to answer for, where he says,
Mine iniquities have taken hold on me, etc. they are more than the ha^rs of
mine head, Psalm. 40. 12. And with respect to that first disobedience of our
first Father, in which we have all sinned, and from whence we are unavoidably
polluted, as we come to have a being from him, may that also be fundamentally
mean* and intended by the Baptist; Behold the Lamb of God that bears the sin
of the world, Joh. 1. 29.

3. Having our debt thus charged upon him, and accepting of it as his to answer
for, he was made a curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. and had the judgment of the world
executed upon him, Joh. 12. 31. a bitter cup prepared for him, which he
willingly, for the joy set before him, drank of, in which there was the hiding
of God's face from him, and the rage and cruelty of men, and fury of Satan,
which was permitted and ordered by God, and so in all God went to Law with him,
and thereby he was brought into the dust of death; his sufferings were, 1. More
immediately from God. 2. By God's permission and ordering from men. 3. From
Satan; by all which he was brought to death; all these, and in this order, are
spoken to, Psalm. 18. 4, 5. which Psalm, though it was directly spoken of David,
as appears by the Title; yet it was also a Prophecy of Christ, and some things
in it cannot fully be applied to any other person, as may be seen in the latter
end especially; and the like order is also used in Psalm. 22. And so,

1. The sorrows of death compassed him, even the sorrows or pains of death,
which he endured as inflicted more immediately by his Father, which were as
pains of a woman in travel, that cannot be delivered, yea inexpressibly
greater; he suffered the torments of death, he was tormented for our
transgressions, Isa. 53. 5. it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he put him to
grief, he forsook him, Psalm. 22. 1. The Evangelists all of them declare the
greatness of those sorrows he was compassed about with, before he was
apprehended by men. See Mat. 26. 38. My soul, says he, is exceeding sorrowful
(beset or compassed about with sorrows on every side) even unto death; as if
our Savior did refer unto, and open that, Psalm. 18. 4. These s^rrows were
doubtless very great, and so great, as though they were in, or upon the soul,
and so not so discernable to others as those more outward, yet they could not
be hid from others, but the grief thereby occasioned was in some part visible,
yet not the greatness of it. The Evangelist, ver. 37. says, He began to be
sorrowful, etc. but our Savior (to signify the greatness of his exercise, was
not known by others) says, My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto d^a^h.
Mark ( Chap. 14. 33.) says, He began to be sore amazed; both to show the
wonderfulness and marvelousness of the weight of that burden he was bearing,
and bitterness of the cup he was to drink, and was now drinking; as also, that
he began to be afraid, Mark 16. 5 6. Heb. 5. 7. Luke thus expresses it; And
being in an agony, he prayed move earnestly, and his sweat was as it were,
great drops, or clots of blood falling down to the ground, Luke 22. 44. So Joh.
12. 27. Now (namely, when the judgment of this world was ex^cuting upon him,
ver. 31.) is my soul troubled; and these great and inconceivable pains he
in^ured before he was apprehended by men, in all which we may in part ^^e,

1. The greatness of the wrath he endured more immediately from the Father,
such as it even made him to roar and cry, Psalm. 22. 12. and offer up prayers
and supplications with strong crying and tears, Heb. 5. 7. his wrath lay hard
upon him (as our surety) and he afflicted him with all his waves, Psalm. 88. 3,
7. He spared not his own son, Romans 8. 32.

2. That God did forsake him for some time, and not presently hear him and
deliver him as he did our Fathers, but left him to taste death, and feel the
weight of that curse that was our due to have born, Psalm. 22. 1, 4. Yea, it
seems God's wrath, and forsaking him, continued from first to last in this
harvest of affliction; therefore in Psalm. 22. 1. his crying out, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me, is set down before the sufferings he endured
from men, and in Mat. 27. 46. a little before he commended his Spirit to God;
yea (it seems as if) he so cried out when he yielded up the Ghost; for it is
said, ver. 50. Jesus when he had cried [again] with a loud voice, yielded up
the Ghost: Where [again] may be meant, not only as with respect to time, which
might have been understood, though that word had been left out, as it is in
Mark 15. 37. But [again] may be the same words also; as also appears by all the
expressions in the verse in which it seems the Evangelist refers to, ver. 46.

2. The floods of the ungodly made him afraid, namely, their multitude and
their rage against him; they made a noise like the noise of the Seas, and a
rushing like the rushing of mighty waters, as if they would have born him down
before them; The heathen did rage, and the people imagine a vain thing, Psalm 2.
1, 2. He was a reproach of men, and despised of the people, even of his own,
Psalm. 22. 6. And so, he was betrayed by Judas under pretense of affection; He
that ate bread with him did lift up the heel against him, Psalm. 41. 9. This
was a great affection, and that for which he vva^ troubled in spirit; not
only outwardly troubled, and sad in co^ntenance, as a man may be when he is
not inwardly affected, but he was inwardly grieved for it and by it, Joh.
13. 21. and therefore surely he had not from the beg^n^i^g determined him so to
do, nor was the Author of this his iniquity. And those to whom Judas was
guide for apprehending him were the chief Priests, and his own, amongst whom
he had been teaching, these came out against him as against a thief, Mat. 26.
47, 55. This was a g^ea^ ^ri^f, He came to his own, and his own received him
not, yea (...) him; he labored in vain, and spent his stre^^^h ^^^ naught and
in vain, for Israel was not gathered, Isa 49. 3. 5. yea, they were the chief
Priests, and his own Nation, the delivered him to the Gentiles, Joh. 18. 35.
And now his disciples forsook him and ^led, Mat. 26. 56. This added to his
affliction, he looked for some to take pity, but there was none, and for
com^orters, but he found none, Psalm. 69. 20. To him that is afflicted pity
should be showed from his friends, ^ob 6. 14. but they were scattered and left
him alone, Joh. 16. 32. And when he was thus apprehended by his enemies, and
forsaken by his friends, he is led away to the High Priests, w^ere the Scribes
and Elders were assembled in Council; and they, instead of waiting for a legal
charge and evidence against him, sought false witness against him to put him to
death, Mark 14. 55, Mat. 26. 57, 59. This was matter of his complaint, false
witnesses did rise up, Psalm. 35. 11, 12. And when they found nothing, or
nothing material, they laid snares for him, by prop^sing a question, and
adjuring him to answer it; which when he had answered, they judge him to have
spoken blasphemy, and to be guilty of death; and then they spit in his face,
and buffeted him, and others smote him with the palms of (or rods in) their
hands, etc. Mat. 26. 60, 68. And now to add to his affliction, he is denied by
Peter. Yea, and the chief Priests and Elders led him away bound, and delivered
him ^^ Pilate, before wh^m they accuse him, Mat. 27. 1, 2. Luke 23. 1, 7. and
Pilate sends him to Herod, and there he is vehemen^ly accused by the chief
Priests and Scribes; yea, and Herod also with his men of War, set him at
naught, and mocked him, and arrayed him in a gorgeous Robe, and sent him again
to Pilate, Luke 23. 7, 11. And though he was determined to let him go, and
sought once and again to ^elease him, yet because of the importunity of the
people, and particularly because they cried out, If thou let this man go thou
art not Caesar's friend, he delivered him to them to be crucified, John 19. 4,
16. The Kings of the earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered together
against him, Psalm. 2. 2. Many Bulls comp^s^ed him, strong Bulls of Bashan beset
him round, they gaped upon him with their mouths as a roaring and a ravening
Lion, Psalm. 22. 12, 13. And he was hanged between two Malefactors, and so
numbered with transgressors; yea, and now when they had so f^r accomplished their
design, their hearts relented not, but still they reproach him concerning his
trusting in God. He trusted in God, say they, that he would deliver him, let
him deliver him if he will have him, Psalm. 22. 8. Mat. 27. 41, 43. And this was
a sword in his bones; Reproach has broken mine heart, says he, and I am full
of heaviness, Psalm. 42. 10. and 69. 20. And those that were instruments of this
cruelty and shame to him, were the professed Church of God, and the Gentiles
high and low; those that would not at another time been in company together,
are confederate herein; in his adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves
together; yea, the abjects gathered themselves together against him they did
tear and ceased nor, with hypocritical mockers in seasts they ^^^shed upon him
with their teeth, Psalm. 35. 15, 16. And as this which he ind^red from men was a
great affliction, so it was the greater at this time, because the hand of God
touched him; they prevented him in the day of his calamity or fog, when the
Father hid his face from him; They persecuted him whom God had smitten, Psalm.
18. 18. and 69. 26. And though men were thus incensed against him, and enemies
to him, because he bore wi^ness to the truth which he received of his Father,
and witnessed a good confession, and so persecu^ed him for following and doing
the thing that was good; yet as it was permitted and ordered to him of the
Father, so it was a part of the curse which we had deserved, and herein God
went to Law with him for our sins; and this appears in that, whereas the Lord
by the Prophet says, Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man,
my fellow, sai^^^ the Lord of Hosts, smite the shepherd, etc. as herein giving
permissive commission, and ord^ring the wicked which are his sword, to smite
him, Zech. 13. 8. with Psalm. 17. 13. Mark 14. 27. Our Savior referring to, and
citing that place, thus renders it: I will smite the shepherd, and the sheep of
the flock shall be scattered abroad; as signifying that God did execute this
upon him, as part of the judgment of this world, Mat. 26. 31.

3. Yea the sorrows of Hell compassed him about, when men were thus persecuting
and reproaching him; the power of darkness also added to his great sorrow, Luke
22. 53. The Prince of this world, says he, comes, etc. John 14. 30. that is,
he came to afflict him, and execute death upon him, of which he had the power,
according to the curse of the Law, Heb. 2. 14. His soul was in Hell, Acts 2.
27. 31. He did taste the sorrows of it, even of all those sorrows and to^ments
of the first death, and hell thereto appertaining, which we must have endured,
had he not undertaken for us, and in the suffering whereof we had remained
miserable for ever. And he c^m^ also together herewith to move him to put forth
his hand to iniquity, and to go out of his Fathers way, that he might avoid
further troubles; he came to tempt him to sin, John 14. 30. with Mat. 4. 3.
etc. He thrust sore at Christ, that he might fall, Psalm. 118. 13. He was in all
points tempted like unto us, yet without sin, for the Prince of this world
found nothing in him for the temptation to work upon, Heb. 4. 15. And unto both
these ways of Satan's afflicting him, respect may be had in that prayer of the
Prophet, speaking in the person of Christ, and concerning him, Psalm. 22. 20.
Deliver my darling (or my only one) from the hand or power of the dog; namely,
of Satan, who was now bruising his heel, and causing great sorrows unto him; he
was now tearing of him, as it were, and therefore is he compared to a dog, Mark
9. 18. He had spoken of dogs before, ver. 16. viz. of the Gentiles; but here,
as I conceive, of the Prince of the world; and ver. 21. Save me from the Lions
mouth, even from the mouth of him who as a roaring Lion seeks to devour, 1
Pet. 5. 8. and who was tempting and moving him to go out of God's way, that he
might not accomplish and finish the work the Father gave him to do.

And by all these great, inexpressible and inconceivable sorrows and pains, the
snares of death prevented him; He dyed for our sins according to the
Scriptures, and was buried, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4. Herein it appears that the
grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, and therefore we have good reason to
commit our selves to him whose grace was so great, and who has so discovered
it in the word of his grace.

3. His grace still further appears to be great in this word of his grace, if
we consider the persons for whom he was thus greatly abased, and that both as
to their condition, and as to their number.

1. As to their condition in which they were, we have it declared* Romans 5. 6,
8, 10. While we were yet without strength, in due time Christ dyed for the
ungodly. God commends his love towar^^ ^s, in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ dyed for us; when we were enemies we were reconciled by the death of his
Son. And so, when without strength to help our selves, sick, and sick to death,
as water spilt upon the ground, that cannot be gathered up again, 2 Samuel 14.
14. when none could by any means redeem his brother, by any thing he could do,
suffer, or offer to God, Psalm. 49. 7. Gal. 2. 21. then he commended his love to
us; yea, this great weakness and helplessness we had contracted to, and brought
upon our selves by out voluntary departure from God: God made man upright, in a
condition to have had communion with his Creator, but they sought out many
inventions, Eccl. 7. 29. Adam transgressed the Covenant, and there dealt
treacherously against God, even as a Wife treacherously departs from her
Husband, Hos. 6. 7. and not for want, but through wantonness listened to the
lie of the tempter, and so brought death and misery into the world, Romans 5. 12.
Our comeliness was turned into corruption, and we retained no strength; and now
to lay hold on us, when we had voluntarily disabled our selves, this was great
love indeed. Amongst men this shuts up the bowels of their pity, when any one
does willingly and wil^ully lame or disable himself; who will bemoa^ such an
one? or turn aside to ask how he does? But in such a state God pityed us; yea,
when we were ungodly and sinners; ungodly, such as did not worship him, or
desire (and much less deserve) any favor; yea, acknowledged not our fault, but
sought to hide and cover it, Job 31. 33. and to throw it from one to another;
yea, the man, as it were, secretly to cast it upon God; The woman thou gave
to be with me, she gave me and I did eat; yet now he manifested his love to
them that asked not after him, yea that hid themselves first from the presence
of the Lord, and afterward sought to cover their transgression by hiding it in
their bosom.

And sinners, such as had mist their mark, and were greatly deceived, they in
their pride, not content with their state God created them in; but listening to
the temptation of Satan, aspired to an equality with God, and to be as God's.
Oh high presumption! to have a self-sufficiency in themselves, but they missed
miserably what they in harkening to the seducer proposed to themselves, and so
became transgressor^ and broke his Law, and thereby became such as God hears
not though they had cried, Joh. 9. 31. such as he could not delight in, or have
fellowship with, yet now he had compassion on us: This is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Christ has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, 1 Pet. 3. 18. yea, when we were enemies, enemies to him as well as to
our selves, haters of him; God was in Christ reconciling us to himself. David's
kindness toward Saul wonderfully wrought upon him, and it even broke his heart,
because he killed him not, but spared his life, when it was in the power of his
hand to have destroyed him: If a man find his enemy, says he, will he let him
go well away? wherefore the Lord reward thee good for that thou have done unto
me this day, 1 Samuel ^4. 19. But alas David's love herein, though very rare
amongst men, is not to be compared with this we are speaking of; for Saul whom
he spared was God's Anointed, and King, and therefore David could not put forth
his hand against him and be innocent, 1 Samuel 24. 10. and 26. 9. But now on the
contrary, he that so testified love toward us was the Lord, and heir of all
things; it is Christ, the Lord's anointed that dyed, and we were his creatures
and servants that had rebelled against him: Again, David parted with nothing
that was dear to him, much less laid down his life to show kindness to Saul,
only spared him* and forbore to touch him, but Christ dyed for our sins, that
he might bring us back to God. Is this the manner of man, Oh Lord God? Greater
love than this has no man, than to lay down his life for his friends; but God
commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, and enemies,
Christ dyed for us, Joh. 15. 13. with Romans 5. 6. 8. Great reason have we to
break forth into admiration with the Psalmist, and say, How excellent and
precious is thy loving kindness, O God! Psalm. 36. 7.

2. The persons, as to the number, for whom he so humbled himself, were all of
them whose nature he took, and in which he was made a little lovver than the
Angels; he was crowned with glory and honor, that he by the grace of God
should taste death for every man, Heb. 2. 9. It was a light thing, too mean
for, and below him, that he should be God's servant to raise up the Tribes of
Jacob, etc. but God has given him also that he should be for salvation to the
ends of the earth, Isa. 49 6. And this began to be preached by the Lord
himself. God so loved the world, says he, that he gave his only begotten Son,
etc. For God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the world, but that the
world thr^ugh him might be saved, Ioh. 3. 16, 17. This he spoke to one man,
even to Nicodemu^, that he might be born again. We are apt to think that a
particular application of God's love, as men call it, might have been more
proper in this case, when our Savior was applying himself to one person; yet
we see the course our Savior, the Wisdom of God takes, when he is declaring
the necessity of the Nevv-birth, and directing to the means by which a man may
be born again. And indeed, herein he shows what is the water of which a man
may be begotten again; namely, the pity and kindness of God to man-vvard, and
not some particular, or peculiar love to this, or that man. And from his mouth
the Samaritans received and learnt this lesson. Now (say they to the woman) we
believe, not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves, and know
that this is indeed the Christ* the Savior of the world, Joh. 4. 42. So Joh.
6. 51. And this was also confirmed unto us by them that heard him. We thus
judge, says the Apostle, that if o^e dyed for all, then were all dead; and he
dyed for all, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Yea, this was that which they favv in the
light and evidence of the Spirit, and accordingly did testify, even as the sum
of their testimony, that the Father sent the Son, the Savior of the world, 1
John 4. 14. 1 Timothy 2. 4, 7.

4. In this Word is discovered to us his grace, in what he has through and by
means of his death effected and obtained into himself for us, and is become.
And so,

1. That which he has effected thereby is, that he has saved us mankind in
himself, from that so great a death, in which otherwise we must have perished
for ever; for in Jesus Christ mercy and truth are met, righteousness and peace
have kissed; he has satisfied God's justice, fulfilled his truth, appeased his
wrath, paid that our debt, answered the Law; and this is manifested, in that
God has raised him from the dead in that same body in which he was crucified,
and in which he bare our sins on the Tree, and he has brought him again from
the dead through his blood, so precious was it in the sight of the Lord, Heb.
13. 20. That same Jesus, whom the Jews crucified, in that same personal body in
which he dyed for our sins, is raised again, and this was of absolute
necessity; for if he be not taken from prison, we must dye, and abide in our
sins for ever, preaching is vain, and faith vain, etc. But he is raised from
the dead, in that body which was pierced with a spear, and with those hands and
feet which were nailed to the Tree, John 19. 34. with Chap. 20. 20, 25, 27. And
unto his Apostles he showed himself alive after his passion by many infallible
proofs, being seen of them forty days, Acts 1. 3. And as he is raised in that
very body in which he suffered, so also in that public consideration, being
acquitted from all our sins that were imputed to him, and having over come all
our death and enemies that had led us captive* He was declared and determined
to be the Son of God (in whom he is well pleased) with power, according to the
spirit of holiness in the resurrection from the dead, Romans 1. 4. He is taken
from prison, and from judgment, and as in him as in the public man, all have
dyed and suffered the whole of the curse due to them for our first departure
from God, 2 Cor. 5. 14. So in him, who is the last Adam, they are acquitted;
For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, being justified freely
by God's grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus, Romans 3. 23, 24. and 5.
18. He has so purged away our sins from before the presence of God, the guilt
whereof was imputed to him, as that now the Father judges no man according to
the Law, as they fell under it in the first public man, Heb. 1. 3. with John
5. 22. that is to say, no man is condemned or held out from God, either because
our first Father has sinned, and we in him, or because as we come to receive
our beings we come forth and are born in sin, and so naturally and necessarily
polluted and defiled; for he has made peace, slain the enmity that was between
God and mankind, taken out of the way all that was in the way contrary to us,
broken down the middle wall of partition, and is become the way to the Father,
and God has committed all judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the
Son, Ephesians. 2. 13, 15. Col. 2. 13, 14. Ioh. 5. 22, 23. Gal. 3. 13. And he has
spoiled principalities and powers, led captivity captive, and destroyed him
that had the power of death, that is the Devil, Col. 2. 15. Psalm. 68. 18. See
how this began to be spoken by the Lord himself, as to both these branches,
John 12. 31, 32. Now, says he, is the judgment of this world (to wit, it was
now executing upon him when his soul was troubled, the guilt of the trespasses
of the world, which made it liable to the judgment of God, being imputed to
him, he was called to the judgment seat, and made a curse for us, and God in
him took vengeance of our iniquities, he judged and condemned sin in the flesh
of Christ Jesus, Romans 8. 3. Isa. 61. 1, 2. He was wounded for our
transgressions, bruised for our iniquities, etc. Now shall the Prince of this
world be cast^out (namely, out of his principality, and from being the Prince
of this world, as he was according to that judgment, for we were fallen under
his dominion necessarily, and must have so remained for ever, had not God
devised this blessed means.) And I, if I be lifted up from the earth (namely,
crucified, and hung on the Tree) will draw all men unto me. That is, by means
of his death, who in the virtue thereof is discharged and acquitted, he would
draw all men unto him and now (in the first sense) has drawn them unto himself
from under the judgment of this world, which was executed upon him, from under
that sentence of banishment, according to which they were shut out from God,
and must have perished in their sins; and from being under the necessary
dominion of Satan, who was become the Prince of this world; from under both he
has drawn them unto himself to be under his judgment, his gracious Government
and Lordship, for to this end Christ both dyed, rose and revived, that he might
be Lord both of the dead and living; Lord of all, Romans 14. 9. Acts 10. 36. And
to a gracious end did he dye for all, and is raised again, and has the
sentence of banishment remitted to him, and brought us under his kingdom, viz.
that he might bring us back to God, 1 Pet. 3. 18. 2 Cor. 5. 15. And of both
these it appears the Psalmist prophetically speaks in Psalm. 136. where he
provokes to give thanks to the Lord for his mercy, and that first because of
his creating all things, ver. 5. 9. and then for his great goodness toward the
house of Israel, which he bestowed on them, ver. 10, 22. to which he adds, he
remembered us in our low estate (when we were brought low for our iniquities,
and were justly banished from his presence in the sentence of his Law) for his
mercy endures for ever; and redeemed us from our enemies, for his mercy
indureth for ever, ver. 23, 24. I say, it appears he speaks of this redemption
of mankind in Christ generally, and of his mercy to the Gentiles particularly,
in that it is distinguished from his work of creation, his goodness to Israel,
and his providing for, and giving food to all flesh. And the like is also said,
Col. 2. 14, 15. yea, he has so saved all mankind in himself, as that no man
shall perish for ever in that first death, of which our Jesus tasted, and which
he overcame, and has abolished; but be raised out of it; for since by man
death, by man also the resurrection of the dead; For as in Adam all dye, so in
Christ shall all be made alive, 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. And when they are raised,
they shall not be judged according to that first rule of judgment, bu^ God will
judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ (he is appointed the judge of quick
and dead, an^ God will judge the world in righteousness by t^^^ man ^ct. 10.
42. and 17. 31. and the rule by which he will judge ^^^ ^ will be) according to
Paul's Gospel (in which is declared ^h^^ Christ dyed for all, and by the grace
of God ^asted (...) for every man, 2 Cor 5. 14, 15. Heb. 2. 9.) Romans 2. 16. And
he ^^at believes (this Gospel as declared ^^ the means (...)) and is baptized,
shall be saved; and he that believes ^ot shall be damned, Mark 16. 15, 16.
Joh. 16. 8* 9. Romans 2. 6, 11. Jer. 31. 29, 30. Ezekiel. 18. 2, 4. Psalm. 68. 18, 21.

2. He has not only delivered us from so great a death, and curse, and from
the hand of our deadly enemy who hated us, but has obtained and recovered all
things into himself for us, and is made perfect through sufferings, that he
might bring us back to God; namely, he has obtained forgiveness, spirit and
grace, and all power and authority in the name of the Father. Forgiveness, he
is exalted with God's right hand a Prince, and a Savior to give repentance and
forgiveness of sins, Act. 5. 31. This man, when he had offered one sacrifice
for sins for ever, sat down, etc. namely, from this work of offering any more,
his sacrifice being so acceptable, as that he has taken away the guilt of his
sins which were imputed to him, and h^th obtained power to forgive the sins of
the people, Heb. 7. 27. and 10. 11, 12. He is ascended up on high, and has led
captivity captive, and has received gifts (of justification, forgiveness and
spirit) in the man for men (as they come forth from Adam) yea for the
rebellious also (which add rebellion unto their sin, Job 34. 37.) Psalm. 68. 18.
Herein the free gift, this grace in Christ exceeds the offense of the first
man; the judgment was by one (offense) to condemnation, but the free gift is of
many offenses unto justification, Romans 5. 16. even of many offenses that are
distinct from that offense, and unto which men are not thereby necessitated
merely; of many offenses in which men sin after the similitude of Adams
transgression, ver. 14. through this man whom God raised again, and who saw no
corruption, is preached the forgiveness of sins, even of such sins as they that
believe this preaching are justified from; namely, from such sins as they could
not be justified from by the Law of Moses, for which it afforded or directed
to, no sacrifice for a typical justification; to wit, rebellious, presumptuous
sins, Act. 13. 38, 39. with Numb, 15. 30, 31. The Son of man has power on
earth to forgive sins, Mat. 9. 6. and in him God is become a God gracious and
merciful, pardoning iniquity, and transgression, and sin, Romans 3. 25. Heb. 10.
14, 18. In him the Apostles had in the testimony to declare redemption through
his blood, even the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of Gods grace,
Ephesians. 1. 7. Col. 1. 14. Oh great consolation for us that have transgressed, and
have rebelled, and have thereby procured such testimonies of displeasure, as in
which he has been taking away faithful and eminent helpers in the Lord! Oh
excellent object, and medium to be commended to, that we may in the
encouragement of his grace in what he has done, and is become, and has
received, come with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy,
forgiveness of our sin, and grace to help in time of need, Heb. 4. 16.

And he has received the immeasurable fullness of the Holy Ghost, the spirit of
grace, Isa. 11. 1, 3. and 42. 1. Joh. 3. 34. he is full of grace and truth,
Joh. 1. 14. In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. 2.
3. This is the record that God has given us eternal life (even the knowledge
and favor of God, and fellowship with him) and this life is in his Son, 1 Ioh.
5. 10, 11. all things are here ready, Mat. 22. 4. durable riches and
righteousness, a feast of fat things for all people, of fat things full of
marrow, Prove. 3. 13, 18. and 8. 18, 19. Isa. 25. 6. he is become a fountain of
life and living waters, to cool and refresh our thirsty souls, and to wash us
from all our pollutions and defilements, Zech. 13. 1. Psalm. 36. 9. Ier. 2. 13.

Yea, it discovers the great power, and authority, and dominion which he has
recovered into, and received in our nature, and for us: God has given him
power over all flesh, over all mankind; he is the Prince of the Kings of the
earth, and has power over all creatures, all power is given to him both in
heaven and in earth, Mat. 28. 18. God has given him dominion over the works of
his hands in this lower part of his Creation, the which he gave to man in the
first Adam, but by their seeking out inventions they came short of this glory
of God which he had conferred upon them, Gen, 1. 26, 28. Eccl. 7. 29. Romans 3.
23. but our Jesus has redeemed this which was part of our possession, and
which we had sold and aliened. and not only so, but he has power over Angels,
he has ob^^i^^d a more excellent name than they, even than the holy and elect
Angels, they are now his, and are instructed to worship him, even all the
Angels of God, Heb. 1. 4, 6. they are the Angels of the Son of man, sent forth
and ordered by him, Mat. 24. 30, 31. Heb. 1. 10, 14. and his own right hand,
and his holy arm has gouen himself the victory over the evil Angels, he has
bound the strong man, spoiled principalities, and powers, and God has put all
things under his feet, Ephesians. 1. 20, 21. Psalm. 98. 1. This was that which was
more darkly prophefied of by the Prophet; Thou made him to have dominion over
the works of thy hands, thou have put all things under his feet; all sheep and
oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field (even the great and wild beasts, the
fear of him is upon them) the fowl of the Air, and the fish of the Sea, and
whatsoever passes through the paths of the Sea, Psalm. 8. 5, 8. He has the
dominion over these, that he may give food to all flesh during his pleasure,
and that he may preserve from the ^ury and rage of the wildest and strongest of
them, that men's lives may be preserved while it is the day of his grace, and
for the peculiar good of those that believe, Job 5. 22, 23. Yea, the Apostle
citing that place in the Psalmist, and showing it was spoken concerning our
Jesus, does also explicate it unto us, and shows that he has obtained a more
excellent and large dominion than over the works of God's hands here below;
yea, that nothing, no person, or thing is exempted from being under his
Lordship, except him who has put all things under him, though this be not so
gloriously manifested now, as it shall be in due time: Thou have set him over
the works of thy hands, thou have put all things in subjection under his feet;
sor in that he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put
under him, Heb. 2. 7, 9. Oh great, grace toward mankind, and especially for the
good of those that shall be heirs of salvation. Hence that admiration, What is
man that thou art mindful of him! Psalm. 8. 4. Heb. 2. 6. and 1. 14.

This is that grace in Christ as to the first branch of the testimony, even
that he by virtue of his blood has delivered us in himself from the guilt of
our sins which occasioned the first breach, and from that so great a death, and
has obtained forgiveness of all our sins, all grace and truth into himself,
and a great and glorious Lordship and authority.

And by virtue of what he has done and has received, he is become the one and
only foundation, the living stone, and chief corner stone, the head of the
corner, 1 Cor. 3. 11. 1 Pet. 2. 4, 6. yea, to the disobedient the head of the
corner, 1 Pet. 2. 7. the Savior of the world, Joh. 4. 42. 1 John 4. 14. the
way, the truth, and the life, Joh. 14. 6. the only door ^f approach to God, by
whom only we may come to the F^ther, Ioh. 10. 7, 9. the true light, the light
of the world, Ioh. 1. 9. and 8. 12. the bread of life, and water of life, Ioh.
6. 35. the true vine, Ioh. 15. 1. he is beauty and glory, excellency and
comeliness for our escape, Isa. 4. 2. the Lord and Christ, Act. 2. 36. a Prince
and Savior, Act. 5. 31. yea, in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, and in him we are complete, who is the head of all principality and
power, Col. 2. 9, 10. Who can utter the mighty acts of the Lord? who can show
forth all his praise? Psalm. 106. 2, 3. his love is that which passes
knowledge, Ephesians. 3. 19.

And great cause, and good ground have we to pray for our selves and one
another, that God would strengthen us with might by his Spirit in the inner
man, that Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith (in what he has done and is
become) that we being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend
with all Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height (even
of his grace) Ephesians. 3. 16, 18. where the excellency of this love and grace is
set forth in like expressions, as is the unsearchableness of the Almighty, for
God is love. See Job 11. 7, 9. there we have these several dimensions spoken
of, though in a contrary order.

The breadth of this grace is such, as that it is broader than the Sea, though
that be famous for its breadth, and therefore called the great and wide Sea,
Psalm. 104. 25. yet he has given to it its decree that the waters should not
pass his commandment, Prove. 8. 29. there is an end of that, but his love is
exceeding broad (and his commandment, his Gospel in which it is declared) this
is more capacious, infinitely, exceedingly wide, who there-through has in our
nature obtained dominion now, and shall exercise it gloriously from Sea to Sea;
he is that place of broad rivers and streams, and shall be so gloriously
manifested, Isa. 33. 21. and they that from the excellency of his loving
kindness, put their trust under the shadow of his wings, shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of his house, and he will make them drink of the
river of his pleasures, (now in a first fruits of the Spirit, and hereafter in
a full enjoyment) for with him is the fountain of life, Psalm. 36. 7, 9. and 46.
4.

As to its length it is longer than the earth, as to its duration and
continuance, for it is everlasting, Jer. 31. 3. And he has given us
everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, 2 These. 2. 16. and it is
by virtue thereof that the earth and all the inhabitants thereof, which were
dissolved by the sin of man, are upheld; he bears up the pillars thereof,
upholds all things by the word of his power, Psalm. 75. 3. Heb. 1. 3. whereby
all the inhabitants of the earth are in him redeemed from the curse of the Law,
and whereby there is peace on earth, good will toward men, and which extends
in the virtue and fruit of it, to all the inhabitants of the earth in every age
and generation, and that to a gracious end. Hence all the earth called upon to
make a joyful noise, to be thankful unto him, and bless his name, etc. Psl.
100. to look to him and be saved, Isa. 45. 21, 22.

The depth of it is deeper than hell, even that wherethrough he has destroyed
Satan in his first work, and is fitted and empowered to destroy him in his
second, and will do it in due time; he has spoiled principalities and powers;
Destruction and death say, we have heard the fame thereof with our ears, Job
28. 22. Satan had laid his plot very deep, and by his subtlety having begui^ed
our first Parents, and drawn them into the transgression, and so into the
desert of curse and death, thought to have made them for ever necessarily alike
miserable with himself; and indeed the condition into which he brought them,
and they by listening to him brought themselves, was such, as they could never
suffer this death, so as to overcome in suffering; no man could redeem his
brother, etc. and yet the death must be suffered and overcome, or no mercy
could be shown to mankind; but now our God, and the Father in him, the man
Christ Jesus has counterplotted and underuin^d him, and in what he thought to
have dealt proudly, he was above him; in that very destruction in which he
though to have destroyed us for ever, is he taken and fallen; our Jesus has
through death destroyed him that had the power of death, even the Devil, and
has obtained the victory and his triumphing Song is, Oh death, where is thy
sting? Oh hell, where is thy victory? Death in him is swallowed up into
victory, and abolished, and he has overcome hell, and outwitted Satan; in the
net which he laid for us, and into which we were fallen, is he himself taken:
Oh infinite pity and love to man-ward, and through Christ God gives us the
victory, that we may rejoice in his salvation, and in the name of our God list
up the banner, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 58. Psalm. 20. 5. and 98. 1. and 47.

The height of it is the height of heaven, for there-through, and by virtue of
what he has done thereby, he being raised from the dead, has offered himself
a spotless sacrifice unto God through the eternal spirit, and is ascended
^ar-above all heavens, into heaven it self, that he may fill and fulfill all
things; he is gone up into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, and by
means, and by virtue of what he has done, there is peace in heaven, Luke 19.
38. When man had sinned, and brought themselves under the sentence of
banishment, God's love and pity was toward them; but such was the holiness of
God, and his truth, and justice, that there was no mercy to be showed forth to
mankind, until his justice was satisfied, his truth fulfilled, and his
righteous Law answered; For heaven and earth shall pass away, but not one jot,
or title of the Law shall pass till all be fulfilled. But now Jesus Christ
becoming under the Law by the will of God, he bare our sins, and dyed our
death, and is raised again, so as in him mercy and truth are met, righteousness
and peace have kissed; truth is sprung out of the earth in his resurrection,
and righteousness looks down from heaven, in all the streams of God's goodness
and compassion to us; and now there is cause to sing, peace in heaven, and
glory in the highest; he is ascended upon high, and is set down at the right
hand of the throne of the Majesty, in the heavens. Oh infinite love! Oh
unsearchable riches of grace!

2. This word of his grace discovers his grace to us in what he is now doing to
us from heaven, in the name and authority of the Father, and in the anointing
of the holy Ghost: And in what he is doing in heaven for us with the Father; in
both which he is the Savior of all men, especially of them that believe 1 Timothy
4. 10. his end in both, being, that he might bring us to God; his end in what
he has done for us in breaking down the middle wall of partition that was
between God and us, and between Jew and Gentile, and having abolished in his
flesh the enmity, it was, that he might reconcile both (Jew and Gentile) unto
God in one body by the Cross, Ephesians. 2. 14, 16. His end in his having made peace,
was, that he might reconcile all things, and so all men (as persons sometimes
is included and meant in that expression, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 23.) Col. 1. 20. And
indeed that his end was to reconcile all men, appears to be included in that
expression, in that he immediately adds, And you who were sometimes enemies,
and alienated in your minds, etc. yet now has he reconciled, Col. 1. 20, 21. 2
Cor. 5. 14, 15. and so his end in what God has now appointed Christ to, and in
which he is faithful, is the same, not to condemn the world, but that through
him the world might be saved; and the Apostle does hereby demonstrate and prove
the graciousness of God's heart toward all men, by showing what he has
appointed Christ unto in his present work and office. God, says he, will have
all men to be saved', and come to the knowledge of the truth. To evidence that,
he says; For there is one God, (namely, not only to distinguish him from all
other who are called Gods, but to denote to us that he is one, not divided,
has not a secret will contrary to his revealed, but he is light, and in him is
no darkness at all, and so he is the same, he has manifested himself to be in
abasing his Son to dye for us, and crowning him with glory and honor, that he
by the grace of God should taste death for every man.) And one Mediator,
(namely, as before, not only to distinguish him from all others that are called
so, and so to signify that he is the one and only Mediator appointed by the
one God; though that is true, and may be principally intended, but also to
assure us that he is one, the same, Jesus Christ the same, yesterday, to day,
and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. And so in what he is appointed to, to day, he is one
and the same with what he was yesterday, even the Savior of the world, the
anointed Savior of men, while they are not wholly given up to, and become one
with Satan, and reckoned fully of his seed, and for such in that consideration
he was never a Savior; and so he is one Mediator) between God and men, the man
Christ Jesus (even he that had such infinite grace to all men, that) he gave
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time, 1 Timothy 2. 4 6. If God
had not willed and desired that all men should be saved, he would never have
appointed such a gracious Mediator between him and them, and such a faithful
testimony: Now then to this end that men might be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the truth in this day, and this in order unto their eternal
salvation.

1. Jesus Christ is a testimony of God's graciousness to men in due time, even
to all men as they come to years of capacity, that they might be reconciled,
and their hearts turned to the Lord; the enmity that was in the state and
condition of mankind, Jesus Christ has already slain, and has taken out of
the way all that was in it contrary to us; but yet still men while abiding in
their natural state, are enemies in their minds to God; there is a secret
enmity and contrariety in their hearts to God, through that ignorance that is
in them. Now then, that this may be purged out, and their minds turned to the
Lord, Jesus Christ is seasonably by all means witnessing his, and his Fathers
pity and love to them, and is by his goodness discovered moving to repentance,
for it is the goodness of God leads to repentance, even those that are not
led by it, Romans 2. 4, 5. It is his love manifested and discerned that begets
love to him again, 1 John 4. 7, 10, 19. Grace is poured into the lips of Jesus
Christ, Psalm. 45. 2. and he is in some measure giving some witnessings of God's
mercifulness and goodness to all; yea, to those that had not the Word and
Oracles committed to them, as Israel after the flesh had: He left not himself
without witness (of his propitiousness through a Mediator) but gave them rain
from heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling their hearts with food and gladness,
Act. 14. 17. and 17. 26, 27. that which may be known of God is manifest in
them, for God has showed it unto them; for the invisible things of him, from
the Creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things
that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, even his mercy, goodness and
wisdom, etc. That he is, and is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him,
which whoever believes, having no more clear discovery, comes to God
acceptably, Romans 1. 19, 21. Psalm. 19. 1, 6. and 145. 8, 10. Heb. 11. 6. The
grace of God brings salvation to all men, Tit. 2. 11. even some discovery of
the salvation Christ has wrought and obtained in himself for them: So it is
said, Wisdom, (...) Jesus Christ, cries without, (without the pale of the
profess^^ Church, without, where are dogs Rev. 22. 15.) She utters her voice
in the streets, she cries in the chief place of concourse, in the opening of
the gates, in the City she utters her words; namely, speaks of excellent
things to them, and the opening of her lips are right things: She declares good
things to them, the goodness and graciousness of God toward them, and right,
true things also, that which is faithful and worthy of all acceptance, Prove.
1. 20, 21. with Chap. 8. 1, 4, 6. And so it is said, the Spirit of the Lord God
is upon Jesus Christ, because the Lord has anointed him to preach the Gospel,
etc. and so to preach it as to comfort all that mourn, as distinguished from
Zions mourners, even all that mourn, whatever be the occasion, Isa. 61. 1, 2.
and without controversy he is without sin herein; he is faithful in what he is
appointed to, yea not only faithful from the engagement and obligation of an
appointment, but his own gracious heart and cordial affection to all, moves him
so to be, for he is the Son of the Father in love. Hence that, Good and upright
is the Lord, therefore will he teach sinners in the way, Psalm. 25. 8, 9. He is
not simply upright, but good, gracious, and thence also upright; therefore will
he teach such as are out of the way, even such as have missed the way, and
mark, as distinguished from meek ones, and fearers of the Lord.

And in and with his witnessings of God's goodness, he is also faithfully
reproving and convincing men of the sinfulness of their sin, and of the vanity
of their idols; he is showing unto them the emptiness and unprofitableness of
all those things in which naturally they are seeking rest. So it is said, Prove.
1. 21. Wisdom utters her words, this is the first thing she does; namely,
speaks of excellent things, as before, and in and with this reproves: How long
ye simple ones will ye love simplicity? and the scorners delight in their
scorning? and fools hate knowledge? ver. 22. He is making gracious proclamation
and invitation to every one that thirsts, to come to the waters; and he that
has no money, no gracious frame or qualification, and therewith reproving them
for, and convincing them of their folly and unreasonableness, in spending their
money for what is not bread, and laboring for that which satisfies not, Isa.
55. 1, 3, and 41. 29. with Chap. 42. 1. Psalm. 4. 2, 3. and 62. 8, 10. Prove. 8.
4, 10, 21, 32, 36. and 9. 1, 6. All things that are reproved are made manifest
by the light; for whatsoever does make manifest is light. The true light does
not simply reprove, but makes all things manifest, it discovers things in their
right and proper colors, that men might flee from the things reproved;
wherefore he says, Awake thou that sleep (that have fellowship with men in
their unfruitful works of darkness) and arise from the dead, (both from dead
persons and things, forsake the foolish) and Christ shall give thee light, Ephesians.
5. 13, 14. Prove. 9. 6. It is the work and office of the Holy Ghost to reprove
and convince the world of sin, because they believe not on Christ, of
righteousness, and of judgment; and this he does by glorifying Christ, and
taking of his things, and showing unto men, John 16. 8, 14, 15.

And together with this discovery of God's goodness to all in due time
vouchsafed, and reproof of men's evils, and discovery of the sinfulness of their
sin, and emptiness, and unprofitableness of their objects of rest and
satisfying, in which in vain they seek what is not in them, Jesus Christ is
also preventing men in due time with some capacity to behold what he is
commending to them, and what he is condemning and faulting: This is the true
light that lights every man that comes into the world, Joh. 1. 9. God has
put his Spirit upon him, and so furnished him, and as so furnished he has
given him to be a light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, Isa. 42. 1, 7.
Hence that, If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives liberally
to all men, and upbraids not, Jam. 1. 5. The poor and deceitful man meet
together, the Lord lightneth both their eyes, Prove. 29. 13. Jesus Christ is the
light of the world, the great manifestation of God's goodness to men, and the
giver of light to men; Upon whom does not his light arise? Joh. 8. 12. Job 25.
3. He does seasonably open men's eyes, and unstop their ears, that they might
behold what he is presenting, and hear what he is speaking; and is also turning
men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God (even Jews and
Gentiles) that they might turn to God from idols, to serve the living and true
God, and so by his Spirit preaching, not to their outward ears only, but to
their spirits, who still continued disobedient, Act. 26. 18. 1 Pet. 3. 18, 20.
Not only bowing and moving them by a moral swasion (as some speak) but giving
some supernatural light, and power unto them, as in his hand is power, and
might, and strength, so in his hand it is to give strength unto all, and he is
faithful hereto in due time, 1 Chronicles. 29. 12. The bread of God is he that
comes down from heaven, and gives life unto the world, unto the dead world,
who are dead in sins and tresp^sses, John 6. 33. and he so comes down (in such
manner, and to such end) that a man (any man) may eat thereof and not dye, ver.
50. He is not only calling to men, but also stretching forth his hand unto them
in the means vouchsafed, Prove. 1. 24. And indeed otherwise men could not come
unto him; No man can come to Christ, except the Father who has sent Christ
draw him, Joh. 6. 44. they have no sufficiency of themselves, as of themselves,
to think any thing that is good; they have no light in their understanding, no
freedom of will, no inclination or affection to anything that is spiritually
good; in them, as of them, and from Adam dwells no good thing; but now that
they might come, he is vouchsafing the cords of a man, some demonstrations of
his goodness through a Mediator, and is drawing them with the cords of a man,
with the bands of love, and is to them (that refuse to return) as he that
takes off the yoke on their jaws, and lays meat unto them, Hos. 11. 3, 5.
Jesus Christ draws all men unto him, even such as break his bands, and cast
away his cords from them, and despise the riches of his goodness and
forbearance, etc. Joh. 12. 31, 32. Psalm. 2. 3. Jer. 5. 5. Romans 2. 4, 5.

And it is men's refusing their own mercies for lying vanities, and neglecting
and abusing such capacities given them, that is their iniquity which is now
imputed to them, according to the rule of the glorious Gospel. Men were not
capable of adding rebellion to their sin, if God were not thus preventing them
with his goodness; for this is that which renders them rebellious, when they
are disobedient to God who is stretching forth his hands to them, that is, who
is even beseeching them to be reconciled, and giving them some light and power
of his Spirit that they might turn, and when also they are gainsaying and
contradicting, and so rebelling against the light extended. Compare Isa. 65. 2.
with Romans 10. 21. Men are therefore said to be a rebellious people, because
they have eyes to see and see not, and ears to hear and hear not, Ezekiel. 12. 3.
Jer. 5. 21, 23. Mat. 13. 15. This is the condemnation (viz. the cause of
condemnation, the condemning sin, and that which makes all sins condemnable,
according to the rule of Gospel) that light is come into the world (some
discovery and manifestation of God's goodness afforded, and some capacity to
behold it given) and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds
were evil (so discovered to be by the light) Joh. 3. 17, 19. And certainly no
man shall be condemned to a second death, but for refusing the grace of God
that brings salvation to save them in due time, and persisting therein. As our
Savior says to the Jews; If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not
had sin, but now they have no cloak or excuse for their sin, Joh. 15. 22.

And this is great consolation to us, that Jesus Christ is appointed to be, and
is the light of the world, for he is good and upright; any man is unmeet for
this, though he were never so willing, yet he is unable to speak to all men;
yea, the spirit is not put upon them to give forth or dispense to others; this
glory he will not give to another besides Jesus Christ, nor his praise to
graven images, Isa. 42. 6, 8. It is true, they are instruments in his hand, and
though they have no sufficiency of themselves as of themselves to do any good,
yet their sufficiency is of God, and Jesus Christ has promised to be always
with his people in their faithful ministration, even to the end of the world,
Mat. 28. 18, 20.

But however unable men are, yet seeing God has given him to be a light of the
Gentiles, that he should be for salvation to the ends of the earth, he will not
fail, nor be discouraged; and this grace of his, and of the Father in him, is
discovered to us in this word of his grace.

2. He is also the Mediator between God and men, making intercession for
transgressors, Isa. 53. 12. that is to say, when men after some manifestation
of God's goodness afforded, leading to repentance, and some capacity given to
behold it, and men strengthened to turn from darkness to light, yet they are
found rebelling against the light, and grace of God vouchsafed, and provoke new
wrath; now that men might not be presently cut off, and bound over to the wrath
to come, according to their deserts, he is appearing in heaven for them, that
God may be still patient toward them, and not deal with them according to their
sins: It is generally found with men that they are sinning against the grace of
God bringing salvation to them; the Lord (after means used, and mercies
afforded) looked down from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there
were any that did understand and seek God: They are all gone aside, they are
together become filthy, there is none that does good, no not one, Psalm. 14. 2,
3. they are not believing God in what he is testifying to them of his goodness
in and through Jesus Christ, or however, not in what he is therewith testifying
of them, their works, ways and idols. And he that believes not the Son is
condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God; that is, not so believed as to love the light more than
darkness, Joh. 3. 18, 19. And this is generally the reason of men's refusing and
rebelling against the light, not simply because it discovers good of God, and
declares his graciousness and desire of men's good, but because it testifies of
the world that the works thereof are evil, Joh. 7. 7. even their best works as
well as their worst works: He that does evil hates the light, neither comes
to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved and discovered, Joh. 3. 20. Job
23. 13, 17. and for this men are condemned, they do deserve, and are under the
sentence of the wrath to come; this is the sin of the world, and for which it
shall be condemned, so persisting. Now Jesus Christ in his present work is
presenting himself in the virtues of his sacrifice once offered, and always
acceptable before the Father for such as these, during his good pleasure, that
judgment may not speedily be executed upon them, but patience and forbearance
may be exercised, further means used, and spirit sent forth in the means to
open their eyes, and to turn them from their disobedience to the wisdom of the
just; he is the Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world, even their
sin of unbelief, for this is the sin of the world, Joh. 1. 29. with Chap. 16.
8, 9. that is, he in his present Mediation so takes it away, that God's wrath
may not presently break forth to cut men off in their sins; and so in a lower
sense he procures forgiveness for them; not such as they receive who come unto
God by Christ, for their sins are blotted out in heaven, but the sins of these
are retained in heaven against them while they con^inue in them, and the wrath
of God abides on them, Joh. 3. 18, 36. but he procures sparing, and further
space of repentance, Luke 13. 34. Rev. 2. 21. and is also giving unto them
grace of repentance; and to such an end he is said to be and is the
propitiation, not only for their sins who have him as their Advocate with the
Father, but also for the sins of the whole world, who lie in wickedness, 1 John
2. 1, 2. with Chap. 5. 19. Hence it is that God is so slow to anger, and that
he says to men, to day, after so long a time, if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts; yea, that he waits so long on such as love their
simplicity, delight in scorning, and hate knowledge, Prove. 1. 22. Isa. 43. 14.
2 Pet. 3. 15. A type of whom was Moses, who was the Mediator of the first
Testament. When that people had greatly sinned, so as God threatened to
destroyed them, then Moses his chosen stood in the breach before him to turn
away* his wrath, lest he should destroy them, Psalm. 106. 23. Heb. 3. and so
prevalent is he in his Mediation, that God always gives to him his hearts
desire, and withholds not from him the requests of his lips; he did oft-times
hear Moses, but once when he request somewhat for himself, the Lord said unto
him, let it suffice thee, speak no more to me of this matter, and would not
grant him his desire; but God never turns away the face of this his anointed
one, but hears him always, Joh. 11. 41, 42. And (as before is intimated) his
end in making intercession it is, not only that men's lives might be a little
longer continued, much less is it that he may aggravate their condemnation
(though if men still refuse and rebel, their condemnation will be hereby
aggravated, and God will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalpe of
such as go on still in their trespasses, Psalm. 68. 18, 21.) but that they which
live, and have their lives prolonged, might live, not to themselves, but to him
who dyed for them, and rose again, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. and therefore while he
intercedes for further sparing, it is that he may dig about (by his corrections
and chastenings, in which he has a gracious end while it is called to day, Job
7. 17, 18. and 33. 19, 29.) and dung them, with his mercies and goodness to
lead them to tepentance, as Luk 1. 3. 6, 8. So also the Apostle signifies in
that motive and argument he lays down, to move the Cori^^hians not to receive
the grace of God in vain; for he (to wir, the Father) says (to Christ) I have
heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored
thee. I say, therein is signified, that while God hears Christ, and that is all
the time he is mediating, he is also using means, and succouring him in his
ministration, that men might receive the grace of God to purpose; and so all
this while, it is an accepted time, and day of salvation, in which men may seek
the Lord, and he will be found, 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2. Isa. 55. 1, 6. And hence the
Apostle Peter. instructs to account the long-suffering of our Lord to be
salvation; that is, not only an evidence and witness of that salvation wrought
and completed in the person of our Lord, though it is so also, Psalm. 68. 18,
20. nor only that during that time of his exercising long-suffering, he is
saving them from destruction; but also to signify what the end of our Lord in
procuring it for us, and exercising it toward us is* namely, He is
long-suffering to usward, not willing that any should perish, (no not those
scoffers that walked after their own lusts, and said, Where is the promise of
his coming? while it is called to day) but that all should come to repentance,
2 Pet. 3. 4, 9, 15. Prove. 1. 22. for he has no pleasure, none at all, neither
secret nor revealed in the everlasting destruction of men, while the day of his
grace and patience continues, and that is while Jesus Christ mediates, and that
is while God is calling men by any means, and stretching forth his hand, which
he does while he calls. Have I any pleasure at all that the wicked should dye,
says the Lord God? and not that he should return from his ways and live,
Ezekiel. 18. 23. and 33. 10, 11. Isa. 49, 8. and 50. 1, 2. and therefore when men
have so provoked God as that they have deserved to be presently cut off, and he
is threatening to bring upon them such judgments as in which many would have
their lives taken away, and so, dying in their sins, be sealed up to the wrath
to come; because he has no pleasure concurring with their destruction, while
there may be hope, he is through the Mediation of Jesus deferring his anger,
and waiting that he may be gracious, and ex^^^ting himself that he may have
mercy upon such, Isa. 30. 8, 18. such his grace to man-ward while it is called
to day.

But now in his present work and office, he is especially the Savior of them
that believe, the Apostle and High Priest of their profession, to whom he is
more abundantly gracious, he give^h grace to the humble.

He forgives them their iniquities that come unto God by him, and retains
them no longer in heaven against them, but justifies them freely by his grace,
and ever lives to make intercession for them, to take away their manifold
mixtures, weaknesses and infirmities, and is therefore able to save them to the
uttermost, yea, they are justified in believing by him from all things from
which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, even from rebellious
iniquities; and to them he imputes righteousness without works, and they are
made accepted in the beloved, Heb. 7. 25. Act. 13. 39. Tit. 3. 7. Romans 4. 5, 7.
yea God is daily and continually t^^ just fire of him that believes in Jesus
through him as the propitiatory, Romans 3. 22, 25, 26. and so, To them he gives
power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name, and
they are the subjects of peculiar grace and favor: Behold what manner of love
the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the sons of God, even
such as were sometimes the children of wrath, even as others, 1 John 3. 1. Ephesians.
2. 3. Jesus Christ loves them with the same manner of love as wherewith the
Father loves him, and the Father loves them with such manner of love as
wherewith he loves his Son Jesus Christ, Joh. 15. 9. and 17. 23. even with a
delightful and well pleased love; yea therefore he loves them, because they
have loved Jesus Christ, and have believed that he came forth from God, Ioh.
14. 21, 23. and 16. 27.

And because they are sons, he sends forth the Spirit of his Son into their
hearts, to them he pours forth his Spirit, and makes known his words, Gal. 4.
6. Prove. 1. 23. He gives unto them the Spirit of Wisdom and Rev^lation in the
knowledge of Christ, opening and enlightening the eyes of their understandings,
that they may know what is the hope of his calling, etc. Ephesians. 1. 17, 20. And
this he does, not because of any perfection of their coming to God by Christ,
but from his own goodness he is pleased to make and repute them as his people,
and to favor them with such favor. Hen^e the Psalmist ascribes it principally
to the graciousness of the Lord, that he still and further teaches them, and
makes known his words: Good and upright is the Lord, therefore the meek he will
guide in judgment, and the meek he will teach his way; and the secret of the
Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant (his Son
whom he has given for a Covenant of the people, and in whom all the promises
of God are yea, and Amen, Isa. 42. 6. 2 Cor. 1. 20) Psalm. 25. 8, 14. He gives
them his good Spirit to guide them into all truth, to teach them all things,
and bring all things to remembrance which Christ has said, and so he gives
wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to them that know understanding, Joh. 14. 27.
and 16. 13. Dan. 2. 21. And by his thus giving the Spirit to them, and opening
the testimony of Jesus, and therein glorifying Christ, he is still, and further
baptizing them by this holy Spirit, making them clean, and washing them with
the washing of water by the Word, from the errors and pollutions of the world
into Jesus Christ, Joh. 15. 3. Mat. 3. 11. Ephesians 5. 25, 26. 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11.
strengthening them there through to mortify the deeds of the body, Romans 8. 13.
giving this as a spirit of adoption into their hearts, a spirit of grace and
supplication, Zech. 12. 10. a spirit of boldness and confidence to come unto
God as their Father, and cry Abba, to draw nigh to him by the blood of Jesus,
through that new and living way consecrated through the veil, the flesh of
Christ, he being also the great High Priest over the house of God; and so to
come with boldness to the throne of grace, that they may obtain mercy, and find
grace to help in time of need, Heb. 10. 19* 22. Romans 8. 15. Gal. 4. 6. Heb. 4.
16. and to teach them what to pray for as they ought, both what things to
desire, and so what to pray for first, and especially, namely, the kingdom of
God, and the righteousness thereof, and things more directly thereto
appertaining, and other things with submission to his will, and upon what
account, and in what encouragement, and to what end to seek them, to wit, in
the name of Christ, and that God in all things may be glorified, Rom 8. 26, 27.
to fulfill in them the righteousness of the Law, and fill them with the fruits
of righteousness, and so to conform them to Christ, that their soul may be as a
watered garden, Romans 8* 4. Gal. 5. 16, 22. Ephesians. 5. 9, 10. Isa. 58. 11. to teach
them to answer adversaries and opposers, and that they may contend earnestly
for the faith once delivered to the Saints, Luke 12. 11, 12. and 21. 14, 15. to
anoint them, and give grace to them, even some gracious gift for the good of
men, and growth of the Church, that they may grow up together by that which
every joint supplieth, Ephesians. 4. 7. 1 Cor. 12. 7. and so makes them a royal
Priesthood to show forth his praises, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9. yea, strengthens them
through his Spirit, to wait for the hope of his righteousness by faith, in
purging away their transgressions, subduing their iniquities, fighting their
battles* (he being the Captain of their salvation) perfecting all their works;
and even to look for the mercy of our Lord Jesus to eternal life, Gal. 5. 5.
Psalm. 138. 7, 8. Isa. 26. 12.

He is their Advocate with the Father to plead their cause, to receive their
suits, to make their spiritual sacrifices acceptable, taking away the iniquity
of their holy things, that they may come with acceptance upon his Altar, and so
to give answers of peace and gracious returns. He is the High Priest of their
profession, and so he is not of others; their sorrows shall be multiplied that
hasten after another God, Rock, Mediator, High Priest, their drink offerings of
blood will he not offer, but he offers their sacrifices that come to God by
him, and perfumes them with the virtues and odours of his sacrifice, Psalm. 16.
4. Joh. 14. 13. 1 Pet. 2* 5. 1 John 2. 1. Rev. 8. 3, 5. Heb. 13. 15, 16.

His eyes, unto whom all things are naked and opened, are always upon them to
preserve them from evil, to preserve their souls, 2 These. 3. 3. they are always
upon the righteous, to order his providence as may be good, and to deliver
them from the will of their enemies, and he is caring for them, and will
preserve them that none shall pluck them out of his hand, Joh. 10. 27, 28.
Psalm. 33. 18. 1 Pet. 5. 5, 6, 7.

Such is his grace to them, that when need is, he is chastening them for their
profit, that they may be more partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 9, 11. The
Lord tries the righteous (out of love to them, and faithfulness to Christ
Jesus, Psalm. 89. 28, 33.)* But the wicked, and him that loves violence his
soul hates; and therefore he is not so trying them, Psalm. 11. 5. And oh! that
none of them whom he is so chastening, may forget that consolation in Christ
which speaks to them as to children, that they may not despise his chastenings,
nor faint when rebuked of him, Heb. 12. 5, 8. Prove. 3 11, 12. And in those
chastenings they have a merciful and faithful High Priest to consider, who
himself has suffered being tempted, and therefore is able to succor them that
are tempted, Heb. 2. 17, 18. and 3. 1. and 4. 15, 16. one who pities them as a
father pities his children, and therefore chastens them as a man chasteneth his
Son, Psalm. 103. 13. Deuteronomy. 8. 5. with great tenderness; and in measure he
debateth with them, and with the temptation will make a way of escape, that
they may be able to bear, Isa. 27. 8, 9. 1 Cor. 10. 13. and though he cause
grief, he will have compassion according to the multitude of his mercies, Lam.
3. 31, 32. and cause all things to work together for good to them that love
God, Romans 8. 28. and all these temp^ations and trials of their faith shall
appear to praise, and honor, and glory at the appearing of Christ, 1 Pet. 1.
6, 7* they shall see and acknowledge his grace and faithfulness in nurtu^ing
them in this day to so gracious an end, that they might not be condemned with
the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32. Prove. 23. 14. yea, now while walking in the light of
the Lord, they are acknowledging his faithfulness in correcting, and giving
th^nks to him because of his righteous judgments, Psalm, 119. 62, 68, 75.

Yea, he will in their seeking first the kingdom of God, and unto that, add
unto them all other things; and so what they shall eat, and what they shall
drink, and wherewith they shall be clothed; he will give unto them food and
raiment, such provision has he made in his great and precious promises for
their incauragement, that their conversation may be without covetousness and
carefulness, and he is faithful who has promised, as is wonderfully manifested
in the Cross of Christ, Mat. 6. 33. Heb. 13. 5, 6. Psalm. 34. 9, 10. yea, he is
a Sun and a shield, and will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he
withold from them that walk uprightly (and therefore) O Lord of hosts,
blessed is the man that trusts in thee, Psalm. 84. 11, 12.

3. This word of his grace discovers his grace to us in what he will do, and
that, 1. To those righteous ones whom he gathers to himself now by death, and
before he appears. 2. And to all of them hereafter, when the Lord himself shall
descend from heaven.

1. To those righteous ones who dye in the Lord, his goodness extends so to
them that it is far better with them, than when at home in the body, though for
such to have abiden in the flesh till they had finished their days, who are cut
off in the midst of them, had been more needful for the survivers of that body,
that their rejoicing might have been more abundant in Christ Jesus, Phil. 1.
23, 26. yet their condition is more excellent than any of the Saints here, for
his grace is more abundant to them; according to what the Plalmist speaking in
the person of, and concerning Christ, signifies: My goodness. (namely Christ's
goodness and grace) extends not to thee (not to his Father, it adds nothing to
him, for he is infinitely perfect, it extends not to him to give any thing to
him, or to advantage him) but to the Saints that are in the earth, and to the
excellent ones, in whom is all my delight, Psalm. 16. 2, 3. Surely by the
excellent ones, as distinguished from the Saints that are in the earth, is
meant, those that dye in, or according to the faith, and they are more
excellent than those of that body that are here continued.

They are free from sinning against God, Gal. 4. 29. and so are taken away from
the evil that here was present with them, Isa. 57. 1. While they were here they
had sin dwelling in them, and when they would do good, evil was present with
them; when their hearts were set to seek after wisdom in the knowledge of
Christ, this sin was molesting them, and seeking to divert them, that they
might not consider, but let slip the things they had heard, that the word might
be unprofitable to them; or to cause them to take offense at the reproofs of
instruction? Or, when to will was present with them, and they by the grace of
God fixed to promote the things of Christ in word and conversation, it was
present, moving them to ask counsel of their covetousness, or to seek after
praise of men, and to be desirous of vain glory, etc. but now they are freed
from that. In this present world, and while they were in it, they had
ungodliness and worldly lusts in themselves to be always denying, Tit. 2. 11,
12. but they shall then each one walk in his uprightness before him, as their
blessedness, Isa. 57. 2. and that they shall then, when absent from the body,
be delivered from the indwelling and molestation of sin, may be signified by
that of the Apostle, Oh* wretched man; who shall deliver me from the body of
this death? Romans 7. 17, 24. as implying, that when he should be delivered from
this body of death, which is dead by reason of sin, Romans 8. 10. he should then
be delivered from those troubles and continual combats that here he was greatly
exercised withal; the spirits of those just men are then made perfect, Heb. 12.
23. and their bodies sleep in Jesus, and shall be raised in the r^surrection of
the just, Zech. 9. 11, 12.

They are free from the temptations of Satan, and men, which here they were
exposed to, and from those vexations wherewith their righteous souls were vexed
by the filthy conversation of the wicked, in seeing, and hearing from day to
day their unlawful deeds. The Lord knows how to deliver (and by this means
will deliver) the godly out of temptation; 2 Pit. 2. 7, 9. the hour of
temptation comes to try them that dwell upon the earth, from which now after a
peculiar manner they are delivered, Rev. 3. 10. God does set them in safety
from those that here would have ensnared them. While here, and all the time
they were in this present world, they had ungodliness and worldly lusts in
others also to deny, and abstain from, and no way to be freed from their
temptations and vexations, though they might be preserved from the evil; but
when they are no more in the world they are delivered from those inticements
and griefs; so much the Apostle signifies; I wrote unto you not to company with
fornicators, yet not altogether with the fornicators of this world, etc. for
them must ye needs go out of the world, implying, that when they should be no
more in it, they should no more have such occasions of temptation or vexation,
1 Cor. 5. 10.

They have now rest given to them from the days of adversity, till the pit be
dug for the wicked, and so from those great judgments wherewith God will
punish the world, the influences whereof will cause trembling of the belly, and
quivering of the lips, and rottenness in the bones of the surviving righteous
ones, though they may still rejoice in the Lord, yea, and at the sight of the
coming to pass hereof lift up their heads, because their redemption hasteneth,
Hab. 3. 1, 16, 18. Psalm. 94. 12, 13. from the grief and exercise hereby
occasioned these are free; he shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their
beds, Isa. 57. 2. they are taken from the evil to come, ver. 1. Hence that,
Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, etc. Hide thy self as it were for
a little moment, until the indignation be overpast; for behold the Lord comes
out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity,
Isa. 26. 20, 21.

They are free from all their labors and services, which, while here,
occasioned trouble and weariness to them; there is no work in the grave where
they are, Eccl. 9. 10. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from
henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, Rev.
14. 13. This the Apostle reckons amongst his infirmities, and those things
which occasioned exercise to him, that he was in journeyings often, in
weariness and painfulness, in labors often, 2 Cor. 11. 23, 26, 27. and they
are freed from great grief which here they were exposed to in seeing so little
fruit of their labors amongst men, yea that those that listened to their
doctrine, and were hearers of it, were not yet doers of it, that they were so
little gathered from among the Heathen; and that some of them though they
profess to know God, yet in works deny him, being abominable and disobedient,
and to every good work reprob^te, Tit. 1. 16. that such were still walking in
pride, covetousness, or the more gross lusts of the flesh; thtt they even
labored in vain, and spent their strength for naught and in vain; that though
men received the love of the truth, yet not so as to be saved by it, this was
matter of sadness, and even an heartbreaking to them, and indeed that whereby
God himself is broken, Ezekiel. 6. 9* this was matter of wailing and complaint to
them; that they have been like a woman with child that draws near the time of
her delivery; they have been with child, they have been in pain, they have
wrought (little or) no deliverance in the earth, etc. Isa. 26. 17, 18. Now they
rest from this, Isa. 57* 2.

They are free from al^ p^^secutions in words, gestures or actions, they are
hid in the secret of God's presence from the pride of man, and k^p^ secretly in
a pavillion from the strife of tongues, Psalm. 31* 19. after the body is dead
their enemies have no more that they can do, Luke 12. 4. there the wicked cease
from troubling, and there the weary are at rest; there the prisoners rest
together, they hear not the voice of the oppr^ssor* Job 3. 17, 19. The
reproaches, laugh^ers, scorns, and persecutions that here they met with, did
seem to be grievous to them* as to what they themselves thereby endured, Psalm.
69. 20. as well as also as to their enemies, it caused great grief to them,
rivers of waters run down their eyes, and they were troubled in spirit, because
men kept not God's Laws, but persecuted them wrongfully, and were enemies to
them for following the thing that was good, Joh. 13. 21. this caused heaviness
to them, to consider the greatness of their iniquity and severity of the
judgment they were pulling upon their heads by such iniquities.

They are now out of the danger of miscarrying, and from henceforth there is
laid up for them a crown of righteousness which the Lord the righteous judge
shall give unto them in that day, 2 Timothy 4. 8. there is now a great gulf fixed,
and no passing from one place to another, no altering of their condition, no
not for ever, Luke 16. 26. Eccl. 11. 3. Now abiding in Christ they are safe, he
that abides in him sins not, transgresses not, and misseth not the mark;
but if a man abide not in him, he is cast forth; its possible that such as have
begun to run well may turn aside from him that called them into the grace of
Christ, 1 John 3. 6. Gal. 1. 6. and 5. 7. but then no change of their state,
and their works follow them, all their work of faith, and labor of love, and
patience in tribulation, these shall not be forgotten, but be recompensed in
the resurrection of the just, Luke 14. 14.

And now they are present with the Lord, as here they were not when at home in
the body, seeing and beholding in their spirits the glorified and glorious body
of our Lord Jesus, and then walking by sight, as now they do not, for they are
more excellent; and therefore sorrow not for them as those that have no hope,
Isa. 57. 2. 2 Cor. 5. 6, 7, 8. Phil. 1. 23, 24.

2. It discovers his grace to all of this body, both in soul and body, when
Jesus Christ shall appear the second time without sin to salvation, Heb. 9. 28.
in which his Israel shall be saved with an everlasting salvation, they shall
not be ashamed nor confounded world without end, Isa. 45. 17. this is that
which Peter exhorts the believers to hope for: Gird up, says he, the lions of
your minds, be sober, and hope to the end for the grace that is to be* brought
to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 13. and this he calls the
grace of life, 1 Pet. 3. 7. and indeed that eternal life they shall then
inherit gloriously, it is not wages, as death is of sin, bu^ a gift of grace,
Romans 6. 23. Zech. 4. 6. And this grace that shall then be brought to them is so
exceeding great, as none here fully knows. Hence that admiration, Oh! how great
is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee, which thou
have wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men, Psalm. 31. 19.
since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear
(by any thing they have heard in any declaration vouchsafed) neither has the
eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for him that waits for
him, Isa. 64. 4: These things were indeed revealed to the Apostles by the
Spirit as in form^r times they were not, and so they have declared them; and
yet they did but see in part, and therefore Prophecy in part, 1 Cor. 2. 9* 10.
with Chap. 13. 9. This grace is inexpr^ssi^ly, yea inconceivably great, it has
not entered into the heart of man; and much less can I declare it in order, who
have seen so little of it in the testimony, but yet as I may be helped I shall
speak a little of it.

1. They that sleep in Jesus shall be raised, and the living changed, when
Christ shall descend from heaven, and so before the rest of the dead, 1 These.
4. 16. 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. As in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made
alive; but every man in his own order (not all at once) Christ the first fruits
(he is risen from the dead already, and is become the foundation of the
resurrection from, and of the dead, for if he be not raised, there could be no
resurrection; and he shall be the effecter of it, and is become the first
fruits of them that are fallen a sleep in him especially; like to whom shall be
that lump* Romans 11. 16.) afterward they that are Christ's at his coming* then
(or afterward, as ver. 5.) the end (namely, after the end of the thousand yea^s
of Christ's and his Saints reigning on the earth, there will be the second and
general resurrection, when the dead small and great, shall be raised and stand
before God, Rev. 20. 7, 12, 13, 15.) 1 Cor. 15. 22, 24. So the Apostle John
says, I saw, (to wit, in vision) the souls of them that were beheaded for the
witness of Jesus, and for the word of God, and which had not worshipped the
beast, neither his image, neither had received his mark upon their foreheads,
or in their hands, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years; but
the rest of the dead lived not again until the thousand years were finished,
Rev* 20. 4, 6. Isa. 26. 19.

2. In their being raised they shall be saved wholly from all sin, death, and
other enemies. And so,

From sin, he shall present them to himself a glorious Church, not having spot,
Ephesians. 5. 27. they shall then be sanctified wholly in spirit, soul, and body, and
be presented blameless before the throne of his glory, 1 These. 5. 23, 24. and
3. 13. Jude 24. No sin in them, but as the first fruits, Jesus Christ, is holy,
so will be the lump then completely; nor any imputation of sin to them, or
remembrance of sin upon them, their sins shall then be completely blotted out,
when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he
shall send us Jesus who now is preached to us. There is now no condemnation to
them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but after the
spirit; but yet there is sin in them, and if any of them say they have no sin,
they deceive themselves, and the truth is not in them; yea, and there is some
remembrance of sin upon them: And as to those that dye in the Lord, though
their spirits are made perfect, as before, yet there is some fruit of sin upon
them; but then he will cast all their sins into the depth of the Sea; their
sins, and their iniquities he will remember no more, Act. 3. 19. Heb. 10. 16,
17. Mic. 7. 19. Jer. 50. 19, 20. And this further appears, in that they shall
be raised out of, and delivered for ever.

From death, and all its fruits, this was the wages of sin, Romans 6. 23. By one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, Romans 5. 12, 14. And, now the
body is dead because of sin, Romans 8. 10. And it is appointed to man, the whole
kind, once to dye, though all shall not sleep in death; yea, the bodies of
those just men generally whose spirits are made perfect, sleep in the dust,
they are prisoners, though prisoners of hope, and so they are in the graves:
But he will open their graves, and cause them to come ou^ of their graves, and
their bodies shall be fashioned into the likeness of Christ's glorious body,
Phil. 3. 20. Now they are corruptible, have the seeds of corruption and
principles of mortality* they are perishing, decaying bodies, and we may (with
him) say to corruption, Thou art my father* and to the worm, thou art my mother
and my sister, Job 17. 14. We must needs all dye, and those that sleep in
death, their bodies return to dust; but they shall be raised incorruptible, no
more to return to corruption; this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and
this mottal immortality. That which is now dishonorable, and of which we are
ashamed, for sin brought in shame, and therefore need clothing and covering,
that the shame of our nakedness appear not, and which is sown in dishonor, a
vile, loathsome carcass, shall be raised in glory, even with the glory of the
Lord upon it, Mat. 13. 43. They shall no more need this vile clothing, but
they shall then be clothed with the garments of salvation, and covered with
the robe of righteousness. That which is now weak at best, and subject to many
infirmities, weaknesses and sicknesses, destitute of that health and strength
at first created in; and so sown in weakness (no life, no strength in it to
move it self, and even like the beasts; for that which befalls the sons of
men befalls beasts, even one thing befalls them; as the one dies, so dies
the other, etc. Eccl. 3. 19.) shall be raised in power; be strong and freed
from all weakness and diseases. That which is now a natural body, which we
received by natural propagation, and was here nourished with natural meat and
drink, by the word of God; and is sown a natural body, shall be raised a
spiritual body; they shall be the sons of God then as to their bodies, being
the children of the resurrection; and then they shall hunger no more, nor
thirst any more, they shall be so spiritualized, that they shall be like to,
and equal with the Angels, not hindered by any obstacles; they shall bear the
image of the heavenly, and so they will be more excellent than man in his first
creation; and now freed from all sickness, pain and grief; these inhabitants
shall no more say they are sick, for their sins shall be forgiven them, 1 Cor.
15. 43, 49. Luke 20. 35, 36. Isa. 49. 10. and 33. 24. Rev. 21. 3. Christ shall
then present them to himself a glorious Church not having wrinkle, no fruit, or
remembrance of affliction, or grief upon them, Ephesians. 5. 27. Job 16. 8. but the
glory of the Lord shall be seen upon them; then shall be brought to pass the
saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory, 1 Cor. 15. 53, 55.
they shall be freed and delivered for ever from the first death, and shall be
freed and delivered for ever from the first death, and shall not go into the
second; blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection, on
such the second death has no power, Rev. 20. 6. they shall not be condemned
with the world in that everlasting fire, which was not at first prepared for
mankind, but for the Devil and his angels, into which all that have been
incensed against, and continued disobedient to Jesus Christ shall be cast; he
that overcomes shall not be hurt of the second death, Rev. 2. 11.

Then they shall be delivered and saved from all their enemies, and from all
their deceits and troubles; God shall redeem their souls from deceit and
violence, Psalm. 72. 14.

From deceit, God shall then bruise Satan under their feet, as he is already
bruised under the feet of the Captain of our salvation; for during the thousand
years reign of Christ, and his Saints, he shall be bound, so as not to deceive
the Nations all that time; and when the thousand years are expired, he shall be
loosed a little season out of his prison, and shall go out to deceive the
Nations; he shall not then have liberty given him to deceive the Camp of the
Saints, much less the beloved City, and presently after he shall be cast into
the lake of fire and brimstone, Rev. 20. 1, 3, 7, 10. into the holy City, new
Jerusalem, shall in no wise enter any thing that defiles, neither whatsoever
works abomination, or a lie, Rev. 21. 27. and 22. 15. Now they have
temptations from Satan and men, though yet in hearing Christ's voice and
following him, none shall pluck them out of his hands; neither death, nor life,
nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, not things present, nor things to
come, etc. shall be able to separate them, that love God, from the love of God
which is in Christ Jesus, Joh. 10. 27, 29. Romans 8. 38, 39. but yet Satan is
trying and endeavoring all means to corrupt from the simplicity that is in
Christ Jesus, and by ^etting slip the things heard, and listening to Satan,
it is possible that a man may be entangled and overcome (there being sin in
believers also that is always working deceitfully) as appears by the many
admonitions given to believers, and jealeusies of the Apostles concerning them,
and some instances in Scripture recorded, etc. 1 Thessalonians. 3. 5. Gal. 1. 6, 7. and
5. 3, 5. and 6. 1. 2 Cor. 11. 1, 3. Heb. 2. 1, 3. and 4. 1. and 10. 23, 29. but
then, as they have no sin within them, so none without them that shall tempt
them any more: And herein their condition is more excellent than was Adam's and
mankind's in him in the first Creation; for though then God made man upright,
yet there was a tempter permitted to tempt him, and through his subtilty did
beguil him, he not keeping in believing mindfulness the word of God, but
listening to the lie of the serpent.

And then they shall be delivered from violence also, he will give to them then
rest from all their troubles, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven
with his mighty Angels, in fl^ming fire taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 These. 1. 7, 8.
Somewhat of this was typically enjoyed by Solomon before he departed from the
Lord, according as God promised; the Lord gave him rest on every side, so that
there was neither adversary nor evil occurrent, 1 Chronicles. 22. 9. 1 King. 5. 4.
But behold a greater than Solomon is here: There were then enemies in being,
but now there shall be no more a pricking bryar unto the house of Israel, nor a
grieving thorn, etc. Ezekiel. 28. 24. Psalm. 72. Violence shall no more be heard in
the Land, wasting, nor destruction within thy borders, but thou shall c^ll thy
walls salvation, etc. and the days of thy mourning shall be ended; he will
then destroy them that have destroyed the earth, and precious shall be the
blood of his Saints, for he will take vengeaence on those that have slain them,
and been enemies to them, Isa. 60. 12, 20. and 63. 1, 4. with the assurance of
this he strengthens the weak hands, and feeble knees, viz. that he, their God
will come with vengeance, God with a recompense (for the Lord God of
recompenses will surely requite all the injuries done to his Saints) he will
come and save them, Isa. 35. 3, 4. Jer. 50. 27, 28. and 51. 56. He will then
bind their Kings in chains, and their Nobles in fetters of iron, and his people
shall have an hand with him therein, to execute upon them the vengeance
written; this honor have all his Saints, Psalm. 149. 4, 9. Those righteous ones
that are taken away by death do enter into peace, and are fre^d from
oppression, but yet their blood is not avenged, but they cry with a loud voice,
how long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell on the earth, for this they wait; it was said unto them that
they should rest yet for a little season, etc. Rev. 6. 9, 11. but then he will
thoroughly plead their cause; shall not God avenge his own elect which cry unto
him day and night? I tell you he will avenge them speedily, Luke 18. 7, 8.
vengeance is his, and he will repay, Romans 12. 19. Rev. 11. 18. their eye shall
then see their desire upon their enemies, Psalm. 92. 11. and 112. 8, 10. in
righteousness shall they then be established; they shall be far from
oppression, for they shall not fear, and from terror, for it shall not come
near them, Isa. 54 7, 8, 13, 14. then he will completely and gloriously bless
his people with peace, and they shall delight themselves in the abundance of
peace, Psalm. 29. 11. and 37. 11.

3. They when thus raised and freed from all evil, shall be ever with the Lord,
in companionship with him; the dead in Christ shall rise first, then we which
are alive, and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall be caught up together
with them in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we ever be
with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 15, 17. he will then come and receive them to
himself, that where he is, they may be also, Joh. 14. 1, 3. This is his will
concerning* them, that those the father has given unto him should be with him
where he is, Joh. 17. 14. The tabernacle of God, even Jesus Christ in his
personal body, shall then be with them, and he will dwell with them, Rev. 21.
3. indeed now he dwells in their hearts by faith; but faith is the evidence of
things not seen; but then they shall have a personal and-glorious enjoyment of
him, according to that, Zeph. 3. 14, 17. Sing, O daughter of Zion, shout O
Israel, be glad and rejoice with all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem; the
Lord has taken away thy judgment, he has cast out thine enemy; the King of
Israel, the Lord is in the midst of thee, thou shall not see evil any more; the
Lord thy God in the midst of thee is mighty, he will save thee. The name of the
City from that day shall be, The Lord is there, Ezekiel. 48. 35. and then there
will be a gathering together of the righteous, as unto him, so one unto and
with another, and his coming and their being gathered together unto him are put
together, 2 These. 2. 1. Now in a spiri^ual and invisible consideration they
meet together, they are all one in Jesus Christ, and all in heaven and earth
are one family, one house, and instruction given to them here to endeavor to
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; but yet they are severed and
scattered as to personal society, and so at a distance one from another, and
many of them unknown one to another, yea some of them not owning one another to
be of the same body, whom yet Jesus Christ has received; they are now
scattered and separated one from another.

Sometimes by contentions, judgings and d^spisings one of another, and this is
matter of great lamentation; and when they fall out, they are hardly
reconciled, it being the work of Satan, and his instruments to dig up evil, and
in their lips is a burning fire; they are set on fire of hell, and would set
all on fire; they sow strife, and endeavor further to separate, and make the
breach wider by whispering, and secretly fomenting jealousies, and so are
separating even chief friends, Prove. 16. 27, 28. H^nce they are admonished to
be angry, and not sin, not to let the Sun go down upon their wrath, neither
give place to the devil, Ephesians. 4. 26, 27. the devil is watching for such an
advantage; and therefore needful to be warned that we be slow to anger, and
quick from it, seeing a brother offended is harder to be won than a strong
City, and their contentions are like the bars of a Castle, Prove. 18. 19. How
often now are they separated in their affections, and delightful fellowships
through that sin that dwells in them, and policy of Satan; the weak envying and
judging the strong, and the strong (instead of bearing the infirmities of the
weak) pleasing themselves, and despising and setting at naught those that have
not what they have, Romans 14. Act. 15. 39. But then the envy of Ephraim shall
depart; Ephraim (that had less) shall not envy Judah, and Judah (that was
preferred before, and lifted up above their brethren) shall not vex Ephraim,
Isa. 11. 13. with 1 Samuel 1. 6.

Now also they are scattered by the wise and gracious disposition of the
householder, the Son of man, he sows them abroad in the field of the world for
the good of the world, that they might be instruments of his praise according
to their capacity, that men seeing their good works may glorify their father
which is in heaven, and so that his way may be known on the earth, his saving
health among all Nations, Mat. 13. 24, 37. Psalm. 67. 1, 2. But then his elect
shall be gathered together from the four winds, from one end of heaven to the
other, Mat. 8. 11. and 24* 31. he will then bring the seed of Israel from the
East, and gather them from the West, and will say to the North give up, and to
the South, keep not back, bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the
ends of the earth, every one that is called by my name, etc. Isa. 43, 5, 6, 7.

Now they are scattered sometimes through persecutions, and severed one from
another through the fear of the wrath, reproaches, threats, and oppressions of
men; and so chased from place to place, when God gives permission unto men,
Act. 8. 1. Jam. 1. 1. So those Worthies of whom the world was not worthy,
wandered in deserts and in mountains, and in dens, and in caves of the earth,
Heb. 11. 36, 38. and it is appointed to them, that if they will live godly in
Christ Jesus they shall suffer persecu^ion, Act. 14. 22. 2 Timothy 3. 12. but then
the extortioner shall cease, and the oppressors be consumed out of the Land,
Isa. 16. 4, 5. the destructions of the enemy shall come to a perpetual end; and
their shepherd will seek his sheep that have been scattered, and deliver them
out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day,
and feed them in a good pasture, and upon the high mountains of Israel shall
their fold be, Ezekiel. 34. 11, 15. he will seek up that which was lost, and bring
again that which was driven away, etc. and they shall dwell safely, and none
shall make them afraid, ver. 15, 28.

Now they are separated one from another, and severed by death, many are taken
out of the Land of the living; the godly man cease, and the faithful fail
from among the children of men: and many times they are cut off untimely, and
this is a great woe and affliction to the survivers of that body, and a great
judgment to the children of men* how insensible soever they are of it, Psalm.
12. 1. Mic. 7. 1, 2. for then they can be of no more personal usefulness to
men, they are then ignorant of us; but then death (as with respect to them)
shall be swallowed up into victory, then shall be completely fulfilled what the
High Priest spoke, not of himself, but by way of Prophecy; for then shall be
gathered together in one* the children of God that now are scattered abroad,
Joh. 11. 51, 52. Zech. 14. 4. Oh! how delightful and comfortable will this be
to be always with the Lord, and one with another, and no more for ever to be
separated; and in this blessed congregation and assembly of the righteous, the
sinners shall not stand, Psalm. 1. 5. Ezekiel. 13. 9.

4. In this congregation and gathering together of the righteous unto the Lord,
and one to another, they shall behold the Lord, yea, this is the end why Jesus
Christ wills they should be with him, where he is, that they may behold his
glory, Joh. 17. 24. they shall see his face, and his name shall be in their
foreheads, Rev. 22. 4. how refreshing and desirable was it to Moses to see his
back parts, so as at the sight thereof he made haste and prayed that he would
go amongst them, and take them for his inheritance, Exodus 33. 22. and 34. 8, 9.
and how comfortable was the hope of this to Job, that his Redeemer should stand
at the latter day upon the earth, and that he should see him for himself, and
his eyes should behold him: Oh! this was a great comfort to him in his
affliction, when God's hand was turned against him, and his acquaintance were
estranged from him, his kinsfolk failed him, and his famili^r friends had
forgotten him, etc. Job 19. 6, 27. Now while they see him by faith, believing,
they rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. But oh! how
infinitely satisfying will it be then to see him as he is, in whose presence is
fullness of joy, and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore; they shall
then be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his house, and he shall make
them drink of the rivers of his pleasures, for with him is the fountain of
life, and in his light they shall see light; when they awake, they shall be
satisfied with God's likeness, or image, even with Jesus Christ who is the
image of the invisible God, Psalm. 16. 11. and 36. 8, 9. and 17. 15. Now through
that sight they have of him by faith, their souls are satisfied as with marrow
and fatness, Psalm. 63. 3, 6. they are assured by faith of the truth and
goodness of what is reported, and set in hope before them, and of the
faithfulness of him that has promised to perform all his good Word, and have
such a view of the desirableness and complete contentment there is in these
things, as that i^ crucifies their affections to the world, and prevails with
them to confess themselves strangers and pilgrims on the earth* and to declare
plainly they are seeking another Country, and a better, and more enduring
substance; this preserves them from gadding about, and prevails with them to
sit down under Christ's shadow with great delight, and his fruit is sweet to
their taste; bu^ yet they are hungring and thirsting after a full enjoyment of
what they now see darkly* they are even sick of love, till their desire comes,
and ^e accomplished, and even longing, and in heart breathing for his
appearance: Oh! when will thou come to visit me? Oh! that the salvation of
Israel were come out of Zion. As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so
their soul pants after God; their souls thirst for God, for the living God. Oh!
when shall we come and appear before God? And thus they are looking for (with
expectation) and hasting (from all things reproved, and discovered to be evil,
deadly and unprofitable) unto the coming of the day of God; but when the desire
comes it will be a tree of life, when the desire is accomplished it will be
sweet to the soul, Prove. 13. 12, 19. the complete enjoyment will completely
satisfy and abundantly delight them, so as they shall hunger no more, nor
thirst any more.

5. As the effect and consequent of seeing him, they shall be perfectly made
like him; so the Apostle signifies, 1 John 3. 2. It does not yet appear what we
shall be, but we know when he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is. Now in this day the seeing and beholding him as he has
revealed himself, does transform them in a first fruits; in beholding him with
open face as in a glass, they are changed into the same image from glory to
glory, as by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. but when they shall behold
him as he is, they shall be completely changed into his likeness. And so,

They shall then be made like him in knowledge, though still he has the
pre-eminence in all things, he being Godman, and worthy is the Lamb that was
flain to enjoy it; yet then gloriously of his fullness shall they receive, and
grace for grace: They shall not then need those Mediums for their help that now
they do; whether they be Prophecies they shall fail, whether there be tongues
they shall cease, whether there be knowledge it shall vanish away; for we know
in part, etc. 1 Cor. 13. 8, 9. All those gifts of Apostles, Prophets, etc.
shall then cease, for they are given from on high to continue till we all come
into the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a
perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 8,
13. they shall not then ^each every man his neighbor, and every man his
neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all
know him from the least to the greatest, Jer. 31. 27, 34. Heb. 8. 11. and it
appears this perfect knowledge they shall have through the sight of him. Now in
looking to him they are lightened, Psalm. 34. 5. But Oh! how shall they then be
enlightened, when they shall see him as he is? Hence their knowing now, and
hereafter is put as the effect, and consequent of their seeing, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
For now we see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; now I know in
part, but then shall I know even as also I am known; signifying, that according
to the sight of him, whether darkly or clearly, such is and will be our
knowledge.

And from this sight and knowledge of him, they shall be filled with love to
him, and God in him, and with love and charity one to another, for charity
never fails, 1 Cor. 13. 8. their hearts shall then be ravished with him, from
that clear and open discovery of his love and loveliness; their love now to him
which is in part, is begotten and increased through the understanding of his;
we love him because he first loved us; every one that loves is born of God,
and knows God, for God is love; in this was manifested the love of God
toward us, because he sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might
live through him; whom having not seen ye love, 1 Pet. 1. 8. but when that
which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away, and
they shall completely love him, and delight themselves in, and be abundantly
satisfied with his love, 1 John 4. 7, 10, 19. 1 Cor. 13. 10. and shall be
filled with divine love one to another, yea and with all heavenly virtues; when
they perfectly know the love of Christ, which passes knowledge (even all
discovery and manifestation of it vouchsafed, for it is greater than is
contained in any revelation of it, and therefore it exceeds all our knowledge
and perception of it) they shall be filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.
19. and so they shall be like to the Angels that do his commandments,
hearkening to the voice of his word, Luke 20. 36. with Psalm. 103. 20. his will
shall then be done on earth as it is in heaven, Mat. 6. 10.

And in seeing and beholding him they shall appear with him in glory; then
shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the kingdom of their Father, Mat.
13. 43. When Moses was in the Mount, seeing and beholding the similitude of the
Lord, his face shone that the children of Israel were afraid, Exodus 34. 29, 30.
with Numb. 12. 8. yet he could not see his face or glorious appearance, so no
man has seen him, nor can see him; but then they shall see his face, and his
name, glory and dignity shall be upon their foreheads; the Lord shall arise
upon them, and his glory shall be seen upon them, Rev. 22. 4. Mat. 5. 8. Isa.
60. 1, 2. and 35. 2.

6. In this glorious condition they shall then together keep an everlasting
Sabbath, in that rest, or keeping of Sabbath, which remains for the people of
God, Heb. 4. 9. and together shall they then sing, for they shall see eye to
eye when the Lord shall bring again Zion, Isa. 52. 8, 9. they shall then sing
Hallelujah, salvation, and glory, and honor, and power unto the Lord our God,
Rev. 19. 1, 7. they shall sing the song of Moses, and the song of the Lamb,
Rev. 15. 3. in which they shall with thankfulness and rejoicing remember the
infinite grace of the Son, and of the Father in him, in what he has done, and
is become; in what he is now doing, and in what he will then do, all summed up
in that new song of the four Beasts, and four and twenty Elders, mentioned in
Rev. 5 9, 10. to wit,

That the Lamb was (not is) slain, and is raised again in that same body in
which he bare our sins on the Tree, and has destroyed all our enemies by
himself in the name, and authority of the Father, his own right hand, and his
holy arm has gotten himself the victory; he has purged away our sins,
overcome and abolished death, destroyed the devil, and obtained all glory into
himself in our nature and for us; this is the song of Moses in the type, The
Lord has triumphed gloriously; thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in
power, thy right hand, O Lord, has dashed the enemy in pieces, Exodus 15. 1,
12. God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet, sing
praises to our God, sing praises, sing praises to our King, sing praises, Psalm.
98. 1. and 47. 1, 6. and this the song of the Lamb, that God has brought him
out of the horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set his feet upon a rock,
etc. And put a new song into his mouth, praise to our God, who has so
delivered him, and made him triumph over all our enemies, sin, death, hell,
Devil etc. Psalm. 40. 1, 3. and 22. 19, 25. This is the Psalm or song for the
Sabbath day, I hat God has made Christ glad through his work, in delivering
him and us in him from all our enemies, and exalting his horn like that of an
Unicorn, and anointing him with fresh oil, with the oil of gladness above his
fellows; this is the day which the Lord has made, they shall then for ever be
glad, and rejoice in and for it, Psalm 92. 1, 4, 10. and 118. 21, 24.

And that he has redeemed them unto God by his blood (in discovering the
preciousness of it in his testimony, and testimonies of his goodness) out of
every kindred, and tongue, and people, and Nation, when they were sometimes of
them, and so of the world, children of wrath by nature, even as others; yet
then God, who is rich in mercy, for the great love wherewith he loved them when
dead in sins, quickened them together with Christ, as Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. for this
they are now instructed to sing Allelujah, Psalm. 135. 1, 4. Praise ye the Lord,
etc. for the Lord is good, sing praises to his name, for it is pleasant; for
the Lord has chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure;
they shall then gloriously triumph in the works of his hands, which he is now
working, in leading forth his people which he has redeemed out of the world,
Exodus 15. 13. Psalm. 92. 4, 5. and the Lord himself shall rejoice in his works,
Psalm. 104. 31.

And that he shall then destroy all enemies, and save his people with an
everlasting salvation, and they shall then reign on the earth: These are now
his thoughts, which are very deep; his enemies, and theirs shall then perish,
and all the workers of iniquity be destroyed for ever; but his horn shall be
exalted with honor gloriously and visibly, and the righteous shall flourish,
Psalm. 92. he shall then bring in his people, and plant them in the mountain of
his inheritance, in the place which he has made for them to dwell in, in the
sanctuary which his hands have established, and the Lord shall reign for ever
and ever, Psalm. 149. Exodus 15. 17. 18.

7. And now they shall have a glorious inheritance, to which I shall not here
speak, because it more properly refers to the latter end of the verse. And thus
according to my great weakness I have showed the first Reason, why the Gospel
is called the Word of his Grace.

2. This is called the Word of his grace, because hereby he gives grace unto
men; even as it is called the Word of Life, because, as it discovers that
eternal life in Christ, so it gives life unto others; The words that I speak
unto you, says Christ, they are spirit, and they are life, Joh. 6. 63. so it
is called the word of salvation, because it not only shows where salvation is
wrought and completed, but therein and therewith also it brings salvation to
men, etc. So here answerably* the Gospel of Christ is called the word of his
grace, because as it is the most excellent means whereby God manifests and
reveals his grace in Christ, as before, so hereby he gives grace unto men; he
does manifest his goodness and graciousness unto men, and gives them some
discovery and discerning of it by all means; The heavens declare the glory of
God, and the firmament shows his handy work; he left not himself without
witness to the Gentiles, Psalm. 19. 1, 6. and 147. 7, 9. with Act. 14. 17. Romans
1. 19 28. but he was more especially good to Israel, therefore they especially
were to praise him, and had peculiar engagement so to do; He showed his word
unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto I^^ael he had not dealt so with
any Nation, and as for his judgments they had not known them, Psalm. 147. 12,
19, 20. What advantage has the Jew? etc. much every way, chiefly because un^o
them was committed the Oracles of God, though hereby simply they were not
better as to their gracious state with God, yet they had greater advantage so
to be, Romans 3. 1, 2* 9 and still greater advantage is given to us, now the
Gospel is pr^ac^^ed according to the revelation of the mystery. And hence it is
said, That grace and truth came by Jesus Christ. Jo^. 1. 17. and that the
Prophets in former times prophesied of the grace that should be brought and
vouchsafed to us, 1 Pet. 1. 10. namely, the more clear and abundant revelation
of it, and therewith a more free dispensi^g of it, whereby he gives and
prevents men with capacity to behold his grace in Christ, and is turning them
from idols unto God, to serve the living and true God. The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the soul, whether men be converted by it or no, it is
converting, restoring, and bringing it (...) G^d; and in order hereto the
testimony of the Lord (in which God has testified unto us what Jesus Christ
has done for us, and is become, and his grace in him, this) is sure, making
wise the simple; even those that are without mixture of wisdom; it fails not in
this efficacy of it, it discovers Jesus Christ, who is the fountain and object
of wisdom, in knowing whom we may be made wise, and it gives wisdom and
subtilty to the simple, Jam. 1. 5. Prove. 1. 4. The commandment (the old and
new commandment declared from the beginning, in which was prophesied and
promised, that the seed of the woman should break the Serpents head, and which
is now more revealed, because the darkness is past, 1 John 2. 7, 8. this) is
pure, namely in its effect also, inlightning the eyes, and therewith
converting, Psalm 19. 7. 8. Hereby he gives grace of repentance unto men, and is
operating faith in them, his spirit being always vouchsafed, and present in
and with this testimony of Christ in the faithful ministration of it, even unto
the end of the world, so that he that rejects, rejects not man but God,
Mat. 28. 20. 1 These. 4. 8. Surely he does accompany all means which he
affords, while it is called to day, with some presence of his Spirit, and
does in due time give some supernatural light unto men, because he is willing
all should come to repentance: There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of
the Almighty gives them understanding, Job 32. 8. He says not, it must give
it them if they have it, but it does give it unto them: So he is said to give
breath unto the people upon the earth, and spirit to them that walk therein,
Isa. 42. 5. and that his Spirit is sent forth into all the earth, even that
Spirit which the Lamb that was slain has received, Rev. 5. 6. 1 Pet. 3. 19,
20. and in and with his Prophets he spoke by his Spirit, and gave his good
Spirit even unto them that rebelled against him to instruct them, and this
aggravated their iniquity, that they always rejected the Holy Ghost, for God
did not only call them with an outward call, but he sent his words in his
Spirit, in the light and power thereof, and so stretched out his hand unto
them, Neh. 9. 20, 26, 30. Zech. 7. 12. Isa. 65. 2. but now in and with the
Gospel of Christ as now preached according to the revelation of the mystery, he
does pour forth of his Spirit upon all flesh; namely, to glorify Christ, and
show his excellency and comeliness for our escape, and therein and therewith to
wither all flesh, to show that all flesh is grass, and all the glory of man,
the goodliness of the flesh is as the flower of the field, that men might cease
therefrom, and turn in his reproofs, and so he will further pour forth his
Spirit unto them, Act. 2. 17. with Isa. 40. 3, 8. Hence it is called the
ministration of spirit, even of this spirit of grace, 2 Cor. 3. 6, 8, With this
Gospel the Apostle was sent to open the eyes of Jews and Gentiles, and to turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, Act. 26. 17,
18, 22 yea, any man in having and declaring it faithfully, does minister grace
to the hearers, Ephesians. 4. 28. with Col. 4. 6. It is true, men have no knowledge
of, or will to any thing that is spiritually good, yea, they are naturally
inclined to all evil, lusting after vain things, but he gives more grace,
grace abounding and exceeding their natural corruption, pulling down their
strong holds, casting down their imaginations, and every high thing that exalts
it self against the knowledge of God; it presents more excellent and glorious
arguments, and gives more strength; where ore he says, God resis^^th the
proud, such as still refuse to humble themselves, and turn at his reproofs,
Jam. 4. 5, 6. the grace of God saving to all men has now appeared, Tit. 2. 11.
and therefore men's sin is rendered hereby to be exceeding sinful, because they
either receive not this grace, or receive it in vain, because they receive not
the love of the truth so as to be saved thereby, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. But no
more to this, because it has been in part spoken to already.

3. This Gospel of Christ is called the word of his grace, because it is that
whereby he gives grace more abundantly to them that hear in hearing; he
rejects the proud, that scorn to receive his grace, but he gives grace to
the humble, Jam. 4. 6. He so gives testimony to the Word of his grace, as that
in receiving this men receive the Spirit, even through this hearing of faith,
and not by the works of the Law, even that spirit of faith, whereby they have
the faith of the operation of God wrought in them, and so they are said to have
believed through grace, Gal. 3. 2. Act. 14. 1, 3. and 18. 27. Hence this is
called the Word of faith, both because it testifies Christ to be the foundation
and object of faith, and because by it he is working faith in those that hear
it, yea and does work it in all those that in hearing hear, Romans 10. 8, 17. and
so chooses them out of the world, from the state and fellowship thereof; saves
them from their ignorance of God, and enmity unto God, Romans 11. 5, 6. Tit. 3.
3, 5. it is that means whereby he makes them partakers of the forgiveness of
their sins in their minds and consciences; they are justified by grace,
justified by faith, by this word of faith believed, even from all things from
which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, Tit. 3. 7. Romans 5. 1
Act. 13 39. he makes the opening of his name in his testimony, the very
declaration of that justification and forgiveness he has received, powerful to
wash them from the guilt of their sins, and so speaks peace to them, Act. 26.
18. the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, does make them free from the
Law of sin and death, and so from the a cusation of sin by the Law, in opening
this ar^ument unto them, that what the Law could no d^, in that it was weak
through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the ^^eness of sinful flesh, and
for sin condemned sin in the flesh, Romans 8. ^, 3. It washes their heart from an
evil conscience, namely, from a conscience that charge and condemns it self
as held under wrath, because our first Father has sinned, and we in him, and
come forth from him naturally and necessarily polluted, for this is not now the
condemnation; and from an evil conscience that seeks by dead works to wash it
self, and speak peace to it self from some works of righteousness of ours. This
truth known makes free, and so the Son hereby, Heb. 10. 22. Joh. 8. 31, 32, 36.
yea, and hereby they receive remission of those sins in which they sin after
the similitude of Adam's transgression. To him give all the Prophets witness,
that through his name whosoever believes in him, shall receive forgiveness of
sins, Act. 10. 43. And so being justified by faith, they have peace with God
through our Lord Jesus Christ, freedom from the fear of his wrath, and that in
believing this Word; he fills with joy and peace in believing, and multiplies
grace and peace to them through the know^dge of God, and of Jesus Christ our
Lord, even ^^rough the doctrine of him known and received by them, Romans 5. 1.
and 15. 13. 2 Pet. 1. 2. and so begers them again unto a lively hope by the
resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dea^ as discovered in the Gospel, for it
is his word that quickens them, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Psalm. 119. ^0, 93. yea, hereby he
washes them from the dominion and service of sin in their members, that
henceforth they should not serve sin, and walking in the Spirit, in minding the
things of the Spirit, and yielding up to its operations, sin shall not have
d^minion over them, nor shall they fulfill the lusts of the flesh, Joh. 15. 3.
and 8, 32. Romans 6. 14. Gal. 5. 16. Psalm. 17. 4. and 119. 9, 11. through this
knowledge of Christ, and God's grace in him, he gives unto them still and
further the spirit of wisdom and revelation to glorify Christ, and enamour
their hearts on him, and so to redeem them from their vain conversation, Ephesians.
1. 17, 18. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Tit. 2. 14. And hereby he gives unto every one of
this body, grace, even some gracious gi^t, whereby they may speak to God, and
pour out their hearts unto him; and some useful gift to speak to men, as this
testimony of Christ is received by them, and confirmed in them, Romans 8. 26. 1
Cor. 1. 5, 6. Joh. 7. 38, 39. yea, in and with this he does establish them, and
save them from the error of the wicked, and from diverse and strange doctrines,
that they may not be as children tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of doctrine, Heb. 13. 7, 9. Ephesians. 4. 11, 14. 1 Cor. 15, 1, 2. Psalm.
17. 4. He that abides in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and
the Son, to preserve and keep him from those deceivers that are entered into the
world, and to make him strong, that the wicked one shall not touch him, so as
to corrupt him from that simplicity in Christ, 2 John 7, 9. 1 John 2. 13, 14,
and 4. 4. and 5. 18. yea, hereby he gives grace to them to strengthen them with
might unto all long-suffering and patience with joyfulness in those afflictions
and tribulations which he is ordering unto them, this is their comfort in their
affliction, for his word quickens them, and it is unto them the joy and
rejoicing of their hearts, Col. 1. 11. Psalm. 119. 49, 50, 78, 82. Jer. 15. 15
16 17. he creates the fruit of his lips unto them in his testimo^y peace,
peace, and so heals them that are broken in heart, and binds up their griefs,
Psalm. 147. 2. with Psalm. 107. 20. Isa. 57. 15* 19. with Chap. 61. 1, 3. and so
causes them to know and prove that his grace is sufficient for them, though
the temptation and affliction be not removed, and hereby shoes their feet that
they may not be discouraged, or driven back by any afflictions, though they
seem to be very grievous, Romans 5. 2, 6. 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. Ephesians. 6. 15. yea, it is
the power of God to salvation to every one that believes, and whereby they are
kept through faith unto that salvation ready to be revealed in these last
times, Romans 1. 16. 1 Pet. 1. 5. it is able to build them up, etc. as it follows
in the after part of this verse. And, Oh that we may never forget it, or let it
slip. Forget not wisdom, neither decline from the words of her mouth; forsake
her not and she shall preserve thee, love her and she shall keep thee; exalt
her and she shall promote thee, etc. she shall give to thine head an ornament
of grace, etc. Prove. 4. 2, 9.

Thus, though weakly, I have spoken to the first thing proposed in this
resignation, viz. the person and thing to which he commends them; in which, in
some little measure, we may see the worthiness and excellency of this Object
and Medium to which he now commends them, and that for our instruction also,
that in God we may praise his word; as Psalm. 56. 4, 10. and now come to
consider the next thing* viz.

2. What is here meant by commending, and what is imported to us herein?

1. By [commending] here is not meant a praising or speaking honorably of
them, and so in their commendation, as many times the word signifies, they
deserved not in this sense to be commended to God, yea he of himself says,
that though he knew nothing by himself, yet ^e was not hereby justified, this
would not commend him to God, 1 Cor. 4. 4. If I be righteous, says Job, yet I
will not lift up my head, Job 10. 15. Those holy men that trusted in God have
been so far from commending themselves in this sense, that they have abased
themselves in God's presence, and prayed him not to condemn them, Job 10. 2.
not to enter into judgment with them, Psalm. 142. 2. and have intimately
acknowledged, that if God should mark iniquities, none could stand as approved
and justified before him, Psalm. 130. 3, 4 7. and our Savior instructs his
Disciples to say, when they have done all those things which are commanded
them, we are unprofitable servants, we have done that which was our duty to do,
Luke 17. 10. and not to praise themselves, or one another. But the word
[commend] does here and elsewhere signify a committing a person or thing to
the care or custody of another, to betrust one with such or such a thing or
person; and so to commit and commend seem to be used indifferently: So when it
is said in one place, Into thy hand I commit my spirit; in another, our
Savior, as it appears, referring thereto, says, Into thine hands I commend my
spirit, Psalm. 31. 6. with Luke 23. 46. and so the Apostle commends these to
God, etc. to be taught, directed, cared for and preserved, and so unto and for
all things as the needs of their matters did require.

2. Now then in that he says [I commend you] therein is imported, something as
to the person and thing to which he commits them, something as to himself who
did thus commend them, something as to the persons he thus commended.

1. As to the person and thing to which he commends them, there is intimated
therein.

1. A willingness and readiness to take the charge and care of those committed
to him; amongst men they commit not a person or thing to any one that is not
willing to receive that trust; and much less can any commend to him, unless he
were graciously willing to receive them, and that he is so, has been the
design of what is spoken, to evidence and demonstrate; and it is shown
abundantly in the word of his grace. He is one that has greatly loved us when
dead in sins and trespasses, and manifested his love in laying down his life
for us; yea, and made it known in due time through preaching, and first
prevented us with it, when we sought not after him, he manifested himself to
them that asked not after him, and will in no wise cast off him that comes,
but loves them with peculiar manner of love, even with such manner of love as
wherewith the Father loves him, Joh. 15. 9, 10. he receives them, and will be a
father to them; and these were by the father already committed to him, and his
peculiar care; he was their shepherd that had bought them, and was rich in
mercy to them; he has an high account of such, and has set his heart and eye
upon them; yea he is one that is especially ready to receive those of this
chosen generation committed to him, when he takes away those that have been
instruments of help to them, he is a refuge for the oppressed; a refuge in the
time of trouble, even then after a peculiar consideration, Psalm. 9. 9. he is an
helper of the fatherless, Psalm. 10. 14. a father of the fatherless, a judge of
the widows (of those that are desolate) is God in his holy habitation, Psalm.
68. 4, 5. in him the fatherless find mercy, Hos. 14. 3. and now when he takes
away such as have been eminent helpers to them, he is then abundantly ready to
receive those that are committed, and do commit themselves to him: So much he
signifies, in that when the faithful failed, he then says, Now will I arise,
says the Lord, Psalm. 12. 5. And on a like account, and in the encouragement of
his special readiness to receive those that come, at such a time when there is
none shut up or left, that might here be comforters to them, the Prophet
resolves to look to the Lord, and wait for him, My God will hear me, when I sit
in darkness (when those instruments that have shined as ligh^s are gone) the
Lord will be a light unto me, Mic. 7. 1, 8. he will not leave them fatherless,
or Orphans, but will then especially be nigh unto them, and ready to receive
them, Joh. 14. 18.

2. His ability and faithfulness to keep them committed to him (2 Timothy 2. 2.)
and this has also been evidenced in what has been said; he is the wise God,
and our Savior, who is able to keep them from falling, through his powerful
word, the word of his grace, and to present them faultless before the presence
of his glory, Jude. 24, 25. he has wonderfully manifested his faithfulness in
what he has suffered and endured for us, and we are instructed to consider him
who was faithful to him that appointed him, and to be always looking to him who
endured the Cross, despising the shame; and therein we may behold, and be fully
assured of his faithfulness in perfecting whatsoever concerns us, Heb. 3. 1, 2.
and 12. 2. Isa. 42. 1, 3. and he is able to do exceeding abundantly above all
we ask or think; the Father has committed all judgment to him, and so
infinitely loved him, because he humbled himself, and became obedient to death,
even the death of the Cross, that he has not given the Spirit by measure unto
him, but has filled him immeasurably therewith, and has given all things into
his hand, Joh. 5. 22. and 3. 34, 35. with Chap. 10. 17, 18. yea, herein is
imported his sufficiency and readiness to assist them, and dispense unto them,
according to their needs and capacities, whatsoever was good, unto all their
services and sufferings, and unto the utmost saving of them, that they might be
preserved blameless unto his coming, and so not fail of his grace, 1 These. 5.
23, 24. Heb. 7. 25.

2. As with respect to himself who now commended them, even the Apostle, there
is signified.

1. That he had the care of these lying upon him, and indeed upon him came
daily the care of all the Churches; he was a steward, to whom a great trust was
committed, and it is probable was the first that planted the Gospel among them,
and so might be an instrumental father of them, and now he shows his love to
these who had first given themselves to the Lord, and afterward to him and his
fellow laborers by the will of God, as 2 Cor. 8. 5. and his faithfulness to
his Lord, in returning the charge of them to him from whom he received it:
herein imitating our Savior, the great shepherd of the Sheep; Thine they were,
says he, and thou gave them me, and now I am no more in the world, but these
are in the world, and I come unto thee, holy father, keep through thine own
name those whom thou have given me, Joh. 17. 6, 11, 13. And thus our Brother,
who was counted faithful, and put into the Ministry, and had a trust committed
to him, when departing to show his faithfulness to the chief shepherd, and love
to the sheep, returned his charge to him from whom he had received it.

2. His assurance of his faithfulness and ability to whom he commends them, it
was to him whom he knew by experience to be gracious, and had proved faithful
in all things, who had been exceeding abundantly gracious to him, and had stood
by him and strengthened him; even as Israel blessed Jacob, and intimately
commends him and his to one whose faithfulness he had proved. The God, says
he, which fed me all my life long unto this day, the Angel which redeemed me
from all evil, bless, etc. Genesis 48. 15, 16. He knew whom he had believed, and
he was persuaded that he was able to keep that which he committed to him
against that day, as 2 Timothy 1. 12. he was well assured of, and satisfied in his
infinite faithfulness, and therefore safely trusts in him, and commends these
unto him, 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18.

3. As with respect to them whom he commends, he may intimate unto us,

1. That they were children, such as had not attained, either were already
perfect, Phil. 3. 12. and could not keep themselves; they were all little
children, though there might be diversity among themselves, some fathers,
experienced believers who might be instruments of begetting others through the
Gospel; and some young men, who were strong, having the word of God abiding in
them, and some weak and babes; yet in this respect all little children, they
had not yet attained to perfection, as 1 John 2. 12, 14, 18. they yet needed a
tutor, but not such as they were under during the ministration of the Law, in
which, though sons, they differed nothing from servants; but such an one as
became sons, even Christ as a Son over his own house, and the word of his
grace, and so the Law of faith, and not of works; they were not perfect as to
attainment, and therefore needed to be committed to one who would be careful
of, and faithful to them; yea, and that they had many enemies, who would
endeavor to corrupt them from the simplicity that is in Christ, and if
possible defraud them of their inheritance, and so beguil them of their reward;
many evil men, violent persons, and many seducers that would endeavor to
pervert them, and subvert their souls, by removing them from him who had called
them into the grace of Christ; they were weak in themselves, and had strong
enemies, whose end was destruction, and therefore they needed an helper.

2. To instruct them to commit themselves to, and leave themselves with him,
Psalm. 10. 14. to submit themselves to God, and commit the keeping of their
souls to him in welldoing, as unto a faithful Creator, and to be ordered, and
guided, and taught by this Law of grace, and to have all their expectation from
him and it, for their being kept by his power in this Gospel through faith unto
salvation, 1 Pet. 4. 19. and 1. 5. And indeed this is the most p^rfect means by
which he does now help them, assist, instruct and strengthen them, and preserve
them from evil; the Gospel of Christ is the power of God unto salvation to
every one that believes, Romans 1. 16. This is the way whereby he keeps the
souls of those committed to him; so much may be signified to us in this, That
when the congregation of God's poor cry out to him, Help Lord, for the godly
man cease, etc. God does then create the ^^uit of his ^ips, peace, and speaks
good words and comfortable to them, in first assuring them that in committing
themselves to him, he would care for them, and prethem; and then he, or the
Prophet in his name, directs them where they might meet with his gracious
keeping, guidance and preservation; he will set his poor and needy ones in
safety, but wherewith and where may they expect this, so as to commit
themselves and way thereto? The words of the Lord (of, or concerning the Lord,
in which is showed that he is the Lord, and by what means he is so become, and
the grace of God in him, and so the words that are spoken by the Lord, in the
words of the Holy Ghost, and not which man's wisdom teaches) are pure words;
that is, they are pure in themselves, in what they testify of the Lord, and of
all things, faithful words, there is no lie of them; and worthy of all
acceptance; they give a true and right discovery of all things, and a good and
gracious report of the Lord; and they are pure in their effect and efficacy,
inlightning the eyes, Psalm. 19. 7, 8. and purifying the heart, Act. 15. 19. and
so purifying from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, Jam. 3. 17. Joh. 15. 3.
by this means then God saves and helps, even by his words, and therefore he is
commending them to us, that we might in them, and by them expect his performing
all things for us. Now then in that he says, I commend you to God, and to the
word of his grace, therein is imported to us, that his desire and counsel was,
that they should betake themselves to God* and this faithful word for and unto
all things, and not wander herefrom as a bird from her nest, but even say with
rejoicing as they, Jer. 3. 22. Behold we come unto thee, etc.

3. In that he now commends them to God, when he was to be taken from their
head, as it were (as 2 King. 2. 3, 5.) and when he had signified some jealousy
concerning them, or some of them, as ver. 30. he may signify unto them, that
now it behoved them, and they needed to commit themselves more immediately to
God, and the word of his grace then formerly, and to take heed to themselves
singly and jointly, as ver. 28. and not too much confide one in another, lest
both he that helps fall, and they who are helped fall, and both fail
together; such an understanding may agree with other places of Scripture, in
which such causes of lamentation are presented; so much I conceive, is
signified in that, Psalm. 12. by that cry lifted up to God: Help Lord, for the
godly man cease, for the faithful (even such whose spirits were fixed, and
hearts united to proclaim God's goodness to the children of men, Prove. 20. 6.
these) fail from among the children of men; there were some of the congregation
of God's poor and needy left, who thus pour out their hearts; but as persons
sensible there were none of such usefulness and faithfulness left behind, none
in whom they could so safely trust, or to whom they could so securely commit
themselves, as they could have done to those taken away, they therefore more
immediately apply themselves to the Lord, and jointly entreat his mercy: Arise,
O Lord, for our helpfulness, stand up for us, for our faithful helpers are
gone, and we have none like them left behind: And the Lord, as moved with
bowels toward them, graciously answers, and says; Now will I arise, says the
Lord, because of the sighing of the needy; as intimating, that while these
faithful ones were preserved, he had committed the care to them, as it were,
and took his rest, and even sat him down, but now there were none like them he
had taken away, or like minded to them, he would arise for their help, and keep
them in safety by his words from those that would ensnare them, as is before
said, ver. 5. And the Prophet as it were filled with joy, and resting sa^isfied
with God's gracious assurance, replies ver. 7. Thou shall keep them, O Lord,
thou shall preserve them from this generation for ever; the poor commit
themselves to thee, and thou have graciously said, thou will arise and set them
in safety, and be thy self (more immediately) the helper of and guide to them,
and thou shall have the keeping of them, for they cannot so safely commit
themselves to these surviving as they could have done to those taken away,
there is none to guide them that is of like usefulness and faithfulness; like
that bewailed and declared to be an heavy testimony of displeasure, Isa. 51.
17, 18. There is none to guide Jerusalem among all the sons she has brought
forth (she has sous that are begotten of her, of whom she is the mother, but
there is none that has such skilfulness in the word of righteousness to guide
her, Psalm. 78. 72.) nor any that takes her by the hand (to be a comfort to,
and leader of her in this day of her weakness, languishing and darkness) of all
the sons she has brought up. To the same purpose also is the counsel of the
Prophet Micah, in such a day of calamity. Woe is me, says he, etc. the good man
is perished out of the earth, etc. Mic. 7. 1, 2. Trust ye not in a friend (who
were friends to you, and in whom, in a sense you might trust, while the good
man was continued in the earth) put no confidence in a guide; there is none
like the good man, and faithful ones taken away, and though they are guides,
and not to be despised in their prophecyings, yet put no confidence in them,
namely, such as you might have done in those removed; they are not like the
good man, the merciful man, they want mercies and kindness to pursue your good
singly, they are not so filled with bowels of mercies to pity you, and
strengthen you in your weaknesses, and even to put their souls in your souls
stead, but may rather add grief to your sorrow; you cannot so freely and safely
pour out your hearts and complaints to them, and acquaint them with your
temptations and exercises, as you might have done the merciful man; Who was
weak, and he was not weak? who was offended, and he burned not? 2 Cor. 11. 29.
Or they are not upright like those faithful ones who fail from among the
children of men, not so entirely loving Christ, Ca^t. 1. 4. and cleaving to the
Lord with full purpose, not seeking the things of Christ with a neglect of
their own things, but either corrupting the word of God, and mixing therewith
the wisdom of this world, either natural or artificial, 1 Cor. 1. 17. 2 Cor. 2.
17. Or otherwise pursuing their own name, and praise, and esteem, and instead
of boasting in and of God boasting of themselves, and their own mouths praising
themselves, proclaiming their own goodness, kindness, successfulness, and what
they have done for this and that person, and how much they have exceeded
others, Prove. 20. 6. Or not faithful in their reprovings, but have either
omitted the rebuking of their brethren, when need required, and so hated them,
and suffered sin upon them, Lev. 19. 17. Prove. 27. 6. Or else have done it in
proud wrath, and so the best of them like a bryar, even scratching and breaking
others to pieces with their words, and even tearing them instead of healing
them, Job 19. 2. and so doing things out of strife. Or not upright in their
conversations outwardly, that men seeing their good works, might glorify God
in the day of visitation, but rather causing the name of God and his doctrine
to be evil spoken of, and blasphemed by their receiving it in vain, and so
causing the Ministry to be blamed. Or if they be more upright hearted than the
generality, yet you can put no such confidence in their openings and applyings
of the testimony of Christ, as you might have done in the good man's who is
removed; therefore, says the Prophet, I will look to the Lord, namely, more
immediately, and incourageth himself with this assurance, my God with hear me;
even now especially he will prepare his ear to hear me, and be a light to me
now the good man is perished (like that before in Psalm. 12.) and cries, feed
thy flock, especially now the good man is perished, Mic. 7. 5, 8 14. He has
promised, and is faithful that has promised, that when the poor and needy seek
water and there is none, he the Lord will hear them, he who is the God of
Israel will not forsake them, etc. Isa. 41. 17. And yet in committing
themselves to God, and the word of his grace, they should be directed to give
to every one their due, and not to neglect (though they could not put such
confidence in) th^s^ left behind, but to consider their word, and the end of
their conversation.

3. Wherefore the Apostle now especially commends and resigns them to God, and
the word of his grace, to the end they should commit themselves unto, and leave
themselves with him?

This has been signified in part before, and is also intimated afterward in
the verse; yet I shall add somewhat further, and say in general; he does commit
them to him with instruction to them to commit themselves to God, and leave
themselves with him, and the word of his grace, 1. For his help, Psalm. 10. 14.
2. For his preservation of them, Psalm. 12. 7. as referring to the scope of the
Apostle in the former verses.

1. For his help of them, and assistance to be graciously vouchsafed to them,
and expected by them; and that both, 1. Upon the account of his being taken
away, and so for our instruction when God removes faithful and eminent
watchmen. 2. And that they might feed the flock of God, and so for believers
edifying one another more generally.

1. As with respect to his being taken away, and so for instruction to us when
God removes faithful and eminent watchmen in the midst of their days; what I
shall speak under this head will be of more direct respect to our selves to
whom God has been ordering such an occasion of mourning and lamentation; and
so let us now commit our selves to God as with respect to them so taken away,
and as with respect to our selves that yet are preserved in the Land of the
living.

1. As with respect to them so taken away, let us betake our selves to God, and
to the word of his grace, that we sorrow not for them as those that have no
hope; it is far better with them as is before said, they sleep in Jesus, and
are delivered from those sorrows, troubles and disquietments that here they
were exposed to. Hence the Prophet, when he had been saying, The righteous
perishes, and merciful men are taken away, adds, from the evil; and He shall
enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, etc. as that which was proper
to comfort the contrite one, and his mourners, Isa. 57. 1, 2. And though the
Apostle John had given him in charge at first, to write the things which he had
seen, and the things which are, etc. Rev. 1. 11, 19. yet also he had a voice
from heaven particularly and expressly commanding him to write (that it might be
preserved for, and considered in the time to come) blessed are the dead that
dye in the Lord, etc. Rev. 14. 13. And so the Apostle on like account says, If
we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, then them also which sleep in Jesus
will God bring with him, etc. Wherefore comfort one another with these words, 1
These. 4. 14, 18. And oh that the consolations of God may not be small with us
on this account.

2. As with respect to our selves who are yet preserved in the Land of the
living, let us on such an occasion commit and betake our selves to him for his
gracious teaching us out of his Law what we see not by any light that is in us
as of us, or what we have forgotten, or let slip; that we may know wherefore he
is ordering such great and heavy testimonies of displeasure, that we may be
contrite, and humble our selves before him, and be broken off from what he has
been reproving us for; doubtless in acquainting our selves with him, and the
word of his grace, and its instructions, we may know wherefore he is thus
pleading with us; thereby he is teaching us what we see not, that we might not
be unwise, but unstand what the will of the Lord is, Job 34. 31, 32. Prove. 6,
24.

In general, it appears, the cause of his so lifting up his hand amongst us is,
because of our great provocations of him; for he who is the God of all grace,
does not willingly afflict or grieve the children of men; and much less does
he, till he be highly provoked, smi^e with such heavy strokes as these are;
such judgments are of such a nature as in which he shows his people very hard
things, and gives them the wine of astonishment to drink; especially when he
smoaks against the prayers of his people: Such as in which he begins to give to
his Jerusalem the cup of his fury to drink; yea the dregs of the cup w^ung out,
as Isa. 51. 17, 18. hereby threatening to take away his Kingdom from them;
therefore surely we may in the light of the Lord see, that when he so judges
us, there has been lewdness found in our filthiness; so much they acknowledge
and bewail when God's hand was turned against them, Lam. 3. 42, 44. we have
transgressed (as a wife treacherously departs from her Husband, we have gone a
whoring from under our God) and have rebelled ( viz. gone on, and continued in
our transgression against light and admonition; rebelled against the light)
thou have not pardoned; thou have covered with anger and persecuted us, thou
have slain, thou have not pitied; thou have covered thy self with a cloud, that
our prayer should not pass through. Not only did God shut out the Prophets
prayer when he cried and shouted, even prayed very earnestly, as ver. 8. but he
covered himself with a cloud that prayer should not pass through; when they
assembled together, and there was some joint agreement of them in their
praying, as it may seem. The reasons then of God's proceeding on in such
judgments in removing such faithful instruments untimely, and not withstanding
his people have been crying and praying for sparing mercies, yet he has not
given such gracious returns as they have begged for, are (as far as I am helped
to understand.)

1. More generally, because those that are hearers of the word are hea^^r^
only, receiving his grace in vain, and not suffering it to have its efficacy
upon them, so as to redeem them from their iniquities, and purify them unto
God a peculiar people zealous of good works; this even provokes God to remove
his servants from us, when men are hearers of the word, and not doers; so much
the Apostle signifies, I know, says he, that I shall abide and continue with
you all, for your furtherance and joy of faith, etc. only let your conversation
be as becomes the Gospel of Christ; implying, that the want of this would be
the only cause of their being deprived of such a mercy, Phil. 1. 25, 27. So the
Lord by the Prophet Ezekiel threatens, that he would make them desolate of
their glory, and make them know that a Prophet had been among them, by his
removing him from them, because they sat before him as his people, and heard
his words, but they would not do them; yea, though the Prophet was unto them as
a very lovely s^ng of one that had a pleasant voice, and they heard his words,
delightfully it seems, yet they did them not, Ezekiel. 33. 29, 33. yea, men's
persisting in such iniquity will at last provoke him to lay them open to the
wild beasts to devour them, as here, ver. 29. the earth which (drinking in the
ra^n that often comes upon it, yet) bears briars and thorns, is rejected, and
nigh unto cursing, etc. namely, it is rejected from that use it was set apart
for, and peculiar care that was toward it, and pains used in it, and about it.
Whereas it was set apart for a vineyard or garden, and so dealt with in every
respect and enclosed, their still bearing briars and thorns, instead of herbs,
and fruit meet for him by whom they are dressed, will provoke the Husbandman to
take away the hedge thereof, and break down the wall thereof, and so reject it
from that peculiar use it was intended for, and nighness it was brought into,
and so it is nigh to cursing even now to be eaten up and trodden down; yea, it
provokes God in judgment to forbear pruning or digging it, and on his judgments
to write their sin, as they brought forth bry^rs and thorns as their sin, so
now by his taking away the hedge, and forbearing to prune and dig them, there
should in judgment come up briars and thorns, and he will also command the
clouds that they rain no rain upon it, Heb. 6. 8. with Isa. 5. 1, 7. the wrath
of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness, and suffer it not to redeem them
unto God from their sins and idols; for this abiden in, and yielded up to,
would make free from the dominion and service of sin; and consecrate and devote
men unto God, and make them servants of righteousness; yea, for this the wrath
of God is so revealed, that therefore God shall send men strong delusions, that
they should believe a lie, etc. because they received not the love of the truth
that they might be saved; namely, they received it not to that end, they might
receive it after a manner, and many did, and do receive it as good tidings, as
a right and true opinion, are persuaded of the truth of it, and plead for it
against opposers, and yet still they retain a lie in their right hand, and are
not washed hereby from the pollutions of the world into Jesus Christ; and so
how firmly soever they may credit it, and how stiffly soever they may plead for
it, yet while they love darkness rather than light, they are under
condemnation, and reckoned amongst such as believe not on the name of the Son
of God, and reputed as such as have not received the truth, but as such as have
pleasure in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. Joh. 8. 31, 32. Romans 6. 17, 18. 2
These. 2. 10, 11. Joh. 3. 18, 19. with 2 These. 2. 10, 12.

Yea, this receiving his grace in vain so provokes God, as that he will hide
his face, and will not hear, or take notice of their crying unto him so as to
give gracious returns, how fervant soever they seem to be therein; yea, though
they fast and pray, and seek him daily, and delight to know his ways and take
delight in approaching to God, yet he will not hear: So God himself by his
Prophet in his answer to the demand of such signifies; Wherefore have we
fasted, say they, and thou see not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and
thou take no knowledge? Behold, says the Prophet, the Lord's hand is not
shortened that it cannot save, neither his ear heavy that it cannot hear, etc.
but your iniquities (who thus seek him daily, and fast, and pray) have made him
hide his face from you that he will not hear, Isa. 58. 1, 3. and 59. 1, 2. yea,
though men fast, and mourn, and weep, and set apart extraordinary times for it,
and continue a long time in thus crying unto him, yet their having hardened
their hearts against his words, and not being doers of them, and in their
waitings on him not making this the one thing principally sought for, that they
may turn from their iniquities, and understand his truth, this causes him not
to hear when they cry, Zech. 7. 2, 13. with Dan. 9. 13, 14. yea, when his
people, who have his name upon them, love to wander and refrain not their feet,
it provokes him to be as a man astonished, as a mighty man that cannot save; and
though they fast and cry, yea, and though his faithful servants pray for his
mercy for them, yet he will not hear, Jer. 14. 7, 9, 10, 12. with Chap. 15. 1.
yea, when men bless themselves in their hearts, concluding they shall have
peace, though they walk in the imagination of their heart, to add drunkenness
to thirst, and so abuse the goodness of God, and turn his grace into
wantonness, continuing in sin because grace has abounded, this provokes God
greatly to angry, and causes him to smoke, even against the prayers of such,
Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. with Psalm. 80. 4.

And this is for admonition to us all, that we walk while we have the light,
lest darkness come upon us, etc. even to believe in the light, that we may be
the children of the light, born of it, and walking in the light as God is in
the light, as he is in it reproving and discovering our vileness and
sinfulness, so to confess it as discovered, and to lay apart all filthiness and
super fluity of naughtiness, and to receive with meekness his ingrafted word
which is able to save the soul, Joh. 12. 35, 36. Jam. 1. 22, 25.

2. More particularly, the cause of God's taking away his faithful servants
untimely, and in anger to the survivers is, because those to whom such have
prophesied cannot endure sound doctrine, but have been angry with, and
secretly, at least, haters of faithful reproofs, and reprovers, this is an
iniquity which is very provoking to God, when those that are hearers resolve
not to give heed to their words in which they are faithfully admonishing of
what is evil, and showing to them the bitter fruit of going on still in their
trespasses, and that whosoever walks in crooked paths shall know no peace, Jer.
18. 15, 18, 23. This provokes God at some times to stop the mouths of his
servants while he continues them in the Land of the living, even men's hardening
their hearts against warning and admonition: For this cause, God says to the
Prophet, I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth; that thou
shall be dumb, and shall not be to them a reprover, for they are a rebellious
house, Ezekiel. 2. and 3. 7, 26. and God has more generally given instruction of
this nature; Rebuke not a scorner, namely, one that hears not rebuke, that
loves not one that reproves him, Prove. 9. 8. with Cha^. 13* 1 and 15. 12. and
threatens it as a judgment, that when men hate him that rebukes in the gate,
and abhor him that ^peaks uprightly, that then the prudent shall keep silence
in that time, for it is an evil time, Amos 5. 10, 13. Surely the reproofs of
instruction are the way of life, and a wise and faithful reprover is to be
obediently heard, and highly priz^d; open rebuke is better than secret love,
Prove. 6. 24. and 25. 12. and 27. 5. Psalm. 141. 5. Now therefore when men cannot
endure reproof, but hat^ the light, and come not thereto, lest their deeds
should be reproved, this greatly incen eth God, and will cause him to remove
faithful reprovers. To this agrees that of the Prophet, Mic. 2. 6. with Isa.
30. 10, 11. Prophecy ye not, say they to them that prophecy (namely,
prophecy not unto us right things speak to us smooth things, prophecy
deceits, get ye out of the way, and^.) ^hey shall not prophecy, that they
shall not take shame (that is, God hereby threatens, that either they shall not
so prophecy as to cause th^se haters of reproof to take shame, but they should
(while continued) cease to be reprovers of them; (...) ^e would remove those
Prophets in testimony o high displeasure, because they to whom they prophesied
despised ^^roof, that they should have no more opportunity to prophesi unto
them, no not for^ever, that they should not take shame) Thi^ provokes God to
take away the speech of the trusty or lip of the faithful, and to make men
desolate of their glory. This was also contain^d in the iniquity of that people
that heard the words of the Prophet delightfully and frequently, they were
still talking against him by the walls, and in the doors of the houses ( viz.
privately secretly, and so as he knew not of it, until the Lord gave him
knowledge, and so he knew, and he showed him their doings, as Jer* 11. 18 19)
and therefore he would deprive them of such a faithful watchman and repr^ver,
Ezekiel. 33. 30, 33. So much also may be signified in that, Hos. 4. 4, 5. where,
after the Lord had been declaring the great iniquity of Israel, and therefore
threatening that the Land should mourn, etc. he adds, yet let no man strive, or
reprove another, for thy people are as they that strive with the Priest; they
cannot endure to be reproved; therefore the Prophet shall fall in the night.
This hating reproof is an iniquity of such a nature, as in which men do even
declare some stiff purpose and resolvedness to continue in the things reproved;
not a wandering simply, but a loving to wander; it is a sure evidence that a man
is out of, and forsakes the way while correction is grievous unto him, while he
loves not one that reproves him, Prove. 15. 10, 12. it keeps such an one from
going unto, or abiding amongst the wise, the company of such as are wise
reprovers is a burden to them, Prove. 15. 12, 31. 32. and therefore this
persisted in, will at last provoke God to say as he did concerning, Ephraim,
Let them alone; yea, and because their heart is set on their iniquity, and they
will not be made clean, give them such teachers as will sooth them up, such as
are Prophets of the deceit of their own hear, that will cry peace, peace unto
them, and flatter them, telling them they are the temple of the Lord, and no
evil shall come unto them. So he threatens that when his people were come to
that bad condition that they would not be reproved, but their heart was set on
their iniquity, he would so order it in his judgments that there should be like
people, like Priests; and that he would herein punish them for their ways, and
reward them their doings, and even chose their delusions, as they could not
endure those that spoke uprightly, but rather desired and spoke well of those
that daubed them up with untempered mortar, so he would take away the faithful
ones from amongst them, or give them charge to let them alone, and set such
over them as would be like unto themselves, and strengthen them in, or not pull
them out of their evil way, Hos. 4. 4, 8, 9, 17. So also when the house of
Jacob were come to that pass, that they said to them that prophecy, prophecy
not unto us right things, as before, he then threatens this as a judgment to
them: If a man walking in the spirit and falsehood do lie, saying, I will
prophecy unto thee of wine and strong drink; he shall even be the Prophet of
this people, Mic. 2. 6, 11. Oh heavy judgment ordered for a great and heinous
iniquity; because men love to be well spoken of, and to whatever crooked path
they are walking in, and what will this come to in the issue? as Jer. 5. 30,
31. A wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land; the Prophets
prophecy fasely -- and my people love to have it so, and what will ye do in
the end thereof?

Yea and this causes God to shut out men's prayers, because they hate his
reproofs, and his faithful reprovers, and when they cry he will not hear them,
but will even hide his face from them at that time, as they have behaved
themselves ill in their doings, Mic. 2. 6, 11. with Chap. 3. 4. So the Lord
threatens; They shall call upon me, but I will not answer; they shall seek me
early, but they shall not find me; for that they hated knowledge and did not
choose the fear of the Lord; they would none of my counsel, they despised all my
reproof; therefore they shall eat the fruit of their own way, etc. Prove. 1. 28,
30. So much also may be contained in that Proverb; Poverty and shame shall be
to him that refuses instruction, viz. that regards not reproof, as appears by
the latter part of the verse; that is, poverty in spiritual things shall be to
such an one, God will put an end to the Harvest, and he shall beg in Winter,
and have nothing; poverty shall come upon him as an armed man, and want as one
that travelleth. And shame, God will put such to shame, to wit, hide himself
from them, and cast them off, and be as one that is asleep, he will lightly
esteem them, and though they cry and shout, yet he will shut out their prayers;
but he that regards reproof shall be honored: God will honor such an one,
he will enrich him with durable riches and righteousness, he shall get
understanding, and his ear shall be always opened to his cry, Prove. 13. 18.
with Psalm. 44. 9, 23, 24. and 89, 45, 46. Prove. 15. 32.

3. More particularly, this provokes God to take away the righteous and
faithful ones, because their heart goes after its covetousness who are hearers
of the Word, because such as these love the world, and the things of this
world, and go on in pursuing this evil inclination, in oppression or
unmercifulness in not doing good to others with what God has been putting into
their hands, Ezekiel. 33. 31, 33. The love of money is the root of all evil, not
only of the evil of sin, but also of judgment and affliction; and it appears
that the Apostle does include that also in the evil of which covetousness is
the root; for he says, which while some have coveted after they have erred
from the faith; (this is a great iniquity, and that which leads to many other
iniquities) and pierced themselves with many sorrows (caused much grief, and
procured many judgments to themselves) 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10. So when the Prophet had
been saying, The righteous perishes, etc. and merciful men are taken away, the
Lord (as I conceive) shows that this was the cause of this judgment: For the
iniquity of his covetousness I was wroth and smote him, I hid me and was wroth,
etc. Isa. 57. 1, 17. This iniquity followed after causes men to hate faithful
reprovers, and so provokes God to take them away, Mic. 2. 2, 6. yea, this being
inclined unto, and persisted in, and suffered to bring forth its fruits, will
even procure that great judgment of depriving such of, or of the usefulness of
all faithful helpers, or such as have the words of wisdom fitted in their lips
for speaking profitably unto others; so, for this, the Lord threatens, Amos 8.
3, 13. The songs of the temple shall be howlings in that day, says the Lord
God, etc. Hear this ye that swallow up the needy, even to make the poor of the
Land to fail, saying, when will the new Moon be gone that we may sell corn, and
the Sabbath that we may set forth wheat? (when will those appointed days and
meetings be over, that we may follow and seek after our profit, that we may
buy, and sell, and get gain;) making the Ephah small (namely the measure, and
so we may say the weight, or any thing they sell) and the shekel great (getting
as much money as they can, though to the defrauding and overreaching another;
and think this honesty too) and falsifying the balances by deceit, (that they
may wrong others, as follows) the Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob,
surely I will never forget any of their works; shall not the Land tremble for
this? I will turn your feasts into mourning, and your songs into lamentation.
And, Behold the days come, that I will send a famine in the Land, not a famine
of bread, or a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of the Lord; and they
shall run to and fro to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not find it.

Yea this, and its direct fruits, provokes God to shut out men's cries, even the
oppressions of those upon whom God's name is called, and their want of pity and
mercy; their withholding more then is meet tends to poverty, even to poverty
in spiritual things; it provokes God to take away or withold such faithful
helps for their growth, as they might have had, and such betrusting with the
true riches as might have been committed to them; If therefore, says our
Savior to his Disciples, ye have not been faithful in the unrighteous Mammon,
who will commit to your trust the true riches; and if ye have not been faithful
in that which is another man's, who shall give you that which is your own? This
is another given to them for the good of others, and especially that they
might communicate to those that teach them in all good things; if they have
reaped their spiritual things, their duty is also to Minister unto them in
carnal things, Luk 16. 9, 12. Gal. 6. 6. Romans 15. 27. And (as I was saying) it
causes God to hide his face that he will not hear. To this purpose is that of
the Lord by the Prophet Isaiah: The new Moons and Sabbaths, the calling of
Assemblies, I cannot away with, it is iniquity, or grief, even the solemn
Meetings, etc. And when ye spread forth your hands I will hide mine eyes from
you, yea when ye make many prayers I will not hear, your hands are full of
blood: And what he means by blood, he afterward explicates and shows to be
their oppression, and not showing mercy to the oppressed and helpless; for he
adds, Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes; cease to do evil, learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the
oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow: Come now, let us reason
together, says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow, etc. Isa. 1. 10, 23. Like whereto is that, Isa. 58. 3. 12.
Wherefore have we fasted say they, and thou see not, etc. Behold in the day
of your fast ye -- exact all your labors: Is not this the fast that I have
chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness? -- Is it not to deal thy bread to the
hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house, when thou
see the naked that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thy self from thine
own flesh; then shall thy light break forth as the morning -- Then thou shall
call, and the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry, and he shall say, here I am,
etc. Add hereto also that of the Lord by the Prophet Zechariah: Thus speaks
the Lord of Hosts, saying, execute true judgment, and show mercy and
compassions every man to his brother, and oppress not the widow nor the
fatherless; the stranger, nor the poor, etc. but they refused to hearken --
yea, they made their hearts as an Adamant stone -- therefore it is come to
pass, that as he cried, and they would not hear, so they cried, and I would not
hear, says the Lord, Zech. 7. 9, 13. He shall have judgment without mercy that
has showed no mercy, Jam. 2. 12, 16.

And truly, there might be some intimate reproof of these to whom the Apostle
speaks, for being so much inclined to this evil, in that he appeals to them,
and says; Your selves know that these hands have ministered to my necessities,
and those that were with me; it had been a small thing for him, or those with
him to have reaped of their carnal things, who sowed unto them spiritual
things, Act. 20. 33, 34. with 1 Cor. 4. 11, 12, 14. and 9. 11, 12. Ephesians. 4. 28,
32. and 5. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6.

4. And to add no more, when pride is not hidden from the people of God, but
they retain high thoughts of themselves by their wisdom, knowledge, gifts and
attaiments, etc. and go on serving their pride, and bringing forth the fruits
thereof in envyings, strifes, contentions, divisions (for only by pride comes
contention, Prove. 13. 10. and 28. 25.) and are not with all lowliness
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace; this
deprives their souls of good; it hinders them from partaking of one another
grace, and of that delightful and profitable fellowship in the Gospel of Christ
they might have enjoyed while they are preserved together in the Land of the
living, and causes them to live as strangers, or separate one from another (
Act. 15. 39.) and even provokes God to separate them one from another, and in
anger to divide them, who could not agree one with another, Lam. 4. 16. with
Jer. 9. 4, 8. All the Law, says the Apostle, is fulfilled in one word, even in
this, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; but if ye bite and devour one
another, take heed^ye be not consumed one of (or by) another, Gal. 5. 14, 15.
For this cause many were sick and weak amongst the Corinthians, and many slept,
because they did not discern the Lord's body, namely, they did not highly and
honorably esteem of his personal body that was broken, so as therein to
consider the infinite grace of God to sinners, and to examine themselves in
that perfect Law of liberty, in which the infinite excellency of it is
discovered, so as to have pride hidden from them. Or they did not discern his
congregational body, so as to esteem them to be of the body of Christ, and
every one members in particular, how poor and mean soever, but there were
contentions, divisions, strifes and envyings amongst them, and there were some
that did shame those that were poor, either in this world, or poor in knowledge
or utterance, and that had not what they had, listing up themselves by their
knowledge, and despising or dealing in proud wrat^ with others, 1 Cor. 1. 11.
and 3. 3. and 8. 1. and 11. 18, 22, 28, 30. 2 Cor. 12. 20. To the same purpose
the Apostle speaks to the Philippians, I know I shall continue with you -- only
let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel of Christ; and what he means by
this conversation he himself declares, however as to a great and principal
thing in it, to w^t, that ye stand fast in one spirit (that into which ye have
been made to drink) with one mind, design, affection, and love, striving
together, not one against another, etc. Otherwise they might deprive themselves
of the mercy of his being continued with them; and hence also with powerful
arguments bese^cheth them, If therefore there be any consolation in Christ, if
any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and
mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye ^e like minded, having the same love, being
of one accord, of one mind; let nothing be done through strife or vain glory,
etc. Phil. 1. 25, 27. and 2. 1, 3. So it is said, They angered Moses at the
waters of strife (where they did things in strife and chod with him) so that it
went ill with Moses for their sakes, Psalm. 106. 32. wi^h Numb. 20. 3.

And this root of pride, and these fruits of it, envy, strife, contention, etc.
provoke God to hide his face, that he will not hear. So much (I conceive) the
Apostle James signifies; If ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts,
glory not, and ^ye not against the truth (^ay not this is zeal for God) this
wisdom descends not from above -- for where envying and strife is, there is
confusion, and every evil work -- from whence come wars, and fightings, or
brawsing among you? come they not hence, even of your lusts that war in your
members. Ye lust (^reagerly desire) and have not; ye kill (as those also do
that despise the poor, Jam. 2. 1, 2, 5, 10, 11.) and desire to have, and cannot
obtain; ye fight and war, yet ye have no^, because ye ask not; ye ask and
receive not, because ye ask amiss -- Do ye think that the Scripture says in
vain, the spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy? but he gives more grace
(whereby we might be preserved from pride, and th^se envyings and strifes)
wherefore he says, God resists the proud (that receive not his grace to save
them, he puts them at a distance from him, and shuts cut their prays) but
gives grace to the humble (that receive his grace to hide pride from them, and
to strengthen them to cease from their own wisdom that descends not from above)
submit your selves therefore to God -- Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh
to you, Jam. 3. 14, 16. and 4. 1, 5, 8, 11. Isa. 58. 3, 4.

Oh, that we may judge our selves, that we be not further judged, and therefore
let us examine our selves in the light of God's testimony, and there with in
the light of his judgments; for his judgments are as the light that goes
forth, Hos. 6. 5. and not in the light of our own heart^, for the heart of man
is deceitful and desperately wicked, and ^e that trusts in it is a fool, Jer.
17. 9. Prove. 28. 26. All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes, but the
Lord weighs the spirits, Prove. 16. 2. and 21. 2. with Chap. 12. 15.

But now in the perfect Law of liberty, as in a true glass, we may see our
hearts, it gives light for discovering all things, and it gives understanding
to the simple, or capacity to behold what is manifested, so wonderful are God's
testimonies, and especially the entrance of God's word, even the word of the
beginning of Christ, the first thing to be declared, and which enters the
heart, and is the entrance for our understanding all things, the key of
knowledge for opening all things to us, Psalm. 119. 129, 130. The commandment
is a lamp, and the Law light, and the reproof, of instruction are the way of
life, Prove. 6. 24. His testimony does so discern and discover all things, as
that he that is an hearer of the word and not a doer has this great advantage
put into his hand, he beholds himself (the secrets of his heart are made
manifest, as 1. Cor. 14. 24* 25. but then this is his great evil and iniquity,
because he is not willing to take shame to himself, and to continue beholding
his spots which are discovered in the glass, therefore he shuns the light) and
goes his way, and straightway forgets what manner of man he wa^. This was
brought to his view by the word of truth, and the discovery was made, and
advantage given him by that; now therefore departing from that, he immediately
lets slip what an one he was there manifested to be, and is now ready to think
and say, he is not polluted, or has not such spots as before in the glass he
beheld himself to have, Jam. 1. 23, 24. In that word of truth then let us
examine our selves, and search and try our ways, even narrowly search them,
and consider them; our ways, and not God's ways so as to search for some
unrighteousness, or unevenness in them, for his ways are equal, the Lord our
God is righteous in all he has brought upon us. And, our ways, as
distinguished from other men's ways, so as to lay the blame on them; for if we
had been, or were willing to judge our selves, we should not have been, or
should not yet further be judged.

Yea, with that light also let us examine our selves in and by the judgments he
has been ordering to us; for many times he does so bring his judgments to
light as that he plainly reveals our sin, and writes it upon the rod, in doing
to us what we have done to others, Judge. 1. 7. Or in taking away those mercies
which we have abused, or neglected, 1 Samuel 2. 29, 34. Hos. 2. 8, 9. And
however, he does so open men's ears when he afflicts them, that they might hear
the rod, and who has appointed it, and so seal home their instruction, which
they are to receive, that they in considering their ways, as he is helping
them so to do, might see wherefore he is correcting them; and therefore he
looks upon men (who looks not to gather grapes of thorns, nor expects men
should do impossibilities) and if any m^n say, I have sinned and perverted that
which was right, etc. implying this they might do, Job 33. 16, 28. When the
righteous are holden in cords of affliction, then he shows them their work,
and their transgressions that they have exceeded; he opens also their ear to
discipline, and commands that they depart from iniquity, Job 36. 8, 10. Mic.
6. 9. 1 Cor. 11. 28, 31.

In this light of the Lord then in both considerations let us consider our
selves and ways, and not lean to our own wisdom, for that will pervert us, and
lead us to say, ^^caus^ I am innocent, surely his anger shall turn away from
me, Isa. 47. 10 Jer. 2. 35. And let u^ ^ot make our selves of the num^er, or
compare our selves with some that commend themselves, for they measuring
themselves by themselves (by what sometim^s they were) an^ c^m^^^i^g themselves
amongst themselves (namely, vi^wing and consid^ri^g what others are, they are
ready to say and conclude, G^^ I thank thee, I am not like other men, but
herein they) are not wise, 2 Cor. 10. 12. Surely we may in this light see that
there have been great provocations found generally with us, which have provoked
God thus highly to lift up his hand, and to be angry with the prayers of his
people, and so to testify displeasure as to remove such an one who was an
instrument of such general usefulness in the societies of God's people, and God
is even in this breach saying unto us, as he did to his people of old, Ye have
all transgressed against me, Jer. 2. 29. and therefore he gives us all to eat
of the fruit of our ways and doings. So when God was angry with Moses, it went
ill with him for the peoples sake, even for the sin of the congregation, Deuteronomy.
3. 26. So when God made that breach upon them in taking away Uzzah, the Prophet
acknowledges this was the reason, because they (generally) sought him not
after the due order, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. So when Josiah was removed, it was
because the people were generally polluted: The crown, says the Prophet, is
fallen from our head, ^wo unto us that we have sinned, for this our heart is
faint, 2 King. 23. 25, 30. Lam. 5. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 11. 29, 31. Yea, and not only
so, not only have we generally sinned, but (as before was hinted) our sins have
been very sinful, we have added rebellion to our sin: Such an account the
Prophet gives of the sin of himself and his people, when God did slay, and not
pity; Let us, says he, search and try our ways, etc. And when he comes to
give an account of them, he says, We have transgressed and have rebelled; not
only departed out of the way, and wandered, but done so against light: yea, and
this has been multiplied also; He has wounded us with the wound of an enemy,
with the chastisement of a cruel one (in slaying and not pitying, when we cried
and shouted) for the multitude of our iniquities, because our sins were
increased, Lam. 3. 40, 42. Jer. 30. 14. Oh house of Jacob, come ye then, and
let us walk in the light of the Lord, that we may behold our selves and ways,
and bear his indignation, for we have sinned against him, Isa. 2. 5. And though
we might be ready to say, there may be many other evils than those
forementioned, which may have provoked God, yet (though this be true) let us
not so say, that we may plead our innocence, and seek to hide our guiltiness of
these evils, for surely so much is generally spoken, as may include any
particular, but as in this light we are discovered, let us as such judge our
selves.

Have we not been unprofitable hearers of the word of truth, the Gospel of our
salvation? Have we not too much imprisoned it in unrighteousness, and either
retained the things this came to redeem us from, or hindered it from bringing
forth its fruits in us and through us? Has not his heritage been unto him as a
speckled bird? Are there not many spots upon us which are not the spots of his
children? Have we not con^ented our selves with sitting before God as his
people, and hearing his words delightfully, and yet have been polluted either
with the lusts of the flesh, pampering our selves with the best, feeding
without fear, and so with surfeiting, drunkenness, uncleanness, etc. or with
the desires of the mind, the wisdom of this world, the friendship of this
world, praise of men, and fashioning our selves according to our former lusts
in our ignorance; yea exceeding our condition and manner, before the grace of
God was received by us, in the fashions of this world, and decking our selves
in gold or silver, or costly array, or sprucing up our selves; and so consuming
upon our lusts what was put into our hand for a better end, as if this did tend
to adorn the Gospel? in short, have we not believed in vain, and loved darkness
rather than light, after light has been vouchsafed?

Or have we not dealt foolishly, and been soon angry with the reproofs of
instruction, and counted the wise reprover our enemy, because he has told us
the truth, and taken offense at him, and the light also, because we were not
suffered to find pleasure in our unrighteousness? Have we not, when we have
been dealt faithfully withal, said in our hearts, or with our tongues, ye take
too much upon you; and counted those that have spoken uprightly, busybodies
in other men's matters, proud, censorious, etc. that we might do what is good,
and right in our own eyes? Have we not even in our hearts been ready to say
with him, There is one Micaiah by whom we may inquire of the Lord, but I hate
him, for he does not prophecy good concerning me, but evil? 1 King. 22. 8.
Surely such iniqui^y has also been found.

Have we not been setting our hearts upon the world, and the things thereof,
that we might heap up for our selves, and shut up the bowels of our compassion,
when the needs of our brethren have been presented to us, and God working in us
both to will and to do? Have not those that have gone before us in the word of
the Lord had too much cause to say to some; Now ye are full, now ye are rich,
ye have reigned as Kings without us -- ye are honorable, but we are despised;
we hunger and thirst -- and labor, working with our own hands; and too little
cause to say of any, their deep poverty abounded unto the riches of their
liberality. Oh that there were not cause generally to say, from the least to
the greatest, Every one is given to covetousness. How few are there that have
been willing to promote the Gospel of Christ to their power, and have been
faithful in the least things?

Yea, and how much have we been walking in pride and high thoughts of our
selves, and in those fruits of it, such as anger, wrath, divisions,
contentions, debates, whisperings, etc. Lord, be merciful unto me, heal my
soul, for I have sinned.

Doubtless the thus examining our selves in the light of the Lord is a more
meet exercise for us to be exercised unto, than to cry out of the affliction
simply. Wherefore does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his
sin? it is the punishment of his sin that he suffers, why does he comcomplain
for the punishment, and mean time too much forget that which procures it? Let
us search and try our ways, this is a more meet exercise for us, Lam. 3. 39,
40. Why cryest thou for thine affliction? thy sorrow is incurable for the
multitude of thine iniquity, because thy sins were increased I have done these
things to thee, says the Lord, Jer. 30. 15. See what God says to Joshua when
he rent his clothes, fell to the earth upon his face -- and said, Alas, O Lord
God, wherefore have thou brought this people over Jordan, to deliver us into
the hand of the Amorites to destroy us? -- What will thou do unto thy great
name? and the Lord said unto Joshua, get thee up, wherefore lie thou thus
upon thy face? (complaining of the affliction) Israel has sinned, and they
have transgressed -- up, sanctify the people, etc. As if he should say, is
there not a cause for what I have done? am I not provoked hereto? up and be
doing, in searching and diligently inquiring what that is that has procured
these things unto you, and sanctify your selves, Josh. 7. 7, 10, 15. So the
Lord says to his people when he was judging of them, because his house lay
waste, and they run every man to his own house; or as now ^in^^ grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ, all sough own, and not the things which are Jesus
Christ's. Thus says the Lord of hosts, consider your ways; ye have sown much,
and bring in little; ye eat, but ye have not enough -- Thus says the Lord of
hosts, consider your ways, Hag. 1. 5, 7, 9. Phil. 2. 21.

And in and with our searching, and trying our ways, let us turn again unto
the Lord whom we have revolted, Lam. 3. 40. Let us not listen unto the
deceitfulness of sin in us, which is the endeavoring to slay us, so as to
harden our hearts and say, there is no hope, the case is desperate, we have
loved strangers, and after them we will go, Jer. 2. 25. though we have done all
this wickedness, yet turn not aside from following the Lord, but serve the Lord
with all your heart, and turn ye not aside, for then should ye go after vain
things which cannot profit, nor deliver, for they are vain, 1 Samuel 12. 20, 25.
even turn unto him from our iniquities, acknowledging, and confessing them as
reproved, and discovered, and lay them apart in the light and strength of his
grace. And to move hereto.

Remember how great things he has done for us when we were dead in sins and
trespasses, and justly banished from his presence in the righteous sentence of
his Law; he then remembered us in our low estate, for his mercy indureth for
ever, and devised a blessed means that his banished might not be utterly and
for ever expelled from him, hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast unto
the end: Behold, he has given his Son for a witness to the people of the
greatness and sincerity of his love to us; let us then remember that Jesus
Christ who was delivered for us all, was raised from the dead according to the
Gospel; and let us ^eed upon that bread, even his flesh that was given for the
life of the world. This will encourage us to search and try our ways, and to
turn to him against whom he have sinned.

And herewith also consider that there is mercy with the Lord, and with him is
plenteous redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of our sins,
according to the riches of God's grace, Ephesians. 1. 7. there is forgiveness with
him, not that we should continue in sin that grace may abound, but that he may
be feared, Psalm. 130. 3, 4, 7. even forgiveness of the sins reproved, and
washing, and cleansing from them. Oh, let us then turn unto him and say, take
away all iniquity, and receive us graciously, heal our backslidings, and love
us freely; he is merciful and will not keep anger for ever, only let us
acknowledge our iniquity, that we have transgressed against him. This is
powerful to purge guile out of our spirits, and preserve us from it, which
leads us to keep silence, and to hide, that we may hold fast the things
reproved, that he is a God ready to pardon; and for this cause shall every one
that is godly pray unto him in a time of finding, Psalm. 32. 2. 6. Neh. 9. 17.
In this encouragement let us yet look again toward his holy Temple, Jonah 2. 2,
7.

Yea, consider that the end of the Lord is gracious in ordering such great
judgments, while it is called to day, and so much the Apostle particularly
signifies when he had been saying, For this cause many are weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep -- He adds; But when we are judged (namely with such
judgments, and that because we have not timely judged our selves) we are
chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world, 1 Cor.
11. 30, 32. His end herein is good, that he might awaken us to his
righteousness, and cause us to arise from the dead, that Christ may give us
light, that he may keep back our souls from the pit, and we may be enlightened
with the light of the living. And it is infinitely better to be now judged, and
to submit to him therein, and bear patiently his indignation, than to be
condemned hereafter, and sentenced to, and punished in that lake, where their
worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched.

Yea, in thus searching and trying our ways, and turning unto him in the
encouragement of the multitude of his mercies, humbling our selves before him,
and confessing our vileness and sinfulness; hereby we shall ascribe
righteousness to our Maker, and give glory to him. My son, said Joshua, give, I
pray thee glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him, and
tell what thou have done, hide it not, Josh. 7. 19. While men are pleading
their innocence, or hiding their sin, and crying out only of the affliction,
they therein endeavor to disannul his judgment, and condemn him that they may
be righteous, Job 40. 8. whereas in a right examining our selves in the light
of the Lo^d, and taking shame to our selves, as it appears thereby to belong to
us, and so humbling ourselves, we shall herein rightly glorify him, and
acknowledge that he is righteous in all he has brought upon us, and that he
has not done without a cause all he has done in the midst of us; yea, that he
has not laid upon us more than is meet, or was needful to seal home our
instruction, and make us partakers of his end in afflicting us, 2 Chronicles. 12. 6.
Neh. 9. 33. Job* 34. 23. Dan. 9. 7, 14. yea, we shall have cause abundantly to
confess, and acknowledge to his praise, that he has not in thus afflicting us
dealt with us according to our sins, nor rewarded us according to our
iniquities, but has punished less than our iniquities deserve, Psalm. 103. 9,
10. Ezra 9. 13. It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed, because
his compassions fail not, Lam. 3. 18, 22. This will strengthen us to say, I
will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, Mic.
7. 9.

Yea, consider that there is mercy with him, as to forgive our iniquities, and
heal our backslidings, so also to make up our ^^sses, and repair our breaches;
yea, though our breach be like the great Sea, and none can heal it; though our
bruise be incurable, and wound grievous, and there are with us no healing
Medicines, yet he can, and in returning to him will, restore health unto us and
heal us of our wounds, Jer. 30. 12, 13, 17. Such as sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death -- Because they rebelled against the words of God, and
contemned the counsel of the most high; therefore he brought down their heart
with labor, they fell down and there was none to help; then they cried unto
the Lord in their trouble, and he saved them out of their distresses: He
brought them out of darkness, and the shadow of death -- Oh that men would
praise the Lord for his goodness -- for he has broken the gates of brass, and
cut the bars of iron in sunder. And, whosoever is wise, and will observe these
things, even they shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord. Psalm. 107.
10, 16, 43. Oh that we may not be tempting God, and limiting the holy one of
Israel, and say, can he help us? can he repair our breaches? but consider what
he has done already, and in that encouragement, and as that is working in us
both to will and to do; Come and let us return to the Lord, for he has torn
and he will heal us, he has smitten, and he will bind us up, Hos. 6. 1, 2.
Isa. 57. 1, 15, 18. Levit. 26. 40. 42.

Yea, and be we admonished to examine our selves, and to return to him in
confessing our sins, lest we provoke him to make further breaches upon us, lest
his soul depart from us, and he make us utterly desolate of our glory, Jer. 6.
8. For if we be not reformed by these liftings up of his hand, but still walk
contrary to him, he will proceed in walking contrary to us, and will yet punish
us, Levit. 26. 21, 24. such like strokes as these are not only great judgments
in themselves, but also forerunners of greater; so when the Prophet was
declaring the greatness of such a judgment as in which there was none to guide
Jerusalem among all the sons she had brought forth; namely, that it was an
heavy testimony of God's displeasure, such as in which she had drank at the
Lord's hand, the cup of his fury, the dregs of the cup of trembling wrung out;
he then signifies that this was also the forerunner and concomitant of greater
judgments, therefore he adds, These two things are come unto thee, who shall be
sorry for thee? desolation, and destruction, and the famine (viz. that also of
hearing of the words of the Lord) and the sword, etc. Isa. 51. 17, 19. [See
what our Brother has spoken more largely to this purpose, in lamentation over
the dead in Christ, Page 30, 33, 37, 38. and in breach upon breach, page 8,
12.] And so much the Apostle here signifies; I know, says he, that after my
departure shall grievous wolves enter in amongst you, not sparing the flock,
etc. ver. 29. 30. Oh that the consideration of all might awaken us to gather
our selves together, before the decree bring forth, before the day pass as the
chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come upon us, before the day of the
Lords anger come upon us, that we may seek the Lord, seek righteousness and
meekness, that either he may graciously turn away his anger and judgments
further threatened; or however we may be hid in the day of the Lord's anger,
Zeph. 2. 1, 3. Amos 4. 2. 12.

2. He now commits these to God, and the word of his grace, that they might
take heed to themselves, and to the flock, to feed them; as ver. 28. And so for
instruction to them, and to them, and to such as now go before others in the
word of the Lord, yea to all that are faithful in the Lord, that, to the end
they may edify themselves and one another, they commit themselves to this
person and thing, quietly leave themselves with the great Shepherd, and the
Word of his grace, expecting helpfulness herein, even wisdom, strength, and
direction to all their service, for in Christ as declared in the Gospel, they
may be furnished unto every good word and work; in this person and thing to
which he commends them, they might be every way furnished for feeding and
edifying themselves, and one another; in Christ as manifested in the word, and
so in the word of Christ, there is given matter wherewith to seed; instruction
to the manner how to feed, and motive to move hereto.

1. Matter wherewith to feed, namely to nourish them up with the words of faith
(in which Christ is declared to be the Author and finisher of the faith) and of
good doctrine, 1 Timothy 4. 6. that they might grow in grace, and in the knowledge
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. the thing wherewith they
might feed them, it was the Gospel of Christ, as opened according to the
revelation of the mystery, in which is the sincere milk, whereby men may grow,
and be nourished up, 1 Pet. 2. 2. And so the Apostle in this his exercise in
directing them on such an occasion, to God and the word of his grace, was a
follower of God, and gave such instruction to these, as God gave to the leaders
of the people in former ^imes, to whom he said, This is the rest (even that
foundation laid in Zion) where ye may cause the weary to rest, and this is the
refreshing; namely, that matter wherewith they might refresh those to whom they
spoke, in directing them to the vision of all, even to Jesus Christ as he was
witnessed in the Law and the Prophets, Isa. 28. 12, 16. These are Pastors after
God's own heart, that feed with knowledge, viz. with the doctrine of Christ,
and with understanding, with skilfulness in the word of God's righteousness,
Jer. 3. 15. To this then he commits them as to that wherewith they might do all
their work; for the Gospel of Christ is the power of God to salvation to every
one that believes. So the Apostle charges Timothy, Preach the word (namely,
the Word of truth, the Gospel of our salvation) be instant in season, out of
season, 2 Timothy 4. 2. And this he determined to know amongst the Corinthians,
even Jesus Christ and him crucified, as the one thing for and unto all things.
1 Cor. 2. 2. Yea, this our Savior commanded his Apostles to preach the Gospel,
as the one thing in and unto their whole work of discipling, Mat. 28. 19, 20.
Mark 16. 15. Luke 24. 46, 48. and so they did preach, even Jesus Christ, and
not themselves, or the Law, Romans 10. 8. Act. 10. 42. yea, our Lord Jesus the
great peacemaker; and peacepreacher, was anointed with the holy Ghost to
preach the Gospel, Isa. 61. 1, 3. Luke 4. 18. And it is the work and office of
the holy Ghost to bear witness of Christ, to glorify Christ, and therewith to
convince the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment, and to guide the
believers into all truth, and to show them things to come, Joh. 16. 8, 14.
Surely this word of God's grace is a complete doctrine, both for opening the
eyes of the blind, and turning to the Lord, and for perfecting them that do
believe, so as there is no need for preaching the Law, either at first to
prepare men for Christ, or afterward, to perfect that by the flesh which was
begun by the Spirit: In Christ, as declared in the testimony, ye are complete,
etc. Col. 2. 3, 10. Nor is the Law in the use of it good, unless it be lawfully
used, according to the glorious Gospel, 1 Timothy 1. 7, 8, 11.

This is that food then wherewith they might feed, even with the Gospel of
Christ, in which is spiritually given to us his flesh, which is meat indeed,
and his blood which is drink indeed; and so here they might be instruments of
causing the flock to lie down in green pastures; this God, even our God, being
always with this word of his grace, in the plain and faithful ministration of
it, to give himself to us to feed upon, even his flesh which he has given for
the life of the world. And so in green pastures, Psalm. 23. 2. namely, such as
are delightful and pleasant to the eye, and sweet to the taste, sweeter than
honey, and the honey comb, Psalm. 19. 7, 10. and 119. 103. And such as are
fruitful, and which cause growth, and increase, that from the head all the body
by joints and bands, having nourishment ministered, and knit together, may
increase with the increase of God, Col. 2. 19. For this bread of life comes
down, and is given to us in this Gospel of grace, so as that while Paul
planteth, and Apollo waters, God gives the increases the feeding that is in
this word of his grace is not dry, like the heath in the wilderness, but that
which has ^^p in it, and in which the Lord is the dew unto his Israel, to
cause them to revive as the corn, and flourish like the Palm Tree, and grow
like a Cedar in Lebanon, Psalm. 92. 13, 15. Hos. 14. 5, 6. 2 These. 1. 3. And
green pastures, such as are not ^ouled and sullied, but this word is very pure,
it is a wholesome word, Psalm. 12. 6. and 119. 140. there is no lie of it, 1 John
2. 27. every word of God is pure, Prove. 30 4, 6. Though men may corrupt the
word of God in their interpretations, and glosses, and meanings which they put
upon it, yet it is pure in it self, and he has kept it, and will preserve it
so in the records of it, that we may safely ^eed thereon, and therewith: And
green, even tender, and easy of digression for the weakest, milk for babes as
well as strong meat for those that are strong; yea, such an abundance of
feeding here is, that the flock may lie down, as satisfied as with marrow and
(...) and lie down and still feed; and such security in those pastures, as they
may lie down, and none shall make th^^ afraid, Jer. 23. 4. Herein also they
might instrumentally d^rect them to the still waters, to give refreshing to
their thirty ^^uls, even to him who is the fountain of living waters, in whom
is forgiveness of sins, and fullness of spirit, who is filled with grace and
truth, in whom is, and who gives water of life which causes fatness and
fruitfulness, and gives satisfying, so as he that drinks hereof shall never
thirst; yea, their soul shall be as a watered garden, and as springs of water
whose waters fail not, Joh. 4. 10, 14. Isa. 58. 11. and these are still waters,
even the consolations of Christ as given in the Gospel, like the waters of
Shiloah that run softly, and make no noise in the world: This doctrine of the
grace of God is not like the diverse and strange doctrines of men, which make a
noise like the noise of many waters, and who have the wisdom of this world,
excellency of speech, strength of reason, consent of fathers, approbation of
great ones, and power on their sides, which makes them appear so strong as if
they would carry all before them; but this is the weakness of God, and
foolishness of God, and that which being declared in the words which the holy
Ghost has taught, is every where spoken against, Isa. 8. 6, 7. 1 Cor. 1. 25.
Act. 28. 22. And yet still waters in their effect, that whereby God does and
will still and quiet the enemy and the avenger, Psalm. 8. 2. confound the wisdom
of the wise, and bring to naught the understanding of the prudent, and will
make them quiet, that they shall have nothing to say, Act. 6. 10. the weapons
of this warfare are mighty through God, to the pulling down strong holds,
casting down imaginations, etc. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. yea, still waters, waters of
quietness in their efficacy to any, and every one that takes and drinks of this
water of life, which any one may do freely, Isa. 55. 1. Rev. 22. 17. they give
quietness to the soul, cause it to dwell at ease, Psalm. 25. 13. cool its
thirst, quiet its fears, still the clamours of sin, deliver from the fears of
God's wrath, and make quiet from the fear of all evil, adversity and
tribulation, so as in Christ they have peace while they have tribulation in the
world, Joh. 16. 33. yea, through grace in the hope set before them, they have
everlasting consolations, which are as the waters of Noah, of rest and
quietness; for as he has sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more go over
the earth, so he has sworn that he will not be wroth with his flock, nor
rebuke them: For the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but his
kindness shall not depart from them, etc. Isa. 54. 9, 11. yea, and hereby they
might be instruments of restoring the soul from its wanderings and goings
astray, and so from its diseases thereby contracted, its death, ignorance,
leanness and batrenness, its witheredness, etc. Ezekiel. 34. 4. the Law of the
Lord is perfect, restoring the soul, Psalm. 19. 7. Gal. 6. 1. Jam. 5. 20.

In and with this Gospel they might warn and admonish of all that is evil, Col.
1. 28. reprove when need requires; they are the reproofs of instruction which
are the way of life, Prove. 6. 24. rebuke sharply and openly, when men are
stubborn and un^uly, while they will heat, and when they sin openly; and exhort
to love and good works: this being the word of exhortation in and with which
they may exhort to all, 1 These. 4. 18. 2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. and 4. 2.

2. As to the manner of feeding the flock, the Apostle Peter gives instruction
thereabout, in 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3.

Not by constraint, as matter of necessity and duty only, to do it because you
must do it, 1 Cor. 9. 17. but willingly and cheerfully, as moved thereto by the
grace of God, 2 Cor. 5. 14.

Not for filthy lucre, or doing it out of covetousness, to enrich your selves
thereby, though the labourer is worthy of his reward, yet that should not be
the end aimed at, to feed themselves, and cloth themselves, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3.
The Apostle herein approved himself as a Minister of Christ; he coveted no man's
silver, or gold, or apparel, 1 These. 2. 5. Act. 20. 33. but of a forward ready
mind, a willing forward mind, though others should withold more than is meet.

Neither as being Lords over God's Heritage; or Clergy, exercising authority
over them, or as seeking to have dominion over their faith, but as ensamples to
the flock, being examples of the believers in word, in conversation, in
charity, inspirit, in faith, in purity, 1 Timothy 4. 12. in all things showing
themselves patterns of good works, Tit. 2. 1, 7.

Yea, to preach the Gospel, and to feed the believers with the sincere milk of
the word, and not to corrupt the word of God by mixing therewith the excellency
of speech, or of wisdom; for however pleasing to the flesh this is, and
whatever good thereby they may think to do that use it, yet certainly, though
men do preach the Gospel, while it is done with wisdom of words, it makes the
Cross of Christ of none effect, 1 Cor. 1. 17. it pleases God by the
foolishness of preaching, even by that plain and faithful commending and
proclaiming the Cross of Christ, which is without the wisdom of this world, to
save them that believe, and so to feed them, and build them up, 1 Cor. 1. 21.
though this manner of preaching the Gospel be to them that perish (wander out
of the way of understanding) foolishness, yet to the saved it is the power of
God, ver. 18. And hence the Apostle when he came to the Corinthians, came not
with excellency of speech, or of wisdom declaring the testimony of God, for he
determined to know nothing among them (who were rich in knowledge and
utterance) but Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 2, 7. And oh that
this were considered both by them that teach others, and by them that are
taught.

By them that teach others, that they might deny themselves, and lay aside the
use of their wisdom in preaching the Gospel, both in word, and in their
writings; for it renders them in both very unfruitful and unsuccessful; and
this they reap as the fruit of their evil, in leaning to the wisdom of this
world; for herein they endeavor to build what God has resolved to destroy,
and to make something of that which he has purposed to bring to naught, 1 Cor.
1. 19, 20. and while they walk contrary to God herein, it provokes God to walk
contrary to them, and to withold his presence and blessing from them, so as
they bring forth little or no fruit: Or if men do receive the testimony of
Christ declared by them, their faith stands in their wisdom, and not in the
power of God, and so the word of God works not effectually in them, 1 Cor. 2.
1, 5. 1 These. 2. 13. God has chosen the foolish things of the world to
confound the wise, and the weak things of the world to confound the mighty, and
base things of the world, and things that are despised has God chosen, and
things which are not, to bring to naught things that are, that no flesh should
glory in his presence. Those whom he chooses and makes partakers of this
heavenly calling to minister unto him, and serve him in his Temple, and who do
worthily in the Ministry, they are babes and sucklings generally, and not the
wise and prudent; yea, all of them are such as he either finds or makes fools:
And therefore let no man deceive himself (whether he be such an one as has
only natural parts, or whether he be such an one as has by study and industry
acquired some skill in the wisdom of this world, let him not think that by his
wisdom he can find out the mind of God, or be profitable to others, but) if any
man among you seems to be wise in this world, let him become a fool (not lean
to his own understanding, but cease from his own wisdom) that he may be wise,
for the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God, Mat. 1. 1. 25. 1 Cor. 1.
26, 29: Prove. 3. 5. and 23. 4. 1 Cor. 3. 18, 19. This way or manner of
preaching the Gospel, namely, with excellency of speech, or of wisdom, it is
very unprofitable and hurtful; and men are making use of it, partly from a
jealousy of the Gospel of Christ, as if it were not the power of God to
salvation as declared in the words of the holy Ghost, but needs somewhat else
to be added to it to make it forcible; But he that has my word, says the
Lord, let him speak my word faithfully, what is the chaff to the wheat? is not
my word like as a fire, says the Lord? and like an hammer that breaks the
rock in pieces? Jer. 23. 28, 29. and partly they are enticed hereto, and
strengthened herein by desires of vain glory, and that they may be accounted
wise, and men of parts, and have respect and applause; and therefore unless the
grace of God be so received as to purge out that jealousy, and those desires,
we shall not cease from our own wisdom, for vain man would be wise; but by
committing our selves to God, and the word of his grace, we may be helped to
become fools* and so to be crucified to the world, and not matter though we be
accounted unlearned and ignorant men, and such as have never learned, which is
part of the Cross of Christ that is to be taken up and born by us, Joh. 7. 15.
Act. 4. 13. This wisdom is part of the goodliness of the flesh, the glory of
man, which the spirit in the testimony is withering. Oh! that he might be
suffered to have his perfect work in us.

And oh that this were considered by them that are taught. that that manner of
preaching the Gosp^l which is with wisdom of words, makes the Cross of Christ
of none ^ffect, when men receive the word of God as the word of men, and their
faith stands in the wisdom of man, that is, they hear it with delight, and
credit it, because such as bring it to them are furnished, and come with
excellency of speech, or of wisdom; though it is the word of God that is
received, yet it works not effectually in them, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. 1 Cor. 2. 5.
And truly we all need to be admonished of this evil, for men naturally love and
admire the wisdom of this world; and oh that there were not too much cause to
say that many of God's people are too much polluted with this iniquity. If a
man be made willing to become a fool for Christ's sake in declaring the
testimony, how ready is he to be despised, and lightly esteemed: Whereas if
another be wise in Christ, and exalt himself, this they can suffer gladly, and
love to have it so, and st^engthen those that so teach them in this evil way,
while they weaken the hands of others, 1 Cor. 4. 10. 2 Cor. 11. 20. Oh let us
all beware of the in^icing words of man's wisdom, and so of Philosophy, etc. for
in Christ dwel^s all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and in him we are
complete, Col. 2. 2, 4, 8, 10.

3. And in this to which the Apostle commits them, there is contained motive
for feeding; that which is powerful to strengthen to seek the good of men
generally, and especially the good of the flock of Christ. As to say,

1. Herein they may behold the infinite grace of Jesus Christ, and God in him,
toward every sinful soul of mankind, and that he is not willing any man should
perish, but that all should come to repentance, as is wonderfully evidenced in
this, that Christ by the grace of God tasted death for every man: Oh how will
this constrain to endeavor the good of men, and especial good of believers.
The love of Christ constrains us, says the Apostle, because we thus j^dge,
that if one died for all, then were all dead; and he died for all, that they
which live should not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that died for
them and rose again. This judgment received by them, did powerfully move them
to persuade men, and they could not but speak the things they had seen and
heard, 2 Cor. 5. 11* 15. Act. 4. 19, 20. This love of God known and believed
with the heart, effects in them that so receive it, an hearty desire and prayer
to God that they may be saved, who are ignorant of, and enem^es to the
righteousness of God; it fram^s them to some like mindedness with their
heavenly fat^er, and causes their hearts to burn within them in an ardent
affection to, and desire of the good of those that are ignorant and out of the
way, 1 John 4. 14, 16. Luke 24. 26, 27, 32. Jer. 20. 9. Whereas others that
have not received th^s judgment, that one died for all and rose again, what
appearance of zeal and devotion soever they have, yet the love of Christ does
not constrain hereto; but either they do what they do, that they may have
praise of men; or out of a desire of filthy lucre, or to establish a
righteousness to themselves; yea, and this judgment received* and believed, is
the bottom* ground and motive to move them that have it, to feed the flock of
Christ, to pray them to be (further) reconciled to God, and not to receive his
grace in vain, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 19* 21. and 6. 1. their hearts are purified in
obeying the truth through the Spirit, unto the unfeigned love of the brethren,
1 Pet. 1. 22. And so,

2. They have this further motive to move them to feed the Church, that they
are Christ's flock, the Church of God which he has purcha^ed with h^s own
blood; not only has he given himself a ransom to God for them, as he has done
for all; but he so evidenced the preciousness of his blood to them, in the
peace and atonement which he thereby made, in the victory thereby obtained, in
the righteousness thereby completed, in the fullness of grace and truth thereby
received in the New Testament, and everlasting Covenant thereby confirmed, as
that they, not being disobedient to the heavenly call, were hereby redeemed
unto God, and what things were formerly gain to them, these they counted loss
for Christ, and so were made of the chosen generation, and of his flock in a
peculiar consideration, being all baptized into one body, and made to drink
into one spirit, called in one hope of their calling, etc. such as Christ loves
with peculiar manner of love, and frames those that receive his grace to the
same mind, even to do good to all, but especially to the household of faith,
Gal. 6. 10. to love one another with a pure heart fervently, 1 Pet. 1. 22. and
so to be followers of God as dear children, and walk in love as Christ has
loved them, Ephesians. 5. 1* 2. This is a great mo^ive for a servant to love and seek
the good o^ such as are his Lord's children, and such as he delights in. So
Peter from this motive exhorts the Elders; Feed the flock of God that is among
you, 1 Pet. 5. 2, 3. yea, and in that they are his flock, there is contained in
it this further encouragement, that he will bless and assist their helpers, and
be with them in the faithful declaration of the Gospel unto the end of the
world, Mat. 28. 18, 20. For who goes a warfare at any tim^ at his own charges?
yea, these had some oversight of the flock committed to them, and it is
required of Stewards, that a man be found faithful, and the shepherd will
require the flock at their hands, Ezekiel. 34. 10. Oh, let such take heed
therefore to themselves, and to all the flock, that they may be pure from the
blood of all men. Nay, surely in their places, and according to their capacity,
all the holy brethren are partakers of the heavenly calling, though not all
chosen into office; and the grace of God does instruct them, and God their
Shepherd does furnish them that they may edify one another on their most holy
faith, Jude 20, 21. 1 These. 5. 11. Romans 15. 14. The manifestation of the Spirit
is given to every one of the chosen generation to profit withal, and they ought
to be teachers who are faithful in the Lord, 1 Cor. 12. 7. Heb. 3. 1. and ^.
12. and it is required of them to look diligently, lest any man fail of the
grace of God, Heb* 12. 15.

3. To move hereto also, our God has in the word of his grace set great
encouragement before them, that when the great shepherd shall appear, they that
have fed the flock faithfully, or who shall be reputed graciously so to have
done, shall receive a crown of glory that fades not away, 1 Pet. 5. 1, 4. he
will then say to such, Well done good and faithful servant, etc. Oh, then
blessed will that servant be, whom the Lord when he comes shall find so doing,
viz. giving to his household their portion of meat in due season. Of a truth,
says our Savior, I say unto you, that he will make him ruler over all that he
has, Mat. 25. 21, 23. Luke 19. 17. and 12. 42, 44. Dan. 12. 3.

And on the other hand, woe will be to them that have received the word of
reconciliation* if they hold not forth the wo^d of life in word and
conversation, but abuse their talent, or hide it in a napkin, the Lord will be
terrible to them. Oh, that therefore knowing the terror of the Lord, they may
labor, that whether present or absent, they may be accepted of him, Luke 12.
45* 48. Mat. 25. 24, 30. 1 Cor. 9. 16. 2 Cor. 5. 9, 11.

Yea, and to provoke these, to whom he speaks, to feed the flock, and therefore
to commit themselves to God* and the word of his grace, he adds, ver. 29. I
know that after my departure shall grievous wolves enter in among you, not
sparing the flock; and this leads us to the next general head proposed, viz.
That he does commit them all to God and the word of his grace.

2. For their preservation, that they might not be destroyed or moved from the
faith by such as would endeavor it; but might trust in God before the sons of
men.

By [ grievous Wolves] is here meant as is before said.

1. Violent persons, who endeavor by force and cruelty to scatter the flock,
and cause them to flee as a Bird to their Mountain, to cast in their lot among
them; for this is the end of their persecutions, and secret speech of all their
cruelty, Psalm. 11. 1, 2. these are called Wolves, Mat. 10. 16, 23. Luke 10. 3.
And so the Psalmist speaking of the wicked that persecute the poor, says, His
ways are always grievous: and in such grievous ways they walk* because of
their evil thoughts, as is there said; God is not in all his thoughts: Or, all
his thoughts are, there is no God; and hence, his ways are always grievous,
and Gods judgments (both of his mouth and hand) are far above out of his sight:
Those ways and persons walking therein, are grievous to God, they grieve him
at the heart, and they are grievous to the congregation of Gods poor ones,
Psalm. 10. 4 5, 9. So it is said of those oppressive and cruel rulers, even
amongst those on whom God's name was called, they decree unrighteous decrees,
and write grievousness, which they have prescribed, Isa. 10. 1. Psalm. 31. 18.
yea, and Princes and Judges, in the professed Church, were for their cruelty
compared to Wolves, Ezekiel. 22. 27. Zeph. 3. 3.

2. Hereby is also signified false Prophets that come to corrupt from the
simplicity that is in Christ, and the voice of whose instructions, which cause
to err from the words of knowledge in sum, is, stolen waters are sweet, and
bread eaten in secret places is pleasant, Prove. 9. 17. who commend unto us
somewhat which is not the bread which wisdom has prepared, for that is the
flesh of Christ which he has given for the life of the world, Prove. 9. 5, 17.
Joh. 6. 51. such are called Wolves, as Mat. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets
that come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. So
those that come with a strange voice from that of Christ's, those thieves and
robbers that come not in by the door, these are compared to Wolves, and do come
to catch and scatter the sheep, John 10. 1, 5, 10, 12. And herein both violent
and deceitful persons agree, they are both enemies to, and such as will not
spare the flock.

Now then, that they might be preserved from the fear and terror of the former,
and the deceit and subtil^y of the latter, he commits them to God, and the word
of his grace; thereby giving us to understand, that the name of the Lord is a
strong tower, and those that run into it shall be set on high, Prove. 18. 10.
according to that, Whosoever hearkneth unto me shall dwell safely, and shall be
quiet from the fear of evil, Prove. 1. 33. And so the Apostle, when he fo^^wa^ns
Timothy, That all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution; and that evil men (persecuters) and seducers (^alse Prophe^s)
shall wax worse and worse, He adds, But continu^ ^hou in the things thou have
learned; (of God in the word of his grace) this will preserve thee from the
evil of the violence of the one, and cunning craftiness of the other, 2 Timothy 3.
12, 14.

1. Then, the Apostle here commits them to God, and the word of his grace, with
desire they should commit themselves to him and it, and be strong in the grace
that is in Christ Jesus- and so rest in the Lord, expecting his gracious
preservation of them from the hurt of those grievous violent Wolves, and
waiting patiently for him, enduring hardness as good Soldiers of Christ Jesus,
not being afraid of the terror of persecuters, neither being troubled or
hindered from holding fast the profession of their faith, 2. Tim. 2. 1, 3.
Psalm. 37. 7. 1 Pet. 3. 14.

And in this he signifies to us, that there is good cause and encouragement to
commit our selves to God, and the word of his grace, when he is taking away
eminent and faithful instruments, and suffering grievous wolves to enter in: At
such a time, in the Lord we may praise his word, and be strong in him, and the
power of his might. Now especially, when the godly man cease, the wicked then
insult and say; Seeing the foundations are destroyed, what can the righteous
do? now they cry, flee as a Bird to our Mountain; your pillars, the principal
of the flock are removed, those upon whom you leaned, and who were supporters
to you, and upholders of you; and what will you now do? at such a time as this
when they thus rejoice, the righteous have this still to encourage themselves
in: Though those you call foundations are removed, yet the Lord is in his holy
Temple, the Lord's throne is in heaven, Psalm. 11. 1, 4. yea, now especially (as
before is noted) he has promised that he will be nigh to them; for the
oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will I arise says
the Lord, (namely, when the godly man cease, and when the tongue of the
wicked speaks proud things, as if now they should prevail) I will set him in
safety from him that puffs at him; and this he would do by his words, which
are pure words, Psalm. 12. 1. 6. As to speak a little particularly.

^. The person to whom he commends them, as is declared in the word of his
grace, is one that has triumphed gloriously, who having had the judgment of
this world executed upon him, has endured and overcome it, and has cast out
the Prince of the world, and so has drawn all men unto him; he has purged our
sins from before the presence of God, abolished death, and destroyed him that
had the power of death, even the devil, and overcome the world; his own right
hand, and his holy arm has gotten himself the victory, Psalm. 98. 1. and has
obtained all power both in heaven and in earth, and all fullness of grace and
truth into himself for us; The Father has not given the Spirit by measure unto
him, but has so loved him, that he has given all things unto him, Joh. 3. 34,
35. The consideration hereof is powerful to strengthen us not to fear any of
those things we may suffer, and to preserve us from evil, and from the fear of
evil; this is our victory, even our faith: Who is he that overcomes the world,
but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? even accepted to all the
ends of his undertaking, and so raised from the dead, etc. 1 John 5. 4, 5. In
this we see, that

He has trodden down strength, and delivered us in himself from the hand of
our enemies, so that neither Satan, nor his instruments can set on us to harm
us, till he give permissive commission thereto, because all judgment is
committed to him of the Father; he has bound the strong man, and the kingdom
of God by him is brought unto us, and reigns over us graciously, Mat. 12. 28,
29. And this is made known to us in the Gospel, that we might rejoice in his
salvation, and in the name of our God we might set up the banner, as they
profess to do, Psalm. 20. 5. Forasmuch as the children were partakers of flesh
and blood, he likewise took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is the devil; and deliver them
(through the knowledge hereof) who through fear of death were all their life
time subject to bondage, Heb. 2. 14, 15. See in our types how Moses incourages
the hearts of the people: If thou shall say in thine heart, these Nations are
more than I, etc. thou shall not be afraid of them, but shall well remember
what the Lord thy God did unto Pharaoh, and unto all Egypt, etc. Deuteronomy. 7. 17,
18, 21. As if he should say, consider how great things he has done, how
gloriously he has triumphed, and in that thing wherein they thought to deal
proudly he was above them, and this will be bread to you, for their strength is
departed, Numb. 14. 9. Psalm. 74. 13, 14. And now grace and truth is come by
Jesus Christ, we have this deliverance and victory obtained by the Captain of
our salvation set before us, to encourage us to serve God without fear, seeing
in and by him we are delivered out of the hands of our enemies, Luke 1. 71, 75.
and to be of good comfort, for he has overcome the world, Joh. 16. 33. He has
spoiled principalities and powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing
over them in himself, Col. 2. 15. Ephesians. 4. 8. Psalm. 68. 18. He has obtained in
himself a complete conquest over Satan (the true Lev^athan and crooked Serpent)
and his instruments, and is gone up with a shout (in token of victory) the Lord
with the ^ound of a trumpet; Sing praises to our God, sing praises* (...)
praises to our King, sing praises, Psalm. 47. 5, 6. so as that they have no
power except it be given them from above*

And he has abolished death, and taken out the sting thereof, and so out of
all afflictions and lesser deaths, so as there is nothing in them simply to
separate us from the love of God in Christ; he has delivered us in himself
from that so great a death into which we were fallen, and in which we must have
perished for ever, had he not remembered us in our ^^w estate, for his mercy
indures for ever; yea, he has turned our curses into blessings; he is ascended
far above all heavens, into heaven it self, that he might fill all things, and
so all afflictions, and death, with the vertu^s and influences of his
sacrifice; yea, he has the keys of hell, and of death, 2 Cor. 1. 10. 2 Timothy 1.
8, 10. Romans 8. 39. Ephesians. 4. 10.

2. Consider, he who has thus obtained the victory, and whose it is, he is the
Shepherd of his flock, the High Priest of their profession, who hold fast the
beginning of the confidence, and the rejoicing of the hope firm to the end,
Heb. 3. 1, 2, 6, 14. And so,

He is one who has offered up an acceptable sacrifice unto the Father, even
the offering of his own body once for all, both for his own sins which were
imputed to him, and accepted by him, and for the sins of the people; and has
so taken away the guilt of the former, that the wrath of God from him remains
not on any one for that sin and sinfulness simply; and obtained power to make
reconciliation for the latter, and to forgive them that through his name
believe in him, Act. 10. 43. and 13. 39. Oh, what encouragement is there in
this to strengthen us to run with patience the race set before us, and not to
fear in the days of evil when the iniquity of our heels compass us about,
Psalm. 49. 5, 15. See how this even compleats the consolation of believers in a
day of adversity, and causes them to triumph always in Christ: It is Christ
that dyed, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of
God, who also makes intercession for us (that our iniquities may not be
imputed, but graciously forgiven and healed) who shall separate us from the
love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or
nakedness, or peril, or sword? -- Nay, in all these things we are more than
conquerors through him that has loved us, Rom* 8. 34, 39. Oh, consider what a
merciful and faithful High Priest we have in things pertaining to God, to make
reconciliation for the sins of the people; and who is therefore able to save to
the uttermost all that come to God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them; for such an high Priest became us, etc. Heb. 2. 17, and
3. 1. and 7. 25, 26. If our sins were lest upon us, and no deliverance there
from obtained, how then could we live? This would make us faint in our
sighings; But bless the Lord, O my soul, says the Prophet -- Who forgiveth all
thine iniquity; whose office it is so to do unto all that come unto God by him,
and to make them partakers of the forgiveness of sins through the word of
faith, Psalm. 103. 1, 3. Act. 26. 18. and 10 43.

He is one who is made perfect through sufferings, and so he orders nothing but
what he himself endured, for he was in all points tempted like unto us, yet
without sin; yea, he bare our sufferings with the sting in them; He was a man
of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. And how may this strengthen us, and make
us willing to follow his steps, considering he endured so great afflictions for
our sins, and has taken the sting out of what remains for us to suffer. Has
our Lord so willingly humbled himself for us, and for the joy set before him
(that he might bring us to God) endured the Cross, despising the shame, and
shall not we count it an honor, and rejoice that we are counted worthy to
suffer shame for him? seeing also we have but the shadow of death to pass
through Consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against
himself, that ye be not weary, nor faint in your minds, Heb. 12. 1, 3.

Yea, and since he has suffered being tempted, he is able also (even fitted
and disposed) to succor them that are tempted: He has also been compassed
with Bulls, Lions, Wolves, etc. and knows how to have compassion on us, and to
sympathize with us, to be even afflicted in our afflictions, and to pity us
therein as a father pityeth his children, Heb. 2. 18. and 3. 1. and 4. 15.

Our High Priest is one on whom rests the spirit of wisdom and understanding,
who knows all things, and knows the hearts and thoughts of men, Joh. 21. 17.
Act. 1. 24. the darkness and the light are both alike to him; Great is our Lord
-- his understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147. 5. And with this infinite wisdom
is he filled, and furnished for the good of men, and especial good of those
that believe, that he may improve it for their good in so befooling and
disappointing their persecuters, that their hands may not perform their
enterprises; his eyes run to and fro to show himself strong in the behalf of
those whose heart is perfect with him, 2* Chron. 16. 9. Neither is there any
creature that is not manifest in his sight; but all things are naked and open
unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do: Seeing then we have a great High
Priest that is passed into the heavens -- let us hold fast our profession, Heb.
4. 13, 14. Had we more to do with him, and did we consider that in him we are
complete, our souls would dwell at ease, and it would preserve us from those
fears of amazement, and cares wherewith we afflict our selves to know men's
intentions, and to save our selves, Psalm. 10. 11, 14, and 35, 22. Jer. 11. 18,
19.

And together herewith, He, our Lord, is of great power, Psalm. 147. 5. and has
received this, and will manage it for the special good of those that believe;
The Father has put all things under his feet, and given him to be head over
all things unto his Church. And the Apostle prays for the believers, that the
eyes of their understandings might be enlightened to know this, which would
delight their souls in the multitude of their thoughts within them, Ephesians. 1. 17,
20, 22. And this compleats the answer of the good conscience, that he is gone
up into heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels, Authorities and powers
being made subject unto him, 1 Pet. 3. 21. 22. Heb. 4. 14. and 8. 1. and 12. 2.
All are his servants; Satan and all his instruments are ordered by him, and
when he suffers them to take away from us, or afflict us, yet it is the Lord
that takes away and orders that affliction to us; though he is not the author
of the sin, yet who is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord
commands it not? Out of the mouth of the most high proceeds not evil and good?
Job 1. 21. Lam. 3. 37, 38. Consider then, when any grievous wolves enter in
among us, that it is the Lord that dyed for us, yea rather that is risen again,
that has ordered those cruel ones to us; and his will is good, perfect and
acceptable; and therefore let him do what seems him good.

He is such an High Priest who has confirmed great, and precious promises in
his blood, even for this life also, as

He will debate in measure, both as to the weight and continuance of the
affliction: The rod of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous,
lest the righteous put forth their hands to iniquity, Isa. 27. 8. Psalm. 125. 3.
There has no temptation taken you (says the Apostle) but that which is common
to man (or moderate) and God is faithful (for the time to come) who will not
suffer you to be tempted above what you are able, but will with the temptation
make a way of escape, that you may be able to bear, 1 Cor. 10. 13* 14. To this
purpose also speaks Moses, Deuteronomy. 8. 5. 6. Thou shall also consider in thine
heart, that as a man chasteneth his son, so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee
(namely, with compassion and much tenderness.) He is a God of judgment, by whom
actions and afflictions are weighed. The fitches are not threshed with a
threshing instrument, neither is a cart-wheel turned about upon the cummin; but
the fitches are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod; (he will
not lay upon his people more than they are able, or he will enable them to
bear, but beat them with a rod and a staff, and not bring the wheel over them,
Prove. 20. 26. and his rod and his staff shall comfort them; namely, his
moderate afflictions, as Psalm. 23. 4.) bread corn is bruised, because he will
not ever be threshing it, nor b^eak it with the wheel of his cart, nor bruise
it with his horsemen. This also comes from the Lord of hosts, which is
wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working; who knows our frame and
weakness, and is excellent in working for our escape, that the Spirit may not
fail before him, and the Soul which he has made, Isa. 57. 16. Abruised reed he
will not break, Isa. 28. 26, 29. and 42. 1, 3. Psalm. 103. 13, 14. Surely, says
the Prophet, the wrath of man shall praise thee; and the remainder thereof
(which would not tend to his praise in the profit of his people) thou will
restrain, Psalm. 76. 10.

He will be with them in all the grievances he is ordering to them, according
to that, Isa. 41. 10, 14. Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not disma^ed,
for I am thy God, I will strengthen thee, yea I will help thee, yea I will
uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. And, Isa. 43. 2, 5. When
thou passest through the waters I will be with thee, and through the rivers,
they shall not overflow thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou shall
not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee; fear not for I am wi^h
thee. So Hag. 2* 4, 5. Hence the Psalmist says, Though I walk in the valley ^f
the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me; namely, I will
fear no evil of, or concerning thee, I will not be jealous of my Shepherd; and
so, I will fear no evil, no adversity whatsoever, for thou art with me, to
uphold and strengthen me with strength in my soul, Psalm. 23. 4. and 138. 3.
This comforted the Prophet when in great affliction, and inderision daily; I
heard the defaming of many, fear on every side: report, say they, and we will
report; all my familiars watched for my halting, peradventure he will be
enticed, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on
him. (By the way, they signify, that unless they could entice him, or turn him
aside, they could not take their revenge on him) but, says he, the Lord is
with me, therefore my persecuters shall stumble, and they shall not prevail,
Jer. 20. 10, 11. And so

He will preserve their souls from the design of Satan and his instruments,
that nothing shall be able to separate them from the love of God in Christ,
that love him and keep his word, Romans 8. 35, 39. he will not deliver them unto
the will of their enemies, Psalm. 41. 2. He is faithful who will establish them,
and keep them from evil, 2 These. 3. 3. He will not suffer the feet of those
that trust in him to be moved, he that keeps them will not sl^mber; behold he
that keeps Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep, the Lord is their keeper;
the Sun shall not smite them by day, the Lord shall preserve them from all
evil, he shall preserve their souls, etc. Psalm. 121. and 97. 10. 1 Samuel 2. 9.
My sheep, says our Savior, hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow
me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand, etc. Joh. 10. 27, 30. Oh! what
encouragement is given us herein to trust in him, and not be afraid; not to
fear any of those things we may suffer, but though briars and thorns be with
us, and we dwell among Scorpions, and our souls are among Lions and Wolves,
even amongst them that are set on fire, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and
their tongue a sharp sword, yet to walk in the strength of the Lord God, and to
make mention of his righteousness, even of his only. Yea,

He will cause all things to work together for good to them that love God, who
are the called according to purpose, so as that in all the tribulations he is
ordering, they shall be m^r^ than conquerours through him that has loved them,
and given himself for them, Romans 8. 28, 37. and they shall be gainers by their
losses, and have occasion with thankfulness to acknowledge, that it was good
for them that they were afflicted. Psalm. 119. 62, 71. for his end in ordering
the afflictions of the Gospel is for their profit, that they might be partakers
of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10, 11. he is refining them but not with silver; he
is choosing them in the furnace of affliction, Isa. 48. 10. Zech. 13. 9. Every
branch in the true vine the Husbandman purges (continually) that it may bring
forth more fruit, Joh. 15. 2. and by all tribulations he is preparing them for
glory, and more glory for them: Our light afflictions which are but for a
moment, work for us a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory, while we look
not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen, says
the Apostle; for which cause they fainted not, 2 Cor. 4. 16. 18. yea, death is
theirs, and to die gain; and the Lord knows how, even by this means, to
deliver the godly out of temptation, 1 Cor. 3. 22. Phil. 1. 21. 2 Pet. 2. 9.
and their manifold temptations, the trial of their faith, through which now for
a season, when need is, they are in heaviness, shall be found unto praise, and
honor, and glory at the appearing of Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7.

And now in the multitude of their troubles, and thoughts within them, his
comforts shall delight their souls, Psalm, 94. 19. He is the God of all comfort,
who comfort them in all their tribulations; and as the sufferings of Christ
abound in them, so their consolation also abounds by Christ; He is one who
comforts them that are cast down, and restores comfort to the con^^ite one,
and his mourners, by creating the fruit of his lips in his Gospel, peace, peace
unto them, 2 Cor. 1. 3, 5, 7, and 7. 5. Isa. 57. 18, 19. The Spirit of the Lord
God is upon Christ, because the Lord has anointed him to preach good tydi^g^
to the meek -- To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to g^ve unto them
beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, etc. Isa. 61. 1, 3. He will then
especially and abundantly cause them to prove the sufficiency of his grace, 2
Cor. 12. 7, 10. that having access by faith into that groce wherein they stand,
even that grace, that while we were yet without strength in due time Christ
died for the ungodly, they may rejoice in tribulations also, Romans 5. 2, 3, 6.
Jam. 1. 2, 5.

He will give unto them his good Spirit to bring to remembrance the sayings of
Christ, to glorify him, and enamour their hearts on him, and to teach them all
things; and so to be a spirit of grace and supplication unto them, to teach
them how to pour out their hearts unto him, in what manner, and for what
things, and in what encouragement, Joh. 14. 27. and 16. 13, 14. Likewise the
Spirit also he^peth our infirmities, for we know not what we should pray for as
we o^ght; but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us with groanings
which cannot be ^ttered, Romans 8. 26, 27. and so to teach them how to answer
adversaries and opposers. This is the promise which our Savior promised his
Disciples* when he sent them forth as Lambs in the midst of Wolves, to preserve
them from carefulness and thoughtfulness what to answer: But when says he,
they deliver you up, take no thought how, or what ye shall speak (either as to
the manner or matter) for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye shall
speak; for it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your father which
speaks in you, Man. 10. 16, 20. And hence our ^aviour admonishes them to
settle it in their ^ea^ts not to medi^are before what they shall answer, for he
assu^es them (in so doing) he will give them a mouth, and wisdom, which all
their ^dversaries shall not be able to gainsay, nor resist* Luke 21. ^4* 15.

Yea, what shall I say, for the time would fail; he will be abundantly nigh
unto them in this ^ime of trouble: For the eyes of the Lord are over the
righteous, and his ears open to their cry, 1 Pet. 3. 12. he will fulfill their
desires, Psalm. 145. 18, 19. Purge away their transgressions, Psalm. 65. 3.
Subdue their iniquities, Mic. 7. 19. Fight their battles, 2 Chronicles. 32. 8. Renew
their inward man, 2 Cor. 4. 16. Revive them in the midst of trouble, Psalm. 138.
7. Supply all their wants according to his riches in glory, Phil. 4. 19.
Perform all things for them, Psalm. 57. 2. And perfect whatever concerns them,
Psalm. 138. 8. And so sanctify them throughout, that their whole spirit, soul,
and body, shall be p^eserved blamel^ss unto the coming of the Lord Jesus, 1
These. 5. 23. In short, he will never leave them, nor forsake them, so that they
may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man can do unto
me, Heb. 13. 5* 6.

And he is faithful that has promised. Oh! let us then hold fast the
profession of our faith without wavering, Heb. 10. 23. and not be afraid of
men, or their fear; nor say a confederacy with them that say a confederacy; but
sanctify the Lord of hosts in our hearts, and make him our fear and our dread,
and he shall be a sanctuary unto us, Isa. 8. 12, 14. Consider the Apostle and
High Priest of our profession, who was faithful to him that appointed him in
that hard and difficult work; he has been wonderfully tried, and did not fail
therein, nor was discouraged; but for the joy set before him endured the Cross,
despising the shame: He set his face like a flint, and patiently endured the
judgment of the world, and waited for the Lord till he brought him out of the
horrible pit and miry clay, and set his feet upon a rock: He was for this
purpose manifested, to take away our sins, and in him is no sin; and therein
may we so behold his faithfulness, as to be strengthened to rest in him, and
wait patiently for the performance of what yet remains, for faithful is he that
has promised, who also will do it.

And he is the Mediator of the New Testament which he has confirmed by his
blood. He it is who lives, and was dead, and is alive for evermore, to make
intercession for them that come to God by him, that their iniquities might not
withold good things from them, and make them know God's breach of promise,
Rev. 1. 18. Heb. 7. 25. Numb. 14. 34. He mediates the New Covenant, and appears
in the presence of God in the virtues of his sacrifice once offered as the
propitiation for their sins, to take them away, and cover them; and in their
confessing them he is faithful and just to forgive them their sins, and his
blood cleanses them from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1. 7, 9. and 2. 2. and he
lives to perform and execute this Testament of his own, and to dispense to them
all things that pertain to life and godliness, that the called may obtain the
promise of the eternal inheritance, Heb. 7. 25, 28. and 8. 6. and 9. 15.

3. Yea, and he has set a blessed hope before them, that those that suffer
here with him shall reign with him, and be glorified together. And he that has
this hope in Christ purifieth hemself (from desires of present manifestation)
as he is pure, 2 Timothy 2. 12. Romans 8. 17, 18. 1 John 3. 2, 3. which hope is now
powerful, as declared in the word of the truth of the Gospel, to save them from
their sins and idols, and from being afraid with any fear of amazement, Romans 8.
24, 25. and it is so confirmed, that they might have strong consolation who
have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before them; which they have
as an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast; and which enters into that
within the vail, whether the forerunner is for us entered, Jesus, made an
High Priest after the order of Melchisedeck, Heb. 6. 18, 20. He will then give
complete rest to them who are now troubled, avenge them of their adversaries,
and save them with an everlasting salvation. And this is now reported to us in
the Gospel, that looking to the end from the beginning, we might be strengthened
with strength in our soul; according to that, Isa* 35. 3, 10. Strengthen ye the
weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees, say to them that are of a fearful
heart, be strong, fear not, behold your God will come with vengeance, God with
a recompense, he will come and save you; and then no Lion shall be there to
afflict them, nor any ravenous be^st, and so no grievous Wolf, etc* Everlasting
joy shall be upon their heads* they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow
and sighing shall flee away: There will be an end of all these troubles and
afflictions to those that live godly in Christ Jesus, and their expectation
shall not be cut off; yea, now it is but a little while, and he that shall come
will come, and will not tarry, and will redeem them out of all adversity, and
they shall then obtain that salvation in Christ Jesus with eternal glory; and
therefore they have cause, and are instructed to rejoice, in as much as they
are partakers of Christ's sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed,
they also may be glad with exceeding joy, 1 Pet. 4. 13. Jam. 1. 12. Rev. 2. 7,
10, 11, 13, 17. Surely there is that contained in God and the word of his
grace, which may strengthen us to all patience and long-suffering with
joyfulness; so as we need not fear any of those things we may suffer, but
rather rejoice that we are counted worthy to suffer for his sake, who so
willingly endured so great sufferings for us.

2. To God and the Word of his grace he commits them for their preservation
from grievous wolves, as taken in the second sense before mentioned, viz. for
false Prophets and seducers; to the end that committing themselves thereto,
they might not be led away with the error of the wicked, and so fall from their
own stedfastness, but be preserved from hearing and receiving those
instructions which cause to err from the words of knowledge; and great need we
have to commit our selves to him and his word on this account, that we may go
from the presence of such foolish ones, in whom we perceive not the lips of
knowledge; for these, or many of them are very powerful to deceive. For,

1. The Ministers which Satan imploys as his instruments in sowing tares, they
are such, many times, as are very specious in their outward apperance; they
come unto you in sheeps clothing, says our Savior, Mat. 7. 15. namely,
appear in their outward conversation, as if they were of the sheep of Christ;
pretend to a great deal of meekness, self-denial, mortification, righteousness
in their dealings amongst men, holiness, and have a show of wisdom in
will worship and humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the
satisfying of the flesh, Col. 2. 18, 23. they appear very righteous unto men,
while yet within they are ravening wolves, and full of hypocrisy and iniquity,
as Mat. 23. 25, 28. and have a form of godliness upon them, and so are
deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the Ap^stles of Christ: And no
marvel, for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of light; therefore it
is no great thing if his Ministers be transformed as the Ministers of
righteousness, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 5. 2 Cor. 11. 13, 15. there is a generation that
are pure in their own eyes, and say to others, stand further off, for I am
holier than thou; though yet they are not washed from their filthiness. There
is a generation, Oh how lofty are their eyes, and their eyelids lifted up,
Isa. 65. 5. Prove. 30. 12, 13. they are like unto the Pharisees of old, who
trusted in themselves that they were righteous, and despised others, and even
accounted themselves more pure than the Lord Jesus, condemning him, and
faulting his Disciples, Luke 18. 9, 11. and 15. 1, 2. Joh. 9. 16. and therefore
they are the more dangerous; were they such as were walking in the gross lusts
of the flesh* they would be more readily abstained from; but being like graves
that appear not, yea appearing as the Disciples of Christ in their outward
conversation: And also boasting of themselves, and their own mouths praising
themselves as if they were the only Saints, and mean time despising and
condemning others; they are the more powerful to deceive, considering that we
are naturally prone and apt to s^ffer gladly such fools as exalt themselves,
and proclaim their own goodness, 2 Cor. 11. 19, 20. We have therefore great
need to watch unto God, and the word of his grace.

2. The m^ss^ge also which they bring, is such as the flesh savours and finds
sweetness in; it is such as is suitable to our natural spirit, lust and desire:
namely, such as leads men to have their rest and rejoicing in something that
was not crucified for them, as in some work or privilege of the flesh, some
manner of observing such or such an Ordinance, some tradition of the Elders,
some light, spirit, or operation in men; some marks, frames, qualifications,
changes or alterations in them, some sign that is not the sign of the Prophet
Jonas. In short, as is before said, the voice of their diverse and strange
doctrines, is, stolen waters are sweet, and bread of secrecies is pleasant,
Prove 9. 17. to wit, the matter of feeding they direct unto, and commend and
approve, it is somewhat else than the flesh of Christ which was given for the
li^e of the world, Joh. 6. 51. that which wisdom calls to and commends, it is
that feast of fat things prepared in Christ for all Nations; and those
consolations of Christ wherewith the God of all comfort does comfort the
believers in all their tribulations, are such as are proper to comfort others
that are in any trouble, Prove. 9. 1, 6. Isa. 25. 6. Mat. 23. 4. 2 Cor. 1. 3, 5.
But now these consolations of God are small with them, because there is some
secret thing with them, Job 15. 11. and they direct men to have the beginning
of their confidence and consolation, not in Christ as declared in the
Testimony, but in themselves, which is very savoury to the flesh. Hence the
Apostle, when he had been exhorting the believers as the sum and end of all he
had been speaking to them, to rejoice in the Lord, even in Christ Jesus as
preached in the Gospel, he adds, beware of dogs, beware of evil workers, Phil.
3. 1, 3. As who should say, those evil workers will direct you to rejoice in
something besides the Lord; and indeed as the serpent beguiled Eve through his
subtil^y, so they come to corrupt from the simplicity that is in Christ, 2 Cor.
11. 3. viz. by promising others, that in listening to them, they shall be as
Gods, and have a self-sufficiency in themselves, and shall have their life in
their own hands. Oh how pleasing is this to us ever since we drank in the
poison of Satan's temptations! How does this fill us with evil thoughts and
jealousies of God, and of that rest and refreshing he has prepared for us in
Christ, and leads us to seek to have our portion in our own hands? How does
this lead us to say, Our soul loatheth this Manna, this light bread, and to
seek after some other beginning of confidence, some other witness and sign of
God's love, some other matter of feeding than the flesh of Christ; or to feed
on it after some other manner, than as given for the life of the world; and to
have the ground and bottom matter of our rejoicing, and confidence in our
selves, or in something in which we are preferred before others, or d^fferenced
from others, and to this these ravening wolves lead; yea, and they pretend a
great deal of love and kindness to others, and use flattering words, promissing
them liberty in listening to them, and that they shall have their fill of love,
boasting of their freedom from sin, their seize, experiments, etc. many
times while they (though privily) are the servants of corruption, Prove. 7. 13,
21. Gal. 4. 17. Col. 2. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 18, 19. and therefore we need to beware of
them in the light, and strength of God's grace.

3. They are such also as are very forward, impudent, and diligent in promoting
their evil design; they will enter in amongst you, says the Apostle, ver. 29.
they come unto you, says our Savior, Mat. 7. 15. So 2 John 10. their feet
abide not in their hou^e, but now they are without, now in the streets, and lie
in wait at every corner, to call passengers who go right on their ways, Prove.
7. 8, 12. and 9. 13, 16. They sleep not except they have done mischief, and
their sleep is taken away unless they cause some to fall; they compass Sea and
La^d to make a proselyte, as our Savior says of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Mat. 23. 15. they watch for all opportunities, that with good words and fair
speeches they may deceive the hearts of the simple, Romans 16. 18. who believe
every word, Prove. 14. 15. and trouble, and unsettle believers; and if they can
but find C^rist's servants asleep, the enemy then will have a fit season to sow
his tares, Mat. 13. 25* this is the day they look for; and through their
importunity and watchfulness to beguil others, they do much mischief: Needful^
herefore also it is to betake our selves to God, and the word of his grace and
watch thereto and therein, that we may not be turned aside by them.

4. Yea, they are very reserved and subtle of heart, Prove. 7. 10. and use a
great deal of cunning craftiness to deceive and beguile others withal; her
ways are moveable, thou can not know them, Prove. 5. 6. they would be
thought, many times, to commend that which their soul loathes; they can
sometimes speak of Christ in their words, and of Gods grace in him to sinners;
while yet they only consult to cast him down from his excellency, they delight
in lies, they bless with their mouth, while they curse inwardly, Selah, Psalm.
62. 4. they privily deny the Lord that bought them, and not openly and in plain
words, however not at first, or until men begin to listen to them, and embrace
their strange doctrines, 2 Pet. 2. 1. inwardly they are ravening wolves, while
yet they come unto you in sheeps clothing, Mat. 7. 15. they hide their design
so cunningly, that they are not easily discovered therein, and speak in secret*
and are like them that peep and mutter, as those that are afraid of the light;
and if one know, discern and take notice of them, they are in the terrors of
the shadow of death; and therefore believers are more ready to be ensnared with
them, and it is more difficult so to detect them, as to preserve others from
them. So much the Apostle signifies, when he says; Many walk, of whom I have
told you often, and now tell you even weeping (as signifying that the believers
were hardly persuaded to believe they were evil workers, or as bad as indeed
they were, because they pretended one thing, and intended another, and yet
notwithstanding their spec^^us p^etences) they were the enemies of the Cross of
Christ, whose end is destruction, a marring of the visage of the Son of man,
Phil. 3. 18, 19. and therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the
things we have heard, that we may not be as children t^ssed to and fr^, and
carried about with every w^n^ of doctrine, by the sle^ght of men, and cunning
craftness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4. 14.

For notwithstanding their appearing godliness and great boastings of
themselves, their alluring doctrines; their diligent importunity, and cunning
craftiness in hiding their design; we may by the words of God's lips keep us
from the error of the wicked, and from every path of the destr^yer. When wisdom
(Jesus Christ) enters into thine heart, by faith; and knowledge (the word of
his grace) is pleasant unto thy soul; discretion shall preserve thee,
understanding shall keep thee, to deliver thee from the way of the evil man,
Prove. 2. 10, 12. and 4. 10, 16. On, let us hear then the instruction of our
f^ther, which is, let thine heart retain my words, keep my commandments and
live; get wisdom, get understandi^g, to get it not, neither decline from the
words of my mouth; forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee; love her and
she shall keep thee, Prove. 4. 1, 4, 8. In committing our selves then to God and
his Gospel, we may be preserved from those whole end is destruction. For, 1.
Here is compleatness prepared and discovered to give satisfying to our souls.
And, 2. Direction given, whereby we may know, so as to beware of those grievous
Wolves.

1. Here is compleatness prepared and discovered to give satisfying to our
souls, this, to which he commits them, is the rest where the weary may find
rest, and this is the refreshing, Isa. 28. 12. Jesus Christ as declared in the
Gospel is the bread of life; and he that comes to him shall never hunger
(after other food) and he that believes on him shall never thirst, Joh. 6. 35.
this God, even our God, has done all things well for us, and obtained all
things into himself, that may answer to all our needs, supply all our wants,
and perfect whatsoever does concern us; he having been delivered for our
offenses, and raised again from the dead, has made peace by the blood of his
Cross, slain the enmity that was between God and mankind, broken down the
middle wall of partition, abolished death, destroyed him that had the power of
death, wrought righteousness, completed salvation, obtained eternal
redemption, received all fullness into himself for us; yea, he has all things
given unto him that may satisfy us. All things are delivered to him of the
father, Luke 10. 22. All things are here ready, Mat. 22. 4. The Father loves
the Son, and has given all things into his hand, Joh. 3. 35. All things that
the Father has are his, Joh. 16. 15. And surely he says so often, All things,
that we might be assured that all fullness dwells in him; and we may well
reason as the Apostle does, in that he put all things in subjection under him,
he left nothing that is not put under him, Heb. 2. 8. So may we say, in that
all things are delivered to him, and ready and prepared in him, it is manifest
that nothing is excepted; yea, and he gives all things that pertain to life and
godliness through the knowledge of himself, even through the word of knowledge,
the word of his grace, 2 Pet. 1. 2, 3. How powerful is this to preserve us from
those who come unto us preaching another Jesus, whom the Apostles have not
preached, or another Gospel, which the believers have not accepted? whosoever
drinks of the water which Christ in the Testimony gives, shall never thirst.
This will preserve such as continue drinking from gadding about to change their
way, and from an itching ear to hear, and heap up to themselves teachers that
bring not this doctrine, and even make them say with Peter, when many of
Christ's Disciples, because of reproofs met with, and not submitted to, went
back, and walked no more with him: Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the
words of eternal life, Joh. 6, 60, 68. Prove. 8. 34, 36. In him (namely, in
Christ as declared in the Testimony) are hid all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge: And this I say, says the Apostle, lest any man should beguile you
with in^icing words; in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and
in him ye are complete, who is the head of all principality and power, let no
man therefore beguile you, etc. Col. 2. 3, 9, 18. These things says the
Apostle John, have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of
God, that ye may know ye have eternal life, in having the Son, and that ye may
believe on the name of the Son of God. This was powerful to preserve them from
those that did seduce them, 1 John 5. 10, 13. with Chap. 2. 25, 26. Of him are
ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption; that, according as it is written, he that
glories let him glory in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. He is the living bread
that came down from heaven Joh. 6. 51. The fountain of living waters for
washing and cleansing us, for cooling our thirst, and satisfying us, for
watering and making us fruitful, even like a watered garden; he is the great
Apostle and High Priest of the believers profession, and able to save to the
ut^ermost all that come to God by him; and they that forsake him shall be
ashamed of all other confidences, consolations, bread of secresies, and stolen
waters, while in him all the seed of Israel shall be justified, and shall glory.

2. We have also direction given us to know, so as to beware of those grievous
wolves: Our Savior gives a general one to his Disciples; By their fruits ye
shall know them, Mat. 7. 15, 16. where, by their fruits, is not meant their
outward clothing, or outward appearance: Such may seem unto men to have a good
life and conversation, and be therein blameless among men, Phil. 3. 6. appear
outwardly righteous unto men, Mat. 23. 28, desire to make a fair show in the
flesh, Gal. 6. 16. have a form of godliness upon them, 2 Timothy 3. 5. abstain
from many gross evils, Luke 18. 11. be transformed as the Ministers of
righteousness, 2 Cor. 11. 15. boast of their sufferings, and preaching freely,
2 Cor. 11. 7, 13, 23. zealously affect the believers, Gal. 4. 17. commend
themselves, and justify themselves before men, 2 Cor. 10. 7, 12, 18 Luke 16.
15. promise others liberty, and fullness of contentment and satisfaction in
listening to them* Prove. 7. 14, 18. 2 Pet. 2. 18, 19. and yet be inwardly
ravening wolves; and therefore the way to know them is not by their outward
appearance, for that may be so specious in evil workers, that the believers
themselves, while judging and walking as men, may have such a good opinion of
them as to fall too much in love with them, and to count them their enemies who
give a true discovery of them; Gal. 4. 16: and occasion grief to those that are
over them in the Lord, and admonish them, because they are so hardly persuaded
to beware of them, Phil. 3. 18. judge not according to appearance, says our
Savior, but judge righteous judgment, Joh. 7. 24. as signifying, the judging
according to appearance is not righteous judgment; for, such as are the enemies
of the Cross of Christ may have a beautiful outside; do ye look on things after
the outward appearance, says the Apostle, when he is warning of deceitful
workers, 2 Cor. 10. 7. This is the way to be mistaken and deceived.

But, by their fruits is meant,

1. The fruits of their l^ps, even those diverse and strange doctrines which
they bring, in which they cause to err from the words of knowledge: And this
appears to be the meaning of it, and not their outward appearance; because such
have sheeps clothing, as is said before; as well as also it is a direction for
knowing, not evil persons in general, but false Prophets in particular: Now,
how should they be known so well as by their strange voice? and a strange voice
it is indeed to hear persons that appear to be, and are by many taken for
sheep, and have sheeps clothing upon them, to bark like wolves against the
Shepherd, and the Testimony of Christ; to appear like a Lamb, and speak as a
Dragon, as is said of the man of sin, Rev. 13. 11. and this understanding of it
suits well with what our Savior gives as the reason why the sheep will not
follow a stranger, which also he calls a wolf, namely, because of their voice,
and not their outside appearance: A stranger, says he, they will not follow,
but will flee from him, for they know not the voice of strangers, Joh. 10. 4 5,
12. by their words then they may be discovered and condemned. And that this is
meant ^y fruits, will further appear by those rules of direction given to know
false Prophets by, by the Apostles: I shall particularly pitch upon those two
given by the Apostle John, 1 John 4. 1, 6. where he warns the believers not to
believe eye y spirit, but to try the spirits whether they are of God, because
many false Prophets are gone out into the world. And that we may try them, he
gives two rules for trial, by which we may know them.

1. Every spirit that confesses not Jesus Christ come in the flesh, is not of
God, and this is that spirit of Antichrist, ver. 3. So again, 2 John 7. Many
deceivers are entered into the world, who confess not Jesus Christ come in the
flesh, this is a deceiver and an Antichrist.

The person they confess not, is, Jesus Christ which is come in the flesh, and
has finished the work which the Father gave him to do in his own body, even
Jesus of Nazareth, who was born in the days of Caesar Augustus, when Cyrenius
was Governor of Syria, who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again,
in the same body in which he was crucified, the third day according to the
Scriptures, as distinguished from all other persons and things.

And by [ confessing] is meant, an open and plain acknowledgment that he has
come, with a praising, commending and speaking honorably of him, according to
the Scriptures, giving thanks unto him, or giving him the praise which is due
unto him, and so thankfully acknowledging in their doctrines, that he has done
such things, and is become, and is such an one as the Father has testified of
him. So where it is said, Psalm. 18. 49. I will give thanks unto thee, or praise
thee; it is thus rendered, Romans 15. 9. I will confess to thee among the
Gentiles. So where we read in Psalm. 107. 8, 15, 21, 31. Oh that men would
praise the Lord. In every of these verses in the former translation, it is
rendered, confess. So, Mat. 11. 25. At that time Jesus said, I thank, or praise
thee, it is in the Margin, I confess, etc. See also, Heb. 13. 15. So here,
Every spirit that confesses not Jesus Christ which is come in the flesh, that
is, that praises not, magnifieth not, lifts not up, celebrateth not him, is
not of God. We may instance a little particularly.

1. Those persons confess not, praise not Jesus Christ come in the flesh who
tell us, That the bread and wine in the Supper when cons^crated, is
transubstantiated into the very body and blood of Christ: They hereby praise
not that Jesus of Nazareth that was born of the V^rgin Mary, and dyed for our
sins at Jerusalem, and is raised again; but somewhat else in the room and stead
of him, that was not then, nor many hundred years since, in being; which was
never crucified for us, never buried, never raised again as he was; yea,
blasphemously they lift up and magnify themselves, who think they can make
their Savior, and so are greater than he; besides they cast him down from his
excellency, for he is but one, 2 Cor. 5. 14. 1 Cor. 8. 6. but of these it may
be said, according to the number of their Cities are their Christ's, as Jer. 2.
28.

2. So also they confess not Jesus Christ, who say, the body of our Lord Jesus
lies where they laid it, and is turned to dust, and rottenness, and that he is
not raised from the dead in that same body in which he bare our sins on the
Tree; but call some light, spirit, or seed in every man, the Christ, in
somedying, in others rising, etc. These deny Jesus to be the Christ, and so are
Antichrists, 1 John 2. 22. and even call him accursed, one who has failed in
the work appointed him to do, and has not redeemed us from the curse of the
Law; for if Christ be not raised from the dead in that same body in which he
died for our sins, according to the Scriptures, and was buried; then is our
preaching vain, says the Apostle, and your faith is also vain, ye are yet in
your sins, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4, 12, 20. They speak indeed many times of a Christ,
but they deny or confess not him who is so indeed; for he is one who showed
himself alive after his suffering by many infallible proofs, and rose in that
same body in which he was crucified (though not in the weakness it was sometime
in) in that body which has flesh and bones, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Joh. 2. 21. Act. 1.
3. Luke 24. 39. and evidenced that it was he himself that was alive after his
resurrection, by showing to his Disciples his hands and his feet, Luke 24. 39,
40. and his hands and his side; namely, his hands that were nailed to the Tree,
and his side that was pierced with a spear; and says to Th^mas, reach hither
thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into
my side, etc. And these things are written that we might believe tha^ Jesus
(the son of the Virgin Mary, that had that name given unto him on the eighth
day, when he was ci^cumcised, and was known by the name of Jesus of Nazareth,
by friends and enemies) is the Christ, the ^nointed one of God, Joh. 20. 20,
25, 27, 31. with Chap. 19. 34. and in that very body he ascended and offered it
up to God, according the will of God, by the which will of God we are
sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus once for all, even of that body
which the Father prepared for him when he came into the world, Heb. 10. 5, 10.
and has in heaven a glorious body, distinct from his body the Church, which
while here is vile, Phil. 3. 20 21. and is there, and from thence nam^d himself
unto Paul, Jesus of Nazareth, ^ct. 2^. 8 and in that body of his flesh, as
distinct from his body the Church, he does, and will present holy, unblameable
and unreproveble in his ^ight, his body the Church, even such as continue in
the faith grounded and settled, and are not moved away from the hope of the
Gospel, Col. 1. 22, 24. and so he in that same body, even the man Christ Jesus,
is the Mediator between God and men, 1 Timothy 2. 5. and by this man God shall
judge the world in righteousness, whereof he has given assurance unto all men,
in that he has raised him from the dead, Act. 17. 31. Mat. 16. 27. and 19. 28
and 25. 31.

3. And so they are not of God, who deny Jesus Christ to be, or confess him not
to be, the only foundation of our faith and hope, but call some purpose or
decree of election, respecting men's persons in a personal consideration, the
foundation: There is no purpose of God which is the foundation, and much less
that which many plead for, which is no purpose of his, and which renders the
Cross of Christ, and the preaching of it, a foolish and undesirable thing. As
w^ll as also they confess not Christ in their doctrines, who direct men to look
into themselves originally for some sign and witness of God's lov^ before they
can assure them Christ has died for them, and God loves them; and if upon
examination they find (as they conceit) some love to God, before they know
whether he has loved them, th^n they ^^ll them they are in a good condition,
Christ has died for them, and God loves them, and righteousness is prepared
for them; and so they have according to such doctrines the beginning of their
confidence, and bottom matter of their faith in themselves, in some frame,
change, alteration, love to God, before they know God has loved them, which is
not love; herein not confessing Jesus Christ which is come in the flesh to be
the foundation, which he only is, 1 Cor. 3. 11. 1 John 4 9 10.

And so such praise not Jesus Christ, who confess him not to be the only
High Priest and Head of the Church, but give that honor to another besides
him, or together with him; and confess not the infinite excellency and abiding
virtue of his one sacrifice of his own body offered by himself once for all;
but offer up a propitiatory sacrifice besides for the quick and the dead;
hereby counting the blood of the Covenant a common thing, and like the blood ^f
Bulls and Goats; and his sacrifice like those offered by the Law, which because
they could not purge away sin, were therefore continually offered, Heb. 9. 12,
14 25. and 7. 27. and 10. 1, 14. or that confess him nor to be ^he only door of
approach to God, Joh. 10. 4, 5, 7, 9, 12. or the only bread of life, Joh. 6.
35, 51. or the only Mediator, but multiply Mediators to themselves, as Saints
departed, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 5. to which we shall add no more now, but that which
the Apostle says, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema Ma^anatha, 1 Cor. 16. 22.

2. But because many say, Lord, Lord, and do make some right acknowledgment of
Christ, viz. that he was delivered to death, and rose again, and ascended into
heaven, and sits on the right hand of God, etc. which is true; and yet give not
to him the praise due to his name, nor lift him up, and praise him as he
worthily deserves; therefore we have another rule of trial given us, in 1 John
4. 6. We are of God (namely, the Apostles in their word and doctrine) he that
knows God hears us; he that is not of God hears not us (that is, he is
not determined by ou^ word in all his confessions, he always hears not,
adhereth not to the words which the Apostles have spoken, viz those which the
Holy Ghost teaches, but rather speaks in the words which man's wisdom teaches)
hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error. By this word of
God's grace we may mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the
doctrine which the believers have learned of Christ by his Apostles, so as to
avoid them, Romans 16. 17. to this r^le we are often directed; To the Law and to
the testimon^, if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is
no light in them, Isa. 8. 20. If we, says the Apostle, or an Angel from
heaven, preach any other Gospel unto you than what we have preached, let him be
accursed, Gal. 1. 8, 9. If any man consent not in his teachings, to wholesome
words, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine which is
according to godliness, he is proud, etc. from such turn away, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 5.
Now then we may be assured; that such consent to wholesome words, who say, Christ
died not for all; nor by the grace of God tasted death for every man; contrary
to 2 Cor. 5 14. Heb. 2. 9. and so such as deny him to be the standing
propitiation for the sins of the whole world, 1 John 2. 2. These teach men to
deny the Lord that bought them; yea, they are led by the spirit of error, who
confess not, praise not, lift not up Jesus Christ, as the Son of God, the
Savior of the world; they come not up to wholesome words, for the true Christ
is the Savior of the world, even of mankind, and this began to be spoken by
the Lord himself, Joh. 3. 16, 17. and 4. 42. and 6. 51. and was confirmed unto
us by them that heard him, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15, 19. and so the Son of God is the
Savior of the world; and this was the sum of the Apostles testimony, which
they had received, and saw in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, 1 John 4. 13, 15. And the Apostle Paul says, that he was ordained a Preacher of
this, viz. That God will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge
of the truth, etc. 1 Timothy 2. 4, 7. and instructed Timothy to hold fast the form
of sound words, which he heard of him, that unto which he was ordained a
Preacher (as before) and an Apostle, viz. that God is one, and there is one
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom
for all, to be testified in due time; by which he proves and evidences that God
will have all men to be saved, etc. I say, to hold this last, in faith, in an
hearty belief of the truth of it, and in love to men, so as declaring this to
them, and holding it fast in profession, according to the constraining
operations of the grace of God in Christ, 2 Timothy, 1. 9, 13. with 1 Timothy 2. 4, 7.
and 2 Cor. 5. 13, 15, 18, 20. and exhorted Timothy to command others to teach,
and himself to teach, that the living God is the Savior of all men, especially
of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4. 10, 11. See also Tit. 2. 11, 15.

And in this direction given unto us for trial of spirits, that we may know so
as to avoid false Prophets, it is observable, the Apostle does not positively
and particularly declare what the false spirits do hold and teach; but in the
general he says, If they confess not, praise not, lift not up Jesus Christ, or
give not to him the glory due to him in their confessions, so as in all hearing
the Apostles, they are not of God, and we are to beware of them; if they
Evangelize otherwise than what the Apostles have Evangelized, we are to reject
them; for if it be not the voice of our Shepherd, we may be sure it is the
voice of a stranger, and so we are to flee from them; yea, if any man come unto
you, says the Apostle, and bring not this doctrine (the doctrine of Christ in
which he is lifted up in the words of the Holy Ghost) receive him not into your
house, neither bid him God speed: He says not, if he take not up this
doctrine, which he may seem to do for advantage sake when he is with you, that
he may not be discovered, but may deceive you; but if he bring it not, if this
be not his message, his errand when he comes, the thing he is set to promote,
receive him not, etc. Prove. 14. 7. Joh. 10. 4, 5. 2 John 7, 11.

2. And by their fruits may be meant also the effects of their doctrines, which
the Disciples of Christ may perceive and discern, namely, that they are such as
tend to corrupt from that simplicity that is in Christ, to draw away men's
hearts and affections from him who is the only foundation of faith and hope,
the only fountain in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily, the
only bread of life, and door of approach to God. They tend to remove men from
him that called them into the grace of Christ, and cause men to err from the
words of knowledge, Prove. 19. 27. Gal. 1. 6. and this appears plainly in those
that embrace and entertain those confessions in which Jesus Christ is not
lifted up in the word of the Apostles.

Now then in applying our selves to God, and the word of his grace, we may be
preserved from those grievous Wolves; for they confess not our God, or confess
him not according to that discovery given of him in the word of his grace: Oh
let us then keep sound wisdom and discretion, so shall they be life to our
souls, preserve our souls in life, and grace to our necks; then shall we walk
in the way safely, and our foot shall not stumble, Prove. 3. 21, 26. take fast
hold of instruction, let her not go, keep her for she is thy life, Prove. 4. 13.

3. That I may not overmuch enlarge, I shall briefly say, the Apostle directs
and commends them to this person and thing, that they might not arise speaking
perverse things; and that they might be preserved from those amongst themselves
that would arise speaking perverse things to draw away disciples after them,
ver. 30. What has been spoken before may be useful here also, only in that he
now forewarns them of this danger among themselves, and therefore thus commits
them. He signifies,

1. That amongst those whom the Holy Ghost has made overseers over the flock,
some may possibly arise speaking perverse things, crooked wreathed things, such
as in which they would pervert the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 1. 7. and that either
by desiring to be teachers of the Law, as there were some inclined hereto
amongst these believers, 1 Timothy 1. 3, 7. So some such among the Galatians that
turned them aside to the Law, to be justified or sanctified by the works
thereof, and to perfect by the flesh what was begun by the Spirit, Gal. 2 15,
16, and 3. 1, 5. and 5. 1, 4. and turning them again to weak and beggarly
element^ Gal. 4. 9. Col. 2. 22, 24. or by not consenting unto wholesome ^^rds,
event the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, but limiting the grace of God, and
teaching men to deny the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. or not
consenting to the doctrine according to godliness, but ^urning the grace of our
God into wantonness, as if it gave liberty to men to continue in sin; or to use
their liberty for a cloak of maliciousness or licentiousness, 1 Timothy 6. 3, 4.
Jude 4. 1 Pet. 2. 16, or corrupting the word of God with Philosophy, and that
Science which is falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. 4, 20, 21. yea, some it seems
there did arise that turned all into an Allegory, and said the resurrection was
past already, and so made shipwreck of faith, and overthrew the faith of some,
1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. 2 Timothy 2. 16, 18.

2. That the end of those that speak perverse things is, to draw Disciples
after them, and herein they are distinguished from the true Ministers of
Christ, the end of whose conversation is, Jesus Christ the same, yesterday, to
day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 7, 8. These that speak perverse things serve not
our Lord Jesus, but their own belly, magnify not him in and unto all, but seek
to espouse men to themselves, that they may have pre-eminence and maintenance:
Whereas those that are like minded with the Apostles, endeavor to espouse men
to Christ, that they may present them a chaste Virgin to him; and aim at this,
that God in all things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, and in lifting up
Jesus Christ they seek the good of men, and especial good of believers, though
they be as reprobates, 2 Cor. 11. 2, 3. and 13. 7. 1 These. 2. 5, 6.

3. That because such may arise speaking perverse things to draw away Disciples
after them, therefore it behooves others, yea, all believers to watch, that
seeing they know this before, they may not be removed from him that called them
into the grace of Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 17. Gal. 1. 6. It is good for them to take
heed what they hear (especially when God is removing faithful and eminent
instruments) even from such as are over them, Mark 4. 24. and not take things
on trust. Surely we are very ready, when once we have an high esteem of men, to
receive all for truth they say, and not to bring it to the light, and from
hence much evil springs: for we rob Christ of that honor that appertains to
him, and hurt our selves if we so receive what is said, though it be truth we
receive, while our faith stands in the wisdom or authority of men; and while we
receive the word of God as the word of men, because of our esteem of their
goodness, wisdom, learning, it works not effectually in us, 1 These. 2. 13. And
if those we so esteem err from the truth, we are apted to follow them, and so
the blind leading the blind, both fall into the ditch; good it is therefore to
examine what such say, that if it be truth, we may receive it as the word of
God; if they speak perverse things, as they do when they consent not to wholesome
words, Prove. 8. 8. We may reject it, according to that, despise not
prophecyings, wherein men speak to edification, exhortation and comfort; try
all things, in those prophecyings you may not despise, hold fast that which is
good* a^^^ain from all appearance of evil, 1 These. 5. 20, 22. with 1 Co^. 14.
3. The Jews at Berea are commended as more noble that those in Thessalonica, in
that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and searched the
Scriptures daily* whether those things (declared by the Apostle Paul and Silas)
wereso; therefore many of them believed, Act. 17. 10, 12. and the Apostle
exhorts the believers to judge what he said to them, 1 Cor. 10. 15. and surely
then we may well try all others that are of our selves, and not therefore to
receive what they bring, because they are such as have received and declared
the Gospel.

4. That whereto we are to watch, that we may discern and avoid any perverse
things that may be spoken by some among our selves; it is God, and the word of
his grace, as before is said, by attending unto wisdoms words, and inclining
our ear unto her sayings, etc. we may put perverse lips far from us, so as not
to use them our selves, nor be corrupted by others that have them, Prove. 4. 20,
24. they are powerful to deliver us from the man that speaks froward (or
perverse) things, Prove. 2. 1, 12. yea, if any should turn away their ears from
the truth, and be turned to fables, yet here-through believers may be
instruments of saving themselves, and them that hear them, 1 Timothy 4. 16. Hence
when the Apostle says, They went out from us, but they were not of us,
(namely, immediately before their departure; he says not, they were never of
us, but there was a secret departure in heart before they left them as to
bodily presence.) He adds, But ye have an unction from the holy one, (viz. the
truth, Christ as declared in the Gospel) and ye know all things -- Let that
abide in you which ye have heard from the beginning -- And ye shall continue in
the Son and in the Father (in their peculiar favor, care and protection) these
things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you, 1 John 2. 19,
26. See also 2 Pet. 2. 1, 2. and 3. 1, 2. Jude 18, 21. Believers need not that
any man teach them (as to matter or manner) but as the anointing, the testimony
of Christ, teaches of all things, and is truth, and is no lie, 1 John 2. 27.
to that therefore let us have our recourse always, and especially when God is
taking away, as here, eminent and faithful watchmen; we have then the more
abundant need to have the great things of God's Law always in remembrance (in
which we may have fellowship with the Father and Son, 1 John 1. 3.) and that
believers might have these things always in remembrance was the Apostles
endeavor, 2 Pet. 1. 12, 14. 1 Timothy 6. 12, 14. 2 Timothy 1. 8, 13. and 2. 2.

And though the gifts which Christ has given to men be very useful, and given
to a gracious end; yet because the persons that have them are men subject to
like passions with others, and so may possibly speak perverse things; good
therefore it is for believers to pray for themselves and one for another, that
their love may abound in all knowledge and judgment, that they may try things
that differ, and so approve things that are excellent, that they may be
sincere, and without offense till the coming of Christ, otherwise they will not
so be, Phil. 1. 9, 10. Oh, that there were not too much cause to say, That so
great is our dullness of hearing, we have not our spiritual senses exercised to
discern both good (to embrace it) and evil (to avoid it) as Heb. 5. 11, 14. but
according to our account of the persons we hear, such account we have of what
they say, if we be jealous of them, we suspect what they say, when they speak
right things; and if we think highly of them, we are apt to drink down all they
say, and therein to think more highly of them than is meet.

Oh! that we did more commit our selves to God, and the word of his grace, for
his teaching and preservation, that we might know what to hear and receive, and
what to refuse: Let us take fast hold of instruction, and though those that
speak perverse things, pretend word as from the Apostles for what they say, yet
let us not for trial of them, and preservation from them, wave the Gospel, or
seek help any where else, but still hold fast the things delivered which we
have been taught by the Apostles, by word or Epistle; as the Apostle instructs
the Thessalonians, when he beseeches them not to be moved or troubled, neither
by Spirit, Word, or Letter as from them, 2 These. 2. 2, 15. Let us not leave the
Scripture because they perve^t it in their glosses, but still hold that fast;
as our Savior has set us an example, Mat. 4. 6, 7. and in the light and
instruction thereof, that we may not be carried about with diverse and strange
doctrines, let us consider the end of their conversation that speak unto us in
their word, or by writing or personal conference; if that be Jesus Christ the
same, yesterday, to day, and for ever, though weaknesses be found, acknowledge
them that are such, and so walk, Heb. 13. 7, 9.

And be we all followers together of the Apostles, and of those that have
spoken to us the Word of the Lord, Phil. 3. 17* looking diligently unto our
selves, and one to another that none fail of the grace of God, that no root of
bitterness (no evil spirit or doctrine) springing up, trouble us, and thereby
many be defiled, etc. Heb. 12. 15, 16. and thereto warning one another in all
wisdom according to capacity; and let us observe that counsel and instruction
given by the Apostle Jude, ver. 20. 21. Ye beloved, building up your selves on
your most holy faith, praying in the holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love
of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.

Having thus spoken largely to the former part, viz. the Apostles commendation
of them to God, and the word of his grace, at this time of his departure, we
shall briefly add somewhat to the second thing at first proposed, which is
contained in the words, in which we have,

2. A ^urther Declaration of the excellency of the person and thing to which he
commends them, laid down by way of motive to engage them to commit themselves
to God, and the word of his ^^ce. Which (God, and Word of his grace) is able to
build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which are
sanctified.

In which we have these two branches.

1. This God and Word is able to build you up. 2. And to give you an
inheritance among all them which are sanctified.
1. This God and Word is able to build you up.

In which we shall speak to these two things.

1. Show what is meant by building up. 2. What is imported in this branch of
the motive.
1. Then, by building up, is meant, a making them to increase, or causing them
to grow up, and ^ise higher. This expression of building refers to two things
in Scripture; sometimes to a place of habitation, 2 Chronicles. 2. 1, 12. and
sometimes to a family or household, Ruth. 4. 11. and according to this double
acceptance, these two things are meant.

1. An increasing of them who were already g^thered to Christ, and making them
as to themselves and the society to prosper, and ascend higher and higher into
J^^us Christ, and those things that are excellent, both with respect to
themselves particularly, and as with respect to the Church or society, of which
these, to whom the speaks directly, were members and overseers; a growing up
into Christ in all things, which is the Head, namely into the knowledge of him
who is the Son of God in our nature, accepted to all the ends of his
undertaking, and unity with him, which is called, edifying the Church, Ephesians. 4.
12, 13, 15. a growing in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. and so it is an abounding in the knowledge of his
will, in all wisdom (even in the whole of Christ) and in all spiritual
understanding, namely, such a discerning as is given by the Spirit in the words
which the Holy Ghost teaches, Col. 1. 9. and growing more into union with
Christ, and conformity to him; a more hearty imbracement of him and the word of
his grace. And so a being united more one to another in love, and growing up
together in the virtues of Christ; adding to their faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge, and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance patience, and to
patience godliness, and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly
kindness charity, 2 Pet. 1. 5, 7. setting their affections more on things
above, having their conversation in heaven, and expectation from heaven; and in
all a going on to perfection, and being more firmed, settled, and established by
walking in Christ as they have received him, Col. 2. 6, 7.

2. An increasing of them as to number, and so multiplying of them by an
addition of others to them, gathering others to Christ and the Church, besides
those that are gathered, as Isa. 56. 8. which is the issue of the former; for
while they are edified in knowledge, faith, and all virtues of Christ, they
come to be multiplied, according to that, Act. 9. 31. then had the Churches
rest, and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, and comfort of the
holy Ghost, were multiplied. So the whole body growing up into Christ in all
things, is said to make an increase of the body, to the edisying of it sell in
love, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. An adding to the Lord, and to the Church continually,
till we all come to the unity of the faith, and knowledge of the Son of God,
unto a perfect man, the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Act.
2. 41, 46. and 11. 24. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13. even as an house or family is said to be
built by the birth and addition of children to it, Genesis 16. ^, Deuteronomy 25. 9*

2. Now then in that it is said, which is able to build you up, herein is
imported and signified to us,

1. That those to whom he speaks were in some measure come unto, and built upon
the foundation of God, and so born of the incorruptible seed of the Word: So
much is signified in that he says, which is able to build you up, that they
were come to, and built upon Jesus Christ, according to that; To him coming as
unto a living stone -- Ye also as lively stones are built up, etc. 1 Pet. 2. 4,
5. Ephesians. 2. 20, 21. and indeed the foundation on which they were built, and seed
of which they were begotten, it was the word of God which lives and abides
for ever, and which by the Gospel is preached to us, 1 Pet. 1. 23, 25. namely,
Jesus Christ, who was delivered to death for our offenses, and raised again for
our justification; And other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which
is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3. 11. he as witnessed of by the Prophets, and
manifested by the Apostles, is the foundation which God has prepared and laid,
the bottom ground, or first thing for men to come unto, and be built upon. And
hence he is called, the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, viz. that upon
which they were built, they were begotten to a lively hope by the resurrection
of Christ from the dead, as this was discovered of God in the Gospel, 1 Pet. 1.
3. and which they have doctrinally and Ministerially laid, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2. 20. he was at first declared by God when
mankind had departed from him, in order to his being brought back again to him,
in that first Oracle, The seed of the woman shall break the head of the
Serpent, Genesis 3. 15. Therein was assured, that Jesus Christ should spoil the
plot of Satan, who thought, and devised to have separated us for ever from God,
and destroy and spoil his principality which he had gotten over mankind, and
so, that he should destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3. 8. and so he was
witnessed of by the Prophets, as the head of the corner, Psalm. 118. 22. and as
the foundation, Isa. 28. 16. with 1 Pet. 2. 6. and so laid in the revelation of
the mystery by the Apostles as wise Master Builders, 1 Cor. 3. 10. and God has
raised him from the dead, and given him glory, that our faith and hope might be
in God, 1 Pet. 1. 21.

This was the foundation on which they were built, even Jesus Christ, who by
the grace of God tasted death for every man, and is raised again in the same
body in which he was crucified and hanged on a Tree, according to the
Scriptures, who is the foundation of God, and which stands sure, and is laid
for a foundation to them who are disobedient; and is the foundation of all
unfeigned believers. Hence he is called, the beginning of our confidence, Heb.
3. 14. even of the Apostles, and of all believers confidence, for they have all
but one beginning of their confidence, and that is Christ, who is the
beginning, the first born from the dead, that in all things he should have the
pre-eminence, Col. 1. 18. Heb. 12. 2. he is the foundation, and not any
changes, frames, qualifications, works or gifts given some above others; not
any revela^ions, or visions, in which the Apostles were preferred before others.

Many there are indeed who have as their foundation on which they are bottomed,
and seed of which they are begotten, somewhat that was not crucified for them;
either the enjoyment of his Word and Ordinances, Luke 13. 26, 27. or that they
have prophesied in his name, and in his name have cast out Devils, and in his
name have done many wonderful works, Mat. 7. 21, 23. but the having as the
beginning of their confidence such like things, is but building the house upon
the sand, which will deceive them, for he never knew or owned any that were
built on these things, as he does those who are built upon Jesus Christ the
rock, as declared to us in the Gospel. Compare Luke 13. 27. and Mat. 7. 23.
with 2 Timothy 2. 19. and in trusting in these things, and being bottomed hereon,
they are workers of iniquity, and seek to cast down Christ from his excellency,
and to rob him of that honor the Father has given unto him, and which he will
not give to any other person or thing. And yet how many such are there, who
either trust in themselves that they are righteous, like the old Pharisees,
they confide in the flesh, and think, and hope, that because they run not with
others to the same excess of riot, but on the other hand, fast, and pray, and
give alms, and frequent the assemblies of God's people, though yet they do not
his words in suffering the loss of all things for the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ, that they may win him, and be found in him; that therefore
God will be gracious unto them, and they shall have eternal life, Luke 18. 9,
11. Phil. 3. 4, 10. or trust to themselves that they are Christ's, like the new
Pharisees, 2 Cor. 10. 7. who being convinced of the shortness and
unprofitableness of their own works of righteousness to render them acceptable
before God, disclaim it as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. and yet they have as the
beginning of their confidence, some changes or alterations in them, some marks
and signs, some first act of repentance, or love to God, before they are
persuaded of the love of God to them, or know certainly whether God has loved
them; and so from somewhat fore-wrought in them, or done by them (before they
dare believe that God loves them) from hence they conclude that Christ died for
them, and God loves them, and righteousness is prepared for them; and so the
first thing that springs up hope, the seed of which they are first begotten to
some kind of persuasion of God's peculiar love to them, and bottom ground of
their confidence, it is not Christ's death for sinners, ungodly ones, all men,
every man, as is declared in the testimony, but something in themselves, some
secret thing with them, which will in conclusion prove a lying refuge; and
however though for a season they may rejoice and be confident, yet their
foundation will be overthrown with the flood of God's anger (as Job 22. 16.)
though now they may cry peace and safety, and think themselves to be happy
persons while they are in health and prosperity, and because they find the life
of their hands are not grieved, Isa. 57. 10. yet this bed of seeming ease will
be shorter than that a man can stretch himself on it, and this covering
narrower than that a man can wrap himself in it, when the Lord shall rise up as
in mount Perazim, and be wroth as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his
work, his strange work, etc. Isa. 28. 12, 20, 21, 22. When the rain descends,
and floods come, and winds blow, and beat upon that house built upon the sand,
it will fall, and great will be the fall thereof, Mat. 7. 22, 26, 27. God is
now in his Gospel graciously declaring that their righteousness and their works
shall not profit them, and by the weapons thereof pulling down men's strong
holds, casting down imaginations, scaling the City of the mighty, and casting
down the strength of the confidence thereof, that men might count what things
are gainful to them loss for Christ, and go on to count all things but loss and
dung for the excellency of the knowledge of him; but if now, when his hand is
lifted up, they will not see, they shall hereafter see, and be ashamed that
they have made lies their refuge, and hid themselves under falsehood, Isa. 57.
12. 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. Prove. 21. 22. Isa. 26. 11. Now therefore be ye not
mockers, reject not that rest to which he is calling, that foundation which he
has laid in Zion, and listen not to the builders who in all ages have
disallowed the living stone, who is the foundation and cornerstone, lest your
bands be made strong; but incline your ear, and come unto him who is the rock,
and whose work is perfect, Isa. 28. 12, 16, 22. Psalm. 118. 22. Mat. 21. 42.
Act. 4. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 2. 4. 7.

Yea, and he is the foundation as distinguished from the purposes and decrees
of God, and so from any purpose of his which he has purposed in himself
concerning his loving some with peculiar manner of love: Indeed he was purposed
from the beginning to be the foundation, and this was his decree, the sum of
his decrees concerning sinful mankind, and out of the bowels of which all his
decrees issue concerning them; that he would raise Christ in due time from the
dead, Psalm. 2. 7. and has fulfilled the promise and purpose; but not his
purpose and decree simply, but Jesus Christ is the foundation, the one and only
foundation, For other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is
Jesus Christ: And this appears evidently from that place some men allege to
prove some purpose of God to be the foundation, viz. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Nevertheless
the foundation of God stands sure, etc. Which saying is not only opposed unto
the effect of the evil doctrines of the false teachers, namely, they overthrow
the faith of some; nevertheless, notwithstanding they have corrupted some, and
removed them from Christ the foundation, yet the foundation of God stands
steady; but also it is opposed to the doctrine it self of those vain bablers;
they said, the resurrection is past already: meaning (as appears) by
resurrection, some metaphorical, or allegorical resurrection; they said not
there was no resurrection, but they said there was no resurrection of the dead,
like those 1 Cor. 15. 12. and so consequently that Christ was not raised in
that body in which he bare our sins on the Tree, and so endeavored to raze the
foundation; for if Christ be not raised, ye are yet in your sins, says the
Apostle; preaching* faith, and hope is in vain: But notwithstanding what they
say, Christ is risen from the dead, and is become the first frui^s of them that
sleep; and so the foundation of God stands sure, notwithstanding their
babblings and batteries made against him. Compare 2 Timothy 2. 18, 19. with ver.
7. 8. and 1 Cor. 15. 12, 20. Yea, it further appears in that p^ace that Christ
is the foundation, and not some purpose in God concerning some peculiar manner
of love to, and owning of some persons; for his knowing, owning and loving with
peculiar manner of love, is not the foundation, but the seal of the foundation;
the foundation has this seal for the evidence and confirma^ion of its
steddyness and goodness, the Lord knows, owneth, approves them that are his,
or i^s, that are built and abide upon the foundation, and so no purpose simply,
but Christ as declared in the t^stimony is the foundation. And much less is
that the foundation of God which men call a purpose or decree of his that is
not so, viz. such a purpose as in which he has absolutely purposed in himself,
and decreed a certain number of persons to salvation before they were born; for
this is no purpose of his, but a device of men who are ignorant of the truth as
it is in Jesus [See what my Brother and helper in the Lord Mr. Tho. Moor has
spoken more largely to this in his explicit declaration of the Testimony, Page
389, 410.] And so in coming unto, and being built upon this foundation, they
became living stones, and were made a spiritual house and habitation of God
through the Spirit, 1 Pet. ^. 4, 5. their sins were forgiven them for Christ's
name sake on which they believed, which is even the sum of all blessedness,
Romans 4. 5, 7. and that where-through he gives all knowledge and enjoyment of
further salvation, Luke 1. 77. and therefore it seems, the receiving the
forgiveness of sins, answers unto, and is put for the being built up. Compare
this, Act. 20. 32. with Chap. 26. 18. or he quickened them together with Christ,
and made them lively stones, and a spiritual house, having forgiven them all
trespasses, Col. 2. 13. with 1 Pet. 2. 5. And so in being bottomed on Christ as
preached in the word of his grace, and united to him who is originally and
completely the temple of God, in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily, in whom God dwells, and will dwell for ever, they also became the
temple of God, in whom he dwells, and walks, in and through whom he manifests
himself, and so they were made of the household of God, 1 Cor. 3. 16. and 6. 19.
2 Cor. 6. 16. Ephesians. 2. 19, 22.

And as this instruction is for admonition to them that are built on this
foundation of God, and made of this temple of the living God, that they should
be clean, and not defile the habitation of God which is holy (devoted and
dedicated for peculiar use and service to him) with any filthiness of flesh or
spirit, lest they provoke God to destroy them, and suffer the Boar out of the
wood, and the wild beast of the field to devour them, even those grievous
wolves before spoken of, for he cannot endure that his habitation should be
polluted, but holiness becomes his house for ever, 1 Cor. 3. 17, 18. 2 Cor. 6.
16, 17. and 7. 1. Psalm. 93. 5.

So the consideration hereof, that in coming to Christ, and being built on him,
they were made a spiritual house, is of great usefulness to them to encourage
them in well-doing to commit themselves to God, and the word of his grace, for
his receiving them, and being a father to them, when he deprives of faithful
instruments, for he has a favor for such; they are his building, his family,
the sanctua^y and true tabernacle which the Lord has pitched, and not man: no
servant has such right in them, or love to, or care for them as he. This man
is counted worthy of more honor than Moses, though Moses was faithful in all
h^s house; inasmuch as h^ who has builded the house ha^h more honor than the
house. Moses was of the house, and faithful as a servant in the house, b^t he
that built all things is God, the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ; And
Moses verily was faithful in all his house as a servant, etc. but Christ as a
Son over his own house; they are his own house, pitched by him, his own family,
the children God has given to him, members of his body, of his flesh, and of
his bones; even begotten by the resurrection of Christ from the dead, and
holding ^ast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm to the end, he
does and will nourish and cherish them when in the wilderness, and guide them
therein like a flock, Heb. 3. 1, 6. Ephesians. 5. 29, 30. with Luke 24. 39* Rev. 12.
14. Psalm. 78. 52, 53. he is the Minister of them, the High Priest over the
house of God, who is passed into the heavens, and entered within the veil for
them ^specially, to appear as their Advocate, who is also the propitiation for
their sins, to forgive their iniquities, to plead their cause, manage their
matters, fight their battles, subdu^ their iniquities, sanctify and cleanse
them with the washing of water by the Word, teach them, and lead them into all
truth, send from above, and save them from the reproach of those who would
swallow them up, and cause all things to work together for good to them. Happy
art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee, O people, because there is none like
unto thy God, the God of Jesurun, who rides upon the heaven for thy help, and
in his excellency on the sky; the eternal God is thy refuge, etc. Deuteronomy. 33.
26, 29. Oh therefore cry unto him and say, Thou art my refuge (from mine
oppressors, those grievous wolves that come to devour) and my portion in the
Land of the living, when refuge fails, and no man cares for thy soul, commit
thy self, thy way and works unto him, trust also in him, and he shall bring it
to pass, and (though thou now walk in darkness) he shall bring forth thy
righteousness as the light, and thy judgment, as the noonday, Psalm. 142* 4* 5.
and 37. 4, 7. Though now the Lord calls thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in
spirit, and has ordered to thee cause of lamentation, in taking away the
pleasant teats at which thou have sucked, and through which he has conveyed
the sincere milk of the word, yet thy maker is thy hu^band, the Lord is thy
Shepherd, thou shall not want; He will make thee to lie down in green pastures,
and lead thee besides the still waters, etc. Oh trust in the Lord for ever, for
in the Lord Jehovah is the rock of ages, everlasting strength, Isa. 54. 5, 7.
and 26. 4.

Yea, and in that they were come unto Jesus Christ the foundation and head of
the corner, and so made a spiritual house, and from the head fitly joined
together and compacted; it was for instruction to them, and is for instruction
to those of the same body, to love one another with a pure heart servently, as
those whose hearts are purified and principled in obeyed the truth through the
spirit, unto unfeigned love of the brethren. Jesus Christ is the corner stone
that c^uples the building together, and in coming unto him they are baptized
into one body, and made to drink into one spirit, called in one hope of their
calling, etc. that they should endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace, and that they may do so, the way is, to endeavor it with all
lowliness and meekness, etc. All lowliness is the first thing instructed to
unto this endeavor, namely, lowliness of mind, suffering our pride and high
thoughts of our selves by occasion of our learning, knowledge, gifts,
utterance, seize, riches, etc. to be purged out, and hidden from us; and
lowliness in our words, demeanours and looks, having low eyes (for only by
pride comes contention) that so brotherly love may be continued and preserved
amongst us. This is the use the Apostle makes of this instruction to this
Church; for after he had been saying, ye are built upon the foundation of the
Apostles, etc. and are builded together (even those that are taught, and those
that teach, the teachers not being the Church alone, nor made of the true
tabernacle at all, because chosen by men, but both together in coming to Christ
are made) an habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2. 20, 22. He having
begun to come to the usefulness hereof in Chap. 3. 1. digresses all that
Chapter; and Chap. 4. 1, 6. he shows them what engagement this put upon them to
love as brethren, and as a prisoner of the Lord beseeches them (not first to
relieve him in his bonds, but) to endeavor to keep the unity of the Spirit in
the bond of peace, and directs them to that firstly, asa main thing in which
they*might walk worthy of the vocation wherewith they were called; they were
called to the foundation and corner stone, and made members one of another; and
what more suitable hereto, than to cleave to the Lord with full purpose, and one
to another in the fear of the Lord. And so from the like ground and motive the
Apostle Peter instructs the believers to love one another with a pure heart
servently, and to that end to lay apart all evil and bitter roots. Sec 1 Pet.
1. 22, 25. and 2. 1, 5. And oh how good and pleasant a thing is it for brethren
to dwell together in unity? and especially then when he is removing those that
have been use^ul helpers of them in the Lord. Hence the Apostle, when he takes
his leave of the Corinthians, powerfully presses this exhortation on them.
Finally brethren, farewell; be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live
in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you, 2 Cor. 13. 11.

2. In that he says, which is able to build you up, he does therein intimate,
that though they were built upon the foundation of God, and so made and framed
into an habitation of God through the spirit, yet they needed still to be
further built up, and to grow up more into Jesus Christ in all things, into the
knowledge of him, union and fellowship with him, and conformity unto him; even
those amongst them who might have attained most, those who were overseers over
the rest, to whom he directly speaks, needed still and further to be built up,
and to go on unto perfection; they were not yet perfect as to attainment.
Though they might be perfect, sincere and undefiled in the way, and fixed
herein to walk and to seek all wisdom, righteousness and strength, all washing
and cleansing by an exercise of faith in Christ, and so were blessed; yet they
were not come to their journeys end, but were yet to run with patience the race
set before them, laying aside every weight, and that sin that so easily besets,
Psalm. 119. 1, 2. Heb. 12. 1. So the Apostle Paul says concerning himself, that
he had not already attained, neither was already perfect, though he had
suffered the loss of all things for Christ, and did count them as dung that he
might win him, and be found in him; but did follow after, if that he might
apprehend that for which also he was apprehended of Christ Jesus; and instructs
others who were perfect to be like minded with him, namely, to count that they
had not attained, either were already perfect, Phil. 3. 12, 15. yea, indeed he
signifies that he should not attain, or be perfect as to attainment till the
resurrection of the dead; for though the spirits of just men, that dye in the
Lord are perfect, yet they wait for the adoption, the redemption of the body;
and so it is said of those that died in the faith, that these all having
obtained a good report through faith, received not the promises, God having
provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made
perfect, Phil. 3. 11, 12. Heb. 12. 39, 40. Though believers are compl^at in
Christ, who by the one offering of his personal body once for all has
perfected for ever in himself, and that provision he has made, and Covenant he
has sealed, them that are sanctified, so as there needs no more offering for
sin; yet in themselves they are not complete, nor completely in him, and are
therefore instructed to walk in Christ as they have received him, rooted and
built up in him; and to have their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience,
and their bodies washed with pure water, Col. 2* 10. with ver. 2, 7. Heb. 10.
14, 22* their being built up is by degrees, they go from strength to strength,
Psalm. 84* 7. and are changed from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 3. 18. And hence they
are said to grow like a Cedar, Psalm. 92. 12. to grow up, Ephesians. 4. 15. to
increase, 1 These. 4. 10. Col. 2. 19. to abound more and more, 1 These. 4. 1. to
press toward the mark, Phil. 3. 14. to run the race, Heb. 12. 1. All which
expressions signify, that the believers while here in mortal bodies have not
yet attained to compleatness in themselves, or to a complete i^joyment of what
is to be possessed, and which while here they seek and wait for.

Here, though he that is perfect in knowledge is with them abiding in Christ,
yet they are not perfect in knowledge, but are instructed to grow in grace, and
in the knowledge of our Lord and sav^our Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 18. And the
Ap^stle prays for these Ephesians, who were sealed with the holy spirit of
promise, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the father of glory would give
unto them the spirit of wisdom and revelation, etc. The eyes of their
understandings being inlightn^d that they might (further) know what is the hope
of his calling, etc. Ephesians. 1. 13, 20. and that they might know the love of
Christ, Chap. 3. 14* 19. And hence that holy man so oftentimes prays, that God
would open his eyes, make him understand, teach him the way of his statutes,
give him understanding, teach him knowledge, etc. Psalm. 119. 18, 19, 27, 33, 34
64, 66. yea, the Apostle Paul, who as a wise Master Builder laid the
foundation, and preached the Gospel according to the revelation of the mystery,
affirms of himself, and other believers, that now they knew in part, and not
perfectly, 1 Cor. 13. 9, 12.

And so they are not perfect in their faith, in their hearty persuasion and
imbracement of what God has testified of his Son, and dependence on him
according thereto, so as to live the life they now live in the flesh, by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved us and gave himself for us, and to walk by
faith; but many weaknesses and mixtures are found with them, and much shortness
according to what the Apostle signifies concerning the Thessal^nians, where he
says, night and day praying exceedingly that we -- might perfect that which is
lacking in your faith, (...) ^^^. 3. 10. and thanks God because th^^ ^^i^^ ^i^
grow* etc. 2. These. 1. 3. and tells the Corinthians tha^ he had hope* that when
their ^aith was increased, they should be i^arged ^y them, 2 Cor. 10. 15. and
surely this appears when God is ordering ^^pt^^ions and trials of the faith to
them, by their weak^ess and readiness to faint, ^^d be w^a^y, that they ba^e
not yet attained unto a most ^ull assurance of ^^i^h? what dou^^ings and
aptness to be calling into question God's love and ^aithfulness? what
jealousies and ^ears concerning him, as if he would leave and forsake them?
what readiness to be looking or vain h^lp, and turning the eyes this way, and
that way is found with such, the Scriptures testify, and the experiences of
such confirm? Psalm. 31. 22. and 77. 7, 10. and 116. 11. How often our Savior
reprehends his Disciples on this account, may be seen, mat. 6. 30. and 8. 26.
and 14. 31. and 16. 8. Mark 4. 4^. Luke 8. 25. yea, when they said, We believe
that thou came forth from God* Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe? Behold
the hour comes, yea is now come, that ye shall be scattered every one to his
own etc. Joh. 16. 30, 32. That hour that came upon him made discovery of them,
that there was yet somewhat lacking in their faith, how confident soever they
were of themselves; yea, it may seem there was sometime some shortness found
with Abraham the father of the faithful, though not imputed* of whom* it was
said, he staggered not at the promise through unbelief, but was strong in
faith; for when God promised that Sarah should be a Mother of Nations, etc.
Abraham fell on his face and laughed -- and said unto God, O that Ishmael may
live before thee, Genesis 17. 17, 19. and surely believers have need to pray, Lord
help our unbelief* as he, Mark. 9. 24. or however as the Disciples, Lord
increase our faith, Lu^. 17. 7.

Nor are they yet perfectly conformed to Christ, and filled with the fruits of
righteousness; there is yet sin dwelling in them, and in many ^^i^gs they
offend all, and need therefore to be still sanctified and washed with the
washing of water by the word; to which end Christ gives himself to them for
them, Ephesians. 5. 25, 26. 1 These. 5. 23. their love to Christ, and God in him, may
yet abound in all knowledge and judgment, and though they love one another, and
all men, yet they may increase and abound therein. Hence they are instructed to
add to their faith virtue, etc. Phil. 1. 9, 11. 1 These. 3. 12, 13. and 4. 1, 9,
10. 2 Pet. 1. 4, 8.

And as this instruction is useful to preserve us from the error of those
wicked and Antichristian spirits, who boast that they are sinless and perfect,
and enjoy the fullness of all blessing, and that they have need of nothing;
while yet they are poor, and miserable, and blind; who though they are pure in
their own eyes, yet are not washed from their filthiness; Woe unto them, for
they have received their consolation. And also from their swelling words of
vanity, who being puf^ up with their fleshly mind, and not holding the head,
boast of their merits and works of super^rrogation, etc. seeing it shows our
shortness and incompleatness in our selves while here, that pride may be hidden
from us, and no flesh may glory in his presence, but that even unfeigned
believers may confess that when they have done all that is commanded them, they
are unprofitable servants.

So also it is proper, as viewed in the glorious Gospel, to move us continually
to come unto Jesus Christ, and to give more earnest heed to the things we have
heard, that with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, we
may be changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit
of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3. 18. And this leads us unto another instruction contained
in this branch of the declaration of the excellency of this person, and word to
which he commits them* Namely,

3. That God and the word of his grace is able to build up believers; this is
the work of the great God and our Savior Jesus Christ; and the means by which
he does it, is the Gospel of himself, according as it is vouchsafed; he gives
all things that pertain to ^ife and godliness, but he gives it through the
knowledge of himself, 2 Pet. 1. 3. Jesus Christ is the author and finisher of
the faith, Heb. 12. 2. the Alpha and the Omega; he who has begun the good
work, and who also will perform it, Phil. 1. 6, 7. he is the foundation, and he
shall bring forth the head stone with shoutings, crying grace, grace unto it,
Z^ch* 4. 6, 7.

Jesus Christ is ^^^ ^oundation of God, and yet he is so laid in the word of
his grace, and those that come unto him are built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, as before. It is his work and office to open men's eyes,
and to turn men from idols to himself, but he does it in preaching the Gospel,
Isa. 42. 6, 7. with Chap. 61. 1. The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise
the simple, giving wisdom to them that have none, and revealing him in
beholding whom they may be made wise; and the Law and doctrine of the Lord is
perfect, converting the soul, both at first, and continually, Ps. 19. 7, 8.
Hence the Apostle was sent with this to open the eyes of Jews and Gentiles, and
to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, Act.
26. 18, 23. He gives unto, and makes them partakers of the forgiveness of sins
that turn unto him; but he does give it, and they receive it through his name,
even through the word of faith, Act. 5. 31. with Chap. 10. 43. and 26. 18. He
gives wisdom to the wise, but he gives it through this word of wisdom; The Lord
gives wisdom, and out of his mouth (his doctrine) comes understanding; the
spirit of wisdom and understanding is still and further given in the knowledge
of him, Prove. 2. 1, 6. Ephesians. 1. 17. Joh. 7. 37, 39. He quickens them to a lively
hope, but he does it by his resurrection from the dead, as declared in the
Scriptures, 1 Pet. 1. 3. his words are spirit and life; his word quickens them,
Joh. 6. 63. Psalm. 119. 50, 93. He it is that increases the faith of believers,
but he does it in and by his testimony; he has written it, that those that
believe may believe on the name of the only begotten Son of God, that they may
go on believing and be more strong in faith and that their trust may be in the
Lord he has written to them excellent things in counsels and knowledge, Prove.
22. 17, 20. 1 John 5. 10, 13. He is faithful who will establish them, and keep
them from evil, 2 These. 3. 3. but he does it according to the Gospel; they are
stablished in the faith, Romans 16. 25. Col. 2. 7. He does and will sanctify
them throughout, but he does it through his truth, and his word is truth, 1
These. 5. 23. Joh. 17. 17, 19. he sanctifies and cleanses them with the washing
of water by the word, Ephesians. 5. 26. He fills them with the fruits of
righteousness, and makes their souls like a watered garden, but it is by his
Gospel, this brings forth fruit in them, and they that delight themselves in
his Law, and meditate there in day and night, shall be like a tree planted by
the rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in his season, Col. 1. 6.
Psalm. 1. 2, 3. he does build them up, but it is by the word of his grace, and
they are therefore instructed to be building up themselves on their most holy
faith, Jude 20. In short, they are kept by the power of God (the Gospel of
Christ) through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5. with Romans 1. 16, 17. they
live by faith, and therein they may go on to perfection, as far as here they
are capable, Heb. 6. 1. it is able to make wise unto salvation, and profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness,
that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished and perfected unto all
good works, 2 Timothy 3. 15, 17. and those gifts which Christ having ascended up
on high, has given, and which continue with us in the Gospel, are for
perfecting the Saints for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ, etc. Ephesians. 4. 12, 13.

And this is of usefulness to those that go before others in the word of the
Lord, yea and to all unfeigned believers, to beware of Philosophy, and vain
deceit; for in Christ, as preached in the Gospel, are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge; and in him believers are complete, Col. 2. 3, 10.

And that they turn not to the Law, or any other doctrine or tradition of the
Elders, to perfect that by the flesh which was begun by the spirit; for this
Law and doctrine of the Lord is perfect in it self and in its effect, for
convincing the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment, and turning and
conveiting the soul, and for teaching believers, and guiding them into all
truth, and showing them things to come; and in walking after the Spirit in the
testimony, the righteousness of the Law shall be fulfilled in men; he will put
his Laws in their hearts, and write them in their minds, Joh. 16. 7, 15. Psalm.
19. 7, 8. Romans 8. 4. 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. Heb. 10. 16.

And this shows unto us wherein their great strength lies, and how they may be
preserved from all that would corrupt them, and whereby they may be strong in
the Lord; this Gospel is the power of God, it is able to build them up whoever
would pull them down; they cannot build up themselves by any wisdom or strength
that is in them as of them, but this is a powerful w^rd, whereby they may
overcome the wicked one, and overcome the world, be enabled to withstand in the
evil day, and having done all things to stand, Ephesians. 6. 10, 17. 1 John 2. 13,
14. and 4. 4. and 5. 4, 5, 18. to the end they may cleave to the Lord wi^h full
purpose, and love his Law, the perfect Law of liberty, and it might be their
medi^ation night and day.

2. He further shows the excellency of God, and the word of his gra^e, in
saying, And (which is able) to give you an inheritance among all them that are
sanctified. Which is still powerful to move us to (...) ourselves thereto.

We shall here br^^fly consider,

1. What is this inheritance? 2. Who are the heirs of this inheritance? 3. How
God and the word of his grace does give, and is able to give them this
inheritance?
1. What is this inheritance? It is not the riches, honors, and great estates
here below tha^ men are e^gerly seeking after, and blessing themselves in the
enjoyment of; it is not of this world, Joh. 18. 36. nor to be fully and
gloriously enjoyed in the time of this world: And this may be seen in the
words: It is not of this world, because it is the inheritance of the Saints or
sanctified ones; now it is evident that the inheritances of this world are not
their peculiar portion, for God gives the greatest part of these things unto
those that are the men of this world, they have their portion in this world;
their children are full, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes,
Psalm. 17. 14. those that set their months against the heavens, they have more
than heart could wish, they prosper in the world, and increase in riches: God
fills their houses with good things, Psalm. 73. 5, 12. Job 21. 7, 13. and 22.
17, 18. whereas generally they are the poor of this world, who are rich in
faith, and heirs of the Kingdom, which God has prepared; many of them are as
having nothing, having no inheritance here, but are many times hungry, and
thirsty, and cold, and naked, Jam. 2. 5. 2 Cor. 6. 10. And besides, those of
them that have here any inheritance, they have it not as sanctified ^n^s, but
as men, s^ns of Adam, and upon a natural and civ^l (...); The earth he has
given to the children of men, Psalm. 115 ^6*

And this inheritance here spoken of is not fully and gloriously to be enjoyed
in the ^^ne of this world, because it is to be enjoyed among all them that are
sanctified, many of whom are gone out of this world, and many that hereafter
will be of this number being not yet in the world; but none of them shall be
made perfect, or perfectly and completely enjoy this without the rest of their
brethren; those that have died in the faith have not received the promises, and
so are not made perfect without the surviving of that body; and those that are
alive and remain unto the coming of the Lord, shall not prevent them which are
asleep, Heb. 11. 39, 40. 1 These. 4. 15.

Yea, as the sanctified ones, who are the heirs, are more excellent than their
neighbors, Prove. 12. 26. so is their inheritance more excellent; it is an
inheritance incorruptible, and unde^iled, and that fades not away, reserved in
the heavens for them, 1 Pet. 1. 4. and so not like the inheritances of this
world, which are subject to corruption and pollution, and which will fade away;
for riches are not for ever, nor does the crown endure to all generations,
Prove. 27. 24. and the rich man here shall fade away in his ways, Jam. 1. 11.

The inheritance then here spoken of is a glorious and eternal inheritance,
which all that are sanctified shall be made partakers of when those that sleep
in Jesus shall be raised, and the living of that body shall be changed, Prove.
3. 25. Heb. 9. 15. of which having spoken so ^ewhat before, I shall be the
b^^^fer h^re, and shall say,

1. They shall inherit the earth, when God shall make all things new, even new
heavens, and a new earth, in which dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 13. So it
is often assured and promised, they that wait upon the Lord shall inherit the
earth; the meek shall inherit the earth, and delight themselves in the
abundance of peace; such as be blessed of him shall inherit the earth, Psalm.
37. 9, 11, 22, 34. and 25. 13. And this our Savior confirms, saying, Blessed
are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth, Mat. 5 5. and therein they
shall possess and inherit the Land of Canaan, when it is made an heavenly
Co^ntrey, as it shall be^. For the Lord will comfort Zion* he will comfort all
her was^ places, and he will make her wilderness like Ed^n, and her desert like
the garden of the Lord, Heb. 11. 16. Isa. 51. 3. This was contained in the
Covenant which God made with Abraham, etc. That he would give unto him the Land
of Canaan, the lot of their inheritance, even for an inheritance to himself and
his seed, which Covenant is not yet performed according as promised, for he
gave Abraham none inheritance in it, no not so much as to set his foot on, yet
he promised that he would give it to him for a possession, and to his seed,
etc. By faith he sojourned in the Land of promise, as in a strange Country,
dwelling in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same
promise; yea, though David did enjoy that typical rest, yet he also confessed
that he was a stranger, as were all his fathers, and so was not come to the
inheritance as God promised it to Abraham, Psalm. 105. 8, 11. Genesis 13. 15. and
17. 8. Act. 7. 5. Heb. 1^. 8, 13. 1 Chronicles. 29. 15.

2. Herein they shall inherit glory, Prove. 3. 25. even the Kingdom of Christ
and of God, when the Lord God shall give unto Jesus Christ the throne of his
father David: He then as King shall reign in righteousness, and they as Princes
shall rule in judgment, Isa. 33, 1. He now washes them from their sins in his
blood, and makes them Kings and Priests, and they shall reign on the earth,
Rev. 1. 5, 6. and 5. 10. they shall reign with Christ a thousand years, Rev.
^0. 4, 6. the Kingdom, and dominion, and greatness of the Kingdom (he says
not, in heaven, but) under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of
the Saints of the most high, etc. Dan. 7. 18, 27. they shall judge the world, 1
Cor. 6. 2. and have power over the Nations, Rev. 2. 26, 28. for Christ will
grant them to sit with him on his throne, Rev. 3. 21.

3. In this glorious place and Kingdom they shall inherit all things, and God
himself shall be their God gloriously, their temple, their light, their
salvation, and their portion for ever, Rev. 21. 3, 7, 21, 23. So they are said
to be heirs of God, and coheirs with Christ, Romans 8. 17. And Christ says, The
Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, even of his people, whom he has
chosen for an inheritance, Psalm. 16. 5. with Psalm. 33. 12. he will then dwell
with them, and gloriously manifest himself unto them, they shall see his face,
and inherit eternal life in the perfect knowledge and favor of God, and
fellowship with him; yea, they shall reign for ever and ever. See the explicit
declaration of the testimony of Christ, page 157, 173.

2. Who are the heirs of, and shall be counted worthy to obtain this
inheritance? [ All them which are sanctified] consider here,

1. What it is to sanctify, and who they are that are sanctified? 2. By what
means they are sanctified, and made meet for the inheritance?
1. What it is to sanctify, and who they are that are sanctified?

To sanctify and to be sanctified in Scripture signifies these two things;

1. To separate a person or thing from common and profane use, and so from
uncleanness and filthiness, as it usually signifies in our types of old. So
Hezekiah commanded the Levites to sanctify themselves, and to sanctify the
house of the Lord, and to carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place; and
accordingly they sanctified it by carrying out the uncleanness out of it, as is
signified, 2 Chronicles. 29. 5, 15, 18. and so the sanctifying the people, it was a
separating them from those things that we e prov^king in the eyes of God, or
forbidden by him, Lev. 20. 2, 8 a severing them from the pollutions and manners
of the Nations whom the Lord cast out, Levit. 20. 23, 26.

2. To set apar^ forth^ Lord, and for his p^culiar use and service any thing or
person; a devoting or dedicating it to the Lord, that it may be his, and unto
him, as were the Priests, and Levites, and ^emple, etc. So setting apart unto
the Lord, answers to, and is the same with, sanctifying unto him, Exodus 13. 2,
12. So here,

They are said to be sanctified, who are cleansed from the errors and
pollu^ions of this world, and devoted to the Lord; separated from uncleanness,
and set apart for the Lord; such as come out from among men* and are separated,
and touch no unclean thing: Such as in the light and strength of God's promises
do cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of the Lord, 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18. and 7. 1. and so the
sanctified are such as are daily turned from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan to God, Act. 26. 18. 2 Timothy 2. 21. such as so receive the grace
of God as to redeem them from all iniquity, and to purify them unto him a
peculiar people zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 11, 12, 14.

2. The means whereby God in Christ by his Spirit does sanctify, (as to
persons, I mean, that are come to years of capacity) are,

1. The chief and principal medium, is, the word of his grace, in which is
declared and commended to us the free grace of God in the blood of Jesus
Christ; Jesus Christ is said to sanctify with the washing of water by the
word, even with the kindness and love of God our Savior, Ephesians. 5. 26. and so he
is said to wash in his blood, in which the love of God is commended, and men
are said to be sanctified with the blood of the Covenant, Rev. 1. 5. Heb. 10.
^9. that is the blood of sprinkling, whereby the heart is sprinkled from an
evil conscience, and the conscience from dead works to serve the living God,
Heb. 10. 22. and 9. 14. and so they are said to be sanctified by the Spirit in
the testimony, and so by the Word, 2 These. 2. 13. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Joh. 17. 17, 19.
Act. 26 18. and these three agree in one, 1 John 5. 6, 8. And indeed the
principal means whereby men may be sanctified, born again and saved, now it is
by discovering and commending the love of God to mankind, in lifting up the Son
of man by the Spirit in the testimony: So our Savior signifies in answer to
Nicodem^s, when he asks, How can these things be? namely, that a man can be
born again; in answer thereto he tells him, As Moses lifted up the Serpent in
the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up, etc. For God so loved the
world (of mankind) that he gave his only begotten Son, Joh. 3* 5, 9, 14, 17. So
that which the Apostle preached in order to the sanctifying of the Corinthians,
who were unholy and profane; the first thing he delivered to them was, that
Christ died for their sins according to the Scriptures, and was buried; and
that he rose again the third day according to the Scriptures; and tells them,
they were washed, sanctified, and justified in the name of the Lord Jesus (even
in and by that good report of him, in which the Father's love was. manifested)
and by the Spirit of our God. Compare 1. Cor. 15. 1, 4. with Chap. 6. 10, 11.
So the Apostle signifies, that the means whereby he and other believers were
saved from their ignorance, disobedience, and serving diverse lusts, it was by
the appearance of the kindness and love of God our Savior to man-ward, which
is the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the holy Ghost, Tit. 3. 3, 6.
It is not the Law as a Law of works, or any observance thereof by men, or
endeavoring to frame their hearts thereby to love God and men, and to avoid
the evils forbidden, that is the way or means whereby God does sanctify; nor
is the Law first to be preached to the effecting this sanctification; though
men may seek to sanctify themselves, and purify themselves thereby, and in so
doing account themselves Saints, and be so accounted by others, yet these are
none of God's Saints, or sanctified ones, but these shall be consumed together,
Isa. 66. 17 nor is it any peculiar manner of love to men's persons in a personal
consideration first discovered to, or working in men before they believe, that
is the means for effecting this sanctification, but it is done by the Spirit in
glorifying Christ, and therein commending God's love to the world, sinners, and
ungodly ones, Act. 26. 18, 23. this is the supreme means.

2. And in subs^rviency and ^ubordination to the former, he does also cleanse
and w^sh with afflictions, even with the manifold trials and temptations which
he is ordering to men while it is called to day, in which he is also purging
and causing the scum to swim aloft, that by this men might be purged, and that
the iniquity of his Jacob might be purged, Isa. 27. 9. that he may withdraw man
from his purpose, and hide pride from him, Job 33. 17, 19. then he shows men
their work, and their transgressions that they have exceeded; he opens also
their ears to discipline, and commands them to depart from iniquity, Job 36.
8, 10. and shows unto men the vanity of their idols, in which they have been
trusting, and by which they have been lifting up themselves; according to that,
When thou with rebukes do correct man for iniquity, thou make his beauty to
consume away like a moth; surel^ every man is vanity, Psalm. 39. 11. He then
shows, that all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of
the field, even all their wisdom, strength, goodness, etc. and so is cleansing
and purging them from their sins and idols, that they may live to him, and
bring forth more fruit, Joh. 15. 2. So the Apostle says, he chastens us for
our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness, Heb. 12. 10. that we may
be delivered from our filthiness, (for stripes cleanse the inward parts of the
belly) Prove. 20. 30. and be dedicated to him, and filled with the fruits of
righteousness; and this fruit we reap of it, in being exercised to the
consideration of the grace of God in Christ, that while we were yet without
strength in due time Christ dyed for the ungodly, and having access by faith
thereinto, Heb. 12. 2, 11. Romans 5. 2, 6. Jam. 1. 2, 5. Hence afflictions are
compared to water, because God is hereby washing and cleansing us, Psalm. 66.
12. Isa. 27. 3. and to fire, because God is hereby proving, and purifying, and
making white, that the trial of the faith of believers being much more precious
than that of gold which perishes, though it be tried with fire, might be found
to praise, and honor, and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ, Isa. 31. 9.
and 48. 10. Zech. 13. 9. 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. and so the means by which Jesus Christ
does wash, baptize, and sanctify, are the holy Ghost in the testimony and
fire, Mat. 3. 11. Luke 3. 16.

3. How God and the word of his grace does give, and is able to give them the
inheritance?

To this we say, as before is noted, that he does not now fully and gloriously
give it to them in this day; yea, Abraham to whom the promises were made, and
the rest of the P^triarchs they received not the promises, Heb. 11. 13, 39. God
gave Abraham none inheritance in the actual and glorious enjoyment of it, and
he, and Isaac, and Jacob, heirs together with him of the same promise, all died
in faith, not receiving the promises, Act. 7. 5. Heb. 11. 13. and though Peter
says he was a partaker of glory, yet he says, of the the glory that shall be
revealed, it is not so yet, 1 Pet. 5. 1. But now,

1. Jesus Christ does give it them in giving himself to them in the word of his
grace, to whom the promises were originally made, Gal. 3. 16. who is the heir
of all things now actually in our nature, Heb. 1. 2. and whose the inheritance
is, and who is entered to take possession for us, Heb. 6. 20. and so in
receiving him they are made sons of God by faith in Christ; Christ is theirs,
and they are Christ's; And if sons then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs
with Christ, Romans 8. 17. The Father loves the Son, and has given all things
unto him; and he that believes on the son has everlasting life; all things
are theirs as Christ is theirs, even by faith, whether things present, or
things to come, and they are Christ's, and if Christ's then are they Abraham's
seed, and heirs according to promise, Joh. 3. 35, 36. 1 Cor. 3. 21, 23. Gal. 3.
26, 29. and so God in giving Christ, as raised from the dead, in the w^rd of
his grace, makes an everlasting Covenant with believers, Isa. 55. 3. with Act.
13. 34. And so,

2. God does in and through Christ give it in the word of his grace by promise,
which was confirmed of God in Christ before the Law, and now actually ratified
and sealed by the death of the Testator, whose blood is the blood of the new
Testament, and everlasting Covenant; and so God gave the inheritance to Abraham
by promise, and they who are Christ's are heirs according to promise, Gal. 3.
18, 29. that they might have strong consolation who have fled for refuge to lay
hold on the hope set before them, Heb. 6. 17. 20. and so as Abraham is said to
have received the promise, even in the word of it, and through faith and
patience to inherit the promises, even so he gives, and they are receiving it,
and are saved by hope; and so by faith and in hope they are receiving a Kingdom
that cannot be moved, Heb. 12. 28. for he is faithful that promised, having
confirmed the Covenant by his blood, and is alive to see it performed, and is
the Mediator of it, that the called may receive the promise of the eternal
inheritance, Heb. 9. 14. Jam. 1. 12. and 2. 5.

3. He is giving unto them an earnest now, even the holy Spirit of promise,
which is the earnest of the inheritance, until the redemption of the purchased
possession, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. 2. Cor. 1. 22. and 5. 5. An earnest is a part of
the whole, a first fruits, and so they receive a first fruits of the spirit,
Romans 8. 23. and an earnest is also an assurance and confirmation that they
shall have all in due time; this spirit he is now giving unto them to make them
partakers of the forgiveness of their sins, to be a spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of Christ; and so to indue them with a new spirit,
judgment, and disposition, to write his Laws in their hearts, and put them in
their minds, and to fill them with his fruit, love, joy, peace, long suffering,
etc. Heb. 10. 14, 17. Ephesians. 1. 17, 18. Gal. 5. 16, 22, 23. and this spirit which
is the earnest of the inheritance he is giving unto them, and they receive,
through the word of his grace, according to that, Received ye the spirit by the
works of the Law, or by the hearing of faith? Gal. 3. 1, 5.

4. Yea, when the Lord himself shall descend from heaven, he will give unto
them the inheritance gloriously, which here they have been receiving by faith,
and hope, and in the earnest and first fruits of it; they shall then inherit
all things, and God himself will be with them, their God; and God shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes, etc. and this he will give unto them, not
according to their works of righteousness, but of grace, yea and according to
the rule of the word of his grace; for God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ according to the Gospel, the word of his grace, and so according
to that rule he will give eternal life to them that by patient continuance in
well-doing have been seeking glory, honor, and immortality, Romans 2. 7, 16.
they shall then be judged according to the Law of liberty, Jam. 2. 12. and
according thereto, he that believes the Gospel, and is baptized (sanctified in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God) shall be saved, viz.
shall obtain that salvat^on in Christ Jesus with eternal glory, Mark 16. 16. 2 Timothy 2. 10. they shall not then be judged according to the Law of works, which
is, do and live; and, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things
written in the book of the Law to do them; for according thereto, no flesh
living can be justified in his sight; but by the Law of faith, the word of his
grace, in which is declared to us, that this is the will of him that sent Jesus
Christ, that every one that now sees the Son, and believes in him, should
have everlastinglife, and he will raise him up at the (...) day to the glorious
enjoyment of it, and so of that inheritance which is of faith that it might be
by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed, Joh. 6. 40.
Romans 4. 16. and this always excludes boasting, and sh^ws that this inheritance
will be given to them of grace, and that in Christ (and not in themselves)
shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory, Isa. 45* 25.

What has been said to this second branch of the further declaration of the
excellency of the person, and thing to which he commits them, viz. which is
able to give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified; may be
useful to us.

1. To show unto us among whom this inheritance is to be enjoyed, and shall be
possessed, it is among all them that are sanctified, even by says in Christ;
and so,

1. It is not to be inherited by such who are contentious against the truth,
and enemies to the testimony of God concerning Christ, such as these shall
inherit folly, Prove. 14. 18. and shame shall be their promotion, Prove. 3. 25.
all that are incensed against Christ shall be ashamed, Isa. 45. 24. to such God
will render indignation and wrath* tribulation and anguish, Romans 2. 8, 9.
Whatever inheritances they may have here, and how rich soever they are here,
yet then God will in flaming fire take vengeance on them that know not God --
Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord -- When he comes to be glorified in his Saints and sanctified ones, 2
These. 1. 8, 10.

2. This inheritance shall not be enjoyed by such as though they prosess to
know God, and believe his Gospel, yet obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, 2 These. 1. 8, 10. Who though they receive the love of the truth, yet
receive it not in such manner, and to such end as to be saved thereby, but
still hold fast deceit, and refuse to return, 2 These. 2. 10, 12. This is the
will of God, our sanctification, that we should abstain from fornication, from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit -- He therefore that despises, despises
not man but God, 1 These. 4. 3, 8. Oh let us not deceive our selves, nor be
deceived by others, as if we should inherit, though we receive his grace in
vain, and suffer it not to save us from our sins and idols; or though we did
run well, yet are hindered from obeying the truth. This ye knew, that no
whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man which is an idolater, has
any inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God* Ephesians. 5. 5, 6. they that
do the works of the flesh shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, ^al. 5. 19, 21.
and 6. 7. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.

3. Nor shall this inheritance be possessed by the children of the bondwoman,
who are born to the hope of, and challenge the inheritance from some wisdom and
strength of the flesh; such as have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge; who being ignorant of God's righteousness, and going about to
establish a righteousness of their own, submit not unto the righteousness of
God, Gal. 3. 16, 18. and 4. 22, 30. such shall not inherit with the children of
the promise, who trust in themselves that they are righteous, Joh. 1. 12, 13.

2. Seeing there is such an inheritance prepared for the sanctified ones, it
may be of usefulness to those that are in Christ Jesus, to walk after the
Spirit, and yield up to the saving efficacy of the grace of God; and having
such promises to cleanse themselves from all filthiness of flesh and spirit,
perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord; And as he who has called them is
holy, so to be holy (separated from uncleanness, and devoted to God) in all
manner of conversation, 2 Cor. 7. 1. Col. 3. 1, 5. Heb. 11. 13, 15. 1 Pet. 1.
13, 18. 1 John 3. 2, 3.

And to choose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of Christ greater
riches than the treasures of this world, having respect unto the recompense of
the reward, Heb. 10. 32, 34. and 11. 24, 26. and 13. 13, 14. 2 Cor. 6. 16, 18.

3. It shows the blessedness of the sanctified ones; though they are generally
the poor of this world, and for Christ's sake killed all the day long, and
appointed as sheep for the slaughter, yet they are rich in faith, and heirs of
the Kingdom which God has prepared for them that love him, Jam. 2. 5. and 1.
12. and 5. 11. Isa. 54. 6, 17.

4. In that the inheritance is among all them that are sanctified, it may
instruct them to live together according to knowledge, and as heirs together of
the grace of life, that their prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. 3. 7. Ephesians. 4. 3,
4.

5. Yea, and it may strengthen them with strength in their souls not to fear,
for it is their fathers good pleasure to give them the Kingdom, Luke 12. 29,
32. and therefore though now they walk in the midst of trouble, he will revive
them, he will stretch forth his hand against the wrath of their enemies (those
grievous Wolves, etc. that spare not the flock) and his right hand shall save
them; and though he has removed eminent and faithful instruments, yet the Lord
will perfect (by the word of his grace) what concerns them; his mercy indureth
for ever, he will not forsake the works of his own hands, Psalm. 138. 7, 8.

Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that
great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant,
make us perfect in every good work to do his will, working in us that which is
well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and
ever,

Amen.
THE END.

